TELA 


STONE ART AND ARCHITEcTy 


NGANA HISTORY CONGRESS 


MANUFACTURE OF Stone 


TUBS AND OTHERS: THE 
TECHNOLOGY BEHIND AND 
THE TOOLS USED 


K. V. Ramakrishna Rao: 


Introduction: Nadigudem has been situated ina hilly area with 
Paleolithic cultural evidences. M.L.K. Murthy? has pointeg ae 
the presence of prehistoric men with the discovery of dolmen 
and Paleolithic axes at Nadigudem, Nalgonda district, 


Indians and Stones: Interestingly, Indians like stones so much 
that they occupy part of their life in many aspects. 


ws 
as 


In India, even today, they use stone implements stone mill 
roller-stone / grinding stone (for grinding grains converting 
into flour), stone mortar (Kallural), Hew and Pick Grinding 
stone (Kallupoliya), Stone jar (Kal-jadi), etc., for different 
purposes, mainly forming part and parcel of (traditional) 
kitchen. 


In many games, stones are used characteristically (stone 
dice, stone-bar, stone-marker, etc.) —a kind of backgammon 
board / dice-play (Thayam / Thaya-katta), a tablet with 14 
holes to play (Pallanguzhi), mock-fighting with Tiger (Adu: 
puli), a game of six-stone spheres (Aru-kallu) etc. 


Washing cloths by striking, sharpening domestic knive* 
--INVOlve stones. 


il Commissioner of Customs, Central Excise and Suter 
ax (Retd) & Director — Institute for the Study of Ancient 
Indian Arts and Sciences 


198 


Fifth Annual Session P 

jeninmany ceremonies, particularly, 
gee symbolically used. Moreover, in 
guages hundreds of words are 

a . ‘ 

-onnected with stone. Of course, the j 


of precious stones has been unique c 


roceedings 
in the last rites, stones 
vocabulary of Indian 
available Specifically 
Mportance and uSage 
ulture and tradition. 


Thus, from birth to death the stone formed part and 
sarcel of Indians involving with daily routines, activities and 


duties. 


peification of stones — from temple building to town-planning: 
atone point or the other, the stones naturally available were 
considered divine and hence men converted them into 
venerable objects. The saligramas, pillar-like structures, 
cylindrical stones etc., became specific Gods adorable and 
objects of worship. Here, devotees do not bother whether the 
divine objects were animate or inanimate, as through, mantras, 
they invoked their God to come down, reside and bless them. 
That the inanimate stone becoming animate is made an axiom?, 
‘Vastu rewa vastu.” The colour of the God also changing from 
black, blue, green and white. In other words such coloured 
tones were chosen to represent specific murti / God of their 
choice, Vaishnavites represent Salaligramas in 24 categories. 
Saivites Worship Linga that has origins in IVC and supported by 
dic literature. Mukhalingam, Astottra-sata and other 
‘ategories are there. During the medieval period, Lingothbava 
ttl was also developed?. The Brahma had always gone with 
muti and and four faced Lingas. The organized temple 
rl had 80ne with the town-planning. Thus, Indian art and 


: m man- related 
itive ® cover all human and human-nature 
IQs. 


Thee day activities encroach and destroy uence rt 
they One artifacts were found till 1960s and therea ter, en 
Nag arted disappearing because of pen 7 
“Over Ure development‘. The highway ee either 
MoVg § Toads into four-way, six-way etc, they fa et what 
*Molished and disappeared or made to torg 


199 


TELANGANA HISTORY CONGRESS 


d. Not only stone tubs, granite troughs, mantaps \ 
y temples disappeared. When dams were built rby 
emples were either displaced or disappearey an 
temples with many sannidhis and pragaras spreading over Q 
land as “Temple-complex” have been reduced to smaller ¢ st 
with the encroachment of temple land by others. Thus, no 
people see the strewn sculptures, broken idols and falling ill 
and many amateurists claim that they “discovered” Medieval 
sculptures, temples and so on. Moreover, there has been 
another menace in Tamilnadu, particularly, where, these 
‘conoclasm has been carried on under the guise of “Dravidian 
analytical wisdom” and so on. Now, it has resulted in Mantap 
and temple demolition, idol smuggling and so on. The stone 
cutters, polishers and other works, stapatis and experts haye 
virtually lost their jobs. They have to switch over to other jobs 
and slowly started forgetting their traditions and art. 


happene 
also man 
villages andt 


Lithic culture, metallurgy and chronology of the people 
involved®: The lithic culture was / is closely associated with 
metal, and metallurgical science and technology. 


The presence of man in India and his handling of stones 
date back to millions of years back. In fact, scholars have not 
been definite about fixing Stone Age to India. F. E. Zeuner® 
considers that, though no classification applicable to the whole 
of India is possible, a rough guide is: 


¢ Neolithic: Passing upwards into the Asoka period (274 BCE) 
and downwards into Indus valley culture (about 2300 BCE) 
and beyond). 


* Microlithic: from the late Pleistocene to pre-historical. 


* Paleolithic: from about 5,00,000 years ago to the end of the 
Pleistocene. 


The archaeologists divide lithic culture into Paleolithic 
Mesolithic, megalithic, Neolithic, chalcolithic and S° ye 
Incidentally, the megalithic culture is linked with iron ag€ io 
bronze also. The iron and steel has impact on the stone 


200 


Fifth Annual Session Proceedings 


a nrc cae 
pete exact y - } C culture. It differs within 
jet ion ata time and place and therefore, the Civilizations 
owl eq at different places cannot be compared 
gical’ Indus Valley Civilization (IVC) poses many 
a to all, as its ancient layers with materia] evidences 
it to 9000 BCE, peak period 2250-1950BCE, whereas the 
srl period starts trom 326 BCE, that too, with Asoka 274 
xce.In other words, the illiterate people of IVC only produced 
uchhighly technical bronzes, sculptures, houses with all moder 
rxiities, cities and town-planning. Such bias is exhibited in 
jating the stone art and architecture also. 


eo! 


sone Art and Architecture — Its Style, relative dating etc: 
identification of certain features, characters and design and 
associating them with a particular race, tribe, dynasty, empire 
and taking it as a “style” or “standard” and fixing the date or 
chronology accordingly. Here, many assumptions and 
esumptions are made. Cunnignham dated certain monuments 
found at Taxila as belonging to 2" and 3" centuries CE (ASR, 
VolV, Plate.xxiv), which was disputed by J. H. Marshall. 
Fergusson dated to gth cent. CE (1910, p.98, fig.27), so Marshall’ 


Nsstioned him also as his woodcut was a mere travesty of the 
Original, 


ands “The attribution of this monument, as fitment, as itnow 

the, ‘ the eighth century or thereabouts by Fergusson Is 
Strap ae amazing as his attribution of the Hues stupaat 
| ecorgti ‘0 the eleventh century. The style of the arc a ur : 
| Mecicoh Ground the plinth and base of the super-structu - 
bu die Hat which prevailed at Taxila in the second eae 
"turgor mpletely transformed during the three su 


iffer b 
"Noy ‘ Scholars like Fergusson and Marshall could differ by 


“thibite N dating of the same Indian monume at of 


Fifth Annual Session P 
iy laid by stone slabs, till they were re 
genet! ae rafters. Hand-rails, steps, pillar 
4 pene slabs. The same pattern was f 
made . palaces and temples. In IVC itself, 
antap>, 
“e been found. 


roceedings 


placed with bricks 
Ss, and others were 
ollowed in building 
all these examples 


lithic / rock-cut temples, cave temples: Rock-cut 
Ane ture has been carving out the required three 
Se al structures with all minute details of geometry with 
oT en The Indian rock-cut technology appears to be 
i a with any principles of modern science and 
Ne The details such as - how the engineers visualized, 
ail te details of the structures to be built, where they 
Os h drawings and details, what tools and implements used 
pe out the stalk of the material, how the carving started, 
evan where the scooped out material bias cone a 

othing is available. The marvelous, aston | 
sae Sone vacan has been noted - a eae 
perplexed to explain the technology wl it. 
note the observation of James Fergusson”: 


II 
“Frequently the capitals and shafts bie i ele 
turned in a sort of lathe in which the shaft was he 
(p.425). 


Taylor’ 
About the Chalukyan sculptures, Meadows Tay 
Urprised as follows: 


: lintels 
“ s.the carvings on some of the pillars a aie , mae 
rte: iption. 
ind architraves of the doors are beyon a eae By what tools 
"ork in silver or gold could possibly cle been wrought and 
this very hard, tough stone could dupe the present day; nor 
Polished as it is, is not at all intelligible a reenstone rock was 
Indeed from whence the large blocks of 9 
Ought”, 


. «in the lathe would be 
That is generally, the work-piece In UO is unimaginable. 
horizontally, therefore, placing as should find out 
Istorians archaeologists and resea nd tools would have 

or 49 Pillars, what type of lathe, chuck a 


203 


TELANGANA HISTORY CC INGRESS 


gh, such machine tools have been recoy 

| evidences available stand proof to the - 
lable. Some of the important monolith, 
ple complex and structures are tabula 
d appended (See appendix -1), 


been used. Thou 
so far, the materia 
that there were avai 
rock-cut temples, tem 
for illustrative purpose an 


The movement of people and transport used: The Movement 
of people in Indian had been there for more than 5000 yes,, 
and definitely, there was some sort of transport system COVEring 
thousands of kilometers distance. When, priests, merchants and 
warriors had gone to Southeast Asian countries crossing the 
ocean, there is nothing strange for the land route transpor 
system existed. Though, they had covered distances by walking 
definitely, horses, bullock carts and horse driven vehicles were 
used. Incidentally, there were chariots with stone wheels 
operating till 18""-19"" centuries in temples’. However, as the 
wheels were heavy, they might have been used for specific 
hard and difficult roads / routes. And of course, the national 
high ways and other roads were there for travelling and 
transport. The movement of salt loaded bullock carts going to 
north was faithfully recorded in the Sangam literature™. The 
common people were travelling covering distances for the 
purposes of pilgrimages, attend festivals and fairs and other 
functions. Thus, for night stay of the travellers, vehicles, there 
were shelters built all along the roads and high ways, 4s 
evidenced by the mantaps found at equidistance. 


Mantaps for the stay of travellers, luggage-rest-stones and stone 
tubs: As lakhs of people were moving here and there, 
periodically, for many exigencies, undertaking long distanc* 
travel also, there were mantaps, luggage-rest-stones and stone 
tubs. They were made of stones. The mantaps were just like 
inns, transit rest rooms or motels, where, they could stay, take 
rest and sleep during night and uncomfortable weathe! 
conditions and then proceed. The luggage-rest-stones were fo! 
keeping their luggage temporarily, while taking rest. Here, the 
were two categories open and closed. The open ones could . 
seen on the road sides and closed ones inside the mantar® 


204 


F f Annual Session roceedin SAY 
o 


Ho 
oe These practices were followed till 11"°-19" centuri 
were inscriptions about these facilities offered by “e 


rere ; : 
nment officials and philanthropists. 


sovel 
mines and the Gruel-stone troughs during the British colonial 
eriod’*: AS the colonial forces including the British started 
peecing the Zamindars and in turn farmers, there were famines 
juring 18" and 19 centuries leading to death of millions of 
innocent poor people. At that time, the local Kings, chieftains, 
hilanthropists, traders and others out up “Kanji-thotti,” Gruel 
trough from which the food was distributed to the famine- 
affected starving people. They also inscribed on them specifically 
mentioning the names of the donors and the purpose. 
Therefore, it could be noted that during the period, the demand 
for stone-tub, stone-trough increased with the demand. Noting 
the gravity of the condition, the British also resorted to such 
provision. Incidentally, when they put up one trough near Stanely 
Hospital, Madras, it was known as “Kanji-thotti hospital.” Earlier, 
in1781, that place was known as “Kanji-thott! Sattiram,” i.e, the 
Gruel-trough staying place, where, the old people used to stay 
and spend time. When the troughs were used in 1891-famine, it 
Was figuratively mentioned as “Kanji-thotti pancham,” l.e, 
es ough-famine. In any case, the usage of monolithic tub / 
gh could be noted. Now, other examples are discussed. 

16. The Namdang Stone Bridge Is a 
ters away from Sibsagar 
ted in 1703 by craftmen 
king Rudra Singha. 


Bri 
. 6¢ made of a single stone 
oa bridge located a few kilome 
ty oo India. It was construc 
tfrom Bengal during the reign of Anom 
bridge Sane 1.7m (5.6 
ft “ridge is 60 m (200 ft) long, 6.5 m (21 ft) wide and ( 


Bh. Itry tributary of the Dikhou 
ver, atrl . 


eT, 
Unj ii Present National Highwa ut from a 
characteristic of the bridge 


y 37 Is pa 
5 that it was cut © 


205 


NA HISTORY CONGRESS 


e of rock hundred years of age. The bridge 
hape. During the time of Ahom kings en a 
or construction. A paste of Bora (stickyjrig 
duck eggs, black lentils and lime was used to make the bridge 
The bridge connects Sibsagar town to Jorhat and other district 
in the west. This example again proved that the technology wa. 
wn vogue even in 13% century, till, it was taken over by brie 
structure and then by concrete. 


How these stone tubs were manufactured?: There are stone 
tubs, troughs and bowls also. In the Hajo temple complex 
District Kamrup. It’s around 30 kms from Guwahati, Assam, one 
huge stone bowl is found known as Bimar choriya or Bhina’s 
bowl. It is believed to be a bowl in which Bhima 
Mahabharataharta used to eat his food. According to 
Mahabharata and Puranas, Bhima married Hidimba, a triba| 
princess, during his exile and spent time in the North East”, 
Now when modern men look at these stone tubs, utensils etc, 
they are surprised to note as to how they could have been 
manufactured and what type of tools were used to carry out 
such processes involved in the manufacture. How they were 
carved out of a single stone block or whether stone slabs were 
joined together by applying any resin or such bonding material. 
The stone utensils, domestic appliances, jars, flasks posed many 
questions. Today, many tools are used to manufacture the very 
same goods. Thus, it is evident that the ancient and medieval 
manufacturers must have had similar tools. There have been 
palmleaf books that describe the manufacturing processes. 


TELANGA 


single solid piec 
little curved in s 
was not in use f 


Stone lamps of different varieties used**: Here, it has to 
mentioned about the light arrangements made during the 
evening and night times till dawn. There were stone-lam posts 
erected at the cross-roads and important junctions and places: 
Poees and open lamp-posts were used. For which, the rule® 
Different Cees people to light the lamps oiling regular? 
mosquitoes inc or Oils were used specifically, to i les 
lanterns an, insects and pests. In houses, palaces and temP™ 

S and other lamps were used, That different types ° 


206 


Fifth Annual Session Proceedings 


sae of stone and ceramics were used could be noted 
mie archaeological findings also. Inscriptions always 
jor tne ot kings, queens, chieftains, traders and others 
Oe eh keeping and maintenance of the perpetual lamps 
a cemples Stone lamp posts are still used at many places, 
in 


recause of their easy availability and long lasting nature. 


The stone artifact that enthralls others: Now, some stone 
gtifacts are discussed that enthrall all. The stone chain, that 
too, with a bell, fascinate as none could understand as to how it 
could have been carved out of single stone. Anyone is at loss 
how the links were made converting to a chain and then the 
bell attaché to it! The chain links are of the same size joined 
together. What type of tools were used to scoop out the material 
toproduce the tong hanging and attached to the chain. And the 
whole “assembly” was done without any breakage. Perhaps, 
even with modern machines and tools, it could not have been 
manufactured. The “chained bell” is at the “Tiruval eswaram” 
Shiva temple situated at Brahmadesam, 4 kms north of 
Ambasamudram, Tirunelveli district, built by Rajaraja - I. 


Sl Vessels, utensils and flasks used for food, medicine 
le and hospitals: In hospitals, for the storage of different 
Mig Various liquids, extracts and medicinal gece 
Study Yessels, utensils, flasks, jars etc were used. So in - 
Lorin 7 been made about the nature of stones use : . 
tOre ; Pickles, soft stone jars were used, where they ne 
Slow) nut getting effected for one year. As they spe chek 
ing ced with ceramic ware, they disappeared. ; - 
hey other board games, different parts were use aes 
“ed for manufactured with stones. Thus, as ecie ine 
| ven Wer "erent uses, they were continuously sue 

rough ian Employed for the purposes at pause oy 
th *been Nadays, the domestic appliances like gr ee 
‘ busine. Waturized, stone has not been replaced. ee 
bE *S ethics has come down with reduction 0 


PRLANGANA HISTORY CC INGRESS 


The availability and selection the stones for Idols: Evens 3 
the black stone category, the dark black-blue is chosen ir 
making, particularly thats installed in the sanctum SANCton 
Besides the Silpa Sastra rules, by nouns the Stapati 
the-required stone’. The following details are Biven ; 
illustrative purposes to understand how stone is Selecteg 7, 
particulars of the collection of stone have been describes S 
follows: The chief architect (sthapati) together with the BSSistan 
workers (sthapaka), the master, and his retinue, after sett. 
up in the moming, would go to a hill or a forest onan BUSpicions 
moment of good constellation, and collect stone. After 4. 
collection, they place the stone on a wagon (lit., chariot) * 
convey it to their place of work. Ifthe stone is covered by leaves 
burnt by fire, disfigured by being fallen into a pit, or lickeg by 
the sun (shines), it would be rejected. The selected ston: 
without blemishes would be placed positioning with the carding 
points. All those stones which lie lengthwise in the fou 


} i a 


~rel a wz mm ~ ® = c . = : sa 
Sata to Oe Quadrengular, and the female circular; and when= 


~ 


ss 
=* tba . -2 : 
neuter). \\y nen mt Sounc< athe ciceal + a ftale) tke 
seers UAC UNE MUSiCal TONE [Teta] & 
~~ A SS Morictnn sa FRaF le ~~ f} - - Y sha) we . 
C ~PSA HORE, Nail i Called the tree-stone (VTINsuic 
> = e~% we = 
4 a ee eel ~ > ~~ i 9 a7 Ok 
sounds like the buffalo. Those (stones) which $ und Hen” 
~ tAYSO qre cS aaa ~ 
Tra 2H... *.! S 
the afnre<an} ci... | -a SONS 
~ SIMA T3ai SNOW c Se the Dene, iya fa)s one All rmecs MS 
which are drm! n scines OF 
A = If CAM, P ; c = ali 
~~ af SNOuld be reared as grain (sali). BeS** 
er. = ace 
DALES Tsim enka P : thoy fist 
ows SQSOUT, White, red, yellow, and black, if 0) 
>i -= . , i 
rk A re em eA nes anil 
> th them, they shou! oided. The ste 
5 me” ; a 
Lie 
a wy | fe anc e-lLA ve 
y ZF ~ > e 5 Fe 
7 Ss SOsC NES are auspicious and conducrs 
-@ a.%a ~ ar. 
Pe VOPenivty, 


as structure and compounds have been built with 
fig -~ 


Fifth Annual Session P 


ad why the black stones are chosen forthe man 
idols?: If a temple is looked at, almost mo 


rocecdingps 


ufacture 
St of the 

Stones of 
"gous sizes, Shapes and colours. As for as the dj 


of vine Idol 
_nyfacture, Silapa Sastras mandate usage of specific stones 


...she purpose. Actually, the stones are divided as follows: 
aa ° 


F pine 


- ? 


i. Masculine 
2. Feminine and 
3. Neuiral. 


The sculptors, stapatis and experts identify recognize 


_ znd select such stones by carefully looking at the structure, 
_ sgund produced when tapped with finger and surface changes 
_ wnen applied with water, oil and other liquids. According to 
_ tiem, the stones have life, nerves mind andall. There are stones 
_ wihseven colours, which are in turn categorized into 49 varieties 

ci stones. Of which, the required stone is selected with the 


Dove tests. 


i. The male stones are used for the manufacture of Male 


Sties / divinities. 


7 2. The female stones are used for the manufacture of 
“male deities / divinities. 


3. The neutral stones are used for the manufacture of 
“<P, Dillars ete. 


_. _ the female stones are used to grind, scoop and carry 
other Operations with male stones. The sculptor and all 


hry involved in Idol-making to temple-building should be 


os i : in 
—" devoted and faithful to work, besides well versed 
Fo SaStras. 


. : _ 
—*& machines and tools used in the granite manufacturing 


- of. 
, Vin 
Eine "BS 0 


i 


"How 40’ pillars were manufactured, that too, with 
n them without any mismatch. What type of ae 7 

Say =Machine was used to manufacture such pillars. a a 
“Pillars are available prove that some machines had been 


209 


TELANGANA HISTORY CONGRESS 


there to manufacture. Then the question ofitocis i 
shovel, spade, etc., used for cutting, chiseling 
scooping, designing, polishing etc. In ‘granite ‘tg 
monuments manufacturing factory, many ma chines : 5 ai 
for cutting, chiseling, levelingand polishing. Here, mach; Usey 
more work than men. And there have been “Profile /¢ "St 
cutting machine” that produce required figures baseg Simi 
computerized programs. Whenever, any mistake jg the 8 
breakage is there, they are adjusted with sticking together, 
special resin / bonding material. Then, they are refurb 
and polished so that such mistakes could not be noteg He 
also, though all have been man-created, the machine-pro ta 
artifacts cannot be equated with the man-created ones With 
high skill and creativity. 


S 
el thy : 


ee 


= = ae = reat 


The dating of Manasara, Mayamata and other Sanskrit works 
Ram Raz opined that the existing manuals of Indian art ang 
architecture were from South India and the manuscripts were 
not available in complete form. From the internal evidences 
found, particularly about the mention of the Four Saivite Great 
Nayanmar, Pandyas etc., he tried to fix the date to 3" to 5 
-cent.CE”°. However, P. K. Acharya pointed out later that many 
palm-leaf mss were discovered. He gives hundreds of such 
works in his monumental work on ‘Indian architecture”. He 
discussed about “Age of the Manasara,” and fixed its date to 
c.500-500 CE based on the Malwa king named Manasara™. Ram 
Raz pointed out that H. H. Wilson placed the work to 300-400 
BCE in one place and to c.1000 BCE in another place’*. Brun? 
Danens” dates to 11 century, as it mentions about imagine 
oe storied temple, perhaps after getting inspiration from the 
Big Temple” of the Cholas! He puts it characteristically: 


| 
| 


_ “Our'text however must be earlier and may havé peer 
written between the definitive elaboration of the false storey 
option and the appearance of the very big temples of this type 
as those of Tanjore or Gangaikodacolapuram’”. 


a 
P.K. Acharya dates it to Gupta periodi.e, ¢. gtr century 


210 


Tut Seantern P eee 


44 4) finer: “t 


=" 
toe oneme land i TOM Riemer a 
es cook see SOUS Guner sources. 
acts goin ts out thet Peushlere Semhite, one of Panchereys 
= = = 298 =. >= -~ = . e = ~ 
re = Gate av me &XS Cent. = However they cdo not 
aii) ~s FF % 
5 a —_— r= = 
qotor where the original “Ur-Manesera” is there and how? 
. ° & _ ff = id 


teen dated, how it is ‘incomplete’, 
gies of Upgreced by others when where and whom ex 
Waser the enlergement may be the existing texts / books 
wisi x copied irom the originals, the existed could not he 
miei Rhes to be noted thai Indien scholars end writers ahwey 
eae cge the source of their derived knowle es end 
vin. therefore, such quality of due acknowledgement could 
| Mimeke the earlier sources Imagined or non-=xisiéd ones. 


_ =F=ierence, uniqueness and usage of stone forall purposes: 
“33 ihe ebove discussion, the points are summarized as 


t 
i- 


—_ 


the indian selection of stone for many purposes in the 
tend architecture has been unique. Researchers note 
tet not only the historians, archaeologists and art 
“*Beris differ in dating IVC, IVC artifacts, Vedic 
Cvilizstion and literature, but also in dating available 


| _ “One art specimens of all forms. 


Stone has been formed with the creation of Esra 
Pert of Panchabhutas. As human body with life has pie 
of Panchabhuta s, the stone has been unique, a 

"C lasts forever. Thus, anything made of ae 
reserved in stone, lived with stone would have [ons 


: ‘ ~ “ithout degradation. 


4 Was Considered divine and aun 
Gog “'shipped as ‘stone-god, nature 
Manifested. 


qa’ is treated 
rved Idol of 


211 


TELANGANA HISTORY C ONGRESS 


4. 


10. 


References : 


Murty, M. L. K., ed. Pre-and Protohistoric Andhr 5 104 
up to 500 bc. Vol. 1. Orient Blackswan, 2003. p.87: 


he 


hilly areas, so that they could get all their requ 


The word Maansaar has unique meaning of the act/s 


Sts ang ‘ 
reme q 


Thus, the Vedic people referred to live jp, ’ 
Q 


The Jains and the Buddhists differed, thus, the Nts | 
their paces at remote places at the hilly p| OCatey 
viharas. They had to come to villages and Cities and 
requirements. | the, 
Thus, the stone art developed and Progressed jn, 
way or the other, giving employment to thoy 
people. 

During their periods, the quarrying and defore 
were undertaken in a balanced way, so that the 
no ecological imbalances. As population increase 
multiplied, imbalances had crept into. 


e 
Sands of 


re Were 
d, Cities 


Sa a Ee 


Modern methods of exploitations, including quarrying 
and infrastructure development activities make Many 
monuments disturbed, displaced and disappeared, __ 


The uniqueness of /Indian stone art expertise, skill in 
the carving, particularly rock-art architecture and other : 
features has bee unparalleled. Whether the material _ 
evidences came first and the architectural manuals 
composed later or vice versa, both had been in existence 
definitely 2000 to 5000 YBP depending upon various 
experts, different theories and varied chronologies. 


safes aetna gfe nee he NN gyros 


In any case, the Indians have been so fascinated with 
stones and rocks of all forms, used and benefited by 
their use, and lived with them, that they have not 
disturbed the ecological imbalances, as modern men 
do. 


a Pradesh 


cience/ 


212 


meaacates pcan ve hie 
terenae tina nage enna, dren gntrnentin meee enna 


’ Delo 
Mant 


Fifth Annual Session Proceedings 


jandard / system Of measurement. The Vastushastra has 
"pte and adopted the meaning in its subject. 


" actually shows the superiority of Shiva over Brahma 
and Vishnu mixing the Puranic narratives to create a new 
sory tO support such depiction. 


in Tamilnadu, many would have been eye-witnesses as to 
how thousands of trees were uprooted, temples, mantaps 
and ancient structured demolished and disappeared etc., 
when travelling from Madras / Chennai to Pondicherry, 


Trichy, Madurai, Tiruvannamalai, Bangalore and other 
places. 


kK. V. Ramakrishna Rao, Stone — Work, Art, Architecture, 
Style and Dating in Indian Context , a paper presented at 
the international conference on Indian History, ICIH-2009, 
held on January 9th to 12th 2009 at New Delhi - http:// 


scribd.com/document/13798682/Stone-Work-Art- 
Architecture-Style-and-Dating 


D.N. Wadia, Geology of India, TMH edition, 1981, New 
Delhi, p.388. : 


1. H. Marshall, The Date of Kanishka, JRAS (GBI), 1914 
D.984, cf.1. 


Warmington, The Commerce Between the Roman Empire 
end India, 1928, p.143. 


ae Agrawala, India Represented on a Silver Dish from 
Mpsacos, JUPHS, Vol.XVI, 1943, pp-3-6- 


D.R. Bha 


ques ndarkar, A Kushana stone-inscription and the 


cla about origin of the ‘Saka era, JBBRAS, Vol.20. 
PP.269-302, 


he Fergusson, History of Indian & Eastern Apres 
*ticed Publications, New Delhi, 1997: pp.422-423. 


Dhan ows Taylor and James Fergusson. pa airs 
*8, and Mysore, John Murray, London, 1866. PP: 


Ufa, Jean. The Incredible Survival of Laeniia 
8cture in South India. In Indian Journal of History 


TELANG 


16. 


20 


21 


22: 


23 


24 


ANA HISTORY CONGRESS 


ional Science Acad 
Science, Indian Nationa cates 
oi 53, No..2, 2018, pp.232-240. 


Ettuttogai and Pattuppaattu give references abo 
loaded bullock carts going to north [north India 
the salt manufactured from sea waters was not avallae® 


: el be 

1791-92 — Doji bara or sku amine; 1876-79 _ 
tamine/ South Indian famine of 1876-78; Indian famine 
Of 


1896-97. 

The details are taken from the following site. They 
available in Wikipedia also. https://web.archive.orgiya 
50090604121320/http://www.mapsofindia.com/assan 


tourism/namdang-stone-bridge.html 


The Buddhist also lay claim to this stone basin. Wenge) 
in his studies (with references from Tibetan and Bhutanese 
Buddhist texts) mentions that the Buddhists believe tha 
this is the pot where Death Demons boiled the heads of 
the Damned, this is. the place where snakes lived. This 
shows how the rival faith manufacture new myths to claim 
space and force their belief on others. 


Prasanna Kumar Acharya, Architecture of Manasara - 
Translation in English, Vol.IV, p.503 


Prasanna Kumar Acharya, Architecture of Manasara, 
Chapter LI], Oxford University Press, London, 1933, pp. 
532-534 


Ram Raz, Essay on the Architecture of the Hindus, Royal 
Asiatic Society, London, 1834, pp.9-10. 


Under Appendix-l, he gives ‘A Sketch of Sanskrit treatises 
on Architecture’ running into hundreds, A Dictionary 
Hindu Architecture, Manasara Series — |, pp.749-804- 


PK, Acharya, Indian Architectute according to Manas 


Silpa Sastra, Manasara Series — Il, Chapter.V, pp.160-198 


. | 
hak Raz, Essay on the Architecture of the Hindus. Roya 
Asiatic Society, London, 1834, p.10. 


ste Ol 
edie Dagens, Mayamata, Sitaram Bharatia Insti n 
Science & Research, New Delhi, 1995, p.v in Intro - 


New Del | 


ut the Sal, | 


in } 


sil ghattacharya. The Cannons of Indian Art, Calcutta, 1963 
Pr 9p.183-199: 


p Pp. Apte, Pauskra Samhita, Rashtri 
‘ vidhyapeetha, Tirupati,. 1991. riya Sanskrit 


Appendix-I 


‘Name Type, group, cave or temple Date 7 
| period / 
dynas 


Jaabar, | Lomas Rishi, Sudama, Karan Chaupar, | c.1000- Bi 
Ionarshi | Viswakarma, = Gopika, Vadathike BCE 0-500 | Bihar 
caves Vapiyaka : 


‘Masroor | Near Masroor lake Also known as | earl Sth. | K 

Cave Himalayan Pyramid, Masroor Rock Cut century Bean 7 ge i 

\Temples, | Temple is a complex of 15 monolithic | (telative Himachal 

| rock-cut monuments. dating, Pradesh 
compared) 


The: most eminent statue in. the cave | 7‘ century, 

temple is _of Lord Vishnu, which | Pallavas 

incarnated in the form of a Varaha: or 

‘ear elevating earth from the sea. 

fee ie caves feature Buddhist sculptures | dating back 

| along with relief carvings, paintings and|to the 1* 

| inscriptions. century BCE 

| Kish — nor the Sanskrit|to the 10% 
mM, which: 

Moai means___— Black cent CE. 


complex of four majestic temples 


Mamallapuram 
of Tamil Nadu 


Maharastra 


northern _ part 
of Karnataka. 


dates back 
from 6th 
century, 
Badami 
Chalukya 
architecture. 


Rashtrakuta | Aurangabad 
dynasty district of 

Maharashtra 
ond century | Maharastra 
BCE to about 


Co ° 
Hinge ; d of 34 caves. combination of 
» Jain, Buddhist rock-cut temples. 


Buddh; 

cs d eee complex that 
(@) 1s ° 

monuments 30 rock-cut Buddhist cave 


two : 


.. Sou : : d Elephanta 

H Ps of caves, including five | place ) 

du caves and two Buddhist ogee between 5th | Island of 
and 7th | Maharashtra 


Gy : 

ea Ong; centuries a, 
: Hindu ¢ of some of the. most ancient | 5th century CE | Vidisha, 
is ave Temples. The cave complex Madhya 
Pradesh, 


Compr} 
Jainisn n° of 20 caves, including 1 of 
Udayagir 10 of Hinduism, 
has i has 18 caves and Khandagiri 
Caves. Various religious 
are done on these caves. 


2nd-century Orissa 


BCE. 


ins 15 
Script; Ons 


verve te 


215 


TELANGANA HISTORY CONGRESS 

Lampsacos (ancient name papeenl) Asia Minor depicting 
“Bharata-Lakshmi" dating to 1* or 2"° century CE based On the 
features exhibited in the figure. V. S. Agrawala? discussing it 
states that the style of hair depicted — coiffure was found among 
the Roman women during 1* or 2° century is not known, 
However, such style appears in the terracotta figures of Gupta 
period dated to 4" century (or 3 cen. BCE). Thus, even the 
surmise has a difference of 3 or 2 centuries gap, if one has to 
date sculptors by the style. D. R. Bhandarker” also points out 
the lacuna in deciding the date of the monuments based on the 
style: 


¢« Different ways of reading letters and script in the 
inscriptions. SAKA is read as SAN, SANAB, and so on and 
Kanishka as KARANO, KANAK, KANIK and so on (p.272). 


¢ If one goes by Paleolithic evidence i.e, reading of letters / 
alphabets in the inscriptions based on style, The Guptas are 
made contemporary rulers of Kanisha (p.300). 


Again, the difference would be 400-500 years. Therefore, 
in history and hisroriography, the difference of 300-600 years 
woukd play havoc. Yet, Indian history has been constructed with 
such inaccurate estimations, surmised relative datings and wrong 
chronologies, leading to conflicting, confusing and confronting 


history. Therefore, the monuments have to be independently 
dated with scientific methodology. 


From rocky caves to stone houses: Initially, caves could have 
been the living places of men, but, slowly, they started building 
their own shelters developing into different types of house: 
the Jains and Buddhists used caves for their activities: 
Moreover, their Practices of digambara, mantra-tantra-yant’ 
and other practices made them excluded from the cities, tow" 
and villages. The usage of stone has been important in any tyP© 


of be : we 
building activity. The granite slabs were used as beams 
rafters, joists and lin 


windows and tels in every house building activity. Eve" 
hes ae. nd doors, door frames of them, sun-shades, pipes, 
, TIttings and chimneys were made of stones. Roofs were 


202 


