SIT IIO ee OT GT 
facteld 


Viswambhar upanishad with english 
translation 


Al Sat MMSAl ASS TSE AAI aval eado 
HOA AAA AATA sel [pated Hrar 

ud aerate: erpai TZ Pa 
gta Haoriadara Heat sit Bret 
AMMA Aes Gated | 


Meaning:- After asking many questions, Rishi 
Shandilya asked Mahashambhu what is Brahman, 
which even the Vedas cannot describe directly? 
Who is the Lord of all the Lords (i.e. all the 
incarnations including Maha Vishnu, Maha Brahma, 
Maha Shambhu)? Who is beyond both the Nirguna 
and the Saguna? What are the kartta (doer of 
everything) and karayita (doer of everything to 
everyone)? Further, you also tell us that by what 
mantras the soul is freed from the world and quickly 
liberated? Who has the right to those mantras? 


Ula ASME AAE ARAA aA AANA ATATS ef 
Saet Fassett Acta al ara altel Zag) 
CAUCE dal THA Yao UA Isl AMAAN, | 


Meaning:- Hearing the question of Rishi Shandilya, 
Mahashambhu said with certainty that the name, form, 
pastimes and abode of the Supreme Being about 
whom you asked is Chinmaya (Sachchidananda) which 
is invisible (beyond) mind and speech. Only by His 
grace are they self-illuminated. That is why the 
illuminating divine body of the Svarat Paramatma 
“Raghav” (i.e. Raghukulabhushan Sri Rama) who is 
called Arup-Anam (i.e. devoid of Prakrit name and 
form) is `Sanatan Brahman”. 


a SU 92T aE aie: Tet azet a cad AAA 
ii mR oat onic wate a aiaa | 
gda Med (ata [aad agis Hiatt [aaa feri 


gat RARA Adiga Fell Ga; 
at aAa a STZ | 


Meaning:- He Is the Supreme God of Gods, the 
husband of husbands and the Supreme God of 
gods. He is the base body, the source of the 
immaterial (Nirguna) and the embodied (Saguna) 
Brahman. And there are both doers and non-doers 
and they are different from both. He who pervades 
all places by His own effulgence and is subtler than 
subtle and larger than subtle creates the entire world 
in this form and expands divine pastimes in Saket by 
Himself form, that is, the two-armed transcendental 
human form. Scholars actually believe in unity in 
these even though they are two different forms 
because there is no one like them, so how can there 
be more? So by the scholars, that Sri Ram is called 
Advaita Brahman. 


AA Waar Hela A Agor TNR Tea 
RAJS CRAAACA oe fog Areata Rattaet 


AAAA AANA CS Ala Aedy a Auk 
AoA AAT | 


Meaning:-Sri Ram in Saguna form who performs 
Leela in various incarnations and Sri Rama in 
Swayamrupa who performs only Ras in Sridham 
Ayodhya is the same beyond both Saguna and 
Nirguna. He has infinite mantras, 600 of them are 
the best, three of them are the best. 


TSAI GURL AeA 2701 Yat AcAMAlA fag Tact 
geara siaa TIS ac Azo fala Getlactede 
IMANA aé ceed sit aed Got st shard SA Ste 
Usagi aqal AA SA At CIS STC ARRI AAT 
Tae Hod toate A Udiel Iie ad dat Be alad 
SI AA Oaea A fedienaaeddrarare AT 
AGMA Al ASAM AS 7 ASIA A AAMA 
Moco areola SAACAN AGIA Fart stata 
TAA AA Ud AoA Ae Gal ell Heed Hat 


iezet A TITS ANAA A 
Udaeroatacretc | 


Meaning:- The (1) six-syllable Mantraraja (2) mantra 
Ratna Mantradvaya (2) and the Yugal Mantra (3). 
Now let us show the mantra. Dot preceded by long 
fire seed Rakara (Ran) then only long fire seed R 
car (Ra) behind it (Maya) then Namah all this 
together became “Ran Ramaya Namah’ this six- 
letter Rama Mantra. Now show two mantras first 
Srimad say Ramachandra Charanau behind him say 
this verse behind him and say Prapadye behind him 
then say Srimate and say Ramachandra before him 
say Namah all together ``Srimad Ramachandra 
Charanau Sharanam Prapadye Srimate 
Ramachandraaya Namah’ this 25 letter mantra is 
the best mantra gem among all mantras He who 
chants this mantra attains all his desires and attains 
bliss with Sri Rama. Now let us show the form of the 
couple mantra — behind Omkara Na second letter 
~Ma” third letter “Si” fourth letter “ta” fifth letter “Ra” 
sixth letter “Ma” seventh letter “Bhyam” eighth letter. 


Those who are exclusive devotees of Sri Rama are 
the ultimate owners of it. 


REA arda aa Waledal [noe UMA Heita 
delaorsticefirifernelnt aasieordqpoodienta 
SCUIALATAAM Taq Arosa aelreplaateenety 
NA: y RIAA SIA | 


Meaning:- Sri Rama is the ultimate cause of all. There 
are two forms of the same Sri Rama, Parichinna and 
Aparichhinna. In his Parichinna form, Shri Ram is 
situated in the Saket loka midst of his friends in 
Pramodvan and performs only Raas. The second 
unbroken form, which is the cause of the origin of the 
entire world, appears from the southern limb of the 
same form, Ksheersagar Narayana, who lies in the 
ocean of milk. From the left limb, Rama Narayana, the 
inhabitant of Ramavaikuntha, appears. Paranarayana 
arises from the heart. From the feet arise Nara- 


Narayana who performs penance in Badrivan. From 
shrimgar arises Nandanandana Sri Krishna. 


Od MdSAAE ARIAAeCALA AMR Ag calot 
ASAA colle awa et Adele ta Uacdled 

Het Aya Aalawdiala AIS AAAA TGT aq 
Telos Ud Hret pdha a ud cafefaenr: Brats 
saps ARRA ATA Uded PALM Teles: 
AINA ARISE | 


Meaning:- Thus all the incarnations appear from the 
lines of the feet of Sri Ramachandra and infinite 
millions of Vishnu and Chaturvyuha etc. are produced. 
Such is the immense influence of Aparajiteshwar 
(Ayodhyapati) Sri Rama, before whom Anantakoti 
Paranarayana, Ashtabhuja Narayana and others stand 
with both hands folded and worship Him daily. 
Whenever those innumerable Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva 
and others receive the command from Sri Rama, they 


create, maintain and destroy all the millions of 
universes. They are of two types (1) fractional and (2) 
integral. They both serve Lord Sri Raghukulashrestha. 
The fractions are the demigods like Brahma and Shiva 
and the integral fractions are the incarnations like 
Narayana. 


Matec 1 Era da: Ucd AAAA 
aima TT A Cad Teal Tse FF 

atot raide aa Tiad Aofa 
pagata RaRo Sra favor rep TTC E 
dAl Cals Add Araicela cey [ST AAA Cdt | 


Meaning:- When the soul performs 
Panchangopasana (ie worship of the Sun, Ganesha, 
Shakti, Shiva and Vishnu) for thousands of years, it 
becomes the form of bliss. The Supreme Being 
described in the Chandogya Upanishad, who is one 
and unique, assumed the main five forms with the 


desire to become many. In the past, during the time 
of creation, these five devotees attain the Goloka by 
attaining the worship of Krishna in order. Some 
people go there and reside there and some people 
are entitled to worship Sri Rama and then attain the 
supreme Saketloka. The same God is called a deity 
by entering into the best body like Vishnu and 
worships the deity by entering into the body of the 
lowest human beings living in the mortal world. 


a 
adai A aig adler dredesdicaa at 
samaa ea a Carenexlerate: 

UAPR PRO A AAR Nad dacdaedite | 


Meaning:- All the names of Narayana and others 
appear in the name of the Supreme Lord Sri Ram. 
All the Dhams are produced from His Dham. The 
same divine pastimes of Sri Ram give rise to the 
pastimes of all incarnations. From the same divine 
two-armed transcendental form of Sri Rama, all the 


forms of the Lord, from the four-armed, six-armed, 
eight-armed, ten-armed, etc., to the infinite-armed, 
etc., appear. He is the Lord of Ayodhya, Lord 
Ramachandra, the original cause of all causes. 
There is no other element beyond Him, that is, He is 
the Supreme Being. 


AA AA Slee RA act Hast Hea Aa A 

d A darda. Adl aisa Td Uatctteloataeaia RC 
pioi Teta eel qa slater: Be aafo 

Aw aaea RAPA, Ida Aad Ree 
Ud ya Wert atadan AAA AC AAAAAAA, AAH 
qo paiera Aa AAA Aeatert AAAA 
Met wet Aea. ioaea adaa PST 
PAAA ATA l 


Meaning:- Now write the yantra. For the attainment 
of Rama, the seekers of liberation cannot perfect the 
mantra-like deity without worshiping the Yantra. 
Therefore, one must worship the Yantra. Itis called 


Yantra because it is used to punish (subdue) the 
evils of desire and anger. Now make the instrument 
— first make hexagonal circles of two triangles then 
write circular from all four sides. Then write eight 
teams with twelve thunderbolt spears Sattva Raja 
Tama form three lines write Chaturastrabhugriha 
write four doors in four directions that are full of all 
the characteristics and provide all happiness. 
Surround the Yantra with the seeds of all the 
incarnations and then worship this Yantra always. In 
the middle of the instrument, write the clear 
achievable action according to the ritual. Write the 
name of the seeker Bhag with the sixth inflection on 
the Ran Vij and write two Kurus on both sides of the 
Ran Vij in this manner. 


aa deed distatatard facettad brett 

EMA CUS dL 21T Aetcpronie Hog 
asgi paler Yat pody et sta 
fateracyelt hamra g Ao Hares | 
FIM ATA aaora Aaa HOU acd acted 
Uc Uc TTT act HaC aT 


ate feagepaqd eet ygeaqeead | 


Meaning:- Now write five seeds behind it, namely 
Rin Run Rain Raun Rah, from all sides. After this, 
the ten-letter “Hum Janaki Vallabhaaya Svaha” 
should be purified and wrapped by the intelligent. In 
the six angles like Agni Kona, write the six postures 
( 1. Ram Hridaya Namah 2. Rim Shirase Svaha 3. 
Rum Shikhayai Vashat 4. Rain Kavachaya Hum 5. 
Raum Netrabhya Vaushaat 6. Rah Astraya Phat) in 
order. Write the seed Hum in the front of the angle 
and write the alphabet mantra which has 47 letters 
in the eight-petalled. Write six six letters in seven 
groups and five letters in the eighth group. Cham 
Cham Jm Jm Jm. Tm thm dm dm nm. Tam tham 
dam dham nam. Pm Fm Bm Bm Man. Yam Ram 
Lam Vam. Sham Sham Sam Hum. Lam ksm is. 
With these letters, the knower of the essence should 
surround Chaturastra within three Bhugrihas in the 
direction of the eastern countries, write Nrishimha 
seed Ksraun and Varaha seed Hum, both seeds. 


This device is worthy of worship in all ways. By 
worshiping it, man attains Bhukti (Satvik Bhoga) and 
Mukti. Now he writes the second method of the 
Yantra 


ALAS Tal [TTT Te loreal aA spate HOt SIRIA 
AACA Aleelodat A MAAA, HSY A Ae Ae 


IO" ech cla HAA AATOY ATA Heat 
Paleriad KMart Aerde fated: | 
Riagg dem dTa anean AAA 
aga Aara rA Aer Ata ol AA 
qota | 


Meaning:- Or write Omkara with the letters of Sri 
Rama Mantras in order in the six corners from the 
middle of the instrument. (Write Om Ram Om Ra 
Om Ma Om Ya Om Na Om Mah as follows) and 
(Write Kamabij Klim in the joint of the six angles with 
the position of the limbs, i.e. Klimram Hridaya 
Namah. Klimrim Shirase Svaha. Klimrun Shikhayai 
Vashat Write Astraya Phat as follows) Write Maya 


seed Aim in forehead and write the alphabet mantra 
of 47 letters in saffron ie eight petals as before in 
order then wrap it with ten letters mantra then write 
Kadi letters and write seeds of both Nrishimha 
Varaha in ten directions of the ritualistic worship. 
Write it in silver or in a golden banquet vessel and 
worship it. 


SMA decir edlel STL E oA Easa 
areta me Act tad: STTS 
daadaa? SIS FAld-Sa AAAA TE 
qed ddl rated fasraretiad age a TG: TAA AAA 
ddl ded dega ae Sé SCT Tae 
adad [Tarca total Ao AA STT eT 
TAMA YAAA Vallee ANTA Ale TAA 
dete salad Asta AAA Watley [aor sat: LAA 
Hef iat aaron Faectatela: | 


Meaning:- Hum Janaki Vallabhaaya Svaha” This is 
the ten-syllable mantra Ksraun Hum is the seed of 
both the Nrishimha and Varaha mantras. Now say 


the Mala Mantra Hrim Shrim Klim and say Om 
Namo. Then say the Bhagavate Pad then say 
Raghunandanaya so then say 
Rakshoghnavishadaya then say Madhur Pad behind 
then say Prasanna so say then Vadanaya say so 
behind Amit Tejase say so then say Balaya say 
Ramaya Vishnuve Namah. Such was the mantra. 
Om Namo Bhagavate Raghunandanaya 
Rakshoghna Vishadaya Madhura Prasanna 
Vadanaaya Amit Tejase Balaya Ramaya Vishnuaya 
Namah This garland mantra is said to give the 
desired fruits to human beings. 


36 Utara deal Tatler: UTA Aca Select: | 

AAS RAA AARIA US AA AM BIRSI 
Jich Hea araeleAAeASH AA | A A gA Ta 
Me sora Ad [tell Ae Wad Ud Beet He Ual | 
gran Peay da wyraate leh as Kat TOMA 
ud fated Saara Moa ae fader 
recat BARAR trove aftardenteerdrel 
bron Buel Aa MAAA AAAA, Rat dal 


Meade A goaa, Brae: 
yisatsedateients: Yel: Hard aole diel td 
AA Riga ARARA UA ATAU. We A 


Pod Goll AA NAA Had: SF PRİ Bet Ise 


deal upaa | 


Meaning:- Om Sim Sitaai vadan Namah at the end. 
This is called Sri Sita Mantra. In this mantra, 
worship Sri Rama with the limbs and covers. After 
worshiping, one should make a ball of the best 
yantra and hold it. This yantra is the destroyer of all 
sufferings and it is the one that gives people the 
attainment of sons and grandsons. He is the giver 
of all riches. These thunderbolts are used in other 
bewitching, killing, enchanting, exterminating and 
other acts. Much to say, this device is going to give 
all perfection to human beings and destroy sorrows. 
One who performs the best means should wear the 
Yantra in accordance with the prescribed rituals. 
Place the deities (Ganesh, Durga, Kshetrapala, 
Saraswati etc.) with your family in front of the door of 


Sri Rama and worship them. After that, purify your 
body and perform the main worship. The wise 
should perform the sixteen-fold worship and worship 
in the eleventh way or with the five-fold worship. 
After this, chant Sri Rama with all the powers and 
coverings, then offer obeisances for the pleasure of 
Sri Rama. Thus, those who worship Yantraraja enjoy 
all the pleasures in this world and attain the supreme 
Sri Saketloka with me 


BEA ARIA WLM AAA AT Wetaogl TC dT 
wierd: acA get ott AANE Act A He 
Mela Hea Teta Aisi maA Prater | 
Qena gA day face | 


Meaning:- The sage of this Sri Rama Sharanagata 
Mantra is Sri Ramachandra, Gayatridevi is the 
chand, Paramatma Sri Ramachandra is the deity, 
Ran is the seed, Namah is the power, and it is used 
to chant for the fulfillment of all desires. After 
cleansing the hands with the original mantra, place 
the first seed in the palm of the hand and place it in 


both the remaining letters in the fingers according to 
the ritual. 


AF LUA ALAM A: ATAA AAAA 12T 
Wold Tea Bre at Adel ara BA TC 
fad TATA HTAGE rag Asa Aa ATC 
AA diol seal He AR aA ac aot Seley 
TAA MAR AA STATA TRAST ATS TSS TTT: 
sikaa aena dac aTait at aerate ot 


Aoa Sgt AAPA iec T HAL A Stoller Tot: 
TEA AALAN | 


Ah aled Aga ANAA l 
SA Age Ad sos: HAAGAN II 


aata SITO Balad Yor | 
Uotlacttadat eneleathsrecret facet I 


