4 
THE 


HYMNS OF THE RIGYVEDA © 
TRANSLATED WITH A POPULAR COMMENTARY 


BY 


RALPH T. H, GRIFFITH, M.A.,C.1.E. 


FORMER PRINCIPAL OF THE BENARES COLLEGE, AND LATE 
DIRECTOR PUBLIC INSTRUCTION N,-W. P. AND OUDN. 


a 


Third Edition. 
COMPLETE IN TWO VOLUMES, 


.0: 
Sern: meneame cael ee eee al 
q@ ® 


VOL. I. 


BENARKS : 
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY E. J, LAZAR'S AND CO. 


ere 


1920. 
All rights reserved, 


a VAVIUINY SAURVIRVINYNIN SNP UYU. SUNMRUNVINVIOUISMAY YISO 
*, Cal 


(p 

Cs 9 
fn Printed and Published by Dr. Jagannath Prasad, a 
ff \ 
“ M. B, B.S. Propristor, E, J. Lazarus & Co, “a 
r = ' 
~, at the Medical Hall Press, Benares. is 
ve) vy 
* - 


v~ 


we “a 
EOS VAIO SISOS IDS 


CONTENTS. 


Page. 
PRIFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. v, 
‘ ° 

Hymns, Translation and Cummentary :-— 

Book I, oe ss on 1 
. 

ys IT. as 4 ae 959 
ge ~ AIL . Ls bak 315 
r IV. e 391 
i; V. \ 46+) 
oe |UOG : ays) 
Appenpix L—IIymn I. 126 6,7; and L179. ” 649 
Arpenpix IT —Metra he : Set se 651 
657 


Index of Hymns 


Index of Names, Htc. a hs sa 673 


PREFACE 


TO THE FIRST EDITION, 


“Whatcan be more tedious than the Veda,and yet what can be 
more interesting, if ouce we know that ib is the firat word penen by 
the Aryan man ?” 

“ The Veda has a two-fold interest : it belongs to the history of 
the world and to the history of India......... As loog as man contivurs 
to take an interest in the history of his race, and as long as we collect in 
Jibraries and museums the relics of former ages, the first placein that 
long row of books which contains the records of che Aryan branch of 
mankind, will belong for ever to the Rig-veda,” F. Max MULLER. 

Tis work is an attempt to bring within easy reach of all 
readers of English a translation of the Hymns of the Rigvega 
which, while aiming especially at close fidelity to the letter and 
the spirit of the original, shall be as readable and intelligible 
as the nature of the subject and other circumstances permit. 


Veda, meaning literally knowledge, is,the name given to 
certain ancient works which formed the foundation of the early 
religious belief of the Hindus, These are the Rigveda, the 
Simaveda, the Yajurveda, and the Atharvaveda ; and of these 
the Rigveda--so called because its Sanhité or collection of 
mantras or hymns consists of Richas or verses intended for loud 
recitation--is the oltlest, the most important, and the most 
geneially interesting, some of its hymus b-ing rather Indo-Eu- 
ropean than Hindu, and representing the conditign of the Aryans 
beforé their final settlement in India, + Thesq four Vedas are 
considered to be of divine ctigin and to have existed from all 
eternity, the Rislis or sacred poetg to whom the hy {ne are ascr- 
ibed being merely inspired seers who saw or received them by, 
sight directly from the Suprgme Creator, In accordance with this — 
belief these sacred books have been preserved ‘and hénded down 
with the most reverential care from generation to generation, and 


® 

; € 

“i » PREFACE YO THE FIRS? EDITION. 
e 


have accompanied the creat army of Agyan immig®ante in their 
@eward march from the Land of the Seven@Rivers to@me Indian 
Ocean and the Bay %f Bengal. Each of these four Vedas is divided 
into twy distinct parts, one the Mantra containing prayer and 
praise, the other the Brilmana containing d: tailed directiogs for 
the performance of the ceremonies at which the Mantras were 
to be used, and explanations of tic legends connected ede” 
them, the whole forming a vast body of sacred literature in verse 
and in prose, devotional, ceremonial, expository and theusephic. 


The Sanhita of the Rigveda is a collection of bymns and songs 
brought by the remote ancestors of the present Ilimdus froin their 
ancient homes on the banks of the Indus where they had been 
first used in adoration of the Father of Heaven, of the Sun, of 
Dawn, of, Agni or the God of fire, in prayers for health, wealth, 
lang life, offspring, cattle, victory in battle, and freedom from 
tho bonds of sn: and cele bration of the ever-renewed warfare bet- 
ween the beneficent thunder-wielding Indra, the special champion 
of the Aryans, and the malevolent powers ‘of darkness and the 


de@xons of drought who withheld the rain of heaven, 
@ 


* Of these hymns there are more than a thousand, arranged in 
ten Mandalas, Circles, or Books, in accordance with an ancient 
tradition of what we should call authorship, the hymns ascribed 
to the same RiShi, inspired poet or seer, or to the same school or 
family of Rishis being placed together. Within these divisions 
the hymngare generally arrang7u more or Fess in the order of the 
deities to whom they are addressed, Agni and Indra a%e the 
Gods most freqacntly invoked. Hymns to Agni generally bone 
firsts next comegthose Rdd- essed to Indga, ande after them those 
in honour of other deitigs or deified objects of adoration, The ninth 
Book is Sua almost efMirelg to Soma, the dwified juice used 
“in pouring lbateons to the Gods, and the tenth forms a sort of a p- 
pendix of peculifand miscellaneous materiale, Independently 
of the evidence afforded by Indian tradition, there can be no rea- 
sonable doubt of the great antiquity of the Rigveda Sanhita 


= PREFACE TO THF FIRST FDITIOY. : Vil 
, : oe 


¢ 


which, Wh the exception of the Egyptian monwmental recorgs 
and papyrug rolls, and the recently discovered Assyrign liter:ttu- 
re, 1s prokably the oldest literary document in existence. Bat st 
seems impossible to fix, with anything approgching to certainty, 
any date for the composition of the hymns. In the first Hymn 
of Book I. ancient and recent or modern Rishis or seers are 
spoken of, and there is other internal evidence that some hymns 
‘aramuch older than others. Colbrooke came to the conclusion, 
from astronomical calculations, that acertain Vedic calendar 
was composed in the fourteenth century before the Christian era; 
from which it would follow, that as this calendar must have been 
prepared after the arrangement of the Rigveda and the inclusion 
of the most modern hymn, the date of the carliest hymn might 
be carried back, perhaps, soute thousand years. The correctness 
of Colebrooke’s conclusions, however, has been questioned, and 
some recent scholars consider that his calculations arc of a very 
vague character, and do not yield any such definite date. In the 
absence of any direct evidence, the opinions of scholers vary and 
must continue to vary with regard to the age of tle Ilymns of 
the Rigveda, ‘‘The reasons, however,” (to quote Professor 
Weber*) “by which we are fully justified in regardig the lijer- 
ature of India as the most ancient literature of which written 
records on an extensive scale have been handed dovn to us are 
these :-In the more ancient parts of the Rigveda Sanhita, we 
find the Indian race settled on the north-westirn borders 
of India, in the Panjib, and even beyond the Parjib, on the 
Kubha, or in Kabul, The gradual spread of th: race from 
these seats towards the east, beyond the Sarasvati and over Ii- 
ndustiin as far as the Ganges, can be traced in the later portions 
of the, Vedic writings almost step by step. The’ writings of the 
following period, that ov the epic, consis of avkoun:s of the in- 
ternal conflicts aneong the conqucrors of Hindustia themselves, 


* The History of Indian I a by Albregnt Weber, Trubner’s 
Oriental Series. 1878, 


Viil PREFACE 2O THE FIRST EDITION. 


e 

as®for instance, the Mahabharata ; or of the*farthoy%pread of 
Brébmanism towards the south, as, for anstance, the Réméyana. 
Tfewe connect with this the first fairly &ecurate ifformation 
about India which We have from a Greek source, viz, from Me- 

gasthenes,* it becomes clear that at the time of this writer the 
Brahmanising of Hindustan was already completed, while aé the 
time of the Periplus (see Lassen, 4. AA., ii. 150, n53 J. St, il 
192) the very southern-most point of the Dekhan had already 
become the seat of the worship of the wife of Siva. Whata 

Series of years, of centuries, must necessarily have elapsed before 
this boundless tract of country, inhabited by wild and vigorous 
tribes, could have been biought over to brahmanism !” 

i must beg ry HKuropean readers not to expect to find in 
these hymns ind songs tho sublime poetry that uney meet with 
in Isaiah or Job or the Psalms of David ‘'To me,” says Profes- 
sor Wilson, f‘the verses of the Veda, except in their rhythm, 
and in a soe i passages, appear singularly prosaic for so carly 
an era ag thai of their probable comp sition, and at any rate their 

chief value Jes not in their fancy but in their facts, social and 
religious. Pyofessor Cowell, also, says : “The poetry of the Rig- 
veda is 8 sing:larly deficient in that simplicity and natural pathos 
or sublimity which we naturally look for in tha songs of an early 
period of sflioation The language and style of most of the 
hymns is sijgularly artificial......Occasionally we meet with 
fine outburst| of poetry, especially in the hymns addressed to 
the dawn, but these are never Jong sustained, and as a rule we 
find few grand similos or metarhors.” TRe worst fault of all, 
in the Collection regardedvas a whole, is the intolerable monetony 
of 2 great sumber of the hymns, a monotony which reaches 
its climax in the niath Book which cgnsistsealmoat entirely 
of invocations of Soma Pavamaia, or the deified Soma juice 
in process of training and pugification, The agreat interest of 


_ ee eee meet 


°* * Who as smbassador of Seleucus resided for some time at the court 
of Chandragupta. offs reportg are preserved to us chietly in the of 
Arrian who lived in the second céntury A. D, 


dees meee ge reece ma gg ee en ee me eee —~ ae a a 


a PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. | 1X 
the Ritwreda te in fact, historical rather than poetical. "As 
in its original language we see the roots and shoots of the 
languages of Greek and Latin, of Kelt, Feuton and Slavonian, 
so the deities, the myfhs, and the religious beliefs and practices 
of the Veda throw a flood of light upon the religions of all 
European countries before the introduction of Christianity. As 
the science of comparative philology could hardly have existed 
without the study of Sanskrit, so the comparative history of the 
religions of the warld would have been impossible without the 
study of the Veda. 

My translation, which follows the text of Max Miiller’s 
splendid six-volume edition, is partly based on the work of the 
great scholiast Sdyana who was Prime Minister at the court of 
the King of Vijayanagar—in what is now the Madras District 
of Bellary—in the fourteenth century of our era? Sayana’s 
Commentary has been consulted and carefully considered for the 
general sense of every verse and for the meaning of every word, 
and his interpretation has been followed whenever it seemed 
rational, and consisteat with the context, and with other passages 
in’which the same word or words occur. With regard to 
Sayana’s qualifications as an interpreter of the Veda there is, or 
was, a conflict of opinion among [European scholars. Professor 
Wilson—whose translation of the Rigveda is rather a version of 
Sayana’s paraphrase—was firmly persuaded that he had a “know- 
ledge of his text far beyond the pretensions of any European 
scholar, and must have been in possession of all the interpretations 
which had nase perpetuated by " taditional teaching from the 
earliest times.” Yet, as Dr. J. Muir has pointed out; Professor 
Wilson in the notes to his trrinslation admits thi he “occasignally 
failed to find ir, ‘Sdyana a perfectly satistactory guide,” that “the 
scholiast is evidently puzzled,” and that his explanations are 
obscure. On the other hand Professor Roth—the author of the 
Vedic portion of the great St. Petcrsburg Lexicon-~says in his 
preface to that work: “so far as regards one of the branches of 


x e PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDIT:O! 
es ¢ P ‘ 


VeGic literature, the treatises on theology and worshi{,; we can 
dtire no better guides than these commentators, so exact in all 
respects, who,follow*their texts word by word, who, so long as 
even the semblance of a misconception might arise, are never 
weary of repeating what they have frequently said before, and 
who often appear as if they had been writing for us foreigners 
rather than for their own priestly alumni who had grown upein 
the midst of these conceptions and impressions. Here......they 
are in their proper ground. he case, however, is quite different 
when the same men assume the tack of interpreting the ancient 
collections of hymns..,...Here were required nat only quite 
diffgrent qualifications for interpretation but alsoa greater freedom 
of judgment and a greater breadth of view aad of historical 
intuitions. Freedom of judgment, hawever, was wanting to 
priestly learning, whilst in India no one has ever had any concep- 
tion of historical development. The very qualities which have 
made these commentato:s exccllent guides to an understanding 
of the theological treatises, render them unsuitable canductors on 
tha far older and quite differently circurrstanced domair. As 
the «rcalled chass'c:l Sanskrit was perfecdy familiar to them, 
they sought its ordinary idicm in the Vedte hymis also. Since 
any difference in the ritual appeared to them inconceivable and 
the present forms were believed to have evinced from the 
beginning of the world, they fancied that the patriarchs of the 
Indian religion must have sacri“ced in theavery sare manner. 
As the recéynized mytholegical and classical systems of teir 
own age appeared ro them unassathibis and revealed verities, 
they must necessgrily (s= the commentat m5 thou he) be discofer- 
able in that centre point of revelauSit, the hyions of the ancient 
Rishis, who Sad, indeed,® lived in famrbar Pewee with the 
‘Gods, and possessed jar higher wisdom tha:: the succeeding 
yenerations......I tis never occurred to any o-.e to make our 
understanding of the Hebréw books of the Old Testament 
depend on the Talmud and the Rabbins, while there are not 


PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.” X1 


C 5 


wantingesscholars who hold it as the duty ofa conscientious 
interpreter of the Veda to translate i in conformity with Sayana, 
Mahtdhara, etc, ‘Consequently, we do not believe like H. “HH. 
Wilson, that Sdyana, for instance, inderseond the expressions of 
the Veda better than any European interpreter ; but we think 
that a conscientious Luropean interpreter may understand the 
Veda far better and more correctly than Sdyana. We do not 
esteem it our first task to arrive at that understanding of the 
Veda which was current in India some centuries ago, but to 
search out the sense wiuich the poets themselves have put into 
their hymns and utterances. Hence we are of opinion that the 
writings of Sdyana and the other commentators do not form a 
rule for the interpreter, but are merely one of those helps of 
which the latter wili avail himsel: for the execution of his unr- 
doubtedly difficult task, a task which is not to be agcomplished 
at the first onset, or by any single individual,..We have, there- 
fare, endeavoured to follaw the pata ;rescribed by philology, to 
derive from the texts themselves the seuse which they contain, 
by a juxtaposition of all the passages which are cognate in diction 
G1 cantents ;—a tedious and laborious path, in which nefther 
the commentators nor the translators have preceded us. The 
double duty of ex:gete ans lexicogripher has thus devolved 
upsn us. A simple etymological procedure, practised as it must 
be by those who seek to divine the sense of a word from the 
sole consideration of the passage befure them without regard to 
the ten or twenty ” other passages in which it reqirs, cannot 
possibly lead to a correct result.’’ #e 

« Professor Max Miiller says : “‘As the authurs of the Br4h- 
manas were blinded *by thgology, the authc\s of the still later 
Niruktas were @eceived by etymological fictions, and both conspir- 
ed to mislead by their authority later and more sensible com- 
mentators, such as Siyana. Where SAyana ha? no authority» 


ta mislead him, his commentary is,’at all events gational ; but 


*On the lilerpretatian of the Veda, by J. Muir Esq. 


xii “PREFACE TO, THE IRST EDITIQN. 


° 
still” eliis scholastic notions would never allow him to shank the 
frge interpretation which comparative study gf these venerable 
docurhents forces ugon the unprejudiced scholar. We must 
therefore discover ourselves the real veStiges of these ancient 
poets.” 

Professor Benfey says: “Every one who has carefully 
studied the Indian interpretations is aware that absolutely no 
continuous tradition extending from the composition of the Veda 
to their explaaation by Indian scholars, can be assumed ; that, 
on the ‘contraty, between the genuine poetic remains of Vedic 
antiquity and their interpretations a long-continued break in 
tradition must have intervened, out of which at most the 
comprehension of some particulars may have been rescued and 
handed déwn to later times by means of liturgical usages and 
words, formule, and perhaps, also, poems connected therewith. 
Besides these remains of tradition, which must be estimated as 
very scanty, the interpreters of the Veda had, in the main, 
scarcely any other helps than those which, for the most part, 
aré still at our command, the usage of the classical speech, and 
the grammatical and, etymological-lexicographical investigation 
of words. At the utmost, they found some aid in materials 
preserved iff local dialects ; but this advantage is almost entirely 
outweighed by the comparison which we are able to institute 
with the Zend, and that which we can make (though here we 
must of course proceed with caution and prudence) with the 
languages cognate to the Sanskrit, —a comparison which has 
already supplied so many helps to a clearer understanding of the 
Vedas. Brt quite irrespectively of all particular aids, the Indian 
method of interpr.tation Secomes in, its whole essence an entirely 
false one, owing to the prejudice with whith it chooses to 
conceive the ancient circumstances and ideas which have become 
‘quite strange to ity, from its own religious stand-point, so many 
centuri¢s mors recent, whiist, an the other hand, an advantage 
for the comprebension of the whole is secured to us by the 


e 


~ PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. xiii 
‘ . : : ‘ ° ae 
acquainmayce (drawn from analogous relations) with the life, the 
conceptions, the waits, of ancient peoples and popular songs, 
which we possess,—an advastage which, ,even if the Indians 
owed more details that: they actually do owe, to tradition, would 

not be eclipsed by their interpretation. ’’* 

A very different opinion of the value of the Indian commen- 
tators was held and expressed by Professor Goldstiicker. ‘‘With- 
out the vast tuformation,’’ he says, “which those commentators 
have disclosed to us,—without their method of explaining the 
obscurest text,—in one word, without their scholarship, we 
should still stand at the outer doors of Hindu antiquity.” 
He ridicules the assertion that a European scholar can understand 
the Veda more correctly ‘than Siyana, or arrive more nearly at 
the meaning which the Rishis gave to their own hymns, and yet 
even this stanch champion of the Indian commentasors “cannot 
be altogether acquitted (as Dr. J. Muir says and shows) of a 
certain heretical tendency to deviate in practice from the 


=~ 


interpretations of Sdyana.”’ 

The last quotation which I shall make in connexion with 
this question is from Professor E. B. Cowell’s Preface to his 
edition of Vol. V. of Wilsan’s Translation of the Rig-Keda 
Sanhita ; ““This work does not pretentdto give a complete 
translation of the Kig-Veda, but only a faithful image of that 
particular phase of its interpretation which the medizval Hindus, 
as represented by Sayana, have preserved. This view is in 
itself interesting and of an historical value ; but far wider and 
deeper study is needed to pierte to the real meaning of these 
old bymns. Sayana’s commentary will always retain a value 
of its own,—even its mistakes are Sich irteresting,—but bis 
explanation mlst not fora moment bar the progress of scholar- 
ship. We can be thankful to him for any real help ;_ but let 
us not forget the debt which we owe to modern scholars, 
espscially to those of Germany. The’ great St. Petersburg 


*On the Inlerpretation of the Veda, by J. Muir Esq. 


xiv “PREFACE TQ, THE VIRST EDITIQN. 


€ ue e 
Dictionary i is indeed a monument of triumphant sroditiggfand it 
has inaugurated a new era inthe interpretation | of the Rig-Veda.” 

“ My translation, wthen, is pardy based on the commentary 
of SAyana, corrected and regulated by®*rational probability, 
context, and intercomparison of similar words and passages. 
For constant and most valuable assistence in my labour I am 
deeply indebted to the works of many illustrious scholars, 
some deparied, aud soiae, Guppily, sai! flourisbirg. Tani thank- 
ful to Siyaia, my first guide to the hymns of the Rigveda ;_ ta 
my revered Master, Professor H. H. Wilson ; ta Professors Roth, 
Benfey, Weber, Ludwig, Max Miller, Grassmann, and Monier 
Williams, and Dr. Jobn Miunr and Mr. Wallis. I have also 
consulted, and shall probably cuoake*more use beacafter ot, the 
works of M. Berpaigne and Dr. Oldenberg ; + or can T omit 
to mention the Svelenzig Lreder dis Rigveda by Geldner and 
Kaegi, Der Rigveda, by Kavu, and Hymns fron the Regveda, by 
Professor Peterson of Bombay, all of which I have read with 
pleasure and profit. 

But it must not ve supposed that Kuropean students and 
interpreters of the Vega claim anything like infallibility, comple- 
teness, or finality for the results ta which their researches have 
led them. All modern scaolars will allow that many hymns are 
dark as the darkest oracle, that, as Professor Max Miller SAYS, 
there.are whole verses which, as yet, yield no sense whatever, and 
words the meaning of which we can only giles, As in the 
interpretation of the more difhcult books of the Old Testament 
and the Homeric poems, “S08 in the explanation of the Veda 
ee aiplete wiccess, if ever attainable, can be attained only by the 
e 


labours of penerntnt of ehigiace: . 


The Hymns are contpased in various metres? some of which 
aye exceedingly simple and others camaratively complex and 
‘elaborate, and two. of more different metres are frequently found 
in the same Hymn ; one Hymg, for ins:ance, in Book I. shows 


nine distinct varieties in the sarne number of verses. The verses 


PREFACE TO THE ,FSRST EDITION. , XV 
e 


; 


* : 
or starM™s consist of three or more—generally three or fgur— 
Péddas,,semi-hemgtichs or lines, each of which contains eight, 
eleven, or twelve syllables? sometimes, bat rarcly, five, and still 
less frequently four’ or more than twelve. As regards quantity 
the first syllables of the line are not stricily defined, but the last 
four are regular, the measure being iambic in the eight and 
twelve syllable verses and trecsaic in these of eleven syllables. 
Partly by wy of saf guard apa‘nst the besetting tempiation to 
paraphrase and expand, and pardy ia the hope of preserving 
however imperfectly, something of the form of the Hymns, 
I have translated each verse by a verse syllabically commen- 
surate with the original and generally divided into corresponding 
hemistichs. 

The verses consisting of three or four ocrasyllabic lines are 
tolerabiy well represented by the common octosyllabi@ or dimeter 
iambic metre which I fav: -emploved. In other verses I Save 
not attempted to reproduce or imiftte rhe rhythm or metre, 
of the orsaisal : such 4 task, suoposing its sstisfactory completion 
to be possbil2, would require mure time and labour than I 
could spare far the purpose. All that I heve done, or tried to 
do, is ta show to same extent the ortzinal form of the Hynes 
by rendering them in syllabicaliy commensurate hemistichs 
and verses, as Benfey aud the translators or the Seventy Hymns 
have done for a portion of the Rigveda, and Grassmann for nearly 
the whole of the Collection, 

" For further information regardiag the Rigvedasthe English 
reader is referred to Max Miiller®s Hustory of Ancient Sanskrit 
Leterature, Muir's Original Sanskrit Texts, and Webar’s History 
of Indian Literature ;or if agsimpler an¥ more bapular ex Sosition 
be required, to Mrs. Manning’s Indja*® Ancient and Mediwval, 
or to Kaegr’s Der Rigveda, of which an English translation has 
recently appeared. The student who readssGerman and French 
will, as a matter of course, consult Ludwie’s great work Der 
Rigveda and Bergaigne’s Htudes sur la Religion Védique. 


Xvi “PREPACK Te THE FIRST EDITION. 


Lo conclude, my reasons for publishing this v.ork are 
chiefly these : there is at present no complete translation of 
the Rigveda in English, Professor *Wilson’s version—of which 
the last two volumes have only lately apptared—being “only a 
faithful image of that particular phase of its interpretation which 
the media-val Hindus, as represented by Siyana, have preserved,” 
and, moreover, the price of Woilsun’s six volumes—upwards ot 
ninety rupees—puts the work beyond the reach of the great 
majority of readers in India. 

I can hardly hope that my work will find acceptance with 
Pardits and Indian scholars inasniuch as I venture to deviate 
both widely and frequently from Siyana whom they have been 
taught to regard as infallible. No arguments are likely to shake 
this belief. Nothing short of a course of study similar ta that 
to which tie leaders of the modern school of Vedic interpretation 
have devoted half their ives wil! enable them to see with aur 
eyes and accept our views. I trust, however, that they wil! 
at any rate vive the leaders and the followers of this modern 
school credti for deep devation to ancient Indian literature and 
due admiration of the great Indian scholars who have expounded 
‘¢ sand will acknowledge that these modern scholars-—however 
mistaken their views may appear io be are labouring sincerely 
and solely to discover and declare the: spimt and the truth of 
the most ancient and venerat.d literary records that are the 
heritage of Aryan man. 
KoraGiniaNetcike : x. T. H. GRIFFITH. 
May 25ph, 1589. o 7 

8 Norg. 

This seconu editioh of my translation is in the main a 

reprint in compacter and cheaper form, with, some corrections 


: ° @ : ee 
and other improvements in text and commentary, of the original 
four-volume edition. 


w 


IKCOTAGIRI : : R. T. HG. 


: e 


5th Ovteéer, Logo. 


te 


ry 


THE HYTINS OF THE RIGVEDA. 


BOOK THE FIRST. 


pom () one 


HYMN I. Agni, 


IT raup Agni, the chosen Priest, God, minister of sacrifice, 
The hotar, lavishest of wealth. 
2 Worthy is Agni to be praised by living as by ancient seers : 
He shall bring hitherward the Gods. 
3 Through Agniman obtaineth wealth, yea, plenty waxing day 
by day, . 
e Most rich in heroes, glorious. 
4 Agni, the perfect sacrifice which thou encompassest about 
Verily goeth to the Gods, 
5 May Agni, sapicnt-minded Priest,truthful,most glorivusly great, 
The God, come hither with the Gods, a 
6 Whatever blessing, Agni, thou wilt grant unto thy worshipper, 
That, Angiras, is indced thy truth. . 


a 


fad eet eee eee See aE ee neers 

The first two hymns of this Book are ascribed to the Lishi or seer 
Madhuchchhandas Vaisvamitra, a son or descendant of the famous 
Visvamitra. The deity to whom this hymn ig addressed is Ag@i, the 
God of fire, the most prominent, next to Indra, of the deities uf the 
Rigveda, Acniisthe messenger and mediator betweenearth and he vem, 
Announcing tothe Gods the hymns, and conveying to them the obla- 
tions of their worshippers, inviting them with the sound of his crack- 
ling flames and bringing them down to the place of sacrifice. AS con- 
centrating in himself the various sacrificial duties of different classes 
of buman priests, Agni is culled the Purvhita or chosen priest, the 
preposttus or preses ke isa Aityij,a& priest or minister who sacrifices 
at the proper seasons, anda Z/otar, an invoking priostea herald who 
calls the Gods to enjoy the offering, ‘Adl riches are at his disposal, and 
beisthe most bountiful rewarder, both directly aud imfirectly, of the 


pious whose oblations ha carries to the Gods. 2 aAncrsnt seers : 
said by Sayanato be Bhrigu, ,Angiras, emd othtys. The expression 
indicates the existence of earlier hymns. 3 Most rich wn heroes: 
the heroes here spoken of, who accgmpany the acquisigion aud increase 
of wealth, are brave sons and dependents 4 Perfect: uninter- 
rupted by Rakshasas or fiends, who are unable to mar a sacrifice which 
Agni protects on all sides. 6 Angiras : Yere o “narmae of Agni, 


The Angirases appear to have beep regarded as a,race of higher 
beings between Gods and men, the typical first sacrifioers, whose 
ritual is the pattern whioh later priests must follow, 

® 


9 | *PHR.AY MNS OF [BOOK f 
7 Téthev,dispeller of the night, O Agni,day bday with prayer 


Brénging thee reverence, we come; ¢ 
8 Ruler of sacrifices, guard of Law eternal, gadiant Ope, 
Increasing in thing own abode, 
9 Be to us easy of approach, even as a father to-his son ; 
Agni, be with us for our weal, 
HYMN If. Vaéyu. 
Bravtirut Vayu, come, for thee these Soma drops have been 
prepared ; 
Drink of them, hearken to our call. 
2 Knowing the days, with Soma juice poured forth, the singers / 
glorif 
Thee, Viy u, with their hymns of praise. 
3 Vayu, thy penetrating stream goes forth unto the worshipper, 
___ Far-spreading for the Soma draught. 


8 Law eternal. The word used to denote the conception of the order 
of tho: world is itd. Everything in the universe which is conceived 
as showing regularity of action may be gaid to have the rita for its principles 
In its most general application the conception expressed by the 
word occupigd to some extent the placo of natural and moral law, 
fate, or the will of a supreme God. See Wallis, Vhe Cosmology of the 
Rigveda, p 92. In thine own abode: své ddme, sud domo, in tha 
sacrificial hal] or chamber in which fire-worship is performed, and in 
which the fire (Agni) increases as the oblations of clarified butter 
are poured upon it by the priest. 

1 Vdyuw; God of the wind. Soma drops: libations of thre 
juice d the Soma, or Moon-plant, said to be the Acid Asclepias or 
Sarcostema Viminalis. «The plant was gathered by moonlight on 
certajn mountains, stripped of its leaves, and then carried to the 
“place of sacrifice ; the stalks having been thore crushed by tha 
priests were sprinkled with water and placedon a sieve or stainer, 
whence, after further pressure, the acid juice trickled into a vassel 
called Drona; after which it was mixed with flour etc., made 
to ferment, and then offered in libations to the Gods or drunk by the 
Brahmans, by both of whom {te exhilarating qualities were supposed 
to be highly prized. This famous plant has remsined unidentified till 
recently (see Max Muller, Biographies of Words, Appendix Il )¥Dr. 
Aitchison has lately stated that Sema must be the Ephedra pachyclade, 
whioh in the tMrirud valley is said to bear the name of hum, huma, 
and yahma. This supposition is contirmed by Dr. Jogeph Bornmidller, 
a botanst long ra Uicnbin ornate. who identifies the Soma plant 
with some kind of Ephedra, probably Ephedra djstachya, but who 
remarks that dif@ent varieties of Epkedra arc to be found from Siberia 
to the [berian peninsula, so that we must give up the hope of determin- 
ing the original Pomo'of the Aryss by means of the habitat of the Soma 
plant (Quarterly Raview, No, 354, October 1894, p. 455). 2 
Knowing the days : knowing the proper days for sacrifices ; or perhaps, 
knowing or marking the time of daybreak, the exact time for the 
cemmencement of sacrificial rites, a) Hymns of praise: wkthas, 


HY AN 3.] : , THE Rie VEDA. 3 


4 These, 4adra- Vaya, have been shed ; come for our ofered 

"  dainties’ sake: ° 
The dreps are ye&rning for you both. 2° 

5 Well do ye mark jibations,ye Vayuand Indra, rich in appl ! 
So come ye swiftly hitherward, 

6 Vayu and Indra,come to what the Suma-presser hath prepared : 
Soon, Heroes, thus I make my prayer. 

7 Mitra, of holy strength, I call, and foe-destroying Varuna, 
Who make the oil-fod rite complete. 

8 Mitraand Varuja, through Law,lovers and cherishers of Law, 
Have ye obtained your “mighty power. 

9 Our Sages, Mitra-Varuna, of wide dominion, strong by birth, 
Vouchsafe us strength that worketh well. 

HYMN III. Asvins, 
Ye’ Asvins, rich in treasure, Lords of splendour, having 
nimble hands, 

Accept the sacrificial food, « 


Yauds recited or spoken,in opposition to verses that are chanted or sung. 

4 Indraand Vayuare here conjointly addressed in a dual compound, 
Indravaya. Indra was the favourite national deity of. the Aryan 
Judians in the Vedic Age, and more hymus are dedicated to his honour 
than to the praise of any other divinity. He is the God who S%eigns 
over the intermediate region or atmosphere; he fights against and 
conquers with his thunderbolt the demons of drought and darkness, 
an] is in general the type of noble heroism. 7 According to 
Sayana, Mitra presides over the day as Varuna over the night ; henee 
the closest connexion subsists between these two deities who arg more 
frequeatly invoked together than Varuna is inYoked singly; together 
they uphold and rule the earth and sky, together they guard he 
world, together they promote religious rites, avenge sin, aud are the 
lords of truth and light, Oul-fed: performed with ghritdm (ihe 
modren ght), and olarified butter, or butter which has been boiled 
gently and then allowed to cool. ‘Fhe butteristhen used for oulinary 
purposes and also offered in sacrifice to the Gods. Complete: by 
grauting the worshi ipper’s prayer, 8 Through Law: i. 6. in 
accordance with rttd, the eternal law or everlasting order of tha 
universe, See I. 1. 8. 

1 ‘The Ayvius seem to have been a*puzale even tothe oldest Indian 
Commentators. Yaska thus refers to them in the NiruMa, ° SUA 
‘Next in order ane the dgities whose sphese is the heaven; of these 
the Asvins are the first to arrivee.. Who theff are these Asvins '?<Heaven 
and Earth,’ say seme;‘Day and Night,’ say others; ‘The Sun and 
Moon,’ say others ; ‘Two King, performers of holy acfs,’ say the legen- 
dary writers’ Professor Roth thus speaks of these Gods : ‘The two 
Agvins, though, like the ancient interpreters of the Vada, we are ky 
no means agreed as to the conception, .of theirgckaracter, hold never- 
theless, a perfectly distinot position m the entire body of the Vedic 
deities of light. They are the earliest bringers of light in the 
morning sky, who in their charjots hasten onward before the dawn, ° 


° THE HY MNS OR *  [BQOR I. 


®e 
2 Yo Asvins, rich in wondrous deeds, yo. heroes ed of our 
praise, 
A@cept our songs with mighty thought® e 


3 Nasatyas, wonder-workers, your’ are these libations with 
clipt grass: : 
Come ye whose paths are red with flame. 
4 0 [ndra, monres te bright, come, these libations dong 
for thee, 
Thus by fine Raper purified. 
fy Urged by the holy singer, sped by song, come, Indra, to the 
pr aye rs 
Of the libation- pouring priest. 
6 Avproach, O Indra, hasting thee, Lord of Bay Horses to 
he prayers: 
In our libation take delight. 
7 Ye Visvadevas, who protect, reward, and cherish men, 
approach ¢ 
Yeur worshipper’s drink-offering 
8 Ye Visvedevas, swift at work, come hither quickly to the 
draucls, 
Ax milch-kine hasten to their stalls. 
3 ‘Tho Visvedevas, changing shape like serpents, fearless, vcid 


of guile, 
and prepare the way for ber,—J. Muir, O. S. Texts, V. 234. Nim- 


ble hands: hands outstretchad and quick to seize the offerings, 

A Itech in wondrous deeds : some of these deeds for the protection 
and beuelit of those who craved tho aid of the Asving are mentioned in 
_Slgansa CXIT., CX VI, and the three following, of this Book. 3 
Nasatyas, derived by JIndian Commentators from nme+asatya ‘not 
untrue,’ {s a name of common occurrence applied jointly to the 
two Aavins. Vdasatya is said to be specially the name of one of the Asvins, the 
other being then called Dasra, wonder-worker,’ or perhaps ‘destroyer’ 
(ofthe wicked ) With clips grass. The sacred Ausa grass (Poa 
synosuroides), after having the roots out off, is spread on the vedi 
or altar; and ypon it the libation of So.aa juice, or *oblation of clarified 
butter is poured out. It is also spread over the sacrificial ground or 


floor to serve gs a seat for the Gos and the savcrificers. 4 Thus 
by fine fingers, purified : carefully strained by the priests. 6 
Lord of Boy Horses, Hari§an and Haryagva,, ‘having bay or tawny 
horses,’ are fiequently ee epithe® of Indra. 7 Ye Visve- 


devas: Visvo devah may have originally denoted ‘alé the Gods collect 
ively, though the Introduction of the Visvas under the name wisvadevdh 
or etsvedevdh as a separate troop of deities seems to have taken places 
afian early period, It ig “Sometimes dificult to decide whether the 
exprotion risecdsvd rwfers to all the Gods or the particular troop. 

Sos” Fydsats sppeara to be ahother form of ahimdydsah which 
ig Oxpoeind by Bobtlingk, and Roth as ‘multiform or  varsatile 
—e ae showing the same vagiety of colour and shape, 


HYMN4) ° THE RIGVEDA . 5 


“ e e® 
Bearezz, accept the sacred draught! : 

10 Wealthy in spoil, @nriched with hymns, may 

vatedesire, ° 

With eager love, our sacrifice. ° 

11 Inciter of all pleas#nt songs, inspirer of al] gracions thought, 
Sarasvati accept our rite! 

12 Sarasvati, the mighty flood,—she with her light illuminates, 
She brightens every pious thought, 

HYMN IV. Indra. 

Asagood cow to him who milks, weeall thedoer of fair deeds 
To our assistance day by day. 


bright Saras- 
s” 


oe ne meee 


Sayana explains it as ‘those who have obtained knuwledge univer. 
sally.’ It is more than porbable, says Professor Wilson, that the 
orivin and import of the term were forgotten when Sayana_ wrote. 

Bearers, of riches, according to Sayana. 10 Sarasvati ‘is 
a goddess of some, though not of very great importance in the 
Rigveda As observed by Yaska (Nirukta ii, 23) she is cSlebrated 
both as a river and as a deity...She was, no doubt, primarily a river 
deity , a3 her name, ‘“‘ the watery, olearly denotes, and in this 
capacity she is celebrated in afew separate passages. Allusionis made 
in the Hymns, as well as in the Bidhmanas to sacrificus being per- 
formed on the banks of this river and of the adjoining Drish&dvati: 
and the Sarasvati in particular seems to have been assuciated with the 
reputation for sanctity, which according to the well-known passage* in 
the Institutes of Manu,was ascribed to the whole region,called Brahma- 
vartta, lying between these two small streams, and situated imme. 
diately to the westward of the Jumna. The Sarasvati thus apears to 
have been to the early Indians what the Ganges (which is only twica 
named in the Rigveda) became to their descendants...When vacetug 
river had acquired a divine character, it was quite natural that she 
should be regarded as the patroness of the ceremonies which were 
celebrated on the margin of her holy waters, and that her direction 
and blessing should be invoked as essontialto their proper performance 
and success. The connection into which she was thus brought with 
sacred rites may have led to the further step of imagining her to have 
an influence on the gomposition of the hymns which fogmed so impor- 
tai a part of the proceedings, and of identifying her with Vach, the 
goddess of speech:—J. Muir, O. S. Yeats, kk. 838. \ 12 ‘Sayana 
explains: “the Sarasvati by her act (of flowing) displavs a copious 
flood.” Roth is his Ilystrations of the irukim (xi. 26), p. 152, 
translates, “a mighty stream is*Sarasvat{; with her light she lightens, 
illuminates, “all@ious minds,” He however, regards the commen- 
cing words as figurative, and rfot as referring to the river. Benfey 
renders: ‘‘ Sarasvati, by her light, causes the graat seato be known; 
she shines through all thoughts,” He undetgtandsa the “great sea” 
as the universe, or as life... The conseptions ef Sarasvati as a river, 
and as the directress of ceremonies, thay be blended in the passage. 
—Muir, O. S. 7., V. p. 339. 

1The doer of fair desds: Tadra, 


Q@ .. °° %THRHYMNSOF , ° ©— [B00K1, 


e 
2 Come thon tqour libations drink of Soma,Soma-drinéger thou! 
The rich One's rapture giveth kine. © 


or ® ° 
3 So may we he acquainted with thjne innermost benevolence : 
Neglect us not, come hitherward. P 


4 Go to the wise unconquered One, ask thou of Indra, skilled 
in song, ° 
Him who is better than thy friends 
6 Whether the men who mock us say, Depart unto another place, 
Ye who serve Indra and none else ; 


6 Or whether, God of wondrous deeds, all onr true people 
call us blest, : 
Still may we dwell in Indra’s care. 
7 Unto the swift One bring the swift, man-cheering, grace of 
sacrifice, 
Thatto the Friend gives wings and joy. 
8 Thou, Satakratu, drankest this and wast the Vritras’ slayer . 
thou 
Holpest the warrior in the fray. 
9 Westrengthen, Satakratu, thee, yea, thee the powerful in fight, 
Thut, Indra, we may win us wealth. 
10 Tohim the mighty stream of wealth prompt friend of him who 
pours the juice, 
Yea, to this Indra sing your song, 


a ee te eR = ar 


2 [Wdrais especially the lord of Soma and its chief drinker. The 
exhilaration produced by drinking the fermented juice offered in liba- 
civus Stimulates his warlike energies and disposes him to give out of his 
boundless riches liberal rewards in the shape of cattle and other wealth 
to those who worship him. 6 ‘The general meaning of this and the 
two preceding verses seems to be: [udra is the best friend aud protector, 
and so long as we enjoy his friendship and protection we care nothing 
for tho rovilings of the ungodly who mock at our faithful worship. 

7 The swift One: Indra. The Soma juica which exhilarates men or 
heroes and aceempanies or graces the saorifioe is also called swift both 
because it flows quickly and betauseat makes Indra hasten to the screm- 
nity. Zhe Fvrieyd is Indra whom the juice exhilarates and sends quickly 
to the sacrificé. 8 Satakratu, a name of Indra, ‘ is explained by 
Sayana, hp who is connected gvith a hundred (many) acts, religious rites 
(bahukarma- yukta), either as their perférmer cr their object: or it may 
he rendered ‘endowed with great wisdom:’ krats implying either 
karma, act, or prajni, knowledge.’— Wilson, The Vritras, tho enemies, 
the oppressors or obstructors, are ‘the hostile powers in the atmosphere 
who malevalently shut i.6 the watery treasures in the clouds. These 
demons of drought, aalldd by a vatiety of names, as Vrittra, Ahi, Sushna, 
Namuohi, Pipru, Sambara, Urana, eto., etc., armed on their side, also, 
with avery variety of celestial artillery, attempt but in vain, to resist 
the onset of the gods,'\—Muir, 0. 8. Tacts, V. 95. 


HYMN6) ° _ THE RIGVEDA. ° " 


e °° 
HYMN V. ; Indra. 
O come ye hither, stt ye down; to Indra sing ye forth yourgong, 
Qomp@nions, bringing hymns of praise ; 
9 To him the richest gf the rich, the Lord of treasures excellent, 
Indra, with Soma juice outpoured. 
d May hestand by usin oar need.and in abundance for our 


wealth ; 
May he come nigh us with his strength ; ‘y 
4 Whose pair of tawny horses yoked in battles foemen challenge 
not: 


To him, to Indra sing your song. 


° ° ° t ° 
6 Nigh to the Soma-drinker come, for his enjoyment, these pure 
drops, 
The Somas mingled with the curd, 
6 Thou, grown at once to perfect strength, wast born tee drink 
e the Soma juice, 
Strong Indra, for preéminence, 


7 O Indra, lover of the song, may these quick Somas enter thce : 
May they bring bliss to thee the Sage. . 
8 Our chants of praise have strengthened thee, O Satakratu, and 
our lauds: . 
So strengthen thee the songs we sing. 
9 Indra, whose succour never fails, accept these viands thousand: 
fold, ‘ 
Wherein all manly powers abide. ° 
10 0 Indra, thou who lovest song, let no man hurt our bodies -keen, 
Slaughter far from us, for thou canst. 


HYMN VI. Indra, 


Tuy who stand round him as he moves harness the bright, 
the ruddy Steed: 
The lights are spining in the sky. 


] “Companions. The call is addressed to the ministering priests. 

3 ‘Two separate cases appear to be meant: yoge, wherdthé God must 
recognize the necpssity of his intervention,eand pyrandhydm, where he 
may deem it superfluous.’—Lugwig. $4 At the sight ef whose 
chariot and horses_all enemies flee. 9, Wherein all manly powers 
abide. The oblations of worshippers, as’ well ss thei hymns of praise, 
stimulate and strengthen the Gods for deads of heroism. ais 

1 They who stand round: lokatrayavartingh Pranigah, ‘the living 
beings of the three worlds,’ is Sayana’s explanatign, Probably the Maruts, 
Indra's constant companions are ingended. The bwight, the ruddy 
Steed, (bradhdm arushdm), is probably the Sun, with whom Indra is 
frequently connected. 


= «(| PHE'HYMNS OF ° [BOOKT 
2 On oe sides to the car they yoke the two bay cougsers dear 
to him, @ . 
BoN, tawny, bearers of the Chief. @ : 


3 Thou, making light*where no light was, and form, O men: 
where form was not, . 


Wast born together with the Dawns. 


4 Thereafter they, as is their wont, threw off the state of bubes 
unborn, 
Assuming sacrificial names, : 


5 Thou, Indra, with the Tempest-Gods, the breakers down of 
what is tirm, 
Foundest the kine even in the cave, 


6 Worshipping even as they list, singers laud him who findoth 
wealth, 
The, far-renowned, the mighty One. 


7 Mayest thou verily be seen coming by fearless Indra’s side : 
Both joyous, equal in your sheen. 


8 With Indra’s well belovéd hosts, the blameless, hastening to 
eaven, 
The sacrificer cries aloud. 


2 On both sides : vipakshasdé : harnessed-on different sides. 3 
Thou, i.e the Sun. O men / is perhaps merely an exclamation expres- 
sive of admiration. If marydh, men, be taken to mean the Maruts the 
words thou, making, wast born, although in the singular number, may 

EY bo these Gods regarded as one host or company and born at one 
birth. 4 Threw off the state of babes unborn: according to Prof, 
M.- Muller assumed ‘again the form of new born babes,’ ‘The idea that 
the Maruts assumed the form of agarbha, lit. of an embryo ora new- 
born child. is only meant to express that the storms burst forth from 
the womb of the sky assoon as Indra arises to do battle avsinst the 
demon of darkness. As assisting Indra in this battle, the Maruts, whose 
pame retainodfor a long time its purely appellative meaning of storms, 
attained their rank as deities by the side of Indra, or as the poa ex- 
presies it,ethop aysumed their sadred name. This seeins to bethe whole 
moaning of tle later logend that the Maruta, like the Ribhus were not 
originally gods, but Secam Aieitied for their werks’ Me Muller. Ridveda 
Sanhita, i. p. 25. 5. Tha Tempat-Gods : the Maruts, the friends 
aud helpers of Indra. © The kine : wre strening, of water and the 
beams of light which follow theire fusion The cave is tha thick dark 
gloud which holds the imprisoned waters and which Tndra cleaves asun- 
der with his thunderbal¥ or lightning. 7 Thow : the host of Maruts. 
According to Bonfey, the Sun. + = 8 The sacrificer cries alowd : This 
is the interpretation proposed by® Professor Max Muller, but it is only 
oonjectural and not altogether satisfactory, Benfey translates: Mightily 
shines the saorifioe ; and Ludwig : The warrior sings triumphantly. 


( 
AY MN 1,] THE RIGVEDA. e 9 
: é 
9 Come from thia place, O Wanderer, or downward from, the 
light of heaven : 
Our songs of praise*all yearn for this, 


1C Indra fe sesk té give us help, from here, from heaven Move 
the earth, . 


S 
Or from the spacious firmament. 


é e 


. HYMN VII. : Indra. 
Inpra the singers with high praise, Indra reciters with their 
lauds, 


Indra the choirs have glorified. 
2 Indra hath ever close to him his two bay steeds and word-yoked 
car, 
Indra the golden, thunder-armed. 
3 Indra hath raised the Sun on highin heaven, that he may see 
afar: ° : 
He burst the mountain for the kine. 
4 Welp us, O Indra, in the frays, yea, frays, where thousand 
spoils are gained, 
With awful aids, O awful One. 
In mighty battle we invoke Indra, Indra in lesser fight, 
The Friend who bends his bolt at fiends. 
6 Unclose, our manly Hero, thou for ever bounteous, yonder 
cloud, a o 
For us, thou irresistible. 
. ° ° ° ns , 
7 Still higher, at each strain of mine, thunder-armed Indra’s’* 
. praises rise : 
I tind no laud worthy of him. 
8 Even as the bull drives on the herds, he drives the people with 
his might, 
The Ruler irresistible : m 
» 


2 


en 


9 From this place: from earth. Wandersr : Gancinan) here 
applied toIndra, * 1) Tha spacious firngaument sthe oxpanse between 
garth and heaven. ° i 


1 The choirs: (04'nt) referring perhaps to both singers and chanters, 
2 The golden : i.e. richly decorated (xarvabharansbhidshitah) according 


td 
to Sayana. 3 Lhe mountain : is the mountain-shaped mass of thidk 
cloud, and the kine are the waters as, in J. 6, §. fhe words ddrt and 
parvata mean both mountain and cloud, these being constantly seen in 


lose juxtaposition and being often indistinguishable one from the othe. 
2 9 


av cS) 6440 11 MIND UL |5UURN fF. 


% 
9 me who rules with single sway men, riches, und the fivefold 
Of Those who dwell upon the earth. e 7s 
10 F8r your sake from each side we call Infra away from other 
men ; @ 
Ours, and none others’, may he be. 
HYMN VIII. Indra. 


Inpra, bring wealth that gives delight, the victor’s ever-con- 
quering wealth, 
Most excellent, to be our aid ; 
2 By means of which we may :cpel our foes in battle handto 
hand, 
By thee assisted with the car. an 
3 Aided by thee, the thunder-armed, Indra, may we lift up the 
bolt, 
And conquer all our foes in fight. 
4 With thee, O Indra, for ally with’missile-darting herocs, may 
We conquer our embattled foes, 
DS Mighty is Indra, yeasupreme ; greatness be his, the Thunderer « 
Wide as the heaven extends his power ; 
6 Which aideth those to win them sons, who come as heroes to 
the fight, 
Or singers loving holy thoughts: 
7 His belly, drinking dee pest draughts of Soma, like an ocean 
swells, 
Like wide streamserom the cope of heaven. 
_& “2 also is his excellence, great, vigorous, rich in cattle, like 
A ripe branch to the worshipper. 
9 For verily thy mighty powers, Indra, are saving helps at 
once 
Unto a worshipper like me. 


eee ee et er 


AA treet tate ap yt sree A ee RP OY at et 


Y The fivefold race; Benfoy explains this as ‘the whole inhabited 
world” But the expression secms to ‘uoan the Aryan settlements or 
tribes only, and not tho indigengus inhabitants of tha country.* The 
fivestribes or fottlomonts were probably the confederation of the Tur- 
vagas, Yaduss Anus, Diuhyus, and Purus. Sayana’s explanation is ‘those 
who ara,fit for habftavion«.’ and the phrase ds said fo imply the four 
castes and Nisadas or indigenous barbarians. But there wero no such 
distinctions of asste when tha hymp was composet. 2 Wuth the 
cur: drvatd, literally, with a horse, is explained by Sdjyana to mean 
fizhting on horseback. But horses seem to have been usod in war as 
drawers of chariots ouly, and drvatdé here stands for rathena, with a 
oar or chariot. , 3” May we lift wp the bolt. The thunderbolt here 
spoken of is sacrifice which, when employed against enemies, is as 
powerful a weapon as the bolt of Indra, ‘ 


i“ 


AYMNO]  « THE RIGVED'A. ~, il 


10 So are his lovely cifts ; let lauds and praises be to Indra sung, 
That ha may drink, the Soma juice. é e 


: : HYMN IX, Pidra. 
Comm, Indra, and delight thee with the juice atall the Soma 
feasts, 


Protector, mighty in thy strength. 
2 To Indra pour ye forth the juice, the active gladdening juice 


to him 
The gladdening, omnifie God. , 
3 O Lord of all men, fair of cheek, rejoice thee in the gladdening 
lauds, 


Present at these drink-offerings. 


4 Songs have outpoured themselves to thee, Indra, the strong, 
the guardian Lord, 
And raised themselves ugsatisfied. ° 
e5 Send to us bounty manifold, O Indra, worthy of our wish, 
For power supreme is only thine, 


6 O Indra, stimulate thereto us emulously fain for wealth, 
And glorious, O most splendid One, : 
7 Give, Indra, wide and lofty fame, wealthy in cattle and in 
strength, . 
Lasting our life-time, failing not. 
8 Grant us high fame, O Indra, grant riches bestowing thousands, 


those - Py 
Fair fruits of earth borne home in wains. 


° s : : mane 
Y Praising with songs the praise-worthy who cometh to our aid, ® 
we call 


Indra, the Treasure-Lord of wealth. 


10 To lofty Indra, dweller by each libation, the pious man 
Sings forth aloud a strengthening hymn. 


@ 
Seat a i 


1? ¥.. lauds and praises be to Indra sung 2 more exactly, ‘be lauds, 
spoken and sung, to Indra given ; uktha being properly the laud that 
is regited, and stoma the hymn of praise-that is sung. 

4 And raised tAtemselves unsatisfied : djcfhah, wot contented, that is, 
with prayers ever new. Ludwig observes that the Samaveda has froserved 
the correct readin@sajdshah, ‘with one acgord.’ Those fair fruits 
of earth brought home in wains. “The original of this hymn, as of many 
others, is so concise and elliptical as to be unintelligible without the 
liberal amplification of the Schaliast. We haven the text simply ‘‘thot8e 
enr-having viands,” td rathinir wshah, meaning, SPyaba says, those articles 
of food which are conveyed in cars, carts, or waggons, from the site of 
their production ; as rice, barley, and other kinds of grain,’— Wilson. 

The meaning of rathinér is net clear. 


~ 


12 . ' THE AY BMNS-OF e f BOOK I. 
s HYMN X., 7 _ Indra. 


« ( 

Tne chanters hymn thee, they whosdy the word of praise 

Nnagnify thee, : : J 

The priests have raised thee up on high, O Satakratu, like a 
pole, 


2 As up he clomb from ridge to ridge and looked upon,the 
toilsome task, 


Indra observes this wish of his, and the Ram hastens with his 
troop. 


3 Harness thy pair of strong bay steeds, long-maned, whose 
bodies fill the girths, 


And, Indra, Soma-drinker, come to listen to our songs of 


praise, 
4 Come hither, answer thon the song, sing in approval, ery 
altud, Ff 
. @ 
Good Indra, make our prayer succced, and prosper this our 
saxerifice, 
5 To Indra must a laud be said, to strengthen him who freely 
gives, 
, Phat Sakra may take pleasure in our friendship and drink-offur- 
ins, 
6 Him, him we seck fer friendship, him for riches and heroie 
micht. 


For Indra, heis Salfra, he shall aid us while ho gives us wealth. 
suasy to turn and drive away, Indra, is spoil bestowed by thee, 


eee, 


"7 


I ‘The concluding phrase, tw?.,.ud vansam iva yemire, they hava 
raised thee, like a bamboo,” is rather obscure. The Scholiast says, they 
have elevated Tnudra, as tumblers raise a bamboo—on ths summit of 
which they balance themselves ; a feat not uncommon in India : or, as 
vansa moans, also, a family, it may ve rendered, ‘as ambitious persons 
raise their farhily to consequence.’— Wilson. 2 The text htsenly, 
mounting from, ridge to ridge, ov from height to height, which the 
Schdliast comletes by observing that this is said of the Yajamana,‘ the 
person who institutespr performs a regular sacrifice ancdkpays the expenses 
of it, wh& goes to the mountain to gather the Soma plant, fuel, ete, 
Ludwie thinks that Indra is meant, rising higher and higher, and yet 
not delaying to come to the sacrifices. The Ram, (viishn th) is Indra, 
and his flock or troop are the Maruta. Hastenr : comes quickly to 
the sacrifice. . a era, &@ common name of Indra, used in the next 
stanza ag an epithet «: ‘the powerful,’ fram sak, to beable 7 Easy 
to turn : The Booty spoken of in\he Rigveda consists chiefly of cattle, 
which with Indra’s assistance are aasily turned and driven away from 
the enemy who pessesses them, ( 


HYMN11] « THE RIGVEDA - 13 
Unclose the Stable of the kine, and give us mane O Thunder- 


armed. ¥ e 
8 The heaven andeearth contain thee not, together, in thy wfath- 
ful mood. : . 


Win us the watersof the sky, and send us kine abundontly. 
9 Hear, thou whose ear is quick, my call; take to thee readily 
my songs, 
© Indra, let this laud of mine come nearer even than thy 
friend. 
10 We know thee mightiest of all, in battles hearer of our cry. 
Of thee most mighty we invoke the aid that giveth thousand- 
fold, 
11 O Indra, Son of Kusika, drink our libation with delight. 
Prolong our life anew, and cause the seer to win a thousand 


gifts. : ° 
12 Lover of song, may these our songs on every side encompass 
thee: 


Strenethening thee of lengthened life, may they be dear de- 


lights to thee, . 


HYMN. XI, Indra, 


Auu sacred songs have magnified Indra expansive as the sea, 
The best of warriors borne on cars, the Lord, the very Lord of 


etreneth. 


2 Strong in thy friendship, Indra, Lord of power and mig!it, we 
have no fear. a 


‘We glorify with praises thee, the never-conqnered conqueror, 


3 The gifts of Indra from of old, his saving succours, never fail, 

When tothe praise singers he gives the boon of substance 

rich in kine. 
® 
© Re eae Be ey er ee 

@ 

Unelose the stable of the kine “Open the thick cloud that holds the 
water imprisoned and fertilize our fields with rain, V9 “Thy frrered s 
probably the vdéjga or thunderbolt, which ig Indrajs inseparable associate 
and ally. 1) Son of Kusska: Kasil wasthe father orethe grand- 
father of Visvamigra who wa- the father ofthe poat or seer of this hymn. 
This epithet Kaugika, son of Kusika, is here applie® to Indra as being 
the chief or special God of the seer’s family. 12 Of lengthened 
life =immortal. ee ; ‘ 


1 This hymn is ascribed to Jetar the son of *Madbuehchhandas the 
seer of the preceding hymn. Expanstve as the sea: cf. I, 8, 7. Or 
the expression may be, as Wilson says, ‘a vague mode of indicating the 
Univeral diffusion of Jodra as the firmament,’ 


{ THE RYMNS OF [BOOK I. 


; Crusher of forts, the young, the wise, of stre noth unmeasured, 
wag he bor 
Sugfainer of each sacred rite, Indra, the ;thunderer, much- 
extolled. 
5 Lord of the thunder, thou didst burst the cave of Vala Fichi 
in cows. 
The Gods came pressing to thy side, and free from terror aigled 
theo. 
6 I, Hero, through thy bounties am come to the flood addressing 
thee. 
Song-lover, here the singers stand and testify to thee thereof. 


7 The wily Sushna, Indra ! thouoerthrewest with thy wondrous 


powers, 

The wise beheld this dced of thine: now go beyond their 
eulogies. 

8 Our songs of praise have glorified Indra who ruleth by his 

might, 

Whose precious gifts in thousands come, yea, even more 
abundantly. 
v HYMM XII. Agni. 


We choose Agni the messenger, the herald, master of all wealth, 
‘Well skilled in this our 5 sacrifice. 


2 With callingsever they invoke Agni, Agni, Lord of tha House, 
Oblation-bearer, much beloved. 


° bd ¢ e . 
83 Bring the Gods hither, Agni, born for him who strews the sacred 
P el 7 Frags ‘: 
Thou art our herald, meet for Praise, 


(aperene a ee 


4 Crusher of forts: destroyer or breaker-down of the clouds that 
withhold the rain, which are regardad as tho forts or strongholds of 
Vritra and the other hostile powers of the air, 5 The cave of Vala s 
Vala is the brother of Vritra, or Vyitra himself under another name, 
who stole the cows of the Gods nud hid thom in # cave, that is, kepb 
me light and waters imprisonod in| dark clouds. 6 To the Mad » 

yo Indra, gthe river or sea Sf bounty. 7 The wily Sushna : 
Suslins is descA&ibed as a demon slain by Indra. The word means Grier 
up : bhutdandm soshanaketu. calise of the drying up of beisgs, tho axcessive 
heat and drought before the Rains, whiclf Indra puts an end to Now 
go beyond their erfogies : i. & do deeds worthy of svill higher praise. 
Or it may mean, make their eulogies endure, 

1 The Hymns from-X UL to XX IIT inclusive are sacribed to Medhatithi, 
gon of Kanva. ° Whe medsenger : the mediator between men and Gods. 
The herald : devdnidm “dkvdtaram, the inviter of the Gods, is Siyana’s 
explanation. 3 Born: newly® produced by attrition for the man 
who has prepared and spread tho sacrifical grass as a seat for the expec- 
ted deit ies. 


HYMN 13.] THE RIGVEDA. ° 15 


° 2 
4 Wake up the willmg Gods, ‘since thou, Agni perfoymest 
enbassage: : 
Sit on the sacred gfass with Gods. 
. 2 ee a 
5 O Agni, radiant One, to whom the holy oil is poured, burn up 
Our enemies whom icnds protect. 
6 By Agni Agniis inflamed, Lord of the House, wise, young, who 
, bears 
The gift: the ladle is hig mouth. 
7 Praise Agniin the sacrifice, the Sage whose ways are ever true, 
The God who driveth grief away. 
& God, Agni, be his strong defence who, lord of sacrificial gifts, 
Worshippeth thee the messenger. 
J Whoso with sacred gift would faincall Agni to the feast of 
Gods, 
( Purifier, favour him. : 
gO Such, Agni, Purifier, bright, bring hither to ovr sacrifice, 
To our oblation bring the Gods, 
11 So lauded by our newest song of praise bring opulence to us, 
And food, with heroes for our sons, 
12 4 Agni, by effulgent flame, by all invokings of the Gods, 
Show pleasure in this laud of ours. 
HYMN XIII. Agni, 


Aanr, well-kindled, bring the Gods for him who offers holy gifts, 
M4 


Worship them, Puritier, Priest. . ° 
2 Son of Thyself, present, O Sage, our sacrifice to tlie Gods to- 
day. = 
Sweet to the taste, that they may feast, 


ae. 


oe re a Se rene ee me ee 


+ eromgn 


poured is lighted by the application of other fire. Young: as newly 
born each time the fire is produced. The ladle: usedfor pouring the 
sacrificial butter int® the fire. 8 Lord of sacrificial gifts : the 
woalshy patron or institutor of the sacrificg, 9 O P&rifier: pdvaka, 
purifying is in later Sanskrit a commen word forfire. , 
. e 

This is ono of the Apri or propitiatory hyngas, gopsistine of invocations 
to a serios of deified objects, ané said to be introductory to te animal 
sacrifice. All the geified objects addressed in this hymn are said by 
Sayana to be forms of Agni. e ° ® 

1 For him Who offers holy gifts : for the institutor of the sacrifice. 

2 Son of Thyself. Taninapat, son or descendayt of onerelf, is a frequent- 
ly recurring name of Agni, so called because, fire is sometimes self- 
generated, as in the lightning, or produced by attrition, and not neces- 
sarily derived from other fire, Other fanciful derivations are givon. 


9 By Agni Agniis inflamed: The fire into which the oblation is 


16 ¢ ° . THE RYMNS OP (BOOK I 


; ° : ee eee 

3 Dear Nardsansa, sweet of téngue, the giver of oblations, I 
Invoke to this our sacrifice, ; 

4 Agni, on thy mo-t easy car, glorified hither bring the Gods: 
Minu appsnted thee as Priest. : 

5 Strew, O ye wise, the sacred grass that drips with oil, in order 

dus, % 

Where the Immortal is beheld. : 


6 Thrown cpen be the Doors Divine, unfailing, that assist the rite, 
For sacrifice this day and now, 


7 I call the lovely Nightand Dawn to seat them on the holy grass 
At this our solemn sacrifice. 


8 The two Invokers [Iinvite, the wise, divine, and sweet of 
tongue, 


To celebrate this our sacrifice, 


9 [!i, Sarasvati, Mahi, three Goddesses who bring delight, 
Be séated, peaceful, on the grass. 


10 Tvashtar I call, the carliest born, the wearer of all forms at‘ 
will: 


May he be ours and ours alone 
y ; 


11 ge Sovran of the Wood, present this our oblation to the 
- Gods, 


And let the giver be renowned. 


3 Nardsansa: ‘Praise of Men’ is one of Agni’s mvstical mames. 
eet Manu: is the man par ecrellence, or tho rapresentative man and 
fathor of the human race, regarded as the first institutor of sacrifices 
and relizious ceramonies 9 The immortal ¢ according to Sayana 
either the clarified butter or Agnitho Gon. 6 The Duors Divine: 
the doors of he chamber in which the ob! ation is offored Onfailing: 
the Significiution of astchitah inthe text is uncertsin. Saysna explaing 
the word variously in various places, 8 The trvo Involers. Vt 
scems Uncertain who these two invokers or priests (hotard) are. whother 
Agni and Aditye, or Agni and ‘Varuna, or Varuna and MAttya, Sota M. 


Muller's de § PLiteratira, p. 464. 9 J:a: the Goddess of sacred 
spesch and action Surasvati: sea 1 3 10. Mihi: ‘the greav 


(Goddess) said to be “identidal with Bharati also a Goddess of speech, 

10 Prashtar, is the Hephaistos, or Vulcan, of the Indian pintheon, 
the ideal artist, the diving artisan, the most skilful a! workmen, versed 
in all wanderful and admirable contrivances ll God, Sovran of 
th: Wood: vans pati s lord of the wood ; usually, a larga tree; hare grid 
to ba an Agni ——hs if {he fuel and the burning of if, wergs identified, 
Or tha Sacrincial Post may bo intended, which is enumeratod among 
the Apri deities or deified objects. 


HYMN 15.) THE RIGVEDA °. 19 


2 Drink from the Purtfier’s cup, Maruts, with Ritu; san@tify 
The rite, for ye give precious gifts. ’ é 


30 Neshtar, with thy Dame accept oursacrifice; with Ritudgank, 
For thou art he who giveth wealth. 


4 Bring the Gods, Agai; in the three appointed places set them 
down: 
Sprround them, and with Ritu drink. 


® Drink Soma after the Ritus, from the Brahmana’s bounty : 
undissolved, 


O Indra, is thy friendship’s bond, 


6 Mitra, Varuna, ye whose ways are firm—a Power that none 
; deceives—, 
With Ritu ye have reached the rite. 
7 The Soma-pressers, fain for wealth, praise the Wealth giver in 
the rite, 
In sacrifices praise the Gad. 2 
® May the Wealth-giver grant to us riches that shall be far 
renowned : 
These things gain among the Gods, 
9 He with the Ritus fain would drink, Wealth-giver, from the 
Neshtar’s bowl. 
Haste, give your offering, and depart. 
10 As we this fourth time, Wealth-giver, honour thee with the 
Ritus, be 
A giver bountiful to us. 


2 The Purifier’s cup: the sacrificial vessel of the Potar, or Purifier, 
who pours into the fire the libation for the Msruts. 3 O Neshtar: 
the Neshtar is ove of the chief officiating priests, who leads forward tha 
wife of the institutor of the sacrifice. In this place Neshtar is said to 
be another name for the God Tvashtar from hig having on some occasion 
assumed the function ‘of Neshtar priest. 4 The three appointed 
places: by the threo Sacrifisial fires. 5 The Brdhmana’s bounty. 
The Be&Ahmana bere is said to be the Brahmanachchhansl, one of the 
sixteen priests employed in sacrifices; and perhaps hes office may 
have bedn to hold some ladle or vase in which the ofering &s presented. 
7 The Soma-prearees : grthvahastasah, meng heaveng stones in their 
hands with which to bruise the 58ma plant. The Wealth-giver*is Agni. 
In the rita, In sacrigces : ‘in the adhvara and in tha yafnds, the first 
suid to be the primary or essential 8eremony, such as the Agnishtoma ; 
tha second, the modified ceremonies, such as the Ukthya which iv else- 
whore termed an offering with Soma juice’—Wilson. ° 10 As we 
this fourth tume: Agni, as Dravanodas or Wealeh-iver, has now been 
celebrated in four stanzas instead of the usual ¢richa dr triad ; or we 
may translate with Ludwig, ‘As we in fourth place,’ Agni being fou rth 
place in the invocation (Iodra, Maruts, Tvasbtar, Agni). 


20 ~ | © THRE HYMNS OF [ ROOK I. 


11 Drink ye the meath, O Asvins bright with Games, whose acts 
age purep who with 
Ritus accept the sacrifice. 7 
12 With Ritu, through the houge-fige, thou, kind Givor, guidest 
sacrifice : e 
Worship the Gods for the pious man. 
HYMN XVI. Ipdra, 


r 
@ 


Ler thy Bay Steeds bring thee, the Strong, hither to drink the 
Soma druught— 
Those, Indra, who are bright as suns. | 
2 Here are the grains bedewed with oil: hither lot the Bay 
Coursers bring 
Indra upon his easiest car. 


3 Indra at early morn we call, Indra in course of sacritice, 
Inéra to drink the Soma juice. 


4 Come hither, wlth thy long-maned Steeds, O Indra, to tha 
draught we pour: 
We call thee when the juice is shed. 
Come thou to this our song of praise, tu the libation poured 
for thee : 
Drink of it like a stag athirst. 


6 Here are the drops of Soma juice expressed on sacred grass : 
thereof 


Drink, Indra, to increase thy might. . 
7 Welcome to thee be this our hymn, reaching thy heart, most 
~" excellent: 
Then drink the Som: juice expressed. 
8 To every draught of pressed-out juice Indra, the Vritra-slayer, 
comes, 
To drink the Soma for delight. 


9 Fulfil, O Satakratu, all our wish with herses and with kine: 
With hely thoughts we sing thy praise, z 
° (12 Phroiwtgh the houss-fire The gVrhapatya is the sacred fire per. 
petually maintained by Re householder; the fire from which Gres for 
racrificial purposes sre li§hted. ° 

1] Bright as suns: si'rachakeasnh°® Sayana understands this to refer 

to the priests,and, Wil one rendgrs acoordingly® may (the priests) 
radiant as the sun (make thee manifest). 2 Hastest car - sukh. 
_ dtame rithe ‘ thatis, most oasily moving, swiftess. 3 nave at 
early morn we call, 4 Ithouzh not more particularly named, the speci- 
fication implies the nforning, mid-day, and evening worship. Bike 
‘Drink 


a stag athirat : like a ganra (Bos Gaurus) a kind of buffalo. 
would parhapa be a more strictly accuate rendering. 


like a thirsty buffalo,’ 


HYMN 14) PAE RIGVRDA. 1? 
12 With Svaha pay the sherifice to Iudra in the offerer’s howe ; 


Thither [ call the Deities, P 3 

°* HYMN XIV. Visvedevags., 

To drink the Sorta, Agni, come, come to our service andeour 
songs * e 


With all these Gods*; and worship them, 
2 The Kanvas have invoked thee; they, 0 Singer, sing thee 
songs Of praise : 
Agni, come hither with the Gods ; 
3 Indra, Vayu, Brihaspati, Mitra, Agni, Pashan, Bhaga, 
*. Adityas, and the Marut host. 


1am 


- 12 Sva@h@ is the sagred word or exclamation (Hail ! Blessing ! ) used 
in pouring che oblation on the fire. According tu Sdyana, Svaha alsa 
may bo identified with Agni. 

2 The K.nvas: sons or descendants of Kanva, men of the same 
family as the seer of the hymn. 3 Indra, Viyu, etc. The names 
of these Gods are in the accusative casa, governed by ‘ they (the Kanvas) 
gave invoked,’ or ‘ worship them,’ understood. Brthaspati, ‘alterna. 
tng with Brahmanaspati is the name of a dei'y in whom the action of 
the worshipper upon the Gods is personified. He is the suppliant,. the 
priest who intercedes with the Gods for men, and protects them against 
the wicked Heuce he appears ay the prototype of the priests and tha 
priestly order, andis also designated as the Purohita of the dfvine 
“ commanity. The essential difference between the original idea represen- 
ted in this God and those expressed in most of the other and older 
deities of the Veda consistsin the fact that the latter are personifications 
of various departments of nature, or of physical forces, while the former 
is the product of moral ideas, aud an impersqnation of the poger of 
devotion.’~-Muir, O. 8. Zexts, V. 272. Pashan ia a God who proteota 
and multiplies cattle and human possessions generally. In chara.‘ar, 
he is & solar deity, beholds the entire universe, and is a guide on roads 
and journeys, Bhaga, the gracious Lord and protector, is regarded 


as the bestower of wealth. Adityas, ‘There (in the highest heaven) 
dwell and reign those Gods who bear in common the name of Adityas, 
We must, however, if we would discover their earliest character, abandon 
the conceptions whiok in a later ace, and even in that of the heroic 
poems, ware entertained regarding thesg deities. Acoogling to this 
conception they were twelve Sun gods,ebearing evident reference to the 
twelve months. But for the most ancient period we must hol fast the 
primary signification of their name. They ape the inviolable imperish- 
able, eternal beings Aditi, eterniéy or the eternal, isthe elameng which 
sustains them and i sustained by them...The eternal and inviolable 
element in which the Adityas dwell, and ‘which forms¢éheir essence, is 

the celestial light... The Adityas, the Gods of this light, do not therefore 

by any means coincide with any of the forma ig which ,light is mani-, 
fested in the universe. They are neither sun, nog moon, nor stars, nor 

dawn, but the eternal sustainers of this Juminous life which exivts, 

as it were, behind all these phenomena.’--Roth, quoted by Muir, 0. 

S, Texts, V. p. 56. ; 


18 _ WHE AYMNS OF {BOOK I. 
ze .. ‘ 
4 For you these juices are poured fertl that gladden and exhi- 
larate, , 
The meath-drops resting in the cup. ; 
& The sons of Kanva fain for help,adore thee, having strewn the 
PTUss, 


With offerings and all things prepared, 


6 Let the swift steeds who carry thee, thought-yoked and dito p- 
ping holy oil, 


Bring the Gods to the Soma draught. 


7 Adored, the strengtheners of Law, unite them, Agni, with their 
Dames : 


Make them drink meath, O bright of tongue. 


8 Let them, O Agai, who deserve worship and praise drink with 
thy tongue 


The meath in solemn sacrifice. 


9 Away, from thesun’srealm oflight, the wise invoking Pries? 
shall bring 


All Gods awaking with the dawn. 


10 With all the Gods, with Indra, with Vayu, and Mitra’s splen- 
dours, drink, 


Agni, the pleasant Soma juice. 


11 Ordained by Manu as our Priest, thon sittest, Agni, at each rite ; 
Hallow thou this our sacrifice. 


12 Harness the Red Mares to thy car, the Bays, 0 God, the flam- 


- ing ones : 
With those bring hitherward the Gods. 
HYMN XV, Ritu. 


QO Invra drink the Soma juicz with Ritu; let the cheering 
drops 


Sink deep within, which settle there. 


a 


The Marr& host : the Maruts are the Gods of the winds and storms, 
the companions and friend of Indra. They are saitin the Veda to ba 
the sons of Rudra and Prigni, the latter being explained by Sayana as 
‘the many-coloured earth,’ but.regarded by Professor Noth asa personifica- 
tion of the apeckled clouds. ii Unitg them with their Dames = 


pdtnivatas kridht : raake them (come) with their consorts. 9 The 
wis invoking ‘Priest ; deni, who calls the Gods. 10 All the Gods; 
or Visvedevas ; sea'I.43. 7. ll Manu: see I. 13. 4. 


1 Aitws meaning generally a'season, asitth part of the Indian year, 
is here personified and addressed as a deity. 
( 


HYMN 20.] THE RIGVEDA. © 23 


HYMN XIX. Agni. Maruts. 


To this fair sacrifice to drink the milk draught thou art in- 
voked: 
O Agni, with fhe Marutg come. 


2 No mortal man, no God exceeds thy ‘mental power, O Mighty 
One: 


,O Agni, with the Maruts come: 
3 All Gods devoid of guile, who know the mighty region of mid- 


air: 
O Agni, with those Maruts come. 
4 The terrible, who sing their song, not to be overcome by 
might: 
O Agni, with those Maruts come, 
5 Brilliant, and awful in their form, mighty, devourers of their 
foes: 
O Agni, with those Maruts come. ° 


6 Who sit as Deities in heaven, above the sky-vault’s luminous 
sphere: 
O Agni, with those Maruts come. 


1 Who scatter clouds about the sky, away over the billowy sea: 
O Agni, with those Maruts come. 


8 Who with their bright beams spread them forth over the 
ocean in their might: 
O Agni with those Maruts come, 


9 For thee, to be thine early draught, | pour the SomaMmingled 
meath: 


O Agni, with the Maruts come. i 
HYMN XX, Ribhus. 


For the Celestial Race this song of praise which gives wealth 
lavishly 
Was made by singers with their lips. 


2 They who for bndra, with their mind, formed horses harnessed 
» by a word, r . 
Attained by works to sacrifice. ° 


$e 

d For the Celestial Ricer devdya janmape, the divine class or race of 
the Ribhus, the three sons of gSudhanvan who is said to Rave been a 
descendant of Angiras. They were uamed severally Ribhu, Vibhvan 
and Vaja and atfled collectively Ribh‘us from thefame of the eldest. 
‘Through their assiduous performance of good works they obtainud 
divinity and became entitled to receive praisqa and adosation. They*are 
supposed to dwell in the solar sphere, and thege ds an indistinct identif- 
cation of them with the rays of the sun: but, whetler typioal or nob, 
they prove the admission, at ao early date of the doctrine that men 
might become divinities.’— Wjlson. 


{ ; THE EQYMNS OF [BOOK f. 
They for the two Nasatyas wrought a light car neoving every 
way:® 
Thew formed a nectar-yielding cow. 


: The Ribhus with effeetual prayers, honest, with constant 
labour, made 


Their Sire and Mother young again. 


5 Together came your gladdening drops with Indra by the 
Maruts girt, 


With the Adityas, with the Kings. 


6 The sacrificial ladle, wrought newly by the God Tvashtar’s 
hand — 


Four ladles have ye made thereof. 


7 Vouchsafe ns wealth, ta him who poars thrice seven libations, 
yee. to each 


Give wealth, pleased with our eulogiies. 


8 As ministering Priests they held, by pious ‘acts they won 
themselves, . 


A sliare in sacrifice with Gods. 
€ 


HYMN XXI. Indra-Agni, 


Inpra and Agnilinvoke; fainare we for their song of praise: 
Chief Soma drinkers are they both. 


© 3 The two Ndasatyas: the Asvins. Sve [. 3. 3. The Ribhus may have 
been the first to attempt the bodily representation of the horses of 


Indra and the chariot of the Agvins. 4 Sire and Mother: Heaven 
and Earth, which they, as deitive of the seasons, refresh and restore to 
youth. 5 ‘According to Asvalayan.., as ‘quoted by Sayana, the 


libations offered at the third daily (or evening) sacrifice are presented 
to Tudra along with the Adityas, together with Ribhu, and V4ja, with 
Brihaspati and the Visvadevas.’ — Wilson. 6 “T'vashtar, inthe 
Pauranik mythojouy is the carpenter‘or artisan of the Gode: so Siyana 
says of him, hegs a divinity whose duty, with relation to the Cods, is 
carpentry... Sayana al-o calls¢he Ribhus the disciples of Tvashtar...’Fhe 
not ascrilee to them in thestext, of making one ladty four, has, probably, 
rather reference io some innevation in the objects of hbation than to 
tho mere multiplica@ion of the wooden spoons used to pour out the Soma 
juice. The Nite- Manjari says that Agni, coming to a sacrifice which 
the Ribhus celebrated, begame as one of them, ad therefore they made 
the ladle fourfold, thateaoh might have his share ’— Wilson. 7 Or 
the ‘thrice seven’ ‘may refer to rdéndat, grant thrice sevun rich treasures. 

L dndra and Agni: addressed conjointly aya dual deity, L[adragni, 
that is, Indra-Agni, See. I. 17. 1. ¢ 


HYMN 18. , THR RJQVEDA | 21 


‘ . "HYMN XVII. " Indra-Varuna. 
I crave help from the Imperial Lords, frofa Indr@- Varuna ; 
may they a 


Both favour One of us like me, . 

2 Guardians of men, ye ever come with ready succour at the call 
Of every singer such as L. 

3 Sate you, acoording to your wigh, O Indra- Varuna, with wealth : 

¢ Fain would we have you nearcst us. 

4 May we be sharers of the powers, sharers of the benevolence 
Of you who give strength bounteously, 

®% Indra and Varuna, among givers of thousands, meet for praise, 
Are Powers who merit highest laud. 

6 Through their protection may we gain great store of wealth, 

and heap it up: 

Enough, and still tospare, be ours. 

7 © Indra-Varuna, on you for wealth in many a form I call: 


St#l keep ye us victorious. e 
8 O Indra-Varana, through our songs that seck to win you to 
ourselves, 


Give us at once your sheltering help, 
9 0 Indra-Varuna, to you may fair praise which I offer come, 
Joint eulogy which ye dignify. : 


HYMN XVTIL. Brahmanaspati. 


O BrauMaNaspati, make him who presses Soma glorious, 
Even Kakshivan Ausija, 


1 Indra the Hero and Varuna the King” are addressed conjointly as 
adual deity, Indravaruna. The most prominent of the other duel 
deities are Agni-Soma, Indra-Vayu, Indra-Agni, Indra Brihaspati, Indra: 
Soma, Mitra-Varuna Tndra-Pashan, Indra-Vishnu, Dyaus-Prithivt and 
Soma- Rudra Brahmanaspati. See I 14, 3. Professor Wilcon gays! 
‘The Scholiast furnishes us with no account of the station or functions 
of this divinity. The etymology will justify Dr. Roth’s definition of 
him sas the deity of sacred prayer, or rather. perhaps, of the text of the 
Veda; but whether he is to be considered asa distine porsonifieation, or 
as @ modified form of one of thosa already recognized, and axpocially of 
Agni, is doubtful. His giving weflth, healing diseage, aid promoting 
nourishment, are properties not peculiar to him; and his being assuciated 
with Indra aud Some, while it makes hlM distinet from them, lsaves 
him Azni as his protoype. HPis baing, in an especial manner, connected 
with prayer apgears more fully in a subsequent: passage, Hymn XL. 
Agni is, in an especial degree, the deity of the Brahman; and, according 
to some statements, the Rigveda is suppused to proceed from him ; a 
notion, however, which according to Medh&tithi, the commentator a 
Mano, was suggested by its opeuing with the fymn te Agni, Agnim ile.’ 

Kakshtvan, called Ausija, or som of Usij, was a renowned Rishi or 


aver, of the family of Pajra, and the author of several of the hymns of 
the Rigveda. ° 


29 © [PTE HYMNS OF . [BOOK T. 


2 The rich, the healer of disease, who givéth wealgh, increaseth 
store, e 


Thenprompt,—may he be with us still. - ‘ 


3 Let not the foeman’s qurse, let not” mortal’s onslaught fall om 
Us: ® 


Preserve us, Brahmanaspati. 


4 Ne’er isthe mortal hero harmed whom Fndra, Brahmanaspafi, 
And Soma graciously inspire. 


5 Do, thou, O Brahmanaspati, and Indra, Soma. Dakshina, 
Preserve that mortal from distress. 


6 To the Assembly's wondrous Lord, to Indra’s lovely Friend 
who gives 


Wisdom, have I drawn near in prayer. 


7 He without whom no sacrifice, e’en of the wise man, prospers ; 
he 


Stiis up the series of thoughts. 


8 He makes the oblation prosper, he promotes the course of 
sacrifice: 


if 


Our voice of praise goes tu the Gods, 


9 I have seen Nardsansa, him mostresolute, most widely famed, 
As'twere the Housebold Priest of heaven, 


2 Ta: rich, the healer, of discase ; Brahmanaspati, 4 Soma: the 
God who represents and animates the juice of the Soma plant. He was 
en fofmer times the Indian Dionysus or Bacchus ‘The simple minded 
Aryan people,’ says Professor Whitney, ‘whose whole religion was a 
worship of the wonderful powers and phenomena of nature, had no 
gooner poreeived Ghat this Fiquad {Soma juice] had power in elevate the 
spirits, and produce a temporary frenzy, under the influence of which 
the individual was prompted to, and capable of, decds beyond his natural 
powers, than they found in it something divine: it was to their appre- 
hension a Gok endowing those into whom it entered with godlike 
powers; the plant which afford6d it became to them the king of plants 
the process of oraparing it hesome aholy sacrifice The high antiquity 
of this cultus is attested by the references to it found ocourring in, the 
Persian Avesta’—Soa Muit, O 8 Texts, V. 258. D Dakshiad: 
properly the present mads to the priests at the conclusion of a sacrifice, 
hore personified aga Goddess, . 6, The Assembly’. wondrous Lord : 
Sadasaspati, the master or protector of the assembly of priests, is here 
a title of Agni. | 9 Honschold Priest : sidmamakhasam ; according to 
Sayana, ‘radiant as heaven,’ according to Ludwig’ ‘as one who fought 
tu win heaven’s seat.’ * Nardsdnsa has already occurred as a name of 
Agni (I 13 3) The meaning appears to be: through my invocation 


and praise I have reached the Gods, and with the eye of the spirit have 
looked on Agni in heaven. ° 


HYMN 22.| THE RIGVEDA. ¢ 25 
2 Praise ye, O men. and glorify Indra-Agni in the°holy rites; 
Sing praise ts them in sacred songs. 
*3 Indra and Agni w@invite, the Soma-drinkers, for the fame 
Of Mitra, to theeSoma-draught. e 
4 Strong Gods, we bid thent come to thes libation that stands 
ready here: ° 
Indra and Agni, come to us. 
ae ae Agni, mighty Lords of our assembly, crush the 
nenas : 
Childless be the devouring ones. 
6 Watch ve, through this your truthfulness, there in the place 
‘ of spacious view : 
Indra and Agni, send us bliss. 
HYMN XXII. Asvins and Others. 
Waxen the Asvin Pair who yoke their car at early morn: 
may they : ° 
Approach to drink this Soma juice. 
9 We call the Asvins Twain, the Gods borne in a noble car, the 


~ best : 
of charioteers, who reach the heavens. 
3 Dropping with honey is your whip, Asvins, and full of plea. 


bantness : 
Sprinkle therewith the sacrifice. 


4 As ye gothither in your car, not far,”O Agvins, is the home 
Of him who offers Soma juice. . 

5 For my protection [invoke the golden-handed Savitar : 
He knoweth, as a God, the place, 


3 For the fume of Mitra: the meaning is not clerr. Mitra appears 
to be regarded asthe guardian of the world = Savans takes Mitra in 
the sense of friend,gand refers itto the institutor of the sacrifice. 

3 Crush the fiends : the Rikshasas, demous who go about at nizht, 
ensnaring and even devouring huuay bé&ings, disturbing ssciifices and 
devout men, and generally b stile to the Aryan race. * 6 dn the place 
of spacious view : Sgyana explains ‘in the gstatiou which* preéminently 
makes known the experience ¥ results (ot actions) that is ia heavea 
(Svarga).' In the place where what ia hid jen will be made kuSwa, 


3 Your whip : the madhukasd'or Honey. whip of the Asvius is parhaps 
the stinulating morning breeze. Sea Atharva-vada [X. 1, tine while of 
which hymn is a glorification of this wondrors® whip. 5 Savitar : 
the yenerator or vivifier, is a name of the Sun? in the Vada sometimes 
identified with and sometimes distingaished from Sarya, 


26 . THE HYMNS OF (BOGK f. 


G That he may send us succour, praise,*the Waters’ Offspring 
Savitar : 
Fyin are wo for his holy ways. : 
Y We call on him, distyibuter of woxdrous bounty and of wealth, 
On Savitar who looks on men. ‘ 
8 Come hither, friends, and seat yourselves; Savitar, to be 
praised by us, . 
Giving good gift, is beautiful. 
9 O Agni, hither bring to us the willing Spouses of the Gods, 
And Tvashtar, to the Soma draught. 
10 Most youthful Agni, hither bring their Spouses, Hotra, Bharati, 
Varttri, Dhishana, for aid. 


11 Spouses of Heroes, Goddesses, with whole wings may they come 
to 1s 
With great protection and with aid. 
12 Indran‘, Varunini and Agndyi hither I invite, 
For weal, to drink the Soma juice. 
13 May Heaven and Earth, the Mighty Pair, bedew for us our 
sacrifice, 
And feed us full with nourishments. 
14 Their water rich with fatness, there in the Gandharva’s sted- 
fast place, 
The gingers taste through sacred songs. 


ewes te 


ee ee eee eee ee 


~~ 


6 The Waters’ Offspring Savitar : son or offspring of the Waters, 
updmndpit, ig an epithet more frequently applied to Agni. Sayana 
explains it otherwise as ‘one who doas not’cherish (na palakain) the water, 
but dries it up with his heat.’ 10 Hotrd, is called the wife of 
Agni, or the personified invocation 1 BAdratt is Holy Speech or Prayer : 
Varitri is explained as ‘she who is to be chosen, the cxcellent ;’ 
and Dhishand is said to be a synoaym of Vak or Vagdevi, the Goddess 
of Speech. Ll With whole wings ; literally, wieh unclipped wings ; 
that is, swift as°birds whose wings have not been cut. 12 Indien f, 
Varunis, and Agndyt : are respectavély the consorts of Indra Varuna, 
and Agni. “  . 14 Zhetr twa er rich in futness ; che fertilizing rain sent 
by Heaven and Earth. The g@neaning appears to be: ghe holy singers 
enjoy, ay guerdon for their hymns, the kindly rain and other gifts 
whioh are seut down from the regions above by the great parents Heaven 
and Earth. Thi. Gandharva’s stedfast place: Though in later times 
the Gandharvas are regarded us a olass, in the Rigveda more than one 
ie celdom mentioned, LHe is commonly designated as ‘the heavenly 
Gandharva,’ whose habitation is the sky, and whose especial duty is 
to guard the heavenly Soma, which the Gods obtain through his 
permission. 


AYMN 22]. THE RIGVEDA. * 27 


15 Thornless be thou, 6) Earth, spread wide before us for ad well- 
ing-place: 
Vouchsafe us shelter broad and sure. 
16 The Gods be gracious rfnto us even efrom the place whence 
Vishnu strode : | 
eThrough the seven regions of the earth! 
17 Through all this world strode Vishnu; thrice his foot be 
planted, and the whole 
Was gathered in his footstep’s dust. 
48 Vishnu, the Guardian, he whom none deceiveth, made three 
steps ; thenceforth 
Establishing his high decrees. 
19 Look ye on Vishna’s works, whereby the Friend of Indra, 
close-allied,. ° Le 
Hath let his holy ways be seen, 
20 The princes evermore behold that loftiest place where Vishnu 1s, 
Laid as it were an eye in heaven. 


21 This, Vishnu’s station most sublime, the singers, ever vigilant,, 
Lovers of holy song, light up. 


<n 


ene ea 


a a nt ee ae ea 


16 Vishnu: This God, ‘the all-pervading or encompassing,’ is not. 
placed in the Veda in the foremost rank of deities, and, though. fre- 
uently invoked with Indra, Varuna, the Maruts, Rudra, Vayu and the. 
Adityas, his superiority to them is never stated,and he is even described: 
in ona place as celebrating the praise of Indra and deriving his power 
from that God. The point which distinguishes him. from the othér 
Vedic deities is chiefly his stridiug over the heavens, which he is said. 
so do in three paces, explained as denoting the threefold manifestation. 
of light in the form of fire, lightning and the sun, or as designating the 
three daily stations of the sun, in his rising, culminating and setting. 
The meaning of. the stanza is obscure: Wilson,after Sayana,translates: 
‘May the Gods preserve us (from that portion) of the earth whence 
Vishnu, (sided) by the seven matres, stepped, and notes: ‘According to. 
the Taittirivas, as cited by the scholiast, the Gods with Vishnu at their 
bead subdued the invincible earth, using the seven meters of the’Veda as 
their instruménts. Siyana conceives the®ext to allude to the 7rivikrama 
Avatara, in which Vi-hnu’traversed the three worlds iff three steps. 
‘The phrase “Preserve us frgm thaedrth ” implies according to the 
commentary, the hinderance of the siu of those“inhabiting the earth. 
17 The whole was guthered in hia footstep's dust: This ig the mean- 
ing according to Sd3yana Vishnu was soanighty that the dust raised 
byhis footstep enveloped the whole world, o8 the earth was formed from 
the dust of his strides, 20°Vhe princes : the *Siiris, the wealthy 
patrons of sacrilice, al Tight up; glorify with their praises. 


28 THE BYMNS OF [BOOR I. 


HYMN XXIII. Vayu and Others. 
Srrofte Are ‘the Somas; come thou nigh ; these juices have ~ 
‘Been mixt with milk : 
Drink, Vayu, the pfesented draughts. : 
2 Both Deities who touch tne heaven, Indra and Vayu we invoke 


To drink of this our Soma juice, ‘ 
3 Tho singers, for their aid, invoke Indraand Vayn, swift as 
mind, 


The thousand-eyed, the Lords of thought. 
4 Mitra and Varuna, renowned as Gods of consecrated might, 
We call to drink the Soma juice. 
5 Those whoby Law, uphold the Law, Lords of the shining light 
of Law, 
Mitra I call, and Varuna, 
6 Let Varuna be our chief defence, let Mitra guard us with all 
aids : 
Both make us rich exceedingly, 
7 Indra, by Maruts girt, we call todrink the Soma juice: may he 
Sate him in union with his troop. 


8 Gods, Marut hosts whom Indra leads, distributers of Pishan’s 
gifts, 
Hearxen ye all unto my cry. 
9 With conquering Indra for ally, strike Vritradown, ye boun- 
”"  teous Gods : 
Let not the wicked master us. 


10 We call the Universal Gods, and Maruts to the Soma draught, 
For passing strong are Prisni’s Soas. 
11 Fierce comes the Maruts’ thundering VOICE, | like that of con- 
querors, when ye go 
Forward to vietory, O © Mer. , 
12 Born of the laughing li; ghtning, may the Maruts guard us 
everywhere : . 
May thay be gracious unto us. ‘ 


This hymn is addressed to Vayu, Indra, Mitra, Varuna, tlie Visve 
Devas, Pashan, the Waters, Agni. 3 Lords of thought : dhi thought, 
means especially in the Veda holy thought, devotiun, prayer, a religious 
rite, & sacrifice. 8 Fdshan is the guardiaa oi flocks and herds 
and of property in,general. 10, Prianimdtarah : Prigni’s sons, those 
who have for their mother Prigui, the many-coloured earth or the 
speckled cloud ; the Marute. 11 O Men: O heroie Maruts, 


HYMN 23.) ° THE RIQVEDA. , 29 


13 Like some fost animal, drive to us, bright Pdshan, hjm who 
- bears up heaven, ® 
Resting on many*coloured grass. 
J4 Pashan the Bright has found the King, “concealed and hidden 
in a cave, 
Who rests on grass of many hues. 
15 And may he duly bring to me the six, bound closely, through 
these drops, 
As one who ploughs with steers brings corn, 
16 Along their paths the Mothers go, Sisters of priestly ministrants 
Mingling their sweetness with the milk. 
17 May Waters gathered near the Sun, and those wherewith the 
Sun is joined, 


—7 


Speed forth this sacrifice af ours. ; 
b8 I call the Waters, Goddesses, wherein our cattle quench their 
thirst ; 


Oblations to the Streams be given, 
19 Amrit is in the Waters; in the Waters there is healing batm : 
Be swift, yo Gods, to give them praise. 


20 Within the Waters—Soma thus hath told,me—dwell all balms 
that heal, 
And Agni, he who blesseth all. The Waters hold all medigines. 


21 O Waters. teem with medicine tokeep my body safe from harm. 
So that [ long may see the San. 


22 Whatever sin is found in me, whatever evil I have wrought, 
If I have led or falsely sworn, “Waters, remove it far from me, 


23 ‘the Waters I this day have sought, and to their moisture 
have we come: 


O Agni, rich in milk, come thou, and with thy splendour 
caver me. * 


13 Him who bears up heaven: Soma, th®juice which prompts the 
world-sustaining deeds of the God?. 14 Whe King :Suma.“ Con. 
cealed and hidden inga cave: ina place difficult of accegs; the reference 
is to the flight of Agni. See Ili. 9. 4. 15 The sia® the six svasons, 
spring, summer, the rains, autumn, winter, the dews. Phrough these 
drops: May this libation induce him to brimg, ete,’ 16 The 

mothers : the Waters, regarded as the close allies Df"the priests, as they 
sre mingled with the ingredients of the’Soma libation. 19 Amrit: 
nectar, the drink that confers immortality ; the Greek Ambrosia. 

20 Soma thus hath t.ld me : Som4 is especially lord of mediciual plants. 


30. TRE RYMNSOF + [800K2. 
24 Fillme with splendour, Agni; give offspring and length of 


days; the Guds e 
hall know meevenas I am, and Agni, wigh the Rishis, know. 
HYMN XX1V Varuna and Others, 


Wuo now is he, what God among tlf Immortals, of whose 
auspicious name we may bethink us? 

Who shall to mighty Aditi resture us, that I may seq my 
Father and my Mother ? 


2 Agni the God the first among the Immortals,—of his auspici- 
ous name let us bethink us, 


He shall to mighty Aditi restore us, that I may see my Father: 
and my Mother, : 


3 To thee, OSavitar, the Lord of precious things, who helpest us 
Continually, for our share we come— 


4 Wealth, highly lauded ere reproach hath fallen on it, which is 
laid, . 
Free from all hatred, in thy hands. 


ee en ne ee et et en ee es = em ema 
~~ ee 


24 Indra with tha Hishis: Perhaps the seven great Rishis are in- 
tended,— Marichi, Atri, Augiras, Pulastya. Kratu, aud Vasishtha, 
a 


—— 


This hymn, addressed to Varuna, Prajdpati, Agni, Savitar, and Bhaga, . 
is the first of @ series attributed to Sunahgopa, the son of Ajizarta, Js 
The lagond is told in full detail in the Aitareya Brahmana, A king, named 
Harischndra, worships Varuna in order to obtain a son, promising te 
sacri¢ces to him his first-born A son is born, named Rohita ; but the 
kiny dolays the sacrific& until Rohita grows up, when his father com- 
municates to him his intended fate. Rohita refuses submission, and 
sponds saveral years in the forest away from home. ‘There, at last, he 
meots with Ajfsarta, a Rishi in great distress, and persuades him to 
part with his second son Sunabsepa to ba offered, as a substitute, to 
Varuna, Suaahgepa is about to be sacrificed, when, hy the advice of 
Vigvamitra, one of the officiating priss.s, he appeals to the Gods, and 
is liberated. See Wilson, Rigveda, i p. 60., Mutr, O S. Tests, i 355, 
407,413, and M Miller, 4 S Literature, gy 408 1 Mighty 
Aditi: Professor Muller( T'rens. of the Pigvada, 1 230) says thas ‘Aditi, 
an, ancient gbd or goddese, is ita reality the earliest name invented to, 
express the Infinite; not the Infinite as the result of a long pracess 
of abstract reasoning, buttthe visible Infinite, the engless axpansa* beyond 
the earth, (beyond vhe clouds, beyorti the sky.’ ‘These words [ Who. 
shall to ean! Aditi restqre ust] may be undarstood as spoken by 
some one in danger of death who pfayed to be permitted again to behold 
the face of nature...If we should understand the father and mother: 

"whom the suppliant jr anxious to behold, as meaning heaven and earth, 
it would become’still more probable that Aditi is to be understood as 
meaning nature.’ —Muir, O: S.*Zexts, v. 45. Sayana explains Aditi 
in the text as Earth; Roth. as freedum or security; Beaofey, ag 
sinlessness. ¢ : 


HYMN 24. THE RIGVEDA. ‘ 3t 


5 Through thy protectton may we come to even the height of 
, affluence : 7 
Which Bhaga hath dealt out to us. 

6 Ne’er ltave thos birds that fly through air attained to thy 

high dominion or thy might or spirit P 
Nor those the water§ that flow on for ever, nor hills, abaters 
o. the wind’s wild fury. 


7 Varuna, King, of hallowed might, sustaineth crect the Tree's 
stem in the baseless region. 
Its rays, whose rvot is high above, stream downward. Deep 
may they sink within us, and be hidden. 


,8 Xing Varuna hath made a spacious pathway, a pathway for 
the Sun wherein to travel 
Where no way was he made him set his footstep, and warned 
afar whate’er afflicts the spirit, 
9 A hundred balms are thine,Q King, a thousand ; deep and 
wide-reaching also be thy favours. 
* Far from us, far away drive thou Destruction, Put from us 
een the sin we have committed. 


10 Whither by day depart the constellations that shine at night, 
set high in heaven above us ? , 
Varuna’s holy laws remain un weakened, and through the night 
the Moon moves on in splendour. 


11 I ask this of thee with my prayer adoring; thy worshipper 
craves this with his oblation. 

Varuna, stay thou here and be not angsy; steal not out life 
from us, () thou Wide-Ruler. 


12 Nightly and daily this one thing they tell me, this too the 
thuught of inine own heart repeateth. 
May he to whom prayed fettered Sunahsepa, may he the 
Sovran Varuna release us. 


5 Which Bhaga hashdeali out tous : the riches which the distributer 
of wealth, Bhaga, futy or Fortune, bas allatted to us, 7 Vianasyo 
sti'pam in the text af pears to niean he stem of the tree,and Sayana's 
explanation ‘the mass or pile of light’ seems forced and unnatural The 
phrase is not clear, but perhaps the ancien® myth of «he worid-tree, 


the source of life, may be alluded to. 9 Merritt is Weoay or 
Destruction personified, the Guddess of dgath and corruption. Sayana 
calls her pdpudevat ‘, the deity of*sin. 10 tar®na’s holy laws : 


Varuna is the chief of the lords of natural order. His activity dispiays 
itself preeminently in the control of the most areyulac phenomena of 
nature. See Wallis, Cosmology of the Rigveda, p 97 f. The connexion 
appears to be: Fear nob: the laws of Varuna are inyiviable, and tha 
constellations will duly reappear, 


32 THRE HYMNS OF _ + [B00K I, 


13 Btund to three pillars captured Sunaksepa thus to the Aditya 
made his supplication. 


Him may the Sovran Varuna delivery wise. ne’er deceived7~ 


“Moosen the b nds that bind him. e . 
14 With bending downy oblations, stcrifices, O Varuna, wedepre- 
cate thine anger ° : 


Wise Asura, thou King of wide dominion, loosen the bonds of 
sins by us committed. ‘ 
15 Loosen the bonds, O Varuna, that hold me, loosen the bonds 
above, between, and under. 
So in thy holy law may we made sinless belong to Aditi, O 


thou Aditya. 
HYMN XXV, Varuna. ° 


Wuatever law of thine, O God, O Varuna, as we are men, 
Duy after day we violate, 


2 Give us notas a prey to death, to be destroyed by thee in 
wrath, e 
To thy flerce anger when displeased. 


3 To gain thy mercy, Varuna, with hymns we bind thy heart, 
as binds 
The charioteer his tethered horse. 
4 They flee from me dispirited, bent only on obtaining wealth, 
As to their nests the birds of air, 
5 When shall we bring, to be appeased, the Hero, Lord of 
warrior might, : 
Hin, the far-seeing Varuna ? 
6 This, this with joy they both accept in common: never do 
they fail 
The ever-faithful worshipper. 
7 He knows the path of birds that fly through heaven, and, 
Sovran of the sea, 
He knows tbe ships that are thereon, 


13 Three pillars, or trees, apparently the sacrificial post, a sort of 


tripod. The Aditya ig Varuna one of the sons of Aditi. See 14 3, 
A4 Agra $ an incorporeal, spiritual, divine being ; tha Zend Ahura, 
15 Lhe bonds ; according to Savana, the ligatures fastenin: the bead, 

the waist and the feet.4 But the bonds of sin wre here intended. 


Muy we belong to Aditi: May we've restored tu freedom and the 


enj yment of nature, 


4 they flee: apparently, my enemies ; but the passage ig very 


obscure. 6 Both : Varuna and Mitra Why Mitra is thus suddenly 
introduced is not clear The stanza breaks the conuexiog between 
stanzas 5 and 7 ; and is probably an interpolation. 7 Varuna is 


King of the air aud of the sea, the latter being often regarded as iden- 
tical with the former. 


e 
HYMN25)  - _ THE RiGVEDA. : 33 


8 True to his holy law, he knuws the twelve moons with their 
progeny : - e 
He knows the moom of later birth. oe 
9 He knows the pathway of the wind, the epreading, high, and 
mighty wind : 
He knows the Gods who dwell above. 


IO Varuna, true to holy law, sits down among his people ; he, 
Most wise, sits there to govern all. 


11 From thence perceiving he beholds all wondrous things, both 
what hath been, 


And what hereafter will be done, 


12 May that Aditya, very wise, make fair paths for usall our days : 
May he prolong our lives for us. 


13 Varuna, wearing golden mail, hath clad him in a shining robe : 
His spies are seated round ‘abont. 


e ‘ ‘ 
14 The God whom enemies threaten not, nor those who tyrannize 
oer men, 


Nor those whose minds are bent on wrong. 


15 He who gives glory to mankind, not glory that is incomplete, 
To our own bodies giving it, 
16 Yearning for the wide-seeing One, my thoughts move onward 
unto him, : 
As kine unto their pastures move. . 
17 Once more together let us speak, because my meath is brought : 
priest-like 
Thou eatest what is dear to thee. 


18 Now saw [ him whom all may see, I saw his car above the 
earth: 


He hath accepted these my songs. 
19 Varuna, hear this call of mine: be gracious unto eus this day 
Longing for help I cried to theg, ° £ 
20 Thou, O wise God, art Lord of all, thou art the King of eafth 
and heaven : 
Hear, as thou goest on thy Way. : 


8 The twelve moons with their pRogeny : the twelve“months with the 
days whichare theiroffspring. Z'hemoonof later birth: the thirteenth, 


tne supplementary or intercalary month of thelunysolar year. 13 His 
spies: Varuna’s spies, messengers or angels, are® Probably the reat of 
the Adityas, See M. Muller, A. S. Ziterature, p. 538. 17 My 
meath : or honey ( mddhu ), the libation of Soma juice. 18 Now 


saw L him: I saw Varuna, visible to the mental eye of his worshippers. 


ai “TRE HYMNS OF - [BOOK I. 


21 Release us form the upper bond, untie the bond between, and ; 


lotse 
Qhe bonds below, that I may live. 
° HYMN XXVI. , Agni, 
O aia of oblation, Lord of prospering powers, assume thy 
robes, e 


And offer this our sacrifice, 


2 Sit, ever to be chosen, as our Priest, most youthful, through 
our hymns, 


O Agni, through our heavenly word. 


3 For herea Father for his son, Kinsman for kinsman worshippeth, 
And Friend, choice worthy, for his friend. 


4 Here let the foe-destroyers sit, Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman, 
Like men, upon our sacred grass. 


5 © ancient Herald, be thou glad in this our rite and fellowship :, 
Hearken thou well to these our songs. | 


6 Whate’er in this perpetual course we sacrifice to God and 


God, 
‘Phat gift is offered up in thee. 


7 May he be our dear household Lord, Priest, pleasant and 
choice-worthy : ma 


y 
We, with bright fires, be dear to him. 


8 The Gods, adored with brilliant fires, have granted precious 
wealth tous: | 


So, with brigit fires, we pray to thee. 


9 And, O Immortal One, so may the eulogies of mortal men 
Belong to us and thee alike. 


10 With all thy fires, O Agni, find pleasure in this our sacri fice, 

And this our speech, O Son of Strength. 

21 Release us from the upper bond: I. 24, 15. 

x — ge ad 

1] Assume thy robes: clothe thyself in thy vesture of flames. 

2 Most youthful : continually renewed for sacrifice, either from the 
household tire or by repeated attrition. 3 For Here a Father for his 
son: Agni, who stands in the place of father, kinsman, and friendto his 
worshipper. 4 Aryamae- the name of an Acktya commonly invo- 
ked together with Varuna and Mitra. He is said to preside over twilight. 

5 Like men: or, according to Sqyana, as they sate at the sacrifice 
‘of Manus, whbd is the vame as Manu 10 Son of Strength: the 
appellation is of frequent occurrence, and is sometimes applied to Indra 
also as a specially mighty God. The expression, applied to Agni. al udes 


to the strength employed in rubbing together the two pieces of wood 
to generate fire. 


AYMN 217.| THE RIGVEDA. 3% 


‘HYMN XXVII. Agni. 
W1ra worship will I glorify thee, Agni, likea loag-tailed steed,, 
Imperial Lord of satred rites, 
2 May the far striding Sop of Strength, bringer of Sreat 
felicity, : . 
Who pours his gifts like rain, be ours. 


8 Lord of all life, from near, from far, do thon, O Agni evermore 
Protect us from the sinful man, 


4 0 Agni, graciously announce this our oblatios to the Gods, 
And this our newest song of praise. 


® Give us ashare of strength most high, a share of strength 
that is below, 


A share of strength that is between. 


6 Thou dealest gifts, resplendent One; nigh, as with waves of 
Sindhu, thou 


Swift streamest to the worshipper. 


7 That man is lord of endless strength whom thou protectest in 
the fight, 


Agni, or urgest to the fray, : 
8 Him,whosoever he may be,noman may vanquish, mighty One : 
Nay, very glorious power is his. 
9 May he who dwells with all mankind bear us with war-steeds 
through the fight, 


And with the singers win the spoil. ° 
10 Help, thou who knowest lauds, this work, this eulogy to 
Rudra, him : 


Adorable in every house. 


11 May this our God, great, limitless, smoke-bannered, excel- 
lently bright, 


Urge us to streggth and holy thought. 


4 

1 Like a long-tailed steed : Agni, or Fire, is likened to a horee, pro- 
bably, on account of his impetuosity ; and bis long fldmes, curled and 
driven by the wind, are compared to tha horse’s flowing tail. Sayana 
explains: scattering our foes yith thy flames as a horse brushes away 
the fiies that trouble him. 6 Sindhu: the Indus; dt the word 
may stand for anf river, and the ¢xpresston mean, with great abundance. 

9 With the singers: the priests who sing hymns of praise at the 
sacrifice. 10 Thou who knowest lauds: ( jardbodha ) seems to 
refer to the Riehi or poet of the hymn, not to Agni.” Rudra: the 
Roarer, or Howler, is here a name of Agni,*on accgunt of the loud 
crackling or roaring of his flames. Or the word may signify red, brighé. 
“ee Pischel, Vedische Studign, 1. pp. 55 aqq. 


36 ‘ THE HYMNS OF [BOOK I. 


12 Tike some rich Lord of men may hé, Agni, the banner of 
the Gods, 


Refflgent, hear us through our lauds. e 


13 Glory to Gods, the mighty and the lesser@glory to* Gods the 
younger and the elder ! . 
Let us, if we have power, pay the Gofls worship : no better 
prayer than this, ye Gods, acknowledge. 


HYMN XXVIIL. Indra, fte. 


Tarre where the broad-based stone is raised on high to press 
the juices out, 

O Indra, drink witheager thirst the droppings which the 
mortar sheds. 


2 Where, like broad hips, to hold the juice, the platters of the 
press are laid, . 
© Indra, drink with eager thirst the droppings which the 
mortar sheds. 


3 There where the woman marks and learns the pestle’s constant , 
rise and fall, 
O Indra, drink with eager thirst the droppings which the 
mortar sheds, 


4 Where, as with reins to guide a horse, they bind the churning- 
staff with cords, 
© Indra, drink with eagor thirst the droppings which the 
mortar sheds. 


5 If of a truth in every house, O Mortar, thou art set for 
work, - 
Here give thou forth thy clearest sound, loud as the drum of 
conquerors 


12 The banner of the Gods: who like a banner brings tha Gods to- 
gather ; or it may be rendered ‘the herald of the Gods,’ the Gods, he 
who notifies to them, as Savana explains 10. 13. These distinetions 
of yreater and lesser, older and younger Gods, or as we should say, 
anvels, are nowhere further explained. SunahSpa, it ig said, b 
the advice of Agni, worships the Visvedevas or the Universal Gods? The 
Visvedevas, a3 a seprrate troop or clnss of Gods, are ten in number, 
especially worshipped at funeral obsequies, and moreover, according to 
the laws of Manu, entitledsto daily offerings. ® 

This hyyan —a song sung during the reparation of the Soma juice 
—is said to be addressed to Endya, and to the pestle andmortar and other 
utensils used in the work 2 Piatters: two shallow plates, one 
being used 4s a receiver and the other ag a cover. They bind the 
churning wtaff with cords; the churning stick is moved by a rope passed 
round its handle and round a post used as a pivot. 5 O Mortar: 
according to Saysna the divinities presiding over the mortar and pestle, 
and not the implements themselves, are addressed. | 


HYMN 29)] THE RIGVEDA. 31 


6 O Sovran ‘of the Fofest, as thé wind blows soft in froht of 
thee, . ° 


Mortar, for Indra press thou forth the Soma juice that hegaay 
drink. 


7 Best strength-givera ye stretch wide j jaws, O Sacrificial Imple- 
ments, 


Like two bay horses champing herbs. 


8 Ye Sovrans of the Forest, both swift, with swift pressers press 
- to-day 


Sweet Soma juice for Indra’s drink. 


9 Take up in beakers what remains : the Soma on the filter 
pour, 
And on the ox-hide set the dregs. 


HYMN XXIX. Indra. 


CO SoMA-DRINKER, ever true, utterly hopeless though we be, 
Do thou, 0 Indra, give us hope of beauteous horses and of kine, 
In thousands, O most wealthy One. 


2 O Lord of Strength, whose jaws are strong, great deedg are 
thine, the powerfal : 


Do thou, 0 Indra, give us hope of beauteous horses and of kine, 
In thousands, 0 most wealthy One. 


3 Lull thou asleep, to wake no more, the pair who on each 
other look : e 
Do thou, O Indra, give us hope of beauteous horses and of kine, 
Tn thousands, O most wealthy One. 


4 Hero, let hostile spirits sleep, and every gentler genius wake : 
Do thou, O Indra, give us hope of beauteous horses and of kine, 
In thousands, O most wealthy One. 


6 O Sovran of the Forest : (vanaxpati) a large tree ; used in this place, 
by metonymy, for thg mortar, and in verse 8. in the dual number, for 
the mortar and pestle. 7 Strength-givers: explained by Siyana as 
especially givers of food. The two platters mentioned ab»ve are probab- 
ly meant. When the upper platter is raised to receive the juice of the Soma 
atalks the apertyre eavncs the two is like a horse’s mouth when he 
chews succulent grass. 2 Teis verse is addressed to the nsinistering 
priest. What remains: after the libation. *7ke filter or sieve was used 


to purify the juice before it was poured into the recetacle. Ox-hide: 
laid under the mortor. 


3 The pair who on each cther look: ‘The textsis very elliptical and 
obscure. In is, literally: Put to sleep the two reciprocally looking: let 
them sleep, not being awakend. The Scholiast calla them the two 
female messengers of Yama [the God of the Dead].’ Wilson. 


38 . THE HYMNS OF (BOOK I. 


D Dtstroy this ass,O Indra, who in tones discordant brays to thee: 
Do thou, O Indra, give us hope of beauteous horses and of kine, 
In thousands, O most wealthy One. 


6 Far distanton the forest fall the tempest in®a circling course | 
Do thou, O Indra, give us hope of beauteous horses and of kine, 
In thousands, O most wealthy One. 


7 Slay each reviler, and destroy him who in secret injures us : 
Do thou, O Indra, give us hope of beauteous horses and of Kine 
In thousands, O most wealthy One. 


HYMN XXX. Indra. 


We sevking strength with Soma-drops fill full your Indra 
like a well, 
Most liberal. Lord of Hundted Powers. 


2 Who lets a hundred of the pure, a thousand of the milk-blent 
draughts 
Flow, even as down a depth, to him ; 


3 When for the strong, the rapturous joy hein this manner‘ 
- hath made room 
Within his belly, like the sea. 


4 This is thine own. Thou drawest near, as turns a pigeon tu 
his mate : 
Thou carest too for this our prayer. 


6 O Hero, Lord of Bounties, praised in hymns, may power and 
joy fulness 
Be his who sings tlte laud to thee. 


6 Lord of a Hundred Powers stand up to lend us succour in 
this fight : 
In others too let us agree. 
7 In every need, in every fray we call as friends to succonr us 
Indra the mightiest of all. 


e 

5 Thie asa: our adversary,.says the Scholiast. ‘Therefore is hacalled 

an ass, as brkying, or uttering harsh sounds intolerable to hear ’ 

Far distant on the forest: may the cyclone or tempest expend its 

fury on the wood, and not gome nigh us = The word kgendren i’ cht, which 

I have refdered in accordance with Sagana, maans elsewhere a certain 

kind of animal, a lizard accérdjng to Siyana. This passage may perhaps 

mean, ‘may the Wind fall on the for8st with the kunértad'chit whatever 
that may be. 


1 Lord of Hundrel Powers: Satakratu. 3 The strong, the 
rapturous joy : the exhilarating Soma juice. 4 This is thine own: 
this Soma libation is for thee alone, 6 In this fight: the hyma is 


a prayer for aid in a coming battle. ° 


. ® 
HYMN 30} | THE RIGVEDA. 39 


8 If he will hear us let him come with succour of athousand kinds, 
And all that strengthens, to our call. 7 e 


9 Toall him mightg to resist, the Hero of our ancient heme, 
Thee whom my sire invoked of old. , 


10 We pray to thee, @ much-invoked, rich in all precious gifts, 
© Friend, . 
Kind God to those who sing thy praise. 
11 O Soma-drinker, Thunder-armed,Friend of our lovely-featured 
dames 
And of our Soma-drinking friends. 
.12 Thus, Soma-drinker, may it be ; thus, Friend who wieldest 
thunder, act 
To aid each wish as we desire. 


13 With Indra splendid feasts be ours, rich in all strengthening 
things wherewith, 
Wealthy in food, we may’ rejoice. 


“14 Like thee, thyself, the gingers’ Friend, thou movest, as it were, 
besought, 
Bold One, the axle of the car, 


15 That Satakratu,thou to grace and please thy praisers,as it vere, 
Stirrest the axle with thy strength, 

16 With champing, neighing, loudly-snorting horses Indra‘hath' 
ever won himself great treasures. 

A car of gold hath he whose deeds are wondrous received from 


us, and led us too receive it, ° 
17 Come, Asvins, with enduring strength wealthy in horses and 
in kine, 


And gold, O ye of wondrous deeds, 


9 The Hero of our anoient home: the tutelary God of our family, 

11 Friend of our lovely-featured dames: the maning of sriprinindm 
in the textis very douBtful. Wilson, following Sayana, paragphrases : (bes- 
tow upon) us, thy friends, (abungancesof cows) with projecting jaws, 
Benfey takes the word to mean beaftiful women. Ludwig. suggests 
helmeted, from a possible form siprini, agreeing with visdm, of men 
understood. Rothtonsiders the reading to ba thulty, and suggests. siprint. 
van, inthe vocative case, agreeing with Soma-drinker. 14 Tho lines 
in this and the following stanza referring tothe axleand the chariot or wain 
are somewhat ohscure and have been variously interpreted, Ludwig's 
explanation, which I follow, appears to be the simplest and the best. 
The expression, movest, or stirrest, the axle, which is the firmest and 
strongest part of the car, is intended to signify Indra’g great strength 
exerted at his worshippers’ prayer. 16 The hymn really ends with 
the preceding stanza. The car o/ gold given to Indra is the hymn. The 
car of gold prayed for is abundant wealth. 


¢ F 
40 THE HYMNS OF (BOOK I. 


18 Your chariot yoked for both alike,immortal, ye of mighty acts, 
Travels, O Asvins, in the sea. 
19 ae on the forehead of the Bull one chariot wheel ye ever keep, 
The other round the sky revolves, . ° 
20 What mortal, O imimortal Dawn, enjoyeth thee ? Where 
lovest thou ° 
To whom, O radiant, dost thou go ? 
21 For we have had theein our thoughts whether anear or far away, 
Red-hued and like a dappled mare. 
22 Hither, O Daughter of the Sky, come thou with these thy 
strengthenings, 
And send thou riches down to us. 
HYMN XXXI, Agni. 


Tuov, Agni, wast the earliest Angiras, a Seer; thou wast, a 
God thyself, the Gods’ auspicious Friend. 
After thy holy ordinance the Maruts, sage, active through 
wisdom, with their glittering sSears, were born, 
2 () Agni, thou, the best and earliest Angiras, fulfillest as a Sage 
the holy law of Gods, 
Sprung from two mothers, wise, through all existence spread, 
resting in many a place for sake of living man, 
3 To Mitarisvan first thou, Agnt, wast disclosed, and to Vivas- 
van through thy noble inward power. 
Heaven and Harth, Vasu ! shook at the choosing of the Priest: 
the burthen thou didst bear, didst worship mighty Gods. 


7 

18 The sea: the ocvan of air. 19 The Bull: apparently the Sun. 
The car of the Asvins stands at his head or in front of him, aud the 
Asvins precede him in his course round heaven, But the meaning is not 
very clear. 20 We are reminded of the old Grecian myth of Eog 
and Tithonus. Ushas, Dawn, or Morning, is the daughter of personitied 
Heaven, Dyaus, or Dyu. 


This hymn, and the four following, are ascribed to Hiranyastipa, son 
of Angiras. L Thow, Agni, wast the earliest A.rgtrus: the Angirases 
are the most {mportant priestly family mentioned in the Veda. Nee 1. 
1,6. Wrth ther glittering spears: the spears of the Maruts or Storm- 


Godg are* lightning flashes. 2 The holy law of Gods: sacrifice to 
the Gods, which Azul perfevms. Sprung from two mothers - from 
the two paces of wood used to produsn fire. 3 WM itarievan : tha 


name of a divine being described in I. 60. 1 as bringing the hidden Agni 
to Bhrigu, and @eatified by Siyana with Vayu the God of wind. 

Vivaavan : ‘the brilliant; he appears to be the God of daylight and the 
mvrning sun, the personification of all manifestations of light. He is said 
to be the father of* Yama, and the Gods are called his offspring. 

Vasu: (goodpoften used as a name or epithet of Agni. The Vasus 
as a class of Gods, ¢ight in numbor, were at first personifications of 
natural pheuomena, . 


a 


AY MN 31,] ; THE RIGVEDA. ; 4} 
4 Agni thou madest heaven to thunder for mankind ; thou, yet 
more pious, for pious Purtravas, e 


e 
When thpa art ragidly freed from thy parents, first eastward 
they bear thee round, andgafter, to t @ west. 
5 Thou, Agni, art a Bull who makes our store increase, to be 
invoked by him who lifts the ladle up. 
Well knowing the oblation with the hallowing word, uniting all 
who live, thou lightenest first our folk. ; 


6 Agni, thou savest in the synod when pursued e’en hith, far- 
seeing One ! who, walks in evil ways. 


Thou, when the heroes fight for spoil which men rush round; 
slayest in war the many by the hands of few. ~ 


7 For glory, Agni, day by day, thou liftest up the mortal man 
to highest immortality,— i 


Even thou who yearning,for both’ races givest them great 
e __ bliss, and to the prince grantest abundant food: 


8 O Agni, highly lauded, make our singer famous that he may 
win us store of riches : 


May we improve the rite withnew performance. O Earth and 
Heaven, with all the Gods, protect us. 4 


" 9 O blameless Agni lying in thy Parents’ lap, a God among the 
Gods, be watchful for our good, 


Former of bodies, be the singer's Providence : all good things 
hast thou sowr for him, auspicious Ong! e:* 


10 Agni, thou art our Providence, our Father thou : we are thy 
brethren and thou art our spring of life. : 


In thee, rich in good heroeg, guard. of high decrees, meet hund- 
red, thousand treasures,’ O infallible ! 


». 4& Purdrgvds: son Of Budha. He is aaid ‘to have instituted the three 
sacrifictal fires.- Agni, to reward bim,sent*thunder tht forerunner of 
rain. Freed from thy parents :, produced and separated from fhe- 
fire-sticks. Eastward they bear thee : the fire is first applied to ‘light 
the Ahavaniya fire and then the Garhapatya.- - °& A Bull: exceed- 


ingly strong. With the hallowing word : the exclamation *Vashat s 
(may be (Agni) bRar-it (to tha, Gods}, used at the moment of 
pouring the excrificial oil or clarified butter on the fire. - 6 Agns, 


thou savest in the synod :the vidatha, synod or sacrificial assembly, seemg 
to have been regarded as aninviolabledsylum. °  . 7 Both races : Goda 
andmen. The prince: the Sfri, thé noble of eminent may who institutes 
and pays the charges of the sacrifice. «© 9 Thy Parents: here said 
to mean Heavenand Harth. former of bodies: yiver of children. 


6 


“2 : THE.AYMNS OF [BOOR I. 


11 Thee, Agni, have the Gods made the first living One for living 
nman, Lori of the house of Nahusha. 
§l4 they made the teacher of the sons of men, what time a Son 
was born to the father of my yace. ° 
412 Worthy to be revéred, QO Agni, God, preserve our wealthy 
patrons with thy succours, and ourselves. 
Guard of our seed art thou, aiding our cows to bear, inces- 
santly protecting in thy holy way. 
313 Agni, thou arta guard close to the pious man; kindled art 
thou, four-eyed! for him who is unarmed. 
With fond heart thou acceptest e’en the poor man’s prayer, 
when he hath brought his gift to gain security. 
4 Thou, Agni gainest for the loudly-praising priest the highest ° 
wealth, the object of a man’s desire. 
Thou art called Father, caring even for the weak, and, wisest, 
to the simple one thou teachest lore. 
15 Agni, the man who giveth guexdon to the priests, like well- 
sewn armour thou guardest on every side, 
He who with grateful food shows kindness in his house, an 
offerer to the living, is the type of heaven. 
16 Pardon, we pray, this sin of ours, Q Agni,—the path which 
we have trodden, widely straying, 
Dear Friend and Father, caring for the pious, who speedest 
nigh and who inspirest mortals. 
1? As erst to Manus, to Yayati, Angiras, so Angiras! pure Agni ! 
come thou to our hall. 
Rring hither the celestial host and seat them here upon the 
sacred grass, and offer what they love, 
18 By this our prayer be thon, Q Agni, strengthened, prayer 
made by us atter our power and knowledge. 
Lead thou us, therefore, to increasing riches ; endow us with 
thy strength-bestowing favour. 


ee ree Ae a TT Se en 


eng, 


we et rere a _— 


11 Nahusha: one of the groat prugenitors of the human race, 

Ila: the personification of prayer, and the firet teacher of the rules 
of sacrifice. What time a Son was born: this Son is Agni himsolf. 

Hiranyastcipa, the Rishi of thé hymn, is the son or descendant of 
Ausiras, who, as ono of the first introducers of the sacrificial fire and the 
rites of worship, 13 regarced as the venerator or father of Agni. The 
meaning of the verse is that Agni wax appointed priast, and Ha teacher 
of the rules of divine worship in the earliest time when Agni 
was first bors on earth as stcrificial fire. ~ 13 Four-eyed ; 
iluminating the four cardinal points, or looking in all directions. 
“15 An offerento the living : probably, one who offers food and hogpitality 
to a human being, ths mrtyajia, worship of man, of Manu. Or it may 
man, 43 Ludwig suggests, one who offera a sacrifice that transports 
the sacrificer at once, living, to heaven. 16 Yaydtt > a celebrated 
king, one of the sons of Nabusha. ¢ 


HYMN 32.1 | TH RIGVEDA 4's 
BYMN XXXIL Indra. 


. I wrtt declare the manly deeds of Indra, the’ first that he 


achieved, the Thunder-wielder, 
He slew the Dragon, then gisclosed the waters, and cleft “the 


channels of the mogntain torrents, 


2 He slewthe Dragonlying on the mountain : his heavenly bolt 
ef thunder Tvashtar fashioned, 
Like lowing kine in rapid flow descending the waters glided 
downward to the ocean. 
3 Impetuous as bnil, he chose the Soma, and in three sacred 
beakers drank the juices. » 
Maghavan grasped the thunder for his weapon, and smote to 
death this firstborn of the dragons. 


4 When, Indra, thou hadst slain the dragons, firtborn, and 

overcome the charms of the enchanters, 

Then, giving life toSun and Dawnand Heaven, thou fouadest 

< not one foe tostand against thee. 

© Indrawith his own great and deadly thunder smote into pieces 
Vritra, worst of Vritras, 

As trunks of trees, what time the axe hath felled them, low 
on the earth so lies the prostrate Dragon, 


6 He. like a mad weak warrior, challenged Indra, the great 


impetuous many-slaying Hero. 
H>, brooking not the clashing of the weapons, erushed—Indra’s 


eae ie shattered forts in falling 


£ Footless and handless still he aliniianees Indra, who smote 
him with his bolt between the Stanton: 
Emasculate yet claiming manly viguur, thus Vritra lay with 
scattered limbs digsevercd. 


1 ‘Tn this aud subsequent Saktas we have an ample elucidation of 
the original purport of the legend of Indra's slaying Vritra, converted 
by the Paurdnik writers inte a literal contesp betwoen T8dra and an 
Asura, or chief of the Asuras, from what fh the Vedas js merely an 
allegorical narrativa of the production of rain. Vritra, sometirags also 
nained Ahi, is nothing more than the accumglation of vapoar, con- 
densed or figuratively. shut up in, gr obstructed by, a cloud Endra, with 
his thunderbolt, or atmospheria or electrieal influence, divides the 
avgrevated mays, and vent is given 60 the °rain whiche then descends 


upon the earth’ Wilson. 2 The Dragon: Ahi, literally a serpent. 
Zvashtar is the artist of the Gods 3 Maghavan : the wealthy, 
and liberal ; Lord Bountiful. 4 The charmg of the enchanters : 


magical or supernatural powers ascribed to Vritra and his allies. 
In three sacred beakers : irikadrukeshu ; according to Sgyana, ca the 
Trikadrukas, the first three days of the Abbiplava ceremony. 


44 | THE HYMNS OF [BOOK I. 


rf 


8 ‘here as he lies like a bank-bursting river, the waters taking 
courage flow above him. 
The Dragon lies beneath the feet of torrents which Vritra 
© with his greatness had encompassed. 


9 Then humbled wds the strength of Vritra’s mother : Indra 
hath cast his deadly bolt against her. 
The mother was above, the son was under, aud like a cow 
beside her calf lay Dinu. 


10 Rolled in the midst of never-ceasing currents flowing without 
a rest for ever onward, 
The waters bear off Vritra’s nameless body: the foe of Indra 
sank to during darkness. — | 


11 Guarded by Ahi stood the thralls of Dasas, the waters stayed 
like kine held by the robber, 
But he, when he had smitten Vritra, opened the cave where- 
in the floods had been imprisoned. 


12 A horse’s tail wast thou when he, Q Indra, smote on thy bolt : 
thou, God without a second, 
Thou hast won back the kine, hast won the Soma; thou hast 
let loose to flow the Seven livers. 


13 Nothing availed him lightning, nothing thunder, hailstorm of 
mist which he had spread around him: 
When Indra and the Dragon strove in battle, Maghavan gained 
the victory for ever. 


14 Whom sawest than to avenge the Dragon, Indra, that fear 
‘ possessed thy heart when thou hadst slain him ; 
That, likea hawk affrighted through the regions, thou crossedst 
nine-and-ninety flowing rivers ? 


9 Danu : according to Sayana, the mother of Vritra. 11 Zhralls 
of Ddasas : in the power of Vritra and his allies. Disa is a general 
name applied in the Veda to certa‘: evil beings or demons, hostile to 
Indra aud to men. It means, also, a savage, a barbarian, one of the 
non- Aryan ‘nhabitants of India. The robber : pant (literally, one who 
barters and traffics) means a miser, aniggard ; an impious nfin who 
gives little or nothing to the Gods. The word is used also as the name 
of a class of envious demons watching over treasures, and as an epithet of 
the fiends who stealcows and hide themin mountain taverus 12 A 
horse’s tail was thou : destroying thy enemies aseasily a horge sweeps 
away flies with his tail. Cf. I 27. J. The Severs Rivers : acoording 
to Professor Max Muller. the Indus, the five rivers of the Panjab 
(Vitasta, Asikni Parushni, VipAsi Sutudni) and the Sarasvati. Lassen 


and Ludwig put the Kubhd in the place of the last-named. 14 This 
flight of Indra is frequently alluded to. It it said that he fled thinking 
that he had committed a great sin in killing Vritra. Nine-and- 


wineiy > used indefloitely for a great number, 


AY MN 33.] THE RIGVEDA. 45 


15 Indra is King of all’that moves and moves not, of credtures 
tame and hoxned, the Thunder-wielder. ° - 
Over all living mtn he rules as Sovran, containing all as 
spokes withig the felly. ll 


. & 
e HYMN XXXITI. Indra. 


Comm, fain for booty let us seek to Indra : ye more shall he 

* increase his care that guides us, 

Will not the Indestructible endow us with perfect knowledge 
of this wealth, of cattle ? 


2 I fly to him invisible Wealth-giver as flies the falcon to his 
cherished eyrie, 
With fairest hymns of praise adoring Indra, whom those 
who laud him must invoke in battle, 


3 Mid all his host, he bindeth on the quiver : he driveth cattle 
from what foe he pleaseth : 
Gatheaing up great stdre of riches, Indra, be thou no 
trafficker with us, most mighty. 


4 Thou slewest with thy bolt the wealthy Dasyu, alone, yet 
going with thy helpers, Indra! 

Far from the floor of heaven in all directions, the ancient 
riteless ones fled to destruction. 


5 Fichting with pious worshippers, the riteless turned and 
fled, Indra ! with averted faces, 
When thou, fierce Lord of the Bay Steeds, the Stayer, 
blewest from earth and heaven and ky the godless, 


6 They met in fight the army of the blameless: then the 
Navagvas put forth all their power. 
They, like emasculates with men contending, fled, conscious, 
by steep paths from Indra, scattered. 


1 Fain for booty : gavydntah, literally seeking or eager for kine, that 
is, hooty or wealth consisting chiefly of cattle. 3 Be thou no 
trafficker with us : “Do not deal illiberally with us like petty trader : 
do not give sparingly, nor demand tod much in return. 4 The 
wealthy Dasyu : according to Seyana, ‘ Vritra the robber,’* thee with- 
holder of the fertilizing rain. The Dasyus, are alsu a class of demons, 
enemies of gods und men, and sometimes*the word means savage, & 
barbarian, The ancient Ain sete ones: the followers of ee ; here 
apparently identitied with indigenous races who hagl not adopted, or 
were hostile to, the ritul of the Veda, ) The Stayer: he who 
stands firm in battle. The word in the text sthgtar appears to corses- 
pond exactly with the Latio Stator (Jupiter Siptor). Sue Benfey, Orient 
unt Occident, 1. 48. 6 The Navagvas : the name of a mytholo- 
gical family often associated with that of Angiras, and described as 
sharing in Indra’s battles, regulating the worship of the Gods, etc. 


a ‘THE HYMNS OP (BOOK I. 


¢ Whether: ‘they weep or laugh thou Mast o’erthrown them, 
© Indra, oa the sky’s extremest limit. 
The Dasyu thou hast burned from heaven, and welcomed 
“he prayer of him who pours the juice ane lauds thee. 
8 Adorned with their grray of gol@ and jewels, they oer the 
earth a covering veil extended. e 
Although they hastened, they o’ercame not Indra :‘ their 
spies ‘he com passed with the Sun of morning, 
9 As thou enjoyest heaven and earth, O Indra, on every side 
surrounded with thy greatness, 
So thou with priests hast blown away the Dasyu, and those 
who worship not with those who worship 
10 They who pervaded earth’s extremest limit subdued not 
with their charms the Wealth-bestower : 
Indra, the Bull, made his ally the thunder, and with its 
heht milked cows from out the darkness, 
11 The waters flowed according to their nature; he mid the 
navigable streams waxed mihty, 
Then Indra, with his spirit concentrated, smote him for ever- 
with his strongest weapon, 
12 Indea broke through Llibisa’s strong castles, and Sushna with 
is horn he cut to picees ° 
Thou, Maghavan, for all his might and swiftness, slewest thy 
fighting ‘foeman with thy thunder. 
13 Fierce on his enemies fell Indra’s weapon : with his sharp 
bull he rent their forts in pieces. 
He with his thunderbolt dealt blows on Vritra, and con- 
quered, executing‘ all his purpose. 
14 Indra, thou holpest Kutsa whom thou lovedst, and guardedst 
brave Dasadyu when he battled. 
The dust of trampling horses rose to heaven, and 5vitra’s sun 
stoud up again for conquest. 


& With the Sun of morning :* We rave vi here to the allegory. The 
followers of Vritra aro here said to be the shades pf might which are 
dispersed by the rising of the sun: according to the Brabuna * Verily 
the sun, when he rises in the east, drives away tho Rakshasas °° 


Wilssu. * 10 ALilked cows struck the cloud with his hyhtning, 
and inads tho milky stream: of fertihzing rain flow forth. 12 Lléi- 


bisa’s stroyg castles : [fbisa is said by Sdyana to be Vritra who sleeps 
in caverns of the earth.” Pret ably one of the confaderate demons is 
intended. Suna with his horn : he demon of drow sht, © furnished,’ 
gays the Scholiast, ¢ with wo. eps like the horns of bulls anil buffaloes.’ 
Phe meaning of ‘horned? or * with his horn’ is simply ‘imnighty,’ the 
horn befng used as <n. [Inbrew poetry as the emblem of strength. 
13 With Ais sharp bull: the rushing thunderbolt. 14 Kutsa: 
said to have been a Rishi or seer, founder of a religious family or 
schyol, and elswhere spoken of as the particular friend of Indra. 


HYMN 34) THE RIGVEDA. 47 


e 
15 Svitra’s mild steer, O Maghavan thou holpest in combat for 
the land, midWTugra’s houses. e 
Long stood they there before the task was ended : thougwas! 
the master of the foemeg’s treasure. : 


*HYMN XXXIV. Asving, 


Ye who observe this day be with us even thrice: far-stretch- 
¢ ing is your bounty, Asvins, and your course. 
To you, as to 1 cloak in winter, we cleave close : ye are to be 
drawn nigh unto us by the wise. 
2 Three are the fellies in your honey-bearing car, that travels 
after Soma’s loved one, as aj! know. 
Three are the pillars set upon it for support: thrice journey 
ye by night, O Asvins, thrice by day. 
3 Thrice in theself-same day, ye Gods who banish want, sprinkle 
ye thrice today our sacrifice with meath ; 
And thrice vouchsafe usstore of food with plenteous stsength, 
at evening, O ye Asvins, and at break of day. 
4 Thrice come yo to our home, thrice to the righteous folk, 
thrice triply aid the man who well deserves your help, 
Thrice, O ye Axvins, bring us what shall make us glad ; 
thrice send ws store of food as nevermore to fail. ° 
5 Thrice, O ye Asvins, bring to us abundant wealth; thirce in 
the Gods’ assembly, thrice assist our thoughts. 
Thrice grant ye us prosperity thrice grant us fame; for tho 
Suy’s daughter hath mounted your threc-wheeled ear. 
6 Thrice, Asvins, grant tous the heavenly medicines, eéhrice 
those of earth and thrice those that the waters hold. 
Favour and health and strength bestow upon my son ; triple 
protection, Lords of Splendour, grant to him. 
T Thrice are ye to be worshipped day by day by us ; thrice, O ye 
Asvins, ye travel around the earth, 
Car-borne from faraway, O ye Nasatyas, come, like vital air to 
bodies, come ye to the three, 


Dgsadyu, is also said to have been Rishi, but nothing ig known of 
him. ‘The same may bo said of Svaifreya or Svitrya, theson of a woman 
named Svitra. 15 The meaning of tugrydsw in the textiS nob 
clear. Sayana explains it by ‘in the water®;’ Beufey translates, among 
Tugra’s daughters,’ and the @etersburg Lexicon takes i to mean 
‘among the familigs of Tugryans,’ Mild stetr ¢ strong but gentle son. 

e e 


L Be present with ws even thrice: that is, at all the three daily 


cacrifices., 4 Soma: is here the Moon. Hés darling is Jyotsna Sr 
Kaumudé, Moonlicht, identified with sary4, th® light borrowed from 
the Sun. 3 for the Sun’s daughter: Stryd, whdé is called the 


consort of the Agvins. @ Nasatyas : a common appellation of 
the Agvins, See [ 3. 3, To the three: to the three daily sacrifices. 


48 THE HY MN8 OF, . [BOOK 1. 


8 Thrice, O yg Asvins, with the Seven Mother- Streams; three 
are ‘he jars, the triple offering is preperec. 
Three are the worlds, and moving on above,the sky ye guard 
the firm-eet vault of heaven thraugh day and nights. 


9 Where arethe three wheels of your trigle chariot, where are 
the three seats thereto firmly fastened ? 
When will ye yoke the mighty ass that draws it, to bring you 
to our sacrifice, Nasatyas ? 
10 Nasatyas, come : the sacred gift is offered up; drink the sweet 
juice with lips that know the sweetness well. 
Savitar sends, before the dawn of day, your car, fraught with 
oil, various-coloured, to our sacrifice, 
11 Come, O Nasatyas, with the thrice-eleven Gods; come, O ye 
Asvins, to the drinking of the meath. 
Make long our days of life, and wipe out all oursins: ward off 
Ou- enemies ; be with us evermoe. 
12 Borne in your triple car, O Asvins, bring us present prosperity 
witn noble offspring, 


I cry to you who hear me for protection: be ye our helpers 
where men win the booty. 


HYMN XXXV. Savitar, 


Aant I first invoke for our prosperity ; I call on Mitra, Varuna, 
to aid us here. 


1 call on Night who gives rest to all moving life; I call on 
Savitar the God to .end us help. 


2 Throughout the dusky firmament advancing, laying to rest 
the immortal and the mortal, 

Borne in his golden chariot he cometh, Savitar, God who looks 
on every creature. 

The God moves by the upward vath, the downward ; with two 
bright Bays, adorable, he journeys, 

Savitar coges, the God from the far distance, and chases from 
us all distress and sorrow. : 


G3 


8 The Seven* Mother Streams : see I, 32. 12. Three are the jars: 
three sorte of pitchers, used to contain and pour out the Soma juice at 
the three daily sacrifices. + QY The three worlds earth, middle air, 
and heaven. v9 The mighty ass ; according to the Nezhantu ‘ two 
asses ary the steeds of the Asvins.’ 10 Savitar : implying that the 
A’svins are to be worshinped with this hymn at dawn. Savitar is the 
Sun. Ll The thriye-eleven Gods : This is authority for the usual 
Paurjnik enumoration of thirty-three deities, avowedly resting on 
Vaidik texts. The list is, thore, made up of the eight Vasus; twelve 
Adityas, Prajapati, and Vashatkara.’ V’ilson. 


HYMN 35} ®  PHE RIGVEDA. 49 
4. His chariot decked With pearl, of ‘Various colours, lofty,ewith 


golden pole, the God hath mounted, P 
The many-rayed Qne, Savitar the holy, bound, bearifig power 
and, might, fgr darksome regions. e 


& Drawing the gold-yoke@ car his Bays, white-footed, have 
manifested lightto all the peoples. _ 
Held in the lap of Savitar, divine One, all men, all beings 
~ have their place for ever. i 


6 Three heavens there are; two. Savitar’s, adjacent : in Yama’s 
world is one, the home of heroes. 
As on a linch-pin, firm, rest things immortal: he whe hath 
known it, let him here declare it. 


1 He, strong of wing, hath lightened up the regions, deep-qui- 
vering Asura, the gentle Leader, 
Where now is Sfirya, where is one to tell us to what celestial 
sphere his ray hath wandered ? 


8 The earth’s eight points his brightness hath illumined,-.three 
desert regions and the Seven Rivers. 
God Savitar the gold-eyed hath come hither, giving choice 
treasures unto him who worships, 


9 The golden-handed Savitar, far-seeing, goes on his way he- 
tween the earth and heaven, | 
Drives away sickness, bids the Sun approach us, and spreads 
the bright sky through the darksome region, 


10 May he, gold-handed Asura, kind Leader, come hither to us 
with his help and favour, ; . 
Driving off Rakshasas and Yatudhanas, the God is present, 
. praised in hymns at evening, | 


11 © Savitar, thine ancient dustless pathways are well established 
in the air’s mid-region : 
O God, come by those paths so fair to travel, preserve thou 
us from harm this day, and bless us. 


6 *Two Savitar’s 3. heaven and earth, sr the heaven of day and the 
heaven of night. As ona linch-pin: the linch-pin is the ¢mblgm of 
stability, retaining ita position unchanged bythe revolution of the wheels. 
‘So the Gods remain unmoved, unaffected by deathor change, unlike the 
mortals who depart to the realm of Yama, See J. Ehni, Dar Mlythus des 
Yama, p.1l5. © 7 He, strong of wimg: ( suparndgh) an epithet or a 
name oftheSun. Asura: thaimmortal and divine One. 9 Bids the 
Sunapproochus: Sayana says ‘approaches the Sun’, and observes that 
falthough Savitar and the Sun are the same Ag xegarda their divinity, 
yet they are two different forms, and therefore one mgy be said to go 
to the other. 10 Yatedhinas : & class of demons or ‘evil spirits, 
much like Rakshasas, but more gArticalarly of sorcery. . 


\ 
’ ‘ 
. + 


50 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK I. 
HYMN XXXVI. Agni. 


Wirn words sént forth in holy hymns, Agnfwe supplicate, 
the Lord 


Of many families who duly serve the Gods, yea, him’ whom 


others also praise. ‘ 


2 Men have won Agni, him who makes their strength abound : 
we, with oblations, worship thee. 


Our gracious-minded Helper in our deeds of might, be thon, 
O Excellent, this day. 


3 Thee for our messenger we choose, thee, the Omniscient, for 
our Priest. 


The flames of the mighty are spread wide around : thy 
splendour reaches to the sky. 


4 The Gods enkindle thee their ancient messenger, —Varuna, 
Mitra, Aryaman. 


That mortal man, O Agni, gains through thee all wealth, who 
hath poured offerings unto thee. 


5 Thou, Agni, art a cheering Priest, Lord of the House, men’s 
messenger : 


All'constant high decrees established by the Gods, gathered 
together, meet in thee. 


6 In thee, the auspicious One, O Agni, youthfullest, each sacred 
gift is offered up: 
This,day, and after, vracious, worship thou our Gods, that 
we may have heroic sons. 


¢ To him in his own splendour bright draw near in worship 
the devout. 


Men kindle Agni with their sacrificial gifts, victorious o'er 
the enemies, 


8 Vritra they smote and slew, and made the earth and heaven 
and firmament a wide abode. 


The glorious Bull, invoked, hath stood at Kanva’s side : oud 
peighed the Steed in fraya for kine. 


This Hymn and the twelve following are ascribed to Kanva, a very 
celobrated Rishi ’ho is called the son of Ghora and is said to belong 
to the family of Angiras, 5 The preservation of the whole world 
rests, according to the Vaidik view, on the sacrifices offered by men, as 
these give the Gods strényth and euable them to perform their duties. 

8 The glorious Bull: the mighty Agni, strong as a bull and impetuous 
asa war horse, hag aided his favourite {fanva in battle, 


HY MN 36.] THE RIGVEDA. ~* BI 


-9 Seat thee, far thon art mighty; shine, best entertainer of 
the Gods. 


Worthy of saceed food, praised Agni! loose the smoke, Tudd ¥ 
and beautiful to see. ° e 


10 Bearer of offerings whom, best sacrificing Priest, the Gods for 
Manu’s sake ordained 5 


* Whom Kanva, whom Medhyatithi made the source of wealth, 
and Vrishan and Upastuta. 


11 Him, Agni, whom Medhyatithi, whom Kanva kindled for his 


rite, 


Him these our songs of praise, him, Agni, we extol: his power 
shine out preeminent. 


12 Make our wealth perfect thou, 0 Agni Lord divine: for thou 
hast kinship with the Gods. 


Thou rulest as a King o'er widely-famous strength : be good 
to us for thou art great. 


13 Stand up erect to lend us aid, stand up like Savitar the God: 
Erect as strength-bestower when we call aloud, with unguents 
and with priests, on thee. ° 


14 Erect, preserve us from sore trouble; with thy flame burn 
thou each ravening demon dead. 


Raise thou us up that we may walk and live: so thou shalt 
find our worship mid the Gods. 


15 Preserve us, Agni from the fiend, preserve us from malicious. 
wrong. 


Save us from him who fain would injure us or slay, Most 
Youthful, thou with lofty light. 


16 Smite down as with aclub, thon who hast fire for teeth, 
smite thou the wicked, right and left. 


Let not the man who plots against us in the night, nor any 
foe prevail o’ér us, ; . 


eee 


10 Medhyatith: : Sayana takes this wordgto be an epithet of Kanva, 
‘ entertainer of gussts who are werthy of sacrificial food.’ But, it appears 
to ba the name of a Rishi of Kanva’s family, the seer of twenty-eighs 
hymns of Books WIII. and [X. © Yrlshan and Upastuta : rendered 
by Wilson, after Sayana, ‘Indra and some other worshipper,’ are also 
apparently the names of two other Rishisa. , 13 Stamd wp erect: 
Agni, as orect, is identified by Sayana with thayxpe or sacrificial post 
to which the victims, at an animal sacrifice, were bound. Accordingly 
he takes anjibhih to mean ‘with unguents’ wherewith the post was 
anointed. This word may howWever refer to the ornaments—another 
signification of the word—worn by the ministering priests. 


92 ( THE RYMNS OF | 


t 


[BOOR f, 


17 Agni hath given heroic might to Kanva, and/felicity ; 
Agni Rath helped our friends, hath helped Mod by atithi, hath 
helped Upastuta to win. 
18 We call on Ugradeva, Yadu, Gurvasa, by means of Agni, 
from afar ; 
£ gui, bring Navavastva and Brihadratha, Turviti, to subdue 
the foe. 
19 Manu hath stablished thee alight, Agni, for all the rave 
of men: 
Sprung from the Law, oil-fed, for Kanva hast thou blazed, 
thou whom the people reverence, 
2) The flames of Agni full of splendour and ot might are fearful, 
not to be approached. ; 
Consume for ever all demons and sorcerers, consume thou 
each devouring fiend. 


TIYMN XXXVII, Maruts. 


c 
Stine forth, O Kanvas, to your band of Maruts, unassailable, 
Sporting, resplendent on their ear : 
2 They who, self-luminous, were born together, with the spotted 
deer, 
Spears, swords, and glittering ornaments. 
3 One hears, as though’ twere close at hand, the cracking of the 
whips they hold ; 
They gather glory on their way. 
4 Now sing ye forth the God-given hymn to your exultant 
Marut host, ; 
The fiereely-vigorous, the strong. 
2 Praise ye the Bull among the cows; for ‘tis the Maruts’ 
sportive band : 
It strengthened as it drank the rain. 


me ee 8 ee wt a vee a ee - seo ae a eer we ee 


17 Agnt hath helped our friends: S.yaua takes mztrd’ in the text as 
mitra'ni, friends Benfey and Ludwig consider it to mean, the former 
Mitra, and thd latter the two Mitras, i.e. Mitra and Varuna; and they 
translate respectively “\gni ahd Mitra protected,’ and‘Agni, as ‘sfitra 
[and ruta] hath favoured.’ 18 Turvass and Yadu are froquently 
mentioned together as eponymi of tribes of those names. The poet 
appears to pray for the return of Nayavastva, whoever he may have 
been, to protect the home attacked by the Dasyus or robbers. and 
perhaps, also to girangthen his prayer by an appeaf to the spirits of 
departed heroes. 20 Demons and sorcerers; Rakshasas and evil 
spirits who practise sorgery. | 

For an exhawtive explanation of thisand other Hymns to the Maruts, 
see M. Miller’s Vedic Hymns, Part 1 (Sacred Books of the Hast, 
HAXKIT.) 5 The Bull among thdcows: the band of Storm-Gods 
preeminent among the clouds as a bull is among cows. 


HYMN 38.| 53 


6 Who is your \iightiest, Heroes, when, O shakers of the earth 
and heaven, ’ 


Ye shake them like a garment’s hem ? a 
7 At your aoproach man eholds him dpwn before the fury of 
your wrath:  e 


The rugged-jointed mountain yields 
8 They at whose racings forth the earth, like an age weakened 
lord of men, 
Trembles in terror on their ways. 
9 Strong is their birth: vigour have they to issue from their 
Mother ; ; strength, 
Yva, even twice enough, is theirs. 
10 And these, the Sons, the Singers, in their racing's have enlarg- 
ed the bounds, 
So that the kine must walk knee-deep, 


11 Before them, on the ways they go, they drop this offspring 
of the cloud, 
Long, broad, and inexhaustible. 


i2 O Maruts, as your strength is great, so have ye cast men 
down on earth, 
So have ye made the mountains fall. 
13 The while the Maruts pass along, they talk together on the 
wa 


Doth any hear them as they speak ? 


e 
14 Come quick with swift steeds, for ye have worshippers among 


Kanva’s sons : 
May you rejoice among them well. 


15 Allis prepared for your delight, Weare their scrvants 


evermore, 
To live as long as life may last. 
HYMN XXXVIIL. ? Maruts. 
Wat now ? When wil] ye take us by both hagds, as a dear 
sire bis son, nee 


Gods, for whom sacred grass is clippad ? 


6 That is, where all are so mighty it would be superfluous to ask who is 
mightiest, Like a garment’s hem: or, according to Savana, ‘like a 
tree’s high top.’ 10 Phe Singers : the loud? ‘voiced Maruts. The 
Maruts have spread themselves over the sky and caused, so much rain 
to fall that the cows inthe pastures ara up to their knees in water. 
But see Ludwig, Ueber die neueften Arbeiten auf dem Gebiete der 
Reveda-forschung, Prag 1893. 


4 ( . THE RYMNSOP, [BOOR I. 


2 Now whither? To what goal of yours go ys in heaven, and 
notton earth? 
Where do your cows disport themselves” 
& Where are your newest favougs shown? Where, Maruts, 
your prosperity ? ‘ ‘ 
Where all your high felicities ? 
4 1% © ye Maruts, ye the Sons whom Prisni bare, were mortal, 
and . 
Immortal he who sings your praise, 
§ Then never were your praiser loathed like a wild beast in 
pasture-land, 
Nor should he go on Yama’s path. 
6 Let not destructive plague on plague hard to be conquered, 
strike us down: 
Let each, with drought, depart from us. 
7 Truly. they the fierce ana mighty Sons of Rudra send their 
wtndless ‘ 
Rain e’en on the desert places. 
8 Like acow the lightning lows and follows, motherlike, her 
youngling, 
When their rain-flood hath been loosened. 
9 When they inundate the earth they spread forth darkness 
e’en in day-time, 
With the water-laden-cloud. 
10 O Maruts, at your voice’s sound this earthly habitation 
shakes, 
Axd each man reels who dwells therein. 
11 O Maruts, with your strong-hoofed steeds, unhindered in 
their courses, haste 
Along the bright embankéd streams. 
12 Firm be the fellies, of your wheels, steady your horses and 
your cars, 
And may your reins be fashioned well. 


Se enamannnaneeanaadl 


A A NB 


fe et 


Sew 

2 Where do your cows disport themselves 1: perhaps, as M. Willer 
suggasts £ where tarry your herds?’ viz. the clouds Why do you remain 
in the sky, and not come down to earth 3 Or, according to Ludwig : 
‘ Where do the cows feed that are to supply milk and butter for sacri- 
fice to you? Where is the place in which saoritice is to be offered to 
you? 5 Like a wt? beast: or, ynwelcome like & doer in the home- 
pasture or meadow roserved for the cows. Yama’s path: the path 
that leads to Yama the God of the Departed, 6 Destructive 
plague : nirriteh; sin. M Miller. Drought: greed, M. Muller 7 
Sons of Rudra,: or’ dear to Rudra,’ who is the father of the Maruts. 
Windless rain; steady rain, not blown away; that sinks into the 
round ; the wind generally ceasing as{;00n as heavy rain begins to fall. 
8 The thunder follows tho lightning as a cow lowing, follows her calf. 


HYMN 339.) THE RIGVEDA. 55 


13 Invite thou hXher with this song, for praise, Agni the Lord of 

Prayer, 
. Him who is fair demdfitra is. 

14 Form jn thy naouth the pyme of praise : expand thee I?ke a 

rainy cloud: 
Sing forth the measured anibee 

15 Sing glory to the Marut host, praiseworthy, tuneful, vigorous: 

ere let the Strong Ones dwell with us. 


HYMN XXXIX. Maruts. 


Wuen thus, like flame, from far away, Maruts, ye cast your 
measure forth, 
To whom go ye, to whom, O shakers of the earth, moved by 
whose wisdom, whose design * i 
2 Strong let your weapons be to drive away your foes, firm for 
resistance let them be, 
Yea, passing glori ious must be your warrior might, not asa 
guileful mortal’s strength, 
3 When whatis strong ye overthrow, and whirl shee, each 
ponderous thing, 
Heroes, your course is through the forest trees of earth, and 
through the fissures of the rocks. 
4 Consumers of your foes, no enemy of yours is found in hedven 
or on the earth: 
Ye Rudras, may the strength, held in this bond, be yours, to 
bid defiance even now, 
They make the mountains rock and reel, they rend the rateee 
kings apart. 
Onward, ye Maruts, drive, like creatures drunk with wine, ye 
Gods with all your company. 


Rm anes re ce a ene eet te te re a ee nee ee een” Ye 


a ed 


13 Agni, the Lord of Prayer: ‘Agni is frequently invoked together 
with the Maruats, andis even called marut-sakha, the friend of the 
Maruts, vill. 92, 14. It seems better, therefore, to refer brahmanas patim 
to Agni, than, with Sjyana, to the host of the Maruts. BredAhmanaspati 
and Brihaspati are both varieties of Agni, the priest and purohita of 
Gods and men, and as such he is intoked together with she Maruts in 


ather passages, 1. 40, 1.’ M. Maller. 14 Expand thee : addresked 
to the poet of the hymn. & Tuneful : so I. 37, 10 ‘And these the 
Sons, the Singers.’ The song ‘of the Maruts is the music or smging of 
the winds. . 

s ee. e 


1 Maruts, ye cast your measure forth: ‘To this passage we must take 
measure, not in the abstract sense, but as a measuring line, which is’ 
cast forward to measure the distance of an objest, “an image perfectly 
applicable to the Maruts, who seem with their weapons to strike the 
the trees and mountains when gthey themselves are still far off.’ M. 
Muiler. 4 Held in this bond : togethor with your race. M. Miller. 


56 THE RYMNS OR [BOOK I. 
6 Ye'to your chariot have yoked the spotted via :ared deer, 


as a,leader,* draws. 
Even the Earth herself listened as yo camsmt-var, and men were. 
Sorely terrified. e , 


7 O Rudras, quickly wedesire yéur succour for this work of 
e 
ours. 
Come to us with your aid as in the days of old, so now for 
frightened Kanva’s sake, c 


8 Should any monstrous foe, ( Maruts, sent by you or sent by 
mortals threaten us, 
Tear ye him from us with your power and with your might, 
and with the succours that are yours, 


9 For ye, the worshipful and wise, have guarded Kanva 
perfectly, 

O Maruts, come to us with fall protecting help, as lightning 
flashes seek the rain. 


10 Whole strength have ye, O Bounteous Ones ; perfect, earth- 
shakers, is your might. 
Maruts, against the poet’s wrathful enemy send ye an enemy 
like a dart. 


HYMN XL. Brahmanaspati. 


O BranmaNnaspati, stand up: God-serving men, we pray to 
thee. 

May they who give good gifts, the Maruts, come to us Indra, 
.aost swift, be thon with them, 


2 OSon of Strength, each mortal callsto thee for aid when 
spoil of battle waits for him. 
O Maruts, may this man who loves you well obtain wealth of 
good steeds and hero might. 


3 May Brahmanaspati draw nigh, may Stinrit’ the Goddess 
come, 
And Gods bring to this rite which gives, the fivefold gift the 
Hero, lover of mankind, 


boa eeeteedllimmeeee taeeesen cnn ens noeenaenenenemeennamened 


OO TE tee Ge ERS ty SO LL AT SPS LTC A I SLY SA CC SR 


. 
‘ 


‘sg 4 
9 As liyhining-flashes seck the rain : ‘Lightning precedes the rain. and 
may thereture by, reprosented'as luaking about for the rain.’ M. Muller. 


“. 1 O Brahmanaspati: Agni is sometimes called Brahmanaspati, or Lord 
of Prayer. See 1, 38 13. 3 May Sanrtta the Goddess coms: Sanrita 
( Plessantness} is, according to Siyana, the Goddess of Speech ( Vagdevata) 
in the form of lover of truth. an flvefold gift : an offering of gruel, 
curdled milk, rice-cake, and curda, 


HYMN 41.) THE RIQVEDA. | 67 


4 He who bestolys a noble guerdon on the priest wins fame that 
never shall dmga * 
For him we offer sacred hero-giving food, peerless and gon- 
quering easil . 


5 Now Brahmanaspati speaks forth aloud the solemn hymn of 
praise, 
, Wherein Indra and Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman, the Gods, have 
made their dwelling-place. 


6 May we in holy synods, Gods! recite that hymm, peerless, 
that brings felicity. 
If you, O Heroes, gracioysly accept this word, may it obtain 
all bliss from you. 


7? Who shall approach the pious ? who the man whose sacred 
grass is trimmed ? 
The offerer with his folk advances more and more: he fills his 
house with precious things. 8 


8 He amplifies his lordly might, with kings he slays : e’on mid 
alarms he dwells secure. 
In great or lesser fight none checks him, none subdues,—the 
wielder of the thunderbolt, 


HYMN XLI. Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman. 


Ne’er is he injured whom the Gods Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman, 
The excellently wise, protect. 


2 He prospers ever, free from seathe, whom they, as with full 
hands, enrich, 
Whom they preserve from every foe., 


3 The Kings drive far away from him his troubles and his 
enemies, 
Aud lead him safely o’er distress, 


4 Sacred food : £14 or i'da, sacriffcial food, or a libation, especially 
a hedy libation coming between the Prayaja and the fora eacrilice and 
the after sacrifice ; the preliminary aad tha final offering. 9 Now 
Brahmanaspati speaks forth :‘ Professor Roth remarks : Tho ‘%uander 
is his (rahmanaspati’s) voice. The voice cé thunder, again, as the voice 
of the superintendent of prayer, is by a beautiful transference brought 
into conuection with tho prayer which, spoken on earth, finds, as io 
were, its echo ae heights of he&ven.’ Muir O. S. Tents, v. p. 279, note. 

8 The wtelder of the thunderbolt : meaning, Sayana says, Brahma- 
naspati, and so far identifying him with Tadra. Ludwig refers the 
expression to the pious sacrificer who is said t™ &e armed, as it wore 
with Brahmanaspati’s thunderbolt. ° 


3 The Kings; Varuna, Mitra, and Aryaman. 
8 


58 THE AYMNS OF [BOOR I. 


4 Thornless, Adityas,is the path, easy for hin/ who seeks the 
Law : : . oa 
ith him is naught to anger you, : 7 
2 What saorifice, Adityas, ye Heroes guide by the path direct ,—' 
May that come nigh‘unto your thought,, 
6 That mortal, ever unsubdued gains wealth and every precious 
thing, 
And children also of his own. 
7 How, my friends, shall we prepare Aryaman’s and Mitra’s 
laud, 
Glorious food of Varuna ? 


8 I point net out to you a man who strikes the pious, or reviles : 
Only with hymns J call you nigh. 
9 Let him not love to speak ill words ; but fear the Qne who 
holds all four 
Within his hand, antil they fall, 


HYMN XLII. Pfishan. 


SHORTEN our ways, O Pishan, move aside obstruction in tho 
path : 
Go close before us, cloud-born God, 


4 Adityas : the thrae Gods named above, with others. See I. 14 3. 

9 But fear the One who holds the four : Wilson remarks : ‘The text 
has chaturas chid dadamdnid bibhiydd & nidhatoh, he may fear from 
one holding four uatil the fall. Tho meaning is supplied by the Scho- 
liast with the assistance of Yaske, chaturo’ kshan dhdrayatah ...kitavdt, 
from a gambler holding four dice,,,That is, where two men are playing 
together, the man who has not the throw of the dice is in anxious 
apprehension Jest it should be against him.’ Benfey thinks that «the 
holder of the four (dice) is God who holds in his hands and decides 
the destinies of man. Ludwig maintains that there is no reference to 
dice, eithor of gambling or destiny, and that ‘ the four’ are Varuna, 
Mitra, Bhaga, and Aryaman. The pious man when he possesses these 
four as friends should fear to leb them ge. Bergaigna (La Religion 
Veédiquo, TIL. ':58) is of opinion that the cords or pooses of Vaguna, 
with which he catches and punishes the wicked, aro intended, 


i 


& 


1 Shorter our tvays, O Fishan: Pashan is usually a synonym of 
the Sun ; that is, he is one of the twebve Adityas According to the 
tenour of this hymn, he is the deity presiding especiqlly over roads and 
journeyings. @loud-born: with foeference, perhaps, to the close 
connexion between nourishing the earth, which is one of Pushan’s 
especial duties, and the cloud that gives the necessary rain, But in 
Rigveda VII. 4, 15,°1@, Pashan is called wimochana, tho deliverer, 
{from sin, according to Sayana), and perhaps vimucho napat may mean 
the same thing. See Muir O. S. Zexts, V. 173, where the whole bywa 
is translated. 


AYMN 43.) THE RIGVEDA. Oo 


2 Drive, Paishat, from our road the wolf, the wicked inayspicious 
wolf, eam: 
Who dies im wait to injure us, 


3 Who lurks about the path we take, the robber with a guileful 
heart: 
Far from the road chase him away. 


4°Tread with thy foot and trample out the firebrand of the 
wicked one, 
The double-tongued, whoe’er he be. 


2 Wise Pdshan, Wonder- Worker, we claim of thee now the aid: 
wherewith 
Thou furtheredst our sires of old. 


© So, Lord of all prosperity, best wielder of the golden.sword, 
Make riches easy to be won. 


¢ Past all pursuers lead us, make pleasant our path emd fair 
to tread: 
QO Pishan, find thou power for this. 


8 Lead us to meadows rich in grass: send on our way no early 
heat: 
O Pishan, find thou power for this. 
9 Be gracious to us, fill us full, give, feed us, and invigorate: 
O Pishan, find thou power for this, # 
49 No blame have we for Pishan; him we magnify with songs 
of praise : » 


We seek the Mighty One for wealth. 
HYMN XLIII. Rudra, * 


Waar shall we sing to Rudra, strong, most bounteous, exccl- 
lently wise, 
That shall be dearest to his heart ? 


2 That Aditi may grant the grace of Rudra to our folk, our kine, 
Our cattle and*our progeny ; i 


2 ry 
3 That Mitra and that Varuna, that Rudra may remember us, 
Yea, all the Gods with one accord. _ 


 ) 


e 


2 The wolf; vrtka = Swedish and Norwegian varg, gvhich signifies not 


only wolf, but also a wicked godless man. 


1] Rudra appears in this hymn as a gentle and. benoficent deity, pre- 
siding especially over medicinal plants. 2 That Adit may grant 
the grace: Aditi is said by Sayana to mean here the earth, and is accor- 
dingly so translated by Wilson.? Benfey explains the word by ‘Sinless- 

? . oy ° : : : 
ness, and Ludwig takes it as a masculine deity meaning Rudra himeelf, 


6U « THE HYMNS OF [800K 1. 


4 To Radra Lord of sacrifice, of hymns and Piny medicines, — 
We pray for joy and health and strengtn. 


@ 
5 He shines in splendour like the Sun, refulgent as bright gold 
is he, 
The good, the best among the Gods, 
6 May he grant health into our steeds, well-being to our rams gnd 
ewes, 
To men, to women, and to kine. 


7 O Soma, set thon upon us the glory of a hundred men, 
The great renown of mighty chiefs. 


8 Let not malignities, nor those who trouble Soma, hinder us. 
Indu, give us a share of strength. 


9 Soma! head, central puint, love these; Soma! know these as 
serving thee, 
Children of thee Immortal, at the highest place of holy law. 


HYMN XLIV, Agni. 


Immorrac Jitavedas, thou many-hued fulgent gift of Dawn, 
Agmni, this day to him who pays oblations bring the Gods who 
waken with the morn. 


2 For thou art offering-bearer and loved messenger, the chariot- 
cer of sacrifice : 
Accordant with the Asvins and with Dawn grant us heroic 
srenyth and lofty fame, 


3 As messenger we choose to-day Agni the good whom many 
love 
y 


Smoke-bannered spreader of the light, at break of day glory of 
sacrificial rites, 


ee 


6 May he grant health: here Rudra appears as pasupdll, Lord and 
guardian of cattle. 8 Those wro trouble Soma: probably the people 
of the hills who interfere with the gathering of thts Soma plant which 
has to be sought there. Indu : literaly ‘drop ;’ from the sante root 
as Indra, the Kainer; a name ofthe Moon as rain-giver, and of Soma 
which is identified with it, 9 At the highest place of holy law : at 
tho place where sacrifice is duly performed. ‘The whole Verse is difli- 
cult, possfoly a later addition.’ Max Miller. 


f 


This Hlymn and the six following are ascribed to the Rishi Praskanva, 
tho son of Kanva who is tho seer of the preceding group. 1 Im- 
mortal Jdtavedas: J Atavedas is @ commen epithet of Agni, the mean- 
ing of which is explained in five ways ; 1.‘knowing all created beings ; 
2. passessing all creatures ;,’ 3. ‘known by created beings ;’ 4. ‘possossing 
riches; 5. possessing wisdom.’ 2 The Asvins: soo I. 3. 1. Dawn: 
the Goddess Ushas; Morning personified. — 


HYMN 44.) 3. THE RIGVEDA. » 6 


4 Him noblest 42d most youthful, richly-worshipped gxest, dear 
to the men wh offer gifts, : 
Him,*Agni JAtuvedas, I beseech at dawn that he may bring 
the Gods to us. e 
5 Thee, Agni, will f glorify deathless nourisher of the world, 
Immortal, offering-bearer, mect for sacred food, preserver, 
e best at sacrifice. 
6 Tell good things to thy praiser, O most youthful God, as 
richly-worshipped, honey-tongued, 
And, granting to Praskanva lengthened days of life, show 
honour to the Heavenly Host. 
7 For the men, Agni, kindle thee as all-possessor and as Priest ; 
So Agni, much-invoked, bring hither with all speed the Gods, 
the excellently wise, 
S At dawn of day, at night, Ushas and Savitar, the Asvins, 
Bhaga, Agni’s self: , . 
Skilled in fair rites, with Soma poured, the Kanvas light 
thee, the oblation-wafting God, 
9 For Agni, Lord of sacrifice and messenger of mon art thou : 
Bring thou the Gods who wake at dawn, who see the light, 
this day to drink the Soma juice. ‘ 
10 Thou shonest forth, O Agni, after former dawns, all visible, 
O rich in light, 
Thou art our help in battle-strife, the Friend of man, the great 
High Priest in sacrifice. 
11 Like Manu, we will stablish thee, Agni, performer of thg rite, 
Invoker,ministcring Priest, exceeding wise,the swift immortal 
messenger, 
}2 When as the Gods’ High Priest, by many loved, thou dost 
their mission as their nearest Friend, 
Then, like the tar-resounding billows of the flood, thy flames, 
O Agni, roar aloud. 
13 Hear,Agni,who hast ears to hear, withall thy train of escort Gods; 
Let Mitra, Arygman, seeking betimes our rite, seat them upon 
the sacred grass, : 
14 Let those who strengthen Law, who bountifully give, the fire- 
toncued Maruts, hear our praise. ene oe 
May Law-supporting Varuna, witl? the Asvins twain and 
Ushas, drink the Soma fuice. . 


1l Like Mann : the representative man and father of the human 
race and the first institutor of religious coremonigs. , 12 Of the flood : 
or of Sindhu; the word meaning either that river (the Indus) in 
ceneral. 13 Let Mitra, Aryaman: and Varuna, understood, 

14 The fire-tongued Maruts: who consume the sacrifice by means 
of the tongue-like flames of Agni, 


62 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 1. 
HYMN XLV. Agni. 


Weorsute the Vasus, Agni! here, the Rudrgs, the Adityas, alk 
Who spring from Manu, those who know fair rites, who pour 
their blessings down. 
2 Agni, the Gods who understand give ear unto the worshipper: 
Lord of Red Stceds, who lovest song, bring thou those Three- 
and-Thirty Gods. 
3 O Jitavedas, great in act, hearken thou to Praskanva’s call, 
As Priyamedha erst was heard, Atri, Viripa, Angiras. 
4 The sons of Priyamedha skilled in lofty praise have called for 
hel 
On fare who with fulgent flame is Ruler of all holy rites. 
& Hear thou, invoked with holy oil, bountiful giver of rewards, 
These eulogies, whereby the sons of Kanva call thee to their 


aid. 
6 O Agni, loved by many, thou of fame most wondrous, in their 
homes 
Men cali on thee whose hair is fame, to be the bearer of their 
rifts, 


¢ Thee, Agni, best to find out wealth, most widely famous, quick 
"to hear, 
Singers have stablished in their rites Herald and ministering 
Priest. 
8 Singors with Soma pressed have made thee, Agni, hasten to 
the feast, 
Great light to mortal worshipper, what time they bring the 
sacred gift. 
J Good, bountcous, Son of Strength, this day seat here on sacred 
grass the Gods 
Who come ateurly morn, the host of heaven, to drink the 
Soma juice. 
10 Bring with joint invocations thou, O Agni, the celestial host: 


Jlere stands the Soma, bountevas Gods: drink this expressed 
cre yesterday. 


1 Vasus, Rudras, Adit as: three classes of Gods who make up 
nlinost the whole number of the thirty-three deities spoken of in the 
next stanza. Who sepriyg from Manu : Manu appears here as Pra- 
japati, the proganitor of God¢ as wejl as of men. © 2 Lord of Red 
Steeds 2 Agu, a Pe horses sro tlames of fire. The Three-and- Thirty 
Gods: seeT 34.11.  . 3 Priyamedha, Atri, and Virfipa are famous 
Rishis, tho seers of gngny hymns of tht Rigveda. Angiras has already 
been meutiongd See I. 1}. 6. 9 Son of Strenyth: made or gene- 
rated by strong friction; ‘ kindled through agitation to a flame. 

10 Evpressed ere yester say : prepasted two days before in order that 
juice might ferment before it was used, 


HYMN 46.] THE RIGVEDA. . 63 


HYMN XLVI. o ASVINS. 
Now Morning wre*uer earliest light shines forth,dear Daughter 
of the Sky: ¢ 
High, Asvins, I extol your praise, °* 
2 Sons of the Sea, mfghty to save, discoverers of riches, ye 
Gods with deep thought who find out wealth, _ 
8 Your giant coursers hasten on over the region all in flames, 
When your car flies with winged steeds. 
4 He, liberal, lover of the flood, Lord of the House, the vigilant, 
Chiefs! with oblations feeds you full, 
5 Ye have regard unto our hymns, Nisatyas, thinking of our 
words : 
Drink boldly of the Soma juice. 


6 Vouchsafe to us, O Asvin Pair, such strength as, with attend- 
ant light, 


May through the darkness carry us. ° 
7 Come in the ship of these our hymns to bear you to the hither 
shore: 


QO Asvins, harness ye the car. 
8 The heaven's wide vessel is your own: on the flood’s shore 
your chariot waits: . 
Drops, with the hymn, have been prepared. 


9 Kanvas, the drops are inthe heaven; the wealth is at the 
waters’ place : 


Where will ye manifest your form ? 


ee ee 


ne a a ee 


v 


1 Morning: Ushas or Dawn, personified as a Goddess, Asvins : 
gse [. 3.1. 2 Sons of the sea: offspring of the celestial ocean, the 
atmosphere. 4 Ile, liberal lover of the flood: evidently Agni and 
not the Sun. Agni’s connexion with water is frequently alluded to, 
and he is often called the Lord and Guardian of the house or family. 

6 The darkness: in the shape of poverty or want, according to the 
Scholiast. 7 The poet appears to invite the Agsvins to yoke their 
chariot for part of the journey and come to meet his hymp which shall 
bear them as in a ship through the sky. The middle air or atmosphere 
is the g3a between heaven and earth,-and the earth is tha hither shore. 

& Vessel: (aritram), a vehicle in the shape of a ship, says Siyana. 
You have already the ship of our songs to bear you through the sky, 
and now your chariot has reached,the earth and the place where, toge- 
ther with this hymn, the Soma juice has been prepared for a libation 
tu you, 9 The*drops, or Somatibation,and the wealth or treasure, 
and the sky and the place of rivers appear here tobe parallelisms, both 
pairs of expressions signifying the same thiny.- The oblation is said’ 
‘o have already reached the heaven where the Agwias will receive it. 
Sayana’s paraphrase which Wilson has followed, seeris forced and 
unnatural. ‘Kanvas, (ask this of the Asvins): (How) do the rays (of the 


sun proceed) from tho sky ?: (How) does the dawn (rise) in the region 
uf the waters ?’ 


64. THE AYMNS OF [BOOK TF. 


10 Light,came to lighten up the branch : the Sy'a appeared as it 
were gold: 
nd with its tongue shone forth the dark. 

11 The path of sacritice, was made te travel to ‘the farther goal: 


The road of heaven was manifest. « 
12 The singer of their praise awaits whatever grace the Asvins 
rive, 


Who save when Soma gladdens them. : 


13 Ye dwellers with Vivasvan come, auspicious, as to Manu erst 5 
Jome to the Soma and our praise. 
14 O circumambient Asvins, Dawn follows the brightness of your 
way: 
Approve with beams our solemn rites. 
15 Drink ye of our libations, grant protection, O ye Asvins Twain, 
With aids which none may interrupt. 


’ HYMN XLVII. Asvins. 


Asvins, for you who strengthen Law this sweetest Soma hath 
been shed. 
Drink this expressed ere yesterday and give riches to him who 
«Offers it. 
2 Come, O ye Asvins, mounted on your triple car, three-seated, 
beautiful of form, 
To you at sacrifice the Kanvas send the prayer: graciously 
listen to their call. 
3 0 Asvins, ye who strengthen Law, drink ye this swectest Soma 
iLLGe. 
rihene on your wealth-fraught car come ye this day to him 
who offers, ye of wondrous deeds. 
4 Ocaniscient Axvins, on the thrice-heaped grass bedew with the 
sweet juice the sacrifice. 
The sons of Kanva, striving heavenward, call on you with 
draughts of Soma juice out-poured. 
® Q Asving, with those aids wherewith ye guarded Kava sare- 
fully, 
Keep J O Lords of Splendour: drink the Soma juice, ye 
strengtheners of holy law. 


10 Light came to lighten ~p the branch: the brench is probably the 
sacrificial tire. “Cf. ‘The other fires are verily thy branches’ (I. 59. 1). 
‘The epithet ‘dark? may refer to thedarkening of the fire by the sunlight 
ov by the smoke... Ll Sacrifice is the path which loads the Gods 
from heaven to earth, and the way through heaven is made visible by 
the sacrificial fire or by the da light. 13 Vivasvdin: ‘the 
Brilliant, a name of the morning ae: personified. He is regarded 
ay the father of Yuma, Manu, and the Asvins. See X. 17. 2, note. 


‘ 
HYMN 48.) THE RIGVEDA. 65 
: b a ad 
6 O Mighty Onvs, ye gave Sudds abundant food, broughg on 
your treasurc-laden car ; 
- So now vouchsafe * us the wealth which many crave, either 
from heaven ow from the sea. ee 
7 Nasatyas, whether ye be far away or cdose to Turvasa, 
Borne on your lightly rolling chariot come to us, together 
with the sunbeams come. : 
8 So let your coursers, ornaments of sacrifice, bring you to our 
libations here, 
Bestowing food on him who acts and gives aright, sit, Chiefs, 
upon the sacred grass. 
G Come, O Nasatyas.on your car decked withasunbright canopy, 
Whercon ye ever bring wealth to the worshipper, to drink the 
Soma’s pleasant juice. 
JO With lauds and songs of praise we call them down to us, that 
they, most rich. may suecgur us 3 e 
For ye have ever in the Kanvas’ well-loved house, O Asvins, 
drunk the Soma juice. 


HYMN XLVIITI. Dawn, 


Dawy on us with prosperity, Q Ushas, Daughter of the Sky, 
Dawn with great glory, Goddess, Lacy of the Light, dawn 
thou with riches, Bounteous One. 
2 They, bringing steeds and kine, boon givers of all wealth, haye 
oft sped forth to lighten us. 
O Ushas, waken up for me the sounds of joy ; send us the riches 
of the great. 
3 Ushas hath dawned, and now shall dawn, the Goddess, driver 
forth of cars 
Which, as she cometh nigh, have fixed their thought on her, 
like glory-seekers on the flood, 


6 Sudds:a king, the son of Pijivans. Sea VII. 18. §—25. 7 
Nasatyas : Asvins. See I. 3.3. Turvass : the tribe or family called 
after the chief of this name, frequently mentioned in the Itigveda. Sea 
J. 36. 18. 10 With lawd®: wkthébhth, answering, acgording ta 
SAyansa, to whatinéhe Brahmana is galled Sastram (to be recited by tha 
Hotar) while the Stoma (stotram) song, is sung by tl Sama-priests. 


1 Ushas : Morning, Dawa, personified. 3 They > the Duwng of 
preceding days. 3 The approach of Dawii sets cara or wiins in 


motion in the same way as it causes ships or buats that *have anchared 
during the night to move out to She open water. 


J 


or . THE HYMNS oe [BOOR I. 


bs e 
4 Here Kanva, chief of Kanva’s race, sings forth aloud the glo- 
ries of the heroes’ names,— | 
The rinces who, O Ushas, as thou cayaest near, direct their 
eethoughts to liberal gifts. e ; 
6 Likea good matron JJshas comes@arefully tending everything: 
Rousing all life she stirs all creatures that have feet, and 
makes*the birds of air fly up. 
6 She sends the busy forth, each man to his pursuit : delayeshe 
knows not as she springs. 
O rich in opulence, after thy dawning birds that have flown 
forth no longer rest. 
7 This Dawn hath yoked her steeds afar, beyond the rising of 
the Sun : 
Borne ona hundred chariots she, the auspicious Dawn, advan- 
ces On her way to men. 


8 To meet her glance all living creatures bend them down: 
Excellent One, she makes the Tight. 
‘Ushas, the Danghter of the Sky, the opulent, shines foes and 
enmitics away. 
‘9 Shine on us with thy radiant light, O Ushas, Daughter of the 
Sky, 
Bringing to us great store of high felicity, and beaming on our 
solemn rites. 
LO For in thee is each living creature’s breath and life, when, 
Excellent ! thou dawnest forth. 
Borne on thy lofty car, O Lady of the Light, hear, thou of 
wondrous wealth, our call. 
11 O Ushas, win thyself the strength which among wen is won- 
derful. 
Bring thou thereby the pious unto holy rites, those who as 
priests sing praise to thee. 
12 Bring from the firmament, O "!shas, all the Gods, that they 
may drink our Soma juice, 
And, being what thou art, vouchsafe u® kine and steeds, 
strenyth meet for praise and hero might. 


13 May Ushas whose auspicious rays are seen resplendent round 


about, - 
Grant as great riches, fair in form, of all good things, wealth 
which light labour may, attain. e 


{4 Mighty One, whom the Rishis of old time invoked for their 
« protection and their belp, 


4 Lhe princes ara the wealthy patrons or institutors of sacrifice, whe 
bear all expenses and remunersate tha priests, 


HYMN 30] . THE RIGVEDA ° 67 


® 
O Ushas, graciously answer onr songs of praise with bounty 


and with brillicas light. . 
1 Ushas,eas thou evith fight to day hast opened the twin @éors 
of heaven, : ° 


So grant thouus a Awelling wide and free from foes, O Qod- 
dess, give us food with kine. 


16 Bring us to wealth abundant, sent in every shape, to plentiful 
refreshing food, , 
7’ all-subduing splendour, Ushas, Mighty One,to srtength, thou: 
rich in spoil and wealth. 
HYMN XLIX Dawn, 


E’en from above the sky’s bright realm come, Ushas, by aus- 
picious ways: 
Let red steeds bear thee to the house of him who pours the 
Soma juice, 
2 The chariot which thou thountest, fair of of shape, O. Ushas ?’ 
light to move, -- 
Therewith, G Daughter of the Sky, aid men of noble fame to 
day. 
3 Bright Ushas, when thy times return, ail quadrupeds, and 
bipeds stir, a 
And round about flock wingéd birds from all the boundaries of 
heaven. 


4 Thou dawning with thy beams of light illumest all the radiant 
realm. 2 
Thee, as thou art, the Kanvas, fain for wealth, have called. 
with sacred songs, 
HYMN L. Sirya. 
His bright rays bear him up aloft, the God who knoweth all 
that lives, 
Surya, that all may look on him. 
4 The constellations pass away, like thieves, together with their 
e 


lgams, 
Before the all-beholding Snu... * : 


8 His herald rays are seen afar refulgent o'er the world“of men, 
Like flames of fire thut burn and bil&ze, 


4 Swift and all beautiful art thou, O Sfirya, maker or the light, 
Illuming all the radiant realm. ° ‘3 


ptm mr 8 rr re a a cr NC RL A 
1 Let red steeds bear thee: the Scholiast explains arugdpsavah as the 
purple cows, the vehicles of morning, that is,*the dark red clouds that 
eecompany the dawn. ‘ 
e 
1 The God who knoweth all that live : jdtdvedasam, have an epithet of 
Surya the Sun-God, 


68 THE HYMNs OF [ BOOK I. 
§ Thou ae to the hosts of Gods, thou comest hither to mankind 


Hithef all light to beheld. -_ 
6 Weth that same eye of thine wherewith thon lookest? brilliant 
Varuna, ; . 
Upon the busy race of men, ? 
7 Traversing sky and wide mid-air, thou metest with thy beams 
our days, : 


Sun, secing all things that have birth. 


8 Seven Bay Stceds harnessed to thy car bear thee, O thou far 
seeing One, 
God, Strya with the radiant hair, 


9 Strya hath yoked the pure bright Seven, the daughters of the 
ear; with these, 
His own dear team, he gocth forth. 


10 Looking upon the loftier light above the darkness we have come 
TosSurya, God among the Gods, the light thatis most excellent 


11 Rising this day, O rich in friends, ascending to the loftier 
heaven, 


Strya, remove my heart’s disease, take from me this my yel- 
low hue. 


12 To parrots and to starlings let us give away my yellowness, 
Or this my yellowness let us transfer to aritala trees. 


13 With allhis conquering vigour this (di tya hath gone up on high, 
Giving my foe into mine hand: let ine not be my foeman’s prey. 


6 Varuna: the word is, as Savana points out, used here as an 
appollative (the encompasser) and applied to Sirya bayana explains it ag 
anishtanivdraka, averter of evil. 9 Sdria hath yoked the pure bright 
Seven: tha seven steeds that draw his car, and which, as intimately 
connect ?d threwith, are called the daughters of the chariot The number 
soven has referpnce to the seven days of the week. . Ll ‘This verse 
and the two following constitute.a tricha or triplet,the repatition of which, 
with due formalities, is considured to be curative of diseaso Wilson. 

12 Ths yellowness here spoken of is probably the colour of the skin 
in jaundice Tha haridra dt of the text is said by SAyana to mean 
harttaladrivena, a haritala troe ; but thete seems to be no tree of that 
name. Huritdla means, usually, yellow orpiment, and Adridrava, a 
yellow vegetable powder. The word hdridravais explained in the 
Petersburg Lexicon as ao certain yellow bird. To p2rrots and to 
sidrlings : similarly, ameng the Romans, people with the jaundice 
were called ‘ictorici? according to Pliny (H N_ xxx. If), from the 
fanciful no‘ion that the disease was cured by looking at the icterus, 
ono of the niany varieties of the sturaids or starling family. The 
itd was said to die instead of the patient 


HYMN 51] THE RIGVEDA. _ 69 


HYMN LI. » Indra, 
' Maxx glad with édngs that Ram whom many men inygke, 
worthy of songs of praisg, Indra, the sea of wealth ; 
Whose gracious deals for men spread Ifke the heavens abroad: 
sing praise to him the Sage, ntost liberal for our good. 
2 Asaids the skilful Ribhus yearned to Indra strong to save, 
who fills mid-ait, encompassed round with might, 
Rushing in rapture ; and o'er Satakratu came the gladening 
sheut that urged him on to vistery, 
& Thou hast disclosed the kine’s stall for the Angirases, and 
made a way for Atri by a hundred doors. 
On Vimada theu hast bestowed both food and wealth, making 
thy bolt dance in the sagrificer’ fight. e 
4 Thou hast unclosed the ptisons of the waters; thou hast in 


the mountaiu seized the treasure rich in rifts, 
When thou hadst slain with might the dragon Vritra, thou 
Indra, didst raise the Sun in heaven for all to see, 


This hymn and the six following aro attributed to the Rishi Sivya, 
who is called the son of Angiras 1 That Ram: that famous ram, 
lndra, See lt 10 2. Here the reference is to a fighting ram ; or, accor- 
ding to Sayana to a legend which says that [ndra cime in the form of 
a ram to Modhatithi’s sacrifice, and drank the Soma juica. 2 Tha 
skilful Aibhus: see I. 20. I Sayana says that the Maruts are here 
intended, who encouraged Indra when all the Gods had deserted him, 

Paeheng in rapture : when exhilarated by draughts of Soma, 

‘Hore again, says Professor Max Miller, ‘the difficulty of render- 
ing Vedic thought in Wnglish, or any other modern language, becomes 
apparent, for we have uo poetical word to express a ‘high State of 
mental excttement produced by drinking the intoxicating juice of the 
Some or other plants, which has not something opprobrious mixed up 
with it, while in an@ient times that state of excitement ;was celebrated 
a B \hassing of the gods, as not unworthy of the gods themselves, nay, 
as a state in which both the warrior and the post woul! porform their 
hivhest achievements. The German Bansch i is the nearest approach to 
the Sanskrit mada,’ [n this verion ma .a has generally been rendered 
hy rapture, delight, transport, or wild joy. Satakratu Todra, See 
I. 4.8 3 The kine’s stall: the dark cloud that holds the waters 
imprisoned. The Angtrases: an ancient priestly family Sve I. 1. 6. 
Atrv: a Rishi usully enumerated with the Angirases among the prajdpates 
or progenitors of men. Indra freed him from? captivity, showing him a 
hundred ways of escape. Vimada was also a Rishi of ancient times. 

4 The mountain: the cloud. The treasure is the fertilizing rain. 

Didst raise the Suv: according to Sayana, didst free the Sun which 
had been hidden by Vritra. 


70 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR FP. 


5 With wondrous might thou blewest enchanter fiends away, 
witlf powers celestial those who calledan thee in jest, ; 
TshOu, hero-hearted, hast broken down Piprugs forts, and helped 
Rijisvan when the Dasyus were struck dead. 
G6 Thou savedst Kutsa when Sushna was smitten down ; to Ati- 
thigva gavest Sambara for a prey. 
Wen mighty Arbuda thou troddest under foot: thou from, of 
old wast born to strike the Dasyus dead. 
? All power and might is closely gathered up in thee; thy 
bounteous spirit joys in drinking Soma juice. 
Known is the thunderbolt that lies within thine arms: rend 
off therewith all manly prowess of our foe. 
8 Discern thou well Aryas and Dasyus; punishing the lawless 
give them np to him whose grass Is strewn, 
Bc thou the sacrificer’s strong encourager : all these thy deeds 
are my delight at festivals. 
9 Indra gives up the lawless to the® pious man, destroying by 
the Strong Ones those who have no strength, 
Vamra when glorified destroyed the gathered piles of the still 
waxing great one who would reach the heaven. 
10 The might which Usani hath formed for thee with might 
rends in its greatness and with strength both worlds apart, 


& Thise who called on thea im jest : literally, called on thee or offered 
to thee above or over the shoulder, anparently an ancient proverbial 
expression applied to those who instead of sacrificing to the Gods put 
the intended oblation inte thelr own mouths Pipraw is one of the 
demons of the air; his forts arv the clouds that withhold the rain ; 
RLijisvsdn? is a pious worshipper oppressed hy the Dasyus, robbers or 
barbarians. 6 Sushna, ‘the Drier-up, is the personifica tion of the 
excessive heat befuretherain ;a demon of drought. Sumbara and Arbuda 
are similar demons of the atmosphore. | Aésthiguvais another name of the 
liboral prinee Divodasa, & VYhe Aryas are, first, the people who 
speal the lanzuace of the Veda, and the Dasyus are the original and 
hostile peoples of India. ator, the former aro the true and loyal peo- 
ple, faithful to Indra and the Gods, and the latter sco the wicked and 
colless. Whose grass is strewn, the faithful worshipper, the priest 
who has trimmed and strewn ‘the sacred grass for the Goda. 

9 Vathra? tho second half of the stanza is uuintelligible. Wilson 
remarks : Tho toxtis obseule,—Vanero vi jaghdna sandihah; Vamra 
destroyed the collections, The Svholias?says that a Rishi named Vainra 
took advantage of Indra’s alisonce from sacrifice, te carry away the 
accumulated heap sof offorings.’ ‘10 The Rishi Usvna, called also 
Kauya or Kavi's son, appearsin the Veda as the especial friend of Indra. 
In’‘T. 121, 12. he is said to have given Indra his thunderbo't: ‘The bolt 
which Kavya Usani‘erst gave thee.’ Hore, also, ‘the mizht’ moans the 
conquering thunderbolt, although in other places its fabrication is attri- 
buted to Tvashtar. Lhe steeds of Vale: horses of the Wind-God, borses 
swift as wind. 


HY MN 52.) _ THE RIGVEDA. 1 


O Hero-souled, the steeds of Vata, yoked by thought,‘ have 
carried thee to fame while thou art filled with power. 


11 When Indra hath rejoiced with Kavya Usand, he mouiits his 
steeds who sWorve wider and wider yet. 


The Strong hath loosed his bolt with the swift rush of rain, 
and he hath rent in pieces Sushna’s firm-built forts. 


12 [hou mountest on thy car amid strong Soma draughts : Sar- 
yata brought thee those in which thou hast delight, 


Indra, when thou art pleased with men whose Soma flows thou 
risest to unchallenged glory in the sky. 


13 To old Kakshivin, Soma-presser, skilled in song, O Indra, 
thou didst give the youthful Vrichaya, 


Thou, very wise, wast Mend, Vrishanasva’s child : those deeds 
of thine must all be told at Soma feasts, 


{14 The good man’s refuge ip his need is Indra, firm as 1 door- 
post, praised among the Pajras. 


Indra alone is Lord of wealth, the Giver, lover of riches, cha- 
riots, kine, and horses. 


15 Tohim the Mighty One, the self-resplendent, verily strong and 
great, this praise is uttered. 


May we and all the heroes, with the princes, bo, in this fray, 
O Indra, in thy keeping. 


HYMN LIL. Indra, 


I cuoriry that Ram who finds the light of heaven, whose hun- 
dred nobly-natured ones go forth with him, 


With hymns may [I turn hither Indra to mine aid,—the Car 
which like a strong steed hasteth to the call. 


11 When Indra hath rejoiced: drunk the exhilarating Soma. 12 
Sirydta : @ Rajarshior royal Rishi of the family of Bhrig:. Brought 
thee th®se : draughts of Soma juice. Thou riseat te unchallenged glory : 
when thou hast exhilarated thyself with the Soma offered by thy 
worshippors thou performost thy most glorious deeds. 13 Kakshiv- 
dm: a Rishi, son of Usij. See [. 18.1 Vrichayd, the damsel who wag 
given to him, is not mentioned elsewhere. Mend : acoceding toa 
later legend, Indra became, himself, the daughter of King Vrishanagva. 

It Amony the Pajras: an ancient priestly family, said to ba 
identical with the Angirases. 15 In this fray : the hymn appears 
to have been addrassed to Indra for aid in a coming battle. 


1 That Ram : that famous warrior, Seo I, 5]. 1. Whose hundred 
nobly-nasured ones : see Verse 4, ° 


72 


2 Like as a mountain on firm, hasis, unremoved, he, thousand- 
fold protector, waxed in mighty strength, ; 
When Indra, joying in the draughts of Soma juice, forced the 
““6louds, slaying Vritra etayer of their flov. 


3 For he stays e’en thestayers, spread o’er laden cloud, roated 
in light, strengthened in rapture by the wise. 
Indra with thought, with skilled activity, I call, most liberal 
giver, for he sates him with the juice. 


4 Whom those that flow in heaven on sacred grass, his own as- 
sistants, nohly-natared, fill full like the sea,— 
Beside that Indra when he smote down Vyitra stood his helpers, 
straight in form, mighty, invincible. 
§ To him, as in wild joy hefought with him who stayed the rain, 
his heipers sped like swift streams down a slope, 
When Indra, thunder armed, made bold by Soma draughta, 
as Trita cleaveth Vala’s fences, cleft him through. 


6 Splendoar encompassed thee, forth shone thy warrior might: 
the rain-obstructer lay in mid-air’s lowest deep, 
What time, O Indra, thou didst cast the thunder down upon 
the jaws of Vritra hard to be restrained, 


¢ The hymns which magnify thee, Indra, reach to thee even as 
water-brooks flow down and fill the lake. 
Tvistar gave yet more force to thine appropriate strength. 
and forged thy thunderbolt of overpowering wight, 


8 When, Indra, thou whose power is linked with thy Bay Steeds 
kadst smitten Vritra, causing floods to flow for man, 
Thou heldst in thine arms the metal thunderbolt, and settes$ 
in the heaven the Sun for ull to see, 


¢ 


THE HYMNS OF, ~ [BOOK 1. 


~~ 3 Wor he stays een the stayers ; the words of the text sd At deard 
dvartshu vavrd d'dhana, are very difficult. Sayana’s paraphrase, adopted 
by Wilson, is looso but seems to give the general sense of the passage. 
‘Hoe who is victorious over his enemies, who is spread through thedewy 
(firmament) ’ ‘ ‘ho stayor among the rtayers, is probably the conqueror 
who checks tha.demons who obstruct the rain, and a'dhan, the udder 
(of the sky) moans the rain-giving clouds, over which Indra, as (od of 
the firmament, .s extonded as a cuvering. 4 Js own assistants : 
the inspiring Suma draughts. 5 His helpers: his constant allies, 
the Maruta. As Trita bik st his way : S&yans refers to a lagend which 
says that ‘lvita fell into a well, and the) Asuras heaped coverings over 
its mouth; but he broke trough them with oase, So Indra broke 
down the defences of the demon Vala. See Wilson’s note on the passage, 
But Trita appears to be Indra’s associate Agni. Nae Macdonell, 


Journal R. A, Society, July, 1893. 6 The rain-obstructer: the 
demon Vritra, 7 Pvashtar : the Vulcan or Hephastus of the Indian 
Gods. 8 she metal thunderbolt: vdjram Agasdm, usually transla- 


ted ‘iron thunderbolt’; but we do net kAow for certain what metal dyas 
(Latin aes) was, 


F nw 


AYMN 53. THE RIGVEDA. 13 


9 In fear they raised the lofty self-resplendent hymn, praise- 
giving and effectual, leading up to heaven, ° 

- When Indra’s helptrs fighting for the good of men, the Marg js, 
faithful to m@kind, joyed in the light. 


10 Then Heaven himself, the mighty, at tat Dragon's roar reeled 
back in terror when, Indra, thy thunderbolt 
In the wild joy of Soma had struck off with might the head 
° of Vritra, tyrant of the earth and heaven. 


11 O Indra, were this earth extended forth tenfold, and men who 
dwel therein multiplied day by day, 
Still berg thy conquering might, Maghavan, would be famed: 
it hatf¥waxed vast as heaven in majesty and power. 


12 Thou, bold of heart, in thine own native might, for help, upon 
the limit of this mid-air and of heaven, 
Hast made the earth to be the pattern of thy strength: em- 
bracing flood and light thou reachest to the sky, : 


13 Thou art the counterpart of earth, the Master of lofty heaven 
with all its mighty Heroes: 
Thou hast filled all the region with thy greatness: yea, of a 
truth there is none other like thee. 


14 Whose amplitude the heaven and earth have not attaited, 

whose bounds the waters of mid-air have never reached,— 

Not, when in joy he fights the stayer of the rain: thou, and 
none else, hast made all things in order due. 


15 The Maruts sang thy praise in this encounter, and in thee all 
the Deities delighted, : 
What time thou, Indra, with thy spiky weapon, thy deadly 
bolt, smatest the face of Vritra. 


HYMN LIII. Indra, 


We will present fair praise unto the Mighty One, our hymns 
to Indra in Vivasvan’s dwelling-place ; 

For he hath ne’er found wealth in those who seem to sleep: 
those who give’wealth to men accept no paltry praise. 


~ 9 In fear they raised : thatis, Indra’s worshippers in fear of Vritra. 
11 If the earth were ten times as large and populous as if is, thy 
fame would extend ever the whole of it, + 14 The waters of mid-air : 
the aerial ocean, the firmament. He fights: said “of Indra. We 
should expect ‘thou fightvst ;’ but this and similgr sudden changps of- 
person are common in the Veda. 


eR SED 


_ Vivasvdn’s dwelling-place : the geat of the sacrificer, the representae 
tive of the colestial Vivasvan. 


1” 


M4 THR HYMNS OR™ [BOOK {, 


2 Giver of ‘horses, Indra, giver, thou, of kine, giver of barley, 
theu art Lord and guard of wealth: 

svafan’s helper from of old, not disappoidting hope, Friend of 
our friends, to thee as euch we sing this*praise, ° 


'3 Indra, most splendid, powerful, rich jn mighty deeds, this 
treasure spread around is known to be thine own. 
‘Gather therefrom, O Conqueror, and bring to us: fail not the 
‘hope of him who loves and sings te thee. 


4& Well pleased with these bright flames and with these Soma 
drops, take thou away our poverty with steeds and kine. 
With Indra scattering the Dasyu through these drops, freed 
frow their ‘hate may we obtain abundant food, 


“5 ‘Letiusobtain, © Indra, plenteous wealth and food, with strength 
exceeding glorious, shining to the sky: 
May we obtain the Goddess Providence, the strength of heroes, 
special source of cattle, rich in steeds, 


‘6 ‘These our libations, strength-inspiring, Somadranghts, glad- 
dened thee in the fight with Vritra, Hero Lord, 
What time thou slewest for the singer with trimmed grass ten 
thousand Vritras, thou resistless in thy might. 
7 Thou goest on from ‘fight to fight intrepidly, destroying castle 
after castle here with strength. 
Thou, Indra, with thy friend who makes the foe bow down, 
slewest from far away the guileful Namuchi. 


8 ahou hast struck down in death Karanja, Parnaya, in Ati- 
thigva’s very glorious going forth. 
Unyielding, when Rijisvan compassed them with siege, thou 
hast destroyed the hundred forts of Vangrida, 


9 With all-outstripping chariot-wheel, O Indra, thou far-famed, 
hast overthrown the twice ten Kings of men, 
With sixty thousand nine-and-ninety followers, who came in 
arms to fight with friendless Susravas, 


19 Thou hast protected Susravds with succour, and Tarvayana 
with thine aid, O Indra. , ‘ 


2 Those who seem to sizep: Indra derives no advantage from thoése 
who aregremiss in their religious dutits. - 6 Ten thousand Vritras : 
countless demons like Vritra 7 Wirth thy frsepd : the thunderbole. 
Or ndmyd@ may:mean ‘ with Namt’* as thy confederate. Namuohs : 
‘non-looser ( of the heavenly waters), another demon of drought. 
‘ 8 Karanja, Parnaya, and Vangridu are Asuras or demons ; Atithiges 
has been mentioned before, I. 51. 6, and Rijigvan in verse 5 of the same 


hymn. ‘9 Sueravds, and Térvaydna, in the next verse, are said to 
‘be kings, . 


HYMN 54} THE RIGVEDA. 2 75 


Thou madest Kutsa, Atithigva, Ayu, subject unto this King, 
. the young, the mighty. iis 
11 May we protected by theGods . hereafter remain thy very 
prosperous friends, O Indra, . 


Thee we extol, enjoying through thy favour life long and 
joyful and with store of heroes. 


HYMN. LIV. Indra. 


UrcGe us not, Maghavan, to this distressful fight, for none 
may comprehend the limit of thy strength. 
Thou with fierce shout hast made the woods and rivers roar : 
did not men run in crowds together in their fear ? 
2 Sing hymns of praise to Sakra, Lord of power and might : 
laud thou and magnify Indra who heareth thee, 
Who with his daring might, a Bull execeding stréng in 
strength, maketh him master of the heaven and earth. 
3 Sing forth to lofty Dyaus a strength-bestowing song, the Bold, 
__ whose resolute mind hath independent sway. 
High glory hath the Asura, compact of strength, drawn gn by 
two Bay steeds : a Bull, a Car is he, 
4 The ridges of the lofty heaven thou madest shake; thou, 
daring, of thyself smotest through Sambara, 
When, bold with gladdening juice, thou warredst with thy 
bolt, sharp and two-edged, against the banded sorceress. 


10 Kutsa has been mentioned (I 33. 1t.}as a fovourite of Indra, 
but ta here represented, together with Atithigva and Ayu, as chastised 
by him. his King: Susravgs, or Turvayana ; these names perhaps 
denote the same individual. 


1 Urge us not, Maghavan : the verb, urge, which is not in the text, is 
supplied by Sayana. The meaning appears to be, Do not, O Indra, 
force_us into any odnflict in which we may have thee for bur opponent. 

2 Sakra : ‘the Mighty,’ a name of, Intira. 3 Sing forth to lofty 
Dyaus: Heaven The God who is represented in the Veda as.the con- 
sort of Harth and the progenitor of the Godg is called Dyaue or Dyau- 
shpitar, names identical in origin with Zeus, or Zeus pater, and Jupiter, 
_ or Diespiter, the appeilations given to the supreme God of the Greeks 
and Romans. In’this place Sayana identities Dyaus with Indra, who 
seems, in later times, to have succeeded to the functions assigned to 
the former God. See Muir, Original Sanskrvs Texts, v. 33. The 
Asura: the divine One, Indra as the supreme Qyous. 4 Sambara: 
a demon. See 1. 51. 6. The banded sorcerers : the fiends of the atmos- 
phere who use enchantments of usperantural powers in their conflicts 
with Indra. 


° ( 
16 THE HYMNs OF [BOOK 1. 


5 Wher, with a roar that fills the woods, thou forcest down on 
zithe wind’s head the stores which Sushna kept confined,: 


Who shall have power to stay jhee firm and eager-souled 
form doing still this day what thou of old hast done ? 


6 Thou holpert Narya, Turvasa, and Yadu, and Vayya’s son 
Turviti, Satakratu! 


Thou holpest horse and car in final battle ; thou brakest d own 
the nine-and-ninety castles, 


7 A hero-lord is he, King ofa mighty folk, who offers free 


oblations and promotes the Law, 


Who with a bounteous guerdon welcomes hymns of praise: 
for him flows down the abundant stream below the sky. 


8 His power is matchless, matchless is his wisdom; chief, 
through their work, be some who drink the Soma, 
Those, Indra, who increase the loridy power, the firm heroic 
strength of thee the Giver. 


9 Therefore for thee are these abundant beakers, Indra’s drink, 
stone-pressed juices held in ladles. 


Quaff them and satisfy therewith thy longing ; then fix thy 
mind upon bestowing treasure, 
10 There darkness stood, tho vault that stayed the waters’ flow : 
in Vritra’s hollow side the rain-cloud lay concealed. 
Bat Indra smote the rivers which the obstructer stayed, flood 
following after flood, steep declivities, 


11 So give us, Indra, bliss-increasing glory ; give us great sway 
and strength that conquers people. 


Preserve our wealthy patrons, save our princes; vouchsafe 
us wealth and food with noble offspring. 


HYMN LV. Indra, 


THouGH ean this heaven’s wide space and ¢arth have spread 


them out, nor heaven Lor earth may be in greatness Indra’s 
match. 


Awful and very mighty, Causing woe to men, he whets his 
thunderbolt for sharpness, as # bull. 


5 Sushna : a demon of drought, © 6 Thou holpest Narya : some 
chief or Rishi so named ; or the word may be an adjective, manly, 


qualifying Turvasa. « Zurvasa, Yadu, Turvtti bave been mentioned 
before. I, 36. 18. * ¢ 


1 Asa bull : aa bull sharpens his ‘horns. 


Cauging woe to men ; 
we the punisher of the wicked, i Bad 


HYMN 55.) THE RIGVEDA. | 77 


2 Like as the watery ocean, so doth he receive the rivers spread 
on all sides in their ample width. 


He bears him like a bull to drink of Soma juice, and will, aa 
Warrior from of old, be praised for micht, 


8 Thou swayest, Indra, all kinds of great manly power, so as to 
bend, as’t were, even that famed mountain down. 


Foremost among the Gods is he through hero might, set in the 
van, the Strong One, for each arduous deed. 


4 He only in the wood is praised by worshippers, when he shows 
forth to men his own fair Indra-power. 


A friendly Bull is he, a Bull to be desired, when Maghavan 
auspiciously sends forth his voice. 


5 Yet verily the Warrior in his vigorous strength stirreth up 
with his might great battles for mankind ; 


And men have faith in Indta, the resplendent One, what?time 
he hurleth down his bolt, his dart of death. 


6 Though, fain for glory, and with strength increased on earth, 
he with great might destroys the dwellings made with art, 


He makes the lights of heaven shine forth secure, he bids, 
exceeding wise, the floods flow for his worshipper. 


? Drinker of Soma, let thy heart incline togive; bring thy Bays 
hitherward, O thou who hearest praise. 


Those charioteers of thine, best skilled to draw the rein, the 
rapid sunbeams, Indra, lead thee not astray, | 


8 Thou bearest in both hands treasure that never fails; the 
famed One in his body holds unvanquished might. 


O Indra, in thy members many powers abide, like wells 
surrounded by the ministering priests, 


4 & friendly Bull ia he: Maghavan, the mighty Indra, is here repre- 
sented in his gracious mood, strong “yet gentle. But uréhsa, the male 
the bull, the strong, may also mean the strong Soma; maghdvd means 
also the rich institutor of a sacrifice, a worshipzer ; and dhénd means cow as 
well as voice, Accordingly Professur Max Miiller translates the passage: ‘The 
strong Soma is plecsing, the strong Soma is delicious, when the sacrificer 
safely brings the cow,’ in order th&t the Soma may be. mixed with milk. 
See Vedic Hymns, Part I., p. 148. in the wood,in the first line 
of the verse seems to be an allusion tothe flrest life of Brahmans. 


5 Inthis verse Indra is represented asa terrible God, and in the follow- 
ing Verse as sometimes sending ,atilictions bub generally blessing men 
with light and with kindly rain, 


78 THE AYMNS OF [BOOK I. 
HYMN LVI. Indra. 


bad ry 
, For this man’s full libation held in ladles, he hath . roused 
* him, eager, as a horse to meetthe mare. 


He stays his gold&n car, yoked with Bay Horses, swift, and. 
drinks the Soma juice which strengthens for great deeds. 


2 To him the guidance-following songs of praise flow full, as those 
who seek gain go in company to the flood. 


To himthe Lord of power, the holy synod’s might, as to a hill,. 
with speed, ascend the loving ones. 


3 Victorious, great is he ; in manly battle shines, unstained with 
dust, his might, as shines a mountain peak ; 


Wherewith the iron one, fierce e’en against the strong, in. 
rapture, fettered wily Sushna fast in bonds. 


4 When Strength the Goddess, 5 ae more strong for help by 
thee, waits upon Indra as the Sun attends the Dawn, 


Then he who with his might unflinching kills the gloom stirs 
up the dust aloft, with joy and triumphing. 


5 When thou with might, upon the framework of the heaven, 
-didst fix, across, air’s region firmly, unremoved, 


In the light-winning war, Indra, in rapturous joy, thou smotest 
Vritra dead and broughtest floods of rain. 


6 Thou withthy might didst grasp the holder-up of heaven, thou 
who art mighty also in the seats of earth. 


Thou, gladdened by the juice, hast set the waters free and 
broken Vritra’s stony fences through and through. 


HYMN LVIL. Indra, 


To him most liberal, lofty Lord of lofty wealth, verily power- 
ful and strong, | bring my hymn,— 


Whose checkless bounty, as of waters down a slope, is spread” 
abroad for all that live, to give them strdngth. 


e 
€ q 


1 This man: the institytor of the sacrifice, He: Indra 2 The 
flood : (samudrd) any large gathering of waters not necessarily the sea 
or oceans The holy synod: an assembly for worship of the Gods, 

The loving ones the songs of loving praise. I fidd the stanza unin- 
telligible ; and the version (based chiefly on Grassmann’s) which I offer 
is merely « temporary makeshift. 3 The tron one : the thunderbolt, 
made of dyas, iron or other metal. 4 By thee : by Soma. 5 in 
the light-winning war: waged with the demons of the air for rain and 
the light which follows the dispersion of {he clouds. 6 The bearer-up 
of heaven; perhaps the thunderbolt, with whioh Indra maintains order. 


HYMN 58.) _THE RIGVEDA. : 79 


2 Now all this world, fur worship, shall come after thee—the 
offerer’s libations like floods to the depth. ° 
“When the well-lgved one seems to rest upon the hill, the 
thunderbolt of Indra, shasterer wrought of gold. 
3 To him the terrible,*most meet for lofty praise, like bright 
, Dawn, now bring gifts with reverence in this rite, 
Whose being, for renown, yea, Indra-power and light, have 
been created, like bay steeds, to meve with speed. 
4 Thine, Indra, praised by many, excellently rich! are we who 
trusting in thy help draw near to thee. 
Lover of praise, none else but thou receives our laud : as earth 
loves all her creatures, love thou this our hymn. 
5 Great is thy power, O Indra, we are thine. Fulfil, O 
Maghavan, the wish of this thy worshipper. q 
After thee lofty heaven hath measured out its strength: to 
thee and to thy power this earth hath bowed itself, 
6 Thou, who hast thunder tor thy weapon, with thy bolt hast 
shattered into pieces this broad massive clond. ° 
Thou hast sent down the obstructed floods that they may 
flow ; thou hast,thine own for ever, all victorious might. 
HYMN LVIII. Agni 
Ne’er waxeth faint the Immortal, Son of Strength, since “he, 
the Herald, hath become Vivasvan’s messenger. 
On paths most excellent he measured out mid-air: he with 
oblation calls to service of the Gods. 
2 Never decaying, seizing his appropriate food, rapidly, eagerly 
through the dry wood he spreads. 


His back, as he is sprinkled, glistens like a horses: loud hath 
h& roared and shouted like the heights of heaven, 
ne er, SE ae See ee oe ee 


2 When the well-loved one ; when the lightning-laden cloud is resting 
on the mountain, men pray to Indra in orde that he may discharge hig 
celestial artillery and bring down the rain. 5 After thee: the 
heaven has taken thy might as a pattern for its own might. 


This Hymm and the five following are ascribed to Nodhas, the son of 


Gotama. 1 Vivasvdn's messenger: VivasVan is the morning hea- 
ven and the personification of the sacrificer of tRe “Gods, He meas- 
ured out mid-air : this act is ascribed to Indra in I. 56, 5. 2 As he 


is sprinkled : with clarified butter. 


80 THR HYMNS OF [BOOK 1. 


3 ‘set high in place o’er al] that Vasus, Rudras do immortal, 
Lord of riches, seated as High Priest ; 
Hastening like a car to men, to those wholive, the God 
‘ * without dalay gives boons to be dosired 


4 Urged by the wind he spreads through dry wood as he lists, 
armed with his tongues for sickles, with a mighty roar. 
Black is thy path, Agni, changeless, with glittering waves ! 
when like a bull thou rushest eager to the trees. 


) With teeth of flame, wind-driven, through the wood he speeds, 
trumphant like a bull among the herd of cows, 
With brigth strength roaming to the everlasting air: things 
fixed, things moving quake before him as he flies. 


6 The Bhrigus stablished thee among mankind for men, like as 
a treasure, beauteous, easy to invoke ; 
Thee, Agni, as a herald and choice-worthy guest, as an aus- 
picious Friend to the Celestial Race. 


7 Agni, theseven tongues’ deftest Sacrificer, him whom the 
priests elect at solemn worship, 

The Herald, messenger of all the Vasus, I serve with dainty 
food, I ask for riches, 

8 Grant, Son of Strength, thou rich in friends, w refuge without 

a flaw this day to us thy praisers, 
O Agni, Son of Strength, with forts of iron preserve thou 
from distress the man who lands thee. 


9 Be thou a refuge, Bright One, to the singer, a shelter, Boun- 
‘ teous Lord, to those who worshlp. 

Preserve the singer from distress, QO Agni. May he, enriched 
with prayer, come soon and early. 


HYMN LIX. Aaa 


Tus other fires aro, verily, thy branches ; the Immortals al] 
rejoice in thee, O Agni. 

Centreart thou, Vaisvanara, of the people, Sustaining men like 
a deep-founded pillar. 


3 Rudras,*Vasus: two classes’ of Gods. See. I. 34. 1]. 4 The 
description of Agniin this verse and the next applies, not to the sacri- 
ficial fire, but to the fire nat clears the junzle as the new settlers ad- 
vance isto the country. 6 The Shrizus ; one of the most eminent 
priestly families of more arcient times. Friend te the Celestial Race : 
as bearing to the Gods the oblationgs of their worshippers. 7 Agni 
the seven tongues’ deftest Sacrificer: the seven tongues appear to be the 
tongue-like flames which Agni employs to consume the oblations, 


1 Thy brartches > merely offshouts of theo. Vaisvdnara : a name 
of Agni ; common to, dweling with, aid benefiting all Arya men, 


AYMN 60.) THE RIGVEDA. ° 81 


2 The forehead of the sky, eurth’s sentre, Agni became the mes- 
senger of earth and heaven. ° 
‘Vaisvanara, the Deities produced thee, a God, to be a lizht 
unto the Arya. 
3 As in the Sun firm rays are set for @ver, treasures are in 
Vaisvanara, in Agni, 
Of all the riches in the hills, the waters, the herbs, among 
*mankind, thou art the Sovran. 
4 As the great World-halves, so are their Son’s praises ; skilled, 
as a Man, to act, is he the Herald. 
Vaisvanara, celestial, truly mighty, most manly One, hath 
many a youthful consort. 
5 Even the lofty heaven, O Jatavedas Vaisvanara, hath not 
attained thy greatness. 
Thou art the king of lands where men are settled, thou hast 
brought comfort to the Gods tn battle. 
6 Now will [ tell the greatness of the Hero whom Piruw’se sons 
follow as Vritra’s slayer : 
Agni Vaisva’nara struck down the Dasyu, clave Sambara 
through and shattered down his fences. 
7 Vaisvgnara, dwelling by his might with all men, far-shining, 
holy mid the Bharadvajas, ° 
Is landed, excellent, with hundred praises by Purunitha, son 


of Satavani. 
HYMN LX. Agni. 
As’ twere some goodly treasure Matarisvan brought, as a gift, 
the glorious Priest to Bhrigu, 
Banner of sacrifice, the good Protector, child of two bir vig: 
the swiftly moving envoy. 


4 Vast as heaven and earth, which constitute the world, are the 
praises offered to Agai their son. Skilled, as @ man, to act: 
duties of the heavenly Hotar, invoking priest, ur herald, being regardad 
as similar to those of the earthly fuuctionary, Many a youthful 
consort : the flames. | 6 Pdru's sons : men in general _; Paru being 
regarded as their progenitor. Sirnck down the Dasyw: the demon 
who stayed the rain. The deeds usagqlly’ ascribed to Iadra are here 
attributed to Agni, that is, Agni is identified with Indra. T Vhs 
Bharadv4jas : the descendants of the Rishi Bhgradvaja. Purunttha : 
a king of that name, says SAyana; probably the institutor of the 
sacrifice. ‘The name does not cccuc again, aud nothing is known regacd- 
ing him. ° - 


1 Matariavan a divine or semi-divine being, who as the messenger’ 
of Vivasvan brings down from heaven Agni wh® ‘had hitherto been 
concealed, The explanation of Matarisvan as Vayu, the, God of wind, 
does not appear to be justified by Rigveda texts. See Muir, O. g. 
Lexuts, Vv. 204. 


11 


4 ° . THE HYMNS OF [BOOK I. 
2 Both Gods and men obey this Ruler’s order, Gods who are 
wérshipped, men who yearn and worship. 


o/s Priest he takes his seat ere break of mgrning, House-Lord, 
adorable with Men, Ordainer, 
3 May our fair praise, heart-born, most recent, reach him whose 
tongue, e’en at his birth, is sweet as honey ; 


Whom mortal priests, men, with their strong endeavour, 
supplied with dainty viands, have created. 


4 Good to mankind, the yeraning Purifier hath among men been 
placed as Priest choice-worthy. 


May Agni be our Friend, Lord of the Household, protector of 
the riches in the dwelling, 


5 As such we Gotamas with hymns extol thee,Q Agni, as the 
guardian Lord of riches, 


Dycking thee like a horse, the swift prize-winner. May he, 
enriched with prayer, come soon and early. 


HYMN LXI. Indra: 


Even to him, swift, strong, and high-exalted, I bring my 
song of praise as dainty viands, 


My thought to him resistless, praise-deserving, prayers offered 
most ospecially to Indra. 


2 Praise, like oblation, I present, and utter aloud my song, my 
fair hymn to the Victor. 


Tor Indra, who is Lord of old, the singers have decked their 
lauds with heart and mind and spirit. 


3 To him then with my lips mine adoration, winning heaven's 
light, most excellent, I offer, 


To magnify with songs of invocation and with fair hymns 
the Lord, most bounteous Giver, 


~~ Lhe glorious Priest : Agni. Bhrigu : the chief of the ancient priestly 
family who bear that name. Banner of sacrifice : announcer of sacrifice 
by his crackling flames. Child of two births: born of heaven and earth 
and again from the two fire-sticks, or born from the fire-sticks and 


again when he is consecrated. wiftly moving envoy : messenger 
between Gods and men. See l. 1. 1, note. 3 Sweet as honey ; 
with tasting the sweet tibations. ' Have created : by rapid agita- 
tion of the fire-stiok. ¢ > We Gotamas : descendants of Gotama, 


men of the family to which the Rishi of the hymn belongs. Decking 
thee: trimming thee, to make thee shine as men groom a race-horse in 
the morning. 


HYMN 61.] THERIQVEDA ° 83 


4 Even for him I frame a laud, as fashions the wright chariot 
for the man who needs it,— 
’ Praises tohim who gladly hears our praises, a hymn well-4omn- 
ed, all-moving to wise Ipdra. 
3 So with my tongues! deck, to please that Indra, my hymn, as 
’twere a horse, through love of glory, 
Jo reverence the Hero, bounteous Giver, famed far and wide, 
destroyer of the castles. 
6 Even for him hath T'vashtar forged the thunder, most deftly 
wrought, celestial, for the battle, 
W herewith he reached the vital parts of Vritra, striking—the 
vast, the mighty—with the striker. 
7 As soon as, at libationsof his mother, great Vishnu had drunk 
up the draught, he plundered 
The dainty cates, the cooked mess; but One stronger trans- 
fixed the wild boar, shooting through the mountain. 
8 To him, to Indra, when he slew the Dragon, the Dames, too, 
Consorts of the Gods, wove praises, 
The mighty heaven and earth hath he encompassed: thy great- 
ness heaven and earth, combined, exceed not. 
9 Yea, of a truth, his magnitude surpasseth the magnitude of 
earth, mid-air, and heaven. 
Indra, approved by all men, self-resplendent, waxed in his home 
lound-voiced and strong for battle. ° 
10 Through his own strength Indra with bolt of thunder cut 
piece-meal Vritra, drier up of waters. 
He let the floods go free, like cows imprisoned, for glory, with 
a heart inclined to bounty. 


4 For the man who needs it: and orders it to be made. Tétsindya 
is a difticult word. Wilson renders it, after Sayana, (thag the driver) 


may, thence, (obtain) food. 5 The castles : the strongholds of the 
atmospheric demons of drought, the castles of rait- imprioning cloud. 
6 The striker: the thunderbolt or lightning. 7 His mother : 


Indra’s mother Aditi who gave him Soma tc@drink as soon as he was 
horn. See IIIf. 32.9, 10; 48.203; VIT. 98. 3. Dainty egtes : the 
demon’s store of raig. One stronger : the mfghtier Indra. The wild 
boar : the fierce demon Vritra. Cf.* VITT.’66. 10. Tha mountain : the 
massive cloud in which Vritra was enveloped. For my corrected version 
of this stanza [am indebted to Prof. A. A. Macdonell’s article on’ 
Mythological Studies in the Rigveda, Royal Asi&tic Society Journal, 
January, 1895, 8 The Dames, the Consorts of the Gus > according 
to SAyana these are the personified Gayatri and other metres of the 
Veda. The Celestial Waters are probably intended. 


84 . THE.HY MNS OF [BOOK I. 


11 The rivers played, through-his impetuous splendour, since with 
hissbolt he compassed them on all sides. 
Using his might and favouring him who worshipped, he made 
a ford, victorious, for Turviti. - 


12 Vast, with thine ample power, with eager movement, against 
this Vritra cast thy bolt of thunder. 
Rend thou his joints, as of an ox, dissevered, with bolt oblique, 
that floods of rain may follow, : 


13 Sing with new lauds his exploits wrought aforetime, the deeds 
of him, yea, him who moveth swiftly, 
When, hurling forth his weapons in the battle, he with impe- 
tuous wrath lays low the foemen. 


14 When he, yea, he, comes forth the frm-set mountains, and the 
whole heaven and earth, tremble for terror, 
May Nodhas, ever praising the protection of that dear Friend, 
gin quickly strength heroic. , 


15 Now unto him of these things hath been given what he who 
rules alone o'er much, electeth. 
Indra hath helped Etasa, Soma-presser, contending in the race 
of steeds with Sarya. 


16 Thus to thee, Indra, yoker of Bay Coursers, the Gotamas have 
brought their prayers to please thee, 
Bestow upon them thought, decked with all beauty. May he, 
enriched with prayer, come soon and early, 


. HYMN LNILI. Indra. 


Lire Angiras a gladdening laud we ponder to him who loveth 
song, exceeding mighty. 

Let us sing glory to the far-famed Hero who must be praised 
with fair hymns by the singer. 


2 Unto the great bring ye great adoration, a chant with praise 
to him exceeding mighty, 
Through whom our sires, Angirases, singing praisesand know- 
ing well the places, found the cattle. + 


Ll Vuretis: Sayans says that this Rishi had heen immersed in water 
and that Indra brought bém to dry land, 14 Nodhas : the Rishi, 
or seer of the hymn. 15 Praises and sacrifice have been offered 
to Indra. Ho bimself possesses everything else Such praises and sacrifice 
Jed Indra to halp, Etass, his worshippor, in his rivalry of SQrya and 
his horses. Sve II. 19 5, note. 16 The hymn ends with the 
refrain that coucludes also Hymns [ 58 and 60. 


td 


1 Like Angiras : after tha manner of Angiras, one of the first insti- 
tutors of religious ceremonies 2 Found the cattle : the rain-clouds, 
or the rays of light which follow the effusion of rain 


HYMN 62.) THE RIGVEDA. ° 85 


3 When Indra and the Angirases desired it, Saramf found pro- 
vision for her offspring. 2 
Byihaspati cleft the mountain, found the cattle: the, heroes 
shouted witif the kine in triumph. 


4 Mid shout, loud shont, and roar, wifh the Navagvas, seven 
singers, hast thou, heavenly, rent the mountain ; 
Thou hast, with speeders, with Dasagvas, Indra, Sakra, with 
°*  thnnder rent obstructive Vala. 


 Praiged by Angirases, thou, foe-destroyer, hast with Dawn, 
Sun, rays, dispelled the darkness, 

Thou Indra, hast spread out the earth’s high ridges, and firm- 
ly fixed the region under heaven. 


6 This is the deed most worthy of all honour, the fairest marvel 
of the Wonder- Worker, 
That, nigh where heaven bends down, he made four rivers 
flow full with waves that carry down sweet water. . 


? Unwearied, won with lauding hymns, he parted of old the 
ancient Pair, united ever, 
In highest sky, like Bhaga, he the doer of marvels set both 
Dames and earth and heaven. 


8 Still born afresh, young Dames, each in her manner, unlike 
in hue, the Pair in alternation 

Round heaven and earth from ancient time have travelled, 

Night with her dark limbs, Dawn with limbs of splendour. 


3 Sarama found provision for her offapring : Sarama, the h.und of 
Indra and mother of the two dogs called after their mother Sarameyas 
who are the watchdogs of Yama the God of the Dead, is said to have pursu- . 
ed and recovered the cows stolen by the Panis; which has been supposed 
to mean that Sarama is the Dawn who recovers the rays of the Sun that 
have been carried away by night. The legend says that Sarama agreed 
to go in search of the stolen cattle on condition that the milk of the 
cows should be given to her young ones. Ludwig ts of opinion that 
the word ‘ offepring’ in the text refers not to Sarama’s young ones, 
but to the descendants of the Angirases. Cf. I. 72. &, Brthaspati 
cleft the mountain : Brihaspati or Brahamanaspati is the Lord of prayer. 
‘It is, therefore,’ as Professor Roth observes, ‘brahma, prayer, with 
which the God breaks open the hiding-pljce of the enemy. Prayer 
pierces through to the object of its desire, and attains it. 4 The 
acven singers are probably the Angirages themselves ; the Navagvas 
and Dasagvag are also the Angizases or their priestly allies. They ara 
called speeders as hastily following the track of the stolen cows. 
Vala is the fiend who keeps the cows impriso.ed. 6 Nigh wiere 
heaven bends down; flowing away to the distant horizon. The four rivers 
are not specified by Sayann, who merely says they are the Ganges 
and others. 7 The ancient Pair: Heaven and Harth. Bhaga is 
herethe Supreme God, Both Dames ; Night and Morning., 


86 ‘ THE HYMNS OP [BOOR 7. 


9 Rich in good actions, skilled in operation, the Son with might 
maintains his perfect friendship. 


Tkoa in the raw cows, black of hue or ruddy, storest the ripe’ 
milk glossy white in colour. Z 


10 Their paths, of old connected, rest uninjured ; they with 
great might preserve the immortal statutes. 


For many thousand holy works the Sisters wait on the haughty 
Lord like wives and matrons. 


11 Thoughts ancient, seeking wealth, with adoration, with newest 
lauds have sped to thee, O Mighty- 


As yeacning wives cleave to their yearning husband, so cleave 
our hymns to thee, O Lord most potent. 


12 Strong God, the riches which thy hands have holden from 
days of old have perished not nor wasted. 


Splentlid art thou, O Indra, wise, anbending : strengthen us 
with thy might, O Lord of Power. 


13 O mighty Indra, Gotama’s son Nodhas hath fashioned this 
new prayer to thee Eternal, 


Surs leader, yoker of the Tawny Coursers, May he, e nriched 
with prayer, come soon and early. 


HYMN LAIITI. Indra. 


Tuovu art the Mighty One; when born, O Indra, with power 
thou terrifiedst earth and heaven ; 


When, in their fear of thee, all firm-set mountains and mons. 
trous creatures shook like bust before thee. 


2 When thy two wandering Bays thou dravest hither, thy 
praiser laid within thine arms the thunder, 


Wherswith, O Much-invoked, in will resistiess, thou smitest 
foemen down and many a castle. 


9 The Sun with might : Sayana takes sdvaedt, ‘ with might,’ in the 
sense of the genitive sdvasah, and explains: the Son of Might, that is 
the exceedingly strong one. But this seems forced. The Son is Indra. 

Thou in the raw cows : the cows are called raw, as contrasted with 
the warm mjlk matured or cooked in thair udders. The colour of the 
milk is also contrasted with that of the cows, ay in the German child’s 
ditty quoted by Zimmor: ‘O sage mir, wie geht es zu, gibt weisse 
Milch die rothe Kuh.’ 10 Thetr paths : the courses of Night and 
Morning. The Sistert : frequently ocourring appellation of the 
fingers as employed ih ‘acts of worship. The haughty Lord: {adra. 


2 Thy pratser : the praises of the worshipper strengthen Indra, and 
urge him to the performance of glorious exploits. 


HYMN 64] THE BIGVEDA. 87 


3 Faithful art thou, these thou defiest, Indra; thon art the 
Ribhus’ Lord, heroic, victor. | ° 
Thou, by his side, for young and glorious Kutsa, with steed 
and car in Battle slewegt Susbna. 
4 That, as a friend, thou furtheredst, 0 Indra,when, Thundcerer, 
Strong In act, thou crushedst Vyitra ; 
When, Hero, thou, great-souled, with easy conquest didst rend 
* the Dasyus in their distant dwelling. 
5 This doest thou, and art not harmed, O Indra, e’en in the 
anger of the strongest mortal. 
Lay thou the race-course open for our horses: as with a club, 
slay, Thunder-armed ! our foemen. 
6 Hence men invoke thee, Indra, in the tumult of battle, in tha 
light-bestowing conflict. 
This aid of thine, QO Godlike One, was ever to be implored in 
deeds of might in combat. 
? Warring for Purukutsa thou,O Indra, Thunder-armed !* brakest 
down the seven castles ; 
Easily, for Sudas, like grass didst rend them, and out of need, 
King, broughtest gain to Piru. 
8 O Indra, God who movest round about us, feed us with varied 
food plenteous as water— ° 
Food wherewithal, OQ Hero, thou bestowest vigour itself to 
flow to us for ever. 
9 Prayers have been made by Gotamas, O Indra, addressed to 
thee, with laud for thy Bay Horses. 
Bring us in noble shape abundant riches. May he, enSiched 
with prayer, come soon and early. 
HYMN LXIV. Maruts. 
Brina for the manly host, wise and majestical, O Nodhas, for 
the Maruts bring thou a pure gift. 
I deck my songs as one deft-handed, wise in mind prepares 
the water that hath power in solemn rites. 


re a a a a ei te trey Se ate ents a 


3 The Ribhus’ Lord: Chief over the threa semi-diving beings who by 
their good works raised themselves to immortality and godhead. See 
I. 20 Kutsa; has been mentiongd “before as protected by Indra. 
See 1. 33, 14; 51. 6. 4 Dasyus: hustile demons, or perhaps savage 
tribes. 7 Purukutsa: a favourite of Iadra and of the Asvins, See 
I.112. 7; 174.2; 1V. 42. 8, npte. Sudds (See I. 47, 6) and Pure are 
kings or chiefs of clans. 9 Who movest round about us : parijman, 
circumambient, is°an epithet apphied to the Sun also.,and to the chariot 
of the Agvins. 9 Wsth laud for thy Bay Horses: this is clearly 
the sense of the words as they stand. Sayana bxplains ‘with reverence 
to thee connected with thy bay horses. 77 


‘y 
1 O Nodhas: the Rishior seer of the hymn addresses this line to 
himself. 


88 | THE HYMN8 OF [BOOK I. 


2 They spring to birth, the lofty Ones, tho Bulls of Heaven, 
divine, the youths of Rudra, free from spot and stain ; 


The' purifiers, shining brightly even as sunsy awful of form 
like giants, scattering rain-drops down. 


3 Young Rudras, demon-slayers, never growing old, they have 
waxed, even as mountains, irresistible. 


They make all beings tremble with their mighty strength, 
even the very strongest, both of earth and heaven. 


4 With glittering ornaments they deck them forth for show ; for 
beauty on their breasts they bind their chains of gold, 


The lances on their shoulders pound to pieces; they were 
bron together, of themselves, the Men of Heaven. 


& Loud roarers, giving strength, devourers of the foe, they make 
the winds, they make the lightnings with their powers, 


The restless shakers drain the udders of the sky, and ever 
wandering round fill the earth full with milk, 


6 The bounteous Maruts with the fatness-dropping milk fill full 
the waters which avail in solemn rites. 


They lead, as’ twere, the Strong Horse forth, that it may rain: 
they milk the thundering, the never-failing spring. 


7 Mighty, with wondrous power and marvellouly bright, self- 
strong like mountains, ye glide swiftly on your way. 


Like the wild elephants ye eat the forests up when ye assume 
your strength among the bright red Hames. 


8 Exceeding wise they roar like lions mightily, they, all-posses- 
sing, are beauteous as antelopes ; 


Stirring the darkness with lances and spotted deer. combined 
as priests, with serpents’ fury through their might, 


9 Heroes who march in companies, befriending man, with ser- 
pents’ ire through strength, ye greet, the earth and heaven. 


Upon the seats,() Maruts, of your chariots, upon the cars 
stands ligatning visible as-light, 


2 The Bulls of Heaven: oe of Dyuor Dyaus. 3 Young fudras ? 
the Maruts,.or Storm-Gods, are the sons of Rudra. Demon slayers : 
slayers of the clouds that give no rain. 4 The lances, as well as 
their other bright ornaments, are the lightning-flashes. & The 
udders of the sky ; the full clouds. The milk, is the sweet fertilizing 
rain. 6 The Strong Horse : is the rain cloud, which in the same 
line is called a spring or well. 8 Combined as priests : the music 
of wind aud sto.m being regarded as the Macuts’ song of praise. But 
tho meaning of the words thus ryndered is not cloar. Sayana, Benfey, 
and Max Muller give other interpretations, 


HYMN 64.} THE RIGVEDA. 89 


10 Lords of all riches, dwelling in the home of wealth, eydowed 
with mighty vigour, singers loud of voice, 

Heroes, of power® infinite, armed with strong men’s rings, the 
archers, they have laid the arrow on sheir arms. 

111 They who with golden fellies make the rain increase drive for- 
, ward the big clouds like wanderers on the way. 

Self-moving, brisk, unwearied, they o’erthrow the firm; the 

Maruts with bright lances make all things to reel. 


12 The progeny of Rudra we invoke with prayer, the brisk, the 
bright, the worshipful, the active Ones. 


To the strong band of Maruts cleave for happiness, the chasers 
of the sky, impetuous, vigorous. 
13 Maruts, the man whom ye have guarded with your help, he 
verily in strength surpasseth all mankind. 


Spoil with his steeds he gaineth, treasure with his men; he 
winneth honourable strength and prospereth. 
14 O Maruts, to the worshippers give glorious strength invincible 
in battle, brilliant, bringing wealth, 
Praiseworthy, known to all men. May we foster well, during 
a hundred winters, son and progeny. 
15 Will ye then, O ye Maruts, grant us riches, durable, rich in 
men, defying onslaught, 
A hundred, thousandfold, ever increasing ? May he, enriched 
with prayer, come soon and early. 


10 Armed with strong men’s rings : the meaning of vrishakhddayah 
is uncertain ; but the khddi seems to have been a ring worn on the arm 
and foot. It may also have been used as a weapon, as the sharp-sdged 
quoits are used by the Sikhs. Vrtshan as Professor Max Muller obser- 
ves, ‘conveys the meaning of strong, though possibly withsthe implied 
idea of rain-producing, fertilizing.” , 412 The worshipful : the mea- 
ning of vaninam is uncertain. Wilson, after Siyana, translates it by 


’ vana being said to mean Water. Ludwig suggests 


‘water-shedding, 
‘dwelling in the woods,’ instead of ‘fightiny’ which he gives inshie trans- 
lation. ‘Worshipful’ is Professor Max Muller’s suggestion, and [ adopt 
it for tha present. 15 Enriched with prayer : either, generally, 
invoked by many worshippers, or rich through thea hymn just recited. 
This last hemistich is the usual refrain of the hymns ascriped to Nodhas. 

I have generally followed Professor Max Miller in his translation of 
this hymn. See his Vedic Lymus, Part I. 


Lu 


90 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK I, 
HYMN LXV. Agni, 


eQNE-MINDED, wise, they tracked thee like a thief lurking in 
dark cave with a stolen COW 3. 


Thee claiming worship, bearing it to Guds: there nigh to thee 
sate all the Holy Ones. 


2 The Gods approached the ways of holy Law; there was a 
gathering vast as heaven itself. 


The waters feed with praise the growing Babe, born nobly in 
the womb, the seat of Law, 


3 Like grateful food, like some wide dwelling-place, like a fruit- 
bearing hill, a wholesome stream ; 


Like asteed urged torun in swift career, rushing like Sindhu, 
who may check his course ¢ 


4 Kir asa brather to his sister floods, he eats the woods asa 
King eats the rich. 


When through the forest, urged by wind, he spreads, verily 
Agui shears the hair of carth. 


5 Like a swan sitting in the floods he pants ; wisest in mind mid 
men he wakes at morn. 


A Sage like Soma, sprung from Law, he grew like some young 
creature, mighty, shining far. 


HYMN LXVI. Agni. 


( 
Lik the Sun’s ‘glance, like wealth of varied sort, like breath 
which is the life, like one’s own son, 


Like a swift bird, a cow who yields her milk, pure and reful- 
gent to the wood he speeds. 


This and the eight following hymns are ascribed to the Rishi Para- 
sara, son of Sxkti the son of Vasishtha. They are generally difficult, 
and not seldom unintelligibls. 1 They tracked thee: the Gods 
followed Agni who had fled away; carrying with him the sacrifice as a 
thief carries off a cow. The cark cave is the depth of the waters in 
which Agni hid himself. = 2. The seat of Latv: the place of sacrifice, 
the law ordained for ever, 3 Sundhus the Indus, or any great 
river, 4 Asa Aing sats the rich: supports his state by levying 
contributions froia the wealthy. The hair of earth: grass and 
shrubs, which forest-firas destroy. 5 He pants: after hiy rapid 
flight to the waters ip which he hid himself. Ils wakes at morn: 
av the time of the oarly morning sacrifice. A Saye lite Soma: like 
the deitied Soma. ‘As Soma creates or causes useful plants to grow, 
so Agni creates, or extracts from them, their nutritive faculty. — 
Wilson (frem Sayana). 


RY MN 61,| THE RIGVEDA. = 


» [le offers safety like a pleasant home, like ripened corn, the 
Conqueror of men. | 
" Like a Seer lauding, famed among the folk; like a séeed 
friendly he vouchsafes us power, 
3 With flame insatiat®, like eternal might ; caring for each one 
like a dame at home, 
Bright when he shines forth, whitish mid the folk, like a car, 
gold-decked, thundering to the fight, 


4 He strikes with terror like a dart shot forth, e’en like aft 
archer’s arrow tipped with flame ; 
Master of present and of future life, the maidens’ lover and 
the matrons’ Lord. 
DS To him lead all your ways: may we attain the kindled God 
as cows their home at eve, 
He drives the flames below as floods their swell : the rays rise 
up to the fair place of htaven. . 


HYMN LXVII. Agni. 


Victortovus in the wood, Friend among men, ever he claims 
obedience as a King. 

Gracious like peace, blessing like mental power, Priest was 
he, offering-bearer, full of thought. 

2 He, beeuine in his hand all manly might, crouched in the 

cavern, struck the Gods with fear. 

Men filled with understanding find him there, when they 
have sung prayers formed within their heart. 


3 He, like the Unborn, holds the broad earth up, and with effec- 
tive utterance fixed the sky. 
© Agni, guard the spots which cattle love : thou, life of all, 
hast gone from lair to lair. 


2 Like a steed : like a war-horse who helps to win spoil in battle. 

4 The maidens’ lover: the offering to» Agni being an essential part 
of the marriage-service. The matyons’ Lord : children being espe- 
cially the gift of Agni, in whose worship the wife of the sacrificer 
bears 4n important part. [ have not attempted to imitate the rhythm 
of the original, and have contented myaolt swith preservinge the same 
number of syllable’ in each line. , 


1 Victortows in the wood ; subduing the fuel.and burning it to asheg. 

2 Crouched in the cavern: concealed in the.dark depth of the 
waters, See I. 63. 1. 3 The Unborn: the Sun ; regarded sr the 
Supreme God. The spots which cattle love: ag thou knowest by expe- 
rience how pleasant it is to find a safe place of refuge, do not burn up 
the places where the cattle find refuge and food. 


€ 


92 THE HYMNS OF (BOOK I. 


4 Whoso hath known him dweling in his lair, and hath approach- 
ed the stream of holy Law,— 

° @hey who release him, paying sacred rites,—truly to such 
dcth he announce great wealth. 


5 He who grows mightily in herbs, within each fruitful mother 
and each babe she bears, 
Wise, life of all men, in the waters’ home,—for him have 
sages built as’ twere a seat. 


HYMN LXVIIL. Agni. 


Communaiine, restless, he ascends the sky, unveiling nights 
and all that stands or moves, 

As he the sole God is preeminent in greatness among all these 
other Gods. 


2 All men are joyfnl in thy power, O God, that living from the 
éry wood thou art born, ‘ 
All truly share thy Godhead while they keep, in their accus- 
tomed ways, eternal Law. 


3 Stroag is the thought of Law, the Law’s behest; all works 
have they performed ; he qnickens all. 

Whoso will bring oblation, gifts to thee, to him, bethinking 

thee, vouchsafe thou wealth. : 


4 Seated as Priest with Manu’s progeny, of all these treasures 
he alone is Lord. 
Men yearn for children to prolong their line, and are not 
disappointed in their hope. 


5 Eagerly they who hear his word fulfil his wish as sons obey 
their sire’s behest. 
He, rich in food, unbars his wealth like doors : he, the House- 
Friend, hath decked heaven’s vault with stars. 


aS ee eee ie ee ee a Ea aemenes 2 tad = = 


4 The stream of holy Law ; ov as Sayana explains, the supporter of 
the truth or of sacrifice, that is, Avni. Lhey who release him: free 
him, by attritcon, from the fire-sticks. 

1 Commingiing : Avni, devouring and fusing together with his 
fiames and smoke the elements of the oblations which he bears to the 
Goda. 3 [can make nothing of the first hemistich, Wilson, 
after Siyaus, paraphrases :, ‘Praises are addressed to him who has 
repaired (to the solemnity) ; oblations are offered ta him who has goua 
(tu the sacrifice) ; in him ts all sustenance ; (and to him) have all (devout 
persons) performed (thq customary) rites,’ 4 Manw's progeny: 
alt Aryan men. Mey yearn for ohildren: men have children at 
their desire, as the reward of their faithful worship of Agni, He, the 
House- Friend : he, Agni, who is the friend and guardian of every house 
in his character of the household fire, as the Sun, the Creator, the 
Supreme God, made the heaven and adorned it with stars, 


HYMN 10.) THE RIGVEDA. , 93 
HYMN LXIX, » Agni. 


Brieut, splendid, like Dawn’s lover, he hath filled the two 
joined worlds as with the light of heaven. 


e 
When born, with might thou hast encompassed them : Father 
of Gods, and yet their Son wast thou, 


2 Agni, the Sage, the humble, who discerns like the cow’s udder, 
the sweet taste of food, 


Like a _bliss-giver to be drawn to men, sits gracious in the 
middle of the house. 


3 Born in the dwelling like a lovely son, pleased, like a strong 
steed, he bears on the folk. 


What time the men and I, with heroes, call, may Agni then 
gain all through Godlike power. 


4 None breaks these holy lawsof thine when thou hast granted 
audience to these chieftains here. 


This is thy boast, thou smotest with thy peers, and joined with 
heroes dravest off disgrace, 


& Like the Dawn’s lover, spreading light, well-known as hued 
like morn, may he remember me. 


They, bearing of themselves, unbar the doors: they all ascend 
to the fair place of heaven, 


HYMN LXX. Agni. 
May we, the pious, win much food by prayer, may Agni with 
fair light pervade each act, — 


He the observer of the heavenly laws of Gods, and of the rac 
of mortal man. | 


1 Like Dawn's lover: both the Sun and Agni are called the lovors of 
Ushas or Dawn. Agni is so called from his making his appearance as 
sacrificial fire at the earliest break of day. The two jptned worlds : 
earth gnd heaven coupled into a single dual conception. 2 Like 
the cows udder: Agni discerns and selacts the sweet savours of oblations 
in the same manner as the udder of a cow selects and assimilates the 
sweet juices of grass and herbs for the prod ction of milk. 3 The 
meaning of the second hemistich is not claer. Wilson, after Sayana, 
renders it: ‘Whatever (divine) beings I nfay, along with other men, 
invoke (to the ceremony) thou, Agni, assumest all (their) celestial na- 


tures.’ 5 They, bearing of themselves: either, his rays bearing up 
the oblation of their own accord, or the steeds who freely draw the 
chariot of Dawn. .- 


1 Pervade each act: be present and regulate all our acts of worship; 
or the meaning may be ‘attain each gift,’ receive avery oblation that we 
offer. 


Wd, THE AYMNS OF [BOOK I. 


2 He wko is germ of waters, germ of woods, germ of all things 
that move not and that move, — 
6 him even in the rock and in the house:dmmortal One, he 
cares for all mankind. . 


3 Agniis Lord of riches for the man who serves him readily 
with sacred songs. 
Protect these beings thou with careful thought, knowing the 
races both of Gods and men. 


4 Whom many dawns and nights, anlike, make strong, whom, 
born in Law, all things that move and stand, — 
He hath been won, Herald who sits in light, making effectual 
all our holy Worle: 


§ Thou settest value on our cows and woods: all shall bring 
tribute to us, to the light. 

Mer have served thee in many and sundry spots, parting, as 
‘twere, an aged father’s wealth. 


6 Like a brave archer, like one skilled and bold, afierce avenger, 
so Le shines in fight. 


HYMN LXXI Agni. 


Lovina the loving One, as wives their husband, the sisters of 
one home have urged him forward, 

Bright-coloured, even as the cows love morning, dark, breaking 
forth to view, and redly beaming, 


2 Onr sires with lauds burst e’en the firm-set fortress, yea, the 
Angirases, with roar, the mountain. 
They made for us a way to reach high heaven, they found 
us day, light, day’s sign, beams of morning. 


3 They stablished order, made his service fruitful; then parting 
them among the longing faithful, 
Not thirsting after aught, they come, most active, while with 
sweet food the race of Gods they strengthen. 
ee 
2 To him even in the rock: I can make nothing out of this. Vilson, 
aftor SAyana, Paraphrases: ‘(They vffer oblations) on the mountain, or 
in the mansion, to that Agni:’ but this cannot be the meaning. Lud- 
wig suggests an alteration uf the text, so that the meaning would be, 
‘oven within the stone is his dwelling.’ D ‘Agni, anatase excellence 
upon our valaed cattle ; and may all mon bring us acceptable tribute.’— 
‘Wilson. ‘ 


1 The loving One,: Agni. The sisters of one home: the fingers that 
serve him by kindling the fire, etc. Zhe cows: the clouds brightened 
by the approach of Dawn. 2 The priestly Angirases, the earliest 
lnstitutors of religious worship, caused by prayer and praise the 
mountain-lke cloud, that held the rain imprisoned, to be opened. 

3 ffis service: the worship of Agni, 


HYMN 11.) THE RIGVEDA. " 95 


4 Since MAtarisvan, far-diffused, hath stirred him, and he in 
every house grown bright and noble, o' 
He, Bhrigu-like, hath gone as his companion, as on commission 
to a greater Sovean, 
5 When man poared juice to Heaven, the mighty Father, he 
knew and freed himself from close embracement. 
The archer boldly shot at him his, arrow, and the God threw 
his splendour on his Daughter, 
6 Whoso hath flames for thee within hisdwelling, or brings the 
worship which thou lovest daily, 
Do thou of double might increase his substance : may he whom 
thou incitest meet with riches. 
7 All sacrificial viands wait on Agnias the Seven mighty Rivers 
seek the ocean. ° 
Not by our brethren was our food discoverad : find with the 
Gods care for us, thou who knowest. 
8 When light hath filled the Lord of men for increase, straight 
from the heaven desecnds the I: impid moisture. 
Agni hath brought to bght and filled with spirit the youthful 
host blameless and well providing, 
9 Ile who like thought goes swiftly on his journey, the Sun, 
alone is ever Lord of riches. 
The Kings with fair hands, Varuna and Mitra, protect’ the 
precious nectar in our cattle, 
10 O Agni, break not our ancestral friendship, Sage as thou art, 
endowed with despest knowledge. 


Old age, like gathering cloud, impairs the body : before that 
evil be come nigh prote: t me. 


4 Mdtarisvan : the divine or semi-divine being who srought Agni 
to Bbrigu, Oo This verse is very pbscure. Theo mvaning of the 
first hemistich seems to be that when oblations were offered to Dyaus 
or Heaven Agni shone forth freed from encompassing night. Who 
the archer is, whether Matarisvan or Agni, ts uncertain nor is it clear 
at whom the arrow was shut. The God may be Dyaus, and his Daughter 


may be Ushas or Dawn. 7 The Seven mighty Rivers: ses 
I. 32, 12. Not by our brethren : wa do not losk ‘to our kinsmen for 
food, but depend upon Agni and the othor Gods. 8 The Lord of 


men : accrding to Sfyana, the sacrificer. Porhaps Indra is meant, whe 
comes attended by the youthful hust of Maruta, 


96 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 1. 
a HYMN LXXII. Agni. 


Txuovucs holding many gifts tor men, he humbleth the higher 
powers of each wise ordainer. 


Agni is now the treasure-lord cf treasures, for ever granting 
all immortal bounties. 


2 The Gods infallible all searching found not him, the dear Babe 
who still is round about us. 


Worn weary, folluwing his track, devoted, they reached the 
lovely highest home of Agni, 


3 Because with holy oil the pure Ones, Agni, served thee the 
very pure three autumn seasons, 


Therefore they won them holy names for worship, and nobly 
bern they dignified their bodies. 


4 Making them known to spacious earth and heaven, the holy 
Ones revealed the powers of itudra, 


The mortal band, discerning in the distance, found Agni 
-standing in the loftiest station. 


5 Nigh they approached, one-minded, with their spouses, kneel- 
ing to him adorable paid worship. = * 


Friend finding in his own friend’s eye protection, they made 
their own the bodies which they chastened. 


Wilson, after Sayana, translates: ‘ Agni...,..appropriates the pray- 
ors addressed to the creator.” The meaning appears to be that although 
Agni bestows many good gifts on men, his flaines are at times torribly 
destructivo. The flight of Agni and his pursuit by the Gods have 
been mentioned before (1. 65. 1). The idea hera is, as Ludwig ob- 
serves, that the Gods did not really find Agni—visible though he be in his 
earthly form+-until they attained to the true philosophical knowledge 
of the Deity as he is. 3 The pure Ones. ‘The text has only 
siichayah, the pure: the Scholias* supplies Waruts, for whom, it is said, 
seven platters are placed at the Aynichayana ceremony +. and they are 


severally invoked by the appallations Idris, Anyadris, Tadris, Pratidrig 
Mitah, Sa.amitah, and others. In consequance of this participation, 
with Agni, of sacrificial offerings, they exchanged tuoeir perishable, for 
immortal, bodies, and obtained heaven. The Maruts are, therefore, 
like the Ribhus, deified mortals.’ Wilson. Three antumn seasons : 
during three years. Ludwig observes that the period of three years In 
connexion with religious vows or ceremonies is mentioned elaewhere also. 

4 The potwers of Rudra: Rudra here is a name of Agni. The 
mortal band : the Maruts, so called as not having been originally im- 
mortal. 


TTY MN 73] THE RIGVEDA. 97 


e 
6 Soon as the holy beings hid discovered the thrice. seven mystic 
things contained within thee, a 
_ With these, one-minded, they preserve the Amrit: guard thau 
the life of all @heir plants and cattle, 

7 Thou, Agni, knowey of men’s works, hést sent 2s good food in 
constant course for our subsistence : 

Thou deeply skilled in paths of Gods becamest an envoy never 

‘ wearied, offering bearer. 

Knowing the Law, the seven strong {floods from heaven, full of 
vood thought, discerned the doors of riches. 

Sa and found the cattle’s firm-built prison,whoreby the racc of 
man is still supported 

They who approached all noble operations making a path that 
leads to Jife immortal, 

To be the Bird’s support, the spacious mother, Aditi, and her 
great Sons stocd in power. | ‘ 

When Gods immortal made both cyes of heaven, they gave to 
him the gift of beauteous glory. 

Now they flow forth like rivers set in motion : they knew the 


oS. 


~ 
— 


— 


Ak 


Ned Stceds coming down, Q Agni. : 
HYMN LXXII. Agni, 


Ile who gives food, like patrimonial riches, and guides aright 
Ike some wise man’s instruction, 
Loved like a guest who lies in pleasant lodging,—may he, as 
Priest, prosper his servant's dwelling. ° 
2 He who like Savitar the God, truc-minded, protecteth with his 
power all acts of vigour, 
Pruthful, like spendour, glorified by many, like breath joy- 
giving,—all must strive to win hun, 
O He who on earth dwells like a kine surrounded by faithful 
friends, like a God all-sustainining, 
Like heroes who preside, who sitin safety : lhkeas a blameless 
dame dear to her husband. : 


Nae on re : = . . 

O The threce-seren mystic things. the secret or mysterious rites hy 

which heaven is to be obtainad 5 offerings of various kinds, food, clarified 
. ed “ 7 } . a ‘ Le and 8: by 5 

butter, Soma juice, ote., arranged ‘in three classes of seven. All these 


offerings require fre,eand so are contained in Agni, They preserve 
_ the Amrté? the nectar or drink of the Gods ; by the perfotinance of these 
sacrifiess they secure the fall of rain aim due eeason. 8 Saran’ 


Jownet the catthe’s firm built prison: see f 6203. 9 09 Vo be the birds 
support: the Bied isthe Sun Adefe is intinite Nature, and her qreat 
Sonus aro the Adityas, 10) Both eyes of heaven: the Sun and Moon, 
he hed steeds : the Sun’s rays. 


lo 


98 THE IYMNS OF [BOOK 7, 


4 Thee, such, in settlements secure, O Agni, our men serve ever 
kiftdled in each dwelling 


*@a him have they laid splendour in abungance: dear to all 
men, bearer be ha of riches. ¢€ 
.§ May thy rich worshippers win food, O Agni, and princes gain 
long life who bring oblation. 
May we get booty from our foe in battle, presenting to the 
Gods their share for glory. 
6 The cows of holy law, sent us by Heaven, hive swelled with 
laden udders, loudly lowing ; 
Soliciting his favour, from a distance the rivers to the rock 
have {lowed together. 
7 Agni, with thee, soliciting thy favour, the holy Ones have 
gained glory in heaven. 
They made the Night and Dawn of different colours, and set 
the black and purple hues together. 
8 May we and those who worship be the mortals whom thou, 
O Agni, leadest on to riches, 
Phou hast filled earth and heaven and air’s mid-region, and 
followest the whole world like « shadow. 
9 Aided by thee, O Agni, may we conquer steeds with stecds, 
men with men, heroes with heroes, 
Lords of the wealth transmitted by our fathers : and may our 
princes live a hundred winters. 
10 May these our hymns of praise, Agni, Ordainer, be pleasant 
to (hee in thy heart and spirit, 
May we have power to hold thy steeds of riches, laying on 
thee the God-sent gift of glory. 


G The cows of holy dare: the cows whose milk is used in the various 
sacriticas offerad in accordancs with the eternal ordinance The 
rivers: the whiter used in sacrities which flows or is broaght to the rock 
or stone with which the Soma juice is expressed, 7 Through 
Agnvs favour the holy Ones, the pmmortal Gods, recoive the oblations 
which stlengthen them fer the porfurmance of the great deeds which 
bring thom glory & Lihea shadow : averting Aistress, as the shade 
of a vreat rock or (roo wards off the oppressive heat of the sun ) 
“May our promeca. may the woalthy men who institute our sacrifices live 
to the vreatost. aie ukually allotted to mon. 10 Vo hold thy steeds 
of vichea sto’ retain by us thy horses which bring wealth, that 1s 
continue to receive and keep the riches which thou sondort, 


HYMN 751] TITE RIGVEDA. 299 
HYMN LXXIV. . Agni. 


.As forth to sacrifice we go, a hymn to Agni let ns say, 
Who hears us even when afar 5 
2 Who, from of old, in carnage, when the people gathered, hath 
preserved 
His household for the worshipper. 
3 And let men sav, Agni is born, e’en he who slayeth Vritra, he 
Who winneth wealth in every fight. 
4 Him in whose house an envoy thou lovest to taste his offered 
oifts, 
And sirenethenest his sacrifice, 


< 


Him, Angiras, thou Son of Strength, all men call happy in his 
God, 
His offerings, and his sacred grass. 
Hitherward shalt thou bring these Gods to our laudatiosf and 
to taste 
These offered gifts, fair-shining One. 
7 When, Agni, on thine embassage thou goest not a sound is 
heard of steed or straining of thy car. : 
8 Aided by thee uninjured, strong, one after other, goes he forth: 
Agni, the offerer forward steps. 
9 And splendid strength, heroic, high, Agni, thou grantest from 
the Gods, 
Thou God, to him who offers gifts. ‘ 
HYMN LXXV. Agni. 
Accert our loudest-sounding hymn, fvod most delightful to 
the Gods, 
Pouring our offerings in thy meuth, 
2 Now, Agni, will we say to thee, O wisest and best Angiras, 
Our precious, much-availing prayer. 
3 Who,Agni, is thy kin, of men ? whois thy worthy worshipper > 
On ~vhom dependent? who art thou,? 
4 The kinsman, Agni of mankind,'their well-beloved Friend art 
thou, : 
A Friend whom friends may supplicate. 
Bring to us Mitra, Varuna, bring the Gods to mighty sacrifice. 
Bring them, O Agni, to thine home, 


wed 


en 


- 


This Hymn and the nineteen following are aseribed to the Rishi 
Gotama, son of Rahaigana 3 Who slayeth Vritra: Agni may here 
Le identitied with Judra. 5 Angiras: a name of Agni. Seo I. Lb. 6. 


100. THE HYMNS OP [BOOK 1. 
HYMN LXAAVI, Agent, 
«How may the mind draw nigh to please thee, Agni ? What 
hymn of praise shall bring us greatest blessing ? 
Or who hath gained thy power by sacrifices? or with what 
mind shall we bring theo oblations ? 


2 Come hither, Agni; sit thee downa ITlotar; be thou who 
never wast deccived our leader. 


May Heavenand Earth, the all-psrvading, love thee : wersh'p 
the Gods to win for us their favour. 
3 Burn thou upall the Rikshasas, O Agni; ward thon off curses 
from our sacrifices, 
Bring hither with Bays the Lord of Soma: here is glad 
welcome for the Bounteous Giver, 
4 Thou Priest with lip and voice that bring ns children hast been 
invoked. Jlere with the Gods bo seated. 
Thine is the task of Cleanser and Presenter: waken us, Woalth- 
bestower and Producer, 
As with oblations of the priestly Manus thou worshippedst tha 
Gods, a Sage with sages, 


Mo now, O truthfullest Invoker, Agni, worship this day with 


joy bestowing ladle. 
HYMN LXXVIL. Agni. 


Vow shall we pay oblation unts Agni? What hymn, God-lovel 
is said to him refulgent ? 
Who, deathless, true to Law, mid mena herald, bringeth the 
Gods as best of sacrificers ? 
2 Bring him with reverence hither, most propitious in sacrifices, 
true to Law, the herald ; 


lor Agni, when he seeks the Gods for mortals, knows them full 
well ard worships them in spirit. 


3 The Lord of Soma > Indra, ,4 Agni, the priest or bearer of 
oblations, has been invoked with a hymn which will bring the blessing 
of children. The Cleanser (Potar) and the Presenter or Juvoker 
(Hotar) are two of the sixteen officiating priests. 

' 5 Manus: another form of the word Manu, Man, the great fore 
father of men. Wath joy-besloroing ladle: with the sacrificial ladla 


used in pouring the holy oiler clarified Luttoreiutyu the fire, an offering 
sepecially pleasing tu the Guds. : 


HYMN 79.] THE RIGVEDA, 101 


3 For he is mental power, a man, and perfect ; he is the bringer, 
. friend-like, of the wondrous. 
The pious Aryau tribes at sacrifices address them first to ‘him 
who doeth marvels, 


4 May Agni, foe-destroyer, manliest Hero, accept with love our 
hymns and our devotion. 

So may the liberal lords whose strength is strongest, urged 
by their riches, stir our thoughts with vigour. | 

Thas Agni Jatavedas, true to Order, hath by the priestly Go- 
tomas been lauded. 

May he angment in them splendour and vigour: observant, 
wus he lists, he gathers inercase. 


HYMN LAAVIIL. Agni, 
© Javavepas, keen and swift, we Gotams with sacred song 
exalt thee for thy glories’ sake. , 


2 Thee, as thou art, desiring wealth Gotama worships with lis 
SsOne | 


We laud thee for thy glories’ sake. 


3 As such, like Angiras we callon thee best winner of the spoil : 
We laud thee for thy glories’ sake. 
4 Thee, best of Vritra-slayers, thee who shakest off our Dasyu 
foes ; 
We laud thee for thy glories’ sake. 


5D A pleasant song to Agni we, sons of Rahktigana, have sun : 
We laud thee for thy glories’ sake. 


HYMN LXXIX. Agni. 
IT in mid-air’s ex panse hath golden tresses; a raging serpent, 
jike the rushing tempest : 


Purely refulgent, knowing wel] the morning ; like honourable 
dames, trae. active Fore. 


3b The wondrous: extraordinary wealth. 4 Inrberal lords: 


wealthy patrons whose gifts will encourage and strengtuen the devo- 
tions of the priests: 


Saran 


3 Lake Angirags: after the manner of Angirag, one of the earliest 


performers of sacri ‘ice. £ Best of Vritra slayers : here again Agni 
is identified with Indra. v 


1 Agni is here spoken of in his three forms, the golden-haired Sun, 
the serpentine lightning, and the household fire for religious purposes 
and ordipary use. He is said to know tha morning as being re-kindled 


for sacrifice at. daybreak, and is compared to anactive matron on accouab 
of his employment of domestic purposes, 


192 THE ILYMNS OF BOUK ft. 


2 Thy well-winged flashes strengthen in their manner, when the 
black Bull hath bellowed round about us. 
With drops that bless and seem to smile he'cometh: the wa- 
ters fall, the clouds utter their thunder, 
3 When he comes streaming with the milk’ of worship, conduct- 
ing by directest paths of Order, 
Aryaman, Mitra, Varuna, Parijman fill the hide full where lies 
the nether press-stone. 
4 0 Agni, thou who art the Lord of wealth in kine thou Son 
of Strength, 
Vouchsafe to us, O Jatuvedas, high renown, 
y He, Agni, kindled, good and wise, must be exalted in our song : 
Shine, thou of Many forms, shine radiantly on us. 


6 QO Agni, shining of thyself by night and when the morning 
breaks, 


Burn, thou whose teeth are sharp, against the Rakshasas, 
7 Adorable in all our rites, favour us, Agni, with thine aid, 
When the great hymn is chanted forth. 
8 Bring to us ever-conquering wealth, wealth, Agni, worthy of 
cur cholce, 
In all our frays invinciblo, 
9 Give us, O Agni, through thy grace wealth that supporteth all 
cour life, 
Thy favour so that we may live. 
10 O Gotama, desiring bliss present thy songs composed with 
care 
To Acni of the pointed tlames. 
11 May the man fall, O Agni, who near or afar assatleth us : 
Do thou increase and prosper us. 


12 Keen and ‘swift Agni, thousand- eyed, chaseth the Rakshasas 


alar e ce 


Ile amor, herald meet for lauds. 


29 The black Bull hath bellowed : the dark rain-clo@ds have thundered. 

3 When he comes to the Gods with the alk of worship, the rich 
arvrificial offering, the Gods send copious rain, Pariyman, the Wan- 
derer, the circumamlyent, is in this place the stormy Wiad. Zhe 
nether press-stone (which rests upon an ox hide) is here the earth, the 
heaven being the upper stone. Wilson, following Sayana, translates : 
‘pierce through the (.imvesting) membrane into the womb of the cloud.’ 


II¥YMN 80.) THE RIGVENRA, 103 
HYMN LXXX, Indra. 


Trus in the Soma, in wild joy the Brahman hath* exalted 
tiee: Py ee 
Thou, mightiest, thundey,armed, hast driven by force the 
Dragon from thegearth, lauding thin’ own impcrial sway. 
2 The mighty Jowing Soma-draught, brought by the Hawk, hath 
g¢laddened thee, 
That in thy strencth, O Thunderer, thou hast struck down 
Vritra from the floods, lauding thine own impcrial sway. 
3 Go forward, meet the foe, be bold; thy bolt of thunder is not 
checked. 
Manliness, Indra, is thy might: slay Vritra, make the waters 
thine, lauding thine own imperial sway. 


4 Thou smotest Vritra from the carth, smotest him, Indra, from 
the sky. 
Let these life-fostering waters flow attended by the Marut host, 
lauding thine own imperial sway. 


The wrathful Indra with his bolt of thunder rushing on the 
foe, 
Smote fierce on trembling Vritra’s back, and loosed the waters 
free to run, lauding his own imperial sway, ; 
G With hundred-jointed thunderbolt Indra hath struck him on 
the back, 
And, while rejoicing in the juice, secketh prosperity for friends, 
lauding his own impcrial sway. ‘ 
7 Indra, uneonqucred might is thinc, Thundercr, Caster of the 
Stone, 
For thou with thy surpassing power smotest to death the cuile- 
ful beast, lauding thine own Impertal sway. 


8 Far over ninety spacious floods thy thunderbolts were cast 
abroad : 
Great, Indra, is thy hero might, and strencth is seated in 
thine arms, lauding thine own impertal sway, ® 
Q Land him athousand all at-gncée, shout tweaty forth the 
hyinn of praise. 
Hundreds have sung aloud to him, 9 Indra hath the prayer 
been raised, lauding his 8wn iinperial sway. 


on 


1 The Drayon: the great serpent Ahi, one ‘of tho demons of 


drought, 2 Browysht by the Hawk. the Soma is said to have been 
brought from heaven by a hawk or faloon. Wf T 93 6. 7 The 
guueftal boasés the demon Vritra, 8 Ninety spacious flours * the 


many watore obstructed by Vritra, 


10 ° THE HYMNS OF BOOK f, 


1) fadra hath smitten down.the power of Vritra,—might with 
stronger might, 
This was his manly exploit, he slew Vritra and let loose the 
* @fluuds, lauding his own imperial sway, 1 
11 Yes, even this great Pair of Worlds trembled in terror at thy 
wrath, ; 
When, Indra, Thunderer, Marut-girt, thon slewest Vritra in 
thy strength, lauding thine own imperial sway. 
12 Bat Vritra scared not Indra with his shaking or his thunder 
roar, 
On him that iron thunderbolt fell fiercely with its thousand 
points, lauding his own imperial sway. 
13 When with the thander thou didst make thy dart and Vritra 
meet in war, . 
Thy micht, O Indra, fain to slay the Dragon, was set firm in 
heaven, landing thine own Imperial sway. 
14 When at thy shout, O Uhunder-armed, cach thing both fixed 
and moving shook, 
Wen Tvashtar trembled at thy wrath and quaked with fear 
because of thee, lauding thine own imperial sway. 
7 ° . 
1) There is not, in our knowledge, one who passeth Indra in his 
strength : 
Yn him the Deities have stored zanliness, Insight, power and 
might, lauding lis own imperial sway, 
AG Still as of old, whatever rite Atharvan, Manns sire of all, 
athyach performed, their prayer and praise united in that 
Indra mect, lauding his own imperial sway, 


IYMN LXXNI. Indra, 


Tar men have lifted Indra up, the Vritra-slayer, to joy and 
streneth : 

llim, verily, we invocate in battles whether great or small: 
be he our aid in deeds of might 


2 Thon, Heco, art a warrior, thou art giver of abundant spoil, 
Strengthening con the fooble, thou aidest the sacrificer, thou 
givest the offeror ample wealth, : 


16 Atnarvan is the pritst who first obtained fire aad offered Sema 
and prayers tothe Gady Dadhyach is his son. Manus or Mann is the 
progemtor of mankind, Tho refrain, © Jauding’® his own imperial 
away, isn ft always in syntactical connexion with the verse of which 
it forms the conclusion, 


—— a 


Phe men; tho ministering pricsts who exalt and strengthen with 
oblatinus, : 


UYMN 82.) THE RIGVEDA. 195 


3 When war and battles are on foot, booty i is laid before the bold. 
Yoke thou thy wildly-rushing Bays. Whom wilt thou slaye 
and whom enrigh ? Do thou, O Indra, make us rich. 
4 Mighty through wisdom, as he lists, terrible, he hath wax. d 
in strength. 
Lord of Bay Steeds, strong: jawed, sublime, he in joined hands 
fur glory’s sake hath grasped his iron thunderbolt. 
5 [fe filled the carthly atmosphere and pressed against the lights 
bt boaven, 
None like thee ever hath been born. none, Indra, will be born 
hike thee Thou hast waxed mighty over all. 
6 May he who to the offerer gives the focman’s man-sustaining 


food, 
May Indra lend his aid to us. Deal forth—abundant is thy 
wealth ~ that in thy bounty I may share, ° 
7 Ue, righteous-hearted, at each time of rapture gives us herds 
of kine. 
Gather in both thy hands for us treasures of many hundred 
sorts. Sharpen thou us, and bring us wealth, 5 


8 Refresh thee, Hero, with the juice outpoured for bounty and 
for streneth. 

' We know thee Lord of ample store, tothee have sent our 
hearts’ desires : be therefore our Protector thou, 

9 These people, Indra, keep for thee all that is worthy of thy 


ehotee, 
Discover thou, as Lord, the wealth of men who offer up no 


gifts : bring thou to us this wealth of theirs. 
ILYMN LAXAIY, Indra. 


Gractousny listen to our songs, Maghavan, be not neglicent, 

As thou hast madc us full of joy and lettest us solicit thee, 
now, Indra, yoke thy two Bay Stecds. 

? Well have they eaten and rejoiced ; the fricads have fisen and 


passe cd ny 
The sages luminous in themselves peer praised thee with their 


latest hymn, Now, Indra, yoke thy wwo Bay Stceds. 
3 Maghavan, we will reverence thee who art so fair to look upon. 
Thus praised, accerding to our wish come now with richly 
iaden car, Now, Inder: , yoke oo two i Steeds. 


9 The people: thy wursaippscs here. 


—— one 


1 Maghavan : Indra, the rich and liberal, 2 Well have they 
rater: they, moaning the worshippers. 


Lt 


6 
106 THE IYMNS OF [BOOK ?. 


4 Heewill in very truth ascend the powerful car that finds the 
* kine, ; 
"Who thinks upon the well-filled bowl, t.c Tawny Coursers’ 
harnesser, Now, Indra, yoke thy two Bay Stceds, 
5 Let, Lord of Hundred Powers, the Stveds be harnessed on the 
right and left. 
Therewith in rapture of the juice, draw near to thy beloved 
Spouse. Now, Indra, yoke thy two Bay Stceds. 
6 With holy prayer I yoke thy long maned pair of Bays + come 
hitherward ; thou holdest them in both thy hands. 
The stirring draughts of jnice outponred have made thee glad: 
thou, Thuuderer, hast rejoiced with Piishan and thy Spouse, 


HYMN LXXXII1 Indra. 


InpRaA, the mortal man well guarded by thine aid goes fore- 
most in the wealth of horses and of kine. 
With amplest wealth thou fiflest him, as round about the 
waters Glearly secn afar fill Sindhu full. 
2 The heavenly Waters come not nizh the pricstly bowl: they 
but look down and see how far mid-air is spread : 
* The Deities conduct the pious man to them: like suitors they 
delight in him who loveth prayer . 
3% Praiseworthy blessing hast thou laid upon the pair who with 
uplifted ladle serve thee, man and wife, 
Unchecked he dwells and prospers in thy law: thy powee 
. brings bicssing to the sacriticer pouring gifts, 
4 First the Angirases won themsclves vital power, whose fires 
were kindled through good deeds and sacrifice. 
The men together found the Panis hoarded wealth, the cattle, 
and the wealth in horses and in kine, 
§ Atharvan first by sacrifices laid the paths; then, guardian of 
the Law, sprang up the loving Sun, 
Usana Kavya straightwory hither drove the kine. Let us with 
offerings honour Yama’s deathless birth. 


5 Thy Gpouse: Indrdut. See 1. 22. 12. 


ee eat a 


3 Man and wife: She text has only mithun’d, a couple. The word 
appsrently means here the offerereof the sacrifice and his wife, who 
took part in the ceremidny. Sayan explains it ps the grain and the 


butter of oblation. 4 The Pani: is the illiberal demon who with- 
holds the rain. The paths : for rising Sun to travel. Usand Kary@ 


ie the name of a celebrated ancient Rishi. See [ 51. 10. The mean- 
ing of the latter haf of the second versa is obscure. Ludwig renders 
it § Seek we to win by sacrifica the immortality which has sprung fromm 
Yama, Yama seems here to represent tho rising Sun. Soe Khoi, Dor 
Mvythus des Yama, p 62, 


HY AIN 4.1 TILE RIGVEDA. - ; 107 


b 


&Y 


ao 


an 


e 
When sacred evass is trimmed to aid the UISPeious work,eto 
the hymn makes its voice of praise sound to the sky. 


Where the stone rings as ‘twere asinger skillin laud, = lads 
m truth delicles when these come near to him, °° 


PYMN "LXXXIV. ° Indra 


Tire Soma hath been pressed for thee, O Indra; mightiest, 
bold One, come. 

May Indra-vigour fill thee fall, as the Sun fills mid-air with 
rays. 

His parr of Tawny Coursers bring Indra of unresisted might 

Hither to Rishis’ songs of praise and sacrifice performed by 
men, 

Slayer of Vritra, mount thy car; thy Bay Steeds have been 
yoked by pre ee 

May, with its voice, the pressing stone draw thine atteation 
hitherward. 

This poured fibation, Indra, drink, immortal, gladdening, ex. 
cellent. 

Streams of the bright have fluwed to thee here at the seatecf 
holy Law. ° 

Sing glory now to Indra, say to him your solemn eulogics. 

The drops poured forth have made him glad; pay reverence 
to his might supreme. 

When, Indra, thou dost yoke thy Stecds, there is no be'ster 
charioteer 

None hath surpassed thee in thy might, none with good steeds 
ocrtaken thee. 

He who alone bestoweth wealth on mortal wan who offereth 
eifts, 

The ruler of resistless power, is Indra, sure. 

When will he trample, like a weed, the man whodiath no gift 
for him ? ° 

When, verily, will Indra hear dur songs of praise ? 

[le who with Soma juice prepared awd the many honours 
thee, -— e 

Verily Indra Sains thereby tremendous mught, 


4 The bright: Soma juice. T'he seat of holy dw: the place where 


sacrifice, ordained by rita, or eternal Law, is pertormed., 


108 ; | THE IY MNS OF [BOOK 1. 


1VeLhe juice of Soma thus diffuse ‘d, swect to the taste, the bright 
cows drink, 
Wt for the sake of splendour close to mighty India’s side 
ee rejoice, good in their own supremacy,,, 
11 Craving his touch the dappled kine ininele the Soma with 
their milk. . 
The mileh-kine dear to Lndra send fort his death-deating 
thunderbolt, good in their own supremacy. 
12 With veneration, passing wise, hououring his victorious mignt, 
They follow close his many have, Yoav them due preeni- 
nenee, good in their own supremacy. 
13 With one of Dadhaych for his arms, Ledra, resistless in 
attack. 
Struck nine-eand-ninety Vritras dead, 
14 Ile, searching for the horse's head, removed among the moun: 
tains, found 
At. ee us he sought. 
15 ‘Then verily they 1 ‘ecounized tlre essentinl form of Tvashtar's 
Ball, 
Ilere in the mansion of the Moon, 


LO The braght cares: the pare and glossy milk whieh absorbs or drinks 
the Soma juice with which 1t is mixed, and is close to, or united with, 
Indra when offered to and acceptod by him in Wibation, lL] Send 
Jorth: the cows, theatoie, ther alk, exalt and strencthon Indra, and 
ines hin to battle with the demons ‘The meaning of the refrain of 
of this triad (verses 10, U1, 12) 1s uot very clear, Wilson, following 
Seas, translates it: abiding (in their stalls) expectant of his so- 
verornby 13 Dadhyach, or ina later form, Dadhicha, was a 
Rishi, son of A tharvan, he and dis father being regarded as the first 
foundees of sacritica Te is described as havine the head H n horse 
eiven to him by the Agvins which was atterwards ent off by Dadra. 
en his bones or, as the lagend says, the bones of this horse's head, 
convertod into a thunderholt, ladra slew the Veritras or daemons wis. 
withheld the rain. Tha Vedie legend, which was modified and ainpli- 
fielin later times, appears to have been connacted in its origin with 
that of Dachtkras, often mentioned in the Veda and deceribed asf kind 
of divine horse, probably iy or iiention of tha me ening Sin in lity 
rapid course Dadhyach may be the old Moon whose ones, whee te 
dies, become the stars wiih which India slays the fiends of darkoess 
14 Merve rus the morning clouds  Seryandrdns said to 
andl distsict ta Wurukshogra, near the modern Dott. 5 Trashtar’a 
Ball: an obscure expression for the Sun. Vlya Surport of the vere 
may be that whha, atter the rains, the bright umonheht nichts Cee, 
men recognized the fit that the hent was borrowed from the Sun. 
Wilson following Xayana, translates the veese : ' The (sol. wr rays) fou: ad 
On this oceiston tho light of Pwashtri, vertly, concealed in the mansion, 
of the moving moon’ See Hymns of tlie AthaiVa-veda, XX. 41. 


bea dake 


HYMN 85.} THE RIGVEDA-: 109 


rd 


® “ 
16 Who yokes to day unto thé ‘pole of Order the strong and pas- 
sionate steers of checkless spirit, 
e . e e 
With shaft armed mouths, heart- piercing, health-bestowing ? 
Long shall be live who richly pays their service, e* 
17 Who fleeth forth? whosuffereth ? whofearcth ? Who knoweth 
Indra present, Pudra near us ? 
Who seudcth benediction on his offspring, his houschoid, 
wealth and person, and the people ? 
18 Who with ponred oil and offering honours Agni, with Jadle 
worships at appointed seasons ? 
To whom do the Gods bring oblation quickly 2 What offerer, 
God-favoured, knows hin throughly ? 
19 Thon as a God, O Mightiest, verily blessest mortal man. 
O Maghavan, there is no comforter but thou: Indra, PF speak 
my words to thee. 
‘ e ‘ 
20 Let not thy bonnteous gifts, let not thy saving help fail us, 
good Lord, at any fine: 
And measure out to us, thou lover of mankind, all riches 
hitherward from men, 


ILYMN LXXXV. Maruts, 


Trty who are glancing forth, like women, on their way, doers 
of mighty deeds, swift racers, Rudra’s Sons, 


The Marnts have made heaven and earth increase and grow : 
in sacrifices they delight, the strong and wild. 


2 Grown to thoir perfect strength greatness have they attained ; 
the Rudras have established their abode in heaven. 


Singing their song of praise and generating might, they have 
ee glory on, the Sons whom Prisni bare. 


16 The strong and passionate steers » the zealoug and tudehaticaa 
priests, who are yoked to the chariot-pole of Ordor or employed in the 
performance of sacrifice ordained by eternal Law. Te words of the 
pries’s ara the arrows with which thope mouths aro armed, 17 
Tho answer to these questions is,°tha priests, who re resent the fea)- 
ines of the man who Institutes (lis sacrifices, 18 The second line 
of this verse is rendered by Wilson, follow$ng SAy ana: ©'To whom do 
the gods guickly bring (the we alti) thay has been called for?" Thais 

world he intelliemble cuough } but homa (oblstion) can jardly bear the 
interpretation thus forced upon Te, ° 


1 Rudra’s Suns: the Marvuts or Stoim-G aoe are the sang of Rudra 
and of Prigni, the earth or the speckled cloud. 2 Lhe Ludras: 


the sons of Rudra. 


e 


110) ‘ THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Tf, 


t 
& When, Children of the Cow, they shine im bright attire, and 
vn their fair litmbs Jay ther golden ornaments, 
e v 


They drive away each adversary from their path, and, follow- 
eo e 
Shy their traces, fatness (loweth down, — a 
4 Whea, mighty Warriors, ye who glitter with your spears, o’er- 
throwing with your strength een wha’ is ne'er o’erthrown, 
When, O ye Maruts, ye the host that send the rain, bad har- 
nessed ts your cars the thought-tleet spotted deer. 


When ye have harnessed to your cars the spotted deer, urging 
the thunderbolt, O Maruts, to the fray, 


Forth rush the torrents of the dark-red stormy cloud, and 
motst on, like askin, the earth with water-flouds. 
G Let your sweft gliding coursers bear you hitherward with their 
fleet pintons. Come ye forward with your arms. 
Sit on the grass 3 a wide seat hath been made for you : delight 
yourselves, O Marnts, in th: pMasant food. 


7 Strong in their native strength to greatness have they grown, 
ptepped to the firmament and made their dwelling wide. 


Whe nVishia saved the Soma bringing wild delight, the Maruts 
‘gate like birds on their dear holy CLiuss. 


8 Jn sooth like heroes fain for fight they rush about, like com- 
batants fame-secking have they striven in war. 


Pefore th: Maruts every creature is afraid: the men are like to 
Kings, terrible to behold 


9 When Tvashtar deft of hand had turned the thunderbolt, 
golden, with thousand edges, tashioned skilfully, 


Indra received it to perform heroic decds. Vritra he slew, 
and forced the flood of water forth. 


10 They with their vigorous strength pushed the well upon high, 
and clove the cloud in twain though it was passing strong. 


The Maruts, bounteous Givers, sending forth their voice, in 
the wild joy of Soma wrought their elorious deeds. 


a -¢q-% =: _ 2 £22 miss ~ fetes ee ay de Le 


3 Chaltiren of the Cor; that is, of Prisni or the cloud under that 
type. Patness flurweth “down : the clouds drop fatness : the fertils- 
Zirice vay deaseends 1 The elittering spears are the flashes of lret- 
ning Phe chariot of the Maruts as sat ta be drawn by sported deer 
or antolopos "tO Sat om the arass ou the sacred crass Goimimed and 
strewn for the Gods + T Wher Vashuew saved the Soma: Vishnu 
prepared the Soma agdcbrought it te Indra, aud the \Maruts,  Indra’s 
COMpANLONs, Sat dow iN with him to ghyuy lt. 10 The well . here the 
cloud, as a reseivoir of water. 


HYMN 86.] THE RIGVEDA. il 


11 They drove the cloud transverse directed hitherward, and 
poured the fountain forth for thirsting Gotama 
Shining with ganed light they come to him with help ethey 
with their might fulfilled che longing of the sage. 
12 The shelters whidh ye have for him who lauds you, bestow 
them threefold on the man who offers, 
Extend the same boons unto us, ye Maruts, Give us, O Heroes, 
wealth with noble offspring. 


HYMN LXXXVI, Maruts. 


Tie best of guardians hath that man within whose dwelling- 
place ye drink, 
O Maruts, giants of the sky. 
~ ILonoured with sacrifice or with the worship of the sages’ 
hymns, O Marnts, listen to the call. 
3 Yea, the strong man to whom ye have vouchsafed toe give a 
sage, shall move. 
Into a stable rich in kine. 
4 Upon this hero’s sacred grass Soma is poured in daily rites : 
Praise and delight are sung aloud. . 
) Let the strong Maruts hear him, him surpassing all*mcn: 
strength be his 
That reaches even to the Sun. 
G For, through the swift Gods’ loving help, in many an autumn, 
Maruts, we 
Have offered up our sacrifice. 


7 Fortunate shall that mortal be, O Maruts most adorable, 
Whose offerings ye bear away. 


8 O Herocs truly strong, ye know the toil of him who sings 
your praise, 
The heart’s desire of him who loves, 
9 O ye true strength, make this thing manifest by your great- 
eness : strike 


The demon with your thundeybolt. ° 
10 Conceal the horrid darkness, drive far from us cach devour: 
ing fiend. . 
Create the light for which we long. ‘ 


11 Gotama: the Rishi to whom the hymn was fevealed. 


3 Shall move into a stable rich in kine * iad] become the wealthy 
possessor of many cows. 8 OF him who loves: of the suppliant 
who loves and prays to you. 10 Derouring fiend: ‘Atrin, which 
stands for attrin, is one of the wany names assiguod ty thea powors of 


112_ THE HYMNS OP [BOOK f. 
. HYMN LXXXVILI. Maruts. 


L.qup Singers, never humbled, active, full of strength, immov- 
able, impetuous, manticst, best-beloved, 


They have displayed*themsclves with glittering ornaments, 4 
few in number only, like the heavens with stars. 


2 When, Maruts, on the steeps ye pile the moving cloud, ye are 
like birds on whatsoever path it be, 


Clouds everywhere shed forth the rain upon your ears, Drop 
fatness, honey-hued, for him who sings your praise. 


3 Karth at theie racings trembles as if weak and worn, whcn on 
their ways they yoke their cars for victory. 
They, sportive, loudly roaring, armed with slittering spears, 
shakers of all, themselves admire their mightiness, 


4 Self-moving is that youthful band, with spotted steeds; thus 
it hath lordly sway, cndued with power and might. 


Truthfal art thou, and blameless, searcher-out of sin : so thou, 
Strong Host, wilt be protector of this prayer, 


h We speak by our descent from onr primeval Sire ; our tongue, 
when we behold the Soma, stirs itself, 


When, shoutign, they had joined Indra in toil of fight, then 
only they obtained their sacrificial names, 


6 Splendours they gained for glory, they who wear bright rings ; 
rays they obtained, and men to colcbrate their praise. 


Armed with their swords, impatnous and fearing naught, they 
have possessed the Maruts’ own beloved home, 


darkness and mischief. Tt is derived from atra, which means, tooth or 
jaw, and thortfora meant otytaally au ogte with large toeth or jaws, 
a dovourer -- Max Mater, Sea Vodie Ifymns, Part [. (Sacred Books 
of the Hast, XNNUL) for a translation and fall exaplanation of th’; and 
other HLymus to the Maruts. 


1 A fer te number only: ‘refers to the Maruts, who are representad 
ag cradually, rising or just showing them-elves, as y°. only afew in 
number, like the first stars in the skvo--Miaix Muller, 5 The Soma 
juice inspires as, and we are guided by the tradition recived from our 
aAucestors The Maruts obtained divine honours only as a reward 
for assisting Indra in “hfs battle with the demon YVritra, 6 They 
have possessed the Maruts' own belored home: ‘have established them- 
selves in what became afterward known as their own abode, their own 
place among the gods invokad at tha sacritice ’—Max Muller, 


HYMN 89.) THE RIGVEDA., 413 


HYMN LXXXVIII. Maruts. 


Come hither, Maruts, on your lightning laden cars, soundipgy 
with sweet sors, armed with lances, winged with steeds. 


Fly unto us with nohjest food, like birds, 0 ye of mighty power, 


2 With their red-hued or haply, tawny coursers, which speeds 
their chariots on, they come for glory. 


Brilliant like gold is he who holds the thunder. Earth have 
they smitten with the chariot’s felly. 
3 For beauty ye have swurds upon your bodies. As they stir 
woods so may they stir our spirits. 


For your sake, O ye Maruts very mighty and well-born, have 
they set the stone in motion. 


4 The days went round you and came back, O yearners, back, 
to this prayer and to this solemn worship. ; 
The Gotamas making their prayer with singing have pushed 
the well’s lid up to drink the water. 
5 No hymn was ever known like this aforetime which Gotama 
sang forth for you, O Maruts, ° 


W hat time upon yonr golden wheels he saw you, wild boars 
rushing about with tusks of iron, 

6 To you this freshening draught of Soma rusheth, O Maruts, 
like the voice of one who prayeth, 


It rusheth freely from our hands as these libations wontsto 
flow. 


HYMN LXXXIV. Visvedevas. 


MaAy power auspicious come to us from every side, never de- 
ceived, unhindered, and victorious, 


That the Gods ever may be with us for our gain, our guardians 
day by day unceasing in their care. 


re 


Gotamas have loug been devoted to the Maruts.:.... The pushing up of 
the lid of the well for to drink, means that they obtained rain from the 
cloud, which 1s here, as before, represented asa covered well.’—Max 


Muller. 6 This verse is very obscure, I follow M. M.’s translation 
which ‘is to & great oxent conjectural,’ 


1d 


112 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 1]. 


2 Mayethe auspicious favour of the Gods be ours, on us descend 
@. the bounty of the righteous Gods. 
The friendship of the Gods have we devout-y sought : so may 
the Gods extend eur life that’ we may live. 


3 We call them higher with a hymn of ofden time, Bhaga, the 
friendly Daksha, Mitra, Aditi, - 
Aryaman, Varuna, Soma, the Asvins. May Sarasvatl, auspici- 
ous, grant felicity. 
4 May the Wind waft to us that pleasant medicinc, may Earth 
our Mother give it, and our Father Heaven, 
And the joy-giving stones that press the Soma’s juice. Asvins, 
may ye, for whom our spirits long, hvar this. 
5 Him we invoke for aid who reigns supreme, the Lord of all 
that stands or moves, inspirer of the soul, 
That Pdshan may promote the increase of our wealth, our 
keeper and our guard infallible for our good, 


6 Illustrious far and wide, may Indra prosper us: may Pishan 
prosper us, the Master of all wealth. 
eMay Tirkshya with uninjured fellies prosper us: Brihaspati 
e vouchsafe to us prosperity. 


7 The Maruts, Sons of Prisni, borne by spotted steeds, moving 
in glory, oft visiting holy rites, 
Sages whose tongue is Agni, brilliant as the Sun,—hither let 
all the Gods for our protection come, 


¢ 
8 Gods may we with our ears listen to what is good, and with 
our eyes see what is good, ye Holy Ones. 
With limbs and bodies firm may we extolling you attain the 
term of life appointed by the Gods. 


9 A hundred autumns stand before us, O ye Gods, within whose 
space ye bring oar bodies to decay ; 
Within whose space our sons become fathers in turn. Break 
ye not in the midst our course of fleeting life. 


5 ——<- ae tee, 


3 Bhaga, enumerated by ¥Yska among the deities of the higheso 
sphere, is an Aditya regarded in the Veda as bestowing wealth and 
instituting or presiding ¢ver love and marriage. Daksha is a creative 
power associated with Aditi, and therefore sometimes identified with 
Prajipati. 4 Our Father Heaven: piti Dyaus = Jupiter. 6 
Tarkshya : usually described as a divine horse, and probably a personiti- 
oation of the Sun, Brthaspati: Lord of Prayer. 7 Whose tongue 
ts dgnt: who receive oblations through Agni or fire. 9 A hun- 
dred autumns : regatded as the natural length of human life. Cf. Isaiah, 
LXV. 20 ‘There shall be no more thence aninfant of days, nor an old 
inan that hath not filled bis days: for the child shall die an hundred 
years old. 


HYMN 91,] TAE RIGVEDA. 115 
10 Aditi is the heaven, Aditi is mid air, Aditi is the Mother and 


bo 


versing the three worlds. 


s oe e Pe ap ae ae 
10 Adite: the Infinite, infinite Nature. « e 
® 


the Sire and Son. . 
Aditi is all Gods, Aditi five-classed men, Aditi all that 1h 
been born and shall be barn. 


e HYMNxG ° Visvedevas. 


May Varuna with guidance straight, and Mitra lead us, he who 
knows, 
And Aryaman in accord with Gods. 


For they are dealers forth of wealth, and, not deluded, with 
their might 

Guard evermore the holy laws. 

Shelter may they vouchsafe to us, Immortal Gods to mortal men, 
Chasing our enemies away. 

May they mark out our paths to bliss, Indra, the Maruts, 
Pishan, and : ° 

Bhaga, the Gods to be adored. 


Yea, Pfishan, Vishnu, ye who run your course, enrich our 
hymns with kine ; 
Bless us with all prosperity, 5 


The winds waft sweets, the rivers pour sweets for the man who 
keeps the Law : 
So may the plants be sweet for us. 


Sweet be the night and sweet the dawns, sweet the terrestrial 
atmosphiere ; 
Sweet be our Father’ Heaven to us. 


May the tall tree be full of sweets for us, and full of sweets 
the Sun : 
May our milch-kine be sweet for us. 


Be Mitra gracious unto us, and Vatuna and Aryaman : 
Indra, Brihaspati be kind, and Vishnu of the mighty stride. 


HYMN XCI. Soma, 


Tuou, Soma, art preeminent for wisdom ; along the straightest 
path thou art oar leader, 4. ° ° 

Our wise forefathers by thy guidance, Indu, dealt out among 
the Gods their share of treasure. 9 — 


er ene, se ne eee 


— 
9 Vishnu of the mighty stride: as the Sun, striding over or tra- 
& ® 


e ¢ 
1 Indu: another name of Soma, here identified with the Moon who 


teaches men the proper seasons at which to worship the Manes %r dei- 
fied Fathers. See I 43. 8, note, 


11g THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 1. 


2 Thon by thine insight art most wise, O Soma, strong by thine 
energies and all-possessing 5 | 
ithty art thou by all thy powers and greatness, by glories 
art thou glorious, guide of mortals. 

3 Thine arc King Varuna’s eternal statutes, lofty and decp, O 
Suma, is thy glory. 

All-pure art thou like Mitra the beloved, adorable, like 
Aryaman, O Soma. 


4 With all thy glorics on the earth, in heaven, on mountains, in 
the plants, and in the waters,— 
With all of these, well-pleased and not in anger, accept, O 
royal Soma, our oblations. 
Thou, Soma, art the Lord of heroes, King, yea, Vritra-slayer 
thou : 
Thou art auspicious energy. 
G6 And, Soma, lect it be thy wish that we my live and may not 
die : 
Praise-loving Lord of plants art thou. 
7, To him who keeps the law, both old and young, thou givest 
« happiness, 
And energy that he may live, 
8 Guard us, King Soma, on all sides from him who threatens us : 
never let 
The friend of one like thee be harmed. 
9" With those delightful aids which thou hast, Soma, for the 
worshipper, — 
Even with those protect thou us, 


10 Accepting this our sacrifice and this our praise, 0 Soma, come, 
And be thou nigh to prosper us. 


11 Well-skilledin speech we magnify thee, Soma, with our 
sacred sons : 
Come thou to us, most gracious One, 


12 Enricher, healer of disease, wealth-finder, prospering vur store, 
Be, Soma, a good Frietid to us. 
13 Soma, be happy inwur heart, as milch-kine in the grassy 
meads, e 
As a young man in‘his own house, Ps 
14 O Soma, Ged, the mortal man who in thy friondship hath. 
delicht. ‘ 
Him doth the mighty Sage befriend. 


3 Thine are King Varuns eternal statutes: thy laws are the same 
as Varunas, or Varuna’s laws have their origin in thee. 


HYMN 91.| THE RIGVEDA. 117 


9 
15 Save us from slanderous reproach, keep us, O Soma, from 
distress : ° 


- Be anto us a gracious Friend. rr.) 
16 Soma, wax great. From every side may vigorous powers unite 
mm thee : ® 
Be in the gathering-place of strength. 
17 Wax, O most gladdening Soma, great through all thy rays of 
light, and be 
A Friend of most illustrious fame to prosper us. 


18 In thee be juicy nutriments united, and powers and mighty 
foe subduing vigour, 


Waxing to immortality, O Soma: win highest glories for thy- 
self in heaven. 


19 Such of thy glories as with poured oblations men honour, 
may they all invest our worship, 


Wealth-giver, furtherer with troops of heroes, sparing the 
brave, come, Soma, to our houses, 


20 To him who worships Soma gives the milch-cow, a fleet steed 
and a man of active knowledge, 


Skilled in home duties, meet for holy synod, for council niet. 
a giory to his father, 


21 Invincible in fight, saver in battles, guard of our camp, winner 
of light and water, 


Born amid hymns, well-housed, exceeding famous, victor, in 
thee will we rejoice, O Soma. 


22 These herbs, these milch-kine, and these running waters, all 
these, O Soma. thou hast generated. 


The spacious firmament hast thoa expanded, and with the 
light thou hast dispelled the darkness, 


23 Do thou, God Soma, with thy Godlike spirit, magnet win for 
us a share of riches, 


Let none prevent thee : thou qrt Lord of valour, Provide for 
both sides in the fray for booty, 


14 The mighty Sage: Soma himeelf, 16 B8 in the gathering 
place of strength: be tbou the central point antl source of all powar. 
17 Through all thy rays of light: through all shy stalks, according to 
Ludwig who takes Soma to be the plant. Wilson, following Sayana, 
translates : ‘Increase with all twining plants’ 22 These milch-kine : 
the milk which is to be mixed with the Soma juice. 


118 THE HYMNS OF [ROOK 1. 


° HYMN XCIl. Dawa: 


Trest Dawns have raised their banner; in the eastern half 
eof the mid-air they spread abroad their shining light. 
Like heroes who prepare their weapons for the war, onward 
they come bright ted in hue, the Motker Cows. 


2 Readily have the purple beams of light shot up; the Red 
Cows have they harnessed, easv to be yoked. 
The Dawns have brought distinct perception as before : red- 
hued, they have attained their fulgent brilliancy. 


3 They sing their song like women active in their tasks, along 
their common path hither from far away, 
Bringing refreshment to the Jiberal devotee, yea, all things to 
the worshipper who pours the juice. 


4 She, like a dancer, puts her broidcred garments on : as & cow 
ields her udder so she bares her breast. 

CrFating heht for all the world of life, the Dawn hath laid 
the darkness open as the cows their stall. 


We have beheld the brightness of her shining ; it spreads 
and drives away the darksome monster. 
Like tints that deck the Post at sacritices, Heaven’s Daughter 
‘hath attained her wondrous splendour. 


6 We have o’erpast the limit of this darkness ; Dawn breaking 
forth again brings clear perception. 
She like a flatterer smiles in light for glory, and fair of faee 
« hath wakened to rejoice us. 


7 The Gotamas have praised Heaven’s radiant Daughter, the 
leader of the charm of pleasant voices, 
Dawn, thou conferrest on us strength with offspring and men, 
conspicuous with kine and horses. 


1 These Dawns? ‘We have the term Ushasah, in the plural, intend. 
ing, cnet to the Commentator, the divinities that preside over the 
morning: but, according to Yaska, the plural is used honorifically only, 
for the singular personifieatioa,’— Wilson. The Mother Cors : the 
Dawns, with their red clouds, wifo have just given birth to the day. 
2 Tho Red Cows: the red clouds of morning. 3 Who pour the 
juice: presses out and offers libations of Soma juice. 4 Hath 
tatd the dackness open :; tha meaning, rather obscurely expressed with a 
harsh zuma or ellipsis, is, Dawn, with her bright tlouds, has opened 
and emerged fromthe darknees which surrounded her, in thesame man- 
ner as cows leave the dark pen or stable in which they have been shut 
Up, 8S S000 AS 1t is opened in thea early morning. Like tints that 
deck the Post: the sacrificial post or pillar, to which the victims were 
tied, was anointed by the priests.: 7 Pleasant voices: of the 
newly-awakened birds, other animals, and human beings. 


HYMN 92] THE RIGVEDA. 119 


8 O thou who shinest forth in wondrous glory, urged onward by 
thy strength, auspicious Lady, 


Dawn, may I gain that wealth, renowned and ample, in bide 
sons, troops of slaves, fay-famed for horses. 


(3) 
9 Bending her looks en all the world, the Goddess shines, widely 
spreading with her brizht eye westward. 
Waking to motion every living creature, she understands the 
voice of exch adorer. 


10 Ancient of days, again again born newly, decking her beauty 
with the self-same raiment, 
The Goddess wastes away the life of mortals, like a skilled 
hunter cutting birds in pieces, 
11 She hath appeared discovering heaven’s borders: to the far, 
distance she drives off her Sister. 
Diminishing the days of human creatures, the Lady shines 
with all her lover’s spleadour. : 


12 The bright, the blessed One shines forth extending her rays 
like kine, as a flood rolls his waters. 
Never transgressing the divine commandments, she is beheld 
visible with the sunbeams. ° 


13 O Dawn enriched with ample wealth, bestow on us the won: 
drous gift, 
W herewith we may support children and children’ sons. 


14 Thou radiant mover of swect sounds, with wealth of horses 
and of kine i 
Shine thou un us this day, O Dawn, auspiciously, 


15 O Dawn enriched with holy rites, yoke to thy car thy purple 
steeds, 
And th-n bring thou unto us all felicities. 
16 O Asvins wonderful in act, do ye unanimous direct, 
Your chariot to our home wealthy in kine and gold. 
17 Ye who broaght down thehymn from heaven, ee light that 
giveth light to man, : 
Do ye, O Asvins, bring strengt\ hither unto us. ° 


a a a a TT 

10 Like a skilled hunter cutting birds tm pieces: ‘Sayana takes 
svaghni for a ‘ fowlgr’s wife’, and vijah for ‘Birds.’ Benfey takes vuah 
for ‘dice,’ and explains the clause 4s denoting a cunning gambler who 
tampers with the dice by shaving them down. The phrase vijah iva g 
mindtt occurs again in R. V. II. 12. 5. where Sgyana takes vijah for 
advejakah ‘a vexer.’ So uncertain are his explanations.’—-J. Muir, O. 8. 
Texts, V. 186. 11 Her sister: Night. Her lever: the Sun. 


12 Never transgressing : always obedient to the eternal Law or divine 
order of the universe. 


120, THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 1. 


18 Hither may they who wake at dawn bring, to drink Soma, 
¢ both the Gods, 


Health-givers, Wonder- Workers, borne on paths of gold. 
“AYMN XCIIL : Agni-Soma. 
Acni and Soma, mighty Pair, graciously hearken to my call, 
Accept in friendly wise my hyn, and prosper him who offers 
gifts. 
2 The man who honours you today, Agni and Soma, with 
this hymn, - 


Bestow on him heroic strength, increase of kine, and noble 
steeds. 


3 The man who offers holy oil and barnt oblations unto you, 
Agni and Soma, shall enjoy great strength, with offspring, all 
his life. 
4 Agni and Soma, famed is that your prowess wherewith ye 
stole the kine, his food, from Pani. 


Ye caused the brood of Brisaya to perish ; ye found the light, 
« the single light for many. + 


5 Agni and Soma, joined in operation ye have set up the shining 
lights in heaven. 


From curse and from reproach, Agni and Soma, ye freed the 
rivers that were bonnd in fetters. 


6 Une of you Matarisvan brought from heaven, the Falcon rent 
the other from the mountain. 


Strengthened by holy prayer Agni and Soma have made us 
ample room for sacrificing, 


a 


ee 


18 They who wake at dawn: according to Saéyansa, the horses of the 
Asvins. The expression may apply, with at least equal propriety, to 
the priests who rive at day-break to perform the morning sacrifices. 


1 dgnt aud Soma: or, O Agni-Soma, the two Gods forming a dual 
deity dgnishomau. 4 Ye stole the kine: recovered the cows (the 
rain-clouds, or rays of ligkt) which the niggard demon had carried off 
and concealed. Brisaya: the name of a demon or savage enemy. 
5 From curse and from reproach: according to Sayana, ‘the rivers were 
detiled by the dead body of Vritra, which had fallen into them ; their 
waters were, consequently, unfit to bear any part in sacred rites, until 
they were purified by Agni and Soma, that is, by oblations to fire and 
libations of Soma juiée.’— Wilson. 6 Matarisvan, or, in the nomi- 
native case. Maitarisva, brought Agni or fire from heaven, and the Fal- 
‘con brought Soma from the mountain or cloud, that is, says Siyana, 
from Svarga on the top of Mu unt-Meru. 


HYMN 94.) THE RIGVEDA, 121 


e 
7 Taste, Agni, Soma, this prepared oblation ; accept if, Mighty 
Ones, and let it please you. 
Vouchsate us .7ood protection and kind favour: grant A *ic 
sacrilficer hcalth and rie@hes. 


8 
8 Whoso with oi] aml poured oblation honours, with God-devoted 
heart, Agni and Soma,— 
Protect his sacrifice, preserve him from distress, grant to the 
sacrificer great felicity, 
9 Invoked togcthcr, mates in wealth, Agni-Soma, accept our 
byimns: 
Together be among the Gods. 


1) A;ni and Soma, unto him who worships you with holy oil 
Shine forth an ample recompense. 


11 Agniaud Soma, be ve pleased with these oblations brought 
to you, e 
And come, together, nigh’ to us. 


2 Agni and Soma, cherish well our horses, and let our cows be 
fat who yield oblations, 
Grant power to us and to our wealthy patrons, and cuusg our 
holy rites to be successful. 


HYNN XCIV, ‘Agni. 


for Jatavedas worthy of our praise will we frame with our 
mind this eulogy as ’twere a Gar, 

For good, in his assembly, is this care of ours, Let us not, in 
thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm, ‘ 


The man for whom thou sacrificest prospereth, dwelleth with- 
out a foe, gaincth heroic might. 

Ile waxeth strong, distress never approacheth him. Let us 
not, in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm. 

3 May we have power to kindle thee. Fulfil our thoughts. Tn 
thee the Gods cat the presented offering. 

Bring hither the Adityas, for we long for them, Let us not 
in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm, 


(REN oer, Rete e 2 
12 Who yreld oblations : who supply milk to be mixod with Soma 
Juice. Our wealthy patrons: the rich youseholders who institute 
the sacrifices. . 


LN 


This Hymn aid the four fallowing are attributed to the Rishi 
“Kutsa, the son of Angiras. 1 Jdtavedas: Agfi. See I. 44. 1. 
As 'twerea car: a8 a carpenter constructs a cdr or wain, In Is 
assembly ; among those who have met together %o*® wership him. The 
meaning might also be: good, or auspicious, is his providence or loving 
vare of us. 3 Bring hither the Adityas;: the Sons of Aditi; all 
the Gods, according to Sayana. 


16 


122, THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 1]. 


4 We will bring fuel and prepare burnt offerings, reminding thee 
at each successive festival. 


Pua our thought that so we may prolong ¢ur lives. Let us 
not in thy friendship, Agni sdffer harm. 


§ His ministers move forth, the guardians Of the folk, protecting 
quadruped and biped with their rays. 


Mighty art thou, the wondrous herald of the Dawn. Let us 
not in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm, 


G6 Thou art Presenter and the chief Invoker, thou Director, 
Purifier, great High Priest by birth. 


Knowing all priestly work thou perfectest it, Sage. Let us 
not in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm. 


7 Lovely of form art thou, alike on every side; though far, 
thou shiuest brightly as if close at hand. 


O Wod, thou seest through even the dark of night. Let us 
not in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm. 


8 Gods, foremost be his car who pours libations ont, and let our 
hymn prevail o’cr evil-hearted men, 


Attend to this our speech and make it prosper well. Let us 
not in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm. 


9 Smite with thy weapons those of evil speech and thought, 
devouring demons, whcther near or far away. 


Then to the singer give frce away for sacrifice. Let us not in 
thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm. 


10 When to thy chariot thou hadst yoked two red steeds and two 
ruddy steeds, wind-sped, thy roar was like a bull’s. 


Thou with smoke bannered flame attackest forest trees. Let 
us not in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm. 


11 Then at thy roar the very birds are terrified, when, eating up 
the grass, thy sparks fly forth abroad. 


Then is it easy for thee and thy car to pass, Let us not in 
thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm. 


5 His ministers : his*beams of light. 6 ‘Agni is here identified 
with the chief of the sixteen priests Gngaged at solemn sacrifices. He ie 
Adhwaryu, usually called the reciter of the Yajus*,—here defined, by 
the scholiast, as the presenter of “the offerings : he is the Hotri, er 
invoking priest : hoe is the Prasdstri, or the Mattirdvaruna, whose duty 
it ig to direct the pther priests what to do, and when to perform their 
fuinctions : he is the patrt, or priest so termed, and the family or heredi 
tary purohita : or purohita may be the same as the Lrahmt of a cere- 
mony,—being, to mon, what Byiharpati is to the Gods.’— Wilson. 


HYMN 99.) THE RIGVEDA. 123 
12 He hath the power to soothe Mitra und Varuna: woyderful is 
the Maruts’ wrath when they descend. 


: ; oe 
' Be gracious : yt their hearts be turned tous again, Let us 
notin thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm. 


13 Thou arta God , fhou art the wondrous Friend of Gods, the 
Vasu of the Vasus, fair in sacrifice. 


Under thine own most wide protection may we dwell. Letus 
not in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm. 


14 This is thy grace that, kindled in thine own abode, invoked 
with Soma thou soundest forth most benign. 


Tbou givest wealth aud treasure tothe worshipper. Let us not 
in thy friendsip, Agni, suffer harm. 


15 To whom thou, Lord of goodly riches, grantest freedom from 
every sin with perfect wholeness, 


Whom with good strengtlt thou quickenest, with children and 
wealth—-may we be they, Eternal Being. 


16 Such, Agni, thou who knowest all good furtune, God, lengthen 
here the days, of our existence. 


This prayer of ours may Varuna grant, and Mitra, and Aditi 
and Sindhu, Karth and Heaven. 


HYMN XCV. Agni, 


To fair goals travel Two unlike in semblance : each in sucges- 
sion nourishes an infant. 


One bears a Godlike Babe of golden colour: bright and fair. 
shining is he with the other, 


12 He hath the power; Agni persuades Mitra and Varuna to send 


the rain and protects men from the fury of the Storm-Gods. 13 
The Vasu of the Vasus: best of the class of Gods called Vasus; or 
‘the good among the good.’ 16 The second line sf ‘this verse 


termingtes the following hymns, with two exceptions, as far as the hun- 
dred and first Sdkta. Mitra, Varuna, and Aditi have been Before noticed. 
By Sindhu is to ba understood the divinity presiding over, or identified 
with, flowing water ; and it may mean either the sea or flowing streams 
collectively, or the river Indus. © Prtéhivi and Div are the personified 
earth and heaven. These are requested to honour, meaning, to preserve, 
or perpetuate, whatever blessing hat been asked for (tag...mimahantim ); 


‘from mah, to venerate or worship.’— Wilson. - . 


>» 


- 


1 The 7wo are Day and Night, andthe infant that eaoh suckles in 
turn is Agni, as the Sun by day and Firé, or the Moon, by night. 


124 . THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 1. 


2 Tvashtar’s ten daughters, vigilant and youthful, produced 
this Infant borne to sundry quarters. 


They bear around him whose long flames arg pointed, fulgent 
among mankind wath native sthendour. 


3 Three several places of his birth they hondéur, in mid-air, in the 
heaven, and in the waters. 


Governing in the east of earthly regions, the seasons hath he 
’stablished in their order. 


4 Who of you knows this secret One? The Infant by his own 
nature hath brought forth his Mothers, 


The germ of many, from the waters’ bosom he goes forth 
wise and great, of God-like nature. 


® Visible, fair, he grows in native brightness uplifted in the lap 
of waving waters. 


When he was born both Tvashtat’s worlds were frightened : 
they turn to him and reverence the Lion, 


6 The Twoauspicious Ones, like women, tend him: like lowing 
cows they seek him in their manner. 


Ie is the Lord of Might among the mighty 3 him, on the right, 
they balin with their oblations, 


7 Like Savitar hisarms with might he stretches; awful, he 
strives grasping the wolrd’s two borders, 


le forces out from all a brilliant vesture, yea, from his 
Mothers draws he forth new raiment. 


2 Tvashiar’s ten daughters : the fingers, called daughters of the artist 
of the Gods on account of skill andspeed with which thy perform their 
work, generate Agni by the attrition of the fire-sticks, and then the 
newly-born babe is carried about hither and thither to light the various 
sacrificial fires. 3 In his character of the Sun he rules especialiv 
in the east, dad has established and regulates the seasons of the year. 
4 This secret One: Agni latert in the waters, in the woods, ete. * ‘Agni, 
in the form of lightning, may bé considered as the son of the waters 
collected in the clouds; apd those waters he is said to gonerate by the 
oblations he conveys.’— Wilson. 5 Both Tvashtar’s worlds : heaven 
and earth, formed by thadivine artfst represented as the Creator. 
Sayana takes tudshtuh as an epithet, of Agni, and ‘accordingly Wilson 
translates: Bothe (heaven and earth) are alarmed, as the radiant Agni 


is born.’ 6 Lhe wo auspicious Ones : Heaven aud Earth, On 
the right: standing a1 the right side of the altar, the priests anoint 
him with offerings ofclaritied butter. 7 Savifar : the Sun. Accor- 


ding, to Sayana the Sun is called Savitar before rising, and Sdrya from 
his rising till his setting. Hig Mothers: are the Waters. 


HYMN 96. THE RIGVEDA., oleh 


8 He makes him a most noble form of splendour, deckjng him 
in his home with milk and waters, ae 


* The Sage adorys the depths of air with wisdom: this is the 
mecting where the Gods*are worshipped. 
9 Wide through thefirmament spreads forth trinmphant the 
far-rasplendent strength of thee the Mighty. 
Kindled by us do thou preserve us, Agni, with all thy self- 
bright undiminished succours. 
10 In dry spots he makes stream, and course, and torrent, and 
inundates the earth with floods that e¢listen. 
Ali ancient things within his maw he gathers, and moves 
among the new fresh-sprouting grasses. 
11 Bed with our fucl, purifying Agni, so blaze to us auspicionsly 
for glory, . 
This prayer of ours may Varuna grant, and Mitra, and Aditi 
und Sindhu, Karth and Lleaven. 


ILYMN XCVI. Agni. 


He in the ancicnt way by strength engendered, lo ! straight 
hath taken tu himsclf all wisdom, 
The waters and the bowl have made hum friendly. The Gods 
possessed the wealth bestowing Agni. 
2 At Ayu’s ancient call he by his wisdom gave all this progeny 
of men their being, " 
And, by refulgent light, heaven and the waters. The Gods 
possessed the wealth-bestowing Agni. 
3 Praise him, ye Aryan folk, as chief performer of sacrifice 
adored and ever toiling, 


Well-tended, Son of Strength, the constant Giver, The Gods 
possessed the wealth-bestowing Agni- 


S Phe Sage: Agni. This cs the meecliny : all this is the reason why 
men assemble to worship the Gods. 
® . 


1 By strength engendered : produced by violent agitation %f the fire- 
sticks. Possessed : fore he was vigible to men. The bowl: the 
Suma juice contained in the dhtshind, or bowl. DPhishund may be 
Otherwise explained Sdyana, who is tullowed By Wilson, takes it td 
mean vdk, Speech. Ludwig rondera it by ‘wish, o® Wish-Goddess Dihs- 
hana; Grassmann by ‘sacrificial offering.’ 2 4t Ayu's ancrent colt: 
at the invitation of Ayu (living man) said by Siyana to be another 
name of Manu, the progenitur of mankind, 


126, THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Tf, 


4 That Yatarisvan rich in wealth and treasure, light-winncr, 
__finds a pathway for his offspring. 
“Gnhard of oar folk, Father of earth and heaven, The Gods 
possessed the wealth-bestowing Agni. 
6 Night and Dawn, changing each the otfer’s colour, meeting 
torether suckle one same Infant : 
Golden between the heaven and carth he shineth. The Gods 
possessed the wealth-bestowing Agni. 
6 Root of wealth, gathering-place of treasures, banner of sacri- 
fice, who grants the suppliant’s wishes : 
Preserving him astheir own !1fe immortal, the Gods possessed 
the wealth-bestowing Agu, 
7 Now and of old the home of wealth, the mansion of what is 
born and what was born aforctime, 
Guard of what is and what will be hereafter,—the Gods pos- 
sessed the wealth-bestowing Agni, 


8 May the Wealth-Giver grant us conqucring riches; may the 
Wealth-Giver grant us wealth with heroes. 
May the Wealth-Giver grant as food with offspring, and 
* length of days may the Wealth-Giver send us, 
9 Fed with our fucl, purifying Agni, so blaze to us auspiciously 
for glory. 
This prayer of ours may Varuna grant, and Mitra, and Aditi 
and Sindhu, Marth and Heaven, 
HYMN XCVILI. Agni. 
CHasine with light our sin away, O Agni, shine thou wealth 
on Us. 
May his light chase our sin away, 
2 For goodly fields, for pleasant homes, for wealth we sacrifice 
to thee. 
May his light chase our sin away. 
3 Best prawer of all these be ha; foremost, our chiefs who 
sacrifice, : 
May his fight chase our sin’ away. 


* 


4 Matarisvan : usually the pame of the divins beiag who brought 
Agni front heaven (see 1. 31. 8 ), said by Sayana tq.mean in theis place 


Agni himself. 5 One same Infant: Agni(see I. 95. 1.) whom 
they nourish with the oblation offered by men. Golden ; as the Sun. ™ 
ce 


3 May he, that is Kutsa, the Rishi of tha hvmn, be preeminent 
among these who celebrate thy praises, and may the householders who 
have instituted this sacrifice be similarly distineuished. 


HYMN 99.] THE RIGVEDA. 2 127 


4 So that thy worshippers and we, thine, Agni, in our gons may 
live. 


Os ad 
ny 


" May his light ghase our sin away. 
5 As ever conquering Agni’s beams of sp&ndour go to every side, 
May his light chase our sin away. 


6 To every side thy face is turned, thou art triumphant every- 
where, 


May his light chase our sin away. 
7 O thou whose face looks every way, bear us past foes as in a 
ship. 
May his light chase our sin away. 
8 As ina ship, convey thou us for our advantage o’er the flood. 
May his light chase our sin away. 
HYMN XCVIII. "Agni. 


Sr1Lu in Vaisvanara’s grace may we continue : yea, he is King 
supreme o’er all things living, 
Sprung hence to life upon this All he looketh. Vaisvapara 
hath rivalry with Sirya, ‘ 
2 Present in heaven, in earth, all-present Agni,—all plants that 
grow on ground hath he pervaded. . 


May Agni, may Vaisvanara with vigour, present, preserve us 
day and night frum foemen. : 


3 Be this thy truth, Vaisvanara to as-ward : let wealth in rich 
abundance gather round us. 


This prayer of ours may Varuna grant, and Mitra, and Aditi 
and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven. 


HYMN XCIX. Agni. 


For Jatavedas let us press the Soma: may he eonsume the 
wealth of the malignant. 


May Agni carry us through all cur troubles, though grief ag 
in a boat across the river. - ; 


® 
1 Vaisvdnara, is an epithet of “Agni or Fire as present with, com- 
mon to, or benefiting, all men. Sprung hence to life: produced 
from these two aranis or fire-sticks. >? 


This Hymn, consisting of single stanza, is ascribed to the Rishi 
Kasyapa, the son of Marichi. : 


128. | THK HYMNS OF [LOOK 1. 
HYMN ©. Indra. 


~MAy he who he hath his home with strength, the Mighty, the 
King supreme of earth and spacious heaven, 
Lord of true power, to be invoked in hattles,—may Indra, 
girt by Maruts, be our succour, 
2 Whose way is unattainable like Sarya’s: he in each tight 1s 
the strong Vritra-slayer, 
Mightiest with his Fricnds in his own course. May Indra, 
cirt by Maruts, be our succour. 


3 Whose paths go forth in their great might resistless, forth- 
milking, as it were, hcaven’s genial moisture. 
With manly strength triumphant, foe-subduer,—imay Indra, 
cirt by Maruts, be our succour. 


4 Among Angirases he was the chiefest, a Friend with friends, 
mighty amid the mighty. 
Praiser mid praisers, honoured most of singers. May Indra, 
girt by Maruts, be our succour, 


5 Strong with the Rudras as with his own children, in manly 
battle conquering his foemen, 
With his close comrades doing deeds of glory,—may Indra, 
cirt by Maruts, be our succour. 


G6 Ilumbler of pride, cxciter of the conflict, the Lord of heroes 
God invoked of many, : 
‘May he this day gain with our men the sunlight. May Indra 
girt by Maruts, be our succour. q 


7 His help that made him cheerer in the battle, the folk have 
made him guardian of their comfort. 
Sole Lord is he of every holy service, May Indra, girt b 
Maruts, be our succour. BOR 


This Hymn is ascribed to the regal Rishis the Varshagiras, the five 
sons of the aja Vrishadgir, \7yhose names are mentioned in the seven- 
teenth stanza, 3 Whose paths: pdnthdsah paths, is explained as 
‘rays’ by Sayana. Indra_is here represented as the God of light and 
of rain. 0 Rudras: the Marutg, Sons of Rudra the chief Storm- 
God. They are the close comrades. or faithful companions of Indra 
who regards them not as his equals but as his cnildren. 6 The 
stunlight : the hymu is addressed to Indra for aid in an approaching 
‘battle. Sfyana says "that the Varshdgiras pray that they may have 
daylight and thav cheir enemies may fight in the dark, 7 [Indra is 
regarded as their helper and inspirater in battle and their protector in 
poace. Ho also presides over all acts of worship, and ag such rowards 
those who serve him. 


HYMN 100. THE RIGVEDA, 129 


8 To him the Hero, on high days of prowess, heroes for Ielp 
and booty shall betake them, 


° 
-He hath found light even inthe blinding darkness, May 
Indra, girt by’ Maruts, ba our succcur. 


9 He with his left hagd checketh even thé mighty, and with his 
right hand gathereth up the booty, 


Even with the humble he acquireth riches. May Indra, girt 
by Maruts, be our succour. 


10 With hosts on foot and cars he winneth treasures : well is he 
known this day by all the people, 


With manly might he conquereth those who hate bin, May 
Indra, girt by Maruts, be our succonr. 


11 Whenin his ways with kinsmen or with strangers he speedeth 
to the fight, invoked of many, 


For.gain of waters, and of sons and grandsons, may [ndra, 
girt by Maruts, ba our succour, 


12 Awful and fierce, fiend-slayer, thunder-wielder,with boundless 
knowledge, hymned by hundreds, mighty, 
In strength likeSoma, guard of the Five Peoples, may Indra, 
girt by Maruts, be our succour, . 


13 Winning the light, hitherward roars his thunder like the terri- 
fic mighty voice of Heaven, 
Rich gifts and treasures evermore attend him. May Indra, 
girt by Maruts, be our sacconr. ‘ 


14 Whose home eternal through his strength surrounds him on 
every side, his laud, the earth and heaven, 


May he, delighted with our service, save us. May Indra, girt 
by Maruts, be our succour, 


15 The limit of whose power not Gods by Godhead, nor mortal 
men have reached, not yet the Waters. 


Both Earth and Heaven in vigour he surpasseth., May Indra, 
girt by Maruts, be our succonr. 


9 Even the humble : not the strong only, bat the feeble man also 
acquires riches wifh his help. 12 Guard of the Fives Peoples : of 
the five classes of beings, according,to Sayana, that is, Gode, Gandharvas, 
Apsarases, Axuras and Rakshasas. Probably the five Arya tribes are 
intended. Seel. 7. 9. 14 The Karth artd Heaven, his dwelling- 
place, are his everlasting song of praise becouse they have been establi- 
ahed and regulated by him. This is Ludwing’s explanation of this 
obscure verse. 


17 


130 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 7. 


16 ‘che red and tawny mare, blaze-marked, high standing celes- 
tial who, to bring Rijrasva riches, 

e wWrew at the pole the chariot yoked with stallions, joyous, 
among the hosts of men was moted. 

17 The Varshigiras tinto thee, O Indra, the Mighty One, sing 
forth this laud to please thee, 

Rijrasva with his fellows, Ambarisha, Suridhis, Sahadeva, 

Bhayamana. 


18 Me, much invoked, hath slain Dasyns and Simyus, after his 
wont, and laid them low with arrows, 


The mighty Thunderer with his fair-complexioned friend won 
the Jand, the sunlicht, and the waters, 


19 May Indra evermore be our protector, and unimperilled may 
we win the booty. 


This praycr of ours may, Varuna grant, and Mitra, and Aditi 
and Sindhu, Karth and Heaven. 


HYMN CI. Indra. 


Sive@, with oblation, praise to him who maketh glad, who with 
» ijsvan drove the dusky brood away. 


Iain for help, him the strong whose right hand wields the bolt, 
him girt by Maruts we invoke to be our Friend, 


2 Indra, who with triumphant wrath smote Vyansa down, and 
Sambara, and Pipru the unrighteous one ; 


\Vho extirpated Sushna the insatiate,—him girt by Maruats 
we invoke t» be our Friend. 


3 He whose great work of manly mightis heaven and earth, and 
Varuna and Strya keep his holy law ; 


Indra, whose law the rivers follow as they flow,--him girt by 
Maruts we invoke to be our Friend. 


16 The epithets in this stanza are taken by Ludwig as names of the 
six horses with which Rijragva drove to battle and conquered ‘The 
Jast four versec of the hymn appear to have been added after the victory. 
18 Dasyus and Simyus : men of indigenous hostile races Lis facr- 
compleztoned friends ; exp'sined by Sayana as the glitteriny Maruts, 
means probably the .\ryan invaders «3 opposed to the dark skinned 
races of the country. ‘ 

a 

This Hymn and the following thirteen are ascribed tothe Rishi 
Katea. 1 Rijisvan;: aking, favoured and protected by Indra. 
Seel 51. 5,53. 8.5 ? The dusky brood: the dark aborigines who 
opposed the Aryans. 2 Vyansa, Sambara, Pipru, and Sashna are 
names Cf fiends of drought, 


UY MN 101,) THE RIGVEDA. 131 
4 He who is Lord and Master of the steeds and kine, hongured— 
the firm and sure—at every holy act ; ne 
Slayer even of she strong who pours no offering out,—him 
girt by Maruts we invoke’to be our Fyiend. 
5 He who is Lord of all the world that moves and breathes, who 
for the Brahman first before all found the Cows ; 
Indra who cast tho Dasyus down beneath his fect,—him girt 
by Maruts we invoke to be our Friend, 
Whom cowards must invoke and valiant men of war, invokcd 
by those who conquer and by those who flee ; 
Tundra, to whom all beings turn their constant thoueht,—him 
girt by Maruts we invoke to be our l’riend. 
7 Refulgent in the Rudra’s region he proceeds, and with the 
Rudras through the wide speeds the Dame, 


The hymn of praise extol¢ Indra the far-renowned : him girt 
by Maruts we invoke to be our Friend. 


O girt by Maruts, whether thou delight thee in loftiest gather- 
ing-place or lowly dwelling, 


Come thence unto our rite, true boon-bestower : through love 
of thee have we preparcd oblations. 
J We, fain for thee, strong Indra, have pressed Soma, and, O 
thou sought with prayer, have made oblations. 
Now at tins saerifice, with all thy Maruts, oa sacred grass, O 
team-borne God, rejoice thee. 
10 Rejoice thee with thine own Bay Steeds, O tundra, unclose thy 
jaws and let thy lips be open, 
Thou w.th the fair cheek, let thy Bay Steeds bring thee : 
cious to as, be pleased with our oblation. 


1: Guards of the camp whose praisers are the Marnts, may we 
through Indra, get ourselves the booty, 


This prayer of ours may Varuna grant, and Mitr&, and Aditi 
and Sindhu, Earth and Heayen.« 


( 


we 


CK 


gra- 


e 


5 Who for the Brahman: according to Sayana, who recovered for 


the Angirases the cows that had béen carried off by ghe Panis. See‘ 


o2. iL. 7 The Dame: Ludwig suggests that Rodasi, the wire of 
Rudra, is intended, and refers tu the Old-German myth of the Wind’s 
Brida. 11 Guards of the camp: my we who are the guardians cf 


the camp or new settlement, praised and favoured by the Maruts, w in 
the spoil, The words murutstotrasye vrijdnasya are soniew hat obscu re. 


132 THE HYMNS OF (BOOK 1, 


HYMN CII. Indra, 
To thee the Mighty One I bring this mighty hymn, for thy 
~ ™ desire hath been gratified by my laud. : 
In Indra, yeain him victorious through his strength, the God 
have joyed at feast and when the Sqma flowed. 


2 The Seven Rivers bear his glory far and wide, and heaven and 
sky and earth display his comely form. 
The Sun and Moon in change alternate run their course, that 
we, O Indra, may behold and may have faith. 


3 Maghavan, grant us thatsame car to bring us spoil, thy con- 
quering car in which we jvy in shock of fight. 
Thou, Indra, whom oar hearts praise highly in the war, grant 
shelter, Maghavan, to us who love thee well. 


4 Encourage thou our sidein every fight ; may we, with thee for 
our ally, conquer the foeman’s host. 
Indra, bestow on us joy aud felictty : break down, O Maghavan, 
the vigour of our foes, 
f’ For here in divers ways these men invoking thee, holder of 
treasures, sing thee hymns to win thine aid. 
“Ascend the car that thou mayest bring spoil to us, for, Indra, 
* thy fixt mind winneth tho victory. 


6 }lis arms win kine, his power is boundless, in cach act best, 
with a hundred helps, waker of battle’s din 
Is Indra: none may rival him in mighty strength. Hence, 
~ eager for the spoil, the people call on him. 


¢ Thy glory, Maghavan, excecds a hundred, yea, more than a 
hundred, than a thousand mid the folk. 
The great bow] hath inspirited thee boundlessly : so mayst 
thou slay the Vritras, breaker-dowa of forts! 


S Of thy great might there ts a threefold counterpart, the three 
earths, Lord of men ! and the threc realms of light. s 
Above this whole world, Indra, thou hast waxen great : with- 
out a fue art thou, by nature, from of old. 


2 The Sevan Rivers : the chief rivers in the neighbourhood of the 
earliest Aryan settlements, See I 32. 12 7 The oreat bowl: the 
vessel containing the oxhilarating Sofa jnice, or the mighty hibation 
itvalf. Tha sorta are the clond casties of the demops of the air which 
Indra destroys with his lightuing - *the clouis whose moving turrets 
make the bastions of the storm,’—Shelley, MWucek of Atlas. § The three 
earths . perhaps the, earth, the atmosphere and the heaven. The 
three reals of light : or according to Savanna, the three fires or fire in 
three forms, as the sun in heaven, the lightning in mid-air, and terrest- 


rial fre on earth See also] 105 35. 


HYMN 103.| | THE RIGVEDA., 133 


We invocate thee first among the Deitios: thou hast become a 
mighty Conqueror in fight, ° 
‘May Indra fill with spirit this our singer's heart, and mek 
our car impe@uous, forempst in attack. 
10 Thou hast prevaised, and hast not kept the booty back, in 
trifling battles or in those of great account. 
We make thee keen, the Mighty One, to succour us : inspire 
us, Maghavan, when we defy the foe. 
11 May Indra evermore be our Protector, and unimperilled may 
we win the booty. 
This prayer of ours may Varuna grant, and Mitra, and Aditi 
and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven. 


HYMN CII, Indra. 
Tuat highest Indra-power of thine is distant: that which is 
here sages possessed aforetime. ; 


This one is on the earth, in heaven the other, and both unite 
as flag with flag in battle. 
9 He spread the wide carth out and firmly fixed it, smote with 
his thunderbolt and loosed the waters, : 


Maghavan with his puissance struck down Ahi, rent Rafhina 
to death and slaughtcred Vyansa. 


3 Armed with his bolt and trusting in his prowess he wandered 
shattering the forts of Dasas. 


Cast thy dart, knowing, Thunderer, at the Daysu ; increase 
the Arya’s might and glory, Indra. 


4 For him who thus hath taught these human races, Maghavan, 
bearing a fame-worthy title, 


Thunderer, drawing nigh to slay the Dasyus, hath given him. 
self the name of Son for glory. 


1 That highest (ndra-power : Benfey explains this vergp as meaning : 
Tndra’s might is in a certain way divided: one part of itis possessed 
by the sages who by their hymns, sagrifites and Jibatiovs of Sona juica 
give him complete power to perform his great deeds. Sdyana says that 
the Sun and fire are equally the lustre of Indra, one in heaven and the 
other on earth ; and that by day fire is combined with the Sun, and by 
night the Sun is cembined with fire. 2 Xaahina, said to%e a demon, 
is, like the other fiends of drought, a dark purple cloud that withholds 
the rain. 3 Dasas: or Dasyus, the non- Aryan inhabitants of the 
land Knowtng: distinguishing the Aryan from the barbarian. 
4 The meaning of this verse appears to be, as Ludwig says, that Indra, 
in preparing to slay tha Dasyus, has become, as it were, ason to the 
pious worshipper who has proclaimed his great deeds to men. 


134 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK fF. 


e 
5 See this abundant wealth that he possesses, and put your trust 
in Indra’s hero vigour. . 
- He found the cattle, and he found the hogscs, he found the 
plants, the forests and the waters. 
6 To him the truly strong, whose deeds fre many, to him the 
strong Pull let us pour the Soma. 
The Hero, watching like « thief inambush, goes parting the 
possessions of the godless. 
7 Well didst thou do that hero deed, O Indra, in waking with 
thy bolt the slumbering Ahi 
In thee, delighted, Dames divine rejoiced them, the flying 
Maruts and all Gods were joyful, 
8 As thou hast smitten Sushna, Pipru, Vritra and Kuyava, and 
Sambara’s forts, O Indra. 
THis prayer of ours may Varuna grant, and Mitra, and Aditi 
and Sindhu, Marth and Heaven. 
HYMN CIV. Indra, 
Tnk altar hath been made for thee to rest on: come likea 
* panting courser and be seated 
Loosen thy flying Steeds, set free thy Ilorses who bear thee 
swiftly nigh at eve and morning. 
These men have come to Indra for assistance: shall he not 
q quickly come upon these pathways ? 
May the Gods quell the fury of the Dasa, and may they lead 
our folk to happy fortune, 


8 \fe who hath only wish as his possession casts on himself, casts 
foam amid the waters. 


bo 


7 Dames devine: the Consorts of the Gods. 8 huyara : mean- 
ing, probably, ‘causing bad harvests,’ is the name of another of thie 
demons of drgught. 

oe ae eee Be a 

2 The Ddsu: explained by Savana. as the destroying demon. It 
apparently means here a chief of non-Aryan race whom the suppliants 
were going to attack. @ 3 Sayana explains: the Asura, or demon, 
Kuyava, who knows the wealth of othets carries it away of himself, and 
being preset in the water he carries off tho water with the foam. Ia 
this water which has been carried ‘away Kuyava’s two wives bathe. 
Benfey takes the foamy water to mean tho fertilizing rain, Ludwig's 
eXpianation is : While the poor Arya who can only wish for the wealth 
which he does not possess has not aven ordinary water to wash himeelf 
in, the wives of the enemy, in the inevlent pride of their riches, bathe 
in milk. 


HYMN 104] TITE RIGVEDA. 135 


Both wives of Kuyava in milk have bathed them: may they 
be drowned within the depth of Sipha. ‘ 
4 This hath his kinship checked who lives beside us: with an-. 
cient streams forth speedsyand rules the Hero, 
Anjasi, Kulisi, andeVirapatni, delighting him, bear milk upon 
their waters, 
Svon as this Dasyu's traces were discovered, as she who knows 
her home, he sought the dwelling. 
Now think thou of us, Maghavan, nor cast us away as doth a 
profligate his treasure. 
G Indra, as such, give usa shareof sunlight, of waters, sinless- 
ness, and reputation. 
Do thou no harm to our yet unborn offspring: our trust is in 
thy mighty Indra-power. 
7 Now we, 1 think, in thee,as such have trusted: lead ys on 
Mighty One, to ample riches, 
In no unready house give us, O Indra invoked of many, food 
and drink when hungry. 
8 Slay us not, Indra; do not thou forsake us: steal not away 
the joys which we delight in, © 
Rend not our unborn brood, strong Lord of Bounty ! our 
vessels with the life that is within them, 
9 Come to us; they have called thee Soma-lover : here is the 
pressed juice. Drivk thereof for rapture. , 
Widely-capacious, pour it down within thee, and, invocated, 
hear us like a Father. 


CH 


Kuyava : porhaps a name given by the Aryans to one of non-Aryan 
chieftains. Sipha, is said by Sayana to be the name of a river. 
4 This stanza is very obscure. The meaning appears tabe that the 
triendshép of Indra, whv sends down the rain as before, has put an end 
to tne insolence of Kuyava. See Ludwgg, Ueber die neue&ten Arbeiten 


auf dem Gebiete der Rgveda-forschung. The signification of the 
three rivers in the second line isobscure. Benf€y considers the names to 
bs faminine personifications of the clouds. Virapatni, ‘the hero’s 


wife’ occurs, as Dr. Yall has pointed out, in °VI. 49. 7. as &n epithet 
of Saragvati the Goddess, and it may possibly here mean the river Sara- 


BVati, 5 As she who knows her dwelling ; as pcow who knows her 
Stall. 7 In no unready house: that is, in a house well supplied and 
furnished. 8 The joys that we delight in. prohably, cue children. 


Our vessels: our wives with their unborn babies. Sayana gives other 
explanations of the expression. 


136 ‘THK HYMNS OF [BOOK 1. 


HYMN CV, V isvedevas, 
Wirftin the waters runs the Moon, he with the beanteous 
wings in heaven. . 
Ye lightnings with your golden wheels, mer: find not your abid- 
ing-place. Mark this my woe, ye Harth and Heaven. 


2 Surely men crave and gain their wish. Close to her husband 
clings the wife, 
And, in embraces intertwined, both give and take the bliss of 
love. Mark this my woe, ye Karth and Heaven. 


3 O never may that light, ye Gods, fall from its station in the 
aky, . 
Ne’er fail us one like Soma sweet, the spring of our felicity. 
Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven. 


4 T ask the last of sacrifice. As envoy he shall tell it forth. 
Whereis the ancient law divine? Who is its new diffuser 
ncw ? Mark this my woe, ye Ka~th and Heaven. 


§ Ye Gods who yonder have your home in the three lucid realms 
of heaven, 

What count ye truth and what untruth ? Where is mine an- 

cient call on you? Mark this my woe, ye Harth and Heaven, 


G What is your firm support of Law ? What Varuna’s observant 

eye? | 

iow may we pass tha wicked on the path of mighty Arya- 
man ? Mark this ny woe, ye Earth and Heaven, 


7 Lam the man who sang of old full many a laud when Soma 
flowed. 
Yet torturing cares consume me as the wolf assails the thirsty 
deer, Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven. 


This Hymn is ascribed either to Trita or to Kutea. It is addressed 
to the Visvedevas on behalf of Trita who had been imprisoned in a 
well. See I 52. 5, 1 Within the waters: in the ooean of air. Je 
with the beeuteous wings: tho Sun. Mark this my woe: the texd 
has only vettdm me asya rodast ‘know of this of me, O Heaven anc arth,’ 
which means, acoording to SAyansa, either ‘ bc aware of this my affliction,' 
or ‘attend to these my hymns.’ 4 I ask the last: the latest or youngest 
of the Gods, Agni, as betng continually reproduced, 5 The three 
lucid realms of heaven: the world is divided into earth, sky, and heaven 
and each of these, again, is sometimes spoken of as threefold. 6. 
The bath of mighyy Aryaman. probably the milky way, regarded as the 
path to heaven.—Ludwig. The general meaning of the questions in 
this and the two preceding verses is : Is there no longer any distinction 
between right and worng ? Is there no moral government of the world ’ 
If there be, why am J, a faithful worshipper to suffer this undeserved 
misery ? 


HYMN 105.) THE RIGVEDA. 137 


8 Like rival wives on every side enclosing ribs oppress me sore. 
O Satakratu, biting cares devour me, singer of thy prkiise, as 
rats devour the weaver’s threads, Mark this my woe, ye 
Earth and Heaven. ° 
9 Where those sevea rays are shining, fhence my house and 
family extend. 
This Trita Aptya knoweth well, and speaketh out for 
brotherhood. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven. 


10 May those five Bulls which stand on high full in the midst 
of mighty heaven, 
Having together swiftly borne my praises to the Gods, return. 
Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven. 
11 High in the mid ascent of heaven those Birds of beauteous 
pinion sit. 
Back from his path they drive the wolf as he would cross the 
restless floods, Mark this my woe, ye Barth and Heaven. 
12 Firm is this new-wrought hymn of praise, and meet to be told 


forth, O Gods. 
The flowing of the floods is Law, Truth is the Sun’s extended 


light. Mark this my woe, ye Harth and Heaven. e 
13 Worthy of land, O Agni, is that kinship which thou Hast 
with Gods. 


* Here seat thee like a man: most wise, bring thou the Gods 
for sacrifice. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven. 
Lc eenteen “GY 


8 Enclosing ribs : according to Sayana, the walls of the wall in which 
Trita was confined. Weaver's threads: the meaning of sisnd thus ex- 
plained by Siyana is uncertain. Ludwig is of opinion that wooden 
phallus-idols are intended. The line recurs in X. 33. 3. 9 Those 
seven rays : of the Sun, says Sayana. But probably, as Ludwig suggests, 
the rays are the flames of Agni That is, Agni with his bright beams, 
or the worship of Agni, is the central point through which I and all the 


members Of my family are connected and held together. Trita 
Aptya: A mythical being who dwells in the remotest part of t&e heavens, 
and who &nows the celestial origin of the human race. 10 Those 


five Bulls : the stars of some constellatiom According to Sayana, Indra, 
Varuna, Agni, Aryaman, and Savitar, or Fire, Wind, Sun, Moon, and 
Lightning. Sidyana explains ukshdnah, bulls ‘or oxen, as ‘sheddera of 
benefits.’. 11 Those Birds of Pauteous pinion : the stars. The 
wolf; darkness or ectipse of the Moon. 12 Law (ritém,) eternal 
.order, ‘The meaning of the word as‘applied to the natural world con- 
neots itself with the alternation of day and night, the regular passage 
of the sun through the beavens, or the unswerving, motion of the rain 
in ite fall from heaven and of the streams along their courses. This last 
application of the word may have determined its special sense of ‘water’ 
In the latter language. Wallis, Cosmology of the Rigveda, p. 93. 


18 ; 


138 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 1. 


14 Here seated, man-like as a priest shall wisest Agni to the Gods 
Speéd onward our oblations, God among the Gods, intelligent. 
= Mark this my woe, ye Harth and Heaven. 


15 Varuna makes the holy prayez. To him‘who finds the path 
we pray. ' 
He in the heart reveals his thought. Let sacred worship rise 
anew. Mark this my woe, ye Karth and Heaven, 


16 That pathway of the Sun in heaven, made to be highly 
glorified, 
Is not to be transgressed, O Gods. O mortals, ye behold it 
not, Mark this my woe, ye Karth and Heaven. 
17 Trita, when buried in the‘well, calls on the Gods to succour 
him, 
That call of his Brihaspati heard and released him from 
distress. Mark this my woe, ye Harth and Heaven, 
18 A ruddy wolf beheld me once, as I was faring on my path. 
He, like acarpenter whose back is aching croached and slunk 
away. Mark this my woe, ye arth and Heaven. 
19 Through this oursong may we, allied with Indra, with all our 
heroes conquer in the battle. 
‘This prayer of ours may Varuna grant, and Mitra, and Aditi 
and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven. 
HYMN CVI, Visvedevas. 
Cau we for aid on Indra, Mitra, Varuna, and Agni and the 
Marut host and Aditi, 


Even asa chariot from a difficult ravine, bountiful Vasus, 
rescue us from all distress, 


ta 


16 That pathway of the Sun : according to Benfey, the way of truth, 
right, eternal order, as in verse 12. According to Ludwig the path of 
the Sun between the tropics is meant. The Gods, says Sayana, must 
not disregard the path of the Sun, because their existence depends upon 
him as regulator of the seasons at which sacrifices are offered to them. 
Still less may men disregard it, who as sinners do not behold -or under- 
stand it aright. 17 brthgspate : the Lord of Prayer. 18 Like 
a carpenter: the comparison is not very clear. It apparently meang 
that the wolf crept awy, arching his back or contracting his limbs, 
like a carpenter bending over hiswork till his back aches. Sayana 
suggests also an alternative and totally different explanation of the 
whole passage, by interpreting urea, the wolf, as the Moon, and reading. 

_ méskrit, maker of months, instead of m4 sakriz, me, once. See Ludwig, 
Uber die neuesten Arbeiten aufdem Gobiete der Rigveda forschung. 


1 Vasus : originally meaning ‘the good’ is sometimes used, as in this 
place to designate Gods in general, 


HYMN 107] THE RIGVEDA. 1Zo 


9 Come ye Adityas for our fnll prosperity, in conquests.of the 
foe, ye Gods, bring joy to us. 
Even as a charigt from a difficult ravine, bountiful Vasus, 
rescue us from all distress? 
3 May the most gloriols Fathers aid us, and the two Goddesses, 
Mothers of ihe Gods, who strengthen Law. 
Even asachariot froma difficalt ravine, bountiful Vasus, 
rescue us from all distress. 


4 To mighty Nardsanea, strengthening his might, to Pishan, 
ruler over men, we pray with hymns. 
Even asachariot froma difficult ravine, bountiful Vasus. 
rescue us from all distress. 


5 Brihaspati, make us evermore an easy path : we crave what boon 
thou hast for men in rest and stir 
Like as a chartot from a difficult ravine, bountiful Vasus, regcue 
us trom all distress. . 


6 Sunk inthe pit the Rishi Kutsa called, to aid, Indra the 
Vritra-slayer, Lord of power and might. 

Even as achariot from a difficult ravine, bountiful Vasus, 

rescue us from all distress, 
@May Aditi the Goddess guard us with the Gods: may the 
» protecting God keep us with ceaseless care, 

This prayer of ours may Varuna grant, and Mitra, and Aditi 

and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven. ? 

HYMN CVII. Visvedevas. 


Tne sacrifice obtains the Gods’ acceptance: be graciously 
inclined to us, Adityas, 
litherward let your favour be directed, and be our best 
deliverer from trouble. 
2 By praise-songs of Angirases exalted, may the Gods come to 
us with their protection. 
May Indra with his powers, Maruts with Maruts, Q@diti with 
Adityas grant us shelter. 


3 The Fathers: the Manes or shirits of departed ancestors. The 
tewo Goddesses : Heaven and Earth. 4 Ndrdsana : a mystfcal name 
.of Agni, ‘the Praise of Men.’ Pishtn: the God who nourishes men 
and flocks and herds. 6 Sunk on the prc: perhaps Rguratively for 

§ ‘tu distress.’ Kutea i iv the Rishi to whom the hymn is ascribed. 


2 Maruts with Maruts : that is, all the Maruts together, or Maruts 
with their winds and storin. 


140 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 1. 


3 Thig land of ours may Varuna and Indra, Aryaman, Agni, 

Savitar find pleasant. . - 

This prayer of ours may Varuna grant, 4nd Mitra, and Aditi 
and Sindhu Earth and Heaven. 


HYMN CVIII. * Indra-Agni, 


Own that most wondrous car of yours, O Indra and Agni, which 
looks round on all things living, a 
Take ye your stand and come to us tog. ther, and drink liba- 

tions of the flowing Soma. . 
2 As vast as all this world is in its compass deep &s It is with 
its far stretching surface, 
So let this Soma be, Indra and Agni, made for your drinking 
till your soul be sated. 
3 For ye have won, a blessed name together: yes, with one aim 
« ye strove, O Vritra-slayers, | 
So Indra-Agni, seated here together, pour in, ye Mighty Ones, 
the mighty Soma. 
4 Both stand adorned, when fires are duly kindled, spreading the 
sacred grass, with lifted ladles. 
‘ Drawn by strong Soma juice poured forth around us, come, 
* Indra-Agni and display your favour. 
5 The brave deeds ye have done, Indra and Agni, the forms ye 
have dispiayed and mighty exploits. 
The ancient and auspicious bonds of friendship,—for sake of 
» those drink of the flowing Soma. 
6 As first I said when choosing you. In battle we must contend 
with Asuras for this Soma. 
So came ye unto this my true conviction, and drank libations 
of the flowing Soma. 
7 Ifin your dwelling, vr with prince or Brahman, ye,Indra-Agni, 
Holy Ones, rejoice you, 
Even from thence, ye mighty Lords, come hither, and drink 
libations of the flowing Soma. 
8 If with the Yadus, Turvasas, ye sojourn, with Druhygs, Anus, 
Pfrus, Indra-Agni! ,-. 
Even from thence, ye mighty Lords, come hither, and drink 
libations of the Xowing Soma, 


4 ‘We have, merely, in the text, the epithete in‘the dual number: the 
commentator supplies the Adhwaryu and his assistant priest.’— Wilson, ° 
| Benfey refers the dual epithets to Indraand Agni, translating them 
severally by ‘honsured,’ ‘for whom sacred grass has been strewn,’ ‘bo- 
wards whom the ladles have been uplifted.’ 8 This verse contains 
the names of the five well-known Aryan tribes or families, said, to be 
descendants of the five similarly named sons of Yayati. See I. 7: 9. 


HYMN 109, THE RIGVEDA. © 141 


9 Whether, OIndra-Agni, ye be dwelling in lowest earth, in cen- 
tral, or in highest, 
Even from thence, ye mighty Lords, come hither, and drink 


libations of the flowing Soma. , 
10 Whether, O Indra-Agni, ye be dwelling in highest earth, in 


central, or in lowest, 
Even from thence, ye mighty Lords, come hither, and drink 
libations uf the flowing Soma. 
11 Whether ye be in heaven, O Indra-Agni, on earth, on moun- 
tains, in the herbs, or waters. 
Even from thence, ye mighty Lords, come hither, and drink 
libations of the flowing Soma. 
12 If, when the Sun to the mid-heaven hath mounted, ye take 
delight in food, O Indra-Agni., 
Even from thence, ye mighty Lords, come hither, and drink 
libations of the flowing’Soma. 
13 Thus having drunk your fill of our libation, win us all kinds 
of wealth, Indra and Agni, 
This prayer of oars may Varuna grant, and Mitar, and Aditi 
and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven, 
HYMN CIX, lodea fen 


Lonaine for weal I looked around, in spirit, for kinsmen, 
Indra-Agni, or for brothers, 
No providence but yours alone is with me: so have I wrought 
for you this hymn for succour. 
2 For I have heard that ye give wealth more freely than worth. 
less son-in-law or spouse's brother. 
So offering to you this draught of Soma, I make you this new 
hymn, Indra and Agni, 
3 Let us not break the cords : with this petition we strive to 
gain the powers of our forefathers. 


6 In lowest earth, in central, or highest : in earth, mid-air, or heaven, 
the word earth used loosely for sphere or world. Or the reference may be 
to the fanciful threefold division of the earth. 


2 Than worthless son-in-law or spouse's brother: the worthless or 
defective son-in, law, or suitor, who has not, as Yaska explains, the 
necessary qualifications, is obliged to win the consent of his futura 
father-in-law by very liberal gifts. The maiden’s brother gives her rich 
presents out of natural affection. 3 Let us*not break the cords ;: léb 
us not break or interrupt the long series of religious rites observed by 
our ancestors and continued to our time, Or, as Sayana explains, led 
us not cut or break off the long liop of. posterity, but ask for and obtain 
‘descendants endowed with the vigour of their progenitors.’ 


142, THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 1. 


For Iygdra-Agni the strong drops are joyful, for here in the 
bowl’s lap are both the press-stones. 


4 For you the bowl divine, Indraand Agni, presses the Soma 
gladly to delight you. 


6 e 
With hands auspicious and fair arms, ye Asvins, haste, sprinkle 
it with sweetness in the waters. 


5 You, I have heard, wore mightiest, Indra-Agai, when Vritra 
fell and when the spoil was parted. 


Sit at this sacrifice, ye ever active, on the strewn grass, and 
with the juice delight you. 


6 Surpassing all men where they shout for battle, ye Twain ex- 
ceed the earth and heaven in greatness. 


Greater are ye thin rivers and than mountains, O Indra-Agni 
and all tuinys beside tliom. 


° 6 . . 2 
7 Bring wealth and give it, ye whoge arms wield thunder; Indra 
and Agni, with your powers protect us. 


Now of atruth these be the very sunbeams whcrewith our 
fathers were of old united. 


8 Gixe, ye who shatter forts, whose hands wield thunder: Indra 
and Agni save us in our battles. 


This prayer of ours may Varuna grant, and Mitra, and Aditi 
and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven. 


‘ HYMN CX. Ribhus, 


Tue holy work I wronght before is wrought again : my sweet- 
est hymn is sung to cclebrate your praise. 


Here, O ye Ribhus, is this sea for all the Gods: sate you with 
Soma offered with the hallowing word, 


The strong drops ; the exhilarating Soma. In the bowl’s lap : 
close to the vgssel which receives the juice. Bub see Ludwig, Ueber die 
neuesten Arbeiten etc. pp 85—88. 4 Ye Asvins; here called upon 
to porform thesduties of the Adhvaryu and his assistant priest, ‘to mix 
the sweetness, or Soma, with water to be offered to Indra and Agni. 
7 These be the very swnbeayss : The meaning of the line may be that the 
worship of Indra and Agni is the great bond which has kept the Rishi’s 
ancestors umited. Wilson, fellowing SAyana translates : ‘May those rays 
of the Sun, by which our forefathers have attained, together, a heaven- 
ly region,, shine &so upon us.’ 


1 This sea for all the Gods: this vessel containing Soma juice for all 
the Gods, or for the particular class of Gods called Visvedevah or 


Visvedas. Lhe hallowtng word : Sudha (Ave? Hail !); an exclamation 
used in making oblations to the Gods. 


HYMN 110.) THE RIGVEDA. 143 


9 When, seeking your enjoyment onward from afar, ye, certain 
of my kinsmen, wandered on your way, 
Sons of Sudhanvan, after your long journeying, ye came unto 
the home oP liberal Savatar. 
3 Savitar therefor gave you immortality, because ye came pro- 
claiming him whom naught cau hide ; 
And this the drinking-chalice of the Asura, which till that 
time was one, ye made to be fourfold, 
4 When they had served with zeal at sacrifice as priests, they, 
mortal as they were, gained immortality. 
The Ribhas, children of Sudhanvan, bright as suns, were in a 
year’s course made associate with prayers. 
5 The Ribhus with a rod measured, as ’twere a field, the single 
sacrificial chalice wide of mouth, 
Lauded of all who saw, praying for what is best, desiring glo- 
rious fame among Immortal Gods. 
6 As oil in ladles, we through knowledge will present unto the 
Heroes of the Geipanient our hyinn, — 
The Ribhus who came near with this great Father’s speed, and 
rose to heaven's high sphere to eat the strengthening food. 
7 Ribhu to us is Indra freshest in his might, Ribha with powers 
and wealth is giver of rich gifts. 
Gods, through your favour may we on the happy day quell 
the attacks of those who pour no offerings forth, 
8 Out of askin, O Ribhus, once ye formed a cow, and brought the 
mother eluse unto her calf again. ’ 
Sons of Sudhanvan, [Ieroes, wirh surpassing skill ye made 
your aged Parents youthful as before. 


een —— 


2 Seeking your enjoyment : desirous of enjoying libations of Soma 
juice. My kinsmen: Sudhanvan, father of the Ribhus, was a des- 
condant of Angiras. as was also Kutsa the Rishi of the hymn. 3 
Him whom rarught can hide : or, from whom nothing can be hidden, that 
is, Savitar as the Sun. The drinking: chalice of the Agura : the cup 
that had been made by the Asura or immortal God Tvashvar. See I 26. 
6. Tis chalice appears to be the moon which contains the Amrit or 
nectar of the Gods. The legend seerAs to mean that Tvashtar as God 
of the year created 16 uniformly bright, and, that the Ribhus, as Gods 
of the seasons, made it fourfold or diversified with four phases. See 
Hillebrandt, Vedische Mythologie, 1. p. 55. 4 Asgpciatea with 
prayers: ‘connected with the Garemionies (appropriated to the different 
saasons) of the year’.— Wilson. 5 Measured: imworder to divide it 
into four, asin said in verses 3. 6 This great Father: Savitar as 
the Sun, the source of alllife Strengthening food: Sama. 8 A skin: 
perhaps the dried-up earth. A cow : the earth refreshed by the Rains. 
The mother : the earth. Jer calf: the autumn Sun. Parents : Heaven 
and Earth. 


144 THE HYMNS OF {BOOK J, 


9 Help ys with strength where spoil is won, O Indra: joined 
_ with the Ribhus give us varied bounty. ' 
"” This prayer of ours may Varuna grant, and Mitra, and Aditi 
and Sindhu, Earth and Heaveu.. : 

HYMN CX], ° Ribhus. 


Workxine with skill thay wrought the lightly rolling car: they 
wrought the Bays who bear Indra and bring great gifts. 
The Ribhus for their Parents made life young again; and fa- 

shioned for the calf a mother by its side. 


2 For sacrifice make for us active vital power; for skill and wis- 
dom food with noble progeny. 
Grant to our company this power most excellent, that with a 
family all-heroiv we may dwell. 
3 Do ye, O Ribhus, make prosperity for us, prosperity for car, 
ye Heroes, and for steed. 
Grant us prosperity victorious evermore, conquering foes in 
battle, strangers or akin. 


4 Indra, the Ribhus’ Lord, I invocate for aid, the Ribhus, Vajas, 
Maruts to the Soma draught. 
aruna, Mitra, both, yea, and the Asvins Twain: let them 
speed us to wdalth, wisdom, and victory, 

5 May Ribhnu send prosperity for battle, may Vaja conquering 
in the fight protect us. 

‘This prayer of ours may Varuna grant, and Mitra, and Aditi 

and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven. 


HYMN CXII. ASvins, 


To give first thought to them, I worship Heaven and Earth, 
and Agni, fair bright glow, to hasten their approach. 

Come hither unto us, O Asvins, with those aids wherewith 
in fight ye speed the war-cry to the spoil. 


2 Ample, unfailing, they have mounted as it were an eloquent 
car that ye may think of us and give 
Come hithor unto us, O Asvins, with those aids wherewith ye 
help our thoughts to further holy acts, 


4 Vdjas : that is, Vaja and his two brothers Ribhu and Vibhvan, 
more usually called collectively the Ribhavah or Ribhus. Similarly, in 
this line the Ribhys are Ribhuand His brothers. — 

1 To gwe first thought to them: Heaven and Earth are to be the first 
objects of invocation Agni, with his signal of bright fire, is also called 
upon to hasten the approach of the Asvins to the sacrifice, 2 They : 
our offerings. An eloquent car : the chariot of our hymns. 


HYMN 112.) THE KRIGVEDA. 145 


3 Ye by the might which heavenly nectar giveth you are in 
supreme dominion Lords of all these folk. : 


(‘ome hither unt us, O Asvins, with those aids wherewith ye, 
Heroes, made the barren cow give milk. 


4 The aids wherewith the Wanderer through his offspring’s 
might, or the Two-Mothered Son shows swiftest mid tho 
swift ; 

Wherewith the sapient one acquired hir triple lore,—Come 
hither unto us, OQ Asvins, with those aids. 


5 Wherewith ye raised from waters, prisoned and fast bound, 
Rebha, and Vandana to look upon the light ; 


Wherewith ye succoured Kanva as he strove to win,—Come 
hither unto us, O Asvins, with those aids. 


6 Wherewith ye rescued Antaka when languishing deep ia the 
pit, and Bhujyu with unfailing help, 
And comforted Karkandhu, Vayya, in their woe,—Coma 
hither unto us, O Asvins, with those aids. 


? Wherewith ye gave Suchanti wealth and happy home, and 
made the fiery pit friendly for Atri’s sake ; * 


Wherewith ye guarded Purukutsa, Prisnigu,—Comce hither 
unto us, O Asvins, with those aids. 


3 Heavenly nectar : the Soma. The barren cow: of the Rishi Sayu. 
4 The Wanderer : according to Siyana, the Wind. Agni is called his 
offspring as having been excited into flame by the wind. Or Matarigvan 


may be intended (see I. 31. 3), who brought Agni from heaven. The 
I'wo-Mothered Son: Agui sprang from the two fire-sticks. The sapi- 


ent one: said to be the Rishi Kakshivan. His triple lorev: knowledge 
of sacrifecial food, oblations of clarified butter, and libations of Soma 
juice. The meaning of the passage ‘is uncertain. ‘D Rebha and 
Vandana are said to have been thrown into wells by the Asuras or de- 
mons, Kanva was somewhat similary treatea’ ‘In these, and similar 
instances subsequently noticed,’ says Wilson, ‘we may possibly have 
allusions tothve dangers undergone by some of the first tdachers of 
Hfuduism among the people whom thty sought to civilize.’ 6 Antaka: 
said to have been a RAjarshi or regal Rishi. Bhujyu : s Rajarshi, son 
of Tugra, rescued when in danger of drowning. Vayya : see II. 13. 
12; IV. 19. 9. 7 Purukutsa : seo I. 63 7, Of Suchanti and Prisnigu 
nothing more is related. Atri: See I. 45. 3; 51, 3. Ha is said to 
have been thrown by the Asuras into a fiery pit. 


19 


146 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR 1, 


8 Mighty Ones, with what powers ye gave Pardvrij aid what 
time ye made the blind and Jame to see and walk ; 


Wherewith ye set at liberty the swallowed quail,—Come hither 
unto us, O Asving, with those aids. 


9 Wherewith ve quickened the most sweet exhaustless flood, and 
comforted Vasishtha, ye who ne'er decay ; 


AndtoSrutarya, Kutsa, Narya gave your help,~-Come hither 
unto us, O Asvins, with those aids. 


10 Wherewith ye helped, in battle of a thousand spoils, Vispala 
seeking booty, powerless to move, 


Wherewith ye guarded friendly Vasa, Asva’s son,--Come hither 
upto us, O Asvins, with those aids. 


11 Whereby the cloud, ye Bounteous Givers, shed sweet rain 
for Dirghasravas, for the merchant Ausija, 


W herewith ye helped Kakshivaén,singer of your praise,—Come 
hither unto us, O Asvins, with those aids. 


12 Wherewith ye made Rasa swell full with water-flood, and 
urged to victory the car without a horse ; 


‘Wherewith Trisoka drove forth his recovered cows,—Come 
hither unto us, O Asvins, with those aids. 


8 Pordvrij: according to Siyana, the name of aman. Benfey 
explains the word as the setting Sun (sideways departing), called blind 
because his light is nearly gone, and lame because he no longer travels. 
The swllowed quai : swallowed, or seized, by a wolf. The quail is said 
by Yaska, as quoted by Sayana, to signify the Dawn seized and swal- 
lowed by the bright Sun. Benfey takes it to mean the Sun after setting. 
9 Ae the earliest bringers of light, the Asvins, may be said to quicken and 
animate by their coming the streams of the ocean of air. Wea are not 
told how the famous Vasshtha way comforted, and Sratarya, Kutas and 
Narya are merely said by Sayana to be three Rishis, Kutsa has ben 
mentioned before. See I. 33. 14; 51. 6;63 3. 10 Vispald : a 
lady who was wounded in battle, and made whole by the Asvins. See 
T. 116. 15; 117 11; 128. 87x.39 8;X. 39. 8. Powerless to move: 
pierced through with a lance, according to Ludwig, The meaning of 
atharvyam is uncertain. ' Vasa: a celerbated Rishi, the seer of Hymna 
VITI. 46. ll Dirghasrava: ssid to bea Rishi who traded for 
his livelihood. Ausija is » patronymic meaning somof Usij. Kakshtvan 
is also said to have been ason of Usij. See 1.18.1. 12 Rasa‘The Rasd 
known to the Zoroagtrians as the Ranha, was originally the name of 4 
Teal river, but when the Aryas moved away from it into the Punjab, 

‘Jt assumed a mythical character, and became a kind of Okeanos, sur- 
rounding the extreme limits of the earth.-—M. Muller, Vedic Hymne, 
1,323 No further account is given of the events mentioned inthis verse. 


HYMN 112.) THE RIGVEDA. 147 


13 Wherewith ye compass round the Sun when far away, strength- 
ened Mandhatar in his tasks as lord of lands, : 
And to sage Bharadvaja gave protecting help,—Come hither 
unto us, O Agvins, with @hose aids. 


14 Wherewith, when Sambara was slain, ye guarded well great 
Atithigva, Divodasa, Kasoju, 
And Trasadasyu when the forts were shattered down,—Come 
hither unto us, O Asvins, with those aids. 


15 Wherewith ye honoured the great drinker Vamra, and Upas 
tuta and Kali when he gained his wife. 
And lent to Vyasva aud to prithi favouring help,—Come 
hither unto us, O Asvins, with those aids. 


[6 Wherewith, O Heroes, ye vouchsafed deliverance to Sayu 
Atri, and to Mana long ago ; 
Wherewith ye shot your shafts in Syimarasmi’s cause, -Come 
hither unto us, O Asvins, with those aids. ° 


17 Wherewith Patharva, in his majesty of form, shone in his 
course like to a gathered kindled fire ; 
Wherewith ye helped Saryata in tha mighty fray,-Come hither 
unto us, O Asvins, with those aids. . 

s si Seba eie tte a ae I ee 

13 The Asving are said to compass the Sun in order to save him 
from eclipse. Mandkhdtar: a Rajarshi or regal Rishi. See VIII. 
39. 8 Bharadvdja ; 2 very celebrated Rishi, said to be the son 
of Brihaspati. 14 Sambara : one of the demons of drought slain 
by Indra. Sdyana takes atithiguim and kasojum as epithets of Divu- 
dasa the king who was aided by the Agvins: ‘the hospitable Divodasa 
as he sought the water (through fear of the Asuras)” Zrasadasyu : a 
prince renowned for hig victorivs and liberality, and for the favour 
shown him by the Gods. See EV, 42,9; VII. 19.3; VIIL 9. 21; 19. 
36; 36 7, 15 Vamra : called a Rishi, son of Vikbanas, by Sayana. 
‘The text calls him wipipand drinking much and varivusly, which the 
Scholiast explains, drinking, especially moisture or dew.’—Wilsou. 
Benfey thinks that Indra is intended under the name Vamra, Upa- 
stuta :.taken by Sdyana as an epithet of Vamra, ‘ praised by all around 
him. Kali: » Rishi, mentioned agaiu in X. 39 8. The Asvins may 
have restored him to youth. Vyasta ; taken by Sayana as an epithet 
of Prithi,* horseless, or who had lost his horge.’ Prtthe is said to have 
been a Rajarshi. 16 Say: gee note on verse 3 of this Hymn, see 
alsol 116. 22; 1}7. 20. Alri : see note,on verse 7 ; algo 1.116 8. 
Manu: this Manu is said by SAyana to havea Rajarsht whom the 
Agvine taught to sow barley and‘otber grain. Syylmaraxms : said to 
have been a Kishi, seer of hymns 77, 78, Book X- 17 Pathared : sajd 
_ by Sayana to hava been a Rajarshi. Benfey thinks that the word pdthar- 
van, is a dialectical form of patrdrvan, ‘having winged horses ’ Ludwig 
considers Sayana’s explanation (which I have followed) to be erroneous 
and impossible He thinks that Pathard was the name of some 


a eee 


¢ 


148 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 1. 
18 Wherewith, Angirases! ye triumphed in your heart, and 
onward went to liberate the flood.of milk ; 


Wherewith ye helped the hero Manu with new strength, — 
Come hither unto, us, O Asvins, with those aids. 


19 Wherewith ye brought a wife for Vimada to wed, wherewith 
ye frecly gave the ruddy cows away ; 


hes 


Wherewith ye carricd home Sudevi to Sudas,—Come hither 
unto us, O Asvins, with those aids. 


2). Wherewith ye bring great bliss to him who offers gifts, where 
with ye have protected Bhujyu, Adnriga, 


And good and gracious Subhaia and Ritastup,—Come hither 
unto us, O Asvins, with those aids, 


21 Wherewith yeserved Krisinu where the shafts were shot, 
and helped the young man’s horse to swiftness in the race ; 


Wicrewith ye bring delicious honey to the bees,-Come hither 
unto us, O Asvins, with those aids. 


stronghold which the Asvins saved from burning, either throuch 
the irfetrumentality of a man called Jathara or by means of the rain- 
clouds He accordingly renders: § By means of which, at Pathard, thro- 
ugh the powor of Jathara (violence of tho rain-clouds) the fire did nob 
flame up though prepared and lighted on the way.’ The passayve is di- 
flic ult, and the. interpretations pub upon the words by Sayana certainly 
Appoar to be forced, but on the whole [ think it safer to follow his gui- 
dance. [ may obgerve here that 6nd,’ which in the Veda means both 
‘not’ and ‘ like” sometimes makes the meaning of a passage uncertain. 
Tn this line Sayana taken it in the latter sense, and Ludwig in the 
former. Sarydta : perhaps the same as Sarvati, a son of Manu Vai- 
vasvalta. 18 Angirases : the text has Angirag oe in the Singular 
form, which may stand, as Ludwig remarks, for the dual. Wilson, follow- 
ing Slyana, translates: § Angiras, (praise the Agvins).’ Sayan su ppos- 
es the Rishi to address himself by this title. Benfey joins angiras with 
the following word, making angiromdnasad : ‘through affection for the 
Angirasas’ 4 The flood of milk : the cows shut up in the cave, that 
is, tho rain-clouds prevented from pouring out water. Manes; : see 
vorse 16 Vimada : a Rishi, whose name occurs again in I, 116. 
1;117. 20; VITI 9.15; X 20. 10; aad X 23.7 The wife ie said to 
havo been the daughter of Curumitra. The ruddy cows: perhaps 
the red rain-cloude. Sudds : soa of Pijivana Seo I. 47. 7. 20. 
Bhujyn : see note ‘on verse 6, Adhrigu, taken by S{vana as a proper 
mime, is said to have bben a sacrificer of the Cuds, Ritastup i is called a 
Rishi. Sayana takes subhardm as an adjective, but has to supply ixham 
food, for it to qualify. 21 Hersdnw : the Keregini of the Avesta ; 

one of the guardians of the celestial Soma. See IV. 27, 3 The 
young man: whose horse was aided, wag Purukutsa., 


HTYMN 113} THE RICVEDA. *149 


99 Wherewith ye speed the hero as he tights for kin& in hero 
battle, in the strife for land ana sons, 
Wherewith yeesafely guard his horses and his car,—Come 
hither unto us, O Asvins, with thosctaids, 
93 Wherewith ye, Lords of Hundred powers, helped Kutsa, son 
of Arjuni, save Turviti and Dabhiti strength, 
Favoured Dhvasanti and lent Purushanti help, —Come hither 
unto us, O Asvins with those aids. 
2i Make ye our speech effectual, O ye Asvins, aud this our hymn, 
ye mighty Wonder- Workers. 
In luckless game I call on you for succour : strengthen us also 
on the field of battle. 
25 Wih undiminished blessings, QO ye Asvins, for evermore both 
“night and day protect us. 
This prayer of ours may Varuna grant, and Mitra, and Aditi 
and Sindhu, Karth and fleaven. . 
HYMN CXIII. Dawn. 


Tuts light is come, amid all lights the fairest ; born is the bril- 
liant, far-extending brightness. 
Night, sent uway for Savitar’s uprising, hath yielded up a bifth- 
place tor the Morning. 
2 The Fair, the Bright 1s come with her white offspring ; to her 
the Dark One hath resigned her dwelling. 
Akin, immortal, following each other, changing their colours 
both the heavens move onward. 
3 Common, unending is the Sisters’ pathway : taught by the 
(Jods, alternately they travel. 
Fair-formed, of different hues and yet one-minded, Night and 
Dawn clash not, neither do they tarry, | 
4 Bright leader of glad sounds, cour eyes behold her: splendid 
in hue she hath unclosed the portals 


23 Kutsa : has been mentioned before as a favourite of*lndra. See 
L 51. 6.) Turvita: sea I. 36. 18. Dabhitt : see II. 13. 9 315; 1V. 30. 
21: VI. 20. 13,26. 6. Purushantis a -ljberal prince. See IX.5 8 3. 
24 In luckless game: a metaphor borrowed from dicing ; that is, in a 
time of difliculty, perhaps the eve of a desperats battle Savana, follaw- 
ing a different derivation of the wood, explains it, in the absence of light, 


or in the last watch pf night, when the Asvins’ are especially to be wor- 


Shipped. ay , 

1 Savitar : the Sun. 2 Her white offspring sewhite clouds that 
attend her. Or the word in the text may be rendered ‘brigho offspring,’ 
the Sun whom she precedes. Both the heavens : or Day and Nighs. 


4 Leader of glad sounds : awakened of ‘the charm of earliest birds’ 
and the joyful voices of other animals. 


15) THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 1. 


She, Stirring up the world, halh shown us riches: Dawn hath 
awakened every living creature. 


5 Rich Dawn, she sets afoot the ceiled-up sleeper, one for enjoy- 
ment, one for wealth or worship, 


Those who saw little for extended vision. All living creatures 
hath the Dawn awakeued, 


6 One to high sway, one to exalted glory, one to pursue his gain 
and one his labour 5 


All to regard their different vocations, all moving creatures 
hatn the Dawn awakened. 


7 We see her there, the Child of Heaven, apparent, the young 
Maid,flushing in ber shining raiment. 


Thou sovran Lady of allearthly treasure, flush on us here: 
auspicious Dawn, this morning, 


8 She, first of endless morns to comc hereafter, follows the path 
of morns that have departed. 


Dawn, at her rising, urges forth the living: him who is dead 
e she wakes not from his slumber, 


9 As thou, Dawn, hast caused Agni to be kindled, and with the 
Sun’s eye hast revealed creation. 


And hast awakened men to offer worship, thou hast performed, 
for Gods, a noble service. 


10 How long atime, and they shall be togcther.—Dawns that 
have shone and Dawns to shine hereafter ? 


She yearns for former Dawns with eager longing, and goes forth 
gladly shining with the others. 


11 Gone are the men who in the days before us looked on the 
rising of the earlier Morning. 


We, we the living, now behold her brightness, and they come 
nigh who shali hereafter see her. 


renner 

5 Thos who saw little : dusing the darkness of night, 6 Thie 
verse apparently alludes to a divieion into four castes or classes, regal 
and military, priestly, mercantile, and servile. But verses 4, 5, 6 seem 
to be atin by their refrain ffom the rest of the hymn, and may 
perhaps be a later addition to it 9 Caused Agni to be kindled: 
daybreak being the proper time fbr, lighting the sacrificial fires. 10, 
The meaning appears to be : How long have we to live ? When will all 
our euiure Dawnge he witb those that have passed away ? Wilson, follow- 
ing Sayana, translates: ‘For how long a period is it that the dawns have 
risen? For how long 4 period will they rise? She yearns: the 
Dawn that now shines as the first of Dawns to come is already eager 
to Join those that have puso. 


HYMN 113.) THE RIGVEDA., 151 


12 Foe-chaser,born of Law,the Law’s protectress, joy-giver, waker 
of all pl: asant voices, 
Auspicious, bringing food for Gods’ enjoyment, shine on us 
here, most braht, O Dawa, this morning. 
13 From days eternal hath Dawn shone, the Goddess, and shows 
this light to-day, endowed with riches. 
So will she shine on days to come; immortal she moves on in 
her own strength, undecaying. 
14 In the sky’s borders hath she shone in spendour: the Goddess 
hath thrown off the veil of darkness. 
Awakening the world with purple horses, on her well-harnessed 
chariot Dawn approaches. 


15 Bringing all life-sustaining blessings with her, showing herself 
she sends forth brilliant lustre. 
Last of the countless mornings that have vanished, first of 
bright morns to come hath Dawn arisen . 


16 Arise! the breath, the life, again hath reached us : darkness 
hath passed: away, and light approacheth. 
She for the Sun hath left a path to travel: we have arrived 
where men prolong existence. @ 
17 Singing the praises of refulgent Mornings with his hymn’s web 
the priest, the poet, rises. 
Shine then to-day, rich Maid, on him who lauds thee, shine 
down on us the gift of life and offspring. 
18 Dawns giving sons all heroes, kine und horses, shining upon 
the man who brings oblations, — 
These let the Soma-presser gain when cnding his glad songs 
louder than the voice of Vayu. 
19 Mother of Gods, Aditi’s form of glory, ensign of sacrifice, shine 
forth exalted, 
Rise up, bestowing praise on our devotion : all. bounteous, make 
us chief among the people, 
2) Whatever splendid wealth the Dawns bring with them to bless 


thé man who offers praise and .worship, . 
Even that may Mitra, Varuna vouchsafe us, and Aditi and 
Sindhu, Earth and Heaven, “ 


_ 12 Evil epirits vanish when Dawn appears,. She comes in accordance 

with the eternal law of the univerge which she observes and guards. 
‘ Her coming is the signal for men to offer oblations to the Gods. 16 
Where men prolong. existence: a new life begins At the return of day-’ 
light, 17 His hymn’s web: the words which he weaves, or carefully 
composes. 18 Louder than the voice of Vayu: louder even than 
the roaring of the wind. Wilson translates: ‘At the conclusion of his 
Praises, (enunciated), like the wind, (with speed).. 


159. THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 1. 
¢ HYMN CXIV, Rudra, 


To the strong Rudra bring we these our songs of praise, to 
him the Lord of Heroes, with the braided hair, 


That it be well with all our cattle and our men, that in this 
village all be healthy and well-fed. 
2 Be gracious unto us, O Rudra, bring us joy; the, Lord of 
Heroes, thee with reverence will we serve. 


Whatever health and strength our father Manu won by sacrifice 
may we, under thy guidance, gain. 
3 By worship of the Gods may we, O Bounteous One, O Kudra, 
gain thy grace, Ruler of valiant men. 


Come tv our families, bringing them bliss; may we, whose 
heroes are uninjured, bring thee sacred gifts. 
4 Hither we call for aid the wise, the wanderer, impetuous Rudra 
perfecter of sacrifice, 
May he repel! from us the anger of the Gods ; verily we desire 
his favourable grace, 
5 lim with the braided hair we call with reverence down, the 
wild boar of the sky, the red, the dazzling shape. 
May he, his hand filled full of sovran medicines, grant us pro« 
tection, shelter, and a home secare. , 
6 To him the Maruts’ Father is this hymn addressed, to streng- 
' then Rudra’s might, a song more sweet than sweet, 
Gracious unto me, my secd, my progeny. 
7 O Rudra, harm not cither great or small of us, harm not the 
growing boy, harm not the full-grown man. 


Slay not a sire among us, slay no mother here, and to our 
own dear bodies, Rudra, do not harm, 


8 Harm us not, Rudra, in our sced and progeny, harm us not 
in the living, nor in cows or steeds. 


Slay not our heroes in the fury of thy wrath. Bringing 
oblations evermore we Goll to thee. 2 


1 Rudra: generally explained as the Roarer,' from the sound of 
stormy winds, the God of tempests ard father of the Maruts He is callod 
Aeparcdin xs wearing chair braided and kuotted like a cowry shell (Aa- 
parda). Prof Pischel (Vedische Studien, I. 55. sqq ) derives fudra 
(the Red, the Brilliant) from a lost root red, to be red. 2 Won 
by sacrefice : that is, as an institutor of earliest sacrifice, enabled us to 
obtain by offeringy to the Gods, 


HYMN 115,) THE RIGVEDA. 153 


9 Even as a herdsman I have brought thee hymns of spraisc : 
O Father of the Maruts, give us happiness, 
Blessed is thy most favouring benevolence, so, verily, do we 
desire thy saving help. ° : 
10 Far be thy dart that killeth men or cattle : thy bliss be with 
us, O thou Lord of Heroes, 
Be gracious unto us, O God, and bless us and then vouchsafe 
us doubly-strong protection, 
11 We, seeking help, have spoken and adored him: may Rudra, 
girt by Maruts, hear our calling. _ 
This prayer of ours may Varuna grant, and Mitra, and Adit 
and Sindhu, Karth and Heaven. 


HYMN CXV. Sirys. 


Tue brilliant presence of the Gods hath risen, the eye of 
Mitra, Varuna and Agni, 
The soul of all that moveth not or moveth, the Sun fiath 
filled the air and earth and heaven. 
2 Like asa young man followeth a maiden, sodoth the Sun 
the Dawn, refulecnt Geddess : 
Where pious men extend their generations, before the 
Aispicious One for hippy fortune. . 
3 Anspicious are the Sun’s Bay-coloured Horses, bright, chan. 
ging hues mect for our shouts of triumph. 
Boarmg our prayers, the sky’s ridge have they mounted, and 
in a moment speed round earth and heaven. ’ 
4 This is the Godhead, this the might of Surya: he hath 
withdrawn what spread o'er work unfinished. 
When he hath loosed his Horses from their stution, straight 
over all Night spreadeth out her garment, 


9 ven as a herdsman : as a herdsinan prays for the well-being of 
his eattle, so the poet prays for the prosperity of those for whom he 


speaks. 
Py 


2 Theeexact meaning of the second line is somewhat uncertain. Ag 
T have rendered it, in accordance with Ladwig, it reminds one of She- 
ley’s, Man, the imperial shape, then multipliedyHis generations under 
the pavilion of the Sun’s throne.’ Wilson, following SAyana, paraphra- 
ses, ‘At, which season pious men perform (the geremonies established 
for) ages.’ Sayana propores an alternative rendering by takinig yugant 
(ene rations, ages,) 0 mean ‘yokes Sor, at this season, men seeking ta 
propitiate the gods by the profit which agriculture® yields, equip their 
«ploughs, ‘4 He hath withdrawn : that is, says Wilson, ‘the cultivator 
or artisan dosisty from his labour, althouyh unfinished, upon the setiing 
of the sun has withdrawn (into bimself) the diffused (light which has 
Leon shad) upon the unfinished task,’ 


20 ; 


154 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 1, 


§ In the sky’s lap the Sun this form assumeth that Varuna and 
Mitra may behold it. 
His Bay Steeds well maintain his power eternal, at one time 
bright and darksome at another, "i 
6 This day, O Gods, ‘while Sirya is ascending, deliver us from 
trouble and dishonour. 7 
This prayer of ours may Varuna grant, and Mitra, and Aditi 
and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven. 
HYMN CXVI, Asvins, 
I rrim like grass my song for the Nasatyas, and send their 
lauds forth as the wind drives rain clouds, 
Who, in a chariot rapid as an arrow, brought to the yonthful 
Vimada, a consort, 
2 Borne on by rapid steeds of mighty pinion, or proudly trust- 
ing in the Gods’ incitements, 
That stallion ass of yours won, O Nasatyas, that thousand in 
the race, in Yama’s contest. 
3 Yes, Asvins, as a dead man leaves his riches, Tugra left Bhuj- 
yu in the cloud of waters. 
Ye brought him back in animatcd vessels, traversing air, un 
‘ wetted by the billows. 
4 Bhujyu ye bore with winged things, Nasatyas, which for threo 
nights, three days full swiftly travelled, 


To the sea’s farther shore, the strand of ocean, in three cars, 
hundred-footed, with six horses. 


) Ye wrougt that hero exploit in the ocean which giveth no 
support, or hold, or station, 


What time ye carried Bhujyu to his dwelling, borne in a ship 
with hundred oars, O Asvins. 


5 I[ts power eternal, as maker and ruler of day and night. 


This Hymn and five following are ascribed to the Rishi Kakshivan. 
1 Grass: the sacred grass which is spread on the altar. Ndsatyas : 
a common name of the Aavins. Sea I. 3. 3. Vimada : the Asving 
assisted Vimada, who was attacked when returning home with his 
newly-won bride, whom they carried to his house in their own chariot. 
Most of the deeds ascrived to the Asving in this hymn have been men- 
tioned in I, 112. 2 Stallion asa: that drawe tha car of the Agvine. 
See [ 34 9. Yama’s contest: apparently the race instituted by 
‘the Gods when Prajipati (here represented by Yama) gave his daughter 
Stiryad in marriage to King Soma, the Moon, as related in Aitareya- 
Brahmana, IV, 2. See Ehni, Der Mythus des Yama, p. 160. 
Bhujya : see I. 112, 6. 


intelligible account of & sea-voyage, aluhough the words of the text do 
not admit ‘of any other rendering.’ 


5 ‘This,’ ohserves Wilson, ‘is a rather un- 


at 


HYMN 116) THE RIGVEDA. 155 


6 The white horse which of old ye gave Aghasva, Asvins, a gift 
to be his wealth for ever, — 
Still to be prat&ed is that ° your gtoriops present, still to ba 
famed is the brave horse of Pedu. 


7 O Heroes, ye gave wisdom to Kakshivan who sprang from 
Pajra’s line, who sang your praises. 

¥e poured forth from. the hoof of your strong charger a hun. 
dred jars of wine as from a strainer 


8 Ye warded off with cold the fire’s fierce burning ; food very 
rich.in nourishment ye furnished. 
Atri, cast downward in the cavern, Asvins, ye brought, with 
all his people, forth to comfort. 


9 Ye lifted up the well, O. ye Nasatyas, and not the base on high 
to open downward. 
Streams flowed for folk ofGotama who thirsted, like rain to 
bring forth thousandfold abundance. 


1G Ye from the old Chyavina, O Nasatyas, stripped, as ’twere 
mail, the skin upon his body, 
Lengthenced his life when all had left him helpless, Dasrag! 
and made him lord of youthful maidens. 


11 Worthy of praise and worth the winning, Heroes, is that yoar 
favouring succour, O Nasatyas, 
What time ye, knowing well his case, delivered Vandana fr om. 
tbe pit like hidden treasure- 


12 Thot mighty dced of yours, for gain, O Heroes, as thunder 
heraldeth the rain, I publish, 
When, by the horse's head, Atharvan’s offspring Dadbyach 
made known tu you the Soma’s sweetness. 


6 Agdsva : another name of Pedu; or an epithet of Pedu ‘having 
bad or vicious horses.’ Pedu was a royal Rishi who worshipped the 
Asvins and was thus rewarded. 7 Kakshivan: afamous Rishi, 
(see I. 18. 1.) a descendant of the Pajras or Angirases. Strong charger: 
that is, the rushing rain-cloud, from -which the Asvins poured down 
eopious showers. Cf. the Greek myth of the horse Pegasus and the 
horss Pegasus and the fountain Hippoorene. *° 8 Atrt: see I. 112. 7, 
9 The well: that is the watery sloud. This deed is ascribed to the 
Maruts io I. 85. 11. 10 Dasras : a namé of the Asving ¢ Wonder- 
Workers, or Mighty Ones. 1}* Vandana: see I. 112. 5. 12 
By the horses head: Indra, having taught the sciences called Pravar- 

gyavidyd and Madhuvtdyd to Dadhyach, threatened that he wonld out 

off his head if ever he taught them to any one else. The Agvine pre- 
vailed upon bim to teach them the prohibited knowledge,and, to evade 
Indra’s threat, took off the bead of the sage, replacing it by that of a 
horse.’— Wilson. See I, 84. 13. 


156 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 1. 


13 In tke great rite the wise dame called, Nasatyas, you,Lords 
of many treasures, to assist her. 


Ye heard ths weakling’s wife, as ’twere an:order, and gave to 
her a son Hiranyahasta. 
14 Ye from the wolf's jaws, as ye stood together, set free the quail, 
O Herves, O Nasatyas. 
Ye, Lords of many treasares, gave the poet his perfect vision 
as he mourned his trouble. 


15 When in the time of night in Khela’s battle, a leg was severed 
like a wild bird’s pinion, 
Straight ye gave Vispalia leg of iron that she might move 
what time the conflict cpened. 


16 His father robbed Rijrasva of his eye-sight who for the she-wolf 
slew a handred wethers. 


A 


Ye gave him eyes, Nasatyes, Wonder- Workers, Physicians, that 
he saw with sight uninjared. 


17 The Daughter of the Sun your car ascended, first reaching as 
it were the goal with coursers. 


Ail Deities within their hearts assented, and ye, Nasatyas are 
close linked with glory. 


18 When’ to his house ye came, to Divodisa hasting to Bharad- 
vaja, O ye Asvins, 


The car that came with you brough: splendid riches : a por. 
poise and a bull were yoked together. 


13 The Weakling’s wife : or Vadhrimati which has that maaning. 
14 Set free the quuil : see T, 112 8. LD Ahula’s battle: the Com- 
mentator says that Khela was a Raji, whose relative V gpald lost a foot 
in battle and received an iron Jeg from the Agvins at the prayer of 
Agastya, Khela’s family priest. See I. 112. 10. 16 Rigrigva, wen- 
tioned in [. 101.17. was one of-the sons of Vrishgvir. The she-wolf 
for whom he slaughtered the sheep was cne of the asses of the Asvins 
in divyuise, and the Asvens consequontly restored to him the eyesight 
of which his angry fathor had deprived him 17 The Daughter of 
the Sun.‘ Sarya, it is related, was desirous of giving his daughter Saryd 
to Soma; but all the gods desired-her as a wife. They agreed that he. 
who should hirst reach the sun, as a “goal, should wed the damsel. The 
Asvins were Victorious ; and Siirya, well pleased by their success, rushed 
immediately into their chariot..—Wilson See note on verse 2 of this” 
hymn. 18 Devoddsa : see I, 112. 14. His family priest was one of 


the Bharadvajas. The Agvins, it is said, yoked the porpoise and the 
bull togethor as a proof of power. 


HYMN 117} THE RIGVKEDA. 157 


19 Ye, bringing wealth with rale, and life with offspring, life rich 
in noble heroes, O Nasatvas, 
Accordant cameewith strenggh to Jahnu’s children who offered 
you thrice every day your portion. ¢ 
20 Ye bore away at night by easy pathways Jahusha compassed 
round on every quarter, 
And, with your car that cleaves the foe asunder, Nasatyas 
neer decaying ! rent the mountains, 
21 One morn yestrengthened Vasa for the battle, to gather,spoils 
that mivht be told in thousands. 
With ‘Indra joined ye drove away misfortunes, yea, foes of 
Prithusravas, O ye Mighty. 
22 From the deep well ye raised on high the water, so that Rich- 
atka’s son, Sara, should drink it ; P 
And with your might, to help the weary Sayu, ye made the 
barren cow yield milk, Nisatyas. 
23 To Visvaka. Nasatyas! son of Krishna, the righteous man 
who sought you: aid and praised you, ; 
Ye with your powers restored, like some lost creature, his son 
Vishnapu for his eyes to look on. 
Z4 Asvins, ye raised, like Soma in a ladle, Rebha, who for ten 
days and ten nights, fettered. 
Had Jain in cruel bonds,immersed and wounded, suffering 
sore affitction, in the waters, 
25 I have declared your wondrous dceds, O Asvins: may this be 
mine, and many kine and heroes, 
May I, enjoying lengthened life, still seeing, enter old age 
as twere the house l live in. 
HYMN CXVII, Asvins, 
Asvins, your ancicnt priest invites yon hither to gladden you 
With draughts of meath, of Soma. 
Onr gift is on the grass, our song apportioned: with food and 
strength come hither, O Nasatyas. ¢ 


ee ee 


Ll Jahnu’s children : Jabou was a Maharshi or great Rishi. 21 
Vasa: see 1. 112, 10. Prithusravas appears to be identioal with Pri- 
thusravas Kanita, mentioned in VIIT 46 21, whose family priest was 
Vasa. 22 Sayw: has been mentioned in Ty 112. 16. Of Sara in 
" this verse and of Vigvaka, Krishna, and VishnApu ‘in the next we are 
only told that they wore Rishis 24 Rebha: soo I. 112. 5 25 
May this be mine; may I be master of this place or district, a substan- 
tive of some such signification being understood. 


158° THE HYMNS OP [BOOK 1. 


2 That‘car of yours, swifter than thought, O Asvins, which 
drawn by brave steeds cometh to the people, 
Whereon ye seek the dwelling of the pious,.~come ye thereon 
to our abode, O Heroes. 


3 Ye freed sage Atri, whom the Five Tribes honoured, from the 
strait pit, ye Heroes, with his people, 
Bathing the guiles of the malignant Dasyu, repelling them, ye 
Mighty, is succession. 
4 Rebha the sage, ye mighty Heroes, Asvins! whom, like a 
horse, vile men had sunk in water, — 
Him, wounded, with your wondrous powers ye rescued: your 
exploits of old time endure for ever, 


5 Ye brought forth Vandana, ye Wondcr- Workers, for triumph 
like fair gold that hath been buried, 

Like one who slumbered in destruction’s bosom, or like the 
Sun when dwelling in the darkness. 


6 Kakshivan, Pajra’s son, must laud that exploit of yours, 
Nasatyas, Heroes, ye who wander ! 
When from the hoof of your strong horse ye showered a 
hundred jars of honey for the people. 
7 To Krishna’s son, to Visvaka who praised you, O Heroes, ye 
restored his son Vishnapu. 
To Ghosh, living in her father’s dwelling stricken in ycars 
ye gave a husband, Asvins. 
8 Rushati, of the mighty people, Asvins, ye gave to Syava of 
the line of Kanva. 
This deed of yours, ye Strong Ones. should be published, that 
ye gave glory to the son of Nrishad, 
9 O Asvins, wearing many forms at pleasure, on Pedu ye bestow- 
ed a fleet-foot courser, 
Strong, winner ofa thousand spoils, resistless, the serpent- 
slayer, glorious, triumphant. 


3 Atri: see I. 116 8. The Five Tribes : are the confederate Aryan 
families named in the note tol 7.9. “ 4 Hebha: seal 112. 5. Lerke 
a horse: sunk deep in water like a horse when he ie bathed in a river. 
& Vandana: see I, 116. 11. 6 *Kakshivdn: see IT 116.7. Strong 
horse: seo I. 116 7. 1 Ghoshd: Kakshévan’e daughter, said to 
have been afflicted with leprosy and healed by the Agvins, who found 
her a hushand. 8 Syavd + a Rishi whom the Agvins cured of leprosy, 
and enabled to marry Rushati The son of Nrizshad: Kanva or his 
descendant Syava. 9 Pein: ceo I 116. 6. The serpent-slayer : soe 
X. 88 4, and Hymne of the Atharva-veda, X 4 47, 


HYMN 117.) THE RIGVEDA, 159 


10 These glortous things are yours, ye Bounteous Givers ; prayer, 
praise in both worlds are your habitation. , 


O Asvins. when the sons of Pajra call you, send strength with 
nourishment 40 him who-knoweth, 


11 Hymned with the reverence of a son, O Asvins, ye Swift Ones 
giving booty to the singer, : 
Glorified by Agastya with devotion, established Vispala again, 
Nasatyas. 


12 Ye Sons of Heaven, ye Mighty, whither went ye, sought ye 
for his fair praise the home of Kavya, 


When, like pitcher full of gold, O Asvins, on the tenth day 
ye lifted up the buried ? 


13 Ye with the aid of your great powers, O Asvins, restored to 
youth the ancient man Chyavana. 


The Daughter of the Sun with all her glory, O ye Nisatyas, 
ehose your car to bear her. 
14 Ye, ever youthful Ones, again remembered Tugra. according 
to your ancient manner ; 


With '‘orses brown of hue that flew with swift wings, ye 
brought back Bhujyu from the sea of billows, 


15 The son of Tugra had invoked you, Asvins; borne on he went 
uninjured through the ocean. 


Ye with your chariot swift as thought, well-harnessed, carried 
him off, O Mighty Ones, to safety. 


16 The quail had invocated you, O Asvins, when from the wolf's 
devouring jaws ye freed her. 


With conquering car ye cleft the mountain's ridges ; the off- 
spring of Visvach ye killed with poison, 


17 He whom for furnishing 4 hundred wethers to the she-wolf, 
his wicked father blinded. — 


To him, Rijrasva, gave ye eyes, O Asvins ; light to the blind 
fe sent for perfect vision. 


11 Agastya: the family oriest of Khela, See T. 116. 15. 12 
Kavya: Usara, son of Kavi. see. I. 836. Theburied: Rebha. The 
meaning is, ‘why did yeadelay so long the rescue of Rebha?’ 13 
Chyavana : see I. 116. 10. The Daughter of the Sun: seo I, 116. 17. 
14 Ye brought back Bhujyw: see l. 116 3. 16 The quail : see T. 
116. 3. Visvdch: said to be an Asura or fiend. 17 Pijrdsva: 
see | 116. 16. : 


160 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 1. 


18 ‘I'o bring the blind man joy thus eried the she-wolf: O Asvins, 
O ye Mighty Ones, O Heroes, 
For me Rijrasvalikea youthful lover, hath cut piecemeal one 
and a hundred wethers- c o 
19 Great and weal-giviug is your aid, O Asvins, ye objects of all 
thonght, made whole the cripple, 
Purandhi also for this cause invoked you, and ye, O Mighty, 
came to her with succoars. 
20 Yo, Wonder- Workers, filled with milk for Sayu the milkless 


cow, emaciated, barren ; 


And by your powers the child of Purumitra ye brought to 
Vimada to be his consort. 


21 Ploughing and sowing barley, O ye Asvins, milking out food 
for men, ye Wonder- Workers, 
Bla ting away the Dasyu with your trumpet, ye gave far-spread 
ing light unto the Arya. 
22 Ye brought the horse’s head, Asvins, and gave it unto Dadh- 
yach the offspring of Atharvan. 


Truc, he revealed to you, O Wonder-Workers, sweet Soma, 
Tvashtar’s secret, as your girdle. 
23 O Sages, evermore I crave your favour : be gracious unto all 
my prayers, O Asvins. 
Grant me, Nasatyas, riches in abundance, wealth famous and 
accompanied with children. 
24 With liberal bounty to the weakling’s consort ye, Herocs, gave 
a son Hiranyahasta ; 
And Syava, cut into three several pieces, ye brought to life 
avain, O bounteous Asvins. 
2o These your herote exploits, O ye Asvins, donc in the days of 
old, have men related. . 


May we, addressing prayer to you, ye Mighty, speak with 
brave sons about us to the synod. 


19 Purandhi: ov as Sdyana explains, ‘the wise maid,’ Ghosha. 
20 Sayw:see I. 112,16; andI 116 22. Vimadat see I 112 19. 
22 Darhyach: see ¥. 116 12. As your girdle: to strengthen and sup- 
port you, 2& The weakling’s consort: see I, 116.13. Syavd: cut 
to pieces by the Asuras, was made whole by the Aavins. 25 Zhe 


Synod: the congregation of worshippers, 


HYMN 118.) THE RIGVEDA, 161 
HYMN CXVIII. Asvins. 


FiyinG, with falcons, may your chariot, Asvins, most gracious, 
bringing friengly help, cqgme hither, — 

Your chariot, swifter than the mind ef mortal, fleet as the 
wind, three-seated, O ye Mighty. 


2 Come to us with your chariot triple seated, three-wheeled, of 
triple form, that rolleth lightly. 

Fill full our cows, give mettle to our horses, and make each 
hero son grow strong, O Asvins. 


3 With your well-rolling car, descending swiftly, hear this the 
press-stone’s song, ye Wonder- Workers, 
How then have ancient sages said, O Asvins, that ye most 
swiftly come to stay affliction ! 


4 O Asvins, let your falcons bear you hither, yoked to pu 
chariot, swift, with flying pinions, 
Which, ever active, like the airy eagles, carry you, O Nasatyas, 
to the banquet, 


9 The youthful Daughter of the Sun,delighting in you,ascend- 
ed there your chariot, Heroes. 
Borne on their swift wings let your beauteous horses.your 
birds of ruddy hue, convey you near us. 


6 Ye raised up Vandana, strong Wonder- Workers ! with great 
might, and with power ye rescued Rebha, 
From out the sea ye saved the son of Tugra, and gave hjs 
youth again unto Chyavana. 


7 To Atri, cast down to the fire that scorched him, ye gave, O 
Asvins, strengthening food and favour. 
Accepting his fair praises with approval, ye gave his eyes again 
to blinded Kanva. 


8 For aricient Sayu in his sore affliction ye caused his cow to 
swell with milk, O Asvins. 
The quail from her great misery ye delivered, and a new leg 
foy Vispala provided, 


9 A white horse, Asvins, ye bestowed on Pedu, a serpent-slaying 
steed sent down by Indra, 
Loud- -neighing, conquering, the foe, high- mettled, firm limbed 
and vigorous, winning thousand tressures. ‘ 


10 Such as ye are, 0 nobly born, O Heroes, we in our trouble call 
on you for succour. 


tt nero eeretanonntneeanenesinsinannatknnt erent iatnenstrastersinnnase sniper aes ce 
5 In this and the following verses most of the wondeaful deeds of 
the Agsvine mentioned in the precediag hymn are briefly referred to. 


21 


| re 


162 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK I. 


a 
Accepting these our songs, for our well-being come to us on 
your chariot treasure-laden. 


11 Come unto us combined in love, Nasatyas; come with the fresh 
swift vigour of the falcon, 
Bearing shiaticne Tinvoke yon, Asvins, at the first break of 
everlasting morning, 


HYMN CXIX. _ ABSVins, 


Hiratr, that I may live, I call unto the feast your wondrous 
car, thought-swift, borne on by rapid steeds, 

With thousand banners, hundred treasures, pouring gifts, 
promptly obedient, bestowing ample room. 


2 Even as it moveth near my hymn is lifted up, and all the re- 
gions come together to sing praise, 
I sweeten the oblations ; now the helpers come , -Urjani hath, 
O Asvins, mounted on your car. 


3 When striving man with man for glory they have met, brisk 
measureless, eager for victory in fight, 
Then verily your car is seen upon the slope when ye, O Asvins 
bring some choice boon to the prince. 


4 Ye come to Bhujyu while he struggled in the flood with flying 
bird, self-yoked, ye bore him to his sires, 
Ye went to the far-distant home, O Mighty Ones ; and famed 
is your great aid to Divodasa given. 


© Axvins, the car which you had yoked for glorious show your 
own two voices urged directed to its goal. 
Then she who came for friendship, Maid on noble birth, elected 
you as Husbands, you to be her Lords, 


6 Rebha, ye saved from tyranny; for Atri’s sake ye quenched 
with cold the fiery pit that compassed him. . 
Ye made the cow of Sayn stream refreshing milk, and Van. 
dana was holpen to extended life, 


2 Urjunt: strength, personified. According tu Sgyana, Urjant is 
Baryi the daughter of the Sun. . 3 Upon the slope: that is, of 
the sky. 4 Bhujyu.: and other persons and incidents referred to 
this hymn have been mentioned in I. 116, 5 She who came for 
friendship : siya. The meaning seems to be, as Ludwig says, thab 
ahe came intending to avail herself of the services of the Asvins as 
birdsmen and that they became her bridegroome instead. 


HY MN 120.) THE RIGVEDA. 263 


7 Doers of marvels, skilful workers, ye restored Vandana? like a 
car, worn out with length of days. 
From earth ye kgought the gage to life in wondrous mode: 
be your great deeds done here for him*who honours you. 
S Ye wens to;him who mourned in a far distant place, him who 
was left forlorn by treachery of his sire. 
Rich with the light of heaven was then the help ye gave, and 
marvellous your succour when ye stood by him. 
9 To you in praise of sweetness sang the honey-bee: Ausija 
calleth you in Soma’s rapturous joy. 
Ye drew unto yourselves the spirit of Dadhyach, and then the 
horse’s head attered his words to you. 


10 A horse did ye provide for Pedu, excellent, white, O ye Asvins, 
conqueror of combatants. 
Invincible in war by arrows, seeking heaven, worthy of Zkwe, 
like Indra, vanquisher of men. 


HYMN CXX. ASvVins. 
Asvins, what praise may win your grace? Who may be plea. 
sing to you both? ; 
How shall the ignorant worship you? ° 


2 Here let the ignorant ask the means of you who know—for 
none beside you knoweth aught — 
Not of spiritless mortal man. 


3 Such as ye are, all-wisc, we call you. Ye wise, declare to u8 
this day accepted prayer. 
Loying you well your servant lauds you. 


8 To him who mourned: Bhujyu. 9 The honey-bee: meaning 
Ausija or the son of Usij, the sage Kakebivan. 


With regard to the legends recounted in these hymns to the Asvins, 
Mr. Muir remarks (OQ. 8. Zexts, V. 248): * Tha deliverances of Rebha, 
Vandana, Paravrij, Bhujyu, Chyavina, and others are eXplained by 
.Professo® Benfey (following Dr. Kuhn and Professur Mullgr,) as refer- 
ring to certain physical phenomena with? which the Agvins are supposed 
by these scholars to be connected. But this allegorical method of inter- 
pretation seems unlikely to be correct, as it is difficult to suppose that 
the phenomena in question should have bsen, alluded to under such a 
variety of names and*ciroumstanoes, It appears, therefor to be more 
‘popularly current of interventions of the Agvius in behglf of the persons 


whose names are mentioned.: a : a 
aims ’ 

Parts of the Hymn are difficult and obscure. The first nine stanzas 

are in nine differant metres, 2 Inline 2 I adopt Ludwig's em- 


endation akratau for dkray of the text. 


164 THE AYMNS OF (BOOK 1. 


4 Simpky, ye Mighty Ones, I ask the Gods of that wondrous 
oblation hallowed by the mystic word. 
Save us from what is stronger, Aercer thar ourselves. 


6 Forth go the hymn that shown in Ghosha Bhrigu’s like, the 
soug wherewith the sou of Pajra worships you, 
Lik some wise minister. 


6 Hear ye the song of him who hastens speedily. O Asvins, I 
am he who sang your praise. — 
Hither, ye Lords of Splendour, hither turn your eyes, 


7 For ye were ever nigh to deal forth amplo wealth, to give th: 
wealth that ye had gathered up. 


As such, ye Vasus, guard us well, and keep us safely from the 
wicked world. 


8 Give us not up to any man who hateth us, nor let our milch- 
vows stcay, whose udders give us food, 
Far from our homes without their calves, 


9 May they who love you gain you for their Friends. Prepare ya 
us for opulence with strengthening food, 
‘Prepare us for the food that tloweth from our cows. 


10 I have obtained the horseless car of Asvins rich in sacrifice, 
And I am well content therewith. 


1) May it convey me evermore: may'the light chariot pass from 
men 


‘ To men unto the Soma draught. 


12 {t holdeth slumber in contempt, and the rich who enjoyeth 
Not : 


Both vanish quickly and are lost. | 
HYMN CxXXI, Indra, 


Wuen will men’s guardians hasting boar with favour the song 
of Angiras’s pious children ? 

When tp the people of the home he cometh, he strideth to the 
sacrifice, the Holy. 


feet ONE? RSS to See Wet te i ee 


2 Hallowed by the mystic word: by the exclamation vdshat, used in 
making au oblation to a‘dod with fire. This word is of the most essen: 
tial importance in sacrifice, but if carelessly and incousiderately used its 
effacte are. deadly against these the Rishi praye fon protection. D. 
Ghosha: Sayans says that Suhasiys, the sun of Ghosha, is intended. 


The son of Pajra: one of the descendants of the Augirases; here, ac- 
cording to Sayan, the Rishi Kakshivan. 


eu 


In thie Hymn, as in the preceding, there are several very obscure 
pase ages which cau only conjecturally be translated and explained, 


HYMN 121) THE RIGVEDA. 165 


2 He established heaven; he poared forth, skilful worker, . the 
wealth of kine, for strength, that nurtures horoes. : 
The Mighty One his self-born host regarded, the horse’s mate, 
the mother of the heifer. 


3 Lord of red dawns, he came victorious, daily to the Angirases’ 
former invocation. | 
His bolt and team hath he prepared, and established the heaven 
for quadrupeds and men two-footed, 


4 In joy of this thou didst restore, for worship, the lowing com- 
pany of hidden cattle. 
When the three-pointed one descends with onslaught he opens 
wide the doors that cause man trouble, wy 


5 Thine is that milk which thy swift-moving Parents brought 
down, a strengthening genial gift for conquest ; 
When the pure treasure untu thee they offered, the milk shed 
from the cow who streameth nectar, _ 


6 There is he born. May the Swift give us rapture, and like the 
Sun shine forth from yonder dawning, 
Indu, even us who drank, whose toils are offerings, poured 
from the spoon, with praise, upon the altar, 


2 The Mighty One: Indra is here said to have regarded or looked 
on the host born from, or produced by him, that is, perhaps, the heaven 
and the earth in general. Specially has he regarded the animals in 
which the wealth of the people chiefly consists, among which the mare 
and the cow naturally hold the chief place. Ludwig would read mdta- 
ram gdm iastead of mdatdram géh. He thinks that the mate of the 
horse (Sirya) is the earth the motherly cow. Sayanasaya that Indra 
in spoto made a mare bring forth a calf, and Wigon following him 
translates: ‘he made the female of tha horse unnaturally the mother 
of the cow.’ 4 In joy of this: in the rapture arising from driok- 
‘ving this Soma juice. The loving company of hidden cattle: tha 
rain-clouds curried off and kept concealed by the Panie. he three 
pointed one: appatently tha thunderbolt. Sadyana takes jt to mean 
Indra (elevated as a triple crest in the three worlds). He: Indra, 
5 Thy xwift-moving parents: Heaven and Karsh. 6 The Swift: 
the swiftly flowing and efficacious Indu or Soma. «| Whose toile are 
offerings ; whose drops of sweat, a8 we Jabouc in our eacred duties, cound 
as obluvions to the Gods whom we serve. From yonder dawn- 
ing: probably an indication of time only. 


166: , THE HYMNS OF [BOOK t.- 


7 When she-wood-pile, made of good logs, is ready, at the Sun's — 
worship to bind fast the Bullock, 
Then when thou shinest forth through daygof action for the 
Car-borne, the Swi't, the Cattle-seeker. 


8 Bight steeds thou broughtest down from mighty heaven, when 
fighting for the well that giveth splendour, | 
That men might press with stoncs the gladdening yellow, 
strengthened with milk, fermenting, to exalt thee. 


9 Thou hurledst forth from heaven the iron missile, brought by 
the Skilful, from the sling of leather, 
When thou, O Much-invoked, assisting Kutsa with endless 
deadly darts didst compass Sushna. 


10 Bolt-armed, ere darkness overtook the sunlight, thou castest 
at the veiling cloud thy weapon, 
T.3 rentest, out of heaven,though firmly knotted the might 
‘of Sushna that was thrown around him, 


11 The mighty Heaven and Earth, those bright expanses that 
have no wheels, joyed, Indra, at thine exploit. 
Vritra, the boar who lay amid the waters, to sleep thou sentest 
with thy mighty thunder. 


12 Mount Indra, lover of the men thou guardest, the well-yoked 
horses of the wind, best bearers. 
The bolt woich Kavya Usana erst gave thee, strong, gladden- 
ing Vritra-slaying, hath he fashioned, , 


‘|e 


13 The strong Bay Horses of the Sun thou stayedst : this Htasa 
drew not the wheel, O Indra. 

Casting them forth beyond the ninety rivers thou dravest 
down into the pit the godless, 


7 To bind fast the Bullock : the Bullock is the ‘Sun himself : the Sacri- 
fice is secure the blessings of sunlight. Siyana explains: the priest is 
competent forsthe attachment of the animal to the stake. The Car- 
borne, the Swift, the Cattle-seeker : apparently appellations of Indra.e 8 
The well that giveth splendour :thessloud that sheda fertilizing rain, The 
yellow : tha Soma juice, 9 The Skilfut : Tvashtar. Kdvya Usana, : see 
I. 51 10. 13 The firfs hemistich of this stanza is most difficult, 
and { do not see how it can be satisfactorily translated and explained. 
I have followed Grasgmann who traasiatas: ‘Du liessest ruin der Soone 
rtarke Rosse, nicht zog der Renner mghr ibr Rad, O Indra’. If this be 
the meaning, the réferepca may be, perhaps, tu an eclipses of the syn. 
Elasa: appears ina double churacter, firet as a sacrificer who offered 
Soma juice to Tadra and was aided and favoured by that God (I .51.15). 
and secundly, Etasa is the name of the horses, or one of the horses or 
of the single horse, of Sirya or the sup, especially, it seems of the horse 


HY MN 122) THE HYMNS OF 167 


14 Indra, preserve thou us from this affliction; Thundes-armed, 

save us from the misery near us 
- Vouchsafe us affluence in chariots, founded on horses, for our 

food and fam® and cladiess. ; 

15 Never may this thy loving kindness fail us ; mighty in strength, 
may plenteous food surround us. 

Maghavan, make us share the foeman’s cattle: may we be thy 

most liberal feast-companions. 


HYMN CXXIL Visvedevas, 


SAy, bringing sacrifice to bounteous Rudra, This juite for 
drink to you whose wrath is fleeting ! 
With Dyaus the Asura’s Heroes [ have lauded the Maruts as 
with prayer to Karth and Heaven. 
2 Strong to exalt the early invocation are Night and Dawn who 
show with varied aspect. 
The Barren clothes ber in wide-woven raiment, and fair »fJrn 
shines with Sairya’s golden splendour, 
heer us the Roamer round, who strikes at morning, the Wind 
8 Cdelight us, pourer forth of waters ! 
Sharpen our wits, 0 Parvata and Indra. May all the Geds 
Vouchsafe to us this favour. ; 


ne re ar ee 


_— 


who, during the night, draws back the chariot of the Sun from the west to 
the east. In this verse, according to M. Bergaigne, Etasa himself or his 
substitute (the word ‘ na’ which I have taken to mean ‘ not’ being 
understood in its alternative sense of ‘ like or as’) if represented a 
drawing the wheel when Indra has stayed the course of the Harits 
or bay Horses of the Sun. Tt is not difficult, says M. Bergaigne, to 
reconcile these two diffsrent conceptions of the role of Etasa. A 
sacrificer especially favoured by [ndra may represent either the sacri- 
ficial fire or the Soma juice that is prepared, consecrated, and off 
ered to the God, and Soma in the Veda, is frequently represented as 
a horse. See Berygaigne, La eligion Védiguc, Vol. [I 330—333. 


1 Tho meaning of this very difficult verse appears to be, that the 

. offering 6f Soma juice is presented to Rudri and to his sous the fierce 
but easily appeased Maruts or Storm-God, whom the poet has lauded 

as the Heroes of Dyaus, the Immortal, and has-at the same time suppli- 
cuted the Deities Heaven and Karth. Wilson, following Sayana, para- 
phrases the second bemistich : *T praise him who with his heroic 
(followers) as (with shafts) from a quiver expelled (the Asuras) from 
"~* heaven ; and (I praise) the Maruts, (who abide) between heaven and 


earth.’ 2 The barren: the unfruitful Night ; in which no work ia 
*~wlone. |§ 3 The Roamer round: ‘tha circumambient divinity,’ the 
Wind. Who dtrikes at morning: perhaps, blows away all evil 
spirits of the night Parvata : the presiding Genius of the moun- 


tains and the ruler of the clouds, frequently associated with Indra, 


168, THE RIGVEDA. [BOOK }, 


4, And Ausija shall call for me that famous Pair who enjoy and 
drink, who come to brighten. 
Set ye the Offspring of the Floods before you; both Mothers 
‘of the living One who beameth. é 
5 For you shall Ausija call him who thunders, as, to win Arju- 
na’s assent, cried Ghosh. 
I will invoke, that Pashan may be bounteons to yoa, the rich 
munificence of Agni. 
6 Hear Mitra-Varuna, these mine invocations, hear them from 
all men in the hall of worship, 
Giver of famous gifta, kind hearer, Sindhu who gives fair fields, 
listen wit all his waters ! 


7 Praised, Mitra, Varuna! is your gift, a hundred cows to the 
PrikshyAmas and the Pajra. 
Pupsented by car-famous Priyartha, supplying nourishment, 
they came directly. 
8 Praised is the gift of him the very wealthy : may we enjoy it, 
men with hero children : 
His who hath many gifts to give the Pajras, a chief who makes 
* me rich in cars and horses. 
9 The folk, O Mitra-Varuna, wh» hate you, who sinfully hating 
pour you no libations, . 
Lay in their hearts, themselves, a wasting sickness, whereas 
the righteous gaineth all by worship. | 
fO That man, most puissant, wonderously urged onward, famed 
among heroes, liberal in giving. 
Moveth a warrior, evermore undaunted in all encounters even 
with the mighty- 
11 Come to the man’s, the sacrificers callling :. hear, Kings of 
Immortality, joy-givers ! 
While ye who speed through clouds decree your bounty large- 
ly, for fame, to him the chariot-rider. 


4 Ausija: the son of Usij, that is, Kakshivan himself the Rishi 
of the hymn., That famous Pate: the Asvins. The Offspring of | 
of the Flood: Agni. The ving one who beameth: or praiseth. 
Agni appeare to be meant. § Him who thunders: Indra. Ghosha 
in I. 117. 5, is said to have bean provided with a husband by the 
Asvins. Arjuna, in this verse, may perhaps have been the husband's 
name. The meaning of the passage is uncertain. Giyana takes drjuna 
to mean white skin, or leprosy, frou, which Ghosha prayed to be made 


Cree. 6 Sindhus the Indus; The Deity presiding over waters. 
7 Who the Prikshdyamas, or drivere-of swift horses are, ig wn- 
certain, The Pajra: the Rishi Kakshivin himself, a member of 


the priestly family of the Pajras. 1] Kings of immortality : 
Varuna and Mitra. . 


HY MN 123\] THE HYMNS OF 169 


12 Vigour will we bestow on that adorer whose tenfold draught 
we come to taste, so spake they. ar 
May all in whom rest splendour and great riches obtain re- 
freshment in @hese sacrifmes, 
13 We will rejoice to drink the tenfold présent when the twice- 
five come bearing sacred viands, 
What can he do whose steeds and reins are choicest ! These, 
the all-potent, urge brave men to conquest, 
14 The sea and all the Deitics shall give us nim with the golden 
ear and neck bejeweiled. 
Dawns, hasting ¢> the praises of the pious, be pleased. with 
us, both offerers and singers, 
15 Foor youthful sons of Masasara vex me, three, of the King, 
the conquering Ayavasa. 
Now like the Sun, O Varuna and Mitra, your car hath shone, 
long-shaped and reined with splendvur. 
HY ON CXXITI. an VE. 
Tne Dakshini’s broad chariot hath been harnessed: this oar 
the Gods Immortal have ascended. 
Fain to bring light to homes of men the noble and active God. 


“dess hath emerged from darkness. ; 


ge ee eee See ee ee eee are 
ee rr et 


Lenfold draught : Soma juice offered in ten ladles, éwice frre of the 
9 J 


fallowing verse. 14 Him with the golden ear: perhaps the Sun; 
but the meaning of hemistich is uncertain. 15 There is no verb 


in the first hemistich, and ¥ follow Siyana in supplying ‘vex ’ But sisoah 
may mean ‘young horses’ as well as ‘youthful sons.’ and the verb to ’e 
supplied may be ‘carry, as suggested by Grassmann. The whole hyma 
as Wilson observes, ‘is very elliptical and obscure,’ and much of it 1s 
at present unintelligible. 


1 The Dakshinds broad charios: the Dakshina itself, that is the 
honorarium or fee presented by the institutor of a sacrifice to the 
priests who perform the ceremony, The meaning of the first hemistich 
appears to be that all preparations have been made for the morning 
racrifice, and especially that the fee for its performance—# most essen- 
tial element—is ready, and that the Gods are coming to the rite The 

word ddkshindydh is considered by Sagana to be an epittiet of ushode- 
vatayah, understood, that is, ‘ of the Goddess Ushas or Dawn’ Wilson 
accordingly translates, ‘ the spacious chariot of the graceful (Dueor) ; 
Ludwig renders the word by ‘ friendly,’ and Grassmann by ‘ weal:h,’ 
both scholars applying the epithet to Ushas*or Dawn who #& not men- 
tioned in the text, I have followed? M. Bergaigne who says: ‘ The in- 
terpratation of the word dakshind in the sense of sacrificial salary, in 
the first verse of our hymn as also in the fifth, is, not only possible but 
the only possible one, for the reason that this word has, no ather sense 
in the Rig-Veda than that of “salary, recompense,” given either by 
the earthly mughavan, that is to say by those who pay the priest for 


oy ; 


's 


170 THE AYMNS OF [BOOK 1. 


2 She before all the living world hath wakened, the Lofty One 
who wins and gathers treasure. 


Revived and ever young on high she glances, Dawn hath 
come first unto onr morning worship. 
3 If, Dawn, thou Goddess nobly born, thou dealest fortune this 
day to ail the race of mortals, 
May Savitar the God, Fricnd of the homestead, declare before 
the Sun that we are sinless, 
4 Showing her wonted form each day that passeth, spreading 
the light she visiteth each dwelling. 
Eager for conquest, with bright sheen she cometh. Her por- 
tion is the best of goodly treasures. 
® Sister of Varuna, sister of Bhaga, first among all sing forth, 
nO joyous Morning. 
Weak be thestrength of him who worketh evil : may we sub- 
due him with our car the guerdon. 
6 Let our glad hymns and holy thoughts rise upward, for the 
flames brichtly burning have ascended. 
The far-refulgent Mornings make apparent the lovely treasures 
which the darkness covered, 


7 The one departeth and the other cometh; unlike in hue day’s 
~  balves march on successive, 


One hides the gloom of the surroundiug Parents. Dawn on 
her shining chariot is resplendent. 


8 The same in form to-day, the same to-morrow, they still keep - 
Varuna’s cternal statute. 


performing the sacrifice, or by the heavenly maghavan, Indra, who in 
his turn pays for the sacrifive by favours of every kind to the man who 
causes it to be offered’ See La Religion Védigue, Vol IIL. pp 0283, ff, 
for M. Bergaigne’s translation af, and polemical commentary on, this . 
hymn. The noble and active Goddess : Ushas, Aurora, or Dawn. 
The word Goddess is not‘in the text. 3 May Savitar; the all- 
seeing deity Savitar who presidas Ove¢, but is sometimes distinguished 
from, the bun, is appealeG to as the best judge of ethe suppliant’s in- 
pocenes. 5 Our car the guerden ; may the liberal fee given for 
the performance Uf the sacrifice be to us as a war-chariot to ennble us 
to overpwer those who would ivjure us. 7 Day's halves ; day and 
night. The surrounding Parents are the all-encompassing Heaven and _ 


Earth : the nightly darkness which envelopes them is hidden or dispel- 
led by the day. 


HYMN 124] THE RIGVEDA. 171 


Blameless, in turn they traverse thirty regions,and dart across 
the spirit in a moment. ° 


9 She who hath knowledge of the first day’s nature is born re- 
fulyent white $rom out th® darkness. 
The Maiden breaketh not the law of Ordet, day by day coming 
to the place appointed. 


10 In pride of beauty like a maid thou goest, O Goddess, to the 
God who longs to win thee, 

And smiling, youthful, as thou shinest brightly, before him 
thou discoverest thy bosom. 


11 Fair as a bride embellished by her mother thou showest forth 
thy form that all may see it. 
Blessed art thou, O Dawn. Shine yet more widely. No other 
Dawns have reached what thou attainest. 


12 Rich in kine, horses, and all goodly treasures, in constant oper- 
ation with the sunbeams,¢ = 
Th: Dawns depart and come again assuming their wonted 
forms that promise happy fortune. 


13 Obedient to the rein vf Law Eternal give us cach thought 
that more and more sha!] bless ns. . 
Shine thou onus to-day, Dawn, swift to listen, With us be 
riches and with chiefs who worship, 


HYMN CXXIV. Dawn. 


THe Dawn refulgent when the fire is kindled, and the Sun 
rising, far diffuse their brightness. . 

Savitar, God, hath sent us forth to labour, each quadruped, 
each biped, to be active, 

2 Not interrupting heavenly ordinances, although she minisheth 

human generations, 

The last of endless morns that have departed, the first of 
those that come, Dawn brightlv shineth. 


ee fan a + 


8 They traverse thirty regions : I follow M. Bergaine ip understan- 
ding thg thirty regions or spaces to be an indefinite expression for the 
whole universe. <A more elaborate attempt ab explanation will be 
found in Wilson’s Translation in a Note from Bentley's Hinds Astro- 
nomy. They are the Dawns, and they may %e said to pass across or 
through the spirit, to enlighten ig. The second hemistich is very difli- 
cult and obscure, 4nd can be translated only provisionally, 10 
The God who longs to win thee: the Sun, the lover of Dawn, 13 
Chiefs who worship : the wealthy Institutors of, sacrifices. 


1 The fire: the sacrificial fire lighted for the morning rites. 2 
She minisheth : by marking the lapse of man’s allotted time. Cf. I. 
92.10, 11. | 


2 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 1. 


e 


3 There in the eastern region she, Heaven’s Daughter, arrayed 
in “garments all of light, appeareth. 


Truly she followeth the path of Order, nor faileth, knowing 
well, the heavenly quarters. 


4 Near is she sean, as’t were the Bright Onc’s bosom : she show: 
eth sweet things like a new song-singer. 


She cometh like a fly awaking sleepers, of all returning dames 
most true and constant. 


5 There in the east half of the watery region the Mother of 
the Cows hath shown her ensign. 


Wider and wider still she spreadeth onward, and filleth full 
the laps of both her Parents. 


6 She, verily, exceeding vast to look on debarreth from her light 
«a0r kin nor stranger. : 


Proud of her spotless form she, brightly shining, turneth not 
from the high nor from the humble. 


@ She seeketh menas she who hath no brother, mounting her 
car, as ’t were to gather riches, 


Dawn, like a loving matron for her husband, smiling and well 
attired, unmasks her beauty. 


8 The Sister quitteth, for the elder Sister, her place, and having 
looked on her departeth. 


She decks her beauty, shining forth with sunbeams, like wo- 
men trooping to the festal meeting. 


9 To all these Sisters who ere now have vanished a later one 
each day in course succeedeth. 


So, like the past, with days of happy fortune, may the new 
Dawns shine forth on us with riches, 


10 Rouse ep, O Wealthy One, the liberal givers; let niggard 
traffickers sleep on ynwakened ; 


Shine richly Wealthy One, on those who worship, richly,glad 
Dawn! while waking, on the singer. 


4 Inkea fly: admasan nd ; 8eeeGeldner, Vedische Studien, If. 179. 
S The watery region: the misty sky’ The Cows: rays of light. _ Both 
her Parents : Heaven ana Earth, 7 She seeketh men : this is not 
very clear. Perhaps the Sun, her lover or husband, is intended. ‘& 
The elder Sister : Day, for whom Night makes room. 10 While 
wasting ; as in Verse 2, 


HYMN 125.) THE RIGVEDA., 173 


11 This young Maid from the east hath shone upon us ; “sue har- 
nesseth her team of bright red oxen. 
She will beam forth, the hight will hasten hither, iia Agni 
will be presant in each alwelling, 


12 As the birds fly forth from their resting-places, so men with 
store of food rise at thy dawning. 
Yea, to the liberal mortal who remaineth at home, O Goddess 
Dawn, much good thou bringest, 


13 Praised through my prayer be ye who should be lauded. Ye 
have increased our wealth, ye Dawns who love us, 
Goddesses, may we win by your good favour wealth to be told 
by hundreds and by thousands. 


HYMN CXXV. Svanaya. 


Comine at early morn he gives his treasure; the prudent one 
receives and entertains him. 

Thereby increasing still hts life and offspring, he comes with 
brave sons to abundant riches. 


2 Rich shall he be in gold and kine and horses. Indra bestows 
on him great vital power, 
Who stays thee, as thou comest, with his treasure, like game 
caught in the net, O early comer. 


3 Longing, I came this morning to the pious, the son of sacrifice, 
with car wealth-laden, 
Give him to drink juice of the stalk that gladdens : prosper 
with pleasant hymns the Lord of Heroes. i 


4 Health-bringing streams, as milch-cows, flow to profit him who 
hath worshipped, him who now will worship. 
To him who freely gives and fills on all sides full streams of 
fatness flow*and make him famous. 


5 On the high ridge of heaven he stands exalted, yea, to the 
Gods he g0es, “the liberal giver. 

The streams, the waters flow for him with fatness : tc him this 
guerdon ever yields abundance. 


a aa ——. 


12 With store of food: we should: expect § who seek their food,’ and 
se Sdyana explains pitubkijah. The wealth) may be meant who share 
their store with others and must work to replenish it, 


This hymn is & dialogue between a wandering priest and 4 pious 
and liberal prince. For the explanatory legend, whicl? i is cited by Sayana, 
sew the note in Wilson’s translation, 1 Tho, priest (Kaksbiv#n) 
speake. His treasure ¢ the wealth that will follow sacrifice. The prudené 
one: the prince. 2 The prince (Svanaya) speaks, 3 The 
priest speaka. fim; Indra. 


174 THE RIGVEDA. (BOOK 1, 


6 For those who give rich mceds are all these splendours, for 
those who give rich meeds suns shine in heaven, 


The givers of rich meeds are made immortal: the givers of 
rich fees prolong their lifetimé. e 
7 Let not the liberal sink to sin and sorrow, never decay the 
pious chiefs who worship! 


Let every man besides be their protection, and let affliction 
fall upon the niggard. 


HYMN CXXVI, Bhavayavya. 


Wiru wisdom I preesent these lively praises of Bhavya dweller 
on the bank of Sindhu ; 


For he, unconquered King, disiring glory, hath furnished mea 
a thousand sacrifices. 
e 


2 A hundred necklets from the King, beseeching, a hundred 
gift stceds I at once accepted ; 

Of the lord’s cows a thousand, I Kakshivan. His deathless 
glory hath he spread to heaven. 


3 Horses of dusky colour stood besides me, ten chariots, Savanya’s 
cift, with mares to draw them. 


Kine numbering sixty thousand followed after. Kakshivan 
gained them when the days were closing. 


4*Borty bay horses of the ten cars’ master before a thousand lead 
the long procession. 


Reeling in joy Kakshiviin’s sons and Pajra’s have groomed the 
coursers decked with pearly trappings. 
0 An earlier gift for you have I accepted, eight cows, good milk- 
ers, and three harnessed horses, 


Pajras, who with your wains with your great kinsman, like 
troops of subjects, have been fain for glory. 


1 Bhavya : the princeSavanya of the preceding hymn is here 
again eulogized for his munificenve under the name of his father Bhiva 
or Bhavayaxya, who lived on the bank of Sindbu or the Indus. 3 
With mares to draw them: or, with damsels or femala slaves. Cf. VI. 
27. 8. 4, Pajya: the founder of the priestly family ‘from which 
Kekshivan was descendéd The sixth stanza of the hymn is as- 
cribed to Savanaya, and the seventh to his wife Romasi. They hava 
no apparent connexion with what precedes, and are in a different 
metre. They seem to bea fragment of a popular song, See Appendix. 


HYMN 127,} THE RIGVEDA. 115 
HYMN CXXVIL c Agui. 


Aant I hold as herald, the munificent, the gracious, Son of 
Strength, wkd knoweth 4ll that live, as holy Singer, know- 
lng ail. 

Lord of fair rites, God with form erected turning to the Gods, 

He, when the flame hath sprung forth from the holy oil, the 
offered fatness, longcth for it with his glow. 

2 We, sacrificing, call on thee best worshipper, the eldest of Angi- 
rases, Singer, with hymns, thee, brillant One! with singers’ 
hymns, 

Thee, wandering round as’t were the sky, who are the invok- 
ing priest of men, 

Whom, Ball waith hair of flame, the people must observe, the 

pope that he speed them on, = 


3 Me with his shining glory blazing far and wide, he verily it is 
who slayeth demon foes, slaye th the demons like an axe: 
At whose close touch things solid shake, and what is stable 
yields like trees. 
Subduing all, he keeps his ground and flinch2s not, fro.a the 
skilled archer finches not. 


4 To him, as one who knows, even things solid yield ; through 
fire-sticks heated hot he gives his ‘eifts toaid, Men offer 
Agni gifts for aid, 


He deeply piercing many a thing hews it like wood with fer- 
vent glow. 


Iiven hard and solid food he crunches with his might, yea, 
hard and solid food with might. 


This hymn, and the twelve that follow it, are attributed to the Rishi 
Paruchchepa. They are generally very obscure aud frecuently unin- 
telligible. One of their peculiarities is ‘to reiterate a leading word 
which occurs the third or fourth from the end of the first line, and 
sometimes also of the third, and to repeat i. as the last word of the 
line. Thus we have here stinum«sahaso JaATAVEDASAM, vipram na J ATA- 
VEDASAM ; this is little else than a kind of verbal alliterutive jingle, 
but the Scholiast thinks it necessery to assign to the, repeated word a 
distinct signification.’ — Wilson. 2 Eldest of Angirases: see {. l. 6. 
3 From the skilled archer flinches not: not even a strony man armed 
with his bow can turn him from his course. 4 Fire sticks : the two 
pieces of wood which are still used to produce the sacrificial fire. 


116 THE HYMNS OF (BOOK I. 


5 Here near we place the sacrificial food for him who shines 
forth fairer inthe night than in the day, with life then 
stronger than by day. 

His lite gives sure and firm defence as that one giveth to a 
son. 

The during fires enjoy things given and things not given, the 
during fires enjoy as food. 

6 He, roaring very loudly like the Maruts’ host, in fertile cul- 
tivated fields adorable, in desert spots adorable, 

Accepts and eats our offered gifts, ensign of sacrifice by desert ; 
So let all, joying, love his path when he is glad, as men pur- 
sue a path for bliss. 

7 Even as they who sang forth hymns, addressed to heaven, the 
Bhrigns with their prayer and praise invited him, the 
Bhrigas rubbing, offering gifts, 

Fer radiant Agni, Lord of all these treasures, is excecding 
strong. 

May he, the wise, accept the cratcful coverings, the wise accept 
the coverings. 

8 Thee we invoke, the Lord of all our settled homes, common 

‘ toall, the houschold’s guardian, to enjoy, bearer of true 

hymns, to enjoy. 

Thee we invoke, the guest of men, by whose mouth, even as 

& sire’s, 

All these Immortals come to gain their food of life, oblations 

come to Gods as food. 

9 Thou, Agni, most victorious with thy conquering strength, 
most Mighty One, art born for service of the Gods, like 
wealth for service of the Gods. 

Most mighty is thine cestasy, most splendid is thy mental 
power. 

Therefore men wait upon thee, undecaying One, like vassals, 
undevaying One. 


10 To him the mighty, conquering with victorious strength, to 
Agni walking with the dawn, who sendeth kine, be sung 
your laud, to Agni sung ; 

As he who with oblation comes calls him aioud in every place. 
Before the brands of fire he shouteth singer-like, the herald, 
kindler of the brands. . 


~~ 


5 Things given and thangs not given: both sacrificial offerings aud 
the grass brushwood of the jungle 7 The Bhrigus : descendants 
of Bhrigu, the evarlicss cherisher of Agni, or kindler of fire, Rudbing : 
agitating the fire-eticks. Zhe coverings : according to Nayana, the - obla- 
tions of clarified butter, etc. 


b 


AYMN 128) THE RIGVEDA. 117 


11 Agni, beheld by us in nearest neighbourhood, accordant with 


to 


the Gods, bring us, with gracious love, great riches*with thy 
gracious love. 

Give as, O Miitiest, wh is great, toseeand to enjoy the 
earth. 

As one of awful power, stir up heroic might for those who 
prais thee, Bountevus Lord! 


HYMN CXXVITI. Agni. 


By Manuw’s Jaw was born this Agni, Priest most skilled, bora 
for the holy work of those who yearn therefor, yea, born 
for his own holy work. 

All ear to him who seeks his love, and wealth to him who 
strives for fame, 

Priest ne’er deceived, he aits in I]4’s holy place, girt rotnd in 
Lla's holy place. 

We call that porfeeter of worship by the path of sacrifice, with 
reverence rich in offerings, with worship rich in offerings. 

Throuzh presentation of our food he grows not old in this his 
Form 5 

The God whom Mitarisvan brought from far away, for Mana 
brought from far away. 

In ordered course forthwith he traverses the earth, swift-swaJ: 
lowing, bellowing Steer, bearing the genial seed, bearing 
the seed and bellowing, 

Observant with a hundred eyes the God is conqueror in the 
wood : 

Agni, who hath his seat in broad plains here below, and in the 
nigh lands far away. 

That Agni, wise Lligh-Priest, inevery house takes thought for 
sacrifice and holy service, yea, takes thought, with mental 
power, tor sacrifice. 

Disposer, he with mental power ‘Shows all things unto him who 


strives ; Py 
W henee he was born a guest enriched with holy oil, born as 
Ordainer ang as Priest. » 


1 Jld’s holy place: the altar , Ida or [lA is personified Prayer and 


Worship. 2 Mdatdrisvan ; see I. 31, 3, 


23 


178 THE HYMNS OP (BOOK 1. 


5 When through his power and in his strong prevailing flames 
the Maruts’ gladdening boons mingle with Agni’s roar, boons 
gladdening for the active One, 

Then he accelerates the gift, and, by the greatness of his 
wealth, , : 

Shall rescue us from overwhelming misery, from curse and 
overwhelming woe. 

6 Vast, universal, good, he was made messenger ; the speeder 
with his right hand hath not loosed his hold, through love 
of fame not loosed his hold. 

He bears oblations to the Gods for whosoever supplicates. 
Agni bestows a blessing on each picus man, and opens wide 
the doors for him. 


¢? That Agni hath been set most kind in camp of men, in sacri- 
fice like a Lord victorious, like a dear Lord in sacred 
rites. 
His “are the oblations of mankiad when offered up at Ila’s 
place. 
He shall preserve us from Varuna’, chastisement, yea, from 
the great God’s chastisement, 


3 Agni the Priest they supplicate to grant them wealth: him 
dear, most thoughtful, have they made their messenger, 
him, offering-bearer have they made, 

Beloved of all, who knoweth all, the Priest, the Holy One, 
the Sage— 
‘Him, Friend, for help, the Gods when they are fain for wealth, 
him, Friend, with hymns, when fain for wealth. 


HYMN CXXIX, Indra, 


THE car which, Indra, thou, for service of the Gods, though it 
be far away, O swift One, bringest near, which, Blameless 
One, thou bringest near, 

Place swiftly nigh us for our help: be it thy will that it be 
strong. 

Blamelesaand active, hear this speech of orderers, this speech 
of us like orderers, ° 


2 Hear, Indra, thou whom men in every fight must call to show 
thy strength, for c-y of battle with the men, with men of 
war for victory. 

He who with heroes wins the light, who with the singers gains 
the prize, | 

Him the rich Seek to gain even asa swift strong steed, even 
as a courser fleet and strong. ~ 


5 The Maruts’ gladdening boons : storm and rain. 


AYMN 129) THE RIGVEDA. °179 


3 Thou, Mighty, pourest forth th: hide that holds tha rain; thou 
keepest faraway, Hero, the wicked man, thou shattest out 
the wicked man. 

Indra, to thee I sing, to Dyaus, to Rudra glorious in himself, 
To Mitra, Varuna I sing a far-famed hymn, to the kind God 
a far-famed hymn, 

4 We wish our Indra here that he may further you, the Friend, 
beloved of all, the very strong ally, in wars the very strong 
ally. 

In all encounters strength2n thou our prayer to be a help 
to us. 

No enemy—whom thou smitest down—subdueth thee, no 
enemy, whom thou smitcst down, 

5 Bow down the overweening pride of every foe with succour 
like to kindling-wood in fiercest flame, with mighty sudeour, 
Mighty One. 


Guide us, thou Hero, as of old, so art thou counted blameless 


still. 
Thou drivest, as a Priest, all sins of man away, as Priest, in 
person, seeking us. . 


6 This may I utter to the present Soma-drop, which, meet to be 
invoked, with power, awakes the prayer, awakes the demon- 
slaying prayer. 

May ‘he himself with darts of death drive far from us tife 
scorner'’s hate. 

Far let him flee away who speaketh wickedness, and vanish 
like a mote of dust. 

? By thoughtful invocation this may we obtain, obtain great 
wealth, O Wealthy One, with hero sons, wealth that is 
sweet with hero sons. 

Him who is wroth we pacify with sacred food and eulogies, 
Indra the Holy with our calls inspired and true, the Holy One 
with calls inspired. “ o 

8 On, for your good and ours, come Indra with the aid of his 
own lordliness, to drive the wicked hence, to rend the evil. 
hearted ones ! . 

The weapon which devouring fiends cast at us shall destroy 


themselvas. ae 
Struck down, it shall not reach the mark ;-harled forth, the 
fire-branod shall not strike. : 


9 With riches in abundance, Indra, come to us, come by an 
unobstructed path, come by a path from demons free. 


180 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 1. 


Be with us when we stray afar, be with us when our home is 


niglf 
Protect us with thy help both near and fur away : protect us 
ever with thy help. ‘ . 


10 Thon art our own, O Indra, with victorious wealth : let might 
accompany thee, Luc Strong, to give us aid, like Matra, to 
give mighty aid, 

. ’ 
O strongest saviour, helper thou, Immortal! of each warriors 
car, 


Hlurt thou another and not us, O Thunder-armed, one who 
would hurt, O Thunder-arwed ! 


11 Save us from injury, thou who art well extolled : ever the 
warder-off art thou of wicked ones, even as a God, of 
wicked ones ; 

Thon slayer of the evil fiend, saviour of singer such as | 


Gucd Lord, the Father made. theé slayer of the fiends, mady 
the, good Lord, tu slay the fiends. 


HYMN CXXX, Indra, 


Come to us, Indra, from afar, conducting us even as a lord of 
heroes to the gatherings, home, like a Xing, his heroes’ 
lord. 

We come with gifts of pleasant food, with juice poured forth, 
invoking thee, 

~As sons invite a sire, that thou mayst get the strength, thee, 
bounteousest, to get thee strength. 


2 O Indra, drink the Soma jnice pressed out with stones, poured 
from the reservoir, as an ox drinks the spring, 4 very 
thirsty bull the spring. 


For the sweet draught that gladdens thee, for mightiest fresh- 
ening of they strenath, 

Let thy Bay Horses bring thee hither as the Sun, as every ney 
day théy bring the Sun. 


3 He found the treasure brought from heaven that lay son aie: 


close-hidden, Ike the nestling of a bird, in rock, enclosed in 
never: ending rock® 


Best Angiras, bolt-armed, he strove to win, as 't were, the 
stall of kine ; 


So Indra hathedisclosed the food concealed, disclosed the doors, 
- the food that lay concenled. 


ll The Father ; Janita, the Latin genitor ; the Supreme God, the 
Maker end Father of the Universe. 


HY MN 130.] TAE HYMNS OF - 181 


4 Grasping his thunderbolt with both hands, Indra made its 
edee most keen, for hurling, like a carving-knife for Ahi’s 
slaughter made it keen. | 

Enducd with m&jesty and strength, O Indra, and with lordly 
migiit, 

Pion. crwsheat down the trees, as when acraftsman fells, crash: 
est them down as with an axe 


5 Thou. Indra, without effort hast let loose the floods to run 
their free course down, like chariots, to the sea, like chariots 
showing forth their strength, 

They, reaching hence away, have joined their strength for 
one eternal end, 

Even as the cows who poured forth every thing for man, yea, 
poured forth all things for mankind, 


6 Eager for riches, men have formed for thee this song, like as 
a skilful craftsman fashieneth a car, so have they wrought 
thee to their bliss 5 

Adorning thee, O Singer, like a generous steed for deeds of 
might, 

Yea, like a steed to show his strength and win the prize, that 
he may bear each prize away. 7 


7 For Piru thon hast shattered, Indra! ninety forts, for Divo- 
diisa, they boon servant with thy bolt, Q Dancer, for thy 
worshipper. 

For Atithigva he, the Strong, brought Sambara from the 
mountain down, 
Distributing the mighty treasures with his strngth, parting 
all treasures with his strength. 

8 Indra in battles help his Aryan worshipper, he who hath hun- 
dred helps at hand in every fray, in frays that win the 
hght of heaven. 

Plaguing the lawless he gave up to Manu’s secd the dusky 

skin ; x 

Blazing, ’t were, he burns each covetous man away, he burns 
the tyrannous away. | 

J 

3 He found the treasure: the Soma. The food concealed : accor- 

ding to Sayana, in the tirst place the rain enckosed in the c'ouds, and 

in the secoud place the seeds shut up in the earth which await the rain 

‘to make them germinate. 5 for man: or for ifanu, the great: 

progenitor of the human race. 7 Paruw: the name of a prince 

protected by Indra. Divoddsa: called also Atithigva. See I. 92, 191. 

Sumbara : a demon of the air ; or perhaps in this place some human 

adversary of Atithigva. Dancer: thou who dancest in battle ; 

dancer of the war-dance. 


192. THE RIGVEDA. [BOOR 1. 


9 Waxed strong in nigbt at dawn he tore the Sun’s wheel off. 
Bright red, he steals away their speech, the Lord of Power, 
their speech he steals away from them, | 

As thon with eager speed. O Sage, hast come from far away 
to help, 

As winning for thine own all happiness of men, winning all 
happiness cach day. 


10 Lauded with our new hymns, 0 vigorous tn deed, save us with 
strenvthening help, thou Shatterer of the Forts ! 
Thou, Ind:a, praised by Divodasa’s clansmen, as heaven grows 
great with days, shalt wax in glory, 


HYMN CXXXI. Indra. 


To Indra Dyaus the Asura hath bowed him down, to Indra 
mighty Earth with wide-extending tracis, to win the light, 
with wide spread tracts. ° 

All Gods of one accord have set Indra in front preminent. 

For Indra all libations must be set apart, all man’s libations 
set apart, 


2 In all libations men with hero spirit urge the Universal One, 
each secking several light, each fain to win the light apart, 
Thee, furthering like a ship, will we set to ths chariot-pule of 
strength, 
As men who win with sacrifices Indra’s thought, men who win 
e Indra with their lands, 


3 Couples desirous of thine sid are storming thee, pouring their 
presents forth to win a stall of kine, pouring gifts, Indra, 
seeking thee. 

When two men secking spoil or heaven thou bringest face to 
face in war, 

Thou showest, Indra, then the bolt thy constant friend, the 
Bull that ever waits on thee. 


9 He tore the Sun's wheel off: according to Siyana, Brahma had 
promised the Asuras or fiends that Indra’s thunderbolt should never 
destroy them. Indra, accordingly, cast at them the wheel of the Sun's 
chariot and slew them therewith . He steals their speech :; Sayany 
thinks thatthe meaning is that Indra deprived his enemies of life, 
O Sage: O Indra, 10 By Diyoddsa’s clunsmen: by me, Paru- 
chchhepa, a member of the house or family of Divodasa. 


3 Couplas :*sacrificere and their wives who are associated with 


them in offering oblatioas, The Bull : the Gercely rushing 
thunderbole. 


HYMN 132.) THE RIGVEDA. 183 


4 This thine heroic power men of old time have known, where- 
with thou breakest down, Indra, autumnal forts, breakest 
then down with conquering might. 

Thou hast chasticed, O Indra, Lord of Streagth, the man who 
worships not, : 

And made thine own this great earth and these water-floods, 
with joyous heart these water- floods. 


5 And they have bruited far this hero-might when thou, O Strong 
One, in thy joy helpest thy suppliants, who sought to win 
thee for their Friend, 

Their battle-cry thou madest sound victorious in the shocks of 
war. 

One stream after another have they gained from thee, eager 
for glory have they gained. 

6 Also this morn may he be well-inclined tous, mark at our call 
our offerings and our song of praise, our call that wounay 
win the light. 

As thou, O Indra Thunder-armed, wilt, as the Strong One, slay 


the foe, 
Listen thou to the prayer of me a later sage, hear thou a 
later sage’s prayer. —— 


7 O Indra,waxen strong and well-inclined to us,thou very mighty 
slay the man that ts our foe, slay the man, Hero! with thy 
bolt, 

Slay thou the man who injures as: hear thou, as readiest te. 
hear. 
Far be malignity, lke mischief on the march, afar be all 
malignity, 
AYMN CXXXII. Indra. 


Heuvep, Indra Maghavan, by thee in war of old, ‘may we sub- 
due in fight the men who strive with us, conquer the men 
who war with us. 


4 Autumnat forts : strongholds on high ground, occupied as places 
of refuge during the heavy rains, or ‘the brilliant battlemonted cloud- 
castles, which are so often visible in the Indian sky at this period of 
the year..—Muir, O. 8. Texts, IT. 372. Men of old timé: I have 
followed Sadyana here. But pérdvah Srobably means the Parus, ane of 
the five great Aryan tribes or clane. as 


1 This day: the hymn is addressed to Iudra just before an expected 
battle. May we divide the spoil : divide it in anticipation ; secure it by 
Our sacrifice. 


184 THE HYMNS OF (BOOK 1. 


€ 


This day that now is close at hand bless him who pours the 
Soma juice 

In this our sacrifice may we divide the spoil, showing our 
strength, the spoil of war. 

2 In war which wins the light, at the free giver’s call, at due 
oblation of the errly-rising one, oblation of the active one, 

Indra slew, even as we know—whom each bowed head must 
reverence. 

May all thy bounteous gifts be gathered up for us, yea, the 
good gifts of thee tha Good, 

3 This food glows fur thee as of old at sacrifice, wherein they 
made thee chooser of the place, for thou choosest the place 
of sacrifice. 

Speak thou and make it known to us: they see within with 
beams of light. 

Inglra, indeed, is found a sccker after spoil, spoil-seeker for his 
own allies. 

4 So now must thy great deed be lauded as of old, when for the 
Augirases thou openedst the stall, openedst, giving aid, the 
stall. 

In the same manner for us here firht thou and be victorious. 
Té him who pours the juice give up the lawless man, the law- 
less who is wroth with us. 

5 When with wise plan the Hero leads the people forth, they 
conquer in the ordered battle, secking fame, press, eager, on- 
ward seeking fame. 

To him in time of need they sing for life with offspring and 
with strength 

Their hymns with Indra tind a welcome place of rest: the 
hymns go forward to the Gods. 

6 Indra and Parvata, our champions in the fight, drive ye away 
each man who fain would war with us, drive him from 
us with the bolt. 


2. The early-rising and active ove is the offered of the esacritica. 
3 T'hey made the choser of -the place: the meaning appears to be 
that Indra is present at such sacrifices only as he chooses to favour. 
Spenk thow and make it known: Wilson, following Sayana. para- 
phrases ; ‘do thou declare that (rite), that men may thence behold the 
intecmedfate (firmament bright) with the rays (ef the sun)’ [find 
the passage unintelligible, & Tha man who pours the juice is the 
_ worshipper of Indra, and the lawless mam is the none Aryan inhabitant 
of the country, tie natural enemy of the new settlers. 6 Parvata 
the presiding Genius of mountains and clouds, frequently assoviated 
with Indra, or, according to Sayana, another form of that God. Cf. 
I, 122. 3. 


HYMN 133} THE RIGVEDA. 185 


Welcome to him concealed afar shall be the lair that he hath 
found. 
So may the Render rend €ur foes on every side, rend them, O 
Hero, everywhere. 
HYMN CXXXIITI. Indra, 


Wiru sacrifice I purge both earth and heaven : I burn up 
great she-fiends who serve not Indra, 

Where throttled by thy hand the foes were slaughtered, and 
in the pit of death lay pierced and mangled. 


2 © thou who castest forth the stone, crushing the sorceresses’ 
heads, 

Break them with thy wide-spreading foot, with thy wide-spread: 
ing mighty foot. 

3 Do thou, O Maghavan, beat off these sorceresses’ Uaring 
strength, 

Cast them within the narrow pit, within the deep and narrow 
pit. 

4 Of whom thoa hast erc now destroyed thrice-fifty with thy 
fierce attacks. : 

That deed they count a glorious deed, though small to thee, 
a glorious deed, 

6 O Indra, crush and bray to bits the fearful fiery-weaponed 

fiend : 7 
Strike every demon to the ground. 

6 Tear down the mighty ones. O Indra, hear thou us. For 
heaven hath glowed like earth in fear, O Thunder-armed, 
as dreading fierce heat, Thunder-armed ! 

Most Mighty mid the Mighty Ones thou speedest with strong 
bolts of death, 

Not slaying men, unconquered Hero! with the brave, O Hero, 
with the thrice-seven brave. ° 


7 The pourer of libations gains the home of wealth, pouring his 
gift conciliates hostilities of Gods. 
Pouring, he strives, unchecked and strong, to win him riches 

thousandfold. P 

Indra gives lasting wealth to him who pours forth gjfts, yea, 
wealth he givés that long shgll last. 
e @ 

This hymn is a prayer fer the destruction of witghes, goblins, and— 
evil spirits of various sorts. 2 Who castest forth the stone: hur- 
lest the thunderbolt. 6 Not slaying men : that is destroying evil 
Spirits Only. The thrice-seven brave : the Maruts, Indra’s allies. These 
were forty-nine in number, and thrice-saven is used indefinitely for # 
largor multiple of seven. ° 


w4 


186 THE HYMNS OF (BOOK 1. 
: HYMN CXXXIV, Vayu. 


Vavyo, let fleet-foot coursers brin~ thee speedily to this our 
feast, to drink fitst of the juice we pour, to the first 
draught of Some juice. 

May our glad hymn, discerning well, uplifted, gratify thy 
mind, 


Come with thy team-drawn car, O Vayu, gladden thee, effectual, 
the sacrificer’s gift, 


2 May the joy-giving drops, O Vayu, gladden thee, effectual, 


well prepared, directed to the heavens, strong, blent with 
milk and seeking heaven ; 


That aids, effectual to falfil, may wait upon oar skilfal power, 
Associate teams come hitherward to grant our prayers: they 
shall address the hymns we sing. 


3 Two red steeds Vayu yokes, Vayu two purple steeds, swift- 
footed, to the chariot, to the pole to draw, most able, at the 
pole, to draw. 


Wake up intelligence, as when a lover wakes his sleeping love. 
I\lumine heaven and earth, make thou the Dawns to shine, 
for glory make the Dawns to shine. 


4 For thee the radiant Dawns in the far-distant sky broaden 


their lovely garments forth in wondrous beams, bright: 
coloured in their new-born beams, 


For thee the nectar-yielding Cow pours all rich treasures forth 
as milk. 


The Marut host hast thou engendered from the womb, the 
Maruts from the womb of heaven. 


5 For thee the pure bright quickly-flowing Soma-drops, strong in 
their heightening power, hasten to mix themselves, haste 
to the water to be mixed. 


To thee the weary coward prays for luck that he may speed 


away. ce 
Thou by thy law protectest us from every world, yea, from 
the world of highest Gods. 


6 Thou, Vayu, who hast none before thee, first of all hast right 
to drink these offerings of Soma juice, ‘ast right to drink 
the juicesout-poured, , 


_ 1 Vays : the God of wind. 4 Nectar-yielding cow; Sabardugha ; 
yielding amrit, ambrosia, nectar, or food for the Gods. 


AYMN 135.) THE RIGVEDA. 187 


Yea, poured by all invoking tribes who free themsedves from 
taint of sin. 

For thee all cows are milked to yield the Soma-milk, to yield 
the butter and the milk® 


HYMN OXXXV. Vayu, Indra-Vayn. 


Strewy is the sacred grass ; come, Vayu to our feast, with 
team of thousands, come, Lord of the harnessed team, with 
hundreds, Lord of harnessed steeds ! 

The drops divine are lifted up for thee, the God, to drink them 
first. 

The juices rich in sweets have raised them for thy joy, have 
raised themselves to give thee strength. 


2 Purified by the stones the Soma flows for thee, clothed with 
its lovely splendours, to the reservoir, flows clad in pis re- 
fulgent light. 

For thee the Soma is poured forth, thy portioned share mid 
Gods and men. 

Drive thou thy horses, Vayu, come to us with love, come well- 
inclined and loving us. e 


3 Come thou with hundreds, come with thousands in thy team 
to this our solemn rite, to taste the sacred food, Vayu, to 
taste the offerings. 

This is thy seasonable share, that, comes corradiant with the, 
Sun. 

Brought by attendant priests pure juice is offered up, Vayu, 
pure juice is offered up. 


4 The chariot with its team of horses bring you both, to guard 
us and to taste the well-appointed food, Vayu, to taste the 
offerings ! 

Drink of the pleasant. flavoured juice: the first draught is 
assigned to yuu. 
O Vayu, with your splendid bounty come ye both, Iadra, with 
bounty come ye both, 


5 May our songs bring you hither ‘to our solemn rites: these 
drops of mighty vigour have they beau tified, like a swift 
steed of mighty strength., 

Drink of them well-inclined to us, come Ninewells be our 
hel p. ¥ 

Drink, Indra-Vaynu, of thes. juices pregsed® with stones,, 
Strength givers! till they gladden you. . 


6 The Soma-milk : the libation consisting of Soma juice mixed 
with milk, 


188 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 7. 


6G These Soma juices pressed for you in waters here, borne by 
attendant priests, are offered up to you : bright, Vayu, are 
they offered up, 
Swift through the strainer have tiey flowed, and here are shed 
fur both of you, 
Soma-drops, fain for you, over the wether’s fleece, Somas over 
the wether’s fleece. 


7 O Vayu, pass thou over all the slambers, and where the press- 
stone rings enter ye both that house, yea, Indra, go ye both 
within. 

The joyous Maiden is beheld, the butter flows. With richly- 
Jaden team come to our solemn rite, yea, Indra, come ye to 
the rite. 


8 Ride hither to the offering of the pleasant juice, the holy Fig- 
tree which victorious priest surround : victorious be they 
still for us. : 

At once the cows yield milk, the barley-meal is dressed. For 
thee. 

O Vayu, never shall the cows grow thin, never for thee shall 

» they be dry. 

9 Thess Bulls of thine, O Vayu with the armof strength, who 
swiftly fly within the current of thy stream, the Bulls in- 
ercasing in their might. 

Horseless, yet even through the waste swift-moving, whom no 
shout can stay, 
Hard to be checked are they, like sunbeams, in their course, 
hard to be checked are by both the hands. 


HYMN CXXXVI. Mitra-Varuna 


Brine adoration ample and most excellent, hymn, offerings to 
the watchful Twain, the bountifal, your sweetest to the 
bounteous Ones. 

Sovran, adored with streams of oil and praised at every sacri- 
fice, 

Their high imperial might may nowhere be assailed, ne'er may 
their Godhead he assailed. 


6 The wethers’s fleesc : the filter or ebtrainer made "of wool, used 
in purifying the Soma juice. See I. 2. 1. 7) Where the press-stone 
rings : where m*-n are pressing out the Soma juice. The joyous Maiden : 
probably Ushas or ‘Dawn, 8 The holy Fig-tree: the vessel for 
holding the Soma juice, made of the wood of the Agwattha or Ficus 
Religiosa ; or, as Saiyana explains it here, the Soma itself. The 
barly-meal : forming a part of the offeriog. 9 Bulls : blasts of 
wird. 


HY MN 136.] THE HYMNS OF 189 


2 For the broad Sun was seen a path more widely laid, the path 
of holy law hath been maintained with rays, thg eye with 
Bhaga's rays of light. 

Firm-set in heaven is Mitra’> home, and Agyaman’s and 
Varuna’s. * . 

Thence they give forth great vital strength which merits praise, 
high power of life that men shall praise. 


3 With Aditi the luminous, the celestial, upholder of the people, 
come ye day by day, ye who watch sleepless, day by day, 
Resplendent might have ye obtained, Adityas, Lords of liberal 
vifts. 
Movers of men, mid both, are Mitra, Varuna, mover of men is 
Aryaman. 


4 This Soma be mostsweet to Mitra. Varuna: he, in the drink- 
ing-feasts, shall have a share thereof, sharing, a God, among 
the Gods, 

May all the Gods of one accord accept it joyfully to-day. 
Therefore do ye,O Kings, accomplish what weask, ye Righte- 
ous Ones, whate’er we ask. 


5 Whoso with worship serves Mitra and Varuna, him guard ye 
carefully, uninjured, from distress, guard from distress tho 
liberal man. ° 

Aryaman guards him well who acts uprightly following his law, 
W ho beautifies their service with his lauds, who makes 1t beau ti- 
ful with songs of praise. 


6 Worship will I profess to lofty Dyaus, to Heaven and Ear'h, 
to Mitra and to bounteous Varuna, the Bounteous, the Com- 
passionate. 

Praise Indra, praise thou Agni, praise Bhaga and heavenly 
Aryaman. . 

Long may we live and have attendant progeny, have progeny 
with Soma’s help. 


2,Phaga’s rays of light : ‘the ancient god, Bhaga,’ stys Mr. Wallis, 
thas become inthe Rigveda little more than a source from which descrip 
tions of the functions of other gods*are obtained, or a standard of com- 
parison by which their greatness is enhancgd. His name has survived 
in the Slavonic languages as 9 general name for god, a sense which it 
also has in the Avesta. To judge from the Rigveda, Bhaga would seem 
to be a survival from an ancient Sun-worahip.’ The Cdsmology of the 
Rigveda, p. 11. Ibis difficult to explain every exgressionin the verse ; 
but the general meaning appears to be that tlfe heaven has been lighted 
by the Sun, and that there is the home of the Gods who thence show 
forth the powers which men should glorify. 3 Adit and Adttyas ¢ 
gee I. 14. 3, 4 He: Soma himself, meaning perhaps the Moon. 


190 THE RIGVEDA. [BOOR 1. 


7 With the Gods’ help, with Indra still beside us, may we be 
held sclf-splendid with the Maruts. . | 
May Agni, Mitra, Varuna give us shelter : this may we gain, 
we and oyr wealthy princes, , 


HYMN CXXXVII, Mitra-Varuna, 


Wirn stones have we pressed out: O come; these gladdening 
drops are blent with milk, these Soma-drops which gladden 
you, 

Come to us, Kings who reach to heaven, approach us, coming 
hitherward. 


These milky drops are yours, Mitraand Varuna, bright Soma 
juices blent with milk. 


2 Here are the droppings; come ye nigh; the Soma droppings 
blent with curd, juices expressed and blent with curd. 
Now for the wakening of your Dawn together with the Sun- 
God’s rays, 
Juice waits for Mitra and for Varuna to drink, fair juice for 
drink, for sacrifice. 


3 As'twere a radiant-colourcd cow, they milk with stones the stalk 
for you, with stones they milk the Soma.plant. 
May ye come nigh us, may ye turn hither to drink the Soma 
juice. 


The men pressed ont this juice, Mitra and Varuna, 
. out this Soma for your drink. 


HYMN CXXXVITII. 


Strona Piishan’s majesty is landed evermore, the 
lordly might is never faint, his song of praise 1s 

Seeking felicity I laud him nigh to help, the sour 

Who, Vigorous One, hath drawn to him the hearts 
them, Vigorous One, the God, 

2 Thee, theng O Pishan, like a swift one on his w 
lauds that thou mayst make the foemen fle 
like, our foes afar. . 

As I, a man, call theeg a God, giver of bliss, to 


So make our loudly-cbanted prals 
them glorious. ‘ 


pressed. 


Pishan. 
glery of his 
never faint, 
ce of bliss, 
of all, drawn 


ay, Turge with 
e, drive, camele 


be my Friend, 


es glorious, in battles make 


1 Pidshan: see I. ‘14. 3, and 42 1, 
ins : ‘as a camel carries away his load, go o 
the battle. The meaning is obscrra 


2 Camet-like : Siyana expla- 
arry away our enemies from 


HYMN 139.) THE RIGVEDA. 191 


3 Thou, Pishan, in whose friendship they who sing forth praise 
enjoy advantage, even in wisdom, through thy grace, in 
wisdom even, they are advanced. 

So, after this most recent course, we come to thee with prayers 
for wealth, 

Not stirred to anger, O Wide-Ruler, come to us, come thou to 
us inevervy fight, - 

4 Not stirred to anger, come, Free-giver, nigh to us, to take this 
gift of ours, thou who hast goats for steeds, Goat-borne! 
their gift who long for fame. 

So, Wonder- worker! may we turn thee hither with effectual 
lauds. 

I slight thee not, O Pishan, thou Resplendent One: thy friend 
ship may not be despised. . 


HYMN’CXXXIX, Viswedevas. 


Hrarp be our prayer! In thought I honour Agni first: now 
straightway we elect this heavenly company, Indra and Vayu 


we elect. e 
For when our latest thought is raiscd on Vivasvin tentred 
well. 


Then may our holy songs go forward on their way, our songs 
ast were unto the Gods. 

2 As there ye, Mitra, Varuna, above the true have taken fo 

yourselves the untrue with your mind, with wisdom’s mental 


energy; 
So in the seats wherein ye dwell have we beheld the Golden 
One, t 


Not with our thoughts or spirit, but with these our ‘eyes, yea, 
with the cyes that Soma gives. 


4 Thou who hast goats for steeds: Pfishan’s chariot, like Thorr's in 
the Edda, is said to be drawn by a team of goats. 


1 Vivasedn: the radiant celestial Agni. : 2 This verse is 
exceedingly difficult. Ludwig's &xplanation, if [ have understood him 
rightly, is to the following effect: The Golden One, whfch is in the 
home of Mitra and Varuna, is the Sun which is only the image‘or copy 
of the transcendental reality, the golden shell that covers the face of 
the Satyam or verity, This apparent Sun Mitra and Varuna have 
taken to themselves in addition to their real essence. As this real 
essence is perceived not with the eys of the body but by the eyes of 
the spirit strengthened by the elevating Soma-draught, so on the other 
band the apparent Sun is not an object of spiritual porception. 


192 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 1. 


3 Asvins, the pious call you with their hymns of praise, sound- 
ing their loud song forth to you, these living men, to their 
oblations, living men, 

Al glories and all nourishment, Lords of all wealth! depend 
on you. 

The fellics of your golden chariot scatter drops, Mighty Ones ! 
of your golden car. 


4 Well is it known, O Mighty Ones: ye open heaven; for you 
the chariot steeds are yoked for morning rites, unswerving 
steeds for morning rites. 

We set you on the chariot seat, ye Mighty, on the golden car. 
Ye seek mid-air as by a path that leads aright, as by a path 
that leads direct. 


Rich in strength, through your great power vouchsafe us 
blessing day and night, 
The offerings which we bring to you shall never fail, gifts 
brought by us shall never fail. 


6 These Somadrops, strong Indra! drink for heroes, poured, 
pressed out by pressing-stones, are welling forth for thee, 
for thee the drops are welling forth. 

They shall make glad thy heart to give, to give wealth great 
and wonderful. 
Thou who acceptest praise come glorified by hymns, come thou 

° to ns benevolent, 


7 Quickly, O Agni, hear us: magnified by as thoushalt speak 
for us to the Gods adorable, yea, to the Kings adorable : 
When, O ye Deities, ye gave that Milch-cow to the Angirases, 
, They milked her: Aryaman. joined with them, did the work : 
he knoweth her as well as I. 


8 Ne’er may these manly deeds of yours for us grow old, never 
may your bright glories fall into decay, never before our 
time d3cay. 

What deed of yours, new every age, wonderous, surgassing 


man, rings forth, ‘ 


Whatever, Maruts ! may be difficult to gain, grant us, whate’er 
is hard to gain. 


© 


Consequently thee poet says: ‘With our bodily eyes we have seen the 
Sun, but enlightened by the Soma juice we have recognized it as being 
only an image of yéu.’ The untrue is the Sun ; the true is the transcen- 
dental essence of the God. 7 That Milch-cow : according to Sayana, 
the Cow of Plenty. M. Bergaigne (La Religion Vedique, [ 135, 310) 
thinks that vrayer Is meant, ‘the ancient prayer of the Fathers,’ The 
meaning of the latte: part of tho verse is uncortain., 


HYMN 140.) (He RIGVEDA. 193 


4 Dadhyach of old, Angiras, Priyamedha, these, and Kana, Atri, 
Manu knew my birth, yea, these of ancient days and Manu 
knew, e > 


Their long line stretcheth to the Gods, our birth-connexions 
are with them. 


To these, for their high station, I bow down with song, to Indra, 
Agni, bow with song. 


10 Let the Invoker bless : let offerers bring choice gifts; Brihas- 
pati the Friend doth sacrifice with Steers, Steers that have 
many an excellence, 


Now with our ears we catch the sound of the press-stone that 
rings afar. 


The very Streng hath gained the waters by himself, the Strong 
gained many a resting-place, ° 
11 O ye Eleven Gods whose home is heaven, O ye Eleven 
whos make carth yoar dwelling. 


Ye who with might, Eleven, live in waters, accent this sacrifice, 
O Gods, with pleasure 


HYMN CXI. “Agni. 


To splendid Agni seated by the altar, loving well his home, 
I bring the food as ’twere his place of birth. 


I clothe the Bright One with my hymn as with a robe, him 
with the car of light, bright-hued, dispelling gloom, 


9 Dadhyach of old: all these ancient sages have been mentioned in 
former hymns As predecessors of Paruchchhepa, the Rishi of this 
hymn, they are said to have known his ancestry. 10 Let the Invo- 
ker bless: let the Hotar, or invoking priest utter the Yajyd, words cf 
consecration used at sacrifice, Brthaspatt; see 1.14 3. With 
Steers: according to Sdyaua, a metaphorical expression fer strong and 
copious libations of Soma juice, The very Strong; the Soma. The 
resting-places sre the different receptacles into which the juice flows. 
11 O ye Hleven Gods: on this Séyana remarke: ‘Although, according 
to the text, ‘There are only three gods’, (Nirukta, vil. 5), the deities 
who represent the earth, etc., ara but three, still through their great- 
ness, 2 @. their respective varied manifestations, they amount to thirty- 
three, according to tha saying, ‘other manifestationg of Him exist in 
different places.—J, Muir, O. S. Texts, v.10. = ° 

This and the twenty-four following hymns are ascribed to the Rishi 
Dirghatamas, the son of Uchathya. 1 The food as ’twere his place 
of birth: the oblation of clarified butter which makes the fire spring 
up into fresh life, 


25 


194 THE HYMNS OF {BOOK 1. 
2 Child of a double birth he grasps at triple food ; in the year’s 


course what he hath swallowed grows anew. 
He, by another’s mouth and tongue a noble Ball, with other, 
as an elephant, consumes the trees. 
3 The pair who dwell together, moving in the dark, bestir 
themselves: both parents hasten to the babe, 
Tmpetuous-tongued, destroying, springing swiftly forth, onc to 
be watched and cherished, strengthener of his sire, 
4 For man, thou Friend of men, these steeds of thine are yoked, 
impatient, lightly running, ploughing blackened lines, 
Discordant-minded, fleet,gliding with easy speed, urged onward 
by the wind and rapid in'their course, 


5 Dispelling on their way the horror of black gloom, making a 
glorious show these flames of his fly forth, 
Whfen o’er the spacious tract he spreads himself abroad, and 
rushes panting on with thunder and with roar. 


6 Amid brown plants he stoops as if adorning them, and rushes 
bellowing like a bull upon his wives. 
Proving his might, he decks the glory of his form, and shakes 
lis horns like one terrific, hard to stay. 


7 Now covered, nuw displayed, he grasps as one who knows, 
having his resting-place in those who know him well, 

A second time they wax and gather Godlike power, and blend- 
ing both together change their Parents’ form. 


8 The maidens with long tresses hold him in embrace; dead, 
they rise up again to meet the Living One. 
Releasing them from age with a loud roar he comes, filling 
them with new spirit, living, unsubdued. 


a) 


2 Child of a double birth: born first from tha fire-sticke and then 
anew by consecration, Triple food: clarified butter, fried cakes, 
Soma juice. ' By another's mouth; according to Sgyana, ‘ he receives 
the oblation by means of the ladle of the ministering priest:, and in 
another form that is the fire that burns forests, he consumes the trees.’ 
3 The pair who dwell tocether : the two fire-sticks from which Agni ig 
produced by friction, is sire: said to be the institutor of the sacri- 
fica. 4 In this and the four following stanzas Agni is described 
not in this sacrificial form but as the fire that destroys the Jungle and 
prepares the way for new settlemente. 6 As adorning them: with 
the glory of his flame. 7 As one who knows: because, coming 
from heaven with the waters, he makes the plants grow, and is said to 
live withiu: them. Change their Parents’ form: perhaps, as Ludwig 
suggests, the plants alter the appearance of the earth, and Agni or fire 
that of the sky. 8 Lhe maidens with lony tresses: the curling 
flames. 


AY MN 141.) THE RIGVEDA. 195 


9 Licking the mantle of the Mother, far and wide he wanders 
over fields with beasts that flee apace. . 
Strengthening all that walk, licking up all around, a blackened 
path, forsooth, he leaves, where’ er he goes. 


10 O Agni, shine resplendent with our wealthy chiefs, like a 
loud snorting bull, accustomed to the house. 
Thou casting off thine infant wrappings blazest forth as 
though thou hadst put on a coat of mail for war. 


11 May this our perfect prayer be dearer unto thee than an 
imperfect prayer although it please thee well, 
With the pure brilliancy that radiates from thy form, mayest 
thou grant to us abundant store of wealth. 


12 Grant to our chariot, to our house, QO Agni, a boat with mov- 
ing feet and constant oarage, 
One that may further well our wealthy princes and all the 
folk, and be our certain refuge, , 


13 Welcome our land with thine approval, Agni. May earth and 
heaven and freely-flowing rivers 
Yield us long life and food and corn and cattle, and may the 
red Dawns choose for us their choicest. : 


HY MN CXL. * Agni. 


YrA, verily, the fair effulgence of the God for glory was 
established, since he sprang from strength, 

When he inclines thereto successful is the hymn: the songs 
of sacrifice have brought him as they flow. 

2 Wonderful, rich in nourishment, he dwells in food; next, in 

the seven auspicious Mothers is his home. 

Thirdly, that they might drain the treasures of the Bull, the 
maidens brought forth him for whom the ten provide. 


9 The Mother: the earth, whose vesture of grass and shrubs he 
licks and consumes. Strengthening all that walk: giving them 
strength and speed to fly before him. 10 Thine infant wrappings : 
the waters that enveloped the ‘Child .of the floods.’ 11 This our 

perfect prayer : see Vedic Hymns, I. 225. 12 A boat: according 


to Sayana, the sacrifice, with priests for oars, and Gods, prayere and 
offerings, for feet. 


® 

1 From strangle: from violant‘agitation of the fire-stick. 2 He 
dwells om Jvod : he is the cause of the production of men’s food, as 
sender of rain and ag sacrificial fire. The seven auspicious Mothers : 
according to Sayana, the rains which fertilize the seven lokas or worlds. 
The Bull: Agni. The maidens, and the ten, are the fingers which pro- 
duce the fire by attrition and tend it afterwards. 


196 THE AY MNS OF {BOOK I. 


3 What time from out the deep, from the Steer’s wonderous 
forfo, the Chiefs who had the power produced him with 
their strength ; 

When Matarisvan rubbed fortk him wha lay concealed, for 
mixture of the sweet drink, in the days of old. 


4 When from the Highest Fathar he is brought to us, and the 
plants he rises hungry, wondrously. 
As both together join to expedite his birth, most youthful he 
is born resplendent in his Iight. 


5 Then also entered hu the Mothers, and in them pure and 
uninjured he increased in magnitude. 

As to the first he rose, the vigorous from of old, so now he 
rans among the younger lowest ones, 


6 Therefore they choose him Herald at the morning rites, "press- 
ifg to him as unto Bhaga, popring gifts. 
When much-praised, by the power and will of Gods, he goes 
at all times to his mortal worshipper to drink. 


7 What time the holy One, wind-urged, hath risen up, serpent- 
« like winding through the dry grass unrestrained, 
Du&t lies upon the way of him who burneth all, black-winged 
and pure of birth who follows sundry paths. 


8 Like a swift chariot made by men who know their art, he 
, with his red limbs lifts himself aloft to heaven 
Thy worshippers become by burning black of hue: their 
strength flies as before a hero's violence 


9 By thee, O Agni, Varuna who guards the Law, Mitra and 
Aryaman, the Bounteous, are made strong ; | 
For, as the felly holds the sp kes, thou with thy might 
pervading hast been born encompassing them round. 


10 Agni to him who toils and pours libations, thou, most Youth- 
fal! sendest wealth and all tle host of Gods. 
Thee, therefore, even as Bhaga, will we set anew, young Child 
of strength, most wealthy! in our battle-song, 


3 Agni appears here to have been partly produced by the Chiofs, 
the Saris or Gods, from the depth of the atmosphere, from Parjavya 
the rainy cloud symbolically reprefanted as a bull, and partly gene- 
rated by Matarisvan (see T. 31. 3) by attrition, and brought by him to 
the earth to receive libations of Suma juice 4 The Highest 
Father: Dyaus. Both together: Heaven and Earth. 5 The Mothars: 
the waters. The younger lowest ones: the plants in which aiso he 


dwells. 6 Herald: or, Hotar. Bhaga: see] 136. 2, 


HYMN 142.] THE HYMNS OF 197 


11 Vouchsafe us riches turned to worthy ends, good luck abiding 
in the house, and strong capacity, 
Wealth that directs both worlds as they were guiding reins, 
and, very Wise, the Gods’ assent in sacrifice. 
12 May he, the Priest resplendent, joyful, hear us, he with the 
radiant car and rapid horses. 
May Agni, ever wise, with best directiuns to bliss and highest 
happiness conduct us. 
13 With hymns of might hath Agni now been lauded, advanced 
to height of universal kingship 
Now may these wealthy chiefs and we togcther spread forth 
as sp:cads the San above the rain-clouds. 


HYMN CXLII. Apris, 
Kinp ep, bring, Agni, Gods to-day for him who lifts the 


ladle up. 
Spin out the ancient thread for him who sheds, with gifts, 


the Soma juice. 
2 Thou dealest forth, Tanfnapat, sweet sacrifice enriched 
with oil, 
Brought by a singer such as I who offers gifts and toils for thee. 
3 He wondrous, sanctifying, bright, sprinkles the sacrifice with 
mead, 
Thrice, Nardisansa fromthe heavens, a God mid Gods adorable. 
4 Agni, besought, bring hitherward Indra the Friend, the 
Wonderful, 
For this my bymn of praise, O sweet of tongue, is chanted 
forth to thee, 
5 The ladle-hulders strew trimmed grass at this well-ordered 
sacrifice ; 
A home for Indra is adorned, wide, fittest to receive the Gods. 
6 Thrown open be the Doors Divine, unfailing, that assist 
the rite, 
High, purifying, much-desired, so that the Gods may onter in. 


7 May Night and Morning, hymued With lauds, united, fair to 


look upon. 
Strong Mothers of the sacrifice, seat them together on the 
grass, P 
1 Zhe ladle: the sacrificial ladle containing the sblation. Spin 
out the ancient threat: perform the sacrifica ordained of old, 2 
Tanducpat: Son of Thyself; Agui. Sve I 13.2, ° 3 Nar sansa: a 
name of Agui. See I. 13. 2. The Doors Divine? of the hall of 


sacrifice. See I. 13, 6. 


198 THE RIGVEDA. [BOOR 1. 


8 May the two Priests Divine, the sage, the sweet-voiced lovers 
of the hymn, 
Complete the sacrifice of ours, effectual, reaching heaven 
to-day. 
9 Let Hotra pure, set among Gods, amid the Maruts Bharati, 
la Saraswati, Mahi, rest on the grass, adorable. 
10 May Tvashtar send us genial dew abundant, wondrous, rich 
in gifts, 
For increase and for growthof wealth, Tvashtar our kinsman 
and our Friend. 
11 Vanspati, give forth, thyself, and cail the Gods to sacrifice. 
May Agni, God intelligent, specd our oblation to the Gods. 


12 To Vayu joined with Pishan, with the Maruts, and the host 


of Gods, 
to Indra who inspires the hymn ery Glory! and present 
tlie gift. : 
13 Come hither to enjoy the gifts prepared with cry of Glory! 
Come, 
O Indra, hear their calling ; they invite thee to the sacrifice. 


HYMN CXLIII Agni, 


To Agni TI present a newer mightier hymn, I bring my words 
and sung unto the Son of Strength, 

Who, Offspring of the Waters, bearing precious things sits on 
the earth, in season, dear Invuking Priest. 

2 Soon as he sprang to birth that Agni was shown forth to 

Matarisvan in the highest firmament, 

When he was kindled, through his power and majesty his 
fiery spi!endoar made the heavens and earth to shine. 


3 His flames that wax not old, beams fair to look upon of him 
whose face is lovely, shine with beauteous sheen. 
The raye of Agni, him whose active force is light, through 
the nights glimmer sleepless, ageless, like the floods. 


8 The two Prissts Dévine: see I. 13. 8. 9 Hotrd: a Goddess 
of sacrifico, regarded aé the consort of \gni. Bharati: » Goddess 
of sacred speech. Na, Sarasvati, Mahi: sea I. 13, 9. li 
Vanaspatr : the sacrificial post, said .to be a form of Agni. 12 Cry 


Glory!: Sviba ! tke sacred word uttéred at the end of sacrificial invo- 
c#tions. 


2 Matarisvan: see I. 31. 3. 


HYMN 144) THE RIGVEDA. 199 


4 Send thou with hymns that Agni to his own abode, whorules, 
one Soveran Lord of wealth, like Varuna, 
Him, All-possessor, whorfi the Bhrigus with their might 
brought to earth’s central point, the centre of the world. 


& He whom no force can stay, even as the Maruts’ roar, like 
to a dart sent forth, even as the bolt from heaven, 

Agni with sharpened jaws chews up and eats the trees, and 
conquers them as when the warrior smites his foes, 


6 And will not Agni find enjoyment in our praise, will not the 
Vasu grant our wish with gifts of wealth ? 
Will not the Inspirer speed our prayers to gain their end ? 
241m with the radiant glance I laud with this my song. 


7 The kindler of the flame wins Agni as a Friend, promoter of 
the Law, whose face is bright with oil, 

Inflamed and keen, refulgént in our gatherings, hé lifts our 
hymn on high clad in his radiant hues. 


8 Keep us incessantly with guards that cease not, Agni, with 
guards auspicious, very mighty, 
With guards that never slumber, never heedless, never be- 
guiled, O Helper, keep our children. 


HYMN CXLIV. Agn. 


Tue Priest goes forth to sacrifice, with wondrous power send- 
ing aloft the hymn of glorious care 

He moves to meet the ladles turning to the right, which are 
the first to kiss the place where he abides. 


2 To him sang forth the flowing Streams of Holy Law, encom. 
passed in the home and birth-place of the God. 
He, when he dwelt extended in the waters’ lap, adsorbed those 
Godlike powers for which he is adored, 
3 Seeking in course altern to reach the selfsame end, vhe two 
copartners strive to win this beauteous form. 
Like Bhaga must he be duly invoked by us, as he who drives 
the car holds fast the horse's reins. 


4 Karth’s central point : the altar, © 6 The Vasu: the God Agni. 


1 The place where he abides: Agni’s dwelling-place ; the altar. 
2 Of Holy Law: flowing in accordance with the order of the universe. 
3. The two copartners: the two priests, Hotar and Adhvaryu, according 
to Sayana. Perhaps Day and Night are intended, as Ludwig suggesvs. 


200 THE HYMNS OF (BOOK I. 


4 He whom the two copartners with observance tend, the pair 
who dwell together in the same abode. 
By night as in the day the grey one was born young, passing 
untouched by eld through many an age of man. 


5 Him the ten fingers, the devotions, animate : we mortals call 
on him a God to give us help. 
He speeds over the sluping surface of the land: new deeds 
hath he performed with those who gird him round. 


6 For, Agni, like a herdsman, thou by thine own might rulest 
o’er all that is in heaven and on the earth ; 
And these two Mighty Ones, bgight, golden, closely joined, 
rolling them round are come unto thy sacred grass. 
7 Agni accept with jvy, be glad inthis our prayer, joy giver, 
self-sustained, strong, born of Iloly Law! 
For fair to sce art thou turniag to every side, pleasant to 
look on as a dwelling filled with food. 


‘ HYMN CXLYV. Agni. 
‘Ask ye of him, for he is come, he knoweth it; he, full of 
wisdom, is implored, is now implored, 
With him are admonitions and with him commands: he js 
the Lord of Strength, the Lord of Power and Might. 


.2 They ask of him: not all learn by their questioning what he. 
the Sage, hath grasped, as ’twere, with his own mind, 
Forgetting not the former nor the later word, he goeth on, 
not careless in his mental power. 


3 To him these ladles go, to him these racing mares: he only 
will vive car to all the words I speak. 
All-specding, victor, perfecter of sacritice, the Babe with 
flawless help hath mustered vigerous might, 
4 Whatec’pr he meet he grasps and then rans farther on, and 
diraichtway, newly born, creeps forward with his kin. 
THe stirs the wearted man to pleasure and great joy what time 
the longing gifts approach him as he cumes. 


4 The grey one: Agni. Cf. I. 164. 1. 5 Him the ten fingers : 
see 1. 141.2. Tose who gird him rownd: his worshippers, 6 These 


‘two Mighty Ones :, Hvaven and Earth, 


3 Thess racing mares: these libations that quickly reach Agni. 


The Babe with flawless help: the ever-youthful Agal who protects his 
worshippers. 


AYMN 146.) THE RIGVEDA, 201 
5 He is a wild thing of the flood and forest : he hath begn laid 


upon the highest surface. 
He hath declared the lore of works to mortals, Agni the Wise, 
for he knows Law, the Truthful, 


HYMN CXLVL Agni. 


I Laub the seven-rayed, the triple-headed, Agni all-perfect in 
his Parents, boso:n, 
Sunk in the lap of all that moves and moves not, him who 
hath filled all luminous realms of heaven. 

2 Asa great Steer he grew to these his Parents; sublime he 
stands, untouched by eld, far-reaching. 

He plants his footsteps on the lofty ridges of the broad earth : 
his red flames lick the udder. : 

Coming tugether to their common youngling both Cows, fair- 
shaped, spread forth in all dircctions, 

Measuring out the paths that must be travelled, entrusting 
all desires to him the Mighty. s 

4 The prudent sages lead him to his dwelling, guarding with 
varied skill the Ever- Youthful. 

Longing, they turned their eyes unto the River: to these the 
Sun of men was manifested. ‘ 

Born noble in the regions, aim of all mens’ eyes, to be implored 
for life by great and small alike, 

Far as the Wealthy One hath spread himself abroad, he is 
the Sire all-visible of this progeny, 


e 


uy 


5 Upon the highest surface: the meaning is not clear, but the refer- 
euce appears to be to celestial Agni in the firmaments rather ghan to 
the sacriticial fire upon the altar. : 


6 

1 ‘The three heads may be the three daily sacrifices, or the three 
household fires, or the three regiong, earth, heaven and mid-air, The 
seven rays are the seven flames of fire.’—-Wilson. s His Parenta’ 
bosom: the lap of Heaven and Earth. 2 The udder: the cloude 
of the sky. 3 Both Cows: apparently Heaven and Earth ; accord- 
ing to Sayana, the institutor of the rite aud the priest, vr the saorificer 
and hia wife. 4 The River: Agni, whose bounties flow like stream 
of water. 9 The Wealthy One: the rich and mighty Agui. 


26 


202 THE HYMNS OF (BOOK 1. 


e 
How, Agni, have the radiant ones, aspiring, endued thee with 
the vigour of the living, ; 
So that, on both sides fostering seed and offspring, the Gods 
may joy in Holy Law’s fulfilment ? 


2 Mark this my speech, Divine One, thou, Most Youthful! 
offered to thee by him who gives most freely. 
One hates thee, and another sings thy praises : I thine adorer 
laud thy form, O Agni. 
3 Thy guardian rays, O Agni, when they saw him, preserved 
blind Mamateya from affliction, 
Lord of all riches, he preserved the pious : the foes who fain 
would harm them did no mischief. 


4 The sinful man who worships not, O Agni, who, offering not 
bharms us with double dealing, — 
Be this in turn to him a heavy sentence: may he distress 
himself by his revilings. 
§ Yea, when 4 mortal knowingly, O Victor, injures with double 
tongue a fellow-mortal, 
from him, praised Agni! save thoa him that lauds thee: 
bring us not into trouble and affliction. 


HYMN CXLVIII, Agni. 
Waar Matarisvan, piercing, formed by friction, Herald of all 
. the Gods, in varied figure, 


Is he whom they have set mid human houses, gay-hued as 
light and shining forth for beauty. 


2 They shall not harm the man who brings thee praises : such 
as lam, Agni my help approves me. 
All acts of mine shaillthey accept with pleasure, laudation 
from the singer who presents it. 


3 Him in his constant seat men skilled in worship have taken 
and with praises have established. 

As, harnessed to a chariot, fleet-foot horses, at his command 

let bearers lead him‘forward. 


1 The radiant ones :“thy bright rays. On both sides: both in 
men and women; or (offspring) of: both sexes. 3 Mdmateya: 
Dirghatamgs, the Rishi oc the hymn, son of Mamata, the wife of Ucha- 
thya. 
. 

1 Wilson, following Sayana, translates: ‘The wind, penetrating 
(amidst the fuel) has excited (Agni) the invoker (of the gods) the mul. 
tiform, the minister of all the deities.’ But then ydt, what or when, 
ie left untranslated, and the explanation of Matarisvan as Vayu or 
wind cannot be justified by any Rigveda text. 


AY MN 150.] THE RIGVEDA. 203 


4 Wondrous, full many a thing hechews and crunches: he 
shines amid the wood with spreading brightness, ° 
Upon his glowing flames the wind blows daily, driving them 
like the keen shaft of anearcher. 


5 Him, whom while yet in embryo the hostile, both skilled and 
fain to harm, may never injure, 
Men blind and sightless through his splendour hurt not: his 
never: failing lovers have preserved him. 


HYMN CXLIX. Agni. 


Hirer he hastes to give, Lord of great riches, King of the 
mighty, to the place of treasure. 
The pressing-stones shall serve him speeding near us, 


2 As Steer of men so Stcer of earth and heaven by glory, he 
whose streams all life hath drunken, 
Who hasting forward rests upon the altar. 


3 He who hath lighted up thé joyous castle wise Courser like 
the Steed of cloudy heaven, 
Bright like the Sun, with hundred fold existence. 


4 He, doubly born, hath spread in his effulgence through the 
three luminous realins, through all the regions, : 
Pest sacrificing Priest where waters gather. 
5 Priest doubly born, he through his love of glory hath in his 
keeping all things worth the choosing. 
The man who brings him gifts hath noble offspring. : 


HYMN CL. Agni, 


Agni, thy faithful servant I call apon thee with many a gift, 
As in the keeping of the great inciting God ; 


2 Thou who ne’er movest thee to aid the indolent, the godless man, 
Him who though wealthy never brings an offerlng. 


8 Splendid,O Singer, is that man, mightiest of the great in heaven. 
Agni, may we be foremost, we thy worshippers. 


eee erent ae ne ee 


: = : oe ¢=—___— 
1 Bhe place of treasure: the altar, where riches are obtatned by 


sacrifice and prayer. 2 As Steer af mtn : preéminent, likea strang- 
bull, among men. 3 The joyous castle: or the castle Narmini ; 
meaning, probably, the proud stronghold of sdme demon. 4 Where 


waters gather: according to Safana, in the place of sacrifice where 
water is collected* for cercmonial, purpose. ° But the refgrence is pro- 
bably to Agni’s appearance in the firmament, the waters abovs the 


earth, in the form of lightning. 5 Doully bérn: from the fire- 
sticks and again at consecration, . 
3 That man: who propitiates thee by sacrifice and praise. Q 


Stnger ; singer of hymas, sage, or priegt. 


204 THE RIGVEDA., [BOOK 1. 
HYMN CLI, Mitra and Varuna. 


Fe 
Heaven and earth trembled at the might and voice of him, 
whom, loved and Holy One, helper of all mankind, 
The wise who longed for spoil in fight for kine brought forth 
with power, a Friend, mid waters, at the sacrifice. 
2 As these, like friends, have done this work for you, these 
prompt servants of Purumilha Soma.offerer, 
Give mental power to him who sings the sacred song, and 
hearken, Strong Ones, to the master of the house, 
3 The folk have glorified your birth from Earth and Heaven, 
to be extolled, ye Strong Ones, for your mighty power. 
Ye, when ye bring to singer and the rite, enjoy the sacrifice 
performed with holy praise and strength, 
4 The people prospers, Asuras! whom ye dearly love: ye, 
Righteous Ones, proclaim aloud the Hvuly Law. 
That cfficacions power that comes from lofty heaven, ye bind 
unto the work, as to the pole an ox. 
® On this great carth ye send your treasure down with might: 
© unstained by dust, the crowding kine are in the stalls. 
Here in the neigh bourhood thev ery unto the San at morning 
aud at evening, like swift birds of prey. 
6 The flames with curling tresses serve your sacrifice, whereto 
yo sing the sung, Mitra and Varuna, 
Send down of your free will, prosper our holy songs: ye are 
sole Masters of the singer's hymn of praise. 
7 Whoso with sacrifices toilling brings you gifts, and worships, 
sage and priest, fulfilling your desire,— 
To hm do ye draw nigh and taste his sacrifice. 
inclined to us unto songs and prayer. 
8 With saqrilices and with milk they deck you first, ye Righteous 
Oxes, as if through stirrings of the mind, ‘ 
To you they bring theit hymns with their collected thought, 
while ye with earnest soul come to us gloriously. 


1 Ofhim: Agni 23 As these: the priests. Purumi/ha: the 
prinoe who offers the sacrifice. ' Strong Ones: ye mighty Gods, 
Mitra and Varuna. 3 When ye bring: him, Agni, to the sacrifice. 
4 Asuras: immorta! Gods, especially the ancient deities. That 
efficacious power + an Wilson observes, the meaning is not very obvious, 
although it is clear that the adequacy of worship or sacrifice to effeco 
ios objects, or realize ite rewards, is intended, 


HY MN 152.) THE HYMNS OF 205 


9 Rich strength of life is yours: ye, Heroes, have _obtained 

through your surpassing powers rich far. extending mig lit. 

Not the past days con joined with nights, not rivers, not the 
Panis have attainel your God-head and your wealth 


HYMN CLIL Mitra- Varna. 


TE robes which ye put on abound with fatness : uninterrupted 
courses are your counsels. 
All falsehood, Mitra-Varuua! ye conquer, and closely cleave 
unto the Law Eternal. 
2 This might of theirs hath no one comprehended, True is the 
erushing word the sage bath uttered, 
The fearful four-edged bolt smites down the three-edged, and 
those who hate the Gods first fall and perish. 
3 The Footless Maid precedeth footed ercatures. Who marketh) 
Mitra-Varuna, this your doing ? 
The Babe Unborn supporteth this world’s barthen, fnlfilleth 
Law and overcometh falsehood. 
4 We look on him the darling of the Maidens, always advancing 
never falling downward, 
Wearing inseparable, wide-spread raiment, Mitra’s and Varaite 
delightful glory. 
5 Unbridled Courser, born but not of horses, neighing he flieth 
on with back uplifted. 
The youthful love the mystery thought-surpassing, praising in 
Mitra- Varuna, its glory. 


9 The panis: the envious demons who carry away and concea) the 
cows or rays of light. 


1 The robss which ye put on: the oblatiun of clarified butter with 
which the Gods may be said to be clothed. Uninterrupted courses 
are your counsels: your designs are always fully carri.d into effect. 
Or thetmeaning may be as Wilson, following Sayana, renders ib: ‘your 
natures are to be regarded as without’ dofbct.’ 2 The fearful four- 

edged bolt: Ludwig sugg sts an emendation of the text and then trans- 
lates: ‘thrice strikes the edge [of Indra's thunderbolt], four times the 
fearful edge.’ I give the literal English of the words as they stand, the 
sense being, accorcing to Sayana, that he who has more arms is stronger 
than he who has fewer, the arms ihtended being, perhaps, sacrifice and 


prayer. 3 The footless Maid: Dawn. Whe Babe Unborn: The 
Sun before his appearance in beaven. 4 The darling of the Mandens: 
the Sun, the lover of the Dawns. D The mystery thought-.urpass- 


iny : the mystery of the Sun’s motion excites wonder, aud Mitra and 
Varuna are praised in counexion with it, 


206 THE HYMNS OF (BOOK I. 


6 May the milch kine who favour Mamateya prosper in this 
world him who loves devotion. 
May he, well skilled in rites, beg food, and calling Aditi with 


his lips give us assistance. 
7 Gods, Mitra-Vacuna, with love and worship, let me make you 
delight in this oblation. 
May oar prayer he victorious in battles, may we have rain 
from heaven to make us prosper, 


HYMN CLIJI., Mitra- Varuna. 


We worship with our reverence and oblations you, Mitra. 
Varuna, accordant, mighty, 

So that with us, ye Twain whose backs are sprinkled with oil, 
the priests with oil and hymns support you. 


2 Your praise is like a mighty power, an impulse : to you, Twain 
Gods, a well-formed hymn js offered, 


As the priest decks you, Strong Ones, in assemblies, and the 
prince fain to worship you for blessings. 


3 Mitra-Varuna, Aditi the Milech-cow streams for the rite, for 
folk who bring oblation, 


When in the assembly he who worships moves you, like toa 
human priest, with gifts presented, 


4 So may the kine and heavenly Waters pour you sweet drink 
in families that make you joyful, 


Of this may he, the ancient House-Lord, give us. Enjoy, 
drink of the milk the cow provideth, 


6 Mamateya: the son of Mamata, Dicghatamas the Rishi of the 
hymn. Him who loves devotion : apparently Purumilha the insti- 
tutor of the sacrifice, mentioned in stanza 6 of the preceding hymn. 
M ay he beg jood: tlie food that remaing after the oblations have been 
P resented and consumed Attia : I follow Ludwig in taking Aditi 
14 the usual signification. , Sdyans takes it as meaning ‘a perfect core- 
Mouy’ which is to be completed, aud Grassmann as famino, dearth, or 
want, which 1s to be averteyd. The bymn is fuli of difficulties, and 
cannot at prévent be satisfactorily translated. 


» 2 The prince: the Wealthy man who institutes the sacrifice. 3 
Aditi, the Milch-cow: aditi regarded as the source of rewards for tha 
pious ; or Aditi may be baleen ax an apithet, ‘the exhaustless, qualify- 
ing Milch cow. 4 Lhe ancient liowe-Lord; Agni, the guardian of the 
homestead. 


HYMN 155) THE RIGVEDA. 207 


HYMN CLIV. - Vishnu. 


Twitt declare the mighty deeds of Vishnnu, of him who 
measured out the earth$v regions, 

Who propped the highest placc of congregation, thrice setting 
down his footstep, widely striding 

2 For this his mighty deed is Vishnu lauded, like some wild 

beast, dread, prowling, mountain roaming ; 

He within whose three wide-extended paces all living creatures 
have their habitation. 


3 Let the hymn lift itself as streneth to Vishnu, the Bull far. 
striding, dwelling on the mountains, 
Him who alone with triple step hath measured this common 
dwelling-place, long, far extended. 


4 Him whose three places that are filled with sweetness, imperish- 
able, joy as it may list them, 
Who verify alone upholds the threefold, the earth, the heaven, 
and all living creatures. 


5 May [attain to that his well-loved mansion where men devoted 
to the Gods are happy. ‘ 
For there springs, close akin to the Wide-Strider, the well of 
meath in Vishnu’s highest footstep. 


§ Fain would we go unto your dwelling-places where there are 
many-horned and nimble oxen, 
For mightily, there, shineth down upon us the widely-striding 
Buall’s sublimest mansion, 


HYMN CLV, Vishnu-Indra. 


To the great Hero, him who sets his mind thereon, and Vishnu, 
praise aloud in song your draught of juice,-— 

Gods ne’er beguiled, who borne as’t were by noble steed, have 
stood upon the lofty ridges of the hills. 


1 The highest place of congregation: heaven, where the Gods are 
assembled. Thrice setting down his footstep: see I. 22. 16. 2 
For this his migkty deed : I have followed S&yana who takes the active 
verb in a passive signification, Prof. Peterson translates . ‘Vishnu 
makes loud boast of this,’ which is perhaps a more accurate rendering, 
5 Meath: or nectar, or honey ; meaning celestial Soma, 6 Your 
dwelling-places : Vishnu’s and probably Indra’s. | Many-horned and 
nimble oxen: the stars with their ever-twinkling rays. Cf, I, 105. 10; 
Valakhilya 7. 2. 

1 Zo the great Hero: Yadra. Who sets his mind thereon: who loves 
praise. 


208 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK f. 


2 Your Soma-drinker keeps afar your furious rush, Indra and 
Vishnn, when ye come with all your might. 
That which hath been directed we)l at mortal man, bow-armed 
Krisinu’s arrow, ye turn far aside. 
3 These offerings increase his mighty manly strength : he brings 
both Parents down to share the gemal flow 
Ile lowers, though a son, the Father’s highest name ; the third 
is that which is high in the light of heaven. 


4 We land this manly power of him the Mighty One, preserver, 
inoffensive. bounteous and benten ; 
His who strode, widely pacing, with three steppings forth over 
the realms of earth for freedom and for lite. 
5 A mortal man, when he beholds two steps of him who lovks 
npon the light, is restless with amaze. 
But! is third step doth no one venture to approach, no, nor 
the feathered birds of air who fly with wings, 
6 He, like a rounded wheel, hath in swift motion set his ninety 
racing steeds together with the four. 
Developed, vast in form, with those who sing forth praise, a 
"youth, no more a child, he cometh to our call. 


HYMN CLVI. Vishnu. 


Far-sointna, widely famed, going thy wonted way, fed with 
the oil, be helpful, Mitra-like, to us. 

So, Vishnu, e’en the wise must swell thy song of praise, and 
he who hath eblations pay thee solemn rites. 


2 dour Soma drinker: you gently approach your devoub worship- 


per and do him no harm Artsdnw: one of the guardians of the 
heavenly Soma, apparently a demon of drought who prevents men from 
enjoying the ambrosial rain. 3 Poth Parents : Heaven and Earth. 


The genial Jow: the sacrificial offering, tha libation of Soma juice. 
He lowers, though a son: the meaning appears to be that Vishny takes 
rank in the sacrifice above fis own father Dyaus, and that Agni has 


the third place. 5 ‘Hie (Vishnu’s) path on earth and in the firma- 
ment is within mortal observation ; not so that in heaven.— Wilson. 
Hia third step: in the highest heaven. Cf. I. 154, 5. 6 This 


verse is not very intelligible. Wilson following Siygna, gives the fol- 
lowing explanation. ‘Vishnu is here identified with Time, comprising 
ninety-four periods: the year, two ‘solstices, five seasons, twelve 
months, twenty-four half-months, thirty days, eight watches, and 
twelve zodiacal signs.’ Ludwig translates the first hemistich: ‘ and 
under four names [vf the four seasons] he, like a round wheel, has set 
in motion ninety spokes." The steeds, or spokes, are the days of the 
solar year, ninety in each of the fuur seasons. 


HY MN 157.) THE RIGVEDA. 209 


2 IIe who brings gifts to him the Ancient and the Last, to 
Vishnu who ordains, together with his Spouse, ® 
Who tells the lofty birth of hin the Lofty Ono, shall verily 
surpass in glory e’en hig peer. 
3 [lim have ye satisfied, singers, as well as ye know, primeval 
germ of Order even from his birth. 
Ve. knowing e’en his name, have told it forth : may we, Vishnn 
enjoy the grace of thee the Mighty One. 


4 The Sovran Varuna and both the Asvins wait on this the will 
of him who guides the Marut host, 
Vishnu hath power supreme and might that finds the day, 
aad with his Friend unbars the stable of the kine, 


5 Even he the Heavenly One who came for fellowship, Vishnu 
to Indra, godly to the godlier, 
Who, Maker, throned in three worlds, helps the Aryan man, 
and gives the worshipper, bis share of Holy Law, 


HYMN CLVILI. Asvins. 


Aant is wakened : Sfirya riscth from the earth, Mighty, re- 
falyent Dawn hath shone with all her light. 

The Asvins have equipped their chariot for tho course. erod 
Savitar hath moved the folk in sundry ways, 7 


2 When, Asvins, ye equip your very mighty car, bedew, ye 
Twain, our power with honey and with oil. 
To our devotion give victorious strength in war : may we wig 
riches in the heroe’s strife for spoil. 


3 Nigh to us come the Asvins’ Jauded three-wheeled car, the car 
laden with meath and drawn by fleet-foot steeds., 
Three-scated, opulent, bestowing alf delight: may it bring 
weal to us, to cattle and to men. 


4 Bring hither nourishment for us, ye Asvins Twain ; ‘sprinkle 
us with your whip that drops with honey-dew. 


2 Tegether with his Spouse: sumajjdnaye ; explained by Si#yana_ to 
mean ‘self-born,’ and by Ludwig ‘vegy delightful’. 4 With his 
Friend : assists his friend Indra io releasing the rain imprisoned in tha 
mountains vf cloud, or the rays of light that h&ve been stolen. ) 
His share of Holy Law: bis shai of the blessings which follow the 
performance of sacrgtice. 


rn ened ° 
: Savitar : the sun at the great cause of life,, © 3 Three wheeled 
ear: sen [. 34 5, 4 Your whip: sea Hymns @f the Atharva-veda, 


[X. 1 which is a glorification of tho Asvins’ JLoney- whip, signifying, 
pe rhape, the early stimulating and life-viving breeze which accompanics 
he first «appesrance of these Lords of Light “nnd Heralds of Dawn. 


4 
‘ “A we! 9" 
3 FI 
f 


210 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 2. 


Prolong our days of life, wipe out our trespasses ; destroy our 
foes, be our companions and our Friends. 


5 Ye store the germ of life in female creatures, ye lay it up 
within all living beings. ¢ : 
Ye have sent forth, O Asvins passing mighty, the fire, the 
sovrans of the wood, the waters. 


6 Leevhes are ye with medicines to heal us, and charioteers are 
ye with skill in driving. 
Ye Strong, give away to him who brings oblation and with his 
heart pours out his gift before you. 


HYMN CLVIII. Asvins. 


Ye Vasus Twain, ye Rudras full of counsel, grant us, Strong 
Strengthencrs, when ye stand beside us, 

What wealth Auchathya craves of you, great Helpers when 
ye come forward with no niggard succour. 


2 Who *may give you aught, Vasus, for your favour, for what, 
at the Cow’s placc, ye grant through worship ? 
Wake for us understanding full of riches, come with a heart 
that will falfil our longing, 


8 As erst for Tugra’s son your car, sea-crossing, strong, was 
equipped and set amid the waters, . 
So may I gain your shelter and protection as with winged 
course a hero secks his army, 


A May this my praise preserve Uchathbya’s offspring : let not 
these Twain who fly with wings exhaust me. 
Let not the wood ten times up-piled consume me, when fixed 
for you it bites the ground it stands on. 


§ The most maternal streams, wherein the Dés3as cast me 
securely bound, have not devoured me. 

When Traitana would cleave my head asunder, the Dasa 
wounded his own breast and shoulders, 


t 
5 Phe sovrans of the wood: the tall trees of the forest, 2 


2 Ye Vasus Twain, ye Rudras : the AsvVins are addressed as identi- 
cal with these two classes of Gods. See I. 31. 3. and 34. 11. 
Auchathya: the son of Uchathya,e Dirghatamas the Rishi of the 
hymn. _ 2 The Cow's place: according to Saygna, the altar ; the 
Cow being the earth. 3 Tugra’s son: see I. 116. 3. 4 
Uchatya’s offsprarty : the poet ‘himself. These Twain: day and night 
From this and the following verse it would appear that Dirghatamas 
had been subjected to the ordeals of fire, water, and single combat 
with a man calfed Traitana. and preserved in all three by the Asving, 
See Ludwig, Der Rigveda, LV. p. 44. ° 


HY MN 160.} THE RIGVEDA. 211 


6 Dirghatamas the son of Mamata hath come to length: of days 
in the tenth age of buman kind. 
He is the Brahman of the,waters as they strive to reach their- 
end and aim: their charioteer is he. 


HYMN CLIX. Heaven and Earth, 


I prAISe with sacrifices mighty Heaven and Earth at festivals, 
the wise, the Strengtheners of Law. 

Who, having Gods for progeny, conjoined with Gods, through 
wonder. working wisdom bring forth choicest boons. 


2 With invocations, on the gracious Father’s mind, and on the 
Mother's great inherent power I muse. 
Prolific Parents, they have made the world of life, and for 
their brood all round wide immortality. 


& These Sons of yours well skilled in work, of wondrous power, 
brought forth to life the¢wo great Mothers. first of all, 
To keep the truth of all that stands and all that moves, ye 
guard the station of your Son who knows no guile, 


4 They with surpassing skill, most wise, have measured the- 
Twins united in their birth and in their home. 
They, the rcfulgent Sages, weave within the sky, yee, in neh 
depths of sea, a web for ever new. 


9 This is to-day the goodliest gift of Savitar: this thought we 
have when now the God is furthering us. 
On us with loving-kindness Heaven and Earth bestow riches. 
and various wealth and treasure hundred fold! 


HYMN CLX. Heaven and Earth.. 


Tumse, Hreavern.and Earth, bestow prosperity on all, sustainers 
of the region, Holy Ones and Wise, 
Two Bowls of noble kind : between these Goddesses the God, 
the falgent Sun, travels by fixed decree. 


6 The tenth age: perhaps the tenth decade. The meaning of the 
verse, whieh appears to be a later additign, is obscure. 


3 These Sons of yours: the Ribhus, who restored their Parents’ 
youth. Soe I. 20.4. Lhe two great Mothers : the Parents of all, Heaven 


and Earth. Your Son who knows noguile : Sirya, or the Sun, 
who is regarded as the symbol of truch. ‘Solem quie Gicere falsum 
Audeat ?’ 4 The Twins: Heaven and Harth. Ix the depths of sea: 


in the aerial ocean or atmosphere. 


1 Two Bowls : so called from their hemispherical appearance. But 
see Hillebrandt, Vedische Mythologie, I. p. 177, and Ludwig, Ueber 
die N. A. auf dem G. der Rigveda-forschung, p. 87. 


212 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK I 


2 Widgly capacious Pair, mighty, that never fail, the Father and 
the Mother keep all creatures safe : 
The two world-halves, the spirited, the beautiful, because the 
Father hath clothed them in goedly forms. 


3 Son of these Parents, he the Priest with power to cleanac, Sage, 
sanctifics the worlds with his surpassing power. 
Thereto for his bright milk he milked through all the days 
the party-coloured Cow and the prolifie Bull. 
4 Among the skilful Gods most skilled is he, who made the two 
world-halves which bring prosperity to all ; 
Who with great wisdom measured both the regions out, and 
stablished them with pillars that shall neer decay. 
Iixtolled in song, O Heaven and Earth, bestow on us, ye 
mighty Pair, great glory and high lordly sway. 
Whereby we may extend ourselves ever over the folk; and 
send us strength that shall déserve the praise of men, 


HYMN CLXI, Ribhus, 


Wuy hath the Best. why hath the Youngest come to us? 
« Upon what cmbassy comes he? What have we said ? 
We'have not blamed the chalice of illustrious birth, We, 
Brother Agni, praised the goodness of the wood. 

2 The chalice that is single make ye into four; thus have the 
Jods commanded 5 therefore am T come. 

If, O Sudhanvan’s Children, ye will do this thing ye shail 
participate in sacrifice with Gods. 


gen 


sy 


> What to the envoy Agni in reply ye spake, A courser must be 
made, a chariot fashioned here, an 

A cow must be created, and the Twain made young. When 
we have done these things, Brother, we turn to you. 


4 When thus, O Ribhus, ye had done ye questioned thas, 
Whither went he who came to us a messenger ? 

oak a oO aan ee he re he, Bl at oe 
2 The Father: Dyaus, dv pechaps Tvashtar. 3 Son of these 
Parents: the Sun, the offspring of Heaven aud Earth. For his 
bright milk: he has drawS the dew as milk from his mother Earth, and 
obtained his light from Heaven his father. 4 Most skilled ts he: 
Savana observes that having magnified Heaven and Tarth by praising 


thair son, the post now maguifies them by lauding their maker. See 
° e 

Muir, O, S Pexts°v 39 

u 


ite eS ee gi 


ee 


1 The Ribhus ask Agni why he cames totham. The chalice : ge 
J. 20 9 3 A courser must le mae, etc, : sea I. 20 2, 3, 4, and J, 
JUU and 111. ‘ 


HYMN 161.) THE RIGVEDA 213 


Then Tvashtar, when he viewed the four wrought vchaliccs, 
concealed himself among the Consorts of the Gods. 


5 As Tvastar thus had spoken, Let us slay these men who have 
revil:d the chalice, drinking cup of Gods, 
They gave themselves now names when Soma juice was shed, 
und under these new names the Maiden welcumed them. 


6 Indra hath yoked his Bays, the Asvins’ car is horsed, Brihas. 
pati hath brought the Cow of every hue. 
Ye went as Ribhu, Vibhvan, Vaja to the Gods, and skilled 


in war, obtained your share in sacrifice. 


7 Ye by your wisdom brought a cow from out a hide ; unto that 
ancient Pair ye gave again their youth, 

Out of a horse, Sudhanvan’s Sons, ye formed a horse: a cha. 
riot equipped, und went unto the Gods, 


8 Drink ye this water, wére, the words ye spake to them 3 or 
drink ye this, the rinsing of the Manja-grass. 
If ye approve not even this, Sudhanvan’s Sons, then at the 
third libation gladden ye yourselves. 


9 Most excellent are waters, thus said one of you ; most exccl- 
Jent is Agni, thus another said. 
Another praised tomanyaone the hghtning cloud. Then 
did ye shape the cups, speaking the words of truth. 


10 One downward to the water drives the crippled cow, another 
trims the flesh brought on the carving-board. 
Once carries off the refaed at the set of sun. How did the Pa- 
rents ald their children in their task! 


4 Then Tvashtar: represented as hiding.himself for shame among 
the Goddessos—-probably the Celestial Waters—whwn he saw this al- 
teration of his work, and in anger proposing to slay the Ribhus who 
had thus disgracod him. D9 New names: probably Ritus, Soasons, 
in place of Ribhus —Ludwig. Zhe Maiden: apparently tile goielitae 
of Tvagtar, meaning, perhaps, as Ludwig suyvusts, the first Dawn of 
the year, of which Tvastar, ia the God "OG Lhe Cow of every hue : 
the fruitful earth restored to youth by the Gods of the Seasons. 8 
The rising of the Munja-grass: or Soma juices which has been filtered 
through a strainer made of trat grass. ‘ The two first alternatives 
intimate that the ,Ribhus may be participant of the libetions offered 
at dawn or at noon; the third applies to the evening sacrifice ; the 
right of the Ribhug to share in this being elsewhere ackoowledge d.’ —r 
Wilson. 9 The meaning of these sayinysia this place is not clear. 
10 The restoration to youth of the aged Parents, Heaven and Earth, 
appears to be symbulically described under the figure of a sacrifics, 
How dié the Parents aid?: weak and exhausted ili uva they were 
unnble to give uny assistance 


O14 THK HY MNS OF [BOOK 1. 


11 On tlfe high places ye have made the grass for man, and water 
in the valleys by your skill, O Men. 
Ribhus, ye iterate not to-dav that act of yours, your sleeping 
in the house of him whom naught can hide. | 


12 As, compassing them round, ye glided through the worlds, 
where had the venerable Parents their abode ? 
Ye laid a curse on him who raised his arm at you: to him 
who spake aloud to you ye spak again. 


13 When ye had slept your fill, ye Ribhus, thus ye asked, O thou 
whom naught may hide, who now hath wakened us ? 
The goat declared the hound to be your wakener. That day, 
in a full year, ye first unclosed your eyes. 


14 The Maruts move in heaven, on earth this Agni; through the 
énid-firmament the Wind approaches, 
Varuna comes in the sea’s gathere? waters, O Sons of Strength, 
desirous of your presence, ~ 


HYMN CLXILI. The Horse, 


Stigut us not Varuna, Aryaman, or Mitra, Ribhukshan, 
Indra, Ayu, or the Maruts, 

When we declare amid the congregation the virtues of the 
strong Steed, God-descended. 


2 What time they bear before the Courser, covered with trap- 
: pings and with wealth, the grasped oblation, 


11 In the house of him whom naught can hide: in the mansien of 
the Sun, to whom the Ribhus went to obtain jmmoré.ity. In this 
and the remaining stanza, according to Sf{yana, the Ribhus are identi- 
fied with the rays of the sun. 13 When ye had slept: in the 
mansion of the Sun. The goat declared the hound to be your waken- 
er: the meaning is obscure. Sayana’s rendering is, ‘the Sun replied 
that the awakener was the wind.’ That day: Wilson following 
Siyana, explains : ‘you have mado this world to-day luminous, after the 
year has expired ; that is, the rainy season being past, the rays of the 
sua and moon are again visible,’ 14 Sons of Strength: ye power- 
ful Ribhus, ar P 


1 Ribhukshan: a nam3 of Indra, as lord of the Ribhus. Ayu 
said by both commentators, Sayana and Mahidhara, to be used in this 
glace for Vayu, the God of Wind, Ayuis probably Agni. Amid 
the congregation : sacrifice. God-descended : sprung from the Gods, 
or, according t@ Sayana, born as ithe type of various deities. 2 
Grasped oblateon: the offering that is to be made for the horse, and 
which has been taken from the remains of the burnt-offering made the 
night before. 


RYMN 162.) THE RIGVEDA. 215 


The dappled guat goeth straightforward, bleating, to the place 
dear to Indra and to Pishan. 


3 Dear to all Gods, this goat, the share of Pishan, is first led 
forward with the vigoroas Courser, — 
While Tvashtar sends ‘him forward with the Charger,acceptable 
for sacrifice, to glory. 
4 When thrice the men lead round the Steed, in order, who 
goeth to the Gods as meet oblation, 
The goat precedeth him, the share of Pishan, and to the Gods 
the sacrifice announceth. 


9 Invoker, ministering priest, atoncr, fire-kindler,Soma-presser, 
sage, reciter, 
With this well ordered sacaifice, well finished, do ye fill full 
the channels of the rivers. 


6 The hewers of the post and those who carry it and those who 
carve the knob to deck the, Horse's stake ; 
Those who prepare the cooking-vessels for the Steed,—may 
the approving help of these promote our work. 


7 Forth, for the regions of the Gods, the Charger witb his 
smooth back is come; my prayer attends him, 
In him rejoice the singersand thesages. A good fricnd have 
we won for the Gods’ banquet. 


8S May the flect Courser’s halter and his heel-ropes, the head-stall 
aud the girths and cords about him. 
And the grass put within his mouth to bait him,—among the 
Gods, too, let all these be with thee. 
9 What part of the Steed’s flesh the fly hath eaten, or is Jeft 
svickase to the post or hatchet. 
Or to the slayer% hands and nails adhereth,—among the Gods, 
too, may all this be with thee. 
10 Food undigested steaming from his belly, and any odoar of 
raw flesh remaining, 
This let the immolators set in order and dress the sacrifice 
with perfect cooking. : 


— 


The dappled goat: this goat is to be tied tu the horse at the sacri- 
ficial post. Pdshan here is said vy Sayana to stand for Agni. 4 
Who goeth to the Gods : the object of the sacrifite is to send the horse to 
the Gods thathe may obtain wealth and other blessings for his 
sacrificers. 5 Invoker, etc: these are the desigrktions OE eight of 
the sixteen priests employed at solemn rites. The, sage (siviprah, a 
priest of profound knowledge) is the superintendent of the whole cere - 
mony. Fill full the channels : obtain abundance of rain ; or perhaps 
offer oblations in abundance. 


216 THE HYMNS OF (BOOK 1. 


11 What from thy body which with fire 1s roasted, when thouart 
set‘upon the spit, distilleth,— 
Let not that lie on earth or grass neglected, but to the long- 
ing Gods let all be offered. F; 


12 They who observing that the Horse is ready call out and say, 
The smell is good 3 ; remove It 5 
And, craving meat: await the distribution, —may their approv- 
ing help promote our labour. 


13 The trial-fork of the dosh cooking caldron, the vessels out of 
which the broth is sprinkled, 
The warming pots, the covers of the dishes, hooks, carving- 
boards,—all these attend the Charger. 


14 The starting-place, his place of rest and rolling, the ropcs 
wherewith the Charger’s fect were fastened, 
The water that he drank, the food he tasted ,—among the 
Gods, too, may all these attend the. 


15 Let not the fire, smoke-scented make thee crackle, not glow. 
ing caldron smell and break to pieces. 
Offered, beloved, approved, and consecrated,—such Charger 
do the Gods accept with favour, 


16 Thetrobe they spread upon the Horse to clothe him, the upper 
covering and the golden trappings, 

The halters which restrain the Steed, the heel- ropes, —all these, 
as grateful to the Gods, they offer. 


I! If one, when seated, with cxcessive urging hath with his hecl 
or with his whip distressed thee, 
All these thy woes, as with the oblations’ ladle at edulis 
with my prayer I banish, : 


18 The four-and-thirty ribs of the swift Charfer, kin to the Gods, 
the slayer’s hatchet pierces. 
Cut ye with skill, so that the parts be flawless, and picce by 
picce declaring them dissect them. 


19 Of vasntar’s Charger there is one dissector,—this Js the 
custom—two there are who guide him. 
Such of bis limbs as I divide in order, all these, amid the 
balls, ia tire I offer, 


18 Fowr-and-thirty : so many out of the thirty-six, Ag the Sacri- 
ficial Horse is the symbol of the heavens, the thirty-four ribs represent 
the sun, the mook, the five planets, dnd the twenty-seven nakshatras or 
Tunar asterisms. Ses Ludwig, Dor Rigveda, ITf. p. 186, Pisce by piece 
declaring them: the dasecotors are to name the several parts as they 
divide them, each part being sacred tu a separate divinity, 1) dmid 
the balls : the meat madu up inte balls. 


HY MN 163.) THE RIGVEDA. 217 


20 Let not thy dear soul burn thee as thou comest, Jet not the 
hatchet linger in thy body. 


Let not a greedy clumsy immolator, missing the joints, 
mangle thy limbs unduly. 

21 No, bere thou diest not, thou art not injured : by easy paths 
unto the Gods thou goest. 


Both Bays, both spotted mares are now thy fellows, and to 
tho ass’s pole is yoked the Charger. 


22 May this Steed bring us all-sustaining riches, wealth in good 
kine, good horses, manly offspring. 
Freedom from sin may Aditi vouchsafe us: the Steed with 
our oblations gain us lordship! 


HYMN CLXIII. The Horse, 


What time, first springing “nto life, thou neighedst, proceed- 
ing from the sea or upper waters, 


Limbs of the deer hadst thou, and eagle pinions. O Steed, 
thy birth is high and must be lauded. 


2 This Steed which Yama gave hath Trita harnessed, aaa him, 
the first of all, hath Indra mounted. 


His bridle the Gandharva grasped. O Vasus, from out the 
Sun ye fashioned forth the Courser. 


3 Yama art thou, O Horse; thou art Aditya; Trita art thou by 
secret operation. 


«Thou art divided thoroughly from Soma. They say thon 
' Wits “bree bonds in heaven that hold thee. 


90 Burn the: make thee sad. 21 Both Bays: thou art now 
associated in heaven with the two bay horses of Indra, the two epotted 
mares pf the Maruts, and the ass that draws the chariot of the Agvina. 
A full description of an Agvamedha oy Herse-sacrifice in later times may 
be found in the Ramayana, Book I., Cantos 10—13, 


are 
® 


1 From the seas the Sacrificial Horse is here identified with the Sun 
in the ocean of air. 2 Yama’: here said to mean Agni, as a solar 
deity. rita: as God of the reniote birth-place of fhe Sun. See 1. 187, 
note. The Gandharva: Visvavasu, a heavenly being who dwells 
,in the region of the air and guards the celestial Soma, 3 Aditya 
the Sun. By secret operation : by the mysterious effect of the sacrifice, 
Soua ; here, perhaps, the Muon ; but the meaning is uncertain. 


28 


218 THE HY MNS OF {BOOR 2. 


4 Three bonds, they say, thou hast in heaven that bind thee, 
threean the waters, three within the ocean, 
To me thou seemest Varuna, O Courser, there where they say 
is thy sublimest birth- place, 


‘> Here, Courser, are the places where they groomed thee, here 
are the traces of thy hoofs as winner. ~ 
Here have I seen the auspicious reins that guide thee, which 
those who guard the holy Law keep safely. 


‘6 Thyself from far I recognized in spirit —a Bird that from 
below flew through the heaven. 
I saw thy head still soaring, striving upward by paths unsoiled 
by dust, pleasant to travel. 


7 Tlere I beheld thy form, matchless in glory, eager to win thee 
food at the Cow’s station. 
Whene’er a man brings ‘thee to thine enjoyment, thou swallow- 
est tue plants, most greedy eater. -f 


8 After thee, Courser, come the dar, the bridegroom, the kine 
come after, and the charm of maidens, 
Full companies have tollowed for thy friendship: the pattern 
of thy vigour Gods have copied. 


‘9 Horns made of gold hath he : his fect are iron: less fleet than 
he, though swift as thought, is Indra. 

The Gods have come that they may taste the oblation of him 
who mounted, first of all, the Courser, 


10 Symmetrical in flank, with rounded haunches, mettled like 
heroes, the Celestial Coursers 
Put forth their strength, like swans in lengthened order, when 
they, the Steeds, have reached heavenly causeway. _ 


4 The three bonds in heaven are said by Sdyana to be his ‘media of 
origin, that is the Vasus, Aditya, and Heaven.’ By the waters, it ig 
said that the Ifabitable world is intended, and that three bonds therein 
are tillage, rain, and seed. In the ocean, thabis the firmament, they 
are cloud, lightning, and thunder. Varuna: on account of the three 
bonds (See I. 24. 15). € In this and the following stanza the horse 
is regarded ag seri with the Sun in his course through heaven, and 
as accepting the oblations offered by the worshipper. The Cow’e station : 
the chief place f earth, the Cow, is the altar, 7 idost greedy eater : 
regarded as a mere earthly horse. 9, Horns made of gold: according 
to Sdyana, the word horns is used figuratively for mane. The Sun’g 
rays are probably inténded. Who mounted, first of all, the Courser : 
{ndra, ae said in Varee 2, 10 The horses of the Sun are said to be 
spoken of, The exact meaning of the words is uncertain. 


HYMN 164} THE RIGVEDA. 219 


1f A body formed for flight hast thou, O Charger ; sWift as the 
wind in motion is thy spirit. ; 
Thy horns are spread abroad in all directions: they move 
with restless beat in wildernesses. 
12 The strong Steed hath come forward to the Slaughter, vonder- 
ing with a mind directed God-ward. 
The goat who is his kin is led before him: the sages and the 
singers follow after. 
13. The Steed is come unto the noblest mansion, iscome unto his 
Father and his Mother. 
This day shall he approach the Gods, most welcome; then he 
declares good gifts tg him who offers, 


HYMN CLXIV. Visvedevas. 


Or this benignant Priest, with eld grey-coloured, the brother: 
midmost of the thrédyig lightning. = 
The third ishe whose bacR with oil is sprinkled: Here I 
behold the Chief with seveu made children. 
2 Seven to the one-wheeled chariot yoke the Courser; bearing 
seven names the single Courser draws it. 
Three-naved the wheel is, sound and undecaying, whgreSn are 
resting all these worlds of being. 
3 The seven who on the seven-wheeled car are mounted have 
horses, seven in tale, who draw them onward. 
Seven Sisters utter songs of praise together, in whom he 
names of the seven Cows are treasured. 


nn et te Aer A ta 


11 Thy horns? meaning, here, perhaps hoofs. 13 Ais Father 
ew his Mother: Heaven and Rarth. Wilson remarks : ‘Although 
more tyserzal than the preceding hymn, especially in regard to the 
intimations of the identity of the horse with the sun, there is nothing 
in it incompatible with the more explicit description in the former 
Sakta of the actual sacrifice of a horse.’ 

1 The priest is Aditya, theSun. His next brothe: isglightniug, 
‘another form of fire, and the third brother is Agni Gérhapatya, the 
western sacred fire maintained by each Householder, and fed with ob- 


Jations of clarified butter. The seven male children are probably 
the priests. 2 Seven: priests. The gs ay charzot: the Sun. 
Seven names: perhaps the sevén solar rays. Three-naved: with re- 


ference, probably» to the three seasous, the hot weathurg the rains, and 
the cold weather. On this wheel of the Sun all existing things depand. 
3 The seven: according to Sayana, the seven solar rays, or the seven 
divisions of the year, solstice, season, month, fertnight, day, night, 
hour. The seven wheels of the chariot and the sevan horses may also, 
according to Sayana, be the solar rays. Seven Sisters: probably 
the seven celestial rivers, which, as emblems of fertility may bear the 
name of cows. Sa)ana explains the seven Sisters as the solar rays, 


220 THE HYMNS OF (BOOK 1. 


4 Who heth beheld him as he sprang to being, seen how the 
boneless One supports the bony ? . | 

- Where is the blood of earth, the life, the spirit? Who may ap 
proach the man who knows, to ask it ? 


5 Unripe in mind, in spirit undiscerning, I ask of these the Gods’ 
established places ; 
For up above the yearling Calf the sages, to form a web, their 
own seven threads have woven. 


6 I ask, unknowing, those who know, the sages, as one all igno- 
rant for sake of knowledge, 
W bat was that ONE who in the Unborn’s image hath stablished 
and fixed firm these worlds’ six religions. 


7 Let him who knoweth presently declare it, this lovely Bird’s 
securely founded station. 
Forth from his head the Cows draw. ’milk, and, wearing his 
vesture, with their foot have Grunk the water. 


8 The Mother gave the Sire his share of Order : with thought, 
at first, she wedded him in spirit. 
She, the coy Dame, was filled with dew prolific : with adoration 
then, approached to praise her, 


or the six seasons and the year, or the six pairs of months with she 
invercalary montb, and the seven Cows as the seven notes of music as 
employed in chanting the praises of the Sun, 4 How the boneless 
One supports the bony: or more conventional and less literal words, 
how the unsubstantial one (feminine) supports that (masculine) which 
is endowed with substance. The boneless or unsr’<aaual is 
Prakriti, Nature, the original source of the substantial, that is the 
material and visible world. According to Hillebrandt, Vedische My- 
thologie, I. p. 338, the boneless One is the Sun and the bony the Moon. 
See M. Muller, India, What can it Teach us? pp. 245 246. 5 The 
yearling Calf probably the Sun, in reference to his yearly course. 
What the seven threads are ig uncertain. Sayana says they are thea 
seven forins of the Soma sacrifice, or the seven metres of the Vedas. 
Ludwig thinke that the general meaning of the stanza is: I (the post) 
content myself with asking for information about the places or traces 
of the Gods in our Yorld ; but the sage. talk about things which are 
beyond my power of conrprehensior, 6 In the Unborn’s image : 
in the form of Aja or the Unborn Greator, represented by the Sun. 
Cf, VIII 41.10. : i This lovely Bird’s...station : the place of the 
Sun. The Cowg draw milk: “The solar rays, although especial 
agents in sendigg down rain, are equaily active in its re-absorption,’ 
Wilson. 8 ‘vhe mother Earth gave the father Heaven bis share 
in the great work of cOsmical production. Dew prolific: the 
fertilizing rain. | 


HY MN 164.] THE RIGVEDA. 991 


4 Yoked was the Mother to the boon Cow’s car-pole : in the dank 
rows the cloud the Infant rested. 


Then the Calf lowed, and lqoked upon the Mother, the Cow who 
wears all shapes in three directions. 


10 Bearing three Mothers and three Fathers, single he stood 
erect; they never make him weary. 


. here on the pitch of heaven they speak together in speech 
all knowing but not all-impelling. 


11 Formed with twelve spokes, by length of time unweakened, 
rolls round the heaven this wheel of during Order. 


Herein established, joined in pairs together, seven hundred 
Sons and twenty stand, O Agni. 


12 They call him in the farthor half of heaven the Sire five-footed, 
of twelve forms, wealkhy in watery store. . 


—. , : ; 
These others say that he, God with far secing eyes, is mounted 
on the lower scven-whceled, six-spoked car. 


13 Upon this five-spoked wheel revulving ever all living creatures 
rest and are dependent. 


: a 
Its axle, heavy-laden, is not heated.: the nave from sncicnt 
time remains unbroken, 


* 14 The wheel revolves, unwasting, with its felly : ten draw it, 
yoked to the far-stretching car-pole, 


The Sun’s cye moves encompassed by the region: on him depend- 
ent rest all living creatures. 


9 Yoked was th.’Mother ; Earth undertook the functions of the cow 
who supplies milk for sacrifices, The Infant: the young Sun. 
The Calf lowed: the cloud thundered. , Jn three directions: heaven, mid- 
air, and earth. 10 Three Mothers and three Fathers: the three earths 
and the three heavens, This fanciful threefold division has occurred 
hefore. See I. 105, 5. They speak : the Gods converse together about 
the Sun, says Sayana, in speech that knows all bub does not extend to 
or impress all. 11 The wheel formed with twelve spokes is the 
year with its twelve months. The seven handred and twenty sons, 
joined in pairs, are the days and nights of the year, jthree hundred and 
sixty of each. 12 Five-footed : the five feet are, Sayana says, the five 
seasons, the dewy aud cold seasons being counted as one. Th twelve forms 
are the months of the year. ‘lhesseven wheels of ths car are said to be 
the seven solar rays, and the six spokes of each wheel are the six sea- 


sons. [ find the stanza uniotelligible. 13 The five-spoked wheel : 
in refsrence, the, perhaps, to the five seasons, ag in verse [2. 14 Ten 
draw it: probably the ten regiuns of space. The region : the firma- 


ment, mid-air, . 


222 THE HYMNS OF (BOOK 7. 


15 Of the co-born they call the seventh single born; the six twin 
pairs are calied Rishis, Children of Gods. 
Their good gifts sought of men gre ranged in order due, and 
various in their form move for the Lord who guides. 


16 They told me those were males, though truly females: he 
who hath eyes sees this, the blind discerus not, 
The son who is a sage hath cumprehended : who knows this. 
rightly is his father’s father, 
17 Beneath the upper realm, above this lower, bearing her calf 
at foot the Cow hath risen. 


Whitherward, to what place hath she departed ? Where calves 
she ? not amid this herd of cattle. 


18 Who, that the father of this Calf discerneth beneath the upper 
realm, above the lower, 

Shosving himself a sage, may hewf declare it? Whence hath 
the Godlike spirit had its résing ? 


19 Those that come hitherward they call departing, those that 
depart they call directed hither. 
And what so ye have made, Indra and Soma, steeds bear as 
«’t were yoked to the region’s car-pole. 


é . . Y . . e . . . 
20 Two Birds with fair wings, knit with bonds of friendship, in 
the same sheltering trec have found a refuge. 


« 15 The co-born : the six pairs of two months, or six seasons of two months 
each. Tho stngle-born is the thirteenth and fntercalary mouth. Siyana explains 
rishayah, Rishigs, in this stanza as ganturah, goers; but in what sense is uncertain. 
16 They told me these were males : Wilson observes : ‘This isa piece of «2-8.citical 
mysticism ; yas, a ray of the sun, here personified ag a feniaie, is properly a 
noun masculine, But this isjust the reverse of the explanation required. The 
meaning is obscure, Grassmann suggests that the meaning is that Night 
and Morning, both feminine, have received the masculine name of Day. The 
son who te@ sage: “According to the Scholiast, the Sun is to be considered 
as the fathes of the rays of light, which again, in their collective ecapa- 
city, beifig the cause of rain, are the fosterers or parents of the earth: 
the Sun is therefore father of the feather, and he who knows this is identical 
with the Sun.’—Wilson, The meaning of the last semi-hemistich is probably 
that an intelligent son may ve called the parent of an ignorant father, as being 
his superior in ae 17 Usha or Dawn hath risen between heaven 
and earth, cargyiug with her the young Sun her offprint. hts herd of cattle : 
the visible world. 18 Usha is the mother, but who is able to say who bhe 
father of the Sun is ? 19 This stanza may refer to the plants which change 
their relative position as they revolve. Indra is bere the Sun, and Soma the 
Moon. 20 Sayana says that the ¢wo Birds are the vital and the Snpreme 
Spirit, dwelling in one body. The vital spirit enjoys the fruit or rewards of 
actions while the Supreme Spirit is merely a passive speatator, 


HYMN 164) THE RIGVEDA. 223 


One of the twain eats the sweet Fig-tree’s fruitage ; the other 
eating not regardeth only, 
21 Where those fine Birds hymn ceaselessly their portion of life 
eternal, and the sacred synods, 
There is the Universe’s mighty Keeper, who, wisc,hath entered 
into me the simple. 
22 The tree whereon the fine Birds eat the sweetness, whure they 
all rest and procreate their offspring,— 
- Upon its top they say the fig is luscious : none gaineth it who 
knoweth not the Father. 
23 How on the Gayatri the Gayatri was based, how from the 
Trishtup they fashioned the Trishtup forth, 
How on the Jagati was based the Jagati,—they who know 
this have won themselves immortal life, 
24 With Gayatri he measures out the praise-song, Sama with 
praise-song, triplet with the Trishtup, 
The triplet with the twot four-foot measure, and with the 
__ syllable they form scven metres. 


~ 21 Lhe fine Lirds hero are perhaps the priests, and the Keeper of 
the Universe may be Soma. 22 Sayana explains separnd’, well- 
winged, in this and the preceding stanza as smooth- -gliding (rays). 
Their offepring i is, he says, the light, and the Father is the cherisWing 
and protecting Sun. All explanations of these three stanzas can be 
only conjectural. Ludwig is of opinion that they are originally un- 
connected fragments and that they have beon inserted together in this 
hymn merely because the word suparnd (used) apparently in various 
senses) has &@ prominent place in each stanza. Suparnd (dual) 
has been explained by different scholare as two species of souls; day 
and night, Sun and Moon ; (plural) as rays of light; stare; metres, 
spirits of the dead ; . prieata ; and the tree on which they rest ag the body ; 
the orp ur - ston of the Sun; the sacrificial post; the world ; 3 and the 
mythical World-Trau:’ A generally satisfactory explanation i is scarcely 
to be hoped for. 23 Wilson, following Sayana, paraphrases this 
stanza as follows : ‘They who know the station of Agni upon the earth; 
the station of Vayu that was fabricated from the firmament, and that 
station of Sun which is placed in heaven, obtain immortality” Hae 
observes that the purport of the phraseology, borrowed frm the 
several metres Gayatri, Trishtubh, and Jagati, is nob very clear, aud 
and that it may be merely an obscure and mystic reference to the text 
of the Veda, a knowledge of which is essentiarto final felicity. The 
meaning seems to be that thosa wo are thoroughly ¢acquainted with 
the appropriate rewards which follow the smipiayient of each of tha 
sacred metres named are on the right road to immortal lite. 24 
Triplet: the word in the text vdka is said to mean eituer two or threa 
connected stanzas. Two or four-foot measure: consisting of twa 
or four pddas or semi-hemistichs, And with the syllable: they 
form the seven generic metres of the Veda with the sylfable, which is 
the chief element of metre, the GAyatri consisting of eight syllables, 
the Trishtup of eleven, and the Jagati of twelve, See Wilson's note. 


224 THE HYMNS OF (BOOK 1 


25 With Jagati the flood in heaven he stablished, and saw the 
Sun in the Rathantara Siman. 

Gayatri hath, they say, three brands for kindling ; hence it 
excels in majesty and vigour: 


26 I invocate the milch-cow good for milking, so that the milker, 
deft of hand, may drain her, 
May Savitar give goodliest stimulation, The caldron is made 
hot 3 I will proclaim it. 


27 She, lady of all treasure, iscome hither yearning in spirit for 
her calf and lowing. 
May this cow yield her milk for both the Asvins, and may 
she prosper to our high advantage. 


28 The cow hath lowed after her blinking youngling; she licks 
his forehead, as sho lows, to form it. 

[lis mouth she fondly calls to her warm udder, and suckles 
him with milk while gently dusiing. 


23 Ile also snorts, by whom encompassed round the Cow lows as 
she clings unto $s shedder of the rain. 
She with her shrilling cries hath humbled mortal man, and, 
_ turned to lightning, hath stripped off her covering robe. 


30 Thas which hath breath and speed and life and motion lies 
firmly stablished in the midst of houses. 
Living, by offerings to the Dead he moveth, Immortal One 
the brother of the mortal, 


31 I saw the Herdsman, him who never stumbles, approaching 

by his pathways and departing. 

Ho, clothed with gathered and diffusive splendour, within the 
worlds continually travels. ae 


re 


25 Ife: Brahma, according to Siyana. Rathantara : one of 

the most important Sima-hymns; Samveda If. i, i, l1=-Rigveda VIT. 
32. 22, 23 ° Three brands: the three pdédas, divisious, or lines of 
the verse being fancifully likened to the sticks with which the sacri- 
ficial fire is kindled. 43 The milch-cow in this and the two follow- 
ing stanzas may be the cow who supplies milk for the sacrifice. But 
Shyana says that,the cow may be the rain-cloud, the milk being the 
rain and the milkyr Vayu the God of ‘Wind who causes it te flow. The 
calf, Sdyana says, is the world longing for the ra‘n to fall. 29 
He also: probably Parjanya, the personified Storm-Cloud. The Cow 
here is undoubtedly a. cloud. 30 The subjech of the first hemig- 
tich is apparently Agni. The Moon, sustained by sacrificial offerings 
to the Departed, appears to be tho subject of the second. Bub see 
Hymns of the Atharva-veda [X 10. 8. 31 Herdsman: the’ Sun, 
the guardian of the world. 


‘MN 164 | THE RIGVEDA. 295 


Fle who hath made him doth not comprehend him ; from him 
who saw him surely is he hidden. 
Ile, yet enveloped in his Mother’s bosom, source of mach life, 
hath sunk into destructfon. 
33 Dyaus is my Father, my begetter: kinship is here, This 
creat earth is my kin and Mother, 
Between the wide-spread world-halves is the birth-place: the 
Father laid the Daughter’s germ within it. 
34 I ask thec of the earth’s extremest limit, where is the centre 
of the world, [ask thee. 
Iask thee of the Stallion’s seed prolific, [ask of highest 
heaven where Specch abideth, 
35 This altar is the earth’s extremest limit; this sacrifice of ours 
is the world’s centre. 
The Stailion’s seed peolific is the Soma; this Brahman 
highest heaven where Sptach abideth, 
36 Seven germs unripened yet are heaven’s prolifie s 9d ; their 
functions they maintain by Vishnu’s s.dinance, 
Endued with wisdom through intelligence and thought, they 
compass us about present on every side, e 
3¢ What thing I truly amI know not clearly: mystérious, 
fettered in my mind I wander, 
When the first born of holy Law approached me, then of 
this specch I first obtain a portion. : 
38 Back, forward goes he, grasped by strength inherent, the Im- 
mortal born the brother of the mortal, 


34 a4: fying, the immediate cause of rain, with his countless 
offspring the fertil’ zig rain-drops, appears to be alluded to. 33 
Werld-halves ; literally bowls or vessels into which the Soma is poured, 
a figurative expression for heaven and earth, The firmament or space 
between these two is, as the region of the rain, the womb of all beings. 
‘The Father is Dyayus and the daughter is Harth whose fortility de- 
pends ugon the germ of rain jaid in the firmament. @35 Tha 
earth’s extremest limit: the altar,as the plage nearest to heaven, the 
place where the Gods visit men. Phe Stallion + Dyaus, or Father 
Heaven. This Brahman : The priest so aamed who recites tha 
texts of the Veda, 36 This ¢tanza, as Ludwig remarks, is one of 
the most unintelligible in the whole Veda. Zhe seven, according to 
SAyana, or the solar rays, and Vishnu is said to be the Sun.° 37 The 
first-born of holy Law : according to Sayana, the first-bern (perceptions) 
of the truth. Soma may be intended, as suggested by Bergaine, Re.-° 
ligion Vedique, [. 150. 38 This stanza appears to refer to the 
Sun in his daily course from east to west and his nightty return to the 
east, the former visible to men and the latter invisible. They, in 

this case, would méan the Sun by day and the Sun by night. 


29 : 


226 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 1 


Ceasqless they move in opposite directions: men mark the 
one and fail to mark the other. 
39 Upon what syllable of holy praise-song, as “twere their 
highest heaven, the Gods repose them,— 
Who knows not this, what will he do with praise-song! Put 
they who know. it well sit here assembled. 
40 Fortunate mayst thou be with goodly pasture, and may we 
also be exceeding wealthy. 
Feed on the grass, O Cow, at every season, and coming hither- 
ward drink limpid water, 
41 Forming the water-floods, the buffalo hath lowed, one footed 
or two.footed or four-footed, she, 
Who hath become eight-footed or hath gut nine fect, the 
thousand syllabled in the sublimest heaven. 
42 From her descend in streams the seas of water; thereby the 
world’s four regions have their } cine. 
Thence flows the imperishabld flood, and thence the universo 
hath life, 
43 Isaw from far away the smoke of fuel with spires that rose 
on high o’or that beneath it. 
The Mighty Men have dressed the spotted bullock. These 
Were the customs in the days aforetime., 
44 Three with long tresses show in ordered season, One of them 
sheareth when the year is ended. 
One with his powers the universe regardeth : of one the 
sweep is seen, but not his figure. 
45 Speech hath been measured out in four divisions, the Brak. 
mans who have understanding know them, 


a] 


39 The syllable is tha Pranava, the mystical sacred syllable Om. 
This syllable is set forth in the Upanishads as the object of profound 
religious meditation, and the highest spiritual efficacy is attributed to 


it, 4Q This stanza is addressed to the cow who supplies the 
milk fon libations. 41 The buffallo hath lowed : the great rain- 


cloud has thundered, Sadyana explains one-footed, as sounding 
from the cloud ; two-footed, from cloud and sky ; four-footed, from the 
four cardinal points ; eigat-footed, from the four points and the four- 
intermediate points ; nwine-footed, from these points and the zenith. 
Gauri, the buffalo; is, acaording to Sayana, Vak, Speech, the voice of 
heaven, * 42 From her: from the buffallo, or cloud. Zhe world’s 
Jour regions : the whole world, - 43 The smoke of fuel: arising 
from burning vow-dung. The Mighty Men: the Heroes, the Gods, 
The spotted bullock: the Soma, The whole may, perhaps, bo a figura- 
tive desoription of the gathering of the rain-clouds. 44 The 
three are Agni who burns up the vegetation, the all-seeing Sup, and 
the invisible Vayu or Wind, 


AYMN 164) THE RIGVEDA. 901 


Three kept in close concealment cause no motion; of speech, 
men speak only the fourth division. ° 


. 46 They call him Indra, Mitra, Varuna, Agni, and he is heavenly 


4 


nobly-winged Garutmanye 
To whut is Onc, saves give many a title: they call it Agni, 
Yama, MAatarisvan. 
47 Dark the descent: the birds are golden-cologred ; up to the 
heaven they fly robed in the waters, 
Again descend they from the scat of Order, and all the earth 
is moistencd with their fatness, 
48 Twelve are the fellies, and the wheel is single; three are the 
naves. What man hath understood it? 
Therein are sct together spokes three hundred and sixty, 
which in nowise can be loosened 
49 That breast of thine exhaustless, spring of pleasure, where- 
with thou feedest all thieas that are choicest, ; 
Wealth-giver, treasure-finder, free bestowcr, —baime that,Sara- 
svati, that we may drain it. 3 
00 By means of sacrifice the Gods accomplished their sacrifice : 
these were the earliest ordinances, 
These Mighty Ones attained the height of heaven, ,tHere 
where the Sidhyas, Gods of old, are dwelling, 
51 Uniform, with the passing days, this water mounts and falls 
VAIN, 
The tempest-clouds give life to earth, and fires re-animate ther 
heaven, 


A5 Three kept in close concealment ; the three might mean the three 
Vedas ; buc thy interpretation does not suit the rest of the half-line. 
The fourth division : ordinary language. See Wilson for Sayana’s ela- 
borate explanation of this stanza, and Muir, O. 8. Texts, If. 155. 
46 Garutmdn : the Celestial Bird, the Sun, All these names, says the 
poet, are names of one and the same Divine Being, the One Suprema 
Spirit under various manifestations. 47 Dark the ¢escent: the 
rays of léc¢ht descend into the darkness of the earth when wrépped in 
night, and rise again to heaven with fheemoisture which they have 
absorbed to descend again in the form of fertilizing rain. 48 The 
single wheel is the year ; the twelve spokes ar® the months ; the three 
naves are the three seasons of for months each? and the spokes are 
the daya of the lunigolar year. The stanza is*out of place here. 4a 
Saraswatt: seo [. 3. 10, 50 The Sddhyas: said by Yaska to b9 
‘the Gods whose dwelling-place is the sky.’ They are &amed among the_ 
minor divinities in the Amarakosha, and, as Wilson gbserves, ‘it would 
seem that in Siyana’s day the purport of the designation had become 
Uucertain.’ 51 Fires re-animate the heaven; the oblations offered 
in sacrificial fires delicht and strengthen the Gods. 


228 THE HYMNS OF (BOOK 1. 


52 The Bird Celestial, vast with noble pinion, the lovely germ of 
plants, the germ of waters, 

Him who delighteth us with rain in season, Sarasvin I invoke 

that he may help us. 


HYMN CLXV. Indra-Maruts, 


Wira what bright beauty are the Maruts jointly invested, 
peers in age, who dwell together ? 

From what place have they come? With what intention ? 
Sing they their strength through love of wealth, these 
Heroes ? 


2 Whose prayers have they, the Youthful Ones, accepted ? who 
to his sacrifice hath turned the Maruts ? 
We will delay them on their journcy sweeping—with what 
high spirit !—through the air like eagles. 
3 Whence comest thou alone, thou who art mighty, Indra, Lord 
of the Brave? What is thy yatpose ? 
Thou greetest us when mecting us the Bright Ones. Lord of 
Bay Stceds, sav what thou hast against us. 
4 Minc arc devotions, hymns ; sweet are libations, Strength 
stirs, and hurled forth is my bolt of thunder. 
‘They call for me, their lauds are longing for me, These my 
Bay Stecds bear me to these oblations. 
6 Therefore together with our strong companions, having adorn- 
ed our bodics, now we harness 
« Our spotted deer with might, for thou, O Indra, hast learnt 
and understood our Godlike nature. 


6 Where was that nature then of yours,O Maruts, that ye 
charged me alone to slay the Dragon ? 
For I in truth am fierce and strong and migiity 
away from every foeman’s weapons. 


7 I bent 


ne ee 


2o eee = 


a 


— eo ene ne! 


52 Sarasvaén: or Sarasvat, is the name of a River-God usually 
assigned as a consort to Sarasvati. In this place the Sun is meant, and 
sdrasvantan, may be taken as a mere epithet, ‘rich in water’ which he 
abserbs. ‘ 


( 


Indra, the Maruts, and the great sage Agastya are regarded as the 
Rishis of this hyn, whfth appears to be, as Wilson observes, a vindi- 
cation of ‘the separate, or at least ‘preferential, worship of Indra, 
without comprehending, kt the same time, asa w.atter of course, the 
adoration of the Maruts.’ The hymn is translated and fully explained 
jo Prof. Max Muller's Vedio Lymns, Part I. 1 Indra speaks. 
3 Here the Maruts address Indra whom they meet alone. unattended 
by then as was usual. 4 Indra replies. D The Maruts again 
speak. 6 ludra claims for himself the glory of the victory over 
Vritra. 


AY MN 165,] THE RIGVEDA. 999 


7 Yea, much hast thou achieved with us for saan with 
manly valour like thine own, thou Lere. 
Much may we too achieve, O mightiest Indra, with our great 
power, we Maruts, when we will it, 


8 Vritra I slew by mine own strength, O Maruts, having waxed 
mighty in mine indignation. 
I with the thunder in my hand created for man these lucid 
softly flowing waters. 
Q Nothing, O Maghavan, stands firm before thee; among the 
Gods not one is found thine equal. 
None born or springing into life comes nigh thee. Do what 
thou hast to do, exceeding mighty ! 


10 Mine only be transcendent power, whatever I, daring in my 
spirit, may accomplish, 
For I am known as terrible, O Maruts: I, Indra, am the Lord 
of what I ruined. * m=, ° 


1t Now, O ye Maruts, hath your praise rcjoiced=ae, the glorious 
hymn which ye have made me, Herogs! 
For me, for Indra, champion strong in battle, for me, your- 
selves, as’ joners: for a lover. 


12 Ilere, truly, they send forth their sheen to meet me, wéaring 
their blameless glory and their vigour. 
When I have seen you, Maruts, in gay splendour, ye have 
delighted me, so now delight me. 


13 Who here hath magnified you, O ye Maruts? speed forwar&, 
O ye lovers, to your lovers. 
Ye Radiant Oncs, assisting their devotions, of these my holy 
rites be ye regardful, 


14 To this hath Manya’s wisdom brought us, so as to aid, as aids 
the poct him who worse: 
Bring hither quick! On to the sage, ye Maruts! These 
prayers for you the singer hath recited, 


11 In this verse Indra, after having declined with no uncertain 
sound the friendship of the Maruts, repont@#himself of his unkindness 
towards his old friends, The Words of praise’ which they addressed 
to him in verse y in spite of the rebuff whfch they had received from 
Indra, have touched his heart, and we may suppose that, after this, 
their reconciliation was complte, ’—Max Muller.® 14 This verse 
is exceedingly difficult, and its translation at pregent can be only don- 
jectural, Mdanya, apparently, means the son of Mana. Man- 
darya, probably the name of the poet, but explained differently by 
Sayana and Mahidhara. 


230 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK f. 


15 May this your praise, may this your song, O Maruts, sung 
by the poet, MAna’s son, Mandarya, 
Bring offspring for ourselves with food to feed us. May we 
find strengthening food in full abundance! 


HYMN CLXVI, Maruts. 


Now let us publish, for the vigorous company the herald of 
the Strong One, thetr primeval might. . 

With fire upon your wiy, O Maruts loud of voice, with battle, 
Mighty Ones, achieve your deeds of strength, 


2 Bringing the pleasant meath as ’twere their own dear gon, 
they sport in sportive wise gay at-their gatherings. 
The Itudras come with succour to the worshipper ; self-strong 
they fail not him who offers sacrifice. 


3 To whomsoever, bringer of oblations, they, immortal guard- 
tan&, have given plentcous Wesson. 
For hun, like toving friends, the Maruts bringing bliss bedew 
the regions round with milk abundantly. 


4 Ye who with mighty powers have stirred the regions up, your 
coursers have sped forth direeted by themselves. 
Alfercatures of the carth, all dwellings are afraid, for bril- 
liant is yeur coming with your spears advanced, 
When they in dazzling rush have made the mountains roar, 
and shaken heaven’s high back in their beroic strength, 
*fiuch sovran of the forest fears as ye drive near, and the 
shrubs fly before you swift as whirling wheels, 
6 Terrible Maruts, ye with ne’cr-diminished host, with creat 
benevolence fuilil our heart’s desire. | FS 
Where’er your lightning bites armed with its rory teeth it 
crunches up the cattle like « well-aimed dart. 


Jo 1 borrow three-fourths of this verse from Prof. M. Muller. 


This hymn and the twenty-five following are ascribed to the Rishi 
Agastya, who appears in the Ramayana as the friend and counsellor 
of Rama, He is one of thése indefinable mythie personages who are 
found in the ancient traditions of many ‘ations, and in whom cosmo- 
gonical or astronomical notions are generally figured.« Thus it is re- 
lated of Agastya that the Vindhyan mountains prostrated themselves 
before him ; and yes the sama Agastya is believed to be tha regent of 
thystar Canopus. . 1 The Strong One: Indra, who is preceded by 
the Maruts. 2 The Rudras: The Maruts, sons of the Strong- 
God Rudra, 3 Milk: fertilizing rain. 5 As ye drive near t 
similar abrupt changes vf person are common in the Veda. 


HY MN 166.) THE RIGVEDA. Q34 


? Givers of during gifts whose bounties never fail, free from ill. 
will, at sacrifices glorified, 
They sing their sony aloud that they may drink swect juice : 
well do they know the Llero’s first hervie deeds. 
8 With castles hundredfold, O Maruts, guard ye well the man 
whom ye have loved from ruin and from sin, —~— 
The manwhom ye the fierce, the Mighty Ones who roar, 
preserve from calumny by cherishing his seed. 
9 O Maruts, in yourcars are all things that are good : great 
powers are sct as ’twere in rivalry therein, 
Rings are upon your shoulders when ye journey forth : your 
axle turns together both the chariot wheels. 
10 Ueld in your manly arms are many goodly things, gold chains 
are on your chests, and vlistering ornaments, 
Deer-skins are on their shoulders, on their fellics knives : 
they spread their ¢l¥rvgout as birds spread out their wings. 
11 Mighty in mightiness, pervading, passing strong, visible from 
afar as ‘twere with stars of heaven, _ 
Lovely with pleasant toncues, swectsm gers with thcir mouths, 
the Maruts, joined with Indra, shout forth all around. 
12 This is your majesty, ye Maruts nobly born, far as the «way 
of Aditi your bounty spreads. 
Even Indra by desertion never disannuls the boon bestowed 
by you upon the pious man. 
13 This is your kinship, Maruts, that, Immortals, ye were oft in 
olden time regardful of our call, 
Having vouchsated to man 4 hearing through this prayer, by 
wondrous deeds the Herocs have displayed their might, 
14 That, O ye Maruts, we may long time flourish through your 
abundant riches, O swift movers, 
And that our men may spread in the encampment, Ict me 
complete the rite with these oblations, 
15 May this your laud, may this your song, O Maruts, sung by 
the poct, Mana’s Mandirya, ig 
Bring offspring for ourselves with food to feed us. *May we 
find strengthening food in full sbundance. 


we 

10 On their Jellies knives: ‘heir war-chariots have sharp scythe-like 
blades attached tp their wheels, or sharp edges to their fellies. lt 
Sweet singers: the Maruts' song in the music of the wina’. 12 The 
sway of Aditi : ‘What the poet suys simply this, thet the bountiy of the 
Maruts extends as far as the realm of Aditi. ¢. ¢. js endless, or extents 
everywhere, Aditi being in its original conception the deity or the un- 
bounded world beyond, the earliest attempt at expressing the Infinite.’ — 
Max Miller. This also is one of the hymns translated by Prof, Max 
Muller in Vedio L7ymns, Part I. 


232 THE HYMNS OF (BOOK !. 


“ HYMN CLXVII. Indra. Maruts. 


A THOUSAND are thy helps for us, O Indra: a thousand, Lord 
of Bays, thy choice refreshments, 

Wealth of a thousand sorts hast thou to checr us: may prcci- 
ous goods come nigh to us in thousands. 


2 May the most sapient Maruts, with protection, with best boons 
brought lofty heaven, approach us, 
Now when their tcam of the most noble horses speeds even 
on the sea’s extremest limit. 


3 Close to them clings one moving in scelusion, like a man’s wife, 
like a spear carried rearward, 
Wel! grasped, bright, decked with gold ; there is Vik also, 
like to a courtly, cloquent dame, aruong them, 


A Far off the brilliant, never-weary Maruts cling tothe young 
Muid as a joint possession. «~ | 
The ticree Gods drave not Roditsi before them, but wished for 
her to grow tir friend and fellow. 


'% When chose immortal thodasi to follow—she with loose tresses 
and heroic spirit— 
She cGlamb her servant's chariot, she like Siryé with cloud-like 
motion and refulrent aspcct, 


6 Upon their car the young men sct the Maiden wedded to glory, 
mighty in assemblies, 

© When your song, Maruts, rose, and, with ublation, the Soma. 
pourer sang his hymn in worship. 


7 I will declare the greatness of these Maruts, their rcal great- 
ness, worthy to be lauded, 
How, with them, she though firm, strong-minded, haughty, 
travels to women happy in their fortune. 


2 The sea’s extremest limit: the skirts of the sea of air, the firma- 
ment. 3 Siyana says that the lightning is spoken of, moving in 
the clougla, ‘as if in secret, like the well-attired wife who remains in 
the women’s apartment, but sometimes showing itself, like the hymn 
or prayer recited at religious ceremonies. The comparisons are scarca- 
ly intelligible. Vakhere js the voice of Heaven, the thunder, Sac 
Max Muller, Vede JTymns, Part . 5 Rodasi: usually ragarded 
as the consort of Rudra,said by Sdyana to mean here the lightning 
the bride of the Maruts, Sadryd; the daughter of the Sun, who 
mounted the chariot of the Agsvins, See I. 116. 17. 7 ri 

~Rodasi. In thesecond: hemistich there is no substantive only ad- 
jectives in the feminine gender, Wilson, following SAyana renders 
the last half-line by ‘supports a flourishing progeny.’ Ludwig thinks 
that Rodasi appears as Kithelviya of the Greek pantheon, the Goddess 
who presides over childbirth. / 


HYMN 168.) THE RIGVEDA. 233 


8 Mitra and Varuna they guard from censure: Aryaman too, 
discovers worthless sinners. E 
Firm things are overthrown that ne’cr were shaken: he pros: 
pers, Maruts, who gives choice oblations. 


Q None of us, Maruts, near or at a distance, hath ever reached 
} the limit of your vigour. 
They in courageous might still waxing boldly have compassed 
round their foemen like an ocean, 


“0 May we this day be dearest friends of Indra, and let us call on 
him in fight to-morrow. 
So were we erst. New might attend us daily! so be with us 
Ribhukshan of the Heroes! 


1l May this your laud, may this your song, O Maruts, sung by 
the poet, Mana’s son, Mandirya, 
Bring offspring for ourselves with food to feed us. May we 
find strengthening foo@ 1g full abundance. ° 
HYMN CLXVIII. re Maruts, 
Swirt gain is his who hath you near at everz*rite: ye welcome 
every song of him who serves the (ods. 
So may I turn you hither with fair hymns of praise to give 
great succour for the weal of both the worlds. . 


6 
2 Surrounding, as it were, self-born, self-powerful, they spring 
to life the shakers-down of food and light ; 
Like as the countless undulations of the floods, worthy of praise 
when near, like bullocks and like kine. 


3 They who, like Somas with their well-grown stalks pressed out, 
imbibed within the heart, dwell there in friendly wise. 
Upon their shoulders rests as "twere a warrior’s spear, and in 
their hand they holda daggor and a ring, 


10 The hymn appears to havo been recited on the eve of an ex- 

pocted battle. Aibukshan : a name of Jadra, as lord of the Ribhus, 
—_ . 

I The text of the first line is manifestly corrupt, and translation 
is conjectural.” See Max Muller, Sacred Bouks of the East, XXXII, 
p. 281. 2 Th2 shakers-down: violently sending down the rain 
which is followed by sunlight and fertility. When near: terrific 
in appearence at a distance, but gentle when propitiated with worship. 
3 Tho first hemistich is obscure. Perhaps the meaning fs that the 
beneficial effects of the storm are dasting like the ingpiring influence 
of Some juice. Warrior's spear: ‘Rambhini L now take with 
Siyana in the sense of a wife clinging to the shoulders of her husband, 
though whatis meant isthe spear, or soma other weafon, slung over 
the shoulders ; sec I, 167. 3, ~—M, Miller, Vedze Hymns, I. 283, 


30 


234 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK f, 
4 Self-yoked they have descended lightly from the sky, With 


your own lash, Immortals, urge yourselves to speed. 
Unstained by dust the Maruts, mighty in their strength, have 
cast down e’en firm things, armed with their shining spears. 


5 Whoamong you, O Maruts armed with lightning-spears, moveth 
you by himself, as with the tongue his jaws ? 
Ye rush from heaven's floor as though ye sought for food, on 
‘ many errands like the Sun’s diurnal Steed, 


6 Say where, then, is this mighty region’s farthest bound, where, - 
Maruts, is the lowest depth that ye hava reached, 
When ye cast down like chaff the firmly stablished pile, and 
from the mountain send the glittering water-flood ? 


¥ Your winning is with strength, dazzling, with heavenly light, 
with fruit mature, O Maruts, full of plenteousness. 
Auspicious is your gift like a free giver’s meed, victorious, 
epreading far, as of immortal Gods. 


8 The river- »°or before your chariot fellies when they are utter. 
ing the voidieof rain-clouds, 
The lightnings laugmapon the earth bencath them, what time 
the Maruts scatter forth their fatness. 


9 Prisni brought forth, to fight the mighty battle, the glittering 
army of the restless Maruts. 
Nurtured together they begat the monster, and then looked 
round them for the food that strengthens. 


10 May this your laud, may this your song, O Maruts, sung by 
the poet, Manas son, Mandarys, 
Bring offspring for ourselves with food to feed us, May ws 
find strengthening food in full abundance, 


HYMN CLXIX, ‘° Indra, 


As, Indra, from great treason thou protectest, yea, from great 
treachery these who approach us, 

So, marking well, Controller of the Maruts, grant us their 
biessings, for thcy are thy dearest. 


5 What, asks the p&et, is the moving principle of the Maruts? who 
gives them their, first impulse, as a man when he wishes moves his 
tongue and iaws? ‘This stanza,’ remarks Wilson, ‘is exceedingly ellip- 
tical and obscure: Siyana’s completion of the text is entirely conjec- 

dural. 9 Prisni: the mother of the Maruts. Seel, 24,3, Zhe 
monster: the mam of dark storm-clouds. 


1 These whe approach us: the Maruts. 


HYMN 170] TAB RIGVEDA. 235 


9 The various doings of all mortal people by thee are ordered, 
in thy wisdom, Indra. 
The host of Maruts goeth forth exulting to win the light- 
bestowing spoil of battle. 


3 That spear of thine sat firm for us, O Tadra: the Maruts set 
their whole dread powcr in motion. 
E’cn Agni shines resplendent in the brushwood : the viands 
hold him as flouds hold an island, 


4 Vouchsafe us now that opulence, O Indra, as guerdon won by 
mightiest donation. 
May hymns that picase thee cause the breast of Vayu to 
swell as with the mead’s refreshing sweetness. 


9 With thee, O Indra, are most bounteous riches that further 
every one whe lives uprightly. 
Now may these Maruts* show us loving-kindness, Gods who 
of old were ever prompt te help US. 


6 Bring forththe Men who rain down _bonas, O Indra: exert 
thee in the great terrestrial region , 
For their broad-chested speckled deer are standing eee 
King’s armies on the field of battle. 


7 Heard is the roar of the advancing Maruts, terrific, slittering 
and swiftly moving, 
Who with their rush o’erthrow as ’twere a sinner the mortal 
who would fight with those who love him. P 


8 Give to the Manas, Indra with the Maruts, gifts universal, 
gifts of cattle foremost. 
Thou, God, art praised with Gods who must be lauded. May 
we find strengthening food in full abundance. 


HYMN CLXX. - Indra. Maruts, 


Naveur is to-day, to-morrow natght. Whocomprehends the 
mystery ¢ 

We must address ourselves unto another's thought, and lost 
is then the hope we formed. 


2 The Marats are thy brothers. Why, O Indra, wouldst thon 
take vur lives! . 
Agree with them in friendly wise, and do nog slay us in the fight, 


Sg es 
3 Sat firm: wes firmly aud properly béld by the Warrior-God. 
6 The Men: the Maruts. Their chariot is deawn by spotted deer. 
8 Th Manas: men of the family Of tha poet Mana. * 
1 Lostis then the hope we formed : Indra appears bo have appropriated 
to himself the sacrifice intended for the Maruts, whe complain, accord- 
ingly, of their dependence on another's will and of their disappointed 
hopes. 2 This is spoken by Agastya, who offered the sacrifice. 


ad 


236 THE AYMNS OF [BOOK If. 


3 Agastya, brother, why dost thou neglect ys, thou who art our 
friend ? 

We know the nature of thy mind. Verily thou wilt give us 
naught. 


4 Let them prepare the altar, Ict them kindle fire in front ; 
we two 

Here will spread saerifice for thee, that the Immortal may 
observe. 


§ Thou, Lord of Wealth, art Master of all treasures, thou, Lord 
of friends, art thy friends’ best supporter. 
O Indra, speak thou kindly with the Maruts, and taste obla. 
tions in their proper season, 


HYMN CLXXI. Maruts. 


To,you I eome with this mine _qdoration, and witha hymn I 
crave the Strong One’s favour, 


A hymn tnaedruly makes you joyful, Maruts. Suppress your 
anger and unyvke,vveur horses, 


2 Maruts, to you this laud with prayer and worship, formed in 
« the mind and heart, ye Gods, is offered. 
Come ye to us, rejoicing in your spirit, for ye are they who 
make our prayer effective.’ 
3 The Marnts, praised by us, shall show us favour; Maghavan, 
lauded, shall be most propitious. 
Maruts, may all our days that are to follow be very pleasant, 
lovely and triumphant. 


4 I fled in terror from this mighty Indra, my body trembling in 
alarm, O Maruts. 
Obliations meant for you been made ready ; these have we 
set aside : for this forgive us, 


3 The Marute complain that Agastya does not support their claim. 
4 Spoken by Agastya to Indra. We: Agniand I, The immortal: 
Agni. 5 Agastya continues his conciliatory speech. 


1 Unyoke your horggs : stay with us and anjoy the sacrifice. ‘This 
hymn, again,’ as Wilson remarks, ‘iralicates a sort of trimming bet- 
“sween the worship: of Indra and the Maruts.’ wo Unable to trans- 
Jate the secund hemistich satisfactorily, I have followed Sdyana who 
| takes vdndni ase dn adjective, lovely, Grassmann translates : ‘May 
~-all our days stand upright like beautiful trees,’ and Ludwig suygesta 
‘battling ? spears‘ for komyd vdndni. ‘May our trees (our lances) 
through our valour stand always erect.’—Max Miller, 4 Agastya 
apologizes for having allowed Indra to enjoy the offerings intended 
for the Maruts. . 


~ 


HY MN 173.) | THE RIGVEDA. 237 


5 By whom tho Manas recognize the daysprings, by whose strength 
at the dawn of endicss mornings. 
Give us, thou Mighty, glory with the Maruts, fierce with the 
fierce, the Strong who givest triumph, 
6 Do thou,O Indra, guard the conquering [eroes, and rid thee 
of thy wrath against the Maruts, 
With them, the wise, victorious and bestowing. May we find 
strengthening food in full abundance, 


HYMN CLXAXAIL. Maruts. 


WonpderFUvL let your coming be, wondrous with help, ye Bount- 
eous Ones, 
Marats, who gleam as serpents gleam. 
2 Far be from us,O Maruts, ye free givers, your a shaft; 
Far from us be the s* one ye hart. 
3 O Bountcous Givers, touch ye not, O Marnts, , Teuaaendae 
follx 5 
Lift ye us up that we may live, - 
HYMN CLXXTIII. Indra. 
THE praise-song let him sing, forth bursting bird-like ; sing we 
that hymn which lke heaven’s light expandeth, 
That the milk-giving cows may, unimpeded, call to the sacred 
grass the Gods’ assembly, 
2 Let the Bull sing with Bulls whose toil is worship, with a loud 
roar like some wild beast that hungers. 
Praised God! the glad priest brings his heart’s devotion ; the 
holy y youth presents twofold oblation. 


5 By whom: ‘thou, {ndra, by whom, ete, 


1 Who gleam as serpents gleam: referring tothe flashes of lightning 
that accompany the Gods of storm. 2 The stone : the thunderbult. 
3 Trinaskanda’s folk : Trinaskanda appears to be the name of some chief 
not elsewhere mentioned, Wilson, following Siyana, translates : ‘pro- 
tect my people (although [ be) as insifignificant as grass.’ 


ad @ 


1 Let hin sing: let the Udgatar priest sing the Saman or metrical 
hymn of praise, which spreads and blesses’ like the light of heaven. 
2 The Bull: perhaps the institutor of the sacrifice; ar Indra himself 
may beintended. Siyana offers both explanations’ The Bullze- 
the officiating priests. Praised God!;: addressed: to Indra. The 
meaning of the hemistich is obscure. The word mithund (literally, 
pairs) which I have rendered in accordance with Siy ana and Wilson, 
means according to Grassmann, ‘both the worlds,’ and according to 
Ludwig, ‘the couples consisting of the sacrificera and the respective wives.’ 


238 THE HYMNS OF {BOOK 1 


3 May the Priest come circling the measured stations, and with 
him bring the earth’s autumnal fruitage. 

Let the Horse neigh led near, let the Stecr bellow : let the 
Voice go between both worlds as herald. 


4 To him we offer welcomest oblations, the pious bring their 
strength-inspiring pratses, 
May Indra,wondrous in his mighty, accept them,car-borne and 
swift to move like the Nasatyas. 


5 Praise thou that Indra who is truly mighty, the car-borne 
Warrior, Maghavan the Lero; 
Stronger in war than those who fight against bim, borne by 
strong steeds, who kills enclosing darkness ; 


G Him who surpasses heroes in bis greatness: the earth and 
heavens suffice not for his girdles. , 
Indra endnes the earth to be his,@¢bment, and, God-like, wears 
the heave 48 twere a frontlet, 


%7 Thee, Mero, enardtan ef the brave in battles, who roamest in 
the van,—to draw thee hither, 
Indra, the hosts avree beside the Soma, and joy, for his great 
act¢oms, in the Chieftain. 


8 Libations in the sen to thee are pleasant, when thy divine Floods 
come to cheer these people, 

, To thee the Cow is sum of all things grateful when with the 
wish thou seeckest men and princes. 


9 So may we in this One be well befriended, well aided as it were 
through praise of chu ftatns, 
That Indra still may linger at our worship, as one led swift to 
work, to hear our praises. : 


10 Like men in rivalry extolling princes, our Friend be Indra, 
wielder of the thunder. 
Like truce friends of some city’s lord, within them held in good 
rule with sacrifice they help him. 


3 The Priest: Agni, whd isealso the Jforse and the Steer. The 
measured stations: the different fire-altars. Pruttage: grain for the 
oblation. The Votce: thufier. Phe Nasatyas: the Asvins, whose 
chariot is famed fon swiftness. 8 In the sea: reaching thee in the 
sea Of air ; or,.‘the saa’ may meanthe large reservoir of Soma juice. 
Lhe wish: granting all their desires. 9 In this One: this one 
““pgua friend Indra. 10 The stanza is difficult. Wilson, following 

Sayana, tranelates : ¢Emulous in commendation like (those contending 
for tha favour) of,man, may Tadra, the wielder of the thunderbolt, be 
equally (a friend) to us: lika those who, desirous of his friendship 
(conciliate) the lord of a city (ruling) with good government, so do our 
intermediate (representatives) propitiate (Indra) with eacrifices. 


HYMN 1174) THE RIGVEDA. % 239 


11 For every sacrifice makes Indra stronger, yea, when he goes 
around angry in spirit ; z 
As pleasure at the ford invites the thirsty, as the long way 
brings him who gains his object. 
12 Let us not here contend with Gods, O Indrs,for here, O Mighty 
One, is thine own portion, 
The Great, whose Friends the bountcous Maruts hononr, as 
with a stream, his song who pours oblations, 
13 Addressed to thee is this our praise, O Indra: Lord of Bay 
Steeds, find us hereby advancement, 
So mayst thou lead us on, O God, to comfort, May we find 
strengthening food in full abundance. 


HYMN CLXXIV. Indra, 
Trou art the King of all the Gods, O Indra: protect the men, 
O Asura, preserve us. 
Thou Lord of Heroes, Mazhavan, our saver, art faithful, very 
rich, the victory-giver. — x 4 
2 Indra, thou humbledst tribes that spake wich insult by break- 
ing down seven autumn forts, the. retage. 
Thou stirredst, Blameless ! billowy floods, and gavest his foe a 
prey to youthful Purukutsa. 
3 With whom thou drivest troops whose lords are herovs, and 
bringest daylight now, much worshipped Indra, 
With them euard lion-like wasting active Agni to dwell in our 
tilled fields and in our homestead. : 
4 They through the greatness of thy spear, O Indra, shall, to 
thy praise, rest in this earthly station. 
To loose the floods, to seek, for kine, the battle, his Bays he 
mounted, buldly seized the booty. 
9 Indra, beer Kutsa, him in whom thou joyest: the dark-red 
horses of the Wind are docile, 


rt oe os --— 


LL Iudra will come at last although he tarries now. We must 
wait patiently. The thirsty traveller comes to the stream and reaches 
his journey’s end abt last. Wilson observes with truth tat ‘thig 
hymn iis in general elliptical and obscure.’ A translator has to en- 
deavour to give the probable meaning of the worde as they stand, 
without venturing on conjectural completion of fancied ellipses and 
the insertion of words at pleasure after the manner of Sayana, 

1 Zhe men: thy priests. Us: thy worshippers. Aaseu-a: immortal 
and divine, 2 dutumn forts: probably strorgholds on high. 
ground, occupied in the rainy season, Purukutsa: has been men‘ 
tioned before. See I, 63. 7. 3 With whom: the Maruts. 4. 
Lhey: tha enemy. He: Indra. 6 Kutsa: the Lishi of that 
name, Wilson paraphrases after SAyana: ‘Bear (the sage) Kutsa to 
that ceremony (to which) thou desired (to convsy him).’ 


240 STHE HYMNS OF (BOOK I. 


Let the Sun roll his chariot wheel anear us, and Ict the Thund- 
erer {ro to meet the foemen. 
6 Thou Indra, Lotd of Bays, made strong by impulse, hast slain 
the vexers, of thy friends. who give not. 
They who behold the Friend beside the living were cast aside 
by thee as they rodc onward. 
7 Indra, the bard sang forth in inspiration : thou madest earth a 
covering for the Dasa, 
Maghavan made the three that gleam with moisture, and to 
his home brought Kuyavach to slay him. 
8 These thine old deeds new bards have sung, O Indra, Thou 
conquercdst, boundest many tribes for ever. 
Like castles thou hast eraushed the godless races, and bowed 
the godless scorner’s deadly weapon, 
9 A Stormer thou hast made the stormy waters flow down,O Indra, 
like the running rivers. 
‘When over t. ,o~‘}g0d thou broughtest them, O Hero, thou kept- 
est Turvasa ana Yadu safely. 
10 Indra, mayst thou be dirs in all occasions, protector of the 
yaen, most gentle-hearted, 
Giving us victory over all our rivals. May we find strengthen- 
ing food in full abundance. 


HYMN CLXXV. Indra, 


Gap thee: thy glory hath been quaffed, Lord of Bay Steeds, 
as ‘twere the bowl’s enlivening mead. 
For thee the Strong there is strong drink, mighty,omnipotent 


to win. 
2 Let our strong drink, most excellent, exhilarating, come to 
thee, : 
Victorious, Indra! bringing gain, immortal, conquering in 
ficht. 


Thou, Ilero, winner of the spoil, urgest to speed the car of man. 
Bur n wile a vessel with the flame, the lawless Dasyu, i ea ! 


a ob eae ee ate 


6 Who « give not: who ctfer, no oblations ; barbarians who do not 
worship the Gods of the Aryans, The Friend : Indra. Beside the 
living: Ayu, the living, thay perhaps be a propsr name here, 7 
The three that gleam with moisture t what the three areis not clear, Wilson 
translates: ‘has made thé thres (regions) marvelljus by his gifts.’ 
Some reference to, three mornings appoars to be intended. myavdch : 

‘probably the namés of a deiuai or barbarian, 9 Turvasa and 
Yadu: eponymi of Aryan tribes. Seel. 36. 8. 


ee err eet Oe ae eee eee a emery 


w ening Eee 


1 Thy glory hath been quaffed: thou hast drunk what incites thee 
to glorious deeds, namely the Soma juice contained in the bowl, 


) 


HYMN 176.] THE RIGVEDA, O41 


4 Empowered by thine own might, O Sage, thou stolest Sirya’s 
chariot wheel. . 
Thou barest Kutsa with the steeds. of Wind to Sushna as his 
death. 
fy Most mighty is thy rapturous joy, most splendid is thine 
active power; | 
Wherewith, foe-slaying,“ sending blizs, thoa art supreme in 
caining steeds. 
G As thon, O Indra, to the ancicnt singers wast ever joy, as 
water to the tlursty, 
So unto thee L sing this mvocation. May we find streng then- 
ine food in full abundance. 


DYMN CLAXVI Indra, 
Curer thee with draughts to win us bliss : Soma, pierce Indra 
in thy strength, 
Thou stormest tremDbilragein thy rage, and findest 40¢a fooman 
yieh. ® 
% Make our song's penctrate to him who us the Onty One of inen ; 
Por whom the sacred foud is spicad, as the steer ploughs the 
barley mn. 
3 Within whose hands deposited all the Five Peoples’ treasures 
rest. F 
Mark thou the man who injures us and kill him hike the heav- 
enly bolt. 
4 Slay everyone who pours no eift, who, hard to reach, delights 
thee not, 
Jostow on tis what wealth he hath: this even the worshipper 
awalts, 
§ Thon helpest him the doubly strong whose hymns were sung 
unceasine Ly. 
When Indra fought, O Soma, thou helpest the mighty In the 


fray. 
G Asthou, O Indra, to the ancient singers wast ever joy, like 
water to the thirsty, 7% 


Se unto thee Tsing this invocation, May we fiud strengthen: 
. , 2 e 
ing food in full abundance, 


t Dhow stolest Stiryws chariot wheel: dra is said to have taken 
the wheel of tne chariot of th Sun and to haya cast it Jike a quoit 


aginst the demon of Grought, Kadsas the [rasta mentioned in 
the preceding hymo, lndra di. fonded him against Sushiya or protectod 
maukind from drought. Seo 2 OL. 6, 5 Must mighty a thie Fup 


turous joy : Wilson translates: “Phy inebrietyeis most intense.’ 


—— ~~ 


. e al 
3 Uhe eve Peoples’ treasures: the woalth of all the Aryans. sea 


| ee eae 


4 
242 TAE HYMNS OF [BOOK 1. 


HYMN CLXXVII. Indra. 


Tie Bull%f men, who cherishes all people, King of the Races, 
Indra, called of many, 
Fame.loving, praiscd, hither to me with succour turn having 
yoked both vigorous Bay Horses! 
2 Thy mighty Stallions, yoked by prayer, O Indra, thy Coursers 
to thy mighty chariot harnessed,— 
Ascend thou these, and borne by them come hither: with 
Soma juice out-poured, Indra, we call thee. 
3 Ascend thy mighty car: the mighty Soma is poured for thee, 
and sweets are sprinkled round as. 
Come down to us-ward, Bull of human races, come, having 
harnessed them, with strong Bay Horses. 
4 Here is God-reaching sacrifice, here the victim; herc, Indra, 
are the prayers, here is the Soma. 
Strewn is the sacred grass : cume hither, Sakra ; seat thee and 
drink : unyoke thy two Bay Ccurscrs, 
5 Come to us, Indra, ‘cume thou highly lauded to the devotions 
of the singer Mana. 
Sinving, may we find early through thy succour, may we find 
strengthening food in full abundance, 


WYMN CLXXVIIL. Indra. 


Ir, Indra, thou hast given that gracious hearing wherewith 
thou helpest those who sang thy praises, 
Blast not the wish that would exalt us: may I gain all from 
thee and pay all man’s devotions. 
2 Let not the Sovran Indra disappoint as in what shall bring 
both Sisters to our dwelling. 
* To him haverun the quickly flowing waters.. Max Indra 
come to us with life and friendship. 
3 Victorious with the men, Iicro in battles, Indra, who hears 
the singer’s supplication, 
Will bring his ear nigh to the man who offers, if he himself 
upholes the songs that praise him. 


1 The Bull: the hero, or chiéf distinguished by superior strength. 
2—3 The word here rendered by ‘mighty’ (wrtshan) is cémmonly 
applicd in the Veda to fiving’ Beings and things pre-eminent for strength, 
and the Vedic poets delight in repeatifg it and its compounds and 
derivatives. ‘But this is fothing yet,’ observes Pref, Max Miller, 
* compared to other passages, when the poet cannot get enough of 

“vrishan and vrishabha, Cf. I]. 16.6; V’ 36,5; V. 40 2,3; VIIL 13. 
31—33. : 


2 Both Sesters ; Night and Morning. Zhe quickly flowing waters: 
for the libations, 


HY MN 180.] VHE RIGVEDA. 243 


4 Yea, Indra, with the men, through love of glory gonsumes the 
sacred food which friends have offered, 
The ever-strenzthaning song of him who worships ts sung in 
fizht amid the clash of voices. 
5 Aided by thee, O Maghavan, O Indra, may we subdue our fves 
who count them mighty. 
Be our protector, strengthen and increase us. May we find 
strenvthening food in full abundance. 


TLYMN CLXXX. Asvins, 


Licur_y your courser travel through the regions when round 
the sea of air your car ts flying. 
Your golden fellies scatter drops of moisture : drinking the 
sweetness ye attend the Mornings, 
2 Ye asye travel overthl$e the Courser who flies part, the 
Friend of man, most holy, 7 
The prayer is that the Sister may convey you, all praised, 
ineatl:- drinkers ! to support and strengthen, 
3 Ye have deposited, matured within her, in the ray cow the 
first milk of the milch-cow, ° 
Which the bright offerer, shining like a serpent mid trees, 
presents to you whose forin is perfect. 
4 Ye made the fierce heat to be full of sweetness for Atri at his 
wish, like streaming water, : 
Fire-offering thence is yours,O Asvins, Heroes: your car-wheels 
speed to us like springs of honey. 
§ Like Tugra’s ancient son may I} ye Mighty, bring you to giye 
your gifts with milk-oblations. 
Your greatness compasscth Harth, Heaven, and Water : dccay- 
ed for you is sorrow’s net, ye Holy. 


“For Uymn CLXXIX. Seq Appendix. 2 The Courser: the 
Sun. The Sister: Ushas, Dawn. 3 The first milk: yea deposited 
the milk within the Cosmic Cow, and:ihis is. found unaltered in the 
cows of earth. Tke bright offerer: I follow Roth in taking this to 
be the fire, crasping through the fuel as 4 enake that creeps and gleams 
through the bushes, Sut the hemistich is very difficult and the mean- 
ing is doubtful. Wilson, after Sayana, paraphrages: ‘(as vigilan: ia 
the midst of the ceremony) as 4 thief (in thamidst) of a thicket.’ Lud- 
wig says that Avérd means neither snake nor thief, but a tub or wood- 
en vessel. 4 Atri: see I. 112 7. 5 Zugra’s ancient son: 
seo I. 117. 4. Greatness: I adopt Ludwig's conjecture mdhimd for 
mahind: 


OAL CHE UYMNS OF (BOOK 1. 


G When, Bounte ‘ous Ones, ye drive your yoked team downward, 
ye se nd} by your own natures, understanding. 
Swift as the wind fet the prince please and feast you: he, hke 
a plous man, gains strength for mercase. 
7 Bor verily we trnthfad singers praise you! the nigvard trafficker 
is here excluded. 


Now, even now do vo QM blamele-s Asvina, ve Mich ty, curd 
‘ic man whose God ts near hun. 


8 You of a trath day after day,O Asvins that he might win the 
very plentcous torrent, 


Agastya, famous among mortal heroes, roused with o thousand 
lauds like sounds of music, 


9 When with the glory of your car ye travel, when ye ga speed- 


me dike the priest of mortals, : 


ea 8 Fe 
And giva good horses to the sacrfmers, may we, Nasatyas! 
eam our shate of riches. 
10 With songs of praise we ea!! today, O Asvins, that voue new 
chariot, for our own well being, 
That corcles heaven with never-injured fellics. May we tind 
strenethcoing food m full abundance. 


HYMN CLXXXL Asvins. 


War, dearest Pair, 1s this in strength and riches that ye as 

* Priests are bringing from the waters ? 

This srerifice is your glorification, ye who profees mankind and 
ceive thom treasures. 


2 May your pure steeds, rain-drinkers, bring you bitherwilt as 
the tempest, your celestial coursers, 
Rapid as thought with fair backs, full of vigour, resplendent in 
ther native hebt, O Asvins. 
3 Your car ts hike a torrent rushing downward : 
meh, dsrGad- scated, for our we i ire, — 
tar holy, strony that ever would be foremost, thought- swift, 


which ye, for whom we lone, have mounted. 
‘ ee 


may it come 


6 The prince :, the instivutor of the’ sacrifice. « 
plenteous larrent : es obtain abuadavco of rain, Agastya: the Risht 
of tha bymn. Vien you assist the pious chiefy in battle, and 
they win the spoil, a thes priests who officiated at the sacrifices which 
woo that aid receive their due share of the booty as their reward. 


8 The very 


1 Doom the waters: from tho firmament. 


HYMN 18?) THE RIGVEDA. 210 


4 Here sprung to life, they both have sung together, with bodies 
free from stain, with signs that mark them ; 

One of you Prince of Sacrifice, the Victor, the ather counts as 
Heaven’s auspicious offspring, 

May your car-scat, down gliding, golden- Cope C ReCeLeNG te 
your wish, approach our dweilings. 

Men shall feed full the bay steeds of the other, and, Asvins 
they with roars shall stir the regions. 


G Porth comes your strong Ball like a cloud of autumn,sending 
abundant food of liquid sweetness. 
Let theny fecd with the other's ways and vigour: the upper 
streams have come and do us service. 
7 Your constant song hath been sent forth, Disposers! that Hows 
threefold in mighty strength, O Asvins. loses 
Thus lauded, give the arp pliant protection : moving’ or resting 
hear mine invocation. 
8 This sony of bright contents for you is swelling in thc men’s 
hall where threefold grass is ready. 
Your strong rain-cloud, ye Mighty Ones, hath swollen, honour- 
ing men as ’twere with milk’s outpouring, : 
9 The prudent worshipper, like Ptshan, Asvin! praises you as 
he praises Dawn and Agni, 
When, singing with devotion, he invokes you. May we {ind 
strengthenwy food in full abundance. 


HYMN CLXAXIT, Asyins, 


Tis was the task, Appear promptly, ye prudent Ones, Here 
is the chariot drawn by strong stecds :. be ye glad, 

Ueart stireing, longed for, suecourers of Vispala, here are 
Heaven’ S Sons whose sway blesses the pious nan. 


6 Vane irons Bull: your swift chariot. Wilson, gemacke < om hig 
and the preceding stanza are not very explicit in the comparison which 
is intimated between the functions of the two Asvins, for the use of 
anyasya, of the other, in the sedond half of the verse, is all that, inti- 
mates that ekasya, of the one, is understeod in the first half.” 7 That 


flows threefold: trom three priests, 8 Threefold grass: sacred crass 
arranged to form three Jayers or seats. _ ~ 9 As the praises Darvon 
and Agni: that’is, at the morning sacrifice. 
5 s 
® 


1 This was the task: this saorifico is the work at which you have 
to preside. Be ye glad: delight yourselves with the Soma juice. 
Succourers of Vispald: by giving Tee aniron leg. Sea I, 116 15. Or 
‘the word in the text may mean, a3 explained by Sdyana, ‘rich in bone- 
volonce to mon,’ 


216 TAE UYMNS OF [BOOK 1. 


€ ? ‘ A 
2 Loneed fors most Indra-like, mighty, most Marut-lke, most 
wonderful in deed, car-borne, best charioteers, 
Bring your full chariot hither heaped with liquid sweet : 
thercon, ye Asvins, come to him who offers gifts. 
3 What make ye there, ye Mighty ? Wherefore linger ye with 
follkk who, offering not, are held in high esteem ? 
Pass over them; make ye the nigeard’s life deeay : give light 
unto the singer eloquent in praise. 
4 Crunch up on every side the dogs who bark at us: slay ye 
our foes, 0 Asvins; this ye understand, 
Make wealthy every word of hun who praises you: accept 
with favour, both Nasatyas, this my Iaud. 
f Ye made for Tugra’s son amid the water-floods that animated 
ship with wings to {ly withal, , 
Whereoh with God devoted mind yg» brought him forth, and 
fled with casy flight from ont the mighty surge, 


6 Four ships most welcome in the midst of ocean, urged by the 
Asvins, save the son of Tugra, 
Ifim who was cast down headlong in the waters, plunged in 
the thick mmevitable darkness. 
T What tree was that which stood lixed in surrounding sea to 
which the son of Tugra supphcating clang ? 
Like twigs, of which some winged creature inay take hold, ye, 
° Asvins, bore him off safely to your renown. 
8 Welcome to you be this the hymn of praises uttered by 
Minas, O Nasatyas, LLerces, 
\ ~ ay: yy * yyprga \ ,y : s 
«© From this our sath ring Where we offer Soma, May we tind 
strengthening food in full abandance. : : 


HYMN CLXX XIII Asvins, 


Make ready that which passcs thought in swiftness, that hath 
three wiedis and triple seat, ye Mighty, 

Whereon ye seck the dwelling of the pious, whereon, three: 
fold, ye fly like birds with pinions, 


5 Tugra’s son: sea I,*116. 3,4. | 6 Im the midst of ocean: 
I can make nothing of the jdthalasya of the text, and insert these ° 
words as substitut’ for translation. 7 What tree“was that: figura- 
tively of the Axvins who saved him, as, in a sudden inundation, a tree 
saves the man who climbs it. An ingenious interpretation of the 
legend will ba found in M. Bergaigne’s La Religion Vedigue, III. 10,17. 


1 The three-w heeled chariot of the Asvins hag been ‘mentioned 
before, See I, 34, I. 


HYMN 184.) THE RIGVEDA. 247 


2 Light rolls your easy chariot faring earth-ward, what time, for 
food, ye, full of wisdom, mount it, 
May this song, wondrous fair attend your glory : ye, as ye 
travel, wait on Dawn Heaven’s Daughter. 


3 Ascend your lightly rolling car, approaching the worshipper 


who turns him to his duties,— 
Whereon ye come unto the house to quicken man and his 


offspring, O Nasatyas, Heroes. 
4 Let not the wolf, let not the she-wolf harm you, Forsake me 
not, nor pass me by for others. 
Here stands your share, here is your bymn, ye Mighty: yours 
are these vessels, fall of pleasant juices. 
9 Gotama, Purumilha, Atri bringing oblations all invoke you 
for protection. 
Like one who gos straight to the point directed,, come, ye 
Nasatyas, to mine in’écation. 
3 We have passed o’er the limit of this darkness: our praise 
hath been bestowed on you.O Asvins. 
Come hitherward by paths which Gods have travelled, May 
we find strengthening food in full abundance, 


fYMN CLXXXIV, Asvins, 


Lev us invoke you both this day and after: the priest is here 
with lauds when morn is breaking : 
Nisatyas, wheresoc’er ye be, Ileaven’s Children, for him Who 
is more Itberal than the godless, 
2 With us, ye Mighty, let yourselves be joyful, glad in our 
stream of Soma slay the nigeards. 
Graciously hear my hymns and invitations, marking, O Ieroes, 
with your cars my longing, 
3 Nisatyas, Piishans, yeas Gods for glory arranged and set in 


order Stiryi’s bridal. 
Your giant steeds move un, sprung from the witters, like an: 


cient times of Varana the Mighty. 


4 Let not the wolf: let no enemy prevent your coming, Ludwig 
thinks that there is an ironica: reference to the wolf Hon whose jaws 
the Asvins rescuad the quail. See I. 117. 16, 5 Golama, Puru- 
mila, Atri: saves favoured by the Asvins. 


3 Pdshans: ye who cherish men like Pashan himself. Sdrya : 
the daughter of the Sun and the consort of the, Asvins. Seol 116. 
17. Giant steeds; cf. [, 46, 3. What the times or ages of Varuna 


are ig uncertain, 


248 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 2. 


4 Your grace be with us, ye who love sweet juices : further 
the hymn sung by the poet Mina, 
When men are joyful in your glorious actions, to win heroic 
strength, ye Bounteous Givers. 


9 This praise was made, 0 liberal Lords, O Asvins, for you with 
fair adornment by the Manas. 
Come to our house for us and forjour children, rejoicing, 
Nasatyas, in Agastya. 
6 We have passed o’cr the limit of this darkness: our praise 
hath been bestowed on you, O Asvins. 
Come hitherward by paths which Gods have travelled. May 
we find strengthening food in full abundance. 


HYMN CLXXXV. Heaven and Earth. 


Wuernte of these is elder, whether later ? low were they 
born ‘Who knowcth it, ye sages?“ 
These of themsa'ves support all thihes existing: as ona car 
the Day and Night roll onward. 
2 The Twain uphold, though inotionless and footless, a wide: 
spread offspring having fect and moving, 
Like your own son upon his parents’ bosom, protect us, 
Heaven and Earth, from fearful danger. 
3 1 call for Aditi’s unrivailed bounty, perfcct, celestial, deathless, 
meet for worship 
Froduce this, ye Twain Worlds, for him who lands you, 
Protect us, Heaven and Harth, from fearful danger. 


4 May we be close to both the Worlds who suffer no pain, 

Parents of Gods, who aid.with favour, 
7 \ ‘ © ; . . 

Both mid the Gods, with Day and Night alterrate. Protect 
us, Ilcaven and Harth, from fearful danger. 

Faring together, young, with mecting limits, Twin Sisters 
lying in their Parents’ bosum, 

Kissing tls centre of the world together. Protect us, Heaven 
and Marth, trom fearful danger. 

6 Duly Icall the two wide seats, thre mighty, the general Parents, 

with the Gods’ protection, . 


ay 


otal wee ew ee 


3 Adili’s gift: all the blessings of idfinite Nature. According to 
Sayana, Aditi moaas hore thy firmament, in which cag her vif would 
be sessonable rain ang conseque it wualth. 4 Parcnts of Gods : 
as with the Greoke, Heaven and Karth are regarded as the father and 
mothor of the Gods, “S Tha meaning is obscure, Ludwig suggests 
Dakeha and Aditi as the parents, Zhe eentre of the world means usual- 
ly the altar, G Weth the Gods’ protection ; to come to uy with the 
favouring help of the Guds. Zhe nectar; the rain. 


HYMN 186.) THE RIGVEDA. 249 


Who, beantiful to look on, make the nectar. Protect us, 
Heaven and Karth, from fearful danger. ‘ 
7 Wide, vast, and manitold, whose bounds are distant,—these, 
reverent, I address at this our worship, 
The blessed Pair, victorious, all-sustaining Protect us, Heaven 
and Earth, from fearful danger. 
8 What sin we have at any time committed against the Gods, 
our friend, our house’s chieftain, 
Thereof may this our hymn be expiation. Protect us, Heaven 
and Harth, trom fearful danger. 


9 May both these Friends of man, who bless, preserve me, may 
they attend me with their help and favour. 
Enrich the man more liberal than the godless, May we, ye 
Gods, be strong with food rejoicing. 
10 Endowed with understanding, I have uttered this truth, for 
allto hear, to Earth and Heaven. 
Be near us, keep us from reproach and trouble. °Father and 
Mother, with your help preserve us. 
11 Be this my prayer fullfilled, O Earth and [eaven, wherewith, 
Father and Mother, | address you. . 
Nearest of Gods be ye with your protection, May we find 
strengthening food in full abundance. 


HYMN CLXXXVI. -Visvedevas, 


Loven of all men, may Savitar, through praiscs offered ag 
sacred food, come to our synod, 

That you too, through our bymn, ye ever-youthful, may glad- 
den, at your visit, all our people. — « 

2 Tous may all th8 Gods come trooped together, Aryaman, 

Mitra, Varuna concordant, 

That all may be promoters of our welfarc, and with grcat 
night preserve our strength from slackness. 


3 Agni I sing, the guest vou love most dearly ; the Contiueror 
thrdugh our lauds is friendly-minded : 
That he may be our Varana rich ih glory, and send food like 


& prince praised by the godly. ; 
r er so ss 
4 To youl seck with reverence, Night and Morning, like a cow 
good to milk, with hope to conquer, ° Cs 
1 Savitar: the Sun, especially revarded as the vivilite eal genera- 
tor. Yeever youthful: Visvedevas, or All-Gods. © 3 Our Varuna: 
our lord and protector. 4 Like @ cow: the singer is the cow and 
his hymu the milk. With hope to conquer: to overcome ging, ac- 


cording to Siyana. 


32 


250 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 9. 


Preparing on a common day the praise-song with milk of vari- 
ous hues within this udder. 


5 May the great Dragon of the Deep rejoice us: as one who 
nourishes her young comes Sindhu, . 
With whom we will incite the Child of Waters whom vigorous 
coursers swift as thought bring hither. 


§ Moreover Tvashtar also shall approach us, one-minded with 
the princes at this visit, 

Hither shall come the Vritra-slayer Indra, Ruler of men, as 
strongest of the Heroes, 


2 Him too our hymns delight, that yoke swift horses, like 
mother cows who lick their tender youngling. 
To him our songs shall yield themsclves like spouses, to him 
the most delightful of the Heroes. 


8 So may the Maruts, armed with mwhty weapons, rest here on 
heaven and earth with heasts in concord, 
As Gods whose cars have dappled steeds like torrents, destroy: 
ers of the foe, allies of Mitra, 


9 They hasten on to happy termination their orders when they 
. are made known by glory. 

Asvon a fair bright day the arrow flieth, o'er «ll the barren 
soul their missiles sparkle. 


10 Incline the Asvins to show grace, and Pfishan, for power and 
» might have they, their own possession. 
Friendly are Vishnu, Vata and Ribhukshan: so may [ oring 
the Gods to make us happy. 


11 This is wy reverent thought of you, ye Holy; may itinspire 
you, make you dwell among us.— . | 
Thought, toiling for the Gods and seeking treasure, 


May we 
find strengthening food in full abundance. 


A common day: belonging to the past night and tho present 
morning. Milk of various hues: the libaticus of nvilk mixed with 
the yellow or brown Soma juice. This udder: apparently a figu- 
rative expression for the place of @acrifice whence the milky hbations 
flow. 5 Dragon of the Deep: Ahibudhnya, a divine being that 
dwells in,‘and presides over the firmament. Sindhu: tha Indus. 
The Child of Waters: Agni. e 6 Z'vashtar: the heavenly artist. 

' The Princes : institutors of the sacrifice. 7 That yoke swift horses : 
that quickly bring the Gods to the sacrifice. Thew tender young- 
ling: Sdyana Sakes the epithet tdrunam as applying to Indra ‘ the 


ever-youthful. 10 Aebhukehans a name of Indra, as Lord of the 
Bibhus, See I. 162. 1. 


HY MN 187.] THE RIGVEDA. 951 


HYMN CLXXXYVII, Praise Sf Food. 


Now will L glorify Pood that upholds great strength, 
By whose invigorating power Trita cent Vritra limb from limb. 
24) pleasant Wood, O Food of meath, thee have we chosen for 
ol OWN, 
So be our kind protector thou, 
3 Come hitherward to us, O Food, auspicious with auspicious 
help, 
[lealth-bringing, not unkind, a dear and guileless friend. 


ar? diffused. 
Like winds they have their place in heaven, 


5 These gifts of thine, O Food, O Food most sweet to taste, 

These savours of thy jdices work like creatures that® have 
nughty nocks. : : 

§ In thee, O Food, is sct the spirit of great Gods. 

Under thy flag brave deeds were dene: he slew the Dragon 
with thy help, 

If thou be gone unto the splendour of the clouds, ° 

tiven from thence, QO Food of meath, prepared for our enjoy: 
nent, come, 


ae | 


8 Whatsver morsel we consume from waters or from plants of . 


carth, QO Soma, wax thou fat thereby. 
What, Soma, we enjoy from thee in milky food or barley-brew, 
Vutapi, grow thou fat thereby. 
10 O Vegetable, Cake of meal, be wholeséme,firm,and strength- 
enipg : : 
Vapat: grow thon fat thereby. 


IL © Food, from thee as such have we drawn forth with lauds, 
like cows, our sacrificial gifts, 
“rom thee who banquetest, with Gods, from thee who Datiquet- 
est vith us, 


— 


ee a 


1 7rite: a mysterious ancient deity frequently mentioned in the 
Rigveda, principally in connexion with Indra, Vayu. and the Maruts. 
{lis home is in the remotest part of heaven, and he is éalled Aptya, the 
Watery, that is, sprung from, or dwelling in the sea of cloud and 
vapour. By Sayana be is identifigd sometimes with Yayu, sometimes 
with Iudra as the pervader of the three worlds, and sometimes with 
Agni atationed in the three fre-receptaclos. 2 The God addressed 
1s the Soma. 5 Like creatures that have mighty necks: like strong 
bullocks. 6 The spirit of great Gods: thou iuciteat Indra and the 
Gods to perform glorious and benevolent acts. 9 Valdpi: the 
fermenting Suma, According to Sayana, the body, 


4 These juices which, O Food, are thine throughout the regions. 


250 THE HYMNS UF (BOOK I. 
HYMN CLXXXVILL. Apris. 


Winner of thousands, kindled, thou shinest a God with Gods 
to-day. 
Bear our oblations, envoy, Sage, 
2 Child of Thyself! the sacrifice is for the righteous blent with 
meath, 
Presenting viands thousand fold, 
3 Invoked and worthy of our praise bring Gods whose due is 
sacrifice : 
Thou, Agni, givest countless gifts, 
4 To seat a thousand Herocs they eastward have strewn the 
grass with might, 
Wiereon, Adityas, ye shine forth. 
& The sovran all-impertal Doors, wide.good,many and manifold, 
Have poured their streams of holy ual. 
6 With gay adornment, fair to see, in glorious beauty shine 
, they forth: 
Let Night and Morning rest them here. 
7 Let these two Sages first of all, heralds divine and cloquent, 
Perform for us this sacrifice. 
8 You I address, Sarasvati, and Bharati, and Ila, all: 
Urge ye us on to glorious fame. 
9 Tvashtar the Lord hath made all forms and all the cattle of 
the field : ¢ 
Cause them to multiply for us. : 
10 Send tu the Gods, Vanaspati, thyself, the sacrificial draught 
Let Agni make the oblations swect. 


11 Agni, preeeder of the Gods, is honoured with the sacred song : 
He yiows at offerings blest with Hail! 


- 


The Aptis’ are.tha various fons of Agni, according to Sgyana, 


which are invoked in the hymn. 1 Thou: Agni. 2 Child of 
Thyself : Ayui, See I 13. 2. 4 Aditras: See I. 14. 3. 5 


The sovran ailimperial Doors: of. the sacrificia] hall through which 
Gods enter, They are types of the portale of the Kast through which 
light comes into the world. See Wallis, Cosmology of the Rigveda, 


p. 19. 7. These two Sages: heralds or invokers, because they call 
the Gods. See I. 13. 8. 8 Sarasvatt aud Bharati and Lid: see 1. 
13, 9. 10 Vanaspatt: see I. 13, il. ll Blest with Hail /s 


see I, 13. 12, 


HYMN 189) THE RIGVEDA. 955 
UYMN CLXXXIX, 2 Agu 


Ry goodly paths lead us to riches, Agni, thou God who know- 
est every sacred duty. 
Remove the sin that makes us stray and wander : most ainple 
aduration will we bring thee. 
9 Lead us anew to happiness, O Agni ; lead us beyond all danger 
and affliction. 
Be unto us a wide broad ainple castle : bless, prosper on their 
way our sons and offspring, 
3 Far from us, Agni, put thou all diseases : let them strike 
lands that hive no saving Agni. 
God, make our home again to be a blessing, with all the Im- 
mortal Deities, O Holy. 
4 Preserve us, Agni, with perpetual succour, refulgent in the 
dwelling wich thou lovest. 
O Conqueror, most youthftl, let no danger touch him who 
praises thee to-day or after, 
§ Give not us up a prey to sin, O Agni, the greedy enemy that 
brings us trouble ; 
Not to the fanged that bites, not to the toothless : give not 
us up, thou Conqueror, to the spoiler. 
G6 Such as thou art, born after Law, O Agni, when inaded vive 
protection to our bodies. 
From whosoever would reproach or injure : for thou, God, 
rescuest from all oppression, ° 
7 Thou, well discerning both these classes, comest to men at 
early morn, O holy Agni, 
Be thou obedient unto man at cverang,to be adorned, as keen, 
by eager suttors. 
8 To bim have we addressed our pious speeches, I, Mana’s son, 
to him victorious Agni, 
May we gain Countless riches with the sages. May we find 


strengthening food in full abundance. 
AER... eee 


This hymn, as Ludwig observes, appears to have been composed abt 
a time of pestilence. 3 That have no saving Agni: or, which do 
not maintain the sacred fire ; whose inhabitants do not worship Agni. 
5 The fanged:; venomous serpents, Lhe toothless: wild animals that 
do not bite, buteinjure with their horns, ete. 7 Both these classes : 
worshippers aud nou-worshippers. Be thow obedidist: be a useful 
servant in the house. As keen: akr@h, applied to Agni in all the 
places where it occurs in the Rigveda, appears tq mean hasty, violtnt, 
eager, or keen. Ludwig thinks that it means here a sacrificial post, 
and Grassmanp, a banner. Wilson, following Si#yanua, paraphrases : 
‘be compliant (with his wishes); like an institutor of the rite, (who 
is directed) by the desires (of the priests),’ 


a ee re 


254 THE RY MNS OF [BOOK ?, 
IIYMN Cx, Brihaspati, 


Gioriry thou Brihaspati, the seatheless, who must be praised 
with hymns. sweet-tongucd and imghty, 
To whom as ieader of the son, respleudent, worthy of lauds, 
both Gods and mortals listen. 
2 On him wait 2ongs according to the season, even as a stream 
of pious men set moving, 
Pythasp-t: —for he laid out the expanses-—-was, at the sacrifice, 
vat M itarisvan, 
3 The praie, the verse that offers adoration, may he bring forth, 
as th» San sends hiv arms out, 
He who gives daily ligit throuzh this God’s wisdom, strong 
asa dread wild beast, and incfFensive, 


A [lis sony of praise pervades the earth and heaven : Ict the 
wise worshipper draw it, like a covrser 
These of Jirihs-pati, like hunter's’ arrows, eo to the skies that 
echanve their hie hke serpents, 
4 Those, God, wh> count thee as a worthless bulloek, and, 
wealthy sinners, live on thee the Bount-ous,— 
On fouls Jike there no blessing thou bostowest : Drihaspats, 
thoy punishest the spiteful. 
G Lice a tam path as be, where grass is pleasant, though hard 
to win, a Friend beloved must dearly 
Those whe unharmed by enemies behold us, while they would 
e make them bare, stoud closely ¢»mpassed. 


L Bretkaspete: Vaord of Prayer. See To 14, 3, 2 hor he latd 
Out the Geprmses: spread out and revealcd to the eyes of men the broad 
revions Of heaven audcarth, * The meaning of the second jhemistich is 
not clear | Wilson paraphrases » ‘for that Brihaspati is the manitester 
(of all), the cxpansivo wind that (diffusing) blussines has been pro- 
duced for (the disfusioa cf) water’? There seems to be nothing iu the 
Rigveda to justify the tduatification of Matarisvan with the wind, and 
only in fhe tater Jnugarge hisus pot thie sense of water. see | ol. 3. 
3 Me: “rile<pati, dle who gives daily light: the regular appeagance 
of the Sun depouds upon Brihaspati’s wisdom Inoffensive : arak- 
shasah, according to Sayana, ‘ free from the opposition of Rakshasas,’ 
4 These of Brihwspatt; these sacred songs, compared to arrows. = Thud 
change their hue like serpents: Ahimdydu. Seve I 3. 9. 6 This 
stanza is unintelligible toseme Wilson rendors it: Be a (pleasant) 
way to bin whosvoes well and makes good offerings, like the affection- 
ate. fulond of (a rawer who) restrains the bad ; and may those sinless 
men Who instruct us, although yet onveloped (by ignorance) stand 
extricated from their covering’ ; and remarks; ‘it is not clear how 
those who are caveloped by 1gnorance should be competent to teach; 
another explanation is, let those who revile us, and are being protect- 
ed, be deprived af that protection.’ 


AY MN 191.) THRE RIGVFDA. O5 


7 Ile to whom songs of praise go forth like torrents, as rivers 
eddying undcr banks flow sea-ward— : 
Brihaspati the wise, the cager, clusely looks upon both, the 
waters and the vessel. 
8 So bath Brihaspati, great, strong and mighty, the God excecd- 
ing powerful, been brought hither, 
May he thus lauded give us kine and horses. May we find 
strengthening food in full abundance. 


HYMN CXCI1. Water. Grass. Suan, 


Vunomous, slightly venomous, or venomous aquatic worm,— 
Roth creatures, stinging, unobserved, with potsun have infected 
mo. 
2 Coming, it kills the unobserved ; it hills them as if goes away, 
It kills them as it drives them off, and bruising bruises them 
to death. ° : 
3 Sara grass, Darbha, Kusafe, and Sairya, Munja, Virana, 
Where all these cre. tures dwell unsecn, with Poison have in- 
fected me. . 
A The cows had scttled in their stalls, the beasts of prey had 
sought their lairs, 
Extinguished were the lights of men, when things ugséen in- 
fected me. 
F Or these, these reptiles, are observed, like lurking thicves at 
evening time, 
Scers of all, themselves unseen : be therefore very vigilant? 


7 This stanza also is vory obscure. Drihaspati is said to look upon 
the waters and the vossel, that is thu riveynto be crossed and the howk 
which is to be used, meaning perhaps the sacrifice and all thab is used 
in performing 1. Ludwig thinks that a play upon the words is intend- 
ed, dpah meaning both water and a religious corumony and tdrah both 
furry-boat aud prompt anergy. 


This so-called hymn is a spell or charm said to havesSseen recitied 
hy A’zastya whon ho suspeeted that ho had been poisoned [ts silent 
repetition is said tu bo an effectual atitido.e szainet fall venom in reptr- 
leg, insects, scorpions, roots, and artificial poisons.’ I cenerally follow 
Sayana ; but his explanations ®re not always satisfactory, and several 
passages must be left in their original obscurity. °* 1 The exact mean- 
ning of the words in the first line 1s uncertain. auth creatures s 
both classes either the venomous and the slightly gvenomous, or land- 
reptiles and water-snakes. 2 Coming, rt kil/s the wnoboer ved: the 
herb, used as an antidote, coming to the man who has been bitten kills 
the vonomous creatures who secretly attacked him. 3 Sara grass, 
etc: these are different sorts of grass ia which snakes and other veno- 
mous roptiles lurk. 


O56 THRE HYMNS OF [BOOK 1. 


6 Heaven is your Sire, your Mother Earth, Soma your Brother, 


Aditi 
Your Sister : seeing all, unseen, keep still and dwell ye hap- 
pily. 
1 Biters of shoulder or of limb, with necdle-stings, most veno- 
nous, 


Unseen, whatever ye may be, vanish together and be gone. 


8 Slayer of things unsecn, the Sun, beheld of all, mounts, east: 
ward, up, 
Consuming all that are not secn, and evil spirits of the night. 
9 There hath the Sun-God mounted up, who scorches much and 
everything, 
Even the Aditya from the hills, all-seen, destroying things un- 
scen, 
10 1 hang the poison in ths Sun, a wine-skin in a vintner’s house, 
He will not die, nor shall we d%: his path is far : he whom 
Bay Horses bear hath turned thee tosweet meath. 


11 This little bird, so very small, hath swallowed all thy poison up. 
She will not die, nor shall we die: his path is far: he whom 
Bay Worscs bear hath turned thee to sweet meath, 


12 The threc-times-seven bright sparks of fire have swallowed up 
the poison’s strength, 
They will not die, aor shall we die: his path is far: the whom 
Bay IJlorses bear hath turned thee to swect meath. 


1) Of ninety rivers and of nine with power to stay the venom’s 
course,— 
The names of all L have secured: his path is far : he whom Bay 
Ilorses bear hath turfied thee to swect meath. 

6 Heaven, or Dyaus, is here said to be the father of the snakes. 
Soma : the Moon. 10 Lhany the porson we the Sun: ‘T deposit tha 
poison in the solar orb, like a leather bottle in the house of a vendor 
of spirits. —Wilsun, See Wilson’s note in which he says that by the 
Sun or as Sifana paraphrases it, the orb of the Sun, ‘is probably. to be 
understood & mystical diagram, or figure wholly or partly typical of 
the solar orb: the Sun being conSidered as especially instrumental in 
counteracting the operation of poison.’ He will not die: the Sun 
will not die from the effect of the poisow thus applied, and we also who 
have been bitten shail throayh his favour recover. ll This little 
bird: according to Siyana, the bird which we call the francoline parb- 
ridge, said to be agremover of poison.s 12 Bright sparks of fire: 
either. says Sayana, the seven flames of fire multiplisd, or the twonty- 
one varieties of andther kind of bird unaffected by eating poison. 
13 Of ninety rivers and of nine : the numbers are used indefinitely for 
all the rivera of the country. 


HYMN 191} THE RIGVEDA. 257 


14 So have the peahens thrce-times-seven, so have the , maiden 
Sisters Scven +e 
Carried thy venom: far away, as girls bear water in their 
Jars, 
i) The pcison-insect isso small; Icrush thecrcature with a 
Stuna, 
I turn the poison hence away, dcparted unto distant lands. 


Forth issaing from the mountain’s side the poison-insect spake 
and said : 

The scorpion’s venom hath no strength ; Scurpion, thy venom 
Is but weak, 


It The peaheus three-times-seven: peafowls are rogarded as great 
enomies of snakes. The number appears to be merely fanciful and 
borrowed from verse 12. *The mauler Sisters Seven: the seven chic 
river of the land. 15 Askeimbha means poison-bag, kushwm- 
bhakch in the toxt is taken by Ludwig and Grassmanu to mean veao- 
mOus Insect, SAyana explains ivas the nakua, ncui or mungoose 
whose hostility to the snake is proverbial Wilson paraphirases + ey 
the insignificant mungoose carry off uhy vonuui,(Puison): if nod, ! wii 
crush the vile (creature) yith a stone.’ 


Jd 


BOOK THE SECOND, 


HYMN I, Agni. 


Tuov, Agni,ehining in thy glory through the days, art brought 
to life from out the waters, from the stone: 
From out the forest trees and herbs that grow on ground, 
thou, Sovran Lord of men art generated pure. 
2 Thine is the Herald’s task and Cleanser’s duly timed ; Leader 
art thou, and Kindler for the pious man. 
Thou art Director, thou the ministering Priest: thou art the 
Brahman. Lord and master in our home, 
$ Hero of Heroes, Agni! thou art Indra, thou art Vishnu of 
the Mighty Stride, udorable : 
‘hou, Brahmanaspati, the Bfahman finding wealth: thou, O 
Sustainer, with thy wisdom tendest us. . 
4 Agni, thonart King Varuna whose Jaws stand fast; as Mitra, 
Wonder-Werkor, thou must be implored, 
Aryaman, heroes’ I ord, artthou, enriching all, and liberal 
Ansa in the synod, O thou God. ; 


The hymne of this Book, with the few exceptions that will be noted, 
are ascribed to the Rishi Griteamada. As Book I is called the Book 
of the Satarchine, that is bf the seers of a hundred or large indefinite 
number of Richas or verses, 60 this Book is commonly called the GArt- 


sarmnada Mandala or Book of Gritsamada. 1 Through the days: for 
the days of sacrifice, according to Sayana. « The waters ; from tha 
waters of the @rmament, as lightning. From out the forest trees: 


in the frequently occurring conflagrations caused by the friction of dry 
bra: ohes. Agni is also said to have his home in plants, perhaps origi- 
nally on account of a phosphorescent light which some plants emit. 
2 Acni concentratc-sin himself the various functions of different classas 
of human priests, the most important of which are menitened in the 
verse, °The classification of the priests and the description of their 
duties are given with variations by diffefent authorities. The Hotar 
or Herald invokes the Gods; the Potar, Puritier, or Cleanser, is the 
assistant of the Brahman or praying priesh who ‘remedies any defect i in 
the ritual ; the Neshtir or Leader leads forward the wife of the secri- 
ficer; tha “Agniath 8r Kindler lights the eaortificial fire ; fhe Prasastar 
or Director is the assistant of the, Ifotar ;. and the Adhvaryu or minia- 
tering priest is the deacon who measures the ground, builds the altar ; 
and makes all the preparations necessary for the sacrifice. The duties 
of the priests, however, varied at different times and according to the 
nature of the ceremony which they were engaged to perform. 3 
Vishnes of the Mighty Stride: gq I. 32, 16, 4 Ansa: the Distri- 
buter ; one of the Adityas, 


260) THE HYMNS OF (BOOK I. 


Q Thou givest strength, as Tvashtar, to the worshipper : thou, 
wiclding Mitra’s power, hast kinship with the Dames. 
Thou, urging thy flect coursers, givest noble steeds : a host 
of heroes art thou with great store of wealth. 


6 Rudra art thou, the Asura of mighty heaven : thoa art the 
Maruts’ host, thou art the Lord of food, 
Thou goest with red winds: bliss hast thou in thine home, 
As Pishan thou thyself protectest worshippers, , 
7 Giver of wealfh art thouto him who honours thee ; thou art 
God Savitar, granter of precious things. 
As Bhaga, Lord of men! thou rulest over wealth, and @uard- 
est in lis house him who served thee well. 


8 To thee, the people’s Lord within the house, the folk press for- 
ward to their King most graciously inclined. 
: g 
Lord of the lovely look, all things belone to thee : ten hun- 
dred, yea, a thousand are otttweighed by thee. 


9 Agni, men seek thee as a Father with their prayers,win thee, 
beight-formed, to brotkerhood with holy act 

Thou art a Son to hin who duly worships thee, and as trusty 

Friend thou guardest from attack. 


10 A Ribha art thou, Agni, near to be adored ; thou art the 
Sovran Lord of fuodfal spoil and wealth. 

Thon shinest brightly forth, thou burnest to bestow : pervad- 
inv sacrifice, thou lendest us thine help. 


11 Thou, God, art Aditi to him who offers gifts: thoa, Hotra 
Bhirati, art strengthened by the song. 
Thou art the hundred-wintered la to give strength, Lord of 
Wealth ! Vritra-slaycr and Sarasvati. 
12 Thou, Agni, cherished well, art bighest vital powcr ; in thy 
delightful hue glories vistble. 
Thou art the lofty might that furthers each design : thon art 
wealth manifold, diffused on every side. 


13 Thee, ‘Agni, have the Adityas taken as their mouth: the 
Bright Ones have mate thee, O Sage, to be their tongue. 


They who love offerings cling tothee at solemn rites : by thee 
the Gods devour the duly offered food, 


14 By thee, O Agni, all the Immortal cuilcless Gods eat with thy 
mouth the oblation that is offered thei, 


5 The Dames: tho Consorts of the Gods. ll Hotré, Bharati 
Jia are personificatiuns of parts of religious worship Tho epithet 


‘hundred-wintered ’ appears to refer to the natural duration of human 
life. Sarasvatz: sea 1. 3. 10, 


HYMN ».| THE RIGVEDA. 261 


e 
By thee do mortal men give sweetness to their drink, 
Bright art thou born, the embryo vf the plants of carth. 


1) With these thou art united, Agni; yea, thou, God of noble 
birth, surpassest them in majesty, 
Which, through the puwer of good, here spreads abread from 
thee, diffused through both the worlds, throughout the carth 
and heaven. 


16 The princely worshippers who send to those who sing thy 
praise, O Agni, guerdon graced with kine and stceds,-— 
Lead thou both these and us forward to higher bliss. With 
brave men in the assembly may we speak aloud, 


LUYMN Il. Agni. 
Wirn saerifice exalt Agni who knows all life; worship hin 
with oblation and ‘the song of praise, 
Well kindled, nobly fed. theaven’s Lord, Colestial Priest, who 
labours at the pole where deeds of might are done 
2 Atnight and mornin, Agni have they called to thee, like 
milch-kine in their stwlls lowing to mcet their young. 
As messenger of heaven thou lightest all night long tlfe fami 
lies of men, thou Lord of precious boons. 
% flim have the Gods established at the revion’s base, door of 
wondrous deeds; Herald of heaven and earth 3 
Like a most famous car, Agnithe purcly bright, like Mitra’to 
be glorified among the folk, 
4 Ilim have they set in his own dwelling, in the vault, like the 
Moon waxing, fulgent, in the realm of air, 
Bird of the firmament, observant with his eyes, guard of the 
place as ’twere, looking to Gods and men, 


May he as Priest encompass all the sacrifice : men throng to 
him with offerings and with hymns of praise, 

Raging with jaws of gold among the growing plantelike heaven 
with all the stars, he quickens earth and sky, 


16 With brave men; attented by brave sous, who will support and 


strengthen us, : 
s a 


l Who labours at the pole: who takes the chief “part in the per- 
formance of all important sacrifice. A metaphor from oxen drawing 
a car or waln, 2 Have they calted: the priests. 3 At th 
region’s base: at the altar, according to Sayana. 4 The word 
hudré, hore rendered ‘in the vault,’ ia difficult. SAyana explains it as 
‘solitary.’ Roth would alter the text, Guard of the place: of the 
most sacred place, the altar. ° 


262 TAK HYMNS OF [BOOK 11, 


® 
6 Such as thou art, brilliantly kindled fur our weal, a liberal 
giver, send us riches in thy shine, 
For our advantage, Agni, God, bring Heaven and Earth hither 
that they may taste oblation brought by man 


7 Agni,give us great weajth, give riches thousandfold: unclose to 
us, like doors, strength that shall brins renown, 
Make Heaven and [arth propitious through the power of prayer, 
and like the sky’s bright sheen Jet murning’s beam on us. 
8 Enkindled night by night at every morning’s dawn, may he 
shine forth with red flume like the realm of lhght,— 
Agni adored in beautcous rites with lands of men, fair guest 
of living man and King of all our folk. 
9 Song chanted by us men, O Agni, Ancient Onc, has swelled 
unto’ the deathless Gods in lofty heaven — 
A milch cow, yielding to the singer in the rites wealth mani- 
fold, in hundreds, even as he wills. 


10 Agni, may we show forth ow? valour with the steed or with the 
power of prayer beyond all other men ; 
And over the five Races let our glory shine high like the realm 
of light and unsurpassable. 


11 Such, Conqueror! be to us, be worthy of our praise, thou for 
whom princes nobly born exert themselves ; 
*W hose sacrifice the strong seek, Agni, when it shines for never- 
failing offspring in thine own abode, 
12 Knower of al] that lives, O Agni may we both, singers of praise 
and chiefs, be in thy keeping stil. 
Help us to wealth exceeding good and glorious, abundant, rich 
in children and their progeny, 


‘13 The princely worshippers who send to those who sing thy 
praise, O Avni, guerdon, graved with kine and steeds, — 
Lead thes both these and us forward to higher bliss. With 

brave men in the assembly may we speak aloud, ’ 
HYMN III. _  Apris, 
AGNI is set upon the earth well kindled ; he standcth in the 
presence of all beings. ; 
Wise, ancient, God, the Priest and Purifier, leg Agniserve the 
Gods for he is worthy, 


cael x Socal cee ae 


8 Muayhe: Aguis 9 A milch-cow: the hymn of praise bringe 
riches to the worghipper. 10 With the steed: with the war-car 
in battle ay well as with prayer in sacrifices. The Five Races : 
the five great Aryan tribes. Sse JI, 7. 9. 11 The strong: the 
wealthy worshippers. Never-furling offspring: one of the chief: 


rewards of the worship of Agni. : 


HYMN 3.) THE RIGVEDA., 963 


2 May Narasansa lightig up the chambers, bright in bis majesty 
through threefold heaven, 
Steeping the gift with oil-diffusing purpose, bedew the Gods at 
chiefest time of worship. 
3 Adored in heart, as is thy right, O Agni, serve the Gods first 
to-day before the mortal. 
Bring thou the Marut host. Ye men, do worship to Indra 
seated on the grass, eternal. 


4 Q Grass divine, increasing, rich in heroes, strewn for wealth’ 
sake, well laid upon this alter, — 
On this bedewed with oil sit ye, O Vasus, sit all ye Gods, yo 
Holy, ye Adityas. 
Wide be the Doors, the Goddesses, thrown open, casy to pass, 
invoked, through adorations. 
Let them unfold, expunsive, everlasting, that sanctify the class 
famed, rich in herocs, % : 
6 Good work for us, the glorious Night and Morning, like female 
weavers, waxcn from aforetime, 
Yielders of rich milk, interweave in concert the longz-ex tended 
thread, the web of worship. ° 


7 Let the two heavenly Heralds, first, most wise, most fair, pre: 
sent oblation duly with the sacred verse. 
Worshipping Gods, at ordered scasons decking them at three 
high places at the centre of the carth. . 
8 Sarasvali who perfects our devotion, [14 divine, Bharati all, 
surpassing ,~— 


=) 


2 Nardsansa : ‘the Praise of Man,’ Agni. The chambers : the recepta- 
cles of the offerings, accurding to S§yana. At chiefest time of worship: 
when the oblation of clarified butter is cast intu tho fire. ™ 3 Lefore 
the mogéal : before the mortal priest. 4 O Grass divine: the sacred 
grass, strewn or the floor of the hall of s&crifice as a seat for the Gods, 
is Ono of the Apris or deified objects which are to be propitiated in 
this hymn. All these are regarded as forms of Agni. Do Lhe Doors: 
cf the hall of sacrifice. These appear to have beeh regarded as types 
of, and even fancifully identified with, the doors of the cosmic house, 
the portals of the East through which the morning light enters into 
the world. See Cosmology of the Rigveda, p. 19. The class : the 
maghavans, the eminent and wealthy men who’ institute sacrifices. 
6 xtelders of rich milk : cheerful givers of rewards. » 7 Z'wo heavenly 
Heralds : invokers or priests. According to Sayana, the personiliod fire 
of earth and of the firmament. See I,.133. 8. The centre of the 
earth: the alter. The three high placea: of the three fires. 


264 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 11. 


Three Gaddesses, with powcr inhcrent, seated, protect this holy 
Grass, our flawless refuge! 
9 Born is the pious hero swift of hearing, like gold in hue, well 
formed, and full of vigour. 
May Tvashtar Iegthen out our line and kindred, and may 
they reach the place which Gods inhabit, 


10 Vanaspati shall stand ancar and start us, and Agni with his 
arts prepare oblation. 
Let the skilled heavenly Immolator forward unto the Gods the 
offering thrice anointed. 
11 Oil bas been mixt: oilis his habitation. Jn oil he rests: oil is 
his propor province. 
Come as thy wont 1s: O thou Stccr, rejoice thee; bear off the 
oblation duly consecrated. 


e 
HYMN IV Agni, 


For you I call the glorious rofulvent Agni, the guest of men, 
rich in oblations, 

Whom all must strive to win even as a lover, God among godly 
people, Jatavedas. 


2 Bbrigus who served him in the home of waters set him of old 
in houses of the living. 
Over all worlds let Agni be the Sovran, the messenger of Gods 
with rapid coursers. 
3 Among the tribes of men the Gods placed Agni asa dear Friend 
when they would dwell among them. 
Aganist the longing mghts may heshine brightly, and show the 
offcrer in the house his vigour, 


4 Sweet is his growth as of one’s own possessions; his look 
when rushing fuin to burn is levely. 
Ile darts his tongue forth, like a harnessed courscr who shakes 
his flowing tail, among the bashes. 


8 Three Goddesses : presiding over different departments of worship. 
9 The pros hero: a sun devoted to the Gods. 10 Vanaspate : the 
sacrificial post, or Agni in that-form. See I 13. 11. The heavenly 
Immolater : Agui, typicatly so called. LL Owl: the claritied butter 
oblation. how Stver: michty Agni. Duly consecrated. offorad 
with the holy “word Svahai. Soe T. 13° 12. This hymn and tha 
threo that follow Gre ascribed to the Rishi SomaAhuti of the ancient 
priestly family of Dhyigu, ono of the first institulors of sacrifice. 


1 Jdtavedas: Agni, who knows all life. Soe 1. 44. 1. 1 Who 
served him in the home of waters: existing inthe form of lightning in 
the firmament before ho was brought down to oarth, 


HYMN 5.) THE RIGVEDA. 85 


*, Since thev who honour me have praised my greatness, —ie eave, 
as twere, his hne to thoge who love lin, 

fnown is he by his bright delightful splendour, and waxine 
old renews his youth for ever. 

Like one athirst, he lighteth up the forests ; ike water down 
the chariot ways he roareth. 

Qn his black path he shines in burning beauty, marked as it 
were the heaven that suules through vapour, 


~ 


Aromd, consumine the broad earth, he wanders, free rowming 
hike en ox withont a herdsman, — 

Acni retuige birnine he bushes, with blackened lines 
eniretuigent, burning up the bushes, with blackened lines, 

«© as though the earth he seasoned 


fh 


Tinremembrance of thine ancicnt favear, have suug my lynn 
In this one turd acsembly, ‘ 

Hy) Avent, give us wealth wath store of heroes and nughty 
strenvth in food and noble offspring. . 

4 May the Gritsamadas, serving in secret, throegh thee,O Agnt 
oyergome ther nate hbours, 

Heh in good heroes and subduing foemen That vital pgwer 


vive thou to chtefs and sigers, e 
TY ain ae Avi, 
lleraLp and techer was he born, a euadian for our patrons’ 
b] -o) 
nelp, 


faruer by rites of noble wealth. That Strong One may we 
eraspiand vuide 5 

In whom, Leader of sacrifice, the seven reins, far extended, 
meet ; 

Who furthers, maa-like, exehth in place, as Cleanser, all the 
work divine. 


Sines they who honowr me: Agni appears to be the speaker of these 


wards. 7 As though the earth he sensoned : as though, Ly burning 
the woestg@and bushes, ho dressed and prepared the around for tillage. 
S Lhord assembly: at the third of the threo daily sacrifices, 9 


“ereing in secret: by tho peaceful discharga of priestly duties, not by 
warfare lise the chiefs who institu%e the sacrilica. ° 


® : : 
1 Our patrons: the wealthy institutors of the sacrifice, That 


Strong One: Agni. 2 Leader: Netar, one of the Axteen spriests. 
Lhe seven reirg: the seven priests onga: ail in theirs several dutias. 
Cleanser: Potar, one of the sixteen eee: See It. La 3 


— first hemistich, ag it stands, ig Nuinte Nivible to me. * Wilson, after 
Sayana pa raphrases : § Whateyer (offerings the priest) presente, 
whatever prayers he recites, 


34 


956 THE HYMNS OF (BOOK J. 


3 Whe swift he follows this behest, bird-like he chants the holy 
prayers. 
He holds all knowledge in his grasp cven as the felly rounds 
the wheel. 


4 Tovether with pure mental power, pure, as Director, was he 


born, 
Skilled in his own unchanging laws he waxes like the gréwing 
bouchs. 
5 Clothing them in his hues, the kine of him the Leader wait on 
him. 
Is he not better than the Three, the Sisters who have come to 
us? 


6 When, Jaden with the holy oil, the Sister by the Mother stands, 
The Priest delights in their approach, as curn at coming of the 
rain, : 
7 For his support let him perform as ministrant his priestly task; 
Yea, song of praise and sacritice : we have bestuwed, let us 
obtain. | ji 
8 That so this man, well skilled, may pay worship to all the 
feoly Oues, 
And, Agni, this our sacrifice which we have here prepared, to 
thee. 


HYMN VI. Agni. 


Acni, accept this flaming brand, this waiting with my prayer 
on thee: 


Llear graciously those songs of praise. 

With this hymn let as honour thee, seeker of jworses, Son of 
strength, 

With tiis fair hymn, thou nobly born. 


LS 


4 Duector: Prasistar, one of the priests. See II. I. 2. 4) 
The stanzvis obscure, Lndwig thinks that Agni is here called the 
Leader because he leads tie ‘sister Dawns to the sacrifice, and that 
they are said to bo three iu number to correspond with the number of 


the cows. 6 The Sister: Usha’ or Dawn. The Mother: the North- 
ern altar, representine Marth. 7 Let him. Agni as priest. 8 
This mans ths worshipper, 

. _ 


This waiting. with my prayer on thee: this * beseeching and_besieg- 
ing’ as Milton says. Or upasidam taken in a special sense may mean’ 
the ooremony called Upasad which formed part of the Jyotishtoma, a 


very important Soma ceremony. 2 Seeker of horsea: in order to 
bestow them on the worshipper. 


HY MN 7.) THE RIGVEDA. 267 


3 As such, lover of song, with songs, wealth-lover,efver of our 
wealth! 
With reverence let us worship thec. 
4 Be thou for us a liberal Prince, giver and Lord of precious 
things. 
Drive those who hate us far away. 
5 Such as thou art, give rain from heaven,give strength which 
no man may resist: 
Give food exceeding plentiful. 
6 To him who lauds thee, craving help, most youthful envoy ! 
throngh our song, 
Most holy Herald! come thou nigh. 
7 Between both races, Agai, Sage, well skilled thou passest to 
and fro, 
As envoy friendly to mankind, ° 
8 Befriend us thou as knowtng all, Sage, duly worship thou 
the Gods, : 
And seat thec on this sacred grass, 


MYMN VII. Agul 
QO VAsu, thou most youthful God, Bharata, Agni, being us 
wealth, : 
Excellent, splendid, much-desired. 
2 Let no malignity prevail against us, either God's or man’s : 


Save us from this and enmity- 9 
3 So through thy favour may we force through all our enemies 
away. 


As ’twere through streaming water-floods, 

§ Thou, Puriicr Agni, high shinest forth, bright, adorable, 
When wérshipped with the sacred oil, 

9 Ours art thou, Agni, Bharata, honoured by us with barren 

cows, 

With bullocks and with kine in calf : 

6 Wood.fed, bedewed with sacred oil, ancient, Invokes,excellent, 
The Son of Strength, the Wonderful. 


7 Both races: Gods and men. Well skilled : acquainted with both. 


® 


1 Vasu: one ef the class of Gods so named. Bhérata: Agni is so 

called according to Sayana, either as having been produced by attrition 
by the priests, or as being the bearer of oblations. Tho meaning ‘1s, 
probably, specially connected with the Bharatas o@ Warriors.’ 
_ 9 With kine in calf: ashtdpadibhih is thus explaiped by Sayana, and 
is used inthe language of the ritual for animals with young. ~ Roth 
and Grassmann understand ‘verses’ consisting of eight feet, divisions, 
or syllables, According to Bergaigne, these cows represent prayers. 


268 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK II. 
HYMN VIII. Agni. 
Now praise, as one who strives for strength, the harnessing of 
Agnv’s car, 
The liberal, the most splendid One; 
2 Who, guiding worshippers ariaht, withers, untouched by are, 
the foe: 
When worshipped fair to look upon ; 
3 Who for his glory is extolled at eve and morning in our homes, 
W hose statute is inviolate ; 
4 Who shines refulgent like the Sun, with brilliance and with 
hery flune, 
Decked with impcrishable sheen, 
Him Atri, Agni, have our songs strengthened according to his 
sway : * 
All viories hath he made his own.’ 
6 May we with Acni’s, Indra’s help, with Soma’s, yca, of all the 


i) 


Gods, . 
Uninjured dwell together still, and conquer those who fight 
With Us. 


ITYMN IX. Aen. 
Accusromen to the Herald’s place, the Herald hath scated 
. him, bright, splendid, passing mighty, — | 
Whose forcsieht keeps the Law from violation, excellent, 
pure-toneucd, bringing thousands, Agni. 
2 Envoy art thou, protector from the foeman ; strone God, thou 
Jleadest us to lugher blessings. 
Refulgent, be an ever-heedfal keeper, Agni, *for ‘as and for 
our seed and offspring. 
8 May we adore thee in thy loftiest birthplace, and, with our 
praises, in thy lower station, ; 
The plac. whence thou hast issued forth I worship: to thee 
well kindled have they paid oblations. ‘ 


5 lfim Aira: Agni appears here to be called by the name of the 
ancient save Atri. Or-cétrim may be ah epithet of Agni, signifying 
the deyourer of the food with which he is supplied, as Sayana explains it. 

¢ . if 


id 


«1 The Herald : or Uotar ; Agni, the Involer of the Gods, The name 
comes, with more oimngbasis, at the end of the verse. Zhe Law: especi- 
ally sacrifice. , 3. dn thy loftiest birthplace: as the fire of the Sun 
in heaven. Thy lower station: the firmament, where Agni is born as 
lightning. The place whence thou hast issued forth: the altar where thg 
pacrificja] fire burny. 


HYMN 10) THE RIGVEDA. 269 


4 Agui, best Priest, pay worship with oblation; quickly com- 
mend the gift to be presented 5 
For thou art Lord of gathered wealth and treasure: of the 
bright song of praise ‘thou art inventor. 
fy, The twofold opulence, © Wonder: Worker, of thee new-born 
each day never decreases. 
Enrich with food the man who Jauds thee, Agni: make him 
the lord of wealth with noble offspring, 
6 May he, benevolent with this fair aspect, best sacrificer, bring 


the Gods to bless us. 
Sure guardian, var protector from the foeman, shine, Agni, 


with thine affluence and splendour, 
HYMN X. Agni. 


Aant, first, loudly calling, , like a Father, kindled by man upon 
the seat ‘of worship. 
Clothed in his glory, laa keen of insight, must be 
adorned by all, the Strong, the Famous, 
2 May Agni the resplendent hear my calling, through all wy 
songs, Immortal, kcen of insight. 
Dark steeds or ruddy draw hiscar, or carried in sundry ways 
he makes them red of colour. 
3 On wood supine they got the well-formed Infant: a germ i 
various-fashioned plants was Aeni; : 
And in the night, not compassed round by darkness, he deolls 
exceeding wise, with rays of splendour. 
4 With oil and sacred gifts I sprinkle Agni who makcs his home 
in fronteof all thines living, 
Broad, vast, through vital power o’er all expanded, conspicu- 
ous, strong with all the food that feeds him, 
5 I porr to him who looks in all directions : may he accept it 
with a friendly spirit. 
Agni with bridegroom’s grace and lovely colour may not be 
bombed when all his form is fury, 


re le ee ee ner met 


D9 The “twokold opulence : enriching Gods with sacrifice and men with 
earthly blessings. — New-born each day : rektodled at the morning 


sacrifice, ‘ : ° 
® 


ED eae 


1 First: ohief of the Gods. ° Loudly calling: moaring as fire, or, 
to he invoked by all, according‘to Sayana. Like a, Father : supporting 


the Gods by conveying oblations to them, Carried in sundry 
ways: to one fre-receptacle after another. 3 On wood supine: 
the lower pieas of wood in which fire is produced. A germ: latent 


in plants, with reference to the luminosity of some plants. See II, 1. 1. | 
35 ° 


270 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK 11. 


6 By cho'ce victorious, recognize thy portion: with thee fot 
envoy may we speak like Manu, 
Obtaining wealth, I call on perfect Agni who with an eloquent 
tongue dispenses sweetness. 


HYMN XJ. Indra. 


Hear thou my catl, O Indra; be not heedless : thine may we 
be for thee to give us treasures ; 

For these presented viands, secking riches, increase thy 
strength like streams of water flowing. 


2 Floods great and many, compassed by the Dragon, thou badest 
swell and scttest free, O Hero. 
Strengthened by songs of praise thou rentest piecemeal the 
Dasa, him who deemed himself immortal. 


3 For, ilero, in the lauds whereir thou joyedst, in hymns of © 
praise, O Indra, songs of Rudras. 
These streams in which is thy delight approach thee, even as 
the bruliant ones draw rear to Vaya. 


4 We who add strength to thine own splendid vigour, laying’ 
w.shin thine arms the splendid thunder — 
With us mayst thou, O Indra, waxen splendid, with Strya 
overcome the Dasa races. 


© [kero, thou slewest in thy valour Ahi concealed in depths, 
ae myatericus, great enchanter, 
Dwelling cnveloped decp within the waters, him who checked 
heaven and stayed the flvods from flowing. 


G Indra, we laud thy great dceds wrought aforetime, we laud 
thine exploits later of achievement ; . : 
We land the bolt that in thine arms hes eager; we laud thy 
two Bay Steeds, heralds of Surya. 


ee ee Tenner a ne ee ae a ec ey re ae ee a Nee ne ree am 


6 By choice: according to Sayana, ‘with lustre.” Recognize thy 
portion: acxnowledye the sacrificial offering to be suitable. Like 
Manu: with the wisdom and authority of Manu who was insuructed 
directly by tha Gods. 


2 Compassed by che Dragon: obstructed by the great serpent Ahi. 
The Dasa: the savage or demon Ahi. See { 32. 11. 3 Songs of 
Rudras: like those sung by the Rudras or Maruty, Indra’s allies. 
These streams: sactificial waters or libations. Vdyu, the God of wind 
was entitled to the first draught of tHe Soma juice. Sve verse 14 of 


this hymn. 4 Splendtd: the word subArd, splendid, occurs in all 
three places in the text. 5 Concealed tn depths: of the atmos- 
phere. 6 Herald of Sirya: announcing the comiog of the sun- 


light after the heavy rain which Iodra has sent. 


AYMN 113} THE RIGVEDA. 271 


' 7. Indra, thy Bay Steeds showing forth their vigour have sent a 


loud ery out that droppeth “fatness. 
The earth hath spread herself in all her fulness : ie cloud 


that was about to move hath rested. 

& Down, never ceasing, hath the rain-cloud settled : bellowing, 
it hath wandered with the Mothers. 

Swelling the roar in the far distant limits, they have spread 
wide the blast sent furth by Indra, 

9 Indra hath hurled down the magician Vritra who lay beleaguer- 


ing the mighty river, 
Then beth the heaven and earth iron in terror at the 


strong Hero’s thunder when he bellowed. 


16 Loud roared the mighty Llere’s bolt of thunder, when he, the 
Friend of man, burnt up the monster, 
And, having drunk his fill of flowing Soma, baffled the guileful 
Danava’s devices. 
11 Drink thou, O Hero Indra, drink the Soma ; let the joy-giving 
juices make thee joyful. 
They, filling both thy flanks, shall swell thy vigour. The 
joice that ‘satisties hath holpen Indra, 
12 Singers have we become with thee, QO Indra: may*we serve 
duly and prepare devotion, 
Secking thy help we meditate thy praises: may we at once 
enjoy thy gift of riches. 
13 May we be thine, such by thy help, O Indra, as swell thy 
vigour while they seek thy favour. 
Give us, thou God, the riches that we long for, most powerfal, 
with store of noble children, 
14 Give usa friend, give us an habitation ; Indra, give us the com- 
pany of Maruts, 
And those whose minds accord with theirs, the Vayus, who 
drink the first libation of the Soma. 


15 Iset those enjoy in whom thou art delighted, Indra, drink 
Soma for thy strength and gladness. 
_ Thou hast exalted us to heaven, Preserver, in battles, through 
the lofty hymas that praise thee. 
aR gk 
" The loud ory that drops fatness: is the thuuder that precedes the 
fértiliziag rain. Zhe earth hath,spread herself: to receive the rain. 8 
The Mothers; the original waters above the firmément. They : 
[ndra’s attendants, the Maruts or Storm-Code.¢ 9 The mighty 
river : the great cloud that holds the rain. 10 The guileful Dana- 
va’e devices: the magic arte of the demon Vritra, 14 Zhe Vdyua: 
she plural is used honorifically for the singular. : 


272 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK II. 


i6 Great verily, are they, © thou Protector, who by their songs 
of praise have won thy blessing. 
They who strew sacred grass to be thy dwelling, holpen by thee 
have got them strencth, O Indra. 


17 Upon the great Trikadruka days, Hero, rejoicing thee, O Indra, 
drink the Soma, 
Come with Bay Stceds to drink of our libation, shaking the 
drops from out thy beard, contented. 


18 Hero, assume the might wherewith. thou clavest Vritra piece. 
weal, the Danava Aurnavabha, 

Thou hast disclosed the light to light the Arya: on thy left 
hand, O Indra, sank the Dasyu. 


19 May we gain wealth, subduing with thy succour and with 
the Arya, all our foes, the Dasyus. 
Our gain was that to Trita of our party thou gayest up 
Tvashtar’s son Visyarupa. : 


20 He cast down Arbuda what time his vigour was strengthened 
by hbations poured by Trita. 
Tundra sent forth his whirling wheel like Sarya, and aidcd by 
the Angirases rent Vala. 


21 Now Jes that wealthy Cow of thine, O Indra, yieldin return a 
boon to him who lauds thee. 
Give to thy praisers: Ict not fortune fail us. Lond may we 
, Speak, with braye men, in the assembly. 


HYMN XII, Indra. 


HE who, just korn, chief God of lofty spirit by power and might 

» became the Gods’ protector, 

Before whose breath through greatness of his valeur the two 
worlds trembjed, He, O meu, is Indrg. 


17 Zrikadruka days: the first three days uf the Abhiplaya festival. 
18 Aurnardbha: son of Urnavabha, a demon. The Lasyu: the bar- 
barian, the original inhabitant of the land. According to Siyana the 
demon Vritra ia meant. 19 It ia difficult to make anything intolligi- 
ble of this stanza. Zrifa is said by Siyana to be a Maharshi or great 
Rishi, and Vi: variipa is said to be a three-headed monster slain by Indra. 
See Sacred Books of the East, XII. 164. . 20 Arbuda; a demon of ~ 
the atmosphere. See I. dl 6. Sent forth his whirling wheel : Indra 
js said to have ueed a wheeP of the Spn’: chairotas a 3..issile. Vela: 
the brother of Yritra or Vritra himself. See] II. 5. 21° That 
wealthy Cow of thiné: meaning probably Ushas or Dawn, who brings 
good yifts toman. Or sé ddékshind maghon? may be translated ‘ that 
ljberal meedl’ of thine, that is the rich reward which Judra bestows upon 
his worshippers, fegarded as the counterpart of the dakshind or 
honorarium given by the institutors of baorifises to the priests whe 
perform the ceremonies. | 


HYMN 12} THE RIGVEDA. 273 


2 He who fixed fast and firm the earth that staggere@, and set 
at rest the agitated mountains, 
Who measured vut the air’s wide middle region and gave the 
heaven support, [le, men, is Indra. 
3 Who slew the Dragon, freed the Seven Rivers, and drove the 
kine forth from the cave of Vala, 
Begat the firs between two stones, the spoiler in warrior’s battle, 
He, O men, is Indra. 
4 By whom this universe was made to tremble, who chased away 
the humbled brood of demons, 
Who, like a gambler gathering his winnings, seiged the foe’s 
riches, Le, O men, is Indra. 
6 Of whom, the Terrible they ask, Where is He ? or verily they 
say of him, He is mt. 
Ile sweeps away. like birds the tue’s possessions. Have faith 
in him, for lie. O men, is Indra. 


Stirrer to action of the poor and lowly, of priest, of suppliant 
who sings hi praises ; 

Who, fair- faced, favours him who presses Soma with stones 
‘nadia ready, Lie. O men, is Indra, e 


¢ He under whose supreme control are horses, all chariots, aud 
the villages, aid cattle ; 
He who gave being to the Sun and Morning, who leads the 
waters, He, O men, is Indra. 
8 To whom two armies cry in close encounter, both enemies, the 
stronger and the weaker 5; 
Whom two invoke upon one chariot thonnted, cach for himself, 
He, O yé mer, is Indra. 


9 Without whose help our people never conquer ; whom, battling, 
they invoke to give them succour 3 
He of whom all this world is but the copy, who shakes things 
moveless, I{e, O men, is Indra. 


10 He'who hath smitten, ere they knaw theirdanger, with his 
hurled. weapon many grievous sinners ; 
Who pirdans not his boldness who provokes him, who slays 
the Dasyu, lle, O men, is Indra. _ : 


Co 


A Begat the fire between two stones : generated lightning betweeh 
heaven and earth. 5 Like birds: as birds dre “captured by the 
fowler. According to iia ‘like stakes of gamblers,. the meaning of 
vijah being uncertain. See 1,92. 10, note. 7 Who leads the waters : 
brings the periodical raing. 8 Whom two wvoke: the warrior 
and the charivteer. 


&6 


274 THE HYMNS OF (BOOR 2. 


11 He who discovered in the fortieth autumn Sambaraas he dwelt 
among the mountains ; 
Who slew the Dragon putting forth his vigour, the demon lying 
there, He, men, is Indra. 


12 Who with seven guiding reins, the Bull, ‘the Mighty, set free 
the Seven great Floods to flow at pleasure ; 
Who, thunder-armed, rent Rauhina in pieces when scaling 
heaven, He, O ye men, is Indra, 
13 Even the Ileaven and Karth bow down before him, before his 
very breath the mountains tremble. 
Known as the Soma-drinker, armed with thunder, who wields 
the bolt, He, O ye men, is Indra, 


14 Whe aids with favour him Who pours ths Soma and him wko 
brews it, sacrificer, singér, | 
Whom prayer exalts, and poaring forth of Soma, and this our 
gift, He, O ye men, is Ittde'a, 
15 Thou verily art fierce and true who sendest strength to the 
man who brews and pou libation, 
So may weevermore, thy‘riends, O Indra, speak leudly to the 
synod with our heroes. 


HYMN XIIl. Indra, 


‘Tue Season was the parent, and when bern therefrom it entered 
rapidly the floods wherein tt grows. 

Thence was it fall of sap, streaming with milky juice : the 
milk of the plant’s stalk is chief and meet for lauds, 


‘2 They come trooping together bearing milk te him, and bring 
him sustenance who gtves support to all. 
‘The way is common for the downward streams to flow. Thoa 
who didst those things first art worthy of our lands. 


Y 


_— 42 Seven guideng reins : or, according to Ludwig, seven bright rays, 
said to mean seven forms of Indra, Rauhina: the name of a demon 
‘of drought. 15 With our heroes: with our brave sons ardund us. 

c 


| The Season: the Rains, the most important of thu seasons. So 
monsoon, a corruption of maxsina, ny sarson, means tho Rains 
especially. Jé: the Soma-olant. 2 They come:, probably the cows 
whose milk is ¢o:be used in sacrifice. Lhe way és common : referring 
to the water used in the Soma ceremony. Sdyaua explains the stanza 
cifferently, and Wilson paraphrases it thus: ‘The agsregated (streams) 
come, bearing sverywhere the water, and conveying it as sustenance fer 
the asylum of all rivers, (the ocean): the same path is assigned) to all 
the descending (currents) to follow ; and as he who hag (assinuged) them 
(their course), thou, (Indra), art especially to be praised.’ 


RY MN $3.) THE RIGVEDA. O15 


3 One priest announces what the institutor gives : one, altering 


ths forms, zealously plies hus task. ° 
The third corrects the imperfections left by each, Thou who 


didst these things first art worthy of our lauds. 


4 Dealing out food unto their people there they. sit, like wealth 
to him who comes, more than the back.can bear. 
Greedily with his teeth he eats the mastzr’s food, Thou who 
didst these things first art worthy of our lauds. 


Thou hast created earth to look wpon the sky : thou, staying 
Ahi, settost free the rivers’ paths. 

Thee, such, aGod, the Gods hava quickened with their lauds, 
even as a steed with waiters: meet fur praise art thou. 

6 Thou civest increase, thou dealest to us our food : thou milkest. 
from the moist the dry, the rich in sweets, 

Thou by the worshipper layest thy precions store ° thou art.sole 
Lord of all. Meet for ar parse art thou 

Thou who hast spread abroad tha streams by Stablished law, 
and in the field the plants that blussom and bear seed ; 

Thou who-hast made the matchless lichtnings of the sky,— 
vast, compassing vast realans, mect for our praise art thou, 


8 Who broughtest NArmara with all his wealth, forsake Sf food, 
to slay him that the fiends might be destroyed, 
Broughivst tas face unclouded of th: strengthening one, per- 
forming much even now, worthy art thou of praise. 
9 Thou bound: ‘st up the Dasa’s hundred friends and ten, wlien,, 
at one’s hearing, thou holpest thy worshipper. 


qn 


~ 


— 


3 Accorcing to, Sayana alieas priests are here indicated, the ILotac 
who announces ha: sacrifice, the Adhvaryu who apportions the several: 
pieces of the victim, and the Brahman who corrects mistakes and’ reme- 
dies defects in the rivusl. The first four stanzes are full of difd- 
culties aud in places absolutely unintelligible. My version of stanza 
3, which generally follows Sayana, will not bear critical examination, 
but am present | have nothing better to propose. 4, Phere ther sit: 
according to Sayana, ‘the houcelroldaye abide in their homes.’ 0 hires 
who comes Nor guest. ie eats the neasier’s food: probably,. Agni con- 
sumes the A iter of the hovseholder. & Thou. milkest from the 
mouse ¢ produpest the dry nutrivious grain from tha moist stalk, . 
This stanza is’ @nintelligible. inmates said to be a fiend slain by. 
Indra, The slrengthening gne: according to Sayaha, Urjayantiis 
the name of a female demon or Pisich¥ G rassmadn takes it to mgan 
the Sun. Ludwing thinks it is*the name of a stroaghold used as « store-~ 
hause of provisivhs. 9 The meaniog of the first half-versa iy un- 
certain, the text beiag evidently corrupd. 1 adopt Ludwig’ 8 emendation, 
désasya, in place of the unintelligible vd ydsyac 


276 THE HYMNS OF (BOOK 11. 


Thou for Dabhtti boundest Dasyus not with cords; thou wast 
““a mighty help. Worthy of lauds art thou. 
10 All behks of rivers yielded to his manly might; to him they 
gave, to him, the Strong, gave up their wealth, 
The six directions hast thou fixed, a fivefold view : iby victories 
reached afar. Worthy of lauds art thon. 
11 Meet for high praise, OQ Hero, is thy power, that with thy 
single wisdom thou obtainest wealth, 
The life-support of conquering Jatiishthira, Indra, for all 
thy deeds worthy of lauds art thou. 
12 Thou for Turviti heldest still the flowing floods, the river- 
stream for Vayya easily to pass, 
Didst raise the outcast from the depths, and gavest fame unto 
the halt and blind, Worthy of lauds art thou. 
13 Prepare thyself to grant us that great bounty, O Vasu, for 
abundant is thy treasure, : 
Snatch up the wonderful, O Ipdra, daily, Loud may we 
speak, with heroes, in assembly. 
HYMN AILV. Indra, 


Ministers, bring the Soma juice for Indra, pour forth the 
gladdening liquor with the beakers. 
To drink of this the Hero longeth ever; offer it to the Bull, 
for this he willcth. 
2 Ye ministers, to him who with the lightning smote, ilkea 
‘tree, the rain-withholding Vritra— 
‘Bring it to him, bim who is fain to taste it, a draucht of 
this which Indra here deserveth. 


mene a a Se i ee ree = re ae 


Dabhitt: a Rishi, named in I. 112. 23. Mot with cords: in a prison 
without cords, the grave. ¢ 10 All banks of rwers: the dams that 
' prevented the rivers of the clouds from flowing. The aia directions : 
above, below, before, bshind, right, left. Zhe fivefold view : inasmuch 
as we cannot see what is below the ground. Sdyara explains the shad 
eishttrah as heaven, earth, day, night, water, and plants. and 
the pancha sandrisah as the five races Of men. ll Jdtishthira : 
a certain man of that name, says Sayana ; perhaps the institutor ¢f the 
sacrifice, 12 Turvitt and Vayya appear to have been enabled to 
ford a great river by the aid of [ndra. See I G1 11. Turviti was the 
son of Vayya, Seo I. 54. 6. The outcast: or Parivrijfias a proper 
name. See J. 112. 8, where the mitacle is ascribed to‘the Asvins, 
13 Snatch up» the wonderfub: thatis, gain quickly ye.adrous wealth. 
This appears toe be the literal meaning of the words which Wilson 
parapbraces, after SAyana : ‘mayest thou be disposed tv grant us excead- 
ing‘abundance.' Es 


] Ministers : Adhvary ug, or priests, whose duty was to make the 
proparations for sacrifice. 


HYMN 34) THE RIGVEDA. 277 


‘+; Ye ministers, to him who smote Dribhika, who drove the kine 
forth, and discovered Vala, 
Cffer this draught, hke Vata in the region : clothe him with 
Soma even as stecds with trappings. 
4 Him who did Urana to dcath, Adhvaryus ! ! though showing 
arms ninety and-nine in nuiber: ; 
Who cast down headlung Arbuda and slew him,—speed ye 
that Indra to our offered Soma, 


Ye ministers, to him who struck down Svasna, and did to 
to death Vyansa and greedy Sushna, 
And Rudhikras and Namuchiand VPipra,—to him, to Indra, 
poar ye forth libation. 
G Ye ministers, to him who, as with thunder, demolished 
Sambara’s hundred ancient castles ; 
Who cast down Varchig’s sons, a hundred thousand,—to him, 
io Indra, offer ye the Some, ° 
7 Ye ministers, to him who slew a hundred thousand, and cast 
them down upon earth’s bosom 3; 
Who quelled the valiant men of Atithigva, Kutsa, and Ayu,-- 
bring to him the Soma, 


8 Ministers, men, whatever thing ye long for obtain ye queckly 
bringing gifts to Indra. 
Bring to the Glorious One what hands have cleansed; to 
Indra bring, ye pious ones, the Soma, 


9 Jo ye, O ministers, obey his order: that, purified in wood, in 
wood uplift ye 
Well pleased he longs for what your hands have tended ; offer 
the gladdening Soma juice to Indra, 


LO As the cows uddér teems with milk, Adhvaryas, so fill with 
Soma Indra, liberal giver. 
Tknow him: Lam sure of this, the Holy knows that I fain 


would give to him more largely. 


3 Dgibhika: one of the numerous demons slain by Indra, Like 
Vala in the region : bringing rain, as the Wind God does. As steeds 
uith trappings ; the meaning of jdh i is Uncertain. Sgyana explains it, 
‘as an old aeNGs covered) with parmants: 4 Urana: another 
demon. Arbuda Aa demon mentioned in I. 51.6. ° 5s) Svasna, Vyansa, 
and the rest, are demons, some of yhom have besn previously mentioned. 
6 Sambara:a fiend mentioned several times in Book I» Varchin: a 
demon who reviled Endra, and was élain with all his soas and followers, 
? The valiant men : virdn; heroes. Sayana supplies ‘ assailants,’ as Ati- 
thigva, Rutea, and Ayu appear in Beok I. as favoured by Indra, Hore 
their-battle with Tarvayina (1.53, 10) isreferred to, * 9 Jn wocd: 
in the wooden receptacly. ’ 


278 THE IIYMNS OP [BOOR Ft. 


1! Him, ministers, the Lord of heavenly treasure and all tcrrest- 
rial wealth that earth possesses, 
Him, Indra, fill with Soma as a garner is filled with barley 
full: be this your labour. 


12 Prepare thyself to grant us that great ou: O Vasu, fur 
abundant is thy treasure. 
Gather up wondrous wealth, O Indra, daily. Loud may we 
speek, with heroes, in assembly, 


HYMN XY, Indra.. 


Now, verily, will I declare the exploits, mighty and true, of 
him the True and Mighty. 

In the Trikadrukas he drank the Soma : then in its rapture 
Indra slew the Dragon 


2 High heaven in Mnsuppor ted space ho stablished : he filled the 
two worlds and the air’s mif-region 
Earth hetupheld, and gave it wide expansion. These things 
did Indra in the Soma’s rapture. 


3 From front, as’twere a house, he ruled and measured ; pierced 
with his bolt the fountains of the rivers, 
Ang made them How at ease by paths far-reaching. These 
things did Indra in the Soma’s rapture. 


4 Compassing those who bore awy Cabhiti, in kindled fire he 
burnt up all their weapons, 
And made him rich with kine and ears and ieeeue These 
things did Indra in the Soma’s rapture. 


9 The mighty roaring flood he stayed from flowing, and carried 
those who swam ngt safe ‘ly over, 
They having crossed the stream attained to ches: These: 
things did Indra in the Soma’s rapture. 


G With mighty power he made the streams flaw upward, crushed 
with his thunderbolt the car of Ushas, 
Rending her slow steeds with his rapib coursers. Thes¢ things. 
did Indra in the Soma’s rapture. 


1 In the Trikadriukes: see VE 11.17. Jn tts rapttre:in the exhi- 
laration produced by drinking the ®&rmonted juiél! See FT. 51. 2 and 
note 3° trom front, ag twere a house; the formation of the world 
is compared to the building of a house. Wilson renders: ‘(HH ib 1s) 
who has measured fhe eastern (jar tefs) with measures like a chamber. 
4 Dabhiti: see If. 13. 9. ® Cf. ). 13, 12. 6 Zhe car of Ushas: 
the destruction of the chariot of Ushas or Dawn by Tudra is described 
more fully Ia 1V. 30 8. 


HYMN 16. THE RIGVEDA, 279 


7 Knowing the place wherein the maids were hiding, the,outcast 
showed himself and stood befure them 
The cripple stood erect, the blind beheldthem. These things 
did Indra in the Soma’s rapture. 
§ Praised by the Angirases heslaughtered Vala,and burst apart 
the bulwarks of the mountain. 
He tore away their deftly-built defences, These things did 
Indra in the Soma’s rapture. 
) Thon, with sleep whelming Chumariand Dhuri, slewest the 
Dasyu, keptest sate Dabhiti. 
There the staff-bearer found the golden treasure, These things 
did Indra in the Soma’s raptare, 


10 Now let that wealthy Cow of thine, O Indra, yield in return 
a boon to him who leuds thee, 
Give to thy praisers : let nat fortune fail us. Load nfay we 


speak, with brave men, in assembly. , 
ITY MN XVJ, Indra. 
To him, your own, the best among the good, Ibring culogy, 
like oblation in the kindled fire, 7 


We invocate for help Indra untouched by eld, who thaketh 
all decay, strengthened, for every young. 
2 Without whom naught exists, Indrathe Lofty One; in whom 
alone all powers heroic are combined, ® 
The Soma is within him, in his frame vast strength, tho 
thunder in his hand and wisdom in his head, 


& Not ky both worlds is thine own power to be surpassed, nor 
may thywar he stayed by mountains or by seas. 
None comcth near, O Indra, to thy thunderbolt, when with 
swift steeds thou thest over many a league. 


4 Por all men bring their will to him the Resolate, to him the 
Holy One, to him the Strong they cleave. 
Pay.sworship with oblation, strong and passing wise, Drink 
thou the Soma, Indra, through tle mighty blaze. 


7 Paraveij. here rendered ‘the outcast,’ is taken by Sayana as tha 
name of a Rishe who was lame and blind. ,Whon some girls made 
sport of him he prayed to Indra &nd was made sound.  , 9 Chumuri 
and Dhunt: Asuras or demons. +» The staffbearer: the door-keopes 
or chamberlain, of Dabbiti. The golden treasure: of Chumuri and 
Dhuni. , 

1 Like oblation: praise that magnifies and strengthens Indra ag 
eblations of clarifiod butter cast into the fire increase the fame. 


280 THE HYMNS OF (BOOK II. 


OD Theevessel of the strong flows forth, the flood of meath, unto 
the Strong who feeds upon the strong, for drink. 
Strong are the two Adhvaryus, strong arc both the stone. 
They press,the Soma that is strong for him the Strong. 


G Strong is thy thunderbolt, yea, and thy car is strong ; strong 
are thy Bay Steeds and thy Weapons powerful. 
Thou, Indra, Bull, art Lord of the strone gladdening drink :‘ 
with the strony Soma, Indra, satisfy thyself. 


7 I, bold by prayer, come near thce in thy sacred rites, thee 
like a saving ship, the shouting in the war, 
Verily h+ will hear and mark this word of ours ! we will pour 
Indra forth as ’twere a spring of wealth, 


8 Turn thee unto us ere calmity come nich, as a cow full of 
pasture turns her to her calf. 
Lord of a Hundred Powers, nu.y we once firmly cling to thy: 
fair favours even as husbanda to their wives. 


) Now let that wealthy Cow of thine, O Indra, yield inretnrna 
boon to him who lauds thee. 
Give to thy praisers : Ict not fortanc fail us. Loud may we 
‘speak, with heroes, in assembly. 


HYMN XVII. Indra. 


Lint the Angirascs, sing this new song forth 'to him, for, a9 
im ancient days, his mighty powers are shown, 

When in the rapture of the Soms he unclosed with strength 
the solid tirm-shut stables of the kine. 


2 Let him be even that God who, for the carliest draught mea: 
suring out his power, increased his majesty 5 
Ifero who forttiea his body in the wars, and through his creat- 
ness set the heaven upon his head, 


3 Thou didst perform thy tirst great deed of hero might what time 
thou showedst power, through prayer, before this folk. 

Hurled down by thee the car-borne Lord of Tawny Steeds, the 

congregated swift ores fled in sundry ways. 


2 The vessel of the strong: the reservoir containiag tha strong 
Som. In reference ‘o the repetition of the word ‘etry ng’ In this and 
the following slanza seo C17. 2, 3., Both thetones: for press- 
ing out the Soma juice. 


A 
A 


] Praise [ndra-after the manner of the ancient Ancirases with a 
kong, becauso his nncient daeds ara continually renewed for our ad- 
vantage, 3 Fortified has body : protected it with a coat of mail. 
¢ vay , PyIET A, ; 

3 The congregated set ones: according to SAyana, the Asuras or 
enomiva uf the Gods. Accurding tu Roth the waters of the heaven. 


HYMN 18.| THE RIGVEDA. 281 
4 He made himself by might Lord of all living things, and strong 


in vital power waxed great above them all. 
He, borne on hich, o’erspread with light the heaven and earths 
and, sewing up the turbid darkness, closed it in. 
5 He with his might made firm the forward-bending hills, the 
downward rushing of the waters he ordained. 
Fast he upheld the earth that nourisheth all life, and stayed 


the heaven from falling by his wondrous skill. 
Fit for the grasping of his arms is what the Sire hath fabricated 


from all kind of prectous wealth, 
The thunderbolt, wherewith, loud-roaring, he smote down,and 


striking him to death laid Krivi on the earth, 
+ Asshe who in her parents’ house is growing old, I pray to thee 


as Bhaga from the seat of all. 
Grant knowledge, mete it oué and bring it to us here: give ug 


the share wherewith thou makest people g glad. 
3 May we invoke thee as a liberal giver : thou givest us, O Indra, 


strength and labours. 
Help us with manifold assistance, Indra: Mighty One, Tnde 


make us yet more wealthy. : 
9 Now may that wealthy Cow of thine, O Indra, give in return 


a boon to him who lauds thee. 
Give to thy praisers: lct nct fortune fail us. Loud may we speak, | 


with heroes, in assembly. 
HYMN XVIII. Indra, 
Tue rich new car hath been equipped at morning ; four yokes 


it hath, three whips, seven reins to ruide it: 
Ten-sided, friendly to mankind, light-winner,that must be urged 


tu speed with prayers . ond wishes. 


ewe ee ee ee ne ee ren a in area amen ee espe ete a 


4 Rorne on hayh : or perhays ‘luminous,’ as Prof. Max Muller ren: 
dars it. 5 lorward-bending :ready to fall until Indra fixed them. 
§ Aviviceoriginally ‘a leather bag’ and metaphorically ‘a cloud,’ said 
hy Siyana to bean Asura or demon. | © 7 As Bhaga: as the God 
who «aistributes woalth, and also presides over Jove and marriage. 
From the seat ofrall + from the hall of sacrifice where seats of sacred 
giass are providel for all the Gods. . 
® 
if? we Bam 

1 The rich new car is the morning sacrifice which tr&vels to the 
Gods and obtains wealth for the worshipper, The fou* yokes are the 
foue pair of stones for pressing out the Soma juice; the three whips 
are the three tones of prayer; thé seven reins are the seven metres 
The meaning of ddsdritrah, ‘ten sided,’ is not clear. Sayana explaing 
arti dh as ‘preservers from enemies, i.e. sing,’ the planets. Grave 
mann hinks that wheels ace meant. 


282 THE HYMNS OP (BOOK 11. 


2 Thisds prepared for him the first, the second, and the third 
time : he is man’s Priest and Herald, 
Others get offspring of another parent: he goeth, asa noble 
Bull, with others. 
3 To Indra’s car the Bay Steeds have I harnessed, that new 
well-spoken words may bring him hither, 
Here let not other worshipers detain thee, for among us are 
many holy singers. 
4 Indra, ccme hitherward with two Bay Coursers, come thou 
with four, with s1x when invocated. 
Yome thou with eight, with ten, to drink the Soma. Here is 
the juice, brave Warrior: do not scorn it. 
5 O Indra,come thou hither having harnessed thy car with twenty 
thirty, forty horses, 
Come thou with fifty well trained coursers, Indra, sixty or 
seventy, to drink the Soma. 
6 Come to us hitherward, O Indra, carried by eighty, ninety or 
an hundred horses, 
This Soma juice among’ the Sunahotras hath been poured out, 
in love, to glad thee, Indra. 
7 Bo this my prayer, O Indra, come thou hither: bind to thy 
car’s pole all thy two Bay Coursers. 
Thou ert to be invoked in many places: Hero, rejoice thyself 
in this libation. 
8 Ne’er be my love from Indra disunited: still may his liberal 
Milch cow yield us treasure. 
So may we under his supreme protection, safe in his arms, 
succeed in each forth-going. 
9 Now may that wealthy Cow of thine, O Indra, givein return 
a boon to him who lauds thee. | | 
Give to thy praisers : let not fortune fail us. Loud may we 
speak, with heroes, in assembly. 


2 The first, the second, and the third time: the three daily sacri- 
fices are referred to. J/7e 278 man’s Priest: Agni must ke meant. 
The second hemistich is obscu:e. Wilson, after Sayana, paraphrases: 
‘Other (priests) engender the embryo of a different (rite), but this 
Victorious (sacrifice), the showerer (of benefits) combines with other 
(ceremonies).’ ‘ 4 .With two Bay Coursers : this is the usual num- . 
ber, The progressive multiplication in this and tifé following stanzas 
is perhaps interded to indicate the ever increasing rapidity with which 
the eager worshipper prays Indra to approach. The Scholiast says 
that by their supbrnatural power the two horses of Iudra multiply 
themselves indsfinitely, 6 The Sunahotras : apparently a family ~' 
so called; etymologically ‘those who sacrifice with bappy result.’ 
According to Sayana, sundhutrah means certain Vessels into which the 
Soma juice was poured. 


HYMN 19.) THE RIGVEDA. 283 
HYMN XIX, Indra, 


Draucats of this sweet juice have been drunk for rapture, of 
the wise Soma-presser’s offered dainty, 
Wherein.grown mighty in the days aforetime, Indra hath found 
delight, and men who worship. 
2 Cheered by this meath Indra, whose hand wields thunder,rents 
piecememeal Aht who barred up the waters, 
So that the quickening currents of the rivers flowed forth like 
birds unto their resting-places. 
3 Indra, this Mighty One, the Dragon’s slayer, sent forth the 
tlood of waters tothe ocean, 
He wave the Sun his life, he found the cattle, and with the 
night the works of days completed. 
4 To ltim who worshippeth hath Indra given many and matchless 
eifts. He slayeth Vitra. é 
Straight was he to be soughf with supplications by men who 
struggled to obtain the sunlight : 
5 To him who poured him gifts he gave up Sirya,—Indra, the 
God, the Mighty, to the mortal ; 
For Etasa with worsbip brought him riches that keep distress 
afar, as twere his portion, —" 
G Once to the driver of his chariot, Kutsa, he gave up greedy 
Sushna, plague of harvest ; 
Anvd Indra, for the sake of Divodasa,demolished Sambara’s nine-s 
and-ninety castles. 


~~ 


nn ne ere 


1 Have been drunk: by Indra 3 And with the night: per- 
haps by giving the night for rest enabled meg to perform the labours 
of the day. Or,eas akgund may mean ‘by light,’ ‘effected the mani- 
festation of the days by light,’ as Wilson renders ip after SAyana. 
D Seo T. 61. 15. The legend says that a certain King who wished for 
«sun worshipped Surya who, to grant his prayer, was born himself as 
the King’s son. Afterwards when sume dispute arose between this 
King’s son who was named Siarya and the Rishi Ktasa, Indra sided 
with theelatter. Inf. 61. 15, a chariot race appears to be referred 
to, and [ have translated the passage acaordPngly, following Sdyana in 
taking Surya to be the name of a man. If, however, as is very possi- 
blo, Surya there is the Sun-God the meaning is that [adra, in order 
tu favour his faithful worshipper Htaga, compglled Surya or the Sun 
to briug back his cufriot and horsés to the east ; that is the return of 
day on some particular occasion is attributed to Indra’s intervention , 
on behalf of his favourite, This appears to be the meaning of thie :. 
Versa aleo. See aleo I 121. 18. As 'twere hes portion : as (a 
father gives) his portion (to a son), according to Sayana., 6 Kutsa 
aud Jevoddsa, favourites of Indra, and Sushna and Sambarg, demons 
of drought, have occurred frequently in Book I. 


eo — —— 


QR4 TAE HYMNS OF [BOOK 11, 


7 So have we brought our hymn to thee, O Indra, strengthening 
thee and fain ourselves for glory. 
May we with best endeavours gain this friendship, and mayst 
thou bend the godless scurner’s weapons, 
8 Thus the Gritsamadas for thee, O Ilero, have wrought their 
hymn and task as seeking favour. 
May they who worship thee afresh, O Indra, gain food and 
strength, bliss, and a happy dwelling. 
9 Now may that wealthy Cow of thine, O Indra, give in return 
a buon to him who lauds thee. 
Give to thy praisers ; let not fortune fail us. Loud may we 
speak, with heroes, in assembly. 


HYMN XX. : ‘Indra. 


s . . ° 

As one brings forth his car when fain for cambat, so bring we 
power to thee—regard us, Indra—— 

Well skilled in song, thoughtful in spirit, seeking great bliss 
from one like thee amid the Heroes. 


2 Indra, thou art our own with thy protection, a guardian near 
‘te men who love thee truly. 
Astive art thou, the liberal man’s defender, his who draws 
near to thee with right devotion. 


¢8 May Indra, called with solemn invocations, the young, the 
Friend, be men’s auspicious keeper, 
One who will further with his aid the singer, the toiler, praiser, 
dresser of oblations, 


@ With laud and song let me extol that Indra in whom of old 
men prospered and were mighty. 
May he, implored, fulfil the prayer for plenty of him wha 
worships, of the living mortal. _ 
6 He, Indra whom the Angirases’ praise delighted, strengthened 
their prayer and made their goings prosper. , 
Stealing away the mornihgs with the sunlight, he, lauded, 
crushed even Asna's ancient, powers. 


’ 
SS Se ee 
a 
1 For combeé: or, perhaps, for the race, 3 The toler: the 
*"gaan who labours in the discharge of religious duties. 4 The living 


mortal: the present worshipper, as distinguished from the men of old. 
5) Made thew gotngs prosper: by recovering for them the stolen cows, 
frequently mentioned in Book [  Axna, ‘the voracious,’ said to be the 
wame of a demon, one Of tue many foes vvertheuwa by Ladra. 


HYMN 21} THE RIGVEDA 283 


6 He verily, the God, the glorious Indra, hath raised him up for 
man, bast Wonder: Worker. 
Ile, self-reliant, mighty and triumphant, br ought iow the dear 
head of the wicked Disa. 


7 Indrathe Vritra slayer, Fort destroyer,scattered the Dasa hosts 
who dwelt in darkness. 
For man hath hecreated earth and watars, and ever helped the 
prayer of him who worships. 
8 To him in might the Gods have ever yielded, to Indra in the 
tumult of the battle 
Wh:enin his arms they laid the bolt, he slaughtered the Dasyus 
and cast down their forts of iron. 


2 Now may that wealthy Cow of thine, O Indra, give in return a 
boon to him who lauds thee. 
Give tothy praise:s let not fortune fail us. Loud may we 
speak, with heroes, in sssembly. 


HYMN XXT. Indra. 


To him the Lord of all, the Lord of wealth, of ight; him who 
is Lora for ever, Lord of men and tilth, 

Him who is Lord of horses, Lord of kine, floods, to’ Indra, 
to the Holy bring sweet Soma juice, 

2 To him the potent One, who coaquors and breaks down, the 

Victor never vanquished who disposes all, 

The mighty-voicad, the rider, aiassarlibles to Iudra ever- 
conquering speak your reverent prayer, 


8 Still Victor, loved by mortals, ruler over men, oerthrower, 
warrior, be hath waxen as he would ; 
Host- gatherer, triumphant, honoured mid the folk, Indra’s 
horoic deeds will I tell forth to all. 


a a rn 


—— 


6 Désa: said by Sayana to be an Asura, or cemon of that name. 
The word is frequently applied to the foes of the Aryas, to the malig- 
ant demons of the air ag well as to the barbarous and hostile cheb: 
tanta of the land, and it is not always claar whether human or super- 
human enemies are intended. The dear head: the Dasa’s own 
head ; 7 The Ddsa hoets who dwelt in darkness: the words 
thus rendered are variously explained. [6 ig uncertaia whether the 
aborigines of the-country are meant, or the demons of air who dwell 


in the dark clouds. 8 The Dasyus: the Asutas or demons, 
according to Sgyana. 2 
1 The Lord: jiterally, conqueror of all, of waalth, ete. 2 


Migkty-voiced : Sgyana gives two explanations, ‘having a full throat,’ 
Or ‘praised by many.’ Lider: borne through the sky, 


286 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 11. 


4 The strong who never yields, who slew the furious fiend, the 
deep#the vast, of wisdom unattainable ; 

Who speeds the good, the breaker-down, the firm, the vast, — 

Indra whose rites bring joy hath made the light of Dawn. 


) By sacrifice the yearning sages sending forth their songs 
found furtherance from him who speeds the flood. 
In Indra seeking help with wership and with hymn, they 
drew him to themselves and won thein kine and wealth. 


6 Indra, bestow on us the best of treasures, the spirit of ability 
and fortune ; 
Increase of riches, safety of our bodies, charm of sweet speech 
and days of pleasant weather. 


HYMN XXII, Indra. 


Av the Trikadrukas the Great and Strong hath drunk drink 
bleht with meal. With Vishny hath he quaffed the poured 
out Soma, juice, all that he would. 

That hath so heightened him the Great, the Wide, to do his 
mighty work. : 

So may the God attain the God, true Indu Indra who is true. 


2 So hs resplendent in the battle overcame Krivi by might. Lle 
with his majesty hath filled the earth and heaven, and waxen 
strong. 

So may the God attend the God, true Indu Indra who is true, 


3 Brought forth together with wisdom and mighty power thou 
geroewest great; with hero dceds subduing the malevolent, 
most swift in act ; 

Giving prosperity, and lovely wealth tohim who praiseth thee. 
So may the God attend the God, true Indu Indra who is true. 


4 This, Indra, was thy hero deed, Dencer, thy first and ancient 
work, worthy to be told forth in heaven, 
What time thou sentest down lite with a God’s own power, free- 
ing the floods. 
All that is godless may he conquer with his might, and, Lord 
of Ilundred Powers, find for us strength and food, 


4 The furious fiend :*Vritra. 


ceremonies, acording to Sayana. 


6 Ability: to perform sacred 


The Trikadrukas: the first three days of the Abhiplava ceremony. 
Indus a dcop, especially of Sowa juice ; another name of the deified 
Soma. 2 Avive: ademon  Seell. 17. 6. 4 Dancer: active 
in battle, dancer of the war-dance. 


HYMN 23.) THE RIGVEDA., 287 


HYMN XXIII. Brahraanaspati. 
We call thee, Lord and Leader of the heavenly hosts, the wisc 
among the wise, the famousest of all, 
The King supreme of prayers, O Brahmanaspati : hear us with 
help; sit down in place of sacritice. 
2 Brihaspati, God immortal ! verily the Gods have gained from 
thee tha wise, a share in holy rites 
As with great light the Sun brings forth the rays of morn. so 
thou alone art Father of all sacred prayer, 
38 When thou hast chased away revilers and the gloom, thou 
moantest the refulgent car of sacrifice ; 
The awful car, Brihaspati, that quells the foe, slays demons, 
cleaves the stall of kine, and finds the light. 


4 Thon leadest with good guidance and preservest men; distress 
oertakes not him who offers gifts to thee : 
Him who hates prayer thou panishest, Brihaspati, quelling his 
wrath: herein is thy great mightiness. 
&’ No sorrow, no distress from any side, nu foes, no creatures 
double-tongued have overcome the man, — 
Thou drivest all seductive ticnds away from him whom, careful 
guard, thou keepest, Prahmanaspatt. 
6 Thou art our keeper, wise, preparer of our paths : we, for thy 
service, sing to thee with hymns of praise. 
Brihaspati, whoever lays a snare for us, him may his evil fated, 
precipitate, destroy. 
7 Him, too, who threatens us without offence of ours, the evil. 
minded, arrogant, rapacious man, g- 
Him, turn*thou from our path away, Brihaspati: give us fair 
access to this banquet of the Gods, 
8 Thee as protector of vur bodies we invoke, thee, saviour, ag 
the comforter who loveth us. 
Strike, O Brihaspati, the Gods’ revilers down, and let not the 
warighteous come to highest bliss. 


Ll Brahmanaspati: alternating with Brikaspati, the Deity ia whom 
the action of the worshtoper upon the Gods 1, personified Sse I 14. 3. 
A comparatively recent God, as the representative of the bn ‘rarchy, he 
is gradually encrosching on the gurisdiction of Indra the Warrior God 
of the Ksbatriyas, cl iming his achievements as his own ‘and assuming 
his attributes, See Weber, Uber den Vajapeya, Sitgungsberichte dar 
K.P) Academie der Wissenscuaften, 4892, XXXIX, p15. J 
Remlers: blaspheming damons of darkness. Cleaves the stalt of kine: 
opens the prison where the ews or raya of light bave been shut up. 
7 This banquet of the Gods: sacrifice in general, and especially the 
sacritica which is performing. ’ 


988 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR ?r, 


9 Through thee, kind prosperer, O Brahmanaspati,may we obtain 
te wealth of menu which all desire : . 
And all our enemtes who near or far away prevail against us, 
crush, and leave them destitute, 


10 With thceasour own rich and liberal ally may we, Brihaspati, 
gain highest power of life. 
Let not ue guilefal wicked man be lord of us: still may we 
prosper, singing goodly hymns of praise. 


11 Strong, never yielding, hastening to the battle cry, consumer 
of the foe, vic.or ions in the strife, 
Thou art sin’s true avenger, Brahmanaspati, who tames e’en 
the fierce, the wildly passionate. 


12 Whoso with mind ungodly seeks todo us harm, who deeming 
himk a man of might mid lords. would stay, — 
Let not his deadly blow reach us, Brihaspati; may we humi- 
liate the strong ill-duer s wrath. 


138 The mover mid the spoil, the winner of all wealth, to be invoked 
in fight, and reverently adored, 
Brikuspati hath overthrown like cars of war all wiked enemies 
who fain would injure us, 


14 Burn up the demons with thy fiercest flaming brand, those who 
, hove scorned thee in thy manifested might. 
Show forth that power that shall dese: ve the hymn of praise : 
destroy the evil'speakers, O Brihaspati. 


15 Brihaspati,that which the foe deserves not, which shines among 
e the folk effectual, splendid, 
That, Son of Law! which is with might refulgent—that trea. 
sure wonderful bestow thou on us. 


16 Give us not up to those who, foes in ambusecade, are greedy 
for the wealth of him who sits at ease, 
Who cherishin their heart abandonment of Gods, Brihaspati, 
no further rest shall they obtain. 


17 For Tvashtar, he who knows each sacred song, brought thee 
to life, preeminent cer all the things that be. 
Guilt-scourger.guilt-avengeris Brihaspat, who slays the spoiler 
and upholds aN inighty Law. 


nt me oer ap a tg 
oe re ee ey 


15 Son of Law: who hast thy being ih accordance with rita, truth 
or eternal Law and Order. 16 This stanza is ditlicult, and the 
transjation os canjectural,  Wilsov observes that Sayana’s explanation 
is WoL Very Intoiligiede 


AY MN 24.) THE RIGVEDA. 289 


18 The mountain, for thy glory, cleft itse:f apart when, Angiras! 


thou opencdst the stall of kine. e 
Thou, O Brihaspati, with Indra for ally didst hurl down water- 
Hood: which gloom had compassed round. ; 


19 O Brahmanaspati, be thou controller of this our hymn and 
prosper thou oar children | 
All that the Gods regard with love is blessed. Loud may Wwe 
speak, with ences. in assembly, 


HYMN XATV. Brahmanaspati. 


Br pleased with his our offering, thou who art the Lord; we 
will adore thee with this new and mighty song. 
As this thy frend, our Inperal patron, praises thee, do thon, 
svihaspati, full our hearts’ desire. 


Ue who with might howed down the things that should be 
buwed, and im his fury rent the holds of Sambaras i se 

Who overthrew what shook not, Brahmanitspati,—he made 
his way within the mountain stored with wealth. 


3 That was a great deed for the Godliest of the Gods: strong 
things were loosened and the firmly fixed gave way. 

He drave the kine forth and cleft Wala through by prayer, 
dispelled the darkness and displayel the light of b&aven. 
The well wtth mouth of stone that ponred a thood of meath, 

which Brahmanaspati hath opened with his might— 
All they who see the light have drunk their fill “thereat : ty- 
gether they have made the watery fount flow forth. 
& Ancient will be those creatures, whatsoe’er they be; with 
moons, with autumns, doors unclose themselves to you. 
Effortless they pass on to perfect this 4nd that, appointed works 
which Brahinanaspati ordained. 


ko 


—) 


® 


fo een wee ee coe twee me ee ee we tr enn eee 


~~ ~_ —S — -_—— 


1 WoaGaie Brihaspati is here called by the name of the ancient 
Petriarch as Agni isin f 1.6, Aceording to the Bh4gavata Purdne 
Mr HNaspatiis the son of Angtras. Thow...... datst hurl down: the 
deed usually aseribed to Indra ie here attributed to Drihaspati as the 


Lord of effectual prayer. See I 14. 3, and 62 3. 


® 
1 Thy friend, our liberal patron : the instititiog of the sacrifice, the 
faithful worshipper of the God And the rewarder of the pricete, 2 
The holds of Sambara : great blagk cloud be fore they*pour their rain. 
The mountain storet with wealth: fhe cloud full of pfecious rain. |? 


This stanza is diflicult, Ludwig’ takes 44 bhiivand, those creavures, ‘whose 
nature is imperfectly known, to be the sun and moon, the parents of 
months and years, which without any effurt on their part bring to pass 
whatever Brahmanaspati deerees. 


38 


260 THE HYMNS OF {BOOK 17. 


. 


‘6 They who with much endeavour searching round obtained the 
Pangs’ noblest treasure hidden in the cave,— 
Those sages, having marked the falschoods, turned them back 
.whence they had come, and sought again to enter in. 


7 The pious onee when they had seen the falsehoods turned them 
back, the sages st.¢d again upon the lofty woys. 
Cast down with both their arms upon the rock they left the 
kindled fire, and said, No enemy is he. 


‘8 With his swift bow, strung truly, Brahmanaspati reaches the 
mark whate’er it be that he desires. 
Excellent are the arrows wherewithal he shoots, keen-eyed to 
look on men and springing from his ear, 


9 He brings together and he parts,the great gh Priest; extolled 
is he, in battle Brahmanaspati. 
When,¢racious,for the hymn he brings forth food and wealth, 
the*¢lowing Sun untroubled s nds forth fervent heat, 
10 First and preeminent,excelling all besides are the kind gifts of 
liberal Brihaspati, 
These are the boons of him the Strong who should be loved, 
whereby both ciasses and the people have delight. 


11 Thos who in every way supreme in earthly power, rejoicing 
by thy iniehty strength hast waxen great,— 
He is the God spread torth in breadth ag inst the Gods: he, 
Brahmanaspati, encompasseth this All, 


12*From you, twain Maghavans, all truth proceedeth: even the 
waters break not your commandment. 
‘Come to us, Brahmanaspati and Indre,to our oblation like youed 
steeds to fodder. 


ee a ee wren, a. Aire he a Gat! er fo ee 


6 he Pari is are the robber-fiencds who carry off ail: hide tha cows 
or rays of lighh. Those sages: the Angirasas, to whom the stolen cows 
‘are said to have belonged. /aving marked the falsehood: having seen 
through the guiles of the fiends who sought to mistead them. 7 
They lett the kindled fire: the cows, or waters ang the light which fol- 
lows their effusion, were set frae by fire-oblations of which thé Angi- 
rases cre rogarded as the exurliest institutors, Wo enemy: that is, 
unan's ¢reatest friend, The stanza is obscure, and Sayana’s explana- 
‘tion is unsatisfactory. S Springing from his ear: the bow-string 
being drawn to the right ear. The word may, perhaps, mean also, 
‘finding their home in, @. e. “reaching the ears’ of mon, and might be 
‘translated Jevelled to the ear.’ 9 He brings together and he parts 
brings friends togetiier in worship, and disperses enemien in battle. 
10° Both classes: according to Sayana, the institutors of the sacrifice 
and the priests, or Gods and men. In breadth against the Gods: 
in his mightinees the representative of all the Gods. 12 Lver the 
evaters: all nature, even the strong and rapid water floed, 


HYMN 2%.) TRE RIGVEDA. 291 
¢ 


13 The sacrificial flames most swiftly hear the call : thie priest of 
the assembly gaineth wealth for hymns. 
Heating the stern, reniitting at his wall the debt,strong in the 
shock of fight is Brahmuaspati. 


t4 The wrath of Brahmanaspat: according to his will had full 
clfeet when he would do a mighty deed. 
Ths kine he drave forth and distributed to heaven, cven-as @ 
copious flood with strength ilows sundry ways. 
1A O Brahineaspati, may we beevermvre masters of wealth werl- 
guided, full of vital strength. 
Herves on keroes s.nd abundantiy to us,when thou omnipstent 
through prayer seckest my call, 
16 O Bratmnaspati, be thor controller of this our hymn, and. 
prosper thou our chgldren. 
Ail that the Guds regard with love is blessed. Loud may we 


speak, with heroes, in assewbly. 
: “ ® 


IYMN XXYV, Brahmiaspati. 


He ligktinrg up the fime shall conquer enemies : strong shall. 
he be who offers prayer and brings his gift, 

Ee with his secd spreads forth beyond another's socds &hom- 
ever Brahmanaspau takes for his friend. 

With heroes he shall ov-rcome his hero foes, and: spread his. 
wealth by kine: wise by himself is he ; 

Hus ehildcen and his children’s children grow in strenghth, 
Whomever Brahmanispatt takes for his friend. 


ta 


Re] 


He, mighty lke a raving river’s bill ow flood, as a bull coa- 
q:ters et overcomes “wits stre enguh. 

Like Agnes blaving rash he may nué be restrained, whomever. 
erent takes for his friend, 


For him the floods of heaven flow never failing down: firsé 
with the heroes he goes forth to war for lane. 

He glaysin unabated vigour with great might, whomever 
Brahmanaspati takes for his friend. “s 


All roaring rivers pour their waters dowa for him, and many 
a flawless shelter huth been granted him,’ 

Blest with the happiness of Gods he prospers well, whomever 
Brahmanaspati wakes for*his friend. . 


HYMN XXVL * Brahmnaspat, 


Teun righteous singer shall o'ereome his enomies, and he who. 
serves the Gods sabdue the godless man. * 

The zealous man shall vanqnish the invncibie,the Wwors sipper 
share the food of bim who worships not, 


a 


292 THE HYMNS OF (BOOK 10. 


2 Worship, thou hero; chase the arrogant afar: put on aus- 
picious courage for the fight with focs. 
Prepare oblation so that thou mayst have success: we crave 
the favouring help of Bralimanaspati, 
3 He with his folk, his house, his family, his sons, gains booty 
for himself, and, with the heroes, wealth, 
Who with oblation and atrue believing heart serves Brak- 
manaspati the Father of the Gods, 


4 Whoso hath honoured him with offerings rich in oil, hina 
Brahmanaspati leads forward ov his way, 
Saves him frow sorrow, frees him from his enemy, and is his 
wonderful deliverer from woe. 


HYMN XXVIII. Adityas, 


Turse hymns that drop down fatness, with the ladle J ever 
offer tu the Kings Adityas, ~ 

May Mitra, Aryaman,and Bhaga hear us,the mighty Varuna, 
Dalksha, and Ansa. 


2 With one accord may Aryaman and Mitra and Varuna thie 
_ day accept this praise-song — 
Adityas bright and pure as streams of water, free from all 

rule and falsehood, blameless, perfect. 

3 These Gods, Adityas, vast, profound,and faithfal, with many 
eyes, fain to deceive the wicked, 

Looking within behold the good and evil: near tothe Kings 
is even the thing most distant. 


4 Upholding that which moves and that which moves not 

Adityas, Gods, protectors of all bem, — : 

Provident, guarding well the werld of spirits, true to eternal 
Law, the debt-exactors, 


2 Worsmup, thow hero: the Rishi addresses the exhortation to 


himeolf, The Father of the Gods: Saiyana explains pitdram, father 
by pdlaystdnam, protector, me, 


qe 
i een amie ct 


1 With the ladle: thatis, with my tongue that utters praises as 
¢ho sacriticial ladle pours out the oblations uf clarified butter. Adié- 
tyas: seo J. It. 3 © Bhaga: thg name of this ancient God etill 
survives in the Slavonic lang fiages as a goueral nawe for God. He is 
froqueutly invoked together with Pushan and the Adityas. See I 14 


ae Daksha. active evergy, spiritual power personified, and called 
an Aditya or son Of Aditi, Sféiyansa takes the word ag an epithet of 
Ans., pewerful. Ansa: another of the Adityas, the Distributer. 
See IT. 1. cf. 3 Looking within: iato the hoarte of meu. 4 


The debt-exactors: the punishers of sin. 


AYMN 27)| THE RIGVEDA. | DOs 


& May J, Adityas, share in this your favour which, Aryaman, 
brings profit een in danger. : 
Under your guidance, Varuna and Mitra, round troubles may 
1 pass, like rugged places, 
4 Smooth is your path, QO Aryaman and Mitra ; excellent is it, 
Varuna, and thoraless. 
Thereon, Adityas, send usdown your blessing: grant us a 
shelter hard vw be demolished. 
7 Mother of Kings, may Aditi transport us, by fair paths Arya- 
yuan, beyond all hatred, 
May we uninjured, girt by many heroesgwin Varuna’s and 
M.tra’s high protection, 


8 With their support they stay three carths, three heavens ; 
three are thew funguons m the (rods? assembly. 
Mishty throuzk Law, \dityas, is your greatness ; faer is it, 
Aryuman, Varuna, and Mitra. 
: . S 
9 Golden und splendid, pure Itke streams of water, they hold 
aloft the three bright heavenly regions, 
Neer do they slumber, never close their eyelids, faithfal, far- 
ruling for the righteous mortal. 
t \ ad 
10 Thou over all, O Varuna, art Sovran, be ecy Gods, ASurat or 
be they mortals. 
Grant unto ustv see a handred aztumns: ours bethe blest 
long lives of our forefathers, . 
11 Neither the rigkt nor left do I distinguish, neither tha east 
nor yet the west, Adityas. 
Simple end guided by your wisdom, Vasus! may I attain the 
hight that brsngs no danger, 
32 Hewho bears gifts unto the Kings, true Leaders, he whom 
their everlasting blessings prosper, 
Moves with his chariot tirstim rank and wealthy, munificent 
and lauded in assemblics. 
13 Pure, faithful, very strong, with heroes round him, he dwells 
beside the waters rich with pasttre, 
None slays, from near at hand or from a distance, him who is 
under the Adityas’ guidance. ; 


7 Mother of Kings: Agiti, the Infinite, mother of the Adityhs. 
8 Three ate ther functions: sperkaps the absorption, retention, ahd 


effusion of rain, 10 .lsera : @ divine and immortal being; appa- 
rently a higher title than devik, Gods or Bright Ones. lil 


_know nothing of myself and cannot attaiu to tha light of day, or the 
light of true knowledge, without your as:"' ce, 


294 TAK HYMNS OF [BOOR 7. 


14 Aditi, Mitra, Varuna, forgive us however we have erred and 
sinhicd against you. 
May \obtaim the broad light free from peril + QO Indra, let 
not during darkness seize us. 


15 For him the Twaia united pour their fulness, the rain from 
heaven: he thrives most highly favoured. 
IIc goes to war masterimy both the mansions: to him both 


per tions of the world are gracious, 


16 Your gniles, ye Loly Ones, to queil oppressors, your snaras 
spread out against the foe, Adityas, 
May [ car-borng pass Ithke a skilful horseman: uninjured may 
we dwell in spacious shelter. 


17 May I not live, O Varuna, te witness my wealthy, liberal, 
dear friend’s'destitatioa, “ 
King, ruay T never lack well-erdered riches, Loud may we 
spuak, With heroes, in assembly. 


HYMN XXVIIQ, Varuna, 


Tris laud of theself-radiant wise Adityashall besupreine oer 
all that is im greatness. 

T beg renown of Varunt the Mighty, the God exceeding kind 
to him who wi@bships. 


2 Having extolled thee, Varuna, with thoughtfal care may we 
have high fortune in thy service. 
Singing thy praises like the tires at coming, day after day, of 
mornings rich m cattle. 


3 May we be in thy keeping, O thou Leader, wide ruling Varanas 
Lurid of many herods. , ; 
O Sons of Aditi, for ever faithfal, pardon us, Gods, admit us 
to your friendship, 


4 Ife made them flow,the Aditya, the Sustainer ¢ the rivers run 
by Varuna’s commandment. 


; 1f Daring darkness ; death, hight. darkness are to be draade {: day: 
light, 1 colvparatively free from danger, Ja Lhe Teun mused: 
Heaven and earth whicd together make up the worlde foth the 
MANSIONS : that is, ‘he reoains possesslog of his own dwelling and vaias 
Possession of that of his enemy. Both portions of the world : heaven 


and earth, \7 May I never soe iny wealthy patron, she, institutor 
of the ceremony reduced to poverty. 
Sf] 


1 This laud : che poet magnitios the importance of tha worship which 
he offers tothe Aditya Varuna, the groab King over all, the God of 


natural, peaceful, moral order as contrasted with Ladra the God of battles. 


AYMN 29.) THE RIQGVEDA 9295 


These feel no-weariness,nor cease from flowing : swift have they 
. * Sd 
fiown like birds in air around us. 


s Loose me from sin as from a band that binds me: may we 
sweil, Varuna, thy spring of Order. 
Let not my tirread, while [ weave song, be severed, nor my 
work’s sum, before the time, be shattered. 
€ Bar from me,Varuva,cemove all danger 7 accept me graciously, 
thoa Moly Sovran | 
Cast of, like cords that hold a cal fin y troubles : L am not 
even uline eyelid’s lord without thee, 
¢ Strive us not, Varnna,within those dread weayfons which, Asura, 
at thy bidding wound tha sinner, 
Letus not pass away frova light toexile, Scatter, that we may 
live, the men who hage us 


8 O mighty Varna, now and ehercaftergoven as of old, will we 


speak forth our worship. ° 
For in thyself, invincible God, thy statutes ne’er to be moved 
are jixed as on @ monntain. ° 


9 Move far from me what sins 1 have committed : letimc not suffer, 
Kine, for cult of others, e 
Fall many a morn remains todawn upon us: in thése, O 
Varuna, while we live direct us, 49 


ig O Kine, whoever, be he friend or kinsman, hath threatened 
me affri¢bted in my siamber— 
Ifany wolf or robber fair would harm us, therefrom,O Varuna, 
vive thon us protection, 
Il May I not live, O Varuna, to witness my wealthy, liberal, dear 
friend’s deytitu¢ion. 
King,may [never Jack we)l-ordered riches. Loud may we speak 
with heroes, ia assembly. 


4 


HYMN “XIX. Visvedevas, 
Urrotpers ef the Law, ye strong Adityas, remove ny sin like 
her who bars in secret. 


You, Varuna, Mitra and all Gods who listen, I call to help me, 

I who know your goodness. 

2 Ye, Gods, are providence and ye are power : remove ye utterly 
all those who: hate us. : . 
5 Swell......aptring of Order: observe and strengthen thy statues. 

» sud ordinances frum which life aud all blessings flow, 

_ 1 Like her who bears on secret: as an unwedded mother abandons 

“er secretly bora child in some distant place, 


256 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK rf, 


As givers of good things deal with us kindly : this day be graci- 
ous to us and hereatter. 


3 What service may we do you with our future, what service, 
Vasus, with our ancient fri: ndship ? 
O Aditi, and Varuna and Mitra, Indra and Maruts, make us 
well and happy. 
4 Ye, O ye Gods, are verily our kinsmen ; as such be kind to me 
who now implore you. 
Let not your car come slowly to our worship: of kinsmen sucl» 
as you ne or Jet us weary. 
5 J singly have sinmed many asin against you, and ye chastised 
meas a sire the gambler, ' 
Far be your nets, far, Gods, be mine offences: seize me not 
like a bird upon ker offspring. 
6 Turn yourselves hitherward this day, ye Holy, that fearing in 
my he art Loimay approach yeu 
Protect us, God; let not the wolf destroy us. Save us, ye 
Ifoly, from the pit and failing. 
@ May I not tive. O Varuna, to witness my wealthy,liberal, dear 
friend’s destitution, 
Ki.e, may I never lack well-ordered riches, Loud may we 
speak, with heroes,4m assembly. 
LIWMN XXX, Indra and Others. 
_ Tae streams unceasing flow to Indra, slayer of Ahi, Savitar, 
God Laws fulfiller, 
Day after day goes on the sheen of waters, What time hath 
past since they were first set flowing ? 
2 Ilis Mother—for she knew—spike and proclaimed him who 
was about tocast his bolt at Vritra. 
Cutting their paths aceording to his pleasure day after day 
{luw to their vroal the rivers. 
J Aloft he stood above the airy region, and against Vritra shot 
his deadly missile. 
enveloped ina cloud he rashed upon him. ‘tadra snbdued 
the Te a sharpened “yea pons. 


wes - 


DO als a sire the gambler: asa Cahir punishes his son ‘for gambling, 
J owr nets: the nogses are snares which ye spread for the wicked, 


_——OP Wy 
LF Sarita: the Sun, as identical with Indea, Tha Scholiast ex- 
plains the word ere as the instigator or impeller of all, What 
time hath passed 1: meaning that the waters are eternal, 2 The 


firat hemistich as obseure. FT follow Ludwig's conjectural interpre 
tation (Der Risveda, Vo 63), who reads oidushi for vidushe, and refers 
to Che legend related in TV 1S (fis Wother : Aditi, the mother of Endra. 
3 Aloft he stood : laudra, See I. 32. Luveloped in a cloud refering to Vritra, 


UY MN 31.) THE RIGVEDA. 297 


4 As witha bolt, Brihaspati, fiercely flaming, pierce thou 
Vrikadvaras’, the Asura’s, heroes. 
Even as in time of old with might thou slewest, so slay eveu 
now our enemy, O Indra. 
nh Cast down from heaven on high thy bolt of thuuder where- 
with in joy thou smitest dead the fueman. 
For gain of cliddren make us thine, O Indra, of many child. 
ren’s children and of cattle. 
(6 Whomso ye love. his power ye aid and strengthen; ye Twain 
are the rich worshipper’s advancers, 
Graciously favour us, Indra and Soma; give us firm standing 
in this thine of danger. 
7 Let it not vex me, tire me, make me slothfal, and never let 
us sxy, Press not the Soma ; 
For hum who cares for fc, gives gifts, supports me, who comes 
with kine tv me who pour*lbations. 
8 Sarasvati, protect us: with the Maruts allied shou boldly 
conquerest our foemen, 
While Indra does to death the dating chieftain of Sandikas 
exulting in his prowess. 
9 Him who waylays, yea, him who wonld destroy us,—alp) at 
him, pierce him with thy sharpened weapon. ; 
Brihaspati, with arms thou slayest foemen - O King, give up 
the spoiler to destruction, 
19 Perform, O Hero, with our valiant heroes the deeds heroics 
which thou hast to finish. 
Long have they been inflated with presumption : slay them, 
and bring us hither their posscsstons. 
11 L craving jov address with hymn and‘homage your heavenly 
host, the Gompany of Maruts, 
That we may gain weaith with full store of herocs, each day 
more famous, and with troops of children. 


HYNN AXXLI. Visvedevas, 
Heur Varuna and Mitra,O ye Twain allied with Vasus, Rudras, 
autl Adityas, help our car, 
That, as the wild birds of the forest from their home, our horses 
may fly forth, glad, eager for renown. 


eee a eeemenel 


4 Vrikadvaras: supposed by Ludwig to ba the King of the Sandi- 
kas, the hymn beiu% a prayer fot victory in an approaching battle 
with him. Zhe Aswra would then mean King. | Comes with 
kine : referring to Indra who rewards his worshippors with gifts of 
cattle. — 

1 Help our cam: in the chariot-race. According to_Prof. Windisch, 
‘car’ isa ligurative expression fur ‘hymn of prais o Seo thet scholar’s 
exhaustive discussion of this hytan in Pestgruss an Iudolf von Toth, 
J803, pp —IE£E. 


oJ 


298 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK II. 


2 Yea, now ye Gods of one accord speed on our car what time 
among the folk it seeks an act of might ; 
When, hasting through the region with the stamp of hoofs, 
our swift steeds trample on the ridges of the earth 
3 Or may our Indra hero,the Fricnd of all mankind,coming from 
heaven, mosi wise, girt by the Marut host, 
Accompany, with aid uutroubled by a foe, our car to mighty 
gain, to win the meed of streneth. 
4 Or inay this Tvashtar, God who rules the world with power, 
one-minded with the Goddesses speed forth our car 3 
Ta and Bhaga the cclestial, Earth and Ileaven, Pdishan, Puran- 
dhi, and the Asvins, ruling Lords. 
9 Or, seen alternate, those two blessed Goddesses, Morning and 
Night who stir all living things to act: 
While with my newest song I praige you both, O Earth, that 
from what movos not ye may spread forth threefold food, 
6 Your blessing asa boon for suppliants we desire : the Dragon of 
the Deep, and Aja-Kkapid, 
Trita, Ribhukshan, Savitar shall joy in as, and the Floods’ 
swift Childin our worshipand our prayer, 
@ These carnest prayers I pray to you, ye Holy: to pay you 
honour, living men have formed them, 
Men fain t> win the prize and glory. May they win, as a car. 
horse might the goal, your notice, 
ITYMN XXXXTI. Various Deities 
Gracrotsiy farther,O ye Ieaven and Earth, this speech striv- 
me to win reward, of me your worshipper. 
First rank 1 give to you, Immortal, high extolled! 1, fain to 
Win me wealth, to you the mighty Patr., 
2 Let not man’s guile annoy us, secret or by day: give not us 
up a prey to these calamities. 
Sever not thou our friendship: think thereon forus. This, 
with a heart that long for bliss, we seck from thee. 


4 Purandht: meaning tho bold, or the intelligent, may be either 
an opithot of Pishan or thé nano of a separate deity. Do / praise 
you both, O arth: 7. e. O Ilaaven and Karth ; the pair being always 
regarded as closely connected, the mention of ona is sufficient. 
From what moves not: from plants as distinguished from animals. 
6 The Dragon of the Deep: Ahibudhuya., who dwehs in the depth of 
air. Sool 186, 5. Aja-dkapad: ‘the uaborn one footed,’ the Sun. 
‘Soe VI. ou. 14, note. Zrita: a Vodic God, appearing In connexion 
with Indra. he Floods’ swift Child: Agni, For the othor names 


soe [ndex. 


» These calamitec. . sone pressing troubles or immiuont dancers 


sul further epreificd rom thee. probably Tndtra. 


ITY MN 35 | THE RIGVEDA. 29%) 


> Bring hither with benignant mind the willing Cow seeming 
with plenteous milk, full, inexhaustible. 
O thou invoked by many, day by day I urge thee with my 


word, a charger rapid in his tread. 


4 With ealogy I vall on Rika swift to hear: may she,auspicious, 
hear us, and herself observe. 

With never breaking needle may she sew her work, and give 
a hero son must wealtny, meet for praise 

Allthy kind thoughts, O Raka, lovely in their form, wherewith 
thoa grantest wealth to him who offers vifts— 

With these come thou to us this day benevolent, O Blessed 
One, bestowiuy ford of thousand sorts, 

6 O broad-tressed Sinivaii, thou who art the Sister of the Gods, 

Accept the offered sagrifice, and, Goddess, grant us progeny. 

With lovely fingers, lovel yarms, prolific Mother of man sons— 

Present the gue ea ‘uifts to her, to Sinivali Queen of mer, 


a 


~j 


8 er, Siniviil, her, Gunet, her, Rika, her, Sarasvati, Indrani 
tomine ad t eall, and Varuuini for my weal, 
HYMN NXAIILU Rudra, 
Farair of Moruts, let thy bliss approach us : exclude us not 
trom lookipy on the sunlight, ; 
Gravious to our fleet courser be the Hero > may we transplant 
us, ftudra, in our children. 
with the most saving medicines which thou givest, Rudra,mily 
1 attain a hundred winters, 
Far from us banish enmity and hatred, and to all quarters 
mmaludies and trouble. : 
3 Chief of all born art thou in vlory, tudra, armed with the 
thunder, michticst of the mighty, — 
Tranepert us over trouble to well-being: repel thou from us all 
assaults of mischief. 
4 Let us not anver thee with worsihip, Rudra, ill praise, Strone 
god ! or mnogled invocation, 


Ne 


. 
w 


4 tidkd: the Goddess presiding over the actual day of full moon 
and apparently assuciated with child-birth, GO Senivdli: asimilar 
lunar Goddass, who aide the birth of children. ” . & Gunga: identi- 
fied by Sayause with Kuha, angther lusar Goddess, or the day of cun- 
junction when the moon rises invisible. Judrdnéi aud Varundni are 
the consorts rospectively cf Indra and Varuna, =? : 


1 The Lfero: liudra. According to Ludwig : Tet cuc brave gon 
be mighty with the charger. 4 With wurshdp : with imperfect 
worship. Jlingled invocation: in which other Gods alév, who hava 
no claim to the particular oblation, are addressed. 


300 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK If. 


Do tLou with strengthening balms incite our heroes: ] hear 
thee famed as best of all physicians. 
5 May I with praise-songs win that Rudra’s favour who is adored 
with gifts and invocations. 
Ne’er may the tawny God, fair-cheeked, and gracious, swift- 
hearing, yield us to this evil purpose . 
6 The Strong, begirt by Maruts, hath refreshed me, with most 
invigorating food, imploring, 
As he who finds a shade in fervent sunlight may J, uninjued, 
win the bliss of Rudra. 
7 Where is that gracious hand of thine, O Rudra, the hand that 
giveth health and bringeth comfort, 
Remover of the woe that Gods haye sent us? O Strong One, 
look thou on me with compassion. , 
8 To him the strong, great, tawny, fair-complexioned, I uttor 
forth a mighty hymn of praises, 
We serve the brilhant God with adorations, we glorify the 
splendid name of Rudra. 
9 With firm limbs, multiform. thestrong, the tawny adorns him- 
self with brieht gold decorations : 
The strength of Godhead ne’er departs from Rudra, him who 
is Sovran of this world. the mighty. 
10 Worthy, thou carriest thy bow and arrows, worthy, thy many- 
hued and honoared necklace. 
Worthy. thou cuttest here each fiend to pieces: a mightier 
than thou there is not, Radra. 
11 Praise him the chariot-borne, the young. the famous, fierce, 
slaying like a dread beast of the forest. 
QO Rudra, praised, be gracious to the singer: !2t thy hosts 
spire us and smite down ancther. 
12 T bend to thee as thou appreachest, Rudra, even asa boy be- 
fore the sire who greets him. 
I praise thee Bounteous Giver, Lord of heroes ; give medicines 
to us as thou art lauded. ' 
13 Of your pure medicines, O potent Maruts, those that are 
wholesomest and health Bestowing, 
Those which our father Manu hath selected, I crave from 
Rudca for our gain and welfare. 


r 


 & Yield ua'to thia evil purpose: give us up to the malice of our 
enemy. 6 The Strong: or the Bull, Rudra, accompanied by his 


gong the Maruts. © 8 Fatr-complextoned : the white complexion of 
Biva, the later representative of Rudra, has, therefore, as Wilson ob- 
serves, its origin in the Rigveda. 13° Those which our father Manu 
hath selected: Wilson observes, that ‘this alludes to the vegetable 
seeds which Manu, agoording to tha Muhabhdrata, was directed ta 


HY MN 34.) THE RIGVEDA. 301 


14 May Radra’s missile turn aside and spare us, the great wrath 
of the impetuous One avoid us. 
Turn, Bounteous God, thy strong bow from our princes, and 
be thou, gracious to our seed and offspring. 
19 O tawny Bull, thus showing forth thy nature, as neither to 
be wroth, O God, nor slay us, 
Here, Rudra, listen to our invocation. Loud may we speak, 
with heroes, in assembly, 


HYMN XXXIV. Maruts. 


Tur Maruts of resistless might who love the rain, resplendent, 
terrible like wild beasts in their strenvth, 
Glowing like flames of fire, impetuous in career, blowing the 
wandering rain cloud, have disclosed the kine. 
® They gleam with armlets as the heavens are decked witlstars, 
ike cloud-born lightnings shine the torrents of their rain, 
Since the strong Rudra, O Maruts with brilliant chests, sprang 
into life for youin Prisni’s radiant lap. 
3 They drip like horses in the racings of swift steeds; with the 
stream’s rapid ears they hasten on their way. 
Maruts with helms of gold, ye who make all things shake, 
come with your spotted deer, one-minded, to our food. 
4 They have bestowed on Mitra all that live, to feed, they who 
for evermore Cause their swift drops to flow : 
Whose steeds are spotted deer, whose riches never fail, like 
horses in full speed, bound to the pole in works, 
5 With brightly-flaming kine whose udders swell with milk, 
with glittering lances on your unobstructed paths, 


ee 


take with him into th vessel in which he was preserved abt the time 
of the deluge,’ 14 Our princes: our wealthy patrons, the insti- 
tutors of our sacrifices. 


1 Have disclosed the kina : ‘give vent to its (collected) rain ’— Wilson. 
2 Prisnjs radtant lap : prigui the mother of the Maruts, probably ‘the 
speckled cloud,’ ig, according to Sayana, the Karth who in the form of 
a brindled cow was impregnated by Rudra. 3 Woth the stream’s 
rapih ears; ‘The waves raised by the sturm may be revarded ag the ears 
with which the stream listens to the roaring of the’ tem pest.’— Ludwig, 
Wilson, after Sayays, paraphrasas:,‘and thev rush along with swift 
(horses) on the ekirte of the sounding (cloud) ’ 4 ‘The meaning » 
of the first line is not clear. Wilson renders it ; ‘Tht prompt. giving’- 
Maruts ever confer upon the (offerer of sacrificial) food, as upon a friend: 
all these (world supporting) waters.’ Hound to the pole in works : 
carrying on their appointed duties as horses draw the chariog to whose 
pole they are harnessed D Woth breyhily-flaming kine: clouds that 
smait flashes of lightuing before they pour down theic stores of fortili- 
zing rain. 


302 THE HYMNS OF {BOOK 11. 


q 
O Maruts, of one mind, like swans who seek their nests, come 
to the rapturous enjoyment of the meath. 


6 To these our prayers, O Maruts, come unanimous, come ye to 
our libations like the praise of men. 
Make it swell like a mare, in udder like a cow, and for the 
Singer grace the song with plenteous strength. 


T Give usa steed,O Maruts, mighty in the car ; prevailing prayer 
that brings remembrance day by day ; 
Food to your praisers, to your bard in deeds of might give 
winning wisdom, power uninjured, unsurpassed. 


8 When the bright-chested Maruts, lavish of their gifts, bind at 
the time of bliss their horses to the cars, 
Then, as the milch-cow feeds her ca!f within the stalls, they 
pour forth food for all oblatjon-bringing men. 


9 Save us,‘O Marats, Vasus, from the injurer, the mortal foe 
who makes us looked upon as wolves. 
With chariot all aflame'compass him round about : O Radras, 
cast away the foeman’s deadly bolt, 


10 Well-known, ye Maruts, is that wondrous course of yours, who 
they milked Prisni’s udder, close akin to her, 
Or when to shame the bard who lauded, Rudra’s Sons, ye the 
infallible brought Trita to decay. 


‘}1 We call you, such, great Maruts, following wonted ways, to 
the oblation paid to Vishnu Speeder-on, 

With ladles lifted up, with prayer, we seek of them preeminent, 
golden-hucd, the wealth which all extol, 


6 Like the praise of men : which attends pious worshippers. Mate 
a¢ swell: wake our sacred song effectual, metaphorically full of milk. 
Prof. M Miller would read asvdm instead of devdm : ‘Fultil,(our pra- 
yer) like the udder of a barren cow’ 7 Brings remembrance : makes 
the Godse remember us. 10 Pr‘sni here is the firmament, and her 
udder is the cloud from which the Naruts drew the rain. ‘There isa 
very abrupt change from the second person to the third, from ‘ye’ to 
‘they.’ I can make nothing ef the second hemistich. Wilson 

| paraphraos te: ‘You (destroyed) the reviler of your worshipper, and 

~{came), irresistZole sons of Rudra, to Trita for the destruction of his 
enemies.’ Trita is,said by Sgyana to ke a Rishi. Ludwig in his note on 
the passage takes Trita to be a name of the Soma, 11 Vishvew 
Spesder-on: who runs his rapid course round heaven. Sdyana explains 
Vishnu to mean ‘the diffusivs and desirable Soma,’ Perhaps, as Ludwig 
thinks, sacrifice in general is intended, of which Vishnu is the repre- 
sentative. 


HYMN 35.) THE RIGVEDA. 303 


12 They, the Dasagvas, first of all brought sacrifice : they at the 
break of mornings shall inspirit us. 
Dawn with her purple beams uncovercth. the nights, with 
great light glowing liké a billowy sea of milk. 


13 The Rudras have rejoiced them in the gathered bands at seats 
of worship as in purple ornaments. 
They with impetuous vigour sending down the rain have taken 
to themselves a bright and lovely hue, 


14 Solicitins their high protection for our help, with this our adora- 
tion we sing praise to them, 
Whoni, for assistance, like the five terrestrial priests, Trita 
hath brough to aid us hither on his car, 


15 So may your favouring help be turned to us-ward,your kind- 
ness like a lowing cow approach us, 

Wherewith ye bear your servant over trouble, and free your 
worshipper from scoff and scorning. 


HYMN XXXYV. Son of Waters. 
HActr for spoil my flow of speech'I utter: may th> Floods’ 
Child accept my songs with favour. 
Will not the rapid Son of Watars make them lovely,for,he it 
is who shall enjoy them? 2 


2 To him let us address the song well-fashioned, forth from tha 
heart. Shall he not understand it ? 
The friendly Son of Waters by the greatness of Godhead 
hath produced all things existing. 


3 Some floods unite themselves and others join them: the 
sounding rivers fill one common starchonse. 
On cvery side tle bright Floods have encompassed the bricht 
resplendent Offspring of the Waters. 


4 The never-sullen waters, youthful Maidens, carefully decking, 
wait on him the youthful. 
He with bright rays shines forth in splendid beauty, unfed 
wéth wood, in waters, oil-envelopcd. 


12 The Dasagvas : the Maruvs are here said to have been the first 
performers of sacrifico, the true Dagagvas. The priests eo called be- 
longed originally to the race or sthool of Angiras. 14 The second 
hemistich is very obscure, Sayana's explanation (see Wilson) ig a’ 
together unsatisfactory. : i. 


1 The Floods’ Child : or Son of the Waters, Apamnapat, a name of 
Agni as born in the form of lightning from the waters of the sorial * 
ucuso or firmament, Make them lovely: grace them with acceptance, 


304 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK II. 


9. To him three Dames are offering food to feel him, Goddesses 
to the God whom none may injure. 

Within the waters hath he pressed, as hollows, and drinks, 

their milk who now are first made mothers, 
6 Here was the horse’s birth; his was the sunlight. Savethou 
our princes from the oppresscr’s onslaught. 

Him, indestructible,dwelling at a distance in forts unwrought 

lies and ill spirits reach not. 
7 He, in whose mansion is the teeming Milch-cow, swells the 
Gods nectar and eats noble viands, 
The Son of Waters, gathering strength in waters,shines for his 
worshipper to give him treasures, 
8 He who in waters with his own pure Godhead shines widely, 
law-ubiding, everlasting — 
The other worlds are verily his branvhes, and plants are born 
of him with all their offspring. 
9 The Watars’ Son hath risen, and clothed in lightning ascended 
up unto the curled cloud’s bosom ; | 

And hearing with them his supremest glory the Youthful Ones, 

gold coloured, move around him. 
10 Golden in form is he, hike gold to look on, his colour is like 
celd, the Son of Waters. 

When he is seated fresh from goiden birth-place those who 

present their gold give food to feed him, 
}1 This the fair name and this the lovely aspect of him the waters’ 
Son increase in secret 
whom here the yonthful Maids together kindle, his food is 
sacred oil of golden colour. 
12 Him, nearest Friend wf many, will we worship with sacrifice 
and reverence and oblation. 

5 Three Dames: Tid, Sarasvati, and Bharati, the personifications 
of sacred prayer and worrhip, Within the waters: Ayni dwelt within 
the waters as their unborn babe. 6 Here was the horse's birth: 
the production of tha rapid lightning, or pertaps of the Sun; but the 
meaning is doubtful The expression mag as Ludwig suggests, refer 
to the creation of the natural horse ax a desceudant of the original 
heavenly horse. Hts was the suntight: Apamnapat’s or Agni’s. Jn 
forts unwrought: in thé castles of the clouds ag opposed -to the stone 


strongholds of men. 9 the :outhful Ones: the rivers or waters 
of the aerial ocean. 10 Golden ts form; whett.wearing the shape 
of lightning. . Zhose who present their got't: tha institutors of sacrifice 
Who reward the ;riests. ll In secret: Ap&mnapat, the celestial 


“Agni, increases and grows strong without men seeing the process. The 
terrestrial Agni is kindled and tended by the sister fingers and fed 
with oil or clarided butter. 12 Nearest Friend of many: lowest 


down, and 60 nearest to ion, of all the Gods. ake his back to shine : 
with butter offered in sacritice, 


AYMN 36.) THE RIGVEDA. 305 


I make his back to shine, with chips provide him ; I offer food 
and with my songs exalt him. 


13 The Bull hath laid his own life-germ within them, He sucks 
them as aa infant, and they kiss him. 
He, Son of Waters, of unfading colour, hath entered here as in 
another's body. 


14 While here he dwelleth in sublimest station, resplendent with 
the rays that never perish, 
The Waters, bearing oil to feed their offspring, flow, Youthfal 
Ones, in wanderings about him, | : 


15 Agni, | gave good shelter to the people, and to the princes 
goodly preparation, 
Bl.ssed is all that Gods regard with favour. Loud may we 
speak, with heroes, in assembly. 


HYMN XXXVI. Various Gods, 


Water and milk hath he endued, sent forth to thee: the men 
have drained him with the filters and the stones. 

Drink, Indra, from the Hotar’s bowl—tirst right is thine— 
Soma hallowed and poured with Vashat and Svahi. | 


2 Busied with sacrifice, with spotted deer and spears, gfeaming 

upon your way with ornoments, yea, our Friends, 
Sitting on sacred grass, ye Sons uf Bharata, drink Soma from 
the Potar’s buwl, O Men of heaven. ° 


3 Come unto us, ye swift to listen : as at home upon the sacred 
grass sit and enjoy yourselves, 
And, Tvashtar, well-content be joyful in the juice with Gods 
and Goddesses in gladsome company. 


13 Within them: within the waters. Zhe Bull: apparently Agni 
himself. As in another's body : that is, fire originally celestial as 
Apimnapat, has come to men as terrestrial aud sacrificial fire, contained 
in the wooden drill from which it is produced by friction. 15 As 
the rasult of my hymns to Agni our people have dwelt safely, and our 
wealthy men have been enabled to offer well-conducted sacrifices, 


, Sony 


1 The Soma jujce has been pee out with the stones, strained 
through the filters, and then mixed with water and mijk before it is 
offered to Indra. The Hotar’s bowl: the sacred vgssel held by the 
Hotar or Hotri, one of the chief officiating priests. Vashat ant 
Svdhd, meaniug respectively ‘may he (Agni) bear it (to the Gods)’ and 
Ave!or Hail! are words of consecration and blessing used when 
oblations gre offered. 2 Sons of Bharata: the Maruts, sons of 
Rudra the Warrior. Potar : etymologically, Cleanser, the title of the 
Priesta, 


40 


306 THE HYMNS OF (BOOK 11. 


4 Bring the Gods hither, Sage, and offer sacrifice : at the three 


altars seat thee willingly, O Priest. 
Accept for thy delight the proffered Soma meath : drink from 
the Kindler’s bow! and fill thee with thy shure, 


§ This is the strengthener of thy body’s manly might : strength, 
victory for all time are placed within thine arms. 
Pressed for thee, Maghavan, it is offered unto thee : drink from 
the chalice of this Brahman, drink thy fill. 


6 Accept the sacrifice ; mark, both of you, my call: the Pricst 
hath seated him after the ancient texts. 
My prayer that bids them come goes forth to both the Kings: 
drink ye the Soma meath froin the Director's bowl. 


UYMN XXXVII, Various Gods. 


Ensvy the fill of meath out of the Hotar’s cup: Adhvaryus, 
he desires a full draught poured for him. 

Bring it him: seeking this he gives Granter of Wealth, 
drink Soma with the Ritus from the Hotar’s cup. 


2 He whom of old I called on, him I call on now, He is to be 
invoked ; his name is He who Gives. 
Here'brought by priests 1s Soma meath. Granter of Wealth, 
drink Soma with the Ritus from the Potar’s cup. 


3 Fat may the horses be wherewith thou specdest on: Lord of 
* the Wood, unharming, strengthen thou thyself. 
Drawing and seizing, Bold One, thou who grantest wealth, drinkk 
Soma with the Ritus from the Neshtar’s cup. 
4 From Hotar’s cup and, Potar’s he hath drunk and joyed: the 
proffered food hath pleased him from the Neshtar’s bow], 
The fourth cup undisturbed, immortal, let him drink who giveth 
wealth; the cup of the wealth-giving God, 
5 Yoke, O ye Twain, to-day your bero-bearing car, swift-moving 
hitherward : your loosing- place is here. 
Mix the oblations, then come hither with the meath, and drink 
the Soma, ye rich insabundant strength, 


4 Sage: Agni. The Kindler: thé Agnidh, the priest who lights 
the fire. The three eliars :,of the Garhapatya, Ahavaniya, and Dakshina 
fires, 6 Both the Kings: Mitra afd Varuna. Zhe Director: Pra- 
gjstdr, another priest, first assistant.of the Hotar. 


1 Agoi is addressed as Deavinodas ‘cor Wealth-giver. Adhvaryus : 
ministering priests. Zhe Jtitus: the Seasons or the deities presiding 
over the Segsuns. See Ll. 1d 3 Lord of the Wood: Agni, reyarded 
asthe King of plants. Zhe NVe,htar’s cup?the Neshtar is the priets 
who leads forward the wife of the sacrificer. 0 O ye Twain; Asvins, 


HYMN 38.) THE RIGVEDA. S0T 


6 Agni, accept the fuel and our offered gift : accept the prayer of 


man, acecpt our eulogy. os 
Do thon with all, with Ritu, O thou Excellent, fain, make the 


ereat Gods all fain taste the gift we bring. 


HYMN XXXVIILI. Savitar, 
Uprisen is Savitar, this God, to quicken, Priest who neglects 
not this most constant duty. : 


To the Gods, verily, be gives rich treasure, and blesses him 
who calls them to the banquet. . 
9 Having gone up cn high, the God broad-handed spreads his 
arms widely forth that all may mark him. 
Even the waters bend them to his service : even this wind rests 
in the circling region 
3 Though borne by swift steeds he will yet unyvke them : e’en 
the fleet chariot hath he stayed from going. 
He hath chacked een their haste who glide lke serpents. 
Nigit closely followed Savitar’s dominion, ° 
4 What was spread out she weaves afresh, re-weaving : the skilful 
leaves his labour half completed 
Ife hath arisen from rest, and ptrted seasons: Savitar hath 
approached, God, holy-minded. 
8 Through various dwellings, through entire existence, spreads, 
manifest, the household light of Agni. ° 
The Mother gives her Son the goodliest portion, and Savitar 
hath sped to meet his summons 


a ee ee ee ee = 


~§ Wath atl, with Parte: tha meaning 4, apparently, with ali the 
Ritus; but Kituin the text is in the singular number. 


1 To quicken: the meaning of Savitar, as a name of the Sun, being 
the gread generator or vivifier. Priest: véhnth ; or, perhaps, the sup- 
porter, or, the luminons. 3 Ther h%&ste who, glide like serpents: 
the spued of Che il%et footed horses who draw the ehariod of the Sun 
4 The meaning of this stanzais obscure. 1 have given what appsars. 
to be the sense of the words as they stand, but the verse, as a whole, 
is soarcely intelligible, Wilson, following Sayana, paraphrases it thus: 
‘She(Night), enwraps the extended (world) like (4 woman) weaviug 
(a garigent) : the prudent man lays aside the work he is able (to ex- 
eoute) in the midst (of his labour): bute all spring up (from repose) 
when tbe divine,unwearied Sun, who has divided the seasons, again 
appears. Roth takes arémath, which I have rendered by holy-minded, 
as & substantive, the Genius of Devotion, and trduslates: Again had the 
Weaver (Aramatip drawn in what she had spun out (the web or tissue 
of devotion and sacrifioe), the devout man had left off en the midst of 
his task (atthe approach of night); then Aramafie arises anew angl 
arranges the seasons; the diviee Savitar is presept {i @. morning re- 
turns). 3 The Mother Ushas or Dawn assigustoher Sou Agni the Agui- 
hotra rite which is performed at day-break, and Savitar, or the rising 
Sun, is present at the ceremony after the lighting of the sacrificial fire, 
Thus Agni is honoured by deities in heaven as weil as by mea onearth, 


308 THE HYMNS OF (BOOK 11. 


6 He comes again, unfolded, fain for conquest: at home was he, 
the love of all things moving. 
Each fnan hath come leaving his evil doings, after the Godike 
Savitar’s commandment, 


7 The wild beasts spread through desert places seeking their 
watery share which thou hast set in waters. 
The woods are given to the birds, These statutes of the God 
Savitar none disobeyeth. 


8 With utmost speed, in restless haste at sunset Varuna seeks 
his watery habitation. 
Then secks each bird his nest, each beast his lodging. In due 
place Savitar hath set each creature. 


9 Him whose high Jaw not Varuna nor Indra, not Mitra, Arya- 
man, nor Rudra breaketh, 

Nor evil hearted fiends, here for my, welfare hi i invoke, 
Ged Savitar, with worship. 


10 May they who strengthen bliss, and thought and wisdom, and 
the Dames’ Lord and Nardasansa aid us. 
That good may come to us and wealth be gathered, may we 
be Savitar the God’s beloved. 


11 So come to us oar hearts’ desire, the bounty bestowed by thee, 
from heaven and earth and waters, 
That it be well with friends and those who praise, thee, and, 
Savitar, with the loud-lauding singer. 


eo HYMN XXXIX, Asvins, 


Sina «ike the two preess-stones for this same purpose; come 
like two misers to to the tree of treasure; 

Like two laud-singing Brahmans in the assembly, like the 
folk’s envoys called in many places. . of 


6 He comes again: Agni, re-kindled in the morning, resumes his full 
power. He, whom all living beings love, was present, Jitent, during 
the night. 7 Savitar provides for the wild beasts of tha de-ert anld 
for the birds of the air. 8 Though not generally regardedjin tha. 
Veda as the God of the oceay, Varuna is yet frequently connected with 
the waters, either of the firmament or of earth. 10 Thay who 
strengthen bliss: the Gods in general. »Lhe Dames’ Lord: the guardian 
of the consorts of the Gods, Tvashtar, who ia generally. repres-ented as 
attending or attended by“them. Nardsansa: ‘the Praise of Men,’ 
a name of Agwi. . 


e 


e eee seen 
1 In this hymn the Asvins are compared to a number of objects, 
animate and inanimate, in many of which the only point of resem biance 
is duality. Sing like the two prsss-stones : may your auspicious brightness 
as you appfoach be as clear as the ringing sound of the press stones, 
and may similar blessings reward the worshippers. | 


e? 


HYMN 40) THK RIGVEDA. 309 


9 Moving at morning like two car-borne heroes, like to a pair of 
goats ye come electing ; . oe .. 
Like two fair dames embellishing their bodies, like a wise mar- 
ried pair among the people, 
3 Like toa p.ir ot horns come first to us ward, like toa pair of 
hoofs with rapid motion ; 
Come like two Chakwas in the grey of morning , come like two 
chariot wheels at dawn, ye mighty. 
4 Bear us across the rivers like two vessels, save us as ye were 
yokes, naves, spokes and fellies. 
Be like two dogs that injure not our bodies ; preserve us, like 
two crutches, that we fall not. 
9 Like two winds ageing not, two eonflacnt, rivers, come wit h 
quick vision like two eyes before us. 
Come like two hands most h«Ipful to the body, and guide us 
like two feet to whatis precious. 
6 Even as two lips that wit, the mouth speak honey, even as 
two breasts that nourish our existence. . 
Like the two nostrils that protect our being, be to us as our 
ears that hear distinctly. . 
7 Like two hands give ye us increasing vigonr ; like heaven and 
earth constrain the airy regions. 
Asvins, these hymns that struggle to approach you, shappen ye 
like anaxe upon a whetstone. 
8 These prayers of ours exalting you, O Asvins, have the Gritsa- 
madas, far a laud, made ready, . 
Welcome them, O ye Loroes, and come hither, Loud may we 
speak, with brave nen, in assembry. 
HYMN XL Soma andPushan. 
Soma and Pishan, Parents of all richts, Parents of earth and 
Parents of high heaven, 


a ee ee 


Seemed 


Like two misers to tha tree of treasure: as misers come to dig up the 
gold they have buried at the foot of a tree, so come ye to the libation 
made of the juice of the precious Soma plant. The folk’s envoys: the 
messengers whom the institutors of sacrifices send to the priests when 
they wish to secure their services. 2 Ye oome electing : to choose 
and accept the offerings made. 3 Chakwds : the Chakravaka, or as 
it ig now called in Hindl, the Chakwé&, is a bird frequently mentioned 
in later poetry as a type of love and constancy, The male bird and his 
mate are condemned to spend their nights on epposife banks of a river, 
and are allowed to meet again In the early morning., The English 
name of the bird is Brahmany duck. Chakwa is properly the mate 


bird, and Chakwi the female. | —— 
_ 1 Soma: addressed iu this hymn is the God who represents and 
Abimates the juice of the Soma plant. See I. 18, 4.. Pishan: 6 


“ay deity who protects and multiplies cattle and other property. See 
. 42. 


310 THE HYMNS OF (BOOK II. 


You Twain, brought forth as the whole world’s protectors, the 
(;eds have made centre of life eternal. 


9 At birth of these two Gods all Gods are joyful : they have 
caused darkness, which we hate, to vanish. 
With these, with Somaand with Pushan, Indra generates ripe 
warn milk in the raw milch-cows. 


3 Soma and Pashan, urge your chariot hither, the seven-wheeled 
car that measures out the region, 
That stirs not all, that moves to every quarter, five-reined and 
harnessed by the thought, ye Mighty, 
4 One in the heaven on high hath made his dwelling, on earth 
and in the firmament the other. 
May they disclose to us great store ef treasure, much-longed.- 
for, rich in food, source of enjoyment. 


5 One, of you Twain is Paret of all creatures, the other journey 
onward all-bcholding. ‘ 

Soma and‘Pushan. aid my thought with favour: with you may 
we o’ercome in all encounters, 


6 May Pushan stir our thought, the all impelling, may Soma 
Lord of riches grant ts riches. 
Mary, Aditi the perfect Goddess aid us. Loud may we speak, 
with heroes, in assembly. 


HYMN XLT. Various Daities. 


« O VAyu, com tous with all the thousand chariots that are 
thine, 
Team-borne, to drink the Soma juice. 


2 Drawn by the team, O Vayu, come; to thee is offered this, 
the pure. 
Thou visitest the presser’ house. 
5 a Vayu, drawn by teams, ye Heroes, come to-day and 
rink, 
Of the bright juice when blent with milk, 


Ripe warm milk: see ¥. 6.2. 9. 3 That stirs not all: that 
moves and influences the higbest beings only. 4 Oxe in the heaven 
on high : Pushan, asa celestial God. ’ Zhe other : Soma. who dwells on 
earth in plants, and in the firmament as the Moon. | D One of you: 
Soma. With allusion, perhaps, to che libations of Soma Juice which 
produce the rdin upon which the production and growth of all crea- 
fures depend. dt! beholding : as a solar deity, or the Sun. 

Vayu, the God of wind, is addressed in the first two stanzas. Ia 
those that- follow the post invokes Indra and Vayu, Mitra and Varia 
the Asvins, Indra, the Visvedeva:, Surasvati, aud Heaven and Barth. i 


HYMN 41.) THE RIGVEDA. Bl 


4 This Soma hath been shed for you, Law-strangthencrs, Mitra- 
Varuna! — 
Listen ye here to this my call, 
5 Both Kings who never injure aught seat them in their snprem- 
est hume, 
The thousand pillared, firinly-bascd. 
6 Fed with oblation, Sovran Kings, Adityas, Lords of liberal gifts, 
They wait on him whose life 1s true, 
7 With kine, Nasatyas, and with steeds, come, Asvins, Rudras, 
to the house 0 
That will protect its heroes well ; 
8 Such, wealthy Gods! as none afar nor standing nigh to us 


may harm, ° 
Yea, no malicious mortal fae. ® 
9 As such, O longed-for Asvins, lead ns on to wealth of varied 
sort, 


Wealth that shall bring us room and rest. 

10 Verily Indra, conquering all, drivethe’en mighty fear away, 
For firm is he and swift to act. P 

11 Indra be gracious unto us: sin shall not reach us afterward, 
And good shall be before us still. 

12 From all the regionsof the world Jet Indra send secugity, 


The foe-subduer, swift to act. mS 
13 Oall ye Gods, come hitherward: hear this mine invocation, 
seat 


Yourselves upon this sacred grass. ¢ 
: 
14 Among the Sunahotras strong for you is this sweet gladdcning 
draught: ‘ 
Drink ye of this delightsome juice. 
15 Ye Maruts led by Indra, Gods with Pishan for your bounte. 
ousest, 
Hear all of you this call of mine. , 
16 Best Mother, best of Rivers, best of Goddesses, Sarasvati, 
We are, as ‘twere, of no répute: dear Mother, give thon us 
renown. : ° 


-~ 


14 Among the Sundhotras “the family cf whieh Gritsamada, the 
Righi of the hymn, was a member. Cf. I[.18. 6, note. .15 With Pushan 
for your bounteousest that is, among whom Pdéshan is the post liberal 
giver of good gifts; or the meaning may be, whose benefactor is 
Paishan. 16 Sarasvaty: see 1. 3. 10. 


312 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 1. 


17 In thée, Sarasvati, divine, all generations have their stay. 
Be glad with Sunahotra’s sons: O Goddess grant us progeny. 
18 Enriched with sacrifice, accept Sarasvati, these prayers of ours 
Thoughts which Gritsamadas beloved of Gods, bring, Holy One, 
to thee. 
19 Ye who bless sacrifice, go forth, for verily we choose you both, 
And Agni who conveys oar gifts. 
20 This our effectual sacrifice, reaching the sky, shall Heaven and 
Karth. 
Present unto the Gods to-day. 
21 In both your laps, ye guileless Ones, the Holy Gods shall ait 
them down 
To-day to drink the Soma here. 


HYMN XLIL Kapinjals, 


Tene his race aloud with cr'es repeated, he sends his voice 
out as ht. boat a steersman. 
O Bird, be ominous of happy fortune: from no side may 
calamity befall thee.  * 
2 Let not the falcon kill thee, nor the eagle: let not the arrow: 
bearing archer reach thee. 
Stillterying in the region of the Fathers, speak here auspicious, 
bearing joyful tidings. 
3 Bringing good tidings, Bird of happy omen, call thou out loudly 
* #outhward of our dwellings, 
So that no thief, no sinner may oppress us. Loud may we 
speak, with heroes, in assembly, 


HYMN XLII. | Kapinjala. 


Here on the right sing forth chanters of hymns of praise, even 
the winged birds that in due season speak. 


at 


eee tg amen 


19 Yewho bless sacrifice : according to Sayana. the two kavirdhdanas or 
vehicles on which the Soma and other offerings are 7 ut, and which are 
supposed to represent Heaven and Earth, are addressed. Ib is more 
likely, as Ludwig suggests, that Aygnl and the human pries® are in- 
a a ‘We choose you both, thee, the human priest, and Agni the 
God. 


4 


This Hymn is said ta be addressed to Indra in the form of a kapin- 
jala, the bird which we call the Franceline partridge. 1 He; the 
leapinjala. 2, Inthe region of the Fathers: towards the qnatter 
‘there the Fathers Pitaras, or spirits qf deoeased ancestors dwell, that 
iv, the svuth, the ‘cry of birds from that quarter being regarded as 
auspicious. ; | 


This Hymn is said to be addressed, like the preceding, to Iadra in 
the form of a kapinjala or Francoline partridge. 


HYMN 43.| THR RIGVEDA, ~~ | 313 


He, like a SAma echanter utters both the notes, skilled in the 
mode of Trishtup and of Gayatri. 


"2 Thou iike the chanter-priest chantest the Sima, Bird; thou 
singest at libations I'ke a Bralman’s son. 

Even as a vigorous horse when he comes near the mare, an. 

nounce to us good fortune, Bird, on every side, proclaim in 


all directions happy luck, O Bird. 


3 When singing here,,O Bird, announce good luck to as, and 

when thon sittest still think onus with kind thoughts. 
When flying off thon singest thea art like a lute. 

With brave sons in assembly may we speak aloud. 


eerie ee ae ~ 


ne 


] sdma-chanter : the Udgatar, ene of the four chief priests whore duty 
is ta chan! the hymns of the Samavela. Both the notes: a high and a 
middie Trishtup: the meesure consisting of forty-four syllables ina 
verso or stanza ; four Padas or demi-hemtstichs of eleven syllables each, 
Gayatri: the measme consisting®s£ wwen*y-four syllabloy in » stanza; 
three lines of eight syllabley eweh, or cne line of sixteen and one of 
cight 2 A Brahman’s: the Brabmaputrsa, ov Brahman-priest’s 
son, is said ta be the same as the Brahamansachchhansi, one of the 
sixteen priests, who recites the mantra thatrinut to be sung or chanted, 

td 


4] 


BOOK THE THIRD. 


HYMN I. Agni. 


Tsou, Agni, who wilt have the strong, hast made me the Soma’s 
priest, to worship i in assembly, 
Thou shinest to the Gods, I set the press-stones. I toil; be 
joyful in thyself, O Agni. 
2 East have we turned, the rite ; may the hymnaidit. With 
wood and worship shall they honour Agni. 
From heaven the synods ofthe wise have learnt it: e’en for. 
the quick and strong they seek advancement. * 
3 The prudent, he whose will is pure, brought welfare, allied by 
birth to Heaven and Earth in kinship. 
The Gods discovered inthe midst of waters beautiful Agni 
with the Sisters’ labour. 
4 Him, Blessed One, the Seven strong Floods augmented, him 
white at birth and red when waxen mighty, 
As mother mares run to their new-born youngling, so at his 
birth the Gods wondered at Agni. eS 


mar 


The Hymns of Book III. are asoribed to the Rishi Visvamitra or to 
members of his family. Visvamitra holds an important place in Indian 
tradition, according to which ho was borrea Kehatriya, but by the 
virtue of his intense austerities raised himerelf to the Brahman caste. 
The rivalry between Visvamitra and tho Rishi Vasishtha is alluded te 
in many passages of the Rigveda, and, it is thought that as caste 
distinctions had not at that time become fixed, the later stories on the 
subject of this rivalry may have rested ona Vedic legend which says that 
King Sudas, having employed Vasishtha as his domestic priest, allowed 
on various occasions Vigvamitra also to officiate, which led to jealousies 
and quarrel between these two functicnaries. The story of VisvAmitra 
is told at full lenguh in the Ldmdyana, 1. 5!—55, (Schlegel’s edition, 
and Griffith’s translation). The first and etoven following hymns 
are ascribed to Vis¥amitra himse}t. 1 ast have we turned the rite : 
towards the region of the Gods; ‘we have performed a syccessful sacri- 
fioe ’"— Wilson. 2 The quick dnd strong : Agni, acgording to Sayana. 

Ludwig suggests that ‘the quisk, or clever’ may mean the priest, and 
the strong’ the warrior, the Maghvan or institutor of the sacrifice 
3 The Prudent: all- knowing Agni, son of Heaven and Earth. With 
the Sisters’ /abour: the meaning is not clear, Ludwig suggests upast 
instead of apdst ; ‘in the visters’ bosom, in the depth of the sister rivers. 


316 TH HY MNS OF [BOOK IT. 


5 Spreading with radiant limbs throughout the region, purging 
his power with wise purifications, 
Robiag himsclf in light, the life of waters, he spreads abroad 
his high and perfeat glories. 
6 He sought heaven’s Mighty Ones, the unconsuming, the un- 
impaired, not clothed and yet not naked. 
Then they, ancient and young, who dwell together, Seven sound 
ing Rivers, as one germ recoived him, 
7 His piles, assuming every form, arc scattered wherc flow sweet 
waters, at the spring of fatness ; 
There stood the mileh kine with full-laden udders, and both 
paired Mighty Mothers of the Wondrous, 


8 Carefully cherished, Son of Strength, thou shonest assuming 
lasting and retulgent beauties. : 
Fulkstreams of fatness and sweet juice descended, there where 
the Mighty One grew strong by wisdom, 


9 From birth he knew even his Father’s bosom, he set his voices 
and his streams in motion 5 
Knew him who moved with blessed Friends in seeret, with the 
young Dames of heaven. He stayed not hiduen, 


10 He ntrsed the Infant of the Sire and Maker: alone the Babe 
sucked many a teeming bosom, 
Guard, for the Bright and Strong, the fellow-spouses friendly 
* ‘to men and bound to him in kinship 


11 The Mighty One increased in space unbounded ; full many a 
clorious flood gave strength to Agni, 
Fricnd of the house, wéthin the lap of Order lay Agni, in he 
Sister Rivers’ service. . 


6 IIcaven’s mighty Ones: the waters above the firmament, the seven 
rivers or thcuextbeutntich, Mot clothed and yet not naked : having only 
the lucid waters for robes. 7 Hts piles : the bosped elouwis Rprtng 
of fatness : the place whence the fortilizing rain flows. Zhe milch-hine 
alsa are the laden clouds, and the® patred Maghiy Mothers are Heaven 
and Karth, the parents of the Wondroug Agni. 9 fs Father's bo- 
som: his father, according to Sdyana, is the frmamaent; but as the fir 
mament js not represented in the Veda, as a God, Dgaus, or Tvashtar, 
is probably inten led as Ludwig suggests, The blessed Friends must 
be the Nibhus,and the young Dames the Gnas or consorts of the 
Gods. He stayed not hidden: refers nod ta Agni bus to hig futher, 
Tvashttar 10 Yfe- the father Muny @ swelling bosom: of the 
celestial Waters. The Leight and Strong : Agni. 7'he fellow-spouses : 
Heaven and*Wartb, or Night aud Morning. 11 Jn the Sister Reivers 
service; Or iu their bosom, if wpost may be read far avast. 


HYMN 1) THE RIGVEDA. 317 


12 As keen supporter where great waters gather, licht-shedder 
whom the brood rejoice to look on ; 

He who begat, and will beget, the dawn- nee) most manly, 
Child of Floods, 18 youthful Agni. 


13 Him, varied in his form, the lovly lafant of floods and plants 
tho blessed wood hath gendered. 
Gods even, moved in spirit, came around him, and served him 
at his birth, the Strong, the Wondrous, 


14 Like brilliant lightnings, mighty luminaries accompany the 
light-diffusing Agni, 
Waxen, as ‘twere in secret, in his dwelling, while in the 
boundless stall they milk out Amrit. 
15 I sacrificing serve thee with oblations and crave with longing 
thy good-will and friendship. 
Grant, with the Gods, thy grace to him who lauds thee, pro- 
tect us with thy rays that ‘ewtard the homestead. 
16 May we, O Agni, thou who leadest wisely, thy followers and 
masters of all treasures, 
Strong in the glory of our noble offspring, subdue the godless 
whan they seek the battle. 
17 Ensign of Gods hast thou b:come, O Agni, j joy-giver, ore 
of all secret wisdom 
Friend of the homestead, thou hast lightened mortals ; car- 
borne thou goest to the Gods, fulfilling, 


18 Within the house hath sate the King Immortal of mortals, 
filling full their sacred synods. 
Bedewed with huly oil he shineth widely, Agni, the knower of 
all secret wisdgm. 


19 Come unto us with thine auspicious friendship, come speeding, 
Mighty, with thy mighty succours. 
Grant us abundant wealth that saves from danger, that brings 
a good repute, a glorious portion, 
20 To thee who art of old these songs, O Agni, have I deelared, 
the ancient and the latér, oe 
These great libations to the Strong ars offered: in every birth 


. 


is Jdtavedas stablished. 


12 The brood: "par excellencd, the host of Maruta, I3 The 
blessed wood : one of the fise-sticks, by which Agni is cindled. l¢ 
The bouwdfess stuld: limitless aerial space. Amrit: water, according to 
Sdyana. 17 Thou guest to the Guds Sulfilling : completing our sacri- 
fices and making them effectual. 20 Songs : literally, births; thao 
ts, producticns. “In every berth is Jatavedas stablished : Agni ’ho knows 
all life is appointed inevery generation as the great high priest who 
mediates between Gods and men, 


‘ 


318 THE HYMNS OF (BOOK III. 


21 Stablished in every birth is Jitavedas, kindled perpetual by 
the VAsvimitras. a 
May we rest ever in the loving-kindness, in the auspicious 
grace of him the Holy. 
22 This sacrifice of ours do thou, O Mighty, O truly Wise, bear 
to the Gods rejoicing. 
« Grant us abundant food, thou priestly Herald, vouchsafe to 
give us ample wealth, O Agni, 
93 As holy food, Agni, to thine invoker give wealth in cattle, 
lasting, rich in marvels. 
To us be born a son and spreading offspring, Agni, be this 
thy gracious will to us-ward. 


HYMNII . Agni. 


4 
To him, Vaisvinara, who strengthens Holy Law, to Agni we 
present our praise lika oil made pure. 


With thoughtful insight human priests bring him anear, our 
Herald from of old, as an axe forms a car. 


2 He made the heaven and earth resplendent by his birth: Child 
of two Mothers he was meet to be implored, 


Agni, oblation-bearer, gracious, ever-young, infallible, rich in 
radiant light, the guest of men. 


3 Within the range of their surpassing power, by might, the 
Gods created Agni with inventive thought. 


J, eager to win strength, address him, like a steed, resplendent 
with his brilliance, ‘with his ample light. 


4 Eager to gain, we crave from him the friendly God strength 
confident, choice-worthy, meet to be extolled. 


The Bhrigus’ bounty, willing, strong with sages’ lore, even 
Agni shining forth with light that comes from heaven, 


5 For happiness, men, having trimmed the sacred grags set 
Agni glorious for his strength before them here, 


Yea, with raised ladles, him bright, dear to all the Gods, 
perfecting aims of works, Rudra of solemn rites. 


ee ae @ 
e 1 Vaisvdanra: Agni who belonga to all men; the God of all Aryan 
families. Our praise: literally ‘the wish, explained by Sayana as 


statim, that is the praise which thou wishest for and which we now offer. 

2 Child of two Mothers: of Heaven and Earth, or of the two fire- 
sticks.  ‘¢ 4 The Bhrigus’ bounty? Agni, the treasure which the Bhrigue 
received from Mitarisvan and bertowed on other men. 5 Rudra 
here p synonym of Agni See I. 27, 10," 


AY MN 11,} THE RIGVEDA. 319 


6 Around thy dwelling-place, O brightly-shining Priest, are men 
at sacrifice whose sacred grass is trimmed. a 
Wishing to do thee service, Agni, they are there, desirous of 
thy friendship: grant them store of wealth. 


? He hath filled heaven and earth and the great realm of light, 
when at his birth the skilful held him in their hold. 


‘He like a horse is led forth to the sacrifice, Sage, graciously 
inclined, that-he may win us strength, 
8 Honour the oblation-bearer, him who knows fair rites, serve 
ye the Household Friend who knows all things that be. 


He drives the chariot of the lofty ordinance : Agni most 
active, is the great High priest of Gods, 


9 They who are free form death, fain for him, purified three 
splendours of the mighty Agni, circling all. 

Te man, for his enjoymest, one of these they gave: the other 
two liave passed into the sister sphere, 


10 Man’s sacrificial food hath sharpened like an axe, for bright- 
ness, him the Sage of men, the people’s Lord. 
Busied with sacred rites be mounts and he descends. He hath 
laid down his vital germ within these worlds, : 


11 He stirs with life in wombs dissimilar in kind, born as a Lion 
or a loudly-bellowing Bull. . 
Vaisv:inara immortal with wide-reaching might, bestowing 
goods and wealth on him who offers gifts, 


12 Vaisvanars, as of old, mouuted the cope of heaven, heaven’s 
ridize, well greeted, by those skilled in noble songs. 
He, a3of old, producing riches for the folk, still watchful, tra- 
verses the common way again. : 
13 For sew prosperity we seek to Agni, him whose course is splen 
did, gold-haired, excellently bright, 
Who m Mtdarisvan stablished, dweller in the heaven, meet for 
o higth praise and holy, sage and true to Law. 


ea Anan arene neeernernseennenan names tceatenereeenaree  gre e eeeennenees 
7 He: Agni, The skt/ful : the priests. 8 He drivas the chariot : 
he is th) leader of sacrifice by holy law. 9 They who are free 


from devsth : the immortal Gods. Three splendours : with reference to 
his appearance 4s the Sun, tht lightning, and domestic firs, the last of 


which its given to man as his own special possession.” 10 Wrthrn 
these words: the germ of fire jstalways Istent in the fire-sticks or $wo 
Pieces « f wood which ars employed to produce tha flame. 11 Born 
asa Lim: destructive and voracious, and as a loudly-bellowtng Bull 
with re ference to bis strength and the roar rf hia fiames,” 12 The 


commo;.) way: the path of the Gods, which as the Sun he travele over. 


320 THE HYMNS OP (BOOK Il. 


14 As pare and swift of course, beholder of the light, who stands 
m hgaven’s bright sphere a sign. who wakes at dawn, 
Agni, the head of heaven, whom none may tarn aside—to him 
the powerful with mighty prayer we seek. 


IS The eheerful Priest, the pure, in whom no guile is found, Friend 
of the House, praise-worthy, dear to ail mankind, 
Fair to behold for beauty like asplendid car,—Agni the Friend 
of men we ever seek tor wealth, 


HYMN IIL. Agni. 


To him who shines afar, Vaisvanara, shall bards give precious 
things that he may go on certain paths ; 

For Agni the linmortal serves the D:ities, and therefore never 
breaks their everlasting laws. 


ny 


2 He, wondrous envoy, goes between the earth and heaven, firm- 
seated as the Herald, great Hifh Priest of men, 
He compasseth with rays the lofty dwelling place, Agni, sent 
forward by the Gods, enriched with prayer. 
3 Sages shall glorify Agni with carnest thoughts, ensign of sacri- 
fice, who fills the synod full ; 
In whom the singers have stured up their holy acts: to him 
the worshipper looks fer joy and happiness. 
4 The Sire of sacrifice, great God of holy bards, Agni, the measure 
« 4nd the symbol of the priests, 
Ilath entered heaven and earth that show in varicd form: the 
Sage whom many love rejoiecth in his might. 
5 Bright Agni with the buight ear, Lord of green domains, Vaisv- 
anara dweller in the floods, who finds the tight, 
Pervading, swift and wild, encompassed round with powers, 
him very glorious have the Gods established here. 
6 Agni, together with the Geds and Manu’s folk by thought ex- 
tending sacrifice in varied form, é 
Goes, car-borne, toand fro with those who crown eacly rite, the 
fleet, the ILouschold Friend, whu turns the curse «aside. 


cr 
& 


co ae a ne em ee eee ee — 
‘ sine mal _ ee ~— TR ee eee re ne Ce een bate ~ 


14 Who wakes at dawn: when re-kindled for the niorning sacrifice. 


ae oO 


el That he may no on cerlain paths s may constantly Visib 'nen. 9 
The lofty dwelliny-place ; the ball or chamber in which sacrifign is cele- 
brated. 5 Lord of greet domains + who has dominion ovr bushes 
and trees. 6 fv and fro: between heaven and earth. 7huse who 

u r) | 248 
crown each rue: the Gods who mike sacrifice effectual. 


AYMN 4) THE RIGVEDA. 391 


7 Sing, Agni, for long life tous and noble sons: teem thou with 
plenty, shine upon us store of food. 
Increase the great man’s strength, thou ever- -vigilant : thou, 
‘longing for the Gods, knowest their hymns full well. 


8 The Mighty One, Lord of the people and their guest, the 
leader of their thoughts, devuted Friend of priests, 
Our solemn rites’ announcer, J&itavedas, men with worship 
ever praise, with urgings for their weal. 


9 Agnithe God resplendent, giver of great joy, hath on his 
lovely car compassed the lands with might. 
Let us with pure laudations in his house approach the high 
laws of the nourisher of multitudes. 


10 I celcbrate thy glories, O Vaisvinara, wherewith thou, O far- 
sighte d God, hast found the Jight. 
Thou filledst at thy b: ‘th both worlds, the earth and heaven : 
all this, O Agni, hast thow compassed of thyself. . 
il By his ereat skill the & sage alone hath brought tcepass a great 
deed, ‘mightier than Vaisvinara’ a wondrous aets. 
Agni sprang into being, magnifying both his Parents, Heaven 
and Karth, rich in proli ifie sced. 


HYMN IV. Apris. 
Br friendly with cach kindled log of fuel, withevery flash 


bestow the boon of riches. 
Bring thou the Goda, O God, unto our worship: serve, well- 
inclined, as Friend thy fr iends, O Agni, : 
2 Agni whom daily Varuna and Mitra the Gods bring thrice a 
ae wy to this our worship, 
Tantnapit, enrich with meath our service that dwells with 
holy oil, ‘Phat offers honour, 


—— ee 


ne a 


T' he great man’s strength: the strength of the eminent man who is the 
in-titutor of the sacrifice 9 Approach the high laws: perform the 
eacrilices —M Muller. 11 The first hemistich of this stanza is 
somewhat obscure. Sayana’s paraphrase as given by Wilson is: ‘From 
acts th€t arc acceptable to Vaisvanara comes great (wealth) ; fur he, 
the sage (Agni) alone, bestows (the reward§ of zeal in (tbe performance 


of) his worship, 
® 


Tle Apris who,are said to be the deites of fhig hymn are the div- 
ine or deified bo 1 Pe and objects*to which the propitiatory verses are 
addressed. Llc hymn, as Wilson remarks, ‘is more canplicated and 
obscure than any ot tha preceding addressed to the Afris, except Sakta 
It{. of the S:cond Mandala (fl. 3.], to which ite bears the nearest 
an logy: they are both perhaps of somewhat later date than the 
others? 2 Tandnapdt: a name of Agni; ‘Child gf Thyself,’ 
see [. 12. 2. 


42 


322 THE HYMNS OF (BOOK I11. 


3 The thought that bringeth evry boon proceedeth to worship 
first the Priest of the libation, . 
That we may greet the Strong One with our homage. Urged, 
may he bring the Gods, best Sacrificer. 


4 On high your way to sacrifice was made ready ; the radiant 
flames went upward to the regions. 
Full in the midst of heaven the Priest is seated ; strew we 
the sacred grass where Gods may rest them. 


5 Claiming in mind the seven priests’ burat-oblations, inciting 
all, they came in settled order. 
To this our sacrifice approach the many who show in hero 
beauty at assemblies, 
6 Night and. Dawn, lauded, hither come together, both smiling, 
different are their forms in colour, 
That Varuna and Mitra may accept us, and Indra, girt by 


Maruts, with his glories, 


7 Teorave the grace of heaven’s two chief Invokers : the seven 
swift steeds joy in their wonted manner. 
Thece speak of truth, praising the truth eternal, thinking on 
Order as the guards of Order, 


8 May Bharati with all her Sisters, []4 accordant with the Gods, 
with mortals Agni, 
Sarasvati with all her kindred Rivers, come to this grass, Three 
Goddesses, and seat them. 


¢9 Well pleased with us do thou O God, O Tvashtar, give ready 
issue to our procreant vigour, 
Whence springs the hero, powerful, skilled in action, lover of 
Gods, adjuster of the press-stones. 


10 Send to the Gods the oblation, Lord of Férests ; and let the 
Immolator, Agni, dress it, 


He as the truer Pricst shall offer worship, for the Gods’ genera- 
tions well he knoweth, 


we 
ee 


@ 

4 Your way:a path for Agni andthe Barhis or sacred grass, the 
God and the deified object addréseed in the stanza. In the midst 
of heaven: in the centre of the radianp hall of sacrifice, as Sayna ex- 
plains it. 5 Thies stanza refers to the deified doors of tho hall of 
sacrifice, and to thé deities who iba over then, 7 Heaven's 
‘two chief Invokers : Agni and perhaps Varuna. Sec T. 13. 8, The 
‘spon swift steeds: seven ministering priests. 8 Bhédrats, 114, and 
Sarasvati are Goddesscs presiding overs different departments of reli- 
gious worship. SebI. 13.9. The nae of Agni is inserted somewhat 
unconnectedly. , 10 Lord of Forests: Vanaspati, a large; here the 
sacrificial gst which is said to be a form of Agni. lruer Priest: 
as compared with human priests. 


AY MN 5.} THE RIGVEDA. 323 


11 Come thou to us, O Agni duly kindled, together with the 
potent Gods and Indra. ae 
On this our grass sit Aditi, happy Mother, and let our Hail! 
delight the Gods Immortal, 


HYMN Y, Agnt, 
Aent who shines against the Dawns is wakened, the holy 
Singer who precedes the sages. 


With far-spread lustre, kindled by the pious, the Priest hath 
thrown both gates of darkness open, 


2 Agni hath waxcn mighty by laudations, to be adored with 
hymns of those who praise him. 
Loving the varied shows of holy Order at the first flush of dawn 
he shines as envoy. 
3 Amid men’s homes hath Agni been established, fufilling with 
the Law, Friend, germ of waters. ° 
Loved and adored, the height he hath ascended, the Singer, 
object of our invocations. 
4 Agni is Mitra when cnkindled duly, Mitra as Priest, Varuna, 
Jatavedas ; 
* Mitra as active minister and House-Friend, Mitra of flowing 
rivers and of mountains. °° 


2 The Earth’s, the Bird’s dear lofty place he guardeth, he guard- 
eth in his might the course of Sarya, 
Guardeth the Seven-headed in the centre, gaardeth sublim® the 
Deities’ enjoyment. 
6 The skilful God who knows all forms of knowledge made for 
himself a fair form, meet for worsbip. 
This Agni®vuavds with care that never ceases the Soma’s skin, 
the Bird’s place rich in fatness, 


11 Happy Mother : literally, having oxcellend sons, the Adtiyaw. 


1LeWho shines against the Dawns: rekindled for the morning 
sacrifices. Who precedes the sages : as their guide and teacher. The 
Priest : Agni. 3 The height : thé place called the north altar, says 
Sayana. Perhaps the height of heaven may be intended. 4 Agni 
is here identified with Mitra, the Sun, and both.these Gods are identi- 
fied with Varuna.e 5 The dear lofty place of the earth may be the 
altar, or the eastern point. The Bird is tbe Sun who flies through, 
heaven. Zhe Seven headed, said by Sayana to he the bost of Marate, 
ie more probably the Sun dsawn by his seven horses. 6. The 
Soma’s skin: the meaning of the words sasdsya*cha-ma is not clear. 
An envelops or a covering, which in some mystical way is supposed to 
conceal the Soma-plant, appears to be intended. The@ird’s place: 
the station of the Sua, who is adored with oblations of clarified. buttec. 


B24 THE AYMNS OF (BOOK III. 


7 Agni hath entered longingly the longing shrine rich with fat- 
ness, giving easy access. 
Resplendent, pure, sublime, and purifying, again, again he 
renovates his Mothers. 
8 Born suddenly, by plants he grow to greatness, when tender 
shoots with holy oil increased him, 
Like waters lovely when they hasten downward : may Agni 
in his Parents’ lap protect us. 
9 Extolled, the Strong shone forth with kindled fuel to the 
-earth’s centre, to th: height of heaven, 
May Agni, Fricnd, adorable Matarisvan, as envoy bring the 
Gods unto our worship 
10 Best of all luminaries lofty Agni Supported with his flame 
the height of heaven, 
Wren, far from Bhrigus, Matgrisvan kindled the oblation- 
bearer where he lay in secret. 
11 As holy food, Agni, to thine invoker give wealth in cattle, 
lasting. rich in marvels. 
To us be born a son and spreading offspring. Agni, be this 
thy gracious will to us-ward, 
HYMN VI. Agni, 
Urcep on by deep devotion, O ye singers, bring, pious ones, 
the God-approaching ladle. 
«© Borne onward to the right it travels eastward, and, filled with 
dil, to Agni bears oblation, 
2 Thou at thy birth didst fill both cari and heaven, yea, Most 
Adoruble, thou didst exceed them 
Even through the heaven’s and through tke eat'th’s expanses 


let thy swift seven- tongucd flames roll on, O Agni. 


ae eS ee ee  - eee eer ee me teem ea canner Se 


7 His Mothers: or his parents, Heaven and Earth, who are streng- 


thened and restored to their youth by sacrifice. The plants are 
the twigs used as fuel, and the tender shoots are the bunch af grass 
used in sprinkling the claritied butter over the fire. 9 The aarth’s 


centre : earth's most important place, the altar. In the second hemis- 
tich Agni is identified with Matarisvan, the divine or semi-divine being 
who bronght him from heaven, 10 Har from Bhpigus : the words 
in the text would séem tucmean that Matarisvan toc: the fire from the 
Bbrigus , but, as Ludwig suggests, part . perhaps implies separation. 
Savana explains Bbrigus in this place by ray of the Sun. 


1 Tho God-appraaching ladle: the sacrificial ladle with which the 
oblation of clarified butter or oil is offered to the Gods, Borne on- 
ward to the hight: or to the south of the mre: altar. cuore tO ae 
‘wig,’ bearing tho sacrificial yifo, ©... . a aie 


AYMN 6) THE RIGVEDA. 325 
3 Both Heaven and Karth and Gods who should be worshipped 


establish thee as t’riest for every dwelling, 
Whenever human families, God-devoted, bringing oblations, 
laud thy splendid lustre. 
4 Firm in the Gods’ home is the Mighty seated, between vast 
Hleaven and Earth, the weil-beloved — 


Those Cows who yield, unharmed, their nectar, Spouses of the 
Far-Strider, ever- young, united, 
Great are the deeds of thee, the Great, O Agni : thou by thy 
power hust spread cut earth and heaven. 


As soon as thou wast born thou wast an envoy, thou, Mighty 
One, wast Leader of the people. 


6 Bind tothe pole witecorts of holy Order thy long-maned 
ruddy steeds whosprinkle fatness. ° 


Bring hither, O thou Gods all Gods together : provide them 
nuble worship, Jatavedas. 


7 Even from the sky thy brilliant lights shone hither: still 
hast thou beamed through many a radiant morning, ' 


That the Gods praised their joyous Herald’s labour eagerly 
burning, Agni, in ths forests. ° 
8 The Gods who take delight in air’s wide region, or those the 
dwellers in heaven’s realm of brightness, — 
Or those, the Holy, prompt to hear, our helpers, who, car- 
borne, turn their horses hither, Agni— 


9 With these, borne on one car, Agni, approach us, or borne on 
many, for thy steeds are able. ° 
e 


Bring, with their Dames, the Gods, the Three-and-Thirty, 
after thy Godlike nature, and be joyful. , 


10 He is the Priest at whose repeated worship even wide Heaven 
and Earth sing out for increase. — 


Tleey fair and truce and holy coming forward stand at his 
sacrifice who springs from Owdef, 


}1 As holy food, Agni, to thine invoker give wealth in cattle, 
lasting, rich ia marvels. . 


To us be bor a son and espreading offspring. Agni, be this 
thy gracious will to us-ward., ° ; 
e ° 
4 The Mighty: Agni. Those Cows: Heaven and Earth who yield all 
blessings, here called also the spouses of Vishnu the God gf the mighty 
stride, that is, the Sun, or as Sayana says, of the far-exttnding Agni. 
6 The Three-and-Thirty : see I. 34. 1k. : 


326 THE HYMNSOF _ {BOOK 111. 
; HYMN VII. : Agni, 


Tur seven tones risen from the white-backed viand have 
made their way between the pair of Mothers. 

Both circumjacent Parents come together : to yield us length 
of days they hasten forward. 


29 The Male who dwells in heaven hath Mares and Milchkine: 
he came to Goddesses who bring sweet treasure. 
To thee safe resting in the seat of Order the Cow alone upon 
her way proceedeth. 


3 Wise Master, wealthy finder-out of riches, he mounted those 
who may with ease be guided. 
He, dark- backed, manifold with varied aspect, hath made 
them burst forth from their food th® brush-wood. 


4 Strength-giving streams bear hither him eternal, fain to sup- 
port the*mig!ity work of T'vashtar. 
He, flashing in his home with all his members, hath entered 
botli the worlds as they were single. 


5 They know the red Bull's blessing, and are joyful under the 
fAgming-coloured Lord’s dominion : 
They who give shine from heaven with fair effulgence, whose 
lofty song like Ila must be hononred. 


A A EG ee, 


Speen a ee EE errr, 
: This bymn and the five following are ascribed to the Rishi Visvamitra. 
1 The seven tones are the hymns in scven tones, or metres. The 
white-backed viand is the Soma mingled with milk, and the pair of Mot- 
hers or Mother and Father are Heaven and Earth whose intermediate 
space the hymns have reactfed. The circumjacent Parents are Heaven 
and Earth. The construction in the first half of the stanza is difficult, 
the masculine from ye being apparently used for the feminine. Sayana 
inserts rasmayah, rays, which he makes the subject of the first sen- 
tence, aud explains dhds}, viand, by ‘ the all-sustaining Agni, ’ and saptd 
wdnih, seven voices or tones, by ‘ the flowing rivers.’ The hymn is full 
of difficulties ; ‘an intentionally obscure hymn, says Professor Grass. 
mann, ‘ whose partially corrupt text cannot, on account, fo this obs- 
curity, be satifactorily re-estalished. ’ 2 The Male who dwells in hea- 
ven; celestial Agni. The Mares and Mekshkine are the Goddesses of the 
air. Zo thee: to Agni. The Cow? Vak the Goddess of Speech itself, 
prayer. The Wise Master: Agnis Those: his rhares, the rapidly 
adyancing flamev that bear him onward. Dark-backed: with smoke, 4 
Sipength-gsving siraims: the waters of° the air which bring down the 
embryo Agni in rain, The mighty work of Tvashttar : the wehle crea- 
tion, or, a8 there ie no substantive expressed, the son of Tvashtar, the 
Sun, may ba intenfled. As they were single: hath pervaded and illu- 
mined heaven aud varth simultaneously, ag though they were one world. 
5 The Bull ; Agni. They : perhaps the Gods, Z/4 7 Prayer or Praice. 


HYMN 8.) THE RIGVEDA. 327 


6 Yes, by tradition from the ancient sages they brought great 
strength from the two mighty Parents. . 
To where the singer’s Bull, the night’ dispeller, after hig 
proper law hath waxen stronger. 
7 Seven holy singers guard with five Adhvaryus the Bird’s 
beloved firmly-settled station. 
The willing Bulls, untouched by eld, rejoice them: as Gods 
themselves the ways of Gods they follow. 
8 I crave the grace of heaven’s two chicf Invokers: the seven 
swift steeds joy in their wonted manner. 
These speak of truth, praising the Truth Eternal, thinking 
on Order as the guards of Order. 
9 The mauy seck the great Steed as a stallion: the reins obey 
the Lord of varied colour. 
O heavenly priest, mvsté pleasant, full of wisdom, bring the 
great Gods to us, and Earth and Heaven. ° 
10 Rich Lord, the Mornings have gleamed forth in splendour, 
fair-rayed. fair-speaking, worshipped with all viands, 
Yea, with the glory of the earth, O Agni Forgive us. for 
Our weal eer sin committed, . 
11 As holy food, Agni, to thine invoker, give wealth in cattle. 
lasting, rich in marvels. Dy 
To us be born a son, and spreading offspring. Agni, be this 
thy gracious will to us-ward, 
HYMN VIII. Sacrificial Posts 
God.Servine men, O Sovran of the Forest, with heavenly 
meath at sacrifice anoint thee. 
Grant wealth to us when thou art standing upright as when 
reposing on this Mother’s bosom, 


9 They: the men whe first honoured agni who is called the singer's Bull, 
the strong God protecte his worshipper. 7 Adhvaryys: minister. 
ing priests, Zhe bird: the rapidly.flymg Agui, Zhe willing Bulls : the 
zealous priests, who in this stanza are boldly called Gods. Cf. Is it 
nof written in your law, 1 said, Ye are Gods? (Sc. Jobn, X. II) 
8 Heawn’s two chisf Invokers: or Hotars; according to Sayana, the celas- 
tial and the terrestrial Agni. This stanzaeis repeated from III, 4. 7, 
9 The many ¢ the adjective is feminine and has no substantive express- 
ed. The Dawns may be intended, or perhaps libations. 11 This 
concluding stanza ie the burden of several hymnseof this Beok, and 
there is considerable variation iw Sayana’s interpretation of it in the 
different places in which it occurs. 1 O Sovran of the Forest: the 
tall tree (vdnasydtz) out of which is made the sacriffcial post to which 
the victim is tied. The post when consecrated is « deified object and 
is regarded asa form of Agni. With heavenly meath: or balm; sacred 
oi] or clarified butter. For a full account of the ceremony yof anoint- 
ing ea Post, cee Haug’s Aitarey. Brahmanam, Vol. II, 
Pp, 74-78. 


828 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 111. 


2 Set up’to eastward of the fire enkindled, accepting prayer 
thai wastes not, rich in heroes, 
Driving far from us poverty and famine, lift thyself up to 
bring us great guod fortune, 
3 Lord of the Forest, raise thysclf up on the loftiest spot of 
earth. 


Give splendour, fixt and mcasured well, to him who brings 
the sacrifice. | 
4 Well-robed, enveloped, he is come, the youthful : springing to 
life his giory waxeth greater. 
Contemplative in mind and God-adoring, sages of high in- 
telligence upraise him. _ 
5 Sprung up he rises in the days’ fair weather, increasing ‘in 
the men-frequented synod. — 
* With song the wise and skilful consecrate him: his voice the 
God-adoring singer utters. 
6 Ye whom religious men have firmly planted; thou Forest- 
Sovran whom the axe Lath fashioned, 


Let those the Stakes divine which here are standing be fain 
to grant us wealth with store of children, 


Ny 
7 O mén who lift the ladles up, these hewn and planted in the 
ground, 
Bringing a blessing to the field, shall bear our precious gift 
« to Gods. 
Adityas, Rudras Vasus, careful leaders, Earth, Heaven, and 
Prithivi and Air's mid-region, 
Accrodant Deities, shall bless our worship and make our 
sacrifice’s ensign lofty. se 
9 Like swans that flee in lengthened line, the Pillars have come 
to us arrayed in brilliant colour. 


- They, lifted up on high, by sages, eastward, go forth as Gods 
to the Gods, dwelling-places. 


10 Those Stakes upon the earth with rings that deck them seam 
to the eye like horns of horned creatures ; 


3 The loftiest spot of earth; the altar. 4 Well-robed, enveloned : 
with a cord or garland ~ D In th2 days’ fair weather : when the 
periodical Raines are over. = 7 These hewnand planted: apparently 
gplinters cut fronethe trea. 8 Prithivt : Earth regarded as single. 


and not as one Of the constantly connadved pair Heaven and Earth 
9 Pillars: apparently chips of splinters (cf. stanza 7) which fall froin 
the tree, ag it is dut to form the Sacrificial] Stake, like white or grey 
birds alighting on the ground. 


AY MN 9.) THE RIGVEDA. 329 


Or, as upraised by priests in py oeaticn, let them assist us in 
the rush to battle. ° 
11 Lord of the wood, rise with a bundred branches : wtth thousand 
branches may we rise to greatness, 
Thou whom this hatchet, with an edge well whetted for great 
felicity, hath brought before us, 
HYMN IX, Agni. 
We as thy friends have chosen thee, mortalsa God, to be our’ 
help, 
The Waters’ Child, the blessed, the resplendent ne, vigton ious 
and beyond compare. 
2 Since thou delighting in the woods hast gone unto thy mother 
streams, 
Not to be scorned, Agni, is that return of thine when from 
afar thou now art here. e 7 
3 O’ er pungent smoke hast theu prevailed, anc thus art thou 
benevolent, . 8 . 
Some go before, and others round about thee sit, they in whose 
friendship thou hast place. 
4 Him who had passed beyond his foes, beyond continual farsuits, 
Him the unerring Ones, observent, found in flouds, couched like 
w lion in his lair. 


5 Him wandering at his own free will, Agni here hidden fro n 


our view, 
Him Matarisvan brought to us from far away produced by fric- 
tion, from tie Gods. . 
6.0 Bearer of*Oblations, thus mortals received thee from the 
Gods, 


Whilst thou, the Friend of man, guardest each sacrifice with 
thine own power, Most Youthful One. 

7 Amid thy wonders this is good, yea to the simple is it clear. 

When gathered roun about thee, Agni, lie the herds where 
thou art kindled in the morn. ’ 


2 That return of thine: thy desceut frum the celestial waters in 
which thou art bormas lightning , 3 Some : according to Savana, 
the Adhvaryus ; others: the Sima-priests who sit and recéte the prayers 
and hymns. 4 The wnerring’ Ones: the Gods, who followed ang 
found the fugitive Agni. | 5 Matarisvan: the diyina or semi-divine 
beiug who brought Agni to men. Sve Index. 7 Jv the morn : before 
the cattle are sent out to graze. The hervs, according ‘to the Scholiast, 
laclude men as well as quadcupeds. 


43 


330 «THE AYMNS OF (BOOK U1}, 


8 Offer to him who knows fair rites, who burns with purifying 
glow, 
Swift envoy, active, ancient, and adorable: serve ye the God 
attentively. | 
9 Threo times a hundred Gods and thrice a thoasaad, and three 
times ten and nine bave worshipped Agni. 
For him spread sacred grass, with oil bedewed him, and 
stablished him as Priest and Sacrificer. 


HYMN X. Agni. 


Tuez, Agni, God, Imperial Lord of all mankind, do mortal 
men : 
With understanding kindle at the sacrifice. 
2 They'laud thee in their solemn rites, Agni, as Minister and 
Priest. or 
Shire forth in thine own home as guardian of the Law. 
3 He verily; who honours thee with fuel, knower of all Life, 
He, Agni! wins heroic might, he prospers well. 
4 Ensign of sacrifices, he, Agni, with Gods is come to as, 
Decked by the seven priests, to him who bringeth gifts. 
§ To dgni, the Invoking Priests, offer your best, your lofty 
speech, 
To bim Ordainer-like who brings the light of songs, 
(§ Wet these our hymns make Agui grow, whence, meet for laud, 
be springs to life, 
To mighty strength and great possessiun fair te see. 
7 Best Sacrificer, bring the Gods, O Agni, to the pious man : 
A joyful priest.thy splendour drive our foes afar ! 
8 As such, O Purifier, shine on as heroic glorious might : 
Be nezrest Friend to those who laud thee, for their weal. 


9 So, wakeful, versed in sacred hymns, the holy singers kindle 


thee, 
Oblation-bearer, deathless, cherisher of strength. 
¢ HYMN XI. Agui- 
Aent is Priest, the great High Priest of sacrifice, most swift 
in act: ‘ 
He knows the rite iu canstant course, C 


i eee een 
‘9 Inthe Vai.vadeva Nivid or Hymn of Invitation to the Visvedevas, 
the number of the Gods is said to be 3, times 11, then 33, then 303, then 
$003. By adding together 33 + 303 + 3003 the number 3339 is obtained. 
See Baus Aitarcya Brahmanam, 18 212, note. ¢ 


. 


5 Who brings the light of songs : who brightens and inspires our bymns. 


AYMN 12) THE RIGVEDA. 331 


2 Oblation-bearer, deathless, well inclined, an eager messenger, 
Agni comes nigh us with the thought. ; 
3 Ensign of sacrifice from of old, Agni well knoweth with his 
thought 
To prosper this man’s aim and hope. 
4 Agni, illustrious from old time, the Son of Strength who 
knows all life, 
The Gods have made to be their Priest, 


5 Infallible is Agni, he who goes before the tribes of men, 
A chariot swift and ever new, 
6 Strength of the Gods which none may harm, subduing all his 
enemies, 
Agni is mightiest in fame, 
7 By offering sacred fpad to him the mortal worshipper obtains 
A home from him whose light makes pure. 
8 From Agni, by our hymn@ may we gain all things that bring 
happiness, 
Singers of him who knows all life. , 


9 O Agni, in our deeds of might may we obtain all precious 


things ; 
The Gods are centred all in thee. . 
HYMN XII. Indra-Agni. 
- Movep, Indra-Agni, by our hymn, come to the juice, the pre- 
Clous dew : e@ 9 


Drink ye thereof, impelled by song, 
2 O Indra Agni, with the man who lauds you comes the waen: 
ing rite ; é 
So drink ye both this juice outpoured. 


3 Throngh force of sacrifice I choose Indra-Agni who love the wise 
With Soma let these sate them here. 


4 Indra and Agni I invoke, joint-victors, boanieoas unsubdued, 
Foe-slayers, best to win the spoil. 
9 Ingra and Agni, singers skilled in ie hymn you, bringing 
lauds : 
I choose you for the sacred food, 


6 Indra and Agni, yecast down the ninety forts which Dasas held, 
Together, wigh one mighty deed. , ‘ 


2 With the thought : or, eBrpUg TD our prayer. e ° 3 This mah's : 


who institutes the saarifica ° : 


6 The ‘sacle vinety is used indefinitely for s large number, 
The forts are the strongholds of the non-Aryan inhabfante of the 
country. 


332 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 111. 


1 To Indra-Agni reverent thoughts go forward from the holy 
task . 
Along the path of sacred Law. 
8 O Indra-Agni, poweres are yours, and dwellings and delig htful 
food : 
Good is your readiness to act. 
9 Indra and Agni, in your deeds of might ye deck heaven's 
lucid realms : ‘ 
Famed is that hero strenght of yours, 


AYMN XIII. Agni. 
To Agni, to this God of yours I sing aloud with utmost 
power. 
May he come to us with the Gods, and sit, best Offerer, on 
the grass, -: 
2 The,Holy, whose are earth and heavei, and suecour waits 
upon his strength. é 


Him men who bring oblations laud, and they who wish to 
gain, for grace, c 4 
3 He is the Sage who guides these men, Leader of sacred rites 
is he. , 
Hint, your own Agni, serve ye well, who winneth and bestow- 
eth wealth. 


4 So may the gracious Agni grant most goodly shelter for our 
¢ ¢use; , 
Whence in the heavens or in the floods he shall pour wealth 
upon our lands. ; 


6 The singers kindle him, the Pricst, Agni the Lord of tribes 
of men, c 


Cc 


Resplendent and without a peer through his own excellent 


designe, 
6 Help us, thou Brahman, best of all invokers of the Gods in 
song. 
Beam, Friend of Maruts, bliss on us, O Agni, a mosteiberal 
od. . 


e 


7 Yea, grant us treasure thousandfold wth children and with 
nourishment. . 


And, Agni, spiendié hero strength, exalted, wasting not away, 


‘ e 
“ 7 The holy task : sacrifice. . 


The hynan and that which follows ane ascribed te the Rishi Rishabha, 


a son of Visvamitra. 6 Thou Brahman: Agni ishere addressed 
as the Brahman or praying priest, 


a 


HYMN 15.}) THK RIQVEDA. 334 
| HYMN XIV. > Agni. 


The pleasant Pricst is come into the synod, true, skilled in 
sacrifice, most wise Ordainer, 
Agni, the Son of strength, whose car is lightning, whose hair 
is flame, hath shown on earth his lustre. 
2 To thee I offer reverent speech ; accept it; to thee who mark- 
est it, victorious, faithful! 
Bring, thou who knowest, those who know, and seat thee amid 
the sacrd grass, for help, O Holy. 
3 The Two show their vigour, Night and Morning, by the 
wind’s paths shall haste to thee, O Agni, 
When men adorn the Ancient with oblations, these seek, as on 
two chariot-seats, the dwelling, 
4 To thee, strong Agni! Vaguna and Mitra and all the "Maruts 
sang a song ‘of triumph, 
What time unto the people’s lands thou camest, spreading 
them as the Sun of men, with lustre. 
5 Approaching with raised hands and adoration, we have this 
day fulfilled for thee thy longing. 2 
Worship the Gods with most devoted spirit, a Priest ‘with no 
unfriendly thought, O Agni. 


6 For, Son of Strength, from thee cume many succoursy aral 
powers abundant that a God possesses, 
Agni to us with speech that hath no falschood grant riches, 
real, to ba told in thousands, 
7 Whatever,eCtod, in sacrifice we mortals have wrqught is all for 
thee, strong, wise of purpose | 
Be thou the Friend of each good chariot’s masfer,. All this 
enjoy thou here, immortal Agni, 


Hymn XV. . Agni. 


RespLEnvent with thy wide-extending lustre, dispel the terrors 
of the fiends who hate us. 


Mav lofty Agni be my guide and snettel the easily-invoked, 
the good Patector, 


2 Be thou to us, while now the morn is breakeng, be thoua 
guardian when the Sun hath mounted. ° *~ 


‘2 Those whe know ¢ the Gods. 3 The Ancient: A ni. 
4. Spreading them: causing Aryan men to: spread as the fun spreads 
Ais rays. 5 Thy tonging. for oblations. 6 All this: all our 
sacrificial offerings. / 


534 ‘THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 111. 


Accept as men accept a true-born infant, my laud, O Agni 
nobly born in body. 


3 Bull, wh beholdest men, through many mornings, among 
the dark ones shine forth red, O Agni. 
Lead us, good Lord, and bear ns over trouble : Help us who 
long, most youthful God, to riches. 


4 Shine forth, a Ball eels O Agni, winning by conquest 
all the forts and treasures, 

' Thou Jatavedas who art skilled in guiding, the chief high sav- 
ing sacrifice’s Leader, 


8 Lighting Gods hither, Agni, wisest Singer, bring thou to us 
many and flawless shelters. 
Bring vigour, like a car that gathers booty: bring us, O Agni, 


beauteous Earth and Heaven. 


6 Swell, O. thou Bulland givetthose powers an impulse, e’on 
Earth and Heaven who yield their milk in plenty, 


Shining,,O God, with Gods in clear effulgence. Let nota 
mortal’s evil will obstruct us. 


7 Agni, as holy food to thine invoker, give wealth in cattle, last- 
ifg, rich in marvels, 
To us be born a son and spreading offspring. Agni. be this 
thy gracious will td us-ward. 

‘ AYMN XVI. Agni, 
Tuts Agni is the Lord of great felicity and hero strength : 
Lord of wealth rich in children, wealth in herds of kine; Lord 

of the battles with the fue. 


2 Wait, Maruts, Heroés, upon him the Proepetee in whom is 
bliss-i -increasing wealth ; 


Who in fight ever conquer evil-hearted men, who overcome 
the enemy, 


3 As sa O Agni, deal us wealth and hero might, O Bounteous 
ne ! 


Most lofty, very glorious, rich in progeny, free from “disease 
and full of power. 


4 He who made all that lives, who passes all in might, who 
orders serwice to, the Gods, 


He works among the Gods, he works in herd Ystrength, yea, also 
“« | in the praise. of men. 


. 3 Among the dark ones in the datkness of the nights. 6 Thew 
milk: rain and all fertilizing influence, : 

@ Who: referring to the Maruts ; the verbs being in third person. 
S$ Most lofty, etc ; these epithets qualify wealth and hero might, 


HYMN 18.) THE RIGVEDA. 835 


5 Give us not up to indigence, Agni, nor want of hero sons, 
Nor, Son of Strength to lack of cattle, nor to blame. Drive 
thou our enemies away. 
6 Help us to strength, blest Agni! rich in progeny, abundant, 
in our sacrifice. 
Flood us with riches yet more plenteous, bringing weal, with 
high renown, most Glorious One ! 


HYMN XVII. Agni. 


Duty enkindled after ancient customs, bringing all treasures, 
he is baled with unguents, — 

Flame-haired, oil-clad the purifying Agni, skilled in fair rites, 
to bring the Gods for worship. 


2 As thou, O Agni, skilful Jatavedas, hast sacrificed as Priest of 
Earth, of Heaven. 
So with this offering bring the Gods, and ad this sacrifice 
to-day as erst tor Manu? 


3 Three are thy times of life,O JAatavedas, and ihe three morn- 
ings are thy births, O Agni. y 8 > 
With these, well-knowing, “erant the Grds’ kind favour, and 
help in stir aud stress the man who worships. 
4 Agni most bright and fair with song we honour, yea, the ador- 
able, O Jniavedas. 
Thee, envoy, messenger, oblation-bearer, the Gods have made 
centre of life eternal. > 3 
9 That Priest befor thee, yet more skilled in worship, stablished 
of old, health-givsr by his nature,— 
After his custom offer, thou who knowest, and lay our sacri- 
fice whege Gods may taste it. P 


| HYMN XVIIL. ) Agni. . 


Aen, be kind to us when we approach thee, good as a friend 
to friend, as sire and mother. | 
The races of mankind are-great oppressors : burn up malignity 
what strives against us. 
2 Agni, burn up the unfriendly whoare near us, burn thou the 
fueman’s curse who pays no worship. 


2 Three are thy tumes of ltfe: tha existence of*Agni upon earth is 
said to be threefold as dependent on the supply of fuel, clarified butter, , 
and Soma. Zhe three mornigs: Agni is reborn every mourning, and the 
number three appears to be used merely for the sake of accordance with 
the three times of life previously mentioned. . °5 That Priest before 
thee : Agni’ s more skiful predecessor is probably thecelestial Agni, the 
high priest who sacrifices for the Gods. Tha terrestrial Agui i ig to take 
him for his model, ~~ 


TAB HYMNS UF (BOOR IIL. 


"Burn; Vasu, thou who markest well, the foolish : let thine 
eterenal nimble beams surround thee. : 


3 With fuel, Agni, and with oil, desirous, mine offering I present 
for strength and conquest, 
. With prayer, so far as I have power, adoring—This hymna 
divine to gain a hundred treasures, 


4 Givo with thy glow, thou Son of Strength when lauded, great 
vital power to those who toil to serve thee. 
Give richly, Agni, to the Visvamitras in rest and stir, Oft have 
we decked thy body. 
5 Give us, O liberal Lord, great store of riches, fur, Agni, such 
art thou when duly kindled, 
Thou in the happy singer’ home bestowest, amply with arms 
extended, things of beauty. | | 
; HYMN XIX. Agni 
Aent, quirk, sage, infallible, alt-knowing, I choose to be our 
Priest at this oblation. = 
In ovr Gods’ service he, hest skilled, shall worship : may he 
obtain us boons for strength and riches. 


2 Agni, to thee I lift the oil-fed ladle, bright, with an offering, 
betring our oblation. 
Fiom the right hand, choosing the Gods’ attendance, he with 
rich presents hath arranged the worship. 
&'Ot keenest spirit is the man thou aidest: give us good off- 
spring, thou who givest fr eely. 
In power of wealth most rich in men, O Agni, of thee, the 
Good, may we sing forth fair praises. | 
4 Men as they worship thee the God, O Agni, have set on thee 
fall many a brilliant aspect. 
So bring, Most Youthful One, the Gods’ assembly, the 
Heavenly Host which thou to day shalt honour. 
5 When Gods anoint thec Priest at their oblation, and seat thee 
for thy task as Sacrificer, 
O Agni, be thon here our kind defender, and to ourselves 
vouchsafe the gift of glory. 


HYMN XxX, Agni. 


Wirn lauds at break of morn the priest invoketh Agni, Dawn, 
Dadhikras, and both the Asvins, 


° 4 Full many d nena aspect: “bright nppserance, or splendid 
presgncea 

1 Dadhikrds : or + Dadhikrd, is a mythical being Jowseibad asa kind 

of divine hose, and probably s personification of the morniug Sun He 

is invoked in the morning together with Agni, Ushas, and the Aeviua. 


HYMN 21.) THE RIGVEDA. 837 


With one consent the Gods whose ‘tight is splendid, longing 
to taste our sacrifice, shall hear us. 
2 Three are thy powers, O Agni, three thy stations, three are 
thy tongues, yea, many, Child of Order! 
Three bodies hast thou which the Gods deightin: with 
these protec: our hymns with care unceasing. 
3 O Agni, many are the names thou bearest, Immortal, God, 
Divine, and JAatavedas : 
And many charms of charmers, All-Inspirer ! have they laid in 
thee, Jord of true attendants ! 
4 Agni, like Bhaga, leads the godly people, he who is true to 
Law and guards the seasons. 
Ancient, all-knowing, he the Vritra-slayer shall bear the singer 
safe through every trouble. ; 
® I call on Savitar the Gof, on Morning, Brihaspati, and 
Dadhikras, and Agni, 
On Varuna and Mitra, on the ASvins, Bhaga, the *Vasus, 
Rudras, and Adityas. 


HYMN XXI. agen. 


Ser this our sacrifice among the Immortals : be pleased with 
these our presents, Jatavedas, 

O Priest, O Agni, sit thee down before ns, and first onioy the 3 
drops of ot! and fatness, 


2 For thee, O Purifier, flow the drops of fatness, rich in oil. 
After thy wont vouchsafe to us the choicest ‘boon that Gods 


may feast, 
3 Agni, Most Excellent! for thee the Sage are drops that drip 
with oil. 
Thou art enkindied as the best of Seers. Help thou the 
sacrifice. 


4 To thee, O Agni, mighty and POBUEMGE: to thee stream forth 
the drops of oil and fatness. , 

With great light art thou come, O praised by poets! Accept 

our offering, O thou Sage? 


a A ay 


2 Three are thy owers : or thee kinds of strengthening food, clari- 
fied butter. fuel, and Soma. Three thy «tutions : three «altars, or the 
threa worlds, Three are thy torgues: the three fiees, Garhapatya, 
Ahsvaniya and Dakshina. Z'hree bodies: or formes as Pavaka, Pavamaaa, 
and Suchi. 


fae ene ear ee ee ae 


e@ 
ED 


3 The names thou bearest : or vhe natures thou possesses. Many 
charms : or supernatural powers, 


44 ‘6 


‘338 THE HYMNS OF (BOOK UIt, 


° Fatness exceeding rich, extracted from tha midst,— this as our 
gift we offer thee. 
Excellent God, the drops run down upon thy skin. Deal 
them to each among the Gods. x 


HYMN XXIZ. Agni. 


Tats is that Agni whence the longing Indra took the pressed 
Soma deep within his body 

Winner of spoils in thonsands, like a courser, with praise art 
thou exalied, Jitavedas. 

2 That light of thing in heaven and earth, O Agni, in plants, 

O Holy One, and in the waters, 

Wherewith thou bast spread wide the air’s mid-region — 
bright is that splendour, wavy, man-beholding. 


3 O Agni, tu the sea of heaven thou guest : thou hast called 
hither Gods beheld in spirit. 
The waters, too, come hither,“ those up yonder in the Sun’e 
realm of light, ard those beneath it 
4 Let fires that dwell in mist, combined with those that have 
their home in floods, 
Guilcless accept our sxcrifice, great viands free from all disease. 
5 Agni, as holy food to thine invoker give wealth in cattle, 
Jastine, rich in marvels, 
To us be born a son and spreadiig offspring. Agni, be this 
é o thy gracious will to us-ward. 


HYMN XXIII. Agni. 


Rowsep into life, well stablished in the. dwelling, Leader of 
sacrifice, the Sage, the Youthful, 

Here in the wasting fuel Jatavedas, eternal, hath assumed 
immortal being. 

2 Both Bbaratas, Devasravas, Devavata, have strongly rubbed 

to life effectual Agni. 

O Agni, look thou forth with ample riches: be, every day, 
bearer of food to feed us. 


3 Him nobly born of old the fingers ten ‘pordaced, him whom 
his Mothers counted dear. 


5 Fatness excreting rich, extractad from tha mudat : this hymn, Say- 
Alla SAYS, 19 suitable for animal snerjlices, The fatness here spoken of 
‘is, as Professwr Wil-on remarks, the same thawte dueerihol sacleviik 
ecus, LV. 9, as ‘he fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fut thas 
is upon the inwards. . 
1 Whence : literally, wherein ; that is poured out on whom or which. 
2 Both Bharatas : sons of Bharata, the two Rishis of the hymn. 
3 His Mothers: the two fire-sticks from which Agni springs to life. 


AY 2% 29.) THE RIGVEDA., 339: 


Praise Devavita’s Agni, thou Devasravas, him who shalt be 
the people’s Lord. 
4 He set thee in the earth’s most lovely station, in Ila’s place, 
in days of fair bright weather. 
On man, on Apaya, Agni ! on the rivers Drishadvati, Saras- 
vati, shine richly. 
5 Agai, ss holy food to thine invoker give wealth in cuttle, 
lasting, rich In marvels. 
To us be boyn a son and spreading offspring Agni, be this 
thy gracious will to us-ward. 


HYMN XXIV, Agni. 


Agni, subdac opposing bands, wnd drive our enemies away. 
Tnvinerble, slay wodless foes: give splendour to the .wor- 


shippe r. r 
2 Lit with libation, Agni, then dcathless, who callest Gods to 
feast, ® ° ‘ 


Accept our sacrifice with joy. 


3 With splendour, Agni, Soa of Streneth, thou who art wor- 
shipped, wakeful One, ° 
Seat thee on thisiny sacred grass, 


4 With all thy fires, with all the Gods, Agni, exalt the songs 
We Sing, 
And living men in holy rites. 


2 Grant, Agni, to ths worshipper wealth rich. in heroes, plen- 
teous store : 
Make thou ys rich with many sons. 
% 


HYMN XXV. Reni. 
Trou art the sapient Sonof Dyaus, 0 Agni, yea, and the 


Child of Earth, who knowest ail things. 
Bring. the Gods specially, thou Sage, fur worship. 


2 Agnfthe wise bestows the might of heroes. grants strengthen- 
ing food, preparing it for nectar. 
Thou who art rich in food kring the Geds hither. 


4 He:the worsbipper. Lurth’s most lovely® statiti ; according to 
Sayana, on the morthern altar. //d’s place: the place of prayer and 
praise Drishadvatt and Sarasvats( see Book I 3 10, are well known’ 
streams ; Apayd, which is nob mentioned elsewhere, appears to have 
heen a little stream in the same neighbourhood, near the earlier settle- 
mente of the Aryan immigrants. ° ? 

This hymn and the sight following are ascribed to. the Rishi. 
Visvamibra. , 


340 THE HYMNS OP (BOOK IIT. 


3 Agni, infallible, lights Earth and Heaven, immortal Goddesses 
gracious to all men,— 
Lord through his strength, splendid through adorations. 


4 Come to the sacrifice, Agni and Indra: come to the offerer’s 
house who hath the Soma. 
Come, friendly-minded, Gods, to drink the Soma. 
§ In the floods’ home art thon enkindled, Agni, O Jitavedas, 
Son of strength, eternal, 
Exalting with thine help the gathering-places. 


HYMN XXVI. Agni, 


Reverine in our heart Agni Vaisvinara, the finder of the light, 
whose promises are true, 


The liberal, gladsome, car-borne God, we Kusikas invoke him 
With oblation, seeking wealth with songs. 
© That Agni, bright, Vaisvanara, we invoke for help, and 
Matarisvan worthy of the song of praise ; 
Brihaspati for man’s observance of the Gods, the Singer 
prompt to hear, the swiftly-moving gucst. 
§ Age after age Vaisvinara, neighing like a horse, is kindled 
with the women by the Kusikas. 
May Agni, he who wakes among Immortal Gods, grant us 
¢  ¢ heroic strength and wealth im noble steeds. 
4 Let them go forth, the strong, as flames of fire with might, 
Gathered for victory they have yoked their spotted deer. 
Pourers of floods, the Maruts, Masters of all wealth, they 
who can ne'er be conquercd, wake the mountains shake. 


f The Maruts, Friends of men, are glorious as the fire: their 
mighty and resplendent succour we implore, 
Those storming Sons of Rudra clothed in rohes of rain, 
boon givers of good gifts, roar as the liuns roar. 
§ We, band on band And troop following troop, entreat with 
fair lauds Agni’s splendour and Maruti’ might. 


pe ne a ——aeee 


— 


| 5 In the fiaads' home : in thefi rmamtnt,t be home of the acrial waters. 
The gathering-places , the worlds or regions jnhabited by living be: 
ings, according to Sayana. e . 


¢ | Vaisvanara £ common to, dear tv, or dwelling with, all Aryan men. 
Kustkas : men of the family of the Rishi Kusika. Matarisvan : said 
here by Sayana to mean Agni as God of the lightning ; but the usual 
pense of the wofd is appropriate enough. 3 With the women : the fingers, 
elsewhere called the damsels, and the sisters, which agitate the fire- 
gtick Let them go forth: the Margts or Storm-Gods. 


AY MN 21.) THE RIGVEDA. 341 


With spotted deer for steeds, with wealth that neyer fails, 
they, wise Ones, come to sacrifice at our gatherings, 
7 AgniamI who know, by birth, all creatures. Mine eye is 
butter, in my mouth is nectar, 
Iam light threcfold, measurer of the region ; exhaustless 
head am [ named burnt-oblation. 
8 Bearing in mind a thought with light accordant, he purified 
the Sun with three refinines ; 
By his own nature gained the highest treasure, and looked 
abroad over the earth and heaven. 
9 The Spring that fails not with a hundred streamlets, Father 
inspired of prayers that men should utter, 
The Sparkler, joyous in his Parents’ bosom,—him the Truth- 
speaker, sate ye, Harth and Heaven. | ° 
HYMN XXVIII. ! Agni. 


In ladle dropping oil your food gocg in oblation up to heaven. 
Goes to the Gods in search of bliss, 


2 Agni I laud, the Sage inspired, crowner of sacrifice through 
song, it 
Who jistens and gives bounteous gifts. 
3 O Agni, if we might obtain contro] of thee the potent God, 
Then should we overcome vr foes. » 4 


A Kindled at sacrifices he is Agni, hallower, meet for praise, 
With flame for hair : to him we scek. 


5 Immortal Agni, shining far, enrobed with oil, well worshipped, 
bears + : 
The gifts of sacrifi¢ec away. 

6 The priests with ladles lifted up, worshipping here with holy 


thought. 


__ Have brought this Agni for our aid, 
pelget eR eee ee ee See eC I Ie ere 


sie pec cele ek et i oe Ne eee 

4 Here Agni speaks and ceclares his universality as the Soul of all. 
knows allliving creavures. His eye, or ia his eya, is the light which is 
fed with sferings of sacred oils The amrit, nectar, or ambrosia, which 
is the: reward of piety, is obtainad by burnt- offerings or through the 
mouth of Agni. Re traverses or measures out the firmament, and ag light 
he shines as the sun in heaven, the lightning in mid-alr, and fire on 
earth. See note on the passage in Wilson’ g Translation. 

8 With three refinings : accorcing to Sayana, with his three purifying 
forms as Agni, Vayu, and Surya, or fire, wind, and sun, But pavitrath 
may mean with mental divisious, and the sense would be that Agni 
divided light into three, sun, lightning and fire. 

9 His Parents’ bosom ¢ in close cunnexion with Heaven and Earth. 


342 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR TIL. 


7 Immostal, Sacrificer, God, with wondrous powcr he leads the 
way, 
Urging the great assembly on 
8 Strong, he is set on deeds of strength. In sacrifices led in 
front, 
As Singer he completes the rite. 
9 Excellent, he was made by thought. The Germ of beings have 
1 gained, 
Yea, and the Sire of active streneth. 
10 Thee have I stablished, Excellent, O strengthened by the sage’s 
prayer ! 
T ae Agni, longing, nobly bright. 
11 Agni, the swift and aetive One, singers, at time of sacrifice, 
Kagerly kindle with their pot 
12 Agni ths Son of Strength who’ shines up to the heaven in 
solemn rites, 
The wise of heart, I glorify. 
13 Meet to be lauded and adored, showing in beauty through the 
dack, 
Agni, the Strong, is kindled well. 


14 Agni is kindled as a bull, like a horse bearer of the Gods: 
§ Men with oblations worship him. 


15 Thee will we kindleas a bull, we who are Bulls ourselves, O 
Ball, 


Thee, Agni, shining mightily, 
HYMN XXVIII, Agni, 


Acni who’ knowest all, accept our offering and the: cake of 
meal, 


At dawn’s Jibation, rich i in prayer | 
2 Agni, the sacrificial cake hath been preparcd and dressed for 
tine : 
Accept it, O Most Goats God. 


3 Agni, enjoy the cake of meal and our oblation three days old ; 
t hou, Son of Strength, art stablished at our sacrifice. 


ee re 


ame a oe ee 


° "9 “Me was mals by honght ly holy 4 thought, or ir cvouan 15 
We who are Bulls oneselves : priests nie Frequently ealled bulls, on ac- 
count of their great power. Cf. 1H] 7 7. 


3 Our oblutinn three days old: the Soma juice preparcd the day 
before yesterd sy and left to ferment. 


HYMN 29.} THK RIGVEDA 343 


4 Here at the midaay sacrifice enjoy thou the sacrificial cake, 
wise, Jtaviedas ! : 
Agni, the sages in assemblies never minish the portion due to 
thee the Mighty. 
5O Agni, at the third libation take with joy the offered cake of 
sacrifice, theu, Son of Strength. 
Through skill in song bear to the Gods our sacrifice, watchful 
and fraught with riches, to Inmuortal Gods. 


6 O waxing Agni, knower thou, of all, accept our gifts, the cake, 


And that prepared ere yesterday, 


HYMN XXIX. Agni. 
Here is the gear for friction, here tinder made ready for the 
spark, 
Bring thou the Matron : we willrub Agni in ancient fashion 
forth, 
2 In the two Gre-sticks Jatavedas lieth, cevenas the well-set verm 
In pregnant women, 
Agni who day by day must be exalted by men who watch and 
worship with oblations., 
es = 
3 Lay tius with care on that which lies extended : straicht hath 


she borne the Steer when made prolific. 
With lus red pillae —radiant is his spleudour~ in our skilled 
task is born the Son of [1d. 
4 In Tla’s place we set thee down, upon the central point of earth, 
That, Agni Jatavedas, thou mayst bear our offerings to the 
Gods. 
Rub into life, ye men, the Sage, the guileless, Immortal, very 
wise and fair to lovk on. 
O men, bring forth the most propitious Agni, first ensign of 
the sacrifice to castward. 


én 


1 Here is the gear for friction: tive word adhimdnthanam means 
the upper fire-stick and the string u-ed in agitating it. The tinder ig a 
tuft of dry Kuga grass placed so as to catch the Jame produced by at- 
trition. The Matrcva rthe lower picce of wood in which the spark is ven- 
erated, Sdyana explains the word ors patuém, feminine of ots pati, lord 
of the people, as protectress of mca by means of the gacrificus whith 
are performed with tha help ofthe tire which she produces 3 Ley 
this with care: place the upper fire-stick, which is to be turnad rapidly 
round, upon the lower piece of wood which is prepared tu receive it, 
The Son of Ila: Agni. 4 dn Ili’s place: on the nordhern altar, 
the place of worship and libation, or prayer aud praise, 


344 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 111. 


6 When with their arms they rub him straight be shineth forth 
like a strong courser, red in colour, in the wood, 
Bright. checkless, as it were upon the Asvins’ path, he passeth 
by the stones and burneth up the grass. 


7 Agni shines forth when born, observant, mighty, the bountiful, 
the Singer praised by sages ; 
Whom, as adorable and knowing all thing 
rites as offering- bearer. 


8 Set thee, O Priest, in thine own place observant: lay down 
the sacrifice in the home of worship. 
Thou, dear to Gods, shalt serve them with oblation: Agni give 
long life to the sacrificer. " 


9 Raise ye a mighty smoke, my fellow-workers! Ye shall attain 
to wealth withont obstruction. : 
This, Agni is the battle-winning Hero by whom the Gods have 
overcome the Dasyns, ‘ 
10 This is thine ordered place of birth whence sprung to life thor 
shonest forth. mw 


Knowing this, Agni, sit thee down, and prosper thou the songs 
we sing. 


e 
s, Gods set at solemn 


~ 


11 As Germ Celestial he is called Tanfinapit, and Nardsansa born 
diffused in varied shape. 
Formed in his Mother he is MAtarisvan ; he hath, in his course, 
{ «become the rapid flight of wind. 
12 Wit! strony attrition rubbed to life, laid down with careful 
hand, a Sage, 
Agni, make sacrifiecs gvod, and for the pious bring the Gods. 
13 Mortals have brought to life the God Immortal, tae Conqueror 
with mighty jaws, anfailing 


The sisters ten, unwedded and united, together grasp the 
ry, Babe, the new-born Infant. 


14 Served by the seven priests, he shone forth from ancient time, 
when in his Mother‘s bosom, in her lap, he glowed. ° 
Giving delivht exch day he closeth not his eye, since from 
the Asuras body he was brought to life. 


PA are Sak ee Peo a 2a sla RO es 
6 As it were wyon the Asvins’ path: with the sped of the Agvias’ 
charint. S In thine ows place :*the centre of the north altar. 


. 11 As Germ Crelestoal :or child of the Asura Dyaus, that is in the 
férm of lightning. Zn hox Mother : according to Sayana, in the maternal 
atmosphere, 13 The sisters ten : the fingers used in producing fire. 

14 The Asuras baby: the Asura is, apparently, Dyaus. Professor 
Wilson, folowing Sayana, trauslates, ‘from the interior of the (spark-) 
eluitt 2 wood. . 


AYMN 30.) THE RIGVEDA. SA5 


15 Even as the Maruts’ onslaughts who attack the foe. those 
born the first of all knew he full power of prayer. 
The ustkas have made the glorious hymn ascend, and, each 
one singly in his home, have kindled fire. . 


16 As we, O Priest observant, have elected thee this day, what 
time the solemn sacrifice began, 
So surely hast thou worshipped, surely hast thou toiled : come 
thou unto the Soma, wise and knowing ail. 


ILY MN XXX. Indra. 


Tue friends who offer Soma long to find thee: they pour forth 
Soma and present their viands. 

They bear unmoved the cursing of the people, for all our 
wisdom comes from thee, O Indra, 


2 Not far for thee are imid-air’s loftest regions: start hither, 
Lord of Bays, with thy Ray Horses. . 
Made for the Firm and Strong are these libations. The 
pressing-stones are set and fire is kindled. 
3 Fair cheeks hath [ndra, Maghavan, the Victor, Lord of a 
great host, aa strong im actiore 
What once thou did. $ an might when mortals vexed thee, — 
where now, O Buil, are tinase thy hero exploits ? 


4 For, overthrowing what hath ne’er been shaken, thow goest 
forth alone desir oying Vritras. . 
For him who followeth thy Law the mountains and heaven 
and earth stand as if frmly stablished. 


9 Yea, Much-invoked ! in safety through thy glories alone thou 
spakest truth as Vritra’s slayer. —» 
Wen these two boundless worlds tothee, O Indra, what time 
thou graspest them, arc but o handful, 


6 Forth with thy Bay “teeds down the stecp, O Indra, fort? 
crushing foemen, zo ny: bolt of thunder ! 
Slay those who meet tl «, the @ who le: , Who follo. . = 
fl thy promise true ; " all cenly leted. 


Lua manto whom thou givest as Provider enjoys dome: 
plenty undivid-d, ? 

Blest, Indra, is thy favour dropping fathess: thy worsh.p, 
Much- invoked ! brings gifts in thousands, 


8 Thou, Indra, Muchinvoked,! didst crush to, pieces Xnnirn 
handless fiend who dwelt “with DAnn, - 


15 Those born the first of all; the most ancient Rishis suc has Kugika 
aud his sous. ? 


8 Kundrw: the name of a demon, Ldnuw: mother of Vritra, See 1, 32.9. 
45 | 


346 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 111. 


Thoy with might, Indra, smotest dead the scorner, the 
footless Vritra as he waxed in vigour. 


9 Thou hast established in her seat, O Indra, the Jevel earth, 
Vast, vigorous, unbounded, 


The Bull hath propped the heaven and air’s mid-region, By 
thee sent onward let the floods tlow hither. 


106 He who withheld the kine, in silence yielded in fear before 
thy blow O Indra, 
He mide paths casy to drive forth the cattle, Loud-breath- 
ing praises helped the M uch-invoked One. 


11 Indra alone filled full the earth and heaven, the Pair who 
meet together, rich in treasures. 
Yea, bring thou near us from the air’s mid-region strength, 
on thy car, and wholesome food, O Hero. 


12 Surya transgresses not the or ‘ered limits set daily by the 
Lord of Tawny Coursers. 


Wher to the goal he comes, his journey ended, his Steeds he 
looses: this is Indra’s doing. 


13 Men gladly in the course of nicht would Jook on the broad 
bteht front of the refulgent Morning ; 
And all acknowledge, when she comes in glory, the manifold 
and goodly works ef Indra, 
14 A mighty splendour rests upon her bosom: bearing ripe milk 
the Cow, unripe, advances, 


All sweetness 1s collected in the Heifer, sweetness which 
Indra made for our enjoyment. 
{ 
15 Barring the way, thoy come. Be firm, O Indra; aid friends 
to sacrifice and him who singeth. 
These must be slain by thee, malignant mortals, armed with 
ill arts, our quiver bearing foemen, 


16 Acry is heard from enemies most near us: against them 
send the fiercest-flaming weapon. o 


Rend them from under, crush themand subdue them. Slay, 
Maghavan. aud make the fiends our booty. 


9 The Hull: the mighty Indra, | 10 In stleftce: YT adopt Prof, 
M. Mullet’s tpterprotation (Ve tic Hymns, L. pp 227, 298) of the 
difficult word aldteaneh, ‘which had eevident'y beocome unintelligible 
even at the time of Yaska 12 Set daily : with reference, parhaps 
as Professor Ludwiy remarks, to the apparent change in the wines 
place of rising. « Lt 7hecow, and the Hetfers beneficent Ushas or 
Morning. & [5 hey come: thosg whq reyile and hinder the worship 
of Indra, 


HYMN 31} THE RIGVEDA. 347 


i7 Root up the race of Rakshasas, O lodra; rend it in front and 
erush it in the middle. 
Hoy one :.3st thou behaved as one who wavers? Cast thy 
hot dart at him who hates devotion : 


18 When borne by string ‘Steeds for our weal, O Leader, thou 
seatest thee at many noble viands, 
May we be winners of abundant riches, May Indra be our 
wealth with store of children. 
19 Bestow on us resplendent wealth, O Indra; let us enjoy thine 
overflow of bounty, 
Wide as a sea our longing hath expanded, fulfil it, O thou 
Treasure-Lord of treasures. 


20 With kine and horses satisfy this longing ; with very splendid 
bounty still extend it. 
Seeking the light, with hymns to thes, O Indra, the Kusikas 
awe brought their giftythe singers. 


» 
21 Lord of the kine, burst the kine’s stable open : cows shall be 
ours, and streneth that wins the lsoty. ‘ 
Hero, whose might is trae, thy home is heaven: to us, O 
Maghavan, graut gifts of cattle, 
22 Call we on Maghavan, auspicious Indra, best Herovin this 
hieht where spoil 1s gathered, 
The Strong who listens, who gives aid in battles, who slays 


the Vritras, wins and eathers riches. » \ 


HYMN XXXII. Indra. 

Wisk, teaching, following the thought of Order, the sonless 
gained a grandson from his daughter. 

Fain, as asirc, to see his child prolitie, he sped to meet her 

with an eager spirit. 


1 Iam aaabled to give a satisfactory or even an intelligible version 
or explanation of the first two stanzas which appear to attribute, in a 
Very obscure manner, to Agniand the Gods in heaven, the customs or 
Jaws sf succession to property among men. * In the first stanza vdhnzh, 
which usually means an oblation-beager, sacrificer, & priest, or one 
who is borne along as a Godin a colestial car, is said by Siyana to 
mean sonless, the father of a daughter ouly, because he transfers hig 
property through his marricd daughter into agother family. The sonless 
father, according to Sayana, ‘stipulates that his daughter’ s s0n, hig 
grandeon, shall be his son, a mode of affiliation recognised by law; an 
relying on an heir thus obtained, and one who can perform his funeral 
rites, he is satisfied’, This may’ be intelligible, but,what it bas todo 
with Agni or with the rest of the hymn is not clear. Grassmann takes 
vihnuik to mean the upper fire-stick, and the daughter tp mean the 
lower piece of wood. 


348 THE HYMNS OF (BOOK Uf, 


2 The Son left not his portion to the brothcr, he made a home 
ty kold him who should gain it. 
What time his Parents give the Priest his being, of the good 
pate one acted, one promoted, 
3 Agni was born trembling with tongue that flickered, so that 
the Red’s great children should be honoured. 
Great is their germ, that born of them is mighty, great the 
Bays’ Lord’s approach through sacirtices, 
4 Congacring bands upon the Warrior waited: they recognized 
ereat helt from out the darkness, 
Tho conscious Dawns went fourth to mect his coming, and the 
sole Master of the kine was Judra, 
5 The saves freed them from tacit firm-built prison: the sev n 
priests drive them forward with their spirvé. 
Ailholy Order’s pathway they discovered > he full of know- 
ledge, shared these deeds throngh worship, 
G Wien Sarama had found the maniain’s fissure, that vast and 
ancient place she plundered theeachly. 
in the floods’ van she led them forth, light-footed : she who 
well knew came first unto their lowing. 
7 Longing for friendship came the noblest singer : the hill pour- 
ed forth its treasure tor the pious, 


YW 


a 


2 ihe Sor left wot his portion to the brother : Wilson, following Sayana 
transiates: “Cason ) born ot the body does not trausfer (paternal) 
we Motes sister.’ Ludwig takes the meaning to ba: the bodily gon 
(of Dyaus, or of the heavenly waters) did not teansmit his inheritance 
(that is, sacrifice) to a brother A home: the plants which receive and 
hold Agei, who obtains the inheritance of sacrifice. Hts Parents: per- 
haps the tie-sticks, one of which by agitation produces the fame in 
the other. The goofs paar: the terrestrial offerer whe performs the 
sacrifice, aud the colestial offerer wio makes it effectual. See Bergaig- 
ne, La Reityton Vedique, 1 234, Ludwig allows that the meaning of 
the first two stanzas is problematical, and Wilson says of his own 
translation, ‘these two verses, if rightly interpreted, are wholly uncon. 
nected with the subject of the Sahta, and come in without aDY appa- 
rent obj ct: they ara very obscure, and are only made somowhat fntelli- 
gible by interpre ations which seem to be arbitrary, and are very un- 
usnual, although not pecaliar to Sdyana, his explanations being based on 
thosa of YAska 3 Lhe Revs great children: the hot rays of the 
glowing fire That born of them: Jadea’s coming, which is cause] by 
the kindling of sac. ie fire 4 Conquering bands: the ever-victo- 
rious Maruts ‘Zhe Warrtor: Tadra, their leader. ILaster of the king - 
recoverer of the Vanished rays uf light. 5 The sages and the Penern 
priests: are the Argirages, 6 Sarama: the hound of Tndra. Sco T. 
62.3 Inthe floods’ van? hastening out of the mountsin cavern im ad- 
yance of the lihetated waters. 7hem: the cows, the waters and the ways 
of light, 7 Zhe noblest senger : as a noun of muititudo, all the Augirases, 


HYMN 31, THE RIGVEDA. 349 


The Hero with young followers fought and conquered, and 
straightway Angiras was singing praises, 
8 Peer of each noble thing, yea, all- excelling , all creatures doth 
he know, he slayeth Sushua, 
Our Leader, fain for war, singing from heaven, as Friend he 
saved his lovers from dishonuur. | 
9 They sate them down with spirit fain for booty, making with 
hymns a way to life eternal. 
And this is still their place of frequent session, whereby they 
sought ts gain the months through Order, 
19 Drawing the. milk of ancient seed prolific, they joyed as they 
beheld their own possession. 
Their shout of triumph heated earth and heaven, When the 
kine showed, they bade the heroes rouse them. 
11 Indra drave forth the kine, that Vritra-slayer, while ym 
of praise rose up and eifts were offered, 
For him the Cow, noble rand far- -extending, poured pleasant 
juices, bringing oil and sweetness. 
12 They madea mansion for their Father, deftly provided hima 
great and glorious dwelling ; 
With firm support parted and stayed the Parents, and, sitting, 
fixed him there erected, mighty. ? 
13 What time the ample chalice had impelled him, swift waxing, 
vast, to pierce the carth and heaven, — 
Him in whom blameless songs are all united: all powers inyjn- 
cible belong to Indra. 
14 T crave thy powers, I crave thy mighty friendship: full many 
a team goes to the Vritra slayer. 
cree is the laud, we seek the Prince’g favour, Be thou, O 
Maghavanyour guard and keeper. — 


The Hero: Indra with his alles the Marute. 9 They : the 
Angirases, who had been eager to recover tha cows. Zo gain the mon- 
ths: to acquire the power of keeping the monthly festivals. 10 Or, 


‘They joycd to sea them, as their Own possession, yielding the milk of 
ancient seed prolific.” The Angirases rejoiced as they again beheld the 
raysggf light, shedding what originates and supports all life, Sdyana's 
rendering of thie difficult stanza is thus’ given by Wilson: Contem- 
plating their own (cattle ) giving,milk to their former progeny ( the 
Angtrases ) were delighted ; their shouts spread through heaven and 
earth ; they replaces the recovered kine in their plates, Pand stationed 
guards over the cows’ 12 Por their Father : accoyding to Saya- 
na, for their protector Indra. But Agni may pe megnt, the mansiot, 
bene the place of sacrifice. Zhe Parents: Heaven and E: arth, parents 


of all things. 13 The ample chalrce : the bow! of Soma juice, But, 
accordivg to Ludwig, dhishéud here and elsewhere, means carnest wish, 
longing. 14 Full many a team: bymns sent forth hke teams of 


horsey. 


350 THE HY MNS OF (BOOK 111, 


15 He, having found great, splendid, rich dominion, sent life and 
nfotion to his friends and lovers, 
Indra who shone together with the Heroes begat the song, 
the fire, and San and Morning. 
16 Vast, the House-Fricnd, he set the waters flowing, all-lucid, 
widely spread, that move tugether. 
By the wise cleansings of the meath made holy, through days 
and nights they speed the swift streams onward. 
17 To thee proceed the dark, the treasure-hulders, both of them 
sanctified by Sarya’s bounty, 
The while thy lovely storming Friends, O Indra, fail to attain 
the measure of thy greatness, 
18 Be Lord of joyous songs, O Vritra-slayer, Bull dear to all, who 
gives the power of living. 
€ . eee 7 7 ° 
Come unto us with thine augpicious friendship, hastening, 
Mighty One, with meghty succours, 
19 Like Angiras L honovr him with worship, and renovate old song 
for him the Ancient. 
Chase thou the many godless evil creatures, and give ua, 
Maghavan, heaven's light tv help us, 
20 Far forth are spread the purifying waters: convey thou us 
across them unto safety. 
‘Save us, our Chariotcer from harm, O Indra, soon, very soon, 
make us win spoil of cattle. 
21 His kine their Lord hath shown, e’cn Vritra’s slayer : through 
the black hosts he passed with red attendants. 
Teaching us pleasant things by holy Order, ‘tous hath he 
thrown open all his portals. 
22 Call we on Maghavan, auspicious Indra, best Hero in this fight 
where spoil is gathered, 
The Strong who listens, who gives aid in battles, who slays 
the Vritras, wins and gathers riches. 


16 By the wise cleansings : or acgording to Sdyana, the wise purt- 
fiers, that is, Agni, Vayu. Sirya, who act as purifiers of the libation of 
Soma juice, ol7 The dark, the treasure-holdere: or, the dark onc 
and the treasure-holder ; Night aad Day. Storming Friends: the 
Maruts. 20, The purifying wateys : the epithet pavakdh, purifying, 
“4s satirely out of place here, Ludwig, sugvests pdpakah, wicked, which 
would be more suttable 21 Kine: rays of light. ed attendants: 
the Maruts ‘ Many of the verses in this hrmn.’ Prof. Wilson obser- 
ves, ‘aretof more than usual obscurity.” Prof. Grassmann places the 
hymn in hie Appendix, 


rr ee EE 


AYMN 32.) THE RIGVEDA. 351 


HYMN XXXII. Indra. 


Drink thou this Soma, Indra, Lord of Soma; drink thou the 
draught of noonday which thou lovest. 
Pafting thy cheeks, impetuons, liberal Giver, here loose thy 
twe icy ILorses and rejoice thee. 
2 Quaff it pure, meal-blent, mixt with milk, O Indra ; we have 
poured forth the Soma for thy rapture. 
Knit with the prayer-fulfilling band of Maruts, yea, with tha 
Rudras, drink till thou art sated ; 
3 Those who gave increase to thy strength and vigour, the Maruts 
singing forth thy might, O Indra. 
Drink thou, O fair of cheek, whose hand wields thunder, with 
Rudras banded, at our noon libation. 


4 They, even the Maruts who were there, excited with song the 
weath-created strength of Indra. , 
By them impelled to act he retched the vitals of Vritza, though 
he deemed that none might wound him. 


fy Pleased, like a man, with our libation, Indra, drink, for éndur- 
ing hero might, the Soma. 
Lord of Rays, moved by sacrifize come hither : thou with the 
Swift Ones stirrest floods and waters, ? 
6 When thou didst loose the streams to run like racers in the 
swift contest, having smitten Vritra. 
With flying weapon where he lay, O Indra, and, godless, kept 
the Goddesses encompassed. 


7 With reverence let us worship mighty Indra, great and sub- 
lime, eternal, ever-youthful. 
Whose greatgess the d-ar world-halves l’ave not measured, no, 
nor conceived the might of him th» Holy. 
8 Many are Indra’s nobly wrought achievements, and none of all 
the Gods transvress his statutes, 
He beareth up this earth and heaven, and, doer of marvels, he 
begat the Sun and Morning. 


» 


1 Puffing thy cheeks; meaning, apparentdy, smaoking thy lips in 
anticipation of the Soma-draught. Sdyana explains it as, § filling theic 
(Indra’s horses’ ) jaws with fodaer. IJmpetuous: this appears vo be 
the meaning of the epithet riyjishin as derived fram tha root 977, rather 
than, 18 Sgyana explains it, ‘drinker of the spiritless residue of the 
Soma’, The latter meaning, however, is admissible, anid is supported by 
cood authority. 3 The Miruts singing forth thy tight : the song ° 
of the Maruts i9 the music of ‘Tha winged gtorms, vchaunting their 
thunder psalm,’ —Siellay. 5 Like aman: or, as thou wast pleased 
with the libation of Manu. Zhe Sroeft Ones: the Maruty. o 6 The 
Goddesses ; the heavenly waterg, 7 The dear world-halves ; heaven 
and earth, 


352 THE HYMNS OP (BOOR III. 


9 Herein, O Guileless One, is thy true greatness, that soon as 
born thou drankest up the Soma. 
Days may not cheek the power of thes the Mighty, nor the 
nights, Indra, ner the months, nor autumns. 
10 As svon as thou wast born in highest heaven thou drankest 
Soma to delight thee, Indra 5° 
And when thou hadst pervaded earth and heaventhou wast 
the first supporter of the singer. 
11 Thou, puissant God, more mighty, slewest Ahi showing his 
strength when couched around the waters. 
The heaven itself attained not to thy greatness when with one 
hip of thine the earth was shadowed. 
12 Sacrifice, Indra, made thee wax so mighty, the dear oblation 
with the flowing Soma, 
O Worshipful, with worship help our worship, for worship 
helped thy bolt when slaying Ahi. 


13 With sacrifice and wish have I brought Indra; still for new 
blessings may I turn him hither, 
Him magnified by ancicat songs and praises, by lauds of later 
time and days yet recent, 
14 I have brought forth a song when longing seized me: ere the 
decisive day? will I laud Indra ; 
Then may he safely bear us over trouble, as in a ship, when 
. both sides invocate him. 
“15 Full is his chalice s Glory ! Like a pourerI have filled up the 
vessel for his drinking. 
Presented on the right, dear Soma juices have brought up 
Indra, to rejoice him, hither. 
16 Not the dcep-flowing flood, O Much-invoked One! not hills 
that compass thee about restrain thee, 
Since kere incited, for thy friends, O Indra, thou brakest e’én 
the firm-built stall of cattle. 
17 Call we on Maghavan. auspicious Indra, best Hero in the fight 
where spoil is gathered, 
The Strong who listgns, who give aid in battles, who slays 
the Vritras, wins and gathers riches. 


ree, ES a 


11 Whew with one hip of thine the earth was shadowed ; Pro Wilson, 
following Sayana; trarslutes: ‘as thou remsin dst concualiny the earth 
by one of (thy) flames,’ and observes that the meaning is not vary 

Jclear, But sphigé meang a hip and yot a flame, and the poet appears to 
mean that @ portion of Indra’s body, shadow:d or covered the earth 
while the rest was in the heavens. Soin, Book X 119 JI, Indra is 
represented as, saying when exhilarated by Soma: dint me anydh 
paksho ’ tho anydm achikrisham, one side of ma is in the sky, and [ have 
drawn the other down. 14 Hre the decisive day : on the eve of an 
importand battle. 


ae 0 sae ee 


AYMN 33.) THE RIGVREDA., 358 


HYMN XXXIILI. 
Fortn from the bosom of the mountains, eager as #wo switt 
marea With loosened rein contending, 
Like two bright mother cows who lick their youngling, 
Vip'is and Suatudri speed down their waters, 
2 Impelled by Indra whom ye pray to urge you, ye move ag 
‘itwere On Chariots to the occan 
Flowing togather, swelling with your billows, O lucid Streams, 
each of you seeks the other, 
8 I have attained the most maternal River, we have approached 
Vipas, the broad, the blessed. 
Licking as ‘twere their calf the pair of Mothers flow onward 
to their common home together, 
4 We two who rise and swell with billowy waters move forward 
to the home which Gods have made us 
Our flood may not be stayed when urged to motion., What 
would the singer, calling to the Rivers ? 
D Linger a Jittle ab my friendly bidding ; rest, Holy Ones, a 
moment in your journey. . : 
With hymn sublime soliciting your favour Kusika’s son hath 
called unto the River. 
’ 6 Indra who wiclds the thunder dug our channels¢ he smote 
down Vritra, him who stayed our currents, 
Savitar, God, the lovely-handed, led us, and at his sending 


forth we flow expanded. ‘ 
bd e 


——— 


- ete arp 


The hymn is adialogue becween Visvamitra aud the rivers Vipés 
and Sutud:i who are reyarded severally as the Riehis or secre of the 
verses ascribad to them. The legand cited by Séyana saya that Vigva- 
mitra, the Paurohita orfamly priest of King Sugas, having obtained wealth 
by means of he offiqs, took the whole of it and came to the con- 
jHluence of the Vipas and the Sutudri. Oshera followed. In order to 
make the rivers fordable he lauded then with the fireb three verses of 
the hyma. The hymn has some poetical beauty, and is Interesting ag & 
roiie of the traditions of the Aryans regarding their progress eastward 
onthe Land of the Five Rivers. 1 Vipds : considered to be iden- 
tical @ith the Hyphasis of Arrian, is the modern Buds which rises in 
the Himalaya and falls into the Sutles th® Sutadri of the text, a little 
to tha south aast.9 of Amritvar. 4 The rivers speak in reply to 
Visvamitra’s address. 5 Visvamitra speaks again. A/ my friendly 
biidang : according to the Scholiasts, Yasks and Sapana, the meaning of 
me vichase somydya is, ‘to my sptech importing the Soma; that is, the 
object of my address is that [ may cross over and gather the Sorma- 
plant. The word somy@, consigting of, connected with, or inspired hy, 
Soma, appears, to have here its more general meaiting of lovely, plea- 
sant, or friendly. Awstka’s son: Visvimitra. 6 The rivers speak. 
Savitar : said by SAyana to be used here as an epithet ofe Indra, the 
impeller of the whole world. 


46 , 


354 THE AYMNS OF [BOOK 111, 


2 That hero decd of Indra must be lauded for ever that he rent 
A Ifi in pieces, 
He smote away the obstructers with his thunder, and eager 
for their course forth flowed the waters, 


8 Never forget this word of thine, O Singer, which future gene- 
rations shall reecho. 
In hymns, O bard, show us thy loving-kindness, Humble us 
not mid men. ‘To thee be honour ! 
9 List quickly, Sisters, to the bard who cometh to you from far 
away With car and wagon, 
Bow lowly down; be casy to be traversed : stay, Rivers, with 
your floods below our axles. 
16 Yea, we will listen to thy words, O Singer. With wain and 
ear from far away thou comest, 
Low, like a nursing mother, willl bend me, and yield me asa 
maiden to her lover. 


11 Soon as the Bharatas have fared across thee, the warrior band, 
urged on and sped by Indra. 
Then Ict your streams flow on in rapid motion. I crave your 
favour who deserve our worship, 


12 Theswarrior host, the Bharatas, fared over : the singer won the 
favour of the Rivers. 
Swell with your billows, hasting, pouring riches. Fill full your 
. channels, and roll swiftly onward. 


13 So let your wave bear up the pins, and ye, O Waters, sparc the 
thongs 5 
And never may the pair of Bulls, harmless and sinless, waste 
away. , 
ITYMN XXXIV. Indra. 


Fort-renpgr, Lord of Wealth, dispelling foemen, Indra with 
lightnings hath o’ercome the Dasa. 


7 Vig dmitra speaks. . 8 The rivers speak. 9 Visvjmitra 
speaks, 10 The rivers speak, 11 Visvamitra speaks. The Bhar- 
atas: the family of Visvamitra. 13 This verse, in a different metre, 


is manifestly a later addition. The pins: the yokes. The pair of 
Bulls: the two strong rivers. Cf. Horace’s tawriformis Aufidus. 
Prof. Wilson, following sayansa, gives &® somewha’ diffcrent Version 
of the.stanza : ‘Let your waves (rivers) so flow that the pin of the yoke 
may be above (their) waters: leave she traces full, and may (the twe 
streams) exempt from misfortune or defect, and uncensured, exhibit 
no (present) increaso. : 

1 Fort-render : breaker-down of the cloud-castles of the demons who 
withhold tls rain as well as of the strongholds of the hostile non- 
Aryan tribes. 


HY MN 34.) THE RIGVEDA. 358 


Impelled by prayer and waxen great in body, he hath filled 
carth and heaven, the Bounteous Giver. ° 


2 Estimulate thy zeal, the Strong, the ILero, decking my sone 
of praise for thee Immortal, 
O Indra, thon art eqaally the Leader of heavenly hosts and 
human generations. 


3 Leading his band Indra encompassed Vritra; weak grew the 
wily Veadee of enchanters. 
Ile who burns fierce in forests slaughtered Vyansa, and made 
the Mileh-kine of the nights apparent. 


4 Indra, light- winner, days Creator, conquered, victorious, 
hostile bavads with those who loved him. 
For man the days’ bright ensign heillumined, and found the 
hight for his great joy and eladness, 


2 Forward to fiercely falling blows pressed Indra, herolike. 
doing many hero exploets, 
These holy sunes he taught the bard who praised him, and 
widely spread these Dawns’ resplendent colour. 


6 They laud the mighty acts of himthe Mighty, the many 
glorious deeds performed by Indra. 
He in his strength, with all-surpassing prowess,gthrough 
wondrous arts crushed the malignant Dasyus, 
7 Lord uf the brave, Indra who rules the people gave freedom 
to the Crods by might and battle. A 
Wise singers glorify with chanted praises these his abhieve: 
ments mn Vivasvin’s dwelling, 
8 Excellent, Conqucror, the victory-giver, the winner of the 
light aad Godlike Waters, * 
IIc “eho hath won this biccad earth and this heaven,—in 
lnodra they rejoice who love devotions. 
9 He gained possession of the Sun and Llorses, Indra obtained 
the Cow who feedcth many. 
Treasure of gold he won; hesma@te the Dasyus, and gave 
Direc to the Aryan cvlour., 


eet 


3 He who burns fierce in jorests: Seilane the diantiarbolb yense: 
the nee of one pf the demons of drought. . Se I. 102; 2, and 103. 
Made the Milch-kine of the niglts apparent : “according to Sdyana, made 
manifest the (stolen) cows (that had been hidden ) ingtho night ;’ that 
is, recovered the rays of light. . Y Toe Vavosvda’s levelling: if the 
eacrificial chamber, in bie home of the wor shipper who represcute 
Vivasvan, tbe Radiuit God, regarded as the Culestial Sacrificer, 3 
The Aryan eolowr . or race of Aryas ; according toeSiyana, the nobless 
tribe or order, meaning the first three classes or castes, 


356 THE HYMNS OF [ROOK It. 
10 He took the plants aad days for his possession; he gained 


il 


2 


3 


4 


. 


5 


6 


7 


theeforest trees and air’s mid-region. 


Vala he cleft, and chased away opponents : thus was he tamer 
of the overwecning, 


Call we on Maghavan, auspicious Indra, best Hero in the fight 
where spoil is yathered. 


The Strong, who listens, who gives aid in battles, who slays 
the Vritras, wins and gathers treasures 


HYMN XXXV. Indra. 


Mount the Bay Horses to thy chariot harnessed, and come to 
us like Vayu with his coursers, 

Thou, hastening to us, shalt drink the Suma, Hail, Indra! 
We have poured it for the rapture. 

For him, the God who is invoked by many, tho twoswift Bay 


Stecds to the pole 1 harness, ; 


That they in fleet course may bring Indra hither, c’en to this 
sacrifice arranged completely. 


Bring the strong Steeds who drink the warm libation, and, 
Bull of Godlike nature, be thou gracious. 

Let thy Steeds eat; set free thy Tawny Horses, and roasted 
grain like this consume thou daily, 


Those who are yoked by prayer with prayer | harness, flect 
¢riendly Bays who take their joy together. 

Mounting thy firm and easy car, O Indra, wise and all know- 
ing come thou to the Soma, 


No other worshippers must stay beside them thy Bays, thy 
vigorous and smooth-backed Coursers. 


Pass by them all and hasten onward hither: with Soma 
pressed ‘we will prepare tu feast thee. 


Thine is this Soma: hasten to approach it. Drink thou there- 


of, benevolent, and cease not. - 


Sit on the sacred grass at this our worship, and take these 
drops into thy belly, Indra. 


The grass 18 strewn for thee, pressed is the Soma; the grain 
18 ready for thy Bays 10 feed on, e 
°e . ‘ 
To thee who lovest them, the very mighty, strong, girt by 
- Maruts, are these gifts presené¢ed. 


———eee 


1h che E eS aes Oe re eon enre ere 
2 J harness : my prayer causes Indra to harnass. 3 Who drink 


the warm ltbation : or, according to Sjyana, ‘ who protech us from our 
enemies.’ Foagted grain: fried barley, according to Sqgyana. The grain 
would appear to be intended for Indra’s horses, Sec stanza 7. 


HYMN 36.) THE RIGVEDA. BHT 


8 This tne swect draught, with cows, the men, the mountains, 
the waters, Indra, have for thee made ready. ° 
Come, drink thereof Sublime One, friendly-minded, foresceing, 
knowing well the ways thou gocst, 
9 The Maruts, they with whom thou sharedst Soma, Indra, who 
nade thee strong and were thine army,— 
With these avcordant, cagerly desirous drink thou this Soma 
wilh the tongue of Agau. 
10 Drink, Indra, of the juice by thine own nature, or by the 
toeneue of Agni, O thou Holy. 
Accept the sacrificial gift, OSakra, from the Adhvaryw’s hand 
or from the Llotar’s, 
11 Call we on Maghaven, auspiciuus Indra, best Hleroin the fight 
where spotl is weathered, 


fan) 
The Strong, who listens, who gives aid in battles, whaslays 
the Vritras, wins and gathers riches. 2 
JIYMN AXXNVL, Indra. 


Wirn constant suecours, fuin thy$elf® to share it, make this 
oblation wineh we bring effective. 
Grown vreat through strengthening gifts at each libation, he 
hath become renowned by mighty exploits, ? 
2 Tor Indra were the Somas erst discovered, whercby he grew 
strong-jointed, vast, and skilful. . 
Indra, take quickly these presented juices ; drink of the strong, » 
that which the strong have shaken, 
3 Drink and wax great, Thine are the juices, Indra, both Somas 
of old tine and these we bring thee. 
Kiven as thog drgnkest, Indra, earlicry Somas, so drink to-day, 
anew guest, mect for praises, 
4 Great and impetuous, mighty voiced in battle, surpassing 
power is his, and strength resistless. 
im the broad carth kath never comprehended when Somas 
cleeered the Lord of ‘Lawny Coursers. 


ee ae ee ee 


ne 


7 . : ° . _ ®. < ° . = j 

8 Wirth cows : that is, with the milk whichis mixed with Soma. 
The men: who make all preparations for the sacrifices. Zhemouwntains : 
ou which the Soma grows : or perhaps the pressingstones brought from 


the hillside. Zhe water: used to purify the Sbma. ® 10 By thine 
viow nature: by thing own strenzth, or effort ; spontaneonsly. Sakra: 
Mighty One ; 4 common name of Tadra, 2 ° 
.) 

e 


2 Drink of the strong: that is, of the strong Soma juicc, which has 
been shaken- i. o. violently pressed out, by the strong. pressing-stones, 
4 Mighty-voiced: the exact meaning of virapsin is uncertain. Prof. 
Wilsoa renders it, after Sayana, ‘detier of fues’. 


358 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IE. 


5 Mighty and strong he waxed for hero exploit; the Bull was 
furnished with a Sage’s wisdom, 

Indra is our kind Lord; his steers have vigour; his cows are 
many with abundant offspring. 


6 As floods according to their stream flow onward, so to the sea, 
as burne on cars, the waters. 
Vaster is Indra even than his dwelling, what time the stalk 
milked out, the Soma, fills him, 
7 Eaver to mingle with the sca, the rivers carry the well-pressed 
Suma juice to Indra, 
They drain the stalk out with their arms, quick-handed, and 
cleanse it with a stream of mead and filters. 
8 Like lakes appear his flanks filled full with Soma : yea, he con- 
tains libations m abundance. 
When Indra bad consumed the first sweet viands, he, after 
slayusg Vritra, claimed the Soma, 


oo) 


Then bring thou hither, and Jet none prevent it: we know 
thee well, the Lord of wealth and treasure. 

That splendid gift which is thine own, O Indra, vouchsafe to 
us, Lord of the Tawny Coursers. 


10 O fadra, Maghavan, impetuous mover, grant us abundant 
wealth that brings all blessings. 

» Give ns a hundred autumns for our life-time: give us, O fair: 

: cheeked Indra, store of herocs. 

1] Call we on Indra, Maghavan, auspicious, best Hero in the fight 
where spoil is gathered, 


The Strong, who listens, who gives aid in battles, who slays 


the Vritras, wins and gathers riches. « : 
HYMN XXXVII. Indra. 


O Inpra, for the strength that slays Vritra, and conquers in 
the fight, : P 


We turn thee hitherward to us. 


e 
5 /fas cows: | follow Sayana, Roth, Ludwig, and Grassmann in 
giving thig meante, to Mihohindh, as the meaning ‘guerdons,’ ‘dona- 


tious,’ docs not surt the passage, ° 6 As rivers incres-c the size of 
the oceal, 84) fibytions of Soma juice augmcht the Ulroatness of Tndra 
until he ig too vast for Lis home the keaven to contain him, 7 The 
sea: perhapstho Sacrificial reservoir, Z'he rivers : waters used in the 
Soma cercmonieg. Ths drain: that ie, the offciating pricsts. 

9 Bring thou hither: bring the wealth for which we pray. 80 A 


hundred autummns :ece 1 89. 9, 


HY MN 38.) THE RIGVEDA. 359 


2 O Indra, Lord of Hundred powers, may those who praise thee 
hitherward : 
Direct thy spirit and thine eye. 


3 O Indra, Lord of Hundred Powers, with all our songs we in- 
vocate 
Thy names for triumph over foes. _ 
4 Westrive for glory through the powers immense of him whom 
many pratse, 
Of Indva who supports mankind. 
5 For Vritra’s slaughter I address Indra whom many invocate, 
To win us booty in the wars. 
G In battles be victorious. We seck thee, Lord of Hundred Powers, 
Indra, that Vritra may be slain. 
7 In splendid combats of the hosts, in glories where the fight 
is won, 
Indra, be victor over foes. 
8 Drink thou the Soma for dur help, bright, vigilanf, exceeding 


strong, " 
. . e ‘ 
O Indra, Lord of undred Powers. 
9 O Satukratu, powers which thou mid the Five Races hast dis- 
played — : P 
These. Indra, do I claim of thee. 
10 Indra, vreat glory hast thou gained. Win splendid fame which 
none may mar: 2 


. 2 
We make thy might perpetual. 


11 Come io us either from anear, or, Sakra, come from far away. 
Indra, wherever be thy home, come to thence, O Thunder- 
armed. 


, . HYMN XXAXTIL. Indra. 


Hastie like some strong courser good at drawing, athought 
have IT imagmed like a workman. 
Pondering what is dearest and most noble, 1 long to sce the 
sages full of wisdom. 2 
2 Those who praise thee: the instifutess of the sacrifice. 8 
Vogilant : according to Sayina, Soma prevents sleep, 9 Satakratu: 
Lord of a hundred, or countloss; powers. Lhe five faces : Indra 
ig the special protector of the five Aryan tribes. 


This hymn is ascribed to the Rishi Prajapati, of tha family-of Vis- 
vamitra, or Prajapati, son of VAk, or both togerlfer, or Visvamitra 
hunsolf. The deity is said to Be Indra, although lw is mentioned only 
in the concluding verse. The hymn is intentionally obscure, and 


in parts unlatelligible. 1 Like a@ workman : as a Earperter prepares 
his wood. I long to see the sages; that I may lcarn from them 


what I wish to know. 


860 TAK AYMNS OF (BOOK TTI, 


2 Ask of the sages’ mighty generations: firm-minded and devout 
they framed the heaven. 
These are thy heart-sought strengthening directions, and they 
have come to be the sky’s apholders. 


Ge 


Assuming in this world mysterious natures, they decked the 
heaven and earth for high dominion, 


Measured with measures, fixed their ‘none expanses, set the 
great worlds apart held firm for safety, 
4 Evenas be mounted up they all adorned him: sclf-luminous he 
travels clothed in splendour. 


That is the Bull’s, the Asura’s mighty figure: he, omniform 
hath reached the eternal waters. 
§ First the more ancient Bull engendered offspring : these are 
his many draughts that Jent him vigour, 


Frém days of old ye Kings, two Sons of Heaven, by hymns of 
sacriffve have won dowinions 


r . . > r c 
6 Phree seats yo Sovrans, in the holy synod, many, yea, all, ye 
honour with your presence, 


here saw {, going thither in the spirit, Gandharvas in their 
course with wind-blown tresses. 


7 That same compantonship of her, the Much-cow, here with the 
strony Bull’s divers furms they stablished, 


Finduing still some new cclestial figure, the skilful workers 
shaped a form around him. 


8 Let no one here debar me from enjvying the golden light which 
Savitar diffuses, 


6 . . . 
He covers both all-fostering worlds with praisesoven as a wo- 
man cherishes her children, 


3 For hagh dominton : that Indra might rule over them. 4 Mnven 
as he mounted wp: that isy Indra as the Sun. Lhe eternal toaters : 
or, according to Prof. Roth | the forces of eternity’, SE esanane 
een Bull: Indra as the San The sons of Ifeqren? or of Dyaus; 
Varuna and perhaps Mitra ( The Vhree seats are heaven, the 
firmament or mid-ait, and earth, The poet Appears to mean, by the 
words that follow, Ghat i no place of sacrifice 1s duly’ consecrated unless 
these Gods are spiesant The Gandharvas: according tothe Scho- 
litst, arc the guaydians of the Sumas Here, probably, they are merely 
sunbeams. The Jliich-cow is Dawn, &nd the strong Dull is apparent ily 
Jndra as the Sun. “This stanza, Professor Wilson remarks, ‘is slugu- 
Jarly obscure, and is very imperfectly explained, by the commentators. 
8 This stands also is hardly intclligible. 


HYMN 39.) THE RIGVEDA, 361 


9 Fulfil, ye Twain, his work, the Great, the Ancient: as heavenly 
blessnig keep your guard around us, 
All the wise Gods behold his varied actions who stands erect, 


whose voice 1s like a herdsman’s. 


10 Call we on Indra, Maghavan, ausp! icious, best Heroin the 
tight where spoil 13 gathered, 
The Strong, who listens, who wives aid in battles, who slays 
the Vritras, wins and gathers riches. 


HYMN XXXIX., Indra. 


ToIndra from the heart the hymn procecdeth, to him the Lord, 


recited, built with praises ; 
The wakenine song sung forth in holy synod : that which is 


born for biee: Q Indra, notice, 
2 Born from the heavene’en in the days aforetime, wakening, 


sung aloud in holy synod, 
Auspicions, clad in white and shining raiment, this*is the 


ancient hymn of our foréfathers. 
3 The Mother of the Twins hath borage Twin Children : my 
tongae’s tip raised itself and rested silent, 
Killing the darkness at the light’s foundation, the Couple newly 
born attain their beauty. 
4 Not one is fond among them, none of mortals, to blame our 
sires who fought to win the eattle, 
Their strengthener was Indra the Majestic : he spread theig 
stalls of kine, the Wonder-Worker,  % 
5S Where as a ¥ricnd with friendly men, Navagvas, with heroes, 
on his Knees he sought tho cattle. 
There, verily with the Dasagvas Indr} fond the Sun lying 
hidden if the darkness, 


9 Ye Trois apparently Mitea and Varuna. %he Great,,the Ancient : 
Dyaus Whose voice ts like @ herdsman’s: Professor Wilson renders this, 
‘blandly-speaking.’ The meaning appears to bo, using his voice for the 
protection of man, like a herdsman who calls out to his cattle. 


This hvmn and the following thirtean are ascribed to the Rishi 
Vi:vamitra, 2 Clad tv white and shining raiment: clothed with 
enorgy and splendour. 3 The Mother of the Twins : according to 
Sgvana, Ushas or Dawn. Twin (Children: the Agvms. My tongus's tip 
raised itself’: I prepared to praisa the Asvirs, hut was _uuequal to tha 
taal, 4 Sse M, Muller, Chias, TV. 29 (Edition of 1895). ~ o 
Nuvagras: a mythological famity often associated with the Angirasés 
and dascribed as sharing ia Indra’s battles. See [.°33. 6, and 62. 4. 
Dasagvas : members of, or priestly allies connected with, the family of 


Angirag. See I. 62. 4, " 
44 


362 THE HYMNS OF (BOOR III, 


6 Indra Found meath collected in the milch-cow, by foot and 

hoaf, in the cow’s place of pasture, 

That which lay secret, hidden in the waters, he held in his 
right hand, the rich rewarder. 


7 He took the light, discerning it from darkness: may we be far 
removed from all misfortune. 
These songs, O Soma-drinker, cheered by Soma, Indra, accept 
from thy most zealous poet. 


8 Let there be light through both the worlds for worship; may 
we be far from overwhelming evil. 
Great woe comes even from the hostile mortal, piled up ; but 
good at rescue are the Vasus, 


9 Call we on Maghavan, anspicious Indra, best Hero in the fight 
where spoil is gathered, 


The Strong, who listens, who gives aid in battles, who slays 
the Vritras, wins and gather riches, 


HYMN XL. Indra. 


Take, Indra, we invoke, the Bull, what time the Soma is 
expressed, 
So drink thou of the savoury juice. 
2 Indra, whom many laud, accept the strength-conferring Soma 
juice : 
§ Quaff, pour down drink that satisfies, 
8 Indra, with all the Gods promote our wealth-bestowing 
sacrifice, 
Thou higly-lauded Lord of men. 
4 Lord of the brave, to’thee proceed these drops of Soma juice 
expressed, 
The bright drops to thy dwelling-place. 
® Within thy belly, Indra, take juice, Soma the most excellent : 
Thine are the drops celestial. 
6 Drink our libation, Lord of hymns : with streams of meath 
thou art bedewed : 
Our glory, Indra, is thy gift. 
| eee go the <reasures of the worshipper, which never 
ail: ‘ . ; = 
He drinks the Soma and is strong. 


—y 


aan * 


Indra found méath : sweet rain By foot and hoof: tracking the 


cows by their foot-marks. Yhat which lay seoret : the rain which was 
imprisoned én the clouds. . 


AYMN 42.) THE RIGVEDA. 363 


8 From far away, from uear athand, O Vritra-slayer, come 
to us ; ; 
Accept the songs we sing to thee, 
9 When from the space betwean the near and far thou art 
invoked by us, 
Thence, Indra, come thou hitherward. 
HYMN XLl. Indra, 


Invoxen to drink the Soma juice, come with thy Bay Steeds 
Thunder-armed ! . 
Come, Indra, hitherward to me, 
2 Our pricst is seated, true totime; the grass is regularly 
strewn ; 
The pressing-stones were set at morn. 
3 These prayers, O thou who hearest prayer, sare offered : seat 
thee on the grass, ; . 
Hero, enjoy the offered cake. 
4 O Vritra-slayer, ba thou pleased with these libatigns, with 
these hymns, 
Song-loving Indra, with our lauds, 
5 Our hymns caress the Lord of Strength, vast, drinkey of the 
Soma’s juice, 
Indra, as mother-cows their calf. 
6 Delight thee with the juice we pour for thine own grea} 
munificence :; 
Yield not thy singer to reproach. 
7_We, Indra, dearly loving thee, bearing oblation, sing thee 
e 


hymns? * 
Thou, Vasu, dear:y lovest us. 
8 O thou to whom the Bays are dear, loose not tlry Horses far 
from us: 
Here glad thee, Indra, Lord divine. 
9 May long-maned Coursers, dropping oil, bring thee on swift 
car hitherward, a 
Indra, to seat thee on thegrass. 


° HYMN XLII. ° , Indra. 


Comx to the juice that we have pressed, to Sopa, indra, blent 
with milk ; a . = = 
Come, favouring us, the Bay-drawn car! , 
el se pacts Dek ca ae a ene a eee 
9 The space between the near and far: the firmament or mid-air, 
between the earth and the distant sky. i 


364 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK T11. 


2 Come, Indra. tothis gladdening drink, placed on the grass, 
pressed out with stones: 
Wilt thou not drink thy fill thereof ? 
3 To Indra have my sonys of praise gone forth, thus rapidly 
sent hence, 
To turn him to the Soma-draught. 
4 Hither with songs of praise we call Indra to drink the Soma 
juice : 
Will he not come te us by lauds ? 
§ Indra, these Somas are expressed. Take them within thy 
belly, Lord 
Of Hundred Powers, thou Prince of Wealth. 
6 We knowthee winner of the spoil, and resolute in battles, 
Sage, 
Thefefore thy blessing we implore. 
7 Bronce hither by thy Stallions, drink, Indra, this juice which 
we have pressed, 
Mingled with barley and with milk, 
8 Indra, for thee, in thine own place, L urge the Soma for thy 
draught: 
Deep in thy heart Ict it remain. 
9 We call on thee, the Ancient Ona, Indra, to drink the Soma 
« « juice, 
We Kusikas who scek thine aid. 


HYMN XLIII. Indra 


Mounrep upon thy chariot-seat approach us: thine is the 
Soma-draught from days aforetime, 

Loose for the sacred grass thy dear companions, These men 
who bring oblation call thee hither. 


2 Come our true Friend, passing by many people; come with 
thy two Bay Steeds to our devotions ; : 
For these our hymns are calling thee, O Indra, hymns formed 
for praise, soliciting thy friendship. 
3 Pleased, with thy Bay Steeds, Indra, God, come quickly to 
this our sacrifite that heightens worship ;, 


For with my thoughts, presehting oil to feed thee, I call 
- tkee to tite feast of sweet libations. 


9 We Kusvikas: members of the family of Kusika who was the father 
or the grandfather of Visvamitra, the Rishi of the hymoy., 


1 Thy dear companions : thy horses. 


HYMN 44) THE RIGVEDA 365 


4 Yea, let thy two Bay Stallions bear thee hither, well: limbed 
and good to draw, thy dear companions. 
Ple wed with the corn-blent offering which we bring thee, 
may Indra, Friend, Lear his friend’s adoration, 
A Wilt thou not make ine guardian of the psople, make me: im- 
petuous Maghavan, their ruler ? 
Make me a Rishi having drank of Soma ? Wilt thou not give 
me wealth that lasts for ever ? 
§ Yoked to thy chariot, let thy tall Bays, Indra, companions of 
thy banquet, bear thee hither, 


Who from of old press to heaven’s farthest, limits, the Bull’s 
impetuous and well-croomed [orses, 


T Drink of the strong pressed out by strong ones, Indra, that 
which the Faleon b: oem thee when thon lon: sods 3. 


In whose wild joy thou stifrest up the people, tn ‘whose wild | 
joy thou did-f unbar the cow-syillg 


& Call we on Indra. Mavhavan , AUS pICLons, best Hero in the fight 


where spoil is gathered ; 


The Strong, who listens, who gives aid in battles, who slays the 
Vr.tras, wins and atl ies riches. 


TIYMN XLIVY. Indra, 


May this delightsome Soma be expressed for thee by tawny’ 
stanes, 


Joying thereat, O Indra, with thy Bay Steeds come: ascend 
thy golden- euloared car. 


2 In love thou madest Ushas glow, in love thou madest sirya 
shine, 
Thou, Indra, knowing, thinking, Lord of Tawny Stcedg, above 
all elories waxest aa 


8 The heaven with streams of golden hue, earth with her tints 
ol green and gola— 


The golden Pair yield Indra plenteous nourishment : between 
them moves the golden Gne. 


7 The strong: tha Soma juice “ The strong ones : the press stones.-—— 
—That which the Falcon brouaht thee : ‘ mais said to have been lnoughy : 
from heaven by a falcon. Sco [80 2,and93 6. ° 


Throughout the hymn the poet rings the changes on words said to 
be derivatives of the root hrz to take, as haryatd, delichtsore, harydn, 
loving, hdért, bay or tawny, Adrit, green, yellow, or gold-coloured, 2 
Lhe golden One: the Sun. 


366 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK 111, 


4 Whien born to life the golden Bull illumines all the realm of 
heht, 
He takes his golden weapon, Lord of Tawny Steeds, the golden 
thunder in his arms, 
D The bright, the well-loved thunderbolt, girt with the bright, 
Indra disclosed, 
Disclosed the Soma juice pressed out by tawny stones, with 
tawny stecds drave forth the kine. 
HYMN XLV. Indra, 
Come hither, Indra, with Bay Steeds, joyous, with tails like 
peacocks’ pliumes, 
Let no mencheck thy course as fowlers stay the bird : pass 
o’er them as oer desert lands, 
2 He who slew Vrita, burst the cloud, brake the strongholds 
and drave the floods, 
Indra who mounts his chariot at his Bay Steeds’ cry, shatters 
een things that stand most firm. 
3 Like pools of water deep and full, ike kine thou cherishest 
thy might ; 
Like the milch-cows that go well-guarded to the mead, like 
water-brooks that reach the lake, 
4 Bring thou us weaith with power to strike, our share ’gainst 
him who ealls it his. 


« Shake, Indra, as with hooks, the tree for ripened fruit, for 


wealth to satisfy our wish. 

9 Indra, self-ruling Lord art thou, good Leader, of most glorious 
fame, 

So, waxcn in thy strength, O thou whom many praise,be thou 

most swift to hear our eall. = 


4 The golden Bull: Indra as the Sun. 5 Girt wrth the bright: 
surrounded*by flashes of light. With tawny steeds : or by means of 
the tawny pressing—stones, 4, ¢. inspirited by draughts of the expressed 
Soma juice. 


1 Tails lake peacock’s plumes : trailing clouds with fringes df purple 
and gold. 3 Like pools o} water : the meaning appears to bs, as 
Prof. Ludwig suggests: thy mental power is as inexhaustible as the 
water in dee» eprinys, ax safe from harm as carefully guarded cows 
that go withcut strayihy to their pas' ure, and ever full like streams 
that pour weter into a lake. Prot+ssor Wilson, following Sayana, 
Karaphrages thug : ‘Thou cherishest,the celebrator of the pious rite ag 
(thou fillest) the decp seas (with water) ; or as a careful herdsman 
(cherishes) the cows: (thou imbibest the Soma) as cows (obtain) 
fodder, and the juices {17 into thse) as rivulets flow into a lake. 'Kratw, 
which I h&ve rendered by ‘might,’ meaus power, either mental or bodily, 
and sometimes also, especially in later works, a sacrificial ceremany. 
Sayana has filled up supposed ellipses in the most arbitrary way. 


AYMN 41.) THE RIGVEDA, 361 


HYMN XLVI, Indra, 


Or thee, the Bull, the warrior, Sovran Ruler, joyous and fierce, 
ancient and ever youthful, 
The undecaying One who wields the thunder, renowned and 
great, great are the exploits, Indra. 
2 Great art thou, Mighty Lord, through manly vigour, O fierce 
One, gathering spoil, subduing others, 
Thyself alone the universe’s Suvran :so send forth men to 
combat and to rest them, 
3 He hath surpassed all measure in his brightness, yea, and the 
Gods, for none may be his equal. 
Impetuous Indra in Ins might excecdeth-wide vast mid-air and 
heaven and earth together. 


4 To Indra, even as rivers to the ocean, flow forth from = of 

old the Soma juices ; 

To him wide decp and mighty from his birth-time,sthe wall of 
holy thoughts, all-comprehending. 

9 The Soma, Indra, which the eartheand heaveu bear for thee as 
a mother bears her infant, 

This they send forth to thee, this, vigorous Lliro ! — 
purify for thee to drink of, 


HYMN XLVII. Tdi 


Drink, Indra, Marut-girt, as Bull, the Soma, for joy, for nen 
ture even as thou listese 

Pour down the floods of meath within thy belly : thou from of 
old art King of Soma juices. 

2 Indra, accordant, with the banded Maruts, drink Soma, Hero, 

as wise Vritra. slayer. i 

Slay thou ofr fomen, drive away assailants and make us safc 
on every side from danger. 


3 And, drinker at due seasons, drink in season, Indra, wath friend- 
ly Gods, our pressed-out Soma, 
The Maruts following, whom thou madyst sharers, gave thee 
the victury, and thou slewest Vritra 
4 Drink Soma, Indra, banded with ‘the lintuts who, Maghavan, 
strengthened thee at Ahi slaughter r, 
’Gainst Sambara, Lord of Bays! in winning vattle, and now re- 
joice In thee, “he holy Sing gers. 


(ee 


e meanagn 
& Impetuous or, according me) Shana: whom Profergors Wilson and, 
Ludwig follow, ‘drinker of the spiritless Soma juice,” ‘ee des auch dic 
somatrester’. 


a ee 


mn ea ee. 


4 In winning cattle : in recovering the stolen kine, the vanished 
“aye of light, or generally, in batule with the demons of drought. 


868 * THE HYMNS OF (BOOK U1. 


5 The Bull whose strength hath waxed, whom Maruts follow, 
free-giving Indra, the celestial Ruler, 
Mighty, all-conquering. the victory-giver, him let us call to 
grant us new protection. 
HYMN: LXVIIL. Indra. 
Soon asthe young Ball sprang into existence he longed to 
taste the pressed-out Soma’s liquor, | 
Drink thou thy fil, aevcording to thy longing, first, of the 
goodly mixture bleut with Soma, 


2 That dav when thou wast born thou, f in to tasté it drankest 
the plant’s milk which the mountains nourish, 
That milk thy Mother first, the Dame who bare thee, poured 
for thee in thy mighty dtather’s dwelling, 


3 Desiring food he came unto his Mother, and on her breast 
beheid the pungent Soma. 
Wise, he moved on, keeping aloof the other, and wrought 
creat exploits in his varied aspeets. 
4 Fierce, quickly coneuering, of surpassing vigour, he framed 
his body even as he listed. 
Hen from his bith time Indra conquered Tvashtar, bore off 
the Soma and in beakers drank it. 


9 Call we on Maghavan, au-p.cious Indra, best ero in the 
fieht where spoil is cathered 5 
The Strong, who listens, who gives aid in battles, who slays 
the Vritras, wins and gathers riches. 
HYMN XLIX. Indra. 
Great Indra will I laud, in whom all people who drink the 
Soma have attained their longing ; 
Whom, passing wise, Gods, Heaven and Earth, engendered, 
formed by a Master’s hand, to crush the Vritras. 


Ceremonies ee kee rere 


rR e . Y 

® This stanza recurs in VI 19, 11. 

1 The young Pull + Yadra. 2 Which the mownfains neaurtsh: 
the Soma piaat is sad to have grown on the hilla Thy Mothers Aditi, 
Thy mighty Father: aceordiag to the later mythology Kasyapa wis the 
husband of Aditi and father of Tndia and the othar deities, and Savana 

e . r s ) . . : 
RAYS thst ia this PING heres JAagyapa 1 Intended, : Bub it seems alimogt 
certatn that Tvanht wr, whom Tadra conquered atohig pinch, is here 
referred ro ag his mighty Father, Sve Burgaiyne, La Leligin Vediyue, 


KT. o oO iT, : 


TT TC SS ee arin, 


ec 


—r1 

1 #ormed hy a Vastey’ hand « or fashtonad bv Vibhan one of the 
Ribhne. According to Savana, appointed by Brahma for the government 
Of the woeld. Zhe 'riseas: Vritva and similar ficnis, or geuerally, the 
enemies of the Gods aud Aryans. 


AYMN 50.) THE RIGVEDA. 369 


2 Whom, most heroic, borne by Tawny Coursers, verily none 
subdueth in the battle. 
Who, reaching far, most vigorous, hath shortened the Dasyu’s 
life with Warriors bold of spirit, 
3 Victor in fight, swift mover like a war-horse, pervading both 
worlds, rainer down of blessings, 
To be invoked in war like Bhaga, Father, as ’twere, of hymns, 
fair, prompt to hear, strength-giver. 
4 Supporting heaven, the high back vf the region, his car is 
Viyu with his team of V asus, 
IHumining the nights, the Sun’s creator, like Dhishana he 
deals forth strength and riches. 
9 Call we on Maghavan, auspicious Indra, best ILero in the fight 
where spon is gathered ; 
The Strong, who listens, who gives aid in battles, who slays 
the ¥ritcas, Wins and cathers. treasure. ° 


HYMNL.’ ° * Indra. 


Lit Indra drink, All-hail! for his is Soma, —the wen Bull 
come, girt by Maruts, hither. 
Far reaching, let him fill him with these viands, and let ote 
offering sate his body’s longing. 
2 1 yoke thy pair of trusty Steeds for swiftness, whose faithTal * 
service from of old thou lovest. 
Llere, fair of check ! let thy Bay Coursers place thee : drink 
of this lovely well-effused Iibation, » 
3 With milk they made Indra their good Preserver, laudiag for 
help and rule the bountcous rainer- 
Impetuous God, when thou hast drunk the Soma, enraptured 
send us cattle in abundance, 


2 With Warriors bold of spirit: histalliés the Maruts 4 Has 
ear is Vay: the construction of the first hemistich is difficult and the 
sense iy doubtful The meaning may he, as Vayu the God of wind 
mov. s hike a chariowon bigh drawa by the courgerg c€ the air, so Indra 
moves accompanied by the Vasu8 or Maruts, Like Dhishanad: 
the Wish-Goddess, a ae prosidipg over prosperity, "See Im86. i, 
note ; IV. 34.1; Vv. 41. ' 


1 All-hail ?: [take sr@hi here as an exclamatipbn addresse | to 
Indra Sayeny explains the word by soihakritamimnm somam, ( leb 
Tndra drink) chis Soma. offered with Svaha, 3 With mick + with 
Nbations of Some juice mingled Sith milk, 


48 


378 THE HYMNS OF (BOOK fl, 


4 With kine and horses satisfy this longing ; with very spendid 
bounty still extend 1t. 
Secking the light, with hymns to thee, O Indra, the Kusikas 
have brought their gift, the singers. 
& Call we on Maghavan, auspicious Indra, best Hero in the fight 
where spoil 1s gathered ; 
The Strong, who listens, whe gives aid in battles, who slays 
the Vritras, wins and gatbers riches, 


HYMN LI, Indra. 


tir¢n hymns have sounded forth the praise of Maghavan, sup- 
porter of mankind, of Indra meet for lauds ; 

Him who hath waxen great, invoked with beauteous songs, 
linmortal One, whose praise cach day is sung aloud. 


2 To Indra from all sides go forth my songs of praise, the Lord 
of Hunaderd Powers, strong, .lero, like the sca, 


Swift, winner of the booty, breaker-down of forts, faithful and 
ever-glorious, finder of the light. 


3 Where battle’s spoil is piled the singer winneth praise, for 
Jaudra taketh care of matchless worshippers. 

He in Vivasvin’s dwelling findeth his delight : praise thou the 
ever-conquering slayer of the foe. 
°4.Thee, valorous, most heroic of the heroes, shall the priests 

glorify with songs and pralses. 
Full of all wondrous power he goes to conquest : worship is 
his, sole Lord from days aforetime, 


2 Adundantare the gifts he gives to mortals: for him the earth 
bears a rich store of treasures, 
The heavens, the growing plants, the living waters, the forest 
trees preserve their wealth for Indra. 


6 To thee, O Indra, Lord of Bays, for ever are offered preyers 
and songs : accept them gladly. 
As Kinsman think thou of some fresh assistance; good Hriend, 
give strength and life to those why praise thee. 


7 Here, Indra, drink thou Soma “with the Maruts, as thou didst 
drink the juice beside Siryata. 
e. ‘ ; , € : 
Under thy euidance, in thy kecping, Hero, the singers serve, 
e «oxilled in fair sacrifices. 


4 This stanzais found also in Hyinn XXX 20 of this Book, 


4 8 


3 Iu Vavasviin’s dwelling : in the sacrificial chamber of the worship- 
per, See LIL 384 7. 7 Sdrydta ; said by Savana to have been a 
Raja son of Saryata who was perhaps the sume as Saryati, a sun of 


Manu Vaivasvata. See I, 51. 12; 112¢ 17. 


HYMN 52.) THE RIGVEDA. ST 


8 So eagerly desirous drink the Soma, ouc juice, O'lndra, with 


thy friends the Maruts, 
Since at thy brith all Davia adorned thee for the great fi¢ht, 


O thou invoked of many. 
Y 9 Tle was your comrade in your zcal, O. Maruts: they, rich in 
noble gifts, rejoiced in Indra, 
With them together let the Vritra- -slayer drink in his home the 


wWorshipper’s libation, 
10 So, Lord of afflucnt gifts, this juice hath been expressed for 
thee with strength: 
Drink vf it, thou who lovest song. 
11 Incline thy body to this juice which suits thy Godlike natare 


well: 
May it checr thee who lovest it, 


12 Brave Indra, let 1t work through both thy flanks, and trough. 


thy head by prayer, 
And through thine arms, to prosper us, 


HYMN LII. "Indra. 
TworA, accept at break of day our Soma mixt with roasted 
corn 
} ? 


With groats, with cake, with eulegies. 
2 Accept, O Indra, and enjoy the well-dressed sacrificial cake : 
Oblations are poured fourth to thec. Se 
3 Consume our sacrificial cake, accept the songs of praise we sing, 
As he who woos accepts his bride, 
4 Famed from of old, accept the cake at oue libation poured at 
dawn, 
For great, O Indra, is thy power, 
9 Let roasted corn of our midday libation, and sacrMicial cake 
here please thee, Indra. 
What time the lauding singer, keen of purpose and eager as a 
bell, with hymns implores thee. * 
6 At the third sacrifice, O thou whom many praise,’ give glory 
to the roasted corn and holy cake. 
With offered viands and with songs may we assist thee, Sage, 
whom Vaja aod the Ribhus wait upom x 


8 Lor the great fight: the pes with Vritra and the deffiens of 
_ drougho. 


1 With groats, with cake: karambhinam apilpdvantam ; karambha 
is coarsely ground corn, or meal mixed with curds, a kind of gruel: 


apipd is a cake made af flour. Stanzas 1—4, in Gayatri matre, 
accompany the morning offering,; stanz. 5, in Trishtup, the offering of 
noon ; and 6, ia Jagati the evenihg libation. 6 Give glory ; honow 


by accepting. Vija and the Ribhhus ;the three Ribhus. 


372 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK 111. 
7 The groats have we prepared for thee with Piishan, corn for 
thee, Lord of Bay Steeds, with thy horses. 
Eat thou the meal-cake, banded with the Maruts, wise Hero, 
Vritra-slayer, drink the Soma. 
8 Bring forth the roasted corn to mect him quickly, cake for 
the bravest Hero mid the heroes. 
Indra, may hymns accordant with thee daily strengthen thee, 
Bold One, for the draught of Soma, | 


HYMN LIIt. Indra, Parvata, te, 


On a high ear, O Parvata and Indra, bring pleasant viands, 
with brave heroes, hither. 
Enjoy the vifts, Gods, at our sacrifices ; wax strong by hymns, 
rejoice in our oblation. 
2 Stay still, O Maghavan, advance no farther, a draught of 
well-pressed Soma will [ give thee. 
Witk sweetest song I grasp, © Mighty Indra, thy garment’s 
hem asa child grasps his father’s 
3 Adhvaryu, sing we both; sing thou in answer: make wea 
land acceptable to Indra. 
Upon this sacrificer’s grass be seated : to Indras’ all our calogy 
. be uttered. 


“4 ‘A wife, O Moghavan, is home and dwelling : so Ict thy Bay 
Steeds yoked convey thee ither. 


Whenever we press out fur thee the Soma, let Agni as our Herald 
speed to call thee., 


5 Depart, O Maghavan; again come hither ; both there and here 
thy goal is, Indra, Brother, 


@ 
Where thy tall chariot hatha place to rest in, and where thou 
{cosest thy loud-neighing Courser. 


e. x 
T Wath Piishan : because karambha, groats or gruel is the usual 
offering tothat God. Corn: for [odra‘s horses, 
€ 


e 

To addition to Pndra and his frequent associate Puvwite the Genius 
of the mountains and ‘clouds, the Goddess Vak or Speech(stangag 15 14) 
peed the several parts of the chariot’oy wain (17, 20) are ppaneilad fe 
deities or objects reversntly mentioned or addressed im this hymn l 
With brave heroes: accompanied, or followed by heroic sone, 3 
Adiraryu, aig we both: the Hotar calls on the Advharyu to join him 
in the performance of tho ceremony. 4 A wiye...... wn home and 
dw-llting ; or perhaps, ‘Wife, Maghavan, is home, so is this chamber:’ 
that is, Injra is to regard the aacciticial «chamber as his home for the 
present, until he rm turns to his consort and bis other heme in beaven, 


AYMN 53.) THE RIGVEDA. 373 


6 Thou hast drunk Soma, [ndra, turn thee homeward ; thy joy 
is in thy home, thy gracious Consort ; 
Where thy tail chariot hath a place to rest in, and thy strong 
_Courser is set free with guerdon. 


% Bounteous are these, Angirases, Virtpas: the Asura’s Heroes 
and the Sons of Heaven. 
They, giving Store of wealth to Visvimitra, prolong his life 
through countless Soma-pressings. 
S Maghavan wearcth every shape at pleasure, effecting magic 
chanves in his body, 
Holy One, drinker out of season, coming thrice, in a moment, 
through fit prayers, frum heaven. 
9 The mighty sage, Goud-born and God-ineited, who looks on men, 
restrained thefbillowy river, 
When Visvimitra was Sudas’s escort, then Indra throtgh the 
Kusikas grew friendly. ? . 
10 Like swans, prepare ascne of prajse with pressing ‘stones, glad 
7 . e - . s 
in your hyinus with juice poured forth 1u sacrifice, 
Ye singers, with the Gods sages who lovk on‘men, ye Kusikas, 
drink up the Soma’s savoury weath, 


11 Come forward, Kusikas, and be attentive ; let louse Sudis’s 
horse to win him riches. 
Kast, west, and north, let the King slay the foeman, then at, 
earth’s choicest place pertrom his worship, 
12 Praises to Indra havel-ung, sustainer of this earth and heaven. 
This prayer of Visvimitra kecps secure the race of Bharatas, 


6 The gracious Consort: Indrani. With gueridon : with corn and water. 
7 Professor Wilson, fulluwing Sayana, paraphrases : ‘Thega sacrificers 
ave (/hojas), of whom the diversitied Angirases (are the pricsts) and 
the heroic sons of the expeller (of the fues of the Gods) from heaven, 
bestoyging riches upon Vigsvamitra at the sacrifice of a thousand(victims), 
prolong his life’ The Brojas (bounteoue ones) are gaid to be the 
K shauriya descendants of Sudis and the diversified Angirases Medhatithi 
and the resp of the race of Angi®as ‘The Asura, explained by Sgyana 
as the expeller of the foes of the Gods from heaven, is said to be Rudra 
and his sons are ths Maruts, The Virdpas are connected with Angiras 
in X. 62. 5., and a Virdpa is mentioned in I. 45 3. andsVIIL. 4,6. , 8 
Drinker out of season : drinking thd celestial Soma wltenever be wishts, 
irrespectively of the appointed times for libations qn earth. Thrice : to 
the three daily libationg. 9 The mighty sage: Visviimitra. See 
TIT 39, note. lt In this and the two following stanzas implore 
the aid of Indra for Kinz Sudas who is going forth to battle. Harth’s 
choicest place : the altar. 12 The race of Bharatas: the descendants 
of Visvamitra, Bharata being tig son of the celebrated Saknntala who 
was Visvamitra’s danghter by the Apsaras Mend. See Vedic India 
(Story of the Nations serios), pp 319 £f. 


374 THE AYMNS OF (BOOR fl. 


13 The Visvimitras have sung forth this prayer toIndra Thunder, 
armed : 
So let him make us prosperous. 
14 Among the Kikatas what dothy cattle? They pour no milky 
diaucht, they heat no caldron. 
Brinz thou to us the wealth of Pramaganda; give up to us, O 
Meehavan, the low-born. 
15 Sasarpari, the gift of Jamadagnis, hath lowed with mighty 
voice dispelling famine. 
The Daughter of the Sun hath spread our glory among the 
Gods, imperishable, deathless. 
16 Sasa: pari brought glory speedily to these, over the generations 
of the Fivefoid Race ; 
Daughter of Paksha, she bestows new vital power, she whom 
the ancient Jamadaynis gave to me. ne 


of mer ee 


anne 


14 The Aetkatas: the non—Aryan ing@iabrtants of a country (probably 
Kosala or Oudh) usually iden Rtyed with S mr eae bihar. The meanning 
ig that thp cuws bestowed by Dueira ara unucofitable when in the posses. 


sion of men who do not worship the Aryan Gods. Pramuaganta s the 
prince of the Kikatas 5 according to Savane the word moans ‘the son of 
bhe usurer. 15 S isn pare hie gilt of Janie ry es : according to 


Sayana, Savarpart (swift!y movins, or gadimeg ove ywhure), is a nane 
or an epi het of Vak, Vere or Sovech, the daucshter cf Siyana or the 
Sun, The tollowms is Dr. Muir’a tran daticn of sayane’s quotation 
frome Shadvarusivaya’s Comm nary onthe Anukremamka, as given 
with an addition ino Wobers Jn tascie Nteucdien : ‘Reovarding the two 
verses beegluning ‘Sassep wi” thor aquataed with antiquil y tell a 
story. At asacrifice of king Saucg-a the power and speuch of Visva- 
mitra were comletely vangui-hed by Sskti, son of Vasishtha; and the 
son of Gadhi (Visvamitra) belas so overcams, beosme Gejected. The 
Jumadagnis drew from the abode of the sun a voice called “Sasapari” 
the dauchtceof Brahma or of the sun, and gave her to him. Then 
that Voice somewhat dispelled the disquiet of tha Jamadagnis [or, 
according to the reading of tha ling given by Savana “that Voreo, 
being inteihigence, dispelled the uaintelliganes of the Kusikas’ | Yisva- 
witra then incited the Kusikas with the words wpapreta ‘approach’ 
(see verse Li). And being’ eladdtned by receiving the Voier, he patd 
homage to the Jamadaynis praising thom with the vwo versos bavin- 
ning ‘Sasdeparil’ —O. 2 Vexcts, | 3b Prof. Ludwig is inclined to agree 
with Prof Roth whe thirfks that sasarparf may meat a war—trumpet, 
which inspirits the combatants and dispuls their fear of the enemy Prof. 
Gragsufafio argues that mimdya, hath lowed, is applicable only to a 
cow or bull, and thinks that -asarpart mieans the mystic cow Sabardu- 
ghi, thecow who les her milk flow abundautly. Lam inclined to 
preter the explantjon of the Ladian commeatator, although it cannot be 
regarded ag entirely satisfactory, Tne Simadtagnis. according to 
Sayana, are [tishis who mvintain @ blazing tira. 16 The Fivefold 
face: the five tribes of Aryan nen ; according ta Saysna, the four 
castes, and barbarians or non—Aryans, * Daughter of Paksha: that 
is, of tue Sun who causes the ligho and dark periods of the moon. 


HYMN 53.) THE RIGVEDA. 375 


17 Strong be the pair of oxen, firm the axles, let not the pole slip 
nor the yoke be broken. 
May Indra keep the yoke-pins from decaying : attend us, thou 
whose fellies are uninjured. 
18 O Indra, give our bodics strength, strength to the bulls who 
draw the wains, 
Strength to our seed and progeny that they may live, for thou 
art he who giveth strength. 

19 Enclose thee in the heart of Khayar timber, in the car wrought 

of Sinsapa’ put firmness, 
Show thyself strnog, O Axle, fixed and strengthened ; throw us. 
not from the car whereon we travel. 

20 Let not this sovran of the wood leave us forlorn or injure as. 
Safe may we be until we reach our homes and rest us aud un- 
oke. 

21 With varioue aids day come to us, Indra, with best aids 

speed us, Maghavan, thou Hero. ° 
Let him who hateth os falf headlong downward him whom 
we hate let vital breath abandgn. 

22 He heats his very axe, and then cutsa mere Semal biossim ofl. 
O Indra, like a caldron cracked and seething, so he pours out 

foam. 

ee ee - Sayers esc et eee Ona os (Seen eee 
17 In this and the three following stanzas Visvamitra being about 

to depart from King {Sudas’s sacrificial hall blesses, or invukes good luck 

for, the several parts of the chariot or wain on which he 13) goireg tce 
travel, Altend us: the chariot is here addressed 19 AKhayar tamber : 
the hard wood of the Khadira, or Acacia Catechu, of which the pin of 
the axle was inade Snes spd : Dilbercia Sisa, also a Gammon trarber— 


tree, 20 This sovran of the wood: the tigber of which tha body of 
the car is made. =, 21 Peof. eth is of opiaion that this hymn 


consists of fragmeats composed by Visvdimitra or his desecendants 
at diffverent dates, and that the varses (J—13), in whieh thao Riehi 
represeuts himself and tha Kusilas boing the priestsas of Sudgs are 
extlicr than the concluding var-es (21-2), which consiet of impreca- 
tions dirccted againstVasishtha. These last verses, he remarks, coutaln 
an cxBression of wounded pride, and threaten vengeance against an 
enemy who had come into possession of s8me power or dignity which 
Visvamitra himse'f had prevjously enjoyed, With regard to the 
relations between Visvamitra and Vasishtha as priests of Suda, sea 
Muir's Original Sogskrit Texts, I pp. 371 ff. * %2 Professor Wilson 
remarks: ‘The construction is @lliptical : the ellipse is supplied by the 
scholiast, a9 the tree is cus down ky the axe so may the euem} baxut 
down: as one cuts off without, difficulty the flower of the Simbala ‘go 
may he be destroyed : as the cauldron when struck,and thence leaking, 
scattars foam or breath from its mouth, so may that hater, struck by 
the power of my prayer, vomit foam from his mouth’. Tho phrases are 
probably, as Ludwig explains, merely proverbial +xpressions for threats 
full of sound and fury followed by insingnificant results, The 
Semal (Simbala) is the Silk—cotton tree. 


876 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 11 


23 Men notice not the arrow, O ye people; they bring tbe red 
beast deeming it a bullock, 
A sluggish steed men run not with the courser, nor ever lead 
an ass before a charger, 


24 These men, the sons of Bharata, O Indra, regard not severance 
or close connexion. 


They urge their own steed as it were another’s, and take him, 
swift as the bow’s string. to battle, 


HYMN LIV. Viscdevas. 


To him adorable, mighty, mect for synods, this streythening 
hymn, unceasing, have they offered, 


May Agni hear us with heavenly splendours, hear us, Eter- 
nal One, with heavenly lustre. 


2 To mighty Heaven and Earth I sing forth loudly: my wish 
gces out desirous and well knowing. 


Both, at whose laud in synods, ‘showing favour, the Gods re- 
joice them with the living mortal. 


23 Men notice not the arrow: or, according to Séyana, ‘men heed 
not the destroyer,’ i», the power of VisvAamitra who will destroy his 
enemies isnot known to, or regarded by his opponents. Theg bring 
the racé beast: the meaning of lodhdim is uncertain SAyana explains it 
as /ubdham, desirous (that his penance might not be frustrated). Prof. 
‘oth eugvests that /odh-im means red, and denotss an animal of some 
kind contrasted with past («tame or sacrificial animal, a bullock), 
80 that the clause would have some what the sam? meaning ay ‘they 
Jook on the wolf as if it were a hare’ Durga, the commentator on the 
Nirukia, says: The text im which this word (/od¢éhd) occurs 1s.a Verse 
expressiiy hatred of Vayishtha. Bab Tama -Kapisithal:. of the family 
of Vasishtha; and therefore do nob interpret it’ . See Muir's OS. 
Pevts, Lo pp. Sik, 372 Deeming it a bullock: according to Sayana 
thinking tha sage, Visvamitra, who kept silence of his own accord to 
be merely stupid like some inferior animal.- In the secoud line the 
rivalry of Vasihtha with himself appears to be rid.culed. 24 The 
son of Bharata: de-cendants and adherents of Visvimitra. * Prof. 
Wils6n, following S&yana, paraphrases the stanza: ‘These sons of 
Bharata, [ndra, understand sevarance (from the Vaishthas), not as-ocia- 
tion (with them), they urge their streds (against them) as against a 
constant fos ; they dear a stuut bow (for their dest uction) in battle’. 
The word dranam, strange, foreign, another's, gives no intelligible sensa 
Prgf Zudwig sugvestsin its place ,karanam: an cVver-ready helper. 
Dr. Muir suggests that the word may maan ‘as if to a distance’. 


1 To him: Agni. Meet for synods: to be worshipped in sacrificial 
assamblies ¢ Duy dAyut hear ws: both as terrestrial fre used for sacri- 
‘fice and domestic purposes and as celestial fire in the form of the Sun, 
They: the priestly singers. 2 Ayowiny both: recognizing the 
greatnuss Of Heaven and Harth. Zhe diving mortal ; mou as worshippers. 


AYN” 58 | THE RIGVEDA., 385 


4 Fixing with thonght, at sacrifice, the press-stones, I bid the 
well-formed Heaven and Earth come hither ; 
For these thy flames, which give men boons in plenty, rise up 
on high, tie beautiful, the holy. 
5 Agni, thy meath-sweet tongue that tastes fair viands, which 
among Gods is called the far-extended,— 
Therewith make all the Holy Ones be seated here for our help, 
and feed them with sweet juices, 
6 Let thy stream give us drink, O God, O Agni, wonderful and 
exhaustless like the rain-clouds, 
Thus care for us, O Vasu Jitavedas, show us thy loving-kind- 
ness, reaching al! men. 


HYMN LVIII. Asvins, 


Tue Ancient’s Milch-cow yiclds the things we long see the 
Son of Dakshin& travels between them. 
She with the splendid charfot brings refulgence. ‘The praise 
of Ushas hath awoke the Asvins. 
2 They bear you hither by well- ordered statute : out sacred 
offerings rise as if tu parents. 
Destroy in us the counsel of the niggard : come hitherward, 
for we have shown you favour. ° 
3 With lightly. rolling car and well-yoked horses hear this, the 
press-stone’s song, ye Wunder-Workers. 
Have not the sages of old time, ye Asvins, called you most’ 
prompt to come and stay misfortune ? 


4 Remember us, and come to us for ever men, as their wont is, 
invocate the Asvins, - 
Friends asat wore have offered you these juices, sweet, blent 
with milk at the first a of morning. 


2 Even through many regions, O ye Asvins—high prdise‘is yours 
among mankind, ye Mighty — 
Come, nel pers, on the paths which Gods have travelled : here 
your libations of sweet meath are réady. 


OT A Nt i oR 


i aaa aR ara eee a eR OR AB CP Oe ene op eer gr ee a oe 
4 Thy flames ;O Agoi. 6 Jdtavedas ; knowing all things that live 
® 


or exisb. 
t 


1 The Ancient’s’Milch cow : hounteous Ushaa Sr Dawn, daughter 
of ancient Dyaus or Heaven. Dakshind: the sacrificial guerdon pers 
soolted, Her son is Agni, the Suh who travels besween heaven tad 
earth 2 They : our offerings of prayer and praisg. Destroy in us :. 
remove from us all illiberal thoughts and let us be bounteous in our 
worship of the Gods. 5 Even through many regions : come to ug 
even from far away, although wavy other worshippers also Will try to 
detain you. 


o0 ° 


386 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK II. 


6 Ancient your home, auspicious is your friendship : Heroes, 
your wealth is with the house of Jahnu. 
Forming again with you auspicious friendship, let us rejoice 
with draughts of meath together. 
7 O Asvins, Very Mighty Ones, with Vaya and with his steeds, 
one-minded, ever-youthtul, 
Nasatyas, joying in third day’s Soma, dirnk it, not hostile, 
Very Bounteous Givers, 
8 Asvins, to vou are brought abundant viands in rivalry with 
sacred songs, unceasing. 
Sprung from high Law your car, urged on by press-stones, 
goes round the earth and heaven in one brief moment. 
9 Asvins, your Soma sheds delicious sweetness: drink ye thereof 
and come unto our dwelling, 
Your car, assuming many ashape, most often goes to the 
Soma presser’s place of meeting, 


HYMN LIX, Mitra, 


Mitra, when speaking, stirreth men tolabour : Mitra sustain- 
eth both the earth and heaven. 

Mitra beholdeth men with eyes that clcse not. To Mitra 
bring, with holy oil, oblation. 

2 Foremost be he who brings thee food, O Mitra, who strives to 

keep thy sacred Law, Aditya, 

He whom thou helpest ne’er is slain or conquered, on him, 
from near far, falls no affliction, 


3 Joying in sacred focd and free from sickness, with knees bent 
lowly on the earth’s broad surface, : 
Following closely the Aditya’s statute, may we remain in 
Mitra’s gracious favour, 


4 Auspicious and adorable, this Mitra was born with fair domi- 
nion, king, Disposer. 
May we enjoy the grace of him the Holy, yea, rest in Ifis pro- 
pitious loving- kindness, 


5 The great Aditya, to be served with worship, who stirreth 
men, gracious tq the singer. 


e & Fhe hove of Jahnn : the family of the Kusikas, of whom Jahnu 
was theancestor’ ‘Jahnu's children,’ "are mentioned as having been 
favoured worshippers of the Asvins in Book I. 116.19. 7 The thir 
day's Soma : pressed out the day before yesterday, and in the meantime 
left to ferment, 


=o 


1 Stirreth men to labour : Mitra being the God of Day, Cf. VII. 362. 


\! 


HY MN 60.) THE RIGVEDA. 3R7 


To Mtira, him most highly to be lauded, offer in fire oblation 
that he loveth, 


6 The gainful grace of Mitra, God, supporter of the race of man, 
Gives splendour of most glorious fame. 


7 Mitra whose glory spreads afar, he who in might surpasses 
heaven, 
Surpasses carth in his renown. 


8 All the Five Races have repaired to Mitra, ever strong to aid, 
For he sustaineth all the Gods. 


9 Mitra to Gods, to living men, to him who strews the holy 
rass, 


g 
Gives food fulfilling sacred Law, 


HYMN LX. Ribhus. 


Here is your ghostly kinship, here, O Men: they came, desir- 
ous to these holy rites with store of wealth, 


With wondrous arts, whereby, with schemes to meet each 
need, ° ) . 
Ye gained, Sudhanvan’s Sons ! your share in sacrifice. 


2 The mighty powers whercwith ye furmed the chalices, the 
thought by which ye drew the cow from out the hidg 
The intellect wherewith ye wrought the two Bay Steeds,— 
through these, O Rlbhus, ye attained divinity, 


3 Friendship with Indra have the Ribhus fully gained : gramd- 
sons of Manu, they skilfully urged the work. 
Sudhanvan’s Children won them everlasting life, serving with 
holy rites, pious with noble acts. 


4 In company with Indra come ye to thé juice, then gloriously 
shall your wishes be fulfilled. 
Not tobe paragoned, ye Priests, are your good, decds, nor 
your heroic acts, Ribius, Sudhanvan’s Sons, 


9 O Indra, with the Ribhus, Mighty Ones, pour down the Soma 
jgice effused, well-blent, from both the hands. 
Maghavan, urged by song, in the dripk-vfferer’s house rejoice 
thec with the Heroes, with Sudhanvan’s Sons. 


aa a a Ses cece me ie ee ae ee 


8 All lhe Five, faces: All Aryan men. 2.9 Gives foad fulfilling 
sacred Law : the food which enables men to offer the appointed sacri- 
fices. ; e ) 7 

1 Here ta your ghostly kinship: hero, in the sMrificial chamter 
where the deities are worshipped, ye, Ribhus, oraginally men, are 
spiritually connected with the Gods as partakers of sacrificial offerings. 

They: the Ribhus. Wath store of wealth: their great ekill; the ‘ won. 
drous arts’ ef the following line. & See I, 20. 2, 3, 4, 


388 THE HYMNS OF (BOOK IIL 


6 With Ribhu near, and Waja, Indra, here exult, with Sachi, 
praised of many, in the juice we pour. 
These homes wherein we dwell have tuined themselves to thee, 
--devotiuns to the Gods, as laws of men ordain. 


7 Come with the mighty Ribhas, Indra, come to us, strengthen- 
ing with thy help the singer’s holy praise ; : 
At hundred cager calls gome to the living man, with thousand 
arts attend the act of sacrifice. 


HYMN LXI. Ushas. 


O Ushas, strong with strength, endowed with knowledge, 
accept the singer’s praise, O wealthy Lady. 
Thou, Goddess, ancient, youny, and fullof wisdom, movest, 
all-bounteous ! as the Law ordaineth. 
2 Shine forth, O Morning, thou auspicious Goddess, on thy 
bright car awaking pleasant yoices. 
Let docile horses of far-reacuing splendour convey thee 
hitherward, the golden-coloured. 
3 Thou, Morning, turning thee to every creature, standest on 
high as ensign of the Immortal. 
o one same coal ever and ever wending : now, like a wheel, 
_G newly-born, roll hither. 
4 Letting her reins drop downward, Morning cometh, the 
wealthy Dame, the Lady of tha dwelling ; 
Bringing forth light, the Wonderful, the Blessed hath spread 
her from the bounds of earth and heaven, 
5 Hither invoke the radiant Goddess Morning, and bring with 
reverence your hymn to praise her, 
She, dropping sweets, hath set in heaven her brightness, and, 
fair to look ov, hath beamed forth her splendour. 
6 From heaven, with hymns, the Holy One was wakened : 
_ brightly to both worlds came the wealthy lady. 
40 Morning, Agni, when she comes refulgent, thop goest 
forth soliciting fair riches, 
7 On Law’s firm base the speeder of the Mornings, the Bull, 
hath entered mighty earth aud heaven. , 
Great is the péwer of Varuna and Mitra, which, bright, hath . 
spread in every place its splendour, 
rs -S Vacht : Miche, personified, the Consort of Inia. (7 The living 
man : the worshipper. : 
3 The Immortal : the Sun. 4 Lotling her reins drop: parhapas 


sending Gown rays of light. 7 The Bull : the Sun, wha, as following 
the Dawns, may be said to urge them onward. ; 


HYMN 62.) TAR RIGVEDA. _ 889 
HYMN LXII. Indra and Others. 


Your well-known prompt activities aforetime needed no im- 
pulse from yvur faithful servant. 
Wiere, Indra-Varuna, is now that glory wherewith ye 
brought support to those who loved you ? 
2 This man, most diligent, seeking aftcr riches, incessantly 
invokes you for your favonr, 
Accordant, Indra- Varuna. withMaruts, with Heaven and Earth, 
hear ye mine invocation, 
3 O Indra-Varuna, ours b- this treasure, ours be wealth, Maruts, 
with full store of heroes. 
May the Var(fitris with their shelter aid as, and Bhiérati und 
Hotra with the Mornings. 
4 Be pleased with our oblations, thou loved of all Gods, Bribas- 
pati: 2 $ 
Give wealth to him who brings thee gifts. 
5 At sacrifices, with your hymns Worship the pure Brihaspati— 
I pray for power which none may bend— 
6 The Bullcf men, whom none deceive, the wearer of each 
shape at will, ¢ 
Brihaspati Most Excellent. 
7 Divine, resplendent Pishan, this our newest hymn of eulpgy 
By us is chanted forth to thee, 
8 Accept with favour this my song, be gracious to the earnest 
thought, | . 
Even as a bridegroom to his bride.» 


The bymn consists of six trichas or triplets, the deities of which 
are severally (1) Indra and Varuna, (2) Brihaspati, (3) Pa-han, (4) 
Savitar, (5) Soma, (6) Mitra and Varuna. 1 Thie stanza is difi- 
cult on account of the uncertainty of the meaning of barimdyuh in the 
first @ine and of sfnam in the second’ Professor Wilsou readery is: 
‘Indra and Varuna, may theve people wha are relying upon you, and 
wandering about (in alarm), sustain no mjury from a youthtul (adver. 
eary) ; for where ix that reputfion (you enjoy) ou account that you 
bestow sustenance ou your friends ? Professor, Lidwig’s translation jig 
to the fullowing effect : § These {hat are counted yhurs, these whirling 
weapons, were made not to be hurled at your dependent sVaruns, Mitra, 
where is this your glory, wiereawith against your frisads ye send yur 
missile ? My version follows Profo-sor Roth’s interpretation in the Se. 
Petersburg Lexicon 2 This man? the worshipper. 3 She 
Vardtrés : guardian Goddesses ; the Consorts of the Gods, according to 
the Commantator. Bhdralt and Hotra : Goddesses presiding over diffa- 
rent departments of religious worship. 4 Brihaspats: Lord of Prayer, 


390) THE HYMNS OP [BOOK 111. 


9 May he who sees all, living things, aces them together ata 
glance,— 
May he, may Pishan be our help. 
10 May we attain that excellent glory of Savitar the God : 
So may he stimulate our prayers. 
11 With understanding, earnestly, of Savitar the God we crave 
Our portion of prosperity. 
12 Men, singers worship Savitar the God with hymn and holy 
rites, 
Urged by the impulse of their thoughts. 
13 Soma who gives success goes forth, goes to the gathering- 
place of Gods, 
To seat him at the seat of Law, 
14 To us and to our cattle may Soma give salutary food, 
To biped and to qnadrapcd. 
15 May‘Soma, strengthening our power of life, and conquering 
our foes, 
In our assembly take his scat. 


16 May Mitra-Varuna, sapient Pair, bedew our pasturage with 
oil 
With meath theeregions of the air. 
17 Far-ruliog, joyfal when adored, ye reign throuzh majesty of 
might, 
With pure laws everlastingly. 


18 Lauded by Jamadagni’s song, sit in the place of holy Law: 
Drink Soma, ye who strengthen Law. = 


ee 


10 This stanza is the Savitri, the Gayatri par excellence, ‘ the cele- 
brated verse of the Vedas which forms part of the daily devotions of 
the Brahmans, and was first made known to English readera by Sir 
W. Jone.’s translation of & paraphrastic interpretation ; he rendira it, 
Let us adore the supremacyof thav divine sun, the god-head, who illumi- 
nates all, from whom all proceed, to whom all must returo, whom we 
invoke to direct our, understandings fright in our progress towards 
hie holy seat.’—Wilaon S-e Rigvedd, Sanhita Vol. [TT p. 111. 13 
The gathering-place of Gods : the sacrikei:} chamber. Zhe seat of Law : 


the plac® where sacrifica ordained hy eternal Law is performed. 16 
Wh ow : with clibified butter, with faineas, that is, with fertilizing rain. 
With meath: or with horey that is with swect refreshing dew. 18 


Jamadagnt, may, according to Savana, be in this place au epithet of 
Visvamitrga, and* mean‘ by whom the fire bas been kindled ;’ or 
Jamadagné may be anot! er Rishi and the seer of the hymn. 


BOOK THE FOURTH, 


HYMN I, Agni. 


Tate, Agni, have the Gods, ever of one accord, sent hither 
down, a God, appointed messenger, yea, With their wisdom 
sent thee down. 

The Immortal, O thou Holy One, mid mortal men, the God- 
devoted God, the wise, have they brought forth, brought 
forth the omnipresent God-devoted Sage, 

2 As such, O Agni, bring with favour to the Gods thy Brother 
Varuna who leveth sacritice, the Chief who loveth sacrifice, 

True to the Law, the Aditya who supporteth men, the’ King, 
supporter of mankind. 6 : 

8 Do thou, O Friend, turo hither him who is our Friend, swift 
asa wheel, like two car-steeds in rapid course, Wond:ous ? 
to us in rapid course, 

QO Agni, find thou grace for us with Varuna, with Maruts 
who illumine all, ; 

Bless us, thou Radiant One, for seed and progeny, yea, bless 
us, O thou Wondrous God. 


4 Do thou who knowest Varuna O Agni, put far away fruth ais 
the God’s displeasure. 
Best Sacrificer, brightest One, refulgent, remove thou far 
from us all those who hate us. 


i 
5 Be thou, OrAgny, nearest us with succour, our closest Friend 
while now this Morn ts breaking, 
Reconcile to us Varuna, be bounteous : enjoy the gracious 
juice ; be swift to hear us, 


6 Excellent is the glance, of brightest splendour. which the 
fuspcious God bestows on mortals,— 

The God’s glance, longed-for even ay the butter, pure, hcatcd 

of the cow, the mileh-cow’s bounty. ; 


¢ Three are those births, the true, the most exalted eagerly 
longed-for, of the God, of Agni. : 

He game invested in the beundless region, pure, vadiant 
friendly, mightily resplendent. ‘: aia 

This bymn, and the following forty, are ascribed tothe Rishi Vi- 

madeva, son of Gotama. 7 Three are those dirths’: the manifesta- 

tions of Agni in heaven as the Sun, in the firmawent as lightning, and 

on earth as sacrificial and domestic fire. 


302 THE HYMNS OP (BOOK 111. 


8 This envoy joyeth in all «eats of worship, borne on his golden 
Car, sweet-tongued Iuveker : 
Lovely to lock on, with red steeds, effulgent-like a feast rich 
in food, joyous for ever, 


9 Allied by worship, Ict him give man knowledge: by anex- 
tended cord they lead him onward, ; 


He stays, effectual, in this mortal’s dwelling, and the God 
wins a share in his possessions. 


10 Let Agni—-for he knows the way =conduct us to all that he 
enjoys of God-sent riches, 


What all the Immortals have prepared with wisdom, Dyaus, 
Sire, Begetter, raining down true blessings, 


11 In houses first he sprang into existence, at great heaven’s base, 
and in this region’s bosom ; 


Footless,and headless, both his ends cuncealing, in his Bull’s 
lair drawing himself together, 


12 Wondrously first he ose aloft, defiant, in the Bull’s lair, the 
home of holy Order, 


Longed-for, young, beautiful, and far-resplendent : and seven 
dar friends sprang up into the Mighty. 


13 Here did our human fathers take their places, fain to fulfil 
the sacred Law of worship. 


orth drave they. with loud call, Diwn’s teeming Milch-kine 
hid in the mountain-stable, in the vavern, 


14 Splendid were they when they had rent the mountain: others, 
around shall tell forth this their exploit, 
They sang their song, Prepared to free ths cattle: they found 
the light 5 with holy hymns they worshipped, 


8 Sweel-tongned ¢ withe tasting the oblations , or, perhaps, pleasant: 
voiced. 9 By an eatendet cord : by virtue of the endless chain o¢ 
series of regularly performed saccifioes, Hffectual : perfecting the sa- 
crifices, or fulnlling all the desires of the worshipper. A share in his 
porseasions : bacaure the wealth of the worshipper depends Upon the 
favour of Agni. “°11 Footless and hgwilasa : whithour distinguishable 
bead or fpen =. His Bull's lair : apparently the fu-l in which he grows 
stecug ; according;to Savana, ‘ia the most of the rain cloud,’ 12 The 
home of holy Order: the altar, the place of law-appointed sacrifice 
Seven dear friends : seven minor priests : or the frequantly mentioned 
seven tongues Oreavs of fire, 13° Our human fathers : the Anyir- 
ares. Teething Milch-kine: the rays of light , 14 Splendid ; illus 
mined by the recovered rays of light. 


AYNM 58) THE RIGVEDA. 385 


4 Fixing with thoaght, at sacrifice, the press-stones, I bid the 
well-formed Heaven and Earth come hither ; 
For these thy flames. which give men boons in plenty, rise up 
on high, the beautiful, the holy. 


6 Agni, thy meath-sweet tongne that tastes fair viands, which 
among Gods is called the far-extended,— 
Therewith make all the Holy Ones be seated here for our help, 
and feed them with sweet juices, 
6 Let thy stream give us drink, O God, O Agni, wonderful and 
exhaustless like the rain-clouds, 
Thus care for us, O Vasu Jatavedas, show us thy loving-kind- 
ness, reaching all men. 


HYMN LVIII. Asvings. 


Tue Ancient’s Milch-cow yiclds the things we long for: the 
Son of Dakshing travels between them. 

She with the splendid charjot brings refulgence. ,The* praise 
of Ushas hath awoke thé Asvins. 

2 They bear you hither by well-ordered statute : ouy sacred 

offerings rise as if to parents. 

Destroy in us the counsel of the niggard ; come hitherward, 
for we have shown you favour. 


3 With lightly-rolling car and well-yoked horses hear this, the 
press-stone’s song, ye Wunder- Workers. 
Have not the sages of old time, ye Asvins, called you most 
prompt to come and stay misfortune ? 


4 Remember us, and come to us for ever men, as their wont is, 
invocate the Asvins, 
Friends as it were have offered you thtse juices, sweet, blent 
with milk at the first break of morning. , 
9 Even through many regions, O ye Asvins—high praise'is yours 
among mankind, ye Mighty — 
Come, uelpers, on the paths which Gods have travelled : here. 
Your libations of sweet meath are ready. 


4 Thy flames ;O Agui. 6 Jatavedas ; Rnowing all thinge that live 
or exist. 


® 


1’ The Ancient’s Milch cow ; bounteous Ushas pr Dawn, daughter 
of ancieut Dyaus or Heaven. Ddhshin@: the sacrificial guerdon, per- 
souitied. Her sonis Agni, the Sup who travels betwSenu he&vey and 


earth 2 They : our offeringseof prayer and praise” Destroy tn us*: 
remove from us all illiberal thoughts and let us be bounteous in our 
worship of the Gods. 5 Hven through many regions: coma to us 


even from far away, although many other worshippers aleo will try to 
detain you. 


AQ , .: 


B86 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK If. 


6 Ancient your home, auspicious is your friendship : Heroer, 
your wealth is with the-house of Jahnu. 
Forming again with you auspicious friendship, let as‘rejoice 
with draughts of meath together. . 
7 O Asvins, Very Mighty Ones, with Vaya and with his stceds, 
one- minded, ever-youthfal, 
Nasatyas, joying in third day’s Soma, dirnk it, not hostile, 
Very Bountecous Givers, 
8 Asvins, to vou are brought abundant viands in rivalry with 
sacred songs, unceasing. 
Sprung from high Law your car, urged on by press-stones, 
goes round the carth and heaven in one brief moment. 
9 Asving, your Soma sheds delicious sweetness: drink ye thereof 
and come unto our dwelling, 
Your car, assuming many ashape, most often goes to the 
Soma-presser’s place of meeting, 


HYMN LIX. Mitra, 


Mitra, when speaking, stirreth men to labour : Mitra sustain- 
eth both the earth and heaven. 

Mitra beholdeth men with eyes that clese not. To Mitra 
bring, with holy oil, oblation. 


2 Foremost be he who brings thee food, O Mitra, who strives to 
« keep thy sacred Law, Aditya, 
He whom thon helpest ne’er is slain or conquered, on him, 
from near far, falls no affliction, 


3 Joying in sacred food and free from sickness, with knees bent 
lowly on the earth’s broad surface, 
Following closely the Aditya’s statute, may we remain in 
Mitra‘’s gracious favour. 


4 Auspiciousand adorable, this Mitra was born with fair domi- 
nion, Kine, Disposer. 
Mav ae enjoy the g:ace of him the Holy, yea, rest in his pro- 
pitious loving- kindness, 


5 The great Aditya, to be served with worship, who stirreth 
men, gracious to the singer. 


6 The house of Jahnu : the family of the Kusikas, of whom Jahnu 
wat-the Ancestor . ‘Jahnu’s children’? ’are menunned as having been 
favoured worshippers of the Agvins in Book T. 116. 19. 7 The third 
day’s Soma : pressed out the day before yesterday, and in the meantime 
left to ferment, 


e 
Oommen 


1 Stirreth men io Jabour : Mitva being the God of Day, Cf.VIT. 362. 


HY MN 60.) THE RIGVEDA. 387 


To Mtira, him most highly to be lauded, offer in fire oblation 
that he loveth, 


6 The gainful grace of Mitra, God, supporter of the race of man, 
Gives splendour of most glorious fame. 
7 Mitra whose glory spreads afar, he who in might surpasses 
heaven, 
Surpasses carth in his renown, 
8 All the Five Races have repaired to Mitra, ever strong to aid, 
For he sustaineth all the Gods. 
9 Mitra to Gods, to living men, to him who strews the holy 
grass, 


Gives food fulfilling sacred Law, 
HYMN LX. Ribhus, 


Here is your ghostly kinship, here, O Men: they came “desir- 
ous to these holy rites with store of wealth, 

With wondrous aris, whercby, veith,schemcs to megt each. 
need, 

Ye gained, Sudhanvan’s Sons ! your share in sacrifice. 


2 The mighty powers wherewiih ye formed the chalicgs, the 
thought by which ye drew the cow from out the hide, 
The intcileet wherewith ye wrought the two Bay cee ees 
through these, O Ribhus, ye attained divinity, ‘ 


3 Friendship with Indra have the Ribhus fully gained : grand- 
sons of Manu, they skilfully urged the wor I. 
Sudhanvan’s Children won them everlasting life, serving with. 
holy rites, pious with noble acts. . 
4 In company witli Indra come ye to the juice, then gloriously 
shall your wishes be fulfijled. 
Not tobe paragoned, ye Priests, are your good “decds, nor 
your heroic acts, Ribaus, Sudhanvan’s Sons, 
2 O Indra, with the Ribhus, Mighty Onas, pour down the Soma 
juice effased, well-blent, from both the hands. 
Maghavan, urged by song, in the drink-offerer’s house rejoice 
~ thee with the Heroes, with Sudhanvan’s Sons. 


8. All lhe Five Races: All Aryan men. 9 Gives food fulfilling 
sacred Law ; the food which enables mon to offer the appointed sgogi- 
ficus. ° 


? 


l Here 1s your ghostly kinship : here, in the sacrificial chamber 
where the deitied are worshipped, ye, Ribhus, originally men, are 
spiritually connected with the Gods as partakers of sacrificial , offerings. 
They : the Ribhus. With store of wealth: their great skill; the‘ won- 
drous arts’ of the following line. 2 See l. 20, 2, 3 


388 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 111. 
6 With Ribhu near, and Vaja, Indra, here exult, with Sachi, 


praised of many, in the juice we pour. 
These homes wherein we dwell have turned themselves to thee, 
—devotions to the Gods, as Jaws of men ordain. 


7 Come with the mighty Ribhas, Indra, come to us, strengthen- 
ing with thy help the singer’s holy praise 5 
At hundred eager calls come to the living man, with thousand 
arts attend the act of sacrifice. 


HYMN LXLI. Ushas. 


O Ushas, strong with strength, endowed with knowledge, 
accept the singer’s praise, QO wealthy Lady. 
Thou. Goddess, ancient, young, and fullof wisdom, movest, 
all-bounteous ! as the Law ordaineth. 


2 Shine forth, O Morning, thou auspicious Goddess, on thy 
brigkt car awaking pleasant ‘voices. 
Let docile horses of far-reaching splendour convey thee 
hétherward, the golden-coloured. 


3 Thou, Morning, turning thee to every creature, standest on 
high as ensien of the Immortal. 

Te one same goal ever and ever wending : now, like a wheel, 

O newly-born, roll hither. 


4 Letting her reins drop downward, Morning cometh, the 
* wealthy Dame, the Lady of the dwelling ; 
Bringing forth light, the Wonderful, the Blessed hath spread 
her from the bounds of earth and heaven, 


5 Hither invoke the radiant Goddess Morning, and bring with 
reverence your hymn to praise her. . ¢ 
She, dropping sweets, hath set in heaven her brightness, and, 
fair ¢o look on, hath beamed forth her splendour. 


6 From heaven, with hymns, the Holy One was wakened : 
brightly to both worlds came the wealthy lady. 


To Morning, Agni, whenshe comes refulgent, thea goest 
forth soliciting fair riches, ; 


? On Law’s firm base the speejler of the Mornings, the Bull, 
hath entered mighty earth and heaven. 
Great is theepower of Varuna and Mitra, tvhich, bright, hath 
spread in every place its splendour, 
6 Saché - Might, personified, the Cousort of Indra, 7 The living 
man :ths worsHipper. 


oe ne ee 


3 The Immorta’ : the Sun. 4 Letting her retngs drop: perhaps, 
sending down rays of light. 7 The Bull : the Sun, who, as following 
the Dawns, may ba said to urge them onward. 


AY MN 62.) THE RIGVEDA. 389 
HYMN LXII. Indra and Others. 


Your well-known prompt activities aforetime needed no im- 
pulse from your faithful servant. 
Where, Indra-Varuna, is now that glory wherewith ye 
brought support to those who loved you ? 
2 This man, most diligent, seeking after riches, incessantly 
invokes you for your favonr., 
Accordant, Indra- Varuna. withMaruts, with Heaven and Earth 
hear ye mine invocation, 
3 O Indra-Varuna, ours b+ this treasure, ours be wealth, Maruts, 
with full store of heroes. 
May the Variitris with their shelter aid us, and Bharati and 
Hotra with the Mornings. 
4 Be pleased with our oblations, thou loved of all Gods Brihas- 
pati : ‘ . 
Give wealth to him who brings thee gifts. 
™ e 


? 


D At sacrifices, with your hymns worship the pure Brihaspati-- 
I pray for power which none may bend— 


6 The Bull cf men, whom none deceive, the wearer of each 
shape at will, . 


Brihaspati Most Excellent. 


7 Divine, resplendent Padshan, this our newest hymn of ealogy 
By us is chanted fourth to thee, 


8 Accept with favour this my song, be gracious to the earnest 
thought, 
Even as a bridegroom to his bride. ® 


The hyinn consists of six ¢richas or triplets, the daities of which 
are severaliv (1) Indra and Varuna, (2) Brihaspati, (3) Pashan, (4) 
Savitar, (5) Soma, (6) Mitra and Varuna. 1 This stanza is difli- 
culf on aceount of the uncertainty of the meaning of bhrimdyah in tha 
first) line and of sénam in the second Professor Wilson renderg it : 
‘Jndra and Varuna, may these people who are relying upon you, and 
wandering abour (in alarm), sustain no injury from a youthtul (adver- 
sary) ; for where is that regutation (you enjoy) on account that you 
bestow sustenange on your friends ? Profeseor Lydwig’s translation ig 
to the following effect : ‘Thes® that ara counted yours, these whirling 
weapons, were made nut to be hurled at your depend+iet, Varuna Nitra, 
where 19 this your glory, wherewith against your frieuds ye send your 
missile? My version follows Profe sor Roth’s interpretation in the Sp. 
Petersburg Lexicon. 2 This man: the worshipper. 3 The 
Vardtris ; guardian Goddesses ; the Consorts of thé Gouge, according to 
the Commentator. Bhdratt and Hotra : Goddesses presiding over diffg- 
rent departments of religious worship. 4 Brihasputt: Lord of Prayer, 


390) THE HYMNS OP [BOOK 111. 


9 May he who sees all, living things, sees them together ata 
glance, — 
May he, may Pishan be our help. 
10 May we attain thit excellent glory of Savitar the God: 
So may he stimulate our prayers. 
11 With understanding, carnestly, of Savitar the God we crave 
Our portion of prosperity. 
12 Mcn, singers worship Savitar the God with hymn and holy 
rites, 
Urged by the impulse of their thoughts, 
13 Suma who gives success goes forth, goes to the gathering- 
place of Gods, 
To set him at the seat of Law, 
14 To us and to our cattle may Somargive salutary food, 
To biped and to qnadreped. 


15 May Soma, strengthening our power of life, and conquering 
our foes, 


In our assembly take his seat. 


16 May Mitra-Varuna, sap:cnt Pair, bedew our pasturage With 
oil, 

With meath the regions of the air, 
17 Far-ruling, joyfal when adored, ye reign through majesty of 
| might, 

With pure laws everlastinely. 

ae sf * e 

18 Landed by Jamadagni’s song, sit in the place of doly Law : 


Drink Soma, ye who strengthen Law. 
ie a 


_ 10 This stanza is the Savitri, the Gayatri par excellence, * the cele- 
brated verse of the Vedas which forms part of the daily devotions of 
the Brahmans, and was firet made known to English readers bwSie 
W Jone-’s translation of a pgraphrastic interpretation ; he renders it, 
Let us adore the supremacy of that divine sun, the god-bead, who illumi- 
nates all. from whom all proceed, to whom all must return, whom we 
invoke to direct our anderstandings aright in our progress towards 
his holy seat.’—Wilstn S-e Rigveddt, Sanhita Vol. LY. p. 111. 13: 
The gatheryng-place of Gods : the sacrifict:-}chambar. he seat of Law = 


the, plate where sacgifice ordained by eternal Law is performed. 16 
With orl : with clarified butter, with fatnogs, that is, with fertilizing rain. 
With meath : or with honey, that is with swect refreshing dew. 18 


Jamadagnt, may, according to Savana, bein this place an epithet of 
Visvamitra, ‘and mean‘ by whom the fire has been kindled ;’ og 
Jamadagni may be another Rishi and the seer of the hymn. - 


fecene— 


BOOK THE FOURTH. 


MYMN I. Agni. 


Tare, Agni, have the Gods, ever of one accord, sent hither 
down, a God, appointed messenger, yea, with their wisdom 
sent thee down. 

The Immortal, O thou Holy One, mid mortal men, the God- 
devoted God, the wise, have they brought forth, brought 
forth the omnipresent God-devoted Sage, 


2 Assuch,O Agni, bring with favour to the Gods thy Brother 

Varuna who leveth sacrifice, the Chief who loveth sacrifice, 

True to the Law, the Aditya who supporteth men, tke King, 
supporter of inankind. ; 


e é, ° e a 
3 Do thou, O Friend, turn hither him who is our Friend, swift 
e. ° 

as a wheel, like two car-steeds in Papid course, Wondrous 2? 
to us in rapid course. 

O Agni, find thou grace for us with Varuna, with Maruts 
who illumine all, m 

Bless us, thou Radiant One. for seed and progeny, yea, bless 
us, O thou Wondrous God. 


4 Do thou who knowest Varuna O Agni, put far away froth us 
the God's displeasure. 
Best Sacrifcer, brightest One, refulgent, remove thou far 
from us all those who hate us. 
5 Be thou, Q Agni, nearest us with suctour, our @losest Friend 
while now this Morn is breaking, 
Reconcile to us Varuna, be bounteous : enjoy the gracious 
juice 5 be swiit to hear us, 
6 Excellent is the glance, of brightest splendour. which the 
wuspeious God bestows on mortals, 
N ’ > oye oe > gs 
The God’s glance, longed for even ag the butter, pure, heated, 
of the cow, the mileh-cow’s bounty. 


7 Three are those births, the true, the most exalted, eagerly 


longed-for,seof the God, of Agni. aa 
He came invested in the beundless region, pure, , radiant, 


friendly, mightily resplendent. " ; 


At a ry a ype ee ng 


madeva, son of Gotama. 7 Three ara those birtha: the manifesta- 
tions of Agni in heaven as the Sun, in the firmament ag lightning, and 
on earth as sacrificial and domestic fire. 


392 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 111, 


8 This envoy joyeth in all seats of worship, borne on his golden 
Car, sweet-tongded Invoker ! : 
Lovely to look on, with red steeds, effulgent like a feast rich 
in food, joyous for ever, 


9 Allied by worship, let him give man knowledge: by anex- 
tended cord they lead him onward, 


He stays, effectual, in this mortal’s dwelling, and the God 
wins a share in his possessions, 


10 Let Agni—for he knows the way—conduct us to all that he 
enjoys of God-sent riches, 
What all the Immortals have prepared with wisdom, Dyaus, 
Sire, Begetter, raining down true blessings, 


11 In houses first he sprang intoexistence, at great heaven’s base, 
and in this region’s bosom ; 


Footless and headless, both his ends concealing, in his Bull’s 
lair drawing himself together, « 
2 Wondrously first he rose aloft, defiant, in the Bull’s lair, the 
home of holy Order, 


Longed-for, young, beantiful, and far-resplendent: and seven 
dear friends sprang up into the Mighty. 
13 Here did our human fathers take their places, fain to fulfl 
the sacred Law of worship. 


Forth drave they, with loud call. Dawn’s teeming Milch-kine 
hid tn the mountain-stable, in the vavern. 


14 Splendid were they when they had rent the mountain: others, 
around shall tell forth this their exploit. 
They sang their song} prepared to free thea cattle: they found 
the light 5 with holy hymus they worshipped, 


8 Sweel-tonaued + with, tasting the oblations , or, perhaps, pleasant- 
voiced. 9 By an extended cord : by virtue of the endless chain or 
series of regularly performed sacrifices. Lffectual : perfecting the ga- 
crifices, or fuliilling all the desires of tke worshipper. A share in hig 
porsessions : becau-e the wealth of the worshipper depends Upon the 
favour of Agul. dl Footless and headlass : whithous distinguishable 
bead or faet His Bull's lair : appafentiy the fuel in which he grows 
strfig; according to Savana, fin the rest of the rain cloud,’ 12 The 
home of holy Order: the altar, the place of law-appointed sacrifice. 
Seven dear freends 2 seven winor priests : or the frequently mantioned 
seVen tongues Or rave Of fire, 13 Our human fathers : the Anvir- 
ases. Teemnng Milch-kine: the: rays of light 14 Splendid ; illu- 
mined by the recovered rays of light, 


HYMN 1.) THE RIGVEDA. 393 


16 Eager, with thought intent upon the booty, the men with 
their celestial speech threw open 
The solid mountan firm, compact, enclosing, connfining Cows, 
the stable full of cattle, 
16 The Milch-cow’s earliest name they comprehended ; they found 
the Mother’s thrice-seven-noble«st titles. 
This the bands knew, and sent forth acclamation : with the 
Bull’s sheen the Red One was apparent. 


17 The turbid darkness tled, the heaven was splendid : up rose 
the bricht beam of eolestal Morning. 
Strya ascended to the wide expanses, beholding deeds of Men 
both good and evil. 


18 Then, afterwards they looked around, awakened, when first 
they held that Ueaven-allotted treasure. 
Now all the Gods abide in all their dwellings, — Mitra, 
be the prayer effuctive. 


19 1 will eall hither brightly-beaming xen the Acid: all-sup- 
porting, best at worship. ° 


Ile hath disclosed, like the milch-cows’ pure udder, the Soma’s 
juice when cleansed and poured from beakers. 
20 The freest God of all who should be worshipped, the guest who 
is received in all men’s houses, 
Agni who hath secured the Gods’ high favour,—may he be 
gracious, to us, Jatavedas. : 


15 The booty : the Cows, the rays of light. 9 Their celestial speech : 
prayer, 16 J$e/ch-cow’s : here, according to Sdyana, Vak or Voice, 
Sperch, or especiaily prayer. It is uncertain what is meano by the 
Mothers thrice-seren nob/est (vitles, names,forms, or some similar word be- 
ing necessarily understood ). Professor Watson, following Sayana, ren- 
ders the passigo: * knowlog the thriec-seven excellent ( forms of the 
maternal (chythm), that itis, the twantyone naetres of the Vedas , or, 
he addg, the passave may tofer ‘to the ancient nomenclature of cattle, 
as uttered by the Anytrases as At, gugatlu, “yandthing, etc.’ With 
the Jrull’s sheen : with the splenioug of the Sun. The Hed one « Ushas- 
or Dawn, 1S Vhat Heaven-aleotted treasure: theerecoverad rays of 
light. 19 Sayana'#explanation of the sccond “line ef this stanza is 
different, and Professor Wilson, following him translates : ¢ without 
riulking the pure udder (of tha cow), eichout purified faod of tho Sima 
offered in libation,’ implying, accosding to the Scholiagt, ‘that no offer- 
Ping is made to Agui on the occasion 5 praise alone ig fddressed to him.’ 
Na, in the Veda, 1t may be remembered, means both nog and dike, and 
In soma passages it is ditlicult to determing in which of its senses the 
word is to ba taken. 


oO] : 


S94 THE HYMNS OF {BOOK i111. 
HYMN II, 


Tut Faithful One, Immortal among mortals, a God among 
the Gods, appointed envoy. 

Priest, best at worship, must shine forth in glory : Agni shall 
be raised high with man’s oblations, 


2 Born for us here this day,O Son of Vigour, between both 
races of born beings, Agni, 
Thou farest as an envoy, having harnessed, Sublime One! 
thy storng-muscled radiant stallions. 


3 I laud the ruddy steeds who pour down blessing, dropping 
oul, fleetest through the thought of Order. 
Yoking red horses to and fro thou goest between you Deities 
and mortal races. 
4 Aryaman, Mitra, Varuna, and Indra with Vishnu, of the 
Gods, Maruts and Asvins— 
These,‘Agni, with good car ahd steeds, bring hither, most 
bountiful, to folk with fair oblations. 


5 Agni, be this our sacrifice etcrnal, with brave friends, rich in 
kine and sheep and horses, 
Rich, Asura! in sacred food and children, in full assembly, 
Wealth broad-based and during, 


6 The man who, sweating, brings for thee the fuel, and makes 
his head to ache, thy faithful servant,— 
“Agni, to him be a self-strong Protector : guard him from all 
who seek to do him mischief. 


7 Who brings thee food, though thou hast food in plenty, wel- 
comes his cheerfal guest and speeds him onward, 
Who kindles thee devoutly in his dwalling,—to him be 
wealth secure and freely giving, 


8 Whoso'sings praise to thee ateve or morning, and, with 
oblation, doth the thing thou lovest,— 
In his own home, even as a gold-girt courser, rescue him from 
distress, the bountions giver. © 


9 Whoso brings gifts‘o thee Immortal, Agni and doth thee 
service with uplifted ladle, 
Let him not, sorely toiling, loseehis riches; let not be sinner’s 
wickedness enclose him. ‘ 


.” ¥& Betwem doth races of born beings : between Gods and men, the 
Gods also being called jatah or born, dx sons of Heaven and E& arth. 3 
The thought of Order : the thought of Law-appointed sacrifice. You 
Deities : the Gods of whom thou, Agni, art one. 6 Make his head 
to ache : ‘with the load of wood which he carries on it. 7 Freely 
giving : enabling the possessor to be bountiful in turn. 


HYMN 2) THE RIGVEDA. 395 


10 Whoso well-wrought worship thou acceptest, Agni, thou God 
a mortal’s gift, thou liberal Giver,— 
Dear be his sacrifice to thee, Most Youthful! and may wa 
strengthen him when he adores thec. 
32 May he who knows distinguish sense and folly of men, like 
straight and crooked backs of horses. 
Lead ws, O God, to wealth and noble offspring : keep penury 
afar and grant us plenty. 
12 This Sage the Sages, neer deceived, commanded, setting 
him down in dwellings of the living. ° 
Hence mayst thou, friendly Gud, with rapid footsteps b:hold 
the Gods, wonderful, fair to look on. 
13 Good guidance hast thou for the priest, O Agni, who, 
Youngest God ! with out-poured Soma serves thee. 
Ruler of men, thou joyous God, bring treasure splendid and 
plentiful to aid the toiler. : 
14 Now all that we, thy faitiful servants, Agni. have done with 
feet, with hands, and with ourebodyes, 
The wise, with toil, the holy rite have guided, as those who 
frame a car With manual cunning. 
15 May we, seven sages first in rank, engender, from Dawn the 
Mother, men to be ordainers. e 
May we, Angirases, be sons of Heaven, and, radiant, burst 
the wealth-containing mountain. 
16 As in the days of old our ancient Fathers, speeding the w8rk 
of holy worship, Agni, 


per om a tm emer 


ll He who knows: the wise Agni Like straight and crooked backs : 
asvanam, of horses, is supplied by Sayana ; awa horse-keeper or groom 
distinguivhes Wetwedn well-shaped and ill shaped backs. - Keep penury 
afar: | follow Professor Roth in his interpretation of détim and dditim 
in this passage. Professor Wilson, following Sayana, trenslates: ‘ be 
bountiful to the liberal giver ; shun him whogives nob.’ Give us this life 
on earth, keep off the life to come.’—Max Miller. 12 This Sage: 
Agni.dhe Sages : the other Gods. Commanded ; ordered to become a 
pricstly herald or invoker. With rapid footsteps : I follow Sayana ; but 
the correctness of bis oxplanation is dbdubtful, According to Pischel, 
padbhih here means ‘with (thine reyes.’ 15 ‘ Again, through the 
identification of the fathers with the light they ave brought into con- 
nection with the m&taphor of gencration.........Thefathers are united 
with the Dawn, and desire with Her to beget male childfen. fn a hymn 
to Soma they are mentioned along with the mornin Sun as having 
placed the gorm in the earth ; and the fruitfulness of heaven and varth, 
which give birth to gods and men, is described as pfoduced by the fa- 
thers ‘—Wallis, Cosmology of the Rigvida, p, 72 , The wealth-con 
taining mountain t the cloud with its store of rain, or the cave in which- 
the cows or rays of light wore imprisoned, 


— 2 en rare = 


396 THE HYMNS OF (BOOK IV. 


Sought pure light and devotion, singing praises; they cleft 
the ground and made red Dawns apparent. 
17 Gods, doing holy acts, devout, resplendent, smelting like ore 
their hnman venel rations. 
Enkindling ay and exalting Indra, they came encompassing 
the stall “of cattle. 


18 Strong One! he marked them—and the Gods before them— 
like herds of cattle in a foodful pasture. 
There they moaned forth their strong desire for mortals, to 
aid the Truc. the ncarest One, the Living. 


19 We have worked for thee, we have laboared nobly—bright 
Dawns have shed their lizht upon our worship— 
Adding a beauty tothe perfect Agni, and the God’s beauteous 
eye that shines for ever. 


20 Agni, Disposer , we have sung these praises to thee the wise : 
do thou accept them cladly. ‘ 
Blaze upon high andyver make us richer. Give us great 
wealth. O thou, whose boons are many, 
HYMN Il. Agni. 


Wiy, toassist you, Rudra, Lord of worship, Priest of both 
worlds, effectnal Sacrificer, 

Agni, invested with his golden cvlours, before the thunder 
strike and lay you senseless. 

2 This shrine have we made ready for thy coming, as the fond . 

dame attires her for her husband. 

Performer of good work, sit down before us, invested whlle 
these flames incline to mect thee, 


3 A hymn, O Priest, to him who hears, the gentle, to him who 
looks on men, exceeding graciots, 
A song of praise sing to the “God Immortal, Whom the stone, 
oe of the sweet juice, worships. 


ci at ee nt ee we ~—- = A ee 
Ne ee a emer 


"17 Gods: the godlike Anuirases. Smelting like ore ; purifying their 
humanity, AS O18 18 puritieg by smelting 18 Strong One: O migh- 
ty Agni. fe marked them: Lndra saw the kine of the Auvirases, the 
stolen rays of livht. Zhe 7'rue, the Mearest One, the Living: Aa ap 
pears to be meant, © | __&. 

1 Rudra : hore mowing Agni, Besore the thunder strike-r*befare 
death oyertakes you Rist cssoe Ludwig refers tothe \tharvaveda XIl. 
2. 9, where AgnisKravyad, or Aguian his most terrific form is spoken . 
of as the God of De wth wht ntupeties mea with his thunderbolt, 9 
The flames : there iv no substantive in the text. Sjyana supplies § flames 
or songs of praise,’ or ‘ladles’ may be the word understuod, Professor 
Ludwig srfpplies visah or prajgh ‘familics or people,’ and Professor 
Grassmann ‘libations. ’ 


AYNM 3) THE RIGVEDA. 397 


4 Even as true knower of the Law, O Agni, to this our solemn 
rite be thou attentive 
When shall thy songs of festival be sung thee ? When is thy 


Friendship shown within our dwelling ? 


DS Why this complaint to Varnni, O Agni? And why to 
Hleaven ? for what ts our transeression ? 
How wilt Bhad speak to Harth and bounteous Mitra 2 What 
wilt thou say to Aryiman and Bhaga ? 


6 What, when thou blaz-st on the lesser altars, what to the 
mighty Wind who comes to ve is, ° 
True, ciretmambient ? what ts Earth, O Agni, what wilt 
thou say to man-destroying Rudra ? 


7 How to great Pishan who promotes our welfare,—to honoured 
Rudra what, who eves oblitions ? 
What sin of ours to the far-striding Vishnn, what, Aeni, wilt 
thou tell the Lofty Arfow @ 


8 What wilt thou tell the tt uthful band of Matuts, how answer. 
the great Sun when thea art ite sriened 2 . 
Before AG Free, betore the Swit, defend us : fulfil heaven’s 
work, all-knowing Jatavedas, 


9 I crave the cow’s truc ett arranged by Order : thofeh raw, 
she hath the sweet Pipe juice () Agni 
Though she is black of hue with milk she teemeth, nutritious 
brightly shining, all-sustaiming, ° 


10 Agni the Bull, the manly, hath been sprinkled with oil upon 
his back, by Law cternal, 
He who vives vital power 2oCs on unswerving , Prisni the 
Bull hath milked the pure white aad: 


5 Why this complaint: why dost thou accuse ug of sin 2 On the 
lesser altars 3 on the déArshnyds, sidc-altars, or heaps of earth covered 
with@aod on which the fire ts placed, Jae d-sfroyeng : the destroyer, 
of wicked men, says tho Scholtash  LQudragis generally representod ag 
a benevolent God. 7 The Lofty Arrovo: the lightning, {low answer 
the yreat Sun : the sense of stafizas O--8 appoars ta “ne us Professor 
Ludwig observes : thou hast n& vrouads for gontplainioy of us to any 
one of the Gods "hid, rather, oug advocate if Surya comes forward ag 
our accuser. Before the Mies, befure the Swit: the Sun, e 9 The 
first line is difficult. * [goiter fhe milk of the cow essential for tha 
sacrifice ’—Whlson Though rdw: thie opposition pf the uncooked cow 
and the milk couked or ripsogd in ber udder has been notivel before, 
See I, 62. 9 10 Prisua s bere said to be Surya or the sun, who 
draws his light from the sky, But see Bevfey, Vedica und Verwand- 
tes, pp. 74, “95. 


398 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR IY. 


11 By Law the Angirases cleft the rock asunder, and sang their 
bymns together with the cattle. 
Bringing great bliss the men encompassed Morning : light 
was apparent at the birth of Agni. 


12 By Law the Immortal Goddesses the Waters, with meath rich 
waves, O Agni, and uninjured, 
Like a str ong courser luuded in his running, sped to flow 
onward swiftly and for ever, 


13 Go never to the feast of one who harms us, the treacherous 
neighbour or unworthy kinsman. 
Panish as not for a false brother’s trespass, Let us not feel 
the might of friend or foeman, 


14 O Agni, keep us safe with thy protection, loving us, honoured 
God ! and ever guarding. 
Beat*thou away, destroy severe affliction: slay e’en the dcmon 
when Be waxes mighty. . 
15 Through these our songs of praise be gracious, Agni ; moved 
by ‘our prayers, O Tero, touch our viands, 
Accept, O Angiras, these our devotions, and let the praise 
which Gods desire address thee, 


16 To thee who knowest, Agni, thou Disposer, all these wise 
secret speeches have I uttered, 
Sung to thee, Sage, the charming words of wisdom, to thee, 
’ O Singer, with my thoughts and praises, 


HYMN IV. Agnt, 


Por forth like a wide-spreading net thy vigour; go likea 
mighty King with-his attendants. 

Thou, following thy swift net, shootest artows % transfix the 
fiends with darts that burn most fiercely, 


2 Forth ro in rapid flight thy whirling weapons: follow them 
closely, glowing in rthy fury. 
Spread with thy tongue the winged flames, O Agni; unfet- 
tered, cast thy fircbrands all around thee. 


8 Send thy spies forward, ffvetest in thy motion; be, ne’er de- 
ceived, the guardian of this people 
From him who hear or far, is befit on evil, and let no trouble 
sent from thee o’ercome us. ; 


This hymn is said by Siyana to be‘addressed to Agni as slayer of 
the Rakeshasas, that is, as God of the tire with which the immigrant 
Aryaus burnt the jungle, drove back the hostile aboriginas, and cleared 
the ground’ for encampment or permanent settlement, 3 Thy 
spies: bby first flame sent forward as if to reconnoitre. 


A@YMN 4, THE RIGVEDA., 399 


4 Rise up, O Agni, spread thee out before us: burn down our 
foes, thou who hast sharpened arrows. 
Him, blazing Agni! who hath worked us mischicf, consume 
thou utterly like dried-up stubble, 


5 Rise, Agni, drive off those who fight against us : make mani- 
fest thine own celestial vigour, 
Slacken the strong bows of the demon-driven: destroy our 
foemen whether kin or stranger. 
6 Most Youthful God, he knoweth well thy favour who gave an 
impulse to this high devotion. 
All fair days and magnificence of riches hast thou beamed 
forth upon the good man’s portals. 
7 Blest, Agni, be the man, the liberal giver, who with his lauds 
and regular oblation. 
Is fain to please thee for his life and dwelling. May all his 
days be brizht: be this his longing’ ‘ 
8 I praise thy gracious fafour: sing in answer. May this my 
song sing like a loved one with thee, 
Lords of good stceds and cars may we adorn thee, and day by 
day vouchsafe thou us dominion. 
9 Here of free choice let each one serve thee richly, resplendent 
day by day at eve and morning. 
So may we honour thee, content and joyous, passing beyond 
the glories of the people, s 
10 Whoso with good stecdsand fine gold, O Agni, comes nigh 
thee on a car laden with treasure, 
His Friend art thou, yea, thoa art his Protector whose-joy it 
is to entertain thee duly. 8 
11 Through words and kinship I destroy the mighty : this power 
I have from Gotama my father, 
Mark thou this speech of ours, OU thou Most Youthfal, Fricnd 
of the House, exceeding wise, Invoker, 


12 Keowing no slumber, specdy and peopitious, alert and ever 
friendly, most unwearied, , 

May thy protecting powers, unerring Agni, taking their places 

here, combined, preserve. 


5 The demon-driven : those whom evil spirite iacite to attack ws, 

8 Sing in answer : with tho’ auspicious sound of,the crackling fiames. 

ll Through words and kinship: that is, through my close alliance 
with Agni, effected by the prayers with which my “fathers ,aod I have 
worshipped him. The mighty ¢ the Rakshasas, according to Sdyana. 


46) THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IV. 


13 Thy guardian rays, O Agni, when they saw him, preserved 
blind Mamateya from aflliction, . 
Lord of all riches, he preserved the pious: the foes who fain 
would harm them did no mischief. 


14 Aided by thee with thee may we be wealthy, may we gain 
streneth with thee to euide us onward, 
Fulfil the words of both, O Ever Truthful: straightway do 
this, thou God whom power emboldens. 
15 O Agni, with this fuel will we serve thee ; accept the laud we 
sing to thee with favonr, 
Destroy the carsing Rikshasas : preserve us, O rich in friends, 
from guile and scorn and slander, 


JLYMN Y. Agni. 


How shall we give with one accord oblation to Agni, to 
Vatkvanara the Bounteous ? 


Great hehe, with full high growth hath he uplifted, and, as 
a pillar bears the rogt, sastains it. 


2 Reproach not him who, God aud self-reliant, vouchsafed this 
bounty unto me a mortal, — 


Deatkless, discerner, wise, to me the simple, Vaisvinara most 
manly, youthful Agent. 


3 Sharp-pointed, powerful, strong, of boundless vigour, Agni 
‘who kuows the lofty hymn, kept secret, 


As the lost mileh-cows track, the doubly Mighty,—he hath 
declared to me this hidden knowledge. 


4 May he with sharpened teeth, the Bounteous Giver, Agni, 
constme With fame most fiercely glowing. ' 


Those who regard not Varuni’s commandments aud the dear 
stedfast laws of sapient Mitra, 


e : ; ¢ 
13 This stanze has occurred befora, 1.147. 3. Blind ALimateya : the 
Rishi Dirghatamas, Lard of ar? riches ¢ Aga. ket The word 
of both : vhe wishes of Gods and men Sjyana gives a different expla- 


nation, and Professor Wilson translates. accordingly : ‘destroy boths 
(sorts of calumuiators.)’ | 


The Rishi Vimacova, as Professcr Roth observes, ‘professes’to make 
known a mystertous gnd roe ondite wisdom, which had been revealed 
to him by Agni,” anc the lanzaage of the hymn is correspondingly 
difficult and obscure. 1 Vatsrdnuara: common Goi of all Aryan. 
men. This bounty : the gift of this mystorioous kuowledge, 


YNM Ad) THE RIGVEDA., 401 


5 Like youthful women without brothers, staying, like dames 
who hate their lords, of evil conduct, 
They who are full of sin, untrue, unfathful, they have engen- 
dered this abysmal station. 
6 To me, weak, inuocent, thou, luminous Agm, hast boldly given 
as ’twere a heavy barthen, 
This Prishtha hymn, profoand and strong and mighty, of 
seven elements, and with offered dainties. 
7 So may our song that purifies, though wifdom reach in a 
moment him the Universal, 
Established on the hcight, on earth’s best station, above the 
beauteous grassy skin of Pyisni, 
8 Of this my speech what shall I utter further ? They indicate 
the milk stored up in sgceret,. e 
When they have throws as ’twere the cows’ stalls open. The. 
Bird protects carth’s best and evellloved station. 
9 This is the Great Ones’ mighty apparition which from of old 
the radi. nt Cow hath followed, 
This, shining brightly inthe place of Order, swift,, hasting 
on the secr 3t, she discovered. 
10 He then whe hone together with his Parents remembered 
Prisni’s fai, and secret treasure, e 
Which, in the Mother Cow’s most lofty station, the Bull's 
tongue, of the flame bent forward tasted. 


® 

5 This abYsmal°station : that is, says Sayana, narakasthdnam or 
hell. The wicked are the cause of the existence of the place of punish- 
ment prevared for them. 6 This Prishtha hymn: Prishtha is the 
name of a particular arrangement of S4mans employed at the mid-day 
oblation: 7 The Universal: Vaisvinara Agni. Hstablished on the 
height ; according to this conjectural translation, which follows a sug- 
gestion of Professor Ludwig, the referencg is to Agni placed on the al- 
tar, above the surface of the earth (Prigai), But the meaning of jiddre 
(on the height ?) is uncertain. *Professor Wilson translates: ‘whose 
swift-aecending brilliant (crb)s stationed on thé east of the earth, to 
mount like the son, above the immoveable heaven.’ 8 This stanza 
appears to allude to the Augirases recovering the lost rays of licht, the 
milk stored wp in secret. The Bird: the Sun who fijee through hésyen. 
9 The Grent Ones’ mighty oppatition : tne solar orb: the Great Ones bo- 
ing the Sun’s rays = Vherastant Cow : Ushas or fawn who discovers 
the Sun as he travels in secret, or by night, from west, and followg 


him till he is about to rise. 10 We: Agni He Parénts : Heaven 
and Eacth Prisni in the Cow whose milk is used in the oblation which 
Agni, the Bull, devours. ° 


92 


412 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR IV. 


1i With reverence J declare the law, O Agni; what is, comes 
by thine order, Jitavedas. 
Of this, whate’er it be, thou art the Sovran; yea, all the 
wealth that is in earth or heaven. 
12 What is our wealth therefrom, and what our treasure ? Tell 
us, O Jatavedas, for thou knowest, 
What ls our best course in this scerct passage : we, unre- 
proached, have reached a place far distant. 


13 What is the limit, what the rules, the guerdon ? Like ficet- 
foot coursers specd we to the contest, 
When will the Goddesses, the Immortal’s Spouses, Dawns, 
spread over ts the Sun-(Ciod’s splendour ? 
14 Unsatisfied, with speech devoid of vigour, scanty and frivolous 
and inconclusive, 
Whe.efore do they address thee here. O Agni? Let these who 
have nu weapons suffer sorrow. , 


15 The majesty of him tha good, the Mighty, aflame, hath 
shone for glory in the dwelling, 
He, clothed m light, hath shone most fair to look on, wealthy 
in boons, as a home shines with riches, 


HYMN VI, Agni, 


Priest of our rite stand up erect, Agni, in the Gods’ ser- 
vice best of sacrificers, 

For over every thought thou art the Ruler : thou furtherest 
e’cn the wisdom of the pious 


2 He was set down mid men as Priest unerring, Agni, wise, 
welcome in oar holy synods. 
Like Savitar he hath lifted up his splendcur, and like a 
builder raised his smoke to heaven, 
3 The glowing ladle, filled with oil, is lifted : choosing Gods’ 
service to the right he circles, 
Eager he rises like the new: wrought pillar which, firmly set 
and fixed, anoints tue victims. . 
4 When sacred grass is sirewn and Agni kindled, the Adhvaryu 
rises to his task rejoicing, 
Agni the Priest, like one who tends the cattle, goes three 
times round, as from of old he wills it. 


ab These wno have no weapone : who are unprovided with the 
necessary clements of sacrifice, and therefore anable to please Agni. 


2 Like a burlder : as the builder of a house raises a pillar, 3 76 
the right he oircles : is carried round to the altars, Anvoints the victims : 
smears them with the clarified buttae with which it (the sacrificial 
post ) has buen previously anointed. 


HY MN 1.) THE RIGVEDA. 403 


5 Agni himself, the Priest, with measured motion, goes round, 
with sweet speech, cheerful, true to Order. 

His fulgent flames run forth like vigorous horses: all crea- 
tnres are affrighted when he blazes. 


6 Beautiful and auspicious is thine aspeet, O lovely Agni, ter- 


rible when spreading. | 
Thy splendvurs are not covered by the Gani nese detraction 


leaves no stain upon thy body. 
¢ Naught hindered his production, Bounteous Giver : his Mother 
and his Sire were free to send him. : 
Then as a Fricnd benevolent, refulgent, Afni shone fourth in 
human habitations. 
8 He, Agni, whom the twice-five sisters, dwelling together, in 
the homes of men engendered, 
Bright like aspear’s tooth, wakend In tie morning, with 
powerful mouth and like an axe well-sharpened. © 
9 These thy Bay Coursers, Agni, dropping fatness, ruddy and 
vigorous, speeding straizhtly forward, 
And red steeds, wonderful of mighty muscle, are’to this 
service of the Gods invited : 
10 These brightly-shining flames of thine, O Agni, that move for 
ever restless, all-subduing, 
Like falcons hasting eacerly to the quary, roar loudly like 
the army of the Maruts. 
11 To thee, O flaming God, hath prayer been offered. Let the 
priest laud thee : give to him who worships. 
Men have established Agni as Invoker, fain to adore tho 
glory of the living. ; 


- HYMN VII. Agni. 


HERE. by ordainers was this God appointed first Iivoker, best 
at worship, toe be praised at rites ; 

Whom Appavina andthe Bhrigus caused to shine bright: 
éoloured in the wood, spreading frem home to home. 


7 Him Mother and his Sire: Karth and Heaven, To send him. to be 
messenger between men and Ggds. 8 The twice-fine sisters: the 
priest’s fingers whwh produce the sacrifoial fire. ,9 Boy Coursers: 
haritah ; Harits; the prototybe *( the word being femi nine ) of the 
Greek ‘Charites’ See M. Muller, Chips from a Gernfan Workshop, 
TV. 141 (new edition). ll The glory of ind living: Agni ds 
Naragansa, the Praise of glory of Men. 


i Here: at this ceremony. Ordainers : the regulators of the sacrifice, 
Apnavina: a Rishi of the family of Bhrigu, 


4()4 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IV. 
2 When shall thy glory asa God, Agni, be suddenly shown 


forth ? 
For mortal men have held thee fast, adorable in all their 
homes, 
3 Seeing thee faithiul to the Law, most sapient, like the starry 
home, ; 


lllumining with cheerfal ray each solemn rite in every house, 
4 Vivasvan’s envoy living men have taken as their ensign, swift, 
The ruler over all mankind, moving like Bbriguin cach home. 


© Him the intelligent have they placed duly as invoking Priest, 
Welcome, with sanctifying flame, best worshipper, with seven- 


fuld might ; 


6 In his Eternal mothers, in the wood, concealed and unpproa- 
ched ; 
Kept secret though his flames are bright, sceking on all sides, 
quickly foud, 
7 That, as food spreads forth in this,earthly udder, Gods may 
rejoice them in the home of Order, . 
Great Agni, served with reverence and oblation, flies ever to 
the sacrifice, the Faithful. 


8 Bird of each rite, skilled in an envoy’s duties, knowing botli 
worlds and that which lies between them, 
Thou goest from of old a williug Herald, knowing full well 
heaven’s innermost recesses. 


9 Bright God, thy path is black; light is before thee : thy 
moving splendour is the chief of wonders. 
When she, yet unimpregnate, hath conceived thee, even when 
newly born thou art an envoy. 


10 Yet newly born, his vigour isapparent wheu the' wind blows 
upon his fiery splendour. 
His sharpened tonzue he Jayeth on the brushwood, and with 
his teeth e’en solid food consumeth, 


4 Vivasvan’s envoy : according to Sayana the messenger of tha 
worshipper. Moving like Bhrigu : or shining, Bhrigu being originally 
a personificagion of lightning. 5 Sevenfold miyht: Agui’sa seven 
flames. 6 Hterndl Mother : the Cokostial Waters. Seeking on all 
sides ? roaming at will in search of foojl. 7 Inthis earthly vider : 
here on earth, and ospecially at the altar from whioh oblativus come. 
Only When the elements of sacrifice ace forthcoming oan Agai invite 
and bring the Gods, The home of order ¢%be place of law-ordained eacri- 
fice. Bird of each rtte: attending all sacrifices. That which lies be. 
tween them : the ficmament'or mid-air between heaven and earth. g 
She, yet untnpregnate : the piece uf wood in which fire is produced: 

% 


HYMN 9.} THE RIGVEDA 405 


11 When he hath borne off fuod with swift flame swiftly, ° strong 
Agni makes himself a speedy envoy, 
Follows the rustling of the wind, consuming, and courser-like, 
speeds, drives the swift horse onward, 


HYMN VIL. Agui. 


Your envoy who possesses all, Immortal, bearer of your gifts, 
Best worshipper, I woo with song. 


2 He, mighty, knows the gift of wealth, he knows .the devp 


recess of heaven : . 
He shall bring hitherward the Gods. . 
3 He knows, a God himself, to guide Gods to the righteous in 
his home, 


He gives e’en treasures that we love, 
4 He is the Herald : well-informed. he dcth his errand to and 
fro, 2 
Knowing the deep recess gf heaven, 
5 May we be they who gratify Agmi with sacrificial gifts, 
Who cherish and enkindle him. 
6 Illustrious for wealth are they, and hero deeds, victorivus, 
Who have served Agni reverently. ; 
7 So unto us, day after day, may richescraved by many cone, 
And power and might spring up for us. 
8 Thet holy Singer in his strength shoots forth his arfows 
aWiftter than 
The swiit shafts of the tribes of men. 


HYMNIX. Agni. 


® © . . 
Aant, show favour : great art thou who to his pious man art 
come, 
To seat thee on the sacred grass. 


\ 


1® When he hath borne of food : [ follow*Sivana, but am not satis- 
fied with bis explanation. Courser-like,: Agni, himsclf a courser, drives 
ou the wind as ib were acourscr, Professor Ludwig suggests that 
drvd here may mean a rider, nob ‘courger. 


2 Knows the gilt of wealth ; hew to enrich hig worshippers. 4 Doth 
his errand toandjro: bears to the Guds the prayere, praises, aad 
oblations of their worshippers, and’ brings them doen to the sacrifice. 
8 That holy Singer: Agni the Priest The stanza isadificult. Professor 
Wilson, following Sayana, translates: ‘May the wise Agni entirely 
obviate by his power the removeable (ills) of men the deqcendante of 
Manu. ‘ have adupted Professor Ludwig's inter pretation. 


406 THE AYMNS OP (BOOK IV. 


2 May he the Immortal, Helper, hard to be deceived among 
mankind, 
Become the messenger of all. 
3 Around the altar is he led, welcome Chief Priest at solemn 
rites, 
Or as the Potar sits him down. 
4 Agni in fire at sacrfice and in the house as Lord thereof, 
And as a Brahman takes his seat. 
5 Thou comest as the guide of folk who celebrate a sacrifice, 
And to oblations brought by men. 
6 Thou servest as his mesgenger whose sacrifice thou lovest 
well, 
To bear the mortal’s gifts to heaven. 
7 Accept our solemn rite; be pleased, Angiras, with our 
sacritice : 
Give ear and listen to our call.’ 
8 May thine inviolable car, wherewith thou guardest those 


who give, 
Come near to us from every side. 
HYMN X. Agni. 
Tris day with praises, Agni, We bring thee that which thou. 
lovest. 


Right judgment, like a horse, with our devotions. 


2 For thou hast ever been the Car-driver, Agni, of aoble, 
Strength, lofty sacrifice, and rightful judgment. 
3 Through these our praises come thou to meet us, bright as. 
the sunlight, ¢ 
OQ Agni, well disposed, with all thine aspects. 
4 Now may,we serve thee singing these Jauds this day to thee, 
Agu. ; 
Loud as the voice of Heaven thy blasts are roaring. 
5 Just at this time of the day and the night thy look is the 
sweetest : P : 
It shineth near us even as gold for glory. 


6 Spotless thy b-dy, brilliant as gold, like clarified butter : 
This gleams like gota on thee, O Self-dependent. 


3 Chief Priast: Hotar, the presenter of the oblation. The Potar : 
literally, Cleanser tr Purifier, anothér of the sixteen pricsts usually 
employed. 4 I read wt ‘gnd@as proposed by Prof Max Muller and 
Prof. Ludwig in place of the almost impossible utd gnah of the text. 


9 Car driver : promoter. 6 7his : thy splendour, 


HYMN 12.) THK RIGVEDA. 407 


7 All hate and mischief, yea, if committed, Agni, thou turnest, 
Holy One, from the man who rightly worsh Ips. 


8 Agni, with you Gods, prosperoas be our friendships aud kin- 
‘ships. 
Be this our bond here by this place, thine altar, 


HYMN XI. Agni, 


Tay blessed majesty, victorious Agni, seine brightly in tho 
neighbourhvod of Sirya. 
Sple ndid to see, it shoWs even at sighing and food is fair. 
to look on in thy beauty, 
2 Agni, disclose his thought fur him who singeth, the well, 


Strong God! while thou art praised with (orvour: 
Vouchsafe to us that powerfulliymn, O Mighty, whech. Ra- 


diant One ! with ali the Gods thou lovest. * 
3 From thee, O Agni, sprigs poetic wisdom, from thee come 
thoughts and hymns of praise that*prosper 5 : 


From theo flows wealth, with heroes th adorn it, to the true- 
hearted man who gives ovlation. 


4 From thee the bero springs who wins the booty, br&ger of 
help mighty, of real courage 
From thee comes wealth, sent by the Gods, _bliss- giving 5 ; 
Agni, trom thee the Het 1m petuous charger, 


9 Immortal Agni, thee whose voice is pleasant, as first in rank, 
as God, religious mortads. 
Invite with hymns ; ; thee who removest cuarreds Friend of the 
Home, the household’s Lord, unerrt 


6 Far from us thon removest want and sorrow, far from us ull 
ill-will when thoa protectest, 
Son of strength, Agni, blest 1s he at evening, whom thou as 
God attendest fur his welfare. 
@ 


° HYMN XII. Agni. 


Wnuoso enkindles thee, with lifted ladle, aed thrice this day 
offers thee food, O Agni,- 

May he excel, , triumphant through thy splendours, wise, 
through thy” mental power, O Jatavedas. 


® ° a) 


ene memeettien 


e 3. 
This altar: literally, thinsndder: that is, the place whence 
oblations proceed. 


1 In the netyhbourhood af Surya : by day, in the saan’. 2 
The well 2 the suurce of sacred sung, 4 T'he hera: or the strong 
hocse. ® 


408 THE HYMNS OF [BUOK IV. 


2 Whose with toil and trouble brings thee fuel, serving the 
majesty of mighty Agni. 
He kindling thee at evening and at morning, prospers, and 
comes to wealth, and slays his foemen. 


3 Agni is Master of sublime dominiun, Agni is Lord of strength 
and lofty riches. 
Straightway the self-reliant God, Most Youthful, gives trea- 
sures to the mortal who adores him. 


4 Most Youthful’God, whatever sin, through folly, we here, as 
human beings, have committed, 
In sight of Aditi make thou us sinless: remit, entirely, Agni, 
our offences. 


5 Even in the presence of great sin, O Agni, free us from prison 
of the Gods or mortals, 
Never nfay we who are thy friends beinjured: grant health 
and strength unto our seed and offspring , 


6 Even as ye here, Gods Excellent and Holy, have loosed the 
cow that by the foot was tethered, 
So also set us free from this affliction: long let our life, O 
Avni, be extended. | 


HYMN XIII. Agni. 


‘aGnt hath locked, benevolently-minded, on the wealth-giving 
spring of radiant Mornings. 

Come, Asvins, to the dwelling of the pious: Surya the God is 
rising with his splendour. 


2 Savitar, God, hath spread on high his lustre, waving his flag 
like a spoil-seek:ng hero. 


Their stablished way go Varuna and Mitra, what time they 
make the Sun ascend the heaven. 


4 Adtit: apparently the griat omnipresent Power which controls 
the forces of the univ«rse, and feom which no sins are hidden 2 Prison 
of the Gorls or mortals : actual imprisonment by men and correspond- 
ing chas'isemen? dy ttfe Gods. 6 T'he cow: the cow-buffalo, tied 
to @ post, representing symbolically the man who is in the bonds of 
sins Cf. X. 12%. 6. 


Cremona! 


2 Waving his flag: according to Sayana, ‘scattering the daw.’ But 
there can be nd doubt that drapsd, the Zend drafsha, means a banner 
in this place. Sadyana explsins sdtvd, here, as ‘a bull, but this inter- 
pretation cannot be accepted, This stablished way : the course 
appointed for them in the eternal ordur of the universe, 


HYMN 15.) THE RIGVEDA. 4.4 


6 Him whom they made to drive away tho darkness, Lurcds ui 
sure mansions constant to their object, 
Him who beholds the universe, the Sun-God, seven strong and 
youthful Coursers carry onward, . 
4 Spreading thy web with mightiest Steeds thou comest, rending 
apart, thou God, the black-hued mantle, 
The rays of Sirya tremulously shining sink, like a hide, the 
darkness in the waters. 
5 How isit that, unbound and not supported, he faileth not 
although directed downward ? i 
By what self-power moves he? Who hath seen it ? He guards 


the vault of heaven, a close set pillar, 


HYMN XIV. Apni. 


Tue God hath looked, even Agni Jatavedas, to meet the 
Dawns refulgent in their glories, e 
Come on your chariot, y€ who travel widely, camo to this 
sacrifice of ours, Nasatyas. 
2 Producing light for all the world of creatures, God -Savitar 
hath raised aloft his banner. 
Making his presence known by sunbeams, Surya hath filled 
the firmament and earth and heaven. ° 
3 Red Dawn is come, riding with brightness onward, distin” 
guished by her beams, gay-hued and mighty, 
Dawn on her nobly-harnessed car, the Goddess, awaking men 
to happiness, approacheth. ; 
4 May those most powerfud steeds and chariot bring you, O 
Asvins, hither at the break of morning. 
Here for your draught of meath are S8ma juices :-at this our 
sacrifice rejoice, ye Mighty. 
& How is it that, unbound und unsupported, he.falleth not 
although directed downward ? 
By what self-power moves he? Who hath seen it ? He guards 
ghe vault of heaven, a close-set pillar ? 


HYMN XV.. Agni. 
Aent the Herald, like a hoyse, is led forth at our solemn rite, 
God among Gods adorable. ° 


3 Coursers: haritah ; Harits.eCf. IV. 6. 9. 


Thie hymn is an imitation,of the preceding. Phe last etanza fg 
adopted word for word. 5 He: in the text eydm, thie, that ia 
Sairya, the Sun, mentioned in stanza 2. 

1 Is led forth: implying the formal bringing of fire fromt he heues- 
hold fire to light the sacrificial fire, 


o3 : 


410 - THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IV. 


2 Three times unto our‘solemn rite comes Agni like a charioteer, 
Bearing the viands to the Gods. 


3 Round the oblations hath he paced, Agni the Wise, the Lord 
of Strength, 
Giving the offerer precious boons. 


‘4 He who is kindled eastward for Srinjaya, Devavita’s son, 
Resplendent, tamer of the foe. 


5 So mighty be the Agni whom the mortal hero shall command, 
With sharpened teeth and bountiful. 


6 Day after day they dress him as they clean a horse who wins 
the prize, 


Dress the red Scion of the Sky. 


7 When Sahadeva’s princely son with two bay horses thought 
of me, 


Summoned by him I drew not back. 


8 And truly those two noble boys straightway took when 
offered me, 


From Sahadeva’s A ancels son. 


9 Long, O ye Asvins may he live, your care; ye Gods, the 
‘princely son 
Of Sahadeva, Somaka. 


10 Cause him the youthful prince, the sun of Sahadeva, toenjoy 
Long life, O ye Gods, 


HYMN XVI. Indra. 


Imperouvs, let Maghavan come hither, and let his Tawny 
' oursers speed to reach us, 
or him have we pressed juice exceeding potent: here, prais 
ed with song, let him effect his visit. 


EEE EEEnnaeeeemnanenendiinettieetnementtenenen anmammegerann anatase anmnenenmemnent 


2 Three times : with reference to the three sacrifices. 4 Hast- 
ward : on the utlaravedt or north altar. “Srinjayas » certain Soma- 
sacrificer, kaschtt somay/jf, says Sayana. Professor Wilson . obse-vee : 
‘We have several princes of thename in the Purinas, but none distin- 
guished by this patronymio : the Srinjayas are alsoa people in the west 
of India. 6 The red Seton of the Sky : or, Arusha, the Child of 
Heaven, i.e. the Sun. . 7 Sahareva’s*princely son: Somaka, the Ins- 
titutor of the sacritice, son of a Rajic named Sahadeva, With twa bay 
hor geg : which were to be the priest's honorarium. 9 Your care: there 
ie no substantivecn the text Sayaia supplies tarpakah satistier, i, e. 


worshipper, Professor Ludwig regards vdm as a dativus ethicus. : 


1 Impgtuous*: according to 8avana, rtjtshi, the word in the taxt, 
means actepter, drinker, of the spiritless Soma when its assence or. 
strength has passed away. Professor Ludwig followa Sayana, ‘ 


‘ 
38 


HYMN 16.) THE RIGVEDA, © 41 


2 Unyoke, as at thy journey’s end, O Hero, to gladden thee to- 
day at this libation. 
Like Usand, the priest a laud shall utter, a agua to thee, the 
Lord Divine, who markest, 
3 When the Bull, quaffing, praises our libation, as a sage paying 
holy rites in secret, 


Seven singers here from heaven hath he ani who e’en 
by day have wrought their works while singing. 


4 When heaven’s fair light by hymns was made apparent (they 
made great splendour shine at break’of morning 
He with his succour, best of Heroes, scattered the blinding 
darkness so that men saw clearly. 
SD Indra, lupetuous One, hath waxed immensely: he with-his 
vestness hath filled earth and heaven 
H’en beyond this his majgsty extendeth who hath exéeeded all 
the worlds in greatness. 
6 Sakra who knoweth well all human actions hath with his 
eager Friends let loose the waters. 
They with their songs cleft e’en the mountain open and will- 
ingly disclosed the stall of cattle. 


@ He smote away the floods’ obstructer, Vritra ; Earth, Sonscious, 
lend her aid to speed thy thunder, 

Thou sentest forth the waters of the ocean, as Lord through 
power and might, O daring Hero. 


8 When, Much-invoked ! the water’s rock thou cleftest, Sarama 
showed herself and wént before thee. 


Hymned by Angirases, bursting the cowstalls, much strength 
thou ftunddst for us our leader. 


9 Cume, Maghavan Friend of Man, to aid the singer imploring 
thee in battle for the sunlight. 


Speed him with help i in his inspired invakings ; downsink the 
e sorcerer, the prayerless Dasyu. » 


ee ee 
2 Like'Usand: the Rishi Wgand, or Usanas, called also Kavya cr 
Kavi’s son, appears in the Veda as the es peciar friend of Indra. See 
I 51. 10;33,5 9117, 12 The Bull + the mighty dupra. Seven singers : 
the meaning of this liue is odt clear. Professor Wilson folluwing 
Savana, trauslats; ‘and this gererates the seven pfiicient (rays) from 
heaven, which, being glorified, bavye made (aaniifost) the objects) of 


(tumah) perception. Scattered, ete: or, fashioued blind burbid 
darkness so that men saw clearly, | 6 Sakar: Jdra, the powerful, 
His eager Friends: the Maruts. - § Saramd : the hoand of Indra, 


who tracked tho stolen cows, See J. 62, 3, and 72. 8, 


412 THE HYMNS OP (BOOK IY. 


10 Come to our home resolved to slay the Dasyu: Kutsa longed 
eagerly to win thy friendship. 
Alike in form ye both sate in his dwelling: the faithful Lady 
was in doubt between you. 


11 Thou comest, fain to succour him, with Kutsa,—a goad that 
masters both the Wind-God’s horses, 
That, holding the brown steeds like spoil for capture, the sage 
may on the final day be present. 
12 For Kutes, with thy thousand, thou at day-break didst hurl 
down greedy ‘Sushna, foe of harvest, 
Quickly with Kutsa’s friend destroy the Dasyus, and roll the 
chariot-wheel of Sfiraya near us, 
13 Thou to the son of Vidathin, Rijisvan, gavest up mighty Mri- 
gaya and Pipru. 
Thou'’smotest down the swarthy fifty thousand, and rentest 
forts age consmes & garment 


14 What time thou settest near the Sun thy body, thy form, 
Immortal One, is seen expanding: 
Thou a wild elephant with might invested, like a dread lion 
as thou wieldest weapons. 


15 Wishts for wealth have gone to Indra, longing for him in war 
for light and at libation, 
Eager for glory, labouring with praise-songs : he is like home, 
‘like sweet and fair nutrition. 
16 Call we for you that Indra, prompt to listen, him who hath 
done so much for men’s advantage ; , 
Who, Lord of envied bounty, toa singer like me brings quick- 
ly booty worth the‘capture. . 


* 


ete. ema 


10 Kutsa t a Rajarshi or royal Rishi frequently mentioned as the 
favoured friend of Indra. 

The faithful Lady 2: even Kutsa’s wife could hardly distinguish one 
from the other ; or, as SAyana explains, Indra took Kutsa to his own 
home where Sachi his constrt was uncertain which of the two waé In- 
dra, 11 The sage: Katea., The final day: the decisive day of 
battle. 12 With thy thousand. thy many followers. Foe of har- 
west ¢ orKuyava may be the name of arfother fiend or barbarous enemy, 
Bee I. 104. 3. Kutsa’s fetend: the thuhderbolt, acoprding to Sayana. 
Roll the chartot-wheel of Sdrya near us: bring back the daylight. 13 
Hijigugn ia privoe mentioned before as protected by Indra. See I 51. 
5. ave and Pepru: demons of tht air. The swarthy fifty thousand: 


black Rakshasas, fjende, or hostile aborigines. 14 What time 
thou settest near the Sun thy body: perhaps, as Professor Ludwig sug- 
gests, a poetical explanation of an eclipse of the sun. 15 Hager 


for glory a transition from ‘ wishes’ to ‘ wishere’ implied therein. 
Nutrition: according toSayana, like Lakshmi the Goddess of prosperity. 


‘\ 


HYMN 11,) THE RIGVEDA. 413° 


17 When thesharp-pointed arrow, O thou Hero, flieth mid any 
conflict of the people, 
When, Faithful One, the dread encounter cometh, then be 
thou the Protector of our body. | | 
».18 Further the holy thoughts of Vamadeva ; be thou a guileless 
Friend in fight for booty. 
We come to thee whose providence protects as : wide be thy 
sway for ever for thy singer. 
19 O Indra, with these men who love thee truly, free givers, 
Maghavan, in every battle, ° 
May we rejoice through many autumns, quelling our foes, as 
days subdue the nights with splendour. 


20 Now, as the Bhrigus wrought a car, for Indra the Strong, the 
Mighty, we our prayer have fashioned, 
That he may ne’er withdraw from us his friendship, but be 
our bodies’ guard and swrong defender. ss 
21 Now, Indra! lauded, gloyified with praises, let power swell 
high like rivers for the singer.« 4 
For thee a new hymn, Lord vf Bays, is fashioned. Muay we, 
car-borne, through song be victors ever. 


HYMN XVII. Indra, 


y Great art thou, Indra ; yea, the earth, with gladness, and 
heaven confess to thee thine high dominion. 
Thou in thy vigour having slaughtered Vritra didst free éhe 
floods arrested by the Dragon. 
2 Heaven trembled at the birth of thine effulgence ; Earth trem- 
bled at the fear of thy displeasure. 
The stedfast mountains shook in agitatjon : the waters flowed, 
and desest spots were flooded. 
3 Hurling his bolt with might he cleft the mountain, while, 
putting forth his strength, he showed his vigéur, 
He slaughtered Vritra with his bolt, exulting, and, their lord 
. Slain, forth flowed the waters swiftiy. 
4 Thy Father Dyaus esteemed himself ahero: most noble was 
the work of Indra’s Maker, . e 
His who begat the strong bolt’s Lord who roareth, immovable 
like earth from her foundation. 


19 Free givers : liberal institutors uf sacrifice, © 20 As the Bhri- 
gus t according to Sayana=splendid carpenters ; bute the erefesence 
must be to the celebrated priestly family, and ‘ar’ maY be used mets: 

» phborically for the hymn which rapidly reaches the Gods. 


1 The Dragon : Ahi, the serpent-demon who stays the,rain from 


falling, 4 Lsteomed himeci/ a hetos as being the father of auch 
acon. 


4i4 g TAS ares OF [BOOK IV. 


5 He who alone oerthrows the world of creatures, Indra the 
peoples’ King, invoked of many — 
Verily all rejoice in him, extolling the boons which Maghavan 
the God hath sent them. 
6 All Soma juices arehis own for ever, most gladdening , 
draurhts are ever, his, the Mighty, 
' Thou ever wast the Treasure- Lord of treasures : Indra, thou 
lettest all folk share thy bounty, 
7 Moreoyer, when thou first wast born, O Indra, thou struckest 
terror intoeall the people. 
Thou, Maghavan, rentest with thy bolt the Dragon who lay 
against ‘the water-flonds of heaven, 
8 The ever-slaying, bold and furious Indra, the bright bolt’s 
Lord, infinite, strong and mighty, 
Who slayet » Vritra and acquireth booty. giver of blessings, 
aghavan the bounteous : « 
9 Alone renowned as Maghavan ip battles, he frighteneth away 
assembled armicg. — « 
He bring+th us the booty that he winneth : me we, well- 
loved, continue in bis fr'endship. 


10 Renowned is he when conquering and when sieyine : tis he 
who winneth cattle in the combat. | 
When Indra hardeneth his indignation all that is fixed and 
all that moveth fear bim. 
11° Indra hath won all kine, all gold, all horses, —Maghavan, he 
whv breaketh forts in pieces ; 
Most manly with these men of his who help him dealing out 
wealth and gathering the treasure. 
12 What is the care of Indra for his Mother, what cares he for 
the Father who begat him ? 
His care is that which sp-eds his might in conflicts, like wind 
borne onward by the clouds that thunder. 


‘ 


5 Extolling : I follow Professor Wilson in taking grinatéh asa 
nominative plural, a lighteved form for grinanidh. OtherWise it is 
Giffcult to make sense ov of she second line. 8 Indre : in this stan- 
za is inthe accusative case Without a subjector a governing verb, 
Sayaua supplies vayam stota-ah stumefi, ‘we singers praise. ll Who 
brewketh forts im pieces*: ax it seems Impossible ta make any senge out 
of pérvih, I have adopted Professue Grasemann’s conjecture, which ig 
sormewhkt reluctantly accepted by Professor Ludwig, and read pérdhie 
“instead of bhe word in the text, Sayana supplies satrusendh, ‘armies 
of enemies,’ 7hes® men : who sing his praises and 60 increase his streng™ oy 
th. 13 ts care ws: there are no curresponding words in the texts 
but it is necessary to supply something of the kind, The meaning is, 
Indra is independent of, and cares nothing about, his parents, but he 
dovs care for his dear ally the thunderbolt. 


BYMN 17, THE RIGVEDA. 415 


13 Maghavan makes the settled man nnsettee : he scatters dust 
that he hath swept together, 
Breaking in pieces like Heaven armed ick lightning 
Maghaven shall enrich the man who lauds him. 


14 He urged the chariot-wheel of Sarya forward: Etasa, speed- 
~ * ing on his way, he rested. 
Hith the black undulating clond bedeweth, in this mid air’s 
depth, at the base of darkness, 


15 As in the aight the sacrificing priest. 
16 Haver for booty, craving strength and horses, we singers stir 
"Indra, the strong, for friendship, 
Who gives the wives we seek, whose succour fails not, to 
hasten, like a pitcher to the fountain. 
17 Be thou our guardian, show thyself our pmenina, watching 
and blessing those who pour the Soma; 
As Kriend, as Sire, most,fatherly of fathers, giving the 
suppliant vital strength and freedom. 


18 Be helping Friend of those who eeek, thy friendship : give 
life, when lauded, Indra, to the singer. 
For, Indra, we the priests have paid thee worship, exalting 
thee with these our sacrifices. 
19 Alone, when Indra Maghavan is lauded, he slayeth *many 
ne’er-resisted Vritras. 
Him in whose keeping is the well-loved singer never do Gods 
or mortals stay or hinder. 
20 E’en so let Maghavan. the loud-voiced Indra, give us true 
blessing, foeless, men’s upholder- 
King of all creatures, give us glory amply, exalted glory due 
to him who lauds thee, 
21 Now, Indr&! lauded, glorified with praises, let power swell 
high like rivers for the singer 
For thee a new hymn, L rd of Bays ! is fashioned, May we, 
car-borne, through song b be victors ever. 


120 Scatters dust: causes foumolon and keeps the world in a state 
of unrest. 14 This dificult stanzg appears to refer to an eclipse 
of the Sun, Indra was urging on the Suu’s chariot when suddenly 
he rested or atopped Etasa the hrse that drew it, and throw nim back 
inta the black moixt cloud of tle darkness of wight. See 1. 121. 13, 

‘and A. Kuhn, Mytholegische Stucien, 1. pp. 54-60 15 The sacri- 
firing priest : lets the fire shine, understood. Sayana explaiws, ‘ag the 
sacrificer sprinkles Soma upou the’ luvoking priest A@ni, taken hdtd, a 
nominative case, as Adtdram, °an accusative. Prefessor Grassmann. 
thinks that the single Pada was originally a gloss on the preceding 
stanzs. 16 Who gives the wives we seek: perhaps referring, as 
Profeseor Ludwig observes, to the forcible abduction of women after- 
& Victroy. 


416 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 1V. 


@ HYMN XVIII Indra and Others. 
Tuts is the ancient and accepted pathway by which all Gods 
have come into existence. é 


Hereby could one be born though waxen mighty, Let him 
not, otherwise, destroy his Mother. 
2 Not this way gol forth: hard is the passage. Forth from 
the side obliquely will I issue. 
Much that is yet undone must I accomplish: one must I 
combat and the other question. 
3 He bent his eye upon thedying Mother: My word I now 
withdraw. That way I follow. 
In T'vashtar’s dwelling Indra drank the Soma, a hundred- 
worth of juice pressed from the mortar. 
4 What strange act shall he do, he whom his Mother bore for a 
thousand months and many autumns? . 
No peer hath he among those born already, nor among those 
who shall be born hereaft.r. 
5 Deeming hima reproach, his Mcther hid him, Indra, endow- 
ed with all heroic,valcur. 
Then up he sprang himself, assumed his vesture, and filled, 
as soon as born, the earth and heaven, 
6 With lively motion onward flow these waters, the Holy Ones, 
sfouting, as’ twere, together. 
Ask them to tell thee what the floods are saying, what girdling 
rock the waters burst asunder, 
oO et ene Se NE Ae ee Re oe ae ek aE 
Indra, Aditi, and Vamadeva are said to be the Rishis or seers as 
well as the deities of the hymn, as it consists of conversation in which 
all bear part. The hymn appears to be made up of somewhat in- 
coborent fragments, and, the Commentators do not seem to have been 
successful in their apportionment of the stanzas to thr several speak- 
ers. Seo Prof. Pischel’s Excursus (Vedische Studien, I1. pp. 42—54), 
and Prof. Ludwig's criticism thereon, Ueber die neuesten Arbeiten auf 
dem Gebiete der Kgveda- forschung, pp. 142 sqq. 1 The main 
subject is the birth and infancy of [ndra.-He refuses to be born in the 
usual manner and insists ou coming into the worldin another, way. 
The speaker—Vyansa his father, Aditi his mother, or some other— 
dissuades him, eventually, it seme, (stanza 3) with success. The Com- 
menbators erropeoualy take the stanza as referring to the birth of 
Vamadeva. 2eIndra, as yet unkorn, is the speaker: One? per- 
haps Vritra. The ether } perhaps Vishnu, whom he i.ddresses in stanza 
11. 3 Indra, who has changed his mind, speaks the second half 
of the firtt line. 4 It is not glear who the spsaker is. Professor 
Wilson obsorves: ‘ Aditi defends herg#on upon the plea that, as his 
period of gestation was marvellous, his actions are not to be compared 


with those of any others,’ 5 Deeming hima reproach: either be- 
cause he appeared to be weak, or because, as Sgyana says, he was born 
in a chamber in privacy unworthy of so great a Gad, 6 What 


girdling rock: an allusion to the prison of thick cloud from which 
Ir dra freed the waters. : 


HYMN 18.) THE RIGVEDA. 4tT 


7 Are they addressing him with words of welcome ? Will the 
floods take on them the shame of Indra ? 
With his great thunderbolt my Son hath slaughtered Vritru, 
and set these rivers free to wander. 
8 I cast thee from me, mine,—thy youthful mother ; thee, mine 
own offspring, Kushava hath swallowed, 
To him, mine infant, were the waters gracious, Indra, my 
Son, rose up in conquering vigour. 
9 Thou art mine own, O Maghavan, whom Vyansa struck to 
the ground and smote thy jaws in pieces. ° 
But, smitten through, the mastery thou wonnést, and with 
thy bolt the Daisa’s head tbou crashedst. 


10 The heifer hath brought forth the Strong, the Mighty, the 
unconquerable Bull, the furious Indra. 
The Mother left her unlicked Calf to wander, sceking, himself, 
the path that he would follow. e 
11 Then to her mighty Child the Mother turned her, saying, My 
son, these Deities forsaké thee. 
Then Indra said, abont to slaughter*Vritra, O my friend 
Vishnu, stride fall boldly forward. 
12 Who was he then who made thy Mother widow ? Who sought 
to slay thee lying still or moving ? , 
What God, when by the foot thy Sire thou tookest and slewest, 
was at hand to give thee comfort ? 


ee enc A 


7 Words of welcome : nivids, sentences or short formularies insér- 
ted ina Jiturgy and containing epithets or short invocations of the 
Gods. Zhe shame of Indra : his fancied guilt incurred in slaying Vrit- 
ra. Seal. 32. 14. 8 Mine : Sayana explains mamat as ‘ exulting.’ 
Professor Roth, whom Professor Grassmaun ana the trans!ators of the 
Siebenztg Lieder*follo#, renders is by now—now. _ I have preferred 
Professor Ludwig's interpretation, originally due to Benfey, aod taken 
the word as another form of mama, The word is important*as expres- 
sing Aditi’s acknowledgment of [udra as her son. Kushavd : according 
to Saya na, a Rakshast or female demon who swallowed Indra at his 
birth ;eaccording to von Roth, the namo of a,river. 10 The Hewfer : 
Aditi, young mother of Indra,” 11 Stride [ull boldly forward : that 
ie, assist me in my hattle with Vritra. Professor Grassmann and the 
translators of the Siebenztg Lieder*render the passage differently. ‘O 
Vi-chnu, Freund. geh etwas doch®zur Seite,’ and, ¢ Vishnu mein Freund 
geh etawas aus dem*Wege ; that ix, ‘step aside, or ‘out of the way,’ 
and let me conquer Vritra without thy aid. 12 This appears to be 
Vishnu’s answer- Why dost thouask mc to help thee now ? Didst 
thou rot slay thine own father who sought to kill thee when yet un- 
born and when coming to the birth 1 Vyansa appeafs to be the father 
whom Indra slew (atanza 9) Sgyana merely saya that the allusions are 
variously explained by the followers of the Taitthiya scleoel of the 
Yajurveda. 


54 : 


ee ee ee 


—— meet 


418 THE HYMNS OF {BOOK IV. 


13 In deep distress I cooked a dog’s intestines, Among the Gods 
[ found not one to comfort. 
My consort I beheld in degradation, The Falcon then brought 
me the pleasant Soma 
HYMN XIX, Indra. 
Tatt, verily, O Thunder-wielding Indra, all the Gods here, 
the Helpers swift to listen, 
And both the worlds elected, thee the Mighty, High, waxen 
strong, alone to slaughter Vritra, 
2 The Gods, as worn with eld, relaxed their efforts: thou, 
Indra, borr of truth, wast Sovran Ruler. 
Thou slewest Ahi who besieged the waters, and dugeest out 
their all-supporting channels. 


3 The insatiate one, extended, hard to waken, who slumbered in 
perpetual sleep, O Indra,— 
The Dragon stretched against the seven prone rivers, whcre 
no joint was, thou rentest with thy thunder, 
4 Indra with might shook earth ‘and her foundation as the 
wind stirs the water With its fury. 
Striving, with strength he burst the firm asunder, and tore 
away the summits of the mountains, 


5 They ran to thee as mothers to their offspring : the clouds, 
like chariots hastened forth together. 
Thou didst refresh the streams and force the billows : thou, 
_ Indra, settest free obstructed rivers. 
§ Thou for the sake of Vayya and Turviti didst stay the great 
stream, flowing, all-sustaining ; 
Yes, at their prayer didst check the rushing river and make 
the floods easy to CT Oss, O Indra. 


Pett ner sec 


13 This appears to be Vamadeva’s excuse for having in his utmost 
need cooked,and eaten, or desired to eat, impure flesh. ‘So Aan has, 
Vamadeva who well knew right and wrong, was by no means rendered 
impure, though desirous, when oppressed with hunger, of eating the 
flash of dogs for the presérvation of bis life, X, 106 ’— Wilson. Accor d- 
ing to Ludwig, Bergaigne, and Hillebrandt, the stanzais spoken by Indra. 
The Falcon : “alluding to the way in which the Soma wae first brought 
from heaven. Siyana explains it as ‘ Jadra coming swiftly asa falcons 


- QQ 


Oo 

2 Relaxed thewr efforts > or abdicated their functions as protectors 
and made over to Indra the duty of élaying the oppressor Vritra, 3 
Whee no‘yount was : that would haye facilitated his dismemberment. 
5 The clouds. according to Sayana, ddrayah, mountains or clouds, here 
means the Maruts. 6 Vayya and Turvitt: Turviti has been men- 
tioned frequently, i in Book J. as having been protected by Indra, and 
Vayya is said to have been his father and companion. See I, 54.6, 
TI. 13, 12. 


HYMN 20.) THE RIGVEDA. 41% 
% He let the young Maids skilled in Law, unwedded, like foun- 


tains, bubbling, flow forth streaming onward. 
He inundated thirsty plains wud deserts, aud milked the dry 
Cows of the mighty master. 
8 Through many a morn and many alovely autumn, having 
slain Vritra, he set tree the rivers, 
Indra bath set at liberty to wander on earth the streams. 
encompassed, pressed together. 
3 Lord of bay Steeds, thou broughtest from the ant-hill the 
unwedded damoel’s son Whom ants Were cating, ° 
The bund saw clearly, as he grasped the serpent, rose, brake 
the jar: his joints again united. 
10. To the wise man, O Sage and Sovran Ruler, the man who. 
knoweth all thine ancient exploits, 
Hath told these decds of might as thou hast wrought them,. 
great acts, spontaneous, aud to man’s advantage. °@ 
11 Now, Indra ! lauded. giorificd with praises, let powers swell. 
high, like rivers, for thé singer, 
Four thee anew hymn, Lord ot Bays! iS fashioned. May we,. 
car-borne, thruugh song be victors ever: 
| HYMN XX, Indra. 
From near or far away may mighty Indra, giver lof sifecour,, 
come tur our protection, 
Lord of men, armed with thunder, with the Strongest, 
slaying his foes in conflict, in the battles, 


2 May india come to us with Lawny Coursers, inclined to us, to 
tavour and enrich us. 
May Maghavan, loud-voiced and wieding thunder, stand by 
us at tule sacrafice, in Cumbat. 
3 Thou, honouring thie our sacrifica, O Indra, shalt give us. 
strenght and fill us full of courage, ° 
To win the bouty, Thunder-armed ! like hunters may Wo With, 
thee subdue in hight our foemen, 
————— 6 
7 he youny Matis stillet wm Law : the rivecs that know aud. follow 
the law of tueir being, the Order ot tha universe. LHe milked the dry 
Cows : he drew rain trom the cloads which had hitherto beva prevent- 
ed by theic mighty master Vritea from yielding their atures. 9 
Sayana saya thad Agru (unwedded) Was a Woman ofthat names, whosd 
son was hidden in an ant-hill, whence Indra reseued Lim, restured his 
sight, aod re-united. ‘his bruken Joints, Brake, the jar: brdKey 
through the aot-hill in which hs was confined. Prateysur Ludwig 
thinks that the sou of the unwedded damsel is tha hghtnipg which 
burat forth from the parent cloud. The passage is obsaure. 


1 Wilh the Strongest; the most powerful Maruts. 


‘420 THE AYMNS OF [BOOK IV. 


4 Loving us, well benevolent, close beside us, drink, Godlike 
Indra, of the well-pressed Soma. 
Drink of the meath we offer, and delight thee with food that 
cometh from the mountain ridges. 


5 Him whv is suog aloud by recent sages, like a ripe-fruited 
trec, a scythe-armed victor, — 
I, like a bridegroom thinking of his consort, call hither Indra, 
him invoked of many 3; 


6 Him who in native strength is like a mountain, the lofty 
Indra borr of old for conqnest, 
Terrific wielder of the ancieut thander, filled full with 
splendour as a jar with water, 


7 Whom from of old there js not one to hinder, none to curtail 
the riches of his bounty. 


Pouring forth freely, O thou Strong and Mighty, vouchsafe us 
riches, God invoked of many: 


8 Of wealth and homes of‘men titou art the ruler, and opener 
of the stuble of tke cattle. 


Helper of men, winner of spoil in combats, thou leadest to an 
ample heap of riches. 


3 By what great might is he renowned as strongest, wherewith 
the Letty One stirs up wild battles. 

Best soother of the worshipper’s great sorrow, he gives pos: 
sessions to the man who lauds him. 


10 Slay us not; bring, bestow on us the ample gift which thou 
hast to give to him who offers, 
At this new gift, with this laad sung before thee, extolling 
thee, we, Indra, ‘vill declare it, 

4 That cometh from the mountain ridges: where the Soma was 
said especially to grow. According to Sfyana’s interpretation, the 
translation would be ‘with the food brought thee vith the hymn of 
noonday, Prishtha means buth ‘back, or high ridge,’ and ‘a hyuin em. 
ployed av the midday oblation,’ and the meaniog of the adjective prish- 
thya is similarly ambiguous. 5 A scythe-armed victor: the meaning 
ig uncertain. Sdyans explains srinyah as ‘armed with a hook or sickla,’ 
skilled in the use of arms.’ Professor Ludwig translates, ‘wie ein 
fassender haken,’ ‘lie a grasping hook’ Professor Aufrecht thinke thao 
srinyo na jéta may perliaps’ mean,’ ‘like a winner of sickle (as @ prize).’ 
Professor Grassmaan thiaks that a reaper, cutting down corn with his 
sicxte, isYatenlled. 6 Wielder ofthe ancrent thunder: 1 follow Sayana 
but am not eatished with his explaation Professor Grassmann follows 
Bollensey in reading vrajim, cowprn, instead of vdjram, thunderbolt, 
and this is the reading givon also iu the St. Petersburg Lexicon. If 


this alteration were adopted the translation would be, ‘the fierca 
discloser of the firm-built cow.stall, 


AYMN 21) THE RIGVEDA. 421 


11 Now, Indra ! lauded, glorified with praises, let power swell 
high, lke rivers, for the singer. 
A oew hymn, Lord of Bays ? tor thee is fashioned. May we, 
car-borne, through song be victors ever. 


HYMN XXI. Indra. 
May Indra come to us for our protection ; here be the Hero 
praised, our feast companion 
May he whose powers are many, waxen mighty, cherish, like 
Dyaus, his own supreme dominion. ° 
2 Here magnify his great herow exploits, mst glorious One, 
enriching men with bounties, 
Whose will is hke a Sovran in assembly, who rules the 
peopte, Conqueror, all-surpassing. 
3 Hithar let Indra come from earth or heaven, hither with 
speech from firmament or ocean ; ° 
With Maruts, from the tealm of light to aid ug, or from a 
distance, from the seag of Order. 


4 That Indra will we laud in our assemblies, him whois Lord 
of great and lasting riches, 
Victor with Vayu where the herds art; gathered, who leads 
with boldness on to higher fortune. 3 
® May the Priest, Lord of many blessings, steeving,— who 
fixing reverence on reverence, giving. 
Vent to his voice, inciteth men to worship—with lauds being 
Indra hither to our dwelhings, 
6 When sitting pondering in deep devotion in Ausija’s abode 
they ply the press storfe. 
May he whose wrath is fieree, the mighty bearer, come as the 
house-lgrd’s priest within our chambers, 
7 Surely the power of Bharvara the mighty for ever helpeth to 
support the singer ; . 


3 From a distance, from the seat of Order : perhaps, from the farth- 
est limin of the ordered universe. According to Sayana, from the region 
of clfud, meyhalokit. 4 Where the herds are gothered ; in places 
where cattle, the prize of victory, abuand. ° 5 The Priest : apparently 
Agni. Fixing reverence on revergnca : urging men to continual adora, 
tion. 6 Ausiza is generallya patronymic of ethe Rishi Kaksbivan 
and others, Acgording to Sayana the iastitutor of the secrifice ig 
meant. The stanza is obscure. * 7 Bhdarvara : according tu Siyana, 
a name of Indra as son uf Bharvaya, the supporter of the World,* that 
is, Prajapati. Professor Grassmann thinks that Agni is meant, 
and Professor Ludwig considers it tolerably cle&r that Bharvara is 
identical with Ausija. The exact meaning of the sfanza is doubtful, 
but its genora!l purport appears to be that Bharvara, whetber he be 
Augija, or Iodra, or Agni, has a store of wealth or power to protect the 
worshipper and assist him in the performance ef his religious duties. 


422 THE HYMNS OP rBOOK FP. 


That which in Ausija’s abode lies hiddea, to come forth for 
delight and for devotion 
8 When he unbars tie spaces of the mountains, and quickens 
Witn bis floods the water-torr. ats, 
He tinds in lair the buffalo and wild-ox when tbe wise lead 
him on to wigorous exploit. 
9 Auspicious are thy hands, thine arms woll-fashioned which 
proffer bounty, Indra, to thy praiser. 
What sloth is this 2? Why dost thou not rejuice thee ? Why 
dost thou nui delight thyself with giving ? 
10 So Indra is the trathful Lord of treasure. J'reedom he gave 
to man by slaying Vritra, 
Much-lauded ! help us with thy power to riches : may I ba 
sharer of thy Godlike favour. 
11 Now, Indra! lauded, gioritied with praises, let power swell 
high, dike rivers, for the siuge:. 
For thee a new hymn, Lord of Bays ! is fashioned, May we, 
care-borne, through song be victurs ever. 
LWYMN XXIT. Indra, 
Tat gift of curs which Indra loves and welcomes, even that 
h¢ makes for us, the Great and Strong One, 
He who cSmes wielding in his might the thunder, Maghavan 
gives prayer, praise, and laud, and Soma. 
2 Bull, hurler of the four-edged rain.prodycer with both his. 
arms, strong, mighty, most heroic ; 
Wearing as wool Parushni for sdornment, whose joints for 
suke of friendship he hath covered. 


ee we: 


8 When he unbars: when Indra lays open ‘the 4‘nterivr of the 
mountain of clouds within which the rain is imprisoned The baffilo 
and wild-ow tT the Gaura (Bos gauru,) and the Gavaya (Bos gaAvaeUs)) 
are two kinds of wild cattle = The yaurdsya and gavaydsya of the text 
mus6 be taken as partitive gemitives after vidat, he inde. “The pur- 
port of the expression, aceordiny to the scholiast, is that Londra o@¢ains 
these two animals taw dwuge pas lubhate, either fur himself as sacrifi- 
cial flesh. or for nis worshippers, xome of whom, at least, even now,. 


would not object to eat the flesh of tht wild oxen.’— Wilson. # 


e 

2 Rain prodweér > the thunder bolp or lightning which 18 supposed, 
to cause rain by Opening the elouud. Parushut : one of the rivars of 
the’ Panjab, called in later times Tavati, the modern Ravi. Jnudra Ap- 
pears to be represented as clothing himself in the wool-lke waves, or 
fleecy vap®ore, of the river, and lovingly covering or uniting in one 
stream her several joints, limbs, or branches. ‘Tue phraseology here * 
Professor Wilson remarks, ‘is somewhat obscure, and the scholiast dows 
the materially enlighten us,’ 


AY MN 224 THE RIGVEDA., 423 


3 God whe of all the Gods was born divinest, endowed with 
ample strength and mighty powers, 
And bearing in his arms the yearning thunder, with violent 
rush caused heaven and earth to tremble. 
4 Before the High God, at his birth, heaven trembled, earth, 
many fioods and all the precipices. 
The Strong One bringeth nigh the Bull’s_ two Parents: loud 
sing the winds, like men, in air’s mid-region. 
-s Those are the great deeds, Indra, thine, the Mighty, deeds to 
be told at all libations, 
That thou, O Hero, bold and boldly daring, didst with thy 
bolt, by strength, destroy the Dragon 
6 True are all these thy deeds, O Most UWeroic, The Milch-kine 
issued from the streaming udder. P 
Tn fear of thee, O thou of Inanly spirit, the rivers ewiftly set 
themselves in motion. @ 
7 With joy, O Indra, Lord of Tawny Colirsers, the Sistefs then, 
these Goddesses, extolled thee, 
Whenthou didst give the prisoned oncs their freedom to 
wander at their will m long succession, - 
8 Pressed is the gladdening stalk as ’twere a river: so let the 
rite, the toiler’ s power, attract thee. 
To us-ward, of the Bright One, as the courser strains his 
exceedingly strong leather bridle, 


9 Ever by us perform the most heroic, thine highest, best 


victorious deeds, O Victor. ° 
For us make Vritras easy to be conquered : destroy the 
weapon of our murtal foeman. : 


10 Graciously listen to our prayer, O Indra, and strength of 
varied gort bestow thou un us, 


Sead to us all intelligence and wisdont: Q Maghavan, be he 
who gives us cattle. 2» ® 


—— er 


emis Cormeen emer re A RC A ee 
8 


The meaning of the second, line is, Indra brénge near, but holds 
apart, the heavou amd the.earth, the mighty Son, and the ‘winds sing 
in the intermediate space which ‘halve bern provided for them. 6 
The Milch-hine ; streams of feruilizging rain. The udder is%he cloud. 

7 The Sisters: the rivers. + 8 The construction of the middle 
portion of the stanza is very difficult. Tho gehetral aning ape 
years to be, ‘Tbe Soma has been pressed and the juice, flows copiously. 
Let our sacrifice draw thee hither witb all the streugth of a hard pull- 
ing horse.’ Who ‘the Drayhkt Oue’ is not clear ; probably Agui is meant, 


424 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IV. 


11 Now, Indra ! landed, glorified with Praises, let wealth swell 
high like rivers to the singer. 


For thee a new hymn, Lord of Bays ! is fashioned. May we, 
car-borne, through song be victors ever, 


HYMN XXIII. Indra. 


How, what priest’s sacrifice hath he made mighty, rejoicing 
in the Boma and its fountain ? 

Delighting in the juice, eagerly drinking, the Lofty One hath 
waxed for splendid riches. 

2 What hero hath been made his feast-companion ? Who hath 

been partner in his loving-kindness ? | 

What know we of his wondrous acts ? How often comes he to 
aié and speed the pious toiler ? 


3 How heateth Indra offered invocation ? How, hearing, marketh 
he the invoker’s wishes ? , 
What are his ancient acts of bounty ? Wherefore cull they 
him One who filleth full the singer ? 


4 How doth the priest who laboureth, ever longing, win for 
hitnself the wealth which he possesseth ? 
May he, the God, mark well my truthful praises, having 
received the homage which he loveth. 


5 How, and what bond of friendship with a mortal hath the 
God-chosen as this morn is breaking ? 
How, and what love hath he for those who love him, who 
have entwined in him their firm affection ? 


6 Is then thy friendship with thy friends most mighty ? Thy 
brotherhood with as,—when may we tell it ? 
The streams of milk move, as most wondrous sunlight, the 
beauty of the Lovely One for glory. 


1 Mighty : effectual Jt3 fountain more literally, udder ; the sacri- 
fica the source from which the Soma flows as milk from: the udder of 
the cow. Yor splendid rich23: in order to bestow spdendid wealth on 
the sacrificer according to Sayana. ¢ 2 What hero, etc: no one is 
allowed tot shard the offerings made to Indra or to know his benevolent 
intentions. The streams of milk: this Jine is difficult. Indr-.’s close 
connexionwith the Sun is referred to, and the general purport may be 
as Professo Ludwig Ruggests: When thou risest up as the Sun then 
we declare fhy brotherhood with us ; or in other wo0rds. Indra’s beauty 
is made known as the lieht of the Sun. Sayana fies Be eye fee 
the efforts, (udyogdh), goh, of the moving one (Indra), ) As, 


HYMN 24.) THE RIGVEDA, 425 


7 About to slay the Indra-less destructive spirit he sharpens 
his keen arms to strike her. 
Whereby the Strong, although our debls’ exactor, drives in 
the distant mornings that we know not. 
8 Eternal Law hath varied food that strengthens; thotght of 
eternal Law removes transgressions. 
The praise-hymn of cternal Giw, arousing, glowing, hath 
oped the deaf ears of the living. 
9 Firm-seated are eternal Law’s foundatiots; in its fair form 
is are many splendid beauties. @ 
By holy Law long lasting food they bring us; by holy Law 
have cows come to our worship. 
10 Fixing eternal Law he, too, upholds it: swift moves the might 
of Law and wins the booty. ; 
To Law beong the vast deep Earth and Heaven! Milch-kine 
supreme, to Law their*milk they render. . 
11 Now, Indra! lauded, glorified with praises, let pow»r swell 
high lke rivers to the singer.* =» ; 
for thee a new hymna, Lord of Bays, is fashioned. May we, 
\ car-borne, through song be victors ever. 
HYMN XXIV. o Indra. 
Wnrat worthy praise will bring befour us Inde, the Son of 


Strength, that he nay grant us riches ; 
For he the Hero, gives the singer treasures: heis the bord 


who sends gifts, ye people. 


a i 

7 Spirat: the Druh, or meéscnievous female sprite who does non 
acknuoviedge Indra. The purport of the second live is: Indra, alth: 
ough the punisher ofour sins, does not suffer us to ke destroyed by 
evil spirits, bub continuing to rise as the Sun, urges on a sudcession of 
mornings in the light of which the damous of the night disappear. 

8 Etarnal Law: here, Sqyana says, the word rité means Aditya, or 
Indra, or sacrifice. [ts meauing Varies slightly in this and the twa 
following stanzas, but the original of regularity, conformity to, or 
establishment by, eternal order or law, is found throughour. In the 
second line eternal Law is the regular low-owdained sacrifice. Glowing : 
brilliant, or clearly sounding, Zhe tiving + the worehippper. sy] 
Lhey bring us: that is, the cows which have come tp our worship, to be 
presented to the pyicsts as payment of thei servicas, 10 Fixing 
eternal Law: the establisher of the law is also its upholder or admin- 
istrator., Profess Wilson translates: ‘The ( worshipper ) subjooting 
Rita (to his will) verily enjoys Rita.’ To Law 8elong: or, were 
made for the sake of order or law-ordained sacwifice. uch-kine 
supreme: bounteous heaven and earth, which cherish and A sacri- 
five or eternal order in general. : ° 


PEELED 


1 The Son of strongth: the Mighty One. 
65° s 


426 THE HYMNS OF BOOK IY. 


2 To-be invoked “and: liymned in -fight with Vritra, the well- 
praised Indra gives us real bounties. 
That Maghaven brings comfort in the foray to the religious 
man who pours libations, | 
3 Him,-verity, the men invoked in‘combat; risking their lives 
they make him their protector, 
When heroes, foe to foe, give up their’ bodies, fighting, each 
side, fur children and their offspring. 
4 Strong God! the folk at need put forth their vigour, striving 
torether in the whirl of battle. ne 
‘When warrior bands encounter one another some in the 
grapple quit themseves like Indra. 
5 Hence many a one worship the might of Indra: hance let 
the brow succeed the meal-oblation, 
Hence-let the Soma banish those who pour not; even hence 
I jey topay the Strong One worship. 
6 Indra giv@s comfort to the man who truly presses, for him 
who longs for-it, the Soma, 
Not disaffected, with devoted spirit this man he takes to be 
his friend in battles, 
7 He who this day for Indra presses Soma, prepares the brow 
‘and fries the grains of barley — 
Loving tir» bymns of that devoted servant, to him may Indra 
give heroic vigour, 


‘8 Wen the impetuous chief hath sought the conflict, and the 
lord looked upon the long-drawn battle, 
The matron calls to the Strong Goad whom pressers of Soma 
have encouraged in the dwelling. 
9 He bid asmall price fora thing of value: I was content, 
returning, sti]l unpurchased, ° . 
He heightened not his insufficient offer, Simple and clever, 
both milk out the udder. 


eo ee 


eee 


5 Let the brew succeed the meal-oblation: or, let the offering of 
cooked viands follow that of the sacrificial cake, let varied offe.ings 
be made in rapid susocessior, Lt the Soma banish: let those who pour 
no Soma-libations to Indra be kept at a distance from thosa who 
thus worship him. 8 When the cnieftain has gone out to fight, 
his wife calls on Indra to protect nim. Accordjng to Sayana the 
‘impetuous chief,’ the lord,’ is Indra whom his consort recalls to drink 
the Sgma juice -vhich has been prepared for him by men. o£ 
wes content: spoken by Indra. Bolh milk out the wider: both the 
simple, or needp, buyer ani the sherwd selled make as much as they 
can out of tve bargain, that is, the buying ani selling of Tudra, mean- 
ing the settlemeatof the fee to be paid tothe priest for obtaining Indra’g 
favour by sacrifice. Professor Grassmann banishes stanzas 9 and 10 
to an appendix, as not originally belopgiag to the bymn, 


AY MN 25) THE RIGVEDA. 421 


10; Who for ten milch- kine purchaseth from me this Indra whois 
maine ? 
When he hath slain the Vritras let the: buyer give him back 
to ma, 
11 Now, Indra lauded, glorified with praises, let wealth swell 
high like rivers for the singor. 
For thee a new hymn, Lord” of Bays. is fashioned. May we, 
car burne, thiough song be victore ever. 


as - HYMN XXV, , ° Indra. 


Wuar frien] of nan, God- loving, hath delighted, yearning 
therefor, this day in India’s friendship ? 
Who with enkindled flame 5d flswing Soma laudeth him 
for his great protecting faveur ? 
2 Who hath with prayerebowed to the Soma- lover ® What 
pious man erducs the beams of morning ? 
Who seeks bond, fr iatship, brotheshorod with Indra ? Who 
hath recourse ae tha Sage for sucerur ? 
3 Who claims to-day the Davies protection, asks Ad ti for 
light, or the Adityas ? 
OF whose pressed stalk of Soma drink the Asvig-¢ Indra, and 
Agni, well-inclined in spirit ? 
4 To bim shall Agni Bharata give shelter : long shall heelook 
upon the Sun uprising, 
Who sayeth, Let as press the jufee for Indra, man’s Priend, 
the Hero mantiest of heroes. 
Him neither few men overcome, por m&noy.: to him shall Aditi 
give spicious shelter, 
Dear is the pious, the devout, to Indra; dear ig the zealous, 
dear the Soma-bringes. 
6 This Hero curbs the mighty for the g-alous : the presser’s- 
eorew Ludra possesses solely : 
No brother, kin, or friend'to him who pours not, destroyer of, 
the dumb who would. resist, him, 


on 


eee. 
gps: 


9 Hndnes the beams of morfttng : ea expression moans, apparently, 
Cherakes bitself to prayer atdday-break.’ Sqyana’s interpretation is, 


‘Who covers that 1s, supports, the cows given.by Tndrg 2’ 4. Ayni 
Bhdérata: Agui as the espacial God of the Bourats family to. wie bb 
Vamadeva the Righi of tho bytin belyngid, 6. Curds the miyhty : 


the meaning of prasushdt 18 BOW hat dace promp@Mitscotatises 
of foes ’—Sgyana, ' Bridling, leading, driving, driving or having swift. 
horres.’—Prof. Roth, * Cuvqueror of the mighty.’—Piof, Ludwig, Thetis 
dumbd.; the mau why bas by vowuc-to praise, bin 


428 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IV. 


7 Not with the wealthy churl who poars no Soma doth Indra, 
Soma-drinker, bind alliance, 
He draws away his wealth and slays him naked, own Iricnd 
to him who offers, for oblation, . 
8 Highest and lowest, men who stand between them, going, 
returning, dwelling in contentment, | 
Those who show forth their strength when urged to battle— 
these are the men who call for aid on Iadra. 
HYMN XXV. Indra. 
T ws aforetime Manu, 1 was Stirya : Iam the sage Kakshivar _. 
holy singer. © 
Kutsa the son of Arjunil master. lam the sapient Usana ; 
behold me. : 
2 I have bestowed the earth upon the Arya, and rain upon the 
man who brings oblation, 
I cuided forth the loudly-roaring waters, and the Gods moved 
according to my pleasure, : 
3 In the wild joy of SomaI demolished Sambara’s forts, ninety- 
and-nine, together, ° 
And, utterly, the hundredth habitation, when helpng Divo 
disa Atithigva, 
4 Before all birds be ranked this Bird, O Maruts ; snpreme of 
fafcons be this flect-winged Falcon, 
Because, strong-pinioncd, with no car to bear him, he brought 
to Manu the God-loved oblation. 
& When the Bird brought it, hence in rapid motion sent on the 
wide path fleet as thought he hurried, 
Swift he returned with sweetness~of the Soma, and hence the 
Falcon hath acquired his glory. 
6 Bearing the stalk, the Falcon speeding onward, Bjrd bringing 
from afar the draught that gladdens, 


we ee ee 


ae es ee ebb aehsaree, eRe 
@ Naked: stripped of all his property ; destitute. 7’o him who offers, 
jor oblation : according to Sadyana, §to the men who poucs the libation 
and prepares the dresged food ; to him who presents the libation and 
oblatien '— Wilson. ‘ e 
e oc 
Tho deity of the first three stanzas is said to be either Eadra or Pa- 
ramatma [the Supreme Spirzt ar Soul cf the universe]: the deity or dei- 
fied object of the other stanzas is the S¥ena or Palegn. 1 Indra 
is the speaker of the first three versesgalthough it is not clear what ha 
moins by saying that he is Kakshivau and Usanaé, unless be iutends 
to‘identify himself*with all exietenca 
3 Sambara ; Diwrlasa ; Atihigva (hare an adname or epithet of Div- 
odasa): see M.dex of Names. 4 With no car to bear him : literally, 
with his own whidel-less nature’ that is by his own natural impulse, 
Qblatiom : the Soma. - 6 Lhe draughé that gladdens : the pland teht 
yields the exhilarating juice. 


RYMN 27) THE RIGVEDA 429 


Friend of the Gods, brought, grasping fast, the Soma which 
he had taken from you loftiest heaven. 
@ The Faleon took and brvught the Soma, bearing thousand 
libations with him, yea, ten thousand, 
The Bold One left Malignities behind him, wise, in wild joy of 
Soma, left the foolish. 
HYMN XXVII. The Falcon, 
J, as I lay within the womb, considered all generations of 
these Gods In order. 
e~ A hundred iron fortresses confined me, but forthel fiew with 
rapid speed a Falcon. . 
2 Not at lis own free pleasure did he bear me: he conquered 
with his strength and manly courage. 
Straightway the Bold One Jeft the fiends behind him and 
passed the winds as he grew yct more mighty. 
3 When with loud cry from heaven down sped the Falcon, 
thenco hasting like the wind he bore the Bold Qne. 
Then, wildly razing in ls mind, the archer Kristow aimed 
and loosed the string to strike ‘hime 
4 The Faleon bore him from heaven’s lofty summit as the swift 
car of Indra’s Friend bore Bhujyu. 
Then d wnoward hither fell a flying feather - the Bird. 
hasting forward in his journey, 
S And now let Maghavan accept the beaker, white, “alled with, 
milk, fiiled with the shining liquid ; 
The best of sweet meath which the priests have offered : that 
Indra to his joy may drink, the Hero, that he may take: 
and diink it to his rapture. 


— 


rr a 


7 The Bold Ohie: Indra, - 

1 The wom@y of the rain cloud. A hundred fortresses ; ‘Sambara’s, 
bundred ancient castles’ (11 14 6), Considered 2 or re vie wad, in hopa 
of finding a deliverer. The speaker is Agni, that ia, the lightning 
which reads the cloud and brings down the sweet rain-the flee: Hal- 
con who brings Soma from heaven, See Prof. Blootmfield, The Myth 
of SoMa and the Kagle, Festgruss an Rudol# von Roth, 1893, pp 149-. 


~155. Cf Wymnus of the Atharva-vedy VlLe48 I 2 Not at his 
own free pleasure : the falcon’s mo e will was not enough, says Soma ; 
he had trst to fight and euriqner my keepers. The Bold One; 


Indra, §-e stanzy 7 of the p®eveding*hyypn. ° 3 The B. yt One t 
measning Soma, Tha constructiougof the first line is “difficult. Krisinu: 

one of the guards of the celastial Sima. Seol., 15562 I, 1 2. ,o) 

aud we slicaid therefure Ox pect indrdvatoh, ‘of Inéra’s two trieuds, 
instead of fadetavuto. Feather: *parnum ; whishi begome on earth the 
sacred Parna or Palaga tre’, the Butea Frondosa, 5 Tae wetricalh 
form and the ritual application indicate the comypsratively recend, 
addition of the ancient bymn. The hymu has been discussed by 


Weber, Vedische Beitrage, pp. 4 f 


430; FE HEMNS OP. (BOOK LV. 
HY¥MN XXVITL. Tndra-Soma, 
ALLIED: with thee, in this thy friendship, Soma, Indrasor mam 
made was rs flow together, 
Slew Ahi, and seat forth the Seven Rivers, and. opened. ag ik 
were ODstructed fountains, . 
2 lodu, with tree for his confederate, Indra swiftly with mighi. 
pressed down the wheel of Stirya, 
What rolicd, all Jife’s support. on heaven’s high.summit was 
scparated from the great oppressor. eo. 
3 Indra smote down, Agni consumed, O Indu, the Dasyus ere. 
the noontide in, the con flict. 
Of those who gladly sought a hard-won dwelling bha-cast down. 
many a thousand with his arrow, 


4 Lower than.all besides hast thou, O Iudra, cost down the 
Dasyus, abject tribes of Dasas, 
Ye draws away, ye put to death the foeman, and took great 
vergeance with your murderiny weapons 
§ So, df a truth, Indra and Soma, Heroes, ye burst the stable of 
the kine and horses, 
Lhe stable which the bar of stone obstructed; and piercing 
through. set. free the habitations, 
_ HYMN XAXIX, Indra. 
“omr, lauded, unte us with powers and succours, O Indra, 
with thy Tawny Steeds, exulting, 
Prst even the foenan’s manifold hbations, glorified with our 
hymns, true Weath-bestuwer. ® 


2 Man’s Fricnd, to this our sacrifice he cometh marking how 
he is called. by Somia-pressers ° ¢ 

Hearless, and conscious that his Steeds are noble, he joyeth 
with the Soma-psurins herces, 

1, The Seven. Ravers: perhaps the tive rivera of the Panjab, the 
Indus, and the Sarasvati. See F 38. Lz. 2 Pressed down the v@eel of 
Sdrya’ psobably aa eclipsa af the sun ie inpended, What rolled: the 
gun's wheal, row tie great oppressor: ‘maho druho, prabhitasya 
drogdhuh, of the very mighty oppressdr or tyrant, alluding probabiy 
to his heat’ —~-Wialsod, Cy. VIL 205 Zrble sa. drop, espocially a drop 
of Suma juice, is a trequently-occurrigg name of the God Soma, 3 
Ere the nogntw¢ ? inthe forenoon, when thy have inspirited themselves 
with draughte.of Soma juics, 3 Ye burst the stable of the kine and 
horses ; liberated the kine, than is, the “imprisoned waters which forti- 
lizud the d%pth.aud. caused cattts and horses to multiply. 


1 Past: dr, over, that is, let not the offerings of our enemies detain, 
thee. 2 Heroes ; emi.ent men who institufe sacrifices. 


~ 


AYMN 30.) THRE RIGVEDA 431 


8 Muke'‘his ears hear, -that h: may show hisvigonr and may ba 
joyful in the way he loveth, 
‘May mighty Indra pouring forth in bounty bestow onus good 
roads and perfict safety ; : 


% He who with succour comes to his implorer, the singer here 
who with his song invites him ; 
He who himself sets to the pole swift Coarsers, he who. hath, 
hundreds, thousands, Thunder- vielder, 
‘SO Indra Maghavan, by thee protected may we be thine, princes 
and priests and singers, e 
Sharing the riches scnt from lofty heaven which yields much 
fuod, all desire its bounty, 


HYMN XXX. Indra, 


O Inpra, Vritra-slayer, nene is better, mightier than ‘thou : 
Verily there is none like thee. 


2 Like chariot-w heels thase people alPtogather follow afty thea: 
Thou ever art renowned as (treat. 


3 Not even all the gathered Godsconqnered thee Indra,in the war 
When thou didst lengthen days by night. - 


4 When for the sake of those oppressed, and Kutsa a8 ffe battled 
thou Stolest away the Sun’s car-wheel, 


S When, fighting singly, Indra, thou o’ercamest al] the furidug 
Gods, thou slewest those who strove with thee. 


§ 


4 [Hundreds, thousands: apparently, of tr@asures, and not’ horceg 
as Sivauaexplatus ° 5 Princes : the institutore of the sacrifice, of 
the Siris The phraseology of the second line ig somewhat obscene, 
Professor Wileon renders it ‘participant with thee for the sake of dig- 
tributing brilliant weslth, and abundant Food, entitled to (our) Com- 
mendatiou’ Professor Ludwig, in his Commentary Suggveets that the 
meanity aiav be that the instititutors of the sacrifice are to distribute 
the wealth, and the priests to receive ib., ° 


3 This seems tobe the meaning of the text,—a contest Hebwean 
Indra and the rest of the Gods—and branza, 5 Appears to confirm thia 
interpretation, Professrr Wilson, fyllowing Sayana, translates : Vorily 
all the gods with thee (for) their etrengsh, have warned lavith shia 
Asuras ); wherefore thou hash destfoyed them by day aud by night, 

Wh-n thon diist lengthen days*: didst prolong the gav into the night, 
Cf, Joshua X. 13, £ St lest away the Sun's car-wheel -@n eclipse 
of the Sun, perhaps, is intended, or the meaning may® be merely that 
the Sun's couree was etayed, as in stanze. 3. 5 All the furious 
Gods : according to Siyana, ‘all those who strove against the Gods, 


£ 


439 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR 1°. 


6 When also for a mortal man, Indra, thou speddest forth the 
Suny 
And holpest Btasy with might. 
7 What ? Vritra-slayer, art not thou, Maghavan, ficrcestin thy 
wrath ? 
So bast thou quelled the demon too. 
8 And this heroic deed of might thou, Indra, also hast achieved, 
That thou didst smite todeath the Dame, Heaven’s Dauvchter, 
meditationg ul. oe 
9 Thou, Indra, Mighty One, didst crush Ushas, though Daughter 
of the Sky, 
When lifting up hersclf in pride, 
10 Then from her chariot Ushis fled, :affrighted, from her 
ruined car, 
When the strone God had shattered it : 
11 So there this car of Ushas lay, broken to picces, in Vipis, 
And she herself fled far away. 
12 Thou, Indra, didst with magic power resist the overflowing 
stream, 
Who spread her water o’er the land, 


23 Valiantly didst thou seize and take the store which Suslna 
had an.-ssed, 
When thou didst crush his fortresses. 


14 PBhou, Indra, also smotest down Kulitara’s son Sambara, 
The Dasa, from the lofty hill. 
15 Of Dasa Varchin’s thou didst slay the hundred thousand aud 
the five 
Crushed like the fellics of a car, , 


6 And holpest Kase: that is, the return of day on some partieular 
oceasion is attributed to [ndra’s intervention on behalf of his favouri‘e. 
See Index. 7 The demon: Vritra the son of Donn & The 
destruction by Indra of the chario€ of Ushas or Dawn appears to mean 
the extinction of her light after the rising of the Sun, Soin I€ 15, 
6 Indra is said to have ‘e-yshed with his thunderbolt the car of U-hae, 
rending her slow steeds with his rap'd Coursers The inyth is alluded 
to in other passages also. Sea X. 138°5. 11 Le Vipas: or on the 
bank of that river. “ . 12 The overfiswing stream: or, possibly, soma 
stream called Vibalt, the exact meaning of the word Yoain.« doubtful. 

1d Aulztarags sin: this is SAvana’s explanation of kaulitardm., 

15 Of Dasa Varchen’s ¢ of the followécs of the demon or sivage Var- 
chin, See 10. 14. 6 ,dred the fives the phition of pancha in the stanza 
seems to iftgicate thatibis taken separately. Sdyana prefixes it to 
sald, making thee number slain a thousand and tive hundred. 
Crushed like the fellies of a car: (surrounding) him like the fellieg 
(round the spokes of a whae!),’— Wilson, 


HYMN 30.) THE RIGVEDA. 433 


16 So Indra, Lord of Heroes, Powers, caused the unwedded 
damsel’s son, 
The castaway, to share the lauds. 


17 So sapient Indra, Lord of Might, brought Turvasa and Yadu, 
those. 
Wh» feared the flood, in safety o’er, 


18 Arna and Chitraratha, both Aryas, thou, Indra, slewest swift, 
On yonder side of Sarayu. : 


19 Thou, Veitra, slayer, didst conduct those two forlorn, the 
blind, the lame: 
None mav attain this bliss of thine, 


20 For Divodisa, him who brought oblations, Indra overthrew 
A hundred fortresses of stone. 


21 The thirty thousand Dasag he with magic power and w®apons 
sent ; 
To slumber, for Dabhiti’s’sake. , 


e e 
22 As snch, O Vritra-slayer, thou art general Lord ofkine for all, 
Thou Shaker of ali things that ba. 


23 Indra, whatever deed of might thou hast this day to execute, 


None be there now to hinder it. a 


24 O Watchful One, may Aryaman the God give thee all goodly 
things. _@ 
May Pishan, Bhaga, and the God Karitilati give all things fair. 


The unwedded damsel’s son: the son of Agra, according to Sayana. 
Sea TV. 19. 9. L7 Tumvasa and Yadu: go I. 174. 9. ‘Whea o’er 
the flood vhou rougditest them, O Hero, thou keptest Turvasa and 
Yadu safely.” Who feared the flood : literally, ‘non-bathers, (asndtard), 
meaning vrobably unable to swim. Arna and Chtiratha : two 
kings, saya the Scholiast, ‘prasuming on thoir dignity as Aryas and 
dovoid of faith. in, or aevotion to, [ndra. Sarayu here ig probably 
gome river in the Panjab, and not the Sarayu of Oudh the modern 
Sarja.” Turvass and Yadu may perhaps have crossed the river, and 
under the protection of Indra conquered two Aryau chiefe whose lands 
lay beyond iv, 19 Whe blind, the bame: see If 13 12. where one man 
only, tha outcast, or Pardveyj, isxyspoken of as ‘the Balt and blind.’ 

20 Dwodisa : see Tadex. 21 Dabite: a®Rishi favoured by Indra. 
See Index. 24 Kardlati: frdm the position of tha word in the 
stanza would appear to be the name of @ saparate Good, hut Sayana 
(who is followed by Professors Roth and Grassmann as well as Wilson) 
takes ip as an epithet of Pishan,i.«. the broken‘ toothed qpouthless 
God. ‘According to the Puranas Pushan had his teeth Eaneted aub by 
Virabhadra’s followers at Daksha's sacrifice.$—Wilson. Thd institu tor 
of the sacrifice appears to be addressed in this verse which is probably 
@ later addition to the original byma, 

e 


o6 


434 ‘THE HYMNS OF [BOOK I. 
HYMN XXXI. Indra. 


. Wits what help will he come to us, wonderful, ever-waxing 
Friend, 
With what most mighty company ? 


2 What genuine and most liberal draught will spirit thee with 
juice to burst. 
Open e’en strongly-guarded wealth ? 
3 Do thou‘ who art Protectur of us thy friends who praise thre 
With hundred aids approach us, 
4 Like as a courser’s circling wheel,so turn thee hitherward 
to us, 


Attracted by the hymns of men. - 
5 Thou seekest as it were thine own stations with swift descent 
of powers: 
I share thee even with the Sur, 
6 What time thy courage and his wheels together. Jadra, run 
their course 
With thee and with the Sun alike, 


7 So even, Lord of Power and Might, the people call thee 
Magha<an, 
Giver, who pauses not think. 


8 And verily to him who toils and presses Soma juice for thee 
Thou quickly givest ample wealht. 


9 No,cnot a hundred hinderers can-check thy gracious bounty’s 
flow, 
Nor thy great ededs'when thou wilt act. 


10 May thine assistance keep us safe, thy hundred and thy 
thousand aids : 


May all thy favours strengthen us. 


11 Do thou elect us in this place for friendship and prosperity, 
And great celestial opulence. : 


2 Genuine and cnost liberal: prods«cing good results and causing 
thee to be most bovntitul. ' Sirungly-guarded wealth ¥ to burst open the 
treasure-houses of our enemies and gife us their contents : or the allu- 
sion faay ls to the waters shun up inethe clouds. 4 By the hymns: 
literally, ‘by the teams,’ niywdbhth, that is, strings of verses, hymas, 
or dette 5 With swift descent of powers: by the natural and 
spontaneougd outflow of divine strength, as water pours dowa a prceip- 
ic@. ' Isshare thee : ‘I glorify tnee together with the Sun.—’ Wiisou 
7 Maghavan ; the rich aud munificent. Oue. 


AYMN 32) THE RIGVEDA 435 


A2 Favour us, Indra, evermore with overflowing store of wealth : 
With all thy succours aid thon us: 

13 With new protections, Indra, like an archer, open thon for us 
The stables that are filled with kine. 

14 Our chariot, Indra, boldly moves endued with splendour, 

ne'er repulsed, 

Winning for us both kine and steeds. 

15 O Sirya, make our fame to be most excellent among the Gods, 

e °° Most lofty as the heaven on high. : 


HYMN XXXII. Indra, 


O rnou who slewest Vritra, come, O Indra,‘hither to our side, 
Mighty One with thy mighty aids. 
2 Swift and impetuous art thou, wondrous amid the well. 


dressed folk : ° 
Thou doest marvels for ogr help. . 


83 Even with the weak thou smitest towr him who is stronger, 


with thy strength 
The mighty, with the Friends thou hast. 


4 O Indra. we are close to thee; to thee we sing aloud our,songs: 
Help and defend us, even us. 
5 As such, O Caster of the Stone, come with ng succours 


wonderfal, e 
Blameless, and irresistible. 


6 May we be friends of one tike thee, O Indra, with the wealth 


of kine, 
Comrades for lively energy. * 
7 For thou, O Indra, art alone the Lord of strength that comes 
from kine: : 


So grant thou us abundant food. 
8 They turn thee nut another way, when, lauded, Lover of the 


Seng, e 
Thou will give wealth to those who praise, 


9 The Gotamas have sung their song of praisetotheethat thou 
mayst give, e ; 


Indra, for lively energy, | ° 


2 Amid the well-dressed folk ?the adjective chitrinishu, f-minine 
plural in the locative case, stands without a substantive, anfl Sdyana 
supplies prajasu, people ; well dressed, prenaps, for a religious caremony, 
or possibly, armed for war. 0 Caster of the Stone: Wielder of 
the thunderbolt. 


436 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IV. 


10 We will declare thy hero deeds, what Disa forts thou brakest 
down, 
Attacking them in rapturous joy. 
11 The sages sing those manly deeds which, Indra, Lover of the 
Song, ‘Thou wroughtest when the Soma flowed, 


12 Indra, the Gotamas who bring thee praises have grown strong 
by thee. 
Give them renown with hero sons. 
13 For, Indra, verily thou art the general treasure even of all : 
Thee, therefore, do we invocate, ~ 
14 Excellent Indra, turn tous: glad thee among us with the juice 
Of Somas, Soma-drinker thou. 
15 May praise from us who think on thee, O Indra, bring thee 
near to us, 
Turn thy two Bay steeds hither ward, 
16 Eat‘of gur sacrificial cake : rejofce thee in the songs we singe 
Even as a lover in his bride. , as 
17 To Sndra for a thousand stecds well-trained and fleet of foot 
we pray, 
And hundred jars of Soma juice. 
18 We make a hundred of thy kine, yea, and a thousand, hasten 


nigh ¢ | 
So let thy bounty come to us, 
19 We have obtained, a gift from thee, ten water-ewers wrought 
of gold : 
Thou, Vritra-slayer, givest mach, 
20 A bounteous Giver, give us much, bring much and not a 
trifling gift: ae 
Much, Indra, wilt thou fain bestow, 
21 O Vritra-slayer, thou art famed in many a place as bountiful: 
Hero, thy bounty let us share. 
22 I praise thy pair of Tawny Steeds, wise Son of him who 
giveth kine: 
Terrify not the cow: with these. ; ' 


ar SPER epee, Sg meee 


See 


10 In rapturous joy: in exhilaration produced by the Soma juice 

17 Jars: a khar? is properly a measure of grain, and by metonym 
a vessel, jar, or pitcher, containing tha quantity, which is said to be 
equal to about three of our bushels, | 22 Wise Son of him who giv- 
eth kine:,Jndre himself is the special giver ef cattle, and thig attribute 
of his may perbas, as Professor Lidwig conjectures, be personified in 
an imaginary father Gosha, the winner or bestower of kine. Sayana 
would forse on napdt, son, the meaning na pdtoyitah, ‘thou who Pere 
not cast down’ (thy worshippers), Wetth these; two horses of thine, The 


meaning of this last Pada is uncertain. 


HY MN 33.) THE RIGVEDA, 431 


23 Like two slight images of girls, unrobed, upon a new-wrought 
post, , 
So shine thy Bay Steeds in their course. 


24 For me the Bays are ready when [ start, or start not, with the 
dawn, Innocuous in the ways they take, 


HYMN XXXIII. Ribhus, 


T SEND my voice as herald to the Ribhus ; I crave the white cow 
.e for the overspreading. 
Wind-sped, the Skilful Ones in rapid motion have in an instant 
compassed round the heaven, 


2 What time the Ribhus had with care and marvels done proper 
service to assist their Parents, 
They won the friendship of the Guds; the Sages carried away 
the fruit of their devotion. 


3 May they who made their Parents, who were lying like posts 
that moulder, young again for ever,— 
May Vaja, Vibhvan, Ribhu, joihed with Indra, protect our 
sacrifice, the soma-lovers. 


4 As for aycar the Ribhus kept the Milch-cow, throughout a 
year fashioned and furmed her body, : 
And through a year’s space still sustained hey brightness, 
through these their labours they were made immortal, 


5 Two beakers Jet us make,—thus said the eldest. Lat us 
make three,—this was the younger's sentence. 
Four beakers let us make,—thus spoke the youngest, Tyashtar 
approved this rede of yours, O Ribhus. 


6 The men gpake,truth and even so they acted : this Godli ke 
way of theirs the Ribhus followed. 
And Tvashtar, when he looked on the four beakeys resplend- 
ent as the day, was moved with envy. 


23 Images of girls: perhaps as curya' ids, but the passage is obscurn, 
Professor Wilson translates : ‘ Jsike two puppets on an arrauged, new, 
and slender stage.’ 24 According to Sdiyana, Leb thy inoffesive 
bay horses give 1A & sufficiency at sacrifiees whether I goto them in 
a car drawn by oxen or withouta car so drawa, that is, on foot. 

> 


i] i ep as 


1 For the onerspreading : a technicrl expression for pouring the 
milk into or over the Soma juice. ‘Forthe dilution (pt the Soma 
libation).’— Wilson. For the Rtbhus, see Index. + 5 Two beakers; 
or sacrificial ladles. See I, 20, 6. : 


438 THE HYMNS OP [BOOR 1YV. 


7 When for twelve days the Ribhus joyed reposing as guests of 
him who never may be hidden, 
They made fair fertile fields, they brought the rivers. Plants 
spread o’er deserts, waters filled the hollows. 


8 May they who formed the swift car, bearing Heroes, and the 


Cow omniform and all-impelling, 
Even may they form wealth for us,—the Ribhus, dexterours- 
handed, deft in work and gracious. 
9 So in their work the Gods had satisfaction, pondering it with 
thought andemental insight. 
The Gods’ expert artifizer was VAja, Indra’s Ribhukshan, 
Vartna’s was Viblivan. 
10 They who. made glad with sacrifice and praises, wrought the 
two Bays, his docile Steeds, for Indra,— 
Ribhus, as those who wish a faiend to prosper, bestow upon 
us‘gear and growth of riches, 
11 This day have they set gladdening drink before you. Not 
without toil are Gods inclined to friendship, 
Therefore do ye who are so great, O Ribhus, vouchsafe us 
treasures at this third libation, 


HYMN XXXIV. Ribhus. 


e 
To this ovr sacrifice come Ribhu, Vibhvan, Vaja, and Indra 
with the gift of riches, 
Because this day hath Dhishana the Goddess set drink for 
you: the gladdening draughts have reached you. 


7 Him who never may be hidden: the Sun; Savitar. 8 The 
swift car ; the three-wheeld chariot which bears the Asvins. The 


Cow omniform: or ofevery hue. ‘Indra hath yoked Lis Bays, the 
Agvins’ caris horsed, Brihaspati hath brought the Cow of every 
hue.’—I. 161 6. 1] Ad thie third (tbattion? in the evening, the 
proper time for drink-offerings to the Ribhus, The myttr of the 
Ribhus is exceedingly obscure. They are regarded as ancient sacrifi- 
cers who attained immortality as the reward of their pious labeurs. 
The parents whom they restored to youth appear to be the universal 
parents, heaven and earth, Tejuvenated vach morning and especially 
in the spring. The milch-covy (atanza 4)fis perhaps the earth, regarded 
asthe productive so#l. The twelve days ( stanza 7 ) are perhaps, av 
Ludwig suggests,t he twelve hights vratydh prajdpate, or ‘holy to Pra- 
japati.’ See Hymne of the Atharva-veda, 1V.11.41. For careful study 
and ingeniots interpretations of the myth, see I. Neve. Hssai sur le 
mythe des Ribhavas : Paris : 1847 : and Me Bergaigne, La Religion Veus- 
que, II. 408—413; fl. 51—55. 


Dhishan@: a divinity connected with Soma and presiding over 
prosperity. 


« 


HYMN 334.) THE RIGVEDA. 439 


2 Knowing your birth and rich in gathered treasure, Ribhus, 
rejoice together with the Ritus. 
The gladdening draughts and wisdom have approached ‘you : 
send ye us riches with good store of heroes. 


3 For you was made this sacrifice, O Ribhus, which ye, like 
men won for yvurselves aforetime. 
To you come all who find in you their pleasure : ye all were 
—even the two elder—Vajas. 


4 Now for the mortal worshipper, O Heroes, for him who served 
you, was the gift of riches. e 
Drink, Vajas, Ribhus! unto you is offered, to gladden you, 
the third and great Iibation. 
§ Come to us, Heroes, Vijas and R:bhukshans, glorified for the 
sake of mighty treasure. 
These draughts approach you as the day is closing, | 
whose calves are newly-born, their stable. 2 . 
6 Come to this sacrifice of Yours, y¢ Children of Strength, in- 
voked with humble adoration. ° , 
Drink of this meath, Wealth-givers, joined with Indra with 
whom ye are in full accord, ye Princes, 


7 Close knit with Varuna drink the Soma, Indra; close-knit, 
Hymn-lover ! with the Maruts drink it : : 
Close-knit with drinkers first, who drink in season; close-[nit 
with-heavenly Dames who give us treasures. 
8 Rejoice in full accord with the Adityas, in concord with the 
Parvatas, O Ribhus; ° 
In full accord with Savitar, Divine One ; in “full accord with 
fluods that potr forth riches. 


, 


ag COWS, 


2*%nowing your birth: knowing howe you have attained im- 
mortality and deification. The Ritusy: tha seasous persunifie! aud 
honoured as deities. Tne Ribhus as cosmic powers are closely cannec- 


ted with them. 3 Vajas 3 that is, although Vaja is strictly the name 
of the youngest of the three oalf, you ara all eutitled to that appel- 
lation which means active, strong,or spirited. Professor Grassmann 


translates ; ‘ihr alle seid die ersten hier, O Vadscha’s;s yaq,are aj| the 
first (antitled to precedence) here, O Vajas, but the word wid is then 
loft untranslated. 4 Thé third and great libation : see the preceding 
hymn, stanza 11. 3 Ribhukshans : Ribhukshan ig anct@er name of 
Ribhu, the eldcat of the three. 1 Drinkers firat : those who claim 
and receive the libation first ; here, apparently, the Ritus or S+asons. 
8 Parvatas : Gods presiding over muuatains and clouds. 


440 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IV, 


9 Ribhus, who helped their Parents and the ASvins, who formed 
the Milch-cow and the pair of horses, 
Made armour, set the heaven and earth asunder, —far-reach- 
ing Heroes, they have made good offspring. 
$0 Ye who have wealth in cattle and in booty, in heroes, in rich 
sustenance and treasure, 
Such, O ye Ribhus, first to drink, rejoicing, give unto us and 
those who laud our present, 


11 Ye were not far : we have not left you thirsting, Bistneleas: in 
this our sacrifice, O Ribhus. 
Rejoice you with the Maruts and with Indra, with the kings, 
Gods ! that ye may give us riches. 


HYMN XXXY. Ribhus. 


Comé hither, O ye Sons of Strength, ye Ribbus ; stay not afar, 
ye © Children of Sudhanvan. 

At this hbation is your’gift of treasure. Let gladdening 
draughts approach you after Indra’s. 


2 Hither is come the Riblius’ eift of riches ; here was the drink- 
ing of the well-pressed soma, 


Since by dexterity and skill as ‘craftsmen ye made the single 
chalice to be fourfold, 


3 Ye made fourfold the chalice that was single : ye spake these 
words and said, () Friend, assist ws ; 


Then, Vajas ! gaincd the path of life eternal, deft-handcd 
Ribhus, to the Gods’ assembly. 


4 Out of what substanse was that chalice fashioned which ye 
made fourfold by your art and wisdom ? 

Now for the gladdening draught press out the liquor, and 
drink, O Ribhus, of the meath of Soma. 


5 Ye with your cunning made your Parents youthfal ; the cup, 
for Gods to drink, ye formed with cunning ; 
With cunning, Ribhus, rich in’ treasure, fashioned the two 
swift Tawny Steeds wh> carry ludra. 


Made armour } for the Gods. 10 Those who land our present 
who eccumpany ‘with hymns, and so recommend to the Gods, our obla- 
tion. ll Zhe Aings : the other Gods, or the Gods in general. 


1 Ajter . Indra’s : libations having bean offered to Indra ab dawn 
aud ab noonday. Sae stanza 7. 3 0 Friend: Agu. 5 Cunning 
power and skill as craftsmen ; sdchyd, 


BYMN 36 | THE RIGVEDA. 441 


6 Whoso pours out for you, when days are closing, the sharp 
libation for your joy, O Vajas, 
For him, () mighty Ribhus, ye, rejoicing, have fashioned 
wealth with plenteous store of heroes. 
7 Lord of Bay Steeds, at dawn the juice thou drankest : thine, 
only thine, is the noonday libation. 
Now drink thou with the wealih-bestowing Ribhus, whom for 
their skill thou madest friends, O Indra. - 
‘8 Ye, whom your artist skill hath raised to Godhead, have sat 
you down above in heaven like falcons. ° 
So vive us riches, Children of Sudhanvan, O Sons of Strength ; 
ye have become immoftal. 
9 The third libation, that bestoweth treasure, which ye have 
won by skill, ye dexterous-handed, ~ 
This drink hath been effused for you, O Ribhus: drink ig with 
high delight, with joy like Indra’s. ‘ 


HYMN XXXVI. . Ribhus 
THE car that was not made for horses or for reins, three-wheel- 


ed, worthy of lauds, rolls round the firmament, 
That isthe great announcement of your Deity, that,, O ye 


Ribhus, ye sustain the earth and heaven. . 
2 Ye Sapient Ones who made the lightly-rolling car out of your 
mind, by thought, the car that never errs, ‘ 


You, being such, to drink of this drink-offering, you, O ye 
Vajas, and ye Ribhus, we invoke, . 
3 O Vajas, Ribhus, reaching far, among the Gods this was your 
exaltation gloriously declared, * 
In that yotir aged Parents worn with length of days, ye 
wrought again to youth so that they moved at wilJl, 


4 The chalice that was single ye have made fourfold, and by 
your wisdom brought the Cow forth from the hide. 
So quickly, mid the Gods, ye gained immortal life. Vajas and 
Ribhas, your great work must be extolled. 


e e 
6 Fashtoned weblih : mate or fabricated as craftvmen. 


e 
1 The cars the three-wheeled chariot of the Asvine, drawn by wack 
5. e. the grey clouds of morning twilight, 3 Ya wrought again to 
youth : forms of the verb taksh, to form, fabricate, fashion, a8 & carpen- 
ser does with wood, are used in this and other hymrs to the Kibhus, 
‘he artificers, instead of words signifying restoring, giving, producing, 
nd the like. ¢ 


DT *e 


442 THE AYMNS OF (BOOK IY. 


5 Wealth from the Ribhus is most glorious in renown, that 
which the Heroes, famed for vigour, have produced. 
In synods must be sung the car which Vibhvan wrought; that 
which ye favour, (ods! is famed among mankind. 


6 Strong is the steed, the man a sage in eloquence, the bowman 
is a hero hard to baat in fight, 
Great store of wealth and manly power hath ke obtained 
whom VAja, Vibhvan, Ribhus have looked kindly on. 


7 To you hath been assigned the fairest ornament, the hyme of 
praise: VAjas and Ribhns, joy therein ; 

For ye have lore and wisdom and poetic skill: as sach, with 
this our prayer we call on you to’come. 


8 According to the wishes of our hearts may ye, who have full 
knowledge of ail the delights of men, 
Fashion for us, O Ribhus, power and splendid wealth, rich in 
high courage, excellent, and vital strength. 


9 Eestowing on us here riches and offspring, here fashion fame 
for us befitting he~oes.* 
Vouchsafe us wealth of splendid sort, O Ribhus, that we may 
make us more renowned than others. 


HYMN XXXVII. Ribbus, 


Come to Our sacrifice, VAjas, Ribhukshans, Gods, by the paths ~ 
which Gods are wont to travel, 


As ye, gay Gods, accept in splendid weather the sacrifice 
among these folk of Manus. | 


2 May these rites please you in your heart and epirit; may the 
drops clothed in ol this day approach yon. 
May the abundant juices bear you onward .o power and 
strength, and, when imbibed, delight you. 


3 Your threefold going near is God-appointed, so praise is given 
you, Vajas and Ribhukshans. 
So, Manus-like, mid younger folk I offer, to you who are aloft 
in heaven, the Soma. 


5 The car which Vibhvan wrought : or the sacrificial cup ; the text 
has only etbhvatashtdh, tuat which was fabricate by Vibhvan, or as 


SAyana says, by the Ribhus. 8 according to the wishes of our hearts: 
or, according vo Séyana, on account of the praises which we have offered 
to you. : : 


q 
1 In &plandid weather : after the rains, when protracted sacrifices 
are not interrupted by storms. These folk of Manna: Aryan men. 3 
Threefold going near : coming to the altar at the three daily sacrifices. 


AY MN 38.) THE RIGVEDA. 443 


4 Strong, with fair chains of gold and jaws of iron, ye bavea 
splendid car and well-fed horses. 
Ye Sons of Strength, ye progeny of Indra, to you the best is 
offered to delight you, 
5 Ribhukshans! him, for handy weaith, the mightiest comrade 


in the fight, a 
Him, Indra’s equal, we invoke, most bounteous ever, rich in 
steeds, 
6 *The mortal man whom, Ribhus, ye and Indra favour,with your 
help, e 
Must be successful, by his thoughts, at sacrifice and with the 
steed, 


7 O Vajas and Ribhukshans, free for us the paths to sacrifice, 
Ye Princes, lauded, that we may press forward to each point 
of heaven, 
8 O VAjasand Ribhukshans,%c Nasatyas, Indra, bless this Wealth, 
And, before other mens’, the steed, thatample riches may 
be won. 2 
HYMN XXXVIILI. Dadhikras. 
From you two came the gifts in days aforetime which Trasa- 
dasyu granted to the Pirus. 
Ye gave the winner of our fields and piough-lands, and tha 
strong smiter who subdued the Dasyus. 


~— 
ee 
eee Ne (ee ee oe nn 


Semen em mee ee eee oe cy ee 
cena rent gs 


0 Him: Ribhu, as representing bis brothers also. 6 By his 
thouyhts: referring to the worshipper who by his devout thoughts and 
acta will obtain success in sacrifice. Wath the steed : referring to the 
warrior who will be victorious in battle with bis war-chariob. rf 
Press onward to each point of heaven: that je, be everywhere Victori- 
our achieve, vehat was in later times tha object uf great kings’ highoso 
ambition, the adigvijays or cOnquest of lands in every direction. 8 
Ndsatyas : Asvins J'he steeds: either the war-horses inegeneral, or, 
as Professor Ludwig suggests, a particular horse that is to be eacri- 
ced. 


oe ee 


Dedhikras, in the nominative case, or Dadhikra in the crude form, 
18 the namo of a mythical being often mentioned in the Rigved& aud 
the actual subject of this hyma and three ot ers. He is described as 
& kiud of divine horse, and probably, like Tarkshya, is a personifica- 
tion of the morning sun; sometimes he ig cousidgred ag a creation uf 
heaven and earthy sometimes of Mitra-Varfuna, and is invoked in the 
morning together with Agni, Ushas, and the Asvins. The name is 
probably derived from dadhi, thickened milk, and ky,” to Weattety in 
allusion to the rising sun spreading dew and hoar-frost like milk. 
(Aeschylus) See St. P. Lexicon, or M. Williams’s Dictionasy. Pro- 
fessor Ludwig thinks that the hymn is a fragment,,referfing not to 
the mythical being but to an actual war-horse bearing his neme, l 
From you two: Mitra and Varuna, according to stanza 2 of the follow- 
ng bymo; Heaven and Kartb, according to Sayana. Trasadasyu: 


444 THE AYMNS OP [BOOK 19. 


2 And ye gave mighty Dadhikras, the giver of many gifts, who 
Visiteth all people, 
Impetuous hawk, swift and of varied colvur, like a brave King 
whom each true man must honour. 


3 Whom, as ’twere down a precipice, swift rushing, each Piru 
praises and his heart rejoices, — 
Springing forth like a hero fain for battle, whirling the car 
and flying like the tempest. 


4 Who guiineth precious booty in the combats, and moveta, 
wiuning spoil, among the cattle ; 
Shown 1n brigbt colour, looking on the assemblies, beyond the 
churl, to worship of the living. 


5 Loudly thefolkcry after him in battles, as ’twere a thief who 
steals away a garment ; 
Speading to glory, ora herd of cattle, even asa hungry falcon 
swoop.ng downward. 


6 And, fain to come forth first amid these armies, this way and 
that with rows of cars he rushes, 
Gay like a bridesman, making hima garland, tossing the dust, 
champing the rein that holds him. 


¢ And‘that strong Steed, victorious and faithful, obedient with 
his body in the combat, 
Speeding straight on amid the swiftly pressing, casts o'er his 
“brows the dust he tosses upward. 


8 And at his thunder, like the roar of heaven, those who attack 
tremble and are affrighted; 
For when he fights against embattled thousands, dread is he 
In his striving ; none may stay him. 


9 The people praise the overpowering swiftness of this fleet Steed 
who giveth men abundance. ’ 
Of him they say when drawing back from battle, Dadhikras 
hath sped forward with his thousands, 


— eee 


this king has been mentioned before ([. 112 14) asa favourite of the 
Asvins. Professor Ludwig points out that, to accord with what ig 
said in IV. 42. 8., the reading should be Trasadasyum ; ‘ ye who pava 
Trasadasyu to the Pirus,’ the verb nitosé standing for the dual nitoge- 
the. The Pires: one of the Aryanéribes. See Index. 4 Beyond 
the churl: nassiug by the niggard who offers no oblations, and louking 
kindly on the sacrifice of the living man or devout worshipper, Tha 


word araijm appareatly =@ Atim. 5 Spveding: referring to Dadhi- 
kras seeking fame and booty. 6 Muking him a garland : of the. 
Chariots that surround him 7 Amid the swiftly pressing: the 


text has no gubstantive : sendsu, hosts, or vikshu, people, may be 
uaderstood. 


HYMN 40, THE RIGVEDA. 445 


10 Dadhikras hath o’erspread the Fivefold People with vigour, as 
the San lightens the waters: 
May the strong Steed who winneth hundreds, thousands, requite 
with sweetness these my words and praises. 


HYMN XXXIX. DadhikrAs, 


Now give we praise to Dadhikrds the rapid, and mention in 
our laud the Harth and Heaven. 
May the Dawns flushing move me to exertion, and bear me 
safely over every trouble. ‘ , 
2 I praise the mighty Steed who fills my spirit, the Stallion 
Dadhikrdvan rich in bounties, 
Whom, swift of foot and sh'ning bright as Agni, ye, Varuna 
and Mitra, gave to Pirus, 


3 Him who hath honoured, when the flame is kindled at break 
of dawn, the Courser Dadhikravan, > 
Him, of one mind with Varuna and Mitra may Aditi make 
free from all transgresston. . 4 ; ’ 
4 When we remember miglity DadhikrAvan our food and strength 
then the blest name of Maruts, 
Varuna, Mitra, we invoke for wolfare, and Agni, and the 
thunder-wielding Indra. si 


s 
5 Both sides invoke him as they call on Indra when they stir 
forth and tarn to sacrificing, A 
Tv us have Varuna and Mitra granted the Courser Dadhikras, 
a guide for mortals. 


6 So have I glorified with praise strong Dadhikravan, conquer- 
ing Steed. v 
Sw-et may he take our mouths; may he prolong the days we 
have to live. 


HYMN XL. | Dadidivevan: 


Let us recite the praise of Dadhikravan: may all the Morn- 
iggs move me to exertion : . 

Praise of the Lord of Waters, Dawn, and Agni, Brihaspati 
Son of Angiras, and Sirya. 


@o——. a Rewer ewe ewonr Veer dce urement, 


2 Dacdhikrdvan : a levgthened, interchangeabie form of Dadhikras, 
3 Adi: here a male deity, probably Agni, , 5 When they stir 
forth and turn to sacrificing: wif—a men who are going out on a foray, 
or tu battle, offer sacrifices for thpir success. Or the fneantng ufwy be, 
both those who go out to batgle and those who refasin at home and 
sacrifice. 6 Sweet may he make our mouths. ‘purify ouslips if we 
have spoken wicked words. @ 


1 The Lord: literally, the conqueror, that is, the winner, the 
obtainer. : 


446 THE HYMNS OP _ [BOOR IV. 


2 Brave, seeking war and booty, dwelling with the good and 
with the swift, may he hasten the food of Dawn. 
May he the true, the fleet, the lover of the course, the bird- 
like Dadhikravan, bring food, strength, and light, | 
3 His pinion, rapid runner, fans bim on his way, as of a bird 
that hastens onward to its ain, 
And, as it were a falcon’s gliding through the air, strikes 
Dadhikravan’s side as he speeds on with might. 


4 Bound By thaneck and by the flanks and by the month, the 
vigorous Courser lends new swiftness tu his speed. 
Drawing himself together, as his strength allows, Dadhikras 
springs along the windings of the paths. 
5 The Hansa homed in light, the Vasu in mid-air, the priest 
beside the altar, in the house the guest, 
Dwetler in noblest place, mid nren, in truth, in sky, born of 
flood, Kine, truth, mountain, he is holy Law. 


e 
¢ 


TWYMN XL Indra-Varuna. 


Wrar laud, O Indra-Varuna, with oblation, hath like the 
Imiortal Priest obtained your favour ? 

Hath our 6ffectual land, addressed with homage, touched you, 
O Indra-Varuna, in spirit? 

2 He who with dainty food hath won you, Indra and Varuna, 

Gods, as his allies to friendstup, 

Slayeth the Vritras and his foes in battles, and through your 
mighty favours is made famous. : 


2 Hasten, the food of Duwn: ‘accept tho (sacrificial) food at the 
time of the desirable dawn’—Wilson, This hie is difficult, »od the 
meanisg ie somewhat obscure. 4A Leuds new swiftness to his speed: 
I adopt Savana’s interpretation, tvarnyalt gantum. Prof Ey goeling 
translates more literally © apeedeth after tha whip’ (Sats patha-Brab- 
mana, V. 1,5. 19). 5e Ty this stanza Dadhikias is identified with 
the eternal Law of the universe and, with all types or forme of the 
Supreme Being He,is the Hansa, the Swan ot heaven, or the Suan, 
the Vasu in mid-air or the Wind, Agni as the priest and guest of men, 
As the Sun he ie born from, or amid, tne or rays of light and springs 
up from the oclestial ocean and the mountains of cloud behind which 
he rises. See Prokessor Wilson’s note on the passave, The stanza is 
explainedalso in Sutapatha Brahmana VI. 7. 3. 11 (Sacred Bouke of 
the Kast, XIeI. p. 281.) 


The hymn is addressed to Indra-Varunas, that is, Indra and Varuna, 
conjuintly. 1 The immortal Prisat ; Agni. 


HYMN 41.) THE RIGVEDA, 447 


3 Indra and Varuna are most liberal givers® ‘of treasure to the 
men who toil to serve them, 
When they, as Friends inclined to friendship, honoured with 
dainty fuod delight in fuwing Soma. 


4 Indra and Varuna, ye hurl, Q plenty) on him your strongest 
flashing bolt of thunder 
Who treats us ill, the robber and oppressor : measure on him 
your overwhelming vigour. 


¥ O Indra-Varuna, be ye the lovers of this my song, as steers 
who love the milsh- cow. 
Milk may it yield us as, gone forth to pastare, the great Cow 
pouring out her thousand rivers. 


6 For fertile fields, for worthy sons and grandsons, for the Sun’s 
beauty and for steer-like vigour, 
May Indra-Varuna with eracious favours work marve?s for us 
in the stress of battle, 


7 For you, as Princes. fais your ancfent kindness, goud cgmrades 
of the man who sceks for booty, 
We chovse to us for the dear Bed of fricadship, most liberal 
Herves bringing bliss like parents, 


8 Showing their strength, these hymns for grace, Free-givers ! 
have: gone to you, devoted, as to battle. 
For glory have they gone, as milk tu Soma, to Indra-Vayuna 
my thouvhts and praises. 


9 To Indra and to Varana, desirous of gaining wealth have 
these my thoughts progecde id, 
They have come nigh to you as treagure-lovers, like mares, 
fleet-foeted, eager for the glory. 


16 Muay we ourselves be lords of during riches, of gmple suste- 
nance for car and horses, 
So may the Twain who work with newest succours bring 
yoked teams hicherward to us and riches. 


11 Come with your mighty succours, O y e Mighty; come, Indra- 
Varuna, to us in battle. 

What time the flashing ¢rrows play in combat, may we 

through yyu be winne®s in the contest. ° 


5 Milk may vt yield us : hrimg us a rich reward’ The great Cow t 
of plenty. 6 For the Sun’s beauty: for long Ife where® we may 
continue to see the glory of the sun 8 For re > to * glorify you. 
9 Eager for the glory : of winning the prize in tos cuariot-race. 1} 
Tha bymn isa prayor for aid in 4 cowing battle, 


448 THE AYMNSOP [BOOK 1Y. 
HYMN XLII. Indra- Varuna, 


I Am the royal Ruler, mine is empire, as mine who sway all 
life are all Immortals, 
Varuna’s will the Gods obey and follow. I am the King of 
men’s most lofty cover. 
2 Iam King Varuna. To me were given these first existing 
high celestial powers. 
Varuna’s will the Gods obey and follow. Iam the King of 
meu’s fnost lofty cover. 
3 I Varuna am Indra :in their greatness, these the two wide 
deep fairly-fashioned regions, 
These the two world-halves have I, even as Tvashtar knowing 
all beings, joined and held together. 
4 I made tv flow the muvisture shedding waters, and set the 
heaven firm in the seat of Order, 
By Lawsthe Son of Aditi, Law Observer, hath spread abroad 
the world in threefold measure, 
5 Heroes with noble ho:ses, fain for battle, selected warriors, 
eall on me in combat, 
I Inira Maghavan excite the conflict; I stir the dust, Lord 
of surpassing vigour. 
6 All this [did. ‘The Gods’ own conquering power never im- 
pedeth me whom none opposeth, 
When lauds and Soma juice have made me joyful, both the 
unbounded regions are affrighted. 
7 All beings know these deeds of thine: thou tellest this unto 
Varuna, thou great Disposer ! 
Thou art renowned as having slain the Vritras. Thou madest 
flow the floods that were obstructed. : : 
8 Our fathers then were these, the Seven Rishis, what time the 
son of Durgaha was captive. 


Varuna and his supersessor Tudra severally urge their claims to 


superiority, and the poet decides between them. Cf X. 124, 1 
Varuna is the speaker of the first four stanzas. Men’s most lofty cover: 
the highest heaven. oIndia:all that Indra represents, Prince 
and King of all. As Jvashtar : or, as their great artificer. 4 In 


the seat of Order: iw the place appointed by Law or the eternal Order 
of the universe, The Son of Aditt: J, Varuna. eo 5 Indre&is the 
speaker of this and of the following-stanza. 7 The poet speake. 
8 Ovlr fatners chen were these: ‘The seven Hishis were the protectora 
of this our (kingdom).’—Wilson. The meaning is obscure, Professor 
Grassmax banishes stanzas 8, 9, and 10 to the appendix as late addi- 
tions to the bymn Sayana says that Purukutea, son of Durgaha, 
being an eaptivitv, hie wife propitiated the Seven Rishis, who by the 
favour of Indra and Varuna obtained for her a son named Trasad eyu. 
For her : the wife of Purukutsa‘ 


BYMN 43 | * THE RIGVEDA. ; 44‘) 


For her they gained by sacrifice Trasadasyu, a demni-vod, hke 
Indra, couquering foemen, 
9 The spouse of Purukutsa gave oblations to you, O Indra- 
Varuna, with homage. 
Then unto her ye gave King Trasadasyu, the demi-god, the 
slayer of the foeman, 
10 May we. possessing much, delight in riches, Gods in oblations 
wud the kine in pastuve ; 
eAnd that Milch-cow who shrinks not frum the milking, O 
Indra-Varuna, give to us daily. ° 
HYMN XLIII. Asvins. 


Wo will hear, who of those whu merit worship, which of all 
(suds take pleasare in our homage ? 

On whose heart shall we lay this laud celescial, rich with fair 
offerings, dearest to Immortals ? e 

2 Who will be gracious ? _Who will coine most quickly of all 

the Gods ? who will bring bliss mogt largely ? 

What car do they call swift with rapid Coursers ? That which 
the Daughter of the Sun elected. 


3 So many days do ye come swiftly hither, as Indra to give help 
In stress of battle. 
Descended from the sky, divine, strong-pinioned, by which of 
all your powers are ye most mighty ? m 
4 What isthe prayer that we should bring you, Asvins, whereby 
ye come lo us when invuoeated ? 
Whether of you confrotts c’en great betrayal ? Lovers of 
SWeetness, Dasras, h:lp and save Us., 


9 In the wide spage your chariot reacheth heaven, what time it 
turneth hither trom the ocean, : 
Sweets from your sweet shall drop, lovers of swectness ! These 
have they dressed for you as dainty viands. 


6 Let Sindhu with his wave bedew your horses : in fiery glow 
iave the red birds come hither. 

Observed of all was that your rapid gding, whereby ye were 
the Lords of Sirya’s Dauchter- 


7 Whene’er I gratified you Mere togetber, your grace was given 
us, O ye rich in booty. : 
Protect, ye ‘I'wain, the singer of your praises : to you, Ndsa- 
tyas, Is my wish directed. . 


a ee Oro 


i0 That Milch-cow : wealth. —_— r : 


2 The Daughter of the Sun: Sarya, bride of the * Asvigs. Seo I. 
116 17. 4 Dasras: workers of marvels, mighty ones, & Common 
appellation of the Asvins. 6 Bards; tlyiny suweds, Ch LV. fo. sf. 


53 *e 


450 TRE AYMNS OF » (BOOK IV. 


HYMN XLIV. Asvins. 
We will invoke this day your car, far-spreading, O Asvins, 
even the gathering of the sunlight,— 
Car praised in hymns, most ample, rich in treasure, fitted with 
seats, the car that beareth Surya, 
2 Asvins, ye gained that glory by your Godhead, ye Sons of 
Heaven, by your own might and power. 
Food followeth close upon your bright appearing when stately 
horses in your chariot draw you. 
3 Who btingeth you to-day for help with offered oblation, or 
with hymns to drink the juices ? 
Who, for the sacrifice’s ancient lover, turneth you hither, 
Asvins, offering homage ? 
4 Borne on your golden car, ye omnipresent! come tu this sacri- 
fice of ours, Nasatyas. 
Drink of the pleasant liquor of the Soma : give riches to the 
peopie who adore you. 
Come hitherward to us from earth, from heaven, borne on 
yeur golden chariot rolling lightly. 
Suffer not other worshippers to stay you : here are ye bound 
by earlier bonds of friendship. 
6 Now for us both, mete out,O Wonder-Workers, riches exceed- 
ing great with store of heroes, 


Because the men have sent you praise, O Asvins, and Aja- 
, milhas come to the laudation. 


7 Wheneer I gratified you here together, your grace was given 
us, O ye rich in booty. 
Prétect, ye Twain, the singer of your praises: to you, 
Nasatyas, is my wish directed. 
HYMN XLV. Asvins, 
YonrpkEr goes up that light: your chariot is yoked that travels 
round upon the summit of this heaven. 
Within this car are stored three kindred shares of food, and 
askin filled with meath is rustling as the fourth. 

1 The gathering of the sunlight Protessor Wilson translates after. 
Siyana, ‘the associator of the solar ray,’ and observes: ‘ Sangatim 
goh, ia only explained, goh sangameyitdram, the bringer into union, 
or agsaciator, of (fa: what the latter is intended for is nov explamed, 
and the translation is purely, conjectural, founded upon the connect. 
ion of the Asvins with light or the aun,’ Professor Grassmann trans- 
lates: ‘dep,zur Milch eilt,’ ‘which hastens to the milk.’ 6 Buth : 
priests and patreus. 4jamilhas s men of the Kishi’s family. 


ao 


The Righi of this and the remaining hymns of this Book is Vama- 
deva. 1 Three kindred shares: shares of similar food, for both 


Asvins and Surya, the skin of meath being intended for earthly 
beings,— Ludwig. 


AYMN 46.) THE RIGVEDA. 45! 


2 Forth come your viands rich with store of pleasant meath, 
and cars and horses at the flushing of the dawn, 
Stripping the covering from the surrounded gloom, and 
spreading tbrough mid-air bright radiance like the Sun. 
3 Drink of the meath with lips accustomed to the draught ; 
harness for the meath’s sake the chariot that ye love. 
Refresh the way ye go, refresh the paths with meath : hither, 
QO Asyins, bring the skin that holds the meath. 


4 he swans ye have are friendly, rich in store of meath, gold- 
pinioned, strong to draw, awake at early worn, 

Swimming the flood, exultant, fain for draughts that cheer : 
ye come like flies to our libations of the meath. 


) Well knowing solemn rites and rich in meath, the fires sing 
to the morning Asvins at the break of day, 
When with pure hands the prudent energetic priest hath 
With the stones pressed ‘out the Soma rich in meath. 
6 The rays advancing nigb, chasing with day the gloom, spread 
through the firmament bright radiance like the Sun.; 
And the San harnessing his horses gocth forth : ye throuzh 
your Godlike nature let his paths he known. 


7 Devout in thought I have declared, @ Asvins, your ¢hariot 


with good steeds, which lasts for ever, e 
Wherewith ye travel swiftly through the regions to the 
prompt worshipper who brings oblation. ° 


HYMN: XLVI. Vayu. Indra-Vayu, 
Drink the best draught of Soma juicc, O Vayu, at out hoiy 
rites : 
For thou agt he who drinketh first. 
Come, team.drawn, with thy hundred helps, with ludra seated 
in the car, : ° 
- Vayu, and drink yoar fill of juice. 
3 May steeds a thousand bring you both, Indra and Vayu, 
itherward : 
To drink the Soma, to the feast. ° : 


4 For ye, O Indra-Vayu, mount the golden-seated car that aids 
‘The sacrifice, that reacRes heaven, 


Ss 


eae @ 
7 


_ 4 Swans : the Asvins’ chariot-ateeds. G The cays gdvanging 
nigh: I follow the interpretation “of Sayana who ewpplies ‘the rays’ 
and ‘the gloom ;’ but the exact ‘meaning of the halfeliue is uncyrtain. 


2 Drink your fill: the verb is in the dual number, Indra being 
Included. 


452 THE HY MNS OP [BOOK 1YV. 


6 On far-refaleent chariot come unto the man who offers gifts: 


Come, Indra-Vayu, hitherward, ‘ . 
6 Were, Indra- Vaya, is the juice: drink it, accordant with the 
Gods, 


Within the giver’s dwelling-place. 


7 Ilither, O Indra-Vayu, be your journey : here unyoke your 
steeds, 
Ilere for your draught of Soma juice. 
HYMN XLVII. Vayu, Indra-Vayu. 


Vayu, the bright is offered thee, best of the meath at holy rites. 
Come thou to ‘drink the Soma juice, God, longed-for, un thy 
team drawn car. 


2 O Vayu, thou and Indra are meet drinkers of these Soma- 
draughts, 
Fo:: unto you the drops procecd as waters gather to the vale. 
3° © Indra-Vayu, mighty Twain, speeding together, Lords of 
streneth, ‘ 
Come to our succour with your team, that ye may drink the 
Suma juice. 


4 The longced-for teams which ye possess, O Heroes, for the 
worshipper, 
Turn to us, Indra-Viyu, ye to whom the sacrifice is paid. 
HYMN XLVIII. Vayu. 


Tasrt offerings never tasted yet, as bards enjoy the foeman’s 
Wealth, 
O Vayu, on refulgent car come to the drinking of the juice 
2 Removing curses, drawn by teams, with Indra se: ated by the side 
O Vayu, on refnigent cur come to the drinking of the juice. 
The two dark treasuries of wealth that wear all beauties wait 
on thee. 
O Vayu, on refulzent car como to the drinking of the juice. 


a re ee ee eee a ert a re nmr ee ae ee 


fe oo 


1 The bright : juice, understood. t 


1 As bards enjoy the foeman’s wealth : vipo na rdyo arydh: SAyana 
explains vipo na as Slike a king who thakss nis enemies trembly,’ and 
7dyo aryah as ‘bestow wealth upon the worshipper,’ Professor Grase- 
mann translates : zleich Reisern rpriass des Frommén Gut,’ ‘May the 
pious man’s wealth sprout like twigs or suckers’ Vipo (vipah) may 
mewn eit har inspired singers, barde, or twige,and arté of which aryah 
rs the Bene mens both an enemy snd a pious msn, & worshipper. 
§ follow Professor Ludwig's liturpretation, Tae éhards’ are the losp. 
ired aver) of the victorious party who share the booty after the 
battle. * 3 The two dark traasuries of wialth ; beavya and earth, 
not vet Ulumionated by the aun 


HY MN 50.) THE RIGVEDA. 453 


4 May nine-and-ninety harnessed steeds who ycke them at thy 
will bring thee. 
O Vayu, on refulgcnt car come to the drinking of the juice. 
5 Harness, O Vayu, to thy car a hundred well-fed tawny 
steeds, 
Yea, or a thousand steeds, and let thy chariot come to us 
with might. 


HYMN XLIX, Indra-Brihaspati. 
° Der is this offering in your mouth, O Indra and Brihaspati: 
Famed is the laud, the glauddening draught 


2 This lovely Soma is effused, O Indra and Brihaspati, 
For you. to drink it and rejoice. 
3 As Soma-drinkers to our house come, Indra and Brihaspati~— 
and Indra— to drink Soma juice. 


4 Vouchsafe us riches huntlredfold, O Indra and BrihaSpati, 
With store of horses, thousandfold. 7 


® O Indra and Brihaspati, we call You avhen the meath,is shed, 
With songs, to drink the Suma juice. 


6 Drink, InJjra and Brihaspati, the Soma in the giver’s house: 
Delight yourselves abiding there. . 


HYMN L. ¢ Bribaspatt 


Him who with might hath propp d earth’, ends, who sitt.th 
in threefold seat, . rihaspati, with thander, if 

Him of the pleasant. tongue hive ancient saves, de p tiinking, 
holy singers set before them. e 

2 Wild in their course, in well-marked wise rejoicing were they, 

Brihaspatt, who p:essed around us, 

Preserve, Brihaspati, the stall uninjured, this company’s rain- 
ing, ever-moving birth-place. . 


3 And Indra: the words indrascha of the text are manifestly su- 
per ffucus, e 

Indra and Bribaspati conjointly age the deities of stanzas 10 and 11 
which, with 7, 8, and 9, are evidently a late addition to the origtoal 
hymn lL du threefold seat: heaven, mid-air, aud earth Set before 
them : for adoratgon ; or given®*them the fugemost place io sacrihee 2 
They...who pressed around us: apparently the Matuts. Zhe stall. like 
‘the boundless stall’ of 1{I. 1 14, the aerial homg ot the Maruts. 
This company's: the tex has ohly asya, ‘of thiss I follow Professor 
Ludwig io bis interpretation of this very difficulp stanza, and supply 
ganasya,, troop Or company, 1. e of the Maruts. According to Sayana, 
Brihaspati is asked to protect the worshipper or ingtitutor of the sucri- 


ficg, 


454 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR 1”. 


3 Brihaspati, from thy remotest distance have they sat down 
who love the law eternal, 


For thee were dug wells springing from the mountain, which 
murmuring round about pour streams of sweetness. 


4 Brihaspati, when first he had his being from mighty splendour 
In supremest heaven, 
Strong, with his sevenfold mouth, with noise of thunder, with 
his seven rays, blew and dispersed the darkness. 


O With the loud-shouting band who sang his praises, with 
thunder, be Westroyed obstructive Vala, 


Brihaspati thundering drave forth the cattle, the lowing cows 
who make oblations ready. 


6 Serve we with sacrifices, gifts, and homage even thus the 
Steer of all the Gods, the Father. 
Brihkspati, may we be lords of riches, with noble progeny and 
store of heroes. : 
7 Surely that King by-power and might heroic hath made him 
lord of all his foes’ possessions, 


Who cherishes Brihaspati well-tended, adorns and worships 
him as foremost sharer. 

8 In his ownchouse he dwells in peace and comfort ; to him for 
ever holy food flows richly. 

Tc him the people with free will pay homage~ the King with 

whom the Brahman bath precedence. 

J He, sinopposed, is master of the riches of his own subjects 
and of hostile pcople. 


The Gods uphold that King with their protactior who helps 
the Brahman when he seeks his favour. 
10 Indra, Brihaspati, rainers of treasure, rejoicing at this sacrifice 
drink the Soma. 


Let the abundant drops sink deep within you: vouchsatp us 
riches with full store of heroes. 


3 Have they sat dewn : probably the Maruts are intended, and not 
horees as Sayana says, Wells springeng from the mowntain : reservoirg 
of Soma juice, pressed out by the stones, bave been prepared. 4 
Sevenfold meuth.<....seven rays: as identified with Agni. 5 Obs- 
tructive : or retenti¥e ; the meaning'of phaligdm is somewhat uncertain ; 
probably, ceservoir, i e, holder and withholder of the rain’ The lond- 
shouting band: the Maruts. 10 Rainers of treasure: the meaning 
of vrishanvagd is uncertain , ‘strong or excellent as bulls,’ according to 
Ludwig and Grassmann, Perhaps ‘strong with treasures.’ 


AYMN 51.) THE RIGVEDA, 455 


1 Brihaspati and Indra, make us prosper: may this be your 
benevolence to us-ward. 

Assist our holy thoughts, wake up our spirit: weaken the 
hatred of our foe and rivals. 


HYMN LI. Dawn. 


Forva from the darkness inthe region eastward this most 
abundant splendid light hath movuted. 
»Now verily the far-refalgent Mornings, Daughters of Heaven, 
bring welfare to the people. ° 
2 The richly-coloured Dawns have mounted eastward, like 
pillars planted at our sacrifices, 
And, flushing far, splendid and purifying, unbarred the 
portals of the fold of darkness. 
3 Dispelling gloom this day the wealthy Mornings urge liberal 
givers to present their treasures. ® 
In the unlightened depth of darkness round them let niggard 
traflickers sleep unawakened. * : 


4 O Goddess*s, is this your car, I ask you, ancicnt this day, or 
is it new, ve Mornings, 
Wherewith, rich Dawns, ye seek with wealth Nayageva, 
Dasagva Angira, the seven-toned singer ? ‘ 
5 With horses harnessed by eternal Order, Goddesses, swiftly 
round the worlds ye travel, - 
Arousing from .their rest, O Dawns, the sleeping, and all that 
lives, man, bird, and beast, to motion. : 
3 Which among these is eldest, and where is she through whom 
they fixed the Ribhus’ regulations ?» 
What time the splendid Dawns go forth for splendour, they 
are not known apart, alike, unwasting. , 


7 Bdest ware these Dawns of old, shining with succour, true 
with the truth that springs from holy Order ; 
Wath whom the toiling worshipper, by praises, hymning and 
lauding, soun attained to riches. 


3 Niggara traffickers : wealthy churls Who offes no sacrifices. 4 
Yavagra, Dasagva : individual members of the so-named mythical pri- 
stly families which are frequently associated with *the' *A ngirases, 
ngira: &® member of the fainily of Angiras. Seven-toned: literally, 
sven-mouthed,’ using in his hymns the seven metres of the*Veda, or 
epeating hymns of seven kinds. 6 The Kibhuy regflations : tha 
yasons of the year, the Ribhus being copmic powers andelousely con- 


ected with the Nitus. 


456 THE HYMNS OP (BOOR IY. 


8 Hither from eastward all at once they travel, from one place 
spreading in the self-same manner. | 
Awaking, from the seat of holy Order the Godlike Dawns 
come nigh like troops of cattle 
9 Thus they go forth with undiminished colours, these Morn- 
ings s!milar, in self-same fashion, . 
Concealing the vigantic might of darkness with radiant bodies 
bright and pure and shining. 
10 O Goddesses, O Heaven’s refulgent Daughters, bestow upen 
us wealth with atore of children, 
As from var pleasant place of rest we rouse us may we be 
masters of heroie vigour. 
1] Well-skilled in lore of sacrifice, ye Daughters of Heaven, 
refulgent Dawns I thus address you. 
Mav we be gloriots among the people. May Heaven vouchsafe 
us ths, and Earth the Goddess. 
HYMN Lit, Dawn. 


Tus Lady. giver of delight. after her Sister shining forth, 
Daughter of Heaven, bath shown hercel & 
2 Unfailing, Mother of the Kine, in colovr ikea buightred mare, 
The Dawn bi came the Asvins’ Friend, 
3 Yea, and thou art the Asvins’ Friend, the Mother of the ine 
ait thou : 
Dawn, thou rulest over wealth. , 
4 Thinking of thee, O Joyous One, as her who driveth hate away, 
We woke to meet thee with our lauds. 
9 Our eyes behold thy blessed rays like troops of cattle loosed 
to feed. 
Dawn hath filled full the wide expanse, 


6 When thou hast filled it, Fulyent One! thou layest bare the 
gloom with hight, 


After thy nature aid us, Dawn. t 
7 Thou overspreadest heaven with rays, the dear wide region of 
mid-air 


With thy bright shining lustre, Dawn. 


@ Liké troops of catile: going forth to pasture at day-bresk. 


) After her Stster: when Night hae departed, 3 The Kine: 
the early rays of light, or fleecy clouds of morning. Friend of the 
Agvins : as *being worshipped at the same time. 4 Driveth hate 


away: especially the maliguity of the evil spirits of the night, 


"YMN 54.) THE RIGVEDA. 457 
: HYMN LIII. Savitar, 


Or Savitar the God, the sapient Asura, we crave this great 
gift which is worthy of oar choice, 

W herewith he freely grants his worshipper defence. This with 
his rays the Great God hath vouchsafed to us, 


Sastainer of the heaven, Lord of the whole world’s life, the 
Sage, he putteth on his golden-coloared mail. 
Clear-sighted, spreading far, filling the spacious realm, Savitar 
* hath brought forth bliss that deserveth laud. ° 


He hath filled full the regious of the heaven and earth: the 
God for his own strengthening waketh up the hymn, 

Savitar hath stretched out his arms to cherish life, producing 
with his rays and lulling all that moves. 


Lighting all living creatures, ne’er to be deceived, Savitar, 
God, protects each ho!y erdinance. ® 

He hath stretched ont his arms to all the folk of e&rth, and, 
with his laws observed, rules his,own mighty course, 


Savitar thrice surrounding with his mig ltiness mid-air, three 

regions, and the triple sphere of light, 

Sets the three heavens in motion and the threefold earth, and 
willingly protects us with his triple law. e 

Most gracious God, who brings to life and lulls*to rest, he 
who controls the world, what moves not and what moves, 

May he vouchsafe us shelter,—Savitar the God,—for tranquil 
life, with triple bar against distress, 


With the year’s seasons hath Savitar, God, come nigh $ may 
he prosper our home, give food and noble sons, 

May he inyigorate us through the days and nights, and may 
ho send us opulence with progeny. 


HYMN LIV. * Savitar. 


Now must we praise and honour Savitar the God: at this 
time of the day the men must call to him, 

Him who distributes wealth to Manu’s"progeny, that he may 
grant us here riches most exceMent.* 


For thou at first producest'for the holy Gods the noblest of 
all portion 8, jmmortality®: Z : 

Thereafter as a gift to men, O Savitar, thou dpenest existence, 
life succeeding life, R ; 


~—s eee 


ae oO o._____——_—__—_-——.... 

1 Savitar : the Sun as the gteat vivifier, generagor, and producer. 
Lulling : the word in the text, nivesdyan, means ‘ bringing ‘to rest.’ 
lyana explaing it by ‘establishing in their several duties.” 5 
‘tiple law : acoordiug to Sayana, his functiona as distributer of heat, 
n, andculd, Three heavens : vee I. 195. 5. 


09 =< 


458 TAE HYMNS OF [BOOR IV. 


3 If we, men as we are, have sinned against the Gods through 
want of thoucht, in weakness, or through insolence, . 
Absolve us from the guilt and make us free from sin, 
O Savitar, alike among both Gods and men. 


4 None may impede that power of Savitar the God whereby he 
will maintain the universal world. 
W hat the fair-fingered God brings forth on earth's expanse or 
in the height of heaven, that work of his stands sure. 
5 To lofty hills thou sendest those whom Indra Icads, and 
givest fixed abodes with houses unto these. 
However they may fly and draw themselves apart, still, 
Savitar, they stand obeying thy behest. 
6 May the libations poured to thee thrice daily, day after day, 
O Savitar, bring us blessing. 
May Indra, Heaven, Earth, Sindhu with the Waters. Aditi 
with Adityas, give us shelter. 


HYMN LV. Visvedevas. 


Who of you, Vasus, saveth ? who protecteth ? O Heaven and 
Earth and Aditi, preserve us, 
Varuna, Mitra, from the stronger mortal. Gods, which of you 
at sacrifice giveth comfort ? 
2 They who with laud extol the ancient statutes, when they 
shine forth infallible dividers, 
Have ordered as perpetual QOrdainers, and beamed as holy- 
” thoughted Wonder- Workers, 


3 The Housewife Goddess, Aditi, and Sindhu, the Goddess Svasti 
Timplore for friendship: ° 
And may the unobstructed Night and Morning both, day and 
night, provide for our protection. 
4 Aryaman, Varuna have disclosed the pathway, Agni as Lord of 
Strencth the road to welfare. 
Lauded in manly mode may Indra-Vishnu grant us their 
powerfal defence and shelter. 


er ee re es see eet ete SE GE 


5 To lo ty hills : © Thou elevatest those, of whom Indra is chief, 
above tbe vas: clouds. for theses, (thy worshippers), thou provides 
dwelling (places) filled with habitations. —Wilson. ‘ The difficulties io 
connection with thi: versa are very gcaat, and perhaps insuperable,’ 
says Professor Peterson, in whose Hymns from the Rigveda (Bombay 
Sanskrit Series, No. XXXVI) the Sanskrit student will find a full 
statatmente of fhese difficulties, and the interpretations proposed by 
Sayana and by European scholars, noteone ot which is convincing. 

® 


® 

2 They : thetdeites of light , dividers’ as separating day from night 
and ‘Ordainers’ as fixing and regulating the yeer and the seasons. 3 
Housewife Goldess : as beiug the mother of the Gods, Svasti: Prosperity. 


AYMN 56,) THE RIGVEDA. 459 


5 I have besought the favour of the Maruts, of Parvata, of Bhaga 
God who rescues. 
From trouble caused by man the Lord preserve us; from woe 
sent by his friend let Mitra save us. 
6 Agree, through these our watery oblations, Goddesses, Heaven 
and Earth, with Ahibudhnya. 
As if to win the sea, the Gharma-heaters have opened, as they 
come anear, the rivers, 
7? May Goddess ‘Aditi with Gods defend as, save us the saviour 
God with care unceasing. 
We dare not stint the sacred food of Mitra and oe upon 
the back of Agni. 
8 Agni is Sovran Lord of wealth, Agni of great prosperity : 
“May he bestow these gifts on us, 
9 Hither to us, rich aa Dawn, bring many things to be 


desired, é 
Thou who hast ample sare of wealth. ° 
10 So then may Bhaga, Savitar, Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman, Indra 
with bounty coe to us. ° 
HYMN LVI. Teaven and Earth. 


May mighty Heaven and Karth, most meet fur honour, be 
present here with light and gleaming splendonrs ; 

W hen, fixing them, apart, vast, most extensive, thy Steer rors 
loudly in far- reaching courses. 

2 Tbe Goddesses with Gods, holy with holy, the Two stand pgur- 

ing out their rain, exhaustless : 

Faithfal and guileless, having Gods for children, le eaders of 
sacrifice with shining splendours. 


5 The Lord: Varuna. Sent by his Friend: Varuna, as the great 
Pan of mé@h. Prefesaor Roth, whom Professor Grassmann folluwe, 
takes jdnydt to mean caused by strangers, and mitriya. caured by friends. 
€ This stauza is diffcultand its meaning is obscure. The winds apyebher 
ixhtath, ‘through watery oblations,’ are rendered by Professor Grass. 
mann. ‘nebst den erwunschten Wassergottern,’ ‘together with the 
wished for |Water-Gods’ Ahibudhnya: the Dragon of the D-ep isa 
divine being who dwells in the depths of tle gcean of air Cf I. 1860 5; 
JL 31.6. As if to win the sea: as if wishing to gain the ocean of 
abundant wealth. Vhe Gharmaheaters the priests who prepare the 
oblation of hot mk or ot} er Rot beverage which “is offe'ed e-p cially 
to vthe Asvins. Or Gharma may mgan the caldron oréveaselin which the 
oblation is boiled. The meaning seems to be, as Professor Ludwiz expla- 
ing it, that the priests, sacrificing and hymning lead "dowh towards 
themselves the rivers of the ocean of plenty. 7, The saviour God ; 
Indra. Upon the back of Agni : poured upon the flames. a 

1 The Steer : according to Siyana, Parjanya the God of rain-cloudg. 
2 Pow ring cut their rain: bestowing good gifts. 


460 THE HYMNS OP - [BOOR IV. 


3 Sure in the world he wasa skilful Craftsman, he who produced 
these Twain the Earth and Heaven. 
Wise with his power he brought both realms together, spacious 
and deep, well-fashicned, unsupported. 


4 O Heaven and Earth, with one accord promotiong, with high 
protection as of Queens, our welfare, 
Far-reaching, universal, holy, guard us. May we, car-borne. 
through song be victors ever. 
§ To bath of you, O Heaven and Earth, we bring our lofty song 
of praise, + 
Pure Ones! to glorify you both. 
6 Ye sanctify each other’s form, by your own proper might 
e rule 
And from of old observe the Law. 


7 Furthering and fulfilling, ye, O Mighty, perfect Mitra’s Law. 
Ye s.¢ around our sacrifice. 


: HYMN LVII. Kshetrapati, Ete. 


We through the Master of the Field, even as through a 
friend, obtain. 

What nourisheth our kine and steeds. In such may he be 
guod to us. 

© As the cow yieldeth milk, pour for us freely, Lord of the Field, 
_the wave that beareth sweetness, 

Distilling meath, well-purified like butter, and let the Lords 

of holy Law be gracious, 


3 Sweet be the plants for us, the neavens, the waters, and full 
of sweets for us be air’s mid-region. 
May the Field’s Lord for us be full of swectness, and may we 
follow after him uninjured. 


4 Happily work our steers ang men, may the plough furrow 
happily. 
Happily be the traces bound ; happily may he ply the good. 

4 As of Queens: 1 fol'ow with some hesitaion Professor Ludwin's: 
interpretation of patnivadbhir, Prof-ssor Wilson, following Siyans 
translates. with our spacious dwellings, inhabited by our wives, 2 
5 These three concluding verses form 1h reality ano*her byma. 


In this hymn various agricultural personificatione are sddresged 
the deity of the rst threa stanzai being called Kuhetrapati, of the 
fourth Suna, of the fifth and eighth Sunistra, of the sixth and iseventh 
Sita. ‘It is eaid inthe Grihya Sfitras that each verse is to be yilent! 
repeated, with au oblation to fire, at the commencement af ploughing bg 
Wilson. 1 The Master of the Field: Keshetrapati, the popular 
Genius Losi, s aid to mean eithar Rudra or Agni. 


AY MN 58.) THE RIGVEDA, 461 


4 Suna and Sira, welcome ye this laud, and with the milk which 
ye have made in heaven. 
Bedew ye both this earth of oars, 
6 Auspicious Sita, come thou near : we venerate and worship thee 
That thou mayst bless and prosper us and bring us fruits 
ubundantly. 
7 May Indra press the furrow down, may Pishan guide its 
course aright. 
May she, as rich in milk, be drained for us through each 
* succeeding year. , 
8 Happily let the shares turn up the ploughbland, happily go the 
ploughers with the oxen. 
With meath and milk Parjanya make us happy. Grant us 


prosperity, Suna and Sira, 
HYMN LVIII. Ghrita. 
Forts from the ocean spfrang the wave of sweetnegs: together 
with the stalk it tugged to Amrit, 
That which is holy oil’s mysteriots titJe : but the Gods’ tongue 
is truly Amrita centre, 


5 Suna aud Sira: two deities or deified objects vho bless or ara 
clos-ly connected with agriculture, According to Yaska. Syna (the 
auspicious) is Vayu, and Sira ( plough )is Aditya or the,Sun Professor 
Koth conjectures that the words mean here ploughshare and plough- 
Professor Grassman translates: ‘O Pflug und Lenker, plough and pleu 
man,’ 6 Sita the Furrow or Husbandry personified and addres- 
sed as a deity ;in after time the heroine of the Ramayana. 7 Indra: 
as the God who sends the necassary rain, Indra is prayed to bless the 
work by pressing down and deepening the furrow, ‘May Jndra take hold 
of Sitd.’—Wilson. Muy she, as rich in milk : eecording to the Scholiast, 
ea, she, here @acans the sky. 


Gee 


The hymn is in praiso of Ghrita, the clarified butter or oil used in 
sacrifices, but a choice of deities is offered in the Index— Agni or Surya, 
Waters, Cows, or Ghrita. It is, as Professor Wilson observes, ‘a good 
epecimen of Vaidik vaguenass, and mystification, and of the straite 
to which commentators are put to extract an intelligible meaning 
from the text.’ 1. It Would be fruitless, as Professor Ludwig re- 
marke, to repeat all the varioug explanations which Sayana giver of the 
first line of this s#anza : they ouly show the utter uncertainty of tradi- 
tion in reference to the passage. lor instance, samudra, ocuan, is said 
to mean, sacrificial fire ; or celestial fire; or the firmament; or the 
udder of the cow ; and zirmt, wave, may aocordingly mean reward ; or 
rain; or buttér. Professor Ludwig thinks thao the sense of tae stanza 
may be : the life-giving essence which develops itself out uf the world- 
ocean turns into Soma in the Moon, but it is neither of these two, but 
the tongue of the Gods (Agni) from which the Amrit proceeds and to 
which it returns. Butsee A. Hillebrandv, Vedische Mythologie, 1,321,322 


462 THK HYMNS OF [BOOK 19, 


2 Let us declare alond the name of Ghrita, and at this sacrifice 
hold it up with homage. 
So let the Brahman hear the praise we utter. This bath the 
four-borned Buffalo emitted, 
3 Four are bis horns, three are the feet that bear him ; his heads 
are two, his hands are seven in number. 
Bound with a triple bond the Steer roars loudly : the mighty 
God hath entered in to mortals. 
4 That oil in triple shape the Gods discovered laid down within 
the Cow, congealed by Panis 
Indra produced one shape, Surya another : by their own powcr 
they formed the third from Vena 
5 From inmost reservoir in zountless channels flow down these 
rivers which the foe beholds not. 
I look upon the streams of oil descending, and lo! the Galden 
Reed is there among them. ‘ 
6 Like rivers our libations ow together, cleansing themselves 
in inmost heart and spirit, 


ee Bite Se a ee Sp ee ee 


The Brahman : acoording to Mahidhbara, the rity or priest. Probably 
Agniie meant The last half lineof the stanza i translated, after Sayana, 
by Professor Wilaon : ‘the fair.complexioned deity perfects this rite,’ the 
epithet “our-horned’ being trensferred to *Brahman.’ The God may be 
called a buffald (gaurd, Bos Gaurus) as a type of extraordinary strength 
Mvhidhara explains gaura by yejna, sacrifice, having four horns, that is, 
four ufficiatine priests 3 Hour are his horns: the four horns of 
Agni as identified with sacrifice are said by Sdyana to be the four Vedas 
and, if jdontifies with Aditya, the four cardinal points. The three feet 
are, in the former case, the three daily sacrifices, in the latter, morning, 
neon, and evening. The two heads are, in the former case, tha Brahman- 
dana and the Pravargya ceremonies, inthe latter, day and night. Similarly, 
the seven hande are explain:d, alternatively, as the seven metres of tha 
Veda or the oven rave of the Sun ; and tha triple fond as the Mantra, 
Kalpa, and Bréhmana, prayen ceremonial, and rationa’e, of the Veda, 
or tha three ragions, heaven, firmament, and earth The Steer is, either 
as sacrifice or Aditva, the pourer down of rewards, and tha loud roaring 
is the sound of the repetition of the txts sf the Veda. Mahidhara’g 
explanation differs from thit of SAvana The four horas are priests; or 
noung verbe, prepositions, and particles ; the three feet ara the Vedas, 
or the first, second, and third persons, of the past, present, and furure 
tenses the two heads are two sacrifices or the aged snd obj ct; the 
seven hands are the metres or the Gaces of the noun; and the three 
bonds are the three daily snorifices,, or the singular, dual, and plural 
numbers. See Wilson’s note. 4 dn traple shane : aa milk, curds, 
and buttir, according to Sayana. The meaning seems to ha that Indea, 
Surya, and‘Vena,( who is probably Agni ), restored the power of tha 
elements of sacrifice respectively in heaven, the firmament, and the 
earth, after they had bcen rendered ineffectual fora time by tne 
malignant Panis. 5 The Goltlan Heed ; Celestial Agni. 


HYMN 58.) THE RIGVEDA 463 


The streams of holy oil pour swiftly downward like the wild 
beasts that fly before the b>»wman. 


7 As rushing down the rapids of a river, flow swifter than the 
wind the vigorous Currents, 

The streams of oil in swelling fluctuation like a red courser 
bursting through the fences. 


8 Like women at a gathering fair to look on and gently smiling, 
they incline to Agni, 
The streams of holy oil attain the fuel, and Jataved&s joyfully 
receives them. 


9 As maidens deck themselves with gay adornment to join the 
bridal feast. [ nuw behold them. 
Where Suma flows; and sacrifice 1s ready, thither the streams 
of holy oil are running. 


10 Send to our eulogy a her@ of cattle : bestow upon us excellent 
possessions. 
Bar to the Gods the sacrifice we offer ; the streams of gil flow 
pure and full of sweetness, 
11 The universe depends upon thy power and might within tbe 
sea, Within the heart, within all Iife. 
May we attain the sweetly-flavoured wave of thine, brought, 
at its gatheriny, o'er the sarface of the floods. 


10 Send to our eulogy a herd of cattle : this is Sdyana’s interpretation. 
The Gods are addre-sed, aud asked to reward the singers. 11 The 
dower: Avni’s Ju the sea: ine the aerial ocean, the firmamént, in 
which Agni is present a: lightning within the heart: as Vaisvanara, 
belonging to all men. Wrthrn all fife: as thé vital principle, or heat. 
The wave is th® buttér of the oblation. 


BOOK THE FIFTH. 


HYMN I. ; Agni. 
Act is wakened by the people’s fuel to mect the Dawn who 
cometh like a milch-cow. 
Like young trees shooting up on high their branches, his flames 
are rising to the vault of heaven. 
2 For worship of the Gods the Priest was wakened : at morning 
gracious Agni hath arisen, 
Kindled, his radiant might ts made apparent, and the great 
Deity set free from darkness. ? 
3 When he hath stirred the I*ne of hisattendants, with the pure 


milk pure Agni is anointed, 
The strength. bestowing viftis then made ready, which spread 


in front, with tongues, erect, he drinketh. 


4 The spirits of oe pious turn together to Agni, as the eyes of 
all to Sar 
He, when bok ‘Dawns of different hues have borne him, springs 
up at daybreak as a strong white charger. 


5 The noble One was born at days’ beginning, laid red in colour 
mid the well-laid fuel, . : 
Yielding in every house his seven rich treasures, Agni is seat- 

ed, Priest most skilled in worship. 
6 Agni hath sat him down, a Priest most skilfal, on a sweet- 
smelling place, his Mother’s bosom, 
Young, faithful, sage, preminent oer many, kindled among 
the folk whom he sustaineth. 
i This Singer excellent at sacrifices, a tlte Priest, they glorify 


with homage. , 
Him who spread out both worlds is Law Eternal they balm 
with oil, strong Steed who gever faileth. + 


1 ae trees : tho meaning of yahvah’ here is uncertain, * Lika 
oirds (7) flying up (or like strony men reaching up ) to a Branch* 
iM. Muller). 3 The line ofhis attendants : the row of ministering 
Jriexts, the people of st. 1. But the exact meaning of the words of the 
ext iv uncertain. 4 7'o Sdrya: to the Sun. ” Both Dawns’: Night 
nd morning. 5 Seven rich treaswres : wealth of various sort. 6 
dis Mother's bosom : the altar raised above the ground. 


60 s 


466 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR V. 


8 He, worshipful House-Friend, in his home is worshipped, our 
own ausp cious guest. landed by sages. 
That +t:enuth the Bull with thousind horns possesses, 
In might, QQ Agni, thou excellest others. 
9 ‘Lhou quickly passest by all otvers, Agni, for him to whom, 
theu hast “pp ared most lovely, 
Wondrenusly fair, adorable, effulgent, the guest of men, the 
darling of the people. 
10 To thee, Most Youthful God ! to thee, OQ Agni, from near and 
far the people bring tieir tribute. 
Mark well the prayer of him who best extols thee. Great, 
high, auspicious, Agni, Is thy shelter, 
11 Ascend to-dvy thy splendid car, O Angi, insplendour, with the 
ILoly Ones around it. 
Knowing the paths by midair’s spacious region bring hither 
. Gods to feast on our oblation, 
12 To kim adorable, sage, strong and mighty we have sung forth 
our song of praise and homage. 
Gavishthira hath raised with prayer,to Agni this laud far-reach- 
ing, like gold light to heaven. 
ILYMN II. Agni. 
Tue youthful Mother keeps the Boy in secret pressed to her 
ciose, nor yields him to the Father, . 
But, when he lies upon the arm, the people see his unfading 
—  Gountenance before them. 
2 Whit child is this thou carriest as handmaid, O Youthful one ? 
Theo Consort-Queen bath borne him. 
‘fhe Babe unborn increased through many autumns, I saw 
him born whet time his Mother bare him. 


3 Isaw him from afar gold-toothed, bright-celoured, hurling 
his weapons from his habitation. 


S The Bull with thousand horns: Agui as the Sun with his countless 


rays. 
’ 1 Tho kindling of the sacrificial fire is figurative!y described. The 
lower }i-ce of wood retains the latent spark and will not give 1b up to 
the yajamdna or worshipper until he hag generated it by attrition. 
When the fire has be6n produced, and is thown like a child that is car- 
rid on che arm, its brightness 1s apparetit to all, This seems to be the 
meaning of the tanza ; but to arrive at it aratnaw inust be read instead 
of the eratad of the text ; and this or some similar alteration is requir- 
ed by tna inet re. But seo Ludwig’s Commentary. 2 Ths meaning 
is obscure. The handmaid and the:Consort Queen ( mihishi ) ara per. 
haps‘he two fire-sticks. The fire thus produced is not tha genuine! 
Agui, whois burn as lightning from the cloud 3 T offared sweet 
libations of Soma juice to Agni when I beheld bim in the form of 
lightuimg, and consequontly the godless whe do not ack nowledge Indra 
are unable to injure me. ‘ 


BAYMN 2.) THE RIGVEDA. 467 


What time I gave him Amrit free from mixture. How can 
th: Indraless, the hymnless harm me ? 
4 [saw him moving froin the place he dwells in, even as with a 
herd, b-ilhantly shining. 
These se:zed him not: he had been born already. They who 
were grey with ave again grow youthful. 
9 Who separate my young bull from the cattle, they whose pro- 
tector was in truth no stranger ? : 
Let those whose hands have seized upon them free them, May 
1¢, observant, drive the herd to us-ward, : 


®@ 
6 Mid mortal men the godless have secreted the King of all who 
live, home of the people. 
So may the prayers of Atri give him freedom. Reproached in 
turn be those who now reproach him. 
7 Thou from the stake didst loose e’en Sunahsepa bound for a 


thousand ; for he prayed With fervour. 7 
So, Agni, looye from us the bonds that bind us, when fhon art 
seated here. O Priest who knowes€, — ¢ 
8 Thou hast sped from me, Agni, in thine anger : this the protec- 
tor of Gods’ Laws hath told me. 
Indra who knoweth bent his eye upon thee : by him instructed 
am [eome, O Agni, ° 
9 Agnishines far and wide with lofty splendour and by his 
greatness makes all things appirent, : 
He conquers godless and malign enchantments, and sharpehs 
both his horns to gore the Rakshas, 


Se, Ae EE een os se, | eligi acrS, eben aie oe aE een an EON 
4 Even as wih ow herd: Agni is here represented asthe Sun with 
his host of rays. Trese seized him not: the Dawne could nob detain 
him ; the Sun w&s too powerful. But the meaning of (dh, ‘these,’ with- 
out a substantive, is somewhas uncertain. They who were urey: the 
angi n® flames of the Sun recover their youth and etrength. Or the half. 
line may ve rend red: * Tao Diwns, the youthful Mai lungs, grow daore- 
pit” Thisis Profssser Ludwig's lnterpretatiun, and it has much to 
recommend it. OD This stanz. is extremely obscure. Tt may refer 
to some actual occurrenes to which a mythical eg: wing has been added. 
‘What enemies have despoiled my kingdom 1 is Sayana’s sxplanation of 
the first balf-line. 6 Th:s stanza ay pears to refer to seme conten. 
tion between the degcendants of &tri anit somp other priestly family, 
perhaps the Bhrigus, as Professor Tyndwig thinks, regarding thea wor. 
khip of Agni. Home of the people: Agni: ‘the asylum of man,.’— Wilson, 
7 Sunahsepa: see I. 24. Bound for @ thousand : bought for a thuusadd 
_€owe io order thathe might be bound to the sacrificial post. Sdyana, who 
is followed by Profossors Wilson, Roth, and Grassmann, takes sd&&dsrd- 
dyipddt tovether, ‘from a thousand stakes,’ 9 Lahkshas?a collec- 
tive noun signifying the whole race of Rakehasas, OriginalPy, harm, 
injury. ‘ 


‘ 
t 


* 468 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK V. 


® 
10 Loud in the heaven above be Agni’s roarings with keen-edged 
weapons to destroy the demons, 
Forth burst his splendours in the Soma’s rapture. The godless 
bands press round but cannot stay him. 


11 As a skilled craftsman makes a car, asinger I, Mighty One}, 
this hymn for thee have fashioned. 
If thou, O Agni, God, accept it gladly, may we obtain thereby 
the heavenly Waters. 


12 May he, the strong-necked Steer, waxing in vigour, gather the 
foeman’s, wealth with none to check him. 


Thus to this Agni have the Immortals spoken. To man who 
spreads the vrass may he grant shelter, grant shelter to the 
man who brings oblation. 


HYMN ITl. Agni. 


Trou at thy birth art VarunayOQ Agni; when thou art kindled 
tiiou becomest Mitra. 

In thee, O Son of Strength, ali Gods are centred, Indra art 

« thou to man wno brings oblation. 


2 Aryaman art thou as regardeth maidens: mysterious is thy 
name, O Sclf-sustainer. 
Asa kind friend with streams of milk they balm thee what 
time thou makest wife and lord one-minded. 


3 The Maruts deck their beauty for thy glory, yea, Rudra! for 
« thy birth fair, brightly-coloured. 
That which was fixed as Vishnu’s loftiest station—thercwith 
, the secret of the Cows thou. guardest. 


4 Gods through thy glory, God who art so lovely ! granting abund- 
ant gifts gained life immortal. ; ‘ 
As their own Priest have men established Agni ; and serve him 
fain for praise from him who liveth. 


nn a 
sateen teeta eemere arenemneentn eee rem eee rT 


1 Varuna: regarded as the type of royalty. Mitra: the friendly 
beneficent God, Indra; the chief of all the Gods. 2 AS yaman : 
in connexion with marriage , aryaman meaning also a companion, expe- 
cially a friend who asksa girl in marriage for another, and Agni being 
as the Sun, the regulator of the sexson for marriage, and ite conseorator 
as the sacrificial fire, 3 fudro: here, as in other places, a name 
of Agni. Yishnu’s loftiest station: the height of the firmament 
which supplies milk to the celestial Cows, and, ag mysteriously conte. 
oted with them, to the cowsofearth 7'he secret of the Cows : apparently 
their udder—the cloud—is meant by guhyam ndma gonam, ‘the cows’ 
secrot: name.’ 4 Gained life immortal» Agni alone, it is said, ae 
originally immortal, and the other Gods obtained immortality through 
him. « Fromhimwho liveth: Agui, the specia) representant of 
vital power. 


¢ 


HYMN 3.) THE RIGVEDA. 469 


There is no priest more skilled than thou in worship ; none 
Self-sustainer ! passes thee in wisdom. 
The man within whose house as guest thou dwellest, O God, 
by sacrifice shall conquer mort: als. 


6 Aided by thee, O Agni may we conquer through our oblation, 
fain for wealth, awakened : 

May we in battle, in the day’s assemblies, O Son of Strength, 
by riches conquer mortals. 


«@ He shall bring evil on the evil-plotter whoever turns against us 
sin and outrage. 
Destroy this calumny of him, O Agni, whocver injures as With 
double-dealing. 


8 At this dawn's flushing, God ! our ancient fathers served thee 
with offerings, making thee their envoy, 
. When, Agni, to the stoye of wealth thou goest, a Gomenkindlod 
with good things by mortals. 


9 Save thou who knowc, draw thy father near thee, who counts 
as thine own son, O Child of powtr. 
O sapient Agni, when wilt thou regard us, When, skilled in 
holy Law, wilt thou direct us / 


10 Adoring thee he gives thee many a title, when tltou, Good 
Lord ! acceptest this as Father. 
And doth uot Agni. glad in strength of Godhead, gain splendid 
bliss when he hath waxen mighty ? 


11 Most Youthfal Agni, verily thou bearest thy praiser safely 
over all hts troubles. 
Thieves have been seen by us and open foemen : unknown 
have been the plottings of the wicked. 


12 To thee” these eulosies have been directed: or to the Vasy 
hath this sin been spoken, ® 


But thisour Agni, fiaming high, shall never yield us to calum- 
ny, to him who wrongs us. 


6 In the day's assemblies : gatherings on days appointed for sacrifice 
8 The store of wealth: according to Sayana, the place containing the 
riches of sacrifisial offerings, 9 Thy father : the sacriticer, who sup- 
ports Agni with oblations, acai his turn is loved and cherished asa 
son, Accaptest thes : the homage of the worshipyver, When he hath 
waxen mighty: or been exalted by our praise, "Ll Thieves have been 
geen : although we have seen thieves and enemiss we haveebeen saved 
by Agni from suffering injury from their evil designs. 2 12 Hath this 
sin been spoken :if my praise be not acceptable to Agni, t is an offence 
andasin, Or the meaning raay be, this sin of our enemies who plot 
against us has been declared to Agni. 


470 THEHY MNS OP [BOOK V. 
HYMN IV. Agni. 


O Aewr, King and Lord of wealth and treasures, in thee is my 
delight at sacrifices. 


Through thee may we obtain the strength we long for, and 
overcome the fierce attacks of mortals. 


2 Agni, Eternal Father, offering-bearer, fair to behold, far-reach- 
ing, far-refulgent, 
From well-kept household fire beam food to feed us, and mea-. 
sure out to us cbundant glory. 


3 The Sage cf men, the Lord uf human races, pure, purifying 
Agen, balmed with butter, 
Him the Omniscient as your Priest ye stablish :he wins among 
the Gods things worth the choosing. 


4 Agni. anjoy, of one accord with Ila striving in rivalry with 
beams «f Surya, 
Enjoy, O Jatavedas, this our fuel, and bring the Gods to us 
to teste oblations ° 


5 As dear House-Friend, guest welcome in the dwelling, to this 
our sacrifice come thou who knowest, 
And, Agni, having scattered all assailants, bring to us the 
possessione of our formen. 


6 Drive thou away the Dasyu with thy weapon. As, gaining 
vétal power for thine own body, 

O son of Strength, the Gods thou satisfiest, so in fight save 

us,@nost heroic Agni, 


~ 


7 May we,O Agni, with our lauds adore thee, aud with our- 
gifts, fair.beaming Puritier. : . 
Send to us wealth containing all things:precious : bestow upon 
us ever yesort of riches. 


8 Son of Strength, Agni, dweller In three regions, accept out 
sacrifice and our oblation. 


Among the Gods may we be coanted pious: protect us with 
a triply-guarding shelter., 


4 Jla: prayer and praise, personified. Weth beams of Sirya : put- 
ting fosth thy power at day-break and so vying with the sun. 6 As, 
gartning yttal power: as the oblation§ of meu which thou carriest to 
the Gode ipcreare thike own strength algo. Siyana takes the second 
half line in copnexion with the first: ‘ Drive thou away the Dasyu 
with thy weapon, obtaining vital strength for thine own body,’ 8 
Dwetler in three regions: heaven, firmament and earth, as the sun, 
ths lightwing, and tersestrial fire: 


AYMN 5.) THE RIGVEDA, 471 


9 Over all woes and dangers, J&tavedes, bear us asin a boat 
across & river. 


Praised with our homage even as Atri praised thee, O Agni, be 
the guardian of our bodies. 
10 As I, remembering thee with grateful spirit, a mortal, call with 
mig}it on thee Immortal, 
Vouchsafe us high renown, O Jatavedas, and may I be immor- 
tal by iny children, 
11 The pions man, O Jit:vedas Agni, to wn thou grantest 
ample room and pleasure, . 4 
Gaineth abundant wealth with sons and horses, with heroes 
and with kine for his we!l-being. 
HYMN V, A pris. 
To Agni, Jitavedas, to the flame, the well-enkingled God, 
Off r thck sacrificigl oil. 
2 Ilo. Nardsanra, ne’er boguiled, inspériteth this sacrifice : 
For sage ts ho, witke weets In hand, 
3 Adored, O Agni, hither bring Indra the Wonderful, the Friend, 
On hghtly- -roiling Gpr to aid. 
4 Spread thy-elf out, thoy soft as wool ! The hoty iad have 


sung to thee. : 
Bring “gain to us, Q beautiful ! » 
5 Open yourselves, ye Doors Divine, easy of access for our aid: 
Fill more aud more, éhe sacrifice. 2 
6 Fair strengtheners of vital power, young Mothers of eternal 
Law,, 


Morning and ‘Night we supplicate. 


7 On the wind’s flight come, glorified, ye two celeStial Priests of 
man : 
Come ye to this our sacrifice. 


8°Tla, Sarasvati, Mahi, three Goddesges who bring us weal, 
Be seated harm!ess on the grass. 


9 Atri: tho famous Rishi, ancsstor of Vasugruta the Rishi or seer 
of this hymn. ) ) 


o 9 


Aptis i is the collective name vat the Gods and deified objects addrea- 
sad jn tie hymn, Sea I, 13-142; 188; 17 3; LTT. 4, 74 Thon ae 
@3 woul}: the oe or sacred a ASS, oni es hiol the,Gody are to sit, i 
addressed. 5 Doors Divine: of the satrificial hall,etypes of ie 
portals af the Bast See I. 188 5. 6 Llernal Law: \law-ordained 
Sacrifice. 7 Two celestial Priests : sea I 13. 8 


472 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR V. 


9 Rich ia all plenty, Tvashtar, come auspicious of thine own 
accord : 
Help us in every sacrifice. 
10 Vauaspati, wherever thou knowest the Gods’ miyatsnions names, 
Send our oblations hitherward, 
11 To Agni and to Varuna, Indra, the Maruts, and the Gods, 
With Svaha be oblation brought, 


HYMN VI. Agni. 
I vitue Agni that good Lord, the home to which the kine 


return 
Whom fl-et-foot coursers seek as home, and strong enduring 
steeds as hume Bring food to those who sing thy praise. 


2 ’Tis Agni whom we laud as good, to whom the milch-kine 
come In herds, 
To whim the chargers swift of foot,” to whom our well-born 
princes come. Bring food to those who sing thy praise, 
3 Agni the Ged of all mankind, gives, verily, a steed to man. 
Agni gives precious gear for wealth, treasure he gives when 
~ he is pleased. Bring food to those who sing thy praise. 
4 God, Agni, we will kindle thee, rich in thy spiendour, fading 
not, 
So that this glurious fucl may send forth by day its Hight for 
thee. Bring food vo those who sing thy praise. 
5 To thee the splendid, Lord of flame, bright, wondrous, Prince 
of men, is broaght 
Oblation with the holy verse, O Agni, bearer of our gifts. 
Bring food to those wh> sing thy praise. 
6 These Agnis ln the seats of fire nourish each thing most 
excellent 
They give delight, they spread abroad, they move themselves 
continually, Bring food to those who sing thy praise. 


7 Agni, these brillant flames uf thine wax like strong chargérs 
mightily, i 


10 Vanaspati : th. sacrificial stake, regarded as a formof Agni. 
11 Swdh@; Hail! Glory !is here an Apri, as a personification of Agni, 
See T. Y3. 12. 

1 Strong endurino steads > or constant worshippers, according to 
S4vana:and this interpretation is supported by stanzas 2, which is a 
slichtle-varied Tepetition of this stanza. 6 Jhase A: zuis : the original 
flames of Agni’ manifested in the three fire-altars, each tire being re- 
garded a2 an independent representative of Agni, 


; a ae 4 . > 
HYMN 1) THE RIGVEDA. 473 
_ Who with the treadings of their hoofs ‘g0 swiftly to the stalls 

of kine. Bring food to those who sing thy. praise, 
8 To us who laud thee, Agni, bring fresh fuod and safe and 
happy homes. | . : 
May we who have sung hymns to thee have thee for envoy 
in each heuse. Bring fvod to those who sing thy praise. 
9 Thou, brilliant God, within thy mvuth warmest both ladles 
e of th: oil ; e 
So fill us also, in our hymns, abundantly, O» Lord of Strength, 
Bring food to those who sing thy praise, 
10 Thus Agni have we duly served with sacrifices and with hymns 
So may he give us whit we crave, store of brave sons and 
fleet-foot steeds, Bring fuod to those who sing thy praise. 


HYMN VII, rr Agni. 


Orrtr to Agni, O my friends, your saemly food, your.seemly 
praise ’ : 
To him supremest o'er the folk, the Son of Strength, the 
mighty Lord : | 
2 H mn whose presence, when they meet in full agsembly, men 
rEjOICe | 
Even him whom worthy ones inflame, and living creatires 
bring to life. 
3 When we present to him the food and sacrificial gifts of men, 
He by the might of splendour grasps the holy Ordinance’s rein. 
4 He gives a signal in tha night even tushim who is afar, 
When begthe Eright, uuchanged by eld, consumes the sovrans 
ot the wood, P 
6 He in whose service on the ways they offer up their drops 


of sweat, 
Og him as their high kin have they mounted, as ridges on 


the earth, 


1 To the stalls of kine: the flames of Avni who longs for oblations 
of milk and butter are compared to the hovees of rfiders who seize the 
cattle of their enefaies. e me, A 

The Rishi of this and of thefullowing hymn ie said ta he Ieha of 
the family of Atri But ths nama snpears to have Deen fdérmed from 
the word tsham (food) in stanzsel, or dg4th in stanza» 10, and not to be 
the name of a real person 3 Grasps the holy Ordinance’s Bin : nae 
sues the direction of the ssorifice ae inveker of the Gods &nd conveyer 
of men’s oblations. 5 On the ways : in the course of sacrtfice ; The 
toil of the ministering priest. is often regarded as their offering to the 
Gode, On him : the mesning of this. - 


61 


aie THE HYMNS OF [BOOR V. 


6 Whom, sought of many, mortal man hath found to be the 
Stay of all; 
He who gives flavour to our food, the home of every man that 
lives. 
7 Even as a herd that crops the grass he shears the field and 
wilderness, 
With flashing teeth and beard of gold, deft with his unabat- 
.ed might, 
8 For him, to whom, bright as an axe he, as to Atri, hath flashed 
forth, 
Hath the well-bearing Mother borne, producing when her time 
is come. 
9 Agni to whom the oil is shed by him thou lovest to support, 


Bestow upon these mortals fame and splendour and intelli- 
gence, 
10 Such zcal hath he, resistless one : he gained tho cattle given 
by thee, 
Agn:, may Atri oversome the Dasyus who bestow no gifts, 
subdae the men who give no food, 


HYMN VIII. Agni. 


O Agni urged to strength, the men of old who loved the Law 
enkindled thee Ancient, for their aid, 

Thee very bright, and holy, nourisher of all, most excellent, 
‘the Friend and master of the home. 


2 Thee, Agni. men have stablished as their guest of old, as 
\.aster of the household, thee, with bair of flame ; 
High-bannered, multiform, distributer of wealth, kind helper, 
good protector, drier of the floods, 
3 The tribes of men praise thee, Agni, who knowest well burnt 
offerings, the Discerner, lavishest of wealth, 


line is obscure. _ Professor Wilson, following Sayana, translates: ‘and 
( the drops ) mount upon the fire as if they were its own numerous 
offspring as (boys ride) upon the back (of a father). ’ The meaning may 
be that the drops mount upon Agni, who bears the oblation to heaven as 
the back or ridges (0: the hills) raise thumselves above the ground. My 
version, which follows Professor Ludwig’s explanation, is only conjectu- 
ral. . 8 Thie stanza alse is obscure. The well-bearing Mother is the 
lower fire stick which at the proper time produces the spark for the 
rian to whom Agni, keen and bright as tn axe, manifested as he was to 
the anosént sage Atri, the ancestor of the Rishi of the hymn, 10 The 
lagb Pada is Siffcult. Professor Wilson, after Sayana, renders ib . ‘may 
Isha overcorve (hostile) mon’ But ishah is evidently ‘food,’ and not the 
name of aman, | 


HYMN 9.) THE RIGVEDA. 475 


. Dwelling in secret, Blest One! visible to all, !aud roaring,“ 
skilled in worship, glorified with oil. 
4 Ever to thee, O Agni, as exceeding strong have we drawn 
nigh with songs and reverence singing hymns. 
So be thou pleased with us, Angiras ! as a God enkindled by 
the noble with man’s goodly light. 


8 Thou, Agni! multiform, God whe art lauded much! givest in 
* every house subsistence as of old. ‘ 
Thou rulest by thy might o’er food of many asort : that light 
of thine when blazing may not be opposed, 
6 The Gods, Most Youthful Agni, have made thee, inflamed, the 
bearer of oblations and the messenger. 
Thee, widely-reaching, homed in sacred oil, invoked, effalgent, 
have they made the Eye that stirs the thought. © 
7 Men seeking joy have lit+the worshipped from o fuld, O Agni, 
with good fuel and with sacred oil. ° 
So thou, bedewed and waxing mighty by the plants, spreadest 
thyself abroad over the realms of earth. 


HYMN IX. . Agni. 


BEagiInG oblations mortal men, O Agni, worship thee the God. 
I deem thee Jatavedus: bear our offerings, thou, unceasingly, 


2 In the man’s home who offars gifts, where grass is trin?med, 
Agni is Priest, 
To whom all sacxifices come and strengtenings that the win 
renown, ° 


3 Whom, as an infant newly-born, the kindling-sticks have 
brought to life, 


Sustainer of the tribes of men,skilled in well-ordered sacrifice. 
4 Ye&, very bard art thou to grasp, like offspring of the wrig- 
gling snakes, 


When thou consumest pany woods, like an ox, Agni, in the 
mead. : ° 


3 Dwelling in secret : latent in the fire- sticks, or dwelling in men’s 
@ hearts. 4. The noble : the patron of the sacrifice. 7 Bedouwed : 
anointed with clarified butter. By the plants which supply "fuel, 


™~ 


1 J degm thee Jatavedas : I hojd thee to be the knower ofall created | 
beinzs. 2 Like an ox ; ag an ox eate up the grass. 


4716 THE HYMNS OF — (BOOK V, 


4 
& Whose flames, when thon art sending forth the smoke, com- 
pletely reach the mark, 
When ‘T'rita in the height of heaven, like as a smelter fanoeth 
thee, e’en as a smelter sha: peneth thee. 
6 O Agni, by thy succour aud by Mitru’s friendly furtherance, 
May we, averting hate, aubdue the wickedness of mortal men. 
7 O Agni,, to our heroes bring such riches,thou victorious God. 
May he protect and nourish us, and belp in gaining strength: 
be thou near us in fight for our success, 


HYMN X, Agni. 

Brixe us most mighty splendour thou, / gni, resistless on 
thy way. 

With overflowing store of wealth mark out for us a path to 
strength, 

2 Ours art thou, wondrous Agni, by wisdom and bounteousness 
uf power. 


The might of Asuras rests on thee.l.ke Mitra worshipful in act, 
3 Agni, increase oar means of life, increase the house and home 
of these, 
The men, the princes who have won great riches through our 
hymns of praise. 
4 Bright Agni, they who deck their songs for thee have horses 
as their meed. 
The men are mighty in their might, they whose high laud, as 
that of heaven, awakes thee of its own accord, 


5 O Agni, those resplendent flames of thine go valorously forth, 
Like lightnings flaching round us, like a rattling car that 
seeks the spoil, 


6 Now, Agni, come to succour us ; let priests draw nigh to offer 
gifts ; 
And let the patrons of our rites subdue all regions of the earth, 
7 Bring tu us, Agni, Angiras, landed of old and lauded nowy, 
Invi ker ! wealth to cuell the strong, that singers may extol 
thee. Be near ua in fight for our success. 


5 Tria: here ‘perhaps Vayu, tho Wind. According to Sayana, 
Trita here means Agni himself diffused in the three regions. 


a Awdkes thee of tts own acoord : the mexning of this last Pada ig 
fe doubtful. Siyana disconnects bddiati tmdnd from the preceding 
words. and supplies the name of the Rishi Gaya : Gaya of his own accord 
arouree thee °6 Subdue all regions of the earth ; un allusion to the 
digvijaya. “universal conquert, or subjugation of all neighbouring 
princes. Sf&yansa explains Gch alternatively ae ‘wishes’ ; ‘compass all 
their desires.’ . 


BYMN 12) THE RIGVEDA. 477 
HYMN XI. Agni. 


Tat watchful Guardian of the people hath been born, Agni, 
the very strong, fur fresh prosperity. 
With oil upon his face, with high heaven- -touching flame, he 
shineth splendidly, pure, for the Bharatas. 
2 Ensign of sacrifice, the earliest Hous hold- Priest, the men have 
kindled Agni in his threefo'd seat, 
” With Indra and the Gods together on the grass let the wise. 
Priest sit to complete the sacrifice. 
3 Pure, unadorned, from thy two Mothers art thou been : thou 
camest from Vivasvan as a charming Sage, 
With oil they strengthened thee, O Agni, worshipped God ; 
thy banner was the sm: ke that mounted to the sky, 
4 May Agni graciously come to our sacrifice, The men bear 
Agni here aod there én every hoase, 
He hath become an envoy. bearer of ‘our gifts ; electing Agni, 
men choose one exceeding Wise, 
5 For thee, O Agni. is this sweetest prayer of mine: dear to 
thy spirit be this product of my thought. . 
As great streams fill the river 80 our songs of praise fill thee, 
and make thee yet more mighty in thy strength. : 
6 O Agni, the Angirases discovered thve what time thou ‘layest 
hidde mn, fleeing back frum wood to wood. 


Thou by attrition art préduced as conquering might, and men, 
O Angiras, call thee the Son of Strength. 


= AYMN XII, Agni. 
To Agni, lofty Asura, meet for worship, Steer ofeternal Law, 
my prayer I offer ; 
I bring my song directed to the Mighty like pure oil for his 
* mouth at sacrifices. 
2 Mark the Law, thou who knowést, yea, observe it: send forth - 
the fall streams of eternal Order, 


I use no sorgery with might or falashood ; 3 the sacred Law of 
the Red Steer I follow, . 


1 For the Bharatae : for the sake of the priests, according to Sayana 
and Muhidhara. 2 In hte threefold seat: ‘the three ‘fre-altare. 
3 Thy too Mothers: the fireetioks. Vevasvan: the pacrifcer, eccording . 
to Sayana. But see Index. 4 Here and there or in diferent placee,; 
from one alter to another. 6 Thou ie hidden: alluding, to .the 

flight and capture of Agni. See I. 65..4 


478 THE HYMNS OP [BOOR V. 


3 How hast thou, follower of the Law eternal, become the. 
knower of a new song, Agni ? 
The God, the Guardian of the seasoas, knows me: th2 Lord 
of him who won this wealth I know not. 


4 Who, Agni, in a!liance with thy foeman, what splendid help- 
ers won for them their riches ? 

Agni, who guard the dwelling-place of falsehood ? Who are 

protectors of the speech of liars ? 


5 Agni, those friends of thine have turned them from thee: 
gracious of old, they have hecome ungracious, 
They have deceived themselves by their own speeches, uttering 
wicked words against the righteous, 
6 He who pays sacrifice to thee with homage, O Agni, keeps the 
Red Steer’s Law eternal ; 
Wide is his dwelling. May the noble offspring of Nahusha who 
wandered forth come hither, 
i KYMN XIII. Agni, 
Wira songs of praise we vall on thee, we kindle thee with son- 
gs of praise, 
Agni, with songs of praise, for help. 
2 Eager for wealth, we meditate Agni’s effectual praise to-day, 
Praise of the God who touches heaven. 
3 May. Agni, Priest among mankind, take pleasure in our songs 
of praise, 
And worship the Celestial Folk. 
4 Thou, Agai, artspread widely forth, Priest dear and excellent > 
through thee. q 
Men maks the sacrifice complete. 


5 Singers exalé thee, Agni, well lauded, best giver of our strength: 
So grant thou us heroic might. 
6 Thou, Agni, as the felly rings the spokes, encompassest the 
Gods. 
I yearn for bounty man!fold.. 


3 Knower of a new sony : according to Professor Ludwig, the new 
song is one in which forthe first time we Have been obliged to remind 
thee of thy duties as the champion of efernal Law, whereas formerly 
we had only thanks and prayers to offer thee. Zhe Guardian of the 
seasons ¢ thous Agni, who, as the Sun, regulatest the seasons, knowest 
me ;, but 1 know nothing of the God who has befriended my wealthy 
enemy. © 4 Who are the Gods who have enriched the wicked who 
hate both thee &nd me ? 6 The meaning of the second line ig obs- 
cure. Professér Wilson, following Sayana, translates : ‘and may a virt- 
uous successor of the man who diligently worship: thee come in his p!ace,” 
I adopt Professor Ludwig's rend sriag ' 


AYMN 15.) THE RIGVEDA, 479 


selina the Immortal, wake Agni with song of praise : 
may he bear our oblations to the Gods, 
2 Athigh solemnities mortal men glorify him the Immortal, best 
At sacrifice among mankind. 


3 That he may bear sheir gifts to heaven, all glorify him Agni, 
God, 
With ladle that distilleth oil. 


4 Agni shone bright when born, with light ‘killing. the oe 
‘and the dark : 
He found the Kine, the Floods, the Sun. 
5D Serve Agni, God adorable, the Sage whose back is balmed with 
oil : 
Let him approach, and hear my call. 
6 They have exalted Agni,God of all mankind, wilh oil ang hymns 
Of praise, devout andeeloquent. ; 


FPYMN XV. : Agni, 


To him, the far-renowned, wise Ordainer, ancient and glori- 
ous, a song I offer. 

Enthroned in oil, the Asura, bliss-civer, is Agni, firof support 
of noble riches: 


2 By holy Law they kept supporting Order by help of sacyifice, 
in loftiest heaven, — 
They who attained with born men to the unborn, men seated 
on that stay, heaven's firm sustalner, 


3 Averting woe, they labour hard to bring him, the ancient, 
plenteous food as power resistless. 
May he, born newly, conquer his assailants : round him they 
stand as round aun angry lion, ' 
4 When, like a mother, spreading forth to nourish, to cherish 
and regard each man that liveth, — 
Censuming all the strength that thou hast gotten, thou wander- 
est round, thyself in varied fashion. 


The Rishi of Hymn XV. ,is said to be Dharuna of the family of 


Atri, but thie name is evidently taken from the words dhavunth (firm) 
in stanza I, and dharinam in stanza 2 2 They who Attained : our 
ancestors, or the Fathers, who with, or bv the aid of, the priests, were 
raised to seats in the firmament. 4 Thou wanderest round : seeking 
fresh wood to burn in order to restore “thy exhausted atrength, 


480 THE HYMNS OF [ROOK ¥. 


5 May strength preserve the compass of thy vigour, God ! that 
broad stream of thine that beareth riches. 
Thoa, like a thief who keeps his refuge secret, hast ho)pen 
Atri to great wealth, by teaching. 


HYMN XVI. Agni. 
GREAT power is in the beam of light, sing praise to Agni, to 
the God. 
Whom ren have set ie foremost place like Mitra with their 
enlogies : 


2 He by the splendour of his arms is Priest of every able man, 
Agni c6nveys oblation straight, and deals, as Bhaga deals, his 
boons, 


3 All rests upon the laud and love of himtherich, high-flaming 
God, : 
On when, Joud-roaring, men have laid great strength as on @ 
faithful fri-nd 
4 So, Agni, be the Friend of these with liberal gift of hero 
strength. 


Yea, Heaven and Earth have not surpassed this Youthful One 
in vlorious fame. 
§ O Agni. quickly come to us, and, glorified, bring precious 
wealth 
Se.we and these our princes will assemble for the good of all, 
Be near in fight to prosper us. 
HYMN XVII. Agni, 


Gop. may a mortal call the Strong hither, with solemn rites, 
to aid, 
A man call Agni to protect when sacrifiee is well prepared, 
2 Near him thou seemest mightier still in native glory, set to 
h ld. 
Apart you flame-hued vault of heaven, lovely beyond the 
_ thought of man, 


5 May strength preserve: mayest thou sverfi nd fresh fuel or strength 
enlIng food. Thin, like a thief, ‘Tais may, perhaps, imply that 
the wealth hestowee upon the Rewhi is deposited in a secuce receptacla, 
like the hidden booty of a thief, but the whole Sdkta is obscurely wor- 


ded “—Wilfon, ‘ seeds 
1 Like Mitra : or as a friend, 2 Enary abla man: who has 
means, wil) and skill ae 8 wacrifioer. 4 Of these insti'vtors of the 


sacrifice. This Yonthrul Ouse: Agni. The exact meaning of the second 
line is somewhat uncertain, 


1 The Stro9; Agni. 2 Near him: Snrya. 


HYMN 18.) THE RIGVEDA. 48) 


3 Yea, this is by the light of him whom powerful song hath 
bound to act, 

Whose beams of splendour flash on high as though they sprarg 
from heavenly seed. 

4 Wealth loads the Wonder-Worker’s car through his, the very 

wise One’s power. 

Then, meet to be invoked among all tribes, is Agni glorified. 

5 Now, too, the princes shall obtain excellent.riches by oar. lips. 
Protect us for our welfare: lead thy succour, O thou Son of 


Strength, Be near in fight to prosper us,, ’ 
HYMN XVII, Agui, 
At down let Agni, much-loved guest of the house, be glori- 
fied ; | 


Immortal whodelights ineall oblations brought by mortal men. 


2 For Dvita who receives through wealth of nativd strength 
maimed offerings, ° ‘ 
Thy praiser even gains at once the Sonfa-drops, Immortal Gods! 
3 Nobles, with song I call that car of yours that shines with 
lengthened life, 
For, God who givest steeds! that car hither and thither goes 
unharmed. ° 


eS nee ON ro eed nt Ee oe Pe ey 

3 This v8 by the light of him: this Sarya, or the Sun, shings only 
by the light of Agni. 4 When the wonder-working Sun brings us 
wealth, the merit is due to Agni—Ludwig. According to Sayana, the 
meaning is, a8 given by Professor Wilson: ‘ By tho worship of bim 
who is pleasing of aspect the provident (heap) wealth in their cars,’ 
The absence of & vetb makes the exact meaning uncertain. 


The bymn is ascribed to a Rishi Dvita of the family ef Atri, but 
the name snemsa to be borrowed from the Dvita of stanza 2. 2 The 
meaning of this stanza is obscure, According to Sayana, Dvita is the 
Kis'si of the hymn, and the first line is rendered by Professor Wilson : 
‘Be (willing to make) a grant of thine own wtrength to Dwiba, the 
bearer of the pure libation.” But m*ktdvfhase must mean the bearer 
or receiver of a maimed or imperfect Oblation, and Dvita then would 
be the mythical personage of that name to whom, together with Trita, 
it was aactoueey to wish away and ocontign any, threatened calamity 
or unpleagantnese (To Trita an? to Dvita, Dawn ! bear thou away the 
evil dresam—R. V. X. 47. 16) Io, the present case, aby pessibl¢,imper- 
fection in the offering mada, to Agni is previously removed by a liba- 
tion to Dvita. See Professor Ludwig's Commerftary, Part d. 338. M. 
Bergaigne (Religion Vedique, II. 327) gives a differemt explanation. 
3 Nobles: wealthy ingtitutors of the sacrifice ; Maghavans. That car 
of yours: apparently Agni, who carries oblations to the Gods, 


6? ° ° 


482 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK V. 


4 They who have varied ways of thought, who guard the lauds 
within their lips, 
And strew the grass before the light, have decked themselves 


with high renown. 


5 Immortal Agni, give the chiefs, heroes who institute the rite, 
Ieroes’ illustrious, lofty fame, who at the synod met for praise 
presented me with fifty steeds, 


r 


IIYMN XIX, Agni, 


One state begets another state: husk is made visible from husk: 
Within his Mother’s side he speaks. 


2 Discerning, have they offered gifts : they guard the strength 
that never wastes, 
To a strong fort have they pressed in, 


3 Svaitreva’s people, all his men, have gloriously increased in 
might. 
A gold chain Brthadvktha wears, as, through this Soma, scek- 
ing spoil, 
4 1 bring, as ’twere, the longed-for milk, the dear milk of tie 
Sister-Pair. 
Like"to a, caldron filled with food is he, unconquered, con- 
quering all, 


4°Varied ways of thought: manifold modes of showing their devo- 
tion. Guard the /ands: perpetuate hymns of praise by frequent repo- 
rition. Before the livht: according to S§yana, svdrnare means, ‘in the 
sacrifice which leads man to heaven.’ Professor Grassmann renders 
tho word by ‘ Dem Glanze.berrn,’ ‘for the Lord of Light. 


1 Wé know only outward forms and circumstances, and the real 
nature of the God is concealed from us. ‘The God speaks only in the 
bosom of his mother,—-Ludwig, Sadyana gives a totally different inter- 
pratation, the word vavri (husk or covering) in the firet stanza being 
taken as the name of the Rishi of the hymn 2 Discerning : per- 
haps, as Prof Ludwig suggests, distinguishing the essence from thy 
appearance. The strong fort which the worshippers bave entered and 
settled in 18, perhape, their religious knowledge. 3 Svaitreya’s 
people have conquered, and their priest Brihaduktha has been reward- 
ed for his sarvices with « chain of gold, won for him by the Soma-liba- 
tions which .he Kas offered.—Ludwig. Svaitreya (con of Svitra. See 
I. 33. 14) and Brinaduktha are, apparvntly, propor names, Sdyana 
explains the former “as Agni or lightning ‘abiding in the white firma- 
ment,’ and the latter as ‘zealously or highly praising.’ 4 The dear 
marth of the Stister-Patr: the Soma dear to Heaven and Earth. ‘The 
exact meaning of the line is uncertain, 


HY MN 12.) THE RIGVEDA. 483 


§ Beam of light, come to us in sportive fashion, finding thyself 
elose to the wind that fans thee, 
hese flames of his are wasting flames, like arrows keen-pointed, 
sharpened, on his breast. 


ILYMN XX. Agni. 


Aant, best winner of the spoil, cause ps to praise before the 
Gods, ; ° 
As our asscciate meet for Jauds, wealth which thou verily 

dcemest wealth. 


2 Agni, the great who ward not off the anger of thy power and 


“might. 
Stir up the wrath and hatred due toone who holds an alien 
creed. 
3 Thee, Agni would we chogse as Priest, the perfecter of strength 
and skill ; 
We who bring sacred foad invoke With song thee Chicf at 
holy rites. e 


4 Ilere as is necdful for thine aid we toil, O Conqueror, day 
« by day, 
For wealth, for Law. May we rejoice, Most Wise One! ! at the 
feast, with kine, rejoice, with heroes, at the feast. ° 


‘ HYMN XXII. Agni. 


WE stablish thee as Manus used, as Manus used we kindle thee. 

Like Manus, for the\pious man, Angiras, Agni , worship Gods. 

2 For well, O Agni, art thou pleased when thou art kindled 
mid mankind. 


Straight go the ‘ladles unto thee, ties high-born ; God whose 
food is oil. 


& This stanza is very diflicult, aud like, much of the rest of the 
hymn, can be only conjecturally tranelated. 


The Rishis of the hymn are raid to be certain members of the 
family of Apri gallec Prayavats, that 18, brifigers or possessore of 
sacread food, @ word which occurs in stanza 3. % Who holds an olien 
creed : who follows other than Vedic observanees. 4 For Law: to 
to maintain the holy law, and especiaily the eternally-Ordaimed sdorifice. 
With kine : possessing plenty of cattle. With heroes ¢ with brave sons 
about us. F . 

The hymn is ascribed to a Rishi Sasa, this name beifig taken from 
the word sasasya in the last Pada of stanza 4. 1 Manwe: another 
form of Manu. : 


484 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK V. 


3 Thee have all Gods of one accord established as their mes- 
senger. 
Serving at sacrifices men adore ‘thee as God, O Sage. 


4 Let mortal man adore your God, Agni, with worship due to 
Gods, 
Shine forth enkindled, Radiant One. Sit in the chamber of 
the Law, sit in the chamber of the food. 


HYMN XXII. Agni. 
Lizt Atri, Visvasdman ! sing to him of purifying light, 


Who must be: praised in holy rites, the Priest most welcome 
in the house. 


2 Set Jatavedas in his place, Agni the God and Minister, 
Let sacrifice proceed to-day duly, comprising all the Gods. 
3 All mortals come to thee for aid, the God of most observant 
mind. 
Of thiae excelling favoar we bethink us as we long for its 


4 Mark with attention this our speech, O Agni, thou victorious 
One. 
Thee, Strong-jawed ! as the homestead’s Lord, the Atris with 
their lauds exalt, the Atris beautify with songs. 
: HYMN XXIII. Agni. 
By thy fair splendour’s mighty power, O Agni, bring victori- 
ous wealth, 
Wealth that o’ercometh all mankind, and near us, conquereth 
in fight, 
2 Victorious Agni, bring to us the wealth that vanquisheth in 
war 3; 


Nf 
For thou art wonderful and true, giver of strenzth in herds 
of kine. 


3 For all the folk wlth one accord, whose sacred grass is trim- 
med and strewn, 


Invite thee to their worship-halls,as a dear Priest, for choicest 
wealth. 


4 The chamber cf the Law : the sacrificial chamber or hall. Of the 
Jood: or, as Profeasor Roth explains it, where the sacred grass is 
strewn ; according to Siyana, of Saga, the supposed Rishi of the hymn. 


The Rishi is ‘Vigvacdman, of the family of Atri. 
a eeeesaengeenareeatt 
The Rivhi is said to be Dyamoa Visvacharshani—both these names 


being words occurring inthe hymn. 1 By they fatr splendour's mighty 
power : the words of the text are dyumnasya prasdha. 


AYMN 25.) THE RIGVEDA. 485 


4 For he, the God of all men, hath gotten him might that quel- 
leth foes. 
O Agni, in these homes shine forth, bright God ! for our pro- 
sperity, shine, Purifier ! splendidly. 


HXMN XXIV, Agni. 


O Acnt, be our nearest Friend, be thou a kind deliverer and a 
gracious Friend. 


2 Excellent Agni, come thon nigh to us, and give us wealth most 
splendidly renowned. 


3 So hear us, listen to this call of ours, and "keep us far from 
every sinful man. 

4 To thee then, O Most Bright, O Radiant God, we come with 
prayer for happiness for our friends. 


HYMN XXV. Agni. 


I witt sing near, for grace, ial God Agni, for hé is good to 
us. 

Son of the Brands, may he give gifts, and, righteous, save us 
from the foe. 

For he is true, whom men of o!d enkindled, and the Gods 
themselves, 

The Priest with the delicious tongue, rich wivh the light of 
glorious beams. 

3 With wisdom that surpasseth all, with gracious wil} most 
excellent, 


O Agni worthy of our ohvice shino wealth on us through 
hymas of praise, 


4 Agni is rings for he extends to morals and to Gods alike, 


Agni is bearer of our gifts. Worship ye Agni with your 
thoughts. 
) Agni gives to the worshipper a son, the best, of mightiest 
fame, 


Of deep devotion, ne er subdued, bringer of glory to his sire, 


4 The God of all men: visedcharshanih, common epithet of Agni, 

The legand connected with thie hymn is disuussed by Prof. Max 
Muller in Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, New Series, “ 441 f. 
See Lanman’s Sanskrit Reader, yp. 368. 

The Rishis of the hymn are membere of the family of “Atri called 
Vasiiyus ( seekers of riches ). Cf. stanza 9. L I will sing near: [ 
will invite and bring near with my song. 2 For he sa true ; the 
faithful rewarder of his worshippers. 


486 THE AYMNS OF (BOOK V. 


6 Agni bestows the hero-lord who conquers with the men in 
hight. , 
Agni bestows the fleet-foot steed, the victor never overcome, 
7 The wightiest song is Agni’s : shine on high, thon who art 
rich in light. 
Like the Chief Consort of a King, riehes and strength proceed 
from thee. * 
8 Resplendent ara thy rays of light; loud is thy voice like 
pressing-stones. 
Yea, of’ itself thy thunder goes forth like the roaring of the 


heaven. 


9 Thus, seeking riches, hayé we paid homage to Agni Conqueror 
May he, most wise, as with aship, carry us over all our foes. 


HYMN XXVI. Agni, 
O Acnt, Holy and Divine, with splendour and thy pleasant 


tongtie. 


Bring hither and adore the Gods. 


2 We pray thee, thou who droppest oil, bright-rayed ! who look- 
est on the Sun, 
Bring the Gods hither to the feast. 


3 We have enkindled thee, O Sage, bright caller of the Gods to 
feast, 
O Agni, great in sacrifice. 


40 Agni, come with all the Gods, come to our sacrificial gift : 
We choose thee as Invoking Priest. 


4) Bring, Agni, to the worshipper who pours the juiec, heroic 
strenyth : , 
Sit with the Gods upon the grass. 
6 Victor of thousands, Agni, thou, enkindled, cherishest the laws 
Laud-worthy, envoy of the Gods. 


7 Set Agni Jatavedas down, the bearer of our sacred gifts, 
Most Youthful, God and Minister. 


‘ ee eee 


F 


o 


ae nn ne nr 


7 “The exact meaning of the stanza is uncertain. Professor Wilson, 
following Sayana, paraphrases the first line: ‘That (praise) which best 
conveys (Our Veneration is due) to Agni: affluent insplendour, grant us, 
(Agui), great (wealth).’ ' Like the Chies Consort of a King : as the 
chief queen proceeds from her home in royal state, Professor Ludwig 
translaves mMéhishiva by ‘as a strong cow,’ but gives in his Commentary 
the alternative rendéring ‘as a king's wife’ Sayana makes mdhishi an 
adjectiva rgreeing with rayth, and. says that iva, like, is pleonastic. 
I have followed Mahidhara. 8 Loud ts thy voice: the meaning of 
this half-lineés not certain. 

6 Chertshest the laws: especially religious ordinances, sacrifices, 


AYMN 28) THE RIGVEDA. 487 


8 Duly proceed our sacrifice, comprising all the Gods, to-day : 
*Strew holy grass to be their seat. 

9 So may the Marats sit thereon, the Asvins, Mitra, Varuna : 
The Gods with all their company 


HYMN XXVII. Agni, 


Tue Godlike hero, famousest of nobles, hath granted me two 
oxen With a wagon. 

Trivrishan’ s son Tryaruna hath distingnished himself, Vafsva- 
nara Agni! with ten thousands. e 


2 Protest Tryaruna, as thou art waxing strong and art highly 
praised, Vaisvanara Agni! 
Who granteth me a hundred kine’ and twenty, and two bay 
horses, good at draught, and harnessed. 


3 So Trasadasyu served thee, God Most Youthful, aun thy 
favour for the ninth time, Agent ; 
Tryaruna who with attentive ‘spirit accepteth many : a song 
from me the mighty. ° 
4 He who declares he wish to me, to Astamedha, to the Prince, 
Pays him who with his verse secks gain, gives power tu him 
~* who keeps the Law. 
9 From whom a hundred oxen, all of speckled hue, delight my 
heart, 
The gifts of Asvamedha, !ike thrice-mingled draughts of 
Soma purce, 
6 To Asvamedha who bestows a hundred gifts grant hero power, 
O Indra-Agni! loftv rule like the unwasting Sun in heaven. 
HYMN XXVUIL. "Agni. 
Aent inflamed hath sent to heaven hise!ustre: he shines forth 
widely furning unto Morning. 


Eastward the ladle goes that brings all blessing, praising the 
Gods with homage and oblation. 


~The Rishis are said tu be Tryaruna, Trasadasy, ; and tM 6vame dha: 
or Atri alone. The metre is Trishtup in stanges 1,2, 3 ard Auush. 


=e 


tup in 4,5, 6; and, correspondingly, theghymn 1 acd up of two 
separate and independent eulogies of munificent prine.s 3° Tvasa- 
dasywu : Terror of Dasyus ; . apparently, as Ludwig .ugge-ts, an honorary 
name or title of nqyeral princes? Accepteth, rewards wi hi gif... 4. 


The stanza is difficult Asvamedjia apparently say’ thas the man who 
requests him to institute a sacrifice is by so doing thy enricher of the 


priests. 9 TLhrice-mingled : ntixed with milk, gurds, dnd patched 
grain, 7 e e 

The hymn is ascribed to a supposed Visvavira, a lady of the family 
ef Atri. 1 The ladle: vhe sacrificial ladle with which the oil or 


clarified butter is taken up and poured out. The text has the faminine 
adjective ghritacht only, juhd being euudorstoud. That brings all 


488 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR V. 


2 Enkindled, thou art King of the immortal world : him who 
brings offerings thou attendest for his weal, 
He whom thou urgest on makes all possessions his: he sets 
before thee, Agni, gifts that guests may claim. 


3 Show thyself strong for mighty bliss, Q Agni, most excellent 
be thine effulgent splendoars. 
Make easy to maintain our household lordship, and overcome 
the might of those who hate us. 


4 Thy glory, Agni, I adore, kindled, exalted in thy strength. 
A Steer of brivliant splendour, thou art lighted well at sacred 
rites. 


5 Agni, invoked and kinaled, serve the Gods, thou skilled in 
sacrifiee : 
For thou art bearer of our gifts. 


6 Invcke and worship Agni while tue sacrificial rite proceeds : 
For Offering-bearer choose ye him, 


HYMN XXIX. Agni, 


Man’s worship of the Gods hath three great lustres, and three 
cetestial lights have they established, 

ine Marwms gifted with pure strength adore thee, for thou, 

- O Indra, art their sapient Rishi. 


2 What time the Maruts sang their song to Indra, joyous when 
he had drunk of Soma juices, 
He zrasped his thunderbolt to slay the Dragon, and loosed, 
that they might flow, the youthful Waters. 


3 And, O ye Brahmans, Maruts, so may Indva drink drughts of 
this my carefully pressed Soma ; 
For this ublation found for man the ca%tle, and Indra, having 
quaffed it, slew the Dragon. 


blessing : Siyans takes visrdndrd_ ta be the name of a woman Praising 
the Gods: said figuratively of the ladle held by the priest who praises, 
3 Make easy to maintain: or, to follow Sayana: Perfect the well-knit 
bund of wite and husoand. | ) 

1 Three great lustres : this is Sg yana’s explanation of the trydryamd 
of the text; Professor Ludwig suggosts that human relationships, such 
aa Maghavans or nobles, priests, and visas or the people, may be in- 
tended. The three celestial lights: the Sun, the Wind, the Fire, accord- 
ing to‘Sayaga. They: the Maruts, says Sayana. ishi: here meaning 
beholder, according to Sayana. 3 Brahmans: priests, Sayana 
explaing the word as meaning lpfty or mighty in thie passage. 


Lo 


4 Then heaven and earth he sundered and supported : wrapped 
» even in these he struck the Beast with terror 
So Indra forced the Engulfer to disgorgement, and slew the 
Danava panting against him, 
5 Thus all the Gods, O Maghavan, delivered to thee of their free 
will the draught of Soma ; 
When thou for Etasa didst cause to tarry the flying mares of 
Stirya racing forward. 
6 When Maghavan with the thunderbolt demolishede his nine- 
and-ninety castles all together, 
The Marats, where they met, glorified Indra: ye with the 
Trishtap hymn obstructed heavert. 
7 As friend to aid a friend, Agni dressed quickly three hundred 


buffaloes, even as he willed it. 
And Indra, from man’s gift, for Vritra’s slaughter, drank off 


at once three lakes of pressed-out Soma. 
8 When thou three hundréd buffaloes’ flesh hadst eaten, and 
drunk as Mayhavan, three lakes of Soma. 
All the Gods raised as ’twere s shout of triumph, to Indra 
‘e. praise because he slew the Dragon. 
9 What time ye came with strong steeds swiftly speeding, O 


Usana and Indra, to the dwelling, 
Thou camest thither conquering together with Kutsa and. the 


Gods ; thou slewest Sushna. 


AYMN 29) THE RIGVEDA. 489 


10 One car-wheel of the San thou rolledst forward, and one us 


settest free to move for Kutsa. ‘ 
Thou slewest noseless Dasyus with thy weapon, and in their 
home oerthrewest hostile speakers. 
11 The lands 6f Gauriviti made thee mighty : to Vidathin’s son, 
ag prey, thou gavest Pipru. 
Rijisvan drew thee into friendship, dressing the sacred food, 
and thou hast drunk his Soma. 


4 Yhe Beast: the demon Vritra. The Engulfer Vritra, who had 
swallowed the celsetia) watera. Whe Ddgvava » the son of Dann, Vritra, 
§ For Hinga: see IL. 19. 5, 6 Hrs nine-and ninety piantlaa: the 
aerial castles of Sambara, the demon of dronght. | Obstructed heaven: 
made the loud hymn strike the sky. 7 Three lakes: large vessels 
or tuba are probably intended, . 9 Usand: Inifa’e special friend. 
See Index. To the dwelling: of Kutaa. 10 One war-wheet :. 
eclipse of the sun appears to be referred to Moseless ethat is, the ae 
nosed barbarians, a-nisah ; or thé word may be, as Sdyaua expline it, 
an-dsah, 4. 4. mouthless, voiceless, unintelligibly epoaking, 1@ SHE Muir, 


Original Sanskeut Texts, IT, 377. 11 Gaurtoiti: the Kighi of the 
hymn. Vadathin’s son: Rijisvan, mentioned in Book I as a favourite 
of Indra. @ 


63 ° 


490 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK V. 


12 Navagvas and Dasagvas with libations of Soma juice sing 
hymns of praise to Indra. . 
Labouring at their task the men laid open the stall of Kine 
though firmly closed and fastened, 


‘13 How shall I serve thee, Maghavan, though knowing fall wel 
‘What hero deeds thou hast accomplished ? 
‘And the-fresh deeds which thou wilt do, Most Mighty ! these, 
otoo, will we tell forth in sacred synods. 


14 Resistless from -of old through hero courage, thou hast done 
all these many acts, ‘O India, 
What thou wilt doin bravery, Thander-wieldcr ! none is there 
who may hinder this thy prowess. 


15 Indra, accept the prayers which uow are offered, accept ihe 
new prayers, Mightiest! which we utter, 
Like fair and well-made robes, J, seeking riches, as a deft 
cfaftsman makes a car, have wrought them. 


HYMN XXX. Indra. 


WueEreE is that Hero? Who hath looked on Indra borne on 
light-rolling car by Tawny Coursers, 
Who, Thunderer, seeks with wealth the Soma-presser, and to 
his house goes, much-invoked, to aid him? 
21 have beheld his strong and secret dwelling, longing have 
sought the Foander’s habrtation. 
t*asked of others, and they said in answer, May we, awakened 
men, attain to Indra, 
3 Wé will tell, Indra, when we pour libation, what mighty deeds 
‘thou hast performed to please us, 
aLet him who knows not learn, who knows vhem listen : hither 
rides Maghavan with all his army. 
4 Indra, when bora, thow madest firm thy spirit: alone thou 
seekesat war to fight with many, 
With might thou clavest e’en the rock asunder, and fuundest 
out the stable of tae Milcb-kine, " 
% When thea wast boru supermest at a distance, bearing a name 
renowned in far-off regions, 


‘Since then e’entGods have been c fraid of Indra: he conquered 
all the floods which served the Dasa. 


12 Nevagdas and Dasagvas: priestly families counccted or ideuti- 
fird with the Augirases. ‘ 

2 Lehave behelu ‘meaning, perhaps, I have tried to behold, I have 
looked fur. « Zhe Founder's habitation : the dwelling-place of India whe 


established the world. 5 Whach served the Dasa: which were 
subject tv the dwmon Vritra. _ 


AY MN 50; THE RIGVEDA: 49r 


6 These blissful Maruts sing their psalm to praise thee, and'pour 
- to thee libation.of the Soma, 

Indra with wondrous powers subdued the: Dragon, the guilefui, 
lurker who beset the waters, 


7? Thou, Maghavan, from the first didst scatter foemen, speeding;. 
while joying in the milk, the Giver. 
There, seeking man’s prosperity, thou torest away the head: 
of Namuchi the Disa. 


8 Pounding the head of Namuchi the DAsa, me, £00, tion: madest: 
thine associate, Indra ! 
Yea, and the rolling stone that is in. heaven both worlds, as 
on a car, brought to the Maruts, ° 


9 Women for weapons hath the Dasa taken. What injary can: 
his feeble armies do me ? 
Well he distinguished hisetwo different voices, and Inds then, 
advanced to ‘fight the Dasyu: 
10: Divided From their calves the Caws went lowing around, on: 
every side, hithur and thither. 
These Indra re-united with his helpers, what time the. well- 
‘tw. pressed Soma made him joyful. 
11. What time the Somas mixed by Babhru cheered him, leud the 
Steer bellowed in his habitations. 
So Indra drank thereof, the Fort-destroyer a gave a 
guerdon, in return, of milcb kine. 


7 The giver : the offerer of: oblations. Byt the meaniag of-ddnam: 
is uncertain. Professor Ludwig translates it by ‘the splitting (thun- 
derbolt),’ and Sayana explains. it aa ‘tho assailane of the: Gods (Vri- 
tra).’ Namuchi: one of the malignant demons of the “atmosphera 
who withhold the rain, 8 The rolliug stone : perhaps the thunder- 
bolt: or if the thunderbolt is supposed to be the speaker of this stanza, 
as Prefessor Gudwig is indlined to think, the Sun must be meant ; that 
is, heaven and earth brought the Sun to the Maruts to aid Indea in bis, 
figho with the demon. 9 Indra is the speaker of the first line. 
Women: perhaps. the subject waters. Tis two diffarent voices: thy, 
meaning: may be that Indra heatd the voiceg of tlfe women as well as, 
the voice cf Namuchi, and so knew that he had not am arniy of demon- 
warriors to fight against, Professor Wilson, following B Sayane, trans- 
lates : “the two his best beloved, (Ludra) confined in the inner apart. 
ments,’ 10 With his helpers : witle the aid.of the Marpte. 11 Babhew :.. 
the Risbi of the bymn, who appears to have assisted the Rustmas, &. 
neighbouring people, in a succesaful foray, and to have beén rewardsdy 
with.a large portion of. the booty. Rinanchaya. was the kfng of this, 


people. . 


492 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK V. 


12 This good deed have the Rusamas done, Agni! that they have 
granted me four thousand cattle. 

We have received Rinanchaya’s wealth, heroes the most 
heroic, which was freely offered. 


13 The Rusamas, O Agni, sent me homeward with fair adorn- 
ment aud with kine in thousands. 
The strong libations hive made Indra joyful, when night, 
‘whose course’ was ending, changed to morning. 


14 Night, well-nigh ended, at Rinanchaya’s coming, King of the 
Rusamas, was changed to morning. 
Like a strong courser, fleet of foot, urged onward, Babhru 
hath gained four thovsand as his guerdon. 


15 We have received four thousand head of cattle presented by 
tne Rusamas, O Agni. 
And we, the singers, have received the caldron of metal which 
was heated for Pravargya: 


HYMN XXA1. Indra, 


Maauvan Indra turns his chariot downward, the strength- 
displaying car which he hath mounted. 
Fiven as a herdsman driveth forth his cattle, he goeth, first, 

uninjured, fain for treasure, 


2 Haste to us, Lord of Rays: be not ungracions : visit us, lover 
‘ of go!d-hued oblation. 
There is naught else better than thou art, Indra : e’en to the 
wifeless hast thou given spouses. 


3 When out of strength arose the strength that conquers, Indra 
displayed all powers that he possesses. 
Forth from tha cave hedrove the milky mothers,.and with the 
hght laid bare investing darkness. 


4 Anus have wrought a chariot for thy Courser, and Tvashtar, 
Much-invoked ! thy bolt that ¢litters. 
The Brahmans with their songs exalting Indra increased his 
strength that he night slaughter Ahi, 


aaa Dn arc te ai letras 

15 Heatca for Pravargya : 8 cereinony introductory to the Soma- 
encrifice, in which fresh milk was poured into a heated vessel called 
mahavird Or, a5 in this place, ghurmd. * 


| Even as @ herdsman driveth forth his cattle: s0, aays Sayana, 
Indra drive. his enemies before hint, Fain for treasure: wishing ta 
‘obtain fhe riches oj his enemies. 2'@Gold-hued oblation : consisting 
of yellow Sqma juice. Spouses: carried off in raids favoured by the 
Warrior-God, '4 Anus: probably meaning Bhrigus, who belonged 


to thad tribe. The Brahmans : according to Sayana, the Angirases, or 
the Maruts. ' 


HYMN 31, THE RIGVEDA. 493 


© When herces sang their land to thee the Hero, Indra! and 
° stones and Adit: accordant, 
Without or steed or chariot were the fellies which, sped by 
Indra, rolled npon the Dasyus. 


6 I will declare thine exploits wrought aforetime, and, Maghavan, 
thy deeds of late achievement, 
When, Lord of Might, thou sunderedst earth and heaven,.Win- 
ning for Man the muistly-gleaming waters. 


7 This is thy deed, e’en this, Wonderful Singer! that, slaying 
Ahi, here thy strength thou showedst, 
Didst check and stay een Sushna’s wiles und magic, and, draw- 
ing nigh, didst chase away the Daryus. 


8 Thou, Indra, on the farther bauk for Yadu and Turvasa di dst 
stay the gushing waters. 
Ye both assailea the fierée : thou barest Kutsa: when Gods and 
Usana came to you together. 


9 Let the steeds bring you both, Intra aad Kutsa : borne on the 
chariot within he ae nielistanee: 
Ye blew him from the waters, from his dwelling, and chased 
. the darkness from the neble’s spirit, 


10 Even this sage hath come looking fur succour even to Vata’s 
docile harnessed horse. 
Here are the Maruts, all thy dear companions : prayers Have 
increased thy power and might, O Indra. 


11 When night was near its close he carried forward een the Sun’ 8 
chariot backward in its running. 
Ktasa brought his wheel and firmly stays it : setting it east- 
ward he shali give us courage. 


5 Stones : used for expressing the Soma juice. Withowt or steed or 
chariot ¢ that is, the worshippers of Intra overcame their +nemies by 
prayer and the favour of their God: ‘3 Yadu and Turvasa : see 
Index. Ye both: Indra and Kutea. The fierce: Sushna, a demon of 
drought. Z'how barest Kutsa : to his home. 9 Ye blew him from the 
waters : drave Sushna from the atmosphere in which he dwelt, and thue 
removed the grief, of the eminetit men who. instituted eacrifices. 10 
Louking for succour : Sayana takes avasyzh here as ‘vhe name of a Rishi 
the seer of the hymn. 11 The return of the lingering alee sun 
appears to be attributed, on some particular occasion, to the’ apecia in- 
tervention of Indra on his favourite’s behalf. The stanza ig hardly: 
intelligible asit stands. SAdyana explains Etaga by ‘fur Etasa. The 
voeree is discussed by Prof. Gaeldoer (Vedische Studien, 11. ,162£), and 
his explanation is oriticizad by Prof. Ludwig (Ueber die Neuesten 
Arbeiten do. p, 171). ° 


491 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK VY. 


12 This Indra, O ye men, hath come to see you, seeking a friend 

who hath express-d the Soma, : 

The creaking stone is laid upon the altar, and the Adhvaryus 
come to turn it quickly. 


13 Let mortals who were happy still be happy : let them not come 
to sorrow, O Immortal. 
Love thou the pious, and to these thy peeplgwatl whom may 
we be numbered—give thou vigour. 


7 HYMN XXXII. Indra. 


Tue well thou clavest, settest free the fonntains, and gavest 
rest to floods that were obstructed. 

Thou, Indra, laying the great mountain open, slaying the 
Danava, didst loose the torrents. 


2 The fountain-depths obstructed in their seasons, thou, Thun- 
derer ! madest flow, the mountain's udder, 
Strong Iudra, thou bv slaving e’en the Dragon that lay extend- 
ed there hast shown thy vigour. 


3 Indra with violence smote down the weapon, yea, even of the* 
wild and mighty creature, 

Although he deemed himself alone unequalled, another had been 
born e’en yet more potent. 


4 flim, whom the heavenly food of these delighted, child of the 
mist, strong waxing, couched in darkness, 

Him the bolt hurling Thanderer with his lightning smote down 
and slew, the Danava’s wrath-fire, Sushna. 


5 Though he might ne’er be wounded still his vitals felt that, 
the God’s bolt, which his powers supported, 
When, after offered draughts, Strong Lord, thou laidest him, 
fain to battle, in the pit in darkness, 


6 Him as he Jay there huge in length extended, still waxing in 
the gloom which po sun lightened, 
Him, after loud-voiced threats, the Hero Indra, rejoicing in the 
poured libation, slabghtéred. 


7 When ‘gainst the mighty Danava his weapon Indra uplifted, 
power which none eould combats, 
When at the hurling of his belt he smote him, he made him 
_iower than all living creatures. 


pawn A ceatencen nh 

12 (he creaking stone : tha upper ptess-stone. 
1 The well: *the rain-cloud, The Jountaius: the sources of the 
waters of the firmament. J'he mountain: the massive cloud. The 
Ddnava : Vritra, the son of Daru. 4 Of these : of living creatures. 


a aw ican ag se pee ce a Cl TS, SY 


HYMN 33.) THK RIGVEDA. 495 


8 The Hlerce God seized that huge and restless coiler, insatiate, 
drinker of the sweets, recum dent. 
Aud with his mighty weapon in his dwelling smote down the 
footless evil-speaking ogre, 
. 9 Who may arrest bis strength or check his vigour ? Alone, res- 
istless, he bears off all riches 
Even these Twain, these Goddesses, through terror of Indras 
might, retire from his dominion. : e 
10 E’en the Celestial Axe bows duwn before him, and the Earth, 
lover-like, gives way to Indra. ® 
As he imparts all vigour to these people, straightway the folk 
bend them to him the Gedlike. . 
11 I hear that thou wast born sole Lord of herces of the Five Races, 
famed among the people. : 
As such my wishes have most lately grasped him, invoking 


Indra both at eve and morning. ° 
12 So, to», I hear of thee as an due season urging to action and en- 
. . e 
riching singers, ° ° 


What have thy friends received from thee, the Brahmans who, 
faithful, rest their hopes on thee, O Indra? 


HYMN XXXIII. Indra. 


Great praise to Indra, great and strong mid heroes, I pqnder 
thus, the fecble to the Mighty, 

Who with his band shows favour to this people ; when landed, 
In the fight wuere spoil 4s gathered. 


2 So made attentive by our hymns, Steer } Indra! thou fastenedst 
the girty of thy Bay Coursers, 

Which, Maghavan, at thy wtil thou drivest hither. With these 
subdue for us the men who hate us, ; 


3 They were not turned to us-ward, lofty Indra! while yet through 
lack of prayer they stood anharnessed. 
A€ceud this chariot, thou whose hand wields thander, and draw 
the rein, O word of noble horses, °° 


9 These Goddesses : Heaven and Earth, . 10 F¥n the Celestial 
Axe; perbups the tcbuuderbult, which is one of the Meanings assigned 
to seddattih. Sdyana explains the wurd 10 this patsave as ‘tbe self- 
supported heaven,’ and Professor Ruth thinks thas a tree @ very hard 
wvod, called Svadhiti, ie inteuded, as we might say, even the oak bende 
down betoure him. ll Of the FKene Kaces : belonging to the five 
Aryan tribes, But cen Muir, Oraytnul Sawskri¢ Texts, Vol. I, 178. 


495 THE HYMNS OF {[BOUK V. 


4 hon, because many lauds are thine, O Indra, wast active war- 
ring in the fields for cattle. 
For Surya‘in his own abode thou, Hero, formedst in fights even 
a Daxa’s nature. 


& Thin are we, Iudra; thine are all these people, conscious of 
might, whose cars are set in mvtion, 
Some here come to us, O Strong as Ahi ! beauteous in war, to 
be invoked like Bhaga. 


6 Strength much to be desired is in thee, Indra: jhe Immorial 
dances forth his hero exploits, 
Such, Lord of lreasnre, give us splendid riches, I praise the 
Friend's gift, his whose wealth is mighty. 


7 Thus favour us, O Indra, with thy succour; Hero, protect 
the bards who sing thy praises. 
Be friendly in the fray to those who offer the skin of beauti- 
ful znd well-pressed Soma. 


8 And these ten steeds which Trasadayu gives me, the gold- 
rich chief, tbe son of Purukutsa. 
Respiendent in their brighness shall convey me. Gairikshita 
witled 1t and ao came I hither. 
9 And these, bestowed as sacrificial guerdon, the powerful tawny 
stecds of Marutisva ; 
Aud thousands which kind Chyavatina gave me, abundantly 
estowed for my adornment. 
10 And these commended horses, bright and active, by Davanya 
son of Lakshmana presented. 
Came unto me, as cows into the Rishi Samvarana’s stall, with 
magnitude of riches. 
HYMN XXXIV. Indra. 
Botun Diss and wasting not, the heavenly food uf Gods goes to 
the foeless One, doer: of woudtnus deeds. 


Press out, make ready, offer gifts with special zeal to him 
whom many laud, accepter of the prayer, 


4 The second half of the etanza refers to an eclipse of the sun. Indra 
iz said to have formed for Surya in hts own abode, thatis, in the eastern 
heaven, the nature of a Da a, t. ¢. made him a slave or dark. 6 
Daunees forth his hero ecplotts : battle being regarded as a war dance, as 
in the Old German Hoary: and in Homer’s —Ludwig. 
8 Son of Purukutes : Paurukutsya ayd Gairikehita are both patronymics 
of Traga dacyvu 9 [his etanza is obscure. Nothing furcher ig 
known of Miu: igva or Chyavatana. 10 Dbvanya and his father 
Lakshmana,are also unknown to fame. These three concluding stanzas 
are banished to the app'ndix by Professor Grassmann as belng a laver 
addition to the origiual byma. . 


HYMN 34.3 THE RIGVEDA. V9 
2 He who filled full his belly with the Soma’s juice, Maghavany 


. was delighted with the meath’s sweet draught, . 
When Usand, that be uuyht slay the monstrous beast, gave 
him the nighty weapon with a thousand points. 


8 iilustrious is the man whoever presscth owt Soma for him if 
~ sunshine or in cloud and rain 
The mighty Maghavan whois the sage’s Friend advanceth 
mure and more his beautedus progeny. = * . 
4 Tie Sutroug God doth not flee away from him whose sire, whose 
mother uc whose brother he hath dune to death. 
He, the Avenger, seeketh this man’s offered gifts: this God, 
the souree of riches, duth not fee from sin. 
5 He seeks no enterprise with five or ten to aid, nor stays with 
him who puurs no juice though prospering well. " 
The Shaker conquers or slays in this way or that, and tg the 


pious gives a stable full of kine, * 
6 Exceeding strung in war hestays the chariot wheel, and, hating 
hun who pours not, prospers him who ours. . 


Indra the terrible, tamer of every man, as Arya leads away 
“the Dasa at his will. 


7 He gathers up for px.nder all the niggards’ gear > exg¢ellent 


-% wealth he gives “0 nim who offers gifts, e 
Not even in wide stronghold may ali the folk stand firm who 
have provoked to anger his surpassing might. s 
8 When Indra Maghavan hath maaked two wealthy men fight: 
ing for beauteous cows with all their followers, ° 


He who stirs all things takes one as his close ally, and, Shaker, 
with his Heroes, sends the kine to him, 


2 Usana + see 1. 61. 10. Zhe monstrous beast :Vritra or Ahi ; accord- 
jng to Sdyana, a demon called Mriga. 3 The meaning of the second 
half of this stenge is somewhat uncertain, Professor Wilson, following 
Sayana, renders it: ‘Sakra disregards tbe man who is proud of bis desc 
eudauts and vain of his person, aud who,ethough wealthy, is a friend of 
the base.’ Professor Grassmann, following Professor Koth’s interpret- 
ation of the doubtful words, transjates similarly: ‘Den Prahler stosst 
wuruck der starke, na&chtige den eitlen Storzet, der dem Kargen sich 

’ gesellt,’ Professor Ludwig, whom Iehere follow with hesitation, expla- 
ins kavdsakhah, or kuvd sakhd (like AguaVishnu, Apnamanut, Nabbined+ 


ishtha, etc.) ae, friend with the wise. 4 Sakra or®the Strong God 
‘ Woes not fear the vengeance of those whose nearest * relations ¢e has 
killed for neglect of his worship Doth not fles from siw: perhaps, 


as Dr. Muir suggests, dues not fear toypunish the offender against him, 
5 The Shaker : he who makes his euemies tremble, accoiding ‘o Sdyana 
© The chariot wheel : vf bis enemies. ° 


64 : 


498 THE HYMNS OP {BOOK 'V. 


‘9 Agni! I laud the liberal Agnivesi, Satri the type and stand- 


ard of the pious, . ; 
May the collected waters yield him.plenty, and his be.power- 
fal and: bright-dominion. 


HYMN XXXV, Indra. 


‘INDRA, for our assistance bring that most effectual power df 
thine ; 
Which conquers men for us,iand wins the spoil, invincible in 
fight. 
2 Indra, whatever aids be thine, four be they, or, O Hero, three, 
Or those of the Five Tribes of men, bring quickly all that: 


help to us. 
3 Thu aid most excellent of thee the Mightiest hitherward we 
call . 
For thou wast born with hero might, conquering, Indra, with 
the Strong. 


4 Mighty to prosper us wast thou born, and mighty is the 
strength thou bast, F 
To Hutive power thy soul is firm: thy valour, Indra, slays a 
‘host. 
5 'O Satakratu, Lord of Strength, O Indra, Caster of the Stone, 
With all tby chariot’s furce assail the man who shows himself 
thy foe. 
6 For, Mightiest Vritra-slayer, ‘thee, fierce, foremost among many 
folk. 
Whose sacred grass is trimmed invite to battle where the 
spoil is won. 
“I Indra,:do thou protect our car that mingles foremost in the 
fic hts, 
That bears its part in every fray, invincible and seeking spoil. 
‘8 Come to us, Indra, and protect our car with thine intelligence, 
May we, O Mightiest One, obtain excellent fame at break of 
‘day, and meditate our hymn at dawn, 


9 Agntvesv: sou of Agnivega, Satri,a'priace or chief whose name 
does’nobt occur agwin in the Rigveda. 
YY . 


2 Foum be they: according to Sayana, the favours or succours given 
to the four castes ; three, similarly meaniog the euccours given to the 
three worlds. 3 With the’Strong :; the Marute, 


BYMN 37] THE RIGVEDA 499: 
HYMN XXXVI. Indra. 


May Indra come to us, he who knows rightly to give forth 
treasures from his store from his store of riches. 
Even as a thirsty steer who roams the deserts may he drink 
eagerly the milked-out Soma, 
2 Lord of Bay Horses, Hero, may the Soma rise to thy cheeks. 
and jaws like mountain-ridges. . ais 
May we, O King, as he who driveth coursers, all joy in thee: 
with hymns, invoked of many! e 
3 Invoked of many, Caster of the Stone! my heart. quakes like. 
a rolling wheel for fear of penurye 
Small not Purivasu the singer give thee praise, O-ever-pros-. 
pering Maghavan, mounted on thy car ° . 
4. Like the press-stone is this thy praiser, Indra. Loudly he lifts. 
his voice with strong endeavour. ° 
With thy left hand, O Maghavan, give us riches: with thy: 
right, Lord of Bays, be not reluctant. ° 
5 May the strong Heaven make thee the Strong wax: stronger : 
“.. Strong, thou art borne by thy two strong Bay Horses. 
So fair of check, with mighty chariot, mighty, uphold us, 
strong-willed, thunder-armed, in battle. é 
§ Marnts, let all the people in obeisance bow down before this. 
youthful Srutaratha, e 
Who, rich in steeds, gave me two dark. red horses together: 
with. three hundred head of cattle.. i 


HYMN XXXVIIr Indra... 


Brepewekp with holy oil and meetly worshipped, the Swift One- 
vies with Sirya’s beam in splendour. 

For him may mornings dawn without cessation who saith, Let. 
eis press Soma out for Indra, 

2 With. kindled fire and strewn grass let him worship, and,. 

Soma-presser, sing with stones’adjusted : 

And let the priest whose press-stones ring forth. loudly, go. 
down with bis oblation. to the river,. : 


3 Purdvasu : I, the Rivshi-; &pparently the sama as Prabhuyasu, the: 
seer of the hymn, ‘ 


e 
ieee 
e 


1. The Swift One: Agni. 2. Jo the river; for ablution before 


aorificin g, 


500 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK Y. 


3 This wifa is coming near who loves her husband who carries 
to his home a vigorous cunsort. : 
Here may his ear seek fame, here loudly thunder, and his 
wheel make a thousand revolutions. 


4 No troubles vex that King in whose home Indra. drinks tho’ 
sharp Soma juice with milk commingled, 
With heroes he drives near, he slays the foeman : Blest, che- 
* rishing that name, he guards his people, 
4 May ke support in peace and win in battle: he masters both 
the hosts that meet together. 
Dear shall he be to Sirya, dear to Agni, who with pressed. 
Soma offers gifts to*[adra. 


HYMN XXXVIII. Indra, 
Wink, Indra Satakratu, spreads the bounty of thine ample 
grace : ; 
So, Lord of fair dominion, Friend of all men, give us splendid 
wealth, 
2 The food which, Mightiest Indra, thou possessest worth y-of 
renown. #* 


Is lruited as most widely famed, invincible, O Golden-hued ! 
3 O Dartef of the stone, the powers which readily obey thy : 
© will,— 
Wivinities, both thou and they, ye rule, to guard them, earth 
and heaven, 
4 A‘nd from whatever power of thine, O Vritra-slayer, it may be, 
Bring thou to.us heroig strength : thou hast a man’s regard 
for us. : 
5 In thy protection, with these aids of thine, O Lord of Hundred 
Powers, 
Indra, may we be guarded well, Hero, may we be guarded well. 


. HYMN XXXIX. | ‘indra. 


Stone-DarTine India, Wondrous One, what wealth is richly 
given, from thee, 

That bounty, Treasnre-Finder '«bring, filling both thy hands, 
to us, 


3 his wife : &coording to Sayana, ‘the wifa of Indra who Accan- 
panies him 40. the sacrifice. 4 The foeman : or the wicked man, or. 
hig oma mys PGpawm vairinam vd,—Sayana. : 


3 The powers : according te Sayans, the strong Maruts, 


HYMN 40 THE RIGVEDA. 50 


2 Bring what thou deemest worth the wish, O Fndra, that which, 
is in heaven, 
So may we know thee as thon art, boundless in thy munificence. 


3 Thy lofty spirit, far-renowned as fain to give and prompt to 


win,— 
With this thon rendest-e’cn the firm, Stone-Darter ! so to gain 
thee strength. : ° 
4 See with many songs have made Indra-propitious to their 
ame, 
Him who is King of human kind, most liberal of your wealthy 
ones. 
9 To him, to Indra must be sung the poet’s word, the hymn of 
praise. : 


To him, aceepter of the prayer, the Atris raise their songs on 
high, the Atris beautify their supgs. ° 


HYMN XL. . — Indra, Srya, Atri, 


Come thon to what the stones have pressed, drink Soma, O 
thou Soma’s Lord, 
Indra best Vritra-slayor Strong One, with the Strong. 
2 Strong 1s the stone, the draught is strong, stro is this Soma 
that is pressed, ‘ 
Indra, best Vritra-slayer, Strong One with the Strong. « 
3 As strong I call on thee the Strong, O Thunder-armed, with 
various aids, e . 
Indra, best Vyita-slayer, Strong One with the Strong. 


4 Impetuous. Thunderer, Strong, quelting the mighty, King, 
potent, Vritra-slayer, Soma-drinker, 
May he come hither with his yoked Bay Horses » may Indra 
gladden him at the noon libation, 
5 O Sarya, when the Asura’s descendant, Svarbhinu; pierced 
e thee through and through with darkness, 
All creatures looked like one who1s bewildered, who knoweth 


not the place where he is standing, 


The hymn is not homogeneoys. The first part *( 1-4) 18 & separate 
invocation of Indra, and the subject of the evcdnd part is’ the Sun’s 
eolipse by Svarbhanu and release by Atri. 1 W&h the Strong > 
together with the Marute. 5 Svarbhdnus the Asura or defion who cau- 
sea eclipses of the sun and moon, the Rabu of later times. The name 
does not accur again in the Rigveda, ° 


502 TAE HYMNS. OP. [‘BOOR V: 


6 What time thou smotest down Svarbhina's-magic that spreadi 
itself beneath the sky, O Indra, 
By bis fourth sacred prayer Atri discoverad, Surya concealed 
in gloom that stayed his function. 


7 Let not the oppressor with this dread, through anger swallow 
me up, for { am thine, O Atri. 
Mjtra art thou.,the sender of true blessings: thou.and King 
Varuna be both my helpers. 


8 The Brahman Atri, as he set the press-stones, serving the 
Gods with. praise and adoration, 
Established in the heaven the eye cf Strya, and caused Svar- 
bhinu’s magic arts to vanish. 


9 The Atris found the Sun again, him whom Svarbhinu of the 
brood. 
Of Asuras had pierced: with gloom. This none besides had. 
power to do. 


: , HYMN XLi. Visvedevas. 


Who, Mitra- Varuna. is your pious servant to give you gifts 
from earth or mighty heaven ? a 

Preserve us in the seat of holy Order, and give the offerer 
power that winneth cattle, 


2 May Mitra, Varuna, Aryaman, and Ayu, Indra Ribhukshan, 
eand the Muaruts. love us, 
And they who of one mind with bountcous Rudra accept the 
hymn and laud with adorationg, 


3 You will I call to feed the car-horse, Asvins, with the wind’s. 
flight swiftest of those who travel : 


6 By his fourth sacred prayer : according to Sdiyana, by four stanzas 
(5-8) of thie hymn. Probably, as Ludwig suggests, a fourth prayer in 
addition to the usual liturgy of three prayers against an eclipse. Prof. 
Lanman discusses and translates the latter portion of the hymn in Fest- 
gruss an R. von Roth, pp’ 187 #, and adducos an interesting Buddbist 
paralle] from the Samyutta-Nikaya, I. ii, 1. 7 Sarya or the Sun is 
the speaker. The oppressor ; Svarbbing.. 9 Of the brood of Asuras : 
the word Q@susd4h inthis hymo means belonging to,°or descendant of, 
Asuras, demons or evil sdirits. This use of the word is unkoown in the- 
earliest portions of the Rigveda. 


e 


2 Ayt: here arid 40 mean Vayu, the God of wind, See [: 162, I. The- 
celestial Agai is probably intended. Azbhukshan: a name of Indra, as. 
Lord of the Ribbus. And they who: the Maruts especially, as- 
being Rudra’s sons. m8 


AYMN 41.) THE RIGVED A, 503 
‘Or also to the Asura of heaven, Worshipful, bring a hymn as 
e ‘twere libation. 
4 The heavenly Victor, he whose priest:is ‘Kanve, Trita with 
Dyaus accordant, Vita, Agui. 
All-feeding Pishan, Bhaga sougkt'the oblation,as they whose 
steeds are flectest seek the contest. 
‘> Bring ye your riches forward borne or horses : lot thought be 
framed for help and gain of treasure. °° 


Blest be the priest of Ausija through cougses, the Courses 
which-are yours the fivet, O Marites, 


‘6 Bring hither him who vokes the car, your Vayu. who praises 
with his songs, the God and Singer ; 


And, praying and devout, noble and prudent, may thé Gods’ 


Spouses in their thoughts retain us, “ 


7 I speed to you with powers that should be honouted, with 
songs distinguishing Ebeaven’s »mighty Daughters, 


Morning and Night, the two, as ’twere all-knowing’: these 
bring the sacrifice unto the mortal. 


Woulextol, the noarishers of heroes, bringing you gifts, 
Vastosh pati and ‘Tvashtar— 


Rich Dhishana accords through onr obeisancee-and Trees and 
Plauts, for the swift gain of riches, 


9 Ours be the Parvatas, even they, for offspring, frec- -moving’ 
who are Heroes like the Vasus. 


May holy Aptya, Friend of ‘man, exalted, strengthen our 
word tur ever and be near us, ; 


3 The Asura of heaven: or the "Lord of heaven, According to 
Sayena Asura means here either the® destroyer & life, or the giver of 
lifa, SGrya or Vayu. 4 The heavenly Vietor : [ndra. J7'rita : aceord- 
ing to Sdyana ‘rita here is notythe name of a separate deity (Trita 
Aptya), but an epfthet of Vayu, ‘ pervading the thrge regions of earth, 
tiroament, and heaven.’ D The preest os Ausija: Atri, the minist- 
rant priest of Kakshivan the eon of Ugij —Sayans. . °8, Vaistoshpati z 
Lord of the Homestead, Indra, » DArsnand: a Goddess p presiding over 
prosperity aud gain ; acourding to Sayana, Vagdevati, the Gdddess of 
speech. 9 The Parvutas : the gouii who preside over mountains and 
clouds. For offspring : that they may give us children’s chAdren. Holy 
Aptya ; Trita Aptya, a divmity or ny tical being who dwells in the 
eeinotest part of the heavens. , 


D04 THE HYMNS OF [BV0K VY, 


10 Trita praised him, germ of the earthly hero, with pure songs 
him the Offspring of the Waters | 
Agni with might neighs loudly iike a charger : he of the 
flaming hair destruys the forests, 


11 How shall we speak tv the great might of Rudra ? How 
speak to Bhaga who takes thougt for riches ? 
May Plants, the Waters, and the Sky preserve us, and Woods 
ad Mountains with their trees for tresses. 


42 May the swift Wanderer, Lord of refreshments, list to ovr 
songs, who sp eds through cloudy heaven ; 
And may the Waters, bright hke castles, hear Us, as they flow 
onward trom the cloven mountatn, 


14 We know your ways, ye Mighty Ones; receiving choice meed, 
ye Wonderful, we will proclaim it. 
Even strong birds descend not to the mortal who strives to 
reach them with swift blow and weapons, 


44 Celestial and terrestrial generations, and Waters will I sum- 
inor. tu the feasting, 
May days with bright dawns cause my songs to prosper, and 
may the conquered streams increase their waters. ene 


15 Duly.tv each one hath my laud been offered. Strong be Va- 
riitri will her powers to succoar. 


10 Qerm of the earthly hero : Agni, the Offspring of the Waters, 
who develops into the strong God, or Hero, who appears On earth in the 
form of torrestrial hre, . 12 Swift Wanderer : Vayu, God of tha 
vircumambient wind, As they flow onward ; the text has pars sriicho. 
Sayaua explains srecho (ladles) vy saranasildh, inclined or accustomed 
00 flow. Professor Ludwig suggests parisruto (flowigg round or over) 
‘ag the original roading. Cloven mountain - according to Sgyana, the 
increasing, t. 6. the towering, or swelling, mountain, or cloud, | 13. 
Thia stanza is exceedingly ditficult, - I fullow Professor Ludwig in his 
iter pretation, and wo eretand the meaning to be: we know what your 
waye are, and we glofify you because you reward ua for doing so. If 
you appeared to uy only as hostile and terrible deities we should not 
praise you any more than birds allow thémselves to b: lured down by 
the inan who shootseat them. Professor Wilson, folluwing Sayana, 

ondly aspect, quickly hear 


parapirases the stanzas ; ‘Mighty Muarute, of g 
pair to you repeat, offering acceptable 


(the praises) tthat wa who re 
(oblativus) : ( the Mocuts 9 coming hither, weil disposed, coma down to 
pposed to them, 


us (destroying) with their Weop.uns the mortals o 
Lhe conquered straams . won from tha 


(uVercome) by Bgitacion, 14 
hostile barbatians, 15 Vardira: one vot a class vf guardian G 
See 1.22. 10 aud II, 62, 3, ponnen ceevenen 


BYMN 42] THE RIGVEDA. 508 


May the great Mother Rasa here befriend us, straight-handed, 
with the princes, striving forward. 

16 How may we serve the Liberal Ones with worship, the Maruts 
swift of course in invocation, the Maruts far-renowned in 
invocation ? 

Let not the Dragon of the Deep annoy us, and gladly may 
he welcome our addresses, 

17 Thus thinking, O ye Gods. the mortal wins: you to givehim 

. increase of his herds of cattle: the mortal wins him, O ye 


Gods, your favour. 2 
Here he wins wholesome food to teed this body : as for mine 
old age, Nirriti consume it ! p 


18 O Gods, may we obtain from you this favour, strengthening 
food through the cow’s praise, ye Vasus, 
May she who gives good gifts, the gracious Goddess, come 
speeding nigh to us for our well-being. ° 
19 May I14 ; Mother of the herds of, cattle, and Urvasi with all 
the streams accept us ; ru ° 
« May Urvasi in lofty heaven accepting, as she partakes the 
» oblation of the living, 
20 Visit us while she shares Urjavya’s food. e 


HYMN XLII, +” Visvedevas, 


Now may our sweetest song withdeep devotion reach Vatuna, 
Mitra, Aditi, and Bhaga, 
May the Five Priests’ Lord, dwelling in oblations, bliss-giving 

Asura, hear, whose paths are open, 


} 


Fast: a mythical stream which flows round the earth and the 
atmosphere, here personified as a benignaand Goddess : earth, acoording 
toSéyans. See l. 112 12 Stratght-handed ; holding out her band to 
guide and help uw. 16 The Dragon of the Deep: Ahibudhnva, the 
regent of the depths of the firmament.° 17 Nirrité : the Goddess of 
destruction. ‘May Nirriti (be thinks) swallow up my old age (not 
m«),’— Ludwig. 19 J/a: hewe meaning Earth, according to Sayana. 
Ureast ; apparently Fervour or Enthusiasm! personjfied as a divine be- 
ing. 20 Urjavya’s food : thé viands provided by Urjavya, the 
prince or patron who institutes the sacrifice, The bymn és gonerally 
difficult and obscure ; and parts of the translation ‘are, and must af 

> 


present bo, conjectural, . 
9 


1 The Five Priests’ Lord : apparently Varuna the five pri 
! ‘ Prieet 
verve him being five Adityas. According to Shyane Vayu ie a 
65 : j 


566 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR Vv, 


2 May Aditi welcome, even as a mother her dear heart-gladden- 
ing son, my song that lands her. ‘ 
The prayer they love, bliss-giving, God -appointed, I offer unt 
Varuna and Mitra. 
3 Inspirit him, the Sagest of the Sages ; with sacrificial oil and 
meath bedew him, 
So then let him, God Savitar, provide us excellent, ready, and 
‘resplendent freasures, 
4 With willing mind, Indra, vouchsafe us cattle, prosperity, Cord 
of Buys ! ard pious patrons ; 
And, with the sacred prayer by Gods appointed, give us the 
holy Deities’ loving-kindness. 
§ God Bhaga, Savitar who deals forth riches, Indra, and they 
who conquer Vritra’s treasures, 
And Vaja and Ribhukshan and Purandhi, the Mighty‘and Im. 
mortal Ones, protect as ! 


6 Let us declare his deeds, the undecaying unrivalled Victor 
whom the Maruts follow. 
Nono of old times, O Maghavan, nor later, none of these days. 
hath reached thy hero prowess. 


¢ Praire him the Chief who gives the boon of riches, Brihaspati 
distributor of treasures, 
Who, blessing most the man who sings and praises, comes with 
abundant wealth to his invoker. 


8 Tended, Bribaspati, with they protections, the princes are un- 
Farmed and girt by heroes. 


Wealth that brings bliss is found among the givers of horses 
and cattle and of raiment, , 


9 Make their wealth flee who, through our hymnsenjoying their 
riches, yield us not an ample guerdon, 
Far from the sun keep those who hate devotion, the godless, 
prospering in their vocation. 
10 With wheelless chariots drive down him, O Maruts, who at 
the feasts of Gods segards the demons. 


May he, though bathed in sweat, form’ empty wishes, who 
blames his sacred rite who toils to serve yon. 


11 Praise him whose bow is strong and sure his arrow, him who 
_is Lord of every balm that healeth. 


3. The Sagest uf the Sages : Savitar, perbaps as identified with Agni. 
5 Ribhukshan : in this placais said by S&yana to mean Ribhu, and 
Purandhs (the intelligent) to mean Vibbvan. 11 Pratse him ; Rudra. 


AYMN 43.) THE RIGVEDA. 507 


Worship thou Rudra for hls great good favour : adore the Asura, 
- God, with salutations. 
12 May the House-friends the cunning-handed Artists, may the 
Steer’s Wives, the streams carved out by Vibhvan, 
And may the fair Ones honour and befriend us, Sarasvati., 
Bribaddiva, and Raka, 
13 My newest song, thought that now springs within me, I offer 
to the Great, the Sure Protector, 
Who made for us this Al!, in fond love laying each eerie form 
within his’ Daughter’s bosom, 
14 Now, even now, may the fair praise, OSinget, attain Tdaspati 
who roars and thunders, 
Who, rich in clouda and waters with his lightning speeds forth 
bedewing both the earth and heaven, 
15 May this my laud attain the troop of Maruts, those who are 
youths in act, the Sons of Rudra. 
The wish calls me to riches and well being : praise the unwea- 
ried Ones whose steeds are dappled. 
16. May this my laud reach earth and airs mid- -region, and forest 
trees and plants to win me riches, 
“May every Deity be swift to listen, and Mother Earth with no 
il] thought regard me. 
17 Gods, may we dwell in free untrovbled bliss. 
18 May we obtain the Asvins’ newest favour, and gain their health 
bestowing happy guidance. 
Bring riches hither unto us, and heroes, and all felicity and 
joy, Immortals ! 


oh) 


HYMN XLIIL. : 


May the Milch-cows who hasten to their object come harmless 
unto us with liquid sweetness. 

The Singer, lauding, calls, for ample riches, the Seven Mighty 
Ones who bring enjoyment. 


12 The eunnina-handed Artists: the Ribhue. The Steer’s Wives : 
the spouses of the mighty Indra. Curved ont by ViBhran . whose chan- 
nels were formed by him as the artificer of Varuna. Brihaddina : 
a Goddess freqneatly associated with Ha, Sarasvati, and others. Sayana 
takes the word in this place as an epithet, ‘vary brilliant,’ of Adkd, the 
Goddess whv presides over the day ef full moon 13 Phe Great, the 
Sure Protector: Indra. His Ddughter : Earth. , Here,” as Ludwig 
obsurves, we have the germ of the myth of Prajgpati and bis daughter. 
Cf. X. 61 14 Idaspats : the Lord of the libation ; here Parjanya, 
God of the rainclouds. 1 The Milch-cows: the’ rivers, The Seven 
Mighty Ones : probably the Indus, the five rivers of the Panjab, and the 
Barasvati, or the Kubha. See I, 32. 1%. 


508 THE HYMNS OP (BOOK V. 


2 With reverence and fair praise will I bring hither, for sake of 
strength, exhaustless Earth and Heaven, ; 


Father and Mother, sweet of speech, fair-handed, may they, 
far-famed, in every fight protect us. 


3 Adhvaryus, make the sweet libations ready, and bring the 
beautiful bright juice to Vayu. 


Ged, as our Priest, be thou the first to drtnk it : we give thee 
of the meadsto make thee joyful. z 


4 Two arms—tke Soma’s dexterous immolators—and the ten 
fingers set and fix the press-stone. 


The stalk hath poured, fair with its spreading branches, the 
mead’s bright glittering juice that dwells on mountains, 


5 The Soma hath been pressed for thee, its lover,, tu give thee 
power and might and high enjoyment. : 


Invokad, turn hither in thy car, O Indra, at need, thy two wel I- 
trained and dear Bay Horses. < 


6 Brivg by God-traversed paths, accordant, Agni, the great Ara- 
mati, Celestial Lady, ip 


Exalted, worshipped with our gifts and homage, who know, éth 
holy Law, to drink sweet Soma. 


7 As on his father’s lap the son, the darling, so on the fire is set 
« the sacred caldron, . 


Which holy singers deck, as if extending and heating that 
which holds the fatty membrane. 


8 Hither, as herald to invite the Asvins, come the great lofty 
song, most sweet and pleasant ! 


Come in one car, Joy-givers ! to the banquet, like the bolt bind. 
ing pole and nave, come hither. 


9 I have declared this spech of adoration to mightiest Pishan 
and victorious Vayu, 


4 Immolators: or preparers: 6 Aramatt: the Goddese who 
presides over worship and active piety, and also personifies the Earth ; 
the Spenta-Armaiti, or Holy Piety, audSpirit of Earth, of the Zoroastr- 
jans. 7 As +f extending: perhaps, stretching ( ‘dver the fire ) and 
so roasting, as Prof. Roth explains. ‘<Heating that which holds the fatty 
memprane:, ‘rcasting a marrow-yielfing animal,/—Wilson. The vapa 
is the omentum or membrane enfolding the intestines of the victim 
dpecially offered to Gods in the Vapdhuts sacrifice 1 Joy-givers , 
yo beneficenteAgvine, tke the bolt; ‘Ae the cart cannot move if the 
axle of the wheel is not fastened by the pin or bolt, so the offering of 
the Soma is without efficacy unless the Astwins bo present,’— Wilson, 
from Séyaga, oh 


HYMN 43, THE RIGVEDA. 509 


Who by their bounty are the hymns’ inspirers, and of them- 
selves give power as a possession, 


10 Invoked by us bring hither, Jatavedas ! the Maruts all under 
their names and figures. 
Come to the sacrifice with aid all Maruts, all tothe songs and 
praises of the sigger ! 


11 From high heaven may Sarasvati the Holy -visit our sacrifice, 
and from the mountain. : 
ager, propitious, may the balmy goddess hear offr effectual 
speech, our invocation. 


12 Set in his seat the God whose back is dusky, Brihaspati the 
lofty, the Disposer. 
Him let us worship, set within the dwelling, the red, the 
golden-hued, the all-resplendent. 


13 May the Sustainer high in heaven, come hither, the Rounteous 
One, invoked, with all his favours, 
Dweller with Dames divine, with planés, unwearied, the Steer 
with triple horn, the life-bestower. . 


44 The tuneful eloquent priests of iim who liveth have sought 
* the Mother’s bright and loftiest station. 
As living men. with offered gifts and homage they deck the 
most ausp:cious Child to clothe him. ° 


15 Agni, great vital power is thine, mighty : pairs waxing old 
in their devotion seck thee. 
May every Deity be swift to listen, and Mother Earth with no 
ill thought regard me. ° 


16 Gods, may we dwell in free untroubled bliss, 


17 May we dbtain the Asvins’ newest favour, and gain their 
health-bestowing happy guidance, > 
Bring riches hither unto us, and heroes, and all felicity and 
joy, Immortals ! 


11 Balmy : literally, filled with or sprinkling ghritd, oil, fatness, or 
fertilizing fluid ‘The showerer of water.’—Wilson. 12 Whose back 
ts dusky : darkened by enve:oping smoke, Brihaspati being bere identi- 
fied with Agni. 13 Sustartger : or the very strong One, Agni. With 
triple horn: aco®rding to Sayana, havirfg horng or flames of three 
colours, red, white, and black (with) smoke). 14 Eloquent : the 
meaning of rdepirdsah ig uncertain, Sayana explains it by ‘holders of 
sacrificial ladles’, 7'he mother ig the earth, and her co/tiest station is the 
altar. Of him who liveth : of the living man, thd worshippsr. The 
Child is Agni. 15 Patrs : human pairs of worshippers ; husbands 
and wives. The second half of this stanza is repeated from stanza 16 
of the preceding hymn, 16 This line and the following stanza are 
identical with 17 and 18 of the precedidg bymn. 


510 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK ¥. 


HYMN XLIV. Visvedevas. 
As in the first old times, as all were wont, as now, he draweth 
forth the power turned hitherward with song, 
The Princedom throned on holy grass, who findeth light, swift, 
conquering in the plants wherein he waxeth strong. 
2 Shiniug to him who leaves heaven’s regions undisturbed, which 
to his sheen who is beneath show faingin light, 
Good guardian‘art thou, not to be deceived, Most Wise! Far 
from deceits thy name dwelleth in holy Law. ; 
3 Truth waits upon oblation present and tocome: naught checks 
him in his way, this victory-bringing Priest : 
The Mighty Child who glides along the sacred grass, the un- 
decaying Youth sct in the midst of plants, 
4 These come, well-yoked, to you for furtherance in the rite : 
down come the twin-born strengtheners of Law for him, 
With reins easily guided and commanding all. In thee deep 
fali the hide stealeth away their names. 
5 Thou, moving beauteously in visivly pregnant ones, snatching 
with trees the brinching plant that grasps the juice, 
Shinest, true Slnger ! mid the upholders of the voice. Increase 
thy Consorts thou, lively at sacrifice. . 
1 He draweth forth: the Agnidh, or priest who kinldess the sacrifi- 
cial fire, draw, or literally milks out, Agni from the fire-sticks by abt- 
trition. I follow Professor Ludwig in taking dohase and vdrdhase ag 
third parsons singular. Professor Grassmann banishes to his Appendix 
this ‘most bombastic and intentionally obseure hymn,’ which he aonsi- 
ders to be a later interpolation, The Princedom: the Prince, Agni ; 
jyeshttktdtim the abstract being used fo- the concrete. 2 Shining to- 
him : apparently, to the Sun ; but the meaning is uncertain. Who 
as Feneath ; the Sun wher he is setting, or perhaps Agui. Vhow : Indra. 
3 Truth watts upon ablation : the hopes and wishes of tha sacrificer are: 
realized. I{ seems impossible to get any meaning out of atyam (courser 
and [ follow Professor Ludwig in reading stydm (truth or realization). 
The viotory-bringing Priest, the Mighty Child, the undecaying Youth, ia 
Agni. 4 These come, well yoked : probably the priests, closely as- 
sociated in their gacred «dutiess who bring the waters used im the 
preparation of the Soma and so are called strengtheners of Law, 4. e. 
furtherers of the law-apvointed sacrifice for him, for Agui the Child of 
the Waters. The hide stealeth awuy their aumes : according’ to 
Sayana, Aditya or the Sun steals (thatis, absorbs) phe waters in low 
places ; or Agoi appropriates the offerings preseated to him. Professor 
Ludwig is of opinion that Arivth (literally, leather bottle or bag, and 
metaphoriéally cleud, cistern, or wéll) in this plase==samudrdah in its 
“pwofold signification as Soma reservoif and sea. The meaning then 
would be thgt the names of the waters, 4 e, waters thamselves, fall into. 
the reservoir and into the sea According to Siyana the whole stanza 
refers to the Sun, the well-yoked being his ‘well-combined rays.’ 5. 
This stanza is addressed to Agri. Vtssbly pregnant ones: perbape the- 
waters. With trees: with burnfng fuel. Thy Consorts : the flames. 


AYMN 44.) THE RIGVEDA, 511 


6 Like as he is beheld sach is he said to be. They with effectual 
. splendour in the floods have made. 
Earth yield us room enough and amply wide extent, great 
might invincible, with store of hero sons. 


7 Sarya the Sage, as if unwedded, with a Spouse, in battle-loving 
spirit moveth o'er the foes. 
May he, self-exccllent. grant us sheltering home, a house 
that wards the fierce heat off on every side, o 


8 Phy name, sung forth by Rishis in these hymns of ours, 
goes to the loftier One with this swift mov®r’s light. 
By skill he wins the boon whereon his heart is set : he who 
bestirs himself shall bring the thing to pass. 


9 The chief and best of these abideth in the sea, nor doth libation 
fail wherein it is prolonged. 
The heart of him who praiseth trembleth not in fearethere 
where the hymn is found connected with the pure. ® 


10 For it is he : with thoughts of Kghatra, Manasa, of Yajata, 
and Sadhri, and Evavada, a : 
With Avatsara’s sweet songs will westrive to win the mightiest 

qstrength which even he who knows should gain, 


11 The Hawk is their full source, cirth-stretching rapturous drink 
of Visvavira, of Mayin, and Yajata, a? 
They ever seck a fresh draught su that they may come, knaw 
when thy time to halt and drink thy fill is near, . 


12 Sadaprina the holy, Tarya, Srutavit, and Bahuvrikta, joined 
with you have slain the foes. : 
He gains his wish in both the worlds and brightly shines— 
when he adoreg the host—with well-advancing steeds. 
@ 


LS SSS ds eis SUSPENDS Tse eh a gS astern 


7 As tf unwedded : Surya the Sun-God, although wedded to U-shas 
or Dawn, is courageous as an unmarried man untroubled by care for 
wife and child ; may he give us assurance of security as he himself knows 
how golichtful that is. 8 Thy name : the-namae of the institutor of 
the sacrifice. T'he loftier One: Surya. T'his swift movew's light: the 
flames of Agni. He who bestirs himself? the restless Agni. 9 Of 
these : hymns of praise. ... Abideth in the sea: ia closely connected with 
the vab or re-ervoir of Soma. Avcording to Sdyana*the meaning is that 
the best of the hymne proceed to the ocean-like Sun ¢samudravatparya- 
vardnabhiiamsdr yam ). 10 Fot it is he : ‘He verily (is to be glorifi- 
ed.)’— Wilson. Kshatra, Manasa, eto are said to be the named of Rishie 
associated with Avatsdra bo whom especially the hymn is ascribed. 11, 
The Hawk : who brought the Soma from heaven. See IV 27. Viavavdra, 
Magin, and Yajata are said to be Rishis, 12 SadAprina and the 
others mentioned in this verse are also Rishis. He: each tiche Righis, 
Lhe host : of Gods. 


512 THE HY MNS OP [ROOK VV. 


13 The worshipper’s defender is Sutambhara, producer and up- 
lifter of all holy thoughts, 
The milch-cow brought, sweet-flavoured milk was dealt around. 
Who speaks the bidding text knows this, not he who sleeps. 
14 The sacred bymas love him who wakes and watches: to him 
who watches come the Sama verses. 
This Soma saith unto the man who watches, I rest and have 
my dwelling in thy friendship. 
15 Agni is watchfal, and tha Richas love him ; Agni is watchful, 
Sama verses seek him. 
Agni is watcl.ful, to bim saith this Soma, I rest and have my 
dwelling in thy friendship. 


HYMN XLV. Visvedevas, 


Baxps of approaching Dawn who know the heaven are come 
with hymns to throw the mountain open, 
The Sun hath risen and oped the stable portals : the doors of 
men, to», hath the God thrown open. 
2 Sirya hath spread his light as splendour : hither came the 
Cow’s Mother, cofiscious, from the stable, 
To streams that flow with biting waves to deserts : heaven 
is stablished like a firm set pillar, 
3 Thislaud hath won the burden of the mountain. To aid the 
ancient birth of mighty waters, 
The mountain parted, h:aven performed his office. The wor- 
shippers were worn with constant serving, 


4 With hymns and God-loved words will I invoke you, Indra 
and Agni, to obtain your favaur, 
For verily sages, skilled in sacrificing, worship the Maruts and 
with lauds invite hem. 


4 


13 Sutambhara : sxid to be the name of a Rishi. The word means 
the bearer of the juice or libation. Profes or Ludwig saya that the 
Hawk (et. 11) is intended. 15 The Richas : the hymns and verses of 
the Kiyveda. The hymn is exceedingly difficult aud obscure, and in 
parts is seams to be hopejemly jniatelligibie Professor Wilsor’s pa- 
rapbrase and Professor Grasemann’s bransiation diffar very widely from 
the version—founded mainly on Professor Ludwlg’s interpretation— 
which |] offer as a temporary makeshifo. 

o Yee 

1 Bords . the Angirases who elng the praises of Ushas and who 
know the exact time when morning rites are to be cclebrated, The 
mountain®: the clouds in which the. stolen Cows, or vanished rays of 
light, have been concealed. 2 The Cow's mother : Dawn ; the ; arent 
of the raye of lighé, 3 Tke burden of the mountain : the store of 
water which lies like an unborn babe in the bosom of the mountain-like 
cloud. Pérformed hts office : aided the production of the rain. The 
worshippers : the Angirases, 


RY MN 45.) THE RIGVEBDS, 613 


6 This day approach us : may our thoughts be holy, far from us 
let us cast away misfortune. 
Let us keep those who hate us ata distance, and haste to 
meet the man who sacrifices. 
“6 Come, let us carry out, O friends, the purpose wherewith the 
Mothor threw the Cow’s stall open, 
That wherewith Manu conquered Visisipra, wherewlthsthe 
.Wandering merchant gained heaven’s water. 


7 Here, urged by hands, loudly bath rung the psess-stone where- 
with Navagvas through ten months sang praises. 
Sarama went aright and found the aattle. Angiras gave effect 
to all their labours. 


8 When at the dawning of this mighty Goddess Angirases all 
sang forth with the cattle, — 
Their spring is in the loftiest place of meeting,—Saram& 
found the kine by Orders pathway. 


9 Borne by his Coursers Seven may'Sirya visit the field that 
spreadcth wide for his long journey. = 

* Down on the Soma swooped therapid Falcon. Bright was 
‘Nhe young Sage moving mid his cattle. 


19 Sfrya hath mounted to the shining ocean whgn he hath 
yoked his fair-backed Tawny Horses. : 
The wise have drawn him like a ship through water : the 
floods obedient have descended hither. 


6 Wherewtth : I follow Professor Grassmann in takihg yd as instru- 
mental—yaya The Mother : Dawn. Vi isipra : meaning, perhaps 
jawless or chinless, may, Sayana says, be Vritra, and Manu here may 
mean Indra. Manu probably representa the victorious Aryan invader 
and Visisipra the conquered barbarian., The wandering merchant : 
Sayana says that thie refers to the story of Kakshtvin to whom the 
Asving sent rain, See I, 112 11. 7 “Through ten months : referring 
to the sacrifices of nine and ten months’ duration performed by the 
Navagvas and the Dasagvas, prieetly families frequently mentioned in 
connexion with the Angirases. These nameg man, erespectively, nine- 
month ministrants and ten-month mfinistrants, and are translated in the 
St. Petersburg Lexicon by Neuner and Zebner, Ningrs and Tennbre. 
Sarama : see Index. Angiras :, Agni. 3 Their spring : the aquree of 
the Cows, that is the Cows themselves. The lofties place of meeting : 
the height of heaven. The haif-line is apprently parenthetical. 9 
The rapid Falcon : which brought the Soma from heaven. °The youny 
sage: ‘ever young and far-sesing.’ The Sun ia intended, moving in the 
midst of his rays. 10 The shiging octan : the luminous firmament, 


65 


514 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR V. 


11 I My upon the Floods your bymn, light winning, wherewith 
Navagvas their ten months completed. 
Through this our hymn may we have Gods to guard us: 
through this our hymn pase safe beyond affliction. 


HYMN XLVI, Visvedevas, 


Wet knowing I have bound me, horselike, to the pole : 
I carry thet which bears us on and gives us help. z 
I seek for no release, no turning back therefrom. May he who 
knows the way, the Leader, guide me straight. 
2 O Agni, Indra, Varuna and Mitra, give O ye Gods, and 
Marut, host, and Vishnu, 
May both Nasatyas, Rudra, heavenly Matrons, Pushan, Sara- 
svati, Bhaga, accept us. 
3 Incra and Agni, Mitra, Varuna, Aditi, the Waters, Mountains, 
Maruts, Sky and Marth and Eleaven, 
Vishnu I call, Pushan, ard Brahmanaspati, and Bhaga, Sansa, 
Savitar that they may help. 


4 May Vishnu also and Vata who injures none, and Soma grantew 
of possessions give as joy ; 
And may the Ribhus and the Asvins, Tvashtar and Vibhvan 
remember us so that we may have wealth. 


39 So may the band of Marats dwelling in the sky, the holy, come 
to us to sit on sacred grass ; 
Brihaspati and Pushan grant us sure defence, Varuna, Mitra, 
Aryaman guard and shelter w., 
6 And may the Mountains famed in noble eulogies, and the fair- 
gleaming Rivers keep us safe from harm, 
May Bhaga the Dispenser come with power and grace, and 
far-pecvading Aditi listen to my call. 
7 May the Gods’ Spouses aid us of their own free will, aid us to 
offspring and the winning of the spoil. 
Grant us protection, O ye gracious Goddesses, ye, who are on 
the earth or in the waters’ realm. 
See CEE REET A POOR ea Ie IES aT ee 


11 J lay upon tie floods: I offerts the Waters. Light-winning : 
which gains for the worshipper the light of heaven. 


The Ccnsorts of the Gode are .the deities of the last two stanzag 
12: The Rishi Paratikshatra, The pola: & metaphorical expression 
for sacrifical duties. That which bears us on : the pole, the performanca 
of sacrifice. ‘‘[ srpport that transcendant and preservative load.’—Wil- 
son, He wio knows the way: the divine inner guide : mdrgabhijno' 
devah—Sayana. 3 Sansa : prayer or wish, personified, Or sdnsam 
may be a verbal form, I praise, - 


HYMN 417.) THE RIGVEDA. 615 


8 °May the Dames, wives of Gods, enjoy our presents, Rat, Asvini, 
Agnayi, and Indrani. 
May Rudasi and Varunani hear us, and Goddesses come at the 
Matrons’ season. 


HYMN xXLVII. Visvedcvas. 


Uraine to toil and making proclamation, seeking Hegyen’s 
¢ Daughter comes the Mighty Mother : . 
She comes, the youthful Hymn, unto the Fathers, itviting to 
her home and loudly calling. 
2 Swift in their motion, hasting to their duty, reaching the cent- 
ral point of 1ife immortal, : 
On every side about the earth and heaven go forth the spaci- 
ous paths without a limit. 
3 Steer, Sea, Red Bird with strong wings, ue hath enteged the 
dwelling-place of the Primeval Father. ° 
A gay-hued Stone set inthe sg of heaven, he hath gone 
forth and guards mid-air’s two limit® ° 
.4 Four bear him upand give him rest and quiet, and ten invigor- 
e ate the Babe for travel. 
His kine most excellent, of threefold nature, pass swiftly round 
the boundaries of heaven, acs 
5 Wondrous, O peopie, is the mystic knowledge¢that while the 
waters stand the streams are flowing : . 
That, separate from his Mother, Two support him, closely“hnited 
twins, here made apparent. 
eee esenraeens ee eee eee ee enn Serena 
8 Rat: the name of a Goddess, or, as Sayana takes it, bright, qual- 
ifying Asvind, he Comsort of the Agvins. Rodksi : the Spouse of Rudra. 
See Index. At the Matrons' season : at the time appointed for the cslest- 
ial dames, the Consorts of the Gods. ° 
1 Heaven's Daughter: Ushas os Dawn, Zhe Mighty Mother : per- 
haps, as Professor Ludwig suggests, Vak or Speech is intended, who 
appeare in the second line as tho Hymn personitied. 2 The central 
point of life wmmortal: the Sun. The paths: the long lines ot light. 
3 Sea: as the great attracter and recefitacle® of the waters. He: 
the Sun Zhe Primeval Father ; Dyaus, or Heaven. A gay-hued 
Stone: Professor Ludwig would read prisni-rasmda, ‘with variegaed 
rays,’ instead of the prisnir asmé of the text. But ghe alteration seems 
to be unnecessary. 4 Fow%® : according to Sayana, the four chief 
priests. Possibly Varuna, Mitra,, Aryaman, Bhaga ‘are eintended— 
Ludwig. Ten; the regions of space; as the Sun attracts the 
waters from all sides His kine: his rays, Of threef8ld nature :* produc- 
ing heat, cold (by their absence), and rain. 5 The r@arvel is that 
the waters stand still in the sea while the rivers are continaally fiowing 
into it. Cf. Eolesiastes, I. 7. Separate from his Mother: Surya's Mother 
te the invisible Aditi; and he lg supported by Heaven and Earth, the 
closely.connected pair who are vivible in this world,—Ludwig. 


ae —— 


516 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR V. 


6 For him they lengthen prayers and acts of worship: the 
Mothers weave garments for him their offspring. 
Rejoiciag, for the Steer’s impregning contact, his Spouses move 
on paths of heaven to meet him. 
7 Be this our praise,-O Varuna aod Mitra; may this be health 
and force to us, O Agni. 
May we obtair firm ground and room for resting : Glory to 
ees the lofty babitation ! ’ 
: c HYMN XLVIII. Visvedevas, 


Wuat may we meditate for the beloved Power, mighty in na- 
tive strength and gldrious in iteelf, 
Which as a magic energy seeking waters spreads even to the 
immeasurable middle region’s cloud ? 
2 O'er all the region with their uniform advance these have 
spread out the lore that giveth heroes strength. 
Back, with their course reversed, the others pass away : the 
pious lengthens li“e with those that are before. 
3 With pressing-stones and with the bright beams of the day he. 
hurls his broadest bolt against the Guileful One, 
Even he whose hundred wander iu his own abode, driving the 
days afar and bringing them again. 
A I, to enjoy the beauty of his form, behold that rapid rush of 
« his us ‘twere an axes edge, 
What time he gives the man who calls on him in fight wealth 
like a dwelling-house filled full with store of food. 
5 Fowr-faced and nobly clad, Varuua, urging on the pious to his 
task, stirs himself with the tongue. 
Naught by our humaa nature do we know ef him, him from 
whom Bhaga Savitar bestows the boon. 


6 They : worshippers. Zhe Mothers; the Dawns, or the regions of 
space, which clothe the Sun with. light. His Spouses: the solar rays. 
7 Firm grownd and room for resting: ‘stability and permanence,’-— 


Wilson. —e : 
1 Which as a magte energy : or, what time the magic energy, that 
is Vak, Voice or Speech. . 2 These? Dawns. Befire : yet to come. 


3 With pressing-stonta: in alliance with, and strengthened by them, 
that is, the libations which they aid. He: Indra. Zhe Guileful One: 
Vritrd. Hvesf hss: Todra ag the Sun. * Whose hundred: Sayana supplies, 
rrys, , 4 Hy jorm: Agni’s. 5 Varuna: according to Sayana, 
vdrunah here js an adjective =tamovdrakah, darkness-repeiling, and an 
epithes of Agni. ‘ With the tongue: causing the worshipper to speak 
of him. * Naught by our human nature: all our knowledge of tha 
God comes by his inspiration, «+ Bhaga: according to Sayana, bhagah 
hero ie an epithet of Savitar, mighty or adorable. - 


BYMN 50] THE RIGVEDA. 517 
. HYMN XLIX. Visvedevas. 


Tx18 day I bring God Savitar to meet you. and Bhaga who 
allots the wealth of mortals. 
You, Asvins, Heroes rich in treasures, daily seeking your friend- 
ship fain would I turn hither. 
2 Knowing full well the Asura’s time of coming, worslfip God 
¢ Savitar with hymns and praises. ‘ 
Let him who rightly knoweth speak with domage to him who 
dealeth out man’s noblest treasure. 
3 Not for reward doth Pishan send his blessings, Bhaga, or 
Aditi : his garb is splendour. 
May Indra, Vishnu, Varuna, Mitra, Agni produce avspicious 
days, the Wonder- Workers. 2 
4 Sending the shelter which we ask, the foeless Savitar and 
the Rivers shall appeoach us. 
When I, the sacrificer’s priest, invitethem, may we be lords of 
wealth and rich possessions. : 
5 They who devote such worship to the Vasus, singing their 
bymns to Varuna and Mitra, é 
Vouchsafe them ample room, far off be danger. Through 
grace of Heaven and Earth may we be happy. : 
HYMN L. Viswedevas. 
Ler every mortal man elect the friendship of the guiding God. 
Each one solicits him fox wealth and seeks renown to»prosper~ 
him, 
2 These, leading God, are thine, and these here ready to speak 


after ds. 
As such may we attain to wealth and wait witl services on 


thee, 
5 So farther honour as our guests the Hero Gods and then the 


e Dames. ° . 
May he remove and keep afar our foes and all who block our 


path, 


2 The Asura’s time of coming t the approach of the divine Savitar. 
3 Adjtt ¢ according to Sayana=gkhandaniyah, who cannot be impaired, 
used here as an epithet of Agni, understood, as are alo pashd, ‘nourish- 
ing,’ and bhdgah, ‘adorable,’ But Sayana gives? also’the alternative 
interpretation of the words ‘as three deities. " . : 
e 


The Rishi is said to be Svasti (a name apparently Sorrowed from 
avastaye, for weal, in stapza 5). 1 The guiding God: Savitar. 
2 These ; worshippers, B The Dames: the Consorts of the Gods. 
May he: Savitar. , 


518 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR V. 


4 Where fire is‘set, and swiftiy ransthe victim dwelling in the’ 
trough, . 
He wins, with heroes in his home, friendly to man, like con- 
stant streams. 


5 May these thy riches, Leader God ! that rule the car, be blest 
tous, 7 
Yea, blest to us for wealth and weal. This will we ponder 
praising streng*h, this ponder as we praise the God, 
HYMN LI. Visvedevas, 


Wire all assistants, Agni, come hither to drink the Soma- 
juice 5 
With Gods unto our sacred gifts. 
2 Come to the sacrifice, O ye whose ways are right, whose laws 
are true, ’ 
And drink the draught with Agni’s tongue- 
3 O Singer, with the singers. O Gracious, with those who move 
at dawn, ° 
Come to the Soma-draught with Gods. 


4 To Indya and to Vayu dear, this Soma, by the mortar pressed, 
Is now poared forth to fill the jar. 


® Viyu, come hither to the feast, well-pleased unto our sacred 
giéte : 
Drink of the Soma juice effused : come to the food, 
6 Ye, Indra, Vayu, well deserve todrink the juices pressed by us. 
Gladly accept them, spotless Pair : come to the food. 
7 For Indra and for Vayu pressed are Soma juices blent with 
curd, 
As rivers ‘o the lowland fluw : come to the food. 
8 Associate with all the Gods, come, with the Asvins and with 
Dawn 
Agni, as orst with Atri, so erjoy the juice, ee 


et 


4 This stanza is obscure, Drdnyah pasih, the victim or beast 
connected with, or dwelling in, the dréna tub or trough, is apparently 
the Soma. The meaning may ‘oe that the man who caugés the sacrificial 
fire to be kindled and libations of Somatjuice to be prepared is reward- 
ed with brave souls and general prosperity. 


1 With all assistants: ‘with all the protecting deities.’— Wilson. 


2 Oye: other* Gods. 3 O Singer: Agni. With the singer: with 
the human priests. Those who movs at dawn: the Gods who come to 
the morning sacrifice. 8 As erst with Aird: as thou wast accustom- 


ed to enjoy the libation offered by the ancient Atri, the progenitor of 
the Rishi of the bymn. 


HYMN 52.) THE RIGVEDA. 519 


.9 Associate with Varuna, with Mitra, Soma, Vishnn, come, 
Agni, as erst with Atri, enjoy the juice. 
10 Associate with Vasus, with Adityas, Indra, Vayu, come, Agni 
as erst with Atri, so enjoy the juice, 


11 May Bhaga and the Asvins grant us wealth and health, and 
Goddess Aditi and he whtm none resist, 
The Asura Piishan grant us all prosperity, and heaven and 
¢ Earth most wise vouchsafe us happiness. 3 


12 Let us solicit Vayu for prosperity, and Sema who is Lord of 
all the world for weal ; 
For weal Brihaspati with all his eompany, May the Adityas 
bring us health and happiness. 


13 May all the Gods, may Agni the beneficent, God of dll men, 
this day be with us for our weal. 
Hclp us the Ribhus, the Divine Ones, for our goody May Ru- 
dra bless and keep ne from calamity. 


14 Prosper us, Mitra, Varuna. O wealthy Pathy4, prosper us, 
{Indra and Agni, prosper us ; prosper us thou, O Aditi. 


1f* Like Sun and Moon may we pursue in full prosperity our path, 
And meet with one who gives again, who knows us well and 
slays us not. ° 


HYMN LIL. . ; 


Sine boldly forth, Syivasva, with the Maruts who are loud in 
song, . 
Who, holy, as their wont is, joy in glory that is free from enile, 


2 For in their boldness they are friengs of firm and sure heroic 
strength. 
They in their course, bold-spirited, guard all men of their 
Own accord. 


3 Like steers in rapid motion they advance and overtake the 
e hights ; 
And thus the Maruts’ power in heaven and on the earth we 
celebrate. 


11 Health gnd wealth :*svastt ; well-being, prosperity. TI have 
slightly varied the translation gf the word, which recurs in every line 
of stanzas 11—14 and in the first line of 15. The Astra: the divine and 
immortal being. Sfyans ex; laifts the word as ‘the expaller of enemies, 
or the giver of life and strength.’ 12 Wh all kise compaty : 
with all the host of heaven. 14 Wealthy Pathya :¢ the rich path,’ 
personified ag a deity of happiness and welfare. 15 Who gives again : 
who repays the kindness we have shown him when he was our guest. 
These, as a Professor Ludwig observas, are the wishes of & man who is 
starting on a journey to a distant place. 


520 THE HYMNS OP ([BOOR V, 


4 With boldness to your Maruts let offer laud and sacrifice ; 
Who all, through ages of mankind, guard mortal man from 
injury. 
& Praiseworthy, givers of good gifts, Heroes with full and per- 
fect strength— 
To Maruts, Holy Ones of heaven, will I extol the sacrifice, 
6 The laf ty Heroes cast their spears, and weapuns bright with 
gleamins gold. ‘ 
After these Maruiés followed close, like laughing lightning from 
the sky, a splendour of its own accord. 
7 They who waxed mighty, of the earth, they whoarein the 
wide mid-air, 
Or in the rivers’ compass, or in the abode of ample heaven. 
8 Praise thou the Maruts’ company, the valorous and truly 
strong. 
The Heroes, hasting, by themselves nave yoked their deer for 
victory, 
9 Fair-gleaming, on Parushni they have clothed themselves in 
robes of wool, | 
And with their ehariot tires they cleave the rock asunder j 
their might. 


10 Wkether as wanderers from the way or speeders on or to the 


pati, 
Under these names the spreading band tend well the sacrifice 
for ne, - 
11 To this the Heroes well attend, well do their teams attend to 
this. 


Visible are their varied forms, Behold, they are Pardvatas, 


12 Hymn-singing, seeking water, they, praising, have danced 
about the spring. 

What are they unto me ? No thieves, but helpers, splendid to 

behold. . ; 


9 Parushné : one of the rivers of the Panjab, now oxled the Ravi. 
Robes of wool ; the fleety vapours which rise from the waters. See IV. 
32 9. 11 Pardvatas : a tribe who dwelt on the banks of the Paru- 
shni who may heve bren in the habit ot’ making suddan incursions into 
tha country through +-hich the Sindhu or Indus flows. 12 Seeking 
water : this is Sdyana’s explanation of kebhanydvah, the meaning of 
which is uncertain. The spring : apparently, the cloud. According to 
Sayana the reference is to the water—or the well__which was mira- 
oulously brought to the thireting Gotama by the Maruts. See I. 85. Il. 
The stanza is difficult and obscure. : 


HYMN 52.) THE RIGVEDA. B21 
13 Sublime, with lightnings for their spears, Sages and Orderers 


are they. 
- Rishi, adore that Marat host, and make them happy with thy 
song. 
14 Rishi, invite the Marut band with offerings, as a maid her 
friend. 
From heaven, too, Bold Ones, in your might haste hither glo- 
rified with songs. ° 


15 Thinking of these now let him come, as with the escortyof the 


° Gods. 
And with the splendid Priuces, famed for ,rapid® courses, to 


the gifts. 
16 Princes, who, when IJ asked their kin, named Prisni as theit 
Mother-cow, 
And the impetuous Rudra they, the Mighty Ones, dgclared 
their Sire. 
17 The mighty ones, the seven times seven, have singly given 


me hundred gifts. 
IT have obtained on Yamuné famed wealth in kine ang wealth 


in steeds, : 


e 

14 As a maid her friend: this seams to be the meaning of mitrdm 
nd yoshdnd, which Siyana expleins, as a friend (or as Adjtym the Sun) 
with praise. 15 The three concluding stanzasgaré very difficult, 
and attempts at translation and explanation must be pucely conjecgural. 
The following is the substance of Professor Ludwig’s note. e Saking 
[mighty ones] io stanza 17 are apparently a clan (yajamangh, or insti- 
tutors of sacrifice) whose number consisting of a multiple of seyen, gave , 
occasion to their comparison to the Marubs, and an easy transition to 
the ddnastuts or eulogy of their liberality. .The construction is: now 
thinking of ¢hese eacrificers [ or, Maruts] may he [ the Rishi ] come 
together, as with the escort of the Gods [invited in stanza 14], in com- 
pany with [the Maruts or] the Surie to the sacrificial offermgs. Stanza 
16 is to be understood figuratively as eulogy of the Sakine who are here 
directly identified with tbe Maruts. The priest must know the lineage 
of the sacrificers, because in certain geremqnies he must proclaim their 
nameg, and here Sakius are considered to have inherited their liberality 
from Prisni as their mother and vheir*power from Rudra as their father. 
17 The Mighty Ones: or the Sikins, as Professor Ludwig explains 
The seven times geven : there are said to be eevenstroops of the Maruts, 
each consieting of seven. The Sakina, or powerful] inetitutors of sacri- 
fice, appear to be intended here {see preceding note) as compared to, or 
identified with the Maruts. On F¥amund? on the Uhnksof the river 
now known as the Jumna, . ° This and all Rigveda hymns addressed 
to the Maruts have been translated and thoroughfy discussed by Profge- 
sor Max Muller in Vedic Hymns, Part I. ( Sacred Books of sheet Rine, 
Vol. XXXII.) ° 


66 ® 


522 THE AYMNS OF [BOOR V. 


HYMN LIII. Maruts. 


Wuo knows the birth of these, or who lived in the Maruts’ 
favour in the days of old. 
What time their spotted deer were yoked ? 


2 Who, when they stood upon their cars, hath heard them tell 
the way they went? 
Who was the bounteous man to whom their kindred rains 
flowed down with food of sacrifice ? 


3 Tone they told it, and they came with winged steeds radiant 
to the dranght, 

Youths, Heroes free from spot or stain: Behold us here and 
praise thou us ; 


4 Who shine self-]Juminous with ornaments and swords, with 
breastplates, armlets, and with wreaths, 
Arvayed on chariots and with bows. 


9 Osvift to pour your bounties down, ye Maruts, with delight 
I lovk upon your cars, 
Like splendours coming through the rain. 


6 Manificent Herocs, they have cast heaven’s treasury down for 
the worshipper’s behoof : 
They set the storm-cloud free to stream through both the 
worlds, and rainfloods flow o’er desert spots 


7 The bursting streams in billowy flood have spread abroad, like 
:milch-kine, o’cr the firmament. 
Like swift stecds hasting to their journey’s resting-place, to 
every side run glittering brooks. 


- 8 Hither, O Maruts, come from heaven, from mid-air, or from 
near at hand : 
Tarry not far away from us. 


9 So let not Ras&, Krumu, or Anitabh4, Kubha, or Sindhu hold 
you baék. 


Let not the watery Sarayu obstruct your way. With us be 
all the bliss ye give. 


1@ That brilliant gathering of your cars, the company of Maruts, 
of the Youthful Ones, 


The rain-showers, speeding on, attend, 


1 Of these: Gods ; the Maruts. * 9 Ras&: a river, probably an 
affluent of the Sindbn or Indns, as Anctabhd aleo seems to have been. 
Krumu : a tributary of the Indus, identifted by some with the Kurum. 
Kubha : the Kophen, or Kabul river which falle into the Indus near 
Attock. Sarayu : probably a river in the Panjab which gave its name 
to the Saraya,oa Sarja of Oudh. 


AYMN 54) TAKE RIGVEDA. 523 


11 With eulogies and bymns may we follow your army, troop by 
troop, and band by band, 
And company by;company. 
12 To what oblation-giver, sprung of noble ancestry, have sped 
The Maruts on this course to-day ? 
13 Vouchsafe to us the bounty, hat which we implore, through 
which, for child and progeny, ° ag 
Ye give the seed of corn that wasteth not away, and bliss 
that reacheth to all life. . : 
14 May we in safety pass by those who slander us leaving be- 
hind disgrace and hate. ; 
. Maruts, may we be there when ye, at dawn. in rest and toil, 


rain waters down and balm. “ 
15 Favoured by Gods shall be the man, O Ileroes, Maruts ! and 
possessed of noble sons, at 


Whom ye protect. Such may we be, 


16 Praise the Free-givers. At this ‘liberal patrons’ rite they jay 
like cattle in the mead. : 
So call thou unto them who come as ancient Friends : hymna 


* those who love thee with a song. 
HYMN LIV, 2° | Maruts. 
Tuts hymn will I make ready for the Marut host who bright 
in native splendour cast the mountains down. e 


Sing the great strength of those illustrious in renown, who 
stay the heat, who sacnfice on heights of heaven. 


2 O Marats. rich in water, strengtheners of life are your strong 
bands with karnessed steeds, that wander far, 
Trita roars out at him who aims the lightning-flash. The 
waters sweeping round are thundering on thei way. 


3 They gleam with lightning, Heroes, Casters of the Stone, 
wind-rapid Maruts, overthrowere of the hills. 
° Oft through desire to rain coming with storm of hail, roaring 
in onset, violent and exceedipg strong, 
orgs pee ee 
1 Who sachsfice on heights of heavens ‘to whom solemn rites are 
familiar ; by whom the sacrifices called Prishtha‘are mado.’— Wilson. 
The word Prishthd is ambiguous, signifying both height or, ridge ,and 
certain arrangement of bymne,(see IV 20 4). Sotlso yharma in the 
same half-lins signifies both heat and an obljatiorof hot milk or Othfer 
heated beverage, and the meaning of the compound gkarmastubhe ia 
accordingly ambiguous. 2 Trita t the Vedic God who frequently 
appears in connexion with the Marute. Aosording to Sayana, Zirste is 
the cloud or company of Marute statidhed in three places. 


524 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK V. 


4 When, mighty Rudras, through the night and through the 

days, when through the sky and realms of air, shakers of all, 

When over the broad fields ye drive along like ships. e’en to 
strongholds ye come, Marnuts, but are not harmed. 


5 Maruts, this hero strength and majesty of yours hath, like 
the Sun, extended o’er a lengthened way, 
When in your course like deer with splendour unsubdued ye 
bowed the hill that gives imperishable rain. 


6 Bright shone yeur host, ye Sages, Maruts, when ye smote the 
waving tree as when the worm consumeth tt, 
Accordant, as the eye guides him who walks, have ye led our 
devotion onward by an easy path. 
7 Newsr is he, O Marats, slain or overcome,never doth he decay, 
ne’er is distressed or harmed ; 
His treasures, his resources, never waste away, whom, whether 
he be prince or Rishi, ye direct, , 


8 With.barnessed team like heroes overcoming troops,the friendly 
Maruts, Jaden with their water-casks, . 
Let the spring flow, and when impetuous they roar they 
inundate the earth with floods of pleasant meath. 


9 Free for the Marutsis the earth with sloping ways, free for the 
rushing Oncs is heaven with steep descents, 
Te paths of air’s mid-region are precipitous, precipitous the 
mountains with their running streams. 


10 When, as the Sun hath risen up,. ye take delight, O bounteous 
radiant Maruts, Heroes of the sky, 
Your coursers weary, not when spceding on their way, and 
rapidly ye reach the end of this your path. 


11 Lances are on your shoulders, anklets on your feet,gold chains 
are on your breasts, gems, Maruts, on your car. 
Lightnings aglow with flame are flashing in your hands, and 
visors wrought of gold are laid upon your heads, 


12 Marats, in eager stir ye shake the vaalt of heaven, splendid 
beyond conception, for its shining fruit. 
Theyathered when they let their deeds of might flash forth, 
The Pious One'send forth a far-resounding snout. 


13 Sage Maruts, may we be the dviver of the car of riches full 
of life that have been given by you. 
© Maruts, let that wealth in thousands dwell with us which 
"never vanishes like Tishya from the sky. 


rarer amenities eee esos nena, 


13 For its shining fruit : the bright water. 13 The drivers of 
the car : that is, the controllers.: May we by our prayers and sacrifices 
bring down and enjoy the riches which you give. 


AYMN 55.) THE RIGVEDA, 525 


14 Maruts, ye farther wealth with longed-for heroes, further the 
Rishi skilled in chanted verses, 
Ye give the Bharata as his strength, a charger, and ye bestow 
a King who quickly listens. 
15 Of you, most swift to succour! I solicit wealth wherewith we 
may spread forth mid mendike as the Sun. 
Accept, O Maruts, graciously this hymn of mine that we may 
live a hundred winters through its power. . 


HYMN LV. F ¢ Maruts. 


Wirs gleaming lances, with their breasts adorned with gold, 
the Maruts, rushing onward, hold high power of life, 
-They hasten with swift steeds easy to be coutrolled. Their 
cars moved onward as they went to victory. < 
2 Ye, as ye wist, have gained of your own selves your power : 
high, O ye Mighty Ones, and wide ye shine abroad. ¢ 
They with their strength have even measured out thé sky. 
Their cars moved onward as they went to victory. 
3 Strong, born together, they together havo waxed gre&t : the 
Heroes more and more have grown to majesty. 
Resplendent as the Sun’s beams in their light are they, Their 
cars moved onward as they went to victory, . 
4 Maruts, your migbtiness deserves to be adoreds ‘sight to be 
longed for like the shining of the Sun. . 
So lead us with your aid to immortality. Their cars moved 
onward as they went to victory, 
5 O Maruts, from the Ocean ye uplift the rain, and fraught with 
vaporous Moisture pour the torrents down. 
Never, ye Wonder- Workers, are your, Milch-kine dry. Their 
cars mowed ofiwurd as they went to victory, 
6 When to your car-pules ye have yoked your spotted deer to be 
your steeds, and put your golden mantles on, ~ 
O Maruts, ye disperse all enemies abroad. Their cars moved 
, onward as they went to victory. 


Tishya : an asterism regarded as shaped like an arrow and contain- 
ing three stare. According to Sfyana Z2shya here is synonymous with 
Aditya. 14, The Bharata? a warrior, or one*of family of Bharata. 
Sea Index. According 1» Sayana, Sydvasva the Rishi of the hymn ie 
intended : ‘to (me) the ministrant priest.’—Wilson. | Who quickly 
listens : to his people’s prayers.*Ssyana explaing srughfimdnitdm ag 
sukhavautam, happy and prosperous. 15 Ahundred winters: 
frequently occurring expression, ‘from which we might infer,' saye Dr. 
J. Muir, ‘that the Indians still retained some recolldotion of their hav- 
ing ab one time occupied a colder country’. See Originat S&uskrit Texts, 
IJ. 323. ——- » 


5 Your Milch-kine : the rain-clouda, 


526 THE HY MNS OF {BOOK VY. 


7 Neither the mountains nor the rivers keep you back : whither 
ye have resolved thither ye, Maruts, go. 
Ye compass round about even the heaven andearth, Their 
cars moved onward as they went to victory. 


8 Whate’er is ancient, Maruts, what of recent ttme, whate’er is 
spoken, Vasus, what is chamted forth, 
They who take cognizance of all of this are ye. Their cars 
moved onward as they went to victory. p 


9 Be gracious upto us, ye Maruts, slay us not: extend ye unto 
us shelter of many a sort. 
Pay due regard unto our friendship and our praise, Their 
cars moved onward as they went to victory. 


10 O Maruts, lead us on to higher fortune: deliver us, when 
lauded, from afflictions. 
Accépt, ye Holy Ones, the gifts we bring you. May we be 
masters of abundant riches. 


‘ - HYMN LVI. Maruts, 


Acni, that valorous company adorned with ornaments of gold,» 
The people of the Marats, I call down to-day even fromthe 
luminous realm of heaven, - 
2 Even aaa thinkest in thy heart, thither my wishes also 
tend, 
Those who have come most near to thine invoking calls, 
strengthen them fearful to behold. 
3 Earth, like a bountcous lady, liberal of her gifts, struck 
down and shaken, yet cxultant, comes to us. 
Impetuous as « bear, O Maruts, is your rash terrible as a 
dreadfui bull. ' ; 
4 Thoy who with mighty strength o’erthrow like oxen difficult 
to yoke, 
nets e’en the heavenly stone to shake, yea, shake the rocky 
mountain as they race along. 
6 Rise up ! even now with laeds I call the very numerous cém- 


pany; ry ’ 
Unequalled, of these Maruts, like a herd of kine grown up 
together in their strength. 


€ 
@ 


2 Strengthen them : that is, the M&rutes, with oblations, 3 The 
exact: meaning of the first line is somewhat uncertain. Sayana explains 
iy: ‘Ag the earth—bhat is the people ofthe earth—having a powerful 
master, when oppressed by others, has recourse to him bar own master, 
so the army of Maruts comes exulting to ue’ But milhishmati ( bount- 
eous, liberal,‘bringing forth abundant fruit) cannot mean prabalasvamikd, 
having a powerful master. Struck down : by the rain send by the 
Maruts. : 


HYMN 81] THE RIGVEDA. 527 


6 Bind to your car the bright red mares, yoked the red coursers 
to your car. 
¢Bind to the pole, to draw, the fleet-foot tawny steeds, the 
best at drawing, to the pole. 


@ Yea, and this loudly-neighing bright red vigorous horse whe 
a hath been stationed, fair to see, 
Let him not cause delay, O Maruts, in your course, urge ye 
him onward in your cars. ° 


8 The Maruts’ chariot, ever fain to gather glony, we invoke, 
hich Rodasi hath mounted, bringtng pleasant Bifts, with 
Maruts in her company. 7 


9 I call that brilliant band of yours, adorable, rapid on the car 
Whereon the bounteous Dame, auspicious, nobly born, shows 
glorious with the Marut host. ~ 


HYMN LVII. Maruts, 
Or one ascord, with Indra, ye Rudras, come borne on your 
golden car for our prosperity. 
An offering from us, this hymn is brought to you, as, unto one 
who thirsts for water, heavenly springs. ¢ 


*2 Armed with yoar daggers, full of wisdom, armed with spears, 
“armed with your quivers, armed with arrows,with good bows, 
Good horses and good cars have ye, O Prisni’s Sons ye Maruts,. 
with good weapons go to victury. . 


3 From hills and heaven ye shake wealth for the worshippgy : in 
terror at your coming low thé woods bow down, 

Ye make the earth to tremble, Sons of Prisni, when for victory 
ye have yoked, fierce Ohes ! your spotted deer, 


4 Bright with the blasts of wind, wrappel in their robes of rain, 
like twixs of rfoble aspect and of lovely form, 
The Maruts, spotless, with steeds tawny-hued and red, strong 
in their mightiness and spreading wide like heaven, 


6 Rich in adornment, rich in drops, munificent, bright in their 
aspect, yielding bounties that endure, 
Noble by birth, adorned with gold upon their breasts, the 
Singers of the sky have won intmortal fame. 


“Who hath been stationed : gr harnessed to the car. 8 Rodast 
the Consort of Ruelra and mother of the Matute. | 9 The bounteons 


Dame : Rodasi. Shows glorious : ow, ia glorified, 
e 


@e e " 
1 O ye Rudras: or Sonsof, Rudra, For our prosperity : to the 
' accessible (sacrifice)’—Wilson. Heavenly springs’: an allusion, says 
Sayana, to the well, that is, the cloud which was browgh» By the Maru- 
ts to thirety Gotama. Sve [. 85 [1 4 Like twins : all Slike. 5 
The Singers of the sky : chantere of their thunder-psalm. 


628 | THE HYMNS OF [BOOK V. 


6 Borne on both shoulders, O ye Maruts, are your spears : withiu 
your arms is laid your energy and strength. 
Bold thoughts are in your heads, your weapons in your cars, 
all glorious majesty is moulded on your forms, 


7 Vouchsafe to us, O Maruts, splendid boanty in cattle and in 
steeds, in cars and heroes. 
Children of Rudra, give us high distinction : may Tenjoy your 
Godlike help and favour. « 
8 Ho! Maruts, Heroes, skilled in Law,immortal, be gracious un- 
to us, ye rich in treasures, 
Ye hearers of tbe truth, ye sage and youthfal, grown mighty, 
dwelling on the lofty mountains 


HYMN LVIII. Maruts. 


Now do I glorify their mighty cohort, the company of these the 
youthful Maruts, 

Who ride impetuous on with rapid horses, and radiant in 
themselves, are Lords of Amris, 


2 The mighty glittering band, arm-bound with bracelets, givers 
of bliss, unmeasured in their greatness, 
With magical powers, bountiful, ever-roaring,—these, liberal 
Heroes, venerate thou singer. 7 


3 This day may all your water-oringers, Maruts, they who impel 
| the falling rain, approach us. 
This fre, O Maruts, hath been duly kindled ; let it find favonr 
with you, youthful Sages. 
4 Ye'raise up for the folk anactive ruler whom, Holy Ones! a 
Master’s hand hath fashioned. 
Ye send the fighter ‘:and to hand, arm-mighty, and the brave 
hero, Maruts ! with good horses. 


6 Bold thoughts : Sayana explains srimnd =nrimini as golden tiarag 
The wor) nrimnd in one or another of its oases occure some thirty 
times in the Rigveda, and alwave in the sense of manly power, valorous 
deed. 8 Ye haarers of the truth: or, famous for your truth for the 
realizaion of your promises, 

1 Lords of Amrit : corftrollere of the sweet life Siving rain. 9 
Arm-bouned with bracelets : or, rather, * adorned with quoits on their 
hands’— M+ Miller. 4 Who......0 Master's hand hath fashioned : 
acoording to Biyara wtbhvatashtdm means fabricated or modelled by 
Vibhvan, the second of the three Ribhus. i.e. atyantarapavantam or 
exceedingly tandeomea The fighter hand to hand: the man who fights 
on foot is your gift ae wellas warrior whois borne to battle in a 


chariot. 


HYMN 59 |} THE RIGWEDA. §29 


6 They spring forth more and more, strong in their glories, like 
¢ days, like spokes where none are last in order. | 
Highest and mightiest are the Sons of Prisni. Firm to their 
own intention cling the Maruts. 
6 When ye have hastened on with spotted coprsers, Q Maruts, 
on your cars with strong wrought fellies, 
The waters are disturbed, the woods are shattered. Let Dyaus 
the Red Steer send his thunder downward, ? 


7 Even Earth hath spread herself wide at their cofiing, and 
they as husbands have with power impregfed her. 
They to the pole have yoked the winds for coursers: their 
sweat have they made rain, thes® Sons of Rudra. 


8’ Ho! Maruts, Heroes, skilled in Law, immortal, be gragious 
unto us, ye rich in treasures, 
Ye hearers of the truth, ye sage and youthful, grown naghty, 
dwelling on the lofty mountains. : 


HYMN LIX. ‘ Maruts., 


Your spy hath called to you to give prosperity. I sing to Heaven 
and Earth and offer sacrifice. | 
hey bathe their steeds and hasten through the firmament : 
they spread abroad their radiance through thasta of cloud. 


® Earth shakes and reels in terror at their onward rush, like a 
full ship which, quivering, lets the water in. x 
Marked on their ways are they, visible from afar : the Heroes 
press between in mighty armament, ® 
3 As the exalted horn of bulls for splendid might, as the Sun’s 
eye set in the firmament’s exparise, e 
Like vigorous hdrses ye are beauteous to behold, and for your 
glory show like bridegrooms, O ye Men. ° 


4 Who, O ye Maruts, may attain the mighty lore of you the 
mighty, who may reach your manly deeds ? 
ave, verily, make earth tremble, like aray of light what time 
ye bring your boons to give prosperity. 
& Like steeds of ruddy colour, scions of one race, as foremost 
champions they have battled in the van. , 
The Heroes hgve waxed strong like well-grown man! y youths ; 
with floods of rain they make the Sun’s eye fade away. 


6 Having no eldest and no youngest in thcir band, no midale- 
most, preeminent they; have waxed in might, 


Your spy: Agni, as the lightning, According to Sayaila spdt is for 
sprashid, one who teuches (the oblation), the Hotar or *presenting 
privet. 2 Press between: rush through the air between heaven 
and earth. A 6 , 


67 : 


530 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK V. 


These Sons of Prisni, sprung of noble ancestry : come hither: 
ward to us, ye bridegrooms of the sky. : 
@ Like birds of air they flew with might io lengthened lines from 
heaven's high ridges to the borders of the sky. 
The steeds who carry them, as Gods and mortals know, have 
caused the waters of the mountaius to descend. 
8 May Dyaus, the Infinite, roa for our banquet: may Dawns 
toil for us, glittering with moisture. 
Lauded by thee, these Maruts, Sons of Rudra, O Rishi, have 
sent down the heavenly treasure. 


HYMN LX. Maruts. 


I Lau with reverence the gracious Agni : here may hesit and 
ynart our meed among us. 
As with spoil-seeking cars I bring oblation : turned rightward 
I will swell the Murut’s praise-song. 
2 The wfaruts, yea, tho Rudras, who bave mounted their famous 
spotted deer and cars swift-moving,— 
Befvre you, fierce Ones! woods bow down in terror: Earth, 
even the mountain, trembles at your coming. 
3 Though vast and tall, the mountain is affrighted, the height 
of heaven is shaken at your roaring. 
When, urmed with lances, ye are sporting, Maruts, and rash 
along together like the waters. 
4 ‘They, like young suitors, sons of wealthy houses, have with 
their golden natures decked their bodies. 
Strong on their cars, the lordly Ones, for glory, have set their 
splendours on their forms for ever. 
5 None being eldest, none among them youngest, as brothers 
they have grown vo happy fortune. 
May their Sire Radra, young and deft, and Prisni pouring 
mnch milk, bring fair days to the Maruts. 


7 Gods and mortals: the text has only wbhdye, both (sides or part- 
ies), The word generally means Gods and men ; but perhaps, as Pro- 
fessor Ludwig suggeste, Heaven and Earth may be intended bere. 8 
Dyaus, the Infinite: Cf. X. 63. 2. 


1 Turned rightward. making reverential salutation by circumam- 
bulation from left to right, the Gaelic deasil. 4 With their golden 
natures: with some hesitation I fcllow Professor Ludwig in taking 
hiranyath, se un old form of the feminine, with svadhaih. Brofeseor 
Wilson, following Sayana, translates; ‘with golden (ornaments) and 
purifying waters’ 5 Pouriug much milk: Prigni, the mother of 
the Maruts, the cloud of the firmament, being represented as a cow. 
Rring fair ‘ays to the Maruts : perhaps the bright weather which fol- 
lows.the Rains. ‘Grant favourable days for (the sake of) the Marute.’ 
— Wilson. 


HYMN 61.) THE RIGVEDA. _ 531 


Whether, O blessed Maruts, ye be dwelling in highest, mid- 
most, or in lowest heaven, 
Thenee, O ye Rudras, and thou also, Agni, notice the sacrificial 
food we offer, ) 
_ 1 0 Maruts, Lords of all, when Agni and when ye drive down- 
ward from sublimest heaven slong the heights. 
Shakers of all, rejoicing, siayers of the foe, give riches to the 
Soma-pressing worshipper, : - 
8 O Agni, with the Maruts as they gleam and sing, gathered in 
troop, rejoicing drink the Soma juice; , : 
With these the living ones whocleanse and further all, joined 
with thy banner, O Vaisvanara, {rom of old. 


HYMN LXI. . Maruts. 


@ 
O ntROEs lordliest of all, who are ye that Lava singly céme 
Forth from a region most remote ? e 
e T ) 
2 Where are your horses, where the reins ? How came ye? how 


had ye the power ? -. 
Rein was on nose and seat on back. ° ° 


° 3 The whip is laid upon the flank. The heroes stretch their 
*thighs apart, 


id 


{ Like women when the babe is born, .? 
4 Go ye, Heroes, far away, ye bridegrooms q@ith a lovely 
Spouse, e 
@ 


That ye may warm you at the-fire. 
5 May she gain cattle for her meed, hundreds of sheeps and 


steeds and kine, 
Who threw embracing arms around, the hero mhom Sydvdsva 


praised.e : 
6 Yea, many @ woman is more firm and better than the man 
who turns. 


Away from Gods, and offers not. 
7 She who discerns the weak and worn, the man who thirsts. 


and is in want ; 
She sets her mind upon the Gods, 


rr 
8 Joined witPthy banner: closely connected with they ensign or 
banner of flame, . 


e 
e e 
rs e 


_— & ~With a lovely Spouse : apparently Rodasi, who® is sometimes re; 
garded as the wife of the whofe band of Maruts. ° 5 She: adcording 
to Sayata, the wife of Taranta (stanza 10) who is ‘the thero whom 
Byavasva praised.’ 6 More firm: the word thus rendered, sdstyaat : 
ia taken by Sayana to be the name of Taranta’s wife, 


632 THE HYMNS OP [BUOR V. 


8 And yet full many a one, unpraised, mean, niggard, is entitled 
man : ; 
Oaly in weregild is he such. 
9 And she, the young, the joyoue-spirited, divulged the path to 
SyAva, yea, to me. 
Two red steeds carried me to Purumilha’s side, that sage of 
far-extended fame, 


10 Hig who, like Vaidadasvi. like Taranta, hath bestowed.on me 
A hundred cows in liberal gift. 


11 Thay who are-borne by rapid steeds, drinking the meath that 
gives delight, 
They have attained high glories here. 
12 They by whoze splendour both the worlds are over-spread : 
_Mhey shine on cars. 
As the gold gleams above in heaven. 
13 That-Marut band isever young, borne on bright cars, un- 
blamable, 
Moving to victory, checked by none, 
14 Who knoweth, verily, of these where the All-shakers take 
delight, 
Born, spotless, after sacred Law ? 
15 Guides are-ye, lovers of thesong! to mortal man through holy 
hymna, ~*~ 
And hearers when he cries for help- 
16 Do ye, destroyers of the foe, worshipful and exceeding bright, 
Send down the treasures that we, crave. 
17 O Urmya, bear thou far away to Darbhya this my hymn of 
praise, yo 
Songs, Goddess, as if chariot-borne. 
18 From mv to Rathaviti say, when he hath pressed the Soma 
juice, 
The wish I had departeth not, 


19 This wealthy Rathaviti dwulls among the people rich in kine, 
Among the mountains, far.withdrawn. 


-) 


8 Only in weregild: only as regarde the fine to be paid for 
manslaughter, either'by him or for hin, oan he be eécounted o man. 
The verse is obsoursa. See Vedic H dale (Sacred Books of the East ), 
Pare J, p. 360, and Ludwig, Ueber die neuesten Arbeiten, &o., p. 40 
9 Astd she; Taranta’s wife, Sydva=Syavasva, the Rishi of the hymn. 
}0 Vatdadasei : Purumtiha, son of Vidadasva, 11 This stanza is 
appsrently the beginning of a separate hymn. in honour of the Marute. 
12 As the gold : the golden Sun. 17 Urmyd : Goddess of Nigh», 
Dérbhya : Kathaviti, son of Darbha. 18 The wish I had : to per- 
form a sacrifice for che rich and liberal Rathaviti, 


AY MN 62.) THE RIGVEDA, 633 


HYMN LXII. Mitra-Varuna, 


¢ By your high Law firm order is established there where they 
loose for travel Surya’s horses, . 
Ten handred stood together : there [ looked on this the most 
marvellous Deities’ one chief glory 
2 This, Mitra-Varuna, is your special greatness : floods that stood 
there they with the days aftracted, 
Ye cause to flow all voices of the cow-pen : yéur single obariot- 
- felly bath rolled hither. : 
3 O Mitra-Varuna, ye by your greatness, both Kings, have firmly 
stablished earth and heaven. 
Ye caused the cows to stream, the plants to flourish, and, scat- 
tering swift drops, sent down the rain-flood, 
4 Let yoar well-harnessed horses bear you hither: hithemyard 
let them come with reins drawn tightly. 
A covering clond of sacred oi] attends you, and your streams 
flow to us from days aforetime. 
5 To make the lustre wider and amore famous, guarding the 
sacred grass with veneration, Y  % ° 
Ye, Mitra-Varuna, firm, strong, awe-inspiring, are seated on a 
¢ throne amid oblations. 
6 With hands that shed no bluod, guarding the pioug, whom, 
Varuna, ye save amid oblations. . o° 
Ye Twain, together, Kings of willing spirit, uphold dominion 
based on thousand pillars, me 
7 Adorned with gold, its columns’are of iron : in heaven it glit- 
ters like a whip for horses ; 
1 By your high Law : the eternal order of the universe, which in 
the region of the Sun regulates the starting and the journeying of bie 
horses, depends on, or is identical with, the everlasting statutes of 
Mitra and Varuna. Zen hundred; rays of the Sun. Onewhtef glory : 
the orb of the Sun, the noblest visible form of Agniand other Gods, 
2 Floods that stood there: they, that ie the sunbeams, have in the course 
of days milked out or attracted to themselves the waters that stood 
apért from the Sun. Tasthushth (statding, ftationary) has no substan- 
tive expressed, and the meaning of theesecona half line is consequently 
somewhat uncertain, All voices of the cow-pen: the cow-pen is the 
vast serial stall which holds the rain-clouds, the milch-kine of tho firm- 
ament The voices are probably the thunder and the roar of the rush- 
ing rain. Your single chariot-felly : the circumference or felly of the 
wheel being, by metonymy, put for the chariot... 4 A covering gloud 
of sacred oil : of ghrita, butter, i. 6° fertilizing rain. © 5°On a throne: 
or on your car. Ye save amid oblations : the sacrificial hallewith ite 
precincts being regarded as an inviolable asylum. 7 Adorned with 
gold; the chariot of Mitra and Varuna. Like a whip for hoxses : accord. 
ing to Sayana, the whip ie the lightning and the horses are the flying 
clouds. 4 


534 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK VY. 


Or stablished on a field deep-soiled and fruitful. So may we 
share the meath that loads your car-seat. 

8 Ye mount your car guld-hued at break of morning, and iron- 
pillaged when the Sun is setting. 

And from that place, O Varuna and Mitra, behold infinity and 

limitation. 

9 Bountiful guardians of the world! the shelter that is impene- 
trable, strongest, flawless, 
Aid us with that, O Varuna and Mitra, and when we long to 
win nmtay we be victors. 


HYMN LXIII. Mitra- Varuna. 


Guarpians of Order, ye whose Laws are ever true, in the 
sublimest heaven your chariot ye ascend. 
O, Mitra-Varuna whomsoe’er ye favour, here, to him the rain 
with sweetness streameth down from heaven, 
2 This world’s imperial Kings, O Mitra-Varuna, ye rule in holy 
synod, looking on the light. 
We pray for rain, your boen, and immortality. Through heaven 
aid over earth the thunderers take their way. 
©» Imperial Kings, strong, Heroes, Lords of earth and poe 
Mitra and Varuna, ye ever active Ones, 
Ye weit on thunder with the many-tinted clouds, and by the 
Asura’ semagic power cause Heaven to rain. 
4 Your magic, Mitra-Varuna, resteth in the heaven. The Sun, 
tlie wondrvus weapon, cometh forth as light. 
Ye hide him in thesky with cloud and flood of rain, and water-~ 
drops, Parjanya! full of sweetness flow. 


Or stablished : the meaning, of this third Pada is not elear. FPro- 
fessor Wileon, following Séyana, translates: ‘may we load the vehicle 
with the libation in an auspicious place, or in the saoriticial hall, 
{where the scolumns) are erected.’ 8 Iron-pillared : the chariot 
which shines like gold in the light of the rising sun looks dim and dark 
like brouze or iron ab sunset). Infinity and limitation : aditim ditim 
cha: according to Sayana, Aditi or the Earth as an indivisible whole, 
and Diti at representing the divisible people and living creatores ‘in- 
hablting it. Aditi appoaru to mean infinite Nature, and Diti to be a 
Goddess connected with Aditi without any distincb conception, and 
merely as a contragh to her. The two words may perhaps mean the 
eternal and the perishable, yonier boundless space and the bounded 
space near us, or Sky and Earth, or Nature by day and Nature by 
night, ‘At ell‘e vente, as Dr, Muir observes, ‘the two together appear 
to be put by ‘che poet for the entire “aggregate of visible nature.’ See 
Original ena Texts, V. pp. 42, 43. 

The vie ina prayer for rain. 2 Tha thanderers : the roaring 
winds. 3 The Asura's mayic power: the Asura ur divine Being bere 
is either Dyaus or Parjanya. °", 


HYMN 6A) TAR RIGVEDA. 535 


4 The Maruts yoke their easy car for victory, O Mitra. Varune, 
as a hero in the wars. 
*The thunderers roam through regions varied in their hues, 

Imperial Kings, bedew us with the milk of heaven. 

| 6 Refreshing is your voice, O Mitra-Varuna : Parjanys sendeth 
out a wondrous mighty voice. 

With magic power the Marutg clothe them with the clouds 

Ye Two cause Heaven to rain, the red, the spotless One. 


7 Wise, with your Law and through the Astra’s magic power 
ye guard the ordinances, Mitra- Varuna. : 
Ye by eternal Order govern all the world. Ye set the Sun in 
heaven as a refulgent car. : 


HYMN LXIV. + Mitra-Varuna. 


You, foeman-slaying Varuna and Mitra, we invoke with s8ng, 
Who, as with penfold of your arms encompass round tho,realm 
of light. ° 
2 Stretch out your arms with favouring love unto this man who 
singeth hymns, ee ° 
, For in all places is sung forth your ever-gracious friendliness, 
3 That I may gain a refuge now, may my steps be on Mitra’s 
path. ® 
Men go protected in the charge of this dear Frignd ‘who harms 
us not. . 
4 Mitra and Varuna from you,may I, by song, win nebles; 
meed, 
That shall stir envy in the uomes of wealthy chiefs andthose 
who praise. . 
5 With your fair gplendours, Varuna aid Mitra, to our gather- 
ing comé, 
That in their homes the wealthy chiefs and they who are your 
friends may thrive, 


6 With those, moreover, among whom ye hold your high supre- 


°* macy, ° 
Vouchsafe us room thot we may, wingtrength for prosperity 
and wealth. 


1 With penfold of your arms : I follow Professor Ludwig in taking 
vraj4 as an instrumental case. 3 May my steps be emey I walk in 
the way of Mitra, that is may [ keep bis holy law, 5 The wealthy 
chiefs : the inetitutores of sacrifice, Your friends : we, the priests, 6 
With those : with the Gods. ° 


536 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK V. 


7 When morning flushes, Holy Ones ! in the Gods’ realm where 
white Cows shine. , 
Supporting Arechandnas, speed, Heroes, with your active 
feat hither to my pressed Soma juice. 


AYMN LXV. Mitra-Varuna. 

Fouuu wise is he who hath discerned : let him speak to us of 
the Gods,— a 

The mun whose praise-songs Varuna the beautiful, or Mitra, 


loves. . 


2 For they are:Kings of noblest might, of glorious fame most 
widely spread ; 
Lords of the brave, who strengthen Law, the Holy Ones with 
every race. 


3 Avproaching you with praysr for aid, together I address you 
ret. 
We who have good steeds call on you, Most Sage, to gige us 
strength besides. 


4 }’en out of misery Mitra gives a way to dwelling at our ease, 
For he who worShips hath the grace of Mitra, fighter in the 
van. 
5 In Mitra’s shelter, that extends to utmost distance may we 
dwéll,- - 
Unmenacedy, guarded by thy care, ever as sons of Varuna, 


6 Ye, Mitra, urge this people on, and to oneend direct their 
ways, 
Neglect not ye the wealthy chiefs, neglect not us the Rishis : 
be dur gaurdians when ye quaff the milk. 


HYMN LXVI. Mitra-Varuna- 
© SapIENT man, call the Two Gods, the very w-se, who slay 
the foe, ' 
For Varuna, whose form is Law, place offerings for his great 
delight. 


T White Cows : the white clouds of early morning. Archandnus : 
the Rishi of the hymn. Wath your active feet : the literal translation of 
hastibhih padbhih would be, with feet provided with hand ; ‘Wilh rapid 
steeds'—- Wilson. Sea M, Bloomfield, Contributions to the Interpreta- 
tion of the Veda, Seound Series, p. 35. 


A 
ad 


1 Of the Gods : regarding Mitra and Varuna. 5 As sons of Varu- 
aa: or perbaps, as Professor Ludwig euggeste, with Varuna ag our son, 
that is with kingly descendants. 6 Fe Mitra: and Varuna. When 
ye quaff the milk : in the presenting of the libation,’— Wilson. 


1 O Sapientman: thou who knowest how to praise the Gods. 
Whose from ts Law : acoording to Sayana, ‘whose form is water. 


\AYMN 61] THE RIGVEDA. 637 


2 For they have won unbroken sway in full perfection, pewer 
¢ divine, 
And, like his laws, the world of man bath been made beauti- 
ful as light. 
8 Therefore we praise you that your cara may travel far in front 
of otrs— 
You who accept the eulogy of Raathavya with his hymns. 
4 And ye shuw wisdom, Wondrous Gods ! with fulness of intelli- 
gence. ° 


By men’s discernment are ye marked, O ye*whose might is 
purified. 
6 This is the Law sublime, O Karth: to aid the Rishis’ toil for 


fame 
The Two, wide-spreading, are prepared. They come With 
ample overflow. e 
6 Mitra, ye Gods with wandering eyes, would that the worship- 
pers and we ° a 
Might strive to reach the realm ye rule, most spacious and 
protected well, 


HYMN LXVII. Mitrg-aruna. 


Ye Gods, Adityas, Varuna, Aryaman, Mitra, verily ‘ 
Have here obtained supremest sway, high, holy, set apars for 
you. 
2 When, Varuna and Mitra, yesitin your golden dwolling-piace, 
Ye Twain, supporters of mankind, foe-slayers, give felicity, 
3 All these, pgssessors of all wealth, Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman, 
Follow their ways, as if with feet, and guard from injury 
mortal man. , 


2 Liks high laws : Professor Ludwig would read vratena instead of 
vrateya, that is, through holy ordinance. 3 Rdtahavya : the Rishi 
of the hymn. I can make nothing out ‘of this stanza, and I follow 
Sayana in despair of finding a reasonable ~interpretation. 4 This 
stanza also is difficult and obscure. 5 O Earth: Pritbivi, or Earth 
is quite out of place here. Professor Ludwig suspects a corruption of 
the text, and Professor Grassmann thinke tliat the whole stanza has 
been inserted by mistake. The two wide-spreading or far-reaching Gods, 
Mitra and Varuna, are eaid to be ready to listen to the hishie) prayera 
and so to increase their renowa.. The copious fall of rdin is proof that 


¥ their prayers have been heard. ~ 6 Ye Gods: Mitra and Waruna,” 
Mitra only being named, —en Pa 
2 Your golden dwelling-place : the delightfal place of eecrifice, ac- 
cording to Sayana. 3 Follow thew ways : their royal ordinances, 


vraid, that is vratdni, 
63 


538 MIE HYMNS OF [BOOK Vv, 


4 For they are trhe, they cleave to Law. held holy among every 
race, 


Good leaders, bounteous in their gifts, deliverers even from 
distress, 


9 Which of your persons, Varuna or Mitra, merits not our praise? 


Therefore our thought is turned to you, the Atris’ thought is 
tarned to you. 


‘ HYMN LXVIII. Mitra- Varuna. 


Sine forth unto your Varuna and Mitra with a song inspired. 
They, Mighty: Lords, are lofty Law: 
2 Fall springs of fatness, Sovran Kings, Mitra and Varuna, the 
Twain, 
Gods glorified among the Gods. 


3 So help ye us to riches, great terrestrial and celestial wealth : 
Vast is your sway among the Gods. 


4 Carefully tending Law nn Law they have attained their 
vigorous might. 


The Two Gods .wax dave of guile, 


With rainy skies and streaming floods, Lords of the strength 
that bringeth gifts, 


A lofty | seat have they attained. 


HYMN LXI1X, Mitra: Varuna. 


TargF spheres of light, O Varuna, three heavens, three 
firmaments ye comprehend, O Mitra; 


Waxed strong, ye keep the splendour of dominion, guardicg 
the Ordinance that lasts for ever. 


2 Ye, Varuna, have kine who yield refreshment ; Mitra, your 
floods pour water full of sweetness. 
There atand the Three Steers, splendid in their brightness, 
who fill the three world-bowls with genial moisture, 


1 They, Mighty Lords, are lofty Law: ‘(come ) mighty deities, to 
the great sacrifice.'— Wilson. 2 Full springs of fatness : originator 
of streams of fertilizing rain ; or ghritdyont may mean here as it does 
eleewhera, dwelling or having their homa with ghrtid, clarified butter or 


oil used in sacrifice. 5 Lords of the strength that -bringeth gifts: 
lords of sustenance, suited to the hiberal donors (of obvlations).’— Wilson. 
ont sew 


1 Three firmaments: according to Sayana, three realms of earth, an 
i,tarpretation which is morein acoprdance with the second half of 
‘stanza Q, 2 Yhe Three Steers: Agni as terrestrial fire on earth, 
Vayu as thu wind in the firmament, and Stirya as the Sun in heaven. 
World boeals : Ludwig explaine differently- See his Ueber die neuesten 


Arbeiten auf dem Gebiete der cen forechung, p. 85, Genial moisture: 
the fertilizing rain. 


HYMN 72.) THE RIGVEDA. 539 


3 I call at dawn on Aditi the Goddess, I call at noon and when 
- the Sun is setting, 
I pray, O Mitra-Varuna, for safety, for wealth and progeny, 
in rest and trouble, 
4 4 Ye whouphold the region, sphere of brightness, ye who 
suport carth’s realm, Divine Adityas, 
The Immortal Gods, O Varun’ and Mitra, never impair your 
everlasting statutes. : 2 
; HYMN LXaA, " Mitga-Varana. 
Even far and wide, O Varuna and Mitra, doth your grace 
extend. 
May I obtain your kind good-will. « 
2 From you, benignant Gods, may we gain ‘fully food for 
sustenance, “e 
Such, O ye Rudras, may we be. F 
3 Guard us, O Rudras, with your guards, save us, ye sk{lled to 
save, May we. : ; 
Subdue the Dasyus, we oarselves. ae ° 
4 Or ne'er may we, O Wondrous Strong, enjoy another’s 
golemn feast, 
Ourselves, our sons, or progeny, 


HYMN LXXL. Mitra-Varana 
O Varunaand Mitra, ye who slay the foemen, come with 
might, “ e 


To this our goodly saerifice, 
2 For, Varuna and Mitra, ye* Sages are Rulers over all.¢ Fill 
full our songs, for this ye can. . 
3 Come to the juice that we have prefsed. Varuns, Mitra, 
come to drink, 
This Soma of the worshipper. 


HYMN LXXII, Mitra- Varuna. 


To Varuna and Mitra we offer with gongs, as Atri did Sit 
on the sacred grass to drink the Soma juice. 


2 Oye Rudras : O Mitra and Varuna. 2 Or ne'er may wet I 
adopt Professor Ludwig's explanation. We will overcome the Dasyus 
by our owu power, or we will never agaia participate in any man’s 
solemn festival held in honour of tee Gods: a self-ithprecation in case 
of failing to carry out their purpose. . ; 

ee 8 e 
4 1 With might : Styana explaine barhdnd ae hantdrau satrdnadm, des? 
troyers of ensmies. 2 Fill full our songs : lev them overflow with, 
or produce abundantly, the results for which we pray. P 


1 As Atri did : after the manner of Abri, the founder of our family: 


510 THE SYMNS OF [BOOK V 


3 By Ordinance and Law ye dwell in peace secure, bestirring men, 
Sit on the sacred grass to drink the Soma juice. . 
8 May Varuna and Mitra, for our help, accept the sacrifice. 
Sit on the sacred grass to drink the Soma juice. 
AYMN LXXIII. Asvins. . 


Waueraerr, O Asvins,’ye this day be far remote or near at hand, 
In many spots or in mid-air come hither, Lords of ample 
wealth, 


2 These here, who show o’er widest space, bringing full many a 
wondrous act, 
Resistless, lovingly I seek, I call the Mightiest to enjoy. 
3 Another beanteous wheel have ye fixed there to decorate your 
car: 
With others through the realms ye roam in might unto the 
neighbouring tribes, 


4 That deed of yours that is extolled, Visvas ! hath all been done 


with this. , 
Born otherwise, an@ spotless, ye have entered kinship’s bonda 
with us. : 


5S When Siry& mounted on your car that rolls for ever rapidly, 
Birds of ‘red hue were round about and burning splendvars 
comiprssed you, 


6 Atri bethin‘xs himself of you, O Heroes, with‘a friendly mind, 
‘What time, Nasatyas, with his mouth he stirs the spotless 
ame for you. . 


Sr re es eee, ae 


Lefn many spots : the purd in the text is thus explained by Sdyana. 
2 To enjoy : the libation offered to you, According to Sdyana, bhuje 
here means for enjoyment, for protection. 3 There : the third wheel 
of their chsriot, standing by itself in front, is especially ornamental. 
Wsth others : Sdyana explains anya by anyana chakrena, ¢. 6. with ano- 
ther, or the orther, wheel ; but the two hind wheels must be intended, 
or anyd@ must be in agreement with yugd, The neighbouring tribes : 
the meaning af ndhushd yugd is not clear. Professor Ludwig tranela- 
tes the words by ‘zu den‘geschlcocheernder Nahusa,’ ‘ ta the tribes of 
the [people called] Nahyshas.’. Professor Wilson, following Sayana, 
translates the stanga differently : ‘You have arrested one luminous 
wheel of (your) car for illumining the form (of the sun), whilst with the 
other you traverse the spheres (to regulate) by your power the ages of 
mankind.’ 4 Visoas /: Sayana explains visvd by vydptau, the twa 
who spread thrqugh or pervade: ‘universal (deities)’—Wilson. With 
this * according to Sayana, with this Paura (the Rislfi of the hymn ). 
Oc ‘this’ may mean. .ae Professor Ladwig thinks, the third whee) of the 
car, in which, mysterious virtue more especially resides, Born otherwise : 
of divine and nod buman arigio, 5 Sdrya: the Daughter of the Sun, 
Bee I. 116. £7, 


AYMN 18.) THE RIGVEDA., 641 


7 Strong is your swiftly moving steed, famed his exertion in the 
course 
When by your great deeds, Asvins, Chiefs, Atri is brought to 
us again. 
8 Lovers of sweetness, Rudras, she who streams with sweetness 
waits on you. 
When ye have travelled through the seas men bring you gifts 
of well-dressed fvod . 
9 Asvins, with truth they call you Twain beatowers of felicity 5 
* At sacrifice most prowpt to hear, most gracious ye at sacrifice, 
10 Most pleasing to the Asvins be these prayérs which magnify 
their might, 
Which we have fashioned, even # cars : high reverence have 
we spoken forth. ; - 
HYMN LXXIV. ASvins. 
WuErE in the heavens are ye to-dsy, (ods, Asvins,grich in 
constancy ? e 
Hear this, ye excellent a “t ery: Atri inviteth you to come, 
2 Where are they now? Wire’ areethe Twain, thee famed, 
Nasatyas, Guds in heaven ? : 
Who is the man ye strive to reach? Who of your suppliants 
e is with you ? 
3 Whom do ye visit, whom approach? to whomglifect your 
harnessed car ? ° o° 
With whose devotions are ye pleased? We iong for you to 
e 


further us. . 
4 Ye, Streagtheners, for Paura stir the filer swimming in the 
flood, e ° e 


Advaneing to be captured like a.liun to the ambuscade. 
® Ye from Chyavana worn with age removed his skin as ‘twere 


a robe. 
So, when ye made him young again, he stirred the longing of 
a dame. 
7 Atri ta brought to ua again : see [. 112. 7. 8 She who streams 


with sweetness: Vak, Voice or Speech, cr our praice, stutirasmactkratd, 
‘Our nutritious (adoration).’—Wilson. The seas : of air. 

1 Rich tn constancy : faithful friende of your worshippers. Lacellent 
as Steers : ‘liberal showerers (of benefits) Wilson. ° 2 Of your sup- 
pliants : this, altfiough not entirely satisfactory, seeme to be the only 
possible explanation of nadindém “in this place. Profeysor Ludwig rem- 
erks, truly enough, that if ko (quis %) could be taken as = (quaé), the 
passage would present no difficulty. The meaning would then pe, whieh 
of the rivers (of the Panjab) rejoices in your presence | Siyana parapb- 
rases the passage : Aah stott vam yuvayornadindm stutindm sacha sahtyah 
sydt : ‘what praiser may be the associate of the praises of*yon twain ?’ 
4 This stanza is desperately difficult. Professor Wilson translates in 
accordance with Sayana’s explanation® ‘Pauras, send to Pavra the rain: 


542 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VY. 
6 Here is the man who lauds you both : to see your glory are 


we here. 6 
Now hear me, come with saving help, ye who are rich in store 
of wealth, 


7 Who among many mortal men this day hath won you to himself? 
What bard, accepters of the bard? Who, riohin wealth! with 


sacrifice ? ° 
8 O Asvins, may your car approach, most excellent of cars for 
speed, : ‘ 


Through’ many, regions may our praise pass onward among 

morte! men. 
9 May oar landation of you Twain, lovers of meath! be sweet 

to you. 

Fly hitherward, ye wise of heart, like falcons with your wing- 
ed steeds. 

10 O Acvins, when at any time ye listen to this call of mine, 

For you is dainty food prepared: they mix refreshing food for 

you. | 


eterna me women tol ert ee EE TNT, COTTER TNE ON RN 


ohase) & lion in a forest.’ Professor Wilson remarks: ‘The name of the 
Rishi is here, according to the scholiast, arbitrarily applied, first to ‘he 
Aswins, beeause they are in relation with Paura as tha author of the 
Sukta ; and although the text gives Paura in the vocative singular, it is 
to be understood in the dual Paura, therefore, being Aswins: next ib 
implies,.a¢ Pawram, a cloud, from its being solicited by the Aishi for 
the fall of rain. as implied by the last term, Paurdya, to me the Rishi so. 
called.’ Professor Roth is of opinion that Paura, in the vocative case, 
means the Asvins, as fillers, increasers, or sbrengtheners ; and that pau- 
ram, in the accusative case, means the Soma, the filler or'satisfying juice 
(cf IT, 11. 11, The juice that satisfies hath holpen Indra). said to ba 
swimming in the flood, 2. ¢«. mixed with water. The secona half of the 
stanza would: then probably mean that the Soma flows on in ordar to be. 
taken up and used in libations as a lion goes to the place where men lie 
in wait to capture him or where a pitfall hae baen prepared to entrap 
him. Still there remains the very great difficulty of Paura in the singu- 
lac being used instead of thé dual Paurau. Professor Ludwig remark?: 
‘Paura : S. etad asvinoh six bodhroam ; but ib is to be taken direct as 
a cry of warning. Paura is t0 mean the Asvins. Paura is to mean the 
Rishi of the hymna, Paura is to maan the cloud. This ie naturally too 
much. The word udaprutam (swimming in water) shows that Paura 
had been enticed to a plac where his enemies intended to drown him. 
He had gona to the spot as unsuspiciously as a lion approaches the pit- 
fall, and was already in the water when the Agvins called out to him 
and stopped him. Atccording to this explanation the translation would 
be: ‘For Pauea ye cried, Paura! and saved him when swimming iu the 
flood, Him who had reached the ambush as a lion to the capture goeg. 
5 Chyavdna: see I. 116 19. 6 Rich in store of wealth: ‘affluent 
in food,’— Wilson, after Sayana: ‘ lords of swift horses,’—Robth : ‘ pos- 
sessors of excellent mares,’— Ludwig. 


AYMUN 15.) THE RIGVEDA. 543 


HYMN LXXYV. Asvine. 


‘To meet your treasare-bringing car, the mighty car most dear 
to us, 
Asvins, the Rishi is prepared, your praiser, with his song of 
praise. Lovers of sweetness, hear my call, 
2 Pass, O ye Asvins, pass away bayond all tribes of selfish men, 
Wonderful, witb your golden paths, most gracious, bringers 
of the flood. Lovers of sweetness, hear my call, e 
3 Come to us, O ye Asvin Pair, bringing your precious treasnres, 
come, e 
Ye Rudras, on your paths of gold, rejoicing, rich in store of 
wealth. Lovers of sweetness, hear my call. 
4 O Strong and Good, the voice of him who- lands you well 
cleaves to your car. -e 
And that great beast, your chariot-steed, fair, wonderful, makes 
dainty food. Lovers of sweetness, hear my call, .° 
5 Watchful in spirit, bornon cars, impetuous, listing to his cry, 
Asvins, with winged steed ye speed dqwn to Chyavana votd 
of guile, Lovers of sweetness, hear my catl, 
6 Hither,O Heroes, let your steeds, of dappled hue, yoked at 
e the thought, 
Your flying steeds, O Asvins, bring you hitherward, with bliss, 
to drink. Lovers of sweetness, hear my calj.e 
7 O Asvins, hither come to us ; Nasatyas, be not disinclined, 
Through longing for the pious turn out of the way te reach 
our home, Lovers of sweetness, hear my call. 


8 Ye Lords of Splendour, free from guile, come, stand &t this « 
our sacrifice, : 
Beside the singer, Asvins, who longs Sor your grace and lauds 
you both. Lovers of sweetness, hear my call. 
9 Down with her white herd hath appeared, and m due time 
hath fire been placed. 
Harnessed is your immortal car, O Wonder-Workers, strong 


. and kind. Lovers of sweetness, hgar my call. 


1 Lovers of sweetness : drinkers of éhe sweet Soma juice: according 
to Sdyana, masters of the Madhuvidya, or knowledge of sweetness, that 
is, the knowledge that teaches where the Soma igto be found. See I. 
84. 13. 2 belfish men: reading ahamsaudh for ahamsand. See 
Aufrecht, R. V. If XLII. notg. 3 Rich in store of wealth : or, 
Lorde of rapid steeds. See note on stanza 6 of the e preceding hymna, 
4 And that great beast : the charioo of the Asvins*is sometimes said to 
be drawn by a stallion ase (ste I. 34. 9 5116. 2 ; 162 21), thedun-cdio- 
ured animal representing the grey tints of early morping.e 5 Chyavé- 
na :eee I. 116 10. 8 Who longs for your grace: Sayana takes 
avasyum here to be a proper name, Avasyu, who is said to be the Ri- 
shi of the bymn. 9 In duc time :for the morning libation. 


544 THE HYMNS OP [BOOR V. 


HYMN LXXVI. Asvins: 
Aent, the bright face of the Dawns, is shining ; the singers: 
pious voices have ascended. 
Borne on your chariot, Asvins, turn you bither, and come 
unto our full and rich libation. 
2 Most frequent guests, they scorn not what is ready: even now - 
the lauded Asvins are beside us. | 
With promptest : aid they come at morn and evening, the 
worshipper’s most blessed guards from trouble. 
3 Yea, comé at milking-time, at early morning, at noon of day 
and when the Sun i is setting, 
By day, by night, with favour most auspicious. Not only 
now the draught hath drawn the Asvins., 
4 For this place, Asvins, was of old your dwelling, these were 
Your houses, this your habitation. 


Come’ to us from high heaven and from the mountain, Come 
from the waters bringing food and vigour, 
5 May weobtain the Asvins’ newest favour, and gain their 
heatth-bestowing happy guidance. 
Bring riches hither unto us, and heroes, and all felicity and 


joy, Immortals ! 
HYMN LXXVII. Asvins. 
First worship those who come at early morning: let the 
Twain drink before the giftless niggard. 
The Asvins claim the sacrifice at day-break : the sages yield- 
ing the first share extol them. 
Worship st dawn and instigate the Asvins: nor is the wor- 
-Shipper at eve rejected. 
Besides ourselves another craves and worships: each first in 
worship is most highly favoured. 


@ 1 The bright face: making his firso appearance at early morning. 
Libation : gharmdm, the offering of hot milk or uther heated beverage. 
3 ‘The Agvins are invited to come a‘ diffurent times, at morning, mid- 
day and suuset ; and in VI[T 22. lf, ib is siruilarly said that they are 
invoked in the evenins au well as .t dawn. Lt neel nob, however, sur- 
prise us that they should be invited bo attend che different ceremonies 
of the worshippers, avi therefore conceived to appyar at houre distinct 
from the supposed natural periods of thoir manifestation ’—7. Muir, 
O. Sanskrit Texts, V. 239. 5 Chis stanza is ideotical “with ‘Y. 42. 18. 


1 Before dhe, giftless nigga”: ‘before the gready withholders (of the 
offaring). "_ Wilaon. 2 Nor ts the worshipper at eve rejected 2 liter- 
ally, a a thing unaccepted or rejocted. Séyana explains differently : ‘the 
evening is not for the gods, it is unacceptable to them’ = Wilson. This 
explanation, tough supported by the text piiredhno vai devinam, the 
forenoon verily belongs to the Gads, iv not in accordance with the use 
of Vedic times, 


HYMN 8] THE RIGVEDA. | 54s 


3 Covered with gold, meath-tinted, dropping fatness, your 
chariot with its freight of food comes hither, 
Swift as thought, Asvins, rapid as the tempest, wherewith ye 
travel over all obstructions, 
4 He who hath served most often the Nasatyas, and gives the — 
sweetest food at distribution, 
Furthers with his own holy works his offspring, and ever 
_ passes those whose flames ascend not. 
5 May we obtain the Asvins’ newest favour, and egain their 
health-bestowing happy guidance. 
Bring riches hither unto us, and heroes, and all felicity and 
joy, Immortals ! 


HYMN LXXVIII. Gsvins. 
Ye Asvins, hither come to us : Nasatyas, be not distnclined. 
Fly hither like two swans unto the juice we shed. . 


2 O Asvins, like a pair of deer, like two wild cattle to the mead : 
Fly hither like two swans unto’ the juice we shed. : 


_ 8 O Asvins rich in gifts, accept our sacrifice’ to prosper it’: 
e Fly hither like two swans unto the juice we shed, 


4 As Atri when descending to the cavern called oa yu loudly 
like a wailing woman, 
Ye came to him, O Asvins, with the freshest até n most _— 
ous fleetness of a falcon. 


5 Tree, part asunder like the side of her who bringeth forth » child, 
Ye Asvins, listen tomy cal: loose Saptavadhri from hig, bonds. , 


6 For Saptavadhri,for the seer affrighted when he wept and wailed, 
Ye, Asvins, wtth your magic powers cent up the tree and shat- 
tered if. 


7 Like as the wind on every side ee a pool of lotuses, 
So stir in thee the babe unborn, so may the ten-month babe 
descend, 
8°Like as the wind, like as the wood, like as the seais set astir, 
So also, ten-month babe, descen together withthe after-birth. 
9 The child who hath for ten months time been lying in his 
mother’s side,— 
May he come forth alive, unharmed, yea, living from the liv- 
ing dame. ® 


2 Wild cattle: Gauras, or Beves Gauri.  . £ Theoavern: the 
abyes or deep pit into which-b® waa caat by Asurag or evil spirits. See 
I. 112.7; 116. 8’; 117. 3. 5 Tree, part asunder: Saptavadhri 
appears to have got his hand or foot jammed in aeapli? tree, and to 
have been extricated when he called on the Agvins toaid him. 3 
This and the two stanzas preceding age termed by Sayaga the oor 
dvinyupanishad, the liturgy of child-birth.’— Wilson, 


69 


646 THE AY MNS OF [BOUK V. 


HYMN LXXxIx. Dawn, 


O HEAVENLY Dawn, awaken us to ample opulence today. 
Even as thou hast wakened us with Satyasravas, Vayya’s son, 
high-born ! delightful with thy steeds | 
2 Daughter of Heaven, thou dawnedst on Sunitha Suchadratha's 
son, 
So dawn thou on one mightiet still, on Satyasravas, Vayya’s 
aon, high-born ! delightful with thy steeds ! . 
3 So, bringing tfeasure, dawn to-day on us thou Daughter of the 
Sky, , 
As sa, O mightier yet, didst shine for Satyasravas, Vayya’s 
son, high-born ! delightful with thy steeds ! 
4 Here round about thee are the priests who laud thee, Bright 
Gne, with their hymns, 
And men with gifts, O Bounteous Dame, splendid with wealth 
aad offering much, high-born ! delightful with thy steeds ! 
§ Whatever these thy bands perform to please thee or win them 
. wealth, : 
E’en fain they gird us round and give rich gifts which ne'er 
are reft away, high bora! delightful with thy steeds ' 

The connexion between 1—6, and 7—9 is not clear. By yosha na- 
dhamana.a wailing woman) & parturient woman may perhaps. Profes- 
sor Ludwig thnks, be inteuded Atri, as he descended into the pit, 
invoked the A-vins that they might releace him aa a woman releases the 
child ghe bears, A  tree-—which is much harder and fiewer thao a 
woman’s bodv—unclose! itself when Saptavadhri invoked the Asvins, 
So shall the parturient wuman bring forph her child through the belp 
of the Asvins aud at Atri’s intercession. A connexion may thus ba 
established, though here and there ib would be rather forced. 


- 


1 Satyasravas ; the Rishi of the hymn, Delightfel with thy steeds : 
pleasant to Jhose whom thou favourest on accound of the horses which 
thou bestoweeb. The word asvosunrite is variously rendered, e. g. by, 
Profes.or Wiison, after Sayana, ‘praised sincerely for (the gift of) hor- 
ses ; by Prof, Ludwig ; ‘ an rugsen trefliches besitzende, ‘havin an exce}- 
Jent possession in horaes ; by Prof. Roth, ‘vom jubel der Rossa 
begleitete, accompanied bythe joyous neigh of horses ? and by Prof. 
Grassmann, rosvereiche, ‘rich in borses.’ 4 Men with gifts : the 
Magh>vans, or wealthy householders, who institute the sacrifice and 
provide offerings forthe Gods and presents for the priests, 5 
These thy bands : the congregation of Wworshinpers. Which ne'er are reft 
away: or which are never in vain, never fail to obtain their due reward 
from heaven : ‘Siyana,’ Professor Wilson-romarks, ‘seems rather dubious 
ad to the*proper sense of several of theese words:............tha sum of 
the meaning,‘sgregably to the scholiast, is, all they who, offering obl-- 
tions, worebjp the dawn, receive the reward for the benefit of us, of me, 
that ia the author of the hymn, ye twam havir-dadatah stuvantt le sarve 
apy-asmadartham phalam dharayacitt.’ 


HYMN 80.] THE RIGVEDA. 547 


6 Give to these wealthy patrons fame, O affluent Dawn, with 
* hero sons, 
To these our princes who have brought rich gifts ne'er to be 
reft away, high-born ! delightful with thy steeds ! 


‘ 7 Bring lofty and respledent fame, O thou manificent Dawn, 


to these . 
Our wealthy patrons who bestow rich gifts on us of steeds and 
_ kine, high-born ! delightful with thy steeds ! 8 


8 Bring us,O Daughter of the Sky,subsistence in our herds of kine 
Together with the sunbeams, with the shine @f pure refulgent 
flames, high-born ! delightful with thy steeds! 


9 O Daughter of the Sky, shine forth ; delay not to perform 
thy task, ; 2 
Let not the San with fervent heat consume thee like a rébber 
foe, high-born ; delightful with thy steeds ! ‘ 
10 So much, and more exccedingly,O Dawn, it suits thee to bestow 
Thou Radiant One who ceasest net to shine for those who sigg 
thy praise, high-born ! delightful with thy steeds ; ° 


HYMN LXXX, Dawn. 


@ 
Tre singers weleome with their hyums and prajses the Goddess 
Dawn who bringeth in the sunlight, 7 
Sublime, by Law true to eternal Order bright on her pagh, red- 
tinted, far-refulgent. 


2 She comes in front, fair, fousing up the people, malsing thee. 
pathways easy to be travelled. 
High, on jher lofty chariot, all-impelling, Dawn gives her splen- 
dour at the days beginning. 
3 She, harnessing her car with purple oxen, injurin? none, hath 
brought perpetual riches. 
Opening paths to happiness, the Goddess shines,praised by all, 
giver of every blessing. . ° 


4 Withchanging tints she gleame in edouble splendour while 
from the eastward she displays her body. 
She travels perfectly tha path of Order, nor fails to reach., as 
one who knows the quarters. ° 


s, As conscious that her lifhbe are bright with bathing, she 


stands, as "twere, erect that we may see ber. , ° 


9 Delay notto perform thy task: ‘delay nof? our (sacred) rit8,’— 
Wilson. . 

2 In front of the Sun ; sdryasya purastat ~~Sayansa, 4 The 
quarters the regions of the sky which she visite in obedience to the 
eternal law of the universe. , 5 With bathing: in the dews of heaven, 


548 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK V. 


Driving away malignity and darkness, Dawn, Child of Heaven, 
hath coms to us with lustre. 
6 The Daughter of the Sky, like some chaste woman, bends, 
opposite to men, her forehead downward. 
The Maid, disclosing boons to him who worships, hath brought 
again the daylight as aforetime. 


‘ HYMN LXXXI. Savitar. 


Tue priests of him the lofty Priest well-skilled in hymns 
harness their spirit, yea, harness their holy thoughts. 
He only knowing works assigns their priestly tasks. Yea, 
lofty is the praise of Savitar the God. 
2 The Sapient One arrays himself in every form : for quadruped 
“and biped he hath brought forth good. 
Excellent Savitar hath looked on heaven’s high vault, and 
shineth after the outgoing of the Dawn. 
3 Even he. the God whose going-forth and majesty the other 
' Deities have followed with their might, 
He who hath méasured the terrestrial regions out by his great 
power, he is the Courser Savitar. : 
4 To the three spheres of light thou goest, Savitar, and with 
the vazs of Sfirya thou combinest thee, 
Around, on< both sides thou encompassest the night: yea, 
» thou, O God, art Mitra through thy righteous laws. 
5 Over all generation thou art Lord alone: Pushan art thou, 
O God, in all thy goings-forth. 
Yea, thou hast domination overt all this world. SyAvdsva 
hath brought praise to thee, O Savitar. 


1 


HYMN LXXXU, ‘ Savitar, 


We crave of Savitar the God this treasure much to be enjoyed. 
The best, all-yielding, conquering gift of Bhaga we would 
~ gladly win. 
2 Savitar’s own supremacy, most glorious and beloved of all, 
No one diminisheth‘in arfght. 


1 The lofty Priest: Savitar. Knowing works : skilled in rules which 
regulate religious functions or perhaps understanding the intentions or 
wishes of the worshippers: ‘he alone uowing their functions direota the 
priests.’— Wilson, 2 Arrays himself in every form: makes all 
eternal objects cleacly visible at suntise, . 3 Phe Courser Savitar : 
Sayana explains efasah as white, bright, shining. It also means a horse, 
especially oneef the horses of the Sun, and here designates the Sun 
himself undgr that form. See Satapatha-Brdbmana, VI. 3. I. 18 ; 
Sacred Books of the East, XLIp. 195, 4 According to Sayana, Savitar 
ie especially the Sun before risiry,.and Sarys is the Sun in general. 


HYMN 33.) THE RIGVEDA. 549 


3 For Savitar who is Bhaga shall send riches to his worshipper. 
* That wondrous portion we implore. 
4 Send us this day, God Savitar, prosperity with progeny. 
Drive thou the evil dream away. 
5 Savitar, God, send far away all sorrows and calamities, 
And send us only what is good, 
6 Sinless in sight of Aditi thréugh the God Savitar’s influence, 
May we obtain all lovely things. ; : 
1 ‘We with our hymns this day elect the general God, Lord of 
the good, . 
Savitar whose decrees are true. 
8 He who for ever vigilant precedes these Twain, the Day and 
Night, 
Is Savitar the thoughtful God. ” 
§ He who gives glory unto all these living creatures with the song, 
And brings them forth, is Savitar. e 


HYMN BXXXITl. Parjanya 


Sine with these songs thy welcome to the Mighty, with adora- 
tion praise and call Parjanya. ; 
eThe Ball, loud roaring, swift to send his bounty, lays tn the 
plants the seed for germination, 2 
Y He smites the trees apart, he slays*the demonse: ‘all life fears 
him who wields the mighty weapon, ‘ 
From him exceeding strong flges e’en the guiltless, when thund- 
ering Parjanya smites the wicked. 


3 Shall send: suvdti, from the root se or st, from whick Savitaf 
also is formed. The principal significations of the root are (1) to gener- 
ate or le whe (2) to pour forth a lit&tion; and (3) to send or 


impel. See Muir, QO. S. Texts, V. 165. 4 Send us: sdvih, from the 
same root : Drive thou away : pard suva. 5 Sen@ far away: pard 
ava. 6 Influence : své. 7 The general God: visvadevam : 


* who possesses all divine attributes ’—Muir; ‘( identical with ) all the 
gode,’ Wilson; ‘den allgott,’ ‘the all-goc,’-—Ludwig; ‘den allgottlichen,’ 
‘the all-divine,—Grasemann. Whode decrees are true : satyasavam ‘who 
possesses true energy. — Muir. °3 Heewwvho gives glory: he who by 
-his creative power produces the objects of the song of praise,'—Ludwig, 


e 

1 Parjanya: God of thunderstormé and rain. the generator and 
nourisher of plants and living oseatures. See Muir. 0. S. Zexts, V. 140 
ff , and, especially, M. Muller, India, What can it Teath us? pp. 186--194 
2 The wicked: dushkritah, -eyil-doers. ‘There doo# nof seem to be any 
sufficient reason to understand evil-daers here, #nd, in verge 9, of the 
, cloud demons, or simply of the malignant clouds, ag Sayana in his expla- 
“nation of verse 9 does. The poet may naturally have supposed that it 
was exclusively or principally the wicked who were struck down by 

thunderbolts,’—Muir, 0. S. Zeauts, ¥? 141, 


550 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK V. 


3 Like acar-driver whipping on his horses, he makes the messen-~ 
gers of rain spring forward 
Far off resounds the roaring of the lion, what time Parjanya 
fills the sky with rain-cload. 
4 Forth burst the winds, down come the lightning-flashes: the 
plants shoot up, the realm of light is streaming. 
Food springs abundant for All living creatures, what time 
Parjanya quickens earth with moisture. 
5 Thou at whose:bidding earth bows low before thee, at whose 
command hoofed cattle fly in terror, 
At whose behest the plants assume all colours, even thou 
Parjanya, yield us great protection. 
6 Send down for us the rain of heaven, ye Maruts, and let the 
Stallion’s flood descend in torrents. 
Come hither with this thunder while thou pourest the waters 
dawn, our heavenly Lord and Father. 
7 Thunter and roar : the germ of life deposit. Fly round us on 
thy chariot water-laden. ig 
Thine opened water-8kin draw with thee downward, and let 
the hollows and the heights be level. 
8 Lift up the mighty vessel, pour down water, and let the 
liberated streams rush forward. 
Saturate Ooth the earth and heaven with fatness, and for the 
cows let tlfere be drink abundant. 
9 When thou, with thunder and with roar, Parjanya, smitest 
sinners down, : 
This universe exults thereat, yea, all that is upon the earth. 
19 Tho hast poured down the rain-flood: now withhold it, 
Thou hast made desert piaces fit for travel. 
Thou hast made herbs to grow for our enjoyment yea, thou 
hast won thee praise from living creatures. 


HYMN LXXXIV, Prithivi. 

Tuou, of a truth, O Prithivi, bearest the tool that rends the 
hills : : : 

Thou rich in torrents -who*with might quickenest earth, O 

Mighty One. 


a 


10 ‘Thow hast ton thee praise: or, perhaps, ‘thou hast fulfilled tha 
lonping of, the people,’ eae 

1 Prithivi : in this place not the Goddess Earth or earth personified, 
but a deity of the middle air or firmament. ‘ Dvirdpa Prithivi,’ says 
Sayana, ‘Prithivi bas two forme’ The tool that rends the hills: the ins- 
trument that strikes and pierces ,the mountains and opens the water- 
springs, the thunderbolt or the power that produces similar results. 


HYMN 85.) THE RIGVEDA. 551 
2 To thee, O wanderer at will, ring out the lauds with beams 


of day, 
Who drivest, like a neighing steed, the swelling cloud, O 
bright of hue, 


3 Who graspest with thy might on earth een the strong sovrans 


of the wood, 
When from the lightning of thy cloud the, rainfloods of the 


_ heaven descend, . ° 


HYMN LXXXV. * Varuna, 


Sine forth a hymn sublime and solemn, grateful to glorious 


Varuna, imperial Ruler, ° 
Who hath struck out, like one who slays thevictim, earth 3 


a skin to spread in ‘front ef suirya, e 
2 In the tree-tops the air he hath extended, put milk 4 dn kine 
and vigorous speed in horses, 
Set intellect in hearts, fite in the -waters, Strya in heave and 
Soma on the mountain. ° 
3 Varuna lets the big cask , pening downward, flow through the 
° heaven and earth and air’s mid-region. 
Therewith the universe's Sovran waters earth as the, shower of 
rain bedews the barley. ° 
4 When Varuna is fain for milk he moistens the ay the laud, 
and earth to her foundation, ° 
Then straight the mountains clothe them in the rain-cloud : 
the Heroes, putting fosth their vigour, loose them. ¢ a 


2 The swelling olond : perum ; thé exaot meaning of the word is 
doubtful. Brofesser Ludwig thinks that libhtning is intended, 


1 Sing forth : pra...... archi. The Rishi addresses * himself... Or 
archd may be the first person singular, I sing. Like one who slays the 
victim : ‘not the ordinary Immolator, but the priest who spreads out 
the skin of the slaughtered victim to receive its disjointed members.’— 
Ludwig. 2 In the tree-trops:: vdneshu, explained by Siyana as 
vrtkshdgreshu : ‘iv the clouds,’ accorfing t® the St. Petersburg Lexicon 
“Soma on the mountain : ‘the Soma creeper, Mahidhara observes, grows 
in the clefts of the stunes of mountains, parvatendm pashnasanphishu 
somavallyd utpadyamanatwat '— Wilson. 4 Is fain for milk : wishes 
for libations of milk ; or the m@&ning may be, when he wishes to draw 
forth the milk, the fertilizing rain, of the clouds. Barth fo her founda- 
tion : the text has only prishwdm, meaning earth in® its full extent 
(terra) as distinguished from bAdmim, the land, goil, or groulhd (humus 
or sojum) Or prithivim may perhaps mean thea fir maifiont here as S3- 
yana explains it. See note on Prithtvt in the preceding hymn. Zhe 
Heroes : the strong Maruts. Loose them: loosen the roots of the 
mountains and make them trembles 


“4 


552 TAR AYMNS OP [BOOR V. 


5 I will declare this mighty deed of magic, of glorious Varuna 
tbe Lord Immortal, 
Who standing in the firmament hath meted the earth out with 
the sun as with a measure. 


6 None, verily, hath ever let or hindered this the most wise 
God’s mighty deed of magic, 
Whereby with all their flood, the lucid rivers fill not one sea 
wherein they pour their waters. ; 


7 If we have sinned against the man who loves us, have ever 
wronged a brother, friend, or comrade, 

The neighbour ever with us, or a stranger, O Varuna remove 

from us the trespass. * 


8 1f we, as gamesters cheat at play, have cheated, done wrong 
unwittingly or sinned of purpose, 
Cast.all these sins away like loosened fetters, and, Varuna, let 
us be thine own beloved. 


HYMN LXXXVI, Indra-Agni. 


THE mortal man whom ye, the Twain, Indra and Agni, help 
in fight, 

Breaks through e’en strongly guarded wealth as Trita burst 
his way through reeds. 


2 The Twain‘ir vincible in war, worthy to be renowned in frays, 
Lord of the Fivefo!d People, these, Indra and Agni, we 
invoke. 
3 Impetuous is their strength, and keen the lightning of the 
mighty Pair, 
Which from their arms speeds with the car to Vritra’s slayer 
for the kine. m 
4 Indra and Agni, we invoke you both, as such, to send your cars : 
Lords of quick-coming bounty, ye who know, chief lovers of 
the song. 


5 These who give increase day by day, Gods without guile for 

mortal man, 
Worthy themselves, [ honotr most, Two Gods as partners, 
for my horse, . 


5 Deed of magic t mdyadm : or the word may be rendered by ‘device’ 
or ‘design.’ See Wallis, Cusmology of the Rigveda, pp. 132, 133. 

1 Through reeds,: a0 Professor Roth interprets the vdnth of the 
texh, See.I. 52. 5. Ancording to Sayana the meaning is, as Trita the 
Rishi breaks dawn and refutes the words or arguments of bis opponents. 
2 The Fivefold People: the five Aryan tribes. 5 I honour most 
purd dadhe ; I seb in front, in the most honourable place. For my 
horse: that I may win the chariot-race. ‘For (the sake of obtaining) 
horses.’— Wilson. 


HYMN 87,| THE RIGVEDA, §53 


6 The strength-bestowing offering thus to Indra-Agni hath been 
paid, as batter, purified by stones. 
*Deal to our princes high renown, deal wealth to those who. 
sing your praise, deal food to those who sing your praise. 


HYMN LXXXVIL. Marats. 


To Vishnu, to the Mighty whom the Maruts follow let your 
hymns born in song go forth, Evay4amarut ; 

To the impetuous, strong band, adorned with bracelets, that 

‘rushes on in joy and ever roars for vigour. ° 
2 They who with might were manifest, and who willingly by 
their own knowledge told it forth, Evayamarnut. 

Maruts, this strength of -yours n@ wisdom comprehendeth : 
through their gifts’ greatness they are moveless as the 
mountains. ~ s 

3 Who by the psalm they sing are heard, from loftly heaven,the 
strong, the brightly shining Ones, Evayamarut: e 

In whose abode there is ng mightier one to move them, whose 

lighthings are as fires, who urgé the roaring rivers. , . 


6 As butter: Sdyana explains ghritam, sacrificial oil or clarified 
buttér by Soma juice : but pd/am purified, qualifies havydm, the offer- 
ing, and not ghritam, The libation of Soma juice which das been 
purified by the operation of the press-stonts, strainerz,etc., has been 
offered like elarified butter or oly oil. m 

—. “ 

The hymn is ascribed to a Rishi Evayamarut, a name which is evi- 
dently borrowed from the refrajn. 1 Born in song: developing, 
themselves and taking form in song : vdcht nishpannd :—Siyana. ‘Votce- 
born.’—Wilson. Or girigé may have its usual meaning, mountain-born, 
with reference,to theeclose connexion of the bymns with bbe pressing 
stones which came from the hills. Hoaydmarut : Professor Wilson, follow- 
ing Sayana, translates: ‘May the voics.born praises of Evaydmarut 
reach you, Vishnu, attended by the Marutes,’ and observes that ‘the 
name of the Hisht, Avaydmarut, remains unaltered in its case termina- 
biog, whatever may be its syntactical gonnection with the rest of the 
seutence. This is manifestly impossible, and the word is certainly not 
a proper name, Lvayd, in I. 156. 1, going th¥ wonted way,’ is an epi- 
theo of Vishnu, and Professor Roth thinks that Hvayamarut is an excla- 
mation meaning, O Vishnu snd Maruts! or, O* Maruts who speed 
sround ! But in both these cases it would be necessary to change the 
accent, both in this hymn and in the SAmaveda where stanza 1 occurs 
again. Professor Grassmann suggaste, ‘speeding ( like Vishnu ) 28 the 
Marut host,’ or. ‘The speeding: Vashnu is the true Marut, or lord of the 
Maruts,’ as the probable meaning of the word. [ find Hvayimarut 
unintelligible, and, as Professor Ludwig has done, leaeve it untranslated 
as 8 mere sacrificial exclamation. See Vedic Hymos (Sacréd Books of 
the East) Part i. p. 365. : 


10 : ' 


554 TAE RIGV BPA. [BOOR *, 


4 He of the Mighty Stride forth strode, Bvayamarut, out of the 
spacious dwelling-place, their home in common. 

When he, himself, hath yoked his emulous strong’horses on 
heights, he cometh forth, joy-giving, with the Heroes. 

§ Like your tremendous roar, the rainer with light “Hashing, 
strong, speeding, hath made all tremble, Evaydmarut, 

W herewith victorious ye, seM-luminous, press onward, with 
strong reins, decked with syofc, impetuous amd well 
weaponed, 

6 Unbounded isqour greatness, ye of mighty power : may your 
bright vigour’be our aid, Evaydmarut ; 

For ye are visible helpers in the time of trouble : like fires, 
aglow with light, save us from shame and insult. 

7 So may the Rudras, mighty warriors, Evayamarut, with 
splendid brilliancy, like fires, be our protectors ; 

They-whose terrestrial dwelling-place is wide-extended, whom 
none suspect of sin, whose banas have lufty courage. 

8 Come in a friendly spirit, come to us, O Maruts, and hear his 
call who. praises you, Evaydmarut. 

Like car-borne men, one-minded with the mighty Vishnu, 
keep cnmity far from us with your deeds of wonder. 

© . ’ = : 
9 Come to our sacrifive, ye Holy Ones, to bless it, and, free 
from demons, hear our call, -Evaydmarut. 

Most excellent, like mountains in -the air’s mid-region, be 
igresistible, ye Wise, to this man’s-hater. 


4 Ile of the Mighty Stride : Vishnu. According to, Sayana, the wide- 
spreading (band of Maruts) Their home; Vishnu’s‘and [adra’s, With 
the Heroes : with the Maruts. 6 In the time of troubte :'the meaning 
of prdstéau is uncertain, Professor Wileon, after Sayana, trauslates ; 
‘for you are regulators for overseeing (what is fit for) the limite of the 
sacritice.’ 9 Thts man's hater : him who hates the insbitutor of the 
Sacrifice, or derides and reviles the huly. ceremony. 


r BOOK THE SIXTH. 


BYMN Ii. : Agni. 
Txo0, fitst inventor of this prayer, OAgni, Worker of Mérvels, 
ast become our Herald. ° 
Thou, Bull, hast made us strength which nohe may conquer 
strength the shall overcome all other prowess. 
2 As Priest thou sattest at the seat‘of worship, farthering us, 
best Offerer, meet for honour. : 


So first‘to thea kave pious men resorted, turning thy min@ to 
thoughts of ample riches. 8 


3 In thee, still watching, they have followed riches, whd goest 
with much wealth as with an army, ° 
The radiant Agni, lofty, fair to look on, worshipped with mar- 

e row; ¢vermore-respleadens.. 


4 TRey who approached the God’s abude with homage, eager for 
glory, won them perfect glory : °° 
Yea, they gained even sacrificial tittcs and fognd delight in 
thine*auspicious aspect, 


9 On earth the people -magnify-thse greatly, thee their celestial 
and terrestrial riches. 
Thou, Helper, must be kaewn ag our Preserver, Father and « 
Mother of mankind for ever. . 


6 Dear pries{ among mankind, adorable Agui hath seated him, 
joy-giver, skilled in worship. 
Let us approach thee shining in thy dwelling, knebdling upon 
our knees, with adoration. 


T. Longing. for bliss, pure-minded, God-devoted, Agni, we seek 
* thee, such, meet to be lauded,e - 
Thou, Agni, leddest forth. our men to battle, refulgent with 
the heaven's exalted splendour. 


ST I TT 

The Rishi of the°hymn is Bharadvaja, to whom,.with a few excep: 
tions, all the hymnefof this Book #re attributed. 1 Our Herald t 
or Invoking Priest who calls the Gade to the sacrifice. ° 3 Worehtp- 
ped with marrow : to whom egpecially the fat coverihg of the inwards. 
of the victims was offered. 4 They who approached the God abodd “a 
the Ribhus, Marute, or Angirases may be meant. +5 Their celestial 
and terrestrial riches : rdydh ubhdydsah : literally, riches of both kinds, 
Acoording: to Sayana, consisting in. ogttle. and in vosscssions Gther 
than cattle, : : 


556 THE RY MNS OF [BOOK VI. 


8 Sage of mankind, all peoples’ Lord and Master, the Bull of 
men, the sender down of blessings, : 
Still pressing on, promoting, purifying, Agni the Holy One, 
the Lord of riches, 


9 Agni, the mortal who hath toiled and worshipped, brought 
thee oblations with his kindled fuel, 
And well knows sacrifice with adoration, gains every joy with 
phee to gaard and help him. 


10 Mightiby let us worship thee the Mighty, with reverence,Agni ! 
fuel and obfations, 
With songs, O Son of Strength, with hymns, with altar : so 
may we strive for thine auspicious favour. 


11 Thou who hast covered heaven and earth with splendour and 
’ with thy glories, glorious, and triumphant, 
Continue thou to shine on us, O Agni, with strength abundant, 
rivh, and long-enduring. 


12 Vouchsafe us ever, as man needs, O Vasu, abundant wealth of 
Kine for son.and offspring. 
Food noble, plenteous, far from sin and evil, ba with us, and « 
. fair fame to make us happy, 


13 May J obtain much wealth in many places by love of thee and 
through thy grace,"King Agni ; 
-For in thee, Bounteous One, in thee the Sovran, Agni, are 
smany boons for him wha serves thee. 


HYMN II, Agni. 


THou, Agni, even as Mitra, hast a princely glory of thine own. 
Thou, active Vasu, makest fame increase like full prosperity, 


9 For, verily, men pray to thee with sacrifices anc with songs. 
To theg the Friendly Courser, seen of all, comes speeding 
through the air. 


3 Of one accord men kindle thee Heaven’s signal of the sacrifice, 
When, craving bliss, this race of man invites thee to the 


‘ 


solemn rite, . 


“4 Let the man thrive ‘who travails sore, in prayer, for thee the 
Bountiful. 


8 Sage of mankind, etc : Sage, Tord, Bull, etc arein the accusative 
case, in apposivion with ‘thee’ in stanza 7, though separated by an in- 
tervening haif-stauza, P aee 

2 The sriendly Courser : the Sun. 3 Or possibly, as suggested 
by Professor Ludwig, ‘The men accordant with the heaven light thee 
»the sign of sacrifice,’ that is, understanding the sigos in heaven and so 
knowing the proper time for he ceremony. 


AY MN 3.) THE RIGVEDA. 651 


He with the help of lofty Dyaus comes safe through straits 
. of enmity. 
& The mortal who with fuel lights thy flame and offers unto 


thee, 
Supports a house with many a branch, Agni, to live a hund- 
red years, , 
6 Thy bright smoke lifts itself aloft, and far-extended shines in 
heaven. ; 
For, Purifier ! like the Sun thou beamest with’ thy radiant 
glow. 
7 For in men’s houses thou must pe glorified as a well-loved 
. guest, - 


Gay like an elder in a fort, claiming protection lik e-sgn. 
8 Thou, Agni, like an able steed, art urged by wisdom in the 
wood, : 
Thou art like wind ; fgod, home art thou, like a young horse 
that runs astray. : ‘ P = 
9 E’en things imperishable, thou, O Agni, tike a grazing ox, 
Katest, when hosts, Eternal One! of thee the Mighty rend 
° the woods, 
10 Agni, thou enterest as Priest the home of men whé sacrifice, 
Lord of the people, prosper them, Accept the offering, 
Angiras ! ‘ 
11 O Agni, God with Mitra’s mifht, call hither the favour of the 
Gods from earth and heaven. _ 
Bring weal from heaven, that men may dwell secarely. May 
we oercume the foe’s malign dppressions, may we o’ercome 
them, through tby help o’ercome*them, 


HYMN III, Agni. 


Trog, guardian of the law, thy faithful servant wins ample 
light and dwells in peace, O Agni, 
, Whom thoa, as Varuna in accord wigh Mitra, guardest, O God, 
by banishing histrouble. ° 


2 He hath paid sacrifices, toiled in worship, and offered gifts to 
: wealth-increasing Agni, 


7 Gay like an elder : Agni must be respected® and cared for like a 
father as well as protected like a son. 8 In the weod : wherein’ fire 
_is produced by attrition. The exact meaning ofsthe 3tanza is some- 

what uncertain. Liks wind , moving everywhere. °9 Hatest: this 
“or some similar verb must be supplied, 1 As Varuna in accord 
with Mitra : that ie, Agoi, Varun, 9nd Mitra as one-—Ludwig. 


558 TAR AYMNS OP [BOOR Vr. 


Him the displeasure of the famous moves not, outrage and ; 
scorn affect not such a mortal. 


3 Bright God, whose look is free from stain like Sarya’s, thou, 
swift, what time thon earnestly desirest, 

Hast gear to give us, Come with joy at evening, where, 
Child of Wood, thou mayest also tarry. 


4 Fiercg isfhis gait and vast his wondrous body : he champeth 
like a horse with bit and bridle, 
And, darting forth his tongue, as’twere a hatchet, burning the 
woods, smelteth them. like a smelter, 


5 archer-like, fain to shoot, he sets his arrow, and whets his 
splendour like the edge of iron : 
The messenger of night with brilliant pathway, like a trec- 
roosting bird of rapid pinion. 


6 In beams of morn he clothes him like the singer, and bright 
as Mitra with his splendour crackles, 
Red in the night, by day “the men’s possession : red, he be- 
longs to men by day, Immortal. 


7 Like heaven’s when scattering beams his voice was uttered : 
among the plants the radiant Hero shouted. 


Who with’ hjs glow in rapid course came hither to fill both 
worlds, wefi-wedded Dames, with treasure. 


8 Whawith supporting streams and rays that suit him, hath 
flashed like lightning: with his native vigour. 


e Like’the deft Maker of the band. of Maruts, the bright im- 
petuous One hath shone refulgent. 


3 I gratefully adopt Professor Pischel’s interpretation of this vary 
difficult stanza which I had regarded as hopelessly obscure. See Ve- 
dische Studien, I. pp. 37—5d. 14 With bit and bridle : yamasana ; 
asi ; ‘champiug fodder with hie mouth.’—Wilson. As ‘twere a hatchet : 
Agoi, and not his tongug, is likened to the hatobet, 5: Of éron: or 
metal, the exact meaning of dyas being unsertain. 6 In beams of 
morn ; the light of early morning shine dua the fire and the singer alike- 
and simultaneously. » Bright as Mitra : ‘diffusing friendly light, —Wi)- 
f0u. The men’s possession : I taka nrin as a shortened form of nrindm; 
but it is difftuls to make sense of the half-stanza. Professor Wilson, 
following Sayana, translates : ‘(he 36 is). who is luminous by hight, and 
lighte men (to, their work) by day ; who is immortal and radiant ; who 
lighte men by day. The verb is supplied by Sayana. T Liks Hea 
wen’a: like the voice of Dyaus, the thunder. Well-wedded Damas : 
having excellent Lords, perhaps [ndra and Agol, 8& Zhe deft Maker of 
phe band of Maruis ; Dyaus is probably intondad: : 


HYMN 4.) THE RIGVEDA. . $59 
HYMN TY. -Apnd, 


- -As & man’s ‘service of the Gods, Invoker, ‘thou, ‘Son ‘of 
Strength, dost sacrifice and ‘worship, 
So bring for us to-day all Gods together, bring willingly ‘the 
willing Gods, O Agni, 
“2 May Agni, radiant Herald.ofthe morning, meet to be known, 
- accept our/praise with faVour. ; 
Dear to all life, mid mortal men Immortal, our guest,e awake 
° at dawn, is Jatavedas, : r 


‘3 Whose might the very heavens regard witk wonder : bright 
-ag the Sun he’slothes himself with lustre. 
He who sends forth, Eternal Parifier, hath shattered e’en the 
ancient works of Asna. “ - 
4 Thou art a singer, Son ! our feast-companion : Agni at"birth 
‘prepared this’food and pathway. ° 
Therefore vouchsafe us strength, O Strength-bestotter. Win 
like a King : foes troable not thy dwelling. a 
5 Even he who eats his firm hard food With swiftness, ahd over- 
takes the mights as Vayu kingdoms. 
diay-we 'crcome those who resist thine orders, like a steed 
casting duwn the flying foemen, ; 
& Like Sirya with his fulgent rays, 9 Agni, thgmoverspreadest 
both the worlds with splendour, . : 
-Decked with bright colour he dispels the darkness, like Ausija, 
with clear fame swiftly flying. 
‘l We have elected thee as aust delightful for thy beams glow 
hear our great laud, O Agni. . 
The beet men praise thee as the peer ef Indra in strength, mid 
Gods, Ake Vayu in thy bounty. 


1 Invoker : Motar, herald or tnviter of tha Goda. 3 Asna : ap- 
parently one of the demons of drought. 4 Hts food and pathway : 
or hie pathway to his food may bo mfended. 5 His firm hard jood : 
vdrandm anuam ;*the food of elephant, + e*treex, according to Profes- 
gor Ludwig. Profassor Wilson, following Sayana, translates the firet 
balf-line :‘ Fle whe whets his (yloom)—dtspersing (radiance), who eata 
thhe (offered) oblation.’ ds Vayu kingdoms 1 rdeht¢gt standing, perhaps 
for rdshiryd (rdshirydni), but the exact meaning is uncertain. Perhaps 
as Professor Ludwig suggerts, as Vayu or the wind blo¥s uninterrupted 
through the whole land, ro Age: ie kindled at night-fall and again ab 
early dawn before the wight bas. entirely passed’away. - 6 Like 
Austja : perhaps sume contemporary priest, who is °regarded as 
bringing back the daylight by prayer and sacrifice. ‘Like the adored: 
(eun),’— Wilson. 


560 THk AYMNS OF [BOOR V1. 


8 Now, Agni, on the tranquil paths of riches come to as for our 
weal : save us from sorrow, 
Grant chiefs and bard this‘boon. May welive happy, with hero 
‘children, through a hundred winters. 


HYMN V. Agni. 


TI ivvocars your Son of Strength, the Youthful, with hymns, 
the Youngest God, whose speech is guileless ; 

Sage who sends wealth comprising every treasure, bringer of 
many boons, devoid of malice. 


2 Ateve and morn thy pious servants bring thee their precious 
gifts, O Priest of many aspects, 

On whom, the Purifier, all things living, as on firm ground 
their happiness have stablished, 


3 Thou from of old hast dwelt among these people, by mental 
power the charioteer of blessings. 
Hence sendest thou, O sapient Jatavedas, to him who serves 
¢ thee treasures in su°ression. 


4 Agni, whoever secretly attacks us, the neighbour, thou with 
Mitra’s might ! who harms us, 
Burn him with thine own Steers for ever youthful, burn.ag 
with ourning heat, thou fiercest burner. 


5 He who servis thee with sacrifice and fuel,with hymn, O Son 
of Strength, and chanted praises, 
Shines out, Immortal ' in the midst of mortals, a sage, with 
wealth. with splendour and with glory. 


‘® Do this, O Agni, when we urge thee, quickly, triumphant in 
thy might subdue our foemen. 
When thou art praises with words and decked with brightness, 
accept this chanted hymn, the singer's worship, 


% Help us, that we may gain this wish,O Agni, gain riches, 
Wealthy One ! with store of ‘heroes. 
Desiring strength from thee may we be strengthened, and win, 
Eternal ! thine eternal glory, 


8 Tranquil : avrikébhih ; literally untroubled by wolvas, or enemies, 
Grant chiefs and bard : the <vealthy men who institute the sacrifice and 
the priest who sings. Or it may be rendered, Grant the chiefe’ 
bard,’ that is, thc priest who sings for his wealthy patrons. A hund- - 
red winters ? sea V. 54. 15, nove. 


- 


2 Preest ¢f many aspects : purvanika, having many faces, aspects, 
or manifestations. According to Sayana, having many flames instead 
of faces. 4 Thine own Steers: thy strong flames. Burn him, etc. : 
tapa taptshtha tapasa tapasuin, - | 


HYMN?) - THE RIGVEDA. 561 


HYMN VI. Agni. 


*He who seeks furtheranee and grace to help iim goes to the 
Son of Strength with newest worship 
Calling the heavenly Priest to share the banquet, who rends 
the wood, bright, with his blackened pathway. 
2 White-hued and thundering he dwells in splendour, Most 
Youthful, with the loud-vofsed and eternal— 
Agni, most variform, the Purifier, who follows crunchingmany 
*ample forests, 
3 Incited by the wind thy flames, O Agni, meve onward, Pure 
One! pure in all directions. 
Thy most destractive heavenly Navagvas break the woods 
* down and devstate them boldly, p 
4 Thy pure white horses from their bonds ‘are loose#eds O 
Radiant One, they shear the ground beneath them, 
And far and wide shines out thy flame, and flickers ,rapidly 
moving over earths high ridges. 
6 Forth darts the Bull’s tongue lrkathe sharp stone weapon 
discharged by him who fights to win the eattle. 
Agni’s fierce flame is like a ‘hero’s onset : dread and resistsless 
ehe distroys the forests. 
6 Thou with the sunlight of the great Papeltee sik boldiy over- 
spread the earth’s expanses. 
So drive away with conquering might all perils : fighting par 
foemen burn up those who harm us. 
7 Wondrous! of wondrous power! give to the singer wealth 
wondrous, marked, most, wonderfal, life-giving, ° pe 
Wealth bright, O Bright One, vast, with many heroes, give 
with thy bright flames to the man who louds thee, 


© ° HYMN VII. Agni. 


Him, messenger of earth and head of heaven, Agni Vaisvinara, 
born in holy Order, 

The Sage, the King, the guest of men, a vessel’ fit for their 

e mouths, the Gods have generated, « 


2 The loud-voice and eternal; Thé Mafuta. 3 Navagvas the 
flames of fire being ragarded as the ministers of Agni, who is the 
best or oldest of the Angirases, of whom the Navagvas are a class. 
4 Earth’s high ridges : ddhisdnu prisneh ; Prigni here being the multi- 
form earth. 5 Who fights to win the cattle: Indra who ware with 
demons of drought and darkness, 6 The great Tmpdler: Barya 
vivifying Sun. 7 Sd chitramchitayantam asme fhitrakshatra chitra- 
stamam vasodham Chandram rayim puruviram “brihantam “chandrd 
chandrabhir grinate YUUGEUG. e . 

1 A vessel fit for their mouths: thrqugh whose means they receive 
mon’s offerings. : ° 


cp ee 


B62 TAE BYMNS OF [BOOR Vi. 


2 Him have they praised, mid-point of sacrifices, great cistern 

of libations, seat of riches. . 

Vaisvanara, conveyer of oblations, ensign of worship have the 
Gods engendered. 


3 From thee, O Agni. springs the mighty singer, from thee come 
heroes who subdue the foeman. 
O King, Vaisvanara, bestow ‘thou on us excellent treasures 
werthy to be longed for. ; 
4 To thee, 'mmortal! when to life thou springest, all the Gbds 
sing for joy «8 to their infant. . 
They by thy mental powers were made immortal, Vaisvanara, 
when thou shonest from thy Parents, 
5 Agni Vaisvanara, no one hath ever resisted these thy mighty 
‘ordinances, 
When thou, arising from thy Parents’ bosom, foundest the 
light: for days’ appointed courses. 


6, The summits of the hegyen.are traversed through and through 
by the Immortal’s light, Waisvanara’s brillancy. 
All creatures in existence rest apon his head. The Seven 
swift-flowing Streams have grown like branches forth. | 


7 Vaisvirara, who measured out the realms of air, Sage very 
wise who made the lucid spheres of heaven, 
The Undeceivable who spread out all the worlds, keeper is he 
ard guard of immortality, 


, HYMN VIII. Agni. 


At Jitavedas’ holy gachering I will tell aload the conquering 
might of the swift red-hued Steer. 

A pure and fresher hymn flows to Vaisvanara, even as for 
Agni lovely Soma is aade pire. 


2 That Agni, when in loftiest heaven he sprang to life Guardian 
of Ho,y Laws, kept and observed them well, ; 
Exceeding wise, he m2asurad out the firmament. Vaisvinara 


attained to heaven by mightiness. . 
3 Wonderful Mitra propped the he..ven and carth apart, and 
covered and ccneealed the darkness with his light. 


ne on enn, 
a — 


2 Mid-poin. of sacrifices: ‘the bond of, sacrifices.— Wilson Agni 
or Gre is ussential in:all sacrifices. 6 The Seven swift-flowing Streams : 
the five riverr of the Punjab, the Indus and the Saraswati or tha 
Kubba. J/awy grou: from Vaisvanara Agni. 7 Of immortality : 
according to Sayana, of water which is the aause of immortality. «Of 
ambrosial (rain ).’— Wilson. 


BY MN %} THB. RIGVEDA. 563 


He made the two bowls part asunder like two skins, Vaisvanara 
- put forth all his creative power.: 
4 The Mighty seized him in the bosom of the floods : the people 
wa.ced on the King who should be praised. 
.As envoy of Vivasvéin Mitarisvan brought Agni Vaisvanara 
hither from far away. | 
» In every age bestow upon thg singers wealth, worthy of holy 
synods, glorious, ever new. ° 5 
King, undecaying, as it were with sharpened bolt,® smite 
down the sinner like a tree with lightning-flashe 
6 Do thou bestow, O Agni, on our wealthy Shiefs, rale, with 
good heroes, andecaying, bending not, 
. So may we win for us strength, (Gf Vaisvdnara, handredfold 
thousandfold, O Agni, by thy help. : 
7 O thou who dwellest in three places, Helpper, keep with tffective 
guards our princely patrons. ‘ 
Keep our band, Agni, who have brought thee presents. Leng- 
then their lives, Vaiswinara, when lauded. 
HYMN IXs-:* . Agi. 
Ont half of day is dark, and bright the 8ther : both atmos- 
pheres move on by sage devices. 
Keni VaisvAnara, when born as Sovran, hath with his lustre 
overcome the darkness. 52 
2 I know not either warp or woof, f know noé “the web they 
weave when moving to the contest. ° 
3 The two bowls : the heaven and earth, called dhishane &r bow!s 
from their hemispherical appearnance. 4 The Mighty.: the Gods 
who followed and found the fugitive Agni. Zhe people ¢ or the @ubjecte,: 
vtsah. Of Vivasudn : according to Shyana, from Aditya or the Sun. 
7 Who dwollest in three places : in heaven ag the Sun, in the firmament 
as lightning,%&od on earth as fire. 
The hymn is somewhat obscure ; butthe general puyport appears 
to ba ; Agni is the priests’ guide and teacher. As sunlight dispels the 
darkness eo hoe enlightens our understanding [ know nothing of 
the mysteries of sacrifiee ; but I look to Agni for light, and prepare 
te ear and eye of my mind to receive knowledge and inspiration from 


him. 1 Both atmospheres : the rajgs orgtmosyphere is divided into 
two parte, one halt belonging to the sky and the other to the earth. 
See Wallis, The Cosmology of the Rigveda, pp. 115, 116. 2 I know: 


not either warp or woof: ‘The ‘iret haif ofethe stanz4...implies, accord- 
ing to those who know traditign, sampradayaviiah, says Scyana, a 
figurative allusion tothe mysteries of sacritica:thg threads of the 
warp, fantu, are the metres of the Vedas, those af thee woof, ofu, the 
liturgic prayere and ceremdfial, the combinatior of whivh two is éhe 
oloth, or sacrifice: the atmavidah, or, Vedantis, ungerstand it ag 
alluding to the mysteries of creation, the threads °of the warp being 
the subtile slaments, those of the woof the gross, and their combination 
the universe.’— Wilson. Professor Graesmann and the traniators of the 


564: THK HYMNS OP (BOO Vt. 


Whose son shall here speak words that must be spoken without 
assistance from the Father near him ? ; 
3 For both the warp and woof he understandeth, and in due 
time shall speak what should be spoken, 
Who knoweth as the immortal world’s Protector, descending, 
seeing with no aid from other, 
4 He is the Priest, the first of ajl : behold him, Mid mortal men 
he is the light immortal. 
Hero was he born, firm-scated in his station, Immortal, ever 
waxing in his body. 
§ A firm light hath been set for men to look on: among all 
things that fiy the mind is swiftest. 
All Gods of one accord, ‘with one intention, move unobstructed 
to a single purpose. 
6 Minu ears unclose to hear, mine eye to see him ; the light that 
harbours in my spirit broadens. 
Far roams my mind whose thoughts are in the distance. What 
shall I speak, what shall 1 now imagine ? 
? All the Gods bowed tse down in fear b-fore thee, Agni, when 
thou wast dwe!ling in the darkness. 
Vaisvanara be gracious,to assist us, may the Immortal favour 
us and help us. | 
er HYMN X. Agni, 


InstaLu at cacrifice, while the rite advances, your pleasant, 
~ heavenly Agni, meet for praises, 
With bhymns—for he illumiaes as—install him He, Jatavedas, 
makes our rites successful. 

oor ee ene ol ee 
Nebenzig Lieder think that a young eioger is preparing himself for a 
contest with older bards, and, being distrustful of this own unaided 
powers to find material for his song, expresses his‘relianse upon Agni, 
and saeks inspiration from bim. 7o the contest: the sacrifice is here 
intended : a meeting for religious worship ; sangamane devayajame.— 
Sayana. Whose eon s Agni is the Father whose aid every one requires, 
however excellent bis own human father may be. 5 A firm light: 
Agni remaine in his place, and the effectual performance of the sacri- 
fice depends upon the activity of his mind. According to the Vedantio 
view of the text, the light’is Brahma, seated spontaneously in the 
heart as the means of true knowledge, to which all the senses, together 
with the mind and ocnsciousness, refer,‘as 60 the one cause of creation, 
or Paramatma, suprome spirit. —Wilson, The stanza is translated by 
. Prof. Wilson, after Sayana : ‘A steady light, ewifter than thought, 
stationed among moving beings to show (the way) to happiness ; all the 
gode being of on mind and of like wiscom, proceed respectfully to the 

presence of the one (chief) agent, (Vaigvanara)’. 


Sl 


1 Install : eatablish him as your Purohita or Chief Priest ; or set 
him imfront as the Ahavaniya fire, 


AY MN 11.) THE RIGVRDA, 565 


2 Hear this laud, Radiant Priest of many aspects, O Agni with 
the fires of man enkindled, 
” Laud which bards send forth pure as sacred butter, strength 
to tuis man, as ’twere for self-advantage. 
3 Mid mortal men that singer thrives in glory who offers gifts 
with hymns of praise to Agni, 
And God, wondrous bright, with wondrous succoure helps. 
him to win a stable filled with cattle, 
4 Ho, at his birth, whose path is black behind ‘him, fi filled freaven, 
and earth with for apparent splendcar : 
And he himself hath been, ‘through night's thick darkness, 
made manifest by light, the Purifier. 
5 With thy most mighty aid, confer, O Agni, wonderfal wealth. 
on us snd on our princes, 
Who stand preeminent, surpassing others ‘in liberal Sifts, in 
fame, and hero virtues, 
6 Agni, accept this sacrifice with gladness, which, seated here, 
the worshipper presengteth. 
Fair fymns hadst thou among the~ Daharadvajas, and hol pst 
them to gain abundant vigour. 
7 Scatter our foes, increase our store, May we be glad a hund- 
* red winters with brave sons. 


HYMN Xi. .° rene 


EAGERLY sacrifice thou; most skilful, Agni ! Pricst, Progsing 
on us if the Maruts sent the 

To our oblation bring the two Naatpas Mitra and Varuna 
and Barth and Heaven, 

2 Thou art our guileless, most delightful Herald, the God, among 

mankind, of holy synods. 

A Priestewith purifying tongue, O “Agni, sacrifice with thy 
mouth to thine own, body, : 


coed 


3 Strength to this, man: the hymn is to give strength to the 
wprebipper, and the prieate are to sing withevigour as though their own 
interests were immediately concerned, Styana takes mamalé (out of self- 
interest) as a proper name, ‘As Mamafa (fofmerly offered it).’— Wilgon. 
§ Astatle filled with cattle: the expression includes the waters of 


heaven, the light of day, and booty in cattle-lifting expeditions. 6. 
Bharadvdjas : the family of the great Rishito .whom the hymn was 
revealed. 7 A hundred winte?s : see note on VI. 4. 8. 
r e e 
e @ 


o”% 6 ‘ ‘~ 
2 Of holy synods : T follow Professor Ludwig i in taking vidathdé as 
an old genitive plural, and not = vidathe, as Siyanatioes. Sacrifice.s.... 
to thine own body : or sacrifice ...thy ‘proper body ¢ of, ‘ keep thine 
own body near us to be worshipped.’ , 


666 TAB AYMNS OF [ROOK VI. 


3 For even the blessed longing that isin thee would bring the 

Gods down to the singer’s worship, 3 

When the Angirases’ sagest Sage, the Poet, sings the sweet 
measure at the solemn service. 


4 Bright hath he beamed, the wise, the far-refulgent, Worship 
the two wide-spreading Worlds, O Agni, 
Whom as the Living One riclf in oblations the Five Tribes, 
/  begnging gifts, adorn with humage. : 
®& When f{ with reverence clip the grass for Agni, when the trim- 
med ladle, fill of oil, is lifted, 
Firm on the seat of earth is based the altar: eye-like, the 
sacrifice is directed Sun-ward. 


6 Enrich us, O thou Priest of many aspects with the Gods, Agni, 
‘wilh thy fires, enkindled. 
O Son of Strength, clad in the robe of riches, may we escape 
froia woe as from a prison. 


. ed ¥MN XIt. | Agni. 


Kine of trimmeil grass, Herald within the dwelling, may 
Agui worship the Impeller’s World-halves. 
He, Son of Strength, the Holy, from a distance hath spread 
himselfabroad with light like Sarya, 

6 In thee, most wise, shall Dyaus, for full perfection, King ! 
‘Holy One ! pronounce the call to worship, , 

Fouhd in three places, like the Speeder’s footstep, come to 

present men’s riches as oblations ! 


¥ Whose blaze most splendid, sovran in the forest,shines waxing 
on his way like the Impeller. 

Ho knowns himself, like as a guileless smelter. noteto be stayed 
among the plants, Immortal, 


4 Our friends extol him like asteed for vigour, even Agni in the 
dwelling, Jatavedas, : 


QJ ¢ en ee ee 
1 The Impeller's World-halves: the heaven and earth, illumined 
by, and so belonging to, the all-vivifying Sun 2 In thee : or by thea, 
in thy lightning form, Dyaus or Heaven shall pronounce the ydjyd4, the 
consecrating text used ab saorifices, and thus invite the Gods to be 
present. Foundin three places: in heaven, atmosphere, and earth, 
and in the corresponding fire-reseptacies at sacrifice. The Spesder's 
footstep : therthseefold step of Vishne ae the Sun, traversing the three 
worlds ofearth, air, and sky. 3 A Yetleless smelter : he knows his 
power to consume what he attacks, like a malter of metal who knows 
what he can do and does not deceive himself. According to Sayana, 
dravita here Means ranuer, ‘rushing like the innoxioys ( wiud \o 
Wilson. e 


fIYMN 13.) THE RIGVEDA. 567 


Tree, fed, he fights with power as doth a champion, like Dawa’s 
« Sire to be praised with sacrifices. 
5 Men wonder at his shining glows when, paring the woods with 
exse, oer the broad earth he goeth, 
And, like a rushing flood, loosed quickly, burneth, swift as a 
guilty thief, o’er desert places. 
6 So mighty thou protectest us from slander, O Champion, Agni! 
with all fires enkindled. ; é 
Bring opulence and drive away affliction.’ May, brave sons 
gladden us through a hundred winters. e 


HYMN XIlIl. Agni, 
’ From thee, as branches from a tree,O Agni, from thee, 
Auspicious God! spring all our blessings— e e 


Wealth swiftly, strength in battle with our foemen, the rain 
besought of heaven, the flow of waters. . « 
2 Thou art of Bhaga toesend wealth: thou dwellest, like 
circumambient air with wondrogs’splendour. ; 
Friend art thou of the lofty Law, like Mitré, Controller, Agni! 
God! of many a blessing. 
3 Agni! the hero slays with might his foeman ; the singer bears 


away the Pani’s booty— ° Pi 
Even he whom thou, Sage, born in Law, incftest by wealth, 
accordant with the Child of Waters. i 


4 The man who, Son of Strength! with sacritices, hymns, lauds, 
attracts thy fervour to gthe altar, ‘ a 
Enjvy each precious thing, O God, O Agni, gains wealth of 


corn and is th: lord of treasures, . 


5 Grant, S8n of “Strength, to men for their subsistence such 

things as bring high fame and hero children. 
For thou with might givest much food in cattle even to the 

wicked wolf when he is hungry. 

6eEloquent, Son of Strength, Mogt Mighty, Agni, vouchsafe us 
seed and offspring, full of vigoar. | 

_ May I by all my songs obtain abundance. May brave sons 
gladden us through a handred winters, 


e 


e 
4 Dawn's site: Dyaus or Heaven, the father of Ushas or Dawn. 
e ° e # 


¢ s, 6 


@ ® e 
3 His fooman: vrtirim signifying any enemy: gvarakam satrum— 
Sayana. The Child of Waters : here said to mean the lightning, born 
of the watery cloud. 5 To the wicked wolf: or, perhaps even to the 
foe Vrrika. Cf, VIT. 68. 8. ,° / 


668 THE AY NS OF [BOOK VI. 


HYMN XIV, Agni. 


Waoso to Agni hath endeared his thought and service by his 
hymns. 
That mortal eats before the rest, and finds sufficiency of food. 
2 Agni, in truth, is passing wise, most.skilled in ordering, a Seer. 
At sacrifices Manus’ sons glorify Agni as their Priest. 
3 The foeman’s wealth in many a:place, Agni, is emulous to help. 
Men fight the fienu, and seek by rites to overcome the riteless foe. 
4 Agni bestows the hero chief, winner of waters, firm in fray, 
Soon as they look npon his might his enemies tremble in alarm. 
5 For with his Wisdom Agni, God, protects the mortal from 
reproach, | 
Whose conquering wealth is never checked, Is never checked 
in deeds of might. 
6 OAgni, God with Mitra’s might call hither the favour of the 
Gods from earth and heaven, 
Bring ‘weal from heaven that men may dwell securely. May we 
oercome the foe’s malign oppressions, may we Vcrcome 
them, through thy Belp o’ercome them: 


HYMN XV. Agni. 


Wits this my song I strive to reach this guest of yours, who 
wakes a¢ yearly morn, the Lord of all the tribes. 

Each time h& comes from heaven, the Pure One of old: 
from aucient days the Child eats everlasting food. 

2 Whom, well-disposed, the Bhrigus stablished as a Friend, 
whom men must glorify, high-flaming in the wood, 

~ As such, most friendly, thou art évery day extolled in lauds 
by Vitahavya, O thou wondrous God. 

3 Be thou the foeless helper of the skilful man, suhduer of the 
enemy near or far away. 

Bestow a wealthy home on men, 0 Son of Strength, Give 
Vitahavya riches spreading far and wide, give Bharadvija 
wide-spread wealth. 

4 Him, your refalgent gtest, Agni who comes from heaven, ths 

Herald of mankind, well-gkilled in sacred rites, : 

1 That mortal eats before the rest: May the mortal,.,...quickly 

become distinguised as first (amongst men).’—Wilson. 2 Mose skilled 

in ordering : the chief regulator of raligious rites, 3 Emulous to 
help : waiting for ua to sieze and use, | 


1 The Chilg: born of the fire-sticks, or of Heaven and Barth. 
Everlasting food: the Amrita contained in the sacrificial offerings. 
2 Pitahavya: dither the name of the Rishi, as Sayana takes it, or an 
epithet ' whose oblations are enjoyed,’ qualifying Bharadvaja underatood ° 


AY MN 15.) THE RIGVEDA, 569 


D 


tS 


— 


i 


Il 


Who, like a holy singer,utters heavenly words, oblation-bearer, 


e envoy, God, [ seek with hymns. 


Who with his purifying, eye-attracting form hathshone upon 
the eirth as with the light of Dawn ; 

Who speeding on, asin the fight of Etasa, cometh, untouched 
by age, as one athirst in heat. 


Worship ye Agni, Agni, with*your log of wood ; pease your 
beloved, your beloved guest with songs, 

Invite ye the Immortal hither with yeur hynins, A God a among 
the Gods, he loveth what is choice, loveth aur service, Gods. 
mid Gods. 


Agni inflamed with fuel in my sony I sine, pare, Cleanser, 


stedfast, set in front at sacrifice, 
Wise Jatavedas we implore with prayers for iiss. tha Priest, 
the holy Singer, bounteous, void of guile! 


@ 
Men, Agni, in each age have made thee, Deathless On&, their 
envoy, offering- bearer, guard adorable. 
With revcrence Gods and mortals have established thee, the 
ever-watchful, omnipresent Houschold Lofd, 


Trou, Agni, ordering the works and ways of both, as envoy of 
the Gods traversest both the worlds. 

When we lay claim to thy regard and gracious cage, "hia thOH 
to us a thrice-prutecting friendly guard. 


Him fair of face, rapid, and fair to look on, him very wisy may 
we who know not follow. 

Let him who knows all ruleg invite for worship, Agni announces 
our offering to the Immortals. 


Him, Agni, thou _deliverest and savestewho brings his prayer 
to ‘thee tle V ise, O Hero, 

The end of sacrifige or tts inception > yea, thou endowcst him 
with power and riches, 

Guard us from him who would assail us, Agni ; preserve us. 

e O thou Victor, from dishonour, ° 

Ilere Jet the place of darkening cgme ypon thee : may wealth 
be ours, desirable in thousands, 


5 Inthe fight of Etasa: when be contended with Sfirya. Seo IT. 


‘19. 5, whert Indra is said to have assisted Kbaga. ) @f both of Gods 
and men. 11 The second half ofthe stanza is no® cleat.” Professor 
Wilson paraphrases it sfter ~dyana : ‘thou rewarfost with sfrencth 
and with riches him (who undertakes) the institution, (whceeffects) the 
accomplishment, of the sacrifice. 12 Vhe place of darkening : this 
passage is very obscure. Professor Ludwig thinks that the time of bao- 
tle is meant. May the fous who attack ua “find that they have to deal 


7? . 


570 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR VI 


13 Agni, the Priest, is King,Lord of the homestead, he, Jatavedas, 
knows all generations, 

Most skilful worshipper mid Gods and mortals, may he begin 
tho sacrifice, the Holy. 


14 Whate'er to-day thou, bright-flamed Priest, enjoyest from the’ 
man’s rite—for thou art t Sacrificer— 
Worship, for duly dost thou spread in greatness : bear off thine 
offerings of to-day, Most Youthful. 


15 Lovk thou upon the viands duly laid for thee. Fain would he 
set thee heré to worshtp Heaven and Harth. 

Help 08, O liberal Agni, in the strife for spoil, so that we 
may o’ercome all things that trouble us, o'ercome, o’ercome 
them with thy help, 

16 Together with ali Gods, O fair-faced Agni, be seated first 
upon the wool-lined altar, 

Nesi-like, bedewed with oil. Bear this our worship to Savitar 


who sacrifices rightly. ee 
17 Here the arranging pricsts, as did Atharvan, rub this Agni 
forth, 


Whom, not bewildered, as he moved in winding ways, they 
brovght from gloom. 


18 For the Ges banquet be thou born, for full perfection and 
for weal. 
Bring the Immortal Gods who strengthen holy Law: so Ict our ~ 
sacrifice reach the Gods. 


with thee as our ally. Savana explains ndthah as food offered in sacri- 
fica, and dhvasmanvat as dhvastadosham, fread from defectsi; ‘May the food 
reach thee free from imperfection.’ Professor Grag@smann translates: 
* Kis dring mit dir dein rauchumbullter Gang vor;’ “Thy smoke-enveloped 
couree press forward with thee.’ 13 Anows all generations : vista 
veda jinimd ; etymology of Jitavedas. —Ludwiz. 14 The man’s ; 
who institutes the sacrifice. ,10 Fain would he: the patron of the 
sacrifice. The original byma | sesms tu end with this stanza, a3 the 
repetition, o’ercome...... Oercome, tarems . tarema.. . tarema also 
indicates. 16 Wool-lened altar: built up like the nest of a bird with 
lInyers of wool, in which wool and resits for incense are placed. See 
Aitareya-Brahmanas 1. 5. 28 (Haug’s translation p. 62). Zo Savitar: 
acoording to Sayans, Savitar means the originator, the institutor of the 
sacrifice, aud. tha dative cage is used in the sense of the genitive, 
‘the sacrifice of the institutor of the rite” [na another place 
he explains savitré yajamindya by ‘for the sake of the bencfit of the 
sacrifcing institutur of the cermony. 17 Atharvan / the priest who 
firab obtained fire and offered Soma and prayers to the Gods. As he 


moved in winding ways ; when he fled and tried, to hide himself from 
the Gods. 


HYMN 16.) THE RIGVEDA. 571 


19 O Agni, Lord and Master of men’s homesteads, with kindled 
« fuel have made thee mighty. 
Let not our household gear be found defective. Sharpen us 
wit! thy penetrating splendour. 


HYMN XVI. Agni. 


Prirst of all sacrifices hast thou been epee nies by the Gods, 
Agni, amid the race of man. 
2 So with thy joyous tongues for us sacrifice nobly if this rite. 
Bring thou the Gods and worship them. 
3 For well, O God, Disposer, thou knowest, straight on, the paths 
and ways, 
Agni, most wise in sacrifice. : 
4 Thee, too, hath Bharata of old, with mighty men, imploied 
for bliss, e 
And worshipped thee the worshipful. : 
5 Thou,gjvest these abundant boons.to Divodasa pouring forth, 
To BharadvaAja offering gifts. 
Do thou, Immortal Messenger, bring ee ‘tthe Celestial Folk, 
Hearing the singer’s eulogy. 
7 Mortals with pious thought implore thee,Agni,God, Jax hol yrites. 
To come into the feast of Guds. 
| 8 I glorify thine aspect and the might of thee tite’ ‘Bounti iful. 
All those who love shall joy in thee, 
9 Invoker placed by Manus, thou, Agni, art near, tho ‘wisest 


6 


w 


Priest : 
Pay worship to the Tribes*of Heaven, e « 
10 Come, Agni, lauded, to the feasts; oe to the offering of the 
eifts. 


As Priest be seated on the grass. 
11 So, Angiras, we make thee strong with fuel and with holy oil. 
Blaze high, thou youngest of the Gods. 
12 Forus thou winnest, Agni,God, heroic strength exceeding great, 
far-spreading and of high renoyn. ¢ 
13 Agni, Atharvan brought | thee forth, by rubbing, from the lotus- 
flower, 
" The head of Visva, of the Priest. 
14 Thee, Vritra’s slayer, breaker down of castles, hath Atharvan’s 
son, 
Dadhyach the Rishi, lighted ‘up, ° 


e 
- e 


4 Bharata: according to Sayana the King of phat eame, ‘son of 
Dushyanta and Sakuntala. 13 The lotus-flower : apparently a figu- 
rative expression for heaven. Visua: Heaven, porsonified, 14 
Dadhyaoch : see I. 84, 13, note. ° 


512 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK VL 


15 The hero Pathya kindled thee the Dasyus’ most destructive 
foe, 
Winner of spoil in every fight 


16 Come, here, O Agni, will I sing verily other songs to thee, 
And with these drops shalt thou grow strong. 


17 Where’cr thy mind applies «itself, vigour precéminent hast 
thou : ‘ 
There wilt theu gain s dwelling-place, 


‘ q 
18 Not fora a a only lasts thy bounty, good to many aone! 
Our service therefore shalt thou gain. 


19 Agni, the Bharata, hath been sought, the Vritra-slayer, marked 
of all, 
Yes, Divodisa’s Hero Lord. 


20 Tor he gave riches that surpass in greatness all the things of 
etrth, 
Fiehting untroubled, unsubdued. - 


21 Then, Agut, asin days of old, with recent glory, gathered 
lisht, 
Hast overspread the lofty heaven. : 
22 Bring,to your Agni, O my friends, boldly your laud and 
sacrifice ! ‘ 
Give the Uisposer praise and song. 
23 Boe as sagacious Herald, he hath sat through every age 
of man, 
« QObation-bearing messenger. — . 


24 Bring those Two Kings «whose ways are pure, Adityas, and 
§ § bg pure, y 
the Marut host, 
Excellent God ! and Lleaven and Earth. 


v9 


a @ . ee 
25 Tor strong and active mortal man, excellent, Agni is the look 
Of thee Immortal, Son of Strength ! 


26 Rich through bis wisdom, noblest be the giver serving thee 
to-day : . 
The man hath brought his bymn of praise. 


15 Pathya, prohably some celebrated sacrificer. Dr. Garhe 
(Vattana Sttea TT, lt) translates pithyd vrtsha in this text by ‘der 
Foengst auf der Strasse, the Stallion on’ the way.’ 1'8 Not for a mo- 
ment ooly lgsts thy bounty. Sdyana understands this differently : < Leb 
not thy full (biaZe) be distressing to the evye,’— Wilson. 19 Ths 

_ Bharata ; the especial protector of the Bharatas Aocording to Sayana 
the word means either ‘descended from the prieste called Bharatas, or 
‘the bearer of oblations,’ Those Two Kings ; Mitra and Varuna, 


HY MN 16] THE RIGVEDA. 513 


27 These, Agni, these are helped by thee, who, strong and active 
: all their lives, 
O’ercome the malice of the foe, fight down the malice of 
the foe. 
28 May Agni with his pointed blaze cast down each fierce devour- 
ing fiend : 
May Agni win us wealth by war. 
29 €O active JAtavedas, bring riches with store, of hero sorts : 
Slay thou the demons, O Most Wise. ° 
30 Keeps us, O Jitavedas, from the troubling of the man of sin: 
Guard us thou Sage who knowest prayer. 
3t Whatever sinner, Agni, brings oblations to procure our death, 


Save us from woe that he would work. - © . 
32 Drive from us with thy tongue, O God, the man who docth, 
evil deeds, ” 


Thg mortal who would «trike us dead. 
33 Give: shelter reaching far and wide té Bharadvaja, conquering 
Lord ! 
eAgni, send wealth most excellent. 
34 May Agni slay the Vritras,—fain for riches, throygh the lord 
of song. ° 
Served with oblation, kindled, bright. 
35 His father’s father, shining ig his Mother’s everlastiag side, 
Set on the seat of holy Law. 
36 O active Jatavedas, bristg devotion that wins progeny, Agai, 
that 1t may shine to heaven. « 
37 O Child, of Strength, to thee whofe look is lovely we with 
dainty food, 
O Agni, have poured forth our songs. 
38 To thee for shelter are we come, as to the shade from fervent 
heat, 
* Agni, who glitterest like golds 
39 Mighty as one who slays with sRafts,or like a bull with sharp- 
ened horn, 
Agni, thou brokest down the sorts, ° 


30 His father's father : = Chare: as before, the mother of Agnt i§ the 
earth, the father is heaven ; Agni is said to be theefathdér or fosterer of 
his parent heaven by transmitting to it the fame and smoke of burnt- 
offerings, —- Wilson. 37 Child of Strength : sahaskrita : literally 
made or produced by strength,1. 6. the violent agitation of the fire-stick. 


574 THE AYMNS8 OF (BOOK V1. 


40 Whom, like an infant newly born, devourer, in their arms 
they bear, ‘ 
Men’s Agni, ’skilled in holy rites. 
41 Bear to the banquet of the Gods the God best finder-out of 
wealth. 
Let him be seated in his place, 
42 In Jitavedas kiudle ye the deay guest who hath now appeared 
In a soft place, ¢he homestead’s Lord, 
43 Harness, O Agni, O thou God, thy steeds which are most 
excellertt ; 
They bear thee &s thy spirit wills. 
44 Come hither, bring the Gods to us to tast the sacrificial feast, 
To drink the draught of Soma juice, . 
45 O Agni of the’ Bbaratas, blaze high with everlasting might, 
Shine forth and gleam, Eternal One. 
46 The mortal man who serves the God with banquet, and, bring- 
ing gifts at sacrifice, lauds Agni, 
May welltattract, wih prayer and fiands uplifted, the .Priest 
of Heaven and Earth, rue Sacrificer. 
47 Agni, we bring thee, with our hymn, oblation fashioned in 
the heart. 
Let these be oxen unto thee, let thesa be bulls and ie to 
thee. “¢ 
48 The Gods erfsendle Acni, best slayer of Vritra, first in rank, 


The Mighty One who brings us emcee and crushes down the 
Rakshasas. 


_ . HYMN XV2I, 


Drink Soma, Mighty @ne, toi which, when lauded, thou brak- 
est through the cattle-stall, O Indra; 
Thou who,s() Bold One, armed with thunder smotest Vritra 
with might, and every hostile being, 
2 Drink it thou God who art impetuoas victor, Lord of our 
hymns, with beautequs Jaws, the hero, ; 
Render of kine-stalls, car-borne, thunder- wielding, so pierce 
thy way to w ondrou$ streneth, O Indra. 
3 Drink as of old, and let the draught delight thee : hear thou 
our prayer and ret our songs exalt thee, 
Make the Sun visible, make food abundant, slaughter the foes, 
pierce through and frec the cattle, 


42 Ine litavedas kwndle ye: the meantag‘is said to be, that the fire 
of burnt-offeriggs is to be kindled by the fire produced by attrition. 
46 True Sacrificer : “whnse sacrifices are always effectual. 47 Let 
these be ozem: leb‘our oblations be as acceptable to thee as herds of 
cattle are to men. . 


AYMN 17.) THE RIGVEDA. 675 
4 These gladdening drops, O Indra. Self-sustainer, quaffed shall 


* augment thee in thy mighty splendour. 
Yea, let the cheering drups delight thee greatly, great, perfect, 
strong, powerful, all-subduing. 
9 Gladdened whereby, bursting the firm enclosures, thou gavest 


splendour to the Sun and Morning. ’ 
The mighty rock that compassed in the cattle, neer moved, 
thou shookest from its seat, O Indra. ’ 


6 Thou with thy wisdom, power, and works of Wonder, hast 
stored the ripe milk in the raw cows’ udders, 
Unbarred the firm doors for the kine of Morning, and, with 
the Angirases, set free the cattle. 


T Thon hast spread out wide earth, a mighty- marvel, aad, high 
thyself, propped lofty heaven, ‘O Indra. 
Both worlds, whose Sons are Gods, tiou hast sufported, 
young, Mothers from old time of holy Order. 


8° Ye’, *Indra, all the Deities instulled thee their ong strofig 
( hampion in the van for battle. 
What time the godless was the Cods’ es Indra they 
® chose to win the light of heaven, 


9 Yea, e’en that heaven itself of old, bent back war before thy 
bolt, in terror of its anger, °° 

When Indra, life of every living creature, smote down within 
his lair the assailing Dragons ° 

10 Yea, Strong Onc! Tvashtar turned for thee, the Mighty, the 

bolt with thousand spikes and hundred edges, 

Eager and prompt at will, wherewith thou crushedst the boast- 
ing Dragon, ( impetuous Hero, ° 


11 He dressed a hundred buffaloes, O Indra, for thce whom all 
accordant Maruts strengthen. 
He, Pishan Vishnu poured forth three great vessels to him, 
the juice that cheers, that slauglters Vritra, 


6 The ripe milk: the cows®are called saw a? contrasted with the 
warm milk matured in their uddars. sve 1, 6229 * This miracle ia 
ascribed to the Agvine also, ste 1 180. 3. 7e Whose Sons are 
Gods: Heaven and Karth are frequently called the parents Sf the Gods. 
So in Greek mythology the Gods sprang from the wnion of Uwanusand 
Gaia. ‘Cent mythologies, M. Reville remarks, ‘som gondees sur le 
mariage du ciel et de laterre’ See Muir, O 8S eats, V. bp. 24. /8 
The godless: the demon Vritra. ll He: Agof. "See Ve 29 eT, 
Three great vessels: literally, Jakes. eSee V. 29.7, That slaughters 
Vritra : inspirits [odra to slay- him. ° 


576 THE AYMNS OP [BOOR VI. 


12 Thou settest free the rushing wave of waters, the floods’ great 

swell encompassed and obstructed. ; 

Along steep slopes their course thou turnedst, Indra, directed 
downward, speeding to the ocean. 


13 So may our new prayer bring thee to protect us, thee well- 
armed Hero with thy bolt of thunder, 

Indra, who made these worlds, the Strong, the Mighty, who 
never groweth old, the victory-giver. 


14 So, Indra, form us brilliant holy singers for strength, for 
glory, and fo. food and riches. 
Gige Bharadvaja hero patrons, Indra! Indra, be ours upon the 
day of trial. 
15 With this may we obtain strength God-appointed, and brave 
sons gladden us through a hundred winters. 


: HYMN XVIII, Indra. 


,Guoriry him whose might is all-surpassing, Indra the much- 
invoked who fights antnjured. 

Magnify with these songs the never-vanquished, the Strong, 
the Bull of men, the Mighty Victor. 


2 He, Champion, Hero, Warrior, Lord of battles, impctuons, 
loudly 1varing, great destroyer, 
Who whirls the dust on high, alone, o’erthrower, hath made 
al! races of mankind his subjects. 


3 Thou, thou alone, hast tamed the Dasvus; singly thou hast 
suddued the people for the Arya. 
Is this, or is it not, thine hero exploit, Indra ? Declare it at 
the proper season. ,, 


4 For truce, 1 deem, thy strength is, thine the Mighty, thine, O 
Most Potent. thine the Conquering Vitor ; 
Strong, of the Strong, Most Mighty, of the mighty, thine, 
driver of the churl to acts of bounty, 


5 Be this our ancient Lond of friendship with you and with 
Auvirases here who spsak of Vala 
Thou, Wondrous, Shaker of things firm, didst smite him in his 
fresh strength, and force his doors and castles. 


14 The day of t. ial : the decisive day of battle. 15 With this 
.stulyd, praise, is Uncerstood. . 
\ 


3 At the proper season : show that thou hast this power by aiding 
us befvre it is too late and when our enemies have couquered us, 5 With 
you : with Indra and bis allies, tha Marutes, 


HYMN 18.) THK RIGVEDA. 577 


6 With holy thoughts must he be called, the Mighty, showing 
>  ._ bis power in the great fight with Vritra.— 
He must be called tu give us seed and offspring, the Thunderer 
must be moved and sped to battle. 
FI 7 Ue in bis might, with name that lives for ever, hath far sur- 


passed all human generations, 
He, most heroic, hath his home with splendour, with glory and 
With riches anil with valour. 
8 Stranger to cuile, who nc’er was false or faithless, Bening a 
name thit may be well remembered, 
Indra crushed Chumuri, Dhuni, Sambara, Pi ‘peu, and Sashna, 
that their castles fell in ruin, : 
9 With saving might that must be praised and lauded, Indra, 
ascend thy car to smite down Vritra. © e 
In thy right hand hold fast thy bolt of thunder, and wapecn, 
Bunneoas Lord, his art and magic. 
10 As Agni, as the dart burns the dry forest, like the dr oad shaft 


“burn down the fiends, O Indra; ° 
Thou who with high deep reaching s spear fast broken, hast 


covered over mischief and destr oyed it, 
11 With wealth, by thousand paths come hither, Agni, paths that 
bring ample strength, O thou Most Splendid. e 
Come, ‘Son of Strcneth; o'er whom, Invoked of° many! the 
codless hath no power to keep thee distant, : 


12 From heaven, from earth is bruited forth the greatness of him 
the firm, the ticry, the rgsplendent. ie 
No foe hath he, no counterpart, no refuge is there Frou him 
the Conqueror full of wisdom, , 
13 This day tle: dcedf that thou bast done is famous, when thou, 
for him, with many thousand others. 
Laidest low Kutsa, Ayu, Atithigva, and boldly didet deliver 
Tirvay ana. 
14 In thee, O God, the wisest of the pagesy all Gods were joyful 
when thou slewest Ahi. 


ec 


] 

8 Chumurt, ete: demous of dropght. See IndeX ° 10 The exact 
meaning of the second half-stanza is uncertain, as gambbirdyd and gish- 
vaya, deep and high, have no substantiva, 13 Sor htm® for TMie- 
yayina, who appears to have Been an especial fevourite of Ind. 
Acoording to Sayans, tvrvaydna, ‘quickly going,’ is an epithet of Divo- 
daga, Sayana represents the exploit as haviog been ac ueved for Kutea, 
Ayu, and Atithiyva, but this is not the meaning of the words of thie 
text. A new hymn : of praise fur 4UInG De Ww favour shown to us. 


13 ve 


578 THE AYMNS OF (BOOK V1. 


When, lauded for thyself, thou gavest freedoh to sore-afflicted 
Heaven and to the people. 
15 This power of thine both heaven and earth acknowledge, the 
deathless Gods acknowledge it, O Indra. 
Do what thou ne'er bast done, O Mighty Worker : begeta new | 
hymn at thy sacrifices, 


HYMN XIX. Indra. 


€ 


° 


Great, hero-like controlling men is Indra. unwasting in his 
powers, doubled in vastness, 

He, turned to us. hath grown to hero vigour: broad, wide, he 
hath been decked by those who serve him. 


2°The bowl made Indra swift to gather booty, the High, the 
Tofty, Youthful, Undecaying, 
Him who hath waxed by strength which none may conquer, 
and even at once grown to complete perfection. 


3 Stretch out those hands of thine, extend to us-ward thy ‘wide 
capacious arms, and grant us glory. 

Like as the houschold herdsman guards the cattle, so move 
thou round about us in the combat, 


4 Now, fain for strength, let us invite your Indra hither, who . 
lieth hidden with his Heroes, — 
Free from all blame. without reproach, uninjured, e’en as 
were those who sang, of old, his praises. 


5 With stedfast laws, wealth-giver, strong through Soma, he 
hath much fair and precious food to feed us 

In him unite all paths that lead to riches, like rivers that 
commingle with the ocean, 


6 Bring unto us the mightiest might, O Hero, eee and most 
potent force, thou great Subduer ! 
All splendid vigoruus powers of men vouchsafe us, Lord of Bay 
Steeds, that they may'make us joyful. 


7 Bring us, grown mighty in its strength, O Indra, thy friendly 
rapturous joy that wins the battle, 
Wherewith by thee assisted and triumphant, we may land thee 
in gaining seed anJ offspring. 


a 


@ 


1 Controlling .nen: or, satisfier of men. ‘Falfiller (cf the desires) , 
of men '—V7ileon 2 The bowl : that ts, the libation of Soma juice. 
But see Ludwig, Ueber die neuesten Arbeiten, &e , p. 87 4 Who , 
lieth hidden: Sayan & eX plains chatinam as satr anam chatakam ndsakam ; 
‘the destroyer (of enemies).’—- Wilson. 


HYMN 20] THE RIGVEDA. 579 


8 Indra, bestow on us the power heroic, skilled and exceeding 
* strong, that wins the booty, 
Wherewith, by thine assistance, we may conquer our foes in 
battlo, be they kin or stranger. 


9 Set thine heroic strength come from behind us, before us, from 
above us or below us, 


From every side may it approach us, Indra. Give us the glory 
of the realm of splendour, 


10 With most heroic aid from thee, like heroes, Indra, may wa 
win wealth by deeds of glory, 
Thon, King, art Lord ofearthly, heavenly treasure : vuachsafe 
us riches vast, sublime, and lasting. 
11 The Bull, ‘aliose strength hath waxed, whom nee follow, 
free- giving Indra, the Celestial Ruler, 


Mighty, all-conquering, the victory-giver, him let as call to 
grant us new protection. Py 


12 Give ap the people whe are high and haughty to these men 
and tu me, O thunder-wielder ! e 
Thereforo upon the earth do we invoke thee, where. Bee 
e win, for sons and kine and waters. 
13 Thrcuzh these thv friendships, God invoked of aes may we 
be victors over every foeman, 
Slaying both kinds of foe, may we, ‘0 tlero, be Bacay: helped 


by thee, with ample riches. 
6 


HYMN XX, . indra. 


GivE us wealth, Indra, that with might, as heaven oertops the 
earth, 0’ercomes our foes in battle. 
Wealth that brings thousands and that wins the corn-lands, 
wealth, Son of Strength! that vanquishes the foeman. 
2 Even as the power of Dyaus, to thee, O Indra, all Asura sway 
© was by the Gods entrusted, 
When thou, Impetuous ! leagued with Vishnu, slowest Vritra 
the Dragon who enclosed the waters, 


3 Indra, Strong, Victor, Mightier than the mighty, addressed 

with prayer and perfect in his sflendour, 
Lord of the bolt that brealeeth forts in pieces, became the King 
of the sweet juice of Soma. 


ARACEAE i? eae aE Ta 

9 From behind us, etc: or, from the west, from the north, from a 
south, from the ensb. 11 This stanza hae tocuréd in ITIL. 47. 

12 Where heroes wits: surusdias ; in battle. 13¢ B&th kinds of ye 


kinsmen and strangers, See stanza 8. 


580 THE HYMNS OF (BOOK VU. 


4 There, Indra, while the light was won, the Panis fled, ‘neath 
a hundred blows, for wise Dasoni, | ‘ 
And greedy Sushna’s magical devices: nor left he any of 
their food remaining, 
® What time the thunder fell and Sushna perished, all life's 
support from the great Druh was taken. 
Indra made room for his cat-driver Kutsa who sate beside 
him, when ke gained the sunlight. 
-6 Asche Hawk rent for him the stalk that gladdens, he wrenehed 
the head from Namuchi the Dasa. 
He guarded Mam, Sayva's son, in slumber, and sated him 
with food, sue@ess, and riches. 
7 Thou, thunder-armed, with thy great might hast shattered 
Pipru’s strong forts who knew the wiles of serponts. 
Thou gavest to thy worshipper Rijisvau imperishable wealth, 
O Bounteous Giver. 

8 The crafty Vetasu, the swift Dosoni, and Tugra speedily with 
all his servants, o =r 
Hath Indra, gladdentng with strong assistance, foreed near as 

‘twers to glorivy the Mother, 
9 Resistless, with the hosts he battles, bearing in both his arms 
the Vritra-slaying thunder. 
He mounts his Bays, as the car-seat an archer: yoked ata 
word the bear the lofty Indra. 
10 May we, O Indra, gain by thy new favour: so Piirus laud 
thee, with their sacrifices, 
That thou hast wrecked seven autumn forts, their shelter, 
« slain Dasa tribes and aided Purakutsa, 


4 For wise Dasonr: Daconi would appear in this place to ba the 
name of some man whom Indra protected Sayana says that the dative 
case 3 put for the ablative, and that the meaning 3s, ‘from the sage 
who offers many oblations,’ that is, from Kutsa. Ludwig takes Dagoni 
here to be the priest of the Panis: ¢ fled or fell for or to him?’ meaning 


that he was powerless to save them. 9 Drah: or, oppressor Cf. 
IN 285.2% 6 The Havtk: which brought the Soma from heaven. 
SeeT 93 6;1V,27. Nami: era X. 48 9. 8 Vetasu. Dagoni 


and Tugra appears to bho names of enemier conquered by Indra. Bub 
swt, teitagim, may be a Proper Name, Taitujr = Tuji (VI. 26. 4), and 
Dagoni (aasontm) may be ana adjective, “having ten arms or helpers.’ 
Cf. X 49 4. and see Ludwig, Der Rigveda, IT] p. 156. Aa ’twere to 
glority the Mother. Sayana taker dudtandya as the name of a raja, and 
according to'hir Interpretation Indra compelled the conquered foes vo 
approach, Dyotana eubroissivelyeas a son comes before a mother. The 
Mot!2r: the great Mother Aditi. 10 Antumn forts: probably 
strong places on elévaied ground eecupied by the Divaa or original in- 
habitants during the rains end autuma. According to again oles ss 
strongholds of Sarat, ademon. « 


HYMN 21.) THE RIGVEDA, . 581 


11 Favouring Usani the son of Kavi, thou wast his ancient 
‘ strengthener, O Indra. 
Thou gavest Navavastva as a present, to the great father 
gavest back his grandson. 


12 Thou, roaring Indra, dravest on the waters that made a roar- 
ing sound like rushing rivers, 
What time, O Hero, o’er the sea thou broaghtcst, in safety 
broughtest Turvasa and Yadu. ° 


13°This Indra, was thy work in war: thou sente$8t Dhuni and 
Chumauri to sleep and slumber. . 
Dabhiti lit the flame for thee, and worshipped with fucl, 
hymns, pourcd Soma, dressed dblations, 


HYMN XXL “Andes. Vievedewaa, 
PY 


g& 
Turse the most constant singer’s invocations call thee who 
© areto be invoked, O Hero; , . 
Hymns call anew the chariot-borne, Eternal: by eloquence 
men gain abundant riches, 


2°] praise that Indra, known to all men, honoured with songs, 
extolled with hymns at sacrifices, Pot 
Whose majesty, rich in wondrous ‘rts, surpasgeth the magni- 
tude of earth, and heaven in greatness, ° 


3 He hath made pathways, withthe Sun to aid him, throughout 
the darkness that extended pathless. 
Mortals who yearn to wership ne’er dishonour, O Mig&ty God, 
thy Law who art Inmortal. . 


4 And he who did these things, whete is that Indra! afnong 
@. ‘ ec 
what tribes ? what people doth he visit? 
What sacrifice contents thy mind and wishes ? What priest 
among them all? what hymn, O Indra? 


5 Yea, here were they who, born uf old, have served thee, thy 
e friends of ancient time, thor activ’ Worker, 
Bethink thee now of these, Invoked of many! the midmost 
and the recent, and the youngest. 


11 Navavdstva: an Asura, or a mysterious being who perhaps re- 
presents the Sun, released from*captivity or eclipse, by Indra and by 
him reatored to hie own or to Ipdra’s father—ap areatly to Usana or 
Heaven. Cf. X. 49 6; Bergaigue, Il. 223; Pischel (Vediechg Stydien, 
II. 128); Ludwig, Ueber die n. Arbsiten auf dem Gebiege der Rgveda- 
forschung, 160 12 Seo I 174 9. 13 Dhuni and Chumurt: 
Asuras or demons, sent to sleep, that is slain, by Indra’ ‘ Thou, with 
sleep whelming Chumuri and Dhuni,. slewest the Dasyu keptead safe 
Dabbiti’ ({I. 15.9), Cf. VL18.8. 


# 


58? THK HYMNS OF [BOOR VI. 


6 Inquiring after him, thy later servants, Indra, have gained thy 
former old traditions. 
Hero, to whom the prayer is brought, we praise thee as great 
for that wherein we know thee mighty. 


7 The demon’s strength is gathered fast against thee : great as 
that strength hath grown, go forth to meet it, 
With, thine own ancient friend and close companion, the 
thunderbolt, brave Champion! drive it backward. 


8 lear, too, the prayer of this thy present beadsman, O Indra, 
Herv, cherishing the singer. 
For thou wast aye our fathers’ Friend aforetime, still swift to 
listen to their supplication. 
9 Bring éo our help this day, for our protection, Varuna, Mitra, 
Indra, and the Maruts, 
Pishar. and Vishnu, Agni ond Purandhi, Savitar also, and the 
Plants and Mountains. 


10 The singers here exalt with hymns and praises thee who art 
very Mighty and Most Holy. 
Hear, when invoked, the invoker’s invocation. Besides thee 
there is none like thee, Immortal! . 


11 Now to my*.vords come quickly thou who knowest, O Son of 
Strength, With all who claim our worship, 
Who visit sacred rites, whose tongue is Agni, Gods who made 
Mana stronger than the Dasyu. 


12.On good and evil ways be thou our Leader, thou who art 
known to all as Path-preparer. 

Bring power to us, O Indra, with thy Horses, Steeds that are 

: best to draw, broad-backed, unwearied. , 


HYMN XXII. Indra, 


Wirs these my hymns [ glorify that Indra who is alone to be 
invoked by mortals, 

The Lord, the Mighty ‘One,‘of manly vigour, victorious, Hero, 
true, and full of wisdom, , 


2 Our sires of old, Navagvas, sages seven, while urging him to 
show his might, extolled him,, 
Dwelling.on Heights, swift, smiting down opponents, guileless 
.in word, and fn his thoughts Inost mighty. 


9 Purandhi: ' ‘the intelligent,’ or ‘the bold’ may be either an epi- 
thet of Agni of tbe name of a separate deity. 


2 Navagvas ; here, apparently, identified with the Angirases. 


HYMN 22,) THE RIGVEDA. 583 


3 We seek that Indra to obtain his riches that bring much food, 
and men, and store of heroes. 
Bring us, Lord of Bay Steeds, to make us joyful, celestial 
wealth, abundant, undecaying. 
4 Tell thou us this, if at thy hand aforetime the earlier singers 
have obtained good fortune, 
What ia thy share and portion, Strong Subduer, Asura-slayer, 
rich, invoked of many ? 
& He who for ear-borne Indra, armed with thunder, hath a hymn, 
craving, deeply-piercing, fluent, 
Who sends a song effectual, firmly- erasping, and strength- 
bestowing, he comes near the anighty. 
6 Strong of thyself, thou by this art hast shattered, with thought- 
swift Parvata, him who waxed againsaf thee, e 
And, Mightiest! roaring! boldly rent in pieces thingsethat were 
firmly fixed and never shaken. 
°T Hith will we fit for you with new ere the strongesto An- 
cient One, in ancient manner. 
. 50 may that Indra, boundless, faithful Laver, conduct us o’er 
all places hard to traverse. 


8 Thou for the people who oppress hast kinglpd the earthly 
firmament and that of heaven.’ 


With heat, O Bull,, on every side consume them: heat earth 
and flood for him who hatts devotion, 
9 Of all the Heavenly Folk, of earthly creatures thou art the 
King, O God of splendid aspect. . 


In thy right hand, O Indra, grasp the thunder: Eyjernal ! 
thou*destrdyest all enchantments. 


10 Give us confirmed prosperity, O Indra, vast and exbaustless 
for the foe’s subduing. 
Strengthen therewith the Arya’s hate and Dasa’s, and let the 
arms of Nahushas be mighty. « 


4 What is thy share ang portion: ‘what js the portion, what the 
offering (due) to thee.’——Wilson. Atura-slayer : peasibly, the smiter 
and conqueror of the Asura Dyaus. 5 Come near the mighty : © en- 
counters (with confidence) the malevolent.'— Wilson. 6 Parvata : 
the Genius of the mouptainé and clouds, frequently associated with 
[ndra. According to Sdyana (bahupdrvand ‘vajrena), the iiany “knotted 
thunderbolt is intended. I/im who wowed against thes: Vriora, 8 
The pewple who oppress: the Raikshasas and other enemies, 10 
Nahushas : see VI. 46. 7, note. 


584 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VI, 


11 


3 


Come with thy team which brings all blessings hither, Dis- 
poser, much-invoked, exceeding holy. 
Thou whom no fiend, no God can stay or hind:r, come swiftly 

with these Steeds in my direction. 


HYMN XXIII. Indra. 


‘Tuou ‘art attached to pressed-out Soma, Indra, at laud, at 


prayer, and when the hynin is chanted ; 
Or when with yoked Bays, Maghavan, thou comest, O Indra, 
bearing in thine arms the thunder, 


Or when on that decisive day thou holpest the presser of t'e 
juice at Vritra’g slaughter ; 

Or when thou, while the strong one feared, undaunted, gavcst 
to death, Indra, the daring Dasyus. 


' 

Let Indra drink the pressed-out Soma, Helper and mighty 
Guide of him who sings his praises, 

He gives the herc room who pours oblations, and treasure 
even to the lowly singer. 


E’en humble rites with his Bay Steeds he visits: he wields 
the bolt, drinks Soma, gives us cattle. 

He makes tla valiant rich in store of heroes, accepts our 
praise and hears the singer's calling. 

What ue hath longed for we have brought to Indra, who from 
the days of old hath done us service. 

While Soma flows we will sing hymns and laud him, so that 
our prayer may strengtaen Indra’s vigour. 

Thea hast made prayers the means of thinc exalting, therefore 
we wait on thee with hymns, O Indra. 

May we, by the pressed Soma, Soma-drinker! bring thee, with 
sacrifice, blissful sweet-refreshment. 

Mark well our sacrificial cake, delighted : Indra, drink Soma 
and the milk commingled. 


Here on the sacrificer'r-grass be seated : give ample room to 
thy devoted servant. 


O Mighty One, be juyful as thou wiliest, Let these our sac: 
rifices reach and ‘ind thee ; 


And may this hymn aud these our invocations turn thee, 
whom many mer invoke, to help us.. 

Friénds, when the juices flow, replenish duly your own. your 
bountcous'Indrr with the Soma. 


Will it not aid him to snpport us ¢ Indra spares him who sheds 
the juice to win his favour, 


HYMN 24.) THE RIGVEDA, , 585 


10 While Soma flowed, thus Indra. hath been lauded, Ruler of 
- nobles, mid the Bharadvajas, 
That Indra may become the singer’s patron and give him 
wealth in every kind of treasure, 


HYMN XXIV. Indra. 


StTron@ rapturous joy, praise, glory are with lodra: “im pet- 
vous God, he quaffs the juice of Soma: 

That Maghavan whom men must laud with ediawing Heaven: 
dweller, King of songs, whose help i is lasting. 


2 He, Friend of man most wise, victorious Hero, hears, with 
far-reaching aid, the singer call him. e 
Excellent, Praise of Men, “the bard’s Supporter, Strong; he 
fives strength, extolled in holy synod. 


3 The lofty axle of thy wheels, O Hero, is not eso by 
* héaven and earth in greatness, . 
Like branches of a tree, Invoked of mamy ! manifold aids 
spring forth from thee, O Indra. 


4 Strong Lord thine energies, endowed with vigour, are like the 
paths of kine converging homeward, e 
Like bonds of cord, Indra, that bind the younglings, no bonds 
are they, O thou of boundless bounty. 
5 One act to-day, another act to-morrow: of Indra makés- ‘what 
is not yet existent. 


Here have we Mitra, Varuna, and Pushan to overcofne tke 
foeman’s domination. ® 


6 By song gnd sacrifice men bronght the waters from the as 
from a mountain's ridge, O Indra. 
Urging thy might, with these fair lauds they seek thee, O 
theme of song, as horses rush to battle. 


1 Strong rapturous joy: produced by dtinking Soma-libations. v4 
Praise of Men: sanso naram, as Agni is callgd Narasanea. 4 Con- 
werging homeward : all Indra’a great deed indicate their divine author 
as the tracks made by grazing cows may be traced back to the common 
pen from which they have coms forth ° Like bonds; the ties by 
which Indra’s worshippers are baund to him are fief of love and not 
fetters of slavery. There is a play on the word damanein the texp which 
derived from da, to give means gift or bouuty, andederived from da, to 
bind, means, cord, rope, boad,"or fetter ? vatsanant na tantayalP te Padre 
damanvantah atamanah sudaman (Pada text). The werd vatsa also 
means & youngling, especially a calf, and a dear child, a darling, so 
that Iodra’s favoured worshippers are also intended, D liere; 

that ie, in Todra we have a champion equal to the three Gods mentioned. 


74 oe 


586 THE HYMNS OF (BOOR V1. 


7 That Indra whom nor months nor aui.umn seasons wither with 
age, nor fleeting days enfeeble,— ° 


Still may his body wax, e’en now so mighty, glorified by the 
lauds and hymns that praise him. 


8 Extolled, he bends not to the strong, the stedfast, nor to the 
bold incited by the Dasyu. 
High mountains are as level plains to Indra : even in the deep 
he finds firm ground to rest on. 


9 Impetuous Speeder through all depth and distance, give 
strengthening-food, thou drinker of the juices. 
Stand up erect to help us, uoreluctant, what time the gloom 
of night brightens to morning. 


10 Hasting to help, come hither and protect him, keep him from 
varti when he is here, OQ Indra, 
At home, abroad, from injury preserve bim, May brave sons 
gladden us through a hundred winters. 


TYMN XXV. “Tpdra: 


Wira thine assistance, O thou Mighty Indra, be it the least, 
the midmost, or the highest, — 

Great wich. those aids and by these powers support us, Strong 
God ! in battle that subdues our foemen. 


2 With these discomfit hosts that fight against us, and check 
the opponent’s wrath, thyself uninjured. 
With these chase all our foes to every quarter: subdue the 
‘ tribes of Dasas to the Arya. 


3 Those who array themselves as foes to smite us, O Indra, be 
° hey kin or be they strangers,— _ 
Strike thou their many strength that it be feeble, and drive 
in headlong fight our foemen backward. 


4 With strength of limb the hero slays the hero, when bright in 

arms they range them for the combat. ‘ 

When two opposing hosts cofitend in battle for seed and off- 
spring, waters, kine, or curn-lands., 


10 Hasting to help. I follow Professor Pischel (Vedtsche Studien,, 
I. P. 41 ). in bis explanation of ndydm ia thit passage. Professor 
Ludwig translates somewhat similarly. Siyana (followed by Professors 
Wilson, and amar Maes ndydm in the signification of leader; 
‘accompany the feadcr.’ Professor Roth thinks it may be a 
Him. the institutor of the eacridce 7 paneer 


e ‘ 
The poet pgays for viotory in a coming hattle. 1 By these powers : 
on account of, or by means of, the sacrificial food which increase thy 
strength. 


HY MN 26. THE RIGVEDA. 587 


5 Yet no strong man hath conquered thee, no hero, no brave, 
: ho warrior trusting in his valour. 

Not one of these is match for thee, O Indra. Thou far sur- 
passest all these living creatures, 


6 He is the Lord of both these armies’ valour when the com- 
manders call them to the conflict : 
When with their ranks expaaded they are fighting with a great 
foe or for a home with heroes. ; 


7*And when thy people stir themselves for battle, be thou their 
saviour, Indra, and protector, ° 
And theirs, the manliest of our friends, the pious, the chiefs 
who have installed us priests, Q Indra. 


8 To thee for high dominion hath been given,.for evermore, for 
slaughtering the Vritras, e 8 
All lordly power and might, O Holy Indra, given by Gods for 
victory in battle. : 


eo 
Q So.urge our hosts together in the combats: yield up the 
godless bands that fight against us. : . 
Singing, at morn may we find thee with favour, yea, Indra, 
» and e’en now, we Bharadvajas. 


HYMN XXVI, « ‘Indra, 


O Inpra, hear us, Raining down the Somay we call on thee 
to win us mighty valour, : 
Give us strong sugcour on the day of trial, when fhe tribes 
gather on the field of battle. oe 
2 The warrior, son of warrior sige,.invokes thee, to gain great 
strength that may be won as booby : ‘ 
To thee? the brave man’s Lord, the fiends’ subduer, he looks 
when fighting hand to hand for cattle. : 
3 Thou didst impel the sage to win the daylight, didst ruin 
Sushna for the pioas Kutsa. 
e The invulnerable demon’s head thon, clavest when thou wouldst 
win the praise of Atithigva, : 


4 The lofty battle-car thou broughtest forward; thou holpest 
Dasadyu the strong when fighting. 


— en, 


6 He is the Lord: Indra can give valour and victory to either side 
as he chooses. Sayana explains the first half-stagza differently: ‘ OF 
both these (disputants), that one acquires wealth whose priests invoke 
(Indra) at the sacsifice.”—Witson, =e ‘ oe 


3 The sage: bhargavam rishim :—Siyana ; thé Rishi, descendant of 
Bhrigu. 4 Vetasu 2 accordiog to Sdyana, either & king aided by 
him or a demon lain by him. Cf. YL. 20, 8. 


52g THE AYMNS OP [BOOK VI. 


Along with Vetast thou slewest Tugra, and madest Tuji strong, 
who praised thee, Indra. | 


5 Thou madest good the laud, what time thou rentest a hundred 
thousand fighting foes, O Hera, 
Slewest the Dasa Sambara of the mountain, and with strange 
aids didst succour Divodasa. 


6 Made glad with Soma-draughts and faith, thou sentest Chumuri 
ty, his sleep, to please Dabbiti. 
’ Thou, kindly giving Raji to Pithinas, slaw with might, at 
once, the sixty thousand, 

7 May I too, with the liberal chiefs, O Indra, acquire thy bliss 

supreme and dominaticn, 

When, Mightiest! Hero-girt! Nahusha heroes boast them in 
thea, the triply-strong Defender. 


8 So may we be thy friends, thy best beloved, O Indra, at this 
holy invocation. 

Best be Prétardani, illustrious ruler, in slaying foemen and,in 
gaining riches. ¢ 


HYMN XXVII. Indra, 


Waar deed hath Indra done in the wild transport, in quafting 
or in friendship with, the Soma? 

What joys:aave men ofancient times or recent obtained within 
the chamber of libation ? 


2 In its wild joy Indra hath: proved him faithful, faithful in 
quaffing, faithfal in its friendship. 
«His truth is the delight that in tais chamber the men of old 
and recent times have tasted. 


3 All thy vast power, O'Machavan, we know aot, know not the 
riches of thy full abundance. 

No one hath seen that might of thine, productive of bounty 
every day renewed, O Indra. 


4 This one great power of thine our eyes have witnessed, where- 
with thou slewest Varasilcha’s children. 


n 


Se SS er et er 

Tujt: a raja of that name, says Sayana. 6 Rojt:a maiden of 
that name —Sfyansa. Pithtnas: a man socalled —Sayana. 8 Pra- 
tardant : son of a printe named Pratarddna. The other names have 


occurred before. see Index. 

The liberality of, Abhydvartin Chayamina is said to be the deified 
objec? of.stanza 8. «1 * Accosding to Siydna the Rishi here expresses 
his impatience, at the delay of the reward of his praises: in the nexe 
veree he sings his récantation.’— Wilson. 4 Varastkha: a certain 


Acura or demon, tays Sdyana. He seeme to have been the leader of the 
Vrichivans, L 


HYMN 28.) THE RIGVEDA. 5Eg 


When by the force of thy descending thunder, at the mere 
- sound their boldest was demolished. 


5 In aid of AbhyAvartin Chayam4na, Indra destroyed the seed of 
Varasikha. e 
At Hariyupiy4 he smote the vanguard of the Vrichivans, and 
the rear fled frighted. 


6 Three thousand, mailed, in qhest of fame, together, on the 

Yavyavati, O muoh-sought Indra, 6 

Vrichivan’s sons, falling before the arrow, like burgting vessels 
went to their destruction, 


e 
7 He, whose two red Steers, seeking goodly pasture, plying their 
tongues move on ’twixt earth and heaven, 
Gave Turvasa to Srinjaya, and, to aid him, gave the Vrichivans 
up to Daivavata. : e 


8 Two wagon-teams, with damsels, twenty oxen, Os Agni, 
Abhyavartin Chiyamana, : = 
ahe Jiperal Sovran, giveth me. This guerdon of Prithu’s seed 


is hard to win from others. ea e 


> HYMN XXVIIL. Cows. 


Tue Kine have come and brought good fortune : let them rest 
in the cow-pen and be happy near us, 3 


Here let them stay prolific, many-coloured, and yicld through 
many morns their milk for Indra. ~ = 


2 Indra aids him who offers sacrifige .and gifts: he takes not 
what is his, and gives him more thereto. é 
Increasing ever*more and ever more his wealth, he makes the 
pions dwell within unbroken bounds. : 


ee ee es 


5 Abhydvartin Chdyamana : a king, apparently the leader of the 
Parthavas, the enomiss of Varagikha and the Vrichivans. Hariyi- 
peya : (having golden sacrificial posts), the mame of a town, or, secoord- 
ing to others, of a river, Vdichivans :  Vrichivan is said to have 
been the eldest son of Varasikha, and to have given his name to the 
family or tribe. The name does nob occur again in the Hymns, 6 
Yaoydvati: the name of a river, according to Sgyana identical with 
the Hariynpryaé of stanza5. ¢ V7 He: Indra. Ked Steers: bright 
horses, according to Sayaiia. Gave T'urvara to Sfinjaya: gave up 
the Turvadas a tribe apparently séttle in the north-west of India, to 
their ueighbours and enemies the Srinj&yas, Dai8avata : AbfyrVartin 
Chayamana, son of Devavata. 8 With damsels,: accempanied with 
slave-girls, or, drawn by mares. Cf. J. 126 3. Of Prithu’s seel : or bestow- 
ed by Partbavas, that is, presented by Abbyavartin, one of the deg- 
cendants of Prithu. : 


690 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR VI. 


3 These are ne'er lost no robber ever injures them: evil- 
minded foe attempts to harass them. 
The master of the Kine lives many a year with these, the Cows 
whereby he pours his gifts apd serves the Gods. 
4 The charger with his dusty brow o’ertakes them not, and 
never to the shambles do they take their way. 
These Cows, the cattls of the pious worshipper, roam over wide- 
spread pasture whare no danger is. 
‘5 To me the Cows seem Bhaga, they seem Indra, they sedém a 
portion of the first-poured Soma. 
These present Cow, they, Oye men, are Indra. I long for 
Indra with my heart and spirit. 
6 O Cows, ye fatten e’en the worn and wasted, and make the 
« umovely beautiful to look on, 
Progper my house, ye with auspicious voices. Your power is 
gferified ia our assemblies, 
7 Crop goodly pasturage and be prolific : driak pure sweat water 
at.good drinking-}laces. 
Never be thief or sinful man your master, and may the dart of 


Rudra still avoid you. 
8 ay let this close admixture be close intermingled with these 
OWS, , 
Mixt with the Steer’s prolific flow, and, Indra, with thy hero’ 
“might. 
. HYMN XXIX. © Indra, 


Your men have followed Indra for his friendship, and for his 

& loving-kindness gloeified him. 

For he bestows great wealth, the Thunder-wielder : worship 
him, Great and Kind, to win his favour, 


3 Are ne’er lost: nd td nadanti : Siyana assigns an imperative 
meaning to naéants and the other verbe in the indicative mood which 
occur in this and the following stanzas : * Let not the Cows be lost : fet 
no thief, etc.’—- Wilson « 4 &hecharger,,, o'ertakes them not: they 
are 10%, or, according to Sayaga, let them not be, carried off in preda- 
tory incursions. 5 The worshipper regards the Cows as the deities, 
Bhaga and Indra, who bring him happiness. They O ye men are Indra: 
an allusion, apparently to the refrain,of hymn 12 of Book II; He, O 
men, js Indra. « 7 May the dart of Rudra still avoid you: £0, 1114. 
10. ¢ Far be thy dact that killeth meh or cattle,’ and II. 33. 14, ‘ May 
Ruéca'@ missile turnsaside and‘spare us, ‘thé grea wrath of the Impe-. 
tuous One aveid ug.’ 8 This stanza appears to refar to the mingl- 
ing of the milk (the cows) with the juice of the strong Soma (the steer), 
which when offered as a libation to Sndra will increase his heroic 
strength. But the phraseolegy isssomewhat obacure. 


HYMN 30.) ‘THE RIGVEDA. 691 


2 Him to whose hand, men closely cling, and drivers stand on 
* his golden chariot firmly stationed. 
With his firm arms he holds the reins ; his Horses, the Stal- 
lions, are yoked ready for*the journey, 


~ .3 Thy devotees embrace thy feet for glory. Bold, thunder-arm- 
ed, rich, through thy strength, in guerdon, 
Robed in a garment fair as heaven to look on, thou hast dis- 
played thee like an active dancer, ; . 


4 That Soma when effased hath best consistence, for*which the 
food is dressed and grain is mingled ; 7 
By which the men whv pray, extolling Indra, chief favourites 
of Gods, recite their praises. : 


5 No limit of thy might hath been appointed, which Dy its 
greatness sundered earth and heaven. 
These the Prince nilleth full with strong endeayour, dgiving, 
as ’twere, with help his flocks to waters, 


6 Se bettke lofty Indra prompt to listen, Yelper unaided, golden*® 
visored Hero. ® 

' Yea, so may he, shown forth in might unequalled, smite down 
¢he many Vritras und the Dasyus, 


, HYMN XXX, ° % Indra. 
Inpra hath waxed yet more for hero prowess, alone, Eterfial, 
he bestoweth treasures. : 


Indra transcendeth both the worlds in greatness : one half of 
him equalleth earth and heaven. Oe 


2 Yea, mighty I esteem his Godlike nature : none hinderegh 
what he bath oace determined, 
Near and afar he spread and set the regions, and ,every day 
the Sun became apparent. 


5 The Prince: Indra appeara to be meant. Driving his flocks > cp, 
1. 40.2. ‘And the Ram hastens with bis troop,’ that is, Indra comes 
with bis band of Maruts. Sdyans takes eurth in its more usual signi- 
fication of worshipper or institutor of th’ sacrifices ; and Professor Wil- 
son translates: the pious worshipper, haxtenioy. (to sacrifice), and 
earnestly performing worship, gwatifies thee with the offering, as (the 
cowkeeper satisties) the herds with water,’ 6 Helper unaided : this 
seems to be the meaning of a dfdti, with help that gpeeds no other 
help. Siiyana explains the words, ‘ by coming or by, not.coming,’ ‘whe- 
ther he be present er absent. .* « Goldeg-visored: § Azure chingned4— 
‘Wilson. ‘ With yellow-coloured jaws.’—Ludwig. I have followed 
Professor Roth. ° 


1 Indra hath grown stronger and stronger for the performance of. 
his mighty deeds. ° ° 


692 THE AYMNS OF (BOOK V1. 


3 E’en now endares thine exploit of the Rivers, when, Indra, 
for their floods thou clavest passage. 
Like men who sit at meat the mountains settled: by thee, 
Most Wise! the regions were made steadfast, 


4 This is the truth, none else is like thee, Indra, no God supe: 
rior to thee, no mortal. 5 
Thou slewest Ahi who besieged the waters, and lettest loose 
the streams to hurry sea-ward. 


5 Indra, thou brakest up the floods and portals on all sides, ‘and 
the firmness vf the mountain. 
Thou art the King of men, of all that liveth, engendering 4 


once Sun, Heaven, ana Morning. 


a ‘¢ 


HYMN XXXI, Indra. 


Soue Lord of wealth art thou, O Lord of riches: thou_in thine 
hands hast held tls people, Indra! ° 
Men have invoked thee with contending voices for seed and 

waters, progeny and sunlight. 


2 Through fear of thee, O Indra, all the regions of earth, though 
naugnt “ay move them, shake and tremble. 
All that 1% firm is frightened at thy coming,—the earth, the 
’ heaven, the mountain, and the forest, 


3 With Kutsa, Indra! thou didst conquer Sushna, voracious, 
bane of crops, in fight for cattle. 
In the close fray thou rentest him: thou stolest the Sun’s 
'. wheel and didst drive away misfortunes. 


3 Like man who sit at meat: or, perhaps, like flies who sebtle on food. 
Soe Geldner, Vedische Studien, II. 180. 

1 Man,,,..with contending voices: the combatants on both sides 

invoke Indra’s aid in battle. © According to Prof. Pische)l. Vedische 
Studien, I. 34, the meaning is as follows: ‘¢ Alone mene thou 
Lord of all wealth ard riches, yet hast ‘hou made the folk submissive, 
Jndra, When,with uplifted voice the tribes invoked thee for 
water, sons, posterity and sunlight.’ ; 
‘ The folk,’ dérishtth meaning the speaker’a enemies, and ‘ the tribes,’ 
chayshgnayo, meaning the five, Aryan tribss, 3 Kuisa: the special 
favourite of Indra Bane of crops: or Kuyava many be the name of 
avother demon of drought or savage enemy. See Index Thou revatest 
him: literally, ‘dittest :’ dasa, according to Sayana, standing for adasah. 
Stolest the Sun's wheel: see J. 175, Misfortunes: according to 
Sayansa, ‘ disturbing or injurious Rakebagas, etc.’ 


HYMN 32.) THK RIGVEDA, 593 


4 Thou smotest to the ground the hundred castles, impregnable, 
« of Sombara the Dasyn, 

When, Strong, with might thou holpest Divodasa who poured 
libations out, O Soma-buyer, and madest Bharadvaja rich 
who praised thee, 

5 As such, true Hero, for great joy of battle mount thy terrific 
car, O Brave and Manly, rs | 

Come with thine help to me, thou distant Roamer, aad, giori- 


cous God, spread among men my glory, : 


HYMN XXXII. Indra. 


I with my lips have fashioned for this Hero words never 
matched, most plentiful and auspicious, e a. oe 
For him the Ancient, Great, Strong; Energetic, the very 

mighty Wielder of the Thunder. 2 - 

2 Amid the sages, with the, Sun he brightened the Parents: 
“glorified, he burst the mountain; e 
And, roaring with the holy-thoughted singers, he looséd the 

bond that held the beams of Morning 


3 Famed for great deeds, with priests who kneel and laud him, 
he still hath conquered in the frays for cattle, . 
, And broken down the forts, the Fort-destroyer, a®ricnd with 
friends, a Sage among the sages. e 
4 Come with thy girthed mares,* with abundant vigoul® and 
plenteous strength to bim who sings thy praises. 
Come hither, borne by marés with many heroes, Lover of gong 


Steer! for the people’s welfare. ° ° 
tte See pains aa eae i ST a a 
4 The hunfred castles : probably the castles of cloud which retain 
the rain. So, II. 19. 6, * And Igdra, for the sake of Divodasa, demo- 
lished Sambara’s nine-an.t-ninety castles.’ 4 Soma-buyer . purchaser 
of Soma-libations with the help which he gives to the worshipper. 


ne pinnae ee ee 


°2 Ie brightened the Parents: illuminate the universal parents, 
Hoaven and Earth. Zhe sages: the Angigases, fhe holy thoughted singers 
of the next line. 4 With thy girthed mares : the meaning of nivyd- 
bhih,- feminine plural adjectiye in the ingtrumental case, standing 
without a substantive, is uacertain Say&na cxplains tha word by 
navydbhirnavatardbihh, ‘very newgr young,’ and clpplies vadavddhih, 
‘mares,’ Professor Roth thinks that névyabhth may be a substantive 
meaning ‘ with garments,’ and Professor Grassmang tranglates ‘ mit 
“Je Gaben,’ ‘ with gifts,’ that is, prevents carrfed in & néi or apron. © Wath 
many heroes : puruvirdbhth again is an adjective without a gubstantive, 
in the same gender, number, and case as nivydbhih. According to 
Sayana, id aleo qualifies vadavdbhth, ‘with mares,’ uiderstood, and 


means ‘ having many colts. 7 


16 fe 


vt THE HYMNS OP [BOOK VI. 


5 Indra with rush and might, sped by his Coursers, hath swiftly 
won the waters from the southward. . 
Thus set at liberty therivers daily flow to their goal, incessant 
and exhaustless. 


HYMN XXXII, Indra, 
Give us the rapture that is mightiest, Indra, prompt to bestow 
and swift'to aid, OQ Hero, ° 
That wins with brave steeds where brave steeds encounter, 
and quells the Vritras and the foes in battle. ° 
2 For witb loud voice the tribes invoke thee, Indra, toaid them 
in the battle field of heroes, 
Thou, with the singers. hast pierced through the Panis: the 
charger whom thou aidest wins the booty. . 
3 Both races, Indra, of opposing foemen, O Hero, both the Arya 
and the Dasa, 
Ha.t thou struck down like woods with well-shot lightnings : 
thou rentest them in fight, most manly Chieftain ! 
gf Indra, befriend us with no scanty succour, prosper at aid*us, 
_ Loved of all that siveth, 
When, fighting for the sunlight, we invoke thee, O Hero, in 
the fray, in war’s division. . 
5 Be ours, O Indra, now and for the future, be graciously in- 
clined cud near to help us. 
Thus may ‘we, singing, sheltered by the Mighty, win many’ 
" cattle on the day of trial. 


HYMN XXXIV; Indra, 


« Foi. many songs have met in chee, O Indra, and many a 
. noble thought from thee proceedeth. 
\WNuw and of old, the eulogies of sages, their holv bymns and 
lauds, have yearned for Indra. 
2 He, praised of many, bold, invoked of many, alone is glorified 
at sacrifices. : 
Like a car harnessed for some great achievement, Indra must 
be the cause of our rejoicing. e 
3 They make their way to Indra and exalt him, him whom no 
prayers and no laudations trouble ; 


6 From the southward: from the quarter whence the Rains come, 
1 Give us the rapture: let us be benefited by the transport which 
draughts of Sonth juice produce in thee. 


2 


3 They make.their way : that is, prayers and laudations reach Indra 
and strengtln him. They do not vex him as they would vex a man 
who would be ginable to fulfil the prayers and would be conscious than 
he did nob deserve the laudations. 


HYMN 35.) — THE RIGVEDA. 694 


For when a hundred or a thousand singers laud him who loves 
* the song their praise delights him. 
4 As brightness mingles with the Moon in heaven, the offered 
Soma yearns to mix with Indra. 
Like water brought to men in desert places, our gifts at sacri- 
fice have still refreshed him, 
5 To him this mighty eulogy, to Indra hath thi¥our laud been 
. uttered by the poets, : sd 
That in the great encounter with the foemen, Loved of all life, 


Indra may guard and help us. e 
HYMN XXXY¥, Indra. 
e @ e 
Wuen shall our prayers rest in thy car beside thee ? When 
dost thou give the singer food for thousands ? ° 
When wilt thou clothe this poet's laud with plenty, and when 
¢ wftt*thou enrich our hymns with booty ? ‘ 


2 When wilt thou gather men with men, O bndra, heroes with 
heroes, and prevail in combat ? 
Thou shalt win triple kine in frays for cattle, 80, Indra, give 
thou us celestial glory. 3 
3 Yea, when wilt thou, O Indra, thou Most Mighty, make the 
prayer all-sustaining for the singer ? ° 
When wilt thou yoke, as we yoke songs, thy Horses, an¢come 
to offerings that bring wealth in cattle? 


4 Grant to the singer food With store of cattle, splendid with 
horses and the fame of riches, * ° 
Send food fo sweJl the milch-cow good*at milking : bright f, 
its shine among the BharadvaAjas., 


4 As brightness mingles with the Moon: I follow Professor Ludwig 
‘in his interpretation of this difficult passagés ; bub its exacd meaning 
still seeme doubtful. ‘ Archd is the yomingtive singular. We have 
~ there the later Jyotsna or Kaumudi as the wife or feminine power of the 
Moon. Surya, the daughter of the Sun, $. 6. the Moon’s light which ie 

borrowed from the Sun is an earlier conception.’— Ludwig. 5 R 
the posts: by those who sing bymrg of praise. MatiPhih = stotrtbhih— 
Sayana. In the great encounter with the foemen : mahaté vritraturye ; in 
the great victory over Vritra, that is, generally, in battle with enemies; 

e 


le sangrdme = Sayana. : e ee 


1 Rest in thy car beside thee? when shall our prayers reach thee ag 
thou standest on thy chariot? The poet expresses impatience at Indra's 
® 


inattention to his petitions. 


696 THE HYMNS OF (BOOK Vi. 


5 Juead otherwise this present foeman, Sakra! Hence art thou 
praised as Hero, foe-destroyer. : . 
Him who gives pure gifts may I praise unceasing. Sage, quick 
en the Angirases by devotion. 
HYMN XXXVI... Indra. 


Tuy raptures ever were for all men’s profit : so evermore have 
been thine.earthly riches. 
Thou still hast been the dealer-forth of viguur, since among 
Gods {hou hast had power and Godhead, | 
2 Men have obtained his strength by sacrificing, and ever urged 
him on to hero valour. 
For the rein-seizing, the impetuous Charger they farnished 
power even for Vritra’s slaughter. 
3 Associate withchim, as teams of horses, help, manly might, and 
vigour follow Indra. 
As ysivers reach the sea, so, strong with praises, our holy 
songs reach him the Comprehensive. 
4 Lauded by us, let flow the spring, O Indra, of exceli®nt and 
beightly-shinjng riches. 
For thou art Lord of men, without an equal: of all the world 
thou art the only Sovran, ° 


rr 


5 I tind this stanza hopelessly obscure, and do not attempt to trans- 
late it, giving’ mistead of a conjectural translation a reproduction of thee 
sub: tance of Sayana’s absolutely worthless paraphrase. Lead otherwise: 
accar&.ng to Sayana, ‘consign to.death, to a course different from that 
of living beings.’— Wilson ' The Angirases: the descendants of 
Angireser, that is the Bharadvajas. | Professor Ludwig translates : 
‘Also ab another time (I wish) hither this strong (defence), when thou 
aaa hero, Sakra, singest open [aufsingst] the doors; may I never lose 
the cow that yields bright juica ; cause thou her tv hasten through tbe 
prayer of the Angirases.’ In this Commentary Prof. Ludwig alters 
‘lose the cow, ete.’ into ‘lose the seed-pouring (bull) of the milch-oow.’ 
Professor Aufrecht would read wri janam instead of vrijanam and 
erinishe instead of grinishe, and Prof. Grassmann translates according- 
ly : ‘ Now too, as formerly, I choose for myself this man, wheu, Stroag 
One, as hero thou openest the doors, Never then may the steer whose 
seed streams fail me. Quicken, 'O Sage, the singers through prayer.’ 


1 Thy raptures : produced by drinking the Soma juice. Power and 
Godhead : asuryam: Asura-hood, the nature and power of an Asura or 
High God. Some give a different’ meaning to dhardyathah ; «thou 
mainvainests Vigour among the gods,'.-Wilson ‘Indra is said to give 
divine power to the other gods.’—Muir, O: 8. 7., V. 92. 2 Hie 
strength : the powerful aid of Indra. Charger: Indra, impetuous as a 
war-horse wiio tales the bib between his teeth. Sayana explains sgi- 
mayrtbhe : a& veizer of enemies who are in uninterrupted lines.’ ‘ They 
offer eacrifices to him as the saizer of an uninterrupted series of foes, 
on assailant, their subduer, and also for the destruction of Vritra,’— 

1goan, 


AY MN 38.} TAFE RIGVEDA. 597 


5 Hear what thou mayst hear, thou who, fain for worship, as 
- heaven girds earth, guardest thy servant’s treasure ; 
That thou mayst be our own, joying in power, famed through 
thy might in every genesation. 


HYMN XXXVII. Indra. 


Let thy Bay Horses, yoked, O mighty Indra, bring thy car 
hither fraught with every blessing. / 
For thee, the Heavenly, e’en the poor invoketh, may ave thig 
day, thy feast-companions, prosper. ° 
2 Forth to the vat the brown drops flow for setvice, and parified 
proceed directly forward. 
May Indra drink of this, our guest aforetime, Celestial King 
of the strong draught of Soma. 


3 Bringing as hitherward all potent Indra on well-wheeled 


chariot, may the Steeds who bear him. 2 
Convey him on the road direct to glory, and néer may’ Vayu’s 
» Apwyrit cease and fail Him, e 


4 Supreme, he stirs this man to give the giggdon,—Indra, most 
efficacious of the princes, ~ 
Wherewith, O Tbunderer, thou removest sorrow, and, Bold 
One! partest wealth among the nobles, 


6 Indra is he who gives enduring vigour : may ountongs magnify 
the God Most Mighty. 
Best Vritra-slayer be the Hero Indra : these things he gives aS 
Prince, with strong endeavour. 


HYMN XXXVIII. *Indita- 


He hath drunk hence, most Marvellous, and carried away gar 
great and splendid call on Indra. * 

The Bounteous, when we serve the Gods, accepteth song yet 
more famous and the gifts we bring him. 


1 Thee, the Heavenly: sudrvdn appears to apply to tvd, thee, Indra 
and to atand for svarvantam. See Pischel, Vedixche Studien, I.’ 198, 
‘ofs. 3 To glory: ‘tothe prize of battle. _Grasemann. ‘To our 
rite.’— Wilson. Viyus Amrit: Vayu is possessor of Amrit probably 

*~ag being Tvashtar’s son-in-law. VIII. 26. 21.—Ludwig 4 This 

man: the institutor of the sacnifice. Wherewith, on account of which 
guerdon. The liberal guerdon given by the nobelg who defray the ex- 
penses of the sacrifice causes Todre i in his turn to bw gracious and liberal 
of his gifts to them. 5 With strong endeavour : oxtertipg his. power 
on behalf of worshippers. ; a 

1 He hath drunk hence: Professor Ludwig thinks thet the first lina 
refer to Agni, who receives the libation hence, that is, fram the priast’s 
cup, aud conveys to [adra the invocation addressed to him. Bat Indea 
himself may be intended in the firat Ji:fe as well as in the second. 


598 TAR AYMNS OF '[BOOR VI. 


2 The’ speaker filleth with a cry to Indra his ears who coment 
nigh e’en from a distance, — 
May this my call bring Indra to my presence, this call to Gods, 
composed in sacred verses. © 
3 Him have [ sung with my best song and praises, Indra of 
ancient birth and Everlasting. 
For prayer ad songs in him are concentrated: let laud wax 
mighty when addressed to Indra: 


4 Indra, whom sacritice shall strengthen, Soma, and song and 
hymn, and praises and devotion. 
Whom Dawns shall strengthe: when the night departeth, Indra 
whom days shall strerfgthen, months, and autumns, 
5 Him, born for gonquering might in full perfection, and waxen 
strong for bounty and for glory, 
Grett, Powerful, will we do-day, O singer, invite to aid us and 
to quell otr foemen. 


« HYMN XXXIX. - eeindna, 


Or this our charfaing, our celestial Soma, eloquent, wise, Priest, 
with inspired devotion, 
Of this thy close attendant, hast thou drunken, God, snd 
the anger foud with to grace it. 
2 Craving thekine, rushing against the mountain, led on by Law, | 
« with holy-minded comrades, 
He %roke the never-broken, ridge of Vala. With words of 
might Indra subdued the Panis. 
3 This Indu lighted darksome nighss, O Indra, throughout the 
years, at morning and at evening, 
Ndim have they stablished as the’ days’ bright ensign. He 
made the Mornings to be born in splendotir, « 
4 He shone and caused to shine the worlds thot shone not. By 
Law he lighted up the host of Mornings. 


8 Let laud wax mighty: when the power of Tndra is celebrated, the 
song should be lofty as thé dignity of the subjsot damands, 5 “Boa 
guell our foemen: or, to cqnquer, Vritras, that is, Vritra and similiar 


fiends. 


1 Our celestial Soma: ae Professor Wileon observes, ‘Several of the 
epithets in the teXt*fre unusual, and « agreeably to European notions, 
very inapplicable to a beverage.’ The Soma is called eloquent and wise 
as giving eldqubnceeand wisdom, and priest because it is employed in 
offetings to the Goda, With milk tb grace it; that is, of which milk 
and butter cqnstitute the most excellent part, 2 Holy-minded com- * 
rades: the Apgirases. Vala : a demon who stole away the cows of the 
Goods, ¢ ¢ the rays of light. See Iadex. 3 This Indu: Iadu is here 
the moon, which is indentified with Soma. The days’ brigkt ensign : the 
standard by which time is measuréd, «* 


HYMN 41.) THE RIGVEDA. 699 


He moves with Steeds yoked by eternal Order, contenting men 
> With nave that finds the sunlight. 


5 Now praised, O Ancient King! fill thou the singer with plente- 
ous food that he may deal forth treasures. 
Give waters, heabs that have no poison, forests, and kine, and 
steeds, and men, to him who lauds thee. 


HYMN XL, f indea: 


Darinx, Indra; juice is shed to make thee joyful: loose thy 
Bay Steeds and give thy friends their freedom. ° 

Begin the song, seated in our assembly. Give strength for 
sacrifice to him who singeth, 


2 Drink thou of this whereof at birth, O Indr,.thou drankest,. 
Mighty One! for power and rapture. e Sg 
The men, the pressing-stones, the cows, the waters have made 

this Soma ready for thy drinking. ‘ . 


3 The fire is kindled, Soma,pressed, O Indra: let thy Bays,. best 

; i aaw. dunvey thee hither Z e 

With mind devoted Indra, I invoke thee. Gome, for our great 
prosperity approach us. 


4 Indra, come hither : evermore thou camest through our greot 
strong desire todrink the Soma. , _ 
Listen and hear the prayers which now we offers; 4nd let this 
sacrifice increase thy vigour. * 


5 Mayst thou, O Indra, on the day of trial, present or absent, 
wheresoe’er thou dwellest. 
Thence, with thy team, acéordant with the Maruts, Song-lover i 
guard our sacrifice, to help us.* ” 


. ‘ HYMN XLI. Indra, - 


Come gracious to our sacrifice, O Indra: pressed Soma-drops 
are purified to please thee. 
As cattle seek their home, so, Thunder-wielder, come, Indra, 
- 9° first of those who claim our Wworshim ' 


2 With that well-formed most wide extending palate, wherewith 
oe thou ever drinkest streams of sweetness, ; 
Drink thou; the Adhvaryu standsth up before thee: let thy 
spoil-winning thunderbolt attend thee. . , 


4 Nave: used by synecdoche for chariot. ae 5 
camnn coven r) 7 
¢ 1 Thy friends: thy dear horses. i “ oe 
al ® € 


1 Gracious: more literally, ‘ without anger, : Umirdscible,’— 
Wilson. 2 The Adhvaryu : the ministering priest. : 


a a 


600 THE AY MNS OP [BOOK VI. 


3 ThiSdrop, steer-strong and omniform, the Soma, hath been 
made ready for the Bull, for Indra- 
Drink this. Lord of the Eays, thou Strong Supporter, this 
that is thine of old, thy food for ever. 


4 Soma when pressed excels the unpressed Soma, better, for one 

who knows, to give him pleasure. 
Come to this sacrifice of our, QO Victor: replenish all thy 

pewers with this libation. 

5 We call cn thee, O Indra: come thou hither : sufficient be the 
Soma for thy,body. 

Rejoice thee, Satakratu! in the juices, guard us in wars, guard 
us among our people, : 


HYMN XLIL Indra. 


Brine sacrificial gifts to him, Omniscient, for he longs to drink, 
The Wandercur who comes with speed, the Hero ever in the van. 
2 With Soma go ye nigh to him cbtef drinker of tha. Sama‘s 
ju.ce : 
With beakers to the Impetuous God, Ihdra with the drops 
effused, 
3 What time, with Soma, with the juice effused, ye come before 
the God, 
Fnil wise he knows the hope of each, and Bold One, strikes « 
this foe and that. 


4 To him, Adhvaryu! yea, io him give offerings of the juice 
ex pressed. 3 
Will he not keep us safely from the spiteful carse of each 
“ presumptuous high-horn foe ? 


w 


° HYMN XLIII. Indra, 


In whose wild joy thou madest once Sambara Divodasa’s prey, 
This Soma is pressed out for thee, O Indra: drink! 


. ’ 


3 Supporter : sthdétar=-Stator in Jupiter Stator, one who causes to 
stay or stand, rallier of men in battle. 4 Replenish all the powers : 
or, ‘give us all powere in full.’ 5 Sajakraie: Lord of a hundred, 
t- ¢., countless, powers. 

3 Strikes this foe and that: there is no substantive in the text, 
Sayana makes tam tim refer to kdémam, hove or wish: ‘And the snp- 
presser (of evemies) assuredly granta it, whatever it may ba.’— Wilson. 


l Sambera.’ a demon of draught. Divoddsa: celled also Ati- 
thigva: ‘Thou ssvedet Kutsa when Sushna was smitten down; to 
Atithigva gavest Sambara for a‘prey. a & 51. 5. 


‘HYMN 44.) TAR RIGVEDA, © 601 
2 Whose gladdening draught, shed from the points, thou guar d- 


« estin the midst’ and end, 
This Soma is pressed out for thee, O Indra : drink ! 


8 In whose wild joy thou settest free the kine held fast within 
the rock, 
This Soma is pressed out for thee, O Indra : drink ! 


4 This, in whose juice delighting thou gainesf the might of 


Maghavan, 
This Soma is pressed ont for thee, O Indra : drink ! 
HYMN XLIV. ° Indra. 
Tuat which is wealthiest, Wealthy God ! in splendours most 
illustrious, 


Soma is pressed : thy gladdening draught, Indra! libation’s 
Lord ! is this mF 


2 Effectual, Most Effectual One ! time, as bestowing wgalth of 
hynins, 
Soiiede pressed : thy gladdening draught, Indra! libation’s 
Lord ! is this. 7 2 ° 
3 Wherewith thou art increased in strength, and conqtérest with 
* thy proper aids, 
Soma is pressed : thy gladdening draught, Indra! libation’s 
; Lord ! is this, : ote 
4 Him for your sake I glorify as Lord of Strength who wrongs 
eth none, ° ° 
The Hero Indra, conquering all, Most Bounteons, God of all 
the tribes. ° 


bad ® 

5 Those Goddesses, both Heaven and* Earth, revere the pogrer 

and might of him, ® | 
Him whom our songs increase in strength, the Lord of bounty 


swift to come, ° ° 

6 To seat your Indra, I will spread abroad with power this song 
of praise. . 

# The saving succours that abide in Rim, like songs, extend 
and grow, ° @ 


2 From the points :.from the sharp ends of the branchlets of the 
plant. See Hillebrandt, V. Mythologie, p. 232. [Rk the midst and end: 


ucoording to Sayana, at noon and_at the evening Jébation 4 Gat- 
nest the might of Maghavan : [adra sequires his powgr from libations 
of Soma juice. e . °°? : 


° ® > @ 
. 6 To seat your Indra: as Indra’s seatis on the barhis or sacred 
grass that ia spread on the floor of the chanrber of dacrifibe, 60 the hyma 
aleo, ae bie spiritual seat, ie supposed to have the power $f inducing him 
to come. = 


; 76 


602 THE RYMNS OF (BOOK VI _- 


7 A recent Friend, he found the skilful priest : he drank, and 

showrd forth treasure from the Gods. 

He conquered, borne by strong all-shaking mares, and was 
‘with far-spread power his friends’ Protector. | 


8 In course of Law the sapient juice was quaffed : the Deities 
to glory turned their mind. 
Winning through hymns a lof*y title, he, the Lovely, made 
his beautecus form apparent. 
9 Bestow on us the most illustrious strength : ward off médn’s 
manifold malignities. 
Give with thy might abundant vital force, and aid us gra- 
ciously in gaining riches. : 
10 We turn to thee as Giver, liberal Indra, Lord of the Bay 
Steeds, be not thou ungracious, 
No friend among mankind have we to look to : why have men 
ealied thee.him who spurs the niggard ? 


11 Give us not up, Strong flero! to the hungry : unharmed pe 
we whom thou, so rich, befriendest., 
Full many a boon hast thou for men: demolish those who 
present no gifts nor pour oblations. = 


12 As Indra thandering impels the rain-clouds, so doth he send 
us store of kine and horses. 
Thou art of cld the Cherisher of singers : let not the rich who 
bring no gifts deccive thee. 
13 Adhvaryu, hero, bring to mighty Indra—for he is King there- 
of—the pressed-out juices; 
Fo hitn exalted by the hymns and praises, ancient and modern, 
of the singing Rishis, ° 
44 In the wild joy of this hath Indra, knowing full many a form, 
struck down resistless Vritras, 


Ee munanend 


eae e eee ee 

7 He found the’skil‘ul priest : Indra appreciates him who is skilled 
(in holy rites) ’—Wilson. Tha word yashtdéram, sacrificer, is supplied 
by Sayana. Borne by strong, all-shaking mares : this is Sayana’s 
firat explanation of staulabhth dhantaribhih, two feminine. plurals in the 
instiume@ntal case, vadavdbdhid, ‘with mares,’ being understood ‘Brought 
by his robust agitators (uf the earth, his dteeds),’— Wilson. Or, Sayana 
says, although the words are feminine, tha Maruts may be intended, 
Other conjecturai explanations have been attempted, but they are not 
convinciig,  . ol0 Jiho spura the niggard : urges even the niggardly 
to ba liharal. See Pisghel, Vedssche Studlien, I. P, 124. 12 The 
Cherixhar of singers ? or, ‘he whom the singers nourish, that is, etre- 
nythen by theii’ hymia, 1t Knowing full many a form 1 detecting 
and nob deceived by the various forms assumed by the demon Vritra 
aud bis crew. 


HYMN 44) THE RIGVEDA. 603 


Proclaim aloud to him the savotry Soma so that the Hero, 
_ strong of jaw, may drink it. 


15 May Indra drink this Soma poured to please him, and cheered 

therewith slay Vritra with his thunder. 

Come to our sacrifice even from a distance, good lover of our 
songs, the bard’s Supporter. 


16 The cup whence Indra drinks the dranght ‘is prea the 
. Amrit dear to Indra hath been dranken, . 

That it may cheer the God to gracious favour, end ese far 
from-us hatred and affliction. « 


i7 Therewith enraptured, Hero, slay our foemen, the unfriendly 
Maghavan! be they kin or strahgers, 
Those who still aim their hostile darts to smite us, turn them 
to flight, O Indra, crush and kill them, \ 


13 O Indra Maghavan, in these our battles win easy paths for 
us and ample freedom. 
*Thatwe may gain watefs and seed and offspring, set sou qur 
princes on thy side, O Indra. oa ° 


19 Let thy Bay Stallions, harnessed, bring the hither, Steeds 
with strong chariot and strong reins lu held them, 
Strong Horses, speeding hither, bearing thunder, well-barness- 
ed, “for the strong exciting potion’. ae 


20 Beside the vat, Strong God! stand thy strong Horses, shining 
with holy oil, like waves exulting. 
Indra, they bring: to thee, the Strong and Mighty, Soma of 
juices shed by “mighty press-stones. 
21 Thou art the Bull of earth, the+Bull of heaven, Bull of the 
rivers, Bull of standing waters, e JI 
For thee, the Strong, O Bull, hath Indu swollen, jaice pleasant,° 
sweet to drink, for thye olection. . 
22 This God, with might, when first he had his being, with Indra 
for ally, held, fast the Pani, 
#” This Indu stole away the warlike weapons, and foiled the arts 


of his malignant father. 
; 26 fake, fon Rs so a ee a I en aes 


15 5 The hatd's Supporter : or, ‘ whum singers nourish,’ as in stanzas 
12. 15 In this and thg two following stanzas we have the repe- 
tition, so dear to some of the Vodice posts, of vrisha in compost'iuvn, 
vrishan and vrishabhd, so coramonly applied in the hymns to living 
beings and things preeminent for strength. 2% Lhis God ¢ Indu or 
Soma, the Moon. Of hig. malignant potter Trashfar appears to be 
meant. Sdiyana’s paraphrase is non-natural ; ‘ of as malignans’secreter 
of (the stolen) wealth, (the cxttle).’—Wilson. , Sdyqus makes piuh, 
as derived from p4, to protect, = palayituh, ‘the safe keeper,’ and 
svdsya = Lath. sui, ‘of the property.’ This safe keeper, secreter, and 
robber would be the demon Vala. , ° 


ee ee 


604 THB RYMNS OF (BOOK V1. 


23-The Dawns he wedded toa glorious Consort, and set within 


the Sun the light that lights him. ° 
He found in heaven, in the third lucid regions, the threefold 


Amrit in its close concealment. 
.24 He stayed and beld the heaven and earth asunder : the chariot 
with the sevenfold reins he harnessed. 
This Soma set with power within the milch-kine a spring 
whose ripe contents ten fingers empty. 
Se HYMN XLV. Indra, 
Tuat Indra is, our youthful Friend, who with his trusty 
guidance led, 
Turvasa, Yadu from afar. 
2 Even to the dull and uninspired Indra gives vital power, and 
wins. 0 
Even with slow steed the offered prize. 
3 Greaare his ways of guiding us, and manifold are his eulogies ; 
His kind protections never fail, o 
4 Friends, sing your psalm and offer praise to him to whom the 
prayer is brought: 
For our great Providence is he. 
6 Thou, Slaughterer of Vyitra, art Guardian and Friend of one 
and two, 
Yea, of a mn like one df us. ! 
6 Beyond men’s hate thou leadest us, and givest cause to sing 
thy, praise ; ’ 
Good Hero art thou called by men, 
71 eal] with hymns, ’twere a cow to milk, the Friend who 
Meri{s praise, - 
Khe Brahman who accepts the prayer, 


h 


en eRe ye ae i ee 


“23 Glorious Consort: The Sun. Jn the third lucid regions : perhaps, 
as Prcfessor Ludwig suggests, in the spheres of the Sun, tbe Moon, and 
the stars. ‘ According to the scholiast, this may merely moan that the 
Soma becomes as it were ambrosia when received. or concealed in the 
Vessels at the three diurnal ceremonies, which ambrosia is properlye 
deposited with the gods abiding in the third bright sphere, or in bea- 
ven,’— Wilson, 34 The chariot: of the Sun, drawn by seven horses. 
Whose ripe contents ten fingers empty. this appears to be the meaning of 
the pakvdm ddsayantram utsam of tbe text, literally, ‘ the ripe spring 
with ten engines.’ ‘ The mature deeply-organized secretion.’— Wilson. 


Spee, Pes a oo Me een ee 


] Turvasa, Yadu: the names of these two eponymi of Aryan tribes 
are frequently associatéd. Soe Index, Amexpedition against Divodasa 
appears cv be referred fo, 2 Even to the dull and uninspired : he 
favours whom he will, and the race is not always to the swift. 7 
As ‘twere a cow t milk: like the cow that is brought to give the milk 
that is to be mingled with the Soma libation. Zhe Brahman: Indra 
vegarded as a Priost, uae ; 


ey 


AYMN 45.) THE RIGVEDA. 605 


8 Him in whose hands they say are stored all treasures from the 
°* day of old, 


The Hero, conquering in the fight. 


9 Lord of strength, Caster of the Stone, destroy the firm forts 
built by men, 
And foil their arte, unbending God ! 


10 Thee, thee as such, O Lord of Bower, 0 Tada. Soina- drinker, 


e tr le, e 
We, fain for glory, have invoked. : 
11 Such as thou wast of old, and art now to be’ called on when 
the prize : 


Lies ready, listen to our call. 


12 With hymns and coursers we will gain, Indra, through thee, 
both steeds and spoil 


Most glorious, and the proffered prize, : . 
13 Thgu, Indra, Lover of tle Song, whom men must stir to help, 
hast been . e 
Great in the contest for the prize, ° ° 
14 Slayer of foes, whatever aid of time imparts the swiftest 
COUrSe,e 


With that impel our car to spved, ° 
15 As skilfullest of those who'drive the chariot, Sith our art 


and aim, 
O Conqueror, win the proffered prize. 


16 Praise him who, Matchlegs and Alone, was born the Lord of 
living men, 


Most active, with heroic soul. ° — gs 
17 Thou wh® hast’ been the singers’ Friend, a Friend auspicious 
with thine aid, ° 


As such, O Indra, favour us. 
18 Grasp in thine arms the thunderbolt, O Thunder-armed, to 
7 slay the'fiends : 
Mayst thou subdue the foemen’s 8 host. 
19 I call the ancient Friend, allied with wealth, who speeds the 
lowly man, . 
Him to whom chiefly prayer is brought. 
20 For he alone is Lord of all tife treasures of the earth: he speeds 
Hither, chief Lover of the Song, . 


11 When the prize lies ready: to be given toghe victor in the 
chariou race, the chief object of the hymn being to secure Victory in the 
approaching contest through the favour of the God. 


603 THR AYMNSOF | [BOOR VI. 


21 So with thy yoked teams satisfy our wish with power and 
wealth in steeds 
And cattle, boldly, Lord of kine! 
92 Sing this, what time the juice*is pressed, to him your Hero, 
Much-invoked, 
To please him as a mighty Steer. 
23 He, Excellent, withholdeth nét his gift of power and wealth 
in kine, 
When he hath listened to our songs, 
24 May he with might enclose for us the cow’s stall, whosesoe er 
it be, 
To which the Dasyu-slayer goes. 
95 O Indra Satakratu, these our songs have called aloud to theo, 
Liko mother cosvs to meet their calves. 
26 Hard is thy love to win: thou art a Steer to him who longs 
fd steers ; 
Be to one craving steeds a Steed. | 
2%. Delight thee with the juice we pour for thine on great 
m*anificence : 
Yield: not thy singer to reproach. 
28 These songs with every draught we pour come, Lover of* the 
Song, t to th ee, 
As milch-lwne hasten to their young : ™ 
29 To thee most oft invoked, amid the many singers’ rivalry ‘ 
Whg beg with all their might for wealth. 
30 Nearest “and most attractive may our laud, OQ Indra, come 
to thee. 
*Urge thou us on to ample. wealth, 
31\Bribu hathset himself above the Panis, o’er their highest head, 
Like the wide bush on Gang4’s bank, » s 


24 Whosesoe’er tt be: the meaning of kuvitsasya here is somewhat 
uncertain. Sayana explains it as, of Kuvitsa, a certain person who dues 
much harm, The meaning appears to be, may Indra open for us thea 
cow-stall and give us the ‘cattld of any Dasyu whom he, that is, we. 
under bis guidance, may attack. 26 Thow art @ Steer: gavdm 
praddtd, ‘a giver of cattle =-Sayana. ¢A Steed: asvapradah, a giver of 
horses. —Sayana.. . 27 This stanza is repeated, word for word, from 
Ifl. 41. 6. ol Bribu : according to Sayans, the carpentor or arti- 
ficer of the Payis. The Panis here are, in accordance with the original 
meaning of the words, merchants or teadats, and the merchant Bribu 
is eulogized for his piety and liberality, qualities which were not the 
u:ual charaot@risti¢s of the class to which he belonged. A legend; 
referred to by Sayans, and recorded in the Udnava dharma-sasira or 
Laws of Manu, 10, 107, relates that Bharadvaja, when distressed by 
hunger ina lonely forest, accepted many cows from the carpenteg 

ee e 


"HYMN 46.) THE RIGVEDA, 607 


32 He whose good bounty, chonsandto'ds swift as the rushing of 
the wind, 
Suddenly offers as a gift 
33 So all our singers ever praine the pious Bribu’s noble deed, 
Chief, best to give his thousands, best to give a thousand 
liberal gifts. 


? eo 


HYMN XLVI. — Indra. 
THAT we may win us wealth and power wepoets, verily, call 


on thee : 
In war men call on thee, Indra, thé hero’s Lord, in the steed’s 


race-course call on thee. 
2 As such, O Wonderful, whose hand hulds thunder, praised as 


mighty, Caster of the stone ! 
Pour on us boldly, Indra, kine and chariot-stéeds, ever to be 
* the-conqueror’s strength, : 
3 We call upon that Indra, who, most actives ever slays the foe: 
Lord of the brave, Most Manly, with a thousand powers, help 
* thou and prosper us in fight. 
4 Richishama, thou forcest men as witha bull, witl anger, in 


: the farious fray. oe 
Be thou our Helper in the mighty battle fought for sunlight, 
water, and for life. i t 
5 O Indra, bring us name and fame enriching, mightiest, 
excellent, 2 “Se 


Wherewith, O Wondrous God. fair-visored, thander-armed, 
thou hast filled full this earth and ‘heaven, 


Bribu ; the moral being that men of inferior caste and low 
eandition Ky distinguish themselves by their liberality. See Wi'san’s 
r%te, Vol. III, p 466. Zhe wide bush: the belt of underwood, Others 
would read wrukakshah as One word instead of urvh kakshah, and explain 
ib as the name of aman, son ofa womad oalled Ganga. 33 Chief : 
sdrt, as institutor of the sacrifice. See, on stanzas 3!—33, Prof. We- 
ber’s Episches im vedischen Ritual (Sitzurigsberichte der K. P. Akademie 
der Wissenschaften, XXXVIII. pp. 28 eqq ), and M. Muller, Chips 
from a German Workshop, IV. 138 (new edition). 


3 _ 


a) 


3 With a thousand powers s sahasramushka, litgrally, mille tasticulos 
habone. The reading of the Samaveda, sahasramanyo, full of boundlesg 
‘ardour, is, as Professor Ludwig remarks, much nore &sthetio. 4 
Richishama : or, worthy of praise ! Buo the exact meaning of the epithet 
is somewhat uncertain. 9 fatr-visored ; or, fair of cheek. 


608 THE AYMNS OP (BOOR Vi. 
6 Wecallon thee, King, Mighty amid the Gods, Ruler of 


men, to succour us. 
All ‘hats is weak in us, Excellent God, make firm ‘ make our 
foes easy to subdue. 


? All strength and valour that is found, Indra. in tribes of Na- 
hushas, and all’the splendid fame that the Five Tribesenjoy, 
Bring yea, all manly powers at once. 


8 Or, Maghavan, what v gorous strength in Trikshi lay, in Dru- 
hyus or in Puro's folk, 
Fully bestow on us, that, in the conquering fray, we may 
subdue our foes in fight. 


9 O Indra, grant a happy home, triple refuge triply strong. 
Bestow a dwelling-place on the rich lords and me, and “keep 
thy. dart afar‘from these. 
10 They who with minds intent on spoil subdue the foe, boldly 
attack and, smite him down, — 
From these, Indra Maghavan who lovest song, be glosest 
guardian of our lives. 
11 And now, O Indra, strengthen us: come near and aid us in 
the fisht, 
What time the feathered shafts are flying in the air,'the 
arrowe with their sharpened points, 
12 Give us, were heroes ‘strain their bodies in the fight, the 
shelter that our fathers loved, 
To us and to our sons give refuge : keep afar all unobserved 
hostility, 
13 When, Indra, inthe mighty fray thou urgest chargers to their 
speed, 
ender uneven road and on a toilsome path, like as: eager 
for renown, 
14 Speeding Jike rivers rushing down a steep aeucent responsive 
to the urging call, 
That come like birds attracted to the bait, held in by reins in 
both the driver's hands. \, 


7 Nahushas : people, apparently distinct from the five Aryan tribes 
par excellence, and dwellers on or near the Indus. According ta Saya- 
na, human beings in general are meant, and Professor Roth explains the 
word as men generally, but with the ‘special sense of strangor, or 
neighbour, Sve Mair, 0. S Texts, I. 179, 183, 8 Trukshi : 
king 80 named, says Sayana. In another place (VIL. 22. 7) he ae 
the patronymic "Brdaalasyava, eon, % ¢& peer of, Trasadasy. In Druhyus 
or in Buru’s folk : literally, ‘in Druhyn of in Puru,’ the names of the 
eponymi of these tribes being used for the tribeh themselves. 12 ¢ 
To us and to our sons give refuge : the Commentator takes achittam 
‘unobserved,’ with°chardih, and explains the worde as armour unknow 
by the enemies,’ . 


HYMN 47.) THE RIGVEDA. 609 


HYMN XLVII Indra, Ete. 


* YwA, this is good to taste and full of sweetness, verily it is 
strong and rich in flavour 

No one may conquer Indra in’the battle when he hath drunken 
of the draught we offer. 

This sweet juice here had mightiest power to gladden : it bolden- 
ed Indra when he slaughtered Vritra, 

When he defeated Sambara’s many onslaughts, and battered 
duwn his nine-and ninety ramparts. ° 

3 This stirreth up my voice when | have drunk it: this hath 

. _ arpused from slecp my yearning spirit. 

| This Sage hath measured out the six expanses from which no 

single creature is excluded. 


4 This. even this, is he who hath created the breadth of ‘earth, 
the lofty height of heaven. 
Ile formed the nectar in three headlong rivers. Soma supports 
» the azide mid-air above fs. i 
f Tle found the wavy sea of briiliant colours m. forefe ont of the 
Dawns wh» dwell in brightness 
Tilas Mighty One, the Sheer begirt by Marats, hath propped 
the heav@éns up with a mighty pillar. 


6 Drink Soma boldly from the beaker, “Indra, in wetr os trea- 
. sures, Hero, Vritra-slayer ! : 
Fill thyself full at the mid-day, libation, and give us wealth, 
thou treasury of riches, 
Look out for us, O Indra, %8s our Leader, and guide us én té 
gain yet ¢ coodlier treasure. , , 
Bee llent Guardian, bear us well through peril, and lead us on 
to wealth®with erecta ec uidance. 
8 Lead us to ampie room, “Oethou who knowest, to happiness, 
security, and sunlight. 
High, Indra, are the arms of thee the Mighty: may we betake 
sus to their lofty shelter. 2 
9 Sct us on widest chariot-seat, O Indra, with two steeds best 
to draw, © Lord of Hundreds! : 


ho 


“] 


3 This Sage hath measured owd: the creative avts of Indra are as- 
cribed to Soma which inospirits him to perfurm them.. ‘he six expanses, 
are the two worlds, heaven and eth, and the three subdivisivns of 
each; or, according to the Commeatator, heaven, garth, day, nighd, 
water: ana plants. 4 In, three headlong rivers : perhaps the ives 
unknown rivers Anjasi, Kulisi, and Virapatni, of [ 104 4, which 

wnfey considers to be personifications of the clouds ; but tfe meaning 


ef the half-line is uncertain. ‘This Soma has deposited tite ambrosia 
in its three principal (receptacles). — Wilson, Sums io stanzas 4 and 5 
is probably tha Moon-God. 7 ar 


77 es 


610 THE HYMNS UF (BOOK VI. 


Bring us the best among all sorts of viands: let not the foes 
wealth, Maghavan, subdue us. ° 


10 Be gracious, {ndra, let my days be lengthened: sharpen my 
thought as ‘twere a blade of fron. 
Approve whatever words I speak, dependent on thee, and grant 
me thy divine protection, 


11 Indra the Rescuer, Indra the Helper, Hero who listens at each 
Ire70cation, : 
Sakra [ eall, Indra invoked of many, May Indra Maghavan 
prosper and ‘bless us. 


12 May helpful Indra as our good Protector, Lord of all treasures, 
favour us with succour, 
Baffie our foes. and give us rest and safety, and may we be 

’ th lords of here vigour. 


13 May we enjoy the grace of him the Holy, yea, may we dwell 
in his auspicious favour. 
May helpful Indra as our good Preserver drive from~ag, even 
from afar, our foemen. 


14 Like rivers rushing down a slope, O Indra, to the haste songs 
and prayers and linked verses. ° 
Thou gatherest, Thunderer! like wide-spread Bounty, kine, 
water, diops, and manifold libations, 


15 Who lauds him, satisfies him, pays him worship? K’en the. 
ri3h noble still hath found him mighty. 
With power, as when one moves his feet alternate, he makes 
e tlhe last precede, the foremost follow. 


16, Famed is the Hero as eaci strong man’s tamer, ever advancing 
' one and then another, 
King of both worlds, hating the high and haughty, Indra pro- 
tects tne men who are his people, 


17 He loves no more the men he loved aforetime: he turns and 
movea away allied with others. - 
Rejecting those who disregard his worship, Indra victorivus 
lives through many autumns, 


9 Let not the foe's wealth, Maghavan, subdue us: ib eeoeme necessary 
to foflow Professor Ludwig in taking réyah in the plural as the subject 
of the singular verb ¢drit. Other examples ‘of such an irregularity are 
found in the Veda. 13 This stanza is apparently the conclusion of - 
the original hymn’ a new hymn or fragment of a hymn begins wich the 
fo, owing st#nze.— Ludwig. 15 With power: he rules the fortunes 
of men according to his pleasures, setting up one and putting down 
no ther, making the firet last and the Isst fires. 


HYMN 41, THE RIGVEDA, 611 


18 In every figure he hath been’ the model : that is his only form 
° for as to look on. 
Indra moves multiform by his illusions; for his Bay Steeds 
are yoked, ten times a hyndred. 
- 19 Here Tvashtar, yoking to the car the Bay Steeds, hath extended 
sway. 
Who will for ever stand upen the foeman’s side, even when 
our princes sit at ease ? 
20 Gods, we havereached a country void of pasture: the land, 
though spacious, was too smal! to hold us. 
Brihaspati, provide in war for cattle; tind’a path, Indra, for 
this faithful singer, , 
21 Day after day far from their seat he drove them, alike, from 
place to place, those darksome creatures 
The Hero slew the meanly-huckstering — Varchin and 
Sambara, where the waters gather. 
22 Outeof thy bounty, Indea, lath Prastoka Bastowea bet coffers 


and ten mettled horses. 
We have received in turn from Divedies S&mbara’s wealth, ii 


e gift of Atithigva. 


23 Ten horsts and ten treasure-chests,ten garments as an added gift, 
These and ten lumps of gold havesl received frora Divod4sa’s 


hand. o° 
24 Ten cars with extra steed to each, for the Atharvans hundred 
cows, e 


Hath ASsvatha to Payu g riven. 


te eee sp ct a a ee ee eee areca! emai iene 
18 ‘ Judra presents himeelf as Agm, Vishnu, or Ruira, or any 
other deity who is the actual object of warship, and ie really the deity 
to be adore!: he is identifiable with each.’— Wilson. Ten tumes ae 
hundred : ‘Tis chariots and, horses are multiplied aqeording to tha 
forms in which he manifests himself: agreeably to the Vatddnwk inter- 
pretation of the stanza, Zadra is here identified with Parameswara, the 
ssupreme first cause, identical with creation.—Wilson. 19 ‘Tvashtar : 
supposed by the Commentator to be identtfied with Indra; but this ig 
unnecessary, The sway may be merely ghe avtbority which Tvashtar 
exercises in yoking the chariot-steeds for Indra, Who will for ever 
stand upon the foeman’s side 2: that is, Todra will not always favour 
our enemies, even when, a8 ia now the case, our nobles are nov engaged 
in war. _- Ludwig. 21 Indga is represente@ar having put to flight 
the dark aborigines and sluin the niggardly demons,or savages Varchin 
and Sambara. See IV 30, 14 25. 22 Rrasteka’, Divottasa, and 
Atithigva ara names of one and thésame prmce, who ig evdled also 
Asvatha, and Sirnjaya or son of Scinj ya. 24 For tie Atharvans : 
for the Rishis of the family of Atharvan, says Sdvana. Pdyu: the 
brother of Garga the ltishi of the byma, This et&nz, consists of two 
Padas only instead of four. ° 


612 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VI. 
25 Thus Srinjaya’s son honoured the Bharadvajas, recipients of 


all noble gifts and bounty. : 
26 Lord of the wood, be firm and strong in body : be, bearing us, 
a brave victorious hero. , 


Show forth thy strength, compact with straps of leather, and 
Jet thy rider win all spoils of battle. 


27 Its mighty strength was borrdwed from the heaven and earth : 
its conquering force was brought from sovrans of the wood. 
Honour with holy gifts the Car like Indra’s bolt, the Car bound 
round With straps, the vigour of the floods. 


28 Thou Bolt of Indra, Vanguard of the Maruts, close knit to. 
Varuna and Child of Mitra, — 
As such, accepting gifts which here we offer, receive,O Godlike 
Chariot, these oblations. 


29 Send forth thy voice aloud through earth and heaven, and let 
the world <n all its breadth Feaatd thee ; 
O Drum, accordant with the Godsvand Indra, drive thou afar, 
yea, very far, our foemen. 


30 Thunder out strength and fill ua fall of vigour : yea, thunder 
forth and drive away all dangers. e 
Drive hence, O War-drum, drive away misfortufie ; thou art 
the Ferst of Indra : show thy firmness. 


31 Drive hither those, and these again bring hither: the War- 
‘drum speaks aloud as battle’s “signal, 

Our‘heroes, winged with horses, come together, Let our car- 
warriors, Indra, be triumphant, 


e 


c HYMN XLVIH. — Agni and Others. 


Sing to your Agni with each sang, at every sacrifice, for 
strength. 

Come, let us praise the Wise and Everlasting God, even as a 
well- beloved Friend. 


26 Lord of the wood : forest tree, that is the timber of which the 
car is made, This car is the’deified object of thia apd the two follow- 
ing stanzas. 29‘O Drum. the dundubhi addressed and glorified in 
these concluding varses was a sort of loud kettle drum, like that atill 
used. © 31 Drive ta us the cowe of the enemy and send our own cowa 


home i. safety. Gdh,cows, is Understood with amuh, these, and ima@h, 


these. i 2 


1 Come, let’ ussing: ib eoeme necesrary to take the singular verb 
with the plural pronoun. . 


HY MN 48 | THE RIGVEDA. 13 


2 The Son of Strength ; fur is he not our gracious Lord ? Let 
. us serve him who bears our gifts. 
In battle may he be our help and strengthener, yea, bs the 
saviour of our lives. . 


3 Agni, thou beamest forth with light, great Ilero, never 
“changed by time, 
Shining. pure Agni! witha fight that never fades, Bean with 
_ thy fair beams brilliantly. ; 


4 Thou worshippest great Gods : bring them without delay by 
wisdom and thy wondrous power. 
O Agni, make them turn hitber to succour us. Give strength, 
and win it for thyself. 


5 He whom floods, stones, and trees support, ‘the offspring of 
eternal Law ; 
He who when rubbed with force is brought to life by mén upon 
the lofty height of earth 5 ; 


6°He who hath filled both worlds full yvith his brilliant shirfe, 
who hastens with his smoke to heavens ;e 
He made himself apparent through the gleom by night, the 
e Red bull in the darksome nights, the Red Bull in the dark. 
some nfehts. 


70 Agni, with thy lofty beams, with thy pert brillianey, 
O God, 
Kindled, Most Youthful One ! by Bharadvaja’s hand, ae on 
us, O pure God. with wealth, shine, Purificr ! splendidly, 


8 Thou art the Lord of fouse and home of all the tribes, °O 
Agni, of all tribes of men. : ® 
Guard witha hundred forts thy kinder from distress, phesueh 
hundred winters, Youngest God ! and those who make thy 
singers rich. ° 
9 Wonderful, with thy favouring help, send us thy bounties, 
gracious Lord. - 
‘Thou art the Charioteer, Agni,.of earthly wealth : find rest 
and safety for our seed. ;. % 


10 With guards unfailing never negligent apse thou our child- 
ren and our progeny, e 
Keep far from us, O Agni, all celestial wratheand wickedness 
of Godless men. 7 


2 Who bears our gifts : conveys our sacrificial” offerings to the Goda. 
5 Floods, stones, and trees : the waters that are mixed with the Soma 
juice, the press-atones which crush the plant, and the *wdod which pro- 
duces the fire by attrition or feeds it as fuel, The lofty height of earth : 
the altar, : ° 


614 THE HYMNS OP (BOOK VI. 


11 Hither, O friends, with newest song drive her who freely pours 
her milk : : 
Loose her who never turns away ; 


12 Who, for the host of Maruts bright with native sheen, hath 
shed immortal fame like milk ; 


Whom the impetuous Marutselook upon with love, who moves 
in splendour on their ways, 
13 For Bhayadvaja she poured down in days of old. ° 
The milch-cow yielding milk for all, and food that gives all 
nourishment, 
14 Your friend like Indra.passing wise, with magic power like 
Varuna. 
Nike Aryaman‘joy-giving, bringing plenteous food like Vishnu 
for my wish, I praise, 
15 Brizht as the host of Maruts mighty in their roar. May they 
bring Pushan free from foes ; « 
May they bring hither hundreds, thousands for Our mén : 
may they bring hidden stores to light, and make wealth 
easy to be found. 


16 Haste to me, Pushan, in thine car, bright Deity ! I fain would 
speak - © e 
Most sinfu’ is our fSeman’s hate. s 
17 Tegr not up by the roots the Kakambira tree: destroy thou 
all malignity. : . 
Leg them not snare by day the neck of that Celestial Bird 
the Sun. 


18 Uninjured let thy friendship be, like the smooth surface of a 
skin, 


11 Who frecly pours rer milk +: sabdrdughd ; the general nama othe 
cow or cows milked at sagrifices. 12 The sacrificial cow is here identitind 


with Prisni, the mother of the Maruts. 13 According to my version, 
which follows that of Prefassor Ludwig, Prigni should be the deity of 
thie stunas S4yana explains ib differefitly :O slaruts, milk, ete. 14 


Your friend : Péshan. For my wish_: that I may obtain my wish; ‘for 
the distribution of wealth,’— Wilson. 17 The Kakambira tree : ac- 
cording to Siyana, kAtambira means literally ‘orow-bearer :’ with its 
progeny of crows,’-- Wilson.» It is apparently the name of some umbra- 
geous bree gnd in this place implies metaphorically Samyu the Righi- 
of the hymn with his many branches of sons and grandsons. Let them 
not enare : fet ‘nob our enemies deprive us of the sunlight: the Sun being 
frequently called a bird, thosa who would deprive the speaker of the 
light of day are regarded as fowlers. * 


J- 
HYMN 49) THE RIGVEDA. 615 


A. flawless skin, containing curds, full to the mouth, contain- 
"> ing curds, 


19 For thou art high above mankind, in glory equal to the Gods. 
Therefore, O Pashan, look apon us in thefight : now help us 
% as in days of old. 


20 May the kind excellence of him the Kind, loud Roarers! be 
our yuide, 
Jf fe it the God’s, O Maruts, or a mortal man’s who wosships, 
ye impetuous Ones! 
21 They whose high glory in a moment like the God, the Sun, 
foes round the space of heaven, 
The Maruts have obtained bright strenyth, a sacred name, 
strength that destroys the Vritras, strength Vritra-destroy- 
ing, excellent. . 2 
22 Once, only once, the heaven was made, once, only onge, the 
earth was formed. ° 
“Oncop only Prisni’s milk was shed: no second, after this, 
is burn. 


HYMN XLIX, ° Visvedevas, 


I navn with newest songs the Righteous People, Mitra and 
Varuna who make us happy. i 
, Let them approach, here, let ther listen,— @goi, Varuna, 
Mitra, Lords of fair dominion. 


2 Him, to be praised at each tzibe’s sacrifices, the Two young 
Matrons’ suber-minded Herald, 
The Son of Strength, the Child of Heaven, the signal cé sacsi- 
fice, red Agni will I worship. « * s 4 
3 Unlike ir form.are the Red God’s two Daughters: one is the 
Sun’s, and stars bedeck the other, 
Apart, the Sanctifiers, in Succession, come to the famed hymn, 
praised in holy verses. 


4 I with a lofty sdng call hither Vayu, all bounteous, filler of 
his car, most wealthy. , 


TT mesemee ee renewee mene seer eteeenn sony 


perenne 


18 Containing curds: “Such a skin of curds, Sdyane says, 19 alwaye 

carried in Pushan’s chariot.’— Wilson. 20 The God's: Agni's. 92 

Heaven and Earth, having once been made or brbught forth, aro perma- 

nend. Prisni, the mother of the Maruts, has once for all given birth to 

her brood. No second : sdrdhah, host (of Maruts) §s understood with 
6 e ° 


anydh. — ° . 


2 The Two young Matrons : Heaven and Earth. The Child of Hea- 
ven : or Of Dyaus or Dyu. 3 Two Daughters : Day and Night, 4 
Filler of his car : with wealth to reward his worshippers. The prudent : 
tha wise worshipper. 8 


616 THE HYMNS OF (BOOK VI. 


Thou, Sage, with bright path, Lord of harnessed horses, impe- 
tuous, promptly honourest the prudent. 


5 That chariot of the Asvins, fair to look on, pleaseth me well, 
yoked with a thought, refulgent, 
Wherewith, Nasatyas, Chiefs, ye seek our dwelling, to give 
new strength to us and to our children. 


6 Bulls of the Earth, O Vata and Parjanya, stir up for us the 
remions of the water. 
Hearers of truth, ye, Sages, World-Supporters, increase his 
living wealth whose songs delight yon. 


7 So may Sarasvati, the Hero’s Consort, brisk with rare life. the 
lightning’s Child, inspire us, 
And, withthe Dames accordant, give the singer a refuge unas- 
3ail ble and flawless. 


8 I praise with eloquence him who guards all pathways, He 
when his love impelled him, went to Arka. 
May he vouchsafe us gear with gold to grace it: may.2iishan 
make each prayer of ours effective, 


9 May Herald Agni, fulgent, bring for worship Tvashtar adored, 
in homes and swift to listen, 
Glorious, first to share, the life-bestower, the ever active God, 
fair-arfaed, fair-handed. 
10 Rudra by day, Rudra at night we honour with these our songs 
the Universe's Father. 
Him great and lofty, blissful, undecaying let us call specially 
as the Sage impels us. 


6 Bulls of the Larth: or of Prithivi as identified with Prisni. Vata 
is another name of Vayu, the Wind-God; ani Parjanya is the Raia- 
‘cloud personified. Hearers of truth: the Maru:s are thus addressed, 
as making true.or realizing the prayers of men who which they listen. 
I follow Sayana’s interpretation of the second half of the stanza. 7 
The Hero's Consort: virdipatni: according to Sayana, she whore husband 
is the hero Prajapati, or, the protectress of herves. The River-Goc, 
Sarasvan or Sarasvat is mbre usually considered to be the consort of 
"Sarasvati, who originally a RKiver-Goddess, appears in this place in ber 
later and present-day character of the Goddess of learning and eloquence. 
See note, borrowed from Muir, on I 3.10. Whe Dames : Gnas, or Con- 
sorts of the Gods. ~ 8 Him who guards all pathways : Pushan, the 
special protector of cravellers and guardian of roade and paths. See I. 
42 Arka: the Sun, to whom Pushan appears to hava gone both as an 
eavoy on behalf ot the other Gods when Surya was to be given in mar- 
riage, arel as a suitor on bis awn ’account. Surya, i6 may be remem- 
bered, chose the Asvins to be her husbands See I 116 17. I follow 
Professor Piechel ( Vedssche Studien, I. pp. 1—52) in his tuterpretation 
of this difficult stanza. 10 The Sage: the wise, thad is, wiedum 

giving, Suma. ° 


AY MN 60.) THE RIGVEDA. B17 


11 Ye who are youthful, wise, and meet for worship, come, 
“——e- Maruts, to the longing of the singer. 
Coming, aserst to Angiras, O Heroes, ye animate and quicken 
een the desert. : 
12 Even as the herdsman driveth home his cattle, I urge my 
songs to him the strong swift Hero. 
May he, the glorious, lay upan his body the singers hymns, 
as stare bedeck the heaven. 
4 He who for man’s behoof in his affliction thrise measuréd out 


the earthly regions, Vishnu— 
When one so great as thou affordeth shelter, may we with 


’. wealth and with ourselves be happy. 
14 Sweet be this song of mine to Ahibudhnya, nema Savitar, 


with Floods and Lightnings ; : 
Sweet, with ‘the Plants, to Gods who seek oblations: *May 
@ 


liberal Bhaga speed us on to riches, : 
1D Gjve righes borne on cars, with many heroes, contenting men, 


the guard of mighty Order, 
Give us a lasting home that we may battle wath godless bands 


of men who fight against us, and meet with tribes to whom 
the Godsare gracious. 


HYMN i % eV isvedevas, 


I cauL with prayers on Aditi i Goddess, oa Keni; Mitra, 


Varuna for favour, 
On Aryaman who gives unasked, the gracious, on Gods who 


save, on Savitar and Bhaga. > 
2 Visit, to prove us free from sin, O Strya, Lord of great mighty, 


the bright Gods sprung from Dakshae 
Twice born and true, observing sacred duties, Holy and full of 


light, whose tongue is Agal, 


ll As erst to Angiras: angirasedé : ‘like rays (of light).’—Wilson ; 
‘like the Angirasas’—Roth ; ‘like messengeys of tha Gods.’—Graas- 
mann. 12 The strong swift Hero : Vishnu seams to ba intended, and 
not the company of Marute as Sdyana “explains the passaze, taking 
vird ya ag an adjective =heroio vr powerful. 14 Ahibudhnya : the 
Dragen of the Deep, or ‘leviathaa of the Sea of Heaven, the distant, 
invisible and deified being who presides over the firmamgn’. 15 The 
guard of mighty Order : the wealtl? that ensbles men to institute the 
la-y-ordained sacrifices. Zo whom the Gods are gractous * ‘tq whonr the 
Gods come to accept libations..* I follow Sjyana in tifus distinguishing 


G@'devih from ddevth, Godless. 
® ®@ 


2 Visit, to prove us free from sin: visit and invite tha Gods tiocome 
audbear witness to our innocence before phe all-seeing Sun. The word 


78 = ® 


618 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR VI 


3 And O ye Heaven and Earth, a wide dominion, O ye most | 

blissful Worlds, our lofty shelter, a 

Give ample room and freedom forour dwelling, a home, ye 
Ilemispheres, which none may rival, 


4 This day invited may the Sons of Rudra, resistiess, excellent, 
stoop down to meet us ; 

For, when beset with slight or sore affliction, we ever’call upon 
the Gods, the Maruts ; 


5 To whom the Goddess Rodasi clings closely, whom Piishan®’ 
follows bringing ample bounty. 
What time ye hear our call and come, O Maruts, upon your 
separate path all creatures tremble. 


6 With « new hymn extol, O thou who singest, the Lover of the 
_ Song, the H ro Indra. 
May he, exalted, hear our invocation, and grant us mighty 
Wealth and strength when lauded. 


7 Give full protection, Friends of raan, ye Waters, in-yaace and 
= trouble, to our sens and grandsons, 


For ye are our most motherly physicians, parents of all that 
standcth, all that moveth. 


8 May Savitar come hither and approach us, the Gud who rescues, 
Holy, colden-banded, 
The God’wao, bounteons as the face of Morning, discloses’ 
precious gifts for him who worships. 


9 Ana thou, O Son of Strength. do thou turn hither the Gods 
to-day to this our holy service. 


May I for evermore enjoy thy bounty, and, Agni, by thy 
grace be rich in heroes, 


10 Come also to my call, O ye Nasatyas, yea, verily, through my 
prayers, ye Holy Sages. | 
As from great darkness ye delivered Atri, protect us, Chiefs, 
from danger in the conflict. 


andgdstvé in tha locative case ( in sinlessnaes ) ia used with a dative sig- 
nification. Sprung from Doksha ; Daksha is a creative Power associated 
with Aditi, and therefore sometimes identified with Prajapati- SAyana 
explains ddékshapitrin in his commentary on VII. 66. 2, as! preservers 
or lozde of strength,’ and the compoand may mean Lords of vigour, or 
fathers of strength’in this pagsage also {wwice born: having two birtha 
or manifestations, dwelling in heaven and appearing algo earth. Whose 
tongue ts Agit ; who consume oblations by means of fire, 8 Ye 
Hemispheres : dhishane ; Nterally, ‘two howls,’ & frequently-occurring 
expression for heaven and earth. 5 Rodast : the Coneort of Rudra 


wv « 
HYMN 61, THE RIGVEDA. 619 


.1_O Gods, bestow upon us riches, splendid with strength and 
heroes, bringing food in plenty. 
Be gracious, helpfal Gods of earth, of heaven, born of the Cow, 
and dwellers in the waters 
42 May Rudra and Sarasvati, accordant, Vishnu and Vayu, pour 
down gifts and bless us ; 
Ribhukshan, Vaja, and divine Widhdtar, Parjanya, Vata make 
our food abundant. = 
4 May this God Savitar, the Lord, the Offering éf Waters, pour- 
ing down his dew be gracious, a 
\. And, with the Gods and Dames accordant, T’vashtar; Dyaus 
with the Gods and Prithivi with ogeans, ° 
14 May Aja-Ekapid and Abibudhnya, Earth agd Ocean hear 
our invocation; e e 
All Gods who strengthen Law, invoked and lauded, and holy 
texts uttered by sages, help us. ; . 
15 So with my thoughts and hymns of praise the ehildren of 
* Rhetadvaja sing aloud fo please you. . ° 
The Dames invoked, and the resistless Vasys, andall ye Holy 


Ones have been exalted. 
e 


- HYMN LI Visvedevas. 

Toar mighty eye of Varuna and Mitga, infallibleand dear, 1s 
‘e moving upwrd. . ee 

The pure and lovely face of holy Order hath shone like gold of, 

heaven in its arising. , e 

11 Born of the Cow : tha Maruts, sons of the Caw Prigni, acgording 
to Siyana, The Gods of heaven are said to be the Adi:yas, those o 
earth the Vasus, and those of water, that is, the firmam nt, the Teudr& 
Roth explains gojdtdly as ‘ born of the starry heaven.’ 12 ‘Tins 
and thé four following stanza form a new hyinn, or ace a recapitulaéion 
with additions, of the precedinY® verses. And divine Vidhatar : or ‘ the 
divine Disposer.’ 14 Aja-Hkspdd: according to Roth, probably a genius 
of the storm, ‘the stormer of onerfoot’ So TL. Sl. 6. Bub aja may 
signify ‘ unborn’ rather than ‘ driver, and the Sun may be intended, 
in accordance with the exvlanation of the Commentators. Aja-Ekapad 
53 galled in X 65. 13. the bearer of heaVen, ‘*and the ascription of one 
foot to the Suo might be dua to his appearance alone in the sky as 
opposed to the Dawns and the Asvins’ Sea, Walla, Cosmology of the 
Rigveda, p. 54 M. Bergnigne says : * Aja-Ekapad, ghan is the ‘ unborn 
who has only one foot,’ that is to fay, * who dwells in the single isolated 
world, the place of mystery,’ in opposition to the go ~wbo matifests 
himself in divers worlds, to’Agrmt or Soma,in their yarious visible forme.’ 


fees ee CL, 


See La Religion Velinue, IIL. pp. 20—-25. 15 Savana interprets 
the first line somewhat differently : Thue do my son’ th® Bharadvajas 
worship the Gods with sacred rites and hymns.’ » ° 


! Pee Al 
1 Eye of Varuna and Mitra ; the Sun. 


620 THE AYMNS OF (BOOK V1." 


2 The Sage who knows these Gods’ three ranks and orders, and_. : 
all their generations near and distant, 
Beholding goud and evil acts of mortals, Sura marks well the 
doing of the pious. q 


3 I praise you Guards of mighty Law eternal, Aditi, Mitra, Varu- 
na, the noble, 
Arvaman, Bhaga, all whose thoughts are faithful : hither I 
wall the Bright who share in common. ; t 
4 Lords ef the brave, infallible, foe-destroyers, great King, be- 
stowers of“air homes to dwell in, ' 
Young, Heroes, ruling heaven withstrong dominion, Aditya’, 
Aditi I seek with worship. 


5 O Heaven our Father, Earth our guileless Mother, O Brother 
° seni, and ye Vasua, bless us. 
Gnant us, O Aditi and ye Adityas, all of one mind, your mani- 
told protection. 


.6 Give us nct up to any evil creature, as spoil to wéii or ‘she- 
wolf, Q ye Holy. 
For ye are they who guide aright our bodies, ye are thertlers 
of our speech and vigour. 


7 Let ug not suffer for the sin of others, nor do the deed which 

ye, O.¥,asus, punisn, : ; 

Ye, Universal Gods ' are all-controjlers : may he do harm unto 
himself who hates me. , 


8 Mighty is homage : | adopt and use it. Homage hath held 
: in place the earth and heaven. 
Homage to Gods ! Homage comands and rules them. I 
‘panish even commetted sin by homage. 


9 You Furtherers of Law, pure in your spirit, infallible, d wel- 
lers ift the home of Order, « 
To you all Heroes mighty and far-seeing I bow me down, O 
Holy Ones, with homage. | 


10 For these are they who shine with noblest spledour ; through 
all our troubles these conduct us safely — 


a“ @) 
2 Three ranks and orders: according to Savana, the three cognizable 


worlds or stations 4f the Gods, the garth of the Vasus, the firmament of 
the Rudras, and heaven of the Adityas Sura Surya; the Sun, 3 
ee share aug : tadhany a , acgouding to Sdyans, dhanasahitan, 

accOmpanied by whalth. i Let us not suffor for the sin of pn 
RO, Vit. 86 : : J,o0¢e us from 8INns Committed by our fathers.’ Ose 
par? also Tajttiriya- Brahmana, IIT. 7, 12. 2. cited by Muir,o g 7 
V. 66 ‘May Agni free me from the sin which my mother or my father 
committed when I was a babe tnborn,’, 


‘AY MN 52.) TARE RIGVEDA. 621 


~. Varuna, Mitra, Agni, mighty Rulers, true-minded, faithful to 
the hymn’s controllers. 
11 May they, Earth, Aditi, Indra, Bhaga,Pushan :ncrease our laud, 
increase the Fivefold people. 
Giving good help, good refuge, goodly guidance, be they our 


good deliverers, good protectors. ; 
12 Come now, O Gods, to your celestial station.: the Bhara- 
.  dvajas’ priest entreats your favour. e 
He, sacrificing, fain for wealth, hath honoured tye Gods with 
those who sit and share oblations e 


| 13 Agni, derive thou the wicked foe, the evil-hearted thief away, 
Far, far, Lord of the brave! and give us easy paths. 
14 Soma, these pressing-stones have called aloud to wig thee for 
our Friend. 
Destroy the greedy Pani, for a wolf is he. . : 


15 Ye, O most bountiful, are they who, led by, Indra, seek the 

» Sky. @ 
Give us good paths for travel : guard us*well at home. 

16 Now have we entered on the road that leads to bliss, without 


a foe, 
The road whereon a man escapgs all enenyes eand gathers 
wealth. 


e 
e 


HY MN? LII. V &vedevas, 


Tas I allow not in the earth gr heaven, at sacrifice or in 
these holy daties. e 

May tke huge mountain crash “him down; degraded bé 
Atiyaja’s sacrificing patron. 


10 The hymn’s controllers: ‘those who are prominent in (their) 
praise. — Wilson, *° 11 The fivefold Feople : pdncha jandh ; the five 
‘Arvan tribes ; ‘ the five orders of beings.’— Wilson, 12 This stanza 
is difficult, an I do not thoroughly endarasana it, 14 Pani: either 
one of the envious demons who eteal away the light, or the avaricious 
and niggardly trafficker who offere no sacrifioas to the Gods. 15 Ye, 
O Most Bountiful : all ye Gods. 16 *These ‘four concluding stanzas, 
in changed matres, are x prayergfor protection oh a journey. Professor 
Grassmann banishes them, tozather with stanzas®]1 and 12, to the 
Appendix as being in his opinidh later additions eo the 6 original hymn. 

Te neve 2 ® 

1 According to Sayana Rijigsvan cursea a rival Righi Atiyaja: but 
the name Ativaja (from att and yo7) seems to be employed expressly to 
signify one who over-eacrifices, that is, socrifices more than is neoersary 
or presoribed, superfiui-y, as well as deficiency, being a fault that causes 
a sacrifice to fail, See Ludwig, IV. 220. 


622 THE HYMNS OF (BOOR Vi. 


2 Or he who holds us in contempt, O Maruts, or seeks to blame, 
the prayer that we are making, 

May avonies of burning be his portion, May the sky scorch 
the mzgn wh» bates devotion, i 


3 Why then, O Soma, do they oall thee keeper of prayer ? why 
then our gaardian from reproaches ? 

Why ther beholdest thou how men revile us? Cast thy hot 

dart'at him who hates devotion, ; 


4 May Morhings as they spring to life protect me, and may the 
Rivers as they swell preserve me. 
My guardians be the firmly-seated mountains: the Fathers, 
when I call on Gods, defend me! 


§ Through all our days may we be healthy-minded, and look np- 
on the Sun when he artses. 
Grant,this the, Treasure-Lord of treasures, coming, observant, 
oftenest of Gods, with succour ! 


6 Most near, most oft ¢omes Indra with protection, and she, 
Sarasvati, who swells ‘with rivers: 
Parjanya, bringing health with herbs, and Agni, well lauded, 
swift to listen, like a father. 7 : 
7 Hear this'mipe invocatiop ; come hither, O Universal Gods. 
Be seated orf this holy grass, 


8 To him wh» comes to meet you, Gods, with offerings bathed 
in holy oil— 
Apprgach ye, one and all, to him. 
9 All Sons of Immortality shall listen to the songs we sing, 
nd be excceding good,to us. 


10 May all the Gods who strengthen Law, with* Ritus, listening 
to our call, e 
Be pleased with their appropriate draught, 


11 May Indra with the Marut host, Tvashtar,. Mitra, Aryamau, 
Accept the laud and these our gifts. 


12 O Agni, Priest, as rules ordain, offer this sacrifice of ours, 
Remembering the Heavenly Folk, 


3 Soma: the MaoneGod, ¢ 65 Tretsiere-Lard of treasures : Agni, 
from whom, or through whom, all blessings come to the pious. y 
Sons of Immorthlity “according to the Schohast, ‘vong of the immortal’ 
(Praja; ati, regardéd as the progenitor of Gods and men ) 10 With 


Ritus : together with the Seasons personified ; or, at the prescribed sea- 
sons, as Siyana explains. . . 


> MEMN 53.) THE RIGVEDA, 623 


ova Listen, All-Gods, to this mine invocation, ye who inhabit 
. heaven, and air’s mid-regions, 
All ye, O Holy Ones, whose tongue is Agni, seated upon this 
sacred grass, be joyfule 
. 14 May the All-Gods who claim our worship hear my thought ; 
May the two World-halves hear it, and the Waters’ Cijld 
Let me not utter words that ye may disregard, Closely allied 
with you may we rejoice in bliss. a 
15° And those who, Mighty, with the wiles of serpenty, were born 
on earth, in heaven, where waters gathejy— 
May they vouchsafe us life of full duration. May the Geds 
kindly give us nights and momings. 
16 At this my call, O Agniand Parjanya, help; swift to hear,my 
thought and our laudation + .& 
One generates holy food, the other ofispring, so grant.u: food 


\ 


enough with store of children. e ° 
1% When holy grass is streéwn and fire enkindled; with hymn and 
lowly homage [ invite you. . , 


All-Gods, to day in this our great assembly rejoice, ye Holy, 
in the gifts we offer. 


oe HYMN LIITI. »  Pdshan. 


e @ 
Lorp of the path, O Pushan, we have yoked *and bound thee 
fo our hymn, ° 
Even as a car, to win the prize. 
2 Bring us the wealth that men require, a manly magter of a 


house, 
Free-handed with the liberal mée@? . @ 
3 Even him who would not give, do *thou, O glowing Pushan, ‘ 
urge to give, ° 


And make the niggard’s Soul grow soft 


13 All.Gods: Visve devah, or Universal Goda. 15 With the 
wiles of serpents : dhimdydah ; yccording to Sayana, ‘ possesead of the 
wisdom or knowledge that kills.’ Cf I 3. 9, note. , 16 The other off- 
spring’: Parjanya, the personified Rain-cloud, produces corn and food 
offered in sacrifice, and Agui promotes the procreati8n of, children. 

® 


2 @ e ° 

1 Lord of the path : custodian of roads and guide of travellers. To 

wine the prize : or to win us wealth or food. 2 MaSter of a house : 

a householder who will institute sacrifices and liberali/y rewared the 
officiating priests. ° 


628 THE AYMNS OF (BOOR ¥2 


4 Clear paths that we may win the prize’; scatter our enemies aff* 
Strong God, be all our thoughts fulfilled, 

5 Penetrate with an awl, O Sage, the hearts of avaricious churls, 
And make them subject to our will. 

6 Thrust with thine awl, O Pushan : seek that which the nig- 

gard’s heart Lolds dear, : 

And make them subject to our will. 

7 Tear dp and rand in pieces, Sage, the hearts of avariciuus churls, 
And waka, .vhem subj-ct to our will, 

8 Thou, glowing “Pushan, carriest an awl that urges men to 


prayer ; 
Therewith do thou, tear up and rend. to shreds the heart of 
every one. ; . 


9 Thou bearest, glowing Lord ! a goad with horny point that 
guides the cows : 
Thence do we seek thy gift of bliss, 
10 And make this hymn of ours produce kine, horses, and ‘a wtore 
of wealth. 
HYMN LIV. Pishan, 
© Pusuay, bring us to the man who knows, who shel! direct 
us straipht, 
Aud say unto'us, It is here, 
2 May we go forth with Pashan who shall point the houses out 
to us, 
And say to us, These same are they, __ 
3 Unharined is Pishan’s chariot wheel ; the box ne’er falleth to 


the ground, 
Nor doth the loosened felly shake. , 

4 Win the prize : or, win ns wealth, or food. 5 With an awl: 
“with a goad.’— Wilgon. 9 Wh horny point: the exact meaning of 
of gdopasd is uncertain. Others explain it ag ‘director of cattle? «fur. 
nished with leatehern thongs ;’ ‘ cow tailed ’ This hymn and the 


five following have been translated by Dr. Muir, Original Sanskrit Texts, 
V. i76—180. Professor Peterson also vives & translation of Hymna 
LVIT in bis /ymns from the Rigveda , Bombay Sanskrit Series N, 
XXXVI) : ’ 

1 This stanza, Sayana says, is to be muttered by one who seeks hia 
logt property. * Tie m-n who knows: the wise man or wizard, 2 
These came are they : these are tte houses m which the stolen property 
iscencealed. | 3. The box : basket, or inner part of the car, Professor 
Willson, followipg Sayana, translates : ‘ ‘The discus of Pishan does not 
destroy ; its sheath‘is nob discarded, its edge harms not us.’ But the 
three things mentioned are evidently parte of Pishan’s chariot. 


" YMN 55] THE RIGVEDA. b25 


7. Pishan forgetteth not the man who serveth him with offered 


gift : 
That man is first to gather wealth. 
> May Poshan follow near eurkine; may Pdshan kcep our 
horses safe : 
May Ptishan gather gear for us, 
6 Follow the kine of him who fours libations out and worship 
thee ; 
Aftd ours who sing thee songs of praise. 
7 Let none be lost, none injured, none sink ina pit and break 
a limb. 
Return with these all safe and sound. 
8 Ptishan who listens to our prayers, the strong whose wealth 
is never lost, 


The Lord of riches, we implore. . 
9 Secure in thy protecting care, O Pishan, never "may we fail : 
*Weekere are they who sing thy praise. e 


10 From out the distance, far and wide, may @ishan strefoh his 
right hand forth, 
Mad drive our lost again to us. 


HYMN LV. Pashan. 

Son of deliverance, come, bright God! Let us twain ‘go to- 
gether : be our charioteer of sacrifice, 

2 We pray for wealth to the most gkilled of chariotesrs, with 


braided bair, 
Lord of gveat riehes, and our Friend. 


3 Bright God whose steeds age goats, thon art a stream of wealth, 


a treasure-heap, 
The Friend of every pious man. 


7 With these : cows. 3 We peay te Pushan for the safety of 
our property because he is the Lord of wealth; he himself Joses nothing 
oa is his, and he always listens to our prayers. , 

1 Son of Deliverance: that is,‘ Deli¥erer,’ one who gives men 
ample room and freedom. Sayana explains vimuch’ napat ia another 

- place as ‘ offspring of the cloud.’ Sea I. 42. 1. Here, jhe says, the 
meaning is, € son of Prajapaty, . whv at the! creation sefids forth from 
himeelf all creatures.’ Roth Sxplains vimtch as unYoking’ horses at the 
end of a journey. Paishan would then be ‘ the son of, ratuso,’ the God 
who brings travellers safsly home, which is one of his espgcial function. 
2 With braided hair : kapardinam ; an epithet of Rudra also.” See I. 
114. 1. Whose steeds are goats: of, I, 198. 4. 


79 ee 


wu ¢ 
626 TAE HYMNS OF [BOOK-VI,° 
4 Pa&shan, driveth goats for steeds, the Strong and Mighty, 
who is called 
His Sister’s lover, will we laud. 
5 His Mother’s suitor I address, May he who loves his Sister 
hear, Brother of Indra, and my Friend. 


6 May the sure-footed goats come nigh, conveying Piishan on 


~~ 
oy. 


his Car, 
The God who visiteth mankind, | 
ae HYMN LVI. Pashan. 


Waoso remembers Pashan as eater of mingled curd and mea! 
Need think no more upon the God. 
2 And be is best of chariotcers. Indra the hero's Lord, allied 
With him as ¥riend, destroys the foes. 
3 And there the best of charioteers hath guided through the 
speckled cloud 
The’ golden wheel of Sura’s car, 
4, Whate’er we speak this day to thee, Wise, Wondrvas Géd 
wnom many praise, 
Give thou fulfilment of our thought. 
6 Lead on this company of ours, that longs for kine, to win che 
spoil : thon, Pashan art renowned afar == 
6 Prosperity -ve crave from thee,afar from sin and near to wealth , 
Tending to ferfect happiness both for to-morrow and t- day, ° 


4 


4 His Sister’s lover : accoding to Sayana explains mdtur didhiahum 
agrdire’ patim, lord or husband of Nigks. Probably Surya is intended. 
See Bergaigne, Za Religion Vedique, II. 428. Compare also Book VI. 
48.°8. Brother of Indra: as an Aditya or son of Aditi. 6 Sure- 
footed : nisrimbhah ; this word does not occur elsewhere and ites 
meaning is uncertain Wilson renders it ‘ harnessed,’ and other explan- 
ations have been proposed, but as Dr. Muir observes : * All seems guess 
work.’ 1 Later of mingled curd and meal : karambhat ; korambha 
was some soft food, a eort of gruel, offered especially to POishan. 

I bave followed Professor Ludwig in my translation of thia difficult 
passage, the meaning seeming to be that in setting befora Pushan the 
food that be loves the worshipper hag done all that is necessary to 
secure his help. Sayana’s explanation is much the same if ‘a God’ be 
substituted for ‘ the God’ in line 2, thal is Pushan alone is sufficient : 
the worshipper necd think upon no other God. 3 Pushan seems 
to be intended. He is said to have driven the Sun’s wheel parushe gavi, 
literally, ‘ insthe brindled bull,’ meaning apparently, the speckled vloud, 
or train of variegated clouds. ‘He, the imapaller, the chiel ofcharioteers 
( Pushan ), ever urges on that golden wheel ( of bis car ) for the radi- 
ant eun,’— Wilson. Other think that the verse refers to Indra’s pressing 
down the, whedl of the Sun from the mountain of cloud and bringing 
back the light. See Peterson, Hymns srom the Aigveda, p. 171. 


AYMN 58.) THE RIGVEDA. 627 
AYMN LVII, Indra and Pushan. 


Inpra and Pashan will we cal! for friendship and prosperity 
And for the winning of the gpoil. 
2 One by the Soma sits to drink juice which the mortar hath 
expressed : 
The other longs for curd and meal. 
3 Goats are the team that draws the one: the other “bhajkh Bay 
* Steeds at hand ; 
With both of these he slays the fiends. 
4 When Indra, wondrous strong, brought down the streams, the 


mighty water-floods, ‘ 
Pushan was standing by his side. . 
9 To this, to Pushan’s favouring love, and Indr#s, may we elosaly 
cling, 


As to a tree’s extended bough. 


6 As one who drives acar Uraws in his reins, may we dray 
Pushan near, . 
And Indra, for our great success, 


HYMN LVIII. Pushan. 


@ 
LIKE heaven art thou : one form is bright, one boty, like ey 
anf Night dissimilar in oolour. 
All magic powers thou aidest, self-dependent ! Auspicieus cd 
thy bounty here, 0 Pishan. 


2 Goat-borne, the guard of Cattle, he whuse home fs pei 
inspirer of the hymn, set over all the world ; ® 
Brandishing hereand there his lightly*moving goad, eae 
every creature, Pushan, God, goes forth, 


3 O Pishan, with thy goldef ships that travel across the ocean, 
in the air’s mid-region, 
Thou goest on an embassy to Puy subdued by love, desirous 
of the glory. 


3 The fiends: the Vritras, the pemons of drought, or enemice 
general. 
1 One holy : : © venerable,’ AV ileon, This is apparerftly » euphemism. 
for , Panes Pushan is here, regarded ag the Sun peasend by day and 
even in his absence regulating the night also. Accdrdiung to Professor 
Ludwig, he is represented as the summer Sun and tha wintyr Sun. Thow 
aidest : ¢ thou exercisest.’— Muir. 3 Subdued by lovey of Suryg, 
the daughter of the Sun. See VI. 49. 8. Of the glory : of" winning Surya 
for hia bride, 


623 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VI. 


4 Near kinsman of the heaven and earth is Pashan, liberal, Lord 
of food, of wondrous lustre, = 
Whom strong and vigorous and swiftly-moving, subdued by 
love, the Deities gave to Sunya. 


HYMN LIX. Indra-Agni, 


I wit declare, while juices flow, the manly deeds that ye 
bave done : 
Your Fathers enemies of Gods, were smitten down, and, Indra- ¢ 
Agv:,«ye survive. 
2 Thus, Indra-A-ni, verily yourgreatness merits lofticst praise. 
Sprung from one common Father, brothers, twins are ye 5 your 
Mother is in every place. . 
3 These who mele Bh in flowing juice, like fellow horses at their 
» fod, 
Indra and Agni, Gods armed with the thunderbolt, we call this 
diy to come with help. 
4 Indra and Agni, Friends of Law,served with rich gifts, your 
: eech is kind 
To hina who pra.se you while these libations flow : that man, 
O Gods, ye ne’er consume. 
§ What mortal understands, O Gods, Indra and. &gns’ ‘this 
your, way is 
One of yok, yoking Stécds that.move to cvery side, advances |, 
_in your common ear. 


e 


4 The Deities gave to Sdirryd : ‘ the formula of the verse gives the 
idea rather of a birth than of a marriage, But Pushan is the lover of 
h¢a mother, V1. 55. 5: Suryé then might be the spouse as well as the 
mether of Pushan She is dotbtéessly also the sister with whom Pushan 
is united, VI. 55. 4, 5.—Bergaigna, La Religion V edipue, If. 425 

1 Your Fathers...... were smitten down: hatase vars pitaro y the 
meaning is obscure. Sayana explains piyiro ax Agaris or demons, deri- 
Ving the word from a roon pi, to injure: Tho Pitris the enemios of tha 
gods, have been slain by you ‘— Wilson, Prof. Geassmann roads, ¢ conj-e- 
turally, piyavo.’ * scornors,’ * instead of ‘the unsuitable pitaro’ Gods of 
an elder generation, tho fathe of Indra and Agni, appear to be inteadad, 
and the worda as they stand can fardly bear aay other meaniug Hataso 
then would mean, ‘ not wore slain,’ but were struck down, degraded, and 
deprived of their powor, like the earlier ELsllenic Gods, Profassor 
Ludwing suggests other possible axplanation, See also Bergaigne, La 
Religion Vedique,"IIt. 75, and Ehni,eDer Mythus des Yoma, p 80. 
2 One, common father : Dyaus According te Sayana, Proj. apatt, 
Your father fA(iti iatinite and omniprvent; “aocording to Sayana, inden 
tified with the wide-extended efrth. But ste Ehni, Der Mythus des 


Yama, p. 79. 4 Ye neer consume: Prof, Ludwig suggests the 
reading bhartgathah, ‘threaten,’ instead of bhasatah. 5 One of you : 


Indra, as the Suh whose horaes here are the spreading beams of lignt, 
pursues his appointed way throvgh heaven, 


HY MN 60, - THE RIGVEDA. 629 ; 


6 First Indra-Agni, hath this Maid come footless unto those 
with feet. 
Stretching her head and speaking loudly with her tongue, she 
hath gone downward tpirty steps. 


7 E’en now, O Indra-Agni, men hold in their arms and stretch 
their bows, 
Desert us not in this greatfray, in battles for the sake of kine, 
8 The foeman’s sinful enmities, Indra and Agni, Vex yee sore. 
Drive those who hate me far away, and: keep em distant 
from the Sun. 
9 Indra and Agni, yours are all the reac ane of the heavens 
and earth. : 
Here give ye us the opulence that prospers every living man, 
10 O Indra Agni, who accept the laud, and Near us for Dur “praise, 
Come near us, drawn by all our songs, tu drink ufe this our 
Soma juice, 
e e 


HYMN LX* Indra-Agni. 


He slays the foe and wins the spoil who worships Indra and 
“= Aggy! strong and mighty Heroes, 
Who rale as Sovrans over ample riches, victorious, showing 
forth their power in conquest ° °° 


2% battle now, O Indra and thou, Agni, for cows and-waterg,. 
sunlight, Sinica Mornings® 

Team-borne, thou makest kine thine own, O Agni, thou, 
Indra, light, Dawns? regions, wondrous waters, “~ 


3 With Vritra-slaying might, Indra and Agni, comedowh by 
homage, O,ye Vritra- slay ers. 
Indra and Agni, show yourselves among us with your supreme s 
and unrestricted boutties. 


6 This Maid : the text has only, the fgminine pronoun tydm (hacc) ; 
Ushas or Dawn is intended, /ootless ; moving unsupported in the sky. 
Cf. I. 152. 3, Stretching her head ¢ according to one of Sdyana’s explana- 
tions,, ‘having, abandoned the head, being herself headless,, which is 
hardly consistant with what foJows, TZharty st@ps®: the thirty divisions 
of the Indian day and night through which Dawn *passes befqre she re- 
apnen ey But cf. {. 123. 8. mE ra eae a’ prayer for aid in 
& Tray, : 


9 » 
2 Stolen Mornings : the Dawns and light that, hove bgen carried 
away and concealed by the Panis or demons of darkness, 3 Vritra: 
slaying : or, genvrally, ‘ foeqan-slpytng.’ 


630 THE AYMNS OF ; [BOOK V1. 


4 LTeall the Twain whose deeds of old have all been famed in 
ancient days ° 
O Indra Agni, harm us not. 


5 The Strong ths scatterers of theefoa, Indra and Agni, we 
invoke : 
May they be kind to one like me. 
6 They slay our Arya foes, these Lords of heroes, slay our Dasa 
foes ¢r 
‘And drive ovr enemies away. 
7 Indra and Agnis these our songs of praise have sounded 
forth to you : 
Ye who bring blessings ! drink the juice. 
8 Come, Indra-Agni, with those teams, desired of many, which 
ye have, 
O Heroys, "for the wershipper, 
9 With those to this libation poured, ye Heroes, pngra tens 
come : 
Come ye to drink tke Soma juice, 
10 Glorify tim who compasses all forests with his glowing flame, 
And leaves them blackened with his tongue. we! 


11 ne who gains Jndra’s blisg with = enkindled finds an easy 


bigcet b ce 
Over-the floods to happiness, 
12 Give uf fleet coursers to convey Indra and Agni, and bestow 
Abundant strengthening food on us. 
‘13 Indra and Agni, I will call you hither and make you joyful 
fithtthe eifts I offer. 
© Ye Twain are givers béth of food and riches: ta win me 


6 strength apd vigour I invoke you. 
14 Come anto us with riches, come with wealth in horses and 
in kine. 


Indra and Agni, we invoke you both, the God, as Friends for 
friendship, bringing bliss. : 


15 Indra and Agni, hear his catl who worships with libations 
poured. 
Come and enjoy the’ offerings, drink the sweetly-flavoured 


Soma juice. ° « 
& 


10 Glorify : sddreseed to the stotar or praise-singer. 11 Over 
the flooda : the dangers and troubles that bar his way. 12 To convey 
Indra and Agni: to bring you, Indfa pnd Agni, to our sacrifice. 


FIY MN 61.) TAE RIGVEDA, 631 
HYMN LXI. Sarasvati- 


To Vadhryasva when he worshipped her with gifts she gave 
fierce Divoddsa, canceller of debts. 

Consumer of the churli8h niggard, one and all, thine, O 
Sarasvati, are these effectual boons. 


2 She with her might, like one who digs for ‘lotus-stems, hath 
burst with her strong waves the ridges of the +ills. 

- Let us invite with songs and holy hymns for help Sarasvati 
who slayeth the Pardvatas. “4 


3 Thou castest down, Sarasvati, those who scorned the Gods, 
the brood of every Brisaya skilled in magic arts. 
Thou hast discovered rivers for the tribes ‘of men, and, rich in 
wealth ! made poison flow away from them. : 


4 May the divine Sarasvati, rich in her wealth, protect us well, 
Furthering all our thouchts with might; . - 

8 Whoso, divine Saravatj, invokes thee where the prize is set, 

* fike Indra when he smites the fog - 


6 Aid us, divine Sarasvati, thou who art strong in wealth and 
power : 
theabishan, give us opulence. 
7 Yea, this divine Sarasyati, terrible with her goldtn path, 
Foe-slayer, claims our eulogy. sia 
8 Whose limitless unbroken flood, swift-moving with,a rapid— 
rush, 
Comes onward with tempestuous roar. 


9 She hath spread us bsyond all foes, beyond her Sisters, Holy 
One, As Surya spreadeth out the days. 


1 Vadhryasva : a celebrated Rishi. See X. 69. She: Sarasvati, the 
River-Goddess. Give : as # son, Cancellen of debts: acquitting, by his 
birth, the debt which his father owed to his progonitors, the religious 
Obligation of begetting a son who should perform the ceremonies which 
they require. Churlish niggard : who.offernno sacrifices. The meaning 
of avasam is uncertain. Sdyana explains it as gratiflying himself only 
Professor Ludwig regards it, as compounded of a — vasd = thin or 
meagre. Z'hese effectual beons : the gift of & son. 2 She: Sarasvati 
as the river. The descriptin givey in the text car hardly apply to the 
small stream generally known under that nama; end from this and 
other passages which wil] be noticed as they oocr it? seems probable 
that Sarasvati is also another name of Sindhu or*the Indus. See Zimmer 
Altindisches Leben, pp. 6 tl. Pardwatas : sea V. 52. ll, 3 Every 
Brisaya : every demon like Brisaya, who is said to hava been the father 
of Vritra See I. 93. 4, dich in wealth : vijinivati : atcording’to Sdyana 
‘ giver of sustenance.’ 9 Her sister : the other rivers of the Panjab, 


632 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VI. 


10 Yea, she most dear amid dear streams, Seven-sistered, gracious- 
ly inclimbed, 
Sarasvati hath earned our praise. 


11 Guard us from hate Sarasvati, she who hath filled the realms 
of earth, 
And that wide tract, the firmament ! 


12 Seven-sistered, sprung from threefold source, the Five Tribes’ 
| -progsyerer, must be 
Invoked Ya-every deed of might. 


13 Marked out by majesty among the Mighty Ones, in glory 
swifter than the other rapid Streams. 
Created vast for victory like a chariot, Sarasvati must be ex 
tolled by every sage. . 


14 Guide us, Sarasvati, to glorious treasure : refuse us not thy 
milk, nor spurn us from thee. 
Gladly accept our friendship and obedience : let us not go from 


‘ 


, thee to distant countries, ae 


«e 


HYMN LXII, Asvins. 


I LAUD the Heroes Twain, this heaven’s Controllers** singing 
with songr‘ef praise I ¢all the Asvins. 

Fain in a moment, when the morns are breaking, to par’ the 
“cs earth’s ends and the spacious regions. 


2 Moving to sacrifice through realms of lustre they light the 
« radiance of the car that bears thom. 
Traversing many vide trmeasured spaces, over the wastes yc 
pass, and fields, and waters. 


3 Ye to that bounteous path of yours, ye mighty, have ever 
burne away our thoughts with horses, 

Mind-swift and full of vigour, that the trouble of man who 
offers gifts might cease and slumber. 


12 Sprung from threefold source: ‘ abiding in the three worlds,’ 


that is, pervading heaven, earth, and hell, according to sayaua, like 


Ganga in later times : 
3 


1 To part the earth's ends : as herals of light to define the limits of 
earth and sky and 60 separate one from the other. 3 This stanza 
is very obscure. Sdyana’s paraphrase is inconsistenh with tho plain 
meaning of several of tne words°of the text. * Fierce Aswins, from 
that humble mgneior to which (you have-repaire), you have ever borne 
with your desirable horses, as swift as thought, the pious worshippers 
in some manner (to heaven) : Let the injurer of the liberal man (be 
consigned by you) to (final) repose,’— Wilson, 


HY MN 62.) THE RIGVEDA, 633 


4 So ye, when ye have yoked your chariot-horses, come to the 
hymn of the most recent singer. 
Our true and ancient Herald Priest shall bring you,the Youth- 
ful, bearing splendour, food, and vigour. 


5 With newest hymn I call those Wonder-Workers, ancient and 
brilliant, and exceeding mighty, 
Bringers af bliss to him who lauds and praises, bestowing 
varicd bounties on the singer. 


6 So ye, w ith birds, out of the sea and waters ‘bores Patiya, son 
of ‘T ugca, through the regions. 
’ Speeding with winged steeds through dustless spaces, out of 
the bosom of the food they bore him. ° 


? Victors, car-borne, ye rent the rock asunder’; ; Bulls, heard the 
calling of the eunuch’s consort. : 
Bounteous, ye filled the cow with milk for Sayu : thus, awift 
and zealous Ones, ye showed your favour. °® 


8 Werete’er from olden tifhe, Heaven, Earth! *existeth, grpat 
object of the wrath of Gods and mSrtalg, . 
Make that, Adityas, Vasus, sons of Rudra, an evil brand to © 
e,.one allied with demons, 


9 May he’who knows, as -Varuna and Mitra, air’s realm, ap- 
pointing both the Kings in seasea, . 
Aeminst the sccret fiend cast forth his weapon, against the 
lying words that strangers utter, P oa 
10 Come to our home with friendly wheels, for OnSprtne ; come 
on your radtaut chariet rich in heroes. : 
Strike off, ye Twain, the heads wf our assilants who mith 
man’s treacherous attack approach us, 


11 Come hithcrward to us with toams of horses, the highest and 
the midmost and the lowest. 
Bountiful Lords, throw open to the singer the doors e’en of 
the firm-closed stall of eattle. 


6 Bhujyw : see J. 116. 3—5. 7 The eunuch’s consort : Vadhri- 
mati Seo I. 116 13 Sayw: see I, 116 22. 9 Mitra and Varuna 
apprar here as comprehended” ina third* God, who must be the Asura 
Dyaus He, comprising the heayen of night as well as the heaven of 
day, assigns 00 Mitra and Varuna the charge, reapectively of day and 
night: See Ludwig’s Commentaty, 10 Foreffspring : tinaydya ; 
to vive us offspring. The ssoond line of*the stanin might ba rendered : 
‘Turn back, yo Twain, the heads, with secret onslaught even of those 


who seek to harm the mortal,’ 1-1 Zhe highest and the midmoat or 
the lowest : or, as Proféssor Ludwig translates: “the earliest, the 
midmoet, and tke latest.’ ® : 


80 ee 


634 TAE AYMNS OF [BOOR VI. 


HYMN LXIII, Asvins, 


Warne hath the hymn with reverence, like an envoy, found 
both fair Gods to-day, invoked of many— 

Hymn that hath brought the two Nasatyas hither ? To this 
man’s thought be ye, both Gods, most friendly, 


2 — a to this mine invocation, lauded with songs, that 
y drink the juices, 
eae this house to keep it from the foeman, that none 
may force it, either near or distant, 


3 Juice in ne hath been prepared to feast you : for you 
the grass is “strewn, most soft to tread on. 
With, lifted hanes your servant hath adored you. Yearning 
for you the press stones shed the liquid. 


4 Agni uplifts nim at your sacrifices : forth goes the oblation 
dropping ol and glowing. 
Jp stands the gratefu!-minded priest, elected, appointed to 
invoke the two Nisatyas. 


5 Lords of great wealth ! for glory Sirya’s Daughter, mq ed 
your car that brings a handred succours. 
Famed fur your magic arts were ye, magicians! amid the race 
of Gods, yo dancing Heroes ! et 


6 Ye Twain, with these your glories fair to look on, brought, to 
win vitory, righ gifts fer Sgrya. 
After you flew your birds, marvels of beauty : dear to our 
hearts ! the song, well lauded, reached you, 


@ diay your winged coursers, best to draw, Nasatyas ! convey 
° you to the object of your wishes, 
Swift as the thought, your car hath been sent onword to food 
of many a sort “and dalnty viands, 


8 Lords of great wealth, manifold ig your bounty : ye filled our 
cow with food that never faileth, 
Lovers of sweetness! yours are praise and singers, and poured 
libations which have sougnat your favour. 


9 Kither wens or distant : neighbour or stranger. 3 In wide 
room ! where ''\~ 18 emple spaee for the sacrificial ceremonies, 5) 
Srarya’s Daw. .te> see T. 116. 17, Dancing Lferoes : ye who dance 
through the an OF. VIIT, 20. 22, and ‘Day’s barbinger somes dancing 
from the easy’ (Miiton—-Song On May Morning). 6 ich gifts for 
Survd ; whu chuse the Asving tu be ber husbands. 


HYMN 64) TAR RIGVEDA. 635 


9 Mine were two mares of Puraya, brown, swift-footed ; a hur 
dred with Sumicha, food with Peruk. 
Sanda gave ten gold-decked and well-trained horses, tame and 
obedient and of lofty stature. 
10 Nadsatyas ! Purupanthis offered hundreds, thousands of steeds 
to him who sang your praises, 
Gave, Heroes! to ils singer,Bharadvaja. ¥ e Wonder- Workers, 
Jet the fiends be slaughtered. 
11-May I with princes share your blizs in freedom." 


HYMN LXIYV: - Dawn, 


 ] 


Tar radiant Dawns have risen up for glory, in their white 
splendour like the waves of waters, 
She maketh paths all easy, fair to travel,” and, righ, | hath 
shown herself benign and friendly, 
2 We see that thou art "good : far shines thy lustre ; thy sean 
thy splendours have flown up to heaven. ° 
* Decking thyself, thou® makest bare thy bosom, shining in 
majesty, thou Goddess Morning. 9 
3 Red are the kine and tuminous that bear her tbe Blessed One 
who spreadeth through the distance. 
“Thee: she chaseth like a valiant archer, likea wat warrior 
she repelleth darkness. : 
4 Thy waysare easy on the hills : thou pastest. Invincible ! 
Self-luminous | through waters 
So lofty Goddess with thine ample pathway, Daughter Ox ' 


Heaven, bring wealth to give ue comfort. 
i he oo a = sates Senn 


REGGE ne edna acne eS 
This and the following stanza eulogize the liberality of several 
wealthy institutors of sacrifice ; but it is difficult to make outswha? were 
the gifts they gave as the verses are filled with epithets without nouns, 
Vacdave, mares, suits the dual epithets rayrdé, and raghvé, brown and 
swift. After satém, a hundred. Sgyane supplies gdvah, cows. Instead 
of ‘ well-trained’ Sadvana’s rendering igs ‘handsome,’ and he supplies 
csvdn, ‘horses,’ er wathdn, ‘chariots’ for the absent noun ‘ Obedient, 
gallant, and well favoured servants’ woulgl represent his rendering of 
the last half-line of the stanza, The translations given by Professors 
Ludwig and Grassmann differ fronf each*other and from Sfyana’s ver- 
sion. As Professor Wilson remarks: ‘ If we render the stanza literally, 
itis utterly unintelligible : tae greater part of the Sdkéa is very obscure.’ 
Puraya, Sumidha, and Peruka are the names ef jibgral patrons. 10 
Purupanthds : another of thes? generous nobles, Tn tbis case 3van iim, 
of horses, appears in the texts. ll Yous Biss j the felieity which 
the Agvina bestow. Lees 


8 e 

1 Dawns: the plural may be honorific, or*may dignify Dawn and 
her rays of light, 3 Warrtor : borne on a chariot’ ¢4 Through 
waters ; of the firmament, 2 ‘ 


636 TAE AYMNS OF (BOOK VI. 


Dawn, bring me wealth: untroubled, with thine oxen thou 
bearest riches at thy will and pleasure ; 
Thou who, a Goddess, Child of Heaven, hast shown thee 
lovely through bounty when we called thee early. 
6 As the birds fly forth from their resting-places, so men with 
store of food rise at thy dawning. 
Yea, to thee liberal mortal who remaineth at home, O God- 
dess Dawn. much good thou bringest. 


are HYMN LXV, Dawn. 


SneEppINe her ght on human habitations this Child of Heaven 
hath called us from our slumber ; 
She who at night-time with her argent Instre hath shown her: 
self e’en through the shades of darkness, 
2 All this with reu-rayed steeds have they divided : the Dawns 
on bright cars shine in wondrous fashion. 
They. bringizg near the stately rite’s commencement, drive 
far away the night’s surrounding shadows, 
3 Dawns, bringing hither, to the man who worships, glory and 
power and migut and food and vigour, 
Opulent, with imperial sway like heroes, favour your seryant 
and this day enrich him. oo 
4 Now is there treasure for the man who serves you, now for the 
hero, Dan’rs ! who brings oblation ; 
Now for the singer when he sings the praise-song. Even to 
' one like me ye brought aforetime. 
5 O Dawn who standest on the mountain ridges, Angirases now 
_ praise thy stalls of cattle, : 
With prayer and holy hymn they burst them open : the 
* herves’ calling on the Mods was fruitful. 


6 This stanza ocours in a bymn to Dawn ascribed to the Rishi 
Kaksbivan, I. 124 12. With store of food : piiubhajah, ‘enjoying or 
sharing food,’ is explained by Siyana as annasyopayakah, ‘who have to 
gain their sustenance’ The wealthy may be meant, who share their 
store with others and must vork tn replenish it. Zhe liberal mortal: 
the man who sacrifices to the Gods. To bring out this meaniwe mora 
clearly the last may be translated: ‘To him who stays at home and 
pours oblations, O Goddess Dawn, thou givess ample riches.’ 


1 Al night-time x ap allusion, perhaps, to the ‘false dawn’ before tha 
appearance of the real dawn, although this faint glimmer can hardly 
be called lustre. Or the light of stars: ey be intended, a6 belonging 


to Dawn rather than to Night. . 2 Avl this.. _hawe they divided : : 
separated light: from darkness. The stately rite: the Acnibotra, or 
great morning deur ificu. 5 Agnirases here pravse: ‘ What we ara 


doing here *s in teatity only a repetition of whav the eenuranenre did in 
aneient times.’— Lydwig. w 


AYMN 66.) THE RIGVEDA. 637 


6 Shine on us as of old, thou Child of Heaven, on him, rich 
Maid ! who serves like Bharadvaja. 
Give to the singer wealth with noble heroes, and Upon us bestow 
wide- -»preading glory. 


HYMN LXVI. Maruts. 


E’en to the wise let that be still a wonder to which the gene- 

* ral name of Cow is given. : 

The one hath swelled among mankind for milkipg : > Prisni 
hath drained but once her Pai bright uddér. 


2 They who like kindled flames of five are glowing, the Maruts, 
twice and thrice have waxen mehty. : 
Gdiden and dustless wre their cars, mvested with theiy great 
strength and their heroie vigour. 


S They who are Sons of the rain-pouring Rudra, svhom the long- 
lasting one had power go foster : 
"The Sichty Ones whose germ great Nother Prisni is known 
to have received for man’sadvantaye. ® 


4 They shrink not from the birth; in this same manner still 
Peete there they purge away reproaches, 
When they have streamed forth, krilliant, at bheix pleasure, 
With their own splendour they bedew their Lvtics. 


® Even those who bear the brave bold name of Maruts, Whom 
not the active quickly wins Tur milking. 
Even the liberal wards not off those fierce ones, tuose who are 
light and agile in their greatness. 


6 Bharatvija: Pha great ancestor of the priestly family of which 
the Itish! of the hymn was a mginber. 

1 This meaning may be that while things of different nature are 
designated by the name of Cow, ‘all that is 61) “oalled has a claim to our 
wonder and admiration. The Cow of earth ‘yields her milk frequently 
and in abundance: Prisoi, the Cow o€ thee firmament, has given milk 
but once, when she brought forth her offspring the ‘Maruts. ‘Once 
ovly Prigni’s milk was shed : ng second, after thig, is born’ (VI. 48. 22). 
Savana’s interpretation Is utterly inconsistent with »be plain meaning 

of the words of the texb. 2 'wice and thrice”: perhaps i in relation 
to earth and heaven, and to earth, tirmament, and haven, od Still 
vesting there: while yet unborn they free their mother from the reproach 
of barrenness. 5 Wits for milkiny : persuaties to grant his peti- 
tions. The version of the s-cund line is merely, oonjyctural as the 
meaning of staundh (oxplaine -d by Sayan’ as—astenah, robbers) i 18 uoknown 
‘The liberal donor nacities the angry Maruts who are otherwise in 
theic might the resistless plunderers (cf their wealth).’*-Wilson, 


38 TAE BYMNS OF [BOOR V1. 


6 When, strong in strength and armed with potent weapons> 
they had united well-formed earth aud heaven, . 
Rodasi stood among these furious Heroes like splendour shin- 
ing with her native brightness. 


7 No team of goats shall draw your car, O Maruts, no horse; 
no charioteer be he who drives it. . 
Halting nof, reinless, through the air it travels, speeding 
alongats paths through earth and heaven. 


- 8 None’ w.ay obstruct, none overtake, QO Maruts, him whom ye 
succosr in the strife of battle. 
For sona and progeny, for kine and waters : he bursts the cow- 
‘ stall on the day of trial, 


9 Bring a bright hymn to praise the band of'Maruts, the Singers, 
7 ranid, strong‘in native vigour, 
Who conquer mighty strength with strength more mighty : 
eavth shakes im terror at their wars, O Agni. 


10 Bright like the flashing flames of sacrifices, like tongues of fre 
' impetuous in their onset, 
Chanting their psalm, singing aloud, like heroes, splendid from 
birth, invineible, the Maruts, os” 


a 
11 That swelling band I call with invocation, the brood of Rudra, 
armed With glittering lances. 
Pure hymng are meet for that célestial army : like floeds and 
swouantains have the Strong Ones battled. 


Sa HYMN LXV. Mitra-Varuna, 

Wow Mitra: Varuna shall be exalted high by your songs, noblest 
of all existing ; ’ 

They wha, as ‘twere with reins are best Controllers, unequalled 
with their arms to check the people. 


6 Unsted : by obscuring the horizon with eloud and rain. 7 
No feeble or ordinaty team wust convey you; no common eharioteer 
must drive your chariot. 8 Bursts the cow-stall : carries away tha 
enemy's cattle. 13 Stuginy alowd : ‘causing their opponents to 
tremble,’ according to SAyana, who derives the word from the root 
dh, to shake. Derivec from dhvan, to sound, dhttnayah means singers, 
musicians, minetre!'s, leaders of the wild music of the wind and storm 
(sturmer.— Ludwig Sve Vedische Suudiean, I. 269. ll Ltke floods 
end mountains: perhaps, with the impetwosity of rushing watere and 
the firm strength of rhouataina, But the foehning of this last half-line, 
as of many other passages of the hymn, is very obscure. The byma 
has been translates. and thoroughly discussed by Peter von Bradke 
(Festgruga an¢R, von Roth, 1893,cepp. 117%—125). See also Vedic 
Hymn, I. 368— 372 (Sacred Books of the Hast, XX XII). 


HYMN 67)] TAE RIGVEDA. . 639 


2 To you Two Gods is this my thought extended, turned t) the 
sacred grass with loving homage. 
Give us, O Mitra-Varuna, a dwelling safe from attack, which 
ye shall guard, Boon-Givers ! 
3 Come hither, Mitra-Varuna, invited with eulogies and loving 
adoration, 
Ye who with your own might, as Work-Controllers, urge even 
. men who quickly hear to labour. , 


4 Whom, of pare origin, like two strong horses, AdiX? hore as 
babes In proper season, 
Whom, Mighty at your birth, the Mighty “Goddess brought 
forth as terrors to the mortal foaman. * 
0 As all the Gods in their great joy and gladness gave you with 
one accord your high dominion, 
As ye sarround both worlds, though wide and spucioas ‘your 
spies are ever true and ne'er bewildered. 


6 So, through the days mafntaining princely power, ye prop the 
height as ’twere froin loftiest heaven. 
The Star of all the Gods, established, filleth the heaven and 
searth | with food of man who liveth. 


7 Take the strong drink, to quaff till ye are aated, when he and 
his attendants fill the chamber. - 
Tlit young Maids brook not that none seeks to win them ;when, 
Quickeners of all! they scatter moistare, 


8 So with your tongue come ever, when your envoy, faithful 
and very wise, attends our worship. 
Nourished by holy oil! be this, your glory: annihilate the 
sacrificer’s trouble. 
9 When, Mitra-Varuna, they strive against you a break the 
friendly laws ye have éstablished, 
They, neither Gods nor men in estimation, like Api’ sons have 
godless sacrifices. , 


5 Your spies: messengers or angels, provably the rest of the Adity- 


as. See 25. 13. 6 The height: the high ridge cr summit of 
heaven. Zhe Stur of all the Gads: represantiuy all the Gods: the Sun, 
He draws up the watere which descend to fertilize the earth, 7 


He: the worshipper , or, perhapy, Soma. The Chamber of sacrifice. 
The Young Mars: the water, pecessary for the prepasatiun of the 


Soma libation, is ready and impatiently waiting to be used, 8 Wath 
vour tongue. Agni, by whuse tongue of fire they Gonsume the oblations. 
V aviv envoy: Agni. 9 Dike Apv's sone: ‘sone of the Waterg ’— 


Grassmann. The meanipg is uncertain. Gudless sao fives : unabvended 
by Gods, and therefore fruitless, 


640 THE HYMNS OP [BOOR V1. 


10 When singers in their song uplift their voices, some chant the 
Nivid texts with steady purpose, 
Then may we sing you laud: that shall be fruitful : do ye not 
rival all the Gods in greatnegs ¢ 
11 O Mitra Varuna, may your large bounty come to us hither, 
near to this our dwelling, 
When the kine haste to us, and when they harness the flcet- 
foot mettled stallion for the battle. 


0 ; 
*y HYMN LXVIILI. THavacv arin: 


6é 
His honvurings rite whose grass is trimmed is offcred swiftly 
to you. in Manuw's wise, accordant, 
The rite which Indra-Waruna shall carry this day to high 
success and ‘glorious issue. 
* 3 a y . 
2 For &t Gods’ worship they are best through vigour; they have 
bawome the strongest of the Lleroes ; 
With mighty strength, most liberal of the Princes, Chiefs of 
the host, by Law made Vritra’s’slayers, te. ° 
: r e . . 
3 Praige those Twern Gods for powers that merit worship, Indra 
and Varuna, for bliss, the Joyous. 
Oae with his might and thanderbolt slays Vritra i_th-. «other 
as a Sage stands near in troubles. 
4 Though das&es and me have waxen strong and mighty. and 
all the Gods self-praised among the Heroes, 
- Ye, Indra-Varuna, have in might surpassed them, and thus 
were ye spread wide, O Marth and Ileaven. 
5 sigheeous is he, and liberal aud helpful who, Indra- Varuna, 
brings you gifts with gledness 
Phat bounteous man through food shail conquer focmen, and 
win him opnience and wealthy people. 


6 May wealth which he bestow in fuod and ir: asure on him who 
brings you gifts and sacrifices, 
Wealt. Gods! which breaks the* curse of those who vex us, 
be, Indra-Varuna, een our,own possession. 


ee ee 


10 Nivid teats: short fotimulafies of Invocation inserted in a liturgy 
11 When the kine haste to ws : when the cattle of the men whom we are 
pbout to attack are ready and, eager to be carri-d off. Sayana’s intar- 
pretation of the lagt |jne is totally diffurent : ‘ when (your) praiges ara 
uttered, and the sacrificers add in the Yeremony the Soma that Inspires 
straighiZorwardnegs and resolution, andis the showerer (of benetits),'— 
Wilson, rs i o-.’ 


nee 


3 In troubta&: ‘in deeds of might.’.—Ludwig. ‘ With snares, or 
nooses, acgording ta Professor Geldner,» Vedische Studien, I. 142. 4 
Sel/-praised : on account of their ova deeds, or their own nature. 


HYMN 69.) THE RIGVEDA., 641 


7 So alse, Indra-Varuna, may our princes have riches swift to 
save, with Gods to guard them— 
They whose great might gives victory in battles, and their 
trrumphant glory spreads | with swiftness. 
8 Indra and Varuna, Gods whom we- are laading, mingle ye 
wealth with our heroic glory. 
May we, who praise the streagth of what is .mighty, pass 
dangers, as with buats we cross the waters. 


9 Now will I sing a dear and far-extending hymna to Arana 
the God, sublime, imperial Lord, 
Who, mighty Governor, Eternal, as with flanfe, illufnines both 
wide worlds with majesty and pgwer. ° 
10 True to Law, Indra-Varuna drinkers of the juice, drink this’ 
‘pressed Soma which small give you raptgrous joy. 
Your chariot cometh to the banquet of the Gods, to sacrifice, 
as it were home, that ye may drink. 
11 Jndyajand Varuna. drinls your fill, ye Heroes, of this in- 
vigorating sweetest Soma, 
This juice is shed by us that ye may quaffeit : on this” eee 
qaed grass be seated, aud rejoice you. : 


HYMN LXIY¥. Jadra-Visna, 
‘ @ 


InprA and Vishnu, at my task’s completion I urge you On « 
with food and saered service. 
Acept the sacrifice and grant us riches, leading us,on by 
unobstructed pathways. es 


2 Ye who ipsprre all hymns, Indra and Vishnu, ye vessels who 
contain the Soma juices, 
May hymns of praise that now are sung address you, the lauds 

that are recited by the singers. 


3 Lords of joy-giving draughts, Indra and Vishnu, come, giving 
gifts of treasure, to the Suma. ° 

With brilliaut rays of hymns let chanted praises, repeated 
with the lauds, adorn and deck you. 


ev 
8 Of what is mighty apparently, riches. » 9 This stanza, 
in honour of Varuna alone,.appears tu be the heginaing of another 
byma. Professor Grassmane bAnishes stanzas 9 agd 10 to his Appendix. 


1 At my tasks completion : when aj) arrangements f8r the sacrifice 
have been made. 2° Who in&pire : literally,‘ janstaba. By the sing- 


rs: or, vith taudation. , e e 
° 6 ‘ 


Sl @ ee 


642 THE AY MNS OF [BOOR VI. 


4 May your foe-conquering horses bring you hither, dndra and 
Vishnu, sharers of the banquet. 
Of all our hymns acept the invocations ; list to my prayers 
and hear the songs I| sing you. 


6 This your dead, Indra-Vishnu, must ba lauded : widely ye ° 
strode in the wild joy of Soma. 
Ye made the firmament of darger compass, and made the 
regions broad for our existence. 


6 Stre.zthened with sacred offerings, Indra-Vishnu, first eaters, 
served with worship and oblation, 
Fed with the noly oil, vouchsafo us riches: ye are the lake, 
the vat that holds the Soma. 


7 Drink of this meath, O Indra thou, and Vishnu; drink ye 
your fill of Sama Wonder-Workers. 
The sweet exhilarating juice hath reached you. Hear ye my 
prayers, give ear unto my calling. 
8 Ye Twain have conquered, ne’er have ye been conquered ; 
never hath either cf the Twain becn vanquished. 
Ye, Indra-Vishna, when ye fought the battle, produced this 


infinite with three divisions, 
: eh © 


HYMN LAX, Heaven and Earth. . 


Fiu..8p full of fatness, compassing all things that be, wide, 
spacious, dropping meath, beautiful in their form, 
- The fleaven and the Earth by Varuna’s decree, unwasting, 
_ ich in germs, stand ‘parted cach from each. 
2 The Everlasting Pair,‘with full steams, rich in milk, in their 
pure rule pour fatness for the pious man. 
Ye who are Regents of this worla, O Earth and Heaven, pour 
into us the genial flow that prospers men. 


3 Whoso, for rightcous life, pours offerings’ to you, O Heaven 
and Karth, ye Hemispherés, that man suceeds. 


é 


8 Produced this infinite : brought into existence the world with 
all its creatures, the “three divisions being heaven, firmament, and 
earth. Sea Profeseor Wilson’s note for Sdyana’s explanation of the 
passage. The deities are Dyavaprithivi, that is Dyaus, Heaven, . 


and Prithivi Earth, combined in a compound dual. 


N 

1 Full of fatness : containing ghréta, ght, clarified butter, fatness 
in general, eSpecially the fertilizing rain. 3 Ye Hemispheres : 
dhishane.; tw? bewls. ‘Pirm-set,—~-Wilson. By law in the curse of 
nature, 


HYMN 11.) THE RIGVEDA. 643 


He in his seed {s born again and spreads by Law $ from you 
flow things diverse in form, but ruled alike, 


4 Enclosed in fatness, Heaven and Karth are bright therewith : 
they mingle with the fatngss which thoy still increase. 
« * Wide, broad, set foremost at election of the priest, to them 
the singers pray for bliss to further them, 


5 May Heaven and Earth pour down the balmy ‘rain for us, 
, balm-dropping, yielding balm, with balm upon yeur path, - 
Bestowing by your Godhead sacrifice and wealth, gre.t fame 
and strength for us and good heroic might, ‘ 


6 May Heaven and Earth wake food swell plenteonsly for us, 
all-knowing Father, Mother, wordrous if their works, ° 
Pouring out bounties, may, in union, both the Worlds, all- 
beneficial, send us gain, and power, and vealth, a. xe 


HYMN LXXI., Savitar. 


e 

Fuut of effectual wisdom Savitar the God bath stretched out 
golden arms that he may bring forth life. *° ie 

Young and most skilful, while he bol§s the region tp, the 
Warrior sprinkles fatness over both his hands. ° 

2 Mays. enjoy the noblest vivifying fsres of Savitar the God, 

that he may give us wealth ; P 

Foy thou art mighty to produce and lull to resttho world of 
fi that moves on two feet and on four. 


[3 Protect our habitation, Savitare this day, with guardian aida ° 
around, auspicious, firm and true, 
God of the golden tongue,*keep us for newest bliss: let wot 
tlhe evil-wisher have us in his power. > e 
4 This Savigar the God, the golden-haifded, Friend of the home, . 
hath risen to meet the twilight. 
With checks of brass, with pleasant tongue, the Holy, he sends. 
the worshipper rich gifts in plenty, 


e e 
4 Set foremost at electron of the prteet : ‘first propitiated at the 
gacritice. :— Wilson. e e 


1 Savitar : the Sun as the “great candrator ‘or vivifier, Sprinkles 
' fatness : Professor Ludwig thinkg that this may lee Somewhat ironteal. 
* €Phe god sprinkles bis bands, probatly, as & preparagion for the hand 
work which he is about ta perform ; but there is an urmelaflying thoughs. 
that a good deal of the fatiess [in the® shape ofefertilizing rain| also 
fale dow tothe encth: 4 To meet ths twilight : ab the close of 
night — Wilson. Cheeks of brass 4 dyohanua ; according to Saya na, 
© golden jawed,’ : ‘ 


y? 


644 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK -VI. 


5 Like a Director, Savitar hath extended his golden arms, ex- 
ceeding fair to look on. 
He hath gone up the heights of earth and heaven, and made 
each monster fall and cause fiom troubling 


6 Fair wealth, O Savitar, to-day, to-morrow, fair wealth produée 
for us each day that passes. 
May wo thtough this our sosg be happy gainers, God, of a 
fair end spacious habitation. 
HYMN LXXII Indra-Soma. 
Giles: this might of yours, Indra and Soma: the first high 
exploits were your own achievements. 
‘Ye found the sun, ye found the light of heaven : ye killed all 
darkness and the Gods’ blasphemers. 


2 Ye,,Indra-Somy, gave her light to Morning, and led the Sun 
on high with all his eplendvar. 
Yestayed the heaven witha supporting pillar, and spread 
abroad, apart, the Earth, the Mother. 


3 Ye alew the flood-obrtructing serpent Vritra, Indra and Soma : ; 
Heaven approved your exploit. 
Ye urged to speed the current of the rivers, and many seas 
have ye filled full with waters. comaiiil 


4 Ye in tae poripe uddegs of the milch-kine have set the ripe 
milk, Ifiidra, thou, and Soma’ i . 
Ye have held fast the unimpeded waiteness within these many- 
cvloured moving creaturés. 


9 Verily ye bestow, Indra and Soma, wealth, famed, victorious, 
passing to our children 
*Ye Lave invested men, ye "Mighty Beings, with manly strength 
that conquers in thé battle. “ i 
HYMN LXXIIL. '  Brihaspati. 
SERVED with oblations. first-bori, mountain-render, Angiras’ 
son, Brihaspati, the Holy, 
With twice-firm path, dwelling’in light, our father, roars 
loudly, as a ball, to Earth and Heaven. 


ee, 


5 A Director ;a priest ‘who directs others Or, perhaps, ‘an Invoker,’ 
as Professor Ludwig suggests. Hach monster : every terror of the nigho. 
Sayana’s interpretation of the last line %s totally different ; ‘and, mo- 
ving along, deligh*s avery thing that is.’— Wilson. 

Y 

4 Ye in the anripe uddars : the usripe, that is raw, udders are con- 
trasted with the warm milk that is cook'd or matured in them. See I. 
629. The unimpeded whiteness : the milk which is not prevented from 
flowing. The®clour’ of the milk,is contrasted with the culour of the 
cows thas produes ib. iF < 

Ll Brthaspat; : Lord of Prayer ; the Deity ia whom the action of the 


AYMN 15.) THE RIGVEDA. 645 


2 Brihaspati, who made for such a people wide room and verge 
when Gods were invocated, 
Slaying his enemies, breaks down their castles, quelling his 
foes and conquering those who hate him. 


3 Brihaspatiin war hath won rich treasures, hath won, this God, 
the great stalls filled with cattle. 
Striving to win waters and light, resistlesss Brihaspati with 


lightning smites the foeman. ° 


6 


HYMN LXXIV. ; »Soma-Rudra: 


Hop fast your God-like sway. O Soma-R&dra : fet these our 
sacrifices quickly reach you. , i 0 
Placing in cvery house your seven great treasures, bring bless- 
ing to our quadrupeds and bipeds 7 0 
2 Soma and Rudra, chase to every quarter the sickness that 
hath visited car dwelling. é 
Drive Nirriti away into the distance and give us excellent 
*afid happy glories. ° ‘“ 
3 Provide, O Soma Radra, for our bodies all needfal medicineg 
to heal and cure us. : 
“Seimfrge and draw away the’ sin committed which we have 
still inherent in our persons. P 
4 Armed with keen shafts and weapons, kinde’and loving, be 
gracious unto us, Soma and Rudra ‘ 
Release us from the noose of Varyna ; keep us from sorrow. iff 
your tender loving-kindness, 


HYMN LXXV. Weapons of War, 
Tue warrior’s look is like a thynderous rain-cloud’s, 


armea with® mail, he seeks the lap of battle 


Be thou victorious with unwounded body : so let the thickness 
of thy mail protect thee, 


2 With Bow let us win kine, with Bow the battle, with Bow be 
victors in our bot encounters, 


e 
when, 


worshipper upon the Gods is personiaed See l 14. 3. Mountain-renders ; 
‘Brihaspati cle/t the mountain’ (I 62 3) Dwelling tn light: or, per- 
haps, in the Sun. The meanjng of prdyharmagid is uncertain. 

Such a people: 80 good a people When Guus were tnvocated : in battle. 
3 With liyhtneny: or with Suntight: ‘with sacred prayers '— Wilgo 


1 Quadrupeds and bipeds Yor, ‘blese all of w&, men “and four footed 
creatures ’ 2 Nirriti: the Gudd-sg of Death and Destruction. 
4 The noose of Varuna: Varuna, the moral Governor eof the world, is 
represented as armed with a napse of lasso for the Qabpure and destruc- 
tion of the wicked. 


646 THB AYMNS UP [BOOK VI 


The Bow brings grief and sorrow to the foeman : armed with. 
the Bow may we subdite all iegicns. | 
3 Close to higear, as fain to speak, She presses, holding her 
well-loved Friend in her embraces. 
Strained on the Bow, She whispers like a woman—this Bow- 
string that preserves us in the combat, 


4 These, mecting like a woman aud her lover, bear, mother-like 
their child upon their bosom. 
May the two Bow-cnds, starting swift asunder, scatter, in unl- 
son, the, foes who hate us, 


5 With many a son, father of many daughters, He clangs and 
‘clashes as he gous to battle. 
‘Slung on the back, pouring his brood, the Quiver vanquishes 
all opposing bards and armies. 


6 Upstapding in the Car the skilful Charioteer gnides his strong 
Horses on wdithersoc’er he will. 
See and admire the strength of those controlling Reins which 
‘from behind declare the will of him who drives. ae 


q Horses whose hoofS rain dust are neighing loudly, yoked to 
the Chariots, showing forth their vigour. 
With their forefeet descending on the foemen, thaywitver 
flinching, trample and destroy thei. 


e 
8 Car-bearer *&*the nama of his oblation, whereon are laid,his 
Weapons and his Armour. , 
™ So let® us here, cach day thatspasses, honour the helpful Car 
with hearts oxceeding joyful. 


9 Li sweet association lived the fathers who gave us life,profound 
‘andsstrong in trouble. ~ * 

- Unwearied, armed with‘shafts and wondrous weapons, free, 
real herocs, conquerors of armies, 


3 She: the bowstring.  ‘//er well-loved friend: tho arrow. Whis- 
pers like a woman : ‘iwangs like the scream of a woman.’—Muir, But 
the faint eound made by the etring while ip is baing drawn to the ear ig 
intended. Homer likens the sound to the voice of a swallow. 4 
Thesa: the two ends of the bow.” Like a woman and her lover: or, 
‘jrawing close lika two women to their lovers.’ Zhetr chili: the arrow, 
5 With many a aon: the quiver ig called She farher of sons and daugh- 
ters, it is said, becawie dhe words. signifying arrow are both masculina 
and feminine. 8 Cur-bearer 1 ratharihanam: a platform, stand, 
or truck’ on which the,chariot is places when not in usa The word 
geems in this placa to moan aleo the oblatiot ‘affered by the warriog re 
the ideal war-chariot personified, or to a tubelary deity of chariots. 9 
There is no verb in “this stanza, and the only substantive, pitdrah, 
fathers, is explaikeé by both Commentators as pdlayitdrah, guards, de- 
fenders, that is, apparently, those who attend the chariot of the chief. 


HY MN 15] THE RIGVEDA. 617 


10 The Brahmans, and the Fathers meet for Soma-draughts, and, 
graciously inclined, unequalled Heaven and Karth. 
Guard us from evil, Pishan, guard us streugthener’ of Law: 
let not the evil-wisher Jiaster' us. 


11 Her tvoth a deer, dressed in an eagie’s feathers, bound with 
cow-hide, launched forth, She flieth onward, 
There where the heroes syfecd hither and thither, there may 


the Arrows shelter and protect us, ° 
13 Avoid us thoa whose flicht is straicht, and lef, our ae be 
as stone. 


é 
May Soma kindly speak to us, and Aditi protect us well, 


13 He lays bis blows upon their backs, he deals his blows upon 
their thighs.’ 


Thou, Whip, who urgest horses, drive Redieis horses dn the 
fray. é 
14 It compasses the arm with serpent windings, fending’ away the 
e « feiction of the bowsing : 


So may the Brace, well- skilled in al? its Jaties, cuardnanfully 


the man from every quarter. ‘ 


15. Now to the Shaft with venom smerred, tipped with deer-horn, 
wit® iron mouth, 


Celestial, of Parjany’s s seed, ba tlas creat adgeation paid. 


“TO*L8 sed from the Bowstring fly away, thou Arrow, ens 
by our prayer. 
Go to the fooman, strika them home, and Ice not ang be left 
alive. 
—t—* eee Tr 
a 
Professor Wilsorf, following Sayana, translates: ‘Tbe guards (of the 
chariot), revelling in the savgury (spoil), distributors of food, protectors 
in calamity, eae with spears, resolute, beautifully arrange d, strong 
in arrows, Invineible, of heroic valour, robust, and conqueror. of nume- 
rous hoste.’ 10 Lhé Bramans and the Vathern ;or, perhaps, the sucer- 
dotal Fathers, The stanza, which ig. gramihatically difficult, seems out 
of place. ll LHer tooth a deer g the @oint of the arrow is made of 
s piece of deor’s horn attached to the shaft with leather strings. Tha 
butt of the arrow is fathered. 13 He the whip. 14 Zt: 
the brace or guard worn on “the archer’s left. arm, fastened on with 
leather straps. 15 Woth penom smeared : bythe Laws of Manu, 
that is, the ideal Code of tne Maacvae Kshatriyas were forbidden to 
poison their arrows. Arrows afpear to have been of fwo kinds, one, 
the older and less affective, “tipped with deer-homm, and the other with 
iron mouth, pointed with ayas, bronze or iron. Cplesti of Parjanya’s 
seed : made of the tall raeds that grow in the rains ae the influence 
of Parjanya the God of the rain-cloud. 16 Sharpened by*our prayer t 
‘ whetted by charm.’—eWilson. @ ' ° 


648 THE HYMNS OP (BOOR V1. 


17 There where the flights of Arrows fall like boys whose locks 
are yet anshorn. 
Even there may Brahmanaspati, and Aditi protect us well, 
protect us well through all our days. 
18 Thy vital parts I cover with thine Armour : with immortality 
King Soma clothe thee. 
Varuna give ‘thee what is more ‘han ample, and in thy triumph 
may the Gods be joyful. 
19 Whoso wauld kill us, whether he be a strange foe or one of us, 
May all the Gods discomfit him My nearest, closest Mail is 
prayer, 
17 Like boys whose locks are yet unahorn : ‘the point of the com- 
parison is not very obvious, but it may mean that the arrowe fall 
where they list, as bofs before they are lef: with the lock of hair, before 
the religwus tongure, play abvur wherever thoy like.’— Wilson. Profe-sor 
Roth separaes v.sikha from kumiadrd, and translates ;* Where the 
arrows fly, young,and old : that iv, feathered ani unfeathered ’ 18 
Thy, vital pa ts: the var.nvan, o- coat of mail. prutec'ed the shoulders, 
back, ch'-st, and lowe. parts of the body If not made of metal, i 
was strengthened anc adorned with metal of some kind The Indiany 
in the arfny of Xerxes are said by Herodotus to have worn clothes,made 
out of the bark «f trees ( VIL. 65); but he probably meadt the com- 
mon soldiers onfy, and not the chiefs For a full desoriptin of the 
arms, offensive und defensive, used in Vedic times, sew Muir. A © 
Texts, V4B9 ; Allindixches Leben, pp. 293--301 ; or Dautt's History of 
Covelrzation in Anctent Ludia, I p 88. 


ee 


APPENDIX I. 
Pace 174, Hymn CXXVI. 


I subjoin a Latin version of the two stanzas omitted in my 
translation. They are in a different metre from the rest of the 
hymn, have no apparent connexion with what precedés, and look 
hike a fragment of a liberal shepherd’s love-son$. The. seventh 
stanza should, it seems, precede the sixth: © : 


6 { Ile loquitar ]. Adhaerens, arcte adhadgene, ila quae’ 
mustelae similis se abdidit, multum humoren effandens, dat mihi 
complexuum centum gaudia. ° ° 


- @« 8 e 

7 [ Illa loquitur ], Prope, prope accede ; molliter me tange.. 
Ne putes pilos corporis mei paucos esse 3 tota sum villogs. sicut 
Ganchesidum ovis. 


__Professor Ludwig thinks that Yaduri (multqm humorem, 
4. e, senfen genitale, effundens) may be the name Sf's, slave- girl, 
Gandharidun ovis : a ewe of the, Gandharis. The coungry of 
Gandhara is placed by-Lassen to the west of the Indus and to the 
south of the Kophen or Kabul river. King Darius in ae rogk- 
inscription mentions the Ga(n) dara’together with the H4(n)du 
as people subject twhim, and the Gandarii, together with the 
Parthians, Khorasmians,Sogdians, and Dadikae, are said by Hero- 
dotus to have formed part of the army of Xerxes, The name of 
the country is preserved in the modern Kandahar. See Muir, 
O. 8. Texts, 11, 342, and Zimmer, ‘Altindigches Leben, p. 30. 


PAGE 243, Hymn =e 


e ® 

The deified object of this ae hymn is said tg be Rati or 
.Love, and its Rishis or antlfors are popamudya, Agastya, and 4 
disciple. Lopamudra is represented as inviting, the caresses of 


her aged husband Agastya, and confplaining of iseoldness and 
neglect. Agastya respogds in stanze 3, and in the second. half of 
82 


650 APPENDIX 1. 

stanza 4 the disciple or the poet briefly tells the rusult of the 
dialogue, Stanza 5 is supposed to be spoken by the disciple 
‘who has overheard the conversatiun, but its connexion with the 
rest of the hymn is not very apparent. In stanza 6, ‘ toiling 
With strong endeavour’ is & paraphrase and not a translation of” 
the original kKkanamanah khanttrath (ligonibus fodiens) which 
Sayana explains by ‘obtaining the desired result by means of 
auds‘and sacrifices.’ 


M. Rergaigiie is of opinion that the hymn has a mystical 
meaning, Agastya being :dentifiable with the celestial Soma 
whom Lopamudra. representing fervent Prayer, succeeds after 
long labour in drawing down from his secret dwelling place. See 
La RévigionVidique, ii. 394 f, 

1,‘ Through many autumns have I toiled and laboured, at 
night and mo-n, through age-inducing dawnings. 
Old age impairs the beauty of our bodies. Let husbands still 
come near unto their spouses. ” 
2 For even the men aforetime, law-falfillers, who with the Gods | 
declared ternal statutes, ae 


3 Nun inutilis est labor cui Dii favent : nos omnes aemulos et 
acmulas vincamus. 

4 Cupido me cepit illius tauri [viri) qui me despict, utrum hine 
utrum illinc ab aliqua narte nata sit. 


‘Lopsmudra taurum [raritum suum] ad se detrahit; insipiens 
illa sapientem anhelantem absorbed. 


5 This Somu I address that is most near us, that which hath 
been imbibed within the spirit, 
To pardon any sins we have committed. Verily mortal man 
is full of longings. 
6 Agastya thus, toiling witu strong endeavour, wishing for 
children, progeny and power, 


Cherished—a sage of mighty strength—both classes, and with 
the Gods ok‘a‘nd his prayer’s fulfilment. 


By ‘both classes* probably priests und ‘princes, or institutors 
of sacrifices, are meant, M. Bergaigne uuderstards the expre- 
ssion to mean the two forms ur essences of Soma, the celestial 
and the terrestrial, 


APPENDIX II. 
METRE. 


Rhyme is not used in the Rigveda The metres are regulated 
by the number of syllables in the stanza, which eonsis¢s general- 
ly of three or four Padas, measures, divisions,or quarter verges, 
with a distinctly marked interval at the end of the second Pada 
and so forming two hemistichs or sami-stanza@ of equal er une- 
qual length. These Padas most usaally contain eight or elaven.or 
twelve syllables each ; but. occasionally they consist t of fewer 
and’sofhefimes of more than these numbers. The Padas ofea 
stanza are generally of equal length and of fore or less corres- 
ponding prosodial quantities ; but sometimes two or more kinds of 
metre are employed in one stanza, and then the Padas vary in 


‘ quantity andlength. Asrégards quarftity, the fing syllables of 


f 
f 


\ 
? 


the Pada are not subject to very strict laws but the last.four- 
are more regular, their measure béing generally iambic i? Pedas. 
of eight and of twelve syllables and trochaic in those of eleven. 
In the printed text the first and seeqnd Padas from one lin @,. 
and the third, or third, fourth, and fifgh, complete the Gistich. 
or stanza, This arrangement I have followed in my translation, 

e . ; 

Subjoined, in alphabetical arrangement, are the names, with. 

brief descriptions, of the matres used in the Hymne of the. 
Rigveda. The Index of Hymns will chow the metre or metres 
employed in each, Hymn, 

® e i 
Abhisarini : a species of Trishtup, ja which iwo Padas ocntain 


twelve instead of enee vw ablec, ° 


Y Rpucnean or erie coondeling of fonr Padas of eight syl- 
lables each, two Padas forming adine. This is tHe prevailing: 
form of metre in the Manaue -dharma-sastra, the Mahabharata, 
the Ramayana, and the Pardnas. ‘ 


652 APPENDIX II. 


Anushtubgarbha ; a metre of the Ushnih class; the first Pada 


containing five syllables, and the three following Padas eight 
syllables each, 


Anushtup Pipilikamadhya : a species of Anushtup having tha 
second Pada shorter than the first and third (8 syllables — 4— 
8—8). © c 


_ Ashti': consisting’ of four Padas of sixteen syllables each, or 
sixtyfouf syllables in the stanza. 


Astarapankti : coasisting of two Pada of eight syllables each, 
followed by two Padas of twelve syllables each, 
4 


Attdhriti : four Padas of nineteen syllables each, = 76 syllables. 


Atijagats ' four Padas of thirteen syllables each, 


Ww 


Atinichrit : consisting of three Padas containing repectively 
peven, six, and seven syllables. 


co ] 


Atisakvart : four Padas of fifteen syllables each. 
Atyasht : four Padas of seventeen syllables each. 


Brihaté : four Padas (8 — 8 — 12 — 8) containing 36 syllables 
cn the stanza. 


© | 
Chaturvinsatika Doipada : a Dvipada contuining 24 syllables 
instead of 20, 


Dhriit : consisting of seventy-two syllables in a stanza. 


Dvipada Viraj : a species of Gayatri consisting of two Padas 
only ( 2 — 8 — or 10 — ]0 syllables) ; inadequately repre- 
sented in the translation by two decasyllabic iambic lines. 

Ekapada Trish 


itup : a Trishtup consisting of a single Pade or 
quarter stanza, ; 


Ekapada Viraj 2a Viraj consisting'ofa single Pada. 
Gayatri : the stanza usually consists of twenty-four syllables, 


variously artanged, but generally as a triplet of three Padas 
of eight syllables each, or ta one line of sixteen syllables and a 


Ly METRE. 653 


second line of eight, There are eleven varieties of this metre, 
and the number of syllables in the stanza varies accordingly 
from nineteen to thirty-three, 
e 
Jagata : a metre consisting of forty-eight syllables arranged in 
four Padas of twelve syllables each, two Padas forming a line 
or hemistich which in the franslation is represented by a doa- 
, ble Alexandrine, : 


Kakup or Kakubh: a metre of three Padas,consigting of eight, 
twelve, and eight syllables respectively. : 
e e 


Kakubh Nyankusira: consisting of threg Padas of 9412-4 
sy liables, e ee 


é 
Kriti: a metre of four Padas of twenty syllables each? 


=» oe °® @ e 
Madhyejyotis: a metre in which a Pada of eight syllables stands 


between two Padas of twelve. ? 


Mahabrthati: four Padas of eight syllables each, followed by 
one of twelve. . e o ° 

EP © : ee 

Mahapavapankti : a two-lined metre of thirty-one syllables, t 
first line consisting of four Padas of five sy\lables eath and t 
second being a Trishtup of the usual eleven syllables, See 
Vedie Hymns, Part I. (S. Books of the East, XXXII}, p:Xeviii. 

oe @ i“ e 


Mahapankti : @ metre of forty-eigit syllables (8x6 or 12x 4h 
Mahasatobrihati : a longtheued form of Satobrihati. 
Nashtarupi ;: a variety of Anushtup, 

Nyankusarini ; a metre of fou? Padas of 8+12+48+48 syllables, 


Padanichrit: a variety 8f Gayatriein which one syllable is want- 
' ing in each Pada : 7x3 21 syllables, « ° 


Padapankti: a metra*sonsisting, of five,Padas of five syllables 
each, 


Pankti } a metre of five octosy lables Pados, fike Anushtup with 
an additional Pada. - e s = 


& 


\ 


654’ APPENDIX II. 


Panktyuttara : a metre which ends with a Pankti of 5x5 sylta- 
bles. 


Pipilikamadhyo : any metre the middle Pada of which is short- 
er than the preceeding and the following. . 


Pragatha: a metre in Book VIII. consisting of strophes combin- 
ing two vetses, viz. a Brihatior Kakup followed by a Satobri.. 
‘hati. . 


+S 


( 
Prastarapankti : a metre of forty syllables : 12--12+8-+48, 


Pritishtha : a metre of four Padas of four sy!lables each ; also & 
varrety-of the Gayatri consisting of three Padas of eight, 
seven, and six.syllables respectively, 

( a 


Purastadbrihati+: a variety of Brihat? with twelve syliables. 
in the first Pada. 


Pura-ushnih : a metre of three Padas, containing 12 + 8 + 8 


C 
Sakvary: a metré of four Padas of fourtcen syllables each, 


Satobrihatt : a metre whose even Padas contain eight syllables 
each, and the uneven twelve: 12 + 8 + 12 + 8 = 40, 


Skartlhogriva : consisting of four Padasof 8 + 1248 + 8 
syllables. . : 


' Tanusira : consisting of three Padas of 11 -+ Il + 6 syllables. 
Trishtup or Lrishtubh : a metre of four Padas of eleven sy lla- 
bles each. 


Uparishtadbrihaté : consigting of four Padas of 12 + 8 + 8 
+ 8 syllables, 


Uparishtajjyotis : a Trishtup stanza the last Pada of which 
contains only eight syllables: ¢ 


Urdhvabrihatt : & vaciety of Brihati: 


Urobrihati,: a variety of Brihati : 8 + 12 + 8 + 8 syllables, 
€ 


Ushniggarbdhka : a Gayatri of three Padae of six seven, and 
eleven syllables respectively. * ¢ : 


METRE. . 655 
Ushnih : consisting of three Padas of 8 + 8 + 12 syllables. 


ans >a species of Gayatri: 6 + 7+ 8 = ¥1 sylla- 
es, 


Viparita : a metre of four Padas resembling Vishtarapankti, 


Viradrupa : a Trishtup metre of four Padas, 11 # 11+ 11 + 
7 or 8 syllables, 


Viraj : a metre of four Padas of ten syllables each. . 
Viratpurva : a variety of Trishtup. 
Virutsthana : a variety of Trishtup. 


Vighagnapada : metre of*uneven stanzas. - 
Py . 
Vishtarabrihaté : a form of Brihati of four Padas conéaining8 + 
10 + 10 + & — 36 syllables. . ' 
~*~ e@ 


Vishtarapankti : a form of Pankt consistingeof four Padas 
B+ 12+ 12 + 8 — 4 syllables, , 


e @ 
Yavamadhya :a metre having a longer Pada between two 
shorter ones. 


Hijmn. 


1 Madhuch- 
chhandag. 
% The same. 


D eaecee 


10 : 


wi Jetar or Jata, ...... 


12 Medhatjthi. 
13 The same. 
eer 


23 Medhatithi. 


24 Sunabgepa, 
25 The same. 
AG sarees 


83 


Risht. 


INDEX OF HYMNS. 


BOOK 1. : 
@ 

Deity. . Metree 
Agni. Gayatri. 
Vayu. Indra- Varun’. 
* Mitra-Varuna. The same, 
Asvins. Indra. Visvedevas. .-. os 

Sarasvati. 
Indra, es ° 
Indra. * wieaeee 
Indra, Marute, Indra amd ,..... 
Maruts. < 
Indtu j= agrees 
The same, j= assess 
eeeeee we oe 9 
satis : Anu@isup. 
. Tha same, 

Agai. : Gayatri. 
Apris. The same, 
Visvedeves. = — —— senaee 


Ritus. Indra. Maruts. Tvash- 
tar. Agni, Mitra- Varuna, 

Asvius. 

Indra. Sueawe. ug 
[odra-Va?una Gayatri. 4,5 Padauithrit. 
Brabmanaspati. Indra and Gayatri. 

- Soma. Dukshina. 


eertcee 


Agni aud Maruts. §& The same. 
Ribbus. ‘ . 
Indra: Agai, 


Asvins. Savitar. Agni. In. 
drani, Varunani, asd Ag- 
navi. "Heayen and Earth. * ° 
Earth. Vichow. ® 


Vayu: [ndra-Vayu. Mibra- Ghyatri. 19 Pure. ushnih 
Vartina. Visvedevas. %0 Anushtup. 21 Pra- 
Pachan. Waters. tishthay22-24 Anushtup. 


Varuna. Agni. Savitar, Trishtup, 3-5 Gayatei, 


Varuna. ; Gayatri. 
Agbi. . 9 The same. 
oo ee 


Rrehks. 


27 Sunahsepa 
28 The same 
yee 
BO" ceaieee 


31 Hiranyaewpa 
32 The samy. 


36 Kan~a. 


37 The same 


een eevee 
Geeove 


44 ‘Praskanva. 


«45 The same. 


Ol Savya, 


Oh arene 


58 Nodhag, 
59 Tha eame, 
OOo scence : 


@ovene 


IBDEX OF HYMNS 


Deity. 


Indra. Visvedevas. 
Indra Pestle and Mortar. 


- Indra, c 


lndra. Asvins. Ushas. 


Agni. 

Jadra. 

The same. 

Asving, 

savitar. Apni Mitra-Va- 
tana, Night. 

Agni. 13 - 14 Sacrificial 


Post. 


Mavut. 
M: rute 
The same. 


Brahmanaspati. 

Varuna -Mi.ra Aryaman. 
Adityas, 

Pushan. 

Jiudra, Mitra. Varuna. 
Soma. 


Agni. 
Agni 


Asvins. 
The same, 


Ushas. 
The sam, 
Surya, 
Indra. 
The same, 


Agni, 
Agni Vaisvansra. 
Agni, 


_ Todra 


The saria 


Metre. 


Gayatri. 13 Trishtup. 

Anushtup, 7 9 Gayatri. 

Pankti, 

Gavatri, 1] Padanichrit.16 
Trishtup. 


Jagati. 8, 16, 18 Trishtup 
Trishtup. 
The same, 
Jagati. 9 and 12 Trishtup. 
Trishtup. 1 and 9 Jagati. 


Brihati, & Satobrihati 
alternately, 
Gayatri. 


The same. 
Brihati and Satobribati 
alternately. 


The same. 
Gayatri. 


e SB 


The same. 
Gayatri 9 Anushtup, 


Bribati and Satobrihati. 
alternately, 

Anushtup, 

Gayatri. 

Bribati and Satobribati. 

alvernately. 

The came. 

Anushtup. 

Gayatri 10-13 Anushtup. 

Jageti. 14.15 Trishtup 

Jugati 13 and 15 Trishtup. 

Jagati 10 and 11 Trishtup 

Jagati. 6,8,9,11 Trishtup. 
Jagati, 

The same. 


Jagati. 6-9 Trishtup. 
Trishtup 
The same, 


O@egees 


—_— 


4 
§ Risht. 


63 Nodhas. 


™ 64 The same 


65 Parasara. 
66 The same, 


"3 woe ee ‘ 
74 Gotama. 
75 The same. 


a5 Gotama. 
86 ‘I'be sant. 
Si cass 

BS ciesoient 


BO. .ssnee 


93 we cece 
94 Kutsa. 


95 The sama. 


INDEX OF HYMNS. 


Deity, 


Indra. ” 
Marute. 
Agni. 

The same. 


eeetee 
eveves 


eoaoenea 


aoe 608 


Tndra. . 


Maruts. 
ne same. 


* Visvedevas. 


The same. ; 
Soma. 


Ushias. *\ aving 


® 
Agni Soma, 


658: 


Hetre. 


Trishtup. 

Jagati. 15 Trishtup. 
Dvipada Viraj. 

The same, 


Trishtu p. e 
The same. 


ono. ® 

Gayfori. 7 » 
The same, 
Trishtus. ® 

The eamg. 

Gayatri. ’ 


4.3 d'rishtup. 4-6 Ushnih. 


bad 


7-12 Gayatri, * 
Pankti. 
The sama, . 
Pankti ao Jagati. 
Jagati, 
1-6 Anushtup. 7-9 Ushnih, , 
10 12 Panksi; 13°15 Ga- 
yatri 1618 Teishtup. 19 
Brihati, 20 Satbbrihati. 
Jagati. 5and 12 Wrisktup. 
Gayatri. , 
Jagati 
1 and 6 Prastarapankti. 5 
Viradrupa 2-4 Trishtup. 
Jagati. 6 Viratethana, 8-10 
Trishtup. 
Gayatri. 9 Anushtup. 
Trishtup. 5 16 Gayatri, 17 
UVelinih. 
Jagati, 6-12 Trishbup. 13- 
18 Ushuih, 
Anuahtup. 9-11 Gayatri. 
{-7 ahd 12 Trishtup. 8 
°Trishtup and Jagati, 


Agni Gods. Mitea, Varuna, Jagati. 15 aod 16 Tei- 


Aditi, Sindbu, Heaven and shtup. 


Earth, 
Agni. » 


Trishtap. 


660 INDEX OF HYMNE, 


’ 


gS 
= Rishi. Deity. Metre. 
sa] 
96 Kutsa. Agni. t Trishtup, 
97 The same. The same. Gayatri, 
ee acs Trishtup. 
99 Kasyapa. Sein The same. 
100 Rijrasva, and Indra. eaeees 
Otherg, : 
101 Kutea, ' The same. Jagati. 8-12 Trishtup, 
102 Thesane, ‘ Jagati. 11] Trishtup. 
LOG: esccuta Trishtup. 
104 i. aaies The same, 
105 The same, or” Visvedevas. Pankti 8 Mahabriha- 
Trita Aptya, Vamadhya 19 Trigh- 
o tup. 
106 Kutsa The same. Jagati. 7 Triehtup, 
107 The same. ee Triehtup., 
BOE sere: Indra-Apui, The same, | 
109 © ‘The same, 
110 Ribbus. Jagatii 8 and 9 Tri- 
. shtup. 
Lily 0036 The same. Jagati S Trishtu p. 
112 Kutsa,' Heaven and Kerth, Jagati 24 and 25. 
Asvins. Agni. Trishtup. Gt a 
lloras ose Ushas. Ushas and Night. Trishtup. 
4... Rudra,’ Jagati. 10 and 11 
Trishtup. 
Ws ot, Surya Trishtup. 
11¢ Kakshivan Acving, The same. 
117 The same. The sam@,  easeeees 
118 seeeeeee rr 
see Jagati. 
DaVigeshoss jo ‘Gaau 1, 1012 Gayatri, 9 
Kakup, 3 Kaviraj. 4 
‘Nashtarupi. 5 Tanu- 
. sira. 6 Ushnih. 7 yj. 
shtarabrihati 8 Kriti, 
9 Viraj. 
D121 see Visvedevas or Indra, Trishtup, 
OD espace Visvedevas Trishtop, 5 and 6 
Viradrupa, 
123 Ushas. Trishtup. 
128 cae. The same. Trisbtup. 
1 re Svanaya. Trishtup, 4,5 Jagati, 


126 Kakskivan, 


Bhavayavya, Romasa. C 


127 Paruchcbhepa. 
128 The same, - 
129 @beresie 


Bhavayavya. Romasq. Trishtup. 6 and 7 


Anushtup. 
Agni, '  Atyashti. 6 Atidhritj. 
The sume. Atyashti. 
Indra. Indu..§ | Atyashti 8,9 Atiga. 


kvari. 11 Ashti. 


£ 
= Rishi. 


INDEX OF HYMNS. 


Daity. 


130 Paruchchhepa, Indra. 


131 The same 


~~» 9. 


141 The same. 
142 


@eeesvrse 


weoase 
@eeoetee 
@eneren 
eaenerve 
a2eo een 


151 eee e8 > 


ees Ooo 


1 
eee 8 te 


140 Dirghatamas. 


The same. 


Indra. Indra & Parvata. 


lndra. 3 


Vayu. 

Vayu. Vayu and [ndra. 
Mitra and Varuna. 
Mitra and Varuna,’ 
‘Pushan. 


Visvedevas. Mitra and 


Varuna Asvins Indra Trishtup. 
Indra . 
and Agni. Bribhaspati, 


Agni. Maruts. 


Agni, 


The same. 
Apris. Indra. Agni, 
Agni. . 
The same,’ 


Peegse 


@eseveaen 
eer eve t > 


Mitra Mitra & Varuna. 


Mitra and Varuna. 
The same, 
Vishnu. 


* Vishnu afd Indra. 


Visbnu. , 
Vishnu. 
Asvine. 
The same, 
Heaven and arth, 
The same, , - 
Ribhbus. 
Eulogy. of the Horas, 
The same. 


' Jagati. 


661 
Metre. 


Atyashii. 10 Trieshtup. 
Atyashti. 

The same. 

Trishtup. 2-4 Anushtup. 
5 Gayatri. 6 Dhriti. 7 
Atyashti, J 


Atyashii. 6 ‘Ashti. 

Atyaéhti. 7! 8 Ashti. 
Atyashti. 7 Trishtup. , 
Atisakvari. 
Atvashti. ; 
Aty&shti. 9 Brihati: 11 


} 


4 


10 Trishtup or 
Javati. 12, 13,Trishtup. 
Jagati. 12, 13 Trishtup. 
Anushtap. 

Jagati. 8 Tidshtup. 
Juagati.o | 

Jagati. 5 Trishtup. 
Trishtup. ) ’ 
The same. 

Viraj, 

Ushnih. : 
J acati. 


e@enees 


J agai. 


The sama. 

Jagati. 5, 6 Trishtup, 

‘Trishtup. 6 Anushtup. 
agati. 

THe game. 

Jagati. 14 Trishsup. 

Tr&btup 3, 6 Jagati. 

T?ishtup, 


Visvedevas. Yak. Waters, Triehtup, 12, 15, 23, 29, 


Soma. Agni, Sarys. Vaya. 


J agai, 42 Prastorapa- 


Time. Sarasvati Sadhyag. nett, a Anuehtup. | 


Satasyan or Surya. 


@ 3 


ry 


662 


= td ° 
= Risht. 


sa 


INDEX OF HYMNS 


D esly, 


165 Yadra Maruts. Indra 


Agastya. 
166 Agastya. 


167 The same. < 


168 aeroge € 


Maruts. 

Indra Matubs, ¢& 
Maruats. 

Fodra. 


‘170 Indra. Ayast- Indra. 


ya. 

17% Agastya. 
172 The same. 
RO! asec 


Agastya. 
The same, 


ersepee 


ereeee 


1 Griteamada. 
3 Tha same. 


4 Somahuti. 
5 The same. 
Gases 

© gales” 


4 


Maruts. Indra. 
Maruts. 
‘Todra. 

Tue same. 


ys Gere 


Pesnes 


wr& 
Lopan.udra Ag-Rati (Pleasure). 
astya Pupil. 


Asving. 
The same. 


eeeure 


Heaven and Karth. 
Visvedevas, 
Paise of Fuad. 


Apvria. 

Agni. 

Bribaspati. 
Water, Grasg. Surya, 


BOOK II.” 
Agui. Jagati,” 
‘The same. 


’ Apeis, 


Agni. 
The sane: 


et tOuy 


$ Gritsamada. : seneye. 


Metre. 
Trishtup. 


Jagati. 14, 15 Trishtup, 

Trishtu p. 

Jagati 8-10 Trishtup. 

Trishtup. 2 Viraj, 

1 Brihati. 2-4 Anushtup, 

5 'Trishtup. 

Tr ishtup. 

Gayatri, 

Trixhtup. 

Trishtup. 

Anushtup 1 Skandhogrivi, 
6 Trishtup. 

Anushtup. 6 Trishtup. 

Trishtup. 

The same. 

Trishtup. 5 Brihabi, 


Trishtup. 
The same. 
Jagati. 6, 8 Trishtup:: 
Trishtup. 
The same. 


I Anushtubgarbha, 2, 4 
8, 10 Gayatri 3,5, 6,7 

Auusntup or Brihati. 

Gayatri. 

Trishtup. 

The same. 

Anushtup, 10:12 Ma 
hapankti, 13 Maha- 
bribati, 


Jagati. 


‘ The same 


Trishtup. 7 Jagati, 
Frishtup, 

Aaushtup, 

Gayatri. 

The same. 

Gayatri. 6 Anushtup. 


INDEX OF HYMNS, 663 


z 
= Rishs, Desty, Metre. 

9 Gritemads. Agni. Trishtup. 
10 The same. The same, ° The samo. 
[3 ere Indra, Viratathana ‘Tishtup. 

e 21 Trishtup. 
12 The same, Trishtup 
1 ae ee Jagatiol3 Triehtuy. 
14 0.0. posi Trishtup. ) 
1S... deee ; The game, 
ol ere are Jagati. 9 'Triehtup. 
Diveees.  . yeghce » Jagaxti. 8, 9 Trishtap, 
WSismase asa Trishtup. 
19° sax: say The tanne, 
DOr Aptos scl Trishtup. 3 Viradrupa. 
21 isc, rane Jagat: 6 Trishtup’ 
DP ec eat Ashti 2, 3 Atigakvari 4 Ati 
> ey sakvari’or Ashti | 
De are Brahmanaspati Bribaspavi Jajyati 15 19 Trishtup 
a4... Brahinanaspati Brahmanas Jaguti 12, 16 Vrishtap 
pati and Ladra- 

WOR cass Brabmanaapati dapati 
26 te The same The eamer ~ 
“14 'Kurma, Grit. Adityas 'Teishtup 


samada’s §0n, 
or Gribsaineda 


98 The same Varuna he same 
29°, Visvedevas 
30 Gritsamada Indea Indra and Sonia Sa- Trishoup 15 Jagepi > 


‘ ,rasvati Bribaspatt Maruts 


31 The same Visdeies Jagati 7 Trishtup 
Oo sea Heaven and Barth Indra or Jagati 6-8 Anusbtup » 
Tvashtar. Kaka. Stoivali. 

oor ves Rudra TFrivhtup 

oe eee Maruts, ; Jagati 15 Triehtup 

BO? Mocks Apamnapat . Trishtup 

36 ose jiitus Jagati 

OT see The same The same 

38 ...- Savitar Teishbup 

BO oe Asving Trishtap 

40 .... Soma and Pushan Aditi ‘Fhe same 

41 Vayu Indra and Vayu Gayatri 16,17 Anushtup 
Mitraaod Varuna Asvine 18 Brihati 
Jodra Visvedevas Sarasyvati ; a 

42... The Kapinjalw Trishtup > , [Achti 

43 .... The yame 1-3 Jagati 2 Atisakvari or 


a 


Rishi. 


1 Visvamitra 
2 The same 


ee 8 e OE 


& 
7 Vievamitfa 
8 The samt 
oe 
10 --- 
Wi) sas 
i 
13 Rishabha 
14 The same 
15 Uvkila 
16 The same 
17 Kata . 
18 The same 
19 Gathin 
20 The samc 


-22 
23 Devagravas 
snd Oevavata 


24 Visvamitra 
o20 The same 


AG: cs 
ON os 


28 sane 
29 wey 


30 ow. 
1 eee 


32 eaee1esd 


33 Visvyamaitra. 
The Rivéra,: 


34 Vievamitra, 
35 The seme, . 


$6 eoceee y : 
D7 owe dee 


( seeeee 


INVoa UF HYMNS, 
Deity. 


Agni 

Vaisvanara 

The same 

Apria ( 
Agni 

The same 

Agaul | : 
‘Yupa Visvedevag 


Agni 


: The same 


indra and Agni 
Agui 
The same 


Visvedevag Agui 
Agni 


The same 


he 


Agni Agné and {adra 


Metre. 


Trishtup 
Jagati 

The same 
Trishtup 
The same 


Trishtup 3, 7 Anuehtup 
Bribati 9 Trishtup 
Ushbnih 

Gayatri 

The same 

Avushtup 

Tri-htup 

The same 

Bribati and scucbaned 
Trishtup 

The same 


1, 4 Trishtup2,3 Anwesz 
% Viradrupa Satobrihati 
T ishtup 4 Anushtup 


Trishtup 3 Satobrihap 


Gayatri 1 Anushtup 
Viraj 


Vaisvamara, Agni Maruts 1-6 Jagati 7-9 Trishtup 


Agai 
The same 


r 
peee 


Indra 
The same ; 
lecqvee 


The Rivers. Vievaraitrs.- 
lodra, 


Indra, 
The same, 


¢ s 


e 


& mre cee c 


Gayatri 

1, 2, 6 Gayatri 3 Ushnih 
4 Trishtup 5 Jagati 

Trishtup 1, 4, 10, 12 Anu- 

ehtup 6, 11, 14, 15 Jagatj 

Trishtup 

The same 


Trishtup. 13 eee. 


; Trishtup, 


The same, 


obeces 


fayatri, 11 Anushtvp, © 


@ 
The same, Agni. 
‘T'he same. ® 
Agni Kakahoha, 
Agui ‘\aievanara, 
A vol, 
The same, 


enpeeocece 


gaéi, 3 Dhriti. 
Trishtyp. 
The sane. 


owrese 


INDEX OF HYMNS 665 
Rishi. Derty. Metre. 
Prajapati, or Indra, Trishtup. 
VisVvamil ra, 
Visyamitra, The same, The same. 
The same, eee Crayatri., 
See aay - The same. 
“bees 0 C~C(“‘*‘C Trishtup. ‘ 
ae Drihati. 
ny e ( 
‘ ae The same. 
“haw +. .--|«- @peee Demhtup. 
Sat = Lhe same. 
Jougde.  ..-—§«- «Sager —~*«*S a. 
@ 
eee ee 8 — et ee ee ee ova e ° bad 
den. teen io Sagatt 4-9 Vfrishtup. 
= = 10 12 pyatri 
Siemens .§ %6%orss & nee AIEL vy 0 Prish- 
tap. 6 Jaga. 
indra, Parvata, Vak. Trishtup. 10, 16 Jagagi. 
73 Gayatri, Le, 22 
: Auushtup. > Biihati. 
_Prajapati. Vi-vedaray,- : Trishtwpe 
The came. Tne sanyo. ‘bo seme. 
Visvamitra. ae eee 
The same, AsVIDS. @ esses 
avaae Mitra. a Trishtup. 5-9 Gayatri; 
eins Ribous Tudra, Jag sti. . 
reer ° aJshas (Dawn). Trishtup e 
bos ee tadea and Varun. Briha 1-3 Trishtup, 4-18 Gayatri, 
Spal. Pushan Savitar. 
Suma, Mitra and Varuna, 
ee ee yg a e 
BOOK, 1V., 
Vamadeva. Agni. Varuna. Vrishtup. L Ashti 2 Atija- 


1 Jagatie2-O Anushtup, 7 


11 Tgishtup., 


© 


666 INDEX OF HYMNS. 


bd 
= Rishs. Deity. Hetre. 
ny 
8 Vamadeva. Agni. Gayatri. 
9 The same. The same. ‘ Tie same. 
TO: gieesss Siecias Padapankti. 5 Mahapada, 
- yankti. 8 Ushnib. 
DL, seat a Trishtup., 
12h poses ihe ate The same, 
ie 1s ae ee gee 
14 ...., ee sale 
1a Auni, Somaks, Asvins. Gayatri, 
i eeeee Indra. Trishtup. 
Tae ects The same. Trishtup. 15 Iekapada Vi- 


| ¢: raj. 
13 Ladra. Aditi, Indra, Aditi, Vamadeva, Trishtup. 
Vamadeva, 


19 ,Vamadeva, Indra, The rsame, . 
20 The same, The same. woes 
DQ te. ain 
Oe —~*«C eae 
oe : dios Trishtup, 10 Auushtup, 
Lo ae ase Teishtup. an a 
ee Indra The Falcon. - ‘The same. 
47 ‘The Faleon., Trishtup. 3 Sakvari. 
ih Indra and Sc ma. » Trrhtup. 
1) ee Judra. The same. 
30 | Indra and (U's) as. Gayatri 8, 24, Anushtup, 
2 Indra, og Gayatri. 3 Padanichrit. 
Od, aes Indra [Todra’s hi reeg, Gayatre, 
ms a Ribhus. Trishtup, 
ot ot The cama, The same. 
Jo ee 
36 0 ofa Jagati 9 Trishtup. 
BL sue J intis 1 4 Trishtup, 5-8 Anushtup 
v8 Yeaven and Barth, Daddbi- ‘Trishtap, 

keas, 
39) aces Dathixras. Trishsup. 6 Anushtup. 
£05 seus D dhikeas Sarya, 1 Teishtup, 2-5 Jagati. 
eee Ladra sud Varuna. Lrish' up, 
43 Jrasadasyu. Jraeadasyu. Ludra and- The sama, 

Vacuns. : 

43 Purumilha aod Avvins. agua 


44 The same, _ Tie same, , Seas 
45 Vamadeva. = --+- Jagati? Trishtup. 


*.=1 @Budha and Ga- Agni. * 


2 


cs 


\7 


Rishi. 


Vamadevsa. 
The same. 


vishthira. 
Kumara or 

Vrisa. 
Vasusruta, 


7. Isha. 


The same. 
Gaya, 
The sama. 


Sutambbara. 


The same. 


Dharuna. 
Puru. 
The same, 


18 Dvita. 
19 Vavri. 


20 Prayasvats. 


INDEX OF HYMNS. 
Daity. 


Vayu. Indra and Vayu. 

The game, © 

Vayu. 

Tndra and Brihaepati. 

Brihaspati. I€dra and 
Brihaypati, 

Ushas (Dawn). 

The same. 

Savitar. 

The same, 

Yisvedevas 

Heaven and Earth. 

K-hetrapati Suns. Suna 

aod Sira Sita. 


Meirs. 


Gayatri. 
Anu htup, 
The same. 
Gayarri, 
Trishtup 10 Jagati. 
e 
Trishbup. 
Gayatri, ° 
Jas&ti, 6 
dgati. 6 Trishtup.e 
Trishtup 8-LO Gayatri. 
Tyisiitup 57 Gayatri. 
1% 6,7 Annahtup 2,3,3 
Trishtup. 5 Dura-ushaoib, 


Agni, or Surya, or Watare, Trisftup. LL Sagati. 


or Cows, or Ghrita. 


The same. e 


Agni. Marute, Rudra 
and Vishnu, . . 

Agni. e 

Apris. 

Agul. ¢ 

Tue same, 


@qeo0 008 
eevee 


oor ose 


Trishswp. 
Trishtup. 12 Sakvari,e 


Trishtup, 


The same, 

Gayatri, 

Panktie 

Anushtup 10 Pankti. 
Jagati 

Anushtup 5,7 Pankti. 
Anushtup. 4, 7 Panktt, 
Jagati. 
Trishtup, 
, Gayatri. 

* Phe same, 
TAshtup, 
Arushtup. 
eT he*sarhe. 


1, 2 Gayatri 3, 4 Anush- 
dd Viradeups. 
Arfushtup.°4 Pankti. 


D Pankti. 


oOo 
or 
io 2) 


INDFX OF HYNNZ, 


2 
= Rishi, Deity. 
my 
21 Sasa, Agnt. 
22 Visvasaman, Tee same, é 
23 Dynumian Visva- oe. 
earshanl 
941 Gaupasanas or Sieeae . 
L supa) wag 
Go Vasuyug, <¢ —accees 
°§ Tho same, Agni. Visvedevas. 


4 
Tryarana ‘Tray Avol Indra and Avi, 


‘sadaeyu, and 
Asvamedha, 
. 1 6 

or Atri. C 

98 Visvavara, Agni. 
A ° e an 
99 CGaurivill. Indra. Indra or Usana. 
30 Babhru. ‘Todra. ; 
3] Avasyn. The same 
33 Samvarane. yaa 
Sf Tne same. on 
35 Prabhbuvagu, see 
30 The 6AnleA. € | ae 
37 Atri, Bhauma oo... 
ie The same. eee 
39 sees oe Ld eee 
BOe soem Indra, Surya Atri. 
4] Visvedevas* 
WED Pere * Visvedevas, Rudra. 
Ogee . Visvedevry. . 
44 Avatsara and The sume. | 
t 


others 


45 Sadaprina, 
46 Pratikshatra, 


47 Pratiratha. 
AS Pratibbanu. 
A) Pratiprabha. 
5O Svasti. | . 
51 The saine..” 


Visvedevas,‘Consorts ot 
“tke Gods. +, 


Visvedevae 


° The same. 
€ 


cc 


Ora toes 


Metre. 


Anushtup. 4 Pankti. 
‘The same, 


Dvipada Viraj. 


Anushtup, 
Gayatri. 
Tri-htup. 


4 


t, 6 Auushtup. 


1,3 Trishtup 2 Jagati £ 

Anushtup oO, 6 Gayatri, 
Trishtap, 
Tho same, 


Jagoti, 9 Prisheup. 
Anushtup 8 Pankti, 
Trishtup, 3 Jagati. 


Prisbtup., 


Anushtuy, 

Anyshtup., 

1,3 Ushoth £ Trishtup. 
O-0 Anushtup 6S Tri- 
shtup, 

Trishtup 16, (7 Atijaga- 
ti 20 Hkapada Viraj. 

Trishtup 17 Ekapada 
Viraj. Tpishtup. 16 Eka- 
pada, Vira] 

Trishtup. 

Jagati. 14, 15 Trishtup. 


Trishtup. 
Jayati, 2, 


8 ‘Trishtup. 


do agati. 


Hrishvup. 


Anushtup. 

1-4 Gayatri. 5-10 Ushnih. 
11-13 Jagati or Trishtup, 
4, 15 Anushtup. 


ex ot 
a 8 Hymn. 


62 
63 
64 
65 
225 
67 
68 
69 
70 
71 
72 
73 
74 
75 
76 
77 
78 


INDEX OF HYMNS 


Rishi. Deity, 
Syavasva. Marute. 
The same, The same. 


Muruts and others. 


Srutavid. 
A:chananas, Tue sama, _ . 
The gama, 

Ratahavya. 

he same, 

Yajata, 

The same, 

Uruchakri, 


Tne fame, 

Bchuvrikta, 

Tne same, 

Paura® eAsving. 
The same. The same. 
Avasvu. sg... 

Atri Bhauma. ...., 

The same a6 a ke . 


Saptavadhri: ,..... 


79 Satyasravas. Ushas (Dawn). 
80 The same, The samee 

81 Svavasva. Savitar, 

82 The samo, The same. e@ 
83 Atri Bhauma, ParjanYa. , 

81 The same. Prithivi. 

85 ... Varuna, 

OO: aie vis Indra and Agai, 
87 Evayamarut. Muguts, 


Mitra and Varuna. 


659 
Metre. 


Anushtup 6 16, 17 Pankti 
1,5. 10. 11, 15 Kakup, 2 
B ihati 3 Annshtup 4 
Pura ushnih 6,7 9,13, 
14.16 Satobrihati 8,12 


Gavatri. ° 

Jagati 1£ Tri-htup. 
Jockri 1% Ti ishtup. 
Brihati 3, 7 Satobéihats, 
Jageti 7, & Trishtup., 
fei-htup «6 e 
Jagati, 8 Trightup, 
Trishtup 7 8Jagati, 


Gavanhi 5 Anushoup. 9 

Pie: sobrihati. e 

Trishtup. 

Jagat 

Anushtup 7 Pankti. 

Anushgup*6 Paukti. 

Anus &p, 

The same, 

Gava'ri. 

Trish ip, 

Gavarri. 

Tne samé. 

Ushnit 

Avnushtop. 

The ~ame. 

Pankni. 

Trivhtup, 

The sama, 

1-3 Ushnih 4 Trishtup 5-9 
Anushtup. 


Pankti, 
ef rishtup, 

Jagati 

Gayatri, 1 Anushtup. . 
| Rey 8 1Q Trishtup 24 Ja- 
e 

, sat. 9 Anusheup, 
Anushtup, . 

Trishtup, ° 


Anushthp, 6¢ Viratpurva. | 
‘Atijagati, 


6 


~~! 
o 


Rishi, 


Hymn. 


The same. 


COON wow tore 


Bharadvaja. 


INDEX OF HYMNS 
Deity. 
BOOK Vl. 


Agni, 
The same, 


Vaéisvanara, Agni, 


The same. 
10 Nat 
11 The same, 
12 
13 
14 Pre 
I5 Vitahavya, or ..,... 
Bharadvaja, e 
16 The samc 
oy are ‘ Indra. 
LS! Stes! The same 
19 :, 
BO? bere es 
PAs 235c%8 8 Indra. Visvedevas, 
The same. 
2: acco 
Le See 
NV ioe. 6 
DO wees 
ae 
BOs ses The Cows, 
7 igo Indra, 
30 ....,. . The-same, 


31 Suhotra. 

32 The same. 
33 Sunshotra, 
$f The samo. 


@eersen 
,@e Cee 
4 


‘ee ene 


Metre. 


Trishtup. 
Anushtup. 11 Sakvari. 
Trishtup. 
The same. 


Trishtup. 7 Dvipada Viraj. 
Jagati. 7 Trishtup, 
Trishtup. 


Trishtup 7 Dvipada Viraj. 


Trishtup., 


Anushtup. 6 Sakvari 
Jagati 3, 15 Sakvari 6 
Atisakvari. 104, 16, 19 
Trishtup. 17 Anushtup. 
18 Brihati, _ 


Gayatri. 1,6 Vardhamana, 
27, 47, 48 Anushtap,-6 

Trishtup. 

Trightup. 15 Dvipada Tri- 
shtup. 

Trishtup. 

The same, 

Trishtvp. 7 Plraj. 

Trishtup, 

The same, 


Trisbtup. 2 4 Jagati, 
Anushtup. 

Trishtup. 

The same, 


Teishtup, 4 Sakvari, 


Trishtup. 
The same.. 


Cd 


Ayman, 


35 Nara. 
36 The same, 


37 Bharadyvajsa. 


- The same. 


6 balsa 
41 
A asses 
43 secae 

44 Samyu 


45, The same, 
MG sie 


—~ e 
47 Garga. 


43 Sawyy, 


49 Rijievap. 
ae The same. 


steete 


53 Bharadvaja, 


5{ The same, 


ereoeee 
oer@ts 


Rishi. 


INDEX OF HYMNS. 
Deity. 


Indra, 


The same, * 


Indra Bribu, 


Indra, 
@ 
Soma Indra Brihaspati. 


Prastoka. Chariot, Drum. 


Agni. Marups. Pashan. 
Prisni and others. 


Visvedevas, 

*The same, 
Pushan. ° 
The same: a 


elrree 


Pashan and iguray 
Pushan. an 
Indra and Agni. 
The .same. 


Sarasvatl. 


Asvins. 
The same. 6 


671 
Metre. 


Trishtup. 
The same, 


Anushtup. 4 Brihati. 
Uslnih, 3 - 
Trishtup. 1-6 Anushtup. 
79 Viraj or Poentae: § 
eV tra). 
GAyatri. 29 Atinicnrit 31 
Padanichrit 33 Anushtup 
Brihwi ‘and Sutobrihavi 
alternately. 
Trishtup, 19 Brihagi. 23 
Amushtup. 34 Gayatri 25 
Dvipada. 2¢ Jagatl, 
1, 3,5, 9, 14, 19, 20 Bri- 
hati 2, 4, 10, 12, 
17 Sat8brihati 6, 8 
M #&satobrihati t 
Mahabrihati. 11, 16 
Kakup 13¢18 Puea- 
uenih 5} Atijegatr Ot 
Yavamadhya mahabri 
hati 22 Anushtup. 
Tristtup 1d Sa&varie 
Trishtup. 
Trishtup 1 3- 19 Daan: 16 ae 
Anushtup. 
Trishtup. 7-12 Gayatri 14 


Jagatl. 


Gayatri. 8 Anushtup. 
Gayatri. 

The same. 

Gay ste 6 Anushtup. 
Gayatri 

Trjstaup 2 Jagati. 
Bribgti. 7 10 Anushtup, 


Gagyata. 23, 13 Trishtup. 
14 Brihati 15 Anushtup. 

Gayatri. 1-3, 13-Jayati, 14 
Tfisht ap. .. 

Trishgup. 

Trishtup 1Viraj. 11 Eka 
° pada Trishtup. 


XY 
pos 


672 INDEX OF HYMNS, 


= 
= Rishi. Deity. Metre. 
RS 
64 Bharadvaja. Ushas (Dawn). 'Trishtup 
65 The same. The game. ‘ne same. 
GO) sente Maruts, uae 
C7 hes . Mitra and Varuna, —__...... 
G8 os Ladra and Varuua,' Trishtup, 9, 10 eae 
69 vee ; Indra and Vishnu, Trishtup, 
TO ceases Heaven and Karth, Jagati, 
TED ucts ~ Savitar, 1-3 Jagati. 4.6 Trishtup. 
Lovie 2” Voudra and Soma, Trishtup 
(: ere Bribaspa ti. The same, 
TAS ceras Soma and. Rudra. 
‘75 Payu. Mer, Weapons, and [mple- Trishtup 6, 10 Jagati. 12, 
ro ruents of War. Armour. 13, 15, 16, 19 Anushtap, 


Bow, Bowatring. Quiver. 17 Pankti. 
' Arrow. Charioteer. Ior- 
see. Chariot. Whip, e*c. ete. ; 


INDEX OF NAMES, ETC, 


Apnipnava, the name of 114, 
a religious ceremony, 294. 386, 425, 461, 385, 328, 
510, 521, 525, 563, 


43, 272, 286 notes. 


Abbyavartin Chayamé- 


47-219, 


626. 


na, the name ofa king, Adityas, Varuna, Mitra, 


589, 


Aborigines, 184, 412 no- 


tes; see Dasas, Dasyus, 
Kikatas, Simyus. 
Absolute God, the, 379 
note. 
Acknowledgment 
son, 354, 
Adhriga, the name of a 
Rishi, 148, 

Adbvara, primary essen- 
tial sacrifice, 19 note. 
Adhvaryu(s), the priest 
and priests, who per- 
form the practical 
work of the sacrifice, 
122, 0, 142, 199, 
259, 275, 277, 280, 
306, 327, 357, 402, 
494, 508, 600, 602. 
Aditi, Infinity, Infinite 
Nature, the mother of 
the Gods, 30, 32, 59, 
83, 97, 114, 115, 131 
123, 125, 126, 
139, 151, 189, 
217, 231, 255, 
292-294, 296, 
323, 329, 367, 
372 379, 391, 
416, 417, 427, 
458, 459, 493, 
906, 514, 515, 
519, 539, 549, 
617, 618, 620, 

_ 628, 639, 648. 

—& masculine deity, 
445, 

Aditya, a son of Aditi, 
especially Varuna and 
the Sun, 16, 32-34, 68, 


of a 


206, 
260, 
310, 
368, 
408, 
448, 
505, 
517, 
580, 
626, 


P 
138, 


Aryaman, Bhaga, Dak- 
sha, Anga, and one or 
two others, 17, 24, 27, 
32, 33, 48, 58, 62, 97, 
121, 139, 189; 252, 
259, 260, 263, 292. 
294, 297, 311, 313, 
328, 337, 378, 379, 
383, 427, 439, 458, 
595, p19, 537, 539, 
572, 619, 633. 
Adoption of sony, 327 
not. 


Ae-chylys, 443 note. 
Agastya, avraat Vedic 


Rishi, 228, 230, 235, 
236, 244, 248 955, 
6498 650, 


—the fanily* priest of 


‘King Khela, 156, 159. 
Aghasv&, a name or epi- 
thet of Pedu, a royal 
Rishi protected bythe 
Asvins, 155. 
Agniyi, the consort of 
Agni, 36, 515, 
Agni, the God of Fire 
and Light, vi, 1, 2, 14- 
19,21, 24, 36 28-80, 
34 36, 40-42, 48,5052, 
54, 56, 60-63. 80 82, 
90-102, 114, 120-127, 
136-198, 140, 144, 
145, Me 153, 168, 
173, 175-178, = 190-. 
204, 208, 209,212-215, 
27,°223, 22% 227, 
235, 236, 239, 245, 
250, 259-27@, 275, 
282, 298, 298, 304- 
0307, 312, 0315-377, 
0329-344, *350, 357, 


O55, 


376, 378-381, 383- 
391-410 
421, 423, 427, 429, 


430, “440, 443, 446, 


458-460, 9463, 488, 
492, 498.500 502. 
504, 506, 509-512, 
51% 510-518, 526, 
829531, 533, 538, 
544,552, 553, 555- 
5g4; 577, 612, 613, 
645-618, 622 G23, 


628 630, 634, | 

Agui, @he Soul ef All, 
341, Pniversal King, 
380; Mother and @a- 
ther. 401, 408, 555, 
573; Father®nd Bro- 
ther of men, 41; iden- 
tified with all Gods, 
259, 206, %68; cssen- 
tial if °all sacrifices, 
562; hie names epi- 
thet and qmalities, 
1, 2, 15, 16, 35, 80, 
81, 344 ; his fwnctipns 
as priest, oblatign- 
bearer, and rfediator, 
1, 14, 15, 18, 35, 50, 
51,79, 80, 122, 178, 
267, 330, 336, 470; 
consecrator of marri- 
age, 468, spiritual 
hueband of maidens, 
91,468; Lord of ma- 
trons, ¢ 6. giver of ohil- 
dren, 91, 92; jungle 
‘clearing fire. 79, 80, 
194° 264, 265, 398, 
3994 funacat fire (Kra- 
Wid), 396 ; bis flight 
from his duties, 329, 
477, 563, 570; his bir-. 
th? 40° 41,° 81, 82, 
145.0195, 186, 259, 
318, hie production 
*by attrition, 14, 195, 


674 INDEX OF NAMES, ETC 


342, 380; his double Agra, the name ofa wo- Amarakosha, 227. 
birth, 81, 82, 145, man, 419, 433 notes, Ambarisha, the name 
194, 203; hia three Abavaniya, tht eastern of a man, 139. 
bodies, 337; three ma- sacrificial fire, 41,306, Ambrosia, 29, 341, 604 
nifestations, 391;three 337, 464 notes. Amrit,nectar, the drink 
splendours, 319 ; hese Ahi, the serpent of the of Gods, 29, 97, 143, 
horns, 509 ; thres bir- cloud, demon of drou- 186, 317, 341, 461, 
th places, 124 ; thes ght, €, 43, 44, 103, 466,528,597, 603,604, 
homes, 470, 563, 566; 133, 134, 181, 270, Amritsar, 353 note. 
three recepiacies “or 275, 283, 296, 352, Ancient, the, Dyaus, 
hearths, 472; three 354, 367, 413, 430, Heaven, 385. 

svuations 337; bhree 493. 493, 496, 497, —Indra, 582. 

forms, 101, 219, 319.; 577, 592, Angira, a member of the 
Abibudhnya, the dra- family of Angiras,455, 


various rorms. 15, 95%: AB, Ze 
gon of the deep, an Angiras, a semi-divine 


three po-7ers,3°7 ;three 


tongues, 337; regula- atmospheric deity, patriarehal Rishi, also 
tor, as the sun, cf the 250, 298, 459.505, a name of Agni and 
seasons, 124, 468, 617, 619. Brihaxspati, J], 23, 30, 
478; and of sacreu Ab maiyaeah, versatile 42, 45, 50, 62, 69, 84. 
rites, 568. or wise as serpents, 99, 101, {21, 143, 148, 
nichayana, prepara. 4 "ole. 164, 180, 193, 289, 
sr st ueiuscred ae Ahura, God, Iranie 303, 349, 350, 361, 
th, 96 note. equivalent of Asura, 373, 398, 406, 445, 
ae 32 note. 475, 477, 483 490, 


Agnidh, aes the Air, personified, 328, 513, 517, 617, 644. 
sae ae 259, 306, Aitareya-Brahmana, 30 Anyirases, descendants 
a 154, 327, 330, 570, of Angiras, 1, 40, 69, 


510 note. = ahi 
Aitchison, Dr; 2, 71, 84, 85, 94, 106, 
—— eg ae? Aja, the Unborn, 377 128, 131, "139, 148) 
ui, eis 155, 164, 165, 175, 


Pa dire . Aja-Kkapad, the Ua- 184, 192, 272, 279, 
cali & pro daa born one-focted, the 280, 284, 290, 348, 
ae ceremony, Sun, 298, 619. 349, 361, 373, 392, 
Ajamilhas, men of the 395, 396, 398, 401 
AgniSoma, the two family of the Rishi 411, 455, 477, 492, 
nee asa dual deity, 4. milha 450, 512, 513, 555, 566, 
1 note. Ajigarta, Rishi, father 575, 576, 593, 596, 
Agnivesa, the name of of Sunahsepa, 30 nots, 598, 617, 636. 
a prince, 498 note, All-Gods, 623, see Vis- Angirases, the Bhara- 


Agnivesi, Satri son of vedevas. dvajas, descendants 
Agnivesa, 498. + . All-pervading, Vishnu, of Angiras, 596. 
Agriculture, 460, 461, 27 note Animals, tame and 


plough, ploughing, 99. Altar(s), 4, 1%7, 199, wild. borse, bull, cow, 
460, 461, ploughing 203, %25, 238, 263, passim ; ram, ewe, 60, 
and sowing, 160, goad 268, 323, 324, 339, 69, 71; goat, 191, 215, 
460; siokla, 80, 420, 343, au 373, 381, 219, 309 ; ass, 48, 156, 
garner, 228; barley or 397, 401, 406, 407; 217, 441, dog, 214, 
grain, 160; furrow, per 410, 477, 566, 567, 246, 309, 418, lion, 88, 
eonified, 461, : 613, = | 340, 412, 479, 541 542, 


3 


INDEX OF NAMBS, EC. 675 


buffalo, 422; gaura, Apaya, a small uniden- 433, 495, 497, 513, 
422, 462; gavaya, 462, tified stream,, 339. 552, 576, 583, 586, 
antelope, 88; deer, 54, Apnavang, the name 592, 594, 604, 621, 
136, 217,spotted deer, of a Rishi, 403. 630. 

52, 69; bear 526; wild Apri(s), a clase of pro- Arya, colour, i. ¢ race, 
boar, 83, 113, 152; pitiatory,hymne ad- 356, , 

wild ox, 422, wolf, dressed to Agai, 15, Aryaman, one of the 
136-138, 156, 160, 16, 197, 252, 262, Adityas, %4, 250, 57, 
203, mungoose, 257, 263, 321, 471, 472 58, 61, 402, 114-116, 
scorpion, 257,serpent, Apsaras, a celestial 136 137 140, 189, 
4, 254, eagle, 161, nymph, 373 193, 196.214, 233, 
217,312, falcon, hawk, Apsarases, 129.. "249, 259, 292, 293, 
44, 161, 312, 403, Aptya, dwelling im the 308, 379, 394, 397, 
peafowl, 257, 366; waters (of air), Trita, 433, 458, 459, 468, 
swan, 90, 218;chakwa, 137, 251, 5C3. 502, 514, 515» 37, 
309, pigeon, 38 aes Aramati, tbe Genius of 614.637, 623 

146, 156, 159, kapin- devotion, 307, 50S. ‘Lens 

jais, 312, parrot, 68, Arbutla, a demon of aes - oe 7 — 
starling, 68. See also the air, 70, 272, 47. A4 note BJan, 
under separate words. Archananas, a Rishi, dena tho dane atacda: 


Anitabha, probably an 536. 
affluent of* the Indus, Archer»89, 91, 94, 95, rae ane auo ; 
522. 175, 203, 538, 635 88, figurative, & rival 
Anjasi, apparently an Arjuna,a man’s *name, Worshipper, 35. 
unidentified river, 135, 168 — Aste of the Asvins 
609 note. Agjuni, the father of 48, 156, 217, 441. 
Anklets, 524. _ Kutsa, 145, 428. Assembly, congregation 
eee oe to Ark&, the Sun, 616, synod, 41, 206, 469. 
ood, 1. 6. Soma, 251, Armlets, 522 1 T2 
Ansa, har inade ie and Brut 33, °42, 195, pia a Agn,, 
one of thg Adibyas, .440, 646, 648. » 
259, 292, $y Arna, a prince slain by Asura, Lord God, 3% 
Antaka, the Ender, Indra, 433 49 75, 143, 167, 182, 
Death, 144. Arrian, Viii., 353. 239, 260, 293,° 297, 
Antrhill, 419. _ Arrow, the Lofty, light. 244 360, 373, 384, 


Anus, a Vedic tribe, ning, 397 457, 477, 479, 503, 


descendants of Anu, 10, Arrows, 527, 608, 647, 578 cece 535, 


140, 492. — poisoned, 647. » 
Anuyaja, an after-sacri- Arusha, the Red, the — demon ( later use ) 
fice, 57 note. Sun, 410 note. , 134,199, 501, ; 


Anyadeis, the invoking Arya(s), Aryan, ‘v; vi, Aspra-elayers Indra, 
name of one oftheMa- xvi, 3,910, 3%, 70, 80; *583, 

ruts, 96 nole. 81. 101, 125, 129, , » . 
Apimnapit, offspring: 13), 132-135, 140, Asusase anciént Gods, 
of the Waters (of air) “146, 158, 260, 181,2 204276. 

a title of Agni as Li- 183, 209, 240, 241, —demona(later use), 43, 
ghtning, 26, 303, 305, 262, 272, 285, 333, 72, 74,129, 140, 145, 
see Waters, Child of 339, 340, 355, 374, 147, 160,° 182, 281, 
the. > °380, 387,° 398, 428, 285, 505, 545, 581, 


676 INDEX OF NAMES, ETO, 


Asva, father of the Ri- 108. 209 224. 396, Ayas, metal, iron, 72, 
hi Vasa, 146. 429 78. 


Asvalayana, 24 note. Atibuigva. a pama of Ayavass, the name of a 
Asvamedha, Horse-gac- Divodasa. 70. 74 75. King 169 

Tifice, 217, 147. 181 277. 428, Ayu 75, 125, 214,240, 
Tee nameofa prince 577 687,600 611. $77, 502, 577. . 
487. Atiyaja one who over. Basaru. the name of 
Atvatha,aname of Di sacriticas. 621 Rishi 491. 
vodasa, 611. , Atmospheres. two 563 Bacchus, 22. 

Asvattha, the Holy Fig Atri. a great Rishi 30. Bahuvrikta, a Rishi, 
Tree, 188 nolg 62.69 145 158. 161 51k, 


Asvioi, the consort of 162, 493, 243, 247, Barhie. 322, 471, 601, 
the Asving, 515, , 268: 501-503, D18.5199 eae Sacred Grass. 
Asvins, the two hors 539 541,545, 546, 618, Barley, 74, 4296, 551. 
men’, TWin Heralds o At-in, a voracious fiend, Battle, 419, 420, 426, 
Dawn, 34 90 «24. 25, 111, 112. 444 — — dance. 496, 
39, 40, £7, 42, 60, 61, Atris. descendants of Bay Horses. Lord of, a 
6365, 87, 108.6 114, Atri 484, 501. 558 title of Indra. ‘passim. 
119120, 149, 144-164, Atteck, the river. 522 — steeds of Agni. 18, 
168, 199 -209 210, note of Dyaus 75 of Savi. 
213% 217+ “ogg. 232, Auchathya, a  Riehi. tar, 49° of Surya, 68. 
238" 243” 948. 250, 210 ‘ Bear, 526, ~ 

298° 306, 208° 309, Autidus 354 nose ; Beas, 353 note. 

311, 336, 3375-344, Aufrseht, Profs Th. Beast. the Vritra, 489, 


361, 378, 385, 386, 420. 596 : 497, 
394, £08.410, 417, Aurnavabha, a demox. Benfey Prof. Th. xii. 
429, 438, 440, 441, 272 XIV, xv, 5,8, 10, 30, 


444 44945) 46 459 Aurora, 170 note. , * 39 45 47.52 58 88, 
487,* 504 507, 509, Ausija. the Rishi Kak- 119. 183. 135. 138. 
513. 514, 517-519, shivan. fon of Usip 140. 146-148. 163. 
540-546. 575. 616, 21 1¢6. 163 168 421: 417, 609. « 


32. 634, 422.503 559 Bentley. 171 
— their characker, 4. Autumn forts. 183° 239 Venbley. Lil, ; 
25, 47, 78, their mi- 580 Reryzaigne. Abel xiv. 
raclay 145 149, 154, Autumns. 598, 610. 58, 167 169-171 192. 


163, 945 216, 633, Avasvu a Rishi accord. 25 246. 3868 4388. 
their oharion 95 540, ing to Sayena, 493 581. 619. 626, 628. 


their steed Or steaedg 543,¢ . 650. 
48, 154, 217, 541-543, Avatsara, a Rishi, O11, Bhaga. one of the Adit: 
thoir whip, 25, 209, Avesta | 22, 148 189, yas. God of Good For 
their favourite nugm- notes, mn tune, 17 30 31. 58. 
_ ber. 47,48. ‘Awl, Pushan's 824 61, 85, 114, 115, 170, 
Asylum, the eacrifiofal,.’ hatohet. 215° a17. 189, 196, 199, 260, 
enclosure, 533. xe Be son gin. 281, 292, 298, 337, 
Atharvan, the first Fire 318, 558? 32 3 45 369, * 378, 382, 384, 
priest, 104 ¢ 06,5108. 516, “ 397, 433, 459, 480, 
155, 160, 5(0, 541. — figurative 175, 474 496, 503-506, 514, 
Atharyvens. 611. : Axe. the celestial. Agn, Ol7, 519, 549, §67, 


Atharva-veda, yi, 25, as Lightning e495. * 690, 617, 621, 


INDEX OF NAMES, ETC, 677 


BhAgavata-Purdns,289. Birds, sea Animals. Brabmanaspati, Lord of 


Bharadvaja (s),# great — = stare, 137. Prayer, another name 
Rishiand bis descend-— = flying horses, 449, of Brihaspati, 17, 21, 
ante, Sl, 147, 156, 633. 92,55, 58, 114, 115, 


555, 565, 568, 571, Bird-oatcRing, 296, 366, 259, 287-292, 514, 
573, 676, 58D, 587, $14 648. 
59), 296, 606, 612, Bloomfield, Prof. M. Brahmanism, Vill, 


614, 619, 621, 633, 429, 536 Brahmaputra, a Brah- 
637. Loar, see Wild Boar. man-pries@s son, 313 
Bharata, Warrior, the— = Vritra, 166. note . 

name of a king, 305, Boat, 471; see Ship, Brabmaudana, & cere- 
338, 373, 376, 427, -- = sucrifies, 195. mohial di&ttributioa of 
O25, O71. Bohtling and Reth, se¢ oiled rice ta Brabma- 


Bharatas, 267, 354, So. Petersburg Laxi- ns, 462 note. 
373, 477, 572, 574 con. ° 
Bidrata, a title of Bollensen, 4.90. 
Agm, 267, 427, 572. Boneless the Nature, 3) 
Phatatia sous of Lha- 999 ; Broaggpitte, ets 
he. Qe = ».,, Bribu, a Jiberal mer- 
row, 338. Bonypthe, the Visible han’, 606. 607 
Bhgrati, a Goddess of World, 220. ? ee ; a 
Speech, 16, 26, 198, Bo smuller. Dr. J4 2. Hride, gifts to obtain a, 
141 


252 260, 203, 304, Baw, 645, 646.- Beieddivk. a Godden 


Biahmavartta, a sacred 
region, 9 note: 


3223, 383, 59. wo? heaven 
Bharvara, 421. mae ae 211. .220; of Speech, 507. 
Bharvara, 421 389 563, 618 e Brihadgat#a, name of 4 
Bhavayavya a liberal __ three, heaven, firma. chief§ $2. 

Prince, 17-4. ment, and earth, 538, Brihaduktha, nama of 
Bhavya, the same, 174 Bracelets, 528. priest, 432, e ° 

note, ; Bracke, Peter von, 638 Bribaspati, Lord of 
Bhayamana, the name Brahma, the Absolute, Prayor, 17, 2, 58, 85, 

of a man, 130. 564 note. « « 192, 138, 189, 9147, 
Bhojas, descendants of Brahma, 182, 224 368, 193, 213, B54, 955 

King Su ‘as, 373 “note, 374. 287-290, 297, 33%, 


Borigu, an ancient Ri. Brahiwan (s), priest (8s), 340 989, 445, 453- 
shi, 1,40, 71 81, 95, 103, 129, 225, 259, 455° 506, 509, “514, 
164, 176, 264, 403, 975, 306, 313, 332, 519; 611, 644, 645. 


404. 406, 454, 462, 488, Brisaya, a fiend or sa- 

Bhrigus, 80,176, 199, 499 495,°502, °604, vage enemy, 120, 631. 

ae 403, 647. : r Budha, the father of 
10s ' Brahman (s), 2, 77, Pururavas, 41 note. 


Bhujyu, a protégé of the : : 
Aevine, 145, 148, 154, 131140, 2L1, 375, e Butalo, 20 ; = Agni, 
159.162.163.429. 633 Brahmana, theological 499. -: cloud, 226. 

pay LUO ea, " exarvesds, vi4 46, 462 Buffalues,three hundred 


Bihar, 374 note a e 

Bird, the, the Sun, 7,. 26 ee eriressed for fnd eaten 
218, 227, 228, 333,-~- & prieat, 1%. » by Indra, 489. 
401, 614, Brahmanachchhansi, Duilding, 278, 400, 4Q2. 


—— Agni ag the Sun, the Brahman’s ageig- Pull @ th8°*Male, the 
291, 327, ** tano, £9, 313 notes, Stgofg ), «Indra, 75 


6738 INDEX OF NAMES, BTC 

‘ 
TT, 134, 237, 242, 274, Camel, 190. Chariot, parts of a 
276, 280, 345, 346, Canopus, 230. O75. 
350, 356, 398, 3860, Car, deitied, 612, 646. __ blessing of a, 375; 
462, 366369, 382, -- used in battle, 375 see Car 


411, 417, 491, 495, -- with sharp‘edged fel-__ _. sacrifice, 319. 
D7 6, 579, 083, 6038, lies, 231, 920. —— = Dakshina, priest's 
606, 609. -- hymn or sacrifice, fee, 169, 

Bull, Agni, 41, 50, 175, 144, 281, 287. _ Chariot-pole = sacrifi. 
177, 194196, 201,-- golden, = bymn, rl gial task, 109. 261, 
203, £64, 305, 319, ches, 39. 325, 514 ; 

326, 327, ‘334, 342, -- priests’ guerdon, 170. Charites, 403 note. 
343, 384,392, 397,-- Agni, 481. Childbirth, liturgy of, 
4Q1, 466, 468, 473,-- Dyans, 75 545 note. 

488, 509, 555, 556,-- the Sua, 935. ~~ Goddesses associated 


(O61, 562, 613. * . Car-pole  -: sacrificial with, 232, 299. 
-— tie Gun, 40, 10¢, bask, 109, 261, en Children, prayer for; 
166, 388, 393, 423, Carpenter, 83, 121, ge, Prayer. 


515, 516. 138, 139, 490. -— the gift of Agni. 44, 
-- Dyaus, 75 ~~ of the Gods, “vash- 99 962 334,485, 623. 
-- Vishnu, 207, tar, 24 ~~ the Asvins, 48, 633. 
~- Rudra, 300, 301, | Catte, unknown inear_ payn 15) 

— Bribaspati, 359. liest Vedic time, 10__ garagvati, 631, 

~- Parjanya, 459, 616, mote te het ~~ Sinivali, 299, 
~- Prieni, 397. Castes, allusions § t0__ Soma, 189. 
~~ Regent of thy Year, four, 150, 374, 498. Chitraratha, An Aryan 

383. . Castles, cloud-forts, of jing slain by Indra, 
--Marlub host, 52. fiends, 83, 576, 977; 494 | 
—~ thunderbolt, 182. see Torts, ee 
—~ ratn-c.oud, 102 Epye OF gt ot, oe P Onnine sie, 36 
-- Asvins’ chariot, 245. 396, 388, 411, 420, Chvavi iz , £ 

ra - 4540465, 575. Aes ah gl eg a eas er 

—~ institutor of sacri- ae the Asvine, 155, 159, 
“fice, 937, Cattle-raiding, 473,563, 161, 163, 343, 543. 
Bully the Maruts, 88. 993. Chyavatana, a liberal 
-~ Asvius, 633 Cattle-raiding, 473, prince, 496. 

-- priests, 109, 237, 563, 593. Cleanser, one of tha 

327, 342. Cattle stealing, 90. pricets, 100, 259, 265, 
-~ rivers, 354. Cave = cloud that im- 305, 406, 569; see 
~— stars, 137. prisons rain, 8 14, Porar 
—— blasts of wind, 188. 44, 392. Colevrooke, vii. 

_-- blames of Agni, 560. Centre.of earth — ‘altar, Consorte of the Gods 


Bullock = Soma, 226. 324. 4. 83, 134. 213, 260, 503° 


Butter, clarified, s¢¢ Qhakravaka, Chakwi, 514,517, 616. 
Ghrita. « ‘6 © Chakwi, a species . of Constellations, 31, 67. 


e bird, 300. : Cépartners, Day and 

Catenpar, Vepic, vii. Chandragupta, viii. Night, 199, 200. 
Calf, cloud, 221; young Chariot, used ia war, Cord, series of sacrifices, 
Sun, 222; fun, 38k 10, 13. IT41, 392 


INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 673 


Courser, Agni, 203; the —ripe milk in raw, 86, Daksha, Creative Pow: 


Sun, 204, 243, 348, 575, 644 er, an Aditya, 114, 
556, —white milk in black 292, 433, 617, 618. 
Cow, the Oosmic, 243, or red, 86, 397, 644. Dakshina, — southern, 
379. Cow-pevSthe aerial stall, name uf one of the sa- 


—Ushas, Dawn, 222, the tirmament, 533 crificial fires, 306, 337 
272, 346, 349, 360, Cowell, Prof. E.B., viii., notes. 
385, 401, 513 iii, r Dakshing, Prieste’ ho- 
—EKarth, 210,212, 213, Creation of the worlds, norariume 22, 169,272, 
218, 301, 437, 438, ascribed to Agni, 91, 385 ; see Guefdon, and 


440, 465, 562 ' Liberality to Prieste. 
—Plenty, 192, 299, 355, — -— ---Indra, 507. Dame, the, Vak or Ro- 
447, 449 — —Indra and Soma, ¢ daci, 131... ‘a 
ean 110,530,619, 609, 644. - Dames, Consorta of, 
ie nie lena. COO: Atods, 18, 83, 85, 134: 
—Cloud, 224. . —-—ths Unborn, thef260, 328, 316, 325; 
—Vak, Speech, 320, Sun, QL. 439, .209, p15, 517; 
384, 393. —_—Tvashtar, «124, 618619. © 
—shymw of praise, 262. 332 Dgnaya, one of a class 
—poet, 249. ___-Sages or M[ishis. of demons, 271,e272, 
—-hoon given by Indra, 3k, = “Gj "0489, 494. ° 
272-285, Creator, Agni, 92. Dancer, off the  war- 


—buffalo gied ae repre: __supteme God, 180. dance, Indra, 181, 286, 

sentant of a penitent “ep eachtar 124 389 496, 591. 

sinner, 408. een ae —~fermle,?118. 

Cows® hymn in honour - pate Dindrs, Asvins, 634 

of, 589, 590. Dascitt, a Vishi pro- Danu, the mother of 

—of Ushas, lightclonde, tected by Indra, 149, 01 tye yas 439,489 

67,94, 118,536. + 276-279, 433, 581,588. : ee 

—rays of light, 14, 85, Dadfficha = Dadbyach,,, |. ,- 

118, 120, 131, 172, 108 note, 6 ere ma 

287, 290, 348, 383) Dadhikra = Dadhikras, Darbha, a “species of 

392, 393, 401,°411, « . 
ooo 336, 443 notes. 

512, 513, 575 

-—rain clouds, i14, 316, 


. grass, 200. 
Dadlakras, a personifi-__, mfo’s name, 532 
cation of the morning note. 


382 419 S 108, 336, 337, ns : 
Sof the ‘Matute, 64 ae , pre a of Dar 
301, 525. Dadhikravan = Wadhi- Darius, 649. 


—-floods of rain, 483 kris 445,0446. e 


—sacrificial, 54, 98,121, padhyach. son of Athor- Dark, aborigines, 611 ; 


J8F. 64. 108. 155, °° Dusky, ete. 
—milk, 108, 357 ae fe ag eRe ve Dasa(s) savage foe(s)y 
, 160, 163, 193, 571. ; 
—-Heaven and Earth, 6 4 . demon(s), 44,133,134, 
201, 325. 381, 425  adikde, 2:0, 240, 270, 275, 
— Air-Goddesses, 326., Digadrs, cf the Marute,.285, 351, S54, 417, 
Waters, 468, ~ 0 587. ° . 430, 432, 433, 436, 
— Rivers, 507. Daivavata, son of Deva- 490, 491, 496, Bay 
Cowe, Day and Night, vata, anothgr name of "80,8 583,° 586, 588, 
oe 2 A bhySvartin, 589. 594,°611,.630, 


680 INDEX OF NAMEP, RTC, 


Dasadyu, the nama of Day, 172. ty, 26 125. 349. 369. 
a Rishi, 46, 47, 587. Day and Night, 3, 123, 438. 505. 
Dagagvas, @ priest ly fa- 172, 210, 549, 627. Dhishnyas, side-altars, 
mily, 85, 303, 361,455, Dead, Departed, God of 397 note. 


490, 513. the, Yama, 37, 54,85. Dhuni, a demon, 279, 
Dagoni, a man’s name, Death, Agul, a8 & God O77. S8L. 

580 of, 396 Dhvanya, the name of 
Dasra(s), Wonder- -work- Decay, 31. * a man, 496. 

er(s), Asvine, 4, 155, Deer, 524,545; red, 56; Dhvasanwi, a protégé of 
449, ~ : Spotted (tha ateeds of the Agviny, 149. 


D sayu(s), demin(s), the Maruts, — rain- Diespiter, 75. 
savage foa(sd, 45,666, elon) 56, 88, 110, Dice, 58. 149. 
© §2, 70, 74, 81, 87, 101. _ 128, 225, 301, 52 22. Digvijaya, conquest in 


130, 131, 133, 135, 55, BT. al] directions, £43 476. 
158, 160, 240, 272, Deer-skins, 231. Dionysus, 22. 
973, 27A, 279, 28%;. Deification, of tha Ri- ee Pragastar. 
344, 359, 369, 411, bhua, 23, 24, 143 387; 2,306 644. 


412, 436, 443, 470, 437, 43%, 444, "443; ee the name 
474, 479, 487, 489, of the Marutes, JG 112 of a Rishi. 1465 


491 493, 539, 572, Delhi, 108. , Dirghatamas, a cele- 
576, 584, 582, 5844 Delt: 0, the, 301 noté brated Rishi. 193.202. 
586, 591, 593. eee of dronght or 210. 211. 400. 
Dasyu-slayer, the, Ia- darknesg; see Ahi. Ar- Diseases, jatadice, 68; 
dra, 606. buda, Aurnavabba, As- leprosy. 108 168. 


Dawn. vi.. 40, 43, 60, na, Bri-aya, Chumuri, Dispenser, tho, Bhaga, 
63-67, 78, 85, 9% O4, Du soni, Dhani, Dri- 514. 
1:8, 19 19-151,153, bbika, Titbisa, Karan: Disa ter: the, Ansa. 
€69 173,83. 190,209, ja) Kunaru, Kushava 209. 292, 
222, 243, 245, 247, K rivi, Kuyava, Mrtga, Diti, the antithesis of 
266,.272, 278, 286, Mrigaya, Namuchi, Aditi, 534. 
: 303, 307, 336, 361, Parnayaye Pipru Ru; Div. Heaven. 123 nots, 
335, ©3996 893, 395, dhikrge, Sambara, Su, Divodisa, -& = liberal 
“401, 409, 432, 445, shna, Svarbhann,Svag- prince 70 147. 156. 
446, 455, 456, 459, na, Urana, Vala,,Van- 162 181. 182. 983. 
465,°481, 512, 513, grida. Varchin. Veta- 453 571. 572. 577, 
515, 518. 543.546- 548, su Vievach. Vyansa 588 593.600.611. 631, 
567, 609, 626, 629, Dastruction, 31 305 Dogs 309. 418, 


6395, 636. Devi, Brighd Beings. --figurative. 246. 
Dawn, 9, 118, 150, Gods, 293 note, see Donations, eulogies of. 

«. 151, 169, 171, 186, Gods, 168, 174 410. 496; 
195, 266, 323, 348, Devagravag, a Richi. eee Liberality to Pri- 
*355, 388, 396, 402, 338. 339. ests. 


409, 445, 456, 406, Devavata, 4, Rishi. 338. Doors, divine. 16. 197. 
467, 515, 530, Bdgt, 339, 410 589 nots, © 252. 263. 322 471, 

598, 604,°629 « . ‘Dharuna; said to ‘be, 'Dragon(s) cloud-ser- 
--Congort of the, the Rishi’s’natne, £79 nole.* pent(s), drought-de- 
Syn, 604, 635, 636. Dhishand, a Soma bowl; mon(s). 43 44 69 73, 
« the two, hivho! and Wish. Wish-Goddess, 83. 103. 104, 228, 
‘ morning, 405. © ¢ a Goddess of prosperi-_ 251. 270. 273, 


fe 


274, 278, 283, 413, 

414, 488, 489, 491, 

494, 575, 579. 

Dragon of the Deep, 
Ahibudbnys, an at- 
mospherio deity, 250, 
298, 459, 505, 617. 

Dravinodae, Wealth- 
Giver, Agni, 19,306 
notes. 


Dribhika, the name of 
a demon, 277. 

Drishadvati Rocky, 
the name of astream, 
D, 339, 

Deuh, a spirit of mis. 
chief, avoppressor, 
425, 480. 

Druthyug, men of a cer- 
tain Vedic tribe, 
10, 140, 608. 


Drum, 36, 612. 

addres sed 
glorified, 612. 

Dual deities, 3, 21. 

Durga, ® commentator, 
376 note. 


and 


Durgaha, the father , 


of Puruktusa, 448 
‘note. 

Dushyanta, 8 famous 
King, 57 lenote. « 

Dusky, dark, brood, 
skin (hostile natives), 
130, 181. 

Dutt, R. Ch., 648. . 

Dvita, tbe name of a 
God, 481. > 


Dyaus, Heaven, 42,75, 
ty 114, 167, 179, 
82, 189, 196, 208, 
ne 225, 255, 339, 
344, 348, 360, 378, 
385, 392, 413, 471, 
503, 515, 529, 530, 
534, 558, 566, 567, 
579, 615, 619, 628, 
633, 642. 


86 ° 


INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


Dyaushpiter, Father 
Heaven, 75, 1 l4 notes, 
Dyaus-Prithivi, He- 
aVen: Earth, 21 note. 
Dysveor@hivi Beaver: 
Barth 377,642 notes. 
Dyotana, said to be the 
nume ofa king, 580note. 
Dyu= Dyaus, 40, 88, 
615 notes. 


Dyumna,_splendoar, 
said to be a Rishi’s 
name, 484 note.. 


Barra, 27 ,56,114,123, 
125-127,129,225-255, 
266, 298, 328, 335, 
339, 377, 397, 411, 
413,456, 458, £95, 
505, 507, 509, Bl. 
5%4, 529, 537, 615, 
619, 621. . 


——central “point of, 
the altar, 199. 


+—~and Heaven, 41, 
16%, 249 ; see Haaven 
‘and Earth. 
Ecclesiastes, 515. 
Eclipse, 182,412, 415, 
430, 431, 489, 501, 
0502, 581, 592." 
Edda, 192 note ° 
Eggeling, Prof, J.,446. 
Ebim&iyasah, 4 note. 
Ehbni, Dr. J., 49, 106, 
1549 628, 


Hight poinés of earth, 
49. HKight-fogted, 
Gauri, Vak, 226. 

Kileithyia, 232. 


Elephant, 88, 559, ° 


681 


Ephedra, a species of 
plant, 2 note, 
distachiya, 2 note, 
Ethsa, a favourite of 
Indra, 84, 166, 167, 
283, 432, 489, 569. 
-——one of the Sun’s 
horses; 415, 493, 548. 
Evavada, a,Bishi, 511. 
Evayamarut, ¢? sacti- 
ficial exclamation, 
593, 004. 


Exorcism, ee Incan- 


tation. 
Exposure of children,, 
p95. 
ye, the Sun, 189. 
—ghi, 476, 
——of Varuna and 
Mitfa, the Sun, 619. 
Byes ef heaven. Sun 
and Moon, 97. 


FAIR COMPLEXIONED, 
Aryas, 130. 

j,Audpa, 130, 

FalcOn® hawk. 44, 45, 
162, 42, 545, 608. 

S Somerhringere 
120, 365, 418, 428, 
429, 511, 543. , 

Falsehood, 205, 478. 

False worslipper, 70 
note. ® 

Faming, 328, 374. 

Far-strider, Vishnu, 
326. 

Fate, 31 note, 

Father, Heaven, 95, 
114, 115, 196, 208, ° 
211, 212, 225, 

——Agni, 564. 

———Brihaspati, 


454, ° 


Eleven Goda,of heaven, , 644. 


eof waters, of earth, 


. #193. 


Hochanter, Ahi, 270. , 
Engulfer, Vritra, 489, 
ae 
Kos, 4 


Parjanya, 550. 

ot ——~ the Prinfeval,515. 
” _—Rudra, 616. 
——Savitar, 143, . 
s_— Sun; 223. 

-—e Stpreme God, 180, 


682 


Father and Mother, 
Heaven and Earth, 
911, 212, 249, 643. 

Fathers, Manes, An- 
cestral Spirits, 115, 
159, 192, 312, 380, 
395,479,015,622, 647. 

—cause of the fruit- 
fulness of heaven 
and eartu, 390. 

Fervour, personified, 
200, nole 

Field, Mastur of the, 
the Genius Loci, 46C 

Fig-tree, Holy, 183 

¥ilter for Soma juice. 
37, 183 y 

Fire, 137,488; :¢6 Agni. 

—production of, 343 

Fire-altars, 477. 

Fir--drill, 34, 41, 82, 
124, 125, 175, 176§ 
343, 4665 474, 477. 

Five Races, Tribes, 
ete, 10, 115, 129, 
158, 183, 441; 262, 
359, 374, 389,445, 

495, 498, 552, 566, 

9° 608, 621, 632. 


— Rivers, Land of the, 


353.. 
— Adhvaryus, 327,505. 
—Bulls, 527. 
‘_.Hotar-priests, 303. 
—Seasons, 221,382. 
Fivefold gift, 56. 
Five-footed Sire, the 
Year, 221. 
Floods, waters of he- 
‘ aven, 479, 514, 617. 
Floods’ Child, Agni, 
298, 303, 317. 
“Flower, see Lotus.- 
Food, Soma, 251. ~ 
Footless Maid, Dawn, | 
205, 629. 
Forest life of Bribma- 
ns, apparent allusion. 
to, 77. 


4 
a 


~ Gandharvk, 


INDEX OF NAMES, RTC. 


Forts, cloud castles, 
46. 70, 74, 132, 183, 
304, 489, 573, 580. 

—of aborigines, 133, 
183, 605. 


—autumnal, 183, 239. 


—of 
429, 

Fortune, 31 nofe. 

Four, priests or Gods, 
615 

—vastes, 374. 

—chalices, 213, 437, 
440, 441. 


—dice, 58 note. 
—horns of Agni, 462. 
Vedas, 462 note. 
Four- eyed, Agni, 42. 
Four-faced, Varuna, 
O16 
Fcur-footed, 
Gauri, Vak, 222. 
Fowler, 1.19. 
Friend, Mitra, 535. 
Fruit, 366, 524. 
Furrow, personified, 
461. 


Gana, father of Vi- 
gvamitra, 374, sole. 
Gaia 575 note. 


iron, 80, 285, 


Gairikshita, a patro 
nymi» of Trasadasyu,” 


496 

Gambler, 58, 270, 296. 
Gambling, 58, 149, 
296, 552. 


—cheating i In, 552. 

Ga(n)dira, * Gandaru, 

Ganchéra, ‘Gandbarie, 
modern Kandahar 

. and its people, 649 
note 

the, a 

Genius closely conec-, 


ted with the Suv, ry ° 


» 96, 217. 
Gandharvas, 26, 119, 
360. 


cload, 


Ganga, 606, 632 note. 
Ganges, Vil. ,0,85,noles. 
Garbe, Dr, 572. 
Garga, & Vedic Rishi, 
611 note. 

G4rbapatya, househ ol- 
der’s western sacred 
fire,20,41,2 19,306,337. 
Gartsamada, a name 


of kt. V. Book II, 259. 


Garutman, the Calesti- 
al Bird, the Sun, 227. 


Gaura, a wild bull, 20, 
"422, 462, 4495, notes. 
Gauri, a wild cow; buf- 
falo; cloud, 226 note. 
Gauriviti, a Vedic 

Rishi, 489. 


Gavaya, a wild ox, 
422 note 

Gaya, a Lishi,476 node. 

Gayatri,a Vedic metro; 
a pecially sacred 
versein that metre, 
83,293,924,31 2,390. 

Geldner,Prof. K , xiv,, 
172, 493, 592 , 640, 


Gharma, libation of 
hot milk; caldron ; 
459,492, 523, 544, 

Ghora, father of the 
Rishi Kanva, 50. 

Ghosha, said to be son 
of Ghosha, 164. | 

Ghosha, a protegee of 
the Asvins, 158, 160 
164, 168. 


Gkrita(m), clarified 
bucter,3,461, 462, 
509, 538, 642 notes, 

—fatness, fertlizing 
rain, 533, 538 notes, 

Gongs, consorte of the 
Gods, 316, 616 notes, 

Goad, 624, 627% 

Goat, sacred to Pish- 

‘ep, 215. 


Goat-borne, Pyshan, 
191, 625-627. 

Gop, ONE, see Mono- 
theism. 


Goddess, Goddesses, 16, 


22,26, 29, 31, 65 67, 
74 78 119-139, 15), 


153,169 171,173 211, 


264, 340, 351. 398, 
402, 423, 455, 456, 
459, 495, 504, 505, 
509, 513-515, 539, 
947,601, 635, 639. 
Gode, Devas, Brighb 
Beings, passim. 


—origin of, 62, 211, 
248, 394, 459, 575 
—uumber of, 48, 330. 
—-made immortal by 
Agni, 468; by Saviter, 

457. 


—immortal, 


39, 97, 


253,93 19—3823,448,539. 


—dwelling-places of 


377,383 537,620,623. 


—abide in Indra, 379. 
—mother of, Aditi, 
458; Ushas, 151. 
—Father of, Agni, 93; 
. Brabmanaspati, 292; 


Dyaus, Heaven, aerate 95, 


248, 570, 

-—consorts of, 26, 83, 
213, 260, 316, 325, 
389. 


—greater and lesser, 36 


—elder and younger, 
36 

—King of, Indra,339. 

—akin to men, 193. 
296, 370, 372, 378. 

—priests, 327. 

Gold, 39, 60.64,79,88, 
218, 304, 399, 443, 
§20, 525, 533. 

—the Sun, 532. 


Gold-eyed, Savitar, 49; Hansa, 


gold-girt, horse, 994, 


INDEX OF NAMES, RTC, 683 

Golden-banded Savitar, Haridrava, 68 note. 
25,49, 618, Golden Harischandra, the 
One: the Sun, 19, 365, name of a king, 30 
Golden Bull, the Sun, > note. 
366, “Olden Pair, Haritgla,a tree, accord- 
Heaven and Earth, ing to Sayana, 68. 
365; golden ornamon- Harite, horses of the 
ts, 11@ 231,526;— San, 167, 403, 409. 
ear, 39, 78, 192, 517; Harivan, Lord of Bay 
sp hiaat 482,524;—  Steeds, Indva, 4 note. 
mail. 33, =U Rend (Ag- Haciyupiya, the name 


ni), 462; ear, 169 ,-- of a Place, 589. 
sword, 59 .--visors, va = Harivan 
524;--mantibe, 525. > Haryasve a 
Goldstucker, Prof: ,H%ug, Dr. a 327 
Th , xiii. y 330, 57Q. 3 
Gotania a calebrated Havirdbaioas, car ts 
Rishi, 79,82, 86,99, far bringtag Soma, 
191, 102, 113,° 155, 312, note 


247,391 399,520¢27. 
101,113,118,435,434, 


Grasgmant, Prof. H., Hoaven, Dyaus, 


XIV. XV., ef passim. 
Gfiteamada, ® Vedic 


ITawk, 44 Soma-hring- 
eGotamas, 82, 848 87.> er, 


103, 80; 
Falcon. ? 


866 


40, 
43, 73, 75,88,95, 114, 
113, 178, 123, 125- 127, 


_Sriteantadas, 265, 284, 


e-healing by touch 


Rishi, 259, 311. 2178°995,247,255,328, 
335,341 360,373,378, 
385,395.397,410,415, 


432,450,455,456,458, 


309, 312. 
Guedon, 57, 170, 173, 


385 ; see Dakshina 593,.512;514,015,534, , 
819. 548,566,567 588,581, 
_-of men, Agmi, 97, 615,635,037 642- 644 
177, 262,318, 393, home of the Bleat, 
426,469, 481,574. 20%, 516. 
Guests, the Asvine, Heaven- Earth, a@ dual 
299. deity, 377. 
Gungu, 4, lunar, God- Heaven and Earth, 3, 
dees, 299. 24, 26,41, 100, 123, 


124,136-139,143,144, 


Haar, braided, 152% 
Hall, De. F. E, 135. 
lads, fplifted in 
prayer, 333,634. , 


196,200,204.208,2 $1, 
» 212, 719,248,249 262, 
274, 294,298,319 315, 


of, 300. 
Swan. the 


Sup, 446° 


y 


165-167,170,172;189, 


316.321. 824-327 334, 
340,349,368,376,377, 
379,384,385, 389,394, 
4.01 4035423. 425 438, 
33,444,459, 460,48, . 


684 


482, 495, 508, 515, 
517, 519, 529, 565, 


568, 570, 572, 574, 
593, 601, 615, 618, 
633, 642, 643, 647. 


Heaven and Barth, Fa- 
ther and Mother,508. 


Heifer, Ushas, 346 ; 
Aditi, 447. 
Hell, 401. ‘ 


Hemispheres, 618 642. 
Hephaistos, .16, 72. 


Herald, Agni, 34, 36, 

‘ 62,79 81, ‘94, 100,199, 
502, 259, 261, 265, « 
267, 96k, 318, 319 
372, 395; 404; "405, 
409.5 SYSY5) 7,565,572, 615. 

Hordgman, the Suo, 
224 : ; Indra, 361. 


Herodotus, &48, 

Heroes = Gode,26,252, 

_—-Marute, O29, Ook, 
551, B54, 578, G7. 


——Asving, 540. 
Hillebrandgs, Prof. A.,, 
143, 211, 461, 601. 


Himalaya, 353. 
Hi(n)du, 649 note. 
Hindustan; Svii., Viil. 
Héppoorene, 155, 
Hivangehasta; name of 
a mah, 156, 160. 
Hiranyastups, a son 
of Angirae, 40, 42. 
Holy Grass, 323, 481; 
see Grass, and Sacred 
Grass. 
Holy Speech, 26. 
Homa, oblation, 169 
note, 


Homer, 496, 64¢. . ) 
Honey, 33, 82, 243. 
Honey-whip of tht 
Asins. 25, £09, § 
Horace, 354., t 


IND#X OF NAM!i:, TC. 


Horn, ewbhiesr f Hunired  aubtumna, 
strength, 46, 529. ditto 114 293.-358. 

Hors», rain-clond, 88. -—-Powars. Lord of. 

--light. . or tlfe Indra, passim; see 
Sun, olf. ° Suéakratu. 

--Agm, 238. Hundred-wintered, Ila. 

——hseltar, ‘aad tal), 269, 
girth, e's ,° 216 Huo’ ing. wild beasts. 

~-head of, ‘g t> 463; birds, 312. 
Dadhvac.., ioS.uceve. Husbsnd and wife 

—~-Sacrisca of tiie associate in saGrifice, 
214-219. 106. 182 509 

Horsen, Indra’s, 8,20, Husbandry.  person- 
39 86, ‘105, 107,131, ified. 461. 
180, 217, 282, 382, Hymn. personified. 
451 452, 482 bit 515. 

“--Agni’s, 268, 392 yphasis the modern 
394 403. 561. 574. Beas. 353. 

—-the’ Asvins’., 450. 
441 633 Ictericl, Icterus. 68 

« --Dawn’s 388 636. ole: 

—-the Saq's, 68, 218. Jaa. libation ; Prayer. 
451. 533,604. , 57,117. « 

=e Maruts’, 252. Idaspati. a name of 


522 5233 525 527-539 
Mite Vatance 533. 
--Vayu’s, 451-453. | 
~~in battle, 645. 
Hotar, thief priest ; 

invoker; l, 65, 81, 

100, 122, 193, "196, 

199. 259: 968, 275. , 

305. 306. 357, 372. 


Parjanys. 507, 

Idris. the eacrificial 

. title of one of the 

Maruts, 96 node. 

Lia. a Goddess of Pra- 
yer. 16. 42. 57. 177... 
178 198 252 260 293. 
304 326. ..339. 343. 
381.383.470 471.505. 


380. 406. 529 Ilfbisa. a drought- 
Hotars,the twoCeles- demon. 46. 
Wie 16, 198, 252, Immolator, the oeles- 
322, 327, 471. tial. 264. 
Hotrg. Tnvoeation per- Immortal, originally 
sonified .26. 198, onky Agni aud the 
* 260. 389, other Gods by him, 
Hund red custles. forte. 463. 


277. 429. 433. 503. —-men. in their child- 
» 613 \ ren. 127. 471, 
--Yearr natural life-: Immortality of man. 


‘, time. 556. a O25. 

~-Winters.< ditto, 89, ‘--the drink of, 29 ; 
98. 260. 525. 560. see Amrit. 

565. 567, 578. 586, Impeller. the Sun. 


613. 561° 566. 


Incantation, against 
janndice, 68; against 
Venomous reptiles, 


eto, 255, 256, 


Indians, originally in- 
habitants of « colder 
country, 525 note, 


Indigencs, 335. 


Indigenous races, see 
Abo rigines. 


Indika, Arrian’s, viii, 


Indra, vi., 3-5, 14,17» 
91,23,24,26, 28,34, 36- 
39,43-46, 51, 56, 57, 
60,69-79,81,81,82-87, 
95,99, 101, 108 110, 
112,188,115,128-135 
137-140,143, 144,147, 
155,157,163-168, 173, 
178-185, 187,191,193, 
197, 207-909,213-215, 
917,218,222,997 299, 
232-243, 246,250,251, 
259,993,268,27 0-287, 
290,294,296-298, 305, 
308 310-313,322,323 
340,345-379,382-384, 
387-389,394,410-441, 
445,449,451-455,458, 
459,461,462,465,466, 
468,471,472, 477,488, 
503,50€-508,510,512- 
514,517 519,527,552, 
553,558,561,569,574- 
612,618.621,622,626- 
631,640-642,644, 


® 
— God of the blue sky; 
Thunderer; Caster of 


the Stone; Bounteous 
Lord(Maghavan); The 
Mighty (Sakra); Lord 
ofpHundred Powers . 


INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


Chief of Gods, 182, 
239; King of all th- 


ings, 45, 415; All-eu- 


stainer, 383; identifi- 
able with other Gods, 
611; tutelary God of 
the Aryans, 3,9, 
128, 129; God of Bap- 
tles, 71, 419, 426, xea 
Battle; his birtb,416; 
bis mother, 296, 416, 
417; hig father, Dya- 


us, 119, 413; Tyash- | 


tar, 368; Vyansa, 4.16, 
417; his Consort, Ins 
drani,26,106,373,388; 
his greatness, 13, 73, 
$3, 351, 411; his bat- 
tlesevith demons of 
the air, 14,43, 44,46, 
69, 70, 80, 103, 164; 
bis attributes and 
deeds,,272°274: his 
rivalry with Varu- 
na,’ 448; his relations 
with his worshippera, 
§. 7 11,12, 45, 76,77, 
28, 129, 284285; his 
various forms, 373; 
his horses, 382, his 
flight, 44. 
Indra-Agni, 21, 24, 25, 
331, 332, 487, 552, 
553,°628, 629 
Indragni, 24, 140-142, 
Indrani, 26, 106, 373. 
515. 
Indra-Brikaspati, %1, 
433. . 


Indra*Pushan, 21. 
Indra® Soma, 644. 


Indra-Varuna, 21, 389, 


446-449, 640,641. 
dravaruna, 21. 


685 


Indu, Soma; Moon; 60, 
115, 165, 286, 430, 
520, 598, 603. 

Indus, vi., 35, 44, 61, 
90, 123,168, 174,250, 
430, 507, 522, 562, 
608, 631. 

Infinite, Aditi, 30,115, 
231, 293. ® 

—Dyaus, 930. 

Inspiration, 112, 355, 
400, 404516, 563, 


e564, 641, ° 

Tavoxer, 100, 122, | 

39); see Hotar. , 
vokers, the twa 


celegpiat, 16,993,322, 
327, see Hobars. 
Iravat? the river Ravi, 

$22, note, ; 


Iron, or broaze,(4yas), 
78, 80 113, 218, 443, 
933,534,558,610,647. 

Teaiah, ol 140 

Isha, @ Paid tn be a 
Rishi’s name,e 473 


note. @ . 


gaaati, » Vedic metre, 
223,224. ° ®° 

Jahou, a Gregt Rishi, 
157, 386, 

Jaihueha, a protege of 
the Asvine, 157. « 
Jamadagni, a Rishi, 

390. 
Jamadagnis, 374 
Janita = Latin genito 
(r), 180 note. 


Jatavedas, Omniscient 
° Agni, 60-62, 81, 101, 
162,121,127 264,317, 
332,323,325,334,335, 
33 74338,340,343,385, 


(Satakratu), Lord of Indta-VAyu, 3, 187, , 393,397,402,470,409, 


the Brave; Lord of 
Bay Steed, 
passim. 


451, 452. 


eto,, Indra-Vishnuy 21, 458, 


641, 842, 


470,471,475,484,48G 
609,%595 $60, +564, 
Rae 70, $73, 574, 


686 


Jathara, a word of 
doubtful meaning, 
148 note. ’ 

Jatushthira, a man’s 
name, 276. 

Jaundice, 68. 

Jetar, # Rishi,13 note. 

Jewels, 46. — 

Jones, Sik W ,; 390. 

Joshuh, the Book of, 
431. 

Jumna, the Yamuni,5, 
JOLL notes. 

Jupiter, 45, 79, 4, 
600. 


Jyotishtoma, a Sot. a 
ceremony, 266 note. 
Jyotera, Ato alight 
perecnified, 47, 595 


“otes. 


KasuL, wii, 522, 649. 
Kaegi, Prof. A., xiv. xv. 
Kakambira, a branch- 
ing tree, eymbolizing 
father and rous, 614. 
Kakesbivan, a Risbi,21, 
71,145,146,154,155, 
158, 163,164,168, 173, 
174,421,428 503, 513, 
Kali, a Rishi, 147, 
Kaipa, the cermonial of 
' the Veda, 462 note. : 
Kandabar, 643, 


K Anita, patronymio of 
Prithusravas, 157 note 
Kanva, a Rishi, 14,17, 
18. 50- 5356 60. 64, 66, 
145,158, 161, 193,503, 
Kanvas, 17, 52 61, 63- 
60, 67. 
Kapardin, . 


note. — 


Kapinjala, a spevies ‘cf 


partridge, 312, 313. 
Aapisbthale, pat- 

rovymic of Darga, 

376 note, 


0 
wearing 
braided hair,159 1825, 


INDEX OF NAMES, BTC. 


Karanja, a demon, 74. 
Karkandhu, a ‘ protege 
of the Agvins, 143. 
Karulati, a nama of 


cf Pushan, 433. 


Kagoju, the name of a 
prince, 147. 


Kasyaps, a famous 
Rishi, 127. 368. 
Kaumudi, Moonlight 


personified, 47, 595 


notes. 


« Kaubika, God of Kusi- 


kaa, Indra, 13. 
Kavi, father of Usana, 
70, 159, £11, 580. 
Kavya, Usana, Kavi'e 
sen, 70, 71, 106, 

159, 166, 411, 


Karegani, Iranic furm 
of Krisaou, 148. 

Khgadi, ‘cing, discus, 
quoit, 89 

Khauira, Khayar, 8 
species of tree, 370. 

Khela, the name of,a 
King 156, 159. 


Khorasmians. 69. - 
Kikatas, a non-Aryan 
people, 374. , 


Kindler, Agnidh, Fire- 
lighter, 259, 306. 

Kine, rays of light, 
streams of rain, 8, 
13, 44, 106, 120, 348- 
320, 355, 367, 430, 
456, 479, °515, 533, 
538, 575, 598, 635. 
King, taxer of the 
rich, 90 

—Agni, 51,127, 317, 
380, 556, ee EoGs: 
966, 635, ° 


— Brihaspati, 997. 
—Indra, 45 87, 413, 
579, 5&8, 593, 610, 
—Mitra, 386. 


King, Soma, 29, 11,6 

—Varuna, 21, 31, 32. 
294, 296. 

Kings, Adityas, 24,293, 

— Agvins, 3. 

—Gods, 440 

—Mitra and Varuna, 
95,168, 189, 190,192, 
306,311,360,384,533- 
536. 538, 572, 633. 

— Varuna,Mitra, Arya: 
man, 57. 

—warriors, 110. 

Képhen, Greek name 
of the Kabul river, 
vii., 522, 649 notes. 

Kosala, the modern 
Ouch, 374 note, 

Kratu, act, rower, 6 
note. 

—the name of a Great. 
Rishi, 30 note, 

Krisgau, a guardian of 
the celestial Soma, 
148, 208, 429. 

Krishna, the name of a 
Rishi, 157, 158. 

Krivi, a cloud-demon, 
281, 286. 

Krumu, a tributary of 
the Indus, 522. 

Kehatra, the name of 
8 “Rishi” oll. 


Kshatriya, 315, 647. 
Kshetrapati, Lord 
of the Field, Genius 

Loci, 460 note. 
Kubha, the Kabut 
river, 

vii., 44,507, 522 562. 
Kuhn, Prof. A, 163. 
Kuhn, a lunar GQod- 
dess, 299, 

Kulisi, an unidentified 
stream, 135,609 note. 

Kulitara, a demon on 

savage, said to be the 

_father of Sambare, 

"432, 


Kunaru, s demon, 345. 

Kurukshetra, a district 
in N.-W. Jadia, 108 
note, 

Kurum, 522 note. 

Kusa geaes, 4, 343; see 
Sacred Grass. 

Kushava, name of a 
female fiend, 417. 

Kus ka(s), a famous 
Rishi and bis descen- 
dants, 13, 340. 345, 
347, 353, 364, 370, 
373, 374, 386. 

Kutessa, a favourite of 
Indra, 46, 70, «95, 87, 
121, 126, 130, 136, 
139, 143, 146, 166, 
939° 241, 277, 283, 
412, 428, 431, 489, 
493, 577, 580, 587, 
592, 600. 

Kuvitss oa certain ma- 
licious man, sccord- 


ing to Ssyana,606nole. 
Kuyava, Harvest-Spoil- 


er, sdemon, 134,135, 
412, 592 note. 

Kuyavach, a demon dér 
savage 240. 


Lapy or rue Liaar, e 


65, 66. « 

Laksbmana, the name 
of a man, 496. 

Lakshmi, 412 note. 

Lances of the Maruts, 
524, 525, 638; see 
Spears. 

Lanman, Prof.C.,"485, 
502. 

Lassen, Prof, Ch..viii., 
44, 649. 

Law, Cosmic aod Mo- 
ral (rita), 2, 


52, 61, 64, 90,92,97, _: 


100, 106,115, 119," 
136, 137, 151, 171, 
199-202,’ 204, 205, 
909, 211, 225, 


253, 


INDEX OF NAMES, BTC. 


268, 288, 
296, 318, 


292, 295, 
323, 330, 
337, 388, 397, 402, 
404, 419, 425, 446, 
448, 260, 465, 471, 
478, 483, 510, 528, 
529, 5 3, 536, 538, 
540, 547, 557, 567, 
570, 598 ,613,619,622, 


628,640 "642 643,647. Maghavan, ord 


aw: Sacrifice, 40, 58, 
60,90, 92 107, 268, 


381, 382, 390, 39756 


398, 425, 468 77, 


484, 426,508, 540", 


573, 598, 602 


Leader, Neshtar,one of 


the prieste, 259,265. 
Leprosy, 158 nots. 
Leviticus, 338 e 


687 


Macponett, Prof. A. 
A., 83. 

Made, delight, raptu- 
rouse joy, 69 note. 

Maghachcbhandas, 
Vedic Rishi, 1, 13. 

Madhuvidyg&, know- 
ledge of Soma, 155, 
543 notes. 


of 
Bount, Indra, passin. 
Magbavgne, wealthy 


men, nobles, institu- 
tprs of sacrifice, 77, 
£63, 488, 546. <" 
Magic, poweg of Gods, 
433, 552, 627, 634 
_..af Hondas, %3, 44, 46, 
70, 75, 631 


MababbArato, viij ,000. 


Tiberality to pri@gte, e Mahi, GreateGo Hae 


praises of,-76, 168, 
17% 174, 410, 482, 
487, 492, 496, 499, 
532, 607, 63% 
Life, natural duration 
* of,see Hundred Win- 
ters. 
-sduration of. fixed by 
ethe Gods, 114. 
Lightning, a form of 
Agni, 101, ae 137, 
219, 264, 268. 
—tbe bride of the 
Marutse, 232 note. 
Lightnings, personifi- 
ed, 617. 
Linch-pis, emblem of 
stabilffy, 49. , 
Lion, 88, 340, 412, 
£79, 5419 542. 
—*he, Agni, $24,319. 
— Payjanys, 550 . 


3, 28, e Lopamudra, Agastya’s 


wife, 649, 650. . ¢& 

otus(es), 645, O71., 

—steme, 631]. 

Ludyig, Prof. A., xiv., 
XV., 6¢ possty, 


associated with TA 
and Sarasvati,.° 16, 
198, 471. 


Mahjdhara, xi, 214, 
28% 462° 477, A486, 
BOL. a 


Maiden, the, Dawn, 218. 
—Rodasi, 232. 
Maidens, fingers, 199, 
304. 
-~Dawns, £05. ® 
—~Waters, 303. ° 
——Rivers, 419, 
Maitravaruna, ene, of 
the priests, 122 note, 
Male, the, Agni, 326. 
Mamata. wife of Ucha- 
phya, 202, 211, 56& 
Mama'»ya, Dirghata- 
mas, son of Mamata, . 
«202, 400. 
Man. eervice of, $2. 
Anas, . Rishi, 229, 
Ate men of Sneae 
family, 235, 337 
286,248 ° 


Mahasa,ea Rishi, 512. 


688 


Mandala, division, 
Book of the R, V., 
vi 259, 

Mandarya, a Vedic 
bard,230,231,233,234. 

Mandbatar, a royal 
Rishi, 147. 

Manes, 
Fathera. c 

Manning, Mra, xv. ‘ 


Manslaughner, fine for, 


543 note, 
Mantra, vi 


¢ € 


, 462, 


_ Maou, man ; the father Marnte, 


“of Tani iad: 16.18,4, ° 


42,51,52, 61 62 64,925 


}15, 139, see 


INDEX OF NAMAS, BTC. 


260. 263.270.271.296. 


303.305 311 314.322. 
323 332-334 340.345, 
348 351.356 357 463. 
411.418.419, 421,428. 
439 440 453.454 459, 
468 472 487-48 .491. 
493 499.508507 509. 
512.514 519-532 550. 
553-535 558 561 565 
572 575 576 579 582, 
591 599.602 609 612. 


; 614. 619 622 637 638. 


originally 
storms, deitied, 8.96. 
112. 


100, 125, 147, 148, 152, ae of the, 53 55. 


177, 18h,193, 270,300, 
ie 370.387, "405, 418 
458, 457, 483, 513, 

582. 640. 

— [astitutes® of, 5, 21, 
36, 606, 647. 

Manus = Manu, 34. 42, 
100,104,442°48: 68, 

571.Manya,son of 
220: 


Mare, Usfas compared 


bo a, 40, 456. 

Mares,cnd¢a’s 593,602. 

—rivers compared to, 
353. 


—s = hymns, 447. 
‘i = libations, 200. 
= Waters or Air- 
«Ged ilesnee. 326. 
Marichi. a Great 
Rishi, 30, 127. 


Marute, Storm-Gods.7. 


8 13. ul 19 23 24 27. 
28 4,52-56 61 6S. 
73 87- '89 95 96 103; 

. 109-115. 123 128 131, 
134.138 1°39 144 152. 
153 155.167.176.178. 


185 186 190.192. 198, 
199 208 214.917.528. * 


ana, 


. 209 112 


, io. the name 


of A prineca, 496 
~ Mafaredra, & man’s 
name, 169. 


Matarisvan, a mystic 
being, 40 8195 190. 
126 145 177 196 198. 
202 227 254 318 319 
329 340 344 563 

Matrons, Heaven arid 
Warth, "615. 

Measure, - 
line, 65 

Meath = rain, 524. 

Medhgtithi, » Vedic 
Rishi, 14 21.69 373. 

Medhvatithi, & Rishi, 
51. 62. ‘ 


Mediater, Agui, 1.123 | 


192. 391 393. 397. 
-~Rudra, 152. ( 


Medicine, 29 60. 114, 
J52 210. 645. ‘ 


«heavenly, 47. 
{egaethencs, viii. 

Men, 
23. 387. 


a 


937.239. 246,250,253, —akin to Gods, 265, 


‘ Mitra. a Light-G 


meacuring ¢ 
{ 


Mong, daughter of 
King Vrishanagva,7L. 

-~an Apsaras, mother 
of Sakuntala, 373 
note, 


Meru, a 8acred moun- 
tain, 120 nate. 
Metal. 72,78; see Iron, 
Metres, 223, 563. 
—of the Rigveda 223; 
see Appendix. 
Milch-eow, miloh-kine; 
see Cow, Cows, Kina. 
—=hbymn, 262, 
Milk, passena. 
—=rain, 88, 230,551 
note. 
= hymn, 249, 
—.= water, 632- 
Milky Way, 136. note. 
Milton, 266, 334. 


Mitah, sacred name of 
ove of the Marnte. 
96 note. 


od. 3- 
A7-19. 25. 28-32, 34 
48.5% 52. 55. 57-59, 
61.95 99. 102. 114- © 
116.123.125-127,138. 
144.°53 19% 168.169. 
179.180.189-191,196. 
204.208,214.227.233. 
949 250.259 261.292- 
297.301,306 308.3 21- 
323 337.366 361.378. 
380 386-389.393 394 
397.400 408.443 445. 
458-460 468 480 487. 
502 505 506 514.517. 
519 533-540 548.556- 
558 560 562.565.567. 


« 568 572 583.585 612. 
*' « 615.617.619 622 633, 
deification of, Mitra-Varuna 3 21.168. 


188.204.205 311,330, 
_ 808.633,539,638-640. 


Monogamy, indications 
of, 136, 172, 396. 
Monotheism, 227,377. 
Month,  intercalary, 

33, 222. 

Months = monthly feg- 
tivale, 349. 

Moon, 31, 33, 47, 198, 
123, 1382, 136-141, 
154, 189, 217, 222, 
934, 255. 261, 310, 
461, 595, 598, 603, 
609, 622. 

Moonlight, personified, 
47, 575 notes. 

Moons, twelve, 33 

Morning, 40, 63, 65, 
167, 273, 298, 337, 


316, 850, 351, 388, 
393, 471, 575, 593, 
635, 644. 
Mornings, 151, 170, 
243, 327,379, 408, 


445-455,456 598 622. 
Mortar, 36, 37, 627. 
Motheg, Hartb, 211, 

220, GAE. 

— Aditi, 580. 
— Dawn, 390, 513. 
—the Mighty, Vak, 

O15. 
——Prisni, $37, 
——Rasa, 505. ° 
Mothers, Heaven and 

Earth, 316, 318 324. 
— Waters, 29, 48,196, 

271. 

—Rivers, 48, 353. 
—Dawns, 016. 
—regions of space,378. 
Mountain=clead, 9, 

69, 83, 93, 94, 108, 

392-394, 411, 413, 

593, 598 
—home of the Soma: 

plant, 2, 12,60 ° 
Mountains, Gods pre- 

siding over, 439. , 
— personified 514,582, 

R7 


INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


Moutpless, barbarians, 
489. 

Mriga, the Beast, a 
demop, 497. 

Mrigaya, a demon of 
alr, 419. 

Muir, Dig J, ix, xii, 
XUl , xv., ef passin, 
Muller, Prof. F. Max, 
ix , xi., Xiv,, Xv., e¢ 

passim, 
Mungoose, 257 note. 


Munja-grase, dt3. © 


Nanusna, Man, 12° 
478 
Nahushas, men, neigh- 
bouring peopleg 540, 
note 5&3 588, 6Q8 
Nemi, a friend and 
tégé of Indra, 74,580. 
Namuchi, g demon 6, 
75, 877, 491, 580 
Narakastbaoam, hell, 
40 L *note. “e 
Nariginsa, Praisa of 
®*Moen, Agni, 16 22, 
139, 197, 263, 308, 
eit, 403,471, 585. 
Narmara, a fiead, 275. 


*"Narmirti, perhaps thea 
* name of a for® 203. 


Narya, achief or Rishi, 
76, 146 

Nasatyas, the Asving, 
4, 24 47,48. 63, 65, 
154,162,238 24¢,246- 
248,3199378,386,409, 
443 449.450 514.540, 
543, 545,565, 616, 
618, 634,635. ° 


Nature. Adjti, 30, 32, , 
- 0 97, 115, 534 
‘—,Prakriti, 220. 


— Diti, 534.°® e 
Navagvaa, a mvthical 


race, 45, #, 361,455, 


, 490,513,524,561,562. 


"0° @ Nine-footed,® 


689 


Navavastva, 52, 581. 

Nectar, 29, 186, 609, 

Neshtar, one of tha 
priests, 19, 259,306. 

Nove, Félix (Essay on 
the Ribhus), 438. 

Nighartn, a Vedic 
Slussary, 48. 

Night, 48, 85, 119, 
172, 298 307, 456, 
471, 932, 626. 

—and Day, 350. ° 


—gand Dawn, 16, 98,° 
» 126, 167, 322. ,' 
—and, Morning, 86, 


197, 2229842, 249, 

25.7 ,263,298,316.333, 

382, 458, 465, g71 

Gauri, 
Vik, 228 

Ninere, ninefold, “the 
Navagvas, 513 note. 


Nin&y fouds, rivers, 


183. 
—forte, 181, 331. 
—steads = dkys, 208." 
Ninety-nine arms, 277, 


—farts, 76, 28%, 423, 


489, 609, bad 
—rivers, 44,255. . 
—Vayu’s horses, 453. 


—Vritras, demoys, 
108. 
Nirriti, Destruction, 


31, 54, 505, 646. 
Nirukta, Yaska’s Corm- 


mentary on the Ni- .. 


ghantue, xi, 3, 9, 
293, 3.76. : 
Nishadas, abonigioal 
*tribes; 10 ode. 


° @ Niti-Manjari, a trea- 


tise on ethics, 24 nose, 


Nivjd(s), liturgical 4n- 


vogations, 390, 417, 
640. ° 


690 


Nodhae, a Vedic Risht, 
79, 84, 86, 87, 89. 
Noose of Varuna, 58, 

645. 
Non-Aryans, 44, 331. 
Noseless, Dasyue, bar- 
barians, 489. 


Noyes, s.rvicu of 
man, 42 note. 
Nrishad, the father of 
Kanva, 158 


_OcRAN, 77,95, 246,353, 
867, 461, 525, 61% 
—of sir, 23, 513, 627. 

Oceans, 619. ,,,, 

Offapring'of the Flood, 
Ayni, 168; sea WVa- 
ters; Son of the. 

Okeanos, 146. 

Old age, 157. 


Oldenherg, Dr.H., xiv. 


Om, 226. 
Omen, 312, 313,.*. 
Ounific, Iadra, 11. 
Qunniscient, Gods, 221. 
—Agni, 50, 470. 
—-Agvins, 64. 
——Ind¥a, 600. 
—the'Sun, 377. 
Varuna, 32, 33. 
One, 220. 
One Al, 377. 
One Supreme Being, 
227. 
One-footed, 
“cloud, 226 


buffalo, 


- Ordeals, by fire, water, 


combat, 210. 


Order, Cosmic ahd 
More], 31, 102, 171, 


172,227,295,216,327, 
347 ,381,397,401,403, 


408,421,418.455,456, 
479.513, 534.535 547, 
575, 539, 617, 619. 


—nacrifice, 109, 325, 


—of all, 


INDEX OF NAMES, ETC, 


323, 325, 349,, 392, 
394, 404. 
Ornaments, of the 
Muruts, 88 , 
—of priests, 51. 
Oudh, 374, 433, 522 
moles. Py 
Oxen = stars, 207. 
Oxhide, laid under the 
Soma mortar, 37. 


Pain, the ancient, Hea- 
ven and Earth, 122. 

Pajra(s), a Rishi and 
his family, 21, 71, 
155, 158, 159, 164, 
168, 174 

PakesXa, the Sun, 374. 

Palisa, a tree, Butea 
Frondosa, 429. 


Pani(s),. demons of 
darknass, 44, 85,106, 
120,131,165, 204,290, 
462,567,5980,094,598, 
603, 606, 621, 629. 

Panjab, vii., 44, 140, 
429, 430, 433, 507, 
520, 522, 562, 634. 

Pantheism, 1Y5.. 7 

Pipadevata Goddess 
of Sia, 31 note. 

Paramatmi Supreme 
Spirit, Self, or Soul, 
428, 564 notes. 

Paramesvara, the 8u- 


prema Lord, God, 
61 P note. 

Parasara, wa Vedic 
Rishi, 90. 
Paradvatas, a hoatile 


triba, 520, 63F. 


Paravrij, rn onteast, 


146, 163, 279, 433. 


Parents, the, Heavan 


¢and Earth, 208, 211,, 
213, 214, 349, 593. 


tue Waters, 
618. . 


Parijman, the Roam- 
er round, Indra, the 
Sun, 87, 102. 

Parjanya, God of the 
rain-cloud, 196, 224, 
382, 461, 507, 534, 
535, 549, 550, 616, 
622, 623, 647. 

Parna, the Palisa tree, 
429. 

Parnaya, a demon,7 4. 

Parrots, jauudice tra- 
nxferred to, 68. 

Pirthavas, descendants 
of Prithu, 589 note. 

Parthians, 649. 

Paruchchhepa, a Vedic 
Rishi, 175, 182,193, 

Parushni, the .aodeen 
Ravi, 44, 422, 520 

Parvata, Genius of 
mountain and cloud, 
167, 184, 372, 459, 
583, 617. 

Parvatas, 439, 503 
Pasupati, Lord of Cat- 
tle, Rudra, 60 note. 
Pathard, 147,148 notes. 
Patharva, said to bea 

man’s name, 14/7. 

Pathya, the name of 
a sacrificer? 572. 

Pathya, a Goddess of 
wealth, wife of Pash- 
an, 919. 

Paura, perhaps tha 
name of a Rishi, 540, 
542 

Patirukutsya, son of 
Purukut»a, 496 note. 

Pavaka, Purifier, pure, 
bright, Agni, 15,337. 

Pavamana, a name of 
Agai, 337 note. 


‘Payu, a Rishi, 611, 


Poarl, 49, 174. 

Pedu, a protege of the 
Asvins, 155,158,161- 

_ 163. 


Pegasus, 155 note. 

Penury, 395, 499, 

—--— deprecated 
othere, 294-296. 

Peruk(s), a liberal 
prines, 630. 

Pestle, for pounding 
the Soma plant, 36, 
oT 

Paterson, Prof P., xiv; 
207, 458, 624, 626 

Physician, Rudra, 300 

—Varuna, dl. 

Physicians, Asvias, 
146, 156, 210. 

—Maruts, 300. 

— Waters, 29. 

Pijivana, the name of 
a prince, 65, 148 

Pillare, splinters from 
the sacrificial stake, 
328 

Pipru, @ demon of air, 
6, 70. 130, 277, 412, 
418, $77, 580. 

Pisichi,e female fiend, 
275 note 

Pischel, Prof. R. 152, 
416, 558, 581, 586, 
592, 597, €02, 616. 

Pitaras, 312; see Fa- 
thers. e ss 

Pithinag, a man’s name, 
588. 

Plants, personified, 
582, 617. ‘ 

—-King of, Agni, 306. 

—Lord of, Soma the 
Moon, 29, 116. 

—luminosivy of, 173, 
174, 269. 

—medicinal, Lord of, 
59, 60. 

Pleagant ness, personi- 
fied, 6. 

Pliny, 68. 


for 


Poison, poisonous rep- 


INDEX OF NAME#, ETC. 


Pole, gacrificial task, 
261, 514; ses Car- 
pele, Charivt-pole. 

Polygamg, indications 
of, 86, 94. 

— troubles of, 137. 

Por poise, 56. 

Potar, the Cleanser, 
one of the priests, 
19, 122, 259, 265, 
305, 306, 406 

Poverty, 74, 328. 

Prabbiivacu, a Vedic. 
Rishi, 499, : 

Prai-e of Meb, Nara- 
sansa, Avni, 16,263, 
308, 403 

—~-Indra, 585. ¢ 

Prajafati, Tord of 
Creatures, 30,48,67, 
154, 421, 438, 50% 
618, 628 notes, 

~-a Rishi, 359. 

Prajaipatis, the proge- 
nitorsof man, 6Pnote 

Prakriti, Nature, 220 
@0le 


.rramaganda, & prince 


of The Kikatas, 374. 
Prihava, the sacred 
éyllable,Ow, 228 note. 
Rragastar,  Diregtor- 
priest, 122, 259,266, 
306 aolrs, 
Praskanva, a Vedic 
lhishy, 60 62. 
Prastka, «a vame of 
Divodisa, Olt ° 
Pratardans, @ prince, 
5886. 
Pratagdani, “son 
Pratardana, 598 
Pratidras, sacrificial 
" fitle of one of the 
“Mearute, 96 mote 
Pratikshatra“a Vedic 
Rishi, 514 note 


of 


tiles, charm againgt, « Pravargys, #0 intro- 


5 25) -257. 


ductory Soma cere- 


691 


mony, 462, 492, 
Pravargya vidya, the 
eciencre Of the above 
155 note. 
Prayaja, a preliminary 

offering 57. 
Praya@vate, sacred food 

bringers, fhe title of 
comainitighis, #83 note. 


Prayer, perrenified, 26, 
4% seo otra, La. 


@--Lord of, Brihaspeti, 


, bbe 85, 114, 254, 
e389, 644. 
e e 


—~-Agni, 56 

--poy dof,” Ww, 94 

the bist armour, 648. 

--for aid in battle, 10, 
8,71,98,128-130,%32, 
33,183,184,297,497. 

~-for general safete, 

7,27, 49, 189, 190 

-—for Jongelife, 13, 30, 
51, 497114, 116,157, 
1&9, 210. 

--for children® 35, 48,° 
151,299, 518. 

—-for health,°wemth, 
and hAppingss, 4@51, 
59, 66,119, 121, 126, 
152, 253, 299, 300, 
334/385, et passin. 


~—for rain,534,535 643. 


~—for a safe and epaci- 
ous home, 643, 644. 
—~—-fer freedom from e 
sickneis, 645. 


~-for Divine mercy 

ard pardon of sin,3! ° 
. 92, 42, 995, 408, 552. 
-—for sinleseness, 135. 
e--fot ‘victory in a 


e chariot race, 297. 


-—for, the destruction 
of fiends, ate. ,%1, 52, 
1d}, 185. 


692 


Priests, names and 
duties of, 259 note. 
~—the two divine, 198, 

47). 

--called Gods, 327, 

~-the Asvins, 244, 

--fea of, 169; see 
Dakehina 

—sprcial pifts to; see 
Linorality tu Priests. 

Prikshaydimas, a Pro- 
per Name, 168 | 

Prnishtha, a kind of: 
Stotra or laud, sa 

523 note. 

Prisni, thhuther of the 
Marate- 18, ‘38, O4, 
102, P10, 114, 234, 
301, 397, 401, 521, 
527, 029, 530, 637. 

2aWarth, ool, 6 14, 
al6, 619° 

Prignigu, a protege of 
tbe ASVins, 145. 

Pr guimAtareh Jf gisnv’ @ 
s0u8, the ‘Mat ute, 

18 nola. 

Piso, 408 

Prithi, a coyal Rishi, 
l4F. * 


Prihivi, Broaa Earth, P 


. 123.3 23,537,616,619, 
642 ; see Korth 

~-a Goodders of the 

"firmament, 550, 551 
note. 

TPrithu, an ancient 
King, 589 note 

PrithvSravas, a pceinoa, 
157. 

Priyamedha, afamous , 
Rishi, 63, 493 

Prisfaratha, & prince, 
168 e« ¢ . 

Professione, ’ trades, + 


Puraya, a 


Purifier, 
anser, 19, 259. 
Purohita, 


INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


490 ; boat-byilding, 
154, 226; lesather- 


working, 110,256,450. 
physio, 29,31,146,156. 
»ope-makingy 216,276; 
Fmelting, 337,476,908; 
26; weaving, 
563; workivg of iron, 


Viotner,2 


Dugger, 


sea = Axe, 
Spear, atc. 


Prosperity, personified, 

160, 

Providence, 41,74,604. 
¢ Parana, 433 


Puorandhi, 


298, 506. 


the Intel- 
ligent or Spirited 
160, 298, 506, 582 
liberal 
Hines, 635. — 
Potar, Cle- 
family or 
tribal priest,“ 1, 17, 
122, Dod. 


Fyru(s), the eponymus 


and men of a gréat 
Vedic tritva, 10, St, 


87, 140, 181. 184443-° 


£15, 580, 608° , 


of Indra anu the Aé- 


ving, 87,145, 148,239. 


448, 449, 496, 930 


Purun ilha(s), a Prince 


or Rishi ard his peo- 
ple, 20£, 247,502 


Pusumitra, a Rishi, 


148, 160; 


Puruniths, & prince, 


§1. 


Parupsnthis, & liberal 


prince, 635 « 


Pururavae, an ancieut 
- king, 41. 


and crafts, fadieatiang Purushahti, a liberal’ 


“of, agriculsure, 460, 
4615. carpentry, &3, 
121,138, 181,359,468. 


Puruvasn, 


prince, 149. 
a . Vedio 
Bishi, #99. 


urokutss, « fovourite 


Pishan, a Sun-God, 
giver of prosperity, 
aod guide to travel- 
lers, 17,28, 29,58,59, 
106,114,115,139,168, 
120,191,198,2 15,245, 
347,250,260,292,293, 
309 311 372,378, 384. 
389 390,397, 433, 461. 
503 508, 514,517,519. 
548 585 614-616 613. 
621,623 628.631.647. 

Pishan-Vishnu, 575. 

Pashans = Agving, 247. 


QuaiL, Dawn; the set- 
ting "Suu 146. 106. 
159 161. 247. 

Quarterly Review, on 
the Soma plant, 2. 

Queen, the chief, 486. 

Questionings regarding 
God:, Nature, Mon, 
ol 20. 929 225. 
248, 296 377, £09. 

Quivers, 527 GAG. 

Quoits, ” missiles 
ornamenta of 
Maruts, 89. 528. 


and 
the 


Race-Coursr, 87, 
Raving, ‘see Chariot- 


Rahu, the post-Vediae 
D-mon of eclipse, 
‘BOL note. 


Rahugana, & Rishi, 
99. 101. 
Rains, the, 328, 594 


mole, 

Rajarshi, royal sage, 
71 note. 

Raji, the name of a 
girl? 588. 

Raka, Goddess of Full 
Moon, 299, 507. 

iakshas, the race of 
* Rakshasas, 467. 


Rakehasas, nocturnal 
demonr, 1, 25,4649, 
52, 100, 102,129,347. 


INDEX OF NAMES, BTO, 


Ribhukshan, chief of 
the Ribbus, Iadra,214, 
233, 250, 298, 439,502. 


398,400,412,574,583. —Ribhuge eldest of the 


Rakshasi, a female de- 
mon, 417 note. 


Ram, [Indra as lover of 
battle, 12, 69, 71. 

Rama, 230 nute. 

Ramayana, viii, 217, 
230, 315. 

Ranba, Zoroastriane’ 
name of Rasa, 146. 
Basa, a semi-mythical 
river, 146, 505, 522. 
Rat, a Light-Goddesy, 

115. 
Ratahawya,a Riehi,537. 
*Rathaviti,e prince, 532, 
Rathantara, an impor- 

tant Saman, 224. 
Rati, eexugl enjoym- 

ent, 649. 

Rats, 137. 
Raubiaa, a cloud- 

demoed, 133, 274. 


Ravi, modern name of 


the river Paruehbni, ° 


122, 520. 

Nebha, a protégé of 
the Asvins, 145, 157- 
159, 161-183. © 

Red Bird, the Sun,515. 

— Bull, Agni, 613. 

Steer, Dyaus, 529. 

Revelation, 400 note. 

Reville, M., 375. 

Ribbu, 23, 24144,216, 

260, 388, 437, 438, 
443, 506, 

Ribhus, three deities of 
mid-air, of whom Ri- 
bhu ia the eldeet bro- 


ther, 8, 23 24, 69,87, ° Bi 
96, 142-144, 211-214, 


293, 250, 368, 371,379, 


Rithabha,a *Rivhi, 


three, 438,506,619. 


Ribhukshans = Ribhus, 


439, 442.443, 


Richas,saored verses for 


recitation v., 512. 


Richatka, a Rishi, 157. : 
Richishama, @ title of Rosrer, the, Agni, 35. 


Indra, 607. 
Riding on horstback,» 


Rijishin, 351-nole, 
Rijiavan, a protégé of 
{ndfa,70, 74,130,412, 
489, 580, 621. 


Rijrasva, a royal Rishi, 


130, 156, 159, 160. 
Rinanckaya, king of 
the Rusamas 491,492, 


Rings, . quoite,” 112, 
233. 


281, 


son 
of Visvamitra, 332. 

Righ® Seer of a hymn, 
an inspired bard, vi, 
°21, 108, e passim. 

Rirhie, vi ,vii ,xifft.,30., 
66,107, 299, 511 602. 

~-chifdlike simplicity 
of questions and pra- 
yers’of, 409, 

—the Seven, 30, 448. 

Rita, Rigtt the True, 
Cosmic Order, Moral 
La¥, 2, 3, 107, 137, 


28H 495; see. Law, * 


Order. 


“Pitustap, 8 Rishi, 148, 
ity, ® season of the 
year, sometiines pers- 
onified, 18-20, 307. 


693 


306, 439, 455, 629. 

Ritvij, & sacrificer in 
due season, 8 priest, 
1 note. 


Rivers, personified,3 22, 


514, 517, 622. 
—the*Seven, 44, 132. 
Roamer, the, Wind, 167. 
—Fadra, 393. ’ 


Rober, 5647; see Thief 
ekock = oloud, 416,601 


_ Rodasi, Lightning per 


216, 217,631. °, 
Rigveda, Vv. vi 9 Vii.,ix., Eom Pir aed 
xili ,xv., 512, ° Maruts,' 13}, 232, 


519,527,53 618, 638 


Rohita, son of King 

qiarischandras, *30 
note. bs 

Romasa, wife of Kitg. 
Svanaya, 174 note. 

Roth, # of Prof. R,, ix 
xiv9, 3,5, 17,18,21,30, 
57, 85 243, 2 261, 267,» 


417, 461 4849195,497° 


508,542,546,552,553 
591,593,617961 94648 


Rudra,*the roaring or 
flashing “Tempest-, 
God, father of the 


Marute ; ; sometimey 
a gentle bealer and 
beneficent deity, 18, 
27, 54, 59, 60, 80, 
88, 96, 109, 128, 
131, 152, 153, 167, 
179, 230, 232, 260, 


289-302, 305, 308, 
» 340, 373, 397, $60, 
_ 468, 592-504, 506, 
507, 815, 521, 527- 
" 530. 590, 616, 618, 


619, 633, 638, 645. 


387,388 ‘437- 443 455,, Bitue, sgacon® perseni- —a name of ad, 35, 


507 ,514,519,528, 555.. 


fied, 19, 20, 213, 


ae 396° 


694 


Rudrag, sone of Rudra, 
the Maruts, 48.55.56, 
62, 88, 109,128,131, 
210,230, 970 soOTs er 
303, 328,337,351 .524, 
527, 554, 619, 625. 

*—theAgvins, 219,541. 

— Mitra and Varuna, 
939, 

Rugamas, tha name of 
a people, 491, 492. 
Rushati, wife of the 

Rishi Syava, 158 

SABARDUGHA, nedtar- 
yleldiny, the Uo-z 
milked for sacrifici 
libations, 1e¢. | 

Sachi, ‘Power, persun- 
ified as Indra’ 2 wife, 
388, 412. 

Sacred Books of the 
Bast, 446, 532, 548. 

Sacred grass, 42, 72, 
107, 110, 454, "584, 
623. 

Sacrifice, first institu- 
tors'of , see Angiras, 
Athatvan, Bhrigu, 
Dadhyach, Mauu. 

—npot tance of, 50. 

—importance of, 50. 

—makes” priests and 
sacrificers immortal, 
41, 175, 

“morning and even- 
ing, 408, 

—morning, noon, and 
evening, 20, 47, 
265, 373, 407, 410. 

—nine and ten mon- 
the’, 513, 514. 

—of first-born pon, 
Ris wote. 

= chariot, 319. 
— = stip, 63,195. : 
== thunderbolt, 10, 
SOT. 
— = woven cloth, 563 


~ ras 


mole. c 


Sadhbri, 4 


‘ deities, 


INDKX OF NAMRs, RTC, 


Sacrificer, 73, [7, 78, 
80, 95 

— Ua lestial, Vivasvao, 
79, 355. . 

Sacrificer’s wife, assoc- 
lated in the perform- 
ance of sasred rites, 
106, 182, 509. 

Sacrificial names, titles, 
8, 112, 555. 

—arsen oly 4\, 

—hall, 2, 322. : 

—firo!s), 20,41,42 64 

—Victim, goes straight 

‘to heavan, 215, 217. 

—Vistims, 402. 

—post or stake, 16,32, 
Ol, 118, 225, 264, 
397, 328, 402, 456 

“offerings, milk, 121, 

“165, 206, ef passim ; 
pate blared bubt- 
ter) 5, ‘187 ,.zharma 
(heated milk), 459 
Bo/hia juice, G 18, 20, 
25, 37. 62, 107, 140, 
et passim; 78. Soma 
juice and milk, 7, 
28, 38, 108, . ‘190, 
250, et passim; 
Soma‘juice with gra- 
in,groate, meal,cakoe, 
etc,188,342, 371,487; 
man 30; horse, 214- 
219; bullocks, 267; 
barren cowe. 267; 
cows in calf, 267. 

—visselg’ and imple- 
mente, 215. 


Sadaprina a Rishi,511 


? 


| Sadasaspati, Lord of the 


Assembly, Agni, 22. 

Rishi,511. 

Sdidbyas, a class ot 

227. 

Sahadeva, a prines, 
130, 410. 

Sakins, ‘Mighty Ones, . 
Nobles 521. 


Sakra, Mighty One, 
Indra, 12,75,85,242, 
357, 399, 411, 497, 
596, 610, 


Sakti, a Rishi, 90,374. 

Sakuntalg daughter of 
Visvimiora, 373 571 
noles 


Sima. Siman, gong, 
chanted hymn, 22 
237,313,401,412., 

Sama priesta,65; Sama- 

_ chanter, 313. 

Samaveda, v.11, 224, 
313, 607 notes, — 

Sambara, a demon of 
drought, 6, 70,75° 81, 
130, 147, 274,277,283, 
289, 367, 428, 429, 
432 577, 388, 593 600, 
609, 611. 


Sammitsh, one of the 
Maruts, 96 note. 

Samudrs, sea, gathe- 
ting or receptacle of 
waters, 78, 


Samvarana, a Rishi, 


436, 
Samyu, a Rishi, 614. 
Sanda, a prince, 635. 
Sandikac, a family or 
clan, 297, 
Sanhita, Collection of 
Vedic bymn8,v.,Vi,Vii. 
Sansa, Prayer or 
“Wish ,personified, 514, 
Sanekrib, ix-xid. 
Saptavadhri, name. of 
aman, 549, 546. 


Sara, a Rishi, 157. 
Sarama,[ndra’s hound 
and messenger, per- 
haps the Dawn, 85, 
- 97, 348, 411. 913. 
Sarameyas, Sarama’s 
sons, Yuma’s wateh- 
‘dogs, 85 noée. 


Sarasvan, Sarasvat, 
name of a River-God, 
616 note; applied 
to the Sun: 228, 


Sarasvati, a river; a 


River-Goddess; God- 


INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


Satapatha-Biabmana, 
446, 548 

Sgtarcbing. epithet of 
the Sgers of Book T. 
of the Rigveda, 259 
note, 


dese of eloquence and Satavanifa prince, 81. 


sacred poetry, vii 5, 
16, 44, 114, 135,198, 
927, 25, 260, 
297, 304, 311. 


322, 339. 378, 383, 
439, 471, 507, 509. 
514, 562, 616, 619, 


622, 631, 632. 

Sarat, according to Sa. 
yana a demon, 580 
nole.e 


Sarayu, the Sarju, 433, 


22. 
Sarju, ariver in Oudh, 
433, 522. 
Sarnjaya,son of Srinja- 
‘ya, 611 note. 


Satri, a prince, son of 
Agnivesa, 498, 


263, Satyagravas, a Rishi, 546 
312, Saudiva, a prince, 374. 


Savitar, the Sgn as 
nerator, Vivifiere and 
stimulatos, 25,26,30° 
48,49, 51,61, 97, 124 
137,140, 143, 149, ss 


171,209, 211, 226,2 
266,296;"98.337. on 
337 353,360,378, 983. 
84,389,390 402,908. 
409,438,439°457-459, 
506,614,516, 517 548, 
549,570, 582,617,618, 
619,643,644. ® 


Saryawivan a lake and Savitri, the Gavatri par 


district, 108. 
Saryata, @ Rishi, 147, 
° 370. 

Sary&ta,son of Saryata, 
71, 370. 

Saryati, prdbably the 

"yame as Saryata 148, 

370. 

Sasa, a Rishi; or food, 
or sacred grass, £83, 
484, 

Sasarpari (the meaging 
is uncertain) 374. 
Sasiyasi, wife of Tar- 

anta, 531 note. 


Sastram, recited laud Sayya, 
* «Nami, 5 


Tor of - Scorpion, 257. 
Hendred Powers, It- Soa, 32, 38, p2. 


Or invocation,65 note 
Sabakratu, 


* excellence, & Verse of 
egpecial sanctity ad- 
r*ssed to Savitar, 


90. r 
Sivya, & Rishi, Reer of 
Hymns D1-5¢ of 
Book 1, 69, 


Sayana, Bayanachgrya, 
the 8reat Commenta- 
tor’ of the Rigveda, 
1X. ¥i xiN xiv.® xy, 
xvi, ef hgssim., 

Sayu, a Rishi, protege of 
the Asvine, 145, 147, 
157, 160-1629 633. 


580. 


dra, 6, 7, 12, 20, 38, eltné Sun, 515. 


39, 76, 
498, 500, 600, 603., 


_ Indra, 14, 69, — 


695 


Sea, of air, cloud, 32. 40, 
63 217, 232,243,463, 
0529, 541. 


—Sons of the, 
Asvins, 63. 
Seascn, the, the Raing, 

O74 
Seagops, the, 29, 221, 
222, 382 notes. 


— personified, 306, 439. 

Sek ucusgViii 

-e8emal, Silk-cotton free, 
°37 5. 

Se@bents, wisdom of, 
ascribed to ffods, 623. 

Servicg. of man, 42. 

g Seven, castles® 87. 

caeelestinl streame,97, 
219 note. ° 

®-cows, 219, 

— days of He week 68 


note. 


the 


ay of the year) 
219 frote. 
—flames of Agni, 137, 
201, 392, 104, 454, 
—forte af the abore 
gines, 239. 


— gars, solar rays, 225, 

——horses, 210, 

ae eh of the Sur, 
68 323,409,513 604. 


—metres of the Veda, 
27, 326,455, 469 

— Mothers, 195 

—mouths of Brihag- 
pati, 454 i 

—privsty, 219, 265. 
322, 3144, 348 399, 

—Pfeins (priests), 265. 


rq the, father Of —-egions of the arth, 
7. 


& 


© e--Rishis, 30, 448 


e --Rivers, v., 44. 48, 
49, 95,,1,32 219,957" 
137, 359, —of wealth aad bounty, * 273, 315° , 3h, 430, 


§07, 


in 


696 INDEX OF NAMBS, BTC. 


Seven sages, 395, 582. 
—~Singers, 85. 


Sin, the deity of, 
Nirriti, 112. 


~-Sisters, 219,257, 632 —-searchers-oub pf, 
~-sunbeams, 137,219, Marute, 11 

225, 462. ‘ ——punisher of, Arya- 
—-times seven, she, man,233; Beahmanas- 


* Maruts, 521. , 


~—tones, 326, 455. Agni, 563. 

_-treasares, 645. , Sindbu, the Indas, 35, 

Seven-beaded, the, the 61, 90, 106, 123,125, 
Sun, 325. . 127, 168-174 250,449, 

Seven-rayed, Agni, 201. 458, 520, 522, 631. 

--reined car, of the Sinivali, a lunar God- 
Sun, 604. : dess, 299. 


Seven-wheoled ear, 

219, 241. : 

. * oe. sy ; 

Shisdgurnslchya, ®S74. Singipa, ee Sissoo 
Shelley, 182, 153, 351. gis a river, 135, 
pabpy 9205, 147, 1A Glen Biough, Agricn: 

$54, 406, 513, 524,“ ciral deity, 461 

ms yy ‘7 ba 
iad oe Sister, the, Dawn, 
—~ <= Byma, 243, 266. 

63, 195. 


Q Siste Heaven and 
Sickle(s), 80, 420. i, 
Siebevzig Livder’ des Earth, 377, 482. 


thy 


sacrifice, 


: Rigveda (Geldner aud aed er gi. 
Kaegi)s xiv., 417. --Night and Darn, 
Sikhs, 89. 


149, 172, 242.° , 


SimbSls, ‘the Silk-Cot- —-of pyiaste, the wa- 


ton tree, 375. ters, 29. 
Simyus, a race of bos- at . 
tile natives, 130. oo 315,354,423, 
Sin, » burden, 295. : . 
--the bonds of, 32, 34, aa ee 94, 344, 
295, 408, 467, 552. ' ; : 


Sinless, 170, 549, 617. 
Sinlessness,30, 617,618. 


~-prayer for pardon or 

- removal of, 29, 31, 
32,42, 48, 54, 126, 
127, 210, 217, 249, 
203, 294-296, 
327, 408, 458, 467 
555, 45. 


‘ ‘6 


~-imputed, prayer‘ for’. 


freedom from,295,398. 
--punishment of, 1 
233, 283,292, 295,296, 
98, 425, 563, ‘ « 


321, ‘ 
»« ~-regions.: 220. 


Sits, Farrow person- 

iGAd, 460; 461 
Siva; the <A usnicious 
One, viii., 300 note. 
Six, the, seasons, 29, 
222, 382, 883. 


——directions, 276% 
-~expanses, 609, «+ 


¢--burthens, 383, 
78, Six-spoked car, the 


year with six agaso- 
nes 221.° 


@ € 


Sky, personified, 40, 
63, 65-67, 432, 514, 
547, 548. 

Smelter, 
566, 


Sogdians, 649. 


476, 558, 


pati,258; Varuns,178; Soma, the Moon-God, 


21,22, 29, 47, 60, 
90,114-117,120,121, 
154, 156, 217, 223. 
255, 268, 309, 310 
389, 390, 430, 512, 
514,519, 603, 609, 
622, 644, 645, 648, 
Soma, the plant, 2, 
12, 16, 60, 368. 
--duified juice of, vi, 
Viii , ef passim, 
~~-grown on mountaing, 
368, 420, 508. 551, 
~-preparation of, 2, 
19, 36, 3% 
--drank by Brahm- 


ans, 2. 
~-produces inspira- 
tion, 112, 


-~~eloquence and wie- 
dom, 598, 

--rapture, 6, 22, 69. - 
71, 73, 78,110, 448, 


Lore of, ladra, 100, 
351, 501. 

Soma-drinker. a title 
of Indra, 6, 7, 120 
37, 274. 362, 368, 
436, 584, 605. 


Sowghuti, a Rishi, 264, 
Som8ka, a prince, son 
of Sahadeva, 410. : 
Soma-Rudra, 21, 645, 
Son, begetting of, a 
debt to Fathers,631. 


‘ Sou of Strength, Agni, 


34, 35. 56, 62, 267 , 

see Strengob, Son of. 
sqne, 720, daye and 
‘ nighte, 221, 


Sorcerers, Sorcery, <9, 
52, 75, 477. 

Sorceresses, 185. 

Spear, Indra’e 577. 

Spears of the Maruts, 
40, 52, 100, 112,520; 
see Lancea. 

Speech, Goddess of, 5, 
26, 56, 125,225,503, 
B15, 541; see Vak. 

—fourth ‘division of, 
ordinary language, 
227. 

Speeder, the, Vishnu, 
as the Sun, 566. 


Spenta-Armaiti (of, 

Aramati), 508 note. 
Spies of Varuna, 33, 
—of Agni, 398. 


Spirit, the Supreme, 
222. 

Spokes, welve, the 
months, 227. 


—«360, the days of the 
yeae, 227. 

Spouse8 of Gods, 26 ; 
sce Dames, Consorte. 
Spread of "Aryan po- 

pulation, 631. 
Sri injaya, the name of 
& prince, 410, 589,612. 
Srinjayas, a y people i in 
N.-W. India, 410 note. 
Srutaratha, a prince, 
499, 
Srutarya, a Rishi, 146. 
Srutavit, a Rishi, 511. 
So. John, 327. ad 
So. Potorsburg Lexi- 
con, 1X., Xlli., 6¢ pas- 
sim. 
Etall, aerial home of 
the Maruts, 453. 
Stallion, the 
cloud, 550, 551, 
Star of the Gods, the 
Sun, 639. 


Btars, 92, 108 112, 


cd] 


rain- - 


INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


Stator, Jupiteryg 45, 
600 notes. 

Stayre, the, Indra,40. 

Steed, “Agni, 50, 93, 
208, 327. 

Steeds, priests, 322, 
327. ® 

— Red, flames of Agni, 
97. 

Steer, see Bull, 

Steers, strohg Soma 
libations, 193. 

Stoma, hymn of ‘ praise,” 
ll. e 

Stone, the “heavenly, 
the Sun, 491, 526. 

Strength, a° Goddess, 
7°. 

—Son of, Agni, 
56, 62 weUr 80. 192" 
125, 175, 196. 1982 67, 
316. 33.335,336,336, 
339,340,342,343,407, 
426,468-470 ATs 477, 
481.556.559. 560,566, 
goo? 57 2,573,577 ,613, 
°615, 618° 

—TIngra, 379, 383. 

—&—Sons of, the Rib- 

» hus, 214, 440, 441, 

e 443 9 

Subbara, the name of 
a woman, 148. 

Suchadratha, a prince, 
546, . 

Suchi, Radiance, 
forne of, Xeni, 387. 

Sudas, King of * the 
Tratsus, 63,87, 148, 
31@, 353, 473 O75. . 

Sudhanvan, fathar of 
the Ribhos, 23, 143, 
°212, 213, 387, 440, 
” Ab 1, 


2” 


o 

Sukastya, sot of Gho.* 
sha, 164 note. 

Sumida, @, prirfce, 

. 625, - °° 


a a 8 


697 


Sun, Sun-God,vi., 7,8, 
40, 43,47,48,58, 78, 
°85, 91-93, 95, 106, 
108,114,119, 123,124, 
198. 132,153,136,138, 
147,149, 153, 161,162, 
166, 170-172, 190, 
20% 21), 212, 214, 
817-219, 221, 224- 
226, 298,234, 249, 
943, 245, 247, 254, 
, 205, 208, 273, 283, 
"£98,323, 325,338 350, 
1,260,374,379 380, 
© 385,397 ,40%410,424, 
495.435 43 449,451, 
45¢ 481. 470,481,488, 
502 510, 512, 513. 515, 
529534.538.540 561, 


» 563,575,604,6 15,627, 


639, 644 

-—judge of innocetee, 
170 

= ang , Noon, Be is 

295, 319 

Sinn, the Luck of ag- 
ricultare, 450, 461. 

Sunahotra(s), the chief 
and members of a 
family, 2823119312. 

Sunahgepa,, a youth 
about to “Be sacrificed, 
sayed by prayer, 30, 
32, 36,467. + 

Sunicha, @ man’s name, 
546 

Sunrité, Pleasantness, 
Gladness, personi6i-s 
ed, 56. 

Suparna, Strong-wing- 
ad, Fair-winged, an: 
gagle, the Suan, 49 
Wrote. 

Saparnd, (dual), per- 
hape Sun and Moon, 
223 note, , ; 

Supporter; Indga,6Q0. 

ge leet God, 2, O1, 

, 180, 446 ngles, 


698 


Supreme Spirit, Soul, 
or Self, 222, aoe 


notes. 


Sira,'the Sun,620, 626, 


Surddhas, a 
Rishi, 130. 
muri, institutor of ea- 
crifice, prince, chief, 
27,41, 43%, 521 , 
Suris, Godse 196; 
Marute, $21 ; 
Surya, the S$un-Gad, 


regal 


3U,4 


INDEX OF NAMUS, ETC, 


Svadhiti, axe, perhaps 
the thunderbolt, 495 
note. 

Svaha, a sacrificial ©: ex- 

clamation, AvelHail! 
Biessing !, 17, 142, 
198,264, 30F 369,472, 

Svaitreya, 80n of Svi- 
tra, 47, 482 

Svanayé, a pious 
prince, 273, 174. 

Svarbhanu, the demon 


25,49,67, 68, 84, 87,°% of eclipse, 501, 502. 


124,127,128, 130, .53, <Svarga, heaven, 
154,156,165, 167,209, 


25, 
120 notes. 


217, 211,270,272,283, oSvagna, a demon, 277. 


323,34 15346,3.90,365, 
374,35U 384, 393,397, 


407 409,412,41F 428, 


43@,435,445,449,462, 
' 465,470,480,481,489, 
496,499 563,511 513, 
B15. 933,038 548,501, 
998,559,561 ,566,569, 
617, 627, 651.5634. 
Surya, Sanlight, dan- 
_ Hhter® of the Sun- 
* God, ‘#7, 154, 156, 
162, 232 247, 449, 


4509540,6 16,628,634, 


Sushma, Parchet, a de- 
mon of urought, 6, 


"14, 46,70, 71,76,78, 


130.134,166,241,277, 


183 249.412,432 489, 
493,494,577, 580,587, 


092, 600, 

Sagravis, & prince, 
74, 75. 

Sustainer, the, Agni, 
_ 009 


ws 


— Varuna, 29¢. 
Sutawubhara, a Rishi, * 
512 Z ‘ 


Svasti, Prosperity, 458. 

—vaill to ba a Rishi’s 
rina, 517. 

Svitrd, the nama of a 
woman, 47, 452, 

Svitriya, ron of Svi- 
tra, 47 note. 

Swan(s) 90, 218, 446, 
451, B45. 

Swords, or daggere,&2. 

Syava, a Lishi, 158, 
160, 532. 

Syavasva, & Rishi, 519, 
525, 531, 532. 548, 
Synod, sacrificial aa 
semuly, 41, 57, 78,” 
160, 909; see acsen- 

bly. 

--inviolability of, 41 
mote. 

Syurearagmi, a Rishi, 
147. ae 


Tapeis, che sacrificial 
name of one of,,the 
-Maruts, 96 note. 

Taittiriyas, fol owera 
of the Taitgtriga 


Sutlej, one‘of the Five ‘© school of the Yajur-— 


Rivere of the Pun- 
jab, 333. 
Sutudri; the Sutlej, 
44, 353. . ¢ 


~ veda, 27 

Tanunapat, Son of 
H'meelf; a tithe of 
Agni.15,297,321,344. 


Taranta, a liberal 
prince, 151, 152. 
Tarkshya, a mythical 
being, probably a 
form of the San, 

114, 443. 

Tarya, a ltishi, 511. 

Tempest-Gods, 8; sae 
Maruts. 

Ten, the, the fingers, 
195. 

~—sisters, fingers, 344, 

~-daughters of Tvash- 
tar, fingers, 124 

—-regions, 221, 515. 

—Surys’s horses, ya 

——mouths’ sacrifice, 
513. 

-indefinitely for many, 
361 427. 

--usual number of 
things presented, 174. 
496 "6lt. wd. 

——-monthes of human 
gestation, 045, ° 

T anfold draught, 169. 

Tenth age, or decade 
of lifa, 211. 

Thief, thieves, 67. 90. 
134 444 469 480.621, 

Third lucid regions, 
604. 

Thirty regions, 71. 

——steps, divisions of 
day and night, 629. 

Thirty-thres “Gods, 48. 
62. 193 320. 

Thorr, 191. 

Three, Agni, Surya, 
Vayu, 226. 

--~Gods, 193 note. 

~~-favourite number 
of the Asvins,47.48, 


*_-altare, 306. 477. 


‘-—birth-places of Ag- 
hi, 124, 

--forms of Agui, 101, 

o 319. 341 391. 

~-lights, 488, 


C 


Three, lustres, 488- 
—forme of light(Agni), 
27, 101, 407. 
-—feet of Agni, 462. 
—divisions, heaven, 
firmament, earth, 642. 
—daily sacrifices, 201, 
373,378,383, 442,458. 
—Sieors, Agni, Surya, 
Vayu, 538. 
—Sisters, Dawns, 266. 
—saorificial fires, 19, 
41, 201. 
—horne of Agni, 509. 
— Mornings, 335. 
—Goddesses, 322. 
—steps or strides of 
Vishnue 27, 207, 208, 
566, 617, 
—lLuadies of waters, 
383, 384. 
—earths, $32,141,221, 
293, 457, 538, 609. 
—sheavens, 49, 221, 
293, 609. 
~-firm&ments, 49,221, 
293. 

—castes,ao6, 
—pillars, stakes for 
human Victim, 32. 
—ranks or orders of 

Gods, 620° 
—realms of earth,538, 

—regions, 201, 457, 
—rivers, 609. ; 
—spheres of light,548. 
—Stations of the Sun, 


27. ©. 


ow 


—worlds, 7, 48.383, | 


498, 566, 632. 
— world-bowle, 538. 
“sacred beakers, 43; 

see Trikadrukas, 

— Dawne, 266, 

——DAVes = seasons, 987. 

Thres-and-Thirty, the, 

. 325; soe Thirty-thres 
Gode. 


- Tow 
_ . of drought fiends,14. , 


INDEX OF NAMES, BTO 


Three whealed car, of 
Asvins, 209, 246, 
441 

Threefald, the earth, 
he»ven, kving cre- 
atures, £07 

— Amrit, 604. 

Tnree thousand, three 
hundred, aud thirty- 
nine Gods, 330 


Thrice, in connekion 
wifh Asvins, 47, 48. 
Thrice-eleven * Gods} 


a) ‘ . T 
48, 193 ; gee Thirby- © : 


th:ies Gods. 
Yhrice-seven ‘rave 


(Maruts) 185. 0, 
—nwmes or forme of 
the cow, 393. °* 9 
—fibstions, or treaty 

res, 24 ° 
—myrxgic things, 97. 
—peahens, 257, 
Thrice:mingled ®oma 

libation, 487 
Thunderhols = sacri- 

“fice, 10, 57. 
—Tnglra’e friend, 13, 

BM, 582 
--of gold, 7% 10 
r-Of ayas (iroy or 

bronze), 78, id. 
Times 205 note. 
Tivhys, an asteriem, 

524,525. 

Tithonus, 40 note, 
Tools *aw,), 624 ; Axe, 

215, 216,818, 3919; 

knefe, 181 4 needle, 

299; sickle - 8 

420. ° 


; 

‘Traitana, name of ‘a 
Daea, 210. 

Traesdasya, Terror of 
Daeyus, 4 priser, 


* 0, 147, 443, 444.0 448, 


699 


449,487,496 608 note. 
Tricha (triplet),19,68. 
@rikadrukar, three 

Soma vessele; or 
thé first three days 
of the Abhiplava 
ceremony, 43, 272° 
278, 286. 


: . Te 
Tyikehi, B prince, son, 


% e peer, of Tras- 


adasyu, 608. 


Trinaskduda, a prince, 


1 ORT 


@ 2 
raple-headed, Agni 
Ai. jf 


oTrishtup, ont of the 


Trisoka, 
9 
Trita, 


, ° 


chée *Vedi®, metres, 
223, 312, 489. 
a protege 
of the Asvins, 146. . 
enr»old Vedie 
God, 217, 251, 298, 
353, 476, 481, 003, 
504, 513 

136, 


138, 272, 302, 552, 


Trivikrama Ayatara,: 


27 note. 


Trivrisban, a Risbj,487, 


Truths natural 


law 


137. vc 


¢ Tryaruna,a Riehi,487; 


* 


Tugea,father of Bhu. 


jyu,47, 145,154,159, 
161 210.243,240,580, 
588, 633. 


.-s3 demon or savage 


enemy, conquered by ' 


Indra, 580, 588. 


0,, Tugryans, families des- 


oended fsvra Tugra,47. 


cldud-castlea °Tuji, 580 note, 588. 


Tumbless, 12 node. 

Turvaga(s), the epony- 
mus of one of the Five 

{Tribes,gnd his people, 
10,52,65,76,190,240, 
483,403, 551,589,604, 


t 


_ oslmelond, 88. 201. 


700 


Turviti, a prince, 52, 


e 


INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


Turvaydna, a king --=eource of orofit, 
sided by Indra, 74, 426. 
75, 277, 577. * Ugradeva, a chief, 52. 


Uktha, a recived laud, 

2, 11, 65 voles. © 

Ukthys, an offering 
with Somafé 19 note. 

Unborn, the: the Sun 
as Supreme God, 91 
377. 


ge 
~~Babe, the, the Sun 
before rising, 205 


76, 84,149,276, 318. 
Tubuji, a Proper Name, 
D50 note. e 


Twain, Dayrand Night, 
549. Twain the, Fie- 
aven and Earth O94. 


Tvashtar, the’ Artificer 
f the Gode,16,19 24,' 
26, 13, 70, 72, 83, is 4, Universal Gods, 28 00 
‘108 110 124, 143, e 622 a, 866 Visvedevas. 
166, 198,212, 2213, Sie Upanishads, the ologi- 
250, 252260, 264. 97% 2, cal treatises, 377. 


288,298, 305,308,322, AJparad, a Soma cer: 


368. 378,382,388,416,  aimony, 266. ‘ 
437,448,472 493,503, Upastuta, a Rishi, >I, 
514 575 597,603,611, £%, 147. 


6).6,619, 622, 


Twelve days, 438. 
--moons Sedat 
--forms(monttd) 2 )221 
——spoke+(raanthe) 221, 
—Aditvas, Sun-Gods. 


17 = 3 


ught, 6, 277. § 
Urcsnue, 575 note. . 


sonified, 162. ‘ 


Urjavya, a ‘prince,505 
Urjayanti, she rho 
etrengthens, 275, 
Urmys, Night, 533. 
Urnavabha, a demon 

27 2\note. 
Urukaksha, the pame 
of a man, 607 nota. 
Ucvasi, an Apsarae or 
éolancial nymph, 505. 


Twiqa-vep kings, 74. 

Twins, the, Reaven 
and Mart), 211. 

Gwo Sager. celestial t: 
priests. 2509. « « 

—~ Heralds. Divina Ho- 
tar- priests, 263. 


T wo-footed. Gauri 
Vak. 226. 


4 


bd] 


by Indra, 70,71,106, 


- spe 
ect wo a 493, 497,581. — 
Udgatar. & pfiess who Ushica. Kos, 
chafite#SAma-hymus. “ 
a as | se 
Udder =altar. 404. ¢ 
407. 


Aurora, 


63, 65-67, 93, 169), 
188, 292,943, 273," 

. 978, 307. 336, 361,_ 
385. 388, 393, 401, 
432, 44% 51% 515, 
567-626, 629, 


423 68. ‘ 
Udder r= sac: ifce 42%. 


Urana, a demon of dro- 


Urjan i, Strength per- 


Usafa.a Rishi favoured Va 


159,166,411,428489 , 


Dawe: 4), 68, 61, . 


Ushas, her chariot 
shattered by Indra, 
278. 432. 

Usij, a Rishi, 21, 71. 
146 163 168. 503 
VaADHRIMATI, a proté- 
gée of the Agvine, 156. 
Vadbryasva, a» cele- 
brated Rishi, 631. 
Vagdevats, Goddess of 
Speech, 56,503 notes. 
Vagdevi, the same, 

26 note. 


’ Vahoih, priest; or lumi- 


nous, 307 note. 

Vaidadasvi a prince, 

~532. 

Vaisvadeva Nivid,invo- 
cation of the All- 
Godg, 330. 

Vaisvamitra, descenda- 
nt of Visvamitra, 1 
note, | 

Vaisvgnara,Dear to All 
Men, Agni,80 8], 127, 
318,321,340, 400 401, 
463, 487, 561- 564, 


" Waitg ia Sutra,O7 2 note, 


Vaivasvata, gon of 
Viva-vgn, 148, 370- 
V4ja, one of the Ribhea, 
23, 94, 144, 213, 371, 
388,437-439,442-506, 

619. 

Vajas, Vaja and his 
krothers, the three 

Ribhus, 144, 439. 

k or Vach, Voice, 
the Word, Speech 
personified,5. 26, 125, 
26,125 232, 359. 372, 
374,384,393,515,5 16, 
O41. 

Vala,cave,imprisoniag 

" cloud, personified as a 
drought-demon, 14,72, 
85,272,278, 277,279, 

© 389. 356,454,576, 598, 


9 603. 


Vamadeva, a_ Rishi, 
391, 413,416, 418, 
427, 450. 

Vamra, ssid to be a 
Rishi, 70,147. 

Vanaspati, Sovran of 
the Wood, a tall t:ee, 
the sacrificial stake, 
16, 198, 252, 264, 
322, 327, 472. 

—the mortar for poun- 
_ding the Soma plant, 


aod in the dual, mor- * 


tar and pestle, 37-° 

Vandana, a protéyé of 
the Asvins, 145,155, 
158,161-163. 

Vangrida, ademon,74, 

Vapaouti, name of u 
epecial sacritice, 508 
note. 

Varasikhe, ademcnor 
satage enemy, 588, 
589. 

Varchin, a demon or 
savare, 277,432,611. 
Varshagiras, sone of 
King Vrishagir, 128, 

130. 

“Varuna, the Encompa- 
eser, God of the sta- 
rry heaveu, 3,16, 19, 
21,26, 28, 30-34. 48, 
$0,51,57-59,61,68,95 
$9, 192, 114, 116, 123, 
195, 126, 130, 136- 138 
144, 153,154,168-170 
178,179,189-191, 96, 
199,204 209,214,218, 


227 ,233,247,249,259,° 


292,297,306,308 321- 
$23,333 337, 360, 361, 
378- '380, 388, 391 394, 
397,400,408,438, 438, 


439 443,445,448,458,. 


459,468,47 2,487 BOD 
605-507, 514-517-519. 
533 540, 551,552,557, 


INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 701 


612,614.615,617,619, 471. 

633 640 641,645,648, Vasuyus, a Rishi fami- 
Varuna, chief of the ly, 485. 

Tacdsat naturaland Vata, Wind, the Wind- 

Maral Order, 31, 38, God, 70, 71, 250 493, 


68, 136. 563, 514, 616, 619. 
—King of heaven and Vitapi the fermenti:fy 
earth 33 Soma, 251. 
— Punisher of the wick- avri jcovaring), a 
ed, 178. ° wRishi® according to 


—pardons the sine of "Savana, 82. 
nenitents, 32,34, 295 | ,Vayv, Wind, the ne 
552 2! ** God, 2,3 17,18, 27 2 

—rends rain, 5) Re 0,81, 15], 154, te 

_his rivalry with To- > £88,191,198,214; 
dra 448 ’ 0” 994926.2%5,951,2 

Varunani, * Varuna’s 340%341,250,356 ai 
Consort, 26,575. * 384. 386,421.451-453 

Varitri, a ‘tutelgry 464 , 476, 502, 503, 508 
Saddere, 26, 504. , 518. 519 538,569,597 

Varutris, 389. 615,616,619. 

Vass, Risbi, 146, 157, Vavue, honorific plural 

Vashat, a tacrifoial fur Vayu, 271 
exclamation, 41, 164, voay , father or com- 
305. ? ot Turviti, 76, 

Vashetkara, the ery 1] 5, 276, 418, 546. 

- Vashat :deified, 48 Veda, v. ix, xi. xij, 

‘ 


note. XIV. 
Vasishtha, a famous Vedas, three, 462, 
Rishi, seer of Bock note. <2 


VIL. of the RY,, 30, —fdur, v. yi. 468 note. 
90,146,315, 3 376 Vedanti(s), 563, 564, 
Vastoshpati, “ ava al Vedi, altar, 4 note; see 
thé Homestead, Tn- Alt&r. 
dra, 503 Vedic [ndia, 378, note. 
Vase, food, kind,Gond Vedische Studien , 172, 
Lord, 4Q, 123 0199, 592,597,602, 616 638, 
267 286, 278, 336, 640. 
368, 385; 446,° 469, Vena, probably “Agni, 
486. 462. 
Vatus, a clare afGode Venomous reptiles, cha- 
40,°48, 62, 80, 128, erm aginst, 255, 256 
- 138°139"164, 200, * Vetasu, a feed Br gay- 
* o1%. 918, 263, 293,. * ave,.880,587 588. 
"297, 302, 328° 337° Vibali, a Brook 7 432. 
362, 369, 384, 384, Vibhvan, ong of the 
458, 503, 505, 517, e Rebhuse23, 24, 144, . 
5193 526,%19, 633. 213,368, 437, &38, 


565,572,57 2'582,688, Vasusrntg, a efbishi, (842,506; 507,5,14,528. 


es 


702 


Vidadagva, father of 
Puruwiltha, 532, note. 

Vidatha, sacrificial as- 
wembly, 41 note. 
Vidathin, father of 
Rijisvan, 412, 489. 
Vidbatar, the TD idpo- 
, ser, 619. 

Vikhanaa, a [ishi,? £7 
nole, ¥ 


Vimada, an ancicnt 
Rishi, 69, 148, a 
160. . 


Vindhyan Nountalna.© 
230 note. 


Vintner,“255, “ 


Vipas, the river Beas, 
44, 353, 432. 
Viewvhadra, the des. 


troyer of, Daksha's 
np crifice, 433 note. 
Virapatni, the Hero’s 


Visva, Heaven -perso- 
Visvach, an Asura or 
Visvachar.kani, 


——a Rishi, 48%. 
Visvaka, a Rishi, 157, 


Vigvamitra, a famous 


Visvauitfas 318,336, 


* headed moneter slain 


INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


sun; a sacrificer, 40, 
64,73,79,81, 191,355 
370 404,477,562. 
Voice, see Vik, Speectl 
—— = thunder, 238. 
Vrichsyg, «a dameel 
given to Kakshivau 
by the Asvins, 71. 
Vrichivan(s), chief and 
people of a tribr, 
Ri-hi. 2,13, 30, 315, 5389 
332,339, 353, 354, 359, Vriksa, wolf, robber.. 


nified, 571. 
fiend, 159. « 
Dear 


toalmen, Agni,485. 


158 D 


* 361.38 4,373,375,376, 59. 


Vrikadvarag, the name 
ot a king, 297. 
37 4. Vrishabha, bull, manly 
Visvarupa, a strong, 242 note. 


Vrishagir, ar yal Ri- 


o84, 390, 


three- 


“yadra, 272 ahi, 128, 156, 
Visvas, a clase of Gods, Vein, mala, strong, 


Wife, perhaps the 
river Sarasvast p88, 
609, 616, notés.” 
Virupate), & Rishi an 
his deedendants, 62, 
373 


Vishhapu, a Rishi’s 
604 rostered to his 


the Ganaharvas, 217 
nole, 


father by the Agving, Visv devas, Visvede- 


107, 158. 
Vishnu, Pervader, or 
Active Worker, a 


personification of the 


Sun, 27,83, 110, 115, 


207 209,226 250,259, 
236,302 ,325.378.381, 
394,397,416 417,468, 


514,517,519,553,554, 
566 6,575,575, 582,604 
617,649,841,642. 


A 


vah. Visve Devah, 
All-Gods, Universal 
Gods, a class of deit- 
ier, 4,24,28°36, 113, 
LL5, 136. 142 , 467, 191, 
219,249. ery *330 376, 
379 333, "384, 458,502, 
507,540,512 514 518, 


581,515,647 ,619, 621. 
‘Vitahavya, a. Rishi, 
‘568 


4, n40. bull, hero, chief, 242 
Visva:aman, as Rishi, note. 
: _.. m-—a Rishi, 51. 
Visvavara, a Rishi, Vrishanasva, a king, - 
: L. 71. 
| isvavdra, 8 woman Vritra, Vitttas, the 
said to be tha seer 
of h V. 8.. chief cloud-demon 
yee and fiends of drought, 
Visvavasu, chiat yor 


g.14,28,43-46, 50, 69, 
72-74 76,78,83,84,87, 
99,103,404, 107, 108, 
110,112,120,132, 134, 
142 166,228.229,951 
971,27 2,27 6,283,286 
296,345,347,350,351- 
353, 355,35%, 359,366, 
368,411,413 415,417, 


> 


- 419,422,423, 426, 427, 


435, 446, 448,489, 491, 
494,497 506,513, 516, 
573,574, 575, 577. 579, 
583, 584. 587,594 596, 


—— = Lidra; 207, 

Visisipra 
Yarhbatians 513 

Vispal’,, a proteyee of 
the Asvigs, 46, 16, 
158) 161, 245, 


%s Vitast%, Greek tfydas 
»* probably a. 


598 602,604 ,609,615, 


pes, modern Jehlame 627,631,640-644. 


‘or Jhelum, a river Vritra’s mother, 44. 
of the Panjab, 44. Vritra-slayer, a title 

Vivesvia, Briliiant, a * cof Indea 20,104,107, 
pawe ofthe morniag © 128,139,250,285,340, 


 350,363,367,37 1 372, 
) 378,431-433,436,498, 
\ 500,50 1,597,608. 


Vritra-elayer, Ago}, 


g 81,101.260, 337, 571, 


» 572,574 
} — —- Soma the Moon- 
‘ Gad, 116. 
Vritra slayera, Indra- 
Agni, 140, 629. 


— —Indra-Varuns,640. 


Vulcan, 16, 72 notes 

Vyansa, a damon of 
drought, 130, 133, 
275, 355. 

—[adra’s father, 416, 
417 notes. 

Vyasvs, a protégé of 
tbe A&vins. 


Wari, “V, xiv. 
9 31, 137, 189, 252, 
552, 619. 


Warderer, the, Wind, 
102, 145, 504 

—Judra as the sun, 9, 
600. % 

War, weapons of, bow, 
arrow, chariot, arm- 
our, ete , 645; spear. 
lance, 4, &8, 110, 
112, 113, 232, 2309; 
sword, 52, 112, 113, 
dagaer, 527; lub, 
51, 87; sling, 160. 


Warrior, the’(Bharata) Williams, Sir Ma M, 


Rudra, 305. 
—Savitar, 643. 


‘Warp and woof, 563,’ 


564, 


Waters, personified, 


: Wirt 


INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 703 


Waters, son of the, Hundred Winters. 
Agni, 26, 124, 198, "Wish-Goddese, Dhisha. 
250,303-305,329,504, “pa, 369. 
$10,567,623. Witches 136; see 5 srce- 

——Sivtar, 26, 619. ra~ses 
Wealth-yiver, Agsi Wizard, 624 note. « 
19, 108, 126, 306. Weif, 59, 138, 156, 
—Tudra,45, 456. © 50 24767 ;she-wolf, 

Weavaral weaving, 9259, 160,247,621 
web, 26.” 307. olvesrenemins, 560. 
Web=hvmn, 191. Women praised, O31; 
—=woship, 263  . 9, abduction of, Als, 
Waber, Prof. A , vii. ® €9%; p ize of “War, , 
xiv. xv 287. 607. ©, 415, attend feptivals, 
Weregild, 532. . —% 172, 463; ,6ake parh ° 
Wheel =the year, 227, inagcriticp, 98, 106, 
Whip, of tne Asving, 282 ae 
2A, 209. ae — fingers, see Maidene, 
—of the Marnts, 2, ‘Sisters. ; 

- -deified, 647. om » Woods, pers sified, 59 +. 
— lightning compared Wool, 242. 520. 
toe, 533 Words, play upon, 
Whitney, Prof. , Vrishan strong, 242, 
DY, 22 2ap B97,499, 501,603 
Wicked, place of puni- Aiden, boud, bouuty 
*shment of the, 401 =. 580d. , 

“Wider-stcider, the, Vie World-halve,. beav-n 
‘hnu as the suo, 207, and earth, 8», 966 
3178, Worlds, pay of, 104. 
Wife, carrfrl and -ythses, 7, 48 o8u, 
active, 91, 101; be- 498, 565, 632. 
nevolent 53¢; decks# World-tree, 31, 223 
harsélf for her hue- mOlgs. 
band, 396; takes part X#RXKs, 648 nole , 
in sacrifice, 96, 106, Yawu(s), chivf and 
182.° members of a great, 

Aw an tribe, 10, §2, 


W. 


xv, £03 76,140,240,433, 493, 
Wilson, Pry H. H., 581, 604 | 
viii. xi. iv..xv ef Yajamijna, institutor 
phspim q © eof sacrifice, worshi- 


pergonified, Tl4, ® pper, wealthy house- 


28,29,83.106,124 128, © 145,167,214,22€ 212, » holdgr, 12 hots. 


213,305,379.383,384.« 


gee Vata Vavu. = og Yajava, & Rishi, 511 


398 404,458,514,618- Wind's Bride, 131 note. Yujuas, xacrificial cere- 


ae power of the, Windisch, Prof, 297. 


—removers of sin, 29, 


‘—epbysicians, 618, ° « Winters, hucdred, see 


monirgy 19. , 
Yojurveda, the Veda, 
of ereriticial textes, 

yy AIT. 


Wine (~ur4), 155. 
Wint-skin., 255 


704 INDEX OF NAM&A, ETC. 

Yamuna, the ,Ptole- 
my, the Jomanee of 
~liny, the modern 
Junna, 521.¢ 


Yaska, auth®r of® the 
Nirukta, 3,5,58,114, 
118.141, 146,227,346, 
348.353,461, 

Yotudbanar, sorcerers. 
fiends, 4“, 


Yajus, sacrificial text, 
distinguished from 
recited hymn aid 
chant, 122 

Yajva, sac-ificial verse 
uttered when the ob- 
Jation is offered. 193, 
566 notes. _ 

Yama, F ing of the-fe- 
parted, son ‘bf Vivus- 
van. 37,40,49,54,44, 
$5,106,154,217, 


Yavyavati, the ni 
of a river,589. 
Yayati, an ane: 
patriarch, 42.140 


AEND. xii. 

vag. 75, 114. 

Zimmer, Prof, H 
631, 648. 

Zoroastrians, 146, 


