





his book is returnable on ot 
sfore the date last stamped. 


was^aken from tke Library oh th 
*p*i* It is returnable within 14 






THE MUIRHEAI) 

LIBRARY OF PHILOSOPHY 

As may be seen from the original programme printed 
in Erdmann’s History df Philosophy under the date 
1890, the Muirhead Library of Philosophy was designed 
as a contribution to the History of Modern Philosophy 
under the heads: first of 'different Schools of Thought — 
Sensationalist, Realist, Idealist, Intuitivist; secondly of 
different Subjects — Psychology, Ethics, /Esthetics, 
Political Philosophy, Theology. While much had been 
done in England in tracing the course of evolution in 
nature, history, economics, morals, and religion, Jittle 
had been done in tracing the development of thought 
on these subjects. Yet “the evolution of opinion is 
part of the whole evolution.’’ 

By the co-operation of different writers in carrying 
out thi 5 plan it was hoped that a thoroughness and 
< ompleteness of treatment, otherwise unattainable, 
might be secured. It was believed also that from writers, 
mainly British and American, fuller consideration of 
English Philosophy than it had hitherto received might 
be looked fou In the earlier series of books containing, 
among others, Bosanquct’s History of /Esthetics, 
Pfleiderer’s Rational Theology since Kant, Albee’s 
History of English Utilitarianism, Bonar’s Philosophy 
and Political Economy, Brett’s History of Psychology , 
Ritchie’s Natural Rights, these objects were to a large 
extent effected. 

In the meantime original work of a high order was 
being produced both in England and America by such 
writers as Bradley, Stout, Bertrand Russell, Baldwin, 
Urban , Montague, and others, and a new interest in 
foreign works, German, French, and Italian, which had 



either become classical or were attracting public atten- 
tion, had developed. The scope of the Library thus 
became extended into something more international, 
in the hope that it may contribute to that mutual 
understanding between countries and' peoples which is 
so pressing a need of the present time. 

General Enron 



THE MUIRHEAD 
LIBRARY OF PHILOSOPHY 

General Editor: 


Professor H. D. Lewis 

Professor of Philosophy, University College, Bongo 


NALYTIC PSYCHOLOGY By Prof. G. F. Stout. Two Vols. 5th Impression. 
^ r TENTION By Prof. W. B. Pillsbury. 2nd Impression. 

YTORY OF ESTHETIC By B. Bosanquet. 5th Impression. 4th Edition. 

' STORY OF ENGLISH UTILITARIANISM By Prof. E. Albee. 

iSTORY OF PHILOSOPHY By J. E. Erdmann. 

Vol. I. Ancient and Medieval. 5th Impression. 

Vol. II. Modern. 5th Impression. 

Vol III. Since Hegel. 1th Impression. 

HISTORY OF PSYCHOLOGY By Prof. G. S. Brett. 

Vol. I. Ancient and Patrtstic. • 

Vol. II. Medieval and Early Modern Period. 

Vol. HI. Modern Psychology. 


MATTER AND MEMORY By Henri Bergson. Translated by N. M. Paul and 
W. S. Palmer. 4th Impression. 

TATURAL K1GHT§ By D. G. Ritchie. 3rd Edition. 

H1ILOSOPHY AND POLITICAL ECONOMY By J. Bonar. 4th Impression. 
DEVELOPMENT OF THEOLOGY SINCE KANT By 0. Pfleiderer. 

T, ‘ PHENOMENOLOGY OF MIND By G. W. F. Hegel. Translated by Prof. 
B. Baillie. 2nd Edition. # 

G AND FREE WILL By Prof. Henri Bergson. Translated by F. G. Pogson. 
5th Impression. 


ALUATION:THE THEORY OF VALUE By Prof. W. M. Urban. 

HE PSYCHOLOGY OP fHE RELIGIOUS LIFE By Proi. G. M. Stratton. 2nd 
. ( Edition, , * 

JjfaE GREAT PROBLEMS By Bernardino Varisco. Translated by Prof. R. C. 
% I.odgc. , 

[NOW THYSELF By Bernardino Varisco. Translated by Dr. Guglielnio Salvadori. 

EMENTS 01' FOLK PSYCHOLOGY By \V. Wundt. Translated by Prof 
Edward L. Schaub. 3rd Impression. 

^EI^iPIENTS OF CONSTRUCTIVE PHILOSOPHY By Tiof. J. S. Mackenzie 
, 2W hnprc^ion. 

SOCIAL PURPOSE By II. J. W. Iletlierington and Prof. J. II. Muirhead. 2nd 
Impression. * 


INTRODUCTION TO MATHEMATICAL PHILOSOPHY By Bertrand Russell, 
jF.R.S. 3rd Impression. 

’Of) AND PERSONALITY (Gifford Lectures) By Prof. Clement C. J. Webb 
Vpart l.f 2nd Impression. 



THE MUIRHEAD LIBRARY OF PHILOSOPHY— contd. 


DIVINE PERSONALITY AND HUMAN LIFE (Gifford Lectures) By Prof. 
Clement C. J. Webb. (Part II.) 2nd Impression. 

MODERN PHILOSOPHY By Guido de Ruggiero. Translated by A. Howard 
Hannay and R. G. Colling wood. 

THE ANALYSIS OF MIND By Bertrand Russell, F.R.S. 3rd Impression. 

DIALOGUES ON METAPHYSICS By Nicolas Milcbranche. Translated by 
Morris Ginsberg. 

INDIAN PHILOSOPHY By Prof. S. Radhakrishnan. 2nd Edition. Gth Impression. 
Two volumes. 

CONTEMPORARY BRITISH PHILOSOPHY Edited by Prof. J. H. Muirhead. 
Two Vols. 

THE WAYS OR KNOWING: or, The Methods of Philosophy By Prof. W. P. 
Montague. 2nd Impression. 

A THEORY OF DIRECT REALISM; and the Relation of Realism to Idealism 
By J. E. Turner. 

THE GOODWILL: A STUDY IN THE COHERENCE THEORY OF GOOD- 
NESS. By Prof. H. J. Paton. 

FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEMS OF LIFE: AN ESSAY ON CITIZENSHIP AS 
PURSUIT OF VALUES By Prof. J. S. Mackenzie. 

THE INTELLIGIBLE WORLD: METAPHYSICS AND VALUE By Prof. 
W. M Urban. 

CONTEMPORARY AMERICAN PHILOSOPHY Edited by Prof. George P. 
Adams and Prof. Wm. Pepperell Montague. Two Vols. 

HEGEL’S SCIENCE OF LOGIC Translated by W. H. Johnston and L. G. Strutters, 1 
Two Vols. 2nd Impression. 

IDENTITY AND REALITY By Emile Meyerson. Translated by Kate Loewenberg. 
MORAL SENSE By James Bonar. 

COLERIDGE AS PHILOSOPHER By Prof. J. H. Muirhead. 

IDEAS: An Introduction to Pure Phenomenology By Edmund Husserl 
Translated by W. R. Boyce Gibson. 

THE PLATONIC TxIADITION IN ANGLO-SAXON PHILOSOPHY By Prof 
J. H. Muirhead. ’ 

ETHICS By Nicolia Hartmann. Translated by Stanton Coit. Three Vols. 2 
Impression. M 

ESSENTIALS IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF RELIGION: A PHILOSOI 
AND PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY By J. E. Turner. 

KANT'S METAPHYSIC OF EXPERIENCE By Prof. H. J. Paton. 

CONTEMPORARY INDIAN PHILOSOPHY Edited by Prof. S. Radhakrishnan 
and Prof. J. H. Muirhead. 2nd Edition. 

A HUNDRED YEARS OF BRITISH PHILOSOPHY By Dr. Rudolf Mr;tz. 
Translated by Prof. J.W. Harvey, Prof. T. E. Jessop, Henry Sturt. 

LANGUAGE AND REALITY By Wilbur Marshall Urban. 

THE NATURE OF THOUGHT By Brand Blanshard, B.Sc., Ph.D. 

HUMAN KNOWLEDGE By Bertrand 9 Russell. 

SOME MAIN PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY By E. P. Moore. 



TLhc flbutrbeab Xibrars of philosophy 

edited by h. d. lewis 


rHE PRINCIPAL’ 
UPANISADS 



By R A D H V k R I s a N A N 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 
THE HINDU VIEW OF 1IIL r 
AN IDEALIST VIEW OF LIFL 
EAST AND A\ 1ST IN RELIGION 
RELIGION AND SOCll TY 
THl BHAG AV ADGITA 

( \Ik n &. Unw in) 

EASrtRN REIIGIONS AND WlSILRN IliOlKHI 

(Clarendon Press, Oxloid) 

THL DHAMMAPADA 

(Oxford University Pitss) 

iitdia and china 

IS THIS PI \CL ? 

GRI W INDIANS 

(Hind kitibs, Bombi>) 

Ldltcd b) R \ l) H \ K R I S II N A N 
vt VHA r\t A C ANDHI 
( Allc n 6c Unw in ) 

Fdited by r\dh\krishn \ n ind J H muiriii \ 

CONTEMPORARY INDIAN I HLI OSOPI1Y 

(Allen & Unwin) 

By A N MARLOW 
RADHAKRISIIN AN AN ANTHOI OC Y 



THE PRINCIPAL 
UPANISADS 


EDITED WITH 

INTRODUCTION,' TIXT, TRANSLATION 
AND NOTES BY 

S. RADHAKRISHNAN 


LONDON 

GEORGL ALLLISt & UNWIN LTD 


KUSkIN HOUSE • MUSLUM STRILI 



FIRST PUBLISHED IN 19 I 3 


prin ri_r> frsi oReat bri tain 

in 1 1 point CJ>ld Style type 

BY UNWIN HROIlil RS LIMI1LD 
WOKING AND LON UO N 



PREFACE 


Human • nature is .not altogether unchanging but it does 
remain sufficiently constant to justify the study of ancient 
classics. The problems of human life and destiny have not 
been superseded by the striking achievements of science and 
technology. The solutions offered, though conditioned in their 
modes of expression by their time and environment, have not 
been seriously affected by the march of scientific knowledge 
and criticism. The responsibility laid on man as a rational 
being, to integrate himself, to relate the present to the past and 
the future, to live in time as well as in eternity, has become acute 
and urgent. The Upanisads, though remote in time from us, 
are not remote in thought. They disclose the working of the 
primal impulses of the human soul which rise above the differ- 
ences of race and of geographical position. At the core of all 
historical religions there are fundanlental types of spiiitual 
experience though they are expressed with different degrees of 
clarity. The Upanisads illustrate and illuminate these primary 
experiences. 

‘These are really the thoughts of all men in all ages and 
lands; th^y are not original with me. If they are not yours as 
much as mine, they are nothing or next to nothing,’ said Walt 
Whitman. The Upanisads deal with questions which arise when 
men begin to reflect seriously and attempt answers to them 
which are not very different, except in their ‘approach and 
emphasis fjom what we are now inclined to accept. This does 
not mean that the message of the Upanisads, which is as true 
today as ever, commits us to the different hypotheses about 
the structure of the world and t*he physiology of man. We must 
make a distinction between the message of the Upanisads and 
their mythology. The latter is liable to correction by advances 
in science. Even this mythology becomes intelligible if we place 
ourselves as far as possible at the viewpoint of those who con- 
ceived it. Those parts of the Upanisads which seem to us today 
to be trivial, tedious and almost unmeaning, should have had 
value and significance at the time they were composed. 

Anyone who reads the Upanisads in the original Sanskrit will 
be caught up and carried away by the elevation, the poetry, 
the compelling fascination of the many utterances through 
which tlfey lay bare the secret and sacred relations of the 



6 The Principal Upanisads 

human soul and the Ultimate Reality. When we read them, we 
cannot help being impressed by the exceptional ability, earnest- 
ness and ripeness of mind of those who wrestled with these 
ultimate questions.' These souls who tackled .these problems 
remain still and will remain for all time in essential harmony 
with thV 3 highest ideals of civilisation. 

The Upanisads are the foundations on which the beliefs of 
millions of hjiman beings, who were not much inferior to our- 
selves, are based. Nothing is more sacred to man than his own 
history. At least as memorials of the past, the Upanisads are 
worth our attention. 

A proper knowledge of the texts is an indispensable aid to 
the understanding of the Upanisads. There are parts of the 
Upanisads which repel us by their repetitiveness and irrelevance 
to our needs, philosophical and religious. But if we are to under- 
stand their ideas, we must know the atmosphere in which they 
worked. We must not judge ancient writings from our standards. 
We need not condemn our fathers for having been what they 
were or ourselves for being somewhat different from them. It 
is our task to relate them to their environment, to bridge 
distances of time and space and separate the transitory from 
the permanent. 

There is a danger in giving only carefully chosen, extracts. 
We are likely to give what is easy to read and omit what is 
difficult, or give what is agreeable to our views and omit what 
is disagreeable. It is wise to study the Upanisads as a whole, 
their striking insights as well as their commonplace assumptions. 
Only such a study will be historically valuable. I hayc therefore 
given in full the classical Upanisads, thqse commented on or 
mentioned by Samkara. The other Upanisads are of a later 
date and are sectarian in character. They represent the popular 
gods, Siva, Visnu, Sakti, as manifestations of the Supreme 
Reality. They are not parts of the original Veda, are of much 
later origin and are not therefore as authoritative as the 
classical Upanisads. If they arc all to be included, it would 
be difficult to find a Publisher for so immense a work. I have 
therefore selected a few other Upanisads, some ‘of those to 
which references are made by the great teachers, Samkara and 
Ramanuja. 

In the matter of translation and interpretation, I owe a 
heavy debt, directly and indirectly, not only to the classical 
commentators but also to the modern writers who have worked 



Preface 7 

on the subject. I have profited by their tireless labours. The 
careful reader will find, I hope, that a small advance in a few 
places at least has been made in this translation towards a 
better understanding of the texts. 

Passages in verse arc not translated into rhyme as the 
padding and inversion necessary for observing a ‘metrical 
pattern take away a great deal from the dignity and concise- 
ness of the original. ' • 

It is not easy to render Sanskrit religious and philosophical 
classics into English for each language has its own charac- 
teristic genius. Language conveys thought as well as feeling. 
It falls short of its full power and purpose, if it fails to com- 
municate the emotion as fully as it conveys the idea. Words 
convey ideas but they do not always express moods. In the 
Upanisads we find harmonies of speech which excite the 
emotions and stir the soul. I am afraid that it has not been 
possible for me to produce in the English translation the 
richness of melody, the warmth of spirit, the power of en^llant- 
ment that appeals to the ear, heart and mind. I have tried to 
be faithful to the originals, sometimes even at the cost of 
elegance. I have given the texts with all their nobility of 
sound and the # feeling of the numinous. 

For tfee classical Upanisads the text followed is that com- 
mented on by Saiiikara. A multitude of variant readings of the 
texts exist, some of them to be found in the famous commen- 
taries, others in more out of the«way versions. The chief variant 
readings are mentioned in the notes. As my interest is philo- 
sophical rather than linguistic, I have not discussed them. In 
the translation, w<*rds which are omitted or understood in 
Sanskrit or arc essential to complete the grammatical structure 
are inserted in brackets. 

We cannot bring to the study of the Upanisads virgin minds 
which are untouched by the views of the many generations of 
scholars who have gone before us. Their influence may work 
cither directly or indirectly. To be aware of this limitation, to 
estimate it correctly is of great importance in the study of 
ancient texts. The classical commentators represent in their 
works the great oral traditions of interpretation which have 
been current in their time. Centuries of careful thought lie 
behind the exegetical traditions as they finally took shape. It 
would be futile to neglect the work of the commentators as 
there are words and passages in the Upanisads of which we 



8 The Principal Upanisads 

could make little sense without the help of the commen- 
tators. 

We do not have in the Upanisads a single well-articulated 
system of thought. We find in them a number of different 
strands which could be woven together in a single whole by 
sympathetic interpretation. Such an account involves the ex- 
pression of opinions which can always be questioned. Impar- 
tiality does not consist in a refusal to form opinions or in a 
futile attempt to conceal them. It consists in rethinking the 
thoughts of the past, in understanding their environment, and 
in relating them to the intellectual and spiritual needs of our 
own time. While we should avoid the attempt to read into the 
terms of the past the meanings of the present, we cannot 
overlook the fact that certain problems are the same in all 
ages. We must keep in mind the Buddhist saying: ‘Whatever 
is not adapted to such and such persons as are to be taught 
cannot be called a teaching/ We must remain sensitive to the 
presiding currents of thought and be prepared, as far as we 
are able, to translate the universal truth into terms intelligible 
to our audience, without distorting their meaning. It would 
scarcely be possible to exaggerate the difficulty of such a task, 
but it has to be undertaken. If we are able to make the seeming 
abstractions of the Upanisads flame anew with their ancient 
colour and depth, if we can make them pulsate with their old 
meaning, they will not appear to be altogether irrelevant to our 
needs, intellectual and spiritual. The notes are framed in this 
spirit. 

The Upanisads which base their affirmations on spiritual 
experience are invaluable for us, as the ^traditional props of 
faith, the infallible scripture, , miracle and prophecy are no 
longer available. The irreligion of our times is largely the 
product of the supremacy of religious technique over spiritual 
life. The study of the Upanisads may help to restore to funda- 
mental things of religion that reality without which they seem 
to be meaningless. 

Besides, at a time when moral aggression is compelling 
people to capitulate to queer ways of life, when vast experi- 
ments in social structure and political organisation ire being 
made at enormous cost of life and suffering, when we stand 
perplexed and confused before the future with no clear light 
to guide our way, the power of the human soul is the only 
refuge. If we resolve to be governed by it, our civilisation may 



Preface g 

enter upon its most glorious epoch. There are many 'dis- 
satisfied children of the spirit of the west/ to use Romain 
Rolland's phrase, who ai*e oppressed that fhe universality of 
her great thoughts has been defamed for eftds of violent action, 
that they are trapped in a blind alley and are savagely crushing 
each other out of existence. When an old binding culture is 
being broken, when ethical standards are dissolving, when we 
are being aroused out of apathy or awakened put of uncon- 
sciousness, when there is in the air general ferment, inward 
stirring, cultural crisis, then a high tide of spiritual agitation 
sweeps over peoples and we sense in the horizon something 
novel, something unprecedented, the beginnings of a spiritual 
renaissance. We are living in a world of freer cultural inter- 
course and wider world sympathies. No one can ignore his 
neighbour who is also groping in this world of sense for the 
world unseen. The task set to our generation is to reconcile 
the varying ideals of the converging cultural patterns and help 
them to sustain and support rather than combat and destroy 
one another. By this process they are transformed from within 
and the forms that separate them will lose their exclusivist 
meaning and signify only that unity with their own origins and 
inspirations. 

The study of the sacred books of religions other than one's 
own is essential for speeding up this process. Students of Chris- 
tian religion and theology, especially those who wish to make 
Indian Christian thought not merely 'geographically' but 
'organically' Indian, should understand their great heritage 
which is contained in the Upanisads. 

For us Indians, ^ study of the Upanisads is essential, if we 
are to preserve our national being and character. discover 
the main lines of our traditional life, we must turn to our 
classics, the Vedas and the Upanisads, the Bhagavad-gltd and 
the Dhamma-pada. They have done more to colour our minds 
than we generally acknowledge. They not only thought many 
of our thoughts but coined hundreds of the words that we use 
in daily life. There is much in our past that is degrading and 
deficient But there is also much that is life-giving and elevating. 
If the past is to serve as an inspiration for the future, we have 
to study it with discrimination and sympathy. Again, the 
highest achievements of the hiiman mind and spirit are not 
limited to the past. The gates of the future are wide open. 
While the fundamental motives, the governing ideas which 



10 


The Principal Upanisads 

constitute the essential spirit of our culture are a part of our 
very being, they should receive changing expression according 
to the needs and conditions of our tfme. 

There is no more inspiring task for the student of Indian 
thought than to set forth some phases of its spiritual wisdom 
and bring them to bear on our own life. Let us, in the words 
-of Socrates, ‘turn over together the treasures that wise men 
have left us, glad if in so doing we make friends with one 
another.’ 

The two essays written for the Philosophy of the Upanisads 
(1922), which is a reprint of chapter IV from my Indian Philo- 
sophy, Volume I, by Rabindranath Tagore and Edmond 
Holmes, are to be found in the Appendices A and B respectively. 

I am greatly indebted to my distinguished and generous 
friends Professors Suniti Kumar Chatterji, and Siddhcsvar 
Bhattacharya for their great kindness in reading the proofs 
and making many valuable suggestions. 

S. R. 


Moscow, 



CONTENTS 


•AGE 

Preface 5 

Scheme of Transliteration 13 

List of Abbreviations 14 

Introduction 15 

I. General Influence 17 

II. The Term ‘Upanisad’ 19 

III. Number, Date and Authorship 20 

IV. The Upanisads as the Vedanta 24 

V. Relation to the Vedas: The Rg Veda 27 

VI. The Yajur, the Selma and the Atharva 44 

Vedas 

Vfl The Brahmanas 46 

VIII. The Aranyakas 47 

IX. The Upanisads 48 

X* Ultimate Reality: Brahman 52 

XI. Ultimate Reality • Atman '73 

-s, • 

XII. Brahman as Atman 77 

XIII. The Status of the World and the Doc- 
trine of Maya and Avidyd 78 

XIV* The Individual Self 90 

XV. Knowledge and Ignorance 95 

XVI. Ethics 104 

X\TII. Karma and Rebirth 113 



12 

The Principal Upanisads 


XVIII. 

Life Eternal 

PAGE 

117 

XIX. 

Religibri 

131 

• 

TEXT, TRANSLATION AND NOTES 


I. 

6 rhad-dranyaka U panisad 

i47 

II. 

Chdndogya U panisad 

335 

III. 

Aitareya U panisad 

513 

IV. 

TaittirTya U panisad 

525 

V. 

Isa U panisad 

565 

VI. 

Kena U panisad 

579 

VII. 

Katha U panisad 

593 

VIII. 

Prasna Upanisad 

649 

IX. 

Mundaka Upanisad 

669 

X. 

Mdndukya Upanisad 

.693 

XI. 

Svetasvatara Upanisad 

707 

XII. 

Kausitaki Brdhmaria Upanisad 

75i 

XIII. 

Maitri Upanisad 

793 

XIV. 

Suhdla Upanisad 

861 

XV.* 

Jdbdla Upanisad 

893 

XVI. 

Paihgala Upanisad 

901 

XVII. 

Kaivalya Upanisad 

925 

XVIII 

Vajrasucika Upanisad 

Appendices 

933 


(a) Rabindranath Tagore on The Upani- 

sads 

(b) Edmond Holm # es on The Upanisads 
Selected Bibliography 

General Index 

937 

943 

949 

951 



SCHEME OF TRANSLITERATION 


Vowels aaiiuurrleaioau 

anusvara m 

visarga h 

Consonants 

gutturals k kh § gh n 

palatals c ch j jh n 

cerebrals t th d dh n 

dentals t th d dh n 

labials p ph b bh m 

semi-vowels y r 1 v 

sibilants s as in sun 

s palatal sibilant pronounced like the soft s 
of Russian 

s cerebral sibilant as in shun 
aspirate h 



LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 


Aitar ey a Upanisad 


A.U. 

Anandagiri 


A. 

Bhagavad-gitd .... 


B.G. 

Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad . 


B.U. 

Brahma Sutra .... 


B.S. 

Chandogya Upanisad . 


C.U. 

Indian Philosophy by Radhakrishnan 

I P. 

Isa U pani$ad 


Isa 

Jdbdla Upanisad .... 


Jabala 

Kena Upanisad .... 


Kena 

Katha Upanisad . ' . 


Katha 

Kausitaki Upanisad 


K.U. 

Mahdbhdrata .... 


M.B. 

Maitrl Upanisad 


Maitrl 

Mdndukya Upanisad . 


Ma.U. 

Mundaka Upanisad 


M.U. 

Paihgala Upanisad 


Paihgala 

Prasna Upanisad .... 


Prasna 

Rangaramanuja .... 


R. 

Ramanuja's Continental y on the 

% 

Brahma Sutra .... 


R.B. ‘ 

Ramanuja’s Commentary on 
Bhagavad-gitd 

the 

R.B.G. 

Rg Veda 


R.V. 

Samkara 


s. 

Samkara's Commentary on 
Brahma Slit) a 

the 

% 

S.B. 

Jsartlkara’s Commentary on 
Bhagavad-gitd 

the 

S.B.G. 

Subala Upanisad .... 

m 

Subala 

Svetasvatara Upanisad . 

m 

S.U. 

Taittiriya Upanisad 

• 

T.U. 

Upanisad 

• 

U. 

Variant 


V. 



INTRODUCTION 




I 

GENERAL INFLUENCE' 

The Upanisads represent a great chapter in the history of the 
human spirit and have dominated Indian philosophy, religion 
and life for three thousand years. Every subsequent religious 
movement has had to show itself to be in accord with their 
philosophical statements. Even doubting and denying spirits 
found in them anticipations of their hesitancies, misgivings 
and negations. They have survived many changes, religious 
and secular, and helped many generations of men to formulate 
their views on the chief problems of life and existence. 

Their thought by itself and through Buddhism influenced 
even in ancient times the cultural life of other nations far 
beyond the boundaries of India, Greater India, Tibet, China, 
Japan and Korea and in the South, in Ceylon, the Malay 
Peninsula and far away in the islands of the Indian and the 
Pacific Oceans. In the West, the tracks of Indian thought 
may be traced fgir into Central Asia, where, buried in the sands 
of the desert, were found Indian texts . 1 

The Upanisads have shown an unparalleled variety of appeal 
during these long centuries and have been admired by different 
people, for different reasons, at different periods. They are said 

1 ‘For thejiistorian, who pursues the history of human thought, the 
Upanisads have a ye^ far greater significance. From the mystical 
doctrines of the Upanisads, one current of thought may be traced to the 
mysticism of the Persian Sufism, /to the mystic, theosophical logos 
doctrine of the Neo-Platonics and the Alexandrian Christian mystics, 
Eckhart and Tauler, and finally to the philosophy of the great German 
mystic of the nineteenth century, Schopenhauer/ Winternitz: A History 
of Indian Literature. E. T. Vol. I (1927), p. 266. See Eastern Religions and 
Western Thought. Second Edition (1940), Chapters IV, V, VI, VII. 
It is said that Schopenhauer had the Latin text of the Upanisads on his 
table and ‘was in the habit, before going to bed, of performing his 
devotions fn?m its pages.’ Bloomfield: Religion of the Veda (1908), p. 55. 
‘From every sentence [of the Upanisads], deep original and sublime 
thoughts arise, and the whole is pervaded by a high and holy and earnest 
spirit. In the whole world . . . there is/no study ... so beneficial and so 
elevating as that of the Upanisads. They are products of the highest 
wisdom. They are destined sooner or later to become the faith of the 
people.* Schopenhauer. 



18 The Principal Upanisads 

to provide us with a complete chart of the unseen Reality, to 
give us the most immediate, intimate and convincing light on 
the secret of human existence, to formulate, in Deussen's 
words, 'philosophical conceptions unequalled in India or 
perhaps anywhere else in the world/ or to tackle every funda- 
mental problem of philosophy. 1 All this may be so or may not 
be so. But of one thing there is no dispute, that those earnest 
spirits have known the fevers and ardours of religious seeking ; 
they have expressed that pensive mood of the thinking mind 
which finds no repose except in the Absolute, no rest except 
in the Divine. The ideal which haunted the thinkers of the 
Upanisads, the ideal of man's ultimate beatitude, the perfection 
of knowledge, the vision of the Real in which the religious 
hunger of the mystic for divine vision and the philosopher's 
ceaseless quest for truth are both satisfied is still our ideal. 
A. N. Whitehead speaks to us of the real which stands behind 
and beyond and within *the passing flux of this world, 'some- 
thing which is real and yet waiting to be realised, something 
which is a remote possibility and yet the greatest of present 
facts, something that gives meaning to all that passes, and yet 
eludes apprehension; something whose possession is the final 
good, and yet is beyond all reach; something which is the 
ultimate ideal and the hopeless quest/ 2 A metaphysical 
curiosity for a theoretical explanation of the world as much 
as a passionate longing for liberation is to be found in the 
Upanisads. Their ideas do not only enlighten our % minds but 
stretch our souls. 

If the % ideas of the Upanisads help us to rise above the 
glamour of the fleshly life, it as because their authors, pure of 
soul, ever striving towards the divine, reveal to us their pictures 
of the splendours of the unseen. The Upanisads are respected 
not because they are a part of sruti or revealed literature and 
so hold a reserved position but because they have inspired 
generations of Indians with vision and strength by their in- 
exhaustible significance and spiritual power. Indian thought 

1 Cp. W. B. Yeats: ‘Nothing that has disturbed the schools to 
conti oversy escaped their notice.’ Preface to the Ten Principal 
Upanisads (1937), P* JI * 

2 Science and the Modern World , (1933), p. 238. 



Introduction 


*9 

has constantly turned to these scriptures for fresh illumination 
and spiritual recovery or recommencement, and not in vain. 
The fire still burns bright on their altars. Their light is for the 
seeing eye and their message is for the seeker after truth. 1 


II 

THE TERM ‘UP AN I SAD' 

The word ' upanisad ' is dervied from upa (near), ni (down) 
and sad (to sit), i.c. sitting down near. Groups of pupils sit near 
the teacher to learn from him the secret doctrine. In the quietude 
of forest hermitages the Upanisad thinkers pondered on the 
problems of the deepest concern and communicated their 
knowledge to fit pupils near them. The seers adopt a certain 
reticence in communicating the truth. They wish to be satisfied 
that their pupils are spiritually and not carnally minded. 2 
To respond to spiritual teaching, we require the spiritual 
disposition. 

The Upanisads contain accounts of the mystic significance 
of the syllable aum, explanations of mystic words like tajjalan, 
which are intelligible only to the initiated, and secret texts and 
esoteric doctrines. Upanisad became a name for a mystery, a 
secret, rahasyam , communicated'only to the tested few.3 When 

1 In an article on Christian Vedanti mi, Mr. R. Gordon Milburn writes, 
‘Christianity in India r^ceds the Vedanta. We missionaries have not 
realised this with fc half the clearness that we should. We cannot move 
freely and joyfully in our own religion; because we have not sufficient 
terms and modes of expression wherewith to express the more immanen- 
tal aspects of Christianity. A very useful step would be the recognition 
of certain books or passages hi the literature of the Vedanta as consti- 
tuting what might be called an Ethnic Old Testament. The permission 
of ecclesiastic al authorities could then be asked for reading passages 
found in such a canon of Ethnic Old Testament at divine service along 
with passages from the New Testament as alternatives to the Old 
Testament lessons.' Indian Interpreter. 1913. 

3 Cp. Plato: ‘To find the Father and Maker of this universe is a hard 
task; and when you have found him, it is impossible to speak of him 
before all people.* Tiinaeus. 0 

3 guhyd adescih. C.U. III. 52. paramam guhyam. Kafka I. 3. 17. 
vedante paramam guhyam. S.U. VI. 22. 
vedaguhyam, vedaguhyopanisatsu gUcV'am. S.U. V. 6. 



20 The Principal Upanisads 

the question of man’s final destiny was raised, Yajnavalkya 
took his pupil aside and whispered to him the truth. 1 According 
to the Chdndogya Upani$ad } the doctrine of Brahman may be 
imparted by a father to his elder son or to a trusted pupil, but 
not to another, whoever he may be, even if the latter should 
give him the whole earth surrounded by the waters and filled 
with treasures. 2 In many cases it is said that the teacher com- 
municates tlie secret knowledge only after repeated entreaty 
and severe testing. 

Sarhkara derives the word upanisad as a substantive from 
the root sad , ‘to loosen/ ‘to reach’ or ‘to destroy’ with upa and 
ni as prefixes and kvip as termination. 3 If this derivation is 
accepted, upanisad means brahma-knowledge by which 
ignorance is loosened or destroyed. The treatises that deal with 
brahma-knowledge are called the Upanisads and so pass for 
the Vedanta. The different derivations together make out that 
the Upanisads give us both spiritual vision and philosophical 
argument.4 There is a core of certainty which is essentially 
incommunicable except by a way of life. It is by a strictly 
personal effort that one can reach the truth. 

Ill 

NUMBER, DATE .AND AUTHORSHIP 

The Upanisads form a literature which has been growing 
from early times. Their number exceeds /two hundred, though 

guhyalamam. Maitii VI. 29. 

abhayam vai brahma bhavati ya evam veda, iti rahasyam. Nrsimhottara- 
tapani U. VIII. 

dharme rahasy upanisat syat. Amarakoick. 

upanisadam rahasyam yac cintyam. S on Kena IV. 7. The injunction of 
secrecy about the mysteries reserved for the initiated is found among 
the Orphics and the Pythagoreans. 

* B.U. III. 2. 13. 

* III. 11. 5; B.U. III. 2. 13. 

3 Introduction to the Katha. In his commentary on T.U., he says, 
upanisannam vd asydm par am sreya iti. 

4 Oldenberg suggests that thd real sense of Upanisad is worship or 
reverence, which the word upasana signifies. Upasana brings about 
oneness with the object worshipped. See Keith: The Religion and 
Philosophy of the Veda and the Upanisads (1925), p. 492. 



Introduction 


21 


the Indian tradition puts it at one hundred and eight. 1 Prince 
Muhammad Dara Shikoh’s collection translated into Persian 
(1656-1657) and then into ’Latin by AnquetiJ Duperron (1801 
and 1802) under the title Oupnekhat, contained about fifty. 
Colebrooke's collection contained fifty-two, and this was based 
on Narayana's list (c. a.d. 1400). The principal Upanisads are 
said to be ten. Samkara commented on eleven, Ha, Kena , Katha, 
Praina , Mundaka , Mandukya, Taittiriya, A itareyct, Ghdndogya, 
Brhad-aranyaka and Svetahatara . He also refers to the Kaust - 
taki, Jabala , Mahandrayana • and Paihgala Upanisads in his 
commentary on the Brahma Sutra. These together with the 
Maitrayaniya or Maitri TJpanisad constitute the principal 
Upanisads. Ramanuja uses all these Upanisads as also the 
Subala and the Culika. He mentions also the Garbha , the 
Jabala and the Mahci Upanisads. Vidyaranya includes Nrsi- 
mhottara-tdpam Upanisad among the twelve he explained in his 
Sarvopanisad-arthanubhuti-prakasa. The other Upanisads which 
have come down are more religious than philosophical. They 
belong more to the Purana and the Tantra than to the Veda. 
They glorify Vedanta or Yoga or Sarhnyasa or extol the worship 
of Siva, Sakti or Visnu. z 

1 See the Muktika if., where it is said that salvation may be attained 
by a study of the hundred and eight Upanisads. I. 30-39. 

2 There is, however, considerable argument about the older and more 
original Upanisads. Max Muller translated the eleven Upanisads quoted 
by Samkara together with MaitrayanJva. Deussen, though he translated 
no less than ^jxty, considers that fourteen of them are original and have 
a connection with Vedic schools. Hume translated the twelve which 
Max Muller selected anfl added to them the Mandukya. Keith in his 
Religion and Philosophy of the Ved& and the Upanisads includes the 
Mahandrayana. His list of fourteen is frhc same as that of Deussen. 

English translations of the Upanisads have appeared in the following 
order: Ram Mohan Roy (1837), Roer (1853), (Bibliotheca Indica) Max 
Muller (1879-1884) Sacred Books of the East, Mead and Chattopadhyaya 
(1896, London Theosophical Society), Sitaram Sastri and Ganganath 
Jha (1898-1901), (G. A. Natesan, Madras), Sltanath Tattvabhusan 
(1900), S. C. Vasu (1911), R. Hume (1921). E. B. Cowell, Hiriyanna, 
Dvivedi, Mahadeva Sastrl and Sri Aurobindo have published transla- 
tions of a few Upanisads. 

Samkara’s commentaries on the principal Upanisads are available in 
English translations also. His interpretations are from the standpoint 
of advaita or non-dualism. Rangaramanuja has adopted the point of 
view of Rayianuja in his commentaries on the Upanisads. Madhva's 
commentaries are from the standpoint of dualism. Extracts from his 



22 The Principal Upanisads 

Modern criticism is generally agreed that the ancient prose 
Upanisads, Aitareya, Kautftaki, Chdndogya, Kena, Taittirlya 
and Brhad-dranyfika , together with Isa and Katha belong to 
the eighth and seventh centuries b.c. They are all pre-Buddhis- 
tic. They represent the Vedanta in its pure original form and 
are the earliest philosophical compositions of the world. These 
Upanisads belong to what Karl Jaspers calls the Axial Era of 
the world, 800 to 300 b.c., when man for the first time simul- 
taneously and independently in Greece, China and India ques- 
tioned the traditional pattern of life. 

As almost all the early literature of India was anonymous, 
we do not know the names of the authors of the Upanisads. 
Some of the chief doctrines of the Upanisads are associated 
with the names of renowned sages as Aruni, Yajnavalkya, 
Balaki, Svetaketu, Sandilya. They were, perhaps, the early 
exponents of the doctrines attributed to them. The teach- 
ings were developed in parisads or spiritual retreats where 
teachers and pupils discussed and defined the different 
views. 

As a part of the Veda, the Upanisads belong to sruti or re- 
vealed literature. They are immemorial, sanataria, timeless.Their 
truths are said to be breathed out by God or visioned by the 
seers. They are the utterances of the sages who speak out of the 
fullness of their illumined experience. They are not reached by 
ordinary perception, inference or reflection, 1 but seen by the 
seers, even as we see and not infer the wealth and riot of colour 
in the summer sky. The seers have the same sense of assurance 
and possession of their spiritual vision as we have of our 
physical perception. The sages are men of 'direct' vision, in 
the words of Yaska, sdksdt-krta-dharmdnah f and the records of 
their experiences are the facts to be considered by any philo- 
sophy of religion. The truths revealed to the seers are not mere 
reports of introspection which are purely subjective. The 
inspired sages proclaim that the knowledge they communicate 
is not what they discover for themselves. It is revealed to 

commentaries are found in the edition of the Upanisads published by 
the Panini Office, Allahabad. 

1 They are relevant in matters which cannot be reached by perception 
and inference, aprdpte iastram arthavat. Mtmdmsa Sutra I. 1. 5. 



Introduction 


23 

them without their effort. 1 Though the knowledge is an experi- 
ence of the seer, it is an experience of an independent reality 
which impinges on his consciousness. There. is the impact of 
the real on the spirit of the experiencer. \t is therefore said 
to be a direct disclosure from the 'wholly other/ a revelation 
of the Divine. Symbolically, the Upanisads describe revelation 
as the breath of God blowing on us. 'Of that great being, this 
is the breath, which is the Rg Veda .’ 2 The divine energy is 
compared to the breath which quickens. It is a seed which 
fertilises or a flame which kindles the human spirit to its finest 
issues. It is interesting to know that the Brhad-aranyaka 
Upanisad tells us that not only the Vedas but history, sciences 
and other studies are also ‘breathed forth by the great God/3 

The Vedas were composed by the seers when they were in a 
state of inspiration. He who inspires them is God. 4 Truth is 
impersonal, afiauruseya and eternal, nitya. Inspiration is a joint 
activity, of which man's contemplation and God’s revelation 
are two sides. The Svetdsvatara Upanisad says that the sage 
Svetasvatara saw the truth owing to his power of contemplation, 
tapah-prabhdva, and the grace of God, deva-prasdda. 5 The dual 
significance of revelation, its subjective and objective character, 
is suggested here. 

The Upanisads are vehicles more of spiritual illumination 
than of systematic reflection. Thay reveal to us a world of rich 
and varied spiritual experience rather than a world of abstract 

• 

1 purusa-prayatnam vind pvakatlbhiita. S. 

* B.U.TI. 1. io>M.U.lT. 1. 6; R.V. X 90. 9. 

3 IT. 4. 10. The Naiyavikas maintain that the Vedas were composed 
by God, while the Mhnamsakas hold that they were not composed at all 
either by man or by God, but have existed from all eternity in the form 
of sounds. It is perhaps a way of saying that the timeless truths of 
eternity exist from everlasting to everlasting. Aristotle regards the 
fundamental truths of religion as eternal and indestructible. 

4 With reference to the prophets, Atlienagoras says: ‘While entranced 
and deprived ^of their natural powers of reason by the influence of the 
Divine Spirit, they uttered that which was wrought in them, the spirit 
using them as its instrument as a flute-player might blow a flute.* 
Apol. IX. 

Cp. 'Howbeit, when he the spirit of truth is come he shall guide you 
unto all the truth; for he shall not speak from himself, but whatsoever 
things he sljfill hear, these shall he speak.* John XVI. 13. 

5 VI. 21. 

B 



24 The Principal Upanisads 

philosophical categories. Their truths are verified not only by 
logical reason but by personal experience. Their aim is prac- 
tical rather than speculative. Knowfedge is a means to freedom. 
Philosophy, brahmd-vidyd , is the pursuit of wisdom by a way 
of life. 


IV 

THE UPANISADS AS THE VEDANTA 

The Vedanta meant originally the Upanisads, though the 
word is now used for the system of philosophy based on the 
Upanisads. Literally, Vedanta means the end of the Veda, 
vedasya antah f the conclusion as well as the goal of the Vedas. The 
Upanisads are the concluding portions of the Vedas. Chrono- 
logically they come at the end of the Vedic period. As the 
Upanisads contain abstruse and difficult discussions of ultimate 
philosophical problems, they were taught to the pupils at about 
the end of their course. When we have Vedic recitations as 
religious exercises, the end of these recitals is generally from 
the Upanisads. The chief reason why the Upanisads are called 
the end of the Veda is that they represent the central aim and 
meaning of the teaching of the Veda. 1 The content of the 
Upanisads is veddnta vijhanqm , the wisdom of the Vedanta. 2 
The Samhitas and the Brahmanas, which are the hymns and 
the liturgical books, represent the karma-kanda or the ritual 
portion, while the Upanisads represent the jndna-kanda or the 
knowledge portion. The learning of the hymns and the per- 
formance of the rites are a preparation for true enlightenment. 3 

The Upanisads describe to us the life of spirit, the same 
yesterday, to-day and for ever. But our apprehensions of the 
life of spirit, the symbols by which we express it, change with 

1 tilesu tailavad vede vedantah su-pratisthitah. Muktika. U. I. 9. Again, 
vedd brahmatma-visayd. Bhagavata. XI. 21. 35. atmaikaiva-vidyd-prati - 
pattaye sarve-vedanta arabhyante. S.B. introduction, vedanto ndma 
upamsat pramanam . V eddnta-sara. 

* M.U. III. 2. 6. S. U. speaks >of the highest mystery in the Vedanta. 
veddnte par amain guhyam VI. 22. 

3 Much of the material in the C.U. and B.U. belongs properly to the 
Brahmanas. 



Introduction 


25 

time. All systems of orthodox Indian thought accept the 
authoritativeness of the Vedas , 1 but give themselves freedom 
in their interpretation. This variety of interpretation is made 
possible by the fact that the Upanisads are not the thoughts 
of a single philosopher or a school of philosophers who follow a 
single tradition. They are the teachings of thinkers who were 
interested in different aspects of the philosophical problem, and 
therefore offer solutions of problems which var£ in their in- 
terest and emphasis. There is thus a certain amount of fluidity 
in their thought which has .been utilised for the development 
of different philosophical systems. Out of the wealth of sugges- 
tions and speculations contained in them, different thinkers 
choose elements for the construction of their own systems, not 
infrequently even through a straining of the texts. Though the 
Upanisads do not work out a logically coherent system of 
metaphysics, they give us a few fundamental doctrines which 
stand out as the essential teaching of the early Upanisads. 
These are recapitulated in the Brahma Sutra. 

The Brahma Sutra is an aphoristic summary of the teaching of 
the Upanisads, and the great teachers of the Vedanta develop 
their distinctive views through their commentaries on this 
work. By interpreting the sutras which are laconic in form 
and hardly intelligible without interpretation, the teachers 
justify their views to the reasoning intelligence. 

Different commentators attempt to find in the Upanisads 
and the Brahma Sutra a single coherent doctrine, a system of 
thought which is fr§e from contradictions. Bhartrprapanca, 
who is anterior fo Samkara, maintains that the selves and the 
physical universe are real, though # not altogether different from 
Brahman. They are both identical with and different from 
Brahman, the three together constituting a unity in diversity. 
Ultimate Reality evolves into the universal creation srsti and 
the universe retreats into it at the time of dissolution, pralaya , 2 

The advafta of Samkara insists on the transcendent nature 

1 Even the Buddhists and the Jainas accept the teaching of the 
Upanisads, though they interpret it in their own ways. See Introduction 
to Dhamma-pada and Vikesdvasyaka Bhasya, Yakovijaya Jaina Grantha - 
mala. No. 35. 

» See Indian Antiquary (1924), pp. *77-86. 



26 The Principal Upanisads 

of non-dual Brahman and the duality of the world including 
Isvara who presides over it. Reality is Brahman or Atman. No 
predication is possible of Brahmah as predication involves 
duality and Brahman is free from all duality. The world of 
duality is empirical or phenomenal. The saving truth which 
redeems the individual from the stream of births and deaths is 
the recognition of his own identity with the Supreme. ‘That 
thou art' is the fundamental fact of all existence. 1 The multi- 
plicity of the universe, the unending stream of life, is real, but 
only as a phenomenon. 

Ramanuja qualifies the non-dual philosophy so as to make the 
personal God supreme. While Brahman , souls and the world 
are all different and eternal, they are at the same time in- 
separable.- Inseparability is not identity. Brahman is related 
to the two others as soul to body. They arc sustained by Him 
and subject to His control. Ramanuja says that while God 
exists for Himself, matter and souls exist for His sake and sub- 
serve His purposes. The three together form an organic whole. 
Brahman is the inspiring principle of the souls and the world. 
The souls are different fiom, but not independent of, God. They 
are said to be one only in the sense that they all belong to the 
same class. The ideal is the enjoyment of freedom and bliss in 
the world of Narayana, and the means to it is either prapatti 
or bhakti. The individual souls even when they are freed through 
the influence of their devotion and the grace of God, retain 
their separate individuality. For him and Madhva, God, the 
author of all grace, saves those who giv^ to Him the worship 
of love and faith. 

For Madhva there are five eternal distinctions between 
(i) God and the individual soul, (2) God and matter, (3) soul 
and matter, (4) one soul and another, (5) one particle of matter 
and another. The supreme being endowed with all auspicious 
qualities is called Visnu, and Laksnn is His power dependent 
on Him. Moksa is release from rebirth and residence in the 
abode of Narayana. Human souls are innumerable, and each 
of them is separate and eternal. The divine souls are destined 
for salvation. Those who are neither very good nor very bad 


* C.U. VI. 8. 7; B. U. I. 4. 10. 


a-prthak-siddha. 



Introduction 


27 

arc subject to sarhsara, and the bad go to hell. Right knowledge 
of God and devotion to Hirp are the means to salvation. Without 
divine grace there can be no salvation. 1 . • 

Baladeva adopts the view of acintya-bhcddbhcda. Difference 
and non-difference are positive facts of experience and yet 
cannot be reconciled. It is an incomprehensible synthesis of 
opposites. Ramanuja, Bhaskara, Nimbarka and Baladeva 
believe that there is change in Brahman, but not of Brahman . 2 3 


V 

RELATION TO THE VEDAS: RG VEDA 

Even the most inspired writers are the products of their 
environment. They give voice to the deepest thoughts of their 
own epoch. A complete abandonment of the existing modes of 
thought is psychologically impossible. The writers of the 
Rg Veda speak of the ancient makers of the path. 3 When there 
is an awakening of the mind, the old symbols are interpreted 
in a new way. 

In pursuance of the characteristic genius of the Indian mind, 
not to shake the beliefs of the cpmmon men, but to lead them 
on by stages to the understanding of the deeper philosophical 
meaning byhind their beliefs, the Upanisads develop the Vedic 
ideas and symbols and give to them, where necessary, new 
meanings whiefi. relieve them *of their formalistic tharacter. 
Texts from the Vedas are often quoted in support of the 
teachings of the Upanisads. 

The thought of the Upanisads marks an advance on the 
ritualistic doctrines of the Brahmanas, which arc themselves 
different in spirit from the hymns of the Rg Veda. A good deal 
of time shduld have elapsed for this long development. The 
mass of the Rg Veda must also have taken time to produce, 


1 moksas ca vimn-pvasadena rind na labhvate. Visnu-tattva-nirnaya. 

2 See I.P. Vol. It., pp. 751-7O5; IHr., pp. 15-20. 

3 7 dam *nama rsibhyaft purvajebhyah pfuirbliyah pathi-kydbhyah. 
X. 14. 15. 



28 The Principal Upanisads 

especially when we remember that what has survived is 
probably a small part compared to \vhat has been lost. 1 

Whatever may bet the truth about the racial affinities of the 
Indian and the European peoples, there is no doubt that Indo- 
European languages derive from a common source and illustrate 
a relationship of mind. In its vocabulary and inflexions Sanskrit 2 
presents a striking similarity to Greek and Latin. Sir William 
Jones explained it by tracing them all to a common source. 
‘The Sanskrit language/ he said in 1786, in an address to the 
Asiatic Society of Bengal, 'whatever be its antiquity, is of a 
wonderful structure; more perfect than the Greek, more copious 
than the Latin, and more exquisitely refined than either; yet 
bearing to both of them a stronger affinity, both in the roots 
of verbs, and in the forms of grammar, than could possibly 
have been produced by accident; so strong, indeed, that no 
philologer could examine them all without believing them to 
have sprung from some common source which perhaps no longer 
exists. There is a similar reason, though not quite so forcible, 
for supposing that both the Gothic and the Celtic, though 
blended with a different idiom, had the same. origin with the 
Sanskrit; and the old Persian might be added to the same 
family/ 

The oldest Indo-European literary monument is the Rg 
Veda.i The word ‘Veda/ front vid , to know, means knowledge 

1 ‘We have no right to suppose that we have even a hundredth part 
of the religious and popular poetry that existed during the Vedic age.’ 
Max Muller: Six Systems of Indian Philosophy (^899), p. 41. 

2 samskrCa: perfectly constructed, speech. 

3 ‘The Veda has a two-fold interest: it belongs to the history of the 
world and to the history of India. In the history of the world, the Veda 
fills a gap which no literary work in any other language could fill. It 
carries us back to times of which we have no records anywhere, and gives 
us the very words of a generation of men, of whom otherwise we could 
form but the vaguest estimate by means of conjectures and inferences. 
As long as man continues to take an interest in the history of his race 
and as long as we collect in libraries and museums the reflics of former 
ages, the first place in that long row of books which contains the records 
of the Aryan branch of mankind will belong for ever to the Rg Veda. 1 
Max Muller: Ancient History of Sanskrit Literature (1859), p. 63. The 
Rg Veda, according to Ragozin ‘is, without the shadow of a doubt, the 
oldest book of the Aryan family of nations.* Vedic India (1895), P- IT 4 - 

Winternitz observes: ‘If we wish to learn to understand the* beginnings 
of our own culture, if we wish to understand the oldest Indo-European 



Introduction 


29 

par excellence , sacred wisdom. Science is the knowledge of 
secondary causes, of the created details; wisdom is the know- 
ledge of primary causes/ of the Uncreated Principle. The 
Veda is not a single literary work like the Bhagavad-gttd or a 
collection of a number of books compiled at some particular 
time as the Tri-pitaka of the Buddhists or the Bible of the 
Christians, but a whole literature which arose in the course of 
centuries and was handed down from generation \o generation 
through oral transmission. When no books were available 
memory was strong and tradition exact. To impress on the 
people the need for preserving this literature, the Veda was 
declared to be sacred knowledge or divine revelation. Its 
sanctity arose spontaneously owing to its age and the nature 
and value of its contents. It has since become the standard of 
thought and feeling for Indians. 

The name Veda signifying wisdom suggests a genuine spirit 
of inquiry. The road by which the Vedic sages travelled was the 
road of those who seek to inquire and understand. The questions 
they investigate are of a philosophical character. ‘Who, verily, 
knows and who can here declare it, where it was born and 
whence comes this creation? The gods are later than this 
world's production. Who knows, then, whence it first came 
into being ?' 1 According to Sayana, Veda is the book which 
describes the transcendent means for the fulfilment of well- 
being and the avoidance of evils . 2 

There are four Vedas: the Rg Veda which is mainly composed 

culture, we must«go to* India, where the oldest literature qf an Indo- 
European people is preserved. For, Whatever view we may adopt on the 
problem of the antiquity of Indian literature, we can safely say that the 
oldest monument of the literature of the Indians is at the same time the 
oldest monument of Indo-European literature which we possess.* A 
History of Indian Literature, E.T. Vol. I (1927), p. 6. See also Bloomfield: 
The Religion of the Veda (1908), p. 17. He says that the Rg Veda is not 
only ‘the most ancient literary monument of India’ but also ‘the most 
ancient litei^ry document of the Indo-European peoples.* ‘This 
literature is earlier than that of either Greece or Israel, and reveals a 
high level of civilisation among those who found in it the expression of 
their worship,* according to Dr. Nicol Macnicol. See his Hindu Scriptures 
(1938), p. XIV. 

* X. 129. 

* ista-pr%pty-anista-parihdrayoralaukikam updyam yo grantho 
vedayati sa vedah , 



30 The Principal Upanisads 

of songs of praise; the Yajur Veda , which deals with sacrificial 
formulas; the Sdma Veda which refers to melodies; and the 
Atharva Veda , which has a large number of magic formulas. 
Each contains four sections consisting of: (i) Samhitd or collec- 
tion of hymns, prayers, benedictions, sacrificial formulas and 
litanies; (ii) Brahmanas or prose treatises discussing the 
significance of sacrificial rites and ceremonies; (iii) Ay any okas 
or forest te*ts, which are partly included in the Brahmanas 
and partly reckoned as independent; and (iv) Upanisads . 

Veda denotes the whole literature made up of the two portions 
called Mantra and Brdhmana. 1 Mantra is derived by Yaska from 
manana , thinking. 2 3 It is that by which the contemplation of 
God is attempted. Brdhmana deals with the elaboration of 
worship into ritual. Parts of Brahmanas are called Aranyakas. 
Those who continue their studies without marrying are called 
aranas or aranamdnas. They lived in hermitages or forests. 
The forests where aranas (ascetics) live arc aranyas. Their 
speculations are contained in Aranyakas. 

Yaska refers to different interpretations of the Vedas by the 
ritualists (ydjhikas), the etymologists (nairuktas) and mytholo- 
gists ( aitihdsikas ). The Brhad-dcvatd which comes after Yaska's 
Nirukta also refers to various schools of thought in regard to 
Vedic interpretations. It mentions dtma-vddins or those who 
relate the Vedas to the psychological processes. 

The Rg Veda , which comprises 1,017 hymns divided into 
ten books, represents the earliest phase in the evolution of 
religious consciousness where we have nut so much the com- 
mandments of priests as the outpourings of poetic minds who 
were struck by the immensity of the universe and the in- 
exhaustible mystery of life. The reactions of simple yet unsophisti- 
cated minds to the wonder of existence are portrayed in these 
joyous hymns which attribute divinity to the striking aspects 
of nature. We have worship of devas, 3 deities like Surya (sun), 

ib 

1 mantra-brdhmanayor veda ndmadheyam. Apastamba in Yajiia-pari 
bhds u . 

2 Nirukta VII. 3. 6. 

3 The devas are, according to Amaya, the immortals, amarah, free from 
old age, mrjardh, the evershining ones, devah, heavenly beings, tndasah, 
the knowing ones, mbudhdh , and gods or deities, surah. 



Introduction 


31 

Soma (moon), Agni (fire), Dyaus (sky), Prthivi (earth), 1 Maruts 
(storm winds), Vayu (wind), Ap (water), Usas (dawn). Even 
deities whose names are no* longer so transparent were originally 
related to natural phenomena such as Indra, Varuna, Mitra, 
Aditi, Visnu, Pusan, the two Asvins, Rudra and Parjanya. 
Qualities which emphasise particular important aspects of 
natural phenomena attained sometimes to the rank of inde- 
pendent deities. 2 Savitr, the inspirer or the life-gi^er, Vivasvat, 
the shining, were at first attributes and names of the Sun but 
later became independent Sun-gods. Some of the deities wor- 
shipped by the different tribes were admitted into the Vedic 
pantheon. Pusan, originally the Sun-god of a small shepherd 
tribe, becomes the protector of travellers, the god who knows 
all the paths. Some deities have their basis in abstract qualities 
such as sraddha , faith, many it, anger. 3 We also come across 
Rbhus, or elves, Apsaras or nymphs, Gandharvas or forest or 
field spirits.4 A suras who become the enemies of the gods in 
the later Vedic works retain in the Rg Veda the old meaning 
of 'possessors of wonderful power’ or ‘God’ which the corre- 
sponding word Ahura has in the A vest a A 

1 I11 Greek mythology Zeus as sky-father is in essential relation to 
earth mother. See A. B. Cook: Zeus (1914) I, p. 779. 

2 The ancient Greeks advanced the natural elements into gods by 
deifying their attributes. Apollo shone in the sun. Boreas howled in the 
mountain blasts. Zeus threatened id the lightning and struck in the 
thunderbolt. 

3 These Ojfccur in the latest hymns of the tenth book of the Rg Veda. 

4 The Vedic Indians were not phallus worshippers. Sisna-dcvah (R. V. 
VII. 21. 5; X. 99. 3) aoes riot mean phallus-worshippers, yaska says 
that it refers to non-celibates: * sHna-devah a-brahmacaryah,' IV. 9. 
Sayana adopts this view: sisnena 'divyanti krldanti, iti iisna-devdh , 
a-brahniacaryd ity arthah. Though it is a bahuvrlhi compound meaning 
those whose deity is phallus, the word ' deva ' is to be taken in its 
secondary sense, laksydrtha. It means those who are addicted to sex life. 
The plural number also suggests that it is not a deity that is meant. 
Cp. the later Sanskrit. 

kisnodara-pa^iyandh . 'Addicted to the gratification of sex and stomach." 

5 The Persians call their country Iran, which is the airiya of the 
Avesta and signifies the land of the Aryans. Even to-day after centuries 
of Islam, the influences of Aryan thought are not altogether effaced. 
The Muslims of Persia tend to emphasise passages of the Quran which 
are capable of a mystic interpretation. Professor E. G. Browne writes: 
‘When in # the seventh century the warlike followers of the Arabian 
prophet swept across Iran, overwhelming in their tumultuous onslaught 

B* 



32 The Principal Upanisads 

Varuna, a god common both to the Indians and the Iranians, 
regulates the course of the sun and the sequence of the seasons. 
He keeps the world in order and iS the embodiment of truth 
and order which ale binding on mankind. He protects moral 
laws and punishes the sinful. The Vedic Indians approach 
Varuna in trembling and fear and in humble reverence and 
ask for forgiveness of sins. 1 Indra, who is a king among the 
gods, occupying the position of Zeus in the Greek Olympus, is 
invoked by those who are fighting and struggling. Agni is the 
mediator between men and gods. The hymns speak of him as 
a dear friend, the master of the house, grha-pati. He bears the 
sacrificial offerings to the gods and brings the gods down to 

an ancient dynasty and a venerable religion, a change, apparently almost 
unparalleled in history, was in the course of a few years brought over the 
land. Where for centuries the ancient hymns of the Avesta had been 
chanted and the sacred lire had burned, the cry of the Mu'ezzin sum- 
moning the faithful to prayer rang out from minarets reared on the 
ruins of the temples of Ahura Mazda . The priests of Zoroaster fell by the 
sword; the ancient books perished in the dames; and soon none were 
left to represent a once mighty faith but a handful of exiles flying 
towards the shores of India and a despised and persecuted remnant in 
solitary Yezd and remote Kirman. . . . Yet, after all, the change was but 
skin deep and soon a host of heterodox sects borir on Persian soil — 
Shi’ites, Sufis, Ismailis and philosophers arose to vindicate the claim of 
Aryan thought to be free and to transform the religion forced on the 
nation by Arab steel into something which, though still wearing a 
semblance of Islam, had a significance widely different from that which 
one may fairly suppose was intended by the Arabian prophet.* A Year 
aynongst the Persians (1927), p. 134. 

1 Varuna becomes Ahura Mazda (Ormuzd), the supr^ne God and 
Creator of the world. In one of those conversations with Zoroaster which 
embody the revelation that was made to him, ii! is recorded, Ahura says, 
‘I maintain that sky there above, Shining and seen afar and encompas- 
sing the earth all round. It looks like a palace that stands built of a 
heavenly substance lirinly established with ends that lie afar, shining, in 
its body of ruby over the three worlds; it is like a garment inlaid with 
stars made of a heavenly substance that Mazda puts on.’ Yasht XIII. 
Like Varuna, who is the lord of rta, Ahura is the lord of asa. As Varuna 
is closely allied with Mitra, so is Ahura with Mithra, the sun-god. 
Avesta knows V erethragna who is Vrtrahan, the slayer oiVrtra . Dyaus, 
Apamnapat (Apaiii Napat), Gandharva (Gandarewa), Krsdnu (Keresani), 
Vayu (Vayu), Yama, son of Vivasvant (Yima, son of Vivahhvant) as well 
as Yajna (Yasna), Hotr (Zaotar), Atharva priest (Athravan). These point 
to the common religion of the undivided Indo- Aryans and Iranians. 

In the later Avesta , the supreme God is the sole creator but his attri- 
butes of the good spirit, righteousness, power, piety, health |ind immor- 
tality become personified as ‘the Immortal Holy Ones/ 



Introduction 


33 

the sacrifice. He is the wise one, the chief priest, purohita • 
Mitra is the god of light. When the Persians first emerge into 
history, Mitra is the god o*f light who drives away darkness. He 
is the defender of truth and justice, the protector of righteous- 
ness, the mediator between Ahura Mazda and man. 1 

Mitra, Varuna and Agni are the three eyes of the great 
illuminator Sun. 2 Aditi is said to be space and air, mother, 
father and son. She is all comprehending. 3 Deities presiding over 
groups of natural phenomena became identified. The various 
Sun-gods, Surya, Savitr, Mitra and Visnu tended to be looked 
upon as one. Agni (Fire) is regarded as one deity with three 
forms, the sun or celestial fire, lightning or atmospheric fire and 
the earthly fire manifest in the altar and in the homes of men. 

Again, when worship is accorded to any of the Vedic deities, 
we tend to make that deity, the supreme one, of whom all others 
are forms or manifestations. He is given all the attributes of a 
monotheistic deity. As several deities are exalted to this first 
place, we get what has been called henotheism, as distinct from 
monotheism. There is, of course, a difference between a psycho- 
logical monotheism where one god fills the entire life of the 
worshipper and a metaphysical monotheism. Synthesising 
processes, classification of gods, simplification of the ideas 
of divine attributes and powers prepare for a metaphysical 
unity, the one principle informing all the deities. 4 The supreme 

1 Mithraism is older than Christianity by centuries. The two faiths 
were in acu^j rivalry until the end of the third century a.d. The form of 
the Christian Eucharist is very like that of the followers of Mithra. 

- a tram devdneyn ud*agad anlkam caksur mitrasya varunasyagneh . 
dpid dydvd prthivJ ant ank yarn's City a dtmd jagatas tast/iusas ca. 

• 1 CV. I. 1 5 1. i. 

3 aditiv dyauY aditiv antanksam, 
aditiv wdtd, sa pita, sa putrah 
visve-deva aditih panca-jand 

aditiv jdtam, aditiv janitvani. R.V. I. 89. 10. 

For Anaximander, the boundless and undilferentiated substance which 
fills the universe and is the matrix in which our world is formed, is theos. 

4 mahad devandm asuratvam ckani. R.V. III. 55. ir. 

‘One fire burns in many ways: one sun illumines the universe; one 
divine dispels all darkness. lie alone has revealed h lmself in all these forms/ 
eka evagnir bahucthd samiddha 
ckah suryo vtivam ami prabhutah 
ckaivosah sarvam idani vibhdty 

ekam vaidam /•• babhuva sarvam. R.V. VIII. 58. 2 



34 The Principal Upanisads 

is one who pervades the whole universe. He is gods and men. 1 

The Vedic Indians were sufficiently logical to realise that the 
attributes of creation and rulership of the world could be 
granted only to one ^being. We have such a being in Praja-pati, 
the lord of creatures, Visva-karman, the world-maker. Thus the 
logic of religious faith asserts itself in favour of monotheism. 
This tendency is supported by the conception of rta or order. 
The universd is an ordered whole; it is not disorderliness 
(akosmia). 2 If the endless variety of the world suggests 
numerous deities, the unity of the world suggests a unitary 
conception of the Deity. 

If philosophy takes its rise in wonder, if the impulse to it 
is in scepticism, we find the beginnings of doubt in the Rg 
Veda . It is said of Indra: 'Of whom they ask, where is he? Of 
him indeed they also say, he is not. 1 3 In another remarkable 
hymn, the priests are invited to offer a song of praise to Indra, 
'a true one, if in truth he is, for many say, “There is no Indra, 
who has ever seen him? To whom are we to direct the song 
of praise ?” *4 When reflection reduced the deities who were 
once so full of vigour to shadows, we pray for faith: ‘O Faith, 
endow us with belief/5 Cosmological thought wonders whether 
speech and air were not to be regarded as the ultimate essence 
of all things. 6 In another hymn Praja-pati is praised as the 
creator and preserver of the n world and as the one god, but 
the refrain occurs in verse after verse ‘What god shall we 
honour by means of sacrifice ?’7 Certainty is thos source of 
inertia in thought, while doubt makes for*progress. 

Agni, kindled in many places, is but one; 

One the all-pervading*Sun; 

One the Dawn, spreading her light over the earth. 

All that exists is one, whence is produced the whole world. 

See also X. 81. 3. 

1 yo nah pita janitd yo vidhdtd dhdmani veda bhuvandni visvd. 
yo devanam ndmadhd eka eva tam samprasnam bhuvana yanty anyd. 

R V. X. 82. 3. 

3 See Plato: Gorgias 507. K. 

3 II. 12. 4 VIII. 100, 3 If. 5 X. 151. 5. 

6 Germ of the world, the deities’ vital spirit, 

This god moves eVbr as his will inclines him. 

His voice is heard, his shape is ever viewless : 

Let us adore this air with our oblation. X. i6§ 4. 

7 kasmai devdya havisd vidhema ? X. 12 1. 



Introduction 


35 

* The most remarkable account of a superpersonal monism 
is to be found in the hymn of Creation. 1 It seeks to explain the 
universe as evolving out of One. But the One is no longer a god 
like Indra or Varuna, Praja-pati or Visva-karman. The hymn 
declares that all these gods are of late or of secondary origin. 
They know nothing of the beginning of things. The first 
principle, that one, tad chant, is uncharacterisable. It is without 
qualities or attributes, even negative ones. To apply to it any 
description is to limit and bind that which is limitless and 
boundless. 2 'That one breathed breathless. There was nothing 
else. 1 4 It is not a dead abstraction but indescribable perfection 
of being. Before creation all this was darkness shrouded in 
darkness, an impenetrable void or abyss of waters,3 until 
through the power of tapas , 4 or the fervour of austerity, the 
One evolved into determinate self-conscious being. He becomes 
a creator by self-limitation. N thing outside himself can limit 
hirn. He only can limit himself. He does not depend on anything 
other than himself for his manifestation. This power of 

1 X. 129. 2 See B.U. III. 9. 26. 

3 Cp. Geviesis f. 2, where the Spirit of God is said to move on the face 
of the waters, and the 1 5 uranic description of Visnu as resting on the 
Serpent Infinite in the milky ocean. Homer’s Iliad speaks of Oceanos 
as ‘the source of all things’ including even the gods. 14, 246, 302. Many 
others, North American Indians, Aztecs, etc., have such a belief. 

According to Aristotle, Thales considered that all things were made of 
water. The Greeks had a myth of Falher-Ocean as the origin of all things. 

Cp. Nrsimha-puvva-tdipani U . 1 . 1 

dpo vd idam dsan % sah\am eva, sa pvajd-patir ekah puskara-parne 
samabhavat, tasyfcntar nianasi kdmah samavavtata idam srjeynm iti. 

‘All this remained as water along (without any form). Only Praja-pati 
came to be in the lotus leal In his mind arose the desire, “let me create 
this (the world of names and iorms).” 

Two explanations are ottered for the presence of identical symbols used 
in an identical manner in different parts of the world. W. J. Perry and his 
friends argue that these myths and symbols were derived originally from 
Kgyptian culture which once spread over the world, leaving behind these 
vestiges whea it receded. This theory does not bear close examination and 
is not widely held. The other explanation is that human beings are very 
much the same the world over, their minds are similarly constituted and 
their experience of life under primitive # conditions does not differ from one 
part of the world to another and it is not unnatural that identical ideas 
regarding the origin and nature of the world arise independently. 

4 tapas literally means heat, creative heat by which the brood hen 

produces life from the egg. 



36 The Principal Upanisads 

actualisation is given the name of mdyd in later Vedanta, fo% 
the manifestation does not disturb the unity and integrity of 
the One. The One becomes manifested by its own intrinsic 
power, by its tapas. The not-self is not independent of the self. 
It is the avyakta or the unmanifested. While it is dependent on 
the Supreme Self, it appears as external to the individual ego and 
is the source of its ignorance. The waters represent the unformed 
non-being in which the divine lay concealed in darkness. We 
have now the absolute in itself, the power of self-limitation, 
the emergence of the determinate' self and the not-self, the 
waters, darkness, pard-prakrti. The abyss is the not-self, the 
mere potentiality, the bare abstraction, the receptacle of all 
developments. The self-conscious being gives it existence by 
impressing his forms or Ideas on it. The unmanifested, the 
indeterminate receives determinations from the self-conscious 
Lord. It is not absolute nothing, for there is never a state in 
which it is not in some sense. 1 The whole world is formed by 
the union of being and not-being and the Supreme Lord has 
facing him this indetermination, this aspiration to existence. 3 
Rg Veda describes not-being (asat) as lying 'with outstretched 

1 See Paihgala U. T. 3. 

In the Puranas, this idea is variously developed. Brahma Parana 
makes out that God first created the waters which are called ndra and 
released his seed into them; therefore he is called N dray an a. The seed 
grew into a golden egg from which Brahma was born of his own accord 
and so is called svayambhu. Brahma divided the egg into two halves, 
heaven and earth. I. 1. 38 If. ' 

The Brahmdnda Parana says that Brahma,*, known as Nurdyana, 
rested on the surface of the waters. it 

Vidyaranya on Mali and) dya n a % U. III. 16 says nara-sarirdndm 
itpadana-rupany annadi-panca-bhutdni nara-sabdenocyante , tesu bhiltesii 
yd dpo mukhydh td ayanam ddhdro yasya visnoh so' yam ndrdyanah 
samudra-jala-sayi. 

Cp. dpo nard iti proktd dpo vai nara-siinavah 

ayanam tasya tdh prohtds tena ndrdyanas smrtah. 

The V isnu-dharmottara says that Yisnu created the waters and the 
creation of the egg and Brahma took place afterwards. 

2 Speaking of Bochme’s mystic philosophy which inlluenced William 
Law, Stephen Hobhouse writes that he believes ‘in the Ungrund, the 
fathomless abyss of freedom or indifference, which is at the root, so to 
speak, of God and of all existences . . . the idea of the mighty but blind 
face of Desire that arises out of this abyss and by means of imagination 
shapes itself into a purposeful will which is the heart of the Divine 
personality.' Selected Mystical Writings of William Law (r<j/|8), p. 307. 



Introduction 


37 

feet* like a woman in the throes of childbirth. 1 As the first 
product of the divine mind, the mind’s first fruit, came forth 
kama , desire, the cosmic will, which is the j)fimal source of all 
existence. In this kdma t 'the wise searching in their hearts, 
have by contemplation (: mams a ), discovered the connection 
between the existent and the non-existent’ 2 . The world is 
created by the personal self-conscious God who acts by his 
intelligence and will. 

This is how the Vedic seers understood in some measure 
how they and the whole cre&tion arose. The writer of the hymn 
has the humility to admit that all this is a surmise, for it is not 
possible for us to be sure of things which lie so far beyond 
human knowledge. 3 

This hymn suggests the distinction between the Absolute 
Reality and Personal God, Brahman and Isvara , the Absolute 
beyond being and knowledge, the super-personal, super-essential 
godhead in its utter transcendence of all created beings and its 
categories and the Real manifested to man in terms of the 
highest categories of human experience. Personal Being is 
treated as a development or manifestation of the Absolute. 

In another hymn, 4 the first existent being is called Praja-pati, 
facing the chaos of waters. He impregnates the waters and 
becomes manifest in them in the form of a golden egg or germ, 
from which the whole universe develops. 5 He is called the one 

1 I. io. 72. 

2 Kama becomes defined later as icilia, desire and kriya, action. It is 
the creative urge. * 

Cp. with Kam<f, the Orphic god, # Fros, also called Phanes* who is the 
principle of generation by whom the whole world is created. 

3 See also I. ib. 4. 32, where the writer says that he who made all 
this does not probably know its real nature. 

‘He, the first origin of this creation, whether he formed it 
all or did not form it, 

Whose eye controls this world in highest heaven, 

He, verily, knows it, or perhaps he knows not.’ 

X. 129. 7. E.T. by Max Muller. 

4 T. 10. 121. 

5 hiranya-garbha, literally gold-germ, source of golden light, the world- 
soul, from which all powers and existences of this world are derived. It 
comes later to mean Brahma, the creator of the world. In the Orphic 
Cosmogony we have similar ideas. Professor F. M. Corn ford writes, ‘ 1 ^ 
the beginning there was a primal undiflerentiated unity, called by tliJr 
Orphics “Night.” Within this un *y the world egg was generated, or 



38 The Principal Upani$ads 

life or soul of the gods ( devanam asuh). 1 Hiranya-garbha is the 
first born determinate existent while Brahman-ISvara, Absolute- 

t 

God is in the reafm of the transcendent.* The world is said to 
be a projection, emission or externalisation of the ideal being 
of God, of the eternal order which is eternally present in the 
divine wisdom. 

The Purusa Suktai repeats in concrete form the ideal of a 
primeval being existing before any determinate existence and 
evolving himself in the ‘empirical universe. The being is con- 

according to some accounts, fashioned by Ageless Time (Chronos). The 
egg divided into two halves, Heaven and Earth. Mythically Heaven and 
Earth are the Father and Mother of all life. In physical terms the upper 
half of the egg forms the dome of the sky, ’the lower contains the moisture 
or slime from which the dry land (Earth) arose. Between earth and 
heaven appeared a winged spirit of light and life, known by many names, 
as Phanes, Eros, Metis, Ericapaeus, etc. The function of this spirit, in 
which sex was as yet undifferentiated, was to generate life either by the 
immediate projection of seed from itself, or by uniting the sundered 
parents. Heaven and Earth *in marriage. 'Flic offspring were successive 
pairs of supreme gods; Oceanus and Tethys, Chronos and Rhea, Zeus and 
Hera.' Cambridge Ancient History, Vol. IV (1926), p. 536. 

Anaximander develops a scheme similar to the Orphic cosmology: 
(1) There is a primal undifferentiated unity. (2) A separation of opposites 
in pairs to form the world order. (3) A reunion of these sundered opposites 
to generate life. This formula is stated by Euripides (Melanippe, 
Fragment 484): 'The tale is not mine; f had it from my mother: that 
Heaven and Earth were once one form, and when they had been sundered 
from one another, they gave birth xo all things, and brought them up into 
the light.’ 

1 It is quite possible that the Sarhkhya system was a < development 
from the ideas suggested in this hymn. Primitive matter (waters) is said 
to be existent independently and purusa first comes into determinate 
consciousness in intelligence (mahat or biiddhi), which is a product of 
matter (avyakta ) . 

* 2 ko dadarsa pvathamam jciyamdnam asthanvantam yad 
anasthd bibharti 

bhumya asursrgdtmd kva svit ko vidvdmsam upagdt 
prastum ctat. R.V. I. 164. 4. 

This distinction which becomes established in the Upanisads has its 
parallels in other historical developments. Cp the three Bodies of the 
Buddha, Dhavmahdya or the Absolute Reality, Sambhogahdya , the 
personal God or the Logos and Nirmdnakdya or the historical embodi- 
ment of the Logos in a material body born into the world at a given 
moment of time. See I.P. Vol. i/pp. 597-9. The Sufis regard A 1 Haqq 
as the Absolute Reality, the abyss of godhead, Allah as the personal 
Lord, and Muhammad the prophet as the historical embodiment. 

3 R.V. X. 90. 



Introduction 


39 

ceived as a cosmic person with a thousand heads, eyes and feet, 
who filled the whole universe and extended beyond it, by the 
length of ten fingers, 1 tlie universe being .constituted by a 
fourth of his nature. 2 3 4 The world form is nol a complete expres- 
sion or manifestation of the divine Reality. It is only a fragment 
of the divine that is manifested in the cosmic process. The 
World-soul is a partial expression of the Supreme Lord. 

Creation is interpreted in the Vedas as development rather 
than the bringing into being something not hitherto existent. 
The first principle is manifested in the whole world. Purusa 
by his sacrifice becomes the whole world. This view prepares 
for the development of the doctrine which is emphasised in 
the Upanisads that the spirit in man is one with the spirit 
which is the prius of the world. 

Within this world we have the one positive principle of being 
and yet have varying degrees of existence marked by varying 
degrees of penetration or participation of nonentity by divine 
being. God as Hiranya-garbha is nothing of the already made. 
He is not an ineffective God who sums up in himself all that is 
given. 

Kg Veda used two different concepts, generation and birth, 
and something artificially produced to account for creation. 
Heaven and earth arc the parents of the gods; or the Creator 
of the world is a smith or a carpenter. 

Again Tn the beginning was the golden germ 

From his b*rth he was sole lord of creation. 

He made firm the earth and this bright sky *;'3 

• 

In this hymn Praja-pati, the lord of offspring, . assumes the 
name of Hiranya-garbha , the golden germ, and in the Atharva 
Veda and later literature Hiranya-garbha himself becomes a 
supreme deity. 4 The Kg Veda is familiar with the four-fold 
distinction of (i) the Absolute, the One, beyond all dualities and 

1 sa bhumim viivaio vrtvd aty atisthad dasdngulam. 

* pado’sya visvd bliutani tnpad asyamrtani divi. 

3 R.V. X. T 2 [. I. 

4 In the#/4 tharva Veda he appears as the embryo which is produced in 
the waters at the beginning of cren -on. IV. 2. 8. 



40 The Principal Upanisads 

distinctions, (ii) the self-conscious Subject confronting the 
object, (iii) the World-soul, and (iv) the world. 1 

The monistic emphasis led the Vedic thinkers to look upon 
the Vedic deities as different names of the One Universal 
Godhead, each representing some essential power of the. divine 
being/ They call him Indra, Mitra, Varuna, Agni. He is the 
heavenly bird Garutmat. To what is one, the poets give many 
a name. They call it Agni, Yama, Matarisva/ 2 The real that 
lies behind the tide of temporal change is one, though we speak 
of it in many w r ays. Agni, Yama, etc., are symbols. They are 
not gods in themselves. They express different qualities of the 
object worshipped. The Vedic seers were not conscious of any 
iconoclastic mission. They did not feel called upon to denounce 

1 This list finds a parallel, as we shall see, in the hierarchy of being 
given in the Ma.U. with its four grades of consciousness, the waking or 
the perceptual, the dreaming or the imaginative, the self in deep sleep 
or the conceptual, the turiya or the transcendent, spiritual consciousness 
which is not so much a grade of consciousness as the total consciousness. 

Plato in the Tvnaeus teaches that the Supreme Deity, the Demi-urge, 
creates a universal World-Soul, through which the universe becomes an 
organism. The World-Soul bears the image of the Tdeas, and the world- 
body is fashioned in the same pattern. If the whole world has not been 
ordered as God would have desired, it is due to the necessity which 
seems to reside in an intractable material, which was in ‘disorderly 
motion' before the Creator imposed form on it. 

2 I. 164. 46. ekam santam bahudhd kalpavanti. R.V. X. 114. 4. See B. G. 

X. 41. ‘ 

Zeus is the supreme ruler of gods and men ; other gods exist to do his 
bidding. t 

Cp. Cicero. ‘God being present everywhere in t Nature, can be regarded 
in the field^as Ceres; or on the sea as Xeptune; and elsewhere in a variety 
of forms in all of which He may be worshipped. De Nature Deonmi. 

For Plutarch and Maximus of Tyre, the difierent gods worshipped in 
the third century Roman Empire w r ere symbolic representations of a 
Supreme God who is unknowable in his inmost nature. 

‘God himself, the father and fashioner of all . . . is unnameable by 
any lawgiver, unutterable by any voice, not to be seen by any eye. . . . 
But if a Greek is stirred to the remembrance of God by the art of Phidias, 
an Egyptian by paying worship to animals, another man by a river, 
another by fire, I have no anger for their diveigence; only let them 
know, let them love, let them remember.’ 

In the Taittiriya Samhiia and Saiapatha Brdhmana, it is said that 
Praja-pati assumed certain forms of fish (matsya), tortoise (kurma) and 
boar ( varaha ) for the attainment of certain ends. When the doctrine of 
avatdras, incarnations, becomes established, these three become the 
incarnations of Visnu. 



Introduction 


4i 

the worship of the various deities as disastrous error or mortal 
sin. They led the worshippers of the many deities to the worship 
of the one and only God by a process of reinterpretation and 
reconciliation. 

The reaction of the local cults on the Vedic faith is one of 
the many causes of variety of the Vedic pantheon. People in 
an early stage of culture are so entirely steeped in the awe and 
reverence which have descended to them that 'they cannot 
easily or heartily adopt a new pattern of worship. Even when 
militant religions fell the till trees of the forest, the ancient 
beliefs remain as an undergrowth. The catholic spirit of 
Hinduism which we find in the Rg Veda has always been ready 
to give shelter to foreign beliefs and assimilate them in its own 
fashion. While preferring their own, the Vedic Indians had 
the strength to comprehend other peoples’ ways. 

There is no suggestion in the Rg Veda of the illusory character 
of the empirical world. We find varied accounts of creation. 
The Supreme is compared to a carpenter or a smith who fashions 
or smelts the world into being. Sometimes he is said to beget all 
beings. He pervades all things as air or ether ( akdsa ) pervades 
the universe. He animates the world as the life-breath (prana ) 
animates the human body, a comparison which has been 
developed with remarkable ingenuity by Ramanuja. 

Rg Veda raises the question of the nature of the human 
self, ko nu citmd. 1 It is the controller of the body, the unborn 
part, ajo blfdgah 2 , which survives death. It is distinguished from 
the jiva or the jndhrtdual soul.^ The famous verse of the two 
birds dwelling in one body, which is taken up by the Upanisads,4 
distinguishes the individual soul which enjoys the fruits of 
actions from the spirit which is merely a passive spectator. 5 
This distinction between the individual soul and the supreme 
self is relevant to the cosmic process and is not applicable to 
the supremg supra-cosmic transcendence. Those who think that 
the distinction is to be found in the Supreme Transcendence 

1 T. 164. 4. * X. 16. 4. 

t r. T13. 161. i. i6j. 30. 

4 See M.U. III. 1. 1; S.U. IV. 6. 

•; I. 164* 17. atr a laukika-paksa-dvayci’drstCmtena jlva-paramatmanau 
stuyete. Say ana. 



42 The Principal Upani$ads 

do not know their own origin, pitaram na veda. 1 The individual 
souls belong to the world of Hiranya-garbha. 

‘Let this mortal clay (self) be the immortal god / 2 ‘Vouchsafe, 
O Indra, that we may be you/3 One can become a devata, a 
deity, by one's own deeds . 4 The aim of the Rg Veda is to become 
like gods. The individual soul can become the Universal Spirit. 

The way to spiritual attainment is through worship5 and 
moral life. Vestiges of Yoga discipline are found in a late 
passage 6 which describes the kesins or the long-haired ascetics 
with their yogic powers that enabled them to move at will in 
space. Of a muni , it is said that his mortal body men see but 
he himself fares on the path of the faery spirits. His hair is 
long and his soiled garments are of yellow hue. Vamadeva 
when he felt the unity of all created things with his own self 
exclaimed: ‘I am Manu, I am Surya/7 So also King Trasadasyu 
said that he was Indra and the great Varuna . 8 

The cardinal virtues are emphasised: ‘O Mitra and Varuna, 
by your pathway of truth may we cross/9 Mere memorising 
of the hymns is of no avail if we do not know the Supreme which 
sustains all . 10 . 

Primitive societies are highly complicated structures, 

1 yastmn vrkse madhvadah supaind 
nivisante suvate eddhi visve 
tasyed ahuh fiippalam khddu agre 
tan nonnasad yah pitaram na veda, 

RfV. I. 164. 22. 

* R.V. VIII. 19. 25. c 

3 tve intfrapy ahhuma vipra dhiyarh vanema rtayd sapamtali. R.V. 
II. 11. 12. 

4 B.U. IV. 3. 32; see also IV. 1. 2. devo hhftivd devun dpyeti\ see also 
T.U. II. 8. 

5 The solitary reference to a temple is in R.V. X. 107. 10. where the 
word deva-mana, building of a god, occurs. 

6 R.V. X. 136. See also Aitareya Brahmana VLT. 13. 

7 aham manur abhavam s dry as cdham. R.V. IV. 26. 1. 

8 aham raja varuno. R.V. IV. 42. 2. 

9 rtasya pathd vam . . . larcnia. VI I. 65. 3. 

10 rco ah sure parame vyoman yasmiu 
devd adhi visve niseduh 
ya ? tan 1 na veda him karUyali 
ya it tad vidus ta ime smndsate. 


See S.U. IV. 8, 


R.V.#X. t6 4 . 39. 



Introduction 


43 

balanced social organisations with their systems of belief and 
codes of behaviour. The fundamental needs of society are the 
moral and the spiritual, the military and the economic. In 
Indo-European society these three functions are assigned to 
three different groups, the men of learning and virtue, the men 
of courage and fight, and the men who provide the economic 
needs, 1 the Brahmana, the Ksatriya and the Vaisya. Below them 
were the Sudras devoted to service. These distinctions are found 
in the Rg Veda, though they are not crystallised into castes. 
Ancient Iranian society was. constituted on a similar pattern. 

Even the gods were classified into the Brahmana, the Ksatriya 
and the Vaisya according to the benefits which they provide, 
moral, military or economic. Our prayers are for righteousness, 
victory and abundance. Surya, Savitr are gods who confer 
spiritual benefits. Indra is a war god and Asvins give us health 
and food. In Roman mythology Jupiter provides spiritual 
benefits, Mars is the god of war and Quirinus is the god of plenty. 

Pitaras or fathers or ancestral spirits receive divine worship. 
The king of the ancestral spirits who rules in the kingdom of 
the deceased is Yama, a god who belongs to the Indo-Iranian 
period. He is identical with Yima of the Avesta, who is the 
first human being, the primeval ancestor of the human race. 
As the first one to depart from this world and enter the realm 
of the dead, he became its king^ The kingdom of the dead is 
in heaven, and the dying man is comforted by the belief that 
after deat]} he will abide with King Yama in the highest 
heaven. The world £> f heaven is the place of refuge of the 
departed. 2 In the funeral hymu,3 the departing sou! is asked 
to 'go forth along the ancient pathway by which our ancestors 
have departed/ The Vcdic Heaven is described in glowing 
terms 'where inexhaustible radiance dwells, where dwells the 
King Vaivasvata/3 

There is no reference to rebirth in the Rg Veda , though 
its elements are found. The passage of the soul from the body, 
its dwelling in other forms of existence, its return to human 

* Luther felt that three classes wefe ordained by God, the teaching 
class, the class of defenders and the working class. 

1 R.V. jy. 53. 2; X. 12. 1. 

3 R.V. X. 14. 


3 R.V. IX. 1 13. 



44 The Principal Upanisads 

form, the determination of future existence by the principle 
of Karma are all mentioned. Mitra is born again. 1 The Dawn 
(Usas) is born aj^ain and again. 2 *1 seek neither release nor 
return. '3 ‘The immfbrtal self will be reborn in a new body due 
to its meritorious deeds. '4 Sometimes the departed spirit is 
asked to go to the plants and 'stay there with bodies. "5 There is 
retribution for good and evil deeds in a life after death. Good 
men go to heaven 6 and others to the world presided over by 
Yama.7 Their work (dharma) decided their future. 8 

In the Rg Veda we find the first adventures of the human 
mind made by those who sought to discover the meaning of 
existence and man's place in life, ‘the first word spoken by 
the Aryan man . '9 


VI 

THE YAJUR, THE SAMA AND THE ATHARVA 

VEDAS 

Sacred knowledge is tray l vidyd . It is three-fold, being the 
knowledge of the Rg, the Yajur and the Santa Vedas. The 
two latter use the hymns of the Rg and the Atharva Vedas 
and arrange them for purposes of ritual. The aim of the Yajur 
Veda is the correct performance of the sacrifice to which is 
attributed the whole control of the universe. Deities are of less 
importance than the mechanism of the sacrifice. In jEc Atharva 
Veda the position of the deities is still les^important. A certain 
aversion \o the recognition of. the Atharva Veda as a part of 
the sacred canon is to be noticed. Even the old Buddhist texts 
speak of learned Brahmanas versed in the three Vedas. 10 

1 mitro jdyatc punah. X. 85. 19. 

1 punah punar j ay amdnd. I. 92. 10. 

3 na asydh vasmi vimucam na avrtam pariah. V. 46 1. 

4 jwo mrtasya carati svadhabhir 
amarlyo martyend sa yonih 

I. 164. 30; sec also I. 164. 38. 

5 R.V. X. 16. 3 

6 I. 154. 5. 7 K. 14 2. 8 X 16. 3. 

y Max Muller. For fuither information on the R.V. sec I.P. Vol. I, 
Ch. II. 

10 Suita Nipata. 1019. 



Introduction 


45 

Though we meet in the Atharva Veda many of the gods of 
the Rg Veda , their characters are not so distinct. The sun 
becomes rohita , the ruddy* one. A few gods are exalted to the 
position of Praja-pati, Dhatr (Established ; Vidhatr (arranger). 
Paramesthin (he that is in the highest). In a notable passage 
the Supreme in the form of Varuna is described as the universal, 
omnipresent witness. 1 There are references to kdla or time as 
the first cause of all existence, kama or desire* as the force 
behind the evolution of the universe, skambha or support who 
is conceived as the principle jon which everything rests. Theories 
tracing the world to water or to air as the most subtle of the 
physical elements are to be met with. 

The religion of the Atharva Veda reflects the popular belief 
in numberless spirits and ghosts credited with functions con- 
nected in various ways with the processes of nature and the life 
of man. 2 3 4 We see in it strong evidence of the vitality of the 
pre-Vedic animist religion and its fusion with Vedic beliefs. 
All objects and creatures are either spirits or are animated 
by spirits. While the gods of the Rg Veda are mostly friendly ones 
we find in the Atharva Veda dark and demoniacal powers 
which bring disease and misfortune on mankind. We have to 
win them by flattering petitions and magical rites. We come 
across spells and incantations for gaining worldly ends. The 
Vedic seer was loth to let the oldest elements disappear without 
trace. Traces of the influence o l the Atharva Veda are to be 
found in tjie Upanisads. There are spells for the healing of 
diseases, bhaisajyani* for life and healing ayusyani siiktdni. 
These were the beginnings of the medical science.3 • 

The liberated soul is described as Tree from desire, wise, 
immortal, self-born . . . not deficient in any respect . . . wise, 
unageing, young/4 

1 dvau samnisidhya yau mantrayete raja tad veda varunah trtlyah. 

* A.V. XI*. 53- 

3 In B.U. VI. 4 we read of devices for securing the love of a woman or 
for the destruction of the lover of a wife. See also K.U. 

4 A.V. X. 8 . 44 . 



46 


The Principal Upanisads 
VII 

THE BRAHMANAS 


The elements of the ritualistic cult found in the Vedas are 
developed in the Brahmanas into an elaborate system of 
ceremonies. While in the Rg Veda the sacrifices are a means 
for the propitiation of the gods, in the Brahmanas they 
become ends in themselves. Even the gods are said to owe 
their position to sacrifices. There are many stories of the 
conflict between devas and asnras for world power and 
of the way in which gods won through the power of the 
sacrifice. 1 

It is not the mechanical performance of a sacrificial rite 
that brings about the desired result, but the knowledge of its 
real meaning. Many of the Brahmana texts are devoted to the 
exposition of the mystic significance of the various elements 
of the ritual. By means of the sacrifices we 'set in motion' 
the cosmic forces dealt with and get from them the de- 
sired results. The priests who knew the details of the aim, 
meaning and performance of the sacrifice came into great 
prominence. Gods became negligible intermediaries. If we 
perform a rite with knowledge, the expected benefit will 
result. Soon the actual performance of the rite becomes 
unnecessary. Ritualistic religion becomes subordinate to 
knowledge. 2 

The Brahmanas are convinced that li&3 on earth is, on the 
whole, a good thing. The ideal Jor man is to liVe the full term of 
his life on earth. As he must -die, the sacrifice helps him to get 
to the world of heaven. 

While the Vedic poets hoped for a life in heaven after death, 
there was uneasiness about the interference of death in a 
future life. The fear of re-death, punar-mrtyu becomes prominent 
in the Brahmanas. Along with the fear of rc-deafh arose the 
belief of the imperishability of the self or the atman, the 

1 Katha Samhita XXII. 9; Taittiriya Samhita V. 3. 3; Tdndya 
Brahmana, XVIII. 1.2. 

2 See Franklin Kdgerton: ‘The Upanisads: What do th^y seek and 
Why?' Journal of the American Oriental Society , June, 1929. 



Introduction 


47 

essential part of man's being. Death is not the end but only 
causes new existences which may not be better than the present 
one. Under the influence of popular animism, which sees souls 
similar to the human in all pares of nature, future life was 
brought down to earth. According to the Satapatha Brdhmana , 
a man has three births, the first which he gets from his parents, 
the second through sacrificial ceremonies and the third which 
he obtains after death and cremation. 1 


VIII 

THE ARANYAKAS 

The Aranyakas do not give us rules for the performance of 
sacrifices and explanations of ceremonies, but provide us with 
the mystic teaching of the sacrificial religion. As a matter of 
fact, some of the oldest Upanisads are included in the Aranyaka 
texts, 2 3 which are meant for the study of those who are 
engaged in the vow of forest life, the Vdnaprasthas . 3 As 
those who retire to the forests are not like the house- 
holders bound to the ritual, the Aranyakas deal with 
the meaning and interpretation of the sacrificial cere- 
monies. It is possible that certain sacred rites were per- 
formed in* the seclusion of the forests where teachers and 
pupils meditated on the significance of these rjtes. The 

1 trir ha vat puruso jay ate, etan mi era mdtus ca adhi pitas ca agve 
jdyate; atha yam yajfiah upanamati sa yad yajate, tad dvitiyam jdyate ; 
atha yatra mnyate yatrainam agndv abhyadadhati sa yat tatas sambhavati, 
tat trtiya.ni jdyate XI. 2. i. t. See I.P Vol. I, Ch. Ill 

2 A.U. is included in the Aitareya Aranyaka which is tacked on to 
Aitareya Brdhmana: K.IT. and T.U. belong to the Brahman as of the 
same names. ®.U. is found at the end of the Satapatha Brdhmana. C.U. of 
which the first section is an Aranyaka belongs to a Brahman a of the 
Sdma Veda. Kena (Talavakdra IJ.) belongs to the Jannniiya Upanisad 
Brdhmana. Ika belongs to the White Yajur Veda, Katha and S.U. to the 
Black Yajur Veda, JVI.U. and Pvasna belong to the Atharva Veda. 
Maitri, though attributed to a school of Black Yajur Veda, is perhaps 
post-Buddlfcjstic, judged by its language, style and contents. 

3 Aruncya U. z. 



48 The Principal Upanisads 

distinction of Brahmana and Aranyaka is not an absolute 
one. 


IX 


THE UPANISADS 

The Aranyakas 1 2 shade off imperceptibly into the Upanisads 
even as the Brahmanas shade off into the Aranyakas. 
While the student (brahmacdrin) reads the hymns, the house- 
holder (grhastha) attends to the Brahmanas which speak of 
the daily duties and sacrificial ceremonies, the hermit, the 
man of the forest (■ vdnaprastha ), discusses the Aranyakas, the 
monk who has renounced worldly attachment (sarhnydsin ) , 
studies the Upanisads, which specialise in philosophical 
speculations. 

The great teachers of the past did not claim any credit for 
themselves, but maintained that they only transmitted the 
wisdom of the ancients . 3 4 The philosophical tendencies implicit 
in the Vedic hymns are developed in the Upanisads. 

Hymns to gods and goddesses are replaced by a search for 
the reality underlying the flux of things. 'What is that which, 
being known, everything else becomes known? '3 Kena Upanisad 
gives the story of the discomfiture of the gods who found out 
the truth that it is the power of Brahman which Sustains the 
gods of fire, air, etc.4 While the poets of the Veda speak to 
us of the many into which .tfie radiance of the Supreme has 
split, the philosophers of the Upanisads speak to us of the 
One Reality behind and beyond the flux of the world. The 
Vedic deities are the messengers of the One Light which has 

1 Aitareya Aranyaka (III. i. i ) begins with the title 'Ttye Upanisad of 
the Samhitd,’ athatas samhitdya upanisat: see also Sdmkhydyana Aranyaka 
VII. 2. 

2 Cp. Confucius: ‘I am not born endowed with knowledge. I am a man 
who loves the ancients and h£s made every effoit to acquire their 
learning.' Lanyu VII. 19. 

3 M.U. I. i. 3; see also T.U. II. 8. 

4 See also B.U. III. 9. 1-10. 



Introduction 


49 

burst forth into the universal creation. They serve to mediate 
between pure thought and the intelligence of the dwellers in 
the world of sense. * , 

When we pass from the Vedic hymns to the Upanisads we 
find that the interest shifts from the objective to the subjective, 
from the brooding on the wonder of the outside world to the 
meditation on the significance of the self. The human self 
contains the clue to the interpretation of nature. The Real at 
the heart of the universe is reflected in the infinite depths of 
the soul. The Upanisads give in some detail the path of the 
inner ascent, the inward journey by which the individual souls 
get at the Ultimate Reality. Truth is within us. The different 
Vedic gods are envisaged subjectively. ‘Making the Man 
(purusa) their mortal house the gods indwelt him/ 1 ‘All these 
gods are in me/ 2 ‘He is, indeed, initiated, whose gods within 
him are initiated, mind by Mind, voice by Voice/3 The operation 
of the gods becomes an epiphany: ‘This Brahma, verily, shines 
when one sees with the eye and likewise dies when one does 
not see/4 The deities seem to be not different from Plato's Ideas 
or Eternal Reasons. 

In the Upanisads we find a criticism of the empty and barren 
ritualistic religion. 5 Sacrifices were relegated to an inferior 
position. They do not lead to final liberation; they take one to 
the world of the Fathers from which one has to return to earth 
again in due course. 6 When all things are God's, there is no point 
in offering 4o him anything, except one's will, one's self. The 
sacrifices are interpreted ethically. The three periods of life 
supersede the three Soma offerings. 7 Sacrifices become self- 
denying acts like purusa-viedha and sarva-medha which enjoin 
abandonment of all possessions and renunciation of the world. 
For example, the Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad opens with an 
account of the horse sacrifice (asva-medha) and interprets it 
as a meditative act in which the individual offers up the 

1 Atharva Veda XT. 8. 18. 

2 Jaimmlya Upanisad Brdhmana I. 14. 2. 

3 Kausitaki Brdhmana VII. 4. 

4 K.U. II. 12 and 13. 

*5 M.U. I. 2. 1. 7—1 t ; B.U. III. 9. 6, 21; CM. I. 10-12, IV. 1-3. 

6 B.U. I.$, 16, VI. 2. 16; C.U. V. 10. 3; Pratna I. 9; M.U. I. 2. 10. 

7 C.U. III. 16. 



50 The Principal Upanisads 

whole universe in place of the horse, and by the renuncia- 
tion of the world attains spiritual autonomy in place of 
earthly sovereignty . 1 In every fwma the expression svdhd 
is used which implies the renunciation of the ego, svatva- 
hanana . 2 3 4 5 

There is great stress on the distinction between the ignorant, 
narrow, selfish way which leads to transitory satisfac- 
tions and the way which leads to eternal life. Yajha is 
Karma, work. 3 It is work done for the improvement of the 
soul and the good of the world, dtmonnataye jagaddhitdya. 
Sdmkhydyana Brahman a of the Rg Veda says that the self is 
the sacrifice and the human soul is the sacrificer, puruso 
vai yajnah , dtmd yajamdnah. The observance of the Vedic 
ritual prepares the mind for final release, if it is in the right 
spirit. 4 

Prayer and sacrifice are means to philosophy and spiritual 
life. While true sacrifice is the abandonment of one’s ego, prayer 
is the exploration of reality by entering the beyond that is 
within, by ascension of consciousness. It is not theoretical 
learning. 5 We must see the eternal, the celestial, the still. If 
it is unknowable and incomprehensible, it is yet realisable by 
self-discipline and integral insight. We can seize the truth not 

1 Devi Dhdgavata says that the Supreme took the form of the J3uddha 
in order to put a stop to wrong sacrifices and prevent injury to animals. 
dmta-yajna-vighdtaya pasu-h i msd mvrttaye 
bauddha-rupam dadhau yo’sau tasmai devdvatte namah. 

Animal sacrifices are found in the Vedas (inerted) by the twice-born 
who are gjven to pleasures and relishing tastes. Non-injury is, verily, 
the highest truth. 

dinjair bhoga-vataiY vede dor Lit am himsanam pasoh 
jihvd-svdda-pcuaih kdmam ahimsaiva para maid. 

3 Yaska explains it thus: su aha iti vd, svd vug dheti vd, svum pidheti 
vd, svdhutaYh havn juhoti iti vd. Nirukta VI 1 T. 21. 

3 Cp. B.G. ITI. (j, 10. 

Manu says: ‘Learning is bralinui-yujiia, service of elders is pitv-yajna, 
honouring great and learned people is deva-yajna, performing religious 
acts and charity is bhilta-yajna and entertaining guests is naYa-yajila.’ 
adhydpanam bvahma-yaj riah pitr-yajnas tu taYpanam 
homo dawo balir hhauto w-yajiio atithi-pujanam. 

4 Laugaksi Bhaskara points out at the end of the Artha-samgYaha; 
so'yam dhavmah yad uddisya vihitah tad-uddeUna hriyamdnah tad-hetuh, 
i svaraYpcina-buddhyd kriyamdnas tu nihsyevasa-hctuh. 

5 C.U. VII. 1. 2. 3. 



Introduction 


51 

by logical thinking, but by the energy of our whole inner being. 
Prayer starts with faith, with complete trust in the Being to 
whom appeal is made, with *the feeling of a profound need, and 
a simple faith that God can grant us benefits and is well disposed 
towards us. When we attain the blinding experience of the 
spiritual light, we feel compelled to proclaim a new law for 
the world. 

The Upanisad seers are not bound by the rules 6f caste, but 
extend the law of spiritual universalism to the utmost bounds 
of human existence. The story of Satyakama Jabala, who, 
though unable to give his father’s name, was yet initiated into 
spiritual life, shows that the Upanisad writers appeal from the 
rigid ordinances of custom to those divine and spiritual laws 
which are not of today or of yesterday, but live for ever and of 
their origin knoweth no man. The words tat tvam asi are so 
familiar that they slide off our minds without full compre- 
hension. 

The goal is not a heavenly state of bliss or rebirth in a better 
world, but freedom from the objective, cosmic law of karma 
and identity with the .Supreme Consciousness and Freedom. 
T he Vedic paradise, svarga, becomes a stage in the individual’s 
growth. 1 

The Upanisads generally mention the Vedas with respect 
and their study is enjoined as an important duty.- Certain 
verses from the Vedas such as the gdyatn form the subject of 
meditations* and sometimes verses from the Vedas are quoted 
in support of the teaching of the Upanisads. 4 While the 
Upanisads use the Vedas, their teaching is dependent on the 
personal experience and testimony of teachers like Yajnavalkya, 
Sfindilya. The authority of the Vedas is, to no small extent, due 
to the inclusion of the Upanisads in them. 

It is often stated that Vedic knowledge by itself will not do. 
In the Chandogya Upanisad ,s Svetakctu admits that he has 

1 Tlu' sinuga ottered as a reward for ceremonial conformity is only a 
stage in the onwaid growth of the human soul, sattva-giniodaya. 
Bhagavata XL xy. 42. 

N irdlambopanisad defines bvatga as sat-scniisavga. Heaven and Hell are 
both in the cosmic process: atvaiva navakas svaigah. Bhagavata [II. 30. 29. 

* B.U. IV. 4. 22; I. 9. 3 B U. VI. 3. 0. 4 B.U. I. 3. 10. 

5 VI. Ilf. 



52 The Principal Upanisads 

studied all the Vedas but is lacking in the knowledge 'whereby 
what has not been heard of becomes heard of, what has not 
been thought of becomes thought of, what has not been under- 
stood becomes understood. 1 Narada tells Sanatkumara that 
he has not the knowledge of the Self though he has covered the 
entire range of knowledge, from the Vedas to snake-charming. 1 

X 

ULTIMATE REALITY: BRAHMAN 

To the pioneers of the Upanisads, the problem to be solved 
presented itself in the form, what is the world rooted in? What 
is that by reaching which we grasp the many objects perceived 
in the world around us ? They assume, as many philosophers do, 
that the world of multiplicity is, in fact, reducible to one single, 
primary reality which reveals itself to our senses in different 
forms. This reality is hidden from senses but is discernible to 
the reason. The Upanisads raise the question; what is that 
reality which remains identical and persists through change ? 

The word used in the Upanisads to indicate the supreme 
reality is brahman . It is derived from the root brh. 'to grow, 
to burst forth.’ The derivation suggests gushing forth, bubbling 
over, ceaseless growth, brhattvam. Samkara derives the word 
‘ brahman * from the root brhati to exceed, atisayana and means 
by it eternity, purity. For Madhva, brahman is tlje person in 
whom the qualities dwell in fullness, brfyinto hy asmin gunah. 
The reabis not a pale abstraction, but is quickeningly alive, of 
powerful vitality. In the Rg Veda , brahman is used in the 
sense of ‘sacred knowledge or utterance, a hymn or incantation,’ 
the concrete expression of spiritual wisdom. Sometimes Vac 
is personified as the One. 2 Visva-karman , the All-Maker is said 
to be the lord of the holy utterance . 3 Brahman is mantra or 
prayer. Gradually it acquired the meaning of pow£r or potency 
of prayer, It has a mysterious power and contains within 
itself the essence of the thing denoted. Brhaspati, Brahmanas- 
pati are interpreted as the lord of prayer. 

1 VII. i ff. * R.V. X. \iy t Athavva Ve<{a IV. 30. 

3 X. 81. 7; X. 71. 



Introduction 


53 

In the Brahmanas, brahman denotes the ritual and so is 
regarded as omnipotent. He who knows brahman knows and 
controls the universe. Braliman becomes the primal principle 
and guiding spirit of the universe. ‘There is nothing more 
ancient or brighter than this brahman .’ 1 

In later thought, brahman meant wisdom or Veda. As divine 
origin was ascribed to the Veda or brahman , the two words 
were used with the same meaning. Brahman or s&cred know- 
ledge came to be called the first created thing, brahma pratha- 
majam and even to be treated as the creative principle, the 
cause of all existence. 

The word suggests a fundamental kinship between the 
aspiring spirit of man and the spirit of the universe which it 
seeks to attain. The wish to know the Real implies that we 
know it to some extent. If we do not know anything about it, 
we cannot even say that it is and that we wish to know it. If 
we know the Real, it is because the Real knows itself in us. The 
desire for God, the feeling that we are in a state of exile, implies 
the reality of God in us. All spiritual progress is the growth of 
half-knowledge into clear illumination. Religious experience 
is the evidence for the Divine. In our inspired moments we 
have the feeling that there is a greater reality within us, though 
we cannot tell what it is. From the movements that stir in us 
and the utterances that issue from us, we perceive the power, 
not ourselves, that moves us. Religious experience is by no means 
subjective. (#od cannot be known or experienced except through 
his own act. If we have a knowledge of Brahman , it is due to 
the working of lirahman in us . 31 Prayer is the witness to the 
spirit of the transcendent divine irfimanent in the spirit of man. 
The thinkers of the Upanisads based the reality of Brahman 
on the fact of spiritual experience, ranging from simple prayer 
to illuminated experience. The distinctions which they make 
in the nature of the Supreme Reality are not merely logical. 
They are facts of spiritual experience. 

1 Satapatha Brahmana X. 3. 5. 11. 

a Cp. St. Anselm: ‘I cannot seek Thee except Thou teach me, nor 
find Thee except Thou reveal Thyself’; Burnt: ‘Was it not I who sum- 
moned Thee, to long service; was it not I who made Thee busy with my 
name? Thy calling “Allah” was my “Here am I”.’ 



54 The Principal Upanisads 

The thinkers of the Upanisads attempt to establish the 

reality of God from an analysis of the facts of nature and the 

facts of inner life. ■ 

0 

, Who knows and who can declare what pathway leads 
to the gods ? 

Seen are their lowest dwelling-places only; 

What pathway leads to the highest, most secret 
regions?’ 1 

The Upanisads assume that it is a distorted habit of mind which 
identifies 'the highest, most secret regions’ with the 'lowest 
dwelling-places.’ The Real is not the actual. The Upanisads 
ask, ‘What is the tajjaldn from which all things spring, into 
which they are resolved and in which they live and have their 
being. 2 

The Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad maintains that the ultimate 
reality is being, san-mdtram hi brahma. Since nothing is without 
reason there must be a reason why something exists rather than 
nothing. There is something; there is not nothing. The world 
is not self-caused, self-dependent, self-maintaining. All philo- 
sophical investigation presupposes the reality of being, asti- 
tva-nisthd.3 The theologian accepts the first principle of being as 
an absolute one; the philosopher comes to it by a process of 
mediation. By logically demonstrating the impossibility of 
not-being in and by itself, he asserts the necessity of being. 
Being denotes pure affirmation to the exclusion of every possible 
negation. It expresses simultaneously God’s consciousness of 
himself and his own absolute** self-absorbed being. We cannot 
live a rational life without assuming the reality of being. Not- 
being is sometimes said to be the first principle. 4 It is not 
absolute non-being but only relative non-being, as compared 
with later concrete existence. 

i R.V. TIT. 54. = C U. ITT. 14. i; sec also T.U. TIT. 1; S.U. T. r. 

3 Cp. 'Then God said to Moses: "I am that T Am'V Kxodus TH. j 4. 

There is a familiar distinction between nastiha and astika. The 

ndstika thinks that nothing exists except what we see, feel, touch and 
measure. The astika is one who* holds with R.V. X. 31. 8. naitavad end 
pavo anyad ash, there is not merely this but there is also a transcendent 
other. 

4 T.U. II. 7; C.U. III. 19. 1-3. 



Introduction 


55 

Even as the nyagrodha tree is made of the subtle essence 
which we do not perceive, so is this world made of the infinite 
Brahman . 1 ‘It is at the cofnmand of that . Imperishable that 
the sun and the moon stand bound in their places. It is at the 
command of that Imperishable that the heaven and the earth 
stand each in its own place. It is at the command of that 
Imperishable that the very moments, the hours, the days, 
the nights, the half-months, the months, the seasons and the 
years have their appointed function in the scheme of things. 
It is at the command of that Imperishable that some rivers 
flow to the east from the snow-clad mountains while others flow 
to the west.’ 2 When Balaki defines Brahman as the person 
in the sun ( aditye purusah) and successively as the person in 
the moon, in lightning, in ether, in wind, in fire, in the waters, 
also as the person in the mind, in the shadow, in echo and in the 
body. King Ajatasatru asks, ‘Is that all?’ When Balaki con- 
fesses that he can go no farther, the king says, ‘He who is the 
maker of all these persons, he, verily, should be known.’ 
Brahman is satyasya satyam, the Reality of the real, the source 
of all existing things. 3 

In some cosmological speculations the mysterious principle 
of reality is equated with certain naturalistic elements. Water 
is said to be the source of all things whatsoever.4 From it came 
satya, the concrete existent. Others like Raikva look upon air 
as the final absorbent of all things whatsoever, including fire 
and water. 5 # The Katha Upanisad tells us that fire, having 
entered the universe, ^sumes all forms. 6 The Chandogya Upani- 
sad , however, makes out that fire*is the first to evolve from the 
Primaeval Being and from fire came water and from water the 
earth. At the time of dissolution, the earth is dissolved in 
water, and water in fire and fire in the Primaeval Being. 7 
Akaia , ethei, space, is sometimes viewed as the first principle. 

In regard to the development of the universe, the Upanisads 

1 C.U. VI. 12. For the usage of the world as a tree, see K.V. I. 164. 20; 
VII. 40. 5; VII. 43. 1. 

1 B.U. III. 8. 9. Augustine in his Confessions expresses the thought 
that the things of the world declare through their visible appearance 
the fact that they are created. XI. 4. 

3 B.U. II. I. 4 B.U. V. 5. 1. 5 C.U. IV. 3. 1-2. 6 II. 5. 

7 VI. 8. 4. 

C 



56 The Principal Upani§ads 

look upon the earliest state of the material world as one of 
extension in space, of which the characteristic feature is 
vibration represented to us by the phenomenon of sound. 
From akdsa, vayu , air arises. Vibration by itself cannot create 
forms unless it meets with obstruction. The interaction of 
vibrations is possible in air which is the next modification. To 
sustain the different forces, a third modification arises, tcjas, 
of which light and heat are the manifestations. We still do not 
have stable forms and so the denser medium of water is pro- 
duced. A further state of cohesion is found in earth. The 
development of the world is a process of steady grossening of 
the subtle akdsa or space. All physical objects, even the most 
subtle, are built up by the combination of these five elements. 
Our sense experience depends on them. By the action of 
vibration comes the sense of sound; by the action of things in 
a world of vibrations the sense of touch, by the action of 
light the sense of sight, by the action of water the sense of 
taste, by the action of earth the sense of smell. 

In the Taittinya Upanisad 1 the pupil approaches the father 
and asks him to explain to him the nature of Brahman. He is 
given the formal definition and is asked to supply the content 
by his own reflection. ‘That from which these beings are born, 
that in which when born they live, and that into which they 
enter at their death is Brahman.’ What is the reality which 
conforms to this account? The son is impressed by material 
phenomena and fixes on matter (anna) as the basjc principle. 
He is not satisfied, for matter cannot account for the forms of 
life. He looks upon life (prana) as the basis o‘i the world. Life 
belongs to a different order- from matter. Life, again, cannot 
be the ultimate principle, for conscious phenomena are not 
commensurate with living forms. There is something more in 
consciousness than in life. So he is led to believe that con- 
sciousness (manas) is the ultimate principle. But consciousness 
has different grades. The instinctive consciousness of animals 
is quite different from the intellectual consciousness of human 
beings. So the son affirms that intellectual consciousness 
(vijhdna) is Brahman . Man alone, among nature's children 


* III. 



Introduction 


57 

has the capacity to change himself by his own effort and trans- 
cend his limitations. Even this is incomplete because it is 
subject to discords and dualities. Man's intellect aims at the 
attainment of truth but succeeds only in making guesses about 
it; there must be a power in man which sees the truth unveiled. 
A deeper principle of consciousness must emerge if the funda- 
mental intention of nature, which has led to the development 
of matter, life, mind, and intellectual consciousness, is to be 
accomplished. The son finally arrives at the truth that spiritual 
freedom or delight {ananda); the ecstasy of fulfilled existence 
is the ultimate principle. Here the search ends, not simply 
because the pupil's doubts are satisfied but because the pupil's 
doubts are stilled by the vision of Self-evident Reality. He 
apprehends the Supreme Unity that lies behind all the lower 
forms. The Upanisad suggests that he leaves behind the 
discursive reason and contemplates the One and is lost in 
ecstasy . 1 It concludes with the affirmation that absolute 
Reality is satyam, truth, jnanam, consciousness, anantam , 
infinity. 

There are some who affirm that ananda is the nearest approxi- 
mation to Absolute Reality, but is not itself the Absolute Reality. 
For it is a logical representation. The experience gives us 
peace, but unless we are established in it we have not received 
the highest. 

In this account, the Upanisad assumes that the naturalistic 
theory of evolution cannot be accepted. The world is not to 
be viewed as an automatic development without any intelligent 
course or intelligible aim. Matter, life, mind, intelligence are 
different forms of existence with* their specific characteristics 

1 Cp. Jalal-uddln Ruml. 

‘I died a mineral and became a plant, 

I died a plant and rose an animal, 

I died an animal and I was man. 

Why«should I fear ? When was I less by dying ? 

Yet once more I shall die as man, to soar 
With the blessed angels; but even from angelhood 
I must pass on. All except God perishes. 

When I have sacrificed my angel soul, 

I shall become that which no mind ever conceived. 

O, Jet me not exist ! for Non-existence proclaims, 

"To him we shall return." * 



58 The Principal Upanisads 

and modes of action, each acting on the other but not derived 
from each other. The evolution of life in the context of matter 
is produced not by the material principle but by the working 
of a new life-principle which uses the conditions of matter for 
the production of life. Life is not the mechanical resultant of 
the antecedent co-ordination of material forces, but it is what 
is now called an emergent. We cannot, by a complete knowledge 
of the previous conditions, anticipate the subsequent result. 
There is an element of the incalculable. Life emerges when 
the material conditions are available, which permit life to 
organise itself in matter. In this sense, we may say that matter 
aspires for life, but life is not produced by lifeless particles. 
So also life may be said to be aspiring for or be instinct with 
mind, which is ready to emerge when conditions enable it to 
organise itself in living matter. Mind cannot be produced from 
things without mind. When the necessary mental conditions 
are prepared, intelligence qualifies the mental living creature. 
Nature is working according to this fundamental intention, 
which is being accomplished because it is essentially the 
instrument of the Supreme Being. 

The world is not the result of meaningless chance. There is 
a purpose working itself out through the ages. It is a view 
which modem science confirms. By interpreting the fragmentary 
relics of far remote times, science tells us how this earth in 
which we live was gradually adapted to be a place where life 
could develop, how life came and developed through uncounted 
centuries until animal consciousness arose and this again 
gradually developed, until apparently, man with self-conscious 
reason appeared on the scene. The long record of the develop- 
ment of the human race and the great gifts of spiritual men like 
the Buddha, Socrates, Jesus make out that man has to be trans- 
cended by God-man. 

It cannot be argued that, when material particles are organised 
in a specific way, life arises. The principle of organisation is 
not matter. The explanation of a thing is to be sought in what is 
above it in the scale of existence and value and not below it. 
Matter cannot raise itself. It moves to a higher level by the 
help of the higher itself. It cannot undergo inner d?velopment 
without being acted upon by something above it. The lower 



Introduction 


59 

is the material for the higher. Life is the matter for mind and 
form for physical material : so also intellect is form for the mind 
and matter for the spirit. The eternal is the origin of the actual 
and its nisus to improvement. To think of ft as utterly trans- 
cendent or as a future possibility is to miss its incidence in the 
actual. We cannot miss the primordiality of the Supreme. 
‘Verily, in the beginning this world was Brahman .* 1 There is 
the perpetual activity of the Supreme in the world? 

The Upanisad affirms that Brahman on which all else 
depends, to which all existences aspire, Brahman which is 
sufficient to itself, aspiring to no other, without any need, is 
the source of all other beings, the intellectual principle, the 
perceiving mind, life and body. It is the principle which unifies 
the world of the physicist, the biologist, the psychologist, the 
logician, the moralist and the artist. The hierarchy of all 
things and beings from soulless matter to the deity is the 
cosmos. Plato's world-architect, Aristotle's world-mover belong 
to the cosmos. If there is ordered development, progressive 
evolution, it is because there is the divine principle at work in 
the universe. 

Cosmic process is one of universal and unceasing change 
and is patterned on a duality which is perpetually in con- 
flict, the perfect order of heaven and the chaos of the dark 
waters. Life creates opposites, a§ it creates sexes, in order to 
reconcile them. ‘In the beginning the woman (V rvaix) went 
about in tfye flood seeking a master.' 2 Indra, for example, 
divided the world into earth and sky. He ‘produced his father 
and mother from his own body.' This conflict runs through 
the whole empirical world, and Will end when the aim of the 
universe is accomplished. Creation moves upward towards 
the divine. When the union between the controlling spirit and 
the manifesting matter is completed, the purpose of the world, 
the end of the evolutionary process, the revelation of spirit 
on earth is accomplished. The earth is the foothold of God, the 
mother of all creatures whose father is heaven. 3 

* B.U. I. 4. io-ii ; Maitri VI. 17. 

2 icchantl salile patim. Jaiminlya Upanisad Brdhmana I. 56. 

3 The Chyiese believe that Chien (Heaven) is the father and Khun 
(Earth) is the mother of all terrestrial existence. Zeus as Sky-father is in 



60 The Principal Upanisads 

The conflict is not final. The duality is not a sterile dualism. 
Heaven and earth, God and matter have the same origin. 

As regards the primordial God' Iliranya-garbha , a circular 
process is found. The primal being spontaneously produces the 
primeval water; from this comes the primordial God as the first 
bom of the divine Order, the golden germ of the world 'who was 
the first seed resting on the navelof the unborn Z 1 Hiranya-garbha 
who is the World-soul expresses his spirit through the environ- 
ment. He manifests the forms contained within himself. The 
world is fixed in him as are the spokes in the hub of a wheel. 
He is the thread, sutrdtman, on which all beings and all worlds 
are strung like the beads of a necklace. He is the first-born, 
prathama-ja. He is also called Brahma and these Brahmas are 
created from world to world. 2 

In the Rg Veda , 3 Hiranya-garbha is the golden germ which 
enters into creation after the first action of the creator. In the 
Sdmkhya , prakrti is treated as unconscious and develops on 
account of the influence of the multitude of individual subjects, 
and the first product of development is mahaJt , the great one, 
or buddhi , the intellect. It is the development of cosmic intelli- 

essential relation to Earth-mother. The two' are correlative. See A. B. 
Cook: Zeus (1914), Vol. I, p. 779. 

Zoroaster reaches the conception of a single spiritual God, Ormuzd 
or Ahura Mazda, in whom the principle of good is personified, while the 
evil principle is embodied in Ahriman, or Angra Mainyu, who limits the 
omnipotence of Ahura Mazda. The whole creation is a combat between 
the two. The two principles strive eternally in life, and in this struggle 
mfen take part. Man is responsible for his action^, good or bad. If lie 
struggles against evil, confesses God and cai^s for the purity of his 
body and soul, then after four periods of three thousand years each in 
the world’s history a time shall arrive for the final victory of good over 
evil, of Ormuzd over Ahriman. The general resurrection of the dead and 
the last judgment will take place then, assuring him of his place among 
the saved and the righteous. 

The Jews adopted the two principles of good and evil and they were 
taken over by Christianity. When Blake speaks of the marriage of 
Heaven and Hell, Heaven represents the one clear light over all and 
Hell the dark world of passion and the senses. Divided, both are equally 
barren, but from their union springs joy. 'Oh that man would seek immor- 
tal moments! Oh that men could converse with God' was Blake's cry. 

« R.V. X. 82; IV. 58. 5. 

2 ‘God once created Brahma Hiranya-garbha and delivered the Vedas 
to him.’ S.B. I. 4. 1. 

3 X. 121. 1. 



Introduction 


61 


gence or Hiranya-garbha. On the subjective side, buddhi is the 
first element of the linga or the subtle body. It is the essence of 
the individual spirit. Buddhi serves as the basis for the develop- 
ment of the principle of individuation, ahcbhkara , from which 
are derived, on the one hand, mind and the ten sense organs, 
five of perception and five of action and, on the other hand, the 
subtle elements from which arise in their turn the gross elements. 
Sattva is buddhi , the innermost of the three circles, the outer 
being rajas and tamas which are identified with ahamkara and 
manas, which are the emanations of rajas and tamas . The 
sattva or the buddhi is the bija, the seed of the living individual, 
since it contains the seeds of karma which develop at each 
birth into a sense-organism. The sattva or lihga is called the 
ego, the jiva. As the buddhi is the siitrdtman of the individual, 
so is Hiranya-garbha the siitrdtman , the thread-controller of the 
world. 

In the Katha Upanisad, 1 in the development of principles 
the great self stands after the undeveloped and the primeval 
spirit. Hiranya-garbha , the World-soul is the first product of 
the principle of non-being influenced by the Eternal Spirit, 
Isvara. The purusa of the Samkhya is the Eternal Spirit made 
many. Hiranya-garbha is the great self, mahdn atmd t which 
arises from the undiscriminated, the avyakta , which corresponds 
to the primitive material or waters of the Brahmanas, or the 
prakrti of the Samkhya. We have the Supreme Self, the Absolute, 
the Supreme Self as the eternal subject observing the eternal 
object, waters or prtkrti and the great self which is the first 
product of this interaction of # the eternal subject and the 
principle of objectivity. The Supreme Lord, Isvara , who 
eternally produces, outlasts the drama of the universe. Samkara 
begins his commentary on the Bhagavad-gita with the verse: 
*N dr ay ana is beyond the unmanifest. The golden egg is produced 
from the unmanifest. The earth with its seven islands and all 
other worlcfs are in the egg/ The names and forms of the 
manifested world are latent in the egg as the future tree is in 
the seed. 

Hiranya-garbha answers to the Logos, the Word of Western 


1 III. io. 1 1 ; VI. 7. 8 ; see also K.U. I. 7. 



62 The Principal Upani$ads 

thought. For Plato, the Logos was the archetypal idea. For 
the Stoics it is the principle of reason which quickens and 
informs matter. Philo speaks of the Divine Logos as the ‘first 
born son/ 1 ‘archetypal man/ 2 * * * ‘image of God/3 ‘through whom 
the world was created/4 Logos, the Reason, ‘the Word was in 
the beginning and the Word became flesh/ The Greek term, 
Logos, means both Reason and Word. The latter indicates an 
act of divirte will. Word is the active expression of character. 
The difference between the conception of Divine Intelligence 
or Reason and the Word of God is that the latter represents 
the will of the Supreme. Vac is Brahman.S Vac t word, wisdom, 
is treated in the Rg Veda as the all-knowing. The first-born 
of Rta is Vac: 6 * yavad brahma tisthati tavati vakJ The Logos is 
conceived as personal like Hiranya-garbha. ‘The Light was the 
light of men/ ‘The Logos became flesh/ 8 * 

The Supreme is generally conceived as light, jyotisdm jyotih, 
the light of lights. Light is the principle of communication. 
Hiranya-garbha is organically bound up with the world. Himself, 
a creature, the first-born of creation, he shares the fate of all 
creation in the end.9 But Isvara is prior to the World-soul. 10 
The principle of process applies to God. While he is the expres- 
sion of the non-temporal he is also the temporal. Itvara, the 
eternal Being functions in the temporal Hiranya-garbha. 
Ramanuja who looks upon Hvara as the supreme transcendent 
Reality above all world events treats Brahma as the demi-urge 

1 I. 414. 1 I. 411. 3 I. 6. ■ 4 II. 225. 5 R V. I. 3. 21. 

6 Atharva Veda II. 1. 4. See Nama-Rupa anduharqia-Rupa by Maryla 

Falk (1943). Ch. I. 

7 R.V. X. 114. 8. 

8 John I. 4, 5. See B. F. Westcott: The Gospel According to St. John 

(1886), p. xvii. 

9 ‘When all things are subjected to him then the Son himself will also 

be subjected to him who put all things under him, that God may be 
everything to everyone/ I Cor. XV. 28 

10 Cp. ‘Before the mountains were brought forth, or .even the earth 
and the world were made thou art God from everlasting and world 
without end/ See Hebrews I. 10-13. 

Religio M edict: 'Before Abraham was, I am, is the saying of Christ; 
yet is it true in some sense, if I sky it of myself ; for I was not only before 
myself but Adam; that is, in the idea of God, and the decree of that 
synod held from all eternity. And in this sense, I say, tlje world was 
before the creation, and at the end, before it had a beginning/ 



Introduction 63 

of creation who forms the lower world in the name and bidding 
of God. 

Why is the universe what it is, rather than something else ? 
Why is there this something, rather thait another? This is 
traced to the divine will. This world and its controlling spirit 
are the expressions of the Supreme Lord. While the World- 
soul and the world are organically related and are inter- 
dependent, there is no such relationship between the Supreme 
Lord and the world, for that would be to subject the infinite 
to the finite. The relationship is an 'accident' to use White- 
head's expression. This word 'accident' implies two different 
considerations, (1) that Divine Creativity is not bound up with 
this world in such a way that the changes which occur in the 
world affect the integrity of the Divine, and (2) that the world 
is an accidental expression of the Divine principle. Creativity 
is not bound to express itself in this particular form. If the 
choice were necessary it would not be free. Creation is the free 
expression of the Divine mind, iccha-mdtram. The world is the 
manifestation of Hiranya-garbha and the creation of Isvara. The 
world is the free # self-determination of God. The power of self- 
determination, self-expression, belongs to God. It is not by 
itself. It belongs to the Absolute which is the abode of all 
possibilities, and by its creative power one of these possibilities 
is freely chosen for accomplishment. The power of manifestation 
is not alien to being. It does not enter it from outside. It is in 
being, inhertnt in it. It may be active or inactive. We thus get 
the conception of am Absolute-God, Brahman — Isvara, where 
the first term indicates infinite being and possibility, and the 
second suggests creative freedom - . 1 Why should the Absolute 
Brahman perfect, infinite, needing nothing, desiring nothing, 
move out into the world? It is not compelled to do so. It may 
have this potentiality but it is not bound or compelled by it. 
It is free to move or not to move, to throw itself into forms or 
remain formfess. If it still indulges its power of creativity, it is 
because of its free choice. 

1 In the Taoist Tao Te Ching, Tao , "literally ‘Way/ stands for the 
Absolute, the chvine ground and Te for ‘power/ for the unfolding of the 
divine possibilities. Cp. also tathatd or suchness and alaya-vijndna the 
all-conserving or receptacle consciousn *ss. 

C* 



64 The Principal Upanisads 

In livara we have the two elements of wisdom and power, 
Siva and Sakti. By the letter the Supreme who is unmeasured 
and immeasurable becomes measured and defined. Immutable 
being becomes infinite fecundity. Pure being, which is the free 
basis and support of cosmic existence, is not the whole of our 
experience. Between the Absolute and the World-soul is the 
Creative Consciousness. It is prajnana-ghana - or truth-conscious- 
ness. If sat 4 denotes the primordial being in its undifferenced 
unity, satya is the same being immanent in its differentiations. 
If the Absolute is pure unity without any extension or variation, 
God is the creative power by which worlds spring into existence. 
The Absolute has moved out of its primal poise and become 
knowledge-will. It is the all-determining principle. It is the 
Absolute in action as Lord and Creator. While the Absolute is 
spaceless and timeless potentiality, God is the vast self- 
awareness comprehending, apprehending every possibility. 1 

Brahman is not merely a featureless Absolute. It is all this 
world. Vdyu or air is said to be manifest Brahman, pratyak§am 
brahma. The Svetaivatara Upanisad makes out that Brahman is 
beast, bird and insect, the tottering old man, boy and girl. 
Brahman sustains the cosmos and is the self of each individual. 
Supra-cosmic transcendence and cosmic universality are both 
real phases of the one Supreme. In the former aspect the Spirit 
is in no way dependent on the cosmic manifold; in the latter 
the Spirit functions as the principle of the cosmic manifold. 
The supra-cosmic silence and the cosmic integration are both 
real. The two, nirguna and saguna Brahmqn, Absolute and God, 
are not different. Jayatirtha .contends that S'amkara is wrong 
in holding that Brahman is of f cwo kinds — brahmano dvairupyasya 
aprdmdnikatvat . 2 It is the same Brahman who is described in 
different ways. 

1 Eckhart says: ‘God and Godhead are as different as heaven from 
earth. . . . God becomes and unbecomes.' ‘All in Godhead is one, and of 

this naught can be said. God works, but Godhead works not. There is no 
work for it to do and no working in it. Never did it contemplate any- 
thing of work. God and Godhead differ after the manner of working 
and not working. . . . When I Come into the Ground, into the depths, 
into the flow and fount of Godhead, none will ask me whence I have 
come or whither I go. None will have missed me; God passes away.' 
Sermon LVI. Evans’ E.T. 2 Nydya-suaha, p. 124. 



Introduction 


65 

The personality of God is not to be conceived on the human 
lines. He is not to be thought of as a greatly magnified person. 
We should not attribute to the Divine human qualities as we 
know them. 1 We have (1) the Absolute, (2) God as Creative 
power, (3) God immanent in this world. These are not to be 
regarded as separate entities. They are arranged in this order 
because there is a logical priority. The Absolute must be there 
with all its possibilities before the Divine Creativity can choose 
one. The divine choice must be there before there can be the 
Divine immanent in this world. This is a logical succession and 
not a temporal one. The world-spirit must be there before there 
can be the world. We thus get the four poises or statuses of 
reality, 1 the Absolute, Brahman , (2) the Creative Spirit, Isvara , 
(3) the World-Spirit, Hiranya-garbha , and (4) the World. This 
is the way in which the Hindu thinkers interpret the integral 
nature of the Supreme Reality. Mandtikya Upanisad says that 
Brahman is catus-pat, four-footed, and its four principles are 
Brahman , Isvara , Hiranya-garbha and Virdj * 

1 Aquinas says: ‘Things said alike of God and of other beings are not 
said either in quite # the same sense or in a totally different sense but in 
an analogous sense.* Summa Contra Gentiles XXXIV. God is not good 
or loving in the human sense. ‘For who hath known the mind of the 
Lord ?* Romans XI. 34. God is personal, but, as Karl Barth says, ‘personal 
in an incomprehensible way in so far as the conception of His personality 
surpasses all our views of personality. This is so, just because He and He 
alone is a true, real and genuine person. Were we to overlook this and 
try to conceive God in our own strength according to our conception of 
personality, wt; should make an idol out of God.' The Knowledge of God 
and the Service of God (ic^8), pp. 3 iff. 

2 In Plotinus we have a similar scheme, (i) The One alone, the simple, 
the unconditioned. God beyond being of Basilides, the godhead of 
Kckhart which can only be indicated by negative terms. We cannot 
even affirm existence of it, though it is not non-existent. It cannot be 
thought of as either subject or object of experience, as in it subject and 
object are identical. It is pure impersonal experience or perhaps the 
ground of all experience; it is pure consciousness, ineffable supra- 
existence. It is not the first cause, not the creator god. It is cause only 
in the sense that it is everywhere, and without it nothing could be. 
(ii) The Nous. The Intelligible world which Plotinus calls One — Many, 
the world of Platonic forms or archetypes. Not mere Ideas or things 
thought by the Divine Thinker, not mene passive archetypical pictures. 
They are active powers within the Divine mind. It is personal God. 
Unity cannot be separated from diversity. The most perfect form of 
expressive a& is thought or intellection, vijndna, Divine Intellect, First 
thinker and thought, the personal Lord, Universal Intelligence, The 



66 The Principal Upani$ads 

The conception of tri-suparna is developed in the fourth 
section of the Taittinya Upanisad. The Absolute is conceived 
as a nest from out of which three birds have emerged, viz. 
Virdj, Hiranya-garbha and Isvara. The Absolute conceived as 
it is in itself, independent of any creation, is called Brahman. 
When it is thought of as having manifested itself as the uni- 
verse, it is called Virdj ; when it is thought of as the spirit 
moving everywhere in the universe, it is called Hiranya-garbha ; 
when it is thought of as a personal God creating, protecting 
and destroying the universe, it is called Isvara . Isvara becomes 
Brahma , Visnu and Siva when his three functions are taken 
separately. 1 The real is not a sum of these. It is an ineffable 
unity in which these conceptual distinctions are made. These 
are fourfold to our mental view, separable only in appearance. 
If we identify the real with any one definable state of being, 
however pure and perfect, we violate the unity and divide the 
indivisible. The different standpoints are consistent with each 
other, complementary to each other and necessary in their 

unknowable Absolute is mediated to us through the Divine Intelligence. 
This Intellectual principle of Plotinus is the Hvara of the Upanisads. 
This universal intelligence makes possible the multiple universe. For 
Plotinus this principle is the totality of divine thoughts or Ideas in Plato’s 
sense. These Ideas or Thoughts are real beings, powers. They are the 
originals, archetypes, intellectual forms of all that exists in the lower 
spheres. All the phases of existence down to the lowest ultimate of 
material being or the lowest forms of being in the visible universe are 
ideally present in this realm of divine thoughts. This divine intellectual 
principle has both being and non-being. It has, for Plotinus, two acts, 
the upward contemplation of the One and generation towards the lower, 
(iii) One and Many. The soul of the All is the third, which fashions 
the material universe on the model of divine thoughts, the Ideas laid 
up within the Divine Mind. It is the eternal cause of the cosmos, the 
creator and therefore the vital principle of the world. God is envisaged 
as something apart from the world, its creator or artificer. Human ideas 
of God are centred round him. Plotinus does not make the sensible 
world a direct emanation from the Intelligible World. It is the product 
or the creation of the World-soul, the third person of the Neo-Platonic 
trinity, herself an emanation from the Intelligible Wtfrld, the Nous. 
Our souls are parts or emanations of the World-soul. The three hypo- 
stases form collectively, for Plotinus, the one transcendent being. J'he 
All-Soul is the expression of th^ energy of the Divine, even as the Intel- 
lectual principle is the expression of the thought or vision of the 
godhead, (iv) The many alone. It is the world-body, the world of matter 
without form. It is the possibility of manifested form. * 

1 See also Paingala U. 



Introduction 


67 

totality for an integral view of life and the world. If we are 
able to hold them together, the conflicting views which are 
emphasised exclusively by certain schools of Indian Vedanta 
become reconciled. 

Absolute being is not an existing quality to be found in the 
things. It is not an object of thought or the result of production. 
It forms an absolute contrast to, and is fundamentally different 
from, things that are, as is in its way nothingness. It can be 
expressed only negatively or analogically. It is that from 
which our speech turns back along with the mind, being unable 
to comprehend its fullness. 1 It is that which the tongue of man 
cannot truly express nor human intelligence conceive. Samkara 
in his commentary on the Brahma Sutra 2 3 4 refers to an Upanisad 
text which is not to be found in any of the extant Upani§ads. 
Bahva, asked by Ba§kali to expound the nature of Brahman , 
kept silent. He prayed, ‘Teach me, sir. 1 The teacher was silent, 
and when addressed a second and a third time he said: T am 
teaching but you do not follow. The self is silence. '3 

We can only describe the Absolute in negative terms. In the 
words of Plotinus, ‘We say what he is not, We cannot say what 
he is.' The Absolute is beyond the sphere of predication. It is 
the iunyata of the Buddhists. It is ‘not gross, not subtle, not 
short, not long, not glowing, not shadowy, not dark, not 
attached, flavourless, smell-less, eye-less, ear-less, speech-less, 
mind-less, breath-less, mouth-less, not internal, not external, 
consuming nothing and consumed by nothing. '4 It cannot be 


1 T.U. IT. 4; see^lso Kena. I. 3, 11 * 3 ; Katha I. 27. 

* S.B. III. 2. 17. 

3 upa&dnto’yam dtma. Cp. the Madhyamika view — 
paramdvthatas tu dryandm tusnlm-bhava eva. 

‘Then only will you see it, when you cannot speak of it; for the 
knowledge of it is deep silence and the suppression of all the senses.' 
Hermes Trismegistus, Lib. X. 5. 

4 See B.U. II. 8. 8; see also II. 3. 6; III. 9. 26; IV. 2. 4; IV. 4. 22; 
IV. 5. 15. Ma. # 7. The Buddha, according to Amara, is an advaya-vddm. 
I. 1. 14. 

There was something formless yet complete. 

That existed before heaven and earth, 

Without sound, without substance. 

Dependent on nothing, unchanging, 

1 All-pervading, unfailing, 



68 The Principal Upanisads 

truly designated. Any description makes It into something. 
It is nothing among things. It is non-dual, advaita . It denies 
duality. This does not mean, however, that the Absolute is non- 
being. It means only that the Absolute is all-inclusive and 
nothing exists outside it. 

Negative characters should not mislead us into thinking that 
Brahman is a nonentity. While it is non-empirical, it is also 

' One may think of it as the mother 
of all things under heaven, 

Its true name we do not know; 

Tao is the by-name we give it. 

Tao TS'Ching. 25. A. Waley's E.T. 

The Way and its Power. (1034) 

Plato says that the unfathomable ground of the universe, the absolute, 
is ‘beyond essence and truth.' Plotinus describes the utter transcendence 
of the One thus: ‘Since the Nature or Hypostasis of The One is the 
engenderer of the All, it can Itself be none of the things in the All; that 

is. It is not a thing; It does not possess quality or quantity; It is not an 
Intellectual Principle, not a soul; It is not in motion and not at rest; not 
in space, not in time; It is essentially of a unique form or rather of 
no-form, since it is prior to form, as it is prior to movement and to rest ; 
all these categories hold only in the realm of existence and constitute 
the multiplicity characteristic of that lower realm.' Enneads VI. 9. 3. 
‘This wonder, this One, to which in verity no najne may be given.' 
ibid. VI. 9. 5. 

‘Our way then takes us beyond knowing; there may be no wandering 
from unity, knowing and knowable must all be left aside. Every object 
of thought, even the highest, we must pass by, for all that is good is later 
than this. . . . No doubt we should not speak of seeing; but we cannot 
help talking in dualities, seen and seer, instead of boldly, the achieve- 
ment of unity. In this seeing, we neither hold an object nor trace dis- 
tinction; there is no two. The man is changed, no longer himself nor 
self belonging; he is merged with the supreme,rsunken into it, one with 

it. Only in separation is there duality. That is why the \1s10n baffles 
telling. We cannot detach the .supreme to state it; if we have seen 
something thus detached, we have failed of the supreme.' Enneads. 
VI. 9. 4 and 10. 

Pseudo-Dionysius, whose utterances were once accepted as almost 
apostolic authority, observes: ‘For it is more litting to praise God by 
taking away than by ascription. Here we take away all things from 
Him, going up from particulars to universals, that we may know 
openly the unknowable which is hidden in and under all tilings that may 
be known. And we behold that darkness beyond being, concealed under 
all natural light.' 

Chuang Tzu's vision of the boundless world has this: 'You cannot 
explain the sea to a frog in a well-— the creature of a narrow sphere. You 
cannot explain ice to a grasshopper — the creature of a season. You 
cannot explain Tao to a pedant — This view is too limited.' Waley: 



Introduction 


69 

inclusive of the whole empirical world. The Absolute is des- 
cribed as full both of light and not-light, of desire and not-desire, 
of anger and not-anger, of law and not-law, having verily filled 
all, both the near and the far off, the this and the that / 1 Negative 
and positive characterisations are given to affirm the positivity 
of being. 

To say that the nature of Brahman cannot be defined does 
not mean that it has no essential nature of its own*. We cannot 
define it by its accidental features, for they do not belong to 
its essence. There is nothing outside it. As no inquiry into its 
nature can be instituted without some description, its svarupa 
or essential nature is said to be sat or being, cit or consciousness 
and dnanda or bliss . 2 These are different phrases for the same 
being. Self-being, self-consciousness and self-delight are one. 
It is absolute being in which there is no nothingness. It is 
absolute consciousness in which there is no non-consciousness. 
It is absolute bliss in which there is no suffering or negation 
of bliss. All suffering is due to a second, an obstacle; all delight 

Three Ways of Thought in Ancient China (1039), PP- 55-6. H. A. Giles: 
Chuang-Tzu, Mystic Moralist and Social Reformer (1926). Ch. XVIII. 

Anandagiri begins his commentary on Katha Upanisad with this 
verse : 

dharmd dharmddyasamsrstam kdrya-karana-varjitam 
kdladibhir avicchinnam brahma yat tan namamy aham. 

Paul speaks of a vision which was not to be told and had heard words 
not to be repeated. II Corinthians 12 If. Cp. Hymn of Gregory of Nyasa, 
'O Thou entirely beyond all being.’ ‘O Lord, My God, the Helper of them 
that seek Thfce, I behold Thee in the entrance of Paradise, and I know 
not what I see, for I set# naught visible. This alone I know, that I know 
not what I see, an 3 never can know. An d I know not how to’name Thee, 
because I know not what Thou art, and did anyone say unto me that 
Thou wert called by this name or that, by the very fact that he named 
it I should know that it was not Thy name. For the wall beyond which I 
see Thee is the end of all manner of signification in names. . . .' Nicholas 
of Cusa: The Vision of God. E. T. Salter’s E.T. (1928). Ch. XIII. ‘No 
monad or triad can express the all-transcending hiddenness of the all- 
transcending super-essentially super-existing super-deity.' 'God, because 
of his excellence, may rightly be called Nothing,’ says Scotus Erigena. 

1 B.U. IV. 4. 5. ha 4, 5. Katha 1. 2. 20-21; I. 3. 15; II. 6. 17. M.U. 
I. 1. 6; 1. 7. S.U. V. 8-10. 

1 They are not so much qualities of Brahman as the very nature of 
Brahman. Commenting on the passage Brahman is truth, wisdom and 
infinity, satyath jndnam anantam brahma, S. writes: 

satyadini hi tririi vihesanarth^ni paddni viiesyasya brahmanah . 



70 The Principal Upanisads 

arises from the realisation of something withheld, by the over- 
coming of obstacles, by the surpassing of the limit. It is this 
delight that overflows into creatiofi. The self-expression of the 
Absolute, the creation of numberless universes is also traced to 
Brahman. All things that exist are what they are, because of 
the nature of Brahman as sat , cit and ananda. All things are 
forms of one immutable being, variable expressions of the 
invariable reality. To describe Brahman as the cause of the 
world is to give its tatastha or accidental feature . 1 The defining 
characteristics are in both cases due to our logical needs . 2 When 
the Absolute is regarded as the basis and explanation of the 
world, he is conceived as the lord of all, the knower of all, the 
inner controller of all. 3 God has moved out everywhere: sa 
paryagat. The Svetasvatara Upanisad speaks of the one God, 
beside whom there is no second, who creates all the worlds and 
rules with His powers, and at the end of time rolls them up again. 4 
He lives in all thingss and yet transcends them. The Universal 
Self is like the sun who is the eye of the whole universe and is 
untouched by the defects of our vision . 6 He is said to fill the 
whole world and yet remain beyond its confines. ‘Verily 
motionless like a lone tree does the God stand in the heaven, 
and yet by Him is this whole world filled. '7 

The distinction between Brahman in itself and Brahman in 
the universe, the transcendent beyond manifestation and the 
transcendent in manifestation, the indeterminate and the 
determinate, nirguno gum, is not exclusive . 8 The J:wo are like 
two sides of one reality. The Real is at,, the same time being 
realised. 

In the metrical Upanisads; as in the Bhagavad-gitd, the per- 

1 tatasthatvam ca laksya-svarupa-bahir-bhutatvam Siddhdnta-lesa-sam - 
graha (Kumbhakonam ed.), p. 53. 

* They are said to be kalpita or constructed, as the non-dual Brahman 
is said to possess these qualities on account of its association with 
antafrkarana. They are manifestations through an imperfect medium and 
therefore limited revelations of Brahman. 

3 Ma.U. 6. 4 HI. 2. 3; VI. 1-12. 5 B.U. I. 4. 7. S.U. II. 17. 

* Katha II. 5. 11. 7 S.U. III. 9. 

8 Cp. Eckhart: ‘The Godhead gave all things up to God. The Godhead 

is poor, naked and empty as though it were not; it has not, wills not, 
wants not, works not, gets not. It is God who has the treasure and the 
bride in him, the Godhead is as void as though it were not/' 



Introduction 


7i 

sonal is said to be superior to the superpersonal: 1 puru$dn na 
par am kincit , there is nothing beyond the person. It is doubtful 
.whether the author of the Brahma Sutra accepted the dis- 
tinction of saguna and nirguna in regard »to Brahman . Even 
the nirguya Brahman is not without determinations. The 
Sutrakara makes a distinction between the super-personal 
(apurusa-vidha) and the personal (purusa-vidha ) , i.e. between 
Brahman and Isvara. The latter is not a human fancy or a 
concession to the weak in mind. The nirakdra (formless), and 
the sdkdra (with form) , are different aspects of the same Reality. 
The seeker can choose either in his spiritual practices. In III. 3 
we find that the author maintains that the aksara texts which 
describe Brahman negatively as 'not this, not this' are 'not 
useful for meditation.’ 2 He holds that Brahman is unaffected by 
the different states, of waking, dream, sleep. The view that 
Brahman undergoes changes is refuted on the ground that they 
relate to the effects due to the self-concealment of Brahman. 
Badarayana denies reality to a second principle. 

Hiranya-garbha , the World-soul is the divine creator, the 
supreme lord Isvara at work in this universe. A definite possi- 
bility of the ABsolute is being realised in this world. In the 
.Upanisads the distinction between Isvara and Hiranya-garbha , 
between God and the World-soul is not sharply drawn. If the 
World-soul is ungrounded in Isvara , if he is exclusively tem- 
poral, then we cannot be certain of the end of the cosmic process 
When the ypanisads assert that the individual ego is rooted 
in the universal self f or atman, it would be preposterous to 
imagine that the? World-soul is unrelated to Isvara or Brahman .3 

1 Katha I. 3. 11. M.U II. 1. 1-2. • 

a adhyanaya prayojanubhdvdt. III. 3. 14; see also III. 3. 33. 

3 Valentinus whose activity may be assigned to a . d . 1 30-1 50, teaches 
a similar view. The primordial essence is the Deep (Byihos). With it 
dwelt a thought called also Grace (for it was not conditioned) and 
Silence (for it made no sign of its existence). Professor Burkitt writes: 
‘Somehow the^im measurable Deep made its own thought fecund and so 
Mind (Nous) came into being; although it was called unique, it had a 
correlative side to it called Truth . . . Nous, Mind is an intelligent 
understanding, the inevitable counterpart of which is Truth; for, if 
there be nothing true to understand, there can be no intelligent under- 
standing.' Cambridge Ancient History, Vol. XII (1939), p. 470. 

Eckhart refers to the World-soul and not to the Supreme God in the 
passage, where he asserts that ‘God becomes and dis becomes.' 



72 The Principal Upanisads 

Hiranya-garbha who has in him the whole development in 
germ acts on the waters. As we have seen, the image of waters 
is an ancient one by which human thought attempts to explain 
the development Of the universe. The waters are initially at 
rest and so free from waves or forms. The first movement, the 
first disturbance, creates forms and is the seed of the universe. 
The play of the two is the life of the universe. When the de- 
velopment is complete, when what is in germ is manifest, we 
have the world-consummation. Hiranya-garbha creates the 
world according to the eternal Veda, which has within itself 
eternally the primary types of all classes of things; even 
as the God of the mediaeval scholastics creates according to 
the eternal archetype of Ideas which He as the eternal Word 
eternally possesses. Brahman is the unity of all that is named. 1 
Hiranya-garbha or Brahma is the World-soul 2 and is subject to 
changes of the world. He is karya Brahma or effect Brahman as 
distinct from Isvara who is karana Brahman or causal Brahman. 
Hiranya-garbha arises at every world-beginning and is dissolved 
at every world-ending. Isvara is not subject to these changes. 
For both Saiiikara and Ramanuja, Hiranya-garbha has the place 
of a subordinate and created demi-urge. Isvara is the eternal 
God who is not drawn into but directs the play of the worlds, 
that rise and perish and is Himself existing transcendentally 
from all eternity. The Vedic, deities are subordinate to Isvara 
and hold a similar position to Him in the formation and control 
of the world that the angelic powers and directQrs maintain 
in the heavenly hierarchy of scholasticism and of Dante. 

We have thus the four sides of one whole :*(i) the transcen- 
dental universal being anterior to any concrete reality; (ii) the 
causal principle of all differentiation ; (iii) the innermost essence 
of the world; and (iv) the manifest world. They are co-existent 
and not alternating poises where we have either a quiescent 
Brahman or a creative Lord. These are simultaneous sides of the 
one Reality. 

■ B.U. I. 5. 17. 

1 For Atman as the World-soul, see Atharva Veda X. 8. 44. 



Introduction 


73 


XI 

ULTIMATE REALITY: ATMAN 

The word 'atman' is derived from an To breathe.' It is the 
breath of life. 1 Gradually its meaning is extended to cover life, 
soul, self or essential being of the individual. Samkara derives 
atman from the root which means To obtain' To* eat or enjoy 
or pervade all.' 2 Atman is the principle of man's life, the soul 
that pervades his being, his*breath, prana , his intellect, prajha , 
and transcends them. Atman is what remains when everything 
that is not the self is eliminated. The Rg Veda speaks of the 
unborn part, ajo bhagahl There is an unborn and so immortal 
element in man, 4 which is not to be confused with body, life, 
mind and intellect. These are not the self but its forms, its 
external expressions. Our true self is a pure existence, self-aware, 
unconditioned by the forms of mind and intellect. When we 
cast the self free from all outward events, there arises from the 
inward depths an experience, secret and wonderful, strange 
and great. It is the miracle of self-knowledge, atma-jnana. 5 Just 
as, in relation t& the universe, the real is Brahman , while name 
and form are only a play of manifestation, so also the individual 
egos are the varied expressions of the One Universal Self. As 
Brahman is the eternal quiet underneath the drive and activity 

1 dtma te vatah. R.V. VII. 87. 2. 

2 dpnoter atter atater vd. § on A.U. I. 1. 

Cp. also ycic iapnoti yad ddatte yac cdtti visayan iha 

vac casya santc&o bhavas tasmdd dtmeti kirtyate. 

3 X. ib. 4. 

* Sayana says: ajah janana-rahiiah , sarirendriyabhagavyatinhtah, 
antara-purusa-laksano-yo’bhdgo’sti. Kckhart quotes with approval an 
unnamed heathen philosopher as saying ‘Discard all this and that and 
here and there and be thyself what thou art in thine inner not-bcing’, 
which he adds is mens. 

3 Annapurna U. asks us to inquire into the nature of our inward 
being: 

Who am I ? How came this world ? What is it ? 

How came death and birth ? Thus inquire 

Within yourself; great will be the benefit 
(you will derive from stich inquiry). 
ho' ham, katham tdam , him vd, hatha m marana-janmani 
vicgraydntare vettham mahat tat phalam esyasi. 

I. 40. 



74 The Principal Upani$ads 

of the universe, so Atman is the foundational reality under- 
lying the conscious powers of the individual, the inward ground 
of the human soul. There is an ultimate depth to our life below 
the plane of thinking and striving. The Atman is the super- 
reality of the jiva, the individual ego. 

The Chandogya Upanisad gives us a story, where gods and 
demons both anxious to learn the true nature of the Self 
approach Praja-pati who maintains that the ultimate self is 
free from sin, free from old age, free from death and grief, free 
from hunger and thirst, which desires nothing and imagines 
nothing. It is the persisting spirit, that which remains constant 
in all the vicissitudes of waking, dream and sleep, death, 
rebirth and deliverance. The whole account assumes that there 
is consciousness even in the apparently unconscious states, 
when we sleep, when we are drugged or stunned. The gods 
sent Indra and the demons Virocana as their representatives 
to learn the truth. The first suggestion is that the self is the 
image that we see in the eye, in water or in a mirror. The con- 
ception of the self as the physical body is inadequate. To indicate 
that what we see in another’s eye, a pail of water or a mirror 
is not the true self, Praja-pati asked them to put on their best 
clothes and look again. Indra saw the difficulty and said to 
Praja-pati that as this self (the shadow in the water) is well 
adorned when the body is well adorned, well dressed when the 
body is well dressed, well cleaned when the body is well cleaned, 
so that self will also be blind if the body is blind, lamg if the body 
is lame, crippled if the body is crippled, %nd will perish in fact 
as soon as the body perishes. Such a view canfiot be accepted. 
If the self is not the body, rhay it be the dreaming self? The 
second suggestion is that the true self is “he who moves about 
happy in dreams/ Again a difficulty was felt. Indra says that, 
though it is true that this dreaming self is not affected by the 
changes of the body, yet in dreams we feel that we are struck 
or chased, we experience pain and shed tears. *We rage in 
dreams, storm with indignation, do things perverted, mean 
and malicious. Indra feels that the self is not the same as 
dream-consciousness. The self is not the composite of mental 
states, however independent they may be of the accidents of the 
body. Dream states are not self-existent. Indra again approaches 



Introduction 


75 

Praja-pati who gives him another suggestion that the self is 
the consciousness in deep sleep. Indra feels that, in that state, 
there is consciousness neither of the self nor of the objective 
world. Indra feels that he does not know himself nor does he 
know anything that exists. He is gone to utter annihilation. 
But the self exists even in deep sleep. Even when the object 
is not present, the subject is there. The final reality is the active 
universal consciousness, which is not to be confused with either 
the bodily, or the dreaming consciousness or the consciousness in 
deep sleep. In the state of de6p, dreamless sleep, the self wrapped 
round by the intellect has no consciousness of objects, but is not 
unconscious. The true self is the absolute self, which is not an 
abstract metaphysical category but the authentic spiritual 
self. The other forms belong to objectified being. Self is life, 
not an object. It is an experience, in which the self is the 
knowing subject and is at the same time the known object. Self 
is open only to self. The life of the self is not set over against 
knowledge of it as an objective thing. Self is not the objective 
reality, nor something purely subjective. The subject-object 
relationship has meaning only in the world of objects, in the 
sphere of discursive knowledge. The Self is the light of lights, 
and through it alone is there any light in the universe. It is 
perpetual, abiding light. It is that which neither lives nor dies, 
which has neither movement nor change and which endures 
when all else passes away. It is that which sees and not the 
object seen. Whatever is an object belongs to the not-self. 
The self is the const ant witness-consciousness. 1 

The four states stand on the subjective side for the four kinds 
of soul, Vaisvanara, the experiencer of gross things, Taijasa, 
the experiencer of the subtle, Prajna, the experiencer of the 
unmanifested objectivity, and the Turly a, the Supreme Self. 
The Mdndukya Upanisad, by an analysis of the four modes of 
consciousness, waking, dream, deep sleep and illumined con- 
sciousness, makes out that the last is the basis of the other three. 

1 Through all months, years, seasons and kalpas, through all (divi- 
sions of time) past and future the consciousness remains one and self- 
luminous. It neither rises nor sets. 

masabda-yuga-kalpesu gatdgamyesv anekatha 
• nodeti nastam ety eka samvid esd svayam-pmbhd. 

Panca-dait I. 7. 



76 The Principal Upani$ads 

On the objective side we have the cosmos, Virdj, the World-soul 
Hiranya-garbha, the Supreme God, Isvara, and the Absolute, 
Brahman . 1 By looking upon livara as prajha, it is suggested 
that the supreme intelligence who dwells in the sleeping state 
holds all things in an unmanifested condition. The divine 
wisdom sees all things, not as human reason does in parts and 
relations, but in the orginal reason of their existence, their primal 
truth and reality. It is what the Stoics call spermatikos or the 
seed Logos which is manifested in conscious beings as a number 
of seed -logoi. 

In treatises on Yoga, the potential all-consciousness of the 
state of sleep is represented in the form of a radiant serpent 
called KundalinT or Vdg-devi. We come across this representation 
in earlier treatises also. In the Rg Veda, Vac is said to be the 
serpent queen, sarpa-rajhi . 1 The process of Yoga consists in 
rousing the radiant serpent and lifting it up from the lowest 
sphere to the heart, where in union with prana or life-breath its 
universal nature is realised and from it to the top of the skull. 
It goes out through an opening called brahma-randhra to which 
corresponds in the cosmic organism the opening formed by 
the sun on the top of the vault of the sky. 

1 Cp. William Law: ‘Though God is everywhere present, yet He is 
only present to thee in the deepest and most central part of thy soul. 
The natural senses cannot posses^ God or unite thee to Him ; nay, thy 
inward faculties of understanding, will and memory can only reach 
after God, but cannot be the place of His habitation in thee. But there 
is a root or depth of thee from whence all these faculties cf>me forth, as 
lines from a centre, or as branches from the bodf of the tree. This depth 
is called the centre, the fund or bpttom of the soul* This depth is the 
unity, the eternity — -I had almost said the infinity of thy soul; for it is 
so infinite that nothing can satisfy it or give it rest but the infinity of 
God.* Quoted in Perennial Philosophy by Aldous Huxley (1944), p. 2. 
Again, ‘My Me is God, nor do I recognise any other Me except my God 
Himself.* St. Catherine of Genoa [ibid., p. 11.) 

Eckhart: ‘To gauge the soul we must gauge it with God, for the Ground 
of God and the Ground of the soul are one and the same.' (ibid., p. 12) 
Again ‘The highest part of the soul stands above tinffe and knows 
nothing of time.* ‘There is a principle in the soul altogether spiritual. 
I used to call it a spiritual light or a spark. But now I say that it is fiee 
of all names, void of all forms. It is one and simple, as God is one and 
simple.* 

3 1. X. 189; X. 125. 3. Atharva Veda IV. 1. 



Introduction 


77 


XII 

BRAHMAN AS ATMAN 

In the early prose Upanisads, atman is the principle of the 
individual consciousness and Brahman the superpersonal 
ground of the cosmos. Soon the distinction diminishes and the 
two are identified. God is not merely the transcendeht numinous 
other, but is also the universal spirit which is the basis of human 
personality and its ever-rerfewing vitalising power. Brahman, 
the first principle of the universe, is known through atman, 
the inner self of man. In the Satapatha Brahmana 1 and the 
Chandogya Upanisad 2 it is said: ‘Verily this whole world is 
Brahman ,' and also ‘This soul of mine within the heart, this is 
Brahman ‘That person who is seen in the eye, He is atman, 
that is Brahman. ’3 God is both the wholly other, transcendent 
and utterly beyond the world and man, and yet he enters into 
man and lives in him and becomes the inmost content of his 
very existence. 4 

Ndrdyana is the God in man who lives in constant association 
with nara , the human being. He is the immortal dwelling in the 
mortals.5 The human individual is more than the universe. He 
lives independently in his own inexpressible infinity as well as in 
the cosmic harmonies. We can be, one with all cosmic existence 
by entering into the cosmic consciousness. We become superior 

* X. 6. 3. # * III. 14. 1. 

3 B.U. I. 4. 10. fp. lAith: ‘It is impossible to deny that the Atman- 
Brahman doctrine has a long previous history in the Brahmanas and is 
a logical development of the idea of unity of the Rg Veda/ The Religion 
and Philosophy of the Veda and the Upanisads, p. 494. Heraclitus says 
‘I searched myself.’ The Logos is to be sought within, for man's nature is 
a microcosm and represents the nature of the whole. 

Cp. Plotinus: ‘One that seeks to penetrate the nature of the Divine 
Mind must see deeply into the nature of his own soul, into the Divinest 
point of himsejf. He must first make abstraction of the body, then of the 
lower soul which built up that body, then of all the faculties of sense, of 
all desires and emotions and every such triviality, of all that leans 
towards the mortal. What is left after this abstraction is the part which, 
we describe as the image of the Divine? Mind, an emanation preserving 
some of that Divine Light.' Enneads V. 3. 9. 

4 C.U. IV^i5. Also dtmaiva devatdh sarvdh sarvam hy dtmany avasthitam. 

5 R.V. IV.2.1. 



78 The Principal Upani§ads 

to all cosmic existence by entering into the world-transcending 
consciousness. Answering to the four grades of consciousness, 
waking, dream, deep sleep, spiritual consciousness, we have 
the four states of the individual, sthiila (gross), silksma (subtle), 
karana (causal) and the pure self. As livara is the cause of 
the world, so the causal self is the source of the development of 
the subtle and the gross bodies. 1 

XIII. 

THE STATUS OF THE WORLD: MAYA AND AVIDYA 

The ecstasy of divine union, the bliss of realisation tempts 
one to disregard the world with its imperfections and look 
upon it as a troubled and unhappy dream. The actual fabric 
of the world, with its loves and hates, with its wars and battles, 
with its jealousies and competitions as well as its unasked 
helpfulness, sustained intellectual effort, intense moral struggle 
seems to be no more than an unsubstantive dream, a phantas- 
magoria dancing on the fabric of pure being. .Throughout the 
course of human history, men have taken refuge from the 
world of stresses, vexations and indignities in the apprehension 
of a spirit beyond. The prayer to ‘lead us from unreality to 
reality, from darkness to light, from death to immortality 1 
assumes the distinction between reality, light and immortality 
and unreality, darkness and death. The Katha Upcmisad warns 
us not to find reality and certainty ir# the # unrealities and 
uncertainties of this world. 2 The Chandogya Upanisad tells us 
that a covering of untruth hides from us the ultimate truth 
even as the surface of the earth hides from us the golden 
treasure hidden under it . 3 The truth is covered by untruth, 
anrta . The Brhad-dranyaka and the Isa Upanisads speak to 
us of the veiling of truth by a disc of gold and invoice the grace 

1 The first tattva is the root of manifestation, called mahat or the 
great principle. In ahamkara we find individual consciousness which 
proceeds from the intellectual principle by an individualising deter- 
mination. Sometimes, citta is said to be the (irst product of prahrix , with 
its triple character of buddhi or discrimination, ahamkdra or self-sense 
and manas or mind. • 

* II. 4. 2. 


3 VIII. 3. 1-3. 



Introduction 


79 

of God for removing the veil and letting us see the truth. 1 
According to the Svetasvatara Upanisad, we can achieve the 
cessation of the great world-illusion, viiva-mdya-nivrttih by the 
worship of God. 2 If this aspect of spiritual experience were all, 
the world we live in, that of ignorance, darkness and death 
would be quite different from the world of underlying reality, 
the world of truth, light and life. The distinction would become 
one of utter opposition between God and the world. The latter 
would be reduced to an evil dream from which we must wake 
up as soon as possible. 3 

Indifference to the world is not, however, the main feature 
of spiritual consciousness. Brahman , the completely trans- 
cendent, the pure silence has another side. Brahman is appre- 
hended in two ways. Sarhkara says: dvirupam hi brahma - 
vagamyate , ndma-rupa-vikara-bhedopadhi-visistam, tad vipantam 
sarvopadhi-varjitam. Both the Absolute and the Personal God 
are real; only the former is the logical prius of the latter. The 
soul when it rises to full attention knows itself to be related to 
the single universal consciousness, but when it turns outward 
it sees the objective universe as a manifestation of this single 
consciousness. The withdrawal from the world is not the 
conclusive end of the spiritual quest. There is a return to the 
world accompanied by a persistent refusal to take the world 
as it confronts us as final. The world has to be redeemed and it 
can be redeemed because it has its source in God and final 
refuge in Gqd. 

There are many passages where the world of duality is 
suggested to be only seeming. 4 The existence of duality is not 
admitted to be absolutely real. In the passage of the Chandogya 
Upanisad regarding the modifications of the three fundamental 
constituents of being, fire, water and food, it is said that just 
as all that is made of clay, copper or iron is only a modification, 
a verbal expression, a simple name, the reality being clay, 
copper or iron, even so all things can be reduced to three 

1 2. 15. 2 I. 10. 

3 Cp. Atma-bodha 7: t 

tdvat satyarh jagad bhdtxm huhtika-rajatam yathd 
ydvan na jnayate brahma sarvadhisthanam advayam. 

4 ‘Where fchere is a duality as it were (iva).’ B.U. II. 4. 14; see also 
IV. 3. 31. 



80 The Principal Upani$ads 

primary forms of reality. It is suggested that all things are 
reducible to reality, being mere modifications. All this is to be 
understood as meaning that the Absolute stands above becoming 
and passing awaywhich it transcends. 

In the Maitri Upanisad, the Absolute is compared to a spark, 
which, made to revolve, creates apparently a fiery circle, an 
idea expanded by Gaudapada in his Karikd on the Mdndukya 
Upanisad. This may suggest that the world is a mere appear- 
ance. Even here the intention may well be to contrast the 
reality of the Absolute with empirical reality without making 
the latter an illusion. 

The assertion that with the knowledge of the Self all is known 1 
does not exclude the reality of what is derived from the Self. 
When the Aitarcya Upanisad asserts that the universe is 
founded in consciousness and guided by it, it assumes the 
reality of the universe and not merely its apparent existence. 
To seek the one is not to deny the many. The world of name 
and form has its roots in Brahman , though it does not con- 
stitute the nature of Brahman . 2 The world is neither one with 
Brahman nor wholly other than Brahman . The world of fact 
cannot be apart from the world of being. From one being no 
other being is born. It exists only in another form, samsthandn- 
tarena.i 

Maya in this view states^ the fact that Brahman without 
losing his integrity is the basis of the world. Though devoid of 
all specifications, Brahman is the root cause of t^e universe. 4 
‘If a thing cannot subsist apart from something else, the latter 
is the essence of that thing.' The cause is logically prior to the 
effect. 5 Questions of temporal beginning and growth are sub- 
ordinate to this relation of ground and consequent. The world 
does not carry its own meaning. To regard it as final and 
ultimate is an act of ignorance. So long as the erroneous view 

I B.U. II. 4. 5, 7, 9. C.u. VI. 1. 2. M.U. I. 1. 3. # 

* ato nama-rupe sarvavasthe brahmanaivdtmavati, na brahma tad 
dtmakam. S. on T.U. II. 6. 1. 

3 S. on C.U. VI. 2. 2. krtsnasyajagato brahma-karyatvat tad-ananyatvac 

ra. S.B. II. 1. 20. * 

4 sarva-viiesa-rahito’pi jagato mulam. S. on Katha II. 3. 12. 

5 S. on B.U. II. 4. 7. . 

atah siddhah prak karyotpatteh kdrana sadbhavah. on B.U. I. 2. 1. 



Introduction 81 

of the independence of the world does not disappear, our highest 
good will not be realised. 

The world is the creation of God, the active Lord. The finite 
is the self-limitation of the infinite. No finite can exist in and 
by itself. It exists by the infinite. If we seek the dynamic aspect 
we are inclined to repudiate the experience of pure conscious- 
ness. It is not a question of either pure consciousness or dynamic 
consciousness. These are the different statuses 'of the one 
Reality. They are present simultaneously in the universal 
awareness. 

The dependence of the world on God is explained in different 
ways. In the Chandogya Upani$ad , Brahman is defined as 
tajjalan as that {tat) which gives rise to (ja ), absorbs {It) and 
sustains {an) the world. 1 The Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad argues 
that satyam consists of three syllables, sa , ti, yam , the first and 
the last being real and the second unreal, madhyato anrtam. The 
fleeting is enclosed on both sides by an eternity which is real. 2 The 
world comes from Brahman and returns to Brahman. Whatever 
exists owes its being to Brahmanj The different metaphors 
are used to indicate how the universe rises from its central root, 
how the emanation takes place while the Brahman remains 
ever-complete, undiminished. 4 ‘As a spider sends forth and 
draws in (its thread), as herbs grow on the earth, as] the hair 
(grows) on the head and the body of a living person, so from the 
Imperishable arises here the universe/5 Again, ‘As from a 

* III. 14. * 

2 V. 1. 1. Bede tells o.lthe Anglo-Saxon Council summoned to decide 
on the question of the acceptance of the Christian faith in 627. One of the 
dukes compared the life of man on earth with the flight of a sparrow 
through a banquet hall in winter, ‘a good fire in the midst, whilst the 
storms of rain and snow prevail abroad ; the sparrow, I say, flying in at 
one door, and immediately out at another, whilst he is within, is safe 
from the wintry storm; but after a short space of fair weather, he 
immediately vanishes out of your sight, into the dark winter from which 
he had emerged. So this life of man appears for a short space, but of what 
went before, or what is to follow we are utterly ignorant.' Bede the 
Venerable, Ecclesiastical History of the English Nation (1916), pp. 91 ff. 
see B.G. III. 28. 

3 SeeT.U. Ill; B.U. III. 8. 

4 Cp. Plotinus: ‘Imagine a spring which has no commencement, 

giving itself to all the rivers, never exhausted by what they take, ever 
tranquilly its* full self.' III. 8. 9 Enneads. s M.U. I. 1. 7. 



82 The Principal Upani$ads 

blazing fire sparks of like form issue forth by the thousands 
even so, many kinds of beings issue forth from the Immutable 
and they return thither too/ 1 The many are parts of Brahman 
even as waves are ‘parts of the sea. All the possibilities of the 
world are affirmed in the first being, God. The whole universe 
before its manifestation was there. The antecedent of the 
manifested universe is the non-manifested universe, i.e. God. 
God does rfot create the world but becomes it. Creation is 
expression. It is not a making of something out of nothing. 
It is not making so much as becoming. It is the self- projection 
of the Supreme. Everything exists in the secret abode of the 
Supreme.* The primary reality contains within itself the source 
of its own motion and change. 

The Svetasvatara Upanisad mentions the different views of 
creation held at the time of its composition, that it is due 
to time, to nature, to necessity, to chance, to the elements, 
to the Person or the combination of these. It repudiates all 
these views and traces the world to the power of the 
Supreme. 3 

The SvetdSvatara Upanisad describes God as mdyin , the 
wonder-working powerful Being, who creates the world by His 

* II. i. i. 

2 In the Rg Veda there are suggestions that the Imperishable is the 
basis of the world and that a peFsonal Lord Brahmanas-pati (X. 72. 2), 
ViSva-karman (literally the All-maker), Purusa (X. 90), Hiranya-garbha 
(X. 121. 1) produces the world. The Upanisads refer to the early cosmo- 
logical speculations, but these are not their real interest. 

3 Gaudapada mentions different theories of freation. Some look upon 
creation as the manifestation of the superhuman power of God, vibhuti\ 
others look upon it as of the* same nature as dream and illusion, 
svapna-mdya-svarupd’, others trace it to the will of God icchd-matram 
prabhoh srstih. Still others look upon kala or time as the source; some 
look upon creation as intended for the enjoyment of God (bhoga) ; still 
others attribute it to mere sport (kri<j,d), but Gautjapada’s own view is 
that creation is the expression of the nature of the Supreme, 'for what 
desire is possible for Him whose desire is always fulfil lec^?' 

devasyaisa svabhdvo’yam apta-kdmasya ka sprha. Karikd 1 . 6-9. 

The worid is the revelation of God's nature. To the question, why does 
perfect being instead of remaining eternally concentrated in itself suffer 
the accident of manifesting this* world, the answer is that manifesting is 
of the very nature of God. We need not seek a cause or a motive or a 
purpose for that which is, in its nature, eternally self-existent and free. 
The sole object of the dance of Siva is the dance itself. 



Introduction 


83 

powers . 1 Here may a is used in the sense in which the Rg Veda 
^employs it, the divine art or power by which the divinity 
makes a likeness of the eternal prototypes or ideas inherent in 
his nature. Indra is declared to have assumed many shapes 
by his maya.* Maya is the power of Isvara from which the 
world arises. He has made this world, 'formed man out of the 
dust of the ground and breathed into him a living soul/ All the 
works of the world are wrought by Him. Every existence 
contained in time is ontologically present in creative eternity. 
The Supreme is both transcendent and immanent. It is the 
one, breathing breathless, tad ekam , antd avdtam. It is the 
manifest and the unmanifest, vyaktavyaktdh , the silent and the 
articulate, sabddsabddh. It is the real and the unreal, sad-asat, 3 
While the world is treated as an appearance in regard to pure 
being, which is indivisible and immutable, it is the creation of 
Isvara who has the power of manifestation. Maya is that which 
measures out, moulds forms in the formless. God has control 

1 III. 10. This power or Sakti is contained in the Supreme as oil in 
oilseeds. 

sivecchaya para kaktih kiva-tattvaikatam gata. 
tatah 'parisphuraty adau sarge tciilam tilad iva. 

The power is Sakti or Maya. We speak in inadequate ways when we 
speak of Sakti as Maya. Narada tells Rama in the Devi Bhagavata, that 
this power is eternal, primeval, and everlasting: 

krnu rama sadd nityd saktir adya sandtani. 

Nothing is able to stir without its aid / 

tasyah kaktim vina ko’pi spanditum na ksamo bhavet. 

When we distinguish the creation, preservation and dissolution in the 
form of Brahma, Visnu a^d Siva, their power is also this Sakti: 

• visnoh palana-kaktis sa 
kartr-saktih pitur mama 
rudrasya naka-haktis sa 
tvanya-kaktih para kiva. 

The energy of everyone is a part of the divine kakU. The Supreme with 
its power created the creator Brahma, purvam samsrjya brahmddin. 

In regard to Rama and Sita, Slta becomes £akti. In the Sita U. she 
is said to be mula-prakrti. 

sita bhagavafirjneya mula-prakrti-samjnita. 

In the Devi U. Durga's name is accounted for. ‘Beyond whom there 
is none she is called Durga. Because she saves from crisis therefore she 
is called Durga/ # 

yasyah parataram nasti, saisa durga prakirtitd 
durgat samtrayate yasmad devi durgeti kathyate. 

* VI. 47. i8>; see B.U. II. 5. 19. 
i R.V. X. 5. 7. M.U. II. 2. 1. Prakna II. 5. 6. 



84 The Principal Upanisads 

of maya; he is not subject to it. If God were subject to may5, 
he would not be infinite supreme existence. Any being compelled 
to manifest itself is not free, livara has in him the power of 
manifestation, non-manifestation and other-manifestation, 
kartum , a-kartnm , any athd-kar turn. Brahman is logically prior 
to livara who has the power of manifestation, and takes him 
over into His transcendental being when He is not manifesting 
His nature. 

This dual nature of the Supreme provides the basis for the 
reality of personality in God and man, and so for authentic 
religious experience. This world, far from being unreal, is 
intimately connected with the Divine Reality. This complex 
evolving universe is a progressive manifestation of the powers 
of the Supreme Spirit from matter to spiritual freedom, from 
anna to ananda. The purpose of the cosmic evolution is to 
reveal the spirit underlying it. God lives, feels and suffers in 
every one of us, and in course of time His attributes, knowledge, 
beauty and love will be revealed in each of us. 

When the Katha Upanisad says that the Supreme Lord 
experiences the results of deeds, 1 it suggests, that we are the 
images and likenesses of God, and when we experience the 
results of our deeds, He does also. There is an intimate con- 
nection between God and the world of souls. 2 

Deussen holds that the idealistic monism of Yajnavalkya is 
the main teaching of the Upanisads and the other doctrines of 
theism, and cosmogonism are deviations from it (mused by the 
inability of man to remain on the heiglfts of pure speculative 
thought. The view which regards the universe as actually real, 
the Atman as the universe which we know, and the theistic 
developments are said to be departures from the exalted 
idealism of Yajnavalkya. It is not necessary to look upon the 
theism emphasised in the Katha and the Svetaivatara Upanisads 

1 I. 3. 1. 

1 Cp. Angelus Silesius: 'I know that without me God cannot live an 
instant.' 

Eckhart: 'God needs me as nwch as I need him/ 

Lady Julian: 'We are God's bliss, for in us He enjoyeth without end.' 
When Pascal states that Jesus Christ will be in agony till the end of the 
world, he means that there is a side to God, the temporal, where he 
suffers in every innocent man who is persecuted and tortured. 



Introduction 85 

as a declension from the pure monistic idealism. It is in the 
direct line of development of Upanisad thought. 

The Absolute is not a metaphysical abstraction or a void 
of silence. It is the absolute of this relative world of manifesta- 
tion. What is subject to change and growth in the world of 
becoming reaches its fulfilment in the world of the Absolute. 
The Beyond is not an annulling or a cancellation of the world 
of becoming, but its transfiguration. The Absolute is the life of 
this life, the truth of this truth. 

If the world were altogether unreal, we cannot progress from 
the unreal to the Real. If a passage is possible from the empirical 
to the Real, the Real is to be found in the empirical also. The 
ignorance of the mind and the senses and the apparent futilities 
of human life are the material for the self-expression of that 
Being, for its unfolding. Brahman accepts world existence. The 
Ultimate Reality sustains the play of the world and dwells in it. 
That is why we are able to measure the distance of the things 
of the world from the Absolute and evaluate their grades of 
being. 1 There is nothing in this world which is not lit up by 
God. Even the material objects which lack the intelligence to 
discover the nature of the divine ground of their being are the 
emanations of the creative energy of God and they are able to 
reveal to the discerning eye the divine within their material 
frames. What is not possible for„inanimate and non-rational 
beings is open to the rational human being. He can attain to a 
knowledge of» the divine ground of his being. He is not coerced 
into it, but has to attain it by the exercise of his choice. The 
unchangeableness’ of the Supreme does not mean that the 
universe is a perfectly articulated mechanism in which every- 
thing is given from the beginning. The world is real as based 
on Brahman ; it is unreal by itself. 

Cosmic existence partakes of the character of the real and the 


1 Cp. St. Bernard: 'God who, in his simple substance, is all eveiywhere 
equally, nevertheless, in efficacy, is in rational creatures in another way 
than in irrational, and in good ratioyal creatures in another way 
than in the bad. He is in irrational creatures in such a way as not to 
be comprehended by them; by all rational ones, however, he can be 
comprehended through knowledge; but only by the good is he to be 
comprehended also through lo\ 



86 The Principal Upanisads 

unreal. It is aspiring to become completely real. 1 The Chdndogya 
Upanisad rejects the view that the world was originally a-sat or 
non-being, and from it all existence was produced. 2 * * 5 It affirms: 
'In the beginning this world was just being, one only without 
a second. '3 

The Supreme is described as a kavi , a poet, an artist, a maker 
or creator, not a mere imitator. Even as art reveals man's wealth 
of life, so does the world reveal the immensity of God's life. The 
Brahma Sutra refers to the creation of the world as an act of 
Hid, play, the joy of the poet, eternally young. 

If immutability is the criterion of reality, then the world of 
manifestation has no claim to reality. Change is the pervading 
feature of the world. Changing things imply non-existence at 
the beginning and non-existence at the end. 4 They are not 
constantly present. Mortality is imprinted on all beings who 
are subject to birth, decay, dissolution and death. This very 
planet will decline and dissolve. While change is the mark of 
the relative world, this changing world reaches its fulfilment 
in the Absolute. What is incomplete in the relative world of 
becoming is completed in the absolute world of being. 

Maya is also used for prakrti, the objective principle which 
the personal God uses for creation. All nature, even in the 
lowest, is in ceaseless movement, aspiring to the next higher 
stage, of which it is itself an image or lower manifestation. 
Prakrti, not-self, matter all but cast out from the sphere of 
being, is tending feebly to get back to the self, l^ceives form 
and is thus linked up with Absolute Being, Even matter*is 
Brahman. 5 Prakrti by itself js more a demand of thought than 
a fact of existence. Even the lowest existence has received the 
impress of the Creative Self. It is not utter non-existence. Abso- 

1 Cp. V akya-sudha: 

ash bhdli pnyam rupam ndma cety amta-pancakam. 
ddyam tray am brahma-rupam jagad-rupam at • dvayam. 

2 VI. 2. i. 3 VI. 2. 2. sad-dspadarh sarvarh sarvatra. S. 

4 addv ante ca yan ndsti vartamdne ’ pi tat tathd. Gaudapada: Kdrikd 
II. 6. 

Milarepa, the Tibetan mystic says: ‘All worldly pursuits end in 
dispersion; buildings in destruction; meetings in separation, births in 
death.’ 

5 annam brahmeti vyajdnat. T.U. III. 



Introduction 


87 

lute non-being is non-existent. It is impossible in a world which 
flows freely from the bounty of being. Prakrti is called non- 
being. It is not strictly correct. This description indicates its 
distance from being. It is the ultimate possibility on the side 
of descent from the Divine, almost non-being, but not utter 
non-being. 

While prakrti is said to be the maya of God, its forms seem 
to us individual souls to be external to us. It is the source of our 
ignorance of its real nature. 

While the world is created by the power of maya of Ihara, 
the individual soul is bound down by maya in the sense of 
avidyd or ignorance. The manifestation of Primordial Being is 
also a concealment of His original nature. The self-luminous 
moves about clothed in the splendours of the cosmic light which 
are not His real nature. We must tear the cosmic veil and get 
behind the golden brightness which Savitr has diffused. The 
Upanisad says: ‘Two birds, inseparable friends cling to the 
same tree. One of them eats the sweet fruit, the other looks on 
without eating. On the same tree man sits, grieving, immersed, 
bewildered by his own impotence (1 an-Ua ). But when he sees the 
other lord (tta), contented and knows his glory, then his grief 
passes away/ 1 We mistake the multiplicity for ultimate reality. 
If we overlook the unity, we are lost in ignorance. 

When we get to the concept of prakrti we are in the realm of 
Hiranya-garbha. The similes employed by the Upanisads, salt 
and water, floe and sparks, spider and thread, flute and sound 
assume the existence erf an element different from being. Into 
the original stillness of prakrti, Hiranya-garbha or Brahma sends 
sound, nada-brahma. By his ecstatic dance the world evolves. 
This is the meaning of the symbol of Nata-rdja. His dance is not 
an illusion. It is a timeless fact of the Divine Reality. The forms 
are manifestations of the Real, not arbitrary inventions out of 
nothing. Forrn^ rupa t is the revelation of the formless a-riipa. 
Ndma, name, is not the word by which we describe the object, 
but it is the power or the character of reality which the form 
of a thing embodies. The Infinite is nameless for it includes 
all names The emphasis right through is on the dependence of 

1 S.U. r V. 6 and 7. 

D 



88 The Principal Upanisads 

the world on Brahman . The relative rests in the Absolute. 
There can be no echo without a noise. The world is not self- 
explanatory; it is not the cause of itself. It is an effect. The Ida 
Upanisad indicates that the basic reality is the One, and the 
derivative and dependent reality is the many. 1 When the Kena 
Upanisad says that Brahman is the mind of mind, the life of 
life, it does not assert the unreality of mind and life, but affirms 
the inferiority, the incompleteness of our present existence. 
All that we find in the. world is an imperfect representation, a 
divided expression of what is eternally in the Absolute Being. 

The world depends on Brahman , and not Brahman on the 
world. ‘God is the dwelling-place of the universe; but the uni- 
verse is not the dwelling-place of God' is a well-known Rabbinic 
dictum. The world of experience with its three states of waking, 
dream and deep sleep is based on the subject-object relation. 
This duality is the principle of all manifestation. The objects 
are perceived in both dream and waking and the distinction 
of seer and seen is present in both. The world of manifestation 
is dependent on the Absolute. The Absolute Spirit which 
transcends the distinction between the subject and the object is 
logically prior to the manifested world. 2 The world is a process 
of becoming; it is not being. 

The Upanisads make it clear that the waking state and the 
dream state are quite distinct. The objects of the dream state 
are illusory; not so those of waking experience. ‘There are no 
chariots in that state (of dreaming), no horses, no roads. He 
himself creates chariots, horses, road^/3 Imaginary objects 
exist only during the time we imagine them,* kalpana-kdla, but 
factual objects exist not only when we perceive them but also 
when we do not perceive them, bdhyds ca dvaya-kdldh .4 The 
spatio-temporal order is a fact, not a state of mind or a phase 
of consciousness. 

Avidyd is mentioned in the Upanisads as J:he source of 
delusion. The Katha Upanisad speaks of people living in 
ignorance and thinking themselves wise, who move about 
wandering in search of reality, like blind men following the 


1 4 and 5. 2 Sec Gaucjapada: Kdrika on Md. V. II. 4 and 5. 

3 B.U. IV. 3. 9 and 10. 4 $. on Mdndukya Kdrika II. 14. 



Introduction 


89 

blind. If they had lodged themselves in vidyd , wisdom, instead of 
avidya , ignorance, they would easily have seen the truth. 1 
The Chdndogya Upanisad distinguishes .between vidyd or 
knowledge which is power and avidya or ignorance which is 
impotence. 2 * 4 While maya is more cosmic in significance, avidya 
is more subjective. We are subject to avidya when we look 
upon the multiplicity of objects and egos as final* and funda- 
mental. Such a view falsifies the truth. It is the illusion of 
ignorance. The world of multiplicity is out there, and has its 
place, but if we look upon it as a self-existing cosmos, we are 
making an error. 3 While the world process reveals certain 
possibilities of the Real, it also conceals the full nature of the 
Real. Avidya breeds selfishness and becomes a knot in the 
heart which we should untie before we can get possession of 
the Self in the recesses of our heart. 4 The Prasna Upanisad 
tells us that we cannot reach the world of Brahman unless we 
have shaken off the crookedness in us, the falsehood (anrtam) 
in us, the illusion (maya) in us. 5 

The world has the tendency to delude us into thinking that 
it is all, that it is self-dependent, and this delusive character of 
the world is also designated maya in the sense of avidya. When 
we are asked to overcome maya, it is an injunction to avoid 
worldliness. Let us not put our trust in the things of this world. 
Maya is concerned not with the existence of the world but with 
its meaning, not with the factuality of the world but with the 
way in which we look upon it. 

There are passages # in the Upanisads which make out that 
the world is an appearance, vdcdrawphanam vikdro namadheyam , 
while Reality is pure being. There are others which grant reality 
to the world, though they maintain that it has no reality apart 
from Brahman. Samkara tells us that the former is the true 
teaching of the Upanisads, while the latter view is put forward 
only tentatively as a first step in the teaching to be later 

1 Katha I. 2. 4. 5. * I. 1. 10. 

3 Maya is viewed as the power that makes for delusion 

mah ca mohartha-vacanah ydi ca prapana-vdcakah 
tdm prdpayati yd nityarh, sd mdyd parikxrtitd. 

• Brahma-vaivarta Purdrxa XXVII. 

4 M.U. II. I. IO. 5 I. 16. 



go The Principal Upanisads 

withdrawn. The reality conceded to the world is not ultimate. 
It is only empirical. 

If we keep in mind the fourfold character of the Supreme, we 
shall avoid confusion in regard to the status of the world. If we 
concentrate attention on Brahman , the Absolute, we feel that 
the world is not independent of Brahman but rests in Brahman. 
The relationship between the two cannot be logically articu- 
lated. If we turn to the personal Isvara , we know that the 
world is the creation of Brahman q,nd not its organic expression. 
The power of creation is called maya. If we turn to the world 
process which is a perpetual becoming, it is a mixture of being 
and non-being, sat and asat f the divine principle and prakrti. 
Hiranya-garbha and his world are both subject to time, and 
should be distinguished from the eternal. But the temporal 
becoming is by no means false. 

As to why the Supreme has this fourfold character, why it is 
what it is, we can only accept it as the given reality. It is the 
ultimate irrationality in the sense that no logical derivation of 
the given is possible. It is apprehended by us in spiritual con- 
sciousness, and accounts for the nature of experience in all its 
aspects. It is the only philosophical explanation that is possible 
or necessary. 


XIV 

THE INDIVIDUAL SELF 

Jtva is literally, ‘that which breathes,’ from jiv ‘to breathe.’ 
It referred originally to the biological aspect of man’s nature 
which goes on throughout life, in waking, dream and sleep. It 
is called purusa in the sense of puri-saya or ‘that which dwells 
in the citadel of the heart.’ This means that the biological serves 
the ends of another, the soul or psyche. It is this soul which 
reaps the fruits of deeds jnd survives the death of the physical 
body. It is the bhoktr , the enjoyer, kartr t the doer. 1 It is the 
vijhana-maya atma. The jtva consists of a material body, the 

1 See Praina IV. 9. Katha I. 3. 4. 



Introduction 


9i 

principle of breath (prana), regulating the unconscious activi- 
ties of the individual, and the principle of conscious activities 
(manas) which uses the five sensory organs ( indriyas ) of sight, 
hearing, touch, smell and taste and the fiver organs of action, 
viz. speech, hands, feet, excretory and generative organs. All 
these are organised by vijnana or buddhi. The basis of the indi- 
viduality of the ego is vijnana or intelligence which draws round 
itself mind, life and body. 1 The ego belongs to the relative world, 
is a stream of experience, a fluent mass of life, a centre round 
which our experiences of sense and mind gather. At the back 
of this whole structure is the Universal Consciousness, Atman, 
which is our true being. 

The human individual is a complex of five elements, anna, 
prana, manas , vijnana and dnanda. The Highest Spirit which 
is the ground of all being, with which man's whole being should 
get united at the end of his journey, does not contribute to 
his self-sense. Life and matter are organised into the gross 
physical body, sthula-sanra , mind and life into the subtle body, 
suksma-sanra, intelligence into the causal body, kdrana-sanra 
and Atman, the Universal Self is the supreme being sustaining 
the others. The ego is the manifestation of the Universal Self 
using memory and moral being which are changing formations. 
Purusa is sometimes used for the Atman which is higher than 
buddhi. Buddhi belongs to the objective hierarchy of being. 
Purusa is the subjective light of consciousness that is reflected 
in all beings.. 

The natural science, physics and chemistry, anatomy and 
physiology, psychology and sociology treat man as an object 
of inquiry. They show that man is h link in the chain of living 
beings, one among many. He has a body and a mind which 
belong to him, but his self is not derived from any of these, 
though it is at the root of them all. All empirical causalities and 

1 Cp. ‘He wl^p fcnows more and more clearly the self obtains fuller 
being. In plants and trees sap only is seen, in animals consciousness. 
The self is more and more clear in man for he is most endowed with 
intelligence. He knows to-morrow, he knows the world and what is not 
the world. By the mortal he desires the Immortal, being thus endowed. 
As for animals, hunger and thirst comprise their knowledge. But this 
man is the sea. he is above all the world. Whatever he reaches he desires 
to go beyond it.* Aitareya Aran aka II. 1. 3. 



92 The Principal Upanisads 

biological processes of development apply to his outer being, 
but not to his self. The physical, the biological, the psychological 
and the logical aspects are aspects of his nature, his kosas, as the 
Taittinya Upanisad calls them. There are great possibilities of 
empirical investigation, but man is more than what he knows 
about himself. 

The ego is a unity of body, life, mind and intelligence. It is 
not a mere flux, as some early Buddhists and Hindus thought. 
Intelligence which is the unifying principle gives us the ego- 
consciousness. Memory is one factor which helps to preserve 
the continuity of the ego which is also influenced by a number 
of factors which are not present to our memory and are hardly 
grasped by our surface consciousness. The sub-conscious plays 
a great part in it. The nature of the ego depends on the principle 
of organisation and the experience to be organised. As we have 
an enormous variety of experiences with which we can identify 
ourselves, an infinite number of objects which we can pursue, 
fame, career, possessions or power, we have an infinite number 
of individuals marked out by their past and present experi- 
ences, their education and environment. What we are depends 
on what we have been. The ego is a changing formation on the 
background of the Eternal Being, the centre round which our 
mental and vital activities are organised. The ego is perpetually 
changing, moving up and down, up towards union with the 
divine godhead or down to the fiendish extremes of selfishness, 
stupidity and sensuality. The self-transcending capacity of the 
jiva is the proof that it is not the limited entity it takes itself 
to be. 

The hierarchies of existence and value correspond. The order 
of phenomena which has the lowest degree of reality in the 
existential scale has the lowest degree of value in the ethical 
or spiritual scale. The human individual is higher than the 
animal, plant or mineral. 

What is the relation of the Universal Self to file individual 
selves? Different views are held on the matter. Samkara 
believes that the Universal ,Self is identical with the individual 
self. The individual self is eternally one with and also different 
from the Universal Self, says Ramanuja. The individual self is 



Introduction 


93 

eternally different from the Universal Self according to Madhva. 1 

When the soul is said to be an amia or fragment of the Divine 
mind, it is to indicate that it is subsequent to the Divine mind, 
as a recipient of the Divine idea. The souls therefore serve as 
matter for the Divine Forms. This is the truth indicated in the 
Samkhya theory of the multiplicity of selves. Though the self 
is one in all, in the manifested world, there is an ariiia, fragment, 
part or ray of the self which presides over the movements of 
our personal lives through the ages. This persistent divine form 
is the real individuality which governs the mutations of our 
being. This is not the limited ego, but the Infinite Spirit reflecting 
itself in our personal experience. We are not a mere flux of 
body, life and mind thrown on the screen of’ a Pure Spirit 
which does not affect us in any way. Behind this flux there is 
the stable power of our being through which the Infinite 
Spirit manifests itself. The Divine has many modes of mani- 
festation, and at many levels, and the fulfilment of the purposes 
of these modes constitutes the supreme scope of the eternal 
kingdom. In the world of manifestation the ground of created 
being is God’s idea of it, which, because it is divine, is more real 
than the creature itself. The soul, therefore, represents an idea 
of the divine mind, and the different souls are the members of the 
Supreme. The soul draws its idea of perfection from the Divine 
Creator who has given it existence. The soul’s substantial 
existence derives from the Divine mind, and its perfection 
consists in the vision of the Divine mind, in its effectuating 
the divine pattern foi*it in its consciousness and character. 

There docs not seem to be any suggestion that the individual 
egos are unreal. They all exist only through the Self and have 
no reality apart from It. Th4 insistence on the unity of the 
Supreme Self as the constitutive reality of the world and of the 
individual souls does not negate the empirical reality of the 

1 Commenting on the siltra, amio nana-vyapadesdd anyatha cdpi (the 
individual spirit is a part of the Lord inasmuch as it is not taught that 
they. are different and also the contrary), S. indicates that 'the individual 
and the Lord, are related as sparks to fire, jwa ttvavasydmto bhavitum 
arhati ^ yathdgner visphulingah , in which? the heat is the same (notwith- 
standing that the sparks are distinguishable from fire)’ and concludes 
that ‘from tjiese two doctrines of difference and non-difference the 
meaning of participation, amio 'va, follows.' S.B. II. 3. 43. 



94 The Principal Upanisads 

latter. The plurality of individual souls is admitted by the 
Upanisads. The individuals do not resolve themselves in the 
Universal Absolute so long as the world of manifestation is 
functioning. The feleased individuals know themselves as the 
Self and not as the psycho-physical vehicles which are animated 
by the Self and so are incarnations of the Self. These vehicles 
are causally determined and are subject to change. 

The individual is, in a sense, created by God after His own 
image and in His own likeness, but he has his creaturely form. 
We do not know our own possibilities. The individual ego is 
subject to avidya or ignorance when it believes itself to be 
separate and different from all other egos. The result of this 
separatist ego-sense, ahamkdra , is failure to enter into harmony 
and unity with the universe. This failure expresses itself in 
physical suffering and mental discord. Selfish desire is the 
badge of subjection or bondage. When the individual shakes 
off this avidya , he becomes free from all selfishness, possesses all 
and enjoys all . 1 

The unity of the Self does not make the distinctions of the 
individual souls irrelevant. There is no mixing up of the fruits 
of action, as the different individual selves are kept distinct by 
their association with buddhi 2 Our lives become meaningful in 
so far as they partake of the divine logos. The logos is seen in 
close connection with the logical or rational element in us. The 
Divine Reason is immanent in our reason. The ego's possession 
of intelligence gives it the capacity for moral choice. It may 
either turn to the Indwelling Spirit or pursue the separate 
interests of the ego. It may open itself to the' Self or shut itself 
away from It. One leads to light and life, the other to darkness 
and death. We have the seeds of both in us. We may live a life 
controlled by flesh and blood and earth-born intellect or we may 
lay ourselves open to God and let Him work in us. As we-choose 
the one or the other, we are led to death or immortality .3 When 

1 Cp. Boethius: ‘In other living creatuics, ignorance of self is nature, 
in man it is vice/ 

2 buddhi-bhedena bhoktr-bhedat S. S.B. II. 3. 49. 

3 Cp. M.B. : 

amrtam caiva mrtyus ca dvayam dehe pralisthilam 
mrtyur apadyate mo hat, satyenapadyate amrtam. 

‘In each human body the two principles of immortality and death are 



Introduction 


95 

we forget our true nature and lose ourselves in the things of 
the world, we have evil and suffering. 

Alienation from our true nature is hell, and union with it is 
heaven. There is a perpetual strain in human life, an effort 
to reach from the arbitrary into an ideal state of existence. 
When we divinise our nature, our body, mind and spirit work 
flawlessly together and attain a rhythm which is rare in life. 

Without the individual there is neither bondage nor libera- 
tion. The Eternal in His transcendent form as Brahman or 
cosmic being as Isvara does not arrive at immortality. It is the 
individual who is subject to ignorance and who rises to self- 
knowledge. The self-expression of the Supreme through the 
individuals will continue until it is completed. The Divine 
possesses always its unity, and Its aim in the cosmic process is 
to possess it in an infinite experience through many conscious 
selves. So long as we are subject to ignorance, we stand away 
from God and are immersed in our limited egos. When we rise 
to self-knowledge, we are taken up into the Divine Being and 
become aware of the Infinite, Universal Consciousness in which 
we live. 


XV 

INTUITION AND INTELLECT: 

VIDYA (KNOWLEDGE) AND .AVIDYA (IGNORANCE) 

If buddhi , ijijndna, intelligence, has its being turned towards 
the Universal Self it # develops intuition or true knowledge, 
Wisdom. But ordinarily, intelligence is engaged in discursive 
reasoning and reaches a knowledge which is, at best, imperfect, 
through the processes of doubt, logic and skilful demonstration. 
It reflects on the data supplied by manas or the sense-mind with 
its knowledge rooted in sensations and appetites. At the 
intellectual level we grope with an external vision of things, 
where objects %re extrinsically opposed to one another. We are 
besieged by error and incapacity. Integral knowledge possesses 
its object truly and securely. Nothing is external to it. Nothing 
is other than itself. Nothing is divided or in conflict within its 

established. Bj»the pursuit of delusion we reach death; by the pursuit of 
truth we attain immortality.* 

D* 



96 The Principal Upanisads 

all-comprehensive self-awareness. It is the means of knowledge 
and knowledge itself. 

Intuitive knowing is immediate as distinct from the discursive 
and mediate knowledge. It is more immediate than sensory 
intuition, for it overcomes the distinction between the knower 
and the known which subsists in sense-intuition. It is the 
perfect knowledge, while all other knowledge is incomplete and 
imperfect in so far as it does not bring about an identification 
between subject and object. All other knowledge is indirect and 
has only symbolic or representative value. The only generally 
effective knowledge is that which penetrates into the very 
nature of things. But in lower forms of knowledge this pene- 
tration of the subject into the object is limited and partial. 
Scientific understanding assumes that an object can be known 
only if it is broken up into its simpler constituents. If anything 
organic is handled in this manner, its significance is lost. By 
employing intuitive consciousness we know the object with less 
distortion and more actuality. We get close to perceiving the 
thing as it is. 

Knowledge presupposes unity or oneness r of thought and 
being, a unity that transcends the differentiation of subject and 
object. Such knowledge is revealed in man’s very existence. 1 
It is unveiled rather than acquired. Knowledge is concealed 
in ignorance and when the latter is removed the former mani- 
fests itself. What we are, that we behold, and what we behold, 
that we are. Our thought, our life and our being are uplifted 
in simplicity and we are made one wvth truth. Though we 
cannot understand or describe, we taste and we possess. We 
become new. 2 When the beatific vision of Absolute Being has 

1 Eckhart says: 'God in the fullness of His Godhead dwells eternally 
in His image (the soul itself) . 1 Rudolf Otto: Mysticism : East and West 
(1932), p. 12. 

2 Cp. Plotinus: ‘And one that shall know this vision — with what 
passion of love shall he not be seized, with what pang of desire, what 
longing to be molten into one with this, what wondering delight! If he 
that has never seen this Being must hunger for It as for all his welfare, 
he that has known must love rand reverence It as the very Beauty; he 
will be flooded with awe and gladness stricken by a salutary terror; he 
loves with a veritable love, with sharp desire; all other loves than this 
he must despise, and disdain all that once seemed fair.*' Enneads E.T. 
MacKenna. Vol. I (1917), p. 86. 



Introduction 


97 

once dawned on the dazzled beholder, the savour of the phe- 
nomenal is gone for it is seen to be steeped in the notimenal. 

The report which the mind and the senses give, so long as 
they are unenlightened by the spirit in us, is a misleading report. 
Yet that report is the basis from which we have to proceed. 
What the world and the individual seem to be are a distortion of 
what they really are, and yet through that distortion we arrive 
at the reality. Even as the conclusions of common sense are 
corrected by those of scientific understanding, the conclusions 
of the latter require to be corrected by the light of the spirit 
in us. The abstractions of the intellect require to be converted 
into the actuality of spiritual experience and the concrete 
vision of the soul. 

If the real is misconceived as an object of knowledge, it 
cannot be known. Empirical objects may be known by outer 
observation or inner introspection. But the self cannot divide 
itself into the knower and the known. Logical reasoning is 
incapable of comprehending the living unity of God and man, 
the absolute and the relative. Logical incapacity is not evidence 
of actual impossibility. Reality unites what discursive reason 
is incapable of holding together. Every atom of life is a witness 
to the oneness and duality of God and the world. Being can 
never be objectified or externalised. It is co-inherent and 
co-existent in man. It is unknowable because we identify 
existence with objectivity. This is true, to a limited extent, of 
purely external things like tables and chairs. They are not to 
be reduced to sensations or concepts arising in the knowing 
mind. But spiritual reality is not revealed in the way in which 
objects of the natural world or principles of logic are appre- 
hended. Yajnavalkya tells us that the self is its own light when 
the sun has set, when the moon has set, when the fire is put out, 
atmaivdsya jyotir bhavati . 1 It is our deepest being behind the 
vestures of jjody, life, mind and intellect. Objectivity is not 
the criterion of reality, but the criterion is reality itself revealed 
in our very being. We ask for a criterion of knowledge on the 
assumption of a duality between the knowing subject and the 
known object. If the object appears alien and impenetrable, 


* IV. 3. 2-6. 



98 The Principal Upanisads 

then the question of knowing it becomes a problem. But no 
object can be set in opposition to the spirit and so the question 
of criterion does not arise. True knowledge is an integral 
creative activity of the spirit which does not know anything 
external at all. For it everything is its own life. Here there is 
identity, possession, absorption of the object at the deepest 
level. Truth in spiritual life is neither the reflection nor the 
expression of any other reality. It is reality itself. Those who 
know the truth become the truth, brahma-vid brahmaiva bhavati. 
It is not a question of having an idea or a perception of the real. 
It is just the revelation of the real. It is the illumination of 
being and of life itself. It is satyam, jhanam. Knowledge and 
being are the same thing, inseparable aspects of a single reality, 
being no longer even distinguishable in that sphere where all 
is without duality. 

Where there is duality, theie one sees another, hears another. 
We have objective knowledge. 1 While vijhana deals with the 
world of duality, dnanda implies the fundamental identity 
of subject and object, non-duality. Objectification is estrange- 
ment. The objective world is the 'fallen’ world, disintegrated 
and enslaved, in which the subject is alienated from the object 
of knowledge. It is the world of disruption, disunion, alienation. 
In the 'fallen’ condition, man’s mind is never free from the 
compulsion exercised by objective realities. We struggle to 
overcome disunion, estrangement, to become superior to the 
objective world with its laws and determinations. # 

We cannot, however, become aware <of the true life in its 
unity and multiplicity, in its absoluteness and relativity, if 
we do not free ourselves from the world of divided and isolated 
objects. In the objective world where estrangement and 
limitations prevail, there are impenetrable entities, but in the 
knowledge where we have fullness and boundlessness of life 
nothing is external, but all is known from wi/hin. Intellect 
moves from object to object. Unable to comprehend them all 
it retains their multiplicity. Intellectual knowledge is a scattered, 
broken movement of the 6ne undivided infinite life which is 
all-possessing and ever satisfied. Intuitive knowing is un- 


1 B.U. II. 4. 14. 



Introduction 


99 

imprisoned by the divisions of space, successions of time or 
sequences of cause and effect. Our intellectual picture is a 
shadow cast by the integral knowledge which possesses the 
object truly and securely. 

Reality is a fact, and facts are apprehended by intuition, 
whether perceptual or non-perceptual. The divine primordial 
reality is not a fact of the empirical world, and yet as the central 
spiritual fact we must have a direct apprehension* of it. Our 
logical knowledge can give us indirect approximation to it but 
not a direct grasp of it. 1 The seers of the Upanisads not only 
have deep vision but are able to translate their visions into 
intelligible and persuasive speech. They can do so only through 
hints and images, suggestions and symbols, for they are not 
susceptible of adequate expression. 

The Upanisads distinguish between a-para vidya, lower 
knowledge and para vidya or higher wisdom. While the former 
gives us knowledge of the Vedas and the sciences, the latter 
helps us to gain the knowledge of the Imperishable. 2 3 The first 
principle disguises itself.3 In the Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad, the 
self is seen as the reality of reality.4 The reality of the world is 
the empirical; the true reality is the atman, the self which the 
empirical reality conceals. A distinction is made between the 
knower of texts and the knower of the self in the Chdndogya 
Upanisad. 5 Svetaketu cannot understand the question of 

1 Cp. John Smith, the Platonist: ‘Jejune and barren speculations may 
unfold the plicatures of Truth's garment but they cannot discover her 
lovely face.’ • 

William Law writes: 'To find or knofa God in reality by any outward 
proofs, or by anything but by God Hfrnself made manifest and self- 
evident in you, will never be your case either here or hereafter. For 
neither God, nor heaven, nor hell, nor the devil, nor the flesh, can be 
any otherwise knowable in you or by you, but by their own existence 
and manifestation in you. And all pretended knowledge of any of these 
things, beyond and without this self-evident sensibility of their birth 
withm you, is oi^y such knowledge of them as the blind man hath of the 
light that hath never entered into him.' 

* M.U. I. i. 4-5. 

Mere book knowledge is of no use. 

pustake hkhitd vidya yena sundan japyate 
siddhir na jay ate tasya kalpa-koti-kxtair api. 

% Sat-karma-dipika. 

3 R.V. X. 8i. i. 4 I. 6. 3* II. i. 20; II. 4. 7 -9. 5 VII. 1. 2-3. 



ioo The Principal Upanisads 

rebirth, despite much Vedic learning. The Taittinya Upanisad 
reduces the knowledge of the Vedas to an inferior position by 
assigning it to mano-maya (mind-made) self which has to be 
surmounted before'final truth is attained. 1 The self is perceived, 
according to the Katha Upanisad , not by logical reason but by 
spiritual contemplation, adhyatma-yoga. 2 The real is not attained 
by force of intellect or by much learning but is revealed to the 
aspirant whose will is at rest in Him. 3 We realise God by the 
clarity of illumination, jnana-prasddena . 4 

The Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad teaches that, while those who 
put their trust in the intellect cannot attain to a knowledge of 
Brahman , yet there is an apprehension of His being by those 
who are childlike. 5 Balya includes humility, receptivity or 
teachableness and an earnest search. The writer asks us to give 
up the pride of learning, pdnditya. A self-denial which includes 
our intellectual pride and power is demanded. Purity of 
intellect is different from congestion of it. To attain purity of 
vision, we require a childlike nature which we can get by 
tranquillising the senses, simplifying the heart and cleaning 
the mind. 

It is through quietening the strivings of the will and the 
empirical intellect that the conditions are realised for. the 
revelation of the Supreme in the individual soul. ‘Therefore 
having become calm, subdued, quiet, patiently enduring and 
collected, one sees the Self just in the self.' 6 

Even as we have an intellectual discipline for tfye theoretical 
understanding of the world, we have q. moral and spiritual 
discipline for the direct apprehension of truth. Even as we 
cannot understand the art of swimming by talking about it 
and can learn it only by getting into the water and practising 
swimming, so also no amount of theoretical knowledge can 
serve as a substitute for the practice of the life of spirit. We 
can know God only by becoming godlike. To become godlike 
is to become aware of the light in us, by returning consciously 
to the divine centre within us, where we have always been 
without our knowing it. Detachment ( vairdgya ) is the essential 

* II. 3. 2 II. 1 2. 3 Katha II. 20 and 23. 

4 M.U. III. 1.8. , 

5 III. 5. See also Subdla U . 13. 6 B.U. IV. 4. 23. 



Introduction ioi 

means for the attainment of wisdom (jndna). 1 Only the pure in 
heart can see God. 

We must cultivate a religious disposition. God is revealed 
only to those who believe that He is. 2 WKen in doubt, later 
tradition asks us to give the benefit of the doubt to the theist. 
For if there is no God, there is no harm in believing in Him; 
if there is, the atheist would suffer. 3 Faith, as trust in the 
universe, in its reliability, in its essential soundness and decency, 
is the starting-point of spiritual development. 

Spiritual inclination is essential for the pursuit of spiritual 
life. In the Brhad-aranyaka Uftanisad, Yajnavalkya offers to 
divide all his earthly possessions between his two wives, 
Katyayanl and Maitreyi. The latter asks whether the whole 
world filled with wealth can give her life eternal. Yajnavalkya 
says: 'No, your life will be just like that of people who have 
plenty of things, but there is no hope of life eternal through 
wealth/ Maitreyi spurns the riches of the world remarking, 
'What shall I do with that which will not make me immortal?' 
Yajnavalkya recognises the spiritual fitness of his wife and 
teaches her the highest wisdom. 

Ethical preparation is insisted on. If we da not abstain from 
wrong-doing, if we are not composed in our minds, we cannot 
attain to spiritual wisdom . 4 Our moral being must be purged 
of all evil. The Svddsvatara Uftayisad tells us that we should 
cleanse our natures to reach the goal, since even a mirror can 
reflect an image properly only if it is cleansed of its impurities.5 
We must renounce selfish desire, surrender material possessions, 
become bereft of # cgotism The pstth is 'sharp as the edge of a 
razor and hard to cross, difficult to ’tread/ 6 

A teacher who has attained the goal may help the aspiring 
soul. 7 Truth has not only to be demonstrated but also com- 
municated. It is relatively easy to demonstrate a truth, but it 
can be communicated only by one who has thought, willed and 

1 Cp. V iveka-ciidamani 376, which compares detachment and know- 
ledge to ‘the two wings that are indispensable for the soul, if it should 
soar unrestricted to its eternal home of frpedom and peace.' 

1 Katha II. 6. 12 and 13. 

3 ndsti cet ndsti no hanih, asti cet ndstiko hatah. 

4 Katha I. 2* 24. M.U. III. 1. 5. 5 II. 14-15. 

6 Katha I. 3. 14. 7 C.U. IV. 9. 3. Katha I. 2. 8-9. 



102 The Principal Upanisads 

felt the truth. Only a teacher can give it with its concrete 
quality. He that has a teacher knows, deary avan puruso veda. 1 
Only he must be a proper teacher who embodies truth and 
tradition. Only those who have the flame in them can stir 
the fire in others. 

The individual should develop the habit of introversion, of 
abstracting from the outside world and looking within himself. 
By a process of abstraction we get behind knowing, feeling and 
willing to the essential Self, the God within. We must silence our 
speech, mind and will. We cannot hear the voice of the still 
spirit in us, so long as we are lost in vain talk, mental rambling 
and empty desires. The mind must strip away its outer sheaths 
in complete detachment, return to its inward quiet and fix 
its attention on the essential Self which is the ground and 
reality of the whole universe. The Mundaka Upanisad brings 
out the need for concentrated attention and undistracted effort . 2 
An ordered, disciplined training of all our powers, a change of 
mind, heart and will is demanded. 

Several forms of meditation are advised. Symbols {pratika ) 
are used as supports for meditation. We are free to use the 
symbols which are most in conformity with our personal 
tendencies. Meditation on the pranava is suggested in the 
Mdndiikya Upanisad. 

It is said that the Self cannot be realised except by those 
whom the Self chooses . 3 Self-realisation is possible through the 
grace of the Divine. God-vision is the fruit of strenuous effort 
and Divine grace . 4 Only the Spirit in as can raise us to the 
spiritual status. The Real, which is the basis of this manifold 
world of things and minds, can be apprehended directly and 
immediately only by those who fulfil certain conditions and 
submit to the leadings of the spirit. We do not so much hold the 
idea of the Real as the idea holds us. We are possessed by it. 

Vidya and avidyd are two ways of apprehending Reality. 

I C.U. VI. 14. 2. ^ III. 1. 8. 3 Katha I. 2. 23. M.U. III. 2. j. 

4 Cp. St. Bernard: ‘Grace is necessary to salvation, free will equally 
so, but grace in order to givc u salvation, free will in order to receive it. 
Therefore we should not attribute part of the good work to grace and 
part to free will; it is performed in its entirety by the common and 
inseparable action of both; entirely by grace, entirely by free will, but 
springing from the first in the second.' 



Introduction 


103 

Both are forms of relative knowledge and belong to the mani- 
fested universe. Knowledge formulated logically is not equiva- 
lent to a direct and immediate apprehension of the Real. 
Whatever words we use, whatever concepts we employ, fall 
short of reality . 1 The anubhava is beyond all manifestation 
and is complete in itself. Vidya stresses the harmony and 
interconnections of elements which make up the world; 
avidya the separateness, mutual independence* and strife. 
Vidya helps us to appreciate intellectually the intelligible 
ideas about the nature of the Divine ground and the nature 
of the direct experience of it in relation to other experiences. 
It indicates the means by which we can attain Brahman . 
Such a system of theological doctrine points out that there 
is nothing intrinsically self-contradictory about the postulate 
of religion, viz. the divine reality, and that it is also empirically 
verifiable if only we are willing to submit to a discipline. 
The theological knowledge or vidya is different from the 
experience or anubhava of it. The experience is recorded as 
a pure and direct intellectual intuition in sruti. When we 
reflect on the experiences or their records and reduce them to a 
rational order we have smrti. While the first is the domain of 
metaphysical principles, the second applies these principles to 
individual and social conduct. Vidya is nearer the truth than 
avidya. 

But vidya is also understood as jhana which is of the essential 
nature of the Divine Reality. It is then eternal wisdom which 
is not the knowledge possessed by any individual. It is the 
wisdom hidden beneath the sheaths of ignorance. It is one with 
the Supreme Self, which is self-evident and needs no proof, 
svatah-siddha, self-valid certainty. 

Though intuitive wisdom is different from knowledge of the 
senses or anything we can achieve by logical reflection, it is not 
to be confuted with occultism, obscurantism, or extravagant 
emotion. It is not magical insight or heavenly vision, or special 
revelation obtained through supernatural powers. What we 

1 When A1 Ghazzali or, two centuries later, Thomas Aquinas refused 
to proceed with the consideration of truths about God, when once they 
attained direct apprehension of the Divine Reality, they refer to this 
inadequacy of verbal or logi >1 expressions. 



104 77ze Principal Upanisads 

attain by vision, empirical or trans-empirical, belongs to the 
objective world. It is a distinction within the objective world, 
between the physical and the super-physical, between what we 
reach by the five senses and a sixth sense. Wisdom is pure 
reason, capacity for fundamental truth. It is the possession of 
the soul or it is the soul that penetrates into its own ground 
and depth and becomes essential being. It springs from it of 
necessity when it meditates on itself. This wisdom is eternal, 
universal and necessary for Samkara. It cannot be destroyed 
though it may be obscured. 

All the same, the tradition of thought has been strong in the 
Upanisads. We lead up to experience through intellectual 
knowledge. For those who are incapable of integral insight, 
perception and inference are the only available means. 1 Even 
men of experience do not contradict rational thought, though 
they go beyond it. 


XVI 

ETHICS 

The Upanisads insist on the importance of ethical life. 2 They 
repudiate the doctrine of the self-sufficiency of the ego and 
emphasise the practice of moral virtues. Man is responsible 
for his acts. Evil is the free act of the individual who uses his 
freedom for his own exaltation. It is fundamentally the choice 
which affirms the finite, independent self, its lordship and 
acquisitiveness against the universal will. Evfl is the result of 
our alienation from the Real. If we do not break with evil, we 
cannot attain freedom. 3 

1 Cp. Vakya-pcidlya. ‘For those who cannot sec, the reason which is 
not in contradiction with the Vedas and the scriptures is the eye.' 
veda- 6 dstulvirod hi yas 
tarkas-cak^uy a-pa^yatam. I. 137. ' 

* M.U. III. 2. 4. B.U. IV. 4. 23. 

3 Commenting on Katha I. 2. 2-3, Ramanuja writes: 'This \erse 
teaches that meditation which should become more perfect day by day, 
cannot be accomplished without the dc\otec having broken with all 
evil.' R.B. IV. 1. 13. 

‘The Vedas do not purify the ethically unworthy.’ * 

acdra-hinam na punanti veddh . Vasistha-Dharma-Sdstra. VI. 3. 



Introduction 


105 

Man is of the divine race, but he has in him the element of 
non-being, which exposes him to evil. As a spiritual being 
he can burst the revolving circle of nature and become a 
citizen of another world in unity with Absolute Being who is 
his creative source. Man is the mediator between God and 
nature and has to complete the work of creation by the in- 
carnation of wisdom. He must illumine what is dark and 
strengthen what is weak in him. His entire being should labour 
to become one with the Divine. Our fallen nature, sunk in sin, 
is felt as contrary to the Rea’l and yet as existent. The self feels 
itself to be in contradiction to all that is supremely real. There 
is the pain of discord between the existent and the Real. In 
moral life the self feels itself divided against itself. And yet the 
struggle itself is impossible unless we look upon the desire for 
the divine and the consciousness of rebellion as belonging to 
the same self. The felt contradiction is possible only through 
the reality which is above the discord. The antithesis between 
what we wish to be and what we are is implicitly their unity. 
The divine consciousness and will must become our conscious- 
ness and will. This means that our actual self must cease to be 
a private self; wt must give up our particular will, die to our 
ego, by surrendering its whole nature, its consciousness and 
character to the Divine. 1 

The freedom of the human individual is assumed, though the 
limitations of karma are mentioned. ‘He fetters himself by 
himself, as a bird by its nest/ 2 The freedom of the individual 
increases to the extenj to which he identifies himself with the 
Absolute in him,*the antar-ydmin . If we leave the world after 
having known the true self, then our life in all worlds is the life 
of freedom. 

Some theistic Upanisads say that the inner power, the 
Divine, caused the man whom He will lead on high from these 
worlds to do good works and He causes the man whom He will 
lead downwaftls to do evil works. 3 In theism the stress is on 
Divine providence. In the Svctdsvatara Upanisad, the Self is 
the overseer of all actions, who apportions to each person his 
qualities, who executes justice, who restrains the evil, allots 

1 anuragad%irdgah. 2 Maitrt III. 2 . 3 K.U. III. 8. 



io6 The Principal Upanisads 

good fortune and brings to maturity the actions of the indi- 
vidual souls. 1 

The general impression that the Upanisads require world- 
denial is not quite correct. They insist on a spirit of detachment, 
vairagya, which is not indifference to the world. It is not 
abandonment of objects but non-attachment to them. We do 
not raise ourselves above the world by contempt for the world. 
It is the spirit of equanimity which is insisted on. To be tranquil 
is to envy no man, to have no possessions that another can 
take from us, to fear none. When the Hindu thinkers ask us to 
adopt samnyasa or relinquishment of home and possessions, to 
accept the three great renunciations, consecrated in the three 
vows, evangelical counsels of poverty, obedience and chastity, 
they point to self-denial as the root of spiritual life. 

Spirit of renunciation does not mean neglect of social duties. 
Samnyasa does not mean that we owe no duties to the world; 
we free ourselves only from ritualistic duties. Rare fruits of 
spirit ripen on the soil of detachment. 2 There is a popular verse 
which makes out that one should give up attachment, but if 
one is not capable of it, let him cultivate attachment; only it 
should be attachment to all. 3 

We should release ourselves from selfish likes and dislikes. 
The Divine cannot use our mind and body so long as we wish 
to use them for our own ends. 4 

Detachment is opposed to attachment, not to enjoyment. 

i VI. ii, i2, 4; V. 5H. 

1 When Ernest Renan described St. Francis as ‘the one perfect 
Christian' it was felt to be an exaggeration. Hardly anyone else in the 
Christian world comes so close to "the ideal set forth in the Gospels. ‘He 
that renounceth not everything that he hath, he cannot be my disciple.' 
We feel that these demands are excessive and even fantastic. We excuse 
ourselves by saying that Jesus did not mean all that he is reported to 
have said or that his words were not of general application. We make 
compromises, while St. Francis did not allow any compromises. 

3 tyaktavyo mama-kayak, tyaktum yadi sakyate ndsau 
kartavyo mama-kdrah kimlu sarvatra kartavyfh. 

4 Cp. St. John of the Cross: ‘The soul that is attached to anything, 
however much good there may be in it, will not arrive at the liberty of 
divine union. For whether it be a strong wire rope or a slender and 
delicate thread that holds the bird, it matters not, if it really holds it 
fast; for until the cord be broken the bird cannot fly. So the soul, held 
by the bonds of human affections, however slight they m^y be, cannot, 
while they last, make its way to God.' 



Introduction 


107 

Enjoy through renunciation is the advice of the l£a Upanisad. 1 
Good and evil do not depend on the acts one does or does not, 
but on the frame of mind one has. The gctod man is he who 
concurs with the divine purpose, and the bad man is he who 
resists it. If one’s mind is good, one’s acts will be good. Our 
attempt should be not so much external conformity as inward 
cleansing. From goodness of being good will and .good works 
flow. 2 3 4 When the soul is at peace, the greatest sorrows are borne 
lightly. Life becomes more natural and confident. Changes in 
outer conditions do not disturb. We let our life flow of itself as 
the sea heaves or the flower blooms. 

Work by itself does not give us liberation. It cleanses the 
mind, purifies the heart and produces the illumination which is 
the immediate condition of salvation. Sarhkara argues that 
the knowledge of Brahman , as it relates to an existent being, 
cannot be contingent on what a person does or does not. 3 

Contemplation is the way to cleanse one’s mind and heart. It 
means rest, suspension of mental activity, withdrawal into the 
interior solitude in which the soul is absorbed in the fruitful 
silence of God. We cannot stop there ; we must overflow with a 
love that communicates what it knows to others. Saints with 
abundant power and tireless energy work for the transfiguring 
of men and the changing of the course of secular history. 
Different methods are suited for* different temperaments, and 
they are all permit ted. 4 

1 Eckhart tells us: ‘It is permissible to take life's blessings with both 
hands, provided thou dost know thyself prepared in the opposite event to 
leave them just as gladly.' • 

1 Cp. Eckhart: ‘Men should not think so much of what they ought to 
do, as of what they ought to be. Think not to lay the foundation of thy 
holiness upon doing, but rather upon being. For works do not sanctify 
us, but we should sanctify the works. Whoever is not great in his 
essential being will achieve nothing by works, whatever he may do.' 
Rudolf Otto: ftfosticism: East and West, p. 126. 

3 a-purusa-tantratvad brahma-vijnanasya. 

4 See B.G. V. 5. Vasistha says: 

a-sadhyah kasyacid yogah kasyacit jndna-niscay ah: 
ittham vicarya margau dvatt jagada paramebvarah. 

To some yoga is impossible; to others the ascertainment of truth. 
Viewing thus God has revealed two paths. 

Cp. St. Thomas Aquinas: ‘A thing may belong to the contemplative 
life in two ways essentially or as a predisposition. The moral virtues 



108 The Principal Upani§ads 

The ethical virtues we are called upon to addpt are mentioned 
in several passages. Life is compared to a sacrifice where the 
fee shall be asceticism, liberality, integrity, non-injury to life 
and truthfulness. 1 The Taittinya Upani$ad gives a list of 
students' duties. He should not be negligent of truth, virtue, 
welfare, prosperity, study and teaching. He should perform 
only those, acts which are irreproachable. In case of doubt 
concerning any act of conduct, the student should follow the 
practice of those Brahmanas who- are competent to judge, apt, 
devoted, not harsh lovers of virtue. In one passage all the 
virtues are brought together under the three da's which are 
heard in the voice of the thunder, namely, dama } or self- 
restraint, ddna or self-sacrifice, and daya or compassion. 
Praja-pati conveys it to the three classes of his creation, gods 
(deva), men (manusya) and demons ( asura ). 2 Sariikara makes 
out that gods have desires (/ kama ), men suffer from greed 

belong to the contemplative life as a predisposition. For the act of 
contemplation, in which the contemplative life essentially consists, is 
hindered both by the impetuosity of the passions and by the outward 
disturbances. Now the moral virtues curb the impetuosity of the passions 
and quell the disturbance of outward occupations. 1 fence moral virtues 
belong to the contemplative life as a predisposition.' St. Thomas taught 
there were three vocations, that to the active life, that to the con- 
templative and a third to the combination of both and the last is 
superior to the other two. There are statements to the effect that the 
contemplative life in itself by its very nature is superior to the active 
life. Vita contemplativa, he remarks, simpliciter est melior quarn activa, 
for the contemplative life directly and immediately occupies itself with 
the love of God than which there is no act more perfect or more meri- 
torious. The contemplative life establishes man in the very heart of all 
spiritual fecundity. When St. Thomas admits that the active life can be 
more perfect in certain circumstances, he qualifies it a great deal, 
(i) Action will only be more perfect than the joy and rest of contem- 
plation, if it is undertaken as the result of an overflow of love for God in 
order to fulfil His will, (ii) It is not to be continuous but only an answer 
to a temporary emergency, (iii) It is purely for God's glory, it does not 
dispense us from contemplation. It is an added obligation and we but 
return as soon as we can to the fruitful silence of Recollection that 
disposes our souls to the Divine Union. 

i C.U. III. 17. 

* B.U. V. 2. 

In the Bhdgavata the Lord' says that anyone who does not care for 
the people who are in need of care and simply takes to the worship of 
God, his effort is wasted. 

yo mam sarvesu bhutesu santam atmanam Uvaram 

hitvarcam bhajate maudthyad , bhasmany eva juhoti sah. 



Introduction 


109 

(lobha) and demons from anger ( krodha ). By the practice of the 
three injunctions we free ourselves from the sway of craving, 
greed and anger. When the Buddha asks us to put out in our 
hearts the monstrous fires of infatuation, ’ greed and resent- 
ment, he is emphasising the three virtues enjoined by the 
Upanisads. 

Dama is self-control. .We should reduce our wants and be pre- 
pared to suffer in the interests of truth . 1 Austerity, chastity, 
solitude and silence are the ways to attain self-control. 

Tapas is severe self-discipline undertaken for spiritual ends. 
It is exercised with reference to the natural desires of the body 
and the distractions of the outer world. It consists of exercises 
of an inward kind, prayers offered in the heart, self-analysis and 
outer acts like fasting, self-mortification, sexual abstinence or 
voluntary poverty. Strength is developed by a resisting force. 
The power gained by resisting one temptation helps us in over- 
coming the next. To evade discipline is to empty life of its 
significance. Nothing is more tranquil than to be unshaken by 
the troublous motions of the flesh. Renunciation, nydsa, is 
superior to tapas or austerity or asceticism. The latter is a means 
to the former. It is not to be made into an end in itself . 2 Ethical 

1 ‘The wise man overcomes anger through mind-control, lust through 
the renunciation of desire. He can attain mastery over sleep by develop- 
ing the quality of sattva. Through steadfastness he should protect the 
organ of generation and the stomach. With (the help of) the eyes he 
should protect the hands and the feet. Through (the power of) mind he 
should protect the eyes and the ears and through conduct he should 
protect mind and speech. Through constant vigilance he should shed fear 
and through the service fif the wise, he should overcome pride.’ 

* k vodham iamena jayaU , kahiam samkalpa-varjandt 
sattva-samsevanad dhiro nidtam ucchettum arhati. 
dhrtyd iisnodaram rakset, pdni-padam ca caksasd 
caksuh Srotram ca manasd, mano vdcam ca kannand. 
a-pramadad bhayam jahydd, dambham prajnopasevandt. 

Brahma Parana 235. 40-42. 

Cp. Confucius: ‘With only coarse rice as meal and only plain water 
as drink, and otdy my arm as pillow, I still find joy in the midst of these 
conditions. Wealth and honour acquired contrary to righteousness are 
to me like the passing cloud.’ Lunya Pt. VIII. Ch. XV. See F. T. Cheng: 
China Moulded by Confucius (1947), p. 9^. 

* ‘Do the frogs, fish and others who live from their birth to death in 
the waters of the Ganges, do they become yogis ? ' 

ayanma-maranantam ca gangddi-tatmi-sthitah 
manduka-malsya~pi imukhdh yogmas te bhavanti him ? 



Iio The Principal Upanisads 

life includes moral uprightness though many minds feel only 
the need for mechanical ritual. 

Brahmacarya is not sex-destruction. There is no gulf between 
flesh and spirit, but only between the fallen and the trans- 
figured flesh. Ancient Indian thinkers were of the opinion that 
the seed within man and woman is intended for the purpose 
of creating a body by which another soul may come into 
physical embodiment. When thus controlled, brahmacarya 
helps creative work of every description. When the seed is 
wasted in sex excesses, the body becomes weak and crippled, 
the face lined, the eyes dull, hearing impaired and the brain 
inactive. If brahmacarya is practised, the physical body remains 
youthful and beautiful, the brain keen and alert, the whole 
physical expression becomes the image and likeness of the 
Divine. 

Mauna or silence is advised as leading the soul forward to 
contemplation. 1 By the discipline of silence we curb the ex- 
cesses which flow from the tongue, heresy, backbiting, flattery. 
We cannot listen to the voice of God when our minds are 
dissipated, given to restless activity and are filled externally 
and internally with noise. Progress in silence is progress to the 
realisation of spirit. When silence descends on the soul, its 
activities are joined to the silent creative power of God. 2 

Dana enjoins gifts. It is negatively freedom from greed and 
positively assistance to those in need. ‘There is no hope of 
immortality by wealth. '3 Possessiveness is condemned. The 

1 Cp. Isaiah: ‘The tillage of righteousness is silency.' ‘In silence and in 
hope shall be your strength.' 

2 ‘While all things were in quiet silence and the night was in the 
midst of her course the Word leapt down from heaven.’ 

3 B.U. II. 4. 2. Cp. Jalal-Uddin Ruml: 

Once the noble Ibrahim, as he sat on his throne, 

Heard a clamour and noise of cries on the roof, 

Also heavy footsteps on the roof of his palace. 

He said to himself, ‘Whose heavy feet are tfrjse?' 

He shouted from the window, ‘Who goes there?’ 

The guards, filled with confusion, bowed their heads, saying, 
‘It is we going the rounds in search.’ 

He said, ‘What seek ye? ‘They said ‘Our camels.’ 

He said, ‘Whoever searched for camels on a housetop?' 
They said, ‘We follow thy example, • 

Who seekest union with God, while sitting on a throne. ’ 



Introduction 


hi 


Taittinya Upanisad regulates the art of giving. 1 One should 
give with faith, one should not give without faith, one should 
give liberally, with modesty, with fear, with sympathy. 

Daya is karuna, compassion. We should try to be at peace 
with all, abhor all cruelty and ill-will. 2 3 4 Enmity means misunder- 
standing. A forgiving attitude frees the individual. We should 
grudge none, forgive all. So long as we remember an injustice, 
we have not forgiven cither the person or the action. If only we 
know that there is more suffering than wickedness in the world, 
we would be kindly. It is by compassion, which shrinks from 
no sacrifice, that we can overcome the ravages of selfishness. 
We must be patient. God himself is unimaginably patient. 3 
Tolerance, long suffering, patience are the fruits of spirit. 

The ethical individual is required to become like a child.4 
The perfect man is a divine child, accepting the divine play, 
without fear or reserve, care or grief, in utter purity. A child is 
not entangled with things that seem important to grown-ups, 
whose occupations are mainly paltry and whose professions 
petrified. A child’s wise incomprehension is linked with 
living and is iru^re than defensiveness or disdain. We cannot 
return to childhood. We have to gain the state which is un- 
constricted by temporal purpose, but purposeful, a state in which 
time and eternity coincide. 

When it is said that the Upanisads adopt a spiritual view 
of life, it does not mean that they despise body, life and mind. 
The latter are the conditions or instruments for the life of 

spirit in man. They a A *e not ends in themselves, but are means 

• • 

1 I. II. 2. 

2 Devi Bhdgavata says: 

There is no virtue like compassion and no vice like the use of violence. 
daya-samam nasti puny am, papam himsd-samam na hi. 

3 'The Lord God, merciful and gracious, long suffering and abundant 
in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving the 
guilty transgression and sin.' Exodus XXXIV. 6 . 7. ‘The long suffering 
of our Lord is salvation.' 2 Peter III. 15. 

4 For Heraclitus: ‘The Kingdom is of the child.' ‘Except ye be con- 
verted and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom 
of Heaven.’ Jesus. For Mencius: ‘A great man is one who has not lost the 
child's heart.' Nietzsche says: ‘The’ child is innocence and oblivion, a 
new beginning, a play, a self-rolling wheel, a primal motion, an holy 
yea-saying.’ Thus Spake Zarat'h stra I. 2. 



1 12 The Principal Upanisads 

or opportunities for the expression of the Universal Spirit in us. 
Spirit and life are not to be separated. 

The ritualistic practices are reinterpreted. They are to 
prepare the mind for spiritual realisation, to spur it on to 
pierce the veil of the finite and to seek deliverance in identifica- 
tion with the Supreme Reality. If rites are performed without 
the knowledge of their meaning, they are not only useless but 
dangerous. 1 * The presumptuous performer may have his head 
cut off. 3 * * He who knows a particular rite and he who knows it 
not both perform a rite, but when performed with knowledge 
the act becomes more effective. 3 Meditation on the meaning of 
the sacrifice sometimes took the place of the actual sacrifice. 
‘Suppose/ Janaka asks Yajnavalkya, ‘you had no milk or rice 
or barley to perform the fire-sacrifice, agnihotra, with what would 
you sacrifice V ‘With the fruits of trees and whatever herbs there 
were/ ‘If there were none?’ ‘Then with water/ ‘If there were no 
water?' ‘Then, indeed, there would be nothing here, yet, this 
would be offered, the truth in faith/4 When the heart is fully 
persuaded, there is little sense of sacrifice. Sacrificial life 
becomes a natural manifestation of the new spirit. Self-conscious 
sacrifice, with its burden of self-righteousness and expectation 
of reward, is not of much use. 5 

The caste divisions are mentioned in some of the Upanisads. 6 
They did not, however, harden into a rigid social system. In 
the Chandogya Upanisad five learned Brahmanas who approach 
Uddalaka Aruni for instruction in regard to VaiSvanara Atman 
are taken by him to King A£vapati Kerikeya, who gives them 
instruction after first demorfstrating the imperfections of their 
views. Ajatasatru of Kasi teaches Gargya Balaki the nature of 
Brahman , after pointing out the defects of the twelve views 

i C.U. V. 24. 1. * C.U. I. 8; I. 10— 1 1 . 3 C.U. I. 1-10. 

4 Satapatha Brahman a XI. 3. 1. 

5 Yahweh says (Amos V. 21): 'I hate, I despise youc feast days, and 
I will not dwell in your solemn assemblies. Though ye offer me burnt 
offerings and your meat offerings, I will not accept them; neither will I 

regard the peace olferings of your fat beasts. Take thou away from me 
the noise of thy songs; for I will not hear the melody of thy viols.' 

Again Yahweh speaks (Hosea VI. 6) : ‘Tor I desired mercy, and not 
sacrifice; and the knowledge of God more than burnt offerings.' 

6 B.U. I. 4. 15. 



Introduction 


ii3 

which Gargya Balaki sets forth. AjataSatru observes that it is 
not usual for a Brahmana to approach a Ksatriya for instruc- 
tion. The doctrine of rebirth is taught by Pravahana Jaivali to 
Aruni with the remark that the Brahmanas had never before 
had this knowledge. 1 Among the students of the Upanisads is 
Satyakama, of unknown origin, whose mother Jabala could not 
tell who his father was. 2 

The four d&amas or stages of life are recognised. ‘While the 
usual rule is that one has to pass through successive stages of 
life, exceptions are permitted Jabala Upanisad asks us to 
renounce whenever we feel a call to it. Besides, even in a house- 
holder's stage one can attain spiritual freedom. 3 


XVII 

KARMA AND REBIRTH 

Until we negate the ego and get fixed in the Divine Ground 
we are bound to the endless procession of events called samsara.4 
The principle which governs this world of becoming is called 
karma. There are moral and spiritual laws as well as physical 

1 Sec also K.U. I, where the teacher is the King Citra Gaiigyayani. 

* C.U. IV. 4 . 

3 In the Bhagavata Pur ana it is said that a house is no prison for one 
who has controlled his senses, delights in spirit and is eager for knowledge. 

jitendnyas atmarater budhasya 
grhdsramah him tu karoly avadyam. 

Abhinavagupta says thcJt Gratis and smrtis hold that he who has right 
knowledge attains salvation in all stages of life and quotes: ‘He that 
worships God, has established himself in the knowledge of truth, attends 
devotedly to his quest, pei forms rites, offers gifts, he is liberated though 
a house-holder/ 

tativa-jnaninarii sarvesv dsramesu muktir iti smartest i irutau ca: yathoktam. 
devdnana-ratas tattva-j fidna-nistho' tithi-pnyah 
krdddhayh hrtud dadad dravyam gvhastho' pi hi mucyate. 

4 Cp. Boethiu^: Consolations of Philosophy. ‘The temporal world seems 
to emulate in part that which it cannot fully obtain or express, tying 
itself to whatever presence there is in this exiguous and fleeting moment, 
a presence which, since it carries a certain image of that abiding presence, 
gives to whatever may partake of it the quality of seeming to have 
being. But because it could not stay, it undertook an infinite journey of 
time ; and so it fame to pass that, by going, it continued that life, whose 
plenitude it could not comprehend by staying/ 



H4 The Principal Upani$ads 

laws. If we neglect the laws of health, we injure our health; 
if we neglect the laws of morality, we wreck our higher life. 
Any rational conception of the universe, any spiritual con- 
ception of God requires us to recognise the utter and unques- 
tionable supremacy of law in shaping our conduct and 
character. 

The law of Karma is not external to the individual. The 
judge is not without but within. The law by which virtue 
brings its triumph and ill-doing its retribution is the unfolding 
of the law of our being. 1 The world order is a reflection of the 
Divine Mind. The Vedic gods were regarded as the maintainers 
of the order, rta of the world. They were the guardians of rta. 
God, for the Svetdsvatara Upanisad , is the ordainer of karma , 
karmddhyaksah , God is law as well as love. 2 3 His love is through 
law. The working of karma is wholly dispassionate, just, neither 
cruel nor merciful. Though we cannot escape from the workings 
of this principle, there is hope, for if man is what he has made 
himself, he may make himself what he will. Even the soul in 
the lowest condition need not abandon all hope. If we miss the 
right path, we are not doomed to an eternity of suffering. 
There are other existences by which we can grow into the 
knowledge of the Infinite Spirit with the complete assurance 
that we will ultimately arrive there. If there is a fundamental 
difference between Christianity and Hinduism, it is said that 
it consists in this, that while the Hindu to whatever school he 
belongs believes in a succession of lives, the Christian believes 
that ‘it is appointed to men once to die, but after this the 
judgment /3 

1 Cp. the words of a hue fragment of the lost Mclanippe of Euripides. 
Dream you that men's misdeeds ily up to Ileaven 
And then some hand inscribes the record of them 
Upon God's tablets; and God, reading them, 

Deals the world justice ? Nay, the vault of Heaven 
Could not find room to write the crimes qf earth, 

Nor God himself avail to punish them : 

Justice is here on earth, had ye but eyes. 

* Cp. St. Paul: ‘Behold therefore the goodness and severity of God.’ 
Pomans XI. 22. 

3 John McKenzie: Two Religions (1950), p. 112. Some Western 
philosophers and early Christian theologians accept tlye principle of 
rebirth. 



Introduction 


ii5 

Belief in rebirth has persisted, at any rate, from the time of 
the Upanisads. It is a natural development from the views of 
the Vedas and the Brahmanas and receives articulate expression 
in the Upanisads. 1 After mentioning the dispersal of the mem- 
bers of the human body at death — the eye of man goes to the 
sun, the breath to the wind, speech to fire, the mind to the 
moon, the ear to the quarters of heaven, the body to the earth, 
the soul to the ether, the hair to the plants and trees, the blood 
and seed to the waters — Vajnavalkya is asked as to what 
remains of the individual. He takes the questioner apart, 
discusses with him in secret about the nature of work. In truth, 
a man becomes good by good works and evil by evil works. 2 
Our lives incarnate our characters. 

The future of the soul is not finally determined by what it 
has felt, thought and done in this one earthly life. The soul has 
chances of acquiring merit and advancing to life eternal. Until 
the union with the timeless Reality is attained, there will be 
some form of life or other, which will give scope to the individual 
soul to acquire enlightenment and attain life eternal. Even as 
non-being is only^m abstract lower limit of the existential order, 
absolute evil is also such a lower limit. Non-being, if it existed 
in itself diametrically opposed to being, would be completely 
destroyed. Such non-being is non-existent. Therefore as every 
existent thing has the form of the Divine, it has also the promise 
of good. 

The Upanisads give us detailed descriptions of the manner 
in which a man dies afid is born again. 3 The transition is illus- 
trated by certain examples. As a gf ass-hopper, when it has come 
to the end of a blade ol grass, finds another place of support, and 
then draws itself towards it, similarly this self, after reaching 
the end of this body, finds another place of support and then 
draws himself towards it. As a goldsmith, after taking a piece 
of gold, gives it another, newer and more beautiful shape, 
similarly does this self, after having thrown off this body, and 
dispelled ignorance, take another, newer and more beautiful 
form, whether it be of the manes, or demigods or gods or of 

1 See R.V. X. 16. 3. Satapatha Brahmana I. 5. 3. 4; X. 3. 3. 8. 

* B.U. III. I. 13. 

3 See B.U. IV. 3. 37-38; IV. . 1-5 and 9. 7. See Katha I. 1. 5-6. 



n6 The Principal Upanisads 

Praja-pati or Brahma or of any other beings. 1 These passages 
bring out several aspects of the theory of rebirth. The soul 
finds out its future body before it leaves the present one. The 
soul is creative in the sense that it creates a body. At every 
change of body, the soul takes a newer form. The state of each 
existence of the soul is conditioned and determined by its 
knowledge (vidyd), its conduct {karma) 2 * 4 5 in the previous 
existence. From the Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad it appears that 
all the organs accompany the departing soul, which enters 
into the samjhana and becomes possessed of knowledge and 
consciousness3, vijhdna. The results of learning and conduct cling 
to the soul. 4 

The ignorant, the unenlightened go after death to sunless 
demoniac regions. 5 The good are said to go up to regions which 
are sorrowless, through the air, sun, and moon. 6 * The Chdndogya 
Upanisad speaks of two ways open to mortals, the bright and 
th$ dark, the way of the gods7 and the way of the fathers. 8 9 
Those who practise penance and faith enter the path of light, 
and they never return to the cycle of human existence. Those 
who are only ethical, performing works of public utility, travel 
by the path of smoke, dwell in the world of the fathers till the 
time comes for them to fall down, then they are born again 
according to their deserts.9 The descriptions may be fictitious, 
but the principle of thq ascent and the descent of the soul 
is what the Upanisads insist on. Beautiful characters attain 
covet able births and ugly ones miserable births. 10 Heaven and 
hell belong to the world of time. 

1 B.U. IV. 4. 3-5. 'As a man puts on new clothes in this world, 

throwing away those which he formerly wore, even so the soul of man 
puts on new bodies which arc in accordance with its acts in a former 
life.’ Visnu Smrtt XX. 50. See 13 . G. II. 13, 22. 

* B.U. IV. 4."2. ' 3 IV. 4. 3. 

4 Cp. with this the Buddhist view that the migrating soul consists of 
vijndna and the other four shandhas of vedand, feelflig, samjna, per- 
ception, samskdra or dispositions and rupa or corporeal form. 

5 ha 3. Katha I. 1. 3. B.U. IV. 4. 11. 

6 B.U. V. 10. 1. • 7 See R.V. X. 19. 1. B.G. VIII. 24-26. 

8 C.U. IV. 15. 5-6. There are minor variations in the accounts of 

C.U. and B.U. and K.U. I 

9 C.U. V. 10. 1-6. 

10 C.U. V. 10. 7. K.U. I. 2. 



Introduction 


117 

Rebirth is the lot of man until he obtains true knowledge. 
By virtuous acts he furthers his evolution. The reward of 
goodness is to grow in goodness. The reward of growing in 
purity of heart is to gain a clearer vision of reality. Knowledge 
of Reality leads to salvation. 

It is sometimes suggested that the soul before undergoing 
rebirth experiences reward or punishment for its deeds in 
appropriate places. The original Vedic belief of reward in heaven 
or punishment gets mixed up with the doctrine of rebirth . 1 

The soul is said to be a very minute entity residing in the 
cavity of the heart and resembling in every respect, except 
size, the visible man. 


XVIII 

LIFE ETERNAL 

The fact that the individual consciousness has for its essential 
reality the Universal Self implies the possibility that every 
human being can rend the veil of separateness and gain recog- 
nition of his true nature and oneness with all beings. The 
Upanisads develop this character of life eternal. 

In the Rg Veda , what is aimed *at is length of days on earth 
and life in the world of heaven in the company of gods. In the 
Brahmanas, the performers of various rites are promised the 
reward of community of being, companionship and fellowship 
with the gods . 2 When the Absolute Brahman was recognised, 
the gods became intermediaries through whose influence the 
end of unity with the Absolute is obtained. When Brahman and 
Atman are identified, the highest goal is declared to be unity 
with the Self. Deliverance is different from existence in svarga 
or paradise. The latter is a part of the manifested world. The 
soul may live there for ages and yet return to earth, a heir to 
its deeds. Deliverance, on the other hand, is a state of permanent 
union with the Highest Self. Life in paradise is a prolongation 

* B.U. VI. 'k. C.U. V. 3-10. 

> Satapatha Brahmana II. 6 1.8; XI. 4. 4. 1. 21; VI. 1. 2. 3. 



Ii8 The Principal Upanisads 

of self-centred life, while life eternal is liberation from it. While 
the former is time extended, the latter is time transcended. 

Enlightenment does not mean a departure in space to a new 
abode. Arrival and departure have no meaning in the context 
of liberation. The passages where the soul is said to go by the 
veins to the rays of the sun and to the sun 1 or from the moon 
through the worlds of fire, wind, Varuna, Indra and Praja-pati, 
to Brahmait 2 speak of the soul on the pathway to perfection. 
The Chdndogya Upanisad states that the soul of the emancipated, 
at death, goes out by the hundred and first vein through the 
crown of the head, fire, wind and sun to Brahman. 3 

He who knows Brahman becomes Brahman.4 Perfection is 
a state of mind, not contingent on change of time or place. 
It is an experience of the present, not a prophecy of the future. 
Temporal distinctions do not apply to it, but if any temporal 
terms are to be used, they will be words like 'now/ 'presently/ 
'When all desires that dwell in the human heart are cast away, 
then a mortal becomes immortal and (even) here he attaineth 
to Brahman.' 5 Freedom is not a future state on whose coming 
we wait in expectation. It is life in the spirit, in God who is the 
foundation and power of life. 6 

* Katha III. n. 8. * K.U. I. 2. 

3 C.L J. VIII. 6. 6. K.U. VI. 16. MaitriX I. 21. 

4 B.U. IV. 4. y. M.U. III. 2. 9. 5 Katha VI. 14. 

6 The Christian scriptures say* that ‘the Kingdom of God is among 
you.' It lives and moves secretly here and now as the hidden ground 
overcoming Satan and the world. 

Cp. moksasya na hi vaso’sti na gramantaram eva vd 
ajndna-hrdaya-granthi-ndso moksa iti snirtah. 

Siva-gitd XIII. 32. 

Freedom is not in a particular place nor has one to go to some other 
village in order to obtain it; the destruction of the knot of ignorance 
round our hearts is known as freedom. 

M.B also tells us that the knower of Brahman has neither movement 
nor departure 

sarva-bhutatma-bhiitasya samyag-bhutdni pakyatah. 
devdpi marge muhyamy a-padasya padaisirah. 

‘He who has attained the state of the self of all beings, who hay 
attained the perfect vision of all beings — about the path of such a person 
the gods themselves are perplexed, seeking to discover the place of one 
who has no place at all.’ 

Katha VI. 14. Cp. Kabir: 

O Friend, hope for Him whilst you live, understand whilst you live; 

for in life deliverance abides. 



Introduction 


119 

Is moksa or liberation life with the Supreme Person whom 
we love and worship in this life? 1 Is it personal immortality 
with absolute likeness to God in the world of Brahma? 2 Is it 
an impersonal absorption in the Divine Transcendent? 3 All 
these views are to be found in the Upanisads. There are four 
aspects of release distinguished as samipya or intimacy with 
the divine, sdnlpya or sddharmya, similarity of nature with 
the divine, reflecting his glory, salokya or conscious co- 
existence with the divine in the same world and sdyujya or 
communion with the divine “bordering on identity. 

There are certain general characteristics of the state of 
moksa or freedom. It is conceived as freedom from subjection 
to time. 4 As birth and death are the symbols of time, life eternal 
or moksa is liberation from births and deaths. It is the fourth 
state of consciousness beyond the three worlds, what the 
Bhagavad-gitd calls paramam brahma or brahma-nirvana. 5 It is 
freedom from subjection to the law of karma. The deeds, good 
or bad, of the released cease to have any effect on him. 6 Even 
as a horse shakes its mane, the liberated soul shakes off his 
sin; even as the moon comes out entire after having suffered 

If your bonds be not broken, whilst living, what hope of deliverance in 

death ? 

It is but an empty dream that the soul shall have union with Him 

because it has passed from the body; 

If He is found now. He is found then; 

If not, we do but go to dwell in the city of Death. 

E.T. by Rabindranath Tagore. 

‘What then is our course, what the manner of our flight (to the 
Fatherland whence we Have come?’) asks Plotinus and answers: ‘This 
is not a journey for^he feet; the feet bring us only from land to land; nor 
need you think of coach or ship to carry you away; all this order of 
things you must set aside and refuse to see; you must close the eyes and 
call instead upon another vision which is to be waked within you, a 
vision, the birthright of all, which few turn to use.' Enneads I. 6. 8. 

* C.F. III. 20. 2. a M.U. III. 1. 3; III. 2. 6-8. 

3 PraSna VI. 5. 4 Atharva Veda X. 8. 44. 

5 In Buddhist texts it is nirvana dhatu beyond the three worlds. In 
the Atharva Veda IV. 14. 3, the fourth sphere is 6 var, the light beyond 
the triad of prthivi, antanksa and dyaus. The Brahmanas are concerned 
only with the sphere of the gods. On the matter of the fourth transcen- 
dent sphere they sometimes adopt an agnostic attitude. 

anadhva vai tad yad / iman lokdn ati caturtham asti vd na va. Satapatha 
Brdhmana I. j. 1. 12; 4. 21. 

6 B.U. IV. 4. 22. 

E 



120 The Principal Upanisads 

an eclipse from Rahu, so does the liberated individual free 
himself from mortal bondage. 1 His works consume themselves 
like a reed stalk in the fire. 2 As water does not stop on the 
lotus leaf, works do not cling to him. 3 Works have a meaning 
only for a self-centred individual. Liberation is the destruction 
of bondage, which is the product of ignorance. 4 Ignorance is 
destroyed by knowledge and not by works. 4 Freedom is not a 
created entity; it is the result of recognition. 

Knowledge takes us to the place where desire is at rest, 
a-kdtna , where all desires are fulfilled, dpta-kama , where the self 
is the only desire, atma-kdmafi He who knows himself to be all 
can have no desire. When the Supreme is seen, the knots of 
the heart are cut asunder, the doubts of the intellect are 
dispelled and the effects of our actions are destroyed. 7 There 
can be no sorrow or pain or fear when there is no other. The 
freed soul is like a blind man who has gained his sight, a sick 
man made whole. He cannot have any doubt for he is full and 
abiding knowledge. He attains the highest bliss for which a 
feeble analogy is married happiness. He can attain any world he 
may seek. 8 

The law of Karma prevails in the world of sariisara, where 
our deeds lead us to higher or lower stations in the world of 
time. If we obtain knowledge of the eternal reality, Brahman 
or Atman, deeds have no power over us. The state of life 
eternal is said to be beyond good and evil. The knower of the 
self ceases to be stained by action. 9 He goes beyond the ethical, 
though rooted in it, 10 anyatra dharmdt , anyatrddharmdt. The 

x C.U. VIII. * C.U. V. 24. 3. ^ 3 C.U. IV. t p 3. 

4 bandhana-nasa eva hi vnnksah na kdtyabhulah S on B.U. J TI. 3. 1. 

5 mokso na karma-sadhyah avidyastamayatvat . A. on B.l 1 III. 3. 1. 

6 Satapatha Brahman a X. 5. 4. 15. B.U. Ilf. . \ . 2; IV. 4. 12. 

7 M.U. II. 2. 8. ' 8 M.U. IIL 1. 10. 

9 Tautiriya Brdhmana III. 12. 9. 8 

“> Katha, II. 14; see also C.U. VIN. 4. 1; M.U. TTI. 1.03; K.U. I. 4. 

Cp. The Buddha. Majjhima N thuya I. 135 ‘TI you understand tin 
parable of the raft, you must discard dharma, and adharma.* 

John III. 9. ‘Whoever is born of God, cannot sin.' 

Galatians V. 18. ‘If you are led by the Spirit, you are not under the 
law.' 

Eckhart. ‘There neither vice nor virtue ever entered in.’ T)r. W. K. 
Inge, writing on Christian Mystics, pointed out that the illumination of 



Introduction 


121 


path of virtue and vice is a means, not an end. The end is beyond 
the law of injunction and prohibition of good and evil. 1 Our 
activities, being inspired by the divine cannot be wrong'; 
‘Nous is never wrong/ says Aristotle. 2 The life of a free spirit 
is not bound by any formulas. It breaks its bonds and finds its 
own way to a development of its own which could never have 
been charted in advance. The liberated spirit confgrms spon- 
taneously to the ethical rules. ‘To one who has knowledge of 
the self, non-hatred and other virtues come off naturally 
without any effort'. 3 Every religion sets before us the goal of 
liberation, which has a sense of exaltation, a sense of freedom 
and victory over the world, over evil and death. 

When we arc delivered in life, our condition is that of the 
jivan-mukta , who is freed from the bonds of conditioned exist- 
ence^ His appearance continues without much outer change. 
His embodied state does not affect the being whom it clothes, 
as he has complete control over the bodily frame and knows its 
externality. Though tossed in the welter he retains his vision. 
While jivan-mukti is deliverance during life, videha-mukti is 
• 

the mystic, has ‘strictly speaking no moral side; for morality, in the 
ordinary sense, is left behind. As the anonymous French mystic who 
wrote The Mirror of Simple Souls puts it: “Virtues, I take leave of you. 
Henceforth I shall be more free and more at peace. Once I was your 
servant, now I am delivered from your thraldom!" . . . What he means 
is that in the higher stage morality has become autonomous and spon- 
taneous. . . . God’s service has become perfect freedom.’ Church Family 
Newspaper. July 6, 1923. 

1 I n Majjhima-N ikaya JII. 22 li.) it is said that arrival ( patipanna ) in- 
volves a destruction without residue of good and bad conduct (kusala and 
akusala stla). It is an eradication of all othical values. In the parable of 
the raft ( Majjhima I. 1^5, 260 and Suita Nipdta 21) the distinction of 
right and wrong, the exercise of the discriminatory consciousness are of 
no more use to one who has crossed to the other shore than a boat would 
be to one who has reached shore. These values are for crossing over, not 
for possession, nittharanatthdya , va gahanatthdya. St. Augustine points 
out that one should ‘no longer use the law as means of arrival when one 
has arrived.’ De Spir. et Lit. 16. 

2 De Anima III. 10. 433. A. 

3 utpannatma-pyabodliasya tv adccstrtvddayo gun ah. 
ayatnato bhavanty asya na tu*sddh ana- rup 1 n a h . 

Sure£varacarya’s Naiskarmya-siddh i IV. 69. 

4 As the slough of a snake might lie on an ant-hill dead and cast away, 
even so does Ins body lie. Being verily bodiless, he becomes immortal, 
says the Upanisad. 



122 The Principal Upanisads 

deliverance after death, when out of bodily form. In either 
case the soul is freed from conditioned existence. 

There is the suggestion about krama-mukti or gradual release. 
When the release is only partial and temporary, the individual 
soul descends again into the egoistic life and the higher con- 
sciousness is withdrawn from him. The memory of that experi- 
ence, however, will work its way, until the impurities are 
removed. 

The different emphases we find in the Upanisads, in regard to 
the state of freedom, can be understood if we bear in mind the 
integral or fourfold character of Brahman. In some passages 
oneness with Brahman is stressed; in others communion with 
the Supreme Person and in still others devotion to the Cosmic 
Spirit and participation in the work of the world. Union with 
God may take many forms. When the outer self is hushed, the 
deeper layers of consciousness are released into activity, the 
self may enter into the silence of the Absolute Brahman or into 
communion with the Eternal Person or be transported into the 
beatific embrace of the Cosmic Spirit. The soul may pass 
through various realms of spirit, bathing in their light and 
feeding on their bliss. 

Yajnavalkya centres his attention on oneness with the 
Absolute Brahman , a state where there is no desire, there is 
no passion, not even any consciousness, pretya samjnd ndsti. 1 
When honey is prepared by the collection of various juices, the 
latter cannot discriminate from which trees they were drawn; 
even so when the souls are merged in The Real, they cannot 
discriminate from which bodies they come . 2 The self rises 
above the distinction of subject and object which characterises 
all empirical consciousness. It is altogether time-transcending. 
This is impersonal immortality where the soul achieves abso- 
luteness, unconditioned being . 3 It is illumined consciousness 

* B.U. II. 4. 1 2; IV. 5. 13. 2 (\U. VI. 6. 10. B.U. IV. 3. 21. 

3 Cp. Viveka-cuddmani, ascribed to S. It also occurs in Gaudapada's 
Kdrikd, on Md. U. 

na nirodho na cotputtir na baddho na ca sadhakah 
na mumuksur na vat muhta ity esa paramarthata. 

There is no destruction, nor is there origination. There is no one bound 
nor is there one practising discipline. There is no seeker of freedom nor is 
there the freed. Such is the highest state. 



Introduction 


123 

and not oblivion of consciousness. It is not a void of immobile 
peace where all is lost and everything is extinct. This is only 
one aspect of deliverance. 

There is also the account where the self becomes one with 
the Supreme Person. He who knows T am Brahman * becomes 
the universe. Even the gods cannot prevent him from becoming 
the universe for he is its soul. 1 Man has potential universality 
which he actualises in the state of liberation. We arfe one with 
the indeterminate pure silence in essence and with the personal 
Lord in the liberty of cosmic manifestation. Out of the peace 
and poise of Brahman arises the free activity of the liberated 
individual. Essential unity with God is unity with one another 
through God. In the sense of heightened awareness we do not 
forget the world, which seems strangely of one piece. We are 
lifted out of provincialism into perspective, as we become aware 
of something vaster, profounder, more ultimate than the world. 2 

‘When the tnnul returns to its natural abode there is neither the path 
nor anyone who traverses it.’ 

elite tu veil paravrlte va ydnam no ca yayinah. 

Lankavatdra Sutra. Sylvain Levi’s ed., p. 322. 

Nirvana is define*! as the absence of the distinction of knower and 
knowable, grahya-grahaka-rahitata. Negative descriptions of nirvana 
abound in Madhyamaka-Vrtti. 

aprahinam asampraptam anucchinnam asdsvatam 
amruddham anutpannam etat mrvdnam uevate. 

XXV. 

Cp. Buddhatvam. 

na bhavo ndpi cabhdvc buddhatvam tena kathyate 
t asm ad buddha-tatha-prasne avydkrtamayo matah. 

Mahay ana Sutrdlaihkarli. See also 22 and 26. 

na suddha nasuddha buddhata naikata na bahuia. 

See also • 

yasmm sarvam id am protam jagat sthavara jangamam 
tasmmn eva layam yati budbudah sagare yatha , 11. 

All this universe, movable and immovable is interwoven in him. 
They all merge in him like bubbles in the sea. Culikd U . 17. 

"To be refunded into Brahman as an earthen vessel is refunded into 
its own causal substance, i.e. clay, means nothing else but complete 
annihilation." R.B. I. 3. 21. 1 B.U. I. 4. 10. 

1 Cp. Plotinus: ‘We see all things, not in process of becoming, but in 
being and see themselves in the other. Each being contains in itself the 
whole intelligible world. Therefore All is everywhere. Each is there All, 
and All is each. Man, as he now is, has ceased to be the All. But when he 
ceases to be a^ individual, he raises himself again and penetrates the 
whole world.' 



124 I hc Principal Upanisads 

Rule over oneself, svardjya, becomes rule over the world, 
samrajya. Salvation is sarvdtma-bhdva. 1 

When the mind assumes the form of the Supreme through 
the power of meditation we have samprajndta-samadhi , when the 
individual is aware that his consciousness has assumed the 
nature of Brahman . 2 But when all consciousness of external 
objects in the waking state due to the functioning of the senses, 
of internal objects in the dream state due to the functioning 
of mind, or of the unmanifested in the state of dreamless sleep 
is absent, we have a-samprajhata-samddhi.i While in the former 
our awareness is of God, in the latter it is of the Absolute. 

There are passages-* which suggest that the released self retains 
its own form freed from the imperfections of the empirical ego 
and untouched by worldly pleasure and pain.*? Yet other pas- 
sages affirm the presence of such qualities. They cannot there- 
fore be incompatible with pure intelligence. Such is the view of 
Badarayana . 6 The liberated self’s desires are fulfilled by its 
mere will . 7 The self is spoken of as sinless and one with the 
highest Person. Non-separation or avibhdga from Brahman is 

Referring to the desire of Kckhart to be the oner undivided, eternal, 
imperishable Godhead which is wholly being, wholly spirit, wholly joy, 
Rudolf Otto observes, 'this differs fundamentally and essentially from 
the simpler Christian conception of salvation to which it must always 
seem an extravagance, a Titanic pride and a transgression of the impos- 
sible limitations of the creature, m Faustian urge as we call it to day/ 
Mysticism: East and West, p. 181. 

1 ‘This (universe) is myself who am all this, identity with all is his 
highest state, the self’s own natural, supreme state.' 

aham evedam sarvo* smiti manyate so yah sarvatma-bhdvah, so’ sydtmanah 
paramo lokah, par ama dtma-bhdvaJi svdbhdvihah. S.B. on B.IJ. IV. 3. 20. 
sarvaikatvam evcisya riipam. I\ . 3. 21. yat svaiupam purnatvam para- 
mdtma-bhdvam. V. 1. 1. 

2 brahmdkdra-mano-vrtti' pravdho' hamlirtim mnd 
samprajhata-samadhis sydd dhydnabhyasa -pra k a rs a tali 

Muktikd U. If. 53. 

3 prabha-sunyam manah-sunyam buddhi-sunyam cid-atmakam. 

atad-vydvrtti-rupo’ sau samadhir muni-bh&ntah . 

ibid. If. 54. 

4 C.U. III. 14. 1 ; see also VII. 1.5, VII. 2. 2 ; VII. 3. 1. 

5 Though endowed with divjne qualities Audulomi contends that the 

nature of the liberated self is pure intelligence and it cannot have the 
qualities which are dependent on limiting adjuncts. B.S. IV. 4. 6, 
upadhi-sambandhadhinatvat tesdm na caitanyavat svarupa 4 va-sambhavah. 
S.B. IV. 4-6. 6 B.S. IV. 4. 7. 7 B.S. IV. 4. 8. C.U. VIII. 2. 1. 



Introduction 


125 

suggested in many passages. 1 Non-separation is not absolute 
identity. The liberated self has no other overlord; anyddhipatih 2 
There arc passages where the self is said to possess adjuncts, 
which make for individuality and others where these are 
denied. Badarayana reconciles the two views by affirming that 
the assumption or non-assumption of individual form is 
entirely a matter of option for the released soul. 3 It can, if it 
so chooses, enter into many bodies created by its own will even 
as the flame of a lamp can convert itself into several flames. 4 

In the Aitarcya Aranyaka it is said that Vamadeva ascended 
from this world and attained immortality in yonder world of 
heaven. 5 The Kausitaki Upanisad gives us an account of the 
world of Brahma with the Aparajita palace, the tree Ilya, the 
Salajya city and the sea Ara. The passages of the Upanisads 
which make out that the reward of enlightenment is heaven in 
one form or another have in mind co-residence with Brahma or 
Hiranya-garbha P The Brahma Sutra discusses the question 
whether those who go by the path of the gods reach the world 
of Hiranya-garbha Brahma or become one with Isvara. Badari 
holds that they ^each the world of Hiranya-garbha , for only to 
his world is going possible. Samkara says, ‘The created Brahma 
has a specific locality and so can be the goal of a journey but 
not the Supreme Brahman who is present everywhere and is 
the inner self of the travelling individual selves. '7 When we 
reach brahma-loka , we continue to function there until the end 
of the process, when along with Brahma, w T e enter the Supreme 
Brahman . 8 Saiiikara thinks that all this refers to gradual 

* B.S. IV. 4. 4. S # B. IV. 4-6. \ * B S. IV. 4-0. 

3 B.S. IV. 4-1 z.yada ^asailratdrii sariihalpayati tada sasaiho bhavati , 
yadii tu a-sariratdm tada aiarhah iti bhduah. S.B. IV 4. 12. 

4 B.S. IV. 4. 15. yathd pradlpah ehah aneka-pvadlpa-bhavam apadya/e 
vihdra-sakti-yogdt, evam ehah apt sail muhtatma aisvarya yogdt aneka- 
bhdvam apadya senvatri samkalpa-srstam saihdni dvisati. S B. TV. 4. j 5. 

5 II. 5. ^ See B.U. I V. 3. 15. C T T . VIII. 12. 3. 

7 karya brahifiauah era gantavvatvam upapadyale ptadesavatvat, na tit 
parasmin brahmam tasya sarva-gatatvdt gantnidm pratvagdtmatvdc 1a. 
S.B. IV. 3. 7. 

8 See Praina. V. 5. Cp. also: 

brahmand saha te sarve sampulptc piatisam ate, 
parasydnte krtdtmdiiah pravisanti paraiii padam. 

When tlic efcssolution of the world takes place the selves with their 
natures fulfilled enter the highest plane along with Brahma. 



126 


The Principal Upanisads 

release, krama-mukti . 1 Jaimini holds that the liberated souls 
enter the highest Brahman . 2 Badarayana is of the view that 
those who meditate on symbols go to the world of the symbols 
and not to the world of Brahma. 

Even as we have the fourfold nature of the Supreme, the 
liberated individual has different aspects of utter peace, pure 
energy, devotion to the Cosmic Spirit and participation in the 
world. He looks at the world and is lost in it, as it is a perpetual 
striving to raise itself above itself. 3 

When we refer to Absolute Brahman , we emphasise the 
illumined quiescence, the non-objective consciousness in which 
there is a total extinction of sorrow and evil, the pure bliss 
infinitely surpassing all human joys, far exceeding the power 
of man to conceive. This very insight makes the self one with 
the Supreme and all existences. Only we are no more bound to 
them in a false relation. In our transfigured consciousness 
where our egoistic individuality is absent, we are not divided 
from others but feel one with them. Our real self is no more the 
individual, mental being, but is one with the Self behind the 
mental forms of all other selves. Our body, Jlife, mind are no 
more binding, but become the transparent vehicle of our divine 
consciousness. When that end is reached we are a true becoming 
of the Divine, a free movement of the Universal Spirit. Our 
body, life and mind, we feel,, are one with the cosmic body, life 
and mind. 4 Our spirit fills the whole world. By knowing the 
eternal we understand the true nature of God, the world and 
the individual. 

Spiritual wisdom (vidyd) does not abolish the world, but 
removes our ignorance ( avidya ) of it. When we rise to our true 
being, the selfish ego falls away from us and the true integral 

* S.B. IV. 3. ii. ' ^ B.S. IV. 3. 12 14. 

3 Communing in this sort through earth and heaven 
With every form of creature, as it looked 
Towards the Uncreated with a countenaiVce 
Of adoration, with an eye of love. 

Wordsworth. 

4 Cp. Traherne: 'You never- enjoy the world aright till the sea itself 
fioweth in your veins, till you are clothed with the heavens and crowned 
with the stars; and perceive yourself to be the sole heir of the whole 
world, and more than so, because men are in it who are everyone sole 
heirs as well as you. . . 



Introduction 


127 

self takes possession of us. We continue to live and act in the 
world, though With a different outlook. The world also continues, 
though it is no more alien to us. To live permanently in this new 
consciousness is to live in eternity. 

Possessing the immortality of non-birth, the redeemed self 
still assumes, by free volition an individual form in the mani- 
fested world. Birth is a becoming of the Supreme in the cosmic 
being. This becoming is not inconsistent with Being*. It becomes 
a means and not an obstacle to the enjoyment of life eternal. 
To be released from the chain of birth and death is not to flee 
from the world of becoming. Bondage does not consist in the 
assumption of birth or individuality, but in the persistence of 
the ignorant sense of the separate, selfish ego. It is not the 
embodiment that creates the bondage but the frame of mind. 
To the free spirit life has no terrors. He wishes to conquer life 
for God. He uses the world as the mould and condition for the 
manifestation of his spiritual freedom. He may assume birth for 
the purpose of helping the world. 1 There will be individualisa- 
tion without an ego-sense. The play of the individual conscious- 
ness can take many forms, assume many aspects and poises. All 
through, however, he lives in the truth of the cosmic play with 
no delusion, released from ego, in full control of the manifested 
being. 

The individual soul is eternal. It endures throughout the 
cosmic process. It commences at birth as the inheritor of the 
previous person and survives physical death in an altered form. 
For the self that has, realised perfection the body ceases to be 
a burden. He li\^s in the flesh but not after the flesh. 

The individual is an aspect df the Transcendent in the 
universe and when liberated from all limitations, he acts with 
his centre in the Supreme. The inner peace is manifested in the 
joyous freedom of outer activity. He will be at work in the 
world though he cannot wish to do any evil. 2 He can do any 
action, for he does it disinterestedly. ^ The desires of those whose 
thoughts are fixed on the Supreme do not bind. 4 The freed soul 

1 lokdnugraha evaiho hetuste janma-kannatioh. Kalidasa: Raghu-vamsa 
X. 31. ‘God so loved the world that he gave.' John: III. 1 0. 

* B.U. tV. .4. 23. 3 lia. 2. 

4 na mayy dvcsita-dhiydm A 'mah kamaya kalpati. 



128 The Principal Upanisads 

does not aim at the improvement of humanity, but his life 
itself is a service. His renunciation has become the natural 
consequence of his wisdom. The Chandogya Upanisad dis- 
tinguishes desires that bind from the desires that liberate, 
and speaks of the Supreme Self as desiring and purposing 
truth. 1 

Samkara argues that the co-existence of karma or work, in- 
volving, as it does, the distinction of doer and the thing done, 
with the knowledge of the identity of the individual self with 
the Supreme, which negatives all such distinctions, is incon- 
ceivable. 2 It is only self-centred action that becomes impossible. 
The liberated individual becomes active in God. God is born in 
us, i.e. becomes active in'us, when all powers of the soul, which 
hitherto have been bound and imprisoned, become liberated 
and set free. Tor we are his offspring /3 God becomes the centre 
of the free man’s life so that love is radiated and good works 
spring forth spontaneously. He is as unconscious of the power 
of his life as life itself, which springs, blossoms and puts forth 
its life’s work in a free outpouring with no reflection on the 
why or the wherefore. He lives out of his own, depths, and life 
wells up out of itself. In a sense, he is not the doer. He has 
become one with the Universal Self, possessed by the Trans- 
cendent; he is uddstna or unattached. The Universal Self has 
taken sovereign possession of the individual soul. When the 
individual soul ascends into the silence it becomes vast, tran- 
quil, actionless. It observes the actions of prakrti without 
taking part in them. There is no personal factor, and therefore 
there is no bondage. 

Those who have attained life eternal live and wander about 

1 scityak-amah, satya-amkalpah . \ TIT. i. 5. (>. 'This is life eternal, that 

they might know thee, the only true God.’ Richard of St. Victor says: 
'The soul utterly puts off itself (i c. its self-centred desires) and puts on 
divine love; and being conformed to that beauty which it has beheld, it 
utterly passes into that other glory.’ *’ 

2 Introduction to Kena. 

3 'I do nothing of myself' (John VTTI. 18). ‘Not what I will but what 
thou wilt’ (Mark XIV. 36). Jtachme said: ‘Thou shalt do nothing but 
forsake thy own will, viz. that which thou tallest “I" or “thyself." By 
which means all thy evil properties will grow weak, faint and ready to 
die; and then thou wilt sink down again into that one thing, from which 
thou art originally sprung.’ Discourse between Two Souls. 



Introduction 


129 

in the world, to all appearance, like ordinary mortals. They wear 
no special signs. Only their activities are centred in the highest 
being and are completely under their control, which is not so 
for those who live in the world of sarhsara. They are tolerant, 
sympathetic and respectful to the unliberated who are struggling 
with unsatisfied minds to diminish the evil and imperfection 
in the world. These are helped by the seers who. accept the 
conventions with the idea of refining them. They live and 
suffer and rejoice and die as other mortals do, but they have 
no doubt in their minds, no fear in their hearts. For the liberated 
soul, samsara and moksa or nirvana as the Buddhists call it, 
time and eternity, the phenomenal and the real, are one. 
Though the liberated soul lives in the world of becoming, he 
lives with his consciousness centred in the Divine ground of all 
being. As a matter of fact, his consciousness, because it is centred 
in God, is intensified, and so his life in the world is more vital. 
Holy calm, supreme self-mastery and righteous action charac- 
terise the lives of saints. They become a light, a power of the 
Truth to which they have struggled and attained, and help the 
development of ethers . 1 They will be engaged in the work of the 
world , 2 sustained by their rare vision, until the struggle with 
evil and imperfection is altogether overcome and the world is 
restored to spirit. 

Whether after liberation one takes an active interest in the 
world or renounces it is a matter of temperament. Yajnavalkya 
chooses to retire to the forest, while Janaka rules a state. 
Whatever they c^o, tlicy help those like us who are lost in the 
world of sorrow and suffering. Though embodiment or dis- 
embodiment makes no difference to the liberated souls, as they 
are filled with compassion, they take up the burden of the 
world. According to V ivcka-cudamani , ‘Themselves having 
crossed over, they remain out of compassion for men and in 

1 Aryadeva in ms Citta-visuddhi-piakarana says that the great souls 
who have won the fierce battle of life attempt to save others: 

maha-sattvo maho-pdyah stlrira-bnddhir atantvitah 
jitva dustara-samgvdmam tdrayed apardn api. 

1 For Kablr the true saint is one 'who requireth thee not to close the 
doors, to hold* the breath, and 'o renounce the w r orld . . . who teacheth 
thee to be still amidst all thine activities/ 



130 


The Principal Upanisads 

order to help them also to make the crossing / 1 Until all people 
are redeemed, the liberated work in the world assuming indi- 
vidual torms which are the vestures of spiritual life. Spirit and 
material existence, ilmuida and anna, are the highest and lowest 
rungs of a continuous series. There is a link between the two. 
Even as ihe eternal Divine is able to hold the whole universe 
within itself while remaining pure spirit, the soul that is one with 
the Eternal possesses the same poise, with reference to the indi- 
vidual setting. It is no more ignorantly immersed in the 
mutable creation. It exists consciously in its true being while 
using the psycho-physical apparatus, which it does not any more 
mistake for its true being. While the liberated retain the con- 
sciousness of the transcending, self-existent, timeless, they 
identify their being with the Infinite God in whom all existences 
dwell. 

Again and again, the Upanisads stress that we should see 
all existences in the Self and the Self in all existences. Even 
as the Supreme is all these existences, we also should acquire 
the right relation to the world. Perfect fulfilment of our indi- 
viduality means the perfect fulfilment of our relations with the 
world and the other individuals. We are called upon to over- 
come not only our separate egoistic existence but also our life 
in a paradise of self-absorbed bliss. The perfected soul cannot 
look with indifference on the sufferings of the imperfect, for 
they are also his own self. He would work to lift them into 
freedom. It is not now a function of altruism but is the life 
divine, the integral way. He will work fintil all beings in the 
manifested world are fulfilled. The liberated individuals are 
released from their individuality at the close of creation. 

Brahma-loka is the widest possible integration of cosmic 
experience, the farthest limit of manifested being. Brahma is 
the soul that ensouls this great dwelling. He is the true life of 
every being. He endures during the whole period of the cosmos. 
Beyond it there is nothing in the manifested world. It is not 

1 According to Vyasa’s Yoga Bhdsya ( r . 24), God is permanently 
associated with suddhantah-karana . If God who is the eternally free can 
have an inner organ, the freed men can also have it. 

Cp. Chuang Tzu: 'The sages of old first got Tao for themselves, then 
got it for others. ’ 



Introduction 


131 

the eternal beyond the empirical. It is the farthest limit of 
manifestation. When the world receives its consummation, 
when it is delivered from time to eternity, then there is the 
flight of the alone to the Alone. The plan of God for the world, 
which was before creation is carried out, for He is the beginning 
and the end of the world . 1 The Cosmic Lord has his exteriorised 
existence and his interior life. When he turns outward the 
cosmos is evolved; when he turns his attention inward, the 
cosmos retreats into latency and the manifested world ter- 
minates. When the world is redeemed, the Supreme Lord 
becomes the Absolute One, alone, and knows nothing else. 

In the Brahma-loka the liberated individuals present to each 
other as one. They are manifold in the cosmic process. Their 
consciousness of the Supreme which is lodged in the buddhi is 
one and not divided among the bodily forms* This identical 
consciousness is associated with different bodies. This mani- 
foldness does not take away from the unity of the divine being. 
Until the final return of the whole universe into the Abso- 
lute, until the purpose of God before the creation is carried 
out, the individuals, freed from bondage to matter, will retain 
their distinctivefiess without being sundered by boundaries. 
When the two poles of being are reconciled, when all individuals 
rise above the plane of quality, with its ego sense, struggling 
aspiration and imperfect love, the world lapses into the 
Absolute . 2 

XIX 

RELIGION 

The Upanisads use the inherited forms of religious worship 
as means for the realisation of the Supreme. The Vcdic mantras 
arc addressed to various powers, symbolic of important aspects, 
of the Supreme Reality. They teach the religion of sraddha , 

1 Cp. The Cqgmic Christ speaking through Jesus, 'l am the Alpha and 
the Omega, the first and the last, for what was first comes at last and the 
last is the first.’ 

* In another place I have said that the universe is not an illusion 
utterly devoid of reality but the working out of a possibility of the 
Divine which is infinite possibility. This world of ours is not the only 
possibility and other possibilities will unfold themselves when this is 
worked out. An Idealist Viciv Oj Lije , Fourth Impression, 1951, p. 343 . 



132 The Principal Upanisads 

faith and updsana, worship. The Bralimanas deal with rites, 
and by their performance we are said to gain our ends. Both 
these methods are taken up by the Upanisads and reinterpreted. 

While the Upanisads recognise that deliverance is the 
supreme end of life, they are aware that many are not ready 
for the supreme sacrifice, the dying to their ego. They need 
some preparation for it. They ask for emotional satisfactions, 
and for their sake devotional and ritualistic practices are 
tolerated. They are not useless, for they lead us on by the upward 
path by directing our minds and hearts to the reality of the 
Eternal Being and gradually take us out of ourselves into the 
true religion of the spirit. 1 Till the goal is reached, the law of 
Karma works, and we get the rewards for our worship and piety 
according to the intensity of our faith and devotion. 

The different forms of sraddhd or faith, updsana or worship, 
and practices of yoga are treated as means to the supreme end 
of self-knowledge or dtma~darsana, which is at once a union with 
the one transcendent Being beyond all the worlds and a union 
with all beings in the world. 

Again and again the Upanisads speak of the God who is 
hidden, nihitam guhdyam. God is not easily comprehended. 
There is a certain element of reserve in God as distinct from 
His revelation. The reserve is there because man has to put 
forth effort to know the Divine. God does not wish to relieve 
11s of our responsibility. As His purpose is the development of 
free human personalities, He does not disclose himself to us 
easily and openly. He remains shrouded \n mystery, and yields 
only when our total self yearns for God. 2 

1 A second century Christian apologist said: 'Among us you will find 
uneducated persons and artisans and old women, who, if they are unable 
in words to prove the benefit of our doctrine, yet by their deeds exhibit 
the benefit arising from their persuasion of its tiuth; they do not rehearse 
speeches but exhibit good works; when struck they do not strike again; 
when robbed they do not go to law; they give to those that ask of them, 
and love their neighbours as themselves.' Quoted in Cambridge Review. 
February 14, 1948, p. 348. 

2 ‘O Kama, the Supreme is pleased with him who is ever endowed 
with non-violence, truthfulness, compassion and kindness to all 
creatures.' 

ahmsd satya-vacanam day a bhutesv unugrahah, 
yasyaitdyn sada rama, tasya iusyati kesavah. «■ 

Vismi-dharmotlara I. 58. 



Introduction 


133 

Three stages are mentioned as preparatory to God-vision 
(brahma-sdksdtkdra ) , sravana or hearing, manana or reflection, 
and nididhydsana or contemplation. The first step is to learn 
what has been thought and said about the subject from teachers. 
We should listen to them with sraddhd or faith. 1 Faith is an act of 
will, a yearning of the heart rather than an intellectual disposi- 
tion. It is faith in the existence of the beyond, dstikya-buddhi as 
Sariikara calls it. 2 We should have faith in the inte’grity of the 
seers whose selflessness has enabled them to know the nature 
of Ultimate Reality by direct acquaintance. The propositions 
they have formulated from out of their personal experience give 
us knowledge by description, as we do not yet have direct vision 
of the truth. Yet the knowledge we acquire by hearsay or 
report is not unverifiablc. The truth of the Vedic propositions 
can be verified by us, if we are prepared to fulfil the necessary 
conditions. 

In the second stage of manana or reflection we attempt to 
form clear ideas by the logical processes of inference, analogy, 
etc. So long as faith is firm, the need for philosophy is not felt. 
With the decline of faith, the spirit of inquiry increases. Un- 
questioning belief in the inherent power of knowledge underlies 
the whole intellectual fabric of the Upanisads. The truth of 
the Vedic propositions can, however, be inferred by us by 
logical processes. Hearing of the scriptures is not devoid of 
intellectual content. He who hears understands up to a point. 
But when he reflects on what he hears, he adds to faith a 
knowledge which inci^ascs faith. There is great insistence on the 
need for logical inquiry. 3 Without, it faith will degenerate into 
credulity. Without the material supplied by faith, logical 
reason may become mere speculation. While the scriptures 
declare the truth by enunciation, philosophy establishes it by 
argument. 

Samkara says, ‘When the two, scripture and reasoning, 

1 f'tini-vedcinta-vakyc'ui vUvdsah. 2 S. on Katha I. 1. 2. 

3 Wisdom cannot be attained by any means other than inquiry. 

notpadvate vind jndnam viedren dnyasddhanaih . S. 

Vasistha says: ‘The word even of a child, if it is reasonable, should be 
accepted. All else should be rejected even if it be said by the Creator . 1 
• yuku-yuktani apndeyam vacanam balakad apt. 
any at trnam wa 1 yd] yam apy uktam padma-jamnand. 



134 The Principal Upanisads 

demonstrate the unity of the self it is seen clearly as a bael 
fruit in the palm of one’s hand .’ 1 There are many for whom the 
Supreme is not an immediately experienced fact; nor are they 
willing to accept its validity on the authority of the scriptures. 
For them logical arguments are necessary. 

The distinction between sruti, what is heard, and smrti, what 
is remembered, between direct experience and traditional 
interpretation, is based on the distinction between sravana and 
tnanana. The deposit of experience is not the same as the 
conclusions of theology. The primary data arc the sruti : 
they are experiential; the formulated conclusions are secondary 
interpretations. The one represents the evidence, the other 
records a doctrine. When there is a dispute between the two we 
get back to the evidence. It is always open to review the evi- 
dence afresh. The doctrinal statements are conditioned by the 
historical situations in which they are produced. We must be 
able to get behind the propositions to the events they describe, 
stand in the tension between the data and the interpretations, 
if we are to understand the significance of the doctrines. The 
defect of all scholasticism, Indian or European, is that it tends 
to regard itself as a cold, bloodless logic which moves from one 
position to another with a remorseless rigour. Life is the 
master of thought and not thought of life. 

Logical knowledge acquired by a study of the scriptures and 
reflection on their teaching is only indirect knowledge. It is 
not a direct grasp of reality. Thought must pass into realisa- 
tion. The ideas of the Upanisads should be imaginatively 
and inwardly apprehended! They should be allowed to 
sink deep and simmer before they are re-created in life. 
Nididhydsana is the process by which intellectual consciousness 
is transformed into a vital one. We give up the pride of 
learning and concentrate on the truth . 2 Faith becomes 

1 ugamopapatti hyatmaikatva-prakasandva pmvrtte iatfkutah karatala- 
gata-bilvam iva dar^ayitum. S. on B.l*. II I. i. i. 

1 vihaya sarva-sdstrdyu yat satyam tad upasyatdm. Uttara Gita. 

Even if we study the Vedic texts and all the scriptures we cannot know 
the truth of reality if we are the victims of intellectual pride. 

adhitya caturo veddn sarva-sdstrdny anekasah 
brahma-taltvam na jananti darpopahata-cetasdh . 

Muktikd U . II. 65. 



Introduction 


135 

reality in us by the steady concentration of mind on the 
real. 1 

Nididhydsana or contemplation is different from updsana or 
worship. Worship is an aid to contemplation, though it is not 
itself contemplation. In worship there is the distinction between 
the worshipping self and the worshipped object, but in con- 
templation this distinction is held in suspense. There is a still- 
ness, a calm, in which the soul lays itself open to the Divine. 
Intellect, becomes like a calm sea without a ripple on its 
surface. 

Meditation is not argument. It is just holding oneself 
steadily in front of the truth. 2 The whole energy of the mind is 
centred on the object to the exclusion of all else. We let the 
full flavour of the idea meditated on expand in the mind. Even 
updsana is defined as the continued flow of an identical current 
of thought. 3 It is also of the nature of meditation.4 We can 
practise meditation in any direction, place or time in which we 
can concentrate our mind. 5 Here the process of abstraction, 
isolating the self from the objective, is employed. Concentration, 
is the condition of prayer. More than condition it is itself prayer 
In prayer we must dismiss all distracting ideas, disturbing influ- 
ences and retire within oneself. We are asked to retire to a field 
or a forest where the world and its noise are out of sight and far 
away, where the sun and the sky,, the earth and the water all 
speak the same language, reminding the seeker that he is here to 
develop like the things that grow all around him. 

In all the three # stag£s, a teacher may be found useful. Only 

I r . darvl pdka-rasam yathd. • 

Cp. also Bunyan: 

Seest thou a man wise in his own eyes, 

There is more hope of a fool than of him. 

1 nididhydsanam sad-ehartha-vrtti-pravaham. 

2 In ancient Greek thought, theory meant not hypothesis but con- 
templation, the act not of a speculator but of a spectator. It is not the 
result of investigation as that of the process of investigating, the 
beholding itself. Theory provides the necessary basis for effective 
realisation. The Greek usage brings out that no realisation can be 
attempted without an adequate theoretical preparation. 

3 samdna-pmtyaya-pvavaha-kaYayuim updsanam. S.B. IV. 1. 7. 

4 dhydna-rupa. S.B. IV. 1. 8. 

5 yatra dih dese kale vd sadhahasya ekdgratd bhavati latra eva updsita. 
S.B. IV. 1. 11. 



136 The Principal Upanisads 

those who act in the right way are the deary as. 1 Samkarananda 
distinguishes three kinds of disciples. He who understands 
what is taught along with the proof, when he hears only once, is 
the good pupil; he who understands it only after hearing many 
times and after giving himself and his teacher much trouble 
is the bad pupil. He who understands what the teacher says 
but cannot control his own mind, he is the middling. The last 
are to be led to firm conviction by various means. 2 

The truth can be taught only up to a point. It has to be 
assimilated by personal effort, by self-discipline. Yoga is a term 
that signifies the method of concentration! by which we attain 
to unity with the Eternal.* The practice of yoga is mentioned 
in the Upanisads. In the Katha we are asked to suppress speech 
and mind, merge the latter in the knowledge self, that in the 
great self, that in the tranquil self, the Absolute. The highest 
stage is attained when the five senses, mind and intellect are 
at rest. 5 The Svetdsvatara Upanisad gives detailed directions on 

1 svayam acarate yas tu demy as so'bhidhiyate . 

Cp. Chaucer's poor parson of a town: 

This noble ensample to his sheep lie yaf 

That first he wroghte, and afterwards he taughtc. 

The Bhdgaiata says: ‘The seeker of the highest truth and supreme 
good should seek guidance from a teacher who has mastered the Vedic 
texts and realised the self. 

tcismdd giivutn prapadyeta jijhdsuh sreya utLamam 
sabde pare ca nisndtam brahmany upasamasrayam. 

XI. 3. 21. 

2 yah sakrd-uktam sopapathkam grhndti sa uttamah, yas tu anekaia 
ucyavndnam dtmanam gurum ca samkhsya grhndti sa numdah, yas tu 
guruktam grhnan sva-cittam mxoddhum a-sahtah sa madhyamah, sa tu 
gurunoktasya vdnyasya vd up(\desena citta-dhairyam vividhair vaidikair 
updyair netavyah. On K II 1L 1 

3 jnunam yugdtmakani vuldhi. Know that knowledge has yoga for its 
essence. 

4 aikyam jivdtmanor dhur yogam yoga-visdraddh. Devi Bhdgavata. 

5 Cp. with this the Confucian fasting of the heart. ‘May I ask,' said 
Yen Hui, ‘in what consists the fasting of the heart?’ 

‘Cultivate unity,’ replied Confucius. ‘You do your lfearing, not with 
your cars, but with your mind, not with your mind, but with your very 
soul. But let the hearing stop with the ears. Let the working of the mind 
stop with itself. Then the soul will be a negative existence, passively 
responsive to externals. In such a negative existence, only Tao can 
abide. And that negative state is the fasting of the heart.’ 

‘Then,’ said Yen Hui, 'the reason I could not get the-usfc of this method 
is my own individuality. If I could get the use of it, my individuality 



Introduction 


137 

the practice of yoga . 1 When the awakening takes place scripture 
ceases to be authoritative / 2 sruter apy abhdvah prabodhe.i 

In the Vedas we have vivid belief in powerful gods who are 
not mere abstractions. Adoration of personal gods, along with a 
sense of dependence on and trust in them, which is a marked 
tendency in the religion of the Veda, becomes prominent in the 
Katha and the Svetasvatara Upanisads. The Katha Upanisad 
makes out that saving knowledge is not a matter of learning but 
is revealed to the fortunate man by the highest Reality itself. 
Even the doctrine of predestination is suggested. 

Unfortunately different aspects have been exclusively 
emphasised so as to give rise to the impression that the Upani- 
sads do not give us any single coherent view. It is suggested that 
in the Upanisads the true doctrine is that the Real, the thing-in- 
itself, is empty of content and all positive views are deviations 
from it caused by the inability of man to remain at the high 
level of abstract thought, postulated by the distinction between 
the thing-in-itself and the appearance and the natural tendency 
to apply empirical categories to the thing-in-itself. The absolu- 
tistic and theistic views of the Upanisads are not exclusive of 
each other. Samkara and Ramanuja emphasise different aspects 
of the teaching of the Upanisads. 

Updsana or worship is the basis of the doctrine of bhakti or 
devotion. As Brahman is not described in the early Upanisads 
in sufficiently personal terms, the later ones like the Katha and 
the Svetasvatara look upon the Supreme as personal God who 
bestows grace. Devotion to the personal God is recommended 
as a means for attaining spirilual*enlightenment.4 

would have gone. Is tins what you mean by the negative state?’ 
‘Exactly so,' replied the Master. 

1 II. See also Maitrl VI. 38 27. Appaya DIksita in his Yoga Diupana 
asks us to concentrate on the self-shining self between the two brows, 
listen to the text ‘That art thou,’ conceive oneself as absorbed in it and 
practise meditation. 

pratyag dtmdnam dlokya bhmvor madhye svuyam ptabham 
snitvd tat-tvam-aslty aikyam matcchmlti tad abhyaset. 

92> 

2 S. 13 . IV. 1. 3. 3 §. on B.U. VI. 1. 

4 S.U. VI. 21 and 23. Images, pilgrimages, ceremonies are all acces- 
sories to devotion. 

The Bhdgavata asks us to lo\i the Supieme with all our being, ‘Lord 



138 The Principal Upanisads 

The Upanisads give us different modes of devotional exer- 
cises, by which we are trained to fix our minds on a single 
object. Gradually we get prepared for the contemplation of 
absolute truth. 1 

The prevalent theistic creeds were assimilated to the teaching 
of the Upanisads. The later sectarian Upanisads identify the 
Supreme with Visnu, Siva or Sakti, which are regarded as 
different phases of the One Reality. The Supreme is conceived 
as a person in relation to persons, and symbols taken from 
social life, lord, father, judge are employed. Sometimes dynamic 
symbols like the power of life, the spirit of truth, the glowing 
fire that penetrates and pervades are used. 

Symbols belong to an order of reality different from that of 
the Reality which they symbolise. They are used to make the 
truth intelligible, to make the unbearable audible. They are 
meant to be used as tangible supports for contemplation. They 
help us to reach awareness of the symbolised reality. Some of 
these symbols employed by religions are common. Fire and light 
are usually adopted to signify the Ultimate Reality. It means 
that the minds of people are formed similarly and experiences 
of people do not differ much from one part of the world to 
another. Even conceptions about the origin and nature of the 
world often agree, though they arise quite independently. The 
images are all framed to mediate between the Supreme Absolute 
and the finite intelligence. The individual is free to select for 
worship any form of the Supreme. This freedom of choice 
i$ta-devatdrddhana means that the ditferent forms are all 


may our speech be engaged in recounting your qualities, our cars in 
hearing your stories, our hands in doing service for you, our mind in the 
remembrance of your feet, our head in bowing to this world which is 
your dwelling-place and our eyes in gazing at the saints who are your 
living images on earth. 

vanJ gunanukathane sravanau kathayam 
hastau ca karmasu manas lava pddayor itah 
smrtydm siras tava mvdsa-jagal-prandme 
drstih satdm day sane’ stu bhavat-tanundm. 

• X. 10. 38. 

1 Rabi’a, a woman mystic of the 8th century, says: ‘Oh my Lord, if I 
worship Thee from fear of Hell, burn me in hell; and if I worship Thee 
from hope of paradise, exclude me thence; but if I wofship Thee for 
Thine own sake, .then withhold not from me Thine eternal beauty/ 



Introduction 


139 

included in the Supreme. The acceptance of one form does not 
mean the rejection of others. 

The Supreme is to be comprehended only by a supreme effort 
of consciousness. This knowledge cannot be expressed at the 
level of thought except through symbols. The symbols are 
not entirely subjective. The relativity of the symbols does not 
destroy either our capacity to discover the truth or our faith in 
the existence of objective reality. It is true that different objects 
appear differently from different points of view, but the validity 
of the different points of view need not be denied. Statements 
about reality are definitions of the relationship between those 
making them and the reality which they are describing. 
Symbols have a meaning, and this meaning is objective and 
shared. The bearers of the meaning may be psychological 
states, separate existences, not even identical in their qualita- 
tive content, but meanings can be studied and understood. 

The Upanisads do not speak to us of limited dogmas. The 
life of spirit is wider than any particular religious formulation. 
Religion deals with man’s seeking for the eternal, the' sources of 
truth and joy, aiyl particular formulations are but approxima- 
tions to the Unutterable. Our minds are not detached from the 
circumstances of time and place. Full truth can be known only 
by a mind of transcendent rationality. The conception and 
expression by men of the reality which is universal, can only be 
partial according to the diversities of race and character. As the 
Upanisads lay stress on spiritual experience and psychological 
discipline, they do not insist on any one set of dogmas, rites or 
codes. They are also aware that we" may touch different aspects 
of the spiritual experience when we attempt to define it. We 
may use any symbols and methods which help to bring about a 
change of consciousness, a new birth . 1 

The one Supreme who dwells in us is conceived externally. 
‘The vulgar l(*)k for their gods in water, men of wider know- 

1 Gandhi included from Guru Govind Singh's writings the following 
in his public prayers: 

l&vara alia tere nama 
mandira masdija tere dhama 
subko san-mati de bhagavdn 

O God, RvaraTlnd Allah are Thy names; temples and mosques are Thy 
places of abode. Grant to all right understanding (01 this). 



140 


The Principal Upanisads 


ledge in celestial bodies, the ignorant in (images made of) wood 
or stone but the wise sec the Supreme in their own self.' 1 'The 
yogins see the Supreme in the self, not in the images. The 
images are conceived for the sake of contemplation by the 
ignorant/ 3 The soul of man is the home of God. God is in every 
one of us ready to help us though we generally ignore Him. 3 
Whatever l>e the form we start with, we grow to the worship of 
the one Universal Spirit immanent in all. 4 The worship of the 
determinate form is recommended as a preparation for the 
apprehension of non-determined Reality.5 Narada Bhakti Sutra 


1 apsu deva, manusyanum, divi deva manTsindm 
bdldndm kastha-losthem buddhesv atmani devata 

2 sivam atmani paiyanti pratimasu na yoginah 
ajndndm bhdvandrthdya pratimdh parikalpitah. 

Darhanopanisad ; see also $iva-dharmottara. 

The Bhdgavata says that ‘fire is the god of the twiceborn, the (innermost) 
heart is the god of the wise, the image of the ignorant, for the wise. 
God' is everywhere. 

agnirdevo dvijatlnam, hrdi devo mamsindm 
pratimdsv alpa-buddhinam, jndnindm sarvato harih. 

3 ‘Though really companion and co-dweller, man does not understand 
the friendship of Him who dwells within the same body.' 

na yasya sakhyam puniso’vaiti sakhynh 
sakhd vasan samvasatah pure’smin. 

Bhdgavata. 

Pingala, the public woman, got disgusted with her life and said, 
‘Casting aside this eternal lover who is near (in my own heart), is my 
beloved, gives me joy, gives me, wealth, I foolishly seek another (from 
outside), who does not fulfil my desires, who gives me only sorrow, fear 
and blind infatuation and is petty.' 

santam samipe ramanam rati-p/adarii vitta-pradam nityam 
imam vihdya • 

a-kamadam duhhha-bhayfrJhi-soka moha-pradam tuccham aham 
bhaje’jnd. • 


Bhdgavata XI. 8. 31. 


She resolved : 

‘He is the friend, most beloved Lord and one's own self to all embodied 
beings. I shall earn Him by offering myself to Him and play with Him as 
Goddess LaksmI does. 

suhrt pvesthatamo ndtha, atmd cdyam sarivinjm 
tam vikrlydtmanaivdham vame'nena yatha ramd. 

Bhdgavata XI. 8 35. 

4 yasmin sarvam, yatah sarvam, yah sarvam, sarvatas ca yah. 

In whom is everything, from whom is cveiy thing, who is everything, 
who is everywhere. 

5 Cp. Kalpataru I. 1. 20. ’ 

mr-visesam param brahma sdksdt kartum anUvardh. 
ye mandas te’nukampyante sa-vikesa-nirupanaih . 



Introduction 


141 

tells us that the true devotee becomes a fulfilled being, im- 
mortal and content. 1 Even the released perform image worship 
by way of sport. 2 There is a danger that the emotions of awe 
and reverence are likely to be treated as ends in themselves. 
They prepare for spirituality.3 Devotion ultimately leads to the 
knowledge of one's essential nature. 4 For Ramanuja bhakti is 
a type of knowledge. 5 

Spiritual training begins with the external, with' word and 
gesture in order to produce the answering spiritual content, 
but we should not stop at any stage short of life in God. 6 There 
are those who regard the forms they worship as final, though 
the Upanisads make out that the Real has aspects of both 


Commenting on Brahma Sutra 1*1 T. 3. 59, S. argues that each one is at 
liberty to choose the foim of worship according to his liking and perform 
it. The direct union with the object of meditation is the result of each of 
these meditations. 

1 yal labdhva pitman siddho bhavati, rnnrto bhavati, trpto bhavati. 

2 miiktd apt lilaya vigvahadikam krtvd bhajanlc. S. 

3 Gopikas become one with the Supreme by fixing their minds on Him, 
by singing His songs, by doing His deeds. 

tan-manashdh tad-til# pah tad-vicestah tad-dtmikah. 

There is utter abandonment to God or prapatti. pati-suttinvaya 
bhrdty-bdndliavdn ati vilamghya tc’nty acyutdgatdh. 

The glory of meditation on the name of God is mentioned after the 
whole Blidgavata is related to Panksit. 

patitah skhahtah ditah hsutvdvdvrcaio bmvan 
haraye ndma ity ucanr mucyatc sarva-pdtakdt. 

4 sva-sva-nlpanusandJidvam bhahiir ity abhidlilyatc : atma-tattvtinusand - 
hdnam bhaktir ity apare jaguh. In Bhakti-mtirttinda , bhakti is delined as 
that form of love in whiclf when the lo\ers are together they are afraid 
of being separated a Ad when they are ifot together they have a painful 
longing for union. 

a-drste darsanotkanthd, dvde vislcsa-bhJrutd 
nddrstena na drstena bhacatd labhyatc sukham. 

s dhruvdnusmrti. 

b uttcuno brahma-sctd-bhdvo , dhydna-bhdcas tu madhyamah 
stutir japo'dhamo blidvo, bahih-pujd adhamddhamah 

• Mahdnirvdiui Tantia XIV. 122. 

The highest form of worship is the realisation of the Supreme 111 all, 
the meditation of the Supreme is the middling state; prayeis to and 
praises of him with the silent repetition of his name is the lowest and 
external worship is the lowest of all. Again: 

bdla-bldanavat satvarii riipa-ndmddi-kalpanam. 

• ibid. XIV. 1 17. 

All the imagined names and fuiins are as playthings for the children. 



142 


The Principal Upanisads 

tranquil transcendence and cosmic universality. The advocates 
of bhakti look upon the worship of the personal God as the 
highest bliss , 1 though those who regard the Absolute as super- 
personal declare that it is somewhat lower than the highest, 
that those who do not get beyond the stage of the worship of 
the Personal God, enter, on death, into a heavenly state of 
existence. This survival in the worlds of the blessed belongs to 
the process of time or sarhsara. It is not emancipation from 
time or timeless union with reality. 

Any form of worship which falls short of complete self- 
naughting will not take us to the unitive life. Faith, devotion, 
surrender are the means to it. Each individual has to achieve 
insight by his own effort after long and persistent practice . 2 
When the veil of intellectual knowledge, of avidyii, is swept 
aside, a flood of light breaks upon the awakened soul and a 
vision of the Universal Self is achieved. This self is present, real 
and concrete even as a physical object is present to the physical 
eye. The Supreme is not so much an immanent God as an experi- 
enced God, felt as an inward principle of power and new being in 
life. When we rise in contemplation, when there is the vision of 
the Supreme which is entirely beyond the pftwer of the soul to 
prepare for or bring about, we feel that it is wholly the opera- 

1 Cp. Vedanta Desika. 

O Lord, if Thou art gracious, if T am (always) 
by Thy side, if there is in me pure devotion 
to Thee, if I am in the company of those who are Thy 
servants, then this sarhsara is itself salvation. 
tv am cet prasidasi tavdsmi scAnlpa/as cet 
tvayy asti bhakHr anaghd ka> i-sailfi-ndtha 
samsrjyate yadi ca ddsajanas tvadiyah 
samsdra esa bhagavan apavarga eva 
1 Cp. St. Paul: 'Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling; 
for it is God which worketh in you both to will and to do of Ills good 
pleasure.' Epistle to the Philippians II. 12-13 

The seventeeth-century Platonist, Norris, writes: 'The solitary and 
contemplative man sits as safe in his retirement a% one of Homer’s 
heroes in a cloud, and has this only trouble from the follies and extrava 
gances of men, that he pities them. 1 think it advisable for every man 
that has sense and thoughts enough to be his own companion (for 
certainly there is more required to qualify a man for his own company 
than for other men's), to be as frequent in his retirements as he can, and 
to communicate as little with the world as is consistent with the duty 
of doing good, and the discharge of the common offices of humanity.’ 



Introduction 


*43 

tion of God working on the soul by extraordinary grace. In a 
sense all life is from God, all prayer is made by the help 
of God's grace, but the heights of contemplation which are 
scaled by few are attributed in a special degree to divine grace. 
After the vision the light may fade, darkness may afflict the 
soul, but the soul can never lose altogether what it has once 
seen. Our effort thereafter shall be to renew the experience, make 
it the constant centre of all our activities until the completely 
real is completely known. 

There are references to visions and auditions which sometimes 
accompany the soul’s ascent to God. They are really an em- 
barrassment to the aspiring soul. They distract its attention 
and sometimes tempt it to remain on the wayside without 
pressing forward to the goal. These visions and auditions are 
not an essential part of the religious intuition. These are 
symbols on the natural and historical plane of the mysteries of 
spiritual life. All objects in the natural world are reflections of 
the happenings in the spiritual world. The events of the life of 
spirit are reflected symbolically in the world of space, time and 
matter. 

The paradoxes of mystical language are resolved when they 
are taken over into vital consciousness. The mystery-filled 
figures of the Upanisads are abstractions to those who look upon 
them from outside. The Upanisads speak to us of different 
forms of genuine religious experience. Whether it is contempla- 
tion of the Absolute, or meditation on the Supreme Person or 
worship of the Cosmi® Spirit, or absorption in the world of 
nature, they are all genuine formS, as they aim at the same 
ultimate conclusion of self-transcendence. Man must be sur- 
passed. There are different regions in the realm of spirit in 
which the consciousness of man freed from the fiiiitude of self 
and enlarged finds fulfilment. 

In other religions, too, we have these varieties of mystic 
experience. There are some who wish to establish contact with 
God regarded strictly as a person, and live a life in ever com- 
plete accord with the divine will and at long last reach the 
most intimate union with God. There are others who wish to 
go beyond ufiion to unity, a state of consciousness which is 
above subject-object relationship. Naturally the Upanisads do 



144 The Principal Upanisads 

not adopt an attitude of> dogmatism . 1 This attitude of accept- 
ance of all forms of worship has been a persistent character of 
India's religious life . 2 The word of God is not bound by lan- 
guages in which it is spoken. 3 It is the one voice that is heard 
in all religions. 

We are heirs of a richer heritage than most of us are aware of. 
The life of the people of spirit, from the beginning until now, 
has a greaf deal to offer us. If we cut ourselves away from the 
rich treasury of wisdom about man's aspirations on this earth 
which is available to us from our own past, or if we are satisfied 

1 St. Paul's remarkable words that all nations 'seek the Lord if haply 
they might feel after him and find him, though he be not far from 
everyone of us’ (Acts of the Apostles XVII. 27) indicate the right 
attitude. 

Eckliart: ‘He who seeks God under settled forms lays hold of the form, 
while missing the good concealed in it.' 

3 'The Supreme is pleased with him who listens to all discourses on 
dharmas, who worships all gods, who is free from jealousy and has 
subdued anger.' 

srnute sarva-dkannam* ca sarvdn devan namasyati 
anasfiyur jita-kvodhas tasya tusyati kekavah. 

Visnu-dhannottara I. 58. 

Cp. the popular verse: 

At heart a Sakta, outwardly a Saiva 
and in gatherings a Vaisnava. 

antah sdhto bahih saivo, sabha-madhye ca vaisnavah. 

As we use these symbols, we find that some are more adequate than 
others. 

Uddhava said (Pandava Gita, 17): 

vasudevam pcintyajya yo’nyam devam updsate 
trsito jdhnavl-tlyc kupam vail chat 1 durbhagah. 

That unfortunate one, who, rejecting Vasucleva, yorships another god 
is like a thirsty person searching for a well on the bank of the Ganges. 

Bardosa writes of Krishnadeva Raya of Vijayanagar empire: ‘The 
King allows such freedom that any man may come and go and live 
according to his own creed without suffering any annoyance and without 
enquiring whether he is a Christian, Jew, Moor or Hindu.’ An Advanced 
History of India by R. C. Majumdar, H. C. Ray Chaudhuri and K. Datta 
(1946). P- 379- 

3 Cp. Virgil's passionate outburst: ‘Blessed is he whfj has won to the 
heart of the universe; he is beyond good and evil. But that is too much 
for ordinary humanity to attain; it is a very good second best to know 
the gods of the country, to live the life of the country.’ Georgies II. 490 If. 

‘If any born in barbarous nations, do what lietli in him, God will 
reveal to him that which is necessary to salvation either by inspiration 
or by sending him a teacher.' St. Thomas Aquinas 2. €ent Dist 28 q, 
1, a4, ad 4. 



Introduction 


145 

with our own inadequate tradition and fail to seek for ourselves 
the gifts of other traditions, we will gravely misconceive the 
spirit of religion. Loyalty to our particular tradition means 
not only concord with the past but also freedom from the past. 
The living past should serve as a great inspiration and support 
for the future. Tradition is not a rigid, hidebound framework 
which cripples the life of spirit and requires us to revert to a 
period that is now past and beyond recall. It is not a memory of 
the past but a constant abiding of the living Spirit. It is a 
living stream of spiritual life. 




BE HA D-A RA N Y A KA UP A NIS, \ 1) 

The Brhad-dranyaka-U panisad which is generally recognised 
to be the most important of the Upanisads forms part of the 
Satapatha Brdhmana. It consists of three Kandas or sections, the 
Madhu Kanda which expounds the teaching of the basic identity 
of the individual and the Universal Self, the Ydjhavalkya or the 
Muni Kanda which provides a philosophical justification of the 
teaching and the Khila Kanda, which deals with certain modes 
of worship and meditation, updsana, answering roughly to the 
three stages of religious life, sravana, hearing the upadcsa or the 
teaching, manana, logical reflection, upapatti and nididhydsana 
or contemplative meditation. Of the two rescensions of the 
Satapatha Brdhmana, the Kdnva and the Mddhyandina, 
Samkara follows the former, and the text adopted here is 
the same. 




I. I. I. 


Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 


149 


CHAPTER I 
First Brahmana 

THE WORLD AS A SACRIFICIAL HORSE 

1. aunt, usd vd asvasya mcdhyasya sir ah, suryas caksuh, vdtah 
prdnah, vyattam agnir vaisvdnarah; sarhvaisara dtmdsvasya 
mcdhyasya , dyauh prstham , anlariksam udaram , prthivi 
pdjasyam, disah pdrsvc, avdntaradisah pdrsavah, rtavdhgani , 
mdsds cdrdhamdsds ca parvdni , ahordtrdni pratisthdk, naksa- 
-trdny astlnni , nahho mdmsdni; uvadhyam sikatdh , sindhavo 
gudah t yakrc ca klomanas ca parvatdh , osadhayas ca vanaspatayas 
ca lomani. udyan purvardliah , nimlocah jaghandvdhah , 
vijrmhhate tad vidyotate , vidhunute tat stanayati, yan mchati 
tad varsati; vdg evasya vdk. 

1. Aum, the dawn, verily, is the head of the sacrificial horse, 
the sun the eye, the wind the breath, the open mouth the 
Vai&vanara fire; the year is the body of the sacrificial horse, the 
sky is the back, the atmosphere is the belly, the earth the hoof, 
the quarters the sides, the intermediate quarters the ribs, the 
seasons the limbs, the months and the half-months the joints, 
days and nights the feet, the stars the bones, the clouds the 
flesh; the food in the stomach is the sand, the rivers are the 
blood-vessels, the liver and the lungs are the mountains, the 
herbs and the trees are the hair. The rising (sun) is the forepart, 
the setting (sun) the hind part, when he yawns then it lightens, 
when he shakes himself, it thunders, when he urinates then it 
rains; voice, indeed, is his voice. 

The first chapter of the Upanisad is the third chapter of the 
Aranyaka. 

asv anted ha: In this sacrifice a horse is let loose and a guard of 
three hundred follows his track. If any one hinders the horses’ 
progress, the guard will have to fight. When the horse completes a 
victorious circuit of the earth and returns to the capital, he is offered 
as a sacrifice arid the king who performs the sacrifice assumes the 
title of sovereign, emperor. 

The horse sacrifice described at length in Satapatha Brahmana 
(XIII, 1-5) is given here a cosmic interpretation. It is used as a 
vehicle of religious truth. 

The idea of sacrifice as a means to account for creation goes back 
to the Purusa'* Sukta of the R V. (X. 90. 129), where from each 



150 The Principal Upanisads I. 1. 2 

of the members of the primeval person, Purusa, some part of the 
world is made. 

asvasya medhyasya: of the sacrificial horse, medhdrhasya . S. 
vyattam: open mouth, vivrtam mukham. S. 
dtmd: body, sariram cdtmd. S. 

pdjasyam: hoof, pddasyam, pdddsana-sthdnam. £. See M.U. II. 1. 4. 
The earth is his footing. The supra-physical can be reached only when 
we have a firm hold of the physical. The thinkers of the Upanisads 
reach their conclusions by a study of the sensible fact, of the concrete 
realities of the physical world. 
parvdni: joints, sandhayah. S. 
nabhah: clouds, nabhasthd megJidh. 

iivadhyam : half-digested food in the stomach, udarastham ardha - 

jlrnam asanam. S. 

guddh : blood-vessels, nddyah. $. 

vijrmbhatc: yawns, gdtrdni vindmayali , viksipa //.£. vijrmbhanam 
mukha-viddranam . 

vidhunute: shakes, gdtrdni kampayati. 5. 
mehati: urinates, mutram karoti. S. 

2. ahar va asvam purastdn mahimd nvajdyata. tasya purvc 
samudre yonih, ratrir enam pascan mahimd nvajdyata , tasydpare 
samudre yonih, dan vd asvam mahimdndv abhitah sambabhuvatuh 
hayo bhutvd dcvdn avahat , vdjt gandharvati, arvdsurdn , asvo 
manusydn; samudra evdsya bandhuh, samudro yonih. 

2. The day, verily, arose for the horse as the vessel called 
mahiman appeared in front (of the horse). Its source is in the 
eastern sea. The night, verily, arose for the horse as the vessel 
called mahiman appeared behind (the horse). Its source is in the 
western sea. These two vessels, verily, arose on the two sides of 
the horse as the two sacrificial vessels. Becoming a steed he 
carried the gods, as a stallion the Ganciharyas, as a runner the 
demons, as a horse men. The sea, indeed, is his relative, the sea 
is his source. 

At the horse sacrifice, asva-mcdha , two vessels are placed one in 
front of and the other behind the horse, made of gold and silver, to 
hold the sacrificial libations. They are here interpreted cosmically as 
the eastern (Bay of Bengal) and the western (the Arabian sea). 
mahimd: greatness, mahattvam. 5 . 

The two vessels are made of gold and silver. The gold vessel is 
the day because both are bright, dipti-sdmdnydt ; the silver vessel is 
the night, both the words rdjata and rdtri begin with the same 
syllable rd. Silver and night may have a common nature if the night 
is a moonlit one, candrikd-dhavalatva-samyat. 



I. 2. 2. Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 151 

The sea is taken by § as the Supreme Self: paramatma, samutpadya 
bhutani dravanty asminn iti vyutpattyd parama-gambhlrasy esvarasya 
samudra-sabdatam aha. See A. 


Second Brdhmana 

CREATION OF THE WORLD 

1. naivcha kirheandgra dslt. mjtyunaivcdam dvrtam dsTt, 
asandyaya , asandyd hi mrtyuh; tan mano'kurnta, dtmanvl sydm iti. 
so’rcann acarat, tasydreata. dpo’jdyanta arcate vai me kam abhiid 
iti; tad evdrkasya arkatvam; kam ha vd asmai bhavati, ya evam 
etad arkasya arkatvam veda. 

1. There was nothing whatsoever here in the beginning. By 
death indeed was this covered, or by hunger, for hunger is 
death. He created the mind, thinking ‘let me have a self 
(mind). Then he moved about, worshipping. From him, thus 
worshipping, water was produced. ‘Verily/ he thought, ‘while 
I was worshipping water appeared, therefore water is called 
arka (fire). Water surely comes to one who thus knows the 
reason why water is called arka (fire)/ 

All this was non-being covered by death who is Hiranya-garbha. 
By his thought the universe is produced. 

Death is Hiranya-garbha. It is the matter with which he interacts. 
It is tamas or darkness which is represented as his body : cp. Subdla U. 

yasyavyaktam sarlram yasydksaram sarlram , yasya mrtyus sarlram 

esa sarva-bhutdntardtma apahata-papmd divyo devah eko nardyanah. 

Hiranya-garbha is tafias sarlr aka-par anuitmd, the Supreme Self 
with the body of darkness. 

He thought, ‘let me have a self/ i.e. let me develop a world of 
conscious and unconscious objects: 

cetanacetana-prapahca-sarirakas-sydm iti samkalpa manah krtavdn. R. 
kam: water or happiness, kam udakam sukham vd. S. 

2. dpo vd arkah. tad yad apam sara dsit, tat samahanyata , sd 
prthivy abhaved, tasydm asrdmyat. tasya srdntasya taptasya tejo 
raso niravartatdgnih. 

2. Water, verily, is arka. That which was the froth of the 
water became solidified; that became the earth. On it he rested. 
From him thus rested and heated (from the practice of aus- 
terity) his essence of brightness came forth (as) fire. 

¥ 



i$2 The Principal Upanisads I. 2. 5. 

After the production of the earth Prajd-pati rested: sarvo hi lokah 
kdryam krtvd srdmyati, prajapates ca tan maliat kdryam yat prthivi- 
sargah. 

tcjo-rasah: essence of brightness, tejas-sdra-bhutah. R. 

3. sa trcdhdtnuinam vyakuruta , ddityam trtlyam, vdyuth 
trtlyam, sa esa pranas tredhd vihitah. tasya praci dik sirah, 
asaa cdsait c airman; athd asya prattci dik puccham, asau cdsau ca 
sakthyau; daksind codlcl ca pdrsvc, dyauh prstham, antariksam 
ttdarani , lyam urah , sa cso’psu pratisthitah , yalra kva caiti tad 
eva pratitislhaty evam vidvdn . 

3. He divided himself threefold (lire is one- third), the sun 
one-third and the air one-third. He also is life divided threefold, 
the eastern direction is his head and his arms are that and that 
(the left and the right sides). Likewise the western direction is 
his tail and his two hip-bones are that and that. The southern 
and the northern directions are his sides. The sky is the back, 
the atmosphere the belly. This (earth) is the chest. Thus he 
stands firm in the waters. He who knows this stands firm 
wherever he goes. 

pratitisthati: stands firm, or obtains a resting-place, sthitim labhate. S. 

4. so’kdmayata, dvitiyo ma dtmd jdyeteti , sa manasa vacant 
mithunam samabhavad asandyd mrlyuh, tad yad reta dsit, sa 
samvatsaro ’bhavat; 11a ha pitrd tatah samvatsara dsa. tam 
etdvantam kalam abhibhah. ydivdin samvatsarah, tam etavatah , 
kdlasya parastdd asrjata; tam jdtam abhivyddaddt sa bhdin akarot 
saiva vdg abhavat. 

4. He desired, let a second self (body or form) be born of 
me. He, hunger or death, brought about Hhe union of speech by 
mind. What was the seed there became the year. Previous to 
that there was no year. He reared him for as long as a year 
and after that time he sent him forth. When he was born he 
(Death) opened his mouth (to devour him). He (the babe) 
cried, bhan. That, indeed, became speech. 

Life is the result of previous knowledge and cor luct. relo btjath 
jhdnd-karma-rupam jannidnlara-krtam. S. 

5. sa aiksata: yadi vd imam abhimamsye, kantyo f nnam 
karisya Hi: sa tayd vded tendtmanedam sarvam asrjata yad idam 
kim ca, rco yajumsi sdmdni chanddmsi yajhan prajah pasun. sa 
yad yad evdsrjata, tat tad attum adhriyata; sarvam vd attiti tad 



I. 2. 7. Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 153 

aditer adititvam, sarvasyaitasydttd bhavati , sarvam asyannam 
bhavati, ya evam-etad aditer adititvam veda. 

5. He thought, ‘If I kill him I shall make very little food. 1 
With that speech, with that self he brought forth all this 
whatsoever exists here, (the hymns of) the Kg Veda , (the 
formulas of) the Yajur Veda and (the chants of) the Sama Veda , 
the metres, the sacrifices, men and cattle. Whatever he brought 
forth that he resolved to eat. Verily, because he eats every- 
thing, therefore the aditi - nature of Aditi (i.e. Aditi is so called). 
He who knows thus the aditi - nature of Aditi becomes an eater 
of everything here, and every thing becomes food for him. 

aiksata: thought, acintayat. R. 

In the previous passage, it is said that Death brought forth, by 
the union of speech and mind, year &c; here it is said that he again 
brought forth Vedas &c. $ . explains that while the previous union was 
of an unmanifested character, avyakta, the present one is manifested, 
bahya. 

5. quotes R.V. (I. 59. 10) * Aditi is the sky, Aditi is the atmosphere, 
Aditi is the mother, she is the father/ 

6. so kdmayata , bhuyasd yajiiena bhuyo yajeyeti; so’ srdmyat, 
sa tapo’tapyata: tasya srdntasya taptasya yaso viryam nd- 
akrdmat. prana vai yaso viryam; tat prdnesutkrdntesu sariram 
svayitum adhriyata, tasya sarira eva mana dslt. 

•6. He desired: ‘let me sacrifice again with a greater sacrifice/ 
He rested himself, he practised austerity. While he was thus 
rested and heated, fame and vigour went forth. The vital 
breaths, verily, are fame and vigour. So when the vital breaths 
departed, his body began to swell, but the mind was set on the 
body. 

bhuyah: again, punar api. $. explains that Prajd-pali had performed 
a horse sacrifice in his previous life and those thoughts were in his 
mind now. 

sa tapo’tapyata: He practised austeiity. tapas is literally 'burning/ 
It is the glow caused by the concentration of mental energy. 
Through tapas ^ all cieation effected. The ardour of mind, restrained 
and concentrated, has power over things. (See R.V. X. 190.) Slowly 
it is extended to cover the practice of austerities. To make ourselves 
pure metal we have to pass through fierce fires. We cannot be made 
anew unless we first become ashes. Gocf strips us of everything that 
we possess that we may draw near to him. 

• 

7. so’ kdmayata, medhyan „ ma idam sydt, dtr.ianvy anena sydm 



154 The Principal Upanisads I. 3. 1. 

Hi; tato’svah samabhavat, yad asvat, tan medhyam abhud iti tad 
cvdsva-mcdhasydsva-mcdhatvam; csa ha vd asva-mcdhani vcda , 
ya cnam cvam vcda. tarn anavarudhyaivdmanyala; tam sathva- 
tsarasya parastdd dtrnana dlabhata: pasun dcvaldbhyah pratyau- 
hat. tasmat sarva-dcvatyam proksitam prajdpatyam dlabhante ; csa 
ha vd asva-medho ya csa tapati: tasya samvatsara atma, ay am 
agnir arkah, tasycme lokd dtmdnah ; tdv ctdv arkdsvamedhau. so 
punar ckaiva dcvatd bhavati , mrtyur cva; a pa punar-mrtyum 
jayati, nainani mrtyurm dpnoti , mrtyur asydtmd bhavati , ctdsdim 
dcvatdmhn eko bhavati. 

7. He desired, let this (body) of mine be fit for sacrifice and 
let me have a self (body) through this. Thereupon it became a 
horse, because it swelled, it has become fit for sacrifice (he 
thought). Therefore the horse-sacrifice came to be known as 
asva-mcdha. He who knows it thus, verily, knows the asva-medha. 
Letting it remain free, he reflected; and at the end of a year he 
offered it to himself (sacrificed him for himself). He gave up 
the (other) animals to the divinities. Therefore (men, priests) 
offer to Prajd-pati the sanctified (horse) dedicated to all the 
gods. Verily, that (sun) which gives forth heat is the horse- 
sacrifice. His body is the year. This (earthly) fire is the arka 
and these worlds are his bodies. So these are two, the sacrificial 
fire [arka) and the horse-sacrifice. Yet again they are one 
divinity, even death. He (who know's this) overcomes repeated 
death, death cannot get hold of him, death becomes his body, 
and he becomes one with these divinities. 

dtmanvl: becomes embodied, dtmavdn , sanravdn. S. 
dlabhata: offered, sacrificed it to himself, dlambham krtavdn. 
proksitam: sanctified, mantra-samskrtam . A: 

He overcomes death, assumes the body of death. He becomes 
superior to time. 


Third Brdhmana 

THE SUPERIORITY OF BREATH AMONG THE 
BODILY FUNCTIONS 

1. dvaya ha prdjdpatydh , devds cdsurds ca. tatah kdnxyasd cva 
devdh, jydyasd asurdih , ta esu lokesv aspardhanta, tc ha devd ucuh t 
hantdsurdn yajiia udgithendtyaydmeti. 

1. There were two classes of the descendants of Prajd-pati , 



I. 3. 2. Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 155 

the gods and the demons. Of these, the gods were the younger 
and the demons the elder ones. They were struggling with each 
other for (the mastery of) these worlds. The gods said, come, 
let us overcome the demons at the sacrifice through the 
udgitha . 

dvayah: two classes, dvi-prakdrdh . 

The gods and the demons refer to the organs, speech and the rest. 
They are inclined to sacred or worldly objects, to good or evil, then 
become divine or demoniac, sdstra-janita-jiidna-karma-bluivitdh 
dyotandt devdi bhavanti, ta eva svdbhdvika-pratyaksanumdna-janita- 
drsta-prayojana-ka rma -jn dna-bhdv itd a surah. S. They become gods 
when they shine under the influence of thoughts and actions as taught 
by the scriptures. These very organs become demons when they are 
influenced by their natural thoughts and actions based (only) on 
perception and inference and directed to visible (secular) ends. 
It is a distinction of life, not of beings. § also says that the gods 
were less numerous and less strong than the demons. 
aspardhanta : struggled with each other, vied with each other: 
paraspara-vijiglsdm krtavantah. 

Cp. Plato’s Sophist , where a stranger from southern Italy who has 
studied the Eleatic logic of Parmenides likens the philosophy of his 
own and earlier times to the mythical battle of the gods and the 
giants. ‘What we "shall see is something like a battle of gods and 
giants going on between them over their quarrel about reality. One 
party is trying to drag eveiy thing down to earth, out of heaven 
and the unseen, literally grasping rocks and trees in their hands; 
for they lay hold upon eveiy stock and stone and strenuously affirm 
that real existence belongs only to that which can be handled and 
offers resistance to the touch. They define reality as the same thing 
as body, and as soon as one of the opposite party asserts that 
anything without a bodf- is real, they are utterly contemptuous and 
will not listen to another word. Accordingly their adversaries are 
very wary in defending their position somewhere in the heights of 
the unseen, maintaining with all their force that true reality consists 
in certain intelligible and bodiless forms. In the clash of argument 
they shatter and pulverise those bodies which their opponents wield, 
and what those others allege to be true reality they call, not real 
being, but a scf-t of moving process of becoming. On this issue an 
interminable battle is always going on between the two camps.' 
E.T. by F. M. Cornford. See his Plato’s Theory of Knowledge (1935)- 
The dispute between idealists and materialists is still with us. 
See C.U. VIII. 7-12. 

2. tc ha vacant ucuh, tvarh na udgdya iti, tatlicti : tebhyo vdg 
udagdyat. yo vdei bhogas tarn devebhya dgdyat , yat kalydinam 



156 The Principal Upanisads I. 3. 5. 

vadati tad dtmane; te vidur, ancna vai na udgdtrdtyesya ntiti tam 
abhidrutya pdpmandvidhyan , sa yah sa pdpmd yad cvcdam 
apratirupam vadati sa cva sa pdpmd. 

2. They said to speech, chant (the udgitha ) for us; ‘So be it/ 
said speech and chanted for them. Whatever enjoyment there 
is in speech, it secured for the gods by chanting : that it spoke 
well was for itself. The demons knew, verily, by this chanter, 
they will overcome us. They rushed upon it and pierced it with 
evil. That evil which consists in speaking what is improper, 
that is that evil. 

3. atha ha prdnam iicuh, tvam na udgdya iti, tatheti: tebhyah 
prana udagdyat. yah prune bhogas tam devebhya dgdyat, yat 
kalyanam jighrati tad dtmane; te vidur ancna vai naudgdtr dtye- 
syantiti. tam abhidrutya pdpmandvidhyan, sa yah sa pdpmd yad 
evedam apratirupam jighrati sa cva sa pdpmd. 

3. Then they said to the life-breath, chant (the udgitha) for 
us. ‘So be it/ said the life-breath and chanted for them. What- 
ever enjoyment there is in the life-breath, it secured for the 
gods by chanting; that it smelt well was for itself. The demons 
knew, ‘verily, by this chanter, they will overcome us/ They 
rushed upon it and pierced it with evil. That eyil which consists 
in smelling what is improper, that is that evil. 

prdnam: life-breath, here used for ghrdnaw, the organ of smelling, 
the nose. 

4. atha ha caksur iicuh, tvam na udgdya iti, tatheti: tebhyas 
caksur udagdyat. yas caksusi bhogas tam devebhya dgdyat, yat 
kalyanam pasyati tad dtmane; te vidur anena vai na udgdtrdtyc- 
syantiti. tam abhidrutya pdpmandvidhyan, sa yah sa pdpmd yad 
evedam apratirupam paiyati, sa ova sa pdpmd. 

4. Then they said to the eye: Chant (the udgitha) for us. 
‘So be it/ said the eye and chanted for them. Whatever enjoy- 
ment there is in the eye it secured for the gods by chanting; 
that it saw well was for itself. The demons knew, ‘verily, by 
this chanter they will overcome us/ They rushed upon it and 
pierced it with evil. That evil which consists in seeing what is 
improper, that is that evij. 

5. atha ha irotram iicuh, tvam na udgdya iti, tatheti: tebhyah 
srotram udagdyat. yah srotre bhogas tam devebhya dgdyat , yat 
kalyanam srnoti tad dtmane; te vidur anena vai na udgdtydtye- 



I. 3. 7. Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 157 

syantiti. tam abhidrutya pdpmandvidhyan; sa yah sa pdpmd 
yad evcdam apratirupam srnoti, sa eva sa pdpmd. 

5. Then they said to the ear: Chant (the udgitha) for 11s. 
'So be it,’ said the ear and chanted for them. Whatever enjoy- 
ment there is in the ear, it secured for the gods by chanting; that 
it heard well was for itself. The demons knew, ‘verily, by this 
chanter, they will overcome us/ They rushed upon it and pierced 
it with evil. That evil which consists in hearing what is im- 
proper, that is that evil. 

6 . atha ha mana ucuh, tvarii na udgdya iti , tatheti: tebhyo mana 
udagayat. yo manasi bhogas tam dcvebhya dgayat, yat kalydnarii 
samkalpayati tad atmanc; te vidur anena vai na udgatrdtye- 
syantiti. tam abhidrutya pdpmandvidhyan; sa yah sa pdpmd 
yad evcdam apratirupam samkalpayati , sa eva sa pdpmd; evam 
u khalv eta devatah pdpmabhir upasrjan, evam endh pdpmand- 
vidhyan. 

6. Then they said to the mind: Chant (the udgitha) for us. 
‘So be it/ said the mind and chanted for them. Whatever 
enjoyment there is in the mind, it secured for the gods by chant- 
ing; that it thought well was for itself. The demons knew, 
'verily, by this ghanter, they will overcome us/ They rushed 
upon it and pierced it with evil. That evil which consists in 
thinking what is improper, that is that evil. Likewise they also 
affected these (other) divinities with evil, they pierced them 
with evil. 

All these organs were found to be incapable of chanting the 
udgitha as they had contracted evil on account of their attachment 
to doing well (seeing wcjl, hearing well or thinking well), for them- 
selves : kalydna-visqya-visesatma-samb^ndha-sahga-hetoh. §. 

7. atha hemam dsanyam prdnain ucuh , tvarii na udgdya iti , 
tatheti: tebhya esa prana udagayat; te vidur anena vai na udgd- 
tratyesyantiti. tam abhidrutya papmandvitsan; sa y atha asmdnam 
rtvd ludo vidhvariiseta, evam haiva vidhvamsamdnd visvaheo 
vinesuh, tato devd abhavan , pardsurdh; bhavaty dtmand pardsya 
dvisan bhrdtrvyo bhavati ya cvarii veda. 

7. Then they said to the vital breath in the mouth: 'Chant 
(the udgitha) for us/ ‘So be it/ said this breath and chanted for 
them. They (the demons) knew, 'verily, by this chanter, they 
will overcome us/ They rushed upon him and desired to pierce 
him with evi*. But as a clod of earth would be scattered by 
striking against a rock, even so they were scattered in all 



158 The Principal Upanisads I. 3. 13. 

directions and perished. Therefore the gods became (increased) 
and the demons were crushed. He who knows this becomes his 
true self and the enemy who hates him is crushed. 

avitsan : desired to pierce him, vedhanam kartum istavantah . S. 

Par ah: crushed, pardbhutah , vinatdh. $>. 

8 . tc hocith, kva nu so'bhud yo na ittham asakteti, ayam 
dsyentar iti, so’ydsya dngirasali , ahgdndm hi rasah. 

8. Then they said, what, • pray, has become of him who 
struck to us then? Here he is within the mouth. He (the vital 
breath) is called Aydsya Angirasa (rasa) for he is the essence, of 
the limbs (< anga , members of the body). 

9. sd vd esd devatd dur ndma , duram hy asyi mrtyuh, ddrarh 
ha vd astndn mrtyur bhavati ya evam veda. 

9. That divinity, verily, is dur by name, because death is 
far (dura) from it. From him who knows this, death is far off. 

10. sd vd esd devataitdsdm dcvatdndm pdpmdnam mrtyum apa- 
hatya, yatrdsdm disdm antah, tad gamaydmeakdra , tad disdm 
pdpmano vinyadadhdt, tasmdn na janam iydt , ndntam iydt, net 
pdpmdnam mrtyum anvavdydniti. 

10. 71 i at divinity, verily, after having struck off the evil 
of these divinities, even death, made this go to where the end 
of the quarters is. There he set down their evils. Therefore one 
should not go to people (of that region), one should not go to 
the end (of the quarters), lest he meet there with evil, with 
death. 

11. sd vd esd devataitdsdm devatd ndm pdpmdnam mrtyum 
apahatya athaind mrtyum atyavahat. 

11. That divinity, verily, having struck off the evil, the 
death, of those divinities, next carried them beyond death. 

atha: next, lad-anantaram. 

12. sa vai vacant eva prathamdm atyavahat, sd yadd mrtyum 
atyamneyata , so’gnir abhavat, soyam agnih pjrcna mrtyum 
atikrdnto dipyate. 

12. Verily, it carried speech across first. When that (speech) 
was freed from death it became fire. This fire, when it crosses 
beyond death, shines forth. 

13. atha prdnam atyavahat , sa yadd mrtyum atyamucyata, sa 
vayur abhavat so’yam vdyuh parena mrtyum atikrdntah pavate 



I. 3. 18. Brhad-dranyaka Updnisad 159 

13. Then it carried across (the organ of) smell. When that 
was freed from* death, it became air. This air, when it crosses 
beyond death, blows 

prano ghranah. S. 

14. atha caksur atyavahat, tad yada mrtymn atyamucyata , sa 
adityo’bhavat, so’sdv ddityah parcna mrtyum atikrdntas tapati. 

14. Then it carried across the eye. When that was freed 
from death, it became the sun. This sun, when it crosses beyond 
death, glows. 

15. atha srotram atyavahat , tad yada mrtyum atyamucyata , td 
diso'bhavan, td imd disah parcna mrtymn atikrdntdh. 

15. Then it carried across the ear. When that was freed from 
death, it became the quarters. These quarters have crossed 
beyond death. 

16. atha mano tyavahat, tad yada mrtyum atyamucyata , sa 
candramd abliavai , so'sau tandrah parcna mrtyum atikr ditto 
bhdti, evam ha vd ouim esd devatd mrtymn ativahati, ya evam 
veda. 

16. Then it carried across the mind. When that was freed 
from death, it became the moon. That moon, when it crosses 
beyond death, shines. Thus, verily, that divinity carries beyond 
death him who knows this. 

Cp. Satapatha Brdhmana. X. 5. 2 20. One becomes what one meditates 
on: tam yathd yathopdsatc, tad eva bhavati. 

17. athatmanc } nnddyain a gay at, yadd hi kim c annum adyatc , 
anenaiva tad adyatc, ifyi pratitisthati. 

1 7. Then it (the breath) chanted food for itself (obtained 
food by chanting). For whatever food is eaten is eaten by him 
alone. In it (breath) is established. 

ddyanr eatable, adandrham, bhaksandrliam. R. 

anenaiva: by him alone, by the vital breath alone. $ refers to the 
meaning of the word ana as vital breath, ana iti ptdnasydkhyd 
prasiddhd. I 

18. tc devd abruvan, etdvad vd idam sarvaht yad annum, tad 
dtmana dgdsih, anu no’sminti anna dbhajasvcti, tc vai md' 
bhisamvisateti ; tatheti: tam samantam parinyavisanta, tasmdd 
yad adanendnnam atti , tenaitds trpyanti; evam ha vd enam svd 
abhisamvisanV , bhartd * dndtii s rest hah, pura ctd bhavaty 

F* 



I. J. 21. 


160 The Principal Vpanisads 

annado' dhipatih , ya evam vcda; ya u haivamvidam svesu prati- 
pratir babhusati , na haivdlam bhdrycbhyo biiavati; atha ya 
cvaitam anubhavati , ye variant anu bhdrydn bubhursati, sa 
haivdlam bhdrycbhyo biiavati. 

18. These divinities said, ‘Verily, just this much is whatever 
food there is and that you have obtained for yourself by 
chanting. Now let us have a share in this food.’ He said, ‘then 
sit around, facing me (or enter into me). ‘So be it.’ They sat 
around (entered into) him on all sides. Therefore, whatever 
food one eats by this breath, they are satisfied by it. So do his 
relations come to him who knows this, he becomes the supporter 
of his people, their chief, their foremost leader, an eater of 
food and their lord. Whoever among his people desires to be 
the equal of him who has this knowledge, he is not able to 
support his own dependents. But whoevei follows him and 
whoever, following him, desires to support his dependents, he, 
indeed, will be able to support his dependents. 

desires to be the equal or lival pratikulo bubhftsaii, pratispardhi 
bhavitiim iechati. S. 

desires to support : bubhwsati, bhartmn icehati. £. 

19. so'ydsya dhgirasali, ahgandm hi rasah , prdno vd ahgandm 
rasah, prdno hi vd ahgandm rasah, tasmdd yasmdt kasmdc cdihgdt 
prana utkrdmati, tad era tat snsyati; esa In vd ahgandm rasah. 

19. He is (called) Ayasya Ahgirasa for he is the essence of 

the limbs. Verily, life-bieath is the essence of the limbs, yes, 
life-breath is the essence of the limbs. Therefore, fiom whatever 
limb life-breath departs, that, indeed, dries up; for, it is, verily, 
the essence of the limbs. v 

20. esa 11 eva brhaspatih, rag vai brhall tasya esa patih, tasmdd 
u brhas patih. 

20. And this is also Brhaspati. The brhati is speech and this 
is its lord. Therefore this is Brhaspati. 

byhati: The metre with 3b syllables used in the R.V. Here it is used 
for the R.V. itself. 

21. esa it eva brahmanus-patih, vdg vai brahma , iasyd esa patih, 
tasmdd u br ahmanas- patih. 

21. And this is also Brahmanas-pati. Speech is Brahman, 

and this is its lord. Therefore, this is Brahmanas-pati. 

\ 

Brahman refers to the Yajur Veda. 



I. 3. 25. Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 161 

A EULOGY OF THE CHANT ON BREATH 

22. esa u eva sdma , vdg vai sdma, esa sd cdmasceti, tat samnah 
sdmatvam; yad veva samah plusind, samo masakena, same 
ndgena , sama ebhis tribhir lokaih , samo'nena sarvena, tasmdd 
veva sdma , asnute samnah sdyiijyam salokatdm,ya evam ctat sdma 
veda. 

22. And this is also the Sdma Veda ; speech, verily, is the 
chant. It is sd (she) and ama (he). That is why sdman is called 
sdman or because he is equal to a white ant, equal to a mosquito, 
equal to an elephant, equal to these three worlds, nay, equal 
to this universe, therefore indeed is it the Sdma Veda. He who 
knows this Sdma Veda to be such, attains union with it or lives 
in the same world with it. 

See C.U. V. 2. 6. 

sd is speech, and ama is vital breath. 

23. esa u vd udglihah, prdno vd ut, prdnena hidam savvam 
uttabdham, vdg eva glthd, uc ca glthd ccti, sa udglthah. 

23. And this is also the udgitha. The vital breath, verily, is 
ut, for by vital breath is this whole (world) upheld. Song, verily, 
is speech. This is udgitha, for it is ut and gltha. 

24. taddhdpi brahmadaitas caikitdneyo rdjdnath bhaksayann 
nvdea, ay am tyasya rdjd murdhdnam vipdtayatdt, yad ito’ydsya 
dhgiraso’nyenudagdyad iti , vded ca hy eva sa prdnena codagayad 
iti. 

24. As to this also, Brahmadatta Caikitaneya, while drinking 
King (Soma) said: Let this King strike off this man's (my) 
head (if I say) that Ayasya Ahgirasa chanted the udgitha with 
any other means than this (vital breath and speech) ; for, said 
he, only with speech and with vital breath did he chant the 
udgitha. 

Caikitdneya: the great giandson of ( ikitana. 
rdjdnam: yajiie sonumi. £. 

25. tasya haitasya sdmno yah svam veda, bhavati hdsya svam; 
tasya vai svara eva svam; tasmdd drtvijyam karisyan vdei svaram 
iccheta; tayd vded svara-sampannay drtvijyam kurydt; tasmdd 
yajiie svaravantam didrksanta eva; atho yasya svam bhavati; 
bhavati hdsya m svam, ya evam ctat samnah, svam veda. 

25. He who knows th ' wealth of that Sdman has that 



162 


The Principal Upanisads I. 3. 28 

wealth. Its wealth, indeed, is tone. Therefore, one who is about 
to perform the duties of a Rlvij priest desires to have a rich tone 
in his voice. Being possessed of such a voice, he performs the 
duties of a Rlvij priest. Therefore, people desire to see at a 
sacrifice a priest with a good voice, as one who has wealth. 
He who knows the wealth of Saman to be such attains wealth. 

26. tasya haitasya sdmno yah suvarnam veda, hhavati hasya 
suvarnam, tasya vai svara cva suvarnam , hhavati hasya suvarnam, 
ya cvam ctat sdmnah suvarnam veda. 

26. He who knows what is the gold (correct sound) of this 
Saman obtains gold. The tone, verily, is its gold. He who thus 
knows the gold of that Saman obtains gold. 

suvarna: correct sound or gold: su, varna. 

27. tasya haitasya sdmno yah pratisthdm veda , prati ha tisthati, 
tasya vai vdg cva pratisthd , vdci hi khalv esa ctat prdnah pra- 
tisthito giyate. anna ity a haiku dhuh. 

27. He who knows the support of this Saman is, indeed, 
supported. Speech, verily, is its support ; for, when supported 
on such, the vital breath chants. But some say it is (supported) 
on food (body). 

28. athdtah pavamdndindm evdbhydrohah, sa vai khalit prastotd 
sdma prastauti, sa yatra prastuydt, tadctdni japet: ' asatomd sad 
gamaya, tamaso mu jyotir gamaya, mrtyor mdmrtam gamaya ' iti, 
sayad aha, asato nul sad gamaya iti , nifty ur vd asat, sad amrtam, 
mrtyor mdmrtam gamaya , amrtam via kurv ity evaitad aha; 
tamaso via jyotir gamaya iti, mrtyur vai tamah , jyotir amrtam, 
mrtyor via amrtam gamaya, amrtam kurvaty evaitad aha; mrtyor 
mdmrtam gamaya iti , ndtre c tirohitam ivdsti. atha ydnitardni 
stotrdini, tesv ditmanc nnddyam dgdyct; tasmdd u tesu varam 
vrmta, yam kdmam kdmaycta, tarn, sa esa evam-vid udgdtdtmane 
vd yajamdndya vdyam kdmam kdmayatc, tarn dgdyati ; taddhaital 
loka-jid cva; na haivd lokyatdyd dsdsti, ya cvam ctat sdma veda. 

28. Now next the repetition only of the purificatory hymns, 
verily, the Prastotr priest recites the chant and V. hile he recites 
it, let the sacrificer recite these (three yajus verses): ‘from 
the unreal lead me to the real, from darkness lead ine to 
light, from death lead me to immortality.' When he says ‘from 
the unreal lead me to the real/ the unreal, verily, is death, the 
real is immortality. ‘From death lead me to cmmortality’ ; 
‘make me immortal,' that is what he says. ‘From darkness lead 



I. 4. 2. Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 163 

me to light’ ; darkness, verily, is death, the light is immortality. 
From death lead me to immortality, make me immortal, that 
is what he says. 'From death lead me to immortality/ there is 
nothing here that is hidden (or obscure and so requires explana- 
tion). Now whatever other verses (there are) in the hymns of 
praise, in them one should secure food by chanting. And 
therefore in them he should choose a boon whatever desire he 
may desire. That udgdtr priest who knows this, whatever desire 
he desires, either for himself or for the sacrificer, that he obtains 
by chanting. This, indeed is (called) world-conquering. He who 
thus knows this chant, for him there is no fear of his being 
without a world. 

abhydroha: ascension. It is so called because the performer reaches 
the divinity he worships. 


Fourth Brdhmana 

THE CREATION OF THE WORLD FROM THE SELF 

1. dtmaivedam agra dsit purusavidhah, so’ nuvtksya ndnyad 
dtmano pasycit, sv’ham asmity agre vydharat; tatoham ndmd- 
bhavat, tasrndd apy etarhy dmantvitah; aham ayavi ity evdgra 
uktva, athdnyan ndma prabvutcyad asyabhavati. say at purvo’smdt 
sarvasmdl sarvdn pdpmana an sat , tasmdt pnrusah ; osati ha vai 
sa tain , yo’smdt purvo bubhusati , ya cvarii veda. 

1. In the beginning this (world) was only the self, in the 
shape of a person. Looking aiound he saw nothing else than the 
self. He first said, ‘I am.’ Therefore arose the name of I. There- 
fore, even to this^day when one is addressed he says first ‘This 
is I’ and then speaks whatever 6Lher name he may have. 
Because before* all this, he burnt all evils, therefore he is a 
person. He who knows this, verily, burns up him who wishes 
to be before him. 

aham: derived |rom the root as ‘to be’ means the existence of I. 
anuvlksya : the person who sees and creates himself (srstvd), in the 
very ‘act of seeing enters into the creation (amiprdvisat), into all 
things, beings and selves. 

2. so’bibhct, tasmdd ekdkt bibheti, sa hay am Jksdm cakrc, yan 
mad any an ndfti, kasmdn mi bibhemiti, tata evdsya bhayam vJydya 
kasmdd hy abhesyat, dvitiyd 1 vai bhayam bhavati. 



164 The Principal Vpanisads I. 4. 4. 

2. He was afraid. Therefore one who is alone is afraid. This 
one then thought to himself, ‘since there is nothing else than 
myself, of what am I afraid?' Thereupon his fear, verily, passed 
away, for, of what should he have been afraid? Assuredly it is 
from a second that fear arises. 

3. sa vai naiva rone; tasmdd ckdki na rcnnate; sa dvitiyatn 
aicchat ; sa haitdvdn dsayathd strT-piimdmsau samparisvaktau; sa 
imam cvdtmdnam dvedhdpdtayat, lalah pat is ca patnl cdbhavatdm / 
tasmdt idam ardha-brgalam iva svah , iti ha smdha ydijhavalkyah; 
tasmdd ay am dkdsah striyd p dry at a eva . tdm samabhavat, tato 
maniisyd ajdyania. 

3. He, verily, had no delight. Therefore he who is alone has 
no delight. He desired a second. He became as large as a 
woman and a man in close embrace. He caused that self to 
fall into two parts. From that arose husband and wife. There- 
fore, as Yajnavalkya used to say, this (body) is one half of 
oneself, like one of the two halves of a split pea. Therefore this 
space is filled by a wife. He became united with her. From that 
human beings were produced. 

samabhavat: became united, mailhanam upagatavdn. &. 

Hiranya-garbha or Prajd-pati divided himself into two. Both are 
his elements. The two aie not separate and the theory is not one of 
final dualism. Cp. Yisnu Parana. 

sata-tupdm ca tdm ndrlm tapo-nirdhuta-kalmasdm 
svdyambhuvo manur devah palmtve jagrhe prabhnh. 

Because the woman was born of Viraj, she is said to be his daughter 
also: prajdpatir manvdkhyas sata-rupdkhydm dtmano duhitaram pat- 
mtvena kalpitdim. S. 

The original being, atman or self looks Ground and sees nothing 
else but himself. When he realises his loneliness, he has two feelings, 
one of fear and the other of a desire for companionship. 1 1 is fear is 
dispelled when he realises that there is nothing else of which he has 
to be afraid. His desire for companionship is satislied by his dividing 
himself into two parts which are then called husband and wife. 

Compare this with Plato’o myth of the androgynous man in 
Symposium 189c. 

From the union of the two, the race of human beings is produced 
A series of transformations of the original human pair into animal 
forms is mentioned in the npxt passage. 

4. sd heyam iksdm cakre, katham nu mdtmdna eva janayilvd 
sambhavati , hanta tiro’ s unit i; sd gaur abhavat, rsahha itaras tdm 
sam evdbhavat, tato gdvo ' jdyanta; vadavetar abhavat, asva-vrsa 



I. 4. 6. Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 165 

itarah, gardhabhitard gardabha itarah , tdm sam evdbhavat, tata 
cka-sapham ajdyata; ajctardbhavat , zm/a itarah , aviV Hard, mesa 
itarah, tdm sam evdbhavat , tato } jdvayo jdyanta; cvam cva yad 
idam kirn ca mithunam, d-pipi likdbhyah tat sarvam asrjata. 

4. She thought, ‘How can he unite with me after having 
produced me from himself ?' Well, let me hide myself. She 
became a cow, the other became a bull and was united with 
her and from that cows were born. The one became a mare, the 
other a stallion. The one became a she-ass, the other a he-ass 
and was united with her; and from that one-hoofed animals 
were born. The one became a she-goat, the other a he-goat, the 
one became a ewe, the other became a ram and was united 
with her and from that goats and sheep were bom. Thus, 
indeed, he produced everything whatever exists in pairs, down 
to the ants. 

5. so' vet, aham vdva srsfir asmi, ahum hi dam sarvam asrksiti ; 
tatali srstir abhavat, srstydm hdsyaitasydm bhavati ya cvam veda. 

5. He knew, I indeed am this creation for I produced all 
this. Therefore he became the creation. He who knows this as 
such comes to be in that creation of his. 

He who knows* this becomes himself a creator like Prajd-pati: 
etasmin jagati sa prajdpativat srasld bhavati. 

In the next verse we have the creation of the gods, Agni, Fire, 
and Soma, Moon. 

6. athety abhyamanthat, sa mukhdic ca yoncr hastdibhydim 
cagnim asrjata , tasmdd etcid nbhayam alomakam antaratah, 
alomakd hi yonir antaratah, tad yad idam dhur amum yaja, 
amum yajdy ekaikam devam, ctasyaiva sd visrstih, esa h hy eva 
sarve devdh. atha Tat him cedam dreiram, tad retaso asrjata, tad n 
somah. ctdvad vd idam sarvam annam caivdmuidas ca, soma 
evdnnam, agnir annddah. saisd brahmano’ tisrstih, yac chreyaso 
devdn asrjata: atha yan martyah sann amrtdn asrjata, tasmdd 
atisrstih. aiisrstydm hdsyaitasydm bhavati ya cvam veda. 

6. Then he rubbed l3ack and forth and produced fire from 
its source, theViouth and the hands. Both these (mouth and the 
hands) are hairless on the inside for the source is hairless on 
the inside. When the} T (the people) say ‘sacrifice to him,’ 
'sacrifice to the other one/ all this is*his creation indeed and he 
himself is all the gods. And nowwliate\er is moist, that he pro- 
duced from sf men, and that is Soma. This whole (world) is just 
food and the eater of food. Soma is food and fire is the eater of 



i66 


The Principal Upanisads I. 4. 7. 

food. This is the highest creation of Brahma , namely, that he 
created the gods who are superior to him. He, although mortal 
himself, created the immortals. Therefore it is the highest 
creation. Verily, he who knows this becomes (a creator) in this 
highest creation. 

soma: moon, the lord of medicinal plants, osadhipati. Cp. 
Deuteronomy XXXIII. 14: ‘The precious fruits brought forth by 
the sun and the precious things put forth by the moon/ 

$ refers to two views of Iliranya-garbha, that he is the trans- 
cendent Brahman and that he is the transmigrating ‘self,' para eva 
hiranya-garbha ity eke, samsdnty a pare. $ accounts for it by the 
difference of the presence and absence of limitations, upddhi-vasdt 
samsdritvam, puramdrthatas svuto’ samsdry eva. 

7. taddhcdam tarhy avydkrtam a sit, tan ndma-rupdbhydm eva 
vydkriyata, asau ndma, ayam idam rftpa iti; tad idam apy etarhi 
ndma-rupdbhydm eva vydkriyatc , asau ndma , ayam idam rupa iti. 
sa esa iha pravista dnakhdgrebhyah yathd , ksurah ksuradhdne 
vahitah sydt , visvam-bharo vd visvam-bhara-kuldiye , tam na 
pasyanti. a-krtsno hi sail, prdnann eva prdno ndma bhavati, 
vadan vdk, pasyams caksuh , srnvan srotram, manvdno manah, 
tdiny asyaitdni karma-ndmdny eva. sayo'ta ekaikam h paste, na sa 
veda, akrtsno hy cso’ta ekaikena bhavati, ditmety evopdsita, atra 
hi etc sarva ckam bhavanti. tad etat padanlyam asya sarvasya yad 
ayam dilmd, anena hy etat sarvam veda yathd ha vai padendnu- 
vindet. cvaiii kirtirh slokam vindate ya evani veda. 

7. At that time this (universe) wa,s undifferentiated. It 
became differentiated by name and form (so that it is said) he 
has such a name, such a* shape. Therefore even today this 
(universe) is differentiated by name and shape 1 (so that it is 
said) he has such a name, such a shape. He (the self) entered in 
here even to the tips of the nails, as a razor is (hidden) in the 
razor-case, or as fire in the fire-source. Him they see not for (as 
seen) he is incomplete, when breathing he is called the vital 
force, when speaking voice, when seeing the eye, when hearing 
the ear, when thinking the mind. These arc merely the names 
of his acts. He who meditates on one or another of them (aspects) 
he does not know for he is incomplete, with one or another of 
these (characteristics). The self is to be meditated upon for in 
it all these become one. This self is the foot-trace of all this, 



I. 4. 8. Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 167 

for by it one knows all this, just as one can find again by foot- 
prints (what was lost). He who knows this finds fame* and 
praise. 


ndma-rupa: name and shape which together make the individual. 
The nama is not the name but the idea, the archetype, the essential 
character, and the rupa is the existential context, the visible em- 
bodiment of the idea. In every object there are these two elements, 
the principle which is grasped by the intellect and the envelope 
which is apprehended by the senses. While nama is the inner power, 
rupa is its sensible manifestation. If we take the world as a whole, 
we have the one nama or all-consciousness informing the one rupa, 
the concrete universe. The different nama-rupas are the differentiated 
conditions of the one nama, the world consciousness. While the 
world form is miirta , its soul is a-murta. The former is shaped 
corporeal, sa-sarivam, the latter is incorporeal a-sartram. B.U. II. 3; 
C.U. VIII. iz. i. In B.U. III. 2. 12, the part that does not leave the 
individual soul at death is nayna, which is not accessible to the 
senses. Akasa is nama, and in the human individual the space in the 
heart hrdy-dkdsa, is the domain of nama, the principle of consciousness. 
as a razor in a razorcase : He is hidden in all things as a razor in its 
case or as fire in wood. The ignorant do not know him who is hidden 
behind all names ^nd forms. Sec R.V. I. 164. 5. 
visvam-bhara : He who sustains the world. V aisvdnar a visvam bibharli 
va i svdnardgni-ru penet i visvam-bharah. R. 

karma-ndmdni: names of his aets. These are functional names which 
conceal his undivided nature. We must realise the self not in its 
several aspects but as these are unified in the self. 
akjrtsnah : incomplete, a-purna svarupah. R. Sense or intellectual 
knowledge which does not involve the functioning of the whole self 
is incomplete knowledge^ Wholeness is integral insight. 

We trace out lo$t cattle by following their footsteps, so will we 
find everything if we know the Self. 


8. tad ctat preyah pidrdt, prevo vittdt , preyo* nyasmdt sarvasmat, 
antarataram, yad ayam dtmd. sa yo'nyam atmanah piiyam 
hruvdnam bruydt, priyam rotsyatTti, Tsvaro ha tathaiva syat. 
dtmdnam eva Priyam updsfta, sa ya dtmdnam eva priyam updste 
na Juisya priyam pramdyitkam bhavati. 

8. That self is dearer than a son, is dearer than wealth, is 
dearer than everything else and is innermost. If one were to 
say to a person who speaks of anything else than the Self as 
dear, he will lose what he holds dear, he would very likely do 
so. One should meditate 1 n the Self alone as dear. He who 



168 The Principal Upanisads I. 4. 10. 

meditates on the self alone as dear, what he holds dear, verily, 
will not perish. 

Jsvarah: able, capable, s unmntJiah. £. ' 

pramdyukam: perishable, pramaranasitam. £. 

9. tad ahull , yad braluna-vidyayd sarvam bhavisyanto manusyd 
manyautc, him n tad brahnui vet, yasmdt tat sarvam abhavad iti. 

9. The}' say, since men think that, by the knowledge of 
Brahman , they become all, what, pray, was it that Brahman 
knew by which he became all ? 

10. brahma vd idam agra dslt , tad dtmdnam evdvct , ahum 
brahmdsmlti: tasmdt tat sarvam abhavat, tad yo yo devdndm 
pratyabudhvata , sa cva tad abhavat, tathd rslndm, tathd manu- 
sydndm. taddhaitat pasyan rsii vdma-devah pratipcdc ,ahanimanur 
abluivam sur\ as ceti, tad idam api ctarhi ya evath vcda , a ham 
brahmdsmlti sa idam saivam bhavati; tasya ha na dcvds ca 
ndbhfitya isatc , dtmd hy esdiii sa bhavati. atha yo any dm devatdm 
updiste, anyo’sau anyo ham asmlti , na sa veda ; yathd pasur, 
evam sa devdndm; yathd ha vai bahavah pasavo manusyam 
bhuhjyuh , cram ekaikali puntso derail bhunakti; ckasminn cva 
pasdv ddiyamdnc 1 priyam bhavati, him u bahusu? tasmdd csdm 
tan na priyam yad ctan manusyd vidyuli. 

10. Brahman, indeed, was tins in the beginning. It knew 
itself only as ‘I am Brahman / Therefore it became all. Whoever 
among the gods became awakened to this, he, indeed, became 
that. It is the same in the case of seers, same in the case of men. 
Seeing this, indeed, the seer Vama-deva Juiew, ‘I was Manu and 
the Sun too.' This is so evep now. Whoever knows thus, ‘I am 
Brahman ’ becomes this all. Even the gods cannot prevent his 
becoming thus, for he becomes their self. So whoever worships 
another divinity (than his self) thinking that he is one and 
(Brahman) another, he knows not. He is like an animal to the 
gods. As many animals serve a man so does each man serve the 
gods. Even if one animal is taken away, it cautfws displeasure, 
what should one say of many (animals)? Therefore it is noi 
pleasing to those (gods) that men should know this. 

vSee R.V. IV. 26. 1. Vfuna-deva is the seer of the fourth book of 
the R.V. Being is self-knowledge. 

pratyabudhyata : became awakened. Cp. Buddhist bodhi sambodhi ; 
Kena T2. 

The gods art* not pleased that men should know the ultimate 



I. 4. 12. Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 169 

truth, for then they would know the subordinate place the gods hold 
and give up making them offerings. 

11. brahma va idam agra dsit, ckam eva ; tad ekam san na 
vyabhavat. tac chreyo rftpam atyasrjata ksatram , ydny etdni 
dcvatrd ksatrdini, indro varunah somo rudrah parjanyo yamo 
mrtynr isdna Hi. tasmdt ksatrdt param nasti, tasmdt brdhmanah 
ksatriyam adhastdd updste rdjasuyc , ksatra eva tad yaso dadhdti; 
saisa ksatrasya yonir yad brahma, tasvidd yady api raja 
paramatam gacchati , brahmaivdntata upanisrayati svdm yonim. 
ya u enam hinasti, svdm sa yonim rcchati, sa pdplydn bhavati , 
yathd sreydmsam himsitvd . 

11. Verily, in the beginning this (world) was Brahman , one 
only. That, being one, did not flourish. He created further an 
excellent form, the Ksatra power, even those who are Ksatras 
(rulers) among the gods, Indra, Varuna, Soma (Moon), Rudra, 
Parjanya, Yama, Mrtyu (Death), Isana. Therefore there is 
nothing higher than Ksatra. Therefore at the Rajasuya sacrifice 
the Brahmana sits below the Ksatriya. On Ksatrahood alone 
does he confer this honour. But the Brahmana is nevertheless the 
source of the Ksatra. Therefore, even if the king attains 
supremacy at the end of it, he resorts to the Brahmana as his 
source. Therefore he who injures the Brahmana strikes at his 
own source. He becomes more evil as he injures one who is 
superior. 

ekam eva: one onlv. 

At the beginning there was only one caste or class, the Brahmana: 
differentiations were not, ndslt-ksatrddi-bhcdah . S. 
ksatra: power or dominion, used to designate the princely or the 
military class. 

rdja-suya : the ceremonial anointing of* a King. 

12. sa naiva vyabhavat. sa visum astjata , ydny etdni deva- 
jdtdini ganasa dkhydyantc , vasavo rudra ddityd visvedevd maruta 
iti. 

12. Yet heVlid not flourish. He created the vis (the com- 
monalty), these classes of gods who are designated in groups, 
the Vasus, Rudras, Adityas, Visvedevas and Maruts. 

The Brahmana represents knowledge, the Ksatriya temporal 
power. They aje not enough. We require a class for inci easing pro- 
duction and acquiring wcalt^ 



170 The Principal LJpanisads I. 4. 15. 

13. sa naiva vyabhavat , 67 / saudram varnam asrjata pusanam; 
iyam vai p usd , m//u hfdam sarvam pusyati yad idarn kirn ca. 

13. He did not still flourish. He created the SSudra order, as 
Pusan. Verily, this (earth) is Pusan (the nourisher), for she 
nourishes everything that is. 

Society requires, in addition to wisdom, power, and wealth, service 
and work. Wisdom conceives the order, power sanctions and enforces 
it, wealth and production provide the means for cariying out the 
order, and work carries out. These are the different functions essential 
for a normal well-ordered society. These distinctions are found among 
both gods and men. 

14 - sa naiva vyabhavat. tac chrcyo-nipam aty asrjata dhannam: 
tad dat ksatrasya ksatram yad dharmah , tasmad d liar mad par am 
nasti: at ho a bally an bally dmsam dsamsatc dharmcna , yathd 
raj fid warn, yo vai sa dharmah satyam vai tat: tasmdt satyam 
vadantam dhith, dhannam vadatTti , dhannam vd vaduntam , 
satyam vadatTti: dad hy cvaitad ubhayam bhavati. 

14. Vet he did not flourish. He created further an excellent 
form, justice. This is the power of the Ksatriya class, viz. 
justice. Therefore there is nothing higher than justice. So a weak 
man hopes (to defeat) a strong man by means of justice as one 
does through a king. Verily, that which is' justice is truth. 
Therefore they say of a man who speaks the truth, he speaks 
justice or of a man who speaks justice that he speaks the truth. 
Verily, both these are the same. 

dharma: law or justice is that which constrains the unruly wills and 
affections of people. 

Even kings are subordinate to dharma, # to the rule of law. Law 
or justice is not arbitrary. It is.the embodiment of truth. ‘That which 
is known and that which is practised are justice/ jiidyamdnam 
anusthiyamdnam ca tad dharma eva bhavati. S. 
hopes to defeat : jetum dsamsatc . R. 

Erom early times kings are said to act out the truth, satyam 
krnvdnah. R.V. X. 109. f>, or take hold of the truth satyam grhndnah. 
Atharva Veda V. 17. 10; satya and dharma, truth and justice are 
organically related. 

15. tad dad brahma ksatram vit sudrah. tad agniwiiva devesu 
brahmdbhavat, brdhmano . manusyesu , ksatriycna ksatriyah, 
vaisyena vaisyah, sudrena sudrah; tasmad agndv eva devesu 
lokam icchante, brdhmanc manusyesu , etdbhydm hi rupdbhydm 
brahmdbhavat. atha yo ha vd asmdl lokdit svam lokam adrstvd 



I. 4. 16. Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 171 

praiti , stf avidito na bhunakti, yathd vedo vdnanuktah any ad 
vd karmdkrtam. yad iha vd apy ancvamvid mahat-punyam karma 
fyavoti, taddhdsydntatah kslyata cva , dtmdnam eva lokam updsTta; 
saya dtmdnam eva lokam upaste, na hdsya karma ksiyate , asmddd 
hy eva dtmano yad yat kdmayate tat iat srjate. 

15. So these (four orders were created) the Brahmana, the 
Ksatriya, the Vaisya and the Sfidra. Among the gods that 
Brahma existed as Fire, among men as Brahmana, as a Ksatriya 
by means of the (divine) Ksatriya, as a Vaisya by means of the 
(divine) Vaisya, as a Sudra by means of the (divine) Sudra. 
Therefore people desire a place among the gods through fire 
only, and among men as the Brahmana, for by these two forms 
(pre-eminently) Brahma existed. If anyone, however, departs 
from this world without seeing (knowing) his own world, it 
being unknown, does not protect him, as the Vedas unrecited 
or as a deed not done do not (protect him). Even if one performs 
a great and holy work, but without knowing this, that work 
of his is exhausted in the end. One should meditate only on 
the Self as his (true) world. The work of him who meditates on 
the Self alone as his world is not exhausted for, out of that very 
Self he creates whatsoever he desires. 

See C.U. VIII. 2. 

S quotes Mann II. 87 that a Brahmana is one who is fiiendly to all, 
to justify the aspiration of human beings to attain to the order of 
Brahmanahood: sarvesu btdtesu abhaya-pradah. A. 

A Brahmana grants freedom from fear to all beings. 

‘Tt is a common saying in mediaeval writers that society consists 
of those who work, those who guard, and those who pray. It is 
worth while tomote in parsing that these writers mean by the workers 
those who work oji the land, and .that the classification omits 
entirely the merchant and the dweller. in the towns." Legacy of the 
Middle /lg^s, 1926, p. it, C. G. Crump. 

16. atho ay am vd dtmd sarvesdm bhfitdndm lokah. sayaj juJioti 
yad yajate , tena devdndth lokah; atha yad anubrute , torn rsindth; 
atha yat pitrbhyo niprndti yat prajdm icchate , tena pitrnam / atha 
yan manusydw vdsayatc , yad ebhyo* sanam daddti, tena manii- 
sydndm; atha yat pasubhyas trnodakam vindati, tena pasnndm; 
yad asya grhesu svdpadd vaydmsy dpipilikabhya iipajivanti , tena 
tesam lokah. yathd ha vai svdya lokdydristim icclnt , evam haivam 
vide (sar^add) sarvdni bhiitdny aristim icchanti. tad vd etad 
viditam mimdmsitam. 

16. Now this self, verily, s the world of all beings. In so far 



172 The Principal Upanisads I. 4. 17. 

as he makes offerings and sacrifices, he becomes the world of 
the gods. In so far as he learns (the Vedas), he becomes the 
world of the seers. In so far as he offers libations to the fathers 
and desires offspring, he becomes the world of the fathers. 
In so far as he gives shelter and food to men, he becomes the 
world of men. In so far as he gives grass and water to the 
animals, he becomes the world of animals. In so far as beasts and 
birds, even to the ants find a living in his houses he becomes 
their world. Verily, as one wishes non-injury for his own world, 
so all beings wish non-injury for him who has this knowledge. 
This, indeed, is known and well investigated. 

lokah: world, object or enjoyment, loko hi ndma prdni-bhoga- 
sthdna-visesah . R. 

anubrittc: learns the Vedas, svddhydyatn adhlte. $ 

The intei dependence of man and the world including deities, 
seers, fathers, animals, is brought out. The same idea is elaborated 
in the theory of the five great sacrifices, panca-mahdyajhdh, 
bhiita-yajna , maniisya-yajha , pitr-yajila , deva-yajiia and brahma- 
yajfia for animals, men, manes, gods and seers. 
investigated: vicdritam. 

aristam: non-injury, ristam: ndsah, aristam , andsam. R. 

• 

17. dtmaivedam agra dsit, cka eva; so' kdmayata , jay a me sydt 
atha prajdycya; at ha vittam ?ne sydd, atlia karma kurviyeti. etdvdn 
vai kdimali: necchams ca na aio bhfiyo vindet. tasmdd apy ctarhy 
ekdki kdmayatc , jdyCi me sydt, atha prajdycya, atha vittam me 
sydd atha karma kurviyeti. sa yavad apy etesdm ekaikam na 
prdpnoti, a-krtsna eva tdivan manyate. tasyo krtsnatd: mana 
evdsya dttnd, vdg jdiyd, prdnali prajd , qiksar mdnusam vittam, 
caksusd hi tad vxndate, srotram daivam, sroirena hi tac chrnot. 
dtmaivasya karma, dtmanaiii karma karoti. sa esa pdiikto yajnah, 
pdhktah pasuh , pdinktah purusah , pdiiktam idam sarvam yad idam 
kim ca. tad idam sarvam dpnoti , ya evam vcda. 

17. In the beginning this (world) w r as just the self, one only. 
He desired, ‘would that I had a wife, then I may have offspring. 
Would that I had wealth, then I would perform rites/ This 
much indeed is the (range of) desire. Even if one wishes, one 
cannot get more than this. Therefore, to this day, a man who 
is single desires, ‘would that I had a wife, then I may have 
offspring. Would that I had wealth, then I would perform 
rites/ So long as he does not obtain each one of these, he thinks 
himself to be incomplete. Now his completeness (is as follows), 



I. 5. 2. Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 173 

mind truly is his self, speech his wife, breath is his offspring, 
the eye is his human wealth, for he finds it with the eye, the ear 
his divine wealth, for he hears it with his ear. The body, indeed, 
is his work, for with his body he performs woik. So this sacrifice 
is fivefold, fivefold is the animal, fivefold is the person, fivefold 
is all this w r orld, whatever there is. He who knows this as such 
obtains all this. 

The ignorant man thinks that he is incomplete without wife, 
children and possessions. 
a-krtsnah: incomplete, a-sampurnah . S. 


Fifth Brahma na 

PRAJA-PATPS production of the world as 
FOOD FOR HIMSELF 

i. yat saptdnndni medhayd tapasd janayat pita, 
ckam asya sddhdranam , dve devdn abhdjayat; 
truly dtmane’ kuruta , pasubhya ekam prdyacchat. 
tasmin sarvajn pratislhitam , vac ca prdnili yac ca na. 
kasmdit tdni na ksiyante adyanulndni sarvadd ? 
yu vaitdm aksilim veda, so'nnam atti pralikcna ; 
set devdn apigacchati , sa urjam upajivati. 
iti slokdh. 

1. When the Father (of creation) produced by knowledge 
and austerity seven kinds of food, one of his (foods) was 
common to all beings, • two he assigned to the gods, three he 
made for himself, one he gave to the animals. In it everything 
rests, whatsoever breathes and what does not. Why then do 
they not decline when they are being eaten all the time? He 
who knows this imperishableness, he eats food with his mouth. 
He goes to the gods, he lives on strength. Thus the verses. 

medhayd by knowledge, p raj ft ay a. 

tapasd: by austerity or the performance of rules, kannand ; jiidna- 
karmanl eva hi medhd-tapas-sabda-vdeye. S. 

2. ‘yat saptdnndni medhayd tapasd janayat pita ’ iti medhayd hi 
tapasdjanayat pita. ‘ ekam asya sddhdranam ' iti, utam evdsya 
tat sddhdranam annam, yad idam adyatc, sa ya dad u paste na 
sa pdpmano vydvartate , m is? , m hy ctat. ‘ dve devdn abhdjayat* iti, 



174 Ihe Principal Upanisads I. 5. 2. 

hutam ca prahutam ca; tasmad devebhyo juhvati ca pra ca juhvati , 
atho dhuh , darsapurnamdsav iti; tasmdn nesti-ydjukah sydt. 

‘ pasubhya ekam prdyacchat' iti. tat payah, payo hy evdgre 
manusyds ca pasavas copajivanti. tasmdt kumdram jdtam 
ghrtam vai vdgre pratilehayanti, stanam vdnudhd pay anti: atha 
vatsam jdtam dhuh, 'atrndda iti; 1 tasmin sarvam pratisthitam yac 
ca prdniti yac ca na' Hi, payasi htdam sarvam pratisthitam, yac 
ca prdniti yac ca na. tad yad idam dhuh samvatsaram payasd 
juhvad apa punarmrtyum jayatiti, na tathd vidydt. yad ahar 
eva juhoti, tad ahah punarmrtyum apajayaty cvam vidvdn; 
'sarvam hi devebhyo ’ nnddyam prayacchati. 'kasmdt tdni na 
ksiyantc adyamdndni sarvadd 'iti, puruso vd aksitih, sa htdam 
annam punali punar janayate. 'yo vai tdm aksitim veda 'Hi, puruso 
vd aksitih, sa htdam annam dhiyd dhiyd janayate karmabhih, 
yaddhaitan na kurydt ksiyeta ha. 'so'nnam atti pratikena * iti , 
mukham pratikam, mukhenety ctat. sa devdn apigacchali, sa 
fir jam upajlvati 'iti prasamsa. 

2 . ‘When the Father produced by knowledge and austerity 
seven kinds of food' means that the Father produced them by 
knowledge and austerity. ‘One of his foods was common to all 
beings’ means that the food of his which is eaten is that which 
is common to all. He who worships (eats) th^t (common food) 
is not freed from evil for, verily, that (food) is mixed. 'Two he 
assigned to the gods’ means they are the fire sacrifice (huta) and 
the offering. Therefore one sacrifices and offers to the gods. 
But they also say that they are the new-moon and the full- 
moon sacrifices. Therefore one should not offer sacrifice for 
material ends. ‘One who gave to the animals' ‘that is milk’ for, 
at first, men and animals live on milk alone. Therefore they 
make a newborn babe first lick clarified butter or put it to 
the breast; likewise they speak of a newborn calf as one that 
does not eat grass. ‘In it everything rests whatsoever breathes 
and what does not’ means that on milk everything rests what- 
soever breathes and what does not. This is said that by making 
offerings with milk for a vear one conquers further death. 
One should not think so. For he who know^ this conquers 
further death the very day he makes the offering, for he offers 
all his food to the gods. ‘Why then do they not decline when 
they are being eaten all. the time,’ means verily, the person 
is imperishable, for he produces this food again and again. ‘He 
who knows this imperishableness’ means that # the Person is 
imperishable, for he produces this food as his work by his con- 



I. 5. 3. Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 175 

tinuous meditation. Should he not do this, his food would be 
exhausted. ‘He eats food with his mouth/ The pratJka is the 
mouth, he eats it with his mouth/ He goes to the gods; he lives 
on strength; this is praise. 

$ makes out that desire is possible only when we are ignorant 
of the truth of things. When we realise the truth, there can be no 
desire: brahma-vidyd-visaye ca sarvaikatvdt kdmdnupapatteh . 

The eater is the subject which is constant, imperishable: the 
food eaten is the object, it is changing. 

mukham: mouth, pre-eminence, mukhyatvam, prddhdnyam $>. 

R. makes out that the Supreme Person produces food for the needs 
of creatures, paramdtmd praty aham anndni punah punah prdni-kar- 
manus arena janayati. 

3. ‘tviny dtmane kuruta iti } mano vacant prdnam, tdiny dtmane 
‘kuruta : anyatra mand abhuvam nddarsam , anyatra mand 
abhuvam ndisrausam iti, manasd hy eva pasyati, manasd srnoti , 
kdmah samkalpo vieikitsa, sraddhd ’sraddhd, dhrtir adhrtir hnr 
dhir bhir ity etat sarvam mana eva. tasmdd api prsthata upasprsto 
manasd vijdndti; yah kas ca sabdo, vdg eva sd; esa hi antam dyattd , 
esd hi na prdno ’pdno vydna uddnah samdno’na ity etat sarvam 
prana eva. etanmayo vd ay am dtmd , vdh-mayah, mano-mayah t 
prdna-mayah. 

3. ‘Three he made for himself/ Mind, speech, breath, these 
he made for himself. ‘(They say) my mind was elsewhere, I did 
not see it, my mind was elsewhere, I did not hear/ It is with the 
mind, truly, that one sees. It is with the mind that one hears. 
Desire, determination, doubt, faith, lack of faith, steadfastness, 
lack of steadfastness, shame, intellection, fear, all this is truly 
mind. Therefore e\ten if one is touched on his back, he discerns 
it with the mind. Whatever sound -there is, it is just speech. 
Verily, it serves to determine an end (object), but is not itself 
(determined or revealed). The in-breath, the out-breath, the 
diffused breath, the up-breath, the middle-breath, all that 
breathes is breath only. Verily, the self consists of speech, mind 
and breath. 

See Maitrl VI. 30. 

Mere presentation is not enough for. perception. Mind must be 
attentive. We often say that we did not see it or hear it because we 
were absent-minded. It is through the mind that we see and hear. 
samkalpa: deteftnination, determining the nature of a thing presented 
to us, whether it is white or blue, etc. pratyupasthita-visaya- 



1 76 The Principal Upanisads I. 5. 9. 

vikalpanam sukla-nllddibhedena. §. According to Arnara, it is 
a mental act, manasam karma. 

Prana is the general term for breath, in or out. 

Apdna is the downward breath, Vyana is the bond of union of 
the two. It is the breath which sustains life when there is neither 
expiration nor inspiration. Santana is common to both expiration 
and inspiration. Uddna leads the soul in deep sleep to the central 
Reality or conducts the soul from the body on death. 

Speech reveals things but is not revealed by others of the same 
class. 

4. trayo lokd eta eva, vdg evdyam lokah, mano' ntariksa lokah , 
prdno ’ sau lokah. 

4. These same arc the three worlds. Speech is this world (the 
earth), Mind is the atmospheric world (the sky). Breath is that 
world (heaven). 

5. trayo vedd eta eva, vdg eva rg vedah, mano yajur vedah , 
prdnah sdma vedah. 

5. These same are the three Vedas. Speech, verily, is the 
Rg Veda. Mind is the Yajur Veda. Breath is the Sdma Veda. 

6 . devah pitaro manusyd eta eva, vdg eva devdih, manah pitarali, 

prdno manusyah. * 

6. These same are the gods, manes and men. Speech, verily, 
is the gods. Mind is the manes. Breath is the men. 

7. pita mdtd prajd eta eva, mana eva pita , van mdtd , prdnah 
prajd. 

7. These same are father, mother and offspring, Mind, verily, 
is the father. Speech is the mother. Breath is the offspring. 

• • 

8. vijhdtam vijijhdsyam avijhatam eta eva; yat kirn ca vijhdtam, 
vdcas tad rupam, vdgg hi vijhdtd, vdg enam tad bhTdvdvati. 

8. These same are what is known, what is to be known and 
what is unknown. Whatever is known is a form of speech, for 
speecli is the knower. For speech by becoming that (which is 
known) protects him (the knower). 

9. yat kim ca vijijhdsyam, tnanasas tad rupam , mano hi 
vijhdsyam , mana enam ta$ bhutvdvati. 

9. Whatever is to be known is a form of mind for- mind is 

to be known. For mind by becoming that protects him. 

• 

The mind protects him by becoming that which is to be known. 



I. 5. 14. Brhad-dranyaka Ypanisad 177 

10. yat kirn cdvijhdtam, prdnasya tad rlipam; prdno hy avi- 
jhdtah, prana evarii tad bhutvdvati. 

10. Whatever is unknown is a form of breath for breath is 
what is unknown. For breath by becoming that protects him. 

11. lasyai vdcah prthivi sarlram, jyotl-rupam ay am agnih: tad 
ydvaty eva vdk, tdvatl prthivi , tdvan ay am agnih. 1 

11. Of this speech, the earth is the body. Its light-foim is this 
(terrestrial) fire. As far as speech extends, so far extends the 
earth, so far (extends) this fire. 

12. athailasya manaso dyauh sarlram , jyotl-rupam asdv ddityah , 
tad ydivad eva manas , tdvatl dyauh , tdvan asdv ddityah. tan 
mithunarh samaitam: taiah prdno ajdyata sa indr ah , sa eso’sapa- 
tnaJi: dvitlyo vai sapatnah: ndsya sapatno bhavati, ya evarii veda . 

12. Now of ibis mind, heaven is the body and its light-form 
is that sun. As far as the mind extends, so far extends the 
heaven, so far (extends) that sun. These two (the fire and the 
sun) entered into union and from that was born breath. He is 
Indra (the supreme lord). lie is without a rival. Verily, a second 
person is a rival. He who knows this has no rival. 

Indra: the supremj lord, paramesvarah. S. 

13. athaitasya prdnasydpah sarlram , jyotl-rupam asau c and rah, 
tad ydvdn eva pranah, tdvatya dpah, tdvan asau candrah, ta ete 
sarva eva samdh , sarve nanidh: sa yo haitdn anlavata npaste 
antavantarh sa lokarh jayati. atha yo haitdn anantdn updstc, 
anantam sa lokarh jayati. 

13. Next, of this breath, water is the body. Its light-form 
is that moon. As far as«the breath extends so far extends water 
and so far (extends) that moon. These are all alike, all endless. 
Verily, he who meditates on them as finite, wins a finite world. 
But he who meditates on them as infinite wins an infinite world. 

SELF IDENTIFIED WITH THE SIXTEENFOLD 
PRA JA-PATI 

14. sa esa samvatsarah prajd-patih, sodasa-kalah; tasya rat ray a 
eva pahcadaia-kalah , dhruvaivdsya sodasi kald. sa rdinbhir evd 
ca puryate , apa ca kslyatc; so'mdvdsydm rdtrim ctayd sodasyd 
kalaya sarvam idarh prdnabhrd anupraviiya, taiah prdtar jayate. 
tasmad etdm watrim prana hhrtah pranam na vicchindydd api 
krkatd sasya, etasyd eva devaidyd apacityai. 



178 The Principal Upanisads I. 5. ib. 

14. That Prajd-pati is the year and has sixteen parts. His 
nights, indeed, have fifteen parts, the fixed point his sixteenth 
part. He is increased and diminished by his nights alone. 
Having on the ncw-inoon night entered with that sixteenth 
part into everything here that has breath, he is born thence in 
the (following) morning. Therefore on that night let no one 
cut off the breath of any breathing things, not even of a lizard, 
in honour of that divinity. 

apacityai: in honour of, pujdrtham. S. 

15. yo vai sa samvatsarah prajdpalih sodasa-kalah , ay am eva 
sa yo’yam evam-vit purusah. tasya vittam eva pancadasa-kaldh , 
dtmaivdsya sod a si kald, sa vittenaivd ca puryatc a pa caksiyaic . 
tad ctan nabliyam yad ayam alma, pradhiv vittam. tasmdd yady 
a pi sarvajydnim jiyatc , at maud ccj jivati , pradhindgdd iiy 
ev dhuh. 

15. Verily, the person here who knows this is himself that 
Prajd-pati with the sixteen parts who is the year. His wealth is 
the fifteen parts, the sixteenth part is his self. In wealth alone 
is one increased and diminished. That which is the self is a 
hub, wealth a felly. Therefore even if one loses everything but 
he himself lives, people say that he has lost oijly his felly (which 
can be restored again). 

Wealth is compared to the spokes of a wheel. It is something 
external. If one loses wealth he loses only his outer trappings. He 
can regain wealth. It is the distinction between being and having, 
to use Gabriel Marcel’s words. 

The superscription at Delphi, ‘Know thyself is, according to 
Plutarch, an injunction addressed by God to all who approach him: 
Moraha 384 D.f In Alcibiades I. 130 E.f. Socrates says that he who 
orders ‘Know thyself bids ‘Know the soul,* and he who knows 
only what is of the body ‘k*nows the things that are his but not 
himself.’ 

THE THREE WORLDS AND THE MEANS OF WINNING 

1 HEM 

16. atha trayo vdva Iokdh, manusya-lokah, pitr-lokah. deva-loka 
iti. so’ yam manusya-lokah putrenaiva jayyah, ndnycna karma nd. 
karmand pitr-lokah , vidyayd deva-lokah , dcva-loko vai lokanam 
syesthah: tasmdd vidydm prasamsanti . 

16. Now, there are, verily, three worlds, the jvorld of men, 
the world of the fathers, and the world of the gods. This world 



I. 5. 17. Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 179 

of men is to be obtained through the son alone, not by any other 
work, the world of the fathers by works (rites), the world of the 
gods by knowledge. The world of gods is, verily, the best of 
worlds. Therefore they praise knowledge. 

vidyd: knowledge, vidyd-sabdasya brahma-vidyd-paralvam. R. 


FATHER’S BENEDICTION AND TRANSMISSION OF 

CHARGE 

17. athdtah samprattih. yadd praisyan many ate , atha patram 
dha, tvam brahma tvam yajhah, tvam loka iti. sa putrah praty 
aha , aham brahma, aham yajhah, aham loka iti. yad vai kirn 
ednuktam, tasya sarvasya brahmety ckatd. ye vai kc ca yajhah, 
tesdm sarvesdm yaj ha ity ckatd; yc vai ke ca lokdh, tesdm sarvesdm 
loka ity ckatd ; ctdvad vd idarii sarvam, ctanmd sarvam sann 
ay am itobhunajad iti, tasmdt putram anusistam lokyam dhuh. 
tasmdd cnam anusdsati, sa yadaivam vid asvidl lokdt praiti. 
athaibhir eva prdnaih saha putram dvisati. sa yady anena kirn 
cid aksnayd krtam bhavaii, tasmdd cnam sarvasmdt puiro muheati. 
tasmdt putro ndma sa putrcnaivdsmiml lokc pratitisthati, 
athainam etc daivqh prdnd atnrtd dvisanti. 

17. Now therefore the transmission. When a man thinks 
that he is about to depart, he says to his son, ‘you are Brahman, 
you are the sacrifice and you are the world.’ The son answers, 
‘I am Brahman, I am the sacrifice, 1 am the world.’ Verily, 
whatever has been learnt, all that taken as one is knowledge 
(Brahman). Verily, whatever sacrifices have been made, all 
those, taken as one are the world. All this is indeed, this much. 
Being thus the all, let # him (the son) preserve me from (the 
ties of) this world*, thus, (the father thinks). Therefore they 
call a son who is instructed ‘world-procuring’ and therefore they 
instruct him. When one who knows this departs from this world 
he enters into his son together with his breaths. Whalever 
wrong has been done by him, his son frees him from it all, 
therefore he is galled a son. By his son a father stands firm in 
this world. Then into him enter those divine immortal breaths. 

See K.U. II. 15. 

samprattih: transmission. It is so called* because the father in this 
manner transmits his own duties to his son: putre hi svdtma-vydpdra- 
sampraddnam Jtyroty anena prakdrena pita. S. 

putra: from pur, ‘to til/ and ti ‘to deliver/ a deliverer who fills the 



180 The Principal Upanisads I. 5. 20. 

holes left by the father: yah pitus chidram purayitvd trdyati. §. 
Others derive it from put ‘a hell/ and trd , ‘to save/ See Mann IX. 
138 - 

In the R.V. a son is called rnacyuta , one who removes debts. See 
Taittiriya Samhitd VI 3. 10. 5. 

18. prthivyai cainam agues ca daivT vug dvisati, sd vai daivt 
vdg, yayd yad yad eva vadati, tad tad bhavati. 

18. From the earth and from the fire the divine speech 
enters him. Verily, that is the divine speech by which whatever 
one says comes to be (is fulfilled). 

Ilis speech becomes infallible and irresistible: amogha pratibaddhd 
asya vdg bhavati. S. 

19. divas cainam ddityde ca daivam man a dvisati, tad vai 
daivam ntano yendnandy eva bhavati, atho na socati . 

19. From the heaven and the sun the divine mind enters 
him. Verily, that is the divine mind by which one becomes only 
joyful and sorrows not. 

He sorrows not because he is not connected with the sources of 
grief: sokadi-nimittdsamyogdt. § 

• 

20. adbhyas cainam candramasas ca daivah prana dvisati: sa 
vai daivah prdino , yah samcarams cdsamcarams ca na vyathatc , 
atho na risyati. sa evam-iit sarvesdm bhdidndm dtmd bhavati. 
yathaisd devatd , evam sah. yathaitdm devatdm sarvdni bhiitdny 
avanti, evam haivam-vidam sarvdni bhutany avanti. yad u kirn 
ccmdh prajdh socanti, amaivdsdm tad bhavati, punyam evdmum 
gacchati. na ha vai devdin pdpam gacchati. 

20. From water and thc.moon the divine. breath enters him. 
Verily, that is the divine bt eaih, whether moving or not moving, 
is not perturbed nor injured. He who knows this becomes the 
self of all beings. As is this divinity (Hiranya-garbha), so is he. 
As all beings regard that divinity, so do all beings regard him 
who knows this. Whatever sullerings creatures may undergo, 
these remain with them. But only merit goes *0 him. No evil 
ever goes to the gods. 

Individuals suffer because one causes suffering to another, but in 
the Universal Spirit where all individuals are one, the sufferings of 
the individuals do not affect the whole. 



I. 5. 21. Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 181 

THE UNFAILING BREATH 

21. athdto vrata-mtmdmsd . prajd-patir ha karmdni sasrje, 
tdni srstdni anyo’nyenaspardhanta. vadisydmy evaham iti vdg 
dadhre ; draksyamy aham iti caksuh; srosyamy aham iti srotram; 
evam anydni karmdni yathd karma; tdni mrtyuh sramo bhutvd 
upaycme; tdny dpnot; tdiny dplvd mrtyur avarundha; tasmdt 
srdmyaty eva vdk, srdmyati caksuh, srdmyati srotram. athcmam 
eva ndpnot yo’yam madhyamah prdnah. tdni jhdturh dadhrirc. 
ay am vai nah srcstho yah samcarams cdsamcarams ca na vyathate , 
atlio na risyati, hantdsyaiva sarvc rupam asdmeli: ta ctasyaiva 
sarve rupam abhavan, lasmdd eta etaindkhydyante prdindi Hi. 
tena ha vdva tat kulam dcaksate, yasmin kule bhavati ya evam 
veda. ya u haivam vidd spardhatc, anususyali, atmsusya 
haivdntato mriyate, iti adhydhnam. 

21. Now next a consideration of the observances. Prajd-pati 
produced the active senses. They, when they were produced, 
quarrelled with one another. Speech resolved ‘I will go on 
speaking. 7 The eye T will go on seeing. 7 The ear T will go on 
hearing. 7 And thus the other organs, each according to its 
function. Death, having become weariness, laid hold of them. 
It took possession of them; having taken possession of them, 
death held them back from their work. Therefore speech 
becomes weary (gets tired), the eye becomes weary, the ear 
becomes weary. But death did not take possession of him who 
was the middle breath. They (the senses) sought to know him 
and said, ‘This is, verily, the greatest among us, since (it) 
whether moving or not moving, is not perturbed, is not injured, 
let us all assume his form’ : of him indeed they became a form. 
Therefore they are called after him ‘breath. 7 In whatever 
family there is a man who knows this they call that family 
after him. And whoever strives with one who knows this 
shrivels away and after shrivelling dies in the end. This, with 
reference to the self. 

vrata: observance, meditative worship, updsana. S. 
karmdni: active Senses, instruments of activity. 
dadhre resolved, dlirtavdn R. 



i8 2 ' The Principal Upanisads I. 5. 23. 

THE UNFAILING AIR 

22. athddhidaivatam : jvalisydmy cvdham ity agnir dadhre; 
tapsyamy aham ity ddityah; bhdsydmy aham iti candy amah; 
evam anycl devatd yathd-devatam; sa yathaisdm prandnarh 
madhyamah prdnah , cvam ctdsdm dcvatdndm vayuh. nimlocanti 
hy any a devatdh , na vayuh. saisanastamita devatd y ad vayuh . 

22. Now with reference to the gods. Fire resolved T will go 
on burning/ The sun ‘I will go on warming/ The moon ‘I will 
go on shining'. So said the other gods each according to his 
divine function. As breath holds the central position among the 
vital breaths, so does air among these divinities; for other 
divinities have their decline but not air. Air is the divinity that 
never sets (never goes to rest). 

23. athaisa sloko bhavati: 

yatas codeti suryah 
astam yatva ca gacchati 
iti prdndd vd csa udcti, prune stam cti, 
tarn dcvds cakrire dharmam 
sa evadya sa u svah. 

iti y ad vd cte murky adhriyanta tad evdpy adyn kurvanti. tasmad 
ekam cva vratam caret, prdnyac caiva, apdnydc ca , ncn md pdpma 
mrtyur apnuvad iti ; yady u caret samdpipayiset. teno etasyai 
devatdyai sdyitjyam salokatdm jayati. 

23. On this there is this verse: ‘From whom the sun rises 
and in whom it sets; in truth from breath it rises and in breath 
it sets. Him the divinities made the law, he only is today and 
he tomorrow also. (Whatever the divinities observed then they 
observe till today.)’ Verily, what those (functions) undertook 
of old, even that they accomplish today. Therefore let a man 
perform one observance only. He should breathe in and breathe 
out wishing, ‘Let not the evil of death get me.' And when he 
performs it, let him try to complete it. Thereby he wins com- 
plete union with that divinity and residence in the same world 
with him. 



I. 6. 3. 


Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 


18 


Sixth Brdhmana 

THREE-FOLD CHARACTER OF THE WORLD 

i. tray am vd idam, ndma rupam karma; tesdm ndmndm vdg ity 
ctad esdm uktham , ato hi sarvani ndmany uttisthanti; etad esdm 
sdma; etadd hi sarvair ndmabhih samam; ctad esdm brahma , 
ctadd hi sarvani ndmdni bibharti. 

1. Verily, this (world) is a triad of name, shape and work. Of 
these as regards names, speech is the source, for from it all 
names arise. It is their common feature for it is common to all 
names. It is their Brahman , for it sustains all names. 

§ distinguishes the world of name, shape, work as non-self from 
Brahman the self: ndtmayat sdksdd aparoksdd brahma, 
vdk: speech, sound in general, sabda-sdmanyam. S. 
sama: common, samatvat sdma sdmdnyam. S. 

2. atha rftpdndm caksnr ity ctad esdm uktham, ato hi sarvani 
rupdny uttisthanti , etad esdm sdma, ctadd hi sarvai rupaih 
samam, etad esdm brahma; ctadd hi sarvani rupdni bibharti. 

2. Now, of slices eye is the source, for from it all shapes 
arise. It is their common feature for it is common to all shapes. 
It is their Brahman, for it sustains all shapes. 

3. atha karmandm dtmety ctad esdm uktham, ato hi sarvani 
karma ny uttisthanti, etad esdm sdma, etadd hi sarvaih karmabhih 
samam, etad esdm brahma, ctadd hi sarvani karmdni bibharti. tad 
etad trayam sad ckam ayam dtmd, dtmd ckah sann ctat trayam. 
tad etadamrtam satyencf channam, prdno vd amrtam, ndnla-rupc 
satyam; tdibhydm a^am pranas channyh. 

3. Now of works, the body is the source for from it all 
works arise. It is their common feature for it is common to all 
works. It is their Brahman, for it sustains all works. These three 
together are one, this self; the self, though one, is this triad. 
This is the imjnortal veiled by the real. Breath, verily, is the 
immortal, name and shape are the real. By them this breath is 
veiled. 



184 


The Principal Upanisads 


II. 1. 2. 


CHAPTER II 
First Brdhmana 

PROGRESSIVE DEFINITION OF BRAHMAN . 

1. drpta-bdldkir hdnucdno gdrgya dsn , sa hovdca ajdtasatrum 
kdsyam , brahma tc bravdmti , sa hovdca ajditasatruh , saliasram 
ctasydm vdci dadmah. janakah, janaka iti vai jand dhdvantlii. 

1. There lived formerly Drpta-balfiki of the Gargya clan, who 
was an expositor. He said to Ajfitasatru of KasI, ‘I will tell 
you about Brahman / Ajatasatru said, ‘I give you a thousand 
(cows) for this proposal/ People, indeed, rush, saying Janaka, 
Janaka. 

See K.U. IV. 

In this dialogue Drpla-bfdfihi, though a Brahmana, represents the 
impertect knowledge of Brahman , while Ajatasatru, though a 
Ksatriya, represents advanced knowledge of Bralitnan. Wlnle 
I)rpta-balaki worships Brahman as the sun, the moon, etc., as 
limited, Ajfitasatru knovvs Brahman as the self. 
drptah: proud, garvitah. S. 

Kdsi: KasI is one of the seven sacred places 2 * * * * 7 reputed to confer 
final emancipation. 

ayodhyd mathnrd may a kdsi hand avantikd 
purl dvaravatl caiva saptaitd moksa-ddyikdh. 
amlcdnah: expositor' amivacana-samarthah , vakld. S. Being ex- 
ceedingly vain, Giirgya accosted Ajfitasatru with boastful speech, 
in accepting his kind proposal Ajatasatru offers a reward of a 
thousand cows. 

Janaka was a well-known learned king/ Ajatasatru feels that he 
has also some of his qualities: 

2. sa hovdca gdirgyah, ya evdsdv ddilyc pnrusah , clam evdliam 

bralimopdsa iti. sa hovdca ajdilasalruh; via maitasmin saniva- 

disthdh. atisthdh survcsduii bhutdndiii nulrdhd rdjeti vd ahum clam 

apdsa iti f sa ya dam updste , atisthdh sarvesdm bhutdnani murdhd 

rdjd bhavati. 

2. Gfirgya said: ‘The person who is yonder in the sun, on 
him, indeed, do I meditate as Brahman / Ajatasatru said, 
‘Please do not talk to me about him. 1 meditate on him as 
all-surpassing, as the head and king of all beings. He who 
meditates on him as such becomes all-surpassmg, the head 
and king of all beings/ 



II. i. 5. Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 185 

atisthah: all-surpassing, atltya sarvdni bhutdnl tisthati. S. 
raja: king, resplendent; dlpti-gunopetatvdt. S. 

The results of meditation correspond to the forms meditated 
upon according to the view, .am yathd yatliopclsate tad eva bhavali. 
iatapatha Brdhmana. X. V. 2. 20. 

3. sa hovdea gargyah; ya evdsau candre purusah, etam evaham 
brahmopdsa iti. sa hovdea ajataiatruh , md maitasmin samva- 
di$thdh. brhan panda ra-vdsdh somo rdjeti vd aham etam apdsa iti. 
sa ya etam evam npdiste , ahar ahar ha sutah prasuto bhavati , 
nasyannam ksiyate. 

3. Gargya said: The person who is yonder in the moon, on 
him, indeed, do I meditate as Brahman / Ajatasatru said: 
‘Please do not talk to me about him. I meditate on him as the 
great white-robed king Soma. He who meditates on him as such, 
for him soma is poured out (in the principal) and poured forth 
(in the subsidiary sacrifices) every day. His food does not get 
short. 1 

Soma is the name for the moon and the juice from the creeper 
which is used in the sacrifices, yajiia-sdd hana-bhuta-somardja-sabdita- 
latd-visesa. R. 

pandara-vasah: white-robed. The white rays of the moon flood the 
earth. R. quotes Vyasarya, pdndarair amsubhir jagac-chddakatvdt 
pandara-vdsastvam 

4. sa hovdea gargyah; ya evdsau vidyuti purusah f .etam evaham 
brahmopdsa iti. sa hovdea ajdtasatruh, md maitasmin sarnva- 
disthdli, tejasvlti vd aham etam apdsa iti. sa ya etam evam updste , 
tejasvi ha bhavati , tejasvini hdsya prajd bhavati . 

4. Gargya said: ‘Th£ person who is yonder in lightning, on 
him, indeed, do I meditate as fyahman.* Ajatasatru said: 
‘Please do not talk to me about him. I meditate on him, verily, 
as the radiant. He who meditates on him as such becomes 
radiant, and his offspring, too, become radiant/ 

5. sa hovdea gargyah , ya evdyam dkdse purusah , etam evaham 
brahmopdsa iti* sa hovdea ajdtasatruh , md maitasmin saniva- 
disthah, purnam apravartili vd aham etam updisa iti , sa ya etam 
evam updste , puryate prajayd pasubhih ndsydsmdl lokdit prajo- 
dvartate. 

5. Gargya said: ‘The person who is here in the ether, on him 
indeed, do I meditate as Brahman / Ajatasatru said: ‘Please 
do not speak to me about him. I meditate on him, verily, as the 



186 The Principal Upanisads II. i. 9. 

full and the unmoving. He who meditates on him as such is 
filled with offspring and cattle, and his offspring does not depart 
from this world/ 

The continuity of his line is preserved in this world. 

6. sa hovdca gdrgyah, ya evdyam vdyau purusah, etam evaham 
brahmopdsa iti. sa hovdca ajdtasatruh , md maitasmin samva- 
disthdh, indro vaikunthoparajita seneti vd aham dam updsa iti , 
sa ya dam evam upaste , jisnur hapardjisnur bhavaty anyata- 
stya-jdyl . 

6 . Gfirgya said: ‘The person who is here in air, on him, 
indeed, do I meditate as Brahman / Ajatasatru said: ‘Please do 
not talk to me about him, I meditate on him, verily, as the 
lord, as the irresistible and as the unvanquished army. He who 
meditates on him as such becomes, indeed, victorious, uncon- 
querable, and a conqueror of enemies/ 

7. sa hovdca gdrgyah, ya evdyam agnau purusah, dam evaham 
brahmopdsa iti . sa hovdca ajdtasatruh , md maitasmin samva- 
disthdh, visdsahir iti vd aham etam updsa iti, sa ya etam evam 
it paste visdsahir ha bhavati, visdsahir hdsya prajd bhavati. 

7. Gargya said: ‘The person who is here in fire, on him, 
indeed, do I meditate as Brahman / Ajatasatru said: ‘Please do 
not talk to me about him. I meditate on him, verily, as the 
forbearing. He who meditates on him as such becomes, indeed, 
forbearing and his offspring, too, becomes forbearing/ 

visasahih: forbearing, marsayitd paresdm. §. 

8. sa hovdca gdrgyah , ya evdyam apsu purusah, etam evaham 
brahmopdsa iti. sa hovdca ajdtasatruh ', md maitasmin samva- 
disthdh , pratirupa iti vd aham etam updsa id, sa ya etam evam 
updste, pratirupam haivainam upagacchati, ndpratirupam, at ho 
pratirupo’smdj jay ate. 

8. Gargya said: ‘The person, who is here in water, on him, 
indeed, do I meditate as Brahman.’ Ajatasatru said: ‘Please do 
not talk to me about him. 1 meditate on him, verily, as the 
likeness. He who meditates on him as such, to him comes what 
is like (him), not what is unlike (him), also from him is born 
what is like (him)/ 

pratirupah: likeness, reflection, pratibimbah. 

9. sa hovdca gdrgyah, ya evdyam adarse purusah, etam evaham 
brahmopdsa iti. sa hovdca ajdtasatruh, md maitasmin samva - 



II. i. 12. Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 187 

disthdh. rocisnur iti vd aham etam upasa iti. sa ya etam evam 
upaste rocisnur ha bhavati, rocisnur hdsya prajd bhavati, atho 
yaih samnigacchati, sarvams tan atirocate. 

9. Gargya said: The person who is here in a mirror, on 
him, indeed, do I meditate as Brahman .' Ajatasatru said: ‘Please 
do not talk to me about him. I meditate on him, verily, as the 
shining one. He who meditates on him as such becomes shining 
indeed. His offspring, too, becomes shining. He also outshines 
all those with whom he comes in contact.' 

rocisnuh: shining, dipti-svabhavah. $. 

10. sa hovaca gargyah; ya evayam yantam pasedt sabdo } nudeti ; 
etam evdham brahmopasa iti. sa hovaca ajditasatruh; md maitasmin 
samvadisthah , asur iti vd aham etam upasa iti , sa ya etam evam 
upaste , sarvam haivdsmiml loka dyur eti, nainam puvd kaldt 
prdno jahdti. 

10. Gargya said: The sound here which follows one as he 
walks, on that, indeed, do I meditate as Brahman Ajatasatru 
said: ‘Please do not talk to me about that. I meditate on him, 
verily, as life. He who meditates on him as such attains a full 
term of life in this world. Breath does not depart from him 
before (the completion of) his time.' 

11. sa hovaca gdrgyah, ya evayam diksu purusah , etam evdham 
brahmopasa iti. sa hovaca ajdtasatruh , md maitasmin samva- 
disthdh , dvitiyo’napaga iti vd aham etam upasa iti, sa ya etam 
evam upaste, dvitiyavdn ha bhavati, ndsmad ganas chidyatc. 

11. Gargya said : ‘The person who is here in the quarters (of 
heaven) on him, indeed, do I meditate as Brahman Ajatasatru 
said: ‘Please do not tafk to me abqut him. I meditate on him, 
verily, as the second who never leaves us. He who meditates on 
him as such becomes possessed of a second. His company is not 
cut off from him.' 

His frirnds do not desert him. He is never lonely. 

12. sa hov deb gdrgyah, y a evayam chdydmayah purusah, etam 
evdham brahmopasa iti. sa hovaca ajdtasatruh, md maitasmin 
samvadisthah, mrtyur iti vd aham etam upasa iti, say a etam evam 
upaste , sarvam haivasmiml loka diyut eti, naivam purd kdldn 
mrtyur dgacchati. 

12. Gargya «said: ‘The person here who consists of shadow, 
on him, indeed, do I meditate as Brahman .' Ajatasatru said: 



188 The Principal Upani^ads II. i. 16. 

‘Please do not talk to me about him. I meditate on him, verily, 
as death. He who meditates on him as such attains a full term 
of life in this world. Death does not come to him before (the 
completion of) his time/ 

13. sa hovdea gargyah, ya evdyam dtmani purusah, etam 
evdham brahmopdsa Hi. sa hovdea ajdtasatruh , via maitasmin 
samvadisthdh , dtmanviti vd aliam dam updsa iti , sa ya dam 
evam it paste, dtmanvi ha bhavali atmanvini hasya prajd bhavati. 
sa ha tusnim dsa gargyah. 

13. Gargya said: ‘The person here who is in the self, on him, 
indeed, do 1 meditate as Brahman / Ajatasatru said: ‘Please 
do not talk to me about him. 1 meditate 011 him, verily, as 
self-possessed. He who meditates on him as such he becomes 
self-possessed. His offspring becomes self-possessed/ Gargya 
became silent. 

Self-possession is the quality of those who are cultivated: dtma- 
vattvam vasydtmakatvam. A. 

14. sa hovdea ajdtasatruh , ddivan nv Hi, ddvad-dJiTli; naitdvald 
viditam bhavatlti: sa hovdea gargyah upa tvdydniti. 

14. Ajatasatru said: ‘Is that all?' ‘That is all 1 (said Gargya). 
(Ajatasatru said) ‘With that much only it is not known/ 
Gargya said, ‘Let me come to you as a pupil/ 

I 5 - sa hovdea ajdtasatruh , pratilomam cai tad yad brdhmanah 
ksatriyam upeydt, brahma me vaksyatTii , vy eva tvdjhapayisyd- 
imti; tarn pdndv ddayottasthau. tan ha purusam suptam djagma- 
tuh , tarn dair ndmabhir dmantraydm cakre, brhan pandara-vdsah 
soma rajann iti: sa nottasthau; tarn pdnind pesam bodhaydm 
cakdra, sa hottasthau. 

15. Ajatasatru said: ‘VeAly, it is contrary to usual practice 
that a Brahmana should appioach a Ksatriya, thinking that he 
will teach me Brahman. However, I shall make you know him 
clearly/ Taking him by the hand he rose. The two together 
came to a person who was asleep. They addressed him with these 
names: Great, White-robed, Radiant, Soma. The man did not 
get up. He woke him by rubbing him with his* hand. He then 
got up. 

pratilomam: contrary to usual practice, vipantam. S. 

16. sa hovdea ajdtasatruh, yatraisa ctat supto’bhut, ya esa 
vijndnamayah purusah, kvaisa taddbhul, kuta dad dgdd Hi. tad 
u ha na mene gargyah . 



II. i. ig. Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 189 

16. Ajatasatru said: ‘When this person who consists of in- 
telligence fell asleep thus, where was it and whence did it come 
back.' And this also Gargya did not know. 

The fact that a man recovers his consciousness after deep sleep 
means that it was present even in sleep, though we are not conscious 
of it. In deep sleep the self perceives nothing whatever and is of the 
nature of inactive consciousness. 

17. sa hovdea ajdtasatruh, yatraisa ctat supto'bhut esa vijhdna- 
mayali purusah , tad esdm prdndndm vijndnena vijhanam diddiya 
ya cso' ntar -hr day a dkdsah tasmih chclc, tdini yaddi grim at i atha 
haitat purusah svapiti ndma . tad grhlta eva prdno bliavati , grhitd 
vdk, grhitam caksuh , grin turn srotram , grhitam manah. 

17. Ajatasatru said: ‘When this being fell asleep thus, then 
the person who consists of intelligence, having by his intelli- 
gence taken to himself the intelligence of these breaths (sense 
organs) rests in the space within the heart. When the person 
takes in these (senses), he is said to be asleep. When the breath 
is restrained, speech is restrained, the eye is restrained, the 
ear is restrained, the mind is restrained. 

dkdsa: space. S identifies it with the Supreme Self: akdsa-sabdena 
para eva sva dlmocyate. 

prana: breath. S means by it nose, prana ili ghrdnendr iy am. 

When the organs arc restrained, the self rests in its own self: 
tasmdd upasamhrtesn vdgddisu kriyd-kdraka-plialdlmatdbhdvdt svdt- 
mastha evdtmd bhavatity avagamyatc. S. kdrandvastha svasanraka 
paramdtmany apita iti svapiti sabddrtho’bhiprctah. R. 

18. sa yairaitaya svapndydearati , te hdisya lokdli: tad uta iva 
malidrdjo bliavati , ula jva mall d -brahman ah , uta iva uccdvacam 
nigaccliati: sa yadd ma hard jo, jdnupaddn grlutvd sve janapade 
yathd-kdmam parivarlda , evam eva'isa ctat prdndn grlutvd sve 
sanre yathd-kdmam parivartatc. 

18. ‘When he moves about in dream these are his worlds. 
Then he becomes as it were a great king, a great Brdhmana as it 
were. He enters, as it were, states, high and low. Even as a 
great king, taking his people, moves about in his country as he 
pleases, so also here, this one, taking his breaths (senses), moves 
about in his own body as he pleases. 

19. atha yadd susupto bliavati, yadd 11a kasya cana veda , 
hitd ndma inldyo dvd-saptatih sahasrdini hrdaydt puritatam 
abhipratisthantc, tdibhih ph tyavasrpya puritati sete, sa yathd 



190 The Principal Upanisads II. 2. 1. 

kumdro va mahdrdjo vd mahd-brdhmano vdtighmm anandasya 
gatva sayita , evam cvaisa etac chetc. 

19. ‘Again, when one falls sound asleep, when he knows 
nothing whatsoever, having come through the seventy-two 
thousand channels called hitd which extend from the heart to 
the pericardium, he rests in the pericardium. Verily, as a youth 
or a great king or a great Brdhmana might rest when he has 
reached the summit of bliss, so does he then rest. 1 

Round the heart are the veins 72,000 in number. These are of 
five colours uniting with the rays of the sun similarly coloured. 
The sun and the heart are said to be connected with each other. 
In deep sleep the soul glides into the veins and through them it 
becomes one with the heart. At death the soul is said to pass out by 
the veins and the rays of the sun which the wise find open to them 
while they are closed to the ignorant. See also IV. 2. 3; IV. 3. 20. 
C.U. VIII. 6. 1; M.U. I. 2. 11. There is another suggestion that only 
one vein leads to the sun out of 101, the vein in question leading 
to the head. This refers to the suture, the brahma-randhra (A.U. 
I. 3. 12) through which in the process of creation Brahman is said 
to enter the body as spirit. The two versions of 72,000 and 101 are 
mixed up in later accounts. N 

mahd-brdhmanah: great Brdhmana, anavarata-brahmdnanda-paro- 
brahma-vit. R. 

20. sa yathornandbhtt tantunoc caret, yathdgneh ksudrd visphu- 
hhgd vyuccaranti, evam evdsmdd dtmanah sarve prdndh , sarve 
lokdh, sarve dcvdh. sarvani bhutani vyuccaranti: tasyopanisat, 
satyasya satyam iti prana vai satyam, tesdm esa satyam. 

20. ‘As a spider moves along the thread, as small sparks 
come forth from the fire, even so from this Self come forth all 
breaths, all worlds, all divinities, all beings. Its secret meaning 
is the truth of truth. Vital breaths are the trfith and their truth 
is It (Self)/ 

See Maitrl Up. VI. 32. 

satyasya satyam. the truth of truth The world is not to be repudiated 
as false. It is true, but it is true only derivatively. It is sustained by 
the Ultimate Truth. 


Second Brdhmana 

BREATH EMBODIED IN A PERSON 

1. yo ha vai sisum sa-ddhdnam sa-praty-ddhdnfim sasthunam 
sa-ddmam veda, sapta ha dvisato bhrdtrvyan avarunaddhi: ayam 



II. 2. 3- Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 191 

vdva sisur y 0’ yam madhyamah prdnah , tasyaidam evddhdnam, 
idam pratyddhdnam, prdnah sthuna , annum ddma. 

1. Verily, he who knows the new-born babe with his abode, 
his covering, his post and his rope keeps off his seven hostile 
kinsmen. Verily, this babe is breath in the middle. His abode is 
this (body). His covering is this (head). His post is breath, His 
rope is food. 

The babe is the subtle body (lihgatman) which has entered the 
body in live ways. 

madhyamah: in the middle, sarira-madhy-avarti ayam, panca-vfttir yah 
prdnah. R. 

Seven hostile kinsmen are said to be the seven organs, the eyes, 
cars, nostrils and mouth. They are said to be hostile, because they 
hinder the perception of the inner self. See Katha. IV. 1. By these 
man becomes attached to the world. 

ddma: rope, pasa. 

Even as a calf is bound by the rope, the subtle body is supported 
by food, yatha vatsah pdsena baddho’vatisthate, evam annena pdsena 
baddho hi prdno’vatisthatc. Food binds the subtle to the gross body, 
sthula-sarira. 

2. tam etah saptdksitaya upatistliante. tad yd ima aksan 
lohinyo rdjayah, tdbhir cnarii rudro y nvdyattah; atha yd aksann 
upas tdibhih parjanyah; yd kaninakd , tayd ddityah; yat krsnam , 
tcna agnih; yat suklam , tena indrah; adharayainam vartanyd 
prthivy anvdyatta ; dyaur uttarayd; ndsydinnam ksiyatc ya evam 
veda. 

2. The seven imperishable ones stand near him (to serve). 
Thus, there are these red streaks in the eye and by them Rudra 
is united with him. Then there is the water iri^the eye, by it 
Parjanya (is united with him). There is the pupil of the eye, by 
it Aditya (the sun is united with .him). By the black (of the 
eye), fire (is united with him), by the white (of the eye), Indra 
(is united with him), by the lower eyelash earth is united with 
him, by the upper eyelash the heaven (is united with him). 
He who knows this, his food docs not diminish. 

The seven imperishable ones are so called because they produce 
imperishablcness by supplying food for the subtle body. 

3. tad esa sloko bhavati: 

arvag-bilas camasa iirdhva-budhnah , 
tasmin yaso nihitam visva-rupam: 
tasydsata r say ah sapta-tlre, 
vdg astami b, ahmana samviddna iti. 

G* 



192 The Principal Upanisads II. 3. 1. 

1 arvdg-bilas camasa Tirdhva-bndhnah' iti dam tac chirah x esa hy 
arvdgbilas camasa urdhva-budhnah. tasmin yaso nihitam visva- 
rupam' iti, prana vai yaso nihitam visva-rupam, prdndn etad aha. 
' tasydsata rsayah sapta-tire ’ iti, prana vd rsayah prdndn clad aha. 
‘vdg astami brahmand samviddna iti , vdg astami brahmand 
samvitte. 

3. O11 this there is the following verse: 'There is a bowl 
with its mouth below and bottom up. In it is placed the glory 
of manifold forms. On its rim sit seven seers, and speech as the 
eighth communicates with Brahman! What is called 'the 
bowl with its mouth below and bottom up’ is the head, for it is 
the bowd with its mouth below' and bottom up. ‘In it is placed 
the glory of manifold forms'; breaths, verily, are where the 
glory of manifold forms is placed: thus he says breaths. ‘On 
its rim sit seven seers/ verily, the breaths are the seers; thus 
he says breaths. ‘Speech as the eighth communicates with 
Brahman / for speech as an eighth communicates wdth Brahman. 

visva-rupam: manifold foims, ndnd-riipam. S. 

4. inuiv eva gotama-bliaradvdjau , ay am eva got amah , ay am 
bharadvdjah; imdv eva visvdimitra-jamadagni , ay am eva visvdmi- 
trah, ayam jamadagnih; imdv eva vasistha-kasyapau , ayam eva 
vasisthah, ayam kasyapah; vdg evdtrih , vded hy annam adyatc , 
attir ha vai ndmaitad yad atrir iti ; sarvasyditd bhavati , sarvam 
asydnnam bhavati , ya cram veda. 

4. These tw 7 o (ears) here are Gotama and Bharadvaja. This 
is Gotama, and this is Bharadvaja. These two (eyes) here are 
Visvamitra and Jamadagni. This is Visvamitra, this is Jama- 
dagni. These two (nostrils) here are Yasistha and Kasyapa.This 
is Vasistha, this is Kasyape. The tongue is, Atri, for by the 
tongue food is eaten. Verily, eating is t lie same as the name Atri. 
He who know r s this becomes the eater of everything: everything 
becomes his food. 


Third Brahma na 

THE TWO FORMS OF REALITY 

1. dve vdva brahmano rupe f murtam caivdmurlam ca, martyam 
cdmrtam ca , sthitam ca, yac ca, sac ca, tyac ca. 

1. Verily, there are two forms of Brahman, the formed and 



II. 3- 6. Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 193 

the formless, the mortal and the immortal, the unmoving and 
the moving, the actual (existent) and the true (being). 

See Maitrl VI. 3. 

2. tad ctan miirtam yad anyad vdyos cdntariksac ca , etan 
martyam , etat sthitam, ctat sat , tasyaitasya mftrtasya, ctasya 
martyasya ctasya sthitasya , ctasya sata csa raso ya csa tapati , 
sato hy csa rasah. 

2. This is the formed Brahman , whatever is different from 
the air and the atmosphere. This is mortal. This is unmoving, 
this is actual. The essence of this formed, this mortal, this 
unmoving, this actual is the yonder sun which gives forth 
warmth, for that is the essence of the actual. 

3. athdmurtam vdyus edmtariksam ca , ctad amrtam dad yat , 
etat tyat , tasyaitasydmurtasya , ctasydmrtasya , ctasya yatah 
ctasya lasyaisa raso ya csa etasmin mandate puntsah, tasya hy 
csa rasah, ity adhidaivatam. 

3. Now the formless is the air and the atmosphere. This is 
immortal, this is the moving and this is the true. The essence 
of this unformed, this immortal, this moving, this true is this 
person who is in the region of the sun for he is the essence (of 
true). This, with reference to the divinities. 

4. athddhydtmam: idam eva murtam yad anyat prdindc ca 
yas cdyam antardtmann dikdsah, ctan martyam, ctat sthitam, ctat 
sat, tasyaitasya mftrtasya, ctasya martyasya, ctasya sthitasya , 
ctasya sata csa raso yac caksuh, sato hy csa rasah. 

4. Now with reference to the self; just this is the formed, 
what is different from the breath and from the space which is 
within the self. This ft mortal, this is unmoving, this is actual 
(existent). The essence of this formed, this mortal, this un- 
moving, this actual i> the eye, for it is the essence of the actual. 

5. athdmurtam pranas ca yas cdyam antar-dtmann dkdsah; 
etad amrtam, ctad yat, ctat tyam, tasyaitasydmurtasya, ctasyd- 
mrtasya, ctasya yatah, ctasya tyasyaisa raso yo’yam, daksine’ksan 
purusah, tyatya hy csa rasah. 

5. Now the formless is the breath and the space which is 

within the self. This is immortal, this is moving, this is the 
true. The essence of this unformed; immortal, moving, true is 
this person who is in the right eye, for he is the essence of the 
true. • 

6 . tasya haitasya purttsa ya rupam yathd mdhdrajanam vdsah # 



194 The Principal Upanisads II. 3. 6. 

yathd pdndv-avikam , yathendragopah, yathagnyarcih, yathd 
pundankam , yathd sakrd-vidyuttam; sakrd-vidyutteva ha vd 
asya snr bhavati, ya evarii veda. athdta ddesah na iti na iti, na hy 
etasmdd iti, na ity anyat param asti; atha ndma-dheyam satyasya 
satyam iti . prdnd vai satyam, tesdm esa satyam. 

6. The form of this person is like a saffron-coloured robe, 
like white wool, like the Indragopa insect, like a flame of fire, 
like a white lotus, like a sudden flash of lightning. He who- knows 
it thus attains splendour like a sudden flash of lightning. Now 
therefore there is the teaching, not this, not this for there is 
nothing higher than this, that he is not this. Now the designa- 
tion for him is the truth of truth. Verily, the vital breath is 
truth, and He is the truth of that. 

See also III. 9. 26; IV. 2. 4; IV. 4. 22; iv. 5. 15. 

like a sudden flash of lightning: enlightenment is said to be 
instantaneous. Truth flashes suddenly like lightning. 
not this , not this : 

Matrceta speaks of the Buddha thus 'Only you yourself can 
know yourself who are beyond measure, beyond number, beyond 
thought, beyond comparison.’ 

aprameyam asamkhyeyam acintyam anidarsanam 
svayam evdtmandtmdnam tvam eva j datum arhasi 
151. D. R. Shackleton Bailey’s ed. (1951), pp. 148, 180. 

In the Republic , there is the impersonal form of the good and in 
the Timaeus there is the self-moving spirit fit to receive the name of 
God. This section of the Upanisad suggests that the two cannot be 
left unreconciled but are to be treated as two forms of one Reality. 

The Fourth Gospel insists that God ‘works’ in the world, but he 
works through the Logos who is himself God though not the God- 
head. Plotinus though he believes in heaven as the rich intelligible 
or spiritual world in which our individuality is preserved, affirms 
that on certain rare occasions the human soul may transcend even 
the realm of spirit, and enter into communion with the one, ‘beyond 
existence,' of whom nothing positive can be affirmed. While there is 
a realm which consists in the duality of subject and object, which 
is perceived by the intelligence to be coextensive and reciprocally 
necessary, there is an absolute unity from which all dualities proceed, 
which is itself above duality. The pseudo-Dionysius called God 
‘The absolute No-thing which is above all existence’ and declares 
that ‘no monad or triad can express the cdl-transcending hiddenness 
of the all-transcending superessentially superexisting superdeity.’ 
Scotus Erigena says: ‘God because of his excellence may rightly 
be called Nothing.’ Hooker says wisely: ‘Dangerous it were for 
the feeble brain of man to wade far into the doings of the Most 



II. 4- 3 - Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 195 

High; whom although to know be life and joy to make mention 
of his name, yet our soundest knowledge is to know that we know 
him not as indeed he is . . . our safest eloquence concerning him is 
our silence/ Many systems of thought distinguish between the 
absolutely transcendent Godhead ‘who dwelleth in the light which 
no man can approach unto' and the Creator God. In this famous 
passage, the Upanisad speaks to us of the Absolute transcendent 
non-empirical Godhead. This is S's view. 

Ramanuja, however, thinks that since there can be no object 
without qualities, this passage negates only some attributes and not 
all of them. For Ramanuja, knowledge is possible only of a determined 
or qualified object. He argues that the passage does not mean that 
Brahman has no qualities at all, but only that there are no evil qualities 
in Brahman. 


Fourth Brdhmana 

THE CONVERSATION OF YAJNAVALKYA AND 
MAITREYl ON THE ABSOLUTE SELF 

1. maitreyi, iti hovaca yajhavalkyah, ud ydsyan vd are ham 
asmdt sthanad asmi; hanta, te ’nayd kdtydy any ant am karavdniti. 

1. ‘Maitreyi/ said Yajnavalkya, ‘verily, I am about to go forth 
from this state (of householder). Look, let me make a final 
settlement between you and that Katyayam/ 

See IV. 5. 

sthanad: from the state, i.e. the stage in his life. Yajnavalkya wishes 
to renounce the stage of the householder, gyhastha and enter that of 
the anchorite, vanaprastlmi. 

• • 

2. sa hovaca maitreyi, yan nu ma 4 yam, bhagoh , sarva prthivi 
vittena purnd sydt, katham tendmrtd sydm iti. na, iti hovaca 
yajhavalkyah: yathaivopakaranavatdm jivitam , tathaiva tejivitam 
syad amrtatvasya tu ndsdsti vitteneti. 

2. Then said Maitreyi: Tf, indeed, Venerable Sir, this whole 
earth filled witl\ wealth were mine, would I be immortal through 
that?' ‘No/ said Yajnavalkya: ‘Like the life of the rich even so 
would your life be. Of immortality, however, there is no hope 
through wealth.' 

3. sa hovaca maitreyi, ycnaham ndmrtd sydm, kirn ahath tena 
kurydm, yad eta bhagavdn veda tad eva me bruhiti. 

3. Then Maitreyi said: ‘Wiiat should I do with that by which 



196 The Principal Upanisads II. 4. 5. 

I do not become immortal? Tell me that, indeed, Venerable 
Sir, of what you know (of the w T ay to immortality). 1 

Venerable Sir: Bliarata says that gods, sages, monks and saints 
are to be called bhagavnn: 

devas ca mu nay as caiva lihginah sddhavds ca ye 
bhagavann Hi te vduydh sarvaih stri-pum-napumsakaih. 
the way to immortality: kcvalam amrtatva-sddhanam. S. 

4. sa hovdca ydjnavalkyah, priyd bata arc nah sail priyam 
bhdsase; clii i dssva , vydkhydsydmi te; vydcaksdnasya tn me 
nididhydsasva iti. 

4. Then Yajfiavalkya said: ‘Ah, dear, you have been dear 
(even before), and you (now) speak dear words. Come, sit down, 
I will explain to you. Even as I am explaining reflect (on what 
I say).’ 

priyd: dear. You are dear because you wish to learn of that truth 

which is nearest my heart. 

bata: bately anukampydha. It shows tenderness. 

reflect: vdkydny arthato niscayena dhydtum iccheti. 

Those who recite the Vedas without understanding their meaning 
arc compared by Sayana to lifeless pillars which bear the weight of 
the roof : 

sthdnur ay am bhara did rah kildbhild , adhitya vcdam n a vijdndti yortham. 
Cp. what Krsna says to Arjuna in the Uttar a-gltd : 

ya ha kharas candana-bhdra-vdhi bhdrasya vettd na tn saurabhasya 

tathd hi viprali sruti-sdstra-purnah,jhdnena hinahpasubhihsanidnah . 

Just as a donkey bearing the weight of sandal- wood knows its 
weight but not its fragrance, so also is a Brdlimana who knows the 
texts of the Vedas and scriptures but not their significance. 

There is another version of this verse : 
yathd kharas candana-bhdra-vdlii bhdrasya tetta na tu candanasya , 
tathaiva sastrdni bahuny adhitya , sdram na jdnan kliaravad vahet sah. 

It is said that some people arc clever only at expounding, while 
others have the ability to practise what they learn. The hand carries 
the food to the mouth but only the tongue knows the flavours. 
vyakhydtum eva kccit kusatdh , sdstram prayoktum alum anye 
upandmayati karo’nnam rasdms tu jihvaiva jdindti. 

5. sa hovdca: na vd arc paiynh kdimdya patih priyo bhavati, 
atmanas tu kamaya patih priyo bhavati; na vd are jdydyaikdmdya 
jdyd priyd bhavati, atmanas tu kdmdya jdyd priyd bhavati , na 
vd are putrdndm kdmdya putrdh priyd bhavanti, atmanas tu 
kdmdya putrdh priyd bhavanti; na vd arc viltasya kdmdya vittam 
priyam bhavati, atmanas tu kdmdya vittam priyam bhavati; na 
vd are brahmanah kdmdya brahma priyam bhavati, atmanas tu 



II. 4- 5 - Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 197 

kamdya brahma priyam bhavati; na vd are ksatrasya kdmaya 
ksatram priyam bhavati dtmanas tu kamdya ksatram priyam 
bhavati; na vd are lokdndm kdmaya lokdh priyd bhavanti, 
atmanastu kdmaya lokdh priyd bhavanti; na vd are devdndm 
kamdya devdh priyd bhavanti , dtmanas tu kamdya devdih priyd 
bhavanti; na vd are bhutdndm kamdya bhutdni priydni bhavanti , 
dtmanas tu kamdya bhutdni priydni bhavanti; na vd arc sarvasya 
kamdya sarvam priyam bhavati, dtmanas tu kamdya sarvam 
priyam bhavati; dtmd va arc drastavyah srotavyo mantavyo 
nididhyasitavyali: maitrcyi dtmano vd arc darsancna sravancna 
maty a vijhdnencdam sarvam viditam. 

5. Then he said: ‘Verily, not for the sake of the husband is 
the husband dear but a husband is dear for the sake of the 
Self. Verily, not for the sake of the wife is the wife dear but a 
wife is dear for the sake of the Self. Verily, not for the sake of 
the sons are the sons dear but the sons are dear for the sake of 
the Self. Verily, not for the sake of wealth is wealth dear but 
wealth is dear for the sake of the Self. Verily, not for the sake 
of Brahminhood is brahminhood dear but brahminhood is 
dear for the sake of the Self. Verily, not for the sake of ksatriya- 
liood is ksatriyahood dear but ksatriyahood is dear for the 
sake of the Self, Verily, not for the sake of the worlds are the 
worlds dear but the worlds arc dear for the sake of the Self. 
Verily, not for the sake of the gods are the gods dear but the 
gods are dear for the sake of the Self. Verily, not for the sake 
of the beings are the beings dear but the beings are dear for 
the .sake of the Self. Verily, not for the sake of all is all dear 
but all is dear for the sake of the Self. Verily, () Maitrcyi, it is 
the Self that should be seen, heard of, reflected on and medi- 
tated upon. Verily, by the 1 seeing yf, by the hearing of, by the 
thinking of, by the understanding of the Self, all this is known. 

All objects of the world, earthly possessions, romantic delights, 
provide opportunities for the realisation of the Self. 
the Self should be seen, heard of, reflected on and meditated upon: 
srotavyah sruti-vdkyebhyah , mantavyas copapattibhih. 
matvd ca sat at aril dhyeya, ete darsana-hetavah. Yivarana- 
pra meya- mgr ah a . 

The Sruti, the text, is the basis for intellectual development, 
manana. It is a means subordinate and necessary to true knowledge; 
nididhydsana is the opposite of thoughtless diffusion. It prepares 
for integral purity. 

Contemplation is not mei philosophic thought. It is a higher 



198 The Principal Upanisads II. 4. 8. 

stage of spiritual consciousness. It secures the direct conviction of 
the reality. While a teacher can help, personal effort alone can take 
us to the goal of realisation. 

The Jaina and the Buddhist systems also recognise the three 
stages of religious development. The three jewels of the Jainas, 
ratna-traya, are right belief, right knowledge and right conduct. 
Matrceta says in Satapancdsatka (90) : 

dgamasyartha-cintdya bhdvanopasanasya ca 
kdla-traya-vibhdgo* sti ndnyatra tava sdsandt. 

Nowhere except in your teaching is there the threefold division of 
time into hearing the Scriptures, reflection on their meaning and the 
practise of meditation. 

6. brahma tarn paraddd yo' nyatrdtmano brahma veda. ksatram 
tam paraddd yo 9 nyatrdtmanah ksatram veda. lokds tam parddur 
yo 9 nyatrdtmano lokdn veda. devds tam parddur yo 9 nyatrdtmano 
devan veda. bhutdni tam parddur yo'nyatrdtmano bhutdni veda. 
sarvam tam paraddd yo 9 nyatrdtmano sarvam veda. idam brahma , 
idam ksatram, ime lokdh, hue devdh, imdni bhutdni, idam sarvam, 
yad ay am dtmd. 

6. ‘The Brahman a ignores one who knows him as different 
from the Self. The Ksatriya ignores one who knows him as 
different from the Self. The worlds ignore one .who knows them 
as different from the Self. The gods ignore one who knows 
them as different from the Self. The beings ignore one who 
knows them as different from the Self. All ignores one who 
knows it as different from the Self. This Brahmana, this 
Ksatriya, these worlds, these gods, these beings and this all are 
this Self. 

The various particular notes aie not heard apart from the whole, 
but they are heard in the total sound. 

7. sa yathdi dundubher hanyamdnasya na bdhydn sabddn 
saknuydd grahandya, dundubhes tu grahanena dundubhy-dghd- 
tasya vd sabdo grhitah. 

7. ‘As when a drum is beaten, one is not able to grasp the 
external sounds, but by grasping the drum or the beater of the 
drum the sound is grasped. 

aghdtasya vd: or the beater of the drum, taddhantr-purusasya 
nirodhena vd. R. 

8. sa yathd sahkhasya dhmdyamdnasya na bdhydn sabddn 



II. 4- ii. Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 199 

sdknuyad grahanaya, sahkhasya tu grahaenan sahkha-dhmasya 
va iabdo grhitah. 

8 . 4 As when a conch is blown, one is not able to grasp its 
external sounds, but by grasping the conch or the blower of the 
conch the sound is grasped. 

9. sa yatha vindyai vddyamanayai na bahyan sabddn saknuyad 
grahanaya , vindyai tu grahanena vlnd-vddasya va sabdo grhitah. 

9. ‘As when a vina (lute) is played, one is not able to grasp 
its external sounds, but by grasping the vina or the player of 
the vina the sound is grasped. 

10. sa yathardra-edhagner abhydhitdt prthag dhitmd vinis- 
caranti , evam vd are'sya mahato bhutasya nihsvasitam, ctad yad 
rgvedo yajurvcdah sdmavedo’tharvdngirasa itihdsah purdnam 
vidyd upanisadah slokdh siitrdny anuvydkhydndni vydkhydndni: 
asyaivaitani sarvdni nihsvasitdni. 

10. ‘As from a lighted fire laid with damp fuel, various (clouds 
of) smoke issue forth, even so, my dear, the Rg Veda, the 
Yajur Veda, the Santa Veda, Atharvdngirasa, history, ancient 
lore, sciences, Upanisads, verses, aphorisms, explanations and 
commentaries. From this, indeed, are all these breathed forth. 

See Maitrl VI. '32. 

All knowledge and all wisdom are the breath of the eternal Brahman. 
mahad bhutam: the great reality. It is great because it is greater than 
everything else and is the source of all else. 

breathing: As a man breathes without effort, so all these come out 
of the Supreme without elfort’ yatha aprayatnenaiva purusa-nisvdso 
bhavati. S. 

anuvydkhydndni. explanations, bhdsya-vyakhydndni. 
vydkhydndni: commentaries, bhasya-rupdni. 

11. sa yatha sarrdsdm apdm • samudra ekdyanam, evam 
sarvesdm sparsdindm tvag ekdyanam, evam sarvesdm gandhdndm 
nasikc ekdyanam, evam sarvesdm rasdndni jihvd ekdyanam , evam 
sarvesdm rupdndm caksur ekdyanam, evam sarvesdm sabddndm 
srotram ekdyanam, evam sarvesdm samkalpdndm tnana ekdyanam, 
evam sarvdsdVt vidydndm hr day am ekdyanam, evam sarvesdm 
karmandm hastdv ekdyanam, evam sarvesdm dinanddndim 
upastha ekdyanam, evam sarvesdm visargdndm pdyur ekdyanam, 
evam sarvesdm adhvandm pddav ekdyanam , evam sarvesdm 
vedandm vdg ekdyanam. 

11. ‘As the ocean is the one goal (uniting place) of all waters, 
as the skin is the one goal A all kinds of touch, as the nostrils 



200 The Principal Upanisads II. 4. 13. 

are the one goal of all smells, as the tongue is the one goal of 
all tastes, as the eye is the one goal of all forms, as the ear is 
the one goal of all sounds, as the mind is the one goal of all 
determinations, as the heart is the one goal of all forms of 
knowledge, as the hands are the one goal of all acts, as the 
organ of generation is the one goal of all kinds of enjoyment, 
as the excretory organ is the one goal of all evacuations, as 
the feet are the one goal of all movements, as speech is the 
one goal of all Vedas. 

12. sa y at hit saindhava-khilya udakc prdsta udakam evanuvi- 
liycta , na hdsya udgrahandyeva sydt, yato yatas tv ddadita 
lavanam eva, evani vd ara idam mahad bhutam anantam apduam 
vijndna-gliana eva; etebhyo bhdtebhyah samntthdya, tdny evdnn- 
vinasyati; na pretya samjhdsti , iti are bravzmi, iti hovdea 
ydjhavalkyah. 

12. 'As a lump of salt thrown in water becomes dissolved in 
water and there would not be any of it to seize forth as it 
were, but wherever one may take it is salty indeed, so, verily, 
this great being, infinite, limitless, consists of nothing but 
knowledge. Arising from out of these elements one vanishes 
away into them. When he has departed there is no more know- 
ledge. This is what 1 sa}', my dear’: so said Yarjnavalkya. 

saindhava: salt, sindhor vikdrah saindhavah , sindhu sabdenodakam 
abhidhiyate , syandandt sindhur udakam . S. 
samjiia: detailed knowledge, visesa-samjnd S. 

13. sd hovdea maitreyi , atraiva md bhagavdn amumuhat , na 
pretya samjndstili. sa hovdea , na va arc ham moham bravimi, 
alum vd ara idam vijndindiya . 

13. Then said Maitreyi: ‘In this, indeed, you have bewil- 
dered me, Venerable Sir, by 'saying that, "when lie has departed 
there is no more knowledge.”’ Then Yajnavalkya said: 'Cer- 
tainly I am not saying anything bewildering. This is enough for 
knowledge (or understanding)/ 

The confusion is due to the seeming contradiction that the Self 
is pure intelligence, and, again, when one has departed there is no 
more knowledge. The same lire cannot be both hot aild cold. S points 
out that Brahman , the pure intelligence, remains unchanged, that it 
does not pass out with the destruction of the elements, but the 
individual existence due to avidyd is overcome: katharh vijhana-ghana 
eva , katliam vd na pretya sanijndstlti, na hy usnas sitas edgnir evaiko 
bhavati . . . sa dtmd sarvasya jagatah paramdrthato bhuta-ndsdn na 
vinasl, vindsl tv avidyd-kfta-khilyabhdvah. S. 



II. 5- i. Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 201 

The goal seems to be like the state of dreamless sleep a state of 
utter annihilation. Maitreyi protests against such a bewildering 
prospect. 

14. yatra hi dvaitam iva bhavati, tad itara itaram jighrali, tad 
itara itaram pasyati , tad itara itaram srnoti, tad itara itaram 
abhivadati , tad itara itaram manule , tad itara itaram vijdndti . 
yatra tv asya sarvam atmaivdbhut, tat kena kam jighret, tat kena 
kam pasyet , tat kena kam srnuydt, tat kena kam abhivadet, tat 
kena kam manvita , tat kena kam vijdnlydt? ycnedam sarvam 
vijdndti , tarn kena vijdnlydt , vijhdtdram are kena vijdnlyad iti . 

14. ‘For where there is duality as it were, there one smells 
another, there one sees another, there one hears another, there 
one speaks to another, there one thinks of another, there one 
understands another. Where, verily, everything has become the 
Self, then by what and whom should one smell, then by what 
and whom should one see, then by what and whom should 
one hear, then by what and to whom should one speak, then 
by what and on whom should one think, then by what and 
whom should one understand ? By what should one know that 
by which all this is known ? By what, my dear, should one know 
the knower? 1 

See C.U. VII. 2^. 1. The reference here is to the Absolute Brahman. 

Whatever is known is an object. As the Self is the subject, it cannot 
be known. 

This section indicates that the later subjection of women and 
their exclusion from Vedic studies do not have the suppoit of the 
Upanisads. 


Fifth Brdhmana 

THE COSMIC AND THE INDIVIDUAL 

1. iyam prthivl sarvesdm bhutdnam madhu , asyai prthivyai 
sarvdni bhutani madhu; yas cdyam asydm prthivydm tejomayo* 
mrtamayah purusah , yas cdyam adhydtmam sdrlras tejomayo ’ 
mrtamayah pkrusah , ayam eva sa yo’yam alma , idam amrtam , 
idam brahma , idam sarvam . 

I. This earth is (like) honey for all creatures, and all creatures 
are (like) honey for this earth. Tlii 5 shining, immortal person 
who is in this earth and with reference to oneself, this shining, 
immortal person who is in the body, he, indeed, is just this self. 
This is immortal, this is B> ihman , this is all. 



202 


The Principal Upanisads II. 5. 5. 

The earth and all living beings are mutually dependent, even as 
bees and honey are. The bees make the honey and the honey supports 
the bees: parasparam upakdryopakaraka-bhave phalitam aha. A. 

Brahman is the self in each, in the earth and in the individual. 

2. imd apah sarvesdm bhutdndm madhu y dsdm apdm sarvani 
bhutdni madhu f yas cdyam dsv apsu tejomayo’ mrtamayah 
purusah , yas cdyam adhyatmam raitasas tejomayo’ mrtamayah 
purusah; ayam eva sayo’ yam dtmd, idam amrtam , idam brahma , 
idam sarvam. 

2. This water is (like) honey for all beings, and all beings are 
(like) honey for this water. This shining, immortal person who is 
in this water and with reference to oneself, this shining, immortal 
person existing as the seed (in the body), he is, indeed, just this 
self, this is immortal, this is Brahman , this is all. 

In the body it exists, specially in the seed: adhyatmam retasy 
apdm visesato ’ vasthanam . rctaso jala-vikdratvdt. R. 

3. ayam agnih, sarvesdm bhutdndm madhu; asydgneh sarvani 

bhutdni madhu; yas cdyam asminn agnau tejomayo ’ mrtamayah 
purusah , yas cdyam adhyatmam vah-mayas tejomayo ’ mrtamayah 
purusah , ayam eva sayo’ yam dtmd , idam amrtam , idam brahma, 
idam sarvam. • 

3. This fire is (like) honey to all beings, and all beings are 
(like) honey for this fire. This shining, immortal person who is 
in this fire and with reference to oneself, this shining, im- 
mortal person who is made of speech, he is just this self, this is 
immortal, this is Brahman, this is all. 

4. ayam vdyuh sarvesdm bhutdndm madhu; asya vdyoh sarvani 
bhutdni madhu; yas cdyam asmin vayaiu tejomayo ’mrtamayah 
purusah, yas cdyam adhyatmam pranas tejomayo ’mrtamayah 
purusah, ayam eva sa yo’yanX dtmd, idam amrtam, idam brahma, 
idam sarvam . 

4. This air is (like) honey to all beings, and all beings are 
(like) honey for this air. This shining, immortal person who is 
in this air and with reference to oneself this shining, immortal 
person who is breath (in the body), he is just th^s Self, this is 
immortal, this is Brahman, this is all. 

See I. 5. 11. 

5. ayam ddityah sarvesdm bhutdndm madhu; asyddityasya 
sarvani bhutdni madhu; yas cdyam asminn aditye tejomayo ' 
mrtamayah purusah, yas cdyam adhyatmam caksusas tejomayo 9 



II. 5 - 8. Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad ' 203 

mrtamayah purusah , ayam eva sa yo yam atma, idam amrtam , 
idam brahma , Aw sarvam. 

5. This sun is (like) honey for all beings and all beings, are 
(like) honey for this sun. This shining, immortal person who is in 
this sun and with reference to oneself, this shining, immortal 
person who is in the eye, he is just this Self, this is immortal, 
this is Brahman , this is all. 

6. imd disah sarvesam bhutdndm madhu; dsam disam sarvdni 
bhutani madhu; ya£ cdyam dsu diksu tejomayo ' mrtamayah 
purusah , yas cdyam adhydtmam srotrah prdtiirutkas tejomayo * 
mrtamayah purusah, ayam eva sa yo' yam atma, idam amrtam, 
idam brahma, idam sarvam. 

6. These quarters are (like) honey to all beings, and all 
beings are (like) honey for these quarters. This shining, immortal 
person who is in these quarters and with reference to oneself, 
this shining, immortal person who is in the ear and the time of 
hearing, he is just this Self, this is immortal, this is Brahman, 
this is all. 

time of hearing: sabda-prati-sravana-veldydm i>annihito bhavatlti 
prdti&rutkah. S. 

7. ayam candrcCh sarvesam bhutdndm madhu; asya candrasya 
sarvdni bhutani madhu; yas cdyam cismims candre tejomayo 8 9 
mrtamayah purusah, yas cdyam adhydtmam manasas tejomayo ' 
mrtamayah purusah, ayam eva sa yo’ yam atma, idam amrtam, 
idam brahma, idam sarvam. 

7. This moon is like (honey) to all beings, and all beings are 
(like) honey for this moon. This shining, immortal person wlio 
is in this moon and with reference to one self, this shining, 
immortal person who is in the mind; he is just this Self, this is 
immortal, this is Brahman, this is all. 

8 . iyam vidyut sarvesam bhutdndm madhu, asyai vidyutah 
sarvdni bhutani madhu; ya& cdyam asydm vidyuti tejomayo ’ 
mrtamayah purusah, yas cdyam adhydtmam taijasas tejomayo > 
mrtamayah purVsah, ayam eva sa yo’yam atma, idam amrtam, 
idam brahma, idam sarvam. 

8. This lightning is (like) honey to all beings, and all beings 
are (like) honey for this lightning. • This shining, immortal 
person who is in this lightning and with reference to this self, 
this shining, immortal person who is in the light, he is just this 
Self, this is immortal, this is Brahman, this is all. 



204 The Principal CJpanisads II. 5. 11. 

9. ayum stanayitnuh sarvesdm bhutdnam madhu ; asya 
stanayitnoh sarvdni bhutdni madhu; yas cdyam asmin stanayitnau 
tejomayo ' mrtamayah purusah, ya& cdyam adhyatmam sabdah 
sauvaras tejomayo mrtamayah purusah , ay am eva sayo'yam dtma, 
idam amrtam , idam brahma , id am sarvam. 

9. This cloud is (like) honey to all beings, and all beings are 
(like) honey for this cloud. This shining, immortal person who 
is in this cloud and with reference to one self, this shining, 
immortal person who is in the sound and in tone, lie is just this 
Self, this is immortal, this is Brahman , this is all. 

stanayitnu : cloud, parjanya or thunder, megha-garjanam. R. 

sound: sabde bhdvah sdbdah. £. 

tone: svare visesato bhavatlli sauvarah. £. 

10. ayam dkdsah sarvesdm bhutdnam madhu; asyakdsasya 
sarvdni bhutdni madhu; yas cdyam asminn dkdse tejomayo * 
mrtamayah , purusah , yas cdyam adhyatmam hrdydkdsah tejo- 
mayo ' mrtamayah purusah, ayam eva sa y o' yam atma , idam 
amrtam, idam brahma, idam sarvam. 

10. This space is (like) honey for all beings and all beings are 
(like) honey for this space. This shining, immortal person who 
is in this space and with reference to oneself, this shining, 
immortal person who is in the space in the heart, he is just this 
Self, this is immortal, this is Brahman, this is all. 

11. ayam dharmah sarvesdm bhutdndm madhu; asya dhar- 
masya sarvdni bhutdni madhu; yas cdyam asmin dhanne tejo- 
mayo 1 mrtamayah purusah, yai cdyam adhyatmam dharmas 
tejomayo * mrtamayah purusah, ayam eva sa yo’yam dtma, idam 
amrtam, idam brahma, idam sarvam. 

11. This law is (like) honey for all beings and all beings are 
(like) honey for this law. This shining, immortal person who is 
in this law and with reference to 'one self, this shining, immortal 
person who exists as lawabidingness, he is just this Self, this is 
immortal, this is Brahman, this is all. 

this law: though law is not directly perceived, i£ is described by 
the word This/ as though it were directly perceived, because the 
effects produced by it are directly perceived: ayam ity apratyakso’pi 
dharmah karyena tat-prayuktena pratyaksena, vyapadisyate ; ayam 
dharma iti pratyaksavat. S. The self and dharma or righteousness 
are regarded as equivalent. Cp. 'Live you (viharatha) having self as 
light and refuge and none other, having dharma asdight and refuge 
and none other.’ Digha Nikdya II. ioo. The end of the way is to 



II. 5 - 15 - Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 205 

become what we are, to become Brahman or the Buddha. The 
arhats are said to become one with Brahman , brahma-bliuta. 

12. idam satyam sarvesdm bhutdndm madhu; asya satyasya 
sarvdni bhutdni madhu; yas cdyam asmin satyc tcjomayo’ 
mrtamayah purusah , yas cdyam adhydtmam sdlyas tcjomayo ’ 
mrtamayah purusah, ayam eva sa yo’yam dtmd , idam amrtam, 
idam brahma, idam sarvam. 

12. This truth is (like) honey for all beings, and all beings 
arc (like) honey for this truth. This shining, immortal person 
who is in this truth and with reference to oneself, this shining, 
immortal person who exists as truthfulness, he is just this 
Self, this is immortal, this is Brahman, this is all. 

13. idam mdnusam sarvesdm bhutdndm madhu; asya mdnu- 
sasya sarvdni bhutdni madhu; yai cdyam asmin mdnuse tcjomayo ’ 
mrtamayah purusah, yas cdyam adhydtmam mdnusas tcjomayo ’ 
mrtamayah purusah, ayam eva sa yo’yam dtmd, idam amrtam, 
idam brahma, idam sarvam. 

13. This mankind is (like) honey for all beings, and all beings 
are like honey for this mankind. This shining, immortal person 
who is in this mankind and with reference to oneself, this 
shining, immortal, person who exists as a human being, he is 
just this self, this is immoital, this is Brahman, this is all. 

14. ayam dtmd sarvesdm bhutdndm madhu; asydUnanali sarvdni 
bhutdni madhu; yas cdyam asmiun dlmani tcjomayo’ mrtamayah 
purusah , yas cdyam dtmd tcjomayo’ mrtamayah purusah, ayam 
eva sa yo yam dtmd, idam amrtam, idam brahma, idam sarvam. 

14. This self is (like) honey lor all beings and all beings are 
(like) honey for this self. This shining, immortal person who 
is in this self and t^lie sfiining, immgrtal person who is in this 
(individual) self, he is just this Self* this is immortal, this is 
Brahman, this is all. 

The cosmic self and the individual self are referied to. 

15. sa vd ayam dtmd sarvesdm bhutdndm adhipatih; saivcsdm 
bhutdndm raja;\tad yatlidi ratha-ndbhau ca ratha-ncmau cdrdh 
sarve samar pitdih, evam evdsminn dtmani sarvdni bhutdni sarve 
devdih sarve lokdh sarve prdndih sarva eta dtmanah samar pitdh. 

15. This self, verily, is the lord of all beings, the king of all 
beings. As all the spokes are held together in the hub and felly of 
a wheel, just sg, in this self, all beings, all gods, all worlds, all 
breathing creatures, all these 'elves are held together. 



206 


The Principal Upanisads II. 5. 17. 

MADHU-V 1 DYA : THE HONEY DOCTRINE 

16. iddm vai tan madhu dadhyahh dtharvano ’svibhydm 
tivaca. tad etad rsih pasyann avocat: 

tad vdm nard sanayc damsa ugram . 
avis krnomi, tanyatur na vrstim. 
dadhyah ha yan madhv dtharvano vdm . 
asvasya strsnd pra yad tm uvdca iti. 

16. This, verily, is the honey which Dadhyah, versed in the 
Atharva Veda , declared unto the two Asvins. Seeing this the seer 
said: ‘O Asvins in human form, I make known that terrible 
deed of yours which you did out of greed, even as thunder 
(makes known) the coming rain, even the honey which Dadhyah, 
versed in the Atharva Veda, declared to you through the head of 
a horse. 1 

See R.V. I . 116. 12. Satapatha Brdhmana. XIV. I. 1 and 4. 
The two Asvins desired instruction from Dadhyah, but he was 
unwilling to impart it as Indra had threatened Dadhyah that he 
would cut off his head, if he taught this madhn-vidyd , honey doctrine 
to any one else. So the Asvins took off Dadhyan’s head and sub- 
stituted for it a horse’s head. Dadhyah declared the honey doctrine. 
Indra carried out his threat, and the Asvins restored to Dadhyah his 
own head. This story illustrates the extreme difficulty which even 
the gods had to secure the knowledge originally possessed by Indra. 
Asvins in human form, nardkdrau asvinau. £. 

sanaye: out of greed, Idbhdya: Idbha-lubdho hi lokc'pi krilram karmd- 
carati . S. 

1 7. idahi vai tan madhu dadhyahh dtharvano ’ svibhydm 

uvdca. 

tad etad rsih pasyann avocat: 
ditharvandydsvind dadhlce 
asvyam sir ah praty airayatam. 
sa vdm madhu pra vocad rtdyan , 
tvdstram yad dasrdv api kaksyam vdm iti. 

1 7. This, verily, is the honey which Dadhyah, versed in the 
Atharva Veda, declared unto the two Asvins. Seeing this, the 
seer said, ‘O Asvins, you set a horse's head on £)adhyan, versed 
in the Atharva Veda, ye terrible ones: to keep his promise he 
declared to you the honey of Tvastri which is your secret.’ 

See R.V. I. 117. 22. 

Keeping one’s solemn promise is more important than the life 
itself, jivitdd api hi satya-dharma-paripaland gurutareti. £. 



II. 5 - 19 - Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 207 

kaksyam: secret, gopyarn, rahasyam paramdtma-sambandhi yad 
vijhdnam. S. 

tvdstram: of Tvastr, the sun: tvasta adiiyah tasya sambatidhi. $. 

The head of yajna or sacrifice became the sun ; to restore the head 
the rite called pravargya was started, yajhas Hr as chinnam tvastd- 
bhavat, tat pratisandhanartham pravargyam karma. S. 

18. idam vai tan madhu dadhyann dtharvano ’svibhydm uvdca , 
tad etad rsih pasyann avocat: 

puras cakre dvipadah , puras cakre catuspadah . 
pur ah sa paksi bhutva pur ah purusa avisat iti. 

sa vd ay am purusah sarvdsu pursu purisayah , nainena kith 
ca nandvrtam , nainena kith ca ndsahivrtam . 

18. This, verily, is the honey which Dadhyan, versed in the 
Atharva Veda, declared unto the two Asvins. Seeing this the 
seer said: ‘He made bodies with two feet and bodies with 
four feet. Having first become a bird, he the person entered the 
bodies.’ This, verily, is the person dwelling in all bodies. There is 
nothing that is not covered by him, nothing that is not per- 
vaded by him. 

pur ah: bodies, purayii, iarlrdni . $. 
paksi: bird, subtle body, lihga-sarlram. 

Cp. pura-samjhe . sariresmin sayandt puruso harih, quoted by R. 
There is nothing which is not filled by the Supreme, inside or 
outside. 

sa cva ndma-rupdtmanantar-bahir-bhdvena kdrya-kdrana-riipena 
vyavasthitah. S. 

Cp. ‘This city {pur) is these worlds, the person ( purusa ) is the 
spirit ( yo’yam pavate, vdyu), who because he inhabits (sete) this city 
is called the citizen (puru sa).’ Satapatha BrdJimana XIII. 6. 2. 1. 

See also Atharva Veda it. 2. 30, where ‘he who knoweth Brahma’s 
city, whence the Person ( purusa ) is so called, him neither sight nor 
the breath of life desert ere old age.’ Philo says: ‘As for lordship, 
God is the only citizen.* Cher. 12 1. 

19. idam vai tan madhu dadhyann dtharvano’ svibhydm uvdca, 
tad etad rsih pasyann avocat: 

rypam rupam pratirupo babhuva, 
tad asya rupam praticaksandya ; 
indro mdydbhih puru-rupa iyate. 
yuktd hy asya harayah satd dasa iti. 

ayath vai harayah, ayam vai dasa ca sahasrani, bahfini ednantani 
ca, tad etad prahmdpiirvam, anaparam, anantaram, abdhyam 
ayam dtma brahma sarvdnub h ~ih, ity anusdsanatn. 



208 The Principal Upanisads II. 6. 2. 

19. This, verily, is the honey which Dadhyan, versed in the 
Atharva Veda, declared unto the two Asvins. Seeing this the 
seer said:* ‘He transformed himself in accordance with each 
form. This form of him was meant for making him known. 
Indra (the Lord) goes about in many forms by his may as (magical 
powers), for to him are yoked steeds, hundreds and ten. He, 
verily, is the steeds. He, verily, is tens and thousands, many 
and countless. This Brahman is without an earlier and without 
a later, without an inside, without an outside. This Brahman is 
the self, the all-perceiving. This is the teaching.' 

See R.V. VI. 47. 18. 

praticaksandya : for making him known. Creation is for the mani- 
festation of the glory of god. 
indrah: lord, paramesvarah. 

mayabhih: prajndbhih. £. By his wisdom he manifests himself. 
samkalpa-rupa-jndnaih. R. The Lord reveals himself through many 
forms by his maya, to reveal his thoughts. Indra assumes one form 
after another, makes round himself wonderful appearances: Sayana 
says, yad rupam kdmayate tad riipdtmako bhavati. itdnd-vidhdni 
sarirdni nirmimite. 

harayah: steeds, sense-organs, indriydni. 


Sixth Brdhmana 

THE LINE OF TEACHERS AND PUPILS 

1. atha vamsah : pautimdsyo gaupavanah, pautimdsydt, paitii- 
mdsyo gaapavandit , gaupavanah kausikcV, kausikah ka mutiny at, 
kaundinyah sdndilydt, sdndilyah kausikdc . ca gautamdc ca, 
gautamah . — 

1. Now the line of tradition (of teachers): Pautimasya 
(received the teaching) from Gaupavana, Gaupavana from 
(another) Pautimasya. (This) Pautimasya from (another) 
Gaupavana. (This) Gaupavana from Kausika, Kausika from 
Kaundinya, Kaundinya from handily a, Sandilyu from Kausika 
and Gautama. Gautama. — 

2. dgnivcsydt, dgnivesyah sandilydc ca dnabhimldtdc ca, 
dnabhimldta unabhimldtdt, dnabhimldta dnabhimldtdt, dnabhim- 
lato gantamdt, gautamah saitava-prdcinayogydbhydm , saitava- 
prdcinayogyau pardsarydt, pdrdsaryo bhdradvdjdt, bharadvajo 



II. 6. 3- Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 209 

bhdradvajdc ca gautamac ca , gautamo bhdradvdjdt , bhdradvajah 
pardiarydt , parasaryo baijavdpdyanat , baijavdpayanah, kausi - 
kdyaneh , kausikayanih. 

2. From Agnivesya. Agnivesya from £andilya and Anabhi- 
mlata, Anabhimlata from (another) Anabhimlata. Anabhimlata 
from (still another) Anabhimlata. (This) Anabhimlata from 
Gautama. Gautama from Saitava and Praclnayogya, Saitava 
and Praclnayogya from Parasarya, Parasarya from Bharadvaja. 
Bharadvaja from Bharadvaja and Gautama, Gautama from 
(another) Bharadvaja, Bharadvaja from Parasarya, Parasarya 
from Baijavapayana, Baijavapayana from Kausikayani, Kausi- 
kayani. — - 


3. ghrtakausikdt, ghytakausikah par usury dyandt, p dr usury d- 
yanah pdrdsarydt, parasaryo jdtukarnydt , jdtilkarnya dsurd- 
yandc cuydskdc ca , dsurdyanas traivuneh , traivanir aupajandha- 
neh, aupajundhanir dsurcii, dsurir bhdradvdjdt , bharadvaja 
dtreydt f dtreyo mdntch, mdntir gautamdt , gautamo gautamdt i 
gautamo vdtsydt , vdtsyah sdndilydt , sdndilyah kaisorydt kdpyat, 
kaisoryah kdpyah kimidrahdritdt i kiundrahdrito gdlavdt , gdlavo 
vidarbhi-kaundinydt , vidarbhl-kaundinyo vatsanapdto bdbhravdt, 
vatsanapdd bdbhrayah paihah saabhardt , panthdh saubharo ’yasyad 
dhgirasdt , aydsya diigirasa dbhutcs Ivdstrdt , abhutis tvdstro 
visvarupdt tvdstrdt, visvardpas tvdstro ’svibhydm, asvinau dadhica 
dtharvandt, dadhyahh dtharvano ’tliarvano daivdit , atharvd daivo 
mrtyoh prddhvamsandt, mrtyuh prddhvamsanah pradhvam- 
sandt f pradhvamsana ckarsch, char sir vipracitteh, vipracittir 
vyastch t vyastih sandroli } sandruh sandt audit, sandtanah sanagdt , 
sanagah paramcsthinah , paramcsthi brahmanah, brahma svaya- 
mbhu, brahmane namali. 

3. From Ghrtak’ausika, Ghrtakausika from Parasaryayana, 
Parasaryayana from Parasarya, Parasarya from Jatukarnya. 
Jatukarnya from Asurayana and Yaska. Asurayana from 
Traivani. Traivani from Aupajandhani. Aupajandhani from 
Asuri. Asuri from Bharadvaja. Bharadvaja from Atreya. 
Atreya from tylanti .Manti from Gautama. Gautama from 
Vatsya. Vatsya from Sandilya. Sandilya from Kaisorya Kapya. 
Kaisorya Kapya from Kumaraliarita. Kumaraharita from 
Galava. Galava from Vidarbhikaundinya. Vidarbhlkaundinya 
from Vatsanapat Babhrava. Vatsanapat Bfibhrava from 
Pathah Saub^arat. Pathi Saubhara from Ayasya Angirasa, 
Ayasya Angirasa from Abhrti Tvastra, Abhuti Tvastra from 



210 


The Principal Upanisads II. 6. 3. 

Visvarupa Tvastra. Visvarupa Tvastra from the two Asvins. 
The two Asvins from Dadhyanc Atharvana. Dadhyanc Athar- 
vana from Atharvan Daiva. Atharvan Daiva from Mrtyu Pra- 
dhvamsana. Mrtyu Pradhvamsana from Pradhvamsana. 
Pradhvamsana from Ekarsi. Ekarsi from Vipracitti. Vipracitti 
from Vyasti. Vyasti from Sanaru. Sanaru from Sanatana* 
Sanatana from Sanaga. Sanaga from Paramesthin. Para- 
mesthin from Brahma. Brahma is self-born. Salutation to 
Brahma. 

Paramesthin is Viraj. Brahma is Hiranya-garbha. 

The tradition of the Veda is traced to the Supreme. It is expressed 
or formulated by individuals but they are not its authors. The 
tradition belongs to the supra-individual order and is said to be 
apauruseya or non-personal. It is timeless though its apprehension 
is possible at any time. 



III. I. 2. 


Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 


211 


CHAPTER III 

First Brahmana 

SACRIFICIAL WORSHIP AND ITS REWARDS 

i. janako ha vaideho bahu-daksinena yajficneje. tatraha kuru - 
pdhcdlandm brahmana abhisametd babhuvuh . tasya ha janakasya 
vaidchasya vijijhdsd babhuva: kah svid esdim brahmandndm 
anucdnatama iti. sa ha gavdm sahasram avarurodha: dasa dasa 
pddd ekaikasyah srngayor dbaddhd babhuvuh . 

1. Janaka (King) of Videha performed a sacrifice at which 
many presents (were offered to the priests). Brahmanas of the 
Kurus and the Pancalas were gathered together there. In this 
Janaka of Videha arose a desire to know which of these 
Brahmanas was the most learned in scripture. He enclosed (in a 
pen) a thousand cows. To the horns (of each cow) were fastened 
ten coins (of gold). 

Though this states the same doctrine as the previous madhuvidyd, 
§ makes out that while the previous section depended on scripture, 
dgama-pradhanam % the present one is based on reasoning, upapatti - 
pradhanam. When the two, scripture and reasoning, demonstrate the 
unity of the Self, it is seen clearly as a bael fruit in the palm of one's 
hand: dgamopapattl hy dtmaikatva-prakasandya pravrtte taknutah 
kara-tala-gata-bilvam iva darsayitum. §. 

2 . tan hovdca : brahmana bhagavantah , yo vo brahmisthah, sa 
eta gd udajatdm iti. te ha brahmana na dadhrsuh. atha ha ydjha- 
valkyah svam eva bratymacdrinam uvdca: etdh f saumya, udaja, 
sdmasrava iti. td . hoddcakdra , te Jia brahmanas cukrudhuh: 
katham nu no brahmistho bruviteti. atha ha janakasya vaidehasya 
hotdsvalo babhuva: sa hainam papraccha, tvam nu khalu nah , 
ydjhavalkya , brahmistho ' siti . sa hovdca: namo vayarii brahmist- 
hdya kurmah; gokdmd eva vayam sma iti. tarn ha tata evaprastum 
dadhre hotdsvalah. 

2 . He said to them: 'Venerable Brahmanas. let him of you 
who is the wisest Brahmana among you, take away these cows.' 
Those Brahmanas did not dare (to take the cows). Then Yajna- 
valkya said to his pupil ‘Samasrav^s, my dear, drive them 
away.' He drove them away. The Brahmanas were enraged (and 
said) : 'How can he declare himself to be the wisest Brahmana 
among us?’ Now, there was A£vala, the hotr priest of Janaka 



212 The Principal Upanisads III. i. 5. 

of Videha. He asked him, ‘Yajnavalkya, are you, indeed, the 
wisest Brahmana among us?’ He replied, ‘We bow to the 
wisest Brahmana but we just wish to have these cows/ Therefore, 
Asvala, the hotr priest, decided to question him. 

Yajnavalkya is a teacher of the Yajur Veda but his pupil chants 
the Sdman which is the Rg Veda set to music, and the Atharva Veda 
is subsidiary to the other three. So Yajnavalkya is learned in all 
the four vedas. 

3. Yajnavalkya , iti hovdea. yad idam saw am mrtyundptam , 
sarvam mrtyun abhipannam , kena yajavaino mrtyor clptim atimu- 
cyata iti : hotrd rtvijd , agnitul, vaca: vdg vai yajhasya hotd, tad 
yeyam vak. so’ yam agnilj , sa hotd , sd muktih , satimuktih . 

3. ‘Yajnavalkya/ said he, ‘since everything here is pervaded 
by death, since everything is overcome by death, by what 
means does the sacrificer free himself from the reach of death V 
(Yajnavalkya said) ‘By the hotr priest, by lire, by speech. 
Verily, speech is the hotr of sacrifice. That which is this speech 
is this fire. This (fire) is hotr. This is freedom, this is complete 
freedom/ 

dptam: pervaded, vydptam. §. 
abhipannam: overcome, swayed, vasikrtam. £. 

By the knowledge of the identity of the sacrificer, the lire and 
the ritual speech one gets beyond death. 

4. yajnavalkya , iti hovdea , yad idam sarvam ahorditrdbhydm 
dptam , sarvam aliordtrdbhydm abhipannam , kena yajamano 
’hordtrayor aptim atimucyata iti. adhvaryuna rtvijd , caksusd, 
ddityena , caksur vai yajhasya adhvaryuh, tad yad idam caksnh , 
so’ sav ddityah; so ’ dhvaryuh , sd muktih jsdtimnktih. 

4. ‘Yajnavalkya/ said he, ‘since everything here is pervaded 
by day and night, since everything is overcome by day and 
night, by what means does the sacrificer free himself from 
the reach of day and night?' ‘By the adhvaryu priest, by the 
eye, by the sun. Verily, the eye is the adhvaryu of the sacrifice. 
That which is his eye is the yonder sun. This is the adhvaryu. 
This is freedom. This is complete freedom/ 

Day and night are symbolic of time, which is the source of all 
change: viparinama-hetuh kdlah. S. 

5. yajnavalkya , iti hovdea , yad idam sarvam purva-paksa - 
apara-paksdbhydm dptam , sarvam purvapaksa-apotrapaksabhyam 
abhipannam . kena yajamanah puvvapaksa-aparapaksayor aptim 



III. i. 8. Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 213 

atimucyata iti: udgdtra rtvijd, vdyund, prdncna , prdno vai 
yajnasya udgatd , /arf yo yam pvdnah. sa vdyuh , sa udgdtd, sd 
muktih sdtimukiih. 

5. 'Yajnavalkya,' said he, 'since everything here is overtaken 
by the bright and dark fortnights, since everything is overcome 
by the bright and dark fortnights, by what means does the 
sacrificer free himself from the reach of the bright and the dark 
fortnights?' 'By the udgdlr priest, by the air, by the breath. 
Verily, the breath is the udgdlr priest of the sacrifice. That 
which is this breath is the air. This is the udgdlr priest. This is 
freedom. This is complete freedom/ 

6. Yajnavalkya , iti hovdea , yad idam antariksam andramba- 
nam iva kemikramena yajamdnah svargam lokam dkramata iti: 
brahmand rtvijd, manasd, eandrena; memo vai yajnasya brahma, 
tad yad idam manah, so’ suit candrah, sa brahma , sa muktih , 
sdtimuktili ity alimoksdh, at ha satnpadah . 

6. 'Yajnavalkya/ said he, 'since the sky is, as it were, without 
a support, by what means of ascent does a sacrificer reach the 
heavenly world?' By tlu 1 Brahma priest, by the mind, by the 
moon. Verily, mind is the Bialima of the sacrifice. That which 
is this mind is the yonder moon. This is the Brahman. This is 
freedom. This is complete freedom. This is concerning freedom; 
and now the achievements. 

sampadali: achievements of results acquired, phala-prdptih. 

7. yajnavalkya, iti hovdea , katibhir ayam adya rgbhir hotdsmin 
yajhc karisyatlti: tisrbhir iti: katamds Ids tisra iti . pitro nuvdkyd 
ca ydjyd ca sasyaiva trtjyd: kith tdbhir jayaliti: yat kirn cedam 
prdnabhrd iti. 

7. ‘Yajnavalkya/ said he, 'how many (kinds of) Rg. verses 
will the lwlr priest use today in this sacrifice?' ‘Three.' 
‘Which are these three?' ‘The introductory verse, the verse 
accompanying the sacrifice and the benedictory as the third.' 
‘What does one win by these?' ‘Whatever that is here that has 
breath.' 

8 . yajnavalkya, Hi hovdea, katy ayam adyddhvaiyur asmin 
yajha dhutir hosyatlti: tisra iti: katamds ids tisra iti: yd hutd 
ujjvalanli, yd hutd atinedante, yd hutd adhiserate: kim tdbhir 
jayatiti: yd huffi ujjvalanli deva-lokam eva tdbhir jay at i, dipyata 
iva hi deva-lokah; yd hutd atin ' dante , pitr-lokam eva tdbhir jay at i, 



214 The Principal Upanisads HI. i. io. 

ativa hi pitr-lokah; yd hutd adhiserate , manusya-lokam eva tdbhir 
jayati , adha iva hi manusya-lokah . 

8. ‘Yajnavalkya/ said he, ‘how many (kinds of) oblations 
will the Adhvaryu priest offer today in this sacrifice?' ‘Three.' 
‘Which are these three.' ‘Those which, when offered, blaze 
upward, those which, when offered, make a great noise and 
those which, when offered, sink downward.' ‘What does one 
win by these?' ‘By those which, when offered, blaze upward, 
one wins the world of the gods for the world of the gods burns 
bright, as it were. By those which, when offered, make a great 
noise one wins the world of the fathers for the world of the 
fathers is excessively (noisy). By those which, when offered, 
sink downwards, one wins the world of men for the world of 
men is down below, as it were.' 

The three kinds of oblations are said to be wood and clarified 
butter, flesh, milk and soma juice. S. The first flares up, the second 
makes a hissing noise, the third sinks down into the earth. 

Those who are in the world of the fathers cry to be delivered out 
of it. 

atinedante. make a great noise, ativa sabdam kurvanti. $. 

9. ydjhavalkya, iti hovdea , katibhir ay am adya brahma yaj ham 
daksmato devatdbhir gopdyatlti: ckaycti: katama saiketi : mana 
eveti, anantam vai manah anantd visve-devdh, anantam eva sa tena 
lokam jayati. 

9. ‘Yajnavalkya,’ said he, ‘with how many divinities docs 
the Brahma priest on the right protect the sacrifice today?' 
‘With one.' ‘Which is that one?' ‘The mind alone.' Verily, the 
mind is infinite; the Visve-dcvds are infinite. An infinite world he 
wins thereby. 

Through mind we meditate and it is said to be infinite on account 
of its modifications. 

10. ydjhavalkya , iti hovdea, katy ay am adyodgdtdsniin yajhe 
stotriydh stosyatiti: tisra iti: katamds tds tisra iti: puro ' nuvdkyd 
ca ydjya ca sasyaiva trtiyd: katamds ta yd adhydtmam iti: prana 
eva puro } nuvdkyd, apdno ydjyd , vydinah sasyd: kith tdbhir jay atiti: 
prthivi-lokam eva puro ' nxivdkyayd jayati , antariksa-lokam 
yajyayd, dyu-lokam sasyayd. tato ha hotasvala uparardma. 

10. ‘Yajnavalkya/ said he, ‘how many hymns of praise will 
the udgdtri priest chant today in the sacrifice?' ‘Three.' ‘Which 
are these three?' ‘The introductory hymn, the* hymn accom- 
panying the sacrifice and the benedictory as the third/ ‘Which 



HI. 2. 4. Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 215 

are these three with reference to the self?' ‘The introductory 
hymn is the inbreath, the hymn accompanying the sacrifice is 
the outbreath. The benedictory hymn is the diffused breath.' 
‘What does one win by these?' 'By the introductory hymn one 
wins the world of the earth, by the accompanying hymn the 
world of the atmosphere, by the benedictory hymn one wins 
the world of heaven.' Thereupon the Hotr priest Asvala kept 
silent. 

uparardma: kept silent, tusnim babhuva. R. 


Second Brdhmana 

THE MAN IN BONDAGE AND HIS FUTURE AT DEATH 

1. atha hainam jdratkdrava drtabhdgah papraccha: ydjhavalkya 
iti hovaca , kati grahah katy atigrahd iti. astern grahah astdv 
atigrahd iti. yc te ' stau grahdh, astdv atigrahdh, katame ta iti. 

1. Then Jaratkarava Artabhaga questioned him, ‘Yajna- 
valkya,' said he, ‘how many pcrceivers are there, how many 
over-perceivers?' ‘Eight perceivers. Eight over-perceivers.' 
‘Those eight pereeivers and eight over-perceivers, which arc 
they?' 

The grahas are the organs of perception, graspers or apprehenders 
and the atigrahas arc the objects of perception. 

2. prdno vai grahah, so ' pdncndtigrdhcna grhitah, apdnena hi 
gandhdn jighrati. 

2. ‘The nose is the orgpn of perception. It is seized (controlled) 
by the outbreath a*s an over-pcrceiver, for by the outbreath one 
smells an odour. 

prana iti ghrdnam ucyate. £. 

3. vdg vai grahah , sa ndmndtigrahena grhitah, vded hi ndnuiny 
abhivadati. 

3. ‘Speech, ^rily, is the organ of perception. It is seized by 
name as an over-perceiver, for by speech one utters names. 

4. jihvd vai grahah, sa rasendtigrdhena grhitah, jihvayd hi 
rasdn vijdndti. 

4. ‘The tongue, verily, is the organ of perception. It is seized 
by taste as an over-perceiver, for by tongue one knows tastes. 

H 



2i6 The Principal Upanisads III. 2. 11. 

5. caksur vai grahah , sa rupcndtigrdhena grhitah , caksusd hi 
ritpdni pasyati. 

5. ‘The eye, verily, is the organ of perception. It is seized by 
form as an over-perceiver, for by the eye one sees forms. 

6. sroiram vai grahah , sa sabdcndtigrdhena grhitah, srolrcna hi 
sabddn srnoti. 

6. ‘The ear, verily, is the organ of perception. It is seized 
by sound as an over-perceiver, for by the ear one hears sounds. 

7. mano vai grahah, sa kdmcndtigrdhcna grhitah, manasd hi 
hdmdn kdmayatc . 

7. ‘The mind, verily, is the organ of perception; it is seized 
by desire as an over-perceiver, for through the mind one desires 
desires. 

8 . hastau vai grahah, sa karmandtigrdhcna grhitah, hastdbhydm 
hi karma karoti. 

8. ‘The hands, verily, are the organ of perception. They are 
seized by action as an over-perceiver, for by the hands one 
performs actions. 

9. tvag vai grahah, sparsendtigrdhaia grhitah, tvacd hi sparsdn 
vcdayatc: ity ctestau grahah, astdv at i grahah . 

9. ‘The skin, verily, is the organ of perception, it is seized by 
touch as an ov er-perceiver, for by the skin oik* feels touch. These 
arc the eight organs of perception, and the eight over-perceivers/ 

10. ydjhavalkya iti hovdca, yad idam sarvam mrtyor annam, 
kd svit sd devatd,yasyd mrtyur annam iti: agnir vai mrtyuh, so y pdm 
annam, apa punar mrtyinh jayati. 

10. ‘ Yajnavalkya/ said lie, ‘since everything here is food 
for death, what, pray, is that divinity for whom death is 
food?' ‘Tire, verily, is death. It is the food of water. He (who 
knows this) overcomes fuither death/ 

Everything is the food of death as everything is born and is 
imperilled by and is subject to death: sarvam jdyate vipadyate . . . 
mrtyund grastani. £. 

11. ydjhavalkya, iti hovdca, yatrdyam pnriiso mriyatc, Ud 
asmdt prdindh krdmanly diho ncti. na iti hovdca ydjhavalkyah, 
atraiva samavaniyantc, sa mchvayati. ddhmdyati, ddhmdto 
mrtah sete. 

11. ‘Yajhavalkya/ said he, 'when such a person (a liberated 



III. 2. 13. Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 217 

sage) dies, do the vital breaths move up from him or do they 
not?’ 'No/ replied Yajnavalkya. They are gathered together 
in him. He (the body) swells up, he is inflated and thus inflated 
the dead man (body) lies/ 

The liberated man, when his bondage is destroyed, does not go 
anywhere: bandhana-ndse nmktasya na kvacid gamanam. S. 

12. ydjnavalkya , Hi hovdea, yatrdyam pnrnso mriyate , kirn 
cnam najahdliti: ndona iti, anantam vai ndma , anantd visve-devdh , 
anantam eva sa tena lokarii jayati. 

12. 'Yajnavalkya/ said he, 'when such a person dies, what 
is it that does not leave him?' ‘The name. The name is in- 
finite and infinite are the Visvc-dcvds. Thereby he (who knows 
this) wins an infinite world ' 

What remains is name, ndma It is the name which docs not perish 
at death. Cp. with this the Buddhist doctiine that the clement which 
is reborn is tuima-rupa , ndma and shape. ( p. Rfinn: ‘Every shape 
you see has its archetype in the placeless world and if the shape 
perished, no matter, since its original is everlasting/ Shams-i- 
Tabriz : XII, Nicholson’s E.T. 

13. ydjnavalkya, iti hovdea, yatrdsya puntsasya mrtasydgnim 

vdg apycti, vdtam* prdinah, uiksur ddityam, manas candy am , 
disah srotram, prthivim sari v am, dkdsam dtmd, osadhir lomdni , 
vanaspatin kesdh, apsn lohitam ca rctas ca nidhiyate, kvdyam 
tadd puruso bhavatiti. dihara, sotnya, hastam, dirtabhdga; dvdm 
evaitasya vedisydvah , na ndv etat sajana iti. tan hotkramya , 
mantraydm cakrdtc : tan ha y ad Ftcatuh, karma haiva tad ticatuli 
atha yat prasasahisatnh karma haiva tat prasasamsatuh: pnnyo 
vai punycna karmand bluwati, pdpah pdpcncti. tato ha jdratkdrava 
drtabhdga uparardma. * 

13. ‘Yajnavalkya/ said he, ‘when the speech (voice) of this 
dead person enters into lire, the breath into air, the eye Into 
the sun, the mind into the moon, hearing into the quarters, the 
self into (lie ether, the hairs of the body into the herbs, the 
hairs on the head into the trees and the blood and the semen 
are deposited iif water, what then becomes of this person?’ 
‘Artabhaga, my dear, take my hand. We two alone shall know 
of this, this is not for us two (to speak of) in public.’ The two 
went away and deliberated. What they said was karman and 
what they praised was karman. Verily one becomes good by 
good action, baTl by bad action. Therefore, Artabhaga of the 
line of Jaratkaru kept silent. 



218 The Principal Upanisads III. 3. 2. 

dtman: self, ether in the heart, hrdaydkdsam. 6. 
lohitam: blood, lohito rohito raktah , Amara-kosa I. 5. 15. 

What then becomes of this person? What is the support by which 
he again takes birth? The results of action, Karma, produce rebirth. 

This view finds a parallel in the Buddhist doctrine, that while, 
at death, the different parts of the individual are scattered to their 
different sources, karma remains to cause a new existence. See also 
R.V. X. 16. 3. 


Third Brdlimana 

THE RESORT OF THE PERFORMERS OF THE HORSE- 

SACRIFICE 

I. atha hainam bhujyur lahydyanih papraccha: ydjhavalkya , 
iti hovdea , madresu carakdh , paryavrajdma, te patahealasya 
kdpyasya grhdin aima; tasydsid duhitd gandharva grhttd; tarn 
apYechdma ko 1 siti , so’bravti , sudhanvdngirasa iti , tam yadd 
lokanam antdn aprcchdma, athainam abrftma, kva pdriksitd 
abhavann iti , kva pdriksitd abhavan , sa tvd prechdmi , ydj- 
navalkya, kva pdriksitd abhavann iti. 

1. Then Bhujyu Lahyayani asked him: ‘Yfijhavalkya/ said 
he, ‘we were travelling around as wanderers among the Madra 
tribe and came to the house of Patancala Kapya. He had a 
daughter who was possessed by a gandharva. We asked him 
“Who are you?" He said, "I am Sudhanvan, a descendant of 
Ahgiras." When we were asking him about the ends of the earth, 
we said to him, “What has become of the Pfiriksitas? What has 
become of the Pariksitas?" And I ask you, Yfijhavalkya, what 
has become of the Pariksitas ?' 

The questioner who obtained the knowledge of the limits of the 
earth from a gandharva asks Yajiiavalkya about the descendants 
of Pariksit. The writer believes in the fact of possession. Patancala’s 
daughter was possessed by a gandharva , an aerjal spirit, and so 
served as a medium. She was asked about the adcual extent of the 
world and the place where the sons of Pariksit were. 

Modern para-psychology is investigating phenomena of possession 
and mediumship, as these cannot be explained on principles of 
psychology which are generally recognised. 

2. sa hovdea , uvdea vai sah agacchan vai te lad yatrdsva-me- 
dha-ydjino gacchantiti. kva nv asva-medha-ydjino gacchantiti. 



III. 4. 1. Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 219 

dvatrimsatam vai deva-ratha-ahnydny ayam lokah , tam samantam 
prthivi dvis tdvat paryeti; tam samantam prthivim dvis tdvat 
samudrah paryeti , tad ydvatt ksurasya dhara, ydvad vd maksi- 
kaydh pattram , tavdn antarendkdsah; tan indrah suparno bhfitvd 
vayave prdyacchat , tan vdyur atmani dhitvd tatrdgamayad , 
yatrdsva-medha-ydjino ’bhavann iti; cvam iva vai sa vdyum eva 
prasaiamsa , tasmcid vdyur eva vyastih , vdyuh samastih: apa punar 
mrtyum jayati , jya tato ha bhujyur lahydyanir 

uparardma. 

2. Yajnavalkya said, ‘He (the gandharva ) evidently told 
(you) that they went where those who perform horse-sacrifices 
go/ ‘And where do the performers of the horse sacrifices go?' 
‘Thirty-two times the space covered by the sun's chariot in a 
day makes this world. Around it covering twice the area is the 
earth. Around it covering twice the area is the ocean. Now 
there is just that much interspace as large as the edge of a 
razor or the wing of a mosquito, lndra, having become a bird, 
delivered them to the air. Air, placing them in itself led them 
to the place where the performers of the horse sacrifice were. 
Thus did he (the gandharva) praise the air. Therefore, air is the 
separate individuals and air is the totality of all individuals. 
He who knows it gis such, conquers further death.' After that 
Bhujya Lahyayani kept silent. 


Fourth JJrdhmana 

THE THEORETICAL UN KN 0 W AB I LIT Y OF 

BRAHMAN 

• 

1. atha liainam usastas cdkrdyanah papraccha: yajnavalkya , 
iti liovdca, yat sdksdd aparoksdd brahma , ya dtmd sarvdntarah , 
tam me vydeaksveti. esa ta dtmd sarvdntarah. katamah, ydijiia- 
valkya , satvdntarah. yah prdnena prdniti, sa ta dtmd sarvdn- 
tarah yo/ pdneni%pdniti t sa ta dtmd sarvdntarah , yo vydnena 
vydniti, sa ta dtmd sarvdntarah; ya uddnena uddniti , sa ta dtmd 
sarvdntarah , esa ta dtmd sarvdntarah. 

1. Then Usasta Cakrayana asked him: ‘Yajnavalkya,' said 
he, ‘explain to me the Brahman that is immediately present 
and directly perceived, who is the self in all things?' ‘This is 
your self. That is within all th’ngs.' ‘Which is within all things, 



220 The Principal Upanisads III. 5. 1. 

Yajnavalkya?' ‘He who breathes in with your breathing in is 
the self of yours which is in all things. He who breathes out with 
your breathing out is the self of yours which is in all things. 
He who breathes about with your breathing about is the self 
of yours which is in all things. He who breathes up with your 
breathing up is the self of yours which is in all things. He is 
your self which is in all things/ 

2. sa hovdea usastas cdkrdyanah: yatlia vibniydd, asau gauh t 
asdv asva iti, evam evaitad vyapadistam bhavati , yad eva sdksdd 
aparoksdd brahma ya dtmd sarvdntarali tain me vydcaksva iti: 
esa ta dtmd sarvdntarali. katamah ydjnavalkya, sarvdntarali. 
na drstcr drastdram pasych , na srutcr srotdram srnuydh , na mater 
mantaram manvithdJi , na vijhdtcr vijndldram vijdniydih , esa ta 
dtmd sarvdntarali, ato nyad drlam. tato ha usastas cakrayana 
upararama. 

2. Usasta Cakrayana said:. ‘This has been explained by you 
as one might say “This is a cow,” “this is a horse.” Explain 
to me the Brahman that is immediately present and directly 
perceived, that is the self in all things/ ‘This is your self that 
is within all things/ ‘Which is within all things, Yajnavalkya?' 
‘You cannot see the seer of seeing, you cannot hear the hearer 
of hearing, you cannot think the thinker of thinking, you 
cannot understand the understander of understanding. He is 
your self which is in all things, livery thing else is of evil/ 
Thereupon Usasta Cakrayana kept silent. 

drtam: everything else perishes. 


Fifth Brahman a 

RENUNCIATION, THE WAY TO KNOW BRAHMAN 

1. atha hainam kaholah kausltakeyah papraccha: ydjnavalkya , 
iti hovdea , yad eva sdksad aparoksad brahma ya dtmd sarvan - 
tarah, tam me vydcaksva Hi. esa ta dtmd sarvdntarah-katamah, 
ydjnavalkya , sarvdntarali. y o' sandy d- pip dse sokam mohamjaydm 
mrtynm atyeti. etam vai tam dtmdnam viditvd, brdhmandh 
putraisandyds ca vittai sandy as ca lokaisandyds ca vyuttlidya , 
atha bhiksdearyam caranti. yd hy eva putraisard sd vittaisand 
yd vittaisand sd lokaisand , ubhe hy ete esane eva bhavatah; 



III. 5. 1. Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 221 

tasmdd brdhmanah ,pdndity am nirvidya bdlyena tisthdsct; bddyam 
ca pdndityarh ca nirvidya , atha munih; amaunam ca maunarii 
ca nirvidya , atha brdhmanah. sa brdhmanah kena sydt. yena 
sydi tena idrsa eva ato’nyad drtam. tato ha kaholah kausltakeya 
uparardma . 

1. Now Kahola Kausltakeya asked him, ‘Yajnavalkya,' said 
he, ‘explain to me the Brahman that is immediately present 
and directly perceived, that is the self in all things.' ‘This is 
your self which is in all things.' ‘Which is within all things, 
Yajnavalkya.' ‘It is that which transcends hunger and thirst, 
sorrow and delusion, old age and death. The Brfihmanas, having 
known that self, having overcome the desire for sons, the 
desire for wealth, the desire for worlds, live the life of mendi- 
cants. That which is the desire for sons is the desire for wealth; 
that which is the desire for wealth is the desire for the worlds 
for both these are but desires. Therefore let a Brahmana, after 
he has done with learning, desire to live as a child. When he 
has done (both) with the state of childhood and with learning, 
then he becomes silent meditator. Having done with (both) the 
non-meditative and the meditative states, then he becomes a 
Brahmana (a knower of Brahman).’ ‘How does the Brahmana 
behave?' ‘Howsoever he may behave, he is such indeed. 
Everything else is of evil.' Thereupon Kahola Kausltakeya 
kept silent. 

hunger: asilum icchd asandyd. 5 . 
thirst: pdtum icchd pipdsd. S. 

sorrow: desire, soka iti kdmah. £. Desire or hankering after desirable 
objects is the cause of sorrow. 

delusion: mistake or confusion arising from wrong perception 
vipanta-pratyaya-prtibhavo’viveko bhran\ah. S. 

esand: desire, kdmah. All desires are of one type, since they are directed 
towards results, and all means are adopted towards that end : sarvah 
phaldrtha-prayukta eva hi sarvam sddhanam upddatte. £. 

The knowers embrace the life of a monk and wander as mendicants. 
They give up even the signs of a monk's life prescribed by the 
scriptures, whick are sometimes merely the means of livelihood for 
those who have taken to that life: paramahamsa-pdrivrdjyam 
pratipadya bhiksa-caryam caranti, bhiksdttham caranam , bhiksdeatyam 
caranti tyaklvd smdrtam lingam kcvalam dsrama-mdtra-sarandndm 
jtvana-sadhanam parivrd jya-vya n jaka m. £. 

nirvidya: having done with, having known all about: nihsesam 
viditvd. S. # 

bdlya: state of the child. Deussen and Gough adopt this inter- 



222 The Principal Upanisads TII.fi i. 

pretation. Immediacy and lack of reflection as in a child give us the 
experience of the real. See Subala U. 13. 

It is not a question of lemaining as children, but becoming as 
children. It involves the sacrifice of intellectual conceit, a ‘ sacrificium 
intellectus .* We must be able to acquire naivete. It is what Lao Tzu 
calls ‘returning to the root/ St. Paul says: ‘Thou art beside thyself; 
much learning doth make thee mad’: Acts xxvi. 24. Cp. ‘St. 
Francis once said that a great scholar when he joined the Order, 
ought in some sort to resign even his learning, in order that, having 
stripped himself of such a possession he might offer himself to the 
arms of the Crucified’: A. G. Little, Franciscan Papers. Lists and 
Documents (1943), p. 55. 

Certain things are hidden from the learned and revealed to the 
babes. ‘In this hour Jesus rejoiced, saying, I thank Thee, Heavenly 
Father because Thou hast hidden these things from the wise and 
prudent and revealed them unto babes.’ ‘Except ye become like 
little children, ye shall not see the Kingdom of God.’ To become like 
little children is not easy. It takes much effort to acquire the grace 
and meekness of the child-like; to measure our littleness against 
the greatness of the Supreme. 

bdlya: strength which is the total elimination of the perception of 
objects of self-knowledge, jhdna-bala-bhdva. $. This view is different 
from what is stated above. 

Mauna is abstinence from speech. It is regarded as helpful for 
meditation. We must turn away from the world of noise into the 
inward stillness, the interior silence to become aware of the reality 
which transcends time and space. Cp. Kierkegaard: ‘The present 
condition of the world is diseased. If I were a doctor and was asked 
for my advice, I should answer, Create silence, bring men to silence 
-—the word of God cannot be heard in the world today. And if it is 
blazoned forth with all the panoply of noise so that it can be heard 
even in the midst of all other noise, then it is no longer the word 
of God. Therefore, create silence.' 

The true knower of Brahman devotes himself exclusively to the 
contemplation of the self and shuns all other thoughts as distractions. 


Sixth Brdhmana 

BRAHMA, THE WORLD GROUND 

1. atha hainam gdrgi vdcaknavi papraccha, ydjnavalkya , iti 
hovdea, yad idam sarvam apsv otam ca protarh ca , kasmin nu 
khalv dpa otds ca protds ceti. vdiyau , gdrgi, iti. kdsmin nu khalu 
vdyur, otas ca protas ccti. antariksa-lokesu , gdrgi , iti. kasmin 



III. 6. i. Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 223 

nu khalv antariksa-lokd otds ca protds ceti. gandharva-lokesu , 
gdrgi , iti. kasmin nu khalu gandharva-lokd otas ca protds ceti. 
aditya-lokesu , gdrgi , iti. kasmin nu khalv aditya-lokd otds ca 
protds ceti. candra-lokesu , gdrgi , i/i. kasmin nu khalu candra-lokd 
otas ca protds ceti. naksatra-lokesu , gdrgi , t/i. kasmin nu khalu 
naksatra-lokd otas ca protds ceti. deva-lokesu , gdrgi, iti. kasmin nu 
khalu deva-lokd otds ca protds ceti. indra-lokesu gdrgi , kasmin 
nu khalv indra-lokd otds ca protds ceti. prajd-pati-lokesu , gdrgi, 
iti. kasmin nu khalu praja-pati-lokd otds ca protds ceti. brahma- 
lokesu, gdrgi , ifo’. kasmin nu khalu brahma-loka otas ca protds 
ceti. sa hovdca , gdrgi matiprdksih , md te murdha vyapaptat , 
anatiprasnydm vai dcvatdm atiprechasi, gdrgi , mdtiprakstr iti. 
tato ha gdrgi vdcaknavy uparardma. 

1. Then GargI Vacaknavi asked him : 'Yajnavalkya/ said she, 
‘since all this here is woven, like warp and woof, in water, on 
what, pray, is water woven, like warp and woof?’ ‘On air, O 
Gargi.' ‘On what, then is air woven, like warp and woof?’ 
‘On the worlds of the sky, O Gargi.’ ‘On what then, pray, are 
the worlds of the sky woven, like warp and woof?’ ‘On the 
worlds of the gandharvas, O Gargi.’ ‘On what then, pray, are 
the worlds of the gandharvas woven, like warp and woof?* ‘On 
the worlds of the .sun, O Gargi.’ ‘On what then, pray, are the 
worlds of the sun woven, like warp and woof?’ ‘On the worlds 
of the moon, O Gargi.’ ‘On what then, pray, are the worlds of the 
moon woven, like warp and woof?' ‘On the worlds of the stars, 
O Gargi.’ ‘On what then, pray, are the worlds of the stars 
woven, like warp and woof?’ ‘On the worlds of the gods, O 
Gargi.' ‘On what then, pray, are the worlds of the gods woven, 
like warp and woof?’ ‘On the worlds of Indra, O Gargi.’ ‘On 
what then, pray, are the worlds of Indra woven, like warp and 
woof?' ‘On the worlds of Prajd-pati,*Q Gargi.' ‘On what, then, 
pray, are the worlds of Prajd-pati woven, like w r arp and 
woof?’ ‘On the worlds of Brahma, O Gargi.’ 'On w r hat then, 
pray, are the worlds of Brahma woven, like warp and w'oof?’ 
He (Yajnavalkya) said, ‘Gargi, do not question too much lest 
your head fall gff. Verily, you are questioning too much about 
a divinity about which we are not to ask too much. Do not, O 
Gargi, question too much.’ Thereupon Gargi Vacaknavi kept 
silent. 

The basis of this whole universe is said to bo brahma-loka. 

md atipraksihf S argues that the nature of the deityis to be gathered 
from scriptures and not info. red by logic: svam prasnam nydya- 

H* 



224 The Principal Upanisads III. 7. 1. 

prakaram at tty a dgamcna prastavyam dcvatdm anutndncna ma 
prdkslh. 


Seventh Brahmana 

AIR, THE PRINCIPLE OF THE WORLD. THE INNER 
CONTROLLER 

1. atlui hainatn udddlaka drunih papraccha: ydjnavalkya , Hi 
hovdea madresv avasdnia, patahealasya kdpyasya grhesu, yajham 
adhiydndh. tasydsid bhdryd , gandhatva-grhitd , tam apreehdma, 
ko'siti: so'bravit , kabandha dtharvana Hi. so'bravit, patahealam 
kdpyam ydjnikdms ca;vettha nu tvam , kdpya, tat sdtram yasminn 
(y: vena) ay am ca lokah, paras ca lokah, sarvdni ca bhutdni 
samdrbdhdni , bhavantiti. so'bravit patahealah kdpyah, ndham tad, 
bhagavan, vedeti . so'bravit patahealam kdpyam ydjnikdms ca. vett- 
ha nu tvam , kdpya, tam antaryaminam, ya imam ca lokam par am 
ca lokam sarvdni ca bhutdni yo'ntaro yamayaliti. so'bravit patah- 
ealah kdpyah, ndham tam, bhagavan, vedeti. so'bravit patahealam 
kdpyam ydjnikdms ca, yo vai tat, kdpya, sdtram vidydt, tam 
cantarydminam iti, sa brahma -v it, sa loka-vit, sa deva-vit, saveda-vit , 
sa bhuta-vit, sa dtma-vit, sa sarva-vit, iti tebhyobravit tad aham 
veda; tac ect tvam, ydjnavalkya , sdtram avidvdims tam cdintar- 
ydminam brahmagavir udajasc, mftrdhd tc vipatisyatiti. veda 
vd aham, gautama, tat sdtram tam edntdryamujam iti. yo vd 
idam has eid brdydt, veda vedeti: yathd veltha , tathd bruhiti. 

1. Then Uddalaka Aruni abked him, ‘Yajhavalkya/ said he, 
‘we lived in the house of Patancala Kf\pya among the Madras, 
studying the scriptures on the sacrifices. He had a wife who 
was possessed by a gandharva. We asked him, “Who are you?” 
He said, “I am Kabandha Athai van a.” He said to Patancala 
Kapya and those who studied the scriptures on the sacrifices, 
“Do you know, O Kapya, that thread by which this world, 
the other world and all beings are held together?” Patancala 
Kapya said: “I do not know it, Venerable Str.” He said to 
Patancala Kapya and those who studied the scriptures on the 
sacrifices: “Do you know, Kapya, that inner controller from 
within who controls this world and the next and all things.” 
Patancala Kapya said, “I do not know it, Venerable Sir.” 
He said to Patancala Kapya and those who studied the scrip- 
tures on the sacrifices. “He who knows that thread, O Kapya, 



III. 7. 3. Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 225 

and that inner controller, indeed knows Brahman , he knows 
the worlds, he knows the gods, he knows the Vedas, he knows 
beings, he knows the self, he knows every thing.” Thus he 
explained it to them. I know it. If you, Yajnavalkya, do not 
know that thread, that inner controller and still take away 
the cows that belong only to the knowers of Brahman , your 
head will fall off/ T know, 0 Gautama, that thread and that 
inner controller/ 'Anyone might say, "I know, I know.” Tell 
us what you know/ 

Here is a description of the world spirit, braJima-lokdndm antara- 
tamam sutram. $. It is that which binds together all beings from the 
highest to the lowest, brahmddi-stamba-paryantdni samdrbdhdni 
samgrathitdni, $. All things are strung like a garland with a thread. 
Reference here is to the sutrdtman. Cp. MaitrJ. I. 4. Satasslokl 12, 
55. Man is a bead strung on the thread of the conscious self, and just 
a£ wooden puppets are worked by strings, so the world is operated 
by the sutrdtman, the thread spirit. 

2. sa hovdea vdyur vat, Gautama, tat sutram ; vdyuna vai , 
Gautama, sutrendyam ca lokah paras ca lokah sarvdni ca bhiitdni 
samdrbdhdni bhavanti, tasmdd vai, Gautama, purusam pretam 
dhuh vyasramsisatdsydhgdnJti; vdyuna hi, Gautama, sutrena 
samdrbdhdni bhavantiti. evam ctat , yajnavalkya, antaryaminam 
bruhiti. 

2. He said, 'Air, verily, O Gautama, is that thread. By air, 
verily, 0 Gautama, as by a thread this world, the other world 
and all beings are held together. Therefore, verily, O Gautama, 
they say of a person who dies that his limbs have been loosened, 
for they are held together O Gautama, by air. as by a thread/ 
'Ouite so, Yajnavalkya, describe the inner controller/ 

3. yah prthivydm tisthan prtliivyd antarah, yam prthivT na 
veda, yasya prthivT sanrcim, yah prthivTm antaro yamayati, esa 
ta ditmdntarydmy amrtah. 

3. (Yajnavalkya said,) 'He who dwells in the earth, yet is 
within the earth,»whom the earth does not know, whose body 
the earth is, who controls the earth from within, he is your 
self, the inner controller, the immortal/ 

‘He was in the world and the world was made by him and the 
world knew him not/ — St. John I. 10. 
antarah: within; sometimes 'dill rent from.' 



226 The Principal Upanisads III. 7. 9. 

4. yo’psn tisthann, adbhyo’ ntarah, yam dpo na viduh,yasydpah 
sariram, yo’ po’ntaro yamayati, esa ta dtmantdrydmy amrtah. 

4. ‘He who dwells in the water, yet is within the water, 
whom the water does not know, whose body the water is, who 
controls the water from within, he is your self, the inner con- 
troller, the immortal.* 

5. yo’gnau tisthann , agncr antarah , yam agnir na vcda, 
yasydgnih sariram , yo'gnim antaro yamayati , esa ta dtmdntar- 
ydmy amrtah . 

5. ‘He who dwells in the fire, yet is within the fire, whom 
the fire does not know, whose body the fire is, who controls the 
fire from within, he is your self, the inner controller, the 
immortal.* 

6. yo'ntarikse tisthann antariksdd antarah. yam antariksam 
na vcda, yasy antariksam sariram, yo’ ntariksam antaro yamayati, 
esa ta dtmantdrydmy amrtah. 

6. ‘He who dwells in the sky, yet is within the sky, whom 
the sky does not know, whose body the sky is, who controls 
the sky from within, he is your self, the inner controller, the 
immortal.’ 

7. yo vdyau tisthann vdyor antarah, yam tfdyur na veda, yasya 
vdyuh sariram, yo vdyum antaro yamayati, esa ta dtmantdrydmy 
amrtah. 

7. ‘He who dwells in the air, yet is within the air, whom the 
air does not know, whose body the air is, who controls the air 
from within, he is your self, the inner controller, the immortal.* 

8 . yo divi tisthan divo’ ntarah, yam dyaur na vcda, yasya 
dyauh sariram, yo divam , antaro yamayati, esa ta dtmdntarydmy 
amrtah. 

8. ‘He who dwells in the heaven, yet is within the heaven, 
whom the heaven does not know, whose body the heaven is, 
who controls the heaven from within, he is your self, the inner 
controller, the immortal.’ 

9. ya dditye tisthann aditydd antarah, yam ddityo na veda, 
yasyddityah sariram, ya adityam antaro yamayati, esa ta ditmdn- 
tarydmy amrtah. 

9. ‘He who dwells in the sun, yet is within the sun, whom the 
sun does not know, whose body the sun is, who controls the 
sun from within, he is your self, the inner* controller, the 
immortal.' 



III. 7. 14. Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 227 

It is not the ‘sun whom all men see 1 but that ‘whom we know 
with the mind/ Atharva Veda. X. 8. 14. It is the ‘light of lights/ 
R.V. I, 113. 1; B.G. XII. 17. ‘Whose body is seen by all, whose 
soul by none/ Plato: Laws 898 D. ‘That was the true light of the 
world/ John I. 4; I. 9; IX. 5. See C.U. 1 . 6.6, which speaks of an 
effulgent person in the solar regions who is free from evil. 

10. yo diksu tisthan, digbhyo’ ntarah, yam diso na vidah, 
yasya disah sariram , yo diso antaro yamayati, esa ta dtmdntar- 
ydmy amrtah. 

10. 'He who dwells in the quarters (of space), yet is within 
the quarters, whom the quarters do not know, whose body the 
quarters are, who controls the quarters from within, he is your 
self, the inner controller, the immortal/ 

11. yas candy a-tdrake tisthams candra-tarakdd antarah , yam 
candra-tdrakam na vcda , yasya candra-tdrakam sariram , yas 
candr a-tdrakam antaro yamayati, esa ta dhndntarydmy amrtah. 

11. ‘He who dwells in the moon and the stars, yet is within 
the moon and the stars, whom the moon and the stars do not 
know, whose body the moon and the stars are, who controls 
the moon and the stars from within, he is your self, the inner 
controller, the immortal/ 

12. ya dkdse tisthann dkdsdd antarah , yam dkdso na vcda, 
yasydkdsah sari ram, ya dkdsam antaro yamayati, esa ta dtmdn - 
tarydmy amrtah. 

1 2. 'He who dwells in the ether, yet is within the ether, 
whom the ether does not know, whose body the ether is, who 
controls the ether from within, he is your self, the inner con- 
troller, the immortal/ 

13. yas tamasi tisthams tamaso 9 ntarah, yam tamo na vcda 
yasya tamah sariram, yas tamo’ntaro yamayati, esa ta dtmdn - 
tarydmy amrtah. 

13. ‘He who dwells in the darkness, yet is within the darkness, 
whom the darkness does not know, whose body the darkness 
is, who controls- # the darkness from within, he is your self, the 
inner controller, the immortal/ 

14. yas tejasi tisthams tejaso 9 ntarah, yam tejo na vcda, yasya 
tejah sariram, yas tcjo’ntaro yamayaii, esa ta dtmdntarydmy 
amrtah. ity adhidaivatam, athddhibhutam. 

14. ‘He who dwells in the light, yet is within the light, whom 
the light does not know, whuoe body the light is, who controls 



228 The Principal Upanisads III. 7. 19. 

the light from within, he is your self, the inner controller, the 
immortal. Thus far with reference to the divinities. Now with 
reference to beings/ 

adhibhutam: pertaining to the different grades of beings from 
Brahma down to a clump of grass: brahmddi-stamba-paryantcsu 
antary ami - d a r sail a m. 5 . 

15. yah sarvesu bhiitesu tisthan , sarvcbhyo bhutebhyo 1 ntarah, 
yam sarvdni blultdni na viduh , yasya sarvdni blultdni sari ram, 
yah sarvdni blultdni antaro yamayati, esa ta dtmdntarydmy amrtah. 
tty adhibhutam; athddhydtmam. 

15. ‘He who dwells in all beings, yet is within all beings, 
whom no beings know, whose body is all beings, who controls 
all beings from within, lie is your self, the inner controller, the 
immortal. Thus far with reference to the beings. Now with 
reference to the self.' 

16. yah prune tisthan prdndd antarah, yam prdino na veda, 
yasya ptdnah sari ram, yah prdinam antaro yamayati, esa ta 
dtmdntarydmy amrtah. 

16. ‘He who dwells in the breath, yet is within the breath, 
wdiom the breath does not know, whose body the breath is, 
who controls the breath from within, he is 'your self, the inner 
controller, the immortal/ 

prana : breath. £ means by it the nose, prdna-vdyu-sahitc ghranc. 

1 7. yo vdei tisthan vdeo' ntarah, yam van na veda, yasya vdk 
sariram, yo vdicam antaro yamayati, esa ta dtmdntarydmy amrtah. 

1 7. ‘He who dwells in (the organ of) speech, yet is within 
speech, whom speech does not know*, whose body speech is, 
who controls speech froiii within, he is your self, the inner 
controller, the immortal/ 

18. yas caksusi tisthams caksuso' ntarah, yam caksur na veda, 
yasya caksuh sariram, yas caksur antaro yamayati, esa ta 
dtmdntarydmy amrtah. 

18. ‘He who dwells in the eye, yet is withij; the eye, whom 
the eye does not know, whoso body the eye is, who control 
the eye from within, he is your self, the inner controller, the 
immortal/ 

19. yah srotre tisthan srotrdd antarah, yam srotrant na veda, 
yasya srotram sariram , yah srotram antaro yamayati, esa ta 
dtmdntarydmy amrtah. 



III. 7. 23. Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 229 

19. ‘He who dwells in the ear, yet is within the ear, whom the 
ear does not know, whose body the ear is, who controls the 
ear from within, he is your self, the inner controller, the 
immortal/ 

20. yo manasi tisthan manaso'ntarah , yam mano' na veda, 
yasya manah sarlram , yo mano’ntaro yamayati, esa ta dtman- 
tarydmy amrtah. 

20. ‘He who dwells in the mind, yet is within the mind, whom 
the mind does not know, whose body the mind is, who controls 
the mind from within, he is your self, the inner controller, the 
immortal/ 

21. yas tvaci tisthams tvaco' ntarah, yam Ivan na veda, yasya 
tvak sarlram , yas tvacam antaro yamayati, esa ta dtmdntarydmy 
amrtah. 

21. ‘He who dw r ells in the skin, yet is within the skin, whom 
the skin does not know, whose body the skin is, who controls 
the skin from within, he is your self, the inner controller, the 
immortal/ 

22. yo vijhdne tisthan , vijhdndd antarah, yam vijhdnam na 
veda, yasya vijhdiiam sarlram, yo vijhdnam antaro yamayati, 
esa ta dtmdntarydmy amrtah. 

22. ‘He who dwells in the understanding, yet is within the 
understanding, whom the understanding does not know, whose 
body the understanding is, who contiols the understanding 
from within, he is your self, the inner controller, the immortal/ 

S discusses the text in S.B. I. 2. 18-20. Both the Kanva and the 
Madhyandina recensions speak of the universal and the individual 
selves as dilfcrent from each other, thft former being the ruler and 
the latter the ruled. The Kanva speaks* of the embodied self as the 
understanding and the Madhyandina speaks of it as the self: yo 
vijhdne tisthan iti kdnvah , air a vijhdna-sabdena sarlrah ucyate; ya 
dtmani tisthan iti mddhyandinah , atra dtma-sabdah sarirasya vdeakah. 

For Ramanuja this passage is important as a support for his 
doctrine of visistfyivaita. 

Madhva uses this text in support of his theory of the absolute 
distinction between Brahman and the individual soul. 

23. yo retasi tisthan rctaso'ntarah, 'yam reto na veda, yasya 
retah sarlyam, yo rcto'ntaro yamayati, esa ta dtmdntarydmy 
amrtah: adrsto* drastd, asrutah srotd, amato manta, avijhdto 
vijhdtd. ndnyo'to'sti drasta, ndnyo'to’sti srotd, ndnyo’to’sti 



230 The Principal Upanisads III. 8. 2. 

manta , ndnyo'to’sti vijhatd: esa ta dtmdntaryamy amrtah: 
ato y nyad drtam. tato hodddlaka drunir uparardma . 

23. He who dwells in the semen, is other than the semen, 
whom the semen does not know, whose body the semen is, who 
controls the semen from within, that is your self, the inner 
controller, the immortal. He is never seen but is the seer, he is 
never heard but is the hearer. He is never perceived, but is the 
perceiver. He is never thought but is the thinker. There is no 
other seer but he, there is no other hearer but he, there is no 
other perceiver but he, there is no other thinker but he. He is 
your self, the inner controller, the immortal. Everything else 
is of evil. After that Uddfilaka Aruni kept silent. 

Everything that is not the self perishes. 

Though he is fiee from all the empirical qualities, he still controls 
them all. 

Cp. S. sarva-samsdra-dharma-varjitah sarva-sa m stir in dm karma- 
phala-vibh dga - ka rtd. 


Eighth Brdhmana 

THE UNQUALIFIED BRAHMAN 

1. atha ha vdcaknavy uvdca, brdhmana bhagavantah, hanta , 
aham imam dvau prasnau praksydmi; tan cen me vaksyati , na vai 
jdtu yusmdkam imam kas cid brahmodyam jeteti. pruha } gdrgiti. 

1. Then Vacaknavl said: ‘Venerable Brahmanas, I shall ask 
him two questions. If he answers me* these, none of you can 
defeat him in arguments dbout Brahman .* ‘Ask, Gargi.’ 

Vacaknavl is also Gargi but she is not the Gargi, who is the wife 
of Yajnavalkya. 

brahmodya: discussion about Brahman which often accompanied 
the sacrifices. 

2. sa hovdca: aham vai tvd, yajnavalkya , *yatha kasyo vd 
vaideho vd ugra-putrah, ujjyam dhanur adhijyam krtvd , dvau 
bdnavantau sapatna-ativyddhmaa haste krtvd upottisthet, cvam 
evdham tvd dvabhyam prasnabhydm upodasthdm, tau me bruhiti . 
prccha t gargi , iti. 

2. She said, 'As a warrior son of the Kasis«or the Videhas 
might rise up against you, having strung his unstrung bow 



III. 8. 7. Brhad-uranyaka Upani§ad 231 

and having taken in his hand two pointed foe-piercing arrows, 
even so, O Yajnavalkya, do I face you with two questions. 
Answer me these/ 'Ask, Gargi' (said he) 

3. sd hovdca: yad tlrdhvam, yajnavalkya , divah, yad avdk 
prthivydh, yad antard dydvdprthivi ime, yad bhutarn ca bhavac 
ca bhavisyac ceti dcaksate; kasmims tad otam ca protam ccti. 

3. She said: ‘That, Q Yajnavalkya, of which they say, it is 
above the heaven, it is beneath the earth, that which is between 
these two, the heaven and the earth, that which the people 
call the past, the present and the future, across what is that 
woven, like warp and woof?' 

avdk: below, arvak. 

4. sa hovdca, yad urdhvam, gdrgi, divah, yad avdk prthivydh, 
yad antard dydvdprthivi ime , yad bhutarn ca bhavac ca bhavisyac 
cety dcaksate, dkdse tad otam ca protam ceti. 

4. He said: ‘That which is above the heaven, that which is 
beneath the earth, that which is between these two, heaven 
and earth, that which the people call the past, the present and 
the future, across space is that woven, like warp and woof/ 

5. sd hovdca, uavias tc’stu, yajnavalkya, yo ma dam vyavocah: 
aparasmai dhdrayasveti. prccha, gdrgi, iti. 

5. She said, ‘Adoration to you, Yajnavalkya, who have 
answered this question for me. Prepare yourself for the other/ 
‘Ask, Gargi/ 

6. sd hovdca, yad urdhvam, yajnavalkya, divah, yad avdk 
prthivydh, yad antard dydvd-prthivl ime, yad bhutarn ca bhavac ca 
bhavisyac cety dcaksate 6 7 * 9 : kasmims tad otam ca protam ceti. 

6. She said: ‘That, O Yajnavalkya, of which they say, it is 
above the heaven, it is beneath the earth, that which is between 
these two, the heaven and the earth, that which the people call 
the past, the present and the future, across what is that woven 
like warp and woof?' 

7. sa hovdca, yad urdhvam, gdrgi , divah, yad avdk prthivydh, 
yad antard dydvdprthivi ime, yad bhutarn ca bhavac ca bhavisyac 
cety dcaksate dkdsa eva tad otam ca protam ccti; kasmin nu khalv 

dkasa otas ca protas ceti. 

7. He said: ‘That which is above the sky, that which is 
beneath the .earth, that which is between these two, sky and 
earth, that which the peoj le call the past, tbe present and the 



232 The Principal Upanisads III. 8. 9 

future, across space is that woven like warp and woof. Across 
what is space woven like warp and woof?' 

It is a difficult question. If Yajnavalkya does not explain it because 
he thinks it inexplicable, he lays himself open to the charge of non- 
comprehension, a-pratipatti; if, on the other hand, he attempts to 
explain what is inexplicable he would be guilty of contradiction, 
vi-prati patti. 

8 . sa hovdxca, dad vai tad aksaram, gdrgi, brahman cl abhiva- 
danti, asthfdam, anami , ahrasvam , adlrgham , alohitam , asneham , 
acchdyam , atamali, avciyv andkdsam , asahgam , arasam, agan- 
dham, acaksuskam, asrotram, avdk , amanah , atejaskam , aprdnam , 
amukham , amdtram , anantaram , abdhyam; na tad asndli kirn 
cana, na tad asndti kas cana . 

8. He said: ‘That, O Gargi, the knowers of Brahman, call 
the Imperishable. It is neither gross nor fine, neither short nor 
long, neither glowing red (like lire) nor adhesive (like water). 
(It is) neither shadow nor darkness, neither air nor space, un- 
attached, without taste, without smell, without eyes, without 
ears, without voice, without mind, without radiance, without 
breath, without a mouth, without measure, having no within 

and no without. It cats nothing and no one eats it.’ 

• 

This passage brings out that the Imperishable is neither a sub- 
stance nor a possessor of attibutes. 

aksara: It is not the letter but the Supreme Self, aksaram paramdtmd 
eva, na varnah. S.B. I. 3. 10. It is the changeless reality. 

9. etasya vd aksarasya prasdsane , gdrgi, surydeandramasau 
vidhrtau tisthatah; etasya vd aksarasya prasdsane, gdrgi , dycivci- 
prthivyau vidhrtc tisthatah; etasya vd aksarasya prasdsane, gdrgi , 
nimesd, mnhurtd, ahordtrany, ardhamdsd , mdsd, rtavah, samvat- 
sara iti. vidhrtds tisthanti; etasya vd aksarasya prasdsane, gdrgi , 
prdcyo’ nyd nadyah syandantc svetebhyah parvatebhyah, praticyo ' 
nydih, yam yam cd disam ami; etasya vd aksarasya prasdsane , 
gdrgi, dadato manusydh prasamsanti; y a jamdnarh devdh , darvim 
pitaro ’nvdyattdh. 

9. ‘Verily, at the command of that Imperishable, O Gargi, 
the sun and the moon stand in their respective positions. At 
the command of that Imperishable, 0 Gargi, heaven and earth 
stand in their respective positions. At the command of that 
Imperishable, O Gargi, what are called moments, hours, days 
and nights, half-months, months, seasons, years stand in their 
respective positions. At the command of that Imperishable, O 



III. 8. 12. • Brhad-dranyaka Vpanisad 233 

Gargi, some rivers flow to the east from the white (snowy) 
mountains, others to the west in whatever direction each 
flows. By the command of that Imperishable, O Gargi, men 
praise those who give, the gods (are desirous of) the sacrificer 
and the fathers are desirous of the darvl offering/ 

Inferential evidence from the orderliness of the world is here 
given: anumanam pramdnam upanyasyati. 

The maintenance of the respective positions of heaven and earth 
is not possible without the guidance of an intelligent transcendent 
ruler: cetandvantam prasdsitdram asamsarinam antarena naitad 
yuktum. £. 

10. yo vd dad aksaram, gargi, avidilvdsmiml lokc juhoti, 
yajate, lapas tapyatc, bahuni varsa-sahasrdny antavad evdsya tad 
bhavati; yo vd dad aksaram, gargi, aviditvdsmdl lokdt praiti, sa 
krpanah ; atha y a dad aksaram, gargi, viditvdsmdl lokdt praiti , sa 
brdhmanah. 

10. ‘Whosoever, O Gargi, in this world, without knowing this 
Imperishable performs sacrifices, worships, performs austerities 
for a thousand years, his work will have an end; whosoever, O 
Gargi, without knowing this Imperishable departs from this 
world, is pitiable. But, O Gargi, he who knowing the Im- 
perishable departs from this world is a Brdlimana (a knower of 
Brahman).' 

yad ajhdndl sam sdra- prdptih, yad jndndc cdmrtatva-prdptih. R. 

11. tad vd dad aksaram, gargi , adrstam drastr, asrutam, 
srotr , amatam mantr, avijhdtam vijhdtr, nanyad ato’sti drastr , 
ndnyad ato y sti srotr, nanyad ato y sti mantr, nanyad ato y sti 
vijhdtr ; dasmin mi klfalv aksare , gargi, dkdsa otas ca protas ca. 

11. ‘Verily, that Imperishable, 0 Gargi, is unseen but is the 
seer, is unheard but is the hearer, unthought but is the thinker, 
unknown but is the knower. There is no other seer but this, 
there is no other hearer but this, there is no other thinker but 
this, there is no other knower but this. By this Imperishable, O 
Gargi, is space woven like warp and woof/ 

12. ^sd hovdea; brdhmand bhagavantah, tad eva balm manye- 
dhvamyad asmdin namaskdrena mucycdhvam; na vai jdtu yusma- 
kain imam kascid brahmodyam jeteti. tato ha vacaknavy upa- 
rardma. 

12. She sapid : ‘Venerable Brahman as, you may think it a great 
thing if you get off from aim though bowing to him. Not one 



234 The Principal Upanisads III. 9. 1. 

of you will defeat him in arguments about Brahman / Thereupon 
(GargI) Vacaknavl kept silent. 

§ says that the same Brahman on account of the differences in 
limiting adjuncts, upddhibhedena is called differently: tasman 
nirupadhikasyatmano nirupdkhyatvdn nirvisesatvdd ekatvdc ca neti 
netlti vyapadeso bhavati, avidyd-kama-karma-visista-kdrya-karano- 
pddhir dtmd samsdrl jiva ucyate; nitya-niratisaya-jhdna-sakty-upddhir 
atmdinUirydniHvara ucyate; sa eva nirupddhih kevalah suddhah svena- 
svabhdvcndksaram par am ucyate: 

Therefore the unconditioned Self, being beyond speech and mind, 
undifferentiated and one, is defined as ‘not this,’ 'not this’; when it 
has the limiting adjuncts of the body and the organs, the products 
of ignorance, desire and work, it is called the individual ego ; when the 
self has the limiting adjunct of eternal knowledge and power, it 
is called the inner controller, the Supreme Lord. The same self, 
absolute, alone, pure is called the Imperishable Supreme Self. The 
self is everywhere assuming different forms. For § the differences 
are all traceable to limiting adjuncts and to nothing else, upddhi- 
bhedenaivaisdm bhedah, ndnyathd. 


Ninth Brdhmana 

MANY GODS AND ONE BRAHMAN 

1. atha hainayh vidagdhah sdkalyah papraccha : kati devdh, 
ydjhavalkya , iti. sa haitayaiva nividd pratipede, ydvanto vaisva- 
devasya nividy ucyante; trayas ca tri ca satd , trayas ca tri ca 
sahasreti. awn iti. hovdea , kaly eva devdh, ydjhavalkya iti. trayai 
trimsad iti. Awn iti. hovdea, katy eva devdh, ydjhavalkya, iti. sad 
iti. awn iti. hovdea, katy eva devdh, ydjhavalkya, iti. traya iti. aunt 
iti. hovdea, katy eva devdh , ydjhavalkya, iti. dvdv iti. awn iti. 
hovdea, katy eva devdh, ydjhavalkya, iti. adhyardha iti. aum iti. 
hovdea, katy eva devdh, ydjhavalkya, iti. eka iti. aum iti. hovdea 
katame te trayas ca tri ca sahasreti. 

1. Then Vidagdha Sakalya asked him: ‘How many gods are 
there, Yajnavalkya? , He answered, in accord with the following 
nivid (invocation of the gods). ‘As many as are mentioned in 
the nivid of the hymn of praise to the Visve-devas, namely, three 
hundred and three, and three thousand and three/ ‘Yes/ he 
said, ‘but how many gods are there, Yajnavalkya? > ‘Thirty 
three/ ‘Yes/ he said, ‘but how many gods are there, Yajna- 



III. 9. 4. Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 235 

valkya?’ ‘Six. 1 'Yes/ said he, ‘but how many gods are there, 
Yajnavalkya?’ ‘Three.’ ‘Yes/ said he, ‘but how many gods are 
there, Yajnavalkya?’ ‘Two/ ‘Yes/ said he, ‘but how many 
gods are there, Yajnavalkya?’ ‘One and a half/ ‘Yes/ said he, 
‘but how many gods are there, Yajnavalkya?’ ‘One.’ ‘Yes,’ 
said he, ‘but which are those three hundred and three and 
three thousand and three?’ 

nivid: group of verses giving the number of the gods which are 
recited in the hymns of praise to the Visve-devas. devatd-samkhyd-vd- 
cakdni mantra-paddni kdnicid vaisva-deve sastre sasyamte. S. 

2. sa hovdca, mahimdna evaisdm etc, tray as trimsat tv eva 
devd iti. katamc te trayas trimsad iti. astau vasavah ekadasa 
rudrdh, dvadasddityah, te ckatrimsat indr as caiva prajdpatis ca 
trayastrimsdv iti. 

2. He (Yajnavalkya) said, ‘They are but the manifestations 
of them, but there are only thirty-three gods.’ ‘Which are these 
thirty-three ? ’ ‘The eight Vasus, the eleven Rudras, and the 
twelve Adityas, these are thirty- one, Indra and Prajd-pati 
(make up) thirty-three.’ 

mahimdnah: manifestations: vibhiitayah. S. 

3. katame vasava iti. agnis ca prthivi ca vdyus edntariksam 
eddityas ca dyaiis ca candramds ca naksatrdni ca, etc vasavah, 
etesu hidarii sarvarh hitam iti , tasmdd vasava iti. 

3. ‘Which are the Vasus?’ ‘Fire, the earth, the air, the sky, 
the sun, the heaven, the moon, the stars, these are the Vasus 
for in them all this is placed' therefore they are called Vasus.’ 

• 

The Vasus trapsform themselves* into bodies and organs of all 
beings which serve as the support for their work and its fruition as 
also into their dwelling-places. They help other beings to live and 
they themselves live; prdnindm karma- phaldsrayatvena kdrya- 
karana-samghdta-rupena tan nivdsatvena vi par in am anto jagad idam 
sarvam vasayanti vasanti ca. S. 

Because th^ help others to live they are called Vasus: teyasmdd 
vasayanti, tasmdd vasava iti. S. 

4. katame rudrd iti. daseme puruse prdndh atmaikddasah; te 
yaddsmdt sarirdn martydd utkrdmahti , atha rodayanti, tad yad 
rodayanti, tasmdd rudrd iti. 

4. ‘Which are the Rudras?’ ‘These ten breaths in a person 
with the mind as the eleventh. When they depart from this 



236 The Principal Upanisads III. 9. 8. 

mortal body, they make us (his relatives) weep. So because 
they make us weep, therefore they are called Rudras.* 

ten breaths : the ten sensory and motor organs, jndna-karmendriymi 
dasa purusasthdni. R. 

5. katama ddityd iti. dvddasa vai masdh samvatsarasya , eta 
ddityah , etc hldam sarvam ddaddnd yanti; te yad idam sarvam 
ddaddnd yanti , tasmdd ddityd iti. 

5. ‘Which are the Adityas?* ‘Verily, the twelve months of the 
year, these are Adityas, for they move carrying along all this. 
Since they move carrying along all this, therefore they are 
called Adityas.* 

6 . katama indr ah t katamah prajdpatir iti , stanayitnnr eve- 
ndrah , yajnah prajdpatir iti. katamah stanayitnnr iti. asanir iti. 
katamo yajiia iti. pasava iti. 

6. ‘Which is Indra? Which is Prajd-patit ‘Indra is the 
thunder, Prajd-pati is the sacrifice.* ‘Which is the thunder?* 
‘The thunderbolt.* ‘Which is the sacrifice?* ‘The (sacrificial) 
animals.* 

asanih: thunderbolt, vajratn $. 

Animals are called sacrifices as the latter depend on animals. 
yajnasya hi sddhandni pasavah. &. 

7. katame sad iti. agnis ca prthivT ca vdiyas edntariksam 
cadityas ca dyaus ca, etc sat; etc hldam sarvam sad iti. 

7. ‘Which are the six?* ‘Fire, the earth, the air, the sky, the 
sun and the heaven, these are the six, for the six are all this.* 

8. katame te trayo devdi iti. pna eva trayo lokdh , esu fume sarve 
devd iti. katamau tan dvaii devdv iti, annum caiva pranas ceti. 
katamo dhyardha iti. yo yam pavata iti. 

8. ‘Which are the three gods?* ‘They are, verily, the three 
worlds, for in them all these gods exist.* ‘Which are the two 
gods?' ‘Food and breath.* ‘Which is the one and a half?* ‘This 
one here who blows (the air).* 

The earth and the fire make one god, the sky and the air another, 
the sun and the heaven a third: prthivim agnirii caiklkrtyaiko devah, 
antoriksam vdyum caiklkrtya dvitiyah, divam ddityam caikxkrtya 
tytiyah , ta eva trayo devd iti. S. 

Out of matter and life the rest develops: annum caivarprdnaicaitau 
devau, anayos sarvesam uktdndm antarbhdvah. S. 



III. 9. 11. Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 237 

9. tad ahull, yad ayam eka ivaiva pavate, atha katham adhy- 
ardha iti. yad asminn idarii sarvam adhydrdhnot , tenadhyardha 
iti, katama eko deva iti. prana iti, sa brahma, tyad ity acaksate. 

9. 'Regarding this, some say, since he who blows is like one, 
how then is he one and a half ? (The answer is) because in him 
(when he blows) all this grew up/ 'Which is the one God?' 
‘The Breath. He is Brahman. They call him tyat (that)/ 

adhyardhnot: grew up, attains great growth, adhiruddhim prdpnoti. S. 

The one God has different names, forms, activities, attributes 
and powers owing to differences of function: devasyaikasya 
ndma-rupa-karma-guna-sakti-bhcdo* dhikdra-bheddt. S. 

EIGHT DIFFERENT PERSONS AND ‘THEIR 
CORRESPONDING DIVINITIES 

10. prthivy cva yasydyatanam, agnir lokah , mano jyotih , yo 
vai lam purusam vidydt sarvasydlmanah pardyanam , sa vai 
vcditd sydt, ydjhavalkya. vcda vd ahum lam purusam sarvasyd- 
lmanah pardyanam, yam dllha; ya cvdyam sdnrah pnrusah, 
sa csah. vadaiva sdkalya, lasya kd dcvaid iti. amrtam iti hovdca. 

10. 'Verily, he who knows that person whose abode is the 
earth, whose world is the fire, whose light is the mind, who is 
the ultimate support of every soul, he, verily, would be a 
knower, O Yajhavalkya. Verily, I know that person, who is 
the ultimate support of every soul, of w'hom you speak/ This 
very person who is in the body is he. Tell me, Sakalya, who is 
his god?' ‘The immortal,' said he. 

dyatanam: abode: as ray ah. $. ddhdrah. R. 

pardyanam: ultimate support: par am ayanam para asrayah. S. 

para ma - prd pya-bh Utah p 1 rusa-sa bd it ah, paramdtm d. R. 

• 

11. kdma cva yasydyatanam, hrddyam lokah, mano jyotih, yo 
vai tarn purusam vidydt sarvasydlmanah pardyanam, sa vai 
vcditd sydt, ydjhavalkya. vcda vd aharii tarn purusam sarvasya 
ditmanah pardyanam, yam dllha; y a cvdyam kdmamayah pnrusah 
sa csah. vadaiva, idkalya, lasya kd devata iti. striyah, iti hovdca. 

11. ‘Verily, «he who knows that person whose abode is 
desire, whose world is the heart, whose light is the mind, 
who is the ultimate support of every soul, he, verily, would be 
a knower, O Yajhavalkya.' ‘Verily, I* know that person who is 
the ultimate support of every soul, of whom you speak. This 
very person who is made of desire is he. Tell me, Sakalya, who 
is his god?’ ‘Women/ said he. 



2j8 The Principal Upanisads III. g. 14. 

kdma: desire, desire for sex pleasures, stri-vyatikarabhilasah kdmah. 
hrdayam lokah: We see through the intellect: hrdayena bnddhyd 
pasyati. S. 

women: for men’s desire is inflamed through them: strlto hi kdmasya 
dlp'tir jay ate. §. 

12. riipdny eva yasydyatanam , caksur lokah , mano jyotih, yo 
vai tam purusam vidydt sarvasydtmanah pardyanam , sa vai 
veditd sydt, ydj naval kya. veda vd aham tam purusam sarvasydt- 
manah pardyanam, yam dttha. ya evdsdv ddityc purusah, sa 
esah. vadaiva, sdkalya, tasya kd devatd iti. satyani iti hovdica. 

12. ‘Verily, he who knows that person whose abode is forms, 
whose world is the eye, whose light is the mind, who is the 
ultimate support of every soul, he, verily, would be a knower, 
O Yajnavalkya.’ ‘Verily, I know that person who is the ultimate 
support of every soul, of whom you speak. This very person 
who is in the sun is he. Tell me, Sakalya, who is his god?' 
‘Truth,’ said he. 

forms: colours like white and black: sukla-krsnddini . S. 

13. dkdsa eva yasydyatanam, srotram lokah, mano jyotih, yo 
vai tam purusam vidydt sarvasydtmanah pardyanam, sa vai 
veditd sydt, yajnavalkya. veda vd aham tam pvrusam sarvasydt- 
manah pardyanam, yam dttha; ya cvdyaih srautrah prdtisrutkah 
purusah sa esah. vadaiva , sdkalya, tasya kd devatd iti. disali 
iti hovdica. 

13. ‘Verily, he who knows that person, whose abode is 
space, whose 1 world is the ear, whose light is mind, who is the 
ultimate support of every soul, he, verily, would be a knower, 
O Yajnavalkya.’ ‘Verily, I know that person who is the ultimate 
support of every soul, of whom you speak.. This very person 
who is in hearing and who is in the echo is he. Tell me, Sakalya, 
who is his god?' ‘The quarters of space,’ said he. 

prdtisrutkah: pratidhvani-visistah. R. 

14. tama eva yasydyatanam, hrdayam lokah, mano jyotih, yo 
vai tam purusam vidydt sarvasydtmanah pardyanam, sa vai 
veditd sydt, yajnavalkya. veda vd aham tam purusam sarvasydt- 
manah, pardyanam , yam dttha; ya evdyam chdydmayah purusah 
sa esah. vadaiva, sdkalya ,' tasya kd devatd iti. mrlyur iti hovdea. 

14. ‘Verily, he who knows that person, whose abode is 
darkness, whose world is the heart, whose light is *he mind, who 
is the ultimate support of every soul, he, verily, would be a 



III. 9. 17. Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 239 

knower, O Yajnavalkya/ 'Verily, I know that person who is 
the ultimate support of every soul, of whom you speak. This 
very person who is made of shadow is he. Tell me, Sakalya, 
who is his god?' 'Death/ said he. 

15. rupany eva yasydyatanam, caksur lokah, mano jyotih, yo 
vai tam purusam vidyat sarvasydtmanah pardyanam , sa vai 
veditd sydt, yajnavalkya. veda vd aham tam purusam sarvasydt- 
manah pardyanam , yam dttha. ya cvdyam ddarse purusah , sa 
esah. vadaiva, sdkalya, tasya kd devata iti, asur iti hovdca. 

15. 'Verily, he who knows that person, whose abode is forms, 
whose world is the eye, whose light is the mind, who is the 
ultimate support of every soul, he, verily, would be a knower, 
O Yajnavalkya/ ‘Verily, I know that person who is the ultimate 
support of every soul, of whom you speak. This very person 
who is in the looking-glass is he. Tell me, Sakalya, who is his 
god?' ‘Life/ said he. 

16. apa eva yasydyatanam, hr day am lokah , mano jyotih, yo 
vai tam purusam vidyat sarvasydtmanah pardyanam, sa vai 
veditd sydt, yajnavalkya. veda vd aham tam purusam sarvasydt- 
manah pardyanam, yam dttha. ya evdyam apsu purusah sa esah. 
vadaiva, sdkalya, tasya kd devata iti. varuna tti hovdca. 

16. 'Verily, he who knows that person, whose abode is water, 
whose world is the heart, whose light is the mind, who is the 
ultimate support of every soul, he, verily, would be a knower, 
O Yajnavalkya. ' ‘Verily, I know that person w r ho is the ultimate 
support of every soul, of whom you speak. This very person 
who is in water is he. Tell me, 5 akalya, who is his god?’ 
'Varuna/ said he. 

varuna: rain. 

17. reta eva yasydyatanam, hrdayam lokah, mano jyotih yo 
vai tam purusam vidyat sarvasydtmanah pardyanam sa vai 
veditd sydt, yajnavalkya. veda vd aham tam purusam sarvasydt- 
manah, pardyanam , yam dttha. ya cvdyam putramayah purusah, 
sa esah. vadatva, sdkalya, tasya kd devata iti. prajdpatih iti 
hovdca 

17. 'Verily, he who knows that # person, whose abode is 
semen, whose world is the heart, whose light is the mind, who 
is the ultimate support of every soul, he, verily, would be a 
knower, 0 V^jnavalkya.' 'Verily, I know that person who is 
the ultimate support of every soul, of whom you speak. This 



240 The Principal Upanisads III. 9. 21 • 

very person who is made of a son is he. Tell me, Sfikalya, who 
is his god?’ 1 Prajd-pati ,' said he. 

18. Sdkalya, iti liovdca ydjhavalkyah, tvdm svid ime brdhmana 
ahgdravaksayanam akraid u iti. 

18. ‘Sakalya,' said Yajhavalkya, ‘have these Brahmanas made 
you their remover of burning coals?' 

‘Have these Vedic scholars thrown you to me to be burnt or 
consumed by me?' 

FIVE DIRECTIONS IN SPACE, THEIR DEITIES AND 

SUPPORTS 

19. yajhavalkya, iti hovdea sdkalyah, yad idam kuru-paned- 
landm brdhmandn atyavddlh , kith brahma vidvdn iti , diso veda 
sadevdh sapratisthd iti. yad diso vettha sa devdh sapratisthdh . 

19. ‘Yajhavalkya,' said Sakalya, ‘What is the Prahman 
you know, that you have talked down the Brfihmanas of the 
Kuru-pancfilas?' ‘I know the quarters with their deities and 
supports.' ‘If you know the quarters with their deities and 
supports, 

20. k im-devato ’ sydm prdcydm disy aslti. dditya-devata iti. sa 
adityah kasmin pratisthita iti. caksiisiti. kasmin mi caksuh 
pratisthitam iti. rdpcsv iti. caksusd hi nlpdini pasyati. kasmin nu 
rupani pratisthitdimti. hvdayc iti hovdea , hrdaycna hi rupdni 
jdndti , hrdaye hy eva rupdni pratisthitdini bhavantiti. evam 
evaitat, yajhavalkya. 

20. ‘What deity have you in this eastern quarter?' (Yajna- 
valkya said) : ‘the deity sun.' ‘That sun, #n what is it supported ?' 
‘On the eye.' ‘On what is 'the eye supported?' ‘On forms, for 
one sees forms with the eye.' ‘On what are forms supported?' 
‘On the heart,' said he (Yajhavalkya), ‘for one knows the 
forms through the heart; on the heart only are the forms 
supported.' ‘Even so, Yajhavalkya.' 

Whatever forms we meditate upon, we become identified with 
them: yam yam devatdm tt paste ihaiva , tad bhfitas tam tain pratipad - 
yate. S. 

hr day a: heart. It refers to the intellect and the mind taken together: 
hrdayam iti buddhi-manasi eklkrtya nirdesah. £. 

21. kirii-devato’ sydim daksindydim disy aslti. yeima-devata iti 
sa yamah kasmin pratisthita iti. yajha iti. kasmin nu yajhah 



III. 9. 23. Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 241 

pratisthita iti. daksinaydm iti. kasmin nu daksind pratisthita iti. 
sraddhdydm iti. yadd hy eva sraddhatte atha daksinam dadati; 
sraddhdydm hy ei)a daksind pratisthita iti. kasmin nu sraddhd 
pratisthita iti. hrdaye iti. hovaca hrdayena hi sraddhdm jdndti , 
hrdaye hy eva sraddhd pratisthita bhavatiti. evam cvaitat, 
yajhavalkya. 

2 1. ‘What deity have you in this southern quarter? 1 
(Yajnavalkya said) ‘The deity Yama,' ‘That Yama, on what is 
he supported?' ‘On the sacrifice/ ‘On what is the sacrifice 
supported?' ‘On the offerings to the priests.' ‘And on what 
are the offerings to the priests supported?' ‘On faith, for when 
one has faith, he gives offerings to the priests. Therefore it is 
on faith that the offerings to the priests are supported.' ‘On 
what is faith supported?' ‘On the heart,' he (Yajhavalkya) 
said, ‘for through the heart one knows faith; verily, on the 
heart alone is faith supported.’ ‘Even so, Yajhavalkya.' 

faith: faith in the Vedas accompanied by devotion, dstikya-buddhir 
bhakti-sahitd. S. 

22. kim-devato' sydim praticydm disy asiti. varuna-devata iti , 
sa varunah kasmin pratisthita iti. apsv iti. kasmin nv dpah 
pratisthita iti. reiaslti , kasmin nu retail pratisthitam iti. hrdaye 
iti, hovaca; tasmdd a pi pratiriipam jdtam a huh, hrdaydd iva 
srptah, hrdaydd iva ninnita iti , hrdayc hy eva retail pratisthitam 
bhavatiti. evam evaitat , yajhavalkya. 

22. ‘What deity have you in this western quarter?' ‘The 
deity Varuna.' ‘That Vanina, on what is he supported?’ ‘On 
water.' ‘On what is water supported?' ‘On semen.' ‘On what 
is semen supported?’ T)n the heart,' he said. ‘Therefore they 
say of a new-born child who resembles (the father) that he 
seems as if he slipped out of his heart, he is built out of his 
heart; for on the heart alone is semen supported.' ‘Even so, 
Yajnavalkya.' 

Semen is said to be an effect of the heart, for sex desire is a 
modification of the heart and semen issues when the heart of man 
is under the influence of sex desire: hrdayasya kdryam retail, kdmo 
hr day a sy a vrttih, kdmino hi hrdaydd rcto’ dhiskandati. S. 

23. kirh-devato* sydm udicydm disy asiti. soma-devata iti. sa 
somah kasmin pratisthita iti. diksdydm iti. kasmin nu diksd 
pratisthita iti. satya iti. tasmdd api diksitam dhuh, satyam 
vada iti: satye hy eva diky pratisthita iti. kasmin nu satyam 



242 The Principal Upanisads III. 9. 26. 

pratisthitam iti. hrdaye iti hovaca, hrdaycna hi satyam jdndti 
hrdaye hy eva satyam pratisthitam bhavatiti. cvam evaitat, 
yajhavalkya . 

23. ‘What deity have you in this northern quarter?' The 
deity Soma. 1 ‘That Soma, on what is he supported?' ‘On the 
initiatory rite.' ‘On what is initiation supported?’ ‘On truth, 
therefore, they say to one who is initiated, “speak the truth” 
for on truth alone is the initiation supported.’ 'On what is truth 
supported?' ‘On the heart,' he (Yajhavalkya) said, ‘for through 
the heart one knows truth, therefore it is on the heart that 
the truth is supported.' ‘Even so, Yajhavalkya.' 

24. kim-devato’sydm dhruvdydm disy asiti. agni-devata iti . 
so’gnih kasmin pratisthita iti. vdei iti. kasmin mi vdk pratisthita 
iti. hrdaya iti. kasmin nu hrdayam pratisthitam iti. 

24. ‘What deity have you in this fixed quarter (zenith)?' 
‘The deity, fire.’ ‘On what is fire supported?' ‘On speech.' 
‘On what is speech supported?' ‘On the heart.’ ‘On what is the 
heart supported?’ 

25. ahallika iti hovaca ydjhavalkyah, yatraitad anyatrdsman 
manydsai, yaddhy ctad anyatrdsmat sydt, svdno vainad adyuh 
vaydmsi vainad vinuithnirann iti. 

25. ‘You ghost,' said Yajhavalkya, ‘that you think that 
it (the heart) would be elsewhere than in ourselves, for if it were 
anywhere else than in ourselves, the dogs might eat it (the 
body) or the birds tear it to pieces.' 

Cp. Sumsumdra Jdtaka . 

ahallika : ghost, that which disappears by day, ahani liyate. A. 

Madhva means a fool, one who has hi* knowledge, ahar, in a 
potential, lika, condition. His •knowledge is not developed. 

When the heart leaves the* body, 1 he body becomes dead. 

THE SELF 

26. kasmin nu tvam cdtmd ca pratisthitau stha iti. prana iti. 
kasmin nu prdnah pratisthita iti. apdna iti. kas\nin nv apdnah 
pratisthita iti. vydna iti. kasmin nu vydnah pratisthita iti . 
udana iti. kasminn iiddnah pratisthita iti. samdna iti. sa esa, na 
iti. na ity atmd, agrhyah, - na hi grhyate, asiryah na hi siryate , 
asangah na hi sajyatc , asito na vyathaic, na risyati. ctdny astdv 
dyatandni , astau lokdh, astau devdh, astau purjusdh. sa yas 
tan purusdn niruhya pralyuhydtyakrdmat, tarn tvd aupanisadam 



III. 9. 28. Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 243 

purusam prcchdmi , tarn cen me na vivaksyasi murdhd te vipatis - 
yattti. tarn ha na mene sdkalyah , tasya ha murdhd vipapata , 
hasya parimosino sthiny apajahruh , any an manyamdndh. 

26. Sakalya said: 'On what are you (your body) and yourself 
(the heart) supported?' (Yajnavalkya said): ‘On the prana 
(life-breath — inbreath). ' ‘On what is prana supported?' ‘On 
the apdna (the outbreath).' ‘And on what is the outbreath sup- 
ported?' ‘On the vydina (the diffused breath). ‘And on what is 
the diffused breath supported?' ‘On the samdna (the equalising 
or middle breath). That self is not this, not this. It is incom- 
prehensible for it is not comprehended. It is indestructible for 
it is never destroyed. It is unattached for it does not attach 
itself. It is unfettered. It does not suffer. It is not injured. 
These are the eight abodes, the eight worlds, the eight gods, 
the eight persons. He who takes apart and puts together these 
persons and passes beyond them, that is the person taught in 
the Upanisads about whom I ask you. If you do not explain 
him to me your head will fall off.' Sakalya did not know him, 
and his head fell off. Indeed robbers took away his bones, 
thinking they were something else. 

Brahman is incpmprehcnsiblc because it goes beyond the attri- 
butes of eifects: sarva-kdrya-dharmatitah. ft. 
asitah : unfettered, abaddliah. ft. 
na risyati: not destroyed na vinasyati $. 

parimosinah: robbers, taskardh, ft. Sec Satapatha Brdhmana. XI. 

0. 3. 11. 

MAN COMPARED TO A TREE 

27. atha hovdea, brdlimand bhagav $ anto, yo vah kdmayatc sa ma 
prcchatu , sarve va nid prcchata, yo vah kdmayatc , tarn vali 
prcchdmi , sarvdn vd vah prcchamlti. te ha brdhmana na dadhrsuh. 

27. Then he (Yajnavalkya) said: ‘Venerable Brahmanas 
whosoever among you wishes to do so, may question me or 
you may all question me or I will question him of you who 
wishes (to be questioned) or I will question all of you.' Those 
Brahmanas, however, did not dare (to say anything). 

28. tan haitaih slokaih papraccha: 

1. yathcl vrkso vanaspatih, tathaiva purnso'mrsd 
tasya lomani parndni , tvag asyotpdfikd bahih. 

2 . tvaca evclsya rudhiram brasyandi, tvaca utpafah; 
tasmdt, tad dlrnndt praiti, raso vrksad ivdnatat. 



244 The Principal Upanisads III. q. 28. 

3. mdmsdny asya sakarani , kindtam sndva , tat sthiram; 
asthlny antarato ddruni , majjd majjopamd krtd 

4. yad w'&so vr&Ho rohati muldin navatarah punah , 
martyah svin mrtyund vrknali kasmdn miildt prarohati 

5. retasa iti md vocata; jlvatas tat prajdyate: 
dhandruha iva vai vrksah ahjasa pretyasambhavah. 

6 . yat samdlam dvrheyuh vrksam, na punar dbhavet , 
martyah svin mrtyund vrknali kasmdn miildt prarohati 

7. jdta cva najdyate, konvenam janayct punah; 
vijhdnam dnandam brahma , rdtir ddituh pardyanam , 
tisthamdnasya tadvidah. 

28. He questioned them with the following verses: 

1. ‘As is a mighty tree so, indeed, is a man; his hairs are 
leaves and his skin is its outer bark. 

2. ‘From his skin blood flows forth and sap from the skin 
(of the tree). Therefore when a man is wounded blood flows as 
sap from a tree that is struck. 

3. ‘His flesh is its inner bark, his nerves are tough like inner 
fibres. His bones are the wood within and the marrow is made 
resembling the pith. 

4. ‘A tree when it is felled springs up from its root in a newer 
form; from what root does man spring fortli when he is cut 
off by death ? 

5. ‘Do not say “from the semen' 1 for that is produced from 
what is alive (men). A tree springs also from the seed. After it 
is dead it certainly springs again. 

6. ‘If a tree is pulled up with the root, it will not spring 
again. From what root does a mortal spring forth when he is 
cut off by death ? 

7. ‘When born, he is not .born (again) for who should create 
him again? Brahman who is knowledge, bliss is the final goal of 
him who offers gifts as well as of him who stands firm and 
knows ( Brahman ) . 1 

See T.U. I. 10; II. 1. 
amrsd: indeed, satyam. S. 

From what root does man spring forth xvhen he is cut off by death? 
See also Job XIV. 7-10. A man struck down by death does not come 
to life from seed, because human seed comes from the living only 
while trees springing from grain are seen to come to life after the 
tree is dead. 

jlvatas: what is alive. Philo Judaeus says: ‘Are no\ the parents, 
as it were, concomitant causes only, while Nature is the highest, 



III. 9. 28. Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 245 

elder and true cause of the begetting of children?’ Quis rerum 
divinarum heres. 115. Cp. St. Thomas Aquinas, ‘The power of 
the soul which is in the semen through the spirit enclosed therein 
fashions the body.’ Summa Theologica. III. 32. ii. 
dhdnah: seed, bijam, bijaruho'pi vfkso bhavati, na kevalam kdnda-ru- 
ha eva. §. 

anjasa certainly, sdksat. R. 
tisthamdnasya: brahma-samsthasya. 

tadvidah, brahmavidah. R. Brahman is the principle or the root of a 
new life both for those who practise works and for those who, 
having relinquished works, stand firm in knowledge. 



246 


The Principal Upanisads 


IV. 1. 2. 


CHAPTER IV 

First Brahmana 

INADEQUATE DEFINITIONS OF BRAHMAN 

1. janako ha vaidcha dsdrh cakrc. atha ha ydjhavalkya divctv- 
rdja . tarn hovdca : ydjhavalkya , kim artham acdrih, pashm icchan, 
anvantdn-iti. ubhayam eva, samrdd iti hovdca. 

1. Janaka (King) of Videha was seated (to give audience). 
Then Yajnavalkya came up. He (Janaka) said to him: 
'Yajnavalkya, for what purpose have you come, wishing for 
cattle or for subtle questions?’ He (Yajnavalkya) said (in 
reply) Tor both, Your Majesty.’ 

dsam cakre: was seated, dsanam kytavdn, dsthdyikam dattavan ity 
arthah , d a rsa na-k d m cbhyo rdjd. S. 
acdrih: dgatosi. S. 

anvantdn: subtle questions, suksmdntdn , suksma-vastu-nirnaydntdn 
prasndn attah srotum icchan. £. anoh suksmasya vastunah pratya- 
gatmader antdn niscaydn kartum iti arthah. R. 
samrat: emperor of India, bhdratasya varsasya rdjd. $. 
himavat-setu-paryantasyeti ydvat. A. 

2. yat te kas cid abravit tat srnavdmcti. abravin me jitva 
sailinih, vdg vai brahmeti. yathd mdtrmdn pitrmdn dedryavan 
bruyat, tathd. tat sailinir abravit: vdg vai brahmeti , avadato hi 
kim sydd iti. abravit tu te tasydyatanam pratistham. na me 
‘ bravtd iti. eka-pdd vd ctat, samrdt, iti. sa vai ?io briihi, ydjhavalkya. 
vdg evdyatanam, dkdsah pratisthd, prajhety enad updsita. kd 
prajhatd , ydjhavalkya. vdg^ eva, samrdi, iti hovdca. vdea vai, 
samrdt, bandhuh prajhdyate; rg-vedo yajuf-vedah, sdma-vedo’ 
tharvdhgirasa , itihasah, purdnam, vidyd upanisadah , slokah , 
sutrany anuvydkhydndni, vydkhydndnistam hutam dsitam pdyi - 
tam, ay am ca lokah, paras ca lokah, sarvdni ca bhiUdni vdcaiva, 
samrat, prajhayante; vdg vai, samrdt, paramam brahma ; nainam 
vdg jahdti, sarvdny enam bhiitdny abhiksaranti, devo bhutvd 
devdn apyeti, ya evam vidvdn etad n paste, hasty-rsabham sahasram 
daddmi, iti hovdca janako vaidehah. sa hovdca yajhavalkyah, 
pita me’manyata, ndinanu$isya hareteti. 

2. ‘Let me hear what any (of your teachers) may have told 
you.’ ‘Jitvan Sailini told me that “speech, verily, is Brahman.” 
As one who has a mother, father and teacher 'should say, so 



IV. i. 3. Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 247 

did Sailini say that speech is Brahman , for what can one have 
who cannot speak?' ‘But did he tell you the abode and the 
support (of the Brahman) ?' ‘He did not tell me/ ‘This Brahman 
is only one-footed, Your Majesty/ ‘Verily, Yajnavalkya, do 
tell us/ ‘Its abode is just speech, its support space. One should 
worship it as intelligence/ ‘What is the nature of that intelli- 
gence, Yajnavalkya?’ ‘Just speech, Your Majesty/ said he 
(Yajnavalaya). ‘Verily, by speech, Your Majesty, a friend is 
recognised. By speech alone, Your Majesty, are the Rg Veda, 
the Yajur Veda, the Santa Veda, the Atharvahgirasa, history, 
ancient lore, arts, the upanisads, verses, aphorisms, explana- 
tions, commentaries, (the effects of) sacrifices, oblations, food and 
drink, this world and the other and all beings are known. The 
higher Brahman, Your Majesty, is, in truth, speech. Speech 
does not desert him who, knowing thus, worships it as such. 
All beings approach him. Having become a god he goes even 
to the gods/ Janaka (King) of Videha said, ‘I shall give you 
a thousand cows with a bull as large as an elephant/ Yajna- 
valkya said, ‘My father thought that one should not accept 
gifts without having instructed/ 

prajhd : intelligence. Vdk is Logos, wisdom. 

Vijndna is discrimination, thought, excogitation. It is logical know- 
ledge which is a preparation for prajhd or intuitive wisdom. Prajhd is 
the wisdom that sets free, that shatters the bondage of suffering and 
desire. It is related to the Greek piognosis, knowledge a priori as 
distinct from samjhd or knowledge by observation. Cp. the Buddhist 
Pvajhdpdramitd. 

samjhd: means for S, consciousness of one’s personality: visesajhdna : 

See § on B.U. IV. 5. 13. 

abode : dyatanam ndma saAram . $. 

support: trisv a pi kdltsu ya asr ay ah. £. 

eka-pdd: one-footed, the instruction is paitial only, not complete. 
as one who has a mother, father, teacher : As one who has been taught 
well at home by his mother, then by his father and then by a teacher. 
without Juioing instructed: sisyahi krtdrtham akrtvd sisydd dhanam 
na hareteii mama pita many ata. 

• 

3. yad eva te has cid abravit tat srnavdmcti. abravin ma 
udahkah saulbdyanah, prano vai brahmeti: yathd mdtrmdn 
pitrmdn dedryavan bruydt, tathd tat • saulbdyano'bravit , prano 
vai brahmeti, aprdnato hi kirn sydd iti. abravit tu te tasydyatanam 
pratisthdm. na pie br avid iti. eka-pad vd etat, samrdd, iti. sa vai 
no briilii, yajnavalkya, prd>, 1 evdyatanam, dkdiah prati§thd, 

1 



248 The Principal Upanisads IV. 7. 4. 

priyam ity enad upasita, kd • priyatd , ydjhavalkya, prana cva , 
samrdd , i/i hovdca: prdinasy a vai, samrdt, kdmdydydjyam ydjayati, 
apratigrhyasya pratigrhndti , a pi tatra vadhdsahkam bhavati, 
yam disam eti, prdnasyaiva , samrdt , kdmdya , prano vai, samrdt, 
paramam brahma, nainam prdino jahdti, sarvdny enam bhutany 
abhiksaranti, dcvo bhutvd devdn' apyeti, ya evam vidvdn etad 
updste. hasly-rsabham sahasram daddtni, iti. hovdca, janako 
vaidchah. sa hovdca ydjhavalkyah, pita me manyata ndnanusisya 
harctdi. 

3. ‘Let me hear whatever any one (of your teachers) may have 
told you!' Udanka Saulbayana told me that the vital breath, 
verily, is Brahman. As one who has a mother, father, teacher 
should say, so did that Saulbayana say that the vital breath 
is Brahman , for what can one have who has not the vital 
breath?' ‘But did he tell you the abode and the support?' 
‘He did not tell me.' ‘This Brahman is only one-footed, Your 
Majesty.' ‘Verily, Yajnavalkya, do tell us.' ‘Life, verily, is its 
abode and space its support. Verily, one should worship 
it as the dear.' ‘What is the nature of that dearness, Yajna- 
valkya?' ‘The vital breath itself, Your Majesty,' said he. ‘Verily, 
out of love for life, Your Majesty, one oilers sacrifices for him 
for whom one should not offer sacrifices, one accepts gifts from 
one from whom they should not be accepted. Out of just 
love for life, Your Majesty, there arises fear of being in whatever 
direction one goes. Life is, in truth, Your Majesty, the highest 
Brahman. Life does not desert him, who, knowing thus, worships 
it as such. All beings approach him. Having become a god, he 
goes even to the gods.' Janaka (King) of Videha said, ‘I shall 
give you a thousand cows with a bull as large as an elephant.' 
Yajnavalkya said, ‘My father thought that one should not 
accept (gifts) without haring instructed.' 

pratigraha: that which is received, a gift. 

life does not desert him: he will live long, Ulrghdyur bhavati. R. 

4. yad cva te has cid abravit tat srnavdmcli . abravin me barkur 
vdrsnah caksur vai brahmeti: yalhd mdtrmdn pitrmdn dedryavdn 
bruydt, tathd tad varsnobravit. caksur vai brahmeti, apasyato hi 
kim sydd iti. abravit tu te tasydyatanam pratisthdm. na me’ 
bravid iti. eka-pdd vd ctut, samrdd, iti. sa vai no bruhi, ydjha- 
valkya. caksur evdiyatanam, dkdisah pratisthd; satyam iti etad 
upasita. kd satyatd, ydjhavalkya. caksur cva, samrdd, iti hovdca, 
caksusd vai, samrdt, pasyantam dhuh ; adrdksir iti, sa aha; 



IV. i. 5. Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 249 

adrdksam iti tat satyam bhavatv. caksur vai , samrat, parantam 
brahma . nainam caksur jahdti , sarvdny enam bhiitdny abhik- 
saranti , devo bhtdva devan apyeti, ya evam vidvan etad upaste. 
hasty-rsabham sahasram daddmi, iti hovaca janako vaidehah . 
sa hovaca ydjhavalkyah . me’manyata, nananuSisya 

haretcti. 

4. 'Let me hear what any one (of your teachers) may have 
told you/ ‘Barku Varsna told me that the eye, verily, is 
Brahman . As one who has a mother, father, teacher should 
say, so did that Varsna say that the eye, verily, is Brahman 
for what can one have who cannot see?' 'But did he tell you 
the abode and the support ?' 'He did not tell me/ ‘This Brahman 
is only one-footed, Your Majesty/ ‘Verily, Yajnavalkya, do 
tell us/ ‘The eye, verily, is its abode and space its support, 
verily one should worship it as truth/ ‘What is the nature of 
truth, Yajnavalkya?' ‘The eve itself, Your Majesty/ said he 
(Yajnavalkya). ‘Verily, Your Majesty, when they say to a man 
who sees with his eyes, “have you seen?" and he answers, “I 
have seen”: that is the truth; verily, Your Majesty, the eye is 
the highest Brahman . The eye does not desert him, who 
knowing thus, worships it as such. All beings approach him. 
Having become a god, he goes even to the gods/ Janaka (King) 
of Videha said, ‘I shall give you a thousand cows with a bull 
as large as an elephant/ Yajnavalkya said, ‘My father thought 
that one should not accept (gifts) without having instructed/ 

What is seen with the eye is regarded as more authoritative than 
what is peiccivcd by the other senses, so it is said to be true: 
yat tu caksusd dystavi tad avyabhicdrdt satyam eva bhavati. £; caksusd 
dr dam na vismarati. R. 

• 

5. yad eva te ka s' cid abravzt, *tat srnavdmeti. abravin me 
gardhabhivipito bhdrudvdjah: sroiram vai brahmeti. yathd mdtr- 
mdn pitrmdn dedryuvdin bruydt, tathd tad bharadvdjo’bravit. 
irotram vai brahmeti , asrnvato hi kim sycid iti. abravzt tu te 
tasydyatanam pratisthdm. na mebravid iti. eka-pdd va etat, 
samrad , iti. s& vai no bruhi , yajnavalkya. irotram evayatanam, 
akasah pratistha, ananta ity cnad updsita. kd anantata y ydjiia- 
valkya . diia eva t samrad , iti hovaca. tasmdd vai , samrad , api 
yam kdm ca disam gacchati, naivdsyd antam gacchati , ananta 
hi diiah diso vai, samrat , srotram. srotram vai , samrat , paramam 
brahma nainam Srotram jahdti , sarvdny enam bhiitdny abhik - 
$aranti , devo bhutvd devan ipycti , ya evam v'dvan etad upaste. 



250 The Principal Upanisads IV. i. 6. 

hasty-r§abham sahasrarii dadanii iti. hovdca janako vaidehah , sa 
hovdca yajnavalkyah , pita mc'manyata , ndnannsisya hareteti. 

5. ‘Let me hear what any one (of your teachers) may have 
told you/ ‘Gardhabhivipita Bharadvaja told me that the ear, 
verily, is Brahman. As one who has a mother, father, teacher 
should say, so did that Bharadvaja say that the ear, verily, 
is 'Brahman ; for what can one have who cannot hear?' ‘But 
did he tell you the abode and the support?' ‘He did not tell 
me/ ‘This Brahman is only one-footed, Your Majesty/ ‘Verily, 
Yajnavalkya, do tell us/ ‘The ear verily, is its abode and 
space its support; verily, one should worship it as the endless/ 
‘What is the nature of endlessness, Yajnavalkya/ ‘The quarters 
themselves, Your Majesty/ said he (Yajnavalkya). ‘Therefore, 
Your Majesty, to whatever quarter one goes, he does not 
come to the end of it for the quarters are endless. Verily, Your 
Majesty, the quarters are the ear and the ear, Your Majesty, 
is the highest Brahman. The ear does not desert him, who, 
knowing this, worships it as such. All beings approach him. 
Having become a god he goes even to the gods/ Janaka (King) 
of Videha said, ‘I shall give you a thousand cows with a bull 
as large as an elephant/ Yajnavalkya said, ‘My father thought 
that one should not accept (gifts) without having instructed/ 

6. yad eva kas cid abravit tat srnavdmeti. abravin me satyakdmo 
jdbdlah, mano vai brahmeti: yathd mdtrmdn pitrmdn dcaryavan 
bruyat, tatha taj jdbalo'bravit, mano vai brahmeti , amanaso hi 
kim sydd iti. abravit tu te tasydyatanam pratisthdm. na me' br avid 
iti. eka-pdd vd etat samracl iti. sa vai no bruhi, yajnavalkya . 
mana evdyatanam, dkdsah pratisthd, ananda ity enad upasita , 
ka anandatd , yajnavalkya. mana eva, samrdd, iti hovdca, manasd 
vai, samrdt. striyam abhihdryate, tasydm pratirupah putro 
jdyate , sa dnandah, mano vai, samrdt, paramam brahma, nainam 
mano jahdti , sarvdny enam bhdtdny abhiksaranti , devo bhutvd 
devdn apyeti , ya evam vidvdn etad updste. hasty-rsabham 
sahasram daddmi, iti hovdca janako vaidehah. sa hovdca yajha- 
valkyah, pita mc'manyata ndnanusisya hareteti. * 

6. ‘Let me hear what any one (of your teachers) may have 
told you/ ‘Satyakama Jabala told me that the mind, verily, 
is Brahman. As one who has a mother, father and teacher 
should say, so did that Jabala say that the mind, verily, is 
Brahman, for what can one have who is without a mind?' 
‘But did he tell you the abode and the support?' ‘He did not 



IV. i. 7. Brhad-dranyaka Upani$a<% 251 

tell me/ This Brahman is only one-footed, Your Majesty/ 
'Verily, Yajnavalkya, do tell us/ The mind, verily, is its abode 
and the space its support. Verily one should worship it as the 
blissful/ 'What is the nature of blissfulness, Yajnavalkya?' 
'Just the mind, Your Majesty/ said he. 'Verily, Your Majesty, 
by the mind one takes to a woman. A son resembling him is 
born of her. He is (the source of) bliss. Verily, mind, Your 
Majesty, is the highest Brahman. The mind never deserts him 
who knowing thus worships it as such. All beings approach 
him. Having become a god he goes even to the gods/ Janaka 
(King) of Videha said, 'I shall give you a thousand cows with 
a bull as large as an elephant/ Yajnavalkya said: 'My father 
thought that one should not accept (gifts) without having 
instructed/ 

7. yad eva has cid abravit, tat srnavdmeti. abravin me vidagdhah 
sdkalyah, hrdayam vai brahmeti , yathd matrmdn pitrmdn 
deary avan bruydt, tathd tat sdkalyo’bravit, hrdayam vai brahmeti , 
ahrdayasya hi kirn sydd iti. abravit tu tc tasydyatanam pratis- 
thdm . na mebravid iti. eka-pdd va, etat, samrad, iti. sa vai no 
briihi , yajnavalkya. hrdayam evdyatanam , akdsah pratistha, 
sthitir ity enad updsita. kd sthitita, yajnavalkya. hrdayam eva 
samrad , iti Jiovdca, hrdayam vai , samrdt , sarvesdm bhutandm 
dyatanam , hrdayam vai , samrdt , sarvesdm bhutandm pratistha, 
hrdaye liy eva , samrdt , sarvdni btutdni pratislhitdni bhavanti. 
hrdayam vai , samrdt , paramam brahma, nainam hrdayam 
jahdti , sarvdny enam bhutdny abhiksaranti y devo bhittvd devdn 
apycti f ya evam vidvdn etad updste. hasty rsabham sahasram 
daddmi, iti hovdea janako vaidehah. sa hovdea ydijhavalkyah , 
pita me manyata ndnanusisya harctcii. 

7. 'Let me hear what any one (of your teachers) may have 
told you/ ‘Vidagdha Sakalya told me that the heart, verily, 
is Brahman . As one who has a mother, father, teacher should 
say, so did that Sakalya say that the heart, verily, is Brahman 
for what can one have who is without a heart?' 'But did he 
tell you the abode and the support?' 'He did not tell me.' 
This Brahman is only one-footed, Your Majesty.' ‘Verily, 
Yajnavalkya, do tell us.' The heart, verily, is its abode and 
the space its support. One should Worship it as the stable/ 
‘What is the nature of stability, Yajnavalkya?' 'Just the heart, 
Your Majesty,' he (Yajnavalkya) said; 'the heart, Your 
Majesty, is the abode of al! things and the heart, Your Majesty, 



252 . The Principal Upanisads IV. 2. 2. 

is the support of all beings. On the heart, Your Majesty, all 
beings are supported. The heart, verily, Your Majesty, is the 
Supreme Brahman. The heart never deserts him who knowing 
thus, worships it as such. All beings approach him. Having 
become a god, he goes even to the gods/ Janaka (King) of 
Videha said, T shall give you a thousand cows with a bull as 
large as an elephant/ Yajnavalkya said, 'My father thought 
)fhat one should not accept (gifts) without having instructed/ 

See III. 9. 24. 


Second BrCihmana 
CONCERNING THE SOUL 

jJ. janako ha vaidchah kuredd updvasar pann uvdea: namas 
te’tStu yajnavalkya , ana md sddhiti. sa hovdea: yathd vai , samrdt , 
tfhahantam adhvdnam esyan ratham vd ndvam vd samddadita, evarh 
cvaitdbhir upanisadbhih samdhitdtmdsi , evam brndaraka ddhyah 
sann adhUa-vcda nkta-npanisatkah, ito vimucyamdnah kva 
gamisyasxti. ndham tad , bhagavan, veda , yatva gamisydmxti; atha 
vai tc’ham tad vaksydmi, yatra gamisyasiti , bvabitu , bhagavan , iti. 

1. Janaka (King) of Videha, descending from his lounge 
and approaching said: 'Salutations to you, Yajnavalkya, 
please instruct me/ He (Yajnavalkya) said: ‘As one who wishes 
to go a long distance, Your Majesty, would secure a chariot 
or a ship, even so you have a mind well equipped with the 
teachings of the Upanisads. You are likewise honoured and 
wealthy, you have studied the Vedas and heard the Upanisads. 
Where will you go when ^ou are released (from this body)? 1 
(Janaka said) ‘Venerable Sir, I do not know where I shall go/ 
(Yajnavalkya said) ‘Then truly I shall tell you that, where 
you will go/ (Janaka said) ‘Tell me, Venerable Sir/ 

kuredt: from the lounge, dsana-visesat. 
brnddrakah: honoured, pujyah. 
ddhyah: wealthy, isvarah , na daridrah. $. 

The theoretical knowledge of the Vedas and the Upanisads is 
not enough, for it does not remove fear. We require knowledge of Self 
or Brahman for salvation: evam sarva-vibhuti-sampanno) pi san 
bhaya-madhya-stha eva paramdtmajndncna vina akrtdrtha eva tavat. S. 

-) 

2. indho ha vai ndmaisa y o’ yam daksinck§an purusah: tarn 



IV. 2. 4 - Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad ' * 253 

va etam indham santam indy a ity dcaksate paroksenaiva, parok- 
sa-priyd iva hi dev ah, pratyaksa-dvisah. 

2. 1 Indha by name is this person who is in the right eye. Him, 
verily, who is that Indha people call Indra, indirectly, for the 
gods are fond of the indirect, as it were, they dislike the direct 
(or the evident). 

Indha is the self, identified with the physical self. 

3. athaitad vdme'ksani pumsa-rupam, esdsya patni virat, tayor 
esa samstavo ya eso’ntar-hrdaya dkasah , athainayor etadannamya 
eso' ntar-hrdaye lohita-pindah, athainayor etat prdvaranam yad 
etad antar-hrdaye jdlakam iva; athainayor esa srtih samcaranl 
yaisa hrdayad urdhva nddy uccarati. yatha kesah sahasradha 
bhinnah evam asyaita hitd ndma nddy o’ ntar-hrdaye pratisthitd 
bhavanti; etdbhir vd etad dsravad asravati; tasmdd esa praviviktd - 
haratara ivaiva bhavaty asmdc carl rad dtmanah . 

3. Now that which is in the form of a person in the left eye 
is his wife Viraj. Their place of union is the space within the 
heart. Their food is the red (of blood) lump in the heart. Their 
covering is the net-like structure in the heart. Their path for 
moving is that channel which goes upward from the heart; 
like a hair divided a thousandfold, so are the channels called 
hitd which are established within the heart. Through these 
flows that which flows on. Therefore that (self composed of 
Indha and Viraj) is, as it were, an eater of finer food than the 
bodily self. 

Indra is V aisvdnar a and Viraj or matter is said to be his wife* 

for it is the object of enjoyment, bliogyatvdd eva. S. 

sarhstava : place of union, literally the place where they sing praises 

together, the meetiilg-placc. 

srtih: path, margah. S. 

The subtle body is nourished by finer food than the gross: tasmdc 
clidrlrdd dtmanah vaisvdnardt taijasah suksmannopacito bhavati. 

In the dream state the self is identified with the subtle body. 

4. tasya prcfei dik prdheah prdnah, daksind dig daksine 
prandh , pratlci dik pralyahcah prdnah , udlcl dig udancah prdnah, 
urdhva dig urdhvdh prandh, avacl dig avdneah prdnah; sarva 
disah, sarve prandh, sa esa ncti nety alma agrhyah na hi grhyate; 
aslryah, na hi slryate; asahgah na hi sajyate; asito na vyathate; 
na risyati abhtyam vai,janaka , prdpto'si, iti hovdcaydjhavalkyah. 
sa hovdea janako vaidehah , 'bhayam tvd gacchatdt, ydjhavalkya, 



254 The Principal Upanisads IV. 3. 1. 

yo nah f bhagavan , abhayam vedayase ; namas te’stu ; ime videhdh 
ay am aham asmiti . 

4. 'Of him the eastern direction is the eastern breaths, the 
southern direction is the southern breaths, the western direction 
is the western breaths, the northern direction is the northern 
breaths, the upper direction is the upper breaths, the lower 
direction is the lower breaths, all the quarters arc all the 
breaths. But the self is not this, not this. He is incompre- 
hensible for he is never comprehended. He is undestructible for 
he cannot be destroyed. He is unattached for he does not 
attach himself. He is unfettered, he does not suffer, he is not 
injured. Verily, Janaka, you have reached (the state of) 
fearlessness/ thus said Yajnavalkya. Janaka (King) of Videha 
said: 'May fearlessness come unto you, Yajnavalkya, to you, 
Venerable Sir, who make us to know (the state of) fearlessness. 
Salutations to you. Here are the people of Videha, here am I 
(at your service)/ 

See III. 9. 26. 

abhayam: janma-maranadi-nimitta-bhaya-sunyam. £. 


Third Brdhmana 

THE LIGHT OF MAN IS THE SELF 

1. janakam ha vaideharn yajnavalkyo jagdma: sa mene: na 
vadisya iti . at ha ha yaj janakas ca vaideho ydjnavalkyas edgni- 
hotre sanmddte, tasmai ha yajnavalkyo > vavarh dadau: sa ha 
kdma-prasnam eva vavre , •turn hdsmai dadau. tam ha samrad 
eva purvah papraccha. 

1. Yajnavalkya came to Janaka (King) of Videha. He 
thought (to himself) T will not talk/ But when (once) Janaka 
(King) of Videha and Yajnavalkya discussed together at an 
agnihotra ceremony, Yajnavalkya granted the former a boon. 
He chose to ask any question he wished. He grLnted it to him. 
So (now) His Majesty first asked him. 

Though Yajnavalkya did not wish to say anything, Janaka 
asked him a question, for on a former occasion Yajnavalkya per- 
mitted Janaka to ask him any questions he liked. See Satapatha 
Brdhmana. XI. 6 . 2. 10. ’ 

Sometimes sa mene na vadisya iti is read as sam enena vadisya 



IV. 3. 6. Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 255 

iti. Yajnavalkya came to Janaka intending to speak with him. This 
is only an ingenious conjecture. 

2. yajnavalkya , kim-jyotir ay am purusa iti. aditya-jyotih, 
samrdt, iti hovdea, ddityenaivdyam jyotisdste, palyayate, karma 
kurutc , vipalyctiti. evam evaitat , yajnavalkya . 

2 ‘What light does a person here have? (What serves as 
the light for man ?)' ‘He has the light of the sun, Your Majesty/ 
he said, ‘for with the sun indeed as the light, one sits, moves 
about, does one's work and returns/ ‘Just so, Yajnavalkya/ 

3. astam ita aditye , yajnavalkya , kim-jyotir evdyam purusa 
iti. candy amd evdsya jyotir bhavati, candramasaivdyam jyotisdste , 
palyayate , karma kurutc , vipalyctiti. evam evaitat, yajnavalkya. 

3. When the sun has set, Yajnavalkya, what light does a 
person here have?’ ‘The moon, indeed, is his light, for with the 
moon indeed as the light, one sits, moves about, does one's 
work and returns.' ‘Just so, Yajnavalkya/ 

4. astam ita aditye, yajnavalkya, candramasy astam ite, kim- 
jyotir evdyam purusa iti. agnir evdsya jyotir bhavati, agni- 
naivayam jyotisdste, palyayate, karma kurute , vipalyctiti. evam 
evaitat, yajnavalkya. 

4. When the sun has set, Yajnavalkya, and the moon has 
set, what light does a person here have?' The fire, indeed, is 
his light, for with the fire, indeed as the light, one sits, moves 
about, does one's work and returns.' ‘Just so, Yajnavalkya.' 

5. astam ita aditye , yajnavalkya , candy amasi astam ite, sdnte 
agnau, kim-jyotir evdyam purusa iti. vug evdsya jyotir bhavati, 
vdcaivdyam jyotisdste, palyayate, karma kurute, vipalyeti, tasmad 
vai, samrad, api yaira pdnir na vin%rjndyatc, atha yatra vdg 
uccarati, upawa tatra nyetiti. evam evaitat, yajnavalkya. 

5. ‘When the sun has set, Yajnavalkya, and the moon has 
set and the fire has gone out, what light does a person here 
have?' ‘Speech, indeed, is his light for with speech, indeed, as 
the light, one sits, moves about, docs one's work and returns. 
Therefore, Your* Majesty, even where one's own hand is not 
discerned there when speech is uttered one goes towards it.' 
‘Just so, Yajnavalkya.' 

speech: sound, vdg iti sabdah parigrhyate. 

6 . astam ita dditye, yajnavalkya , candramasy astam ite, sante 
agnau , sdntaydm vdei , kim-jyo.ir evdyam purusa iti. dtmaivasya 



256 The Principal Upanisads IV. 3. 8. 

jyotir bhavati, dtmanaivdyam jyotisdste, paly ay ate, karma 
kuriite , vipalyeti iti. 

6. ‘When the sun has set, Yajnavalkya, and the moon has 
set, and the fire has gone out and speech has slopped, what 
light does a peison here have?' ‘The self, indeed, is his light/ 
said he, ‘for with the self, indeed, as the light, one sits, moves 
about, does one’s work and returns/ 

r ' This self is present in all the states of waking, dream and sleep. 
It is the light different from one’s body and oigans and illumines 
them though it is itself not illumined by anything else: kdrya-kara- 
na-svdvayava-samghdta - vyatiriktam , kdrya-karandvabhdsakam , ddi t- 
yadi bdhya-jyotirvat svayani a 1 tyen dnavabh dsya mdnam abhidlnyate 
jyotih. $. 

THE DIFFERENT STATES OF THE SELF 

7. katania dtmcli. y o' yam vijhdnamayah prdnesu , hrdy 
antarjyotili purnsah, sa samdnah sunn ubhau lokdv anasancavaii , 
dhydyativa Icldyativa , sa hi svapno bhutvd, imam lokam atik- 
rdmaii , mvtyo rupdni. 

7. ‘Which is the self?’ ‘The person here who consists of 
knowledge among the senses, the light within the heart. He 
remaining the same, wanders along the two worlds seeming to 
think, seeming to move about. He on becoming asleep (getting 
into dream condition), transcends this world and the forms of 
death. 

seeming to think: he does not really think but only witnesses the acts 
of thought. 

seeming to move about: Thought and action do not belong to the real 
nature of the self. The universal self appears limited on account of 
the conjunction of the self, with buddhi or uhdei standing, with its 
modifications of desire and aversion, pleasure and pain. In the state 
of liberation the connection with undci standing tenninates. ydvad 
ayam dtmd samsdri bhavati , tdvad eva asya buddhi -samyogak, na lu 
paramarthatah, dtmanah samsdntvam buddhi- samyogdd iva. S. B. 

II. 3- 30- 

who consists of knowledge. S argues that the self it. so called because 
we fail to discriminate its association with the limiting adjunct: 
buddhi-vijndnopddhisamparkdvivckdd vijhdnamaya ity ucyate. 
svapno bhutvd: svapnavaslho bhutvd. R. 

8. sa vd ayam puruso jdyamdnah , sariram , abhisampadyamd- 
nah pdpmabhih samsrjyate, sa utkrdman , mriyclmdnah pdpmano 
vijahati. 



IV. 3- io. Bvhad-dvanyaka Upani§ad 257 

8. 'Verily, this person, when he is born and obtains a body, 
becomes connected with evils. When he departs, on dying he 
leaves all evils behind. 

evils: sources of good and evil, body and the organs: papmasama- 
vayibhiv dhavmddhavmdsvayaih kdrya-karanaih. S. 
samsvjyate : becomes connected, samyujyate . £. 
tijahdti: leaves behind, parityajati . S. 

9. tasya vd ctasya puvusasya dve cva sthane bhavatah: idam ca 
pava-loka-sthdnam ca; sandhyam tytiyam svapna-sthdnam; tasmin 
sandhye sthane tisthann , ubhe sthane paiyati , idam ca pavaloka- 
sthdnam ca atha yathdkvamo’yam pava-loka-sthdne bhavati, tam 
dkramam akvamya , ubhaydn pdpmana dnanddms ca pasyati . 
sa yatra pvasvapiti, asya'lokasya savvdvato mdtrdm apadaya , 
svayam vihatya, svayam nirmaya, svena bhdsd, svena jyotisa 
pvasvapiti ; atvdyam purusah svayam-jyotir bhavati. 

9. 'Verily, there arc just two states of this person (the state 
of being in) this world and the state of being in the other world. 
There is an intermediate third state, that of being in sleep 
(dream). By standing in this intermediate state one sees both 
those states, of being in this world and of being in the other 
world. Now whatever the way is to the state of being in the 
other world, having obtained that way one sees both the evils 
(of this world) and the joys (of the other world). When he goes 
to sleep he takes along the material of this all-embracing 
world, himself tears it apart, himself builds it up; he sleeps 
(dreams) by his own brightness, by his own light. In that state 
the person becomes self-illuminated. 

sandhyam: intcrmediate # state : literally, the junction, sandhi , of the 
two. # • 

dkrama: the way, that by which one? proceeds, support or outfit. 
dkramaty anenety dkramah asrayah, avastambhah. £. He provides 
himself with whatever knowledge, work and previous experience he 
may have for the attainment of the next world, para-loka-pratipatti- 
sadhanena vidyd-karma purva-prajha-laksanena yukto bhavati. S. 
pvasvapiti: sleeps, dreams, svapnam anubhavati. R. 

10. na tatra rathdh J na vatha-yogdh y na panthdno bhavanti; atha 
rathan, ratha-yogan, pathah svjate; na tatrananddh, mudah 
pramudo bhavanti , athdnandan , mudah f pvamudah svjate; na 
tatva vesantdh puskarinyah svavantyo bhavanti; atha veiantdn , 
pu$kavinih sv&vantlh svjate. sa hi kavtd. 

10. ‘There are no chariots there, nor animals to be yoked to 



258 The Principal Upanisads IV. 3. 12. 

them, no roads but he creates (projects from himself) chariots, 
animals to be yoked to them and roads. There are no joys 
there, no pleasures, no delights, but he creates joys, pleasures 
and delights. There are no tanks there, no lotus pools, no rivers, 
but he creates tanks, lotus-pools and rivers. He, indeed, is the 
agent (maker or creator). 

According to $ the agency attributed to the self is only figurative. 
The light of the self, which is pure intelligence, illumines the body 
and organs through the internal organ and they perform their 
functions being illumined by it: yac caitanydtmajyotis-dntahkarana- 
dvdrendvabhdsayati kdrya-karandni . . . tatra kartrtvam upacaryata 
atmanah. 

According to R, the agent is the Supreme Lord, sakala-prapah- 
ca-ndtaka-sutradhdrah sarvesvarah khalu tatra kartd. 

11. tad ete slokd bhavanti: 

svapncna sdrTrain abhiprahatydsuptah suptdn abhicdkasiti ; 

sukram dddya punar aiti sthdnam , hiranmayah purusa 
eka-hamsah. 

11. ‘On this there are the following verses. Having struck 
down in sleep what belongs to the body, lie himself sleepless 
looks down, on the sleeping (senses). Having taken to himself 
light he goes again to his place, the golden person, the lonely 
swan (the one spirit). 

While one is in the state of dream, the self makes the body to sleep 
but the self remains awake and notices the impressions of the deeds, 
that have been left upon the mind. By associating himself with the 
consciousness of the sense-organs, the self causes the body to awake. 
the golden person: the light that is pure intelligence, hiranya-maya 
iva caitanya-jyotis svabhdvah. 5 . 

Sleep is the indispensable condition of physical health and mental 
sanity. In sound sleep there is a respite from craving and aversions, 
fears and anxieties. In that state the individual is obscurely at one 
with the divine ground of all being. 

the lonely swan: he moves alone in the waking and dream states, 
in this world and the next, cko jdgrat svapnehaloka-para-lokddin 
gacchatity eka-hamsah. £. sah ahum so’ham. ‘That I am', hamsa , a 
swan, the symbol of the spirit of the universe. 

12. prdnena raksann avararh kuldyam bahis kuldyad amrtas 

caritvd , 

sa iyate amrto yalra kdmam t hiran-mayak purusa eka- 
hamsah . 



IV. 3- 14 * Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 259 

12. Guarding his low nest with the vital breath, the immortal 
moves out of the nest. That immortal one goes wherever he 
likes, the golden person, the lonely bird. 

avaram: low, nikrstam. anekdsuci-samghdtatvdd atyanta-bibhatsam. §. 
kuldyam: nest, nldam, sarlram. S. 

lyate: goes, gacchati. £. The eternal self goes wherever he desires. 

13. svapndnta uccavacam lyamdno rupdni devah kurutc bahuni 
uteva stnbhih saha modamdnah jaksat , utevdpi bhaydni 

pasyan. 

13. ‘In the state of dream going up and down, the god makes 
many forms for himself, now as it were enjoying himself in the 
company of women or laughing or even beholding fearful sights. 

svapnante : in the state of dream, svapna-sthane. §. in the middle of 
a dream, svapna-madhye, anta-sabdo madhya-vacanah. R. 

14. aramam asya pasyanti, na tam pasyati kas cana: 

iti. tam ndyatam bodhayed ity dhuh; durbhisajyam hasmai 
bhavali, yam esa na pratipadyate. atho khalv dhuh , jdgarita-desa 
evdsyaisah; ydni hi eva jdgrat pasyati , tan i supta iti. atrdyam 
purusah svayam-jyotir bhavati. so* ham bhagavatc sahasram 
daddmi; ata urdhvam vimoksdya bruhiti. 

14. ‘Everyone sees his sport but himself no one ever sees. There- 
fore they say that one should not wake him (the sleeping 
person) suddenly; for it is difficult to cure if he does not get 
back (rightly to his body). Others, however, say that (the state 
of sleep) is just his waking state for whatever objects he sees 
when awake, those too, he sees, when asleep; (not so) for in 
the dream state the person is self-illuminated/ Janaka said, 'I 
give you a thousand (cows), Venerable Sir, please instruct me 
further, for the sa?ke of my liberation/ 

himself no one ever sees : everyone is aware of the experiences but 
no one sees the experiencer; regret is expressed that the self so 
near to us is yet unperceived by us: yac-cliakya-darsanam apy 
dtmdnam tam na pasyati, lokam praty anukrosam darsayati srutih. S. 
one shoidd not wake the sleeping person suddenly : this has reference 
to the popular belief that the self leaves the body in the dream state. 
dyatam: sleeping, gadha-suptam. R. 

To disprove the theory of self-illumination it is said that the 
state of dream is the same as that of waking as we see in dreams 
what we see in the waking state. This is wrong because in dreams 
the senses cease to function; so only the light inherent in the self 
is active in the dream state. 



260 The Principal Upanisads IV. 3. 17. 

15. sa va esa etasmin samprasdde ratvd caritva drsivaiva 
punyam ca papam ca, punah pratinydyam pratiyony ddravati 
svapnayaiva; sa yat tatra kirn cit pasyati ananvdgatas tcna 
bhavati ; asango hy ay am pitrusa iti. evam cvaitat , ydjnavalkya . 
so’ham bhagavatc sahasram daddmi, ata urdhvam vimoksdyaiva 
bruhtti. 

15. ‘After having tasted enjoyment in this state of deep 
sleep, after having roamed about and seen good and evil, he 
returns again as he came to the place from which he started 
(the place of sleep) to dream. Whatever he sees in that state, he 
is not followed (affected) by it for this person is not attached 
(to anything)/ (Janaka said) ‘Just so, Yajnavalkya, I give you 
a thousand (cows) Venerable Sir, please instruct me further, 
for the sake of my liberation. 

samprasdda: deep sleep, the state^ of highest serenity, samyak 
prasldaty asminn iti samprasddah. S. The true nature of the self 
remains unaffected. 

pratinydyam — yathdnydyam, yathdgatam, ni ayah , nydyah, ayanam 
ayah , nigamanam, punah purva-gamana-vai parity cna yad dgamanam , 
sa pratinyayah , yathagatnm punar dgacchatity arthah. S. 

16. 5a va esa etasmin svapnc ratvd carilvd drsivaiva punyam 
ca papam ca, punah, pratinydyam pratiyony ddravati buddhdn- 
tayaiva sa yat tatra kirn cit pasyati, ananvdgatas tcna bhavati: 
asango hy ayam, purusa iti. evam cvaitat, ydjnavalkya. so'ham 
bhagavatc sahasram daddmi, ata urdhvam vimoksdyaiva bruhiti. 

16. ‘After having tasted enjoyment in this state of dream, 
after having roamed about and seen good and evil, he returns 
again as he came to the place from which he started to the 
state of waking. Whatever he sees in.] that state he is not 
followed (affected) by it for this person is not attached (to 
anything)/ (Janaka said) ‘just so, Yajnavalkya, I give you a 
thousand (cows). Venerable Sir, please instruct me further for 
the sake of my liberation/ 

buddhdntdyaiva: the state of waking, jagarita-sthandya. S. 

17. sa va esa etasmin buddhdnte ratvd caritva drsivaiva punyam 
ca papam ca, punah pratinydyam pratiyony ddravati svapndn - 
tayaiva . 

17. ‘After having had enjoyment in this state of waking, 
after having roamed about and seen good and evil, he returns 
again as he came to the place from which he started, the state 
of dream (or that of deep sleep) . 



IV. 3- 20. Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 261 

S says that svapndnta may also be interpreted as deep sleep 
susupti. The self is unaffected in all the three states of waking, 
dream and sleep, avasthd-traye’pi, asangatvam ananvdgatatvam 
catmanah siddharii cet. A. 

.18. tad yathd mahdmatsya ubhe kulc anusamcarati, purvam 
cdparam ca, evam evayam purusa etdv ubhdv antdv anusamcarati , 
svapndntam ca buddhantam ca. 

18. ‘Even as a large fish moves along both banks of a river, 
the hither and the further, so also this person moves along both 
these states, the state of dream (or sleep) and the state of 
waking. 

The self is different from the body and the organs. In the waking 
state it appears, through ignorance, as connected with attachments 
and death; in the dream state as connected with desire but free from 
the forms of death; in the state of deep sleep it is perfectly serene 
and unattached. The sense of this passage is that the Self is by 
nature, eternal, free, enlightened and pure. S. Even as a large fish 
moves from one bank of a river to another, so does the self move 
between dreaming and waking. 

THE SELF IN DEEP SLEEP 

19. tad yathdsniinn dkdse sycno vd suparno vd viparipatya 
srdntah samhatya paksan samlaydyaiva dhriyatc , evam evayam 
purusa etasmd antdya dhdvati yatra na kam cana kamam 
kd may ate, na kam cana svapnam pasyati. 

19. ‘As a falcon or any other (swift) bird having flown 
around in the sky becomes weary, folds its wings and is borne 
down to its nest, even so this person hastens to that state (of 

self) where he desires no desires and sees no dream. 

• 

samlayah: nest, nidah. S. 

The fatigue theory of sleep is suggested here. 

20. id vd asyaitd hitd ndma nddyali, yathd kesah sahasradha 
bhinnah , tdvatdnimnd tisthanti , suklasya , nilasya , pingalasya , 
haritasya, lohitasya purndh; atha yatrainam ghnattva, jinantlva, 
hastwa vicchdyqyati , gartam iva patati, yad eva jagrad bhayam 
pasyati , tad atrdvidyaya many ate, atha yatra deva iva rdjeva; 
aham cvedain, sarvo 1 smTti vianyatc; so f sya paramo lokah. 

20. ‘In him, verily, are those channels called hitd, which are 
as fine as a hair divided a thousandfold and filled with white, 
blue, yellow, jgreen and red (fluids). Now when (he feels) as if 
he were being killed, as if lm were being overpowered, as if he 



262 


The Principal Upanisads IV. 3. 21. 

were pursued by an elephant, as if he were falling into a well, 
he thinks (imagines) through ignorance whatever fear he has 
seen (experienced) in the waking state. But when he thinks 
that he is a god, as it were, that he is a king, as it were, that I 
am all this, that is his highest world. 

hita: See II. 1. 19; IV. 2. 3. The subtle body is said to be in these 
channels. 

The place where the two selves unite is the heart. They have a 
path in common. The vein susumnd leads upwards from the heart 
to the top of the skull. See C.U. VIII. 6. 6. When their union takes 
place, self-consciousness disappears as well as the distinction between 
the outer and the inner world. The highest reality, the all-conscious- 
ness, free from fear and grief is reached. 

Dream states are traced to impressions of waking experiences. 
Ignorance avidyd is not natural to the self; if so it cannot be removed 
even as heat and light cannot be removed from the sun: na 
dlma-dharmo vidya na hi svdbhdvikasyocchittih kaddeid apy upapadyaie 
savitur ivausnya-prakasayoh. $. 

21. tad va asyaitad aticchando' pahatapapmdbhayam riipam. 
tad yathd priyayd striyd samparisvakto na bdhyam kim cana 
veda ndntaram , evam evdyam pnrusah prdjnendtmana samparis- 
vakto na bdhyayh kim cana veda ndntayam. tad vd asyaitad 
dpta-kamam , dtma-kd?nam, a-kdmam rupam sokdntaram. 

21. This, verily, is his form which is free from craving, free 
from evils, free from fear. As a man when in the embrace of 
his beloved wife knows nothing without or within, so the person 
when in the embrace of the intelligent self knows nothing 
without or within. That, verily, is his form in which his desire 
is fulfilled, in which the self is his desire, in which he is without 
desire, free from any sorrow. 

beyond desires: chandah kdmah atigalah chando yasmdt rupdt tad 
aticchandam rupam. S. 

sokdntaram: free from any sorrow, soka-varjitam S. 

The analogy of man and wife is given to show that it is not a state 
of unconsciousness. 

We get on earth to the Kingdom of heaven. In sex intercourse 
when it is rightly conceived, we have an act of pure' 'delight which is 
not mere physical satisfaction but a psycho-spiritual communion. 
The rich deep fulfilment of love between a man and a woman is a 
condition of earthly beatitude so simple, so natural and so real, 
that it is the happiest of all earthly conditions and many mystics 
employ this as the symbol of divine communion. Tike mystic union 
of the finite and the divine is compared in this passage to the self- 



IV. 3- 23. Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 263 

oblivion of earthly lovers where each is the other. It is a fuller identity 
than the mere sympathetic understanding of two individuals. 

In Vaisnava literature the soul pining for union with God is said 
to be the bride and the divine love which sanctifies, purifies and 
elevates the soul to itself is said to be the bridegroom. 

St. Bernard speaks of the highest contemplation as spiritual 
marriage which impels the soul to go forth to bear spiritual offspring 
to the Lord. Richard of St. Victor, St. Bernard’s contemporary, 
dwells upon four phases of spiritual marriage — espousals, marriage, 
wedlocks, child-bearing. John Ruysbrocck's chief work is called The 
Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage. St. John of the Cross says: The 
end I have in view is the divine embracing, the union of the soul with 
the divine substance. In this loving obscure knowledge God unites 
Himself with the soul eminently and divinely.' Ascent of Carmel. II. 24. 

God, for some Sufis, is the Eternal Feminine. The Muslim poet 
Wali of Delhi composed love poems in which the lover is God and the 
loved one sought is the human soul invited to unite with God. 

22. atra pita pita bhavati, matdi rnata, lokdh alokdh , deva 
adevdh, vedd aveddh ; atra steno’steno bhavati bhrunahdbhrunahd , 
cdnddlo' cdnddlah, paulkaso' paulkasah, sramano sramanah, 
tapaso tdpasdh , ananvagatam punyena , ananvagatam pdpena , 
tirno hi tadd sarvdn sokdn hrdayasya bhavati. 

22. ‘There (in 4 hat state) a father is not a father, a mother 
is not a mother, the worlds are not the worlds, the gods are not 
the gods, the Vedas are not the Vedas. There a thief is not a 
thief, the murderer is not a murderer, a canddla is not a candala , 
a paulkasa is not a paalkasa , a mendicant is not a mendicant, 
an ascetic. is not an ascetic. He is not followed (affected) by 
good, he is not followed by evil for then he has passed beyond 
all the sorrows of the hpart. 

The state is beyond empirical distinctions, avidyd-kdma-karma- 
vinirmaktah. S. 

It exceeds the limitations of caste and stages of life. 
bhrunahd: murderer of a noble Brahmana, varistha-bralima-hantd. A. 

It also refers to one who kills an embryo, one who produces an 
abortion. 

The Self is unfouched cither by good or by evil and the sorrows of 
the heart cease to be sorrows and are turned into joy. 

23. yad vai tan na pasyati, pasyanvai tan na paiyati; na hi 
drastur drster viparilopo vidyate, avindsitvdt; na tu tad dvitiyam 
asti, tato'nyadmbhaktam yat pasyct. 

23. Verily, when there (ir the state of deep sleep) he does 



264 The Principal Upanisads IV. 3. 27. 

not see, he is*, verily, seeing, though he does not see for there is 
no cessation of the seeing of a seer, because of the imperish- 
ability (of the seer). There is not, however,- a second, nothing 
else separate from him that he could see. 

Even in the state of deep sleep when the eye and the other senses 
are at rest, the self is the seer, though he does not see with the eyes. 
The seer can never lose the character of seeing, even as fire cannot 
lose the character of burning so long as it is fire. The self sees, by 
its own light, like the sun, even when there is no second, no object 
but the self that could be seen, the seer is. 

svayam-jyotih: self-light 1 nparilopah: destruction, vindsah; citrnd 
avindsl. S. 

R adopting the views of Ramanuja says, \jiidtur dharmabhiita- 
jhdnasya nityatvdt vindso ndsti. 

24. yad vai tan na jighrati , jighran vai tan na jigJirati: na hi 
ghratur ghrdtcr viparilopo vidyatc , avindsitvdt; na tu tad dvitlyam 
asti , tato’nyad vibhaktam yaj jiglirct. 

24. ‘Verily, when there (in the state of deep sleep) he does not 
smell, he is, verily, smelling, though he does not smell for there 
is no cessation of the smelling of a smeller, because of the im- 
perishability (of the smeller). There is not, however, a second, 
nothing else separate from him that he could* smell. 

25. yad vai tan na rasayati , rasayan vai tan na rasayati na 
hi rasayitu rasayatcr viparilopo vidyatc , avindsitvdt, na tu tad 
dvitlyam asti, tato’ nyad vibhaktam yad rasayct. 

25. ‘Verily, when there (in the state of deep sleep) he does not 
taste, he is, verily, tasting though he does not taste, for there 
is no cessation of the tasting of a taster, because of the im- 
perishability (of the taster,). There is dot, however, a second, 
nothing else separate from him that he could taste. 

26. yad vai tan na vadati, vadan vai tan na vadati, na hi 
vaktur vakter viparilopo vidyatc, avindsitvdt; na tu tad dvitlyam 
asti , tato' nyad vibhaktam yad vadet. 

26. ‘Verily, when there (in the state of deep sleep) he does not 
speak, he is, verily, speaking though he dot's nof speak, for there 
is no cessation of the speaking of a speaker, because of the 
imperishability (of the .speaker). There is not, however, a 
second, nothing else separate from him to which he could 
speak. 

27. yad vai tan na srnoti, srnvan vai tan na srnoti; na hi 



IV. 3- 3 1 - Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 265 

irotuh sruter viparilopo vidyate , avindsitvdt ; na tu 'tad dvitiyam 
asti, tato'nyad vibhaktam yat srnuydt. 

27. ‘Verily, when there (in the state of deep sleep) he does 
not hear, he is, verily, hearing, though he does not hear, for 
there is no cessation of the hearing of a hearer, because of the 
imperishability (of the hearer). There is not, however, a second, 
nothing else separate from him which he could hear. 

28. yad vai tan na manute, manvano vai tan na manute , na 
hi mantur mater viparilopo vidyate , avindsitvdt; na tu tad 
dvitiyam asti , tato'nyad vibhaktam yan manvita. 

28. ‘Verily, when there (in the state of deep sleep) he does not 
think, he is, verily, thinking, though he does not think, for 
there is no cessation of the thinking of a thinker, because of 
the imperishability (of the thinker). There is not, however, a 
second, nothing else separate from him of which he could 
think. 

29. yad vai tan na sprsati, sprsan vai tan na sprsati , na hi 
sprastuh sprstcr vipanlopo vidyate , avindsitvdt , na tu tad dvitiyam 
asti , tato'nyad vibhaktam yat sprset. 

29. ‘Verily, when there (in the state of deep sleep) he does 
not touch, he is, verily, touching, though he does not touch, for 
there is no cessation of the touching of a toucher, because of the 
imperishability (of the toucher). There is not, however, a 
second, nothing else separate from him which he could touch. 

30. yad vai tan na vijdndti , vijdnan vai tan na vijdndti , 
na hi vijhdtnr vijhdtcr viparilopo vidyate, avindsitvdt; na tu tad 
dvitiyam asti, tato'nyad vibhaktam yad vijdniydt. 

30. ‘Verily, when the*e (in the state of deep sleep) he does 
not know, he is, verily, knowing tliQUgh he does not know for 
there is no cessation ot the knowing of a knower, because of 
the imperishability (of the knower). There is not, however, a 
second, nothing else separate from him which he could know. 

31. yatra vdnyad iva sydt, tatrdnyo'nyat pasyet, anyo' nyaj 
jighret, anyo' ny did rasayct, anyo' ny ad vadet, anvo' ny at srnuydt, 
anyo'nyan manvita, anyo'nyat sprset, anyo'nyad vijdniydt. 

31. ‘Verily, when there is, as it were, another there one 
might see the other, one might smell the other, one might taste 
the other, one might speak to the other, one might hear the 
other, one might think of the other, one might touch the 
other, one might know the odier 



266 The Principal Upanisads IV. 3. 33. 

He does not see or smell or taste or speak or hear or think or touch 
or know, for there is nothing separate from him, there is no second to 
him; yet he sees, smells, tastes, speaks, hears, thinks, touches, knows 
for he is one with seeing, smelling, tasting, speaking, hearing, 
thinking, touching and knowing. 

32. salila cko drastadvaito bhavati , esa brahma-lokah, samrdd 
iti. hainam anusasdisa ydjhavalkyah; esdsya paramd gatih, 
esdsya paramd sampat , cso’sya paramo lokah, eso’sya parama 
anandah; etasyaivanandasydnyani bhutdni mdtrdm upajivanti. 

32. ‘He becomes (transparent) like water, one, the seer 
without duality. This is the world of Brahma, Your Majesty/ 
Thus did Yajnavalkva instruct (Janaka): ‘This is his highest 
goal; this is his highest treasure; this is his highest world; this 
is his greatest bliss. On a particle of this very bliss other 
creatures live/ 

like water: salila iva salilah . £. 
transparent: svacchlbhutah. S. 

one: because there is no second, dvitiyasydbluivdt . S. 

the seer: the vision which is identical with the light of the self is 

never lost: drstcr avipanluptatvdt, dtnia- jyoti-svabhdvdyd. £. 

33. sa yo manusydndm rdiddhah samrddho. bhavati, anyesdm 
adhipatih , sarvair mdnusyakair bliogaih sampannatamah, sa 
manusydndm parama anandah; alha ye Satam manusydndm 
anandah, sa ekah pilfndm jitalokdndm anandah; atha yC'Satam 
pitfndm jita-lokdndm anandah, sa cko gandharva-loka anandah; 
atha ye satam gandharva-loka anandah, sa cka karma- dev dndm 
anandah, ye karmand devatvam abhisampadyante; atha yc satam 
karma-devdndm anandah, sa eka djdna-dcvdndm anandah , yas 
ca strotriyovrjmo ' kdma-lmtah; atha yc satam djdna-dcvdndm 
anandah, sa ekah prajd-paU-loka anandah, ya’s ca srotriyo ' vrjino * 
kdma-hatah; atha yc satam prajd-pati-loka anandah, sa eko 
brahma-loka anandah, yas ca srotriyo' vrjino' kdma-hatah; athaisa 
eva parama anandah, yas ca srotyiy o' vrjino kdma-hatah; athaisa 
eva parama dmandah. esa brahma-lokah, samrdd, iti hovdea 
ydjhavalkyah. so ‘ ham bhagavate sahasram dadavii; ata iirdhvam 
vimoksdyaiva bruhiti. atra ha ydjhavalkyo bibhaydm cakdra; 
medhavi raja , sarvebhyo mdntcbhya udarautsid Hi. 

33. ‘If one is healthy in body, wealthy, lord over others, 
lavishly provided with all human enjoyments, that is the 
highest bliss of men. This human bliss multiplied a hundred 
times makes one unit of the bliss for the fathers who have won 



IV. 3- 33 - Brhad-aranyaka Upartisad 267 

their world. The bliss of these fathers who have won their world 
multiplied a hundred times makes one unit of the blissof th egand- 
harvawovld. The blissof th egandharva world multiplied a hundred 
times makes one unit of the bliss of the gods by action, those who 
attain their divine status by (meritorious) action. The bliss of 
the gods by action multiplied a hundred times makes one unit 
of the bliss of the gods by birth as well as of one who is versed 
in the Vedas, who is without sin and not overcome by desire. 
The bliss of the gods by birth multiplied a hundred times makes 
one unit of the bliss in the world of Praja-pati, as well as of one 
who is versed in the Vedas, who is without sin and not overcome 
by desire. The bliss in the world of Praja-pati multiplied a 
hundred times makes one unit of the bliss in the world of Hiranya- 
garbha as well as of one who is versed in the Vedas, who is 
without sin and not overcome by desire. This is the highest bliss. 
This is the world of Brahma, Your Majesty,’ said Yajnavalkya. 
(Janaka said) ‘I will give you, Venerable Sir, a thousand (cows) 
please instruct me further for the sake of my liberation.’ At 
this Yajnavalkya was afraid that this intelligent king should 
drive him to (the exposition of) the ends of his convictions. 

Sec T.U. II. 8. Those who live within the bonds of ignorance 
experience but a small portion of the infinite bliss. 
rdddhah: healthy, perfect of body, samsiddhah, avikalah, sama- 
grdvay avail. S. 

srotriya: one versed in the iritti, the Veda. Samkara, the com- 
mentator of Kalidasa’s Sdkuntald quotes: ‘Birth gives the title of 
Brahmana, the sacramental rites the title of the twice-born, knowledge 
the title of vipra and the three together make a srotriya .* jamnand 
brahmana jiicyah , samsfttrair deija iterate, vidyayd ydti vipratvam , 
tribhith srotriya my ate: 

Vcdic learning, sinlessness and freedom from selfish desire are 
essential for the enjoyment of the higher forms of bliss. Cp. ‘The 
sense-pleasures of the world and the great joys of heaven are not 
worth one-sixteenth part of the bliss that comes from the cessation 
of desire.’ 

yac ca hdma-sukham loke yac ca divyani mahat sukham 

trsnd-ksaya-sukhasyaitc ndrhatah sodas! m kaldni. 

’ ■ ’ M.B. XII. 173. 47. 

was afraid: bhltavdn. S. not because hcv was lacking in ability or 
knowledge but because he felt that under the pretext of the boon he 
had to ask me, he raises new problems every time and wishes to gain 
all my knowledge, sarvam madxyam vijndnarh kdma-prasna-vydjcno - 
pdditsatlti. $. 



268 The Principal Upanisads IV. 3. 36. 

• 34. sa vd esa , etasmin svapndnte ratvd caritva drstvaiva 
punyarh ca pdpam ca } pnnah pratinydyam pratiyony adravati 
buddhdntdyaiva . 

34. 'After having had enjoyment in this state of dream (or 
sleep), after having roamed about and seen good and evil, he 
returns again as he came to the place from which he started to 
the state of waking. 

See IV. 3- 16. 


THE SELF AT DEATH 

35. tad yathd l nah su-samdhitam tttsavjad ydydt, cvam evdyam 
sdrtra at)) id prdjhcndtmandnvdrudha utsarjam ydti, yalraitad 
iirdhva ucchvdsl bhavati. 

35. 'Just as a heavily loaded cart moves creaking, even so 
the self in the bod} T mounted by the self of intelligence moves 
creaking, when one is breathing with difficulty (i.e. when one 
is about to expire). 

the self in the body: the subtle body which moves between this and 
the next world as between the waking and the dream states, through 
birth and death consisting respectively in the association w r ith and 
dissociation from the body and its organs: yas svapna-buddlidntdv iva 
janma-marandbhydm ihaloka-paralokdv anmancarati. $. 
breathing with difficulty : gasping for breath. The body groans as a 
heavily laden cart groans under its burden. 

36. sa yatrdyam animanam nyeti , jarayd vopalapatd vdni- 
manam nigacchati , tad yathdmram vd udumbaram vd pippalam 
vd bandliandt pramucyate , cvam evdyam purusa cbhyo’ ngebhyah 
sampramucya punah pratinydyam pratiyony adravati prdndyaiva. 

36. ‘AVhen this (body) -gets to thinness, whether he gets to 
thinness through old age or disease, just as a mango or a fig 
or a fruit of the peepul tree releases itself from its bond (gets 
detached from its stalk), even so this person frees himself from 
these limbs and returns again as he came to the place from 
which he started back to (new) life. 

The dying man separates himself from his gross body even as a 
fruit separates itself from its stalk. He goes back to his new abode 
the same way he came and there assumes another body in which to 
begin a new life. 

The subjection of the body to old age and disease* is mentioned to 
induce the spirit of renunciation, vairdgydvtham. S. 



IV. 4- i- Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 269 

37. tad yatf/ta rdjanam dydntam ugrdh , pratyenasah , siita- 
grdmanyo'nnaih panair dvasathaih pratikalpante: ayam dydti , 
tfjyam dgacchatUi, cvarh haivam-vidam sarvdni bhutdni pratikal- 
pantc , htam brahmdydti, idam dgacchatiti. 

37. 'Just as for a king who is coming, policemen, magistrates, 
chariot drivers, leaders of the village wait for him with food, 
drink and lodgings, saying, “here he comes, here he comes," 
even so for him who knows this, all beings wait for him saying, 
“here comes Brahman, here he approaches." ' 

1 ugrdh : policemen, jdti-visesdh, krura karma no vd. £. 
pratyenasah: magistrates, taskarddi eland an cidau niynktdh. $. 
leaders of the village: grdma-neldro grdmanyah. S. 

38. tad yathd rdjanam prayiydsantam, ugrdh pratyenasah , 
suta-grdmanyo’bhisa may anti, ccam evaimam dtmdnam, antakdle 
sarve prdnd abhisamdyanli, yaimitad in dhvocchvdsl bhavati. 

38. Just as policemen, magistiates, chariot-drivers, leaders 
of the village gather round a king who is departing, even so 
do all the breaths (or senses) gather round the self at the end, 
when one is breathing with diiiiculty (when he is about to die). 


Fourth Bi dh man a 

THE SOUL OF THE UX RELEASED AFTER DEATH 

1. sa yalrdyam atmd-abalyam nwtya sammoliam iva nyeti , 
aihainam etc prdnd abhisamdyanii; sa das tcjomdtrdh sania - 
bhyddaddno hrdayam % cvdnvavak) dmati , sa yatraisa cdksusah 
purusah pardn puj ydvcu tatc , athdnlpajho bhavati. 

1. ‘When this self gets to weakness, gets to confusedness, as 
it were, then the breaths g ither round him. He takes to himself 
those particles of light and descends into the heart. When the 
person in the eye turns aw ay, then he becomes non- knowing of 
forms. 

When his body grows weak and he becomes apparently un- 
conscious, the dying man gathers his senses about him, completely 
withdraws their powers and descend-, into the heart. 
gets to weakness: it is the body that becomes weak. Weakness is 
figuratively applied to the self, which, being formless, cannot become 
weak: yad dfhasya dambalyam, tad dtmana eva daurbalyam tty 
upacaryate: na hy asau svato* murt dvdd abala-bhdvam gaccliati. S. 



270 The Principal Upani§ads IV. 4. 2. 

So also the self does not get confused for it is the eternal self- 
luminous intelligence, nitya-caitanya-jyotis-svabhdvatvdt . S. 

At the moment of death the person in the eye, i.e. prana , departs. 
So one ceases to perceive forms. The dying man becomes single. 
The principle of intelligence {vijndna) after having absorbed all 
the functions of consciousness proceeds to continue in a new life. 

2. eki-bhavati , na paiyati , ity dhuh; eki-bhavati , na jighrati ity 
ahull ; eki-bhavati na rasayati , ity dhuh ; eki-bhavati , na vadati, 
ity dhuh; eki-bhavati na srnoti, ity dhuh; eki-bhavati , namanute, 
ity dhuh; eki-bhavati , na sprsati , i/y dhuh; eki-bhavati , w# 
vijdndti , * 7 v JAhA. liaitasya hrdayasydgram pradyotate, 

tena pradyotenaisa dtmd niskrdmati, caksuso vd murdhno vd 
anycbhyo vd sarira-desebhyah; tam utkrdmantam prdno’nutkrd- 
mati, prdinam anutkrdmantam sarve prana anutkrdmanti; "sa 
vijhdno bhavati, sa vijndna m evdnvavakrdmati; tam vidyd- 
karmani sainanvdrabhctc purva-prajha ca. 

2. ‘He is becoming one, he does not see, they say; he is 
becoming one, he does not smell, they say; he is becoming 
one, he does not taste, they say; he is becoming one, he does 
not speak, they say; he is becoming one, he does not hear, 
they say; he is becoming one, he does not think, they say; he 
is becoming one, he does not touch, they say: he is becoming 
one, he does not know, they say. The point of his heart becomes 
lighted up and by that light the self departs either through the 
eye or through the head or through other apertures of the body. 
And when he thus departs, life departs after him. And when life 
thus departs, all the vital breaths depart after it. He becomes 
one with intelligence. What has intelligence departs with him. 
His knowledge and his work take hold qf him as also his past 
experience. 

Every organ becomes united with the subtle body, lihgdtman. $. 
purva-prajha: past experience, former intelligence, the results of his 
past life, purvdnubhuta-visaya-prajhd , atita karma-phaldnubhava- 
vasand. S. S refers to those who are clever in painting though they 
had no practice in this life and traces their skill to p^ist experience. 
These impressions of the past, under the control of knowledge and 
work, stretch out like a leech from the body and build another body 
in accordance with past woj;k. vidya-karma-purva-vdsana-laksanam 
etat tritayam sdkatika sambhdra-bthdniyam para-loka-pdtheyam. R. 

The individual is born according to the measure of his under- 
standing. Aitareya Aranyaka II. 3. 2. See also Pra&natN. 11. 

Kalidasa in his Sdkuntald , Act IV, says that when a being who is 



IV. 4- 4 - Brhad-aranyaka Upani$ad 271 

(in all other respects) happy becomes conscious of an ardent longing, 
when he sees beautiful objects or hears sweet sounds, then in all 
probability, without being aware of it, be remembers with his mind 
the friendships of former lives, firmly rooted in his heart. 

ramyani viksya madhurdms ca nisamya iabddn paryutsukl bhavati 

yat sukhino pi jantuh 

tac cetasd smarati nunant abodhapurvam bhdvasthirdni janandntara 

sauhrddni. 

3. tadyathd trnajaldyukd , trnasydntam gatva, any am dkramam 
dkramya, dtmdnam upasamharati , cvam evdyam atmd , idam 
sari ram nihatya , avicldm gamayitvd , anyam dkramam dkramya , 
dtmdnam upasamharati. 

3. Just as a leech (or caterpillar) when it has come to the 
end of a blade of grass, after having made another approach 
(to another blade) draws itself together towards it, so does 
this Self, after having thrown away this body, and dispelled 
ignorance, after having another approach (to another body) 
draw itself together (for making the transition to another body). 

4. tad yathd pcsaskdri pesaso mdtrdm updddya, anyan 
navataram kalydnataram rapam tanute, eyam evdyam dtmd , 
idam sariravi nihatya , avidydrii gamayitvd , anyan navataram 
kalydnataram ritpam karate, piiryam vd, gdndharvarh vd, 
daivam vd, prdjdpatyam vd, brdhmam vd anycsdm vd bhdtdndm. 

4. 'And as a goldsmith, taking a piece of gold turns it into 
another, newer and more beautiful shape, even so does this self, 
after having thrown away this body and dispelled its ignorance, 
make unto himself another, newer and more beautiful shape 
like that of the fathers or of the gandharvas, or of the gods or 
of Prajd-pati or of Bralfrnd or of othpr beings. 

goldsmith: pesah savarnam , tat karotiti p'cSaskdri. $. 
another form: sa msthdna-visesa m, dchdntaram. S. 
kalydnataram: more beautiful. Beauty of form indicates beauty 
of soul. We cannot have beauty of form with an evil nature. 
pdpa-vrttaye na rupam: Kalidasa's Kumar a-sambhava V. 36. Malli- 
natlia cites othenpassages. Beauty of form and good qualities go to- 
gether: yatra dkrtih tatra gund bhavanti. Those of good form do not 
behave in evil ways, na surupdh pdpa-samdcdrd bhavanti. In Dasa - 
kamdra-carita, it is said: scyam dkrtih na vyabhicarati silam, such 
is the form, the character cannot be different. 

Beauty is a symbol of the divine. Ananda, the beloved disciple 
of the Buddha/said to the Master: 'Half of the holy life, O Lord, 
is friendship with the beautiful, association with the beautiful. 



272 The Principal Upanisads IV. 4. 6. 

communion with the beautiful/ 'It is not so, Ananda, it is not so/ 
said the Master. ‘It is not half of the holy life; it is the whole of the 
holy life/ Samyutta Nikdya. V. 2. 

5. sa vd ayam dtmd bralima , vijndnamayo manomayah prdna- 
mayas caksurmayah, irotramayah , prthivimaya dpomayo vdyu - 
wrtjy# akdsamayas tcjomayo’ tcjomayah kdmamayo' kdmamayah, 
krodhamayo ' krodhamayo dharmamayo* dharmamayah sarva- 
mayahtad yad ctat ; idam-mayali adomaya Hi. yathdkdn yathdcan 
tathd bhavati, sadhukari sddliur bhavati, pdpakdn pdpo bhavati; 
puny ah punycna karmand bhavati , pdpali pdpcna; athau khalv 
ahuli; kdmamaya cvdyam puritsa iti t sa yatlidkdmo bhavati , 
tat kratur bhavati , yat kratur bhavati , tat karma kurute , yat 
karma kurute , tat abhisampadyate. 

5. 'That self is, indeed, Brahman , consisting of (or identified 
with) the understanding, mind, life, sight, hearing, earth, 
water, air, ether, light and no light, desire and absence of 
desire, anger and absence of anger, righteousness and absence 
of righteousness and all things. This is what is meant by saying, 
(it) consists of this (what is perceived), consists of that (what is 
inferred). According as one acts, according as one behaves, so 
does he become. The doer of good becomes good, the doer of 
evil becomes evil. One becomes virtuous by virtuous action, 
bad by bad action. Others, however, say that a person consists 
of desires. As is his desire so is his will; as is his will, so is the 
deed he does, whatever deed he does, that he attains. 

See Manu II. 4. Cp. Plato: 'Such as are the trend of our desires 
and the nature of our souls, just such each of us becomes/ Laws . 
904. c. 

kratuh: will, resolve, adhyavasdyah , niscayah. S. 

attains: gains the fruit thereof, tadlyum phalam abhisampadyate. S. 

tasya phalam ca prdpnoti. R. 

6. tad esa iloko bhavati: 

tad eva saktah saha karmanaiti lihgam mano yatra nisaktam 
asya; 

prdpydntam karmanas tasya yat kim ceha k'lroty ayam. 

tasmdl lokat punar aiti asmai lokdya karmane 
iti nu kdmayamdnali; athakamayanuinah , yo’kamo niskama 
dpta-kdma dtma-kdmah , na tasya prdnd utkrdmanti , brahmaiva 
san brahmdpycii . 

6. ‘On this there is the following verse: "The object to which 
the mind is attached, the subtle self goes together with the 



IV. 4* 7 * Brhad-dranyaka Upani§ad 273 

deed, being attached to it alone. Exhausting the results of 
whatever works he did in this world he comes again from that 
world, to tliis world for (fresh) work.” This (is for) the man who 
desires. But the man who does not desire, he who is without 
desire, who is freed from desire, whose desire is satisfied, whose 
desire is the self; his breaths do not depart. Being Brahman he 
goes to Brahman. 

Desire is the root of cmpiiical existence: samsdra-mula . 

The subtle body is called mind because mind is the chief factor 
of the subtle body, manah pradhdnatvat lihgasya mano lihgam ity 
ucyate. S. 

He who has desires continues subject to rebirth. 

The man free from desires realises Brahman even here: sa ca 
vidvan dpta-kamah dtma-kdmatayd ihaivabrahmabhutah. S. What the 
blind need is to receive sight. Sight is not change of place or trans- 
porting into another world. One need not wait for the death of the 
body, na sarira-pdtottara-kdlam. Freedom is the cessationof ignorance, 
avidyd-nivrtti. He in whom desire is stilled suffers no rebirth. 

7. tad esa sloko bhavati: 

yadd sarve pramucyantc kdma ye sya hrdi sritdli, 
atha martyo’mjto bhavati , atra brahma samasnute 
Hi tad yathdhinirvlayani valmThe virtu pratyasta sayTta, evam 
evedam sariram sole. athdyam asariro’mrtah prdno brahmaiva, 
teja eva; so’ ham bhagavatc sahasram dad ami, m iti hovdea 
janako vaidchah. 

7. ‘On this -there is the following verse: ‘‘When all the desires 
that dwell in the heart are cast away, then does the mortal 
become immortal, then he attains Brahman here (in this very 
body).” Just as the slough of a snake lies on an anthill, dead, 
cast off, even so lies this body. But this disembodied, immortal 
life is Brahman only, is light indeed, Your Majesty/ ‘I give you, 
Venerable Sir, a thousand cows,' said Janaka (King) of Videha. 

See Kalha VI 14. 
pratyasta: cast away, pratiksipta. 

When we identify ourselves with the body under the influence of 
desires and past work, we are embodied and mortal. When we 
become disembodied we become immortal, as we are no longer 
committed to embodiment, kdma-karma-prayukta-sai iratmo-bhdvena 
hi purvam sasariro martyas ca, tad viyogdd athedamm asarirah, ata eva 
camytah. S. » 

light indeed: ajhdna-laksandndhakdra-hratibhafa eva. R. 



274 The Principal Upani$ads IV. 4. 9. 

8. tad etc slokd bliavanti: 

annh panthd vitatah purdnah ; mam sprsto } nuvitto mayaiva, 
tena dhird api yanti brahmavidah svargam lokam ita 
urdhvam vimuktdh. 

8. ‘On this there are the following verses : “The narrow ancient 
path which stretches far away, has been touched (found) by 
me, has been realised by me. By it, the wise, the knowers of 
Brahman go up to the heavenly world after the fall of this 
body, being freed (even while living). 

anuh: narrow, being difficult to comprehend, suksmah durvijiiey- 
atvdt. &. 

vitatah: stretching far away, vistirnah vispasta-tarana-hctutvdd vd. 
V is vitarah. leading across. 

The teachers are the path-finders. The Buddha speaks of the 
ancient way, the wayfarer bound for home ‘from which there is 
no coming back again.' Rum! attributes to Jesus, the Logos, ‘For 
the true believers I become a bridge across the river.’ Mathnawl 
IV. 10. 70. The Bodhisuttva makes of himself a bridge, attdnam 
samkamam katvd, by which we cross. Having first crossed over 
himself, he serves as a bridge for others. ‘I am the way.' John XIV. b. 
touched by me: found by me, mayd-labdhah. S. 
itah: asmdc chart ra- pat dd S. 

They are freed even while in the body: jivanta cva vimuktds 
santa h. $. 

Cp. Taittiriya Brahmana: ‘He who makes the self (atman) his 
wayfinder is no longer stained by evil action.' III. 12. 9. cS. 

Sometimes the verse is interpreted differently. They go beyond 
the heavenlv world. There is a reading to this elfect: 
tena dhird api yanti brahma-vida utkramya svargam lokam ito vimuktdh . 

9. tasmin suklam uta nilam dhuh , pirdgalam, haritam , lohitam 

ca 

esa panthd brahmana hdnuvittah tenaiti brahmavit punyakvt 
taijasas ca 

9. ‘ “On that path they say there is white, blue, yellow, green 
and red. That path was found by a Brfihmana and by it goes 
the knower of Brahman, the doer of right and the shining one." 

These colours do not affect the path of realisation darsana-mdrgasya 
ca sukladi-varndsambhavdt. These "paths belong to the world of 
empirical existence, na te moksa-mdrgdh , samsara-visaya cva hi te. S. 
brahmana: by a Brahmana. pardtma-svarupenaiva brdhmanena tyak- 
ta-sarvaisanena. S. 

the doer of right: § finds it difficult to uphold his view that spiritual 



IV. 4- 12. Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 275 

wisdom and practical activity are incompatible. He cites a number 
of passages from M.B., which support his view: 

apunya-punyo parameyam punar-bhava-nirbhayah 
sdntas samnyasino yanti tasmai moksatmane namah. XII. 46. 56. 
‘ Salutation to that embodiment of liberation whom serene monks, 
fearless about rebirth, attain after the cessation of the effects of 
their good and bad deeds.' 

nirasisam, andrambham, nirnamaskaram , astutim 
aksxnam , ksina-karmdnam , tam devd brdhmanam viduh. XII. 
269. 34- * * 

The gods consider him to be a knower of Brahman who has no 
desires, who undertakes no work, who docs not bow (to others) or 
praise (any one), who remains unchanged, whose work is exhausted.' 
naitadrsam brdhmanasydsti vittam yathaikatd , samatd, satyatd ca 
illam , sthitim, danda-nidhdnam , drjavam, tatas tatas coparamah 
kriydbhyah. XII. 174. 37. 

‘For a knower of Brahman, there is no wealth comparable to the 
sense of oneness, the sense of equality, truthfulness, virtue, stead- 
fastness, non-injury, integrity and withdrawal from all activities.' 

That the knowers of Brahman arc doers of good is said by way 
of eulogy. This view of 6 is not the obvious meaning of the text 
which seems to suggest jhdna-karma-samaccaya. 

10. andham tamah pravisanti ye vidyam updsate 
tato bhuya iva te tamah yci u vidydydm ratdh. 

10. ‘Into blind darkness enter they who worship ignorance; 
into greater darkness than that, as it were, they that delight 
in knowledge (enter).' 

See Isa 9. § means by avidyd works, and by knowledge the ritual 
part of the Vedas. 

vidydydm: avidydi-vastu-pratipddikdydm karmdrthdydm trayydyn. S. 

11. anandd ndma te lokdh, andhena tamasdvrtdh 
tarns tc pretydbhigacchanti avidvdriiso budho jandh. 

11. Those worlds covered with blind darkness are called 
joyless. To them after death go those people who have not 
knowledge, who p.re not awakened. 

See Katha I. 3: Iia 3. 

not awakened: devoid of the knowledge of the self, dtmdvagama- 
varjildh. $. pratyag-dtma-vidyd-sunydh. K. 

12. dtmdnarii'ced vijamydd ayam asmtti purusah 
kirn icchan , kasya kdmdya sanram anusamjvaret. 



276 The Principal Upani$ads IV. 4. 14. 

12. If a person knows the self as 'I am this/ then wishing 
what, and for desire of what should he suffer in the body? 

should suffer: santa pyet, sarira-tdpam anutapycta. £. 

What craving can be left in him that he should take to himself 
another body, full of suffering, to satisfy it? 

13. yasyiinuvittah pratibuddha atmasmin samdehye gahane 

pravistah , 

sa visva-krt, sa hi sarvasya kartd , tasya lokah sa u loka eva. 

13. Whoever has found and has awakened to the self that has 
entered into this perilous inaccessible place (the body), he is 
the maker of the universe, for he is the maker of all. His is the 
world; indeed he is the world itself. 

anuvittah: found, anulabdhah. £. 

pratibuddah: awakened, directly Toalised, sdksdthtah. S. 
samdehye: perilous, subject to many dangers: anekdnartha-samkato- 
pacaye . §. 

gahane: inaccessible, with hundieds and thousands of obstacles to 

obtaining enlightenment through discrimination: ancka-sata-saha- 

sra-viveka-vijhana-pratipakyi-visamc. 

loka: world. According to § the Self, the Universal Self. 

14. ihaiva santo’ tlia vidmas tad vayam, nu cet avedir mahatl 

vinastih . 

ye tad viduh , amrtds to bhavanti , athetare duhkliam evdpi- 
yanti . 

14. Verily, while we are here we may know this: if (we 
know it) not we would be ignorant, great is the destruction. 
Those who know this become immortal while others go only to 
sorrow. 

avedih: ignorant, ajhdnum bhavati R. 

The Eternal may be realised even while we live in the ephemeral 
body. To fail to realise him is to live in ignorance, to be subject to 
birth and death. The knowers of lUahman aie immortal; others 
continue in the region of sorrow. 

Cp. the words in the Homeiic hymn to Demeter written about 
the beginning of the sixth century b.c. in Attic^ : 'Blessed among 
men who dwell on earth is lie who has seen these things; but he 
who is uninitiated and has no pari in the rites has never an equal 
lot when he has died and passed beneath the dank darkness/ Lines 
480 ft. Plutarch quotes from Sophocles: ‘Thrice blessed are those 
mortals who have seen these mysteries before they come to Hades, 
for to them alone is granted true life. All that Is evil besets the 
rest.' \V. K. C. Guthrie: The Greeks and their Gods (1950), p. xiii. 



IV. 4 - I 9 * Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 277 

15. yadaitam anupasyati dtmdnam dcvam anjasd, 

Udnam bhuta-bhavyasya, na tato vijugupsate. 

15. If one clearly beholds him as the self, as God, as the 
lord of what has been and what will be, he does not shrink 
away from him. 

he does not shrink: he is not afraid, he does not wish to hide himself 
from the Supreme. 

16. yasmdd arvdk sariwatsarah ahubhih parivartate , 
tad devd jyotisdm jyotih dynr hopdsate mrtam. 

16. That in front of which the year revolves with its days, 
that the gods worship as the light of lights, as life immortal. 

(lyuh: life-principle, sarva-prdni-prdnana-hetu-bhutam. R. 

I 7 - yasmin pahea pahea-jandh dkdsas ca pratisthitali , 
tam eva many a dtmdnam , vidvdin brahma mrto mrtam . 

17. That in which the live groups of live and space are 
established, that alone I regard as the self. Knowing that 
immortal Brahman I am immortal. 

Ihe five groups arc the Gandharvas or celestial singers, the 
fathers, the gods, the demons and the Rdkyisas or Titans. 
space: the unmanifested principle, aiydkytdkhyah. S. 

18. prdnasya prdnam uta caksitsas caksuh tita srotrasya 

srotram, 

manaso ye mano viduh , te nieikyur brahma purdnam 
agryam. 

18. They who know the life ol life, the eye of the eye, the 
car of the ear and tlu; mind of the mind, they have realised 
the ancient primordial Brahman. 

Ken a I. 2. 

The different organs do not function if they are not inspired 
by the energy of Brahman. ‘Divested of the light of the self which 
is pure intelligence they are like wood or clods of earth/ svatah 
kdstha-losta-samani hi idni caitanydtma-jyotis-silnydni. S. 
nieikyuh: have realised, niscaycna jiidtavantah. §. 

19. ma nasa ivdnudrastavya m , naiha ndndsti kirn cana: 
mrtyoh sa mrtyum dpnotiya ilui ndneva pasyati. 

19. Only by the mind is it to be perceived. In it there is no 
diversity. He ^oes from death to death, who sees in it, as it 
were, diversity. 



278 The Principal Upanisads IV. 4. 22. 

The mind purified by the knowledge of the Supreme Truth and 
the instructions of the teacher directly realises Brahman, 
paramdrtha-jndna-samskrtenacdryopadesa-purvakam ca. §. Again, 'the 
mind refined by the subjugation of the body, the mind and the 
senses and equipped with the teaching of the scriptures and the 
teacher forms the instrument by which the self may be seen: 
sdstrdcaryopadesa-janita-sama-damddi-samskrtam man a dtma-darsane 
kdranam. S.B.G. II. 21. 

See Kafka IV. 10-11. 

from death to death: from birth to birth, samsdrdt sariisdram. R. 

20. ckadhaivdnud) astavyam etad aprameyam dhnivam, 
virajah pata dkdsdd aja dtmd mahdn dhruvah. 

20. This indemonstrable and constant being can be realised 
as one only. The self is taintless, beyond space, unborn, great 
and constant. 

as one only: as homogeneous pure intelligence without any break in 
it, like space: vijiidna-ghanaikarasa-prakdrendkdsavan nirantarena. S. 

Duality is essential for knowledge; as the self is one and there is 
nothing beside it, it is not an object of demonstration: anycna hanyat 
pramlyate, idam tv ekam eva, ato * prameyam. S. 
dhnivam: constant, nityam , kutastham avicdli. $>. 
virajah: taintless, vigata-rajah. S. rdgdd i-dosa-rahitah . R. 

21. tam eva dhiro vijhdya prajhdm kurvita brdhtnanah 
ndnudhydydd bahun sabddn t vdeo vigldpanath hi tat iti. 

21. Let a wise Brahmana after knowing him alone, practise 
(the means to) wisdom. Let him not reflect on many words, for 
that is mere weariness of speech. 

vijndya : knowing by means of the study of the scriptures and logical 
reflection: sravana-manandbhydm jiidtvd. R. prajndm nididhydsanam. 

R. 

vigldpanam: weariness, viiesena gldni-karam srama-karam hi. £. 

The Real cannot be known by vain and idle arguments. 

22. sa va c$a mahdn aja dtmd yo’yam vijhdnamayah prdncsu; 
ya eso ntar-hrdaya dkdsah tasmin sete, sarvasya vail, sarva- 
syeidnah, sarvasyddhipatih; sa va sdidhund karmand bhuydn 
no evdsadhmid kantyan. esa sarveivarah , esa bhutddhipatih , 
e§a bhutapdlah . esa setur vidharana esdrii lokdndm asambheddya. 
tam etarh veddnnvacanc-na brahmana vividisanti, yajhena , 
ddnena , tapasandsakena; etam eva vidilvd munir bhavati , 
etam eva pravrajino lokam icchantah pravrajanti . etadd ha sma 
vai tat piirve vidvdmsah prajdm na kdmayante: him prajayd 



IV. 4- 22. Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 279 

karisydmah; yesdrh no’yam dtmdyam loka iti. tc ha sma 
putraisanayds ca vittaisanayas ca lokaisandyas ca vyutthdya, 
atha bhik§d-caryarh car anti; yd hy eva putraisand sd vittaisana, 
yd vittaisana sd lokaisand; ubhc hy etc esane eva bhavatah sa 
esa ncti nety atma; agrhyah , na hi grhyate; astryah, na hi siryate; 
asahgah, na hi sajyate ; asito na vyathatc , na ri$yati; etam u 
haivaitc na tarata iti, atah papam akaravam iti, atah kalyanam 
akaravam iti; ubhc u haivaisa ete iarati , nainam krtakrte tapatah. 

22. Verily, he is the great unborn Self who is this (person) 
consisting of knowledge among the senses. In the space within 
the heart lies the controller of all, the lord of all, the ruler of all. 
He does not become greater by good works nor smaller by 
evil works. He is the bridge that serves as the boundary to keep 
the different worlds apart. Him the Brahmanas seek to know by 
the study of the Veda, by sacrifices, by gifts, by penance, by 
fasting. On knowing Him, in truth, one becomes an ascetic. 
Desiring Him only as their worlds, monks wander forth. Verily, 
because they know this, the ancient (sages) did not wish for 
offspring. What shall we do with offspring (they said), we who 
have attained this Self, this world. They, having risen above 
the desire for sons, the desire for wealth, the desire for worlds, 
led the life of a mepdicant. For the desire for sons is the desire 
for wealth and the desire for wealth is the desire for worlds; 
both these are, indeed, desires only. This Self is (that which has 
been described as) not this, not this. He is incomprehensible 
for He is never comprehended. He is indestructible for He 
cannot be destroyed. He is unattached for He does not attach 
himself. He is unfettered, He does not suffer, He is not injured. 
Him (who knows this) these two (thoughts) do not overcome, 
for some reason he has Hone evil or. for some reason he has 
done good. He overcomes both. What* he has done or what he 
lias not done does not burn (affect) him. 

Sec III. 5. 1 ; nr. (). 26; IV. 2. 4. 

sclu: bridge. Agni (Fire) is spoken of as bridge: tvan nas tantnr uta 
setuv ague: Tailtirlya Brdhmana . II. 4. 2. 0 . Agni becomes the 
patli of deva-ydna. % 

Ceremonial observances are treated as means for purification. See 
B.G. XVIII. 5. 

Fasting is restraint, not abstinence, not starvation which will 
mean death: kdmdncisanam andsakam , na tu bhojana-nivrttih bhoja - 
na-nivrttau mriyata eva. S. 

The monastic coders which developed in Buddhism and Jainism 
are forecast here. 


K 



28o 


IV. 4. 24. 


The Principal Upanisads 

23. tad esa rcdbhyuktam: 

esa nityo mahimd brdhmanasya na vardhate karmand no‘ 
kaniydn 

tasyaiva sydt pada-vit t tarn vidilvd na lipyate karmand 
pdpakcna, 

iti tasmdd \cvani-vit, sdnto ddnta uparatas titiksuh samdhito 
bhutvd, atmany evdtnuinam pasyati, sarvam dtmdnam pasyati; 
nainam pdpmdi tarati, sarvam pdpmdxnam tarati; nainam pdipmd 
tapati, sarvam pdpmdnam tapati; vipapo virajo * vicikitso brdh - 
mano bhavati; esa brahma-lokali , sum rdf; cuam prdpitd’si iti 
hovdea ydjmivalkyah; so’liam bhagavate vidchan dadclmi, mam 
cdpi saha ddsydycti. 

23. This very (doctrine) has been expressed in the hymn. 
This eternal greatness of the knower of Brahman is not in- 
creased by work nor diminished. One should know the nature 
of that alone. Having found that, one is not tainted by evil 
action. Therefore he who knows it as such, having become calm, 
self-controlled, withdrawn, patient and collected sees the Self 
in his own self, sees all in the Self. Evil does not overcome him, 
he overcomes all e\il. Evil does not burn (affect) him, he burns 
(consumes) all evil. Free from evil, free from taint, free from 
doubt he becomes a knower of Brahma. This is the world of 
Brahma, Your Majesty, you have attained it, said Yajnavalkya. 
Janaka (King) of Yideha said, ‘Venerable Sir, I give you the 
(empire of) Yidehas and myself also to serve you/ 

pada-vit: he who knows the nature: padasya velid , padyate gamyate 
jhdyata iti mahnnnas-srarupam eva padam. S. 

having become calm: the 1 Bhdgavata defines the state of tranquillity as 
one in which there is not grief nor happiness, nor wony, nor hatred, 
nor longing, not even any desire. 

nayaira dnhkham na sukham na cintd, nai dvesa-rdgau na ca kdcid 
icchci. 

rasah sa sdntah kathito munindraih sarvesu bhdvcsu samah 
pramdnah. 

24. sa vd esa malidin aja dtmd, annddo vasu-ddnah; vindatc 
vasu y a evam veda. 

24. This is that great unborn Self, who is the cater of food 
and the giver of wealth. He who knows this obtains w r ealth. 

the eater of food: sarva-bhutasthas sarvdnndndm attd. S. He dwells 
in all beings and eats all food which they eat. 

the giver of wealth : the giver of the fruits of actions. He enables 
all beings to obtain the results of their actions, dhanam sarvaprdni - 



IV. 5 - 3 - Brhad-dranyaka Upani$ad 281 

karma-phalam , tasya data , praninam yathd-karma-phalena yojayitety 
arthah S. 

25. sfl va mahdin ajdtmd, ajaro, amaro 9 mrto'bhayo brahma; 
abhayam vai brahma , abhayam hi vai brahma bhavati ya evam 
veda . 

25. This is that great unborn Self who is undecaying, undying, 
immortal, fearless, Brahman. Verily, Brahman is fearless. He 
who knows this becomes the fearless Brahman . 


Fifth Brahmana 

THE SUPREME SELF AND THE SUPREME VALUE 

1. atha ha ydjhavalkyasya dve bhdrye babhiivatuh, maitreyi 
ca kdtyayani ca. tayor ha maitreyi brahma-vddini babhuva , 
stn-prajhaiva tar hi kdtyayani . atha yajhavalkyo’nyad-vrttam 
upakarisyan. 

1. Now then, Yajnavalkya had two wives, Maitreyi and 
Katyayani. Of these (two) Maitreyi was a discourser on Brahma- 
knowledge, while 'Katyayani possessed only such knowledge as 
women have. Now then, Yajnavalkya when he wished to get 
ready for another mode of life — 

See II. 4. 

§ holds that in this dialogue between Yajnavalkya and Maitreyi, 
logical argument is advanced in support of scriptural statements: 
tarka-pradhdnam hi ydjnavalkyiyam kdndam. 
discourser on Brahma-knotvledge: brahma-vadana-itld. 

2. maitreyi , iti hovdea ydjhavalkyah, pravrajisyan va are’ ham 
asmdt sthanad asmi; hanta tc nay d kdtydyanydntam karavdmti. 

2. ‘Maitreyi/ said Yajnavalkya, ‘lo, verily, I am getting 
away from this state (into the forest). Forsooth, let me make 
a settlement for you and that Katyayani, 

3. sd hovdea maitreyi: yan nu ma iyam , bhagoh, sarvd prthivi 
vittena purnd syat , sydni nv aham tcndmrtd: dho na iti , na iti , 
hovdea ydjhavalkyah; yathaivopakarannvatdm jivitam , tathaiva 
tc jivitam sydt; amrtatvasya tu ndsdsti vitteneti. 

3. Then said. Maitreyi: ‘My Lord, if, indeed, this whole earth 
filled with wealth were mine, do I become immortal by it or 



282 The Principal Upanisads IV. 5. 6. 

not? 1 ‘No/ replied Yajnavalkya. ‘As the life of people who 
have plenty of things will your life be, but there is no hope of 
immortality through wealth/ 

4. sd hovdca maitrcyi: yendham namrtd sydm, kim aharh tena 
kurydm. yad cva bhagavdn vcda, tad eva me bnlhiti. 

4. Then Maitreyl said: ‘What shall I do with that by which 
I do not become immortal? What you know (of the way to 
immortality), Venerable Sir, that, indeed explain to me.’ 

5. sa hovdca ydjhavalkyah : priyd vai khalu no bhavati sati 
priyam avrdhat. hanta tarhi , bhavati , dad vydkhyasydmi te, 
vydeaksdnasya tu me nididhydsasveti. 

5. Then Yajnavalkya said: ‘You have been truly dear to me 
(even before), now you have increased your dearness. Therefore, 
if you wish, my dear, I will explain it to you. As I am expounding 
to you, seek to meditate on it/ 

priyaiva piirvam khalu nah, asmabhyath bhavati, bhavantl sati priyam 
evavrdhat, vardhitavatl , nirdhdritavaty asi. S. 

6. sa hovdca: na vd are patyuh kdmdya patih priyo bhavati , 
dtmanas tu kdmdya patih priyo bhavati; na vd are jdydyai 
kdmdya jayd priyd bhavati , dtmanas tu kdmdya jdyd pnyd 
bhavati ; na vd are putrdnam kdmdya putrdh priyd bhavanti , 
dtmanas tu kdmdya putrdh priyd bhavanti; na vd are vittasya 
kdmdya vittam priyam bhavati, dtmanas tu kdmdya vittam 
priyam bhavati; na vd are pasundm kdmdya pasavah priyd 
bhavanti, dtmanas tu kdmdya pasavah priyd bhavanti; na vd arc 
brahmanah kdmdya brahma priyam bhavati, dtmanas tu kdmdya 
brahma priyam bhavati; na vd are ksatrasya kdmdya ksatram 
priyam bhavati, dtmanas tu kdmdya ksatram priyam bhavati; 
na vd are lokdndm kdmdya lokdh priyah bhavanti, dtmanas tu 
kdmdya lokdh priyd bhavanti; na vd are devdndm kdmdya dtvdih 
priyd bhavanti, dtmanas tu kdmdya devdh priyd bhavanti; 
na vd are vedanam kdmdya veddh priyd bhavanti, dtmanas 
tu kdmdya veddh priyd bhavanti. na vd are bhutdndm kdmdya 
bhutdni priydni bhavanti, dtmanas tu kdmdya< bhutdni priydni . 
bhavanti; na vd are sarvasya kdmdya sarvam priyam bhavati, 
dtmanas tu kdmdya sarvam priyam bhavati. dtmd vd are 
drastavyah irotavyo maniavyo nididhyasitavyah, maitrcyi; dtmani 
khalv are drste, srute i mate, vijhdte , idam sarvam viditam. 

6. Then, he (Yajnavalkya) said: ‘Verily, not -for the sake of 
the husband is the husband dear but for the sake of the Self 



IV. 5- 7 * Brhad-aranyaka Upani§ad 283 

is the husband dear. Verily, not for the sake of the wife is the 
wife dear but for the sake of the Self is the wife dear. Verily, 
not for the sake of the sons are the sons dear but for the sake 
of the Self are the sons dear. Verily, not for the sake of wealth 
is wealth dear but for the sake of the Self is wealth dear. Verily, 
not for the sake of the cattle are the cattle dear but for the sake 
of the Self are the cattle dear. Verily, not for the sake of the 
Brahmana is the Brahmana dear but for the sake of the Self is 
the Brahmana dear. Verily, not for the sake of the Ksatriya 
is the Ksatriya dear but for the sake of the Self is the Ksatriya 
dear. Verily, not for the sake of the worlds are the worlds dear 
but for the sake of the Self are the worlds dear. Verily, not for 
the sake of the gods are the gods dear but for the sake of the 
Self are the gods dear. Verily, not for the sake of the Vedas are 
the Vedas dear but for the sake of the Self are the Vedas dear. 
Verily not for the sake of the beings are the beings dear but 
for the sake of the Self are the beings dear. Verily, not for the 
sake of all is all dear but for the sake of the Self is all dear. 
Verily, the Self, Maitreyi, is to be seen, to be heard, to be 
reflected on, to be meditated upon; when, verily, the Self is 
seen, heard, reflected on and known, then all this is known. 

to be heard: from the teacher and the scriptures, dcdrydgamdbhydm. 
to be reflected on: through argument and reasoning, tarkenopapattyd. $. 

7 brahma tarn paraded, yo’ nyatrdtmano brahma veda; ksatram 
tain par add t, y o' ny at rat manah ksatram veda ; lokds tarn pardduh , 
yo' nyatrdtmano lokdn veda; devds tam pardduh , yo' nyatrdtmano 
devdn veda; vedds tam % pardduh, yo' nyatrdtmano veddn veda; 
bhutdni tam pardduh, yo' nyatrdtmanb bhutdni veda; sarvam tam 
pardddt, yo'nyatrdt manah sarvam veda; idam brahma, idam 
ksatram, ime lokdh , ime devdh, ime veddh, imdni bhutdni, idam 
sarvam, yad ay am dtmd. 

7 Brfihmanahood deserts him who knows Brahmanahood in 
anything else than the Self. Ksatriyahood deserts him who 
knows Ksatriya*hood in anything else than the Self. The worlds 
deseit him who knows the worlds in anything else than the 
Self. The gods desert him who knows the gods in anything else 
than the Self. The Vedas desert him who knows the Vedas in 
anything else than the Self. The beings desert him who knows 
the beings in Anything else than the Self. All deserts him who 
knows all in anything else than the Self. This Brahmanahood, 



284 The Principal Upani§ads IV. 5. 12. 

« 

this Ksatriyahood, and these worlds, these gods, these Vedas, 
all these beings, this all are the Self. 

8 . sa yathd dnndubher hanyamdnasya na bdhydn Sabddn 
Saknuydd grahandya , dundubhcs tu grahancna dimdabhy-dghdta- 
sya vd Sabdo grhltah . 

8. Just as when a drum is beaten, one cannot grasp the 
external sounds but by grasping the drum or the beater of the 
drum, the sound is grasped; 

9. sa yathd Sahkhasya dhtndyamdnasya na bdhydn sabddn 
saknuydd grahandya , Sahkhasya tu grahancna Sahkha-dlimasya 
vd sabdo grhltah. 

9. Just as when a conch is blown one cannot grasp the 
external sound but by grasping the conch or the blower of the 
conch, the sound is grasped; 

10. sa yathd vindyai vddyamdindiyai na bdhydn sabddn Saknuydd 
grahandya , vindyai tu grahancna vlnd-vddasya vd Sabdo grhltah. 

10. Just as when a Vina (or lute) is played one cannot grasp 
the external sounds but by grasping the vlnd or the player of 
the vlnd, the sound is grasped ; 

11. sa yathdrdraidhdgner abhydhitasya prthag dhiimd viniS - 
car anti , cvam vd are’sya mahato bhutasya nihSvasitam dad yad 
rg vcdo, yajur vcdah, sdima vedo ’ tharvdhgirasa itihdsah purdnam 
vidyd upanisadah Slokdh siibdni , anu-vydkhydndni vydkh- 
ydndmstam lmtam dSitam pdyitam ayam ca lokah paraS ca lokah 
sarvdni ca bhutdni, asyaivaitdni sarvdni nihsvasitdni. 

11. As from a fire kindled with damp fuel various kinds of 

smoke issue forth, so, verily, from this great being has been 
breathed forth that which is the Rg Veda , the Yajur Veda 
the Sdma Veda, the hymns of the Atharvans and the Ahgirasas, 
legend, ancient lore, sciences, sacred teachings, verses, aphor- 
isms, explanations, commentaries, sacrifice, oblation, food, 
drink, this world and the other and all beings. From it, indeed, 
have all these been breathed forth. » 

12. sa yathd sarvdsdm apdrii samudra ekdyanam, evarh 
sarvesam sparsdndm tvag ekdyanam, cvam sarvesdm gandhanam 
ndsike ekdyanam, evam sarvesdm rasdndm jihvaikdyanam , cvam 
sarvesdm rupandm caksur ekdyanam, cvam sarvesdm Sabddndm 
Srotram ekdyanam , evani sarvesdm samkalpdndm mana ekdyanam , 
evam sarvdsdm vidydndm hrdayam ekdyanam, evam sarvesdm 



IV. 5 - 14 - Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 285 

karmandrh hastav ekdyanam , evarh sarvesdm dnandandm upastha 
ekdyanam , evarh sarvesdm visargdnarh pdyur ekdyanam, evarh 
sarvesdm adhvanam pddav ekdyanam , evarh sarvesdm veddnarh 
vdg ekdyanam . 

12. As the ocean is the one goal (meeting-place) of all waters, 
as the skin is the one goal of all kinds of touch, as the nose 
is the one goal of all smells, as the tongue is the one goal of all 
tastes, as the eye is the one goal of all forms, as the ear is the 
one goal of all sounds, as the mind is the one goal of all inten- 
tions, as the heart (intellect) is the one goal of all knowledge, 
as the hands are the one goal of all kinds of work, as the genera- 
tive organ is the one goal of all forms of delight, as the anus 
is the one goal of all evacuations, as the feet arc the one goal 
of all movements, as the (organ of) speech is the one goal of 
all the Vedas. 

13. sa yathd saindhava-ghanah anantar o' bdhyah , krtsno rasa - 
ghana eva, evarh vd arc* yam dtmd, anantaro* bdhyah, krtsnah 
prajhdna-ghana eva ; ctcbhyo bhutebhyah samutthdya, tuny eva - 
nuvinasyati na pretya sariijnasti, iti arc bravlmi, iti hovdea 
ydjnavalkyah. 

13. 'As a mass of salt is without inside, without outside, is 
altogether a mass*of taste, even so, verily, is this Self without 
inside, without outside, altogether a mass of intelligence only. 
Having arisen out of these elements (the Self) vanishes again in 
them. When he has departed there is no more (separate or 
particular) consciousness. Thus, verily, say V , said Yajnavalkya. 

Particular consciousness is due to association with elements; 
when this association is dissolved thiough knowledge, knowledge of 
oneness is obtained and particular consciousness disappears. 

14 . sd hovdea maitrcyl: atraiva •md bliagavdn mohdntam 
dpipipat; na vd aliam imam vijdndmlti. sa hovdea ; na vd arc 
ham mohani bravlmi, avindsi vd are'yam dtmd, an-ucchitti - 
dluirmd. 

14. Then Maitrcyl said: 'Here, indeed, Venerable Sir, you 
have caused mc»to reach utter bewilderment. Indeed, I do not 
at all understand this (the Self)/ He replied, 'I do not say 
anything bewildering. This Self, verily, is imperishable and of 
indestructible nature. 

indestructible nature: it is not subject to destruction cither in the 
form of change* or extinction, ndpi vikriyd-laksano, ndpy uccheda- 
laksano vindso’sya vidyate. S. 



286 


The Principal Upanisads IV. 5. 15. 

15. yatra hi dvaitam iva bhavati, tad ikira itaram pasyati; 
tad itara itaram jighrati, tad itara itaram rasayate, tad itara 
itaram abhivadati, tad itara itaram srnoti, tad itara itaram 
vijdnati ; yatra tv asya sarvam ( itmaivdbhut , tat kcna kam pasyet , 
tat kena kam jighrct, tat kcna kam rasayct, tat kcna kam abhivadct, 
tat kena kam srnnvat, tat kcna kam manvita, tat kcna kam 
sprset , tat kcna kam vijdniydt; ycncdam sarvam vijdnati , tarn 
kcna vijdniydt. sa esa neti nety dtmd; agrhyah, na hi grhyate, 
asiryah na hi siryatc; asahgah , na hi sajyatc, asito, na vyathatc, 
na risyati. vijhdtdram arc kena vijdniydt , ity uktdnusdsandsi, 
viaitrcyi ; ctdvad are khalv amrtatvam , iti hoktvd , ydjhavalkyo 
vijahdra. 

15. 'For where there is duality as it were, there one sees 
the other, one smells the other, one tastes the other, one speaks 
to the other, one hears the other, one thinks of the other, 
one touches the other, one knows the other. But where every- 
thing has become just one's own self, by what and whom should 
one see, by what and whom should one smell, by what and 
whom should one taste, by what and to whom should one 
speak, by what and whom should one hear, by what and of 
whom should one think, by what and whom should one touch, 
by what and whom should one know? By what should one 
know him by whom all this is known? That self is (to be 
described as) not this, not this. He is incomprehensible for he 
cannot be comprehended. He is indestructible for He cannot be 
destroyed. He is unattached for He does not attach himself. 
He is unfettered, He does not suffer, He is not injured. Indeed, 
by what would one know r the knower? Thus you have the in- 
struction given to you, O Maitreyi. Such, verily, is life eternal.' 
Having said this, Yajnavalkya went away (into the forest). 

See III. 9. 26; IV. 2. 4; IV. 4. 22. 
vijahdra: went into the forest, pravrajitavdn. 

by what would one know the knower ? The suggestion is that the knower 
cannot be known in the usual way. He ran only be experienced. 

£ makes out that all the four chapters had the one end in view, 
knowledge of Brahman culminating in renunciation: brahma-vidyd 
sathnydsa-paryavasdnd f etdvdn upadesa , etad veddnusdsanam , esd 
parama-nislha, csa purusdrtha-karlavyatdnta iti. fi. 

This is the instruction, this is the teaching of the Vedas, this is 
the ultimate goal, this is the end of man's effort to achieve his 
highest good. 

Different views are expressed according to the B.S., about the 
relation of the individual and the universal Self. Asmarathya holds 



IV. 6. 3- Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 287 

that the unity of the two is emphasised to indicate that when the 
Universal Self is seen all else is seen. I. 4. 20. Audulomi thinks that 
the identity taught here refers to the state which the individual 
finally attains when he is released from all limitations. I. 4. 21. 
Ka£akrtsna holds that the identity is taught because the individual 
is the form in which the Universal exists. I. 4. 22. 


Sixth Brdhmana 

THli SUCCESSION OF TEACHERS AND PUPILS 

1. at ha vamsah. pautimdsyo gaupavanat , gaupavanah pauti- 
mdsydt, pautimdsyo gaupavanat, gaupavanah kausikdit , kausikah 
kaundinydt, kaundinyah sandilydt, sdndilyah kausikdc ca 
gautamac ca, gautamah — 

1. Now the line of tradition. Pautimasya (received the 
teaching) from Gaupavana, Gaupavana from Pautimasya, 
Pautimasya from Gaupavana, Gaupavana from Kausika, 
Kausika from Kaundinya, Kaundinya from Sandilya, Sandilya 
from Kausika and Gautama, Gautama — 

2. dgnivcsydt , dgnivcsyo gdirgyat , gdrgyo gdrgydl, gdrgyo 
gautamdt, gautamah saitavdt, saitavah p dir dsary dyandt , pdra- 
sarydyano gdrgydyandt , gdrgydyana udddlakdy audit, uddalakd - 
yano jdbdldyandt, jdbdldyano mddhyandindyandt , mddhyan- 
dindyana/j sau hardy audit, saukardyanah kdsdyandt , kdsayanah 
sdyakdvandt, sdyakdyanah kausikdyaneh , kausikdyanih — 

2. From Agnivesya, Agnivesya Irom Gargya, Gargya from 
Gargya, Gargya from Gautama, Gautama from Saitava, Saitava 
from Parasaryayana, Parasaryayana irom Gargyayana,Gargya- 
yana from Uddfilakayana, Udd^ilakayana from Jabalayana, 
J Tibfdayana from Madhyandinayana, Madhyandinayana from 
Saukarayana, Saukarayana from Kasayana, Kasayana from 
Sayakayana, Sayakayana from Kausikayani, Kausikayani — 

3. ghrtakausikdt , ghrtakausikah pdrdsarydyandt , pdrd- 
saryayanah pdrdsarydt , pdrdsaryo jdtukanjydt, jdtfikarnya 
dsurdyandc ca ydskdc ca, dsurdyanas traivanch , traivanir 
aupajandhanch , aupajandhanir asureji, dsurir bharadvdjdt , 
bhdradvdja atreydt, dtrcyo manteh, mantir gautamdt, gautamo 
gautamdt, gautamo vdtsydt, vdtsyah sandilydt, sdndilyah 
kaisorydt kdpyat , kaisoryah kdpyah kunulra-hdritat , hum dr a- 



288 The Principal Upanisads IV. 3 

hdrito gdlavat , gdlavo vidarbhT-kaundinydt , vidarbhi-kaundinyo 
vatsanapdto bdbhravdt, vatsanapad bdbhravah pathah saubharat, 
panthdh saubharo’ydsydd dngirasdt, aydsya dhgirasa dbhutes 
tvdstrat, dbhutis tvdstro visva-rupdt tvdstrat , visva-rupas tvdstro 
’svibhydm, asvinau dadhica dtJuuvandt, dadhyahh dtharvano 
9 tharvano daivdt , atharva daivo mrtyoh prddhvamsandt , mrtyuh 
pradhvamsanah pradhvamsandt, pradhvamsana ekarsch, ckarsir 
vipraatlcJj, vipracxttir vyastch , vyastih sandroh, sandruh sand - 
tandt, sandtauah sanagdt, sanagah paramesthinah , paramcsthi 
brahmanah , brahma svayambhu, brahmanc namah. 

3. from Ghrtakausika, Ghrtakausika from Parasaryayana, 
Parasaryayana from Parasarya, Parasarya from Jatukarnya, 
Jatukarnya from Asurayana and Yaska, Asurayana from 
Traivani, Traivani from Aupajandhani, Aupajandhani from 
Asuri, Asuri from Bharadvaja, Bharadvaja from Atreya, 
Atreya from Manti, Manti from Gautama, Gautama from 
Gautama, Gautama from Yatsya, Vatsya from handily a, 
Sandilya from Kaisorya Kapya, Kaisorya Kapya from Kumara- 
harita, Kumara-harita from Gfdava, Gfdava from Vidarbhl- 
kaundinya, Vidarbhl-kaundinya from Vatsanapat Biibhrava, 
Vatsanapat Babhrava from Patliin Saubhara, Pathin Saubhara 
from Ayasya Angirasa, Ayiisya Aiigirasa from Abhuti Tvastra, 
Abhuti Tvastra from Visva-rupa Tvastra, Visva-rupa Tvastra 
from the two Asvins, the two Asvins from Dadhyahh Atharvana, 
Dadhyahh Atharvana from Atharvan Daiva, Atharvan Daiva 
from Mrtyu Pradhvamsana, Pradhvamsana from Ekarsi, 
Ekarsi from Vipracitti, Vipracitti from Vyasti, Vyasti from 
Sanaru, Sanaru from Sanatana, Sanatana from Sanaga, Sanaga 
from Paramesthin, Paramesthin from Brahma; Brahma is 
the self-existent. Salutation to Brahma. 

the line of tradition: Udyotakara defines sampraddya as uninterrupted 
succession of pupils and teachers by winch scriptural knowledge 
i* conserved and transmitted, sampraddyo ndma sisyopddhydya- 
sambandhasya avicchcdena sdslra-prdplih. A living culture preserves 
the treasures of the past and creates those of the future. 



V. 2. i. Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 289 

CHAPTER V 
First Brahmana 

BRAHMAN THE INEXHAUSTIBLE - 

1. purnam adah , purnam idam , piirnat purnam udacyate 
purnasya purnam addya purnam evavasisyate. 

Aum kham brahma , kham puranam , vdyuram kham, iti ha 
smaha kauravydyani-putrah , vedo’yam brahmana viduh;vedainena 
yad veditavyam . 

1. That is full, this is full. From fullness fullness proceeds. If 
we take away the fullness of fullness, even fullness then remains. 
(The syllable) Aum is Brahman (who) is the ether, the primeval 
ether, the ether that blows. Thus, verily, the son of Kauravyayani 
used to say. This is the Veda which the knowers of Brahman 
know; through it one knows what is to be known. 

that is full: the reference is to the Absolute. 

this is full : the reference is to the manifested world presided over 
by the Personal Lord. 

While this world in infinite, it has its roots in the Absolute. The 
manifestation of this world does not take away from the fullness 
or integrity of the Absolute. 

veda\ the knowledge by which whatever is to be known is known, 
vijdndty annul yad veditavyam tasnuid vedah. S. 


Second Brahmana 

THE THRIVE PRINCIPAL VIRTUES 

• 

1. traydh prdjdpatydh prajdpatau pitari brahma-caryam usuh, 
devd manusyd asurdh , usitvd bralimacaryam deva ucuh ; bravitu 
no bhavdn iti ; tebhyo haitad aksaram uvdea; da iti y vyajiidsisfd 
iti; vyajhdsisma iti hocuh, ddmyata, iti na dttheti, aum iti 
hovdea , vyajndsistcti. 

1. The threefold offspring of Prajd-pati, gods, men and 
demons, lived with their father Prajd-pati as students of sacred 
knowledge. Having completed their studentship the gods said, 
‘Please tell (instruct) us, sir/ To them then, he uttered the 
syllable da (and asked) ‘Have you understood?’ They (said) 
‘We have understood, you said to us “ddmyata,” “control 
yourselves”.’ He said, ‘Yes, you have understood.’ 



290 The Principal Upanisads V. 2. 3. 

The gods are said to be naturally unruly and so are asked to 
practise self-control, addntd yuyam svabliavatah ato ddntd bhavateti. 
iisuh: usitavantah. R. 

aunt: yes, samyak. £, anujndm eva vibhajate. A, satyam. R. 

2. atha hainam manusyd ucuh: bravitu no bhavdn iti; tcbhyo 
haitad evdksaram uvdca; da iti ; vyajhdsistd iti , vyajndsisma 
iti hocuh, datta iti na dttheti ; a mn iti hovdca vyajndsisteti. 

2. Then the men said to him, ‘Please tell (instruct) us, sir/ 
To them he uttered the same syllable da (and asked) ‘Have 
you understood?' They said, ‘We have understood. You said 
to us “give”.' He said, ‘Yes, you have understood.' 

Men are naturally avaricious and so they should distribute their 
wealth to the best of their ability. 

svabhavato Inbdhd yuyam, ato yathdsaktyd samvibhajata. S. 

3. atha hainam asurd ucuh, bravitu no bhavdn iti ; tcbhyo 
haitad evdksaram uvdca; da iti , vyajhdsistd iti, vyajndsisma 
iti hocuh, dayadhvam iti na dttheti, aum iti hovdca vyajndsisteti. 
tad dad evaisd daivi vdg anuvadati stanayitnuh — da, da, da iti, 
damyata, datta, dayadhvam iti. tad etat tray am sikset, damam , 
danam, daydm iti. 

3. Then the demons said to him, ‘Please, tell (instruct) us, 
sir.' To them he uttered the same syllable da and asked, ‘Have 
you understood?' They said, ‘We have understood, you said to 
us, “ dayadhvam y “be compassionate.” He said, ‘Yes, you have 
understood.’ This very thing the heavenly voice of thunder 
repeats da, da, da, that is, control yourselves, give, be com- 
passionate. One should practise* thi^ same triad, self-control, 
giving and compassion. 

The demons are cruel, given to inflicting injury on others, they 
should have compassion and be kind to all: krurd yuyam himsddi- 
parah, ato dayadhvam prdnisu daydm kurutdi. S. 

It is suggested that there are no gods or demons other than men. 
If they are lacking in self-control while endowed with other good 
qualities, they are gods; if they are particularly greedy they are 
men; if they are cruel and given to inflicting injury on others, they 
are demons, Men themselves are distinguished into these three classes 
according to their lack of self-control and the possession of other 
defects or according to the tendencies of the three gunas. 
na devd asurd vd’ nye kccana vidyante manusyebhyah. manusydndm 
evdddntd ye ’nyair uttamair gunais sampanndh , tc devdh; loblia - 
pradhdnd manusydh, tathd himsapardh kriirdh asurdh. ta eva manusyd 
adantatvdidi-dosa-trayam apeksya devddi-sabda-bhdjo bhavanti, itardms 



V. 3- i. Brhad-dranyaka Upani$ad 291 

ca gundn sattva-rajas-tamdmsy apeksya ato manusyair eva hi siksitav - 
yam etat trayam iti. &. 

See B.G. XVI. 21. 

Cp. Y djhavalkya Smrti. 1. 4. 122. 

ahiriisd satyam dsteyam saucam indriya-nigrahah 
ddnatn damo dayd sdntih sarvesam. 

Gautama the Buddha is described as the embodiment of com- 
passion, karund, and non-injury, ahimsd. Matrceta in his Sata- 
pahcasatka says : 

kam nu prathamato vande tvdm maha-karundim uta 
yayaivam api dosajiias tvam samsare dhytas ciram. 

Which shall I first extol, you or the great compassion by which you 
are held so long in samsara, though knowing its faults so well ? 59. 
viruddhesu api vdtsalyam pravrttih patitesvapi 
raudresv api kypdlutvam kd ndmeyam tavdryatd. 

You have affection .even for the hostile, benevolence even to the 
fallen, tenderness even to the cruel, wonderful is your greatness. 105. 
akvostdro jitdh ksdntyd dyugdhdh svastyayanena ca, 
satycna capavaktdras trayd mditryd jighdmsavah. 

You overcame the revilers by forbearance, the malicious by blessing, 
the slanderers by truth, the wicked by kindness. 122. 

The three injunctions require us to go about doing good even 
though we find ourselves in a w r orld of evil. Self-control is necessary 
for we must not b*a elated by success or deterred by failure. Dayd 
or compassion is more than sympathy or intellectual and emotional 
feeling. It is love in action, fellowship in suffering. It is feeling as 
one’s own the circumstances and aspirations to self-perfection which 
we find in others. The practice of these viitues will preserve, promote 
and enhance the values of life. 


Third Brdhmatia 

BRAHMAN AS THE HEART 

1. c§a prajd-patir yad hrdayam, dad brahma , etat sarvam. tad 
dat try-aksaram; hr-da-yam iti. hr ity ekam aksaram; abhiharanty 
asmai svds cdnft ca, ya evarn veda; da ity ekam aksaram, da du- 
ty asm ai svds ccinye ca ya evam veda; yam, ity ekam aksaram; eti 
svargam lokam ya evani veda. 

1. This is Prajd-pati (the same as) this heart. It is Brahman . 
It is all. It has three syllables, hr, da, yam. Hr is one syllable. 
His own people and others bring (presents) to him who knows 
this. Da is one syllable. His ow i people and others give to 



292 The Principal Upanisads V. 5. i. 

him who knows this. Yam is one syllable. He who knows this 
■goes to the heavenly world. 

hrdayam: heart, that is the seat of intelligence, hydayasthd buddhir 
ucyate . S. 


Fourth Brahman a 

BRAHMAN AS THE TRUE OR THE REAL 

1. tad vai tat , ctad eva tad asa, satyam cva. sa yo hailan mahad 
yak$am prathamajam vcda; satyam brahmcti , jayatimdml lokdn. 
jita in nv asav asat, ya cvam dan mahad yaksam prathamajam 
vcda; satyam brahmcti. satyam hy cva brahma. 

1. This, verily, is that. This indeed was that, the true. He 
who knows that wonderful being, the first born as the Brahman , 
conquers these worlds, and conquered likewise may that (enemy) 
be and become non-existent he (for him) who knows that 
wonderful being, the first born as the true Brahman. 

satya: the true, the real, sat and tyat, the formed and the formless 
elements. 

jitah: conquered, vasikrtah. $. and R. 
asau: of the enemy, satnir itpdsakasya. R. 


Fifth Brdhmana 
THE REAL EXPLAINED 

1. dpa evedam agra dsuh, td dpah satyam asrjanta , satyam 
brahma , brahma prajdpatim, prajapatir dcvdn. tc dcvdh satyam 
evopasate , tadetat try-aksaram: sa-ti-yam iti. sa ity ekam aksaram ; 
ti ity ekam aksaram , yam iti ekam aksaram: prathama uttame 
aksare satyam , madhyato nrtam : tad etad anrtam ubhayatah 
satyena parigrhitam satyabhuyam cva bhavati. ndivam vidvdmsam 
amrtam hinasti. 

1. In the beginning this universe was just water. That 
water produced the true (or the real), Brahman is the true. 
Brahman (produced) Prajd-pati and Prajd-pati (produced) the 
gods. Those gods meditated on the real. That consists of three 
syllables, sa, ti, yam: sa is one syllable, ti is one syllable, and 



V. 5- 3- Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 293 

yam is one syllable. The first and the last syllables are the truth; 
in the middle is untruth. This untruth is enclosed on both sides 
by truth; it partakes of the nature of truth itself. Him who 
knows this, untruth does not injure. 

Water is the seed of the universe and in the beginning it is in 
an undifferentiated form: dpo bija-bhutd jagato vydkrtdtmand ’ vas - 
thitah. 

In commenting on Thales* choice of water as the first principle, 
Aristotle suggests that ‘he got the notion perhaps from seeing that 
the nutriment of all things is moist, and that heat itself is generated 
by the moist and kept alive by it . . . and that the seed of all creatures 
has a moist nature, and water is the origin of the nature of moist 
things.* See W. K. C. Guthrie: The Greeks and their Gods (1950), 
P- I 34- 

There is a play on the letter, sa and ya have nothing in common 
with mrtyu and anrta where, is t occurs in the syllable li. Untruth 
leads to death. 

2. tad yat tat satyam asau sa ddityah. ya esa ctasmin mandate 
puruso yas cdyam daksineksan purusah. tdv ctdv anyo’ nyasmin 
pratisthitau; rasmibhir eso'smin pratisthitah prdnair ayam 
amusmin, sa yadotkramisyan bhavati. suddham evaitan mandalam 
pasyati. nainam eti rasmayah pratydyanti. 

2. Now what is the true that is the yonder sun. The person 
who is there in that orb and the person who is here in the right 
eye, these two rest on each other. Through his rays that one 
rests in this one; through the vital breaths this one on that. 
When one is about to depart, he M'es that orb as clear. Those 
rays no more come to him. 

suddham: clear, rasmi-praiighdta-rahitai y. R. 

3. ya esa ctasmin mandate purusah , iasya bhur iti sirah; 
ekarii sirah , ekam ctad aksamm; blmva iti bdhu; dvau bdhu , dve 
etc aksare; svar iti pratisthd; dve pratliisthe dve ete aksare. 
tasyopanisad ahar iti ; hanti pdpmdnam jahdti ca,ya evam veda. 

3. Of the person in that orb, the syllable bhiih is the head; 
for the head is cine and this syllable is one. Bhuvah is the arms. 
There arc two arms and these are two syllables. Svah is the 
feet. There are two feet and these are two syllables. His secret 
name is day. He who knows this destroys evil and leaves it 
behind. 

pratisthd: feet, pdda. R. 

upanisat: secret name, rahasya-ndmu. R. 



294 The Principal Upanisads V. 7. I . 

4. yo’yam daksineksan purusah , tasya bhitr iti sirah , ekam 
sirah , aksaram; bhuva iti bah Ft ; rfwiM cfc 

aksare ; svar iti pratisthd; dvc pratisthe , cfc aksare. tasyo - 
panisad aham iti; hanti pdpmdnam jahdti ca ya cvam vcda. 

4. Of this person who is in the right eye, the syllable bhuh 
is the head. The head is one and the syllable is one. Bhuvah is 
the arms. There are two arms and these are two syllables. 
Svah is the feet. There are two feet and these are two syllables. 
His secret name is ‘I.’ He who knows this destroys evil and 
leaves it behind. 

In some cosmogonic hymns Satyam or Skambha is represented as 
turned upside down, his head being bhuh, his arms bhuvas and his 
feet svah. 


Sixth Brahman a 
THE PERSON 

1. manomayo' yam purusah , bliiih satyah tasniinn antar-hrdaye 
yathd vrlhir vd ydvo vd. sa esa sarvasycsdnah, sarvasyddhipatih , 
sarvam idant prasdsti yad iddnh him ca. 

1. This person who consists of mind is of the nature of light, 
is within the heart like a grain of rice or of barley. He is the 
ruler of all, the lord of all and governs all this whatever there is. 

of the nature of light: bhd era satyam, sad-bhdvah , svarupam yasya 
so 1 yam blulh satyah, bhdsvarah. £. 

By meditating on Brahman in the* form of mind, we attain identity 
with Him as such, for on<_ becomes what one meditates on: turn 
yathd y at hope! sate tad eva bhavati. Satapatha Brdhmana. X. V. 2. 20. 


Seventh Brdhmana 

BRAHMAN AS LIGHTNING 

1. vidynd brahma ity dhuh; viddndd vidyut, vidyaty enam 
pdpmanah, ya evam veda, vidynd brahmeti , vidynd hy eva brahma . 
1. Lightning is Brahman , they say. It is called lightning 



V. 9- i. Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 295 

because it scatters (darkness). He who knows it as such that 
lightning is Brahman , scatters evils (that are ranged against 
him), for lightning is, indeed, Brahman. 

scatters: destroys, avakhandayati, vindsayati. Lightning cuts through 
the darkness of clouds as the knowledge of Brahman cuts through 
the darkness of ignorance and evil. 


Eighth Brdhmana 

SPEECH SYMBOLISED AS A COW 

1. vacant dhenum updslta. tasyds catvdrah standh; svahd-karo 
vasat-kdiro hanta-kdrah svadhd- kdr ah; tasyai dvan stanau deva 
upajivanti, svdhd-kdram ca, vasat-kdram ca; hanta-kdram manu- 
sydh, svadhdi-kdram pitarah. tasydh prana rsabhah, mano vatsah. 

1. One should meditate on speech as a milch cow. She has 
four udders which are the sounds, svdhd, vasat , hanta and 
svadhd. The gods live on two of her udders, the sounds svdhd 
and vasat ; men on the sound hanta , and the fathers on the 
sound svadhd. The vital breath is her bull, and mind the calf. 


Ninth Brdhmana 
THE UNIVERSAL FIRE 

1. ay am agnir vaisvdnaro yo'yam antah purusc , ycncdam 
annum pacyate yad idam adyate; tasyaisa ghoso bhavati yam 
etat karndiv apidhdya srnoti , sa yadotkramisyan bhavati, nainam 
ghosam srnoti. # 

1. This fire which is here within a person is the Yaisvdnara 
(the universal fire) by means of which the food that is eaten is 
cooked (digested). It is the sound thereof that one hears by 
covering the ears thus. When one is about to depart (from this 
life) one does not hear this sound. 

thus: by closing with the fingers, ut.gullbhydm apidhdnam kyiva. §. 



296 The Principal Upanisads V. 11. 1. 

Tenth Brdhmana 

THE COURSE AFTER DEATH 

1. yadd vai puruso' smal lokdt praiti , sa vayiim dgacchati ; 
tasmai sa tatra vijihTte yathd ratha-cakrasya kham; tcna sa 
ilrdhva akramatc , sa dulityam dgacchati ; tasmai sa tatra vijihite 
yqthd lambarasya kham; tcna sa ilrdhva akramatc , sa candramasam 
dgacchati , tasmai sa tatra vijihite yathd dundublieh kham; tcna 
sa ilrdhva akramatc. sa lokam dgacchaty asokam a hi mam ; tasmin 
vasati sdsvatih samdh. 

1. Verily, when a person departs from this world, he goes 
to the air. It opens out there for him like the hole of a chariot 
wheel. Through that he goes upwards. He goes to the sun. 
It opens out there for him like the hole of a lambara. Through 
that he goes upwards. He reaches the moon. It opens out 
there for him like the hole of a drum. Through that he goes 
upwards. He goes to the world free from grief, free from snow. 
There he dwells eternal years. 

lambara: a kind of musical instrument, vdditra-visesa . $. 

asokam: free from giief, free from mental troubles, mdnasa duhkhena 

vivarjitam. S. 

ahimanr free from snow, free from physical sufferings, sanra-duh - 
kha-varjitam. 

eternal years: He lives there during the lifetime of Hiranya-garbha: 
anantdn samvatsardn . R. 


Eleventh Brdhmana 
THE SUPREME AUSTERITIES 

I. etad vai paramam tapo yad vydhitas tapyate; paramam 
haiva lokam jay ali, ya evam veda; etad vai paramam tapo yam 
pretam aranyam haranti; paramam haiva lokam jayati , ya evam 
veda etad vai paramam tapo yam pretam agndv abhyddadhati. 
paramam haiva lokam jayati, ya evam veda. 

1. Verily, this is the supreme austerity whicli a man laid up 
with illness suffers. He who knows this wins the supreme world. 
Verily, this is the supreme austerity when they carry a dead 
person into the forest. He who knows this wins the supreme 
world. Verily, this is the supreme austerity when they lay a 
dead person on the fire. He who knows this win's the supreme 
world. 



V. 13. I. Brhad-dranyaka Upani?ad 297 

laid up with illness: vydthitah, jvarddi- parigrhltas san. £. 

Suffering is to be endured. We do not condemn it, anindato 
’ visidatah . sa esa ca tena vijhdna-tapasd dagdha-kilbisah. S. 

Retirement to the forest from the village is also an austerity, 
grdmad aranya-gamanam paramam tapa iti hi prasiddham. S. 


Twelfth Brdhmana 

1. annum brahma ity cka dhuh, tan na tathd, puyati vd annam 
rte prdndt; prdno brahma ity cka ahull, tan na tathd , susyati 
vai prana rtenndt, etc ha tv eva devatc, ckadhdbhuyam bhiitva, 
paramatdm gacchatah tadd ha smdha pratrdah pitaram, kim 
svid evaivam vidusc sadhn kurydm, kim evdsmd asddhu kurydm 
iti. sa ha smdha pdnind: md pratrda, kas tv enayor ekadha 
bhuyarh bhiitva paramatdm gacchatiti. tasmd u haitad uvdea; 
vi, iti ; annam vai vi; anno himdni sarvani bhutdni vistdni; ram 
iti , prdno vai ram, prune himdni sarvani bhutdni ramante; 
sarvani ha vd asmin bhutdni visanii, sarvani bhutdni ramante, 
ya evarh veda. 

1. ‘ Brahman is food’ say some. This is not so, for, verily, 
food becomes putrid without life. ‘Life is Brahman 3 say some. 
This is not so, for life dries up without food. But these two 
deities when they become united attain their highest state. 
So Pratrda said to his father: ‘What good, indeed, can I do to 
one who knows this, or what evil, indeed, can I do to him? 1 
The father said to him with (a gesture of) his hand, ‘Oh, no, 
Pratrda, who attains the highest state (merely) by entering 
into unity with these two?’ Then he said to him this. ‘This is vi. 
Food is vi, for all these beings rest in food. This is ram. The 
vital breath is ram, for all these beings delight in life. Verily, 
indeed, all beings enter into him, all beings delight in him who 
knows this.’ 

The mutual dependence of life and matter, prana and anna, is 
brought out. 


Thirteenth Brdhmana 

MEDITATION ON LIFE-BREATH 

I. iiktham. prdno vd uktham, prdno hidam sarvani utthdpayati. 
uddhasmdd uktha-vid virus tisthati, ukthasya sdyujyam salokatdm 
jayati, ya evam veda. 



298 The Principal Upanisads V. 13. 4. 

1. The uktha. The life breath, verily, is the uktha for it is 
the life breath that raises up all this. From him there rises up 
a son who knows the uktha. He who. knows this wins union 
with and abode in the same world as the uktha. 

uktha: a hymn of praise, sastram. S. One should meditate on the 
life-breath as the uktha. 

For uktha as the principal part of the mahd-vrata sacrifice, see 
Aitareya Aranyaka II. 1. 2 and K.U. III. 3. 

No man without life ever rises: na hy aprdnah kascid uttisthati. $. 

2. yajuh. prdno vai yajuh , prune hhndni sarvdni bhutdni 
yujyantc; yujyante hdsmai sarvdni bhutdni sraisthydya. yajusah 
sdyujyam salokatdm jayati, ya evam veda. 

2. The Yajus : The life-breath, verily, is the yajus for in 
life-breath are all beings here united. United, indeed, are all 
beings for (securing) his eminence. He who knows this wins 
union with and abode in the same world as the Yajus. 

One should meditate on the life-breath as the yajus. It is the 
name of one of the Vedas, but here is used for the principle of union. 
No one without life has the strength to unite with another: na hy 
asati prune kenacit kasyacid yoga-sdmarthyam . 

• 

3. sdma: prano vai sdma, prune hhndni sarvdni bhutdni 
samyahci; samyanci hdsmai sarvdni bhutdni sraisthydya kalpantc . 
sdmnah sdyujyam salokatdm jayati, ya evam veda. 

3. The Sdnnan: The life-breath, verily, is the sdman for in 
life do all these beings meet. All beings here meet for securing 
his eminence. He who knows this wins union with and abode 
in the same world as the Sdman. 

kalpante: samarthyante. S. 

4. ksatram: prdno vai ksatram. prdno hi vai ksatram; trdyatc 
hamath prdnah ksanitoh. pra ksatram air am dpnoli. k§atrasya 
sdyujyam salokatdm jayati, ya evam veda. 

4. The Ksatra: The life-breath, verily, is the rule, for verily, 
life-breath is rule. The life-breath protects one fiom being hurt. 
He attains a rule that needs no protection. He who knows this 
wins union with and abode in the same world as the Ksatra. 

ksanitoh: Life protects the body from wounds. It has the property 
of self-repair, sastrddi-himsitdt punar mdmscndpurayati yasmdt. S. 
ksatram atram: V ksatramdtram, obtains identity with the ksatra 
or becomes the life-breath, prdno bhavati. S. 



V. 14. 3 - Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 299 

Fourteenth Brdhmana 
THE SACRED GAYATRl PRAYER 

1. bhumir antariksam dyauh ity astdv aksardni ; astaksaram 
ha vd ekam gdyatryai padam, etad u haivasya etat, sa yavad esu 
trisu lokesu, tdvaddha jayati, yo'syd etad evam padam veda. 

1. The earth, the sky and heaven (make) eight syllables. 
Of eight syllables, verily, is one foot (line) of the Gdyatri. This 
(one foot) of it is that. He who knows the foot of the Gdyatri 
to be such wins as far as the three worlds extend. 

The Gdyatri (or Sdvitrl) is a sacred verse of the R.V. It reads: — 
tat savitur varenyam , bhargo dcvasya dhlmahi, dhiyo yo nah praco- 
daydt: ‘ We meditate on the adorable glory of the radiant sun ; may 
he inspire our intelligence, 1 III. 57. 10. There is a metre called 
Gdyatri which has three feet of eight syllables each. The Gdyatri 
verse is in this metre. 

2. rco yajumsi sdmdni , ity astdv aksardni; astaksaram ha 
vd ekam gdyatrai padam . etad it haivasya ctat. sa ydvatiyam 
trayl vidyd, tdvad ha jayati. yo'syd etad evam padam veda. 

2. Rcah (verses) Yajumsi (sacrificial formulas) Sdmdni 
(chants) (make) eight syllables. Of eight syllables, verily, is one 
foot of the Gdyatri. This (one foot of it) is that (series). He who 
knows the foot of the Gdyatri to be such wins as far as this 
threefold knowledge extends. 

The three Vedas constitute the second foot of the Gdyatri. 

3. prdno'pdno vydinah , ity astdv aksardni; astaksaram ha vd 
ekam gdyatrai padam. etad u haivasya etat. sa yavad idam prdni , 
tditad ha jayati , yo'syd etad evam padam veda. athdsya etad eva 
turlvam darsatam padam parorajd ya esa tapati; yad vai catur- 
tham tat turlyam; darsatam padam iti f dadrsa iva hy esah; 
parorajd iti, sarvam u hy evaisa raja upari upari tapati. evam 
haiva sriyd , yasasd tapati, y o' syd etad evam padam veda. 

3. Prana (in-breath), apdna (out-breath), vydna (diffused 
breath) (make)* eight syllables. Of eight syllables, verily, is 
one foot of the Gdyatri. This (one foot of it) is that series. 
He who knows the foot of the Gdyatri to be such wins as far 
as his breathing extends. Of this (the Gdyatri) this, indeed, 
is the fourth, the visible foot, above the dark skies (the sun) 
who glows yonder. This fourth is the same as the turlya. It is 
called the visible foot because it 1 as come into sight as it were. 



300 The Principal Upanisads V. 14. 5. 

He is called above the dark skies, because he glows yonder far 
higher and higher than everything dark. He who knows that 
foot of it to be such, he glows with prosperity and fame. 

darsatam : visible, dadrsa ira, drsyata iva. 

4. saisii gay a try etasmims turlye dariate pade parorajasi 
Pratisthitd , tad vai tat satyc pratisthitam ; caksur vai satyam , 
caksur hi vai satyam; tasmad yad iddnim dvau vivadamdndv 
cydtdm ahatn adarsam , aham asrausam Hi. ya evarh bruydt ; aharn 
adarsam iti, tasma eva sraddadhyama. tad vai tat satyam bale 
pratisthitam; prdno vai balam; tat prime pratisthitam; tasmad 
dhuh : balam satydd oglya iti. cram vesd gdyatry adhydtmam. 
pratisthitd sd haisd gay d ms tatre; prdnd vai gay ah; tat prdndriis 
tatre; tad yad gay dims tatre , tasmad gdyatrl ndma. saydm cvdmurh 
sdvitrhn anvdha , esaiva sd. sa yasmd anvdha , tasya prandriis 
tray ate. 

4. That Gdyatn rests on that fourth, the visible foot, above 
the dark skies. That again rests on truth. Verily, truth is sight; 
for, verily, truth is sight. Therefore, if now, the two persons come 
disputing, one saying, ‘I saw,' and the other ‘I heard/ we should 
trust the one who says, T saw/ Verily, that truth rests on 
strength. Life-breath, verily, is strength. Truth rests on life- 
breath. Therefore they say that strength is more powerful than 
truth. Thus is that Gdyatn based with regard to the self. The 
Gdyatn protects the gay as ] the gay as are the life-breaths and 
it protects the life-breaths. Now because it protects the life- 
breath, therefore it is called the Gdyatn. That Savitrl verse 
which (the teacher) teaches, it is just this. And whomsoever he 
teaches, it protects his life-breaths. 

The three-footed Gdyatn consisting of the gross and the subtle 
worlds, rests with its three teet on the sun . yath a mmtdmiirtdtmakam 
jagat tri padd gdyatn ddity e pratisthitd. 
oglyah: ojiyah, more powerful, ojastaiam. 

gaydh: life-breaths, prdndh. or the organs such as that of speech 
which produce sound: gdyantlti gaydh vdg upalaksitdi caksur -d day ah. 
A. gaya-trdndt gdyatn. 

5. tdm haitdm eke sdvitrim anustubham anvdhuh: vdg anustup; 
etad vdcam anubruma iti. na tathd kurydt. gdyatrhn eva sdvitrim 
anubrnydt.yadiha vd apy evam-vid bahv iva pratigrhndti, na haiva - 
tad gdyatryd ekarh cana padam prati. 

5. Some teach (to the pupil) this Savitrl verse as an anustubh 



V. 14. 7 - Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 301 

metre (saying) that speech is anustubh and that we impart 
(teach) that speech to him. One should not do like that. One 
should teach the Sdvitrl which is the Gdyatri. Verily, if one 
who knows thus receive very much (as gifts) that is not at all* 
equal to a single foot of the Gdyatri . 

There is no such thing as too much for him for he is identified 
with the universe: na hi lasya sarvdtmano bahu-namdsti kirn cit. S. 

6. sa ya imams tvln lokdn purndn pratigrhnlydt, so’syd ctat 
prathamam padam dpnaydt; atha ydvatlyam trayi vidyd , yas 
tdvat pratigrhnlydt , so’syd dad dvitlyam padam dpnuyat; atha 
ydvad idam prdni, yas tdvat pratigrhnlydt, so’syd etat trtlyam 
padam dpnuyat, athdsyd dad eva turlyam darsatam padam , 
paroraja ya csa tapati, naiva kenacandpyam; knta u etavat 
pratigrhnlydt. 

6. If one receives these three worlds full (of wealth) he would 
accept the first foot of it (the Gdyatri). If he receives as much as 
in this threefold knowledge (of the Vedas) he would receive the 
second foot of it. If he receives as much as there is breathing 
here, he would receive the third foot of it. But that fourth, the 
visible foot, above the dark skies, who glows yonder is not 
attainable by anyone whatsoever. How could anyone receive 
such (a gift) ? 

The purport is that the Gay ait i should be meditated upon in its 
entire form, tasmdd gdyatiy evam-prakdi apd^ydy art hah. S. 

7. tasyd upasthdnam: gdyaiti, asy eka-padl dvi-padl tri-padl 
catus-pady a-pad asi, na hi padyasc. namas to turlydya darsatdya 
paddy a parorajasc; asdv ado md prdpad iti; yam dvisydt, asdv 
asmai kdimo md samrddhlti 1 hi; na • hetivdsmai sa kdmah sum - 
rddhyatc yasmd evatn upatisthatc; ahum adali prdpam iti vd. 

7. The salutation of it : O Gdyatri, you are one-footed, two- 
footed, three-footed, four-footed. You are footless for you do 
not go about. Salutation to you, the fourth, the visible foot, 
above the dark skies. May he not attain this (may the enemy 
never attain 1ms object). (Should the knower of the Gdyatri) 
bear hatred towards anyone (he should) either (use this verse) 
'may his wish not prosper/ Indeed that wish is not prospered 
for him in regard to whom one salutes thus or ‘may I attain 
that (cherished wish) of his/ 

upasthdna: salutation, npdya sthanam, namas- karanam. £, going near 



302 The Principal Upanisads V. 15. 1. 

and staying or saluting. The act of ^approaching the gods with a 
request. The request may be imprecatory against another or 
auspicious for oneself, dvi-vidham upasthdnam, dbhicdrikam, dbhyu- 
> dayikath ca . A. 

footless: in his own unconditioned form, atah param-parcna niru- 
pddhikena svcndtmana padasi . S. 

8. ctadd ha vai taj janako vaidelio budilam dsvatardsvim 
uvdca: van mi ho tad gdyatn-vid abrdthdh, atha katham hast i 
bhdto vahaslti. mukham hy asydh, samrdt, na viddm cakdra , iti 
hovaca; tasyd agnir cva mukham: yadi ha vd api bahu ivdgnau 
abhyddadhati, sarvam cva tat samdahati ; warn haivaivam-vid 
yady api bahv iva pdpam karate , sarvam cva tat savipsdya 
suddhah putofaro mrtah sambhavati . 

8. On this point, verily, Janaka (King) of Vidcho said to 
Budila Asvatarasvi: 'Ho, how is it that you who spoke of 
yourself as the knower of Gdyatrl, have come to be an elephant 
and are carrying?’ ‘Because, Your Majesty, I did not know its 
mouth,’ said he. Fire is, indeed, its mouth. Verily, indeed, 
even if they lay a large quantity of fuel on the fire it burns it 
all. Even so, (though) one who knows this commits very much 
evil, burns it all and becomes clean and pure, ageless and 
immortal. 

‘Why then being a fool like an elephant dost thou carry (the 
burden of sin of accepting gifts)?’ Madhva. 


Fifteenth Brdhmana 

PRAYER TO ADITYA BY A DYING PERSON 

1. hirannuiycna pdtrena satyasydpihitam mukham: 

tat ivam, piisan, apdvrnu , satya-dharmdya drstayc. 

1. The face of truth is covered with a golden disc. Unveil it, 
0 Pusan, so that I who love the truth may see it. 

See Maitri VI. 35. 

apihitam: hidden, for no one whose mind is not concentrated can 
see it, a-samdhita-cetasdm adysyatvdt. S. ‘Verily, thou art a god that 
hidest thyself.’ Isaiah. XLV. 15. 

mukham: face, essential nature; mukha-sadrsam mana ity arthah. 
Kuranarayana. 

pusan: the sun, the god of light, who is the protector of the world: 



V. 15. 3 - Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 303 

jagatah posandt pusdravih. dsrita-posana-svabhdva, whose nature is 
the protection of those who seek refuge in him. Vedanta Desika. 
apdvrnn: remove the cause of obstruction to the vision, darsana- 
pratibandha-kdiranam apanayet. S. Reality, Heraclitus observed, likes 
to hide. Fragment 123. Being remains essentially concealed and 
hidden. It is the primary mystery. We are said to behold the truth 
when the real stands naked before us. When we break down the 
surface of appearances, reality is uncovered. 

satya-dharmdya : to me who have been worshipping truth or who have 
been practising virtue as enjoined. S. to me whose principle is truth. 
The connection of truth with liberation is traditional in Indian 
thought. 

The many, if it is divorced from the one, becomes the obscuring 
veil of the one. We must get rid of the opposition of the one and 
the many, look upon the one as the manifold one which is itself the 
expression of the Absolute One. 

2. pilsann , char sc, yama, silrya, prdjd-patya, vyuha rasmln 
samuha-tejah 

yat tc rupcnh kalydnatamam , tat te pasydmi yo sdv asau 
pu rasas , so* ham asmi . 

2. O Pusan, the sole seer, O Controller, O Sun, offspring of 
Prajd-pati, spread forth your rays and gather up your radiant 
light that I may* behold you of loveliest form. Whosoever is 
that person (yonder), that also am I. 

ckarsih: One who travels alone, cka era rsati gaccliati ity eharsih. 
The sun moves alone, s fnya ekdkl carati. Taittinya Samhitd VII. 
T IcS. 1. 

yama: the controller, sarvasya samyamandd yamah. S. 
rupath kalydnatamam: of loveliest form. St. John of the Cross. 
‘The soul prays to see the Face of (iod, which is the essential com- 
munication of His Divinity to the soul, without any intervening 
medium, by a certain knowledge thereof in divinity.’ I)om Cuthbert 
Butler: Western Mysticism (1022), p. 72. 

so' ham asmi: refers to a form of worship in which the worshipper 
contemplates the immanent (iod as one with himself. He who 
dwells in the Sun is one with the light in one’s deepest nature. In 
these verses, tli£ seeker wishes to have God-realization, a direct 
perception of the Realit y. Take as a 'hart desireth the water-brooks, 
so longest my soul after thee, () (iod.’ Psalm XL 1 . 

3. vdyur anilam amrtam athedam bhasmdntam sari ram: 

aunt kvato smara , krtam smara, krato smara , krtam smara . 
3. May this life enter into the immortal breath; then may 
this body end in ashes. O Inteh.gence, remember, remember 



304 The Principal Upanisads V. 15. 4. 

what has been done. Remember, 0 Intelligence, what has been 
done. Remember. 

amrtam anilam : immortal breath. 

Now that I am dying, may my life (vdyu) abandoning its bodily 
adjunct enter the immortal breath. B.U. III. z. 13. R.V. X. 16. 3. 
Satapatha Brdhmana X. 3. 3. 8 . Aitareya Brdhmana II. 6. According 
to his physician Eustochius, the last words of Plotinus which he 
heard were: ‘I was waiting for you, before the divine principle in 
me departs to unite itself with the divine in the universe/ 
krato: 0 Intelligence the Intelligence has purposes and plans: 
samkalpdtmaku : Cp. 4 Now verily, a person consists of purpose/ 
kratu-maya. C.U. III. 14. 1. At the hour of death, we have to remem- 
ber our past and also meditate on the Supreme. 
krtam: what has been done; may mean the perfected. ‘Remember 
perfection/ 

kratu: is also sacrifice. The Supreme is the lord of sacrifice. 

By meditating on the Supreme who is the lord of sacrifice, by 
surrendering to Him, we pray for the revelation of His Supreme 
presence: kraturupimnii hhagavantam jndna-yajna-gocaram abliimukhl 
kurvann tad-anugraliam ydeate: Vedanta Desika. 

4. agne naya supathii, rdye a$mdn\ visvdni, deva, vayundni 
vidvdn ; 

yuyodhy asmaj jitliardnam cno: bhuyistluim to nama-uktirh 
vidhona. 

4. O Agni (Fire), lead us, along the auspicious path to 
prosperity, O God, who knowest all our deeds. Take away from 
us deceitful sin. We shall offer many prayers unto thee. 

See R.V. I. 189. 1. 

who knowest all our deeds: It is an expression of humility born of 
the sense that we are always in God's presence, that all our thoughts 
and actions are open to Ilis sight. lie is at all times present with us. 
take away from us deceitful sin: It is an imploring or supplication 
concerning sins. God is a searcher not of words but of heaits. 



VI. i. 4. 


Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 


305 


CHAPTER VI 
First Brdhmana 

THE SIX BODILY FUNCTIONS AND THE IMPORTANCE 
OF LIFE-BREATH 

1. yo ha vai jyesfham ca srestham ca vcda, jyesthas ca sresthas 
ca svdndm bhavati , prdino vai jyesthas ca , sresthas ca , jyesthas ca 
sresthas ca svdndm bhavati; api ca yesdm bubhiisati, ya evam veda. 

1. Verily, he who knows the oldest and the greatest becomes 
the oldest and the greatest of his own people. Life-breath is, 
indeed, the oldest and the greatest. He who knows this becomes 
the oldest and the greatest of his own people as well as of those 
of whom he wishes so to become. 

See C.U. V. 1; K.U. III. 3; Prasna II. 3. 

Oldest and greatest are the attributes of priority in age and 
excellence. The oldest is not necessarily the greatest. The vital force 
is, however, the fust in time as well as in importance. 

2. yo ha vai vasisthdm veda , vasistliah svdndm bhavati. vdg 
vai vasisthd. vasisthah svdndm bhavati. api ca yesdm bubhiisati ya 
evam veda. 

2. Verily, he who knows the most excellent becomes the 
most excellent of his own people. Speech is, indeed, the most 
excellent. He who knows this becomes the most excellent of his 
own people as well as of those of whom he wishes so to become. 

vasisflia: literally, that which helps one to dwell or covers one 
splendidly. $. atisaycna vasumattvam vasisthatvam. R. 

» 

3. yo ha vai pratisthdrii veda, pratitisthati same, pratitisthati 
durge; caksar vai piatisthd; caksusd hi same ca durge ca prati- 
tisthati. pratitisthati same, pratitisthati durge , ya evam veda. 

3. Verily, he who knows the firm basis has a firm basis on 
even ground, has a firm basis on uneven ground. The eye, 
indeed, is the fijm basis for with the eye one has a firm basis 
on even and on uneven ground. He who knows this has a firm 
basis on even ground, has a firm basis on uneven ground. 

4. yo ha vai sampadam veda, sam hdsmai padyate,yam kdmam 
kdmayate; irotram vai sam pat; srotre htme sarve veda abhisam- 
panndh. sam hdsmai padyate, yam kdmam kdmayate, ya evam 
veda. 



306 The Principal Upanisads VI. i. 8. 

4. Verily, he who knows prosperity, for him, indeed is 
attained whatever desire he desires. The ear, indeed, is pros- 
perity for in the ear are all these Vedas attained. For him who 
knows this, whatever desire he desires is attained. 

Only he who has the organ of hearing can study the Vedas. 

5. yo ha vd dyatanam vcda, dyatanam svandrii bhavati, 
dyatanam jandndm. mano vd dyatanam , dyatanam svdndm 
bhavati , dyatanam jandndm , ya cram vcda. 

5. Verily, he who knows the abode becomes the abode of 
his own people as well as of (other) people. The mind, indeed, 
is the abode. He who knows. this becomes the abode of his own 
people as well as of (other) people. 

6. yo ha vai prajdtim vcda , prajdyatc ha prajayd pasubhih. 
rcto vai prajdtih, prajdyatc ha prajayd pasubhih, ya ovarii vcda. 

6. Verily, he who knows procreation procreates himself 
with offspring and cattle. Semen, verily, is procreation. He who 
knows this, procreates himself with progeny and cattle. 

By semen is meant the organ of generation; rctasd prajanancn- 
driyam upalaksyatc . S. 

7. tc heme prdndh, ahatii sreyase vivadamdmih brahma jagmuh ; 
tadd hocuh; ko no vasistha iti. tadd hovdea , yasmin va ulkrdnta 
idam sariram pdpiyo manyatc , sa vo vasistha iti. 

7. These vital breaths, disputing among themselves about 
their self-superiority went to Brahma and said, ‘Which of us 
is the most excellent?’ He then said, that one of you is the most 
excellent after whose departure this body is thought to be 
worse off. 

vasistha: V, srestha. 

8 . vag ghoccakrdma: sa samvatsaram prosy a, dgatya , uvdea. 

katham asakata mad rtejivitum iti; tc hocuh; yathd kaldh avadanto 
vacd, prdnantah pranena , pasyantas caksusa , srnvantah srotrena , 
vidvdmso manasa, prajdyamdnd rctasd , evam ajlvismeti. pravivesa 
ha vak . * 

8. (The organ of) speech departed and having remained 
absent for a year came back and said, ‘How have you been 
able to live without me?' They said, ‘As the dumb, not speaking 
with speech but breathing with the breath, seeing with the eye, 
hearing with the ear, knowing with the mind, procreating with 
the semen. Thus have we lived.’ Then speech entered in. 



VI. i. 12. Brh ad-dr any aka Upanisad 307 

9. caksur hoccakrama. tat samvatsaram prosya , dgatya, uvdca 
katham asakata mad rte jivitum iti. te hocuh yathdndhdh , apasyan - 
ta^caksusd, prdnantah prdncna, vadanto vdca, srnvantah irotrena , 
vidvamso manasd , prajayamand retasci , ajivismeti. pravi- 

vesa ha caksuh. 

9. The eye departed and having remained absent for a year 
came back and said, ‘How have you been able to live without 
me? 1 They said: ‘As the blind not seeing with the eye, but 
breathing with the breath, speaking with the speech, hearing 
with the ear, knowing with the mind, procreating with the 
semen. Thus have we lived.’ Then the eye entered in. 

10. srotram hoccakrama . tat samvatsaram prosya , dgatya, 
uvdca, katham asakata 'mad rte jivitum iti. te hocuh; yathd badhirah 
asrnvantah srotrena, prdnantah prdnena, vadanto vdca, pasyantas 
caksusd, vidvamso manasd, prajayamand retasa, evam ajivismeti. 
pravivesa ha srotram. 

10. The ear departed and having remained absent for a year 
came back and said, ‘How have you been able to live without 
me?’ They said, ‘As the deaf not hearing with the ear, but 
breathing with the breath, speaking with the speech, seeing 
with the eye, knowing with the mind, procreating with semen. 
Thus have we lived.’ Then the ear entered in. 

11. mono hoccakrama. tat samvatsaram prosya , dgatya, uvdca, 
katham asakata mad rte jivitum iti. tc hocuh. yathd mugdhdh 
avidvdmso manasd, prdnantah prdncna, vadanto vdca, pasyantah 
caksusd, srnvantah srotrena, prajdyamdind retasa, evam ajivismeti. 
pravivesa ha manah. 

11. The mind departed and having remained absent for a 
year came back and said: ‘How hdve you been able to live 
without me?’ They said, ‘A^ the stupid not knowing with the 
mind but breathing with the breath, speaking with the speech, 
seeing with the eye, hearing with the ear, procreating with the 
semen. Thus have we lived. Then the mind entered in. 

12. reto hocccskrdma. tat samvatsaram prosya, dgatya, uvdca: 
katham asakata mad rte jivitum iti. te hocuh, yathd klibdh, 
aprajdyamdnd retasa , prdnantah prdnena, vadanto vdca, pasya- 
ntas caksusd , srnvantah srotrena, tfidvdmso manasd, evam 
ajivismeti pravivesa ha retail. 

1 2. Then semen (the organ of generation) departed and 
having remained absent for a yea ' came back and said: ‘How 



308 The Principal Upanisads VI. i. 14. 

have you been able to live without me?' They said, 'As the 
impotent not procreating with semen, but breathing with the 
breath, speaking with the speech, seeing with the eye, heating 
with the ear, knowing with the mind. Thus have we lived/ 
Then the semen entered in. 

13. atha ha prana utkramisyan , yathd mahd-su-hayah saindha - 
vah padvlsa-sankhun samvrhet, evarii haiveman prdndn sarhva - 
varha. te hociih: md bhagavah utkramlh, na vai saksydmas tvad rte 
jivitum iti, tasyo me balihi kurutcti, tatheti. 

13. Then as the life breath was about to depart, even as a 
large fine horse of the Sindhu land might pull up the pegs to 
which his feet are tied, even so did it pull up those vital breaths 
together. They said: 'Venerable Sir, do not go out, verily, we 
shall not be able to live without you.’ 'If I am such make me 
an offering/ 'So be it/ 

saindhavah: sindhn-desa-prabhavah. R. 

to which his feet are tied: pada-bandhana-sahkhiin. R. 

14. sd ha vdg avdca: yad vd ahum vasisthdsmi , tvam tad 
vasistho' siti. yad vd aham pratisthdsmi , tvarii tat pratistho ’si ti 
caksith. yad vd aham sampad asmi, tvam tat sampad asi, iti 
srotram. yad vd aham dyatanam asmi, tvam tad dyatanam asi , 
iti manah; yad vd aham prajatir asmi, tvam tat prajdtir asi, iti 
retah . tasyo me kim annam , kirn vdsa iti . yad idahi kith ca, d 
ivabhyah, d krimibhyah, d kita-patahgcbhyah, tat te annam; dpo 
vdsa iti. na ha vd asydn annam jagdham bhavati, nanannam 
pratigrhitam , ya evath etad anasy annam veda. tad vidvdmsah 
srotriyd asisyanta dcdmanti , asitvdcdmanti, ctam eva tad anam 
anagnam kurvanto many ante. 

14. Speech said, 'Verily, that in which I am most excellent 
in that are you the most excellent/ 'Verily that in which I am 
a firm basis in that are you a firm basis/ said the eye. 'Verily, 
that in which I am prosperity; in that are you prosperity/ said 
the ear. ‘Verily, that in which I am an abode, in that are you 
an abode/ said the mind. ‘Verily, that in which I am pro- 
creation, in that are you procreation/ said the semen. ‘If such 
I am, what is my food, what my dwelling?' ‘Whatever there is 
here, even unto dogs, worms, insects and birds, that is your 
food; water is your dwelling. He who knows that as the food 
of breath, by him nothing is eaten that is not food, nothing is 
received that is not food/ Therefore wise men who are versed 



VI. 2. 2. . Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 309 

in the Vedas when they are about to eat, take a sip (of water) ; 
after they have eaten they take a sip. So indeed, they think 
they make that breath not naked (they remove its nakedness). 

my excellence is yours: mama vasisthatvam tvad-adhlnam. 

even unto dogs: whatever is food for the dogs, etc., is food for you. 

yat kirn oil prdnibhir adyamdnam annum , tat sarvam tavdnnam. S. 


Second Brdhmana 
LIFE AFTER DEATH 

1. svetaketiir ha vd druneyah pahcdldndm parisadam djagdma. 
sa djagdma jaivalim pravdhanam paricdrayamdriam . tam 
udlksya, abhyuvdula, kitmdira iti. sa, bhoh , iti pratisusrdva 
anusisto nv asi pilreti, aum iti hovdea. 

1. Verily, Svetaketu Aruneya went up to an assembly of 
the Pancfdas. He went up to Pravahana Jaivali who was 
having his servants wait on him. Seeing him, he addressed him, 
‘Young man/ He answered, ‘Sir/ Then (the King said) ‘Have 
you been taught by your father ?' ‘Yes/ he said. 

See (\U. V. 3. 10. 

2. vettha yathcmdih prajdh prayatyo vipratipadyante, iti. na 
iti hovdea. vettho yathemam lokam piinar dpadyante , iti. na iti 
haivovdea. vettho yathdsau loka evam bahubhili punah punah 
prayadbhir na sainpuryatc iti. na iti haivovdea. vettho yatithydm 
dhutyduh hutdydm dpalt pnntsa-vdeo bhutva samuttlidya vddanti , 
iti. na iti haivovdea. vettho deva-ydnasya vd pathah pratipadam 
pitr-ydnasya vd, yat krtvd deva-ydnam vd panthdnam pratipa- 
dyantc pitr-ydnam vd. api hi na rscr vacah srutam. 

dve srti asrnavam pitrndm aliam devdndm uta martydndm; 
tdbhydm idam visvam ejat sameti yad antard pitaram mdta- 
ram ca. 

iti . ndham ata ekam eana veda , iti hovdea. 

2. ‘Do you know how people here on departing (from this 
life) separate in dilferent directions?' ‘No/ said he. ‘Do you know 
how they come back again into this world?' ‘No/ said he. ‘Do 
you know why the yonder world is not filled up with the many 
who, again and again, go there?' ‘No/ said he. ‘Do you know in 
which oblation that is offered ‘he water becomes the voice 



310 The Principal Upanisads VI. 2. 4. 

of a person, rises up and speaks?’ ‘No,’ said lie. ‘Do you know the 
means of access to the path leading to the gods or of the one 
leading to the fathers? i.e. by doing what the people go to the 
path of the gods or the path of the fathers ? For we have heard 
even the saying of the seer: I have heard of two paths for men, 
the one that leads to fathers and the one that leads to the gods. 
By these two all that lives moves on, whatever there is between 
father (heaven) and mother (earth).’ ‘Not a single one of them 
do I know,' said he. 

srtl: gat I. 

visvam : all, sa mast a m. S. 

This (earth) is the mother and that (heaven) is the father iyatii 
vai nuitd asau pita : Satapatha Br alumina XIII. 2. 9. 7; Taittinya 
Brahmana III. 8. 9. 1. Heaven and earth arc the two halves of the 
shell of the universe, dydvd-prthivydv anda-kapdlc. S. 

3. athainam vasatyopamantraydm cakre. anddrtya vasatim 
kumdrah pradudrdva. sa djagdma pita rani, turn hovdea. iti 
vdva kila no bhavdin purdnusistdn avocad iti; katliam sunicdha, 
iti. pahea md prasndn rdjanya-bandhur aprdksil; tato naikarn 
cana vedeti: katame ta iti. ima iti ha pratTkdny uddjahdra. 

3. Then he (the King) gave him an invitation to stay. 
Disregarding the invitation to stay the young man ran off. He 
went to his father. To him he said, ‘Verily, you have, before, 
spoken of me as well instructed.’ ‘What then, wise one?' 
(said the father). ‘Five questions, that fellow' of the princely 
class asked me. Not a single one of them do I know.' ‘What 
are these (questions) ?’ ‘These,’ and he repeated the topics. 

4. sa hovdea: tatlul nas tram, tdita, jdinithd , yathd yad ahum 
kim ca veda sarvam ahum. tat tubhyam avoccim. prchi tu tatra 
pratitya , brahmaearyam vatsydva iti. bhavdin ova gaechalu iti. 
sa djagdma gautamo yatra pravdhanasya jaivalcr dsa. tasmd 
dsanam dhrtya ndakam dhdiraydm cakdra; atha hdismd arghyam 
cakara; tam hovdea, varum bhagavate gautamdya dadma iti. 

4. He (the father) said: ‘My child, you should know me as 
such, that whatsoever I myself know, all that I t have told you. 
But come, let us go there and live as students of sacred know- 
ledge/ ‘You may go, sir,' said the son. Then Gautama went 
forth to where (the place) Pravahana Jaivali was. (The King) 
brought him a seat and had water brought for him. He gave 
him a respectful welcome. Then he said to him. ‘A boon we 
offer to the revered Gautama/ 



VI. 2. 8. Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 311 

5. sa hovdca : pratijhato ma esa varah; yam tu kumarasyante 
vdcam abhdsathdh, tarn me bruhiti. 

5. Then he said: ‘You have promised me this boon. Please 
tell me the speech you uttered in the presence of the young man/ 

6. sa hovdva: daivesu vai, gautama, tad varesu; manusanam 
bruhiti. 

6. He (the King) said, ‘Verily, Gautama, that is among 
divine boons. Please state some human boon/ 

7. sa hovdca: vijhdyatc ha asti hiranyasydpattam, go-asvdndm 
ddsindim pruvdrdndm paridhdnasya ; ma no bhavdn bahor anan- 
tasydparyantasydbhyavaddnyo bhild iti. savai, gautama, tirthcncc- 
chdsd iti. upaimy aham bhavantam. iti vdcd ha smaiva piirva 
upayanti. sa hopdyana-klrtyovasa. 

7. Then he said: ‘It is well known that I have abundance 
of gold, of cows and horses, maid servants, retinue and apparel. 
Be not ungenerous towards me, sir, in regard to that which is 
the abundant, the infinite, the unlimited/ ‘Then, verily, O 
Gautama, you should seek it in the usual form/ ‘I come to 
you, sir, as a pupil/ With this declaration, verily, indeed, the 
ancients approached as pupils. So with the announcement of 
coming as a pupil lie remained. 

pravdrdndm: retinue, parivardndm. 

tlrthena: in the usual prescribed form, ny Hyena sHstra-vihitena. 

Tirtha is a place of pilgrimage generally on the bank of a sacred 
stream or near a holy spring. It is derived from the root, ‘to cross 
over/ Those who cross over the stream wash their sins and become 
purified. 

According to the tradition, seekers belonging to higher castes have 
become pupils to teachers of a lower caste, by living with them. 
It is not necessary for them to touch the feet of the teacher or serve 
them. A simple declaration will do. 

8. sa hovdca: tat lid nas tram, gautama, mdparddhds tava ca 
pitdmahdh yathd, iyam vidyctah purvam na kasmims catia 
brdhmana uvdsa;ddm tv aham tubhyam vaksydmi. ko hi tvaivam 
bruvantam arhati pratydkhydtum iti. 

8. Then he (the King) said: ‘Please do not be offended with 
us even as your paternal grandfathers did not (with ours). 
This knowledge has never hitherto dwelt with any Brfihmana 
whatsoever. But I shall teach it to you, for who can refuse 
you when you speak like this/ 

l 



312 The Principal Upanisads VI. 2. 12. 

9. asan vai loko agnih , gautama. tasydditya eva samit , rasmayo 
dhilmah , diso hgdrah, avantaradiio visphulihgdh; 

tasminn etasminn agnau devdh sraddhdm juhvati; tasya dhutyai 
somo raja sambhavaii. 

9. ‘Yonder world, Gautama, is (sacrificial) fire. The sun itself 
is its fuel, the rays its smoke ; the day the flame, the quarters 
the coals, the intermediate quarters the sparks. In this fire the 
gods offer faith. Out of that offering King Soma arises. 

yonder world: heaven, dyu-loka. 

the fuel: because of kindling, samindhandt. S. Heaven is illumined 
by the sun. 

king: of the manes and brfihmanas : pitfndm brdhmandndm ca. S. 

jo. parjanyo vd agnih gautama. tasya samvatsara eva samit , 
abhrdni dhumaJi , vidyud arcih , asanir ahgdrdh , hrddunayo 
visphulihgdh , tasminn etasminn agnail devdh so mam rdjdnam 
julivati; tasya dhutyai vrstih sambhavati. 

, 10. ‘Parjanya (the god of rain), Gautama, is fire. The year 
itself is its fuel, the clouds its smoke, the lightning the flame, 
the thunder-bolt the coals, the thundering the sparks. In this 
|fire the gods offer the king Soma. Out of that offering rain 
dieses. 

p^arjanya: rain god vrsti-pravartako derail. R. 

s the clouds its smoke: A quotes Kalidasa’s Meghaduta. asti khalv 
abhrdndm dhuma-prabJiaratve gdthd, 
dhuma-jyotis-sahla-manitdm saniupatah kva meghah. 

11. ay am vai loko'gmh , gautama. tasya prthivy eva samit , 
agnir dhilmah, rdtnr avail, candramd ahgdrdh, naksatrdni 
visphulihgdh ; tasminn etasminn agnau devd vrstim juhvati; 
tasya dhutyd annum sambhavati. 

11. ‘This world, verily, Gautama, is fire. The earth itself is 
its fuel, fire the smoke, night the flame, the moon the coals, 
the stars the sparks. In this fire the gods offer rain. Out of that 
offering food arises. 

this world: the abode where all creatures are bona, experience the 
results of their past work, which consists of action, its factors and its 
results, prdni - janmopabhogdsrayah k r lyd-k a raha-phala-v is is tah. S. 

12. pumso vd agnih, gautama. tasya vydttam eva samit, prdno 
dhilmah , vdg arcih, caksur ahgdrah , sfotram visphulihgdh , 
tasminn etasminn agnau devd annum juhvati , tasya dhutyai 
retah sambhavati. 



VI. 2. 15. Brhad-dranyaka Upani$ad 313 

12. The person (man) verily, Gautama, is fire. The open 
mouth itself is its fuel, vital breath the smokes, speech the 
flame, the eye the cqals, the ear the sparks. In-this fire the gods 
offer food. Out of that offering semen arises. 

open month: vivytam mukham. S. 

13. yosa va agnih, gautama. tasyd upastha eva samit, lomdni 
dhumah , yonir arcih, yad antah karoti tehgdrdh , abhinandd 
visphulihgah; tasminn etasminn agnau devd reto juhvati , tasyd 
ahutyai purusah sambhavati. sa jivati ydvaj jivati . atha yada 
mriyate. 

13. The woman, verily, Gautama, is fire. The sexual organ 
itself is its fuel; the hairs the smoke, the vulva the flame, 
when one inserts, the coals; the pleasurable feelings the sparks; 
In this fire the gods offer semen. Out of this offering a person 
arises. He lives as long as he lives. Then when he dies, 

Sexual intercourse is treated as a kind of soma sacrifice, where 
the household fire is identified with the wife. The sacrificial fire is 
the divine womb into which one pours (sihcati) himself and from which 
a solar rebirth ensues. 

inserts: antah-karanam, maithuna-vydpdrah. S. 

The question about the number of olferings before water rises 
up possessed of a human voice and speaks is answered. 

14. athainam agnaye haranti. tasydgnir evagnir bhavati, samit 
samit , dhumo dhumah, arcir arcih, ahgard angarah, visphulihgd 
visphulihgah. tasminn etasminn agnau devdh purusam juhvati; 
tasyd ahutyai puruso bhdsvara-varnah sambhavati. 

14. ‘They carry him to (be offered in) fire. His fire itself 
becomes the fire, fuel the fuel, smoke the smoke, flame the 
flame, coals the coals, sparks the sparks. In this fire the gods 
offer a person. Out of this offering the person, having the colour 
of light, arises. 

bhdsvara-vaftiah: having the colour of light, radiant, exceedingly 
bright, having been purified by the rites pei formed from conception 
to cremation: atisaya-dlptimdn nisekddibliir antydhuty antyaih 
karmabhis samskrtatvdt. S. 

15 . tc ya evam etad viduh, ye edmi ay any e iraddhdhi satyam 
updsate, tc’rcir abhisambhavanii, arciso'hah, ahna apuryamd- 
na-paksam, dpuryamana-paksdd ydn san mdsdn udahh dditya eti, 
mdsebhyo dcva-lokam , deva-lokdd ddityam , dditydd vaidyutam; 
tan vaidyutdn puruso mdnasa ety brahma-lokan gamayati, te 



314 The Principal Upanisads VI. 2. 16. 

tesu brahma-lokesu pardh pardvato vasanti. tcsdm na punar 
dvrttih. 

15. Those who know this as such and those too who meditate 
with faith in the forest on the truth, pass into the light, from 
the light into the day, from the day into the half-month of 
the waxing moon, from the half-month of the waxing moon 
into the six months during which the sun travels northward, 
from these months into the world of the gods, from the world 
of the gods into the sun, from the sun into the lightning (lire). 
Then a person consisting (born) of mind goes to those regions 
of lightning and leads them to the worlds of Brahma. In those 
worlds of Brahma they live for long periods. Of these there is 
no return. 

who with faith meditate on the truth: sraddhd-yuktds santah. £. 

mdnasah: consisting (born) of mind. A person living in the world 

of Brahma sent forth, created by Brahma, by the mind, brahma- 

loka-vdsi puruso brahmand manasd srstah. 

pardh: exalted, n irati say ana n d a isva rya-sdl in ah . R. 

pardvato: V pardvanto. R. 

16. atha ye yajnena ddnena tapasd lokdh jayanti te dhumam 
abhisambhavanti, dhumdid rdtrim , rdtrcr apafisiyamdina-paksam, 
apaksiyamdna-paksdd ydn san mdisdn daksindditya eti, mdisebhyah 
pitr-lokam, pitr-lokdc candram, tccandram prdpydnnam bhavanti; 
turns tatra dcvd yathd somam rdjdnam dpydyasva , apaksiyasveti, 
evam endms tatra bhaksayanti; tesdm yadd tat paryavaiti, 
athcmam evakdsam abhimspadyante , dkdsdd vdyum y vdyor 
vrstim , vrsteh prthivlm; te prthivim prdpydnnam bhavanti; te 
punah purusdgnau huyante , tato yosdgnau jdyante. lokdn pratyu- 
tthdyinas ta evam evdnuparivartantc. atha ya etau panthdnau 
na viduh , te kitdh f patahgdh, yad idayh dandasukam. 

16. ‘But those who by sacrificial offerings, charity and 
austerity conquer the worlds, they pass into the smoke (of 
the cremation fire), from the smoke into the night, from the 
night into the half-month of the waning moon, from the half- 
month of the waning moon into the six months during which 
the sun travels southward, from these months into the world 
of the fathers, from the world of the fathers into the moon. 
Reaching the moon they become food. There the gods, as they 
say to king Soma , increase, decrease, even so feed upon them 
there. When that passes away from them, they pass forth into 
this space, from space into air, from air into rain, from rain 



VI. 3* i. Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 315 

into the earth. Reaching the earth they become food. Again, 
they are offered in the fire of man. Thence they are born in 
the fire of woman with a view to going to other worlds. Thus 
do they rotate. But those who do not know these two ways, 
become insects, moths and whatever there is here that bites.’ 

This Brahmana, C.U. III. 10; K.U. I give different versions of 
the two ways after death, but they all agree that there is repeated 
return to rebirth in forms determined by the deeds of the past. 
This process will continue until saving knowledge is attained, which 
frees the soul from the necessity of rebirth. 


Third Brahmana 

THE MEANS FOR THE ATTAINMENT OF A GREAT 

WISH 

1. sa yah kdmayeta: mahat prdpnuyam Hi , ndagayana 
apuryamdna-paksasya punydhc dvddasaham upasad-vrati bhiltva, 
audumbarc kamse camasc vdi sarvausadham phaldnlti sambhrtya, 
parisamuhya, paritipya , agnim upasamddhdya , paristirya , divrtd - 
jyant samskrtya, pumsd naksatrena , mantham samntya, juhoti. 
ydvanto devds tvayi , jdta-vedah, 
tiryaheo ghnanti purusasya kdman , 
tcbhyo ham bhdga-dheyam juhomi: 
tc via trptah sarvaih kamais tarpayantu: svdhd 
yd tirascl nipudyatc 
aham vidharamti 
tdm tvd ghrtasya dhdrayd 
yajc samrddhanhn aham: svdhd 

1. Whoever may wish, 'I would attain greatness in the 
northern course of the sun or on an auspicious day of the half- 
month of the waxing moon, having performed one upasad 
ceremony for twelve days, having collected in a dish made 
of the wood of the sacred fig tree or in a cup, all herbs and their 
fruits, having swept around, having smeared around, having 
built up a fire, having strewn it around, having purified the 
melted butter in the prescribed manner, having compounded 
the offering on a day presided over by a male star, makes an 
offering, saying: O fire (all-knO\ er), to all those gods under 



316 The Principal Upanisads VI. 3. 3. 

you who spitefully slay the desires of a person, I offer them 
a share. Let them; being satisfied satisfy me with all desires: 
Hail. To that deity who turns out spiteful under your protec- 
tion, saying I support all, I offer this stream of melted butter: 
Hail. 

greatness: mahattvam. 

all herbs and their fruits: sarvausadha-phala-visistam. §. 

• all-knouiug: jdtam jdtam vetti vd jdte jdte vidyata iti. 

2. jycsthdya svdhd, srestluiya svdhd, ity agnail hutvd, manthe 
samsravam avanayati. 

prdndya svdhd , vasisthdyai svdhd, ity agnail hutvd manthe 
samsravam avanayati. 

vdee svdhd, pratisthdyai svdhd, ity agnau hutvd manthe samsravam 
avanayati. 

caksuse svdhd, sampade svdhd, ity agnau hutvd manthe sams- 
ravam avanayati. 

srotrdya svdhd, dyatandya svdhd, ity agnau hutvd manthe sams- 
ravam avanayati. 

manase svdhd , prajdtyai svdhd, ity, agnau hutvd manthe sams- 
ravam avanayati 

retase svdhd ity agnau hutvd ma?ithe samsravam avanayati. 

2. ‘To the oldest, hail; to the greatest, hail' : (saying this) he 
offers an oblation in the fire and pours the remainder in the 
mixed potion. ‘To the vital breath, hail; to the richest, hail’: 
saying this, he offers an oblation in the fire and pours the 
remainder in the mixed potion. ‘To speech, hail; to the firm 
basis, hail: (saying this) he offers an oblation in the fire and 
pours the remainder in the mixed potion. ‘To the eye, hail; to 
prosperity, hail’ : (saying this) he offers an oblation in the fire 
and pours the remainder in the mixed potion. ‘To the ear, hail; 
to the abode, hail' : (saying this) he offers an oblation in the fire 
and pours the remainder in the mixed potion. ‘To the mind, 
hail; to procreation, hail': (saying this) he offers an oblation in 
the fire and pours the remainder in the mixed potion. ‘To the 
semen, hail': (saying this) he offers an oblatioji in the fire and 
pours the remainder in the mixed potion. 

3. agnaye svdhd , ity agnau hutvd manthe samsravam 
avanayati. somdya svdhd, ity agnau hutva manthe samsravam 
avanayati. bhuh svdhd ity agnau hutvd manthe samsravam 
avanayati . bhuvah svdhd ity agnau hutvd manthe samsravam 
avanayati . svah svdhd ity, agnau hutvd manthe samsravam 



VI. 3- 4 Brhad-dranyaka Upani$ad 31 7 

avanayati. bhur bhuvah svah svaha ity, agnau hutvd manthe 
samsravam avanayati. brahmane svaha ity , agnau hutvd manthe 
samsravam avanayati. ksatrdya svaha , ity, agnau hutvd manthe 
samsravam avanayati. bhutaya svaha ity , agnau hutvd manthe 
samsravam avanayati. bhavisyate svaha ity, agnau hutvd manthe 
samsravam avanayati. viivdya svaha ity agnau hutvd manthe 
samsravam avanayati. sarvdya svaha, ity, agnau hutvd manthe 
samsravam avanayati. prajapataye svaha, ity, agnau hutvd 
manthe samsravam avanayati. 

3. ‘To fire, hail/ (saying this) he offers an oblation in the fire 
and pours the remainder in the mixed potion. ‘To the moon, 
hail/ (saying this) he offers an oblation in the fire and pours the 
remainder in the mixed potion. ‘To the earth, hail/ (saying 
this) he offers an oblation in the fire and pours the remainder 
in the mixed potion. ‘To the atmosphere, hail/ (saying this) 
he offers an oblation in the fire and pours the remainder in 
the mixed potion. ‘To the sky (heaven) hail/ (saying this) he 
offers an oblation in the fire and pours the remainder in the 
mixed potion. ‘To the earth, atmosphere and sky, hail/ (saying 
this) he offers an oblation in the fire and pours the remainder 
in the mixed potion. ‘To the Brahmanahood, hail/ (saying this) 
he offers an oblatjon in the fire and pours the remainder in 
the mixed potion. ‘To the k§atrahood, hail/ (saying this) he 
offers an oblation in the fire and pours the remainder in the 
mixed potion. ‘To the past, hail/ (saying this) he offers an 
oblation in the fire and pours the remainder in the mixed potion. 
‘To the future, hail/ (saying this) he offers an oblation in the 
fire and pours the remainder in the mixed potion. ‘To the 
universe, hail/ (saying this) he offers an oblation in the fire and 
pours the remainder in the mixed potion. ‘To all (things), hail/ 
(saying this) he offers an oblation in the fire and pours the re- 
mainder in the mixed potion. ‘To Vrajd-pati, hail/ (saying this) 
he offers an oblation in the fire and pours the remainder in the 
mixed potion. 

4. athainam abhimrsati, bhramad asi, jvalad asi, purnam asi , 
prastabdham asi, eka-sabham asi, hihkrtam asi , hihkriyamdnam 
asi, udgitham asi, udgiyamdnam asi snivitam asi, pratyasrdvitam 
asi , ardre samdxptam asi , vibhur asi, prabhur asi, annum asi , 
jyotir asi, nidhanam asi, sanivargo'sili. 

4. Then he touches it (the mixed potion) saying: ‘you are 
the moving (as breath), you are Mie burning (as lire), you are 



318 The Principal Upanisads VI. 3. 6. 

the full (as the sky), you are the steadfast (as the sky), you 
are the one resort (as the earth), you are the sound hih that is 
made (at the beginning of the sacrifice by the prastotf). You 
are the making of the sound hih. You are the loud chant 
(sung by the udgdtr at the beginning of the sacrifice). You are 
the chanting. You are recited (by the adhvaryu) and are recited 
back (by the dgnidhra). You are the glowing in the moist 
(cloud). You are the pervading, you are the ruler. You are food 
(as the moon). You are light (as fire). You are the end. You are 
that in which all things merge.' 

prastabdham: steadfast, niskampam : still. A. 
drdre ; in the cloud, meghodare. A. 
nidhanam: end, layah. A. 

5. athainam udyacchati: dmarhsi , dmath hi te mahi, sa hi 
rajesano’ dhipatih , sa mam rdjcsdno' dhipatim karotv iti. 

5. Then he raises it (saying), 'You know all. We too are 
aware of your greatness. He is, indeed, the King, the Ruler, 
the Highest Lord. May he make me the king, the ruler and the 
highest lord.’ 

See C.U. V. 2. 6. 

dmamsi : You know all, tv am sarvam vijdudsi. A L . 
he: the vital breath, prdno rdjddi-gunah. A. 

6. athainam dcamati: tat savitur varenyam: madhu vdtd 

rtdyate, madhu ksaranti sindhavah, madhvir nah santv osadhih; 
bhiih svdihd; bhargo dcvasya dhimahi; madhu naktam utosasah, 
madhumat pdrthivam rajah, madhu dyaur astu nah pita ; bhuvah 
svdhd; dhiyo yo nah pracodaydt: madhumdn no vanaspatih, 
madhumdn astu suryah, • madhvir gdvo bhavantu nah, svah 
svdheti. sarvam ca sdvitrim anvdha, sarvds ca madhumatih 
aham evedarn sarvam bhuydsam, bhur bhuvah svah svdheti , 
ayitata dcamya, pant praksalya, jaghanendgnim prdk-sirdh 
samvisati: prdtar ddityam upatisthatc: disdm eka-pundarikam 
asi f aham manusydndm cka-pundarikam bhuydsam iti. yathetam 
etya , jaghanendgnim dsino vamsam japati. • 

6. Then he sips it (saying) ‘On that adorable light: The 
winds blow sweetly for the righteous, the rivers pour forth 
honey. May the herbs be sweet unto us. To earth, hail. Let us 
meditate on the divine glory: May the night and the day be 
sweet. May the dust of the earth be sweet. May heaven, our 
father, be sweet to us. To the atmosphere, hail. May he inspire 



VI. 3* io. Brhad-dranyaka Upani§ad 319 

(illumine) our understanding: May the tree be sweet unto us. 
May the sun be sweet, may the cows be filled with sweetness 
for us. To the heaven, hail.. He repeats the whole Savitri hymn 
and all the verses about the honey (saying), May I indeed be 
all this, hail to the earth, atmosphere and heaven. Having 
thus sipped all, having washed his hands, he lies down behind 
the fire with his head towards the east. In the morning he 
worships the sun (saying) of the quarters (of heaven), ‘you are 
the one lotus flower. May I become the one lotus flower among 
men/ Then he goes back the same way (by which he came), 
sits behind the fire (on the altar) and recites the (genealogical) 
line (of teachers). 

See R.V. III. 62. 10; I. 90. 6-8. 
varenyam: adorable, varanlyam. A. 
naktam: rtitrih. A. 
ulosasah: divasdh. A. 

7. tarn haitam udddlaka drunir vdjasancydya ydjhavalkyd- 
ydntcvdsina uktvovdcu; api ya cnam suske sthdnau nisihcet, 
jdycran sdkhdh, prarohcyuh paldsdniti. 

7. Then Uddalaka Aruni told this to his pupil, Vajasaneya 
Yajiiavalkya and said, ‘If one should sprinkle this even on a 
dry stump, branches would grow and leaves spring forth/ 

leaves: pat rani. R. 

8. dam u haiva vdjasancyo ydjhavalkyo madhukdya paihgyd- 
ydntevdsina uktvovdcu, api ya cnam suske sthdnau nisihcet 
jdycran sdkhdh pyarohcyuh paldsdniti. 

8. Then Vajasaneya Yajiiavalkya told this to his pupil 
Madhuka, the son of Paiiigi and said: ‘If one should sprinkle 
this even on a dry stump, branches would grow and leaves 
spring forth/ 

9. dam u haiva madhukali paihgyas culdya bhdgavittaye 
'ntevdsina uktvovdcu, api ya cnam suske sthdnau nisihcet 
jay cyan Sdkhdh, pyarohcyuh paldsdniti. 

9. Then Madhuka Paingya told this to his pupil Cula Bhaga- 
vitti and said: ‘If one should sprinkle this even on a dry stump, 
branches would grow and leaves spring forth/ 

10 clam u haiva culo bhdgavittir jdnakdya dyasthund- 
ydntcvdsina ukivovaca, api ya cnam suske sthdnau nisihcet 
jay cyan Sdkhdh prayohcyuh paldsd ' T ti. 

L* 



320 • The Principal Upanisads VI. 3. 13. 

10. Then Cula Bhagavitti told this to his pupil Janaki 
Ayasthuna and said: ‘If one should sprinkle this even on a dry 
stump, branches would grow and leaves spring forth/ 

11. dam u haiva jdnakir dyasthunah satyakdmdya jdbdld 
ydntcvdsina iiktvovdca, api ya cnam suskc sthdnau nisihcct , 
jaycran sdkhdh, praroheyuh paldsdniti. 

11. Then Janaki Ayasthuna told this to his pupil Satyakama 
Jabala and said: ‘If one should sprinkle this even on a dry 
stump, branches would grow and leaves spring forth. 1 

1 2. dam u haiva satyakdmo jdbdld ntcvdsibhya iiktvovdca , api 
ya enatii suskc sthdnau nisihcct, jaycran sdkhdh praroheyuh 
paldsdniti. turn dam ndputrdya vdnante’vdsinc vd bruydt. 

12. Then Satyakama Jabala told this to his pupils and said: 
Tf one should sprinkle this even on a dry stump, branches 
would grow and leaves spring forth. One should not tell this 
to one who is not a son or to one who is not a pupil/ 

For a similar prohibition about teaching sacred knowledge, see 
S.U. VI. 22] Mait) 1 VI. 2t). 

£. mentions that the two, the son and the pupil are declared to 
be eligible to receive sacred knowledge. They are chosen out of the 
six_ qualified learners, vuiyddhigamc sat tirthani. 

A. mentions the six, a pupil, a knowerof the Vedas, an intelligent 
person, one who payb, a dear son and one who exchanges another 
branch of learning, sisyah srotnyo mcdhdvi dhanadayl priyah putro 
vidyayd vuiyd-ddteti sat tirthani. 

13. catur audumbaro bhavati; audumbarah snivah, atidum - 
baras camasah, audumbara idhmah , audit mbaryd upamanthanyau ; 
dasa gramydni dhdnydni bhavanti: vrihi yards tila-mdsd anu- 
priyamgavo godhumds ca masurds ca khalrds ca khalakhulds 
ca ; tan pistdn dadhini madhuni ghrta u pas i head, djyasya 
juhoti. 

13. Fourfold is the wood of the sacred fig tree (four things 
are made of it) ; the spoon is of the wood of the sacred fig tree, 
the bowl is of the wood of the sacred tig tree, the fuel is of the 
wood of the sacred fig tree and the two churning rods are of the 
wood of the sacred fig tree. There are ten cultivated grains 
(used), viz. rice and barley, sesasum and beans, millet, and 
panic seeds, wheat, lentils, pulse and vetches. They should be 
ground and soaked in curds, honey and clarified butter. And 
(he) offers melted butter as an oblation. 



VI. 4. 3 - Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 321 

Fourth Brdhmana 
PROCREATION CEREMONIES 

I. esarh vai bhutdnam prthivi rasah, prthivyd apah , apdm 
osadhayah, osadhlndm puspani , puspdndim phalani, phalandm 
purusah , purusasya retah. 

1. The earth, verily, is the essence of all these beings; of 
earth (the essence is) water; of water (the essence is) plants; 
of plants (the essence is) flowers; of flowers (the essence is) 
fruits ; of fruits (the essence is) the man ; of man (the essence is) 
semen. 

The ceremony for obtaining a son of right qualities is given here. 

2. sa ha prajd-pativ iksam cakre: hanta , asmai pratisthdm 
kalpaydmti; sa striyam sasrje; tdm srstvddha u pasta; tasmdt 
striyam adha updslta , sa etam prdheam gravanarii atmana eva 
samudapdrayat, tenaindm abhyasrjat. 

2. And Prajd-pati thought (within himself): Xome, let me 
make a firm basis (abode) for him.’ So he created woman. 
Having created her, he revered her below. So one should 
revere woman belbw. He stretched out for himself that which 
projects. With that he impregnated her. 

grdvdnam: a stone for pressing out soma juice: 

somabhisavopala-stlidniyarii kdthinya-sdmdnyat prajananendYiyam. S. 

3. tasya vedir upasthah, lomdni barhih, carmddhisavane , 
samiddho madhyatastau mvskau; sa ydvdn ha vai vdjapeyena 
yajamdnasya loko bhavati (tdvdn asyaluko bhavati),ya evam vidvan 
adhopahdsam carati f dsdm strut dm sidtrtam vriikte. atha ya idam 
avidvan adhopahdsam carati , dsya striyali sukrtam vrnjate. 

3. Her lower part is the (sacrificial) altar: (her) hairs the 
(sacrificial) grass, her skin the sow<?-press. The two labia of 
the vulva are the lire in the middle. Verily, as great as is the 
world of him who performs the Vajapeya sacrifice (so great is 
the world of hwn) who, knowing this, practises sexual inter- 
course; he turns the good deeds of the woman to himself but 
he, who without knowing this, practises sexual intercourse, 
his good deeds women turn into themselves. 

vedi: vedikd visrama-sthdnam, place of rest. 

muskau: vysanau yoni-pdrsvayoh kathinau mdmsa-khcmdau. A. 

adhopahdsam: sexual intercourse, maithunam. R. 



322 The Principal Upanisads VI. 4. 5. 

These passages indicate the intimate connection between the 
Atharva Veda and the Upanisads. Some practices in the latter are 
treated in the manner of the Atharva Veda. They include even love 
charms to compel a woman to yield her love, charms to prevent 
conception or bring it about when desired. Even here the knowledge 
motive is dominant. 

The sexual act is explained as a kind of ritual performance, the 
elements of which are identified with the parts of the woman's body. 
We are told that if a man practises sex intercourse with the know- 
ledge of this, he gains a world as great as he who sacrifices with 
the Yajapeya rite and takes to himself the merit of the women; 
but if he practises it without this knowledge, women take to them- 
selves his merit. 

4. eiadd ha sma vai tad vidvdn udddlaka drnnir aha ; ctadd ha 
svia vai tad vidvdn ndko maudgalya diha; ctadd ha sma vai tad 
vidvdn kumdra-hdrita aha; baluivo niaryd brdhmandyand nirin - 
driyd visukrto' smdl lokdt pray anti; ya idam avidvdmso dhopa- 
fidsath carantiti, bahu vd idam suptasya vd jdgrato vd retah 
skandati. 

4. This, verily, is what Uddalaka Aruni knew when he said : 
this, verily, is what Naka Maudgalya knew when he said: 
this, verily, is what Kumara-harita knew when he said: many 
mortal men, Brahmanas by descent, go forth from this world 
impotent and devoid of merit, namely, those who practise 
sexual intercourse without knowing this. If even this much 
semen is spilled of one asleep or of one awake, 

marydh: mortal men, marana-dharmino manusyuh. §. 
brdhmandyandh: brdhmanah ay an am yesdtii. R. 
nirindriydh : impotent, nirvlrydh jndna-karma-bala-hhtdh. R. 

5. tad abhimrset, anu va mantrayeta: 

yan medya retah prthivim askdintsit , yad osadhir apy asarat , 
yad apah, 

idam aham tad rcta adadc , punar mam aitu indr iy am, punas 
tejah , punar bhagah. 

punar agnir dhisnydh yathdsthdnam kalpantdm 
ity andmikdhgustabhydm ddciya, antarena stanau vd bhruvau vd 
nimrjydt. 

5. Then he should touch it or (without touching) recite: 
‘Whatever semen of mine has spilt on earth, whatever has 
flowed to the plants, whatever to water, I reclaim this very 
semen, let vigour come to me again, let lustre (come to me) 
again; let glow (come to me) again. Let the fire and the altars 



VI. 4* 9 * Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 323 

be found again in their usual place ; (having said this) he should 
take it with his ring finger and thumb and rub it between his 
breasts or his eyebrows. 

6 . atha yady udaka dtmanam pasyct , tad abhimantrayeta: 
mayi teja indriyam yaso dravinam sukrtam iti-srir ha vd esd 
strindm yan malodvdsdh. tasmdn malodvasasam yasasvinim 
a bhikramyopamantrayeta . 

6. Now if one should see himself (his reflection) in water he 
should recite (the following) hymn. In me (may the gods 
bestow) lustre, vigour, fame, wealth and merit. This, verily, 
is loveliness among women, when she has removed her soiled 
clothes. Therefore when she has removed her soiled clothes 
and is .lovely, he should approach and speak to her. 

7. sd ccd asmai na dadydt , kdmam endm avakriniydt; sa ced 
asmai naiva dadydt , kdmam endm yastyd vd panina vopahat - 
ydtikrdmet , indriyena te yasasd yasa adade, ity ayasd eva 
bhavati. 

7. If she does not grant him his desire, he should buy her 
(with presents). If she still .does not grant him his desire he 
should beat her with a stick or his hand and overcome her 
(saying) with (manly) power and glory, T take away your glory/ 
Thus she becomes*devoid of glory. 

buy her: dbharanddind vasl-kurydt. R. 

8. sd ced asmai dadydt: indriyena tc yasasd yasa ddadhdtni iti; 
yasasvindv eva bluivatali. 

8. If she grants (his desire), he says, 'With power and glory/ 
'I give you glory/ Thus the two become glorious. 

9. sa yam icchet , kdmaycta meti , tasydm arthatii nisthdya , 
mukhcna mukharn samdhdya , upasthajn asyd abhimrsya, japet: 

ahgdd ahgdt sambhavasi , hrdaydd adhijdyasc 
sa tvam ariga-kasdyo'si: digdha-viddhdm iva mddaya imam 
amum mayi 
iti. 

9. If one desires a woman (with the thought) may she enjoy 
love with me, after inserting the member in her, joining mouth 
to mouth and stroking her lower part, he should recite, ‘You 
that have come from every limb, who have sprung from the 
heart, you are the essence of the limbs. Distract this woman 
here in me, as if pierced by a poisoned arrow/ 
artham: member prajananendriyam. S. 
kasdyah: essence, rasah. A. 



324 The Principal Upanisads VI. 4. 12. 

10. atha yam icchet: na garbham dadhitdi , tasydm artham 
nisthdya , mukhcna vmkham samdhaya a bh iprd ny dp any at , indri- 
ycna te rctasd rcta ddada iti; arctd cva bhavati. 

10. Now the woman whom one desires (with the thought) 
‘may she not conceive,’ after inserting the member in her, 
joining mouth to mouth, he should first inhale and then exhale 
and say, ‘with power, with semen I reclaim the semen from you.' 
Thus she comes to be without semen (seed) . 

Apparently, birth control is not a modern device. 

11. atha yam icchct; garbham dadhiteti, tasydm artham 
nisthdya , mukhcna vmkham samdhaya apdnydbhiprdnydt; indri- 
yeiia tc rctasd rcta didadhduni , ity , garbhiny cva bhavati. 

11. Now the woman whom one desires (with the thought) 
‘may she conceive’ ; after inserting the member in her, joining 
mouth to mouth he should first exhale and then inhale and 
say ‘with power, with semen I deposit semen in you.’ Thus she 
becomes pregnant. 

12. atha yasya jdydyai jar ah sydt , tarn ccd dvisyat , dmapdtre 
’ gnivi upasamddhdya , pratilomam sarabarhis tirtvd , tasminn 
etdli sarabhrstih pratilomdh sarpisdktd juhuydt; mama samiddhe 
'hausih, prdndipdmau na ddadcasdv iti. mama samiddhe hausih, 
putra-pasums ta ddadcasdv iti. mama samiddhe hausih istd- 
sukrtc ta ddadc , asdv iti. mama samiddhe hausih dsd-pardkdsau 
ta adade asdv iti. sa vd esa nirindriyo visukrto’smdl lokdt praiti , 
yam evam-vid bvdihmanah sapati. tasmdt evam-vit srotriyasya 
ddrena nopahdsam icchct, uta hy evam-vit paro bhavati. 

1 2. If a man’s wife has a lover and he hate him (wishes to 
injure him), let him put fire in an unbaked earthen vessel, 
spread out a layer of reed, arrows in an inverse order, and let 
him offer (in sacrifice) in inverse order these reed arrows soaked 
in clarified butter, (saying) ‘You have sacrificed in my fire, I take 
away your in-breath and out-breath, you so and so. You have 
sacrificed in my fire, I take away your sons and cattle, you 
so and so. You have sacrificed in my fire. I take away your 
sacrifices and meritorious deeds, you so and, so. You have 
sacrificed in my fire. I take away your hope and expectation, 
you so and so. Verily, he departs from this world impotent 
and devoid of merit, he whom a Brahmana who knows this 
curses. Therefore one should not wish to play with the wife of 
one who is learned in the Vedas, who knows this, for indeed 
he who knows this becomes preeminent. 



VI. 4- 15 - Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 325 

See Katha I. 8; Satapatha Brdhmana I. 6. 1. 18; Paraskara Gyhya 
Sutra I. 11. 6. 

Spells and incantations were familiar practices in the age when the 
Upanisad was composed. 

13. atha yasya jdydm artavam vindet , try aham kamse na 
pibet ahata-vdsdh; naindm vrsalah na vrsaly upahanydt, trira- 
trdnta aplutya vrihin avaghdtayet. 

13. Now, when the monthly sickness comes upon one's wife, 
for three days she should not drink from a bronze cup nor put 
on fresh clothes. Neither a low-caste man nor a low-caste woman 
should touch her. At the end of three nights after bathing she 
should be made to pound rice. 

Sometimes it is interpreted kaimcna pibet ; she should drink from 
a bronze cup. 

aplutya: after bathing, sndtvd. S. 

The rice is intended for the sthdll-pdka ceremony. 

After three nights she should bathe, put on new clothes and 
prepare the rice for the ceremony. 

x 4 * sa ya icchct , putro me suhlo jayeta , vedam anubruvita , 
sarvam dyur iydd iti , ksiraudanam pdcayitvd sarpismantam 
asniydtdm; isvarau janayita vai. 

14. If one wishes that his son should be born of a fair com- 
plexion, that he should study the Veda, that lie should attain 
a full term of life, they should have rice cooked with milk and 
eat it with clarified butter, then they should be able to beget 
(him). 

isvarau: should be able to, samarthau. R. 

15. atha ya icchct , putro me kapilah pihgalo jayeta , dvau 
veddv anubruvita, sarvam dyur iydd iti , dadhy-odanam pdcayitvd 
sarpismantam asniydtdm; isvarau janayita vai. 

15. Now if one wishes that his son should be born of a tawny 
or brown complexion, that he should study the two Vedas, 
that he should attain a full term of life, they should have rice 
cooked in curds and eat it with clarified butter, then they should 
be able to beget (him). 

16. atha ya icchct, putro me sydmo lohitdkso jayeta, trin veddn 
anubruvita, sarvam dyur iydd iti, udodanam pdcayitvd, 
sarpismantam asniydtdm ; isvarau janayita vai. 

16. Now if one wishes that his son should be born of a dark 
complexion with red eyes, that he should study the three Vedas, 
that he should attain a full term of life, they should have rice 



326 The Principal Upanisads VI. 4. 19. 

cooked in water and eat it with clarified butter, then they' 
should be able to beget (him) . 

1 7. atha ya icchct, duhitd me panditd jay da, sarvam dyur iydd 
iti, tilodanam pdcayitvd sarpismantam asniydtdm, tsvarau 
janayita vai. 

17. Now if one wishes that his daughter should be born, 
who is learned, that she should attain a full term of life, they 
should have rice cooked with sesamum and eat it with clarified 
butter, then they should be able to beget (her). 

While the Upanisad seems to grant the privilege of learning and 
scholarship to women, £ points out that this learning is limited to 
domestic affairs: duhituh pdndityam grha-tantra-visayam cva, vede ' 
71 ad hi karat . S. 

The other commentators follow § whose view conflicts with 
ancient beliefs and practices. 

18. atha ya icchct putro me pandito vigitah , samitim-gamah , 
susrusitdm vacant bhdsitd jdycta, sarvdn vcddin anubruvita, 
sarvam dyur iydd iti, mdmsodanam pdcayitvd sarpismantam 
asniydtdm; tsvarau janayita vai, auksncna vdrsabhena vd . 

18. Now if one wishes that a son, learned, famous, a fre- 
quenter of assemblies, a speaker of delightful words, that he 
should study all the Vedas, that he should attain a full term 
of life, they should have rice cooked with meat and eat it with 
clarified butter, then they should be able to beget (such a son) — 
either veal or beef. 

vigitah: famous, vivid ham git ah, prakhydtah . is. 

susrusitdm: delightful, srotum i{tdm, ramaniydm. 

veal or beef: uks w, secana-samarthah puhgavah, ysabhah tato py 

adhikavaydh. $. 

Evidently meat was permitted on certain occasions. A points out 
that this permission was due to local conditions, dcsa-visesdpeksayd 
kdla-visesdpeksayd vd mumsa-niyamah. 

Prenatal conditioning of the child's character is advised. 

19. athdbhiprdtar eva sthdli-pdkdvrtdjyam cestitvd , sthdll- 
pakasyopaghdtam juhoti : agnaye svdhd , any mat aye svdhd, 
devaya savitre satya-prasavdya svdhd , iti ; hutvd uddhrtya 
prdsndti , prdsyetarasydh prayucchuti; praksdlya pdni, ndapdtram 
purayitvd tenainam trir abhyuksati; 

uttisthdto visvdvaso, 
anydm iccha prapurvydm t 
sam jay dm patyd saha t iti. 



VI. 4- 2i. Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 32 7 

19. Now, toward morning, after having prepared clarified 
butter according to the mode of the sthdli-pdka he takes of 
the sthdli-pdka and makes an offering (saying), to fire, hail, to 
Anumati, hail, to the radiant sun, the creator of truth, hail. 
After having made the offering, he takes up (the remnants of 
the cooked food) and eats. Having eaten he offers (the rest) 
to the other (his wife). After having washed his hands and filled 
the water vessel, he sprinkles her thrice with it (water) (saying), 
'Get up from here, Visvavasu; seek another young woman, a 
wife with her husband/ 

sthdli-pdka: literally, a pot of cooked food. 
avftd: according to the mode, vidhind . 

anumati: the feminine personification of divine favour. See R.V. 
X. 59. 6; X. 167. 3. 

visvavasu: gandharva . A. God of love. See R.V. X. 25. 22. 
prapurvydm: young girl, tarunim. A. 

20. athaindm ahhipadyatc: 

amo’ham asmi, sd ivam; 
sd tvam asi, amo'ham; 
sdmdham asmi, rk vam; 
dyaur a ham, prthivl tvam; 
tdv ehi samrabhdvahai , 
saha rcto dadhdvahai 
pumse putrdya vittaye iti. 

20. Then he embraces her, (saying), T am the vital breath and 
you are speech; you are speech and I am the vital breath. I am 
the Sdman and you are the Rg. I am the heaven and you are 
the earth. Come, let us strive together, let us mix semen that 
we may have a male child.’ 

ahhipadyatc: embraces, ahhipattih dlihgdnam. A. 
amah: vital breath, prana. A. 

Sdman rests on Rg. while it is chanted, rg-ddhdram hi sdma glyate. A. 
samrabhdvahai: let us strive together, udyamam karavdvahai. A. 

21. athdsyd uru vihdpayati : vijihxthdm dydvdprthivl, iti 
tasydm artham y\isthdya, mukhena mukham samdhdya , Uir endm 
anulomdm anumdrsti: 

visnnr yonith kalpayatu, tvastd rupdni pimsatu 
dsiheatu prajd-patih , dhdtd garbham dadhdtu te: 
garbham dhchi , simvdli; garbham dhehi, prthustuke, 
garbham te asvinau devau ddhattdm pitskara-srajau. 

21. Then he spreads apart her .highs, (saying) ‘Spread your- 



328 The Principal Upanisads VI. 4. 22. 

selves apart, Heaven and Earth. After having inserted the 
member in her, after having joined mouth to mouth, he strokes 
her three times as the hair lies, (saying), ‘Let Visnu make the 
womb prepared. Let Tvastr shape the (various) forms. Let 
Praja-pati pour in. Let Dhatr place the germ (the seed) for you. 
O Sintvdli, give the seed; give the seed, 0 broad-tressed dame. 
Let the two Asvins crowned with lotus wreaths place the seed/ 

annlomam: as the hair lies, murdhdnam drabliya pdddntam. 
kalpayatu : make prepared, piitrotpatti-samarthdm karotu . A. 
sin mill: the deity delightful to see: darsandrhd dcvatd. A. 

‘When the human father thus emits him as seed into the womb, 
it is really the sun that emits him as seed into the womb . . . thence 
is he born, after that seed, that breath/ J aiminlya-U panisad- 
Brdhmana III. 10. 4. see also Pancavimsa Brdhmana XVI. 14. 5. 
In Buddhist canonical literature three things are said to be necessary 
for conception, the union of father and mother, the mother’s period 
and the presence of the gandharva: Majjhima Nikdya. 1. 2 63-266; 
see also Pancavimsa Brdhmana IX. 3. 1. The gandharva corresponds 
to the divine nature which is the primary cause of generation, while 
the parents are only the concomitant causes. See Philo: Hcres. 115. 
For Aristotle, ‘Man and the Sun generate man/ Physics II. 2. 
Rum! says: ‘When the time comes for the embryo to receive the 
vital spirit, at that time the sun becomes its helper. This embryo 
is brought into movement by the sun, for the sun is quickly endowing 
it with spirit. From the other stars this embryo received only an 
impression, until the sun shone upon it. By which way did it become 
connected in the womb with the beauteous sun? By the hidden 
way that is remote from our sense-perception.’ Mathnawi I. 3775- 
3779. In a very real sense, the commandment is significant, ‘Call no 
man your father on earth , for one is your Father, which is in heaven.’ 
John VI. b. 3. 

22. hiranmayi arani ydbhydm nirtnanthaldm asvinau; 
tam tc garbham havdmahc dasame mdsi sutayc: 
yathagni-garbha prthivi, yathd dyaur indrena garbhim 
vayur disdm yathd garbhah, evam garbham dadhdmi te asdv 
iti. 

22. ‘The (two) Asvins twirl forth a flame with the (two) 
attrition sticks of gold. It is such a germ that we beg of you 
to be brought forth in the tenth month. As the earth contains 
the germ of fire and as the heaven is pregnant with the storm, 
as the air is the germ of quarters, even so I place a germ in you, 
so and so.’ 



VI. 4- 24. Brhad-aranyaka Upani§ad 329 

See R.V. X. 184. also Atharva Veda V. 25. 3; V. 25. 5. 
asdv: tasydh. £. fiatyur vd nirdesah. A. patnlndma grhnlydt. ante 
bhartdsav aham iti svdtmano ndma grhndti , bhdrydya vd. R. 

23. sosyantim adbhir abhyuksali ; 

yatha vdyuh puskarinim samihgayati sarvatah 
eva te garbha ejatu sahavaitu jarayuna: 
indrasyayam vrajah krtah sargalah saparisrayah, 
tarn, indra, nirjahi garbhena sdvaram saheti. 

23. When she is about to bring forth he sprinkles her with 
water (saying) : ‘Even as the wind agitates a lotus pond on every 
side, even so let your foetus stir and come out along with its 
chorion. This Indra's fold has been made with a covering 
enclosed around. O Indra, cause him to come forth the after- 
birth along with babe. 

See R.V. V. 78. 7-8. Pdraskara Grhya Sutra I. 16 ff. This hymn is 
uttered for successful parturition, prasava-kdle siikha-prasavandrtham. 

jarayuna : with its chorion, garbha-vestana-mdmsa-khandena. A. 
come out: nirgacchatu. A. 

24. jategnim upasamddhdya, anka ddhdya kamse prsad-djyam 
samntya, prsad-djyasyopaghdtam juhoti; 

asmin sahcisram pusyasam edhamdnah sve grhe 
asyopasandyam md chaitsit prajaya ca pasubhis ca, svdha: 
mayi prdnams tvayi manasd juhomi, svdha: 
yat karmandtyariricam, yad vd nyiinam ihakaram, 
agnistat svistakrd vidvdn, svistam suhutam karotu nah: svdha. 

24. When (the son is) born, alter having prepared the fire, 
after having taken (the baby) in his lap and having put curds 
and clarified butter in a bronze cup, he makes an oblation again 
and again with those curds and clarified butter (saying), ‘May 
I increase in this (son) and nourish a thousand in my home. 
May fortune never depart from his line with offspring and cattle. 
Hail. I offer to you mentally the vital forces that are in me. 
Whatever in my work I have done too much or whatever I 
have done here .too little, let Agni the all-knowing, the bene- 
ficent, make it fit and good for us. Hail. 

See Asvaldyana Grhya Sutra I. 13 ff: Pdraskara Grhya Sutra 
I. 11 ff. ; Sdhkhdyana Grhya Sutra I. 19 ff. 

prsad-djyam: curds and clarified butter mixed, ghrta-misram dadhi 

prsad-djyam ity ucyatc. A. 

pusyasam: aneka-manusya-posako \uydsam . A. 



330 The Principal Upanisads VI. 4. 28. 

25. athasya daksinant karnam abhinidhdya; vag vdg iti trih. 
atha dadhi madhu ghrtarii samniya anantarhitcna jdta-upena 
prdsayati; bhus te dadhdmi , bhuvas te dadhdmi , svas te dadhdmi 
bhur bhnvah svah sarvath tvayi dadhdmlti. 

25. Then putting his mouth near the child’s right ear, he 
says thrice, ‘speech,’ ‘speech.’ Then mixing curds, honey and 
clarified butter he feeds him out of a spoon of gold which is 
not placed within (the mouth) saying, ‘I place in you the earth, 

I place in you the atmosphere, I place in you the heaven. I 
place in you everything, earth, atmosphere and heaven.’ 

jdta-rupena : hiranycna. S. 

26. athasya nama karoti: vedo ’ siti; tad asya tad guhyam eva 
ndma bhavati. 

26. Then he gives him a name (saying), 'You are Veda.’ So 
this becomes his secret name. 

For a description of the two ceremonies, dyusya-kannan and 
medhd-janana , see, Pdraskara Grhya Sutra 1, 16. 3; I. 17. 1-4; Asva- 
layana Grhya Sutra I. 15. 1-8, Sdhkhdyana Grhya Sutra ; I. 24; 
Gobhila Grhya Sutra II. 8. 14-17; Mann II. 30-33. 

27. athainam matre praddya stanam prayaefhati; 

yas te stanah sasayo yo mayobhuh , yo ratnadhd vasuvid yah 
sudatrah t 

yena visvd pusyasi vdrydni , sarasvati, tarn iha dhdtavc kah. 

27. Then he presents him to the mother and gives him her 
breast saying: ‘Your breast which is unfailing and refreshing, 
wealthy, abundant, generous with which you nourish all 
worthy beings, Sarasvati , give it here (to my wife for my baby) 
to suck from.’ 

Sec R.V. I. 164. 49. 

sasayah: unfailing, sayah phalam, tena saha vartamdnah. A. 

28 athasya mdtaram abhimantrayatc: 
ilasi maitrdvarum; vlre vtram ajijanat, 
sd tvarh vlravati bhava, ydsmdn viravato' karat, 
iti . tam va etam ahuh; atipitd batabhuh, atipildmaho batdbhuh . 
paramam bata kdstham prdpat , sriyd yasasa brahma-varcasena, 
ya evam vido brdhmanasya putro jdyata iti. 

28. Then he addresses the mother (of the baby): ‘You are 
lid, descended from Mitra and Varuna. Being a heroine, you 
have brought forth a hero. You who have given us a hero for a 



VI. 5. i. Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 331 

son, be you the mother of (many) heroes/ Of such a son they 
say, ‘You have gone beyond your father; you have gone beyond 
your grandfather/ Verily, he has reached the highest point 
in prosperity, fame and radiance of spirit, who is born as the 
son of a Brahmana who knows this. 

Ila: A identifies lid with Arundhati, the wife of Vasistha, the son 
of Mitra and Varuna: mitrd-varunabhydm sambhuto maitra-varunah , 
vasisthah, tasya bhdrya maitrdvaruni, sa cdrundhati. 
ila: adorable, stutyabhogyasi. A. 
vir avail: bahu-putrd bhava. A. 

vire: may be taken either in vocative or locative, mayi nimitta bhute. 
brahmavarcasa : radiance of spirit shining in the face. No contempt 
for the body is indicated. Porphyry’s statement of his master: 
‘Plotinus, the philosopher of our time was like one ashamed of 
being in a body/ will not get the support of the Upanisads. 


Fifth Brahmana 

THE SUCCESSION OF TEACHERS AND PUPILS 

1. atha vamsah:pautimasl-putrah katydyarii-pntrdt, katyayani- 
putro gautami-putrdt, gautami-pntro bhdradvdjl-putrat, bhdra- 
dvdji-pntrah pdrdsarl-putrdt, pdrdsari-putra anpasvasti-putrdt 
aupasvasti-putr ah pdrdsarl-putrdt, pdrdsarl-putrah katydyanl-pu- 
trdt , kdtydiyanl-putrah kausihT-putrdt , kausiki-putra alambi - 
putrdc ca vaiydghrapadi-putrdc ca , vaiydghrapadx-putrah. kanvi- 
patrdc ca kdpi-putrdc ca , kdpi-putrah. 

1. Now the line of teachers. The son of PautimasI (received 
this teaching) from the son of KatyayanI; the son of Katyayani 
from the son of Gautami, the son of GautamI from the son of 
BharadvajI, the son of BharadvajI from the son of Parasari, 
the son of Parasari from the son of Aupasvasti, the son of 
Aupasvasti from the son of Parasari, the son of Parasari from 
the son of Katyayani, the son of Katyayani from the son of 
Kausiki, the soft of Kau£iki from the son of Alambi and the 
son of Vaiyaghrapadi, the son of Vaiyaghrapadi from the son 
of Kanvi and the son of Kapi, the son of Kapi — 

§ says that the teachers are named after their mothers because 
the mother holds the important place in the training of children. 
siri-prddhdnydt gunavan putro bhavatlti hi prastutam ; atah strivi- 
iesenaiva putra-visesandd dcarya-parampard kirtyate. 



332 The Principal Upanisads ' VI. 5. 3. 

2. dtreyi-putrat, dtreyi-putro gantami-putrcit, gautamt-putro 
bhdradvaji-putrdt, bharadvdji-pntrah pdrdsari-putrat, pardsan- 
putro vdtsi-putrdt,vdtsi-putrahpdrdsari-putrdt,pdrdsarl-putro var- 
karuni-patrdt, varkclrunl-pntro varkdruni-putrdt, vdrkdruni-putra 
drtabhdgi-putrdt, drtabhdgl-patrah saungi-putrdt, iaungi-putrah 
sankrti-putrdt, sdnJytl-putra dlambdyanl-putrdt, dlambayani - 
pntra dlambl-putrdt , dlambi-putro jdyanti-putrdt , jdyanti-putro 
mdndukdyani-putrdl , mdndukdyaru-putro mandukl-putrdt , 
diiki-putrah sand ill-put rat , sandili-putro rdthUan-putrdt , 
tari-putro bhdlukl-putrdt , bhdluki-putrah kraunciki-putrabhydm , 
kraunciki-putrau vaidabhrti-putrat , vaidabhrtl-putrah kdrsakeyi - 
pntrat, kdrsakeyi-putrah prdcinayogt-putrdi , pracinayogi-putrah 
sdnjivi-putrdt, saiijivi-putrah prdsni-puirdd astir ivdsinah, 

prdsni-putra astirdyandt, dsitrdyana asurch , dsnrih — 

2. from the son of Atreyl, the son of Atreyl from the son 
of GautamI, the son of Gautami from the son of BharadvajI, 
the son of BharadvajI from the son of Parasari, the son of 
Parasarl from the son of VatsI, the son of Vatsi from the son 
of Parasarl, the son of Parasari from the son of Varkaruni, 
the son of Varkaruni from the son of Varkaruni, the son of 
Varkaruni from the son of Artabhagi, the son of ArtabhagI 
from the son of Saungl, the son of Saungl from f the son of Sankrti, 
the son of Sankrti from the son of AlambayanI, the son of Alam- 
bayanl from the son of AlambI, the son of AlambI from the son 
of JayantI, the son of Jayanti from the son of MandukayanI, the 
son of MandukayanI from the son of MandukI, the son of 
MandukI from the son of £andili, the son of Sandili from the 
son of Rathltarl, the son of Rathltari from the son of BhalukI; 
the son of BhalukI from the two sons of Krauncikl, the two 
sons of Krauncikl from 'the son of VaidabhrtI, the son of 
VaidabhrtI from the son of Karsakeyl, the son of Karsakeyl 
from the son of Praclnayogl, the son of Praclnayogl from the 
son of Sanjlvl, the son of Sanjlvi from the son of Priism, the 
Asurivasin, the son of Prasnl from Asurayana, Asurayana 
from Asuri, Asuri — 

3. ydjnavalkydt,yajnavalkya udddlakdt t iidddiako'rundt t aruna 
upaveseh , upavesih kusreh, kusrir vaja-sravasah, vdja-iravd 
phvavato bddhyogat , jihvdvan badhyogo' sitad vdrsagandt, asito 
vdr§agano haritat kasyapat , haritah kasyapah silpat kasyapdt , 
silpah kasyapah kasyapdn naidhruveh , kasyapo naidhruvir 
vacah , vag ambhinydh , ambhiny ddityat, dditydmmdni iukldni 
yajumsi vajasaneyena yajhavalkyenakhydyante . 



VI. 5- 4 - Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad 333 

3. from Yajnavalkya, Yajnavalkya from Uddalaka, Udda- 
laka, from Aruna, Aruna from Upavesi, Upavesi from Kusri, 
Kusri from Vajasravas, Vajasravas from Jihvavant Badhyoga, 
Jihvavant Badhyoga from Asita Varsagana, Asita Varsagana 
from Harita Kasyapa, Harita Kasyapa from Silpa Kasyapa, 
Silpa Kasyapa from Kasyapa Naidhruvi, Kasyapa Naidhruvi 
from Vac (speech), Vac from Ambhini, AmbhinI from Aditya 
(the sun). These white sacrificial formulas received from the 
sun are explained by Yajnavalkya of the Vajasaneyi school. 

sukluni: white, because they arc not mixed up (with Brahmanas), 
orderly, fresh: avydmiirdnt brdlimancna , atJuivd aydtciydmdnlmdni 
yajumsi, tdni sukluni, siiddhdni. S. 

4. samdnam d sdnjivT-putrdt, sdnjivT-putro mdndukdyaneh 
mdndukdyanir vuhidavydt, mdndavyah kautsat, kautso 
mdhitthch , mdhitthir vdma-kaksdycmdt , vdma-kaksayanah 
vacasah ra jastambdyandt , y a jnavaca rdjastambdyanah turat 
kdvaseydt , lurah kdvaseyah prajd patch, prajdpalir brahmanah, 
brahma svayambhu: brahmane namah. 

4. It is the same up to the son of SanjivI, the son of SanjivI 
from Mandukayani, Man^lukayani from Mandavya, Mandavya 
from Kautsa, Kautsa from Mahitthi, Mahitthi from Vamakak- 
sayana, Vamakaksayana from Sandilya, Sandilya from 
Vatsya, Vatsya from Ku^ri, Kusri from Yajiiavacas Kaja- 
stambayana, Yajiiavacas Rajastambayana from Tura Kava- 
seya, Tura Kavaseya from Pvaja-pati, Praju-pati from Brahma. 
Brahma is the self-existent. Adoration to Brahma. 

See $ at a pat ha Brdhmana X. (). 5. 9. 




CHANDOGYA upanisad 


The Chandogya Upanisad belongs to the Sama Veda. Chandoga 
is the singer of the Sdrnan. 1 The Upanisad that belongs to 
the followers of the Sama Veda is the Chandogya Upanisad. It 
is a part of the Chandogya Brahmana which has ten chapters. 
The first two chapters of the Brahmana deal with sacrifices 
and other forms of worship. The other eight constitute the 
Chandogya Upanisad. 

The first and the second chapters discuss the problems of 
liturgy and doctrine such as the genesis and significance of Aum 
and the meaning and names of Sdrnan. 

1 chando sama gdyati iti chandogah 




I. I. 2. 


Chdndogya Upani$ad 


337 


CHAPTER I 
Section i 

THE SYLLABLE AUM AS THE UDGlTHA 

i. aum ity etad aksaram ndgitham updsita , awm iti hrd 
gdyati tasyopavyakhydnam . 

1. Zlww. One should meditate on this syllable, the udgitha , 
for one sings the loud chant beginning with aum. Of this 
(follows) the explanation. 

The syllable aum , with which every recital of the Vedic chants 
begins, is here represented as the symbol of the Supreme and there- 
fore the means of the meditation of the Supreme: arcadivat para - 
syatmanah pratlkam sampadyate; evam nanuitvena pratikatvena ca 
paramatmopasana-sadhanam srestham iti sarva-veddntesv avagatam. S. 
Before we attain to the supreme vision of God, the contemplative 
realisation, we have to resort to prayer and meditation. We may 
chant and sing with devout mind, with fervour of spirit, with an 
inmost longing for the things above, with a purity of soul. We strive 
to keep the soul unembarrassed and at rest from all thoughts. We 
direct our attention lovingly and continuously towards God. 

In meditation, t^e soul is furnished with a symbol on which we 
fix our gaze, on which we concentrate all our imagination and 
reasoning. When meditation reaches its end, when there is no dis- 
traction or disquiet, when there is calm repose, sweet tranquillity, 
there is the vision. Any name may raise us to perfect contemplation. 
We start with prayer, we pass on to meditation. When the discursive 
acts cease, we have contemplation. The Upanisad opens with this 
instruction to concentrate on the syllable aum , to draw our thoughts 
away from all other subjects, to develop ekdgrata or one-pointedness. 
Symbol cannot be taken as final. It has a number of aspects. When 
it is transposed into the words of ordinary language it becomes dim 
and rigid. We then tend to confine the meaning within narrow 
dogmatic frames. Even though the syllable aum like all symbols 
covers the reality as by a veil, to those who know how to look, the 
veil becomes transparent. 

2. esdm bhiUdnam prthivi rasah, prthivyd dpo rasah, apdtn 
o$adhayo rasah , osadliinam puruso rasah , puru§asya vdg rasah, 
vaca rg rasah , rcah sama rasah , sdmna udgitho rasah. 

2. The essence of these beings is the earth; the essence of 
the earth is water. The essence of water is plants; the essence 
of plants is a person. The essence of a person is speech The 
essence of speech is the Rk (hymn). The essence of the Rk is 



338 The Principal Upanisads I. i. g. 

the Sdman (chant). The essence of the Sdman (chant) is the 
udgitha . 

rasa: essence, literally flavour. 

Most of the hymns of the Sdma Veda are taken from the R.V. 

3. sa esa rasdndm rasatamah par amah pardudhyo stamo yad 
udgithah . 

3. That is the quintessence of the essences, the Supreme, the 
highest, the eighth, namely the udgitha. 

parardhya: highest, from para highest and ardha place. 

4. katamd katama rk , katamat katamat sdma , katamah katama 
udgitha iti vimrstam bhavati. 

4. Which one is the Rk? Which one is the Sdman? Which 
one is the udgitha ? This is what is (now) considered. 

5. vdg eva rk, prdnah sdmomity etad aksaram udgithah, tad 
vd etan mithunam yad vdk ca pranas ca rk ca sdma ca. 

5. Speech, indeed, is Rk] breath is Sdman, the syllable aum 
is the udgitha. Now, this is a pair, namely speech and breath, and 
also the Rk and the Sdman. 

6. tad dan mithunam aum ity etasminn aksare samsrjyate ; 
yadd vai mithunau samagacchata , dpayato vui tdv anyo'nyasya 
kdmam. 

6. This pair is joined together in the syllable aum. Verily, 
whenever a pair come together, they fulfil each other's desire. 

7. dpayitd ha vai kdmdndm bhavati ya dad cvam vidvdn 
aksaram udgitham upaste. 

7. He, who knowing this thus, meditates on the syllable as 
the udgitha, becomes, veri)y, a fulfiller of desires. 

8. tad vd dad anujnaksaram , yaddhi kim cdnujdndty aum 
ity eva tad aha; esa eva samrddhir yad anujnd, samar dhay it d ha 
vai kdmdndm bhavati ya etad cvam vidvdn aksaram udgitham 
upaste. 

8 . Verily, this syllable is of assent, for whenever one assents 
to anything he says simply ' aum What is assent is fulfilment. 
He, who knowing this thus, meditates on the syllable as the 
udgitha, becomes, verily, a fulfiller of desires. 

9. teneyam trayi vidyd vartata, aum ity dsravayati, aum iti 
samsati, aum ity udgdyati , etasyaivdk§arasydpacityai mahimnd 
rasena. 



I. 2. i. Chandogya Upanisad 339 

9. By this does the threefold knowledge proceed. Saying 
aum, one recites: saying aum, one orders: saying, aum, one 
sings aloud, in honour of that syllable, with its greatness and 
its essence. 

Threefold knowledge relates to the three orders of priests in the 
sacrificial rites. & thinks that the reference is to the Soma sacrifice. 

10. tenobhau kuruto yascaitad evam veda yai ca na veda : 
nana tu vidyd cdvidyd ca; yad eva vidyayd karoti sraddhayo- 
panisadd, tad eva viryavattaram bhavatiti , khalv etasyaivdksara - 
syopavydkhyanam bhavati. 

10. He who knows this thus, and he who knows not, both 
perform with it. Knowledge and ignorance, however, are 
different. What, indeed, one performs with knowledge, faith 
and meditation, that, indeed, becomes more powerful. This, 
verily, is the explanation of this syllable. 

Vidyd is right knowledge, sraddhd is faith and upanisad is medi- 
tative insight: upanisadd yogena. 

We must perform the sacrifice with knowledge and not ignorantly. 
We must understand what we are doing. God is the inspector of our 
hearts as much as the judge of our acts. Our acts must be accom- 
panied by the devotion of our minds. 


Section 2 

LIFE (BREATH) AS THE UDG 1 THA 

1. devdsurd ha vaiyatra saniyetira ubhaye prdjd-patyds tadd ha 
devd udgitham djahrar anenaindn abhibhavisydma iti. 

1. When the gods and the demons, both descendants of 
Prajd-pati, contended with each other, the gods took hold of the 
udgitha, thinking, with this, we shall overcome them. 

See B.U. I. 3. 1. 

devdsura: gods and demons. Since the word deva is derived from a 
root denoting illumination, the 'gods' stand for such functions of 
the senses as are illuminated (regulated) by scriptures, sdstrodbhdsita 
indriya-vyttayah. And 'demons,' opposed to the former, stand for 
such functions of the senses as delight in activity towards all sensual 
objects appertaining to them and are naturally of the nature of 
darkness: tama dtmikd indriya-vrttu^ah. . . . Thus in the body of all 



34° The Principal Upanisads I. 2. 7. 

beings there is a perpetual fight between 1;he two : sarva-pranisu 
prati-deham devdsura-samgrdmo anddi-kdla-pravrtta ity abhiprdyah. 

2. te ha nasikyam pranam ndgltham updsamcakrire , tarn 
hasurah pdpmand vividhuh; tasmdt tcnobhayam jighrati surabhi 
ca dnrgandhi ca, pdpmand hy csa viddhah. 

2. Then they meditated on the ndgitha as the breath in the 
nose. The demons afflicted that with evil. Therefore, with it one 
smells both the sweet smelling and the foul smelling, for it is 
afflicted with evil. 

3. atha ha vacant ndgltham updsamcakrire , turn hasurah , 
pdpmand vividhnh; tasmdt tayobhayam vadati satyam canrtarh ca, 
pdpmand hy esd viddhd. 

3. Then they meditated on the ndgitha as speech. The 
demons afflicted that with evil. Therefore with it one speaks 
both the true and the false, for it is afflicted with evil. 

4. atha ha caksur ndgltham updsamcakrire, taddhasnrdh 
pdpmand vividhnh; tasmdt tcnobhayam pasyati dar&aniyarh 
cddar&ariiyam ca, pdpmand hy etad viddham. 

4. When they meditated on the ndgitha as the eye, the 
demons afflicted that with evil. Therefore with it one sees both 
the sightly and the unsightly, for it is afflicted with evil. 

5. atha ha srotram ndgltham npdisdmcakrire, taddhasnrdh 
pdpmand vividhuh; tasmdt tcnobhayam srnoti sravaniyam 
cdsravaniyam ca, pdpmand hy etad viddham. 

5. Then they meditated on the ndgitha as the car. The 
demons afflicted that with evil. Therefore with it one hears both 
what should be listened to and what should not be listened to, 
for it is afflicted with evil. 

6. atha ha mana ndgltham updsamcakrire, taddhasnrdh, 
pdpmand vividhuh, tasmdt tcnobhayam samkalpayate samkal- 
paniyam casamkalpaniyam ca, pdpmand hy dad viddham . 

6. Then they meditated on the ndgitha as the mind. The 
demons afflicted that with evil. Iherefore with it one imagines 
both what should be imagined and what should not be imagined, 
for it is afflicted with evil. 

7. atha ha ya evayam mukhyah pranas tam ndgltham upasdm- 
cakrire, tam hdsnrd rtvd vidadhvamsur, yathdsmdnam akhanam 
rtva vidhvamseta. 

7. Then they meditated on the ndgitha as the breath in the 



I. 2. 13 Chdndogya Upanisad 341 

mouth. When the demons hit against it they were destroyed, 
just as (a ball of earth) hitting against a solid stone is destroyed. 

mukhya prana: breath in the mouth or the principal breath, 
a ball of earth : myt-pinda. 

8 . evam yathdsmanam dkhanam rtvd vidhvamsate, evam haiva 
sa vidhvamsate ya evamvidi papam kdmayate , yas cainam 
abhidasati: sa eso'smdkhanah. \ 

8. Just as (a ball of earth) striking against a solid rock is 
destroyed, so will one be destroyed who wishes evil to one who 
knows this, as also one who injures him, for he is a solid rock. 

9. naivaitcna surabhi na durgandhi vijdndty-apahata-papmd hy 
esa, tena yad asndti yat pibati tendardn prdndn avati, etam u 
cvdntato’vit votkrdmati , vyddaddty cvdntata ill. 

9. With this (breath) one discerns neither the sweet-smelling 
nor the foul smelling for this is free from evil. With this, 
whatever one eats or whatever one diinks, he protects the 
other vital breaths. And, not finding this (breath in the mouth) 
one finally departs; one finally leaves his mouth open. 

10. tarn hdngird udgitham updsdhicakva , dam u cvdhgirasam 
many ante' ngdndim yad rasah. 

10. Ahgiras meditated on this as the udgitha. People think 
that it is, indeed, Ahgiras , because it is the essence of the limbs. 

11. tena tarn ha brhaspatir udgitham upusdmeakra dam u ejva 

brhaspatim manyantc, vdgghi brhati tasyd esa patih. I 

11. Brhaspati meditated orrthis as the udgitha . People thfmk 
that it is, indeed, Brhaspati , because speech is great and ](t is 
the lord thereof. 

• t 

12. tena tarn hdydsya udgitham updsdmcakra, dam u evdyd^yam 
manyanta dsydd yat ayatc. 

12. Aydsya meditated on this as the udgitha. People think 
that it is, indeed, Aydsya, because it comes from the moi/ith. 

13. tena tam ha bako dalbhyo viddmeakdra , sa ha naimisiwdndm 

udgdtd babhuva, sa ha smaibhyali kdmdin dgdyati. J ! 

13. Baka Ddlbhya knew it. He became the udgdtr pr/iest of 1 
the people of Naimisa. He sang out for them their desired. ) 

Baka Dfdbhya is mentioned in the M.B. as having performed d 
sacrifice for punishing Dhrta-ra^tra for his rude behaviouf : $qly§ 

VnvDn AT 



34 2 7 'Atf Principal Upanisads I. 3. 3. 

14. rtgrt/rt Art vrti kamdndm bhavati, ya dad evarii vidvdn 
aksaram ndgitham updsta ity adhydtmam. 

14. He obtains wishes by singing, who knowing this thus, 
meditates on the udgitha as the syllable. This, with regard to 
the self. 

These verses relate to the body and not the self. 


Section 3 

VARIOUS IDENTIFICATIONS OF THE VDGlTHA AND 
ITS SYLLABLES 

1. athddhidaivatam. ya cvdsan tapati tam ndgitham updsita- 
dyan vd esa prajdbhya udgdyati , udyams tamo-bhayam apahanti, 
apahantd ha vai bhayasya tamaso bhavati y a cvam vcda. 

1. Now, with reference to the divinities. Him who glows 
yonder (the Sun) one should meditate as the udgitha . Verily, 
on rising, he sings aloud for creatures. On rising, he dispels 
darkness and fear. He, verily, who knows this, becomes the 
dispeller of fear and darkness. 

‘As the sun arises, he removes the darkness of night and the fears 
qadiving beings consequent on it. One who knows the sun with these 
of hilities, becomes the destroyer of all fears of the self in the shape 
shap^irth, death, etc , and also of the cause of fear, darkness in the 
^ be of ignorance.’ $. 

dcak . I samdina u cvdiyam cdsau , cosno'yam, usno'sau, sva>a itimam 
amuikate, svara iti pratydsmra ity amtith tasmdd vd dam imam 

2. V* codgitham updsita. 

is warll his (breath) in the mouth and that (sun) are alike. This 
sound lm. That is warm. This, they call sound and that, they call 
this arf* as the reflecting sound. Verily, one should meditate on 
1 3. Arid on that as the udgitha. 

prdnoxtha khalu vydnam cvodgitham updsita; yadvai prdniti sa 
sa vyaib.yad apdniti so pdmah; atha yah prdndpdnayoh sandhih 
abhivyd^o, y° vydnah sd vdk ; tasmdd aprdnann anapdnan vdcam 

3. Bi harati. 

idgitha n yt one should meditate on the diffused breath as the 
hat That which one breathes in, that is the in-breath; 
^ nich one breathes out, that is the out-breath. The 



I. 3. 7. Chandogya Upanisad 343 

junction of the in-breath and the out-breath is the diffused 
breath. The diffused breath is the speech. Therefore one utters 
speech, without in-breathing and without out-breathing. 

When we speak, we neither breathe in nor breathe out. 

4. yd vdk sdrk, tasmdd aprdnan ana pdnan ream abhivydharati; 
yd rk tat sdma, tasmdd aprdnan anapdnan sdma gay at i; yat sdma 
sa adglthas tasmdd aprdnan anapdnan udgdyati. 

4. Speech is Rk. Therefore one utters the Rk without in- 
breathing and without out-breathing. The Rk is the Sdman. 
Therefore one sings the Sdman , without in-breathing and 
without out-breathing. The Sdman is the udgltha. Therefore one 
chants the udgltha , without in-breathing and without out- 
breathing. 

5. ato ydny anydini vlryavanti karmdni , yathdgner manlJianam , 
djeh saranam, drdhasyadhanusa dyamanam, aprdnan anapdnams 
tdm karoti ; ctasya hetor vydnam evodgitham updslta . 

5. Therefore, whatever other actions there are that require 
strength, such as the kindling of fire by friction, the running of 
a race, the bending of a strong bow, one performs (them) 
without in-breathing and without out-breathing. Therefore one 
should meditate on the diffused breath as the udgltha. 

Whenever we do an action which involves effoit and attention 
we hold our breath. 

6. atha khaludglthdksardny updsltodgltha iti prana evot- 
prdnena hy uttisthati; vdg glr vdeo ha gira ity dcaksatc nnatii 
tham anno htdam sarvam sthitam. 

6. Now one should meditate on tht; syllables of the udgltha , 
ut,gl, tha. ut is breath, for through breath one rises, gl is speech, 
for speeches are called giras ; tha is food, for 011 food is all this 
established. 

7. dyaur evot, antariksam glh, prtliivl tham; dditya evot , vdyur 
glr, agnis tham; sdmaveda evot , yajurvedo glr, rgvedas tham; 
dugdhc smai vagdoham, yo vdeo doho nnavdn annddo bhavati, ya 
etdny evam vidvdn udglthdksardny updsta , udgltha iti. 

7. Heaven is ut, atmosphere is gl and the earth, tha. The 
sun is ut, the air, gl and the fire, tha. The Sdmaveda is ut, the 
Yajurvcda, gl and the Rg Veda, tha. Speech yields milk and the 
milk is speech. For him, he i ecomes rich in food, an eater of 

M 



344 77z£ Principal Upanisads I. 4. 1. 

food, who knows and meditates on the syllables of the udgitha 
thus, ut t gl , 

8 . klmlv dsTh samrddhir upasarandnity updsita ycna 

samnd stosyan syat tat samopadhdvd. 

8. Now then, the fulfilment of wishes: One should meditate 
on the places of refuge. One should reflect on the Sdman 
with which one is about to sing a praise. 

upasarandni: places of refuge. § means by it objects contemplated. 
upasa) tavydni , upagantavydni , dhycydni. 

9. yasydm rci tarn ream , yad drscyam turn rsim , yam dcvatdm 
abhistosyan syat, tarn dcvatdm upadhdvd. 

9. One should reflect on the Rk in which the Sdman occurs, 
on the seer by whom it was seen, on the divinity to whom he is 
about to sing a praise. 

10. ycna chandasd stosyan syat tac chanda upadhdvd. ycna 
stomcna stosvamdnah syat tarn stomam upadhdvd. 

10. One should reflect on the metre in which he is about to 
sing a praise. One should reflect on the hymn-form in which he 
is about to sing a praise. 

11. yam disam abhistosyan syat tarn disanf upadhdvd. 

11. One should reflect on the quarter of space in the direction 
of -which he is about to sing a praise. 

12. dtmdnam antata upasrtya stitvila; kdmam dhydyann apra- 
matto'bhydso ha yad asmai sa kdmah samrdhyda , yat-kdmah 
stuvxtdi, yat-kdmah stuvitdi. 

12. Finally, one should enter into oneself and sing a praise, 
meditating carefully on one's desire. Quickly will be fulfilled 
for him the desire, desiring which he may sing the praise, yea, 
desiring which he may sing the praise. 

abhydsa: quickly. Be sure, depend on it that it will be fulfilled. 


Section 4 

THE SUPERIORITY OF AUM 

1. aum ity dad ak$aram udgttham upasitom iti hy udgdyati , 
tasyopavydkhydnam. 



I. 4. 5. Chandogya Upani$ad 345 

1. Aum . One should meditate on the udgltha as this syllable, 
for one sings the loud chant, beginning with aum. (Now follows) 
its explanation. 

2. dcvd vai mrtyor bibhyatas traytm vidyam pravisams te 
chandobhir acchddayan, yad ebhir acchddayams tac chandasdm 
chandas tv am. 

2. Verily, the gods, when they were afraid of death, took 
refuge in the threefold knowledge. They covered themselves 
with metres. Because they covered themselves with these, 
therefore the metres are called chandas. 

traytm vidyam: threefold-knowledge, the three Vedas. 

3. tan u tatra mrtyur yathd matsyam udake paripasyet; evam 
paryapasyad rci sdmni yajusi , te nu viditvordhvd rcah samno 
yajusah, svaram eva pravisan. 

3. Death saw them there in the Rg, in the Saman and in the 
Yajus just as one might see a fish in water. When they found 
this out, they rose out of the Rg, out of the Sdman , out of the 
Yajus and took refuge in sound. 

svaram: sound, the syllable aum. 

4. yadd va ream dpnoty aum ity evdtisvaraty evam sdmaivam 
yajur e$a u svaro yad etad aksaram etad amrtam abhayam tat 
pravisya dovd amrtd abhayd abhavan. 

4. Verily, when one learns the Rk, one sounds out aum. (It 
is) the same with Sdman\ (it is) the same with Yajus. This 
sound is that syllable, the immortal, the fearless. Having 
entered this, the gods become immortal, fearless. 

5. sa ya etad evam vidvdn aksaram pranauty etad evaksaram 
svaram amrtam abhayam pravisati, tat pravisya yad amrtd devds 
tad amrto bhavati. 

5. He, who knowing it thus, praises this syllable, takes refuge 
in that syllable, in the immortal, fearless sound, and having 
entered it, he becomes immortal, even as the gods become 
immortal. 

There is no difference of degree between the immortality of the 
gods and that of freed men. S. 



346 The Principal Upanisads 1 - 5 - 5 . 

Section 5 

THE UDGITHA IDENTIFIED WITH THE SUN AND THE 

BREATH 

1. atha khalu ya udgithah sa pranavo yah pranavah sa udgTtha 
ity asau vd dditya udgTtha , esa pranava, aum iti hy esa svarann 
eti. 

1. Now, verily, what is the udgTtha is the Aum. What is Aum 
is the udgTtha. And so verily, the udgTtha is the yonder sun and 
the Aum, for (the sun) is continually sounding Aum. 

svarann: sounding or going. S. 

2. etam u evdham ahhyagdsisam , tasmdn mama tvam eko’sTti ha 
kausTtakih putram uvdea , rasmlms tvam parydvartaydd bahavo 
vai tc bhavisyantTty adhidaivatam. 

2. ‘I sang praise to him alone; therefore you are my only 
(son)/ Thus said Kausltaki to his son. ‘Reflect on the (various) 
rays; verily, you will have many sons/ This, with reference to 
the divinities. 

3. athddhydtmam ya evdyam mukhyali pranas turn udgTtham 
updsTtom iti hy esa svarann cti. 

3. Now with reference to the body. One should meditate on 
the breath in the mouth as the udgTtha , for it is continually 
sounding aum. 

4. etam u evdham ahhyagdsisam, tasmdn mama tvam eko sTti ha 
kausTtakih putram uvdea, prdndms tvam bhumdnam abhigdyatdd 
bahavo vai me bhavisyantTti. 

4. ‘I sang praise to him alone. Therefore you are my only 
(son)/ Thus said Kausltaki to his son: 'Sing praise unto the 
breaths as manifold; verily, you will have many (sons)/ 

5. atha khalu y a udgithah sa pranavah, yah pranavah sa udgTtha 
iti hotr-sadanddd haivdpi durudgTtam anusamdharatTty anusamd - 
haratzti. 

5. Now, verily, what is the udgTtha is the aum. What is aum 
is the udgTtha. (If one knows this), verily, from the seat of 
the Hotr priest, all wrong singing is corrected, yea is corrected. 

hoty-sadana: the place from which the Hotr priest gives instructions. 



I. 6. 6 Chandogya Upanisad 347 

Section 6 

THE RG. AND THE SAMA VEDAS 

1. iyam eva rg, agnih sdma, tad etad ctasydm rcy adhyudham 
sdma , tasmeld rcy adhyudham sdma glyata , iyam eva sdignir amas 
tat sdma. 

1. This (earth) is the Rk and fire is the Saman. This Saman 
rests on that Rk. Therefore the Saman is sung as resting on 
the Rk. This (earth) is sd, and fire is ama and that makes saman. 

2. antariksam eva rg, vayuh sdma, tad dad ctasydm rcy adhyud- 
ham sdma, tasmdd rcy adhyudham sdma giyatc. antariksam eva sd, 
vdyur amas tat sdma. 

2. The atmosphere is the Rk and the air is Saman. This 
Saman rests on that Rk. Therefore the Saman is sung as 
resting on the Rk. The sky is sd and the air is ama, and that 
makes sdntan. 

3. dyaur eva rg ddityas sdma, tad etad ctasydm rcy adhyudham 
sdma, tasmdd rcy adhyudham sdma giyatc, dyaur eva sddityo’mas 
tat sdma. 

3. The heaven is Rk and the Sun is Saman. This Saman 
rests on that Rk. Therefore the Saman is sung as resting on the 
Rk. Heaven is sd and the sun is ama and that makes saman. 

4. naksatrdny eva rk, candramdh sdma, tad dad ctasydm 
rcy adhyudham sdma, tasmdd rcy adhyudham sdma giyatc, 
naksatrdny eva sd, candramd amas tat sdma. 

4. The stars are Rk and the moon is Sdma. This Sdma rests 
on that Rk. Therefore the Saman is sung as resting on the Rk. 
The stars arc sd and the moon ama Mid that makes sdma. 

5. atha yad etad ddityasya suklam bJidh saiva rg, atha yan 
nilam par ah krsnam tat sdma, tad dad ctasydm rcy adhyudham 
sdma, tasmdd rcy adhyudham sdma giyatc, 

5. Now, the white light of the sun is Rk ; the blue exceeding 
darkness is Saman. This Saman rests on that Rk) therefore 
this Saman is sung as resting on that Rk. 

6 . atha yad evaiiad dditvasva suklam bhdh saiva sd'tha yan 
nilam parah krsnam tad amas tat sdmdtha ya cso'nfar diditye 
hiranmayah puruso drsyate, hiranya-smasrur hiranya-kesa dpra- 
nakhdt sarva eva suvarnah. 

6 . Now, the white light of the Sun is sd and the blue, 



348 The Principal Upanisads I. 7. 1. 

exceeding darkness, is ama. That makes Sdman. Nowthat golden 
person who is seen within the sun, has a golden beard and 
golden hair. All is golden to the tips of the nails. 
suvarna: gold, used to symbolise light, life and immortality. 

7. tasya yathd kapydsam pundarikam evam aksim , tasyoditi 
nama; sa csa sarvcbhyah pdptnabhya nditi; udcti ha vai sarvcbhyah 
pdpmabhyo ya evam vcda. 

7. His eyes are even as a red lotus flower. His name is high 
(ut). He has risen above all evil. Verily, he who knows this, 
rises above all evil. 

The colour of the lotus is described by a comparison with the 
kapydsa or the seat of the monkey. 

8. tasya rk ca sduna ca gcsnau, tasmdd udglthah J tasmdt tvcvo- 
dgataitasya hi gdtd; sa csa ye cdmusmdt pardhco lokds tc?dm ccsle 
dcva kamdtiam ccty adhidaivatam. 

8. His songs are the Rk and the Sdman. Therefore (they are 
called) the udgitha. Hence the udgdtr priest (is so called) for 
he is the singer of this. He is the lord of the worlds which are 
beyond that (sun) and also of the desires of the gods. This, with 
reference to the divinities. 

gcsnau: songs. § means by it 'joints/ 'As the God is the self of all, 
in as much as He is the lord of the desires of all the worlds, high 
and low, it is only reasonable that He should have Rk and Sdman , in 
the shape of earth and fire, for his joints/ 


Section 7 

THE RG AND THE SAM A VEDAS 
(continued) 

1. athddhydtmam: vdg cva rk } prdnah sdma, tad ctad etasydm 
rcy adhyudham sdma, tasmdd rcy adhyddham sdma giyate, vdg cva 
sa prano’mas tat sdma. 

1. Now with reference to the body. Speech is the Rk: breath 
is the Sdman. This Sdman rests upon that lik. Therefore the 
Sdman is sung as resting on that Rk. Speech is sd and breath, 
ama and that makes sdman. 



I. 7. 6. Chandogya Upanisad 349 

2. caksur. eva rg dtmd sama, tad etad ctasydm rcy adhyudham 
sama, tasmdd rcy adhyudham sama giyate, caksur eva satma’mas 
tat sama. 

2. The eye is the Rk ; the soul is the Saman. This Saman 
rests on that Rk) therefore the Saman is sung as resting on the 
Rk. The eye is sa and the soul ama and that makes saman. 

3. srotram eva rh manah sama , tad etad etasydm rcy adhyudham 
sama , tasmdd rcy adhyudham sama giyate, srotram eva sa 
mano'mas tat sama. 

3. The car is the Rk and the mind is the Saman. This Saman 
rests on that Rk. Therefore the Saman is sung as resting on the 
Rk. The ear is sa and the mind ama and that makes saman. 

4. atha yad etad aksnah suklam hhdh saiva rk, athayan nxlam 
par ah krsnam tat sama, tad dad ctasydm rcy adhyudham sama, 
tasmat rcy adhyudham sama giyate , atha yad evaitad aksnah 
suklam hhdh saiva satha yan nilam parah krsnam tad amas tat 
sama. 

4. Now, the white light of the eye is Rk and the blue, 
exceeding darkness is Saman. This Saman rests on that Rk. 
Therefore the Saman is sung as resting on the Rk. The white 
light of the eye is Sd and the blue, exceeding darkness, ama and 
that makes saman. 

5. atha ya eso i nta)-aksinT puruso drsyate saiva rk, tat sama, 
tad uktham , tad yajuh, tad brahma, tasyaitasya tad eva rupam 
yad amusya rupam, ydv amusya gcsnau tan gcsnau, yan ndma 
tan nama. 

5. Now, this person who is seen within the eye is the hymn 
(rk), the chant (the saman), is the •recitation (uktha), is the 
sacrificial formula (yajus), is the prayer (brahman). The form 
of this one is the same as the form of that (person seen in the 
sun). The songs of the former are the songs of this. The name 
of the one is the name of the other. 

6. sa esa ye caitasmdd arvdnco lokds tesdm ccste manusya- 
kdmdndm ceti, tadya imc vTndydm gdyanty dam tc gay anti, tasmat 
te dhana-sanayah. 

6. He is the lord of the worlds which are under this one and 
also of men’s desires. So those who sing on the vTna sing of 
him. Therefore they are winners of wealth. 

Vind is a musical instrument which has had a long history in India. 



350 The Principal Upanisads I. 8. 2. 

7. atha ya dad cvam vidvdn sdma gdyaty ubhau sa gdyati, 
so’mttnaiva sa csa ye cdmusmdt paranco lokds tarns capnoti 
dcva-kdmdims ca. 

7. Now, he, who knowing this, sings the Sdman, sings of 
both. Through the former (person in the sun) he obtains the 
worlds which are beyond that (the sun) as also the desires of 
the gods. 

8. athdncnaiva ye caitasmdd, arvdmco lokds tdmi capnoti 
manusya-kdmdmi ca tasmdd u haivam-vid udgdtd brnydt . 

8. And through this (person in the eye) he obtains the worlds 
which are under the latter and also the desires of men. There- 
fore an udgditr priest, who knows this, should say (the following). 

9. kam tc kdmam dgdiy unity csa hy eva kdmdgdnasyeste, ya cvam 
vidvdn sdma gdyati , sdma gdyati. 

9. What desire may I win for you by singing? 'He, truly, 
becomes capable of obtaining desires by singing, he, who 
knowing this sings the Sdman, yea, sings the Sdman/ 


Section 8 

THE IDENTIFICATION OF UDGlTHA 

I. trayo hodgithe kuiald babhuvuh , iilakali sdldvatyas caikitd - 
yano ddlbhyah, pravahano jaivalir iti , tc hocar udglthc vai kusaldh 
smo hantodgithc kathdm vaddma iti. 

1. There were three persons well- versed in the udgitha, 
Silaka the son of Sfilavat, the son of Cikitana of the Dalbha 
clan, and Pravahana, son of Jivala. They said: ‘We are, indeed, 
well-versed in the udgitha. Well, let us have a discussion on 
the udgitha/ 

2. tatheti ha samupavivisuh, sa ha pravahano jaivalir uvdea, 
bhagavantdv agre vadatdm, brdhmanayor vadator vdcam sros- 
ydmiti. 

2. 'So be it' said they and sat down. Then, Pravfihana, son 
of Jivala, said: ‘You two, sirs, speak first. I will listen to the 
words of the two Brahmanas discussing.' 

From this it appears that Pravahana was a Ksatriya. wSce C.U. V. 
3.5, where he is said to be rdjayiya-bandhuh. Even though he is not a 



I. 8. 7- Chandogya Upanisad 351 

Brahmana, he happens to be the one who knows the true meaning of 
udgitha. 

3. sa ha silakah sdldvatyas’ caikitdyanam ddlbhyam uvaca, 
hanta tvd prcchdniti; prcchcti hovaca. 

3. Then, £ilaka, son of Salavat said to the son of Cikitana of 
the Dalbha clan, ‘Well, may I question you?' He replied, 
‘Question/ 

4. kdi sduhno gatir iti, svara iti hovdcci ; 
svarasya kd gatir iti , prana iti hovaca; 
prdnasya kd gatir ity, annam iti hovaca 
annasya kd gatir ity, apa iti hovaca. 

4. He asked, ‘What is the goal of the SdmanV He replied, ‘It 
is sound/ He asked, ‘What is the goal of sound?’ He replied, 
‘Breath/ He asked, ‘What is the goal of breath?’ He replied, 
‘Food/ He asked, ‘What is the goal of food?’ He replied, 
‘Water/ 

gatih : goal, substiatum or basis or final principle: gatir dsrayah 
pardyanom ity dal . S. 

5. a path kd gatir iti, asau loka iti hovdedmusya lokasya kd 
gatir iti, na svargam lokam atinayed iti hovaca , svargam vayarh 
lokam sdwidbhisamsthd pay amah svarga-samstdvam hi sdmeti. 

5. (He asked) ‘What is the goal of water?’ He replied, 
‘Yonder world.' (He asked) ‘What is the goal of the yonder 
world?’ He replied, ‘One should not lead beyond the heavenly 
world.’ We established the Sdman in the world of heaven, for 
the Sdman is praised in heaven. 

Cp. 'Hie Santa Veda is the world of heaven: svargo vai lokah sdma 
vedah. 

6. tam ha silakah sdldvatyas caikitdyanam ddlbhyam iivdca: 
apratisthitam vai kila tc, ddlbhya, sdma; yas tv ctarhi bray an 
mdrdhd tc vipatisyatlti murdhd tc vipated iti. 

6. Then Silaka, son of Salavat said to Cikitana of the Dalbha 
clan: ‘Verily, indeed, your Sdman, of you of the Dalbha clan, 
is unestablished. If now, someone were to say, your head will 
fall off, surely your head would fall off/ 

The enormity of the error is suggested by the statement that your 
head will fall oil if one utters a curse like that. 

7. hantdham dad bhagavato vcddnlti, viddhiti hovdedmusya 
lokasya kd gatir ity ayam lorn iti hovdedsya lonasya kd gatir iti 



352 The Principal Upani%ads I. 9. 2. 

na pratisthdm lokam atinaycd iti hovdca pratisthdm vayam lokam 
sdnidbhisamsthd pay amah pratisthd-samstdvam hi sdmeti. 

7. He said, 'Well, I would like to know this from you; sir, 
‘Know it/ said he. (He asked) ‘What is the goal of the yonder 
world?' He replied, ‘One should not lead beyond this world- 
support. We establish the Sdnian on the world as support for 
the Sdnian is praised as the support/ 

8. tamha piavdiliano jaivalir uvdcdntavaddhai kila tc sdldvalya 
sdnia-yastvdarhi bray an nuirdhd tc vipatisyatiti mfirdhd te 
vipated iti. liantaham dad bhagavato veddniti viddhiti hovdca . 

8. Then Pravahana, son of Jivala, said to him, ‘Verily, 
indeed, your Sdnian, O son of Salavat, has an end. If someone 
now were to say, “Your head will fall off," surely your head 
would fall off/ He said, ‘Well, I would like to know this from 
you, Sir/ He replied, ‘Know it/ 


Section 9 

THE U DC IT HA IDENTIFIED WITH SPACE 

I. asya lokasya kd gntir ity dkdsa iti hovdca. sarvdni ha vd 
imdni bhiitdny dkdsdd eva sainutpadyante , dkdsam pralyastam 
yantv dkdiso hy evaibhyo jydydn, dkdsa h pardyanani. 

1. 'What is the goal of this world?' He replied, ‘Space, for 
all thc.^e creatures are produced from space. They return back 
into space. For space is greater than these. Space is the linal 
goal.' 

See VII. 1 2. 1. 

Space E said to be the origin, support and end of all. 

The theory that space is the ultimate ground of the world is 
regarded as more satisfactory than the view which traces it to 
sound, breath, food, water, yonder world or this world. 

2. sa esa paro-vanydn iidgiihah, sa cso’nantah, paro-vanyo 
hdsya bhavati , paro-varlyaso ha lokdh jayati ya dad evam vidvdin 
parovanydm sam udgltham u paste. 

2. This is the udgitha, highest and best. This is endless. He 
who, knowing this, meditates on udgitha , the highest and best, 
becomes the highest and best and obtains the highest and best 
worlds. 



I. io. 3. Chandogya Upanisad 353 

3. tarn haitam atidhanvd iaunaka udara-fdndilydyoktvovdca. 
yavat ta enam prajayam udgitham vedisyante, paro-variyo haibhyas 
tdvad asmimlloke jivanam bhavisyati. 

3. When Atidhanvan Saunaka taught this Udgitha to Udara 
^andilya, he also said: 'As long as they shall know this Udgitha 
among your descendants, so long their life in this world will 
be the highest and best. 

4. tatha mnsmimlloke loka iti; sa ya etad evam vidvdn updste 
parovariya eva hasydsmiml lokc jivanam bhavati , tatha musmiml 
loke loka iti t lokc loka iti. 

4. And so will their state in that other world be. One who 
thus knows and meditates — his life in this world becomes the 
highest and best and so his state in that other world, yea, in 
that other world/ 


Section 10 

THE DIVINITIES CONNECTED WITH THE SACRIFICES 

1. mataci liatesn karusv dlikyd saha jdyayosastir ha cakrdyana 
ibhya-grdme pradrdnaka uvdsa. 

1. Among the Kurus, when they (crops) were destroyed by 
hailstorms, 1 there lived in the village of the possessor of elephants 
a very poor man, Usasti Cakrayana, with his young wife, Atiki. 

The story is intended to make the comprehension easier. 
ibhya-grdme — in the village of the possessor of elephants or in the 
village belonging to Ibhya. 

2. sa hebhyam kulmdsdn khddanhhn bibhikse, tarn hovdea, 
ncto’nye vidyantc yac ca ye ma ima upanihitd iti. 

2. He begged (food) of the possessor of elephants, while he 
was eating beans. He (the possessor) said to him: T have no 
other than these which are set before me/ 

The rich man said that the beans were in the plate from which 
he was eating and therefore they were impure. 

3. etesdrh me dehiti hovdea , tan asmai pradadau, hantanupdnam 
ity, ucchistham vai me pitam sydd iti hovdea . 

* Professor S. K. Chalterji suggests the alternative explanation of 
mataci , locust, an old Dravidian oan word m Sanskrit. Cp. Kannada 
midice , Brahmi malakh . 



354 The Principal Upanisads I. io. 8. 

3. He said: ‘Give me some of them/ He gave them to him 
and said, ‘Here is water (to drink)/ He replied, ‘That would be for 
me to drink something left by another (and hence impure)/ 

4. na svid etc py ucchisthdh iti, na va ajivisyam imdn akhddann 
iti hovdca , kdmo ma udaka-pdnam iti. 

4. Are not these (beans) also left over (and so impure) ? 
‘Verily/ said he, ‘I could not live if I did not eat these. The 
drinking of water is at my will/ 

'One who is endowed with knowledge and fame and capable of 
helping himself and others, if such a one, falling into a state of 
distress should do such a thing (eat unclean food), no demerit 
touches him. A wrong action is faulty only when it is performed 
while other courses that are not wrong are open and would as easily 
save one’s life/ 

5. sa ha khdditva tiscsdh jdydya djahdva, sdgra eva subhiksd 
babhiiva , tan pratigrhya nidadhau. 

5. When he had eaten, he gave what still remained to his 
wife. She had eaten well even before. After taking them, she 
kept them safe. 

6 . sa ha prdtah samjihdna uvdca , yad batdnnasya labhcmahi , 
labhemahi dhana-mdtram: rdjdsau yaksyate , sa md sarvair drtvij - 
yair vrniteti. 

6. Next morning, he arose and said, ‘Oh, if I could get some- 
thing to eat, I might make a little money. The king over there 
is having a sacrifice performed for himself. He might choose 
(select) me to perform all the priestly offices/ 

7. tam jdyovdca , hanta eta ima eva kulmdsd iti : tan khddit- 
vdmnm yajham vitatam eyiiya. 

7. His wife said to him: ‘Here, my lord, an* the beans/ 
Having eaten them, he went over to the sacrifice that was 
being performed. 

In addition to personal religion, the Vedas advocated public 
worship by means of sacrifices. In the period of the Veda, there were 
no temples. Public worship was needed in view of the social nature 
of man. In a crowd, emotions are more easily excited. In every 
religion, social worship of God is recognised, in which mfisic, singing 
and ritual are employed to evoke religious feeling and actions. 
Yajnas or sacrifices are solemn and stately social acts. 

8. tatrodgdtfn dstdve stosyamdndn upopavivesa, sa ha prasto - 
tar am uvdca. 



I. ii. 2. Chandogya Upanisad 355 

8. Then he sat down near the Udgdtr priests as they were 
about to sing the hymn in the place (assigned) for singing. 
Then he said to the Prastotr priest : 

9. prastotar yd devatd prastavam anvdyatta, tarn ccd avidvdn 
prastosyasi, murdhd te vipatisyatlti. 

9. ‘O Prastotr priest, if you sing the introductory praise 
without knowing the divinity that belongs to it, your head will 
fall off/ 

10. evam cvodgdtdram uvdcodgdtar yd devatodgltham anvdyatta 
tarn ced avidvdn udgdyasi, murdhd tc vipatisyatlti. 

10. In the same manner he said to the Udgdtr priest, ‘Oh, 
Udgdtr priest, if you chant the udgitha without knowing the 
divinity that belongs to it, your head will fall off/ 

11. evam eva pratihartdram uvdea, pratihartar yd devatd prati- 
hdram anvdyatta , lam ccd avidvdn pratiharisyasi , murdhd te 
vipatisyatlti: te ha samdratds tusnlm dsdmcakrirc. 

11. In the same manner, he said to the Pratihartr priest, 
‘Oh, Pratihartr priest, if you take up the response without 
knowing the divinity that belongs to it, your head will fall off ' 
They stopped and*sat down in silence. 

In performing sacrifices we should have a knowledge of their 
meaning. 


Section 11 

THE DIVINITIES CONNECTED WITH THE SACRIFICES 

( continued ) 

1. atha hainam yajamdna uvdea, bhagavantam vd aham 
vividisdnlti ; usastir asmi cdkrdyana iti hovdea. 

1. Then, to him, the institutor of the sacrifice said, ‘Verily, 
I would wish to know you, sir/ He replied, 'I am Usasti 
Cakrayana/ 

2. sa hovdea , bhagavantam vd aham ebhih sarvair drtvijyaih 
paryaisisam , bhagavato vd aham avittyd-anydn avrsi. 

2. Then, he said, ‘I look'd for you for all these priestly 
offices. Verily, not finding you, sir, I have chosen others/ 



356 The Principal Upanisads I. n. 7. 

3. bhagavdms tv eva me sarvair drtvijyair iti; tathcti; atha 
tarhy eta eva samatisrstdh stuvatdm; ydvat tv ebhyo dhanarh 
dadyds t tdvan mama dadyd iti. tathcti ha yajamdna uvaca. 

3. But now, sir, please take up all the priestly offices. ‘So 
be it/ he said, ‘let these with my permission, sing the praises. 
But as much wealth as you give to them, so much give to me 
also/ The institutor of the sacrifice said, ‘So be it/ 

4. atha hainam prastotopasasdda: prastotar yd dcvatd prastdvam 
anvdyatta , tdm ccd avidvdn prastosyasi, murdhd tc vipatisyatiti: 
md bhagavdn avocat. katamd sd dcvatcti. 

4. Then the Prastotr priest approached him (and said), 
‘You, sir, said unto me, “Oh Prastotr priest, if you sing the 
introductory praise without knowing the divinity that belongs 
to it, your head will fall off.” Which is that divinity?' 

5. prana iti hovdca, sarvdni ha vd imdni bhutdni prdnam 

evdbhisahivisanti, prdnam abhynjjihate , saisd devatd prastdvam 
anvdyatta: tdm ced avidvdn prdstosyo murdhd to vyapatisyat 
tathoktasya mayeti. 7 * 9 

5. ‘Breath/ said he. ‘Verily, indeed, all beings here enter 
(into life) with breath, and. depart (from life) with breath. 
This is the divinity belonging to the PrastaVa. If you had sung 
the Prastava without knowing it, after you had been told so by 
me, your head would have fallen off/ 

See T.U. III. 3. 

6. atha hainam udgatopasasddodgdtar yd dcvatodgitham anvd- 
yattd, turn ccd avidvdn udgdsyasi, murdhd te vipatisyatlti: md 
bhagavdn avocat. katamd sd dcvatcti. 

6. Then the Udgdtr priest approached him (and said), 'You, 
sir, said unto me: “O Udgdtr priest, if you sing the udgitha 
without knowing the divinity that belongs to it, your head will 
fall off.” Which is that divinity?' 

7. dditya iti hovdca , sarvdni ha vd imdni bhutdny adityam 
uccaih santam gdyanti; saisd dcvatodgitham anvdyatta , tarn ced 
avidvdn udagdsyah, murdhd tc vyapatisyat tathoktasya mayeti. 

7. ‘The sun,' said lie. ‘Verily, indeed, all beings here sing 
of the sun, when he is up. This is the divinity connected with 
the udgitha. If, without knowing this, you had chanted the 
udgitha , after you had been told so by me, your head would 

have fallen off/ 



I. 12. i. Chdndogya Upanisad 35 7 

8. atha hainam pratihartopasasada, pratihartar yd devatd prati- 
haram anvayatta, tdm ced avidvan pratiharisyasi, murdha te 
vipatisyatiti ; md bhagavan avocat. katama sa devateti. 

8. Then the Pratihartr priest approached him (and said), 
'You sir, said unto me, "Oh Pratihartr priest, if you take up 
the response without knowing the divinity that belongs to it, 
your head will fall off." Which is that divinity?' 

9. annam iti hovaca, sarvani ha vd imdni bhutdny annam eva 
pratiharamdndni jivanti, saisd devatd pratiharam anvayatta , 
tarn ced avidvan praty aha risy ah, murdha te vyapatisyat tathoktasya 
mayeti, tathoktasya mayeti. 

9. ‘Food,’ said he. 'Verily, indeed, all beings here live, when 
they partake of food. This is the divinity that belongs to the 
Pratihara , and if, without knowing this, you had taken up 
the Pratihara , after you had been told so by me, your head 
would have fallen off.' 

Cp. T.U. III. 2. 

Meclitation without knowledge is barren of results. 


Section 12 

A SATIRE ON PRIESTLY RITUAL 

1. athdtah sauva udgTthah. tadd ha bako ddlbhyo gldvo vd 
maitreyah svddhydyam udvavrdja . 

1. Now, next, the udgitha of the* dogs. Baka Dalbhya or 
Glava Maitreya went forth for the study of the Veda. 

Here are two names for one person. 
svddhyaya: study of the Vedas. 

Cp. Patafijali’s definition of niyama: 
iauca-santosa-tapah-svddhydycsvara-pranidhdniini. Yoga Sfitra, II. 32. 

It is the study of the scriptures and recitation of mantras which 
lead to purity of mind. 

vedanta-satarudriya-pranavddi japam budhdh . 
sattva-snddhi-karam pumsdm svddhydyam paricaksate. 
Svddhyaya is the study of the scriptures dealing with liberation or 
the repetition of the pranava. 

svddhydyo moksasdstrdndm adhyayanam pranava-japo vd. 



358 The Principal Upanisads I. 13. 2. 

2. tasmai ivd ivetah prddur-babhuva: tam anye svdna upa - 
sametyocur annam no bhagavdn agdyatv asandyama vd iti. 

2. Unto him there appeared a white dog. Other dogs gathered 
round this (one) and said, 'Obtain food for us by singing. Verily, 
we are hungry/ 

3. tan hovdcchaiva md prdtar npasamiydtcti; tadd ha bako 
ddlbhyo gldvo vd maitreyah pratipdlayam cakdra. 

3. Then he said to them: ‘Come to me here tomorrow 
morning/ So Baka Dalbhya or Glava Maitreya kept watch. 

4. te ha yathaivcdam bahispavamdncna stosyamdndh samrab- 
dhdh, sarpantlly evam dsasrpus te ha samupavisya him cakruh. 

4. Just as the priests, when they are about to chant with 
the bahispavamdna hymn of praise, move along, joined to one 
another, so did the dogs move along. Then they sat down 
together and made the noise ‘him/ 

5. attm adama, aum pibdma, aum dcvo varunah prajdpatih 
savitdnnam ihdharat. anna-pate annam ihdhara, dhara , aum iti. 

5. (They sang), 'Aum, let us eat, Aum, let us drink, Aum, 
may the god Varuna, Prajd-pati and Savitr bring food here. 
O Lord of food, bring food here, yea, bring it here. Aum/ 

This section is a satirical protest against the externalism of the 
sacrificial creed, in the interests of an inward spiritual life. 

Madhva attributes the hymn to Yfiyu, who assumed the foim of 
a dog. 


t Section 13 

THE MYSTICAL MEANING OF CERTAIN SOUNDS 

1. ay am vdva loko hdu-kdrah, vdyur hdii-kdras candramd atlui- 
karah , atmcha-kdro* gnir i-kdrah. 

1. This world is the syllable hdu. The air is the syllable 
hai t the moon is the syllabic atha. The self is the syllable iha. 
The fire is the syllable f. 

The syllables mentioned are the sounds used in the recitation of 
Sdman hymns. 

2. aditya u-kdro nihava e-kdro visvcdevd au ho-y i-kdrah , 
prajd-patir him-kdrah ; prdnah svaro’nnam yd, vdg virdt . 



I. 13. 4. Chdndogya Upanisad 359 

2. The sun is the syllable u. Invocation is the syllable e. 
The Visvcdevas is the syllable au-ho-i. Prajd-pati is the syllable 
him. Breath is sound. Food is ya. Viraj is speech. 

yd vdg virdt. Cp. R.V. X. 189. 3. trirhsad-dhama virajali vdk. 

Her character is prajnd or prajndtman, only partially actual in 
the individual self-consciousness, distinguishing the I from the 
not- 1 , the inner world from the outer one. In ordering life, the 
potential all-consciousness lies asleep in the depths of the human 
body. It may be awakened by the discipline of yoga. 

3. aniruktas trayodasah stobhah samcaro hum-kdrah. 

3. The undefined is the variable, thirteenth, interjectional 
sound hum. 

4. dugdhe’smai vdg doham.yo vdeo doho’nnavdn annddo bhavati: 
ya dam evam sdtiindm upanisadam vcdopanisadatii veda. 

4. Speech yields to him the milk, which is the milk of speech 
itself. He becomes rich in food, an eater of food — one who knows 
thus this mystic meaning of the Sdmans, yea, who knows the 
mystic meaning. 



360 


The Principal Upanisads 


II. 2. i. 


CHAPTER II 
Section i 

THE CHANT IS GOOD IN VARIOUS WAYS 

i. aunt samastasya khalu sdmna updsanam sddhu , yat khalu 
sddhn tat samety dcaksatc, yad asddhu tad a-sdmcti. 

1. A um, Meditation on the entire Sdman is good. Whatever 
is good, people call Sdman and whatever is not good a-sdnuin. 

2. tad utapy ahull sdmnainam upagdd iti sddhunainam upagdd 
ity cva tad dhuh asdmnainam upagdd ity asddhunainam upagdd 
ity cva tad dhuh. 

2. So also people say, ‘He approached with Sdman 1 * * ) that is 
they say, ‘he approached him in a kindly way/ They say, ‘He 
approached him with no Sdman 1 i.e. they say 'he approached 
him in no kindly way/ 

Sdman is understood as the good, as the dharma. 

3. athotapy dhuh sama no batcti yat sddhu bhavati sddhu 
batety cva tad dhuh, asdima no batcti yad asddhu bhavaty asddhu 
batcty eva tad dhuh. 

3. And they say 'this, verily, is Sdman for us/ Where they 
say ‘this is good for us' when anything is good. And they say 
‘this is a sdman for us/ where the} 7 say, ‘this is not good' when 
anything is not good. 

4. sa ya dad cvani vidvdn sddhu samety updste’bhyaio ha yad 
enam sadhavo dharma d ca gacchcyur upa ca nameyuh. 

4. He who, knowing this, meditates on the Sdman as good, 
all good qualities would quickly approach him and accrue 
to him. 


Section 2 

SOME ANALOGIES TO THE FIVEFOLD CHANT IN THE 

WORLDS 

1. lokesu panca-vidhah sdmopdsita: prthivi him-karah , agnih 

prastdvo 1 ntariksah udgithah, ddityah pratihdro dyaur nidhanam 

ity urdhvesu . 



II. 3- 2. Chandogya Upanisad 361 

1. In the worlds, one should meditate on the Saman as 
fivefold; the earth as the syllable him , fire as the prastdva, the 
atmosphere as the udgitha, the sun as the pratihara and the sky 
as the nidhana (conclusion). This, among the higher (ascending). 

The sky is said to be nidhana, inasmuch as those that depart from 
this world are deposited (nidhlyante) in the sky. 

2. athavrttesu, dyaur him-kdra, adityah prastdvo' ntariksam 
udgitho’gnih pratihdrah , prthivi nidhanam. 

2. Now in the reverse (descending order) the sky as the 
syllable him , the sun as the prastdva, the atmosphere as the 
udgitha, the fire as the pratihara and the earth as the nidhana. 

The earth is the nidhana as the people that come back to the earth 
are deposited here. 

3. kalpante hdsmai lokd iirdhvdi cdvrttds ca ya etad evam 
vidvaml lokcsu pahea-vidham sdmopaste. 

3. The worlds, in the ascending and reverse orders, belong 
to him, who, knowing this thus, meditates on the fivefold 
Saman in the worlds. 

In different ways the importance of the meditation is indicated. 


Section 3 

IN THE RAINSTORM 

1. vr$tau pahea-vidham sdmopdsifa, puro-vdto him-karo , megho 
jdyatc sa prastdvah, varsati sa udgithah, vidyotate stanayati sa 
pratihdrah. 

1. One should meditate on the fivefold Saman in the rain. 
The preceding wind as the syllabic hint) the formation of the 
cloud is the prastdva. What rains is the udgitha ; the lightning 
and the thunder as the pratihara. 

2. udgrhndti tan nidhanam, varsati hdsmai varsayati ha ya 
etad evam vidvdn vrstau pahea-vidham sdmopaste. 

2. The cessation as the nidhana. It rains for him and he 
causes it to rain, he, who knowing this thus, meditates on the 
fivefold Saman in rain. 



362 


II. 6. i 


The Principal Upanisads 
Section 4 

IN THE WATERS 

1. sarvdsv apsu panca-vidham sdmopdsTta, megho yat sampla- 
vatc sa him-kdro yad varsati sa prastdvo , yah prdeyah sy andante 
sa udgithah, yah pratTyah sa pratihdrah , samadro nidhanam. 

1. One should meditate on the fivefold Sdman in all the 
waters. When a cloud forms, that is the syllable him , when it 
rains, that is a prastdva ; when (the waters) flow to the east, 
they are iidgTtha. When they flow to the west they are pratihdra. 
The ocean is the nidhana. 

2. na hdpsu praity apsumdn bhavati ya dad evdrii vidvdn 
sarvdsv apsu panca-vidham sdmopdste. 

2. He does not die in water, he becomes rich in water, he, 
who knowing this thus, meditates on the fivefold Sdman in all 
the w aters. 


Section 5 

IN THE SEASONS 

1. rtiisu panca-vidham sdmopdsTta vasanto him-kdro, grTsmah 
prastdvah, varsd udgithah , sarat pratihdrah , hemanto nidhanam. 

1. One should meditate on the fivefold Sdman , amoni the 
seasons, the spring as the syllable him , the summer at the 
prastdva, the rainy season as the udgitha , the autumn as the 
pratihdra and the winter as the nidhana. 

2. kalpantc hdsmd rtava rtumdin bhavati ya dad evam vidvdn 
rtusu panca-vidham sdmopdstc . 

2. The seasons belong to him and he becomes rich in seasons, 
he, who knowing this thus, meditates on tin* five 1 fold Sdman in 
the seasons. 


Section 6 

IN THE ANIMALS 

1. pasiisu panca-vidham sdmopdsTta , ajd him-kdro' vayah pras- 
tdvah, gdiva udgTtho' svdh pratihdrah, puruso nidhanam. 



II. 7- 2. Chandogya Upanisad 363 

1. One should meditate on the fivefold Sdman among the 
animals, the goats as the syllable him , the sheep as the prastdva, 
the cows as the udgxtha , the horses as the pratihdra and the 
human being as the nidhana. 

The human being is the culmination of animal development. 

2. bhavanti hdsya paiavah pasumdn bhavati ya etad evam 
vidvdn pasusu panca-vidham sdmo paste. 

2. Animals belong to him and he becomes rich in animals, 
he, who knowing this thus, meditates on the fivefold Sdman 
among the animals. 


Section 7 

AMONG THE VITAL BREATHS 

1. p)dncsu panca-vidham paro-variyah sdmopdsita, prano him- 
kdro, vdk prastdvah, caksur udgithah , srotram pratihdrah , mano 
nidhanam paro-varlydmsi vd ctani. 

1 j One should meditate on the most excellent fivefold 
Sdman among the vital breaths, breath as the syllable him , 
speech as the prastdva, the eye as the udgitha , the ear as the 
pratihdra and the mind as the nidhana. These, verily, are the 
most excellent. 

prana; breath. It is used to include the senses also. 
prana is also explained as ghrdna, smell. 

That which is higher than the high is called paw ( para u). He who is 
higher than this is paro-varam. He who is higher than this pato-varam 
is called paro-varlyah. Madhva. 

2. paro-variyo hdsya bhavati paro-vanyaso ha lokdh jayati ya 
etad cvam vidvdn prdncsn panca-vidham paro-variyah sdmo pasta , 
iti tu panca-vidhasya. 

2. The most excellent belongs to him, he wins the most 
excellent worlds, he, who knowing this thus, meditates on the 
most excellent Sdman among the vital breaths. 



364. The Principal Upanisads II. 9. 2. 

Section 8 

SOME ANALOGIES TO THE SEVENFOLD 
CHANT : SPEECH 

1. atha sapta-vidhasya, vdei sapta-vidham sdmopastta, yat kirn 
ca vdeo hum iti sa himkdro , yat preti sa prastdvah, yad eti sa adih. 

1. Now for the sevenfold. One should meditate on the seven- 
fold Sdnuni in speech. Whatsoever of speech is hum, that is the 
syllable him] whatsoever is pra , that is prastdva ; and the 
syllable a as the first (or the beginning). 

2. yad uditi sa udgithah, yat pratiti sa pratihdrah , yad upeti sa 
upadravah , yan niti tan nidhanam. 

2. Whatsoever is tit, that is an udgxtha ; whatsoever is prati, 
that is a pratihdua] whatsoever is upa, that is an tipadrava (or 
approach to the end); whatsoever is ni, that is nidhana (or 
conclusion) . 

3. diigdhe’smai vdg dofuun yo vdeo doho nnavdn annddo 
bhavati, sa etad evani vidvdn vcici sapta-vidham sdmopdste. 

3. For him speech yields milk, which is the milk of speech 
and he becomes rich in food and eater of food; he, who knowing 
this thus, meditates on the sevenfold Sdman in speech. 


Section 9 
THE SUN 

1. atha klialv amum ddityam sapta-vidham sdmopastta, sarvadd 
samastena sdma, mam prati mam pratiti sarvena samastena sdma. 

1. One should meditate on the sevenfold Sdman in the sun. 
He is Sdma because he is always the same. He is the same with 
everyone since people think Tie faces me/ 'He faces me/ 

2. tasminn imdni sarvdni bhutdny anvdyattdnTti vidydt tasya 
yat purodaydt sa him-kdrcis tadasya pasavo' nvdyattds tasmdt tc him 
kurvanti him-kara-bhdjino hy etasya sdmnah. 

2. One should know that all beings here depend on him. 
What he is before rising is the syllable him. On this depend 
the animals. Therefore they utter the syllable him. Truly they 
are partakers in the syllable him of the Sdman. 



II. 9* 8- Chdndogya Upanisad 365 

3. atha yat prathamoditc sa prastavas tad asya manusya 
anvayattas, tasmdt te prastuti-kdmah prasamsd-kdmdh prastdva- 
bhdjino hy etasya sdmnah. 

3. Now when it is just after sunrise, that is a prastdva. On 
this men depend. Therefore they arc desirous of praise, desirous 
of laudation. Truly they are partakers in the prastdva of that 
Sdman. 

Men are generally lovers of name and fame. 

4. atha yat sangava-veldydm sa ddih. tad asya vaydmsy anvaya- 
ttdni , tasmdt tuny antarikse ndrambandny addya tmdnam pari- 
patanty ddi-bhdjlni hy etasya sdmnah. 

4. Now when it is the sangava (cow gathering) time, that is 
ddi. On this depend the birds. Therefore they hold themselves 
without support, in the atmosphere and fly about. Truly, they 
are partakers in the ddi of the Sdman. 

5. atha yat samprati madhyan-dinc sa udgithah, tad asya devd> 
anvdyattdh, tasmdt tc sattamdh prdjdpatydndm udgitha-bhdjino hy 
etasya sdmnah. 

5. Now, when it is just midday, that is an udgitha. On this 
the gods depend. Therefore they are the best of Prajdpatis 
offspring. Truly they are partakers in the udgitha of that 
Sdman. 

6. atha yad urdhvam madhyan-dindt prdig apardhndt sa prati- 
hdras , tad asya gatbhd anvayattas , tasmdt te pratihrtd ndvapady- 
ante t pratihdra-bhdjino hy etasya sdmnah. 

6. Now when it is past midday and before the afternoon — 
that is a pratihdva. On this all foetuses depend. Therefore they 
are held up and do not drop down. Truly, they are partakers in 
the pratihdra of that Sdman. 

7. atha yad urdhvam apardhndt prdg astamaydt, sa upadravah, 
tad asydranyd anvdyattdh , tasmdt te purusam drstvd kaksam 
svabhram ity upadravanty upadrava-bhdjino hy etasya sdmnah. 

7. Now when it is past afternoon and before sunset, that is 
an upadrava. On this the wild animals depend. Therefore when 
they see a man, they run to a hiding-place as their hole. Truly 
they are partakers in the upadrava of that Sdman. 

8. atha yat prathamdstamitc tan nidhanam, tad asya pitaro* 
nvdyattdh, tasmdt tan nidadhati nidhana-bhdjino hy etasya sdmnah , 
evam khalv amum aditya?h sapta-vidham sdmopaste. 



36b The Principal Upanisads 11 . io. 5 - 

8. Now when it is just after sunset, that is the nidhana. On 
this the fathers depend. Therefore the people lay aside the 
fathers. Truly they are partakers of the nidhana of that Sdman . 
Thus does one meditate on the sevenfold Sdnian in the sun. 


Section io 

THE MYSTICAL MEANING OF THE NUMBER OF 
SYLLABLES IN THE CHANT 

i. atha khalv dtma-sammitam atimrtyu sapta-vidham sdmo 
pdsTta; him-kdra iti try-aksaram prastdva iti try-aksaram tat 
saniam. 

1. Now, then, one should meditate on the sevenfold Sdnian 
which is uniform in itself and leads beyond death. The syllable 
him has three letters, prastdva has three letters. That is the 
same. 

Though in English they arc s\ liable^, in Sanskrit each English 
syllable is represented by one letter. 

2 . ddir iti dvy-aksaram pratihdua iti catur-aksaram lata 
ihaikam , tat samam . 

2. Adi has two letters. Pvahhdra has four letters. (If we take 
one) one from there here, that is the same. 

3. udgitha iti try-aksaram upadrava-iti catur-aksaram tribhis 
tribhih samam bhavati aksaram atisisyatc; try-aksaram tat samam. 

3. Udgitha has three letters; upadrava has four letters. Three 
and three, that is the same, one letter left over. Having three 
letters, that is the same. 

What is left over is supposed to have three letters. 

4. nidhanam iti try-aksaram , tat samam eva bhavati tdini ha vd 
etdni dvd-vimsatir aksardni. 

4. Nidhana has three letters. That is the same too. These 
indeed, are the twenty-two letters. 

5. eka-vimsaty ddityam dpnoti } cka-vimso vd ito'sav ddityo t 
dvdi-vimscna par am dditydj jdyati; tan ndkam , tad visokam. 

5. With the twenty first, one obtains the sun. Verily, the sun 
is the twenty-first from here. With the twenty-second he 



II. 12. i. Chandogya Upanisad 367 

conquers what is beyond the sun. That is bliss. That is sorrow- 
less. 

S quotes The twelve months, the five seasons (taking the whole 
of winter as one) and the three worlds (earth, atmosphere and sky) 
(make up twenty) and the sun is the twenty-first/ 

6. dpnoti hddityasya jayam, paro hdsydditya-jaydj jayo bhavuti, 
ya etad evam vidvdn dtma-sammitam ati-mrtyu sapta-vidham 
sdmo paste, sdmopdstc. 

6. He obtains the victory of the sun, indeed a victory higher 
than the victory of the sun is his, who, knowing this thus, 
meditates on the sevenfold Sdman , uniform in itself, which leads 
beyond death, yea, who meditates on the (sevenfold) Sdman. 


Section 11 

GAY AT R A CHANT 

1. mano him-kdro vdk prastdvah , caksur udgTthah, srotram 
pratilidrah , prdno nidhanam , dad gdyatram pranesu protam. 

1. The mind is the syllable him, speech is the prastava, the 
eye is the udgttha , the ear is the pratihdra, the breath is the 
nidhana. This is the Gay air a - chant woven in the vital breaths. 

2. sa ya evam dad gdyatram pranesu protam veda pram bha- 
vati, sarvam dynr cti , jyog jlvati, mahdn prajayd pasubhir 
bhavali , mahdn klrtyd mahdmanah sydt , tad vralam. 

2. He who knows thus this Gay air a chant as woven in the 
vital breaths, becomes the possessor of vital breaths, reaches 
the full length of life, lives well, becomes great in offspring and 
in cattle, great in fame. One should be great-minded. That is 
the rule. 

mahdmanah: great-minded. He will not be petty-miiukd. aksndta 
c it tali. S. 


Section 12 

RATIIANTARA CHANT 

1. abhimanthati sa him kdrali , dhumo jayate sa prastdvah , 
jvalati sa udgitho’ngdrd bhavanti sa pratihdrah, upasdmyati tan 



368 The Principal Upanisads II. 13. 2 

nidhanam; samsdmyati tan nidhanam; etad rathantaram agnau 
protam. 

1. One rubs the fire-sticks together — that is the syllable 
him. Smoke is produced, that is the prastdva. It blazes. That is 
the udgltha. Coals are produced, that is the prat i/ulra. It becomes 
extinct, that is the nidhana. This is the Rathantava as woven on 
fire. 

2. sa ya cvam dad rathantaram agnau protam veda , brahma - 
varcasy annddo bhavati , sarvam dyur cti, jyog jivati, mahdn 
prajayd pasubhir bhavati , mahdn kirtyd; na pratyahh agnim dcd- 
men na nisthivd , tad vratam 

2. He who knows thus this Rathantara chant as woven on 
fire becomes radiant with sacred wisdoms, an eater of food, 
reaches the full length of life, lives well, becomes great in off- 
spring and in cattle, great in fame. One should not take a sip of 
water or spit before the lire. That is the rule. 


Section 13 

V AM ADEVY A CHANT 

I. upamantrayate sa him-kdrah, jhapayate sa prastdvah, striyd 
saha sde sa ud git hah, prati s trim saha sde sa pratihdrah, kdlam 
gacchati tan nidhanam , pdram gacchati tan nidhanam: dad vdma - 
dcvyam mithune protam. 

1. One summons, that is the syllable him. He makes request, 
that is a prastdva. Along with the woman, he lies down, that is 
the udgitha. He lies on the woman, that is the pratihdra. He 
comes to the end, that is the nidhana. He comes to the finish, 
that is the nidhana. This is the V dmadcvy a chant woven on sex 
intercourse. 

2. sa ya evam etad vdmadcvyam mithune protaih veda mithuni 
bhavati , mithundn mithundt prajdyate, sarvam dyur eti , jyog 
jivati , mahdn prajayd pasubhir bhavati mahdn kirtyd , na kahcana 
pariharet , tad vratam. 

2. He who knows thus this V dmadeoya chant as woven on 
sex intercourse, comes to intercourse, procreates himself from 
every act, reaches a full length of life, lives well, becomes great 
in offspring and in cattle, great in fame. One should not despise 
any woman. That is the rule. 



II. 15- 2. Chandogya Upanisad 369 

Section 14 
BRHAT CHANT 

1. udyan him-ltdrah , uditah prastdvali, madhyan-dina udgitho } 
pardhnah pratiharo' stam yan nidhanam: etad brhad aditye 
protam. 

1. When the sun rises, it is the syllable him. When the sun 
has risen, it is the prastdva] when it is midday, it is the udgitha . 
When it is afternoon, it is the pratihara. When (the sun) is set, 
it is the nidhana. This is the Brhat chant as woven on the sun. 

2. sa y a evam etad brhad aditye protam veda , tejasvi annado 
bhavati, sarvam ayur eti , jyog jivati, mahdn prajayd pasubhir 
bhavati mahdn kirtya: tapantam na nindet , tad vratam. 

2. He who knows thus this Brhat chant as woven on the sun 
becomes refulgent, an eater of food, reaches a full length of 
life, lives well, becomes great in offspring and in cattle, great 
in fame. One should not decry the burning sun. That is the rule. 


Section 15 

VAIRUPYA CHANT 

1. abhrani samplavantc sa liimkdrah , megho jdyate sa prastdvah, 
varsati sa udgithah , vidyotate stanayati sa pratilidrah, udgrlinati tan 
nidhanam, etad vairupam parjanye protam. 

1. The mists come together, that is the syllable him . A 
cloud is formed, that is the prastdva. It rains, that is the 
udgitha. It flashes and thunders, that is the pratihara. It holds 
up. That is the nidhana. This is the Vairupya chant woven 
on rain. 

2. saya evam etad vairupam parjanye protam veda, virupdms ca 
surupams ca pa&un avarundhe , sarvam ayur eti, jyog jivati, mahdn 
prajayd pasubhir bhavati, mahdn kirtya, varsantam na nindet, tad 
vratam. 

2. He who thus knows this Vairupya as woven on rain, 
acquires cattle, of various form and of beautiful form, reaches 
a full length of life, lives well, becomes great in offspring and 
in cattle, great in fame. One should not decry when it rains. 
That is the rule. 



37 ° 


The Principal Upanisads 
Section 16 


II. 17. 2. 


VAIRAJA chant 

1. vasanto him-kdrah, grlsmah prastdvah, varsd udgithah , 
sarat pratihdrah , hemanto nidhanam , etat vairdjam rtusu protam. 

1. Spring is the syllable Zu/w, summer is the prastdiva , rainy 
season is the udgltha ; autumn is the pvatihdra ; winter is the 
nidhana. This is the Vairdja chant as woven on the seasons. 

2. srt 3’<7 m/w cW vairdjam rtusu protam veda, virdjati prajaya 
pasubhir brahma-varcascna , sarvam dyur cti, jyog jivati , mahdn 
prajaya pasubhir bhavati mahdn kirtyd; rtun na nindet , tad 
vratam. 

2. He who knows thus this Vairdja chant as woven on the 
seasons shines with children, cattle and the lustre of sacred 
wisdom, reaches a full length of life, lives well, becomes great 
in offspring and cattle, great in fame. One should not decry the 
seasons. That is the rule. 


Section 17 

SAKVARl CHANT 

1. prthivi him-kdro) ntariksam prastdvah , dyaur udgithah , disah 
pratihdrah, samudro nidhanam, ctdh sakvaryo lokesu protdh. 

1. The earth is the syllable him. The atmosphere is the 
prastdva. The sky is the udgltha, the quarters of space are 
pratihdra. The ocean is the nidhana. These are the verses of the 
SakvarT chant woven on the worlds. 

2. sa y a evam ctdh sakvaryo lokesu protd veda , loki bhavati , 
sarvam dyur cti , jyog jivati, mahdn prajaya pasubhir bhavati 
mahdn kirtyd; lokdn na nindet , tad vratam. 

2. One who knows these verses of the Sakvarl chant as 
woven on the worlds becomes possessed of the worlds, reaches a 
full length of life, lives well, becomes great in offspring and 
cattle, great in fame. One should not decry the worlds. That is 
the rule. 



II. 19. 2. Chdndogya Upanisad 371 

Section 18 
REV AT I CHANT 

1. ajd him-kdro'vayah prastavah, gava udgitho’ svah pratihdrah, 
puruso nidhanam, etd revatyah pasusu protdh. 

1. The goats are the syllable him. The sheep are the prastava. 
The cows are the udgitha. The horses are the pratihara. The 
human being is the nidhana. These are the verses of the Revati 
chant woven on the animals. 

2. sa ya evam etd revatyah pasusu protd veda, pasumdn bhavati , 
sarvam ayur eti , jyog jivati, mahdn prajayd pasubhir bhavati 
mahdn kirtyd; pasun na nindet, tad vratam. 

2. He who knows thus these verses of the Revati chant as 
woven on the animals becomes the possessor of animals, reaches 
the full length of life, lives well, becomes great in offspring and 
cattle, great in fame. One should not decry animals. That is the 
rule. 


Set t ion 19 

YAJNAYA JNlYA CHANT 

1. luma him-kdr ah, tvak prastavah, mdmsam udgitho’sthi prati- 
hdrah , majjd nidhanam , ctad yajMyajmyam angcsu protam. 

1. Hair is the syllable him. Skin is the prastava. Flesh is the 
udgitha . Bone is the pratihara. Marrow is nidhana. This is the 
Y ajhayajhiya chant woven on the members of the body. 

2. sa ya evam ctad yajMyajmyam angcsu protam vcdahgi 
bhavati , ndhgena vihiirchati, sarvam ayur eti , jyog jivati mahdn 
prajayd pasubhir bhavati mahdn kirtyd , samvatsaram majjho 
ndsniydt , tad vratam; majjho ndsniydt iti vd. 

2. He who thus knows this Y ajhayajhiya chant as woven on 
the members of the body becomes equipped with limbs; does 
not become defective in any limb, reaches the full length of 
life, lives well, great in offspring and cattle, great in fame. One 
should not eat of marrow for a year. That is the rule. Rather, 
one should not eat of marrow at all. 

The plural number majjho is used to include fisn also. S. 



372 The Principal Upani§ads II. 21. 2 

Section 20 

RAJ AN A CHANT 

1. agnir him-kdrah, vdyuh prastdvah, dditya udgithah , nak~ 
satrani pratihdrah, candramd nidhanam : etad rdjanam devatdsu 
protam. 

1. Fire is the syllable him ; Air is the prastdva. wSun is the 
udgitha. Stars are the pratihdra and moon is the nidhana . This 
is the Rdjatui chant woven on the divinities. 

2. sa ya evam etad rdjanam devatdsu protam vedaitasdm eva 
devatdndm salokatdm sdrstitdm sdyujyam gacchati, sarvam dyur 
eti, jyog jivati, mahdn prajayd pasubhir bhavati mahdn kirtya; 
brdhmandn na nindet, tad vratam. 

2. He who knows thus this Rdjana chant as woven on the 
divinities goes to the same world, to equality and to complete 
union with these very divinities, reaches the full length of life, 
lives well, becomes great in offspring and cattle, great in fame. 
One should not decry the Brfihmanas. That is the rule. 

He is lifted to the region of the deity whom he has loved and 
worshipped during life. Salvation does not consist in absorption with 
the Absolute or assimilation to God but in getting near His presence 
and participating in His glory. 


Section 21 

THE SAM AN REGARDING THE ALL 

1. trayi vidyd him-kdrah , traya ime lokdli s a prastavo’ gnir vdyur 
dditya h sa udgithah, naksatrdni vaydmsi maricayah sa pratihdrah , 
sarpa gandharvdh pitaras tan nidhanam, etat sdma sarvasmin 
protam. 

1. The threefold knowledge is the syllable him. The three 
worlds here are the prastdva. Eire, air and sun are the udgitha ; 
stars, birds and the light rays are the pratihdra ; serpents, 
gandharvas and the fathers are the nidhana. This is the chant as 
woven in all. 

2. sa y a evam etat sdma sarvasmin protam veda, sarvam ha 
bhavati. 

2. He who knows thus this chant as woven on all becomes all. 



II. 22. 3- Chandogya Upanisad 373 

3. tad esa slokah: ycini pahcadha trlni trlni 
tebhyo na jyayah param anyad asti. 

3. On this, there is this verse. There are triple things which 
are fivefold. Greater than these, there is nothing else besides. 

4. ycis tad vcda sa vcda sarvam sarvd diso balim asmai haranti, 
sarvam asmity updslta , tad vratam , tad vratam. 

4. He who knows that, knows all. All the quarters of space 
bring him gifts. One should meditate (on the thought) T am 
the All/ That is the rule, yea, that is the rule. 


Section 22 

DIFFERENT MODES OF CHANTING 

1. vinardi sdmno vrnc pasavyam ily agner ndgitho niruktah 
prajdpateh , nimktah somasya, mrdu slaksnam vdyoh, slaksnam 
balavad indrasya , krauheam brhaspatcJi, apadhvdntam varunasya : 
tan sarvdn evopaseveta, vdntnam tv eva varjayct. 

1. Of the Sdiman , I choose the high-sounding one as good 
for cattle, this is the song sacred to Fire. The undefined one 
belongs to Prajd-pali, the defined one to Soma; the soft and the 
smooth to Vayu, the smooth and strong to Indra; the heron-like 
to Brhaspati, the ill-sounding to Varuna. Let one practise all 
these but one should avoid that belonging to Varuna. 

2. amrtatvam devebhya iigayanity dgdyd svadhdm pitrbhya 
dsdm manusyebhyas trnodakam pasubhyah svargam lokam 
yajamdndydnnam dtniana dgdydnity ctdim manasd dhydyann 
apramattah sinvlta. 

2. ‘Let me secure immortality for the gods by singing' 
thus should one sing. ‘Let me secure offerings for the fathers 
by singing hope for men, grass and water for the cattle, the 
world of heaven for the sacriticer and food for myself/ Thus 
reflecting in his mind on all these, one should sing the praises 
carefully. 

3. sarve svard indrasyditmdnali sarva usnuinah pyajdpatcr 
dtmdnah carve spared mrtvor dtmdmih, tam yadi svarcsupdlabhe- 
tendram saranam pvapannobhitvam sa tvd prati vaksyatlty enam 
bruydt. 



374 The Principal Upanisads II. 23. 1. 

3. All vowels are the embodiments of Indra; all spirants are 
the embodiments of Prajd-pati ; all consonants are the embodi- 
ments of Death. If one should reproach a person for his vowels, 
he should tell that one, ‘I have taken my refuge in Indra. He 
will answer you/ 

4. atha yady etmm fismasupalabhcta , prajapatim saranayn 
prapanyio’ bhuvam, sa tvd prati pcksyatlty cnam bhiiydt. atha yady 
cnam sparsesupalabhcta: mrtyum saranayn , prapaymo' bhuvam, sa 
tvd prati dhaksyaiity cnam bray at. 

4. So if one should reproach a person for his spirants he 
should tell that one ‘I have taken refuge in Prajd-pati. He 
will smash you/ And if one should reproach a person for his 
consonants he should tell that one, ‘1 have taken refuge in 
Death. He will burn you up/ 

5. sarve svard ghosavayito balavanto vaktavyd indre balayn 
daddyiiti, sarva lismdno’grastd anirastd vivrtd vaktavydh prajd- 
patcr dtyndyiam paridaddtiiti, sarve sparsd lescndyiabhinihitd 
vaktavyd mrtyor dtyyuhiam parihardfiTli. 

5. All the vowels should be pronounced resonant and strong, 
(with the thought) ‘May I impart strength to Indra/ All the 
spirants should be pronounced well open, without being 
slurred over, without being elided, (with the thought) ‘May I 
give myself to Prajd-pati / All the consonants should be pro- 
nounced slowly, without merging them together (with the 
thought) ‘May I withdraw myself from Death/ 


Section 23 

DIFFERENT MODES OF VIRTUOUS LIFE 

1. trayo dhanyia-skandhdh; yajho 'dhyayanam ddyiayyi iti, pra- 
thamas tapa eva, dvitiyo brahmacdrydcdrya-kula-vdsi t trtiyo*- 
tyantam dtmayiam deary akule’ vasddayayi: sarva etc pimya-lokd 
bhavanti, brahma-samstho' mrtatvayn cti. 

1. There are three branches of duty, sacrifice, study and 
almsgiving — Austerity, indeed, is the first. The second is the 
pursuit of sacred wisdom, dwelling in the house of the teacher. 
Absolutely controlling his body in the house of the teacher, is 
the third. All these attain to the worlds of the virtuous. He 
who stands firm in Brahman attains life eternal. 



II. 23. 3 * Chandogya Upanisad 375 

tapah: austerity. It is used sometimes to comprehend all forms of 
the pursuit of self-control. 

Ytam tapas, satyam tapas, srutam tapas, sdntam tapo , ddnam tapo , 
yajhas tapo bhur bhuvas svar brahmaitad updsyailat tapah. 
Ndrayaniya. 8. 

brahmacarya : the practice of continence. 

Brahman is also used for tapas or austerity. Cp. bhagavdn kdsyapah 
sdsvate brahmani vartate. Kalidasa: Sdknntald Act I. The commen- 
tators interpret Brahman as tapas. 
brahma-samstha: He who stands firm in Brahman . 

S suggests that this refers to the parivrdt or the monk who alone 
obtains eternal life, while others who practise active virtues obtain 
the worlds of the virtuous. He, however, points out that there is 
another view held by the Vrttikara, that anyone who stands firm in 
the eternal obtains the life eternal. He need not be a samnydsin. 
$ argues that the true brahma-samstha is the samnydsin who gives 
up all actions: karma-nivrtti-laksanam parivrdjyam brahma-samsthat - 
vam. £. 


THE SYLLABLE AUM 

2. prajd-patir lokdn abhyatapat; tcbhyo abhitaptebhyas trayi 
vidyd samprdsravaty tdm abhyatapat, tasyd abhitaptdyd ctdny 
aksardni samprdsravanla bhur bhitvah svar iti. 

2. Prajd-pati brooded on the worlds. From them, thus 
brooded upon, issued forth the threefold knowledge. He 
brooded on this. From it, thus brooded upon, issued forth 
these syllables, bhuh, bhitvah . svah. 

threefold knowledge: three Vedas. 

bhuh , earth; bhitvah , atmosphere; svah, sky. 

3. tan abhyatapat, tcbhyo' bhitaptebhya amiikdrah samprdsravat, 
tad yathd sahkund sarvdni parndni samtrnndny evam autiikdrena 
sarvd vdk samtrnnaumkdra evedatii sat vam, aumkdra cvcdam 
sarvam. 

3. He brooded on them and on them, thus brooded upon, 
issued forth the syllable Aum. As all leaves are held together 
by a stalk, so is all speech held together by Aum. Verily, the 
syllable Aum is all this, yea, the syllable Aum is all this. 



376 The Principal Upanisads II. 24. 7 

Section 24 

THE DIFFERENT REWARDS FOR THE OFFERERS 
OF OBLATIONS 

1. brahmavddino vadanti yad vasundm prdtah savanam , 
rudrdndm mddliyan-duiam savanam , dditydndim ca visvesdm ca 
devdndni trtiya-savanam. 

1. The expounders of sacred wisdom declare that the 
morning ottering belongs to the Vasus , the midday offering to 
the Rudras and the third (evening) offering to the Adityas and 
the Yisve-devas. 

2. kva tarhi yajamdnasya loka iti, sayas tarn na vidydt katliam 
kurydd , atha vidvdn kuvydt. 

2. Where then is the world of the sacrificer? If he knows 
not (this), how can he perform (sacrifices)? So, let him, who 
knows, perform. 

3. purd prdtar anuvdkasyopdkarandj jaghanena gdrhapa- 
tyasyodahmukha upavisya sa vdsavam sdmdbhigdyati. 

3. Before the commencement of the morning litany, he sits 
behind the gdrhapatya fire, facing the north and sings the 
chant sacred to the Vasus. 

In Srauta sacrifices, three fires arc recognised, dhavamya, ddksina 
and gdrhapatya , .corresponding to heaven, sky and earth. They are 
dedicated to the worlds of gods, ancestors and men respectively. 

4. loka-dvdram apdvrnu, pasyema tvd vayam rdjydya iti . 

4. Open the door of this world, that we may sec thee for the 
obtaining of the sovereignty. 

5. atha jnhoti namo gnayc prthivi-ksite loka-ksite lokam me 
yajamdnaya vindaisa vai yajamdnasya loka ctdsnii. 

5. Then he makes the offering (reciting) ‘Adoration to Fire, 
who dwells on earth, who dwells in the world. Obtain the world 
for me, the sacrificer. To this world of the sacrificer, I will go/ 

6 . atm yajamdnah parastdd dyusah svdha pajahi parigham ity 
ukvottisthati; tasmai vasavah prdtah savanam samprayacchanti. 

6. Thither will the sacrificer, after life, go. Hail, take away 
the bolt. Having said this, he rises. For him the Vasus fulfil the 
morning offering. 

7. purd mddhyan-dinasya savanasyopdkarandj jaghanena 
agntdhriyasyodahm ukha upavisya , sa raudram sdmdbhigdyati. 



II. 24. 15 - Chdndogya Upanisad 377 

7. Before the commencement of the mid-day offering, he 
sits behind the Agnidhnya fire, and facing the north, he sings 
the chant sacred to the Rudras. 

8 . loka-dvdram apavrnu, pasyema tvd vayam vairdjydya iti. 

8. Open the door of this world that we may see thee for the 
obtaining of sovereignty. 

9. atha juhoti , namo vdyave’ntariksa-ksite loka-ksite lokam , me 
yajamanaya vinda, esa vai yajamanasya lokah, etasmi. 

9. Then he makes the offering (reciting) ‘Adoration to Air, 
who dwells in the sky and dwells in the world. Obtain the world 
for me, the sacrificer. To this world of the sacrificer I will go/ 

10. atra yajamdnah parastdd ayusah svaha pajahi parigham 
ity uktvottisthati , tasmai rudrd madhyan-dinam savanam sampra - 
yacchanti. 

10. Thither, will the sacrificer, after life, go. Hail, take 
away the bolt. Having said this, he rises. For him, the Rudras 
fulfil the midday offering. 

11. pur a trtlya-savanasyopakarandj jaghanendhavaniyasyo- 
danmukha upavisya sa ddityam sa vcn'svadcvam sdmdbhigdyati . 

11. Before the commencement of the third offering, he sits 
behind the Ahavanlya fire, facing the north, he sings the chant 
sacred to the Adityas and Visve-devas 

12. loka-dvdram apavrnu , pasyema tvd vayam svdrdjydya iti . 

12. Open the door of this world that we may sec thee for the 
obtaining of sovereignty. 

13. ddityam , atha vaisvadevam , loka-dvdram apavrnu pasye- 
ma tvd vayam sdmrdjydya iti. 

13. Thus the chant to the Adityas: now the chant to the 
Visved-evas : Open the door to this w T orld that we may see thee 
for the obtaining of sovereignty. 

14. atha juhoti , nama ddilyebhyas ca visvebhyas ca devcbhyo 
divi-ksidbhyo loka-ksidbhyah lokam me yajamanaya v indata. 

14. Then he makes the offering (reciting) ‘Adoration to the 
Adityas and to the Visve-devas, who dwell in heaven and dwell 
in the world, obtain the world for me, the sacrificer/ 

15. esa vai yajamanasya lokah, etdsmy atr a yajamdnah parastdd 
ayusah svaha! pahata parighatn ity uktvottisthati. 



378 The Principal Upanisads II. 24. 16. 

15. ‘Verily, to this world of the sacrificer will I go. Thither 
will the sacrificer afterlife go. Hail, take away the bolt.’ Having 
said this, he rises. 

16. tasmd ddityds ca visvc ca devas trtiya-savanam sampra- 
yacchanti, esa ha vai yajhasya mdtram veda, ya evam veda, ya 
evam veda. 

16. For him, the Adityas and the Visve-devas fulfil the third 
offering. He, who knows this, knows the fulness of the sacrifice, 
yea, he who knows this. ' 



III. 2. I. 


Chdndogya Up ants ad 


37 9 


CHAPTER III 

Section i 

THE SUN AS THE HONEY OF THE GODS: RG VEDA 

i. aum: asau vd ddityo dcva-madhu; tasya dyaur cva tiras- 
cina-vamso’ntariksam apupali, maricayah putrdh. 

1. Verily, yonder sun is the honey of the gods. Of this the 
sky is the cross-beam; the atmosphere is the honeycomb; the 
particles of light are the brood. 

The sun is treated as the object of meditation. The sky is the 
crossbeam from which the honeycomb hangs. 

2. tasya ye pvdhco rasmayah td evdsya prdcyo madhundidyah 
rca eva madhukrlah rgveda eva puspam, td amrtd dpah Id vd ctd 
rcah. 

2. The eastern rays of that sun arc its eastern homy cells. 
The Rks are the producers of honey. The Rg Veda is the 
flower and those waters are the nectar and those very Rks 
indeed (are the bees). 

‘Just as the bees produce honey by extracting the juices of 
flowers, so do the rks make their honey by extracting the juices of 
actions prescribed in the Rg Veda * &. 

3. etam rg vedam abhyatapams , tasydbhitaptasya yasas teja 
indriyam viryam annddyam raso’jdyata. 

3. These brooded on the Rg Veda ; from it, thus brooded 
upon, issued forth as its essence, fame, splendour, (vigour of 
the) senses, virility, food and healthy 

4. tad vyaksarat , tad ddityam abhito’ srayat , tad vd dad yad 
etad ddityasya rohitam rupam. 

4. It flowed forth; it went towards the sun. Verily, that is 
what the red appearance of the sun is. 


Section 2 
YA JUR VEDA 

1 . atha ye T sya daksind rain lyas td evdsya daksind madhu-nddyo 
yajumsy eva madhii-krto yajur veda eva puspam , td amrtd dpah . 



380 The Principal Upanisads III. 3. 3. 

1. Now its southern rays are its southern honey-cells. The 
Yajus formulae are the producers of honey. The flower is the 
Ycijnr Veda and these waters are the nectar. 

2. Icini vd etdni yajumsy etam yajurvedam abhyatapams, tasya - 
bhitaptasya yasas, tcja, indr iy am , viryam, annddyam , raso 1 
jdyata. 

2. Verily, these yajus formulae brooded on the Yajur Veda; 
from it, thus blooded upon, issued forth as its essence, fame, 
splendour, (vigour of the) senses, virility, food and health. 

3. tad vyaksarat , tad ddityam abhito’srayat, tad vd etadyad dad 
ddityasya suklam ritpam. 

3. It flowed forth; it went towards the sun. Verily, that is 
what the white appearance of the sun is. 


Section 3 
SAMA VEDA 

1. aihaycsya pratyanco rasmayas id evdsya pr alley 0 madhu-nd - 
dyali sdmdny eva madhu-krtali sduna veda eva puspam, td amrtd 
dpah . 

1. Now, its western rays are its western honey-cells. The 
Sdman chants are the producers of honey. The flower is the 
Sdma Veda and these waters are the nectar. 

2. tdni vd cidni sdmdny dam sdma vedam abhyatapams 
tasydbhitaptasya yasas , tcja, indriyam , viryam , annddyam , 
raso' jdyata. 

2. Verily, these Sdman chants brooded on the Sdma Veda ; 
from it, thus brooded upon, issued forth, as its essence, fame, 
splendour, (vigour of the) senses, virility, food and health. 

3. tad vyaksarat , tad ddityam ablixto srayat, tad vd etadyad dad 
ddityasya krsnam rupam . 

3. It flowed forth. It went towards the sun. Verily, that is 
what the dark appearance of the sun is. 



III. 5. 2. Chdndogya Upanisad 381 

Section 4 

AT II A RV A VEDA 

1. atha ye’syodanco rasmayas td cvdsyodicyo madhu-nddyo * 
tharvangirasa cva madhu-krtah, itihdsa-purdnam puspam , 
amrta dpdh. 

1. Now its northern rays are its northern honey-cells. (The 
hymn of the) Atharvans and the Ahgirasas are the honey 
producers. The flower is legend and ancient lore. These waters 
are the nectar. 

The stories from the Epics and the Puranas were repeated at some 
sacrifices. They are mentioned in the Brahmanas, and later collected 
in the Malidbhdrata and the Pur anas. 

2. te vd etc tharvangirasa dad itihdsa-purdnam abhyatapams, 
tasydbhitaptasya yasas, teja , indr iy am , viryam , annddyam , raso' 
jay at a. 

2. Verily, these (hymns) of the Atharvans and Ahgirasas 
brooded upon that legend and ancient lore. From them, thus 
brooded upon, issued forth, as their essence, fame, splendour, 
(vigour of the) senses, virility, food and health. 

3. tad vyaksarat, tad ddityam abhito srayat, tad vd ctadyad etad 
ddityasya param krsnam rupam. 

3. It flowed forth. It went towards the sun. Verily, that is 
what the extremely dark appearance of the sun is. 


Section 5 
BRAHMAN 

1. atha ye' syordhvd rasmayas td evdsyordhvd madhu-nddyo 
guhyd evadesa madhu-krto , brahmaiva puspam, td amrtd dpah. 

1. Now, its upward rays are its upper honey cells. The hidden 
teachings (the Upanisads) are the honey producers. Brahman 
is the flower. These waters are the nectar. 

Brahman , according to S, here signifies the pranava, i.e. the syllable 
aum. 

2. te vd ete guhyd ddesd dad brahmdbhyatapams tasydbhita- 
ptasya yasas, teja , indriyam, viryam, annddyam, raso'jdyata . 



382 The Principal Upanisads III. 6. 3. 

2. These hidden teachings brooded on Brahman, and from it 
thus brooded upon, issued forth, as its essence, fame, splendour, 
(vigour of the) senses, food and health. 

3. tad vyaksarat, tad ddityam abhito y srayat , tad vd etadyad dad 
ddityasya madhyc ksobhata iva. 

3. It flowed forth. It went towards the sun. Verily, that is 
what seems to be the trembling in the middle of the sun. 

4. te vd etc rasdndm rasdh. vedd hi rasdh , tesdm etc rasdh, tdni vd 
etdny amrtdndm amrtdni , vedd hy amrtdh, tesdm etdny amrtdni. 

4. Verily, these are the essences of the essences, for the 
Vedas are the essences and these are their essences. Verily, 
these are the nectars of the nectars for the Vedas are the nectars 
and these arc their nectars. 

According to § all these are meant to emphasise the importance 
of eulogised actions: kanna-stittir esah. 


Section f) 

THE KNOWER OF THE COSMIC SIGNIFICANCE OF THE 
VEDAS REACHES THE WORLD OF THE VASUS 

1 tad yat prathamam amrtam tad vasava npajivanty agnind 
vmkhena , na vai devd asnanU na pibanty ctad evdmrtam drstvd 
trpyanti. 

1. That which is the first nectar, on that live the FVishs, 
through fire as their mouth. Verily the gods neither eat nor 
drink. They are satisfied merely with seeing that nectar. 

2. ta ctad eva rftpam abhisamvisanty ctasmdd rupdd tidy anti. 

2. They retire into this form (colour) and come forth from this 
form (colour). 

3. sa ya etad evam amrtam veda, vasundm evaiko bhutvdgnin- 
aiva mukhenaitad evdmrtam drstvd trpyati , sa ctad eva rupam 
abhisamvisati , ctasmdd rupdd udeli. 

3. He who knows thus this nectar becomes one of the Vasus 
and through the fire as his mouth is satisfied merely with 
seeing the nectar. He retires into this form (colour) and comes 
forth from this form (colour). 



III. 8. i. Chandogya Upanisad 383 

4. sa yavad adityah purastad udeta pascdd astam eta, vasundm 
eva tavad ddhipatyam svdrdjyam p ary eta. 

4. As long as the sun rises in the east and sets in the west, 
so long does he attain the worship and sovereignty of the Vasus. 


Section 7 

OF THE RUDRAS 

1. atha yad dvitiyam amrtam, tad rudra upajivantindrena 
mukhena, na vai devd asnanti, na pibanti, ctad evdmrtam drstva 
trpyanti. 

1. Now that which is the second nectar, on that live the 
Rudras, through Indva as their mouth, Verily, the gods neither 
eat nor drink. They arc satisfied merely with seeing that nectar. 

2. ta etad eva rupam abhisamvisanti , ctasmad rupdd ndyanti . 

2. They retire into this form (colour) and come forth from 
this form (colour). 

3. sa ya etad evam amrtam veda rudrandm evaiko bhutven- 
drenaiva mukhenaitad evdmrtam drstva trpyati, sa etad eva 
rupam abhisamvisati , ctasmad rupdd udeti. 

3. Who knows thus this nectar becomes one of the Rudras 
and with Indra as his mouth is satisfied merely with seeing the 
nectar. He retires into this form (colour) and comes forth 
from this form (colour). 

4. sa ydvad-ddityah purastad udetd t pascdd astam eta, dvis 
tavad daksinata udetottarato* stain eta, rudrandm eva idvad ddhi- 
patyam svdrdjyam paryetd. 

4. As long as the sun rises in the east and sets in the west, 
twice as long does it rise in the south and set in the north and 
just that long does he attain the lordship and sovereignty of 
the Rudias. 


Section 8 

OF THE ADITYAS 

1. atha yat trtiyam amrtam, tad ddityd upajlvanti varunena 
mukhena, na vai devd asnanti, na pibanti, etad evdmrtam 
drstva trpyanti . 



384 The Principal Upanisads III. 9. 3. 

1. Now, that which is the third nectar, on that live the 
Adityas through Varuna as their mouth. Verily, the gods 
neither eat nor drink. They are satisfied merely with seeing that 
nectar. 

2. ta etad eva rupam abhisamvisanty ctasmdd rupdd udyanti. 

2. They retire into this form (colour) and come forth from 
this form (colour). 

3 sa ya dad evam amrtam vedaditydndm evaiko bhiitvd varun- 
enaiva mukhenaitad evdmrtam drstva trpyati, sa etad eva rupam 
abhisamvisati , etasmdd rupdd ndeti. 

3. He who knows thus this nectar, becomes one of the 
Adityas and with Varuna as his mouth, is satisfied merely with 
seeing the nectar. He retires into this form (colour) and comes 
forth from this form (colour). 

4. sa ydvad ddityo daksinata udetotlarato stain eta , dvis tdvat 
pascdd uddd purastdd astam eta , ddityand 7 n eva tdvad ddhipatyam 
svdrajyam paryetd. 

4. As long as the sun rises in the east and sets in the west 
twice as long does it rise in the west and set in the east and 
just that long does he attain the lordship and sovereignty of 
the Adityas. 


Section 9 

OF THE M A RUTS 

1. atha yac caturtham amrtam, tan maruta upajivanti somena 
mukhena, na vai devd asnanti, na pibanti , etad evdmrtam drstva 
trpyanti. 

1. Now that which is the fourth nectar, on that live the 
Maruts, through Soma as their mouth; Verily, the gods neither 
eat nor drink. They are satisfied merely with seeing that nectar. 

2. ta etad eva rupam abhisamvisanti , etasmdd rupdd udyanti . 

2. They retire from this form (colour) and come forth from 
this form (colour). 

3 . sa y a etad evam amrtam veda, marutdm evaiko bhiitvd 
somenaiva mukhenaitad evdmrtam drstva trpyati , sa etad eva 
rupam abhisamvisati , etasmdd rupdd udeti . 



III. io. 4. Chdndogya Upanisad 385 

3. He who knows thus this nectar, becomes one of the 
Maruts and through Soma as his mouth, is satisfied merely 
with seeing the nectar. He retires into this form (colour) and 
comes forth from this form (colour). 

4. sa yavad adityah pascad udeta , purastdd astatn eta , dvis 
tdvad uttaraia udeta , daksinato’ stam eta, manitdm eva tdvad 
adhipatyam svardjyam p ary eta. 

4. As long as the sun rises in the west and sets in the east, 
just that twice as long does the sun rise in the north and set 
in the south just that long does he attain the lordship and 
sovereignty of the Maruts. 


Section 10 

OF THE SADHYAS 

1. athayat pancamam amrtam tat sadhyd upajivanti brahmana 
mukhena, na vai dcva asnanti , na pibanli, etad evdmrtam drstvd 
trpyanti. 

1. Now, that which is the fifth nectar, on that live the 
Sadhyas, through Brahma as their mouth. Verily, the gods 
neither eat nor drink. They are satisfied merely with seeing 
that nectar. 

2. ta etad eva rupam abhisamvisanti , etasmad rupad udyaiUi. 

2. They retire into this form (colour) and come forth from 
this form (colour). 

3. sa ya etad evam amrtam vcda , sddhydndm evaiko bhutva 
brahmanaiva mukhenailad evdmrtam drstvd trpyanti, sa etad eva 
rupam abhisamvisati , etasmad rupdd udeti. 

3. He, who knows thus this nectar, becomes one of the Sadhyas 
and through Brahma as his mouth, is satisfied merely with 
seeing the nectar. He retires into this form (colour) and comes 
forth from this form (colour) . 

4. sa yavad dditya nttarata udeta, daksinato' stam eta , dvis 
tdvad urdhva udetarvdh a stam eta, sddhydndm eva tdvad ddhipa 
tyam svardjyam paryetd. 

4. As long as the sun rises in the north and sets in the south, 
twice as long does it rise in the zenith and set in the nadir, 



386 The Principal Upanisads III. 11. 5. 

just that long does he attain the lordship and sovereignty of 
the Sadhyas. 


Section 11 

THE WORLD OF BRAHMA 

1. at ha tata ftrdhva udetya naivodetd ndstam ctd, ekala eva 
madhye sthdtd, tad esa slokah: 

1. Henceforth, after having risen in the zenith, he will no 
more rise nor set. He will stand alone in the middle. On this, 
there is this verse : 

The movements of the sun are intended to help the creatures 
to experience the results of their actions, and when these experiences 
have ended the sun takes the creatures unto himself, prdnindm 
sva-karma-phala-blioga-niniittam anugraham tat karma- phalopabho - 
ga-ksaye tdni prdni-jdtdny dtmani samhrtya. S. 

The question is raised whether the sun in the regions of Brahma 
moves along nights and days. The reply is given in the next verse. 

2. na vai tatra na nimloca nodiydya kaddeana , 
devds tendiham satyena md virddhisi brahmand iti. 

2. It is not so there. The sun has not set; nor has he ever 
risen. O ye gods, by this truth, may I not fall from Brahma. 

He calls the gods to bear witness to the truth of his statement. 

3. na ha vd asmd udeti , na nimlocati , sakrd diva haivdsmai 
bhavati , ya ctdm evam brahmopanisadani veda . 

3. Verily, for him, who knows thus, this mystic doctrine of 
Brahma, the sun neither rises nor sets. For him it is day for ever. 

The knower becomes the eternal inborn Brahman, unconditioned 
by time marked by the rising and setting of the sun.’ vidvdn uda- 
yasta-maya-kdldparicchedyam nityani a jam brahma bhavati. £. 

4. tadd haitad brahma prajdpataya uvdica , prajdpativ manave, 
manuh prajdbhyah , tadd haitad udddlakdya runayc jyesthdya 
putrdya pita brahma provdea. 

4. Brahma told this to Prajd-pati ; Prajd-pati to Manu; 
Manu to his descendants. To Uddalaka Aruni, the eldest son, 
his father declared this Brahma. 

5. idam vava taj jyesthdya putrdya pita brahma prabruydt 
prandyydya vantevdsine. 



III. 12. 4. . Chdndogya Upanisad 387 

5. Verily, a father may teach this Brahma to his eldest 
son or to a worthy pupil. 

6. ndnyasmai kasmai cana , yady apy asmd imam adbhih 
parigrhltdm dhanasya purndm dadydd, etad eva tato bhuya ity 
etad eva tato bhuya iti. 

6. And to no one else. Even if one should offer him the whole 
of this (earth) encompassed by water and filled with treasure. 
(He should say) ‘This, truly, is greater than that — yea, greater 
than that.’ 


Section 12 
THE GAY AT IU 

1. gdyatrl vd idam sarvam bhuiam yad idarh kirn ca , vdg vai 
gdy airly vdg vd idam sarvam bhuiam gdyati ca tray ate ca. 

1. Verily, the Gdyatrl is all this that has come to be, what- 
soever there is here. Speech, verily, is Gdyatrl. Verily, the 
Gdyatrl sings of and protects everything here that has come to 
be. 

As Brahman is incomprehensible by itself, these symbols are 
employed. For Madhva Gdyatrl is not the metre of that name but 
Visnu. 

2. yd vai sd gdyatrlyam vdva sd yeyarii prthivl , asydrii hldam 
sarvam bhuiam pratisthilam. etdim eva ndtislyate. 

2. Verily, what this Gdyatrl is, that, verily, is what this 
earth is, for on it everything here that has come to be is 
established. It does not go beyond it*. 

3. yd vai sd prthivlyam vdva sd yad idam asmin puruse 
sarlram, asmin hlrne prdndh pratisthitdh, etad eva ndtislyante. 

3. Verily, what this earth is, that, verily, is what the body in 
man here is : for on it these vital breaths are established. They 
do not go beyond it. 

4. yad vai tat puruse sarlram idam vdva tad yad idam asminn 
antah puruse hr day am, asmin hlrne prdndh pratisthitdh , etad 
eva ndtislyante. 

4. Verily, what the body in man is, that, verily, is what 
the heart within man here is: for on it these vital breaths are 
established. They do not go beyond it. 



388 The Principal Upanisads III. 13. 1. 

5. saisd catuspada sadvidhd gdyatrt, tad etad rcd'bhyanuktam. 

5. This Gayatrt has four feet and is sixfold. This is also 
declared by a Rk verse. 

The Gay at rl is a metre with four feet, each foot having four 
syllables. It is sixfold in the shape of speech, creatures, earth, body, 
heart and vital breath. $. 

6. ctdvdn asya mahimd, tato jydydms capurusah 
pddo'sya sarvd bhiitdni, tripCul asydmrtam divi. 

6. Its greatness is of such extent, yet Purusd is greater still. 
All beings are one fourth of him. The three fourths, immortal, 
is in the sky. 

The Purnsa is so called because it fills everything and lies in the 
body: sarva-puranat puri say undo ca. S. 

7. yad vai tad. brahmctidam vdva tadyoyayn bahirdhd purusdd 
akdso yo vai sa bahirdhd purusdd dkdsah. 

7. Verily, what is called Brahman , that is what the space 
outside of a person is. Verily, what the space outside of a person 
is. 


8. ay am vdva sa yo’yam antah purusa akdso yo vai so'ntah 
purnsa dkdsah. 

8. That is what the space within a person is. Verily, what the 
space within a person is. 

9. ay am vdva sa y o' yam antar-hrdaya dkdsah , tad dal p urn am 
apravarti , purndm apravartinim snyam labhate ya cvam veda. 

9. That is the same as what the space here within the heart 
is. That is the full, the non-active. He who knows thus, obtains 
full and non-active prosperity. 
non-active: unchanging. 


Section 13 

THE FIVE DOORKEEPERS OF THE WORLD 
OF HEAVEN 

1. tasya ha vd etasya hrdayasya pahca deva-susayah, sayo’sya 
pyah susih sa prdinah, tac caksuh, sa adityah, tad clat tejo' 
nnddyam ity updsita, tejasvy annddo bhavati ya cvam veda. 

1. Verily, indeed, this heart here has five openings for the 
gods. Its eastern opening is the prana (up-breath). That is 



III. 13. 6. Chdndogya Upanisad 389 

the eye; that is the sun. One should meditate on this as glow 
and as health. He who knows this becomes glowing and healthy. 

2. atha ydsya daksinah susih sa vyanah, tac chrotram , sa 
candramah, tad etac chrls ca yasas cety updslta srlman yasasvl 
bhavati y a evam veda. 

2. Now its southern opening is vydna (the diffused breath). 
That is the ear: that is the moon. One should meditate on this 
as prosperity and fame. He who knows this becomes prosperous 
and famous. 

3. atha yo’sya pratyah susih so’pdnah, sd vdk so’gnih tad dad 
brahma-varcasam annadyam ity updslta brahma-varcasy annado 
bhavati y a evam veda. 

3. Now, its western opening is apdna (downward breath). 
That is speech, that is fire. One should meditate on it as the 
lustre of sacred wisdom and health. He who knows this becomes 
possessed of the lustre of sacred wisdom and health. 

4. atha yd syodah susih sa samdnah , tan manah, sa parjanyah, 
tad etat klrtis ca vyustis cety updslta , kirtimdn vyustiman bhavati 
ya evam veda. 

4. Now, this northern opening is samdna (equalised breath). 
That is mind, that is rain; one should meditate on it as fame 
and beauty. He who knows this becomes famous and beauteous. 

klrtih: fame; celebrity, due to the knowledge of the mind: manaso 
jhdnasya kirti-hetutvat, dtma-paroksam visrutatvam klrtih t yasah 
sva-karana-samvedyam visrutatvam. 

vyustih: beauty; self -recognised beauty of the body, vyustih kantir 
deha-gat am lav any am. 

5. atha yd syordhvah susih sa uddnah , sa vdiyuh , sa dkdsah, tad 
etad ojas ca mahai cety updslta , ojasvl mahasvan bhavati ya 
evam veda. 

5. Now, the upper opening is uddna (out-breath). That is air, 
that is space. One should meditate on it as strength and great- 
ness. He who knows this becomes strong and great. 

6 . te vd etepahea brahma- pur usdh svargasya lokasya dvdra-pdh t 
sa ya etdn evam pahea brahma-pur usdn svargasya lokasya 
dvara-pan veda } asya kale viro jayate f pratipadyate svargam 
lokam, ya etdn evam pahea-brahma-purusan svargasya lokasya 
dvara-pan veda . 



390 The Principal Upanisads III. 13. 8. 

6. These, verily, are the five Brahma-persons, the door- 
keepers of the world of heaven. He who knows these five 
Brahma-persons, the doorkeepers of the world of heaven, in 
his family a hero is born. He who knows these five Brahma- 
persons, the doorkeepers of the world of heaven, himself reaches 
the world of heaven. 

By controlling the eye, ear, speech, mind and breath through 
meditation, by checking their outward activities, we are enabled 
to reach the Brahma in the heart. 

THE SUPREME EXISTS WITHIN ONESELF 

7. atha yad atah paro divo jyotir dipyate visvatah prsthcsu, 
sarvatah prsthcsv anuttamesuttamesu lokesu , idam vfiva tad 
yad idam asm inn antah pur use jyotili. 

7. Now the light which shines above this heaven, above all, 
above everything, in the highest worlds beyond which there are 
no higher, verily, that is the same as this light which is here 
within the person. 

8. tasyaisd drstih , yatraitad asmih sanvc samsparsenosni- 
mdnam vijdndti, tasyaisd sruti/i yatraitat karndv apigrhya 
ninadam iva nadathur ivdgncr iva jvalata upasrnoti , tad etad 
drstam ca srutam cety updsita: caksusyah sruto bhavati ya evani 
veda , ya cvaiii veda. 

8. There is this seeing of it, as when, in this body, one 
perceives the warmth by touch. There is this hearing of it, as 
when, on closing the ears, one hears as it were a sound, as it 
were a noise, as of a fire blazing. One should meditate on this 
that has been seen and heard. One who knows this becomes one 
beautiful to see and heard of in renown, yea, one who knows 
this. 

The writer here refers to visions and voices of which some mystic 
seers speak. 



III. 14 - 3 - 


Chandogya Upanisad 
Section 14 


391 


THE INDIVIDUAL SOUL IS ONE WITH THE 
SUPREME BRAHMAN 

1. sarvam khalv idath brahma , tajjaldn iti, sdnta updsita; atha 
khala kratumayah pnrusah , yathd-kratur asminl lake puruso 
bhavati tathetah pretya bhavati , sa kratum kurvita. 

1. Verily, this whole world is Brahman , from which he 
comes forth, without which he will be dissolved and in which he 
breathes. Tranquil, one should meditate on it. Now verily, a 
person consists of purpose. According to the purpose a person 
has in this world, so does he become on departing hence. So 
let him frame for himself a purpose. 

All this is Brahman: Cp. Maitrl IV. 0. brahma khalv idam vdva 
sarvam. Brahman is prior to all this and produces all this. 

The word tajjaldn is explained by § as ‘beginning, ja, ending, la, 
and continuing, an/ in it: tasmdt brahmano jatam—atas tajjam, tathd 
tenaiva janana-kramcna pratilomatayd tasminn eva brahmani llyate, 
tad-dtmatayd slisyata iti tallam; tathd tasminn eva sthitikdlc’niti 
prdniti cestata iti. 

As we will, so will our reward be: kratv-anuviipam phalam. S. 

2. mano-mayah prdna-sariro bhd-rupah satya-samkalpa dkds- 
dtmd sarva-kantid sarva-kdmah sarva-gandhah sarva-rasah sarvam 
idam abliy ditto' vdky anddarah. 

2. He who consists of mind, whose body is life, whose form is 
light, whose conception is truth, whose soul is space, con- 
taining all works, containing all desires, containing all odours, 
containing all tastes, encompassing # this whole world, being 
without speech and wiUiout concern. 

§ means by prdna-sarBa, the subtle body. 
prdna-sarirah prdno lihgdtmd vijndna-kriyd - sakti-dvaya-sammurchu 
tah. S. 

3. esa ma dtmdntar hrdaye niydn vriher vd , yavdid vd, sarsapdd 
vd , sydmdkdd vd, sydmdka-tanduldd vd; esa ma dtmdntar hrdaye 
jydydn prthivydh, jydydn antariksdj jdiyan divah , jydydn ebhyo 
lokebhyah. 

3. This is my self within the heart, smaller than a grain of 
rice, than a barley corn, than a mustard seed, than a grain of 
millet or than the kernel of a grain of a miller. This is myself 



39 2 The Principal Upanisads III. 15. 2. 

within tl^e heart, greater than the earth, greater than the 
atmosphere, greater than the sky, greater than these worlds. 

4. sarva-karmd sarva-kdmah sarva-gandhah, sarva-rasah, sar - 
vam idam abliyatlo' vaky anddarah , esa ma dtmdntar hrdaye etad 
brahma , dam itah prdydbh isambhavitasmiti, yasya sydt addhd na 
vieikitsdstiti ha smeiha sdndilyah , idndilyah . 

4. Containing all works, containing all desires, containing all 
odours, containing all tastes, encompassing this whole world, 
without speech, without concern, this is the self of mine within 
the heart; this is Brahman. Into him, I shall enter, on departing 
hence. Verily, he who believes this, will have no more doubts. 
Thus used to say Sandilya, yea Sandilya. 

This is the famous Sandilya vidyd which affirms the oneness of 
the individual soul and the Supreme Buihman. For Sandilya (1) the 
Absolute is that from which things are born, to which they repair 
and by which they live, (2) our next life depends on what we do in 
this life, (3) Atman is both the transcendent and the immanent, and 
(4) the end of man is union with the Self. 


Section 15 

THE UNIVERSE AS A TREASURE CHEST 

1. antariksodarah koso bhumi budhno na jiryati , 
diso hy asya sraktayo dyaur asyottaram bilam , 
sa esa koso vasu-dhdnas tasmin visvam idam iritam . 

1. The chest, having the atmosphere for its inside, and the 
earth for its bottom docs not decay. The quarters of space are 
its corners and its upper lid is the sky. This chest is one con- 
taining wealth and within it rests everything here. 

2. tasya prdet dig jnhur ndima , sahamdndi ndima daksind, rdjhl 
nama pratici , subhdtd ndmodici, tdsdim vdyur vatsah, sa ya etam 
evam vdyuni disdm vatsam veda , na pulra-rodam roditi , so'ham 
etam evarh vdyum disdm vatsam veda , ma putra-rodam rudam. 

2. The eastern quarter is named juhu; its southern quarter 
is named sahamdna ; its western quarter is called rdjni ; its 
northern quarter is called subhuta. The child of these is air. He 
who knows this air thus as the child of the quarters of space 
weeps not for a son. I here know this air thus as the child of the 
quarters of space, let me not weep for a son. 



III. 15. 7. Chomdogya Upanisad 393 

juhu is the sacrificial ladle. 

sahamdna is ‘the region of Yama in which people sulfer the results 
of evil deeds/ 5 . 

rdjnl is so called 'because it is lorded over by the king ( rdjan ) 
Varuna or because it is red (ruga) with the colours of evening/ S. 
subhuta is 'the region presided over by Kubera, the god of wealth/ 
ma putra-rodam rudatn : May I not weep for the death of my son, may 
I have no occasion to weep for the death of my son : putra-marana- 
nimittam putra-rodo mama mdbhut. S. 

If the promise made in III. 13-16, in his family a hero is born is 
to be fulfilled, this kosa-vijhdna or knowledge of the treasure chest is 
needed. 

3. aristam kosatn prapadyc 'mund' muna mund, prdnam 
prapadye , ’ muna munahnund; bhiih prapadye' muna' mund' mund; 
bhuvah prapadyc ' muna mund' mund ; svah prapadye muna mund 
'n\und. 

3. I take refuge in the imperishable chest with this one, with 
this one, with this one. I take refuge in the breath, with this one, 
with this one, with this one. I take refuge in bhiih, with this one, 
with this one, with this one. 1 take refuge in bhuvah , with this 
one, with this one, with this one. I take refuge in svah, with this 
one, with this one, with this one. 

The son’s name, § says, is to be uttered thiice, when praying to 
the different deities. 

4. sayad avocatn: prdnam prapadya Hi prdno vd idam sarvam 
bhutam yad idcuii kin ca, tarn cva tat prdpatsi . 

4. When I said, 'I take refuge in breath/ breath, verily, is 
everything here that has come to be, whatsoever theie is. So it 
was in this 1 took refuge. 

5. atha yad avocam: bhuh prapactya iti prtlnvhn prapadye 
ntariksam prapadye , divam prapadya ity cva tad avocam. 

5. So when I said, ‘J take refuge in bliuh / what I said was ‘I 
take refuge in earth, I take refuge in atmosphere, I take refuge 
in sky/ 

6 . atha yad avocam: bhuvah prapadya ity agnim prapadye , 
vdymn prapadye, ddityam prapadya ity cva tad avocam. 

6. So when I said, ‘I take refuge in bhuvah / what 1 said was, 
'I take refuge in Fire, I take refuge in Air, I take refuge in Sun/ 

7. atha yad avocam: svah prapadya ity rg vedam prapadye, 
yajur vedam prapadye, sama vedam prapadya ity cva tad avocam , 
tad avocam . 



394 The Principal Upanisads III. 16. 3. 

7. So when I said, ‘I take refuge in svah,’ What I said was, 
*1 take refuge in the Rg Veda, I take refuge in the Yajur Veda , 
I take refuge in the Sdma Veda. That was what I said/ 

This section points out how symbols are used for worship and the 
objects prayed for are this-worldly. 


Section 16 

THE WHOLE LIFE IS SYMBOLICALLY A SACRIFICE 

1. paruso vdva yajhah, tasya ydni catnr-vimsati varsdni , tat 
prdtah-savanam , catur-vimsaty-aksard gdyatri , gdyatvam prdtah - 
savavam , tad asya vasavo’nvdyattdh , prana odiva vasavah , etc 
hidam sarvath vdsayanti. 

1. Verily, a person is a sacrifice. His (first) twenty-four years 
are the morning libation, for the Gdyatri (metre) has twenty- 
four syllables and the morning libation is offered with a gdyatri 
hymn. With this (part of the sacrifice) the Vasus are connected. 
Verily, the vital breaths are the Vasus, for they cause every- 
thing here to endure. 

2. tarn ced ctasmin vayasi him cid upatapet , sa brdydt, prdnd 
vasavah , idam me prdtah-savanam tnddhyan-dinam-savanam unit 
samtanuteti , mdham prdndndm vasundm madhye yajho vilop- 
siycti , add haiva tat a ety agado ha bhavati. 

2. If in this period of life any sickness should overtake him, 
let him say, ‘O ye vital breaths, ye Vasus, let this morning 
libation of mine continue over to the midday libation. Let not 
me, the sacrifice, be broke M off in the midst of the vital breaths, 
of the Vasus.’ He arises from it; he becomes free from sickness. 

While the previous section dealt with the long life of the son, this 
deals with one’s own long life. 

3. atha ydni catuscatvdrimsad varsdni , tan mdidhyan-dinam- 
savanam catus-catvdrimsad-aksard tristup , traistubham tnddhyan- 
dinam-savanam , tad asya rudrd anvdyattdih, prdnd vdva rudrdl}, 
etc hidam sarvam rodayanti. 

3. Now the (next) forty-four years are the midday libation 
for the Tristubh (metre) has forty-four syllables and the midday 
libation is offered with a Tristubh hymn. With this (part of the 
sacrifice) the Rudras are connected. Verily, the vital breaths are 



III. 16. 7. Chdndogya Upanisad 395 

the Rudras for (on departing) they cause everything here to 
weep. 

4. tam ced etasmin vayasi kim cid upatapet sa bruydt i prana 
rudrdh idam me madhyan-dinam-savanam trtlya-savanam anu 
samtanuteti , mdham prdndndm rudrdndm madhye yajho vilop- 
slyeti, ndd haiva tata ety agado haiva bhavati. 

4. If, in this period of life, any sickness should overtake him, 
let him say, ‘0 ye vital breaths, ye Rudras, let this midday 
libation of mine continue over to the third libation. Let not me, 
the sacrifice, be broken off in the midst of the vital breaths, of 
the Rudras.’ He arises from it; he becomes free from sickness. 

5. atha ydiny asta-caivdrimsad varsdni , tat trtlya-savanam , 
astd-catvdrimsad-aksard jagatl , jdgatam trtlya-savanam , tad asyd 
dityd anvdyattdh , prana vdvdditydh , etc hidam sarvam ddadate. 

5. Now the (next) forty-eight years are the third libation 
for the jagatl (metre) has forty-eight syllables and the third 
libation is offered with a jagatl hymn. With this (part of the 
sacrifice) the Adityas are connected. Verily, the vital breaths 
are the Adityas for (on departing) they take everything to 
themselves. 

6 . tam ced etasmin vayasi him cid upatapet sa bruydt prana 
ddityd idam me trtlya-savanam dyur anu samtanuteti , mdham 
prdndndm aditydndm madhye yajho vilopslycty , udd haiva tata 
ety agado haiva bhavati. 

6. If, in this period of life, any sickness should overtake him, 
let him say, ‘O ye vital breaths, ye Adityas, let this third liba- 
tion of mine continue to a full length of life. Let not me, the 
sacrifice, be broken off in the midst, of the vital breaths, the 
Adityas.’ He arises from it; he becomes free from sickness. 

7. etadd ha sma vai tad vidvdin alia mahiddsa aitareyah; sa kim 
ma etad upatapasi, yo’ham anena na presydmlti; sa ha sodasam 
varsa-safam ajlvat; pra ha sodasam varsa-satarii jlvati, ya evam 
veda. 

7. Verily, it was knowing this that Mahidasa Aitareya used 
to say, 'Why do you afflict me with this sickness, me, who am 
not going to die by it?’ He lived a hundred and sixteen years. 
He, too, who knows this lives to a hundred and sixteen years. 

Mahidasa Aitareya was a ddsa or a sudra by birth. According to 
Sayana’s Introduction to th c aitareya Brahmana, lie was the son of 



39^ The Principal Upanisads III. 17. 6. 

a Brahmana seer by I tar a, a low-caste woman. As he was not given 
the same treatment as other sons, his mother prayed to Mahl or the 
goddess Earth, who granted her prayers. The son was enabled to 
compose the Brahmanas and the Aranyakas. This story implies a 
protest against the injustice of the caste system. 


Section 17 

MAN'S LIFE A SACRIFICE 

1. sa yad asisisati yat pipdisati, yan na ramatc , td asya diksdh . 

1. When one hungers and thirsts and abstains from pleasures 
these constitute the initiatory rites. 

The writer gives an account of a sacrifice which can be performed 
without any ceremonial and in spirit even by hermits. 

Privation is equated with initiation, enjoyments with the sacrificial 
sessions and chantings, the virtues with the offerings, generation 
with regeneration and death with the last ritual the final bath. 

2. atha yad asndti, yat pibati , yad ramate, tad upasadair eti. 

2. And when one eats and drinks and enjoys pleasures, then 
he joins in the Upasada ceremonies. 

upasada: a particular class of sacrificers who are happy because they 
take only milk: ttpasaddm ca payo-vratatva-nimittam sukham asti. S. 

3. atha yadd hasati yaj jaksati , yan maithunam carati , stnta - 
sastrair eva tad cti. 

3. And when one laughs and eats and indulges in sexual 

intercourse, then he joins in the chant and recitation. 

* 

4. atha yat tapo ddnam dvjavam ahimsd satya-vacanam iti t td 
asya daksmdh. 

4. And austerity, almsgiving, uprightness, non-violence, 
truthfulness, these are the gifts for the priests. 

5. tasmdd ahull sosyaty asostcli pnnar ntpddanam evdsya , tan 
maranam evdvabhrthah. 

5. Therefore they say 'He will procreate/ He has procreated 
— that is his new birth. Death is the final bath (after the 
ceremony). 

6 . tadd haitad ghora dhgirasah krsndya dcvaki-putrdyoktvo - 
vdea, a-pipdsa eva sa babhiiva so’ntaveldyam ctat trayam prati - 



III. 18. i. Chdndogya Upanisad 397 

padyet: aksitamasi , acyutam asi, prdna-samsitam aslti: tatraite dve 
rcau bhavatah. 

6. When Ghora Angirasa, after having communicated this to 
Krsna, the son of Dcvaki, he also said, as he had become free 
from desire, ‘In the final hour, one should take refuge in these 
three (thoughts). Thou art the indestructible; thou art the un- 
shaken, thou art the very essence of life/ On this point, there 
are these two Rg verses 

S points out that the references are to the Yajus verses beginning 
with (i) aksitam asi , (ii) acyutam asi, and (iii) prdna-samsitam asi. See 
Bhagavad-Gita, p. 28. 

7. dd it pratnasya retasah, ad vayam tamasas-pari 
jyotih pasyanta uitaram svah pasyanta uttaram, 

devam devatra suryam aganma jyotir uttamam iti , jyotir 
uttamam iti. 

7. Proceeding from the primeval seed, they see the morning 
light that shines higher than the sky. Seeing beyond darkness, 
the higher light, seeing the higher light, we attain to the sun 
god among the gods, the highest light, yea, the highest light. 

In some texts, after retasah, we find jyotih pasyanti vdsaram, paro 
yad idhyate diva. 

‘Those that know Brahman, with their eyes turned aside, with 
their hearts purged by the restrictions of the ascetic life like brahma - 
carya see the light all round': nivrtta-caksuso brahma-vido brahma- 
caryadi-nivrtti-sddhanaih suddhdntahkarand d samantato jyotih 
pasyanti. S. 


Section iS 

THE FOURFOLD NATURE OF THE INDIVIDUAL AND 

THE WORLD 

1. mano brahmety updsitety adhydtmam, athddhidaivotam 
dkaso brahmety {updsita), ubhayam ddistam bhavaty adhydtmam 
eddhidaivatam ca. 

I. One should meditate on the mind as Brahman — this with 
regard to the self. Now with reference to the divinities one 
should meditate on space as Brahman. This is the twofold 
instruction, that which refers to the body and that which refers 
to the divinities. 



398 The Principal Upanisads III. 18. 6. 

dkasa or space is used as it is ‘all-pervading, subtle and free from 
limitations’: sarva-gatatvdt suksmatvat , upddhi-hinatvdt. S. 

2. tad etac catuspdd brahma , vdk pddah, prdnah pddas caksuh 
pddah srotram pdda ity adhydtmam; athddhidaivatam, agnih pddo 
vciyuh pddah , ddityah pddo disah pdda ity ubhayam cvddistam 
bhavaty adhydtmam caivddhidaivatarh ca. 

2. That Brahman has four quarters. Speech is one quarter, 
breath is one quarter, the eye is one quarter, the ear is one 
quarter. This with reference to the self. Now with reference to 
the divinities. Fire is one quarter, air is one quarter, the sun is 
one quarter and the directions arc one quarter. This is the two- 
fold instruction with reference to the self and with reference to 
the divinities. 

3. vdg eva brahmanas caturthah pddah, so’gnind jyotisd bhdti 
ca tapati ca, bhdti ca tapati ca kirtyd yasasd brahma-varcascna, ya 
cvam veda. 

3. Speech, verily, is a fourth part of Brahman. It shines and 
warms with the light of fire. He who knows this shines and 
warms with fame, with renown, and with the radiance of 
Brahma-knowledge. 

4. prana eva brahmanas caturthah pddah, sa vdyund jyotisd 
bhdti ca tapati ca, bhdti ca tapati ca kirtyd yasasd brahma-varca- 
scna, ya cvam vcda. 

4. Breath, verily, is a fourth part of Brahman. It shines and 
warms with the light of air. He who knows this shines and warms 
with fame, with renown, and with the radiance of Brahma- 
knowledge. 

5. caksur eva brahmanai caturthah pddah, sa ddilycna jyotisd 
bhdti ca tapati ca, bhdti ca tapati ca kirtyd yasasd brahma-varca- 
sena, ya cvam vcda. 

5. The eye, verily, is a fourth part of Brahman. It shines and 
warms with the light of the sun. He who knows this shines and 
warms with fame, with renown, and with the radiance of Brahma- 
knowledge. 

6. srotram eva brahmanas caturthah pddah, sa digbhir jyotisd 
bhdti ca tapati ca, bhdti ca tapati ca kirtyd yasasd brahma-varca- 
sena, ya evarii vcda, ya cvam veda. 

6. The ear is a fourth part of Brahman. It shines and warms 
with the light of the directions. He who knows this shines and 



III. 19. 3. Chdndogya Upanisad 399 

warms with fame, with renown, and with the radiance of 
Brahma-knowledge . 


Section 19 

THE COSMIC EGG 

t. adityo brahmdy ddesah, tasyopavydkhydnam: asad evedam 
agra dsit, tat sad dsit, tat samabhavat, tad cindam niravartata, tat 
samvatsarasya mdtrdni asayata , tan nirabhidyata , te dndakapale 
rajatam ca suvarnam cdbhavatam. 

1. The Sun is Brahman — this is the teaching. An explanation 
thereof (is this). In the beginning this (world) was non-existent. 
It became existent. It grew. It turned into an egg. It lay for 
the period of a year. It burst open. Then came out of the egg- 
shell, two parts, one of silver, the other of gold. 

See K.V. X. 129; Mann I. 12. 

asat: non-existent, it docs not mean absolute non-being. It is a state 
in which name and form were not manifested: avydkrta-ndma-rupam. 
£. See also T.U. II. 7. 

In C.U. VI. 2, the view that in the beginning there was only non- 
being is combated. 

2. tad yad rajatam scyahi prlhivi , yat suvarnam sd dyauh; yaj 
jardyu te parvatdh,yad ulbam sa megho mhdrah , yd dhatnanayas ta 
nadyah , yad vdsteyam udakam sa samudfah. 

2. That which was of silver is this earth; that which was of 
gold is the sky. What was the outer membrane is the moun- 
tains; that which was the inner menlbrane is the mist with the 
clouds. What were the veins w r ere the rivers. What w r as the 
fluid within is the ocean. 

In the Orphic Cosmogony, Chronos and Adrastca produce a 
gigantic egg which is divided into two, the upper half forming the 
sky and the lower the earth. 

3. at ha yat tad ajdyata so’sdv ddityah ; tarn jdyamdnam ghosd 
ululavo' nudatisthan, sarvdni ca bhutdni , sarve ca kdtndh; tasmdt 
tasyodayam prati pratydyanam prati ghosd ululavo nutthisthanti, 
sarvdni ca bhutdni sarve ca kdmdh. 

3. And what was born from it is the yonder sun. When he 
was born, shouts and hurrahs as also all beings and all desires 



400 The Principal U panisads III. 19 4. 

arose. Therefore at his rise and his every return, shouts and 
hurrays as also all beings and all desires arise. 

4. sa ya etam cvam vidvdn ddityam brahmety updste’bhyaso ha 
yad enath stldhavo ghosd d ca gacchcyur upa ca nimrcdcyan 
mnrcderan. 

4. He, who knowing thus, meditates on the sun as Brahman, 
pleasant shouts will come unto him and delight him, yea, 
delight him. 



IV. 1. 5. 


Chdndogya Upanisad 


401 


CHAPTER IV 

Section 1 

THE STORY OF JANASRUTI AND RAIKVA 

1. aum. jdnairutir ha pautrayanah iraddhddeyo bahuddyi bahu- 
pakya dsa, sa ha sarvata dvasathan mapaydm cakre , sarvata eva 
me’tsyantiti. 

1. Aum. There was the descendant of Jana£ruta, his great 
grandson, a pious giver, a liberal giver, a preparer of much 
food. He had rest houses built everywhere, with the thought 
‘everywhere people will be eating of my food/ 

2. atha ha hamsa nisdydm atipetuh, tadd haivam hamso hamsam 
abhyuvada: ho ho'yi blialldksa , bhalldksa, jdnasrutch pautrdya- 
nasya samam diva jyolir dtatam, tan md prasahksis tat tva md 
pradhaksid iti. 

2. Then once at night, some swans flew past and one swan 
spoke to another thus, ‘Hay, Ho, Shortsighted, Shortsighted. 
The light of Janasruti, the great grandson (of Janasruta) has 
spread like the sky. Do not touch it, lest it burn you/ 

v. pradhdksir for pradhaksid . 

3. tarn u ha parah praly uvdica karii vara cnam etat santam 
sayugvdnam iva raikvam dttheti. Ko nu katham sayugvd raikva iti. 

3. To it, the other one replied, ‘Who is that man of whom 
you speak, as if he were Raikva, the man with the cart ?* ‘Pray, 
how is it with Raikva, the man with the cart?' 

§ quotes Raikva in S.B. III. 4. 36 as one of the sages who attained 
brahma- jhana or divine wisdom though they did not observe the 
rules of castes and stages of life: andsramitvena vartamano’hi 
vidydydm adhikriyate, kutah tad, drsteh , raikva-vacaknavl-prabhrtindm 
evam-bhutdnam api brahmavitvasrutyupalabdheh. 

4. yathd krtdya vijitayddharcydh samyanti, evam enarii scwvarii 
tad abhisameti, yat kin ca prajdh sddhu kurvanti, yas tad vedayat 
sa veda, sa mayaitad ukta iti. 

4. Even as all the lower throws of dice go to the winner with 
the highest throw, so whatever good men do, all goes to him. 
He also who knows what he knows, is thus spoken by me. 

5. tad u ha jdnasvutih pautrdyana npasusrdva , sa ha samji- 



402 The Principal Upanisads IV. 2. 1. 

hdna cva ksattaram uvaca , angdrc ha sa-yugvdnam iva raikvam 
attheti, ko nu kathani sa-yngvd raikva it i. 

5. Now, Janasruti, the great grandson (of Janasruta) over- 
heard this. Then when he rose, he said to the attendant, ‘O 
friend, you speak to me in the same way as to Raikva with the 
cart/ (He asked) ‘How is it with Raikva, the man with the 
cart?' 

He overheard the conversation of the swans and spent the night 
brooding over it. When he woke up, listening to the eulogistic chants 
of the bards, he turned to his attendant and said, ‘You speak of me 
as of Raikva with the cart/ $. 

6. yathdhvtdya vijitdyddharcydh samyanii , evam enam sarvam 
tad abhisamcti , yat kin ca prajdili sddhu kurvanti , yas tad vcda yat 
sa vcda, sa mayaitad ukta iti. 

6. Even as all the throws of the dice go to the winner with 
the highest throw, so whatever good men do, all goes to him. 
He also who knows what he knows is thus spoken of by me. 

7. sa ha ksattdnvisya , ndvidam iti pratycydya, tarn lwvdica 
yatrdre brdhmanasydnvesand tad enam arccheti. 

7. The attendant searched for him and returned saying 
T did not find him/ Then he said to him, ‘O where a Brahmana 
is searched for, there look for him/ 

The Brfdimanas are generally to be found in solitaiy places in the 
forests or on the banks of rivers, ekdnte ranye nadl-pulinddau vivi- 
kte dele. S. The attendant was instructed to search in such places. 

8 . so’dhastdc cliakatasya pdtndnam kasamduuim upopavivesa , 
tam hdbhyuvdda , tv am nu bhagavah sa-yugvd raikva iti; ahani 
hy are; iti ha pratijajne; sa ha ksattd f avidam iti pratycydya. 

8. He approached a man scratching the itch underneath a 
cart, and said to him, ‘Pray, Sir, are you Raikva, the man with 
the cart?' He replied: ‘Yes, I am he/ The attendant returned 
saying, T have found him out/ 


Section 2 

THE STORY CONTINUED 

' 1. tad u ha jdnasrutih pautrdyanah sat-satdni gavdm niskam 
asvatan-ratham tad dddya praticakrame, tam hdbhyuvdda. 



IV. 2. 5 - Chandogya Upanisad 403 

1. Then Janasruti, the great grandson (of Janasrtita) took 
with him six hundred cows, a gold necklace, and a chariot with 
mules and said to him : 

2. raikvemdni sat satani gavdm, ayam nisko yam asvatarl- 
rathah , ami ma dam bhagavo dcvatdm sddhi , yam dcvatdm apassa 
iti. 

2. ‘Raikva, here are six hundred cows, a gold necklace and 
a chariot with mules. Now Sir, please teach me the deity whom 
you worship/ 

3. tam a ha par ah pratyuvdca, aluihdre tvd, sudra , tavaiva 
saha gobhir astv iti; tad u ha punar cva jdnasrutih pautrdyanah 
sahasram gavdm niskam a iv atari-rat ham dnhitaram tad ddaya 
praticakramc. 

3. And to him, then, the other replied, 'Oh, necklace and 
carriage along with the cows be yours, O Sudra/ And then 
again, Janasruti, the great grandson (of Janasruta) taking 
a thousand cows, a gold necklace and a chariot with mules, 
and his daughter too, went up to him. 

Sudra. The king is not a Sudra. S explains* it thus: The old 
teachers have explained this point thus: by addressing him as Sudra, 
the sage Raikva shows that he already knows what is passing in the 
king’s mind: The word Sudra meaning “one who is melting with 
sorrows at hearing the greatness of Raikva, as spoken of by the 
swans.” Or it may be that the king is addressed as Sudra because 
he comes for instruction with an offering of riches like a Sudra and 
not with proper obeisance and attendance as befits the higher 
castes, and it does not mean that the king is a Sudra by caste. 
Others, however, explain that Raikva addressed him thus, because 
he was enraged at his oltering him so little, because it is also said 
that riches are to be accepted when plenty of it is offered/ 

4. tam hdbhyuvdda, ra ikvedam sahasram gavdm t ayam nisko’ yam 
asvatari-rathah , iyam jdydyam grdmo yasminn dsse: anv eva md , 
bhagavah, sddhiti. 

4. He said to him: ‘Raikva, here are a thousand cows, here 
is a gold necklace, here is a chariot with mules, here is a wife 
and here is a village in which you dwell. Pi ay, revered Sir, 
teach me/ 

5. tasya ha mukham upodgrhnann uvdea: ahahdrcmdh sudra 

anenaiva mukhcndlapayisyathd iti; te liaite raikva-parnd ndma 
mahdvrscsu yatrasmd uvdsa sa tasmai hovdica. \ 

5. Then, lifting up her (the daughter’s) face toward himself, 



404 The Principal Upanisads IV. 3. 2. 

he (i.e. Raikva) said, ‘He has brought these (cows) along, Sudra, 
merely by this face you would make me speak/ These are the 
villages called Raikva-parna, among the people of the Mahavrsas, 
where he lived. Then he said to him : 

S quotes a verse to the effect that a life of studentship, gift of 
wealth, intelligence, knowledge of the Veda, love and knowledge 
are the six ways to the attainment of knowledge. 

brahma-edri dhana-ddyl medhdvl srotriyah priyah 
vidyayd vd vidydm prdha, tdni tirthdni san mama . 


Section 3 

RAIKVA'S TEACHING 

I. vdyur vdva samvargah , yadd vd agnir udvdyati , vayum 
evdpyeti, yadd suryo’stam eti vayum evdpyeti, yadd candro' stam 
eti vayum evdpyeti. 

1. Air, verily, is the absorbent; for when a fire goes out, it 
goes into the air. When the sun sets, it goes into the air, and 
when the moon sets, it goes into the air. 

For Anaximenes air is theos ; it is the primary substance. His 
follower, Diogenes of Apollonia (fifth century b.c.) makes out that 
air is not only the one original and permanent substance but is also 
in its purest form the substance of all psyche in the universe. It has 
special affinities with the soul in animals and human beings 
Simplicius quotes from his book, On Nature, ‘Mankind and the other 
animals live on air, by breathing; and it is to them both soul and 
mind. The soul of all animals is the same, namely, air, which is 
warmer than the air outside, in which we live, though much colder 
than that near the sun. In my opinion that which has intelligence 
is what men call air, and by it everything is directed and it has 
power over all things; for it is just this substance which I hold to 
be God. 1 See W. K. C. Guthrie: The Greeks and their Gods (1950), 

pp- 135-36. 

The connection of life with breath and so with air seems obvious. 
The Latin word for soul, anima, means both air and breath. 

2. yadapa ucchusyanti, vayum evdpiyanti , vdyur hy evaitdn 
sarvdn samvrhkte , ity adhidaivatam. 

2. When water dries up, it goes into the air. For air, indeed, 
absorbs them all. This, with regard to the divinities. 



IV. 3* 7 * * Chdndogya Upanisad 405 

3. athddhydtmam: prano vdva sathvargah, sa yadd svapiti 
pranam eva vdg apyeti , pranam caksuh, pranam srotram, pranam 
manah, prano hy evaitan sarvan samvrhkte iti. 

3. Now, with reference to the self: Breath, indeed, is the 
absorbent. When one sleeps, speech just goes into breath; sight 
goes into breath ; hearing goes into breath ; the mind goes into 
breath. For breath, indeed, absorbs all this. 

4. tau va etau dvau samvargau , vdyur eva devesu, prdnah 
pranesu. 

4. These two, verily, are the two absorbents, air among the 
gods, breath among the breaths. 

5. atha ha saunakam ca kdipeyam abhipratarinam ca kaksa- 
senim parivisyamanau brahmacarl bibhikse, tasma u ha na 
dadatuh. 

5. Once upon a time, when £aunaka Kapeya and Abhipra- 
tarin Kaksaseni were being served with food, a student of 
sacred knowledge begged of them. They did not give to him 
anything. 

6 . sa hovdea : 

mahdlmanas catuvo deva ckah 
kah sa jagdra bhuvanasya gopak, 
tam , kapeya , ndbhipasyanti martydh 
abhipratdrin bahudhd vasanlam. 
yasmai va dad annam , tasma dan na dattam iti. 

6. Then he said, ‘The one god has swallowed up four great 

ones, he who is the guardian of the world. Him, O Kapeya, 
mortals do not see, though he abides in manifold forms, O 
Abhipratarin. Verily, this food has not been offered to him to 
whom it belongs/ * 

The food you have refused to me, you have really refused to 
Brahman. 

The one god is said to be Prajd-pati. 

7. tad u ha saunakah kapeyah pratimanvdnah pvatycydya 

atmdi dcvdndm janita prajdnam, 
hiranya-damstro babhasdnas Firih: 
mahdntam asya mahimdnam dhuh ,- 
anadyamano yad anannam atti 

iti vai vayam brahmaedrin , idam updismahe , dattdsmai bhiksdm iti. 

7. Then Saunaka Kapeya, reflecting on this, replied. ‘It is 
the self of gods, the creai t of all beings, with golden teeth, 



406 The Principal Upanisads IV. 4. 2. 

the eater, the truly wise one. They speak of his magnificence as 
very great indeed, because he eats what is not food, without 
being eaten. Thus, verily, O student of sacred knowledge, do 
we meditate on this/ (Then he said to his attendants) 'give him 
food.’ 

hiranya: golden, undecaying, undamaged, amrta, abhagna. 5. 
anasurih: truly wise: surir eva. 

8. tasma it ha daduh; te vd etc pahcdnye pane any e dasa santas 
tat krtam , tasnult sarvdsn diksv annam eva dasa krtam , saisd 
virdul annddi, tayedam sarvam drstam , sarvam asyedam drstam 
bhavati, annddo bliavati ya evam veda,ya evam veda. 

8. Then they gave (food) to him. These five and the other 
five make ten and that is the highest throw in dice. Therefore 
in all directions, these ten arc the food and the highest throw. 
This is Virdj, the eater of food. Through it, this whole world 
becomes seen. One who knows this, sees all this and becomes an 
eater of food, yea, one who knows this. 

The first five arc air, fire, sun, moon and water. The second five 
are breath, speech, eye, ear and mind. 


CHAPTER IV 

Section 4 

THE STORY OF SATYAKAMA 

1. satyakamo ha jdbdlo jabdldm mdtaram dmantraydm cakre , 
brahmacaryam , bhavati , vivatsydmi , kirn gotro nv aham asmiti . 

1. Once upon a time Satyakama Jabala addressed his mother 
Jabala, 'Mother, I desire to live the life of a student of sacred 
knowledge. Of what family am I?' 

2. sd hainam uvdea , ndham dad veda, tdta , yad gotras tvam 
asi, bahv aham car anti pariednni yauvane tv dm alabhe, sdham 
etan na veda yad-gotras tvam asi , jabdld-tu ndmdham asmi , 
satyakama ndma tvam-asi, sa satyakama eva jdbdlo bruvitha iti. 

2. Then she said to him: T do not know, my child, of what 
family you are. In my youth, when I went about a great deal, 
as a maid servant, I got you. So I do not know of what family 
you are. However, I am Jabfila by name and you are Satyakama 



IV. 4- 5 - Chandogya Upanisad 407 

by name. So you may speak of yourself as Satyakama Jabala 
(the son of Jabala). 

§ says that she had no time to ascertain about her gotra or family 
as she had to move about much in her husband's house, attending 
upon guests. 

3. sa ha haridrumatam gautamam elyovdca, brahmacaryam 
bhagavati vatsydmi, upeydm bhagavantam iti. 

3. Then he went to Gautama, the son of Haridrumat and 
said, ‘I wish to become a student of sacred knowledge. May I 
become your pupil, Venerable Sir.' 

4. tain hovdca, kim-golvo nil, saumya , asiti; sa hovdca , ndiham dad 
veda, bhoh, yad-golro'ham asmi, apncham mdtaram, sd md 
pratyabravlt , bahv ahani caranti paricdrinl yauvanc tvdm alabhc , 
sdhavi dan na veda yad-gotvas tvavi asi, jabala lu ndmdham asmi, 
satyakdmo ndma tvam asiti, so 5 * * * 9 ham satyakdmo jdbdld smi, bhoh, 
iti. 

4. He said to him ‘Of what family are you, my dear?' He 
replied, ‘I do not know this, sir, of what family I am. I asked 
my mother. She answered me, “In my youth, when I went 
about a great deal as a maid-servant, I got you. So I do not 
know of what family you are. I am Jabala by name and you 
are Satyakama by name." So I am Satyakama Jabala, Sir.' 

5. tam hovdca, naitad abrdhmano vivaktum arhati ; samidham , 
saumya , ahani, npa tvd ncsye, na satydd agd iti. tam upanTya 
krsdndm abaldndm catuh-satd gd nirdkrtyovdca , imdih, saumya, 

anusamvrajdi, tdi abhiprasthdpayann uvdca, ndsahasvendvarte- 
ycti. sa ha vavsa-ganam provdsa, td y add sahasvam sampcduh. 

5. He then said to him, ‘None but»a Brfihmana could thus 
explain. Bring the fuel, my dear, 1 will receive you, as a pupil. 
Thou hast not departed from the truth. Having initiated him, 
he separated out four hundred lean, weak cows and said, ‘Go 
with tlies*', my dear.' While taking them away, he said, ‘I may 

not return without a thousand.’ He lived away a number of 

years. When they came to be a thousand. 


O 



408 The Principal Upanisads IV. 6. i. 

Section 5 

THE FOUR QUARTERS OF BRAHMAN 

I. atha hainam rsabhobhyuvada , satyakdma iti, bhagavah iti 
ha pratisusrdva; prdptdh, saumya, sahasram smah, prdpaya na 
deary a-kulam. 

1. Then the bull spoke to him, saying, ‘Satyakama!’ He 
replied, 'Revered Sir/ ‘We have reached a thousand, my dear, 
take us to the teacher’s house.' 

'him, thus equipped with faith and austerity, the deity of the air, 
connected with the directions, having become satisfied, entered into 
the bull’: tam etam sraddhd-tapobhydm siddham vdyu-devatd dik-sa- 
mbandhini tusta saty rsabham anupravisya . £. 

2. brahmanas ca tc pddam bravdmti, bravltu me, bhagavdn , 
iti, tasmai hovdea: prdci dik kald , pratici dik kald, daksina dik 
kalodici dik kalaisa vai, saumya, catus-kalah pddo brahmanah 
prakdsavdn ndma. 

2. ‘And let me declare to you a quarter of Brahman / ‘Tell 
me, Revered Sir.' To him, it then said, ‘The east is one quarter, 
the west is one quarter, the south is one quarter, and the north 
is one quarter. This, verily, my dear, is Brahman s four- 
quartered foot named the Shining. 

3, sa ya etam evam vidvdms catus-kalam pddam brahmanah 
prakdsavdn ity updste prakdsavdn asmiml loke bhavati, 
prakdsavato ha lokdh jayati, ya etam evam vidvdms catus-kalam 
pddam brahmanah prakdsavdn ity updste. 

3. 'He who, knowing it thus, meditates on this four quartered 
foot of Brahman named, the Shining becomes shining in this 
world. Then he wins shining worlds, who, knowing it thus, 
meditates on the fourquartered foot of Brahman, named the 
Shining.’ 


Section 6 

THE FOUR QUARTERS OF BRAHMAN 

(continued) 

1. agnis te pddam vakteti, sa ha ivo bhute gd abhiprasthdpa - 
yam cakdra , td yatrdbhi-sdyam babhuvuh, tatrdgnim upasamdd - 



IV. 7- T - Chdndogya Upanisad 409 

hay a, ga uparudhya, samidham adhdya , paicad, agneh prdn 
upopavivesa. 

1. Tire will declare to you the other quarter of Brahman / 
He, then, when it was the morrow, drove the cows on. When 
they came, at evening, he lighted a fire, penned the cows, laid 
on fuel, and sat down to the west of the fire, facing the east. 

2. turn agnir abhyuvdda, satyakdma iti ; bhagavah , iti ha 
pratisusrdva. 

2. The Fire said to him, ‘Satyakama/ He replied, ‘Revered 
Sir/ 

3. brahmanah , saumya, te padam bravdniti, bravitu me , bhaga- 
van iti; tasmai hovaca; prthivi kald' ntariksam kald, dyauh kala , 
samudrah kald , esa vai, saumya , catus-kalah pdido brahmano' 
nantavan ndima. 

3. ‘Let me declare to you, my dear, a quarter of Brahman / 
‘Tell me, Revered Sir/ To him, it then said, ‘The earth is one 
quarter, the atmosphere is one quarter, the sky is one quarter, 
the ocean is one quarter. This, verily, my dear, is Brahman s 
fourquartercd foot, named the Endless. 

4. sa ya etam cvam vidvams catus-kalam padam brahmano 
anantavdn ity if paste, anantavan asmiml loke bhavati , anantavato ha 
lokdnjayati,ya etam evam vidvams catiis-kalarii padam brahmano 
anantavdn ity updste. 

4. ‘He, who knowing it thus, meditates on this fourquartered 
foot of Brahman as the Endless becomes endless in this world. 
Then, he wins endless worlds who knowing it thus, meditates 
on the fourquartered foot of Brahman as the Endless/ 


Section 

THE FOUR QUARTERS OF BRAHMAN 
(1 continued ) 

1. hamsas te padam vakteti , sa ha svobhute ga abhiprasthd- 
paydrii cakdra, td yatrdbhisdyam babhfivuh , tatrdgnim upasa - 
mddhdya, ga uparudhya , samidham ddhdya pascdd agneh prdn 
upopavivesa. 



410 The Principal Upanisads IV. 8. i. 

1. ‘A swan will tell you (another) quarter/ He, then, when it 
was the morrow, drove the cows on. When they came at 
evening, he lighted a fire, penned the cows, laid on the fuel, and 
sat down to the west of the fire, facing the east. 

2 . tarn haiiisa upanipatydbliyuvdda , satyakdvui iti, bhagavah, 
iti ha pratisusrdva. 

2. A swan flew down to him and said, 'Satyakama/ He 
replied 'Revered Sir/ 

3. brahmanah , sanmya , tc pddam bravdniti , bravitu me bhagavan , 
ill, tasmai hovdea agnih kola, suryah kald , candrah kald , vidyut 
halt! , esa vai, sanmya , catiis-kalah, pdido brahmano jyotismdn ndina . 

3. 'Let me declare to you. my dear, a quarter of Brahman / 
'Tell me, Revered Sir/ To him, it then said, 'Fire is one quarter, 
the sun is one quarter, the moon is one quarter and the lightning 
is one quarter/ This, verily, my dear, is Brahman's four- 
quartered foot named the Luminous. 

4. sa ya c/am cram vidvdms calus-kalam pddam brahmano 
jyotismdn ity it paste, jyotismdn asmiml lokc bhavati , jyotismato ha 
lokdii jayati ya dam evam vidvdms catus-kalam pddam brahmano 
jyotismdn ity updstc. 

4. ‘He, who, knowing it thus, meditates, on this fourquartered 
foot of Brahman as the Luminous becomes luminous in the 
world. Then he wins luminous worlds, who, knowing it thus, 
meditates on the fourquartered foot of Brahman as the 
Luminous/ 


Section 8 

THE FOUR QUARTERS OF BRAHMAN 
{continued) 

1. madgus tc pddam vaktdi, sa ha svobhfitc gd abhiprastha- 
paydm cakdra, td yatrdbhi say am babhuvuh, tatragnim upasa- 
mdidhdya , gd nparndhya , sa midham ddhdya , pascdid agneh prdh 
upopavivesa. 

1. 'A diver-bird will tell you (another) quarter. He, then, 
when it was the morrow, drove the cows on. When they came at 
evening, he lighted a fire, penned the cows, laid on the fuel and 
sat down to the west of the fire, facing the east. 



IV. g. 2. Chandogya Upanisad 41 1 

2. tam madgUY upanipatyabhyuvdda , satyakama, iti bhagavah, 
iti ha pratisusrava. 

2. A diver-bird flew down to him and said, ‘Satyakama/ 
He replied: ‘Yes, Sir/ 

3. brahmanah , saumya , tc pddam bravdnlti, bravltu me bliagavdn 
iti, tasmai hovaca, prdinali kaldi, cdiksuh kola srotram kald, manah, 
kata esa vai, saumya, catus-kalah pddo brahma na dyatanavdn 
ndma. 

3. ‘Let me declare to you, my dear, a quarter of Brahman / 
‘Tell me, Revered Sir/ To him it then said, ‘Breath is one 
quarter, the eye is one quarter, the ear is one quarter, and the 
mind is one quarter. This, verily, my dear, is the fourquartered 
foot of Brahman named Possessing a support. 

4. sa ya dam cvam vidvams catus-kalam pddam brahmana 
dyatanavdn ity updste, dyatanavdn asmhiil lake bhavati , dyata - 
navato ha lokdh jayati, ya dam cvam vidvams catus-kalam pddam 
brahmana dyatanavdn ity updste. 

4. ‘He, who, knowing it thus, meditates on this fourquartered 
foot of Brahman as possessing a support, comes to possess a 
support in this world. Then he wins worlds possessing a support, 
who, knowing it thus, meditates on the fourquartered foot of 
Brahman as ‘possessing a support/ 


Section 9 

SATYAKAMA RETURNS TO THE TEACHER 

1. prdpa hdcdrya-kulam, tam dcdryo’bJiyuvdda , satyakama iti; 
bhagavah, iti ha pratisusrava. 

1. Then he reached the teacher's house. The teacher said, 
‘Satyakama/ He replied, ‘Yes, Revered Sir/ 

2. brahma-vid iva vai, saumya, bhdsi, ko mi tvdnusasdsdi , anyc 
manasyebhya iti ha pratijajhc, bhagavdms tv eva me kdme 
bruydt. 

2. ‘Verily, my dear, you shine like one knowing Btahman. 
Who has taught you?’ He replied, ‘Others, than men. But I 
wish, Revered Sir, that you teach me/ 

Cp. St. Bernard: ‘What I know of the divine sciences and Holy 



412 The Principal Upanisads IV. jo. 3. 

Scripture, I learnt in woods and fields. I have had no other masters 
than the beeches and the oaks/ 

One who knows Brahman has his senses tranquilliscd, wears a 
smiling face, is free from anxiety and is of fulfilled purpose: pra- 
sannendriyah prahasita-vadanas ca niscintah krtdrtho brahma-vid 
bhavati. S. 

3. sent am hy era me bhagavad-drscbhyah, dcdtyddd haiva vidyd 
vidita sddhistham prdpatiti, tasmai haitad cvovdca atm ha na 
kin cana vlydyeti , vlydyeti. 

3. ‘For I have heard from persons like you, Revered sir, that 
the knowledge which has been learned from a teacher best 
helps one to attain his end/ To him, he then declared it. In it 
nothing whatsoever was left out, yea, nothing was left out. 


Section 10 

BRAHMAN AS LIFE, JOY AND ETHER 

I. upakosalo ha vai kdmaldyanah satyakdme jdbdle brahma- 
cat yam itvdsa, tasya ha dvddasa varsdny again paricacdra, sa ha 
smdnydn antevdsinah samdvartayams tarn ha stnaiva na sama- 
ra y tay at i. 

1. Now, verily, Upakosala, the son of Kamala dwelt with 
Satyakama Jabala, as a student of sacred wisdom. He tended 
his fires for twelve years. But the teacher, though he allowed 
other pupils (after they learnt the sacred wisdom) to return 
to their homes, did not allow him (Upakosala) to depart. 

2. tam jdyovdea, tapto brahmaedri, kuialam agnin pavicacdrln, 
md tvdgnayah panpravocan , prabnlhy asmd iti, tasmai ha 
aprocyaiva pravdsdmeakre. 

2. His wife said to him, ‘(this) student of sacred wisdom has 
performed his penance and tended the fires well. Let not the 
fires blame you. Give him the teaching/ But he went away 
without teaching him. 

3. saha vyddhinanasitum dadhre, tam deary a-jdyovdea, brahma- 
edrin, asdna, kirn nil ndsndsi iti. sa hovdua, bahava imesmin 
puruse kdimd ndndtyaydh, vyddhibhih pratipurno’smi, ndsisydmi 
iti. 

3. Then, on account of sickness (grief), he resolved not to eat. 



IV. ii. 2. Chdndogya Upanisad * 413 

The teacher's wife said to him. ‘0 student of sacred wisdom, 
please eat. Why, pray, do you not eat ?’ Then he said, ‘Many are 
the desires in this person which proceed in different directions. 
I am filled with sicknesses (griefs). I will not eat.' 

4. at ha hdgnayah samudire , tapto brahmacdn, kusalam nah 
paryaednt , hantdsmai prabravdmcli: tasmai hocuh , prdno 
brahma , kam brahma , kham brahmeti. 

4. Then the fires said among themselves: This student of 
sarred wisdom has performed his penance and tended us well. 
Let us teach him then.' They then said to him. ‘Life is Brahman , 
Joy is Brahman , Ether is Brahman .’ 

dkdsa : ether or space. 

5. sa hovdica vijdndmy aham yat prdno brahma , kam ca tu 
kham ca na vijdndmiti: tc hocuh , yad vdva kam tad eva kham , yad 
eva kham tad eva kam iti, prdnam ca hdsmai tad dkdsam cocuh. 

5. Then he said, ‘I understand that life is Brahman. But joy 
and ether I do not understand.’ They said (to him), ‘Joy, verily, 
that is the same as ether. Ether, verily, that is the same as joy.’ 
Then they explained to him life and ether. 


Section 11 

THE SAME PERSON IS IN THE SUN, AND IN THE 
HOUSEHOLD FIRE 

1. atha hainam gdrliapatyo’nusasdsa , prthivy agnir annum 
dditya iti , ya esa ddityc puruso drsyate so'ham asnii , sa evdham 
asmxti. 

1. Then the (iarhapatya fire instructed him, ‘Earth, Fire, 
Food and Sun (are forms of me), the person that is seen in the 
Sun, I am he, I am he, indeed. 

garhapatya: the fire in the household. 

2. sa ya dam evam vidvdn it paste, apahatc pdpa-krtydm , lokt 
bhavali , sarvam dyur eti t jyog jivati, ndsydvara-pitntsdh ksiyante, 
upa vayam tarn bhuhjdmo’smims ca lokc’musmims ca, ya dam 
evarh vidvdn u paste. 

2. ‘He who knowing thE meditates (on the fire) destroys 



414 77/£ Principal Upanisads IV. 13. 1. 

sinful actions, becomes possessor of (this) world, reaches full 
life, lives brightly. His descendants do not perish. Both in this 
world and in the yonder we serve him who knowing this 
meditates (on the lire)/ 

jyog: brightly, conspicuously: ujjvalam. S. 


Section 12 

THE SAME PERSON IS IN THE MOON AN1) IN THE 
SACRIFICIAL FIRE (INTENDED FOR THE MANES) 

1. atJui ha mam cured Inn yapaciino' nusasasa: dpo cl iso nak- 
satrdni caudramd iti, ya esa candramasi puruso drsvate so’ ham 
asmi sa evdham astnlti. 

1. Then, the anvdhdryapaeana instructed him. ‘Water, the 
quarters, the stars, the moon (are forms of me) ; the person that 
is seen in the moon, I am he, I am he, indeed.’ 

2. sa ya dam cram vidvthi it paste 1 pahatc pdpakrtydm loki 
bhavati, sarvam.dyur eti,jyog jlvati, ndsydvara puntsah k sly ante, 
xipa vayam tarn hint hjamo' smiths ca lake mitsmims ca, ya dam 
cram vidvdn it paste. 

2 . Tie who knowing this meditates (on the fire) destroys 
sinful actions, becomes possessor of (this) world, reaches full 
life, lives brightly, His descendants do not perish. Both in this 
world and in the' yonder we serve him, who knowing this, 
meditates on (the fire).’ 


Section 13 

THE SAME PERSON IS IN THE LIGHTNING AND THE 

FIRE 

1. atlia hainani dhavaniyc nusasdsa, prana eikeiso dyaur vidyud 
iti,ya esa vidyuti puruso drsyatc, so’ ham asmi, sa evdham cismtii. 
1. Then the dhavamya (fire) instructed him. Breath, space, 



IV. 14. 3 « Chdndogya Upanisad 415 

sky and lightning (are forms of me) ; the person that is seen in 
the lightning. I am he, I am he, indeed. 

While the anvdhdrya fire is that on the altar on the southern side, 
the dhavanlya lire is that on the altar on the eastern side. 

2. sa ya ctam cvam vidvdn npdsle' pahatc pdpakrtydm, lulu 
bhavati, sarvam dyur cti, jyog jivati, ndsydvarapurusdh kstyante, 
upci vayam tam bhunjdmo smirks ca loke'musmims ca ya ctam 
cvam vidvdn updstc. 

2. ‘He who knowing this meditates (on the hre) destroys sinful 
actions, becomes possessor of (this) world, reaches full life, 
lives brightly. His descendants do not perish. Both in this 
world and in the yonder we serve him, who, knowing this, 
meditates (on the fire)/ 


Section 14 

KNOWLEDGE OF THE SELF 

1. te hoenh upakosala, csd, sciumya, tc' smad-vulydhna-vidyd ca. 
diedryas tit te gat nil vakteti. djagdma hdsydedryah , turn dedryo 
’ bhyuvdulopakosala iti. 

1. Then they (the fires) said, ‘Upakosala dear, you have this 
knowledge of our selves and knowledge of the self. But the 
teacher will tell you the wav/ Then the teacher returned. The 
teacher spoke to him ‘Upakosala/ 

2. bhagavah, iti ha pratisusrdva; bhihma-vid iva , sautnya, tc 
mukham bhdti , ko nit tvd' nusasdsdi , ko nu ma nusisxad bJioh, 
iti iha apevu nihnuta, ime nunam Jdrsd, anyddrsd itihdgmn 
abhyude. him nu, sautnya, kila tcvocann iti. 

2. ‘Revered Sir/ he answered. ‘Dear, your face shines like 
that of one who knows Brahman. Who has instructed you?' 
‘Who should instruct me, sir/ said he. Here he conceals it as it 
were. And he said (pointing to the fires), ‘They are of this form 
now, but they were of a different form/ The teacher said, 
‘What dear, did they indeed tell you?' 

3. idam , iti ha pratijajhc , l ok an vdva kila, sautnya tcvocan , 
aham t\i tc tad vaksydmi yat* d puskara-paldsa dpo na slisyante, 

O* 



416 The Principal Upanisads IV. 15. 5. 

ei nun evam-vidi pdipam karma na slisyata iti, bravitu me bhagavdn 
iti, tasmai hovdca. 

3. ‘This/ he replied. ‘They, dear, have indeed spoken to you 
about the worlds, but I will tell you this and as water does not 
cling to the lotus leaf, so evil deed does not cling to one who 
knows it/ ‘Tell me, revered sir/ To him, he then said. 


Section 15 

THE WAY TO BRAHMALOKA 

1. yd eso’ksini pitruso drsyatc, esa diimd iti hovdca, clad avirtam 
abhayam, dad brahmcti , tad yady apy asmin sarpir vodakam vd 
si he at i , vartmam eva gaahati. 

1. He said, ‘The person who is seen in the eye, he is the self. 
This is the immortal, the fearless, this is Brahman. So even 
if one drops melted butter or water into this (eye), it goes away 
by the sides. 

We can see the self in the eye, only if we are pure of heart. 
nivrtta-caksu-bhir brahmacaryddi-sddhana-sampannaih sdntaih viveki- 
bhir drster drastd. 

2. dam samyad-vama ity dcaksate, dam hi sarvdni vdmdny 
abhisamyanti, sarvdny enam vdmdny abhisamyanti , ya evam veda . 

2. This they call samyad-vama for all desirable things go 
towards him. All desirable things go to him who knows this. 

vdmdni: desirable things: vananlydni sambhajanJydni sobhandni. S. 

3. esa a eva vdmanih, esa hi sarvdni vdmdni nayati, sarvdni 
vdmdni nayati, ya evam veda. 

3. He is also Vdmdni for he brings all desirable tilings. He 
who knows this brings all desirable things. 

4. esa u eva bhamanih, esa hi sayvesit lokesu bhditi, sarvesu 
lokesn bhditi, ya evam veda. 

4. He is also bhdmani for he shines in all worlds. He who 
knows this shines in all worlds. 

5. atha yad 11 caivdismih chavyam kurvanti yadi ca na arcisam 
evdbhisambhavanti , arciso'har ahna dpuryamdna-paksam, dpilr- 
yamdna-paksdd ydn sad ndahh eti musdims tan, mdsebhyah 



IV. i6. 2. Chdndogya Upanisad 417 

samvatsaram , samvatsarad ddityam , aditydc candramasam, 
candramaso vidyutam, tat puruso'mdnavah, sa enarh brahma 
gamayati, esa dcva-patho brahma-pathah , pratipadyamdnd 
imam mdnavam dvartam ndivartanta iti, ndvartanta iti. 

5. Now for such a one whether they perform the cremation 
obsequies or not, he goes to light, from light into the day, from 
the day into the half-month of the waxing moon ; from the half- 
month of the waxing moon into the six months when the sun 
moves northwards, from the months into the year, from the 
year into the sun, from the sun into the moon, from the moon 
into lightning. Then there is a person, not human. He leads 
them to Brahman. This is the way to the gods, the way to 
Brahman. Those who proceed by it do not return to the human 
condition, yea they do not return. 

The reference here is to Brahman who resides in the regions of 
satya: satya-lokcfl-stham. $. 

The followers of the ceremonial code pass along the path called 
pitf-ydna and they return to this world. Those who live in the forests 
practise austerities, go along the path called deva-ydna and do not 
return to this world. 


Section 16 

SILENCE AND SPEECH IN SACRIFICES 

1. c$a ha vai yajho y o' yam pavatc , esa ha yann idam sarvam 
pundti, yad esa yann idam sarvam pundti f tasmdd esa eva yajhas 
tasya manas ca vdk ca vartani. 

1. Verily, that which purifies here (i.e. the wind) is the 
sacrifice for he, moving along, purifies all this. And because 
moving along he purifies all this, he is the sacrifice. Of that mind 
and speech are the ways. 

2. fayor anyatardm manasa samskaroti brahma , vded hota- 
dhvayyur udgdtd anyatardm; sa yatropdkrte prdtar-anuvdkc para 
paridhdmyayd brahma vyavavadati. 

2. Of these the Brahma priest performs one with his mind; 
by speech the Jlotr, the Adhvaryu and the Udgdtr priests the 
other. When the morning litany lias commenced and before the 
concluding recitation, the Liahma priest has to speak. 



4i8 The Principal Upanisads IV. 17. 1 

Generally the Brahma priest follows the sacrifice with his mind, 

1. e. in silence. When he breaks the silence, then the mental exercise 
is interrupted, for he also resorts to speech. The performance of the 
Brahma priest should be an act of meditation. 

3. anxatardm era vartanim samskaroti, hiyate * nyatard , sa 
yathaikapeui vrajan ratho vaikena cakrcna vartamdno' risyati, 
evam asya yaj no risyati , vajham risyantam yajamdno’nurisyati , 
sa isfvd pdpTydn hhavati. 

3 He performs one way only (that by words) but the other is 
injured. Even as a one-footed man walking or as a one-wheeled 
chariot moving is injured, even so is his sacrifice injured. When 
the sacrifice is injured, the sacrificer is injured. By having 
sacrificed he becomes worse off. 

satiiskarana: remaking, reintegration. See Aitareya Brdhmana. 
VI. 27; Satapatha Brdhmana, VII. 1. 2. 1; Aitareya Ar any aka, III, 

2. 6. 

4. atha yatropdikrtc prdtar-anuvdkc na purd paridhdmydyd 
brahma vyavavadati , ubhc eva variant samsknrvanti , na hiyate 
nyatard. 

4. But when after the morning litany has begun and before 
the concluding recitation the Brahma priest docs not speak, 
they perform both ways and neither is injured. 

5. sa yathnbhavapdd vrajan ratho vobhdbhydm cakrdbhychn 
vartamdnah pratitisthati , evam asya yajhati pratitisthali, yajham 
pratilisthantam yajamano * nupratitisthati , sa istvd sreydn 
bhavati. 

5. As a two-footed man walking or as a two-wheeled chariot 
moving is well-supported, even so is his sacrifice well supported. 
When the sacrifice is well supported the sacrificer is well 
supported. By having sacrificed lie becomes better off. 

The Brahma priest knows the wisdom of silence: mauna-vijiidnam 


Section 17 

HOW THE BRAHMA PRIEST CORRECTS MISTAKES 
IN THE SACRIFICIAL RITUAL 

1. prajdpatir lokdn abhyatapat , tesdm tapyamdndndm rasdn 
pr dvr hat, agnim prthivydh vdyum antariksdt , ddityam divah. 



IV. 17. 6. Chdndogya Upanisad 419 

1. Prajd-pati brooded on the worlds. As they were brooded 
on, he extracted their essences, fire from the earth, air from the 
atmosphere, the sun from the sky. 

2. sa etas tisro devatd abhyatapat, tdsdm tapyamdndndm 
rasdn prdvrhat agner rcah , vdyor yajftmsi, sumdny dditydt. 

2. On these three deities he brooded. As they were brooded 
on, he extracted their essences, the Rg verses from the fire, 
the Yajus formulas from the air, the Sdman chants from the 
sun. 

3. sa dam traylrii vidydm abhyatapat , lasyds tapyamdndyd 
rasdn prdvrhat, bhur ity rgbhyah , bhuvar iti yajurbhyah , svar iti 
sdmabhyah. 

3. On this threefold knowledge he brooded. As it was brooded 
upon he extracted its essences; bhur from the Rg verses; bhuvas 
from the Yajus formulas; svah from the Sdman chants. 

4. tad yady rkto risyed bhfih svdhcti gdirhapatyc juhuydt, ream 
eva tad rasena ream virycna ream yajhasya viristam samdadhdti. 

4. If (the sacrifice) is injured from the Rg verses, one should 
make an oblation in the householder’s fire with the words blink, 
hail. So by the essence of the Rg verses themselves, by the 
power of the Rg verses, he binds together (heals) the injury to 
the Rg sacrifice. 

5. atha yadi yajusto risycd bhuvah svdhcti daksindgnati juhuydt. 
yajusdm eva tad * rasena yajusdnii virycna yajusdm yajhasya 
v i r ista m sa mdad h dti. 

5. Again, if (the sacrifice) is injured by the Yajus formulas 
one should make an oblation in the southern fire with the words 
‘ bhuvah' hail. So by the essence of the Yajus formulas them- 
selves, by the power of the Yajus formulas he binds together 
(heals) the injury to the Yajus sacrifice. 

6. atha yadi sdmato risyct, svah svdhcty dhavamyc juhuydt , 
sdmndm eva tad rasena sdunnduh virycna sdmndm yajhasya 
v i r ista m sa mdadh dti. 

b. Again, if (the sacrifice) is injured by the Santa chants, one 
should make an oblation in the dhavamya fire with the words 
*svar’ hail. So by the essence of the Santa chants themselves, 
by the power of the Santa chants, he binds together (heals) the 
injury to the Sdman sacrifice. 

If the injury be with regard to Brahma, 5 says, one should make 



420 The Principal Upanisads IV. 17. 10. 

an oblation in all the three fires, pronouncing all the three, bhuh , 
bhuvah, svah, as the injury relates to all the three Vedas. 

7. tad yathd lavanena suvarnam samdadhydt , suvarncna raja- 
tam f rajatena trapu, irapitna slsam , siscna loham , lohena dam , 
carmand. 

7. Just as one would bind together gold with (borax) salt, 
silver with gold, tin with silver, lead with tin, iron with lead, 
wood with iron or wood with leather. 

loha: iron or brass. 

(S. ei 'tun csdm lokdndm dsdm dcvatdndm asvds trayyd vidydyd 
virycna yajhasya viristam samdadhdti , bhesaja-krto ha vd esa 
yajhah. yatraivam-vid brahma bhavati. 

8. So does one bind together (heal) any injury to the sacrifice 
with the power of these worlds, of these gods, and of the three 
Vedas. Verily, such a sacrifice is well healed when there is a 
Brahma priest knowing this. 

healed: blicsaja-krto ha vd esa yajhah, rogdrta iva pumdm cikitsakcna 
susiksitenaiva yajiio bhavati. 

9. esa ha vd udak-pravano yajhah , yatraivam-vid brahma 
bhavati , evam-vidam ha vd esa brahma nam ami gdithd: yato yata 
dvartate, tat tad gacchati mdnavah. 

9. Verily, that sacrifice is inclined to the north, in which 
there is a Brahma priest who knows this. And with regard to 
such a Brahma priest there is this song. Wherever it falls, 
thither the man goes. 

mdnava: silent from manna , silence; or thoughtful, from tnatiana . 
Whenever mistakes are committed, he breaks his silence and corrects 
them, for it is said, ‘Whenever it fails, thither the man goes.’ 

10. brahmaivaika rtvik kuriin asvdbhiraksali, cvam vidd ha vai 
brahma yajham yajamdnam sarvdms ca rtvijo blnraksati , tasmdd 
evam-vidam cva brahmdnam kurvita , ndncvam-vidarii, ndnevam- 
vidam. 

10. The Brahma priest as a Rtvik priest protects the sacri- 
ficers like a mare, i.e. the Brahma priest knowing this protects 
the sacrifice, the sacrificer and all the Rtvik priests. Therefore 
one should make one who knows this as his Brahma priest, not 
one who docs not know it, yea, not one who does not know it. 



V. I. 6. 


Chandogya Upanisad 


421 


CHAPTER V 
Section 1 

ON BREATH, THE SOUL AND THE UNIVERSAL SELF. 
THE FIVE BODILY FUNCTIONS AND THE IMPORT- 
ANCE OF BREATH 

1. yo ha vai jyestham ca srestham ca vcda, jyesthas ca ha vai 
sresthas ca bhavati, prdno vdva jyesthas ca sresthas ca. 

1. Verily, he who knows the oldest and the best becomes 
himself the oldest and the best. Breath indeed is the oldest and 
the best. 

S explains that breath is the oldest because it functions prior to 
the sense activities, even when the child is in the womb. 

2. yo ha vai vasistham veda, vasistho ha svdnam bhavati , vdg 
vdvd vasisthah 

2. Verily, he who knows the most prosperous becomes the 
most prosperous of his own (people). Speech, indeed, is the most 
prosperous. 

3. yo ha vai pratisthdm vcda , prati ha tisthaty asmims ca loke 
' musmims ca, caksnv vdva pratisthd. 

3. Verily, he who knows the firm basis becomes firm in this 
world and in the yonder. The eye, indeed, is the firm basis. 

4. yo ha vai satnpadam vcda , sa hdsmai kdmdli padyante daivds 
ca mdnusds ca, srotram vdva sampat. 

4. Verily, he who knows success, # his desires succeed, both 
human and divine. The ear, indeed, is success. 

5. yo ha vd dyatanam veddyatanam ha svdnam bhavati, viano 
ha vd dyatanam. 

5. Venly, he who knows the abode becomes the abode of his 
people. The mind, indeed, is the abode. 

manah : mind, for all objects aic perceived by the mind, indri- 
yopahrtdndm vimydndm bhoktr-atthdmlm pratyaya-nlpdndm mana 
dyatanam dsrayah. S. 

6. atha ha prana aham-sreyasi vyud ire: a ham sreydn asmi, aham 
Srcydn asmiti. 

6. Now the (live) senses disputed among themselves as to 



422 The Principal Upanisads V. i. io. 

who was superior saying (in turn) 'I am superior/ T am 
superior.’ 

Cp. Prasna II. 3; A.U. II. 4; B.U. VI. 1. 1-14; K.U. III. 3. 

7. /r /w prdndh prajdi-patim pitaram ctyocnh , bluigavan, ko nah 
srcstha iti; tan hovaca, yasmin va utkrdntc sariram pdpisthataram 
iva drsycta , vah srcstha iti. 

7. Those senses went to Prajd-pati, (their) father and said, 
‘Venerable sir, who is the best of us?’ He said to them, ‘He on 
whose departing the body looks the worst, he is the best 
among you.’ 

8 . sd ha vdg uccakrdma , sd samvatsaram prosya paryctyovdca , 
hatha ni asakata rtc maj jivitum iti , yathd kald avadantah 
prdnantali prdncna , pasyantas caksusd, snivel Utah srotrena, 
dhydyanto manasaivam iti; pravivesa ha vah. 

8. Speech departed and having stayed away for a year 
returned and said, ‘How have you been able to live without 
me?’ (They replied) ‘Like the dumb not speaking, but breathing 
with the breath, seeing with the eye, hearing with the ear, 
thinking with the mind. Thus (we lfved).' Speech entered in. 

f). caksnr Jioccakrduna, tat samvatsaram prosya paryctyovdca , 
katham asakata rtc maj jivitum iti, yathdndhd apasyantah , 
prdnantali prdncna, vadanio vdicd, srnvantah srotrena , dhydyanto 
manasaivam iti; pravivesa ha cahsuh. 

• q. The eye departed and having stayed away for a year 
returned and said, ‘How have you been able to live without 
me?’ (They replied) ‘like the blind not seeing but breathing 
with the breath, speaking with speech (the tongue), hearing 
with the ear, thinking with the mind. Thus (we lived).’ The eye 
entered in. 

10 srotram Jioccakrduna, tat samvatsaram prosya paryctyovdca, 
katham asakata rtc maj jivitum iti, yathd badhird a srnvantah , 
prdnantali prdncna , vadanio vdicd , pasyantas caksusd, dhydyanto 
manasaivam iti; pravivesa ha srotram. 

10. The ear departed and having stayed away for a v^ai 
returned and said, ‘How have you been able to live without 
me?' (They replied) ‘like the deaf not hearing, but breathing 
with the breath, speaking with speech (the tongue), seeing with 
the eye and thinking with the mind. Thus (we lived)/ The ear 
entered in. 



V. I. 15. Chdndogya Upanisaa 423 

11. mano hoccakrdma, tat samvatsaram prosya paryetyovdca, 
katham aiakata rtc maj jtvitum iti, yatha bald amanasah, prdnan- 
tah prdnena , vadanto vdcd, pasyantas caksusd, srnvantah srotre- 
naivam iti; pravivesa ha manah. 

11. The mind departed and having stayed away for a year 
returned and said, 'How have you been able to live without 
me?’ (They replied) 'Like the children mindless but breathing 
with the breath, speaking with speech (the tongue), seeing 
with the eye, hearing with the ear. Thus (we lived).’ The mind 
entered in. 

bald amanasah: children mindless, rather undeveloped minds. 
aprarudha-mayuisah. $. 

12. atha ha prana nccikvamisan, sa yatha suhayah padvisa 
sank Tin samkhidct , cvam Haydn prdndn samakhidat; tarn hdbhi- 
sametyoeuh, bhagavann edhi, tvam nah srcstho'si, motkramir iti. 

1 2. Now when breath was about to depart, tearing up the 
other senses, even as a spirited horse, about to start might tear 
up the pegs to which he is tethered, they gathered round him 
and said, 'Revered Sir, remain, you are the best of us, do not 
depart.’ 

remain our lord, nah svdmL S. 

13. atha hainatn vdg uvdea , yad ahatii vasistho'smi, tvam tad 
vasistho'slti; atha ha math caksur uvdea . yad ahavi pratisthasmi, 
tvam tat pratisthasiti . 

13. Then speech said to him, 'If I am the most prosperous, 
so are you the most prospeious.’ Then the eye said to him, ‘If 
I am the firm basis, so are you the firm basis.’ 

14. atha hainam srotram uvdea, ya'd aham sampad asmi , tvam 
tat sampad aslti; atha hainam mana uvdea, yad aham dyatanam 
asmi, tvam tad dyatanam aslti. 

14. Then the ear said to him, 'If I am success, so are you 
the success.’ Then the mind said to him, 'If I am the abode, so 
are you the abode.’ 

15. na vai vdieo na eaksumsi na srotrdni na mandmsJty 
deaksatc, pvdindi ity evdeaksate , prdno hy evaitdni sarvdni 
bhavati. 

15. Verily, they do not call them speeches or eyes or ears or 
minds. They call them breaths, for all these are breath. 

See K.U. III. 3. 



424 The Principal Upanisads V. 2. 4. 

Section 2 

THE MEANING OF THE MANTHA RITE 

1. sa hovdca , Azm me annam bhavisyatiti; y at him cid idam d 
svabhya a sakunibhyah, iti lidcuh: tad vd dad anasydnnam ano 
ha vai ndma pvatyaksam , na ha vd cvamvidi kimcana anannam 
bhavatiti. 

1. He (Breath) said, ‘What will be my food?’ They said, 
‘Whatever there is here, even unto dogs and birds.’ So this, 
verily, is the food of breath. Verily, breath (ana) is his evident 
name. For one who knows this, there is nothing whatever that 
is not food. 

prana: consists of p)a and ana . ana is breath and pra indicates the 
direction of the motion. 

2. sa hovdca , kirn me vdso bhavisyatiti; dpali , itihoenh ; tasmdd 
vd etad asisyantah purastdc coparistdc eddbhih paridadhati; 
lambhuko ha vdso bhavati, anagno ha bhavati. 

2. He said, ‘What will be my clothing?’ They said, ‘Water.’ 
Therefore it is that, when people are about to eat, they cover 
it (the breath) with water, both before and after. He thus 
obtains clothing and becomes clothed (is no longer naked). 

This verse refers to the usual Indian practice of rinsing the mouth 
both before and after a meal. 

3. tadd haitat satyakamo jdbdlo gosrutayc vaiydghrapadydyokt- 
vovdea , yady apy ctac chuskdya sthdnavc bruydt, jdyerann 
evdsmih-sdkhdh, praroheyuh paldsdniti. 

3. Satyakama Jabfila, after telling this to Gosruti, the son 
of Vyaghrapada, said to fiim, ‘Even if one should tell this to 
a dried up stump, branches w r ould be produced on it and leaves 
w r ould spring forth.’ 

son of Vyaghrapada: vydglirapado' paty am. £. 

4. atha yadi mahaj jigamiset , amdvdsydydm diksitvd patir- 
namdsydm r divan sarvaasadhasya mantham dadhi-madhanor 
apamathya , jyesthdya sresthdya svdhd ity agndv djyasya hufvd t 
manthe sampdtam avanayct. 

4. Now if one wishes to reach greatness, let him perform the 
initiatory rite on the new moon night and then on the night 
of the full moon, let him stir with curds and honey a mash of 
all kinds of herbs and pour melted butter on the fire saying, 



V. 2. 7- Chdndogya Upanisad 425 

‘Hail to the oldest, hail to the best/ And then let him throw the 
residue into the mash. 

See B.U. VI. 3-2. 

On the day of initiation, diksd, the agent should have passed 
through the ethical preparation, austerity, truthfulness and chastity: 
bhumi-sayanddi-niyamam krtvd tapo-ruparii satya-vacanam brahma - 
caryam ity ddulharmavdn bhutvdy arthah . 

5. vasisthdyai svdhd, ity agndv djyasya hutvd, manthe sam- 
pdtam avanayct, pratisthdyai svdilid ity agndv djyasya hutvd 
manthe sampdtam avanayct , sampadc svdhd, ity agndv djyasya 
hutvd manthe sampdtam avanayct , diyatandya svdhd , ity agndv 
djyasya hutvd manthe sampdtam avanayct. 

5. ‘Hail to the most prosperous,’ with these words, let him 
pour melted butter on the fire and then let him throw the 
residue into the mash. ‘Hail to the firm basis/ with these words 
let him pour melted butter on the fire and then let him throw 
the residue into the mash. ‘Hail to success,’ with these words 
let him pour melted butter on the fire and then let him throw 
the residue into the mash. ‘Hail to the abode/ with these words 
let him pour melted butter on the fire and then let him throw 
the residue into the mash. 

0 . atha pratisrpydhjalau mantham didhdya japati: amo ndmdsi , 
amd hi tc sarvam idam , sa hi jyesthah srestho rdjddhipatih, sa 
md jyaistliyam sraisthyam vdjyam ddhipatyam gamayatv aham 
cvcdam sarvam asdnlti. 

f>. Then moving away and holding the mash in his hands, he 
recites, ‘Thou art amd by name for all this rests in thee. He 
is the oldest and the best, the king^and the overlord. May he 
lead me to old age, to the best (position), to kingship, to over- 
lordship. May I be all this.’ 

7. atha khalv day a red paccha dedmati, tat savitur vrnimaha 
ity dedmati , vayam devasya bhojanam ity dedmati , srestham 
sarvadhdtamam ity dedmati , turam bhagasya dlumahi iti satvam 
pibati, nirnijya kamsam eamasam va pasedd agnch samvisati 
earmani vd sthandile vd vdeam-yamn prasdhah; sa yadi striyam 
pasyet samrddharii kanneti vidydt. 

7. Then he takes a sip with this Kk verse at each foot, 
(saying) ‘we desire the Savitr ’ he sips a little: (saying) ‘the 
food of the gods,’ he sips a Uttle (saying) ‘the best and all sus- 
taining/ he sips a little (saying) ‘we meditate on the strength 



426 The Principal Upanisads V. 3. 3. 

of the god,’ he drinks up the whole. Having cleansed the vessel 
or the cup, he sits down behind the fire either on a skin or on 
the bare ground with speech restrained and with self-possession. 
If he now sees a woman let him know that his effort has reached 
fruition. 

§ says that he lies down behind the fire and if, in the dream, he 
sees a woman, that is a sign that his effort has succeeded. 

8. tad csa slokah: 

yadd kannasu kdmyesu striyam svapncsu pasyati, 
sanirddhim tatra jdnlydt tasmin svapna-tiidarsanc iti tasmin 
svapna-nidarsanc. 

8. As to this, there is this verse: ‘If during rites performed for 
(the fulfilment of certain) wishes, he (the performer) secs a 
woman in a dream, let him recognise fulfilment in such a vision 
in a dream, in such a vision in a dream.' 

The Yedic rite is enlarged in its significance. 


Section 3 

THE COURSE OF THE SOUL AFTER DEATH 

1. svetaketur hdruncyah pancdldndm samitim cydya , turn ha 
pravdhano juivalir uvdica: kumdira ami tvdsisat pitch; a nuhi , 
bhagava iti. 

1. Svetaketu Aruneya went to an assembly of the Pancalas. 
Then Pravfihana Jaivali said to him: ‘Young man, has your 
father instructed you?’ ‘Yes, indeed, Venerable Sir’ (said he in 
answer). 

aruneya: the grandson of Aruna. 

2. vettha yad itodhi prajdh prayantih ? na, bhagava , iti; 
vettha yathd punar dvarlanta iti ? na, bhagava iti; vettha pathor 
deva-ydnasya pitrydnasya ca vydvartanam iti ? na, bhagava iti. 

2. ‘Do you know to what place men go from here?’ ‘No, 
Venerable Sir.’ ‘Do you know how they return again?’ 'No, 
Venerable Sir.’ ‘Do you know whore the paths leading to the 
gods and leading to the fathers separate.’ ‘No, Venerable Sir.' 

3. vettha yathdsau loko na sampuryata iti ? na bhagava iti; 



V. 3- 7 - Chandogya Upanisad 427 

vettha yathd pancamydm ahutdv dpah purusa-vacaso bhavantiti , 
naiva, bhagava iti . 

3. 'Do you know how that (yonder) world never becomes 
full?' 'No, Venerable Sir/ ‘Do you know how in the fifth 
libation water comes to be called a person/ ‘Indeed, Venerable 
Sir, no/ 

4. atha mi kim anusisto'vocathdh, yo himdni na vidyat , katham 
so ' nusisto bruvitcti. sa hdyastali pitur ardham eydya; turn hovdca: 
ananusisya vdiva kilct md, bhagavdn, abravit anu tvdsisam iti. 

4. ‘Then why did you say that you had been instructed? 
Indeed how could any one who did not know these things speak 
of himself as having been instructed?' Distressed, he went to 
his father's place and said to him, ‘Venerable Sir, you said, 
indeed, that you had instructed me without having instructed 
me.' 

5. pahea md rdjanya-bandhuh prasndn aprdksit , tesdm naikam 
candsakam vivaktum iti; sa hovdca: yathd md tvam tdita , etdn 
avadah, tathdham csdm naikam ta na veda yady ahum imdn 
avedisyam , katham tc ndivaksyam iti . 

5. ‘That fellow of the princely class asked me five questions 
and I could not understand even one of them/ He (the father) 
said, ‘As you stated to me these (questions) I do not know 
even one of them. If I had known them, how should I not have 
told them to you ? ’ 

6. sa ha gautamo rdjho'rdham eydya, tasmai ha prdptdydrhdm 
cakdra; sa ha pvditah sabhdga udeydya; tarn hovdca: mdnusasya, 
bhagavan gautama, vittasya varam vrnithd iti , sa hovdca tavaiva , 
rdjan, mdnusam vittam , yarn eva Mmdrasydntc vdcam ablids- 
athdh, tdm eva me bnl/uti; sa ha kreehn babhdva. 

6. Then Gautama went over to the king’s place. To him, 
when he arrived, he (the king) had proper respect shown. In 
thi' mouiing he went up to the audience hall (where) the king 
said to him, ‘Venerable Gautama, choose a boon out of the 
wealth that belongs to the world of men.’ Then lie replied, 
‘Thine be the wealth of the world of men, O King; tell me that’ 
speech which you spoke to the young man/ The king was 
perplexed. 

7. tarn ha, ciratii vasetv dihdpaydm cakdra; tarn hovdca: yathd 
md tvam, gautama, avadah, yathey am na prdk tvattah purd vidyd 



428 The Principal Upanisads V. 4. 2. 

brdhmandn gacchati , tasmdd u sarvesu lokcsu ksatrasyaiva 
prasdsanam abhild iti; tasmai harden. 

7. 'Stay for some time' he commanded him. Then he said to 
him, ‘As to what you have told me, Gautama, this knowledge 
has never reached the Bmhmanas before you; therefore in 
all the worlds the rule (this teaching) belonged to the Ksatriya 
class onlv/ Then he said to him. 


Section 4 

THE COURSE OF THE SOUL 
(continued) 

1. asau vdva lokah , gautama , agnilt, lasydditya eva samit , 
rasmayo dhiimah , altar arexh , candramd angarah, naksatrdni 
vispliuhhgdli. 

1 ‘That world, verily, 0 Gautama, is a (sacrificial) fire, the 
sun itself is its fuel, the rays the smoke, the day the flame, the 
moon the coals, the stars the sparks. 

The analogy of the heavenly region to the sacrificial fire is worked 
out. The sun is the fuel as the world shines only when it is lighted 
up by the sun. The rays are the smoke because they rise from it 
even as the smoke rises from the fuel. The day is the flame because it 
is bright and is the effect of the sun. The moon is the coals or the 
embers, for even as the moon becomes visible when the day has 
ceased, the embers become visible when the llame is put out. The 
stars are the sparks; they are like parts of the moon. S. 

2. tasminn ctasminn agnail derail iraddhdm jithvali , tasyd 
dhutch homo rdijd sambhavati. 

2. In this fire the gods ofler (the oblation of) faith. From 
this offering arises Soma (the moon) the king. 

Water is offered as the offering of faith. 

The king answers the last question why the water in the fifth 
libation is called man. V. 3. 3. The sacrilirers rise through their 
offerings to heaven and attain there as their reward a nature like 
that of Soma. 



V. 7- i. Chdndogya Upanisad 429 

Section 5 

THE COURSE OF THE SOUL 
(< continued ) 

1. parjanyo vdva, ga ultima , agnih, tasya vdynr eva samit, 
abhrarh dhumah , vidyud arcih, asanir angdrdh, hrddanayo t 
visphulingdh. « 

1. The god of rain, 0 Gautama, is the (sacrificial) fire, the 
air itself is its fuel, the cloud is the smoke, the lightning is the 
flame, the thunder the coals and the thunderings the sparks. 

•e 

hradani , generally explained as ‘hair, but here it means 'rumblings.' 

2. tasminn etasminn agnau dcvdh so mam rdjdnam juhvati , 
tasya dhuter varsam sanibhavati. 

2. In this lire the gods oiler (the libation of) Soma the King. 
From this offering arises rain. 


Section 6 

THE SAME CONTINUED 

1. prthivT vdva, gautama , agnih; tasydh samvatsara eva samit , 
dkdso dhumah , arcih, diso'hgdrdli, avdntara diso visphit- 

lihgdh. 

1. The earth, verily, O Gautama, is the (sacrificial) fire; of 
this the year is the fuel, space is the smoke, the night is the 
flame, the quarters the coals, the intermediate quarters the 
sparks. 

2. tasminn etasminn agnau dev a varsam juhvati. tasya dhuter 
annum sanibhavati . 

2. In this lire the gods offer (the libation of) rain. From this 
offering arises food. 


Section 7 

THE SAME CONTINUED 

1. puruso vdva, gautama. agnih; tasya vdg eva samit, prano 
dhumah, jihva nih, caksur angdrdh, srotram visphulingdh. . 



43 ° The Principal Upanisads V. 9. i. 

1. Man, verily, O Gautama, is the (sacrificial) fire; of this 
speech is the fuel, breath the smoke, the tongue the flame, the 
eyes the coals and the ears the sparks. 

2. tasminn ctasniinn agnail devil annum jiihvati , tasyd dhute 
retah sambhavati. 

< 2. In this fire the gods offer (the libation of) food; from this 
offering arises semen. 


Section 8 

THE SAME CONTINUED 

1. yosd vdva, gautama, agnih; tasyd upastha eva sunlit, yad 
upaniantrayatc sa dhutnah , yomr arcih , yad antah karoti tc 
angdrdh , ablnnandd visphulingdh. 

1. Woman, verily, O Gautama, is the (sacrificial) fire; of 
this the sexual organ is the fuel, what invites is the smoke, the 
vulva is the flame, what is done inside is the coals, the pleasures 
the sparks. 

2. tasminn ctasniinn agnail devd rcto ju/ivati, tasyd dhuter 
garbhah sambhavati. 

2. In this fire the gods offer (the libation of) semen; from this 
offering arises the foetus. 

From water, through intermediate developments the foetus arises 
and in all these developments water is the piedominating element. 
drava-b dimly am. S. bo it is that water comes to be called man in the 
fifth oblation. 


Section () 

THE SAME CONTINUED 

1. iti tu paheamydm dhutdv dipah piintsa-vacaso bhavantlti, sa 
idbdvrto garbhah, dasa vd nava vd mdsdn antah sayitvd ydvad 
vd’tha jdyate. 

1. For this (reason) indeed, in the fifth oblation water comes 
to be called man. This foetus enclosed in the membrane, having 



V. io. 2. Chandogya Upanisad 431 

lain inside for ten or nine months or more or less, then comes 
to be born. 

Water, by which the self is enveloped on departing from life, 
means the subtle parts of the elements which constitute the seed of 
the body: ap-sabdena sarvesdm eva deha-bijdndm bhuta-silksmdndm 
kathanam siddham. S.B. III. 1. 2. 

2. sa jdto ydvad dyusam jivali, tarn pvctam distam ito’gnaya 
cva haranti , yata cvcto yatah sambhuto bhavati. 

2. When born, he lives whatever the length of his life may 
be. When he has departed, they (his friends) carry him to the 
appointed place for the fire (of the funeral pile), from which 
indeed he came, from which he arose. 

distam: kannand nirdistam. 


Section 10 

THE PATH OF THE GODS 

1. tad ya ittham viduh, yc ccmcranyc sraddhd tapa ity updsatc, 
tercisam abhisambhavanti , arciso'hah, ahna dpfn wimdna-paksmn , 
a puryamdna-paksad ydn sad itdann eti mdsdms tan. 

1. So those who know this, and those who in the forest 
meditate on faith as austerity (or with faith and austerity) go 
to light and from light to day, from day to the bright half of 
the month (of the waxing moon), from the bright half of the 
month to those six months during which the sun moves 
northward. 

The question as to tin* place to which men go from here E taken 
up. See C.U. IV. 15. 5. 

those who know this. The doctrine of the five fires. S makes out that 
this refers to the householders, as the next clause refers to the 
recluses in the forest. 

2. mdsebhyah samvatsaram , samvatsarad ddityam , ddityde 
candr am a sum, candramaso vuiyutam; tat punt so' manavah, sa 
endn brahma gamayati, esa deva-ydnah pant ha it:. 

2. From these months to the year, from the year to the sun, 
from the sun to the moon, from the moon to the lightning. 
There, there is a person wh > is non-human. He leads them on 
to Brahma. This is the path leading to the gods. 



432 The Principal Upanisacls V. io. 5. 

The earliest conception of the path of the gods is to be found in 
the R.V., where Agni who serves as the intermediary between gods 
and men, as bearing the oll'erings to the gods is addressed thus: 
‘Knowing the ways by which the gods go, thou (Agni) hast become 
the unwearied messenger, the bearer of oblations.' 1. 72. 7; see also 
II. 2. 4. The path on which the sacrifices were taken to the heavenly 
world becomes the path bv which the sacrifice!* himself ascended to 
the world of the gods. See Qatapatha Brdhmana , I. 9. 3. 2. The stations 
on the path need not be taken litei ally. Thev represent stages of 
progressive knowledge and light while those of pitr-ydna of progressive 
darkness and corruption. See IV. 15. 5. B.U. VI. 2. 15. 

3. atha ya imc grama istdpurtc dattam ity updsatc, tc dhumam 
abhisambhavauti, dhdtndd rdtrim, rdtrcr apara-paksam , apara- 
paksdd ydn sad daksinaiti mdsdms tan , naite sariivatsaram 
abhiprdpnuvanti. 

3. But those, who in the village practise (a life of) sacrifices, 
(and perform) works of public utility and almsgiving they 
pass into the smoke, from smoke to night, from night to the 
latter (dark) half of the month, from the latter (dark) half of 
the month to the six months in which the sun moves south- 
wards, but they do not reach the year. 

4. mdscbhyah pitr-lokam , pitr-lokdd dkclsam, dkdsdc candrar 
masatn , esa somo rdjd, tad dcvdndm annum , tam dcvd bhaksayanti . 

4. From those months to the world of the fathers, from the 
world of the fathers to space, from space to the moon. That 
is the king Soma. That is the food of the gods. That the gods eat. 

annum. — food. They become the ser\ants of the gods: upahara- 
na-mdtram dcvdndm bhavanti tc stn-patu-bhrtyddivat. S. The gods 
love them and they love the gods. They live with and rejoice in 
gods. 

Three kind-* of future are indicated. The pel formers of sacrifices 
reach the moon bypassing along the path of the fathers, pitr-ydna, 
and after having experienced the fruits of their works these return 
again with a residuum of their karma. The non-performers of sacri- 
fices go to the kingdom of Yania. Those who adopt the way of 
enlightenment go by the path of gods, deva-ydna. There is no return 
for them from the latter. The distinc tiou between the pitr-ydna and 
the deva-ydna is one of two different systems of culture, the way of 
works and the w r ay of knowledge resulting in two diffeient spiritual 
conditions. 


5. tasmin ydvat sampdtam usitva thaitam cvddhvdnam panar 



V. io. 8. Chdndogya Upanisad 433 

nivartante yathetam dkdiam , dkasdd vdyum, vdyur bhutvd dhumo 
bhavati , dhumo bhutvabhram bhavati. 

5. Having dwelt there as long as there is residue (of good 
works) they return again by that course by which they came 
to space, from space into air; and after having become the air 
they become the smoke; after having become smoke, they 
become mist. 

It is not possible, § remarks, for all actions to have their effects in 
one life: na-caikasmin janmani sarva-karmandm ksaya upapadyate. S. 

6. abhram bhutvd megho bhavati , megho bhutvd pravarsati , ta 
iha vnhi-yavd osadhi vanaspatayas tila-mdsd iti jdyante , ato vai 
khalu durnisprapataram , yo yo hy annum atti yo retail sincati, 
tad bliftya eva bhavati . 

6. After having become mist they become cloud, after having 
become cloud he rains down. They are born here as rice and 
barley, herbs and trees, as sesamum plants and beans. From 
thence the release becomes extremely difficult for whoever eats 
the food and sows the seed he becomes like unto him. 

Release is easy from human condition. 

7. tad ya ilia ranianlya-carandJi, abhydso ha yat te ranianiydim 
yonim dpadycran, brdhmana-yonim vd ksatriya-yonim vd, vaisya - 
yonim vd; atlia ya ilia kapuya-carandh abhydso ha yat tc kapuydm 
yonim dpadycran sva+yonirii vd sukara-yonim vd canddla-yonim vd. 

7. Those whose conduct here has been good will quickly 
attain a good birth (literally womb), the birth of a Brfihmin, 
the birth of a Ksatriya or the birth of a Vaisya. But those 
whose conduct here has been evil, will quickly attain an evil 
birth, the birth of a dog, the birth of a hog or the birth of 
a Candala. 

8 . athaitayoh pathor na katarena cana tduilmdni kvnhdny 
asakrd-divartini bhutdni bhavanti, jdyasva, nirivasveti, ctat trtiyam 
st liana m , tendsau loko na sampuryate, tasnidj jugupstta, tad esa 
slokah. 

8. But on neither of these ways are those small creatures 
(which are) continually revolving (those of whom it is said), 
be born and die. Their ’s is a third state. By this (it comes about) 
that that world becomes fid 1 . Therefore let one seek to guard 
himself. To this end, there is this verse. 



V. II. 2. 


434 The Principal Upanisads 

If wo pursue wisdom, wo travol by the path of the gods. If we 
perform good works wo travel by the path of the fathers. If we do 
neither, we will continually revolve like little creatures. 

9. stow hiranyasya surdm pihatiis ca 
guros talpam dvasan brahma lid 
ca-ctc patanti catvdrah. 
pahcamas edcarams taih. 

9. He who steals gold, he who drinks wine, he who dishonours 
the teacher’s bed, he who kills a Brahmana, these four do fall 
as also the fifth who consorts with them. 

10. at ha ha ya dan evam pa he a gain veda , na saha fair apy 
dcaran papmand lipyate , suddhah put ah punya-loko bhavati ya 
evam veda, va evam veda. 

10. But he who knows these five fires thus is not stained by 
evil, even though he consorts with these people. He becomes 
pure, clean, obtains a virtuous world, he who knows this, yea 
he who knows this/ 

The five questions raised in V. 3, 2-3 are answered. 


Section 11 

UNIVERSAL SELF 

1. prddna-sdla aupamanyavah , satya-yajfiah paulusih, indra- 
dyunuio bhdllavcvah , janah sdrkardksyah, budila dsvatardsvis 
te hy etc mahdsdla mahdsrotriydh samdya mhndmsdm cakruh , 
ko na dtmd , him brahmcti. t 

1. Prficlnasfila Aupamanyava, Satyayajna Paulusi, Indra- 
dyumna Bhfdlaveya, Jana Sarkaraksya and Budila Asvatarasvi, 
these great householders, greatly learned in sacred lore, having 
come together, undertook an investigation as to what is our 
self and what is Brahman. 

See Satapatha Brahmana , X. h. 1. 1. 

2. te ha sampddaydmcakruh, udddlako vai bhagavanto’yam 
drunili sum prat imam dtmdnam vaisvdnaram adhyeti, tam 
hantdhhydgacchdmcti ; tam hdbhydjagnmh. 

2. They then reflected among themselves, ‘Venerable Sirs, 
Uddalaka Aruni studies at present this Universal Self; well 
let us go to him/ Then they went over to him. 



V. ii. 7* Chandogya Upanisad 435 

3. sa ha sampddaydmcakdra, praksyanti mam ime mahdsdld 
mahdsrotriydih , tebhyo na sarvam iva pratipatsye, hantdham 
anyam abhyanusdsamti. 

3. He then reflected, These great householders and greatly 
learned in sacred lore will question me. I shall not be able to 
tell them all. Therefore, I shall direct them to another (teacher).' 

4. tan hovdea asvapalir vai , bhagavanto, yam kaikcyali , 
sampvatlmam dtmdnam vaisvdnaram adhyeti , tarn hantabhyd- 
gacchdmeti; tarn hdbhydjagmuh. 

4. He said to them, 'Venerable sirs, Asvapati Kaikeya studies 
at present this Universal Self, well, let us go to him.' Then 
they went over to him. 

5. tebhyo ha prdptebhyah prthag avhdini kdvaydmcakdra, sa 
ha prdtah samjihdna uvdea; 

na me steno janapadc na kadaryo na madyapah , 
ndndhitdgnir ndvidvdn, na svairl svairinT kutah : 
yaksyamdnu vai bhagavantah, aham asnu. ydvad ckaikasmd rtvije 
dhanam ddsydmi, tdvad bhagavadbhyo ddsydmi , vasanta bhaga- 
vanta iti. 

5. Then, when they answered, he (the king) had proper 
attentions shown to them severally. After rising the next 
morning, he said. ‘In my kingdom there is 110 thief, no miser, 
no drunkard, no man without a sacrificial fire, no ignorant 
person, no adulterer, much less an adulteress.’ 1 am going to 
perform a sacrifice, Venerable Sirs, and as much wealth as I 
give to each Rtvig priest, 1 shall give to you, please stay, 
Venerable Sirs.’ 

Asvapati is an expert in Brahma-knowledge and also a wise adminis- 
trator. Wisdom and work go together ii? him. 

$ says that as the viators did not accept the presents, he invited 
them to a sacrifice. 

6. to hocuh, ycna haivdrthcna purnsas caret, tam ha iva vadet; 
dtmdnam cvcmam vaisvdnaram sampraty adhyesi , tam eva no 
br ft Inti. 

6. Then they said, ‘The purpose for which a man conn's, that 
indeed he should speak. At present, you know the Universal 
Self. Tell us indeed about that.’ 

7. tan hovdea: prdtar vah prativaktdsmTti ; tc ha samit-panayah 
puvvdhnc praticakramirc , tan luinupaniyaivaitad uvdea. 

7. He then said to them, ‘Tomorrow I will give you an 



V. 12. 2. 


436 The Principal Upanisads 

answer/ Therefore on the next morning, they approached him 
with fuel in their hands. Then, without having first received 
them as pupils, he said to them. 

He did not insist on the preparatory rites of initiation for he was 
impressed by their humility. 
fuel in their hands. This is a token of discipleship. 


Section 12 

THE SKY AS THE HEAD OF THE 
UNIVERSAL SELF 

1. an p am any av a, ham tvam dtnulnam iipdssa iti: divam eva 
bliagavo rdjan, iti hovdea: esa vat sufejd dtmd vaisvdnarah yam 
tvam dtmdnam npdsse, tasmdi tava sutam prasutam asutam kulc 
drsyate. 

1. Aupamanyava, on what do you meditate as the self? (He 
replied) ‘Heaven only, Venerable King/ He said, ‘The self you 
meditate on is the Universal Self (called) the good light. 
Therefore in your family is seen the suta libation as also the 
prasnta and the dsn tad 

The Soma libation is given these names of sat a, prasnta and dsuta 
in the different sacrifices. 

The good light: sobhanam tejo yasya so' yam sutejd. S. 

Those born in the family will be devoted to work: atlva kanninas 
tvat-kidlnd iti. §. 

2. aisy annum , pasyasupriyam , a tty annum, pasyati priyam, 
bhavaty asya brahma-vaveasam hnlc, ya etam evam dtmdnam 
vaisvdnaram updste, miirdhd tv esa dtmanah, iti hovdea , murdhd 
te vyapatisyat, yan mark ndgamisya iti. 

2. You eat food; you see what is pleasing. He eats food; 
he sees what is pleasing. In the family of him who meditates 
on the Universal Self thus, there arises eminence in brahma- 
knowledge. ‘That, however, is only the head of the self/ said 
he, ‘Your head would have fallen off if you had not come to me/ 

'1 he development of thought is effected gradually. A6vapati elicits 
from these seekers their conceptions of the Universal Self. Their 
conception^ of sky, sun, air, space, water and earth are accepted as 
partially true. The Vaisvdnara self is the whole, the all-comprehend- 



V.14.1. Chandogya Upanisad *437 

ing Infinite of which natural objects and individual selves are parts. 
It is wrong to identify a particular deity, one conceived as presiding 
over a limited part of the world, with the Universal Self. 


Section 13 

THE SUN AS THE EYE OF THE 
UNIVERSAL SELF 

1. atha hovaca satya-yajnam paulusim: prdcTna-yogya, kam 
tvam atmdnam tipassa iti: adityam eva, bhagavo rajan , iti hovaca: 
esa vai visva-nlpa dtmd vaisvdnarah, yam tvam atmdnam updsse, 
tasmdt tava balm visvarupam kale drsyale. 

1. Then he said to Satyayajha Paulusi: Traclnayogya, on 
what do you meditate as the self?’ (He replied) ‘The sun only, 
Venerable King/ He said, ‘The self you meditate on is the 
Universal Self called the Universal Form. Therefore is seen 
in your family much and manifold (wealth)/ 

2. pravrtto ’ ivatarT-ratho ddsi niska/i, alsy annam pasyasi 
priyam, atty annam , pasyati priyam , bhavaty asya brahma-var- 
casam kulc , ya ctam cvam ddmdndim vaisvdnaram update , caksu s 
tv etad dtmanah , iti hovaca andho bhavisyah, yan mdim ndgamisya 
iti . 

2. ‘(for example) there is the chariot with mules, female 
servants and gold necklaces You eat food, you see what is 
pleasing. He eats food, he sees what is pleasing. In the family 
of him who meditates on the Universal Self thus, there arises 
eminence in brahma- knowledge. Th;\t, however, is the eye of 
the self/ said he, ‘and you would have become blind if you 
had not come to me/ 

pravYtti: literally, a course of action, tendency. 


Section 14 

AIR AS THE BREATH OF THE UNIVERSAL SELF 

1. atha hovdiccndra-dyiivn’iim bhdllavcyam : vaiydghrapadya, 
kam tvam atmdnam a pdssa iti: vdyum eva , bhagavo rdjan , iti 



438 The Principal Upanisads V. 15. 2. 

hovdca: csa vai prthag-vartmdtmd vaisvdnarah yam tvam dtmdnam 
u passe tasmdt tvam prthag balaya dyanti, prthag rathasrenayo* 
nuyanti. 

1. Then he said to Indra-dyumna Bhfdlaveya, ‘Vaiyaghra- 
padya, on what do you meditate as the self?' (He replied) 
‘Air only, Venerable King/ He said, ‘The self you meditate 
on is the Universal Self of varied courses (prthag-vartman ) . 
Therefore offerings come to you in various ways and rows of 
chariots follow you in various ways/ 

2. atsy annam , pasyasi priyam , a tty annum, pasyati priyam , 
bliavaty asya brahma-varcasam kale, ya dam evam dtmdnam 
vaisvdnaram itpdstc pranas tv csa dtmanah , iti hovdca, pranas 
ta itdakramisyat , van mam na gamisya iti. 

2. ‘You eat food, you see what is pleasing. He eats food, he 
sees what is pleasing. In the family of him who meditates on 
the Universal Self thus, there arises eminence in brahma- 
knowledge. That, however, is only the breath of the self/ said 
he, ‘your breath would have departed, if you had not come to 
me/ 


Section 15 

SPACE AS THE BODY OF THE UNIVERSAL SELF 

1. atha hovdca janam sdrkardksya : ham tvam dtmdnam 
apdssa iti: dkdsam eva bhagavo rdjan, iti hovdca: esa vai bahula 
dtmd vaisvdnarah , yam tvam Citmdnam u passe , tasmdt tvam 
bahulo'si prajayd ca dhanena ta. 

1. Tht'n he said to Janam Sarkaraksya, on what do you 
meditate as the self?' (He replied) ‘Space only, Venerable King/ 
He said, ‘The self you meditate on is the Universal Self called 
Full (brahma). Therefore you are full of offspring and wealth/ 

2. atsy annam , pasyasi priyam, ally annam, pasyati priyam, 
bhavaty asya brahma-varcasam kulc ya dam evam dtmdnam 
vaisvdnaram updstc samdehas tv csa dtmanah, iti hovdca 
samdehas le vyasiryat, van mdm nd gamisya iti. 

2. ‘You eat food, you see what is pleasing. He eats food, he 
sees what is pleasing. In the family of him who meditates on 
the Universal Self thus, there arises eminence in brahma- 
knowledge. That, however, is only the body of the self/ said 
he, ‘your body would have* fallen off, if you had not come to me/ 



V. ly. 2. Chdndogya Upanisad 439 

Section 16 

WATER AS THE BLADDER OF THE UNIVERSAL SELF 

1. atha liovdca , budilam asvatardsvim, vaiydghrapadya , kam 
tvam dtmdnam updssa iti, apa cva bhagavo rdjan , hovdica. esa 
vai rayir dtmd vaisvdnarah, yam tvam dtmdnam updisse, tasmdt 
tvam rayimdn pustimdn asi. 

1. Then he said to Budila Asvatarasvi, 'Vaiyaghrapadya, on 
what do you meditate as the self?’ (He replied) ‘Water only, 
Venerable King/ He said, ‘The self you meditate on is the 
Universal Self called wealth (rayi). Therefore are you endowed 
with wealth and strength of body/ 

2. atsy annam , pasyasi priyam, atty annum , pasyati pviyam , 
bhavaty asya brahmav area sum kulc ya dam evam dtmdnam 
vaisvdnaram updste, bastis tv esa dtmanah, iti hovdea bastis te 
vyabhetsyata, yan mam nd’gamisya iti. 

2. ‘You eat food, you see what is pleasing. He eats food, he 
sees what is pleasing. I11 the family of him who meditates on 
the Universal Self thus, there arises eminence in brahma 
knowledge. That, however, is only the bladder of the self and 
your bladder would ha\e burst if you had not come to me/ 


Section 17 

EARTH AS THE FEET OF THE UNIVERSAL SELF 

1. atha hovdea udddlakam dt unim: jgautama , kam tvam dtmd- 
nam updssa iti: prthiiim cva , bhagavo rdjan , iti hovdea: esa vai 
pratisthdtmd vaisvdnarah yam tvam dtmdnam updisse, tasmdt 
tvam pratisfhito’si prajayd ca pasubhis ca. 

1. Then he said to Uddalaka Aruni: ‘Gautama, on what do 
you meditate as the self?' (He replied) ‘Earth only, Venerable 
King/ He said, 'The self you meditate on is the L T niversal Self 
called support (pratistha). Therefore you are supported, with 
offspring and cattle/ 

2. atsy annum, pasyasi priyam , atty annam pasyati priyam, 
bhavaty asya brahma-varcasam kulc ya dam cram dtmdnam 
vaisvdnaram updste, pddau *v ddv dtmanah , iti hovdea, padau 
te vyamldsyetdm, yan mam nagamisya iti. 

p 



440 The Principal Upartisads V. 18. i. 

2. ' You see food, you see what is pleasing. He eats food, he 
sees what is pleasing. In the family of him who meditates on 
the Universal Self thus there arises eminence in brahma-know- 
ledge. That, however, is but the feet of the self,’ said he, ‘your 
feet would have withered away, if you had not come to me/ 


Section 18 

THE SELF AS THE WHOLE 

i. tan hoviica: etc vai kluilu yuyam prthag ivcmam dtmdnam 
vaisvdnaram vidvamso’ nnam attha , yas tv etam evani prddesa- 
mdtram abhivimdnam dtmdnam vaisvdnaram updstc , sa sarvesu 
lokesu sarvesu bhutcsu sarvcsv dtmdsv annam atti. 

i. Then he said to them, ‘Verily indeed you eat your food 
knowing this Universal Self as if it were many. He, however, 
w r ho meditates on the Universal Self as of the measure of the 
span or as identical with the self, eats food in all worlds, in 
all beings, in all selves/ 

prddesa-nnltra: of the measure of the span. § gives five different 
renderings of which the chief are (i) that which is recognised bodily 
through heaven as the head and the earth as the feet, (ii) that which 
is measured by a measure extending from the heaven to the earth. 

The self which has assumed the shape of the whole universe is the 
Universal Self. It is to be known as the Self of all beings. One has to 
realise the Self in oneself before one can comprehend Him as the Self 
of the whole creation. The individual T and the universal T arc one. 

Asmarathya teaches the meditation of Yaisvanara as pradesa - 
matra since the Supreme Being is specially manifested in the heart 
which is conceived as of the measure of a span : 
abhivyakter dsmarathyah: B.S. I. 2. 29. 

pratyag-dtmataydbhivimiyate > ham iti jiidyata ity abhivitndnah. £. 

Badari is of the view that the Supreme Being is described as of 
the measure of a span since he is meditated upon by the mind, 
situated in the heart which is of the measure of a span : 
anusmrter bddarih: B.S. I. 2. 30. 

Jaimini holds that pradesa-mdtra is intended to teach sampatti or 
sampad-updsana , i e. 1 he realization of the non-separation of God 
from the objects of sense. § explains dhydnena dysya-vasluni parame- 
svarasya abheda-nis pattih . 
abhivimdna: the inner self behind the parts. 



V. ig. 2. Chdndogya Upanisad 441 

pratyag-dtmatayd abhivimlyate aham iti vijnayate : It is the Universal 
Self in each living being. The seeker should realise the’ divine in 
himself and in all beings. 

2. tasya ha va etasyatmano vaiivanarasya murdhaiva sutejdh, 
caksur visva-rupah, prdnah prthagvartmatma, samdcho bahulah, 
bastir eva rayih, prthivy eva padav ara eva vedih, lomani barhih, 
hrdayam garhapatyah, mano'nvahdrya-pacanah , dsyam dha- 
vaniyah. 

2. Of this Universal Self, the head indeed is the good light, 
the eye is the universal form, breath is (the air) of varied 
courses, the body is the full, the bladder is wealth, the feet 
are the earth, the chest indeed is the sacrificial area, the hair 
is the sacred grass, the heart is the garhapatya fire, the mind 
is the anvaharya-pacana fire and the mouth is the ahavaniya 
fire. 

v. prthag-varima. 

The teacher corrects the wrong notions of the pupils who mistake 
parts for the whole even as blind men mistake parts of the elephant 
for the elephant: hasti-darsane iva jdtydndhah. 

This passage indicates the essential correspondence between the 
microcosm and the macrocosm. 


Section 19 

THE SACRIFICE TO THE UNIVERSAL SELF IN ONE’S 
OWN SELF: PRANA 

1. tad yad bhaktam prathamam * agacchet , tad homlyam , sa 
yam prathamam dhutim juhuydt tarn juhuyat, prdndya svahcti , 
pranas trpyati. 

1. Therefore that food which may come first should be an 
offering. The first olfering he offers he should offer saying, 
‘hail to the prana breath.’ The ptdna breath is satisfied. 

2. prune trpyati caksns trpyati, caksusi trpyaty dditvas trpyati , 
dditye trpyati dyans trpyati, divi trpyantydni yat him ca dyaus 
cadityas eddhitisthatah , tat trpyati iasydnufrptim trpyati prajayd 
pasubhir annddycna tejasd brahma-varcascna. 

2. The prana breath be’ng satisfied, the eye is satisfied. The 
eye being satisfied, the sun is satisfied. The sun being satisfied, 



V. 21 . 2 . 


44^ 'l'he Principal Upanisads 

the heaven is satisfied. The heaven being satisfied, whatever 
is under the heaven and under the sun is satisfied. Along with 
the satisfaction thereof, he himself is satisfied with offspring, 
with cattle, with food (health born of food), brightness and 
with eminence in sacred knowledge. 


Section 20 

vyana 

1. atha yam dvitiydm juliuydt tarn juhuyat, vydndya svdheti, 
vydnas trpyati. 

1. Then the second offering he should offer, saying, ‘Hail to 
the vyana breath/ The vyana breath is satisfied. 

2. vydne trpyati stotram trpyati , srotre trpyati candramds 
trpyati, candramasi trpyati disas trpyanti , diksu trpyanttsu 
yat him ca disas ca candramds eddhitisthanti, tat trpyati , 
tasydnu-trptim trpyati prajayd pasubhir annddycna tejasd 
brahma-va rca sc na. 

2. Vyana being satisfied, the ear is satisfied. The ear being 
satisfied, the moon is satisfied. The moon being satisfied, the 
quarters are satisfied. The quarters being satisfied, whatever 
is under the quarters and under the moon is satisfied. Along 
with the satisfaction thereof he himself is satisfied with off- 
spring, with cattle, with food, with brightness and with eminence 
in sacred knowledge. 


Section 21 
A PAN A 

1. atha yam trtiydm juhuyat turn juhuyat, apdndya svdheti , 
apdnas trpyati. 

1. Then the third offering he should offer, saying, ‘Hail to 
the apdna breath/ The apdna breath is satisfied. 

2. apdne trpyati vdk trpyati, vdei trpyantydm agnis trpyati, 
agnau trpyati prlhivT trpyati, prthivydm trpyantydm yat him 
ca prthivi edgnis eddhitisthatah tat trpyati, tasydnu-trptim trpyati 
prajayd pasubhir annddyena tejasd brahma-varcasena. 



V. 23. 2. Chdndogya Upanisad 443 

2. Apana being satisfied, speech is satisfied. Speech being 
satisfied, the fire is satisfied. 1 he fire being satisfied, the earth 
is satisfied. The earth being satisfied, whatever is under the 
earth and the fire is satisfied. Along with the satisfaction 
thereof, he himself is satisfied with offspring, with cattle, with 
food, with brightness and with eminence in sacred knowledge. 


Section 22 
SAM AX A 

1. atha yam caturtliim juhuydt tarn juhuydl satndndya svdlieti 
sent 1 anas trpyati. 

1. Then the fourth offering he should offer, saying, ‘Hail to 
the satndna breath/ The samdna breath is satisfied. * 

2. samdne trpyati matins trpyati, matiasi trpyati parjanyas 
trpyati, parjanye trpyati vidyut trpyati , vidyuti trpyantydm yat 
kim ca vidyuc ca parjanyas cddlutisthatah, tat trpyati tasydnu- 
trptim trpyati prajayd pasubhir antiddyctia tejasd brahma-var- 
casena. 

2. Satndna being satisfied, the mind is satisfied. The mind 
being satisfied, the rain god is satisfied. The rain god being 
satisfied, lightning is satisfied. Lightning being satisfied, what- 
ever is under the lightning and the rain god is satisfied. Along 
with the satisfaction thereof, he himself is satisfied with 
offspring, with cattle, with food, with brightness and with 
eminence in sacred knowledge. 


Section 23 
UDAXA 

I. atha ydnii pahcatmtii juhuydt tduh juhuydt uddndya svdlieti, 
uddnas trpyati. 

1. Then the fifth offering he should offer, sa\ing, ‘Hail to 
the uddna breath/ The uddtia breath is satisfied. 

2. uddne trpyati tvak trpyati, tvaci trpyantydm vdyus trpyati , 



444 77 /f Principal Upanisads V. 24. 4. 

vdyau trpyaty dkasas trpyati, akase trpyati yat kirit ca vdyus 
cdkasas cddhitisthatah , to/ trpyati , tasydnu-trptim trpyati prajayd 
pasitbhir annddycna tcjasii brahma-varcasena. 

2. Udana being satisfied, the skin is satisfied. The skin being 
satisfied, the air is satisfied. The air being satisfied, space is 
satisfied. Space being satisfied, whatever is under the air and 
space is satisfied. Along with the satisfaction thereof, he 
himself is satisfied with offspring, with cattle, with food, with 
brightness and with eminence in sacred knowledge. 


Section 24 

THE NEED FOR KNOWLEDGE IS 
STRESSED 

# 

1. say a idam avidvdn agni-hotram juhoti , yathdiigdrdn apoliya 
bhasmani juhuydt, tddrk tat sydt. 

1. If, without knowing this, one offers the fire sacrifice, that 
would be just as if he were to remove the live coals and pour 
the offering on (dead) ashes. 

2. athaya clad evarn vidvdn agni-hotram juhoti, tasya sarvesu 
lokesu sarvesu bhutesu sarvesv dtmasu hutam bhavati. 

2. But if, knowing it thus, one offers the fire sacrifice he 
offers it in all worlds, in all beings, in all selves, he will perform 
sacrifices with a full knowledge of their meaning and purpose. 

3. tad yathcsikd-tulam agnau protam praduyeta, evarin hdsya 
sarve pdpmdnah praduyante, ya dad ovum vidvdn agni-hotram 
juhoti. 

3. Even as the soft fibres of the isika reed are burned up 
when laid on a fire, so also are burned up the evils of one who 
knowing it thus offers the fire sacrifice. 

4. tasmdd u haivamvid yady api canddldyocchistam prayacchet, 
dtmani haivdsya tad vaisvdnare hutam sydd iti, tad esa ilokah. 

4. Therefore if one who knows this should offer the remnant 
of his food to a Candala, it would be offered in his Universal Self. 
On this there is the following verse. 

Candala is symbolic of those who do not deserve the offer, anarha. 

S. One is released from the observance of restrictions when one has 



V. 24. 5 - Chdndogya Upanisad 445 

attained knowledge that the one Self dwells in all. One offers it to 
the Universal Self dwelling in the body of the Candala: canddla-de- 
hasthe vaisvdnare. S. The whole system of caste and untouchability 
is undermined by the perception of the Indwelling Self in all. 

5. yathdiha ksudhitd bdldh mataram paryupdsate evam sar- 
vani bhutany agni-hotram upasate ity agni-hotram upasata iti. 

5. As here hungry children sit (expectantly) around their 
mother, even so do all beings sit around the fire sacrifice, yea 
they sit around the fire sacrifice. 



446 The Principal Upanisads VI. 1. 4. 

CHATTER VI 

Section 1 

UDDALAKA’S teaching concerning the oneness 

OF THE SELF 

1. aum. svetakctitr haruncya dsa, tam ha pitovdea: svetaketo, 
vasa brahmacaryam , na vai, saumya, asmat-kulino’ nanficya 
brahma-bandhur iva bhavatiti. 

1. Aum. There was Svetaketu Aruneya. His father said to 
him, ‘Live the life of religious student, verily, my dear, there 
is no one in our family who is unlearned (in the Vedas), who is a 
Brahmana only by birth/ 

aruneya: anuiasya pautrah: grandson of Aruna S. 
braJima-bandhuh: he who calls Brahmanas his relatives but does not 
himself behave like a Brfihmana. brahman an band Inin vyapadisati 
na svayam b) dhmana-vrtta iti. &. 

2. sa ha dvddasa-varsa upetya caturvimsati varsah sarvdn 
veddn adhTtya mahdmand anucdna-mdni stabdha evaya , tam ha 
pitovdea , svetaketo, van nit saiunya idam mahdmand andedna- 
mdni stabdhu'si uta tam ddesam aprdksvah. 

2. He then, having become a pupil at the age of twelve, 
returned when he was twenty-four years of age, having studied 
all the Vedas, greatly conceited, thinking himself well read, 
arrogant. His father then said to him, ‘Svetaketu, since you 
are now so greatlv conceited, think yourself well read and 
arrogant, did you ask for that instruction 

3. yendsruttun srutam btuivati, amatam malum, avijhdtam 
vijndtam Hi: katliam nit, bhagavah, sa ddeso bhavatiti. 

3. By which the unhearable becomes heard, the unper- 
ceivable becomes perceived, the unknowable becomes known? 1 
‘How, Venerable Sir, can there be such teaching?* 

All learning is useless unless one knows the truth with regard to 
the Self, sarvdn a pi veddn adhitya sarvam ednyad vedyam adhigamyapy 
akrtdrtha eva bhavati ydvad ddmalallvam na jdndli S. 

4. yatlui, saumya, ekena mrt-pindena sarvam mrnmayam 
vijndtam sydit, vdudrambhanam vikdro ndma-dheyam, mrtlikely 
eva satyam. 

4. Just as, my dear, by one clod of clay all that is made of 



VI. 2. i. Chdndogya Upanisad 447 

clay becomes known, the modification being only a name 
arising from speech while the truth is that it is just clay. 

vikdra: modification, manifestation, development, change. S suggests 
that the change is only nominal: vdg-dlambana-matram ndmaiva 
kevalam na vikdro ndma vastv asti, paramdrthalo mtttikety eva mrtti- 
kaiva tu salyam vastv asti. S. The Upanisad suggests that all modi- 
fications are based on the reality of clay and not that change rests 
simply on a word, that it is a mere name. 

5. yathd, saumya, ekcna loha-manind sarvath lohamayam 
vijndtam sydt, vdcdrambhanam vikdro ndma-dheyam lohamity eva 
salyam. 

5. Just as, my dear, by one nugget of gold, all that is made 
of gold becomes known, the modification being only a name 
arising from speech, while the truth is that it is just gold. 

by one nugget of gold: suvarna-pindena. £. loha originally meant 
iion or copper but later is used for gold or any metal. 

6. yathd , saumya , ckena nakha-nikrntanena sarvam karsndya - 
sam vijndtam sydt, vdcdrambhanam vikdro ndma-dheyam krsnd- 
yasam ity eva satyam, evam, saumya, sa ddeso bhavatiti. 

6. Just as, my dear, by one pair of nail scissors all that is 
made of iron becomes known, the modification being only a 
name arising from speech while the truth is that it is just iron: 
thus, my dear, is that teaching. 

7. na vai nunam bhagavantas ta dad avedisuh , yadd hy etad 
avedisyan, katham me ndvaksyan iti bhagavams tv eva me tad 
bravitv iti ; tathd, saumya, iti hovdica. 

7. ‘Verily, those venerable men did not know this; for if 
they had known it, why would they not have told it to me? 
Venerable Sir, please tell me that/ ‘So be it, my dear/ said he. 


Section 2 

THE PRIMACY OF BEING 

1. sad eva, saumya, id am agra dsui ekam evddltlyam, tadd haika 
dhnh, asad evedam agra dsld ekam evddvitiyam, tasnuld asatah 
saj jay at a. 

I. In the beginning, my dear, this was Being alone, one 



VI. 2. 2. 


448 - The Principal Upanisads 

only without a second. Some people say ‘in the beginning this 
was non-being alone, one only; without a second. From that 
non-being, being was produced/ 
sad : being. 

eva : without any limitation or upddhi. 

idam: this, the universe of name and form, the world of manifesta- 
tion. Prior to manifestation this world was pure being. 

One only without a second: There is no second to it. There is no other 
object than being: ndsya dvitiyam vastv antaram vidyata ity advitlyam. 
5 . See T.U. II. 7; C.U. III. 19. 1. 

The logical priority of Brahman to the world is brought out by 
the statement that Being alone was this in the beginning. 

See Maitn, VI. 17. 

Cp. Pahcadasi, 1 . 19: 

idam sarvani purii srster ckam cvddvitlyakam 
sad evdsin ndma-rupe ndstdm iti anincr vacah. 

'Previous to creation all this was being, one only without a 
second. Name and form were not: this is the statement of the son of 
Aruna/ 

He does not have ‘being’ as other things have being. He is his own 
being. Being is, is God. Being is above all conceptions and conceptual 
differentiations. It is prior to all things. All other things are from 
being, live in it and end in it. W hat is other than being is nothing. 

According to Indian logic, there are four kinds of non-existence 
or abhava. There is absolute non-existence or atyantdblidva: anything 
self-contradictory like the barren woman's son, vandhydpntra , is 
inconceivable and impossible. Barrenness and motherhood contra- 
dict each other '1 he real excludes self-contradictory non-existence. 
When non-being or asat is said to be the root of existence, asat does 
not mean absolute non-existence but only prior or antecedent 
non-existence or prdg-abhdva or potential existence. The world is 
non-existent before its production. It was existent potentially or 
as a possibility though not as an actuality. (Teat ion is not out of 
absolute non-existence but out of prior non-existence or the world 
of possibility. This type of non-existence has no beginning but has 
an end when the possibility is actualized, pradhvamsdbhdva is posterior 
non-existence. It is the opposite ol pnor non-existence. It has a 
beginning but no end. When a jar G destroyed, its non-existence 
begins at the time it is destroyed, but it has no end. The mutual 
exclusiveness of a jar and a cloth, the lact of dilferencc, is indicated 
by anyony abhava. A is not B. A jar is not a cloth. See Annambhatta’s 
Tarka-samgraha. 3. 

2. kutas tu khalu , saumya, evani sydt, Hi hovdea, katham , asatah 
saj jay cicti, sat tv eva, saumya , idam agra dsid chain evddvitiyam . 



VI. 2. 4- Chdndogya Upani§ad 449 

2. But how, indeed, my dear, could it be thus? said he, how 
could being be produced from non-being? On the contrary, 
my dear, in the beginning this was being alone, one only, 
without a second. 

A suggests that ckavn excludes sajdtlya and svagata bheda and 
advitlyam excludes vijdtlya bheda. 

Cp. Pahcadasl : 

vrksasya svagata-bhedah patra-puspa-phalddibhih 
vrksdntardt sajdtlyo vijatlyah sildditah. II. 20. 

Svagata-bheda is internal difference of a tree from its leaves, 
flowers and fruits. Sajdtlya difference is that of one tree from other 
trees. Vijdtlya is the difference of a tree from rock, etc. Brahman is 
devoid of all these three kinds of difference. 

3. tad aiksata , bahu sydm prajdyeyeti, tat tejo srjata: tat teja 
aiksata, bahu sydm prajdyeyeti, tad apo’ srjata, tasmdd yatra 
kva ca iocati svedate vd purusah, tejasa eva tad adhy dpo jdyante. 

3. It thought, May I be many, may I grow forth. It sent 
forth fire. That fire thought, May I be many, may I grow forth. 
It sent forth water. Therefore, whenever a person grieves or 
perspires, water is produced from the fire (heat). 

aiksata: thought, literally saw. This word indicates that pure being 
is conscious. The reference in all such passages is not to the elements 
as such, but to the presiding deities. 

abhitndninyah cetandh dcvatdh S.B. II. 1. 5. £ also says that the 
Highest Lord abiding as the selves of the various elements, produces 
by his power of thought, the clittercnt effects: 
paramesvara eva tena tena dtmand avatisthamdnah abliidhydyan tarn 
Jam vikdram srjate. S.B. II. 3. 13. 

In other Upanisads, space, aii and futi are mentioned as successive 
products. 

The text, 5 suggests, has no eye to the order of creation for it is 
only interested 111 making out that all effects aie derived from 
Bein 6 . 


4. id apa aiksanta, hahvyah sydma, prajdyonahlti , td annum 
asrjanta , tasmdd yatra kva ca varsati, tad eva bhuyisfhani annum 
bhavati, adbhya eva tad adhy annddyam jdyate. 

4. That water thought, May I be many, may I grow forth. 
It sent forth food. Therefore, whenever it rains anywhere then 
there is abundant food. So food for eating is produced from 
water alone. 



45o 


VL 3. 4- 


The Principal Upanisads 
Section 3 

THREEFOLD DEVELOPMENT 

I. tesam kJialv csiim bh Fit tin dm trlny eva bijFini bhavanti , 
-andajam, jivajani, udbhijjam iti. 

1. Now of these (living) beings there are only three origins, 
those born from an egg, born from a living being, born from a 
sprout. 

In A.U. a fouith svedaja Torn from heat' is mentioned in addition 
to the three mentioned here. Cp. Atharva Veda , I. 12. i. 

2. seyam devataiksata, hantdham imds tisro devoid anena 
jlvend inland* nupraviiy a ndma-rfipe vydkorovdniti. 

2. That divinity thought, ‘Well, let me entei into these three 
divinities by means of this living self and let me then develop 
names and forms. 

devoid — literally divinity. It means being. By the union of sot 
or Being with the three elements of fire, water and earth, all the 
varied manifestations of the world are produced. In relation to 
the three elements which are called dcvatds , sot is called para 
devotd, highest being. Sat is primary being. Tejos is its first product. 
Out of tejos water is produced, and out of water food. Sat pene- 
trates into these three as their inner soul, and by mixing them 
up makes each of them threefold. The red colour of fire is the 
colour of tejos, the white of dpas and the black of anna the three 
are the truth and their difteren tuitions arc derived from vac, 
vdedrambhanam. So long as vac does not differentiate, the three 
colours form a unity. M. Senart thinks that the three rupas are de- 
rived from the three cosmic spheres. S aiguos that this development 
does not affect the Absolute Reality. He points out that the modi-, 
fications of the world are real in so far as they participate in the 
nature of absolute reality and unreal in themselves: sarvam ca ndma- 
rupddi saddtmanaiva satyam vi kora -jut am svatastv anrlam eva. S. 
Again, sadatmand sarva-vyavahdrdndm sarva-vikdrdn am ca satyatvam 
sato'nyatve cdnrtatvam. £. 

3. tdsdm trivrtam trivrtam ckaikdm ka ravd nit i, seyam devatands 
tisro devotd anenaiva jtvena tmana nupraviiy a ndma-ritpc vyd- 
karot. 

3. ‘Let me make each one of the three threefold/ The 
divinity entered into those three divinities by means of the 
living self and developed names and forms. 

4. tdsdm trivrtfim trivrtam ckaikdm akarot , yathd tu kholu 



VI. 4- 4 - Chdndogya Upanisad 451 

saumya , imds tisro devatds trivrt trivrd ekaikd bhavati , taw wc 
vijdnihiti. 

4. It made each of these threefold and how these three 
divinities become each of them threefold, that learn from me 
now, my dear. 


Section 4 

THREEFOLD DEVELOPMENT — continued 

1. yad ague rohitam rupam tejasas tad rupam , yac chuklam 
tad apdm, yat krsnam tad annasya apdgdd agner agnitvam , 
vdedrambhanam vikdro ndma-dheyam , /wwi rupdnity eva satyam. 

1. Whatever red form fire has it is the form of heat, whatever 
(is) white (is the form) of water. Whatever (is) dark (it is the 
form of) earth. Thus vanishes the quality of fire from fire, 
the modification being only a name arising from speech while 
the truth is that it is only the three forms. 

2. yad ddityasya rohitam rupam tejasas tad rupam, yac 
chuklam tad apdm, yat krsnam tad annasya. apdgdd aditydd 
ddityatvam , vdedrambhanam vikdro ndma-dheyam , trim rupdnity 
eva satyam . 

2. Whatever red form the sun has it is the form of heat, 
whatever (is) white (it is the form) of water. Whatever (is) dark 
(it is the form) of earth. Thus vanishes the quality of the sun 
from the sun, the modification being only a name arising from 

speech while the truth is that it is only the three forms. 

• 

3. yac candramaso rohitam rupam tejasas tad rupam, yac 
chuklam tad apdm, yat krsnam tad annasya apdgdc candrdc 
candratvam, vdedramohanam vikdro ndma-dheyam, tiini rupdnity 
eva satvam. 

3. Whatever red form the moon has it is the form of heat, 
whatever (is) white (it is the form) of water. Whatever (is)dark 
(it is the form) of earth. Thus vanishes the quality of the moon 
from the moon, the modification being only a name arising 
from speech while the truth is that it is only the three forms. 

4. yad vidyuto rohitam rupam tejasas tad rupam, yac chuklam 
tad apdm, yat krsnam tad annasya. apdgdd vidyuto vidyutvam, 
vdedrambhanam vikdro ndma-dheyam , trini rupdnity eva satyam . 



452 The Principal Upanisads VI. 4. 7. 

4. Whatever red form the lightning has it is the form of heat, 
whatever (is) white, (it is the form) of water. Whatever (is) 
dark (it is the form) of earth. Thus vanishes the quality of 
lightning from the lightning, the modification being only a name 
arising from speech, while the truth is that it is only the three 
forms. 

All tilings are ultimately modifications of pure being, sarvasya sad 
vikdratvdt. §. The primordial being becomes three deities, fire, water 
and earth. The doctrine of tnvrt-karana, by which each of the three 
original elements, fire, water and earth is to be regarded as being 
divided into two equal portions, of which one half is kept intact and 
the other half is divided into two equal parts, the two quarters of 
the two other elements in combination with the one half of the 
original element. This view is the basis of the doctrine of pahclkarana 
of the later Vedanta. Anaxagoras affirms that there is a portion of 
everything in everything. 

The three colours are taken over by the Sdmkhya system to corre- 
spond to the three gunas, saliva, rajas and lamas. 

5. etadd ha sma vai tad vidvdmsa ahull purve mahdsdld niahd- 
srotriydh na nodya kascana asrutam , ennatam , avijhdtam , itddha - 
risyatlti hy ebhyo viddmeakruh. 

5. Verily it was just this that the great householders and 
great students of sacred wisdom knew when they said of old 
‘no one now will mention to us what we have not heard, what 
we have not perceived, what we have not thought.' For from 
these (three forms) they knew everything. 

6. yad u rohitam ivdbhud ili tejasas tad rupam iti tad viddm 
cakruh , yad u suklam ivdbhud tty apdm rupam iti tad viddm 
cakruh , yad u krsnam ivdbhud ity annasya rupam iti tad viddm 
cakruh. 

6. They knew that whatever appeared red was of the form 
of heat; they knew that whatever appeared white was of the 
form of water; they knew that whatever appeared dark was 
of the form of earth. 

7. yad avijhdtam ivdbhud ity etdsdim eva dcvatdndm samdsah , 
iti tad viddmeakruh , yathd mi khalu , sau my a , imds tisro dcvatdh 
purusam prdpya tnvrt trivrd ckaikd bhavati , tan me vijdnihiti. 

7. They knew that whatever appeared Unintelligible is a 
combination of just these three divinities. Verily, my dear, 
learn from me how each of these three divinities when they 
reach the human, becomes threefold. 



VI. 5- 4 - Chandogya Upani§ad 453 

Section 5 

ILLUSTRATIONS OF THREEFOLD NATURE 

1. annam aiitam tvedhci vidhiyate , tasya yah sthavistho dhatus 
tat purisam hhavati, yo madhyamas tan marnsam , yo’nisthas tan 
manah. 

1. Food when eaten becomes threefold; its coarsest portion 
becomes the faeces; its middle (portion) flesh and its subtlest 
(portion) mind. 

& argues that mind being fed by food is material, elemental and 
not impartible and eternal: 

annopacitatvdn manaso bhautikatvam eva , na vaisesika-tantrok- 
ta-laksanam niiyam nivavayavenn ceti grhyate. 

2. dpah pitas tvedhci vidhiyante , tdsdmyah sthavistho dhatus tan 
mutram hhavati } yo madhyamas tal lohitam , yo nisthah sa pranah. 

2. Water when drunk becomes threefold; its coarsest portion 
becomes the urine; its middle (portion) the blood, its subtlest 
(portion) the breath. 

3. tejo’iitam tvedhd vidhiyate , tasya yah sthavistho dhatus tad 
asthi hhavati , yo madhyamah sa majjd, yo' nisthah sa vak. 

3. Heat when eaten becomes threefold; its coarsest portion 
becomes bone; its middle (portion) marrow, its subtlest (portion) 
speech. 

We eatfficat, in the shape of oil, butter, etc. S: taila-ghrtddi- 
hhaksitam. 

4. annam ay a fit hi, saumya , manah, dpomayah pranah, tejo- 
mayi vdg Hi; bhuya eva md bhagcivan vijhdpayatv iti; tathd 
saumya, iti hovdea. 

4. Thus, my dear, mind consists of food, breath consists of 
water and speech consists of heat. ‘Please, Venerable Sir, 
instruct me still more.' So be it, my dear, said he. 

Everything is threefold and so all the three elements exist in 
everything, sarvasya tvivrt-krta-tvdt sarvatra saivopapattch. S. 



454 The 'Principal Upanisads VI. 7. 2. 

Section 6 

ILLUSTRATIONS — continued 

1. dadhnah , saumya , mathyamdnasya yo’nimd , 5a urdhvah 
samudtsati , sarpir bhavati. 

1. Of the curd, my dear, when churned, that which is subtle 
moves upwards; it becomes butter. 

2. mn;/ 6W khalu , saumya, annasydsyamdnasya yo’nimd, sa 
urdhvah samudisati , tan mano bhavati. 

2. In the same manner, my dear, of the food that is eaten, 
that which is subtle moves upwards; it becomes mind. 

3. apdm, saumya , piyamdndndm yo’nimd, sa urdhvah samu- 
dtsati, sa prano bhavati. 

3. Of the water, my dear, that is drunk, that which is subtle 
moves upwards; it becomes breath. 

4. tejasah saumya asyamdnasya yo’nimd, sa urdhvah samu- 
disati, sd vag bhavati. 

4. Of the heat, my dear, that is eaten, that which is subtle 
moves upwards; it becomes speech. 

5. annamayam hi, sattmya, manali, dpomayah prdnah, 
tejomayi vag iti: bhuya eva md, bhagavan, vijhdpayatv iti; tathd, 
saumya, iti hovaca. 

5. Thus, my dear, mind consists of food, breath consists of 
water, speech consists of heat. 'Please, Venerable Sir, instruct 
me still more.’ So be it, my dear, said he. 


Section 7 

IMPORTANCE OF PHYSICAL NEEDS 

i.sodaia-kalah , saumya, purusah, pahcadasdhdinimd’ sih,kdmam 
apah piba, dpomayah prdno na pibato viahetsyata iti. 

1. A person, my dear, consists of sixteen parts. For fifteen 
days do not eat (any food), drink water at (your) will. Breath 
which consists of water will not be cut off from one who drinks 
water. 

2. sa ha pahcadasdhdni nd’sa atha hainam upasasada, kirn 



VI. 7- 6. Chdndogya Upanisad 455 

bravimi bho iti, rcah , saumya, yajumsi samaniti ; sa hovdca , 
pratibhdnti bho iti. 

2. Then for fifteen days he did not eat (any food); and then 
he approached him saying, 'What, sir, shall I say?' ‘The Rg. 
verses, my dear, the Yajus formulas and the Sdman chants/ 
He replied, ‘They do not occur to me, Sir/ 

3. tam hovdca, yathd, saumya, mahato'bhydhitasyaiko’hgarah 
khadyota-mdtrah parisistah sydt, tcna tato'pi na bahu dahet, evam, 
saumya, te sodaAdndm kaldnam ekd kalatisistd sydt, tayaitarhi 
vedan ndnubhavasi, asana, atha me vijhdsyasiti . 

3. He said to him, ‘ Just as, my dear, of a great lighted fire, 
a single coal of the size of a firefly may be left which would 
not thereafter burn much, even so, my dear, of your sixteen 
parts only one part is left and so with it you do not apprehend 
(remember) the Vedas. Eat. Then you will understand me/ 

4. sa ha sa, atha hainam upasasada, tam ha yat kirn ca 
papracclia sarvam ha pratipede. 

4. Then he ate and approached him (his father). Then what- 
soever he asked him, he answered it all. 

5. tam hovdca, yathd, saumya, mahato’bhydhitasyaikam 
ahgdram khadyota-mdtvam pavisistam tam trnair upasamddhdya 
prajvaJayct, tcna tato pi bahu dahet. 

5. To him he then said, ‘Just as, my dear, of a great lighted 
fire if a single coal of the size of a firefly is left, and made to 
blaze up by covering it with straw and with it the fire would 
thereafter burn much. 

6 . evam, saumya, te sodasdndrii kaldnam ekd kalatisistabhut, 
sa nnenopasamdhitd prdjvdlit, tayd ctarhi veddn anubhavasi. anna 
may am hi, saumya, manah, dpomayah prdnali, tcjomayl vdg 
iti tadd hdsya vijajhdv iti. 

6. So, my dear, of your sixteen parts only one part was left, 
and that . when covered with food, blazed up. With it you now 
apprehend the Vedas. For, my dear, the mind consists of food, 
the breath consists of water and speech consists of heat. Then 
he understood what he said; he understood it. 

In some texts the following verse is found. 

paheendnyasya purusasya yad eva sydd andvrtam 
tad usya prajnd sravati drtch pdddd ivodakam. 

'When the (mind of the) person consisting of the five senses is not 



456 The Principal Upanisads VI. 8. 2. 

supported by food, then his intelligence goes away, even as the 
water flows away from the mouth of a leathern bag. 1 
andvrtam: unprotected, uncovered by food. 


Section 8 

CONCERNING SLEEP, HUNGER AND THIRST AND 

DYING 

1. itdddlako hdrunih svetaketum fiutram uvdca, svapnantam 
me, sail my a, vijdmhiti, yatraitat purusah svapiti ndma, satd, 
samnya, tadd sampanno hhavati , svam apito bhavati , tasmdd cnam 
svapitity acaksate , svam hy apito bhavati. 

1. Then Uddfilaka Aruni said to his son, Svetaketu, Learn 
from me, my dear, the true nature of sleep. When a person 
here sleeps, as it is called, then, my dear, he has reached pure 
being. He has gone to his own. Therefore they say he sleeps 
for he has gone to his own. 

svapndnta: true nature of sleep, literally the end of the dream. 
6 interprets it as the central portion of the dream vision: svapnantam 
svapna-madhyam susuptam. £. In the condition of deep sleep, 
personal consciousness subsides and the self is said to be absorbed 
in the Highest Self. Speech, mind and the senses rest. Only the breath 
is active. The jiva, the living soul returns for a while to the deeper 
self in order to recover from the fatigue. 

In dreamless sleep, buddhi or understanding remains in a potential 
condition and becomes active in the dream and waking states. 
S.B. II. 3. 31. 

2. sa yathd sakunih sutrena prabaddho diiam disam pati- 
tvdnyatrdyatanam cilabdhvd bandhanam evopasrayate, evam eva 
khalu , samnya, tan mano disam disam patitvdnyatrdyatanam 
alabdhvd prdnam evopasrayate, prana-bandhanam hi, sanmya, 
mana iti. 

2. Just as a bird tied by a string, after flying in various 
directions without finding a resting-place elsewhere settles down 
(at last) at the place where it is bound, so also the mind, my 
dear, after flying in various directions without finding a resting- 
place elsewhere settles down in breath, for the mind, my dear, 
is bound to breath. 

The organic nature of the relationship between mind and life is 



VI. 8. 6. Chandogya Upanisad 457 

brought out here. The mental, while it transcends the vital, arises 
out of the vital and is rooted in it. 

3. asana-pipdse me , saumya , vijdnihiti ,yatraitat puruso asisisati 
nama, dpa eva tad asitam nayante: tad yatha gonayo’ svandyah 
puvusanaya iti, evam tad apa acaksate sandy eti , tatraitacchuhgam 
utpatitam , saumya , vijdnihi , nedam amiilam bhavisyatiti. 

3. Learn from me, my dear, what hunger and thirst are. 
When a person here is hungry, as it is called, water only is 
leading (carrying away) what has been eaten (by him). So as 
they speak of a leader of cows, a leader of horses, a leader of 
men, so they speak of water as the leader (or carrier of food). 
On this, my dear, understand that this (body) is an offshoot, 
which has sprung up, for it could not be without a root. 

The person is hungry because whatever he eats is quickly digested. 

4. tasya kva miilam sydd anyatrdnndt , evam eva khalu, saumya , 
annena suhgenapo miilam anviccha, adbhih, saumya , sungena tejo 
mutant anviccha, tejasd , saumya , sungena san miilam anviccha, 
san nullah, saumya, imdh sarvdh prajdh sad-dyatandh, sat - 
pratisthdh. 

4. And what else could its root be than food? And in the 
same manner, my dear, with food as an offshoot, seek for water 
as the root; with water, my dear, as an offshoot, seek for heat 
as the root; with heat, my dear, as an offshoot, seek for Being 
as its root. All these creatures, my dear, have their root in 
Being. They have Being as their abode, Being as their support. 

Being is the ultimate root of the whole universe. 

5. atha yatraitat purusah pipdsati jiama, teja eva tat pitam 
nayate, tad yatha gondy 0 svandyah puvusanaya iti, evam tat teja 
acasta udanyeti, tatraiiad eva suhgam utpatitam, saumya, vijdnihi 
nedam amiilam bhavisyatiti. 

5. Now when a person here is thirsty, as it is called, heat 
only is leading (or carrying off) what has been drunk (by him). 
So as they speak of a leader of cows, a leader of horses, a leader 
of men so one speaks of heat as the leader of water. On this 
my dear, understand that this (body) is an offshoot which has 
sprung up, for it could not be without a root. 

6 . tasya kva mulam sydd anyatva adbhyah, adbhih, saumya, 
sungena tejo mulam anviccha , tejasd, saumya, sungena san miilam 
anviccha ; san muldih, saumy ”, imdh sarvdh prajdh saddyatandh, 



45$ The Principal Upanisads VI. 8. 7. 

satpratisthdh , yathd nu khalu, saumya, imds tisro dcvatdh purusam 
prdpya trivrt trivrdekaikd bhavati , iiktam, purastad cva 

bhavati , rtsya, saumya, purusasya prayato van manasi sampadyatc, 
manah prune, pranas tejasi, tejah parasydm devatdydm. 

6. And what else could its root be than water? With water, 
my dear, as an offshoot, seek for heat as the root; with heat, 
my dear, as an offshoot, seek for Being as the root. All these 
creatures, my dear, have their root in Being. They have Being 
as their abode, Being as their support. But how, verily, my 
dear, each of these three divinities, on reaching the human, 
becomes threefold has already been said. 1 When, my dear, a 
person departs from hence, his speech merges in his mind, his 
mind on his breath, his breath in heat and heat in the highest 
divinity. 


From Pure Being arises fire, from fire water and from water 
earth. In speech the element of lire predominates, in life-breath the 
element of water; in mind the element of earth. When a person 
deceases, his speech is merged in the mind. His voice fails though 
his mind continues to function. When the mind merges in life, the 
mental activity ceases. When life merges in heat, when we are in 
doubt about a man’s condition, whether he is alive or dead,, we feel 
the body. If it is warm, he is alive, if not he is dead. Fire is then 
taken up in the highest Being. If we depart from this life with our 
thoughts merged in the Supreme we reach Pure Being; otherwise, 
we enter the world of becoming. 

7. sa ya cso'nimd aitad at my am idam sarvam, tat satyam , sa 
dtmd: tat tv am asi, svetaketo, iti; bhuya cva md, bhagavdn, 
vijndpayatv iti, tathd, saumya, iti hovdea. 

7. That which is the subtle essence (the root of all) this 
whole world has for its self. That is the true. That is the self. 
That ait thou, Svetaketu. ‘Please, Venerable Sir, instruct me 
still further/ ‘So be it, my dear/ said he. 

tat tvam asi: that art thou. This famous text emphasises the divine 
nature of the human soul, the need to discriminate between the 
essential self and the accidents with which it is confused and the 
fetters by which it is bound. He who knows only what is of the 
body or mind knows the things that may be his but not himself. 
The text ‘That art thou' applies to the inward person, antah puntsa, 
and not to the empirical soul with its name and family descent. 

‘What I am, that is he; what he is, that am 1/ 

See Aitareya Aranyaka, II. 2. 4. h. 

1 VI. 5.1-4. 



VI. 9- 2. Chdndogya Upanisad 459 

Jabdla Up. has the following: tvam vd aham asmi bhagavo devate 
aharii vd tvam asi. ‘I am thou, 0 great God, and thou art I.' 

R interprets tat tvam asi as affirming that the principle of God is 
common to both the universe and the individual. That means God 
having the entire universe as his body, thou means God having the 
individual soul as his body. The principle of God is common to both. 

In the Jaiminiya Upanisad Brdhmana (III. 14. 1-5) when the 
deceased reaches the Sun-door, the question is asked, Who art thou? 
If he answers by a personal or a family name, he is subject to the law 
of karma. If he responds ‘Who I am (is) the light thou (art). As 
such have I come to thee, the heavenly light/ Praja-pati replies: 
‘Who thou art, that same am I; who I am that same art thou. 
Enter in/ 

Rum! speaks to us of the man who knocked at his friend's door 
and was asked, ‘Who art thou^’ He answered ‘ 1 / ‘Begone,’ said 
his friend. After a year’s suffering and separation he came and 
knocked again, and when asked the same question, replied, ‘It is 
Thou ait at the door,’ and ieceived the reply, ‘Since thou art I, 
come in, O myself.’ Mathnavi , I. 3056-3065. 


Section 9 

THE INDWELLING SPIRIT 

I. yathd,saamya y madhu madhukrto nististhanti , ndndtyaydndm 
vrksdndm rasdn samavahdiram ekatdm vasarii gavuiyanti . 

1. Just as, my dear, the bees prepare honey by collecting 
the essences (juices) of diilerent trees and reducing them into 
one essence. 

• 

The son’s difficulty is anticipated. If creatures reach Pure Being 
every day when they fall into sleep, how is it that they do not know 
that they attain that condition every day ? 

2. to yatha tatra na vivekatii labhante , amusyaham vrksasya 
raso ’ smi, amusyaham vrksasya 7 asostnlti, evam ova khalu, salt my a, 
imdh sarvdh prajah sati sampadya na viduh, sati sampadydmalia 
iti. 

2. And as these (juices) possess no discrimination (so that 
they might say) ‘I am the essence of this tree, I am the essence 
of that tree,’ even so, indeed, my dear, all these creatures 
though they reach Being do not know that they have reached 
the Being. 



460 The Principal Upanisads VI. io. 3. 

3. ta iha vydghro vd simho vd vrko vd vardho vd kito vd 
patahgo vd damso vd masako vdyadyad bhavanti, tad dbhavanti. 

3. Whatever they are in this world, tiger or lion or wolf or 
boar or worm or fly or gnat or mosquito, that they become. 

In other words, as they reach Pure Being without being conscious 
of it they return to their special forms. 

4. sa ya cso’nimd aitaddtmyam idam sarvam, tat satyam , sa 
atmd , tat tvam asi, svetaketo, iti; bhuya eva via , bhagavdin, vijha- 
payatv iti ; tathd , saumya, iti hovaca. 

4. That which is the subtle essence, this whole world has 
for its self. That is the true. That is the self. That art thou, 
Svetaketu. ‘Please, Venerable Sir, instruct me still further/ ‘So 
be it, my dear/ said he. 


Section 10 

THE INDWELLING SPIRIT — continued 

1. imdh, saumya, yiadyah purastdt prdeyah syayidantc, pasedt 
praticyah tdh samudidt samudram cvdpiyanti, sa samudra eva 
bhavati, td yathd tatra na viduh, iyam ahum asmi , iyani aham 
asmiti. 

1. These rivers, my dear, flow the eastern toward the east, 
the western 'toward the west. They go just from sea to sea. 
They become the sea itself. Just as these rivers while there do 
not know ‘I am this one/ ‘I am that one/ 

from sea to sea. the clouds .hft up the water fiom the sea to the sky 
and send it back as rain to the sea. 

2. evam eva khalu, saumya , imdh sarvdh prajdh sata agamya na 

viduh, sata agacchamaha iti, ta iha vydghro vd simho vd, vrko 
vd, vardho vd, kito vd, patahgo vd, damso vd, masako vd,yadyad 
bhavanti tad dbhavanti. * 

2. In the same manner, tny dear, all these creatures even 
though they have come forth from Being do not know that 
‘we have come forth from Being/ Whatever they are in this 
world, tiger or lion or wolf or boar or worm or fly or gnat or 
mosquito that they become. 

3. sa eso’nima aitad dtmyam idam sarvam, tat satyam, sa atmd, 



VI. ii. 3- Chdndogya Upanisad 461 

tat tvam asi, ivetaketo , iti ; bhuya eva md, bhagavdn, vijndpayatv 
iti ; tatha, saumya , iti hovdca. 

3. That which is the subtle essence, this whole world has 
for its self. That is the true. That is the self. That art thou, 
Svetaketu. 'Please, Venerable Sir, instruct me still further/ 
'So be it, my dear/ said he. 


Section 11 

THE INDWELLING SPIRIT — continued 

1. asya, saumya , mahato vrksasya yo midebhydhanydt, jivan 
sravet; yo madhyebhydhanydt , jivan svavet yo’gre’bhyahanyat, 
jivan sravet sa esa jivenatmandnuprabhutah pepiyamdno 
modamdnas tisthati. 

1. Of this mighty tree, my dear, if someone should strike 
at the root it would bleed but still live: if someone should 
strike at the middle, it would bleed but still live. If someone 
should strike at the top, it would bleed but still live. Being 
pervaded by its living self, it stands firm, drinking in its 
moisture (which nourishes it) and rejoicing. 

2. asya y ad ekam sdkhdm jivo jahdti, atha sa susyati, dvitiydm 
jahdti , atha sa susyati , trtiydm jahdti , atha sd susyati , sarvam 
jahdti sarvah susyati , evam eva khalu , saumya, viddhi iti hovdca. 

2. If the life leaves one branch of it, then it dries up; if it 
leaves a second, then that dries up; if it leaves a third, then 
that dries up. If it leaves the whole, the whole dries up. Even 
so, indeed, my dear, understand,’ said he. 

According to this view trees are not insentient, cctandvantah 
sthdvardli. S. 

3. jivdpetam vdva kiledam mriyatc, na jivo mriyata iti, sa ya 
eso ' nimd aitad dtmyam idam sarvam, tat satyam, sa dtmd, tat 
tvam asi, ivetaketo , iti; bhuya eva md, bhagavdn, vijndpayatv iti; 
tatha, saumya, iti hovdca. 

3. Verily, indeed, this body dies, when deprived of the living 
self, the living self does not die. That which is the subtle 
essence this whole world has for its self. That is the true. That 
is the self. That art thou, Svetaketu. ‘Please, Venerable Sir, 
instruct me still further/ ' 0 be it, my dear/ said he. 



462 The Principal Upanisads VI. 13. i. 

Section 12 

ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE NYAGRODHA TREE 

1. nyagrodha-plialam ata aharct; idam , bhagavah , iti ; bhinddhiti; 
bhinnam , bhagavah , ///; kim atra pasyasiti ; anvya ivcmd dhdndh , 
bhagavah , i/i; ahgaikdm bhinddhiti; bhinnd , bhagavah, iti; 

kim atra pasyasiti; na kim cana, bhagavah , t 7 f. 

1. ‘Bring hither a fruit of that nyagrodha tree/ ‘Here it is, 
Venerable Sir/ ‘Break it/ ‘It is broken, Venerable Sir/ ‘What 
do you see there?’ ‘These extremely fine seeds, Venerable Sir.’ 
‘Of these, please break one.’ ‘It is broken, Venerable Sir.’ ‘What 
do you see there?’ ‘Nothing at all, Venerable Sir.’ 

The teacher explains how the world which has name and form 
arises from Pure Being which is subtle and does not possess name 
and form. 

2. tam liovdca yam rai f saumya, dam animdnam na nibhdlayasc , 
etasya vai, saumya , eso’nimna evam malum nyagrodhas tisthati . 
srddhatsva , saumya. 

2. Then he said to him, ‘My dear, that subtle essence which 
you do not perceive, verily, my dear, from that very essence 
this great nyagrodha tree exists. Believe me, my dear. 

The lesson of the illustration is that the cosmic process with its 
nanles and forms arises from the subtle essence of Pure Being: sat a 
evdnimnah sthiilam ndma-rupddimat kdryam jagad utpannam. S. 

3. sa ya esu’nimd, aitad dtmyam idam sarvam , tat satyam , sa 
dtmd f tat tvam asi , svetaketo, iti; bhuya eva md, bhagavdn , vijnd- 
payatv iti ; tathd, saumya , iti; hovdea. 

3. That which is the subtle essence, this whole world has 
for its self. That is the true. That is the self. That art thou 
Svetaketu. ‘Please, Venerable Sir, instruct me still further.’ 
‘So be it, my dear,’ said he. 


Section 13 

ILLUSTRATION OF SALT AND WATER 

1. lavanam etad udake' vadhdya , atha md prdtar upasidathd 
iti; sa ha tathd cakdira ; tam hovdea: yad dosd lavanam udake * - 



VI. 14. i. Chandogya Upanisad 463 

vadhah, ahga tad ahareti, tadd havamriya na viveda; yathd 
villnam , evam. 

1. Place this salt in the water and come to me in the morning. 
Then he did so. Then he said to him, ‘That salt you placed in 
the water last evening, please bring it hither/ Having looked 
for it he found it not, as it was completely dissolved. 

This section attempts an answer to the difficulty that if Pure 
Being is the essence of all that exists, why it is not perceived. 

2. angeisyantad dedmeti: katham Hi; lavanam iti; madhyad 
dedmeti , katham iti ; lavanam iti ; antdd dedmeti , katham iti; 
lavanam iti; abhiprasyaitad atha mopdsidathd iti; tadd ha tathd 
cakdra , tac-chasvat samvartate; tarn hovaca: atra vdva kila sat , 
saumya, na nibhalayase, atraiva kila. 

2. ‘Please take a sip of it from this end/ He said, ‘How is it?’ 
‘Salt/ ‘Take a sip from the middle. How is it?’ ‘Salt/ ‘Take 
a sip from the other end. How is it?’ ‘Salt!’ ‘Throw it away 
and come to me/ He did so. It is always the same. Then he 
said to him, ‘Verily, indeed, my dear, you do not perceive 
Pure Being here. Verily, indeed, it is here/ 

As we are able to perceive salt in the water though not by means 
of touch and sight even so we will be able to perceive Pure Being by 
other means, updydntarena, though it is not obvious to our senses. 

3. sa ya cso'iiimd aitad dtmyam idam sarvam , tat satyam, sa 
dtmd , tat tvam asi } hetaketo, iti; bhuya eva via, bhagavdn , 
vijhdpayatv iti; tathd , saumya , iti hovaca. 

3. That which is the subtle essence this whole world has for 
its self. That is the true That is the self. That art thou, 
Svetaketu. ‘Please, Venerable Sir, instruct me still further.’ 
‘So be it, my dear,' said he. 


Section 14 

THE NEED FOR A TEACHER 

I. yathd , saumya , purusam gandhdircbhyo'bhinaddhdksam 
duly a tarn tato’tijane visrjet, sa yathd tatra prdh vodaii vdthardn vd 
pratyaii vd pradhmayTtdbhinaddhdksa dnito’bhinaddhdkso 
visvstah. 



464 The Principal Upanisads VI. 14. 2. 

1. Just as, my dear, one might lead a person away from the 
Gandhdras with his eyes bandaged and abandon him in a place 
where there are no human beings, and just as that person would 
shout towards the east or the north or the south or the west, 
T have been led here with my eyes bandaged, I have been left 
here with my eyes bandaged.' 

2. tasva yathdbhinahanam pramucya prabruydt , dam disam 
gandhdrdli , dam disam vrajeti, sa grdmdd grdmam prcchan 
pandito vicdhdvi gandluirdn evopasampadyda evam evchdi- 
edryavdn purnso veda, tasya tdvad eva ciram ydvan na vimoksye, 
atha sampatsya iti. 

2. And as, if one released his bandage and told him, 'In that 
direction are the Gandhdras , go in that direction; thereupon, 
being informed and capable of judgment, he would by asking 
(his way) from village to village arrive at Gandhdra ; in exactly 
the same manner does one here who has a teacher know, 
“I shall remain here only so long as I shall not be released 
(from ignorance). Then I shall reach perfection/" 

% 

dedryavdn: one who has a teacher. See Katha II. 8. 

Bhlsma says (to Yudhisthira) that the preceptor is superior even 
to the father or the mother : 

gunir garly an pitrto mdtrtas ccti me matih. M.B. Sdnti Parva, 108. 17. 1 

A teacher is regarded as being as essential as the remover of a 
bandage of a blindfolded man who wishes to find his way home. 
On several occasions Yajnavalkya teaches persons such as his wife 
informally and without insisting on prior initiation. ASvapati 
teaches the Brahmanas who come to him freely. 

§ makes out that our real home is sat or Being. Our eyes are 
bandaged with desires for worldly possessions which blind us. When 
we suddenly meet a person who knows the Self, whose own bonds 
have been broken, when he points the way, we feel that we arc not 
mere creatures of the world but we belong to the ultimate reality. 
We are released, according to S, when the body reared by our past 

1 Alexander was one day asked, 'Why do you show greater respect 
and reverence to your instructor than you do to your father?' He 
answered, ‘From my teacher I obtain life eternal; and from my father 
a perishable existence. Moreover, my father brought me down from 
heaven to earth but Aristotle has raised me from earth to heaven.* 
History of the Early Kings of Persia, by Mir Khwand, E.T. by David 
ohea (1832), p. 423. According to Plutarch, ‘Aristotle was the man 
Alexander admired in his younger years and as he himself averred, he 
had no less affection lor him that for his own father; from the one he 
derived the blessing of life; from the other the blessing of a good life.' 



VI. 15. 3- Chdndogya Upanisad 465 

deeds falls off. While the deeds performed after the attainment of 
saving knowledge do not bind us, those acts which have resulted in 
this embodiment have to exhaust their consequences. 

3. sa ya eso'nima aitad atmyam idam sarvam, tat satyam, sa 
dtmd, tat tvam asi, svetaketo, iti; bhuya eva ma , bhagavan , 
vijnapayatv iti; tathd , saumya, iti hovdca. 

3. That which is the subtle essence this whole world has for 
its self. That is the true. That is the self. That art thou 
Svetaketu. ‘Please, Venerable Sir, instruct me still further/ ‘So 
be it, my dear/ said he. 


Section 15 

THE ORDER OF MERGENCE 

1. purusam , saumya , utopatdpinam jhdtayah payyupdsate , 
jdndsi mam, jdindsi mam iti; tasya ydvan na van manasi sam- 
padyate, manah prune, prdinah tejasi, tejali parasydm devatdydm , 
tavaj jdnati. 

1. Also, my dear, around a sick (dying) person his relatives 
gather and ask, ‘Do you know me?’ ‘Do you know me?’ So 
long as his voice is not merged in min$, mind in breath, breath 
in heat and heat in the highest deity, so long he knows (them). 

2. atha yadasya van manasi sampadyate, manah prune , 
pranas tejasi, tejah parasydm devatdydm, atha na jdnati. 

2. Then when his voice is merged in mind, his mind in heat, 
and heat in the highest deity, then he does not know (them). 

See VI. 8. (>. 

Both those who know the truth and those who do not know the 
truth reach the ultimate Reality at death. The former do not return 
to embodied life while the latter do. 

§ denies that he who knows passes at death through the artery 
of the head to the sun and then to the Real. At death he reaches the 
Real straight. 

3. sa ya e$o’nimd aitad atmyam idam sarvam , tat satyam, sa 
dtmd, tat tvam asi, svetaketo , iti; bhuya eva md, bhagavan , 
vijnapayatv iti; tathd , saumya, iti hovdca. 

3. That which is the subtie essence this whole world has for 



466 The Principal Upanisads VI. 16. 3. 

its self. That is the true. That is the self. That art thou, 
Svetaketu. ‘Please, Venerable Sir, instruct me still further/ 
‘So be it/ said he. 


Section 16 

ILLUSTRATION OF THE ORDEAL 

1. purusam , saimiya, uta hasta-grhitam dnayanti , apdhdrsit, 
stcyam akdrslt, parasum asmai tapata iti; sa yadi tasya kartd 
bhavati , tata evdinrtam dtmdnam kurute , so’ nrtdbhisandho’ nrtc- 
nditmanam antardhdya parasum taptam pratigrhndti , sa dahya- 
tc’tha hanyate . 

1. Also, my dear, they lead up a man seized by the hand, 
saying, ‘He has stolen, he has committed a theft, heat the axe 
for him/ If he is the doer thereof (i.e. if he has committed 
the theft) then he makes himself untrue (a liar). Being given 
to untruth, covering himself by untruth he takes hold of the 
heated axe and is burnt. Then he is killed. 

At the time of this Upanisacl belief in ordeals should have pre- 
vailed. The guilty man is burnt and killed by grasping the heated 
axe while the innocent man is not affected by grasping it. So also 
the knower is not repelled by the Real while the non-knower returns 
to embodied life. 

This passage gives an illustration to indicate how he who knows, 
when he reaches the Real, does not return to embodied life, while he 
who does not know, when he reaches the Real returns. 

2. atha yadi tasydkarld bhavati , tata eva satyam dtmdnam 
kurute, sa satydbhisandhah satycndtmdnam antardhdya parasum 
taptam pratigrhndti , sa na dahyate , atha mucyatc. 

2. But if he is not the doer thereof, thereupon he makes 
himself true. Being given to truth, covering himself by truth, 
he takes hold of the heated axe he is not burnt. Then he is 
released. 

It is a universal principle that the truth will make us free. 
John VIII. 32. Truth is not merely theoretical but practical, yathd 
vadl tathd kdrl : Devas and Asuras are distinguished by their respec- 
tive adherence to truth and untruth. 

3. sa yathd tatra na ddhyeta aitad dtmyam idam sarvam, tat 



VI. i6. 3. Chandogya Upanisad 467 

satyam, sa atmd, tat tvam asi, svetaketo, iti; tadd hasya vijajndv 
iti vijajndv iti. 

3. And as in this case he would not be burnt, thus has all 
this that for its self. That is the true. That is the self. That 
art thou, fsvetaketu. Then he understood it from him, yea, 
he understood. 

Madhva makes the text read, atattvam asi — Thou art not that, and 
argues that these passages aim at establishing the difference between 
the individual and the Universal Self. 



468 


The Principal Upanisads 


VII. I 2. 


CHAPTER VII 

Section i 

SANATKUMARA'S INSTRUCTION TO NARADA 
PROGRESSIVE WORSHIP OF BRAHMAN: NAME 

i. adhihi, bhagavah , iti hopasasdda sanatkumdram ndradah , 
tarn hovdea: vad vettha tena mopasfda, tatas ta urdhvam vaksydnnti , 
sa hovdea. 

1. Narada approached Sanatkumara and said, Teach me, 
Venerable Sir/ He said, 'Come to me with (tell me) what you 
know. Then I will teach you what is beyond that/ 

See T.U. III. i. 

The story is introduced to show that the supreme good cannot be 
accomplished without a knowledge of the Self: niratisaya-prdpti- 
sadhanatvam dtma-vidydya. S. 

Narada is he who gives the knowledge of the Supreme Self, 
according to Sabda-kalpa-driima: ndram daddti iti ndradah; ndram 
param-atma-visayakam jiidnam. 

Sanatkumara is represented in Indian tradition as the eternal 
child. Brahma-vaivarta Parana makes out that he is eternally a child 
of five years, who did not undergo the usual samskdras , a pupil of the 
very God, Ndrayana; vayasd panca-Juiyanah, aciido anupavJtas ca 
veda-sandhyd-vihinakah yasya nardyano gurxih. 

Harivamsa confirms this view. 'Know me only to be a child just 
as I was born and so the name sanatkumara was given to me' : 
yathotpannas tathaivdham kumdra iti viddhi mam , 
tasmdt sanatkumdreti mdm aitan me pratisthitam. 

The learned Narada goes to the unlearned Sanatkumara for in- 
struction. For self-realisation, practice of virtue and love to all 
creation are necessary more than scriptural lore. Vdmana Parana 
makes out that Sanatkumara is the son of virtue by the wife of non- 
violence : 

dharmasya bhdryahimsdkhyd, tasydm putra-catustayam jyesthah sanat- 
kumaro 2 3 bhiit. 

2. rgvedain, bhagavah, adhyemi, yajarvedam sdmavedam , athar- 
vanam caturtham, itihdsa-purdnam paheamam , vedandm vedam, 
pitryam , rdsim, daivam, nidhim, vdkovdkyam, ekdyanam , deva- 
vidydm, brahma-vidydm, bhiit a-vidy dm, ksatra-vidydm, naksatra - 
vidydm, sarpa-devajana-vidydm, etat, bhagavah , adhyemi. 

2. Venerable Sir, I know the Kg Veda, the Yajur Veda, the 
Sdma Veda , Atharvana as the fourth (Veda), the epic and the 



VII. I. 5. Chandogya Upanisad 469 

ancient lore as the fifth, the Veda of the Vedas (i.e. grammar), 
propitiation of the Fathers, the science of numbers 
(mathematics), the science of portents, the science of time 
(chronology), logic, ethics and politics, the science of the gods, 
the science of sacred knowledge, the science of elemental spirits, 
the science of weapons, astronomy, the science of serpents and 
the fine arts. This, Venerable Sir, I know. 

deva-vidyd: nirukta or exegetics. S; science of the worship of gods. R. 

3. so* ham, bhagavali,mantra-videvdsminatma-vit;srutam hyeva 
me bhagavad-drscbhyah , tar at i sokam dtma-vid iti ; so’ham, 
bhagavah, socami, tam md , bhagavdn, sokasya par am tarayatv iti; 
tarn hovdca yad vai kin caitad adhyagisthdh , namaivaitat. 

•3. But, Venerable Sir, I am only like one knowing the words 
and not a knower of Self It has been heard by me from those 
like you that he who knows the Self crosses over sorrow. Such 
a sorrowing one am I, Venerable Sir. Do you, Venerable Sir, 
help me to cross over to the other side of sorrow. To him he 
then said, 'Verily, whatever you have here learned is only a 
name/ 

4. ndma vd rg-vedo yajur-vedah sdma-veda atharvanas catnrtha 
itihdsa-purdnah pahcamo veddnam vedah pitryo rdsir daivo, nidhir 
vdkovdkyam , ckdyanam , deva-vidyd , brahma-vidyd, bhuta-vidyd, 
ksatra-vidyd, naksatra-vidyd, sarpa-devajana-vidyd, namaivaitat, 
ndmopdssveti. 

4. Verily, a name is Rg vcda (so also) Yajur Veda, Sdma Veda, 
Atharvana as the fourth, the epic and the ancient lore as the 
fifth, the Veda of the Vedas, propitiation of the fathers, the 
science of numbers, the science of portents, the science of time, 
logic, ethics and politics, the science of gods, the science of 
weapons, the science of serpents and the fine arts. All this is 
mere name. Meditate on the name. 

5. sa yo ndma brahmety updstc ydvan ndmno gatam, tattdsya 
yathd kdma-edro bhavati yo ndma brahmety updstc: ’sti, bhagavah, 
ndmno bhuya iti ; ndmno vdva bhuyo’stiti; tan me bhagavdn 
bravitviti. 

5. He who meditates on name as Brahman becomes inde- 
pendent so far as name goes, he who meditates on name as 
Brahman. ‘Is there, Venerable Sir, anything greater than the 
name?’ ‘There is (something) greater than the name/ ‘Tell that 
to me. Venerable Sir/ 



470 The Principal Upanisads VII. 2. 2. 

kdma carin'. He can pass in and out at will. See T.U. III. 10. 5; 
John X. 9. It is possible for those who live in the spirit to assume 
any form they please. 


Section 2 
SPEECH 

1. rag 1 hi va ndmno bhuyasl, vdg vd rg-vedam vijhdpayati , 
yajur-vedam sdma-vedam atharvanam caturtham itihdsa-purdnam 
paheamani vcddndm vedatn, pi try am rdsim daivam nidhim 
vdkovdkyam, ekdyanam , deva-vidydm, brahma-vidydm, bhuta- 
vidydm , ksatra-vidydm, naksatra-vidyam, sarpa-devajana-vidydm 
divam ca prthivim ca vdyum cdkdsam cdpas ca tejas ca devdriis ca 
manusyams ca pashms ca vaydmsi ca trna vanaspatih svdpadany 
akita-patanga-pipJlakam dharmam eddharmam ca satyam cdnrtam 
casddhu cdsddhn ca hrdayajham cdhrdayajnam ca; yad vai vdinnd 
bhavisyatna dharmo nddharma vyajhdpayisyat ,na satyam ndnrtam 
na sddhu ndsddhu na hrdayajhu ndhrdayajiio vdg evaitat sarvam 
vijhdpayati , vacant updssvcti. 

1. Speech assuredly is greater than name. Speech, verily, 
makes known the Rg Veda , the Yajiir Veda , the Sdima Veda , 
the Atharva Veda as the fourth, legend and ancient lore as 
the fifth, the Veda of the Vedas (i.e. grammar), the rites of the 
Fathers, mathematics, the science of portents, the science of 
time (chronology), logic, ethics and politics, the science of the 
gods, the science of sacred knowledge (i.e. the Vedas), the 
science of the elemental^, the science of rulcrship, the science 
of the stars (astronomy), the science of snake charming, of the 
fine arts as well as heaven and earth, air and space, water and 
heat, gods and men, beasts and birds, grass and trees, animals 
together with worms, flies and ants, the right and the wrong, 
the true and the false, the good and the bad, the pleasing and 
the unpleasing. Verily, if there were no speech neither right nor 
wrong would be known, neither the true nor the false, neithei 
the good nor the bad, neither the pleasing nor the unpleasing. 
Speech, indeed, makes all this known. Meditate upon speech. 

2. sa yo vacam brahmety updste , ydvad vdeo gatam, tatrasya 
yathd kdma-edro bhavati,yo vacant brahmety updste ; asti,bhagavah, 
vaco bhiiya Hi; vdeo vdva bhuyo* slUi; tan me, bhagavdn, bravitv iti. 



VII. 3- 2. Chandogya Upanisad 471 

2. He who meditates on speech as Brahman becomes inde- 
pendent so far as speech reaches, he who meditates on speech 
as Brahman. ‘Is there anything, Venerable Sir, greater than 
speech?' ‘Yes, there is something greater than speech/ ‘Do, 
Venerable Sir, tell me that.' 


Section 3 
MIND 

1. mano vd va vdeo bhuyah , yathd vai dvc vdmalake dve vd kole 
dvau vaksau mustir anubhavati , evam vacant ca ndma ca mano 
’nubhavati, sa yadd manasd manasyati, mantrdn adhiyiyeti , 
athddhite , karmdni kurviyeli , at ha kurutc , putrdms ca pashms 
cecchcyeti, alhccchate , imam ca lokam , amum cecchcycti , athecchatc; 
mano hy dtmd t mano hi lokah, mano hi brahma; mana updssvcti. 

1. Mind, assuredly, is greater than speech. For as the closed 
fist holds two dmalaka or two kola or two aksa fruits so does 
mind hold speech and name. For when one through mind has 
in mind to learn the sacred hymns, then he learns them. If he 
has mind to perform sacred works, then he performs them. 
When he has in mind to desire for sons and cattle, then he 
desires them. When he has in mind to desire this world and 
yonder, then he desires them. Mind is, indeed, the self, mind 
is, indeed, the world, mind is indeed Brahman. Meditate on the 
mind. 

manas is the internal organ ( antah-karana ) endowed with reflection. 
It has for its function determination, decision, choice. It is said 
to be the self because the self has the character of the doer and the 
enjoyer only when the mind functions: dtmanah kartrtvam blioktrtvam 
ca sati manas i ndnyatheti, mano hy dtmety ucyate. $. 

2. sa yo mano brahmety updstc, ydvan mana so gatam , tatrdsya 
yathd kdma edro bhavati yo mano brahmety updstc; asti bhagavah , 
mana so bhilya it i; mana so vd va bhuyo’stlti; tan me, bhagavdn, 
bravitv iti. 

2. He who meditates on mind as Brahman becomes inde- 
pendent so far as mind reaches, he who meditates on mind as 
Brahman. ‘Is there anything, Venerable Sir, greater than mind?' 
‘Yes, there is something greater than mind.' ‘Do, Venerable 
Sir, tell me that.' 

Q 



472 The Principal Upanisads VII. 4. 2. 

Section 4 
WILL 

1. samkalpo vd va manaso bhuydn , yadd vai samkalpayate 
atha manasyati, atha vacant irayati tdm u ndmnirayati, ndmni 
mantra ekam bhavanti, mantresu karmani. 

1. Will, assuredly, is greater than mind. For when one wills, 
then one reflects, one utters speech and then one utters it in 
name. The sacred hymns are included in name and sacred 
works in the sacred hymns. 

samkalpa: will. It is said to be an activity of mind. It is, like thinking, 
an activity of the inner organ: antah-karana-vrtti. §. It has also re- 
flective aspects besides the volitional. What is mechanical process in 
the inorganic world, stimulation in the organic is motivation in 
human beings: mantresu karmani. See M.U. I. 2. 1. 

2. tani ha vd etani samkalpaikdyandni samkalpatmakdni 
samkalpe pratisthitdni, samakalpetam dyavd-prthivi, samakal- 
petdm vayus cdkasaih ca, samakalpantdpas ca tejas ca, tesam 
samklptyai varsam samkalpate, varsasya samklptyd annam 
samkalpate , annasya samklptyai prdndh samkalpante, prananam 
samklptyai mantrah samkalpante, mantrandm samklptyai karmani 
samkalpante , karmandm samklptyai lokah sa?hkalpate } lokasya 
samklptyai sarvam samkalpate , sa esa sarhkalpah: samkalpam 
updssveti. 

2. All these, verily, centre in the will, have the will as their 
soul, abide in will. Heaven and earth were formed through 
will, air and ether were formed through will; water and heat 
were formed through will. Through their having been willed, 
rain becomes willed. Through rain having been willed, food 
becomes willed. Through food having been willed, living 
creatures are willed. Through living creatures having been 
willed sacred hymns become willed. Through sacred hymns 
having been willed, sacred works become willed. Through sacred 
works having been willed, the world becomes willed. Through 
the world having been willed, everything becomes willed. Such 
is will. Meditate on will. 

2. sa yah samkalpam brahmety updste klptan vai sa lokdn 
dhruvdn dhruvah pratisthitdn pratisthito’vyathamdndn avyatha 
mano'bhisidhyati, yavat samkalpasya gatam tatrdsya yathd kdma- 
edro bhavati , yah samkalpam brahmety updste; asti, bhagavah f 



VII. 5* 3- Chdndogya Upanisad 473 

samkalpdd bhuya iti ; samkalpdd vdva bhiiyo’stiti; tan me, 
bhagavdn, bravitv iti . 

2. He who meditates on will as Brahman, he verily obtains 
the worlds he has willed, himself being permanent the perma- 
nent worlds, himself unwavering the unwavering worlds. As 
far as will goes, so far is he independent, he who meditates on 
will as Brahman. ‘Is there anything, Venerable Sir, greater 
than will?’ ‘Yes, there is something greater than will/ ‘Do, 
Venerable Sir, tell me that/ 


Section 5 
THOUGHT 

1. cittam jjd va samkalpdd bhuyah , yada vai cetayate’tha 
samkalpayatc atha manasyati , atha vacam irayati, tarn u namni- 
rayati , namni mantra ekam bhavanti , mantresu karmdni. 

1. Thought, assuredly, is more than will. Verily when one 
thinks, then he wills, then he reflects, then he utters speech 
and he utters it in name. The sacred hymns become one (are 
included) in name and sacred works in the sacred hymns. 

Thought is said to be higher than will. See Maitrl VI. 30. 

See Digha Nikdya I. 21. 

2. tdni ha vd etani cittaikdyandni cittdtniani citte pratisthitani, 
tasmdd yady api bahu-vid acitto bhavati , nay am astity evainam 
dhuh , yad ay am veda , yad vd ay am vidvdn nettham acittah sydd 
iti, atha yady alpa-vic cittavan bhavati , tasmd evota susrusante , 
cittam hy evaisdm ckayanam, cittaln atma, cittam pratisthd ; 
cittam updssvcti. 

2. Verily, all these centre in thought, have thought for their 
goal and abide in thought. Therefore, even if a man be possessed 
of much learning, but is unthinking, people say of him that he 
is nobody, whatever he may know. Verily, if he did know he 
would not be so unthinking. On the other hand, if he is 
thoughtful, even though he knows little, to him people are 
desirous of listening. Truly indeed thought is the centre of all 
these, thought is their soul, thought is their support. Meditate 
on thought. 

3. sa yas cittam brahmety updste, cittdn vai sa lokdn dhruvdn 



474 The Principal Upanisads VII. 0. 1. 

dhruvah pratisthitan pratisthito'vyathamandn avyathamano 
* bhisidhyati , yavac cittasya gatam, tatrdsya yathd kdma-caro 
bhavati , yas cittern brahmety u paste; asti, bhagavah , cittdd bhuya 
iti ; a'/frzrf m bhuyostiti; tan me , bhagavdn , bravitv iti. 

3. He who meditates on thought as Brahman , he verily 
obtains the worlds he has thought, himself being permanent 
the permanent worlds, himself established, the established 
worlds, himself unwavering the unwavering worlds. As far 
as thought goes, so far is he independent, he who meditates 
on thought as Brahman. 'Is there anything, Venerable Sir, 
greater than thought?* 'Yes, there is something greater than 
thought.* 'Do, Venerable Sir, tell me that.’ 


Section 6 

CONTEMPLATION 

I. dhydnam vd va cittdd bhfiyah, dhyayatwa prthivi, dhyaya- 
tivdntariksam , dhyayatwa dyaith , dhydyantivdpoh , dhydyantiva 
parvatah, dhydyantiva deva-manusydh , tasmdd ya iha manu- 
sydndm mahattvam prdpnuvanti dhydndpdddmsd ivaiva te 
bhavanti , atha yelpah halahinah pisund upavddinas te atha ye 
prabhavah dhydndpdddmsd ivaiva te bhavanti; dhydnam 
npdssveti . 

1. Contemplation, assuredly, is greater than thought. The 
earth contemplates as it were. The atmosphere contemplates as 
it were. The heaven contemplates as it were. The waters 
contemplate as it were, the mountains contemplate as it were. 
Gods and men contemplate as it were. Therefore he among men 
here attains greatness, he seems to have obtained a share of 
(the reward of) contemplation. Now the small people are 
quarrelsome, abusive and slandering, the superior men seem to 
have obtained a share of (the reward of) contemplation, 
Meditate on contemplation. 

dhyana: contemplation. It is the concentration of all our thoughts 
on one subject, ekdgratd. 

Even as men who contemplate acquire repose, become firm and 
established, the earth, etc., are said to be firm and established, as 
the result of their contemplation. 

deva-manusydh: gods and men or godlike men for men endowed with 



VII. 7- i. Chdndogya Upanisad 475 

inward peace are not devoid of divine qualities : deva-sama devama- 
nusydh samddiguna-sampanna manusyd deva-svarupam na jahdtity 
arthah. S. 

2. sa yo dhydnam brahmety apdstc , ydvad dhydnasya gatam, 
tatrasya yathd kama-caro bhavati yo dhydnam brahmety updste; 
asti , bhagavah , dhydndd bhuya iti; dhydndd vd va bhuyostiti; tan 
me, bhagavdn, bravitv iti. 

2. He who meditates on contemplation as Brahman , so far 
as contemplation goes so far is he independent, he who meditates 
on contemplation as Brahman. ‘Is there anything, Venerable 
Sir, greater than contemplation V ‘Yes, there is something 
greater than contemplation/ ‘Do, Venerable Sir, tell me that/ 


Section 7 

UNDERSTANDING 

1. vijndnam vd va dhydndd bhuyah, vijhdnena va rg-vedam 
vijdndti , yajiir-vedam sdma-vedam dtharvanam caturtham, itihdsa- 
purdnam pancamam , veddndm vedam , pitryam , rdsim , daivam , 
nidhim , vdikovdkyam , ekdyanam, deva-vidydm , brahma-vxdydm , 
bhilta-vidydm, ksatra-vidydm , naksatra-vidydm , sarpa-devajana t 
vidydm, divam ca prthivlm ca vdyum cdkdsam , cdpas ca tejas ca, 
devdims ca mannsydms ca pashms ca vaydmsi ca trna-vanaspatih- 
svdpaddny dkita-patdnga-pipilakam dliarmam eddharmam ca 
satyam canrtam ca sdidhu cdsddhu ca hrdayajnam cdhrdayajham 
ednnam ca rasam cemam ca lokafli amum ca vijhdnenaiva 
vijdndti, vijndnam updssveti. 

1. Understanding, assuredly, is greater than contemplation. 
Verily, by understanding one understands the 7 ?g. the 

Yajur Veda , the Sdima Veda, the Atharva Veda as the fourth, 
legend and ancient lore as the fifth, the Veda of the Vedas 
(i.e. grammar), the rites of the fathers, mathematics, the 
science of portents, the science of time (chronology), logic, 
ethics and politics, the science of the gods, the science of sacred 
knowledge (i.e. the Vedas), the science of the elementals, the 
science of rulership, the science of the stars (astronomy), the 
science of snake charming, of the fine arts as well as heaven 
and earth, air and space, water and heat, gods and men, 



476 The Principal Upanisads VII. 8. 1. 

beasts and birds, grass and trees, animals together with worms, 
flies and ants, the right and the wrong, the true and the false, 
the good and the bad, the pleasing and the unpleasing, the food 
and the drink (or taste), this world and yonder, all this one 
understands just with understanding. Meditate on under- 
standing. 

2. sa yo vijnanam brahmety upaste , vijhdnavato vai sa lokah- 
jndnavato’bhisidhyati, yavad vijhdnasya gatam, tatrasya yathd 
kdma-cdiYO bhavati , yo vijnanam brahmety upaste; asti, bhagavah , 
vijhdndd bhuya iti; vijhdndd va va bhuyo* stiti; tan me, bhagavdn , 
bravttv iti. 

2. He who meditates on understanding as Brahman , he 
verily, attains the worlds of understanding, of knowledge. As 
far as understanding goes, so far he is independent, he who 
meditates on understanding as Brahman . ‘Is there anything, 
Venerable Sir, greater than understanding?' ‘Yes, there is 
something greater than understanding.' ‘Do, Venerable Sir, 
tell me that.' 


Section 8 
STRENGTH 

1. balarn va va vijhdndd bhuyah: api ha satam vijhdnavatdm 
eko balavan akampayate, sa yadd ball bhavati, athotthdtd bhavati 
uttisthan paricarita bhavati, paricaran upasattd bhavati, 
upasidan drasta bhavati, srotd bhavati, manta bhavati, boddha 
bhavati , karta bhavati, vijhata bhavati, balena vai prthivT tisthati, 
balenantariksam, balena dyauh, balena parvatdh, balena deva- 
manusydh, balena pasavas ca vaydmsi ca trna-vanaspatayah 
ivdpaddny dkita-patahga-pipilakam, balena lokas tisthati; balam 
updssveti. 

1. Strength, assuredly, is greater than understanding. One 
strong man, indeed, causes a hundred men of understanding to 
tremble. When one becomes strong, he becomes a rising man 
If he rises he serves (wise people). If he serves, he draws near 
(by becoming attached as a pupil). By drawing near, he becomes 
a seer, becomes a hearer, becomes a thinker, becomes a per- 
ceiver, becomes a doer, becomes an understander. By strength, 
verily, the earth stands, by strength the atmosphere, by 



VII. 9- 2. Chdndogya Upani§ad 477 

strength the heaven; by strength the mountains, by strength 
the gods and men (or god-men), by strength beasts and birds, 
grass and trees, animals together with worms, flies and ants. 
By strength the world stands. Meditate on strength. 
strength: spiritual power. 

2. sayo halam brahmety upaste , yavad balasya gatam, tatrdsya 
yatha kdma-cdro bhavati, yo balam brahmety upaste; asti, bhagavah, 
baldd bhuya iti; baldd va va bhuyostiti; tan me , bhagavdn, bravitv 
iti. 

2. He who meditates on strength as Brahman — as far as 
strength goes, so far he is independent, he who meditates on 
strength as Brahman. ‘Is there anything, Venerable Sir, 
greater than strength?' ‘Yes, there is something greater than 
strength.' ‘Do, Venerable Sir, tell me that.' 


Section 9 
FOOD 

1. annam va va baldd bhuyah, tasmad yady api dasa ratrir 
nasmydt , yady u ha jivet , atha va adrasta srotamantaboddhd 
' karta vijnata bhavati; atha ' nnasydy’e drastd bhavati , srotd bhavati, 
manta bhavati , boddha bhavati , karta bhavati , vijnata bhavati; 
annam upassveti. 

1. Food, verily, is greater than strength. Therefore, if any- 
one does not eat for ten days, even though he might live, yet, 
verily, he becomes a non-seer, a non-hearer, a non-thinker, a 
non-understander, a non-doer, a non-knower. But on the 
entrance of food (when he gets food), he becomes a seer, he 
becomes a hearer, he becomes a thinker, he becomes an under- 
stander, he becomes a doer, he becomes a knower. Meditate 
on food. 

2. sayo’nnam brahmety upaste , annavato vai sa lokdn pdnavato- 
'bhisidhyati. yavad annasya gatam , tatrdsya yatha kdma-cdro 
bhavati yo’nnam brahmety upaste; asti, bhagavah, annad bhuya 
iti; annad vdva bhuyo'stxti; tan me, bhagavdn, bravitv iti. 

2. He who meditates on food as Brahman , he, verily, attains 
the worlds of food and di ; nk. As far as food reaches, so far he 
who meditates on food as Brahman , has unlimited freedom. 



VII. II. i. 


478 The Principal Upanisads 

‘Venerable Sir, is there anything greater than food?' Yes, there 
is something greater than food/ ‘Do, Venerable Sir, tell me 
that/ 


Section 10 
WATER 

1. apo vci va anndid bhuyasyali , tasmddyadd snvrstir na bhavati , 
vyddhlyanle prdindh, annum kaniyo bhavisyatfti, atha yadd 
snvrstir bhavati , dnandinah prana bhavanti , annam bahu 
bliavisyatiti , dpa evcma murtdih yeyam prthivT, yad antariksam , 
yad dyauh , yat parvatdh , yad deva-manusydih , pasavas ca 

vaydmsi ca trna-vanaspatayah , svapaddny akita-patahga-pipUa- 
kam, dpa evcmd mnrtdli: apa updssveti. 

1. Water, verily, is greater than food. Therefore when there 
is not good (sufficient) rain, living creatures sicken with the 
thought that food will become scarce. But when there is good 
rain, living creatures rejoice in the thought that food will 
become abundant. It is just water that assumes (different) 
forms of this earth, this atmosphere, this sky, the mountains, 
gods and men, beasts and birds, grass and trees, animals 
together with worms, flies and ants. Water indeed is all these 
forms. Meditate on water. 

2. sa yopo brahmety updste f dpnoti sarvdn human, trptimdn 
bhavati. ydvad apdth gatam, tafrdsya yathd kdma-caro bhavati. 
yo’po brahmety updistc; asti, bhagavah, adbhyo bhuya iti; adbhyo vd 
va bhuyo’stiti; tan me, bhagavdn, bravitv iti. 

2. He who meditates on water as Brahman, obtains all his 
desires and becomes satisfied. As far as water reaches so he 
who meditates on water as Brahman has unlimited freedom. 
‘Venerable Sir, is theie anything greater than water?' ‘Yes, 
there is something greater than water.' 'Do, Venerable Sir, 
tell me that.' 


Section 11 

HEAT 

1. tejo vd va adbhyo bhuyah, tasmdd vd etad vdyum dgrhyakaSam 
abhitapati , tad ahuh, niiocali, nitapati, varsisyati vd iti, teja 



VII. 12. I. Chdndogya Upanisad 479 

eva tat piir v am darsayitvd' tha pah srjate. tad etad urdhvdbhis ca 
tirascibhis ca vidyudbhih dhrddds caranii ; tasmdd ahuh: 
vidyotate, stanayati , varsisyati vd iti , teja eva tat piirvarii 
darsayitvdtha’pah srjate: teja upassveti. 

1. Heat, verily, is greater than water. For it seizes hold of 
the wind and warms the ether. Then people say it is hot, it is 
burning hot, it will rain. Thus does heat show this sign first, 
and creates water. So with lightnings, flashing upwards and 
across the sky, thunders roll. Therefore people say, there is 
lightning, there is thunder, therefore it will rain. Heat, indeed, 
first indicates this and creates water. Meditate on heat. 

We see the cause of heat first and then the effect of rain. 
prasiddham hi loke kdtanam abhyudyatam drstavatah kdryam 
bliavisyatiti vijhdnam. S'. 

2. sa yas tejo brahmety updiste , tejasvi vai sa lejasvato lokan 
bhasvato’ pahata-tamaskdn abhisidhyati, yavat tejaso gatam , 
tatrd'sya yathd kama-cdiro bhavati , yas tejo brahmety apaste; asti f 
bhagavah , tejaso bhfiya iti; tejaso vd va bhuyo' stiti; tan me , 
bhagavan, bravitv iti. 

2. He who meditates on heat as Brahman , he, verily, radiant 
himself, attains radiant, shining worlds, freed from darkness. 
As far as heat reaches, he who meditates on heat as Brahman y 
has unlimited freedom. ‘Venerable Sir, is there anything 
greater than heat?' ‘Yes, there is something greater than heat/ 
‘Do, Venerable Sir, tell me that.' 


Section 12 
ETHER 

I. akdso vd va tejaso bhuydin: akdse vai suryd-candramasdv 
ubhau vidyun naksatrdny agnih , dkdsendhvayati , dkdsena srnoti, 
akasena pratisrnoti, dkdise ramate , dkdsc na ramate , dkdse jay ate, 
akdsam abhijdyate : dkdsam upassveti. 

1. Ether (or space), verily, is greater than fire. For in the 
ether exist both sun and moon, lightning, stars and fire. Through 
ether one calls, through Ther one hears, through ether one 
answers. In ether one enjoys himself and in ether one does not 

Q* 



480 The Principal Upanisads VII. 13. 1 

enjoy himself. In space one is born and unto space one is born. 
Meditate on ether. 

akasam abhijdyate. When born, the seed grows upward and not 
downward. 

A kdsa originally meant space through which one can pass or thrust 
one's finger. See Aitareya Brahmana III. 4. 2. 1 ; Satapatha Brahmana 
III. 3. 2. 19. The space between the sky and the earth when they 
separated became antariksa or atmosphere. It was empty and so got 
filled with air. Akasa is more than mere space. K.U. speaks of man 
being born from akasa as from a womb, I. 6. 

2. sa ya akasam brahmety apaste, akasavato vai sa lokdn 
prakdsavato ' sambddhan urugdyavato’bhisidhyati , ydvad dkasasya 
gatam, tatrdsya yathd kama-cdro bhavati, ya akasam brahmety 
updste; asti, bhagavah, akd&ad bhuya iti; dkdsdd vd va bhuyo } 
stlti; tan me , bhagavdn bravitv iti. 

2. He who meditates on ether as Brahman , he verily attains 
the worlds of ether and of light, unconfined and wide extending. 
As far as ether goes, so far he who meditates on ether as 
Brahman , has unlimited freedom. ‘Venerable Sir, is there 
anything greater than ether?' ‘Yes, there is something greater 
than ether.' ‘Do, Venerable Sir, tell me that.' 

asambddhdn: unconfined, also free from pressure and pain: 
sambddho’nyo’nyaptdd tad-rahitdn asambddhdn . S. 


k Section 13 
MEMORY 

1. smaro vd va dkdsdd bhuyah, tasmad yady api bahava astran 
asmarantah, naiva te kamcana srmiyuh, na manvtran, na 
vijamran yada vd va te smareyuh, atha srnuyuh, atha manvtran, 
atha vijamran , smavena vai putrdn vijdndti, smarena pastin' 
smaram upassveti. 

1. Memory, verily, is more than ether, therefore if many 
assemble and if they have no memory, indeed they would not 
hear any one at all, they would not think, they would not 
understand. But surely, if they remember then they would hear, 
then they would think, then they would understand. Through 



VII. 14. 2. Chdndogya Upanisad 481 

memory one discerns one's sons; through memory, one's cattle. 
Meditate on memory. 

Memory is a quality of the inner organ, antah-karana-dharmah. 

2. sa yah smaram brahmety updste, yavat smarasya gatam, 
tatrasya yatha kama-caro bhavati, yah smaram brahmety updste; 
asti, bhagavah, smardd bhuya iti; smardd va va bhuyo'stiti; tan me , 
bhagavan , bravitv iti. 

2. He who meditates on memory as Brahman — as far as 
memory reaches, so far he has unlimited freedom, he who 
meditates on memory as Brahman. ‘Venerable Sir, is there 
anything greater than memory?' ‘Yes, there is something 
greater than memory.' ‘Do, Venerable Sir, tell me that.' 


Section 14 
HOPE 

1. asa va va smardd bhuyasi, aseddho vai smaro mantran 
adhtte karmani kurntc , putrams ca pasumi cecchatc, imam ca 
lokam ammh cecchatc: dsdm updssveti. 

1. Hope, assuredly, is greater than memory. When kindled 
by hope, memory learns the sacred hymns, performs sacrifices, 
desires sons and cattle, desires this world and the other. 
Meditate on hope. 

aid, craving, desire, trsna, kdma S. 

aieddhah: dsa-iddha dsayabhivardhitah, roused by hope. S. 

2. sa y a dsdm brahmety updste , asaydsya sarve kdmdh samr - 
dhyanti, arnogha hasyasiso bhavanti, ydvad dsaya gatam , tatrasya 
yatha kama-caro bhavati ,ya dsdm brahmety updste; asti , bhagavah , 
diaya bhuya iti; asaya va va bhiiyo stlti; tan me , bhagavan, 
bravttv iti . 

2. He who meditates on hope as Brahman, through hope all 
his desires are fulfilled, his prayers do not go in vain. As far 
as hope reaches, so far he has unlimited freedom, he who 
meditates on hope as Brahman. ‘Venerable Sir, is there anything 
greater than hope?' ‘Yes, there is something greater than hope.' 
‘Do, Venerable Sir, tell me that.' 

diisah: prayers, prdrthandh. £. 



482 The Principal Upanisads VII. 15. 3. 

Section 15 
LIFE 

1. prano vd va dsdyd bhfiydn, yathd vd ara ndbhau samarpitdh, 
evam asmin prune sarvam samar pitam, pranah prdnena ydti , 
pranah pranam daddti, prdnaya daddti, prano ha pita , prano 
mdtd, prano bhrdtd, pranah svasd, prana dear yah, prano 
brdhmanah. 

1. Life-breath, verily, is greater than hope. Even as the 
spokes are fastened in the hub, so on this life-breath all this 
is fastened. Life moves by the life-breath. Life-breath gives 
life, it gives (life) to a living creature. Life-breath is one's 
father, life-breath is one's mother, life-breath is one's brother, 
life-breath is one’s sister, life-breath is one's teacher, life- 
breath is the Brahmana. 

According to £ prana is the conscious self, prajndtman, which enters 
the body to reveal the whole variety of names and forms. 

2. sa yadi pitaram vd mdtaram vd bhrdtaram vd svasaramvd 
aedryam vd brdhmanam vd kimeid bhrsam iva pratyaha , dhik 
tvastvfty evainam dhuh , pitrhd vai tvam asi, mdtrhd vai tvam asi, 
bhrdtrha vai tvam asi, svasrhd vai tvam asi, dedryaha vai tvam asi , 
brdhmanahd vai tvam asiti. 

2. If one answers unworthily to a father or a mother, or a 
brother or a sister, or a teacher or a Brahmana, people say to him, 
shame on you, verily, you are a slayer of your father, verily, 
you are a slayer of your mother, verily, you are a slayer of your 
brother, verily, you are a slayer of your sister, verily, you are 
a slayer of your teacher, verily, you are a slayer of a Brahmana. 

bhrsam : ananurupam. 5. 

3. atha yady apy endn utkrdnta-prandn sulena samdsam 
vyatisandahet naivainam bruynh , pitrhdsiti, na matrhdsxti, na 
bhrdtrhasxti , na svasrhdslti, na acdryahdsiti , na brdhmanahdsiti. 

3. But if, when the life breath has departed from them one 
shoves them together with a poker and burns up every bit of 
them, people would not say, ‘you are a slayer of your father,' 
nor ‘you are a slayer of your mother,' nor ‘you are a slayer of 
your brother,' nor ‘you are a slayer of your sister,’ nor ‘you 
are a slayer of your teacher,' nor ‘you are a slayer of a Brahmana.' 

utkrdnta-prdnan: tyakta-dehdn. 5 . 



VII. 17. i. Chandogya Upanisad 483 

The importance of prana is brought out by positive and negative 
proofs, anvaya-vyatirekabhyam. §. 

4. prdno hy evaitdni sarvani bhavati, sa va esa evam pasyan , 
evam manvdnah , evam vijanann ativddi bhavati , tarn ced briiynh 
ativddy aslti, ativady asmiti bruyat , ndpahnuvita. 

4. Life-breath is all this. Verily, he who secs this, thinks 
this, understands this, becomes an excellent speaker. Even if 
people should say to him, you are an excellent speaker, he 
should say, T am an excellent speaker/ He should not deny it. 

ativadin: He goes beyond all declarations made previously beginning 
with name and ending with hope, and realises that prana or the 
conscious self is Brahman. In M.U. III. 1. 4 an ativadin is contrasted 
with one who really knows the highest truth. 

In all this discussion Sanatkumara leads Narada step by step, 
tato bhuyah , until he obtains the experience of the absolutely great, 
which is undefined and unmeasured. As Narada seems to be satisfied 
with prana and does not ask Ts there anything greater than prdnaV 
the teacher leads him on to a higher view in sections 16-26. He is an 
ativadin who passes beyond the empirical variety and grasps the 
metaphysical reality, yastu bhumdkhyam sarvdtikrdntam tattvahi 
paramartha-satyam veda so’tivdditi. £. 


Section 16 
TRUTH 

1. esa tu va ativadati yah salycndticadati; so’ ham, bhagavah , 
satyenditivaddmti; satyam tv eva vijijhdsitavyam Hi; satyam , 
bhagavah , vijijhdsa iti . 

1. But he, verily, speaks excellently, who speaks excellently 
of truth. ‘But I, Venerable Sir, would speak excellently of 
truth/ 'But one must desire to understand the truth/ ‘Venerable 
Sir, I desire to understand the truth/ 
vijijhd^e: visesena jiidtum iccheyam tvatto'ham iti. S. 


Section 17 

TRUTH AND UNDERSTANDING 
1. yaddi vai vijdndti , atha satyam vadati , navi ja nan satyam 
vadati, vijanann eva saty irii vadati , vijhdnam tv eva vijijnd - 
sitavyam iti; vijhdnam , bhagavah , vijijhdsa iti. 



484 The Principal Upanisads VII. 19. 1. 

1. Verily, when one understands, then he speaks the truth. 
One who does not understand does not speak the truth. Only 
he who understands speaks the truth. But one must desire to 
understand understanding. ‘Venerable Sir, I desire to under- 
stand understanding/ 

In his commentary £ distinguishes between the empirical truth 
(riipa-traya) and metaphysical truth (rupa-traya-vyatirekena para - 
mdrthatah), between factual truth and ultimate significance. 


Section 18 

THOUGHT AND UNDERSTANDING 

I. yadd vai manute, atha vijdndti , ndmatva vijdnati, matvaiva 
vijandti, matis tv eva vijijndsitavyeti; matim, bhagavah, vijijhasa 
iti. 

1. Verily, when one thinks, then he understands, one who 
does not think does not understand. Only he who thinks 
understands. But one must desire to understand thinking. 
‘Venerable Sir, I desire to understand thinking/ 

matir mananam, tarko mantavya-visaya ddarah. S. 


Section 19 
FAITH 

I. yadd vai sraddhadhdti , atha manute. nairaddhadhan 
manute , sraddhadhad eva manute, sraddhd tv eva vijijndsitavyeti ; 
iraddham, bhagavah, vijijnasa iti. 

1. Verily, when one has faith, then he thinks. One who has 
not faith does not think. Only he who has faith thinks. But one 
must desire to understand faith. ‘Venerable Sir, I desire to 
understand faith/ 

dstikya-buddhih sraddhd. 5 : sense of religious reality. 



VII. 22. i. Chandogya Upani§ad 485 

Section 20 
STEADFASTNESS 

1. yada vai nististhati , atha sraddadhati, na’ nististhan iradda- 
dhati nististhann eva sraddadhati , nistha tv eva vijijnasitavyeti; 
nistham, bhagavah , vijijhdsa iti. 

1. When one has steadfastness, then one has faith. One who 
has not steadfastness does not have faith. Only he who has 
steadfastness has faith. But one must desire to understand 
steadfastness. 'Venerable Sir, I desire to understand stead- 
fastness/ 

nistha: earnest attention to and service of the spiritual guide: 
guru-susrusadis tatparatvam brahma-vijhandya. S. 

See B.G. III. 3. 


Section 21 
ACTIVITY 

I. yada vai karoty atha nististhati , nakrtva nististhati, krtvaiva 
nististhati, krtis tv eva vijijnasitavyeti ; krtim bhagavo vijijhdsa 
iti. 

1. When one is active, one has steadfastness. Without being 
active, one has not steadfastness. Only by activity does one 
have steadfastness. But one must desire to understand activity. 
'Venerable Sir, I desire to understand activity/ 

activity: £ refers to the duties of a student such as restraint of the 
senses, concentration of the mind: ifidriya-samyamas cittaikagra- 
td-karanam ca. 


Section 22 
HAPPINESS 

1. yada vai sukham labhatetha karoti, ndsukham labdhva 
karoti , sukham eva labdhva karoti, sukham tv eva vijijhdsitavyam 
iti; sukham, bhagavah, vijijhdsa iti. 

1. When one obtains happiness, then one is active. One who 
does not obtain happiness is not active. Only he who obtains 



486 The Principal Upanisads VII. 24. 1. 

happiness is active. But one must desire to understand happiness. 
'Venerable Sir, I desire to understand happiness ’ 


Section 23 
THE INFINITE 

1. yo vai bhuma tat sukham, ndlpe sukham asti, bhumaiva 
siikham; bhuma tv eva vijijhdsitavya iti; bhumdnam, bhagavah, 
vijijhdsa iti . 

1. The infinite is happiness. There is no happiness in any- 
thing small (finite). Only the infinite is happiness. But one 
must desire to understand the infinite. 'Venerable Sir, I desire 
to understand the infinite/ 

bhuma: grand, superlative, abundant, mahat niratisayam bahvlti. 
It is the highest that can be reached, the infinite. In the small 
there is no happiness. It produces craving, trsnd, which is the seed of 
sorrow, duhkha-bija. 

Thou Impost perhaps to subdue desire by the power of enjoyment, 
but thou wilt find it impossible for the eye to be satisfied with 
seeing or the ear to be filled with hearing. If all visible nature could 
pass in review before thee, what would it be but a vain vision?' 
Imitation of Christ. 


, Section 24 

THE INFINITE AND THE FINITE 

1. yatra ndnyat pasyati ndnyac chrnoti ndnyad vijandti sa 
bhuma ; atha yatrdnyat paiyati anyac chrnoti any ad vijandti tad 
alpam; yo vai bhuma tad anirtam , atha yad alpam tan martyam; 
sa, bhagavah , kasmin pratisthita iti; sve mahimni, yadi vd na 
mahimniti . 

1. Where one sees nothing else, hears nothing else, under- 
stands nothing else, that is the infinite. But where one sees 
something else, hears something else, understands something 
else, that is the small (the finite). Verily, the infinite is the same 
as the immortal, the finite is the same as the mortal. 'Venerable 



VII. 25. i Chdndogya Upanisad 487 

Sir, on what is the infinite established? 1 ‘On its own greatness 
or not even on greatness/ 

The empirical dualities are absent in the experience of the infinite : 
samsara-vyavaharo bhumni nasti. §. 

martyam: perishable, vinaii. S. All empirical objects are subject to 
the law of change. 

sve mahimni: on its own greatness, dimly e mahimni mdhatmye 
vibhutau. £. It is rooted in its own greatness while things which are 
in the region of the little, alpa , arc rooted not in themselves but in 
others. 

yadi vd: If the question is taken in an ultimate sense, we cannot 
even say this, for the infinite cannot be established in anything else, 
not even on its own greatness, for it is apratistha , andsrita. 

The last line reminds us of the Ndsadiya hymn of the R.V. where 
the expression of the highest certainty is followed by a misgiving 
that after all it may not be so. 

2. go-asvam iha mahimeiy acaksate, hasti-hiranyam ddsa - 
bhdryam , ksetrany dyatandinTti; ndham evarn bravimi, bravimiti 
hovdednyo hy anyasmin pratisthita iti. 

2. Here on earth people call cows and horses, elephants 
and gold, slaves and wives, fields and houses ‘greatness/ ‘I do 
not speak thus, I do not speak thus/ said he, ‘for in that case 
one thing is established in another/ 

The infinite cannot be established in anytliing different from 
itself 

Finite things are established in others, anyo hi anyasmin pratisthitah. 
The doctrines of para-tantra and pratltya-samutpdda are suggested by 
this passage. 


Section 25 

SELF-SENSE AND THE SELF 

1. sa evddhastdt , sa uparistdt , sa pasedt , sa puyastat, sa 
daksinatah, sa uttaratah , sa evedam sarvam iti , athdto’hamkdrddesa 
eva, aham evddhastdt , aham uparistdt , ahatn pascat , aham purastdt , 
aham daksinatah , aham uttaratah, aham evedam sarvam iti. 

I. That (infinite) indeed is below. It is above. It is behind. 
It is in front. It is to the south, it is to the north. It is indeed 
all this (world). Now no; t, the instruction in regard to the 
self-sense. I, indeed, am below. I am above, I am behind, I 



488 The Principal Upanisads VII. 26. 1. 

am in front. I am to the south, I am to the north; I, indeed, 
am all this (world). 

2. athata atmadcsa eva dtmaivddhastat , dtmoparistat, dtma 
pascdt , dtmd purastdt, dtma daksinatah , dtmottaratah, atmaivedam 
sarvam iti. sa vd esa cvam pasyann evam manvdna evam vijdnann 
dtma-ratir dtma-krida dtma-mithuna dtmdnandah. sa svarad 
bhavati, tasya sarvcsu lokesu kama-caro bhavati , atha yc’nyathdto 
viduh, anya-rdjanas tc ksayya-lokd bhavanti. tesam sarvesu 
lokesv akdma-cdro bhavati. 

2. Now next the instruction in regard to the self. The self 
indeed is below. The self is above. The self is behind. The self 
is in front. The self is to the south. The self is to the north. 
The self, indeed, is all this (world). Verily, he who sees this, 
who thinks this, who understands this, he has pleasure in the 
self, he has delight in the self, he has union in the self, he has 
joy in the self; he is independent (self-ruler); he has unlimited 
freedom in all worlds. But they who think differently from this 
are dependent on others (have others for their rulers). They have 
(live in) perishable worlds. In all worlds they cannot move at 
all (have no freedom). 

pascdt: behind, or to the west. 
purastdt: in front or to the east. 

The knowers are self-governing, autonomous (sva-rdj)\ the non- 
knowers are heteronomous, subject to others (anya-rdj). 


Section 26 

THE PRIMACY OF SELF 

1. tasya ha vd etasyaivam pasyatah , evam manvanasya , evam 
vijanata atmatah prdnah, dtmata did, dtmatah smarah , dtmata 
dkdsah, atmatas tejah , dtmata apah, dtmata avirbhdva-tirobhavau 
atmato’nnam dtmato balam, dtmato vijndnam , atmato dhyanam , 
atmatas cittam , dtmatah samkalpah, dtmato manah, dtmato' vdk , 
dtmato nama, dtmato mantrah, dtmatah karmdni , dtmata evedarh 
sarvam iti . 

1. For him who sees this, who thinks this and who under- 
stands this, life-breath springs from the self, hope from the 
self, memory from the self, ether from the self, heat from the 



VII. 26. 2. Chdndogya Upanisad 4^9 

self, water from the self, appearance and disappearance from 
the self, food from the self, strength from the self, understanding 
from the self, meditation from the self, thought from the self, 
determination from the self, mind from the self, speech from 
the self, name from the self, sacred hymns from the self, (sacred) 
works from the self, indeed all this (world) from the self. 

All these, life-breath, hope, memory, etc., which were traced to 
the real, sat , are now traced to the self, as the real and the self, sat and 
at man are one, 

2. tad esa slokah: 

na pasyo mrtyum pasyati, 
na rogam nota duhkhatdm; 
sarvam ha pasyah pasyati , 
sarvam apnoti savvasah. 
iti. 

sa ekadhd bhavati, tridhd bhavati , pancadha 
saptadhd navadhd caiva punas caikddasah smrtah, 
satam ca dasa caikas ca sahasrdni ca vimsatih 
ahdra-suddhausattva-suddhih, sattva-suddhau dhruvd smrtih, smrti- 
lambhe sarva-granthinam vipramoksah; tasmai mrdita-kasdydya 
tamasah pdram darsayati bhagavdn sanatkumdrah: tarii skanda 
ity dcaksate , tam skanda ity dcaksate. 

2. On this there is the following verse. 

He who sees this does not see death nor illness nor any sorrow. 
He who sees this sees everything and obtains everything 
everywhere. 

He is one, becomes threefold, fivefold, sevenfold and also 
ninefold. Then again he is called the elevenfold, also a hundred 
and elevenfold and also twenty-thousand fold. 

When nourishment is pure, nature is pure. When nature is 
pure, memory becomes firm. When memory remains firm, 
there is release from all knots of the heart. To such a one who 
has his stains wiped away, the venerable Sanatkumara shows 
the further shore of darkness. Him they call Skanda, yea, him 
they call Skanda. 

He who sees this, pasyo yathokta-darsl vidvdn. §. 

One — He is one before creation, prdk srsti-prabheddd ekadhaiva . 
The various numbers, three, five, seven, nine, etc., are intended to 
show the endless variety of manifestations after creation: 
samstridhadi-bhedair ananta-hhcda-prakdro bhavati srsti-kdle. S. 

See Maitrl V. 2. 



490 The Principal Upanisads VII. 26. 2. 

sattva-suddhi: nature is pure. The reference, according to S, is to the 
inner organ, antahkaranasya sattvasya suddhir nairmalyam bhavati. 

Sanatkumara is said to be 'bhagavdn,' as he conforms to the 
definition quoted by S. 

utpattim pralayam caiva bhutdiidm agatim gatim 
vctti vidydm avidyiim ca sa viicyo bhagavdn iti. 

Sanatkumara points out that spiritual freedom is the basis of all 
action. We reach it by stages. The vision of the Divine, the Infinite, 
gives us happiness. Other things which fall short of it are of little 
consequence. The self, dtman, is the source of all things, whatsoever, 
hope, memory, space, light and water. It is the source of all power, 
all knowledge, all happiness. 



VIII. I. 2. 


Chdndogya Upanisad 


491 


CHAPTER VIII 

CONCERNING THE NATURE OF THE SELF 

Section 1 

THE UNIVERSAL SELF WITHIN THE HEART 
AND IN THE WORLD 

1. harih, aum. atha yad idam asmin brahma-pure daharam 
pundarikam vesma , daharo’sminn antardkdsah, tasminyad antah, 
tad anvestavyam , tad vd va vijijhdsitavyam. 

1. Harih , Now, here in this city of Brahman is an abode, 
a small lotus flower; within it is a small space. What is within 
that should be sought, for that, assuredly, is what one should 
desire to understand. 

daharam: alp am, small. £. 

pundarikam: pundarlka-sadrsam, like a lotus. S. 

brahma-pure: sarlre, in the body. S. The body is deva-sadana or the 

temple of God. 

vijijhdsitavyam: saksat-karaniyam, made an object of direct appre- 
hension. £. 

In introducing this chapter £ points out that the speculative 
effort of Chapter VII, which establishes the identity of our self with 
the highest self is too much for ordinary people who are inclined to 
assume that the metaphysical reality which is free from all deter- 
minations is as good as non-being: dig-desa-guna-gati-phala-bheda 
sunyam hi paramdrthasad advayam brahma manda-buddhlndm asad iva 
pratibhdti. Pure being, devoid of all determinations, is often in 
Western thought mistaken for non-being (asatf). Cp. Hegel's criticism 
of Spinoza’s substance. 

As ordinary people find it difficult to conceive of the Real as out 
of space and time, they are taught to think of it as an object endowed 
with qualities, living in the world and the human self. This know- 
ledge is to serve as a preparation for the higher knowledge. 

2. tain ced bhuyuh , yad idam asmin brahma-pure daharam 
pundarikam vesma, daharo sminn antardkdsah , kirn tad atra 
vidyate yad anvestavyam , yad vd va vijijhdsitavyam iti. 

2. If they should say to him, with regard to this city of 
Brahma and the abode and the small lotus flower and the small 
space within that, what is there that should be sought for, or 
that, assuredly, one should desire to understand? 

The implication is that there is nothing there which one has to 



492 The Principal Upanisads VIII. i. 5 

search out or understand: kith tad atra vidyate na kin cana vidyata 
ity abhiprayah. 5. 

3. sa bruydt: ydvdn vd ayam akdsah, tdvdn cso> ntarhrdaya 
dkasah. ubhe asmin dydvd-prthivl aniar eva samdhite, ubhav 
agnis’ca vdyus ca suryd-candramasdv ubhau, vidyun naksatrdni 
yac casyehdsti yac ca ndsti sarvam tad asmin samdhitam iti. 

3. He should say, as far, verily, as this (world) space extends, 
so far extends the space within the heart. Within it, indeed, are 
contained both heaven and earth, both fire and air, both sun 
and moon, lightning and the stars. Whatever there is of him in 
this world and whatever is not, all that is contained within it. 

The individual is to be regarded as the world in miniature. The 
world is the individual writ large. 

In Buddhist thought dlaya-vijnana is the receptacle of all the latent 
possibilities of existence, hrd-dkdsa answers to the alaya-vijhdna. 
When the concrete manifestations are overcome by decay and 
death, their types are not destroyed along with them. The desires 
out of which they arise are preserved in the hrd-dkdsa. 
what is not: What is no longer or not yet, the past and the future. 

4. tam ced bruyuh , asmims'ccd idam brahma-pure sarvam 
samdhitam sarvdni ca bhutdni sarve ca kdimdh yadaitaj jara 
vapnoti pradhvamsate vd, kim tato> tisisyata iti. 

4. If they should say to him, if, within this city of Brahma, 
is contained all (that exists), all beings and all desires, then 
what is left of it when old age overtakes it or when it perishes? 

5. sa bruydt; nasya jar ay a itaj jiryati, na vadhcndsya hanyatc . 
etat satyam brahma-pur am asmin kdimdh samahitah. esa dtmd- 
pahata-pdpmd vijaro vimrtyur visoko vijighatso pipdsah, sat- 
ya-kdmah satya-samkalpah. yathd hy cveha prajd anvdviianti 
yathanusdsanam, yam yam ant am abhikdmd bhavanti yam 
janapadam, yam ksctra-bhdgam, tarn tam evopajivanti. 

5. He should say, it (the self within) does not age with old 
age, it is not killed by the killing (of the body). That (and not 
the body) is the real city of Brahma. In it desires are contained. 
It is the self free from sin, free from old age, free from dea+h, 
free from sorrow, free from hunger, free from thirst, whose 
desire is the real, whose thought is the real. For, just as here 
on earth people follow in obedience to command (as they are 
commanded), of whatever object they are desirous, be it a 
country or a part of a field, on that they live dependent. 

Our desires condition our future. 



VIII. 2. 3- Chdndogya Upanisad 493 

'6. tad yatheha karma-jito lokah kslyate, evam evdmutra pun- 
ya-jito lokah ksiyate . tad ya ihatmanam ananuvidya vrajanty 
etams ca satydn kaman, tesdm sarvesu lokesv akdma-cdro bhavati. 
atha ya ihatmanam anuvidya vrajanty etams ca satydn kaman , 
tesam sarvesu lokesu kdma-cdro bhavati . 

6. As here on earth the world which is earned by work 
perishes, even so there the world which is earned by merit 
(derived from the performance of sacrifices) perishes. Those who 
depart hence without having found here the self and those real 
desires, for them there is no freedom in all the worlds. But 
those who depart hence, having found here the self and those 
real desires — for them in all worlds there is freedom. 

akama-caro’ svatantratd. S. 

kdma-cdro bhavati: rdjha iva sdrvabhaumasyehaloke: He has like a 
King complete sovereignty in the world. S. ‘Seeing the self im- 
partially in all beings and all beings in the self, the dtma-ydji obtains 
autonomy, 1 Manu XII. 91; see also B.G. VI. 29. 


Section 2 

DIFFERENT FUTURE WORLDS 

I. sa yadi pitr-loka-kamo bhavati. samkalpad evdsya pitarah 
samuttisthanti , tena pitr-lokena sanipanno mahiyate . 

1. If he becomes desirous of the world of the fathers, by 
his mere thought, fathers arise. Possessed of the world of 
fathers he is happy. 

• 

Out of these kamas or desires, out of samkalpas or formative 
tendencies, the desired spheres are fashioned. 
mahiyate: pujyate vardhate vd mahimdnam anubhavati. S. 

2. atha yadi mdlr-loka-kamo bhavati , samkalpad evdsya mdtarah 
samuttisthanti, tena matr-lokena sanipanno mahiyate. 

2. And so if he becomes desirous of the world of mothers, 
by his mere thought, mothers arise. Possessed of that world of 
mothers he is happy. 

3. atha yadi bhrdtr-loka-kdmo bhavati, samkalpad evdsya 
bhrdtarah samuttisthanti, tena bhrdtr-lokena sanipanno mahiyate . 

3. And if he becomes desirous of the world of brothers, out 



494 The Principal Upanisads VIII. 2. 10. 

of his mere thought brothers arise. Possessed of that world 
of brothers he is happy. 

4. atha yadi svasr-loka-kdmo bhavati, samkalpdd evasya 
svasdrah samuttisthanti, tcna svasr-lokena sampanno mahiyate. 

4. And if he becomes desirous of the world of sisters, out of 
his mere thought, sisters arise. Possessed of that world of sisters 
he is happy. 

5. atha yadi sakhi-loka-kamo bhavati , samkalpdd evasya sak~ 
hdyah samuttisthanti: tena sakhi-lokena sampanno mahiyate. 

5. And if he becomes desirous of the world of friends, out 
of his mere thought, friends arise. Possessed of that world of 
friends he is happy. 

6. atha yadi gandha-malya-loka-kdmo bhavati samkalpdd 
evasya gandhamdlye samnttisthatah , tena gandha-mdlya-lokcna 
sampanno mahiyate. 

6. And if he becomes desirous of the world of perfumes and 
garlands, out of his mere thought, perfumes and garlands arise. 
Possessed of that world of perfumes and garlands he is happy. 

7. atha yadi anna-pdna-loka-kdmo bhavati , samkalpdd evasya n- 
na-pdne samnttisthatah , tena anna-pdna-lokena sampanno mahi- 
yate. 

7. And if he becomes desirous of the world of food and drink, 
out of his mere thought, fo.od and drink arise. Possessed of 
that world of food and drink he is happy. 

8 . atha yadi gita-vddita-loka-kdmo bhavati , samkalpdd evasya 
gita-vadite samnttisthatah , tena gita-vddita-lokena sampanno 
mahiyate. 

8 . And if he becomes desirous of the world of song and music, 
out of his mere thought, song and music arise. Possessed of 
that world of song and music he is happy. 

9. atha yadi stri-loka-kdmo bhavati , samkalpdd evasya striyah 
samuttisthanti , tena stri-lokena sampanno mahiyate. 

9. And if he becomes desirous of the world of women, out 
of his mere thought, women arise. Possessed of that world of 
women he is happy. 

10. yam yam antam abhikdmo bhavati , yam kamarh kdmayate , 
so*sya samkalpdd eva samuttisthati, tena sampanno mahiyate , 



VIII. j- 2. CMndogya Upanisad . 495 

10. Of whatever object he becomes desirous, whatever desire 
he desires, out of his mere thought it arises. Possessed of it he 
is happy. 

ant am: object, pradesam. S. 


Section 3 

THE SPACE WITHIN THE HEART 

1. ta ime satydh kdimdh anrtdpidhdndh, tesdm satydndm satdm 
anrtam apidhanam: yo yo hy asyctah pvaiti , na tarn ilia darsandya 
labhatc. 

1. These same are true desires, with a covering of what is 
false. Although the desires are true there is a covering that 
is false. For whosoever of one’s (fellows) departs hence, one 
docs not get him (back) to see here. 

2. atha yc cdsycha jwa ye ca pretd yac cany ad icchan na 
labhatc , sarvam tad alra gatvd vindatc , atra hi asyaitc satydh 
kdmdh anrtdpidhdndh , tad yathdpi hiranya-nidhim nihitam 
aksctrajnd upary upari sahearanto na vindcyuh , evam evemdh 
sarvdh prajd ahar ahar gacchanty a dam brahma-lokam na vindanti , 
anrtena hi pratyudhdih. 

2. But those of one’s (fellows) whether they are alive or 
whether they have departed and whatever else one desires but 
docs not get, all this one finds by going in there (into one’s 
own self); for here, indeed, are those true desires of his with 
a covering of what is false. Just as those who do not know 
the field walk again and again over the hidden treasure of 
gold and do not find it, even so all creatures here go day after 
day into the Brahma-world and yet do not find it, for they arc 
carried away by untruth. 

All desires find their fulfilment in the self. The city of Brahma is 
within one’s heart where we can possess all our desires. 

We daily get into the Brahma-world while we are asleep: hr day d- 
kdidkhyam brahma-lokam ahar ahah pratyaham gacchanty d pi susupta- 
kdle na vindanti na labhante S. 

an?tena: by falsehood. Ramanuja interprets rta to mean disinterested 
action, phala-kamana-rahita-i irma and an rta as its opposite, selfish 
work. 



49^ The Principal Upanisads VIII. 3. 5. 

satya and anrta are not two coexistent factors but two alternative 
manifestations of a common factor of the hrd-dkdsa or vijhdna , its 
two orientations upward and downward. 

3. sa vd esa dtmd hrdi , tasyaitad eva niruktam hrdy ayam iti, 
tasmadd hr day am, ahar ahar vd evam-vit svargam lokam eti. 

3. Verily, that self is (abides) in the heart. Of it the 
etymological explanation is this. This one is in the heart, 
thereof it is the heart. He who knows this goes day by day 

into the heavenly world. 

» 

In deep sleep one gets into the Brahman of the heart. One has to 
realise the self in one's heart, hydaya-nama nirvacana prasiddhyapi 
sva-hrdaya dtmety avagantavyam. £. 

4. atha ya esa samprasddo* smdc-charirdt samutthaya param 
jyotir upasampadya svena rupenabhinispadyate, esa atmeti 
hovdca, etad amrtam abhayam, etad brahmetx; tasya ha vd etasya 
brahmano ndma satyam iti. 

4. Now that serene being, rising out of this body, and 
reaching the highest light appears in his own form. He is the 
self, said he (when asked by the pupils). That is the immortal, 
the fearless. That is Brahman. Verily, the name of that Brahman 
is the True. 

sarirat samutthaya: rising out of the body, giving up the notion of 
the identity of the self with the body: sarlrdlma-bhavanam parit- 
yajyety art hah. S. 

5. tdni ha vd etani tnny aksardni sat-ti-yam iti; tad yat sat 
tad amrtam , atha yat ti tan martyam, atha yad yam tenobhe 
yacchati yad anenobhc ydcchati tasmdd yam , ahar ahar vd evarh 
vit svargam lokam eti. 

5. Verily, these are the three syllables sat, ti, yam. The sat, 
that is the immortal. The ti, that is the mortal. The yam, with 
it one holds the two together. Because with it one holds the 
two together therefore it is yam. He who knows this goes day 
by day into the heavenly world. 

For another explanation of the word satyam, see B.U. V. 5. t. 
yacchati: holds together, yamayati, niyamayati, vaslkaroti. S. The 
eternal and the temporal are bound together. There is no suggestion 
that the mortal is illusory. 



VIII. 4- 3- Chdndogya Upanisad 497 

Section 4 

LIFE BEYOND 

I. atha ya atma, sa setur vidhrtir esarii lokdndm asambheddya 
naitam setum ahoratre taratah, na jard na mrtyur na soko na 
sukrtam, na duskrtam, sarve papmdno 'to nivartante, apahata- 
papma hy esa brahma-lokah. 

1. Now the self is the bridge, the (separating) boundary for 
keeping these worlds apart. Over that bridge day and night 
do not cross, nor old age nor death, nor sorrow, nor well-doing 
nor ill-doing. All evils turn back from it for the Brahma-world 
is freed from evil. 

See Katha III. 2, M.U. II. 2. 5. 

Day and night are the factors of time, the determinants of the 
mortality of all things under the sun. 

2. tasmdd vd etam setum, tirtvdndhah sann anandho bhavati, 
viddhah sann aviddho bhavati, upatdpi sann anupatdpi bhavati. 
tasmdd vd etam setum tutvdpi naktam ahar evdbhinispadyate, 
sakrd vibhdto hy evaisa brahma-lokah. 

2. Therefore, verily, on crossing that bridge, if one is blind 
he becomes no longer blind, if wounded, he becomes no longer 
wounded, if afflicted he becomes no longer afflicted. Therefore, 
verily, on crossing that bridge, night appears even as day for 
that Brahma-world is ever-illumined. 

See III. 11. 3. 

When one crosses the bridge and gets to the other shore, the 
troubles of the world cease. Eckhart says: ‘There neither virtue nor 
vice ever entered in.' 

sakyd vibhdtah: ever-illumined, sadd vibhdtah, sadaikarupah. S. 

3. tad ya evaitam brahma-lokam brahmacarycnanuvindanti , 
tesdm evaisa brahma-lokah, tesdm sarvesu lokesu kdma-edrobhavati. 

3. But only they find that Brahma-world who practise the 
disciplined life of a student of sacred knowledge; only they 
possess that Brahma-world. For them there is unlimited freedom 
in all worlds. 



49S The Principal Upanisads VIII. 5. 3. 

Section 5 

IMPORTANCE OF BRAHMACARYA 

1. atha yad yajha ity dcaksate brahmacaryam cva tat , brahma - 
caryena hy cva yo jhdtd tam vindate atha yad istam ity dcaksate , 
brahmacaryam eva tat, brahmacaryena hy evestvdtmdnam anu- 
vindatc. 

1. Now, what people call sacrifice is really the disciplined 
life of a student of sacred knowledge. Only by the disciplined 
life of a student of sacred knowledge docs he who knows obtain 
that (world). Now what people call ‘What has been sacrificed' 
is really the disciplined life of a student of sacred knowledge, 
for only by sacrificing with the disciplined life of a student of 
sacred knowledge does one obtain the self. 

2. atha yat sattrdyanam ity dcaksate brahmacaryam eva tat, 
brahmacaryena hy cva sata dtmanas trdnam vindate. atha yan 
maunam ity dcaksate brahmacaryam eva tat, brahmacaryena hy 
evdtmdnam anuvidya manute. 

2. Now what people call the protracted sacrifice {sattr- 
dyanam) is really the disciplined life of a student of sacred 
knowledge. Only by the disciplined life of a student of sacred 
knowledge does one obtain the protection of the real self. Now 
what people call the vow of silence is really the disciplined life 
of a student of sacred knowledge, for only by finding out the 
self through the disciplined life of a student of sacred know- 
ledge does one '(really) meditate. 

protection of the self: sat ah parasmdd dtmana dtmanas trdnam rak- 
sanam. S. 

manute: dhydyati. S. 

3. atha yad andsakdyanam ity dcaksate brahmacaryam eva tat, 
esa hy ditma na nasyati yam brahmacaryendnuvindate; atha yad 
aranydyanam ity dcaksate brahmacaryam eva tat. tad aras ' ca 
ha vai nyas carnavau brahma lake trtiyasydm ito divi, tad airam 
madly am sarah, tad asvatthah soma-savanah, tad apardjitd piir 
brahmanah, prabhuvimitam hiranmayam. 

3. Now what people call a course of fasting is really the 
disciplined life of a student of sacred knowledge, for the self 
which one finds by the disciplined life of a student of sacred 
knowledge docs not perish. Now what people call the life of 
a hermit is really the disciplined life of a student of sacred 



I 

VIII. 6. i. Chdndogya Upanisad 4gg 

knowledge. Verily, ara and nya are the two seas in the Brahma- 
world in the third heaven from here. And there is the lake 
AirammadTya and there the tree showering Soma, there is the 
city of Brahman Apardjitd and the golden hall built by the 
Lord. 

anasakayanam: a course of fasting. It may also mean entrance 
into the unperishing, a-ndsaka-ayana. 

In the K.U. I. 3, the sea is called ara ; according to §, aparajita is 
not a city but a resting-place, dyatana. 

This section advocates not only the need for brahmacarya but 
also the equivalence of certain sacrifices to brahmacarya. This 
equivalence is established by ingenious etymological explanations. 
Yajha or 4 sacrifice ’ and yo jhdtd ‘ he who knows ' have a certain simi- 
larity. Similarly ista, another kind of sacrifice, has something in 
common with esana or * search. ’ 

sattrayana with sat, the true and tray ana or protection, manna silence 
with manana , meditation, andsakayana with the unperishing from 
nas to perish, aranydyana with ara and nya, the two seas which are 
said to exist in the world of Brahma. 

4. tad ya evaitdv aram ca nya?h ecu navau brahma-loke brahma - 
carycndnnvindanti , tesdm evaisa brahma-lokah tesdm sarvesu 
lokesu kama-caro bhavati. 

4. Only they who find the two seas Ara and Nya in the 
Brahma- world through the disciplined life of a student of sacred 
knowledge, only they possess the Brahma-world. I11 all the 
worlds they possess unlimited freedom. 

All these fulfilled desires mentioned in sections 2-5 are real at 
their own level. They are not to be dismissed as false or unreal. Even 
dreams are unreal only in relation to what we see when we are 
awake. What we see in waking experience is not altogether unreal 
for it is based on the real. 


Section 6 

COURSE AFTER DEATH 

I. atha yd eta hrdayasya nddyas , tdh pingalasyanimnas 
tisthanti, iuklasya nllasya pitasya lohitasyeti. asau vd adityah 
pihgalah , esa suklah, esa nilah , esa pit ah, esa lohitah. 

1. Now as for these arteries (channels) of the heart, they 



500 The Principal Upanisads VIII. 6. 5. 

consist of a fine substance which is reddish-brown, white, blue, 
yellow and red. Verily, the sun yonder is reddish-brown, he is 
white, he is blue, he is yellow, he is red. 

2. tad yatlid mahdpatha atata ubhau grdmau gacchatimam 
camurh ca, evam evaita adityasya rasmaya ubhau lokau gac- 
chantimam cdmmh ca; amusmdd dditydt pratdyante ta asu nddisu 
srptdh, dbhyo nddlbhyah pratdyante tc’musminn aditye srptdh. 

2. Even as a great extending highway runs between two 
villages, this one and that yonder, even so these rays of the sun 
go to both these worlds, this one and that yonder. They start 
from the yonder sun and enter into these arteries. They start 
from these arteries and enter into the yonder sun. 

3. tad yatraitat suptah samastali samprasannah svapnam na 
vijandti asu tadd nadlsu srpto bhavati , tam na kascana papma 
spriati, tejasd hi tadd sampanno bhavati. 

3. And when one is thus sound asleep, composed, serene (so 
that) he knows no dream, then he has entered into these 
channels; so no evil touches him for then he has obtained the 
light (of the sun). 

samastah: composed, upasamhrta-sarva-karana-vrttih. S. 

saynpYasannah: serene, bdhya-visaya-saynparka-janita-kalusyabhdvdt 

samyak prasamiah samprasaymah. S. 

svapnayn: dream, visayakdrabhasam yndnasam. 5. 

tejas: light, saura-tejah: The light of the sun. S. 

No evil touches him because he gets into his own nature: sva-rupa - 
vasthitatvdt. dehendriya-visistam hi sukha-duhkha-kdrya-praddnena 
papma sprsatlti na tu satsampannayn sva-rupavastham. S. 

4. atha yatraitad abalundyiam yiito bhavati , tam abhita asind 
ahuh jayidsi mam, jdyiasi mayn, iti; sa yavad asmaccharirdd 
anutkrdyito bhavati , tdvaj jayidti. 

4. And now, when one thus becomes weak (falls ill), those 
who sit around him say, Do you know me ? Do you know me ? 
As long as he has not departed from this body, he knows them. 

5. atha yatraitad asmaccharirdd utkrdmati, athaitair eva 
rasmibhir urdhvam akramate , sa aum iti vd ha ut vd miyatc. 
sa ydvat ksipyen ynanah } tdvad ddityam gacchati. etad vai khalu 
loka-dvaram vidusdm prapadanam, nirodho y vidusdm. 

5. But when he thus departs from this body, then he goes 
upwards by these very rays or he goes up with the thought of 
aum. As his mind is failing, he goes to the sun. That, verily, 



VIII. 7- 2. Chandogya Upanisad 501 

is the gateway of the world, an entering in for the knowers 
a shutting out for the non-knowers. 

ksipyen manah: As his mind is failing: sometimes rendered ‘as 
quickly as one could direct his mind to it’ : ydvatd kalena manasah 
ksepah sydt tdvatd kdlenddityam gacchati, ksipram gacchatlty artho na 
tu tavataiva kdleneti vivaksitam. S. 

6. tad esa ilokah: 

satam caika ca hrdayasya nadyah 

tasdm murdhanam abhinihsrtaika 

tayordhvam ayann amrtatvam eti 

vi§varin anya utkramane bhavanti, utkramane bhavanti. 

6. On this there is this verse. 

A hundred and one are the arteries of the heart, one of them 
leads up to the crown of the head. Going upward through that, 
one becomes immortal: the others serve for going in various 
other directions, for going in various other directions. 

See Katha II. 3. 6. 


Section 7 

PRA JA-PATPS INSTRUCTION TO INDRA CONCERNING 
THE REAL SELF 

I. ya atma apahata-pdpmd vijaro viwrtyur visoko vijighatso’ 
pipasah satya-kdmah satya-samkalpah , so’nvestavyah, so vijijnasi- 
tavyah sa sarvams ca lokdn dpnoti sarvdms ca kdmdn. yas tam 
atmanam anuvidya vijdndti: iti ha prajd-patir uvdca. 

1. The self which is free from evil, free from old age, free 
from death, free from grief, free from hunger and thirst, whose 
desire is the real, whose thought is the real, he should be 
sought, him one should desire to understand. He who has found 
out and who understands that self, he obtains all worlds and 
all desires. Thus spoke Prajd-pati. 

2. tadd hobhaye devasurd anububudhirc: tc hocuh ; hanta tam 
atmanam anvicchdma, yam dtmdnam anvisya sarvdms ca lokdn 
dpnoti sarvdmi ca kdmdn iti; indro haiva dcvdnam abhipravavraja, 
virocano’ surdndm. tan hd samvidandv eva samit-pdni prajd-pa- 
ti-sakdiam djagmatuh. 

2. The gods and the demons both heard it and said, ‘Well, 



502 The Principal Upanisads VIII. 7. 4. 

let us seek that self, the self by seeking whom one obtains all 
worlds and all desires/ Then Indra from among the gods went 
forth unto him and Yirocana from among the demons. Then 
without communicating with each other, the two came into 
the presence of Prajd-pati, fuel in hand. 

fuel in hand: it is the custom for pupils approaching the master. 

3. tan ha dvdtriiiisatam varsdni hrahmacaryam usatuh: tau ha 
prajd-patir uvdea , kirn icchantdv avdstam iti. tau hocatuh, ya 
dtmdpahatapdpmd vijaro vimrtyur visoko vijighatso' pipdsah 
s atya-kdmah satya-samkalpah so’nvcstavyah-sa vijijndsitavyah , sa 
sarvdms ca lokdn dpnoti sarvdms ca human, yas tam dtmdnam 
anavidya vijdndti iti bhagavato vaco vedayante. tam icchantdv 
avdstam iti. 

3. For thirty-two years the two lived there the disciplined 
life of a student of sacred knowledge. Then Prajd-pati asked 
them, 'Desiring what have you been living?’ The two said, 
‘The self which is free from evil, free from old age, free from 
death, free from grief, free from hunger and thirst, whose desire 
is the real, whose thought is the real. He should be sought, 
him one should desire to understand. He who has found out, 
he who understands that self he obtains all worlds and all 
desires.’ These people declare to be your word. Venerable Sir, 
desiring him we have been living. 

4. tau ha prajdpatir uvdea, ya eso’ksini puruso drsyata esa 
dtmeti hovdea, etad amrtam abhayam ctad brahmeti; at ha yo’yam, 
bhagavah , apsu parikhydyate yasedyam didarse katama esa iti 
esa u evaisa sarvesv antesu parikhydyate iti hovdea. 

4. Prajd-pati said to the two, ‘The person that is seen in the 
eye, that is the self,’ said he. ‘That is the immortal, the fearless. 
That is Brahman .’ ‘But, Venerable Sir, he who is perceived in 
water and in a mirror, who is he?' He replied, 'The same one, 
indeed, is perceived in all these.’ 

While Prajd-pati means by the seif the subject of all seeing, Indra 
and Virocana mistake the self for the poison that is seen, not the 
person that sees. See Yoga Sutra II. 6. The person seen in the eye 
is the figure imaged in the eye, and they ask whether the image 
that is seen in the water and in the mirror is the self. At this stage 
the pupils confuse the true self with the body. 



VIII. 8. 4. Chdndogya Upanisad 503 

Section 8 

THE BODILY SELF 

1. uda-sardva atmdnam aveksya yad dtmano na vijdnithah, tan 
me prabrutam iti. tau hoda-sarave 'veksdmeakrate. tau ha prajd- 
patir uvaca: kim pasyatha iti ; tau hocatuh , sarvam evedam avam, 
bhagavah, atmdnam pasydva t dlomabhya a nakhebhyahpratirupam 
iti. 

1. Look at your self in a pan of water and whatever you do 
not understand of the self, tell me. Then the two looked in 
a pan of water. Then Prajd-pati said to the two, ‘What do you 
see?' Then the two said, 'We both see the self thus altogether, 
Venerable Sir, a picture even to the very hairs and nails/ 

The body is subject to change and cannot therefore be the self 
which is said to be unchanging: loma-nakhddivac charlrasyapy 
agamapayitvam siddham. $. 

2. tau ha prajd-patir uvaca , sddhv alahkrtau suvasanau 
pariskrtau bhutvoda-sdrdvc veksethdm iti. tau ha sddhv alahkrtau 
suvasanau pariskrtau bhutvoda-sdrdve' veksdm cakrdtc. tau ha 
prajd-patir uvaca: kim pasyatha iti. 

2. Then Prajd-pati said to the two, after you have well 
adorned yourselves, put on your best clothes, make yourselves 
tidy, look into the pan of water. Then the two adorned them- 
selves well, put on their best clothes and made themselves tidy 
and looked into the pan of w ater. Then Prajd-pati said to the 
two, ‘What do you see?’ 

This illustration points out that bodily changes are as external to 
the true self as clothes and ornaments are. They belong to the not- 
self, andtman. 

3. tau hocatuh , yathaivedam avam, bhagavah , sddhv alahkrtau 
suvasanau pariskrtau svah , evam cvemau, bhagavah , sddhv 
alahkrtau suvasanau pariskrtdv iti; esdtmcti hovdea, etad amrtam , 
abhayam etad brahmeti. tau ha ianta-hrdayau pravavrajatuh. 

3. The two said, ‘Just as we are, Venerable Sir, well adorned, 
with our best clothes and tidy, thus we see both these, Venerable 
Sir, well adorned, with our best clothes and tidy/ ‘That is the 
self/ said he. ‘That is the immortal, the fearless, that is Brahman . 1 
They both went away with a tranquil heart. 

4. tau hdnvxksya prajd-patir uvaca , anupalabhy atmdnam 

R 



504 The Principal Upanisads VIII. 9. 1. 

ananuvidya vrajatah. yatara ctad upanisado bhavisyanti devd 
vd asura vd , to pardbhavisyantiti. sa ha santa-hrdaya cva virocano > 
surah jagdima. tebhyo haitdim upanisadam provdca, dtmaivcha 
mahayyah dtmd paricaryah , dtmdnam evaiha mahayann dtmdnam 
paricarann ubhau lokdv dpnothndm cdmurii ccti. 

4. Then Prajd-pati looked at them and said, they go away 
without having perceived, without having known the self. 
Whosoever will follow such a doctrine, be they gods or demons 
they shall perish. Then Virocana with a tranquil heart went 
to the demons and declared that doctrine, one’s (bodily) self 
is to be made happy here, one’s (bodily) self is to be served. 
He who makes his own self happy here and he who serves his 
own self, he obtains both worlds, this world and the yonder. 

5. tasmdd apy adyaihddaddnam asraddadhdnam ayajamdnam 
ahull, dsuro bateti; asurdndm Ivy csopanisat pretasya sariram 
bhiksaya vasancndlahkdrcneti samskurvanti , ctena hy a mum lokam 
iesyanto many ante . 

5. Therefore even here they say of one who is not a giver, 
who has no faith, who does not offer sacrifices, that he is a 
demon, for this is the doctrine of the demons. They adorn the 
body of the deceased with what they have begged, with clothes 
and with ornaments, and think that thereby they will win the 
yonder world. 

bhiksaya: with perfumes, flowers, etc., which they have begged: 
gandha-malydnn dd i-laksa nayd . 


Section 9 

INDRA FEELS THE INADEQUACY OF THE 
PHYSICAL THEORY 

1. atha hendro’prdpyaiva devdn clad bhayam dadarsa , yathaiva 
khalv ay am as min sarlre sddhvalahkrlc sadhv alahkrto bhavati, 
suvasane suvasanah, paviskvtc pariskrtah , evam evdiyam asminn 
andhe'ndho bhavati , srdme srdunah, parnrkne parivvknah; asyaiva 
sanrasya nasam anv esa nasyati , ndluim atra bhogyam pasydmiti. 

1. But Indra, even before reaching the gods saw this danger. 
Even as this self (the bodily self) is well adorned when this 
body is well adorned, well dressed when the body is well 



VIII. io. i Chdndogya Upanisad 505 

dressed, tidy when the body is tidy, that self will also be blind 
when the body is blind, lame when the body is lame, crippled 
when the body is crippled. It perishes immediately when the 
body perishes. I see no good in this. 

srdmah: one-eyed, eka-netra. 5. 
bhogyam: good, literally what is enjoyable. 

2. sa samit , pdnih punar eydya, tarn ha prajd-patir uvaca , 
maghavan,yac chdnta-hrdayah prdvrdjih sdrdham virocanena, kim 
icchan punar dgama iti. sa liovdca yathaiva khalv ay am, bhagavah: 
asmin sarlre sddhv alahkrte sddhv alahkrto bhavati , suvasane 
suvasanah , pariskrte pariskrtah evam evayam asminn andhe’ndho 
bhavati , srame srdmah , parivrkno parivrknah , asyaiva sanrasya 
ndsam anv csa nasyati, ndham atra bhogyam pasydmiti. 

2. He came back again with fuel in hand. To him Praja-pati 
said, 'Desiring what, O Maghavan, have you come back, since 
you along with Virocana went away with a tranquil heart?' 
Then he said, 'Even as this self (the bodily self) is well adorned 
when this body is well adorned, well dressed when the body 
is well dressed, tidy when the body is tidy, that self will also 
be blind when the body is blind, lame when the body is lame, 
crippled when the body is crippled. It perishes immediately 
when the body perishes. I see no good in this.' 

Indra evidently was not satisfied with the theory of the self as 
body. 

prdvrdjih: pragatavdn asi. S. 

3. evam evaisa, maghavan , iti liovdca , dam tv eva , te bhuyo 
' nuvydkhydsydmi ; vasdpardni dvdtrimsatam varsdniti. sa hdipa - 
rani dvdtrimsatam varsdny uvdsa , tasmai liovdca. 

3. 'So is he indeed, O Maghavan.’ Said he ( Praja-pati ). 
‘However, I will explain this further to you. Live with me 
another thirty-two years.* Then he lived with him another 
thirty-two years. To him he then said: 


Section 10 

THE DREAM SELF 

1. ya csa svapne maliiyawdnas carati esa dtmd , iti hovdea , 
etad amrtam abhayam , etad brahmeti. sa ha idnta-hrdayah pra - 



506 The Principal Upanisads VIII. io. 4. 

vavrdja; sa hdprdpyaiva devan clad bhayam dadarsa; tadyady, 
apidam sariram andham bhavati, anandhah sa bhavati , yadi 
srdmam asrdmah, naivaiso 'sya doscna dusyati. 

1. He who moves about happy in a dream, he is the self, 
said he, he is the immortal, the fearless. He is Brahman. Then 
he went forth with a tranquil heart. But even before reaching 
the gods he saw this danger. Even though this self is not blind 
(when the body) is blind, is not lame (when the body) is lame, 
though he does not suffer defects from the defects (of the body). 

mahlyamdnah: (moves) happy. 

aneka-vidhan svapna-bhogdn anubhavati, S. He experiences different 
kinds of satisfaction in a dream. 

The dreaming self does not suffer from the defects of the body. 
naivaisa svapndtmdsya dehasya doscna dusyati. S. 

2 . na vadhcndsya hanyatc, ndsya srdmyena srdmah , ghnanti 
tv cvainam , vicchddayantivdpriyavctteva bhavati , api roditiva, 
ndham atra bhogyam pasydmiti. 

2. He is not slain (when the body) is slain. He is not one-eyed 
(when the body) is one-eyed, yet it is as if they kill him, as if 
they unclothe him. He comes to experience as it were what is 
unpleasant, he even weeps as it were. I see no good in this. 

vicchddayanti: unclothe, from the root chad, 
v. vicchdyayanti : tear to pieces. See B.U. TV. 3. 20. 

Even the dreaming self is subject to pleasure and pain. 

3. sa samit-pdnih punar rydya. tarn ha prajd-patir uvdca: 
maghavan, yac chdnta-hrdayah prdvrdjxh, kirn icchan punar dgama 
iti. sa hovdca , tad yady apidam , bhagavah, sariram andham 
bhavati, anandhah sa bhavati, yadi srdmam asrdmah, naivaiso* sya 
doscna dusyati. 

3. He came back again with fuel in hand to him. Prajd-pati 
said, ‘Desiring what, O Maghavan, have you come back since 
you went away with a tranquil heart ?’ Then he said, ‘Venerable 
Sir, even though this self is not blind (when the body) is blind, 
lame (when the body) is lame, even though he does not suffer 
defects from the defects of the body. 

4. na vadhenasya hanyate, ndsya srdmyena srdmah , ghnanti 
tv evainam vicchddayantiva apriyavcttaiva bhavati, api roditiva , 
ndham atra bhogyam pasydmiti, evam evaisa, maghavan, iti 
hovdca etam tv eva te bhuyo nuvydkhydsyami. vasdpardni 



VIII. ii. 2. Chdndogya Upanisad 507 

dvatrimsatam varsdniti. sa hdpardni dvatrimsatam varsdny uvdsa, 
tasmai hovdca. 

4. 'He is not slain (when the body) is slain. He is not lame 
(when the body) is lame, yet it is as if they kill him, as if they 
unclothe him. He comes to experience as it were what is 
unpleasant, he even weeps as it were. I see no good in this/ 
‘So is he indeed, O Maghavan/ said he (Praja-pati). ‘However, 
I will explain this further to you. Live with me another thirty- 
two years/ Then he lived with him another thirty-two years. 
To him he then said : 

In these two stages the self experiences either external or internal 
objects, but in the next stage the self exists without the experience 
of objects, external or internal. 


Section 11 

THE SELF IN SLEEP 

1. tad yatraitat suptali samastah samprasannah svapnam na 
vijdndti, csa dtmcti hovdca , dad amrtam abhayam dad brahmeti. 
sa ha sdnia-hrdayah pravavrdja , sa hdprdpyaiva dcvdn dad 
bhayam dadarsa , ndha khalv ayam evam sampraty dtmanam 
jdnati, ayam aham asmxti , no evemani bhiitdni , vindsam evapito 
bhavati , ndham atra bhogyam pasyamlti. 

1. When a man is asleep, composed, serene, and knows no 
dream, that is the self, said he, that is the immortal, the 
fearless. That is Brahman. Then he went forth with tranquil 
heart. Even before reaching the gods # he saw this danger. In 
truth this one does not know himself that ‘I am he/ nor indeed 
the things here. He has become one who has gone to 
annihilation. I see no good in this. 

Indra feels that if there are no objects of which we are conscious, 
even the subject becomes destroyed. 

2. sa samit-pdhih punar eydya. tarn ha prajd-patir uvdea , 
maghavan, yacchdnta-hr day ah prdvrdjih , kim icchan punar dgama 
iti. sa hovdca: ndha khalv ayam, bhagavah, evam sampraty 
atmdnam jdnati, ayam aham asmxti, no evemani bhutani. vindiam 
evapito bhavati, ndham atra bhogyam pasyamlti. 

2. He came back again \ ith fuel in hand. To him Prajd-pati 



508 The Principal Upanisads VIII. 12. 2. 

said, ‘Desiring what, 0 Maghavan, have you come back, since 
you went away with a tranquil heart?’ Then he said, ‘Venerable 
Sir, in truth this one does not know himself that I am he, nor 
indeed the things here. He has become one who has gone to 
annihilation. I see no good in this.’ 

The self is not the undifferenced consciousness of deep sleep. It 
is the false infinite. Quietistic trance is not final freedom. 

3. ez mm evaisa , maghavan , iti hovdca , clam tv eva te bhuyo' 
nuvydkhydsydmi , no evdnyatraitasmdt , vasdpardui panca var- 
sdniti. sa hdparani panca varsdny uvdsa. tdny eka-satam sam- 
pcduh. ctat tad yad, dhuh cka-satam , ha vai varsdini maghavan 
prajdpatau brahmacaryam uvdsa. tasmai hovdca. 

3. So is he, indeed, O Maghavan, said he. However, I will 
explain this further to you and there is nothing else besides 
this. Live with me for another five years. Then he lived with 
him for another five years. That makes one hundred and one 
years and so people say that, verily, for one hundred and one 
years Maghavan lived with Prajd~pati the disciplined life of a 
student of sacred knowledge. To him (Indra) ( Prajd-pati ) then 
said : 

there is nothing else besides this: it is the highest self. 


Section 12 

THE SELF AS SPIRIT 

1. maghavan , martyam vd idam sanram dittam mrtymid , tad 
asydmrtasydsarirasydtmano dhisthdnam, dtlo vai sasanrah, 
priydpriydbhydm } na vai sasanrasya satah priydpriyayor 
apahatir asti , asanram vd va santam na priydpriyc sprsatah. 

1. O Maghavan, mortal, verily, is this body. It is held by 
death. But it is the support of that deathless, bodiless self. 
Verily, the incarnate self is held by pleasure and pain. Verily, 
there is no freedom from pleasure and pain for one who is 
incarnate. Verily, pleasure and pain do not touch one who is 
bodiless. 

2. asariro vdytih, abhram, vidyut, stanayitnur asanrany etdni. 
tad yathaitany amusmdd dkdsdt samutthdya param jyotir npa- 
sampadya svena svena rupendbhinispadyante. 



VIII. 12. 6. Chdndogya Upanisad 5t>g 

2. Bodiless is air, clouds, lightning, thunder, these are bodi- 
less. Now as these, when they arise from yonder space and 
reach the highest light appear each with its own form. 

3. evam evaisa samprasddo’smdc chanrdt samutthdya param 
jyotir upasampadya svena rupendbhinispadyate , sa uttamah 
purusah , sa tatra parycti, jaksat kndan ramamanah stnbhir va 
ydnair va jhdlibhir va nopajanam smarann idam sanram: sa 
yathd prayogya acarane yuktah , evam evayam asmin Sartre 
prano yuktah. 

3. Even so that serene one when he rises up from this body 
and reaches the highest light appears in his own form. Such 
a person is the Supreme Person. There such a one moves about, 
laughing, playing, rejoicing with women, chariots or relations, 
not remembering the appendage of this body. As an animal 
is attached to a cart so is life attached to this body. 

The self enjoys those pleasures as an inward spectator only and 
does not identify itself with them. The spirit is joined to the body 
as a horse to the cart. The relation is external, dehddivilaksanam 
dtmano rupam. See S.B. IV. 4. 1. 

4. atha yatraitad dkasam anu visannam caksuh, sa cdksusah 
purusah darsandya caksuh; atha yo veda: idam jighrdniti , sa 
ditmd gandhdya gliranam , atha yo veda: idam abhivydhardmti 
sa ditmd , abhivyahdrdya vdk, atha yo veda; idam srnavdmti , sa 
dtmd , sravandya, srotram. 

4. Now when the eye is thus turned to space, that is the 
seeing person, the eye is for seeing. Now he knows ‘let me smell 
this/ that is the self, the nose is for smelling. Now he who knows 
‘let me utter this/ that is the self, the voice is for uttering. 
Now he who knows ‘let me hear this’ *that is the self, the ear 
is for hearing. 

The perceivcr is the self, the sense organs are the instruments for 
perception. 

5. atha yo veda; idam manvdniti sa dtmd, mano'sya daivam 
caksuh, sa va esa etena daivena caksusd manasaitdn kdmdin 
pasyan ruinate. * 

5. Now he who knows, let me think this, he is the self, the 
mind is his divine eye. He, verily, seeing these pleasures 
through his divine eye, the mind rejoices. 

6. ya etc brahma-loke tarn vd etam devd dtmdnam updsate , tasmdt 



5io The Principal Upanisads VIII. 13. 1. 

tesdm sarve ca loka attah sarve ca kamdh, sa sarvdms ca lokdn 
apnoti sarvdms ca kdmdn } yas tam dtmdnam anuvidya vijdndti , 
iti ha prajapatir uvaca, prajdpatir nvdca. 

6. Verily, these gods who are in the Brahma-world meditate 
on that self. Therefore all worlds and all desires are held by 
them. He obtains all worlds and all desires who finds the self 
and understands it. Thus spoke Prajd-pati , yea, thus spoke 
Prajd-pati. 

dttdh: held, obtained, praptdh. 

In this account we have a progressive spiritualisation of the idea 
of self. The highest knowledge is not to be snatched at one leap. 
It is acquired as the result of methodical endeavour, steady deepen- 
ing of the mind. The essence of the psychical self consists in a 
directedness to the object of consciousness, its intentionality . We 
begin with the physical individual, the sensuous outlook, the 
demoniacal view. Slowly there is the inturning of the mind, a direction 
to the phenomena of dream and dreamless sleep. Introspection is 
guided towards the idea of the self. Atman is the highest self. The 
journey ends in pure spirit, the subject of knowledge which is 
continuous despite the shutting off of consciousness, which is 
exalted above waking and sleeping. 


Section 13 

A P/EAN OF THE PERFECTED SOUL 

1. sydmdic chabalani prapadyc , sabaldc chydniam prapadye 
asva iva romdni vidhuya pdpam t candra iva rdhor mukhdt 
pramneya dhfitva sariram, akrtam krtdtmd brahmalokam abhi- 
sambhavdmi , abhisambhavdmi. 

1. From the dark I pass to the vari-coloured ; from the vari- 
coloured I pass to the dark. Shaking off evil as a horse his 
hairs, shaking off the body as the moon frees itself from the 
mouth of Rahu, I a perfected soul obtain the uncreated Brahma- 
world, yea, I obtain it. 

The sun and the moon are treated as the dogs of Yama, £yama 
the moon dog and Sabala the sun dog. We must run past these two 
heavenly bodies coursing across the sky to get to the blessed abode 
of light. See alsoK.U. I. 2. 2. In the R.V. it is said that Yama sends 
forth two dogs, his messengers who search out among men those 



VIII. 15- i. Chdndogya Upanisad 51 1 

who have to join the Fathers: X. 14. 10-12, Pluto’s house has a 
janitor. 

In Indian mythology a lunar eclipse is caused by the demon 
Rahu’s attempt to swallow the moon. 


Section 14 

THE PRAYER OF A SEEKER FOR ETERNAL LIFE 

1. dkdso vai ndma tubna-ru payor nirvahitd , te yad antard, tad 
brahma , tad amrtam , sa dtmd, prajd-pateh sabhdm vesma prapadye t 
yaso ’ ham bhavdmi brdhmandndm , yaso rdjndm , visdm 

yaso’ ham amiprdpatsi: sa hdham yasasdm yasah: syctam adatkam 
adatkam syctam lindu mdbhigdim , lindu mdbhigam. 

1. Verily, what is called space is the determined of name 
and form. That within which they are is the Brahman, that 
is the immortal, that is the self. I pass to Prajd-pati’s assembly- 
hall and abode. I am the glory of the Brahmanas, the glory 
of the princes, the glory of the people. I have obtained glory. 
I am the glory of the glories. May I never go to the white, 
toothless, to the toothless, white, devouring, may I never go 
to it. 

akdsa: space. It is used as a name of the Supreme, because like 
space, Brahman has no body and is subtle : asarlratvdt suksmatvac 
ca. S. 

Brahman is untouched by concrete existences though they are all 
sustained by it. 

The three castes of Brahmana, raj an and vis, are mentioned here. 
mdbhigam: mdbhigaccheyam. S. 


Section 15 

PARTING ADVICE TO THE PUPIL 

1. tadd haitad brahma prajdpataya uvdca , prajd-patir manave, 
manuh prajdbhyah. dcarya-kuldd vedam adhitya yathd-vidhdnam , 
gnroh karma (krtvd) atiscsena abhisamdvrtya , kutumbe sthitvd , 
sucau dese svddhydyam adhijdnali , dhdrmikdn vidadhat, ditmani 

R* 



512 The Principal Upanisads VIII. 15. 1. 

sarvendriyani sampratisthdpya, ahimsan sarva-bhutany anyatra 
tirthcbhyah, sa klialv cvarii vartayan ydvad dyusam brahma-lokam 
abhisampadyatc, na ca punar dvartatc, na ca punar avartate. 

1. This Brahma told to Prajii-pati, Prajd-paii to Manu, Manu 
to mankind. He who has learned the Veda from the family 
of a teacher according to rule, in the time left over from doing 
work for the teacher, he, who after having come back again, 
settles down in a home of his own, continues the study of what 
he has learnt and has virtuous sons, he who concentrates all 
his senses in the self, who practises non-hatred to all creatures 
except at holy places, he who behaves thus throughout his 
life reaches the Brahma-world, does not return hither again, 
yea, he does not return hither again. 

dhdrmikd: virtuous sons and pupils: 
putran sisydms ca dharma-yuhtdn. 

anyatra tirthcbhyah: except at holy places. §. makes out that even 
travelling as a mendicant causes pain, but a mendicant is allowed 
to beg for alms at sacred places, bhiksd-nimittam afanddinapi 
parapidd syat. 



AITAREYA UP AN IS AD 


The Aitareya Upanisad belongs to the Rg Veda and the 
Upanisad proper consists of three chapters. This is part of the 
Aitareya Aranyaka, and the Upanisad begins with the Fourth 
Chapter of the second Aranyaka, and comprises Chapters IV, 
V and VI. The preceding parts deal with sacrificial ceremonies 
like the mahdvrata and their interpretations. It is the purpose 
of the Upanisad to lead the mind of the sacrificer away from 
the outer ceremonial to its inner meaning. All true sacrifice 
is inward. £ points out that there are three classes of men 
who wish to acquire wisdom. The highest consists of those who 
have turned away from the world, whose minds are freed and 
collected, who are eager for freedom. For these the Upanisad 
(Aitareya Aranyaka II. 4-6) is intended. There are others who 
wish to become free gradually by attaining to the world of 
Hiranya-garbha. For them the knowledge and worship of prana, 
life-breath is intended. (Aitareya Aranyaka II. 1-3). There are 
still others who care only for worldly possessions. For them the 
meditative worship of the Sariihitd is intended. (Aitareya 
Aranyaka III). 1 

1 SccS on Aitareya Aranyaka ITT. 1. i. 



INVOCATION 


I. van me manasi pratisthitd, mano me vdei pratisthitam; dvir 
dvtr ma edhi: vedasya ma amsthah. srutam me md prahasih. 
anenadhitendhordtrdn samdadhdmy, rtarii vadisydmi. satyam 
vadisydmi: tan main avatu, tad vaktdram avatu, avatu mdm, 
avatn vaktdram, avatu vaktdram. Ainu, sdntih, sdntih, sdntih. 

i. My speech is well established in my mind. My mind is 
well established in my speech. 0 Thou manifest one, be manifest 
for me. Be a nail for my Veda. Do not let go my learning. By 
this that has been studied, I maintain days and nights. I will 
speak of the right. I will speak of the true. May that protect me. 
May that protect the speaker. Let that protect me. Let that 
protect the speaker. Let that protect the speaker. Atm, peace, 
peace, peace. 

be a nail: let the spirit of the Scriptures be constantly present. 



I. i. 4. Aitareya Upanisad ^15 

CHAPTER I 

Section 1 

THE CREATION OF THE COSMIC PERSON 

1. dtmd vd idam cka cvdgra asit , ndnyat kin cana misat. sa 
aiksata lokdn nu srjd iti. 

1. The self, verily, was (all) this, one only, in the beginning. 
Nothing else whatsoever winked. He thought, ‘let me now 
create the worlds/ 

See B.U. I. 4. 1. 

idam: (all) this, the manifested universe. 

one only: Everything is derived from atman to which there is no 
second. 

* Nothing else whatsoever winked / This is by way of refutation of 
the Sdmkhya dualism. The non-being of matter which is assumed 
for explaining creation is not external to the Supreme. 

2. sa imdthl lokdn asrjata , ambho martetr maram apo'do'mbhah 
parena divam; dyauh pratistha, antariksam mancayah , prthivi 
maro ya adhastdt td dpah. 

2. He created these worlds, water, light rays, death and the 
waters. This water is above the heaven. The heaven is its 
support. The light rays are the atmosphere. Death is the earth. 
What are beneath, they are the waters. 

Earth is called mara or death, because all beings on earth die. 
mriyante asmin bhutdni. 

‘Although the woilds are composed of the five elements, still 
from the preponderance of water, they arc called by names meaning 
water such as ambhas, etc/ S. • 

3. sa Tksata ime nu lokd, loka-pdldn nu srjd iti ; so dbhya eva 
purusam sa muddhrtya m urchayat. 

3. He thought, ‘Here then are the worlds. Let me now create 
the guardians of the worlds/ From the waters themselves, he 
drew forth the person and gave him a shape. 

4. tain abhyatapat. tasydbhitaptasya mukham nirabhidyata 
yathdndain: mukhdd vdg, vdco'gnir ndsike nirabhidyetdm , ndsikd- 
bhydm prdnah , prdndd vayuli, aksim nirabhidyetdm, aksibhydm 
caksnh, caksusa ddityah, karnau nirabhidyetdm, karndbhyam 
srotram, srotrdd disah, tvah nirabhidyata, tvaco lomdini, lomabhya 
osadhi-vanaspatayah , hrdai am nirabhidyata hr day an manah , 



516 The Principal Upanisads I. 2. 3. 

manasas candramah, ndbhir nirabhidvata % nabhyd apdnah, apanan 
mrtynh , sisnam nirabhidyata, iisnad retah , retasa dpah. 

4. He brooded over him. Of him who has thus been brooded 
over, the mouth was separated out, like an egg. From the 
mouth speech, from speech fire. The nostrils were separated 
out: from the nostrils breath, from breath air. The eyes were 
separated out: from the eyes sight, from sight the sun. The 
ears were separated out : from the ears hearing and from hearing 
the quarters of space. The skin was separated out: from the 
skin the hairs, from the hairs plants and trees. The heart was 
separated out: from the heart the mind and from the mind, 
the moon. The navel was separated out: from the navel, the 
outbreath, from the outbreath death. The generative organ 
was separated out : from it semen, from semen water. 

like an egg: as is the case with an egg when it is hatched: yatha 
paksinah andam nirbhidyatc evam. §. 


Section 2 

THE COSMIC POWERS IN THE HUMAN PERSON 

1. td eta devatdh srstd asmin mahaty arnavc prapatan tam 
a sandy a- p ipasdbhy dm anvavdrjat; td cnam abruvann, dyatanam 
nah prajdnihi yasmin pratisthitd annum addim cti. 

1. These divinities thus created fell into this great ocean. 
(The self) subjected that (person) to hunger and thirst. They 
said to him (the creator), 'Find out for us an abode, wherein 
established we may eat food.’ 

drnave: in the ocean: samsdra is generally compared to an ocean. 
samsdrdrnave , samsdra-samttdre . S. 
prdpatan: fell, patitavatyah. $. 

2. tdibhyo gam dnayat td abnivan, na vai no' yam alam iti. tdbhyo 
*svam dnayat td abnivan , na vai no' yam alam iti. 

2. For them, he brought a cow. They said, ‘Indeed this is 
not enough for us/ For them he brought a horse. They said, 
‘Indeed this is not enough for us/ 

gam: gavdkrtivisistam pindam. S. 

3. tdbhyah pnrusam dnayat td abnivan , sukrtam bateti. puruso 
vd va sukrtam , td abravid, yathdyatanam pravisateti . 



I. 3 2. Aitar ey a Upanisad 5^7 

3. For them he brought a person. They said, ‘Well done 
indeed/ A person verily is (what is) well done. He said to them, 
‘enter into your respective abodes/ 

4. agnir vag bhutvd mukham prdviiad, vayuh prclno bhutvd 
nasike pravisad , adityas caksur bhutvdksini pravisad , disah 
srotram bhutvd karnau prdvisann, osadhi-vanaspatayo lomdni 
bhutvd tvacam prdvisams candvamd mano bhutvd hrdayam 
prdvisan, mrtyur apano bhutvd ndbhim pravisad , dpo reto bhutvd 
sisnam prdvisan. 

4. Fire, becoming speech, entered the mouth. Air becoming 
breath, entered the nostrils. The sun, becoming sight, entered 
the eyes. The quarters of space, becoming hearing, entered the 
ears. Plants and trees, becoming hairs, entered the skin. The 
moon, becoming the mind, entered the heart. Death, becoming 
the outbreath, entered the navel : water becoming semen entered 
the generative organ. 

5. tam asandyd-pipdse abrutdm dvdbhydm abhiprajdnihiti . te 
abravit, etdsv eva vdtn devatdsvdbhajdmy , ctdsu bhaginyau karo- 
miti: tasmdd yasyai kasyai ca devatdyai havir grhyate bhdginyd 
vevdsydm asandyd-pipdse bhavatali. 

5. To him (the creator), hunger and thirst said, ‘For us (also) 
find out an abode/ He said to them, ‘I assign you a place in 
these divinities and make you sharers with them. Therefore 
to whatever divinity an offering is made, hunger and thirst 
become partakeis in it. 


Section 3 

THE CREATION OF FOOD AND THE INABILITY OF 
VARIOUS PERSONAL FUNCTIONS TO GET AT IT 

1. sa iksataime nu lokas ca loka-pdlds ednnam cbhyah srjd iti. 

1. He thought, ‘Here are the worlds and the guardians of 
the worlds. Let me create food for them/ 

2. so' po'bhyatapat: tdbhyo'bhitaptabhyo murtir ajdyata, yd vai 
sd murtir ajayatdnnam vai tat. 

2. He brooded over the waters and from the waters so 
brooded over issued a form. That whichever was pioduced as 
that form is, verily, food. 



518 The Principal Upanisads I. 3. 8. 

3. tad enad abhisrstam parahtyajighdmsat: tad vdcdjighrksat 
tan nasaknod vacd grahitum; sa yad hainad vacagrahaisyad 
abhivydhrtya haivdnnam atrapsyat. 

3. This, so created wished to flee away. (The person) sought 
to seize it with speech. He was not able to take hold of it by 
speech. If, indeed, he had taken hold of it by speech, even 
with speech, one would have had the satisfaction of food. 

By merely talking of food, one will not be satisfied. 
ajighrksat: sought to seize, grahitum aicchat. £. 
atrapsyat: would have had satisfaction, trpto'bhavisyat. £. 

4. tat prdnendjighrksat , tan ndsuknot prdnena grahitum; sa 
yad hainat prdnendgrahaisyad abhiprdnya haivdnnam atrapsyat. 

4. (The person) sought to seize it with breath. He was not 
able to take hold of it by breath. If, indeed, he had taken hold 
of it by breath, even with breath one would have had the 
satisfaction of food. 

By merely breathing toward food, no satisfaction of the appetite 
is possible. 

5. tac caksusdjighrksat, tan ndsaknoc caksusd grahitum , sayad 
hainac caksusdgrahaisyad drstvd haivdnnam atrapsyat. 

5. (The person) sought to seize it with sight. He was not 
able to take hold of it by sight. If, indeed, he had taken hold 
of it by sight, even with the sight (of food) one would have 
had the satisfaction of food. 

6. tac chrotrendjighrksat, tan ndsaknoc chrotrcna grahitum; sa 
yad hainac chrotrendgrahaisyac chrutvd haivdnnam atrapsyat. 

6. (The person) sought to seize it with hearing. He was not 
able to take hold of it by hearing. If indeed, he had taken hold 
of it by hearing, even with the hearing (of food), one would 
have had the satisfaction of food. 

7. tat tvacajighrksat , tan ndsuknot tvacd grahitum; sa yad 
hainat tvaedgrahaisyat sprstvd haivdnnam atrapsyat. 

7. (The person) sought to seize it by the skin. He was not 
able to take hold of it by the skin. If, indeed, he had taken 
hold of it by the skin, even with the skin (i.e. by touching food) 
one would have had the satisfaction of food. 

8 . tan manasajighrksat , tan ndsaknon manasd grahitum; sa 
yad hainan manasd grahaisy ad dhydtvd haivdnnam atrapsyat. 

8. (The person) sought to seize it by the mind. He was not 



I. 3. 12. Aitareya Upanisad £19 

able to take hold of it by the mind. If, indeed, he had taken 
hold of it by the mind, even with the mind (i.e. by thinking of 
food), one would have had the satisfaction of food. 

9. tac chisncndjighrksat , tan ndiaknoc chisnena grahitum; sa 
yad hainac chisnendgrahaisyad visrjya haivdnnam atrapsyat . 

9. (The person) sought to see it by the generative organ. 

He was not able to take hold of it by the generative organ. 

If, indeed, he had taken hold of it by the generative organ, 

even by emission one would have had the satisfaction of food. 

10. tad apdnenajighrksat , tad avayat, saiso* nnasya graho yad 
vdyur annayur vd esa yad vdynh. 

10. Then, the person, sought to seize it by the out-breath. 
He got it. The grasper of food is what air is. This one living 
on food, is, verily, what air is. 

anndyuh: anna-bandhano anna-jzvano vai prasiddhah . £. 

THE ENTRANCE OF THE SELF INTO THE BODY 

XI. sa iksata: katham nvidam madrte sydd iti. sa iksata, kat arena 
prapadyd iti. sa iksata , yadi vdcdbhivyahrtam; yadi prdnendbhi - 
pranitam , yadi caksusd drstam, yadi srotrena Srutam, yadi tvaca 
sprstam, yadi manasd dhydtam , yady apdnendbhyapdnitam, yadi 
sisnena visysfam, atha koham iti. 

11. He thought, How can this food exist without me? He 
thought, through what (way) shall I enter it? He thought 
(again), If speaking is through speech, if breathing is through 
breath, if seeing is through the eyes, hearing is through the 
ears, if touching is through the skin, if meditation is through 
the mind, if breathing out is through *the outbreath, if emission 
is through the generative organ, then who am I? 

Speech, etc., are effects and serve a master. The body is like a 
city and there must be a lord of the city: kdrya-kdrana-siuiu^hdta-lak - 
sanam ptiram. It is for the enjoyer, svamy-artham. So the enjoyer 
must enter the body. So the question is raised, ‘through what way 
shall I enter it?' ‘The forepart of the foot and the crown of the 
head are the two* ways of entrance into this body, the collection of 
several parts. By which of these two ways shall I enter this city, 
this bundle of causes and effects?' £. 

12. sa etam eva simdnam viddvyaitaydi dvdrdi prdpadyata , 
saisd vidrtir ndma dvdh, tad etan ndndanam; tasya traya diva - 



520, The Principal Upanisads I. 3. 14. 

sathds trayah svapndh , ayam dvasatho'yam dvasatho'yam dvasatha 
iti. 

12. After opening that very end (of the head), by that way 
he entered. This is the opening known as vidrti. This is the 
pleasing. For that, there are three abodes; three kinds of 
dreams as: this is the abode; this is the abode; this is the abode. 

siman: the very end (of the head), the saggital suture. This is the 
highest centre of spiritual consciousness, called the sahasra, the 
thousand-petalled lotus. It is said to be situated in the centre of the 
brain: 

sa srastesvara etani eva murdhasimdnam kesa-vibhdgdvasdnam 
viddrya cchidram krtvd etaydi dvdrd mdrgcna imam lokam kdrya- 
kdrana-samghdtam prapadyata pravivesa. S. 

three kinds of drems: Reference is to the three conditions of waking, 
dream and deep sleep of the Mdndukya U. The ordinary condition 
of waking is said to be a dream as distinguished from the state of 
enlightenment. 

§ explains that the right eye is the abode during the waking 
state: the inner mind (antar-manas) during dream and the space 
of the heart ( hrdaydkasa ) during profound sleep. He offers an 
alternative interpretation. The three abodes are the body of one’s 
father, the womb of one’s mother and one’s own body. 

13. sa jdto bhutany abhivyaikhyat kim ihdnyam vavadisad iti t 
sa etam eva purusam brahma tatamam apasyat , idam adarsam iti. 

13. He, being born, perceived the created beings, what else 
here would one desire to speak? He perceived this very person 
Brahman all-pervading, ‘I have seen this,’ he said. 

tatamam: all-pervading, takarenaikena luptena tatatamam, vydptata - 
mam paripurnam akdsavat. S. 

14. tasmdd idandro ndrnedandro ha vai ndma tam idandram 
santam indra ity dcaksate paroksena , paroksa-priyd iva hi devdh. 

14. Therefore his name is Idandra. Indeed, Idandra is the 
name. Of him who is Idandra , they speak indirectly (cryptically) 
as Indra. Gods appear indeed to be fond of the cryptic. 

idandra: the perceiver of this. 

indra: is a word denoting an object beyond the rapge of vision. 



II. 1. 4. 


Aitareya Upanisad 


# 52i 


CHAPTER II 

THREE BIRTHS OF THE SELF 

1. puruse ha vd ay am ddito garbho bhavati , yad etad retas tad 
etat sarvebhyo’ngcbhyas tejah sambhutam, dtmany cvatmdnam 
vibharti, tad yatha striyam sihcaty athainaj janayati, tad asya 
prathamam janma. 

1. In a person, indeed, this one first becomes an embryo. 
That which is semen is the vigour come together from all the 
limbs. In the self, indeed, one bears a self. When he sheds this 
in a woman, he then gives it birth. That is its first birth. 

2. tat striyd atmabhuyam gacchati, yatha svam ahgam tatha , 
tasmad enam na hinasti, sdsyaitam atmdnam atra gatam 
bhavayati. 

2. It becomes one with the woman, just as a limb of her 
own. Therefore it does not hurt her. She nourishes this self of 
his that has come into her. 

bhavayati: nourishes, vardhayati, paripalayati §. 

3. sa bhavayatri bhdvayitavya bhavati, tarn stn gavbham 
vibharti , so’gra cva kumdram janmano’ grc dhi bhavayati , sa yat 
kumaram janmano gre dhibhdvayaty atmdnam cva tad bhdvayaty 
esam lokdnam samtatya evam samtatd hime lokdh , tad asya 
dvitiyam janma. 

3. She, being the nourisher, should be nourished. The woman 
bears him as an embryo. He nourishes the child before birth 
and after the birth. While he nourishes the child before birth 
and after the birth, he thus nourishes his own self, for the 
continuation of these worlds; for thus are these worlds con- 
tinued. This is one’s second birth. 

ogre: before (birth), prdg jamnanah. S. 
adhi: after (birth), urdhvam janmanah. S. 

atmdnam: his own self. The father is said to be born as the son. 
pitur atmaiva hi putra-rupena jdyate. §. 

4. so’sydyam • dtma punyebliyah karmabhyah pratidhlyate, 
athdsydyam itara dtma krta-krtyo vayo-gatah praiti, sa itah 
prayann cva punar jdyate, tad asya trtiyam janma. tad nktam 
Ysind. 

4. He (the son) who is one self of his (father) is made his 
substitute for (performing) pious deeds. Then the other self of 



522 The Principal Upanisads II. i. 6. 

his (father’s) having accomplished his work, having reached 
his age, departs. So departing hence, he is, indeed, bom again. 
That is his third birth. That has been stated by the seer. 

prayann eva: departing, sariram parityajann eva. $. 

5. garbhc nu sawn anvcsdtn avedam aharii dcvdndm janimdni 
visvd, 

satam md pur a dyasir araksann aghah sycno javasa nira- 
dlyam 

iti, garbha cvaitac chaydno vdma-deva evam uvdea. 

5. ‘While I was in the womb, I knew all the births of the 
gods. A hundred strongholds made of steel guarded me. I burst 
out of it, with the swiftness of a hawk.’ Vama-deva spoke this 
verse even when he was lying in the womb. 

6. sa cvatii vidvdn aswdc chanrn-bhcddd Ftrdhva utkramy- 
amusmin svarge lokc sarvdn kdmdn dptvdmrtah samabhavat, 
samabhavat. 

6. He, knowing thus and springing upward, when the body 
is dissolved, enjoyed all desires in that world of heaven and 
became immortal, yea, became (immortal). 



III. I. 3. 


Aitareya Upanisad 


523 


CHAPTER III 

I. ko'yam atmcti vayam updsmahe, katarah sa atmd , yena vd 
pasyati, yena vd srnoti , yena vd gandhdn djighrati, yena vd vacant 
vyakaroti, yena vd svddu casvddu ca vijdndti. 

1. ‘Who is this one?’ ‘We worship him as the self.’ ‘Which 
one is the self?' ‘He by whom one sees, or by whom one hears, 
or by whom one smells odours, or by whom one articulates 
speech or by whom one discriminates the sweet and the unsweet/ 

Another reading will give ‘Who is he whom we worship as the 
self? Which one is the self? He by whom . . .’ 

2. yad etad hrdayam manas caitat, samjhdnam djndnam 
vijndnam prajndnam medhd drstir dhrtir matir mantsa jutih 
smrtih samkalpah kratur asuh kdmo vasa iti sarvany evaitdni 
prajhdnasya mhna-dheydni bhavanti. 

2. That which is heart, this mind, that is consciousness, 
perception, discrimination, intelligence, wisdom, insight, stead- 
fastness, thought, thoughtfulness, impulse, memory, concep- 
tion, purpose, life, desire, control, all these, indeed, are names 
of intelligence. 

Here we find a classification of various mental functions, the 
different kinds of perception, conception, intuition as well as feeling 
and will. 

3. esa brahmaisa indr a , esa prajd-patir etc savve devd imdni 
ca paiica mahdbhuldni , prthivT vdyuv dkdsa dpo jyothhslty etdnT- 
mcini ca ksudra-misrdnlva, bijdnltardni cetardni cdndajdni ca 
jdrujdni ca svedajdni codbhijjdni cdsvd gdvah purusa Jtastino yat 
kin cedam prdni jangamam ca patntri ca yac ca sthdvaram , 
sarvam tat prajild-nctram prajndne pratisthitam, prajiid-netro 
lokah prajnd pratisthd, prajndnam brahma. 

3. He is Brahma, he is Indra; he is Prajd-pati , he is all these 
gods; and these five great elements, namely, earth, air, ether, 
water, light; these things and these which are mingled of the 
fire, as it were, the seeds of one sort and another; those born 
from an egg, and those born from a womb, and those born 
from sweat, and those born from a sprout; horses, cows, persons 
and elephants, whatever breathing thing there is here, whether 
moving or flying or what is stationary. All this is guided by 
intelligence, is established in intelligence. The world is guided by 
intelligence. The support is intelligence. Brahma is intelligence. 



524 The Principal Upanisads III. i. 4. * 

brahma: hiranya-garbhah pranah prajhatmd. 
prajd-patih: yah prathamajah sarin. 

Intelligence is said to be the basis of all existence and the final 
reality. We see here the anticipations of the Buddhist Vijnanavada. 

4. sa etcna pnijhcndimandsmdl lokdd utkramydmusmin svarge 
loke sarvdn human dptvdmrtah samabhavat, samabhavat. 

4. He, with this intelligent self, soared upward from this 
world and having enjoyed all desires in that world of heaven 
became immoital, yea became (immortal), 

he: the sage Vama-deva. 



TAITTIRlYA UPANISAD 


The Taitiinya Upanisad belongs to the Taittiriya school of the 
Yajur Veda. It is divided into three sections called Vallis. The 
first is the Siksa Vatti. Siksa is the first of the six Veddngas 
(limbs or auxiliaries of the Veda) ; it is the science of phonetics 
and pronunciation. The second is the Brahmdnanda V alii and 
the third is the Bhrgu Vatti. These two deal with the knowledge 
of the Supreme Self, paramdtma-jhdna. 




I. 2. 2. Taittinya Upanisad 527 

SlKSA VALLI 

CHAPTER I 
Section 1 
INVOCATION 

1. harih aum. sum no mitras sam varunah, sam no bhavaty 
aryamd, sam na indro brhaspatih , sam no visnur uru-kramah; 
namo brahmane , namas te vdyo , pratyaksam brahmdsi, 

tvam eva pratyaksam brahma vadisydmi , vadisydmi, satyam 
vadisydmi; 

tan mam avatu, tad vaktdram avatu , warn, vaktdram, 

aum sdntih sdntih sdntih. 

1. Aum, May Mitra (the sun) be propitious to us; may 
Varuna (be) propitious (to us). May Aryaman (a form of the 
sun) be propitious to us; May Indra and Brhaspati be propitious 
to us; May Visnu, of wide strides, be propitious to us. 

Salutation to Brahma. Salutation to thee, 0 Vayu. Thou, 
indeed, art the visible (perceptible) Brahman. Of thee, indeed, 
the perceptible Brahman, will I speak. I will speak of the right. 
I will speak of the true ; may that protect me ; may that protect 
the speaker. Let that protect me ; let that protect the speaker. 
Aum, peace, peace, peace. 

This is the first section. It is an invocation to God to remove the 
obstacles in the way of attaining spiritual wisdom, parci-vidydm 
drabhamdno vighna-sdntyai devatdh prdrthayate . R. 

See R.V. I. 90. 9. 

uru-kramah: of wide strides, vistirna-kramah. S. It is a reference to 
Visnu's incarnation as T rivikranm or Vdthana whose strides were wide. 
Sdnti or peace is repeated thrice, with reference to ddhydtmika , 
ddhiblumtika and ddhidaivika aspects. S. 


Section 2 

LESSON ON PRONUNCIATION 

2. siksdm vydkhydsydmah: varnas svarah, mdtra balam, sdma 
santdnah , ity uktas itksddhydyah. 

2. We will expound pronunciation, letters or sounds, pitch, 



52& The Principal Upanisads I. 3. 2. 

quantity, force or stress, articulation, combination. Thus has 
been declared the lesson on pronunciation. 

One must learn to recite the text of the Upanisads carefully 
and so a lesson in pronunciation is given. We must learn the text 
before we can ascertain its meaning: vastupdsanam hitvd prathamatah 
sabdopdsana-vidhdnc. A. 


Section 3 

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF COMBINATIONS 

1. saha nan yasah, saha nau brahma-varcasam; athd tat 
samhitdyd a pan i sad am vydkhydsydmali; 

paheasv adhikaranesu, adhilokam , adhijyotisam, adliividyam , 
adhiprajam , adhydtmam: da mahdsamhitd ity dcaksate; 

athadhilokam, prthivT pdrva-riipam,dyaur uttara-rupam , akdsas 
sandhill , vdyus samdhdnam: ity adhilokam. 

1. May glory be with us both, may the splendour of Brahma- 
knowledge be with us both. 

Now next we will expound the sacred teaching of combina- 
tion under five heads, with regard to the world, with regard 
to the luminaries, with regard to knowledge, with regard to 
progeny, with regard to oneself. These are great combinations, 
they say. 

Now with regard to the world : the earth is the prior form, 
the heaven the latter form, the ether is their junction, the air 
is the connection. Thus with regard to the world. 

brahma-varcasam: the splendour of brahma-knowledge. In Lalita- 
vistara we are told that when the Buddha was in samddhi, a ray called 
the ornament of the light of gnosis moved above his head, jhdna- 
lokalahkdram ndma rasmih. Cp. B.G. XIV. 11. 
sariihitd: a conjunction of two words or letters of the text. The mind 
of the pupil is directed to the symbolic significance. 

Master and disciple pray that the light of sacred knowledge may 
illumine them both, that they both may attain the glory of wisdom. 

2. athddhijyautisam: agnih purva-riipam, dditya uttara-rupam , 
apas sandhih t vaidyutas samdhdnam: ity adhijyautisam. 

2. Now as to the luminaries; fire is the prior form, sun the 
latter form. Water is their junction, lightning is the connection. 
Thus with regard to the luminaries. 



I. 4. r. Taittinya Upanisad *529 

3. athadhividyam: dcaryah purva-rupam , antevdsy uttara- 
rupam , wdlyi sandhih , pravacanas samdhanam: ity adhividyam. 

3. Now as to knowledge: the teacher is the prior form; the 
pupil is the latter form, knowledge is their junction; instruction 
is the connection. Thus with regard to knowledge. 

Patanjali in his Mahdbhasya (Kiclhorn’s ed., p. 6) says there are 
four steps or stages through which knowledge becomes fruitful. 
The first is when we acquire it from the teacher, the second when 
we study it, the third when we teach it to others and the fourth 
when we apply it. Real knowledge arises only when these four 
stages are fulfilled: caturbhis ca prakdrair vidyopayuktd bhavaty 
dgama-kdlcna svddhydya-kalena pravacana-kdlcna vyavahdra-kaleneti. 

4. athddhiprajam: mdtd purva-rupam , pitottara-rupam praja 
sandhih , prajananas samdhanam. ity adhiprajam. 

4. Now with regard to progeny: the mother is the prior form, 
the father is the latter form: progeny is their junction, pro- 
creation is the connection. Thus with regard to progeny. 

5. athddhydtmam: adhard-hanuh purva-rupam, uttara-hanur 
uttara-rupam , vdk sandhih , jihvd samdhanam: ity adhydtmam. 

5. Now with regard to the self: the lower jaw is the prior 
form, the upper jaw is the latter form, speech is the junction, 
the tongue is the connection. Thus with regard to the self. 

6 . itima mahdsamhitdh, ya evam eta mahdsamhitd vyakhydta 
veda samdhiyate prajaya paiubhih, brahma-varcasendnnddyena 
suvargena lokena. 

6. These are the great combinations. He who knows these 
great combinations thus expounded becomes endowed with 
offspring, cattle, with the splendoui of Brahma — knowledge, 
with food to eat, and with the heavenly world. 

He will prosper here and hereafter. 


Section 4 

A TEACHER'S PRAYER 

1. yas chandasdm rsabho visva-rupah chandobhyo’ dhyamriat 
sambabhuva 

sa mendro medhayd spriuu 'u amrtasya deva dhdrano bhuyasam. ■ 



53 °* The Principal Upanisads I. 4. 2. 

sanram me vicarsanam , jihva me madhumattama , karnabhyam 
bhuri visruvam , brahmanah koso’si medhayapihitah , srutam me 
gopdya . 

1. May that Indra who is the greatest in the Vedic hymns, 
who is of all forms, who has sprung into being from immortal 
hymns, may he cheer me with intelligence, O God, may I be 
the possessor of immortality. 

May my body be very vigorous ; may my tongue be exceeding 
sweet; may I hear abundantly with my ears. Thou art the 
sheath of Brahman , veiled by intelligence. Guard for me what 
I have heard. 

This is a prayer for acquiring retentivcncss and for physical and 
moral health. 

The syllable aum is pre-eminent among the Vedic hymns. It is 
‘of all forms’ as the whole universe is its manifestation. ‘Of Brahman , 
of the Paramatman or the Highest Self, Thou art the sheath, as 
of a sword, being the seat of His manifestation.’ $. 
madhumattama: exceeding sweet, madhumati , atisaycna madhura- 
bhdsinl. 

2. dvahanti vilanvdnd , kurvdndcxram dtmanah vdsamsi mama 
gdvas ca annapdne ca sarvadd tato me sriyam dvaha lomaiam 
pasubhis saha svdhd. a mdiyantu brahmaedrinah svdha, vi mayantu 
brahmaedrinas svdhd , pra mayantu brahmacarinas svdhd , da 
mayantu brahmaedrinas svdhd , sa mayantu brahmaedrinas svdhd. 

2. Bringing to me and increasing always clothes and cattle, 
food and drink, doing this long, do thou, then, bring to me 
prosperity in wool along with cattle. May students of sacred 
knowledge come to me from every side. Hail. May students 
of sacred knowledge come to me variously. Hail. May students 
of sacred knowledge come to me well equipped. Hail. May 
students of sacred knowledge come to me self-controlled. Hail. 
May students of sacred knowledge come to me peaceful. Hail. 

aciram: soon, presently, aclram, ksipram eva. S. 

To the undisciplined, wealth is a source of evil: amedhaso hi 
srlr anarthayaiveti. £. Not so to the disciplined. What matters is not 
the possession or non-possession of wealth but tb|e attitude to it. 
We may possess wealth and be indifferent to it ; we may possess no 
wealth and yet be concerned with securing it by any means. There 
is no worship of poverty. 

Vasistha tells Rama: — 

dhanam drjaya kdkutstha dhanamulam idam jagat 
antaram nabhijanami nirdhanasya mrtasya ca. 



!• 4- 3- Taittinya Upanisad ^31 

Acquire wealth. This world has for its root wealth. I do not sec the 
difference between a poor man and a dead one. 

3 . yaso janesdni svdhd , sveydn vasyaso'sdni svdhd , turn tvd 
bhaga pravisdni svdhd, sa ma, bhaga, pravisa svdhd, tasmin saha - 
sra-sakhe ni bhagaham tvayi mrje svdhd, yathdpah pravata yanti , 
yathd masd aharjaram, evarii mam brahmacarinah, dhdtardyantu 
sarvatas svdhd, prativeso'si pra ma bhdhi pra ma padyasva. 

3 . May I become famous among men. Hail. 

May I be more renowned than the very rich. Hail. 

Into thee thyself, 0 Gracious Lord, may I enter. Hail. 

Do thou thyself, 0 Gracious Lord, enter into me. Hail. 

In that self of thine, of a thousand branches, O Gracious 
Lord, am I cleansed. Hail. 

As waters run downward, as months into the year, so 
into me, may students of sacred knowledge come, 

0 Disposer of all, come from every side. Hail. 

Thou art a refuge, to me do thou shine forth; unto me 
do thou come. 

of a thousand branches: the different hynms and the gods meant by 
them are varied expressions of the Divine One. 
pravisdmi: I enter. The knowledge of God is said to be a penetration 
of God into the inmost substance of the soul. When God is conceived 
as external to the individual, in heaven or in Olympus, when our 
feeling towards Him is one of love and respect, inspired by His 
majesty and power, our religion of fear, obedience and even love is 
external. When, on the other hand, we are driven by an inner lack 
or insufficiency, when we cry for the highest reality or God which 
or who comes into us, enters us, removes our dross, when we unite 
ourselves to Him, our religion becomes inward, mystical. The mystic 
longs for inner completion by participation which is the real meaning 
of imitation. This is not always accompanied by ecstatic rapture. 
It may be a quiet sense of union which may have a few high points 
of emotion. Cp. John Ruysbroeck: ‘In this storm of love two spirits 
strive together; the spirit of God and our own spirit. God, through 
the Holy Ghost, inclines Himself towards us; and thereby we are 
touched in love. And our spirit, by God's working and by the power 
of love, presses and inclines itself into God; and thereby God is 
touched. These two spirits, that is, our own spirit and the spirit 
of God, sparkle and shine one into the other, and each shows to the 
other its face. . . . Each demands of the other all that it is; and each 
offers to the other all that it is, and invites it to all that it is. This 
makes the lovers melt into each other. . . . Thereby the spirit is 
burned up in the fire of love, and enters so deeply into the touch 



53^ The Principal Upanisads I. 5. 4. 

of God, that it is overcome in all its cravings,* and turned to nought 
in all its works, and empties itself/ Adornment of the Spiritual 
Marriage , II. 54. 


Section 5 

THE FOURFOLD MYSTIC UTTERANCES 

1. bhiir bhuvas suvah iti vd etas tisro vyahrtayah , tdsam u ha 
smaitdm caturthim, mdhdcamasyah, piavedayate, maha iti, tad 
brahma , sa dtmd , ahgdny anyd devatdh, bhitr iti vd ayam lokah , 
bhuva ity antariksam, suvar ity asau lokah , maha tty ddityah , 
ddityena vd va sarve lokd mahiyante. 

1. Bhuh, Bhuvah, suvah, verily these arc the three utterances 
of them; verily, that one, the fourth, mahah, did the son of 
Mahacamasa make known. That is Brahman, that is the self, 
its limbs (are) the other gods. 

Bhuh is this world; Bhuvah, the atmosphere: Suvah is the yonder 
world: mahah is the sun; by the sun indeed do all worlds become 
great. 

Vyahrtis are so called because they are uttered in various rituals. 

Its limbs the other gods: mahah is Brahman, the Absolute ; it is the 
self; all other gods are subordinate to the Absolute. 

2. bhiir iti vd agnih, bhuva iti vdyuh, suvar ity ddityah , maha 
iti candramdh, candramasd vd va sarvdni jyotimsi mahiyante. 

2. Bhuh, verily, is fire; Bhuvah is the air; Suvah is the sun; 
mahah is the moon; by the moon, indeed, do all the luminaries 
become great. 

3. bhur iti vd rcah, bhuva iti sdmdni , suvar iti yajumsi , maha 
iti brahma , brahmand vd va sarve vedd mahiyante. 

3. Bhuh, verily, is the Rg verses; Bhuvah is the Sdman 
chants, Suvah is the Yajus formulas. Mahah is Brahman. By 

Brahman indeed, do all the Vedas become great. 

* • 

4. bhiir iti vai pranah, bhuva ity apanah, suvar iti vydnah, 
maha ity annam, annena vdva sarve prana mahiyante. 

4. Bhuh is the inbreath; Bhuvah is the outbreath; Suvah 
is the diffused breath, mahah is the food. By food, indeed, do 
all the vital breaths become great. 



I. 6. i. Taittinya Upanisad *533 

5. tdvd etas catasrcti caturdha , catasrai catasro vyahrtayah, tdyo 
veda , s# brahma , sarvesmai dev a balim avahanti. 

5. Verily, these four are fourfold. The utterances are four 
and four. He who knows these knows Brahman. To him all the 
gods offer tribute. 


Section 6 

CONTEMPLATION OF BRAHMA 

1. sa ya cso nlarhrdaya akasah , tasminn ay am puruso mano- 
mayah , amrto hivanmayah , antarena taluke, ya esa stana ivava- 
lambate , sendvayonih , yatrasau kcsdnto vivartate, vyapohya sirsa- 
kapalc y bhur ity agnau pratitisthati f bhuva iti vdyau. 

1. This space that is within the heart — therein is the Person 
consisting of mind, immortal and resplendent. That which 
hangs down between the palates like a nipple, that is the birth- 
place of Indra; where is the edge of the hair splitting up the 
skull of the head. In fire, as Bhuh , he rests, in air as Bhuvah. 

See M.U. II. 2. 6; Maitri VI. 30; VII. n. 
hiranmayah : resplendent, jyotirmayah. S. 

Brahman who is said to be remote is here envisaged as close to us. 
Though the Supreme is present everywhere, here we arc taught to 
look upon Him as residing in one's own heart. S. says that the 
Supreme is said to be in the heart as a help to meditation, even as 
an image is used for deity, upalabdhyartham updsandrtham ca 
hrdaydkdsa sthdnam ucyate , salagrama iva visnoh. See C.U. VIII. 
1-6; III. 14. Here we find a transition from the view that the heart 
is the seat of the soul to the other view that the brain is the seat of 
the soul. While the soul is an unextended entity which cannot have 
a spatial locus, psychologists discuss the nature of the part or parts 
of the body with which the soul is closely associated. 

Foi Aristotle, the seat of the soul was in the heart. 1 

1 Cp. Hammond: ‘The diseases of the heart are the most rapidly 
and certainly fatal; (2) psychical a flections such as fear, soirow, and 
joy cause an imnTediat(^ disturbance of the heart; (3) the heart is the 
part which is the first to be formed in the embryo.' Anstotlc's Psychology 
quoted in Kanade: A Constructive Survey of the Upamscidic Philosophy 
(1926), p. 13 1. ‘If by the seat of the mind is meant not being more than 
the locality with which it stands in immediate dynamic relations, we are 
certain to be right in sayin that its seat is somewhere in the cortex of 
the brain. 1 William James: Principles of Psychology, Vol. I, p. 214. 



534 Th e Principal Upanisads I. 7. i. 

The reference here is to the susumnd nddl of the Yoga system which 
is said to pass upward from the heart, through the mid region of 
the throat up to the skull where the roots of the hair lie apart. 
When it reaches this spot, the nddl passes up, breaking up the two 
regions of the head. That is the birthplace of Indra. indrayonih 
indrasya brahmanah yonih mdirgah. S. indrasya paramdtmano youth 
sthdnam. R. It is the path by which we attain our true nature. 
See Maitri. VI. 21; B.U. IV. 4. 2. 

2. suvar ity ddityc , viaha iti brahmani , dpnoti svdrdjyam 
dpnoti manasas-patim , vdk-patis caksus-patih srotra-patih vijnana- 
patih , ctat tato bhavati, dkasa say tram brahma , satydtma prana - 
rdmam mana anandam santi samrddham amrtam iti pracma- 
yogyopasva. 

2. In the sun as Suvah, in Brahman as Mahah. He attains 
self-rule. He attains to the lord of manas, the lord of speech, 
the lord of sight, the lord of hearing, the lord of intelligence — 
this and more he becomes, even Brahman whose body is space, 
whose self is the real, whose delight is life, whose mind is bliss, 
who abounds in tranquillity, who is immortal. Thus do thou 
contemplate, O Pracinayogya. 

He who contemplates in this matter becomes the lord of all 
organs, the soul of all things and filled with peace and perfection. 
This passage brings out that the end is greater existence, not death; 
we should not sterilise our roots and dry up the wells of life. We have 
to seize and transmute the gifts we possess. 


Section 7 

THE FIVEFOLD NATURE OF THE WORLD AND THE 

INDIVIDUAL 

i. prthivy antariksam dyaur diso va avdntaradisdh , agnir vayur 
adityas candramd naksatrani , apa osadhayo vanaspataya akdsa 
dtma ity adhibhutam. 

athddhydtmam , prdnovydnopdna uddnas samdnah caksus 
irotram mano vdk tvak , carma mdmsam sndvdsthi majja etad 
adhividhdya rsir avocat. pdnktam vd idam sarvam pdhktcnaiva 
pdhktams sprnoti. 

1. Earth, atmosphere, heaven, the (main) quarters and the 
intermediate quarters. 



I. 8. i. Taittiriya Upani$ad 5^5 

Fire, air, sun, moon and stars. 

Water, plants, trees, ether and the body. 

Thus with regard to material existence. 

Now with regard to the self. 
prana , vydna , apdna , addna and samdna 
sight, hearing, mind, speech, touch 
skin, flesh, muscle, bone, marrow. 

Having ordained* in this manner, the sage said : Fivefold 
verily, is this all. With the fivefold, indeed, does one win the 
fivefold. 

See B.U. I. 4. 17. 


Section 8 

CONTEMPLATION OF AUM 

1. aum iti brahma , aum itidarii sarvam , anm ity etad anukrtir 
ha sma va apyo srdvayctydsrdvayanti , aum iti samdni gay anti, 
aum iomiti sastrdni samsanti , aum ity adhvaryuh , pratigaram 
pratigrnati , aum iti brahma prasanti, aum ity agnihotram 
anujanati, aum iti brdhmanah pravaksyann aha , brahmopapna - 
vamti , brahmaivopdpnoti. 

1. Aum is Brahman. Aum is this all. Aum , this, verily, is 
compliance. On uttering, ‘recite/ they recite. With aum , they 
sing the sdman chants. With anm, som, they recite the prayers 
With aum the Advaryu priest utters the response. With aum 
does the Brahma (priest) utter the introductory eulogy. With 
aum, one assents to the offering to fire. With aum, a Brahmana 
begins to recite, may I obtain Brahman) thus wishing, Brahman, 
verily, does he obtain. 

The pranava which is a mere sound, is, no doubt, insentient in 
itself and cannot therefore be conscious of the worship offered to it; 
still, as in the case of the worship offered to an image, it is the 
Supreme (Isvara) who, in all cases, takes note of the act and dispenses 
the fruits thereof// 

Aum is the symbol of both Brahman and Isvara. 
pratimeva visnoh. £. pratimddy arcana iva sarvatra isvara cva. 
phala-ddtd. A. 



536 


The Principal Upanisads 


I. 9. 1. 


Section 9 

STUDY AND TEACHING OF THE SACRED SYLLABLE 
THE MOST IMPORTANT OF ALL DUTIES 

1. rtam ca svddhydya pravacane ca } satyarh ca svddhydya 
pravacane ca, tapas ca svddhydya pravacane ca, damas ca 
svddhydya pravacane ca, samas ca svddhydya pravacane ca, 
agnayas ca svddhydya pravacane ca, agnihotram ca svddhydya 
pravacane ca, atithayas ca svddhydya pravacane ca, mdnusani 
ca svddhydya pravacane ca, prajd ca svddhydya pravacane ca. 

prajanas ca svddhydya pravacane ca, prajdtis ca svddhydya 
pravacane ca. 

satyam iti satyavacd rdthitarah, tapa iti taponityah paumsistih, 
svddhydya pravacane cvcti ndko maudgalyah, taddhi tapas taddhi 
tapah. 

I. The right and also study and teaching; the true and also 
study and teaching; austerity and also study and teaching; 
self-control and also study and teaching; tranquillity and also 
study and teaching; the (sacrificial) fires and also study and 
teaching; the agni-hvtra (sacrifice) and also study and teaching , 
guests and also study and teaching; humanity and also study 
and teaching; offspring and also study and teaching; begetting 
and also study and teaching; propagation of the race and also 
study and teaching. 

The true, says Satyavacas (the Truthful) the son of Rathitara: 
austerity says Taponitya (ever devoted to austerity), the son 
of Paurusisti, study and teaching alone, says Naka (painless), 
the son of Mudgala. That, verily, is austerity, aye, that is 
austerity. 

svddhydya: adhyayanam, study. 
pravacana: adhydpanam, teaching. 
dama: bdhyakaranopasanuih, self conti ol. 
sama: anlahkat anopaiamah , (inner) tranquillity. 

Knowledge is not sufficient by itself. \\ r c must perform study and 
also practise the Vcdic teaching. 



I. ii. I. Taittirlya Upanisad 537 

Section 10 

A MEDITATION ON VEDA KNOWLEDGE 

1. aham vrksasya rerivd, kirtih prstham gircr iva, urdhva 
pavilro vdjimva , svamrtam asmi, dravinam savarcasam, sumedhd 
amrtoksitah, Hi trisankor vcddnuvacanam. 

1. 1 am the mover of the tree; my fame is like a mountain's 
peak. The exalted one making (mo) pure, as the sun, I am the 
immortal one. I am a shining treasure, wise, immortal, inde- 
structible. Such is Trisariku's recitation on the Veda-knowledge. 

This statement is an expression of self-realization when the self, 
feeling its identity with the Supreme, says that he is the mover, the 
impeller of this world-tiee of samsara. Trisariku, who realised 
Brahman , said this, in the ^amc spiiit in which the sage Vamadeva 
said. S. 

The world is said to be the eternal Brahma tree, brahmavrksas 
sandtanah. M.B. XIV. 47. 14. 


Section 11 

EXHORTATION TO THE DEPARTING 
STUDENTS 

1. vedam anucydicdvyo'ntevdHnam anusdsti, satyam vada , dhar- 
mani cara f svddhy divan md pramadali , deary dya priyath dhanam 
dhrtya prajdtantum md vyavacchctsTh , satydn nil pramaditavyam , 
dharmdii na pramaditavyam, hisaldn na pramaditavyam , 
bhutyai na pramaditavyam, svddhy dy a- pravacandbliydm na 
pramaditavyam, deva-pitr-kdrydbhydm na pramaditavyam. 

1. Having taught the Veda, the teacher instructs the pupil. 
Speak the truth. Practise virtue. Let there be no neglect of 
your (daily) reading. Having brought to the teacher the wealth 
that is pleasing ^to him), do not cut off the thread of the off- 
spring. Let there be no neglect of truth. Let there be no neglect 
of virtue. Let there be no neglect of welfare. Let there be no 
neglect of prosperity. Let there be no neglect of study and 
teaching. Let there be no neglect of the duties to the gods and 
the fathers. 



53$ The Principal Upanisads I. it. 4. 

antevdsin: the pupil, lie who dwells near. 

I. 11. 1 Cp. speak the truth: 

satyapidam vaded vdcatn manah putarii samdearet. VI. 46. 
Speak that which has been purified by truth and behave in the way 
in which your mind considers to be pure. 

dharmam cam: -practise virtue: dharma means essential nature or 
intrinsic law of being; it also means the law of righteousness. The 
suggestion here is that one ought to live according to the law of 
one’s being. 

2. mdtr devo bhava, pitr devo bhava , dedrya devo bhava , 
a tit hi devo bhava , ydny anavadydni kartndni tdni sevitavydni , 
no itardni, ydny asmdkam SHcaritdni tdni tvayopdsydni, no 
it a rani. 

2. Be one to whom the mother is a god. Be one to whom the 
father is a god. Be one to whom the teacher is a god. Be one 
to whom the guest is a god. 

Whatever deeds are blameless, they are to be practised, not 
others. Whatever good practices there are among us, they are 
to be adopted by you, not others. 

Even with regard to the life of the teacher, we should be dis- 
criminating. Wc mu.st not do the things which are open to blame, 
even if they are done by the wise, sdvadydni sisfa-krtdny api 
nokartavydm. $. 

3. ye ke cdsmacclu eydimso brdlimandh tesdun Ivaydsanena 
prasvasilavyam , sraddhayd deyam , as raddhaya deyam sriyd 
deyam , hriyd deyam , bhiyd deyam , samvidd deyam. 

3. Whatever Brfdimanas there are (who are) superior to us, 
they should be comforted by you with a seat. (What is to be 
given) is to be given with faith, should not be given without 
faith, should be given in plenty, should be given with modesty, 
should be given with fear, should be given with sympathy. 

prasvasitavyam : The good Brahmanas are to be provided with seats 
and refreshed after their fatigue, prasvasanam , prasvdsah sramd- 
panayah. S. Or in the presence of such Brahmanas, not a word should 
be breathed. Wc have merely to grasp the essence of what they say. 
na prasvasitavyam prasvdso’pi na kartavyah kcvalam tad ukta sdrn- 
grdhind bhavitavyam. S. We should not unnecessarily engage in 
discussions with them. 

4. atha yadi te karma-vieikitsd vd vrtta-vicikitsd vd sydt ye 
tatra brahmanas sammarsinah yuktd dyuktdh aluksd dharma 
kdmds syuh yathd te tatra varteran tathd tatra vartethdh. 



I. 12. i. Taittiriya Upanisad 5 {9 

4. Then, if there is in you any doubt regarding any deeds, 
any doubt regarding conduct, you should behave yourself in 
such matters, as the Brahmanas there (who are) competent to 
judge, devoted (to good deeds), not led by others, not harsh, 
lovers of virtue would behave in such cases. 

The Brahmanas have a spontaneity of consciousness which expresses 
itself in love for all beings. Their tenderness of sentiment and en- 
lightened conscience should be our standards. 

5. athdbhydkhydtesu ye tatra brahmanas sammarsinah yukta 
dyuktdh alitksd dharma-kdunds syuh yaihd tc tesu vartcran tathd 
tesu vartethdh. 

5. Then, as to the persons who are spoken against, you 
should behave yourself in such a way, as the Brahmanas there, 
(who are) competent to judge, devoted (to good deeds) not 
led by others, not harsh, lovers of virtue, would behave in 
regard to such persons. 

who are spoken against: who are accused of sin. 

6. esa ddesah , esa upadesah, esa vedopanisat , clad anusdsanam, 
evam updsitavyam, evam n caitad updsyam. 

6. This is the command. This is the teaching. This is the 
secret doctrine of the Veda. This is the instruction. Thus should 
one worship. Thus indeed should one worship. 

Cp. with this the Buddha’s exhortation where the Pfdi word upanisd 
for the Sanskrit upanisad is used: 

etad atthd kathd , etad aithd mantand , dad atthd 
upanisd, etad atthd sotdvadhdnam. Vinaya. V. 

In the Banaras Hindu University this passage is read by the Vice- 
Chancellor on the Convocation day as an exhortation to the students 
who arc leaving the University. They are advised, not to give up 
the world but to lead virtuous lives as householders and promote 
the welfare of the community. 


Section 12 
CONCLUSIONS 

1. sam no mitras sum varunah , sum no bhavatv aryamd, sam 
na indro brhaspatih , sam no visnur uru-kramah , namo brahmane , 
namas te vdyo tvam eva pratyaksam brahmdsi , tvdim eva prat- 
yak§am brahmdivddisam , rt i. m avadisam, satyam avddisam , tan 



540 The Principal Upanisads I. 12. 1. 

mam avit, tad vaktdram dvlt, dvin mam, avid vaktdram, aum 
santih, iantih, sdntih. 

1. Aum, may Mitra (the sun) be propitious to us; may 
Vanina (be) propitious (to us) ; may Aryaman (a form of the 
sun) be propitious to us. May lndra and Brhaspati be propitious 
to us. May Visnu of wide strides lie propitious to us. 

Salutation to Brahman. Salutation to Vayu; Thou indeed 
art the perceptible Brahman. Of thee, indeed, perceptible 
Brahman have I spoken. I have spoken of the right. 1 have 
spoken of the true. That hast protected me; That has protected 
the speaker. Aye, that has protected me. That has protected 
the speaker. Aum, peace, peace, peace. 



II. 1. 1. 


Taittinya Upanisad 


54i 


CHAPTER II 

BRAHMANANDA (BLISS OF BRAHMAN) VALLI 
Section 1 
INVOCATION 

saha ndv avalu , saha nan blmnaktu , saha viryam karavdvahai, 
tcjasvindv adhitam astu, md vidvisdvahai, aum sdntih , sdntih , 
sdntih. 

May He protect us both. May He be pleased with us both. 
May we work together with vigour; may our study make us 
illumined. May there be no dislike between us. Amn , peace, 
peace, peace. 

may our study make 7/s illumined: 

There is not a necessaiy connection between learning and wisdom, 
lo be unlettered is not necessarily to be uncultured. Our modern 
world is maintaining the cleavage between learning and wisdom. Cp. 
‘Perhaps at no other time have men been so knowing and yet so 
unaware, so burdened with purposes and yet so purposeless, so 
disillusioned and so completely the victims of illusion. This strange 
contradiction pervades our entire modern culture, our science and 
our philosophy, our literature* and our art.’ W. M. Urban: The 
Intelligible Wot Id (19-29), p. 172. 


BRAHMAN AND THE COURSE OF EVOLUTION 

1. aum, brahma-vid dpnoti param,*tad esdbliyuktd , satyam 
jhdinam anantam brahma , yo veda nihitam guhdydm parame 
vyoman so’snute sarvan kdmdn saha brahmand vipaseitd , \li. 

tasmdd vd etasmdd dtmana dkdsas sambhutali , dkdsdd vayuli , 
vdiyor agnih, agner dpali , adbhyah prthivf , prthivyd osadhayah 
osadhlbnyo annum , annat pin nsah; 

sa vd esa puniso anna-rasa-mavah , tasyedam eva si rah, ay am 
daksinah paksab, ay am uilarah paksah, ayam dtmd , id am 
puccharii pratisthd; 

tad apy esa sloko bhavati. 

1. Aum. The knower of Brahman reaches the Supreme. As 
to this the following has been said: He who knows Brahman 
as the real, as knowledge and as the infinite, placed in the 



542 The Principal Upanisads II. i. i. 

secret place of the heart and in the highest heaven realises all 
desires along with Brahman , the intelligent. 

From this Self, verily, ether arose; from ether air; from air 
fire; from, fire water; from water the earth; from the earth 
herbs; from herbs food; from food the person. 

This, verily, is the person that consists of the essence of food. 
This, indeed, is his head; this the right side, this the left side; 
this the body; this the lower part, the foundation. 

As to that, there is also this verse. 

tlic real , knowledge and infinite: the opposite of unreal, mithydlva , 
of the unconscious, jadatva and of the limited, paricchinnalva. 
dkdsa: ether is the ether or the common substratum from which other 
forces proceed. 

sambhiitah: arose, emanated, not created. 

The five different elements are clearly defined and described as 
having proceeded one after another from the Self. 

Sometimes from food, semen, and from semen the person. Cp. § 
anncld reto-riipena parinatdt purusah. 

Creation starts from the principle of the universal consciousness. 
From it first arises space and the primary matter or ether whose 
quality is sound. From this etheric state successively arise grosser 
elements of air, fire, water and earth. See Introduction. 
param: the supreme, that beyond which there is nothing else, i.e. 
Brahman. 

guhd: the secret place, the unmanifested principle in human nature. 
It is normally a symbol for an inward retreat, avydkrta dkdsam 
eva guhd. antar-hrdaya dkdsa. &. 

There are five kosas or sheaths in which the Self is manifested 
as the ego or the jivdtman. The first of them consists of food. Other 
sheaths consist of prana or life, manas or instinctive and perceptual 
consciousness, vijndna or intelligence and dnandu or bliss. These five 
principles of matter, life, consciousness, thought and bliss arc found 
in the world of non-ego. Anna or food is the radiant, the virdj, 
that which is perceptible by the senses, the physical. According 
to Suresvara, life, consciousness and intelligence constitute the 
subtle self, the sutratman and bliss is the causal sheath, the kdrana 
kosa. 

B.U. I. i. 2 mentions five sheaths under the names, anna or 
matter, prana or life, manas or consciousness, vac or speech (corre- 
sponding to vijndna or intelligence) and avydkrta, the undiiicren- 
tiated. The last is the kdrana or the ultimate cause of all. 

Atman becomes the knower or the subject when associated with 
antahkarana. vrttimad antahkaranopahitatvendtmano jndtftvam, na 
svatah. A. 



II. 2. i. Taittiriya Upanisad 5^3 

The bodily sheath is conceived in the form of a bird. SureSvara 
says: ‘The sacrificial fire arranged in the form of a hawk or a heron 
or some other bird, has a head, two wings, a trunk and a tail. So 
also here every sheath is represented as having five parts/ 

It is an axiom of mystic religion that there is a correspondence 
between the microcosm and the macrocosm. Man is an image of 
the created universe. The individual soul as the microcosm has 
affinities with every rung of the ladder which reaches from earth to 
heaven. 


Section 2 

MATTER AND LIFE 

1. annad vai prajdh prajayante, yah kds ca pfthivim sritdh , 
atho } nnenaiva jivanti , athainadapi yanty antatah, annam hi 
bhutanam jyestham , tasmat sarvausadham ucyate , sarvarii vai 
te'nnam apnuvanti ye'nnam brahmopdsate, annam hi bhutanam 
jyestham , tasmat sarvausadham ucyate , annad bhutani jdyante , 
jatany annena vardhante , adyatetti ca bhutani , tasmdd annam 
tad ucyata iti; 

tasmdd vd etasmad anna-rasa-may at anyo’ntara atma prana - 
mayah tenaisa pilrnah , sa vd esa purusa-vidha eva f tasya purusa 
vidhatam, anvayam purusavidhah , tasya prana eva sirah , vyano 
daksinah paksah, apdna nttarah paksah, dkdsa atmd , prthivi 
puccham pratisthd , 

tad apy esa sloko bhavati. 

1. From food, verily, are produced whatsoever creatures 
dwell on the earth. Moreover, by foerd alone they live. And 
then also into it they pass at the end. Food, verily, is the eldest 
born of beings. Therefore is it called the healing herb of all. 
Verily, those who worship Brahman as food obtain all food. 
For food, verily, is the eldest born of beings. Therefore is it 
called the healing herb for all. From food are beings born. 
When born they grow up by food. It is eaten and eats things 
Therefore is it called food 

Verily, different from and within that which consists of the 
essence of food is the self that consists of life. By that this is 
filled. This, verily, has the form of a person. According to that 
one's personal form is this one with the form of a person ; the 
inbreath is its head; the diffused breath the right side; the 

s’ 1 



5'44 The Principal Upanisads II. 3. 1. 

outbreath the left side; ether the body, the earth the lower 
part, the foundation. 

As to that, there is also this verse. 

See Maitrl. VI. 12. 

The physical body is sustained by life. 


Section 3 

LIFE AND MIND 

1 . prdnam devd anti prdnanti , manusydh pasavas ca ye, prdno 
hi bhutdndm ayah , tasmdt sarvdyu$am ucyate, sarvam eva ta 
dynr yanti, ye prdnam brahmopdsatc , prdno hi bhutdndm dyuh , 
tasmatsarvayusamucyataitijasyaisaevasdrira atmd t yahpurvasya; 
tasmdd vd etasmdt pranamaydt , anyo’ntara atmd manomayah , 
tenaisapiirnah,sa vd esa purusa-vidha eva,tasya purusa-vidhatam , 
anvayam purusa-vidhah, tasya yajur eva sirah, rgdaksinahpaksah, 
samottarah paksah , ddesa atmd , atharvdngirasah puccham 
pratistha. 

tad apy esa sloko bhavati. 

1. The gods breathe along with life breath, as also men and 
beasts; the breath is the life of beings. Therefore, it is called 
the life of all. They who worship Brahman as life attain to a 
full life, for the breath is the life of beings. Therefore is it called 
the life of all. This (life) is indeed the embodied soul of the 
former (physical sheath). Verily, different from and within that 
which consists of life is the self consisting of mind. By that this 
is filled. This, verily, has the form of a person; according to 
that one’s personal form is this one with the form of a person. 
The Yajur Veda is its head; the Rg Veda the right side; the 
Sama Veda the left side; teaching the body; the hymns of the 
Atharvans and the Aiigirasas, the lower part, the foundation. 

As to that, there is also this verse. 

Life is the spirit of the body. 

Prana originally meant breath and as breatli seemed to be the 
life of man, prana became the life principle. On analogy, it was said 
to be the life of the universe. 

manas: the inner organ, samkalpa-vikalpdtmakam antah-karanam 
tan-mayo mano-mayah. S. 



II. 4- i. Taittiriya Upanisad 545 

Section 4 

MIND AND UNDERSTANDING 

1. yato vdco nivartante, aprdpya manasd saha, dnandam 
brahmano vidvan, na bibheti kadacana. tasyaisa eva sdnra 
atmd, yah purvasya, tasmad vd etasmdn mano-maydt, anyo’ntara 
atmd vijhdna-mayah , tcnaisa purnah, sa vd e$a purusa-vidha eva t 
tasya punisa vidhatdm , anvayam pnrusa-vidhah, tasya sraddhaiva 
sir ah, rtahi daksinah paksah, satyam uttar ah paksah, yoga atmd, 
mahah puccham pratisthd; 

tad apy esa iloko bhavati 

1. Whence words return along with the mind, not attaining 
it, he who knows that bliss of Brahman fears not at any time. 
This is, indeed, the embodied soul of the former (life). Verily, 
different from and within that which consists of mind is the self 
consisting of understanding. By that this is filled. This, verily, 
has the form of a person. According to that one's personal 
form is this one with the form of a person. Faith is its head; 
the right the right side ; the true the left side ; contemplation 
the body; the great one the lower part, the foundation. 

As to that there is also this verse. 

Manas is the faculty of perception. At the stage of manas we 
accept authority which is external; at the stage of vijhdna internal 
growth is effected. The Vedas are our guide at the former level; 
at the intellectual we must develop faith, order, truthfulness and 
union with the Supreme. At the level of intellectuality or vijhdna, 
we ask for proofs. When we rEe higher, the truths are not inferred 
but become self-evident and cannot be invalidated by reason. Cp. 
sdmkhyayogah paheardtram veddh pdsiipatam tathd 
dtma-pramdndny etdni na hantavpani hetubhih. 

Quoted by R. on Katha. II. 19. 

mahah: the great one. It is the principle of Mahat, the first thing 
evolved out of the umnanifested (avydkrta) which is described a§ 
lying beyond the mahat. 

dnandam: bliss. See R.V. IX. 113. 0, n. It gives to apparently 
abstract being an inner content of feeling. 



546 The Principal Upanisads II. 5. 1. 

Section 5 

UNDERSTANDING AND BLISS 

1. vijhdnam yajham tannte, karmdni tanute' pi ca, vijhdnam 
devcis sarvc, brahma jyestham updsate , 

vijhdnam brahma ced veda , tasmdc ccn na pramddyati sarire 
pdptnano hitvd f sarvdn kdman samainute. 

tasyaisa cva sdnra dtmd, yah purvasya, tasmdd vd etasmdd 
vijhdna-maydt , anyo’ntara dtmd ananda-mayah, tcnaisa pilrnah, 
sa vd esa purusa vidha eva, tasya purusa-vidhatdm , anvayam 
purusa-vidhah, tasya priyam eva si rah, modo daksinah paksah , 
pramoda uttar ah paksah , ananda dtmd , brahma puccham pratisthd, 

tad apy esa sloko bhavati. 

1. Understanding directs the sacrifice and it directs the 
deeds also. All the gods worship as the eldest the Brahman 
which is understanding. 

If one knows Brahman as understanding and one does not 
swerve from it, he leaves his sins in the body and attains all 
desires. This (life) is, indeed, the embodied soul of the former 
(the mental). 

Verily, different from and within that which consists of 
understanding is the self consisting of bliss. By that this is 
filled. This, verily, has the form of a person. According to that 
one’s personal form is this one with the form of a person. 
Pleasure is its head; delight the right side; great delight the 
left side; bliss the body, Brahman the lower part, the foundation. 

As to that, there is also this verse. 

These verses indicate the five bodies or sheaths (pahea-kosas) 
material, vital, mental, intellectual and spiritual. 

Manas deals with the objects perceived and vijndna with concepts. 
In later Vedanta, the distinction between the two diminishes. 
Pahcadasl ascribes deliberation to manas and decision to buddhi 
which is the vijhana of this U. mano vimarsa-rupam sydd buddhih 
sydn niscaydtmika . I. 20. 

In every order of things the lower is strengthened by its union 
with the higher. When our knowledge is submissive to things, we 
get the hierarchical levels of being, matter, life, animal mind, human 
intelligence and divine bliss. They represent different degrees of 
abstraction and the sciences which deal with them, employ different 
principles and methods. In ananda , the attempt to connaturalise 
man with the supreme object succeeds. Intelligence is successful 
in controlling the tangible world. As a rational instrument in the 



II. 6. i. Taittinya Upanisad 547 

sphere of positive sciences, its validity is justified. This attempt of 
the intellect to unify is not due to intellect alone. It is derived from 
its higher, from the breath of the divine. In ananda, earth touches 
heaven and is sanctified. 

S thinks that our real self is beyond the beatific consciousness, 
though in his commentary on III. 6 he argues that Bhrgu identifies 
the ultimate reality with the spirit of ananda. 

evam tapasd visuddhdtmd [anna) prdnadisu sakalycna brahma- 
lakianam apaiyan sanaih sanair antar anupravisya antaratamam 
anandam brahma vijhdtavdn tapasaiva sddhanena bhrguh. &. 

The author of the Brahma Sutra in I. 1. 12-19 identifies ananda - 
may a with the absolute Brahman and not a relative manifestation. 
The objection that the suffix may at is generally used for modification 
is set aside on the ground that it is also used for abundance. 
pracuryat. S.B. I. 1. 13-14. 

ananda-brahmanor abheddt brahmabhidhdnam eva dnandabhidhdnam 
iti manvanah. Samkat ananda. 

In this beatific consciousness man participates iruthe life of the 
gods. Aristotle places the idea of a highci contemplation above 
metaphysical knowledge. 


Section 0 

BRAHMAN , THE ONE BEING AND THE SOURCE 

OF ALL 

1. asann eva sa bhavati, asad brahmeti veda cet, asti brahmeti 
ced veda t santam enam tato viduh. 

tasyaisa eva sdrira dtmd, yah pilrvasya, athdto anuprasnah, 
uta avidvdn amum lokam pretya kascana gacchati u , oho vidvdn 
amum lokam pretya , kascit samasnutd tr; 

so’kdmayata, bahu syam prajdycycti , sa tapo'tapyata, so tapas 
taptva , idam sarvam asrjata, yad idam him ca, tat srstvd tad 
evanupravisat, tad anupravisya sac ca tyac ca abhavat , nivuktam 
cdniruktarii ca, nilayanam ednilayanam ca , vijhdnam edvijnanath 
ca, satyarh canrtam ca, satyam abhavat, yad idam kirn ca, tat 
satyam ity dcaksate 

tad apy esa iloko bhavati. 

1. Non-existent, verily does one become, if he knows Brahman 
as non-being. If one knows that Brahman is, such a one people 
know as existent. This is, indeed, the embodied soul of the 
former. 

Now then the following questions. Does anyone who knows 



548 The Principal Upanisads II. 7. 1. 

not, when departing from this life, go to the yonder world? Or is 
it that any one who knows, on departing from this life, attains 
that world? 

He (the supreme soul) desired. Let me become many, let 
me be born. He performed austerity. Having performed 
austerity he created all this, whatever is here. Having created 
it, into it, indeed, he entered. Having entered it, he became 
both the actual and the beyond, the defined and the undefined, 
both the founded and the non-founded, the intelligent and 
the non-intelligent, the true and the untrue. As the real, he 
became whatever there is here. That is what they call the real. 
As to that, there is also this verse. 

tapas: austerity. 5 means by it knowledge, tapa iti jiidnam ucyate. 
tapah paryalocanam . The Supreme reflected on the form of the world 
to be created, srjyamdna-jagad-racanddi-visaydm dlocandm akarod 
dtmety arthah. S. He willed, he thought and he created. Tapas is the 
creative moulding power, concentrated thinking. See B.U. I. 4. 10-n, 
Maitri. VI. 17 which assume that consciousness is at the source of 
manifestation. As we bend nature to our will by thought or tapas , 
tapas becomes mixed with magical control. 

He desired: See C.U. VI. 2. 1. It is damn or desire that brings forth 
objects from primal being. 

the actual and the beyond: Brahman has two aspects, the actual and 
the transcendental, the sat and the tyat. 


Section 7 

BRAHMAN IS BLISS 

1 asad va idam agra dsit, tato vai sad ajdyata, tad dtmdnam 
' svayam akuruta , tasmdt tat sukrtam ucyate. 

yad vai tat sukrtam , raso vai sah , rasam hy evdyam labdh- 
vdnandt bhavati, ko hy cvdnydt kah prdnydt , yad esa akdhi 
anando na sydt, esa hy evdnandaydti, yathd hy evaisa etasmin 
nadrsye ndtmye’ nirukte nilayane bhayam prdtisthdm vindatc, 
atha so'bhayam gato bhavati , yada hy evaisa etasminn udaram 
antararh kurute , atha tasya bhayam bhavati , tattveva bhayam 
viduso’manvanasya 

tad apy e§a iloko bhavati. 

1. Non-existent, verily, was this (world) in the beginning. 



II. 7- i. Taittinya Upanisad 549 

Therefrom, verily, was existence produced. That made itself a 
soul. Therefore is it called the well-made. 

Verily, what that well-made is — that, verily, is the essence 
of existence. For, truly, on getting the essence, one becomes 
blissful. For who, indeed, could live, who breathe, if there were 
not this bliss in space? This, verily, is it that bestows bliss. 
For truly, when one finds fearlessness as support in Him who is 
invisible, bodiless, undefined, without support, then has he 
reached fearlessness. When, however, this (soul) makes in this 
One the smallest interval, then, for him, there is fear. That, 
verily, is the fear of the knower, who does not reflect. 

As to that, there is also this verse. 

asat: non-existent. The manifested universe is called sat and its 
unmanifested condition is said to be asat. From the unmanifested 
{asat) the world of names and forms {sat) is said to arise. The possible 
is prior to the actual. See S.B. II. 1. 17. Cp. R.V. X. 129 which tells 
us that, at the beginning of all things, there was neither being nor 
non-being and what existed was an impenetrable darkness. For 
the Greek Epimenides, the beginning of things was a primary void 
or night. ‘Existence is born of non-existence.' LaoTzu (Ch. 40). The 
Way of Life. 

Brahman is invisible etc., because it is the source of all these 
distinctions, avikdvarii tad brahma sarva-vikdra-hetutvdt . $. 
snkytam: the well-made. See A.U. I. 2, 3. § means by it the self- 
caused. Brahman is the independent cause for He is the cause of all. 
svayam eva atmdnam evdkuruta krtavat. S. 

raso vai sah. Bliss, verily, is the essence of existence. Brahman is 
bliss. It is the source of things. See K.U. I. 5. 

who indeed could live . . .? The passage affirms that no one can live 
or breathe if there were not this bliss of existence as the very ether 
in which we dwell. We have a feeble analogue of spiritual bliss in 
aesthetic satisfaction. It is said to be akin to the bliss of the realisa- 
tion of Brahman, brahmananda-sahodarah. It lifts out of the ordinary 
ruts of conventional life and cleanses our minds and hearts. By th$ 
imaginative realisation of feelings, tanmayatvam rascsu {Kalidasa) 
it melts one's heart, dravlbhutam {Bhavabhuti ) . 
bhaya: tear. We have fear when we have a feeling of otherness. 
See B.U. I. 4. 2. where the primeval self became fearless when 
he found that there was no other person whom he should fear. 
amanvdnasya: who does not reflect. He is not a true sage but thinks 
himself to be so. 



55 ° 


II. 8. i. 


The Principal Upanisads 
Section 8 

INQUIRY INTO FORMS OF BLISS 

i. bhisasmdid vdtah pavate , bhisodeti s dry ah, bhisdsmdd agnis 
cendras ca, mrtyur dhdvati pancama iti. 
saisdnandasya mimdmsd bhavati; 

ynvd sydt sddha yuvddhydyakah dsistho drdhistho balisthah , 
tasyeyam prtliivT sarvd vittasya purnd sydt , sa eko mdnusa 
dnandah te ye satam mdnusa dnanddh , sa eko manusya-gan- 
dharvdndm dnandah, srotriyasya cdkdmahatasya; 

te ye satam mamisya-gandharvdndm dnanddh sa eko deva- 
gandharvdinam dnandah, srotriyasya cdkdmahatasya; 

te ye satam deva-gandharvdinam dnanddh, sa ekah pitrndm 
cira-loka-lokdndm dnandah, srotriyasya cdkdmahatasya; 

te ye satam pitrndm cira-loka-lokdndm dnanddh, sa eka ajdina- 
jdindm devdndpi dnandah, srotriyasya cdkdmahatasya 

te ye satam ajdnajdndm devdndm dnanddh , sa ekah karma- 
devdndm devdndm dnandah, ye karmand devdn apiyanti, srotri- 
yasya cdkdmahatasya; 

te ye satam karma-dcvanam devdndm dnanddh, sa eko devdndm 
dnandah, srotriyasya cdkdmahatasya; 

te ye satam devdndm dnanddh, sa eka indrasy dnandah, srotri- 
yasya cdkdmahatasya; 

te ye satam indrasydnanddih sa eko brhaspater dnandah, 
srotriyasya cdkdmahatasya; 

te ye satam brhaspater dnanddh , sa ekah, prajdpater dnandah 
srotriyasya cdkdmahatasya; 

te ye satam prajdpater dnanddh, sa eko brahmana dnandah, 
srotriyasya cdkdmahatasya; 

sa yas ediyam pur use, yas cdsdvdditye sa ekah, sa ya evam-vit 
asmdl lokdit pretya, etam anna-may am at mdnam upasamkrdmati , 
etam prdna-mayam dtmdnam upasamkrdmati , dam mano-mayajn 
atmdinam upasamkrdmati, etam vijhdna-mayam dtmdnam 
upasamkrdmati , etam dinanda-mayam ditmdnam upasamkrdmati . 
tad api esa stoko bhavati. 

i. From fear of Him does the wind blow; from fear of Him 
does the Sun rise; from fear of Him do Agni' and Indra (act) 
and death, the fifth doth run. 

This is the inquiry concerning bliss. 

Let there be a youth, a ’good youth, well read, prompt in 
action, steady in mind and strong in body. Let this whole 
earth be full of wealth for him. That is one human bliss. 



II. 8 . i. Taittiriya Upanisad $51 

What is a hundred times the human bliss, that is one bliss 
of human fairies — also of a man who is well versed in the Vedas 
and who is not smitten with desire. 

What is a hundred times the bliss of the human fairies, that 
is one bliss of divine fairies — also of a man who is well versed 
in the Vedas and who is not smitten with desire. What is a 
hundred times the bliss of the divine fairies, that is one bliss of 
the Fathers in their long enduring world — also of a man who 
is well versed in the Vedas and who is not smitten with desire. 

What is a hundred times the bliss of the fathers in their 
long enduring world, that is one bliss of the gods who are born 
so by birth, also of a man who is well versed in the Vedas and 
who is not smitten with desire. 

What is a hundred times the bliss of the gods who are born 
so by birth, that is one bliss of the gods by work, who go to 
the gods by work, also of a man who is well versed in the 
Vedas and who is not smitten with desire. 

What is a hundred times the bliss of the gods by work, that 
is one bliss of the gods, also of a man who is well versed in the 
Vedas and who is not smitten with desire. 

What is a hundred times the bliss of the gods, that is one 
bliss of Indra — also of a man who is well versed in the Vedas 
and who is not smitten with desire. 

What is a hundred times the bliss of Indra, that is the one 
bliss of Brhaspati — also of a man who is well versed in the 
Vedas and who is not smitten with desire. 

What is a hundred times the bliss of Brhaspati, that is one 
bliss of Prajd-pati , also of a man who is well versed in the 
Vedas and who is not smitten with desire. 

What is a hundred times the bliss* of Prajd-pati , that is one 
bliss of Brahma — also of a man who is well versed in the Vedas 
and who is not smitten with desire. 

He who is here in the person and he who is yonder in tfie 
Sun — he is one. He who knows this, on departing from this 
world, reaches to the self which consists of food, reaches the self 
which consists of life, reaches the self which consists of mind, 
reaches the self which consists of understanding, reaches the 
self which consists of bliss. 

As to that, there is also this verse. 

For feat of Him does the wind blow: the writer sees the proof of 
God in the laws of the universe. The regularity expresses an intelli- 
gence and presupposes a guide. S. See Katha VI. 3. 



55^ The Principal Upanisads II. 9. 1. 

Those who attain to the status of gods by their own work are called 
Karma-devas. 

The bliss of delight which knowledge of Brahman occasions 
baffles all description. It is something completely incomprehensible. 
Brahman thus is blissful being and so is of the highest value. In 
reaching the richness of being of Brahman we reach our highest 
fulfilment. In describing the various degrees of happiness, the author 
of the Upanisad gives us an idea of the classes of human and divine 
beings recognised in that period, men, fathers, fairies, gods by 
merit and gods by birth, Prajd-pati and Brahma or Hiranya-garbha . 


Section 9 

THE KNOWER OE THE BLISS OF BRAHMAN IS 
SAVED FROM ALL FEAR 

4 

1. yato vdeo nivartantc, aprdpya manasa saha dnandam 
brahmano vidvdin na bibheii kutascana . 

dam ha vd va na tapati , him aham sddhu ndkaravam , kim aham 
papain akaravam iti, sa ya evarii vidvdn cte dtmdnam sprnute, 
ubhe hy evaisa cte dtmdnam sprmtte ya evarii veda , ity upanisat. 

1. Whence words return along with the mind, not attaining. 
It, he who knows that bliss of Brahman fears not from anything 
at all. 

Such a one, verily, the thought does not torment, Why 
have I not done the right? Why have I done the sinful? He 
who knows this, saves himself from these (thoughts). For, 
truly, from both of these he saves himself — he who knows this. 
Such is the secret doctrine. 

1 he enlightened one is not afflicted by anxiety about light and 
wrong. The tiuth makes us free from all restrictions. The Apostle 
proclaims that we are delivered from the law, ‘Viitues, I take leave 
of you for evermore, your service is too travaillous. Once I was 
your seivant, in all things to you obedient, but now I am delivered 
from your thraldom/ Mirrut of Simple Soules, quoted in Evelyn 
Underhill: Mysticism, p. 263. 

upanisat: the great mystery, parama-rahasyam. S. * 



III. i. i. Taittinya Upanisad 553 

CHAPTER III 

BHRGU VALLI 

Section 1 

BHRGU UNDERTAKES INVESTIGATION OF 
BRAHMAN 

1. bhrgur vai varunih , varunam pitaram upasasdra , adhihi 
bhagavo brahmeti, tasmd etat provdca , annum pranam caksus 
srotram mano vacam iti. 

tarn hovaca , yato va imdni bhutdni jayante, yena jdtdni 
jivanti, yat prayanty abhisamvisanti , tad vijijnasasva, tad 
brahmeti 

sa tapo' tapyata, sa tap as taptva. 

1. Bhrgu, the son of Varuna, approached his father Varuna 
and said, ‘Venerable Sir, teach me Brahman 

He explained to him thus: matter, life, sight, hearing, mind, 
speech. 

To him, he said further: ‘That, verily, from which these 
beings are born, that, by which, when born they live, that into 
which, when departing, they enter. That, seek to know. That 
is Brahman.’ 

He performed austerity (of thought). Having performed 
austerity, 

The Jather Varuna teaches his son Bhrgu, the sacred wisdom. 

This fundamental definition of Brahman as that from which the 
origin, continuance and dissolution of the world comes is of Isvara 
who is the world-creating, world-sustaining, and world-dissolving 
God. 

Cp. ‘I am the first and the last ancl the living one.' Revelation 
XIII. 8. 

Brahman is the cause of the world as the substratum (adhistluitia) 
(§), as the material cause (updddna) of the world, as gold is the 
material cause of gold ornaments, as the instrumental cause ( nimitta ) 
of the world. Madhva. 

Austerity is the means to the perception of Brahman, tapas is 
spiritual travaij. brahtna-vijiidna-sddhana. S. Cp. Aeschylus, ‘Know- 
ledge comes through sacrifice.’ Agamemnon, 250. 



554 ' 77 /c Principal Upanisads III. 3. 1. 

Section 2 

MATTER IS BRAHMAN 

1. annam bralimdi vyajdndt, annadhyeva khalv imdni bhutdni 
jdyante , annena jdtdni jivanti, annam prayanty abhisamvisanti. 

tad vijnaya, punar eva varnnam pitarani upasasara , adhihi 
bhagavo brahmeti. 

tarn hovdca , tapasd brahma vijijhdsasva , tapo brahmeti , 

s<7 tapyata, sa tapas taptvd. 

1. He knew, that matter is Brahman. For truly, beings here 
are born from matter, when born, they live by matter, and into 
matter, when departing they enter. 

Having known that, he again approached his father Varuna 
and said, ‘Venerable Sir, teach me Brahman * 

To him he said, ‘Through austerity, seek to know Brahman. 
Brahman is austerity.' 

He performed austerity; having performed austerity, 

The first suggested explanation of the universe is that every 
thing can be explained from matter and motion. On second thoughts, 
we realise that there are phenomena of life and reproduction which 
require another principle than matter and mechanism. The investi- 
gator proceeds from the obvious and outer to the deeper and the 
inward. The pupil approaches the teacher because he feels that the 
first finding of matter as the ultimate reality is not satisfactory. 


Section 3 

LIFE IS BRAHMAN 

1. prano brahmeti vyajdndt, prdnddd hy eva khalv imdni 
bhutdni jdyante, prdnena jdtdni jivanti, prdnam prayanty 
abhisamvisanti. 

tad vijnaya , punar eva varnnam pitaram upasasara, adhihi 
bhagavo brahmeti 

tarn hovdca, tapasd brahma vijijhdsasva, tapo brahmeti, 

sa tapo ' tapyata, sa tapas taptvd. 

1. He knew that life is Brahman. For truly, beings here are 
bom from life, when born they live by life, and into life, when 
departing they enter. 

Having known that, he again approached his father Varuna, 
and said: ‘Venerable Sir, teach me Brahman 



III. 4. 1. Tailtinya U pant sad *555 

To him he said, 'Through austerity, seek to know Brahman 
Brahman is austerity/ 

He performed austerity; having performed austerity. 

See C.U. I. 11. 5; VII. 15. 1; K.U. III. 2-9; B.U. IV. 1. 3. 

While the material objects of the world are explicable in terms 
of matter, plants take us to a higher level and demand a different 
principle. From materialism we pass to vitalism. But the principle 
of life cannot account for conscious objects. So the pupil, dissatisfied 
with the solution of life, approaches the father, who advises the 
son to reflect more deeply. 

Matter is the context of the principle of life. 


Section 4 

MIND IS BRAHMAN 

1. mano brahmeti vyajdndt, manaso hy eva khalv imdni 
bhutani jay ante, manasd jdtdni jtvanti, manah prayanty abhisam- 
visanti. 

tad vijhdya, punar eva varunam pitaram upasasdra, adhihi 
bhagavo brahmeti, 

tarn hovdca, tapasd brahma vijijhdsasva , tapo brahmeti, 

sa tapo ’ tapyata, sa tapas taptvd. 

1. He knew that mind is Brahman. For truly, beings here 
are born from mind, when born, they live by mind and into 
mind, when departing, thev enter. 

Having known that, he again approached his father Varuna 
and said: 'Venerable Sir, teach me Brahman / 

To him, he said, 'Through austerity seek to know Brahman . 
Brahman is austerity/ 

He performed austerity; having performed austerity. 

When we look at animals, with their perceptual and instinctive ' 
consciousness we notice the inadequacy of the principle of life. As 
life outreaches matter, so does mind outreach life. There are forms 
of life without consciousness but there can be no consciousness 
without life. Mmd in the animals is of a rudimentary character. 
See Aitareya Aranyaka II. 3. 2. 1-5. Cp. Milindapanha where 
manasikdra, rudimentary mind is distinguished from panda or 
reason. Animals possess the former and not the latter. Even mind 
cannot account for all aspects of the universe. In the world of man, 
we have the play of intelligence. Intelligence frames concepts and 
ideals, plans means for their realization. So the pupil finds the 



55 & The Principal Upanisads III. 5. 1. 

inadequacy of the principle of mind and again approaches his 
father, who advises him to reflect further. 


Section 5 

INTELLIGENCE IS BRAHMAN 

I. vijndnam brahmcti vyajdnat, vijhdnddd hy eva klialv imdni 
bliutani jay ante , vijhdncna jdtdni jivanti , vijndnam prayanty 
abhisamvisanti. 

tad vijndya, pnnar cva varunam pitaram upasasdra, adlnhi 
bhagavo brahmcti; 

tarn hovdca, tapasd brahma vijijhasasva, tapo brahmcti ; 

sa tapo ’ tapyata, sa tapas taptvd. 

1. He knew that intelligence is Brahman. For truly, beings 
here are born from intelligence, when born, they live by 
intelligence and into intelligence, when departing, they enter. 

Having known that, he again approached his father Varuna, 
and said, ‘Venerable Sir, teach me Brahman .’ 

To him, he said, ‘Through austerity, seek to know Brahman . 
Brahman is austerity.’ 

He performed austerity ; having performed austerity, 

Intelligence again is not the ultimate principle. The categories 
of matter, life, mind and intelligence take us higher and higher 
and each is more comprehensive than the preceding. Men with their 
conflicting desires, divided minds, oppressed by dualities are not 
the final products of evolution. They have to be transcended. In the 
intellectual life there is only a seeking. Until we transcend it, there 
can be no ultimate finding. Intellectual man, who uses mind, life 
and body is greater than mind, life and body but he is not the end 
of the cosmic evolution as he has still a secret aspiration. Even as 
' matter contained life as its secret destiny and had to be delivered of 
it, life contained mind and mind contained intelligence and intelli- 
gence contains spirit as its secret destiny and presses to be delivered 
of it. Intelligence does not exhaust the possibilities of consciousness 
and cannot be its highest expression. Man’s awareness is to be 
enlarged into a superconsciousness with illumination, joy and power. 
The crown of evolution is this deified consciousness. 



III. 6. i. Taittinya Upanisad 557 

Section 6 

BLISS IS BRAHMAN 

1. anando brahmeti vyajdndt , anandddd hy eva khalv imdni 
bhutdni jdyante , dnandena jatdni jivanti, dnandam prayanty 
abhisarhvisanti , 

sai$d bhargavl vdruni vidyd , parame vyoman pratisthitd, ya 
evam veda pratitisthati , annavdn annddo bhavati , mahdn bhavati, 
prajayd paiubhir brahma-varcasena mahdn kirtyd. 

1. He knew that Brahman is bliss. For truly, beings here 
are born from bliss, when born, they live by bliss and into bliss, 
when departing, they enter. 

This wisdom of Bhrgu and Varuna, established in the highest 
heaven, he who knows this, becomes established. Pie becomes 
possessor of food and eater of food. He becomes great in off- 
spring and cattle and in the splendour of sacred wisdom ; great 
in fame. 

The higher includes the lower and goes beyond it. Brahman is 
the deep delight of freedom. 

The Upanisad suggests an analogy between the macrocosm, 
nature and the microcosm, man, an equation between intelligibility 
and being. The ascent of reality from matter to God as one of in- 
creasing likeness to God is brought out. While man has all these 
five elements in his being, he may stress one or the other, the 
material or the vital or the mental or the intellectual or the 
spiritual. He who harmonises all these is the complete man. For 
Aristotle the human soul is, in a certain sense, everything. 

This analysis is accepted by the Buddha who speaks of five kinds 
of food for the physical, vital, psychological, logical and spiritual 
elements. The enjoyment of nirvana is the food for spirit, nibbutim 
bhuhjamdna. Ratana Sutta. Cp. Augustine: ‘Step by step was I 
led upwards, from bodies [anna) to the soul which perceives by 
means of the bodily senses [prana) ; and thence to the soul's inward 
faculty which is the limit of the intelligence of animals {mantis) ', 
and thence again to the reasoning faculty to whose judgment is 
referred the knowledge received by the bodily senses [vijhdna). 
And when this power also within me found itself changeable it lifted 
itself up to its .own intelligence, and withdrew its thoughts from 
experience, abstracting itself from the contradictory throng of 
sense-images that it might find what that light was wherein it was 
bathed when it cried out that beyond all doubt the unchangeable 
is to be preferred to the changeable; whence also it knew that 
unchangeable; and thus with the flash of one trembling glance it 
arrived at That which is’ [u.uinda). Confessions VII, 23. 



55 ? The Principal Upani$ads III. 7. 1. 

Augustine describes the highest state as one of joy: The highest 
spiritual state of the soul in this life consists in the vision and con- 
templation of truth, wherein are joys, and the full enjoyment of the 
highest and truest good, and a breath of serenity and eternity/ 1 

The grades of existence and of value correspond so that the class 
which has the lowest degree of reality in the existential sense has 
the lowest degree of value. 

Behind all our growth is the perfection of ourselves which animates 
it; we are constantly becoming until we possess our being. The 
changing consciousness goes on until it is able to transcend change. 
The Beyond is the absolute fulfilment of our self-existence. It is 
ananda, the truth behind matter, life, mind, intelligence, that controls 
them all by exceeding them. 

The Upanisad suggests an epic of the universe. From out of utter 
nothingness, asat, arises, the stellar dance of teeming suns and 
planets whirling through vast etheric fields. In this immensity of 
space emerges the mystery of life, vegetations, forests; soon living 
creatures, crawling, jumping animals, the predecessors of human 
beings. Human intelligence with its striving for ideals has in it the 
secret of sciences and philosophies, cultures and civilisations. We 
can make the world wonderful and beautiful or tragic and evil. 


Section 7 

THE IMPORTANCE OF FOOD 

1. annam na nindydt, tad vratam, prdno vd annam, iariram 
ann didam , prune sartram pratisthitam , satire pranah pratisthitah , 
tad etad annam anne pratisthitam , sa ya clad annam anne 
pratisthitam veda pratitisthati, annavdn annddo bhavati, mahan 
bhavati, prajayd pasiibliir brahma-varcasena mahdn kirtya. 

1. Do not speak ill of food. That shall be the rule. Life, 
verily, is food. The body is the eater of food. In life is the body 
established; life is established in the body. So is food established 
in food. He who knows that food is established in food, becomes 
established. He becomes an eater of food, possessing food. He 
becomes great in offspring and cattle and in the splendour of 
sacred wisdom; great in fame. 

The world owes its being to the interaction of an enjoyer and an 
object enjoyed, i.e. subject and object. This distinction is superseded 
in the Absolute Brahman. 


Dom Cuthbcrt Butler: Western Mysticism (1922), p. 59. 



III. io. i. Taittinya Upanisad 559 

Section 8 

FOOD AND LIGHT AND WATER 

1. annam na paricaksita , tad vratam, apo vcl annam, jyotir 
annadam , apsu jyotih- pratisthitam, jyotisy dipah pratisthitdh , 
tad etad annam annc pratisthitam , 5a ya c/arf annam anne 
pratisthitam veda pratitisthati, annavdn annado bhavati, mahdn 
bhavati prajaya pasubhir brahma-varcasena, mahdn kirtya. 

1. Do not despise food. That shall be the rule. Water, 
verily, is food. Light is the eater of food. Light is established 
in water; water is established in light. Thus food is established 
in food. 

He who knows that food is established in food, becomes 
established. He becomes an eater of food, possessing food. 
He becomes great in offspring and cattle, and in the splendour 
of sacied wisdom, great in fame. 


Section 9 

FOOD AND EARTH AND ETHER 

1. annam bahu kurvita, tad vratam, prthivi vd annam ? dkaso> 
nnddah, prthivydm dkdsali pratisthitah, dkdisc prthivi pratisthita, 
tad etad annam anne pratisthitam , sa ya etad annam anne 
pratisthitam veda pratitistliati , annavdn annado bhavati , mahdn 
bhavati prajaya pasubhir brahma-varcasena, mahdn kirtya. 

1. Make for oneself much food. That shall be the rule. The 
earth, verily, is food; ether the eater of food. In the earth is 
ether established, in ether is the earth established. Thus food 
is established in food. He who knows that food is established 
in food, becomes established. He becomes an eater of food, 
possessing food. He becomes great in offspring and cattle, 
and in the splendour of sacred wisdom, great in fame. 


Section 10 

MEDITATION IN DIFFERENT FORMS 

1. na kaheana vasatau pratydcaksiia , tad vratam , tasmdd 
yayd kayd ca vidhaya bahv » nnam prdpnuydit, arddhyasmd annam 



569 The Principal Upanisads III. io. 4. 

ity dcaksate , etad vai mukhato'nnam raddham mitkhato* smd 
annum rddhyate, etad vai madhyato’nnam raddham , madhy- 
ato’sma annam rddhyate , etad vd antato’nnam raddham , antato f - 
smd annum rddhyate. 

1. Do not deny residence to anybody. That shall be the 
rule. Therefore, in any way whatsoever one should acquire 
much food. Food is prepared for him, they say. 

If this food is given first, food is given to the giver first. If 
this food is given in the middle, food is given to the giver in the 
middle. If this food is given last, food is given to the giver last. 

2. ya evam veda ksema iti vdei , yoga-ksema iti prdndpdnayoh, 
karmeti liastayoli , gatir iti pad ay oh , vimuktir iti pdyan , iti 
mdnusTh samdjhdh , atha daivlh, trptir iti vrstau , balam iti 
vidyuti. 

2. For him who knows this, -as preservation in speech, as 
acquisition and preservation in the inbreath and the outbreath, 
as work in the hands, as movement in the feet, as evacuation 
in the anus, these are the human recognitions. 

Next, with reference to the deities, as satisfaction in rain, as 
strength in the lightning. 

yoga-ksema : see B.G. II. 45; IX. 22. 

3. yasa iti pasusu , jyotir iti naksatresu, prajdtir amrtam 
dnanda ity upasthc, sarvam ity dkdse , tat pratisthety updsTta , 
pratisthavdn bhavati , tan maha ity npdsita, mahdn bhavati , tan 
mana ity updsTta mdnavdn bhavati. 

3. As fame in cattle, as light in the stars, as procreation, 
irrtmortality and bliss in the generative organ, as the all in 
space. 

Let one contemplate That as the support, one becomes 
the possessor of support; let one contemplate That as great, 
oi^e becomes great. Let one contemplate That as mind; one 
becomes possessed of mindfulness. 

4. tan nama ity updsTta , namyam tesmai kdmdh , tad bvahmety 
upasita , brahmavd?i bhavati , tad brahmanuh parimara ity 
updsTta , paryenam mriyantc dvisantas sapatndh pari ye priyd 
bhrdtrvydh 

sa yas cdyam punisc yas cd savaditye sa ckah. 

4. Let one contemplate That as adoration ; desires pay 
adoration to him. Let one contemplate That as the Supreme, 
he becomes possessed of the Supreme. Let one contemplate 



III. io. 5. Taittinya Upanisad 361 

That as Brahman's destructive agent, one's hateful rivals 
perish as also those rivals whom he does not like. 

He who is here in the person and he who is yonder in the Sun, 
he is one. 

See Aitarcya Brahmana. VIII. 28; T.U. II. 8. 

Brahma: the Supreme. Sdyana interprets Brahma as Veda and 
brahmavdn as one who has a perfect command over the Veda, 
bhratrvydh: rivals: literally it means cousins (father’s brother’s sons), 
who arc generally supposed to be unfriendly. 

5. sa ya evam-vit asmal lokdt pretya , etani anna-may am 
dlmdnam upasamkramya, etam py ana-may am dtmdnam upasam - 
kramya, etam mano-mayam dtmdnam upasamkramya , etarh 
vijhdna-mayam dtmdnam upasamkramya , etam dnanda-mayam 
dtmdnam upa samkramya , imdn lokan kdmdnni kamarupy 
anusahearan , ctat satna gdyannaste 

hd vu hd vu ha vu. 

5. He who knows this, on departing from this world, reaching 
on to that self which consists of food, reaching on to that 
self which consists of life, reaching on to that self wdiich consists 
of mind, reaching on to that self which consists of under- 
standing, reaching on to that self which consists of bliss, goes 
up and down these worlds, eating the food he desires, assuming 
the form he desires. He sits singing this chant : 

Oh Wonderful, Oh Wonderful, Oh Wonderful. 

The enlightened one attains unity with the All. He expresses 
wonder that the individual with all limitations has been able to 
shake them off and become one with the All. To get at the Real, 
we must get behind the forms of matter, the forms of life, the forms 
of mind, the forms of intellect. By removing the sheaths, by shaking 
off the bodies, we realise the Highest. l*his is the meaning of vastrd- 
paharana . "Across mv threshold naked all must pass.’ 

When we realise the truth we can assume any form we choose. 

A MYSTICAL CHANT 

aham annum , aliam annum , ahum annum; aham annadah, 
aham annadah • aham annadah; aham slokakrt , aham slokakrt , 
aham slokakrt; aham asmi prathamaja rtasya , purvam devcbhyo 
amrtasya* ndbhd i , yo via dadati , sa id eva via, vdh, aham 
annam annum adantam ddmi, aham visvavi bhuvanavi abhya- 
bhavdm. suvarna jyotih 

ya evarh veda ity upani. m at. 



563 The Principal Upanisads III. 10. 5. 

I am food, I am food, I am food. I am the food-eater. 
I am the foodeater. I am the foodeater. I am the combining 
agent. I am the combining agent. I am the combining agent. 
I am the first born of the world-order, earlier than the gods, 
in the centre of immortality. Whoso gives me, he surely does 
save thus. I, who am food, eat the eater of food. 

I have overcome the whole world. I am brilliant like the sun. 

He who knows this. Such is the secret doctrine. 

prathanuijd: hiranya-garbhopy aham. A. 

the eater of food: anna-sabditam a-cetanam , tad-bhoktdram cetanarii ca 
admi vydpnomi. R. 

overcome the ivorld: abhibhavdmi parenesvarena svarupena. $. upasam- 
hardmi . A. 

like the sun: suvar ddityah ( nakara upamdrthah) dulitya iva. S. 
kamanxyo dedipyamdna sarlro bhavati. R. 

This is a song of joy. The manifold diversity of life is attuned to a 
single harmony. * A lyrical and rapturous embrace of the universe 
is the result. The liberated soul filled with delight recognises its 
oneness with the subject and the object, the foodeater and food and 
the principle which unites them. He feels in different poises that he 
is one with Brahman, with Isvara and with Hiranya-garbha. 

The chant proclaims that the enlightened one has become one 
with all. 1 The liberated soul passes beyond all limitations and attains 
to the dignity of God Himself. He is one with God in all His fulness 
and unity. It is not a mere fellowship with the chasm between the 
Creator and the created. Here is the exalted experience of one who 
not merely believes in God, or who is merely convinced of His 
existence by logical arguments or one who regards Him as an object 
to be adored and worshipped in thought and feeling but of one for 
whom God is no more object but personal life. He lives God or rather 
is lived by Him. He is boride up and impelled by the spirit of God 
who has become his inward power and life. 

1 Hallaj expressed in the most uncompromising terms this conviction 
• of Oneness with the Supreme. Ana’ l haqq, T am the real.' The Sull theory 
is that man becomes one with God when he transcends Ins phenomenal 
self (Jana). Ghazali believes that Hallaj ’s statement is nothing more 
than the conviction belonging to the highest stage of unitarianism. In 
order to attain to the immediate vision of the Divine, the human soul 
must be lifted altogether above the natural order and* made to partake 
of the divine nature. 2 Peter I. 4. Cp. ‘Delovcd, we are God's children 
now; it does not yet appear what we shall be, but we know- that when 
he appears we shall be like him, for wc shall see him as he is' (1 John 
III. 2). 'God made all things through me when I had my existence in 
the unfathomable ground of God/ Eckhart, E. T. G. Evans, Vol. I, 
P- 589 . 



ITI. io. 5. Taittinya Upanisad 563 

All distinctions of food and foodeater, object and subject are 
transcended. He goes up and down the worlds as he chooses, eating 
what food he likes, putting on what form he likes. 

Suresvara says: ‘All this is divided twofold, food and foodeater. 
The enlightened one says, “I who am the Atman, the Real and 
the Infinite, am myself this twofold world. ” 1 

The Supreme is the subject and the object as well as the link 
between them. 

I have overcome the whole world. 

Cp. this with the Buddha's declaration, after attaining abhisam- 
bodhi : 

‘Subdued have I all, all-knowing am I now. 

Unattached to all things, and abandoning all, 

Finally freed on the destruction of all craving, 

Knowing it myself, whom else should I credit ? 

There is no teacher of mine, nor is one like me; 

There is none to rival me in the world of men and gods; 
Truly entitled to honour am I, a teacher%inexcelled. 

Alone am I a Supreme Buddha, placid and tranquil, 

To found the kingdom of righteousness, I proceed to Kami's 
capital. 

Beating the drum of immortality in the world enveloped 
by darkness.' 

Ariyaparyesana Sutta. Majjhima Nikaya. 

Cp. Richard of St. Victor: ‘The third grade of love is when the 
mind of man is rapt into the abyss of the divine light, so that, 
utterly oblivious of all exterior things, it knows not itself and passes 
wholly into its God. In this state, while the mind is alienated from 
itself, while it is rapt unto the secret closet of the divine privacy, 
while it is on all skies encircled by the conflagration of divine love 
and is intimately penetrated and set on fire through and through, it 
strips olf self and puts 011 a certain divine condition, and being 
configured to the beauty gazed upon, itlpasses into a new kind of 
glory.’ Dom Cuthbcrt Butler: Western Mysticism ( 1922 ), p. 7 . 




ISA UPANISAD 

The Ua, also called the Isdvasya Upanisad, derives its name 
from the opening word of the text Isdvasya or Isa. It belongs 
to the Vajasaneyi school of the Yajur Veda. The Vdjasaneya 
Samhita consists of forty chapters of which this Upanisad is 
the last. Its main purpose is to teach the essential unity of God 
and the world, being and becoming. It is interested not so 
much in the Absolute in itself, Parabrahman, as in the Absolute 
in relation to the world, Paramehara. It teaches that life in 
the world and life in the Divine Spirit are not incompatible. 



INVOCATION 


purnam adah, purnam idam, purnat purnam udacyatc 
piirnasya purnam addya purnam cvdvasisyate. 

That is full; this is full. The full comes out of the full. Taking 
the full from the full the full itself remains. Aum, peace, peace, 
peace. 

Brahman is both transcendent and immanent. 

The birth or the creation of the universe does not in any manner 
affect the integrity of Brahman. 



i. Isa Upanisad 567 

GOD AND THE WORLD 

1. isdvdsyam idam sarvam yat kim ca jagatydm jagat 
tena tyaktena bhuhjitha , md grdhah kasyasvid dhanam. 

1. (Know that) all this, whatever moves in this moving 
world, is enveloped by God. Therefore find your enjoyment in 
renunciation; do not covet what belongs to others. 

All things which move and change derive their significance 
from their relation to the one eternal truth. ‘The invisible always 
continuing the same, but the visible never the same/ Plato: 
Phaedo 64. 

Isdvdsyam: enveloped by God. The world does not stand apart from 
God, but is pervaded by Him. Cp. the Psalmist: ‘The earth is the 
Lord’s and the fulness thereof; the world and they that dwell 
therein.’ The Supreme is viewed not as the Absolute Brahman but 
as the cosmic Lord. 

tsd: isitd paramesvarah. vdsyam , nivdsanlyam , vydpyam. Kur ana- 
ray ana. The world is steeped in God. It is the ‘ household of God.’ 
God dwells in the heart of all things. Isvardtmakam eva sarvam , 
bhrantyd yad anlsvara-rupcna grhltam. A. 

jagat: The universe is a becoming, not a thing. It is a series of change- 
ful happenings. 

tyaktena bhuhjlthah: enjoy through tydga, or renunciation of self-will. 
Enjoy all things by renouncing the idea of a personal proprietary 
relationship to them. If we recognise that the world in which we live 
is not ours, we enjoy it. When we know that the one Real indwells all, 
we will get rid of the craving for acquisition. Enjoy by giving up the 
sense of attachment. When the individual is subject to ignorance, 
he is not conscious of the unity and identity behind the multiplicity 
and so cannot enter into haimony and oneness with the universe 
and thus fails to enjoy the world. When, however, he realises his 
true existence which is centred in the Divine, he becomes free from 
selfish desire and possesses, enjoys the world, being in a state of non- 
attachment. Self-denial is at the root of spiritual life. ‘If any one 
wish to come after me, let him deny himself.’ Matthew XVI. 24. 

Sometimes this passage is interpreted as meaning: enjoy whTit 
is allotted to you by God (tena). Do not ask for more than what 
is given. 

md grdhah: covet not. Do not be greedy. When we realise that God 
inhabits each object, when we rise to that cosmic consciousness, 
covetousness disappears. Cp. Wotton’s Paraphrase of Hoi ace which 
is found in Palgrave’s Golden Treasury : 

This man is freed from servile bonds 
Of hope to rise, or fear to fall ; 

Lord of himself, though not of lands 
And having nothing, yet hath all. 

T 



568 The Principal Upanisads i. 

kasyasvid dhanam. This is taken independently. Whose indeed is 
wealth? It belongs to the Lord. ‘What hast thou that thou hast not 
received/ I. Cor. IV. 7. If we have craving for wealth, we are not 
true believers. 

paramasnhydi bdndhave kalatre suta-tanayd-pitr-mdtr-bhrtyavarge 

sathamatir upaydti yorthatysnam purusa-pasur na vasudeva- 
bhaktah. 

purusapasu is the animal man who is governed by hunger and thirst 
and not the true human being with foresight and understanding. 
See Aitareya Ar any aka II. 3. 2. 

By contemplating the fact that the giver of all is the Supreme 
Lord, we cultivate the quality of detachment, vairdgya. For, the 
meaning of this verse is to encourage all those who wish to understand 
the self, to devote themselves to final release and give up all worldly 
desires. The exterior sacrifice is representative of the interior 
whereby the human soul offers itself to God. 

Gandhi’s comment on this verse is interesting. ‘The mantra 
describes God as the Creator, the Ruler and the Lord. The seer to 
whom this mantra or verse was revealed was not satisfied with the 
very frequent statement that God was to be found everywhere. 
But he went further and said: “Since God pervades everything, 
nothing belongs to you, not even your own body. God is the undis- 
puted unchallengeable Master of everything you possess. If it is 
universal brotherhood— not only brotherhood of all human beings, 
but of all living things — I find it in this mantra. If it is unshakable 
faith in the Lord and Master— and all the adjectives you can think 
of — I find it in this mantra. If it is the idea of complete surrender 
to God and of the faith that he will supply all that I need, then again 
I say I find it in this mantra. Since he pervades every fibre of my 
being and of all of you, I derive from it the doctrine of equality 
of all creatures on earth and it should satisfy the cravings of all 
philosophical communists. This mantra tells me that I cannot hold 
as mine anything that belongs to God and that, if my life and that 
of all who believe in this mantra has to be a life of perfect dedication, 
it follows that it will have to be a life of continual service of fellow 
creatures.’ Address at Kottayam, Harijan , 1937. 

Indifference to the pains of the world, to the suffering of living 
creatures is due either to callousness or thoughtlessness. But when 
we realise that we are all the concern of the same Creator, the objects 
of His care, we feel within ourselves an unburdening, a release, a 
sense that everyone has a right to his own place in the same universe. 
When we envisage all that exists as having its being in the great 
first principle of all beings, we rush forward to help all those who 
come within our reach. 



2 . 


569 


Isa Upanisad 

WORK AND WISDOM 

2. kurvann eveha karmani jijlviset iatam samah 
evam tvayi nanyatheto' sti na karma lipyate nare. 

2. Always performing works here one should wish to live a 
hundred years. If you live thus as a man, there is no way other 
than this by which karman (or deed) does not adhere to you. 

kurvann eva: performing works and without desiring their fruits. 

The first verse tells us that we win our way to inward freedom, 
by renunciation, by the withdrawal from the fortunes and mis- 
fortunes that shape the outward side of our existence. We are called 
upon to withdraw from the world’s work not in body but in mind, 
in intention, in spirit. ‘Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven.’ 
jijlviset : should wish to live jivitum icchet. 

na karma lipyate nare: by which karma does not adhere to you. 
When we act by merging the individual in the cosmic purpose and 
by dedicating all action to God, our action does nflt bind, since we 
are no more entangled in selfish desire. 

S. argues that this and the following verses refer to those who are 
not competent to know the self and who are called upon to perform 
works enjoined in the Vedas. He makes out that the way of know- 
ledge is for sariinyasins and the way of action for others. 

The purport of this verse, is, however, that salvation is attained 
by the purification of the heart resulting from the performance of 
works done with the notion that these are all for the sake of the Lord 
and dedicated to Him. Works done in this spirit do not bind the soul. 

According to Sariikarananda, this verse is addressed to those 
who desire salvation, but cannot renounce the world. 

The importance of work is stressed in this verse. We must do 
works and not refrain from them. Embodied man cannot refrain 
from action, he cannot escape the life imposed on him by his em- 
bodiment. The way of true freedom is not abstention from action but 
conversion of spirit. 

Wisdom is beautiful but barren without works. St. James: ‘Faith, 
apart from works, is dead.’ II. 26. 

The author points out that action is not incompatible with 
wisdom. There is a general tendency to regard contemplation as 
superior to action. This judgment is not peculiar to India. In the 
New Testament % Martha chose the good part and Maiy the better. 
What Martha chose, ministering to the hungry, the thirsty and the 
homeless will pass away, but Mary chose to contemplate, see the 
vision of God and it shall not be taken away from her. The Upanisad 
says that it is not necessary to withdraw from active life to give 
oneself up to the contemplative. Besides, no one can come to con- 
templation without having exercised the works of the active life. 



5 7 ° The Principal Upanisads 4. 

St. Gregory says, 'We ascend to the heights of contemplation by 
the steps of the active life/ Morals on Job, XXXI. 102. 


THE DENYING SPIRITS 

3. asurya ndma ie loka andhena tamasd vrtdh 

tdms te prctydbhigacchanti ye kc cdtmahano janah. 

3. Demoniac, verily, are those worlds enveloped in blinding 
darkness, and to them go after death, those people who are 
the slayers of the self. 

asurya: appertaining to the asuras , those who delight only in physical 
life (< asu ), those who are devoted to the nourishing of their lives, 
and addicted to sensual pleasures. 
v. asurya: sunless. 

Siddhdnta-kaumudi gives two derivations for the word surya : 
saraty dkdse siiryah kartari kyap nipatandd u-tvam yadvd su prerane 
tudddih suvati, karmani lokam prerayati kyapo rut. 

He is the lord who makes men work. From him are derived all 
incentives to work. 

For S. asuras are those who are not the knowers of the Self. The 
term includes all persons, from men to the highest gods, who have 
not the knowledge of the Supreme Self. 

For Sarhkarananda those who desire riches are asuras as, by so 
doing they slay (forget) the all-pervading Self. 
andhena tamasd: ignorance which consists in the inability to see one's 
self. 

dtmahano janah: Those who neglect the spirit, prdkytd avidvamso 
jand dtmahana ucyante, tena hy dtma-hanana-dosena samsaranti te. 
Such souls are destined for the joyless, demoniac regions, enveloped 
in darkness. See B.U. IV. 4. 11. A says that the reference is to 
those who do not know the Self and thus attribute to it agency, etc. 


THE SUPREME IS IMMANENT AND TRANSCENDENT 

4. anejad ckam manaso javiyo nainad deva dpnuvan purva- 
marsat 

tad dhdvato’nyan-atyeti tisthat tasminn - apo mdtariiva 
dadhdti. 

4. (The spirit) is unmoving, one, swifter than the mind. 
The senses do not reach It as It is ever ahead of them. Though 
Itself standing still It outstrips those who run. In It the all- 
pervading air supports the activities of beings. 



5. Isa Upanisad 

devdh: senses, dyotandd dev ah caksurddtnlndriydni. §. 
apah: activities — karmani. §. 

matarisvan: air, because it moves, svasiti , in the sky, antariksc. 
matarisva vdyith, sarva-prdna-bhyt kriydtmakah , yad-dsraydni kdrya- 
kdrana-jatdni yasminn otani protdni ca , yat sutrasamjnakam, sarvasya 
jagato vidhdrayity sa matarisva. S. 

It is that whose activity sustains all life, on which all causes and 
effects depend and in which all these inhere, which is called the 
thread which supports all the worlds (through which it runs). 

For Samkarananda, matarisvan is sutratman. 

The whole world has the supreme Self as its basis, sarvd hi 
kdrya-kdranddi-vikriyd nityacaitanydtmasvarupe sarvdspadabhute saty 
eva bhavanti. S. 

The Supreme is one essence but has two natures, an eternal 
immutability and an unceasing change. It is stillness and movement. 
Immovable in Itself, all things are moved from It. The unity and 
manifoldness are both aspects of the life divine. Unity is the truth 
and multiplicity is its manifestation. The former is # the truth, vidyd , 
the latter ignorance, avidyd. The latter is not false except when it is 
viewed in itself, cut off from the eternal unity. Unity constitutes 
the base of multiplicity and upholds it but multiplicity does not 
constitute and uphold the unity. 

5. tad ejati tan naijati tad dure tad vad antike 

tad antarasya sarvasya tad u sarvasydsya bdhyatah. 

5. It moves and It moves not; It is far and It is near; It is 
within all this and It is also outside all this. 

These apparently contradictory statements are not suggestive of 
the mental unbalance of the writer, lie is struggling to describe 
what he experiences through the limitations of human thought 
and language. The Supreme is beyond # the categories of thought. 
Thought is symbolic and so cannot conceive of the Absolute except 
through negations; yet the Absolute is not a void. It is all that is in 
time and yet is beyond time. 

It is far because it is not capable of attainment by the ignorant 
and it is very near to the knowing for it is their very self. 

Vedanta Desika quotes two verses to show the distance and 
the intimacy of the Supreme to the undevout and the devout 
respectively : 

Pardnmukhdndm govinde, visaydsaktacctasdm 
tesam tat paramam brahma dtirdd duratare stliitam. 
tan-mayatvena govinde ye nardnyasta-cetasah 
visaya-tydginas tesdm vijneyam ca tad antike. 

These verses indicate the two sides of the Divine, the one and 
the many, the unmoving and the moving. They do not deny the 



The Principal Upanisads 7. 

reality of either. They see the one in the many. The one is the 
eternal truth of things; the many its manifestatation. The latter is 
not a figment of the mind. It becomes so when it is divorced from the 
sense of its eternal background. 

All things and beings are the manifestation of the One Supreme, 
which is described through paradoxes. It is swifter than the mind, 
the senses cannot grasp It; It eludes their hold. Standing, It out- 
strips all. Rooted in It, all the cosmic forces energise the whole 
universe. It moves and yet is motionless. It is near, yet distant. 
It is inside of all and outside of all. 

6. yas tu sarvdni bhutdni atnmny evdnupasyati 
sarvabhutesu cdtmdnam tato na vijugupsate. 

6. And he who sees all beings in his own self and his own 
self in all beings, he does not feel any revulsion by reason of 
such a view. 

See B.G. VI. 30. 

vijugupsate -v. vicikitsate. He has no doubts. 

He shrinks from nothing as he knows that the One Self is mani- 
fested in the multiple forms, dtma-vyatiriktani na pasyati. S. 

This verse speaks of the transformation of the soul, its absorption 
in God in whom is the whole universe. It also points out how unity 
is the basis of multiplicity and upholds the multiplicity. Therefore 
the essence of the Supreme is its simple Being. Multiplicity is its 
becoming. Brahman is the one self of all and the many are the 
becomings of the one Being. 

7. yasmin sarvdni bhutdny dtmaivdbhud vijanatah 
tatra ko mohah hah sokah ckatvam anupasyatah. 

7. When, to one who knows, all beings have, verily, become 
one with his own self, then what delusion and what sorrow can 
be to him who has seen the oneness ? 

moha: delusion or the veiling of the self, avarana. 

soka: sorrow due to viksepa or distraction in the manifestations. 

•§. 

When the unity is realised by the individual he becomes liberated 
from sorrow, which is the product of dualities. When the self of the 
perceiver becomes all things, there can be no source of disturbance 
or care. The vision of all existences in the Self ancj of the Self in all 
existences is the foundation of freedom and joy. The Isa, the Lord 
is immanent in all that moves in this world. There is no opposition 
between the one and the many. 

The Upanisad opens with the conception of God immanent in 
the world, asks us to see the creation in God and does not overlook 
the fact of a fundamental oneness, ekatvam which alone is Being. 



9- Isa Upanisad £73 

Eckhart: 'Does the soul know God in the creatures, that is merely 
evening light? Does she know creatures in God; that is morning 
light ? But does the soul know God as He who alone is Being, that is 
the light of midday?' Rudolf Otto: Mysticism: East and West (1932), 
p. 52 n. 

8. sa paryagac chukram, akdyam , avranam , asnaviram , 
suddham , apdpaviddham 

kavir mantsi , paribhuh, svayambhuh, yathdtathyato’rthdn. 
vyadadhac chdsvatlbhyas samdbhyah. 

8. He has filled all; He is radiant, bodiless, invulnerable, 
devoid of sinews, pure, untouched by evil. He, the seer, thinker, 
all-pervading, self-existent has duly distributed through endless 
years the objects according to their natures. 

kavih: the seer. He who knows the past, the present and the future 
kavih kranta-darsi sarva-drk. S. He has intuitive wisdom, while 
manisi is the thinker, manlsi manasa isitd sarvajha isvarah. 
paribhuh: all-pervading. As the cosmic soul He pervades the universe. 

says that the omniscient Lord allotted different functions to the 
various and eternal prajd-patis known popularly as years. 
sarhvatsardkhyebhyah praja-patibhyah. S. See also B.U. I. 5. 14; 
PraSna I. 9. 


IGNORANCE AND KNOWLEDGE 

9. andhath tamah pravisanti yo’vidydm updsate 
tato bhuya iva te tamo ya u vidydydm ratdh. 

9. Into blinding darkness enter those who worship ignorance 
and those who delight in knowledge enter into still greater 
darkness, as it were. 

See B.U. IV. 4-10. 

S. interprets avidyd to mean ceremonial piety and vidya as knowledge 
of the deities. The former leads to the world of the manes and the 
latter to the world of gods. Cp. vidyayd deva-lokah karmana pity-lokah. 
B.U. II. 5. 16. §. feels that vidya cannot refer to the knowledge of* 
Brahman for it cannot lead to greater darkness. If we are lost in the 
world of birth, becoming, we overlook our pure being. If we con- 
centrate on the latter, we will also be onesided. We must look upon 
the Absolute as # the one and the many, as both the stable and the 
moving. It is both immanent and transcendent. 

The verse refers also to the dichotomy of work and wisdom and 
suggests that while those who are lost in works without the wisdom 
of the spirit enter into darkness, those who are exclusively devoted 
to the pursuit of wisdom, to the neglect of works, enter into still 
greater darkness. Selfish seekers of spiritual wisdom miss their aim. 



574 77 z£ Principal Upanisads n. 

The Upanisad repudiates both schools of thought — those who hold 
that salvation is attained only by means of works and those who 
hold that it is to be attained by knowledge alone. It supports 
Kumarila who advocates a combination of knowledge and works. 
Kumarila says that even as a bird cannot fly in the heaven by one 
wing only but only by both the wings, even so man can gain salvation 
only by the combined pursuit of knowledge and works. Contemplative 
and active lives should go together. ‘Faith without works is dead.' 

It is also said that avidya applies to the selfish people who desire 
worldly possessions and vidyd to those who say ‘I am Brahman ' 
without the actual realisation of this truth. £. 

The state of those who are lost in ignorance and cling to external 
props is pitiable indeed, but the state of those who arc intellectually 
learned but spiritually poor is worse. The darkness of intellectual 
conceit is worse than that of ignorance. The writer is here dis- 
tinguishing between knowledge by description and knowledge by 
acquaintance or experience. 

io. any ad evdliur vidyayd anyad dhur avidyaya 
iti susruma dhtrdndm ye nas tad vicacaksire. 

10. Distinct, indeed, they say, is the result of knowledge and 
distinct, they say, is the result of ignorance. Thus have we 
heard from those wise who have explained to us these. 

We cannot grasp the nature of ultimate Reality by either discursive 
knowledge or lack of it. 

If knowledge and ignorance are both real, it is because con- 
sciousness of oneness and consciousness of multiplicity are different 
sides of the supreme self-awareness. The one Brahman is the basis of 
numberless manifestations. 

11. vidydm cdvidydm ca y as tad vcdobhayam saha 
avidyaya mrlyum tirtvd vidyaydmrtam asnute. 

ii. Knowledge and ignorance, he who knows the two 
together crosses death through ignorance and attains life eternal 
through knowledge 

See Maitri. VII. 9. 

Vidyd is equated with knowledge of deities and avidya with karma , 
vidydm cdvidydm ca devatdjiidnam karma cety arthah. £. S makes 
out that by the performance of rites we overcome death and by the 
meditation on deities we attain immortality, which is becoming 
one with the deity meditated upon, amrtam devdtmabhavam. 

Vedanta Desika quotes a verse where it is said that by austerity 
we destroy sins and by wisdom we attain life eternal. 

tapo vidyd ca viprasya nihsreyasa karau ubhau 
tapasd kalmasam hanti vidyaydmytam asnute. 



12. • Isa Upanisad 575 

Kuranarayana says, ‘avidyayd vidyanga-rupatayd coditena karmand 
mytyum vidyotpatti-pratibandhaka-bhutam punya-papa-rupam prak- 
tanam karma tirtva niravasesam ullanghya vidyayd paramatmopasana- 
rupayd amytam ainute moksam prapnoii. 

ubhayam. saha: the two together. Works though they do not by 
themselves lead to salvation, are helpful in preparing our hearts 
for it. If we imagine that we can attain the highest wisdom without 
such previous preparation, we are mistaken. If we give ourselves 
to what is not knowledge we are mistaken, if we delight altogether 
in knowledge despising work we are also mistaken. 1 

Avidyd is regarded as an essential prerequisite for spiritual life. 
Man cannot rise to spiritual enlightenment if he has not first through 
avidyd become conscious of himself as a separate ego. In spiritual 
life we transcend this sense of separateness. To reach the higher self 
we must do battle with the lower. The endowment of intellectuality 
or avidyd is justified on the ground that it creates the conditions for 
its own transformation. If we remain at the intellectual level, look 
upon it not only as a means but as the end in itsetf, if we deny the 
reality of life eternal to which we have to rise, then we suffer from 
intellectual pride and spiritual blindness. The knowledge of discur- 
sive reason is essential, but it has to be transcended into the life of 
spirit. Avidyd must be transcended in Vidyd. Avidyd has its place. 
Without it there is no individual, no bondage, no liberation.* 

THE MANIFEST AND THE UNMANIFEST 

12. andham tamah pravisanti ye sambhutim upasate 
tato bhuya iva to tamo y a u sanibhutydm ratdh. 

12. Into blinding darkness enter those who worship the 
unmanifest and into still greater darkness, as it were, those 
who delight in the manifest. 

asambhuti: the unmanifest, the undifferentiated prakyti. We get our 
rewards according to our beliefs. 

1 Augustine: 'Two virtues arc set before the soul of man, the one 
active, the other contemplative; the one whereby we journey, the other 
whereby we reach our journey’s end; the one whereby we toil that our 
heart may be cleansed for the vision of God; the other whereby we repose 
and see God; the one lies in the precepts for carrying on this temporal 
life, the other in the doctrine of that life which is eternal. Hence it is 
that the one toils, and the other reposes ; for the former is in the purgation 
of sins, the latter in the light (or illumination) of the purgation effected. * 
Quoted in Dom Cuthbert Butler's Western Mysticism (1922). 

* 'Avidyd meaning the normal run of life based upon the procreative 
institution of marriage is treated as a means of preventing physical 
discontinuity, and vidyd meaning the leading of chaste life, the practice 
of austerities and the pursuit d higher knowledge as means of realising 
the immortality of soul.' B. M. Barua: Ceylon Lectures (1945), p. 201 n. 

1 



57^ The Principal Upanisads 14. 

asambhuti : non-becoming: Those who do not believe in re-birth may 
be referred to. 

sambhuti : the manifest, the lord of the phenomenal world, karya- 
brahma Hiranya-garbha. S. It is sometimes said that asambhuti means 
that the world has no creator, that it is produced, preserved and 
destroyed by its own nature. Those who hold such a view are the 
naturalists. See B.G. XVI. 8, 9, 20. 

The Supreme is neither of these in the sense that he is not also 
the other. If we identify the Supreme with the manifest, it would be 
pantheism in the sense that the whole of the Divine nature finds 
expression in the manifested world, leaving nothing over, and it is 
a wrong view. Again, if the world of becoming were not there, it 
would all disappear in what would seem a world of undifferenced 
abstraction. Within the depths of the spirit there is unfolded before 
us the drama of God's dealings with man and man's with God. 
Unity and multiplicity are both aspects of the Supreme and there- 
fore the nature of the Supreme is said to be inconceivable. 
ekatve 3 iti ndndtvam nanatve sati caikatd 
acintyam brahmano ruparh kas tad veditum arhati. 
quoted by R. on M.U. I. 3. 

13. anyad evahith sambhavdd anyad dxhur asambhavat 
iti susruma dhirdnam ye nas tad vicacaksire. 

13. Distinct, indeed, they say, is what results from the 
manifest, and distinct, they say, is what results from the 
unmanifest. Thus have we heard from those wise who have 
explained to us these. 

Those who worship the Creator H iranya-garbha obtain super- 
natural powers: those who worship the Unmanifested principle of 
prakrti get absorbed into it. sambhuteh kdrya-brahmopdsandt asam- 
bhuteh avyakrtdt. S. quoting from the Pur anas. 

14. sambhutim ca vindsam ca yas tad vedobhayam saha 
vinasena mrtyurn tirtvd sambhutyd amrtam asnute. 

14. He who understands the manifest and the unmanifest 
both together, crosses death through the unmanifest and attains 
life eternal through the manifest. 

§ tells us that sambhuti here means asambhuti. vinasa is taken as 
effect and so sambhuti. sambhutim ca vindsam cetyatravarnalopena 
nirdeso drastavyah prakrti-laya-phala-srutyanurodhdt. 

Vedanta Desika and Kur an dray ana dispute S' interpretation. 
atra sambhuti-vindsa-sabddbhydm srsli-pralaya-vivaksayd kdrya-hiran- 
ya-garbhasya avydkrta-pradhanasya copdsanam vidhtyata iti, sdmkara- 
vydkhydnam anupapannam. tatha sati mrtyu-taranamrtatva-prdpti- 
rupa-phala-vacandnaucitydt . 



i8. Isa Upanisad 377 

To be absorbed in the world around without turning to the 
principle at the base of it is one extreme; to be absorbed in the 
contemplation of the transcendent infinite indifferent to the events 
of the manifested world because they are likely to disturb inward 
serenity and self-complacency is another extreme. This verse asks 
us to lead a life in the manifested world with a spirit of non- 
attachment, with the mind centred in the unmanifest. We must live 
in this world without bfeing choked by it. We must centre our thoughts 
in the eternal remembering that the eternal is the soul of the temporal. 

PRAYER FOR THE VISION OF GOD 

15. hiranmayena pdtrena satyasydpihitam mukham 
tat tvarh ptisan apavrnu satyadharmaya dr stay e. 

15. The face of truth is covered with a golden disc. Unveil 
it, O Pusan, so that I who love the truth may see it. 

See B.U. V. 15. 1-3. 

16. pusann ekarse yama surya prdjapatya vyuha rasmm 

samuha tejah. 

yat te rupam kalyanatamam tat te pasyami yo sav asau 
purusah , so’ham asmi. 

16. O Pusan, the sole seer, O Controller, O Sun, offspring 
of Prajd-pati } spread forth your rays and gather up your radiant 
light that I may behold you of loveliest form. Whosoever is that 
person (yonder) that also am I. 

17. vdyur anilam amrtavi athedam bhasmdntam sanram 
aum krato smara krtam smara krato smara krtam smara. 

1 7. May this life enter into the immortal breath; then may 
this body end in ashes. 0 Intelligeftce, remember, remember 
wha,t has been done. Remember, 0 Intelligence, what has been 
done, Remember. 

18. agne naya supathd raye asman visvdni deva vayunani 

vidvan 

yuyodhyasmaj juhardnam eno bhuyisthdm te nama-uktim 
vidhema. 

18. O Agni, lead us, along the auspicious path to prosperity, 
0 God, who knowest all our deeds. Take away from us deceitful 
sins. We shall offer many prayers unto thee. 

Verses 15-18 are uttered at the time of death. Even to-day they 
are used by the Hindus in their funeral rites. We are required to 



5 7# The Principal Upanisads 18. 

remember our past deeds as their results accompany the departing 
soul and determine the nature of the future life. 

The Upanisad emphasises the unity of God and the world and 
the union of the two lives, the contemplative and the active. We 
cannot have the contemplative life without the active. We must 
cleanse our souls to ascend the heights of contemplation. The seers 
of the Upanisads, the Buddha, Jesus have set an example not to 
neglect the work of the w r orld through love of contemplation. They 
are noted for their stability and poise. Their calm was a vigilant 
one. They act without selfishness and help without patronising. 



KENA UPANISAD 

The Upanisad derives its name from the first word Kena, by 
whom, and belongs to the Santa Veda. It is also known as the 
Talavakara, the name of the Brahmana of the Santa Veda to 
which the Upanisad belongs. It has four sections, the first two 
in verse and the other two in prose. The metrical portion deals 
with the Supreme Unqualified Brahman, the absolute principle 
underlying the world of phenomena and the prose part of the 
Upanisad deals with the Supreme as God, Isvara. The know- 
ledge of the Absolute, para vidya, which secures immediate 
liberation ( sadyo-mukli ) is possible only for those who are able 
to withdraw their thoughts from worldly objects and con- 
centrate on the ultimate fact of the universe. The knowledge of 
Isvara, apard vidya, puts one on the pathway that leads to 
deliverance eventually {krama-mukti). The worshipping soul 
gradually acquires the higher wisdom whicl* results in the 
consciousness of the identity with the Supreme. 



INVOCATION 


I. apyayantn mamdhgani vdk pranas caksuh irotram atho 
balam indriyani ca sarvdni. 

1. May my limbs grow vigorous, my speech, breath, eye, 
ear as also my strength and all my senses. 

2. sarvam brahmopanisadam maham brahma nirdkuryam 
md md brahma nirdkarot anirdkaranam astu anirdkaranam 
mc’stu. 

2. All is the Brahman of the Upanisads. May I never discard 
Brahman. May the Brahman never discard me. May there 
be no discarding. May there be no discarding of me. 

3. tad dtmani nirate ya upanisatsu dharmds te mayi santu. 
Awn. sdntih, sdntih, sdntih. 

3. Let those truths which are (set forth) in the Upanisads 
live in me dedicated to the self. Awn, peace, peace, peace. 



i. 2. Kena Upanisad 581 

Section 1 

WHO IS THE REAL AGENT IN THE INDIVIDUAL? 

1. kenesitam patati presitam manah kena prdnah prathamah 
praiti yuktah. 

kenesitam vacant imam vadanti. caksuh srotram ka u devo 
yunakti. 

1. By whom willed and directed does the mind light on its 
objects? By whom commanded does life the first, move? At 
whose will do (people) utter this speech? And what god is it 
that prompts the eye and the ear? 

The questions put in this verse by the pupil imply that the 
passing things of experience are not all and they depend on a 
permanent reality. The necessity of a ground for the existence of 
finite beings is assumed here. The questions assume that there is 
a relation between reality and these phenomena, that the real 
governs the phenomenal. 


THE ALL-CONDITIONING YET INSCRUTABLE 
BRAHMAN IS THE AGENT 

2. irotrasya srotram manaso mano yad vaco ha vacant sa u 
prdnasya prdnah 

caksusas caksur atimucya dhirdh } prety asmal lokdt amrtd 
bhavanti. 

2. Because it is that which is the ear of the ear, the mind 
of the mind, the speech, indeed of the speech, the breath of 
the breath, the eye of the eye, the wise, giving up (wrong 
notions of their self-sufficiency) and departing from this world, 
become immortal. 

This verse contains the answers to the questions raised in the 
first verse. 

ear of the ear: it means that the self directs the ear. 

There is the Eternal Reality behind the mind, life and the senses, 
the mind of the mind, the life of the life. Brahman is not an object 
subject to mind, speech and the senses. He who knows it will gain 
life eternal and not the partial satisfactions of the earthly life. Here 
in the world of space and time we are always seeking the Beyond 
which is above space and time. There, we possess the consciousness 
that is beyond space and tune. 



589 The Principal Upanisads 1. 5. 

3. na tatra caksur gacchati na vdg gacchatino manah 
na vidmo na vijdnimo yathaitad anusisydt. 

3. There the eye goes not, speech goes not, nor the mind; 
we know not, we understand not how one can teach this. 

Katha. VI. 12; M.U. III. (i)-8; T.U. II. 4. 

The Supreme is not dependent on mind, life and senses for its 
being. 

‘Knowledge of a thing arises through the senses or the mind and 
since Brahman is not reached by either of these, we do not know of 
what nature it is. We are therefore unable to understand how anyone 
can explain that Brahman to a disciple. Whatever is perceivable 
by the senses, that it is possible to indicate to others, by genus, 
quality, function or relationship, jdti-gnna-kriyd-viscsanaih. Brahman 
does not possess any of these differentiating characters. Hence the 
difficulty in explaining its nature to disciples. $. 

4. any ad eva tad viditdd atho aviditdd adhi 

iti susruma piirvcsdm ye nas tad vydcacaksire. 

See Isa 10, 13. 

4. Other, indeed, is it than the known; and also it is above 
the unknown. Thus have we heard from the ancients who have 
explained it to us. 

It is above the known and the unknown, but it is not unknowable. 
Verse 6 says, tad eva brahma tva?h viddlii, ‘that, verily, is Brahman, 
know thou/ implies that the Brahman is not beyond our appre- 
hension. The writer suggests that this teaching has been trans- 
mitted by tradition. We cannot know it by logic, brahma caitanyam 
acaryopadesa paramparayaivddhigantavyam , na tarkatah. $. 

‘Those who know do not speak ; Those who speak do not know/ Tao 
Te’Ching. 56. A. Waley’s English translation The Way and the Power . 

5. yad vaca nabhyuditam yena vdg abhyndyate 

tad eva brahma tvam viddhi nedamyad idam updsate . 

• 5. That which is not expressed through speech but that. by 

which speech is expressed; that, verily, know thou, is Brahman, 
not what (people) here adoie. 

S argues that the author lays stress on the distinction between the 
Absolute Brahman who is one with the deepest self in us and livara 
who is the object of worship. 

Isvara as the indwelling spirit and not as an object who is external 
to us is what the Real is. God must cease to be a conceived and 
apprehended God but become the inward power by which we live. 
But this inward experience of God is felt only by the advanced 



i. 8. Kena Upanisad 583 

spirits. The simple, unreflective child-mind seeks God who is above 
and not within. The prayer of Solomon, ‘Hear thou in Heaven thy 
dwelling-place.’ 1 

not what people here adore . — The pure Godhead which is beyond all 
conceptual determinations and differentiations, when viewed con- 
ceptually and concretely becomes, as Eckhart says, an ‘idol,’ ‘Had 
I a God whom I could understand, I would no longer hold him for 
God.'* 

Spirit cannot be objectified. The revelation of Spirit is in the 
depths of one’s life and not in the objective world. However high 
our conception may be, so long as it is an objective attitude, it is 
a form of idolatry. When we are in bondage to the objective world, 
we look upon God as a great external force, a supernatural power 
who demands to be appeased. God is life and can be revealed only 
in spiritual life. The relation to the Supreme is an inward one 
revealing itself in the depths of spiritual life. Spirit is freedom, life, 
the opposite of necessity, passivity, death. This and the following 
verses affirm that Spirit must free itself from the ypke of necessity. 
The more completely we live in the divine the less do we reflect 
on him. 

Cp. Eckhart: When the soul beholds God purely, it takes all its 
being and its life and whatever it is from the depth of God; yet it 
knows no knowing, no loving, or anything else whatsoever. It rests 
utterly and completely within the being of God, and knows nothing 
but only to be with God. So soon as it becomes conscious that it 
sees and loves and knows God, that is in itself a departure. ’i 

6. yan manasd na manute yendhur mano matam 

tad eva brahma tvam viddhi nedam yad idam updsate. 

6. That which is not thought by the mind but by which, 
they say, the mind is thought (thinks) ; that, verily, know thou, 
is Brahman and not what (people) here adore. 

Brahman is the pure subject and should not be confused with any 
object, however exalted. 

7. yac caksusd na pasyati ycna cahsmhsi pasyati 

tad eva brahma tvam viddhi nedam yad idam updsate. 

7. That which is not seen by the eye but by which the eyes 
are seen (see); that, verily, know thou, is Brahman and not 
what (people) here adore. 

8. yac cchrotrena na srnnoti ycna srotram idam srutam 
tad eva brahma tvam viddhi nedam yad idam updsate . 

1 I Kings, VIII. 30. 

2 Rudolf Otto: Mysticism: East and West (1932), p. 25. 

3 Ibid., p. 134 - 



584 The Principal Upanisads II. 2. 

8. That which is not heard by the ear but by which the ears 
are heard (hear) ; that, verily, know thou, is Brahman and not 
what (people) here adore. 

9. yat prdnena prdniti ycna pranah praniyate 

tad cva brahma tvam viddhi nedamyad idam updsate. 

9. That which is not breathed by life, but by which life 
breathes; that, verily, know thou, is Brahman and not what 
(people) here adore. 


Section 2 

* THE PARADOX OF THE INSCRUTABILITY OF 
BRAHMAN 

1. yadi manyase suvedeti dabhvam evdpi nilnam tvam vettha 
brahmano rupam. 

yadasya tvam yadasya devesu atha mi mimdmsyam cva te, 
manye viditam. 

1. If you think that you have understood Brahman well, you 
know it but slightly, whether it refers to you (the individual 
self) or to the gods. So then is it to be investigated by you 
(the pupil) (even though) I think it is known. 

dabhram, another reading is daharam. Both mean alpam or small. 
Whatever is human or divine is limited by adjuncts and is thus not 
different from smallness or finitnde. The Brahman which is free 
from adjuncts is not an object of knowledge. The disciple is asked 
to ponder over this truth and he, through reasoning and intuitive 
experience, comes to a decision and approaches the teacher and 
says, ‘I think that Brahman is now understood by me.' 
evam dcaryoktah sisya ekdnte upavistah samdhitassan , yathoktam 
acaryena dgamam arthato viedrya tarkatas ca nirdharya, svdnubhavath 
kytvd, deary a-sakdsam upagamya, uvdea manye’ham atheddnirh 
viditam brahmeti. £. 

2. ndham manye suvedeti no na vedeti veda ca 
yo nas tad veda tad veda no na vedeti veda ca. 

2. I do not think that I know it well; nor do I think that I 
do not know it. He who among us knows it, knows it and he, 
too, does not know that he does not know. 

Tt is neither that I know him not, nor is it that I know him' is 
also an admissible rendering. 

There is the knowledge that we obtain through philosophical 
processes but there is also another kind of knowledge. The founder 



II. 3- Kena Upanisad 585 

and model of Egyptian monachism, St.- Antony, according to Cassian 
(Coll IX. 31), delivered this judgment about prayer/ That prayer is 
not perfect in which the monk understands himself or his own 
prayer/ (See Encyclopaedia of Religions and Ethics , article on Roman 
Catholic.) 

Cp. Dionysius: ‘There is that most divine knowledge of God 
which takes place through ignorance, in the union which is above 
intelligence, when the intellect quitting all things that are, and then 
leaving itself also, is united to the superlucent rays, being illuminated 
thence and therein by the unsearchable depth of wisdom/ Divine 
Names VII. 3. Louis of Blois observes: ‘The soul, having entered 
the vast solitude of the Godhead, happily loses itself; and enlightened 
by the brightness of most lucid darkness, becomes through know- 
ledge as if without knowledge, and dwells in a sort of wise ignorance/ 
Spiritual Mirror , Ch. XI. 

3. yasydmatam tasya matam matam yasya na vcda sah 
avijndtam vijdnatdm vijndtam avijdnatdm. 

3. To whomsoever it is not known, to him it is Known: to 
whomsoever it is known, he does not know. It is not understood 
by those who understand it; it is understood by those who do 
not understand it. 

This verse brings out how we struggle with the difficulties of human 
expression, how we confess to ourselves the insufficiency of mental 
utterance. 

The Supreme is not an object of ordinary knowledge but of 
intuitive realisation. If we think that we know Brahman and we can 
describe Him as an object perceived in nature or as the cause inferred 
from nature, we do not, in reality, know Him. Those who feel that 
they do not and cannot know Him in this manner do have a know- 
ledge of Him. Brahman cannot be comprehended as an object of 
knowledge. He can be realised as the subject in all knowledge. § says 
that the true knowledge is intuitive experience, samyag-darsanam. 
The process of abstraction employed by philosophers gives us an 
abstract idea, but the intuitive apprehension by which the soul is € 
carried away above all intelligence into a direct union with God is 
different from intellectual abstraction and negation. 

V ajracchedika Sutya , f. 38, XXVI: ‘Those who see me in any form 
or think of me in words, their way of thinking is false, they do not 
see me at all. The Beneficent Ones are to be seen in the Law, theirs 
is a Lawbody; the Buddha is rightly to be understood as being of 
the nature of the Law, he cannot be understood by any means/ 

Plotinus: ‘In other words, they have seen God and they do not 
remember? Ah, no: it is that they see God still and always, and that 
as long as they see, they cannot tell themselves they have had the 



586 The Principal Upanisads II. 4 

vision; such reminiscence is for souls that have lost it.' Enneads , 
IV. 4. 6. Nicolas of Cusa, De Vis. Dei, Ch. XVI: ‘What satisfies the 
intellect is not what it understands.’ 

Cp. Dionysius, the Areopagite: ‘God is invisible from excess of 
light. He who perceives God is himself in darkness. God’s all- 
pervading darkness is hidden from every light and veils all recogni- 
tion. And if anyone who sees God recognises and understands what 
he sees, then he himself hath not seen Him.’ 


THE VALUE OF THE KNOWLEDGE OF BRAHMAN 

4. pratibodlia-viditam matam amrtatvam hi vindate 
atmand vindate vlryarh vidyayd vindate amrtam . 

4. When it is known through every state of cognition, it 
is rightly known, for (by such knowledge) one attains life 
eternal. Through one's own self one gains power and through 
wisdom one gains immortality. 

pratibodha-viditam: through every state of cognition, bodham bodham 
prati viditam. S. The self is the witness of all states, sarva-pratyaya- 
darsi-cicchakti-svarupa-mdtrah. To know it as such is right knowledge. 
It is the absolute a priori, the certain foundation of all knowledge. 
If pratibodha-viditam is interpreted as leading to an inferential 
apprehension of the self, then self becomes a substance possessing 
the faculty of knowing and not knowledge itself, bodha-kriya-sak- 
timdn dtmd dravyam, na bodha-svarupa eva. $. Knowledge appears 
and disappears. When knowledge appears, the self is inferred; when 
knowledge disappears, the self becomes a mere unintelligent sub- 
stance. tathd nastabodho. dravyamdtram nirvisesah. S. The self is 
subject to changes. 

If pratibodha-viditam means knowledge of self by self, the object 
known is the conditioned Brahman and not the unconditioned 
Reality. ‘Pure spirituality is bound only to interior recollection and 
mental converse with God. So although (one) may make use of (these 
interventions) this will be only for a time; his spirit will at once 
come to rest in God and he will forget all things of sense.’ 1 

‘Of all forms and manners of knowledge the soul must strip and 
void itself so that there may be left in it no kind of impression of 
knowledge, nor trace of aught soever, but rather the soul must 
remain barren and bare, as if these forms had never passed through 
it, and in total oblivion and suspension.’ 2 


1 St. John of the Cross: Ascent of Mount Carmel, Bk. Ill, Ch. XXXI. 

* Ibid., Bk. Ill, Ch. II. 



III. 2. Kena Upanisad 5 87 

5. iha ced avedld atha satyam asti na ced ihdvedin mahati 
vinastih 

bhute§u bhutesu vicintya dhirah pretydsmal lokdd amrtd 
bhavanti. 

5. If here (a person) knows it, then there is truth, and if 
here he knows it not, there is great loss. Hence, seeing or 
(seeking) (the Real) in all beings, wise men become immortal 
on departing from this world. 

vicintya: vijhaya , sdksdtkftya. £. v. vicitya. 

The wise man sees the same Brahman in every creature. 
here: If here on earth, in this physical body, we arrive at our true 
existence, and are no longer bound down to the process, to the 
becoming, we are saved. If we do not find the truth, our loss is gicat, 
for we, then, are lost in the life of mind and body and do not rise 
above it to our supramentaLexistcnce. 


Section 3 

THE ALLEGORY OF THE VEDIC GODS’ IGNORANCE 
OF BRAHMAN 

1. brahma ha dcvebhyo vijigye, tasya ha brahmano vijayc dev a 
amahlyanta , ta aiksantcismdkam evdyam vijayo' smdkam evdyam 
mahimd iti. 

1. Brahman , it is said, conquered (once) for the gods, and 
the gods gloried in that conquest of Brahman. They thought, 
ours, indeed, is this victory and ours, indeed, is this greatness. 

The incomprehensible Supreme is higher than all gods, and is the 
source of victory for the gods and defeat, for the demons. Brahman 
as the Supreme Isvara vanquishes the pnemies of the world and 
restores stability to it. 

We see in this allegory the supplanting of the Vedic gods by the 
one Supreme Brahman . 

See B.U. I. 3. 1-7. 

2. tadd haisdm vijajhau , tebhyo ha pradur babhuva , tan na 
vyajanata kirn idam yaksam iti. 

2. {Brahman ) # indeed knew this (conceit of theirs). He 
appeared before them. They did not know what spirit it was. 

yaksam: spirit, pujyam mahad bhutam iti. £. 

The Supicme by His power appeared before the devas. 
svayoga-mdhdtmya-nirmitendtyadbh utena vismdpan lyena rupena 

devdnam indriya-gocare pradurbabhuva. S. 



5?8 The Principal Upanisads III. io. 

3. te’gnim abruvan, jdta-vcda etad vijdnihi kim etad yaksam 
iti , tatheti. 

3. They said to Agni, '0 Jata-vedas, find this out, what this 
spirit is.’ ‘Yes' (said he). 

jata-vedas is said to be omniscient, sarvajha-kalpam : S. jatarh sarvam 
vetti iti jdta-veddh. It is the name given to Agni in the R.V. 

4. tad abhyadravat , tarn abhyavadat ko’siti, agnir vd aham 
asmi ity abravit, jdta-vedd aham asmi iti . 

4. He hastened towards it and it said to him, ‘Who art 
thou?' (Agni) replied, ‘I am Agni indeed, I am Jata-vedas/ 

5. tasmims tvayi kim vivyam iti , apidam sarvam daheyam yad 
idam prthivyam iti. 

5. He again asked, ‘What power* is there in thee? 1 Agni 
replied, ‘I canjburn everything whatever there is on earth/ 

6. tasmai trnam nidadhau dad daha iti, tad upapreyaya 
sarva-javena, tan na sasaka dagdhum, sa tata eva nivavrte, naitad 
aiakam vijhdtum yad etad yaksam iti. 

6. (He) placed (a blade of) grass before him saying, ‘Burn 
this/ He went towards it with all speed but could not burn it. 
He returned thence and said. ‘I have not been able to find out 
what this spirit is/ 

sarva-javena: with all speed, sarvotsaha-krtena vegena. S. 

7. atha vdyum abruvan , vdyav etad vijanihi kim etad yaksam 
iti, tatheti. 

7. Then they said to Vayu (Air), ‘O Vayu, find this out — 
What this spirit is/ ‘Ye£' (said he). 

8 . tad abhyadravat, tam abhyavadat ko’siti, vayur vd aham 
a^mity abravin mdtarisvd aham asmiti. 

8. He hastened towards it, and it said to him, ‘Who art 
thou?' Vayu replied, ‘I am Vayu indeed, I am Matarisvan/ 
mdtari antarikse svayatiti mdtarisvd. 

• 9. tasmims tvayi kim viryam iti apidam sarvam adadiyam yad 

idam prthivyam iti. 

9. (He asked Vayu) ‘What power is there in thee?' (Vayu) 
replied, ‘I can blow off everything whatever there is on earth.' 

10. tasmai trnam nidadhau etad adatsveti, tad upapreyaya 



III. 12. Kena Upanisad 589 

sarva-javena, tan na saiakddatum , sa tata eva nivavrte, naitad 
aiakam vijnatum yad etad yaksam iti. 

10. He placed before him (a blade of) grass saying, 'Blow 
off/ Vayu went towards it with all speed but could not blow 
it off. He returned thence and said, 'I have not been able to 
find out what this spirit is/ 

11. athendram abruvan, maghavan, etad vijamhi kim etad 
yaksam iti , tatheti , tad abhyadravat; tasmdt tirodadhe. 

11. Then they said to Indra, '0 Maghavan, find this out 
what this spirit is/ ‘Yes' (said he). He hastened towards it (but) 
it disappeared from before him. 

12. sa tasminn evakdie striyam ajagama bahu-sobhamanam 
umdm haimavatim turn hovdca kim etad yaksam iti. 

12. When in the same region of the sky, he (Indra) came 
across a lady, most beautiful, Uma, the daughter of Himavat, 
and said to her, 'What is this spirit V 

bahu-sobhamandm umdm: most beautiful, Umd. Uma is wisdom 
personified. 

Umd: the name is said to be derived from u ma, do not practise 
austerities which is the exclamation addressed to Parvatl by her 
mother. 

This legend that Uma, the daughter of the Himalayas revealed 
the mystic idealism of the Upanisads to the gods is an imaginative 
expression of the truth that the thought of the Upanisads was 
developed by the forest dwellers in the mountain fastnesses of the 
Himalayas. 

haimavatlm: the daughter of Himavat. Holy men live there and 
pilgrims go there *as for many centuries the striving of the human 
spirit has been directed towards these mountain ranges. 

Wisdom is the most beautiful of all beautiful things. 
sarvesdm hi sobhamdndndm sobhanatama vidyd. S. viriipo’pi vidyavdn 
bahu sobhate. Beauty is the expression of inward purity. Sins leave a 
scar on the soul or otherwise disfigure it. Uma is the Wisdom th^t 
dispels Indra’s ignorance. Mere knowledge untouched by divine 
grace will not do. In the lives of saints we find that the sight of an 
angel or the hearing of its voice floods the seer with a new power and 
imparts illumination. 

In the Devi Saptasatl it is said that the Mother of the universe 
will descend to earth or assume incarnations whenever disturbances 
are caused by beings of a demoniacal nature. 

ittham yadd yada bddhd ddnavotthd bliavisyati, 
tada tadavatlryaham karisyamy ari-samksayam. 

Mdrkandeya Pur ana, Devi Saptasatl II. 55. 



5po The Principal Upanisads IV. 3. 

Durgd: sometimes worshipped as Katydyanl, is represented to be 
divine wisdom, brahma-vidyd. Cp. moksdrthibhir munibhir asta-sa- 
masta-dosair vidydsi sa bhagavati , paramd hi devi: 0 Goddess, Thou 
art Wisdom, the supreme goddess worshipped by the seekers of 
liberation, by the sages, in whom all passions have subsided, Durgd- 
saptasatl. 

Cp. Peter Abailard: 'However long you exert yourself in dialectic, 
you will consume your labour in vain, unless grace from heaven makes 
your mind capable of so great a mystery. Daily practice, can, indeed, 
furnish any mind with knowledge of the other science, but philosophy 
is to be attributed to divine grace alone, and, if this grace does not 
prepare your mind inwardly, your philosophy merely flogs the air 
outside to no avail/ 1 


Section 4 

KNOWLEDGE OF BRAHMAN IS THE GROUND OF 
SUPERIORITY 

I. sd brahnicti hovdca , brahnuino vd dad vijaye mahiyadhvam 
iti , tato haiva viddriicakdra brahma iti. 

1. She replied, 'This is Brahman, to be sure, and in the 
victory of Brahman , indeed, do you glory thus/ Then only did 
he (Indra) know that it was Brahman. 

The object of the story is to illustrate the superiority of Brahman 
to all the manifestations including the divine ones. 

Brahman here is Isvara or personal God who governs the Universe. 

Cp. : 'All things cry out to Thee, pass on, I am not God/ — Eckhart. 

2. tasmdd vd cte devd atilardmivdnydin dev din y ad agiiir vdyur 
indrah, te hy enan nedistham pasprsuh , te Hy enat prathamo 
viddriicakdra brahmeti. 

t 

2. Therefore, these gods, Agni, Vayu and Indra, surpass 
greatly other gods, for they, it was, that touched Brahman 
closest, for they, indeed, for the first time knew (it was) 
Brahman. 

3. tasmdd vd indro’titardmdvdnydin devdin, sa hy enan nedistham 
pasparsa, sa hy enat prathamo viddriicakdra brahmeti. 

3. Therefore, Indra surpasses greatly, as it were, other gods. 
He, indeed, has come into close contact with Brahman. He, 
indeed, for the first time knew that (it was) Brahman . 

Of the three Agni, Vayu and Indra, Indra obtained the knowledge 
that it was Brahman through the grace of Uina. Brahman is the 
1 G. Sikes: Peter Abailard (1932), pp. 58-59. 



IV. 5- Kena Upanisad 591 

supreme being through whose power alone the gods enjoy greatness. 
See Katha VI. 3. 

BRAHMAN , THE COSMIC AND INDIVIDUAL 
REALITY 

4. tasyaisa adeio yad etad vidyuto vyadyutadd itin nyamlmi - 
sada, ity adhidaivatam . . 

4. Of this Brahman , there is this teaching: this is as it were, 
like the lightning which flashes forth or the winking of the eye. 
This teaching is concerning the gods. 

‘ like sudden lightning *: yathd sakrd vidyutam. The illustration of 
lightning is used to indicate the instantaneous enlightenment pro- 
duced by the union of the individual soul with the transcendental 
principle of universal wisdom. Like lightning Brahman showed 
Himself to the gods once and disappeared. There is a sudden enlarging 
of the mind, a flash of light enlightening the intellect, an inpouring 
of the spirit causing fervour and joy ineffable. 

The masters of spiritual life tell us that the hidden word comes to 
them all on a sudden for one brief moment, when all things are 
hushed in a deep stillness. 

Cp. The Cloud of Unknowing: There will He sometimes perad- 
venture send out a beam of ghostly light, piercing this cloud of 
unknowing that is betwixt thee and Him; and shew thee some of 
his privity, the which man may not nor cannot speak/ Chapter 
XXVI. 

Cp. Augustine quoted by Eckhart: Tn this first flash when thou 
art as if struck by lightning, when thou hearest inwardly the affirma- 
tion 'Truth" there remain if thou canst/ — Rudolf Otto: Mysticism: 
East and West (1932), p. 34. 

The two illustrations of the flash of lightning and the twinkling of 
the eye suggest the sudden glimpse, sakrd-vijhdnam, into Reality 
which has to be transformed into permanent realization. Ultimate 
truth can only be taught by examples: nirupamasya brahmano 
yenopamanena upadesah. S. 

5. athddhydtmam, yadetat gacchativa ca manah anena caitdd * 
upasmataty abhiksnam samkalpah. 

5. Now the teaching concerning the self. — It is this toward 
which the mind appears to move; by the same (mind, one) 
remembers consfantly; volition also likewise. 

The mental processes by which we remember, think and will 
presuppose Brahman. There is a general view that there is an 
analogy between the divine spirit, the cosmic world and the individual 
soul. In several passages, as ^ere, it is said, ‘So with regard to the 
divine; now with regard to the soul/ 



5^2 The Principal Upanisads IV. 9. 

6 ..tadd ha tad-vanam nama, tad-vanam ity updsitavyam, saya 
etad evarii veddbhi hainam sarvdni bhutdni samvdhchanti . 

6 . Brahman , the object of all desire, that, verily, is what is 
called the dearest of all. It is to be meditated upon as such 
(tadvanam). Whoever knows it thus, him, all beings seek. 

tad-vanam: dearest of all: tasya prani-jatasyapratyag-atma-bhutatvad 
vanamyam sambhdjanlyam atas tadvanam nama prakhydtam. brahma 
tadvanam. S. 

vdhchanti: seek, yearn, prdrthayanti. S. 

7. upanisadam bho briihi — iti, ukid upanisat , brdhmtm va va ta 
upanisadam abruma , iti. 

7. (The pupil) ‘Sir, teach (me) the secret (Upanisad).' (The 
teacher): ‘The secret has been taught to thee; we have taught 
thee the secret relating to Brahman * 

8. tasyaitapa-dama-kannetipratisthd, veddh sarvahgani , satyam 
ayatanam. 

8. Austerities, self-control and work are its support; the 
Vedas are' all its units; truth is its abode. 

tapah: austerity. It is derived from the root tap to burn. It signifies 
warmth. The saints are represented as undergoing austerities for 
years to attain supernatural powers. The Supreme is said to have 
endured austerities in order to create. 

Tapas is training in spiritual life. Negatively, it is cleansing our 
soul of all that is sinful and imperfect; positively, it is building up 
of all that is good and holy. In the history of religion, the practice of 
bodily austerities has been looked upon as the chief means for attaining 
spiritual ends. The privations of food and drink, of sleep and clothing, 
of exposure to heat and cold are labours undertaken to wear down the 
body. In the story of asceticism, Hindu or Christian, excesses of 
bodily suffering play a large part such as the use of chainlets, spikes 
and pricks and scourgings. 

• 

9. yo va etam evam vedapahatya papmanam ante svarge loke 
jyeye pratitisthati , pratitisthati. 

9. Whoever knows this, he, indeed, overcoming sin, in the 
end, is firmly established in the Supreme world of heaven; yes, 
he is firmly established. 

ante: in the end. v. anante , infinite, which is taken to qualify svarga 
or heaven. In that case svarga is not paradise but infinite bliss from 
which there is no return to earthly embodiments, na punas samsdram 
dpadyata ity abhiprdyah. £. 



KATHA UPANISAD 


Katha Upanisad, also called Kathakopanisad which belongs to 
the Taittiriya school of the Yajur Veda, uses the setting of 
a story found in ancient Sanskrit literature. 1 A poor and pious 
Brdhmana, Vajasravasa, performs a sacrifice and gives as pre- 
sents to the priests a few old and feeble cows. His son, Naciketas, 
feeling disturbed by the unreality of his father's observance 
of the sacrifice, proposes that he himself may be offered as 
offering (daksina) to a priest. When he persisted in his request, 
his father in rage said, 'Unto Yama, 1 give thee.' Naciketas 
goes to the abode of Yama and finding him absent, waits there 
for three days and nights unfed. Yama, on his return, offers 
three gifts in recompense for the delay and discomfort caused 
to Naciketas. For the first, Naciketas asked, ‘Let me return 
alive to my father.' For the second, ‘Tell me how my good 
works ( istd-purta ) may not be exhausted' ; an d for the third, 
‘Tell me the way to conquer re-death (punar mrtyu).’ 

In the Upanisad, the third request is one for enlightenment 
on the ‘great transition' which is called death. 

The Upanisad consists of two chapters, each of which has 
three Vallis or sections. 

There are some passages common to the Gita and the 
Katha U. 

1 Taittiriya Brdhmana III. i. 8; see also M.B. Anukdsana Parva: 106. 
The first mention of the story is in the R.V. (X. 135) where we read how 
the boy Naciketas was sent by his father to Yama (Death), but was 
allowed to get back on account of his great faith, sraddhd. 



INVOCATION 


sa ha nav avatu, saha nau bhunaktu, saha viryam karavavahai: 
tejasvi nav adhitam astu: md vidvisdvahai; aunt sdntih, sdntih , 
sdntih. 

May He protect us both; may He be pleased with us both; 
may we work together with vigour; may our study make us 
illumined; may there be no dislike between us. Aunt, peace, 
peace, peace. 

See also T.U. II and III. The teacher and the pupil pray for 
harmonious co-operation in keen and vigorous study. 



I. i. 3- 


Katha Upanisad 


595 


CHAPTER I 
Section i 

NACIKETAS AND HIS FATHER 

i. usan ha vai vdjasravasah sarva-vedasam dadau: 
tasya ha naciketa nama putra as a. 

1. Desirous (of the fruit of the ViSvajit sacrifice) VajaSravasa, 
they say, gave away all that he possessed. He had a son by 
name Naciketas. 

usan: desirous. Evidently, at the time of the Upanisad, the 
sacrificial religion of the Brahmanas was popular. Desire for earthly 
and heavenly gain was the prominent motive. The Upanisad 
leads us to a higher goal. 'He who is free from desire beholds him.' 
II. 20. 

usan, is sometimes said to be the offspring of Vajasrgvasa . l 
gave away all that he possessed. He is represented as making a volun- 
tary surrender of all that he possessed, samnydsa, in order to secure 
his spiritual interests. 

Naciketas: one who does not know 2 3 and therefore seeks to know. 

The author attempts to distinguish between VajaSravasa, the 
protagonist of an external ceremonialism, and Naciketas, the seeker 
of spiritual wisdom. Vajasravasa represents orthodox religion and is 
devoted to its outer forms. He performs the sacrifice and makes 
gifts which are unworthy. The formalism and the hypocrisy of the 
father hurt the son. 

2. tarn ha kumdram santam daksindsu myamdnasu sraddhd- 
vivesa , so 1 manyata. 

2 As the gifts were being taken to the priests, faith entered 
him, although but a (mere) boy; he thought. 

Prompted by the desire to do real good to his father, the boy 
felt worried about the nature of the presents. 
iraddhd: faith. It is not blind belief but the faith which asks whether 
the outer performance without the living spirit is enough. 

3. pitodaka jagdha-trna dugdha-dohd nirindriyah 
ananda nama te lokds tan sa gacchata td dadat. 

3. Their watef drunk, their grass eaten, their milk milked, 
their strength spent, joyless, verily, are those worlds, to which 
he, who presents such (cows) goes. 

1 u&an nama vajairavaso’patyam. Bhattabhaskara MiSra. 

2 Cp. R.V. ‘No knowledge of ^e god have I, a mortal.’ ndham devasya 
martyai ciketa. 1 X. 79. 5. 



596 The Principal Upanisads I. 1. 5. 

nirindriydh: without the strength to breed, a-prajanana-samarthah . 
anandah: anananddh, asnkhdh , joyless. l£a 3; B.U. IV. 4. 11. The 
cows which are presented are no longer able to drink, eat, give milk 
or calve. 

Naciketas reveals here, with the enthusiasm of youth, the utter 
inadequacy of a formal soulless ritualism. The idea of complete 
surrender (sarva-vcdasam dadaa) in the first verse should be properly 
interpreted as utter dedication or complete self-giving. 

True prayer and sacrifice are intended to bring the mind and will 
of the human being into harmony with the great universal purpose 
of God. 

4. sa hovdca pitaram , tdta kasmai mam dasyasiti ; 
dvitlyam trtlyam; tarn hovdca: mrtyave tvd daddmiti. 

4. He said to his father, ‘O Sire, to whom wilt thou give 
me?' For a second and a third time (he repeated) (when the 
father) said to him, ‘Unto Death shall I give thee/ 

Dr. Rawson suggests that a mere boy should be so impertinent 
as to interfere with his doings, the father in anger said, ‘Go to hell/ 

The boy earnestly wishes to make himself an offering and thus 
purify his father’s sacrifice. He does not discard the old tradition 
but attempts to quicken it. There can be no quickening of the spirit 
until the body die. 

Cp. St. Paul: Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened 
except it die.’ 

mrtyave: unto Death. Mrtyu or Yama is the lord of death. When 
VajaSravasa gives away all his goods, Naciketas feels that this 
involves the giving away of the son also and so wishes to know 
about himself. When the father replies that he will give him to Yama, 
it may mean that, as a true samnydsin, personal relations and claims 
have henceforward no meaning for him. Naciketas takes his father’s 
words literally. He in the* course of his teaching points out that the 
psychophysical vehicles animated by the spirit are determined by 
the law of karma and subject to death. He who knows himself as 
trhe spirit, and not as the psychophysical vehicle is free and immortal. 

5. bahundm emi prathawah, bahundm emi madhyamah; 
kim svid yamasya kartavyam yan mayadya karisyati . 

5. Naciketas, ‘Of many (sons or disciples) I go as the first; 
of many, I go as the middling. What duty towards Yama that 
(my father has to accomplish) today, does he accomplish 
through me?’ 

emi: gacchami, I go. 

madhyamah: middling, mytandm madhye. Among many who are 



I. i. 7- Katha Upanisad 597 

» 

dead I am in the middle. I am not the last. Many others will still 
follow me and there is no need for lamentation. 

Naciketas in sadness reflects as to what help he has to render to 
Yama. 

Anticipating the teacher's or the parents' wishes and carrying 
them out is the way of the best pupils or sons; promptly attending 
to what is ordered is the next best ; neglecting the orders is the worst 
form of conduct of pupils or sons. Naciketas belonged to the first 
type ; at worst to the second ; he was never negligent of his duty to 
his father. 

yathavasaram jndtva susrusane pravrtti-rupd; ajnddivasena susrusane 
pravYtti-rupa; gurvadibhih kopitassan susrusdkarane pravrtti-rupd. 
Samkarananda and A. 

6 . anupasya yatha piirve pratipasya tathapare, 

sasyam iva martyah pacyate sasyam ivajdyate panah. 

6. ‘Consider how it was with the forefathers; behold how it 
is with the later (men) ; a mortal ripens like jx>rn, and like 
corn is born again.' 

§ makes out that Naciketas, startled by his father's words, 
reflected and told his father who was now in a repentant mood that 
he was much better than many sons, and there was nothing to be 
gained by going back on one's word. Naciketas reminds his father 
that neither his ancestors nor his contemporaries who are decent 
ever broke their word. After all, human life is at best transitory. 
Like a blade of grass man dies and is born again. Death is not all; 
rebirth is a law of nature. The life of vegetation on which all other 
life depends passes through the seasonal round of birth, growth, 
maturity, decay, death and rebirth. The unity of all life suggests 
the application of this course to human beings also. This perpetual 
rebirth is not an escape from the wheel of becoming into a deathless 
eternity. Even if we do not gain life eternal, survival is inescapable. 
So the son persuades his father to keep his word and send him 
to Yama's abode. 

Possibly Naciketas wished to know what happened to his ancestors 
and what will happen to his contemporaries after death. 

The doctrine of rebirth is assumed here. 

NACIKETAS IN THE HOUSE OF DEATH 

7. vaisvdnarah pravisaty atithir brdhmano grhdn: 
tasyaitam sdntim kurvanti , hara vaivasvalodakam. 

7. As a very fire a Brahmana guest enters into houses and 
(the people) do him this peace-offering; bring water, 0 Son 
of the Sun ! 



598 The Principal Upanisads I. i. 9. 

In the Brdhmana account, Naciketas goes to Yama's house, at 
the command of a divine voice. He waits for three nights before 
Death returns and shows him hospitality due to a guest. 

£ says: Thus addressed, the father sent his son to Yama, in order 
to keep his word. And going to Yama’s abode, he waited for three 
nights as Yama had gone out. When he returned his attendants, or 
perhaps his wife said to him as follows informing him (of what had 
taken place in his absence).' 

As fire is appeased by water, so is a guest to be entertained 
with hospitality. The word for fire used here is Vaisvanara, the 
universal fire, which affirms the unity of all life. The guest comes as 
the embodiment of the fundamental oneness of ail beings. 

8. dsd-pratikse samgatam sunrtdm cestdpurte pntra-pasums ca 
sarvan 

etad vrhkte purusasydlpamedhaso yasydnasnan vasati brdh- 
mano grhe. 

8. Hope and expectation, friendship and joy, sacrifices and 
good works, sons, cattle and all are taken away from a person 
of little understanding in whose house aBrahmana remains unfed. 

B.U. VI. 4. 12. 

sunrta: joy in Vedic Sanskrit, ‘kindly speech’ in Jaina and later 

Brahmanical works. 

istapurte: sacrifices and good works. 

istam: fruit produced by sacrifice, purlam: fruit resulting from such 
works as planting gardens, etc. istam yaga jam phalam: purtam , 
drdmddi-kriydjam phalam. £. Cp.R.V.X. 14. 

sam gacchasva pitybbih, sam yamena istdpurtena parame vyoman. 
‘Unite thou with the fathers and with Yama with the reward of thy 
sacrifices and good works in highest heaven.’ 

vdpi-kupa-tatdkadi-devatdyatandni ca 
annapraddnam dr amah purlam ity abhidhlyate. 


YAMA’S ADDRESS TO NACIKETAS 

9. tisro rdtnr ydd avatsir grlie me’nasnan brahman atitthir 
namasyah. 

namaste’stu, brahman; svasti me’stu; tasmlt prati inn varan 
vrnisva! 

9. ‘Since thou, a venerable guest, hast stayed in my house 
without food for three nights, I make obeisance to thee, 
O Brahmana. May it be well with me. Therefore, in return, 
choose thou three gifts. 



I. I. ii. Katha Upanisad 599 

‘When the disciple is ready, the Master appears/ 
tasmdt: in order to remove the evil effects of that, tasya pratlkaraya. 

NACIKETAS’S FIRST WISH 

10. sdnta-samkalpah sumand yathd sydd vita-manyur gautamo 
mdbhi mrtyo , 

tvat-prasrstam mabhivadet pratlta, etat trayandmprathamam 
varam vrne. 

10. That Gautama (my father) with allayed anxiety, with 
anger gone, may be gracious to me, 0 Death, and recognising 
me, greet me, when set free by you and this, I choose as the 
first gift of the three. 

sumanah: gracious, p r as anna-man cl h. S. 

pratlta: recognising. It means ‘recollected, recognising that this is 
my own son come back again/ prallto labdha-smrtih, sa eva ay am 
putro samdgatah ity evam pratyabhijdnan tty arthahT ^ . 

11. yathd purastdd bhavitd pratlta auddalakir drunir mat - 

prasrstah 

sukham rdilris sayitd vltamanyus tvdm dadrsivdn mrtyu- 
mukhdit pramuktam. 

11. (Yama said): ‘As of old will he, recognising thee (thy 
father) Auddfdaki, the son of Aruna, through my favour will 
he sleep peacefully through nights, his anger gone, seeing thee 
released from the jaws of death/ 

auddalakir drunir: Uddalaka, the son of Aruna. The father of 
Svetaketu is also called Aruni. C U. VI. 1. 1. 

mat-prasrstah: through my favour, mayd anujhdtah. S. anujhdtah, 
anugraha-sampannah. Gopalayatindra. It may apply to the first or 
the second part. 

In the previous verse tvat-prasrstam is taken to mean ‘set free 
by you’; so in this verse mat-prasrstah should mean ‘set free by me/ 
It is in the nominative case in apposition to Auddaldki Aruni, the« 
subject which is incorrect. So § gives a dilferent meaning, which is, 
however, not the obvious meaning of the phrase. If we alter it to 
mat-prasrstam, the rendering will be, ‘As of old will he (thy father) 
Auddalaki Aruni^ recognising thee, set Jree by me* 

Deussen retains the original reading but gives a different rendering: 
Auddalaki Aruni will be just as before. Happy will he be, released 
by me (from his words). 

Charpentier identifies Nacikctas witli Auddalaki Aruni. He 
renders the verse thus : 

‘As of old he will be full of joy; since the son of Uddalaka Aruni 

u 



6oo The Principal Upanisads I. i. 14 

has (already) been let loose by me.' So too, Hillebrandt: 'Aruni, son 
of Uddalaka, is (herewith) released by me.’ Indian Antiquary, (192 8), 
pp. 205, 223. 


NACIKETAS’S SECOND WISH 

12. svarge loke na bhayam kirn ca ndsti na talra tvam na jar ay d 
bibheti. 

ubhe tirtvd aiandyd pipdse sokdtigo modate svarga-loke. 

12. (Naciketas said) : In the world of heaven there is no fear 
whatever; thou art not there, nor does one* fear old age. 
Crossing over both hunger and thirst, leaving sorrow behind, 
one rejoices in the world of heaven. 

See R.V. IX. 113; R says that svarga is moksa. svarga-sabdo 
moksa-sthdna- par ah. 

leaving sorrow behind: iokam atltya gacchati. 

13. sa tvam agnim svargyam adhyesi mrtyo , prabruhi tarn 

sraddadandya mahyam 

svarga-loka amrtatvam bhajanta, etad dvitiyena vrne varena. 

13. Thou knowest, O Death, that fire (sacrifice which is) the 
aid to heaven. Describe it to me, full of faith, how the dwellers 
in heaven gain immortality. This I choose, as my second boon. 

svarga-lokdh: svargo loko yesatii te param-pada-prdptdh. 
amrtatvam: immortality. In svarga which is a part of the manifested 
universe, the immortality may be endlessness but not eternity. 
Whatever is manifest will sooner or later enter into that from which 
it emerged. Yet as the duration in svarga-loka is incalculable, the 
dwellers in it are said to be immortal. They may continue as long 
as the manifested world docs. 

14. pra te bravtmi tad u me nibodha svargyam agnim naeiketah 

prajanan 

anantalokdptim atho pratistham viddhi , tvam etarn nihitam 
guhdydm. 

14. (Yama said): Knowing well as I do, that fire (which is) 
the aid to heaven, I shall describe it to thee — learn it of me, 
O Naciketas. Know that fire to be the means of attaining the 
boundless world, as the support (of the universe) and as abiding 
in the secret place (of the heart). 

nihitam guhdydm: abiding in the secret place (of the heart). It 
means literally, hidden in the cave. The cave or the hiding-place is 



I. i. 16. Katha Upanisad 601 

* 

said to be in the centre of the body, guha yam sarlrasya madhye: 
Taittirlya Brdhmana I. 2. i. 3. vidusam buddhau nivistam. S. 

The central purpose of the passage is to indicate that the ultimate 
power of the universe is also the deepest part of our being. See also 
I. 2. 12. It is one of the assumptions of the Upanisad writers that 
deep below the plane of our empirical life of imagination, will and 
feeling is the ultimate being of man, his true centre which remains 
unmoved and unchanged, even when on the surface we have the 
fleeting play of thoughts and emotions, hopes and desires. When we 
withdraw from the play of outward faculties, pass the divisions of 
discursive thought, we retreat into the soul, the witness spirit 
within. 

% 

15. lokadim agnith tam uvdca tasmai, yd istaka.ydvatir vd,yathd 
vd. 

sa cdpi tat pratyavadat yathoktam ; athdsya mrtyuh punar 
evdha tustah. 

15. (Yama) described to him that fire (sacrifice which is) 
the beginning of the world (as also) what kind of bricks (are 
to be used in building the sacrificial altar), how many and in 
what manner. And he (Naciketas) repeated all that just as it 
had been told; then, pleased with him, Death spoke again. 

lokadi: the beginning of the world. In the R.V., Agni is identified 
with Prajd-pati, the Creator, and so may be regarded as the source 
or origin of the world In II. 2. 9 we are told that the one Fire, 
having entered the universe, assumed all forms B.U. I. 2. 7. makes 
out that This fire is the arka, the worlds are its embodiment/ 

S, however, interprets lokadi as first of the worlds, as the first 
embodied existence, prathama-sariritvad. Cp. C.U. where it is said 
that all other things evolved from fire (tejas) which was itself the 
first product of essential being (s#£). VI. 8. 4. 

16. tam abravit priyamdno mahatmd varam tavehddya dadami 

bhiiyah. 

tavaiva namna bhavitdyam agnih, srnkam cemdm ane- 
ka-rupam grhdna. 

16. The great soul (Yama) extremely delighted, said to him 
(Naciketas). I give thee here today another boon. By thine 
own name will this fire become (known). Take also this many- 
shaped chain. 

synkd: chain. The word occurs again in I. 2. 3., where it means 
‘a road.' synkd vitta-mayi, the road that leads to wealth. § gives two 
meanings: ratna-mayim mdlarn, a necklace of precious stones; (ii) 
akutsitdm gatim karma-mayiw the straight way of works which is 
productive of many fruits, karma-vijndnam aneka-phala-hetutvdt . 



I. i. 18. 


602 The Principal Upanisads 

aneka-rupdm : many-shaped. While the ignorant are limited to one 
form, the wise, who have attained unity with the higher self, can 
assume many forms. 

17. trindciketas tribhir etya sandhim trikarma-krt tarali 
janma-mrtyu 

brahma] aj ham devam idyam viditvd nicdvye mdm sdntim 
atyantam cti. 

17. He who has lit the Naeiketa fire thrice, associating with 
the three, performs the three acts, crosses over birth and death. 
Knowing the son of Brahma, the omniscient, resplendent and 
adorable and realising him, one obtains this everlasting peace. 

tri-naciketah: one who has lit the Naeiketa fire thrice. 5 suggests an 
alternative. One who knows about him, studies about him and 
practises what he has learnt, tad-vijhdnas tad-adhyayanas tad-anus- 
than av an. 

tribhir etya sandhim: associating with the three. § mentions ‘father, 
mother and teacher/ or alternatively ‘Veda, smrti and good men/ 
tri-karma: three acts. $ suggests ‘sacrifice, study and alms-giving/ ijya 
adhyayana dana. 

brahmajajha, the knower of the universe born of Brahma, Agni, 
who is known as jdta-vedas or all-knower. §, however, takes it as 
referring to Hiranya-garbha. For Ramanuja, the individual jlva 
is Brahma-born. He who knows him and rules his behaviour is 
Isvara. Madhva says: brahmano hiranya-garbhdj jatali brahmajah , 
brahmajas ca asau jhas ca brahmajajiiah , sarvajhah. 
niedyya , realising in one’s own personal experience, tarn viditvd 
idstratah, niedyya drstvd cdtmabhdvena. $. 

imam sdntim: this peace. It is the peace which is felt in one’s own 
experience, sva-buddhi-pratyaksdm sdnthn. S. 

Two tendencies which characterise the thought of the Upanisads 
appear here, loyalty to tradition and the spirit of reform. We must 
repeat the rites and formulas in the way in which they were originally 
instituted. These rules which derive their authority from their 
* antiquity dominated men’s minds. Innovations in the spirit are 
gradually introduced. 

18. trindciketas trayam etad viditvd ya evam vidvdms cinute 

ndeiketam , 

mrtyu-pdsdn puratah pranodya sokdtigo modate svarga-loke . 
18. The wise man who has sacrificed thrice to Naciketas and 
who knows this three, and so knowing, performs meditation 
on fire throwing off first the bonds of death and overcoming 
sorrow, rejoices in the world of heaven. 



I. i. 20. Katha Upanisad 603 

ndciketam: meditation on fire, agni-sabdena tad-visayaka-jnanam 
ucyate. Gopalayatlndra. 

19. esa te’gnir naciketas svargyo yam avrmthdh dvitiyena 
v arena. 

etam agnim lavaiva pravaksyanti jandsas; trtiyam varam 
naciketo vrntsva. 1 

19. This is thy fire (sacrifice) O Naciketas, which leading 
to heaven, which thou hast chosen for thy second boon. This 
fire (sacrifice) people will call by thy name only. Choose now, 
O Naciketas, the third boon. 

Whoever sacrifices to Naciketas fire, knowing its nature as the 
fire born of Brahma, becomes verily of that nature and is not born 
again. 


NACIKETAS’S THIRD WISH 

20. yeyam prete vieikitsd manusye * silty eke nay am astiti caike ; 
etat vidydm anusistas tvaydham, vardndm esa varas 
trtlyah. 

20. There is this doubt in regard to a man who has departed, 
some (holding) that he is and some that he is not. I would be 
instructed by thee in this knowledge. Of the boons, this is the 
third boon. 

prete: departed. Naciketas has no doubt about survival. He has 
already said: ‘A mortal ripens like corn and like corn is born again* 
I. 6. His problem is about the condition of the liberated soul, 
muktatma-svarupa, Madhva says that pvete means nmkte. 
ndsti: he is not. Doubts about the future of the liberated being 
are not peculiar to our age. In the B.U. Yajnavalkya says, the 
liberated soul, having passed beyond ( pretya ) has no more separate 
consciousness (samjnd). He is dissolved in the Absolute consciousness 
as a lump of salt is dissolved in water. He justifies the absence of 
separate consciousness to his bewildered wife Maitreyi. f WhSre« 
everything has become the one self, when and by what should we 

1 There is a verse on which § has not commented but Rangaramanuj a 
mentions it: 

yo vdpyetdm brahma- jajiidlma-bhutdm citim viditvdeinute ndciketam. 
sa eva bhutvd brahma-jajndtma-bhutah karoti tad-yena punar na 
jay ate. 

Whoever conceives the sacrificial structure of bricks as the body of 
the Fire born of Brahma and kindles on it the sacrificial lire called 
Naciketa, he becomes one wilh the Fire born of Brahma and performs 
the sacrifice by which he is not born again. 



604 The Principal Upanisads T. i. 23. 

see, hear or think?' He who is liberated from the limitations of name 
and form, who has become one with the all, cannot be said to exist 
in the ordinary sense. He is not limited to a particular consciousness ; 
nor can he be said to be non-existent, for he has attained to real 
being (II. 4. 12-14). The question repeatedly put to the Buddha is, 
‘Does the Tathdgata survive after death or does he not survive?' 
The Buddha refused to answer this question, holding that to say 
that he continues to exist would give rise to one kind of misunder- 
standing while to deny it would lead to others. 

21. devair atrdpi vicikitsitam purci , na hi suvijneyam, anur esa 
dharmah , 

anyam vararii naciketo vrnisva, md moparotsir ati md 
srjainam. 

21. (Yama said): Even the gods of old had doubt on this 
point. It is not, indeed, easy to understand; (so) subtle is this 
truth. Choose mother boon, O Naciketas. Do not press me. 
Release me from this. 

22. devair atrdpi vicikitsitam kila , tvarh ca mrtyo yan na 

suvijneyam dttha , 

vakta easy a tvddrg-anyo na labhyah;nanyo varas tulya etasya 
kascit. 

22. (Naciketas said:) Even the gods had doubt, indeed, as 
to this, and thou, 0 Death, sayest that it is not easy to under- 
stand. (Instruct me) for another teacher of it, like thee, is not 
to be got. No other boon is comparable to this at all. 

Gods cannot have any doubts about survival; it is about the 
exact nature of the state of liberation which transcends the empirical 
state that there is uncertainty. 

23. satayasah putra-pautrdn vrnisva , bahun pasun hasti-hiran- 

yam a&vdn 

bhumer mahad-dyatanam vrnisva svayam ca jiva sarado 
yavad icchasi. 

23. (Yama said:) Choose sons and grandsons that shall live 
a hundred years, cattle in plenty, elephants, gold and horses. 
Choose vast expanses of land and life for thyself as many years 
as thou wilt. 

mahad-dyatanam: vast expanses. £ suggests sovereignty over vast 
domains of earth, bhumeh pfthivyd mahad vistirnam dyatanam 
dsrayam mandalam rdjyam. 



I. i. 26. Katha Upanisad 605 

4 

24. etat tulyam yadi manyase, varam vrnisva, vittarh cira-jlvi- 
kam ca, 

mahd-bhumau naciketas tvam edhi, kamdndm tva kdma- 
bhdjam kayomi . 

24. If thou deemest (any) boon like unto this, choose (that) 
as also wealth and long life. 0 Naciketas, prosper then on this 
vast earth. I will make thee the enjoyer of thy desires. 

edhi: prosper. Be thou king, raja bhava. £. 

25. ye ye kamd durlabha martya-loke sarvdn bantams chandatah 

prarthayasva. 

imd rdmah, sarathah saturyah, na hidrsa lambhamyd 
manusyaih. 

abhir mat-prattabhih paricdrayasva , naciketo , maranam 
manuprdksth. 

25. Whatever desires are hard to attain in this world of 
mortals, ask for all those desires at thy will. *Here are noble 
maidens with chariots and musical instruments: the like of 
them cannot be won by men. Be served by these whom I give 
to thee. O Naciketas, (pray) ask not about death. 

The story of the temptation by Mrtyu occurs for the first time 
in the Upanisad and not in the account in the Tailtinya Brdhmana. 
The temptation of Naciketas has points of similarity with that 
related of Gautama the Buddha. 

Cp. also the temptation of Jesus. 

Naciketas is unmoved by the promises of transient pleasures and 
obtains from the god of death the secret of the knowledge of Brahman 
which carries with it the blessing of life eternal. Gautama the Buddha 
also rejects the offers of Mara in order to obtain true wisdom. 
There is this difference, however, that \yhile Yama, when once his 
reluctance is overcome, himself reveals the liberating truth to 
Naciketas, Mara is the evil one, the tempter. 

26. svo-bhdvd martyasya yad antakaitat sarvendriydndm jam- 

yanti tejah 

api sarvam jivitam alpam eva tavaiva vdhds tava nrtya-gtte. 

26. (Naciketas said:) Transient (are these) and they wear 
out, O Yama, tfre vigour of all the senses of men. All life (a full 
life), moreover, is brief. Thine be the chariots, thine the dance 
and song. 

ivobhdvah: transient, existing till tomorrow, so things of a day, 
ephemeral. What profit hns a man of these things which are 
evanescent ? 



606 The Principal Upanisads I. i. 28. 

antaka: Yama: who ends all. Even the Creator is not eternal. § says, 
sarvam yad brahmano’ pi jivitam dyuh alpam cva kirn utasmadddi 
dtrgha-jivika. 

Naciketas portrays the human aspiration to reach the eternal as 
the goal of the truest safety from the ills and anxieties of finite 
experience. 

The Buddhist view that everything that exists is fleeting and 
evanescent is suggested in this verse. 

27. navittena tarpamyo manusyah , lapsydmahe viltam adrdks- 
ma cet tvd. 

jivisydmo ydvad isisyasi tvam varastu me varamyah sa eva. 

27. Man is not to be contented with wealth. Shall we enjoy 
wealth when we have seen thee? Shall we live as long as thou 
art in power? That alone is (still) the boon chosen by me. 

Man is not to be contented with wealth. The material guarantees 
of human security are fragile. It is an earth-bound philosophy that 
makes man the end and aim of life, that recognises no value of a 
transcendental character. What is the value of wealth or life, as 
they are impermanent? So long as death is in power we cannot enjoy 
wealth or life for the fear of death destroys the zest for living. So 
Naciketas asks for self-knowledge, dtma-vijhdnum , which is beyond 
the power of death. 

Naciketas says that ‘We shall live, so long as Yama endures/ 
In other words, he is certain of our continuance in this cosmic 
cycle presided over by Yama. 

permanence till the dissolution of the primal elements is called 
immortality: dbhutasamplavam sthdnam amytatvam hi bhdsyate, 
quoted in Vacaspati’s Bhdmati I. 1. 1. 

What Naciketas is doubtful about, what Yama says, even the 
gods have doubts about, is in regard to the state of liberation. 

28. ajiryatdm amrtdndm npetya jfryan martyah kvadhasthah 

prajdnan 

abhidhydyan varnaratipramoddn , atidirghe jlvite ko rameta. 

28. Having approached the undecaying immortality, what 
decaying mortal on this earth below who (now) knows (and 
meditates on) the pleasures of beauty and love, will delight in 
an over-long life ? 

Anyone who knows here below the joys of immortal life cannot 
be attracted by an earthly life of passion and speed. No one who 
has a foretaste of that which perishes not or changes would find 
pleasure in earthly delights. 



I. 2. i. Katha Upanisad 607 

s 

29. yasminn idam vicikitsanti mrtyo yat sdmpardye mahati 
briihi nas tat, 

y 0’ yam varo gudham anupravisto ndnyarh tasmdn naciketd 
vrnite. 

29. Tell us that about which they doubt, O Death, what 
there is in the great passing-on. This boon which penetrates 
the mystery, no other than that does Naciketas choose. 

sdmpardya: passing-on. What is the great beyond? What is there 
after liberation? These questions lead naturally to others. What is 
the nature of eternal reality? What is man's relation to it? How can 
he reach it? 

Naciketas has already attained svarga-loka and is not raising the 
question of the post-mortal state. He is asking about the great 
departure, mahan sdmpardya , from which there is no return, which 
is nirupddhisesa nirvana according to Itivuttaka 44. Majjhima 
Nikaya II opposes sampardyika altha to the dittha-dluimmika attha. 

Knowledge of life after death is regarded as of the utmost impor- 
tance. See C.U. V. 3, 1-4 where Svetaketu is told that he is not well 
instructed as he docs not know about where the creatures go to 
from this world. 


' Section 2 
THE TWO WAYS 

1. anyac chreyo anyad utaiva preyaste ubhe ndndrthe purusam 
sinitah : 

tayoh sreya adaddnasya sddhu bhavati , liiyate ' rthdd ya u 
preyo vrnite. 

1. (Yama said): Different is the gdod, and different, indeed, 
is the pleasant. These two, with different purposes, bind a man. 
Of these two, it is W'dl for him who takes hold of the good; but 
he who chooses the pleasant, fails of his aim. 

After testing Naciketas and knowing his fitness for receiving 
Brahma-knowledge, Yama explains the great secret to him. 
srayah: the good, nihsreyasam. S. The highest good of man is not 
pleasure but mcftal goodness. 

Cp. Samyntta Nikaya I. 4. 2. 6. tasmd satan ca asatan ca mind hoti 
ito gati, asanto nirayam yanti santo saggapardyand. 

Therefore do the paths of the good and the evil of this world 
divide; the evil go to hell but the final destination of the good is 
heaven. 

u* 



608 The Principal Upanisads I. 2. 3. 

In Samyutta Nikdya V. 4. 5. 2 instead of sagga-parayand , we read 
nibbdna-parayanam. 

In N. P. Chakravarti's edition of UUdana (Sanskrit), Paris, 1930, 
p. 63, we read asantas caiva santas ca ndna ydnti tv itas cyutdh , 
asanto narakam ydnti , santah svarga-pardyandh. 

Cp. Plato: ‘In every one of us there are two ruling and directing 
principles, whose guidance we follow wherever they may lead; the 
one being an innate device of pleasure, the other an acquired judg- 
ment which aspires after excellence. Now these two principles at 
one time maintain harmony, while at another they arc at feud 
within us, and now one and now the other obtains mastery.' — 
Phaedras. 

2. sreyas ca prey as ca niannsyam etas tan samparltya vivinakti 
dhirah. 

sreyo hi dhTro’bhipreyaso vrnite, preyo mando yoga-ksemad 
vrnite. 

2. Both the .good and the pleasant approach a man. The 
wise man, pondering over them, discriminates. The wise 
chooses the good in preference to the pleasant. The simple- 
minded. for the sake of worldly well-being, prefers the pleasant. 

manduh: the simple-minded. Cf. Heraclitus: ‘Oxen are happy when 
they have peas to eat.' Fr. 4. ‘For the best men choose one thing 
above all else; immortal glory above transient things.' Fr. 29. 
yoga-ksema: worldly well-being. 1 lie adopts a materialist view of 
life. The indispensable condition of spiritual wisdom is a pure heart. 

§ distinguishes between the elimination of faults and the acquisi- 
tion of virtues which are the results of Karma and the contemplation 
of the divine which is Jnana. Cassian divides spiritual knowledge 
into practical and theoretic and argues that we cannot strive for 
the vision of God if we do not shun the stains of sin. Illumination 
and union follow purgation or the process of self-discipline. 

3. sa tvam priydn priyarupams ca human abhidhydyan 

naeiketo , tyasraksih; 

naitdm srhkdrk vittamayim avdpto yasydm majjanti bahavo 
manusydh. 

1 Sarirddy-upacaya-raksana-nimittam for the sake of bodily welfare, S 
Cf. B.G. IX. 22. Dr. A. Coomaraswamy makes out that the simple 
minded prefers ksema or well-being to yoga or contemplation, yogdc ca 
ksemdc ca, taking his stand on Suita Nipdtu 2. 20: ‘Unlike and widely 
divergent are the habits of the wedded householder and the holy man 
without a sense of ego.’ asamd ubho dura-vihdravuttino , gihi ddraposi , 
amamd ca subbato. He says that this verse means that the fool prefers 
the case of the householder to the hard life of the Yogi. See New Indian 
Antiquary, Vol. 1, pp. 85-86. 



I. 2. 6. Katha Upanisad 609 

« 

3. (But) thou, O Naciketas, hast -rejected (after) examining, 
the desires that are pleasant and seem to be pleasing. Thou hast 
not taken to the way of wealth, where many mortals sink 
(to ruin). 

srnkd: see I. 16. If srnkd means chain, then majjanti should read 
sajjanti. The meaning then is ‘Thou hast not taken to the chain of 
wealth in which many mortals are entangled.* The Buddha refused 
the wheel-jewel, cakka-ratanam, the recognised symbol of temporal 
power. Naciketas, by refusing all these temptations, makes out that 
his kingdom is not of this world. He hungers and thirsts for the 
eternal, in which alone he can find real satisfaction. 

4. duram ete viparite visuci , avidyd yd ca vidyeti jndtd: 
vidyabhipsinam naeiketasam manye, na tva kdima bahavo 

lolupantah. 

4. Widely apart and leading to divergent ends are these, 
ignorance and what is known as wisdom. I know (thee) Nacike- 
tas, to be eager for wisdom for (even) many desires did not 
distract thee. 

§ suggests that avidyd or ignorance is concerned with the pleasant 
and vidyd or wisdom with the good : avidyd prey o-visay a, vidyd sreyo- 
visaya . 

avidyd kama-karmdtmikd vidyd vairdgya-tattva-jhdna-mayi. R. 

5. avidydydm antare vartamdnah , svayam dhirah panditam 

manyamandh. 

dandramyamdndh pariyanti mudhah , andhenaiva niyamand 
yathdndhdh. 

5. Abiding in the midst of ignorance, wise in their own 
esteem, thinking themselves to be ^earned, fools treading a 
tortuous path go about like blind men led by one who is himself 
blind. 

See also M.U. I. 2-8; Maltrl VII. 9. 

Cp. Matthew: ‘If the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the 
ditch.* XV. 14. 

dandramyamdndh: v. dandravyamandh t visaya-kdmdgnind drta-cittdh. 
R. wise in their own esteem. Their ignorance is serenely ignorant of 
itself and so assumes the appearance of wisdom. 

6. na sdmpardyah pratibhdti bdlam pramddyantam vitta- 

mohena mudham: 

ay am loko ndsti para ; ti mam , punahpnnar vasam apadyate 
me. 



610 The Principal Upanisads I. 2. 8. 

i 

6. What lies beyond shines not to the simple-minded, careless, 
(who is) deluded by the glamour of wealth. Thinking This 
world exists, there is no other,’ he falls again and again into 
my power. 

mdnl: thinking, manana-silo mam. S. 

He who is filled with selfish desires and attracted by worldly 
possessions becomes subject to the law of Karma which leads him 
from birth to birth and so he is under the control of Yama. 

7. sravanaydpi bahubhir yo na labhyah , srnvanto'pi bahavo 

yam na vidyuh 

ascaryo vaktci kitsalo’sya labdha, ascaryo jhdtd kusalanu- 
sistah. 

7. He who cannot even be heard of by many, whom many, 
e\en hearing, do not know, wondrous is he who can teach (Him) 
and skilful is he who finds (Him) and wondrous is he who knows, 
even when instlucted by the wise. 

See B.G. VII. 3. 

instructed by the wise: nipunena dcdryena anusistah sah. 

Naciketas is complimented by Yama as the seeker of final bliss 
is rare among men. The task is very difficult for subtle is the nature 
of the Self. The hidden depths of being are conceived as a great 
mystery. Not many have the earnest purpose: not many are able to 
find a proper teacher. 

8. na narendvarena proktd esa suvijneyo bahudhd cintyamanah: 
ananya-prokte gatir atra nasty anlydn hy atarkyam anupra - 

manat. 

8. Taught by an inferior man He cannot be truly understood, 
as He is thought of in many ways. Unless taught by one who 
knows Him as himself, there is no going thither for it is incon- 
ceivable, being subtler than the subtle. 

bahudhd cintyamanah: thought of in many ways, or it may mean 
' 'much meditated upon’ or 'conceived of as a plurality' while the 
dtman is an absolute oneness 

ananya-prokte: taught by one who knows Him as himself. This is 
S’s rendering. lie must be taught by one who is non-different, 
ananya, i.e. who has realised his oneness with Brahman . 1 He alone 
can teach with the serene confidence of conviction. As a man with 
experience, he is lifted above sectarian disputes. It may also mean 

1 Cp. Eckhart: ‘Some there arc so simple as to think of God as if He 
dwelt there, and of themselves as being here. It is not so. God and I are 
one.’ Pfeiffer’s edition, p. 206. 



I. 2. io. Katha Upanisad 611 

‘taught by one other than an inferior person/ i.e. a superior person 
who knows the truth or ‘taught by another than oneself/ i.e. some 
teacher. 

For Ramanuja, the understanding, avagatih, which a person gets 
about the self when taught by one who has realised Brahman is 
impossible of attainment when taught by a person of inferior 
capacity. Madhva means by it that it is inferior teaching when 
taught by a learned but unintelligent person for it has been variously 
understood and so is not easy of understanding. But when taught by 
one who sees no difference at all, there is no knowledge, not even 
of an inferior kind. It is subtler than an atom and so cannot be 
perceived. It is not to be understood by reasoning. 
gatir atra nasti: without access to a teacher there is no way to it. 
‘There is no going thither* may mean either there is nothing beyond 
the knowledge of Brahman or there is no way back from samsara 
or worldly becoming, samsdra-gatih. 

atarkyam: inconceivable, unreachable by argument. The Supreme 
Self is unknowable by argument, as It is subtle, beyond the reach 
of the senses and the understanding based on sense data. It can be 
immediately apprehended by intuition. 

9. naisd tarkena matir dpaneyd, proktdnyenaiva sujhandya 
prestha: 

yam tvam dpas satyadhritir haldsi; tvddrn no bhuydn 
naeiketah prastd. 

9. Not by reasoning is this apprehension attainable, but 
dearest, taught by another, is it well understood. Thou hast 
obtained it, holding fast to truth. May we find, Naciketas, an 
inquirer like thee. 

Mere reason unassisted by faith cannot lead to illumination. 

May we find an inquirer like thee. It is not only the pupil who is 
in search of the teacher, but the teacher is also in search of the pupil. 


THE SUPERIORITY OF WISDOM TO WEALTH, 
EARTHLY AS WELL AS HEAVENLY 

10. jandmy aham sevadhir ity anityam , na hy adhruvaih 
prdpyate hi dhruvam tat 

tato may d naciketas cito’gnir anityair dravyaih prdptavdn 
asmi nityam. 

10. I know that wealth is impermanent. Not through the 
transient things is that abiding (one) reached; yet by me is laid 
the Naciketa fire and by impermanent means have I reached 
the everlasting. 



612 T'he Principal Upanisads I. 2. 11 

By burning in the sacrifice all transient things is the eternal 
attained. 

Some translators (e.g. Max Muller and Hume) attribute this 
verse to Naciketas. But surely Naciketas has not yet performed the 
sacrifice called by his name. £ attributes these words to Yama, 
who makes out that through the sacrificial fire, he has obtained the 
enduring sovereignty of heaven. But this sovereignty is only 
relatively permanent. Through the ephemeral means of Karma 
including sacrifices, nothing truly permanent can be achieved. The 
performer of the Naciketa fire will endure as long as the cosmos lasts 
but such endurance is not eternity, since the cosmos with all that 
it contains will be absorbed into the eternal at the end of the cosmic 
day. 

By 'impermanent means have I reached the everlasting. 1 What 
Yama has attained is thus stated by Gopfila-yatindra : adhikardpanno , 
dharmddharmaphalayoh , praddnena jantundm niyantftvam dpannah. 
If by the symbolic worship of so unstable a thing as fire we can 
attain an endurjng state, then the view reminds us of a verse in 
Blake's Auguries of Innocence . 1 

We have to use the means of the empirical world to cross it and attain 
to the trans-cmpirical. . . . brahma-prdpti-sddhana-jhdnoddesena 
anityair istakddi-dravyair ndeiketo’ gnis citah , tasmddd hetor nitya - 
phala-sadhanam jhdnam praptavan asmi . R. 

11. kamasydptim jagatah pratisthdm krator dnantyam abha - 
yasya par am 

stoma-mahad urugdyam pratisthdm drstvd dhrtya dhlro 
naeiketo’ tyasrdksih. 

11. (Having seen) the fulfilment of (all) desire, the support 
of the world, the endless fruit of rites, the other shore where 
there is no fear, the greatness of fame, the far-stretching, the 
foundation, O wise Naciketas, thou hast steadfastly let (them) 

go- 

Before his eyes were spread out all the allurements of the world, 
'including the position of Hiranya-garbha the highest state in the 
phenomenal world, obtained by those who worship the Supreme by 
sacrifice and meditation, according to §, and he has rejected them 
all. Here perhaps is suggested the contrast between the Vedic ideal 
of heaven and the Upanisad ideal of life eternal. Th/5 world to which 
the righteous go is the Brahma world. In svarga-loka or heaven there 

1 To see a world in a grain of sand, 

And a heaven in a wild flower; 

Hold infinity in the palm of your hand, 

And eternity in an hour. 



I. 2. 12. Katha Upanisad 613 

is no fear. See Katha I. 12. When we pass beyond fear we pass 
beyond duality. B.U. I. 4-2. 

The fulfilment of all desire can apply to the immortal Brahman. It is 
the support of the world, the ultimate. M.U. III. 2. 1. If this is the 
way we take these words, then the reference cannot be to the Vedic 
heaven but to eternal life or moksa. 

atyasraksih: this refers not to the rejection of eternal life but to the 
rejection of a false view of the objects described in this verse. 
kratu: rite or worship. 
upasandydh phalam dnantyam. S. 


APPREHENSION OF THE SUPREME 
THROUGH ADHYATMA-YOGA 

12. tam durdarsam gudham anupravistam guhdhitam gahva- 
restham pur an am 

adhydtma-yogadhigamena dev am matvd dkiro harsa-sokau 
jahati. 

12. Realising through self-contemplation that primal God, 
difficult to be seen, deeply hidden, set in the cave (of the heart), 
dwelling in the deep, the wise man leaves behind both joy and 
sorrow. 

gudham: deeply hidden. It is hidden because we have to get behind 
the senses, mind and understanding. It is the very ground of the 
soul. The Buddhists look upon every creature as an embryo of the 
tathagata, tathagata-garbha. Every creature has the possibility of 
becoming a Buddha. When we get into the inner being of the spirit, 
we are in immediate relationship with the Eternal. This basic prin- 
ciple which we recognise by immediate experience or continued 
contemplation is the basis of human freedom. It is the principle 
of indeterminacy, the possibilities of determinations which are not 
yet. If we identify ourselves with what is determinate, we are 
subject to the law of determinism. ‘If ye are led by the spirit, ve 
are not under the law/ 

adhydtma-yoga: self-contemplation, visayebhyah pratisamhrtya 
sdtmani samddhdnam. £. adhydtma means pertaining to the self as 
distinct from adhibhuta, pertaining to the material elements and 
adhidaiva , pertaining to the deities. Adhydtma-yoga is yoking with 
one's essential self. It is the practice of meditation, a quiet, solitary 
sustained effort to apprehend truth which is different from the 
ordinary process of cerebration. 

Yama answers Naciketas’s question raised in I. 29, about the 
mysterious divine being hie 1 len behind the phenomenal world, in 
the depths of one's own being, which is difficult of access by ordinary 



6 14 The Principal Upanisads I. 2. 14. 

means and yet is open to spiritual contemplation. Yama, in different 
ways and phrases, brings out the impenetrable mystery of the 
inmost reality which is the object of search. If the Brahma world is 
the fulfilment of all desires, this eternal bliss is obtained by the 
renunciation of all desires; while brahma-loka is the highest place 
of the manifested cosmos, its farthest limit, there is the eternal 
beyond it. 

devam: God. Sec S.U. I. 3; Maitrl VI. 23. 

13. etac chrulvd samparigrhya marlyali pravrhya dharmyam 
anitm etam dpya 

sa modate viodaniyam lii labdhva vivrtarii sadma naeike - 
tasam manye 

13. Hearing this and comprehending (it), a mortal, extracting 
the essence and reaching the subtle, rejoices, having attained 
the source of joy. I know that such an abode is wide open 
unto Naciketas. 

r, 

dharmyam: the essence. We must extract its essential nature, discern 

its real character. 

anum: subtle, suksmam. S. 

modaniyam: the source of joy. The deepest being is the highest value. 
To attain Him is to gain supreme, abiding bliss. It is not merging 
in a characterless absolute, where all feeling fades out. 
vivrtarii sadma: the abode is wide open. 

Naciketas can get released from his house of life, body and mind. 
Cp. the words of the Buddha: ‘Never again shalt thou, O builder of 
houses, make a house for me; broken are all thy beams, thy ridge- 
pole shattered/ 

Yama says that Naciketas is fit fgr salvation, moksarham. S. 

It is suggested that the three steps of sravana (srutva), manana 
{samparigrhya) and nididhydsana [pravrhya) are mentioned in this 
verse and these lead to atma-darsana or dtma-sdksdt-kdra (dpya). 

14. anyatra dharmdd anyatradharmad anyatrdsmdt krtdkrtdt. 
anyatra bhfitdc ca bhavyde ca yat tat pasyasi tad vada. 

14. (Naciketas asks:) Tell me that which thou seest beyond 
right and wrong, beyond what is done or not done, beyond 
past and future. 

what is done or not done: 

§ says effect and cause, krtam kdryam , a krtam karanam. 

Cp. T.U. where it is said thajt the knower is not vexed with the 
thought ‘why have I not done the good? why have I done the evil?* 
(II. 9). 

beyond past and future: the eternal is a ‘now* without duration. 



I. 2. 15. Katha Upantsad 615 

Naciketas asks for an account of that deepest reality rid of all 
extraneous externalities, the real which is deeper than all the 
happenings of time, yad tdrsam vastu sarva-vyavahdra-gocardiitam 
pasyasi jdnasi tad vada mahyam. £. 


THE MYSTIC WORD AUM 

15. sarve vcdd yat padam amananti, tapdmsi sarvani ca yad 
vadanti, 

yad icchanto brahmacaryarh caranti, tat te padam samgra- 
hena bravimi: aum ily etat . 

15. (Yama says.) That word which all the Vedas declare, 
which all the austerities proclaim, desiring which (people) live 
the life of a religious student, that word, to thee, I shall tell in 
brief. That is Aum. 

See S.U. 1 V. 9; B.G. VIII. n. 

pada: word. £ means by it goal, padanlyam, gamaniyam. The Supreme 
is the goal of all revelation, of all religious practices and austerities. 
amananti: avibhdgena pratipddayanti. 

brahmacarya: the life of a religious student. It is referred to in 
R.V. X. 109 and described in Atharva Veda XI. 5. It lasts for twelve 
years but may be longer. Svetaketu was a brahmacdrin from 12 to 
24. The student is expected to live in the house of his teacher, 
wait on him, tend his house and cattle, beg for his own and his 
master’s food, look after the sacrificial fires and study the Veda. 
Detailed rules for brahmacarya are given in the Grhya Sutra. 

Asvalayana says that a brahmacdrin is required to be chaste, 
obedient, to drink only water and not sleep in the daytime. I. 22, 1. 2. 
Brahmacarya has come to mean continence and self-restraint. 

Aum is the pranava, which, by the time of the Upanisads, is charged 
with the significance of the entire universe. Deussen is certainly 
incorrect when he observes: 'Essentially it was the unknowableness 
of the first principle of the universe, the Brahman , and the impos- 
sibilitv of expressing it by word or illustration, which compeile^ 
the choice of something so entirely meaningless as the symbol Aum 
as a symbol of Brahman .’ The word first occurs in the Taittirlya 
Samhitd of the Black Yajur Veda, III. 2. 9. 6, where it is called the 
pranava and indicates, according to Keith, the prolongation of the last 
syllable of the offering verse uttered by the hotr. In the Brahmanas, 
it occurs more frequently as a response by the adhvaryu to each 
Rg Vedic verse uttered by the hotr, meaning, ‘yes,’ so be it, answering 
to the Christian ‘Amen. 1 

In the Aitareya Brahma * a V. 32, aum is treated as a mystic 
syllable representing the essence of the Vedas and the universe. 



616 The Principal Upanisads I. 2. ig. 

r 

It is the symbol of the manifested Brahman (waking, dream and 
dreamless sleep) as well as the unmanifested beyond. See Ma.U. 
IV. 32. 

16. etadd hy evdksaram brahma, etadd hy evdksaram param . 
etadd hy evdksaram jhdtva, yo yad icchati tasya tat 

16. This syllable is, verily, the everlasting spirit. This 
syllable, indeed, is the highest end; knowing this very syllable, 
whatever anyone desires will, indeed, be his. 

§ makes out that Brahma is the lower Brahman and param, the 
higher. Whatever one may desire, the lower or the higher Brahman, 
his desire will be fulfilled. 

17. etad dlambanam srestham etad dlambanam param 
etad dlambanam jndtvd brahma-loke mahiyate. 

17. This support is the best (of all). This support is the 
highest; knowing this support, one becomes great in the world 
of Brahma. 

He attains Brahman, the higher, brahma eva lokah, or the world 
of Brahman, the lower, brahmanah lokah. 

THE ETERNAL SELF 

18. na jdyate mriyate vd vipascin ndyam kntascin na babhiiva 

kascit: 

ajo nityah sasvato' yam purdno na hanyate hanyamdne 
Sartre. 

18. The knowing self is never born; nor does he die at any 
time. He sprang from nothing and nothing sprang from him. 
He is unborn, eternal, abiding and primeval. He is not slain 
when the body is slain. 

See B.G. II. 20. 

„ The Katha vipaicit becomes in the Gita, kaddcit medhavin: Sayana 
R.V. IX. 86. 44. 

The self constitutes the inner reality of each individual. It is 
without a cause and is changeless. When it knows itself as the spirit 
and ceases to know of itself as bound up with any name or form 
(nama-rupa) it realises its true nature. 

puranah: primeval, new even in old times, purd api navah, or devoid 
of growth, vrddhi-vivarjitah. 

19. hantd cen manyate hanturh hatas ccn manyate hatam, 
ubhau tau na vijdnito ndyam hanti na hanyate. 



I. 2. 20. Katha Upanisad 617 

19. If the slayer thinks that he slays or if the slain think 
that he is slain, both of them do not understand. He neither 
slays nor is he slain. 

See B.G. II. 19. 

Here is the answer to the question of Naciketas about the mystery 
of death. The self is eternal and death does not refer to it. 

20. anor anlydin mahato mahtyan, dtmdsya jantor nihito 

guhdydm: 

tarn akratuh pasyati vita-ioko dhatu-prasdddn mahimdnam 
dtmanah. 

20. Smaller than the small, greater than the great, the self 
is set in the heart of every creature. The unstriving man beholds 
Him, freed from sorrow. Through tranquillity of the mind and 
the senses (he sees) the greatness of the self. 

anor aniyan: smaller than the small, smaller than^he minute atom. 
When the self is thought of as a psychical principle, its smallness is 
emphasised. See also II. 2. 3. where it is said to be ‘the dwarf’ and 

II. 1. 12 where it is described as ‘thumb-sized.’ In these cases, the 
old animistic language is used. When it is thought of as cosmic, its 
vast ness is emphasised. 1 

a-kratuh : unstriving man. He who is free from desire for external 
objects, earthly or heavenly, which distract the soul and distort its 
vision. § adopts this view. He will, however, have the desire for 
salvation, mnmuksutva. The Upanisad insists on the absence of 
strife or anxiety and refers to the man whose will is at peace. 2 
dhdtu-prasddat: through the tranquillity of the mind and the senses. 

1 Cp. C.U. (III. 14. 3) where it is said to be greater than the earth, 
greater than the sky, greater than all these worlds. Cp. Dionysius, De 
Div nom. IX. 2. 3. ‘Now God is called great in his peculiar Greatness 
which giveth of itself to all things that are great and is poured upon all 
magnitude from outside and stretches far beyond it. This Greatness is 
infinite, without quantity and without number.’ 

'. . . And Smallness or Rarity is attributed to God's nature because 
He is outside all solidity and distance and penetrates all things without 
let or hindrance. . . . This smallness is without quantity or quality, it 
is irrepressible, infinite, unlimited, and while comprehending all things, 
is itself incomprehensible.’ Quoted by Ananda Coomaraswamy in New 
Indian Antiquary , Vol. I, p. 97. 

2 Cp. Rawson: ‘Christian ataraxia , the untroubled peace of true 
faith, of trust which leads to vision is taught very emphatically by 
Jesus in the passage in John XIV beginning “Let not your hearts be 
troubled,” and in the sermon on the Mount with its repeated warning 
against anxious striving as 1 hindrance in the way of entrance into 
the kingdom of Heaven.’ Ka\ha Upanisad (1934), p. 107. 



618 The Principal Upanisads I. 2. 22. 

V. dhdtuh prasaddt, through the grace of the Creator. The vision 
comes through the tranquillity of the senses and the mind according 
to the reading adopted by £. According to the other reading, the 
vision is reached by the grace or self-revelation of the Creator God. 
If the second reading is adopted it will be a clear statement of the 
doctrine of Divine grace, which was developed in the S.U. III. 20. 
There the reading is 

7 am akratum pasyati vitasoko dhdtuh prasdddn mahimdnam 
tsam: 

(1 dhdtuh prasaddt . jagato vidhatd paramesvarah tasya prasddo 
’nugrahah. Vidyaranya.) 

It does not, however, seem to be the intention of the writer here. 
v\ta-sokah\ He who is freed from sorrow, vigata-sokah . . . anyatha 
durvijhcyo'yam atmd kamibhih prdkrtaih purusaih. £. 
akratum: samkalpa-rahitam . 

See also Mahdndrdyana U . VIII. 3. 


THE OPPOSITE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE 
SUPREME 

21. dsino durum vrajati, say cl no ydti sarvatah: 

kastam madatnadam devam mad anyo jhdtum arhati . 

21. Sitting, he moves far; lying he goes everywhere. Who, 
save myself, is fit to know that god who rejoices and rejoices 
not? 

See Ha 4 and 5. 

By these contradictory predicates, the impossibility of con- 
ceiving Brahman through empirical determinations is brought out. 
viruddha-dharmavdn. S. Brahman has both the sides of peaceful 
stability and active energising. In the foimer aspect He is Brahman ; 
in the latter Isvara. The latter is an active manifestation of the 
absolute Brahman , and not an illusory one as some later Advaita 
V^dantins suggest. 

22. asariram sanresu, anavasthesv avasthitam ; 
mahdntam vibhum dtmdnam matva dhiro na socati . 

22. Knowing the self who is the bodiless among bodies, the 
stable among the unstable, the great, the all-pervading, the 
wise man does not grieve. 

The wise man who knows that his self, though now embodied and 
subject to change, is one with the imperishable omnipresent Self, has 
no cause for grief. He goes beyond all fear and sorrow. 



I. 2. 23. 


Katha Upanisad 


619 


THE MORAL PREPARATION FOR 
BRAHMA-KNOWLEDGE 

23. nayam atma pravacanena labhyo na medhayd, na bahuna 
srutena: 

yamevaisa vrnute, tena labhyas tasyaisa atma vivrnute 
tanum svdm. 

23. This self cannot be attained by instruction, nor by 
intellectual power, nor even through much hearing. He is to 
be attained only by the one whom the (self) chooses. To such 
a one the self reveals his own nature. 

See M.U. III. 2. 3. 

pravacanena : aneka-veda-svikarancna or vyakhydnena. 
medhayd: granthartha-dharana-saktyd or svakiya-prajhd-balena. 

While the Supieme Self is difficult to know and is unknowable 
by unaided intellect. He is knowable through His own self-revelation 
to the man whom He chooses. This view looks upon the Supreme 
Self as personal God and teaches a doctrine of divine grace. 

When we contemplate God in a passive condition without any 
images or concepts derived from authority or instruction, a super- 
natural light darts into the soul and draws it towards itself. We can 
acquire the fruits of the more elementary contemplation by self- 
discipline and prayer, by practice in recollection, introversion. When 
we rise in contemplation, when there is the vision of the Supreme 
which is entirely beyond the power of the soul to prepare for or 
bring about, we feel that it is wholly the operation of God working 
on the soul by extraordinary grace. In a sense all life is from God, 
all prayer is made by the help of God's grace but the heights of 
contemplation which are scaled by few are attributed in a special 
degree to divine grace. If the indwelling of God in the souls is a 
reality, this very indwelling takes us to the supernatural. If man 
becomes aware of God’s presence in the soul, it is due to God's own 
working in the soul. It is beyond the power of unassisted nature. 
Those who are familiar with the Pelagian controversy will kn«w^ 
that this consciousness of divine grace is a fact of religious experi- 
ence. Human nature feels so weakened that it is helpless of itself to 
help itself. If a man is to escape from himself as he actually is and 
reach the perfection for which he is made, he needs a transforming 
force within. The seeker feels that this force issues not out of his own 
natural self but enters into him from beyond. 

Here the natural is equated with the creaturely but the fulness of 
human nature includes the divine working in it. 

Cp. ‘Thy counsel who hath known, except thou give wisdom and 
send thy Holy Spirit from above.' Wisdom of Solomon IX. 17. 



620 The Principal Upanisads I. 2. 24. 

Cp. St. Paul: 'Work out your own salvation with fear and 
trembling; for it is God which worketh in you both to will and to do 
of His good pleasure/ Epistle to the Philippians 2. 12-13. Cp. ‘If 
thou askest how may these things be, interrogate grace and not 
doctrine, desire and not knowledge, the groaning of prayer rather 
than study, the spouse rather than the teacher, God and not man, 
mist rather than clarity, not light but fire all aflame and bearing 
on to God by devotion and glowing affection/ St. Bonaventura: 
Itinerary of the Mind , quoted from H. 0 . Taylor's Mediaeval Mind , 
3rd ed., Vol. II, pp. 448. 

* $, however, gives a different interpretation by an ingenious 
exegesis. ‘Him alone whom he chooses by that same self is his own 
self obtainable/ The self reveals its true character to one that seeks 
it exclusively. 

yam eva svatmanam eva sddhako vrnute prarthayate tenaivdtmana 
varitrd svayam dtma lobby ah jhdyata evam ity etat niskamas cdtmanam 
eva prarthayate , dtmanaiva dtma labyate ity arthah . 

24. ndvirato dnscaritdn nasanto ndsamahitah 

ndsanta-mdnaso vdpi prajhdnenainam apnuydt. 

24. Not he who has not desisted from evil ways, not he who 
is not tranquil, not he who has not a concentrated s mind, not 
even he whose mind is not composed can reach this (self) 
through right knowledge. 

Saving wisdom cannot be obtained without the moral qualifica- 
tions here mentioned. No one can realise the truth without illumina- 
tion, and no one can have illumination without a thorough cleansing 
of one’s moral being. See also M.U. III. 1. 5, III. 1. 8; Cp. B.U. IV. 
4. 23. So long as we are indulgent to our vices, so long as we pine 
away with hatred and ill-will to others, we cannot get at true 
knowledge. The classical division of spiritual life into purgation, 
illumination and union gives the first place to ethical preparation, 
which is essential for the higher degrees of spiritual life. Moral 
disorder prevents us from fixing our gaze on the Supreme. Until 
our mind and heart are effectively purged, we can have no clear 
vision of God. It follows that man’s effort is essential to grasp grace 
and profit by it. Grace is not irresistible. It is open to us to accept 
or reject it. Election by God referred to in the previous verse is not 
to be interpreted as fostering fatalism or predestination, though 
the religious seer feels that even in the first movement of the soul 
towards wisdom, the effort at purgation, the prime mover is God. 

This verse gives the lie direct to the suggestion sometimes made 
that the spiritual and the ethical are not organically connected. 
If we wish to attain the spiritual, we cannot bypass the ethical. 



I. 3. 1. Katha Upanisad 621 

25. yasya brahma ca ksatram ca ubhe bhavata odanah 6 

mrtyur yasyopasecanam ka itthd veda yatra sah. 

25. He for whom priesthood and nobility both are as food 
and death is as a sauce, who really knows where he is? 

Cp. R.V. XI. 129. Who knows for certain? Who shall here 
declare it ? Whence it was born and whence come this creation ? 

Anyone lacking the qualifications mentioned in the previous verse 
cannot understand the nature of the Supreme which contains the 
whole world. Death leads to the rcabsorption into the Supreme of 
the entire world in which the Brahmanas and the Ksatriyas hold the 
highest place. 
odanah: food for the body. 

Even Death is absorbed in the Eternal. B.U. I 2. 1. 
upasecanam: sauce. 

We cannot know where the Omnipresent Spirit is any more than 
we can know where the liberated individual is, for they are not in any 
one place. 


Section 3 
TWO SELVES 

1. rtam pibantau sukrtasya loke guhdm pravistau parame 
pardrdhe, 

chdyd-tapau brahma-vido vadanti , pahedgnayo ye ca tri-naci- 
ketah. 

1. There are two selves that drink the fruit of Karma in 
the world of good deeds. Both are lodged in the secret place 
(of the heart), the chief seat of the Supreme. The knowers 
of Brahman speak of them as shade and light as also (the 
householders) who maintain the five sacrificial fires and those 
too who perform the triple Naciketas fire. 

It has been said already that the Eternal Reality which is greater* 
than anything this world or the celestial offers can be reached by 
meditation on one's own inner self and not by ordinary empirical 
knowledge. This section continues the account of the way in which 
the Supreme Self may be known. This verse makes out that medita- 
tion on the inner self leads to the knowledge of the Supreme because 
the latter dwells in close fellowship with the individual self in the 
cave of the human intelligence. R. ‘There are two drinking/ etc. 
shows that, ‘as the object of devout meditation and the devotee 
abide together, meditation is easily performed.' R.B. I. 4. 6. 



622 The Principal Upanisads I. 3. 2. 

f/aw: Karma. Rta signifies the divinely established order of the 
universe, both natural and moral. It here refers to the divine order 
connecting deeds with their results. § means by it ‘the truth because 
it is the inescapable fruit of action.* rtam satyam avasyam bhdvitvdt 
karma phalam. £. 

sukftasya , of good deeds : of their own deeds, sva-kytasya. 

The two referred to here are the individual soul and the Supreme 
self. Cp. M.U. III. 1. 10, S.U. IV. 6 and 7, which go back to R.V. 
I. 164. 20. Sayana, commenting on this verse, says that the reference 
is to the two forms of the atman, the individual soul ( jivdtman ) and 
the universal (paramdtman). But how can the self which is represented 
as looking on without eating, be treated as experiencing the rewards 
of deeds? £. R, and Srinivasa in his commentary on Nimbarka 
argue that it is loose usage of chattri-nyaya. When two men walk 
under an umbrella, we say there go the umbrella-bearers. Madhva 
is more to the point when he quotes Brhat Samhitd and says, ‘The 
Lord Hari dwells in the heart of beings and accepts the pure 
pleasure arising Jrom their good works.' The Supreme in its cosmic 
aspect is subject to the chances and changes of times. Isvara as 
distinct from Brahman participates in the processes of the world. 

Madhva finds support in this verse for his doctrine of the entire 
disparateness of the individual and the universal souls. 
parame pardrdhe : the chief seat of the Supreme. The Kingdom of 
Heaven is within us. It is in the deepest reaches of the soul that the 
human soul holds fellowship with God. 
chayd-tapau : shade and light, shadow and glowing or light. 
panedgnayah: those who maintain the five sacrificial fires. 

All this indicates that while meditation is the way to saving 
knowledge, due performance of the ordained sacrifices gives us a 
measure of spiritual understanding. 

2. yas setur Tjdndndm aksaram brahma yat par am, 
abhayam titirsatdm pdram ndcikelam iakemahi. 

2. That bridge for those who sacrifice, and which is the 
highest imperishable Brahman for those who wish to cross over 
# to, the farther fearless shore, that Naciketa fire, may we master. 

setu: bridge. Cp. C.U. VIII. 4. 4. B.U. IV. 4. 22. aja dtmd. esasetuh. 
M.U. II. 2. 5. It is that by which we pass from time to eternity. In the 
beginning, it is said that the sky and earth were one. They became 
separated by an intervening river or sea of time and space, samsdra- 
sagara . Each one of us, here on earth, wishes to find his way to the 
farther shore by a ladder or a bridge. If we think of a ladder, the way 
( panthd ) is upward {urdhvam)\ if we think of a bridge, the way is 
across. That which takes us across to the other shore is the immanent 
spiritual self which is at once the way and the goal. The bridge holds 



I. 3. 3. Katha Upanisad 623 

the worlds apart and also unites them. See B.U. IV. 4. 22, VIII. 4. i. 

In Buddhist texts, the way from the vortex of existence, samsara 
to the extinction of life’s fires, nirvana is the eightfold path. ‘I am 
the way,’ John XIV. 6. He who calls himself the way appeared to 
St. Catherine of Siena ‘in the form of a bridge extending from 
Heaven to Earth over which all mankind had to pass.’ See Dona 
Luisa Coomaraswamy : The Perilous Bridge. Harvard Journal of 
Asiatic Studies, August 1944. 

Two ways of crossing the river of sariisara are indicated, the 
performance of the Vcdic sacrifices, which leads to the heaven of 
the gods and the knowledge of Brahman. The first prepares the 
way for the second, on the path of gradual liberation of krama-mukti. 
B.U. IV. 4. 22. 

THE PARABLE OF THE CHARIOT 

3. dtmdnam ralhinam viddhi , sariram ratham gva tu: 
buddhim tu sdradhim viddhi, manah pragraham eva ca. 

3. Know the Self as the lord of the chariot and the body 
as, verily, the chariot, know the intellect as the charioteer and 
the mind as, verily, the reins. 

The idea of the self riding in the chariot which is the psycho- 
physical vehicle is a familiar one. See also J at aka VI. 242. The 
chariot with its sensitive steeds represents the psycho-physical 
vehicle in which the self rides. In Maitri IV. 4, the embodied self 
is spoken of as rathita or ‘carted’ and thus subjected to the conditions 
of mortality. Mind holds the reins. It may either control or be dragged 
by the team of the senses. RumI in his Mathnawi says: ‘The heart 
has pulled the reins of the five senses’ (I. 3275). The conception of 
Yoga derived from the root yuj to yoke, to harness, to join is 
connected with the symbolism of the chariot and the team. Yoga 
is the complete control of the different elements of our nature, 
psychical and physical and harnessing them to the highest end. 
See Plato: PJiaedo 24-28, Phaedrus 246 f. In spite of differencc.in 
details, the Katha Up. and Plato agree in looking upon intelligence* 
as the ruling power of the soul (called buddhi or vijhdna by the 
Upanisad and nous by Plato) and aiming at the integration of the 
different elements of human nature. Cp. Republic (IV. 433): ‘The 
just man sets in # order his own inner life, and is his own master and 
at peace with himself; and when he has bound together the three 
principles within him (i.c. reason, emotion and the sensual appetites) 
and is no longer many but has become one entirely temperate and 
perfectly adjusted nature, tl en he will proceed to act, if he has to 
act, whether in state affairs or in private business of his own.’ 



I. 3- 9- 


624 The Principal IJpanisads 

*4. indriydni hayan ahur visaydrhs tesu gocardn, 

dtmendriya-mano-yaktam bhoktety ahur mantsinah. 

4. The senses, they say, are the horses; the objects of sense 
the paths (they range over); (the self) associated with the 
body, the senses and the mind — wise men declare — is the 
enjoyer. 

The atman (self) is compared to the owner of a chariot (rathin), 
the body being the chariot ( ratha ), buddhi or intellect is the driver 
(sdrathi), the horses are said to be the senses {indriydni), manas is 
the rein (pragraha) by which the intellect controls the senses. 

5. yas tv avijhdnavdn bhavaty ayuktena manasa sadd , 
tasyendriydny avasydni dustdsvd iva saratheh. 

5. He who has no understanding, whose mind is always 
unrestrained, his senses are out of control, as wicked horses 
are for a charioteer. 

6. yas ta vijhdnavdn bhavati , yuktena manasa sadd , 
tasyendriydni vasydni sadaiva iva saratheh. 

6. He, however, who has understanding, whose mind is 
always restrained, his senses are under control, as good horses 
are for a charioteer. 

sad: good, well-trained. 

7. yas tv avijndnavdn bhavaty amanaskas sadd’sucih 
na sa tat padam apnoti samsdram cddhigacchati. 

7. He, however, who has no understanding, who has no 
control over his mind (and is) ever impure, reaches not that 
goal but comes back into mundane life. 

samsdram: mundane life, the world of becoming characterised by 
life and death, janma-marana-laksanam. S. 

8 . yas tu vijhdnavdn bhavati samanaskas sadd sucih 
sa tu tat padam apnoti yasmdt bhuyo na jdyate. 

8. He, however, who has understanding, who has control 
over his mind and (is) ever pure, reaches that goal from which 
he is not born again. 

9. vijhdnasdrathir yastu manah pragrahavan narah , 
so'dhvanah param apnoti tad visnoh paramam padam. 

9. He who has the understanding for the driver of the chariot 
and controls the rein of his mind, he reaches the end of the 
journey, that supreme abode of the all-pervading. 



I. 3. 11. Katha Upanisad 625 

visnu: all-pervading, tad visnoh vydpana-silasya brahmanah paramat- 
rnano vdsudevdkhyasya. S. The name is used for the Supreme Self. 
The development of this idea is taken up in the B.G. and the later 
Bhagavata religion. See R.V. I. 154, 5; I. 22. 20, where Visnu, a 
deity of the solar group, is conceived as the giver of light and life. 


THE ORDER OF PROGRESSION TO THE SUPREME 

10. indriyebhyah para hy artha , arthebhyas ca param manah , 
manasas ca para buddhir buddher atma mahdn par ah. 

10. Beyond the senses are the objects (of the senses) and 
beyond the objects is the mind; beyond the mind is the under- 
standing and beyond the understanding is the great self. 

atma mahdn: the great self. 

§ means by it the great soul of the universe said to be the first- 
born of avyakta, the unmanifest. According to the R.V. (X. 12 1) 
in the beginning was the chaos of waters, floating on which appeared 
Hiranya-garbha, the golden germ, the first born of creation and the 
creator of all other human beings. Hiranya-garbha is the soul of the 
universe. R.V. X. 129. 2. 

When the golden light of purusa is cast on all the rich content of 
prakrti , we have the manifestations from crude matter to the 
divinities in paradise. 1 

For R, mahdn atma is the individual self kartr, which is indwelt 
by the highest self. R.B. I. 4. 1. 

11. mahatah param avyaktam, avyaktdt purusah parah 
partisan na pararh kihcit : sd kdsthd, sd para gatih. 

11. Beyond the great self is the unmanifest; beyond the 
unmanifest is the spirit. Beyond the spirit there is nothing. 
That is the end (of the journey) ; that: is the final goal. 

avyakta: unmanifest. It is beyond ynahat, it is prakrti, the universal 
mother from out of which by the influence of the light of purusa , all 
form and all content emerge into manifestation. 

& calls avyakta , mdyd, avidyd. While purusa, subject, and prakrti , 
object, are co-ordinate principles at the stage of cosmic creation, 

1 Cp. Deussen: ‘We know that the entire objective universe is possible 
only insofar as it is sustained by a knowing subject. This subject as 
the sustainer of the objective universe is manifested in all individual 
subjects but is by no means identical with them. For the individual 
subjects pass away, but the objective universe continues to exist 
without them; there exists therefore the eternal knowing subject 
(Hiranya-garbha) also by whom it is sustained/ T he Philosophy of the 
Upani§ads , p. 201. 



626 


The Principal Upanisads I. 3. 11. 

while their inter-action is essential for all manifestation, purusa is 
considered to be higher as he is the source of light and his unity 
appears nearer to the ultimate one than the multiplicity of prakrti] 
strictly speaking, however, the Pure Self is beyond the descriptions 
of unity, duality and multiplicity. 

For Ramanuja, avyakta is the body or the chariot. It is called 
avyakta because the subtle body and not the gross body is referred to. 
While there is agreement between S and Ramanuja, on the point, 
$ proceeds to say that the subtle body has avidya or ignorance for 
its cause and therefore belongs to the world of mdyd. ‘Maya is 
properly called undeveloped or non-manifested since it cannot be 
defined as that which is or that which is not/ S.B. I. 4. 3. By avyakta, 
§ means not the prakrti of the Samkhya but the mdyd-sakti which is 
responsible for the whole world including the personal God. For 
Ramanuja, avyakta denotes Brahman in its causal phase, when 
names and forms are not yet distinguished. It is rv real mode, prakdra 
or development, parindma of Brahman through which the universe 
is evolved. R.B. % I. 4. 23-27. 

Madhva observes that ‘the word avyakta which primarily denotes 
the Supreme Lord alone also denotes the other (matter), for it is 
dependent on Him and like unto a body of the Lord.' Sutra Bhdsya 

I.4.I. 

purusdn na param kihcit: beyond the Spirit there is nothing. 

The term purusa goes back to the Purusa Sukta (R.V. X. 90) 
and is distinctly personal in significance. 

Purusa is the subject side of that within which are both subject 
and object, the light of unity and the darkness of multiplicity. We 
do not reach it, until the end of the cosmic day. So we can say that 
there is nothing beyond the purusa. 

In these two verses we find a hierarchy of principles or beings 
which have later acquiied highly technical significations. We are 
asked to pass from outward nature to the one world-ground, avyakta , 
and from it to the spirit behind. Between thetwo,^wrws# and prakrti , a 
certain priority is given to purusa , for it is the light of purusa’s 
consciousness that is reflected on all objects of the manifested 
universe high or low, gross or subtle. From the sense world where 
•the senses reveal their objects, we pass to the dream world where 
manas or mind operates independent of the senses. From this latter 
we pass to the world of dreamless sleep where the unmanifest 
prakrti becomes the divine mother. Those who are absorbed in 
prakrti , those who have attained to the state of prakHi-laya have 
the bliss and freedom of dreamless sleep, but it is not the illuminated 
freedom that we seek. For that we must get to the purusa, who is 
the source of all. 

Cp. Pseudo Dionysius: ‘Do thou, in the intent practice of mystic 
contemplation, leave behind the senses and the operations of the 



I. 3. 13. Katha Upanisad 627 

intellect, and all things that the senses or the intellect can perceivd, 
and all things which are not and things which are, and strain upwards 
in unknowing as far as may be towards the union with Him who 
is above all being and knowledge. For by unceasing and absolute 
withdrawal from thyself and all things in purity, abandoning all 
and set free from all, thou wilt be borne up to the ray of the Divine 
Darkness that surpasseth all being/ Mystical Theology , I. 

* Mahat , avyakta and purusa are terms used by the Sdmkhya 
philosophy. Avyakta is the prakrti or pradhdna. When its equilibrium 
is disturbed by the influence of purusa, the evolution or srsti or the 
manifest world starts, and this evolution consists of twenty-three 
principles. Mahat , the great principle, buddhi or intelligence, 
ahamkara self-sense, principle of individuation from which issue 
manas, the central, co-ordinatory sense-organ, 5-9, five buddhtndriyas 
or sense organs, 10-14, five karmendriyas or organs of action, 15-19, 
five tanmatras, or subtle elements, 20-24, five slhula-bhutas or gross 
elements. Purusa, the twenty-fifth, is totally distinct in nature from 
all others, neither producing nor produced, though by its influence 
on prakrti , it causes the evolution of the manifest world. 

The account in the Katha Up. is different from the classical 
Sdmkhya in many respects; there is no mention of aham-kdra or 
self-sense, though it is true that the distinction between buddhi and 
aham-kdra, intellect and individuation is not a material one. 

While the Sdmkhya identifies buddhi and mahat, the Upanisad 
distinguishes them. 

The purusa of the dualistic Sdmkhya is not beyond the avyakta 
or prakrti but is a co-ordinate piinciple. 

It is doubtful whether avyakta refers to the prakrti of the Sdmkhya. 
See S.B. I. 4. 1. The Upanisad account gives certain Sdmkhya ideas 
in a theistic setting. 


THE METHOD OF. YOGA 

12. esa sarvesu bhutesu gudho’tmd na prakdsate, 

drsyate tvagryayd buddhyd suksmayd suksma-darsibhih. 

12. The Self, though hidden in all beings, does not shifie^ 
forth but can be seen by those subtle seers, through their sharp 
and subtle intelligence. 

We must direct a serene and straight look at the Divine object. 
It is samyag-dafsana which is quite different from occult visions or 
physical ecstasies. 

13. yacched van manasi prdjhas tad yaccliej jhdna-dtmani 
jhdnani dtmani mahat ' niyacchet, tad yacchecchdnta-dtmani. 

13. The wise man should restrain speech in mind; the latter 



628 The Principal Upanisads I. 3. 15. 

he should restrain in the understanding self. The understanding 
he should restrain in the great self. That he should restrain 
in the tranquil self. 

jhdndtman is the buddhi of I. 3. 11. 

Purusa answers to the Santatman. The soul must go beyond all 
images in the mind, all workings of the intellect, and by this process 
of abstraction, the soul is rapt above itself and flows into God in 
w r hom are peace and fulness. The process of recollection and intro- 
version is stated here. By shutting out all external things and 
emptying it of all distracting thoughts, the mind is enabled to 
concentrate on its own highest or deepest part. Cp. Bishop Ullathorne: 
'Let it be plainly understood that we cannot return to God unless 
we enter first into ourselves. God is everywhere but not everywhere 
to us. There is but one point in the universe where God communicates 
with us, and that is the centre of our own soul. There He waits for us. 
There He meets us; there He speaks to us. To seek Him therefore 
we must enter into our own interior.' 1 

The wise disciple should discriminate the unchanging light, the 
atman, from the changing objects of sense and mind which it illumines, 
an-dtman. The technique for attaining the spiritual consciousness 
requires the soul to stand clear of all concepts and enter into its own 
depth. 

14. uttisthata jdgrata prdpya varan nibodhata: 

ksurasya dhdrd nisitd duratyayd; dtirgam pathas tat kavayo 
vadanti. 

14. Arise, awake, having attained thy boons, understand 
(them). Sharp as the edge of a razor and hard to cross, difficult 
to tread is that path (so) sages declare. 

prdpya varan: having attained the boons. § means by it 'approaching 
the best of teachers.’ prdpya upagamya , varan prakrsfdn deary an. 

Cp. Hitopadesa: Idleness is the great enemy of man, alasyam hi 
manusydnam sarirastho mahd-ripuh. 

sharp as the edge of a razor: The way of religion is never easy. It is 
•steep and hard. Ihere can be no progress in religious life without self- 
control. Only the clean in heart shall see God. Self-discipline is the 
first step in spiritual training. 

Cp. Jesus: ‘Strive to enter in at the strait gate, for narrow is the 
gate and straitened the way that leads to life, and few be they that 
find it.' Matthew VII. 14. 

15. asabdam aspariam arupam avyayam tatha arasam nityam 

agandhavac ca yat 

1 Groundwork of Christian Virtues , p. 74. 



I. 3. 17. Katha Upanisad 629 

anady anantam mahatah param dhruvam nicdyya talk 
mrtyu-mukhdt pramucyate. 

15. (The self) without sound, without touch and without 
form, undecaying, is likewise, without taste, eternal, without 
smell, without beginning, without end, beyond the great, 
abiding, by discerning that, one is freed from the face of death. 

The atman is not an object of any sort but is the eternal subject. 
We hear, touch, see, feel and think by the atman. By withdrawing 
from all outward things, by retreating into the ground of our own 
soul, in the remotest depth of the soul, we find the Infinite. There 
the Self is raised above all empirical concepts of sound, touch, form, 
etc. 

16. ndciketam upakhydnam mrtyu-proktam sandtanam 
uktva irutva ca medhavl brahma-loke mahiyate. 

16. This ancient story of Naciketas, told by Death, telling 
and hearing (it), a wise man grows great in the wgrld of Brahma. 

17. ya imam paramam guhyarh srdvayed brahma-samsadi 
prayatas srdddha-kdle vd tad anantyaya kalpate, tad dnan- 

tyaya kalpate. 

17. Whoso shall cause to be recited this supreme secret before 
an assembly of Brahmanas or devoutly at the time of the cere- 
monies for the dead, this will prepare (for him) everlasting 
life, this will prepare everlasting life. 

This seems to be the appropriate ending of the Upanisad and the 
second chapter with the three sections, is, perhaps, a later addition. 



II. 1. 1. 


630 The Principal Upanisads 

CHAPTER 11 
Section 1 

THE SELF IS NOT TO BE SOUGHT THROUGH THE 

SENSES 

1. pardhci khdni vyatniat svayambhiis tasmdt pardh pasyati 
ndntardtman: 

has cid dhTrah pralyag-dtmdnam aiksad dvrtta-caksur amrtat- 
vam i cch an. 

1. The Self is not to be sought through the senses. The Self- 
caused pierced the openings (of the senses) outward; therefore 
one looks outward and not within oneself. Some wise man, 
however, seeking life eternal, with his eyes turned inward, saw 
the self. 

vyatrnat: pierced. The Self-caused lias so set the openings of the 
soul that they of en outwards and men look outward into the appear- 
ances of things but the rare soul ripe for spiritual wisdom withdraws 
his attention irom the world, turns his eye inward, sees the Self and 
attains immortality. S makes out that he cursed or injured them by 
turning them outward, himsitavdn hananam krtavdn. Such obser- 
vations which arc disparaging to the legitimate use of the senses 
give the impression oi the unworldly character of much of our best 
effort. S’s opinion is opposed to the view set forth in the previous 
section that senses are like horses, which will take us to our goal, 
if properly guided. The Upanisad calls for the control and not the 
suppression of the senses. Spiritual search has an inward movement 
leading to the revelation of the Divine in the inmost soul. It is this 
aspect which is stressed in this verse. 1 We generally lead outward 
lives; to have a vision of truth we must turn our gaze inward. See 
S.U. III. 18 , we must bring about an inversion of the natural 
orientation of our consciousness. 

svayambhuh: self-caused. Cp. causa sui of Neoplatonism. That 
which causes itself or produces itself is different from the unproduced, 
the uncaused. It is the Creator God and not the uncaused Brahman. 
See Satapatha Brdhmana I. 9. 3. 10; Taitlirlya Brdhmana III. 12. 
3. 1. B.U. II. O.3; IV. 6. 3; VI. 5. 4- 

avrtta-caksuh: eyes turned inwaid. We close our eyes to the phe- 
nomenal variety and turn them inward to the noumenal reality. 

1 It were a \ain endeavour 
Though I should gaze for ever 
On that green light which lingers in the west; 

I may not hope from outward forms to win 

The passion and the life whose fountains are within. 

Coleridge. 



II. i. 2. Katha Upanisad 631 

The soul is like an eye. When the eye rests on the perishing things <ff 
the world, it does not know the truth of things. When it turns 
inward and rests on truth and being, it perceives truth. 

Plato speaks of the object of education as a 'turning around of 
the soul/ In the famous simile of the cave Plato compares those 
who are destitute of philosophic wisdom to prisoners in a cave 
who are able only to look in one direction. They are bound and have 
a fire behind them and a wall in front. They see shadows of them- 
selves and of objects behind them cast on the wall by the light of 
the fire. They regard these shadows as real and have no notion of 
the objects to which they are due. At last some wise man succeeds 
in escaping from the cave to the light of the sun. He sees real things 
•and becomes aware that he had hitherto been deceived by shadows. 

Cp. Phaedo: 'The soul, when using the body as an instrument of 
perception, that is to say, when using the sense of sight or hearing 
or some other sense ... is then dragged by the body into the region 
of the changeable and wanders and is confused. But when returning 
into herself she reflects, then she passes into the other world, the 
region of purity and eternity and immortality, and unchangeableness 
which are her kindred and with them she ever lives, when she is 
by herself and is not let or hindered ; then she ceases from her erring 
ways and being in communion with the unchanging is unchanging. 
And this state of the soul is called wisdom/ 

Descartes points to the necessity of turning away from external 
appearances and rising to the spiritual realities which self-knowledge 
reveals. Only while the author of the Upanisad requires us to rise 
above intellection into insight when we will be imbued with the 
truth already present in the soul, Descartes asks us to strive to 
know the truth through reason. 

The Upanisad points out that God is more manifest in the soul 
of man than in the world outside. It, therefore, demands a con- 
version of the spirit on itself. 

2. paracah kdmdn anuyanti balds te mvtyor yanti vitatasya 
pdsam , 

atha dhtrd amrtatvam viditva dhruvam adhruvesv iha na 
prdrthayante. 

2. The small-minded go after outward pleasures. They walk 
into the snare of widespread death. The wise, however, recog- 
nising life eternal do not seek the stable among things which 
are unstable herti. 1 

1 Cp. the Christian hymn: 

Swift to its close ebbs out life’s little day: 

Earth’s joys grow dim, its glories pass away; 

Change and deca) in all around I see; 

O Thou Who changes t not, abide with inc. 

X 



632 The Principal Upanisads II. 1. 6. 

3. yena rupam rasam gandham sabddn sparsdms ca maithundn , 
etcnaiva vijandti, kim atra pariiisyate: etad vai tat. 

3. That by which (one perceives) form, taste, smell, sounds 
and touches of love, by that alone one perceives. What is there 
that remains (unknown to it) ? This, verily, is that. 

Everything is known by the Self and there is nothing which is 
unknowable to it. sarvam evatvatmana vijneyam, yasyatmano ’ 
vijneyam na kincit pansisyate , sa dtmd sarvajnah. S. Though the 
Self is not manifest as an object, it is ever present in all experience 
as the subject. It is the ground of every possibility of thought, of 
every act of knowledge. As £ says, it is self-proven, svasiddha ; 
for even he who denies it presupposes it. 

4. svapndntam jagaritdntarh cobhau yendmtpasyali, 
mahdntam vibhuni atmdnam matvd dkiro na socati. 

4. That by which one perceives both dream states and 
waking states, having known (that as) the great, omnipresent 
Self, the wise man does not grieve. 

svapndntam: dream states. Literally dream-end. It is sometimes 
suggested that at the end of a dream, before it is waking or sleeping 
we catch the self which is the pure subject. It is the state when we 
dream that we dream. 


THE INDIVIDUAL SOUL, ETC., ARE ONE WITH THE 

UNIVERSAL 

5. ya imam madhvadam veda atmdnam jiv am antikdt, 

zsdnam bhuta-bhavyasya, na tato vijugupsatc: ctad vai tat. 

5. He who knows this Self, the experiencer as the living spirit 
close at hand as the lord of the past and the future — one docs 
not shrink away from Him. This, verily, is that. 

madhv-ada: experiencer. Literally, honey-eater, ‘the enjoyer of the 
fruit of action/ karma-phala-bhujam. S. 

6. yah purvam tapaso jdtam adbhyah purvam ajdyata, 
guham pravisya tisthantam yo bhiltebhir vyapasyata: etad 

vai tat. 

6. He who was born of old from austerity, was born of old 
from the waters, who stands, having entered the secret place 
(of the heart) and looked forth through beings. This, verily, 
is that. 

The text refers to Hiranya-garbha, who is mentioned in several 



II. i. 9. Kafha Upanisad 633 

Upanisads. There is no suggestion here of the unreality of the 
cosmic evolution. 

adbhyah : the waters which refer to the mula-prakrti , the aspect 
of the Supreme Spirit which remains when the light of purusa is 
withdrawn into itself. Cp. C.U. VII. 10. 1; B.U. V. 5; A.U. I. 1-3; 
K.U. I. 7. 

7. yd pranena sambhavaty aditir devatdmayi , 

guhdm pravtsya tisthanti, yd bhutebhir vyajdyata: etad vai tat. 

7. She who arises with life, Aditi, the soul of the gods, who 
stands, having entered the secret place (of the heart), w 7 ho was 
born with the beings. This, verily, is that. 

Aditi (a-diti, not bound, boundless) is said to be the mother of 
the gods; sarva-devata-mayi sarva-devatmika. §. The term is used here 
in the sense of mother-nature, 1 prakrti , the source of all objectivity. 
S derives it from root ad ‘to eat’ and makes aditi the eater or experi- 
encer of all objects. ‘Born from the highest Brahman as prdna t 
i.e. in the form of Hiranya-garbha .’ hiranya-garbftasya eva visesan- 
dntaram aha. A. 

8 . aranyor nihito jdta-vedd garbha iva subhrto garbhimbhih : 
dive diva idyo jdgrvadbhir havismadbhir manusyebhir agnih : 

etad vai tat . 

8. Agni, the all-knower, hidden in the fire-sticks, like the 
embryo well borne by pregnant women, should be daily adored 
by the watchful men with oblations. This, verily, is that. 

This verse is quoted from Sdma Veda I 1. 8. 7; see also R.V. III. 
29. 2. 

Both purusa and prakrti , the subject and the object are identified 
with the Supreme Reality as they are two movements of His being. 
aranyoh: between the upper and the lower fire-sticks: uttar ddhar- 
dranyoh , Madhva. 
nihitah : hidden, nitardm sthitah. 

9. yatas codeti suryo astam yatra ca gacchati , 

tarn devas sarve rpitas tadu ndtyeti kas cana: etad vai tat. 

9. Whence the sun rises and where it goes to rest; in it are 
all gods founded and no one ever goes beyond that. This verily, 
is that. 

See Atharva Veda X. 18. 16; B.U. I. 5. 23. 

The ancient Vedic gods are recognised by the Upani§ads but 

1 R.V. (I. 89. 10). * Aditi is the sky, Aditi the air, Aditi is mother, 
father and son, Aditi is all the gods and the live tribes; Aditi is whatever 
has been and will be born.’ 



634 The Principal Upanisads II. 1. 12. 

they are all said to derive their being from the One Supreme Reality. 
In verses 5-7, the living soul, the soul of the universe, infinite nature, 
are identified with Brahman ; in verses 8 and 9, Fire and Sun are 
said to have their reality in Brahman: devds sarve dtmani pratisthita 
iti. R. 


FAILURE TO COMPREHEND THE ESSENTIAL UNITY 
OF BEING IS THE CAUSE OF RE-BIRTH 

10. yad eveha tad amutra, yad amntra tad anviha , 
mrtyos sa mrtyum dpnoti ya iha ndneva pasyati. 

10. Whatever is here, that (is) there. Whatever is there, that, 
too, is here. Whoever perceives anything like manyness here 
goes from death to death. 

11. manasaivedam dptavyam neha ndndsti kin cana: 
mrtyos sa mrtyum gacchati ya iha ndneva pasyati . 

11. By mind alone is this to be obtained. There is nothing 
of variety here. Whoever perceives anything like variety here, 
goes from death to death. 

In these two verses, the Supreme is declared to be devoid of any 
difference. The multiplicity of the world does not touch the unity 
of the Supreme. 


THE ETERNAL LORD ABIDES IN ONE'S SELF 

12. angustha-mdtrah pttruso madhya dtmani tisthati: 

tsano bhuta-bhavyasya na tato vijigupsate: etad vai tat. 

12. The person of the size of a thumb resides in the middle 
of the body. After knowing him who is the lord of the past 
and the future, one does not shrink (from Him). This, verily, 
is chat. 

ahgustha-mdtra-punisa: the person of the size of a thumb. Taittirlya 
Aranyaka X. 38. 1; S.U. III. 13; V. 8; Maitri VI. 38. 

In the story of Sdvitrl , it is said that Yama, with his grim force 
extracted out of the body of Satyavdn a person bf the size of a 
thumb, bound in his snare and brought in his control. 1 See B.U. 
I. 5. 23; Revelation I. 8. 

1 tatah satyavatah kdyat pdiabaddham vat am gatam 
angustha-mdtram purusam niscakdrsa yamo baldt. 

— M.B. Vana Parva. 



II. i. 15. Kaiha Upanisad 635 

13. angustha-matrah puruso jyotir ivadhumakah: 

tsano bhuta-bhavyasya sa evadya sa u svah: etad vai tat. 

13. The person of the size of a thumb resides in the middle 
of the body, like a flame without smoke. He is the lord of the 
past and the future. He is the same today and the same 
tomorrow. This, verily is that. 

The lord of the past and the future is not a timeless Absolute but 
the ruler of the time order. 

§ discusses this passage in his Sutra Bhdsya (I. 3. 24 and 25) 
and argues that the soul which is said to be of the size of a thumb 
is in reality Brahman. Ramanuja and Nimbarka agree and hold 
that the highest self is called ‘thumb-sized' since it dwells in the 
heart of the worshipper. In B.U. the self is said to be ‘as small as a 
grain of rice or barley and yet it is the ruler of all and lord of all,’ 
V. 5. 1. In C.U.,it is said to be of the measure of a'span, pradesa-matra, 
V. 18. 1. Maitri states all the views of the size of the soul. It tells us 
that a man ‘reaches the supreme state by meditating on the soul, 
which is smaller than an atom or else of the size of the thumb, or 
of a span, or of the whole body.’ VI. 38. 


THE RESULTS OF SEEING VARIETY AND UNITY 

14. yathodakam durge vrstam parvatesu vidhdvati , 

evam dharman prthak pasyams tan evdnuvidhdvati. 

14. As water rained upon a height flows down in various 
ways among the hills; so he who views things as varied runs 
after them (distractedly). 

He who perceives differentiation of dharmas is condemned to the 
restless flowing he perceives. 

15. yathodakam suddhe suddham dXiktam tddrg eva bhavati, 
evam muner vijdinata dtmd bhavati gautama. 

15. As pure water poured forth into pure becomes the very 
same, so the self, O Gautama, of the seer who has understanding 
becomes (one with the Supreme). 

tddrg eva: the very same. Literally just such. § affirms metaphysical 
identity between the individual soul and the Supreme Self. 
Ramanuja and # Nimbarka hold that the individual soul is non- 
different, i.e. not separate from the Supreme Self. It attains 
equality with the Supreme. See M.U. III. 2. 8. manana-silasya 
dtmdpi param-atma-jhdncna visuddhas san visuddhena param-dlmand 
samdno bhavati. R. 

Cp. the observations of the Christian mystics. Bernard of Clair- 



636 The Principal Upanisads II. 2. 2. 

vaux says: ‘As a drop of water poured into wine loses itself and takes 
the colour and savour of wine, so in the saints all human affections 
melt away, by some unspeakable transmutation into the will of 
God. For how could God be all in all if anything merely human 
remained in man? The substance will endure, but in another beauty, 
a higher power, a greater glory.’ St. Theresa says: ‘Spiritual marriage 
is like rain falling from the sky into a river, becoming one and the 
same liquid, so that the river water and the rain cannot be divided; 
or it resembles a streamlet flowing into the ocean which cannot 
afterward be dissevered from it.* 


Section 2 

THE INDIVIDUAL SELF 

1. pnram ekdddsa-dvdram ajasydvakra-cetasah, 

anusthdya"na socati vimuktasca vimucyate: etad vai tat. 

1. (There is) a city of eleven gates (belonging to) the unborn, 
uncrooked intelligence. By ruling it one does not grieve and 
being freed is freed indeed. This, verily is that. 

ekddasa-dvdram: eleven-gated. B.G. (V. 13) mentions nine gates 1 which 
are the two eyes, two ears, two nostrils, mouth, anus and generating 
organ. 1 Here two others are mentioned to make up eleven and they 
are the navel and the saggital suture, the opening at the top of 
the skull (A.U. III. 12), through which the liberated soul is said to 
escape at death. 

a-vakra-cetasah: whose thoughts are not crooked . avakram: akutilam. 
anusthaya: ruling (the city). S takes it to mean ‘contemplating,’ 
dhydtvd. When the soul controls the gates and lives in peace it is free 
from sorrow. It is freedom which begins here (jivan-mukti) and 
leads after death to complete release (videha-mukti ) . 

2. hamsas sucisat, vasur antariksasat hotd vedi$at, atithir 

duronasat , 

nrsat, varasat, rtasat, vyomasat, abjd, gojd, rtaja, adrijd , 
rtam brhat. 

2. He is the swan (sun) in the sky, the pervader in the space 
(between earth and heaven), the priest at the altar, the guest 
in the sacrificial jar (house). He dwells in men, in gods, in the 
right and in the sky. He is (all that is) born of water, sprung 

1 Bunyan in his Holy War describes the human soul as living in a 
city with five gates which are the five senses. 



II. 2. 5 - Katha Upahisad 637 

from the earth, born of right, born of mountain. He is the true 
and the great. 

This hamsavatl mantra whose seer is Vama-deva is a prayer to 
the sun who. illumines the world and dispels the darkness of men. 

See R.V. IV. 40. 5; Vajasaneyi Samhita X. 24; XII. 14; Taittirlya 
Samhita III. 2. 10. 1; Satapatha Brdhmana VI. 7. 3. 11. 
vasu: the pervading: vdsayati sarvdn. S. 

hotd: priest. 'Fire' according to S. hotdgnih, agnir vai hotd ity sruteh. 

In the Satapatha Brdhmana , the triune Agni is identified with 
the sun in heaven, the air in the space between earth and heaven 
and with the priest or the guest on earth. Here, Agni, the Supreme 
energy is identified with Brahman or the Atman. The verse affirms 
that the whole universe is non-different from the Supreme Brahman . 
etat sarvam aparicchinna-satya-rupa-brahmatmakam. R. 

3. urdhvam pranam unnayaty apdnam pratyag asyati , 
madhye vdmanam aslnam visve deva npdsate. 

3. He leads the out-breath upward, he casts inwards the 
in-breath, the dwarf who is seated in the middle, all the gods 
adore. 

Originally prana meant breath and was used for the Supreme 
Being. In the early Upanisads, all the vital powers (i.e. speech, 
breath, eye, ear and manas) are called prdndh. B.U. I. 5. 3; T.U. 
I. 7. These are looked upon as varieties of breath or as powers 
presiding over different parts of the body. Prdna and apdna stand 
for breaths in expiration and inspiration respectively. 
vdmanam: the dwarf (another name for the thumb-sized person, 
angustha-matra purusa). 

‘Worthy to be served/ vananlyam sambha janiyam. £. 
visve devah: all the gods. § interprets as ‘the senses and the vital 
powers’ which are subject to the person within, who is their Lord 
whom they worship by their uninterrupted activity. 

4. asya visramsamdnasya sarlrasthasya dchinah, 

dehdd vimucyamdnasya kim atra parisisyate: etad vai tat . 

4. When the embodied self that dwells within the body slips 
off and is released from the body, what is there that remains? 
This, verily, is^that. 

What remains is the Universal Soul. 

5. na prdnena ndpdnena martyo jlvati kas cana 
itarena tu jtvanti, ya • minn etdv updsritau. 

5. Not by any outbreath or inbreath does any mortal what- 



638 The Principal Upanisads II. 2. 8. 

efver live. But by another do they live on which these (life- 
breaths) both depend. 

This verse repudiates the materialist doctrine that the soul is 
just an assemblage of parts. It makes out that as the house and the 
dweller are separate, the destruction of the house does not mean 
the destruction of the dweller. The loss of the body does not mean 
the dissolution of the soul, while desertion of the body by the soul 
would mean the disintegration of the body. 


REBIRTH 

6. hanta ta idam pravaksydmi guhyam brahma sandtanam: 
yathd ca maranam prdpya dtmd bhavati gautama. 

6. Look (here). I shall explain to you the mystery of Brahman , 
the eternal, and also how the soul fares, after reaching death, 
0 Gautama. 

7. yonim anye prapadyante sanratvdya dehinah, 
sthdnum anye nusamy anti, yathd karma, yathd srutam. 

7. Some souls enter into a womb for embodiment; others 
enter stationary objects according to their deeds and according 
to their thoughts. 

While the Upanisads insist on the independent reality of the 
Supreme Self they also affirm the reality of the individual soul. 

Here the law of Karma that we are born according to our deeds 
is assumed, yathd srutam yddrsam ca vijiidnam updrjitam tad 
anurupam eva sarlram pratipadyanta iti. S. 

8 . ya esa suptesu jdgarti kdmam kdmam puruso nirmimdnah 

tad eva sukram tad brahma tad evamrtani ucyate . 
tasmin lokdih sritdih sarve, tadu ndtyeti kas cana: etadvaitat . 

8. That person who is awake in those that sleep, shaping 
desire after desire, that, indeed, is the pure. That is Brahman , 
«tliat, indeed, is called the immortal. In it all the worlds rest 
and no one ever goes beyond it. This, verily, is that. 

kdmam kdmam : desire after desire, really objects of desire. Even 
dream objects like objects of waking consciousness are due to the 
Supreme Person. Even dream consciousness is a proof of the existence 
of the self. SeeB.U. IV. 3. 

No one ever goes beyond it: cp. Eckhart: ‘On reaching God all 
progress ends.' 1 

1 Quoted in New Indian Antiquary , Vol. I, p. 205. 



II. 2. ii. Katha Upanisad 639 

THE INNER SELF IS BOTH IMMANENT AND 
TRANSCENDENT 

9. agnir yathaiko bhuvanam pravisto rupam rupam prati-rupo 
babhuva , 

ekas tathd sarva-bhiltdntar-dtmd nlpam nlpam prati-nlpo 
bahis ca. 

9. As fire which is one, entering this world becomes varied 
in shape according to the object (it burns), so also the one Self 
within all beings becomes varied according to whatever (it 
enters) and also exists outside (them all). 

Cp. R.V. where Indra, in his conflict with the demons, is said 
to have assumed many forms through his magic powers, becoming 
the counterform of every form. 

rupam nlpam prati-rupo babhuva 
indvo mayabhih pururupa xyate. VI. 47. 18. 
bahis: outside. While the Self assumes many form<fJ it is yet outside 
the manifested world in its own unmodified nature, svena avikrtena 
rupena akdsavat. §. This verse teaches the immanence as well as 
the transcendence of the Supreme Self. Cp. R.V. X. 90, where all 
beings are said to be a quarter of the puntsa while three-quarters are 
immortal in heaven, tripdd asydmrtam divi. R.V. X. 90. 3; S.U. 

III. 9 and 10. 

10. vdyur yathaiko bhuvanam pravisto rupam nlpam prati-rupo 

babhuva , 

ekas tathd sarva-bhiltdntar-dtmd rupam nlpam prati-rupo 
bahis ca. 

10. As air which is one, entering this world becomes varied 
in shape according to the object (it enters), so also the one Self 
within all beings becomes varied according to whatever (it 
enters) and also exists outside (them all). 

11. suryo yathdi sarva-lokasya caksur na lipyate caksusajr 

bdhya-dosaih 

ekas tathd sarva-bhiltdntar-dtmd na lipyate loka-duhkena 
bahyah. 

11. Just as the sun, the eye of the whole world, is not defiled 
by the externar faults seen by the eye, even so, the' One within 
all beings is not tainted by the' sorrow of the world, as He is 
outside (the world). 

The verse admits the reali 7 of the pain of the world but denies 
that it touches the Supreme Self which is our inner being. The forms 



640 The Principal Upanisads II. 2. 14. 

which the Supreme assumes are not its modifications but are the 
manifestations of its possibilities. The Supreme Self is unaffected 
by the pain of the individual selves because the pain of the individual 
self is due to its identifying itself with its psycho-physical vehicle. 
The individual ego makes a confusion between the self and what is 
not the self. The Supreme, on the other hand, does not suffer 
because it is not subject to ignorance (avidya) and it does not identify 
itself with any of the accidents to which its various psycho-physical 
vehicles are subject. 

12. eko vast sarva-bhutdntar-dtmd ekatn bijam bahudhd yah 
karoti , 

tarn dtmastham ye y nnpasy anti dhirds tesdm sukham iasva - 
tarn netaresdm. 

12. The one, controller (of all), the inner self of all things, 
who makes his one form manifold, to the wise who perceive 
him as abiding in the soul, to them is eternal bliss — to no others. 

* , 

vast: controller. See B.U. IV. 4. 22; S.U. VI. 12. 

dtmastham: abiding in the soul. The Supreme dwells in the inmost 

part of our being 

sva-sarv'a-hydaydkdse buddhau caitanydkdrcndbhivyaktam. $. Cp. 
I John IV. 13. ‘Hereby know we that we abide in Him and He in us, 
because He hath given us of His spirit. 1 

who makes his one form manifold . It is one in the unmanifested 
condition. It becomes manifold in the manifested condition, eki-bhu- 
tavibhagavasthamtamo-laksanambijammahadddi bahu-vidha-prapahea- 
rupena yah karoti tarn. R. 

13. nilyo’nitydndm cetanas cetandndm eko bahundm yo vidad- 

hdti kdmdn, 

tarn dtmastham yenupasyanti dhirdli; tesdm sdntis sdsvati, 
netaresdm. 

13. The one eternal amid the transient, the conscious amid 
the conscious, the one amid many, who grants their desires, 

f to the wise who perceive Him as abiding in the soul, to them 
is eternal peace and to 110 others. 

See S.U. VI. 13. 

nityo’nitydnam, sometimes nityo nitydndm the one eternal among 
the eternal. 

The Supreme grants the desires of many. We may see here the 
doctrine of Divine providence. 

14. tad etad iti manyante’ nirdesyam paramam sukham , 
katham mi tad vijdmyam kimu bhdti vibhdti vd. 



II. 3- i- Katha Upanisad 641 

14. This is that and thus they recognise, the ineffable 
Supreme bliss. How then may I come to know this? Does it 
shine (of itself) or does it shine (in reflection) ? 

Docs the Supreme shine in Himself (see III. 1. 3. 12) or does He 
shine in His expression ? 

15. na tatra suryo bhdti, na candra-tdrakam , nemd vidyuto 

bhdnti , kuto'yam agnih: 

tarn eva bhdntam anubhdti sarvam tasya bhdisd sarvam idam 
vibhdti. 

15. The sun shines not there, nor the moon and the stars, 
these lightnings shine not, where then could this fire be? 
Everything shines only after that shining light. His shining 
illumines all this world. 

The Supreme who is the source of all light, The master light of 
all our seeing* 1 cannot be known by any earthly ligjjt. Our knowledge 
cannot find him out. 

See M.U. II. 2. 10; S.U. VI. 14; B.G. XV. 12. The symbol of light 
is the most natural and universal. Plato in his Seventh letter com- 
pares the sudden inspiration of the mystic to a ‘leaping spark.* 
In the myth of the cave, the real world is a realm of light outside the 
cave. The Old Testament and the Zoroastrian religion speak of the 
antagonism between darkness and light. In the First Epistle of 
John, we read, ‘God is light and in him is no darkness at all.* 


Section 3 

THE WORLD-TREE ROOTED IN BRAHMAN 

1. urdhva-mtllo’vdk-sdkha eso’svatthas sanatanah, 
tad eva sukram tad brahma , tad evdmrtam ucyate. 
tasmin lokdh sritah sarve tad u ndtyeti has cana: etad vai to*. 
1. With the root above and the branches below (stands) this 
ancient fig tree. That (indeed) is the pure; that is Brahman. 
That, indeed, is called immortal. In it all the worlds rest and 
no one ever goes beyond it. This, verily, is that. 

tad eva : that indeed, i.e. the root of this tree. The description here 
has its analogue in the description of the tree Igdrasil in Scandinavian 
mythology. 


1 Revelation XX. 1.23. 



642 The Principal Upanisads II. 3. 4. 

'The tree of life has its unseen roots in Brahman. The tree, roots 
and branches represent Brahman in its manifested form. While the 
tree of life is said to be imperishable Brahman , B.G., which uses 
this illustration, asks us to cut off the tree of existence by the potent 
weapon of non-attachment. XV. 1. 3. The tree grows upside down. 
It has its roots above and branches below. See S.U. III. 9; Maitri 
VI. 4. The branches below are for Madhva the lower gods: avdrhcah 
adhamdh devdh sdkhdh yasya asatt. 

THE GREAT FEAR 

2. yad idam kin ca jagat sarvam prana ejati nihsrtam 

mahad bhayani vajram udyatani, ya dad vidur amrtds te 
bhavanti . 

2. The whole world, whatever here exists, springs from and 
moves in life. (It is) the great fear (like) the upraised thunder- 
bolt. They that know that become immortal. 

The whole world trembles in Brahman . parasmin brahmani saty 
ejati kampatc. 6. 

3. bhaydui asydgnis tapati, bhaydt tapati siiryah: 
bhaydul indr as ca vdyus ca, mrtyur dhdvati pancamah. 

3. Through fear of him, lire burns; through fear (of him) the 
sun gives heat; through fear both Indra (the lord of the gods) 
and wind and Death, the fifth, speed on their way. 

See T.U. II. 8. 1. 

The source and sustaining power of the universe is Brahman. 
Evolution is not a mechanical process. It is controlled by Brahman , 
who is here represented as prana, the life-giving power: jagato mulam 
prdna-pada-laksyam prdna-pravrttir api hetutvdt. A. 


PERCEPTION OF THE SELF 

• 4. iha ced asakad boddhmn prdk sarirasya visrasah, 
tatah sargesu lokesu sanratvdya kalpate. 

4. If one is able to perceive (Him) before the body falls away 
(one would be freed from misery) ; (if not) he becomes fit for 
embodiment in the created worlds. 

asakat: able. It is sometimes split up into na sakat, unable, i.e. 
if one fails to know it. The simplest meaning would be Tf one is not 
able to know (the Supreme) before the body falls away, one becomes 
fit for embodiment in the created worlds/ & interprets the verse 



II. 3- 8. Katha Upanisad 643 

thus: ‘If here, in this life, a man is able to know the awe-inspiriAg 
Brahman before the falling of the body, he is freed from the bond 
of samsara; if he is not able to know, then for lack of knowledge, 
he takes embodiment in earth and other created worlds/ 
sargesu lokesu: created worlds. V. sarvesu kalesu, at all times. 

The verse teaches that it is possible for us to attain the saving 
wisdom here and now. 

5. yathddarse tathdtmani, yathd svapne tathd pitr-loke , 

yathdpsu parlva dadrse, tathd gandharva-loke chdyd-iapayor 
iva brahma-loke. 

5. As in a mirror, so (is it seen) in the soul, as in a dream, 
so in the world of the manes, as (an object) is seen in water, 
so in the world of the gandharvas; as shade and light in the 
world of Brahma. 

He can be seen in this life as in a glass, if his mind is pure and 
clear. In the region of the departed, he can be seen only as a reminis- 
cence, a remembrance of dreams. In the world (ft the gandharvas , 
he can be seen as a rellection in trembling waters. In the world of 
Brahma he can be seen clearly as shade and light. 
gandharvas: angels who live in the fathomless spaces of air. R.V. 
VIII. 65. 5; see also B.U. IV. 3. 33. 

6. indriydndm prthag-bhdvam udayastamayau ca yat } 
prthag utpadyamdndnam matvd dhiro na socati. 

6. Knowing the separate nature of the senses, which spring 
separately (from the various subtle elements) and (knowing 
also) that their rising and setting (are separate), the wise man 
does not grieve. 

The discrimination of the Self from the sense organism is here 
insisted on. When the wise man knows, that the material senses 
do not come from the Self, that their rise and fall belong to their 
own nature, he grieves no more. 

7. indriyebhyah param mano manasas sattvam uttamam , 
sattvdd adhi mahdn dtnid, mahato vyaktam uttamam. 

7. Beyond the senses is the mind; above the mind is its 
essence (intelligence); beyond the intelligence is the great self; 
beyond the great (self) is the unmanifest. 

sattva: essence. Intelligence constitutes the essence of the mind. 

See notes on I. 3. 10 and n. 

8 . avyaktdt lu parah puriiso vydpako liiiga eva ca , 
yam jhdlvd mucyate juntitr amrtatvam ca gacchati. 



644 The Principal Upanisads II* 3. 9. 

‘8. Beyond the unmanifest is the person, all-pervading and 
without any mark whatever. By knowing whom, a man is 
liberated and goes to life eternal. 

alihga: without any mark. See M.U. III. 2. 4; Maitri V. 31, 35; 
VII. 2. ‘Without any empirical attributes/ sarva-samsara-dharma - 
varjitah. £. Linga is a distinctive mark or sign. In logic, it is an 
invariable sign which constitutes the basis of inference. IAriga refers 
to linga-sama suksma-sanra, the entity consisting of buddhi, aham- 
kara t nianas, indriyani , tanmatrani. S.U. VI. 9; Maitri VI. 10. 19. 
If linga is taken in this sense, it means that the Supreme needs no 
subtle body as it is not subject to death and re-birth. 

9. na samdrse tisthati rupam asya, na caksusd pasyati 
kascanainam: 

hrdci mamsd manasdbhiklpto ya clad vidur amrtds te 
bhavanti. 

9. Not withip the field of vision stands this form. No one 
soever sees Him with the eye. By heart, by thought, by mind 
apprehended, they who know Him become immortal. 

The first half points out that we cannot form a visual image of 
the Supreme Person and the second half urges that we can still 
apprehend Him by heart, by thought and by mind. The Supreme 
Reality is to be apprehended through the concentrated direction of 
all mental powers. 

mamsd (reflective) thought, vikalpa-varjita buddhi. 
manas: mind, true insight in the form of meditation, manana-rtipena 
samyag-darsana. S. When the mind becomes clear and the heart 
pure, God-vision arises. Cp. R.V. I. 61. 2. hyda manasd mamsd 
We must seek God in our hearts and our souls. The process is called 
introversion, the solitary communing of the soul with God, the 
thought of the alone to the Alone, as Plotinus described it. Cp. 
Cassian: ‘The mind will come to that incorruptible prayer which is 
not engaged in looking on any image, and is not articulate by the 
utterance of any voice or words; but with the intentness of the 
rTiind aglow, it is produced by an ineffable transport of the heart, by 
some insatiable keenness of spirit ; and the mind being placed beyond 
all senses and visible matter, pours it forth to God with groanings 
and sighs that cannot be uttered.' 1 

abhiklpta: apprehended. As the concept of God is formed by our 
mental nature, it cannot be identical for all. This attitude develops 
charity, open-mindedness, disinclination to force one's views on other 
people's attention. If the Hindu does not feel that he belongs to the 

1 Collation X. n. quoted in Dom Cuthficrt Butler: Benedictine 
Monachism, 2nd Ed. (1924), p. 79. 



II. 3- ii. Katha Upanisad 645 

chosen race, if he is relatively free from a provincial self-righteousne£s, 
it is to no small extent due to the recognition that the concepts 
of God are relative to our traditions and training. 

10. yadd pancdvatisthante jndndni manasd sahu, 
buddhis ca na vice?lati, turn dhuh paramdm gatim . 

10. When the live (senses) knowledges together with the mind 
cease (from their normal activities) and the intellect itself does 
not stir, that, they say, is the highest state. 

Cp. Boehine: 'When thou standest still from the thinking of self 
and the willing of self; when both thy intellect and will are quiet 
and passive to the expressions of the eternal world and spirit, and 
when thy soul is winged up and above that which is temporal, the 
outward senses and the imagination being locked up by holy 
abstraction, then the Eternal Hearing, Seeing and Speaking will be 
revealed in thee, and so God heareth and seeth through thee, being 
the organ of this spirit and so God appearcth in thee and whispereth 
to thy spirit. Blessed art thou, therefore, if thoff canst stand still 
from thy self-thinking and self-willing and canst stop the wheel of 
thy imagination and senses.’ 

n. turn yogam iti manyante slhirdm indriya-dhdrandm 
apramattas tadd bhavali, yoga hi prabhavdpyayau. 

11. This, they consider to be Yoga, the steady control of 
the .senses. Then one becomes undistracted for Yoga comes 
and goes. 

apramattah: undistracted, pramada-varjitah samddhdnam prati-nityam 
prayatnavdn. S. See also C.U I. 3. 12 and II. 22. 2; M.U. II. 2. 4. 
In Buddhism all virtues are said to be centred in apramada (Pali 
appamado). Keenness is the way of eternal life and slackness the way 
of death, appamado amatapadam, pamddo maccuno padam. Dhamma - 
pada 21. 

prabhavdpyayau : comes and goes. 

Vigilant keenness is necessary in Yoga, as it comes and goes. 
janandpdya-dharmakah. pratiksandpdyasdlitayd avadhdmm 

apeksitam . R. If we are careful we will acquire it; if we art? 
careless we will lose it. Mind is liable to fluctuation and therefore we 
should be extremely careful. 

It is sometimes interpreted as ‘beginning and end.’ ‘The world 
sinks down in Yoga and again is created afresh, ' says Deussen. This 
is later Patanjala Yoga. 



646 The Principal Upanisads II. 3. 14 

THE SELF AS EXISTENT 

12. naiva vilcii un manasd prdptnm sakyo na caksusd , 
astlti bruvaio' nyalra katham tad upalabhyate. 

1 2. Not by speech, not by mind, not by sight cun he be 
apprehended. How can he be comprehended except by him 
who says, 4 He is’ ? 

He can be comprehended only by those who affirm that ‘He is/ 

The self as the knowing subject can never become an object. 
It can be realised through Yoga. While He transcends the ordinary 
means of apprehension, He can be immediately experienced through 
Yoga, and for such apprehension faith in His existence is an indis- 
pensable condition. The conviction of the reality of that which is 
sought is the prerequisite. 

Commenting on this verse, S argues that the Supreme Brahman 
who is conceived as the source of the universe must be regarded as 
existent. We canyot conceive of the world as produced from nothing. 
The world effect must have an existent cause. 

We can at least reasonably say of God that He is. Cp. Epistle to 
the Hebrews: ‘He that cometh to God must believe that He is/ 
Cp. St. Bernard. ‘Who is God? I can think of no better answer than. 
He who is. Nothing is more appropiiate to the eternity which God is. 
If you call God good, or great or blessed, or wise or anything else 
of this sort, it is included in these words, namely, He is/ 

13. aslity cvopalabdhavyas tattva-bhdvena cobhayoh, 
astlty evopalabdhasya tattva-bhdvah prasidati. 

13. He should be apprehended only as existent and then in 
his real nature in both ways. When He is apprehended as 
existent, his real nature becomes clear (later on). 

The primary assertion that can be made of the Self is the declaration 
of existence, pure and simple. 

ubhayoh: in both ways. In the conditioned and the unconditioned 
w? y s : sopddh 1 ka -mm pad h i hay oh . S . 

' Rational faith in the existence of Brahman leads on to spiritual 
experience in which His nature is revealed to and understood by the 
believer. 

In this section, the author speaks to us of the discipline of Yoga 
by which man’s whole being is unified and concentrated on the 
realization of the highest Being who is also the inner and real self. 

14. yadci sarve pramucyante kdmd ye’ sy a hrdi sritdk, 
atha martyo mrto bhavaty atra brahma samasnute. 

14. When all desires that dwell within the human heart are 



II. 3- 17 * Katha Upanisad 647 

cast away, then a mortal becomes immortal and (even) h£re 
he attaineth to Brahman. 

When self-seeking desire, ignorance and doubt disappear, the 
vision of God is attained. The Upanisad treats fellowship with God 
as the consummation of spiritual experience. 

15. yadd sarve prabhidyante hrdayasyeha granthayah , 
atha martyo ’ m?to bhavaty etavad anusdsanam . 

15. When all the knots that fetter here the heart are cut 
asunder, then a mortal becomes immortal. Thus far is the 
teaching. 

etavad anusdsanam: thus far is the teaching. The original Upanisad, 
it was felt, ended with I. 3. 17. These words seem to mark the end of 
the enlarged Upanisad. The remaining verses seem to be a still 
later addition. 

16. satam caikd ca hrdayasya nddyas tdsdm murdhdnam 

abhinihsrtaikd : 

tayordhvam dyann amrtatvam eti f visvaiin anyd utkramane 
bhavanti. 

16. A hundred and one are the arteries of the heart; one 
of them leads up to the crown of the head. Going upward 
through that, one becomes immortal ; the others serve for going 
in various other directions. 

See C.U. VIII. 6. 6, whete it is said, that if a man has lived the 
disciplined life of a student and so ‘found the self,’ then at the time 
of death, his soul, dwelling in the heart, will pass upward by an 
artery known as susumna (Maitrl VI. 21), to an aperture in the 
crown of the skull known as the brahma-randhra or vidrti , by which 
at the beginning of life it first entered. For there the soul rises by the 
sun’s rays to the sun which is a door- way to the Brahma world to 
those who know and a stopping-place for those who do not know. 
The other ways lead the unliberated to re-embodiment. 

17. angusthamdtrah puruso ntardtmd sadd jandndm hrdaye 

sannivistah 

tarn svdc cliarirdt pravrhen mxthjdd ivesikdm dhairyena: 
tam vidyde chukram amrtam tam vidyac chukram amrtam 
iti . 

17. The person of the size of a thumb, the inner self, abides 
always in the hearts of men. Him one should draw out with 
firmness, from the body, as (one may do) the wind from Ihe 



648 The Principal Upanisads II. 3. 18. 

re'ed. Him one should know as the pure, the immortal, yea, 
Him one should know as the pure, the immortal. 

dhabyena: with firmness, apramddcna. S. with courage, with intel- 
lectual strength, jmna-kausalem. R. 

18. mrtyu-proktdm naciketo'tha labdhva vidydm dam yoga- 
vidhith ca krtsnam, 

brahmaprdpto virajo ‘blind vimrtyur anyopy evam yo vid 
adhydtmam cva. 

18. Then Naciketas, having gained this knowledge declared 
by Death and the whole rule of Yoga, attained Brahman and 
became freed from passion and from death. And so may any 
other who knows this in regard to the self. 



PR A SNA UP AN IS AD 

The Prasna Upanisad belongs to the Atharva Veda and has 
six sections dealing with six questions put to a sage by his 
disciples who were intent on knowing the nature of the ultimate 
cause, the power of aum, the relation of the Supreme to the 
constituents of the world. The Upanisad is so called as it deals 
with praina or question. 



INVOCATION 

i. bhadram karnebhih srunuydma devah, bhadram pasyemdk- 
sabhir yajatrdh; 

sthirair angais tustuvdmsas tanubhih, vyasema deva-hitam 
yad ayuh. 

1. Aum. May we, 0 gods, hear what is auspicious with our 
ears. Oh ye, who are worthy of worship, may we see with our 
eyes what is auspicious. May we enjoy the life allotted to us 
by the gods, offering praise, with our bodies strong of limb. 

2. svasti na indro vrddha-sravdh, svasti nah pusd visva-veddh, 
svasti ttas tdrksyo arista-nemih, svasti no brhaspatir dadhdtu, 
Aum sdntih, sdntih, sdntih. 

2 . May Indra, of increasing glory, bestow prosperity on us; 
may Pusan, the knower of all, bestow prosperity on us; may 
Tarksya, of unobstructed path, bestow prosperity on us. May 
Brhaspati bestofv prosperity on us. Aum, peace, peace, peace. 



1 . 4. Praina Upanisad 651 

Question 1 

SIX QUESTIONERS SEEK BRAHMA-KNOWLEDGE 
FROM A TEACHER 

1. stikesd ca bhdradvdjah , saibyas ca satya-kdmah, saurydyartt 
ca gargyah, kausalyas casvaldyano bhdrgavo vaidarbhih, kabandhi 
katydyanah , te haite brahma-pardh , brahma-nisthdh , param brah - 
manvesamana, esa ha vai tat sarvam vaksyatiti, te ha samit-panayo 
bhagavantam pippaladam upasanndh. 

1. Sukesa son of Bharadvaja, Satya-kama son of Sibi, 
Gargya grandson of Surya, Kausalya son of Asvala, Bhargava 
of the Vidarbha country, Kabandhi son of Katya, these, 
indeed, devoted to Brahman, intent on Brahman , seeking the 
highest Brahman , approached the revered Pippalada with 
sacrificial fuel in their hands, thinking that he would explain 
all to them. 

2. tan ha sa rsir uvdca, bhilya cva tapasd brahmacaryena 
sraddhaya samvatsararh samvatsyatha , yathd-kdmam prasnan 
prcchatha, yadi vijhasyamah sarvam ha vo vaksydma iti. 

m 2 . To them that seer said; live with me another year with 
austerity, chastity and faith. Then ask us questions according 
to your desire and if we know, we shall, indeed, tell you all that. 

tapasd: with austerity, sense restraint, indriya-samyamena. S. 
brahmacaryena: with chastity, yositsmarana-klrtana-kelipreksana 
guhyabhdsana-samkalpddhyavasdyakriyd-nirvrtti-laksandstavidhamait - 
huna-varjanarupa-brahmacarycna. R. 

QUESTION CONCERNING THE SOURCE OF CREATURES 

ON EARTH. 

3. atha kabandhi katydyana upetya papraccha, bhagavan , kuto 
ha vd imdh prajdh prajayante iti. 

3. Then Kabandhi, son of Katya, approached him and asked 
Venerable Sir, whence, verily, are all these creatures born ? 

atha : then, i.e. after a year. 

THE LORD OF CREATION CREATED MATTER AND 

LIFE 

4. tasmai sa hovdca prajd-kdmo vai prajd-patih, sa tapo’tapyata, 
sa tapas taptvd sa mithunam utpddayate , rayim ca prdnam cp x 
ity etau me bahudhd prajdh karisyata iti . 



652 The Principal Upanisads I. 7. 

•4. To him he said, Prajd-pati (the lord of creation), verily, 
was desirous of offspring. He performed austerity. Having 
performed austerity, he produced the pair, matter and life, 
thinking that they would produce creatures for him variously. 

rayi : matter, feminine. 

prana: life, masculine. These two are interpreted also as food and 
its eater. Here we have a duality of primary existences answering 
to matter and form of Aristotle. The application of this duality in 
the following verses is somewhat strange. 

THE SUN IDENTIFIED WITH LIFE 

5. ddityo ha vai prdnah , rayir eva candramdh , rayir va etat 
sarvam yan mfirtam cdmurtam ca, tasmdt rnurtir eva rayih. 

5. The sun, indeed, is life. Matter itself is the moon. Matter 
is, verily, all this, whatever is formed and formless. Therefore, 
whatever is fanned is itself matter. 

Matter and life interact and produce the whole creation. Every- 
thing, gross and subtle, is matter. In the cosmic process or becoming, 
there is always the element of matter. Rayi is the material medium 
in which all forms are expressed. 
rayir evdnnam. £. 
sarvam api bhutajdtam rayih . R. 

6. athdditya udayan yat prdcim disam pravisati, tena prdeydn 
prdndn rasmisu sannidhatte yad daksindm yat praticim yad 
udtctm yad adho yad firdhvam yad antard diio yat sarvam 
prakasayati, tena sarvdn prdndn rasmisu sannidhatte. 

6. Now the sun, after rising, enters the eastern side. By that, 
he bathes in his rays all life that is in the east. When he 
illumines all the other sides of the south, the west, the north, 
below, above and in between, by that he bathes in his rays all 
living beings. 

* 7. sa esa vaisvdnaro visva-rupah prdno’gnir udayate , tad etad 

redbhyuktam. 

This is he, the Vaisvanara fire, assuming every form, life 
and fire who rises (every day). This very doctrine is declared 
in a verse of the Rg Veda. 

The sun which is life in its infinite variety rises as fire. 

Vaisvanara is said to be the essence of all living beings, while 
Visva-rupa is said to be the essence of the whole cosmos, according 
to A. 



I. io. Pra&na Upani$ad 653 

nardh jivdh visve ca te naras ca visvdnardh, sa eva vaisvdnarah sarvfi - 
jivatmakah, visva-rupah sarva-prapancatmakah iti bhedah. 

8. viiva-rupam harinam jdta-vedasam pardyanam jyotir ekam 
tapantam , 

sahasra-raimih satadhd vartamdnah pranah prajdnam 
udayaty esa siiryah. 

8. Who has all forms, the golden one, the all-knowing, the 
goal (of all), the sole light, the giver of heat, possessing a 
thousand rays, existing in a hundred forms — thus rises the 
sun, the life of all creation. 

See Maitri VI. 8. 

The Sun, in many systems of ancient times, is regarded as the 
infinite life of all beings. 


THE YEAR IS IDENTIFIED WITH T£E LORD OF 

CREATION 

THE TWO ROUTES 

9. samvatsaro vai prajd-patih , tasydyanc daksinam cottaram ca, 
tad ye ha vai tad istd-pfirte krtam ity upasate, te edndramasam eva 
lokam abhijayante , ta eva punar dvartante, tasmdd etersayah 
prajd-kdmd daksinam pratipadya 7 ite, esa ha vai rayir yah 
pitrydnah. 

9. The year, verily, is the lord of creation; of it (there are) 
two paths, the southern and the northern. Now those, verily, 
who worship, thinking ‘sacrifice and pious acts are our work/ 
they win only the human world. They certainly return again. 
Therefore, the sages, desirous of offspring, take the southern 
route. This, which is called the path of ancestors, is verilv 
matter ( rayi ). 

The southern route is the material path where we perform acts 
with selfish desires. These acts are of two kinds ista and purtef. 
The former relates to acts of ceremonial piety, observances of Vcdic 
ritual, the latter to acts of social service and public good. 

> agnihotram tapas satyam veddnam upalambhanam , 
atithyaVi vaisvadevam ca istani ity abhidhiyate; 
vdpl-kupa-tatdkddi devatdyatandni ca 
anna-praddnam ardmah pxirtam ity abhidhiyate. 

10. athottarena tapasd brahmacaryena sraddhayd vidyaydt - 
mdnam anvisyddityam abhijayante , etad vai prdindndm dyatanam, 



654 I he Principal Upani$ads 1 . 12. 

etad amrtam abhayatn, etat pardyanam , etasman na punar 
avartante, ity esa tiirodhah, tad esa slokah: 

10. But those who seek for the Self by austerity, chastity, 
faith and knowledge, they, by the northern route, gain the 
sun. That, verily, is the support of life breaths. That is eternal, 
the fearless. That is the final goal. From that they do not 
return. That is the stopping (of rebirth). About that, there is 
this verse : 

Conventional piety and altruism are distinguished from ethical 
and spiritual development. The former do not save us from sub- 
jection to time; the latter do. 

tapas is bodily control, bordering on mortification. Brahmacarya 
is sexual continence. Sraddhd is faith in the Divine. Atma-vidyd is 
self-knowledge, kdya -kl eidd i-laksa n en a tapasd , stri-sahga-rdhitya-lak- 
sancna brahmacarycna, dstikya-buddhi-laksanayd sraddhayd pratyag- 
dtma-vidyayd. . . . K. 

Through the Sun they attain to Brahman, brahma-prdpti-dvdra- 
bhutam ddityam. Ibid. 

n. pafica-pddam pi tar am dvadasdkrtim diva ahuh pare ardhc 
purisinam 

atheme anya u pare vicaksanam sapta-cakre sadara dhur 
arpitam. 

11. They speak of him as the father, having five feet, and 
twelve forms, seated in the higher half of the heavens, full of 
water. And others, again, speak of him as the omniscient set 
on (a chariot of) seven wheels and six spokes. 

pafica-pddam : having five feet, i.e. five seasons. 

Cp. R.V. I. 164. 12. 

£ says that hemanta and iisira seasons are combined into one. 
pitaram: father. Time is the father of all things, sarvasya jana - 
yitftvdt pitrtvam. £. 

dvadasdkrtim: twelve forms, twelve months. 

Time is ever on the move in the form of seven horses and six 
seasons. 

12. mdso vai prajd-patih , tasya krsna-paksa eva rayih t suklah 
pranah t tasmad eta rsayah sukla istim kurvanti, itara itarasmin. 

12. The month, verily, is the lord of creation. Of this the 
dark half is matter, the bright half is life. Therefore, the seers 
perform sacrifices in the bright half, others in the other half. 

The distinction between matter and form is stressed. 



II. i. Praina Upanisad 655 

13. aho-ratro vai praja-patih, tasydhar eva prdno rdtrir eva 
rayih; pranarh vd ete praskandanti ye diva ratyd samyujyam te 
brahmacaryam eva tad yad ratrau ratyd samyujyante. 

13. Day and night are, verily, the lord of creation. Of this, 
day indeed is life and the night verily is matter. They who join 
in sexual intercourse by day spill their life; that they join in 
sexual intercourse by night is chastity indeed. 

It is clear from this verse that brahmacarya or chastity is not 
sexual abstinence but sex control. With all their exaltation of 
celibacy the Upanisads recognise the value of married life. 

14. annam vai prajdpatih , tato ha vaitacl retah, tasmdd imdh 
prajdh prajdyante. 

14. Food, indeed, is the lord of creation; from this, verily, 
is semen. From this creatures here are born. 

15. tad ye ha vai tat prajd-pati vralam car anti te mithunam 
utpddayante, 

tesdm evaisa brahma loko yesdm tapo brahmacaryam yesii 
satyam pratisthitam. 

15. Thus, those who practise this rule of the lord of creation, 
produce couples. To them alone is this brahma world, in whom 
austerity, chastity and truth are established. 

The seers of the Upanisads were not blind to the natural innocence 
and beauty of sex life and parental love. 

16. tesdm asau virajo brahma-loko na yesu jihmam, anrtam, na 
mdyd ceti. 

16. To them is that stainless brahma world, in whom there 
is no crookedness, falsehood or trickery. 

mdyd: trickery, the art of saying one' thing and doing another. 
mdyd nama bahir anyathdlmdnam prakdsya nyathaiva kdryam karoti 
sa mdyd mithydedra-rupd. S. 

This use of the word mdyd has led to the view that the world is 
deceptive in character. 


Question 2 

CONCERNING THE SUPPORTING AND ILLUMINING 

POWERS 

I. atha hainam bhdrgavo vaidarbhih papraccha t bhagavan , 
katy eva devdih prajdm vidhdrayante, katara etat prakdsayantc, 
kah punar esdrii varistha iti. 



656 The Principal Upanisads II. 5. 

*1. Then Bhargava of the Vidarbha country asked him 
(Pippalada) : Venerable sir, how many powers support the 
created world? How many illumine this? And who, again, 
among them is the greatest? 

2. tasmai sa hovdica , dkdso ha 1 hi esa devo vdiyur agnir dpah 
prthivt vdii man as caksuh srotram ca, te prakdsydbhivadanti, 
vayam dad hdinam avastabhya vidhdraydmah. 

2. To him, he said: 'ether verily is such a power — wind, fire, 
water, earth, speech, mind, eye and ear too. They, having 
illumined it, declare, "we sustain and support this body." ’ 

bdna: body, sari r a , kdrya-kdrana-samghdta. S. 

LIFE THE GREATEST OF THEM 

3. tan varisthah prana uvdica, md nioham dpadyatha , aham 
evaitat pahcadhdxtmdnam pravibhajyaitad bdnam avastabhya 
vidharaydmi iti. 

3. Life, the greatest of them, said to them: 'Do not cherish 
this delusion; I, alone, dividing myself fivefold, sustain and 
support this body.’ 

pancadhd : fivefold, the five forms of breath. 

4. te sraddadhdnd babhuvuh, so’bhimdndd urdhvam utkra - 
mata iva, tasminn ntkrdmaty yathetare sarva evolkrdmante , 
tasmims ca pratisthamdne sarva eva prdtisthante , tad yathd 
maksikd thadhu-kara-rdjdnam ntkrdmantam sarva cvotkrdmantc 
tasmims ca pratisthamdne sarva eva prdtisthante , evam van manas 
caksuh srotram ca, te pntdh prdnam stunvanti. 

4. They believed him not. Through pride, he seemed to go 
upward (from the body).' When he went up, all the others also 
went up. When he settled down, all others too settled down. 
This, as all the bees go up when the king bee goes up and as 
# thby settle down when the king bee settles down, even so, 
speech, mind, sight and hearing. They, being satisfied, praise 
life. 

5. eso'gnis tapaty esa siirya esa parjanyo maghavdn esa vayuh: 
esa prthivt rayir devah sad-asac cdmrtam ca yat. 

5. As fire, he burns; he is the sun. He is the bountiful rain- 
god; He is the wind. He is the earth, matter, god. He is being 
and non-being and what is immortal. 

sad-asat : the formed and the unformed, sat murtam , asat amurtam. S. 



II. ii. Praina Upanisad 657 

6 . ard iva ratha-nabhau prane sarvam pratisthitam, 
rco yajumsi sdmdni yajnah ksatram brahma ca. 

6. As spokes in the centre of a wheel, everything is estab- 
lished in life; the Rg (verses), the Yajus (formulas) and the 
sdmans (chants) as also sacrifice, valour and wisdom. 

7. praja-patis carasi garbhe tvam eva pratijayase , 

tubhyam prana prajdstv ima balim haranti yah pranaih 
pratitisthasi. 

7. As the lord of creatures, thou movest in the womb; it is 
then thyself that art born again. 0 life, creatures — here bring 
offering to thee who dwellcst with the vital breaths. 

Praja-pali moves in the form of the seed in the father and the son 
in the mother, piiur garbhe reto-rupena matur garbhe putra-riipena. A. 
This verse reveals the state of scientific knowledge in those days. 

8. devdndm asi vahnitamah pitrndm prathamd svadhd , 
rstndrh caritam satyam atharvdhgirasdm asi. 

8. Thou art the chief bearer (of offerings) to the gods; thou 
art the first offering to the fathers; thou art the true practice 
of the seers, descendants of Atharvan and Angiras. 

9. indras tvam prana , tejasd, rudrosi pariraksitd , 
tvam antarikse carasi sfiryas tvam jyotisdm patih. 

9. Indra art thou, O Life, by thy valour; Rudra art thou as 
a protector. Thou movest in the atmosphere as the sun, the 
lord of the lights. 

10. yadd tvam abhivar§asy athcmdh prdnatc prajdh, 
dinandarfipds tisthanti kdmdydnnam bhavisyatiti. 

10. When thou pourest down rain, then these creatures 
breathe (and) live in a state of bliss (thinking) that there will 
be food according to their desire. 

11. vrdtyas tvam prdna, ekarsir attd visvasya satpatih 
vayam ddyasya d at dr ah, pita tvam matarisva, nah. 

11. Thou art ever pure, O Life, the one seer, the eater, the' 
real lord of all. We are the givers of what is to be eaten. O, 
all-pervading Air, thou art our father. 

vrdtya: ever puro* 'Being the first born and so having no one else to 
initiate you, you are uninitiated. The meaning is that you are by 
nature, pure. 1 $. pratliamajatvdd anyasya samskartuh abhdvad 
asamskyto vrdtyas tvam, svabhdvata eva suddha ity abhiprdyah. Later 
vrdtya came to mean one who lost caste by non-observance of 
prescribed ceremonies or otherwise, samskdra-hlnah . See A and R. ' 



658 The Principal Upanisads III. 2. 

e^arsi: the one seer, the name given to Agni by the followers of the 
Atharva Veda. See Isa 16. 

12. yd te tanur vdci pratisthitd yd srotre yd ca caksusi 
yd ca manasi santald sivdm tarn kuru motkramih. 

12. That form of thine which is well-established in the speech, 
or in the car and in the eye, which exists continuously in the 
mind, make that auspicious; do not get away. 

sivdm: auspicious or restful, sdntam. S. sobhanam. R. 

13. prdnasyedam vase sarvarii tri-dive yat pratisthitam 
mdteva pntrdn raksasva, srls ca prajiidm ca vidhehi nah iti . 

13. All this is under the control of life, which is well estab- 
lished in the three worlds. Protect us as a mother her sons. 
Grant to us prosperity and wisdom. 

For a controversy between prana or life principle and the organs of 
sense, see C.U. V. 1. 6-15. 

as a mother to her sons: In the Devi Bhdgavata, the devotee prays: 
‘O noble Goddess, may this relationship of mother and son prevail 
unbroken between thee and me, now and for ever more.’ 
esa vayor aviratd kila devi bhiiydt 
vydptih sadaiva janani sutayor ivdrye. 

Question 3 

THE LIFE OF A PERSON 

1. atha hainarii kausalyas cdsvaldyanah papraccha, bhagavan, 
kuta esa prdino jdyate, katham dydty asmim charire, dtmdnam 
vd pravibhajya katham pratisthate , kenotkrdmate, katham bdhyam 
abhidhatte, katham adhydtmam iti. 

1. Then Kausalya, the son of Asvala, asked him (Pippalada) : 
Venerable Sir, whence is this life born? How does it come into 
this body? And how does it distribute itself and establish itself? 
In, what way docs it depart? How does it support what is 
•external? How (does it support) what relates to the self? 

2. tasmai sa hovdea, atiprasndn prcchasi , brahmi§tho’ siti tasmdt 
te’ham bravxmi. 

2. To him, he then said: You are asking cjuestions which 
are (highly) transcendental. Because (I think) you are most 
devoted to Brahman , I will tell you. 

atiprasndn: questions of a transcendental character such as the origin 
of 'the world, janmaditvam. §. Subtle questions, suksma-prainam. A. 



III. 8. Praina Upanisad 659 

3. dtmand esa prdno jayate, yathaisd puruse chayaitasminn etad 
dtatam , manokrtcndyaty asmih satire. 

3. This life is born of the self. As in the case of a person 
there is this shadow, so is this (life) connected (with the self). 
It comes into this body by the activity of the mind. 

A person's life in this body is the appropriate result of his activities 
in the previous existence. As the shadow of former lives a new life 
arises. 

4. yathd samrddevadhikrtdn viniyuhkte, etdn graman etan 
grdmdn adhitisthasveti , evam evaisa prdnah itardn prandn prthak 
prthag eva sannidhatte. 

4. As a sovereign commands his officers, saying, ‘you super- 
intend such and such villages,' even so does this life allot the 
other vital breaths to their respective places. 

5. payupasthe' pdnam, caksuh srotre mukha-ndsikabhyam 
prdnah svayam pratisthate, madhye tu samdnah esa hy etadd 
hutam annam samam nayati, tasnidd etdih saptdrciso bhavanti. 

5. The out-breath is in the organs of excretion and generation, 
the life breath as such is in the eye and ear as also in the mouth 
and nose. In the middle is the equalising breath. It is this that 
equalises whatever is offered as food. From this arise the seven 
flames. 

6 . hrdy hy esa ditmd , atraitad ekasatam nddindm, tdsdm satam 
satarn ekaikasydth dvdsaptatir dvdsaptatih pratisdikhd ndidl-sahas - 
rdini bhavanti, dsu vydnas carati. 

6. In the heart is this self. Here are these hundred and one 
arteries. To each one of these belong a hundred smaller arteries. 
To each of these belong seventy-two thousand branching 
arteries. Within them moves the diffused breath. 

See C.U. VIII. 6-6; B.U. II. 1-19. 

The self which is in the heart is the jlvdtman or the lihgdtman. S* 
and A. 

7. athaikayordhva uddnah , punycna punyaloham nayati , 
pdpena papain, jibhdbhydm eva manitsya-lokam. 

7. Now, rising upward through one of these the up-breath 
leads, in consequence of good (work) to the good world, in 
consequence of evil to the evil world, in consequence of both 
to the world of men. 

8. ddityo ha vai bdhyah prdna udayati , esa hy enant cdksusam 



660 The Principal Upanisads IV. i. 

pranam anugrhnanah, prthivyamyd devata saisd purusasydpanam 
avastabhydntard yad dkdsas sa samano, vayur vydnah. 

8. The sun, verily, rises as the external life for it is that 
which helps the life breath in the eye. The divinity which is in 
the earth supports a person’s outbreath. What is between (the 
sun and the earth) is the equalising breath. Air is the diffused 
breath. 

9. tcjo ha vai uddinah , tasmdd upasdmtatejdh punar-bhavam 
indriyair manasi sampadyamrinaih. 

9. Fire, verily, is the upbreath. Therefore, he whose fire (of 
life) has ceased, goes to rebirth, with his senses sunk in mind. 

10. yat cittas tenaisa pranam dydti, pranas tejasd yuktah 
sahatmand yathd samkalpitam lokam nayati. 

10. Whatever is one’s thinking, therewith one enters into 
life. His life combined with fire along with the self leads to 
whatever world has been fashioned (in thought). 

11. ya evarii vidvdn pranam veda na hdsyaprajd hi y ate, amrto 
bhavati, tad esa slokah : 

11. The wise one who knows life thus, to him there shall 
be no lack of offspring. He becomes immortal. As to this, there 
is this verse : 

12. utpattim diyaiim sthdnam vibhutvayyi caiva paheadhd , 
adhyditmam caiva prdnasya vijhdydmrtam asyiute, vijnd- 
yamrtam asnuta iti. 

12. The birth, the entrance, the abode, the fivefold over- 
lordship and the relation to self of the life, knowing these one 
obtains immortality, knowing these one obtains immortality. 

Anyone who knows the birth of life, its entrance into the body, 
f Hbw it abides there in its fivefold division and knows its relation 
to the inner spirit enjoys eternal life. 


Question 4 

CONCERNING SLEEP AND THE ULTIMATE BASIS 

OF THINGS 

• 1. atha hainam saurydyam gdrgyah papraccha , bhagavan , 
etasmin puruse kdini svapanti , kdny asmin jdgrati , katara esa 



IV. 4* Praina Upanisad 661 

devah svapnan paiyati , kasyaitat sukham bhavati, kasmin nu 
sarve sampratisthitd bhavanti iti. 

1. Then Gargya, the grandson of Surya, asked him (Pippa- 
lada): Venerable Sir, what are they that sleep in this person? 
What are they that keep awake in him ? What is the god that 
sees the dreams? Whose is this happiness? In whom, pray, are 
all these established ? 

2 . tasmai sa hovdca : yatha, gargya , maricayor arkasydstam 
gacchatali sarvd etasmims tejo-mandala eki-bhavanti , tdh punah 
punar udayatah pracaranti, evam ha vai tat sarvam pare deve 
manasy eki-bhavati , tena tarhy esa puruso na srnoti, na pasyati , 
na jighrati, na rasayate , na sprsate, ndbhivadate, nadatte , ndnan- 
dayate, na visrjate , ncydyate, svapitity dcaksatc. 

2. To him, then, he said: O Gargya, as all the rays of the 
setting sun become one in this circle of light and as they spread 
forth when he rises again and again, even mo does all this 
become one in the supreme god, the mind. Therefore, in that 
state, the person hears not, sees not, smells not, tastes not, 
touches not, speaks not, takes not, rejoices not, emits not, 
moves not. (Then) they say, he sleeps. 

3. prandgnaya evaitasmin pure jdgrati, gdrhapatyo ha vd 
esopdnah, vydno’nvdhdrya-pacanah , yad ' gdrhapatydt pranlyate 
pranayanad dhavaniyah prdnah. 

3. The fires of life alone remain awake in this city. The 
householder's fire is the out-breath. The (southern) sacrificial 
fire is the diffused breath. The in-breath is the oblation fire, 
from being taken, since it is taken from the householder's fire. 

Life is conceived as a sacrifice and these three life breaths are 
symbolically identified with the fires used in the Vcdic sacrifice. 
gdrhapatya, householder's fire. It is the sacred home fire kept burning 
at home. 

anvahdrya-pacana : southern sacrificial fire. It is the fire of the south 
used for offerings to the ancestors. 

4. yad ucchvasa-nihsvdsdv etdv dhutl samam nayatiti samdnah, 
mano ha vd vayajamanah, ista-phalam evoddnah , sa evamyajamd- 
nam ahar ahar brahma gamayati . 

4. The equalising breath is so called because it equalises the 
two oblations, the in-breathing and the out-breathing. The 
mind, indeed, is the sacrficer. The fruit of sacrifice is tjie 
up-breath. It leads the sacrificer every day to Brahman . 



662 The Principal Upanisads IV. 8. 

-See C.U. VI. 8. i. In deep sleep the soul is said to be at one with 
Brahman ; only we do not know it. See also C.U. VIII. 3. 2. 

5. atraisa devah svapne mahimanam anubhavati , yad drstam 
drstam anupasyati , srutam srutam evdrtham anuirnoti , desa-digan - 
tar aid ca praty anubhutam punah punah praty anubhavati , drstam 
cddrstam ca srutam cdsrutam cdnubhiltam cdnanubhutam ca 
sac casac ca sarvam pasyati sarvah pasyati. 

5. There, in sleep, that god (mind), experiences greatness. 
He sees again whatever object has been seen, he hears again 
whatever has been heard, he experiences again and again 
whatever has been experienced in different places and direc- 
tions. What has been seen and not been seen, what has been 
heard and what has not been heard, what has been experienced 
and what has not been experienced, what is existent and what 
is non-existent, he sees all; being all he sees (all). 

Usually in dreams, we have reproductions of waking experiences 
but sometimes we have also new constructions. See B.U. IV. 3 
9-18, where the creative side of dream consciousness is mentioned. 


DREAMLESS SLEEP 

6. sa yadd tejasdbhibhuto bhavati, atraisa devah svapnan na 
pasyati , atha tad etasmin sarire etat sukham bhavati. 

6. When he is overcome with light, then in this state, the 
god (mind) sees no dreams. Then here in this body arises this 
happiness. 

The state of dreamless sleep is described here. 

7. sa yathd , saumya , vaydmsi vaso vrksam sampratisthante, 
evam ha vai tat sarvam para ditmani sampratisthante. 

7. Even as birds, O dear, resort to a tree for a resting-place, 
so' does everything here resort to the Supreme Self. They all 
find their rest in the Supreme Self. 

8. prthivi ca prthivi-mdtrd ca , apas cdpo-mdtrd ca , tejas ca 
tejo-mdtrd ca, vdiyus ca vdyu-mdtrd ca, dkdsas cdkasa-mdtrd ca, 
caksus ca drastavyam ca, srotram ca srotavyarh ca, ghranath ca 
ghrdtavyam ca, rasas ca rasayitavyam ca, tvak ca sparsayitavyam 
ca, vak ca vaktavyam ca, hastau edddtavyam ca, upasthas 
ednandayitavyam ca, payus ca visarjayitavyarh ca, pddau ca 
gantavyam ca, manas ca mantavyam ca, buddhis ca boddhavyam 



IV. ii. Prasna Upanisad 663 

ca, aham-karas cdham-kartavyam ca, cittam ca cetayitavyam ca , 
tejas ca vidyotayitavyam ca , pranai ca vidharayitavyam ca. 

8. Earth and the elements of earth, water and the elements 
of water, fire and the elements of fire, air and the elements 
of air, ether and the elements of ether, sight and what can be 
seen, hearing and what can be heard, smell and what can be 
smelled, taste and what can be tasted, the skin and what can 
be touched, speech and what can be spoken, hands and what 
can be handled, the organ of generation and what can be 
enjoyed, the organ of excretion and what can be excreted, the 
feet and what can be walked, the mind and what can be 
perceived, the intellect and what can be conceived, the self- 
sense and what can be connected with the self, thought and 
what can be thought, radiance and what can be illumined, 
life-breath and what can be supported by it. 

We have here an enumeration of the Sarhkhya m principles of the 
five cosmic elements, the ten organs of perception and action, mind, 
intellect, self-sense and thought together with light and life. 

9. esa hi drastd, sprasta, srota, ghrdtd, rasayita, manta , boddha , 
karta, vijndnatmd, purusah, sa pare’ksara atmani sampratisthate. 

9. He, verily, is the seer, the toucher, the hearer, the smeller, 
the taster, the perceiver, the knower, the doer, the thinking 
self, the person. He becomes established in the Supreme 
Uundecaying Self 

The subject self is established in the Spirit which transcends all 
duality, even the distinction of subject and object. 

10. param evdksaram pratipadyate sa yo ha vai tad acchayam , 
asanram, alohitam, subhram, aksaram vedayate; yas tu , saumya , 
sa sarvajhah sarvo bhavati. tad esa slokah: 

10. He who knows the shadowless, bodiless, colourless, pure, 
undecaying self attains verily, the Supreme, Undecaying (seff). # 
He who, 0 dear, knows thus becomes omniscient, (becomes) all. 
As to this, there is this verse : 

11. vijnandtn\d saha devais ca sarvaih prana bhutdni sam- 

pratisthanti yatra , 

tad aksaram vedayate yas tu, saumya , sa sarvajnah sarvam 
evdvivesa iti. 

11. He who knows that Undecaying (self) in which are 
established the self of the nature of intelligence, the vital 

Y 



664 The Principal Upanisads V. 4. 

breaths and the elements along with all the gods •(powers) 
becomes, O dear, omniscient and enters all. 

Question 5 

I. atha hainam iaibyas satya-kdmah papraccha , sa yo ha vai 
tad, bhagavan , manusyesu prdyandntam aumkdram abhidhydyita , 
katamam va va sa ten a lokam jayatlti. 

1. Then Satya-kama, son of Sibi, asked him (Pippalada): 
Venerable Sir, what world does he, who among men, meditates 
on (the syllable) Aum until the end of his life, win by that? 

£ explains abhidhyana to be interne contemplative activity free 
from all distractions, bdhya-visayebhyaupasamhrta-karanah samdhita- 
citto bhaktyavesita-brahmabhave amhkdre dtma-pratyaya-santdna-vic- 
chedo bhinnajdtlya pratyaydntardkhillkrtonirvdtastha-dipa-sikha-samo * 
bhi dhyan a-sa bd drth ah . 

2. tasmai sa hovdea, ctad vai, satya-kdma, par am cdparam ca 
brahma yad anmkdrah, tasmdd vidvdn ctcnaivdyatanenaikataram 
anveti. 

2. To him, he said: That which is the sound Aum, O 
Satya-kama, is verily the higher and the lower Brahman. 
Therefore, with this support alone does the wise man reach 
the one or the other. 

The verse distinguishes between the Unqualified Absolute Brahman 
and the qualified Personal Isvara. 

3. sa yady eka-mdtram abhidhydyita, sa tenaiva samveditas 
turnam eva jagatydm abhisampadyate ; tarn rco manusya-lokam 
upanayante, sa tatra tapasd brahmacaryena sraddhayd sampanno 
mahimdnam anubhavali. 

3. If he meditates on one element (a), he, enlightened even 
by that, comes quickly to the earth (after death). The Reas 
(Verses) lead him into the world of men. There, endowed with 
austerity, chastity and faith, he experiences greatness. 

4. atha yadi dvi-mdtrena manasi sampadyate, so’ntariksaw 
yajurbhir unniyate soma-lokam, sa soma-loke vibhutim anubhuya 
pumlr dvartate. 

4. Then, (if he meditates on this) as of two elements (au) 
he attains the mind. He is led by the yajus (formulas) to the 
intermediate space, the world of the moon; having experienced 
greatness there, he returns hither again. 



V. 6. Praina Upani§ad 665 

5. yafipunar etarii tri-matrena aunt ity etenaivaksarena par cm 
purusam abhidhydyita, sa tejasi surye sampannah; yatha pddo- 
daras tvacd vinirmucyata evam ha vai sa pdpmana vinirmuktah 
sa sclmabhir unmyate brahma-lokam , sa etasmdj jivaghanat 
pardt-param purisayam purusam Iksale: tad etauslokau bhavatah . 

5. But if he meditates on the highest person with the three 
elements of the syllable Aum (a, u, m), he becomes one with 
the light, the sun. Even as a snake is freed from its skin, even 
so is he freed from sins. He is led by sdma (chants) to the 
world of Brahma. He sees the person that dwells in the body, 
who is higher than the highest life. As to this there are these 
(two verses). 

§ says: The world of Brahma is the world of Hiranya-garbha who 
is the lord of the satya-loka. Hiranya-garbha is the self of all the jlvas 
travelling in samsara; for he is the internal self of all living beings 
in the subtle form and in him, the subtle self are a^l the jivas strung 
together. So he is ‘jiva-ghana.’ sa hiranya-garbhah sarvesam sam- 
sarinam , jivdnam dtma-bhutah; sa hy antar-atmd lihga-rupena sarva- 
bhutdnam , tasmin hi lingdtmani samhatah sarve jivah, tasmat sa 
jwa-ghanah. 

The knower of the three elements a, u, m, sees the Supreme beyond 
the Hiranya-garbha. He obtains liberation and is not forced to 
return to mundane life. He sees the Supreme Isvara who is beyond 
the world-soul and that vision qualifies him for liberation, jiva-ghanat 
par am purusam pasyati, tato mukto bhavati. A. 

6. tisro-mdlrd mrtyumatyah prayukta anyonya-saktd anavi - 

prayuktah. 

kriyasu bdhydbhyantara-madhyamasu samyak-prayuktasuna 
kampate jnah. 

6. The three elements (each) leading to death (by itself), if 
they are united to each other without being separated and 
employed in actions well performed, external, internal or 
intermediate, the knower docs not waver. 

If a man meditates on the three elements, separately, it is an 
emblem of mortality; if he meditates on them as interconnected, he 
gets beyond mortality, jdgrat-svapna-susupta-purusah saha sthdnair 
mdtra-traya-rupefia aumkdrdtma-rupena dystah sa hy evam vidvdn 
sarvdtma-bhuta aumkara-mayah kuto vd calet kasmin vd. 

The interconnection of the three elements, a , u y m, indicates the 
inter-relatedness of the three worlds of waking, dream and sleep. 
See M.U. 

He becomes one with the personal Supreme Isvara , obtains 



666 The Principal Upanisads VI. 2. 

sarvdtmatva, becomes one with the whole universe and is nof disturbed 
as there is nothing independent of him, sva-vyatiriktabhdvdt. A. 

7. rgbhir etam, yajurbhir antariksam, sdmabhir yat tat kavayo 
vedayante 

tarn aumkdrenaivdyatanendnveti vidvdn yat tac chdntam , 
ajarayn , amrtam, abhayam, param ca. 

71 With the rg (verses) (one attains) this world, with the 
yajus (formulas) (one attains) the interspace and with the 
sdmayi (chants) (one attains) to that which the seers recognise. 
That, the wise one attains, even by the mere sound Aunt as 
support, that which is tranquil, unaging, immortal, fearless and 
supreme. 

kavayah: surayah: sages. 

The Supreme status is beyond the three worlds. The turlya state, 
though it underlies the other three states also transcends them. 


Question 6 

CONCERNING THE PERSON OF SIXTEEN POINTS 

1. atha haiyiam sukesd bharadvdjah papraccha , bhagavan , 
hiranya-nabhah kausalyo rdja-putro mam upetyaitam prasnam 
aprcchata; sodasa kalam, bhdradvdja , purusam vettha, tarn aham 
kumdram abruvam , ndham imam veda, yady aham imam 
avedisam katham te ndvaksyam iti, sa-mulo vd esa parisusyati 
yo’nrtam abhivadati, tasnuin narhdmy anrtam vaktum, sa t its yum 
ratham druhya pravavraja , tarn tvd prcchami, kvasau purusah iti. 

1. Then, Sukesa, son of Bharadvaja, asked him: Venerable 
Sir, Hiranya-nabha, a prince of the Kosala kingdom approached 
me and asked this question, ‘Bharadvaja, do you know the 
person with sixteen parts? 1 I replied to that prince, T know 

* him not. If I had known him, why should I not tell you about 
it. Verily, to his roots, he withers, who speaks untruth. There- 
fore, it is not proper for me to speak untruth.' In silence, he 
mounted his chariot and departed. I ask you about him, where is 
thattperson ? 

He who speaks an untruth withers to his roots. 

2. tasmai sa hovdca, ihaivdntah-sarire, saumya , sa puruso yas- 

minn etdh sodasa kaldh prabhavanti iti . 



VI. 5- Prasha Upani$ad 667 

2. To him he said: Even here, within the body, O dear, js 
that person in whom these sixteen parts arise. 

The self of the sixteen parts becomes in the Sdmkhya system the 
lihga-sartra or the subtle body (see below verse 4), with some 
modifications. 

3. sa ik?amcakre, kasminn aham utkranta utkranto bhavisydmi , 
kasmin vd pratisthite pratisthdsydmi iti . 

3. He (the person) thought (in himself) : In whose departure 
shall I be departing? And in whose settling down shall I be 
settling down ? 

4. sa pranam asrjata , prdndc chraddhdm kham vaynr jyotir 
apah prthivTndriyam, mano'nnam , anndd vtryam, tapo mantrdh 
karma lokah, lokesu ca ndma ca. 

4. He created life; from life, faith, ether, air, light, water, 
earth, sense organ, mind and food; from food, vital vigour, 
austerity, hymns, works, worlds and in the wdrlds name. 

§ means by prana , Hiranya-garbha or the world-soul, hiranya - 
garbhdkhyam sarva-prani-karanadharam , antar-atmdnam. Sraddha or 
faith comes next and then the material elements. 

Ndma suggests individuation. The souls exist in the world-soul, 
in their subtle condition, and then they acquire embodiment or 
gross condition. 

5. sa yathemd nadyah syandanidndh samudrdyandh samudram 
i>rdpydstam gacchanti bhidyete tasdrii ndma-rupe samudra ity 
evam procyate , evam evdsya paridrastur imdh §odasa kalah puru- 
sayandh purusamprdpydstam gacchanti bhidyete casdhi ndma-nlpe 
purnsa ity evam procyate , sa eso f kaW mrto bhavati, tad esa slokali: 

5. As these flowing rivers tending, towards the ocean, on 
reaching the ocean, disappear, their name-shape broken up, 
and are called simply the ocean, even so of this seer, these 
sixteen parts tending towards the person, on reaching the 
person, disappear, their name-shape broken up, and are called 
simply the person. That one is without parts, immortal. As to 
that there is this verse: 

See M.U. IV. S. 8; C.U. VIII. 10. 

As the names of the rivers are lost in the sea, so are our names 
and shapes lost when we reach the Divine. ‘To Tao all under heaven 
will come as streams and torrents flow into a great river or sea.' 
Tao Te Ching } XXXII. Cp. Euml, ‘that your drop may become the 
sea’ (Ode 12), and ‘None has knowledge of each who enters tfiat 



668 


VI. 8. 


The Principal Upanisads 

he is so and so' (Ode 15. Nicholson: Shams-i-Tabriz). Eckhart says: 
‘Vvfflen I go back into the ground, into the depths, into the well-spring 
of the Godhead, no one will ask me whence I came or whither I 
went.' 

Cp. Christina Rosetti: 

‘Lord, we are rivers running to Thy sea, 

Our waves and ripples all derived from Thee, 

A nothing we should have, a nothing be 
Except for Thee/ 

6. ard iva ratha-ndbhau kald yasmin pratisthitdh 

tarn vedyam purusam veda yatlul mii vo mrtyuh parivyathah. 

6. In whom the parts are well established as spokes in the 
centre of the wheel, know him as the person to be known, so 
that death may not afflict you. 


CONCLUSION OF THE INSTRUCTION 

7. tan Jiovdca, ctavad cvdham elat param brahma veda, natal} 
param asti iti. 

7. To them, then, he (Pippalada) said, ‘only thus far do I 
know of that Supreme Brahman. There is naught higher than 
that/ 

8. te tam arcayantah, tvam hi nah pita yo'smdkam 
avidydydh param param tdrayasi, iti; namah parama-rsibhyo 
namali par am a -rs ibhya h . 

8. They praised him (and said) : Thou, indeed, art our father 
who docs take us across to the other shore of ignorance. 

Salutation to the supreme seers. 

Salutation to the supreme seers. 

nah pita: our father. The teacher who helps us to know the tiuth is 
the spiritual father as distinct from the physical father, sarlra-mdtram 
janayati. S. 



MUNI) AKA UPANISAD 


The M imda ka Upanisad belongs to the Atharva Veda and has 
three chapters, each of which has two sections. The name is 
derived from the root mund, ‘to shave,’ as he that comprehends 
the teaching of the Upanisad is shaved or liberated from error 
and ignorance. The Upanisad states clearly the distinction 
between the higher knowledge of the Supreme Brahman and 
the lower knowledge of the empirical world. It is by this higher 
wisdom and not by sacrifices or worship that one can reach 
Brahman. Only the samnyasin who has given up everything 
can obtain the highest knowledge. 




I. i. 3. Mundaka Upanisad 671 

MUNDAKA 1 
Section 1 

THE TRADITION OF BRAHMA-KNOWLEDGE 

1. brahma devanam prathamah sambabhiiva visvasya kartd 
bhuvanasya gopta 

sa brahma-vidyam sarva-vidyd-pratisthdm atharvaya jyestha- 
putrdya praha. 

1. Brahma arose as the first among the gods, the maker of 
the universe, the protector of the world. He taught the know- 
ledge of Brahman , the foundation of all knowledges, to Atharvan, 
his eldest son. 

Brahma, the creator of the world and its governor arose, by the 
exercise of his own choice. His rise is unlike the birth of individuals 
which is determined by their past deeds. S. svatantryena na dharma - 
dharma-vasdt. Brahma here is Hiranya-garbha, the world-soul. 
brahma-knowledge: A life without philosophy is not livable for man, 
in the view of Socrates. See Plato's Apology. Aristotle observes: 
‘AlHhe other sciences which are not philosophy are more necessary, 
but none is more important than philosophy/ 

2. atharvane yam pravadcia brahmdtharvd tdm purovaedhgire 

brahma-vidyam 

sa bhdradvdjdya satyavdhdya prdha blidradvdjo’ iigirase 
pardvaram. 

2. That knowledge of Brahman , which Brahma taught to 
Atharvan, and Atharvan in olden times told Angiras. He (in his 
turn) taught it to Satyavaha, son of Bharadvaja and the son 
of Bharadvaja to Angiras — both th£ higher and the lower 
(knowledge). 

pardvaram: both the higher and the lower (knowledge) or ‘know- 
ledge descended from the greater to the lesser. What permeates frhe 
objects of all knowledge, great and small/ §. parasmdt parasmd<f 
avarena prdpteti pardvard, pardvara sarva-vidyd-visaya-vydpter vd 
tdm pardvaram. 

Avidyd is apard-vidyd concerned with things perishable and vidyd 
is para vidyd dealing with Imperishable Being. Higher knowledge 
is concerned with the understanding of the nature of the supreme 
good, niter eyasa, and the lower knowledge deals with the disciplines 
relating to instrumental values. 

3. saunako ha vai mahasdlo' hgirasam vidhivad upasanilah 

Y * 



672 The Principal Upanisads I. 1. 6 

papraccha, kasmin nu bhagavo vijhdte sarvam idam vijhdtam 
bhavati iti. 

3. £aunaka, the great householder, duly approached Arigiras 
and asked, through what being known, Venerable Sir, does all 
this become known? 

‘Is there one cause of all the varieties in the world, which cause 
bein gknown, all will be well known?’ him nv asti sarvasya jagad- 
bhedasyaika-kdranamyad t kasmin vijhdte satvamvijndtam bhavati ? S. 

TWO KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE 

4. tasmai sa hovdca : dve vidye veditavye Hi ha sma yad 
brahmavido variant i, para caivdpard ca. 

4. To him he said, two kinds of knowledge are to be known, 
as, indeed, the knowers of Bralunan declare — the higher as well 
as the lower. 

a para: lower knowledge. It is also a kind of knowledge, not bhrama 
or mithyd jhdna, error or falsehood. It also aims at knowledge of 
the highest reality even though in a partial or imperfect manner. 

5. tatrdpard rg-vedo yajur-vedah suma-vedo’ tharva-vedah siksd 
kalpo vydkaranam niruktam chanrio jyotisam — iti. atha pardyaydC 
tad aksaram adhi gamy ate. 

5. Of these, the lower is the Rg Veda, the Yajur Veda, the 
Sdma Veda, the Atharva Veda. Phonetics, Ritual, Grammar, 
Etymology, Metrics and Astrology. And the higher is that by 
which the Undecaying is apprehended. 

Cp. Sivasvarodaya. Iho Veda is not to be called Veda for there 
is no veda in Veda. That is truly the Veda by which the Supreme 
is known. 

na vedahi veda ily dhur vede vedo na vuiyale. 
par dimd vedyate yena sa vedo veda ucyate. 

THE IMPERISHABLE SOURCE OF THINGS 
UN PERCEIVABLE 

6 . yat tad adresyam, agrdhyam, agotram, avarnam, acaksuh- 
, srotram tad apdni-pdidam, 

nityam vibhum sarva-gatam sv silks mam tad avyayam yad 
bhuta-yonim paripasyanti dhirdh. 

6. That which is ungraspable, without family, without caste, 
without sight or hearing, without hands or feet, eternal, all- 



I. i. 8. Mundaka Upanisad ' 673 

pervading, omnipresent, exceedingly subtle, that is the Un- 
decaying which the wise perceive as the source of beings. 

adresyam: unperceivable. adresyam adysyam sarvesam buddhin - 
driydnam agamy am. S. 

vibhum: all-pervading, vividham brahmddi-sthdvardnta-prdni-bhedair 
bhavatiti vibhum. S. 

The indescribable Absolute Brahman is _also the source of beings, 
bhuta-yoni. For Samkara, bhuta-yoni is Isvara , for Madhva it is 
Visnu. 

The use of the word yoni suggests that Brahman is the material 
cause of the world, according to R .yoni-sabdasyopdddna-vacanatvam. 
R mentions another verse here which is not found in some editions: 
yasnult par am ndparam asti kincid yasmdn ndniyo najydyo’sti 
kascit, 

vyksa iva stabdho divi tisthaty ehas tcnedam purnam purnsena 
sarvam. 

7. yathorna-ndbhi/i srjate grhnate ca,yathd pytfiivydm osadhayas 
sambhavanti , 

yathd satah purusdt kesalomdni tathaksardt sambhavatiha 
visvam. 

7. As a spider sends forth and draws in (its thread), as herbs 
grow on the earth, as the hair (grows) on the head and the 
body of a living person, so from the Imperishable arises here 
the universe. 

There is no suggestion here that the world is an illusory appearance 
of Brahman. The illustrations aie intended to convey that Brahman 
is the sole cause and there is no second to Brahman which can be 
used by Brahman, kdrandntaram anapeksya svayam eva syjate . S. 

8 . tapasd ciyatc brahma , tato’nnam abhijdyate , 

annat prdino manah satyam lokdh karmasu cdmrtam. 

8. By contemplative power Brahman expands. From tli^it 
food is produced. From food, life (thence) mind, (thence) the* 
reals (the five elements); (thence) the worlds; (thence the 
rituals) in the rituals, immortality. 

tapas: contempkftive power is the energy by which the wor1 # d is 
produced, bahusydm iti samkalpa-riipcna jhdncna brahma systyun - 
mukham bliavati. R. Tapas is derived from two roots which make out 
that it is austerity or meditation, tapa samtdpa iti, tapa dlocana iti . 
The Supreme works by meais and ends and by gradual steps: 
kramena , nayugapat. £. 



I. 2. I. 


674 The Principal Upanisads 

, Brahman in relation to the cosmos is the Personal God who is 
self-conscious and contemplative. The first product anna is for S, 
the unmanifested principle of objectivity, avydkrtam. The two repre- 
sent the subject and the object and next arises prana, which § 
equates with the woild-soul. hiranya-garbho brahmano jndna-kri- 
yd-sakty-adh isth it a- jag at sddharano ' vidyd-kdma-kdrma-bhuta-samu - 
ddya-bijdhkuro jagad-dtnid. All these products arc working towards 
immortality which is the goal of creation. 

9. yah sarvajnah sarva-vid yasya jhdnamayam tapah; tasmdd 
etad brahma ndma-rupam annam ca jay ate. 

9. He who is all-knowing and all-wise, whose austerity 
consists of knowledge, from him are born this Brahma 
(Hiranya-garbha) , name-shape and food 

The all-knowing, all-wise is Isvara or the Absolute in relation to 
the world. He is wisdom, His tapas is jndna. From him issues the 
world-soul, Hiranya-garbha or Brahma. 

anddi-rffuihanam brahma sabda-riipam yad aksaram , 
vivartate ' rtha-bhdvena prakriyd agato yatah. 

V dkyapadiya I. 1. 

The Brahman who is without beginning and end, who is of the 
form of the indestructible word is apparently transformed into 
objects, and this is the process through which creation takes place. 
Sphota is the indivisible idea with its dual form of sabda, word and 
artha, meaning. 


MUNDAKA 1 
Section 2 

CEREMONIAL RELIGION 
1. tad etat satyam: 

mantresu karmdni kavayo ydny apasyams tdni tretdydm 
bahudhd santatdni , 

tdny dcaratha niyatam, satyakdnui , esa vah panthdh snkrtasya 
loke. 

1. This is that truth. The works which the sages saw in the 
hyn?ns are variously spread forth in the three' vedas. Perform 
them constantly, ye lovers of truth. This is your path to the 
world of good deeds. 

tretdydm: in the three Vedas or generally performed in the tretd age 
yuge prayasah pravyttdni. 



I. 2. 4. Mundaka Upani§ad 675 

2. yathd leldyate hy arcis samiddhe havya-vdhane , 

ajya-bhagdv antarenahutih pratipddayec chraddhayd - 
hutam. 

2. When the flame (which) moves after the fire has been 
kindled, then one should throw with faith his oblations between 
the two portions of melted butter. 

havya-vdhana: fire; the bearer of the sacrifice. 

3. yasyagnihotram adarsam apaurnamdsam acdturmdsyam 
anagrayanam atithivarjitam ca 

ahutam avaisvadevam avidhind hutam d-saptamdms tasya 
lokdn hinasti. 

3. He whose agnihotra sacrifice is not followed by the 
sacrifice of the new moon and of the full moon, by the four 
months’ sacrifice, by the ritual (performed in the harvest 
season) is without guests, without oblations, without the cere- 
mony to all the gods or gives offerings contrary to rule, (such 
conduct) destroys his worlds till the seventh. 

The opposition of the Upanisads to the observance of rites is 
greatly exaggerated. The performance of rites is unnecessary for 
those who are already liberated while it is necessary for attaining 
liberation. When performing rites we must be fully aware of what we 
are doing. There is a vital difference between the routine performance 
of rites and an understanding performance of them. 

In Satapatha Brdhmana (II. 2. 2. 8-20) it is said that the gods 
and the demons were both the children of Praja-pati both devoid 
of spiritual wisdom and so were subject to the law of change and 
death. Only Agni was immortal. Both set up their sacrificial fires. 
The demons performed their rites externally and the gods then set up 
that fire in their inward self, evani . . . antardtman adadhata and 
having done so became immortal and invincible and overcame their 
mortal and vincible foes. Again, ‘by knowledge ( vidyayd ) they 
ascend to where desires have migrated (pardgatdh) it is not by 
offerings (daksindbhih) nor by ignorant ardour [avidvtuhsah 
tapasvinah) . . . but only to knowers that that world belongs?’ 
Satapatha Brdhmana X. 5. 4. 16. We must set up the sacrificial 
fire within our self. We must feed the flame by truthful utterance, 
for we quench it by speaking falsehood. The distinction between 
external conforfnity and inward purity is ultimately resolved # when 
the whole of life is interpreted and lived sacrificially. See also 
Satapatha Brdhmana X. 4. 2. 31 and XIII. 1. 3. 22. 

4. kail karall ca mano-j 7 vd ca sulohitd yd ca sudhumravarnd , 

sphulihgini visva-rupt ca devlleldyamdnd iti sapta-jMdh. 



676 The Principal Upanisads I. 2. 7. 

4. The seven moving tongues of lire are the black, the terrific, 
tHe swift as mind, the very red, the very smoky-coloured, the 
spark blazing, the all-shaped goddess. 

all-shaped: another reading visvarttce , all-tasting. 

5. etesu yas carate bhrdjamdnesu yatha-kdilam cd hutayo hy 

ddaddyan 

tam nayanty etas suryasya rasmayo yatra devdmim patir 
eko' dhivdsah. 

5. Whosoever performs works, makes offerings when these 
(tongues) are shining and at the proper time, these (offerings) 
in the form of the rays of the sun lead him to that (world) 
where the one lord of the gods abides. 

devandm patih: the one lord of the gods. Indra according to § and 
Hiranya-garbha according to R. 

6 . ehy ehJti tym dhntayas suvarcasah suryasya rasmibhir 

yajamdnayh vahanti 

priyam vdcam abhivadantyo’ rcayantya, esa vali punyas 
sukrto brahma-lokah. 

6 . The radiant offerings invite him with the words, ‘come, 
come/ and carry the sacrificer by the rays of the sun, honouring 
him and saluting him with pleasing words: ‘This is your holy 
world of Brahma won through good deeds/ 

7. plavd hy ete adrdlid yajila-rupd astddasokiam avaram yesu 

karma : 

etac chreyo ye'bhinandanti mudhdh jard-mrtyurii te punar 
evdpiyanti . 

7. Unsteady, verily, arc these boats of the eighteen sacrificial 
forms, which are said to' be inferior karma. The deluded who 
delight in this as leading to good, fall again into old age and 
death. 

qstadasoktam: eighteen in number consisting of the sixteen rlviks , 
the sacrificer and his wife. 

avaram: inferior because it is devoid of knowledge, kcvalam jnana- 
varjitam karma. $. 

Ritual is by itself not enough. Vasi. ? tha tells Rama: — 

' kalam yajna-tapo-ddna-tzrtha-devdrcana-bhramaih . 
dram ddhi , satopetdh ksapayanli mrgd iva. 

Deluded by sacrifice, austerity, almsgiving, pilgrimage and 
worship of gods men pass many years in misery, like unto beasts. 
Again, Garuda, Pur ana : — 



I. 2. io. Mundaka U pant sad 677 

sva-sva-varndsramdcdra-niratah sarva-mdnavah 
na jdnanti par am dharmam vrthd nasyanti dambhikdh. 

All those who are intent on the performance of the duties of their 
own caste and stage of life do not know the supreme virtue and go 
to ruin with their pride. 

Again in Garuda Pur ana , it is said: Deluded by my may a, the 
ignorant desire (to see me) who am hidden, by adopting the vows 
of single meal, fasting and the like which tend to weaken the body. 
ekabhukto pavdsddyair niyamaih kdya-sosanaih 
mudhdh paroksam icchanti mama mdyd-vimohitdh . 

See B.G. XVII. 5 and 6. 

8. avidyaydm antare vartamdndh svayam dhirdh panditam 
manyamdndh 

janghanyamdnah pariyanti mudhdh , andhenaiva nlyamdna 
yathdndhdih. 

8. Abiding in the midst of ignorance, wise in their own esteem, 
thinking themselves to be learned, fools, afflicted with troubles, 
go about like blind men led by one who is himself blind. 

See Katha I. 2. 5.; Maitri VII. 9. 

9. avidyaydm bahudha vartamdnd vayam krtartha ity abhi- 

manyanti bdldh: 

yat karmino na pravedayanti rdgdt tendturdh kstnalokds 
cyavante. 

9. The immature, living manifoldly in ignorance, think ‘we 
have accomplished our aim.’ Since those who perform rituals 
do not understand (the truth) because of attachment, therefore 
they sink down, wretched, when their worlds (i.e. the fruits 
of their merits) are exhausted. 

bdildh: immature, ignorant, ajhaninah. 

10. istdpurtam manyamdind varislham ndnyac chreyo vedayante 

pramudhdh 

ndkasya prsthe te sukrte' nubhutvemam lokam hlnataranhva 
visanti. 

10. These deluded men, regarding sacrifices and works of 
merits as most important, do not know any other good. Having 
enjoyed in the* high place of heaven won by good deeds, they 
enter again this world or a still lower one. 

ista-purtam: see PraSna I. g.n. 

ndkasya: of heaven or the place where sorrow is unknown, kam 
sukham na bhavatlty akam duhkham tan navidyate yasminn qsau 
ndkah. A. 



678 The Principal Upanisads I. 2. 12. 

f 11. tapah sraddhe ye hy upavasanty aranye idnta vidvdmso 
bhaiksdcafyam car ant ah, 

silrya-dvarena tc virajdh praydnti yatrdmrtah sa puruso hy 
avyaydtmd. 

11. But those who practise austerity and faith in the forest, 
the tranquil knowers who live the life of a mendicant, depart 
freed from sin, through the door of the sun to where dwells 
the immortal, imperishable person. 

aranye: in the forest; spiritual life in India has solitary meditation 
as one of its essential stages. It has been the cherished ambition and 
pursuit of the lonely ascetic. It is assumed that those who are dis- 
tracted by the cares and encumbered by the possessions of the world 
find it hard to secure their spiritual ends. Those emanicipated from 
these are free to devote themselves to the highest aim. When once 
the end is reached, the Indian samnydsin travels at pleasure and 
has no fixed residence or occupation. The first Christians were 
homeless wande^rs. The mendicant rather than the resident 
community of monks has been the Indian ideal. Monasteries are 
more temporary rest-houses or centres of learning than permanent 
habitations. 

The Hindu system of dsramas according to which, every one of 
the twice-born towards the close of his life must renounce the world 
and adopt the homeless life and the ascetic’s garb has had great 
influence on the Indian mind. Though in intention, certain classes 
were not eligible to become monks, in practice monks were recruited 
from all castes. 

The Jain and the Buddhist orders though based on the ancient 
Hindu custom have become more centralised and co-ordinated. 
Mutts or monasteries have become more popular among the Hindus 
also. To erect a monastery for the service of the wandering ascetics 
has become recognised as an act of religious piety. 

In these verses the Upanisad points out the superiority of the way 
of knowledge to the empty and formal ritualism of the Brahmanas. 
The latter lead to the world of Brahma which lasts as long as this 
wotid lasts while the former takes us to the world of Isvara, i.e. 
o.neness with the Supreme, where we obtain sarvdtmabhdva. 


BRAHMA-KNOWLEDGE TO BE SOUGHT FROM A 

TEACHER 

12. panksya lokdn karmacitdn brdhmano nirvedam dydn nasty 
akrtah krtena 

tad vijhdndrtham sa gurum evdbhigacchet samit-pdnih 
srotriyam brahma-nistham. 



II. i. i. Mundaka Upanisad 679 

12. Having scrutinised the worlds won by works, let# a 
Brdhmana arrive at non-attachment. The (world) that is not 
made is not (won) by what is done. For the sake of this know- 
ledge, let him only approach, with sacrificial fuel in hand, a 
teacher who is learned in the scriptures and established in 
Brahman. 

Karma is a means to what is transitory and not eternal, karma 
anityasyaiva sadhanam. 

srotriyam: a teacher who is learned in the scriptures, sruta vedantam. 
He should also be a man of realisation. 

brahma-nistham: established in Brahman, brahma-sdksdtkaravantam . 
R. 


13. tasmai sa vidvcin npasanndya samyak prasdnta-cittdya 
samdnvitdya 

yenaksaram purusam veda satyam provdca fdm tattvato 
brahma-vidydm. 

13. Unto him who has approached in due form, whose mind 
is tranquil and who has attained peace, let the knowing (teacher) 
teach in its very truth that knowledge about Brahman by 
which one knows the Imperishable person, the true. 

Cp. the Buddha: ‘The Brahmana whose self has been cleansed of 
sins, who is free from conceit, whose nature is not stained by passions, 
who is self-controlled, who has studied the Vedanta and lived a 
chaste life is indeed the man who can expound the doctrine of 
Brahman .* 

yo brdhmano bahita-papa-dhammo nihuhunko nikkasdvd ya-tatto 
veddntagu vusita-brahmacariyo dhammena so brdhmano brahma - 
vddam vadeyya 

yass'ussadd n'atthi kuhiiici loke’ti. 

Uddna I. 4. Pali Text Society edition (1SS5) p. 3. 


MUNDAKA 2 
Section 1 

THE DOCTRINE OF BRAHMAN— ATMAN 
tad etat satyam: 

yathd sudlptdt pdvakdd visphulihgdh sahasrasah prabhavante 
sarupdh 

tathaksarad vividhdh, s. umya , blidvdh pr a jay ante tatra caivapi 
yanti. 



68 o 


The Principal Upanisads II. i. 4. 

fi. This is the truth. As from a blazing fire, sparks of like 
form issue forth by the thousands, even so, O beloved, many 
kinds of beings issue forth from the immutable and they return 
thither too. 

See B.U. II. 1. 20. 

2. divyo hy amftrtah purusah sa bdhydbhyantaro hy ajah 
aprdno hy amaniih subhro akscmit paratah parah. 

2. Divine and formless is the person. He is without and 
within, unborn, without breath and without mind, pure and 
higher than the highest immutable., 

aksara, the immutable: the unmanifested, prakyti: the self is 
beyond this. 

3. etasmaj jayate prdno manah sarvendriydni ca, 
kham vdyurjyotir apah prthivi visvasya dhdrini. 

3. From him are born life, mind, all the sense-organs (also) 
ether, air, light, water and earth, the supporter of all. 

jayate: are born. It is not creation but emanation that is suggested. 
S points out that the world which issues out of him is not real. 
avidya-visaya-vikara-bhutah, ndmadheyah anytatmakah. It is as real 
as the person from whom it issues. So even the author is said to be 
unreal, being the manifestation of the Supreme Brahman through 
may a. 

caitanyam nirnpadhikam snddham avikalpam brahma tattvajhdnad 
jivdndm _ kaivalyam tad eva mdyd-pratibimbila-rupena kdranam 
bhavati. A. 

The whole creation is traced to the personal Lord Isvara who along 
with the principle of objectivity is a manifestation of the Absolute 
Brahman . 

4. agnir mtirdha, caksusi candra-suryau, disah srotre, vdg vivrtds 

ca vedah; 

vdyuh prdno hnlayam visvam, asya padbhydm prthivi hy esa 
sarva-bhutantaratma. 

4. Fire is His head, TIis eyes are the sun and the moon, the 
regions of space are His ears, His speech the revealed Vedas; 
air isrHis life and His heart the world. Out of His feet the earth 
(is bom) ; indeed He is the self of all beings. 

We have here a description of the visva-rupa which in B.G. XI 
receives enlargement. It is reported of St. Benedict that he beheld 
a transfiguration in which he saw the whole world before him as in a 



II. i. 8. Mundaka Upanisad 681 

sphere all collected together. Rudolf Otto : Mysticism: East and West 
( 1932 ), p. 60. ' 

The sutratman, world-soul, is pictured as the world form or virat. 
panca-mahd-bhutdndm antar-atmd sthula-pahca-bhuta-sariro hi virad 

iti. A. 

5. tasmad agnis samidho yasya suryah somat parjanya 
osadhayah prtliivyam , 

puman retas sihcati yositdyam bahvlh prajdh purusdt 
samprasutdh . 

5. From him (proceeds) fire whose fuel is the sun; from the 
moon, the rain; herbs on the earth, (nourished by them) the 
male fire pours seed in the female, thus are creatures produced 
from the person. 

6. tasmad yeah sdma yajumsi dlksa yajhas ca sarve kratavo 

daksinas ca, 

samvatsaras ca yajamdnas ca lokah somo yatra pavate yatra 
suryah. 

6. From him are born the rc (verses) the sdman (chants), 
the yajus (formulas), the rites of initiation, all the sacrifices, 
ceremonies and sacrificial gifts, the year too, and the sacrificer, 
and the worlds where the moon purifies and where the sun 
(shines). 

Here is a reference to the world of the fathers and the world of the 
gods. See C.U. V. 10. 

7. tasmac ca devd bahudha samprasutdh sadhyd manusyah 

pasavo vaydmsi 

prdndpdnau vrihi-yavau tapas ca sraddhd satyam brahma- 
car yam vidhis ca. 

7. From him also the gods are born in manifold ways, the 
celestials, men, cattle, birds, the in-breath and the out-breath, 
rice and barley, austerity, faith, truth, chastity and the law. 

8. sapta-prandh prabhavanti tasmdt saptdreisas samicthas 

sapta-homdh 

sapta ime lokd yesu caranti prana guhdsayd nihitds sapta 
sapta . 

8. From him come forth the seven life-breaths, the seven 
flames, their fuel, the seven oblations, these seven worfds in 
which move the life-breaths, seven and seven which dwell in 
the secret place (of the heart). 

§ explains the seven pranas as the seven organs of sense in* the 



682 The Principal Upanisads II. 2. 1. 

head, i.e. two eyes, two ears, two nostrils and the mouth. These 
are compared to the seven different sacrificial oblations. The per- 
ceptions produced by their activities are the flames of the sacrifice. 
The activities of the different senses are co-ordinated by the mind 
which is located in the heart. 

9. atas samudrd girayas ca sarve asmdt syandante sindhavas 
sarva-rupah , 

atas ca sarvd osadhayo rasas ca ycnaisa bhutais tisthate hy 
antar-atma. 

9. From him, all the seas and the mountains, from him flow 
rivers of every kind; from him are all herbs and their juice 
too; by which, together with the elements, the inner soul is 
upheld. 

While the inward way of contemplation takes us to the self, there 
is the other side of union with the world. The knower penetrates 
the whole world and becomes the All. 

10. purnsa evedam visvam karma tapo brahma pardmrtam, 
etad yo veda nihitam guhdydm so’v idyd -grant him vikiratfha, 

saiimya. 

10. The person himself is all this, work, austerity and Brahma 
beyond death. He who knows that which is set in the secret 
place (of the heart), he, here on earth, O beloved, cuts asunder 
the knot of ignorance. 

He gets rid of ignorance. "The universe has no separate existence 
apart from the person/ na visvam ndma purusdd anyad kincid 
asti. S. 


WUNDAKA 2 
Section 2 

THE SUPREME BRAHMAN 

I. avih samnihitam guhacaram ndma mahat padam atraitat 
samarpitam , 

ejat pranan nimisac ca yad etat jdnatha sad asad varenyam 
A param 

vijndnad yad varistham prajdndm i 
1. Manifest, well-fixed, moving, verily, in the secret place 
(of the heart) such is the great support. In it is centred all this 
which moves, breathes and winks. Know that as being, as 



II. 2. 5 - Mundaka Upanisad 683 

non-being, as the supreme object to be desired, as the highest 
beyond the reach of man’s understanding. 

samnihitam: well-fixed, samyak-sthitam hrdi, S. sarva-prdninam 
hydaye sthitam. A. 

2. yad arcimad yad anubhyo’nu ca, yasmin lokd nihitd lokinas 
ca 

tad etad aksaram brahma sa pranas tad u van manah, 
tad etat satyam, tad amrtam, tad veddhavyam, saumya,viddhi. 

2. What is luminous, what is subtler than the subtle, in 
which are centred all the worlds and those that dwell in them, 
that is the imperishable Brahman. That is life, that is speech 
and mind. That is true, that is immortal, 0 beloved, that is 
to be known, know (that). 

veddhavyam: that is to be known or penetrated, from the root vyadh , 
to penetrate. 

3. dhanur grhltvd aupanisadam mahdstram saram hy updsd- 

nisitam samdadhlta: 

ayamya tad-bhdvagatena cetasd laksyani tad evdksarath , 
saumya, viddhi. 

3. Taking as the bow the great weapon of the Upanisads, 
one should place in it the arrow sharpened by meditation. 
Drawing it with a mind engaged in the contemplation of that 
[Brahman), O beloved, know that Imperishable Brahman as 
the target. 

samdadhlta , v . samdhlyata. samdhdnam kurydt. 5. 

4. pranavo dhanuh, saro hy atmd, brahma tal laksyam ucyate, 
apramattena veddhavyam , saravai tanmayo bhavet. 

4. The syllable anm is the bow: one’s self, indeed, is the 
arrow. Brahman is spoken of as the target of that. It is to be 
hit without making a mistake. Thus one becomes united jvith 
it as the arrow (becomes one with the target). 

apramattena: without making a mistake, or becoming indifferent to 
other objects and developing a one-pointed mind, visaydntara - 
vimukhena ekdgra-cittena. R. 

tanmaya: united with it; becomes one with it, ckdtmatva. b. 

5. yasmin dyauh prthivl edntariksam otam manah saha 

prdtiais ca sarvaih , 

tam evaikam jdnatJn » dtmdnam , anyd vdeo vimuheatha , 
amrtasyaisa setuh. 



684 The Principal ZJpanisads II. 2. 9- 

*5. He in whom the sky, the earth and the interspace are 
woven as also the mind along with all the vital breaths, know 
him alone as the one self. Dismiss other utterances. This is the 
bridge to immortality. 

anyd vdcah: other utterances, relating to lower knowledge or not- 
self, apara-vidyd-rupah. S. andtma-visaya-vdcah. R. 

In the beginning, the two worlds of heaven and earth were one. 
They came into separate being by the act of creation and what 
separates them is the river or sea of time and space. From earth 
we have to find our way to heaven by crossing the river of time. 
See Epinomis 984 E. 

6. ard iva ratha-ndbhau samhatd yatra nddyah sa eso’ntas carate 
bahudhd jdyamdnah , 

aum ity evam dhydyathdtmdnam, svasti vah pdrdya tamasah 
parastdt. 

6. Where the arteries of the body are brought together like 
the spokes in the centre of a wheel, within it (this self, moves 
about) becoming manifold. Meditate on aum as the self. May 
you be successful in crossing over to the farther shore of 
darkness. 

pdrdya. V. pardya. 

tamasah: darkness, the darkness of ignorance, avidyd-tamasah. $. 

7. yah sarvajhah sarva-vid yasyaisa mahimd bhuvi 
divye brahma-pure hy esa vyomny dtmd pratisthitah. 

7. He who is all-knowing, all-wise, whose is this greatness 
on the earth, in the divine city of Brahma, in the ether (of 
the heart) is that self-established. 

8. mano-mayah prdna-sanra-netd pratisthito’nne hrdayam 

sannidhdya 

tad vijhdnena par ipasy anti dhTrdh dnanda-rupam amrtam 
yad vibhdti. 

8. He consists of mind and is the leader of life and body 
and is seated in food (i.e. the body) controlling the heart. The 
wise perceive clearly by the knowledge (of Brahman) the 
blissful immortal which shines forth. 

anne: in food, anna-pavindime sarlrc. R. 

9. bhidyate hrdaya-granthis chidyante sarva-samsaydh, 

ksiyante cdsya karmdni tasmin drste pardvare . 

9. The knot of the heart is cut, all doubts are dispelled and 
his deeds terminate, when He is seen — the higher and the lower. 



II. 2. 12. Mundaka Upanisad 685 

See Katha VI. 15. 

When he sees the Real which comprehends himself, he asserts the 
non-reality of all that is opposed to it. The evil in him through his 
past bad acts falls away. With the change in his nature all that is 
not his ceases to bind him. 


THE SELF-LUMINOUS LIGHT OF THE WORLD 

10. hiranmaye pare kose virajam brahma niskalam 

tac chubhram jyotisdm jyotih tad yad dtma-vido viduh. . 

10. In the highest golden sheath is Brahman without stain, 
without parts; Pure is it, the light of lights. That is what the 
knowers of self know. 

11. na tatra suryo bhciti , na candra-tdrakam, nemd vidyuto 

bhdnti , kuto'yam agnih , 

lam eva bhdntam anubhati sarvam, tasya bhdsd sarvam, 
idarii vibluiti. 

11. The sun shines not there, nor the moon and stars, these 
lightnings shine not, where then could this fire be ? Every thing 
shines only after that shining light. His shining illumines all 
this world. 

See Katha V. 15; S.U. VI. 14; B.G. IX. 15, 6. 
his shining illumines all this world. The whole objective universe 
is illumined by Ilim for it cannot illumine itself, lasyaiva bhdsd 
sarvam any ad andtma-jdtam prakdsayati , na tu tasya svatah prakasana - 
sdmarthyam. S. 

In the Uddna I. 10, the Buddha describes nirvana in similar 
terms: 

yattha dpo ca patliavi tcjo vdyo mi gddliati 
na tall ha snkkd jotanti , ddicco nappakasati, 
na tattha candimd bhati, tamo tattha na vijjati. 

Pali Text Society edition (1885), p. 9. 

12. brahmaivedam amrtam purastdd brahma , pascdd brahma , 

daksinatai cottar ena 

adhascordhvam ca prasrtam brahmaivedam visvam idam 
varistftam. , 

12. Brahman , verily, is this immortal. In front is Brahman , 
behind is Brahman , to the right and to the left. It spreads forth 
below and above. Brahman , indeed, is this universe. It is the 
greatest. 



686 The Principal Vpanisads III. i. 3. 

MUNDAKA 3 
Section 1 

RECOGNITION OF THE LORD AS COMPASSION 

1. dva suparnd sayuja sakhdyd samdnam vrksam parisasvajate 
tayor any ah pippalam svddv atty anasnann anyo’bhicdkasiti. 

1. Two birds, companions (who are) always united, cling to 
the self-same tree. Of these two, the one eats the sweet fruit 
and the other looks on without eating. 

See R.V. I. 164. 20; S.U. IV. 6; Katha I. 3. 1. 
sayuja: always united, sarvadd yuktau. S. 

pippalam: the sweet fruit. It eats or experiences the pleasant or 
painful fruits of its past deeds, karma-nispannam sukha-duhkha- 
laksanam phalam. S. 

svddv atti: eats, bhaksayati upabhunkte avivekatah. §. Cp. Agaiina 
Suttanta where eating is said to be the cause of degradation to cruder 
forms of existence. 

anasnan : without eating. Isvara permits the processes of the world 
as the witness and thus impels their activities, pasyaty eva kevalam, 
darsana-mdtrena hi tasya preray itrtvarii rdjavat. S. 

2. sanidne vrkse puruso nimagno’msayd socati muhyamdnah , 
justam yadd pasyaty anyam isam asya mahimdnam iti f 

vita-sokah. 

2. On the self-same tree, a person immersed (in the sorrows 
of the world) is deluded and grieves on account of his help-' 
lessness. When he sees the other, the Lord who is worshipped 
and his greatness, he becomes fieed from sorrow. 

See S.U. IV. 7. 

3. yadd pasyah pasyate rukma-varnam kartdram tsampurusam 

brahma-yonim 

tadd vidvan pnnya-pdpc vidhuya nirahjanah paramam 
sdmyam upaiti. 

3. When a seer sees the creator of golden hue, the Lord, the 
Person, the source of Brahma, then being a knower, shaking 
off good and evil and free from stain, he attains supreme 
equality with the lord. 

See Maitri VI. 18; K.U. I. 4. 

brahma-yoni: the source of Brahma. Brahma, the world-soul has 
Isvaca for his home and birth-place. 



III. i. 5. Mundaka Upanisad 687 

Eternal life is said to consist in attaining an absolute likeness to 
God and enjoying a life of personal immortality. * 

4. prdno hy esa yah sarva-bhutair vibhati vijdnan vidvdn 
bhavate ndtivadi 

dtma-krida atma-ratih kriydvdn esa brahma-viddm varisthah. 

4. Truly it is life that shines forth in all beings. Knowing 
him, the wise man does not talk of anything else. Sporting 
in the self, delighting in the self, performing works, such a 
one is the greatest of the knowers of Brahman . 

kriydvdn: performing works. S, feeling the incompatibility of 
performing works after attaining knowledge of Brahman , suggests 
that it may mean only the previous performance of meditation 
and other acts conducive to a knowledge of Brahman . The verse, 
however, tells us that he who knows the atman is also a performer 
of works. The soul frees itself from all attachments, enters into 
the stillness of the self, becomes composed and ye^ breaks* forth into 
temporal works without compulsion, without seeking for reward, 
without selfish purpose. Its life is a free outpouring of a liberated 
consciousness and it is incapable of resting even as the living God 
Himself does not rest. Deep unmoved repose at the centre and per- 
petual creativity are his features. 

In the Tripurd-rahasya the prince who has become liberated 
even in the present life ( fivan-mnkta ) performs his royal duties like 
an actor on the sta ge,nalavad rahga-mandale, without being motivated 
by any selfish passions. He is not infected by what he does on the 
stage. He remains himself untroubled by the thought ‘Thus I did 
right* or ‘thus I did wrong.’ See B.U. IV. 4. 22. He will do his duty 
impartially, regardless of gain and loss. B.G. tells us that our concern 
is with action only, not with the result. ‘Battles are lost in the same 
spirit in which they are won.’ The duty of a soldier is to fight and 
not to hate. The well-known story of All points out how we should 
not act in passion. Ali, engaged in single combat, was on the point 
of victory, but when his opponent spat in his face, he withdrew 
because he would not fight in anger. 

5. satyena labhyas tapasd hy esa dtmd samyag-jhdnena 

brahmacaryena nityam. 

antah-ianre jyotir-mayo hi subhro yam pasyanti yatayah 
kstnadosdh. , 

5. This self within the body, of the nature of light and pure, 
is attainable by truth, by austerity, by right knowledge, by 
the constant (practice) of chastity. Him, the ascetics with their 
imperfections done away, behold. 



688 The Principal Upanisads III. i. io. 

tapasa: $ quotes a line to the effect that tapas refers to the focusing 
ot the mind and the senses on one object, i.e. the eternal Self. 
manasascendnyanam ca aikdgryam par amain tapah. 

6 . satyam evajayate ndnrtam , satyena panthd vitato deva-yanah 
yenakramanty rsayo hy dpta-kdmd yatra tat satyasya 
paramaiii nidlidnam . 

6. Truth alone conquers, not untruth. By truth is laid out 
the path leading to the gods by which the sages who have their 
desires fulfilled travel to where is that supreme abode of truth. 

satyam eva jayatc : truth alone conquers. This is the motto inscribed 
on the seal of the Indian nation. 

jayatc v. jayati. 

7. brhac ca tad divyam acintya-rupam suksmdc ca tat suks - 

ma4aram vibhdti. 

durat siidiire tad ihdntike ca pasyatsv ihaiva nihitam 
guhdyam \ 

7. Vast, divine, of unthinkable form, subtler than the subtle. 
It shines forth, farther than the far, yet here near at hand, 
set down in the secret place (of the heart) (as such) even here 
it is seen by the intelligent. 

8. na caksusa grhyate ndpi vdca ndnyair devaih tapasa 

karmand vd 

jnana-prasddena viiuddha-sattvas tatas tu tam pasyate 
niskalam dhyayamdnah. 

8. He is not grasped by the eye nor even by speech nor by 
other sense-organs, nor by austerity nor by work, but when 
one’s (intellectual) nature is purified by the light of knowledge 
then alone he, by meditation, sees Him who is without parts. 

9. eso’nur atmd cetasd veditavyo yasmin prdnah paheadhd 

samvivesa, 

pranais cittam sarvam otam prajdndm , yasmin visuddhe 
vibhavaty esa dtmd. 

9. The subtle self is to be known by thought in which the 
senses in five different forms have centred. The whole of men’s 
thought is pervaded by the senses. When it (thought) is purified, 
the self shines forth. 

10. yam yam lokam manasd samvibhdtivisuddha-sattvahkdmay- 

ate yams ca human 

tam tam lokam jdyate tami ca kdmdms tasmdd dtmajnam 
hy arcayed bhuti-kdmah. 



III. 2. 3. Mundaka Upanisad 689 

10. Whatever world a man of purified nature thinks of in 
his mind and whatever desires he desires, all these worlds anti 
all these desires he attains. Therefore, let him who desires 
prosperity worship the knower of the self. 

See B.U. I. 4. 15. 

The knower of the self has all his desires fulfilled and can obtain 
any world he may seek. 


MUNDAKA 3 
Section 2 

DESIRE THE CAUSE OF RE-BIRTH 

1. sa vedaitat paramam brahma dhdma yatra visvam nihitam 

bhati subhram 

updsate purusam ye hy akdmas te sukram etad ativartanti 
dhirdh. ♦ 

1. He knows that supreme abode of Brahman, wherein 
founded, the world shines brightly. The wise men, who, free 
from desires, worship the Person, pass beyond the seed (of 
rebirth). 

sukram: the seed, the material cause of embodied existence, nrbijarii 
sariro pdddna-kdra nam. § . 

2. kdnidn yah kdmayale manyamdnah sa kdmabhir jdyate 

tatra tatra 

parydpta-kamasya krtdtmanas tu ihaiva sarve praviliyanti 
kdmdh. 

2. He who entertains desires, thinking of them, is born 
(again) here and there on account of his desires. But of him 
who has his desire fully satisfied, who is a perfected soul, all 
his desires vanish even here (on earth). 

3. nqyam atmd pravacanena labhyo na medhayd, na bahUna 

srutena: 

yam evai§a vrnute ten a labhyas tasyaisa atmd vivrnute 
tanum svdm. 

3. This self cannot be attained by instruction nor by intel- 
lectual power nor even through much hearing. He is tfo be 
attained by the one whom (the self) chooses. To such a one 
the self reveals his own nature. 

See Katha I. 2. 23. 



690 The Principal Upanisads III. 2. 6. 

4. nayam dtmd bala-hinena labhyo na ca pramdddt tapaso vdpy 
alihgdt 

etair updyair yatate yas tic vidvams tasyaisa dtmd visate 
brahma-dhdma . 

4. This self cannot be attained by one without strength nor 
through heedlcssness nor through austerity without an aim. 
But he who strives by these means, if he is a knower, this self 
of his enters the abode of Brahman. 

bala-hinena: by one without strength, which is said to be derived 
from concentration on the self, dtma-nistha-janita-virya-hincna. S. 
Strength or energy is at the root of all great achievements. 
alihgdt: without an aim. £ equates lihga with samnyasa. lihgam 
samnydsah, etair upayaih baldpramdda-samnyasajhdnaih. $. 
lihga: outward badges of an ascetic, his robes, shaven head, etc. 

Outward signs are not enough for salvation. We require inward 
realisation, alihga: saninydsa. Cp. M.B. XII. 11898-9. 

kasaya-dharanam maundyam trivistabdham kamandaluh 
lihgdny utpathabhutdni na moksdyeti me matih. 
yadi saty api lihge’smin jhdnam evdtra kdranam. 
nirmoksayeha duhkhasya lihga-mdtram nirarthakam. 

Cp. What harm has your hair done? Perform the tonsure on your 
sins. What earthly good is a monk’s robe to a mind besmirched? 
kesdh kim aparddhyanti klcsanam mundanam karu 
sakasayasya cittasya kdsdyaih kim prayojanam. 


THE NATURE OF LIBERATION 

5. samprapyainam rsayo jhdna-trptdh krtdtmano vita-rdgdh 
prasdntdh 

tc sarvagam sarvatah prapya dhird yuktatmdnas sarvam 
evdvisanti. 

5. Having attained Him, the seers (who arc) satisfied with 
their knowledge (who are) perfected souls, free from passion, 
t-anquil, having attained the omnipresent (self) on all sides, 
those wise, with concentrated minds, enter into the All itself. 

They have found the self in all and therefore enter into everything. 

r 

6. Jveddnta-vijhdna-sunitcitdrthah samnydsa-yogad yatayah sud- 

dhasattvah 

te brahma-lokesu pardntakale par dmrtdhparimucy anti sarve. 

6. The ascetics who have ascertained well the meaning of 
the Vedanta knowledge, who have purified their natures 



III. 2. 9. Mttndaka Upanisad 691 

through the path of renunciation, they (dwelling) in the worlds 
of Brahma, at the end of time, being one with the immortal, 
are all liberated. 

veddnta-vijndna: the knowledge of the Vedanta. Cp. Taittirlya 
Aranyaka X. 12. 3; S.U. VI. 22. 

pardntakdle: at theendof time, sarhsdrdvasdnc deha-parity dga-kdlah. §. 
paramytdh: being one with the highest immortal, param amytam 
amarana-dharmakam brahmdtma-bhutam esam te paramytdh . S. 

Companionship with the highest God Brahma is the end and the 
soul will be liberated at the time of the great end along with Brahma. 
Until then they can assume any form at their will (svecchd-pari- 
kalpita). 

In his commentary on this verse, § quotes: — 
sakunlnam ivakase jale varicarasya ca 
padam yathd na dysyeta tathd jhdnavatdm gatih. 

7. gatdh kaldh pahcadasa pratisthd devdis ca sarve prati-devatasu 
karmani vij hdnamayas ca dtmd pare'vyaye sarva eki-bha - 
vanti. 

7. Gone are the fifteen parts to their (respective) supports 
(the elements) and all the gods (the sense organs) into their 
corresponding deities. One’s deeds and the self, consisting of 
understanding, all become one in the Supreme Immutable Being. 

eki-bhavanti: become one. Their separateness is dissolved, avisesatam 
gacchanti. S. See Prasna VI. 4. 

8. yathd nadyas syandamdnds samudre astam gacchanti 

ndma-yupe vihdya , 

tathd vidvdn ndma-rupdd vimuktah pardt-param pnru§am 
upaiti divyam. 

8 . Just as the flowing rivers disappear in the ocean casting 
off name and shape, even so the knower, freed from name and 
shape, attains to the divine person, higher than the high. 

See Prasna VI. 5. 

pardt-param: higher than the high, the unmanifested. The souls 
attain universality of spirit, a-visesdtma-bhdvam . S. Eckhart says, 
‘And here one cannot speak about the soul any more, for she has 
lost her name yonder in the oneness of divine essence. There she is 
no more calleci soul; she is called immeasurable being.’ R argues 
that they attain to equality of nature and not identity of being. 
ftarama-bdmya-mdtram, sddrysam evoktam na tn tad-bhdvah . 

9. sa yo ha vat tat para nam brahma veda brahmaiva bhavati , 

ndsydbrahma-vit kule bhavati , 



692 The Principal Upani?ads III. 2. n. 

tarati iokam tarati papmdnam guhd-granthibhyo vimukto’- 
mrto bhavati. 

9. He, verily, who knows the Supreme Brahman becomes 
Brahman himself. In his family, no one who does not know 
Brahman, will be bom. He crosses over sorrow. He crosses 
over sins. Liberated from the knots of the secret place (of the 
heart), he becomes immortal. 

10. tad etat redbhyuktam: 

kriydvantas srotriya brahmanisthds svayam jahvata ekarsim 
iraddhayantah 

tesdm evaitiim brahma-vidydrii vadda sirovratam vidhivad 
yais tu cirnam. 

10. This very (doctrine) is declared in the verse. Those who 
perform the rites, who are learned in scriptures, who are well- 
established in Brahman, who offer of themselves oblations 
to the sole seer /a form of fire) with faith, to them alone one 
may declare this knowledge of Brahman (to them alone), by 
whom the rite (of carrying fire) on the head has been performed, 
according to rule. 

11. tad etat satyam rsir ahgirah purovdea, naitad a-cirna-vrato’- 

dhite. 

namah parama-rsibhyo namah parama-rsibhyah. 

11. This is the truth. The seer Angiras declared it before. 
Let none who has not performed the rite read this. Salutation 
to the great seers. Salutation to the great seers. 



MANDVKYA upanisad 

1 

The Mdndukya Upanisad belongs to the Atharva Veda and 
contains twelve verses. It is an exposition of the principle of 
aum as consisting of three elements, a, u, m, which refer to the 
three states of waking, dream and dreamless sleep. The Supreme 
Self is manifested in the universe in its gross, subtle and causal 
aspects. Answering to the four states of consciousness, wake- 
fulness, dream, dreamless sleep, transcendental consciousness 1 
there are aspects of the Godhead, the last alone being all- 
inclusive and ultimately real. The Absolute of mystic con- 
sciousness is the reality of the God of religion. The Upanisad 
by itself, it is said, is enough to lead one to liberation.* 

Gaudapiida, Samkara’s teacher’s teacher wrote his famous 
Kdrika on the Upanisad, which is the first systematic exposition 
of Advaita Vedanta which has come down to us. Samkara has 
commented on both the U panisad and the Kdrika. 

1 See Nrsimha-pui va-lapanlya V. IV. i. 

1 mmduhyam chain evdlam mnmihsiinam umuktaye. Muktika U. 

l-V- " ' 




3 Mdndukya Upanisad 695 

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF AUM 

\T aum ity etad aksaram idam sarvam , tasyopavyakhydnam, 
bh dam bhavad bhavisyad iti sarvam aumkdra eva, yac cdnyat 
trikaldtUam tad apy aumkdra eva. 

1. Aum, this syllable is all this. An explanation of that (is 
the following). All that is the past, the present and the future, 
all this is only the syllable aum. And whatever else there is 
beyond the threefold time, that too is only the syllable aum. 

The syllable aum, which is the symbol of Brahman, stands for 
the manifested world, the past, the present and the future, as well 
as the unmanifested Absolute. 

2. sarvam hy etad brahma, ay am dtma brahma, so 1 yam atmd 
catus-pdt. 

2. All this is, verily, Brahman . This self is Brahman. This 
same self has four quarters. 

four quarters: which are visva, the waking state, taijasa, the dream 
state, prdjha, the state of dreamless sleep and turlya which is the 
state of spiritual consciousness. 'The knowledge of the fourth is 
attained by merging the (previous) three such as visva, etc., in the 
order of the previous one in the succeeding one.’ traydnam visva - 
dindrii purva-purva-pravildpanena turiyasya pratipattih. §. 

3. jdgarita sthdno bahis-prajhah saptdhga ckonavimsati-niukhah 
sth r, la-bhug vaisvdnarah prathamah pddah. 

> 3. The first quarter is Vaisvanara, whose sphere (of activity) 
; s the waking state, who cognises external objects, who has 
s ven limbs and nineteen mouths and who enjoys (experiences) 
gross (material) objects. 

who has seven limbs: refe rs to the list mentioned in C.U. V. 18. 2. 
nineteen mouths are the live organs of sense (hearing, touch, sight, 
taste and smell), the five organs of action (speech, handling, loco- 
motion, generation and excretion), the live vital breaths, the mind 
[man as), and the intellect ( buddhi ), the self-sense ( aham-kdra ) an 4 
thought (citta). 

Vaisvdnara : He is called Vaisvdnara because he leads all creatures 
of the universe in diverse ways to the enjoyment of various objects, 
or because he comprises all beings. S. visvesdm nardndm anekadhd 
nayandd vaisvdnarah; yad vdi visvas cdsau naras ceti visvdnarah; 
visvdnara eva vaisvdnarah. 

The waking state is the no: ual condition of the natural man, who 
without reflection accepts the universe as he linds it. The same 

z 



696 The Principal Upanisads 5. 

physical universe bound by uniform laws presents itself to all such 
men. 

4. svapna-sthdno ntah- praj hah saptdiiga ckonavimsati -mnkhah 
pravivikta-bhuk taijaso dvitlyah padah. 

4. The second quarter is taijasa, whose sphere (of activity) 
is the dream state, who cognises internal objects, who has 
seven limbs and nineteen mouths, and who enjoys (experiences) 
the subtle objects. 

The taijasa is conscious of the internal, i.e. mental states. While 
the visva, which is the subject of the waking state, cognises material 
objects in the waking experience, the taijasa experiences mental 
states dependent on the predispositions left by the waking experi- 
ences. In this state the soul fashions it s own world in the imagining 
of the dreams. ‘The spirit serves as light for itself/ 13. U. IV. 3. 9. 
Here also the basis of duality operates, the one that knows and the 
object tha+ is known. Though from the standpoint of the dream, the 
dream objects are 'experienced as external, they are said to be subtle 
because they are different from the objects of the waking state which 
are external. 

The Upanisad makes a clear distinction between waking and 
dream experiences. 

5. yatra supto na kani cana kdunam kdmayate na kam cana 
svapnam pasyati tat siisuptam, snsupta-stluhia cki-bliutah prajiid- 
na-ghana evdnanda-mayo hy dnanda-bhuk cdo-mukhah prdjnas 
trtiyah padah. 

5. Where one, being fast asleep, dot's not desire any desire 
whatsoever and does not see any dream whatsoever, that is 
deep sleep. The third quarter is prdjna , whose sphere (of 
activity) is the state of dee]) sleep, who has become one, who 
is verily, a mass of cognition, who is full of bliss and who 
enjoys (experiences) bliss, whose face is thought. 

\Vhile the first condition is the waking life of outward-moving 
consciousness, and the second is the dream life of inward-moving 
consciousness, the third is the state of dee]) sleep where the con- 
sciousness enjoys peace and has no perception of either external or 
internal objects. Cp the Psalmist who says: ‘God gives truth to 
his beloved in sleep’ (CXXVII. 2). The transitory character of sleep 
show*> that it is not the ultimate state. The name given to this state is 
prdjna. It is a state of knowledge, though the external and internal 
states are held in abeyance. It is the conceptual self, while the two 
previous selves are the imaginative and the perceptual ones. 
ekl-ohutah : the manifold object series, external and internal, lapses 



6. Mdndukya Upanisad 697 

even ‘as at night, owing to the indiscrimination produced by 
darkness, all percepts become a mass of darkness, as it were, so also 
in the state of deep sleep, all (objects) of consciousness, verily 
become a mass (of consciousness)/ §. In deep sleep no desire, no 
thought is left, all impressions have become one; only knowledge 
and bliss remain. 

The apparent absence of duality has led to the view that it is the 
final state of union with Brahman. See B.U. IV. 3; C.U. VIII. 
11. 1. 

ceto-mukhah: because it is the doorway to the cognition of the two 
other states of consciousness known as dream and waking. 
prdjhah: It is called prdjha consciousness or knower as it is not 
aware of any variety as in the two other states. 
dnanda-mayah: full of bliss. 

ananda-bhuk: who enjoys bliss. It is not bliss but the enj oyer of bliss. 
dnanda-prdyah nan and a eva. S. 

In the waking state we arc bound by the fetters of sense-perception 
and desire; in the dream state we have a greater freedom gs the self 
makes a world of its own, out of the materials of tfic waking world. 
Though, in the dream state, we take the dream images of delight 
and oppression as real, we produce them out of ourselves. In dream- 
less sleep the self is liberated from the empirical world, indeed from 
the person as a sell-contained unit. 

6. esa sarvesvarah , esa sarvajhah, eso’ ntdryami, esa yonih 
sarvasya prabhavapyayau hi bhutdndm. 

6. This is the lord of all, this is the knower of all, this is the 
inner controller; this is the source of all; this is the beginning 
** the end of beings. 

Gaudapada says that ‘it is the one alone who is known in the three 
states/ t'ka eva tridhd smrtah. 

S urges that ‘that which is designated as prdjha (when it is 
viewed as the cause of the world) will be described as tuny a separately 
when it is not viewed ns the cause, and when it is free from all 
phenomenal relationship, i.e. in its absolute real aspect/ tam 
abljdvastham tasyaiva prdjha-sabda-vacyasya turlyatvcna dehddi-satn - 
bandha-jagradddi-rahitdm pdramdrthiklm prthag vaksyati. & oi^ 
Gaudapada’s Kdrikd I. 2. 

It is the first time in the history of thought that the distinction 
between Absolute and God, Brahman and Isvara , tuny a and prdjha 
is elaborated. Cp. with this the Christian view of the Son as ‘the 
image of the invisible God, the first born of all creation; for in*him 
all things were created, in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible 
... all things were created through him and for him. He is before 
all things and in him all thing hold together/ Colossians I. 15. The 
son is the Demiurge, the heavenly architect, not the God but the 



698 The Principal Upanisads 7. 

image of the God. For Philo 'the Sun is itself unaffected and un- 
diminished by its radiance, yet all the earth is dependent on it; so 
God, although in His being He is completely self-contained and 
self-sufficient, shoots forth a great stream of radiation, immaterial, 
yet on that account all the more real. This stream is God in extension, 
God in relation, the Son of God, not God/ By Light, Light, p. 243, 
Goudenough’s E.T. 

7. nantah-praj ham, na bahis prajham , nobhayatah- prajham, 
na prajhana-ghanam, na prajham, na prajham, adrstam, avya- 
vahdryam, agrdhyam, alaksanam, acintyam , avyapadesyam , 
ekdtma-pratyaya-saram, prapahcopasamam, sdntam, sivam, ad- 
vaitam, caturtham manyante, sa alma; sa vijheyah. 

7. {Turly a is) not that which cognises the internal (objects), 
not that which cognises the external (objects), not what cog- 
nises both of them, not a mass of cognition, not cognitive, not 
non-cognitive. (It is) unseen, incapable of being spoken of, 
ungraspable, vpthout any distinctive marks, unthinkable, 
unnameable, the essence of the knowledge of the one self, that 
into which the world is resolved, the peaceful, the benign, the 
non-dual, such, they think, is the fourth quarter. He is the 
self; He is to be known. 

Here we get to a reality which is beyond the distinction of subject 
and object and yet it is above and not below this distinction. It 
is super-theism and not atheism or anti-theism. We cannot use here 
terms like all-knowing, all-powerful. Brahman cannot be treated as 
having objects of knowledge or powers. It is pure being. In many 
passages, the Upanisads make out that Brahman is pure being 
beyond all word and thought. He becomes Isvara or personal God 
with the quality of prajhd or pure wisdom. He is all-knowing, the 
lord of the principle of mula-prakrti or the unmanifested, the inner 
guide of all souls. From him proceeds Hiranya-garbha who, as 
Demiurge, fashions the world. From the last develops Virdt or the 
totality of all existents. The last two are sometimes mixed up. 

Gaudapada says that this Brahman is ‘birth less, free from sleep 
and dream, without name and form, ever effulgent, all thought; 
no form is necessary for it.’ 

ajam, anidram, asvapnam, andmakam, arupakam 
sakyd vibhatam sarvajham nopacdrah katham cana. III. 3O. 

Though objective consciousness is absent in both the prdjha and 
turfya consciousness, the seed of it is present in the state of deep 
sleep while it is absent in the transcendent consciousness. Empirical 
consciousness is present though in an unmanifested condition in 
the state of deep sleep while the transcendent state is the non- 
enfpirical beyond the three states and free from their interruptions 



8 . Mdndukya Upanisad 699 

and alternations. It is present, even when we are immersed in the 
activities of the waking world or lost in the unconsciousness of sleep. 
Man's highest good consists in entering into this, the self, making it 
the centre of one's life, instead of dwelling on the surface. 

Deep sleep terminates and the self returns to the dream and the 
waking states. In turlya there is a permanent union with Brahman. 
The metaphysical reality is cognised in turlya, if such an expression 
can be used for the transcendent state. 

Plotinus portrays a gradual ascent from the world-soul to the 
spirit (nous) and finally from spirit to the One. The goal of spiritual 
ascent is a mystical ecstatic union with the Absolute. He writes: 
‘Let us suppose the same rest in the body that surrounds the soul, 
that its movement is stilled, and that the entire surroundings are 
also at rest, the earth, the sea, the heaven itself above the other 
elements.' In words that arc echoes of Plotinus, Augustine in his 
Confessions describes the ascent from the changeable apprehensions 
and objects of sense through the intelligible world of conceptual 
truth to the Absolute Truth. ‘If the tumult of the flesh were hushed, 
hushed the images of earth, and the waters and aif, hushed also the 
poles of heaven' mail turns his spiritual vision godward to receive 
the light, then he attains the absolute object of mystical union 
‘the light unchangeable above the mind’ with the flash of one tremb- 
ling glance. 

8. so yam dtmddhyaksaram aumkdro' dhimdiram padd mditrd 
mdtrds ca pddd akdra ukdra makdra iti. 

8. This is the self, which is of the nature of the syllable aum, 
in regard to its elements. The quarters are the elements, the 
t’ements are the quarters, namely the letter, a, the letter u 
and the letter m. 

This is the self: it is the deepest essence of the soul, the image of 
Godhead. 

The world and the world-soul are both producers and produced. 
The Supreme God is only the producer; Brahman is above the 
distinction of producer and produced. Cp. Gaudapada: 

karya-kdrana-baddhau tdv-isycte visva-taijasau 
prdjnah karana-baddhas tu dvau tau turye na sidhyatah. 

I. 11. 

Visva and taijasa are conditioned by cause and effect. But prdjna is 
conditioned by •cause alone. These two (cause and effect) do not 
exist in turlya. Primal being unfolds itself as a subject-dbject 
relation. The unmeasured and undefined becomes the measured 
and the defined, a universe of logical discourse. Prdjna or wisdom 
and the element ‘m’ both ii dicatc that the function of measuring 
is that of logical mind. All distinctions are within the Supreme 



700 The Principal Upanisads n. 

Brahman. God is the logical being, the defined reality. It is not we 
that define Brahman but Brahman defines itself. The supreme 
logical idea is God who is the true, the good and the beautiful. 
Defined reality is not divided reality. 'Hie real in itself is Brahman ; 
the real as logically defined is Isvara who rests in Brahman who 
does not cease to be Brahman in becoming Isvara. 

9. j cigar ita-sthdno vaisvdnaro' kdrah prathamd mdtrcVptcr didi- 
nuittvdd vd'pnoti ha vai sarvdn kdmdn cidis ca bhavati ya evam 
veda. 

q. Vaisvanara, whose sphere (of activity) is the waking state, 
is the letter d, the first element, either from the root ap to 
obtain or from being the first. He who knows this, obtains, 
verily, all desires, also, he becomes first. 

Vaisvanara is he who has the universe for his body. 

10. svapna-sthdnas laijasa ukdro dvitTyd mdtrotharsdl ubha- 
yatvdidvotkarsatB ha vai jhdna-samtatim samdnas ca bhavati , 
ndsydbrahma-vit-kule bhavati ya evam veda. 

10. Taijasa, whose sphere (of activity) is the dream state, 
is the letter u, the second element, from exaltation or inter- 
mediateness. He who knows this exalts, veiily, the continuity 
of knowledge and he becomes equal; in his family is born no 
one w’ho does not know 7 Brahman. 

11. susupta-sthdnah prdjho makdras trtiyd mdtrd miter apiter 
vd minoti ha vd idam sarvam apitis ca bhavati ya evam veda. 

11. Prajna, whose sphere (of activity) is the state of deep 
sleep is the letter m, the third element, either from the root mi, 
to measure or because of merging. He who knows this measures 
(know's) all this and merges also (all this in himself). 

In deep sleep, all waking and dieam experiences disappear. 
Isvara is the cause of the universe as well as that of its dissolution. 
As the name prajna implies, the condi tion is 011c of intellection. In 
it we have a thinker and a thought. If this dilference did not exist, 
it would be a silent oneness. 

This verse affirms what Parmenides, Plato and Hegel assumed tha f 
the opposition of being and not-being is the original duality from 
the ontological standpoint. Being is a priori to * non-being. The 
negation presupposes what it negates. Though bring is a priori to 
non-being, being itself cannot be conceived without an opposite. 
Being could never be being without being opposed to not-being. 
But there is something which is a priori to the opposition of being 
and non-being and that is the unity which transcends both. Thought 



12. Mandukya Upanisad 701 

cannot grasp and determine this spirit beyond the opposition. 
There is no concept'or substance that could be thought of as beiag 
the unity without any opposition whatsoever. We cannot even call 
it unity for it suggests the opposite category of diversity. But we are 
in the sphere of oppositions, dualities and yet the positive side of 
the opposition brings out the content of the spirit. We have to seek 
the ultimate truth, goodness and beauty in its direction. 

Plotinus says, 'Before the two there is the one and the unit must 
precede the Dyad: coming later than the one, the Dyad has the 
One as the standard of its differentiation, that without which it 
could not be the separate differentiated thing it is/ Enneads V. 1. 5. 

'As long as we have duality, we must go still higher until we reach 
what transcends the Dyad/ Ibid. III. 8. 8. 

12. amiitras catnrtho'vyavahdryahprapahcopasamah sivo’dvaita 
evam aumkdra dtmaiva, sariivisaty dtmana tmcinam ya evam veda. 

12. The foui tli is that which has no elements, which cannot 
be spoken of, into which the world is resolved, benign, jion-dual. 
Thus the syllable aum is the very self. He wflo knows it thus 
enters the self with his self. 

In limy a, the mind is not simply withdrawn from the objects 
but becomes one with Brahman who is free from fear, who is all- 
round illumination, according to Gaudapada. 
llyate hi susuptc lan nigrhilam na liyatc 
tad eva nirbJiayam brahma jhdndlokam samantatah. III. 35. 

In both deep sleep and transcendental consciousness there is no 
consciousness of objects but this objective consciousness is present 
in an unmanifested 'seed' form in deep sleep while it is completely 
transcended in the tuny a consciousness. Gaudapada says: The 
non-cognition of duality is common to both prdjiia and tuny a but 
prajiia is associated witli the seed (consciousness) in sleep while this 
does not exist in tuiiya. 

dvaitasydgrahanam iitlyam ubhayoh prdjha-turyayoh 
blja-nidrd-yutah prdjhah sci ca turye na vidyate. 

5 opens his commentary on the B.G., with the verse that 
'Naray.uia is beyond the unmanifested principle and from this 
unmanifested arises the mundane egg or Ihranya-garbha / ndrdyanah 
paro’vyaktdd andam avyakta-samb/iavam. There is first the pure 
Brahman beyond subject and object and then Narayana or God 
confronted by the object but superior to it and then the world-soul. 

Lao Tze looks upon the Tao as the ultimate Reality which can 
be defined only in negative terms as ‘colourless,’ 'soundless,’ 'non- 
material/ His conception of creation was that out of Tao, the eternal 
ultimate principle came the me, the great monad or the material 
cause of the universe. The one produced the two primary essences. 



702 The Principal Upanisads 12. 

the Yang and the Yin, positive and negative, male and female, 
light and shade, which gave birth to the three powers of nature, 
heaven, earth and man, which in their combination produced all 
creatures. 

Lao Tze’s follower Chuang-tze regarded Tien or God as the first 
great cause. 

Plotinus says : 'Standing transcendent above all things that follow 
It, existing in Itself, not mixing or to be mixed with any emanation 
from Itself, veritably the one, not merely possessing Oneness as an 
attribute of Its essence— for that would be a false oneness— a 
Principle overpassing all reasoning, all knowing — a principle 
standing over all Essence and Existence . . . only when it is simplex 
and First, apart from all, can it be perfectly self-sufficing.’ Enneads , 
V. 4. 1. 

This soundless, partless, supreme Reality is the very self. In 
the state of deep sleep, it becomes the subject confronting the 
object which is yet unmanifested. We infer the presence of the object, 
as its developments take place on getting out of sleep. In the dream 
state, the object is manifested in the form of mental states; in the 
waking state, the object is manifested in material states. The subject- 
object duality is present in different forms in the states of waking, 
dream and dreamless sleep. It is transcended altogether in the state 
of turiya, while we have a pure consciousness of Self or Absolute. 

No object can be set in opposition to the Spirit and so the question 
of validity or otherwise does not arise. It is self- validating, self- 
authenticating experience. The question of validity arises -when the 
object appears as alien and impenetrable but in spiritual experience 
there is no alien object. There is knowledge of identity, by possession, 
by the absorption of the object at the deepest levels. In the ex- 
perience of turiya, there is neither subject nor object; neither the 
perception nor the idea of God. It does not reflect or explain any 
other reality than itself. It is reality, spirit in its inner life. Those 
who know the truth become the truth. It is not a state in which 
objects are extrinsically opposed to one another. It is the immersion 
of the self in reality, its participation in primary being. It is 
illumined life. It is pure consciousness without any trace of duality; 
it is unfailing light, turiyah sarva-drk sadd: Kdrikd 1 . 12. When the 
real is known there is no woild of duality, jihite dvaitam na vidyate. 
Kdrikd I. 18. 

Cp. Astavakra Gita: 

jiiatd jhdnam tathd jheyam trtiyam ndjsti vdstavam. 

• ajhanad bhati yatredam so* ham asmi niranjanah. 

When analogically we transfer this idea from the microcosm to 
the macrocosm, from the individual to the world, since there is a 
co-relation between intelligibility and being, we have answering 
to the waking state, Viraf, to the dream state, Hiranya-garbha , to 



12. Mdndukya Upanisad 703 

the dreamless sleep state, Isvara. All these three are on the plane 
of duality, Isvara has facing him mula-prakyti, though in an unmafii- 
fested ( avyakrta ) condition, as the self has the object in an unmani- 
fested condition in the state of dreamless sleep. 

Plotinus who adopts a similar view puts the case thus: 'If, then, 
the Divine thought-forms (The Ideas) are many, there must of 
necessity be something common to all and something peculiar to 
each to differentiate them: this particularity or specific difference 
is the individual shape; but if there is shape there must be something 
that has taken the shape . . . that is to say there is a foundation, 
substratum, a matter. Further, if there is an Intellectual kosmos of 
which our kosmos is an image, and if ours is compound and includes 
matter, there must be a matter in the Intellectual kosmos as well/ 
Enncads II. 4. 4. 

The interaction of the universal subject and object develops the 
rest of the universe. Hiranya-garbha is the sutratman and plays 
with ideas, mental states as taijasa does in the dream world. In 
Rg Veda, it is said that Hiranya-garbha arose in the beginning, the 
lord of all created beings. X. 121. 1. hiranya-gatbhas sam-avartata 
agre bhutasya jdtah patir cka dslt. This whole world is in him in an 
embryo form, hiranye brahmdnda-rupe garbha-rupendvasthitah prajd - 
patir hiranya garbhah. Vidyaranya. When these are projected into 
space and time, we have Virdt. This answers to the waking state, 
which is Vaisvdnaras sphere of activity. 

The waking and the dream states answer to the exteriorised existence 
and interiorised life of the world-spirit. When the world-spirit 
externalises its attention, we have the manifestation of the cosmos. 
When it turns its attention inward, the cosmos retreats into latency. 
When the world-spirit withdriws altogether into undisturbed still- 
ness, the object, though present, becomes a mere abstraction. When 
even that ceases, Isvara is Brahman. 

Aam thus represents both the unmanifested Absolute and the 
personal Isvara. Gaudapada writes: ‘The sacred syllable aam is 
verily the lower Brahman and it is also said to be the higher Brahman. 
Aam is without beginning, unique, without anything external to 
it, unrelated to any effect and imperishable/ 

pranavo Jiy aparam brahma, pranavas ca par ah smrtah 
apurvo' nantaro bdhyo naparah pranavo' vy ayah. (2b). 

If we worship Aam as Isvara, we pass beyond grief: ‘Know Aum 
to be Isvara, ever present in the hearts of all. The wise man, realising 
aum as all-pervading, does not grieve/ 

pranavarii hlsvaram vidydt sarvasya hrdi samsthitam 
sarva-yydpinam aumkdram matvd dhiro na socati. (28). 

While Isvara, the personal God, is the lord of the world of manifes- 
tation, of becoming, the Supume Brahman is beyond all becoming 
in pure being. ‘One who has known Aum which is (at the same time) 

7 



704 The Principal Upanisads 12 . 

devoid of elements and of infinite elements, in which all duality is 
resolved, the benign, he is the (real) sage and none other. 1 
amatro'nanta-matras ca dvaitasyopasamah sivah 
aumkdro vidito yena sa munir netaro janah. (29). 

In this Upanisad we find the fundamental approach to the attain- 
ment of reality by the road of introversion and ascent from the 
sensible and changing, through the mind which dreams, through 
the soul which thinks, to the divine within but above the soul. The 
truth of our intellectual knowledge presupposes a light, the Light 
of the Real above logical truth, the Light which is not itself but that 
by which it has been created and by whose illumination it shines. 

In the Apocryphal Wisdom of Solomon , the immanent reason is 
described thus: 

Tor she is a breath of the power of God, 

And a clear effluence of the glory of the Almighty. 1 VII. 25. 
Wisdom becomes a personality (XVIII. 14-ib) akin to the word in 
the Prologue of the Fourth Gospel. Though Wisdom is a potency 
outside God it is yet wholly in God. Philo makes a sharp distinction 
between God in Himself and God revealed, between God who is pure 
being, unknowable, outside the material universe and God who is 
immanent in man and the universe, who is all-penetrating, all- 
filling. The gap between the Infinite God and the finite man was 
bridged in the Old Testament by God's angels who were regarded 
as emanations of the divine, offshoots of deity, parts of his very 
being. Philo held that the universe was filled with divine potencies. 
While in one sense these are attributes and self-revelations of God, 
in another sense they are personal beings, incorporeal souls who 
mediate between God and men, who ‘report the injunctions of the 
father to his children and the necessities of the children to the 
father.’ De Somnus I. 22. The unity of all these potencies is con- 
stituted by the Logos. Heaven and earth subsisted in the Logos 
before their material creation. The potencies which are the creators 
of matter emanate from the Logos. God who is the ultimate creator 
never works directly but through the Logos who again works through 
the potencies called logoi. Prcijna, wisdom, Logos, Intellectual 
Principle, have a family likeness. 

Plotinus has the transcendent triad of the Absolute One, the 
Intellectual Principle or God and the World-soul. ‘The one is not 
a Being but the source of Being which is its first offspring. The One 
is perfect, that is it has nothing, seeks nothing, needs nothing, bin, 
as we may say, it overflows and this overflowing js creative : the 
engendered entity looks towards the One and becomes the Intel- 
lectual Principle; resting within itself, this offspring of the One is 
Being.’ Enneads V. 2. 1. This Intellectual Principle Nous is the 
image of the One. It is engendered because the One in its self-quest 
has* vision. This seeing is Nous. The third is the soul, the author of 



12. 


Mdndukya IJpanisad 705 

all living things. It made the sun the moon the stars and the whole 
visible world. It is the offspring of the Divine intellect. It is, ih 
Plotinus, of a twofold nature. There is an inner soul intent on Nous 
and another which faces outward. The latter is associated with a 
downward movement in which the soul generates its image which is 
nature and the world of sense. For Plotinus it is the lowest sphere, 
something emanating from the soul when it forgets to look upward 
towards the Nous. We have the One, Nous, Soul and the world 
answering to the fourfold nature of reality in the Mdndukya U. 
The last two the world-soul and the world are the subtle and the 
gross conditions of the same being, virdt trailokya-sarirah brahma 
samasti-vyasti-rupah samsdra-mandala-vydpi. § on T.U. II. 8. 




SVETASVATARA upanisad 

The Svetdsvatara Upanisad belongs to the Taittiriya school 
of the Yajur Vedp. Its name is derived from the sage who 
taught it. 1 It is theistic in character and identifies the Supreme 
Brahman with Rudra who is conceived as the material and the 
efficient cause of the world, not only the author of the world 
but its protector and guide. The elements associated with 
theism, Personal God and devotion to Him, which are to be 
met with undoubtedly in the other UpanUads, become 
prominent in the Svetdsvatara Upanisad. The emphasis is not 
on Brahman the Absolute, whose complete perfection does not 
admit of any change or evolution but on the personal Isvara, 
omniscient and omnipotent who is the manifested Brahman. 
Terms which were used by the later Sdmkhya philosophy occur 
in the Upanisad, but the dualism of the Sdmkhya, purusa and 
prakrti, is overcome. Nature or pradhdna is not an independent 
entity but belongs to the self of the Divine, devdtma-sakti. God 
is the mdvin, the maker of the world which is mdiyd or made 
by him. 2 The Upanisad teaches the unity of the souls and the 
world in the one Supieme Reality. The Upanisad is an attempt 
to reconcile the different philosophical and religious views 
which prevailed at the time of its composition. 

1 svcUt, pure, diva, indnyas, senses. Sariikarananda. See VI. 21: 
literally, he who has a white mule. ( p. jaiad-gavah, he who has an old 
cow. • 

! may 1 srjate siuvam ctat. 




Sveta&vatara Upani$ad 


709 


I. 2. 

CHAPTER I 

CONJECTURES CONCERNING THE FIRST CAUSE 

1. brahmavadino vadanti: 

kim kdranam brahma, kutah sma jatd, jlvdma kena, kva ca 
sampratisthdh, 

adhisthitdh kena sukhetaresu vartdmahe brahma-vido vyava- 
stham. 

1. Those who discourse on Brahman say: What is the cause? 
(Is it) Brahman ? Whence are we born? By what do we live? 
And on what are we established? O ye who know Brahman, 
(tell us) presided over by whom do we live our different 
conditions in pleasures and other than pleasures (pains). 

2. kalah svabhdvo niyatir yadrccha bhutdni yonih purusa iti 

cintyd. 

samyoga esam na tvdtma-bhdvdd dtmdpy cmisah sukha-duh- 
kha-hctoh . 

2. Time, inherent nature, necessity, chance, the elements, 
the womb or the person (should they) be considered as the 
cause? It cannot be a combination of these because of the 
existence of the soul. Even the soul is powerless in respect 
of the cause of pleasure and pain. 

cintyd: v. cintyam. 

In Atharva Veda XIX. 53. 1, we are told that ‘Time is a horse 
with seven reins . . . him the knowing poets mount.' kdlo asvo vahati 
sapla-rasmih . . . turn droluintl kavayo vipascitdh. In the same verse 
it is said that ‘all the worlds are his wheels.’ tasya cakrd bhuvandni 
visvd. 

The creative and destructive functions of Kola or time are 
brought out in the M.B. 

kalah pacati bhutdni, kalah samharate prajdh 
kalah suptesu jdgarti, kdlo hi duratikramah. 

It also asserts that there is a time-transcending element wfiicli 
overcomes even time — 

kalah pacati bhutdni sarvdny evdtmandtmani 
yasmin tu pacyate kdlas tatii vedcha na kas cana. 
dtmd: the soul, the living self, jlva which is not an independent cause, 
but is subject to the law of karma. • 

yonih: the womb, prakrti which is the mother of all possibilities in 
the world. 

The different views are mentioned as they were suggested in the 
previous history of Indian thought. The non-conscious cannot be 



710 The Principal Upanisads 1 . 3. 

the cause of the conscious. The conscious human being cannot be 
the ultimate cause for he is not the determiner of his own destiny. 

3. te dhydna-yogdnugata apasyan devdtma-saktim sva-gunair 
nigudhdm 

yah kdrandni nikhildni tcini kdldtma-yukldny adhitisthaty 
eh ah. 

3. Those who followed after (were devoted to) meditation 
and contemplation saw the self-power of the Divine hidden 
in its own qualities. He is the one who rules over all these 
causes from time to the soul. 

dhy ana-yoga: Cp. dhydna. 1. 14; again, I. 10--11. 
tasydbliidhydndt. It seems to foreshadow the pranidhdna of the 
Yoga Sidra I. 23. Bhakti or devotion is a natural development of 
dhydna. VI. 22 

devdtma-sakti : the self-power of the Divine. It is not like the prakrti 
of the Sariikhya independent of God. The power, sakti ot the Supreme, 
is the cause of the' world. It is of the nature of the Supreme and not 
independent. 

devasya dyotanddi-yuktasya mdyinah paramesvarasya paramdtmanah 
ddmabhutatd m asvatantrdm , na stimkhya- par ik(il pita- pradhdndd ivat 
prthag-bJnltdm svatantrdm sakhm. S. 

See IV. 10; see B.G. IX. 10. 

Cp. Brahma Pur ana: 

esd catur-vimsati-bheda-bhinnd indy a pard-prahrtis tat-sanudthd. 
There is no reason, as Plotinus says, why the* spirit should remain 
stationary in itself. It is not impotent as it is the source and poten- 
tiality of all things. Enneads V. b. 1. Nothing is lost by its creative 
activity. In Plotinus, the power of Spirit penetrates the whole 
spiritual world and the world of souls. 

sva-gunair nigudhdm: hidden in its own qualities. 1. The self-power 
of the Divine is hidden by the qualities of the Lord, devdtmand , 
tsvara-rupena avasthitdm. S. The power of manifestation (mdyd-sakli) 
is in the form of Isvara, the Supreme Lord. See also III. 2; IV. 1, 9 
and VI. 1. 

2. ihe self-power of the Divine is hidden by the three qualities of 
sultva, rajas and tamas. It is the cause of the creation, maintenance 
and dissolution of the world, devasya paramesvarasya dtma-bhCddm , 
jagad-udaya-sthili-laya-helu-bhutdm , brahma-visnu-sivdtmikdm. S. 

Cp. sarga-sthity-anta-kdrinlm brahma-visnu-sivdimikdm 

sa samjndm ydti bhagavdn eka eva jandrdanah. 

3. The qualities may refer to the modifications of prakrti , parusa 
and Isvara. brahmaparatanlraih prakrtyddi-visesanaih upddhibhih 
nigudhdm. S. 

devds cadtmd ca saktis ca yasya para-brahmanah avasthd-bheddh tarn 



I. 4. Svetcisvatara Upanisad 71 1 

prakrti-purusesvarandm sva-rupa-bhutam brahma-rupena avasthitdm 
parat-paratardm saktim karanam apasyan. S. 

See 1. 9 and 12. 

4. The power of the Lord to create, preserve and dissolve the world 
is looked upon as the cause - 

dcvdtmanah dyotandtmanah prakasa-svarupasya prajn an a -ghana-svaru 
pasya param-dtmanah jagad-ndaya-sthiti-laya-niyamana-visaydim 
saktim sdmarthyam apasyan. S. 

Brahman , the unconditioned Absolute, cannot be regarded as the 
cause of the world. It can only be described negatively. $ says, 
na karanam ndpy akdranam na cob hay am ndpy anubhayam na ca 
nimittam na copdddnam na cobhayam. S. 

So it is that the causation of the world is traced to may a or prakrti 
which is the power of Brahman conceived as Isvara. 


THE INDIVIDUAL SOUL IN DISTRESS 

4. tarn eha-nemim trvrtam sodasdntam satefrdheiram vimsati 
pratyardbhih 

astakaih sadbhih visva-ru paika- pasarii tri-mclrga-bhedani dvi- 
ni-mittaika-moham. 

4. (We understand) Him (as a wheel) with one felly, with 
three tires, sixteen ends, fifty spokes, twenty counter-spokes 
and six sets of eights, whose one rope is manifold, which has 
three different paths, whose one delusion (arises) from two 
causes. 

In this and the following verse , the world is compared to a rotating 
wheel or a llowing stream. I is chief characteristic is movement 
and these images bring it out. 

eka-ncmim: with one felly. Isvara is the one source of the manifested 
world. The root cause of the whole world’described in different ways 
has its locus in Isvara. 

ya ckah kdrandni nikhildny adhitisthati tam eka-ncmim , yonih 
karanam avydkrtam dkdsam parama-vyomamdyd-prakrtih saktis tiyno 
' vidyd ihdydjhdnam anrtam avyaktam ity evam ddi-sabdair abhilap- 
yamdnaikd kdrandvasthd , ncmir iva ncmih sarvddhdro yasyddhis- 
thdtur advitiyasya param-dlmanas tam eka-ncmim. S. 

Isvara uses prakrti for creation. 

It is usual to describe the world as a. wheel, ckam pddam noksipati. 
SanatsujdtJya VI. 11. • 

tl'vrtam: with three tires, threefold. Reference is to the three gunas, 
sattva, rajas and tanuis. 

sodasdntam: sixteen ends. R ference is to the five elements, live 
organs of perception (jndnendnya) , five organs of action (karmendrtya) 



712 The Principal Upanisads I. 4. 

and the mind (manas). Prakrti and its twenty-three evolutes are some- 
times divided into two groups of eight and sixteen. The group of 
eight is called prakrti or miila- prakrti and consists of prakfti, buddhi , 
aham-kdra and the five elements. The group of sixteen called vikdra 
consists of mind, the ten organs and the five objects of the senses. 
See M.B. XII. 7670, 11394-6; 11552 If. Buddha-carita XII. 18-19. 
This view is accepted by T attva-samdsa 1 and 2 ; Garbha IJ. 4 and 
Bhdgavata Parana VII. 7. 22. 

Sdmkhya Kdrika divides the 24 into three groups: 1. prakrti ; 
2. 7 called prakrli-vikrti ; and 3. 16 called vikrti . The last are called 
sodasaka gana (22). 

This expression may refer to the sixteen Katas mentioned in 
Prasna VI. 1. 

satdrdhdram: lift}' spokes. They represent the forces which move 
the wheel. £ mentions the five viparyayas, tama s, nioha, mahd-mohas 
tdmisra and andhatdmisra (they may also refer to ignorance, self-love, 
love, hatred and fear. Yoga Silt/ a I. 8 ; 1 1 . 2. Sdmkhya Sutra III. 37) ; 
twenty-eight asaktis or disabilities. Sdmkhya Sutra III. 28; the nine 
inversions of the trMis, satisfactions, Ibid III. 39; the eight inversions 
of the sidd/us or perfections (III. 40). The various subdivisions of 
viparyaya , asakti, tusti and s iddhi given in Sdmkhya Kdnkd 46 ff. 
form a set of fifty. See E. H. Johnston: Some Sdmkhya and Yoga 
Conceptions of the Svetdsvatara Upanisad. Journal of the Royal 
Asiatic Society, October 1940, pp. 855 If. 

pratyardibhih: counter-spokes. These are the ten organs of perception 
and action and their objects. Piasna IV. 8. It may also refer to the 
five elements with the five objects of the senses and the ten organs. 
See M.B. XII. 112. 38-41. 

astakaih sadblnh: six sets of eights. The six aie 1. prakrti'. with its 
eight causes of the five elements, mind (manas), intellect (buddhi), 
and self-sense (aham-kdta), see B G. VII. 4; 2. dhatu: with the eight 
constituents of the body; 3. aisvarya : lordship with its eight forms; 
4. bhdva: eight conditions, 5. dev a: gods with their eight classes; and 
6. dtma-guna: virtues which are also eight. 

anirnd mahimd caiva garitnd laghimd tat lid 
prdptih prdkamyam isitvam vasitvam ca stabhutayah. 
.vista-rupaika-pdsam: whose one rope is manifold. It is desire or Karma 
vvsva-rilpa, ndnd-rupa ekah kimdkhyah pdsah. S. Visva-rupa is often 
used for the soul which is subject to rebirth. I. 9; V. 7; Maitrl II. 5. 
V isvdkhya; V. 2, Visva and VII. 7, Visvarupa. fp. also M.B. XII i. 
1 12. 33, tathaiva bahu-rupatvdd visva-rupa iti srutah. 
tri-mfirga-bhcdam: which ha^ three different paths to salvation 
explained as dharma, religiousness, adharma, irreligiousness, and 
jhdna or wisdom 

moha: delusion or ignorance of self which is produced by two causes, 
goo^l or bad works. Both of them commit us to the wheel of rebirth. 



I. 6. Svetasvatara Upanisad 713 

5 . panca-sroto* mbum panca-yony ugra-vakrdmpanca-prdnormim 
panca- buddhyadi-muldm • 

pancavartdm panca-duhkhaugha-vegam pahca-sad-bheddm 
panca-parvdm adhimah. 

5. We meditate on him as a river of five streams, from five 
sources, fierce and crooked, whose waves are the five vital 
breaths, whose original source is the fivefold ’perception, with 
five whirlpools, an impetuous flood of five pains, divided into 
fifty kinds (of suffering) with five branches. 

The reality of the world and its relation to the Supreme Isvara 
are brought out here. 

panca-sroto' mbum: having for its water that which has five streams. 
srotas is ‘also used for sense organ. 

indriya: the stream of perceptions which each sense organ receives 
from the outer world. These streams flow from the senses to the mind 
which is said to have five streams. Cp. paiica-srotas in M.B. XII. 
7890-1, where Nllakantha identifies it with minder mancts. 

Yoga Sutra II. 2 mentions the five Mesas as avidyd , asmita, asakti, 
rdga, abhinivesa. 

Vacaspati Misra on Sdmkhya Kdrikd (47) explains panca-viparyaya- 
bheddh by a quotation from Vdrsaganya Pafica-parva-vidyd. See also 
Tattva-samdsa 14. Buddha-carita XII. 33. 

6. sarvdjive sarva-samsthe brhante asmin hamso bhrdmyate 

bralima-cakre . 

prthag dtmdnam preritaram ca matvd justas tatas tend- 
mrtatvam eti. 

6. In this vast brahma-wheel, which enlivens all things, in 
which all rest, the soul flutters about thinking that the self 
in him and the Mover (the Lord) are different. Then, when 
blessed by him, he gains life eternal. . 

asmin v. t asmin. 

Cp. B.U. I. 4. 10. 

Katha IV. 10; T.U. II. 7. 1; B.G. XVIII. 61. Vi suit Dhmma* has 
the following verses: 

pasyaty dtmdnam any am tu ydvad vai param-dtmamh 
tdvad sdmbhrdmyate jantur moliito nijakarmand: 
samksinascsakarmd tu param brahma prapnsyati 
abhed&natmanas suddham suddhatvdd aksayo b/rivet. 

Both Isvara and the individual soul belong to the manifested tvorld. 
brahma-rakram: see also VI. 1. Gaudapikla gives Brahman as a 
synonym for prakrti. See Gaudapada on Sdmkhya Kdrikd 22. The 
soul of man is a traveller v ndering in this cycle of Brahma which 
is huge, a totality of lives, a totality of states, thinking itself to be 



714 77 / 6 ’ Principal Upanisads I 9. 

different from the Impeller of the journey. The soul reaches its goal 
of immortality when it is accepted by the Supreme. 


SAVING KNOWLEDGE OF BRAHMAN 

7. udgitam ctat paramam tu brahma tasmims trayam sitpra- 
tisthdksaram ca. 

atriintaram brahma-vido' viditvd lind brahman i tat-pard 
yoni-muktah . 

7. This has been sung as the supreme Brahman and in it is 
the triad. It is the firm support, the imperishable. The knowers 
of Brahman by knowing what is therein become merged in 
Brahman , intent thereon and freed from birth. 

supratistlid: v. sapratisfhd, svapratistha. 

brahma-vido: v. veda-vido, knowers of the Vedas. 

paramam: Supreme, prapaiica-dharma-rahitam. £. 

trayam: the triad, the individual soul, the world and the cosmic lord. 

bhoktd , bhogyam, preritdram. S. 

8. samyuktam ctat ksaram aksaram ca vyaktavyaktam bharatc 

visvam Tsah. 

anTsas cdlmCi badhyate bhoktr-bhdvdl jhdtvii devam mucyate 
sarva-pdsaih. 

8. The Lord supports all this which is a combination of the 
mutable and the immutable, the manifest and the unmanifest. 
And the soul, not being the Lord, is bound because of his being 
an enjoyer. By knowing God (the soul) is freed from all fetters. 

See B.G. XV. 1G-17. The later doctrine of $aiva-!>iddh(inta with its 
distinctions of pain, pati, pdsa, the creature, the lord and the bond, 
is here suggested. 

9. jhdjnau dvdv ajdv tsamsdv ajd hy ekd bhoklr-bhogydrtha-'yuktd 
anantas cditmdi visva-nlpo hy akarld trayam yadd vindatc 

brahmam ctat. 

'9. There are two unborn ones, the knowing and the unknowing, 
the one all-powerful, the other powerless. Indeed there is 
(another) one who is unborn, connected with the enjoyer and 
the objects of enjoyment. And there is the infinite self, of 
universal form, non-active. When one finds out this triad, that 
is Brahman. 

The individual soul, the personal god and prakrti or nature are all 
contained in Brahman: jivesvara-prakrti-rupa-trayam brahma. £. The 



I. io. Svetcisvatara Upanisad 715 

doctrine of the triune unity elaborated later by Ramanuja is sug- 
gested here. For Ramanuja, God is the soul of nature as well as the 
soul of souls. See 1. 12. 

The distinctions of enjoyer, enjoyment and enjoyed are contained 
in Brahman: bhokly-bhoga-bhogya-rupam. S. 
akarty: non-active, kartylvddi-sariisdra-dharma-rahitah. S. 

In commenting on this verse, S makes out that the manifested 
world is due to the power of mdydi which is not independent of 
Brahman and so does not constitute a second to it. As it is responsible 
for the manifested world it is not a nonentity. Its nature is inde- 
scribable. 

mdydvyd anirvdeyatvena vaslutvdyogdt tathdha; 
esd hi bhagavan-mdiyd sad-asad-vyakti-varjitd. £. 

10. ksaram pradhdnam amrtdksaram harah ksardlmdnav isate 
deva ekah 

tasydbhidhydndd yojamit taltva-bhdvdd bhuyas ednte visva- 
mdyd-nivrttih. 

10. What is perishable is the pradhdna (’primary matter). 
What is immortal and imperishable is Hara (the Lord). Over 
both the perishable and the soul the one God rules. By medi- 
tating on Him, by uniting with Him, by reflecting on His being 
more and more, there is complete cessation from the illusion 
of the world. 

hara: one of the names of Siva; S explains hara as one who removes 
ignorance, avidydder harandt. 

Cp. Siva-mahimna Stotra: 

bahula-rajasc visvotpattau bliavdya namo namah 
prabala-tamasc tat-samhdre hardya namo namah 
jana-sukha-kyte sattvodriktau myddya namo namah 
pramahasi padc nistraignnye sii'dya namo namah. 

Salutations toJBluiva or Bralnna in whom rajas preponderates for 
the creation of the universe, salutation to Hara or Siva in whom 
tamas preponderates for the destruction (of the universe). Salutation 
to Mrda or Visnu in whom saliva preponderates for giving happiness* 
to people. Salutation to Siva who is effulgent and beyond the thiee 
attributes. 

by meditating on him: The way by which the soul is awakened to 
the divine core? of his being is abhidhydna , an intense contemplation 
of the vSaviour God. It leads to contemplative union with the bbject 
and identification with his essential reality. This contemplation is 
introspection, an intimate worship, intuition of one’s own inner 
being. IV. 5. dev am svacitfast ’am apdisya. The embodied jiva becomes 
one with God. II. 14. tad dtma-lattvam prasamiksya dchi cko bhdvate. 



716 The Principal Upanisads I. 12 

visva-mdyd : illusion of the world, sukha-duhkha-mohatmakd&esa- 
pmpanca-riipa-mdyd. S. Cp. Vasubandhu’s A bhidharmakosa: abodhim 
dhydndntye VI. 24. When we reach kaivalya , there is a total 
cessation of the world. The contemplator rises above the cosmic 
structure and attains braluna-nirvana. 

11. jndtvd devam sarvapdsdpahdnih ksTnaih klcsair janma-mrtyn- 
pr aha nih 

tasydbhidhydndt trtJyam delui-bhede visvaisvaryam kcvala 
dpta-kdmah. 

11. By knowing God there is a falling off of all fetters; when 
the sufferings arc destroyed, there is cessation of birth and 
death. By meditating on Him, there is the third state; on the 
dissolution of the body, universal lordship; being alone, his 
desire is fulfilled. 

This verse describes the different sides and stages of liberation. 
Negatively-' it is freedom from birth and death; positively it is 
oneness with Isvara, so long as there is the manifested world and 
oneness with Brahman when the manifested world ceases to exist. 
tasya paramesvarasya, abhidhydndd deha-bhede sarirapdtottara-kdlam 
arcirddind deva-yana-pathd gatvd paramcsvara-sdyujyam gatasya 
tytiyam virdd-riipdpcksaydvydkrta-parama-vyoma-kdrancsvardvastham 
visvaisvarya-laksanam phalnm bliavati, sa tad amibhuya tatraiva 
nirvisesam dtmdnam matvd kcvalo nirasta-samastaisvarya-tad- 
upddhisiddhir avydkrta-paramavyoma-kdranesvardtmaka-trtiydvastham 
visvaisvaryam hitvd, dpta-kdma dtma-kdmah purndyiandddvitlya-brah- 
ma-rupo ' vatisthale . £. He also quotes from Siva-dharmottara: 

dhydndd aisvaryam atulam , aisvarydd snkham uttamam, 
jndnena tat parityajya vidcho mnktim dpnuydt. 

A distinction is made here between dhydna or meditation which 
leads to lordship and jndna or wisdom which leads to liberation. 
The former, which is the contemplation of the heart, the rapture of 
devotion, is a stage to the latter, which is the contemplation of 
intelligence, the blaze of discernment. So long as the cosmic process 
continues, the Personal Lord presides over it and the freed individual 
# oecomes a co-worker with Him. When the cosmic process terminates, 
the Personal Lord lapses into the Absolute and so does the freed 
individual. He knows as does the Lord that he is the manifestation 
of the Absolute, even when he is functioning in the world. 

12., dad jheyam nityam evdtmasamstham ndtah par am vedi- 
tavyam hi kincit 

bhoktd bhogyam preritdram ca maivd sarvam proktam 
tri-vidham brahmam etat. 

I2\ That Eternal which rests in the self should be known. 



I. 15. Svetdsvatara Upanisad 717 

Truly there is nothing beyond this to be known. By knowing 
the enjoyer, the object of enjoyment and the mover (of all), 
everything has been said. This is the threefold Bralimui. 

The individual soul, the object of enjoyment, prakrti and the 
Supreme Lord Isvara are all forms of Brahman, 
dtma-sariistham: which rests in the self. 

Cp. Katha V. 12. 

Siva-dharmottara says: sivam atmani pasyanti pvatimdsu na yoginah. 
The Yogins see the Lord in the self and not in images. 

13. vahner yathci yoni-gaiasya murtih na drsyate naiva ca 
linga-ndsah . 

sabhuya eve’ndhana-yoni-grhyah tad vo’bhayatii vai prana- 
vena dehe. 

13. As the form of fire when latent in its source is not seen 
and yet its seed is not destroyed, but may be seized again and 
again in its source by means of the drill, so it is in b<ath cases. 
The self has to be seized in the body by means of the syllable 
aum. 

Fire though not seen at fust is there all the time; it becomes visible 
by friction; even so the Self is there all the time though unperceived 
by those in a state oi ignorance, it is perceived when by meditation 
on the syllable aum , we subdue the lower self. The vision of the Self 
is achieved by means of the p) inava, aum. 
indhana: the .stick used for drilling. 
yoni: the underwood in which the stick is drilled. 

14. sva deham aranim krtva pranavam co itardranim 
dhyd na-n 1 rmathan dbhydsdl dev am pasycn ni gild l nival. 

14. By making one’s body the lower friction stick and the 
syllable aum the upper friction stick, by practising the drill 
(or friction) of meditation one may see the God, hidden as it 
were. 

In o\ ercoming the obstacles which prevent the realisation* of 
Brahman on the part of the individual, suffering is invoked. # 
We are asked to meditate on Godhead anti biing Him out of the 
recesses of our lieai t. 

Cp. Kaivalya 1 . 11. 

15. tile sn tailam dadhiniva savpir apas srotassu aranim 

cdgnili. 

evam citmdlmani grhyate’sau satyenai naiii tapasd yo * 
nupasyati. 



yiS , The Principal Upanisads i b. 

15. As oil in sesamum seeds, as butter in cream, as water 
in riverbeds, as fire in friction sticks, so is the Self seized in 
one’s own soul if one looks for Him with truthfulness and 
austerity. 

srotas: river-bed. Usually a stream, here the dry bed of a stream 
which, if dug into, will yield water. 

tapasd: by austerity. The divine in us becomes manifest only when 
we subject ourselves to certain disciplines. The Divine operates in 
us but it requites effort to make it shine forth. A later Upanisad 
says that the Divine dwells in 11s as ghee in milk but even as ghee is 
obtained after the process of churning, the churning of the mind is 
necessary to reveal the inner splendour. 

ghrtam iva pay as i nigudham bJiutc bhute ca vasati vijildnam , 
satatam manthdavyam manasd nuinthdna-bhutcna. 

16. sarvavydpinam dtmdnam ksJrc sarpir ivdrpitam 
ditma-vidyd-tapo-mfdamtad brahmo panisat par am , tad brah- 

\ mopanigat par am. 

16. The Self which pervades all things as butter is contained 
in milk, which is the root of self-knowledge and austerity, that 
is the Pra Junan, the highest mystic doctrine. That is the 
highest mystic doctrine. 

brahmopanisat: the mystic doctrine of Brahman. 

Like butter hidden in milk does the eternal wisdom dwell in each 
and every object; let there be constant churning by the churning 
stick of the mind. Brahma-bindu U. 

Cp. Bhdgavata: 

‘When men realise me as present in all beings, as latent lire is in 
wood, from that moment they discard confusion.’ 
yadd tit sarva-bhfdcsu ddnisv agnim iva sthitam 
praticaksila mam loko jahydil tarhyaiva kasmalam. 

lll.q. 32. 

As fragrance is in the flower, as butter in milk, as (hi in sesamum 
seeds, as gold in the reef of gold (so God dwells in all objects). 
DJwana-bindu U. 5. 

puspa-madhye yathd gandham payo-madhyc yatiid ghrtam 
tila-madhyc yathd tailam pdsanesv iva J< din can am. 



II. 5- Svetdivatara Upanisad 719 

CHAPTER 11 

INVOCATION TO SAVITR 

1. yuhjdnah prathamam man as tattvdya savitd dhiyali 
agner jyotir nicdyya prthivya adhyabharat. 

1. Savitr (the inspirer) first controlling mind and thought for 
truth discerned the light of Agni (Fire) and brought it out of 
the earth. 

The five introductory verses are taken from Taittirlya Samhitd 

IV. 1. 1. 1-5; Vdjasaneyi Samhitd XI. 1-5; datapath a Brdhmana 

V. 3. 1. 12-17. 

The U^anisads claim to continue the tradition of the Vedas. 
It is an established convention in Indian thought to make out that 
the greatest innovations are only the developments of the old. Even 
the Buddha said that his teaching was only a restatement of the 
four ancient truths, catvdn drya-sutydni. See Dhammaparfa, Intro- 
duction. 

2. yuktena manasd vayam devasya savituh save 
suvargeydya saktyd. 

2. With mind controlled we are under the command of the 
divine Savitr that we may have strength for (obtaining) heaven. 

suvargeydya : for (obtaining) heaven, svarga-prdpti-hetu-bhiltdya. 

3. yuklvdya manasd dev an suvaryato dhiyd divam 
brhaj jyotih karisyatas savitd prasuvdti tan . 

3. May Savitr, having controlled through thought the gods 
that rise up to the bright heaven, inspire them to make a great 
light to shine. 

4. yuhjatc mana uta ynhjate dhitfo viprd viprasya brhato 

vipascitah 

vi hotrd dadhc vayundvid eka in main devasya savituh 
baristutih. • 

4. The sages of the great all-knowing control their mind arud 
control their thoughts. The one who knows the law has ordered 
the ceremonial functions. Great is the praise of the divine Savitr. 

5. yuje vdm'brahma purvyam namobhir visloka etu pathy eva 

sureh 

irnvantu visve amrtasya putrd d ye dhdmdni divydni 
tasthuh. 

5. I join your ancient prayer with adoration. Let my verse 



720 The Principal Upanisads II. 8 

go forth like the path of the sun. May all the sons of the 
Immortal listen, even those who have reached their heavenly 
abodes. 

amytasya put rah: sons of the immortal. 

Cp. ‘Ye arc all children of light and the children of the day.' 
I Thessalonians V. 5; Hebrews III. 6. 
deho devdlayah p) ohtah jivah sivo hi kevalah. 

6. agnir yatrdhhimathyalc vdyitr yalrddhirudhyate 
somo yatrdtiricyate Ultra samjdyatc manah. 

6. Where the fire is kindled, where the wind is directed, 
whtie the soma flows over, there the mind is bom. 

See B.G. X. n. 

Mind is born where the routine or automatism is broken. 

7. savitra prasavena juseta hralima puny am 
tatrc yonim krnavase na hi te purtam aksipat. 

7. With Savitr as the inspircr, one should delight in the 
ancient prayer. Make your source (dwelling) there. Your work 
will not affect you. 

See C.U. V. 24. 5; B G. IV. 37. 


THE PRACTICE OF YOGA 

8. trirunnatam sthdpya samam sanram hrdindriydni manasd 
samnivesya. 

brahmodupena pratareta vidvdn srotdmsi sarvdni bhaydva- 
hdmi. 

8. Holding the body steady with the three (upper parts, 
chest, neck and head) erect, causing the senses and the mind 
to enter into the heart, the wise man should cross by the boat 
of Brahman all the streams which cause fear. 

' See B.G. VI. 13. 
samnivesya v. samnirudhya. 

trini: three, urognvasirdmsi , chest, neck and head. S. At the time 
of meditation we must hold the trunk, the head and the neck in a 
straight line. The theory of asanas or postmes is a development of 
this view. The control of the senses by means of mind answers to 
the later pratyahdra. 

Body, mind and spirit form one whole and here what is known 
as bodily prayer is mentioned. 

Brchma: the syllable aum. brahma-sabdam pranavarh varnayanti. S. 



II. ii. Svetaivatara Upanisad 721 

9. prdndn prapidyeha samyukta-cestah ksine prane nasikayo* 
cchvasita * • 

dustdsva-yuktam iva vaham enarh vidvan mano dhdrayetd 
pramattah. 

9. Repressing his breathings here (in the body), let him who 
has controlled all movements, breathe through his nostrils, with 
diminished breath ; let the wise man restrain his mind vigilantly 
as (he would) a chariot yokpd with vicious horses. 

Sec B.G. V. 27. The verse refers to prdndydma or breath-control. 

10. same sucau sarkard-vahni-vdlukd-vivarjite sabda-jalasrayd- 

dibhih. 

mhno’nukiile na tu caksu-pldane guhd-nivdtdsrayane prayo- 
jayet . 

10. In a level clean place, free from pebbles, fire and gravel, 
favourable to thought by the sound of water and other features, 
not offensive to the eye, in a hidden retreat ppotectecf from the 
wind, let him perform his exercises (let him practise Yoga). 

See B.G. VI. 11; Maitri VI. 30. 1 

The importance of physical surroundings is brought out here. 
Kurma Parana mentions jantuvydpta and sasdbda as unfitting a 
place for meditation. II. 11; M.B. says nirjane vane. XIV. 56 7; 
also nadipulinasdyl, nadltlraratis ca. XIII. O473. The place for 
meditation should be noiseless and not noisy, sabda is said to be' a 
mistake for sadd, a place green with young grass. 

11. mhdra-dhumdrkdnildnjldndm khadyota-vidytit-sphatika- 

sastnam. 

etcini rupdni purassardni bralimany abhivyaktikarclni yoge. 

11. Fog, smoke, sun, wind, lire, fireflies, lightning, crystal 
moon, these are the preliminary forms which produce the 
manifestation of Brahman in Yoga. 

We road in the Lahkdvatdra Siitra: T11 his exercise, the Yggin 
sees (imaginatively) the form of the sun or the moon or something' 
looking like a lotus, or the underworld or various forms such as 
skyfire and the like. When all those are put aside and there is a state 
of imagelessness, then a condition in conformity with suchness 
(bhuta-tathatd) presents itself and the Buddhas will come together 
from all their countries and with their shining hands will touch the 
head of the benefactor/ 

See also Mandala Brahmana U. II. 1. 

ddau tdrakavad drsyate, tato ' jradarpanam , tat ah paripurnacandra - 
mandalam, tato navaratnaprabhdmandalam , tato madhydhndrka - 



722 The Principal Upanisads II. 12. 

mandalamtato vahnisikhdmandalam . . . sphatika, dhumra, bindu t ndda , 
kola, naksatra , khadyuta, dlpa, netra , suvarna nava-ratnddi-prabhd 
dysyante. 

At first appears a sign like that of a star, then gradually appear 
a diamond mirror, thereafter a full lunar circle, thereafter a circle 
of the lustre of the nine germs, thereafter the midday sun, thereafter 
a circle of flame, then a crystal, a black circle, a dot, sound, digit, 
star, sun, lamp, eye, the lustre of gold and nine gems are seen. 

Mystics speak of visions and auditions. Truth is seen through the 
mirror of human reflection. The mind of man is limited by the nature 
of its possessor, by the kind of man he is. What thinks is the man, 
not the mind. Our senses make definite what is in its nature in- 
definite. We reduce the invisible to our level. As we cannot for long 
dwell on the heights without suffering from vertigo, we descend to 
the sense world and use images belonging to it. Though God trans- 
cends all forms He may still use them and convey His presence 
through them. These images are sent to comfort and instruct us. 

This verse makes out that the images are not the subjective 
activities of the human self. Besides, many of these visions have a 
symbolic character. The words and phrases we use to describe 
impressions which external things make upon us are employed to 
describe the events of our spiritual life. It is a process of spiritual 
materialization. Truths of the spiritual life cannot be adequately 
represented except through symbols. Saint Ilildegrand (1098-1180) 
had visions and she repeatedly assures us: ‘These visions which I 
saw I beheld neither in sleep nor in dream, nor in madness nor with 
my carnal eyes, nor with the ears of the flesh, nor in hidden places; 
but wakeful, alert, with the eyes of the spirit and with the inward 
ears I perceived them in open view and according to the will of God. 
And how this was compassed is hard indeed for human flesh to 
search out/ Quoted in Studies in the History and Method of Science , 
edited by Charles Singer (1917), p. 53. Suso, Theresa, Muhammad 
and many others had these. visions. 

1 2. prthvyapyatejo nilakhc samutthitc pahedtmake yoga-ganc 
pravrtte . 

na tasya rogo na jar d na mrtyuh prdptasya yogagni-mayam 
sariram . 

12. When the fivefold quality of Yoga is produced, as earth, 
water, fire, air and ether arise, then there is no longer sickness, 
no old age, no death to him who has obtained a body made 
of the fire of Yoga. 

This verse and the next emphasise the physical aspects of Yoga. 
Through Yoga we try to build up a healthy and clean body. We 
attempt to make the very substance of our body incorruptible. 



II. i6. Svetdsvatara Upanisad 723 

Four stages of yoga, arambha, ghata , paricaya and nispatti are 
described in verses 13, 14, 15, and 16 respectively. In securing 
bodily health we have the commencement of the yoga, yoga-pravrtti. 
In attaining freedom from sorrbw he reaches the second stage. In 
the third stage the traces of duality disappear, mahd-sunyam tato 
bhati sarva-siddhi-samasrayam. In the fourth stage there is the 
identity of the individual with the Supreme Self. The Yogin does 
not become disembodied. The elements composing his body are 
elevated to the level of their subtleness, suksmatva. He leaves his 
gross body and attains an indefectible one. It is a consciousness-body 
akin to that of the Supreme with whom the contemplator has 
identified himself through meditation. 

13. laghutvam arogyam alolupatvam varna-prasddarh svara-sau- 
• sthavam ca. 

gandhas subho mutra-parlsam alpani yoga-pravrttim pratha- 
mdm vadanti. 

13. Lightness, healthiness, steadiness, clearness t of com- 
plexion, pleasantness of voice, sweetness of colour, and slight 
excretions, these, they say, are the first results of the progress 
of yoga. 

THE VISION OF GOD 

14. yathaiva bimbam mrdayo paliptam tejomayam bhrdjate tat 

sudhdntam. 

tad vdtmatattvam prasamiksya dchl ekali krtdrtho bhavate 
vlta-sokah. 

14. Even as a mirror stained by dust shines brightly when 
it has been cleaned, so the embodied one when he has seen the 
(real) nature of the Self becomes integrated, of fulfilled purpose 
and freed from sorrow. 

15. yaddtma-tattvena tu brahma-tattvam dTpopamcne'lia yuktah 

prapasyet 

ajam dhruvam sarva-tattvair visuddham jndtvd devatn 
mucyate sarva-pdsaih. 

15. When by means of the (real) nature of his self he seos 
as by a lamp here the (real) nature of Brahman , by knowing 
God who is unborn, steadfast, free from all natures, he is 
released from 3.II fetters. 

THE IMMANENCE OF GOD 

lb. esa ha devah pradiso’”U sarvdh purvo hi jatah sa u garblie 
antah. 



724 The Principal Upanisads II. 17, 

sa evajdtah sajanisyamdnahpratyahjandms tisthati sarvato- 
mukhah. 

16. He, indeed, is the God who pervades all regions, He is 
the first-born and lie is within the womb. He has been bom 
and he will be born. He stands opposite all persons, having his 
face in all directions. 

See Vdjasaneyi Samhitn, 32. 4. 

purvo hi jdtah: is the first born as Hiranya-garbha. 

17. yo devo’gnau yo’psu yo visvam bhuvanam dvivesa, 

ya osadhisu yo vanaspatisu tasmai devdya namo namah. 

• 17. The God who is in fire, who is in water, who has entered 
into the whole world (the God), who is in plants, v(ho is in 
trees, to that God be adoration; yea, be adoration. 



HI. 3 - 


Svetahatara Upanisad 


7 2 5 


CHAPTER III 

THE HIGHEST REALITY 

i. ya eko jdlavdn Tsata TsanTbhih sarvdn lokdn Tsata TsanTbhih , 
ya evaika udbhave sambhave ca, ya etad vidur amrtds te 
bhavanti. 

1. The one who spreads the net, who rules with his ruling 
powers, who rules all the worlds with his ruling powers, who 
remains one (identical), while (things or works) arise and 
continue to exist, they who know that become immortal. 

jdlavdn: who spreads the net. § identifies jdla or net with may a. 

2. eko hi mdro na dvitlydya tasthur ya iman lokdn Tsata 

TsanTbhih. 

pratyah jandn tisthati sancnkocdnta-kdle samsrjya visva 
bhuvandni gopdh. 

2. Truly Rudra is one, there is no place for a second, who 
rules all these worlds with his ruling powers. He stands opposite 
creatures. He, the protector, after creating all worlds, withdraws 
them at the end of time. 

The Highest Reality is identified with Rudra who is assigned 
the three functions of creation, protection or maintenance and 
dissolution. 

In R.V. Rudra is the personification of the destructive powers 
of nature, exemplified in storm > and lightning. In the later portions 
of the Veda lie is described as Siia, the auspicious, as Mahadeva, the 
great god. Even in the R.V. it is said that he dwells in mountains, 
that he has braided hair, that he wears a hide. 
pratyah: opposite. He lives as pratyag-dtmin. 

sarvdms ca jandn praty-antarah prati-purusam avasthitah. S who also 
quotes 'rupam rupam piatirupo babhuva 

3. viivatas caksur nta visvato mukho visvato bdhur utavisvatds- 

pdt. J 

sam bdhubhydm dhamati sampatatrair dydvd-bhumi janayan 
deva ekaJi. 

3. That one God, who has an eye 011 every side, a face on 
every side, an arm on every side, a foot on every side, creating 
heaven and earth forges them together by his arms and his 
wings. 

See R.V. X. Si. 3; AtJuirva Veda XIII. 2. 2 


:0; l ’ Ti j a satiny i Samhita 



726 The Principal Upanisads III. 6. 

XVII. 19; Taittirlya Samhitd IV. 6. 2. 4; Taittirlya Aranyaka X 1. 3. 
dhamati: forges. § means by it samyojayati, he joins men with 
arms and birds with wings. 

bdhubhydm: with arms. As it is in the dual number, Samkarananda 
takes it for dharma and adharma. 

Patatraih : with wings. Samkarananda means by it the five chief 
elements patana-silaih pancikrta-mahd-bhutaxh. 

bdhubhydm , vidyd-kanndbhydm t patatraih vdsana-rupaih saihdhamati 
d 1 payati . X dray a na-dipi hd . 

4. yo dcvdndm prabhavas codbluivas ca visvddhipo mdro 
maharsih 

hiranya-garbham janaydmdsa pdrvam sa no buddhyd 
subhayd samyunaktu. r 

4. He who is the source and origin of the gods, the ruler of 
all, Rudra, the great seer, who of old gave birth to the golden 
germ [Hiranya-garbha ) , may He endow us with clear under- 
standing*. 

See IV. 12. 

Hiranya-garbha is the person endowed with clear ideas, hitam 
ati-ramanxyam aty-ujjvalam jndnam garbhah antas-sdrahyasya tam. $>. 
In verse 3, the stress is on the cosmic form virdt svarupa ; here on 
the cosmic spirit, the world-soul, Hiranya-garbha. 


PRAYERS TO RUDRA 

5. yd tc rudra sivd tanur aghordpdpakdsim 

tayd nas tanuvd santamayd giniantdbhicdkaiihi. 

5. Rudra, your body which is auspicious, unterrifying, 
showing no evil — with that most benign body, O dweller in the 
mountains, look upon (manifest yourself to) us. 

For this and the following verse, see Vajasaneyi Samhitd XVI. 2-3. 
auspicious body: this is not identical with his absolute reality. It is 
analogous to the Buddhist dharmakaya. 

m 

6. yam isum girisanta haste bibharsy astave 

sivdm giritra turn hum ma himsih purusam jagat. 

6. O Dweller among the mountains, make, auspicious the 
arrow which thou holdest in thy hand to throw. O Protector 
of the mountain, injure not man or beast. 

purusam asmadiyam jagad api krtsnam . S. the human and the other 
thun human. 



Svetdsvatara Upanisad 


III. io. 


727 


KNOWLEDGE OF THE SUPREME AS THE WAY TO 
ETERNAL LIFE 

7. tatah param brahma param brhantam yatha-nikdyam sar- 
va-bhutesu gudham. 

visvasy aikam parivestitdram isam tam jhdtvdmrtd bhavanti. 

7. Higher than this is Brahman , the supreme, the great hidden 
in all creatures according to their bodies, the one who envelopes 
the universe, knowing Him, the Lord, (men) become immortal. 

tatah param: higher than this. This may refer to the Vedic God 
Rudra or the manifested world. The reference here is to Isvara who 
is higher than H iranya-garbha and Virdt-rupa, to the indwelling Lord, 
antary druin, to the Supreme Personal God, paramesvara. 

8. vedaham etam purusam mahantam adilya-varnam tamasah 

parastdt 

tam eva viditvd atimrtyum eti ndmyah % panthd vidyate * 
yandya. 

8. I know the Supreme Person of sunlike colour (lustre) 
beyond the darkness. Only by knowing Him does one pass over 
death. There is no other path for going there. 

See VI. 15; B.G. VIII. 9. ndnyah panthd: no other path, pantha the 
way, the path; pathikrt, the road-maker. 
ayandya: for going (to salvation) . 
apavarga-gamandya samsdrdbdhch pdra-gamandya vd. 

The sage Svetasvatara says that he has seen the Supreme who 
dwells beyond all darkness, that he has crossed the world of samsara. 

9. yasmat param ndparam asti kiheit yasmdn ndmyo na 

jyayo’sti kiheit. 

vrksa iva stabdho divi tisthaty ekas tene'dam purnam 
purusena sarvam. 

9. Than whom there is naught else higher, than whom there 
is naught smaller, naught greater, (the) one stands like a 4 rec^ 
established in heaven, by Him, the Person, is this whole universe 
filled. 

See Katha VI. 1. 

divi : in heaven Jiyotanat mani sve mahimni, 5 ; established in his own 
greatness. 

10. tato yad uttar atar am tad arupam andmayam 

ya etad vidur amrtas te bhavanti , athetare duhkham 
evdpiyanti. 


AA 



728 The Principal Upanisads III. 14. 

10. That which is beyond this world is without form and 
without suffering. Those who know that become immortal, but 
others go only to sorrow. 

THE COSMIC PERSON 

11. sarvanana-siro-gnvah sarva-bhuta-guhdsayah 
sarva-vydpl sa bhagavdn tasmat sarva-gatai iivah. 

11. He who is in the faces, heads and necks of all, who dwells 
in the cave (of the heart) of all beings, who is all-pervading, 
He is the Lord and therefore the omnipresent Siva . 

See R.V. X. 81. 3; X. 90. 1. 

§ explains Bhagavat by citing the verse : 

aisvaryasya samagrasya, dharmasya, yasasah sriyah 
jhdna-vairdgyayos caiva sannam bhaga itlrana. 

He who has the six qualities of complete lordship, righteousness, 
fame, prosperity, v'isrtom and renunciation is Bhagavan. 

12. mahdn prabhur vai purusah sattvasyaisa pravartakah 
sunirmaldm imam prdptim Tsano jyotir avyayah. 

12. That person indeed is the great lord, the impeller of the 
highest being. (He has the power of) reaching the purest 
attainment, the ruler, the imperishable light. 

saliva: highest being. For § the internal organ, antah-karana. 

• 13. angustha-matrah puruso’ntardtmd sada janandm hrdaye 
sannivistah 

hrdd manvlso manasdbhiklpto ya dad vidur amrtds te 
bhavanti . 

13. A person of the measure of a thumb is the inner self, 
ever dwelling in the heart of men. He is the lord of the know- 
ledge framed by the heart and the mind. They who know that 
become immortal. 

manvlso: the lord of knowledge, jndnesah. S. v. manisd, by thought. 
This reading ‘ hyddmanlsd manasdbhiklpto ' is adopted by Sariika- 
rananda, Narayana and Vijnana-bhiksu. 

14. sahasra-slrsa purusah sahasrdiksah sahasra-pdt 
sa bhnmim visvato vrtvd aty atisthad dasdngulam. 

14. The person has a thousand heads, a thousand eyes, a 
thousand feet. He surrounds the earth on all sides and stands 
ten fingers’ breadth beyond. 



III. ig. Svetd&vatara Upani§ad 729 

Sec R.V. X. 90. 1. 

dasdngulam : ten fingers 1 breadth, anantam , apdram. $. endless, 
shoreless. Though the Supreme manifests Himself in the cosmos, lie 
also transcends it. 

15. purusa evedam sarvam y ad bhutam yac ca bhavyam 
utdmrtatvasyesdno yad annendtirohati. 

15. The person is truly this whole world, whatever has been 
and whatever will be. He is also the lord of immortality, and 
whatever grows up by food. 

See R.V. X. 90. 2. 

Sayana explains that he is the lord of all the immortals, i.e. the gods, 
because they grew to their high estate by means of food. 

16. sarvatah pdni-pddam tat sarvato’ ksi-siro-mukham 
sarvatah srutimal loke sarvam dvrtya tisthati. 

16. On every side it has a hand and a foot, on every side an 
eye, a head and a face. It has an ear everywhere. It stands 
encompassing all in the world. 

See B.G. XIII. 13. 

1 7. sarvendriya-gunabhdsam sarvendriya-vivarjitam 
sarvasya prabhum Isdnam sarvasya saranam brhat. 

17. Reflecting the qualities of all the senses and yet devoid 
of all the senses, it is the lord and ruler, it is the great refuge 
of all. 

See B.G. XIII. 14. 

18. nava-dvdre pure dehi hamso lildyate bahih 
vast sarvasya lokasya sthdvarasya carasya ca. 

18. The embodied soul in the city of nine gates sports 
(moving to and fro) in the outside (world), the controller of 
the whole world, of the stationary and the moving. 

See Katha, V. 1; B.G. V. 13. 

hamsa: soul. It is the Universal Spirit. 

hamsah paramatmd hanty avidydlmakam karyam. $. 

19. a-pdni-pddojavanogrhltdpasyaty acaksuhsa srnoty akarnah , 
so vetti vedyam na ca tasyasti vetta , tam dhur agfyam 

purusam mahdntam. 

19. Without foot or hand (yet) swift and grasping, he sees 
without eye, he hears without ear. He knows whatever is. to 



73° The Principal Upanisads HI. 21. 

be known; of him there is none who knows. They call him the 
Primeval, the Supreme Person. 

20. anor anlycin mahato mahTydn dtmd guhdyam nihito’sya 
jantoh 

tam akratum pasyali vTta-soko dhdtnh prasdddn mahimanam 
tsam. 

20. Subtler than the subtle, greater than the great is the 
Self that is set in the cave of the (heart) of the creature. One 
beholds Him as being actionless and becomes freed from sorrow, 
when through the grace of the Creator he sees the Lord and 
His majesty. 

See Taittiriya Ar any aka X. 10-1. 

akratum: being actionless, visaya-bhoga-samkalpa-rahitam. £. 
dhdtnh prasdddt: through the grace of the Creator. 
dhdtu-prasdddt: through the clarity born of sense-control. Sense 
organs are said to be dlidtii. 

21. veddliam etam ajaram purdnam sarvdtmdnam sarva-gatam 

vibhntvdt. 

jamna-nirodham pravadanty yasya brahmavddino’bhiva- 
danti nityam. 

21. I know this undecaying, ancient (primeval) Self of all, 
present in everything on account of infinity. Of whom they 
declare, there is stoppage of birth. The expounders of Urahman 
proclaim Him to be eternal. 

janma-nirodham: stoppage of birth. 

For whom the foolish think there are birth and death. 
yasya janma-nirodham mudhdh pravadanti . Samkardnanda. 

Nd ray ana Dipikd suggests a reading, janma-nirodham 71a vadanti 
yasya. For whom birth and death are not spoken. 

Sometimes it is used for the creation and destruction of the world 
yasya paramesvarasya karma jagatah janma-samhdrau. Vijhdna - 
bhiksu. 

This chapter makes out that the Impersonal and the Personal, 
*3rahman and Isvara are not two different entities but the same 
in two aspects. 



IV. 2 . 


Svetasvatara Upanisad 


73i 


CHAPTER TV 

THE ONE GOD OF THE MANIFOLD WORLD 

1. ya eko'varno bahudhd sakti-yogad varnan anekdn niliitdrtho 
dadhdti. 

vicaiti cante visvam adau sa devah sa no buddhya subhay d 
samynnaktu. 

1. He who is one, without any colour, by the manifold 
exercise of his power distributes many colours in his hidden 
purpose and into whom in the beginning and at the end the 
universe is gathered, may He endow us with a clear under- 
standing* 

avarnah: devoid of determinations, nirvisesah. S. 

nihitdrthah: in his hidden purpose. Without any motive or personal 

interest, agrhlta-prayojanah , svdrtha-n irapeksah . 

ante: in the end. V. saute . The world was inactive, unmanifest 

before creation. 

2. tad evagnis tad ddityas tad vdyus tad u candy amah 
tad eva sukram tad brahma tad dpas tat prajdpatih. 

2. That indeed is Agni (fire), that is Aditya (the sun), that 
is Vayu (the wind) and that is the moon. That, indeed, is the 
pure. That is Brahma, lhat is the waters. That is Prajd-pati 
(the lord of creation). 

See Vajasaneyi Samhitd, XXXII. 1. 

This verse occurs in Mahandvayana U. in the following way: 
yad ekam avyaktam ananta-rupam visvam purdnam tamasah 
parastdt 

tad eva rtam tad u sat yam dims tad etad brahma paramam kavindm 
istdpfirtam bahudhd jdtamjdyamdnam visvam bibharti bhuvanasya 
ndbhih 

tad evagnis tad vdyus tat suryas tad u candramdh 

tad eva sukram amytam tad brahma tad dpas sa prajd-patih 

This verse indicates that the different Vedic gods are not inde- 
pendent but arc forms of the One Supreme. 
tad: that, self-nature, dtma-tattvam. S. 
sukram: pure, alternatively the starry firmament. 
suddham any ad api dlptiman naksatrddi. 

§ makes Brahma, Hiranya-garbhdtmd and Praja-pati virdd-dtma. 
Vijnanabhiksu makes out that the Supreme through the power of 
maya created the manifestations and entered into them and is 
called by their names: svamayayd adhidaivikopddhln samasti-rupdn 



732 The Principal Upanisads IV. 5. 

srstva tesv anupravisya agnyddityddyakhydm labdhvd sthito * ptsvara 
evety aha. 

3. tv am stri tv am pitman asi , tv am kumdra uta vd human; 
tvam jirno dandena vahcasi, tvam jdto bhavasi visvato- 
mukhah. 

3. You are woman. You are man. You are the youth and 
the maiden too. You, as an old man, totter along with a staff. 
Being born you become facing in every direction. 

See Atharva Veda , X. 8. 27. 

4. nilah patahgo harito lohitdksas tadid-garbha rtavas samudrdh 
anddimat tvam vibhutvena vartase yato jdtdni bhuvanani 

visvd. 

4. You are the dark-blue bird, you are the green (parrot) 
with red eyes. You are (the cloud) with the lightning in its 
womb. You are the seasons and the seas. Having no beginning 
you abide through omnipresence. (You) from whom all worlds 
are born. 

patangah: bird, bhramarah , bee. S 

THE UNIVERSAL SELF AND THE INDIVIDUAL SOUL 

< 

5. ajdm ekdm lohita-sukla-krsndm bahvih prajdh srjamdndm 

sarupah 

ajo hy cko jusamdno' nuscte jahdty endm bhukta-bhogdm 
ajo’nyah. 

5. The One unborn, red, white and black, who produces 
manifold offspring similar in form (to herself), there lies the 
one unborn (male) delighting. Another unborn gives her up, 
having had his enjoyment. 

See, 3 .S. I. 4-8. 

# lohita-sukla-krsndm : red, white and black. Reference is either to firo 
(tajas), water (ap), and earth (anna), or the three gunas, rajas, 
sattva, and tamas of prakrti , 

The one shc-goat, red, white and black in time produces many 
young like herself. For the red, white and black colours see C.U. 
VI. 4; where everything in the universe is said to be connected with 
the three elements, the red of fire, the white of water, the black 
of food or of earth. It is the order of creation when the Absolute first 
produced heat, then water, then earth in the shape of food. 

V. iohita for lohita. 



IV. 8. Svetdsvatara Upanisad 733 

The first unborn is he who is ignorant and therefore subject to the 
influence of prakfti . # 

The second unborn is he who has overcome his ignorance and is 
therefore free from bondage to prakrti . 

6. dva suparnd sayuja sakhdyd , samanam vr.ksam parisasvajdte 
tayor any ah pippalam svadv atty anasnann anyo’bhicakaslti. 

6. Two birds, companions (who are) always united, cling to 
the self-same tree. Of these two the one eats the sweet fruit, 
and the other looks on without eating. 

See M.U. III. 1; R.V. I. 164. 20; Kafka I. 3. 1. 

Our being in time is an encounter of empirical existence and 
transcei^lent reality. The eternal in itself and the eternal in the 
empirical flux are companions. The world is the meeting-point of 
that which is eternal and that which is manifested in time. Man as 
an object of necessity, a content of scientific knowledge, is different 
from man as freedom. 

7. samdne vrkse puruso nimagno’nisayd socati muhyamdnah 
justam yadd pasyaty anyam isam asya mahimdnam iti 

vita-sokaJi. 

7. On the self-same tree, a person immersed (in the sorrows 
of the world) is deluded and grieves on account of his helpless- 
ness. When he sees the Other, the Lord who is worshipped and 
His greatness, he becomes freed from sorrow. 

M.U. III. 1. 2. In verse 6, the cause of sorrow is traced to the sense 
of helplessness induced in us when we are lost in the objective 
universe: in verse 7 freedom from sorrow is traced to our getting 
beyond object-thinking into contact with real being. 

8. rco'ksare parame vyoman yasmin devd adhi visve niseduh 
yas tarn na veda kim red karisyati ya it tad vidus ta ime 

samdsate. 

8. For him who does not know that indestructible beirijj of 
the Rg Veda , whereon in the highest heaven all the gods reside, 
of what avail is the Rg Veda to him? They, indeed, who know 
that rest fulfilled. 

R.V. I. 164. 39; Taittirlya Aranyaka II. 11. 6. 
samdsate: rest fulfilled, krtdrthas ttsthanti . £. 

The Vedas are intended to lead to the realisation of the Supreme . 
For those who study them without undergoing the inward discipline, 
they are not of much use. 



734 The Principal Upanisads IV. io. 

9. chanddmsi yajhdh kratavo vratani, bhutam bhavyam yac ca 
vedd vadanti, 

asmdn mdyl srjate visvam etat tasmims cdnyo mayayd 
samniruddhah. 

9. The Vedas, the sacrifices, the rituals, the observances, the 
past, the future and what the Vedas declare, all this the maker 
sends forth out of this, in this the other is confined by maya. 

the other: the individual soul. 

The whole world proceeds from the imperishable Brahman. The 
actual creator is Isvara , the Personal God, who is acting through 
his power of maya, devdtma-sakti. 

10. mdydm tu prakrtim viddhi , mdyinam tu mahesvaram; 
tasydvayava-bhutais tu vydptam sarvani idam jagat. 

10. Know then that prakrli is maya and the wielder of maya 
is the Groat Lord. This whole world is pervaded by beings that 
are parts of Him. 

The Sdmkhya prakrti is identified with the maya of the Vedanta. 
The Upanisad attempts to reconcile the views of the Sdmkhya and 
the Vedanta. 

Isvara and Sakti are regarded as the parents of the universe. 
Cp. the following verses: — 

'‘Only when united with Sakti has Siva power to manifest; but 
without her, the God cannot even stir.’ 

sivah saktyd yukto yadi bhavati saktah prabhavitum: 
na ced evam devo na khaki kusalah spanditum api. 

Again, ‘O Father-Mother, this world of ours was created by the 
compassion of your joint protectorship to the end that, by your 
mutual help, your joint design may fulfil itself.' 

ubhabhydm etdbhydm ubhaya-vidhim uddisya dayayd 
sanathdbhydm jajhe janaka-jananl maj-jagad idam. 

Anandalahari I. 1. 

l \ think of the mother of all the worlds, who creates this universe 
'of real-unreal nature, protects the same by her own energy of the 
three gunas, and withdraws it at the close of every aeon and remains 
disporting herself in her oneness.' 

srstvakhilam jagad idam sad-asad svarupam 
saktyd svayd trigunayd (or trigunyd ) paripdti visvam . 
samhftya kalpa-samaye ramate tathaika 
tdm sarva-visva-jananlm manasd smardmi. 

Devi Bhdgavata I. 2. 5. 

As the Supreme brings forth the whole universe by His own power 
of riiaya, He is not in any way affected by it as others are. 



IV. 15. Svetdsvatara Upanisad 735 

THE SAVING KNOWLEDGE OF GOD 

11. yo yonim yonim adhitisfhaty eko yasmin idam sam ca 
vicaiti sarvam. 

tarn isanam varadam devam idyam nicayyemdm sdntim 
atyantam eti. 

11. The One who rules every single source, in whom all this 
dissolves (at the end) and comes together (at the beginning 
of creation), who is the lord, the bestower of blessing, the 
adorable God, by discerning Him one goes for ever to this peace. 

12. yo devdnam prabhavas co’dbhavas ca y visvddhipo rudro 

maharsih . 

hiranya-garbham pasyata jdyamdnam , sa no buddhyd 
• subhay a samyunaktu. 

12. He who is the source and origin of the gods, the ruler 
of all, Rudra, the great seer, who beheld the golden germ 
(Hiranya-garbha) when he was born, may He endo^y us with 
clear understanding. 

See III. 4. 

13. yo devdnam adhipo yasmin loka adhisritdh 

ya Tse’sya dvi-padas catus-padah } kasmai devdya havisd 
vidhema. 

13. He who is the overlord of the gods, in whom the worlds 
rest, he who is the lord of two-footed and four-footed beings, 
to what God shall we offer our oblations? 

kasmai , to what: v. tasmai: to that God we shall offer our oblations. 
See R.V. X. 121. 3. 

14. suksmdti-suksmam kalilasya madhye, visvasya srastdram 

aneka-rupam 

visvasyaikam parivestitaram jiidtvd sivam sdntim atyantam 
eti. 

14. More minute than the minute, in the midst of confusion, 
the creator of all, of manifold forms, the one embracer of 
everything, by knowing Him as the auspicious, one attaifts 
peace for ever. 

See III. 7; V. 13. 

15. sa eva kale bhuvanasya goptd , visvadhipah sarva-bkutesu 

gudhah 

yasmin ynktd brahmarsayo devatds ca , tarn cvam jiidtvd 
mrtyn-pdsdms chii ntti. 

A A* 



736 The Principal Upanisads IV. 19. 

15. He indeed is the protector of the world in time, the lord 
of^ all, hidden in all things, in whom the seers of Brahman and 
the deities are united ; by knowing Him thus one cuts the cords 
of death. 

The knowers of Brahman as well as the deities know that their 
reality is in Brahman. 

16. ghrtdt param mandam ivdtisuksmam jndtvd sivam sarva- 

bhutesn gudliam. 

visvasyaikam parivesiitdram jndtvd devam mucyate sarva- 
pdsaih. 

16. By knowing Him, the auspicious, hidden in all beings 
like the film exceedingly fine that rises out of clarified butter, 
the one embracer of the universe, by knowing God one is 
released from all fetters. 

17. esa devo visva-karmd mahatma, sada janandm hrdaye 

sannivistir ih. 

hrdd manlsd manasdbhiklpto , ya etad vidur amrtas te 
bhavanli. 

17. That god, the maker of all things, the great self, ever 
seated in the heart of creatures is framed by the heart, by the 
thought, by the mind, they who know that become immortal. 

See III. 13. 

18. yadatamas tan na diva na rdtrir na san na casac chiva 

eva kevalah , 

tad aksaram tat savitur varenyam, prajnd ca tasmdt prasrta 
pur dm. 

18. When there is no darkness, then there is neither day nor 
night, neither being nor • non-being, only the auspicious one 
alone. That is the imperishable, the adorable light of Savitr 
and the ancient wisdom proceeded from that. 

■ zavilur varenyam: the adorable light of Sanity. Literally the choicest 
(snlcndour) of Savitr. 

See R.V. III. 62. 10. 

The characterisation of the Supreme which transcends the duality 
of subject and object can only be negative and cannot be a field ol 
clear definition and demonstration. 

19. nainam urdhvam na tiryaheam na madhye na parijagrabhat 

na tasya pratimd asti yasya ndma mahad yasah. 

19. Not above, not across, not in the middle, nor has any 



IV. 22. Svetdivatara Upanisad 737 

one grasped Him. There is no likeness of Him whose name is 
great glory. 

20. na samdrie tisthati rupam asya , na caksusd pasyati kas 
canainam. 

hrdd hrdistham manasdi ya enam y evam vidur amrtds te 
bhavanti. 

20. His form is not to be seen; no one sees Him witli the 
eye. Those who through heart and mind know Him as abiding 
in the heart become immortal. 

God does not stand in finite form before the eyes or the mind. 
Finite things serve as symbols enabling us to realise the presence of 
the divine. These verses demand the recognition of the absolute 
transcendence of God in relation to the world. The dens absconditus 
recedes into the distance when we seek to describe him by empirical 
forms; yet this Upanisad emphasises the personal aspect of the 
transcendent God. He is Siva to whom we turn in prayer and praise. 

21. ajdta ity evam kascid bhiruh prapadyatc? 

rudra yat te daksinam mukhani tena mam pdhi nityam. 

21. 'You arc unborn' with this thought someone in fear 
approaches you. O Rudra, may your face which is gracious 
protect me for ever. 

The attitude of bhakti is brought out here. 

22. md nas toke tanaye md na dyusi, md no gosu md no asvesu 

rtrisah. 

vuan md no rudra bhdimiio’vadhlr havismantah sadam it 
tv a havdmahe. 

22. Rudra, hurt us not in my child or grandchild, hurt us 
not in my life, hurt us not in my cattle, hurt us not in my 
horses. Slay not our heroes in your wrath for we call on you 
always with oblations. 

See R.V. I. 114. 8. 



73^ The Principal Upanisads V. 2. 

chapter v 

THE ONE IMMANENT GOD 

i. dve aksare brahma-pare tv anante , vidyavidye nihite yatra 
gudhe 

ksaram tv avidyd hy amrtam tu vidyd , vidyavidye Hate yas 
tn so’nyah. 

1. In tlie imperishable, infinite highest Brahman are the 
two, knowledge and ignorance, placed hidden. Ignorance is 
perishable while knowledge is immortal. And he who controls 
knowledge and ignorance is another (distinct from either). 

By way of preface to this chapter Samkarananda observes that 
this chapter is devoted to the discussion of the nature of That in 
the text That ait Thou , though both of them were treated in Chapter 
III, more specially the nature of Tliou. tat-tvam-pdddrthau trtiye 
\lhydyc njriipitau yady a pi tathdpi tvam-paddrtho ndtyantam niru- 
pitah; tad-artham'ayam pancamo dhydy a drahhyate. 
hrahmapare: hiranyagarbhdt pare or parasmin brahmani. S. 
gudhe: hidden, lokair jndtum asakye. Samkarananda. 
ksaram: perishable. It is the cause of bondage, samsrti-kcinmam. 
while vidyd is the cause of moksa, mukw-hetuh. S. 
any ali: another, tat sdksitvdt, being only the witness. S. 

The one and the many arc both contained in the Supreme. The 
knowledge ot the One is vidyd; the knowledge of the many detached 
from the One is avidyd. 

2. yo yonim yonim adhitisthaly cko visvdni rfipdni yonH ca 

sarvdh 

rsim prasutam kapilam yas tarn agre jndnair bibharli 
jdyamdnam ca pasyet. 

2. He, who being one, rules over every single source, over 
all forms and over all sources, He who bears in His thoughts 
and beholds when born the fiery (red) seer who was engendered 
in # thc beginning. 

JVisdom is prior to the world-soul. 

kapilam: hiranya-garbham . See IV. 12. VI. 1-2. The reference is 
not to the sage Kapila, the founder of the Sdmkhya philosophy. 
The Supreme is described as looking upon Hiranya-garbha while 
lie was being born. He was the first to be created by God and endowed 
by him with all powers. III. 4. Hiranya-garbha or Bralima the 
creator is the intermediary between the Supreme God and the 
created world. He is the world-soul. See IV. 12; VI. 18. 
jiiqnaih: by thoughts. See note IV. 18. 



V. 6. Svetasvatara Upanisad 739 

3. ekaikam jalam bahudha vikurvan, asmin ksetre samharaty 
esa devah • 

bhuyah srstvd patayas tathesas sarvddhipatyam kiirute 
mahatma. 

3. That God, who, after spreading out one net after another 
in various ways draws it together in that field, the Lord, having 
again created the lords, the great self, exercises his lordship 
over all. 

ekaikam: pratyekam, for every creature, such as gods, men, beasts, 
etc. 

jalam: net, samsdra. 

asmin ksetre: in that field, in the world. 

y asmin, Smother reading for asmin. y at ay ah , another reading for 
patayah. 

4. sarvd disah urdhvam adhas ca liryak, prakdsayan blirdjate 

yadv anadvdn , • 

evam sa devo bhagavdn varenyo yoni-svabtidvdn adhilisthaly 
ekah. 

4. As the sun, illumining all regions, above, below and 
across, shines, so that one God, glorious, adorable, rules over 
whatever creatures are born from a womb. 

See IV. 11, V. 2. 

yoni-svabhdvdn: whatever creatures are born from a womb. § means 
by it the sources of world-existence like the elements of earth, etc. 
yonih karanavi krtsnasya jagatah svabhdvd n svdtmabhutdm prthivyddln 
bhavdn or kdrana-svabhdvan kdrana-bhutdn prthivyddin. £. 

The so-called causes of the world are not in themselves causes. 
They operate only because God works through them. 

5. yac ca svabhavam pacati visvayonih, pdcydms ca sarvan 

parindmayed yah 

sarvam dad visvam adhitisthaty eko gamin ca sarvan 
viniyojayed yah. 

5. The source of all, who develops his own nature, who brings 
to maturity whatever can be ripened, who distributes &1L 
qualities, He the one, rules over this whole world. 

6. tad vedq-gnhyopanisatsu gudham, tad brahma vedate 

brahma-yonim 

ye purvam devd r say as ca tad viduh, te tan may d amrtd vai 
babhuvuh. 

6. That which is hidden in the Upanisads which are hidden 
in the Vedas, Brahma knows that as the source of the V£das. 



74 ° ^he Principal Upanisads V. 9. 

The gods and seers of old who knew that, they came to be of 
its nature and have, verily, become immortal. 

vcda-guhyopanisat: Veda is interpreted as referring to the sacrificial 
part which teaches sacrifices and their rewards, karma-kantja ; 
guhya , the dranyaha part which teaches the worship of Brahman 
under various aspects, yoga-kdnda, and the Upanisad , the part which 
teaches the knowledge of Brahman, the undiffcrenced. jndna-kanda . 
This- is the view of Vijndna-bhiksu. 

brahma-yoni: the source of the Vedas or the source of Hiranya-garbha. 
purve devdh is another reading for purvarn devdh, ancient gods. 
tanmaya, of its nature, tad dtma-bhutah. §. 

THE INDIVIDUAL SOUL 

7. gundnvayo yah phala-karma-kartd krlasya lasyai va sa 
copabhoktd 

sa visva-rupas Iri-guyas tri-vartmd pranddhipas sanicarati 
sva-karmabhih. 

7. But he who has qualities and is the doer of deeds that 
are to bear fruit (i.e. bring recompense), he is the enjoyer, 
surely, of the consequence of whatever he has done. Assuming 
all forms, characterised by the three qualities, treading the 
three paths he, the ruler of the vital breaths (the individual 
soul), wanders about according to his deeds. 

tri-gunah: sattva, rajas and tamas. 

tri-vartma: see I. 4 the paths of dharma, adharma and jhana or 
deva-ydna, pitr-ydna and manusya-yana. S. 

While the first six verses speak of That [tat) or the Supreme the 
account of Thou (tvam), the individual soul begins here. 

8. ahgustha-mdtro ravi-tnlya-rupas samkalpdhamkdra-samanvito 

yah 

buddher gunendtma-gunena caiva drdgra-mdtro hy aparo’pi 
> dr stall. 

,8. He is of the measure of a thumb, of appearance like the 
sun, endowed with thought and self-sense, but with only the 
qualities of understanding and the self he seems to be of the 
size of the point of a goad. 

apara, another reading avara. 

atma-gunena: of the qualities of the body like old age, etc. 

9. vdldgra-sata-bhdgasya satadhd kalpitasya ca 

bhdgo itvas sa vijheyas sa ednantyaya kalpate . 



V. 13. Svetasvatara Upanisad 741 

9. This living self is to be known as a part of the hundredth 
part of the point of a hair divided a hundredfold, yet it .is 
capable of infinity. 

The individual soul is potentially infinite. 

10. naiva stn na puman csa na caivdyam napumsakah 
yad yac chariram adatte tena tena sa raksyate. 

10. It is not female, nor is it male; nor yet is tfiis neuter 
Whatever body it takes to itself, by that it is held. 

raksyate: samraksyate, tat tad dharmdn citmany adhyasydbhimanyate. £. 
Another reading is yujyate or joined, sambadyale . 

The living self, jiva is vijndndtman. S. 

• 

11. samkalpana-sparsana-drsti-mohair grdsdmbu-vrsty-dtma 

vivrddhi-j amna 

karmdmtgdny anukramena delii sthdnesn rupdny abhi 
samprapadyate. # • 

11. By means of thought, touch, sight and passions and by 
the abundance of food and drink there are the birth and 
development of the (embodied) self. According to his deeds, 
the embodied self assumes successively various forms in various 
conditions. 

mohaih: v. homaih t by the sacrifices. 

12. sthiildni sitksmdni bahuni caiva , rupdni delii sv a- gun air 

vrnoti 

kriyd-gunair dtma-gunais ca tcsiim samyoga-hetur aparo’pi 
dvstali. 

12. The embodied self, according to his own qualities, chooses 
(assumes) many shapes, gross and subtle. Having himself 
caused his union with them, through the qualities of his acts 
and through the qualities of his body, he is seen as another. 

LIBERATION THROUGH THE KNOWLEDGE OF. 
THE ONE GOD 

13. anddy anantam kalilasya madhyc visvasya srastdram 

anek'a-rupam 

visvasyaikam parivestitdram jndtvd devam mucyate 
sarva-pdsaih. 

13. Him who is without beginning and without end, in the 
midst' of chaos, the creatoi of all, of manifold form, who alone 



742 The Principal Upanisads V. 14. 

embraces the universe, he who knows God is freed from all 
fetters. 

See IV. 14. 

kalilasya: gahana-gabhira-samdrasya. S. The wonder and mystery 
of the cosmic process are emphasised. 

devam: jyoti-rupam paramdUndnam. S. of the nature of light, the 
Supreme Self. 

sarva-pasaih: avidyd-kdma-kamabhih. S. The bonds of ignorance and 
its resultants of desire and deed. 

14. bhdva-grdhyam aniddkhyam, bhdvdbhdva-karam sivam. 

kald-sarga-karam devam, ye vidm te jahtts tanum. 

14. Him who is to be grasped by the mind, who is called 
incorporeal, who makes existence and non-existence, the kindly 
(the auspicious), the maker of creation and its parts, the Divine, 
they who know Him have left the body behind. 

aniddkhyam: SariiVarananda reads anildkhyam, who is called air 
as being the breath of the breath, prdnasya prdruim. 
nida: body; anicla: bodiless. 

kola: 6. explains it to mean the sixteen kalds beginning with prana 
or life and ending with ndma, name. Prasna VI. 4. 

Vijhana-bhiksu means by it ‘inherent power,’ he who creates by 
his inherent power. 

The Vedas and the other sciences are called kalds. 



VI. 3. 


Svetdsvatara Upanisad 


743 


CHAPTER VI 

THE ONE GOD IMMANENT IN AND TRANSCENDENT 
TO THE COSMIC PROCESS 

i. svabhavam eke kavayo vadanti, kdlam tathdnye parimuhya- 
mandh, 

devasyaisa mahima tu loke yenedam bhramyate brahma-ca - 
kram. 

1. Some wise men speak- of inherent nature, others likewise, 
of time (as the first cause), being deluded. But it is the greatness 
of God in the world, by which this Brahma-wheel is made 
to turn. 

See I. 2. 

The cosmic process is generally represented by a rotating wheel. 
It is ever moving, thanks to the greatness of God. It is tht ‘moving 
image of eternity/ In the national flag of India, tfic wheel is placed 
against the background of white. The wheel is represented in blue 
gagana-sadysam, megha-varnam, and is placed against the background 
of white which is above all colours, the pure radiance of eternity. 

2. yendvrtam nityam idam hi sarvam , jnah kdlakdro gum 

sarvavid yah 

tenesitam karma vivartate ha, prthvydpya-tejo’nila-khdrtr 
cintyam. 

2. He by whom this whole world is always enveloped, the 
knower, the author of time, the possessor of qualities and all 
knowledge. Controlled by Him (this) work (of creation) unfolds 
itself, that which is regarded as earth, water, fire, air and ether. 

kdlakdro: author of time; kalasydpi karld: v. is kdla-kdlo , the des- 
troyer of time, kalasya niyantd, upahartd. kdlah sarvavindsakdn, 
tasydpi vindsakarah. 

See also VI. 16. 

(knowei of) all knowledge: sarvavid yah or sarva-vidyah. 

3. fat karma krtvd vinivartya bhuyah, tattvasya tattvena sametya 

yogam 

ekena dvctbhydm tribhir astabhir vd, kdlena caivdtma-gunaii 
ca suksmaih. 

3. Having created this work and rested again, having entered 
into union with the essence of the self, by one, two, three or 
eight, or by time too and the subtle qualities of the self. 



744 Th e Principal Upanisads VI. 5. 

one: purusa of the Samkhya. 
two: purusa and prakrti. 

three: the three gunas, sattva, rajas and tamas. 
eight: the five cosmic elements and manas (mind), buddhi (under- 
standing), and aharii-kdra or self-sense. See B.G. VII. 4. 
dtma-gunaih: the affections^ of the mind, love, anger, etc. antah - 
karana-gunaih kdnuidibhih. S. 

4. drabhya karmdni gundnvitdni, bhdvdn ca sarvdn viniyojayed 
yah 

tesdm abhdve krta-karma-nasah karma-ksaye ydti sa tattvato 9 
nyah. 

4. Who, having begun with works associated with the (three) 
qualities, distributes all existents. In the absence ,of these 
(qualities), there is the destruction of the work that has been 
done and in the destruction of the work he continues, in truth, 
other (different from what he has produced). 

According to S,«this verse tells us that if we dedicate all our works 
to Isvara, we will not be subject to the law of karma, That person, 
his works being destroyed and his nature purified, moves on, different 
from all things, from all the results of ignorance, knowing himself to 
be Brahman * 

viniyojayed: isvare samarpayet tesdm tsvare samar pitattv ad atma- 
sambandhdbhdvas tad-abhdve purva-krta-kar mandril ndsah karma-ksaye 
" isuddha-sattvo ydti. $. 

any ah v. any at. He goes to that Brahman which is different from all 
things, tattvebhyo yad anyad brahma tad ydti. S. 

This verse is capable of different interpretations: (1) The Lord 
passes through different states, yet knows Himself to be above 
them all; (2) If we do works not out of selfish interest, but to please 
the Lord, our work ceases to bind us and we become free. Sarhkara- 
nanda and Vijnana-bhiksu adopt the latter view. 

5. ddis sa samyoga-nimilta-hetuh paras trikaldd akalo’pi drstah 
tam visva-rupam bhava-bhutam idyam dev am sva-citta-stham 

- ' updsya purvam. 

f 5. He is the beginning, the source of the causes which unite 
(the soul with the body). He is to be seen as beyond the three 
kinds of time (past, present and future), and as without parts 
after having worshipped first that adorable God who has many 
forme, the origin of all being, who abides in one's own thoughts. 

source of the causes which unite: cp. samyoga-lirigodbhavamtrailokyam. 
M.B. XII. 819. 

akalah: without parts, trans-empirical, nis-praparicah. §. 



VI. 9- Svetdsvatara Upanisad 745 

updsya purvam: worshipped first. Worship is the preliminary to 
knowledge. • 

visva-rupam: who has many forms. God assumes the form which the 
worshippers attribute to Him. 

updsakaih yad yat rupam upasyate tat-tad-rupa-dhdrinam. 

6. sa vrksa-kdlakrtibliih paro’nyo yasmdt prapancah pari - 
vartaie’yam 

dharmavaham pd panudam bhagesam j hdtvdtmastham 

amrtam visva-dhama. 

6. Higher and other than the forms of the world-tree and 
time is he from whom this world revolves who brings good 
and removes evil, the lord of prosperity, having known Him 
as in one # s*)wn self, the immortal, the support of all (he attains 
Brahman ) . 

vyksa: tree. See Katha VI. 1. 

dharmavaham: dharma is the enlightening power oj the Saviour God 
manifested in the human soul. See R.V. I. 164. 

Siva is the bringcr of dharma, dharmdvaha. 

7. tam isvardndm par amain mahesvaram, tarn dev at and m 

paramam ca daivatam 

patimpatindmparamamparastdt , vidama devam bhuvanesam 
Tdyam. 

7. He in whom is the Supreme Lord of lords, who is thcT 
highest deity of deities, the supreme master of masters, trans- 
cendent, him let us know as God, the lord of the world, the 
adorable. 

8 . na tasya karyam karanam ca vidyate, na tat samas cdpy 

adhikas ca driyate 

pardsya saktir vividhaiva sruyatesvdbhdviktjndna-bala-kriya 
ca . 

8. There is no action and no organ of his to be found. There 
is not seen his equal or his better. His high power is rcvetfled* 
to be various, indeed. The working of his intelligence and 
strength is inherent (in him). 

9. na tasya kascitpatir asti loke, na cesitd naiva ca tasya litigant, 
na karanam karanadhipddhipo na cdsya kascij janitji na 

eddhipah. 

9. Of Him there is no master in the world, no ruler, nor is 
there any mark of Him. He is the cause, the lord of the lords 
of the sense organs; of Him there is neither progenitor nor lard. 



746 The Principal Upanisads VI. 13. 

lihgam : mark, any sign from which we could infer the existence of 
God, as fire from smoke, dhuma-sthdniyam yenanumlyeta . S. 
janitd: progenitor, janayitd. S. 

10. yas tantunabha iva tantubhih pradhdnajaih 

svabhdvatah deva ekah svam dvrnot,- sa no dadhad 
brah m dpyayam . 

10. The one God who, according to his own nature, covers 
himself like a spider with threads produced from pradhdna 
(unmanifested matter), may He grant us entrance into Brahman. 

brahmapyayam: entrance into Brahman, ekl-bhdvam. §. 
yathornandbhir dtma-prabhavais tantubhir atmdnam eva samdvrnoti, 
tathd pradhdnajair avyakta-prabhavair ndma-rupa-karmabJ%is tantus- 
thdnlyaih svam atmdnam dvrnot. £. 

As the spider covers itself with threads produced from itself, so 
does the one God cover Himself with the products of prakrti. 

11. ek !) devas aarva-bhutesu gildhas sarva-ijyapt sarva-bhutan- 

tar-atmd 

karmadhyaksas sarva-bhutddlnvdsas sdkst cetd kevalo 
nirgunas ca. 

11. The one God hidden in all beings, all-pervading, the 
inner self of all beings, the ordainer of all deeds, who dwells ' 
in all beings, the witness, the knower, the only one, devoid 
of qualities. 

12. eko vaii niskriydndm bahunam ekam bijam bahudha yah 

karoti 

tarn atmastham ye’nupasyanti dhirds tesam sukhath 
sasvatam netaresdm. 

12. The one controller of the many, inactive, who makes the 
one seed manifold. The wise who perceive Him as abiding in 
their self, to them belongs eternal happiness, not to others. 

# SeQ Katha II. 2. 12. 

niskriydndm: inactive. 5 makes out that the acts of living beings are 
cfue to their organs and the Higher Self remains untouched by them. 
sarvd hi kriyd ndtmani samavetdh kirn tu dehendriyesu , dtmd tu 
nis-kriyo nirgunah. S. 

Sec B.G. III. 20. 

13. nityo nityandm cetanas cetandndm eko bahunam yo vida- 

dhati kamdn 

tat kdranam sdmkhya-yogddhigamyam jhdtvd devam 
' mucyate sarva-pasaih. 



VI. i6. Svetdsvatara Upanisad 747 

13. He is the eternal among the eternals, the intelligent 
among the intelligences, the one among many, who grants 
desires. That cause which is to be apprehended by discrimination 
(of sdmkhya ) and discipline {yoga) — by knowing God, one is 
freed from all fetters. 

See Katha II. 2. 13. 

nityo nityandm: the eternal among the eternals. The living souls are 
eternal and He is the eternal among them or the eternal may be 
meant for the elements of earth, water, etc. jlvdndm madhye . . . 
adhavd prthivyddlndm madhye. §. 

14. na tatra suryo bhdti na candy a-tdrakam, nemd vidyuto 

bhdnti kuto’yam agnih 

tarn eva bhdntam anubhdti sarvam, tasya bhasd sarvam 
idam vibhdti. 

14. The sun does not shine there nor the moon and the stars, 
nor these lightnings, much less this fire. After Him, when He 
shines, everything shines, by His light all this # is illuntined. 

See Katha II. 2. 15; M.U. II. 2. 10; B.G. XV. 6. 

15. eko hamso bhuvanasydsya madhye , sa evdgnis salile san- 

nivistah 

tam eva viditvdtimrtyum cti , ndnyah panthd vidyate' 
yandya. 

15. The one bird in the midst of this world. This indeed Is* 
the fire that has entered into the ocean. Only by knowing Him 
does one pass over death. There is no other path for going there. 

hamsa: bird, the highest self which destroys the source of bondage, 
ignorance, etc. hanti avidyadi-bandha-kdranam iti hamsah. 

16. sa visva-krd visva-vid dtma-yenir jhah kala-kdro gam 

sarvavidyah 

pradhdna-ksetrajha-patih gunesah samsara-moksa-sthiti- 
bandha-hehih. 

16. He is the maker of all, the knower of all, the self-caused? 
the knower, the author of time, the possessor of qualities, the 
knower of everything, the ruler of nature and of the spirit, the 
lord of qualities, the cause of worldly existence, and of libera- 
tion, of continuance and of bondage. 

dtma-yonih: self-caused, dtmd casau yonis cet dtnia-yonih. S. 
dtmdnam yonih, dtma-yonih: the source of all selves. 
kala-kdro: the author of tim\ See VI. 2, 21. 



748 Ihe Principal Upanisads VI. 20. 

pradhdna: avyaktam, nature. 
ksetvajiia: vijnandtmd , spirit. 

The Supreme binds, sustains and dissolves worldly existence. 

* 7 - sa tanmayo hy amrtd Isa-samstho jfias saruago bhuvana - 
syasya goptd 

ya lie asya jagalo nityam eva-ndnyo hetur vidyateliandya. 

17. Becoming that, immortal, existing as the lord, the 
knower, the omnipresent, the guardian of this world is He who 
rules this world for ever, for no other cause is found for the 
ruling. 

lia-samsthah: existing as the lord, lie svdmini samyak sthitihyasydsau 
lia-samsthah. 

No other is able to rule the world, ndnyo hetah samartho vidyate. £ 

18. yo brahnuinam vidadhdti purvam, yo vaiveddmi ca prahinoti 

tasmai 

tam ha devam atma-buddhi-prakdiam mumuksur vai 
iaranam aham prapadye. 

18. To Him who, of old, creates Brahma and who, verily, 
delivers to him the Vedas, to that God who is lighted by His 
own intelligence, do I, eager for liberation, resort for refuge. 

atma-buddhi-prakdiam: Sariikarananda explains as sva-buddhi- 
saksinam, who is the light or witness of self-knowledge. 

' -It can be derived in two ways: (1) dtmaiva buddhir atma-buddhih 
saiva prakaio’syety dtma-buddhi-pnikdiam. (2) atma-buddhim prakd - 
sayatily dtma-buddhi-prakdiam. S. 

V. atma-buddhi-prasadam. dtmaniyd buddhis tasyah prasddakaram. 
§, he who through his own grace manifests himself. 

19. niskalayh niskriyam sdntam niravadyam niranjanam, 
amrtasya paraih sethrh dagdhendhanam ivanalam. 

19. To him who is without parts, without activity, tranquil, 
irreproachable, without blemish, the highest bridge to immor- 
tality like a lire with its fuel burnt. 

'niranjanam; niriepam , without blemish. 

20. yadd carmavad dkdsam vestayisyanti mdnavah 
tadd devam avijndya duhkhasydnto bhavisyati. 

20. When men shall roll up space as if it wfere a piece of 
leather, then will there be an end of sorrow, apait from knowing 
God. 

To roll up space like a piece of leather is an impossibility but when 



VI. 22. Svetasvatara Upanisad 749 

that impossible becomes possible, only then will sorrow cease, 
without knowing God. There is no other way for ending sorrow 
than the knowledge of God. 
devam: v. sivam. 

21. tapah-prabhavad deva-prasaddc ca, brahma ha svetdsvataro 
’ tha vidvdn 

atyasramibhyah paramam pavitram, provdca samyag- 
rsi-samgha-justam. 

21. By the power of austerity and the grace of God, the 
wise Svetas vatara in proper manner spoke about Brahman , the 
Supreme, the pure, to the advanced ascetics, what is pleasing 
to the company of seers. 

• 

by the poiver of austerity and the grace of God: the grace of God does 
not suspend the powers of the soul but raises them to their highest 
activity The super-natural intensifies the natural. There is nothing 
magical which interferes with the life of man. We are persons, not 
things. Our freedom cannot be obliterated by divine grace. By his 
own free action man makes his own the ideal which he seeks. Baron 
Von Hugel quotes from St. Bernard’s Tractatus de Gratia et IJbero 
Arbitrio, cap. XIV. 47. That which was begun by Grace gets 
accomplished alike by both Grace and Freewill so that they operate 
mixedly not separately, simultaneously not successively, in each and 
all of their processes. The acts arc not in part Grace, in part free 
will; but tlie whole of each act is effected by both in an undivided. 
operation. 1 The Mystical Element of Religion, Vol. I, pp. 69 If. 

advanced ascetics: par amahariisa-samny annas ta evdtydsraminah . S, 
the highest of the four orders of ascetics. 

Cp. caturvidhd bhiksavas ca bahudakau kutlcakau 

hariisah paramahamsas ca yo yah pasedt sa tilt amah. 

22. veddmte paramam guhyam purdkvlpe pracoditam 
naprasdntdya dutavyam ndputrdyd sisydya vd punah. 

22. This highest mystery in the Vedanta which has, been 
declared in a former age should not be given to one whose 
passions are not subdued nor again to one who is not a son* 
or a pupil. 

See B.U. VI. 3. 12; Maitri VI. 29. 

prasdntdya,f)rakarsenasdntam sakala-rdgddi-mala-rahitamcittamyasya 
tasmai patrdya tddrsa sisydya vd ddtavyam, tad viparitdya putrdya 
sisydya vd snehddina brahmavidyd na vaktavyd. £. 

It should not be taught to a son or a pupil, if his passions are not 
subdued. 



750 The Principal Upanisads IV. 23. 

23. yasya deve para bhaktiryathd deve tatha gurau, 

tasyaite kathita hy arthah, prakasante mahatmanah, pra- 
kaiante mahatmanah. 

23. These subjects which have been declared shine forth to 
the high-souled one who has the highest devotion for God and 
for his spiritual teacher as for God. Yea they shine forth to 
the high-souled one. 



kausItaki-brAhmana up an I sad 

Kausltaki-Brahmana Upanisad, also called Kausitaki Upani- 
sad 1 does not form a part of the Kausitaki Brdhmana of thirty 
chapters which has come down to us and the name can be 
accounted for by treating the Aranyaka of which it forms a 
part as itself included in the Brdhmana literature of the 
Rg Veda . 1 Ssamkara refers to it in several places in his com- 
mentary ori the Brahma Sutra and Samkarananda has com- 
mented on it. There are various resccnsions of the text and 
the version adopted in Samkarananda’s Dlpikd is followed in 
this work. The Upanisad has four chapters. 

Dr. S. K. Belvalkar has edited the text and given an English 
translation of the first chapter of this Upanisad."! 

1 Samkarananda explains the name thus: ku hutsitam nindyath heyayn 

ity arthah , Sitam sltalam samsdvikam sukham yasya sa husitah eua 
kusitdkah tasyapatyam kausitakih. II. i. • # 

2 Bvahmanas also deal with Vedanta and so sometimes include the 
Upanisads: brdhmanam dpi trividham, vidhi-rupam, arihavdda-riipam, 
tad-ubhaya-vilaksanam ca, vidhy-arthavadobhaya-vilaksanam tit veddnta- 
vakyam. Madhusudana: Pmsthana-bhcda. 

3 Four Unpublished Upanisadic Texts and The Par yavha Vidyd (1925). 




I. i. Kausltaki-Brahmana Upanisad 753 

CHAPTER I 

REBIRTH AND RELEASE THROUGH KNOWLEDGE 

1. citro ha vai gdhgydyanir yaksyamana drunirh vavrc; sa ha 
putram svetaketum prajiglidya ydjaycti; tam hdbhydgatam 
papraccha , gautamasya putrdsti samvrtam lake yasmin md 
dhdsyasi, anyatamo vcidhva tasya, md lake dhdsyasiti; sa hovdca, 
ndham etad^veda, hantdcdryam prcchdmti: sa ha pitaram dsddya 
papraccha itlti maprdksit katham pratibravanTli; sa hovdca, aham 
apy dan na veda, sadasy cva vayam svddhydyam adhitya hardmahc 
yan nah pare dadati, chy ubhait ganiisydva iti, sa ha samit-pdnis 
citram gdngydyanim praticakrama npdydnfti: tam hovdca, 
brahmarho’si, gautama, yo na mdnam updgdh, ehi vycva tvd 
j n ap ayisyamlti . 

1. Citra Gangyayani, verily, wishing to perform a sacrifice 
chose Aruni. He, then, sent his son Svetak<?tu saying, ‘you 
perform the sacrifice.’ When he had arrived, he asked of him, 
O son of Gautama, is there a hidden place in the world in 
which you will place me? Or is there another way and will you 
place me in its world? Then he said, T know not this. However, 
let me ask the teacher.’ Having approached his father, he asked, 
‘thus ha^ he asked me, how shall I answer? Then he said^ 
‘I,- too, know not this. Let us learn the study of the Veda at 
his residence and obtain what others give to us. Come, let us 
both go, ‘Then with fuel in hand, he returned to Citra Gang- 
yayani and said, ‘May I come near to you (as a pupil). To 
him, then, he said, ‘you are worthy of the knowledge ot 
Brahman, O Gautama, for you have not gone into conceit. 
Come, I will make you understand’ (dearly). 

See B.U. VI. 1; C.U. V. 2. 
gangyayani : v. gargydyani. 
vavre: chose, varanam cakre. 

abhyagatam: has arrived, v. dstnam, when he was seated. 
putrdsti : v. putro’si, you arc the son of Gautama. 
samvrtam: hidden place, samyag dvrtam guplam sthdnam. 
anyatamo: v. any am oho. 

dcaryam: teacher, sarva-jnam , sa rva-sdistr dr tha^ya jndtaram anusthd- 
tdram. 

Worthy of the knowledge of Brahman : V. brahmdrghu'si. brahma- 
grdhyasi: 

1 See Belvalkar: The Paryanka Vidyd, p. 32. 



754 Principal Upanisads 1 . 2 . 

You are to be honoured like Brahman , brahmavat mdnaniyah. 
yon have not gone into conceit: you do not affect pride. 
ehi: come, dgaccha. 

jhdpayisyami: will make you understand clearly. 
vijhdpayisydmi, spastam bodhayisydmi , na tu sandehddikam jana- 
yisydmi . 

The reference is to the two ways deva-ydna and pity-ydna. Those 
who travel by the former do not return to a new life on earth but 
attain liberation by gaining a true knowledge of Brahman ; those 
who travel by the latter to the world of the fathers return to earth 
to be born again and again. 

In the notes on this Upanisad references are to Samkarananda’s 
Dlpikd. 

2 . sa hovdea, ye vai he casmdl lokdt pray anti candramasam 
eva tc sarve gacchanti , tesdm pranaih purva-paksa apydyate tan 
apara-paksena prajanayati , etad vai svargasya lokasya dvdrant, 
yac candramds tarn yah praty aha tam atisrjate: atha yo na praty 
dhd tam ilia vrsiir bhiitva varsati sa iha kito vd, patango vd, 
matsyo vd, saliunir vd, sirnho vd, vardho vd, parasvdn vd, sardulo 
vd, puruso vd, anyo vd tesu tesu sthdnesu pratydjdyate, yathd- 
kanna yathd-vidyam, tam dgatam prcchati ko'sxti, tam pratibruyat: 
vicaksandd rtavo reta abhrtam paheadasdt prasutat pitryd- 
vatali. 

tam md pumsi kartary er ay adhv am pumsd kartra matari md 
nisihea. 

sa jdya upajdyamdno dvaddsa-trayodasopamaso dvadasa-trayo- 
dasena pitrdsam tad-vide'ham pratitad-vide’ham, tan ma 
rtavo' martya va abharadhvam tena satyena tena tapasd rtur 
asmy dutavosmi, ko’si, tvam asmiti, tam atisrjate. 

2 . Then he said, those who, verily, depart from this world, 
they all, in truth, go to 'the moon. In the earlier (bright) half, 
it (the moon) thrives on their breathing spirits, in the latter 
(dark) half, it causes them to be born (again). The moon, 
verily, is the door of the world of heaven. Whoever answers 
it (properly), him it sets free (to go to the higher worlds). But 
whoever answers it not, him having become rain, it rains down 
here. Either as a worm, or as an insect or as a fish or as a bird, 
or as a lion, or as a boar, or as a snake, or as a tiger, or as 
a person or as some other in this or that condition he is born 
again according to his deeds, according to his knowledge; when 
he comes thither, he asks him ; who are you ? He should answer. 
From the far-shining, 0 ye Seasons, the seed was gathered, 
produced from the fifteenfold from the home of the fathers 



I. 3- K ausitaki-Brdhman a Upanisad 755 

(the ancestors) sent me in a man as an agent and with a man 
as an agent, placed me in a mother. 1 So was I born, being 
bom in the twelfth or thirteenth month united to a father <3f 
twelve or thirteen months; for the knowledge of this was I, 
for the knowledge of the opposite of this. Therefore, O ye 
seasons, bring me on to immortality by this truth, -by this 
austerity I am (like) a season. I am connected with the seasons. 
Who are you? (the sage asks again) ‘I am you,’ he replies. 
Then he sets him free. 

apara-paksena : with the latter half, v. aparapakse na in the latter half. 
causes them to he horn again: the moon sends those who do not 
proceed by deva-yana (the path of the gods) to hrahma-loka y back to 
life on earth. 

We are born in accordance with our conduct and knowledge. 
karma-vidyanusdrena subham asubharii vydimisram ca sariram hhavati. 

The question ‘Who are you?' is asked by the teacher, according 
to Samkarananda : karund-rasa-purna-hrdayo veddntdirtha-yiithdtmya- 
vit guru-laksana-sampanno guruh prasnam karoti . 9 
upajdyamanah: born or perhaps reborn. 
twelve or thirteen months : a year. 

There are two kinds of knowledge, unto birth, and unto ignorance. 
The former takes us to the path of the gods, the latter to the path 
of the fathers. Heaven and hell are stages on the journey and belong 
to the world of time, to a succession of births. Knowledge of Brahman 
takes us beyond both. 

THE COURSE TO THE BRAHMA-WORLD 

3. sa etam deva-ydnam panthdinajn dpadydgyii-lokam dgacchali, 
sa vdyu-lokam } sa varuna-lokam,sa indra-lukam, sa prajd-pati-lok- 
am t sa hrahma-lokam. tasya ha vd etasya lokasydro hrado muhurtd 
yestihd vijard nadilyo vrksah sdlajyam samsthdnam, apardjitam 
ayatanam, indra-prajdpati dvara-gopau, vibhu-pramUam , vicak- 
sanasandy amitaujah paryankah, priyd ca mdnasT, pratirupd 
ca caksusiy puspdny dddyavayato vai ca jagdny ambus cjlm- 
bdyavis cdpsaraso' mhayd nadyah , tam ittham-vid dgacchali , tarn 
brahma hdbhidhdvatah , mama yasasd vijaram vd ayarh nadim 
prdpan na vd ay am jarayisyatiti. 

3. Having entered on this path of the gods, he comes to the 

1 Dr. Belvalkar’s rendering of an amended text is this: ‘loom the 
illustrious one (the moon), the lifteenfold, the (new) born loid of the 
world of the manes, O ye seasons, the seed was gathered. 

‘Do ye then, send me on into a male progenitor, and with the half of 
the male agent deposit me intu the mother.' 



756 The Principal Upanisads I. 4. 

world of Agni, then to the world of Vayu, then to the world 
of Varuna, then to the world of Indra, then to the world of 
Prajd-puti, then to the world of Brahma. This brahma world, 
verily, has the lake Ara, the moments yestiha , the river Vijara, 
the tree Ilya, the city Salajya, the abode Aparajita, the two 
door-keepers Indra and Prajd-pati , the hall Vibhu, the throne 
Vicaksana, the couch Amitaujas, the beloved Manas! and her 
counterpart CaksusI, both of whom taking flowers, verily, 
weave the worlds, the Ynothcrs, the nurses, the nymphs, and 
the rivers. To it (to such a world) he who knows this comes. 
To him Brahma runs (advances towards), and says, 'It is on 
account of my glory, verily, he has reached the river, Ageless, 
He, verily, will not grow old/ 

After V ay u-loka, some texts have dditya-loka. 

Brahma-loka is hirdnya-garbha-loka of which an account is given. 
The lake ara is the first impediment to entrance into brahma-loka . It 
is said to*be composed of the enemies. 
ari: desire, wrath, etc. 

muhurtdh: moments which produce desire, wrath, etc., and destroy 
the sacrifice. 

yestihdh: kdma-krodhddi-pravrtyutpddanena ghnantiti yestihdh: the 
moments spent in subduing desires. 
the river Vijara: ageless, vigata jar a. 
the tree Ilya: ild prthivl tad-rupatvena ilya-iti-ndmd taruh. 
the city Salajya: the city is so called because on the bank are bow- 
strings as large as a sal tree, a place abounding with water in many 
forms of rivers, lakes, wells, tanks, etc., and gardens inhabited by 
many heroes. 1 

samsthdnam: city, aneka-jana-nivdsa-rupam pattanam . 
apardjitam: unconquerable (city), hiranya-garbhasya rdja-mandiram. 
pramitam: hall, sabhdstha{am. ahamkdra-svarupam aham ity eva 
sdmdnyena pramitam vibhu- pramitam. 

the throne Vicaksana: reason, vicaksana kusald buddhir mahat-tattvam 
ity adi sabddbhidhcyd. 

Jisavdi sabha-madhye vedih. 

amitaujdh: of unmeasured splendour, amitam aparimitam prdna-sam- 
vadddau prasiddham ojo balam yasya so' yam amitaujdh. 
amba: the mothers, jagad-jananyah srutayah. 

4. tam pahcasaldny apsarasam pratiyanti, satam phala-hastdh , 
satam dnjana-hastah , satam mdlya-hastdh , satam vaso-hastdh, 
Catam ciirna-hastah; tam brahmdlahkdrenalamkurvanti, sa brah- 

1 Dr. Belvalkar adopts the variant sallaja and renders it as the source 
of existence sat, mergence la and emergence ga. 



I. 5 . Kausitaki-Brahmana Upanisad 757 

malahkdreridlahkrto brahma-vidvan brahmdbhipraiti; sa dgacchaty 
dram hradam, tam manasdtyeti , tam itvd samprativido majjanti ; 
sa dgacchati muhurtan yestihdn tesmdd apadravanti , srf 
dgacchati , mjaram nadlm tdm manasaivatyeti, tat-sukrta-duskrte 
dhunute va, tasya priya jndtayah sukrtam upayanty apriyd 
duskrtam; tad yatha rathena dhdvayan ratha-cakre paryavek - 
setaivam aho-rdtre paryaveksetaivam sukrta-duskrte sarvdni ca 
dvandvdni, sa esa visukrto viduskrto brahma-vidvan brahmaivd- 
bhipraiti. 

4. Five hundred apsarasas (nymphs) go towards him, one 
hundred with fruits in their hands, one hundred with ointments 
in their hands, one hundred with garlands in their hands, one 
hundred ^vith garments in their hands, one hundred with 
powdered perfumes in their hands. They adorn him with the 
adornment (worthy) of Brahma. He, having been adorned with 
the adornment of Brahma, goes into (advances towards) 
Brahma. He comes to the lake Ara and he crosses it with his 
mind. On coming to it those who know only the immediate 
present 1 sink. He comes to the moments ycstiha and they flee 
from him. He comes to the river Vijara (Ageless); this he 
crosses with his mind alone. There he shakes off his good deeds 
and his evil deeds. His dear relatives succeed to his good deeds 
and those not dear, to the evil deeds. Then just as one driving 
a chariot looks at the two wheels (without being touched by* 
them), even so he will look at day and night, at good deeds 
and evil deeds and on all the pairs of opposites. Thus one, 
freed from good and freed fiom evil, the knower of Ihahman, 
goes on to Brahman. 

phala: fruits, another reading phana’ ornaments, dbharana. 
pairs of opposites: like light and darkness, heat and cold, pleasure 
and pain, chdydtapa-sifosna-sukha-d'uhkhddmi. He transcends the 
limitations of the empirical world. 

5. sa dgacchatilyam vrksam , tambrahma-gandhah pravisati,$a t 
dgacchati sdlajyam samsthanam, tam brahma-rasah pravisati , sa 
dgacchaty apardjitam ayatanam, tam brahma-tejah pravisati , sa 
dgacchati indra-prajd-pato dvdra-gopau tdv asmad apadravatah , 
sa dgacchati v%bhii-pramitam } tam brahma-yasah pravisati , sa 
dgacchati vicaksandm asandim brhad-rathantare sdmant pu^vau 
padau , syaitanaudhase caparau pddau, vairupa-vairdje anucye , 

1 sariividah, pratividah, accordant and discordant thoughts. Dr. 
Belvalkar. 



758 The Principal Upanisads I. 6. 

sakvara-raivate tiraici , sd prajhd prajhaya hi vipaiyati, sa 
dgacchaty amitaujasam paryahkam, sa pranas tasya bhutan ca 
bhavisyac capdrvanpddau, sris-cerd cdparau , bhadrayajhdyajmye 
sirsanye brhad-rathantare aniicye, rcas ca sdmani ca pracindta- 
nani, yajiimsi iirascindni somdmsava upastaranam udgitho’ paras 
ca yah srir upabarlianam , tasmin brahmaste , tam ittharh-vit 
pddenaivdgra drohati , tam brahma prcchati ko’siti, tam prati- 
bruydt. 

5. He comes to the tree Ilya and the fragrance of Brahma 
enters into him. He comes to the city Salajya; the flavour of 
Brahma enters into him. He comes to the abode Aparajita; 
the radiance of Brahma enters into him. He comes to the two 
door-keepers, Indra and Prajd-pati and they run away from 
him. He comes to the hall Vibhu and the glory o # f Brahma 
enters into him. He comes to the throne of Vicaksana; the 
Sdman verses, Brhad and Rathantara , are its two fore feet, the 
Syaita and the Nandhasa the two hind feet, the Vairupa and 
the Vairaja, the two lengthwise sides (pieces) the Sakvara and 
the Raivata are the two cross ones. It is wisdom for by wisdom 
one sees clearly. He comes to the couch Amitaujas. That is 
the breathing spirit, the past and the future are its two fore 
feet, prosperity and the earth are the two hind feet, the Bhadra 
and the Y ajhdyajhiya the two head pieces, the* Brhad and 

Jihe Rathantara the two lengthwise pieces; the Rg verses and 
the Sdman chants, the cords stretched lengthwise, the yajus 
formulas the cross ones; the moonbeams the cushion, the 
udgitha the coverlet, prosperity the pillow. On this (couch) 
Brahma sits. He who knows this ascends it just with one foot 
only. Brahma asks him, ‘Who are you?' and he should answer: 

sa: He, the devotee, upasakah. 

the abode Aparajita: apardjita-namakam brahma-gfham. 

they run away from him: prapta-brahma-gandha-rasa-tejasah brahmana 

iva darsana-matrena baddhahjalo parityaktasanau dvdra-pradesdt 

» sa 0 , abhasam jayajayeti-sa bdam uccdrayantau apadravatah apasaratah. 
the throne of Vicaksana: see Atharva Veda XV. 3. 3-9 for a description 
of Vratya's seat and Aitareya Brahmana VIII. 12 for a description 
of Indra's throne. 

prosperity and the earth: sris ca ird: laksmih dharant ca. 

IDENTITY WITH THE SUPREME SELF 

6. rtur asmy artavo'smy akasad yoneh sambhuto bhdryayai 
retah , samvatsarasya tejo t bhutasya bhutasyatma, bhutasya 



I. 7. Kausttaki-Brahmana Upanisad 759 

bhutasya tvam dtmdsi , yas asi so' ham asmi, tam aha ko'ham 

asmxti, satyam iti , bruyai, kith tad yat satyam iti , yad anyafi 
devebhyai ca pranebhyas ca tat sad , a/Aa yarf rfezMs ca prandi 
ca tat tyam, tad etayd vdcabhivyahriyate satyam iti , etavad idam 
sarvam idam sarvam asity evainam tad aha , tad etac chloke - 
ndbhyuktam. 

6. I am season, I am connected with the seasons. From space 
as the source I am produced as the seed for a wife, as the light 
of the yeac, as the self of every single being. You are the self 
of every single being. What you are that am I. He says to him, 
‘Who am I?’ He should say, ‘The Real/ What is that called 
the Real? Whatever is different from the gods (sense organs) 
and the .vital breaths that is sat , but the gods and the vital 
breaths are the tyam. Therefore this is expressed by the word 
satyam , all this, whatever there is. All this you arc. Thus he 
speaks to him then. This is declared by a Rg verse. 

yoni: source, upadana-kdrana. 

bharyayai: for a wife; v. bhdya: prpduced from light. 
devebhyah : from the gods, indriyebhyah. 

7. yajudarah samasird asdvrnmurtir avyayah 
sa brahmeti vijneya rsir brahma-mayo mahdn 

iti, tam aha kena me paumsydni ndmdny dpnotiti, pranencti 
bruyat , kena napumsakaniti , manaseti, kena stri-ndmdniti , vdceti \ 
kena gandhaniti, prdneneti , kena rupdniti, caksuseti, kena sabdan 
iti , srotreneti, kendnnarasdn iti , jihvayeti, kena karmaniti , 
hastabhydm iti , kena sukha-duhkhe iti , sanreneti, kenanandam 
ratim prajatim iti ; upastheneti, kehetyd iti, padabhyam iti kena 
dhiyo vijndtavyam kamdn iti , prajhayaiveti, bruyat, tam aha apo 
vai khalu me loko'yam te'sdv iti, sa yet brahmano jitir yd vyastis 
tamjitimjayati, tam vyastim vyasnute,ya evam veda,ya evam veda. 

7. The great seer consisting of the sacred word, whose belly 
is Yajus, whose head is the Sdman, whose form is the Rg, the 
imperishable is to be known as Brahma. He says to him, r By # 
what do you acquire my masculine names?' He should answef, 
‘by the vital breath.' ‘By what, my neuter ones?' ‘By mind.' 
‘By what, my feminine names?' ‘By speech.' ‘By what, smells?' 
‘By the breath.' ‘By what, forms?' ‘By the eye.' ‘By what, 
sounds?' ‘By the ear.’ ‘By what, the flavours of food? f ‘By 
the tongue.' ‘By what, actions?' By the two hands.' ‘By what, 
pleasure and pain?' ‘By the body.' By what, joy, delight and 
procreation?' ‘By the generative organ.' ‘By what, movement?' 

BB 



760 The Principal Upanisads I. 7. 

‘By the two feet.’ ‘By what, thoughts, what is to be known, 
and desires?’ ‘By intelligence,’ he should say. To him he says, 
‘The waters, verily, are my world. It is (they are) yours.’ 
Whatever victory is Brahma’s, whatever belongs to him, that 
victory he wins, that belonging he gets who knows this, yea 
who knows this. 

itya: movements, gatih. 

prajhaya: by intelligence, svayam-prakasenatma-bodhena. 

In Brahma-loka, whatever belongs to the presiding deity Brahma 
belongs also to the aspirant who reaches it. 
yavat madiyam tdvat tvadlyam. 

Cp. with this account Satapatha Brdhinana XI. VI. 1; Jaiminiya 
Upanisad Brdhmana 1 , 17-18; 42-44; 49-50. 



II. I. 


Kausttaki-Brdhmana Upanisad 


761 


CHAPTER II 

THE DOCTRINE OF PRANA (LIFE-BREATH)*' 

' IDENTITY WITH BRAHMA 

1. prano brahmeti ha smaha kausitakih: tasya ha va etasya 
pranasya brahmano mano dutam , caksur goptr , irotram sam- 
iravayitr , vdk parivestn; sa yo ha va etasya pranasya brahmano 
mano diitam veda dutavdn bhavati, yas caksur goptr goptrmdn 
bhavati, yah irotram samiravayitr samsrdvayitrmdn bhavati , yo 
vdcam parivestrim parivestnmdn bhavati , tasmai vd etasmai 
pranaya brahmana etdh sarvd devatd dydcamdnaya balim haranti , 
evam hayjasmai sarvani bhutdny ayacamandyaiva balim haranti , 
ya evam veda tasyopanisan na ydced iti t tad yathd grdmam 
bhik§itvalabdhvopavisen naham ato dattam asniydm iti t la 
evainam upamantrayante ye purastat pratyacak§Tran, esa 
dharmo'yacato bhavati , annadds tv evainam % upamahtrayante t 
daddma ta iti. 

1. The breathing (living) spirit is Brahma, thus, indeed, 
Kausltaki used to say. Of this same breathing spirit which is 
Brahma, the mind, verily, is the messenger; the eye the 
protector, the ear the announcer, speech the housekeeper. He 
who, verily, knows the mind as the messenger of this breathing 
spirit of Brahma becomes possessed of a messenger. He whfc 
knows the eye as the protector becomes possessed of a pro- 
tector. He who knows the ear as the announcer becomes 
possessed of an announcer, he who knows speech as the house- 
keeper becomes possessed of a housekeeper. To this same 
breathing spirit as Brahma, these divinities (mind, eye, ear, 
speech) bring offering though he does not beg for it; even so, 
to this same breathing spirit all beings bring offering even 
though he does not beg for it. For lym who knows this, the 
doctrinal instruction is ‘Do not beg/ As a man who has begged 
through a village and received nothing sits down saying* ‘I* 
shall not eat anything given from here/ and then those who 
formerly refused him invite him (to accept their offerings), 
which is the nature of him who does not beg. Charitable people, 
however, invite him and say, ‘let us give to you/ 

In Chapter I the devotee, updsaka, approaches the couch Amitaujas 
which is prana , breath, spirit, life. The nature of prana as the source 
of everything, as Brahma is explained in this chapter. Brahma with 
which prana is identified is the creator, jagat-karanam. 



762 The Principal Upanisads II. 3. 

To the life principle as the divine all divinities bring tribute 
unasked. 

Food is the aliment which nourishes body or mind. 

2. prdno brahmeti ha smdha paihgyas tasya vd elasya prdnasya 
brahmano vak parastac caksur arundhate, caksuh parastac 
chrotram arundhate , srotram parastdt mana arundhate , manah 
parastdt prana arundhate , tasmai vd etasmai prdndya brahmana 
etdh sarva devata aydcamdnaya balim haranti, evam haivdsmai 
sarvani bhutdny ayacamanayaiva balim haranti y a* evam veda 
tasyopanisan na yaced iti, tad yatha grdmam bhiksitva'labdhvo- 
pavisen ndham ato dattam asniyam iti, ta evainam upaman - 
trayante ye purastat pratyacaksiran, esa dharmo’yacato bhavati , 
annadas tv evainam upamantrayante, dadama ta iti. 

2. 1 'he breathing spirit is Brahma, thus indeed Paingya used 
to say. Of this same breathing spirit as Brahma behind the 
speech the eye is enclosed, behind the eye the car is enclosed, 
behind the ear the mind is enclosed, behind the mind the 
breathing spirit is enclosed. To this same breathing spirit as 
Brahma, all these divinities bring offering though he does not 
beg for it ; even so to this same breathing spirit all beings bring 
offering even though he does not beg for it. For him who knows 
this, the doctrinal instruction is ‘Do not beg/ As a man who 
l^as begged through a village and received nothing sits down 
saying, ‘I shall not eat anything given from here/ and then 
those who formerly refused him invite him (to accept their 
offerings), such is the nature of him who does not beg. Charitable 
people, however, invite him and say, ‘let us give to you/ 

arundhate: is enclosed, surrounded, enveloped. V. drundhe, arudhyate 
samantdt avrtya tisthati. 

3. athata eka-dhandvarodhanam: yad eka-dhanam abhidyayat, 
paurnamdsydm vdmdvdsydydm vd suddha-pakse vd punyenaksatra 
m etefdm ekasmin parvany agnim upasamadhaya parisamuhya pari - 

stirya paryuksya daksinam janvdcya sruvenajydhutir juhoti: van 
ndma devatdvarodham sa me f musmdd idam avarundhyat tasyai 
svahd: prdno ndma devatdvarodham sa me' musmdd idam avaru- 
ndhyat tasyai svahd: caksur ndma devatdvarodham sa me' musmdd 
idam avarundhyat tasyai svahd: srotram ndma devatdvarodham sa 
me musmdd idam avarundhyat tasyai svahd: mano ndma deva- 
tdvarodham sa me'musmdd idam avarundhyat tasyai svahd: 
prajhd ndma devatdvarodham sa me 'musmdd idam avarundhyat 
tasyai svahd iti: atha dhuma-gandham prajighrdydjyalependhgdny 



II. 4- Kau$itaki-Brahmana Upanisad 763 

anuvimrjya vdcamyamo'bhipravrajyartham bruyad dutam vd, 
prahinuydl labhate haiva. 

3. Now next the attainment of the highest treasure. If*a 
man covets the highest treasure, either on the night of a full 
moon or on the night of a new moon or on the bright half 
of the moon under an auspicious constellation, at one of these 
periods, having built up a fire, having swept the ground and 
having strewn the sacred grass, having sprinkled (water) 
around, having bent the right knee, with a spoon he offers 
oblations of melted butter. ‘The divinity named speech is the 
attainer. May it obtain this for me from him. Hail to it/ ‘The 
divinity named breath is the attainer. May it attain this for 
me from him. Hail to it/ ‘The divinity named eye is the attainer. 
May it attain this for me from him. Hail to it/ ‘The divinity 
named ear is the attainer. May it attain this for me from him. 
Hail to it/ ‘The divinity named mind is the attainer. May it 
attain this for me from him. Hail to it/ ‘The divinity named 
wisdom is the attainer. May it attain this for me from him. 
Hail to it/ Then having inhaled the smell of the smoke, having 
smeared his limbs with the ointment of melted butter, in 
silence he should go forth, declare his wish or send a messenger. 
He will, indeed, obtain his wish. 

eka-dhana: highest treasure, single treasure, prdnasya ndmadheyam , 
jagaty asminn eka eva dhana-rupa eka dhanah. 
paristirya: having strewn sacred grass, samantdd darbhan avaklrya. 
sruvena: with a spoon; v. camasena vd kamsena vd: with a wooden 
bowl or with a metal cup. 

4. athato daivah smaro yasya • priyo bubhused yasyai vd 
yesdm vaitesdm evaikasmin parvany etayaivavrtaitd djydhutir 
juhoti, vdcam te mayi juhomy asau . svaha; pranam te mayi 
juhomy asau svaha; caksus te mayi juhomy asau svaha; srotram 
te mayi juhomy asau svaha; manas te mayi juhomy asau svaha; 
prajhdm te mayi juhomy asau svaha iti; atha dhuma-gandham 
prajighrdydjyalependngany anuvimrjya vaccimyamo’ bhipfav* 
rajya samsparsam jigamised api vdtdd vd tisthet sambhdsamdnah 
priyo haiva bhavati smaranti haivdsya. 

4. Now, next, the longing to be realised by the divine powers. 
If one desires «to become dear to any man or woman or to any 
men or women, then at one of these same periods (of* time 
mentioned before) he offers, in exactly the same manner, 
oblations of melted butter, saying, ‘your speech I sacrifice in 
me, hail to you/ ‘Your bi^ath I sacrifice in me, hail to j;ou/ 



764 The Principal Upanisads II. 6. 

‘Your eye I sacrifice in me, hail to you.' ‘Your ear I sacrifice 
in me, hail to you/ ‘Your mind I sacrifice in me, hail to you/ 
‘Your wisdom I sacrifice in me, hail to you/ Then having 
inhaled the smell of the smoke, having smeared his limbs with 
the ointment of melted butter, in silence he should go forth, 
and seek to come to contact or stand speaking from windward 
(so that the wind may carry his words to the person). He 
becomes dear indeed and they think of him indeed. 

smara: longing, abhildsah. ‘I am the fire in which the fuel of your 
dislike or indifference is burnt/ 

SACRIFICE OF SELF 

5. athdtah samyamanam prdtardanam antaram agni-hotram 
ity dcaksate, ydvad vai puruso bhasatc na tavat pranitum saknoti , 
prdnam tada vdei juhoti, ydvad vai purusah prdniti na tavad 
bhdsitum* saknoti. vdcam tadd prane juhoti, ete anante amrte 
ahutt jdgrac ca svapan ca santatam juhoti. atha yd anyd 
ahutayo' ntavatyas tdh karmamayyo hi bhavanti taddhasmaitat 
purve vidvdmso' gnihotram na juhavdncakruh. 

5. Now next self-restraint according to Pratardana or the 
inner fire sacrifice as they call it. As long,, verily, as a man 
is speaking, so long he is not able to breathe. Then he is 
■sacrificing breath in speech. As long, verily, as a person is 
breathing, so long he is not able to speak. Then he is sacrificing 
speech in breath. These two unending immortal oblations, one 
is offering continuously, whether waking or sleeping. Now 
whatever other oblations there arc, they have an end for they 
consist of works. Knowing this very thing, verily, the ancients 
did not offer the agni-hotra sacrifice. 

antaram: inner because it is independent of outer aids' 
bdhya-sadhana-nira peksam . 

PRAISE OF THE UKTHA 

6. uktham brahmeti ha smdha suska-bhrhgdrah , tad rg ity 
updstta, sarvdni hdsmai bhutani sraisthydyabhyarcyante, tad 
yajur ity updstta, sarvdni hdsmai bhutani iraisthyaya yujyante, 
tat s'dmety updstta, sarvdni hdsmai bhutani iraisthyaya sanna - 
mante, tac chrir ity updstta, tad yasa ity updstta; tat teja ity 
updstta, tad yathaitac chrimattamam yaiasvitamam tejasvitamam 
iti §astresu bhavati , evam haiva sa sarve§u bhutesu irimattamo 



II. 7* KausUaki-Brahmana Upanisad 765 

yasasvitamas tejasvitamo bhavati ya evam veda , tad etad aistikam 
karma-mayam dtmanam adhvaryuh samskaroti , tasmin yajur - 
may am pravayati yajur-mayam rh-mayam hotd rh-maye sdma - 
mayam udgdtd, sa esa trayyai vidyayah atmaisa u evaitad 
indrasyatma bhavati , ^0 

6. The (recitation) is Brafanan, so Suska-bhrhgdra used 
to say, let him meditate on it as the Rg (hymn of praise) 
unto such a one, indeed, all beings offer praise for his greatness. 
Let him meditate on it as the Yajus (sacrificial formula), unto 
such a on£ indeed, all beings get united for his greatness. Let 
him meditate on it as the Sdman. Unto such a one indeed all 
beings bow down for his greatness. Let him meditate on it as 
beauty. Let him meditate on it as glory. Let him meditate on 
it as splendour. As this (the uktha) is the most beautiful, the 
most glorious, the most splendid among the invocations of 
praise, even so is he who knows this, the most beautiful, the 
most glorious, the most splendid among all being%. So the 
adhvaryu priest prepares this self which is relatSd to the sacrifice, 
and which consists of works. In it he weaves what consists of 
the Yajus. In what consists of the Yajus , the hotr priest weaves 
what consists of the Rg. In what consists of the Rg the Udgatr 
priest weaves what consists of the Sdman. This is the self of all 
the threefold knowledge. And thus he who knows this becomes 
the self of India. 

DAILY WORSHIP OF THE SUN FOR TFIE REMOVAL • 

OF SIN 

• 

7. athdtah, sarva-jitah kausitakes triny updsandni bhavanti, 
sarva-jiddha sma kausitakir udyantam ddityam upatisthate 
yajnopavitam krtvodakam aniya trih prasicyodapatram vargo’si 
pdpmdnam me vrhdhiti , etayaivavrtd madhye santam udvargo’si 
papmdnam ma udvrhdhiti , etayaivdvrtdstam yantam samvargo'si 
pdpmdnam me samvmdhiti, tad y ad ahoratrdbhydm pdpam akarti 
sam tad vrhkte, tatho evaivam vidvan etayaivavrtddityam upa- 
tisthate y ad ahoratrdbhydm pa park karoti , sam tad vrhkte, 

7. Now next are the three meditations of the all-conquering 
Kausltaki. Ths all-conquering Kausltaki, indeed, used to worship 
the rising sun, having performed the investiture with the sacred 
thread, having fetched water, having thrice sprinkled the water 
vessel saying, 'You are a deliverer; deliver me from my “sin.” ' 
In the same manner he (us 'd to worship the sun) when it was in 



766 The Principal Upanisads II. 8. 

the middle of the sky saying, 'you are the high deliverer, deliver 
me highly from sin/ In the same manner he (used to worship the 
sum) when it was setting saying, 'you are the full deliverer; 
deliver me fully from sin/ Thus whatever sin he committed by 
day or by night that he removes fully. And likewise he who knows 
this worships the sun in the same manner and whatever sin 
one commits by day or by night, that he removes fully. 

yajnopavttam: the sacred thread worn over the left shoulder, for 
performing sacrifices. 

aniya: having fetched, v. dcamya: having sipped. 

vargah: deliverer: sarvam idam jagat dtma-bodhena trnavad vynkte 

parityajati. 

vrhdhi: deliver, varjaya, vinasayet. 


ADORATION OF THE NEW MOON FOR PROSPERITY 

8. atha mdsi mdsy amavdsydydm vrttdyam pascdc candra- 
masarii drsyamanam upatisthetaitayaivdvrtd harita-trne vd 
pratyasyati, yan me susimam hrdayam divi candramasi sritam 
manye'ham mam tad vidvdmsam maham putryam agham rudam 
iti , na hy asmdt purvdh prajah praititi nu jdta-putrasya- 
thdjdta-putrasydpyayasva sametu te sam te paydmsi sam u yantu 
vdjd yam ddityd amsumdpydyayantiti, etas tisra rco japitvd 
masmakam pranena prajaya pasnbhir apyayayisthdh yo’sman 
dvesti yam ca vayam dvismas tasya pranena prajaya pasnbhir 
dpyayaya sva aindrim divrtam dvarta ddityasydvrtam anvdvarta 
iti daksinam bahum anvdvartate. 

8. Then, month by month at the time of the new mooij, 
when it comes around one should in the same manner worship 
the moon as it appears in the west or he throws two blades 
of green grass toward it saying, ‘That fair proportioned heart 
of mine which rests in the moon in the sky, I deem myself 
the knower thereof. May I not weep for evil concerning my 
.children. Indeed his progeny do not die before him. Thus is 
it with one to whom a son is already born. Now in the case 
of one to whom no son is born as yet, ‘Increase. May vigour 
come to thee. May milk and food gather in thee, that ray 
which the Adityas gladden/ Having (repeatedly) uttered these 
three Rg verses, he says, ‘Do not increase by our vital breath, 
by our offspring, by our cattle. He who hates us and him whom 
we hate, increase by his breath, his offspring, his cattle. 
Thereupon I turn myself with Indra's turn, I turn myself along 



II. g. Kausitaki-Brahmana Upanisad 767 

with the turn of the sun.' Thereupon he turns himself toward 
the right arm. 

harita-trne va pratyasyati : lie throws two blades of grass toward it ; 
v. harita-lrnabhydm vdk pratyasyati: with two blades of grass speech . 
goes toward it. 

. The three Rg verses are Rg Veda I. 91. 16; IX. 31; 4; I. 91. 18, 
Atharva Veda VII. 81. 6. 

There is throughout an allusion to an implied comparison between 
the husband as sun or fire and the wife as the moon. 

aham somatmikd stri agnydtmakah piimdn. 

9. atha paurnamasydm purastctc candramasam driyamanam 
upaiisthtta etaya vavrta, somo rdijdsi vicaksanah , panca-mukho’ si 
prajd-patir brahmanas ta ekam mukham, tena mukhena rdjno’tsi, 
tena mukhena mam annddam kuru, raja ta ekam mukham , tena 
mukhena visrio’tsi, tena mukhena mam annddam kuru , syenas ta 
ekam mukham, tena mukhena paksino’tsi, tena mukhena mam 
annddam kuru agnisla ekam mukham, tenemam lokamatsi, tena 
mukhena mam annddam kuru, tvayi paheamam mukham, tena 
mukhena sarvdni bhutdny atsi, tena mukhena mam annddam 
kuru, mdsmdkam prdnena prajayd pasubhir avaksestha, yo'smdn 
dvesti yac ca vayam dvismas tasya prdnena prajayd pasubhir 
avaksiyasveti, daivim avrtam dvarta ddityasydvrtam anvavarta 
iti daksinam bdhum anvdvartate . 

9. Then, on the night of the full moon one should in the 
same manner worship the moon as it appears in the east, 
‘You are King Soma, the wise, the five-mouthed, the lord of 
creation. The Brahmana is one mouth of you. With that mouth 
you eat the Kings. With that mouth make me an eater of food. 
The King is one mouth of you. With that mouth you eat the 
people. With that mouth make me an eater of food. The hawk 
is one mouth of you. With that mouth you eat the birds. With 
that mouth make me an eater of food. Fire is one mouth of 
you. With that mouth you eat this world. With that mouth 
make me an eater of food. In you is a fifth mouth. Wtth 
that mouth you eat all beings. With that mouth make me 
an eater of food. Do not waste away with our vital breath, 
with our offspring, with our cattle. He who hates us and him 
whom we hate, you waste away with his vital breath, his 
offspring, his cattle. Thus I turn myself with the turn of the 
gods. I turn myself along with the turn of the sun. After (these 
words) he turns himself toward the, right arm. 

BB* 



768 The Principal Upanisads II. 11. 

soma: moon : umayd visva-prakftyd saha vartamdnah priya-darsanah. 
vicaksanah: the wise, sarva-laukika-vaidika-kdrya-kusalah. 

‘Here the reference is only to the three classes, the Brahmana, the 
Ksatriya and the common people. 

10. atha samvesyan jdydyai hr day am abhimr&et , yat te susime 
hrdaye sritam antah prajdpatati tendmrtatvasyesane md tvam 
putryam ogham nigd iti, na hy asydh purvdh prajah praititi. 

10. Now when about to lie down with his wife he should stroke 
her|heart and say, O fair one who has attained immortal joy 
by that which is placed in your heart by Praja-pati , may you 
never fall into sorrow about your children. Her children then 
do not die before her. 

See Asvaldyana Grhya Sutra I. 13. 7. 
susime: O fair one : sobliana-gdtre. 

11. atha prosyiyan putrasya murdhdnam abhijighret , angdd 
angdt sambhavasi hrdaydd adhijdyase, dtma vai putra ndmdsi 
sajiva saradah sat am asdv iti ndmdsya dadhdtyasmd bhava, parasur 
bhava, hiranyam astrtam bhava , tejo vai putra ndmdsi sa jiva 
saradah satam asdv iti ndmdsya grhiidty alhainam parigrhnati, yena 
prajdpatih prajdh paryagrhndt tad aristyai tena tva parigrhnamy 
asavitiy athdsya daksine karne japaty asmai prayandhi maghavan 
fjisin itindra sresthdni dravindni dhehiti savye, ma chetthd , md 
vyathisthah, satam sarada dyuso jivasva, putra te ndmna murd- 
hdnam abhijighrdmlti, trirasya murdhdnam abhijighret gavam 
tvd hihkdrcndbhihihkaromiti trir asya murdhdnam abhihihkarydt. 

11. Now, when one has teen away, on returning back he 
should smell (kiss) his head, saying, ‘you arc born from every 
limb of mine, you are born from the heart, you, my son, are 
my self indeed, may you live a hundred autumns (years}/ He 
gives him his name saying, ‘Be you a stone, be you an axe, 
be t you everywhere desired gold, you, my son are light indeed, 
'may you live a hundred autumns (years)/ He takes his name. 
Tnen he embraces him saying, ‘Even as Praju-pati embraced his 
creatures for their welfare so do 1 embrace you (pronouncing 
his name)/ Then he mutters in his right ear saying, ‘Confer on 
him, r O Maghavan, 0 onrusher/ and whispers in his left ear, 
*0 Indra, bestow the most excellent possessions. Do not cut 
off (the line of our race) . Be not afraid, live a hundred autumns 
of life. I smell (kiss) your head, 0 son, with your name/ Thrice 
he rhould smell (kiss his head). ‘I make a lowing over you with 



II. 12. Kau$ttaki-Brahmana Upanisad 769 

the lowing (sound) of cows/ He should make a lowing over his 
head thrice. 

See Asvalayana Grhya Sutra 1. 15. 3. 9; Paraskara I. 16. 18; Khddira 
II. 3. 13; Gobhila II. 8. 21-22; Apastamba VI. 15. 12. 
abhijighret: smell; v. abhimrset: touch, karena sarhsprset. 
putra nama: v. putra mdvitha. You have saved me, son: he putra tvam 
punnamno. nirayat md mam avitha mama raksanam krtavdn. See 
Manu IX. 38. 

asma bhava: be a stone, pdsdno bhava. Be healthy and strong: rogair 
anupadrutah vajra-sdra-sariro bhava. 

hiranyam astrtam: everywhere desired gold, astrtam astrtam sarvatah 

paristrtam kanakavat sarva-prajdpriyo bhava. 

tejas : light, samsdra-vrksa-bljam . 

confer oit him: see R.V. III. 36. 10; II 21. 6. 

md vyathisthah: be not afraid, sarlrendriya-manobhir vyathdm md 
gdh. See B.G. XI. 34. 

MANIFESTATION OF BRAHMAN 

12. athdto daivah parimara, etad vai brahma dipyate yad agnir 
jvalati , athaitan mriyate yan na jvalati, tasyddityam eva tejo 
gacchati vayum prana; etad vai brahma dipyate yad ddityo drsyate 
’thaitan mriyate yan na drsyate , tasya candramasam eva tejo 
gacchati vayum prana; etad vai brahma dipyate yac candramd 
drsyate' thaitan mriyate yan na drsyate , tasya vidyutam eva tejo 
gacchati vayum prana; etad vai brahma dipyate yad vidyud 
vidyotate’ thaitan mriyate yan na vidyotate, tasya disa eva tejo 
gacchati vayum pranas ta vd etdh sarva devatd vayum eva pravisya 
vdyau mrtva na mrcchante: lasmdd eva punar udlrata ity adhidai- 
vatam; athddhydtmam. 

12. Now next the dying around of the gods. This Brahman 
shines forth, indeed, when the lire burns; likewise this dies when 
it burns not. Its light goes to the sun alone and its vital breath 
to the wind; this Brahman shines forth, indeed, when the sfin 
is seen; likewise this dies when (the sun) is not seen. Its figlffc 
goes to the moon; its vital breath to the wind; this Brahman 
shines forth, indeed, when the moon is seen ; likewise this dies 
when it is not seen; its light goes to the lightning and its vital 
breath to the wind; this Brahman shines forth, indeed, when 
the lightning lightens; likewise this dies when it lighten^ not, 
its light goes to the regions of space and its vital breath to 
the wind. All these divinities, verily, having entered into wind, 
though they die in the wmd do not perish (altogether). There- 



770 The Principal Upanisads II. 14. 

from, indeed, they come forth again. This, with reference to 

the divinities: now with reference to the self. 

■ 

Cp. Aitareya Brahmana VIII. 28. 

13. etad vai brahma dlpyate yad vdcd vadati, athaitan mriyate 
yan na vadati , tasya caksur cva tejo gacchati pranam prdna,etad 
vai brahma dipyate yac caksusd pasyati, athaitan mriyate yan 
na pasyati. tasya srotram eva tejo gacchati pranam prana, etad 
vai brahma dipyate yacchrotrena srnoti , athaitan mriyate yan na 
srnoti; tasya mana eva tejo gacchati pranam prana , etad vai 
brahma dipyate yan manasd dhydyati , athaitan mriyate yan na 
dhydyati; tasya pranam eva tejo gacchati prariam pranas td vd 
etah sarvd devatah pranam eva pravisya prdne mrtva na 
mrcchante , tasmad eva punar udlrate, tad yadi ha vd ebarit vid- 
vdmsam ubhau parvatdv abhipravarteydtam daksinas cottaras ca 
tustursamanau na hainam strnvlydtam atha ya enam dvisanti 
yan ca svayam dvesti ta evainam parimriyante. 

13. This BrahUian shines forth, indeed, when one speaks 
with speech; likewise it dies when one speaks not, its light goes 
to the eye; its vital breath to the vital breath. This Brahman 
shines forth indeed when one sees with the eye; likewise this 
dies when one secs not ; its light goes to the ear, its vital breath 
to the vital breath. This Brahman shines forth, indeed, when 
one hears with the ear; likewise this dies when one hears not, 
its light goes to the mind, its vital breath to the vital breath. 
This Brahman shines forth, indeed, when one thinks with the 
mind; likewise this dies when one thinks not; its light goes to 
the vital breath, its vital breath to the vital breath. All these 
deities, verily, having entered into the vital breath, though 
they die in the vital breath, do not perish (altogether). There- 
from, indeed, they come 'forth again. So indeed on one who 
knows this, both the mountains, the southern and the northern, 
should roll themselves forth wishing to crush him, they would 
not, crush him. But those who hate him and those whom he 
himself hates, these all die around him. 

K 

The Southern and the Northern mountains are the Vindhyas and 
the Himalayas respectively. 

14. athdto nihsreyasdddnam , eta ha vai devatd <■ aham-sreyase 
vivadumdna asmdc charlrad uccakramuh tadd hdprdnat suskam 
ddrubhutam sisyethainad vdk pravivesa tad vdcd vadac chisya 
eva , athainac caksuh praviveia tad vdcd vadac caksusd pasyac 
chisya eva , athainac chrotram pravivesa tad vdcd vadac , caksusd 



II. 14. Kausztaki-Brahmana Upanisad 771 

paiyac chrotrena irnvac chisya eva, athainan manah praviveia 
tad vdcd vadac caksusa paiyac chrotrena irnvan manasa dhydyac 
chisya eva, athainat prdnah praviveia tat tata eva samuttasthdu 
td vd etah sarva dev at ah prane nihireyasam viditva prdnam eva 
prajhdtmdnam abhisambhuya sahaiv aitaih sarvair asmac 
chanrad uccakramuh te vdyu-pravista dkaiatmanah svanyuh, 
tatho evaivam vidvdn prune nihireyasam viditvd prdnam eva 
prajhdtmdnam abhisambhuya sahaiv aitaih sarvair asmac chanrad 
utkrdmati, sa vdyu-pravista akdidtmd svareti , sa tad gacchati 
yatraite devds tat prdpya yad amrtd devds tad amrto bhavati ya 
evamjvadam. 

14. Now next the attainment of the highest excellence. All 
these divinities, verily, disputing among themselves in regard 
to self excellence went forth from this body. It (the body) lay, 
not breathing, withered, like a log of wood. Then speech 
entered into it. It just lay speaking with speech. Then the eye 
entered into it. It just lay speaking with speech and seeing with 
the eye. Then the ear entered into it. It just fay, speaking with 
speech, seeing with the eye and hearing with the ear. Then 
the mind entered into it. It just lay, speaking with the speech, 
seeing with the eye, hearing with the ear, thinking with the 
mind. Then the vital breath entered into it and then, indeed, it 
arose at once. All these divinities, verily, having recognised 
the superior excellence of the vital breath, having compre- 
hended the vital breath alone as the self of intelligence, went 
forth from this body, all these together. They, having entered 
into the air, having the nature of space went to the heavenly 
world. Likewise also, he who knows this, having recognised 
the superior excellence of the vital breath, having compre- 
hended the vital breath alone as the self of intelligence goes 
out of this body with all these. He, having entered into the air, 
having the nature of space, goes to the heavenly world. He 
goes to the place where these gods are. Having reached that, 
he who knows this becomes immortal as the gods arc immort^J. 

See B.U. VI. 1. 1-14; C.U. V. 1. 

nihireyasam: highest excellence, sarvasmad utkarsa-rupo guno 
moksa-viiesah. 

aham-ireyase :*in regard to self-excellence, in regard to one who was 

the most important among them. 

uccakramuh: went forth, utkramanam cakruh . 

iisye: lay, sayanam krtavat. 

tata eva: at once, prdna-pra , esdd eva . 



772 The Principal Upanisads * II. 15. 

15. athdtah pita-putriyam sampradanam iti cacaksate , pita 
putram presyannahvayati navais tfnair agaram samstirya agnim 
upasamadhayodakumbham sapatram upanidhdydhatena vasasd 
sampracchannah pita seta etya putra uparistad abhinipadyata 
indriyair indriydni samsprsyapi vdsmd dsindyabhimukhayaiva 
sampradadhyad , athdsmai samprayacchati vacant me tvayi 
dadhaniti pita , vacant te mayi dadha iti putrah , pranam me 
tvayi dadhaniti pita, pranam te mayi dadha iti putrah , caksur me 
tvayi dadhaniti pita, caksus tc mayi dadha iti putrah, irotram me 
tvayi dadhaniti pita, srotram te mayi dadha iti putrah, anna-rasdn 
me tvayi dadhaniti pita, anna-rasdn te mayi dadha iti putrah , 
karmdni me tvayi dadhaniti pita, karmdni te mayi dadha iti 
putrah, sukha-duhkhe me tvayi dadhaniti pita, sukha-c^uhkhe te 
mayi dadha iti putrah, dnandam ratim prajatim me tvayi 
dadhaniti pita , dnandam ratim prajatim te mayi dadha iti putrah, 
ityam me tvayi dadhaniti pita, itydm tc mayi dadha iti putrah, 
mano me dvayi dadhaniti pita, manas te mayi dadha iti putrah, 
prajham me tvayi dadhaniti pita, prajndm te mayi dadha iti 
putrah, yady u vd apdbhigadah sydt samdsenaiva britydt, prdnan 
me tvayi dadhaniti pita, prdnan te mayi dadha iti putrah, atha 
daksindvrd upaniskrdmati , tain pitdinumantrayate, yaso brahma- 
varcasam kirtis tvd jusatdm iti, athctarah savyam amsam 
nvaveksate pdnindntardhdya vasandntena vd pracchddya, 
svargdn lokdn kdmdin apnuhiti, sa yady agadah sydt putras- 
yaisvarye pita vasct pari vd vrajet yady u vai prey at yadevainam 
samdpayeyuh, yathd samdpayitavyo bhavati, yathd samdpayitavyo 
bhavati. 

15. Now next the father and son ceremony or the trans- 
mission (of tradition) as they call it. The father, when about to 
depart, calls his son. Having strewn the house with new (fresh) 
grass, having built up the lire, having placed near it a vessel 
of water with a jug (full of lice), himself covered with a fresh 
garment the father remains lying. The son, having come, 
approaches him from above, touching his organs with his 
organs or the father may transmit the tradition to him while he 
sits before him. Then he delivers over to him (thus) : The father: 
‘Let me place my speech in you/ The son: T take your speech 
in me/ The father: ‘Let me place my vital breath in you/ 
The 9on: T take your vital breath in me/ The father: ‘Let me 
place my eye in you/ The son: ‘I take your eye in me/ The 
father: ‘Let me place my car in you/. The son: ‘I take your 
ear in me/ The father: ‘Let me place my tastes of food in you/ 



II. 15 - Kausttaki-Brdhmana Upanisad 773 

The son: T take your tastes of food in me/ The father: ‘Let 
me place my deeds in you/ The son: T take your deeds in me/ 
The father: ‘Let me place my pleasure and pain in you/ The 
son: ‘I take your pleasure and pain in me/ The father: ‘Let me 
place my bliss, enjoyment and procreation in you/ The son: 
‘I take your bliss, enjoyment and procreation in me/ The father: 
‘Let me place my movement in you/ The son: ‘I take your 
movement in me/ The father: ‘Let me place my mind in you/ 
The son: ‘I take your mind in me/ The father: ‘Let me place 
my wisdom in you/ The son: I take your wisdom in me/ If, 
however, he should be unable to speak much, let the father say 
comprehensively, ‘I place my vital breaths in you/ and the 
son, ‘I take your vital breaths in me/ Then turning to the 
right he goes forth towards the east. The father calls out 
after him. ‘May fame, spiritual lustre and honour delight in 
you/ Then the other looks over his left shoulder. Having 
hidden his face with his hand or having covered it # with the 
hem of his garment, he says, ‘May you obtaift heavenly worlds 
and all desires/ If he (father) becomes well (recovers) he 
should dwell under the authority of his son or wander about 
(as an ascetic). If, however, he departs, let them furnish him 
(with obsequies) as he ought to be furnished, as he ought to be 
furnished. 

a vessel of water: nlrena put n am kalasam vrlhi-purna-pdtra-sahitanV. 

covered with a fresh garment: navinena vastrena samvrtah. 

pita sete: father remains lying; v. svayam syetah ; himself in white, 

svetah, sita-malyambara-dhay oh . 

dadhani: dharaydni. 

After ‘deeds/ in some versions we read, ‘ sarlram me tvayi dadhdniti 
pita , sarlram te mayi dadha iti pntrah / The Father: ‘Let me place 
my body in you/ The son, ‘I take your* body in me/ 
prajha: wisdom; another reading, * dhiyo vijildtavyam human me 
tvayi. May I place my thoughts, my understanding and my desires 
in you, etc. 

upabliigadah: unable to speak much, pratyekam vaktutn asamartJufh. 
honour: some versions have also annddyam: food to eat. 



774 


The Principal Upanisads 


III. i. 


CHAPTER III 

THE DOCTRINE OF LIFE BREATH 
THE GREATEST GIFT IS THE KNOWLEDGE OF INDRA 

i. pratardano ha vai daivoddsih indrasya priyam dhamo- 
pajagdma yuddhena ca paurusena ca, tam hendra uvaca, pratar - 
dana f varam vrmsveti, sa hovdca pratardanah , tvam eva me 
vrnisva yam tvam manusydya hitatamam manyasa iti , tam hendra 
uvaca , na vai varo' varasmai vrmte , tvam eva vrmsveti , avaro 
vfli kila meti, hovdca pratardanah , atho khalv indr ah satydd eva 
neydya satyam hlndrah , tam hendra uvaca, mam eva vijdnihy 
etad evdham manusydya hitatamam manye yan mdim vijaniyan 
trisirsdnam tvastram ahanam, arunmiikhan yatin saldvrkebhyah 
prayaccham, bahvih sandhd atikramya divi prahladiydn atrnam 
aham antarikse paulomdn , prthivyam kalakahjan, tasya me tatra 
na loma Candmiy&te ; sa yo mdm veda na ha vai tasya kena cana 
karmana loko miyate , na steyena , wa bruna-hatyayd, na matr-vad- 
hena t na pitr-vadhena ndsya pdpam cakrso mukhan nilam , 
vetiti. 

I. Pratardana, the son of Divodasa, verily, by means of 
fighting and effort, arrived at the beloved abode of Indra. To 
him then Indra said, ‘Pratardana, choose a boon/ Then 
Pratardana said, Do you yourself choose that boon for me 
which you deem the most beneficial for mankind/ Indra said 
to him: ‘A superior verily, chooses not for an- inferior. Do you 
yourself choose/ ‘No boon, verily, is that to me/ said Pratar- 
dana. Then, however, Indra did not swerve from the truth for 
Indra, verily, is truth. To him then Indra said, ‘Understand 
me only. That is what I deem most beneficial for mankind, 
namely that one should understand me. I slew the three- 
headed son of Tvastri. 1 delivered the arunmukhas, the ascetics, 
to the wolves. Transgressing many agreements, I killed the 
people of Prahlada in the sky, the Paulomas in the atmosphere, 
the Kalakanjas on earth. Of me, such as I was then, not a 
single hair was injured. So he who knows me thus, by no deed 
whatsoever of his is his world injured, not by stealing, not by 
killing an embryo, not by the killing of his mother, not by the 
killing of his father. If he wishes to commit a sin the dark 
colour does not depart from his face. 

Indra, in this passage, speaks in the name of the Supreme Being. 



III. 2. Kausitaki-Brahmana Upanisad 775 

Vamadeva does it according to the R.V. IV. 26. 1. The individual 
self is really one with the Universal Self though unenlightened 
people are not aware of this unity. Those who know and feel jt 
sometimes speak in the name of the Universal Spirit. 
the son of Divoddsa : divoddsasya kdst-rdjasya pittro daivodasih. 

‘ A superior chooses not for an inferior’ or ‘no one who chooses, chooses 
for another,’ na vai varah par asm at vynlte anyartham na vrnite'nyo 
na prarthayate yata evam at ah svdrtham vararh tv am eva vrnlsveti. 

As he is bound by the vow of truth, Indra grants Pratardana his 
desire, satya-pdsdbhibaddhah. 

For Indr&’s exploits referred to here, see R.V. X. 8. 89; X. 99. 6; 
Satapatha Brahmana I. 2. 3. 2; XII. 7. 1. 1; Taittirlya Samhitd 
2. 5. T. 1 ff.; Aitareya Brahmana VII. 28. 
wolves: wild dogs, aranya-svabhyah. 
atrnam: killed, himsitavdn. 
mlyate: injured, himsyate. 

ntlam: dark colour; bloom: mukha-kdnti-svarupam. He does not 
become pale. 

When we attain supreme wisdom and are delivered .from the 
delusion of egotism, our good and evil deeds do*not touch us. We 
have died to the possibility of doing anything evil. 

INDRA’S IDENTITY WITH LIFE AND IMMORTALITY 

2. sa hovdca, prdno’smi, prajndtmd tarn mam dyar amrtam ity 
upasva, dyuh pranah, prano vd ayuh , yavadd hy asmin sartr^ 
prdno vasati tavad dyuh, prdnena hu evdsmin lokemrtatvam 
dpnoti , prajnaya satyarh samkalpam, sa yo mdm dyur amrtam 
ity updste sarvam dyur asmin loka ety dpnoti amrtatvam aksitim 
svarge loke; tadd haika ahur ekabhnyam vai prana gacchantiti, na 
hi kascana saknuyat sakrd vdcd nama prajndpayitum, caksusd 
rupam, srotrena sabdam, manasd dhydnam, ekabhuyam vai 
prdnd bhutvaikaikam etdni sarvani prajhdpayantiti, vdcam 
vadantim sarve prdnd anuvadanti , caksuh pasyat sarve prana 
anupasyanti, srotrarh srnvat sarve prdnd anusrnvanti, mano 
dhydyat sarve prana anudhydyanti, prdnam prdnantam sarv$ 
prana anuprdnanti, evam u haitad iti hendra uvdcdsti tv eva 
prdnandm nihsreyasam iti. 

2. Indra then said: ‘I am the breathing spirit, meditate on 
me as the intelligent self, as life, as immortality. Life is breath 
and breath is life. For as long as breath remains in the .body 
so long is there life. For indeed with the breathing spirit one 
obtains immortality in this world, by intelligence true con- 
ception. So he who-medit ^tes on me as life, as immortality he 



yy 6 The Principal Upanisads III. 3. 

reaches his full (term of) life in this world and obtains immor- 
tality and indestructibility in the heavenly world. Now on this 
point some say the vital breaths, verily, go into a oneness, 
(otherwise) no one would be able, at once, to make known a 
name by speech, a form by the eye, a sound by the ear, a 
thought by the mind. The vital breaths, after having become 
one, make known all these one by one. While speech speaks, all 
the vital breaths speak after it. While the eye sees all, the 
vital breaths see after it. While the ear hears, all the vital 
breaths hear after it. When the breath breathes, all the vital 
breaths breathe after it. Thus is it indeed/ said Indra. ‘There 
is, however (he continued), a superior excellence amongst the 
vital breaths/ 

prajndtma: the intelligence self, buddhi-vrtti-pratiphalita-prajnd- 
naika-svabhdvah . 

Indra is life or the source of life of all creatures, sarva-prdnindm 
jivana-kdranam. 

3. jivati vdg-apeto miikdn hi pasydmah , jivati caksur-apeto' 
ndhdn hi pasydmah , jivati srotrdpeto badhiran hi pasydmah , 
jivati manopeto bdldn hi pasydmah , jivati bdhnchinno jivaty 
uru-chinna ity evam hi pasydmah iti, aiha hhalu prana eva prajndt- 
medam iariram parigrhyotthapayati , tasmad etad evoktham 
Upasiteti , saisd prune sarvdptir yo vai prdnah sd prajna, yd vd 
prajna sa prdnah , tasyaisaiva drstir etad vijnanam, yatraitat 
purusah suptah svapnam na kancana pasyaty athasmin prana 
evaikadha bhavati, tad enam vdk sarvaih namabhih sahapyeti , 
caksuhsarvaihrupaihsahdpyeti, srotram sarvaih sabdaih sahapyeti , 
manah sarvaih dhydnaih sahapyeti, sayadapratibndhyateyathdg- 
ner jvalatahsarvadiso visphulingd vipratisthcrann evam evaitasmad 
dtmanah prana yathdyatanam vipratisthante prdnebhyo devdh, 
devebhyo lokdh, sa esa prana eva prajnatmedam sariram pari - 
grhyotthapayati , tasmad etad evoktham upasiteti , saisa pra2ie 
&arvdptih, yo vai prdnah sd prajhd yd vd prajna sa prdnah , 
tasyaisaiva siddhir etad vijnanam , yatraitat purusa arto maris- 
yandbalyam etya sammoham eti , tarn dhur udakramit cittam , na 
srnoti , na pasyati, na vded vadati, na dhyayati , athasmin prana 
evaikadha bhavati, tad enam vdk sarvaih namabhih sahapyeti , 
caksuh sarvaih rupaih sahapyeti , irotram sarvaih iabdaih 
sahapyeti , manah sarvaih dhydnaih sahapyeti , sa yaddsmac 
charirad utkramati sahaivaitaih sarvaih utkramati. 

3. One lives deprived of speech for we see the dumb; one 



III. 3. Kautftaki-Brdhmana Upanisad 777 

lives deprived of eye for we see the blind; one lives deprived 
of ear for we see the deaf; one lives deprived of mind for we 
see the childish; one lives deprived of arms; one lives deprived 
of legs for thus we see. But now it is the breathing spirit alone, 
the intelligence self that seizes hold of this body and makes 
it rise up. This, therefore, one should meditate on as the uktha, 
it is said. This is the all-obtaining in the breathing spirit. What 
is the breathing spirit, that is the intelligence-self. What is the 
intelligence-self, that is the breathing spirit. This is the view 
thereof, this is the understanding thereof. When a person is so 
asleep that he sees no dream whatever, he becomes one with that 
breathing spirit alone. Then speech together with all the names 
goes to him ; the eye together with all forms goes to it ; the ear 
together with all sounds goes to it, the mind together with all 
thoughts goes to it. When he awakes, even as sparks proceed in all 
directions from a blazing fire, even so from this self the vital 
breaths proceed to their respective stations, from the vit^l powers 
the gods (the sense powers) and from the gods # the worlds. This 
same breathing spirit, the intelligence self seizes hold of the 
body and makes it rise up. This, therefore, one should meditate 
on as the uktha , it is said. This is the all-obtaining in the breathing 
spirit. What is the breathing spirit, that is the intelligence 
self, what is the intelligence self, that is the breathing spirit. 
This is the proof thereof, this is the understanding. When «a 
sick person about to die gets to such weakness as to fall into 
a stupor they say of him, his thought has departed, he does 
not hear, he does not see, he does not speak with speech, he 
does not think. He becomes one in that breathing spirit alone. 
Then speech together with all thoughts goes to it. And when 
he departs from this body, he departs, together with all these. 

‘What is the breathing spirit that is the intelligence self; what is 
the intelligence self that is the breathing spirit/ In some texts we 
find also, ‘for together they live in this body and together they go 
out of it. 1 saha hy ctav asmin sarirc vasatah sahotkramatah. • « 

The intelligence self grasps the breath and erects the flesh. Cp. St. 
Thomas Aquinas: ‘The power of the soul which is in the semen 
through the spirit enclosed therein fashions the body/ Summa 
Theo. III. 32. 1. 

vipratisthante: proceed in different directions, vividham nirgacchanti . 
marisyan: about to die, maranam karisyan, dsanna-marana iti. 
abalyam: weakness, abalasya durbalasya bhdva abalyam, hasta-pddddy 
avasatvam. 

udakramlt: has departed, ut.\> amanam akarot. 



77^ The Principal Upanisads III. 5. 

LIFE-BREATH THE ALL-OBTAINING 

« 4. vag evasmin sarvdni ndimdny abhivisrjyante ; vaca sarvdni 
ndmany dpnoti. prana evasmin sarve gandhd abhivisrjyante , 
pranena sarvan gandhdn dpnoti , caksur evasmin sarvdni rupdny 
abhivisrjyante , caksusd sarvdni rupdny dpnoti. srotram evasmin 
sarve sabdd abhivisrjyante , srotrena sarvan sabddn dpnoti , 
mana evasmin sarvdni dhydndny abhivisrjyante , manasd sarvdni 
dhyandny dpnoti. saha hy etdvdsmin sarire vasatah sahot- 
kramatah, atha yathdsyai prajhdyai sarvdni bhutdny ekam 
bhavanti, tad vydkhydsydmah. 

4. Speech gives up to him (who is absorbed in life-breath) 
all names; by speech he obtains all names. Breath gives up to 
him all odours; by breath he obtains all odours. The fcye gives 
up to him all forms ; by the eye he obtains all forms. The ear gives 
up to him all sounds, by the ear he obtains all sounds. The mind 
gives up to him all thoughts ; by the mind he obtains all thoughts. 
Verily, these two together dwell in the body and together they 
depart. Now we will explain how all beings become one with 
this intelligence. 

abhivisrjyante: v. abhivisrjate: gives up, sarvatah parityajati. 
prana: life; v. ghrdna: nose. 

After the account about mind there is the following passage in 
spme texts: saisd prane sarvdptir yo vai pranah sd prajna yd va 
prajiid sa pranah. This is the all-obtaining in the breathing spirit. 
And what is the breathing spirit, that is intelligence and what is 
intelligence, that is the breathing spirit. 

The two, the vital and the intellectual, live together and depart 
together. 

CORRELATION OF INDIVIDUAL FUNCTIONS AND 
OBJECTS OF EXISTENCE 

"5- vdg evasya ekam ahgam ndulham , tasyai nama parastdt 
pralivihita bhuta-mdtrd , prana evdsyd ekam ahgam udulham, 
ta^ya gandhah , parastdt prativihitd bhuta-mdtrd , caksur evdsyd 
ekam ahgam udulham, tasya rupam parastdt prativihitd bhuta- 
mdtrd, srotram evdsyd ekam ahgam udulham, tasya sabdah 
parastdt prativihitd bhuta-mdtrd, j ihvaivdsyd ekam ahgamudulham 
tasyd' anna-rasah parastdt prativihitd bhuta-mdtrd , hastdv evdsyd 
ekam ahgam udulham, tayoh karma parastdt prativihitd bhuta- 
matrd, sariram evdsyd ekam ahgam udulham, tasya sukha-duhkhe 
parastdt prativihitd bhuta-matrd, upastha evdsyd ekam ahgam 



III. 6. Kausitaki-Brdhmana TJpanisad 779 

udulham , tasydnando ratih prajdtih parastat prativihita bhuta- 
matrd, padav evdsyd ekam angam udulham , tayor tTyaA parastat 
prativihita bhilta-rndtra, mana evdsyd ekam angam udulham , fasy# 
rfAfA kamdh parastat prativihita bhuta-mdtrd. 

5. Speech is one portion taken out of it. Name is its exter- 
nally correlated object element. Breath is one portion taken 
out of it. Order is its externally correlated object element. 
The eye is one portion taken out of it. Form is its externally 
correlated object element. The ear is one portion taken out of 
it. Sound is its externally correlated object element. The 
tongue is one portion taken out of it. Taste of food is its 
externally correlated object element. The two hands are one 
portion taken out of it. Work is their externally correlated 
object element. The body is one portion taken out of it. 
Pleasure and pain are its externally correlated object element. 
The generative organ is one portion taken out of it. Bliss, 
delight and procreation are its externally correlated object 
element. The two feet are one portion taken out of it. Move- 
ments are their externally correlated object element. The 
mind is one portion taken out of it. Thoughts and desires are 
its externally correlated object element. 

Speech, etc , are parts of intelligence, prajnayd vibhagam , with 
objects corresponding to them in the outside world. The objects are 
described as the external existential elements. * 

udulham: taken out, lifted up. Commentator reads adudham adii- 
duhat. milked. 

THE SUPREMACY OF* INTELLIGENCE 

6. prajnayd vacant samdruhya vdcfr sarvani namany dpnoti 
prajnayd prdnam samdruhya prdnena sarvdn gandhdn dpnoti 
prajnayd caksuh samdruhya caksusd sarvani r up any dpnoti , 
prajnayd srotram samdruhya srotrena sarvdn sabddn dpnoti , 
prajnayd jihvdm samdruhya jihvayd sarvdn anna-rasdn dpifoti^ 
prajnayd hastau samdruhya hastdbhydm sarvani karmdny dpnoti , 
prajnayd sartram samdruhya sanrena sukha-duhkhe dpnoti , 
prajhayopastham samdruhyopasthendnandam ratim prajdtim 
dpnoti , prajnayd pddau samdruhya pdddbhyam sarvd ityd 
dpnoti, prajnayd manah samdruhya manasd sarvani dhycmdny 
dpnoti. 

6. Having obtained control of speech by intelligence, by 
speech one obtains all l.^mes. Having obtained control of 



780 The Principal Upani§ads • III. 7. 

breath by intelligence, by breath one obtains all odours. 
Having obtained control of the eye by intelligence, by the eye 
dne obtains all forms. Having obtained control of the ear by 
intelligence, by the ear one obtains all sounds. Having obtained 
control of the tongue by intelligence, by the tongue one obtains 
all tastes of food. Having obtained control of the hands by 
intelligence, by the hands are obtained all actions. Having 
obtained control of the body by intelligence, by the body one 
attains pleasure and pain. Having attained control over the 
generative organ by intelligence, by the generative organ one 
obtains bliss, delight and procreation. Having attained control 
of the two feet by intelligence, by the two feet one obtains all 
movements. Having obtained control of the mind tjy intelli- 
gence, by the mind one obtains all thoughts. 

samdruhya: having attained control. Literally, having mounted on, 
samyak drohanam krtvd. 

7. na hi prajndpeta van nama kihcana prajhapayet , anyatra 
me mano’bhud ity aha ndham etan ndma prajhasisam iti, na hi 
prajhdpetah prdno gandham kahcana prajhapayet , anyatra me 
mano’bhud ity aha ndham etam gandham prajhasisam iti , na hi 
prajhapetam caksurupam kihcana prajhapayet , anyatra me 
mano’bhud ity aha ndham etad rupam prajhasisam iti , na hi 
prajhapetam srotram sabdam kahcana prajhapayet anyatra me 
mano’bhud ity aha ndham etam sabdam prajhasisam iti; na hi 
prajndpeta jihvanna-rasam kahcana prajnapayet anyatra me 
mano’bhud ity aha ndham etam anna-rasam prajhasisam iti , 
na hi prajhdpetau hastau karma kihcana prdjhapayetdm 
anyatra me mano’bhud ity aha ndham etat karma prajhasisam 
iti , na hi prajhapetam s,anram sukham na duhkham kihcana 
prajhapayet anyatra me mano’bhud ity aha ndham etat sukham 
na duhkham prajhasisam iti, na hi prajndpeta upastha anandam 
na ratim na prajdtim kahcana prajhapayet anyatra me mano’ 
&hhd ity aha naham etam anandam na ratim na prajdtim 
prajhasisam iti , na hi prajhdpetau padav ity dm kahcana prajhd- 
p ay etam anyatra me mano’bhud ity aha ndham etam ity dm 
prajhasisam iti na hi prajndpeta dhih kacana sidhyen na prajhd- 
tavyam prajhayeta. « 

7. *For verily, without intelligence, speech does not make 
known (to the self) any name whatsoever. ‘My mind was 
elsewhere/ he says, ‘I did not cognise that name/ For, verily, 
without intelligence breath does not make known any odour 



Ill . S. * Kau$itaki-Brahmana Upani§ad 781 

whatsoever. ‘My mind was elsewhere/ he says. ‘I did not 
cognise that odour/ For verily, without intelligence the eye 
does not make known any form whatsoever. ‘My mind wis 
elsewhere/ he says, ‘I did not cognise that form/ For, verily, 
without intelligence the ear does not make known any sound 
whatsoever. ‘My mind was elsewhere/ he says, ‘I did not 
cognise that sound/ For verily, without intelligence the tongue 
does not make known any taste of food whatsoever. ‘My mind 
was elsewhere/ he says, ‘I did not cognise that taste of food.' 
For, verily, without intelligence, the two hands do not make 
known any action whatsoever. ‘Our mind was elsewhere/ 
they say, ‘we did not cognise any act/ For, verily, without 
intelligence, the body does not make known pleasure or pain 
whatsoever, ‘my mind was elsewhere/ he says, ‘I did not cognise 
that pleasure or pain/ For, verily, without intelligence, the 
generative organ does not make known bliss, delight and 
procreation whatsoever. ‘My mind was elsewhere/ ^he says, 
‘I did not cognise bliss, delight or procreation/ For, verily,* 
without intelligence the two feet do not make known any 
movement whatsoever. ‘Our mind was elsewhere/ they say, 
‘we did not cognise that movement/ Without intelligence no 
thought whatsoever would be effective. Nothing that can be 
cognised would be cognised. 

THE SUBJECT OF ALL KNOWLEDGE AND ITS CHIEF 

OBJECT 

8 . na vdcam vijijnasita vaktdrcCm vidydt, na gandham vijij- 
hasita ghrdtdram vidydt , na rupam vijijnasita drastaram vidydt, 
na sabdam vijijnasita srotdram vidydt , nanna-rasam vijijhasi- 
tdnnara-sasya vijndtdram vidydt , na karma vijijnasita kdrtaram 
vidydt, na sukha-duhklie vijijnasita sukha-duhkhayor vijndtdram 
vidydt , ndnandam na ratirh na prajdtim vijijhasitanandasya rafeh 
prajdter vijndtdram vidydt, netydm vijijhdsitaitdram vidyat * nft 
mano vijijnasita mantdram vidydt, tavd etd dasaiva bhuta-maka . 
adhiprajnam, dasa prajnd-mdtrd adhibhutam yadd hi bhuta-mdtra 
na syur na prajhd-mdtrdh syar, yad vd prajha-matrd na syur na 
bhuta-matrdh *yuh, na hy anyatarato rupam kiheana sidhyen no 
etan ndnd tad yathd rathasyaresu nemir arpito ndbhav ara hrpita 
evam evaitd bhuta-mdtrdh prajhd-mdtrdsv arpitah, prajhd-mdtrdh 
prane’rpitdh, sa esa prana eva prajhdtmanando' jaro’mrtah, na 
sadhund karmand bhuydn uhavati no evasddhuna kaniydn, e§a hy 



782 The Principal Upanisads III. 8. 

eva sddhu karma karayati tam yam ebhyo lokebhya unnini§ata 
esa u evasadhu karma karayati tam yam adho nimsate, esa 
Ibkapala esa lokadhipatih , esa lokesah , sa ma atmeti vidydt , sa ,ma 
dtmeti vidydt. 

8. Speech is not what one should desire to understand, one 
should know the speaker. Odour is not what one should desire 
to understand, one should know him who smells (the odour). 
Form is not what one should desire to understand, one should 
know the seer (of form). Sound is not what one should desire 
to understand, one should know the hearer. Taste of food is 
not what one should desire to understand, one should know the 
discerner of the taste of food. The deed is not what one should 
desire to understand, one should know the doer. Pleasure and 
pain are not what one should desire to understand, one should 
know the discerner of pleasure and pain. Bliss, delight and 
procreation are not what one should desire to understand, 
one should know^ the discerner of bliss, delight and procreation. 
Movement is not what one should desire to understand, one 
should know the mover. Mind is not what one should desire 
to understand, one should know the minder (the thinker). 
These ten existential elements are with reference to intelligence. 
The ten intelligence elements are with reference to existence. 
For, truly, if there were no elements of existence, there would 
be no elements of intelligence. Verily, if there were no elements 
of intelligence, there would be no elements of existence. For 
from either alone no form whatsoever would be possible. And 
this (the self of intelligence) is not many. For as in a chariot 
the felly is fixed on the spokes and the spokes are fixed on the 
hub, even so these elements of existence are fixed on the ele- 
ments of intelligence and the elements of intelligence are fixed 
in the breathing spirit. This same breathing spirit is, truly, the 
intelligent self, bliss, ageless, immortal. He does not become 
great by good action nor small by evil action. This one, truly, 
indeed causes him whom he wishes to lead up from these worlds 
tc perform good actions. This one, indeed, also causes him whom 
he wishes to lead downward, to perform bad action. He is the 
protector of the world, he is the sovereign of the world, he 
is the lord of all. He is my self, this one should know; he is 
my Self, this one should know. 

We should know the subject as also the object. Knowing and 
being are correlated. The correlativity of the subjective ( prajnd - 
mdtra) and the objective (bhuta-mdtrd) factors is recognised. Inter- 



action between the two gives us the knowledge of the external 
world. Cp. Digha Nikaya: 'There must be the organ of sense, the 
appropriate object and the sense cognition. In the coming together 
of the three in a single mental operation lies the possibility of 
sensation.' I, p. 42. 

The true subject is the Universal Self. The activity of the indi- 
vidual self is derived from the Supreme. It is not independent of 
Isvara: jivasya kartrtvarii farad m bhavati, na tu tat isvara-nira- 
peksam. S.B. II. 3. 41. 



784 


The Principal Upanisads 


IV. 2. 


CHAPTER IV 

A PROGRESSIVE DEFINITION OF BRAHMAN 

1. atha ha vai gargyo hdldkir anucdnah samspasta dsa, so' 
vasad ustnaresu savasan matsyesu kurupahcdlesu kasividehesv 
iti , sa hdjatasatrum kdsyam dbrajyovdca: brahma te bravamti, 
tarn hovaca ajdtasatruh sahasram dadma iti , etasydm vaci janako 
janaka iti vd u jand dhavantiti. 

1. Now then, verily, there was Gargya Balaki,. famous as 
learned in the scriptures, for it was said of him that he dwelt 
among the Usinaras, among the Matsyas, among the Kuru- 
pancalas, among the Kasividehas. He, having come to Ajata- 
£atru of Kasi, said, Let me declare Brahman to yoifc To him 
Ajata^atru, then, said: ‘A thousand (cows) we give to you/ 
At such a speech as this, verily, indeed, -people would run about 
saying, Janaka, Janaka. 

See B.U. II. 1. 

The breathing spirit associated with prajha or intelligence was 
explained in the preceding chapter. Even this, it is now said, is not 
the highest self. 

samspasfah: famous, sarvatra prathita-kirtih. 
savasan matsyesu: v • satvanmatsyesu: among the satvatmatsyas. 
janaka: father, the name of the king of Mithila, who was famous 
for his knowledge of Brahman : brahma-vidyaydh sopayaydh data 
vakta ca pitety evam . . . mithilesvaram eva gacchanti. 

2 . dditye brhac , candramasy annum , vidyuti satyam, stanay- 
itnau sabdo, vdydv indro t/aikuntha, akdise purnam , agnau 
visdsahir iti , opsu teja ity adhidaivatam; athddhyatmam: ddarse 
pratiriipaschdydydm dvitiyah, pratisrutkdyam asur iti sabde 
mrtyuh , svapne yamah , sanre prajapatih, daksine aksini vdcah t 
savye'ksini satyasya. 

* 2 . In the sun the great, in the moon food, in lightning truth, 
in thunder sound, in wind Indra Vaikuntha, in space fullness, 
in fire the vanquisher, in water light, thus with reference to 
the divinities. Now with reference to the self: in the mirror 
the reflection, in the shadow the double, in the echo life, in 
sound death, in sleep Yama (the lord of death), in the body 
Prajd-pati , in the right eye speech, in the left eye truth. 

This passage provides a kind of table of contents for the discussions 
which follow. 



IV. 6. Kautftaki-Brahmana Upanisad 785 

BRAHMAN IN VARIOUS COSMIC PHENOMENA . 

3. sa hovdca balakih , ya evaisa dditye purusas tam evdham 
up as a iti , tam hovdca ajatasatruh , mi maitasmin samvddayistha 
brhat-pandura-vdsa atisthah sarvesam bhutandm murdheti va 
aham etam upasa iti , s# haitam evam upaste’ tisthah sarvesam 
bhutandm murdhd bhavati. 

3. Then Balaki said, 'The person who is in the sun, on him 
indeed do I meditate.' To him, then Ajatasatru said, 'Do not 
make me to converse on him. I meditate on him who is the 
great, clad in white raiment, the supreme, the head of all beings. 
He who meditates on him thus becomes indeed supreme, the 
head of all beings.' 

4. sa hovdca balakih, ya evaisa candramasi purusas tam 
evdham upasa iti, tam hovdca ajatasatruh, ma maitasmin samvd - 
dayistha annasydtmeti va aham etam upasa iti. sa yo haitam 
evam upaste ’nnasydtma bhavati. 

4. Then Bfilaki said: ‘The person who is in the mood, on him 
indeed do I meditate.' To him, then, Ajatasatru said, 'Do not 
make me to converse on him. I meditate on him as the self of 
food. He who meditates on him thus becomes, indeed, the self 
of food.' 

Under whatever qualities we meditate on the Supreme we ourselves 
become possessed of those qualities. 

5. 'sa hovdca balakih, ya evaisa vidyuti purusas tam evdham 
upasa iti, tam hovdca ajatasatruh, nid maitasmin samvddayisthah 
satyasydtmeti va aham etam upasa iti, sayo haitam evam upaste , 
satyasydtmd bhavati. 

5. Then Balaki said, ‘The person who is in the lightning 
on him, indeed, do I meditate.’ To him then Ajatasatru said, 
‘Do not make me to converse on him. I meditate on him as 
the self of truth. He who meditates on him thus becomes, 
indeed, the self of truth.' 

The self of truth; v. tejasyatmd: the self of light. 

6 . sa hovdca balakih, ya evaisa stanayitnan purusas tam 
evdham upasa iti, tam hovdca ajatasatruh, md maitasmin samvd - 
dayistKah, saffdasydtmeti va aham etnm upasa iti, sa yo haitam 
evam update iabdasyatma bhavati. 

6. Then Balaki said, ‘The person who is in the thunder, on 
him, indeed, do I meditate.' To him then Ajatasatru said, ‘Do 



786 The Principal Upani§ads IV. 9. 

not make me to converse on him. I meditate on him as the 
self of sound. He who meditates on him thus becomes, indeed, 
the self of sound/ 

7. sa hovaca bdlakih, ya evaisa vdyau purusas iam evdham 
upasa iti, tam hovaca ajatasatruh , ma maitasmin samvadayisthah, 
indro vaikuntho* pardjita seneti vd aham etam upasa iti , sa yo 
haitam evam updste jisnur ha vd aparajayisnur anyatastyajayl 
bhavati. 

7. Then Balaki said, ‘The person who is in the air, on him, 
indeed, do I meditate/ To him then Ajata£atru said, ‘Do not 
make me to converse on him. I meditate on him as*Indra 
Vaikuntha, the unconquercd army. He who meditates on him 
thus becomes indeed the triumphant, the unconquerable, a 
conqueror of others/ 

jisnuh: triumphant, jayana-silah. 

apardjayisnuh: unconquerable, par air jetum asakya-silah. 

8. sa hovaca bdlakih, ya evaisa akase purusas tam evdham 
upasa iti , tam hovaca ajatasatruh, ma maitasmin samvadayisthah , 
purnam apravrtti brahmeti vd aham etam upasa iti sa yo haitam 
evam updste puryate prajayd pasubhir yasasa brahma-var- 
casena svargena lokena sarvam dyur eti. 

8. Then Balaki said, ‘The person who is in space on him, 
ihdeed, do I meditate/ To him then Ajatasatru said, ‘Do not 
make me to converse on him. I meditate on him as the full 
nonactive Brahman. He who meditates on him thus becomes 
filled with offspring, cattle, fame, the radiance of Brahma- 
knowledge and the heavenly world. He reaches the full term of 
life/ 

a-pravytti: nonactive, kriyd-sunyam. 

9. sa hovaca bdlakih, ya evaiso gnau purusas tam evdham 
upasa iti tam hovaca ajatasatruh, ma maitasmin samvadayisthah, 
Visasahir iti vd aham etam upasa iti sa ho haitam evam 
updste visdsahir ha vd anyesu bhavati. 

9. Then Bfilaki said, ‘The person who is in fire on him, 
indeed, do I meditate/ To him then Ajatasatru said, ‘Do not 
make me to converse on him. I meditate on hitn as the irre- 
sistible. He then who meditates on him thus, verily, becomes 
irresistible among others/ 

visdsahih: irresistible, vividha-sahana-iilah or duhsahah. 



IV. 13- Kau$itaki-Brahmana Upani$ad 787 

10. sa hovaca bdldkih , ya evaiso’psu purusas tam evdham 
upasa iti, tam hovaca ajatasatruh, md maitasmin samvada- 
yisthdh, tejasa dtmeti vd aham etam upasa iti , sa yo haitam evath 
updste tejasa atmd bhavati, iti adhidaivatam , athddhyatmam. 

10. Then Balaki said, ‘The person who is in water on him 
indeed do I meditate/ To him then Ajatasatru said, ‘Do not 
make me to converse on him. I meditate on him as the self of 
light. He then who meditates on him thus verily becomes the 
self of light/ Thus with reference to the divinities. Now with 
reference to the self. 

the self of light: v. ndmnasya atmd, the self of name, its source, 
kdranam. 

• 

11. sa hovaca bdldkih , ya evaisa adarse purusas tam evdham 
upasa iti , tam hovaca ajatasatruh , md maitasmin samvada- 
yisthah, pratirupa iti vd aham etam upasa iti , sa yo haitam 
evam updste pratirupo haivasya prajdydm djdyyte napratirupah . 

11. Then Balaki said, ‘The person who is in the mirror on 
him indeed do I meditate/ To him then Ajatasatru said, ‘Do not 
make me to converse on him. I meditate on him as the (reflected) 
likeness. He then who meditates on him thus a very likeness 
of him is born in his offspring, not an unlikeness/ 

pratirupah: likeness, sadrsah. 

12. sa hovaca bdldkih, ya evaisa chaydydm purusas tam 
evdham upasa iti , tam hovaca ajatasatruh, md maitasmin samvd - 
dayisthah, dvitiyo' napaga iti od aham etam upasa iti. sa yo haitam 
evam updste vindate dvitiyat, dvitiyavdn hi bhavati. 

12. Then Balaki said, ‘The person who is in the shadow on 
him indeed do I meditate/ To him then Ajatasatru said, ‘Do 
not make me to converse on him. I meditate on him as the in- 
separable second. He then who meditates on him thus obtains 
from his second and becomes possessed of his second/ 

anapagah: inseparable, apagamana-sunyah. 
from his second: his wife. 

possessed of his second: possessed of offspring, putra-paulrddibhir 
bhavati. 

13. sa hovaca bdldkih , ya evaisa pratisrutkayam purusas tam 
evdham upasa iti, tam hovaca ajatasatruh, md maitasmin 
samvddayisthdh , asur iti vd aham etam upasa iti, sa yo haitam 
evam updste na purd kdldt ^ ammoham eti. 



788 The Principal Upani§ads IV. 16. 

13. Then Balaki said, ‘The person who is in the echo on him 
indeed do I meditate/ To him then Ajatasatru said, ‘Do not 
make me to converse on him. I meditate on him as life. He 
then who meditates on him thus, he does not pass into un- 
consciousness before his time/ 

echo , v. chdya: shadow. 

He does not pass into unconsciousness, does not die before his 
time: sammoham maranam. 

"14. sa hovdca bdlakih , ya evaisa sabde purusas lam evdham 
updsa iti t tam hovdca ajdtasatruh, md maitasmin samvddayisthdh 
mrtyur iti vd aham etam updsa iti , sa yo haitam evam upaste na 
purd kdldt praitUi. 

14. Then Balaki said, ‘The person who is in sound on him 
indeed do I meditate/ To him then Ajatasatru said, ‘Do not 
make me to converse on him. I meditate on him as death. He 

then who meditates on him thus, does not die before his time/ 

• % 

15. sa hovdca bdlakih , ya evaitat purusah suptah svapnaya 
carati tam evdham updsa iti , tam hovdca ajata&atruh, md 
maitasmin samvddayisthdh , yamo rajeti vd aham etam updsa iti, 
sa yo haitam evam upaste sarvam hdsmd idam sraisthyaya 
yamyate. 

15. Then Balaki said, ‘The person, who, while asleep, 
fnoves about in a dream on him indeed do I meditate/ To him 
then Ajatasatru said, ‘Do not make me to converse on him. 
I meditate on him as King Yama. He then who meditates on 
him thus, all here is subdued for his excellence (welfare)/ 

sraisthyaya: for his excellence, adhikatvaya. 

16. sa hovdca bdlakih; y a evaisa sarire purusas tam evdham 
updsa iti , tam hovdca ajdtasatruh , md maitasmin samvddayisthdh , 
prajapatir iti vd aham etam updsa iti , sa yo haitam evam upaste 
prajdyate prajaya pasubhir yasasd brahma-varcasena svargena 
loizena sarvam dyur eti. 

• j i6. Then Balaki said, ‘The person who is in the body on 
him, indeed, do 1 meditate/ To him then Ajatasatru said, ‘Do 
not make me to converse on him. I meditate on him as Praja- 
pati (the lord of creation). He then who meditate*s on him thus, 
becomes increased with offspring, cattle, fame, the radiance 
of sanctity, the heavenly world, he reaches the full term of life/ 

prajdyate: becomes increased, vyddhir bhavati. 



IV. 19. Kausftaki-Brahmana Upanisad 789 

1 7. sa hovdca balakih , ya evaisa daksinc’ ksini purusas tam 
evdham updsa iti , tam hovdca ajdtasatruh, md maitasmin samvd- 
dayisthdh, vdca dtmagner dtmd jyotisa dtmeti vd ah am etam 
updsa iti , sa yo haitam evam updsta etesdm sarvesdm dtmd 
bhavati. 

17. Then Balaki said, ‘The person who is in the right eye 
on Mm, indeed, do I meditate/ To him then Ajatasatru said, 
'Do not make me to converse on him. I meditate on him as 
the self of. speech, the self of fire, the self of light. He then 
who meditates on him thus becomes the self of all these/ 

18. % sa hovdca balakih , ya evaisa savye ksini purusas tam 
evdham updsa iti , tam hovdca ajdtasatruh , md maitasmin 
samvadafosthah , satyasyatmd, vidyuta dtmd, tejasa dtmeti vd 
aham etam updsa iti , sa yo haitam evam updsta etesdm sarvesdm 
dtmd bhavati. 

18. Then Balaki said, ‘The person who is in the left eye on 
him, indeed, do I meditate/ To him then Ajatasatru said, 'Do 
not make me to converse on him. I meditate on him as the 
self of truth, the self of lightning, the self of light. He then 
who meditates on him thus becomes the self of all these. 

THE UNIVERSAL SELF IN THE HEART 

19. tata u ha baldkis tfisnim dsa, tam hovdca ajdtasatruh , 
etavann u bdlakd iti } etdvad iti hovdca balakih, tam hovdca 
ajdtasatruh, mrsd vai * khalu md samvddayisthd brahma te 
bravdmti. yo vai bdldka etesdm purusdndm kartd, yasya vai tat 
karma, sa vai veditavya iti: tata u ha balakih samit pdnih prati- 
cakrama upayaniti, tam hovdca ajdtasatruh, pratiloma riipam eva 
tan manye yat ksatriyo brdhmanam * upanayetaihi vyeva, tvd 
jhapayisyamiti, tam ha pdndv abhipadya pravavraja tau ha 
suptam purusam djagmatuh, tam hdjatasatruh amantraydm- 
cakre, brhat pdndara-vdsah soma-rdjann iti , sa u ha sisya eva, 
tata u hainarh yastyavieiksepa sa tata eva samuttasthau tam 
hovdca ajdtasatruh, kvaisa etad bdldke puruso’sayista, kvaiLtd 
abhut, kuta etad agad iti, tata u ha bdldkir va vijajhe, tam 
hovdca ajdtasatruh , yatraisa etad bdldke purusu’sayisla, yatraitad 
pabhut, yata etad dgdd iti , hitd ndma purusasya nddyo hrdayat 
uritatam abhipratanvanti, tad yathd sahasradhd keso vipatitas 
tdvad anvyah pingalasydnimnd tisthanti, suklasya krsnasya 
pitasya lohitasya ca, tdsu tadd bhavati yadd suptah svapnam 
na kancana paiyati . 



79 ° The Principal Upanisads IV. 20. 

19. After this Balaki became silent. Then Ajatasatru said 
to him, ‘Thus far only (do you know), O Balaki? 1 Thus far 
6nly/ replied Balaki. To him then Ajatasatru said, ‘In vain 
indeed did you make me to converse saying, “Let me declare 
Brahman to you,” He, verily, 0 Balaki, who is the maker of 
these persons (whom you have mentioned in succession), he of 
whom all this is the work, he alone is to be known/ Thereupon 
Balaki, with fuel in his hand, approached, saying, ‘Receive me 
as a pupil/ To him then Ajatasatru said, ‘This I deem a form 
(of conduct) contrary to nature that a Ksatriya should receive 
a Brahmana as a pupil. Come, I shall make you understand/ 
Then taking him by the hand he went forth. The two then 
came upon a person asleep. Then Ajatasatru called hinj (saying), 
‘You great one, clad in white raiment, King Soma/ But he 
just lay silent. Thereupon he pushed him with a stick. He got 
up at once. To him, then, Ajatasatru said: ‘Where, in this case, 
O Balaki, has this person lain, what has become of him here, 
from where has he returned here?' Thereupon (of this) Balaki 
did not know. To him, then, Ajatasatru said: Where, in this 
case, O Balaki, this person has lain, what has become of him 
here, from where has he returned here, as I asked, is the 
channels of a person called hita extending from heart to the 
surrounding body (pericardium). As minute as a hair divided 
a thousandfold, they consist of a thin essence (fluid) white, 
black, yellow and red. In these, one remains, while asleep he 
sees no dream whatsoever. 

See B.U. II. 1. 16. 
mrsa: in vain, vitatham. 

veditavyah: is to be known, directly apprehended, sdksatkdranlyah. 

When the Brahmana became humbled in his pride, the king 
accepted him as his pupil, apagata-garvam brahmanam dlnatamdm 
avasthdm praptam. 

sisyc: lay silent, sayanam cakre ; v. sisya: pupil. 

Mvhiksepa : pushed, a samantdt taditavan. 


ULTIMATE UNITY IN THE SELF 

20. athdsmin prana evaikadhd bhavati , tad enUm vak sarvair 
namabhih sahapyeti , caksuh sarvaih rupaih sahapyeti , srotram 
sarvaih sabdaih sahapyeti, manah sarvair dhydnaih sahapyeti , 
sa yadd pratibudhyate yathdgner jvalatah sarvd diso visphulihgd 
vipratistherann evam evaitasmad atmanah prana yathdyatanam 



IV. 20. Kausttaki-Brahmana Upanisad 791 

vipratisthante , prdnebhyo deva devebhyo lokah , sa csa prana eva 
prajndtrriedam sanram dtmanam anupravista alomabhya dnakhe - 
bhyah, tad yathd ksurah ksura dhdne' vopahito visvambhart) 
vd visvambharakuldya evam evaisa prajhdtmedam sanram 
dtmanam anupravista alomabhya anakhebhyah , tarn etam dtmanam 
eta atmano’nvavasyante: yathd sresthinam svas tad yathd srestho 
svair bhunkte yathd vd svdh sresthinam bhxmjanty evam evaisa 
prajhdtmaitair dtmabhir bhuhktam evam evaita atmdna etam 
dtmanam bhunjanti sa yavaddha vd indra etam dtmanam na 
vijajne , tavad enam asura abhibabhuvuh, sa yadd vijajnetha 
hatvasiirdn vijitya , sarvesdm ca devdndm, sarvesdm ca bhutdndm 
sraisthyam svarajyam , ddhipatyam paryait tatho evaivam vidvan 
sarvan pgpmano ! pahatya sarvesdm ca bhutdndm sraisthyam , 
svarajyam , ddhipatyam paryeti ya evam veda, ya evam veda. 

20. Then in this life-breath alone he becomes one. Then 
speech together with all names goes to it. The eye together with 
all forms goes to it. The ear together with ajl sounds goes to 
it. The mind together with all thoughts goes to it. And when he 
awakes, then, as from a blazing fire sparks proceed in all 
directions, even so from this self the vital breaths proceed to 
their respective stations; from vital breaths, the sense powers; 
from the sense powers the worlds. This very life-spirit, even 
the self of intelligence has entered this bodily self to the very 
hairs anctnails. Just as a razor might be hidden in a razor-case 
or as fire in the fireplace, even so this self of intelligence has 
entered this bodily self up to the very hairs and nails. On that 
self these other selves depend as upon a chief his own (men). 
Just as a chief enjoys his own (men) or as his own (men) are 
of service to a chief, even so this sense of intelligence enjoys these 
(other) selves, even so the (other) selves are of service to that 
self (of intelligence). Verily, as long as Indra did not understand 
this self, so long did the demons overcome him. When he 
understood, then (the self) having struck down and overcome 
the demons, he attained pre-eminence among all gods and'ali 
beings, sovereignty and overlordship. So also he who kno^s 
this, striking off all evils, attains pre-eminence, sovereignty 
and overlordship over all beings — he who knows this, yea, he 
who knows this. 

visvambharah: fire, agnih. 
bhuhkte: enjoys or feeds, annam atti. 

abhibabhuvuh : overcame, humiliated, abhibhavam pardbhavam'cakruh. 


CC 




MAITRl UPANISAD 

The Maitri or Maitrayaniya Upanisad, belongs to the 
Maitrayanlya sakha or branch of the Black Yajur Veda . 1 Maitri 
is the principal teacher and Maitrayana is the name of the sakha 
to which the Upanisad belongs. It contains seven chapters 
of which the last two are comparatively modern. The whole 
Upanisad is later in date than the classical Upanisads which 
it quotes frequently. 2 We have a reference to the trimurti 
conception* Brahma, Visnu and 3 iva in IV. 5, which also 
indicates the late date of the Upanisad. The three forms are 
traced’ to the three gunas, rajas, sattva and tamas in V. 2. 
Suggestions of the illusory character of the world, momen- 
tariness (Jf phenomena show the influence of Buddhist thought. 
Ramatirtha’s commentary on the Upanisad is of much interest. 


1 In some texts it is assigned tft the Sama Veda 

1 From the grammatical peculiarities found m this Upanisad Max 
Muller ascribes the Upanisad ‘to an early rather than to a late period, 
possibly to an anti-Paninean period.’ Sat red Books of the Bast, Vol. XV 
(1900), p. 6. 




Maitri Upanisad 


7 95 


I. 2. 


CHAPTER I 

MEDITATION ON THE SELF. EVANESCENCE OF THE 

WORLD 

i. brahma-yajno va esa yat purvesdm cayanani, tasmad yaja- 
mdnas citvaitan agnln atmanam abhidhydyet; sa purnah khaln 
va addha' vikalah sampadyate yajhah , kah so'bhidhyeyo’yam yah 
prdndkhyah; tasyopakhydnam. 

1. A sacrifice to Brahman , indeed, is the laying (of the 
sacrificial fires) of the ancients. Therefore let the sacrifices 
having laid these fires, meditate on the self. Thus, verily, does 
the sacrifice become complete and flawless. Who is he that is 
to be meditated upon? He who is called life. Of him there is 
this story. 

purvesdm: of the ancients or formerly described. The performance 
of the sacrifices described previously in the Maitrdyana Ijrahmana 
is to lead up in the end to the knowledge of Brahman. 

According to Ramatlrtha, 1 the purpose of the Upanisad is to 
show that ceremonial works insofar as they contribute to produce 
the knowledge of the Supreme Self are themselves indirect causes of 
the highest end of man: sarvesam karmanam paramdtma-jhana- 
janmopakarakatvena parama-purusdrtha-hetutvam darsayitum srutih 
pravavfte. 

khalu : verily, niscitam vai prasiddham. 

2. brhadratho vai ndma rdjd virdjye pntrarh nidhdpayittvedam 
asasvatam manyamdnah sariram vairagyam upeto'ranyam nirja- 
gdma. sa tatra paramam tapa dsthdyadityam udiksamana urdhva- 
bdhus tisthati; ante sahasrasya munir antikam djagamagnir ivd 
dhumakas tejasd nirdahann ivdtmavid bhagavdh sdkdyanyah , 
utthisthothistha varam vrmsveti rdjdnam abravtt, sa tasmai 
namaskrtvovdca , bhagavan, ndham atmavit tvam tattvavit 
susrumo vayam t sa tvam no bruhiti; etad vrttam purastdd duhsaji- 
yam etat-prasnam aiksvdkdnydn kdmdn vrmsveti sdkdyanyah^, 
sirasdsya carandv abhimrsamdno rdjemam gdthdrh jagdda. 

2. Verily, a king, Brhadratha by name, after having estab- 
lished his son in the kingdom, reflecting that this body is 
non-eternal, reaching the state of non-attachment (to the 
things of the *world) went into the* forest. There, performing 
extreme austerity, he stands, with uplifted arms, gazing at 
the sun. At the end of a thousand (days) there came into the 

* Unless otherwise stated, ali references are from Ramatirtha. 



796 The Principal Upanisads I. 4. 

presence of the ascetic, like a fire without smoke, burning as 
it were with glow, the revered Sakayanya, the knower of the 
$elf. He said unto the king: ‘Arise, arise, choose a boon/ He 
did his obeisance and said, ‘O Revered One, I know not the 
self. We have heard that you know its nature. So tell it unto 
us/ Sakayanya replied, ‘Such things used to occur formerly. 
Very difficult (to answer) is this question. O Aiksvaka, choose 
other desires/ The king, touching his (Sakayanya's) feet with 
his head recited this utterance. 

sahasrasya: a thousand ; at the end of a thousand years, sahasrasarii- 
vatsardnte . V. sahasrdhasya , a thousand days. 
vairdgya: non-attachment, rdga-nivftti. 

tattvavit: dtmatattvasya vettd: the knower of the nature of the self. 
dussakyam: dussakam vaktum srotum ca durlabham etat. 
aiksvaka: iksvdku-kulodbhava. 

3. bhagavann asthi-carma-snqyu-majjd-mdmsa-sukra-sonita 
slesmd-sru-dusiku-vin-mritra-vdta-pitta-kapha-saMgliatc durgan - 
dhe nihsdre’ smin sarlre him kdmopabhogaih? kama-krodha-lobha- 
moha- bhaya-visddersyestaviyogdnista-samprayoga-ksut-pipdsd- 
jard mrtyu-roga-sokddyair abhihate asmin sarlre kim kdmo- 
pabhogaih? 

3. O Revered One, in this foul-smelling, unsubstantial body, 
0 conglomerate of bone, skin, muscle, marrow, flesh, semen, 
blood, mucus, tears, rheum, faeces, urine, wind, ’bile and 
phlegm, what is the good of the enjoyment of desires? In this 
body which is afflicted with desire, anger, covetousness, 
delusion, fear, despondency, envy, separation from what is 
desired, union with the undesired, hunger, thirst, old age, 
death, disease, sorrow and the like, what is the good. of the 
enjoyment of desires? 

nihsdre : unsubstantial, kadallstambliavan nihsdre , antah-sdra-varjitc . 
kdma: desire, desire for what one has not got, apraptabhilasah . 
cnoha: delusion, anarthe' rtha-buddhih. 

Such descriptions of the human being occur in Buddhist literature 
aiid are intended to create disgust for the human existence. 

Cp. Manu VI. 62. 

‘On their separation from those whom they love and their union 
with those whom they hate, on their strength overpowered by old 
age and their bodies racked with disease/ 

4. sarvam cedam ksayisnu pasydmo yatheme damsa-ma- 

iakddayas-trna-vanaspatayodbhiita-pradhvamsinah , atha kim 



I. 4. Maitri Upanisad 797 

etair vd pare'nye maha-dhanur-dharcis cakra-vartinah kecit , sud- 
yumna-bhuridytimnendradyumna-kuvalaydsva-yauvandsva-vadhry 
asvdsvapatili sasabindur hariscayidro'mbarisa-ndnahtu-sarydii- 
yayatyanaranyohsasenadayah , atha ynarutta-bharata-prabhriayo 
rdjdnah , misato bandhu-vargasya mahatim sriyam tyaktva smdl 
lokdd amam lokam praydtd iti, atha him etair vd pare'nye gand- 
harvdsura -yaksa - rdksasa - hhitta -gana- pisdcoraga- grahddinCim 
nirodham pasydmah , atha him etair vanydndm sosanam mahdrna- 
vdndm sikharindm prapatanam dhruvasya pracalanam vrascanam 
vdtarajjundm nimajjanam pfthivydh sthdndd apasaranam surd- 
ndm ity etad-vidho’ smin samsdre him kdmopabhogaih, yair 
evdsitasydsakrd ihdvartanam drsyata ity uddhartum arhasi, 
andhodapdnastho bheka ivdiham asmin samsdre bhagavan tvam 
no gatis ttiam no gatih. 

4. And we see that all this is perishing, as these gnats, 
mosquitoes and the like, the grass and the trees that grow 
and decay, hut, indeed, what of these? There are others, 
superior, great w r arriors, some world-rulers, Sfldyumna, Bhuri- 
dyumna, Indradyumna, Kuvalayasva, Yauvanasva, Vadhr- 
yasva, Asvapati, Sasabindu, Ilariscandra, Ambarlsa, Ananakta, 
Saryati, Yayati, Anaranya, Uksasena, and the rest; Kings, 
too, such as Marutta, Bharata and others, with their whole 
families looking on, they renounced great wealth and went 
forth from this world into that. But, indeed, what of theses 
There are others, superior. We see the destruction of Gandharvas 
(fairies), A suras (demons), Yaksas (sprites), Rdksasas (ogres), 
Bhiitas (ghosts), Ganas, Pisdcas (goblins), snakes, vampires, and 
the like. But, indeed, what of these? Among other things, 
there is the drying up of great oceans, the falling away of 
mountain peaks, the deviation of the fixed pole-star, the cutting 
of the wind-ropes (that hold the stars in their places), the 
submergence of the earth, the departure of the gods from 
their station. In such a world as this, what is the good *)f 
enjoyment of desires? Tor he who has fed on them is scei\ tg 
return (to this world) repeatedly. Be pleased, therefore, to 
deliver me. In this world (cycle of existence) I am like a frog Tn 
a waterless well. Revered Sir, you arc our way (of deliverance), 
you are our way. 

Everything in the world is transient. It rises and grows, dfccays 
and dies, udbhuta-pradhvamsinah. Cp. Henry Vaughan: ‘Suddenly 
do the high things of this world come to an end, and their delectable 
things pass away, for when they seem to be in their flower and full 



The Principal Upanisads 1. 4. 

strength, they perish to astonishment. And sure the mine of the 
most goodly places seems to tell, that the dissolution of the whole is 
not far off.’ Mount of Olives (1652). 

• After Ambarisa, name of Nahusa is given in some texts. Ananata 

is the name of a Rsi in R.V. IX. 3. 

nirodham: destruction ; another reading, nirodhanam. 



II. 2. 


Maitn Upanisad 


799 


CHAPTER II 

SAKAYANYA’S TEACHING CONCERNING THE 

SELF 

i. atha bhagavan sdkdyanya/i suprito’bravTd rdjdinam , maha- 
raja brhadratheksvdkii-vamsa-dhvaja slghram dtmajnah krta-kt tyas 
tvam marunndmneti visnito'siti , ayam vd va khalv dtmd te , yah 
katamo bhagava iti , tarn hovdceti. 

1. Then; the revered Sakayanya, well pleased, said to the 
king: ‘Great King Brhadratha, banner of the race of Iksvaku, 
speedily will you who are renowned as Marut (the wind) attain 
your purpose and become a knower of the self. This, indeed, is 
thy self/* 

‘Which, O Revered One,’ said the King. 

Then he said to him. 

dchcndriya mano buddhi prdndndm madhye kiln anyatdmah kim 
vd tad vilaksane anya iti prasniirthah , tatra saiiighdtavilaksana 
evatmeti gurur uttar am pratijajhe. 

The question is raised whether the self is different from the body, 
the senses, mind, understanding and life and the answer is given 
that the self is different from the composite of all these. 

The teaching concerning the self continues till VI. 2 b. 

2 . atha ya esa ucchvdsdvistambhanenordhvam ntkrdnto vyaya- 
mdno'vyayamdnas tamah pranudaty esa dtmd , ity aha bhagavan 
maitrih , ity evam hy aha , atha ya esa samprasddo' smdc charTrdt 
samutthdya param jyotir upasampadya svena rupendbhinis- 
padyata ity esa dtmeti hovdcaitad amrtam , abhayam , etad brahmeti. 

2. Now he who, without stopping the respiration, goes 
upwards, moving about yet unmoving, dispels darkness, he is 
the self. Thus said the revered Maitri. For thus has it been 
said, ‘Now that serene one, who, rising up out of this body, 
reaches the highest light and appears with his own form,*h6 
is the self,’ said he, ‘that is the immortal, the fearless. That js 
Brahman # 

See C.U. VIII. 3. 4. 

moving about , pet unmoving: while he* experiences the changes of 
the mind caused by impressions, he is in reality unaffected by them 
all. 

maitrir mitrdyd apatyam rsir maitvir maitreyah. 

He is the proclaimer of this sdkhd, etat-sakhd-pravaktd. 

cc" 



8oo The Principal Upanisads II. 4. 

sarirdt: from this body, both the gross ( sthula ) and the subtle 
(suksma). 

samprasadah : samyak prasidaty atreti samprasadah susuptih tad - 
avasthah dtmeha samprasdda ncyate. Tt is the self in deep sleep. 

3. atha khalv iyam brahma-vidyd sarvopanisad-vidya vd rdjann 
asmakam bhagavatd maitrinakhydtaham te kathayisydmiti , 
athdpahata-pdpmdnas tigma-tejasd iirdhva-retaso vdlikhilyd iti 
sruyante, atha hr at um prajdpatim abruvan, bhagavan sakatam 
ivacetanam idam sarlram kasyaisa ' khalv idrso mahimatin- 
driya-bhutasya enaitad-vidham etac cetanavat pratisthdpitam 
pracodayitd vd asya, yad bhagavan vetsi tad asmakam bruhlti , 
tan hovdceti. 

3. Now, indeed, O King, this is the brahma knowledge, 
even the knowledge contained in all the Upanisads as declared 
to us by the revered Maitri. I will narrate it to you. Now we 
hear that Valikhilyas were free from evil, of resplendent glory 
and vigorous chastity. Now they said to Kratu Prajd-pati , 
‘O Revered One, this body is like a cart without intelligence. 
To what supersensuous being belongs such power by which 
such a sort of thing has been made intelligent, or in other 
words, who is its mover? What you know, O Revered One, 
tell us that/ Then he said to them. 

The conversation between Valikhilyas and Praja-pati continues 
till the end of IV. 6. 

apahata-pdpmdnah: free from evil. Those who freed themselves from 
evil by severe austerities, tapo-nirdhuta-kalmasdh. 
tigma-tejasdh: of resplendent glory or transcendent radiance, tlvra- 
te jasdh , atyuvpta - pvabhdvdh. 

urdhva-retasdh: of vigorous chastity, askhalita-brahmacaryd jiten 
driydh. 

Cp. mano-vdg-drsti-Yctah sydd ay am dtmdksarah parah , 
baddha-reta vimucyeta mukta-retdb tu badhyate. 

1 yo ha khalu vdvoparisthah srdyate gunesvivordhva-retasah sa 
iW esa suddhah pfitah sunyah sdnto’prdno nirdtmdnanto , ksayyah 
sthirah sdsvato’jah svat an trail sve mahimni tisthaty ajenedam 
sarlram edanavat pratisthdpitam pracodayitd vaiso py asyeti , te 
hocur t bhagavan , katham anenedrsendnisthenaitad-vidham idam 
cetanavat pratisthdpitam pracodayitd vaiso’sya katham iti , tan 
hovdea. 

4. He, who is reputed as standing aloof amidst qualities, 
like those of vigorous chastity, he indeed, is pure, clean, void. 



II. 5. Maitri Upanisad 801* 

tranquil, breathless, mindless, endless, undecaying, steadfast, 
eternal, unborn, independent. He abides in his own greatness. 
By him this body is set up as possessing intelligence or in othe* 
words, this one, verily, is its driver. Then they said, ‘How, 
Revered sir, by this kind of desireless being is this sort of thing 
set up as possessing intelligence, or in other words, how is this 
one its mover?' Then he said to them. 

uparisthah: standing aloof, sarvasya prapahcasyopari nisprapahca 
svarupe'vastkitah. 

urdhva-retasah: may be taken as vocative also. ‘He who, O men of 
vigorous chastity, is described in the Sruti as dwelling amidst worldly 
objects and yet placed above them all. 1 This is more satisfactory. 
sunyah: void, nisprapahcah. 
santah : tranquil, nirvikarah kutasihah. 

nirdtmd: mindless, dtmcti mana ucyate , mano -rahitah , samkalpddhy - 
avasayadi-dharma-rahitah . 

Anubhuti-prakasa reads amsdUryi. (60). 

‘He abides in his own greatness.' See C.U. VII. 2^. 
anisthena: free from any local habitation or attachment. 
v. anistena: istam, icchd, icchd, rahitah , desircless. 
or anisthena suksmat arena, smallest. 

5. sa vd esa sfiksmo’ grdhyo' drsyah purusa-sariijno’buddhi- 
pfirvam ihaivdvartate mseneti suptasyevdbitddhi-purvam vibodlui 
evam iti, atha yo ha kliala vcivaitasydniso’yam yas caitdmdtrcrii 
pratipurusah ksetrajilah s amkalpd d hyavasdyd bhimdnal mgah, 
prajd-patir visvdkhyas cetancncdam sariram cetanavat pratisthd- 
pitam pracodayitd vaiso’pyasyeti, to hocur bhagavan, yady 
anenedrsendnisthenaitad-vidham idarii cetanavat pratisthdpitam 
pracodayitd vaiso’sya katham iti: tan hovdeeti. 

5. Verily, that subtile, ungraspable, invisible one, called the 
person, dwells here (in the body) with a part (of himself), 
with previous awareness (volition) even as the man who is 
fast asleep awakes of his own awareness (volition). Now, 
assuredly that part of him, which is entirely intelligent in every 
person is the spirit (knower of the body) which has the marks of 
conception, determination and self-love, Praja-pati called 
Visva. By him as intelligence is his body set up as possessed of 
intelligence, or in other words this very one is its mover. Then 
they said, ‘Revered sir, if by this kind of desireless bein$ this 
sort of thing is set up as possessed of intelligence, still, how 
is this one its mover?' Then he said to them. 

buddhi-purvam is the reading adopted by Anubhutiprakdsa 67.68. 



8o2 The Principal Upanisads II. 6. 

A man if he likes can wake himself from sleep. Another reading is 
a-buddhi-purvam, without previous awareness or volition. 
fysetrajnah: knower of the body, ksetram sariram tad aham asmlti 
jdnatiti ksetrajnah. 

PROGRESSIVE DIFFERENTIATION OF PRAJA-PATI 
INTO DIFFERENT TYPES OF BEINGS 

6. prajd-patir vii eko'gretisthat, sa ndram ataikah, sotmanam 
abhidhydtvd bahvih prajd asrjata , ta asmevdprabuddhd aprandh 
sthdnur iva tisthamdna apasyat, sa ndramata , so 'manyataitasam 
pratibodhandydbhyantaram vivisdmi , sa vdyur ivdtmdnam . krtvd- 
bhyantaram prdvitat. sa eko ndsakat: sa pahcadhdtmanam 
vibhajyocyate , yah prano' pdnah santdna udano vydna iti h athdyam 
ya ftrdhvam utkrdmaty esa vd va sa prdno’tha yo'yam avdh 
samkrdmaty esa vd va so pano' tha yena vd etd anugrhita ity 
esa vd va sa vyano’tha yo'yam sthavistho dhdtur annasyapane 
prdpayaty anistbp vdngehge samdhayaty esa vd va sa samana- 
samjhd uttar am vydnasya rupam caitesdm antard prasutir 
evoddnasydtha yo'yam pitdsitam udgirati nigivatiti vaisa vd va sa 
uddnah, athopdmsnr antarydmam abhibhavaty antarydma uparh- 
suhcaitayor antard devausnyam prdsuvat. yad ausnyam sa 
puraso'tha yah purusah so'gnir vaisvdnarah. anyatrdpy aktam y 
ayam agnir vaisvdnaro yo'yam antah-puruse yenedam annam 
pacyate yad idam adyate , tasyaisa ghoso bhavati. yam etat 
karndv apidhdya srnoti sa yado utkramisyan bhavati nainarh 
ghosam srnoti , sa vd esa pahcadhdtmanam vibhajya nihito 
guhdydm, mano-mayah prdna-sanro bhd-rfipah satya-samkalpa 
dkdsatmeti. sa vd eso'smdd hrdantardd akrtdrtho'manyatarthdn 
asndmti. atah khdnlmdni bhittvoditah pahcabhi rasmibhir visaydn 
atti, iti buddhlndriydni ydmmdny etdny asya rasmayah karmen- 
driydny asya hayd , rathah sariram , mano niyantd, prakrti- 
mayo'sya pratodo' nena khalviritah paribhramatulam sariram 
cdkram iva mrtyavenedam sariram cetanavat pratisthdpitam 
prCicodayitd vaiso' pyasyeti. 

t 6. Verily, in the beginning Prajd-pati (the lord of creatures) 
stood alone. He had no happiness, being alone. Then, medi- 
tating on himself, he created numerous offspring. He saw 
them to be like a stone, \vithout understanding,, without life, 
standing like a post. He had no happiness. He then thought 
to himself, ‘Let me enter within in order to awaken (enlighten) 
them.' He made himself like wind and sought to enter into him. 
Being one, he could not do it. He divided himself fivefold and 



II. 6. Maitrl Upanisad 803 

is called prana , apdna , samana, uddna, vydna (five kinds of 
breath). That breath which rises upwards that, assuredly, is 
the prana (breath). Now that which moves downwards, that, 
assuredly, is the apdna (breath). Now that, verily, by which 
these two are supported, that, assuredly, is the vydna (breath). 
Now that which carries unto the apdna breath gross elements 
of food and distributes the subtle (elements) in each limb, 
that, assuredly, is called samana (breath). It is a higher form of 
the vydna (breath) and between them is the production of the 
uddna (breath). That which brings up or carries down what 
has been drunk and eaten is the uddna (breath). Now the 
upamsu vessel is over against the antarydma vessel and the 
antarydma vessel is over against the upamsu vessel and between 
these twf) the god generated heat. That heat is the person and 
the person is the universal lire. And thus it is said elsewhere, 
‘This is the universal fire namely that which is here within a 
person by means of which «the food that is eaten i§ cooked 
(digested). Its noise is that which one hears on covering the 
eyes thus. When a man is about to depart this life he does not 
hear this noise/ He, verily, having divided himself fivefold 
is hidden in a secret place, he who consists of mind, whose 
body is life, whose form is light, whose conception is truth, 
whose soul is space. Verily, not having attained his purpose, 
he thought to himself from within the heart here, ‘Let me 
enjoy objects/ Thence having pierced these openings (the five 
apertures of the senses), he enjoys the objects by means of the 
five reins. These reins of his are the organs of perception. His 
horses are the organs of action. His chariot is the body. The 
charioteer is the mind. The whip is made of one’s character. By 
him thus driven, this body goes round, and round like the wheel 
(driven) by the potter. So this body is set up as possessing 
intelligence or in other words, this very one is its mover. 

ekah : with no one to help, asahdyah. 
agre: before creation, car dear asystch purvam. 
asmeva: pdsanavad acetanah. 
aprabuddhdh: buddhi - rahitdh . 

upamsu and antarydma are the two (grahas) vessels for holding 
the soma juice. They are placed on cither side of the stone used 
for crushing tile soma plant. See Taittirlya Samhitd I. 4. 2. 3; 
VI. 4. 5.6. 

Thus it is said elsewhere: B.U. V. 9; C.U. III. 13. 8. 

guhayam: in a secret place, guhati samvynoti jhdndnandddyatisayam 

iti guhd buddhih. It conceals the excess of knowledge, joy, etc. 



804 The Principal Upanisads II. 7. 

bha-rupah: whose form is light, bhd cit-prakaso rupam svarupam 
asyeti bha-rupah. 

satya-samkalpah: whose conception is truth, satydh samkalpd avasyam - 
bhavinah purva-kyta-jndna-karma-samskara-bhdvitdh samkalpd asyeti 
satya-samkalpah. 

dkasatma: whose soul is space, dkasavad asahgo'grahya dtmd svarupam 
asyety dkasatma. 

cakram iva mytyavcncdam , v. cakram iva mrtpacenedam. 

7. sa vd esa dtmehosanti kavayah, sitdsitaih karmaphalair 
anabhibhuta iva prati sartresu caraty avyaktatvdt ' sauksmydd 
adrsyatvdd agrdhyatvdn nirmamatvdc cdmavastho' sati kartd’kar - 
tairvdvasthaJj , sa vd esa suddhah sthiro'calas cdlepyo’vyagro 
nisprhah preksakavad avastliitah svasthas ca, rtabhug gunamayena 
patendtmdnam antardhdydvasthitd ity avasthitd iti. 

7. Verily, this self, the seers declare, wanders here on earth 
in every body (from body to body) unaffected, as it seems, 
by the light or the dark fruits q f action. On account of this 
unmanifestness, 1 subtility, imperceptibility, ungraspability, 
freedom from self-sense, (the self) is unabiding and a doer only 
in seeming, truly is not a doer, he is abiding. Verily, he is pure, 
steadfast, unswerving, stainless, unagitated, free from desire, 
remains fixed like a spectator and abiding in his own self. 
As an enjoyer of righteous work he covers himself with a veil 
rvade of qualities, but he remains fixed, yea, he remains fixed. 

kavayah: seers, medhdvinah. 
anabhibhutah: unaffected, asamsprstah. 

lie is a seer, a witness, not an object seen, avasthd4raya-rahito f 
vasthd-sdksitvdt 11a hi drsyadliarmo drastarl uparajyatc. 
nispyhah: free from desire, pari pur na-paramdnanda-rupatvdt spyhani- 
ydbhdvdt. 

preksaka: spectator, udasina. The impartial looker-on of the drama 
of which all the world, ourselves included, is the stage. 

The suggestion that the self assuming the form of an enjoyer 
wanders in the world of samsara is made here, evam-vidha evdtmd 
ganhmaycna patena trigundvulydmayendvarancndtmdnam nitya-sud- 
dhptvddirupam antardhdya. kanna-phala-bhoktd samsariva bhasamdno 
vartate. 



III. 2. MaitriUpanisad 805 

CHAPTER III 

THE GREAT SELF AND THE INDIVIDUAL SOUL 

1. te hocuh, bhagavan , yady evam asy dtmano mahimdnam 
sucayaslty anyo vd par ah; ko' yam dtmakhyo y o’ yam sitdsitaih 
karma-phalair abhibhuyamdnah sad-asad-yonim dpadyatd ity 
avdncyordhvd vd gatir dvandvair abhibhuyamdnah paribhramati. 

1. They (the Valikhilyas) said (to Prajd-pati Kratu), ‘Revered 
One, if you thus indicate the greatness of this self then there 
is that othfcr, different one also called self, who, affected by 
the bright or dark fruits of action, enters a good or an evil 
womb* so that his course is downward or upward and he 
wanders about, alfected by the pairs (of opposites like pleasure 
and painjf. 

2. asti khalvanyo’ paro bhutdtmdkliyo yo yam sitdsitaih karma- 
phalair abhibhuyamdnah sad-asad-yonim dpadyatd ity avdih- 
cyordhvd vd gatir dvandvair. abhibhuyamdnah paribhramatity 
asyopavydkhydnam, pahea-tanmatrd bhula-saddenocyante , atha 
pahca-mahd-bhfitdni bhilta-sabdenocyante’tha tesdm yat samuda- 
yam, tat sanram ity uktam, clthayo ha khalu vd va sarira ity uktam 
sa bhiitdtmety itktam f athdimrto sydtmd bindur iva pitskard Hi. sa 
vd eso’bhibhutah prdkrlair gunair iti . atho’bhibhdtatvdt sammu- 
dhatvam prayditah , sammudhcttvdd dtmastham prabhum bhaga 
vantam kdrayitdram napasyad gimaughair uhyamdnah kalusi- 
krtas casthiras cahcalo lupyamdnah sasprho vyagras cdbhimdini- 
tvam praydtd iti t aham so mamedam iti , evam manyamdno 
nibadhnaty dtmandlmdnam jdleneva kha-carah. krtasydnu phalair 
abhibhuyamdnah sad-asad-yonim dpadyatd ity avdncyordhvd vd 
gatir dvandvair abhibhuyamdnah paribhramati. katama esa iti 
tan hovdeeti. 

2. There is, indeed, another, different, called the elemental 
self, he who, affected by the bright or the dark fruits of action, 
enters a good or an evil womb so that his course is downward 
or upward and he wanders about affected by the pairs # ((jf 
opposites). And this is its explanation. The five subtle elements 
are called by the name element. Likewise the five gross elcmeifts 
are called by the name element. Now the combination of these 
is called the body. Now he, indeed, who is said to be in the body 
is called the elemental self. Now its iftimortal self is like a drop of 
water on the lotus leaf. This (elemental self) verily, is affected 
by nature's qualities. Now because of being affected, he gets 
to bewilderment (becomes confused) ; because of bewilderment 



806 The Principal Upanisads III. 3 

he sees not the blessed Lord who dwells in himself, the causer 
of action. Borne along and defiled by the stream of qualities, 
unstable, wavering, bewildered, full of desire, distracted, he 
gets to the state of self-love. Thinking, T am he,' ‘This is mine,' 
he binds himself with his self like a bird in a snare. So being 
affected by the fruits of his action, he enters a good or an 
evil womb so that his course is downward or upward and he 
wanders about, affected by the pairs of opposites. Which one 
is this? Then he said to them. 

sariram: body: prune ndriyantah karana-sahita-suksma-bhuta-samu- 
ddyo linga -sariram; pahclkrta-panca-mahd-bhuta-samudayah $thulam 
sariram. 

The gross body consists of the gross elements; the subtle body of 
life, senses, mind and the sub tie-elements. * 

apasyad: does not see. See B.G. VII. 13. 

gunaughair uhyamdnd: this refers to the torrent of gunas by which 
one is swept along. Cp. Plato’s river of sensations, Timaeus 43B and 
Philo: ‘river of the objects of sense that swamps and drowns our 
soul under the flood of the passions until he crosses it.' The self 
is overcome by the gunas and falls into an illusion in which it 
becomes weak, disordered, sensual and believes in its own separate 
existence, fettering itself by its own action like a bird in the net. 

3. athdnyatrdpy uktam , yah *kartd so’ yam vai bhutdtmd 
k/iranaih kdrayitdntah-puvusah. atha yathdgnindyaspindo 
vdbhibhutah kartrbhir hanyamdno ndndtvam upaity evam vd va 
khalv asau bhiddtmdntah-purusendbhibhuto gunair hanyamdno 
ndndtvam upaiti. catur-jdlam catur-dasavidham catur-asitidhd 
parinatam bhuta-ganam etad m vai ndndtvasya nlpam. tdni ha vd 
etdni gundni puruseneritdini cakram iva mrtyaveneti. atha 
yathdyaspinde hanyamdne ndgnir abhibhuyaty evam ndbhi- 
bhuyaty asau puruso’bhibhuyaty ayam bhutdtmopasamslistatvdd 
iti. 

3. And thus it has been said elsewhere. Verily, he who is the 
doer is the elemental self: he who causes to act by means of the 
organs is the inner person. Now even as a ball of iron, overcome 
by fire and beaten by workmen takes many forms, the elemental 
self overcome by the inner person and beaten by the qualities 
takes many forms. The mode of that form has a fourfold 
covering, is fourteenfold, is transformed in eighty-four different 
ways, is a host of beings, is verily manifold. All these varieties, 
verily, are impelled by the person even as the wheel by the 
potter, Now, as when a ball of iron is being beaten, the fire is 



III. 5. Matin U pant sad 807 

not overcome, even so the person is not overcome. The elemental 
self is overcome because of its attachment (to qualities). 

kartybhih: workmen, smiths, lohakdrddibhih. 

catur-jdlam: fourfold covering, the four sheaths, matter, life, con- 
sciousness and intelligence. Commentators mention the four forms 
of animal life. 

fourteenfold: fourteen classes of beings. Reference is to Samkhya 
Kdrika 53 or to the fourteen worlds, Veddnta-sdra 129. 
eighty-four : This may have reference to an early speculation in 
natural history or may mean any number of forms. 

4. athanyatrapy uktam , sarlram idam maithundd evodbhutam, 
samvrddhvyupetam nirayetha mutradvdrena niskrantam , 
asthibhis citam, mdmsendnuliptam carmanavanaddham vin-mu- 
tra-pitta*kapha-majjd-medo-vasdbhir anyais cdmayair bahubhih 
paripurnam, kosa iva vasund. 

4. And thus it has been said elsewhere. This body arises 
from sexual intercourse. It i» endowed with growth in # darkness. 
Then it comes forth through the urinary passage. It is built up 
with bones, smeared over with flesh, covered with skin, filled 
with faeces, urine, bile, phlegm, marrow, fat, grease and also 
with many diseases, like a treasure house full of wealth. 

niraye: in darkness (of the womb), niraya tulye mditur udare. In due 
time comes out of the urinary passage, mutra-dvarena yoni-randhrena. 
dmayaih: v. malaih. 

Wise people should not identify their true self with the body. 
niraya-rupe smin sarlrc vivekindbhimdno nil kdirya ity abhiprayah. 

5. athanyatrapy uktam , samrnoho bhayam, visddo nidrd, 
tandri, pramado jard, sokah, ksut, pipdsd , kdrpanyam, krodho 
ndstikyam, ajhanam , mdtsaryam, naiskdranyam , mudhatvam, nir- 
vrldatvam , nirakrlilvam, uddhatatvam , asamatvam iti tdmasdni , 
antastrsnd sneho rago lobho Jiimsd , ratir dvistir vydvrtalvam irsyd, 
kdmam, asthiratvam, calalvam vyagratvam, jigisdrthopdrjana>n 
mitrdnugrahanam parigrahdvalambo nistesvindriydrthesu dvisti- 
ristesvabhisvangah suklasvaro nnatamastv iti rdjasdny etaih 
paripurna etair abhibhutd ity ayam bhutdtmd tasmdn ndnd-rdpcmy 
dpnotxti , dpnotiti. 

5. And then it has been said elsewhere: bewilderment, fear, 
depression, sleepiness, sloth, heedlessness, old age, grief, hunger, 
thirst (mental), weakness, anger, unorthodoxy, ignofance, 
jealousy, cruelty, stupidity, shamelessness, meanness, rashness, 
unequableness, these are the characteristics of the quality of 



8o8 The Principal Upanisads III. 5 

darkness. Inner thirst, affection, passion, covetousness, hurting 
others, lust, hatred, deceit, envy, insatiability, unsteadfastness, 
fickleness, distractedness, ambitiousness, acquisitiveness, 
patronage of friends, family pride, aversion to unpleasant 
objects and over-attachment to pleasant objects, sourness of 
utterance and gluttonousness, these are the characteristics of 
the quality of passion. By these he is filled, by these he is 
affected, therefore the elemental self attains manifold forms, 
yea, attains (manifold forms). 

sammoha: bewilderment, viparyaya. 
tandri: sloth, alasyam. 

kdr panyam: weakness (mental) , krpanatvam. 

niistikyam: unorthodoxy: non-belief in the unseen world and 

indifference to sacred scriptures, dmusmike sreyasi nimye td ndstlti 

bnddhir vedddy-anddaras ca. 

naiskurunyam: cruelty, naisthuryam. 

nirdkrtitvam: v. nikftatvam: sathatvam. 

nddhatatvam: raslnvss, sdhasesn nihsankatvam. 

himsd: hurting others, para-pldd. 

dvistih: hatred, dvesah. 

vyagratvam: distractedness, vyasanitd. 

The Upanisad is greatly influenced by Sdmkhya ideas. 



IV. 2. 


Maitri Upani$ad 


809 


CHAPTER IV 

THE UNION OF THE ELEMENTAL SELF AND THE 
SUPREME SELF 

I. te ha khalu vdvordhva-retaso’tivismitd abhisametyocuh, 
bhagavan, namastestv anusddhi , tvam asmdkam gatir anya na 
vidyata iti; asya ko vidhir bhutdtmano yenedam hitvdtmann eva 
sdiyujyam upaiti tan hovdceti. 

1. They (the Valikhilyas), indeed, of vigorous chastity, 
exceedingly amazed, approached him and said, ‘Revered Sir, 
salutations to you, instruct us further. You are our way (of 
deliverance) and there is no other. What is the method (rule) 
by which this elemental self, after leaving this (elemental body) 
obtains union with the (true) self?' Then he (Prajd-pati Kratu) 
said to them. 

vismild: amazed that the true ^lf, pure and undefiled, should appear 
to be impure and defiled: nUya-suddhas-ciddhfta smatprhtyaydtmd 
sann api paroksa iva suddlio’py asuddha iva akriyo'pi sakriya ivcti 
vismita eva santali. 
hitva: leaving, vihdya. 

dtman: atmani , the self, cid-dnanda-sat-svarupa eva purndtmani. 
sdyujyam: union, sayug-blidvam. 

2. athanyatrdpy itktam, mahdnadtsurmaya ivdnivartakcun 
asya yat purdkrtam , samudravdeva durnivdryam asya mrtyor 
dgamanam , sad-asad-phalamayaih pdsaili pangur iva baddham , 
bandhanasthasya ivdsvdtantryam , yam avisayusthasya iva bahn- 
bhaydvastham, madironmatta iva nwha~madironmattam } pdipmand 
grhita iva bhramyamanam , mahoraga x dasta iva visaya-dastam f 
mahdndhakdram iva rdgdndham , indrajdlam iva mdydmayam , 
svapna iva mithyd-darsanam, kadali-garbha ivdsdram, nata iva 
ksana-vesam , citra-bhittir iva mithyd- manor amam ity athoktam . 

sabda-sparsddayo hy arthd martyc’ narthd ivasthitdh 
yesdm saktas tn bhutdtmd na smareta param padam. 

2. And this it has been said elsewhere. Like the waves in 
large rivers there is no turning back of that which has befcn 
done previously; like the tide of the ocean, the approach of 
one's death is^hard to keep back. Like a lame man, bound by 
the fetters made of the fruits of good and evil, like the # con- 
dition of a man in prison, lacking independence, like the 
condition of one in the realm of death, beset by many fears, 
like one intoxicated with liquor, intoxicated with the liquor of 



810 The Principal Upanisads IV. 3. 

delusion, rushing about like one possessed by an evil spirit, 
like one bitten by a great serpent, bitten by the objects of sense, 
like gross darkness, the darkness of passion, like jugglery, 
consisting of illusion, like a dream, false appearances, like the 
inside of the banana tree, unsubstantial, like an actor changing 
dress every moment, like a painted scene, falsely delighting 
the mind and therefore it has been said, ‘Objects of sound, 
touch and the like are worthless objects for a man/ the elemental 
self, through attachment to them, does not remember the 
highest state. 

pdpmana: by an evil spirit, pdpa-grahena . 

martye : man, a mortal, marana-dharmini bhutatmani. 

3. ayarii vd va khalv asya pratividhir bhutdtmano yud veda- 
vidyddhigamah svadharmasydnucaranam; svdsramesv evdnukra- 
manam , svadharmasya vd clad vratam, stambasdkhe vdpardni; 
anenorddhvabhdg bhavaty anyathdmn ity esa svadharmo’bhihito 
yo vedesu na svadharmdtikramendsraml bhavati , dsramesv evdna- 
vasthas tapasvl vetyucyata ityetad ayuklam, ndtapaskasydtma- 
jiidne dhigamah karma-siddhir veti; evam hy dha : 

tapasa prdpyate sattvam, sattvdt samprdpyate manaJi 
manasah prdpyate hy dlmd, yam dptvd na nivartata iti 

3. This is, indeed, the antidote for the elemental self, 
acquirement of the knowledge of the Veda and the due per- 
formance of one’s own duty. Pursuit of the duties of the stage 
of life to which each one belongs, this is the rule for one’s own 
duty; others are like the branches of a stem. Through it one 
goes upwards, otherwise downwards. That is one's regular 
duty which is set forth in -the Vedas. Not by transgressing one's 
regular duty docs one belong to the stage of life. If one says that 
a man does not belong to any of the stages of life for he is (one) 
who practises austerity, it is not proper. (However) if one 
does not practise austerity there is no success in the knowledge 
of the self or in the perfection of works. For thus has it been 
said: By austerity goodness is obtained and from goodness 
untierstanding is reached and from the understanding is the 
self obtained and he who obtains the self does not return. 

veda-vidyddhigamah: acquircnient of the knowledge* of the Veda. 
veda-dvard vidydyd atma-tattva-visaydyd adhigamah samyak-prdptih. 
btamba sdkheva: branches of a stem: tfnasalakeva, like a bunch of 
grass. 

We belong to a particular stage of life or asrama by performing 



IV. 4- Maitri Upanisad 811 

the duties belonging to it and not by assuming its external marks : 
kevalam tat-tad-dsrama-linga-dhdrana-mdtrdd dsraml na bliavati. 
sattvam: goodness, sattva-guna-pradhanam cittam- 
manah: understanding, viveka -vijhdnam. 

atmd: the self, purnam tattvam par am brahma. We can say prasanna- 
ciltasyeva moksah: Upanisad Brahmayogin. 

When one attains self-knowledge, he is freed from samsara . . . 
prapya sdksdtkrtya na nivartate punah samsdra-mandale bhutdtma- 
bhdvdya ndvartate mucyata iti. 

KNOWLEDGE, AUSTERITY AND MEDITATION 

4. asti brahmeti brahma-vidyd-vid abravld, brahma-dvdramidam 
ityevaitad dha,yas tapasdpahata-pdpmd , aum brahmano mahimety 
evaitad 'aha, yah suyukto jasram cintayati, tasmdd vidyayd 
tapasd cintayd copalabhyate brahma , sa brahmanah para etd 
bhavaty adhidaivatvam devcbhyas ceti, aksayyam, aparimitam, 
andmayam, snhham asnute yaevam vidvdn anena trikena brahmo- 
pdste , atha yaih paripurndbhibhfito’yam rathltas ca /air vaiva 
muktas tv dtmann eva say it jy am apaiti. 

4. 4 Brahman is,’ said one who knew the knowledge of 
Brahman. ‘This is the door to Brahman ,’ said one who had 
freed himself from evil by (the practice of) austerity. 'Aum is 
the (manifest) greatness of Brahman / said one who, completely 
absorbed, always meditates (on it). Therefore, by knowledge, 
by austerity, by meditation is Brahman apprehended. He 
becomes one who goes beyond the Brahma (the lower, 
Iliranya-garbha) and to the state of the supreme divinity above 
the gods. He obtains happiness, undecaying, unmeasured, free 
from sickness, he who knows this and worships Brahman with 
this triad (knowledge, austerity and. meditation). Then freed 
from those things by which he was tilled and affected, this 
rider of the chariot attains (complete) union with the self. 

brahma -vidyd: knowledge of Brahman which arises from logical 
investigation, pramdna-yukti-janyam brahma-jhdnam. 

By austerity, knowledge and meditation, we obtain Brahman, 
prathamam tapas tato brahma-vidyd sravanddi-laksand tatah prana- 
vaika-nisthateti kramena sddhana-trayavdn brahmopalabhetety arthah. 
brahmanah: leaver Brahma, aparasyajnranya-garbhdkhyasya sabda 
brahmanah. , 

rathitah: the rider of the chariot, ratham prdpito rathitvarh caprdpita 
iti ydvat. 



812 


The Principal Upanisads 


IV. 6. 


WORSHIP OF VARIOUS GODS PERMISSIBLE, BUT 
THEIR REWARDS ARE TEMPORARY 

r 

5. te hocur bhagavann abhivadyasity abhivadyasity , nihitam 
asmdbhir etad yathdvad uktam manaslty, athottaram prasnam 
anubruhiti, agnir vdyur ddityali kdlo yah prdno' nnam brahma 
rudro visnar ity cke’nyam abhidhydyanty eke'nyam; sreyah 
katamo yah so’smdkam bruhiti, tan hovdceti. 

5. They said. 'Revered One, you are the teachejr, you are 
the teacher. What has been said has been duly fixed in mind 
by us. Now answer a further question. Fire, air, sun,, time, 
whatever it is, breath, food, Brahma, Rudra, Visnu, some 
meditate upon one, some upon another. Tell us whicjh one is 
the best for us/ Then he said to them. 

6. brahmano va vaitd agryds tanavah parasydmrtasya sarirasya 
tasyaiva loke pratimodati ha yo yqsydmisakta ityevam hy aha; 
brahma khalv iddm vd va sarvam. yd vasyd agryd stanavas td 
abhidhydyed arcaycn nihnuydc ca , atas tdbhih sahairvopary upari 
lokesu carati , atha krtsna-hsaya ehatvam eti ptirusasya, purusasya. 

6. These are but the chief forms of the Supreme, the immortal, 
the bodiless Brahman . To whichever one each man is devoted 
here, in his world he rejoices. For it has been said, ‘Verily, 
this whole world is Brahman / Verily, these, which are its 
chief forms one meditates upon, worships and discards. For 
with these one moves higher and higher in the worlds. And 
when all things perish (in universal dissolution), he attains 
unity of (with) the person, yea, of the person. 

agryah: chief, {.rest hah. 

tanavah: forms, viwtayah. .‘Veiily, this whole world is Brahman,’ 
C.U. Til. 14. I. 

krtsna-ksaye: when all things peiish. hr/snasya sarva-devatdtmanah 
satya-lokasthasya hiranya-garbhasya ksaye avasdne samfurna-brahma- 
r&pah san piirusasya puinabya parabrahmana ehatvam sdyujyam eti 
gacchati , hrama-mnhtim upaiti. 

•At the end of this world, at the time of universal dissolution, 
the lord of this world Hiranya-garbha lapses into the Absolute 
Brahman. Till then individualities are retained by the souls including 
the world-soul. 

By* the worship of these deities one rises to higher states of being. 
When these forms are resolved he attains to the unity of the Person. 
The different concepts of the Supreme are supports for contemplation. 

Here apparently ends the conversation begun in II. 3. between 



IV. 6 . Maitrl Upanisad 813 

the Valikhilyas and Prajd-pati as derived by tradition from Maitri 
and narrated by Sakayanya to King Brhadratha. Sakayanya’s 
teaching is said to be continued till VI. 29, though it evidently is jl 
later addition as undoubtedly chapters VI and VII are, even 
according to the commentator. 



814 The Principal Upanisads V. 2. 

chapter v 

THE CONCEPTION OF TRIMURTI 

' 1. atha yatheyam kautsydyani stntih. 

tvam brahma tvah ca vai visnus tvam rudras tvam prajapatih, 
tvam agnir varuno vdyus tvam indras tvam nisdkarah: 
tvam annas tvam yamas tvam prthivi tvam visvam tvam 
athdcyutah, 

svdrthe svdbhdvike rthe ca bahudhd samsthitis tvayi: 
visvcsvara, namas tubhyam, visvdtmd visva-karma-krt 
visva-bhug visvamdyus tvam visva-kridd-rati-prabhuh: 
namah sdntdtmanc tubhyam , namo guhyatamdya ca , 
acintydydprameydya anadinidhandya ca. 

1. Now then this is Kutsayana's hymn of praise. 

Thou art Brahma and verily thou art Visnu, thou art Rudra 
and thou Praja-pati ; thou art Agni, Varuna, Vayu, thou art 
Indra and thou jyrt the moon. Thcai art food, thou art Yama, 
thou art the earth, thou art all, thou art the Imperishable. 
All things exist in thee in many forms for their own or for their 
natural ends. Lord of the universe, salutations to thee, the 
self of all, the maker of all, the enjoyer of all, thou art all life 
and the lord of all pleasure and delight. Salutations to thee, 
the tranquil self, salutations to thee, the deeply hidden, the 
incomprehensible, the immeasurable and without beginning 
and without end. 

svdrthah: for their own ends : purusdrtho dhannddi-catustaya-rupah. 

svdbhdvikah: for their natural ends, prakrtikah. 

visvdtmd: because he is the material cause of the world, visvopddd- 

natvdit. 

the tranquil self: Cp. sdnta up/isita, sdntah sa premabhaktikah : Sridhara 
on Bhdgavata. Brahmavaivarta Parana : dhyayante vaisnavdh santah 
sdntam tam tat pardyanam . Brahma Khanda XIX. 23. 2. 

2. tamo vd idam agra dsTd ekam , tat pare sydt tat tat pare- 
ifcritam visamatvam praydti, etad-rupam vai rajas, tad rajah khalv 
iritam visamatvam praydti , etad vai saitvasya rupam, tat sattvam 
everitam rasah samprdsravat so’riiso’yam, yas cetdmdtrah prati 
purusah ksetrajhah samkalpddhyavasdydbhimdna-lingah prajd- 
patir visveti, asya prag-ukpi etas tanavah, atha 9 yo ha khalu 
vd vdtsya tdimaso msu’ sau sa brahmaedrino yo'yam rudro’tha yo 
ha khalu vd vdsya rdjaso' mso' sau sa brahmaedrino yo'yam 
brahmatha yo ha khalu vd vdsya sdttviko'mso’sau sa brahma- 
edrino yo'yam visnuh; sa vd esa ekas tridhd bhuto' §tadhaikd- 



V. 2. Maitri Upanisad 815 

dasadhd dvddasadhd' parimitadhd vodbhuta, udbhutatvdd bhutam 
bhutesu carati pravistah, sa bhutdndm adhipatir babhuva ity asd 
dtmdntar-bahis cdntar-bahis ca. 

2. Verily, in the beginning this (world) was darkness alon£ 
That was in the Highest. When impelled by the Highest it 
moves on to differentiation. That form, verily, is passion. 
That passion, when impelled, moves on to differentiation. That, 
verily, is the form of goodness. That goodness, when impelled, 
the essence flowed forth. That part is what the intelligence 
principle in every person is, the knower of the body, which has 
the marks of conception, determination and self-love, Prajd-pati 
(the lbrd of creation) called Visva. His forms have been pre- 
viously mentioned. Now then, indeed the part of him which' is 
characterised by darkness that, O students of sacred knowledge, 
is this Rudra. Now then, indeed, that part of him which is 
characterised by passion, that, 0 students of sacred knowledge, 
is this Brahma. Now then, indeed, that part of him which is 
characterised by goodness, fhat, () studcnt^#of sacred know- 
ledge, is this Visnu. Verily, that one becomes threefold. He 
developed forth eightfold, elevenfold, twelvefold, in unlimited 
parts. Because he thus developed, he is a (created) being, he 
moves about, having entered all beings. He became the lord 
of (created) beings. That is the self within and without, yea, 
within and without. 

The relation of the three forms [murti-lraya), to the Supreme is 
here indicated. The three Brahma, Visnu and Siva are not to be 
conceived as independent persons; the^ are the threefold mani- 
festations of the one Supreme. 

rasah: essence, saras cid-dnanda-prakdsah. See T.U. II. 7. 
cetamdtrah: intelligence-principle; which is entirely intelligent, cetd 
cetana sdksi-caitanyam tayci miyate’vabhdsyata iti cetamdtrah svaprakd- 
sa-saksi-matrendnubhdvya iti . 

ksetrajna: knower of the body, ksetram sanram dharmddharma- 
bija-praroha-bhumitvdt tad d-pdda-tala-mastakam aham iti jdndtiti 
ksetrajno jtva iti. 

visva: every one, i.e. every individual. He is not only the sum-total 
of all existences but is also the principle of the individual being. 
eightfold , etc. : The eight forms arc the live vital airs, the sun, moon 
and stars or tjie last three and the five elements. The eleven are 
the eleven organs of sense and action # and mind. If we make^mind 
and understanding ( buddhi ), different, we get twelve. It becomes 
unlimited if we take the endless activities in the various individuals. 



8i6 


The Principal Upanisads 


VI. 2. 


CHAPTER VI 

INWARD BREATH AND OUTWARD SUN, CORRELATED 
# MANIFESTATIONS OF THE SELF 

i. dvidha vd esa dtmdnam bibharty ay am yah pvdino yas cdsci 
adityo'tha dvau vd etd asya panthdnd antav bahts editor dtrenaitau 
vydvartete, asau vd ddityo bahir dtmdntardlmd prdno’to bahir 
dtmakyd gatydntardtmano 1 namiyate gatir ily evam hy dihdtha yah 
kascidvidvdnapahata-pdpmaksddhyakso’vaddta-mandS'tan-nistha 
avYtta-caksuh so antar dtmakyd gatyd bahir ditmdno' numiyate 
galir ity evam ha aha y atha ya eso ntardditye hir an may ah pur u so 
yah pasyatimdih hiranyavasthdt sa eso’ntare hrt-puskara evds- 
ritonnam atti. f 

1. He (the self) bears himself in two ways, as he who is 
breath and he who is the Sun. Therefore, two, verily, are these 
paths, inward and outward. They both turn back in a day and 
night. Yonder sijn, verily, is the* outer self; the inner self is 
breath. Hence the course of the inner self is measured (inferred 
from) by the course of the outer self. For thus has it been said, 
'Now, whoever is a knower, who has freed (himself) from evil, 
the overseer of the senses, pure minded, firmly established 
in that, locking away (from outward objects) is even he (the 
self). Likewise, the course of the outer self is measured by the 
cdurse of the inner self. For thus has it been said, 'Now that 
golden person who is within the Sun, who looks on this earth 
from his golden place is even he who has entered into the lotus 
of the heart and eats food/ 

The sixth and seventh chapters arc treated as supplementary. 
The main purpose of the Upanisad is to affirm that there is one 
Supreme Self to be known and the various forms of Brahma, Visnu 
and Siva are only aspects or manifestations of that Supreme Self. 
In these chapters we find refeiences to various modes of worship 
and means by which spiritual knowledge can be gained. See R.V. 
X. §o. 2 . 

ak^ddhyaksa: overseer of the senses and not subject to them. 
indriyddhyaksas tesu svatantro nendriya-paravasa Hi. 
avadata-mandh: pure-minded, nirmala-cittah. 

2. atha ya esontare hrt-p'askara evdisrito nnam atti sa eso’gnir 
divi iritah saurah kdldkhyo* drsyah sarvabhutdny annam attlti, 
hah puskarah kim-mayo veil , idarh vd va tat puskaram y o’ yam 
dkdso’syemds catasro disas catasra upadiso dalasamsthd dsam , 



VI. 4- Maitri Upanisad 817 

arvdg vicarata etan prdnddityd eta updsitom ity etad-aksarcna 
vydhrtibhih sdvitryd ccti. 

2. Now, he who has entered the lotus of the heart and eat£ 
food is the same as that fire of the Sun which enters the sky, 
called Time the Invisible, who eats all beings as his food. What 
is the lotus and of what is it made? That lotus, assuredly, is 
the same as space. The four quarters and the four intermediate 
quarters are its leaves. These two, breath and the Sun, move 
near each other. Let him reverence them with the syllable auni, 
with the mystic utterances (bhuh, bhuvah, svah) and with the 
Sdvitri prayer. 

saurah: of the sun, surya-tejo-rupah. 

AkaSa js described as the lotus flower whose petals are the four 
quarters and the four intermediate quarters or the cardinal points. 
Time who eats all beings as his food, prdnindm kalandt .kdldkhyah 
sarva-bhutdni sariiharati. 
arvdg: near, adure sannihitan. 


THE MYSTIC AUM 

3. dvc vdva brahmano rape murtah camfirlah ca; atha yan 
murtam tad asatyam, yad amurtam tat satyam tad brahma , taj 
jyotih , yaj jyotih sa ddityah , sa vd esa awn ity dad dtmdbhavat , sa 
tredhdtmdnam vydkurutd, aitm iti, tisro mdtrd , ddbhih sarvam 
idam otam protam eaivdsmtti, evam hy dhaitad vd diditya aum ity 
evam dhydyata dtmdnam yuhjxtdi. 

3. There are, assuredly, iwo forms of Brahman , the formed 
and the formless. Now that which is formed is unreal; that 
which is the formless is the real; that is the Brahman , that is 
the light. That which is the light is the Sun. Verily, that came 
to have aum as its self. He divided himself threefold (for aum 
consists of three letters (a, u, m). By means of these all this 
(world) is woven, war]) and woof, across him. For thus has it 
been said, 'One should meditate on the Sun as aum and'gCt 
united to it/ 

The formed is the effect and the formless is the cause. 
satyam: the real, paramdrtha-satyam , sarvddhisthdnam. 
matrdh: parts, Uvayavah. 

4. athdnyatrdpy uktam , atha khalu ya udgithah sa pranavo 
yah pranavah sa udgitha iti, asau vd dditya udgitha esa pranava 
iti. evam hy ahodgitham pranavdkhyam pranetdram bhd-rupam 



8i8 


The Principal Upanisads VI. 5. 

vigata-nidram vijaram, vimrtyum, tri-padam, tryaksaram punah 
paheadha jheyam nihitam gnhdydm ity evam hy dhorddhva-mulam 
t/ipdd brahma sakha akasa-vdyv-agny-udaka-bhumyddaya eko’svat- 
tha-namaitad brahmaitasyaitat tejo yad asd adityah aum ity etad 
aksarasya caitat , tasmad aum ity anenaitad updsitdjasram ity 
ekosya sambodhayitety evam hy aha. 

etad evdksaram puny am, etad evdksaram param 
etad evdksaram jhdtvd yo yad icchati tasya tat. 

4. And then it has been said elsewhere, ‘Novv then the 
udgitha is the pranava and the pranava is the udgitha. And so 
verily the udgitha is the yonder Sun and he is pranava. Fqv thus 
it is said, the udgitha called pranava , the leader (in the per- 
formance of sacrificial rites), whose form is radiance, sleepless, 
ageless, deathless, three-footed, three-lettered, also to be 
known as fivefold, hidden in the secret place (of the heart)/ 
And it is also said, ‘The three-footed Brahman has its root 
above. Ifs branches are space, wiftd, fire, water, earth and the 
like. This Brahman has the name of the “lone fig tree” and of 
it that is the radiance which is called the Sun and the radiance 
too of the syllable aum. Therefore, one should continuously 
worship it with the syllable aum. For thus it is said, “This 
syllable, indeed, is holy, this syllable, indeed, is supreme. By 
knowing that syllable, indeed, whatever one desires (becomes) 
his”/ 


See C.U. 1. 5. 1; R.V. X. 90. 3-4; Katha VI. 1; II. 16. 
pranetdrani: leader (of rites), prakarsena tat-tat-karmandm pravar- 
t ay it dr am. 

5. athdnyatrdpy uktam, svanavaty esdsyah taniih yd aum ity 
stri-pun-napnmsaketi liiigavati , esathdgnir vayur dditya iti bhds - 
vati, esd atha brahma rudro visnur ity adhipativati ’, esatha 
gdrhapatyo daksindgnir dhavaniyd iti mukhavati , esathargyajus- 
sdnieti vijndnavati, esd bhdr bhuvah svar iti lokavati , esatha 
bhuiam bhavyam bhavisyad iti kdlavati , esatha prdno' gnih surya 
iti pratdpavati , esa thdnnam dpas candvamd ity dpydyanavati , 
esh’tha buddhir mano hamkdrd iti cetanavati, esatha prdno'pana 
vyana iti pranavati , esety ata aum ity uktenaitdh prastutd arcitd 
arpitd bhavantiti evam hy dhaitad vai satyakdma par ah cdparah 
ca brahma yad aum ity etad aksaram iti. 

5. And then it has been said elsewhere, ‘This aum is the 
sound form of this (the self). Feminine, masculine and neuter 
(this) is the sex form. Fire, wind and sun; this is his light form. 



VI. 6. Maitri Upanisad 819 

Brahma, Rudra and Visnu, this is his lordship form. The 
Gdrhapatya, the Daksinagni and the Ahavamya sacrificial 
fires — this is his mouth-form. Rg, Yajus and Sdman (Vedas| 
this is his knowledge-form. Earth, atmosphere and sky, this is 
his world-form. Past, present and future, this is his time-form. 
Breath, fire and Sun, this is his heat-form. Food, water and 
moon, this is his growth form. Understanding, mind and 'self- 
sense, this is his thought-form. The prana breath, the apdna 
breath and the vydna breath, this is his breath form. Therefore, 
by the utterance of the syllable aunt all these (forms) are 
praised, worshipped and ascribed. For thus it is said, 'This 
syllable aum, verily, is the higher and the lower Brahman 

svanavati sound-form, sabdavatl. 

THE EXPLANATION OF THE THREE WORLDS 

6. athdvydhrtam vd idam dslt, sa satyam prajdpatis tapas 
taptvanuvydharad bhur bhuvah svar iti; esaivdsya pfajdpateh 
sthavistha tanilr-yd lokavatiti, svar ity asydh siro ndbhir bhuvo 
bhuh pddd adityas caksuh, caksar-dyatta hi purusasya mahati 
matra , caksusd hy ayam mdtrds carati, satyam vai caksuh , aksiny 
avasthito hi purusah sarvdrthesu carati, etasmdd bhur bhuvah 
svar ity updsitdnena hi prajdpatir visvdtmd visva-caksur ivo- 
pdsito bhavatiti, evam hy dhaisd vai prajdpater visva-bhrt-tanur 
etasyam idam sarvam antarhitam, asmin ca sarvasminn esd 
antarhiteti, tasmdd esopdsita. 

6. Now (in the beginning) this (world) was, verily, unuttered. 
When he, the Real, the lord of creation, performed austerity, 
he uttered (the words) bhuh, bhuvah, svah. This, indeed, is 
Prajd-pati’s very gross form, this world-form. Its head is the 
sky, the navel is the atmosphere, the feet are the earth, the eye 
is the sun, for a person’s great material world depends on the 
eye, for with the eye he measures all things. Verily, the eye is 
the real for stationed in the eye a person moves about among 
all objects. Therefore one should reverence bhuh, bhuvah, sHan, 
ior this Prajd-pati, the. self of all, the eye of all, becomes rever- 
enced, as it were. For thus has it been said, 'Verily this is the 
all-supporting form of Prajd-pati, for in it all this (world) is 
hidden, and it* is hidden in this whole (world). Therefore, this is 
what one should reverence.’ 

unuttered: see T.U. I. 5; Paiicavimsa Brdhmana XX. 14. 2. 
sthavistha: very gross, sthula-lama. 



820 The Principal Upanisads VI. 7. 

viiva-bhft: all-supporting, suryarupd prajd-pater brahmano viivam 
bibhartiti viiva-bhrt . 

WORSHIP OF THE SUN BY MEANS OF THE SAVITRl 

PRAYER 

7. tat savitur varenyam ity asau vd adityah savita sa vd evam 
pravaramya dtmdkdmenety dhnr brahmavddino'tha bhargo devasya 
dhimahiti, savita vai devas tato yo'sya bhargdkhyas tam cintayd- 
mity dhur brahma-vddino'tha dhiyo yo nah pracodaydd iti , budd- 
hayovaidhiyastdyo } smakam pracodaydd ity dhur brahma-vddinah , 
atha bharga iti yo ha vd amusminn dditye nihitas tdrahq'ksini 
vaisa bharga kliyah , bhdbhir gatir asya hiti bharga h, bharjayatiti 
vaisa bharga iti rudro brahma-vdxdino tha, bha iti bhdisayatimdn 
lokdn, ra iti ranjayatimdni bhutdni , ga iti gacchanty asminn 
dgacchanty asmad imah prajds tasmdd bha-ra-ga-tvad bhargah, 
sasvat suyamandt suryah savandt savita' ddndt adityah pavandt 
pdvano'thdpopydyanad ity cvam hy dha, khalv atmano * tmd 
netdmrtdkhyas cetd manta gantolsrstdnandayitd karta vaktd 
rasayitd ghrdtd drastd srotd sprsati ca vibhur vigrahe sannivistd 
ity evam hy dha, atha yatra dvaitibhutam vijhdnam tatra hi 
srnoti pasyati jighrati rasayati caiva sparsayati sarvam dtmd 
jdinitcti, yatrddva it ibh Fit am vijndnam kdirya-kdirana-karma-nir- 
muktam nirvacanam anaupamyam nirupdkhydm him, tad 
avacyam. 

7. That desirable (splendour) of Sdvitrl, yonder Sun, verily, 
is Sdvitri. He, verily, is to be sought thus, by one desirous of 
self, so say the expounders of Brahma-knowledge. May we 
meditate on the splendour of the God. Sdvitri , verily, is God. 
Therefore I meditate as that which is called his splendour. So 
say the expounders of .Brahma-knowledge. May he inspire 
(illuminate) our thoughts. Thoughts, verily, are meditations. 
May he inspire these for us, so say the expounders of Brahma- 
knowledge. Now splendour, verily, he who is hidden in yonder 
Sup is called splendour or he who is the pupil in the eye. He 
is so called because his couise is with the rays of light or he is 
Rhdra because he causes to dry up, so say the expounders of 
Brahma-knowledge. Now bha means that he illumines these 
worlds, ra means that he gladdens these beings, ga means that 
creatures here go into him and come out of him. Therefore, 
because of being bha, ra, ga, he is bharga. Surya is so named 
because of the continued squeezing out, Sdvitri is so named 
because of its bringing forth. Aditya is so named because of 



VI. 8. Maitri Upanisad 821 

taking up into itself. Pdvana is so named because of its puri- 
fying. Apas is so named because of its causing to grow. For 
thus has it been said, Assuredly the self of one’s self is callecj 
the leader, immortal, perceiver, thinker, the goer, the evacuator, 
the delighter, the doer, the speaker, the taster, the smeller, the 
seer and the hearer and he touches. He, the all-pcrvader has 
entered the body. For thus has it been said, Now where 
knowledge is of a dual nature (implying a subject which knows 
and an object which is known), there, indeed, one hears, sees, 
smells, tastes and also touches, the self knows everything 
WherQ knowledge, being devoid of effort, cause or action, 
unspeakable, incomparable, indescribable, what is that? It is 
impossible to say. 

pravaraniya: v. pracaraniya. 

atma-kdmah: desirous of self, dhnaiva kdtnah yasya sah. 
brahma-vadinah: expounders of Brahma-knowledge, brahma- 
vadana-slla vedarthavidah. 

bharjayati: causes to dry up. Rudra is the destroyer of the world, 
jagat samharati. 

Creatures go into him and come out of him: They go into him in sound 
sleep and in intervals between successive creations and come out 
of him in waking and in creation. 

For the distinction between dual and non-dual knowledge sec 
B.U. II. 4. 14. The self is present in all knowledge but it is not itself 
an object of knowledge. 

The gdyatri prayer has come down from the peiiod of the R.V. 
and expresses man's aspiration to know more and more. Cp. Nicolas 
of Cusa: 'To be able to know ever more and more without end, this 
is our likeness to the eternal wisdom. Man always desires to know 
better what he knows, and to love more what he loves; and the 
whole world is not sufficient for him, be.cause it does not satisfy his 
craving for knowledge.' 

8. esa hi khalv dtmesdnah sambhur bhavo rudrah prajd-patir 
visva-srk hiranya-garbhah satyam prdno hamsah sdstd visnurndtrd- 
yano’rhah savitd dhdtd vidhdtd samrdid indr a indur iti, ya»e$a 
tapaty agnir ivdgnind pihitah sahasrdkscna hiranmayendndena , 
esa vd jijndsitavyo’nvcstavyah, sarva-bhrttebhyo’bhayam datvd- 
ranyam gatvdtha bahihkrlvcndriydrthdn svdc charirdd upalabheta 
enam iti. 

visvarupam harinam jdtavedasam pardyanam jyotir*ekam 
tapantam , 

sahasra-rasmih satadhd varlamdnah prdnah prajdndm uday - 
aty esa suryah. 



822 The Principal Upanisads VI. 9. 

8. This self, verily, is the lord, the beneficent, the real, the 
terrible, the lord of creation, the creator of all, the golden 
germ, truth, life, spirit, the ordainer, the pervader, Narayana, 
the shining, vivifier, the upholder, the maker, sovereign, Indra, 
the moon. He it is who gives forth heat, concealed by the 
thousand-eyed golden egg as one fire by another. Him, verily, 
one should desire to know. He should be sought after. Having 
given fearlessness to all creatures, having gone to the forest, 
then having put aside objects of sense, let a man comprehend 
the self from out of his own body. He who has alLforms, the 
golden one, who is all-knowing, the final goal, the only light, 
who gives heat, the thousand-rayed, abiding in a hundred 
places, the life of creatures, the yonder sun rises. 

Ramatlrtha makes out that the Supreme associated with the 
three gunas is described here: rudrdntah tamah-pvadhana-mdyo- 
pddhikah, hams dv to rajah-pradhdna-mdyopddhikah sastd visnur 
ndrdyana.iti suddha-sattva-pradhdna-mdyopddhikah. 

The one appears as threefold on account of the three functions. 
samhdra-srsti-sthiti. 

pihitah: concealed, dcchanno bhavati dcchdditah. 
hiranmayena: golden, brilliant, tejomayena. 

aranyam: forest, a solitary place which soothes the mind, vijanam 
desarii manah-prasdda-karam . 

harinam: golden, also interpreted as the scizcr of all : harati sarvesdm 
prdnindm dyumsi bhaumdn vd rasdn iti harinah. 
jdta-vedasah: all-knowing, jdtam jdtam vetti. See also VII. 7; Prasna 
I. 8. 


EATING OF FOOL) A SACRIFICIAL ACT 

9. tasmdd vd esa ubhaydtmaivam-vid dtmany evdbhidhydyaty 
dtmany eva yajatiti dhydnam prayogastham mano vidvadbhis- 
tutam , manah-putim ucchistopahatam ity anena tat pavayet , 
moentram pathati , ucchistocchistopahatani yac ca pdpena dattam 
wrt'i-sdtakdd vd vasoh pavitram agnih savitus ca rasmayah 
punantv annani mama duskrtah ca yad anyat, adbhih purastad 
paridadhdti , prdndya svdhdpdndya svdhd vydndya svdhd sania- 
ndya svahoddndya svdheti pancabhir abhijuhoti, athdvasistam 
yata-vdg asndty ato'dbhir bhuya evoparistdt paridadhdty aednto 
bhutvdtmejydnah prdno’gnir visvo’sili ca dvdbhydm dtmdnam 
abhidhydyet, prdinognih paramdtmd vai pahea-vdyuh samdsritah, 
sa pritah prindtu visvam visva-bhuk, visvo’si vaisvanaro’ si visvam 
tvayd dhdryate jdyamdnam , visan tu tvdm dhutayas ca sarvah 



VI. io. Maitrl Upanisad 823 

prajds tatra yatra visvamrto' siti , evarh na vidhind khalv cinendf- 
tannatvam punar upaiti. 

9. Therefore, verily, he who knows that this has both these 
(breath and the sun) as his self, meditates only on his self, 
sacrifices only to his self; such meditation, the mind absorbed 
in such practice, is praised by the wise. One should purify 
the impurity of his mind with the verse ‘What has been defiled 
by the leavings/ He reads the verse. Leavings or what has been 
defiled by leavings and what has been given by a sinner or 
(what is rendered impure) by a still birth, may the purifying 
power of Vasu, Agni and of Sdvitrl's rays purify my food and 
any other that may be evil. First (before taking his 'food), 
he swathes (his breath) with water. Hail to the prana breath, 
hail to the apdna breath, hail to the vydna breath, hail to the 
samdna breath, hail to the uddna breath. With these five 
invocations, he offers the oblation. Then he eats the remainder, 
with restrained voice (in silence). Then, afterwards he again 
swathes with water. So, having sipped (the water), having made 
the sacrifice to the self, he should meditate on the self with 
the two (formulas) ‘As breath and fire/ ‘Thou art all/ ‘As 
breath and fire, the highest self has entered in with the five airs. 
May he when pleased himself, please all, the enjoyer of all/ 
Thou art all, thou art the Vaisvanara (fire). All that is born is 
supported by thee. Let all oblations enter into thee. These 
creatures live where thou, the all-immortal art. So he who eats 
according to this rule comes not again into the condition of food. 

In this passage the taking of food is represented as a sacrifice 
offered by the self to the self : dtma-yajha-rupam bhojanam. 

The formal rinsing of the mouth at the beginning and the end of 
meals is described here. See C.U. V. 2. . 

papena: by a sinner, pdpdtmand, patitena. 
yata-vdk: with restrained voice, maunl. 
viiva-bhuk: the enjoyer of all, visvam bhunakti, pdlayati. 
visvdmrtah: all-immortal, visvam amytayasi jivayasiti visvdmytah. * 
comes not again into the condition of food: He does not become food 
for others, he is not reborn. 


PURUSA AND RRAKRTI 

10. athdparam veditavyam, uttaro vikdro’ sydtma-yajfiasya 
yathdnnam annddas ceti, asyopavydkhydnam, purusas cetd 
pradhanantahsthah, sa eva bhoktd prdkrtam annam bhunkta iti , 

DD 



824 The Principal Upanisads VI. io. 

tasydyam bhutdtma hy annam asya karta pradhanah, tasmdt 
tri-gunam bhojyam bhokta puruso’ntahsthah , atra dr stark ndma 
pratyayam , yasmat bija-sambhavd hi pasavas tasmdd bijam 
bhojyam anenaiva pradhdnasya bhojyatvam vydkhydtam , tasmdd , 
bhokta puruso bhojyd prakrtis tatstho bhunkta iti.prdkrtam annam 
triguna-bheda-parinamatvdn mahadddyam visesdntam lingam , 
anertaiva caturdasa-vidhasya mdrgasya vydkhyd krtd bhavati, 
sukha-duhkha-moha-samjnam hy anna-bhutam idam jagat f na hi 
bijasya svad uparigraho' stiti ydvann aprasutih , tasydpy evam 
tisrsv avasthasv annatvam bhavati kaumaram yauvanam jara 
parinamatvdt tad annatvam , evam pradhdnasya vyaktatdm 
gatasyopalabdhir bhavati , tatra buddhyadini svaduni bkavanty 
adhyavasaya-samkalpabhimand iti , athendriyarthan panca svaduni 
bhavanti, evam sarvanindriyakarmdni pr ana-karma, li , evam 
vyaktam annam avyaktam annam , nirguno bhokta , 

/r/vflc caitanyam prasiddham tasya , yathdignir vai devandm 
annddah somo’nnam agninaivdnnam ity evam-vit, soma-sam- 
jno\ yambhutatmd'gni-samjno py avyakta-mukhditi vacandtpuruso 
hy avyakta-mukhena tri-gunam bhunkta iti , yo haivam veda 
samnydsi yogi cdtmayaji ceti , yadvan na kascicchunyagare 

kdminyah pravistdh sprsatlndriyarthan tadvad yo na sprsati 
pravistdn samnydsi yogi cdtmayaji ceti. 

io. Now, there is something else to be known. There is a 
fvirthcr development of this self-sacrifice, namely, what concerns 
the food and the eater thereof. The further explanation of this 
(follows). The conscious person abides within nature. He is 
the enjoyer for he enjoys (feeds on) the food (supplied by) of 
nature. This elemental self, eerily, is food for him, its maker is 
nature. Therefore, that which is to be enjoyed consists of the 
three qualities and the enjoyer is the person who stands within. 
Here the evidence is what is observed (by the senses). Since 
animals spring from seed and as seed is the food, by this is 
explained that nature is what is to be enjoyed. Therefore, the 
nerson is the enjoyer, nature is what is to be enjoyed. Abiding 
in it, he enjoys. All that begins with the intellect and ends 
with the elements, being a transformation of the distinction of 
nature with its three qualities is the sign (that there must be 
a self). And by this, the fourteenfold course is explained. This 
world is indeed the food, called pleasure, pain 1 and delusion. 
There is no apprehension of the taste of the seed (cause) so 
long as there is no production (of effect). And in its three 
conditions also it has the character of food, as childhood, 



VI. ii. Maitri Upanisad 825 

youth and old age. There is in them the character of food, on 
account of transformation. Thus as nature moves to the state 
of becoming manifest, there arises the perception of it. For 
the tasting (of the effects of nature) arise intellect and the like, 
determination, conception and self-love. Then there are the 
five objects of sense, for the tasting of them. Thus aris # e all 
actions of organs and actions of senses. Thus the manifest is 
food and the unmanifest is food. The enjoyer of it is without 
qualities (but) from the fact of his being an enjoyer it is evident 
that he possesses consciousness. As fire, verily, is the eater of 
food among the gods and Soma is the food, so he who knows 
this eats food by fire. The elemental self is called Soma. He who 
has the unmanifest as his mouth is called Agni because of the 
saying, f The person truly with the unmanifest as his mouth 
enjoys the three qualities/ He who knows this is a renounccr, a 
contemplator, a performer of the self-sacrifice. Even as there is 
no one to touch sensual vtomen who have # entered* into an 
empty house, so he who does not touch objects of sense that 
enter into him is a renounccr, a contemplator, a performer of 
the self-sacrifice. 

drstam: what is observed, darsanam pratyaksam. 
pratyayam: evidence, pramdnam. 

lihgam: sign. Hume interprets it as the subtle body which includes 

from the intellect up to the separate elements. 

the fourteenfold course: The four forms of antah-karana, the five 

organs of sense-perception and the five organs of action. 

dtma-yaji : the performer of the self-sacrifice : atma-samskdrdrtham yo 

yajate sa dtma-yajf. 

kaminyah: sensual women, kaminih kamaturdh strlh. 

FOOD AS THE FORM OF SELF 

11. par am va etad dtmano rupam yad annam, annamayo hy 
ayam prdno’tha na yady asndty amanta srota’ sprasta draStd’ 
vakta ghrdtarasayita bhavati , prdnamicotsrjatiti , evam hy dhfitfla 
yadi khalv asndti prdna-samrddho bhutva manta bhavati srytd 
bhavati, sprasta bhavati , vakta bhavati , rasayitd bhavati, ghratd 
bhavati, drastd bhavdtiti, evam hy aha anndd vai prajah prajdyante 
yah kascit prthivT-srtdh . ato’nnenaivy jivanti, athaitad api yanty 
antatah. • 

11. This, verily, is the highest form of self, namely, food, 
for truly this life consists of food. If one does not eat, he becomes 
a non-thinker, a non-hearer, a non-toucher, a non-seer, a 



826 


The Principal Upanisads VI. 13. 

non-speaker, a non-smeller, a non-taster, and he lets go his 
vital^ breaths. For thus it has been said, ‘If, indeed, one eats, 
he becomes full of life, he becomes a thinker, he becomes a 
hearer, he becomes a toucher, he becomes a speaker, he becomes 
a taster, he becomes a smeller, he becomes a seer/ For thus has 
it been said: ‘From food, verily, are creatures, whatsoever 
dwell on earth, are produced; moreover, by food, verily, they 
live and again into it they finally pass/ 

See C.U. VII. 9. 1; T.U. II. 2. 

12. athdnyatrdpy uktam , sarvani ha vd imdni bhutany ahar 
ah ah prapatanty annam abhijighrksamanani , suryo rasmibhir 
adaddty annam tenasau tapaty annendbhisiktah pacantime prana , 
agnir vd annenoj jvalaty annakdmenedam prakalpitam brahmand , 
ato’nnam dtmety upasitetyevam hy aha. anndd bhutani jay ante, 
jdtdny annena vardhante. adyate'tti ca bhiitani, tasmad annam 
tad acyate. 

12. And thus it has been said elsewhere: Verily all creatures 
here run about day after day, desiring to get food. The sun 
takes food to himself by his rays and thereby he gives forth 
heat. When supplied with food living beings here digest. Fire, 
verily, blazes up by food. This world was fashioned by Brahma 
with a desire for food. Therefore, let a man reverence food as 
the self. For thus has it been said: From food creatures are 
born, by food they grow when born, because it is eaten by and 
eats creatures, it is called food. 

V. anncndbhijvalati. 

See T.U. II. 2; B.S. IV. 1. 4. 5. 
abhisiktdh: supplied, samklinnah santarpitdh. 

13. athdnyatrdpy uktam: visva-bhrd vai ndmaisa tanur bhaga- 
vato visnor yad idam annam, prano vd annasya raso manah 
prunasya vijhdnam manasa, anandam vijhdnasyeti , annavdn , 
pi'dciavdn , manasvan, vijhdnavan, anandavdn ca bhavati yo 
haivarh veda , ydvantiha vat bhutany annam adanti tavatsvan- 
tastho’nnam atti yo haivam veda. annam eva vijarannam annam 
sarhvananam smrtam. annam pasunam prdno'nnarh jyestham , 
annam bhisak smrtam. 

13* Now it has elsewhere been said: That born of the blessed 
Visnu which is called the all-supporting, that, verily, is this 
food. Life, verily, is the essence of food, mind of life, under- 
standing of mind, (spiritual) bliss of understanding. He who 



VI. 14. Maitri Upanisad 827 

knows this becomes possessed of food, life, mind, understanding 
and bliss. Whatever creatures here (on earth) eat food, abiding 
in them does he, who knows this, eat food. Food, indeed, 
prevents decay, food is worshipful, it is said: Food is the lift 
of animals, food is the eldest-born, food is the physician, it is 
said. 

samvananam: worshipful, sambhajanlyam. 
jyestham: prathamajam, eldest born, first born. 

IMPORTANCE OF TIME 

14. athdnyatrdpy uktam: annarn vd asya sarvasya yonih , 
kalas cdnnasya, suryo yonih kalasya , tasyaitaci rupam yan 
nimesadtkdldt sambhrtam dvddasdtmakam vatsaram , etasydg - 
neyam ardham ardham vdrunam, maghadyam sravisthdrdham 
dgneyam kramenotkramena sdrpadyani sravislhdrdhdntam 
saumyam, tatraikaikani dtmano navdimsakam sacdrafyividham , 
sauksmyatvad etat pramdnam anenaiva pramiyate hi luilah, na 
vina pramdnena prameyasyopalabdhih , prameyo’pi pramdnatdm 
prthaktvdd upaity dtma-sambodhandrlham ity evam hy aha. 
ydvatyo vai kalasya kalas tdvatisu caraty asau, yah kdlam 
brahmety upasita kalas tasydtiduram apasaratiti, evam hy aha:' 
kdlat sravanti bhutdni, kdldd vrddhith prayanti ca . 
kale cdstam niyacehanti kdlo murtir amurtimdin. 

14. And thus it has been said elsewhere: Food, verily is the 
source of this whole (world), and time of food, and the Sun is 
the source of time. The form of it (time) is the year, which is 
composed of moments (twinklings) and other measures of time, 
and which consists of twelve months. Of it one half (when the 
Sun moves northward, belongs to Agni, the (other) half (when 
the sun moves southward) belongs to Varuna. The course 
from the asterism Magha (the sickle) to half of Sravistha (the 
drum) belongs to Agni. In its northward course from Sa?rpa 
(the serpent) to half of Sravistha belongs to the moon. Among 
these each month of the self (named as the year) includes nine 
quarters according to the corresponding course (of the Sun 
through the asterism). Because of its subtilty (imperceptibility 
of senses) thi$ (course of the Sun) is the proof for only in this 
way is time proved (to exist). Without proof there is no appre- 
hension of the thing to be proved. However the thing to be 
proved may become proved from the fact of its containing parts 
and for the sake of making itself known. For this it has been 



828 The Principal Upanisads VI. 15. 

said. As many parts of time as there are, through this the 
yonder (sun) moves. He who worships- time as Brahma from 
him time moves away very far. For this has it been said, ‘From 
time all beings flow, from time they advance to growth; in 
time they obtain rest (they disappear). Time is formed and 
formless too/ 

« 

Half the year is uttardyana, belongs to Agni, ausnya-pradhanatvat; 
and the other half daksinaydna belongs to Varuna, jala-pradhdnatvat. 
The two periods are predominantly warm and moist respectively. 
sarpam : the asterism of Aslesd, sacred to the serpents, sarpa-devatydm 
dslesd-naksatram. 
subtilty: indriyagocaratvat. 

sambodhanartham: for making itself known, samyag-bodhandrtham 
avadharanartham . 

15. dve vdva brahmano rupe kalas cakalas catha yah prag 
dditydt so’kdlo’kalo’tha ya adityad yah sa kdlah, sakalah , 
sakalasyq va etad rupayn yat samvatsarah, samvatsardt khalv 
eveyndh prajdh prajayante, samvatsarencha vai jata vivardhante , 
samvatsare pratyastam yanti f tasmat sathvatsaro vai praja-patih 
kdlonnam brahma-nidam atmd cety evam hy aha 
kdlah pacati bhutdni sarvdny eva mahatmani , 
yasmin tu pacyate kdlo yas tam veda sa vedavit. 

15. There are, verily, two forms of Brahman, time and the 
-timeless. That which is prior to the sun is the timeless, without 
parts. But that which begins with (has a beginning from) the 
Sun is time, which has parts. Verily, the form of that which has 
parts is the year. From the year, verily, are these creatures 
produced. By the year, verily; after having been produced they 
grow. In the year they disappear. Therefore, the year, verily, 
is Prajdi-pati , is time, is food, is the abode of Brahman, is the 
self. For thus has it been said: Time cooks (ripens) all things, 
indeed, in the great self. He who knows in what time is cooked, 
he*is the knower of the Veda/ 

* The Sun is the self of time as he is its ordainer, kala-nirvartakatvdd 
ad\tyah kaldtmakah. 

abode of Brahman: brahmano ntdam alambanam brahma-dfsti-yogyam 
pratlkam. 

pacati: cooks, jarayati. 

pacyate: is cooked, is dissolved, llyate. 

The temporal process and the Sun go together. What is prior to 
the Sun is non-temporal. 

Time is exalted as the highest principle, as the source of all that is. 



VI. 17. Maitrl Upanisad 829 

There is a distinction between time which has parts, which is later 
than the Sun and the stars and the non-time which is without parts 
and is earlier, between time which cooks or matures all beings and 
that in which time is cooked or matured. 

16. vigrahavdn esa kdlah sindhurajah prajdndm , esa tat- 
sthah savitdkhyoyasmdd eveme candra-rksa-graha - samvatsaradayah 
siiyante , athaibhyah sarvam idam atra vd yat kiiicit subhdsitbham 
driyanteha lake tad etebhyas, tasmdd dditydtmd brahmdtha 
kalasamjham ddityam updsitadityo brahmetyeke’tha evam hy aha. 

hotd bhoktd havir mantro yajno visnuh praja-patih, 

sarvah kascit prabhuh sdksi yo f musmin bhdti mandate. 

16/ This embodied (incarnate) time is the great ocean of 
creatures. In it abides he who is called Savitr (the Sun as 
begetter} from whom, indeed, are begotten the moon, stars, 
planets, the year and the rest. And from them comes this whole 
(world) here and whatever of good or evil is seen in this (world) 
comes from them. Therefore, Brahman is the self of the Sun. 
Therefore one should reverence the Sun uftder the* name of 
time. Some say the Sun is Brahman and thus is it said: The 
offerer (of the sacrifice), the enjoyer (of the sacrifice), the obla- 
tion, the hymn, the sacrifice, Visnu, Prajd-pati all this is the 
lord, the witness who shines in yonder orb.’ 

See C.U. III. 19. 1. 
vigrahavdn: embodied, murtimdn. 
ocean: samudravat dust ar ah. 

iy. brahma ha vd idam agra asit, eko y nantah, prdg ananto 
daksinato' nantah , praticy ananta.udicy ananta iirdhvah ca’vah 
ca sarvato' nantah; na hy dsya pracyadi-disah kaipante y tha tirya- 
gvah cordhvam vd, anuhya esa paramatmd’parimito'jo’tarkyo' 
cintya esa dkasatma ; evaisa krtsna-ksaya eko jagartiti , etasmad 
akasdd e§a khalv idam cetdmatram bodhayati; anenaiva cedam 
dhyayate asmin ca pratyastam yati; asyaitad bhdsvaram rupam 
yad amusminn dditye tapati, agnau cadhumake yaj jyotis citra- 
taram, udarastho’tha vd yah pacaty annam; ity evam hy *dha; 
yascaiso y gnau yai cay am hr day e yas casdv dditye sa esa ekdmity 
ekasya haikatvam eti ya evam veda. 

1 7. Verily, in the beginning this world was Brahman, the 
infinite one, Infinite in the east, infinite in the south, infinite 
in the west, infinite in the north and above and below, infinite 
in every direction. For him, indeed, east and the other directions 
exist not nor across, nor uelow, nor abov^ . Incomprehensible 



830 The Principal Upanisads VI. 18 

is that Supreme Self, unlimited, unborn, not to be reasoned 
about, not to be thought of (unthinkable), he whose self is 
space. At the dissolution of all he alone remains awake. Thus 
from that space, he awakes this (world) which consists of thought 
only. By him alone is all this meditated on and in him it is 
dissolved. He is that luminous form which gives heat in the 
yonder sun, the wonderful light on the smokeless fire, as also 
the fire in the stomach which cooks (digests) food. For thus 
has it been said, He who is in the fire, and he who is here in 
the heart and he who is yonder in the sun — he is on-e. He who 
knows this goes to the oneness of the one. 

na kalpante : exists not, na vastutah santi. 

anuhya: The self cannot be imagined because it is not determinate. 
Whatever is imagined is determined : yad vastuhyate tat p'arimitam. 
akasdtman: whose self is space. See C.U. III. 14. 2; K.U. II. 14. 
citra-taram: wonderful, ati-vicitram. 


THE YOGA METHOD 

18. tathd tat- pr ayoga-kalpah prdindy amah pratydhdro dhydnam 
dhdrand tarkah samddhih sadangd ity ucyate yogah, anena yada 
pasyan pasyati rukma-varnam kart dr am Isam purusam brahma - 
yonim; tadd vidvdn punya-pdpc vihdya pare'vyaye sarvam ektka- 
roly; evam hy aha: 

yathd parvatam ddiptam ndsrayanti mrga-dvijdh , 
tadvad brahmavido dosd ndsrayanti kaddeana. 

18. This is the rule for achieving this (oneness), control of 
the breath, withdrawal of the senses, meditation, concentration, 
contemplative inquiry and absorption, (this is) said to be the 
sixfold yoga. When, by this (yoga) he beholds the gold-coloured 
maker, the lord, the person, the Brahma source, then the sage, 
shaking off good and evil, makes everything into oneness in 
tha, supreme indestructible. For thus has it been said, 'As 
b<?a$ts and birds do not resort to a burning mountain, so sins 
do not find shelter in those who know Brahman * 

• 

Yoga is the means by which we control the mind: citta-va&karo 
updyah. See Yoga Sutra II. 29. 

Withdrawal of the senses from their objects is predyahara. indri- 
ydndm visayebhyah pratydharanam pratinivartanam pratyaharah. 

Contemplative inquiry or tarka is savikalpaka-samadhi. It may 
also mean an inquiry whether the mind has become transformed or 
not into the object q,f meditation or an investigation into the hin- 



VI. 20. Maitri Upanisad 831 

drances of concentration caused by the inferior powers acquired by 
meditation. 

pasyati: beholds. By means of yoga we achieve direct perception 
of the Supreme, sdksad anubhavati. See M.U. III. 1. 3. • 

19 athanyatrdpy aktam: yada vai bahir vidvdn mano niyam- 
yendriydrthan ca prdno nivesayitvd nihsamkalpas tatas ticket, 
apranad iha yasmdt sambhutah prdnasamjhako jivas tasmdt 
prdno vai turyakhye dharayet prdnam; ity evam hy aha: 
acittam cittamadhyastham acintyam gnhyam utiamam 
tatra cittam nidhdyeta tac ca lihgam nirdsrayam. 

19. .And thus it has been said elsewhere: ‘Verily, when a 
knower has restrained his mind from the external, when his 
breath has put to rest objects of sense, let him then remain 
void of conceptions. Since the living individual who is named 
the breathing spirit has arisen here from what is not the breath- 
ing spirit, therefore let the breathing spirit merge his breathing 
spirit in what is called the fourth (condition).' For thus has 
it been said: ‘That which is non-thought, which stands in the 
midst of thought, the unthinkable, the hidden, the highest, 
let a man merge his thought there. Then will this living being 
be without support (attachment).' 

aprdndt: from what is not the breathing spirit. Its source is the 
thinking self, prdnadi-visesa-rahitdc ciddtmanah. # 

turya: the fourth, the other three being waking, dream and sleep. 
See M.U. 7. 

lihga : the subtle body. It will not appear in its separate individuality 
on account of the absence of any conscious object or the subtle 
body will become void of all objects.’ 

THE VISION OF THE SELF 

20. athanyatrdpy uktam; atah parasya dharand, tdla-rasand - 
granipidanad vdh-manah-prdna-nirodhanad, brahma tark&ia 
pasyati, yad atmana atmdnam anor antydmsam dyotamanam 
manah-ksaydt pasyati tad dtmandtmdnam drstvd niratma bhavati , 
niratmakatvad asamkhyo' yonis cintyo moksa-laksanam ity efat 
par am rahasyam; ity evam hy aha: 

cittasya hi m prasddena hanti karma subhdsubham , 
prasannatmdtmani sthitvd sukham avyayam asnutd iti. • 

20. And thus it has been said elsewhere: ‘There is yet a 
higher concentration than this for him. By pressing the tip 
of the tongue down the palate, by restraining voice, mind and 

DD’ 



832 The Principal Upunisads VI. 21. 

breath, he sees Brahman through contemplative thought. 
When, by the suppression of the mind,' he sees through self he 
sees the shining self, more subtle than the subtle, then having 
the self through the self he becomes selfless. Because of his being 
selfless he is to be thought of as immeasurable, without origin. 
This is the mark of liberation, the highest mystery.’ And thus 
has it been said, ‘For by the serenity of thought, one destroys 
deeds, good and evil, with the serene self abiding in the self 
he enjoys eternal happiness.’ 

The process described here is called lambika-yoga and the state 
produced by it is called unmanibhava. 

tarkena: through contemplative thought, dharananantara-bhavina 
niscita-rupena jhdnena. 

niratma: selfless, nirmanasko bhavati jivabhavan nivartate esavasthd 
yogibhir unmamty ucyate. 

21. athanyatrdpy uktam: urdhvagd nddl susutnndkhyd prdna- 
sancdrirti talvantarvicchinnd , taya prunomkdra-mano-yukta- 
yordhvam utkramet, talvadhyagram parivartya indriydny asam- 
yojya mahima mahimdnarh nirlkseta, tato nirdlmakatvam eti, 
nirdtmakatvdn na snkha-duhkha-bhdg bhavati, kevalatvam labhata 
ity evarh hy aha: 

parah purvam pratisthdpya nigrhltdnilam tatah. 

, tirtvd param apdrena pascdd yunjita murdhvani. 

21. And thus it has been said elsewhere: ‘The channel called 
susumna leading upward, serving as the passage for the breath, 
is divided within the palate. Through it, when it is joined 
by the breath, the syllabic a.um and by the mind, let him pro- 
ceed upwards. By causing the tip of the tongue to turn back on 
the palate, by binding together the senses, let greatness perceive 
greatness. 1 hence he goes to selflessness.’ On account of 
selflessness, he is not (ceases to be) an cxperiencer of pleasure 
and pain. He obtains aloneness. For thus has it been said: 
‘Having first fixed the breath that has been restrained, having 
crossed the limit, let him join the limitless in (the crown of) 
the head.’ 

See C.U. VIII. 6.6; Katha VI. 16; T.U. 1-6; Prasna III. 7. (7). 6. 
Freed from limitations he becomes conscious of the unlimited 
perfection of Brahman. 



I. 22. Maitri Upanisad 833 

MEDITATION ON AUM 

22. athanyatrapy uktam: dve va va brahmant abhidhycye 
sabdai cdsabdasca , atha sabdenaivasabdam dviskriyate, athd 
tatra aum iti iabdo' nenordhvam utkrdnto' sabde nidhanam eti , 
athahaisa gatir etad amrtam , etat sdyujyatvam, nirvrtatvam tathd 
ceti ; yathornandbhis tantunordhvam utkrdnto' vakdsam Idbha - 

khalv asdv abhidhyatd aum ity anenordhvam 
utkrantah svdtantryam labhate , anyathd pare sabdavadinah: 
sravandngilsthayogendntarhrdaydkdsa-sabdam akar nay anti, sapta - 
vidheyam tasyopamd, yathd nadyah kinkinl kdriisya-cakraka-bheka 
vihkrndhika vrstir , nivdite vadaliti , tarn prthag lalisanam atitya 
pare sabdevyakte brahmany astam gatdh, tatra te’ prthag-dhar - 
mino'prtttag-vivekyd yathd sampannd madhutvam ndndrasd ity 
evam hy aha: 

dve brahmani veditavye, sabda-brahma paran ca yat, 
sabda-brahmani nisndtah.param brahmadhigacchati. 

22. And thus it has been said elsewhere: ‘There arS, verily, 
two Brahmans to be meditated upon, sound and non-sound. 
By sound alone is the non-sound revealed. Now here the sound 
is aum. Moving upward by it one comes to ascend in the non- 
sound. So (one says) this is the way, this is immortality, this 
is complete union and also tranquillity. And now as the spider 
moves upward by the thread, obtains free space, thus assuredly, 
indeed the meditator moving upward by the syllable aum 
obtains independence/ Other expounders of the sound (as 
Brahman) think otherwise. By closing the ears with the thumbs 
they hear the sound of the space within the heart. There is 
the sevenfold comparison of it, like rivers, a bell, a brass vessel, 
a wheel, the croaking of frogs, rain, % as when one speaks in a 
still place. Having passed beyond this variously characterised 
(sound), they disappear (become merged) in the supreme, the 
non-sound, the unmanifest Brahman. There they are unch^r- 
acterised and indistinguishable like the various juices that ha^e 
reached the condition of honey. For thus has it been said, 
‘There are two Brahmans to be known, the sound Brahman and 
what is higher. Those who know the sound Brahman get to the 
higher Brahman / 

See M.B. XII. 8540, also Pdnini-darsana in Sarva-darsana-samgraha- 
nivrtatvam: tranquillity, paramdnandavirbhdvah krta-krtyatvam. 
free space: nirahkusa-viharastL mam. 
kinkinl: bell, ghanta-ghosah. 



834 The Principal Upanisads VI. 24. 

kdmsyam: a brass vessel, tat-patra-ghosah. 
the croaking of frogs, manduka-ravah. 
astam: disappearance, adarsanam . 

* For the comparison of juices and honey, see C.U. VI. 9. 1-2. 
The Absolute is not totally unconnected with God. Those who 
worship God get to the Absolute. 

23*. athdnyatrapy uktam: yah sabdas tad aum ity etad aksaram , 
yad asyagram tac chantam , asabdam, abhayam, asokam, anandam, 
trptam , sthiram , acalam , amrtam, acyutam, dhruvam , visnu-sam- 
* jnitam, sarvdparatvdya tad eta upasitety evam hy aha: 
yo’sau pardparo deva aumkdro ndma ndmatah, 
nihsabdah sunya-bhutas tu murdhni sthane tato'bhyaset. 

23. And thus it has been said elsewhere: ‘What is (called) 
the sound is the syllable aum. That which is its end is ‘tranquil, 
soundless, fearless, sorrowlcss, blissful, satisfied, steadfast, 
unmoving, immortal, unshaking, enduring, called Visnu ; for 
obtaining what is higher than e»very thing (final release), let 
him reverence these two/ For thus is it said, ‘He who is both 
higher and lower, that God known by the name of aum is 
soundless and void of being too. Therefore let one concentrate 
on (the crown) of the head.' 

siinya-bhutah: void of being, nirdkaratvat nirvisesah. Distinctions do 
not apply to it, but it is not, on that account, to be regarded as 
non-being. 

24. athdnyatrapy uktam: dhanuh sarTram, aum ity etac 
charah, sikhdsya manah, tamo-laksanam, bhitvd tamo’tamdvistam 
dgacchati; athdvistam bhitva latacakram iva sphurantam aditya- 
varnam ilrjasvantam brahma tamasah paryam apasyad yad 
amusminn ddityetha some’gnau vidyuti vibhdti; atha khalv enam 
drstva! mrtatvam gacchatity evam hy aha. 

dhydnam antah pare tattve laksyesu ca nidhiyate 
ato’visesa-vijndnam visesam upagacchati: 
manase ca vilinc tu yat sukham catma-sdksikam 
tad brahma cdmrtam sukram sd gatir loka eva sah. 

24. And thus it has been said elsewhere: ‘The body is th^ 
bow. The anow is aum. The mind is its point, darkness is the 
mark. Having pierced through the darkness, one goes to what 
is not enveloped in darkness. Then having pierced through 
what is thus enveloped one sees Brahman who sparkles like 
a wheel of fire, of the colour of the sun, full of vigour, beyond 
darkness, that which shines in yonder sun, also in the moon. 



VI. 25. Maitri U pant sad 835 

in the fire, in the lightning. And having seen Him assuredly, 
one goes to immortality.' For thus has it been said: ‘Meditation 
is directed to the highest being within and to the (outer) 
objects. Hence the unqualified understanding becomes qualified*. 
But when the mind is dissolved and there is the bliss of which 
the witness is the self, that is Brahman , the immortal, the 
radiant, that is the way. That indeed is the (true) world.' 

See B.G. XV. 12; M.U. II. 2. 3-4. 
sikhd: point, agram, salya-sthdniyam. 
darkness, ignorance, muldjhdnam. 

atamavistam: what is not enveloped in darkness, atama-dvistam. 

tama -avesana-rah itam . 

sukram: radiant, dlptimat jhdna-svabhdvam . 

25. athclnyatrdpy nktani: nidrevantarhitendriyah suddhita- 
maycl dhiyii svapna iva yah pasyatindriya-bile’ vivasah prana- 
vdkhyam pranetdram , bhd-rupam , vi gat a-ni dram, vijaram, vimr- 
iyum, visokam ca so' pi prandvdkhyah, pranetd* hhd-rupah , vigata 
nidrah , vijarah, vimrtyur visoko bhavati , ity cvam hy aha: 
evam prdnam athomkdram yasmdt sarvam anekadhd , 
yunakti ytmjate vapi tasmad yoga iti smrtah: 
ekatvam prdna-manasor indriydnam tathaiva ca 
sarva-bhava-parilyago yoga ity abhidhiyate. 

25. And thus it has been said elsewhere: ‘He who has his 
senses indrawn as in sleep, who has his thoughts perfectly pure 
as in dream, who, while in the cavern of the senses, is not under 
their control, perceives him who is called Pranava , the leader, 
of the form of light, the sleepless, free from old age, the death- 
less, ihe sorrowless, he himself fcecomes called Pranava and 
becomes a leader, of the form of light, sleepless, free from old 
age, deathless and sorrowless.' And thus it is said: ‘Because in 
his manner he joins the breath, the syllable aum and all this 
world in its manifoldness or perhaps they are joined, therefore 
this (process of meditation) is called Yoga (joining). The onefiess 
of the breath, the mind and likewise of the senses and*tfie 
abandonment of all conditions of existence, this is designated 
as Yoga.' 

nidreva: as if ip sleep ; svapna iva: as if in dream. 

indriya-bile: in the cavern of the senses, indriydnam nivdsa-sthdne 

dehe. 

avivasah: not under control, sthula-dehdbhimdna-sunyah. 
suddhitamayd: perfectly pure, atisayena suddhiijtatyd. 



836 The Principal Upanisads VI. 27. 

pranetdram: leader. VI. 4. 

bhd-rupam : of the form of light, jndna-prakasa-svarupam. 

The first verse describes the goal of Yoga and the second the means 
to it. 

26. athanyatrdpy uktam: yathd vapsu carinah sdkunikali sutra- 
yant/enoddhrtyodare’gnau juhoty evam vd va khalv iman pranan 
aum ityanenoddhrtydndmaye > gnau juhoti , atas taptorviva- 
so’tha yathd taptorvi sdrpis trna-kastha-samsparsenojjvalatity 
evam vd va khalv asav aprandkhyah prdna-samsparsenojjvalati t 
atha yad ujjvalaty etad brahmano rupam caitad visnoh paramam 
padam, caitad rudrasya rudratvam, etat tad aparimitadha 
cdtmdnam vibhajya purayatiman lokdn, ity evam hy aha: 

vahnes ca yadvat khalu visphulingah , surydn mayukhas ca 
tathaiva tasya 

pranadayo vai punar eva tasmdd , abhyuccar antiha yatha- 
kramena . 

26. And thus ij- has been said dsewhere: 'Verily even as the 
huntsman draws in the dwellers in the waters with his net 
and offers them (as a sacrifice) in the fire of his stomach, thus, 
assuredly does one draw in these breaths by means of the 
syllable aum and sacrifice them in the fire that is free from ill. 
Hence it is like a heated vessel. Now as ghee in a heated vessel 
lights up by contact with (lighted) grass or wood, thus assuredly 
dbes he who is called non-breath light up by contact with the 
breaths. Now that which lights up is a form of Brahman , and 
that is the highest place of Visnu and that is the Rudra nature 
of Rudra. That having divided itself in limitless ways fills 
these worlds/ For thus has it been said, ‘And as indeed the 
sparks (issue) from the fire, as rays from the sun, so do the 
breaths and the rest come forth again and again into the world 
in proper order/ 

See B.U. II. 1. 20. 

dwellers in the waters: matsyddin. 

andmaya: free from ill. See S.U. III. 10. 

i 

27. athanyatrdpy uktam: brahmano vd vaitad tejah parasydmr- 
tasydsarirasya yaccharirasyausnyam asyaitad ghrtam, athdvih 
san nabhasi nihitam vaitad ekdgrenaivam antarhrdaydkdsam 
vinudanti yat tasya jyotir iva sampadyatiti, atas tad bhdvam , 
acirenaiti bhumdv ayaspindam nihitam yathd 1 cirenaiti bhumitvam, 
mrdvat samstham ( ayaspindam yathdgnyayaskarddayo nabhi - 



VI. 28. Maitri Upanisad 837 

bhavanti pranasyati cittam tathairayena sahaivam, tty evam hy 
aha: 

hrdyakdsamayam kosam dnandam paramalayam , 

svam yogai ca tato'smakam teja£ caivagni-suryayoh . 

27. And thus it has been said elsewhere: Verily, this is the 
heart of Brahman , the supreme, the immortal, the bodiless, 
even the warmth of the body. For that (heat) this (body) is 
the ghee (melted butter). Although it is manifest, verily, it is 
hidden in the space- of the heart. Then by intense concentration 
they disperse the space within the heart that the light, as it 
were of that (heat) appears. Then one passes speedily into the 
same ‘condition (of light) even as a ball of iron that is hidden 
in the earth passes speedily into the condition of earthiness. 
As fire and brass smiths and the like do not trouble about the 
ball of iron that is in the condition of earth, so does thought 
disappear together with its support. And thus it is said, The 
store house which consists of the space in the heart, the blissful, 
the supreme abode, is our self, our Yoga (goal) too and this the 
heat of fire and sun/ 

for that this body is the ghee: the splendour of Brahman which is 
otherwise unmanifested is manifested, even as fire blazes up by 
contact with ghee. 

avih: manifest, prakatam. Sec M.U. II. 2. 1. 
kosam: storehouse, bhdndagaram. 

The words as ray a and alaya are used in their technical meanings. 
When disembodied in the yogic process the hrd-akdsa is the 
nirasraya-linga consubstantial with citta, its own as ray a. When this 
process culminates in the dnanda state, it is the higher alaya. 
Lamkavatara Sutra distinguishes two aspects of alaya, the lower 
of which is vijhapti and the higher param alayavijndnam which is 
tathatd. 


THE FREE SPIRIT 

28. athanyatrapy uktam: bhutendriyarthdn atikramya tatyh 
pravrajydjyam dhrti-dandam dhanur grhitva 7 nabhimdnamayena 
caivesund tam brahma-dvdra-param nihatyadyam sammoha-mmili 
trsnersyakundali tandriraghavetryabhimanadhyaksah krodhajyam 
pralobha-dandam dhanur grhitvecchdmayena caivesunemdni khalu 
bhutdni hanti; tam hatvomkdra-plavSndntarhrdayakdsasya param 
tirtvdvirbhute ntarakdse sanakairavataivdvatakrd dhdtukamah 
samvisaty evam brahma-sdldm viset, tatas caturjdlam brahma- 
kosam pranudet , gurvagameneti: atah iuddtyah, putah , iunyah , 



838 The Principal Upanisads VI. 29. 

ianto’prano , niratma’ nanto’ ksayyah, sthirah, idsvato'jah , svatan - 
/raA, mahimni tisthati, atah sve * mahimni tisthamanam . 
drstva vrttacakram iva sancara-cakram dlokayati , ^3/ Ay a A<z. 

f sadbhir mdsais tu yuktasya nityamuktasya dehinah, 
anantah paramo guhyah samyag yogah pravartate. 
rajastamobhydm viddhasya susamiddhasya dehinah 
• putra-dara-kutumbesu saktasya na kadacana. 

28. And thus it has been said elsewhere: Having passed 
beyond the elements, the senses and the objects of sense and 
then having seized the bow, whose string is the life of a mendi- 
cant, and whose stick is steadfastness and having struck down, 
with the arrow which consists of freedom from self-cdnceit, 
the first guardian of the door to Brahma, (who has) bewilder- 
ment as his crown, greed and envy as his ear-rings, sloth, sleep 
and impurity as his staff, the cord of self-love, who seizes the 
bow whose string is anger, whose stick is lust, who slays beings 
here with the arrow that consists of desires; having slain him, 
having crossed o^ter with the raft of the syllable aum to the 
other side of the space in the heart, in the inner space which 
gradually becomes manifest one should enter the hall of Brahma 
as a miner seeking minerals enters into the mine. Then let him 
disperse the fourfold sheath of Brahma by the teaching of his 
spiritual perceptor. Henceforth being pure, clean, void (of 
be,ing), tranquil, breathless, selfless, endless, undecaying, 
steadfast, eternal, unborn, independent, he abides in his own 
greatness. Thereafter, having seen (the self) which abides in his 
own greatness, he looks down on the wheel of births and deaths 
as on a revolving wheel (of a chariot). For thus has it been 
said: Tf a man practises yoga for six months and is constantly 
freed (from the world) then the infinite supreme, mysterious 
Yoga is accomplished. But if a man, though well-enlightened, 
is afflicted with passion and darkness, if he is attached to son, 
wife and family, for such a one, no, never at all/ 

tavdrJ: sloth, satkarmasv alasyam. 
ird: sleep, nidrd. 
agh%m: impurity, pdpam. 

dhdtu-kamah: seeking minerals, suvarnddi-dhdtun antarbhumau nihitdn 
kdmayamanah . 

fourfold sheath, consisting of matter, life, mind and understanding. 
See T.U. II. 1-4. 

29. evam uktva ntarhrdayah sakdyanyas tasmai namaskrtvd > 
nayd brahma-vidyaya rdjan brahmanah panthdnam drudhdh 



VI. 30. Maitri Upanisad 839 

putrdh prajd-pater iti. santosam dvandva-titiksam sdntatvam 
yogdbhydsdd avdpnoti iti, etad guhyatamam ndputrdya ndsisydya 
ndsantdya kirtayed iti , ananya-bhaktdya sarva-guna-sampanndya 
dadyat. • 

29. Having thus spoken (to Brhadratha) Sakayanya with 
his heart (fixed) on the inner self bowed before him and said, 
by this brahma knowledge, did the sons of Prajd-pati astend 
the path of Brahman. By the practice of Yoga one gains con- 
tentment, endurance of the dualities (of pleasure and pain) and 
tranquillity. Let no one declare this most secret doctrine to 
any one who is not a son, who is not a pupil, who is not of 
a tranquil (mind). To one who is devoted to none other (than 

his teacher) to one endowed with all qualities, one may give it. 

• 

The conversation begun at I. 2 and the course of instruction begun 
at II. 1 eonclude here. 

See B.U. VI. 3. 12; S.U. VI. 22. 

The sons of Prajd-pati: The Valikhilyas who approached Prajd-pati 
for this knowledge. See II. 3. 

30. anm sucau dese sucih saltvasthah sad-adlnydnah sad-vadi 
sad-dhydyi sad-ydji sydd iti; atah sad brahmani satyabhildsini 
nirvrtto’nyas tatphalacchinnapdso nirdsah paresv dtmavad 
vigatabhayo niskdmo ksayyam aparimitam sukham akramya 
tisthati. paramam vai sevadher iva parasyoddharanam y#l 
niskdmatvam ; sa hi sarva-kdma-mayah pnruso dhyavasdya-sam- 
kalpdbhimdna-lingo baddhah ; atas tad-mpanto muktah; atraika 
dhur gunah prakrti-bheda-vasdd adhyavasdyatma-bandham updga- 
to’dhyavasdyasya dosa-ksayddd hi moksah, manasd hy eva pasyati, 
manasa srnoti, kdmah samkalpo vieikitsd sraddha sraddha dhrtir 
adhrtir hnr dhir bhtr ity etat sarvam mana eva, gunaughair 
uhyamdnah kalusikrlas casthiras calo lapyamdnah sasprho 
vyagras cdbhimdnitvam praydta iti, aham so mamedam ity evam 
manyamano nibadhndty dtmandtmdmam jalencva hhecarah; a$ah 
puruso } dhyavasdyasamkalpdbhimdna-lihgo baddhah, atas tad- 
viparito muktah, tasmdt niradhyavasayo nihsamkalpo nirab&i- 
mdnas tisthet, etan moksa-laksanam, esdtra brahma-padavi eso'lra 
dvdravivaro } nenasya tamasah param gamisyati; atra hi sarve 
kdmah samdhitd, ity atrodaharanti : 

yada pahedvatisthante jhandni manasd saha, 

* buddhis ca na vicestate turn dhuh paramdm gatim 
etad uktvdntarhrdayah sdkdyanyas tasmai namaskrtvd yathdvad 
upaedri krta-krtyo marud uUurdyanam gato, r^a hy atrodvartmand 



840 The Principal Upanisads VI. 30. 

gatih , eso’tra brahma-pathah, sauram dvdram bhittvorddhvena 
vinirgatd, ity atrodaharati: 

ananta rasmayas tasya dipavad yah sthito hrdi 
sitdsitdh kadru-mlah kapild mrdu-lohitdh. 
urdhvam ekah sthitas tesam yo bhitva surya-mandalam 
brahma-lokam atikramya tena ydnti pardm gatim. 
yad asydnyad ra&mi-satam urdhvam eva vyavasthitam 
tena deva-nikayanam sva-dhdmdni prapadyate. 
ye naikarupas cadhastad rasmayo’s'ya mrdu-prabhah 
iha karmopabhogdya taih samsarati so'vasah 
tasmat sarga-svargdpavarga-hetur bhagavdn asdv dditya 
iti. 

30. Aum. One should be in a pure place, himself pure, abiding 
in goodness, studying the real, speaking of the real, meditating 
on the real, sacrificing to the real. Henceforth absorbed in the 
real Brahman is he who yearns for the real, becomes another. 
He has the reward of having his # bonds (fetters) cut, becomes 
void of 'expectation, is freed from fear in regard to others as 
in regard to himself, void of desire, he remains, having attained 
imperishable and immeasurable happiness. Verily, freedom 
from desire is, as it were, the highest prize from the choicest 
treasure. For a person who is made up of all desires, who has 
the marks of determination, conception and self-love is bound. 
He who is the opposite of that is liberated. On this point, 
some (the Sdmkhyas ) say, it is the quality which, through the 
force of the differentiation of nature, binds the self with deter- 
mination (and the like) and from the destruction of the fault 
of determination (and the like) liberation (results). It is with 
the mind, verily, that one sees. It is with the mind that one 
hears. Desire, conception, doubt, faith and lack of faith, stead- 
fastness and lack of steadfastness, shame, meditation, fear, all 
this is truly mind. Borne along and defiled by the stream of 
qualities, unsteady, fickle, bewildered, full of desire, distracted, 
ope gets into the state of self-love. In thinking I am he, this 
is mine, he binds himself with himself as a bird in a snare. 
Hnnce a person who has the marks of determination, con- 
ception and self-love is bound. He who is the opposite of that 
is liberated. Therefore stand free from determination, free from 
conception, free from self-Jove. This is the mark of liberation. 
This is the path to Brahman in this world. This is the opening 
of the door here in this world. Through it one will go to the 
farther shore of darkness for therein are all desires contained 



VI. 3i. Maitri Upanisad 841 

(fulfilled). On this point they quote, ‘When the five forms (of 
sense) of knowledge along with the mind stand still and the 
intellect stirs not; that, they say, is the highest state/ Having 
spoken thus, Sakayanya had his heart (fixed) on the inner self* 
Then Marut having bowed before him and properly honoured 
him, having obtained his end, departed by the northern course 
of the sun for there is no way thither by a side-path. This is 
the path to Brahma here in the world. Bursting open the door 
of the sun, he rose* on high and departed. On this point they 
quote, ‘Endless are the rays of him, who, like a lamp, dwells 
in the heart, white and black, brown and blue, tawny and pale 
red. One of them leads upwards piercing the solar orb; by it, 
crossing the world of Brahma they go to the highest path. The 
other hundred rays lead upwards also and through them (the 
worshipper) reaches the abiding-places of the gods. But the 
rays of dim colour which manifestly lead downwards by them 
one wanders here helplessly for experiencing (the fruits of) his 
deeds. Therefore, the yonder blessed sun is the*cause of creation, 
of heaven and of final emancipation/ 

Katha VI. 10. 16; PraSna I. 10; C.U. VIII. 6. 1; B.U. I. 5. 3. 
calo: v. cahcalo. 

sat: the real, saddkhyam brahma . 

brahma-padam: path to Brahman , sdksdl-brahma-prdpti-mdrgah. 

avatisthante: stand still, niscaldni bhavanti. 

marut: marud ndma brhadrathah. 

krta-krtyah: having attained his end, avaptakamah. 

By the upward course we roach the highest state or the abodes 
of the gods: by the downward course we are reborn in the world of 
births and deaths. 

THE SELF'S RELATION .TO THE SENSES AND THE 

MIND 

3T. kim-dtmakani vd etamndriydni pracaranty udgantd caite - 
sam iha, ko niyanta vety aha; pratydhdtmdtmakanitydtmd hy 
esdm udgantd niyanta vdpsaraso bhdnaviyas ca mancayo ndma, 
atha pancabhih raimibhir visaydn atti , katama atmeti , yo ’y§m 
suddhah putah sunyah sdintadi-laksanoktah svakair lingair 
upagrhyah, tasyaital lingam alingasyagner yad ausnyam dvistan 
cdpam yah £iv'a-tamo rasa ity eke; atha vdk irotram caksur manah 
prana ity eke , atha buddhir dhrtih smrtih prajha tad ity eke, atha 
te etasyaivam yathaiveha bljasydhkurdvdtha dhumdrcirvi§- 
phulihgd ivagnesxeti, atrodanaranti: M 



842 The Principal Upanisads VI. 32. 

vahnes ca yadvat khalu visphulihgah , siiryan mayukhas ca 
tathaiva tasya. 

pranddayo vai punar cva tasmdd , abhyuccUr antiha yathakra - 
mena. 

31. (One asks) : Of what nature, verily, are these senses that 
go forth (towards their objects)? Who is the one that sends 
them out here and who restrains them? Another answers they 
are of the nature of self for the self is he who sends forth and 
restrains them. There are enticing objects of sense and there 
are what are called the luminous rays. Now the self feeds on 
objects by the five rays. Who is the self? He who has been 
defined as pure, clean, void, tranquil and of other marks. He 
is to be apprehended by his own marks. Some say that the 
mark of him who is without any mark is as heat and*anything 
pervaded by it are to fire, or what the most agreeable taste 
is to water; others say that it is speech, hearing, sight, mind, 
breath; others say that it is understanding, steadfastness,, 
memory*, wisdom? Now, verily, these are the marks of him even 
as the sprouts here are the mark of a seed, as smoke, light and 
sparks are the marks of a fire. On this point they quote: As 
indeed the sparks from fire, and likewise as the rays from the 
sun, living creatures and the rest in proper order again and 
again proceed from him here on earth. 

See II. 4; VI. 28; §.U.‘ VI. 13; A.U. III. 2; B.U. IV. 4. 18; Kena 2. 
The sprout reminds us of the invisible seed, bhumyantargata- 
taya drsyasya sad-bhdva-jnapaka ankurd. Even so from the mani- 
festations of self we infer the reality of self. 

32. tasmdd vd eiasmdd dtmani sarve prdndh, sarve lokdh, sarve 
veddh, sarve devdh, sarvdni ca bhutdny uccaranti tasyopanisat 
satyasya satyam iti, atha yathardraidhdgner abhydhi tasya prthag- 
dhumd niscaranty evam vd ctasya mahato bhidasya nihsvasitam 
etad yad rg-vedo yajur-vedah sdma-vedo tharvdngirasa itihasah , 
py,rjinaM t vidya, upanisadah, slokdh, sutrany anuvydkhyandni 
vydkhydndny asyaivaitdni visvd bhutdni . 

$2. From him, indeed, who is in the self come forth all living 
creatures, all worlds, all the vedas, all the gods and all beings. 
Its mystic meaning is that it is the truth of the truth. Know 
as from a fire laid with green (damp) wood, when kindled, 
clouds of smoke separately issue forth, so, verily, from this 
great being has been breathed forth that which is the Rg Veda , 
the Yajur Veda, tjie Sdma Veda (hymns of), the Atharvans 



VI. 33 - Maitri Upanisad 843 

and the Angirasas, legendary stories, ancient lore, sciences, t 
mystic doctrines, versus, aphorisms, explanations and com- 
mentaries. From it, indeed, all these beings (come forth). 

See B.U. II. 1. 20; II. 4. 10. 

upanisad: mystic doctrines, upanigamayitytvdt saksdt rahasyam nama. 
the truth of the truth: empirical existence is the truth : the underlying 
truth of it is the self. 

• 

33. pahcestako vd eso’gnih samvatsarah tasyema istakd yo 
vasanto gnsmo varsdh iaradd hemantah, sa sirah-paksasi-prstha- 
pucchqvdn, eso’gnih purusavidah seyam prajd-pateh prathama 
citih, karair yajamdnam antariksam utksiptvd vdyave prdyacchat , 
prano vai vdyuh, prano’ gnis , tasyema istakd yah prano vyclno 
’ pdnah samdna uddnah, sa sirah-paksasi-prstha-pucchavdn 
eso’gnih purusavidas tad idam antariksam prajdpatcr dvitiya 
citihy karair yajamdnam divam utksiptvendrdya prdyacchat , asau 
vd aditya indrah, saiso’gnih, tasyema istakd yad rg-yajuh 
samdtharvdngirasd itihdsah pur an aril sa sirah-paksasi-puccha - 
prsthavdn eso’gnih purusavidah, saisd dyauh prajdpates trtiya 
citih, karair yajamanasydtmavide’vaddnam karoti , yathatmavid 
utksipya brahmane prdyacchat, tatrdnandi modi bhavati. 

33. Verily, this {garhapatya sacrificial) fire with its five bricks 
is the year. For that the bricks are these, spring, summer, the 
rainy season, autumn, winter. So it has a head, two wings* a 
back and a tail. In the case ot one who knows the person, this 
earth is Prajd-pati’s first sacrificial pile. With its hands it raises 
the sacrificer to the atmosphere and offers him to Vayu (the 
wind). Wind, verily, is breath. Breath is the fire (daksinagni ) . 
For that the bricks are these, the prana breath, the vyana 
breath, the apdna breath, the samdna breath and the uddna 
breath. So it has a head, two wings, a back and a tail. In the 
case of one who knows the person, this atmosphere is Prajd-pati’s 
second sacrificial pile. With its hands it raises the sacrificer 
up to the sky and offers him to Indra. Verily, Indra is yonder 
sun. He is this (third dhavaniya) fire. For that the bricks are 
these, the Rg Veda, the Yajur Veda, the Sdma Veda (the hyrflns 
of the), Atharvans and Angirasas, legendary stories, ancient 
lore; so it ha$ a head, two wings, a back and a tail. In the case 
of one who knows the person, thfs sky is Prajd-pati’ s m third 
sacrificial pile. With its hands it presents the sacrificer to the 
knower of the self. Then the knower of the self raises him up 
and offers him to Brahma, there he become blissful and joyful. 



844 The Principal Upanisads VI. 34. 

The three fires which are used in religious sacrifices are treated as 
three sacrificial piles erected by Praja-pati the lord of creation 
on earth, the atmosphere and the sky. The year, the wind and the 
•sun rule in these three regions. They raise the sacrificer to the next 
higher stage until, finally, he reaches Brahma. 

- CONTROL OF THOUGHT IS LIBERATION 

34. prthivigdrhapatyo’ntariksamdaksindgnirdyaurahavaniyah, 
tata eva pavamana-pavakaiucaya dviskrtam etenasya yajham, 
yatah pavamdna-pdvaka-suci-samghdto hi jatharah , tasmdd agnir 
yastavyah cetavyah stotavyo'bhidhyatavyah; yajamdno havirgrhitvd 
devatdbhidhyanam icchati: 

hiranya-varnah sakuno hr dy dimity e pratisthitah 

madgur hamsas tejo-vrsah so’sminn agnail yajamahe 
iti cdpi mantrartham vicinoti; tat savitur varenyam bhargo 
y sydbhidhyey am yo buddhyantastho dhydylha manah-sdnti-padam 
anusaraty dtmany eva dhatte treme'sloka bhavanti: 

1. yathd nirindhano vahnih svayonav upasamyate 
tathd vrtti-ksaydc cittam svayonav upasamyate. 

2. svayonav upasdntasya manasah satya-kamatah 
indriydrtha-vimudhasydnrtdh karma-vasanugdh 

3. cittam eva hi samsaram, tat prayatnena sodhayet 
yac cittas tan-mayo bhavati guhyam etat sandtanam. 

* 4. cittasya hi prasadena hanti karma subhasubham. 

prasannatmdtmani sthitvd sukham avyayam asnute: 

5. samasaktam yathd cittam jantor visaya-gocare 

yady evam brahmani sydt tat ko na mucyeta bandhanat. 

6. mano hi dvividham proktam suddham cdsuddham eva ca 
asuddham kamasamparkdt suddham kama-vivarjitam. 

7. laya-viksepa-rahitam manah krtvd suniscalam 
yadd ydty amanibhdvam tada tat paramam padam 

8. tdvan mano niroddhavyam hrdi yavat ksayam gatam 

r etaj jhdnam ca moksam ca sesdnye grantha-vistarah. 

* 9. samadhi-nirdhauta-malasya cetaso nivesitasyatmani yat 

sukham bhavet, 

* na sakyate varnayitum gird tadd, svayam tad antahkar * 

anena grhyate. 

10. apam apo'gnir agnau % vd vyomni vyoma na laksayet , 

. evam antargatam yasya manah sa parimucyate . 

11. mana eva manusyandm kdranam bandha-moksayoh. 
bandhaya visayasahgim mokso nirvisayam smrtam. 

ato’nagnihotryanagiiicid ajhanabhidhydyinam brdhmanah pada - 



VI. 34 - Mailt % Upanisad 845 

vyomdnusmaranam viruddham , tasmdd agnir yastavyah cetavyah 
stotavyo ' bhidhyatavyah . * 

34. The earth is the gdrhapatya fire, the atmosphere is the 
daksina fire and the sky the ahavaniya fire. Hence they artf 
(called) the pure, the purifying, the bright. By this the sacrifice 
is made manifest. Since the digestive fire is the combination 
of the pure, the purifying and the bright, therefore thi^ fire 
should be worshipped with oblations, is to be built (with bricks), 
is to be praised, is to be meditated upon. The sacrificer, when 
he takes the oblation seeks (to perform) his meditation of the 
divinity thus: 'The bird of golden hue abides in the heart and 
in the sun, a diver-bird, a swan, of surpassing radiance. Let 
us worship him in the fire/ Having recited, one discerns the 
meaning*of this verse, the adorable splendour of Savitri should 
be meditated upon by him, who, abiding in his understanding, 
meditates thereon. Here he reaches the place of tranquillity 
for the mind. He places it in the self, indeed; on this point 
there are these verses : Even as fire without fu?l becomes extinct 
in its own place, even so thought, by the cessation of activity 
becomes extinct in its own source. Even in a mind which seeks 
the truth and has quieted down in its own place, there arise 
false ideas due to past acts when deluded by the objects of 
sense. One's own thought, indeed, is samsdra ; let a man cleanse 
it by effort. What a man thinks, that he becomes, this is the 
eternal nrystery. For by the serenity of one's thought, one 
destroys all actions, good or bad. Dwelling within the self, with 
a serene self, he enjoys imperishable happiness. If the thought 
of man is so fixed on Brahman as it is on the things of this 
world, who will not then be free from bondage? The mind, it 
is said, is of two kinds, pure and impure, impure from 
contact with desire and pure when freed from desire. By freeing 
mind from sloth and distraction and making it motionless, he 
becomes delivered from his mind (reaches mindlessness), tjien 
that is the supreme state. So long should the mind be restrajqpd 
in the heart till it reaches its end, that is knowledge, that is 
liberation. All else is but extensions of the knots that bind*us 
to this life. The happiness of a mind whose stains are washed 
away by copcentration and who has entered the self, it 
cannot be here described by wortls. It can be grasped by 
the innei organ (only). One cannot distinguish water in water, 
fire in fire or ether in ether even so he whose mind has entered 
in, he is released completely. Mind, in trijth, is the cause of 



846 The Principal Upanisads VI. 35. 

bondage and liberation for mankind; for bondage if it is bound 
to objects; freedom from objects, that is called liberation. 
Therefore, for those who do not perform the agnihotra sacrifice, 
'who do not build up the fire, who are ignorant, who do not 
meditate, the remembering of the ethereal (heavenly) place of 
Brahman is obstructed. Therefore that fire should be worshipped 
with oblations, should be built (with bricks), is to be praised, 
is to be meditated upon. 

pavamdna-pdvaka-suci: These attributes are applied to the different 
fires: gdrhapatyah — pavamdnah , daksindgnih-pavakah , ahavantyah - 
sucir iti bhedah. 

hiranya-varnah: of golden hue, hiranyavat prakdsamdnah. 

dhatte: places, anusandhatte. 

sva-yonau: in its own place, svadhisthdne. 

kdma-vivarjitam : free from desire. See Brahma-bmdu U.V.i. 

lay a: sloth, sleepiness, layo nidrd. 

viksepah: distraction, bahir-visaya-snytyadih. 

amanlbhdvam: mindlessness: atmano mana upadhi-pravesa-krta-visesa- 
pantydgah amanibhdvah. 

Cp . Y oga-vdsistha : 

cittam lidranam arthanam tasmin sati jagat-trayam, 
tasmin kslne jagat kslnam tat cikitsyani prayatnatah. 

Thought is the cause for all things. When it is active there are 
the three worlds; when it subsides the world subsides. Therefore the 
m*lnd should be treated with diligence.' 

Brahma-bindu U. 2, sec also 3-5. 

Astdvakra Gita II says: 

sarlram svarganarakau bandha-moksobhayam tatlia 
kalpand-mdtram evaitat kirn, me kdryam ciddtmanah. 

The body, heaven and hell and so both bondage and liberation 
are but mental. What then have I (who am) essentially intelligence 
to do with them ? * 

This passage equates di>raya with sabda Brahman whose pravrth 
or concomitant differentiation leads to the universe. Its purification 
or unification leads to asabda or utter voidness, sunyatva. 

• « 

35. namo’gnaye prthivt ksite loka-smrte lokam asmai yajama?i- 
ayt, dhehi . namo vdyave ntariksa-ksite loka-smrte lokam asmai yaja- 
mdndya dhehi , nama aditydya divi-ksite loka-smrte lokam asmai 
yajamdndya dhehi , namo brahmane sarva-ksite safva-smrte sar- 
vam asmai yajamdndya dhehi , 

hiranmayena pdtrena satyasydpihitam mukham 
tat tv am pusann apdvrnu satya-dharmaya visnave 
yo y sd dditye purusa}} so’sa aham, esa ha vai satya-dharmo yad 



VI. 35- Maitrl Upanisad 847 

adityasya ddityatvarh tac chuklam, purusam, alihgam, nabhaso 9 
ntargatasya tejaso'msamdtram etad yad adityasya madhya ivety 
aksiny agnau caitad brahmaitad amrtam etad bhargah etat satya- 
dharmo nabhaso' ntargatasya tejaso'msamdtram etad yad adityasya • 
madhye amrtam yasya hi somah prana vd apyayahkura etad 
brahmaitad amrtam etad bhargah etad satya-dharmo nabhaso' ntar- 
gatasya tejaso'msa-mdtram, etad yad adityasya madhye flijur 
dipyaty aum apo jyotiraso mrtam brahma bhur bhnvah svar aum . 
astapddam sulim hamsam tri-sutram anum avyayam 
dvi-dharmo' ndham tejasendham sarvam pasyan pasyati 
nabhaso' ntargatasy a tejaso'msa-mdtram etad yad adityasya madhye 
uditvd * mayiikhe bhavata etat savit satya-dharma etad yajur etat 
tapa etad agnir etad vdyur etat prana etad apa etac candramd 
etac chnkram, etad amrtam • etad brahma-visayam, etad bhdnur 
arnavas tasminn eva yajamandh saindhava iva vliyanta esd vai 
brahmaikatdtra hi sarve kdmdh samdhitd ity atroddharanti : 
amsu-dhdraya ivdyiuvateritah sqmsphuraty asdv antargali surdndm, 
yo haivamvit sa savit, sa dvaitavit, saikadlfdm etah *syat tad 
dtmakas ca: ye vindava ivdbhyuecaranty ajasram, vidyud ivd - 
bhrdrcisah parame vyoman, te'rciso vai yasasa dsraya-vdsdj jatd- 
bhirupd iva krsna-vartmanah. 

35. Adoration to Agni (Fire), who dwells in the earth, who 
remembers the world. Bestow the world on this worshipper 
Adoration to Vayu (wind) who dwells in the atmosphere, wl*o 
remembers the world. Bestow the world on this worshipper. 
Adoration to the Aditya (the sun), who dwells in heaven, who 
remembers the world. Bestow the world on this worshipper. 1 
Adoration to Brahma, who dwells in all, who remembers all. 
Bestow all on this worshipper. With a golden vessel is the face 
of the real covered. That do thou, O Pusan, uncover, that we 
may reach the Eternal real, the pervader. 2 He who is the 
yonder person in the sun, I myself am he. Verily, that which 
is the sunhood of the sun is the eternal real. That is the brigjit, 
the personal, the sexless. Of the bright power that perva^dgs 
the sky, it is only, a portion, which is, as it were, in the midst 
of the sun, the eye and in fire. That is Brahman , that is the 
immortal, that is splendour. Of the bright power that pervades 
the sky it is only a portion which is the nectar in the midst 
of the sun, of which the moon and the living creatures too are 
only offshoots. That is Brahman, that is immortal, that is 

1 See Taittlrv'a Samhitd VII. 5. 24. 1. 

a lia 15, 16; 13 . U. V. 15. 1. 



848 The Principal Upanisads VI. 36. 

splendour, that is the eternal real. Of the bright power that 
pervades the sky it is only a portion which shines as the Yajur 
Veda in the midst of the Sun that is aum, water, light, essence, 

• immortal, Brahman bhur, bhuvas, svar, aum. The eight-footed, 
the pure, the swan, three-stringed, minute, the imperishable, 
blind to the two attributes (of good and evil), kindled in the 
light, he who sees him sees all. Of the bright power that 
pervades the sky it is only a portion, which, rising in the midst 
of the Sun becomes the two light rays. That is the knower, 
the eternal, real, that is the Yajus, that is heat, that is fire, 
that is wind, that is breath, that is water, that is the moon, 
that is the bright, that is the immortal, that is the pllace of 
Brahman. That is the ocean of light. In it, indeed, the wor- 
shippers become dissolved like, (a lump of) salt. 1 It is the one- 
ness with Brahman for in it are all desires contained. 1 On this 
point they quote. Even as a lamp moved by a gentle breeze, 
he who dwells within the gods shines forth. He who knows 
this, is *the knoWer, he knows the difference, having grasped 
the oneness, he becomes identified with it. They who rise forth 
perpetually like spray drops (from the sea) like lightnings from 
the light within the clouds in the highest sky, they, by virtue 
of their entrance into the light of glory appear like crests of 
flame in the track of fire. 

prthivl-ksite: who dwells in the earth, prthivi-loka-nivdsaya. 
satya-dharmdya visnave: that we may reach the eternal real, the 
pervader ; satya-dharma-visnusvarupa-praptaya iti. 
alihgam: sexless, lihga-varjitam strl-pun-napumsakadi-bheda-rahitam. 
dvi-dharmo’ndham: blind to the two attributes (of good and evil) : 
dvdbhydm punya-papdbhyam andham anavabhdsamdnam punyapa- 
pa-rahitam. 

brahma-visayam: the place of Brahman, brahma-prdpti-dvdram. 
savit : the knower, vida jhanena saha vartata iti savit, vidvdn. 

36. dve vd va khalv ete brahma-jyotiso riipake sdntam ekam 
samrddham caikam, atha yac chdntam tasyadharam kham , atha 
yqt samrddham idam tasyannam, tasmdn mantrausadhdjyd- 
misa-puroddsa-sthdli-pdkddibhir yastavyam antarvedydm dsny 
avasi stair anna-pdnais easy am dhavamyam iti matvd tejasah 
samrddhyai punya-loka- vijityarthdydmrtatvaya 'cdtroddharanti: 
agni-hotramjuhuyatsvarga-kdmo yama-rdjyam agnistomenabhiya- 

* B.U II. 4: 12 

3 QU. VIII. 1.5; Maitri VI. 30 and 38 



VI. 37 - Maitrl Upanisad 849 

yati soma-rdjyam ukthena , surya-rdjyath sodas ind svdrdjyam 
atiratrena prdjdpatyam dsahasra-samvatsaranta-kratuneti : 

vartyddhara-sneha-yogdd yathd dtpasya samsthitih , 

• antarydndopayogad imau sthitav dtmasucT tathd. 

36. Verily, indeed, of the Brahma light there are these two 
forms, one, the tranquil and the other the abounding. Now of 
that which is tranquil, space is the support, of the other which 
is the abounding, food here is the support. Therefore one should 
offer sacrifice in the*sacrificial altar with sacred hymns, herbs, 
ghee, flesh {sacrificial), cakes, boiled rice and the like, and also 
with food and drink cast into the mouth, knowing the mouth 
to be the ahavaniya fire for the sake of abundance of vigour, 
for winning the world of sanctity and for immortality. On this 
point they quote: He whods desirous of heaven should offer 
the agnihotra sacrifice. One wins the kingdom of Yama by the 
agnistoma sacrifice, the kingdom of the moon by the uktha , 
the kingdom of the Sun by the sixteen-day sacrifice, the 
kingdom of independence oy the atirdtm sacrifice, the 
Kingdom of Praja-pati by the sacrifice which continues to the 
end of a thousand years. As the continued existence of a lamp 
is because of the union of wick, support and oil, so also the 
self and the bright (sun) continue to exist because of the union 
of the Inner One and the world egg. 

The two selves are the witness and the experiencing self. The 
former is tranquil and the latter is full of activity. 

tejasah: vigour, jnana-balddi-nimittam prdgalbhyam. 

svdrdjyam: the kingdom of independence or the kingdom of Indra: 

indradhisthito loka-visesah. 

Even as the lamp burns so long as there is oil to be consumed so 
the light of Brahman remains divided as the individual soul and 
the Sun so long as the latent brightness of previous actions in the 
incorporated being and in the world are not exhausted. If the Sun 
is taken as the symbol of the cosmic process it means that the process 
will continue until all men are liberated. 

37. tasmad aum ity anenaitad upasitdparimitam tejas, *tat 
tredhabhihitam agndv dditye prdne’thaisa nddy anna-bahum Hy 
esdgnau hutam adityam gamayati, ato yo raso’sravat sa udgitham 
varsatiy teneme prdnah t pranebhyah praja ity atroddharanti: 
yadd havir agnau huyate tad adityam gamayati , tat suryo rasmibhir 
vaxsatiy tendnnam bhavati } annddbhutdndmutpattirityevamh$dha: 

agnau prdstahutih samyag adityam upatisthate , 
ddityaj jdyate vrstir orster annam tatgh prajah . 



850 The Principal Upanisads VI. 38. 

37. Therefore one should meditate with the syllable aum on 
that unlimited splendour. That has been manifested threefold, 
in the fire, in the sun, in the breath. Now this is the channel 
by which the abundance of food offered in this fire goes up to 
the sun. The sap which flows therefrom rains down like the 
udgttha chant. By this living creatures here exist. From living 
cfeatures come offspring. On this point they quote. The oblation 
which has been offered in the fire goes to the sun. The sun rains 
that down with his rays. Thereby afises food. From food the 
production of beings. For thus has it been said, the offering 
properly cast in the fire goes toward the sun; from out of the 
sun comes rain; from the rain food; from food living beings. 

nadl: channel, dvara-rupa. See Manu JII. 76. 

38. agni-hotram juhvano lobha-jdlam bhinatti , atah sammoham 
chitva na krodhdn stunvdnah kdmam abhidhydyamdnas tatas catur- 
jdlam brahma-kosam bhindad> atahparam-dkdsam atra hi saura sau- 
mydgneya-sdttvikUni mandaldni bhittvd tatahsuddhah sattvdntaras- 
tham, acalam, amrtam, acyutam, dhruvam , visnu-samjhitam, 
sarvdparam dhdma satyakdma-sarvajhatva-samyuktam, svatan- 
tram, caitanyam, sve mahimni tisthamanam pasyati atroddharanti: 

ravi-madhye sthitah somah soma-madhye hutdsanah , 

tejo-madhye sthitam sattvam sattva-madhye sthito* cyntah. 
s/irira-prddesdhgustha-mdtram anor apy anvyam dhyatvdtahpara- 
matdm gacchati , atra hi sarve kamah samdhitd iti, atroddharanti ; 
ahgiistha-pradeia-sanra-mdtram pradlpa-pratapavat dvis tridhd 
hi, tad brahmdbhistuyamanam maho devo bhuvandny avivesa. 
aum namo brahmane namah. 

38. He who performs the agnihotra sacrifice rends the net 
of selfish desire. Then having cut through bewilderment he 
does not approve of anger. Meditating on desire, he cuts through 
the fourfold sheath of Brahma. Thence he goes to the highest 
spfice. There having broken through the spheres of the sun, 
of the moon, of the fire and of the pure being, he, then, being 
purified himself, he sees the intelligence which abides in the 
pure being, immovable, immortal, indestructible, enduring 
bearing the name of Visnu, the ultimate abode, endowed with 
love of truth (or the desires) and omniscience^, independent, 
which stands in its own greatness. On this point they quote: 
In tfie midst of the sun stands the moon, in the midst of the 
moon the fire, in the midst of fire stands pure being; 
in the midst of pui£ being stands the indestructible one : Having 



VI. 38. Maitri Upanisad 851 

meditated on him who is of the measure of -a thumb within 
the span (of the heart) in the body, who is smaller than the 
small, then one goes to the supreme condition. For in that all 
desires 'are contained. On this point they quote: Having the’ 
measure of a thumb within the span in the body like the flames 
of a light burning twofold or threefold, the Brahma who is 
praised, the great god, has entered (all) the worlds. Alim, 
adoration to Brahma, yea, adoration. 

VI. 28; VI. 23; VI. 30; VI. 35. 

He who makes the fire sacrifice tears up the snare of greed, cuts 
down ^elusion and breaks with anger. 
of the measure of a thumb within the span in the body: same f>rade- 
k-matra-parimitam hrdayam tatrahgustha-mdtmh kamalam. 
pradlpa-pmldpavat: like the ilhme of a light, pradipaMkhdvat. 



852 The Principal Upanisads . VII. 3. 

CHAPTER VII 

THE SELF AS THE WORLD-SUN AND ITS RAYS 

1. agnir gay atr am trivrd rathantaram vasantah prano nak- 
satrdni vasavah purastdd udyanti , tapanti , varsanti , stuvanti, 
punar viianti, antar vivareneksanti , acintyo’murto gabhiro gup- 
to'navadyo ghano gahano nirgunah suddho bhasvaro gunabhug 
bhayo’ nirvrttir yogisvarah, sarvajho magho’prameyo’nadyantah , 
srimdn , ajo,dhimdn anirdesyah, sarvasrk ,sarvasydtmd,sarvabhuk, 
sarvasyesanah, sarvasy antar antar ah. 

1. The Fire, the gdyatri metre, the trivrt hymn, the rathantara 
chant, the spring season, the upward breath, the stars, the vasu 
gods (these), rise in the east, they warm, they rain, they praise, 
they enter again within and look out through an opening. He 
is unthinkable, formless, deep (unfathomable), hidden, blame- 
less, compact (solid), impenetrable, free from qualities, pure, 
brillian^, enjoying (the play of* the three) qualities, fearful, 
unproduccd, the master yogin, omniscient, mighty, immeasurable, 
without beginning or end, possessing all excellence, unborn, 
wise, indescribable, the creator of all, the self of all, the enjoyer 
of all, the lord of all, the inmost being of everything. 

vasu gods: deva-gana-visesah. 
deep , unfathomable: duravagahah. 
compact: solid, abhedyah. 

bhayah: fearful, because he is the all-devouring time, kalarupah. 
maghah: mighty or worshipful, maghavdn indr ah pujyah. 

2. indr as tristup pahcadaso brhad-gnsmo vyanah somo rudra 
daksinata udyanti , tapanti, varsanti, stuvanti, punar visanti, 
antar -viv arena iksanti: anddyanto’parimito'paricchinno’parapra - 
yojyah, svatantr o' lingo’ miirto’nantasaktir dhdtd bhdskarah. 

2. Indra, the tristiibh metre, the pancadasa hymn, the brhat 

chant, the summer season, the vydna breath, the moon, the 
l^qdragods rise in the south; they warm, they rain, they praise, 
they enter again within and look out through an opening. He 
is*»without beginning or end, unmeasured, unlimited, not to be 
moved by another, independent, without any marks (signs), 
formless, of endless power, the creator, the maker of light 
(the enlightener). ' 

3. maruto jagati saptadaso vairupam, varsa apdnah sukra 
dditydh pascdd udyanti, tapanti, varsanti, stuvanti, punar-visanti , 
antar vivareneksartli , lac chdntam, asabdam, abhayam, asokam , 



VII. 6. Maitri Upanisad 853 

anandam , trptam, sthiram, acalam, amrtam , acyutam, dhruvam , 
visnu-samjnitatn, sarvdparam dhama. 

3. The Maruts, the jagatl metre, the saptadasa hymn, the 
Vairupa chant, the rainy season, the apana breath, the planet 1 
Venus, the Aditya gods, these rise in the west. They warm, 
they rain, they praise, they enter again within and look out 
through an opening. That is tranquil, soundless, fearless, 
sorrowless, blissful, satisfied, steadfast, immovable, immortal, un- 
shaking, enduring, tearing the name of Visnu, the highest abode. 

4. visve Hevd anustub ekavimso vairdjah sarat samuno varunah 
sddhya uttarata udyanti , tapanti, varsanti , stuvanti, punar visanti , 
antar vivareneksanti, antah-iuddhah, putah , sxinyah, santo’prdno 
niratmanantah. 

4. Th e*Visve devas, the dnustubh metre, the ekavimsd hymn, 
the Vairdja chant, the samdna breath, Varuna, the sadhya 
gods, rise in the north. They warm, they rain, they praise, they 
enter again within, and look out through aji opening. He is 
pure within, clean, void, tranquil, breathless, selfless, endless. 

5. milrdvarunan panktis trinava-Lrayastrirhso sdkvara-raivate 
hemanta-sisirduddno’ngirasas candrumd urddhvd udyanti, tap anti, 
varsanti, stuvanti, punar visanti antar vivareneksanti, prana - 
vakhyam pranetdram, bhd-rupam, vigata-nidram, vijaram, vimr- 
tyum, visokam. 

5. Mitra and Varuna, the paiikti metre, the trinava and the 
trayastrimsa hymns, the Sdkvara and Raivata chants, the winter 
and the dewy seasons, the uddna breath, the Angirasas, the 
moon rise from above. They warm, they rain, they praise, they 
enter again within, and look out through an opening. Him who 
is called pranava , the impeller, whose form is light, sleepless, 
ageless, deathless, sorrowless. 

6 . sani-rahu-keturaga-rakso-yaksa-nara - vihaga - sarabhebhdda - 
yo> dhastdd udyanti, tapanti, varsanti , stuvanti , punar visanti, 
antar vivareneksanti, yah prajho vidharanah sarv antar o y ksayaft, 
suddhah , putah , bhdntah, ksdntah, sdntah. 

6. Saturn, Rahu (the dragon's head), Ketu (the dragon's tail), 
serpents, the Raksasas, Yaksas, men, birds, deer, elephants and 
the like rise from below. They warm, they rain, they praise, 
they enter again within and look o at through an opening. He 
who is wise, the ordainer, within all, imperishable, pure, clean, 
shining, patient, tranquil. 

vidharanah: the ordainer, vidhdrako varndsrama»marydddydh. 



854 The Principal Upanisads VII. 8. 

THE WORLD-SELF 

7. esa hi khalv dtmantarhrdaye nxyan iddho gnir iva visvaru- 
po’ syaivdnnam idam sarvam asminn otd imdh prajdh, esa 
r dtmdpahatapdpma vijaro vimrtyur visoko' vicikitso' vipdiah sat - 
ya-samkalpah } satya-kdmah , esa paramesvarah , esa bhutddhipatih, 
esa bhuta-palah , esa setuh, vidharanah , esa hi khalv dtmesdnah 
iarilbhur bhavo rudrah prajdpatir visva-srkhiranya-garbhahsatyam 
prdno hamsah sdstdcyuto visnur ndrdyanah, yascaiso 1 gnau yas 
cay am hrdayev yascdsdv dditye sa esa ekah y tasmai te visva-rupdya 
satye nabhasi hitdya namah. 

7. And he, verily, is the self within the heart, very subtile, 
kindled like fire, endowed with all forms. Of him all this is food. 
In him are woven creatures here. He is the self which is free 
from evil, ageless, deathless, sorroWless, free from uncertainty, 
free from fetters, whose conception is the real, whose desire 
is the real. He is the supreme lord, he is the ruler of beings, 
he is the protector of beings. He is the determining bridge. This 
self, verily, is thc%rd, the beneficent, the existent, the terrible, 
the lord of creation/ creator of all, the golden germ, truth, life, 
spirit, the ruler, the unshaken, the pervader, Ndrdyana. He 
who is in the lire, he who is here in the heart, he who is yonder 
in the sun, he is one. To thee who art this, endowed with all 
forms hidden in the real space, be adoration. 

visva-rupah: endowed with all forms, sarva-rupo vaisvdnurah. 
otdh: woven, dsritdh, papa iva tantujdtam dsritya sthitdh. See B.U. 
III. 6; III. 8. 

sctu: bridge. See B.U. IV. 4. 22; C U. VIII. 4. 1. 
hitdya : hidden, nihitdya. 

8. atheddmm jhdnopasargd rdjan moha-jdlasyaisa vai yonih, 
yad asvargyaih saha svargyasyaisa vdtye purastad ukte'py adhah 
stambendslisyanti , atha ye ednye ha nitya-pramudita nityapra- 
vasitd, nitya-y dean aka nityam silpopajlvino } tha ye ednye ha 
pma-ydcakd aydjya-ydjakdh siidra-sisydh, siidrds ca sdstra-vid - 
VQ>%so’iha ye ednye ha cdta-jata-nata-bhata-pravrajita-rangdvatd- 
rino rajakarmani patitddayo tha ye ednye ha yaksa-raksasa-bhuta- 
gGtfia-pisdcoraga-grahddlndm artham puraskrtya samaydma ity 
evam bruvdnd, atha ye ednye ha vrthd kasdiya-kandalinah kdpdlin- 
o’tha ye cdtiye ha vrtha tarka-drstdnta-kuhakendrajalair vaidikesu 
paristhatum icchanti, taih Saha na samvaset, prakasya-bhutd vai 
te taskard asvargyd ity evam hy aha: 

nairdtmya-vdda-kuhakair mithyd-drstanta-hetubhih , 

bhrdmyan Iqjto na jdndti veda-vidydntarantu yat. 



VII. g. Maitrl Upanisad 855 

8. Now then, the hindrances to knowledge, O King. This is 
indeed the source of the net of delusion, the association of one 
who is worthy of heaven with those who are not worthy of 
heaven, that is it. Though it is said that there is a grove before 
them, they cling to a low shrub. Now there are some who are 
always hilarious, always abroad, always begging, always making 
a living by handicraft. And others there are who are beggars 
in town, who perform sacrifices, for the unworthy, who are the 
disciples of Sudras and who, though Siidras, are learned in the 
scriptures. . And others there are who are wicked, who wear 
their hair in a twisted knot, who are dancers, who are mer- 
cenaries, travelling mendicants, actors, those who have been 
degraded in the King's service. And others there are who, for 
money, profess that they «can allay (the evil influences) of 
Yaksas (sprites), Rdksasas (ogres), ghosts, goblins, devils, ser- 
pents, imps and the like. And others there arc who, under false 
pretexts, wear the red robe, earrings and skulls. And others 
there are who love to distra’ct the believers* in the Veda by 
the jugglery of false arguments, comparisons and paralogisms, 
with these one should not associate. These creatures, evidently, 
are thieves and unworthy of heaven. Tor thus has it been said: 
The world bewildered by doctrines that deny the self, by false 
comparisons and proofs does not discern the difference between 
wisdom and knowledge. 

jndnopasargah: hindrances to knowledge; jiidnotpatti-vighdtakd 
hetavah. 

vylha: falsely, mithyd. 

veda-vidyd: wisdom and knowledge, veduvidyd: knowledge and 
ignorance. 

The caste prejudice comes out here with reference to the Sudras. 

9. brhaspatir vai iukro bhutvendrasydbhaydydsurebhyah ksayd- 
yemcim avidydm asrjat, fay a sivam asivam ity uddisanty asivgm 
sivam iti y vedddi-sdstra-himsaka-dharmdbhidhydnam astv 
vadanti, ato naindm abhidhlyetdny athaisd bandhyevUisa 
rati-mdtram phalarn asyd vrttacyutasyeva ndirambhanlycty eveyh 
hy dha: 

dm am ete viparlte visucl, avidyd yd ca vidyeti j hut a 
vidydbhipsitam naeiketasam manye , na tvd kdma bahavo 
lolupante 

vidydm edvidydm ca yas tad vedobhayam saha , 
avidyayd mrtyuth tlrtvd vidyayd amrtam asmite. 

EE 



856 The Principal Upanisads VII. 10. 

avidydydm antare vestyamdnah , svayarii dhirdh panditam 
manyamdnah , 

dandramyamandh pariyanti mudhd andhenaiva myamdnd 
yathandhah. 

9. Verily, Brhaspati (the teacher of the gods) became Sukra 
(the teacher of the demons) and for the security of Indra and 
for*the destruction of the demons created this ignorance. By 
this (they) declare the inauspicious to be auspicious and tjie 
auspicious to be inauspicious. They say that there should be 
attention to the (new) law which is destructive of the (teaching 
of the) Vedas and the other scriptures. Therefore one should 
not attend to this teaching. It is false. It is like a 'barren 
woman. Mere pleasure is the fruit thereof as also of one who 
has fallen from the proper course. It should not be attempted. 
For thus has it been said: Widely opposed and divergent are 
these two, the one known as ignorance, and the other as 
knowledge. I (Yama) think that Naciketas is desirous of 
obtaining knowledge and many desires do not rend you. He 
who knows at the s^jne time knowledge and ignorance together, 
having crossed death by means of ignorance he wins the 
immortal by knowledge. Those who are wrapped up in the midst 
of ignorance, fancying themselves alone wise and learned, they 
wander, hard smitten and deluded like blind men led by one 
who is himself blind. 

Cp. C. U. VIII. 7. 

sivam : auspicious, sukhakaram. 

asivam: inauspicious, akalyanam, duhkham. 

uddisanti: declare, kathayanti. 

rati-matram: mere pleasure, of a passing nature, tatkdlikam plialam 
asya na bhdvi-subha-phalam asti. 

knowledge and ignorance: See Katha II. 4; Isa n; Katha II. 5; 
M.U. 1. 2. 8. 

having crossed death by ignorance: karmanisthayd nifty um vidyot- 
patti-pratibandhakam pdpam tlrtva tikramya vidyaya aupanisadaya 
’mitatvam moksam asnute prapnoti. 

vestyamdnah: wrapped up, putra-pasu-dhana-ksctrddi-tfsnd-pdsa- 
idtaih samvestyamandh. 

dandramyamandh: hard smitten, kutildm anekarupdm gatim gac- 
chantah jara-marana-rogddi-duhkha-satair upadruyamanah iti vd. 
pariyanti: wander, samsdra-mandale paribhramanti . " 

10. devdsurd ha vai ya dtma-kamd brahmano’ntikam prayatah , 
tasmai namaskrtvocuh , bhagavan, vayam atma-kdmah sa tvam no 



VII. ii. Maitri Upani§ad 85 7 

bruhtti, atai dram dhyatva* manyatanyatdtmano' vat te’surd, 
ato’nyatamam etesdm uktam, tad ime mudhd upajwanty abhi§- 
vanginas taryabhighdtino’ nrtabhisamsinah satyam ivanrtam pas- 
yantmdrajalavad ity, ato yad vede$v abhihitam tat satyam yad 
vedesuktamtad vidvamsa upajlvanti , tasmdd brdhmano navaidikam 
adhiyttdyam arthah sydd iti. 

10. Verily, the gods and the demons, being desirous* of 
(knowing) the self went into the presence of Brahma. Having 
bowed before him they said, Revered Sir, we are desirous of 
(knowing) t*he,self, so do you tell us. Then, after having reflected 
a long while, he thought in himself. Verily, these demons are 
desirous of a self different (from the true one). Therefore, a 
very different doctrine was told to them. On that these deluded 
(demons) here live their life, Adth intense attachment, destroying 
the means of salvation and praising what is false. They see 
the false, as if it were true, as in jugglery. Therefore what is 
set forth in the Vedas, that is the truth. On what is said in 
the Vedas, on that wise men live their life. Therefore a Brthmana 
should not study what is not of the Veda. -This should be the 
purpose. 

See C.U. VIII. 8. 

anyatatmanah: v. ayatatmanah, not self-subdued. 

with intense attachment: atyasaktah tat-parah. They live according to, 

another idea of the self than the reality, deluded, attached, expressing 

a falsehood ; as if by an enchantment they see the false as the true. 

tarih: the means, the raft by which to cross the ocean of samsara. 

tiryate anayeti tarih samsdra-sdgardtikramana-saihanam atma-tatt- 

va-jhanam. 


MEDITATION ON AUM AND ITS RESULTS 

11. etad vd va tat svarupam nabhasah khe’ntarbhutasya yat 
par am tejas tat tredhabhihitam agnd dditye prana etad vd va tat 
svarupam nabhasah khe' ntarbhutasya yad aum ity , etad aksaram 
anenaiva tad udbudhnyati, udayati , ucchvasati, ajasrambrahmadht - 
ydlambam vatraivaitat samlraneprakasa-praksepakausnya-sthani- 
yam etad dhumasyeva samtrane nabhasi prasakhayaivotkramya 
skandhatskandham anusaraty apsu praksepako lavanasyeva 
ghrtasya causnpam ivabhidhydtur vistrtir ivaitad ityatrodaha- 
ranti: atha kasmdd ucyate vaidyuto yasmdd uccaritamdtra eva 
sarvam ianram vidyotayati, tasmdd aum ityanenaitad upast- 
tdparimitam tejah 



858 The Principal Upanisads VII. 11. 

1. purusas caksuso yo’yam daksino’ ksiny avasthitah , 
indro’yam asya jayeyam savye cdksinyavasthitd. 

2. samdgamas tayor eva hrdayantargate susau, 
tejas tal-lohitasydtra pinda evobhayos tayoh. 

3. hr day ad dyati tavac caksusy asmin pratisthitd 
sarani sd tayor nadi dvayor ekd dvidha salt 

*'4. manah kaydgnim dhanti sa prerayati mdrutam , 
marutas turasi caran mandram janayati svaram. 

5. khajagniyogdd hrdi samprayuktabi, anor hy anur 

dviranuh kantha-dese 

jihvdgra-dese tryanukam ca viddhi vinirgatam matrkam 
evam dhuh . 

6. na pasyan mrtyum pasyati na rogam nota duhkhatam 
sarvarh hi pasyan pasyati satvam dpnoti sarvasvh 

7. caksusah svapna-can ca suptah snptat paras ca yah 
bhedds caitesya catvaras lebhyas turyam mahattaram 

8. trisvekapac cared brahma tripdc carati cottar e, 
ghtydnrtopabhogdrthdh dvaiti-bhavo mahdtmana iti dvaiti- 

bhavo mahdtmana iti . 

11. Verily, the nature of the ether within the space (of the 
heart) is the same as the supreme bright power. This is mani- 
fested in a threefold way, in fire, in the sun and in the breath 
of life. Verily, the nature of the ether within the space (of the 
heart) is the same as the syllable aum. With this syllable, 
indeed, that (light) rises up (from the depths) goes upwards 
and breathes forth. Verily, it becomes for ever, the support 
of the meditation on Brahma. In the breathing, that (bright 
power) has its place in the heart that casts forth light. In the 
breathing that is like the action of smoke; for when there is 
breathing the smoke rises to the sky in one column and follows 
afterwards one branch after another. That is like throwing salt 
into water, like heat in melted butter, like the range (of the 
thpught) of a meditator. On this point they quote, now, why 
ir it said to be lightning? Because in the very moment of going 
forth it lights up the whole body. Therefore one should meditate 
with the syllable aum that boundless light. The person who 
is in the eye, who abides in the right eye, he is Indra and his 
wife abides in the left eye. The union of these two (takes place) 
within the hollow of the* heart and the lump ‘of blood which 
is there is indeed the life-vigour of these two. There is a channel 
extending from the heart up to the eye and fairly fixed there. 
That is the channel which serves both of them, by being divided 



VII. ii. Maitri Upanisad 859 

in two though but one. The mind stirs up the fire of the body; 
that stirs the wind. The .wind, then moving through the chest 
produces the low sound. As brought forth in the heart, by 
contact with the fire of friction it is smaller than the smallest, , 
it becomes double (the minimum size) in the throat, know that 
it is treble on the tip of the tongue and when it comes forth 
they call it the alphabet. The seer does not see death, ^ior 
sickness, nor any sorrow. The seer sees the all and becomes all 
everywhere. He whcf sees with the eye, who moves in dreams, 
who is sound asleep and he who is beyond the sound sleeper, 
these are a person’s four distinct conditions. Of these the fourth 
is greater than the rest. Brahman with one quarter moves in 
the three and with three-quarters in the last. For the sake of 
experiencing the true and the false the great self has a dual 
nature, yea, the great self has a dual nature. 

SccB.U. IV. 2. 3; C.U. VII. 26.2. 
ajasram: for ever, nairantarycnch 

Veda is said to be the expression of the mind of Isvard. isvara- 
cid-vistaro vedah. 
susau: hollow, chidre. 

For the four conditions of the self, see Ma.U. 




SUBALA UPANISAD 

• 

This Upanisad belongs to the Sukla Yajur Veda and is in 
the foFm 6f a dialogue between the sage Subala and Brahma,, 
the creator God. It discusses the nature of the universe and 
the character of the Absolute. 




Subala Upanisad 

I 


863 


I. 1. 


THE ORIGIN OF THE WORLD AND OF THE FOUR 

CASTES 

1. tad dhuhy kirk tad astt, tasmai sa hovdca, na san ndsan na 
sad asad iti y tasmdt tamah samjayate, tamaso bhutddih, bhutddeh 
dkdsam , akaiad vayuh, vdyor agnih, agner apah t adbhyah prthivT; 
tad andam samabhavat ; tat samvatsara-matram usitva dvidhakarot, 
adhastdd bhumim, nparistad dkdsam, madhye puruso divyah t 
sahasra-stnsd purusah , sahasraksah , sahasra-pat , sahasra-bahur 
iti. so'gre bhutanam mrtyum asrjat, tryaksaram, trisiraskam, 
tripddam khandaparasum, tasya brahmabhidheti , sa brahmdnam 
eva vivesa, sa mdnasan sapta-putran asrjat , te ha virajah satya 
mdnasdn jisyjan, te ha prajn-patayo brahmano'sya mukham asid t 
bdhu rajanyah krtah, urn tad asya yad vaisyah, padbhydm sudro 
ajayata. 

candramd manaso jdtas caksoh suryo ajayata , 
srotrad vdyus ca pranas ca, hrdaydt sarvafh idam jdyatc. 

1. (He) discoursed on that: What was there then? To him 
(Subala) he (Brahma) said: It was not existent, not non- 
existent, neither existent and non-existent. From that emerged 
darkness, from darkness the subtle elements, from the subtle 
elements ether, from ether air, from air fire, from fire water, 
from water earth; then there came into being the egg; thiit 
(egg) after incubation for a year split in two, the lower one 
being the earth and the upper one being the sky; in the middle 
(between the two parts) there came into being the divine person, 
the person with a thousand heads, a thousand eyes, a thousand 
feet and a thousand arms, lhis (person) created death the 
foremost of all beings, the three-eyed, three-headed and three- 
footed Khandaparasu. Of him Brahma became afraid. He got 
hold of Brahma alone. He (Brahma) created seven sons out of 
his mind. These (seven) created in their turn, out of their minds, 
seven sons filled with truth. These are, verily, the Prajd-patys. 
Out of his (the divine person’s) mouth came forth the BVah- 
manas, out of hjs arms were made the Rajanyas (the Ksatriy^s), 
out of his (two) thighs the Vaisyas were produced and from his 
feet came forth the Sudras. 

From his mind came the moon, ^nd from his eyes came the 
sun and from his ear came forth air and the vital principle. 
From his heart sprang forth alJ this. 

In the beginning was the formless state whic^ cannot be described 



864 The Principal Upanisads II. i. 

as either existent or non-existent or as both. Cp. R.V. Ndsadlya 
Sukta X. 129. 

The first existent was darkness, the principle of objectivity, the 
void which has to be illumined. 

The egg is the world-form and the person is the world-spirit. 
Earth and heaven are generally represented as the two forces whose 
interaction produces the manifold universe. 

Subjection to death, the principle of unceasing change is the 
characteristic of the cosmic process. 

II 

CREATION OF OTHER BEINGS 

1. apandn msada-yaksa-rdksasa-gandharvas casthibhyah par - 
vata lomabhya osadhi-vanaspatayo Valdtat krodhajo rudro jdyate, 
tasyaitasya mahato bhutasya nihsvasitam evaitad yad rgvedo 
yajurvedah samavedo’tharvavedah siksa kalpo vydkaranam, 
niruktam chando jyotisdm ayanam nyayo mimamsa dharnta- 
sdstrdni* vydkhycfndny upavydkhydnani ca sarvdni ca bhutdni 
hiranya-jyotir yasminn ay am atmddhiksiyanti bhuvanani visva. 
atmdnam dvidhakarot , ardhena stri ardhena purusah, devo bhutva 
devdn asrjat,rsir bhutva rsin yaksa-raksasa-gandharvdn gramany 
dranydms ca pasiin asrjat, itard gaur itaro nadvan itaro vadave 
taro'sva itard gardabhitaro gardabha itard visvambharitaro vis- 
vambharah. so’nte vaisvdnaro bhutva samdagdhvd sarvdni bhutdni 
prthivy apsa prallyata upas tejasi praliyante, tejo vayau viliyate, 
vayur akdse viliyata dkdsam indriyesv indriyani tanmdtresu 
tanmdtrdni bhutddau viliyante, bhutddir mahati viliyate , mahan 
avyakte viliyate, avyaktam aksare viliyate, aksaram tamasi 
viliyate, tamah pare deva ekibhavati parastdn na san, ndsan, 
nasadasad ity etan nirvdnanusdsanam iti veddnusasanam iti 
vedanusasanam. 

1. From the apdna of the Person (sprang forth) the Nisadas 
(forest tribes) as also, the Yaksas, ’the Raksasas and the Gand- 
hi rvas; from the bones the mountains; from the hairs herbs 
and trees of the forest, from the forehead Rudra, the embodi- 
ment of anger. Of this great person's outbreathing are the 
Rg Veda, the Yajur Veda, the Sdma Veda, the Atharva Veda , 
Siksd (pronunciation), Kalpa Sutras, grammar, lexicography, 
prosody, the science of the movements of the heavenly bodies, 
the Nyaya logic, investigation of the rules of conduct and 
nature of reality, the codes of conduct, commentaries and 
sub-commentaries and all other things relating to all beings. 



III. i. Subdla Upanisad 865 

That light of gold (the world-spirit) in whom are reflected the 
self and all the worlds, (he) split his own form into two, half 
female and half male. Becoming a celestial he created the 
celestials, becoming a seer he created seers and similarly the 
Yaksas, the Raksasas, the Gandharvas, village folk, and 
forest dwellers and animals he created, the one a cow, the other 
a bull, the one a mare, the other a stallion, the one a she-ass, 
the other a he-ass, the one the earth goddess, the other the 
lord of the world (Visnu). At the end he, (the same world 
spirit) becoming Vaisvanara, completely burns all existing 
things (dissolves the world), earth dissolves in water, water 
dissolves in fire, fire dissolves in air, air dissolves in ether, ether 
in the senses, the senses in the subtle elements, the subtle 
elements dissolve in their subtile sources, the subtile sources 
dissolve in the principle of mahat, the principle of mahat 
dissolves in the principle of the Unmanifested and the principle 
of the Unmanifested dissolves in the Imperishable. The 
Imperishable dissolves in the "darkness. The darkness becomes 
one with the transcendent {Brahman). Beyond the transcendent 
there is no (other) existence nor non-existence nor both existence 
and non-existence. This is the doctrine relating to liberation. 
This is the doctrine of the Veda; this is the doctrine of the Veda. 

from the hairs , herbs and trees of the forest: see B.U. I. 1. 1. 
the one a cow and the other a bull: see B.U. I. 4. 4. 
mimdmsd: investigation; it is taken as referring to both Purva and 
Uttara Mimamsas, the first relates to the nature of duty, dharma , 
and the second to the nature of Brahman. The order of dissolution 
is the reverse of the order of evolution and the account is based on 
the Samkhya theory. 


Ill 

LIBERATION AND THE \VAY TO IT 

1. asadvdidamagraasU. ajatam , abhutam, apratisthitam, asabaarg, 
asparsam , arupam , arasam, agandham, avyayam, amahantdm, 
abrhantam , ajam , atmanam matva dhiro na iocati. apranam, 
amukham , asrotram, avdg, amano’tejaskam, acaksuskam , andma- 
gotram , asiraskam , apani-padam, asnigdham, alohitam , apra- 
meyam, ahrasvam , adtrgham, asthulary, ananv analpam , apdram, 
anirdesyam, anapdvrtam, apratarkyam , aprakdsyam , asarhifrtam, 
anantaram , abahyam , na tad asnati kin cana f na tad ainati kas 
canaitad vai satyena danena tapasandsakena brahmacaryena 



866 


IV. i. 


The Principal Upanisads' 

nirvedanendndsakena sadahgenaiva sadhayet, etat trayam vikseta 
damam dandm dayam iti t na tasya prana utkramanty atraiva 
samavaliyante, hrahmaiva san brahmdpyeti ya evam veda. 

i. In the beginning this was non-existent. He who knows 
(the Brahman ) as unborn, uncaused, unestablished (in any- 
thing else), devoid of sound, devoid of touch, devoid of form, 
devoid of taste, devoid of smell, imperishable, not dense, not 
prodigious, originless, as one’s own self (he), sorrows not. That 
which is lifeless, mouthless, earless, speechless, mindless, splen- 
dourless, devoid of name and clan, headless, devoid of hands 
and feet, devoid of attachment, devoid of glowing redness (like 
fire), immeasurable, not short, not long, not gross, not minute 
(like a speck), not small, not great, not definable, not obscure, 
not demonstrable, not manifest, • not shrouded, without an 
interior, without an exterior. It does not feed on anything, 
nor does anything feed on it. One should attain this {Brahman) 
by recourse to the six means of truthfulness, charity, austerity, 
fasting/ chastity* (of mind and body) and complete indifference 
to worldly objects (renunciation of all objects which do not 
help the attainment of the knowledge of the self). One should 
also attend to the following three, self-control, charity and 
compassion. The pranas (vital airs) of this (knower of Brahman) 
do not go out ; even where he is they get merged. He who knows 
thus, becoming Brahman remains as Brahman alone. 

See B.U. III. 8. 8. 

Brahman is described in negative terms and the means for its 
attainment are mentioned. While this is the ultimate reality, the 
world can be accounted for by the concepts of the Supreme Person 
and the world-spirit. 


IV 

THE THREE STATES OF WAKING, DREAM AND 
DREAMLESS SLEEP 

i. hrdayasya madhye lohitam mdmsapindam , yasmims tad 
dqharam pundankam kumudam ivdnekadha vikasitam , hrdayasya 
dasa chidrdni bhavanti; yesu prandh pratisthitah, sa yadd prdnena 
saha samyujyate tadd pasyanti nadyo nagarani bahuni vividhdni 
ca, yadd vyanena saha samyujyate tadd pasyati devams ca rslms 
ca, yada apdnena saha samyujyate tadd paiyati yaksa-raksasa- 
gandharvan , yadd udanena saha samyujyate tadd pasyati deva-lo- 
kdn devdn skandqm jayantam ceti } yadd samanena saha sam- 



IV. i. Subala Uftanisad 867 

yujyate tadd pasyati deva-lokan dhandni ca, yadd vairambhyena 
saha samyujyate tadd pasyati drstam ca srutam ca bhuktam 
cdbhuktam ca sac cdsac ca sarvam pasyati. athemd dasa daia 
nddyo • bhavanti . tasdm ekaikasya dvasaptatir dvasaptatih sakhd m 
nddi sahasrdni bhavanti. yasminn ayam dtma svapiti sabddnam 
ca karoti. atha yad dvitiye samkose svapiti tademam ca lokam 
param ca lokam pasyati , sarvan iabddn vijdndti, sa sampratada 
ity dcaksate,pranah sanram pariraksati , haritasya nilasya pitasya 
lohitasya svetasya nndyo rudhirasya purnd athatraitad daharam 
pundankam kumudam ivanekadhd vikasitam. yathd kesah sahas- 
radhd bhinnas tatha hita-nama nddyo bhavanti. hrdy akase pare 
kose divyo’yam dtma svapiti. yatra supto na ham cana kdmarh 
kdnlayate, na kam cana svapnam pasyati , na tatra devd na 
deva-lokd 9 yajna nayajha vfi, na mdtd na pita na bandhur na 
bdndhavo na steno na brahmaha tejaskdyam amrtam salila evcdam 
salilam vanam bhuyas tenaiva mdrgena jdgrdya dhavati samrdd 
iti hovaca. 

1. In the centre of the heart is a lump of ffcsh of red colour. 
In it the dahara of the white lotus blooms with its petals spread 
in different directions like the red lotus. There are ten hollows 
in the heart. In them are established the (chief) vital airs. 
When the individual soul is yoked with the prana breath, then 
he sees rivers and cities, many and varied. When yoked with 
the vydna breath, then he sees gods and seers. When yokgd 
with the apdna breath then he sees the Yaksas, the Raksasas 
and the Gandharvas. When yoked with the udana breath, then 
he sees the heavenly world and the gods, Skanda, Jayanta and 
others. When yoked with the san\dna breath, then he sees the 
heavenly world and wealth (of all kinds). When yoked with 
the vairambha , then he sees what he has (formerly) seen, what 
he has (formerly) heard, what he has (formerly) enjoyed or not 
enjoyed, whatever is existent or non-existent. In fact he sees 
all (in the waking state). (In the subtle sheath) these branch 
into ten branches of ten each. Out of each of these branch (jjat 
seventy-two thousands of nddfs. In these (ramifications) # the 
soul experiences the state of dream and causes sounds to # be 
apprehended. Then in the subtle second sheath the soul 
experiences dreams, sees this world and the other world and 
knows all sounds. (The soul) declare^ it to be the state of serene 
perception. (In this state) the vital air protects the (gross) *body. 
The branched nadts are filled with fluids of greenish yellow, 
blue, yellow and white colours. Then in J:hat in which the 



868 


V. i. 


. The Principal Upanisads 

dahara is enclosed in the white lotus-like sheath which has 
bloomed like the red lotus, with its petals spread in different 
directions, are manifest nadls called the Hita f of the size of 
r a thousandth section of the hair. In the ether of the heart 
situated in the interior of the sheath, the divine soul attains 
the state of sleep. When in the state of sleep (the soul) does 
notr desire any desires, does not see any dreams. In it there are 
no gods or worlds of gods, no sacrifices or absence of sacrifices, 
neither mother nor father, nor kinsmen nor relations, neither 
a thief nor a killer of a Brahmana. His form is one of radiance, 
of immortality. He is only water and remains submerged. Then 
by resorting to the same course he leaps into the waking state. 
He rules on all sides, said (Brahma to the sage Subala). 

dahara: see C.U. VIII. i. i. 
pundarlka: white lotus. 
kumuda: red lotus. 

pari-raksati: protects. Life is devoted to its functions and keeps 
guard o*. er the body. 

We have here a repetition of the description of hit a which extends 
from the heart of the person towards the surrounding body. Small 
as a hair divided a thousand times, these arteries are full of a thin 
fluid of various colours, white, black, yellow, red. In these the 
person dwells. When sleeping he sees no dreams. He becomes then 
one with the life principle alone. 

r When we wake up from the state of sleep we get back to the 
experience of dreams in the dream state and experiences of the 
world in the waking state. See Ma. U. 

V 

THE INDIVIDUAL SELFS FUNCTIONS AND THE 
SUPREME SPIRIT 

i. sthdndni sthanibhyo yacchati. nddt tesam nibandhanam , 
caksur adhyatmam , drastavyam adhibhutam , adityas tatradhi- 
dffiyatam, nadi tesam nibandhanam , yas caksusi yo dratfavye ya 
dditye yo nadyam yah prdne yo vijhane ya anande yo hrdy akdse 
ya etasmin sarvasminn antare samcarati so’yam atma t tarn 
atmdnam upasUajaram , amrtam f abhayam, asokam, anantam. 

i. (The supreme self) bestows on the different local func- 
tionaries their (respective^ spheres of action. The nadts are the 
links 'establishing connection with them (the different organs). 
The eye is the sphere of the self; what is seen is the sphere 
of the objective; the sun is the divine principle (exercising its 



V. 4- . Subdla Upanisad 869 

influence in aid of the self). The connecting link (between the 
self and the organ of the eye) is the (concerned) nddl. He who 
moves in the eye, in what is seen, in the sun, in the nddl, in 
the life principle, in the (resultant) knowledge, in the bliss 
(derived from such knowledge), in the ether of the heart, in 
the interior of all these is this self. One should meditate on 
this self which is devoid of old age, which is free from death, 

which is fearless, sorrowless, endless. 

• 

2. srotram adhydtmam, srotavyam adhibhiltam, disas tatrdd- 
hidaivatam, nadl tesdm nibandhanam, yah srotre yah srotavye 
yo diksu yo nadyam yah prdne yo vijnane y a anande yo hrdy akdse 
ya etasmin sarvasminn antare samcarati so 1 yam dtmd , tam 
dtmdnam updsltdjaram, amrtam, abhayam, asokam , anantam. 

2. The ear is the sphere of the self, what is heard is the sphere 
of the objective; the (guardians of the) quarters are the divine 
principles. The connecting link is the nadl . He who moves in 
the ear, in what is heard, in “the quarters, in* the nadlf, in the 
life-principle, in the knowledge, in the bliss, in the ether of 
the heart, in the interior of all those is this self. One should 
meditate on this self which is devoid of old age, which is free 
from death, which is fearless, sorrowlcss, endless. 

3. ndsddhyatmam, ghratavyam adhibhiltam, prthivl tatrd- 
dhidaivatam, nddltesam nibandhanam, yo ndsdyam yo ghratavtye 
yah prthivyam yo nadyam yah prdne yo vijnane yo anande yo 
hrdy dkase ya etasmin sarvasminn antare samcarati so' yam dtmd , 
tam dtmdnam updsltdjaram, amrtam, abhayam , asokam , anantam. 

3. The nose is the sphere of the self: what is smelt is the 
sphere of the objective. Earth is the divine principle. The 
connecting link is the nddl. He who moves in the nose, in what 
is smelt, in earth, in the nddl , in the life-principle; in the 
knowledge, in the bliss, in the ether of the heart, in the interior 
of all these, in this self. One should meditate on this self which 
is devoid of old age, which is free from death, which is fearless, 
sorrowless, endless. 

• 

4. jihvddhydtmam, rasayitavyam adhibhiltam, varunas tatrd- 
dhidaivatam, nadl tesdm nibandhanam, yo jihvdyam, yo rasa- 
yitavye, yo varune, yo nadyam, yah prdne yo vijnane ya anande 
yo hrdy akdse ya etasmin sarvasminn antare samcarati sb’yam 
dtmdy tam dtmdnam updsltdjaram, amrtam, abhayam, asokam , 
anantam. 



870 The Principal Upanisads V. 7. 

4. The tongue is the sphere of the self, what is tasted is the 
sphere of the objective. Varuna is the divine principle. The 
connecting link is the nddl. He who moves in the tongue, in 

# what is tasted, in Varuna, in the nadl, in the life-principle, in 
the knowledge, in the bliss, in the ether of the heart, in the 
interior of all these is this self. One should meditate on this 
self' which is devoid of old age, which is free from death, which 
is fearless, sorrowless, endless. 

* 

5. tvag adhyatmam, sparsayitavyam adhibhutam , vayus tatrd- 
dhidaivatam, nadl tesdm nibandhanam , yas tvaci , yah spar say i- 
tavye, yo vdyau , yo nddydm, yah prane yo vijnane, ya dyiande , 
yo hrdy dkase ya etasmin sarvasminn antare sarhcarati , so 1 yam 
dtmd , tam dtmdnam upasitajaram , , amrtam , abhayam , asokam, 
anantam. 

5. The skin is the sphere of the self; what is touched is the 
sphere of the objective. Air is the divine principle. The con- 
necting Hnk is tl\e nddi. He who* moves in the skin, in what is 
touched, in the air, in the nddl , in the life-principle, in the 
knowledge, in the bliss, in the ether of the heart, in the interior 
of all these is this self. One should meditate on this self which 
is devoid of old age, which is free from death, which is fearless, 
sorrowless, endless. 

f 6. mano’dhyatmam, mantavyam adhibhutam, candras tatra- 
dhidaivatam, nddl tesdm nibandhanam , yo manasi, yo mantavye, 
yas candre, yo nddydm, yah prune, yo vijnane, ya anande, yo 
hrdy dkase ya etasmin sarvasminn antare sarhcarati so* yam dtmd, 
tam dtmdnam npdsltdjaram, amrtam, abhayam, asokam, anantam. 

6. The mind is the sphere of the self, what is minded is the 
sphere of the objective. The moon is the divine principle. The 
connecting link is the nddl. He who moves in the mind, in 
what is minded, in the moon, in the nadl, in the life-principle, 
in the knowledge, in the bliss, in the ether of the heart, in the 
interior of all these is this self. One should meditate on this 
self which is devoid of old age, which is free from death, which 

is fearless, sorrowless, endless. 

* * 

7. buddhir adhyatmam, boddhavyam adhibhutam, brahma 
tatrddhidaivatam, nadl tesdm nibandhanam, yo buddhau, yo 
boddhavye , yo brahmani, yo nadyam, yah prane ,' yo vijnane, ya 
anande, yo hrdy dkase ya etasmin sarvasminn antare sarhcarati 
so'yam dtmd, tam dtmdnam upasitajaram, amrtam, abhayam , 
asokam , anantam. f 



V. io. Subdla Upanisad 871 

7. Understanding is the sphere of the self, what is understood 
is the sphere of the objective. Brahma is the divine principle. 
The connecting link is the nddi. He who moves in the under- 
standing, in what is understood, in Brahma, in the nddi, in; 
the life-principle, in the knowledge, in the bliss, in the ether 
of the heart, in the interior of all these is this self. One should 
meditate on this self, which is devoid of old age, which is # free 
from death, which is fearless, sorrowless, endless. 

8 . ahamkdro’dhydtmam, ahamkartavyam adhibhutam , rudras 
tatrddhidaivatam , nddi tesdm nibandhanam , yo'hamkdre , yo 
’hamhartavye, yo rudre , yo nddydm , yah praye, yo vijhane, ya 
dnande, yo hrdy akdse, ya etasmin sarvasminn antare samcarati 
so’yam qtmd, tarn dtmanam upasltajaram , amrtam, abhayam 
asokam, anantam. 

8 . The self-sense is the sphere of the self. The contents of 
self-sense are the sphere of the objective. Rudra is the divine 
principle. The connecting lirfk is the nddi. Hm who moves in the 
self-sense and in the contents of self-sense, in Rudra, in the 
nadl , in the life-principle, in the knowledge, in the bliss, in the 
ether .of the heart, in the interior of all these is this self. One 
should meditate on this self which is devoid of old age, which 
is free from death, which is fearless, sorrowless, endless. 

9. cittam adhydtmam , cetayitavyam adhibhutam, ksetrajhas 
tatrddhidaivatam, nddi tesdm nibandhanam, yas citte, yas ceta - 
yitavye, yah ksetrajhe, yo nddydm , yah prune, yo vijhane, ya 
dnande, yo hrdy akdse, ya etasmin sarvasminn antare samcarati 
so’yam dtmd, tam dtmdnam updsltdjaram, amrtam, abhayam, 
asokam, anantam. 

9. The thinking mind is the sphere of the self ; what is thought 
is the sphere of the objective. Ksetrajna (the knower of the 
field) is the divine principle. The connecting link is the nddi . 
He who moves in the thinking mind, in what is thought, in the 
Ksetrajna, in the nadl, in the life-principle, in the knowledge, 
in the bliss, in the ether of the heart, in the interior of all 
these is this self. One should meditate on this self which is 
devoid of old age, which is free from death, which is fearless, 
sorrowless, epdless. 

10. vdg adhydtmam, vaktavyam adhibhutam, vahnih tatrotdhidai- 
vatam, nadl tesdm nibandhanam, yo vaci, yo vaktavye, yo agnau , 
yo nddydm, yah prune yo vijhane, ya dnande, yo hrdy akaie ya 



872 The Principal Upanisads V. 13. 

etasmin sarvasminn antare samcarati so’yam atma, tarn dtmdnam 
upasitdjaram, amrtam, abhayam, asokam, anantam. 

10. Voice is the sphere of the self. What is spoken is the 
;sphere of the objective. Fire is the divine principle. The con- 
necting link is the nadi. He who moves in the voice, in what 
is spoken, in fire, in the nadi , in the life principle, in the know- 
ledge, in the bliss, in the ether of the heart, in the interior of 
all these is this self. One should meditate on this self which 
is devoid of old age, which is free from death, which is fearless, 
sorrowless, endless. 

11. hastav adhyatmam, adatavyam adhibhutam, indras*tatra- 
dhidaivatam , nadi tesam nibandhanam, yo haste, ya ddatavye, ya 
indre, yo nadyam, yah prane, yo vijhane , ya anande, yo hrdy akase , 
ya etasmin sarvasminn antare samcarati , so’yam atma , tarn 
dtmdnam upasitdjaram, amrtam, abhayam, aiokam , anantam. 

11. The hands are the sphere of the self, what is handled 
is the sphere of the objective. Iftdra is the divine principle. 
The connecting link is the nadi. He who moves in the hands, 
in what is handled, in Indra, in the nadi, in the life-principle, 
in the knowledge, in the bliss, in the ether of the he^rt, in 
the interior of all these is this self. One should meditate on this 
self which is devoid of old age, which is free from death, which 
is fearless, sorrowless, endless. 

12. padav adhyatmam , gantavyam adhibhutam, visnus tatra- 
dhidaivatam, nadi tesam nibandhanam, yah pade, yo gantavye, yo 
visnau, yo nadyam , yah prane, yo vijhane, y a anande ,yo hrdydkdse 
ya etasmin sarvasminn antare samcarati, so’yam atma, tam 
dtmdnam upasitdjaram, amrtam, abhayam, asokam, anantam . 

12. The feet are the sphere of the self. What is traversed 
by feet is the sphere of the objective. Visnu is the divine 
principle. The connecting link is the nadi. He who moves on 
the feet, in what is traversed, in Visnu, in the nadi, in the life- 
prificiple, in t.he knowledge, in the bliss, in the ether of the 
heart, in the interior of all these is this self. One should meditate 
on this self which is devoid of old age which is free from death, 
which is fearless, sorrowless, endless. 

I 3» pdyur adhyatmam, visarjayitavyam adhibhutam, mrtyus 
tatrddtiidaivatam, nadi tesam nibandhanam, yah payau, yo 
visarjiyitavye, yo mrtyau, yo nadyam, yah prane, yo vijhane , 
ya anande, yo hrdy dfcdseya etasmin sarvasminn antare samcarati, 



V. 15. Subala Upanisad 873 

so’yam atmd, tam dtmanam updsltdjaram, amrtam, abhayam , 
asokam , anantam. • 

13. The excretory organ is the sphere of the self. What is 
excreted is the sphere of the objective. Death is the diving 
principle. The connecting link is the nddl. He who moves in 
the excretory organ, in what is excreted, in Death, in the nadl , 
in the life-principle, in the knowledge, in the bliss, in the fcther 
of the heart, in the interior of all these is this self. One should 
meditate on this sfilf which is devoid of old age, which is free 
from death, which is fearless, sorrowless, endless. 

14.. upastho' dhyatmam, dnandayitavyam qdhibhutam, prajd- 
patis tatradhidaivatam, nddl tesam nibandhanam, ya upasthe, ya 
anandayitavye, yah prajdrpatau , yo nddyam , yah prdne , yo 
vijhdne , *ya anande, yo hrdy akdse, ya etasmin sarvasminn antare 
samcarati, so’yam atmd , tam atmdnam updsltdjaram, amrtam , 
abhayam , asokam , anantam. 

14. The generative organ* is the sphere oi the self # What is 
enjoyed (as sexual satisfaction) is the sphere of the objective. 
Praja-pati is the divine principle. The connecting link is the 
nadl. He who moves in the generative organ, in what is enjoyed, 
in Praja-pati , in the nadl , in the life-principle, in the knowledge, 
in the bliss, in the ether of the heart, in the interior of all 
these is this self. One should meditate on this self which is 
devoid of old age, which is free from death, which is fearless, 
sorrowless, endless. 

15. esa sarvajha , esa sarvesvara, esa sarvadhipatih, eso 
’ ntaryaml , esa yonih sarvasya sarva-saukhyair updsyamdno na 
ca sarva-saukhydny upasyati , veda-sdstrair updsyamdno na ca 
veda-sdstrany upasyati , yasydnnam idam sarve na ca yo’nnam 
bhavati , atah param sarva-nayanah prasdstanna-mayo bhutdtma , 
prana-maya indriydtmd , mano-mayah samkalpatmd , vijndna - 
mayah kalatma, dnanda-mayo layatmaikatvam ndsti dvajtam 
kuto martyam nasty amrtam kuto ndntah prajho na bahih pnqno 
nobhayatah prajno na prajndna-ghano na prajho ndprajho'pi no 
viditam vedyamndstlty etannirvananusasanam iti,vedanusdsa%am 
iti f vedanusasanam. 

15. This (self) is all-knowing. This is the lord of all. This is 
the ruler of ill. This is the indwelling spirit. This is the source 
of all. This, that is resorted to by all forms of happineis, does 
not stand in need of happiness of any kind. This, that is adored 
by all the Vedic texts and scriptures doeg not stand in need 



874 The. Principal Upanisads VI. i. 

of Vedic texts and scriptures. Whose food is all this but who 
(himself) does not become the food of any. For that very reason 
(it is) the most excellent, the supreme director of all. Consisting 
;of food (it is) the self of (all) gross objects; consisting of life 
(it is) the self of (all) sense organs; consisting of mind (it is) the 
self of (all) mental determination; consisting of intelligence (it 
is) tfie self of time; consisting of bliss, (it is) the self of dis- 
solution. When there is not oneness whence (can arise) duality? 
When there is not mortality, whence (can 'hrise) immortality ? 
(It is) not (endowed) with internal knowledge : nor with external 
knowledge; nor with both these kinds of knowledge, not a mass 
of knowledge, nort knowledge, nor not-knowledge, not (pre- 
viously) known nor capable of being known. This is the doctrine 
relating to liberation. This is the doctrine of the Veda. This is 
the doctrine of the Veda. 

See Ma. U. 7. 

kdldtma: the self of Jime. The witness. self facing kala or the principle 
of temporal happenings. The highest cannot be spoken of as non- 
dual or dual, mortal or immortal. 


VI 

NARAYANA, THE BASIS AND SUPPORT OF THE 

WORLD 

1. naiveha kim candgra dstd amulam , anddhdram , • imdh 
prajdhprajdyante , divyo deva eko ndrdyanas caksus ca drastavyam 
ca } ndrdyanah srolram ca s^otavyam ca, ndrdyano ghranam 
ca ghrdtavyam ca, ndrdyano jihvd ca rasayitavyam ca, ndrd- 
yanas tvak ca sparsayitavyam ca, ndrdyano manas ca mantavyam 
ca, ndrdyano buddhis ca boddhavyapi ca, ndrdyano ’hamkdras 
ca ahamkartavyam ca, ndrdyanas cittam ca cetayitavyam ca, 
ndrdyano vak ca vaktavyam ca, ndrdyano hastau caddtavyam ca, 
ndrAyanah pddau ca gantavyam ca, ndrdyanah payui ca visar- 
jayilavyam ca, ndrdyana upasthas cdnandayitavyam ca, ndrd- 
yafjo dhdta, vidhdtd, kartd, vikartd, divyo deva eko ndrdyana 
adityd, rudra, marato vasavo' svinav rco yajumsi sdmdni, 
mantro’gnir djyahutir ndrdyana udbhavah, sambhavo divyo deva 
eko ndrdyano matd, pita, bhratd, nivdsah, saranani, suhrd, gatir 
ndrdyano virdja sudarsana jitd saumydmoghd kumdramrtd 
satya madhyamd ndsird sisurasurd siiryd bhdsvati vijheydni 
nadi-ndmdni divydn^i garjati, gdyati, vati, varsati, varuno’ryama 



VI. i. Subala Upanisad 875 

candramah hold kalir dhdta brahma praja-patir maghava divasas 
cardha-divasdi ca kalah kalpas cordhvam ca disas ca sarvam 
narayanah 

pUrusa evedam sarvam yad bhiitam yac ca bhavyam 
utamrtatvasy esano yad annenatirohati 
tad visnoh paramam padam sada pasyanti surayah 
divlva caksur dtatam 

tad vipraso vipanyavo jdgrvdmsah samindhate 
visnor yat parctmam padam 

tad etan Viirvandnusasanam iti, veddnusdsanam iti , vedanusd - 
sanam. 

1. Whatever (we see in this world) did not, verily, exist at 
the beginning (of creation). So all these creatures became root- 
less, supportless, The one divine Narayana alone (is the mainstay 
of all creation), the eye and what is seen. The ear and what is 
heard are Narayana, the nose and what is smelt are Narayana, 
the tongue and what is tasted are Narayana. The skin and what 
is touched are Narayana. T*he mind and wftiat is minded are 
Narayana. The understanding and what is understood are 
Narayana. The self-sense and its contents are Narayana. The 
thinking mind and what is thought are Narayana. The voice 
and what is spoken are Narayana. The two hands and what is 
handled are Narayana. The two feet and what is traversed 
are Narayana. The excretory organ and what is excreted are 
Narayana. The generative organ and what is enjoyed (as 
sexual satisfaction) are Narayana. The sustainer, ordainer, 
the doer, the non-doer, the celestial radiance are the one 
Narayana. The Adityas, the Rudras, the Maruts, the Asvins, 
the Rk, the Yajur, the Sdma Vedas , the hymns (employed in 
sacrifices), the sacrificial fires, the offerings and the acts of 
offering, what arises (out of the sacrificial rites) are the celestial 
radiance, the one Narayana. Mother, father, brother, abode, 
shelter, friend and the path (leading to life eternal) a are 
Narayanar, the Viraja, the Sudarsana, the Jita, the Saurr^a, 
the Amogha, the Amrta, the Satya, the Madhyama, the Nefslra, 
the Sisura, the Asura, the Surya, the Bhasvati are to be kne^wn 
as the names of the divine channels. (The self that has to course 
through the channels) roars (like thunder), sings (like a faery 
spirit), blow^ (like wind), rains. He is Varuna, the Aryaman, 
the moon, (he is the) divisions of time, the devourer of time, 
the creator, Prajd-pati, Indra, the days and the half days, the 
divisions of time, aeons anu great aeons. Jle is up and in all 



VII. i. 


876 The Principal Upani$ads 

the directions. All this is Narayana. All this, what has been and 
what is yet to be is only the person an<J symbol of immortality 
which continues (as Soma) by food (which contains life-sus- 
taining Soma). Sages see constantly that most exalted state of 
Visnu as the eye sees the sky. These learned (knowers of 
Brahman ), with their passions cast away, with their inner senses 
alert, declare clearly (to ignorant people) that most exalted 
state of Visnu. This is the doctrine leading to liberation. This 
is the doctrine of the Veda. This is the doctrine of the Veda. 

sages see constantly: see Muktika U. I. 83, 

VII 

NARAYANA, THE INDWELLING SPIRIT OF- ALL 

1. antah sarire nihito guhdyam aja eko nityo yasya prthivi 
sariram yah prthivim antare samcaran yam prthivi na veda ; 
yasydpah sariram^ yo’po’ntare safncaran yam apo na viduh ; 
yasya tejah sariram yas tejo’ntare samcaran yam tejo na veda; 
yasya vdyuh sariram yo vayum antare samcaran yam vayur na 
veda; yasydkasah sariram ya akdsam antare samcaran yam 
akdso na veda; yasya manah sariram yo mano’ntare samcaran 
yam mano na veda; yasya buddhih sariram yo buddhim antare 
samcaran yam buddhir na veda; yasyahamkarah sariram yo’harh- 
karam antare samcaran yam ahamkaro na veda; yasya cittam 
sariram yas cittam antare samcaran yam cittam na veda; yasya - 
vyaktam sariram yo’vyaktam antare samcaran yam avyaktam na 
veda; yasydksaram sariram yo'ksaram antare samcaran yam 
aksaram na veda; yasya mrtyuh sariram yo mrtyum antare 
samcaran yam mrtyur na veda; sa eva sarva-bhutantardtmdpaha- 
tapapma divyo deva eko ndrayanah. etdm vidydm apantarata- 
mdya dadav apdntaratamo brahmane dadau, brahma ghorah- 
girase dadau , ghordngird raikvdya dadau, raikvo ramaya dadau, 
rdmah sarvebhyo bhutebhyo dadav ity evam nirvanamcsasanam 
iti, vlddnusdsanam iti, vedanusdsanam. 

1. There abides for ever the one unborn in the secret place 
within the body. The earth is his body; he moves through the 
earth but the earth knows him not. The waters are his body; 
he moves through the waters but the waters know him not. 
Light is his body, he moves through the light but the light 
knows him not. Air is his body, he moves through the air 
but the air knows him not. Ether is his body, he moves through 



VIII. i. Subala fjpanisad 87) 

the ether but the ether knows him not. Mind is his body, he 
moVes through the mind but the mind knows him not. Under- 
standing is his body, he* moves through the understanding but 
understanding knows him not. Self-sense is his body, he moves, 
through the self-sense but the self-sense knows him not." 
Thinking mind is his body, he moves through the thinking 
mind but the thinking mind knows him not. The Unmanifest 
is his body, he moves through the Unmanifest but the Unmani- 
fest knows him not. The Imperishable is his body, he moves 
through the Imperishable but the Imperishable knows him not. 
Death is his body, he moves through death but death knows 
him not. He alone is the indwelling spirit gf all beings, free 
from all evil, the one divine, radiant Narayana. This vidya 
(wisdom) # was imparted to Apantaratamas. Apantaratamas 
imparted it to Brahma. Brahma imparted it to Ghora Angiras 
Ghora Angiras imparted it to Raikva. Raikva imparted it to 
Rama and Rama imparted it to all beings. This is the doctrine 
leading to liberation. This is? the doctrine of#the Ved^ This is 
the doctrine of the Veda. 

See B.U. III. 7. 3. 


VIII 

SELF AND THE BObY 

1. antah sarire nihito guhaydm suddhah so’ yam atma sarvasya 
medo-mdmsa-kleddvaklrne sarf ramadhye’tyantopahate citra-bhitti- 
prattkdse gandharva-nagaropame kadalt-garbhavan nihsare jala- 
budbudavac cancale nihsrtam dtmdnam, acintyarupam , divyam, 
devam, asangam, suddham, tejaskdyam, arupam, sarvesvaram, 
acintyam, asariram, nihitam guhdyam, amrtam, vibhrajamanam, 
dnandam, tam pasyanti vidvamsas tena laye na pasyanti. 

1. This self abiding within the secret place in the body of , 
all beings is pure. Though intimately connected with *the 
interior of the body, which is full of stinking fluid oozing # out 
of the fat and the flesh, resembling (for its durability) the 
wall painted in a picture (for its invulnerability) the city # of 
the Gandharvas (a castle in the air), as substanceless as the 
pith of a plantain tree, as fickle as ^ bubble of water, the self 
is pure. The learned perceive the self, of inconceivable •form, 
radiant, divine, non-attached, pure, with a body of radiance, 
formless, lord of all, inconceivable, incorporeal, abiding in 



878 The Principal Upanisads IX. 1. 

the secret place, immortal, shining (of the form of) bliss. When 
it subsides they do noLperceive. 

The similes used here indicate the fragility of the human body. 

; The inner self remains unaffected by the changes of the body. 

IX 

THE DISSOLUTION OF THE UNIVERSE 

r 

1. atha hainam raikvah papraccha, bhagavan, kasmin sarve 
'stark gacchantiti . tasmai sa hovaca, caksur evdpyeti yac caksur 
evdstam etidrastavyam evdpyeti yo drastavyam evdstam eti , aclityam 
evdpyeti ya adityam evastam 'eti, virdjam evdpyeti, yo virdjam 
evdstam eti , pranam evdpyeti yah pr/inam evdstam eti, vijndnam 
evdpyeti yo vijndnam evdstam eti, anandam evdpyeti yd dnandam 
evdstam eti, turlyam evdpyeti yas turlyam evdstam eti , tad 
amrtam, abhayam, asokam, ananta-nirbljam evdpyetiti hovaca. 

1. Then Raikya asked thus : * Venerable Sir, in what do 
all things reach their extinction? To him he replied: He 
(the self) who absorbs the eye alone, in his own self does 
the eye reach its extinction (or disappearance). He who 
absorbs (forms) that are seen, in his own self do the (forms) 
that are seen reach extinction. He who absorbs the sun, in his 
own self does the si^n reach extinction. He who absorbs the 
Viraja, in him does Viraja reach extinction. He who absorbs 
life, in him does life reach extinction. He who absorbs knowledge, 
in him does knowledge reach extinction. He who absorbs bliss, 
in him docs bliss reach extinction. He who absorbs the tuny a, 
in him does tuny a reach extinction. (The individual self) 
merges in the immortal, fearless, sorrowless, endless, seedless 
Brahman. This he said. 

absorbs: responds to. 

dditya: the sun. Different deities exercise beneficent influence over 
different organs. 

seedless: the individual self has the basis or seed of individuality 
while the supreme Brahman has not this seed. 

vvjiidna: knowledge. It is repeated because the knowledge of tastes 
is different from the knowledge of smells and so on. 

2. irotram evapyeti yah grotram evdstam eti, sroiavyam evdpyeti 
yah irotavyam evdstam eti , disam evdpyeti yo disam evdstam eti , 
sudarsanam evdpyeti yah sudarsanam evdstam eti , apdnam evdpyeti 
yo’panam evdstam eti, vijndnam evdpyeti yo vijndnam evdstam eti , 



IX. 4- Subdla Upanisad 879 

tad amrtam , abhayam, asokam , ananta-nirbijam evdpyetiti 
hovdca. 

2. He who absorbs the ear, in him does the ear reach extinc- 
tion. He who absorbs (sounds) that are heard, in him do (the • 
sounds) that are heard reach extinction. He who absorbs the 
directions, in him do the directions reach extinction. He who 
absorbs the Sudarsana, in him does the Sudarsana reach«ex- 
tinction. He who absorbs the downward breath, in him does 
the downward breafh reach extinction. He who absorbs know- 
ledge, in him does knowledge reach extinction. (The individual 
self) merges in the immortal, fearless, sorrowless, endless, 
seedleSs Brahman. Thus he said. • 

3. nasdm evapyeti yo ncfcdm evdstam eti, ghrdtavyam evapyeti 
yo ghrdtavyam evdstam eti, prthivim evapyeti yah prthivim 
evdstam eti , jitdm evapyeti yo jitam evdstam eti, vydnam evapyeti 
yo vydnam evdstam eti, vijhdnam evapyeti yo vijhdnam evdstam eti , 
tad amrtam, abhayam , asokam, ananta-nirbijoCbi evapyeti hovdca. 

3. He who absorbs the nose, in him does the nose reach 
extinction. He who absorbs (the smells) that are experienced 
by the nose, in him do the smells reach extinction. He who 
absorbs the earth, in him does the earth reach extinction. He 
who absorbs the jitd nddi in him does the jit a reach extinction. 
He who absorbs the vydna breath, in him does the vydya 
breath reach extinction. He who absorbs knowledge, in him 
does knowledge reach extinction. (The individual self) merges 
in the immortal, fearless, sorrowless, endless, seedless Brahman. 
Thus he said. 

4. jihvdm evapyeti yo jihvdm evdstam eti, rasayitavyam evdp- 

yeti yo rasayitavyam evdstam eti , varunam evapyeti yo varunam 

evdstam eti, saumyam evapyeti yah saumyam evdstam eti, uddnam 
evapyeti ya uddnam evdstam eti, vijhdnam evapyeti yo vijhdnam 
evdstam eti, tad amrtam, abhayam, asokam, ananta-nirbljam 
evapyeti hovdca. * 

4. He who absorbs the tongue, in him does the tongue reach 
extinction. He who absorbs the tastes, in him do the tastes 
reach extinction. He who absorbs Varuna, in him does Varuna 
reach extinction. He who absorbs ihe Saumya (nadi), in him 
does the Saumya reach extinction. He who absorbs the 4 * * * * 9 uddna 

(breath), in him does the uddna (breath) reach extinction. 

He who absorbs knowledge, in him dogs knowledge reach 



880 The Principal Upanisads IX. 7. 

extinction. (The individual self) merges in the immortal, 
sorrowless, endless, seedless Brahman., Thus he said. 

Varuna is the lord of the waters. 

r 

5. tvacam evdpyeti yas tvacam evastam eti , sparsayitavyam 
evdpyeti yah sparsayitavyam evastam eti , vayum evapyeti yo 
vayum evastam eti , mogham evdpyeti yo . mogham evastam eti , 
samanam evdpyeti yah samanam evastam eti , vijnanam evdpyeti 
yo vijnanam evastam eti , amrtam , abhayam, aiokam, anan - 

ta-nirbijam evdpyeti hovaca. 

5. He who absorbs the skin, in him does the skin reach 
extinction. He who absorbs the touch, in him does the touch 
reach extinction. He who absorbs air, in him does air reach 
extinction. He who absorbs the tfiogha (nddi), in .him does 
mogha reach extinction. He who absorbs the samana breath, 
in him does the samana breath reach extinction. He who 
absorbs knowledge, in him does knowledge reach extinction. 
(The individual ’self) merges in the immortal, sorrowless, 
endless, seedless Brahman. Thus he said. 

6. vdcam evdpyeti yo vacant evastam eti, vaktavyam evdpyeti yo 
vaktavyam evastam eti , agnim evdpyeti yo’gnim evastam eti, 
kumdram evdpyeti yah kumdram evastam eti, vairambham evdp- 
yeti yo vairambham evastam eti, vijnanam evdpyeti yo vijnanam 
evastam eti, tad amrtam, abhayam, asokam, ananta-nirbijam 
evapyetiti hovaca. 

6. He who absorbs the vocal organ, in him does the vocal 
organ reach extinction. He who absorbs spoken expressions, 
in him do the spoken expressions reach extinction. He who 
absorbs fire, in him does the fire reach extinction. He who absorbs 
the kumara {nddi), in him does the kumdra reach extinction. 
He who absorbs the Vairambha (vital air), in him does Vairambha 
reach extinction. He who absorbs knowledge, in him does that 
knowledge reach extinction. (The individual self) merges in 
the immortal, sorrowless, endless, seedless Brahman, Thus he 
said. 

7. hastam evdpyeti yo hastam evastam eti , dddtavyam evdpyeti 

ya dddtavyam evastam eti, indram evdpyeti y a indram evastam eti, 
amrtam evdpyeti yo amrtam evastam eti, mukhyafoi evdpyeti yo 
mukh^am evastam eti, vijnanam evdpyeti yo vijnanam evastam eti, 
tad amrtam, abhayam, aiokam, ananta-nirbijam evapyetiti 
hovaca. , 



IX. g. Subdla Upanisad 881 

7. He who absorbs the two hands, in him do the two hands 
reach extinction. He whp absorbs what is handled, in him does 
what is handled reach extinction. He who absorbs Indra, in 
him does Indra reach extinction. He who absorbs the amrta* 
[nadi), in him does the amrta {nadi) reach extinction. He who 
absorbs the mukhya {: mukhya prana , chief vital air), in him does 
the mukhya reach extinction. He who absorbs the knowledge, 
in him does the knowledge reach extinction. (The individual 
self) merges in the immortal, sorrowless, endless, seedless 
Brahman. 'Thus he said. 

8. pjidam evdpyeti yah padam evdstam eti, gantavyam evdpyeti 
yo gantavyam evdstam eti , vi^num evdpyeti yo vi$num evdstam eti, 
satyam evdpyeti yah satyayi evdstam eti , antarydmam evdpyeti 
yo’ntarydfnam evdstam eti , vijnanam evdpyeti yo vijndnam 
evdstam eti, tad amrtam, abhayam, atokam, ananta-nirbijam 
evapyetiti, hovdca. 

8. He who absorbs the (two feet), in him # do the feet reach 
extinction. He who absorbs what is traversed, in him does 
what is traversed reach extinction. He who absorbs Visnu, in 
him does Visnu reach extinction. He who absorbs the satya 
{nadi), in him does satya reach extinction. He who absorbs the 
antarydmam, in him does the antarydmam reach extinction. 
He who absorbs the knowledge, in him does knowledge reach 
extinction. (The individual self) merges in the immortal, 
fearless, sorrowless, endless, seedless Brahman. Thus he said. 

9. pdyum evdpyeti yah payum evdstam eti , visarjayitavyam 
evdpyeti yo visarjayitavyam evastjam eti, mrtyum evdpyeti yo 
mrtyum evdstam eti, madhyamam evdpyeti yo madhyamam 
evdstam eti, prabhdhjanam evdpyeti yah prabhahjanam evdstam eti, 
vijndnam evdpyeti yo vijnanam evdstam eti, tad’ amrtam, abhayam, 
asokam, ananta-nirbtjam evapyetiti hovdca. 

9. He who absorbs the excretory organ, in him does # the 
excretory organ reach extinction. He who absorbs what # is 
excreted, in him does what is excreted reach extinction* He 
who absorbs death, in him docs death reach its extinction. 
He who absorbs the madhyama [nadi), in him does the madhyama 
reach its extinction. He who absorbs the prabhahjana, in him 
does the prabhanjana reach its extinction. He who absorbs 
the knowledge, in him does the knowledge reach its extinction. 
(The individual self) merges in the immortal, fearless, sorrowless, 
endless, seedless Brahman. Thus he said. 



882 The Principal Upanisads IX. 12. 

io. upastham evdpyeti ya upastham evdstam eti, anandayita - 
vyam evdpyeti ya dnandayitavyam ( evdstam eti , prajdpatim 
evdpyeti yah prajdpatim evdstam eti , ndsiram evdpyeti yo ndsiram 
evdstam eti,kumdram evdpyeti yah kumdram evdstam eti, vijnanam 
evdpyeti yo vijnanam evdstam eti, tad amrtam, abhayam, asokam, 
ananta-nirbijam evdpyeti hovdca. 

10. He who absorbs the generating organ, in him does the 
generating organ reach extinction. He who absorbs the (sexual) 
delight, in him does the delight reach extinction. He who 
absorbs Prajd-pati , in him does Prajd-pati reach extinction. 
He who absorbs the nasird (nddi), in him does the nasird reach 
extinction. He who absorbs kumara, in him does kumdru reach 
extinction. He who absorbs the knowledge, in him docs the 
knowledge reach extinction. (The individual self) merges in 
the immortal, fearless, sorrowless, endless, seedless Brahman. 
Thus he said. 

11. mana evdpyeti yo mana evdstam eti, mantavyam evdpyeti 
yo mantavyam evdstam eti. candram evdpyeti yas candram 
evdstam eti, sisum evdpyeti yah sisum evdstam eti, syenam 
evdpyeti yah syenam evdstam eti, vijnanam evdpyeti yo vijnanam 
evdstam eti, tad amrtam, abhayam, aiokam , ananta-nirbijam 
evdpyetiti hovdca. 

11. He who absorbs the mind, in him does the mind reach 
extinction. He who absorbs what is minded, in him does what 
is minded reach extinction. He who absorbs the moon, in him 
does the moon reach extinction. He who absorbs the sisurd 
(nddi), in him does the sisurd reach extinction. He who absorbs 
the syena (nddi), in him does the syena reach extinction. He 
who absorbs the knowledge, in him does the knowledge reach 
extinction. (The individual self) merges in the immortal, fearless, 
sorrowless, endless, seedless Brahman. Thus he said. 

i£. buddhim evdpyeti yo buddhim evdstam eti, boddhavyam 
evqpyeti yo boddhavyam evdstam eti, brahmdnam evdpyeti yo 
brahmanam evdstam eti, suryam evdpyeti yah sxiryam evdstam eti, 
krsnam evdpyeti yah krsnam evdstam eti, vijnanam evdpyeti yo 
vijnanam evdstam eti tad amrtam, abhayam, asokam, anan- 
ta-nirbijam evdpyetiti hovdca. 

12. He who absorbs understanding, in him does Understanding 
reach 'extinction. He who absorbs what is understood, in him 
does what is understood reach extinction. He who absorbs 
Brahma (the creator), in him does Brahma reach extinction. 



IX. 14. Subala Upanisad 883 

He who absorbs the surya (nadi), in him does the surya reach 
its extinction. He who absorbs krsna , in him does krsna reach 
its extinction. He who absorbs the knowledge, in him does the 
knowledge reach extinction. (The individual self) merges in the. 
immortal, fearless, sorrowless, endless,* seedless Brahman. Thus* 
he said. 

13. aham-kar amevdpy eti yo’ham-kar am evastam eti,aham-karta- 
vyam evdpyeti yo’ham-kartavyam evastam eti , rudram evdpyeti yo 
rudram evastam eti , asuram evdpyeti yo’ suram evastam eti, ivetam 
evdpyeti yah svetam evastam eti, vijhdnam evdpyeti yo vijhdnam 
evastaip, eti, tad amrtam, abhayam, asokam, ananta-nirbijam 
evdpyetiti hovdca. 

13. He who absorbs the gelf-sense, in him does the self-sense 
reach extinction. He who absorbs the contents of self-sense, in 
him do the contents of self-sense reach extinction. He who 
absorbs Rudra, in him does Rudra reach extinction. He who 
absorbs the asurd [nddi), in him does the asury reach extinction. 
He who absorbs the sveta (vital air), in him does the sveta 
reach extinction. He who absorbs the knowledge, in him does 
the knowledge reach extinction. (The individual self) merges 
in the immortal, fearless, sorrowlcss, endless, seedless Brahman, 
Thus he said. 

14. cittam evdpyeti yas cittam evastam eti, cetayitavyam evapyeti 
yas cetayitavyam evastam eti, ksetrajham evdpyeti yah ksetrajham 
evastam eti, bhdsvatim evdpyeti yo bhdsvatim evastam eti, ndgam 
evdpyeti yo ndgam evastam etc, vijhdnam evdpyeti yo vijhdnam 
evastam eti, dnandam evdpyeti ya finandam evastam eti, turiyam 
evdpyeti yas turiyam evastam eti, tad amrtam, abhayam, aiokam , 
anantam , nirbijam evdpyeti , tad amrtam, abhayam asokam, 
ananta-nirbijam evdpyetiti hovdca. 

14. He who absorbs the thinking mind, in him docs the 
thinking mind reach extinction. He who absorbs the thoughts, 
in him do the thoughts reach extinction. He who absorbs ^le 
ksetrajha (the knower of the field), in him does the ksetrtipia 
reach extinction. He who absorbs the bhdsvati {nddi), in him 
does the bhdsvati reach extinction. He who absorbs the Naga 
(vital air), in him does the Naga reach extinction. He who 
absorbs the knowledge, in him does the knowledge reach 
extinction. He who absorbs bliss, in him does bliss *reach 
extinction. He who absorbs the turiya, in him does the turiya 
reach extinction. He who absorbs that jmmortal, fearless, 



884 • The Principal Upanisads IX. 15. 

sorrowless, endless, seedless Brahman, in him does the immortal, 
fearless, sorrowless, endless, seedless Brahman reach extinction. 
Thus he said. 

15. ya evath nirbtjam veda nirbija eva sa bhavati, na jayate, 
na mriyate, na muhyate, na bhidyate, na dahyate, na chidyate, 
na kampate, na kupyate, sarva-dahano' yam dtmety dcaksate 
naivam atma pravacana-satendpi laksyate, na bahu-irutena, na 
buddhi-jhanasritena, na medhaya, na vedair na tapobhir ugrair 
na sdmkhyair na yogair nasramair ndnyair atmanam upala- 
bhante,' pravacanena prasamsaya vyutthanena tam etani brahmana 
susruvdmso’ nucand upalabhante santo ddnta uparatas tjtiksuh 
samahito bhutvatniany evdtmdnam pasyati sarvasyatma bhavati y a 
evam veda. v 

15. He who knows this as seedless, he verily becolnes seed- 
less. He is not born (again). He does not die. He is not bewil- 
dered. He is not broken. He is not burnt. He is not cut asunder. 
He does not trcrqble. He is not a.ngry. (Knowers of Brahman ) 
declare him to be the all-consuming self. The self is not attain- 
able even by a hundred expositions (of the Vedas), not by the 
study of countless scriptures, not through the means of intel- 
lectual knowledge, not through brain power, not through the 
(study of the) Vedas, not through severe austerities, not 
through the Samkhya (knowledge), not through Yoga (dis- 
cipline), nor through the (observance of the four) stages of 
life nor through any other means do people attain the self. 
Only through a rigorous study and through discipline and 
devoted service to the knowers of Brahman, do they attain 
(the self). Having become tranquil, self-controlled, withdrawn 
from the world and indifferent to it and forbearing, he sees 
the Self in the self. He becomes the Self of all, he who knows 
this. 

He becomes the Universal Self. What he does is expressive, not 
of h'is individual but of the Universal Self. 

T*do nothing of myself,’ said Jesus. Boehme says, ‘Thou shalt 
do nothing but forsake thy own will, viz. that which thou callest 
“I‘‘ or thyself by which means all thy evil properties ‘ will grow 
weak, faint and ready to die; and then thou wilt sink down again 
into that one thing, from which thou art originally sprung.’ 
Signatura Rerum. 



X. i. Subdla Upanisad 885 

X 

THE SELF, THE ULTIMATE BASIS OF ALL WORLDS 

1. atka hainam raikvah papraccha, bhagavan , kasmin sarve t 
sampratisthita bhavantiti, rasatala-lokesv iti hovdca, kasmin 
rasdtala-loka otai ca protas ceti; bhur-lokesv iti hovdca. kasmin 
bhur-loka otas ca protas ceti; bhuvar-lokesv iti hovdca. kasmin 
bhuvar-lokd otas ca protas ceti; suvar-lokesv iti hovdca. kasmin 
suvar-loka otas ca protas ceti; mahar lokesv iti hovdca. kasmin 
mahar-lokd otai ca protas ceti; jano-lokesv iti hovdca. kasmin 
jano-loka otas ca protas ceti; tapo-lokesv iti hovdca. kasmims 
tapo-loka otas ca protas ceti; satya-lokesv iti hovdca. kasmin 
satya-lokd otai ca protai ceti; prajapati-lokesv iti hovdca. kasmin 
prajd-pati-loka otas ca pr&tas ceti; brahma-lokesv iti hovdca. 
kasmin brahma-loka otas ca protas ceti; sarva-lokaatmanibrahmani 
manaya ivautds ca protas ceti: sa hovdcaivam etdn lokdn atmani 
pratisthitdn veda, dtmaiva sa bhavati iti, etan nirvdndnusdsanam 
iti veddnusasanam iti vedanusUsanam. 

1. Then Raikva asked, ‘Venerable Sir, in what are all 
(these worlds) become firmly established?’ In the rasatala 
worlds, said he. In what are the rasatala worlds (established) 
as warp and woof? In the terrestrial (bhnr) world, said he. 
In what are the terrestrial worlds (established) as warp 
and woof? In the worlds of atmosphere ( bhuvar ), said he. Jn 
what are the worlds of atmosphere (established) as warp and 
woof? In the heavenly (suvar) worlds, said he. In what are 
the heavenly worlds (established) as warp and woof? In the 
mahar worlds, said he. In what arc the mahar worlds (estab- 
lished) as warp and woof? In the janas worlds, said he. In what 
are the janas worlds (established) as warp and woof? In the 
tapas worlds, said he. In what are the tapas worlds (established) 
as warp and woof? In the satya worlds, said he. In what are 
the satya worlds (established) as warp and woof? In the 
Prajd-pati worlds, said he. In what are the Prajd-pati worlds 
(established) as warp and woof? In the Brahma worlds, said 
he. In what are the Brahma worlds (established) as warp and 
woof? All the worlds, like so many beads are established In 
the self, in Brahman as warp and woof, thus said he. He who 
knows thus that these worlds are fstablished in the self, he 
becomes the self alone. This is the doctrine leading to libera- 
tion. This is the doctrine of the Veda. This is the doctrine of 
the Veda. 



886 The Principal Upanisads XI. i. 

like so many beads: see B.G. VII. 7. 

evam sarvdni bhutdni manih sutram ivatmani: even as the beads are 
strung into a thread are all objects strurfg in the self : Dhydna-bindu 
TJ 6 . 


XI 

THE COURSE AFTER DEATH 

1. atha hainam raikvah papraccha , bhagavan , yo’yam vijhd- 
na-ghana ntkrdman sa kena katarad vd va sthdnam ntsrjydipak- 
rdmatiti; tasmai sa Jiovdca , hrdayasya madhye lohitam mam- 
sa-pindam yasmims tad daharam pundankam kumudam ivane- 
kadhd vikasitam ; tasya madhye samudrah , samudrasya madhye 
kosah , tasmin nddyas catasro bhavanti , ramdrameqchapunar- 
bhaveti. tatra r amd puny ena puny am lokam nay ati; arama pdpena 
pdpam , icchaya yat smarati tad abhisampadyate , apunarbhavayd 
kosam bhinatti , kosam bhitvd slrsakapalam bhinatti, sirsakapdlam 
bhiiva frthivlm Uhinatti. prthivlm bhitvdpo bhuiatti. apo bhitvd 
tejo bhinatti. tejo bhitvd vdyum bhinatti. vayum bhitvdkdsam 
bhinatti , dkasam bhitvd mano bhinatti. mano bhitvd bhutddim 
bhinatti , bhutddim bhitvd mahdntam bhinatti , mahantam bhit- 
vavyaktam bhinatti, avyaktam bhitvdksaram bhinatti. aksaram 
bhitvd mrtyum bhinatti. mrtyur vai pare deva eki-bhavatiti, 
pwrastdn na san ndsan sad asad ity etan nirvananusdsanam iti 
veddnusdsanam iti veddnusdsanam. 

1. Then Raikva asked thus: Venerable Sir, How and by 
what means does this self which is a mass of intelligence 
after leaving its seat and . moving upwards have its exit ? 
To him he replied. In the centre of the heart is -a red mass 
of flesh. In it is the white lotus called the dahara which has 
bloomed like a red lotus with its petals spread in different 
directions. In the middle of it is an ocean. In the middle of 
thg ocean is a sheath. In it are four nduiis called Rama, Arama, 
I<;pha and Apunarbhava. Of these, Rama leads (the practitioner 
of fighteousness) through righteousness to the world of right- 
eousness. Arama leads (the practitioner of unrighteousness) 
through unrighteousness to the world of the unrighteous. 
Through Iccha one attains whatever object of desire one recalls. 
Through Apunarbhava one breaks through the sheath. Having 
brok6n through the sheath one breaks through the shell of the 
crest (skull). Having broken through the skull, he breaks 
through the eartl^ element. Having broken through the earth 



XII. i. Subdla Upanisad 887 

element he breaks through water. Having broken through 
water, he breaks through light. Having % broken through light, 
he breaks through air. Having broken through air, he breaks 
through ether. Having broken through ether, he ‘breaks through 
mind. Having broken through mind, he breaks through the 
subtle elements. Having broken through the subtle elements, 
he breaks through the mahat tattva. Having broken through 
the mahat tattva he breaks through the Unmanifested. Having 
broken through the Unmanifested, he breaks through the 
Imperishable. Having broken through the Imperishable, he 
breaks through Death. Then Death becomes one with the 
Supreme. In the Supreme there *is neither existence nor non- 
existence nor existence and non-existence. This is the doctrine 
leading to liberation. This is the doctrine of the Veda. This is 
the doctrine of the Veda. 

apunarbhava: non-rebirth. 

mahat : the great, the first product of prakrti, the principle of buddhi 
or intelligence in the individual. For the Sdmkhya doctrine of 
evolution which is adopted here see I.P. Vol. II, pp. 266-277. 
mrtyu: death. The principle of all-devouring time is not different 
from the Eternal Supreme. 


XII 

PURITY OF FOOD 

1. ndrdyandd vd annam dgatam, pakvam brahmalokemahd-sam- 
vartake, punah pakvam dditye } punah pakvam kratryddi , punah 
pakvam jdlakilaklinnam paryusitam , pdtam annam aydeitam 
asamklptam asmydn , na kam cana ydeeta . 

1. From Narayana came into being food (in a raw state). 
In the Mahd-samvartaka (the great dissolution) in the world 
of Brahma it becomes ripe (cooked). It is again cooked in the 
world of the sun. It is again cooked in the sacrifices. Food with 
water oozing out of it or rendered stale (should not be eatcii). 
Food which is clean (devoid of the defects mentioned) which 
is not acquired by begging or not got according to a previously 
arranged plan should one eat. He should not beg for food of 
any one whatsoever. 

Purity of food makes for purity of disposition. 



888 The Principal Upanisads XIII. i. 

XIII 

THE CHILD-LIKE INNOCENCE OF THE SAGE 

i. balyena tisthdset, bdla-svabhdvo asarigo niravadyo maunena 
pandityena niravadhikdratayopalabhyeta, kaivalyam uktam niga- 
manam prajd-patir uvdca; mahat-padam jilatva vrksamule vaseta, 
kucelo’ sahdya ekdkl samddhistha atma-kdma dpta-kdmo nis-kdmo 
jtrna-kamo hastini simhe damse masake nakule sarpardksasa - 
gandharve mrtyo rupdni viditvd na bibhcti kutas caneti vrksam 
iva tisthdset, chidyamano'pi, na kupyeta, na kampetotpalam iva 
tisthdset , chidyamdno’pi na kupyeta , na kampeta , akasam iva 
tisthdset , chidyantano’pi na kupyeta na kampeta , satyena tisthdset 
satyo'yam ditma, sarvesdm eva gandhdndm prthivi hr day am, 
sarvesam eva rasandm apo hrdayam , sarvesdm eva rdpandm tejo 
hrdayam, sarvesdm eva sparsandm vdyur hrdayam , sarvesdm eva 
sabddndm akasam hrdayam , sarvesdm eva gatindm avyaktam 
hrdayam, sarvesdm eva sattvdndty mrtyur hrdayam, mrtyur vai 
pare deba eki-bhavatiti, parastdn na san ndsan na sad asad ity 
etan nirvdnanusdsanam iti veddnusdsanam iti veddnusdsanam. 

13. One should cultivate the characteristics of a child. The 
characteristics of a child are non-attachment and innocence 
(freedom from notions of right and wrong). By abstinence from 
speech, by learning, by non-observance of conventions relating 
to the classes and stages of life one acquires the state of alone- 
ness proclaimed by the Vedas. Prajd-pati said thus: After 
knowing the highest state (the sage) should reside at the foot 
of a tree. With a rag as his loin cloth, with no one to help him, 
all alone, remaining in concentration, with his desire for the 
self, with all desires fulfilled, with no desires, with desires con- 
sumed, recognising in the elephant, in the lion, in the tiger, 
in the mosquito, in the inungoose, in the snake, the demon 
and the faery spirit so many forms of death, he is not afraid 
of them on any account. He should be (unmoved) like a tree. 
Even if cut asunder, he should not get angry, he should not 
quake. He should be like a rock and even if cut asunder should 
nr»t get angry, should not quake. He should be like the sk) 
and should not get angry, should not quake. He should stand 
by the truth, for verily, this truth is the self. Of all smells, 
earth is the heart, of all tastes water is the heart; of all forms 
light is the heart; of all touches, air is the heart. Of all sounds 
ether is the heart ; of all states of being the unmanifested is the 
heart; of all beings, death is the heart. Death, verily, becomes 



XIV. i. Subala Upanisad 889 

one with the Radiant Supreme. In the Supreme there is neither 
existence nor non-existence nor existence and non-existence. 
This is the doctrine leading to liberation. This is the doctrine 
of the Veda. This is the doctrine of the Veda. 

See B.U. III. 5. 1. 

Superiority to emotions and indifference to worldly objects and 
desires are stressed. 


XIV 

GRADUAL DISSOLUTION IN THE SUPREME 

• • 

1. prthivi vdnnam dpo annddd , dpovdnnam jyotir annadam, 
jyotir van^am vdyur annado vdyur vdnnam dkdso nnada, dkdso 
vdnnam indriydny annddd mndriydni vdnnam manonnadam , 
mano vdnnam buddhir annddd , buddhir vdnnam avyaktam anna- 
dam, avyaktam vdnnam aksaram annadam, aksaram vdnnam 
mrtyur annado mrtyur vai pare dev a ekl-bhaifatUi parctstdn na 
san ndsan na sad as ad ity etan nirvdndnusdsanam iti veddnusd - 
sanam iti veddnusdsanam. 

1. Earth is the food, (in relation to it) water is the eater of 
the food. Water is the food, (in relation to it) light is the eater 
of the food. Light is the food, (in relation to it) air is the eater 
of the food. Air is the food, (in relation to it) ether is the eater 
of the food. Ether is the food, (in relation to it) the organs of 
perception and of action are the eater of the food, the organs 
of perception and of action are the food, in relation to them, 
mind is the eater of the food. Mind.is the food, (in relation to it). 
Understanding is the eater of the food. Understanding is the 
food, (in relation to it) the Unmanifested is the eater of the 
food, the Unmanifested is the food, (in relation to it) the 
Imperishable is the eater of the food. The Imperishable is the 
food, (in relation to it) Death is the eater of the food. Veyly, 
Death becomes one with the Radiant Supreme. In the Supreiye, 
there is neither existence nor non-existence, nor existence and 
non-existence. This is the doctrine leading to liberation. This 
is the doctrine of the Veda. This is the doctrine of the Veda. 

annada: the cater of the food, the cau§e in which it is dissolved in 
involution. 

Only the Transcendent Self remains when all things are negated. 
The very principle of negation, death is absorbed in the Supreme. 



890 The Principal Upanisads XV. 1. 

XV 

DISSOLUTION OF INDJ VI DUALITY 

1. atha hainam raikvah papraccha, bhagavan, yoyam vij- 
ndna-ghana utkrdmam s a kena katarad vd va sthanam dahatiti. 
tasmai sa hovaca, yo’yam vijhdna-ghana utkrdman prdnam dahati; 
apdnatn , vydnam, uddnam, samdnam, vairambham, mukhyam , 
antarydmam, prabhahjanam, kumdram , syenam , svetam, krsnam , 
ndgam dahati; prthivy-apas-tejo-vdyv-dkdsdm dahati; jdgaritam, 
svapnam, susuptam , ttiriyarii ca mahatdm ca lokam param ca 
lokarii dahati; lokdlokam dahati; dharmddharmam dahati; abhds- 
karam, amaryadam, nirdlokam, atah param dahati; mahdntam 
dahati; avyaktam dahati; aksaram dahati; mrtyum dahati; mrtyur 
vai pare deve eki-bhavatiti parastdruna san ndsan na sad asad ity 
etan nirvandnusdsanam, iti veddnusdsanam iti veddnusdsanam. 

i. Then (the sage) Raikva asked: Venerable Sir, how and 
by what Yneans does this (self) which is a mass of intelligence, 
after moving upwards (from this seat) burn away its scat? 
To him he replied thus: This self, after moving upwards, 
burns the prana , the apdna, the vyana , the uddna , the samdna, 
the vairambha , the mitkhya, the antarydma, the prabhahjana, 
the kumdra , the syena, the sveta, the krsna and the ndga 
(vital airs). It burns (the elements) earth, water, fire, air and 
ether. It burns the waking, dreaming and sleeping states as 
aiso the Turiya , this mighty world and the other world. It 
burns the visible and the invisible worlds. It burns virtuous 
and vicious conduct. Thereafter it burns the world, devoid of 
lustre, devoid of limit, devoid of appearance. It burns the 
mahat tattva: it burns the Unmanifested. It burns the Imperish- 
able. It burns Death. Death becomes one with the radiant 
Supreme. In the Supreme there is neither existence nor non- 
existence nor existence and non-existence. This is the doctrine 
leading to liberation. This is the doctrine of the Veda. This is 

thtf doctrine of the Veda. 

c 

vijhdna : intelligence, a form of knowledge superior to the action of 
the mind. In T.U. II and III; K.U. III. 9; it is identified with buddlii 
and is ranked above mind. It is assumed that the moral qualities 
and power of remembrance of the self accompany the soul in the 
journey after death. 



XVI. i. Subala Upanisad 891 

XVI 

CONCLUSION 

1. saubdlabija brahmopanisan ndprasdntdya ddtavyd nd- 
putrdya ndsisydya ndsamvatsarardtrositdya ndparijiidtakulasi- 
Idya ddtavyd naiva ca pravaktavyd. 

yasya deve para bhaktir yathd devc tathd gut an, 
tasyaite kathita hy arthdh prakdsante mahdtmanah 
ity etan nirvandnusdsanam iti vedanusasanam iti vedanusa- 
sanam. 

1. This secret doctrine of the seedless Brahman owing its 
origin to Subala should not be Imparted to ‘anyone who has 
not attained composure of spirit, not to one who has no sons, 
not to oik* who has no disciples, nor to one who has not taken 
residence for one year at nights, nor to one whose family and 
character are not known. This should not be imparted nor even 
mentioned to any such person. The subject-matter of this shines 
to advantage if imparted to the high-souled one whose devotion 
to the Supreme Being is profound and whose devotion to the 
teacher is as (profound as it is) to the Supreme. This is the 
doctrine leading to liberation. This is the doctrine of the Veda. 
This is the doctrine of the Veda. 




JAB ALA UP AN I SAD 

The Jabala Upanisad l belongs to the Atharva Veda and 
discusses a few important'questions regarding renunciation. 




2. Jdbdla Upanisad 895 

JA BALA UFA NISA D 

1. brhaspatir nvdca • ydjnavalkyam yad anu kuruksetram 
devdndm deva-yajanam sarvesdm bhutdndm brahma-sadanam. 
avimuktam vai kuruksetram devdndm deva-yajanam sarvesdn X 
bhutdndm brahma-sadanam. tasmdid yatra kvacana gacchati tad eva 
manyeta tad avimuktam eva , idam vai kuruksetram devdndm 
deva-yajanam sarvesam bhutdndm brahma-sadanam. atra hijdntoh 
prunes fit kramamdnesu rudrah tdrakam brahma vydeaste, yenasav 
amrti bhutvd\ moksi bhavati, tasmdd avimuktam eva niseveta 
avimuktam na vimuheed evam evaitad ydjhavalkya. 

1. Brhaspati* said to Yajnavalkya, Kuruksetra is for the 
gods/the resort of the gods and*for all creatures it is the abode 
of Brahma. Avimukta 1 is the kuruksetra which is for the gods 
the resort of the gods and for all creatures the abode of Brahma. 
Therefore, wherever one may go, one should think of it as such. 
It is only avimukta. It is kuruksetra which is for the gods, the 
resort of the gods, and for ^11 creatures the abode of Brahma. 
There when the lives of living creatures ^o upwards, Rudra 
teaches the t dr aka mantra. By it they become immortal and 
are liberated. Therefore meditate on avimukta. Do not give 
up avimukta , Yajnavalkya. 

2. atha hainam atrih papraccha ydjnavalkyam , ya eso nanto' 
vyakta dtmd tarn katham aham vijdnxydm iti. sa hovdea ydjna- 
valkyah so’vimukta updsyo ya eso’ nanto’ vyakta dtmd so’vinntkte 
pratisthita iti. so’vimuktah kasmin pratisthita iti. varandydm 
ndsydm ca madhye pratistlvta iti. kd vai vdfand ka ca ndsTti, 
sarvdti indriya-krtdn dosdn vdrayatiti tena varand bhavatiti, 
sarvan indriya-krtdn pdpdn ndsaydtiti tena nasi bhavatiti. katamam 
cdsya sthdnam bhavatiti bhruvor ghrdnasya ca yah sandhih sa 
esa dyaur lokasya parasya ca sandhir bhavatiti , etad vai sandhim 
sandhydm brahma-vida updsata iti, so’vimukta updsya iti , 
so vimuktam jhdnam dcasteyo vai tad evam vedeti. 

2. Thereafter Atri inquired of Yajnavalkya, ‘How can I 
know that self which is infinite and unmanifested V Yajnavylfcya 
said (in reply), meditate on avimukta (for) the self which is 
infinite and unmanifested is established in avimukta. (Atri 
then inquired) In what is avimukta established? (Yajnavalkya 
answered) It # is established in the middle of Varand and Nasi. 
(Atri inquired) What is Varand and^vhat is Nasi? (Yajnavalkya 
answered) As it overcomes all the faults done by the sense 
organs it is called Varand, as it destroys all the evils done by 
1 avimuktam sopadhikamP 
FF* 



896 The Principal Upanisads 4. 

the sense organs it is called Nasi. (Atri asked) What is their 
abode? (Yajnavalkya answered) It js the meeting-place of 
the eyebrows and the nose. It is the meeting-place of the 
/world of gods and (the world) beyond. The same meeting-place, 
the knowers of Brahman worship as sandhyd. So avimukta is 
to be meditated on. He who knows it gains the knowledge 
which makes for liberation. 

3. atha hahi am brahmacdrina iiciih, kin? japyena mrtatvam 
bnlhiti, sa hovdca ydjhavalkyah , satarxidriyencty etdny, cva ha vd 
amrtasya ndnnini , etair ha vd amrto bhavatiti , evam cvaiiad 
ydjhavalkyah. 

3. Once students of sacred knowledge asked (Yajnavalkya): 
Can we gain life eternal by the repetition of formulas [mantras) ? 
Yajnavalkya said (in reply) By (meditation on) satarudrlya 
which are the names of eternal life, one becomes immortal. 

4. aiha hainam janako vaidehq ydjhavalkyam upasametyo- 
vdea , bkagavan , samnydsam {ami) bruhiti. sa hovdca ydjnaval- 
kyah; brahmacaryam parisamdpya grhi bhavet, grhi bhfttvd vani 
bhavet, vani bhfitvd pravrajet, yadi vetarathd brahmacarydd eva 
pravrajet, grhdd vd vandd vd. atha pxinar avrati vd vrati vd 
sndtako vd asndtako votsanndgniko vd yad ahar eva virajet tad 
ahar eva pravrajet, taddhaike prdjdpatydm evestim kurvanti, tad 
u » tat lid na knrydd dgneyim eva kxirydt. agnir ha vai prdinah 
prdnam cva tathd karoti. traidhdtaviydm eva kxirydt, etayaiva 
trayo dhdtavo yad xita sattvaxh rajas tama iti. ayam te yonir 
rtvijo yato jdtah pray did arocathdh, taxn prdnam jdnan agna 
drohathdno vardhaya rayim, ity anena mantrenugnim djighret , 
esa ha vd agxier yonir yah prdinah prdnam gaccha svdhety evam 
cvaiiad dha. grdmdd agnim dhrtya purvavad agnim dghrdpayet. 
yad agnim na vindet apsu jxihxiydt, dpo vai t sarvd devatdh sarvd- 
bhyo devaldbhyo jxihomi svdheli, juhvoddhrtya prdsniydt sdjyam 
havir andmayam moksamantrah Irayyaivam vadet, etad brahxna, 
etaiiipdsitavyam , evam evaitad bhagavann iti vai ydjhavalkyah. 

4. Once Janaka (King) of Videha approached Yajnavalkya 
and said, 'Venerable Sir, teach me about renunciation/ 
Yajnavalka said: After completing the life of a student, let 
one become a householder; after completing the life of a house- 
holder let one become a forest dweller; after completing the 
life of a forest dweller, let one renounce, otherwise (if a suitable 
occasion arises) let one renounce even from the state of a 
student or from the state of a householder or from that of a 



4. Jdbdla Wpanisad 897 

forest dweller. Whether one has not completed the injunctions 
or completed the injunctions, whether he is a student or not, 
even if he has not completed the sacrificial rites, on whatever 
day he has the spirit of renunciation, that very day let him 
renounce (and become a recluse). Some, indeed, perform th<> 
prdjdpatya sacrifice. One need not do this but should only 
perform the fire sacrifice. Fire is life and one performs the life 
sacrifice thus: (He makes the fire take the form of life, or 
merge into its original source, life). Then he should also perform 
the traidpdtaviya sacrifice. The three elements represent the 
three qualities sattva, rajas and tamas (which are to be burnt). 
He should inhale the fire (smoke) by uttering the following 
mantra (verse), 'O Fire, this lffe who is tfic source ot your 
birth and from whom, ha\&ing sprung forth you shone. Knowing 
this you* climb up to life and then make my wealth (spiritual 
wealth] increase. 1 He who is life is the source (material cause) 
of fire. O Fire, you assume the form of life, your source. (As 
for one who has not performed the fire sacrifice : having taken 
the fire from the village (i.e. any house in the village), lie should 
inhale the fire as mentioned before. If he is not able to get the 
fire, he should perform the sacrifice in the water. For water 
represents all the gods. So uttering this mantra : T offer unto 
all the gods/ he should perform the sacrifice, he should take 
the sacrificial remnant with ghee, which cures all diseases. 
He should utter the pranava (which leads to release), wltich 
represents (the substance of) the three Vedas). This is Brahman. 
It should be meditated upon. ‘Even so is n, Revered Yajna- 
valkya/ said Janaka. 

avratln: one who has not performed the prescribed rites even as 
vratin is one who has performed the rites. 

sndtaka: one who ha-, completed the ceremonies relating to Vedic 
studies even as asndtaka is one who has not completed the ceremonies. 
that very day he may renounce: MaJui-nirvdna T antra says: One 
should not enter the stage of a recluse giving up an old fatherland 
mother or a devoted wife or an infant son. 

mdtaram pitaram vrddham bhdrydm caiva pativratdm 
sisums ca tanayam hitvd ndvadhutdsraniam vrajet. VII. 7. 

He who becomes a monk, giving up father, mother, child, wife, 
kinsmen and relatives becomes a great sinner. 

mdtrn pitrn sisun ddrdn svajanambandhavan a pi 
yah pravrajeta hitvaitdn sa mahapdtakl bhavet. VIII. 18/ 

Cp. also: 



898 


5 - 


The Principal Upanisads 

adhltya vidhivad vedan putrdms cotpddya dharmatah 
istvd ca saktito yajhair memo mokse nivesayet. 

‘Having studied the Vedas according *to rule, having produced 
sons, in conformity with dliarma, having performed sacrifices to 
/the best of one’s ability, let one set one’s mind on release.’ 
anadhitya dvijo vedan, anutpddya tathatmajdn , 
anistva caiva yajnaisca moksam icchan vrajaty adhah. 

‘Any twice-born individual who desires release without having 
studied the Vedas, without having produced sons and without having 
offered sacrifices, goes down below.' 

These verses are quoted in Vacaspati's Bhdmatl, I. 1. 1 

prana: life. Here it is not individual breath. It is the sutrdtman , the 
soul or the material cause of the world. 

tridhataviya: in this sacrifice three sacrificial cakes puroddsa, are 
used, representing the three gunas. . “ t 

5. atha hainam atrih papraccha ydjhavalkyam prcchdmi tvd 
yajiiavalkya ayajhopavlti katham brahman a iti , sa hovdea 
yajhavalkyah, idayn evdsya tad r yajhopavltam ya dtmdpah 
prdsydcdlnydyam vidhili parivrdjakdndm , vlrddhvdne vd andsake 
vd apdm pravese vd agni pravese vd mahd-prasthdne vd, atha 
purivrdd vivarnavdsd mundo parigrahali sneir adrohi bhaiksano 
brahma-bhuydya bhavatiti, yady dturah sydn manasd vded t>am- 
nyaset, esa pantlid brahmand hdnuvittas stenaiti samnydsT 
brahmavid ity evam evaisa bhagavan yajhavalkyah. 

b. Then Atri enquired of Yajiiavalkya. On being asked how 
one who does not wear the sacred thread can be (treated as) 
a Brahman a, Yajiiavalkya answered, this alone is the sacred 
thread of him that purifies himself by the offering and sipping 
water. This is the procedure for becoming a recluse. (For one 
who is weary of the world but not yet fit to become a recluse 
the following are prescribed), he may choose a hero’s death 
(by following the path of the warrior in the battlefield), he may 
fast unto death, throw himself into water or enter fire (burn 
himself to death) or perform the last journey (walk on unto 
de&'t ( h). Then the wandeiing ascetic who (puts on) orange 
robes, who is shaven, who has non-possession, purity, non- 
entity, lives on alms, obtains the state of Brahman. If he is 
diseased he can renounce by mind and speech. This is not to 
be done by one who is healthy. Such a renouncer becomes the 
knower of Brahman, so said the venerable Yajiiavalkya. 

upavlta: the sacred thread is a cotton thread of three strands 
running from the left shoulder across the body to the right hip. 



6. Jdbdla Upanisad 899 

It is first placed on the youth by the teacher at the ceremony of 
initiation. It is the outward and visible symbol of tKe sutrdtman, 
the thread-spirit on which all the individual existences are strung 
like beads and by which all are inseparably linked to their source. 

Among the ancient Iranians as among the Parsees to this day, 
at the age of 15, a boy or a girl is admitted to the community of 
the Zoroastrians by being girt with the sacred thread. 

dturah: diseased. WJjen one is about to die he may renounce by 
mind or speech. It is unnecessary to go through the ceremonies. 

This passage seems to justify suicide, in certain conditions. 

6. tatra parama-hamsd ndma sdrhvartakdruni svetaketu durvdsa 
rbhu niddgha jada-bharat % a dattdtrcya raivataka prabhrtayah , 
avyaktal ifigdih avyaktdcdrdh an unmaltd unmattavad acarantas 
tridandam kamandalum sikyam pdtram jalapavitram sikhdrii 
ydjhopavTtam ca ity etat sarvam bJiusvdhety apsu parity ajy 
dtmdnam anvicchct. yathd jalajupadharo nirgrantho nisparigrahas 
tat-tad-brahma-mdrge samyak sampannali sudaha-mdinashh prdna- 
samdhdrandrtham yathokta-kdle vimukto bhaiksam dcaran udara- 
pdtrena Idbhdlabhayoh samo bhutvd sunydgdra-devagrha trna - 
kCita-valmika-vrksaynrda-kuldlasdldgnihotra-grha-nadipiilina-giri 
kuhava-kandara-kotara-nirjhara-sthandilesu tesv aniketa vdsya- 
prayattio nirmamah sukladhv dnapar ay ano' dhydtma-nistho subha- 
karma-nirmulanaparah samnydsena deha-tydgam karoti, sapetra - 
ma-hamso-ndma parama-hamso ndmeti. 

6. Sariivartaka, Aruni, Svetaketu, DurvasS? Rbhu, Nidagha, 
Jada-bharata, Dattatreya, Raivataka and others are para- 
mahamsas. They are of unmanifested natures, of unmanifested 
ways of life, seen (to others) to behave like mad men though 
they are in no way ma^J. They renounce tridanda , kamandalu, 
tuft of hair and sacred thread and all that in water with the 
words bhu svdhd and seek to know the Self. Assuming the form 
they hdd at birth, without any bonds, without any possesions, 
they must tread well the path of Brahman. With a clean pfind 
(or a pure heart), for the sake of maintaining life, they must fill 
at fixed times the vessel of their stomach with the alms obtained, 
treating gain and loss as equal. They must live in places like 
a deserted house or a temple or a shrub or an anthill, the root 
of a tree, a potter’s house, fireplaece, a sandbank in a river, 
hill, cave, hollow of a tree, stream in a deserted place. Without 
effort, without self-sense, mtent on meditation established in 
the higher self, keen on removing the (effects of) evil deeds, 



goo The Principal Upanisads 

they give up their bodies by the method of renunciation. Such 
is a parama-hama. Such is a parama-hflrhsa. 

tri-danda: monks carry three staves tied together. It is the sign of 
'“triple control of thoughts, words and deeds. 
kamandalu: a water-jar used by ascetics. 

The knower of dharma who wears no signs should practise its 
principles. M.B. XIV. 46. 51. 

Vasistha Svnti says: ‘His signs are not manifest nor his behaviour,’ 
tasmad alihgo dhamajfio’vyaktalingo’vyaktdcdra’iU. 



PAINGALA UP AN IS AD 

This Upanisad belongs to the Sitkla Yajur Veda and is in 
the form of a dialogue between Yajnavalkya and his pupil 
Paiiigdla. Some of the important questions such as meditation*, 
on the Supreme, the nature of release, are discussed in it. 




I. 3. Paingala Upanisad 903 

chapter 1 
THE QUESTION 

1. atha ha paingalo ydjhavalkyam upasametya dvddasavarsa- 
susriisapurvakam paramarahasyam kaivalyam amibnlhlti pap-\ 
raccha. 

1. Then Paingala approaching Yajnavalkya, after duly 
serving him for twelve years, asked, ‘Do tell us about the great 
secret of aloneness.’ 

then: after -the required ethical preparation. 
paingala: the son^of Pirigala. 

BRAHMAN 

2. sa hovdca yd j naval kyah: sad eva saumyedam agra dsTt. tan 
nitya-muktam , avikriyam, satyaj minanandam } pari purnam , sand- 
tanam, ekam evddvitlyam brahma. 

2. Yajnavalkya replied to* him: ‘At the beginning, # all this, 
my dear, was being alone. That is Brahman , the ever free, 
indeterminate, of the nature of truth, knowledge and bliss, 
ever full, ancient (or eternal) one without a second. 

sad: being, with the names and forms unmanifcst. 

WITNESS SELF 

3. tasmin marn-suklikd-stbdnii-sphatikddaitfala-raupya-puru- 
sa-rekhddival lohita-sukla-krsna-guna inayl guna-sdmydnirvdcyd 
mfilaprakrtir dslt , tat pr alibi mbit arti y at tat sdftsi-caitanyam dsTt. 

3. Even as in the mirage, the pearl-oyster, a log of wood, a 
piece of crystal and the # like there is (respectively) the mani- 
festation of water, silver, the figure of a human being, streaks 
of light and the like, in that (pure being) is the root-principle 
of all objectivity, possessed of the qualities of red, white # and 
black, with the qualities in equipoise and incapable of l}e1ng 
adequately expressed. When this is reflected in Brahman , it 
becomes the witness self. • 

The Pure Brahman becomes the witnessing consciousness, the 
eternal subject faced by the principle of all objectivity. The Pure 
Spirit develops into the subject object relationship. • 

The similes employed suggest the apparent character of the 
reflection. The point stressed is that this development does not 



904 The Principal Upanisads I. 5. 

affect the character of Brahman. The development is based on 
Brahman but; does not injure his integrity. 

mula-prakrti: the root principle of matter. It cannot of its own 
develop. Matter by itself cannot give rise to life, mind, etc. So the 
.principle of caitanya or consciousness is posited. Owing - to the 
'influence of caitanya the root principle evolves into detailed forms. 


ISVARA 

4. sd piinar vikrtim prdpya sattvo-driktdvyaktdkhydvarana- 
saktir dsTt, tat pratibimbitam yat tad isvara-caitanyam dstt. 
sa svddhlnamdyah sarvajnah srsti-sthiti-laydndnl ddikartd jagad- 
ankura-rupo bhavati. svasmin villnam sakalam jagad divir- 
bhdvayati , prdni-karma-vasdd esa pato yadvat prasdritali , prdini- 
karma-ksaydt punas tirobhdvayati . tasminn evdikhilalh visvam 
samkocita-patavad vartatc. 

4. When that (miila-prakrti) undergoes change, due to the 
preponderance of e the sattva (quality) it becomes known as 
the unm'anifested and has the power of veiling (the nature of 
Brahman). What is reflected in it becomes the Isvara con- 
sciousness. That (principle of Isvara) has maya under his 
control, he is all-knowing, the first cause of creation, sustenance 
and dissolution of the world, he takes the form of the sprout 
of the world (the seed from which the world grows). That 
causes the entire world resting in it to become manifest. On 
account of the previous deeds of the souls this unfurls like 
a piece of cloth; $ith the destruction of the deeds of the souls, 
this again causes the world to disappear. In that alone remains 
the entire universeTike a rolled up piece of cloth. 


HIRANYA-GARBHA 

5./ isddhisthitdvarana-saktito rajo-dvikta-mahad-dkhyd vikse - 
pa-*:aktir dstt. tat pratibimbitam yat tad hirdnya-garbha-caitanyam 
dstt, sa mahattattvdbhimdm spastdspasta-vapur bhavati. 

5 From the power of veiling dwelling in Isvara there comes 
into being the power of projection, known as the mahat due 
to the preponderance of rajas. What is reflected in it becomes 
the Hiranya-garbha consciousness. That (consciousness) con- 
ceiving the mahat tattva as its own has its form manifested both 
distinctly and indistinctly. 



I. 7, Paingala Upanisad 905 

VIRAT 

6 . hiranya-garbhadhisfhita-viksepa-saktitas famo-driktdhamka- 
rabhidjia sthula-saktir cisit, tat-pratibimbitam yat tad virat caitan - 
yam asit. sa tad-abhimdni spasta-vapuh sarva-sthula-pdlakc • 
visnuh pradhana-puruso bliavati . tasmdd dtmana dkdsah sambhu- 
tah, aka sad vdyuh, vdyor agnih , agner dip ah, adbhyah prthivi, 
tdni panca-tanmdtrdni trigundni bhavanti. 

6. From the po^er of projection dwelling in Hiranya-garbha 
there cowries into being the power of making gross bodies, 
known as the self-sense. What is reflected in it becomes the 
Virat. consciousness. That (Virat consciousness), conceiving 
the self-sense as its own, with'its form manifested distinctly 
becomes the chief person Visnu, the sustainer of all gross 
creation. 4 From that (Virat) self ether originates; from ether 
air, from air fire, from fire water, from water earth; these 
five subtile elements become the three qualities ( sattva , rajas 
and tamas). 

See T.U. II. 1. 3. 

In these passages the nature of the Supreme Reality is mentioned. 
Brahman which transcends the distinction of subject and object. 
Others are conceived on the subject- object pattern. Witness self 
has confronting it mula-prakrti, Isvara, avyakta; Hiranya-garbha, 
mahat; Viiat, ahaiiikara. All these are necessary for one another. 
Witness Self and Isvara are sometimes combined. See Ma. U. 

CREATION 

7. srastu-kdmo jagad-yonis tamo-gunam adhisthdya suksma- 

tanmdtrdni bhdtdni sthfilikartum so’kdmayata. srsteli parimitani 
bhutdny ekam ekam dvidha vidhdya punas caturdha krtva 
svasvetaradvitiydmsaih paiicadhd samyojya paheikrta-bhutair 
ananta-koti - brahmdnddni - tat-tad - andocita - catur-dasa-bhuvandni 
tal-iad-bhuvanocita-golaka-sthula-sarTrdny asrjat. # 

7. He (the creator of the world) desirous of creating, 
embracing the quality of tamas (inertia) desired to changfc the 
subtile elements into gross ones s Dividing each of the elements 
measured at the time of creation into tw*o and again sub- 
dividing each (first equal part) into four equal parts each and 
mixing each Gf the four subdivided equal parts with each of the 
four (second) equal parts of the other four elements arid thus 
forming five heaps (of fiv ' sorts each) ; out of the elements 
thus quintuplicated he created many ergres of brahmandas 



[. II. 


906 The Principal Upanisads 

(macrocosms), fourteen worlds appropriate to each (of these 
macrocosms) and globular gross bodies appropriate to each (of 
these worlds). 

The process of quintuplication, pahclkarana , is mentioned here. 

8. sa pahea-bhutandm rajomsdm caturdhd krtvd bhdga r trayat 
panfa-vrttydtmakam prcinam asrjat. sa tesam turya-bhdgena 
karmendriydny asrjat. 

8. Dividing the mobile property of the ’five elements with 
four parts, he created out of the three parts thereof, the? principle 
of life with its fivefold functions. Out of therfourth part he 
created the organs* of action. • 

As inertia is the character of lamas , yiobility is the character of 
rajas. * 

9. sa tesebh sattvdmsam caturdhd krtvd bhdga-traya-samastitah 
pahca-kriyd-vrttydtmakam antah-karanam asrjat. sa tesdm sattva- 
turiya-bhfdgena jhdhendriydny asrjat. 

9. Dividing the rhythmic property (of the five elements) into 
four parts, out of the totality of the three parts thereof he 
created the inner sense with its fivefold functions. Out of the 
fourth part of the rhythmic property he created the organs of 
perception. 

10. sattva-samastita indriyapdlakdn asrjat. tdni srstdny ancle 
prdeiksipat. tad-djhayd s am cist y an dam vydpya tuny atisthan. 
tad djhaycihamkcira-samanvito vircicl sthuldny araksat. hiranya- 
garbhas tad-djhayd suksmdny apdlayat. 

10. Out of the totality of the rhythm he created the organs 
of the sense organs. He then cast them into the macrocosm. 
Under his orders they stood pervading the entire macrocosm. 
Under his orders the Virat possessed of self-sense protected 
the gross elements. Under his orders Hiranya-garbha ruled over 

the Subtile elements. 

• 

11'. andasthdni tdni tena vine i spanditum cestitum vd na 
sekuh. tdni cctanikartuhi so’kdpiayata, brahmdncla brahmarar 
dhrani samasta-vyasti-mastakdn viddrya tad cvdnnprdvisat. 
tadd jaddny api tdni cetanavat svakarmdni cakrire. 

11. They (the gross and ihc subtile elements and the products 
of the 'macrocosm) were not capable of moving or functioning 
without him. He desired to make them all conscious, (sentient). 
Piercing through th^ macrocosm and the caverns of the cranium 



I 12 Pain gala Upanisad 907 

of the individual souls, situated in their crests, he entered them 
all. Then they, though nonconscious by nature, were engaged 
in their respective functions, as if they were endowed with 
consciousness. 

12. sarvajneso mdya-lesa-samanvito vyasti-dehampravisya taya 
mohito.jivatvam agamat. sarira-traya-tdddtmydt kartrlva-bhoktr- 
ivatdm agamat; jagrat-svapna-susupti-murcha-marana-dhaftna- 
yukto ghati-yantrav ad udvignojdto mrta iva kuldla-cakra-nydyena 
paribhramatiti. 

12. The Omniscient lord possessed of a particle of maya, 
on entering the several bodies and getting deluded by it attained 
the state of the individual soul. By identification with the 
three bodies (gross, subtle and causal) he attained the state 
of the d(jer and the cnjoyfcr, ever performing the functions of 
waking, dreaming, sleeping, fainting and dying, he twirls 
round and round, like a potter’s wheel, as if dead though alive, 
in keeping with the adage relating to the potter’s wheel. 

® § 

mdyd-lcsa: particle of maya. Cp. Blulgavata: holding on his own 
person maya as a garland of ilowers : 

svamdydm vanamdldkhydm ndnd-guna-maym dadhat. 

The potter’s wheel seems to be still while whirling aud whirling 
while still. Subjection to the world is only seeming, due to false 
identification of the spirit with the body and its adjuncts. This is 
Advaita Vedanta. 



908 The Principal Upanisads II. 2 

CHAPTER II 

ISVARA AND THE INDiyiDUAL SOUL 

1. atha paihgalo ydjnavalkyam uvdca, sarvalokdndni srsti-sthi- 
- ty-anta-krd vibhur isah katham jivatvam agamad iti. 

1. Then Paingala asked Yajnavalkya thus: ‘How does the 
Lo^jd, the all-pervading, the cause of the creation, maintenance 
and dissolution of all the worlds, attain the state of the indi- 
vidual soul?' 


THE GROSS BODY 

2. sa hovdea yajnavalkyah, sthula-suksma-kdrana-dehoclbhava- 
purvakam jwesvara-svarupam vivicya kathaydmiti sdvadhdnen - 
aikagratayd sruyatdm. isah paiicikfta-mahd-bhuta-lesdn dddya 
vyasti-samastydtmaka-sthiila-sanrdyi yathdikramam akarot. kapd- 
lacarmdntrdsthi-mdmsa-nakhdni prthivy-amsdh, rakta-niutra-ldld- 
svedddikam ab-amsdh, ksut-trsnosna-moha-maidhunddyd agny- 
amsdh,pracdranotfurana-svdsddikd vdyv-amsdh, kdma-krodhddayo 
vyomdmsdh etat samghdtam, karmani saiicitam, tvagddi-yuktam , 
bdlyddy avasthdbhimdndspadam, bahn-dosasrayam, sthiila-sanram 
bhavati. 

2. Yajnavalkya replied to him thus: I shall relate the character 
of the individual soul and the Divine in distinction from each 
other preceded by an account of the origin of the gross, subtle 
and causal bodies. Let it be listened to by you with attention 
and one-pointed**mind. The Lord, after getting together the 
minute parts of the quintuplicated great elements, created in 
order, gross boditJo in their individual and collective aspects. 
The skull, the skin, the intestines, the bones, the flesh and the 
nails are parts (of the character) of the earth. Blood, urine, 
saliva, sweat and the like are of the character of water. Hunger, 
thirst, (bodily) heat, swooning, sex impulse and the like are of 
the«character of fire. Movement, lifting, breathing and the like 
arc of the character of aii. Lust, anger and the like are of the 
character of ether. The combination of these becomes the 
gr<?ss body, organised by (under the influence of) previous 
karma, provided with the skin and the like, affording the basis 
for the notion that the stages of infancy and the like belong to 
it and forming the haunt oi various ailments. 

dosa: evil. Evils of the gross body are ailments. 



II. 4- Paingala Xjpanisad 909 

THE SUBTLE BODY 

3 . athdpancikrta-mahct- bh uta-raj 0 'ms a - bhdga-traya - samastitah 
primary asrjat; prdndpdna-vydnodana-samdndh prdnavrttayah. 
naga - kiirma-krkara - devadatta - dhanamjayd - upaprdnah , hrddsa- 
na-nabhi-kantha-sarvdngdni sthdndni; akdsddi-rajo-guna-turlya- 
bhdgeria karmendriydm asrjat; vdk-pdni- pdda-pdyupasthds % tad 
vrttayah; vacanaddna-gamana-visargdnandds tad-visayah. 

3. Then out of tfce three parts (of four) of the great elements 
in their .mobile character and nonquintuplicated state he 
created the life principle. Prana , apdna, vydna, uddna and 
samdina are the (varied) functions of the life principle. The 
minor functions of these are Ndga, Karma, Krkara, Devadatta 
and Dhanamjaya. The heart, the anus, the navel, the throat 
and all the limbs form the seats (of the vital airs). Out of the 
(remaining) fourth part of the ether and other elements in their 
mobile character he created the organs of action. Its variants 
are the vocal organ, the hands, the feet, the* excretory and the 
generative organs. Their functions are articulate expression, 
grasping, movement, excretion and (sex) enjoyment. 

4. evam bhuta-sattvdmsa-bhdga-trayasamastito'ntah-karanam 
asrjat; antah-karana-mano-buddhi-cxttdhamkdrds tad-vrttayah; 
samkalpa-niscaya-smarandbhimdnanusamdhdnds tad-visayah; 
gala-vadana-ndbhi-hrdaya-blinl-madhyam sthdnam; bhuta-sattva- 
turiya- bhdgenaj iidnendr iyam asrj at; srotra-tvak-caksur-jihvd-ghrd- 
nds tad-vrttayah; sabda-sparsa-rupa-rasa-gatodhds tad-visayah ; 
dig-vdtdrka-praceto' svi-vahmndropendra-mrtynkdh; candro-vis- 
nus-caturvaktrah sambhus ca kdraijddhipdh. • 

4. In the same manner out of the totality of the three parts 
of the great elements in their rhythmic character, he created 
the inner sense. Its various forms (or modifications) are the 
inner sense, the mind, understanding, thought and self-sense. 
Determination, conviction, memory, love and dedication are 
its functions. The throat, the face, the navel, the heart and 
the middle of the eyebrows are the seats. Out of the fourth* part 
of the great elements in their rhythmical character, he created 
the organs of perception. Its varied forms are the ears, the 
skin, the eyes, the tongue and the nose. (Perceptions of) sound, 
touch, shape? taste, smell are its functions. Direction, Air, the 
Sun. Varuna, the Asvins, Fire, Indra, Upcndra, Death, the 
Moon, Visnu, the fourfacc I Brahma and Siva are the deities 
presiding over the inner senses. 



* 

910 The Principal Upamsads II. 7. 

THE FIVE SHEATHS 

5. athdnnamaya prdna-maya-mano-maya-vijhdna-mayananda- 
maydh pahcakosdh , annarasenaiva bhutvdnnarasenabhivrddhim 
prdpydnna-rasa-maya-prthivydmyad villyate so’ nna-may a-kosah; 
tad eva sthula-sariram. karmendriyaih saha prdnddi-pahcakam 
prdna-may a-kosah; jhancndriyaih saha mano mano-mayct-kosali ; 
jhanendriyaih saha buddhir vijhdna-may a-kosah , etat kosa-irayam 
lihga-sariram; svarupa-j ndtiam dnanda-maya-kosas tat kdrana- 
sar Irani. 

5. Then the five sheaths made of food, vital air, mind, 
understanding and bliss. What is brought i nifo being ogly by 
the essence of food, what grows only by the essence of food, 
that which finds rest in earth full ()f the essence of food, that 
is the sheath made of food. That alone is the gross body. The 
five vital airs, along with the organ of action constitute the 
sheath made of the vital principle. Mind along with the organs 
of perception is t^e sheath made, of mind. The understanding 
along With the organs of perception is the sheath made of 
intelligence. These three sheaths (of life, mind and intelligence) 
form the subtle body. The knowledge of one's own form is of 
the sheath made of bliss. That is also the causal body. 

Sec T.U. II and III. 

b. atha jhanendriya-pahcakam , kar me ndriy a- paiicakam, prdnd- 
di-pahcakam, vvyadddi-paiicakam, antali-karana-catustayam 
kdma-karma-tamamsy astapnram. 

6. Then the five organs of perception, the five organs of 
action, the five vital airs, breath and others, the five elements, 
ether and others, desire, action and darkness (ignorance), 
they constitute astapura (the totality ,of the subtle body). 

7. isdjnayd virdjo vyastideham pravisya buddhim adhisthdya 
visv&tvam agamat. vijhdndtmd ciddbhdso visvo vydvahdriko 
jdgvat sthfila-dehdbhimdni karmabhur iti ca visvasya ndma 
bhavati. isdjnayd sfitrdtma vyasti-sCiksma-sariram pravisya mana 
adlfisthdya taijasatvam agamat. taijasah prdtibhdsikah svap~ 
nakalpita iti taijasasya ndma bhavati. isdjnayd mdyopddhir 
avyakta-samanvito vyasti-kdrana-sariram pravisya prdjnatvam 
agamat . prdjho vacchinnah pdramdrthikah snsupty abhimdniti 
prajhdsya ndma bhavati. avyakta-lesdjhdndcchddita pdramar- 
thika-jivasya tattvamasyddi vakyani brahmanaikatew jaguh neta - 
rayor vyavaharikajprdtibhdsikayoh , antah-karana-pratibimbita 



II. 8. Paingala ppanisad 911 

caitanyam yat tad evavasthdtrayabhdg bhavati. sa jagrat-svapna- 
susupty-avasthah prdpya ghati-yantravad udvigno jdto mrta iva 
sthito bfiavati. atha jdgrat-svapna-susupti-miirchd-marandvasthdh 
pahca bhavanti. 

7. By the command of the Supreme Lord, after entering* 
each individual gross body and abiding in the intellect, he 
(Virdddtman) attained the Visva state. The intellectual self 
reflecting consciousness is the Visva that has pragmatic relations 
with and conceives of the waking state and the gross body as its 
own. The field of Action is the name of the Visva state. At the 
command of the Supreme Lord, the subtle self, after entering 
each individual%ubtle body and abiding in the mind attained the 
Taijasa state. The Taijasa state is what manifests itself in 
the world of appearances. The product of dreams is the name 
of the Tmjasa state. By the command of the Supreme Lord, 
the self conditioned by mfiya and along with the (principle of) 
unmanifested, after entering each separate body attained 
the Prdjha state. The Prdjya state is non-differentiated from 
and (in quest of) the highest truth. That tvhich conceives of 
the sleeping state as its own is the name of the Prdjha state. 
The Vedic texts That thou art' and the like sing about the 
identity with the Supreme of the individual soul that is (in 
quest of) the highest end and shrouded by ignorance and traces 
of the (principle of) unmanifested, which is unrelated to the 
empirical and the apparent worlds. It is only the conscious»ess 
reflected in the inner sense that is capable of attaining the 
three states (of waking, dream and sleep). After attaining these 
states of waking, dream and sleep, becoming distracted like a 
potter's wheel, he becomes, though alive? dead as it were. 
Then there are the states of waking, dreaming, sleeping, 
fainting and dying, five in number. 

• ^ 

This passage assumes the Advaita Vedanta view of the three 
grades of reality, pdramdrthika , vydvahdrika and prdtibhdsika, 
metaphvsical or ultimate, empirical and illusory respectively. 

WAKING AND DREAM STATES 

8. tat-tad-devatdgrahdnvitaih srotrddi-jhdnendriyaih sabdd- 
dy-artha-visaya-grahana-jhdnam jdgrad avaslha bhavati. tdtra 
bhru-madhyam gatojiva d-pada-mastakam vydpya krsi-sravanddy 
akhila-kriyd-kartd bhavati. tat-tad-phalabhuk ca bhavati * lokdn- 
taragatah karmarjita-phalai 1 sa eva bhuhkte. sa sarvabhaumavad 



912 The Principql Upanisads II. 9. 

vyavaharacchrdnta antar-bhavanam pravestum margam asritya 
tisthati. karaftoparame jdgrat-samskdroltha-prabodhavad grdhya- 
grdhaka-Yupa-sphuranarii svapndvasthd Mavati ; tatra vtsva eva 
jdgrad vyavahdra-lopan nddi-m'adhyam carams taijasatvam 
jivdpya vdsand-rupakam jagad-vaicitryam svabhasa bhdsayan 
yathcpsitam svayam blmnkte. 

8. The state of waking consists in the knowledge acquired 
through the perception of ‘sound and other objects by means 
of the organs of perception like the ear and others accompanied 
by the blessings of the respective deities ^presiding over the 
different forms of perception). Therein the individual soul 
who has established himself in the middle oP the eyebrows, 
after pervading (the entire body) from head to foot, becomes 
the doer of all actions like husbandry, study of the sacred books. 
He becomes the enjoyer of their respective fruits. On reaching 
another world he alone enjoys the fruit. He then stands like an 
emperor overcome with fatigue, on account of his activities 
having taken the path leading to tlje entry into (another) body. 
When the sense ofgan has come to rest (ceased to function) 
the knowledge of the percepts and perceptions arising out of 
impressions (left by) of the waking state is the dream state. 
Therein, owing to the cessation of active functioning such as 
we have in the waking state, Visva alone, after attaining the 
Taijasa state, moves through the middle of the nddis, mani- 
festing through his own power the variety of the world in the 
form of impressions, and himself enjoys as he desires. 


THE STATE OF SLEEP 

9. cittaikakarand susupty-avasthd bhavati. bhrama-visrdnta- 
sakunih paksau samhrtya nlddbhimukhqm yathd gacchati, tatha 
jivo’pi jdgrat-svapna-prapancevyavahrtya srdnto’jndnam pravisya 
svdnandam bhuhkte. 

9. *The sleeping state is that in which only thought (functions). 
Ev£n, as a bird tired of flying about turns towards its nest, 
restraining its wings, even so the individual soul tired of 
functioning in the worlds of waking and dream, entering on the 
state of ignorance, enjoys his own bliss. • 

He retires from his outward and inward activities and enters into 
his own nature. The principle of ignorance, of objectivity is present 
in the state of sleep though it is not manifest. 



II. 12. Paingala'Upanisad 913 

10. akasman mudgaradandadyais taditavad bhaydjndnabhyam 
indriya-samghataih kampann iva mrta-tulyd murcHd bhavati. 

10. As if struck unawares by a hammer or a club, mani- 
festing itself as tremor due to fright or loss of consciousness, 
caused by the fusing together of the several organs of percep-' 
tion is the state of fainting which resembles the state of a dead 
man. 


DEATH 

11. jdgrat-svapna-susupti-murchdvasthdndm any a brahmdd- 
istampa-paryanlam sarva-jiva-bhaya-pradd sthula-dehavisarjani 
marandvasthd bhavati. karmendriydni jndnehdriydni tat-tad-vis- 
ayan prdnan samhtya kdrria-karmdnvitd avidyd-bhiitavestito jivo 
dehdntarfim prdpya lokdntaram gacchati. prdk karma-phala- 
pakend.vartdntara-kitavad visrdntim naiva gacchati. satkarma - 
paripdkato bahundm janmandm ante nrndm moksecchd jay ate. 

11. What is different from the waking, ^dreaming, sleeping 
and fainting states, what instils fear into (the hearts of)*all living 
creatures from Brahma (the creator) to a tuft of grass, what 
causes the giving up of the gross body, that is the state of 
dying. After drawing together the organs of action and the 
organs of perception, their respective functions and the vital 
airs, the soul attended with desire and conduct (in the form 
of impressions left by conduct) and wrapped up in elements 
of ignorance goes to another world after attaining another body. 
Through the ripening of the fruits of his \rA st actions he does 
not attain any rest, like a worm caught within a whirlpool. 
The desire for liberation arises i'n human beings at the end of 
many births through the ripening of their past virtuous conduct. 

See B.G. VII. 19. 

BONDAGE AND RELEASE 

12. tadd sad-gurum dsritya cira-kdla-scvayd bandliam mdksam 
kascit praydti. aviedrakrto bandho vicdrdn mokso bhavati; tasmdt 
sadd vicar ay et. adhydropapaviidatah svarupam niscayikartum 
sakyate. tasmdt sadd viedrayej jagaj-jlva-paramdtmdno jwa-bhdva- 
jagad-bhdva-bddhe pratyag abhinnaw, brahmaivdvasisyata iti. 

12. Then, after resorting to a good teacher and servmg him 
for a long time he questions him as to the nature of bondage 
and release. Bondage produced by the Ijck of investigation 



II. 12 . 


914 The Principal Upanisads 

becomes release by (proper) investigation. Therefore one should 
always inquire. It is possible to determine the nature of the 
self through the way of super-imposition (of qualities that do 
not belong to it) and denial. Therefore one should always inquire 
into the nature of the world, the individual and the supreme 
self. With the denial of the (ultimate) reality of the soul and 
the world, the innermost self non-differentiated from Brahman 
alone remains. 

The way of superposition and denial is developed by S in his 
Introduction to S.B. 



III. 2. PaihgalaUpanisad 915 

CHAPTER III 

MEDITATION AND HIGHEST ENLIGHTENMENT 

1 . atha hainampaingalahpapracchaydjnavalkyam, mahd-vakya- 
vivaranam anubruhiti. 1 

1. Then Paingala asked Yajnavalkya, please relate to me a 
detailed account of the great texts., 

2. sa hovdca ydjhavalkyas tat tvam asi, tvam tad asi, tvam 
brahmaspadam brahmdsmity anusandhanam kurydt; tatra parok- 
sya-sabalahsarvgjhatvddi-laksanomayopddhihsac-cid-dnanda-lak- 
sano *jagad-yonis tad-pada-vdcyo bhavati ; sa evdntah-karana- 
sambhinnabodho' smdt pratyayavalambanas tvam-pada-vdcyo 
bhavati , parajivopadhimdyavidye vihdya tat-tvam-pada-laksyam 
pratyagabhinnam brahma; tattvamasity aham brahmasmiti vak- 
yartha-vicdrah sravanam bhavati; ekantena sravandirthdnusand - 
hdnam mananam bhavati; sravana-manana-nirvicikitserthe 
vastuny ekatdnavattayd cetah’sthdpanam nid ; dhydsanam bhavati; 
dhydtrdhyane vihdya nivdtasthita dipavad dhyeyaikagocaram 
cittam samddhir bhavati; taddnhn dtma-gocardvrttayah samntthitd 
ajhdtd bhavanti; tdh smaranad anumiyante; ihanddisamsare 
samcitdh karma-kotayo f nenaiva vilayam ydnti; tato’bhydsapdtavdt 
sahasrasah sadd amrtadlidrd varsati; tato yoga-viitamdh samddhim 
dharma-megham prdlmh; v d sand- j die nihsesam am and pravildpite 
karma-samcaye punya-pdpe samulonmidite prdk paroksam api 
kara-taldmalakavad vakyam apratibaddhdparoksa-sdksdt-karam 
prasuyate; tadd jivan-mukto bhavati. 

2. Yajnavalkya replied to him: One shoijld engage in medi- 
tation of the kind ‘That thou art/ ‘Thou art the seat of 
Brahman / ‘I am Brahman / Therein the imperceptible per- 
sonal Lord with the qualities of omniscience and others, endowed 
with the power of maya, of the character of being, consciousness 
and bliss, the source of the world is (what is connoted byj the 
word ‘that’ (of the text). That alone, being influenced by^the 
inner sense, supported by the conception of self (I-conception) 
is (what is connoted by) the word ‘thou' (of the text). Giving 
up the power of maya and ignorance which envelop (the tlvo), 
the supreme and the individual soul, what is meant by the 
terms ‘that', and ‘thou' becomes Brahman which is non- 
distinct from the self. The investigation into the import of the 
texts ‘That thou art,' I am Brahman is hearing. Exclusive 
attention to the meaning of what is heard is reflection. The 



916 The Principal Upanisads III. 3. 

fixing of thought with one-pointed attention solely on the 
object attained through hearing and reflection is meditation. 
The thought absorbed only in the object meditated upon, giving 
up the distinction of the meditator and the act of meditation 
^resembling a lamp in a windless spot attains the highest 
enlightenment. In that state, when the functionings directed 
towards the cognition of the self are roused (the intuitions of 
the self), are not cognised but only inferred from memory. 
Through this the numberless previous k^rmas accumulated 
during this beginningless cycle of births and deaths attain their 
dissolution. Thence, through the power of practice, a stream 
of nectar showers always from a thousand directions. The r efore 
the adepts in yoga call this highest enlightenment ‘the cloud 
of virtue/ When the nets of dispositions (good and bad) are 
dissolved without any residue, when the accumulated deeds, 
virtuous and vicious, are completely destroyed, to the very roots, 
the past and the future alike, owing to the removal of all im- 
pediments bring about the direct and immediate perception (of 
Brahman) as of the amalaka fruit, on the palm of the hand. Then 
(the knower of Brahman) becomes one liberated while in life. 

sabalah: mixed. The Absolute is viewed as the personal lord with 
maya or the power of manifestation. Though sac-cid-dnanda , he is 
the source of the world, jagad-yoni . 

srayana: the four stages of hearing, reflection, meditation and 
direct intuition, dtma-darsana , heic called samddhi are explained. 
The truths of the sacred texts are endorsed by personal eiiort and 
experience. See Introduction XIX. 
a lamp in a windless spat: see B.G. VI. 19. 

inferred from memory: when the intuition is no more felt, when it 
lapses from consciousness, we have only a memory of it. 
dharma-megha: the cloud of virtue. The realised soul is virtuous by 
nature. 

3. tsah paiici-krla-bhdtdndm apahei-karanam karlam so’kdma- 
yatq; brahmanda ladgata-lokdn kdrya-rupdms ra kdranatvam 
prapUyitvd, tatah, suksmdngam karmendriydni prdndms ca 
jhanendriydny antah-karana-catusiayam caikikrtya , sarvdni bhauti - 
kdrii karane bhuta-pancake samyojya bhumimjale t jalam vahnau , 
vahnim vdyau, vdyum dkdse, cdkdsam ahamkdre , cdhamkdram 
mahati, mahad avyakte , avyaktam puruse krawena villyate; 
virdddhiranyagarbhesvard upddhi-viiayat param-atmani llyante; 
panci-krta-wiahd-bhuta-sambhava-karma-sariicila-sthrda-dehah kar - 
maksaydt sat-karyna-tparipdkato paiici-karanam prdpya siiksmen - 



HI. 4. Paingala Upanisad 917 

aikibhutvd karana-rupatvam asddya tat-kdranam kutqsthe pratyag- 
dtmani villyaie; visva-taijasa-prdjnah svasvopadhi-laydt pratyag- 
atmani liyante; andam jnandgnind dagdham kdranaih saha 
paranv-atmani Imam bhavati; tato brdhmanah samdhito bhutvot , 
tat-tvam-padaikyam eva sadd kurydt; tato meghdpayaVmsumdn 
ivdtmdvirbhavati; dhyatvd madhyastham dtmdnam kalasantara-di- 
pavad; angustha-mdtram dtmdnam adhuma-jyoti-rupakam. 4 

3. Isvara developed the desire to disquintuplicate the quin- 
tuplicated elements. After causing the macrocosms, the worlds 
comprised in them and other effects to recede into their (ante- 
cedent) causal form, after making into one the subtle body, 
the organs of actions, the life principles, the organs of per- 
ception and the fourfold inner sense, and after merging all 
elements® in the fivefold causal elements, he causes earth to 
dissolve in water, water in fire, fire in air, air in ether, ether 
in the self-sense, the self-sense in the great, the great in the 
unmanifested and the unmanifested in the self in due order. 
The Virat, the Hiranya-garbha and the Supreme Lord, owing 
to the dissolutions of their respective adjuncts, lapse into the 
Supreme Self. The gross body composed of the quintuplicated 
great elements, organised through the accumulated (past) 
karma, owing to the destruction of karma and the ripening 
of the fruits of good karma, becoming one with the subtle body, 
attaining the form of the causal body, causes the causal body 
to merge in the unchanging inner self. The three states of Visva, 
Taijasa, Prdjha, on account of the dissolution of their adjuncts 
merge in the inner self. The microcosm being burnt (and purified) 
by the fire of knowledge becomes merged along with its causes 
in the Supreme Self. Therefore let the Brahmana, after becoming 
possessed of self-control engage in meditation incessantly on 
the identity of That and Thou. Thereafter, even as the sun 
shines with all his splendour on the dissipation of the clouds, 
the self manifests himself. After meditating on the self seated 
in the middle (of the heart) like a lamp placed inside a vessel, 
of the size of a thumb and of the form of smokeless flame" (the 
self manifests himself). 

The order of involution is the reverse of the order of evolution. 
The subordination of the world, world-soul and the Supreme Lord 
to the Ultimate Reality is suggested Lerc. The logical priority of 
Brahman to these three is to be understood. * 

4. prakdsayantam antahstham dhydyct kutastham avyayam 
dhydyan ndste munis caiva cdsupter dmrtes tu yah . 



III. 6. 


918 The Principal Upanisads 

4. One should meditate on the unchanging, imperishable that 
is inside, manifesting (the diverse functions). The sage who is 
continuously engaged in meditation till he goes to sleep or is 
overtaken by death. 

5. jivanmuktas sa vijheyali sa dhanyah krta-krtyavan 
jivanmuktapadam tyaktvd svadehe kdlasatkrtc 
visatya deha-muktatvam pavano’ spandatam iva. 

5. He should be known as one liberated while alive (in this 
body). He is blessed and is of fulfilled duties. After giving up 
the state of being liberated while alive, when the time arrives 
for his quitting the body, he enters on the state of disembodied 
liberation even as the air attains the state of non-movement. 

6. asabdam, asparsam, ariipam, avyayam, tathd rasan nityam, 

agandhavac ca yat. 

anddy anantam, mahatah param, dhruvam, tad eva sisyaty 
amalam, nirdmayam. , 

6. (Ho attains tne state) that is devoid of sound, devoid of 
touch, devoid of forms, devoid of wasting, likewise devoid of 
taste, that is eternal, and devoid of smell, having neither 
beginning nor end, that transcends the Great, constant, that 
alone remains, which is flawless and free from ailing. 

It is the supreme state which is negatively described; it is oneness 
with the transcendent Brahman. 



IV. 4. 


Paingala Upanisad 


919 


CHAPTER IV 

i. atha hainam painga\ah papraccha yajnavalkyam , jhaninah 
kirii karma ka ca sthitir iti. sa hovdca ydjnavalkyah; amanitvddi 
samparlno mumuksur eka-vimsati-kulam tarayati; brahma-vin- 
matrepa kulam ekottara-satam tarayati: 

dtmanam rathinam viddhi sariram ratham eva ca 
buddhim tu sdrathim viddJii manah pragraham eva ca, 

1. Then the sage Paingala asked Yajnavalkya: What is the 
(nature ,of) action* of a knower? What is his condition? 
Yajnavalkya replied unto him: The seeker after liberation 
endowed with h&mility and other good qualities carries (safely) 
across* (the ocean of worldly existence) twenty-one generations 
of his class. The moment he becomes a knower of Brahman 
he carrier across one hundred and one generations of his class. 
Know the self as the lord of the chariot and the body as verily, 
the chariot. Know the intellect as the charioteer and the mind 
as, verily, the reins. 

See Katha I. hi. 2 ff. 

2. indriydni hay an dhur visaydms tesn gocardn . 
jangamdni vimdndni hrdaydni manisinah. 

2. The senses, they say, are the horses and the objects (of 
the senses) the paths (they range over). The hearts of the 
knowers (of Brahman) are so many air chariots. 

3. atmendriya-mano-yuktam bhoktety dhur \naharsayah 
tato ndrdyaiiah sdksat hr day e supratisthitah. 

3. (The self) associated with the body, the senses and the 
mind, the great sages declare, is the enjoyer. Therefore, 
Nardyana is actually established (as the self) in the hearts (of 
all beings). The seeker alter Goti, after becoming one with God, 
becomes the self of all beings. 

4. prdrdbdhcC-karma-paryantam ahinirmokavad vyavahatati 
candravac car ate dehi sa muktas edniketanah. 

4. As long as his previously commenced karma remains 
unspent, he functions (very much) like the snake with the slough 
on. He who has attained liberation, though possessed of the 
body, wander about homeless like the moon (on the sky). 

His body does not fall off until the karmas which have started 
waking out reach their culmination. 

GG 



920 The Principal Upanisads IV. 9. 

5. tirthe svapaca-grhe vd tanum vihdya yati kaivalyam 
prdndin avakirya yati kaivalyam 
tam pascdd dig-balim kurydd athavd khananam caret, 
pumsah pravrajanam proktam netaraya kadacana. 

5. Casting off his body either in a place of pilgrimage or in 
the house of an eater of dog’s flesh (the knower) attains alone- 
ness. After scattering the vital airs he attains aloneness. After 
(the knower has run the appointed course of life and dies) his 
body should be cast away as an offering to the cardinal points; 
or else it may be buried. Only in the case of a male who is 
eligible for the order of monkhood is (burial) prescribed, never 
for others. 

dig-bali: food for appeasing the hunger of birds and the like. 

6 . ndsaucam nagni-karyam ca na pindam nodakakriyd 
na kuryat parvanddlni brahma-bhntdya bhiksave. 

6. No pollution (is to be observed by blood relations), no 
rituals connected with the funeral -fire, no oblations (in the form 
of balls "’of cooked rice) nor offerings of water nor rituals on 
new moon and other days should be adopted for the (departed) 
mendicant who has become fyahman. 

7. dagdhasya dahanam ndsti pakvasya pacanam yathd 
jiiandgni-dagdha-dehasya na ca sraddham na ca kriyd. 

j. Even as there is no cooking of food that has already been 
cooked, there is no cremation of the body (of a knower) which 
has already been burnt (in the fire of austerity). For one whose 
body has already been consumed by the fire of knowledge, there 
is no need for the performance of srdddha ceremonies or any 
other obsequies. 

8. ydvaccopadhi-paryantam tdvac chmrusayed gar urn , 
gurnvad gara-bhdrydydm tat pulresu ca vartanam. 

8. So long as there is the limitation (leading to differentiation 
between the teacher and tile pupil) so long the pupil should 
serve the teacher. He should behave with the teacher’s wife 
and his sons as he would with the teacher (himself). 

9. sitddha-mdnasah suddha-cid-rupah saliisnuh so’ ham asmi 
sahismih , sohamasmiti prdptc jhdncna vijhdne jveye param-at- 
mani hrdi samsthite dehc labdlia-santi-padarii gate tadd pra- 
bha-mano-buddhi-sunyam bhavati ; amrtena trptasya payasd kim 
prayojanam ; evam svdtmdnam jndtvd vedaih prayojanam kim 



IV. it. Paingala Upanisad 921 

bhavati; jhdndmrta-trpta-yogino na kirn cit kartavyam asti, tad asti 
cen na,satativa-vid bhavati. durastho'fti na diirasthah pindavarjitah 
pindavastho’ pi pratyagdlrua sarvavydpz bhavati , hr day am nir- 
malam krtva cintayitvdpy anamayam aham eva sarvam iti pasyet 
param sukham. 

9. With a purified mind, with a purified consciousness, full of 
forbearance, and in the attitude ‘I am he' full of forbearance, and 
when he gains the attitude ‘I am he,’ when the supreme self, \he 
basis of all knowledge gets firmly fixed in the heart, when the 
body attains the state of quiescence then does the mind scin- 
tillating with the intellect become void of its functionings. What 
is the.use of mifk to one satiated with nectar? Even so what 
is the use of the study of the Vedas for one who has perceived 
the Self? For the Yogin who is satisfied with the nectar of 
knowledge (of Brahman) there is nothing whatsoever that has 
yet to be achieved. If there is anything (still to be achieved), he 
is not*a knower of the truth. Remaining aloof, yet not aloof, 
remaining in the body, yet nqt of the body, yie innermost self, 
becomes the all-pervading {Brahman). After purifying the 
heart, thinking of Brahman the perfect (free from ailment), 
the Yogin should perceive that he is the all, the transcendent, 
the blissful. 

10. yalhd jalc jalam ksiptam , ksirc ksTram, ghrte ghrtam, 
aviscso bhavet tadvaj jivdtma paramdtmanoh. 

10. As water poured into water, milk poured into milk, ghee 
into ghee becomes one without differentiation, even so the 
individual soul and the Supreme Self (become one). 

1 he state of liberation is here suggested to be oneness with the 
Absolute Self. 

11. dchc jhanena dlpite btlddliir akhanddkdra-riipd yadd 
bhavati , tadd vidvdn brahma-jhdndgina sarva-bandharh nirdahet, 
t atali pavitram 9 paramesvardkhyam, advaita-rupam , vimaPdfn- 
bardbham yathodake toyam anupravistam tathdtma-rupo niru- 
padhi-samsthitah. 

11. When the body is lit (with the flame of) knowledge, wken 
the understanding becomes indivisible in form, then the knower 
should burn all the bonds with the fire of the knowledge of 
Brahman. Then he who has attained the form of the self, jirmly 
established in the state without limitations should enter on the 
state hallowed, that is known as the supreme lord, that is of 



922 The Principal Upantsads IV. 17. 

non-dual form, that resembles ether devoid of impurities, like 
water that has flown into water. 

The state of liberation is described not as that of a fish in water 
'' but as that of a dewdrop in the sea. Complete identity is maintained. 

12. dkdsavat suksmasarlra dtmd na drsyate vayuvad antardtma 
sa bdhydm abhyantara niscaldtmd jhdnolkayd ■ pasyati 
cdntardtmd. 

12. The self that has a subtle body like the ether, that self 
immanent in all beings is not seen like the air. (That) self is 
motionless both outside and inside. The self immanent in all 
beings perceives with the torch of knowledge. 

13. yatra yatra mrto jhdnl yena vd kena mrtyund 
yathd sarva-gatam vyoma tatra tatra lay am gata/j. 

13. Wheresoever the knower may die, whatever may be the 
manner of death, at that very place he becomes merged (in 
Brahman) even as the all-pervading ether. 

14. ghatdkdsam ivdtmdnam vilayam vetti tattvatah 
sa gacchati nirdlambam jhdndlokam samantatah. 

14. The knower who knows the self to be indissoluble, like 
the ether of the pot, reaches independence with the range of 
his knowledge (spreading) on all sides. 

»As the ether in the pot gets dissolved in the all-pervading ether 
when the limitations are broken, even so the liberated individual 
is lost in the universal self. 

15. taped varsa-sahasrdni cka-pdda-sthito narah 
etasya dhyana-yogasya kaldrh ndrhati sodas 1 m. 

15. A man may perform penance standing on one leg for 
a thousand years (yet his austerities) do not deserve a sixteenth 
part of the merit of concentrated meditation. 

The verse brings out the superiority of dhy ana-yoga to tapas . 

16. idam jhdnam, idaw j hey am, tat sarvam jUditum icchati, 
api varsa-sahasrdyuh sdstrdntam nddhi gacchati. 

j6. One desires to know all about what constitutes know- 
ledge and what has to be known, but even if he should live 
for a thousand years he does not get to the end of the (study 
of the) scriptures. 

1 7. vijheyo f ksara tanmdtro jlvitam vdpi cahcalam , 
vihdya sdstra-jdldni yat satyam tad updsyatam. 



IV. 22. Paingala Upanisad 923 

17. What is to be known is the subtle imperishable existence 
while one's life is unsteady. (Therefore) giving up the network 
of scriptures (which are many and endless), let the truth be 
meditated on. 

18. ananta-karma saucarii ca japo yajnas tathaiva ca 
ti/tha-yatrabhigamanam ydvat tattvam na vindati. 

18. (It is only) so long as the seeker does not attain know- 
ledge of the real that endless ceremonies, observances of purity, 
prayers,, likewise performance of sacrifices, visits to places of 
pilgrimage! (arc prescribed by the scriptures). 

All these are not ends in themselves. They arc means to the 
realisation of the eternal. 


19. ahain brahmeti niyatftm moksa lietur mahdtmandm 
dve padc bandha-moksdya na mameti mameti ca. 

19. For the great souled, the surest way to liberation is the 
conviction that I am Brahman. The two terms, what leads to 
bondage and what leads to liberation, arc th^ sense of qjineness 
and the absence of the sense of mineness. 


Selfishness or looking upon the body and the world as one’s own, 
as means to one’s enjoyment causes bondage. The realisation that 
the body and the world are external to the true self and the con- 
sequent universality of spirit lead to liberation. 


20. mameti badhyate jantur nirmameti vimucyate , 
manaso hy unmanibhdve dvaitam naivojyalabhyatc. 

20. With the sense of mineness the soul is bound; with the 
absence of the sense of mineness it is liberated. When the mind 
rises to the state of illumination, the sense of duality is never 
attained. 


21. yadd yaly unmanlfthdvas kidd tat paramam padam 
yalra yatra mano ydti tatra tatra par am padam. 

21. When the seeker attains the state of illumination then 
he (attains) the*highcst state. Wheresoever his mind'goes thfcre 
is the highest state. 

22. tatra tatra par am brahma sarvatra samavasthitam 
hanydn mustibhir dkdsam ksuddrtah khandayet tusam. 

22. There is the transcendent Brahman well established 
everywhere. However much one toilnentcd by hunger strikes 
with his fisticuffs the ether round him or chews (any amount 
of) chaff (his hunger is not appeased) . 



924 The Principal Upanisads IV. 24. 

THE REWARD FOR THE STUDY OF THIS UPANISAD 
* 

23. naham brahmeti jandti tasya muktir na jayate. ya etad 
upanisadam nityam adhite so’gni-piito bhavati, sa vdyu-puto 
bhavati, sa aditya-piito bhavati , sa brahma-puto bhavati , sa vis- 
nu-puto bhavatiy sa rudra-puto bhavatiy sa sarvesu tirthesu sndto 
bhavatiy sa sarvesu vedesv adhito bhavatiy sa sarva-veda-vrata-car- 
ydiu carito bhavati, tenetihdsa-purdnandm rudrdndm sata-sahas y dni 
japtani phalani bhavanti , pranavanam ayutam japtam bhavati , 
dasa-piirvdndasottardnpundti , sa pahkti-pdvano bhavati, sa mahdn 
bhavati, brahmahatya-surdpana-svarnasteya-gurutalpagamana-tat 
samyogipdtakebhyah puto bhavati. 

tad visnoh paramam padam sadd pasyanti s ur ay ah 

divtva caksur dtatam. 

23. For him who docs not know '"' I am Brahman , liberation 
does not arise. He who studies this Upanisad every day becomes 
hallowed as by fire; he becomes hallowed by air; he becomes 
hallowed by the sun; he becorijes hallowed by Brahma; he 
become® hallowed by Visnu; he becomes hallowed by Rudra. 
He attains the merit of bathing in all the sacred waters. He 
becomes accomplished in the study of all the Vedas. He becomes 
disciplined in the. performance of all the vows prescribed in 
the Vedas. By him are attained the fruits resulting from a 
hundred thousand recitals of the Itihdsas, the Pur anas and the 
Riidras. By him has been repeated the syllable pranava (aum) 
myriads of times. He sanctifies ten previous and ten future 
generations. He sanctifies the rows of people with whom he 
dines. He becomes a great-souled one. He becomes freed from 
the sins of killing'a Brahmana, drinking liquor, stealing gold, 
sharing the bed with the teacher’s wife and associating with 
those who have committed these sins. 

That is the highest state of Visnu ’(the all-pervader) which 
the sages see constantly as the eye spreads towards the heaven. 

£4. tad viprdso vipanyavo jdgrvdmsah samindhate 
visnor yat paramam padam. satyam ity upanisat. 

24. These knowers of Brahman , with their passions cast aw.'"/, 
th&r inner senses alert, expound clearly that highest state of 
Visnu. This is the truth, (this is) the Upanisad. 



KAIVALYA UPANISAD 

The Upanisad belongs to the Atharva Veda and is called 
Kaivalya Upanisad as it§ study and practice lead to the state 
of Kaivalya or aloneness. 




Kaivalya Upanisad 92 7 

KA 1 VALYA UPANISAD 

1. athdsvaldyano bhagavantam paramesthinam parisametyo- 
vdca. 

adhthi bhagavan brahma-vidydm varisthdm sudd sadbhift m 
scvyamdndm nigildhdm. 

yaydcirdt sarva-pdpam vyapohya paratparam purusam 
upaiti vidvdn. 9 

1. Then Asvala^ana approached the Venerable Lord Brahma 
and said:. Teach (me), Venerable Sir, the knowledge of Brahman, 
supreme, sought constantly by the wise, hidden, that by which 
the lyiower is soon freed from impurities and attains the person 
greater than the great. 

at ha: theyi, after having prepared himself for the acquisition of 

wisdom. 

yaya*yathd, as. 

2. tasmai s a hovdea pitamahas ca iraddha-bhakti-dhyepna-yogdd 

avchi, 

na karmand na prajayd dhanena tydgenaike amrtatvam 
(1 nasi t/i. 

2. Brahma the grandsire said to him (Asvalayana) : Seek 
to know (Brahman) by faith, devotion, meditation and con- 
centration. Not by work, not by offspring, or wealth; only by 
renunciation does one reach life eternal. 

3. parena ndkdm nihitam guhdydm bibhrajad etad yatayo 
visanii. 

3. It is higher than heaven, shines in the cave of the heart. 
Those who strive (for it) enter into it. • 

4. vcddnta-vij ndna-juniscitdrthdh samnydsa-yogdd yatayahsud- 

dha-satlvdh. # 

te braltma-lokcsu pardntakdle pardmrtdh parimneyanti 
sarve. • 

4. The ascetics who have ascertained well the meaning of the 
Vedanta knowledge, who have purified their natures through 
the path of renunciation, they (dwelling) in the worlds of 
Brahma, at # the end of time, being one with the immortal, are 
all liberated. 


GG 5 


Sec M.U. III. 2. 0. 



928 The Principal Upanisads 8. 

5. vivikta-dese ca sukhasanasthah sucih samagnvasirah sarirah. 
antyds’ramasthah sakalendriyani nirudhya bhaktya svagu- 
rum pranamya t 

5. In a solitary place, seating oneself in an easy posture, 
» with a pure heart, with the head, neck and body straight, in 

the last order of life, controlling all the senses, bowing with 
devotion to the teacher. 

in the last order of life: atydsramasthah is another reading, ‘having 
passed beyond all orders of life.* 

6. hrt pundarikam virajam visuddhath vifintya madhye 

visadam visokam 

acintyam, avyaktam , ananta-rupam , sivam, prasantam, 
amrtam, brahma-yonim . « 

6. Meditating on the lotus of the heart, devoid oi passion 
and pure, in the centre of which is the pure, the sorrowles.s, the 
inconceivable, the unmanifest, of infinite form, the blissful, 
the tranquil, the irpmortal, the source of Brahma. 

Brahma is the creator, the world-spirit. 
viraja: devoid of passion or the quality of rajas. 

7. tam ddi madhyd n ta -vih l n dm ekam vibhttm cid-dnandam arn- 

pam adbhutam 

umdsahdyam paramesvaram prabhum trilocanam nila - 
' kantham prasantam 

dhydtvd manir gacchati bhuta-yonim samasta-sdksirh tama- 
sah parastdfl. 

7. Him who is without beginning, middle or end, who is 
one, all-pervading, 'who is wisdom and bliss, who is formless, 
wonderful, who has Uma as his companion, the highest lord, 
the ruler,* who is the three-eyed, who has a dark throat, who 
is tranquil; by meditating on him the sage reaches the source 
of beings, the witness -of all, who is beyond (all) darkness. 

who pas a dark throat. Siva is said to have taken the poison which 
came to the* top when the ocean was churned, and kept it in his 
throat. 

8. 'sa brahma sa sivah sendrah so’ksarah par amah svardt, 

sa eva visnuh sa prdnah sa kdlo’gnih sa candramdli. 

8. He is Brahma (the creator); he is Siva (th< judge), he 
is Indra, he is the imperishable, supreme, the lord of himself. 
He is Visnu (the preserver), he is life, he is time, he is fire, he 
is the moon. 



14. Kaivalya IJpanisad 929 

9. sa eva sarvam yad bhutam yac ca bhavyam sandtanam, 
jhatvd tarn mrtyum atyeti nanyah panthd vimhktaye. 

9. He is all, what has # been and what shall be. He is eternal. 
By knpwing him one conquers death. There is no other way to. 
liberation. 

10. sarva-bhutastham dtmdnam sarva-bhutdni cdtmani 
sampasyan brahma paramam ydti ndnyena helitnd. 

10. By seeing the self in all beings and all beings in the self 
one goes to Brahman, not by any other cause. 

not by any other tause: there is no other way to liberation. 

11. dtmdnam aranirii krtvd prdnavam cottar dr anim, 
jhdna-nirmathandbhydsdt pdsam dahati panditah. 

11. Making one’s body the lower firestick and the syllable 
aum the upper firestick, by the effort of kindling (the flame of) 
knowledge, the knower burns the bond (of ignorance). 

See S.U. I. 14. 

pdsam: bond of ajndna. V. pdpam. He burns away the evil or the 
impurity. 

12. sa eva mdyd-parimohiidtma sarlram dsthdya karoti sarvam. 
stry-anna-pdnddi vicitra-bhogais sa eva jdgrat paritrptim eti. 

12. The same self veiled by maya attains a body and performs 
all work. In the waking state he attains satisfaction by *the 
varied enjoyments of women, food and drink. 

m 

13. svapne tn jlvas sukha-duhkha-bhoktd svamdyayd kalpita - 

visva-loke . • 

susupti-kdle sakale viline tamo } bhibhutas sukha-rupam eti. 

13. In the state of dream the self experiences happiness or 
sorrow in the worlds created l^y his own maya. In the state of 
dreamless sleep in which all things disappear, overcome by 
darkness, he experiences happiness. 

Sec Ma. U. 

visva-loke: v. jlva-loke. 

14. punas ca janmantara-karma-yogdt sa eva jlvah svllpiti 

prabuddhah. 

pura-tmye kridati yas ca jlvas tatas tu jatam sakalam 
vicitram. * • 

ddharam anandam abhanda-bodham yasmin lay am ydt 
pura-trayam ca. 



930 ' The Principal Upanisads 20. 

14. Again, he (the individual jiva) on account of his con- 
nection with the deeds of his past life wakes up and sleeps. 
He revels in the three states of consciousness (waking, dream 
and dreamless sleep) and from him all this varied vyorld is 
born. In him who is the support, who is the bliss, who is indi- 
visible wisdom are merged the three states of consciousness. 

The three bodies are the gross, the subtle and the causal ones. 

15. etasmdj jdyate prdno manas sarvendriydni ca } 
kham vdyur jyotir dpaJi prthivi visvasya dhdrinl 

15. From him are born life, mind and all 'chc senses; sky, 
air, light, water and earth which is the support of all existence. 

16. yatparam bralmia sarvdtmd viivasydyalanam mahat 
sdksmdt suksmataram nityam tat tvam eva tvam l eva tat. 

16. He is the supreme Brahman , the self of all, tho> chief 
foundation of this world, subtler than the subtle, eternal. 
That thou art; Thou art That. 

1 

17. jdgrat-svapna-susupty duli prapaheam yat prakdiate 
tad brahmdham iti jiidtvd sarva-bandhaih pramucyaie. 

17. The world which shines in the states of waking, dream 
and dreamless sleep, knowing that it is Brahman who 1 am, 
one is freed from all fetters. 

Cp. ay am dtmd brahma. 

18. trim dhdnuuu yad bhogyam bhoktd bhogas ca yad bhavet 
tebhyo vilaksanah sdksl cinmdtro’ham saddsivah. 

18. In the three states of r consciousness whatever appears 

as the object of enjoyment, or the enjoyer or the enjoyment, 
I am different from them, the witness (thereof), pure conscious- 
ness, the eternal Siva. 1 

19. nuiyy eva sakalam jditam, mayi sarvam pradsthitam, 

♦ may? sarvam layam ydti , tad brahmddvayam asmy aham. 
ig. From me all proceed, in me all exist, and to me all 
return. That Brahman without a second^ am I. 

See T.U. III. 

20. anor amydin ahayn eva tadvan ynahdn ahayh< visvam idam 
c vicitrayn. 

piirdtano'hayn^uruso’hayyijsohirayi-mayo'haiii^iva-rripam 

asmi. 



24 . Kaivalya TJpanisad 931 

20. I am subtler than the subtle, greater than the great. I 
am this manifold universe. I am the ancient, the person. I am 
the lord of golden hue. I ■am Siva. 

21. Updni-pddo'ham acintya-saktih pasydmy acaksuh sa srnomy * 

akarnah , 

aharii vijdnami vivikta-rupo na cdsti vcttd , mama cit 
saddham. 

21. I am without hands and feet, of inconceivable powers. 
I see without eyes! I hear without ears. I know (all). I am of 
one form/ None knows me. I am always pure consciousness. 

22 . •vedair anekair aham $va vedyah , vcdanta-hrd veda-vid eva 

edit am: 

na punyapdpe mama ndsli ndsah , na janma dehendriya- 

bnfldhir asti, 

22. # I am the One to be known through the many Vedas. 
I am the maker of the Vedanta and the knower of the Vedas. 
Merit or demerit I have none (do not affegt me). There is no 
destruction for me, no birth or body, senses or intellett. 

23. na bluimir dpo mama vahnir asti, na cdnilo mcsli na 

cdmbarani ca , • 

evam viditvd paramdtma-rupam guhdsayam niskalam 
advitiyam 

samasta-sdksim , sad-asad-vihinam praydti sudd ham para- 
mdtma-rupam. 

23. I have not earth, water, fire, air, eiher. Knowing the 
nature of the Supreme Self, dwelling in the cave of the heart, 
stainless without a second; the -witness of # all, free from (the 
duality of) existent and non-existent, he obtains the pure 

nature of the Supreme Self. 

• 

24. yah satarudrlyam adhite* sogni-piito bhavati, sa vdyu-puto 
bhavati, sa dtma-piito bhavati , sa surdp'anat pfito bhavati , sa 
brahma-hatydyih puto bhavati , sa suvarna-steydt pilto m bhavati, sa 
krtydkrtydt puto bhavati , tasmdd avimuktam dsrito bfmvati, 
atydsraml sarvadd sakrd vd japet. 

24. Whoever reads satarudrlya (this Upanisad connected 
with it) becomes pure as fire, he becomes pure as air, he becomes 
purified from (the fault of) stealing gold; he becomes purified 
from (the fault of) drinking liquor* he becomes purified from 
(the fault of) murdering a B^ahmana, he becomes purified from 
(the faults of) commission and omission. Therefore one should 



932 i The Principal Upanisads 25. 

strive to become freed (from these faults). He who has freed 
himself from the different orders of life should meditate (on 
this upanisad) constantly or occasionally. 

■ 25. anena jhdnam dpnoti sathsdrdrnava-ndsanam, 

tasmad evam vidittvainam kaivalyam padam asnute 
kaivalyam padam asnute. 

25. He obtains this wisdom which destroys the ocean of 
births and deaths. By knowing this he obtains the state of 
kaivalya, he obtains the state of kaivalya. ' 

Anyone who by faith, devotion and meditation, realises the Self 
and becomes one with the Supreme Brahman is released from the 
wheel of time and change, from sbrrow, birth and death. 



V A JRAStJCIKA UPANISAD 

The Upanisad belongs to the Sdma Veda and describes the 
true character of a Brahmana and incidentally olfers comments 
on the* nature of the Supreme Reality. The Upanisad is valuable 
in that it undermines caste distinctions based on birth. 




4 - 


935 


V A JRASVCIKA UPANISAD 

i. vajrasucim pravaksydmi jnanam ajnana-bhedanam 
dusanam jndna-hind\idm bhusanam jndna-caksusam. 

1. I .shall describe the Vajrasuci doctrine which blasts 
ignorance, condemns those who arc devoid of the knowledge (of 
lirahman) and exalts those endowed with the eye of knowledge. 

jnanam: doctrine. V. ( sdstr a : scripture. 

2. brahman a^ksatriya-vaisya-sudrd iti catvdro varndh; tesdm 
varndndm • brdhmana eva pradhdna iti veda-vacandnurupam 
smrtibhir apy nktam. talra codyam asti. ko vd brahmano ndima? 
kim jivah? kim dehah? kim jdtih?Jkim jnanam? kim karma? kim 
dhdrmika iti. 

2. The ^Brfihmana the Ksatriya, the Vaisva and the Siidra 
are the four classes (castes). That the Brahmana is the chief 
among these classes is in accord with the Vedic texts and is 
affirmed by the Smrtis. In this connection there is a point 
worthy of investigation. Who is, verily, thefBrahmanj.? Is he 
the individual soul? Is he the body? Is he the class based on 
birth? Is he the knowledge? Is he the deeds (previous, present 
or prospective) ? Is he the pcrforrAer of the rites? 

3. tatra prathamo jivo brdhmana iti cet tan na, atitdndga- 
tdncka-dehdndmjivasyaikariipatvdt. ckasydpi karm'a-vasad aneka - 
deha-sambhavdt sarva-sanrdndm jivasyaikanipatvdc ca, tasmdn 
na jivo brdhmana iti. 

3. Of these, if the first (position) that* the JIva or the 
individual soul is Brahmana (is to be assumed), it is not so; for 
the individual’s form is one and the same in the large number 
of previous and prospective bodies. Ev^n though the jlva (the 
individual soul) is one, jLhere is scope for (the assumption of) 
many bodies due to the stress of (past) karma, and in all these 
bodies the form of the jlva is one and It he same. Therefore 
the jlva is not the Brahmana. 

4. tarhi delio brdhmana iti cet tan na. acandaladi paryantdnam 
manusydndm pahca-bhatitikatvenadehasyaikarupatvdt;jard-m^ra - 
na-dharmddharmddi-sdmyadarsanat, brdhmanas sveta-varnah , 
ksatriyo rakta-varnah, vaisyah pita-varnah, sudrah krsna-varnaiti 
niyamdbhdvdt. pitradi-dahane putrddindm brahma-hatyadi-dosa - 
sambhavdc ca , tasmdn na deho brdhmana iti. 

4. Then if (it is said) that the body is the Brahmana, it is 



936 The Principal Upanisads 7. 

f 

not so, because of the oneness of the nature of the body which 
is composed of the five elements, in all classes of human beings 
down to the canddlds (outcastes), etg. ; on account of the per- 
ception of the common features of old age and death, virtue 
f and vice, on account of the absence of any regularity' (in the 
complexion of the four classes) that the Brahmana is of the 
white complexion, that the Ksatriya is of the red complexion, 
thtft the Vaisya is of the tawny complexion, that the Sudra 
is of the dark complexion and because of the liability of the 
sons and others (kinsmen) to becoming tainted with the murder 
of a Brahmana and other (sins) on cremating the bodies of their 
fathers and other kinsmen. Therefore the body is not the 
Brahmana. 

5. tarhi jdtir brahmana iti cet tan na; laira jdtyantprajantusv 
aneka-jdti-sambJiavd maharsayo bahavas santi, rsyasvhgo mrgydh , 
kausikah ktisdt, jdmbuko jambukdt , vdlmfko valmikdt, vydsah 
kaivarta-kanydydm , sasaprsthdt ggntamah , vasislha urvasydm , 
agastyah kalase jata iti srutatvdt, etesdm jdtyd vindpy agre 
jhdna-pratipdditd rsayo bahavas santi; tasmdn na jdtir brahmana 
iti. 

5. Then (if it is said) that birth (makes) the Brahmana, it is 
not so, for there are many species among creatures, other than 
human, many sages are of diverse origin. We hear from the 
sacked books that Rsyasrriga was born of a deer, Kausika of 
Kusa grass, Jambuka from a jackal, Valmlki from an ant-hill, 
Vyasa from a fisher girl, Gautama from the back of a hare, 
Vasistha from CrvasI (the celestial nymph), Agastya from an 
earthen jar. Among these, despite their birth, there are many 
sages, who have taken the highest rank, having given proof 
of their wisdom. Therefore birth does not (make) a Brahmana. 

« 

6 . tarhi jhdnam brahmana iti cet tan na; ksatriyddayohi 
paramdrthadarsanobhijnd bahavas santi , tasmdn na jhdnam 
brdnmana iti. 

6. Then (if it is said) that knowledge (makes a) Brahmana, it 
is i]ot so because among Ksatriyas and others there are many 
who have seen the Highest Reality and attained wisdom. There- 
fore knowledge does not (make) a Brahmana. 

7. tarhi karma brahmana iti cet tan na; sarvesam pranindm 

prdrabdha-sahcitdgdmi-karma-sddharmya-darsanat. karmdbhi - 



9. Vajrasucika JJpanisad 937 

preritdh santo jandh kriydh kurvantiti. tasman na karma 
brahman a iti. 

7. Then (if it is said) that work (makes a) Brahmana, it is 
not so, for we see that the work commenced in the present, 
embodiment or accumulated during the previous or to com- 
mence on a future embodiment is common to all living creatures 
and that good men perform works impelled by their past 
karma. Therefore work does not (make) a Brahmana. 

8. tarh\ dhdrmiko brahmana iti cet tan na; ksatriyddayo 
hiranya-ddtdro bahavas santi; taxman na dhdrmiko brahmana 
, iti. 

8. Then (if it is said) that th£ performer *of religious duties 
is a Brahmana, it is not so; for there have been many Ksatriyas 
and o the is who have given away gold. Therefore the performer 
of religious rites is not the Brahmana. 

Giving away gold is an act of religious duty. 

9. tarhi ko vd brdhmano ndma? yah kascid cMmdnam , advitiyam, 

jdti-guna-kriyd-hinam , sadurmi-sadbhdvetyddi-sarva-dosa-rahitam, 
salya-jhdndnandcinanta-svarnpam, svayam, nirvikalpam, asesa - 
kaipadheiram , aiesa-bhfitdntarydmitvena vartamdnam, antar-ba- 
hisc-dkdsavad anusyutam, akhanddnanda-svabhdvam, aprameyam, 
anubhavaikavedyam , aparoksataydbhdsamdnam , # karat aldmala - 
kavat sdksdt aparokslkrtya krtdrthatayd kdma-rdgddi-dosa-rakritah 
samddi-gnna sampanno bhdva-mdtsarya-irsnasd-mohddi-rahitah 
dambhdhamkdradibhir asamspvstacetd vartate* evam ukta-laksanu 
yah sa eva brahmana iti sniti-smrti-purdnctihdsdndm abhiprdyah; 
anyathd brahmanatva-siddhir nasty eva. sac-cicfadnandamdtmdnam, 
advitiyam, brahma bhdvayet , dtmanam , advitiyam, brahma 
bfuivayed ity ttpanisad. • 

9. Then, who, verily is the Brahmana? He who, after directly 
perceiving, like the amalaka fruit in the # palm of one’s hand, 
the Self, without a second, devoid of distinctions of Ijirth, 
attribute and* action, devoid of all faults such «is the # six 
infirmities, and the six states, of the form of truth, wisdom, 
bliss and eternity, that is by itself, devoid of determinations, 
the basis of endless determinations, who functions as*the 
indwelling spirit of all beings, who pervades the interior and 
the exterior ©f all like ether, of the # nature of bliss, indivisible, 
immeasurable, realisable only through one’s experience and 
who manifests himself directly (as one’s self), and through the 
fulfilment of his nature, beepmes rid of Jhe faults of desire, 



938 ' The Principal Upanisads 9. 

attachment, etc., and endowed with qualities of tranquillity, 
etc., rid of the states of being, spite, greed, expectation, bewil- 
derment, etc., with his mind unaffected by ostentation, self- 
.sense and the like, he lives. He alone who is possessed cf these 
qualities is the Brahmana. This is the view of the Vedic texts 
and tradition, ancient lore and -history. The accomplishment 
of tjie state of the Brahmana is otherwise impossible. Meditate 
on Brahman , the Self who is being, consciousness and bliss, 
without a second; meditate on Brahman , the Self who is being, 
consciousness and bliss without a second. This is the Upanisad. 

six infirmities: old age, death, sorrow, delusion, hunger and thirst. 
six states: birth, being, growth, change, waning and perishing. 

Many texts declare that the determining factor of caste is char- 
acter and conduct and not birth. * ,, 

srnu yaksa kulam tdta 11a svddhydyo na ca srutam 
kdranam vd dvijatvc ca vrttam eva na samsayah. f 

Listen about caste, Yaksa dear, not study, not learning is the 
cause of rebornness. ^Conduct is the basis, there is no doubt about it. 
M.B. Ardnya-parva 312. 10G. 

satyam, ddnam , ksamd, silam anrsamsyam tapo ghrnii 
drsyante yatra ndgendra sa brahmana iti smrtih. 

O King of serpents, he in whom are lfianifcst truthfulness, charity, 
forbearance, good conduct, non-injury, -austerity and compassion is 
a Brahmana according to the sacred tradition. 

'■yatraital laksyate sarpa vrttam sa breihmanas smrtah, 
yatraitan na bhavet sarvarii tarii sudram iti nir diset. 

O serpent he in w}iom this conduct is manifest is a Brahmana, he 
in whom this is absent treat all such as Sudra. M.B. Aranya-parva 
180. 20, 27. The gods consider him a Brahmana (a knower of Brahman 
who has no desires, who undertakes no work, who does not salute 
or praise anybody, whose, work has been exhausted but who himself 
is unchanged. 

nirdsisam andrambham nirnantaskdram astutim 
aksinam ksinakarmdnam tarn devd brdhmanam viduh. 

„ ' ’ M.B. X 11 . 2(x> 34. 

See' Dhammupada, Chapter XXVI. 

Sariatsujata defines a Brahmana as one who is devoted to truth: 
sa eva satydnndpaiti sa jncyo brahmanas tvaya. 

If is valuable to recall the teaching of this Upanisad which 
repudiates the system that consecrates inequalities and hardens 
contingent differences into inviolable divisions. 



939 


Appendix A 
APPENDIX A 
FOREWORD 

By Rabindranath Tagore 
to The Philosophy of the Upanisads 

Not bring a scholar or a student of philosophy, I do not feel 
justified in writing a critical appreciation of a book dealing 
with the philosophy of the Upanisads. What I venture to do 
is to express my satisfaction at the fact that my friend, Professor 
Radhakrishnan* has undertaken to explain the spirit of the 
Upanisads to English readers. 

It is not enough that one should know the meaning of the 
words and the grammar oi the Sanskrit texts in order to realize 
the deepPr significance of the utterances that have come to us 
across centuries of vast changes, both of the inner as well as 
the external conditions of life. Once the language in which 
these were written was living, and therefore the words con- 
tained in them had their full context in the life of tlfe people 
of that period, who spoke them. Divested of that vital atmo- 
sphere, a large part of the language of these great texts offers to 
us merely its philological structure and not life's subtle gesture 
which can express through suggestion all that is ineffable. 

Suggestion can neither have fixed rules of # grammar /ior 
the rigid definition of the lexicon so easily available to the 
scholar. Suggestion has its unanalysable 1 code which finds its 
depth of explanation in the living hearts # of the people who 
use it. Code words philologically treated appear childish, and 
one must know that all those experiences which are not realized 
through the path of reason, but immediately through an inner 
vision, must use some kind of code word for their expression. 
All poetry is full of such words, and therefore poems of one 
language can never be properly translated # into other languages, 
nay, not even *e-spoken in the same language. . # » 

For an illustration let me refer to that stanza of Keats' 
‘Ode to a Nightingale,' which ends with the following lines: — - 

The same that oft-times hath 
Charmed magic casements, opening on the foam 
• Of perilous seas, in faejy lands forlorn. 

• 

All these words have thei r synonyms in our Bengali lan- 
guage. But if through their help I try to understand these 



940 The Principal Upanisads 

lines or express the idea contained in them, the result would 
be contemptible. Should I suffer from a sense of race superiority 
in our own people, and have a low opinion of English literature, 
I could do nothing better to support my case than literally to 
translate or to paraphrase in our own tongue all the best poems 
written in English. 

Unfortunately, the Upanisads have met with such treatment 
in some parts of the West, and the result is typified disastrously 
in a book like Gough's Philosophy of the Upanisads. My 
experience of philosophical writings being extremely meagre, 
I may be wrong when I say that this is the only philosophical 
discussion about the Upanisads in English, but, at any rate, 
the lack of sympathy and respect displayed in it for 
some of the most sacred words that, have ever issued from the 
human mind, is amazing. * 

Though many of the symbolical expressions used in the 
Upanisads can hardly be understood to-day, or are sure to be 
wrongly interpreted, yet the messages contained in these, like 
some eternal source of light, still illumine and vitalize the 
religious mind of India. They are not associated with any 
particular religion, but they f have the breadth of a universal 
soil that can supply with living sap all religions which have any 
spiritual ideal hidden at their core/or apparent in their fruit 
and foliage. Religions, which have their different standpoints, 
eacn claim them for their own support. 

This has been possible because the Upanisads are based not 
upon theological reasoning, but on experience of spiritual life. 
And life is not dogmatic; in it opposing forces are reconciled — 
ideas of non-dualism and dualism, the infinite and the finite, 
do not exclude each other. Moreover the Upanisads do not 
represent the spiritual experience of any one great individual, 
but of a great age of enlighteinhent which has a complex and 
collective manifestation, like that of the starry world. Different 
creeds may find their sustenance from them, but can never set 
sectarian boundaries round them ; generations of men in our 
country, no mere students of philosophy, but seekers of life's 
fulfilment, may make living use of the texts, but can never 
exhaust them of their freshness of meaning. 

For such men the Upanisad-ideas are not wholly abstract, 
like those belonging to the region of pure logic. They are 
concrete, like all truths realized through life. The idea of 
Brahma when judged from the view-point of intellect is an 



Appendix A 941 

abstraction, but it is concictcly real for those who have the 
direct vision to see it. Therefore the consciousness of the 
reality of Brahma has baldly been described to be as real as 
the consciousness of an amlaka fruit held in one's palm. And 
the Upanisad says: — 

yato vaco niv art ante aprapya manasa saha 
dnandam brahmano vidvan na bibheti kadacana. 

From Him come bask bafjied both words and mind. But he who 
realizes th&joy of Brahma is Jree from fear. 

Cannot the same thing be said about light itself to men who 
may by some mischance live all through theit life in an under- 
ground world cut off from the sun's rays? They must know 
that words can never describe to them what light is, and mind, 
through ift reasoning faculty, can never even understand how 
one must have a direct vision to realize it intimately and be 
glad and free from fear. 

We often hear the complaint that the# Brahma of the 
Upanisads is described to us mostly as a bundle of negations. 
Are we not driven to take the same course ourselves when 
a blind man asks for a description of light? Have we not to 
say in such a case that light has neither sound, nor taste, nor 
form, nor weight, nor resistance, nor can it be known through 
any process of analysis? Of course it can be seen*; but what. is 
the use of saying this to one who has no eyes ? He may take that 
statement on trust without understanding m the least what 
it means, or may altogether disbelieve it, even suspecting in us 
some abnormality. . • 

Does the truth of the fact that a blind man has missed the 
perfect development of what should be normal about his 
eyesight depend for its pi oof upon the fact that a larger number 
of men are not blind? The very first creature which suddenly 
groped into the possession of its eyesight had the right to assert 
that light was a reality. In the human world there m^y be very 
few who have their spiritual eyes open, but, in spite of’the 
numerical preponderance of those who cannot see, their want 
of vision must not be cited as an evidence of the negation *of 
iight. 

In the Upanisads we find the note of certainty about the 
spiritual meaning of existence. In the very paradoxical nature 
of the assertion that we can never know Brahma, but can 
realize Him, there lies the strength of conviction that comes 



942 The Principal Upanisads 

from personal experience. They aver that through our joy 
we know the reality that is infinite, for the test by which reality 
is apprehended is joy. Therefore in the Upanisads satyam and 
* dnandam are one. Does not this idea harmonize with our 
everyday experience ? 

The self of mine that limits my truth within n^self confines 
mo to a narrow idea of •my own personality. When through 
some great experience I transcend this boundary I find joy. 
The negative fact of the vanishing of the fences of self has 
nothing in itself that is delightful. But my joy proves that the 
disappearance of self brings me into touch with a great positive 
truth whose nature is infinitude. My love makes me understand 
that I gain a great truth when I realize myself in others, 
and therefore 1 am glad. This has ‘■been thus expressed in the 
Isopanisad: — 

yas tn sarvani bhutdni atmany evdnupasyati 
sarvabhftesu cdtmdnam iato na vijugupsate. 

He who sees all creatures in himself, and himself in all creatures , 
no longer remains concealed. , 

His Truth is revealed in him when it comprehends Truth 
in others. And we know that in 'such a case we are ready 
for the utmost self-sacrifice through abundance of love. 

It has been said by some that the (dement of personality 
has altogether been ignored in tin* Brahma of the Upanisads, 
and thus our own personality, according to them, finds no 
response in the Infinite Truth. But then, what is the meaning 
of the exclamation: ' V eddhametani punisam mahdntam ! L 
have known him who is the Supreme Person. Did not the sage 
who pronounced it at the same time, proclaim that we are all 
amrtasya putrdh , the sons of tfie Immortal ? 

Elsewhere it has* been declared: tarn vedyam purusam veda 
yclhd ma, vo mrtyuh parivyathdh. Know him? the Person who 
only is to be known, so that death may not grieve thee. The 
meaning is obvious. We are afraid of death, because we an 
afraid of the absolute cessation of our personality. Therefore, 
if we realize the Person as the ultimate reality which we know 
in everything that we know, we find our own personality in 
the bosom of the eternal.' 

There are numerous verses in the Upanisads which speak of 
immortality. I quote one of these : — 



943 


Appendix A 

) 

esa devo viivakarmd mahatma 
sadd janandm hy day e sannivistah 
hr da manlsd manasabhiklpto 
ya etad tiidur amytas te bhavanti. 

1 his is the God who is the world-worker , the supreme soul , who 
always dwells in the heart of ail men , those who know him through 
their mind f and the heart that is fall of the certainty of knowledge , 
become immortal. 

To realize with 4he heart and mind the divine being who 
dwells within us is to be assured of everlasting life. It is 
mahatma , the great reality of the inner being, which is visva- 
karmd , the world-worker, whos$ manifestation is in the outer 
work occupying all time and space. 

Our ovjn personality al$o consists of an inner truth which 
expresses itself in outer movements. When we realize, not 
merely through our intellect, but through our heart strong 
with the strength of its wisdom, that Mahatma, the Infinite 
Person, dwells in the Person'which is in me* we cross over the 
region of death. Death only concerns our limited self; when 
the Person in us is realized in the Supreme Person, then the 
limits of our self lose for us their finality. 

The question necessarily arises, what is the significance of 
this self of ours ? Is it nothing but an absolute bondage for us ? 

If in our language the sentences were merely for expressing 
grammatical rules, then the using of such a language would be 
a slavery to fruitless pedantry But, because language has for 
its ultimate object the expression of ideas, our mind gains its 
freedom through it, and the bondage of grammar itself is a help 
towards this freedom. 

If this world were ruled only by some law of forces, then it 
would certainly have lfurt our mind at every step and there 
would be nothing that could give us joy /or its own sake. But 
the Upani ? ad says that from dnandam, from an inner spirit 
of Bliss, have'eome out all things, and by it they are main- 
tained. Therefore, in spite of contradictions, we have oifr joy 
in life, we have experiences that carry their fifial value for us. 

It has been said that the Infinite Reality finds its revelation 
in dnanda-rupam amrtam, in the deathless form of joy. The 
supreme end 3 of our personality al^o is to express itself in its 
creations. But works done through the compulsion of netessity, 
or some passion that blinds us and drags us on with its impetus, 



944 The Principal Upanisads 

are fetters for our soul; they clo not express the wealth of the 
infinite in 11 $, but merely our want or our weakness. 

Our soul has its anandam, its consciousness of the infinite, 
which is blissful. This seeks its expression in limits which, when 
•they assume the harmony of forms and the balance of’ move- 
ments, constantly indicate the limitless. Such expression is 
freedom, freedom from the barrier'of obscurity. Such a mediurfi 
of limits we have in our self which is our medium of expression. 
It is for us to develop this into dnanda-rupam amrtam , an 
embodiment of deathless joy, and only the*n the infinite in us 
can no longer remain obscured. 

This self of ours can also be moulded to gitfe expression to 
the personality of a business* man, or a fighting man, or a 
working man, but in these it does not reveal our supreme 
reality, and therefore we remain shut up in a prison of our 
own construction. Self finds its ananda-rupam , which is its 
freedom in revelation, when it reveals a truth that transcends 
self, like a lamp revealing light t which goes far beyond its 
material, limits, proclaiming its kinship with the sun. When 
our self is illuminated with the light of love, then the negative 
aspect of its separateness with others loses its finality, and 
then our relationship with others is no longer that of competition 
and conflict, but of sympathy and co-operation. 

I feel strongly that this, for us, is the teaching of the 
Upanisads, and that this teaching is very much needed in the 
present age for those who boast of the freedom enjoyed by 
their nations, using that freedom for building up a dark world 
of spiritual blindness, where the passions of greed and hatred 
are allowed to roaih unchecked, having for their allies deceitful 
diplomacy and a widespread propaganda of falsehood, where 
the soul remains caged ’and the self battens upon the decaying 
flesh of its victims. 



Appendix B 945 

APPENDIX B 

AN INTRODUCTION 
By Edmond Holmes 
to The Philosophy of the Upanisads 

Professor Radhakrishnan’s work on Indian Philosophy , ’the 
first volume of wJjrich has recently appeared, meets a want 
which has long been felt. The Western mind finds a difficulty 
in placing itseliat what I may call the dominant standpoint 
of Indian thought, a difficulty which is the outcome of cen- 
turies of divergent tradition, ahd which therefore opposes a 
formidable obstacle to whatever attempt may be made by 
Western Scholarship and criticism to interpret the speculative 
philotf)phy of India. If we of the West are to enter with some 
measure of sympathy and understanding into the ideas which 
dominate, and have long dominated, the Indian mind, India 
herself must expound them to us. Our interpreter must be an 
Indian critic who combines the acuteness and originality of 
the thinker with the learning anjl caution of the scholar, and 
who has also made such a study of Western thought and Western 
letters as will enable hirti to meet his readers on common 
ground. If, in addition to these qualifications, hb can speak to 
us in a Western language, he will be the ideal exponent of that 
notorious philosophy which is known to most of us more by 
hearsay than by actual acquaintance, and which, so far as 
we have any knowledge of it, alternately fascinates and 
repels us. 

All these requirements are answered by Professor Radha- 
krishnan. A clear and .deep thinker, an acute critic and an 
erudite scholar, he is admirably qualified for the task which 
he has set himself of expounding to a ‘lay’ audience the main 
movements of. Indian thought. His knowledge pf Western 
thought and letters makes it easy for him to get into touch 
with a Western audience; and for the latter purpose he has the 
further qualification, which he shares with other cultured 
Hindus, of being a master of the English language and an 
accomplished writer of English prose. 

But the first volume of Indian Philosophy contains over 
700 closely printed pages, and costs a guinea; and it is not 
every one, even of those who are interested in Indian thought. 



946 The Principal Upanisads 

who can afford io devote so much time to serious study, while 
the price, though relatively most reasonable, is beyond the 
means of many readers. That being so, it is good to know 
that Professor Radhakrishnan and his publisher have decided 
to bring out the section on The Philosophy of the Upanisads as 
a separate volume and at a modest price. 

For what is quintessential in Indian philosophy is its spiritual 
idealism; and the quintessence of its spiritual idealism is in 
the Upanisads. The thinkers of India in al^ ages have turned 
to the Upanisads as to the fountain-head of India’s speculative 
thought. ‘They arc the foundations,’ says Professor Radha- 
krishnan, ‘on which most of the later philosophies and religions 
of India rest. . . . Later systems of philosophy display an 
almost pathetic anxiety to accommodate their doctrines to 
the views .of the Upanisads, even if they cannot father them 
all on them. Every revival of idealism in India has traced its 
ancestry to the teaching of the Upanisads.' ‘There is no 
important form of^Hindu thought,' says an English exponent 
of Indian philosophy, ‘heterodox Buddhism included, which 
is not rooted in the Upanisads.' 1 It is to the Upanisads, then, 
that the Western student rqust turn for illumination, who 
wishes to form a true idea of the general trend of Indian 
thought, but has neither time nor inclination to make a close 
stuejy of its vaiious systems. And if he is to find the clue to the 
teaching of the Upanisads he cannot do better than study it 
under the guidance of Professor Radhakrishnan. 

It is true that treatises on that philosophy have been 
written by Western scholars. But the Western mind, as has 
been already suggested, is as a rule debarred by the prejudices 
in which it has been cradled from entering with sympathetic 
insight into ideas which belong to another world and another 
age. Not only does it tend to survey those ideas, and the 
problems in which tney centre, from standpoints which are 
distinctively Western, but it sometimes goes so fer as to assume 
that the Western is the only standpoint which is compatible 
with mental sanity. Can we wonder, then, that when it criticize . 
the speculative thought of Ancient India, its adverse judgment 
is apt to resolve itself into fundamental misunderstanding, 
and even its sympathy is sometimes misplaced? 

In Gough’s Philosophy of the Upanisads we have a con- 
temptuously hostile criticism of the ideas which dominate 
1 Bloomfield: The Religion of the Veda. 



Appendix B 947 

that philosophy, based on obstinate misunderstanding of the 
Indian point of view — misunderstanding so complete that 
our author makes nonsepse of what he criticizes before he has 
begun to study it. In Dcussen's work on the same subject — a 
wopk of close thought and profound learning which deservedly 
commands respect — we have a singular combination of enthu- 
siastic- appreciation with complete misunderstanding on at 
least one vital point. Speaking of* the central conceptioh of 
the Upanisads, that of the ideal identity of God and the soul, 
Gough • says, 'this empty intellectual conception, void of 
spirituality, is the highest form that the Indian mind is capable 
of/ Comment on this jugement saugrenn is needless. Speaking 
of the same conception, Deussen says, ‘it will be found to 
possess a significance reaching far beyond the Upanisads, their 
time and country; nay, we claim for it an inestimable value 
for the whole race of mankind . . . one thing we may assert 
with' confidence -whatever new and unwonted paths the 
philosophy of the future may strike out, this principle will 
remain permanently unshaken, and from it no deviation can 
take place/ This is high praise. But when our author goes on 
to argue that the universe is pure illusion, and claims that this 
is the fundamental view of the "Upanisads, he shows, as Pro- 
fessor Radhakrishnan ha?* fully demonstrated, that he has not 
grasped the true inwardness of the conception which he honours 
so highly. 

With these examples of the aberration of Western criticism 
before us, we shall perhaps think it desirable to turn for 
instruction and guidance to the exposition of the Upanisads 
which Professor Radhakrishnan, an Indian thinker, scholar 
and critic, has given us. If we do so, we shall not be dis- 
appointed. As the inheritor of a great philosophical tradition, 
into which he was born rathfer than indoctrinated, Professor 
Radhakrishnan has an advantage over ‘ the Western student 
of Indian philosophy, which no weight of learning and no 
degree of metaphysical acumen can counterbalance, and of 
which he has made full use. His study of the Upanisads- if a 
Western reader may presume to say so — is worthy of its tb?me. 

The Upanisads arc the highest and purest expression of 
the speculative thought of India. They embody the meditations 
on great matters of a succession of seers who lived between 
1000 and goo B.r. In them says Professor J. S. Mackenzie, ‘we 
have the earliest attempt at a constructive theory of the 



948 , The Principal Upanisads 

cosmos, and certainly one of the most interesting and 
remarkable.’ 

What do the Upanisads teach us?^ Its authors did not all 
think alike; but, taking their meditations as a whole, we may 
say that they are dominated by one paramount conception, 
that of the ideal oneness of the soul of man with the soul of 
the universe. The Sanskrit word for the soul of man is Atman, 
for 'che soul of the universe Brahman. ‘Gods dwelling place/ 
says Professor Radhakrishnan in his exposition of the philo- 
sophy of the Upanisads, ‘is the heart of man. The inner 
immortal self and the great cosmic power are one and the same. 
Brahman is the Atman, and the Atman is the Brahmaiy The 
one supreme power through which all things have been brought 
into being is one with the inmost self in each man’s heart.’ 
What is real in each of us is his self or soul. What -is real in 
the universe is its self or soul, in virtue of which its All is One, 
and the name for which in our language is God. And the indi- 
vidual soul is one, potentially antf ideally, with the divine or 
universal soul. In the words of one of the Upanisads: ‘He who is 
the Brahman in man and who is that in the sun, these are one.’ 

The significance of this conception is more than meta- 
physical. There is a practical side to it which its exponents 
are apt to ignore. The unity of the* all-pervading life, in and 
through its own essential spirituality -the unity of the trinity 
of God and Nature and Man -is, from man’s point of view, 
an ideal to be realized rather than an accomplished fact. 
If this is so, if oneness with the real, the universal, the divine 
self, is the ideal end of man’s being, it stands to reason that 
self-realization, the finding of the real self, is the highest task 
which man can set himself. In the Upanisads themselves the 
ethical implications of {heir central conception were' not fully 
worked out. To do so, to elaborate the general ideal of self- 
realization into a comprehensive scheme of lift', was the work 
of tjie great teacher whom we call Buddha. 

Th,js statement may seem to savour of paradox. In the West 
the idea is still prevalent that Buddha broke away completely 
from the spiritual idealism of the Upanisads, that he denied 
God, denied the soul, and held out to his followers the prospect 
of annihilation as the final reward of a righteous life. This 
singular misconception, which is not entirely confined to the 
West, is due to Buddha's agnostic silence having been mis- 
taken for comprehensive denial. It is time that this mistake 



Appendix B 949 

was corrected. It is only by affiliating the ethics of Buddhism 
to the metaphysics of the Upanisads that we can pass behind 
the silence of Buddha and get into touch with the philosophical 
ideas which ruled his mind, ideas which were not the less real 
or effective because he deliberately held them in reserve. This 
has long been my own conviction; and now I am confirmed 
in it by finding that it is shared by Professor Radhakrishnan, 
who sets forth the relation of Buddhism to the philosophy' of 
the Upanisads in tjie following woids: 'The only metaphysics 
that can justify Buddha’s ethical discipline is the metaphysics 
underlying the tjpanisads. . . . Buddhism helped to democratize 
the philosophy of the Upanisads, which was till then confined 
to a select few. The process dclnanded thal the deep philo- 
sophical truths which cannqt be made clear to the masses of men 
should for practical purposes be ignored. It was Buddha’s 
mission to accept the idealism of the Upanisads at its best and 
make it available for the daily needs of mankind. Historical 
Buddhism means the spread «f the UpanisarJ doctrines among 
the people. It thus helped to create a heritage which 3 s living 
to the present day.’ 

Given that oneness withhisown r^al self, which is also the soul of 
Nature and the spirit of God, union with the ultimate is the ideal 
end of man’s being; the question arises: How is that end to be 
achieved?, Tn India, the' land of psychological experiments, many 
ways to it were tried and are still being tried. There was the 
way of jndna, or intense mental concentration. There was 
the way of bliakti, or passionate love and devotion. There was the 
way of Yoga, or severe and systematic self-discipline. These ways 
and the like of these might be available for exceptionally gifted 
persons. They were not available, as Buddha saw clearly, for 
the rank and file of mankind. It was for the rank and file of 
mankind, it was for the plain average man, that Buddha devised 
his scheme of conduct. He saw that in one’s everyday life, 
among one’s feilow men, there were ample opportunities for 
the higher desires to assert themselves as higher, and fon the 
lower desires to be placed under due control. There were ample 
opportunities, in other words, for the path of self-mastery and 
self-transcendence, the path of emancipation from the false 
self and of affirmation of the true self, to be followed from day 
to day, from year to year, and even Tor Buddha, like tlu; seers 
of the Upanisads, took the reality of re-birth for granted— 
from life to life. He who walked in that path had set his face 




towards the goal of his own perfection, and, in doing so, had, 
unknown to himself, accepted the philosophy of the Upanisads 
as the ruling principle of his life. « 

If this interpretation of the life-work of Buddha is correct, 
if it was his mission to make the dominant idea of the Upanisads 
available for the daily needs of ordinary men^ it is impossible 
to assign limits to the influence which that philosophy has had 
ancl is capable of having in human affairs in general and 
in the moral life of man in particular. The metaphysics of 
the Upanisads, when translated into the ethics of self- 
realization, provided and still provides for a spiritual need 
which has been felt in divers ages and which was never more 
urgent than it is to-day. For v it is to-day, when supernatural 
religion is losing its hold on us, that the secret desire of the 
heart for the support and guidance which the religion- of nature 
can alone afford, is making itself felt as it has never bee^i felt 
before. And if the religion of nature is permanently to satisfy 
our deeper needs r it must take the form of devotion to the 
natural end of man’s being, the end which the seers of the 
Upanisads discerned and set before us, the end of oneness witl 
that divine or universal self which is at once the soul of ah 


things and the true being of each individual man. In other 
words, it is as the gospel of spiritual evolution that the religion 
of nature must make its appeal to our semi-pagan f world. It 
was the gospel of spiritual evolution which Buddha, true to 
the spirit of the Upanisads, preached 2,500 years ago, 1 and it is 
for a re-presentation of the same gospel, in the spirit of the 
same philosophy, that the world is waiting now. 


1 It was the gospel of spiritual evolution which Christ preached m 
a later age, to a different, audience and through the medium of other 
forms of thought. Such at least is my earnest conviction. Of the twr 
pivotal sayings, ‘I and my Father &re one,’ and ‘Be ye perfect even a 
your Father which is ( in heaven is perfect,' the former falls into lir, 
with the spiritual idealism of the Upanisads, the latter into line wiU 
thfi ethical jdealism of Buddha. The notation, as might be expected, is 
different: but the idea and the ideal are the same. 



Biblio 

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY 


95i 


English Translations 

E. Roer: Nine Upanisads. 1853. 

F. Max Muller: The Upanisads. Sacred Books of the East. Vol. I. 

4879; Vol. II. 1884. 

G. R. S. Mead and J. C. Chattopadhyaya : The Upanisads. 2 Vols. 

• 1896. 

S. Sltarama Sastri and Ganganatha Jha: The Upanisads . 5 Vols. 
1898-1901. 

Sltanath Tattvabhu^m: The Upanisads. 2 Vols. 1900, 1904. 

S. C. Vasu: Isa , Kena, Katha , Prasna, Mundaka and Mandukya 
Upanisads. 1^)09. 

R. E. flume: The Thirteen Principal Upanisads. 1931. 

Swami Prabhavananda and Frederick Manchester: The Upanisads. 

I 947* 

Swami Nikhilananda: The Upanisads. 1951. 

English Translations of Single Upanisads 
• E. Roer: Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad. 1856. 

S. ('. Vasu: Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad , with the Commentary of Sri 
, Samkardcdrya. 1913 1916. 

1 Swami Madhavananda: Brhad-dranyaka Upanisad with Samkaras 
Commentary. 1934. ^ 

Rajendralal Mitra: Chduidogya Upanisad. 

S. C. Vasu: Chdndogya Upanisad with Commentary of Sri Madhvd- 
edryeu* 1917. 

H. M. Bhadkamkar: Aitareya Upanisad. 1899. 

S. C. Vidyarnava and Mohan Lai Sandal: Aitareya Upanisad. 1925. 
A. Mahadcva fiastri: Taittiriya Upanisad with' the Commentaries of 
Samkardcdrya, Smcsvardcduya and Say ana. 

S. C. Vidyarnava and Mohan Lai Sandal: Taittiriya Upanisad , 
text and translation with notes and commentaries. 1925. 

, Sr C. Va>.u and A. C. Thirlwall: Kena Upanisad, with the Sanskrit 
text, anvaya, vitti; word-meaning, translation, notes and 
j index. 1902. 

M. Hiriyanna: Kena Upanisad with the Commentary of Samkard- 
cdrya. 1912.* * ^ 

W. D. Whitney: Katha Upanisad, with the Sanskrit text, anvaya, 
vrtti, word-meaning, translation, notes and index, 1890. 

S. (\ Vasu: Katha Upanisad. 1905. 

R. L. Pelly: Katha Upanisad. Introduction, text, translation knd 
notes. 1924. 

Rawson: Kathn Upanisad. 1934. 

Krishna Prem: Katha Upanisad . 1 

1 No date is mentioned in the bbok. 

HH 



952 The Principal Upanisads 

Sir William Jones: Isa.Upanisad. 1799. 

S. C. Vasu and A. C. Thirlwali: Isa Upanisad. 1902. 

M. N. Dvivedi: Mdndukya Upanisad. 1894. 

Swami Nikhilananda: Mdndukya Upanisad. 

Siddhesvar Varma: The Svetdsvatara Upanisad. 1916. 

E. B. Cowell: Kausitaki Upanisad. 1861. 

S. C. Vidyarnava and Mohan Lai Sandal: The Kausitaki Upanisad , 
with notes and commentary. 1925. 

E. f B. Cowell: The Maitri or Maitrdyaniya Upanisad , with the 
commentary of Ramatirtha, edited with an English translation. 
1870. 


Expository and Critical Works 

A. E. Gough: The Philosophy of the Upanisads and Ancient Indian 

Metaphysics. 1882. 

Paul Deussen: The Philosophy of the Upanisads . E.T. 1906. 

L. D. Barnett: Brahma Knowledge. 1911. 

S. C. Vidyarnava: Studies in the first Six Upanisads. 1919. 

R. Gordon Milburn: The Religious Mysticism of the Upanisads. 1919. 

B. M. Barua: A Hirlory of Prc-Buddhislic Indian Philosophy. 1921. 

S. N. Dasgupta: History of Indian Philosophy. Vol. I. 1922. 

A. B. Keith: The Religion and Philosophy of the Veda and the 
Upanisads. 2 Vols. 1925. 0 

R. D. Ranade: A Constructive Survey of Upanisadic Philosophy. 

1926. 

S. K. Belvalkrr and R. D. Ranade: History of Indian Philosophy. 

Vol. II. The Creative Period: Biahmana and l panisadic 
Philosophy and post Upanisadic Thought, 1927. 







