ioio 


\o\o 

V-8 


THE 


SACRED  BOOKS  OF  THE  EAST 


[8] 


ILontron 

HENEY     FKOWDE 


OXFORD     UNIVERSITY     PRESS     WAREHOUSE 
7    PATERNOSTER   ROW 


THE 


SACRED  BOOKS  OF  THE  EAST 


TRANSLATED 


BY  VARIOUS  ORIENTAL  SCHOLARS 


AND    EDITED    BY 


F.   MAX    MULLER 


VOL.  VIII 


Wortr 

AT      THE     CLARENDON      PRESS 
1882 

[All  rights  reserved'} 


THE    BHAGAVADGITA 


THE    SANATSUCATIYA 


AND 


THE   ANUGlTA 


TRANSLATED   BY 


kAshinAth  trimbak  telang,  m.a. 


AT     THE     CLARENDON     PRESS 
1882 

[  All  rights  reserved  ] 


*v> 


CONTENTS. 


Bhagavadgita  : —  PAGE 

«£  Introduction i 

Translation  .         .         .         .         .         .         .         •       37 

Sanatsugatiya  : — 

Introduction  .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .     135 

Translation  .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .149 

Anugita  : — 

Introduction 197 

Translation .229 

Index  of  Principal  Matters    .         .         .         .         .         •     395 

Sanskrit  Index 439 


Transliteration    of    Oriental    Alphabets    adopted    for    the 

Translations  of  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  East  .         .443 


(7\  Of 


§10^7^ 


BHAGAVADGITA. 


[8] 


INTRODUCTION 

TO 

BHAGAVADGiTA. 

It  has  become  quite  a  literary  commonplace,  that — to 
borrow  the  words  of  Professor  Max  M tiller  in  one  of  his 
recent  lectures — history,  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word, 
is  almost  unknown  in  Indian  literature1.  And  it  is  certainly 
a  remarkable  irony  of  fate,  that  we  should  be  obliged  to 
make  this  remark  on  the  very  threshold  of  an  introduction 
to  the  Bhagavadgita ;  for  according  to  the  eminent  French 
philosopher,  Cousin2,  this  great  deficiency  in  Sanskrit  litera- 
ture is  due,  in  no  inconsiderable  measure,  to  the  doctrines 
propounded  in  the  Bhagavadgita  itself.  But  however  that 
may  be,  this  much  is  certain,  that  the  student  of  the  Bha- 
gavadgita must,  for  the  present,  go  without  that  reliable 
historical  information  touching  the  author  of  the  work,  the 
time  at  which  it  was  composed,  and  even  the  place  it 
occupies  in  literature,  which  one  naturally  desires,  when 
entering  upon  the  study  of  any  work.  More  especially  in 
an  attempt  like  the  present,  intended  as  it  mainly  is  for 
students  of  the  history  of  religion,  I  should  have  been  better 
pleased,  if  I  could,  in  this  Introduction,  have  concentrated 
to  a  focus,  as  it  were,  only  those  well  ascertained  historical 
results,  on  which  there  is  something  like  a  consensus  of 
opinion  among  persons  qualified  to  judge.  But  there  is  no 
exaggeration  in  saying,  that  it  is  almost  impossible  to  lay 
down  even  a  single  proposition  respecting  any  important 
matter  connected  with  the  Bhagavadgita,  about  which  any 
such  consensus  can  be  said  to  exist.  The  conclusions 
arrived  at  in  this  Introduction  must,  therefore,  be  distinctly 

1  Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  131. 

2  Lectures  on  the  History  of  Modern  Philosophy  (translated  by  O.W.Wight), 
vol.  i,  pp.  49,  50.  At  p.  433  seq.  of  the  second  volume,  M.  Cousin  gives  a 
general  view  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Gita.  See  also  Mr.  Maurice's  and  Ritter's 
Histories  of  Philosophy. 

[8]  B 


BHAGAVADGITA. 


understood  to  embody  individual  opinions  only,  and  must 
be  taken  accordingly  for  what  they  are  worth.  \y 

The  full  name  of  the  work  is  Bhagavadgita.  In  common 
parlance,  we  often  abbreviate  the  name  into  Gita,  and  in 
Sanskrit  literature  the  name  occurs  in  both  forms.  In  the 
works  of  vSahkara^arya,  quotations  from  the  Gita  are 
introduced,  sometimes  with  the  words  'In  the  Gita,'  or  'In 
the  Bhagavadgita,'  and  sometimes  with  words  which  may 
be  rendered  '  In  the  Gitas,'  the  plural  form  being  used 1. 
In  the  colophons  to  the  MSS.  of  the  work,  the  form  current, 
apparently  throughout  India,  is,  '  In  the  Upanishads  sung 
(Gitas)  by  the  Deity.'  >Sankara£arya,  indeed,  sometimes 
calls  it  the  ljvara  Gita2,  which,  I  believe,  is  the  specific  title 
of  a  different  work  altogether.  The  signification,  however, 
of  the  two  names  is  identical,  namely,  the  song  sung  by 
the  Deity,  or,  as  Wilkins  translates  it,  the  Divine  Lay. 

This  Divine  Lay  forms  part  of  the  Bhishma  Parvan  of  the 
Mahabharata — one  of  the  two  well-known  national  epics  of 
India.  The  Gita  gives  its  name  to  a  subdivision  of  the 
Bhishma  Parvan,  which  is  called  the  Bhagavadgita  Parvan, 
and  which  includes,  in  addition  to  the  eighteen  chapters  of 
which  the  Gita  consists,  twelve  other  chapters.  Upon  this 
the  question  has  naturally  arisen,  Is  the  Gita  a  genuine 
portion  of  the  Mahabhirata,  or  is  it  a  later  addition  ?  The 
question  is  one  of  considerable  difficulty.  But  I  cannot 
help  saying,  that  the  manner  in  which  it  has  been  generally 
dealt  with  is  not  altogether  satisfactory  to  my  mind.  Be- 
fore going  any  further  into  that  question,  however,  it  is 
desirable  to  state  some  of  the  facts  on  which  the  decision 
must  be  based.  It  appears,  then,  that  the  royal  family 
of  Hastinapura  was  divided  into  two  branches;  the  one 
called  the  Kauravas,  and  the  other  the  Pa/a/avas.  The 
former  wished  to  keep  the  latter  out  of  the  share  of  the 
kingdom  claimed  by  them ;  and  so,  after  many  attempts  at 

1  Ex.  gr.  Sariraka  Bh&shya,  vol.  ii,  p.  840.   It  is  also  often  cited  as  a  Smr/ti, 
ibid.  vol.  i,  p.  152. 

2  See  inter  alia  tfariraka  Bhashya,  vol.  i,  p.  455,  vol.  ii,  p.  687,  and  Cole- 
brooke's  Essays,  vol  i,  p.  355  (Madras) ;  Lassen's  edition  of  the  Gita,  XXXV. 


INTRODUCTION. 


an  amicable  arrangement  had  proved  fruitless,  it  was  deter- 
mined to  decide  the  differences  between  the  two  parties  by 
the  arbitrament  of  arms.  Each  party  accordingly  collected 
its  adherents,  and  the  hostile  armies  met  on  the  'holy 
field  of  Kurukshetra,5  mentioned  in  the  opening  lines  of  our 
poem.  At  this  juncture,  Krishna,  Dvaipiyana,  alias  Vyasa, 
a  relative  of  both  parties  and  endowed  with  more  than 
human  powers,  presents  himself  before  Dhrztarish/ra,  the 
father  of  the  Kauravas,  who  is  stated  to  be  altogether  blind. 
Vyasa  asks  Dhr/tarash/ra  whether  it  is  his  wish  to  look 
with  his  own  eyes  on  the  course  of  the  battle;  and  on 
Dlmtarashfra's  expressing  his  reluctance,  Vyasa  deputes 
one  Sang-aya  to  relate  to  DlWtar&sh/ra  all  the  events  of 
the  battle,  giving  to  San^aya,  by  means  of  his  own  super- 
human powers,  all  necessary  aids  for  performing  the  duty. 
Then  the  battle  begins,  and  after  a  ten  days'  struggle,  the 
first  great  general  of  the  Kauravas,  namely  Bhishma,  falls  \ 
At  this  point  Sang-aya  comes  up  to  Dhrztarashfra,  and 
announces  to  him  the  sad  result,  which  is  of  course  a  great 
blow  to  his  party.  Dhrztarash/ra  then  makes  numerous 
enquiries  of  San^aya  regarding  the  course  of  the  conflict, 
all  of  which  San^aya  duly  answers.  And  among  his 
earliest  answers  is  the  account  of  the  conversation  between 
Krishna  and  Arg*una  at  the  commencement  of  the  battle, 
which  constitutes  the  Bhagavadgtta.  After  relating  to 
Dhrztarash/ra  that  'wonderful  and  holy  dialogue,'  and  after 
giving  an  account  of  what  occurred  in  the  intervals  of  the 
conversation,  San^aya  proceeds  to  narrate  the  actual  events 
of  the  battle. 

With  this  rough  outline  of  the  framework  of  the  story 
before  us,  we  are  now  in  a  position  to  consider  the  opposing 
arguments  on  the  point  above  noted.  Mr.  Talboys  Wheeler 
writes  on  that  point  as  follows 2 :  '  But  there  remains  one 
other  anomalous  characteristic  of  the  history  of  the  great 
war,  as  it  is  recorded  in  the  Mahabhirata,  which  cannot 

1  The  whole  story  is  given  in  brief  by  the  late  Professor  Goldstiicker  in  the 
Westminster  Review,  April  1868,  p.  392  seq.  See  now  his  Literary  Remains,  II, 
104  seq. 

2  History  of  India,  vol.  i,  p.  293. 

B  2 


ehagavadgitA. 


be  passed  over  in  silence;  and  that  is  the  extraordinary- 
abruptness  and  infelicity  with  which  Brahmanical  discourses, 
such  as  essays  on  law,  on  morals,  sermons  on  divine  things, 
and  even  instruction  in  the  so-called  sciences  are  recklessly 
grafted  upon  the  main  narrative.  .  .  .  Krishna,  and  Ai^una 
on  the  morning  of  the  first  day  of  the  war,  when  both 
armies  are  drawn  out  in  battle-array,  and  hostilities  are 
about  to  begin,  enter  into  a  long  and  philosophical  dialogue 
respecting  the  various  forms  of  devotion  which  lead  to  the 
emancipation  of  the  soul ;  and  it  cannot  be  denied  that, 
however  incongruous  and  irrelevant  such  a  dialogue  must 
appear  on  the  eve  of  battle,  the  discourse  of  Krishna, 
whilst  acting  as  the  charioteer  of  Ar^*una,  contains  the 
essence  of  the  most  spiritual  phases  of  Brahmanical 
teaching,  and  is  expressed  in  language  of  such  depth  and 
sublimity,  that  it  has  become  deservedly  known  as  the 
Bhagavad-gM  or  Divine  Song.  .  .  .  Indeed  no  effort  has 
been  spared  by  the  Brahmanical  compilers  to  convert  the 
history  of  the  great  war  into  a  vehicle  for  Brahmanical 
teaching ;  and  so  skilfully  are  many  of  these  interpolations 
interwoven  with  the  story,  that  it  is  frequently  impos- 
sible to  narrate  the  one,  without  referring  to  the  other, 
however  irrelevant  the  matter  may  be  to  the  main  sub- 
ject in  hand.5  It  appears  to  me,  I  own,  very  difficult  to 
accept  that  as  a  satisfactory  argument,  amounting,  as  it 
does,  to  no  more  than  this — that  'interpolations/  which  must 
needs  be  referred  to  in  narrating  the  main  story  even  to 
make  it  intelligible,  are  nevertheless  to  be  regarded  'as 
evidently  the  product  of  a  Brahmanical  age1,5  and  pre- 
sumably also  a  later  age,  because,  forsooth,  they  are  irrele- 
vant and  incongruous  according  to  the  ( tastes  and  ideas *  5 — 
not  of  the  time,  be  it  remembered,  when  the  '  main  story  5 
is  supposed  to  have  been  written,  but — of  this  enlightened 
nineteenth  century.  The  support,  too,  which  may  be  sup- 
posed to  be  derived  by  this  argument  from  the  allegation 
that  there  has  been  an  attempt  to  Brahmanize,  so  to  say,  the 

1  History  of  India,  vol.  i,  p.  288 ;  and  compare  generally  upon  this  point  the 
remarks  in  Gladstone's  Homer,  especially  vol.  i,  p.  70  seq. 


INTRODUCTION. 


history  of  the  great  war,  appears  to  me  to  be  extremely 
weak,  so  far  as  the  Gita  is  concerned.  But  that  is  a  point 
which  will  have  to  be  considered  more  at  large  in  the 
sequel \ 

^While,  however,  I  am  not  prepared  to  admit  the  cogency 
of  Mr.  Wheeler's  arguments,  I  am  not,  on  the  other  hand,  to 
be  understood  as  holding  that  the  Gita  must  be  accepted 
as  a  genuine  part  of  the  original  Mahabharata.  I  own  that 
my  feeling  on  the  subject  is  something  akin  to  that  of  the 
great  historian  of  Greece  regarding  the  Homeric  question, 
a  feeling  of  painful  diffidence  regarding  the  soundness  of 
any  conclusion  whatever.  While  it  is  impossible  not  to 
feel  serious  doubts  about  the  critical  condition  of  the 
Mahabharata  generally;  while,  indeed,  we  may  be  almost 
certain  that  the  work  has  been  tampered  with  from  time  to 
time 2 ;  it  is  difficult  to  come  to  a  satisfactory  conclusion 
regarding  any  particular  given  section  of  it.  And  it  must 
be  remembered,  also,  that  the  alternatives  for  us  to  choose 
from  in  these  cases  are  not  only  these  two,  that  the  section 
in  question  may  be  a  genuine  part  of  the  work,  or  that  it 
ftiay  be  a  later  interpolation :  but  also  this,  as  suggested 
recently,  though  not  for  the  first  time,  by  Mr.  Freeman 3 
with  reference  to  the  Homeric  question,  that  the  section 
may  have  been  in  existence  at  the  date  of  the  original 
epos,  and  may  have  been  worked  by  the  author  of  the 
epos  into  his  own  production.  For  that  absence  of  dread, 
'  either  of  the  law  or  sentiment  of  copyright/  which  Mr. 
Freeman  relies  upon  with  regard  to  a  primitive  Greek  poet, 
was  by  no  means  confined  to  the  Greek  people,  but  may  be 
traced  amongst  us  also.  The  commentator  Madhusudana 
Sarasvati  likens  the  Gita  to  those  dialogues  which  occur  in 
sundry  Vedic  works,  particularly  the  Upanishads  4.  Possi- 
bly— I  will  not  use  a  stronger  word — possibly  the  Gita  may 

1  Infra,  p.  21  seq. 

2  Compare  the  late  Professor   Goldstiicker's  remarks  in  the  Westminster 
Review  for  April  1868,  p.  389. 

3  Contemporary  Review  (February  1879). 

4  Madhusudana  mentions  the  dialogue  between  Ganaka  and  Yag-navalkya  as 
a  specific  parallel. 


BHAGAVADGITA. 


have  existed  as  such  a  dialogue  before  the  Mahabharata, 
and  may  have  been  appropriated  by  the  author  of  the 
MahabMrata  to  his  own  purposes1.  But  yet,  upon  the 
whole,  having  regard  to  the  fact  that  those  ideas  of  unity 
on  which  Mr.  Wheeler  and  others  set  so  much  store  are 
scarcely  appropriate  to  our  old  literature ;  to  the  fact  that 
the  Gita  fits  pretty  well  into  the  setting  given  to  it  in  the 
Bhishma  Parvan  ;  to  the  fact  that  the  feeling  of  Ar^una, 
which  gives  occasion  to  it,  is  not  at  all  inconsistent,  but  is 
most  consonant,  with  poetical  justice;  to  the  fact  that  there 
is  not  in  the  Gitd,  in  my  judgment,  any  trace  of  a  sectarian 
or  '  Brahmanizing '  spirit 2,  such  as  Mr.  Wheeler  and  also 
the  late  Professor  Goldstiicker3  hold  to  have  animated  the 
arrangers  of  the  Mahabharata  ;  having  regard,  I  say,  to  all 
these  facts,  I  am  prepared  to  adhere,  I  will  not  say  without 
diffidence,  to  the  theory  of  the  genuineness  of  the  Bha- 
gavadgitci  as  a  portion  of  the  original  Mahabharata. 

The  next  point  to  consider  is  as  to  the  authorship  of  the 
Gita.  The  popular  notion  on  this  subject  is  pretty  well 
known.  The  whole  of  the  Mahabharata  is,  by  our  tradi- 
tions, attributed  to  Vyasa,  whom  we  have  already  noticed 
as  a  relative  of  the  Kauravas  and  PaWavas  ;  and  therefore 
the  Bhagavadgita,  also,  is  naturally  affiliated  to  the  same 
author.  The  earliest  written  testimony  to  this  authorship, 
that  I  can  trace,  is  to  be  found  in  Sankara&lrya's  commen- 
tary on  the  Gita  4  itself  and  on  the  Brzhadara/zyakopani- 
shad  5.  To  a  certain  extent,  the  mention  of  Vyasa  in  the 
body  of  the  Gita  would,  from  a  historic  standpoint,  seem  to 
militate  against  this  tradition.  But  I  have  not  seen  in  any 
of  the  commentaries  to  which  I  have  had  access,  any  con- 
sideration of  this  point,  as  there  is  of  the  mention  in  some 


1  See  to  this  effect  M.  Fauriel,  quoted  in  Grote's  Greece,  II,  195  (Cabinet  ed.) 

2  Compare  also  Weber's  History  of  Indian  Literature  (English  translation), 
p.  187.  The  instruction,  however,  as  to  'the  reverence  due  to  the  priesthood ' 
from  '  the  military  caste/  which  is  there  spoken  of,  appears  to  me  to  be  entirely 
absent  from  the  Gita;  see  p.  21  seq.  infra. 

3  Westminster  Review,  April  1868,  p.  388  seq. ;  and  Remains,  1, 104, 105. 

4  P.  6  (Calcutta  ed.,  Samvat,  1927). 

5  P.  841  (Bibl.  Indie,  ed.) ;  also  tfvetasvatara,  p.  278. 


INTRODUCTION. 


Smrztis  and  Sutras  of  the  names  of  those  to  whom  those 
Smrztis  and  Sutras  are  respectively  ascribed  \ 
v  We  must  now  leave  these  preliminary  questions,  un- 
luckily in  a  state  far  from  satisfactory,  and  proceed  to 
that  most  important  topic — the  date  when  the  Gita  was 
composed,  and  the  position  it  occupies  in  Sanskrit  litera- 
ture. We  have  here  to  consider  the  external  evidence 
bearing  on  these  points,  which  is  tantalizingly  meagre ; 
and  the  internal  evidence,  which  is,  perhaps,  somewrhat 
more  full.  And  taking  first  the  internal  evidence,  the 
various  items  falling  under  that  head  may  be  marshalled 
into  four  groups.  Firstly,  we  have  to  consider  the  general 
character  of  the  Gita  with  reference  to  its  mode  of  handling 
its  subject.  Secondly,  there  is  the  character  of  its  style 
and  language.  Thirdly,  we  have  to  consider  the  nature  of 
the  versification  of  the  Gitci.  And  fourthly  and  lastly,  we 
must  take  note  of  sundry  points  of  detail,  such  as  the  atti- 
tude of  the  Gita  towards  the  Vedas  and  towards  caste,  its 
allusions  to  other  systems  of  speculation,  and  other  matters 
of  the  like  nature.  On  each  of  these  groups,  in  the  order 
here  stated,  we  now  proceed  to  make  a  few  observations. 

And  first  about  the  manner  in  which  the  Gita  deals  with 
its  subject.  It  appears  to  me;  that  the  work  bears  on  the 
face  of  it  very  plain  marks  indicating  that  it  belongs  to  an 
age  prior  to  the  system-making  age  of  Sanskrit  philosophy. 
In  1875, 1  wrote  as  follows  upon  this  point :  'My  view  is,  that 
in  the  Gita  and  the  Upanishads,  the  philosophical  part  has 
not  been  consistently  and  fully  worked  out.  We  have 
there  the  results  of  free  thought,  exercised  on  different  sub- 
jects of  great  moment,  unfettered  by  the  exigencies  of  any 
foregone  conclusions,  or  of  any  fully  developed  theory.  It 
is  afterwards,  it  is  at  a  later  stage  of  philosophical  progress, 
that  system-making  arises.  In  that  stage  some  thinkers 
interpret  whole  works  by  the  light  of  some  particular  doc- 
trines or  expressions.  And  the  result  is  the  development 
of  a  whole  multitude  of  philosophical  sects,  following  the 
lead  of  those  thinkers,  and  all  professing  to  draw  their 

1  See,  as  to  this,  Colebrooke's  Essays,  vol.  i,  p.  328  (Madras). 


8  BHAGAVADGITA. 


doctrine  from  the  GM  or  the  Upanishads,  yet  each  dif- 
fering remarkably  from  the  other  V  Since  this  was  written, 
Professor  Max  Mtiller's  Hibbert  Lectures  have  been  pub- 
lished. And  I  am  happy  to  find,  that  as  regards  the 
Upanishads,  his  view  coincides  exactly  with  that  which  I 
have  expressed  in  the  words  now  quoted.  Professor  Max 
Muller  says  :  '  There  is  not  what  may  be  called  a  philoso- 
phical system  in  these  Upanishads.  They  are  in  the  true 
sense  of  the  word  guesses  at  truth,  frequently  contradicting 
each  other,  yet  all  tending  in  one  direction2.'  Further 
corroboration  for  the  same  view  is  also  forthcoming.  Profes- 
sor Fitz-Edward  Hall,  in  a  passage  which  I  had  not  noticed 
before,  says 3 :  '  In  the  Upanishads,  the  Bhagavadgita,  and 
other  ancient  Hindu  books,  we  encounter,  in  combination, 
the  doctrines  which,  after  having  been  subjected  to  modifi- 
cations that  rendered  them  as  wholes  irreconcileable,  were 
distinguished,  at  an  uncertain  period,  into  what  have  for 
many  ages  been  styled  the  SMkhya  and  the  Vedanta.' 
We  have  thus  very  weighty  authority  for  adhering  to  the 
view  already  expressed  on  this  important  topic.  But  as 
Professor  Weber  appears  to  have  expressed  an  opinion4 
intended  perhaps  to  throw  some  doubt  on  the  correctness 
of  that  view,  it  is  desirable  to  go  a  little  more  into  detail  to 
fortify  it  by  actual  reference  to  the  contents  of  the  Gitd, 
the  more  especially  as  we  can  thus  elucidate  the  true 
character  of  that  work.  Before  doing  so,  however,  it  may 
be  pointed  out,  that  the  proposition  we  have  laid  down  is 
one,  the  test  of  which  lies  more  in  a  comprehensive  review 
of  the  whole  of  the  Gita,  than  in  the  investigation  of 
small  details  on  which  there  is  necessarily  much  room  for 
difference  of  opinion. 

And  first,  let  us  compare  that  indisputably  systematized 
work,  the  current  Yoga-sutras5,  with  the  BhagavadgM  on  one 

1  See  the  Introductory  Essay  to  my  BhagavadgM,  translated  into  English 
blank  verse,  p.  lxvii.    See  also  Goldstiicker's  Remains,  I,  48,  77;  II,  10. 

2  P.  317;  cf.  also  p.  338. 

3  Preface  to  Sankhya  Sara,  p.  7  (Bibl.  Indie,  ed.) 

4  History  of  Indian  Literature,  p.  28. 

*  Are  we  to  infer  from  the  circumstance  mentioned  in  Weber's  History  of 


INTRODUCTION. 


or  two  topics,  where  they  both  travel  over  common  ground. 
In  the  Gita,  chapter  VI,  stanzas  33,34  (p.  7 1),  we  have  Ar^-una 
putting  what  is,  in  substance,  a  question  to  Krishna,  as  to 
how  the  mind,  which  is  admittedly  '  fickle,  boisterous,  strong, 
and  obstinate,'  is  to  be  brought  under  control — such  control 
having  been  declared  by  Krishna,  to  be  necessary  for  attaining 
devotion  (yoga)?  Krishna,  answers  by  saying  that  the  mind 
may  be  restrained  by  '  practice  (abhyasa)  and  indifference 
to  worldly  objects  (vairagya).'  He  then  goes  on  to  say, 
that  devotion  cannot  be  attained  without  self-restraint,  but 
that  one  who  has  self-restraint,  and  works  to  achieve  devo- 
tion, may  succeed  in  acquiring  it.  Here  the  subject  drops. 
There  is  no  further  explanation  of  'practice'  or  'indifference 
to  worldly  objects,'  no  exposition  of  the  mode  in  which 
they  work,  and  so  forth.  Contrast  now  the  Yoga-sutras. 
The  topic  is  there  discussed  at  the  very  outset  of  the  work. 
As  usual  the  author  begins  with  '  Now  therefore  the  Yoga 
is  to  be  taught.'  He  then  explains  Yoga  by  the  well-known 
definition  '  Yoga  is  the  restraint  of  the  movements  of  the 
mind.'  And  then  after  pointing  out  what  the  movements  of 
the  mind  are,  he  proceeds :  '  Their  restraint  is  by  means 
of  practice  and  indifference  to  worldly  objects  V — the  very 
terms,  be  it  remarked  in  passing,  which  are  used  in  the 
BhagavadgM.  But  having  come  thus  far,  the  author  of 
the  Sutras  does  not  drop  the  subject  as  the  author  of  the 
Gita  does.  He  goes  on  in  this  wise  :  'Practice  is  the  effort 
for  keeping  it  steady.5  '  And  that  becomes  firmly  grounded 
when  resorted  to  for  a  long  time,  without  interruption,  and 
with  correct  conduct.'  So  far  we  have  a  discussion  of  the 
first  requisite  specified,  namely,  practice.  Patan^ali  then 
goes  on  to  his  second  requisite  for  mental  restraint.  '  In- 
difference to  worldly  objects  is  the  consciousness  of  having 
subdued  desires  &c.  (Vaiikira  san^na)  which  belongs  to  one 
having  no  longing  for  objects  visible  and  those  which  are 
heard  of  (from  Sastras  &c,  such  as  heaven  and  so  forth). 

Indian  Literature  (p.  223,  note  235),  that  the  author  of  these  Sutras  was  older 
than  Buddha? 

1  Sutra  12,  Abhyasa-vairagyabhyaw  tannirodhafc. 


IO  BHAGAVADGiTA. 


He  next  proceeds  to  distinguish  another  and  higher  species 
of  'indifference,5  and  then  he  goes  on  to  point  out  the 
results  of  that  self-restraint  which  is  to  be  acquired  in  the 
mode  he  has  expounded.  That  is  one  instance.  Now  take 
another.  In  chapter  VI,  stanza  10  and  following  stanzas, 
the  Gita  sets  forth  elaborately  the  mode  of  practically- 
achieving  the  mental  abstraction  called  Yoga.  It  need  not 
be  reproduced  here.  The  reader  can  readily  find  out  how 
sundry  directions  are  there  given  for  the  purpose  specified, 
but  without  any  attempt  at  systematizing.  Contrast  the 
Yoga-sutras.  In  the  Sadhanapada,  the  section  treating  of 
the  acquisition  of  Yoga,  Patan^ali  states  in  the  twenty-ninth 
aphorism  the  well-known  eight  elements  of  Yoga.  Then 
he  subdivides  these  elements,  and  expatiates  on  each  of 
them  distinctly,  defining  them,  indicating  the  mode  of 
acquiring  them,  and  hinting  at  the  results  which  flow  from 
them.  '  That  inordinate  love  of  subdivision,'  which  Dr.  F. 
E.  Hall1  has  somewhere  attributed  to  the  Hindus,  appears 
plainly  in  these  aphorisms,  while  there  is  not  a  trace  of  it 
in  the  corresponding  passage  in  the  Bhagavadgita.  In  my 
opinion,  therefore,  these  comparisons  strongly  corroborate 
the  proposition  we  have  laid  down  regarding  the  unsys- 
tematic, or  rather  non-systematic,  character  of  the  work.  In 
the  one  we  have  definition,  classification,  division,  and  sub- 
division. In  the  other  we  have  a  set  of  practical  directions, 
without  any  attempt  to  arrange  them  in  any  very  scientific 
order.  In  the  one  you  have  a  set  of  technical  terms  with 
specific  significations.  In  the  other  no  such  precision  is 
yet  manifest.  In  one  word,  you  have  in  the  Gita  the  germs, 
and  noteworthy  germs  too,  of  a  system2,  and  you  have 
most  of  the  raw  material  of  a  system,  but  you  have  no 
system  ready-made. 

Let  us  look  at  the  matter  now  from  a  slightly  different 
point  of  view.  There  are  sundry  words  used  in  the  Bhaga- 
vadgita, the  significations  of  which  are  not  quite  identical 

1  In  the  Preface  to  his  Sankhya  Sara,  I  think. 

2  This  is  all  that  we  can  infer  from  the  few  cases  of  division  and  classifica- 
tion which  we  do  meet  with  in  the  Gita.  A  subject  like  that  treated  of  in  this 
work  could  not  well  be  discussed  without  some  classifications  &c. 


INTRODUCTION.  I  I 


throughout  the  work.  Take,  for  instance,  the  word  '  yoga,' 
which  we  have  rendered  '  devotion.'  At  Gita,  chapter  II, 
stanza  48  (p.  49),  a  definition  is  given  of  that  word.  In 
chapter  VI,  the  signification  it  bears  is  entirely  different. 
And  again  in  chapter  IX,  stanza  5,  there  is  still  another 
sense  in  which  the  word  is  used x.  The  word  '  Brahman ' 
too  occurs  in  widely  varying  significations.  And  one  of  its 
meanings,  indeed,  is  quite  singular,  namely,  *  Nature '  (see 
chapter  XIV,  stanza  3).  Similar  observations,  to  a  greater 
or  less  extent,  apply  to  the  words  Buddhi,  Atman,  and  Sva- 
bhava2.  Now  these  are  words  which  stand  for  ideas  not 
unimportant  in  the  philosophy  of  the  BhagavadgM.  And 
the  absence  of  scientific  precision  about  their  use  appears  to 
me  to  be  some  indication  of  that  non-systematic  character 
of  which  we  have  already  spoken. 

There  is  one  other  line  of  argument,  which  leads,  I  think, 
to  the  same  conclusion.  There  are  several  passages  in  the 
Giti  which  it  is  not  very  easy  to  reconcile  with  one  another ; 
and  no  attempt  is  made  to  harmonise  them.  Thus,  for 
example,  in  stanza  16  of  chapter  VII,  Krishna,  divides  his 
devotees  into  four  classes,  one  of  which  consists  of  i  men  of 
knowledge,'  whom,  Kr/sh/za  says,  he  considers  '  as  his  own 
self.'  It  would  probably  be  difficult  to  imagine  any  expres- 
sion which  could  indicate  higher  esteem.  Yet  in  stanza 
46  of  chapter  VI,  we  have  it  laid  down,  that  the  devotee  is 
superior  not  only  to  the  mere  performer  of  penances,  but 
even  to  the  men  of  knowledge.  The  commentators  betray 
their  gnostic  bias  by  interpreting  c  men  of  knowledge '  in 
this  latter  passage  to  mean  those  who  have  acquired  erudi- 
tion in  the  .S&stras  and  their  significations.  This  is  not  an 
interpretation  to  be  necessarily  rejected.  But  there  is  in  it 
a  certain  twisting  of  words,  which,  under  the  circumstances 
here,  I  am  not  inclined  to  accept.  And  on  the  other  hand, 
it  must  not  be  forgotten,  that  the  implication  fairly  deriva- 
ble from  chapter  IV,  stanza  38  (pp.  63,  63),  would  seem  to 


1  In  chapter  X  the  word  occurs  in  two  different  senses  in  the  same  stanza  (st.  7). 

2  Compare  the  various  passages,  references  to  which  are  collected  in  the 
Sanskrit  Index  at  the  end  of  this  volume. 


1 2  BHAGAVADGITA. 


be  rather  that  knowledge  is  superior  to  devotion — is  the 
higher  stage  to  be  reached  by  means  of  devotion  as  the 
stepping-stone.  In  another  passage  again  at  Gita,  chapter 
XII,  stanza  13,  concentration  is  preferred  to  knowledge, 
which  also  seems  to  me  to  be  irreconcileable  with  chapterVII, 
stanza  16.  Take  still  another  instance.  At  Gita,  chapter 
V,  stanza  15,  it  is  said,  that  'the  Lord  receives  the  sin  or 
merit  of  none.'  Yet  at  chapter  V,  stanza  29,  and  again  at 
chapter  IX,  stanza  24,  Krishna,  calls  himself  'the  Lord 
and  enjoyer '  of  all  sacrifices  and  penances.  How,  it  may 
well  be  asked,  can  the  Supreme  Being  e  enjoy'  that  which 
he  does  not  even  'receive?5  Once  more,  at  chapter  X, 
stanza  29,  Krishna,  declares  that  '  none  is  hateful  to  me, 
none  dear.'  And  yet  the  remarkable  verses  at  the  close  of 
chapter  XII  seem  to  stand  in  point-blank  contradiction  to 
that  declaration.  There  through  a  most  elaborate  series  of 
stanzas,  the  burden  of  Krzsrma's  eloquent  sermon  is  '  such  a 
one  is  dear  to  me/  And  again  in  those  fine  verses,  where 
Krishna,  winds  up  his  Divine  Lay,  he  similarly  tells  Arg*una, 
that  he,  Ar^una,  is  '  dear '  to  Krishna,.  And  Kr/sh;/a  also 
speaks  of  that  devotee  as  'dear'  to  him,  who  may  publish 
the  mystery  of  the  Gita  among  those  who  reverence  the 
Supreme  Being  \  And  yet  again,  how  are  we  to  reconcile 
the  same  passage  about  none  being  'hateful  or  dear'  to 
Krishna,,  with  his  own  words  at  chapter  XVI,  stanza  18 
and  following  stanzas  ?  The  language  used  in  describing 
the  '  demoniac '  people  there  mentioned  is  not  remarkable 
for  sweetness  towards  them,  while  Krishna,  says  positively, 
'  I  hurl  down  such  people  into  demoniac  wombs,  whereby 
they  go  down  into  misery  and  the  vilest  condition.'  These 
persons  are  scarcely  characterised  with  accuracy  '  as  neither 
hateful  nor  dear*  to  Krishna..  It  seems  to  me,  that  all 
these  are  real  inconsistencies  in  the  Gita,  not  such,  perhaps, 
as  might  not  be  explained  away,  but  such,  I  think,  as  indi- 
cate a  mind  making  guesses  at  truth,  as  Professor  Max 
Miiller  puts  it,  rather  than  a  mind  elaborating  a  complete 

1  And  see,  too,  chapterVII,  stanza  17,  where  the  man  of  knowledge  is  declared 
to  be  'dear'  to  Knshwa. 


INTRODUCTION.  1 3 


and  organised  system  of  philosophy.  There  is  not  even  a 
trace  of  consciousness  on  the  part  of  the  author  that  these 
inconsistencies  exist.  And  the  contexts  of  the  various 
passages  indicate,  in  my  judgment,  that  a  half-truth  is 
struck  out  here,  and  another  half-truth  there,  with  special 
reference  to  the  special  subject  then  under  discussion ;  but 
no  attempt  is  made  to  organise  the  various  half-truths, 
which  are  apparently  incompatible,  into  a  symmetrical 
whole,  where  the  apparent  inconsistencies  might  possibly 
vanish  altogether  in  the  higher  synthesis.  And  having 
regard  to  these  various  points,  and  to  the  further  point,  that 
the  sequence  of  ideas  throughout  the  verses  of  the  Gita  is 
not  always  easily  followed,  we  are,  I  think,  safe  in  adhering 
to  the  opinion  expressed  above,  that  the  Gita  is  a  non- 
systematic  work,  and  in  that  respect  belongs  to  the  same 
class  as  the  older  Upanishads. 

We  next  come  to  the  consideration  of  the  style  and 
language  of  the  Bhagavadgita.  And  that,  I  think,  furnishes 
a  strong  argument  for  the  proposition,  that  it  belongs  to  an 
age  considerably  prior  to  the  epoch  of  the  artificial  depart- 
ment of  Sanskrit  literature — the  epoch,  namely,  of  the 
dramas  and  poems.  In  its  general  character,  the  style 
impresses  me  as  quite  archaic  in  its  simplicity.  Compounds, 
properly  so  called,  are  not  numerous ;  such  as  there  are,  are 
not  long  ones,  and  very  rarely,  if  ever,  present  any  puzzle 
in  analysing.  The  contrast  there  presented  with  what  is 
called  the  classical  literature,  as  represented  by  Bana  or 
Da^in,  or  even  K&lidisa,  is  not  a  little  striking.  In 
Kalidasa,  doubtless,  the  love  for  compounds  is  pretty 
well  subdued,  though  I  think  his  works  have  a  perceptibly 
larger  proportion  of  them  than  the  GM.  But  after  Kali- 
dasa  the  love  for  compounds  goes  through  a  remarkable 
development,  till  in  later  writings  it  may  be  said  almost  to 
have  gone  mad.  Even  in  B&na  and  Dandin,  Subandhu 
and  Bhavabhuti,  the  plethora  of  compounds  is  often  weari- 
some. And  the  same  remark  applies  to  many  of  the  copper- 
plate and  other  inscriptions  which  have  been  recently 
deciphered,  and  some  of  which  date  from  the  early  cen- 


14  bhagavadgJta. 


turies  of  the  Christian  era.  Take  again  the  exuberance  of 
figures  and  tropes  which  is  so  marked  in  the  classical 
style.  There  is  little  or  nothing  of  that  in  the  GM,  where 
you  have  a  plain  and  direct  style  of  natural  simplicity,  and 
yet  a  style  not  by  any  means  devoid  of  aesthetic  merit 
like  the  style  of  the  Sutra  literature.  There  is  also  an 
almost  complete  absence  of  involved  syntactical  construc- 
tions ;  no  attempt  to  secure  that  jingle  of  like  sounds, 
which  seems  to  have  proved  a  temptation  too  strong  even 
for  Kalidasa's  muse  entirely  to  resist.  But  on  the  contrary, 
we  have  those  repetitions  of  words  and  phrases,  which 
are  characteristic,  and  not  only  in  Sanskrit,  of  the  style  of 
an  archaic  period1.  Adverting  specially  to  the  language 
as  distinguished  from  the  style  of  the  Gtta,  we  find 
such  words  as  Anta,  Bhasha,  Brahman,  some  of  which 
are  collected  in  the  Sanskrit  Index  in  this  volume,  which 
have  gone  out  of  use  in  the  classical  literature  in  the 
significations  they  respectively  bear  in  the  Gitci.  The 
word  '  ha/  which  occurs  once,  is  worthy  of  special  note.  It 
is  the  equivalent  of  'gha,'  which  occurs  in  the  Vedic 
Sa/^hitas.  In  the  form  'ha'  it  occurs  in  the  Brahma^as. 
But  it  never  occurs,  I  think,  in  what  is  properly  called  the 
classical  literature.  It  is,  indeed,  found  in  the  Pura^as. 
But  that  is  a  class  of  works  which  occupies  a  very  unique 
position.  There  is  a  good  deal  in  the  Purd/zas  that,  I  think, 
must  be  admitted  to  be  very  ancient 2 ;  while  undoubtedly 
also  there  is  a  great  deal  in  them  that  is  very  modern.  It 
is,  therefore,  impossible  to  treat  the  use  of  'ha'  in  that  class 
of  works  as  negativing  an  inference  of  the  antiquity  of 
any  book  where  the  word  occurs ;  while  its  use  in  Vedic 
works  and  its  total  absence  from  modern  works  indicate  such 
antiquity  pretty  strongly.  We  may,  therefore,  embody  the 
result  of  this  part  of  the  discussion  in  the  proposition,  that 

1  Compare  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  vol.  i,  p.  5.  See,  too,  Goldstiicker's  Remains, 
I,  177. 

2  This  opinion,  which  I  had  expressed  as  long  ago  as  1874  in  the  Introduction 
to  my  edition  of  Bhartr/hari's  tfatakas,  is,  I  find,  also  held  by  Dr.  Biihler ;  see 
his  Introduction  to  Apastamba  in  this  series,  p.  xx  seq.,  note.  Purawas  are 
mentioned  in  the  Sutta  Nipata  (p.  115),  as  to  the  date  of  which,  see  inter  alia 
Swamy's  Introduction,  p.  xvii. 


INTRODUCTION.  1 5 


the  Gita  is  removed  by  a  considerable  linguistic  and  chro- 
nological distance  from  classical  Sanskrit  literature.  And 
so  far  as  it  goes,  this  proposition  agrees  with  the  result  of 
our  investigation  of  the  first  branch  of  internal  evidence. 

The  next  branch  of  that  evidence  brings  us  to  the  character 
of  the  versification  of  the  Gita.  Here,  again,  a  survey  of 
Sanskrit  verse  generally,  and  the  verse  of  the  Gita  in  par- 
ticular, leads  us  to  a  conclusion  regarding  the  position  of  the 
Gita  in  Sanskrit  literature,  which  is  in  strict  accord  with 
the  conclusions  we  have  already  drawn.  In  the  verse  of  the 
Vedic  Sa/^hit&s,  there  is  almost  nothing  like  a  rigidly  fixed 
scheme  of  versification,  no  particular  collocation  of  long 
and  short  syllables  is  absolutely  necessary.  If  we  attempt 
to  chant  them  in  the  mode  in  which  classical  Sanskrit  verse 
is  chanted,  we  invariably  come  across  lines  where  the 
chanting  cannot  be  smooth.  If  we  come  next  to  the  versi- 
fication of  the  Upanishads,  we  observe  some  progress  made 
towards  such  fixity  of  scheme  as  we  have  alluded  to  above. 
Though  there  are  still  numerous  lines,  which  cannot  be 
smoothly  chanted,  there  are,  on  the  other  hand,  a  not 
altogether  inconsiderable  number  which  can  be  smoothly 
chanted.  In  the  Bhagavadgita  a  still  further  advance, 
though  a  slight  one,  may,  I  think,  be  marked.  A  visibly 
larger  proportion  of  the  stanzas  in  the  Gita  conform  to  the 
metrical  schemes  as  laid  down  by  the  writers  on  prosody, 
though  there  are  still  sundry  verses  which  do  not  so  conform, 
and  cannot,  accordingly,  be  chanted  in  the  regular  way. 
Lastly,  we  come  to  the  Kavyas  and  Na/akas — the  classical 
literature.  And  here  in  practice  we  find  everywhere  a  most 
inflexible  rigidity  of  scheme,  while  the  theory  is  laid  down 
in  a  rule  which  says,  that  *  even  masha  may  be  changed  to 
masha,  but  a  break  of  metre  should  be  avoided.'  This 
survey  of  Sanskrit  verse  may,  I  think,  be  fairly  treated  as 
showing,  that  adhesion  to  the  metrical  schemes  is  one  test 
of  the  chronological  position  of  a  work — the  later  the  work, 
the  more  undeviating  is  such  adhesion.  I  need  not  stay 
here  to  point  out,  how  this  view  receives  corroboration 
from  the  rules  given  on  this  subject  in  the  standard  work 


l6  BHAGAVADgJtA. 


of  Pingala  on  the  AT/£andas  .Sastra.  I  will  only  conclude 
this  point  by  saying,  that  the  argument  from  the  versification 
of  the  Gita,  so  far  as  it  goes,  indicates  its  position  as  being 
prior  to  the  classical  literature,  and  nearly  contemporaneous 
with  the  Upanishad  literature. 

We  now  proceed  to  investigate  the  last  group  of  facts 
falling  under  the  head  of  internal  evidence,  as  mentioned 
above.  And  first  as  regards  the  attitude  of  the  Gita  towards 
the  Vedas.  If  we  examine  all  the  passages  in  the  Gita,  in 
which  reference  is  made  to  the  Vedas,  the  aggregate  result 
appears  to  be,  that  the  author  of  the  GM  does  not  throw 
the  Vedas  entirely  overboard.  He  feels  and  expresses 
reverence  for  them,  only  that  reverence  is  of  a  somewhat 
special  character.  He  says  in  effect,  that  the  precepts  of 
the  Vedas  are  suitable  to  a  certain  class  of  people,  of  a 
certain  intellectual  and  spiritual  status,  so  to  say.  So  far 
their  authority  is  unimpeached.  But  if  the  unwise  sticklers 
for  the  authority  of  the  Vedas  claim  anything  more  for 
them  than  this,  then  the  author  of  the  Gita  holds  them 
to  be  wrong.  He  contends,  on  the  contrary,  that  acting 
upon  the  ordinances  of  the  Vedas  is  an  obstacle  to  the 
attainment  of  the  sum  mum  bonum1.  Compare  this  with 
the  doctrine  of  the  Upanishads.  The  coincidence  appears 
to  me  to  be  most  noteworthy.  In  one  of  his  recent  lectures, 
Professor  Max  M tiller  uses  the  following  eloquent  language 
regarding  the  Upanishads2 :  'Lastly  come  the  Upanishads; 
and  what  is  their  object?  To  show  the  utter  uselessness, 
nay,  the  mischievousness  of  all  ritual  performances  (compare 
our  Gita,  pp.  47,  48,  84s);  to  condemn  every  sacrificial  act 
which  has  for  its  motive  a  desire  or  hope  of  reward  (comp. 
Gita,  p.  1194) ;  to  deny,  if  not  the  existence,  at  least  the  ex- 
ceptional and  exalted  character  of  the  Devas  (comp.  Gita, 
pp.  76-84 5)  ;  and  to  teach  that  there  is  no  hope  of  salvation 
and  deliverance  except  by  the  individual  self  recognising  the 
true  and  universal  self,  and  finding  rest  there,  where  alone 
rest  can  be  found 6 '  (comp.  our  Git&  Translation,  pp.  78-83). 

1  Compare  the  passages  collected  under  the  word  Vedas  in  our  Index. 

2  Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  340  seq.  3  II,  42-45  ;  IX,  20,  21. 

4  XVII,  12.        5  VII,  21-23  J  IX,  23-24.        •  VIII,  14-16 ;  IX,  29-33. 


INTRODUCTION.  1 7 


The  passages  to  which  I  have  given  references  in  brackets 
will  show,  that  Professor  Max  M tiller's  words  might  all 
be  used  with  strict  accuracy  regarding  the  essential  teaching 
of  the  Bhagavadgita.  We  have  here,  therefore,  another 
strong  circumstance  in  favour  of  grouping  the  Gita,  with 
the  Upanishads.  One  more  point  is  worthy  of  note. 
Wherever  the  Gita  refers  to  the  Vedas  in  the  somewhat 
disparaging  manner  I  have  noted,  no  distinction  is  taken 
between  the  portion  which  relates  to  the  ritual  and  the 
portion  which  relates  to  that  higher  science,  viz.  the  science 
of  the  soul,  which  Sanatkumara  speaks  of  in  his  famous 
dialogue  with  Narada1.  At  Gita,  chapter  II,  stanza  45, 
Ar^-una  is  told  that  the  Vedas  relate  only  to  the  effects  of 
the  three  qualities,  which  effects  Ar^*una  is  instructed  to 
overcome.  At  Gita,  chapter  VI,  stanza  44,  Ar^una  is  told 
that  he  who  has  acquired  some  little  devotion,  and  then 
exerts  himself  for  further  progress,  rises  above  the  Divine 
word — the  Vedas.  And  there  are  also  one  or  two  other 
passages  of  the  like  nature.  They  all  treat  the  Vedas  as 
concerned  with  ritual  alone.  They  make  no  reference  to 
any  portion  of  the  Vedas  dealing  with  the  higher  know- 
ledge. If  the  word  Vedanta,  at  Gita,  chapter  XV,  stanza  15 
(p.  113),  signifies,  as  it  seems  to  signify,  this  latter  portion  of 
the  Vedas,  then  that  is  the  only  allusion  to  it.  But,  from  all 
the  passages  in  the  Gita  which  refer  to  the  Vedas,  I  am  in- 
clined to  draw  the  inference,  that  the  Upanishads  of  the  Vedas 
were  composed  at  a  time  not  far  removed  from  the  time  of 
the  composition  of  the  Gita,  and  that  at  that  period  the  Upa- 
nishads had  not  yet  risen  to  the  position  of  high  importance 
which  they  afterwards  commanded.  In  the  passage  referred 
to  at  chapter  XV,  the  word  Vedantas  probably  signifies 
the  Ara/zyakas,  which  may  be  regarded  as  marking  the 
beginning  of  the  epoch,  which  the  composition  of  the  Upa- 
nishads brought  to  its  close.  And  it  is  to  the  close  of  this 
epoch,  that  I  would  assign  the  birth  of  the  Gita,  which  is 

1  See  .KMndogya-upanishad,  p.  473,  or  rather  I  ought  to  have  referred  to  the 
Mundaka-upanishad,  where  the  superiority  and  inferiority  is  more  distinctly 
stated  in  words,  pp.  266,  267. 

[8]  C 


1 8  bhagavadg!tA. 


probably  one  of  the  youngest  members  of  the  group  to 
which  it  belongs. 

It  appears  to  me,  that  this  conclusion  is  corroborated  by 
the  fact  that  a  few  stanzas  in  the  GM  are  identical  with 
some  stanzas  in  some  of  the  Upanishads.  With  regard 
to  the  epic  age  of  Greece,  Mr.  E.  A.  Freeman  has  said  that, 
in  carrying  ourselves  back  to  that  age,  '  we  must  cast  aside 
all  the  notions  with  which  we  are  familiar  in  our  own  age 
about  property  legal  or  moral  in  literary  compositions.  It 
is  plain  that  there  were  phrases,  epithets,  whole  lines,  which 
were  the  common  property  of  the  whole  epic  school  of 
poetry1.'  It  appears  to  me  that  we  must  accept  this 
proposition  as  equally  applicable  to  the  early  days  of 
Sanskrit  literature,  having  regard  to  the  common  passages 
which  we  meet  with  in  sundry  of  the  Vedic  works,  and  also 
sometimes,  I  believe,  in  the  different  Pura^as.  If  this  view 
is  correct,  then  the  fact  that  the  Gtti  contains  some  stanzas 
in  the  very  words  which  we  meet  with  in  some  of  the 
Upanishads,  indicates,  to  my  mind,  that  the  conclusion 
already  drawn  from  other  data  about  the  position  of  the 
Gita  with  regard  to  the  Upanishads,  is  not  by  any  means 
unwarranted,  but  one  to  which  the  facts  before  us  rather 
seem  to  point. 

And  here  we  may  proceed  to  draw  attention  to  another 
fact  connected  with  the  relation  of  the  Gitd  to  the  Vedas. 
In  stanza  17  of  the  ninth  chapter  of  the  Giti,  only  Rik, 
Saman,  and  Yagus  are  mentioned.  The  Atharva-veda  is 
not  referred  to  at  all.  This  omission  does  certainly  seem 
a  very  noteworthy  one.  For  it  is  in  a  passage  where  the 
Supreme  Being  is  identifying  himself  with  everything,  and 
where,  therefore,  the  fourth  Veda  might  fairly  be  expected 
to  be  mentioned.  I  may  add  that  in  commenting  on  6anka- 
raMrya's  remarks  on  this  passage,  Anandagiri  (and  Madhu- 
sudana  Sarasvati  also)  seems  evidently  to  have  been  conscious 
of  the  possible  force  of  this  omission  of  the  Atharva-veda. 
He  accordingly  says  that  by  force  of  the  word  'and'  in  the 
verse  in  question,  the  Atharvangirasas,  or  Atharva-veda,  must 


Contemporary  Review,  February  1879. 


INTRODUCTION.  1 9 


also  be  included.  Are  we  at  liberty  to  infer  from  this,  that 
the  Atharva-veda  did  not  exist  in  the  days  when  the  Gita 
was  composed  ?  The  explanation  ordinarily  given  for  the 
omission  of  that  Veda,  where  such  omission  occurs,  namely, 
that  it  is  not  of  any  use  in  ordinary  sacrificial  matters,  is  one 
which  can  scarcely  have  any  force  in  the  present  instance; 
though  it  is  adequate,  perhaps,  to  explain  the  words  '  those 
who  know  the  three  branches  of  knowledge,'  which  occur  only 
a  few  lines  after  the  verse  now  under  consideration.  The 
commentators  render  no  further  help  than  has  been  already 
stated.  Upon  the  whole,  however,  while  I  am  not  yet 
quite  prepared  to  say,  that  the  priority  of  the  Gita,  even  to 
the  recognition  of  the  Atharva-veda  as  a  real  Veda,  may  be 
fairly  inferred  from  the  passage  in  question,  I  think  that 
the  passage  is  noteworthy  as  pointing  in  that  direction. 
But  further  data  in  explanation  of  the  omission  referred 
to  must  be  awaited. 

^  If  the  conclusions  here  indicated  about  the  relative  posi- 
tions of  the  Giti  and  certain  Vedic  works  are  correct,  we 
can  fairly  take  the  second  century  B.  C.  as  a  terminus  before 
which  the  Gita  must  have  been  composed.  For  the  Upani- 
shads  are  mentioned  in  the  Mahabhishya  of  Patan^ali, 
which  we  are  probably  safe  in  assigning  to  the  middle  of 
that  century.  The  epoch  of  the  older  Upanishads,  there- 
fore, to  which  reference  has  been  so  frequently  made  here, 
may  well  be  placed  at  some  period  prior  to  the  beginning 
of  the  second  century  B.  C.  The  Atharva-veda  is  likewise 
mentioned  by  Pataryfali1,  and  as  'ninefold,'  too,  be  it  remem- 
bered ;  so  that  if  we  are  entitled  to  draw  the  conclusion  which 
has  been  mentioned  above  from  chapter  IX,  stanza  17, 
we  come  to  the  same  period  for  the  date  of  the  Gita. 
Another  point  to  note  in  this  connexion  is  the  refer- 
ence to  the  Sima-veda  as  the  best  of  the  Vedas  (see  p.  88). 
That  is  a  fact  which  seems  to  be  capable  of  yielding 
some  chronological  information.  For  the  estimation  in 
which  that  Veda  has  been  held  appears  to  have  varied  at 
different  times.   Thus,  in  the  Aitareya-brahma/za2,  the  glory 

1  See  also  Sutta  Nipata,  p.  115.  2  Haug's  edition,  p.  68, 

C   % 


20  bhagavadgIta. 


of  the  Saman  is  declared  to  be  higher  than  that  of  the  Rik. 
In  the  j&TMndogya-upanishad x  the  Saman  is  said  to  be  the 
essence  of  the  Rik,  which  >Sankara  interprets  by  saying  that 
the  Saman  is  more  weighty.  In  the  Pra^na-upanishad 2, 
too,  the  implication  of  the  passage  V,  5  (in  which  the  Saman 
is  stated  as  the  guide  to  the  Brahmaloka,  while  the  Ya^*us 
is  said  to  guide  to  the  lunar  world,  and  the  Rik  to  the 
human  world)  is  to  the  same  effect  And  we  may  also 
mention  as  on  the  same  side  the  Nris'wiha.  Tapini-upani- 
shad  and  the  Vedic  passage  cited  in  the  commentary  of 
*Sankara  on  the  closing  sentence  of  the  first  khanda,  of  that 
Upanishad 3.  On  the  other  side,  we  have  the  statement  in 
Manu  that  the  sound  of  the  Sama-veda  is  unholy;  and  the 
consequent  direction  that  where  the  sound  of  it  is  heard, 
the  Rik  and  Ya^*us  should  not  be  recited  4.  We  have  also 
the  passages  from  some  of  the  Pura^as  noted  by  Dr.  Muir 
in  his  excellent  work,  Original  Sanskrit  Texts,  which 
point  in  the  same  direction5.  And  we  have  further  the 
direction  in  the  Apastamba  Dharma-sutra,  that  the  Saman 
hymns  should  not  be  recited  where  the  other  Vedas  are 
being  recited  6,  as  well  as  the  grouping  of  the  sound  of  the 
Saman  with  various  classes  of  objectionable  and  unholy 
noises,  such  as  those  of  dogs  and  asses.  It  is  pretty  evident 
that  the  view  of  Apastamba  is  based  on  the  same  theory  as 
that  of  Manu.  Now  in  looking  at  the  two  classes  of  autho- 
rities thus  marshalled,  it  is  plain  that  the  Gita  ranges  itself 
with  those  which  are  unquestionably  the  more  ancient. 
And  among  the  less  ancient  works,  prior  to  which  we  may 
place  the  Gita  on  account  of  the  facts  now  under  considera- 
tion, are  Manu  and  Apastamba.  Now  Manu's  date  is  not 
ascertained,  though,  I  believe,  he  is  now  generally  considered 
to  belong  to  about  the  second  or  third  century  B.  C.7     But 

1  Bibl.  Ind.  ed.,  p.  12.  2  Bibl.  Ind.  ed.,  p.  221  seq. 

3  Bibl.  Ind.  ed.,  p.  11.  4  Chapter  IV,  stanzas  123,  124. 

5  Vol.  iii  (2nd  ed.),  p.  11  seq.   Cf.  Goldstucker's  Remains,  I,  4,  28,  266 ;  II,  67. 

6  Apastamba  (Biihler's  ed.)  I,  3, 17, 18  (pp.  38,  39  in  this  series) ;  see  further  on 
this  point  Mr.  Burnett's  Devatadhyaya-brahmarca,  Introd.,  pp.  viii,  ix,  and  notes. 

7  Professor  Tiele  (History  of  Ancient  Religions,  p.  127)  considers  the  'main 
features '  of  Manu  to  be  '  pre-Buddhistic' 


INTRODUCTION.  2 1 


Dr.  Biihler,  in  the  Preface  to  his  Apastamba  in  the  present 
series,  has  adduced  good  reasons  for  holding  that  Apa- 
stamba is  prior  to  the  third  century  B.  C.  \  and  we  therefore 
obtain  that  as  a  point  of  time  prior  to  which  the  Gita  must 
have  been  composed. 

The  next  important  item  of  internal  evidence  which  we 
have  to  note,  is  the  view  taken  of  caste  in  the  Bhagavad- 
gita. Here,  again,  a  comparison  of  the  doctrine  of  the 
Gita  with  the  conception  of  caste  in  Manu  and  Apastamba 
is  interesting  and  instructive.  The  view  of  Manu  has  been 
already  contrasted  by  me  with  the  Git&  in  another  place 2. 
I  do  not  propose  to  dwell  on  that  point  here,  as  the  date  of 
Manu  is  far  from  being  satisfactorily  ascertained.  I  prefer 
now  to  take  up  Apastamba  only,  whose  date,  as  just  now 
stated,  is  fairly  well  fixed  by  Dr.  Biihler.  The  division  of 
castes,  then,  is  twice  referred  to  in  the  Bhagavadgita.  In 
the  first  passage  (p>59)  it  is  stated  that  the  division  rests  on 
differences  of  qualities  and  duties;  in  the  second  (pp.  r  26, 127) 
the  various  duties  are  distinctly  stated  according  to  the  dif- 
ferences of  qualities.  Now  in  the  first  place,  noting  as  we 
pass  along,  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  Gita  to  indicate 
whether  caste  was  hereditary,  according  to  its  view,  whereas 
Apastamba  distinctly  states  it  to  be  such,  let  us  compare 
the  second  passage  of  the  Gita  with  the  Sutras  of  Apa- 
stamba bearing  on  the  point.  The  view  enunciated  in  the 
Gita  appears  to  me  plainly  to  belong  to  an  earlier  age — to 
an  age  of  considerably  less  advancement  in  social  and  reli- 
gious development.  In  the  Gitcl,  for  instance,  the  duties  of 
a  Brahma^a  are  said  to  be  tranquillity,  self-restraint,  and  so 
forth.  In  Apastamba,  they  are  the  famous  six  duties, 
namely,  study,  imparting  instruction,  sacrificing,  officiating 
at  others'  sacrifices,  making  gifts,  and  receiving  gifts ;  and 
three  others,  namely,  inheritance,  occupancy,  and  gleaning 
ears  of  corn,  which,  it  may  be  remarked  en  passant,  are 
not  stated  in  Manu.    The  former  seem  to  my  mind  to  point 


1  P.  XXXV. 

2  See  the  Introductory  Essay  to  my  Bhagavadgita  in  English  verse,  published 
in  1875,  p.  cxii. 


22  bhagavadgItA. 


to  the  age  when  the  qualities  which  in  early  times  gave  the 
Br^hma^as  their  pre-eminence  in  Hindu  society  were  still 
a  living  reality1.  It  will  be  noted,  too,  that  there  is  nothing 
in  that  list  of  duties  which  has  any  necessary  or  natural 
connexion  with  any  privilege  as  belonging  to  the  caste. 
The  Law  lays  down  these  duties,  in  the  true  sense  of  the 
word.  In  Apastamba,  on  the  contrary,  we  see  an  advance 
towards  the  later  view  on  both  points.  You  have  no  re- 
ference to  moral  and  religious  qualities  now.  You  have  to 
do  with  ceremonies  and  acts.  You  have  under  the  head 
'  duties '  not  mere  obligations,  but  rights.  For  the  duty  of 
receiving  gifts  is  a  right,  and  so  is  the  duty  of  teaching 
others  and  officiating  at  others'  sacrifices ;  as  we  know  not 
merely  from  the  subsequent  course  of  events,  but  also  from 
a  comparison  of  the  duties  of  Brahma/zas  on  the  one  hand, 
and  Kshatriyas,  VaLryas,  and  6udras  on  the  other,  as  laid 
down  by  Manu  and  Apastamba  themselves.  Apastamba's 
rules,  therefore,  appear  to  belong  to  the  time  when  the 
Brahma^as  had  long  been  an  established  power,  and  were 
assuming  to  themselves  those  valuable  privileges  which  they 
have  always  claimed  in  later  times.  The  rules  of  the  Gita, 
on  the  other  hand,  point  to  a  time  considerably  prior  to 
this — to  a  time  when  the  Brahma/zas  were  by  their  moral 
and  intellectual  qualities  laying  the  foundation  of  that  pre- 
eminence in  Hindu  society  which  afterwards  enabled  them 
to  lord  it  over  all  castes.  These  observations  mutatis 
mutandis  apply  to  the  rules  regarding  the  other  castes 
also.  Here  again,  while  the  Gita  still  insists  on  the  inner 
qualities,  which  properly  constitute  the  military  profession, 
for  instance,  the  rules  of  Apastamba  indicate  the  powerful 
influence  of  the  Brahma^as2.  For,  as  stated  before,  offi- 
ciating at  others'  sacrifices,  instructing  others,  and  receiving 
presents,  are  here  expressly  prohibited  to  Kshatriyas  as 
also  to  Vakyas.  The  result  of  that  is,  that  the  Brahma^as 
become  indispensable  to  the  Kshatriyas  and  VaLsyas,  for 

1  The  remarks  in  the  text  will  show  how  little  there  is  in  the  Gita  of  that 
'  Brahmanizing'  which  has  been  shortly  noticed  on  a  previous  page. 

2  As  to  the  Kshatriyas  the  contrast  with  Manu's  rules  is  even  stronger  than 
with  Apastamba's.   See  our  Introduction  to  the  Gita  in  English  verse,  p.  cxiii. 


INTRODUCTION.  2$ 


upon  both  the  duty  of  study,  of  offering  sacrifices,  and 
making  gifts  and  presents  is  inculcated.  In  his  outline  of 
the  History  of  Ancient  Religions,  Professor  Tiele,  speaking 
of  the  *  increasing  influence  of  the  Brahmans,'  writes  as 
follows  :  '  Subject  at  first  to  the  princes  and  nobles,  and 
dependent  on  them,  they  began  by  insinuating  themselves 
into  their  favour,  and  representing  it  as  a  religious  duty 
to  show  protection  and  liberality  towards  them.  Mean- 
while they  endeavoured  to  make  themselves  indispensable 
to  them,  gradually  acquired  the  sole  right  to  conduct  pub- 
lic worship,  and  made  themselves  masters  of  instruction1/ 
And  after  pointing  out  the  high  position  thus  achieved  by 
the  Brahmans,  and  the  low  position  of  the  iTa^alas  and 
others  of  the  inferior  castes,  he  adds :  '  Such  a  position 
could  not  long  be  endured ;  and  this  serves  to  explain  not 
only  the  rise  of  Buddhism,  but  also  its  rapid  diffusion,  and 
the  radical  revolution  which  it  brought  about  V  To  pro- 
ceed, however,  with  our  comparison  of  the  Gita  and  Apa- 
stamba.  The  superiority  distinctly  claimed  by  the  latter 
for  the  Brahma/za  is  not  quite  clearly  brought  out  in  the 
GM.  'Holy  Brahma^as  and  devoted  royal  saints'  are 
bracketed  together  at  p.  86;  while  the  Kshatriyas  are 
declared  to  have  been  the  channel  of  communication  be- 
tween the  Deity  and  mankind  as  regards  the  great  doctrine 
of  devotion  propounded  by  the  Bhagavadgtta.  That  in- 
dicates a  position  for  the  Kshatriyas  much  more  like 
what  the  Upanishads  disclose  3,  than  even  that  which  Apa- 
stamba  assigns  to  them.  The  fact  is  further  noteworthy, 
that  in  the  Git&  each  caste  has  its  own  entirely  distinct  set 
of  duties.  There  is  no  overlapping,  so  to  say.  And  that 
is  a  circumstance  indicating  a  very  early  stage  in  the  de- 
velopment of  the  institution4.    Besides,  as  already  indicated, 

1  P.  120.  2  Pp.  129, 130. 

8  See  p.  58  infra ;  and  compare  with  this  Weber's  remarks  on  one  of  the 
classes  into  which  he  divides  the  whole  body  of  Upanishads,  History  of  Indian 
Literature,  p.  165.  See  also  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  vol.  i,  p.  508 ;  Max  Muller, 
Upanishads,  vol.  i,  p.  lxxv. 

*  Cf.  Sutta  Nipata,  p.  32  ;  and  also  Mr.  Davids'  note  on  that  passage  in  his 
Buddhism,  p.  131. 


24  bhagavadgitA. 


the  duties  laid  down  by  Apastamba  and  Manu  as  common 
to  Kshatriyas  and  Vaiiyas  are  the  very  duties  which  make 
those  castes  dependent  to  a  very  great  extent  on  the  Brah- 
ma/zas.  Lastly,  it  is  not  altogether  unworthy  of  note,  that 
in  the  elaborate  specification  of  the  best  of  every  species 
which  we  find  in  chapter  X,  the  Brahma/za  is  not  men- 
tioned as  the  best  of  the  castes,  there  is  nothing  to  indicate 
the  notion  contained  in  the  well-known  later  verse,  'The 
Brahma^a  is  the  head  of  the  castes.'  On  the  contrary, 
the  ruler  of  men  is  specified  as  the  highest  among  men1, 
indicating,  perhaps,  a  state  of  society  such  as  that  described 
at  the  beginning  of  the  extract  from  Professor  Tiele's  work 
quoted  above. 

We  come  now  to  another  point.  What  is  the  position  of 
the  Gita  in  regard  to  the  great  reform  of  Sakya.  Muni  ? 
The  question  is  one  of  much  interest,  having  regard  parti- 
cularly to  the  remarkable  coincidences  between  Buddhistic 
doctrines  and  the  doctrines  of  the  Gita  to  which  we  have 
drawn  attention  in  the  foot-notes  to  our  translation.  But 
the  materials  for  deciding  the  question  are  unhappily  not 
forthcoming.  Professor  Wilson,  indeed,  thought  that  there 
was  an  allusion  to  Buddhism  in  the  Gita2.  But  his  idea 
was  based  on  a  confusion  between  the  Buddhists  and  the 
iif arvakas  or  materialists  3.  Failing  that  allusion,  we  have 
nothing  very  tangible  but  the  unsatisfactory  *  negative  argu- 
ment' based  on  mere  non-mention  of  Buddhism  in  the 
Gita.  That  argument  is  not  quite  satisfactory  to  my  own 
mind,  although,  as  I  have  elsewhere  pointed  out 4,  some  of 
the  ground  occupied  by  the  Gita.  is  common  to  it  with 
Buddhism,  and  although  various  previous  thinkers  are 
alluded  to  directly  or  indirectly  in  the  Gita.  There  is, 
however,  one  view  of  the  facts  of  this  question,  which 
appears  to  me  to  corroborate  the  conclusion  deducible  by 
means  of  the  negative  argument  here  referred  to.     The 


1  P.  89  infra.  2  Essays  on  Sanskrit  Literature,  vol.  iii,  p.  150. 

3  See  our  remarks  on  this  point  in  the  Introductory  Essay  to  our  Gita  in 
verse,  p.  ii  seq. 

*  Introduction  to  Gita  in  English  verse,  p.  v  seq. 


INTRODUCTION.  25 


main  points  on  which  Buddha's  protest  against  Brahmanism 
rests,  seem  to  be  the  true  authority  of  the  Vedas  and  the 
true  view  of  the  differences  of  caste.  On  most  points  of 
doctrinal  speculation,  Buddhism  is  still  but  one  aspect  of 
the  older  Brahmanism  \  The  various  coincidences  to  which 
we  have  drawn  attention  show  that,  if  there  is  need  to  show  it. 
Well  now,  on  both  these  points,  the  Gita,  while  it  does  not  go 
the  whole  length  which  Buddha  goes,  itself  embodies  a  protest 
against  the  views  current  about  the  time  of  its  composition. 
The  Gtta  does  not,  like  Buddhism,  absolutely  reject  the 
Vedas,  but  it  shelves  them.  The  Gita  does  not  totally  root 
out  caste.  It  places  caste  on  a  less  untenable  basis.  One  of 
two  hypotheses  therefore  presents  itself  as  a  rational  theory 
of  these  facts.  Either  the  Gita  and  Buddhism  were  alike  the 
outward  manifestation  of  one  and  the  same  spiritual  up- 
heaval which  shook  to  its  centre  the  current  religion,  the 
Gita  being  the  earlier  and  less  thorough-going  form  of  it ; 
or  Buddhism  having  already  begun  to  tell  on  Brahmanism, 
the  Giti  was  an  attempt  to  bolster  it  up,  so  to  say,  at  its 
least  weak  points,  the  weaker  ones  being  altogether  aban- 
doned. I  do  not  accept  the  latter  alternative,  because  I 
cannot  see  any  indication  in  the  Gita  of  an  attempt  to 
compromise  with  a  powerful  attack  on  the  old  Hindu 
system ;  while  the  fact  that,  though  strictly  orthodox,  the 
author  of  the  Gita  still  undermines  the  authority,  as  un- 
wisely venerated,  of  the  Vedic  revelation  ;  and  the  further 
fact,  that  in  doing  this,  he  is  doing  what  others  also  had 
done  before  him  or  about  his  time ;  go,  in  my  opinion, 
a  considerable  way  towards  fortifying  the  results  of  the 
negative  argument  already  set  forth.  To  me  Buddhism  is 
perfectly  intelligible  as  one  outcome  of  that  play  of  thought 
on  high  spiritual  topics,  which  in  its  other,  and  as  we  may 
say,  less  thorough-going  manifestations,  we  see  in  the  Upa- 
nishads  and  the  Gita2.     But  assume  that  Buddhism  was 

1  Cf.  Max  Muller's  Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  137;  Weber's  Indian  Literature,  pp. 
288,  289;  and  Mr.  Rhys  Davids'  excellent  little  volume  on  Buddhism,  p.  151  ; 
and  see  also  p.  83  of  Mr.  Davids'  book. 

2  Cf.  Weber's  History  of  Indian  Literature,  p.  285.  In  Mr.  Davids'  Buddhism, 
p.  94,  we  have  a  noteworthy  extract  from  a  standard  Buddhistic  work,  touching 


26  BHAGAVADGITA* 


a  protest  against  Brahmanism  prior  to  its  purification 
and  elevation  by  the  theosophy  of  the  Upanishads,  and 
those  remarkable  productions  of  ancient  Indian  thought 
become  difficult  to  account  for.  Let  us  compare  our  small 
modern  events  with  those  grand  old  occurrences.  Suppose 
our  ancestors  to  have  been  attached  to  the  ceremonial  law 
of  the  Vedas,  as  we  are  now  attached  to  a  lifeless  ritualism, 
the  Upanishads  and  the  Gita  might  be,  in  a  way,  compar- 
able to  movements  like  that  of  the  late  Raja  Rammohun 
Roy.  Standing,  as  far  as  possible,  on  the  antique  ways, 
they  attempt,  as  Raja  Rammohun  attempted  in  these 
latter  days,  to  bring  into  prominence  and  to  elaborate  the 
higher  and  nobler  aspects  of  the  old  beliefs.  Buddhism 
would  be  comparable  to  the  further  departure  from  old 
traditions  which  was  led  by  Babu  Keshub  Chander  Sen. 
The  points  of  dissent  in  the  olden  times  were  pretty  nearly 
the  same  as  the  points  of  dissent  now.  The  ultimate 
motive  power  also  was  in  both  cases  identical — a  sense  of 
dissatisfaction  in  its  integrity  with  what  had  come  down 
from  old  times  encrusted  with  the  corruptions  of  years. 
In  this  view  the  old  system,  the  philosophy  of  the  Upani- 
shads and  the  Gita,  and  the  philosophy  of  Buddha,  con- 
stitute a  regular  intelligible  progression.  But  suppose  the 
turn  events  took  was  different,  as  is  supposed  by  the  alter- 
native theory  indicated  above.  Suppose  Babu  Keshub's 
movement  was  chronologically  prior,  and  had  begun  to  tell 
on  orthodox  society.  Is  it  likely,  that  then  one  of  the 
orthodox  party  would  take  up  the  position  which  Ram- 
mohun Roy  took  ?  Would  he  still  rely  on  old  authorities, 
but  with  sundry  qualifications,  and  yet  earnestly  assail  the 
current  forms  of  orthodoxy?  I  do  not  think  so.  I  think  the 
true  view  to  be,  as  already  stated,  very  different.  The 
Upanishads,  with  the  Git&,  and   the  precepts  of  Buddha 


the  existence  of  the  soul.  Compare  that  with  the  corresponding  doctrine  in  the 
Gita.  It  will  be  found  that  the  two  are  at  one  in  rejecting  the  identity  of  the 
soul  with  the  senses  &c*  The  Gita  then  goes  on  to  admit  a  soul  separate  from 
these.    Buddhism  rejects  that  also,  and  sees  nothing  but  the  senses. 


INTRODUCTION.  2J 


appear  to  me  to  be  the  successive1  embodiments  of  the  spi- 
ritual thought  of  the  age,  as  it  became  more  and  more  dissa- 
tisfied with  the  system  of  mere  ceremonial  then  dominant. 

There  are  several  other  points  of  much  interest  in  the 
Bhagavadgita,  such  as  the  reference  to  the  Sankhya  and 
Yoga ;  the  place  assigned  to  the  M&rgaiirsha  month ;  the 
allusion  to  the  doctrines  of  materialism  ;  the  nearly  entire 
coincidence  between  a  stanza  of  the  Gita  and  one  in  the 
Manu  Snw'ti.  But  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge,  I 
do  not  think  that  we  can  extract  any  historical  results  from 
any  of  them.  Without  dwelling  on  them  any  further2, 
therefore,  I  will  only  state  it  as  my  opinion,  that  the 
Sankhya  and  Yoga  of  the  Gita  are  not  identical  with 
the  systems  known  to  us  under  those  names,  and  that  the 
Manu  Smrz'ti  has  probably  borrowed  from  the  Gitci  the 
stanza  common  to  the  two  works. 

We  now  proceed  to  a  discussion  of  some  of  the  external 
evidence  touching  the  age  of  the  Bhagavadgita.  It  is,  of 
course,  unnecessary  to  consider  any  evidence  of  a  date  later 
than  the  eighth  century  A.  C,  that  being  the  date  generally 
received,  though  not  on  very  strong  grounds,  as  the  date  of 
.SankaraMrya,  the  celebrated  commentator  of  the  Gita 3. 
For  the  period  prior  to  that  limit,  the  first  testimony  to  con- 
sider is  that  of  Ba;zabha#a,  the  author  of  the  Kadambari. 
The  date  of  Ba^a  is  now  fairly  well  settled  as  the  middle 
of  the  seventh  century  A.  C.  The  doubt  which  the  late 
Dr.  Bhau  Daji  had  cast  upon  its  correctness 4,  by  impugn- 
ing the  received  date  of  king  Harshavardhana,  appears  to 
me  to  have  been  satisfactorily  disposed  of  by  the  paper  of 

1  The  word  Brahma-nirvana,  which  occurs  so  often  at  the  close  of  chapter  V 
and  also  at  chapter  II,  72,  seems  to  me  to  indicate  that  nirvana  had  not  yet 
become  technically  pinned  down,  so  to  say,  to  the  meaning  which  Buddhism 
subsequently  gave  to  it,  as  the  name  of  what  it  deemed  thesummumbonum. 
Nirvana  by  itself  occurs  at  VI,  15. 

2  See  some  further  remarks  on  these  points  in  my  Introduction  to  the  Gita 
in  verse. 

3  Professor  Tiele  (History  of  Ancient  Religions,  p.  140)  says  tfarikara  was  born 
in  788  a.  d.;  on  the  authority,  I  presume,  of  the  Aryavidyasudhakara,  p.  226. 

4  Journal  of  the  Bombay  Branch  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  vol.  viii,  p.  350 ; 
and  see,  too,  Indian  Antiquary,  vol.  vi,  p.  61  (Dr.  Buhler). 


28  BHAGAVADGiTA. 


my  friend  Professor  R.G.  Bha/zafarkar  on  the  Kalukya.  dates1. 
In  the  Kadambari,  then,  we  have  testimony  to  the  existence 
of  the  Bhagavadgita  in  the  middle  of  the  seventh  century 
A.C.  For  in  that  work,  which,  as  is  well  known,  abounds  with 
equivoques,  we  have  a  passage  which  compares  the  royal 
palace  to  the  Mahabharata,  both  being  'Anantagitakanzana- 
nanditanaram  V  which,  as  applied  to  the  royal  palace,  means 
*  in  which  the  people  were  delighted  by  hearing  innumerable 
songs;*  and  as  applied  to  the  Mahabharata  means  'in 
which  Ar^-una  was  delighted  at  hearing  the  Anantagita.' 
Anantagita  is  evidently  only  another  name  here  for  Bha- 
gavadgita. The  conclusion  deducible  from  this  fact  is  not 
merely  that  the  Gita  existed,  but  that  it  existed  as  a  recog- 
nised portion  of  the  Bharata,  in  the  seventh  century  A.  C. 
Now  the  Kadambari  shows,  in  numerous  passages,  in  what 
high  esteem  the  Mahabharata  was  held  in  its  days.  The 
queen  Vilasavati  used  to  attend  at  those  readings  and 
expositions  of  the  Mahabharata,  which  have  continued  down 
to  our  own  times  ;  and  it  was  even  then  regarded  as  a  sacred 
work  of  extremely  high  authority,  in  the  same  way  as  it 
is  now.  It  follows,  therefore,  that  the  Gita  must  have  been 
several  centuries  old  in  the  time  of  Ba/zabha#a. 

Prior  in  time  to  Ba^a  is  the  Indian  Shakespeare,  Kali- 
dasa,  as  he  is  referred  to  in  Ba^abhazVa's  Harsha^arita 3, 
and  also  in  a  copperplate  inscription  of  the  early  part  of 
the  seventh  century,  as  a  poet  who  had  then  already  ac- 
quired a  high  reputation4.  Unfortunately,  it  is  not  yet 
possible  to  fix  exactly  the  date  at  which  Kalidasa  flourished. 
Still,  I  think,  we  have  pretty  satisfactory  evidence  to  show 
that  the  middle  of  the  fifth  century  A.  C.  is  the  very  latest 
date  to  which  he  can  be  referred.  In  a  small  tract  (written 
by  me  in  1873),  discussing  Professor  Weber's  theory  about 
the  Ramaya^a,  I  have  pointed  out 5  that  the  Pan^atantra 

1  Journal  of  the  Bombay  Branch  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  vol.  xiv, 
p.  16  seq. 

2  P.  182  (Taranatha's  ed.) 

3  See  F.  E.  Hall's  Vasavadatta,  p.  14  note. 

4  See  Indian  Antiquary,  vol.  v,  p.  70. 

5  *  Was  the  Ramayarca  copied  from  Homer  V    See  pp.  36-59. 


INTRODUCTION.  29 


quotes  from  Kalidasa  a  passage  which  there  is  good  reason 
to  believe  formed  part  of  the  Pan^atantra  when  it  was  trans- 
lated for  king  Nushirvan  of  Persia  about  the  beginning  of 
the  sixth  century  A.  C.1  Allowing  for  the  time  required  to 
raise  Kalidasa  to  the  position  of  being  cited  as  an  autho- 
rity^ and  for  the  time  required  for  the  spread  of  the  fame  of 
an  Indian  work  to  Persia  in  those  early  days,  I  think,  that 
the  middle  of  the  fifth  century  is  a  date  to  which  Kalidasa 
cannot  well  have  been  subsequent.  Now  in  the  works  of 
Kalidasa  we  have  some  very  remarkable  allusions  to  the 
Bhagavadgita.  It  is  not  necessary  to  go  through  all  these 
allusions.  I  will  only  mention  the  most  remarkable,  one 
from  the  Raghuvaw^a,  and  one  from  the  Kumarasambhava. 
In  Raghu,  canto  X,  stanza  67,  the  gods  addressing  Vishnu 
say :  { There  is  nothing  for  you  to  acquire  which  has  not 
been  acquired.  The  one  motive  in  your  birth  and  work  is 
the  good  of  the  worlds.'  The  first  sentence  here  reminds 
one  at  once  of  Gita,  chapter  III,  stanza  22,  the  coincidence 
with  which  in  sense  as  well  as  expression  is  very  striking. 
The  second  sentence  contains  the  words  '  birth  and  work,' 
the  precise  words  employed  at  Gita  IV,  9  ;  and  the  idea  of 
*  good  of  the  worlds '  is  identical  with  the  idea  expressed  in 
Gita  III,  20-24,  the  words  only  in  which  it  is  clothed  being 
different.  Couple  this  passage  with  the  one  from  Kuma- 
rasambhava, canto  VI,  67,  where  the  seven  Rtshis  say  to 
the  Himalaya  mountain,  'Well  hast  thou  been  called 
Vishnu  in  a  firmly-fixed  form.'  The  allusion  there  to  the 
Gita,  chapter  X,  stanza  25  (p.  89),  is,  I  venture  to  think, 
unmistakable.  The  word  '  firmly-fixed '  is  identical  in 
both  passages ;  the  idea  is  identical,  and  Mallinatha  refers 
to  the  passage  in  the  Gita  as  the  authority  which  Kalidasa 
had  in  view.  It  follows,  therefore,  that  the  Gita  must  be 
prior  to  Kalidasa's  time.  It  may  be  added,  that  Kali- 
dasa in  his  Raghu  XV,  67,  cites  Manu    as  an  authority 

1  Cf.  Colebrooke's  Essays,  vol.  ii,  p.  166  seq.  It  may  be  remarked  that 
this  argument  is  not  affected  by  the  attempt  to  distinguish  the  Kalidasa  of  the 
tfakuntala  from  the  Kalidasa  of  the  Raghuvamsa.  Because  the  work  cited  in 
the  Pafi£atantra  is  the  Kumarasambhava,  which  indisputably  belongs  to  the 
same  author  as  the  Raghuvamsa. 


30  bhagavadgitA. 


for  the  proposition  that  a  king  must  protect  all  castes  and 
all  orders  or  airamas.  Manu,  therefore,  must  have  lived 
considerably  earlier  than  Kalidasa,  and  the  Gita,  as  we  have 
already  argued,  must  be  considerably  earlier,  not  only  than 
Manu,  but  also  than  his  predecessor  Apastamba.  The  Gita 
may,  therefore,  be  safely  said  to  belong  to  a  period  several 
centuries  prior  to  the  fifth  century  A.  C. 

The  next  piece  of  external  evidence  is  furnished  by  the 
Vedanta-sutras  of  Badaraya^a.  In  several  of  those  Sutras, 
references  are  made  to  certain  Smrztis  as  authorities  for  the 
propositions  laid  down.  Take,  for  instance,  I,  2,  6,  or  I,  3, 
23,  and  many  others.  Now  three  of  these  Sutras  are  very 
useful  for  our  present  purpose.  The  first  we  have  to  con- 
sider is  Sutra  II,  3,  45.  The  commentators  SankaraMrya, 
Ramanug*a,  Madhva,  and  Vallabha 1  are  unanimous  in  un- 
derstanding the  passage  in  Gita,  chapter  XV,  stanza  7  (p. 
112),  to  be  the  one  there  referred  to  by  the  words  of  the 
Sutra,  which  are,  *  And  it  is  said  in  a  Smrtt'u9  Now  a  glance 
at  the  context  of  the  Sutra  will,  I  think,  satisfy  us  that 
the  commentators,  who  are  unanimous  though  representing 
different  and  even  conflicting  schools  of  thought,  are  also 
quite  right.  Sutra  43,  in  the  elliptical  language  charac- 
teristic of  that  branch  of  our  literature,  says,  '  A  part,  from 
the  statement  of  difference,  and  the  reverse  also ;  some  lay 
down  that  it  is  a  fisherman  or  a  cheat.'  Sutra  44  runs 
thus, '  And  also  from  the  words  of  the  Mantra.5  And  then 
comes  Sutra  45  as  set  out  above.  It  is  plain,  that  the 
Sutra  No.  45  indicates  an  authority  for  something  not  speci- 
fied, being  regarded  as  part  of  some  other  thing  also  not 
specified.  Now  the  discussion  in  previous  Sutras  has  been 
about  the  soul ;  so  we  can  have  little  difficulty  in  accepting 
the  unanimous  interpretation  of  the  commentators,  that  the 
proposition  here  sought  to  be  made  out  is  that  the  indi- 
vidual soul  is  part  of  the  Supreme  Soul,  which  is  the  proposi- 
tion laid  down  in  the  Gita  in  the  passage  referred  to.     The 

1  I  am  indebted  to  Professor  M.  M.  Kunte  for  a  loan  of  VallabhaHrya's 
commentary  on  the  Sutras  noted  in  the  text.  I  had  not  seen  it  in  1875,  when 
I  last  discussed  this  question. 


INTRODUCTION.  3 1 


next  Sutra  to  refer  to  is  IV,  i,  10.  I  shall  not  set  forth 
the  other  relevant  Sutras  here  as  in  the  preceding  case.  I 
only  state  that  the  three  commentators,  Sankara,  Ra- 
manu^-a,  and  Madhva,  agree  that  the  Gita  is  here  referred 
to,  namely,  chapter  VI,  stanza  n  seq.  Vallabha,  how- 
ever, I  am  bound  to  add,  does  not  agree  with  this,  as  he 
interprets  the  Sutra  in  question  and  those  which  precede 
and  follow  as  referring  to  an  entirely  different  matter.  If 
I  may  be  permitted  to  say  so,  however,  I  consider  his 
interpretation  not  so  satisfactory  as  that  of  the  three 
other  and  older  commentators.  Lastly,  we  come  to  Sutra 
IV,  3-19.  On  this,  again,  all  the  four  commentators  are 
unanimous,  and  they  say  that  Gita,  chapter  VIII,  stanza 
24  seq.  (p.  80),  is  the  authority  referred  to.  And  I 
think  there  can  be  very  little  doubt  that  they  are  right. 
These  various  pieces  of  evidence  render  it,  I  think,  histori- 
cally certain,  that  the  Gita  must  be  considerably  prior  to  the 
Vedanta-sutras ;  and  that  the  word  Brahma-sutras,  which 
occurs  at  Gita,  chapter  XIII,  stanza  4  (p.  102),  is  correctly 
interpreted  by  the  commentators  as  not  referring  to  the 
Vedanta-sutras,  which  are  also  called  Brahma-sutras,  but 
to  a  different  subject  altogether1.  When  were  the  Vedanta- 
sutras  composed  ?  The  question  must  at  once  be  admitted 
to  be  a  difficult  one  ;  but  I  think  the  following  considera- 
tions will  show  that  the  date  of  those  Sutras  must,  at  the 
latest,  be  considerably  earlier  than  the  period  which  we 
have  already  reached  in  this  part  of  our  investigation.  We 
may  take  it  as  fairly  well  settled,  that  Bha#a  Kumarila,  the 
celebrated  commentator  of  the  Purva  Mima^sa  school, 
flourished  not  later  than  the  end  of  the  seventh  century 
A.  C.2  A  considerable  time  prior  to  him  must  be  placed 
the  great  commentator  on  the  Mima^sa-sutras,  namely, 
Sabarasv&min.  If  we  may  judge  from  the  style  of  his  great 
commentary,  he  cannot  have  flourished  much  later  than 
Patang-ali,  who  may  now  be  taken  as  historically  proved  to 

1  Cf.  Weber's  Indian  Literature,  p.  242.     See  also  Lassen's  Preface  to  his 
edition  of  Schlegel's  Gita,  XXXV.     Ramanug-a  takes  the  other  view. 

2  See  Burnett's  Samavidhana-brahmawa,  Introduction,  p.  vi  note. 


32  bhagavadg3!tA. 


have  flourished  about  140  B.  C.1  Now  a  considerable  time 
must  have  intervened  between  Sabarasvamin  and  another 
commentator  on  the  Purva  Mima^sa,  whom  Sahara 
quotes  with  the  highly  honorific  title  Bhagavan,  the 
Venerable,  namely,  Upavarsha.  Upavarsha  appears  from 
5ankara's  statement  to  have  commented  on  the  Vedanta- 
sutras2.  We  have  thus  a  long  catena  of  works  from  the 
seventh  century  A.  C,  indicating  a  pretty  high  antiquity 
for  the  Vedanta-sutras,  and  therefore  a  higher  one  for  the 
Bhagavadgita.  The  antiquity  of  the  Vedanta-sutras  follows 
also  from  the  circumstance,  which  we  have  on  the  testimony 
of  Ramanu£-a,  repeated  by  Madhava^arya,  that  a  commen- 
tary on  the  Sutras  was  written  by  Baudhayana/fcarya 3, 
which  commentary  Ramanu^a  says  he  followed.  Baudha- 
yana's  date  is  not  accurately  settled.  But  he  appears  to  be 
older  than  Apastamba,  whose  date,  as  suggested  by  Dr. 
Biihler,  has  already  been  mentioned  4.  The  Vedanta-sutras, 
then,  would  appear  to  be  at  least  as  old  as  the  fourth  cen- 
tury B.  C. ;  if  the  information  we  have  from  Ramanu£*a 
may  be  trusted.  A  third  argument  may  be  mentioned, 
bearing  on  the  date  of  the  Vedanta-sutras.  In  Sutra  no 
of  the  third  Pada  of  the  fourth  Adhyaya  of  Pacini's  Sutras, 
a  Parai-arya  is  mentioned  as  the  author  of  a  Bhikshu-sutra. 
Who  is  this  Para^arya,  and  what  the  Bhikshu-sutra  ?  Un- 
luckily Patan^ali  gives  us  no  information  on  this  head,  nor 
does  the  Klrika  Vrztti.  But  a  note  of  Professor  Taranatha 
Tarkava^aspati,  of  Calcutta,  says  that  Para^arya  is  Vyasa, 
and  the  Bhikshu-sutra  is  the  Vedanta-sutra 5.  If  this  is 
correct,  the  Vedanta-sutras  go  very  far  indeed  into  anti- 
quity. For  Pa/zini  can  certainly  not  be  assigned  to  a  later 
date   than    the   fourth   century   B.C.,   while   that  learned 

1  The  authorities  are  collected  in  our  edition  of  Bhartn'hari  (Bombay  Series  of 
Sanskrit  Classics),  Introd.  p.  xi  note.  See  also  Buhler's  Apastamba  in  this 
series*  Introd.  p.  xxviii. 

2  See  Colebrooke's  Essays,  vol.  i,  p.  332.  An  Upavarsha  is  mentioned  in  the 
Kathasaritsagara  as  living  in  the  time  of  king  Nanda,  and  having  Pacini,  Katya- 
yana,  and  VyaJi  for  his  pupils. 

3  See  the  Ramanug-a  Bhashya ;  and  the  Ram&nug-a  Darsana  in  Sarvadarsana- 
sangraha. 

*  Apastamba,  p.  xvi.  6  See  Siddhanta  Kaumudi,  vol.  i,  p.  592. 


INTRODUCTION.  33 


scholar,  Professor  Goldstlicker,  on  grounds  of  considerable 
strength,  assigned  him  to  a  much  earlier  date1.  The  ques- 
tion thus  comes  to  this,  Is  the  remark  of  Professor  Tara- 
natha,  above  set  out,  correct  ?  I  find  then,  from  enquiries 
made  of  my  venerable  and  erudite  friend  Ya^ncsvar  5astrin, 
the  author  of  the  Aryavidyasudhakara,  that  the  note  of 
Taranatha  is  based  on  the  works  of  Bhattogt  Dikshita, 
Nagqgi  Bha//a,  and  (Jnanendra  Sarasvati,  who  all  give  the 
same  interpretation  of  the  Sutra  in  question.  It  is  certainly 
unfortunate  that  we  have  no  old^r  authority  on  this  point 
than  Bha//q^i.  The  interpretation  is  in  itself  not  impro- 
bable. Vyasa  is  certainly  by  the  current  tradition2  called 
the  author  of  the  Vedanta-sutras,  and  also  the  son  of 
Parai-ara.  Nor  is  Bhikshu-sutra  a  name  too  far  removed  in 
sense  from  Vedanta-sutra,  though  doubtless  the  former 
name  is  not  now  in  use,  at  all  events  as  applied  to  the  Sutras 
attributed  to  Badaraya^a,  and  though,  it  must  also  be 
stated,  a  Bhikshu-sutra  Bhashya  Vartika  is  mentioned  eo 
nomine  by  Professor  Weber  as  actually  in  existence  at  the 
present  day3.  Taking  all  things  together,  therefore,  we 
may  provisionally  understand  the  Bhikshu-sutra  mentioned 
by  Pacini  to  be  identical  with  the  Vedanta-sutras.  But 
even  apart  from  that  identification,  the  other  testimonies 
we  have  adduced  prove,  I  think,  the  high  antiquity  of  those 
Sutras,  and  consequently  of  the  Bhagavadgita. 

We  have  thus  examined,  at  what,  considering  the  im- 
portance and  difficulty  of  the  subject,  will  not,  I  trust,  be 
regarded  as  unreasonable  length,  some  of  the  principal 
pieces  of  internal  and  external  evidence  touching  the  age 
of  the  Bhagavadgita  and  its  position  in  Sanskrit  literature. 
Although,  as  stated  at  the  very  outset,  the  conclusions  we 
have  deduced  in  the  course  of  that  examination  are  not  all 
such  as  at  once  to  secure  acceptance,  I  venture  to  think  that 
we  have  now  adequate  grounds  for  saying,  that  the  various 
and  independent  lines  of  investigation,  which  we  have  pur- 
sued, converge  to  this  point,  that  the  Gita,  on  numerous  and 

1  See  his  Pamni ;  and  see  also  Biihler's  Apastamba  in  this  series,  Introd. 
p.  xxxii  note.  2  The  correctness  of  this  tradition  is  very  doubtful. 

3  Indische  Studien  I,  470. 

[8]  D 


34  BHAGAVADGITA. 


essential  topics,  ranges  itself  as  a  member  of  the  Upanishad 
group,  so  to  say,  in  Sanskrit  literature.  Its  philosophy,  its 
mode  of  treating  its  subject,  its  style,  its  language,  its  versi- 
fication, its  opinions  on  sundry  subjects  of  the  highest  im- 
portance, all  point  to  that  one  conclusion.  We  may  also,  I 
think,  lay  it  down  as  more  than  probable,  that  the  latest 

^date  at  which  the  Gita  can  have  been  composed,  must  be 
earlier  than  the  third  century  B.  c,  though  it  is  altogether 
impossible  to  say  at  present  how  much  earlier.  This  pro- 
position, too,  is  supported  by  the  cumulative  strength  of 

^several  independent  lines  of  testimony. 

Before  closing  this  Introduction,  it  is  desirable  to  add  a 
word  concerning  the  text  of  the  Bhagavadgita.  The  reli- 
gious care  with  which  that  text  has  been  preserved  is  very 
worthy  of  note.  Schlegel  and  Lassen x  have  both  declared 
it  as  their  opinion,  that  we  have  the  text  now  almost 
exactly  in  the  condition  in  which  it  was  when  it  left  the 
hands  of  the  author.  There  are  very  few  real  various 
readings,  and  some  of  the  very  few  that  exist  are  noted 
by  the  commentators.  Considering  that  the  Mahabharata 
must  have  been  tampered  with  on  numerous  occasions,  this 
preservation  of  the  Gita  is  most  interesting.  It  doubtless 
indicates  that  high  veneration  for  it  which  is  still  felt,  and 
has  for  long  been  felt,  by  the  Hindus,  and  which  is  em- 
bodied in  the  expression  used  in  the  colophons  of  the  MSS. 
describing  the  Gita  as  the  '  Upanishad  sung  by  God  V  In 
view  of  the  facts  and  deductions  set  forth  in  this  essay, 
that  expression  existing  as,  I  believe,  it  does,  almost  uni- 
versally in  Indian  MSS.  of  the  Gita,  is  not  altogether 
devoid  of  historical  value. 

Schlegel  draws  attention  to  one  other  circumstance  re- 
garding the  text  of  the  Gita,  which  is  also  highly  interesting, 
namely,  that   the   number  of  the  stanzas  is  exactly  700. 

1  See  the  latter's  edition  of  the  Gita,  Preface,  p.  xxvii. 

2  In  the  edition  of  the  Gita"  published  in  Bombay  in  £aka  1782,  there  is  a 
stanza  which  says  that  the  Upanishads  are  the  cows,  Kr/sh«a  the  milkman, 
Arg-una  the  calf,  and  the  milk  is  the  nectar-like  Gita,  which  indicates  the  tradi- 
tional view  of  the  Gita — a  view  in  consonance  with  that  which  we  have  been 
led  to  by  the  facts  and  arguments  contained  in  this  Introduction. 


INTRODUCTION.  35 


Schlegel  concludes  that  the  author  must  have  fixed  on  that 
number  deliberately,  in  order  to  prevent,  as  far  as  he  could, 
all  subsequent  interpolations  \  This  is  certainly  not  un- 
likely ;  and  if  the  aim  of  the  author  was  such  as  Schlegel 
suggests,  it  has  assuredly  been  thoroughly  successful.  In 
the  chapter  of  the  Mahabharata  immediately  succeeding 
the  eighteenth  chapter  of  the  Gita,  the  extent  of  the  work 
in  .rlokas  is  distinctly  stated.  The  verses  in  which  this 
is  stated  do  not  exist  in  the  Gau^a  or  Bengal  recension, 
and  are  doubtless  not  genuine.  But,  nevertheless,  they  are 
interesting,  and  I  shall  reproduce  them  here.  'Ke.?ava 
spoke  610  j-lokas,  Ar^una  fifty-seven,  San£*aya  sixty-seven, 
and  Dhrztarash/ra  one  ^loka ;  such  is  the  extent  of  the 
Git&.'  It  is  very  difficult  to  account  for  these  figures. 
According  to  them,  the  total  number  of  verses  in  the  Gita 
would  be  745,  whereas  the  number  in  the  current  MSS., 
and  even  in  the  Mahabharata  itself,  is,  as  already  stated, 
only  700  2.  I  cannot  suggest  any  explanation  whatever  of 
this  discrepancy. 

In  conclusion,  a  few  words  may  be  added  regarding  the 
general  principles  followed  in  the  translation  contained  in 
this  volume.  My  aim  has  been  to  make  that  translation 
as  close  and  literal  a  rendering  as  possible  of  the  Gitd,  as 
interpreted  by  the  commentators  6ankara£arya,  Sridhara- 
svamin,  and  Madhusudana  Sarasvati.  Reference  has  also 
been  frequently  made  to  the  commentary  of  Ramanu^a- 
£arya,  and  also  to  that  of  Nilaka^a,  which  latter  forms  part 
of  the  author's  general  commentary  on  the  Mahabharata.  In 
some  places  these  commentators  differ  among  themselves, 
and  then  I  have  made  my  own  choice.  The  foot-notes  are 
mainly  intended  to  make  clear  that  which  necessarily  re- 
mains obscure  in  a  literal  translation.  Some  of  the  notes, 
however,  also  point  out  the  parallelisms  existing  between  the 
Gita  and  other  works,  principally  the  Upanishads  and  the 
Buddhistic  Dhammapada  and  Sutta  Nipata.     Of  the  latter 

1  P.  xl  (Lassen's  ed.) 

2  tfankara's  commentary  states  in  so  many  words  that  the  Gita  he  used  con- 
tained only  700  slokas. 

D  2 


36  BHAGAVADGITA. 


I  have  not  been  able  to  procure  the  original  Pali ;  I  have 
only  used  Sir  M.  C.  Swamy's  translation.  But  I  may  here 
note,  that  there  are  some  verses,  especially  in  the  Salla 
Sutta  (see  pp.  124-127  of  Sir  M.  C.  Swamy's  book),  the 
similarity  of  which,  in  doctrine  and  expression,  to  some  of 
the  verses  of  the  Gita,  is  particularly  striking.  The  analo- 
gies between  the  Gita  and  the  Upanishads  have  been  made 
the  basis  of  certain  conclusions  in  this  Introduction.  Those 
between  the  Gita  and  these  Buddhistic  works  are  at  present, 
to  my  mind,  only  interesting;  I  am  unable  yet  to  say 
whether  they  may  legitimately  be  made  the  premises  for 
any  historical  deductions. 

There  are  two  indexes :  the  first  a  general  index  of 
matters,  the  second  containing  the  principal  words  in  the 
Gita  which  may  prove  useful  or  interesting  for  philolo- 
gical, historical,  or  other  kindred  purposes. 


BHAGAVADGITA. 


Chapter    I. 


Dhrztar&sh/ra  said  : 
What  did  my  (people)  and  the   Pa^avas  do,  O 
San^aya !    when   they  assembled   together   on    the 
holy  field  of  Kurukshetra,  desirous  to  do  battle  ? 

Safi^aya  said  : 
Seeing  the  army  of  the  PaWavas  drawn  up  in 
battle-array l,  the  prince  Duryodhana  approached 
the  preceptor,  and  spoke  (these)  words  :  '  O  pre- 
ceptor !  observe  this  grand  army  of  the  sons  of 
Pa^u,  drawn  up  in  battle-array  by  your  talented 
pupil,  the  son  of  Drupada.  In  it  are  heroes 
(bearing)  large  bows,  the  equals  of  Bhlma  and 
Ar^oina  in  battle — (namely),  Yuyudhana,  Vira/a,  and 
Drupada,  the  master  of  a  great  car 2,  and  Dhrzshfe- 
ketu,  A^ekitana,  and  the  valiant  king  of  Kasi,  Puru^it 
and  Kuntibho/a,  and  that  eminent  man  6aibya;  the 
heroic  Yudhamanyu,  the  valiant  Uttamau^as,  the 
son  of  Subhadra,  and  the  sons  of  Draupadf — all 
masters  of  great  cars.     And  now,  O  best  of  Brah- 

1  Several  of  these  modes  of  array  are  described  in  Manu  VII,  187, 
like  a  staff,  like  a  wain,  like  a  boar,  &c.  That  of  the  PaWavas,  here 
referred  to,  appears  to  have  been  like  the  thunderbolt,  as  to  which 
see  Manu  VII,  191. 

2  This  is  a  literal  rendering ;  the  technical  meaning  is  '  a  warrior 
proficient  in  military  science,  who  can  fight  single-handed  a  thou- 
sand archers/ 


38  BHAGAVADGITA. 


ma;^as !  learn  who  are  most  distinguished  among 
us,  and  are  leaders  of  my  army.  I  will  name  them 
to  you,  in  order  that  you  may  know  them  well. 
Yourself,  and  Bhishma,  and  Kar^a,  and  Krzpa  the 
victor  of  (many)  battles  ;  Aivatth&man,  and  Vikar/za, 
and  also  the  son  of  Somadatta,  and  many  other 
brave  men,  who  have  given  up  their  lives  for  me, 
who  fight  with  various  weapons,  (and  are)  all  dex- 
terous in  battle.  Thus  our  army  which  is  protected 
by  Bhishma  is  unlimited ;  while  this  army  of  theirs 
which  is  protected  by  Bhima  is  very  limited.  And 
therefore  do  ye  all,  occupying  respectively  the  posi- 
tions 1  assigned  to  you,  protect  Bhishma 2  only/ 

Then  his  powerful  grandsire,  Bhishma,  the  oldest 
of  the  Kauravas,  roaring  aloud  like  a  lion,  blew  his 
conch,  (thereby)  affording  delight  to  Duryodhana. 
And  then  all  at  once,  conchs,  and  kettledrums,  and 
tabors,  and  trumpets  were  played  upon  ;  and  there 
was  a  tumultuous  din.  Then,  too,  Madhava  and  the 
son  of  F&ndu  (Ar^una),  seated  in  a  grand  chariot  to 
which  white  steeds  were  yoked,  blew  their  heavenly 
conchs.  Hrzshikeici3  blew  the  Pin/§a^anya 4,  and 
Dhanan^aya  the  Devadatta,  and  Bhima,  (the  doer)  of 
fearful  deeds,  blew  the  great  conch  Pau/^ra.  King 
Yudhish^ira,  the  son  of  Kunti5,  blew  the  Anan- 
tavi^*aya,  and   Nakula  and  Sahadeva  (respectively) 

1  The  original  word  means,  according  to  -Sridhara, '  the  ways  of 
entrance  into  a  Vyuha  or  phalanx.' 

2  Who,  as  generalissimo,  remained  in  the  centre  of  the  army. 

3  Literally,  according  to  the  commentators, '  lord  of  the  senses  of 
perception/ 

4  Schlegel  renders  the  names  of  these  conchs  by  Gigantea, 
Theodotes,  Arundinea,  Triumphatrix,  Dulcisona,  and  Gemmi- 
florea  respectively. 

5  So  called,  par  excellence,  apparently. 


CHAPTER    I,   24.  39 


the  Sughosha  and  Ma^ipushpaka.  And  the  king 
of  KcLsl,  too,  who  has  an  excellent  bow,  and  Sikh.a7t~ 
din,  the  master  of  a  great  car,  and  Dhrzsh/adyumna, 
Viri/a,  and  the  unconquered  Satyaki,  and  Drupada, 
and  the  sons  of  Draupadi,  and  the  son  of  Subhadra, 
of  mighty  arms,  blew  conchs  severally  from  all  sides, 
O  king  of  the  earth !  That  tumultuous  din  rent 
the  hearts  of  all  (the  people)  of  Dhrztarcishfra's 
(party),  causing  reverberations  throughout  heaven 
and  earth.  Then  seeing  (the  people  of)  Dhrz- 
tar&sh/ra's  party  regularly  marshalled,  the  son  of 
Pa/^u,  whose  standard  is  the  ape,  raised  his  bow  \ 
after  the  discharge  of  missiles  had  commenced,  and 
O  king  of  the  earth!  spake  these  words  to  Hrzshi- 
kess. :  '  O  undegraded  one  1  station  my  chariot 
between  the  two  armies,  while  I  observe  those,  who 
stand  here  desirous  to  engage  in  battle,  and  with 
whom,  in  the  labours  of  this  struggle,  I  must  do 
battle.  I  will  observe  those  who  are  assembled 
here  and  who  are  about  to  engage  in  battle,  wishing 
to  do  service  in  battle2  to  the  evil-minded  son  of 
Dhrztarash/ra.' 

San^aya  said : 

Thus  addressed  by  Gu^ake^a 3,  O  descendant  of 
Bharata4!  Hrzshfke^a  stationed  that  excellent  cha- 
riot between  the  two  armies,  in  front  of  Bhishma 
and  Dro^a  and  of  all  the  kings  of  the  earth,  and 

1  I.  e.  to  join  in  the  fight. 

2  In  the  original,  several  derivatives  from  the  root  yudh,  mean- 
ing '  to  fight/  occur  with  the  same  frequency  as  '  battle '  here. 

3  Generally  interpreted  '  lord  of  sleep/  i.  e.  not  indolent.  Nila- 
ka«/^a  also  suggests,  that  it  may  mean  '  of  thick  hair/ 

4  The  son  of  Dushyanta  and  -Sakuntala,  after  whom  India  is  called 
'  Bharatavarsha/  and  from  whom  both  PaWavas  and  Kauravas 
were  descended. 


4-0  BHAGAVADGITA. 


said  :  '  O  son  of  Pmha  !  look  at  these  assembled 
Kauravas.'  There  the  son  of  Pmha  saw  in  both 
armies,  fathers  and  grandfathers,  preceptors,  ma- 
ternal uncles,  brothers,  sons1,  grandsons,  companions, 
fathers-in-law,  as  well  as  friends.  And  seeing  all 
those  kinsmen  standing  (there),  the  son  of  Kunti 
was  overcome  by  excessive  pity,  and  spake  thus 
despondingly. 

Ar^una  said : 

Seeing  these  kinsmen,  O  Krzshnal  standing  (here) 
desirous  to  engage  in  battle,  my  limbs  droop  down ; 
my  mouth  is  quite  dried  up;  a  tremor  comes  on 
my  body ;  and  my  hairs  stand  on  end ;  the  Ga^fva 
(bow)  slips  from  my  hand;  my  skin  burns  intensely. 
I  am  unable,  too,  to  stand  up;  my  mind  whirls 
round,  as  it  were;  O  Ke^ava!  I  see  adverse  omens2; 
and  I  do  not  perceive  any  good  (to  accrue)  after 
killing  (my)  kinsmen  in  the  battle.  I  do  not  wish 
for  victory,  O  Krishna, !  nor  sovereignty,  nor  plea- 
sures :  what  is  sovereignty  to  us,  O  Govinda !  wThat 
enjoyments,  and  even  life  ?  Even  those,  for  whose 
sake  we  desire  sovereignty,  enjoyments,  and  plea- 
sures, are  standing  here  for  battle,  abandoning  life 
and  wealth — preceptors,  fathers,  sons  as  well  as 
grandfathers,  maternal  uncles,  fathers-in-law,  grand- 
sons, brothers-in-law,  as  also  (other)  relatives.  These  I 
do  not  wish  to  kill,  though  they  kill  (me),  O  destroyer 
of  Madhu  3 !  even  for  the  sake  of  sovereignty  over 
the  three  worlds,  how  much  less  then  for  this  earth 

1  The  words  in  this  list  include  all  standing  in  similar  relation- 
ships to  those  directly  signified. 

2  Such  as  the  appearance  of  vultures,  cars  moving  without 
horses,  &c.,  mentioned  in  the  Bhishma  Parvan  II,  17.  Cf.  Sutta 
Nipata,  p.  100. 

3  A  demon  of  this  name. 


CHAPTER   I,  44.  41 


(alone)  ?  What  joy  shall  be  ours,  O  £anardana ! 
after  killing  Dhrztarash/ras  sons  ?  Killing  these 
felons 2  we  shall  only  incur  sin.  Therefore  it  is  not 
proper  for  us  to  kill  our  own  kinsmen,  the  sons  of 
Dhrztarash/ra.  For  how,  O  M&dhava !  shall  we  be 
happy  after  killing  our  own  relatives  ?  Although 
having  their  consciences  corrupted  by  avarice,  they 
do  not  see  the  evils  flowing  from  the  extinction  of  a 
family,  and  the  sin  in  treachery  to  friends,  still,  O 
Ganardana!  should  not  we,  who  do  see  the  evils 
flowing  from  the  extinction  of  a  family,  learn  to 
refrain  from  that  sin  ?  On  the  extinction  of  a  family, 
the  eternal  rites  of  families  are  destroyed2.  Those 
rites  being  destroyed,  impiety  predominates  over  the 
whole  family3.  In  consequence  of  the  predominance 
of  impiety,  O  Krishna, !  the  women  of  the  family 
become  corrupt4;  and  the  women  becoming  corrupt, 
O  descendant  of  Vrishni !  intermingling  of  castes  re- 
sults; that  intermingling  necessarily  leads  the  family 
and  the  destroyers  of  the  family  to  hell ;  for  when 
the  ceremonies  of  (offering)  the  balls  of  food  and 
water  (to  them)  fail 5,  their  ancestors  fall  down  (to 
hell).  By  these  transgressions  of  the  destroyers  of 
families,  which  occasion  interminglings  of  castes, 
the  eternal  rites  of  castes  and  rites  of  families  are 

1  Six  classes  are  mentioned :  an  incendiary;  one  who  administers 
poison;  one  who  assaults  another — weapon  in  hand;  one  who 
destroys  property ;  one  who  robs  another  of  his  wife ;  or  his  fields. 

2  I.  e.  there  being  none  to  attend  to  the  '  rites/  women  being 
ineligible. 

3  I.  e.  the  surviving  members. 

4  I.  e.  either  by  the  mere  fact  of  relationship  to  such  men,  or  by 
following  their  bad  example. 

5  There  being  no  qualified  person  to  perform  them;  ' their 
ancestors' — that  is  to  say,  of  the  '  destroyers  of  families/ 


42  BHAGAVADGITA. 


subverted.  And  O  £an&rdana!  we  have  heard 
that  men  whose  family-rites  are  subverted,  must 
necessarily  live  in  hell.  Alas  !  we  are  engaged  in 
committing  a  heinous  sin,  seeing  that  we  are  making 
efforts  for  killing  our  own  kinsmen  out  of  greed  of 
the  pleasures  of  sovereignty.  If  the  sons  of  Dhrzta- 
rashfra,  weapon  in  hand,  should  kill  me  in  battle, 
me  weaponless  and  not  defending  (myself),  that 
would  be  better  for  me. 

San^aya  said  : 
Having  spoken  thus,  Ar^una  cast  aside  his  bow 
together  with  the  arrows,  on  the  battle-field,  and 
sat  down  in  (his)  chariot,  with  a  mind  agitated  by 
grief  

Chapter  II. 

San^aya  said  : 
To  him,  who  was  thus  overcome  with  pity,  and 
dejected,  and  whose   eyes    were  full  of  tears   and 
turbid,  the  destroyer  of  Madhu  spoke  these  words. 

The  Deity  said : 
How  (comes  it  that)  this  delusion,  O  Ar^una! 
which  is  discarded  by  the  good,  which  excludes  from 
heaven,  and  occasions  infamy,  has  overtaken  you 
in  this  (place  of)  peril  ?  Be  not  effeminate,  O  son 
of  Prz'tha !  it  is  not  worthy  of  you.  Cast  off  this 
base  weakness  of  heart,  and  arise,  O  terror  of  (your) 
foes ! 

Ar^una  said : 

How,  O  destroyer  of  Madhu !  shall  I  encounter 
with  arrows  in  the  battle  Bhlshma  and  Dro^a — both, 
O  destroyer  of  enemies !  entitled  to  reverence?    Not 


CHAPTER    II,   II.  43 


killing  (my)  preceptors — (men)  of  great  glory — it 
is  better  to  live  even  on  alms  in  this  world.  But 
killing  them,  though  they  are  avaricious  of  worldly 
goods,  I  should  only  enjoy  blood-tainted  enjoyments. 
Nor  do  we  know  which  of  the  two  is  better  for 
us — whether  that  we  should  vanquish  them,  or  that 
they  should  vanquish  us.  Even  those,  whom  having 
killed,  we  do  not  wish  to  live— even  those  sons  of 
Dhrztarashfra  stand  (arrayed)  against  us.  With  a 
heart  contaminated  by  the  taint  of  helplessness  \ 
with  a  mind  confounded  about  my  duty,  I  ask  you. 
Tell  me  what  is  assuredly  good  for  me.  I  am  your 
disciple ;  instruct  me,  who  have  thrown  myself  on 
your  (indulgence).  For  I  do  not  perceive  what  is  to 
dispel  that  grief  which  will  dry  up  my  organs 2  after 
I  shall  have  obtained  a  prosperous  kingdom  on 
earth  without  a  foe,  or  even  the  sovereignty  of  the 
gods 3. 

San^aya  said  : 

Having  spoken  thus  to  Hrzshikei'a,  O  terror  of 
(your)  foes !  Gu^ke^a  said  to  Govinda,  *  I  shall  not 
engage  in  battle  ; '  and  verily  remained  silent.  To 
him  thus  desponding  between  the  two  armies,  O 
descendant  of  Bharata !  Hrtshikesa,  spoke  these 
words  with  a  slight  smile. 

The  Deity  said  : 
You  have  grieved  for  those  who  deserve  no  grief, 

1  The  commentators  say  that  'heart'  here  signifies  the  dis- 
positions which  are  stated  in  chapter  XVIII  infra,  p.  126.  The 
feeling  of '  helplessness '  is  incompatible  with  what  is  there  stated 
as  the  proper  disposition  for  a  Kshatriya. 

2  I.  e.  by  the  heat  of  vexation;  the  meaning  is,  'which  will  cause 
constant  vexation  of  spirit.' 

8  I.  e.  if  the  means  employed  are  the  sinful  acts  referred  to. 


44  bhagavadg!tA. 


and  you  talk  words  of  wisdom1.  Learned  men  grieve 
not  for  the  living  nor  the  dead.     Never  did  I  not 
exist,  nor  you,  nor  these  rulers  of  men ;  nor  will  any 
one  of  us  ever  hereafter  cease  to  be.     As  in  this 
body,  infancy  and  youth  and  old  age  (come)  to  the 
embodied  (self) 2,  so  does  the  acquisition  of  another 
body;    a  sensible  man  is  not  deceived  about  that* 
The  contacts  of  the  senses3,  O  son  of  Kunti!  which 
produce  cold  and  heat,  pleasure  and  pain,  are  not 
permanent,  they  are  ever  coming  and  going.     Bear 
them,  O  descendant  of  Bharata !     For,  O  chief  of 
men!    that   sensible    man   whom    they4  (pain   and 
pleasure  being  alike  to  him)  afflict  not,   he  merits 
immortality.    There  is  no  existence  for  that  which 
is  unreal ;  there  is  no  non-existence  for  that  which 
is  real.    And  the  (correct)  conclusion  about  both 5  is 
perceived  by  those  who  perceive  the  truth.     Know 
that  to  be  indestructible  which   pervades   all  this  ; 
the  destruction  of  that  inexhaustible  (principle)  none 
can  bring  about.    These  bodies  appertaining  to  the 
embodied  (self)  which  is  eternal,  indestructible,  and 
indefinable,  are  said 6  to  be  perishable ;  therefore  do 
engage  in   battle,  O  descendant  of  Bharata!     He 
who  thinks  it  to  be  the  killer  and  he  who  thinks 


1  Scil.  regarding  family-rites,  &c,  for,  says  Nilaka«/^a,  they  indi- 
cate knowledge  of  soul  as  distinct  from  body. 

2  A  common  word  in  the  Gita,  that  which  presides  over  each 
individual  body. 

3  Scil.  with  external  objects.  4  I.  e.  the  '  contacts.' 

5  The  sense  is  this — there  are  two  things  apparently,  the  soul 
which  is  indestructible,  and  the  feelings  of  pain  &c.  which  '  come 
and  go.'  The  true  philosopher  knows  that  the  former  only  is  real  and 
exists;  and  that  the  latter  is  unreal  and  non-existent.  He  therefore 
does  not  mind  the  latter. 

6  Scil.  by  those  who  are  possessed  of  true  knowledge. 


CHAPTER   II,  27.  45 


it  to  be  killed,  both  know   nothing.     It  kills  not, 
is    not  killed1.      It   is  not  born,  nor  does  it  ever 
die,  nor,  having    existed,   does    it    exist    no    more. 
Unborn,   everlasting,   unchangeable,   and    primeval, 
it  is  not  killed  when  the  body  is  killed  2.     O  son  of 
Prttha, !  how  can  that  man  who  knows  it  thus  to  be 
indestructible,  everlasting,  unborn,  and    inexhausti- 
ble, how  and  whom  can  he  kill,  whom  can  he  cause 
to  be  killed  ?    As  a  man,  casting  off  old  clothes,  puts 
on   others  and  new  ones,    so  the    embodied  (self) 
casting  off  old  bodies,  goes  to  others  and  new  ones. 
Weapons  do  not  divide  it  (into  pieces) ;  fire  does  not 
burn  it;  waters  do  not  moisten  it;  the  wind  does  not 
dry  it  up.     It  is  not  divisible;  it  is  not  combustible; 
it  is  not  to  be  moistened;  it  is  not  to  be  dried  up. 
It   is    everlasting,    all-pervading,    stable,    firm,    and 
eternal3.    It  is  said  to  be  unperceived,  to  be  unthink- 
able, to  be  unchangeable.    Therefore  knowing  it  to 
be  such,  you  ought  not  to  grieve.     But  even  if  you 
think  that  it  is  constantly  born,  and  constantly  dies, 
still,  O  you  of  mighty  arms !  you  ought  not  to  grieve 
thus.     For  to  one  that  is  born,  death  is  certain ; 
and  to  one  that  dies,  birth  is  certain4.    Therefore 


1  Cf.  Ka/^a-upanishad,  p.  104. 

2  Ka/^a-upanishad,  pp.  103,  104. 

3  'Eternal.7  Nilaka«//^a  explains  this  by  'unlimited  by  time, 
place/  &c.  ASahkara  and  others  as  '  uncreated/  '  without  cause/ 
Stable = not  assuming  new  forms;  firm = not  abandoning  the  original 
form.  (-Sridhara.)  The  latter  signifies  a  slight  change;  the  former 
a  total  change. 

4  Cf.  the  following  from  the  Sutta  Nipata  (Sir  M.  C.  Swamy's 
translation),  pp.  124,  125:  'There  is,  indeed,  no  means  by  which 
those  born  could  be  prevented  from  dying/  '  Even  thus  the  world 
is  afflicted  with  death  and  decay;  therefore  wise  men,  knowing  the 
course  of  things  in  the  world,  do  not  give  way  to  grief/ 


46  BHAGAVADGITA. 


about  (this)  unavoidable  thing,  you  ought  not  to 
grieve.  The  source  of  things,  O  descendant  of 
Bharata !  is  unperceived ;  their  middle  state  is  per- 
ceived; and  their  end  again  is  unperceived.  What 
(occasion  is  there  for  any)  lamentation  regarding 
them  1  ?  One  looks  upon  it 2  as  a  wonder ;  another 
similarly  speaks  of  it  as  a  wonder;  another  too  hears 
of  it  as  a  wonder ;  and  even  after  having  heard  of  it, 
no  one  does  really  know  it 3.  This  embodied  (self), 
O  descendant  of  Bharata !  within  every  one's  body 
is  ever  indestructible.  Therefore  you  ought  not  to 
grieve  for  any  being.  Having  regard  to  your  own 
duty  also,  you  ought  not  to  falter,  for  there  is 
nothing  better  for  a  Kshatriya 4  than  a  righteous 
battle.  Happy  those  Kshatriyas,  O  son  of  Prztha ! 
who  can  find  such  a  battle  (to  fight) — come  of 
itself 5 — an  open  door  to  heaven  !  But  if  you  will 
not  fight  this  righteous  battle,  then  you  will  have 
abandoned  your  own  duty  and  your  fame,  and  you 
will  incur  sin.  All  beings,  too,  will  tell  of  your 
everlasting  infamy ;  and  to  one  who  has  been 
honoured,  infamy  is  (a)  greater  (evil)  than  death. 
(Warriors  who  are)  masters  of  great  cars  will  think 
that  you  abstained  from  the  battle  through  fear, 
and  having  been  highly  thought  of  by  them, 
you  will  fall  down  to  littleness.    Your  enemies,  too, 


1  Cf.  Sutta  Nipata,  p.  125.  'In  vain  do  you  grieve,  not  knowing 
well  the  two  ends  of  hirn  whose  manner  either  of  coming  or  going 
you  know  not.' 

2  I.  e.  the  self  spoken  of  above. 

3  Ka/^a-upanishad,  p.  96. 

4  One  of  the  warrior  caste. 

5  Without  any  effort,  that  is  to  say,  of  one's  own. 


CHAPTER    II,  42.  47 


decrying  your  power,  will  speak  much  about  you 
that  should  not  be  spoken.  And  what,  indeed, 
more  lamentable  than  that  ?  Killed,  you  will  obtain 
heaven;  victorious,  you  will  enjoy  the  earth.  There- 
fore arise,  O  son  of  Kuntf !  resolved  to  (engage  in) 
battle.  Looking  alike  on  pleasure  and  pain,  on  gain 
and  loss,  on  victory  and  defeat,  then  prepare  for 
battle,  and  thus  you  will  not  incur  sin.  The  know- 
ledge here  declared  to  you  is  that  relating  to  the 
Sankhya1.  Now  hear  that  relating  to  the  Yoga. 
Possessed  of  this  knowledge,  O  son  of  Prz'tha !  you 
will  cast  off  the  bonds  of  action.  In  this  (path  to 
final  emancipation)  nothing  that  is  commenced  be- 
comes abortive  ;  no  obstacles  exist;  and  even  a  little 
of  this  (form  of)  piety  protects  one  from  great 
danger 2.  There  is  here  3,  O  descendant  of  Kuru ! 
but  one  state  of  mind  consisting  in  firm  understand- 
ing. But  the  states  of  mind  of  those  who  have  no 
firm  understanding  are  many-branched  and  endless. 
The  state  of  mind  consisting  in  firm  understanding 
regarding  steady  contemplation 4  does  not  belong  to 
those,  O  son  of  Prz'tha !  who  are  strongly  attached  to 
(worldly)  pleasures  and  power,  and  whose  minds  are 
drawn  away  by  that  flowery  talk  which  is  full  of 
(ordinances  of)  specific  acts  for  the  attainment  of 
(those)  pleasures  and  (that)  power,  and  which  pro- 


1  Sankhya  is  explained  in  different  modes  by  the  different  com- 
mentators, but  the  resulting  meaning  here  seems  to  be,  that  the 
doctrine  stated  is  the  doctrine  of  true  knowledge  and  emancipation 
by  its  means.     See  infra,  p.  52. 

2  Viz.  this  mortal  mundane  life. 

3  I.  e.  for  those  who  enter  on  this  '  path/ 

4  I.  e.  of  the  supreme  Being ;  Yoga  meaning  really  the  dedication 
of  all  acts  to  that  Being. 


48  BHAGAVADGITA. 


mises  birth  as  the  fruit  of  acts1 — (that  flowery 
talk)  which  those  unwise  ones  utter,  who  are  ena- 
moured of  Vedic  words,  who  say  there  is  nothing 
else,  who  are  full  of  desires,  and  whose  goal  is 
heaven 2.  The  Vedas  (merely)  relate  to  the  effects 
of  the  three  qualities 3 ;  do  you,  O  Ar^una !  rise 
above  those  effects  of  the  three  qualities,  and  be 
free  from  the  pairs  of  opposites  4,  always  preserve 
courage  5,  be  free  from  anxiety  for  new  acquisitions 
or  protection  of  old  acquisitions,  and  be  self-con- 
trolled6. To  the  instructed  Brahma/za,  there  is  in 
all  the  Vedas  as  much  utility  as  in  a  reservoir  of 
water  into  which  waters  flow  from  all  sides  7.  Your 
business  is  with  action  alone ;  not  by  any  means 
with  fruit.  Let  not  the  fruit  of  action  be  your 
motive  (to  action).  Let  not  your  attachment  be 
(fixed)  on  inaction  8.  Having  recourse  to  devotion, 
O  Dhanan^aya!  perform  actions,  casting  off  (all) 
attachment,   and   being    equable    in  success   or  ill— 

1  See  Sutta  Nipata,  p.  4. 

2  This  is  a  merely  temporary  good,  and  not  therefore  deserving 
to  be  aspired  to  before  final  emancipation. 

3  I.  e.  the  whole  course  of  worldly  affairs.  As  to  qualities,  see 
chapter  XIV. 

4  Heat  and  cold,  pain  and  pleasure,  and  so  forth.  Cf.  Manu  I,  26. 

5  Cf.  Sutta  Nipata,  p.  17  and  other  places. 

6  Keeping  the  mind  from  worldly  objects. 

7  The  meaning  here  is  not  easily  apprehended.  I  suggest  the 
following  explanation  : — Having  said  that  the  Vedas  are  concerned 
with  actions  for  special  benefits,  Krishna,  compares  them  to  a 
reservoir  which  provides  water  for  various  special  purposes, 
drinking,  bathing,  &c.  The  Vedas  similarly  prescribe  particular  rites 
and  ceremonies  for  going  to  heaven,  or  destroying  an  enemy,  &c. 
But,  says  Knsh«a,  man's  duty  is  merely  to  perform  the  actions 
prescribed  for  him  among  these,  and  not  entertain  desires  for  the 
special  benefits  named.  The  stanza  occurs  in  the  Sanatsugitiya,  too. 

8  Doing  nothing  at  all. 


CHAPTER    II,  55.  49 


success;  (such)  equability  is  called  devotion.  Action, 
O  Dhanan^aya!  is  far  inferior  to  the  devotion  of 
the  mind.  In  that  devotion  seek  shelter.  Wretched 
are  those  whose  motive  (to  action)  is  the  fruit  (of 
action).  He  who  has  obtained  devotion  in  this 
world  casts  off  both  merit  and  sin1.  Therefore  apply 
yourself  to  devotion ;  devotion  in  (all)  actions  is 
wisdom.  The  wise  who  have  obtained  devotion 
cast  off  the  fruit  of  action ;  and  released  from  the 
shackles  of  (repeated)  births2,  repair  to  that  seat  where 
there  is  no  unhappiness 3.  When  your  mind  shall 
have  crossed  beyond  the  taint  of  delusion,  then  will 
you  become  indifferent  to  all  that  you  have  heard  or 
will  hear 4.  When  your  mind,  confounded  by  what 
you  have  heard  5,  will  stand  firm  and  steady  in  con- 
templation 6,  then  will  you  acquire  devotion. 

Ar^una  said : 

What  are  the  characteristics,  O  Ke^ava !  of  one 
whose  mind  is  steady,  and  who  is  intent  on  con- 
templation ?  How  should  one  of  steady  mind  speak, 
how  sit,  how  move  ? 

The  Deity  said : 
When  a  man,  O  son  of  Pr/thd !  abandons  all  the 

1  Merit  merely  leads  to  heaven,  as  to  which  see  note  on  last 
page.     Cf.  Sutta  Nip&ta,  pp.  4,  136, 145  note. 

2  Sutta  Nipata,  pp.  3-7,  &c. 

3  Sutta  Nip&ta,  p.  21. 

*  This,  according  to  Anandagiri,  means  all  writings  other  than 
those  on  the  science  of  the  soul. 

5  I.  e.  about  the  means  for  the  acquisition  of  various  desired 
things. 

6  I.  e.  of  the  soul  (-Sahkara),  of  the  supreme  Being  (Sridhara). 
Substantially  they  both  mean  the  same  thing. 

[8]  E 


50  bhagavadgitA. 


desires  of  his  heart,  and  is  pleased  in  his  self  only 
and  by  his  self1,  he  is  then  called  one  of  steady  mind. 
He  whose  heart  is  not  agitated  in  the  midst  of 
calamities,  who  has  no  longing  for  pleasures,  and 
from  whom  (the  feelings  of)  affection,  fear,  and 
wrath  2  have  departed,  is  called  a  sage  of  steady 
mind.  His  mind  is  steady,  who,  being  without 
attachments  anywhere,  feels  no  exultation  and  no 
aversion  on  encountering  the  various  agreeable  and 
disagreeable3  (things  of  this  world).  A  man's  mind 
\s  steady,  when  he  withdraws  his  senses  from  (all) 
objects  of  sense,  as  the  tortoise  (withdraws)  its 
limbs  from  all  sides.  Objects  of  sense  draw  back 
from  a  person  who  is  abstinent;  not  so  the  taste 
(for  those  objects).  But  even  the  taste  departs 
from  him,  wrhen  he  has  seen  the  Supreme4.  The 
boisterous  senses,  O  son  of  Kuntt !  carry  away  by 
force  the  mind  even  of  a  wise  man,  who  exerts 
himself  (for  final  emancipation).  Restraining  them 
all,  a  man  should  remain  engaged  in  devotion, 
making  me  his  only  resort.  For  his  mind  is  steady 
whose  senses  are  under  his  control*  The  man  who 
ponders  over  objects  of  sense  forms  an  attachment 
to  them ;  from  (that)  attachment  is  produced  desire; 
and  from  desire  anger  is  produced 5 ;  from  anger 
results  want  of  discrimination  6 ;  from  want  of  dis- 

VI.  e.  pleased,  without  regard  to  external  objects,  by  self-con- 
templation alone. 

2  Cf.  Sutta  Nip&ta,  p.  3. 

3  The  word  ,rubha\mbha  in  this  sense  also  occurs  in  the  Dhamma- 
pada,  stanza  78,  and  in  the  Maitrf-upanishad,  p.  34. 

4  See  on  this,  Wilson's  Essays  on  Sanskrit  Literature,  vol.  iii, 
p.  130* 

5  I,  e.  when  the  desire  is  frustrated. 

6  I.  e.  between  right  and  wrong.    Confusion  of  memory =for- 
getfulness  of  *SUstras  and  rules  prescribed  in  them. 


CHAPTER    II,  70.  51 


crimination,  confusion  of  the  memory ;  from  con- 
fusion of  the  memory,  loss  of  reason ;  and  in  conse- 
quence of  loss  of  reason  he  is  utterly  ruined.  But 
the  self-restrained  man  who  moves  among1  objects 
with  senses  under  the  control  of  his  own  self,  and 
free  from  affection  and  aversion,  obtains  tranquillity 2. 
When  there  is  tranquillity,  all  his  miseries  are  de- 
stroyed, for  the  mind  of  him  whose  heart  is  tranquil 
soon  becomes  steady.  He  who  is  not  self-restrained 
has  no  steadiness  of  mind ;  nor  has  he  who  is  not  self- 
restrained  perseverance3  in  the  pursuit  of  self-know- 
ledge ;  there  is  no  tranquillity  for  him  who  does  not 
persevere  in  the  pursuit  of  self-knowledge ;  and 
whence  can  there  be  happiness  for  one  who  is  not 
tranquil  ?  For  the  heart  which  follows  the  rambling 
senses  leads  away  his  judgment,  as  the  wind  leads 
a  boat  astray  upon  the  waters.  Therefore,  O  you  of 
mighty  arms!  his  mind  is  steady  whose  senses  are 
restrained  on  all  sides  from  objects  of  sense.  The 
self-restrained  man  is  awake,  when  it  is  night  for  all 
beings ;  and  when  all  beings  are  awake,  that  is  the 
night  of  the  right-seeing  sage4.  He  into  whom  all 
objects  of  desire  enter,  as  waters  enter  the  ocean, 
which,  (though)  replenished,  (still)  keeps  its  position 
unmoved, — he  only  obtains  tranquillity ;  not  he  who 
desires  (those)  obj  ects  of  desire.  The  man  who,  casting 


1  Cf.  Sutta  Nipata,  p.  45. 

2  Cf.  Maitri-upanishad,  p.  134,  where  the  commentator  explains 
it  to  mean  freedom  from  desires. 

3  For  a  somewhat  similar  use  of  the  word  bhavanS  in  this  sense, 
comp.  Dhammapada,  stanza  301. 

*  Spiritual  matters  are  dark  as  night  to  the  common  run  of  men, 
while  they  are  wide  awake  in  all  worldly  pursuits.  With  the  sage 
the  case  is  exactly  the  reverse. 

E  2 


52  BHAGAVADGiTA. 


off  all  desires,  lives  free  from  attachments,  who  is 
free  from  egoism *,  and  from  (the  feeling  that  this  or 
that  is)  mine  2,  obtains  tranquillity.  This,  O  son  of 
Prztha!  is  the  Brahmic3  state ;  attaining  to  this,  one 
is  never  deluded ;  and  remaining  in  it  in  (one's)  last 
moments,  one  attains  (brahma-nirvi/za)  the  Brahmic 
bliss  4. 


Chapter  III. 

Ar^*una  said : 
If,  O  £anardana!  devotion  is  deemed  by  you 
to  be  superior  to  action,  then  why,  O  Ke^ava! 
do  you  prompt  me  to  (this)  fearful  action  ?  You 
seem,  indeed,  to  confuse  my  mind  by  equivocal 
words.  Therefore,  declare  one  thing  determinately, 
by  which  I  may  attain  the  highest  good. 

The  Deity  said  : 

0  sinless  one !  I  have  already  declared,  that  in 
this  world  there  is  a  twofold  path5 — that  of  the 
Sinkhyas  by  devotion  in  the  shape  of  (true)  know- 
ledge ;  and  that  of  the  Yogins  by  devotion  in  the 
shape  of  action.  A  man  does  not  attain  freedom 
from  action 6  merely  by  not  engaging  in  action ;  nor 
does  he  attain  perfection7  by  mere8  renunciation. 
For  nobody  ever  remains  even  for  an  instant  without 

1  Either  pride  or,  better,  the  false  notion  mentioned  infra,  p.  55. 

2  An  almost  identical  expression  occurs  in  the  Dhammapada, 
stanza  367,  and  Maitri-upanishad,  p.  37. 

3  The  state  of  identification  of  oneself  with  the  Brahman,  which 
results  from  a  correct  knowledge  of  the  Brahman. 

4  Infra,  p.  66.  5  Supra,  p.  47. 

6  I.  e.,  according  to  *S*ahkara,  identification  of  oneself  with 
Brahman.  7  Final  emancipation. 

8  I.  e.  not  coupled  with  knowledge  and  purity  of  heart. 


CHAPTER   III,  13.  53 


performing  some  action;  since  the  qualities  of  nature 
constrain  everybody,  not  having  free-will  (in  the 
matter),  to  some  action  l.  The  deluded  man  who, 
restraining  the  organs  of  action 2,  continues  to  think 
in  his  mind  about  objects  of  sense,  is  called  a 
hypocrite.  But  he,  O  Ar^una !  who  restraining  his 
senses  by  his  mind  3,  and  being  free  from  attach- 
ments, engages  in  devotion  (in  the  shape)  of  action, 
with  the  organs  of  action,  is  far  superior.  Do  you 
perform  prescribed  action,  for  action  is  better  than 
inaction,  and  the  support  of  your  body,  too,  cannot 
be  accomplished  with  inaction.  This  world  is  fet- 
tered by  all  action  other  than  action  for  the  purpose 
of  the  sacrifice  4.  Therefore,  O  son  of  Kuntl !  do 
you,  casting  off  attachment,  perform  action  for  that 
purpose.  The  Creator,  having  in  olden  times  created 
men  together  with  the  sacrifice,  said :  '  Propagate 
with  this.  May  it  be  the  giver  to  you  of  the  things 
you  desire.  Please  the  gods  with  this,  and  may 
those  gods  please  you.  Pleasing  each  other,  you 
will  attain  the  highest  good.  For  pleased  with  the 
sacrifices,  the  gods  will  give  you  the  enjoyments 
you  desire.  And  he  who  enjoys  himself  without 
giving  them  what  they  have  given,  is,  indeed,  a  thief/ 
The  good,  who  eat  the  leavings  of  a  sacrifice,  are 
released  from  all  sins.  But  the  unrighteous  ones, 
who  prepare  food  for  themselves  only,  incur  sin5. 


1  Cf.  infra,  pp.  122-128.  2  Hands,  feet,  &c. 

3  By  means  of  true  discrimination  keeping  the  senses  from 
attachments  to  worldly  objects,  which  lead  to  sin  and  evil. 

4  Cf.  infra,  pp.  60,  61.  Probably  the  '  sacrifices '  spoken  of  in 
that  passage  must  be  taken  to  be  the  same  as  those  referred  to 
in  the  Creator's  injunction  mentioned  in  this  passage. 

5  Cf.  Maitrt-upanishad,  p.  143. 


54  bhagavadgIta. 


From  food  are  born  (all)  creatures ;  from  rain  is  the 
production  of  food ;  rain  is  produced  by  sacrifices  ; 
sacrifices  are  the  result  of  action ;  know  that  action 
has  its  source  in  the  Vedas  ;  the  Vedas  come  from 
the  Indestructible.  Therefore  the  all-comprehending 
Vedas  are  always  concerned  with  sacrifices1.  He 
who  in  this  world  does  not  turn  round  the  wheel 
revolving  thus,  is  of  sinful  life,  indulging  his  senses, 
and,  O  son  of  Prztha!  he  lives  in  vain.  But  the 
man  who  is  attached  to  his  self  only,  who  is  con- 
tented in  his  self,  and  is  pleased  with  his  self2,  has 
nothing  to  do.  He  has  no  interest  at  all  in  what 
is  done,  and  none  whatever  in  what  is  not  done,  in 
this  world 3 ;  nor  is  any  interest  of  his  dependent 
on  any  being.  Therefore4  always  perform  action, 
which  must  be  performed,  without  attachment.  For 
a  man,  performing  action  without  attachment,  attains 
the  Supreme.  By  action  alone,  did  (kanaka  and  the 
rest  work  for  perfection  5.  And  having  regard  also 
to  the  keeping  of  people  (to  their  duties)  you  should 
perform  action.  Whatever  a  great  man  does,  that 
other  men  also  do.  And  people  follow  whatever  he 
receives  as  authority.  There  is  nothing,  O  son  of 
PrztM!    for   me  to  do   in  (all)  the  three  worlds, 

1  The  commentators  explain  this  to  mean  that  though  the 
Vedas  elucidate  all  matters,  their  principal  subject  is  the  sacrifice. 

2  The  distinctions  here  are  rather  nice, — an  ordinary  man  is 
'  attached '  to  worldly  objects,  is  '  contented '  with  goods  &c,  and 
is  '  pleased '  with  special  gains. 

3  No  good  or  evil  accrues  to  him  from  anything  he  does  or 
omits  to  do. 

4  -Srldhara  says  that  Arg-una  is  here  told  to  perform  action,  as  free- 
dom from  it  is  only  for  the  man  of  true  knowledge,  which  Ar^una 
is  not  as  yet. 

5  I.  e.  final  emancipation ;  cf.  p.  59  infra,  and  Iropanishad,  p.  6. 


CHAPTER    III,  30.  55 


nothing  to  acquire  which  has  not  been  acquired. 
Still  I  do  engage  in  action.  For  should  I  at  any 
time  not  engage  without  sloth  in  action,  men 
would  follow  in  my  path  from  all  sides,  O  son  of 
Prztha. !  If  I  did  not  perform  actions,  these  worlds 
would  be  destroyed,  I  should  be  the  cause  of  caste- 
interminglings;  and  I  should  be  ruining  these  people. 
As  the  ignorant  act,  O  descendant  of  Bharata!  with 
attachment  to  action,  so  should  a  wise  man  act 
without  attachment,  wishing  to  keep  the  people  (to 
their  duties).  A  wise  man  should  not  shake  the 
convictions  of  the  ignorant  who  are  attached  to 
action,  but  acting  with  devotion  (himself)  should 
make  them  apply  themselves  to  all  action.  He 
whose  mind  is  deluded  by  egoism  thinks  himself 
the  doer  of  the  actions,  which,  in  every  way,  are 
done  by  the  qualities  of  nature1.  But  he,  O  you 
of  mighty  arms!  who  knows  the  truth  about  the 
difference  from  qualities  and  the  difference  from 
actions  2,  forms  no  attachments,  believing  that  quali- 
ties deal  with  qualities3.  But  those  who  are  deluded 
by  the  qualities  of  nature  form  attachments  to  the 
actions  of  the  qualities  4.  A  man  of  perfect  knowledge 
should  not  shake  these  men  of  imperfect  know- 
ledge (in  their  convictions).  Dedicating  all  actions 
to  me  with  a  mind  knowing  the  relation  of  the 
supreme  and  individual  self,  engage  in  battle  with- 


1  The  active  principle  is  nature,  the  aggregate  of  the  three 
qualities;  the  soul  is  only  the  looker-on;  cf.  inter  alia,  p.  104  infra. 

2  Scil.  the  difference  of  the  soul  from  the  collection  of  qualities, 
viz.  the  body,  senses,  &c,  and  from  the  actions  of  which  they  are 
the  authors. 

3  Qualities  (i.  e.  senses)  deal  with  qualities,  i.  e.  objects  of  sense. 
*  I.  e.  all  mundane  affairs. 


56  bhagavadgitA. 


out  desire,  without  (any  feeling  that  this  or  that  is) 
mine,  and  without  any  mental  trouble  \  Even  those 
men  who  always  act  on  this  opinion  of  mine,  full  of 
faith,  and  without  carping,  are  released  from  all 
actions.  But  those  who  carp  at  my  opinion  and  do 
not  act  upon  it,  know  them  to  be  devoid  of  dis- 
crimination, deluded  as  regards  all  knowledge 2,  and 
ruined.  Even  a  man  of  knowledge  acts  consonantly 
to  his  own  nature3.  All  beings  follow  nature.  What 
will  restraint  effect  ?  Every  sense  has  its  affections 
and  aversions  towards  its  objects  fixed.  One  should 
not  become  subject  to  them,  for  they  are  one's 
opponents4.  One's  own  duty,  though  defective,  is 
better  than  another's  duty  well  performed.  Death 
in  (performing)  one's  own  duty  is  preferable  ;  the 
(performance  of  the)  duty  of  others  is  dangerous. 

Ar^iina  said  : 
But  by  whom,  O  descendant  of  Vrishnll  is  man 
impelled,   even  though  unwilling,  and,  as  it  were, 
constrained  by  force,  to  commit  sin  ? 

1  About  the  consequences  of  your  actions. 

2  Of  actions,  or  of  the  Brahman  in  its  various  forms. 

8  Which  is  the  result  of  the  virtues  and  vices  of  a  preceding 
life.  The  sequence  of  ideas  here  is  as  follows : — The  true  view 
stated  here  about  the  *  difference  from  qualities  and  actions'  is 
disregarded  by  some,  owing  to  their  '  nature '  as  now  explained. 
Then  the  question  is,  If  nature  is  so  potent,  what  is  the  good  of 
the  *Sastras  ?  The  answer  is,  Nature  only  acts  through  our  likes 
and  dislikes.  Withstand  them  and  then  you  can  follow  the  *S"dstras. 
It  is  under  the  influence  of  these  likes  and  dislikes,  that  some  may 
say,  we  shall  practise  duties  prescribed  for  others  (our  own  being 
bad  ones)  as  they  are  equally  prescribed  by  the  *Sastras.  That,  as 
stated  in  the  last  sentence  here,  is  wrong. 

4  Cf.  Sutta  Nipata,  p.  ioi,  as  to  '  likings  and  dislikings/ 


CHAPTER   III,  43.  57 


The  Deity  said : 

It  is  desire,  it  is  wrath  \  born  from  the  quality  of 
passion ;  it  is  very  ravenous,  very  sinful.  Know  that 
that  is  the  foe  in  this  world.  As  fire  is  enveloped 
by  smoke,  a  mirror  by  dust,  the  foetus  by  the 
womb,  so  is  this  2  enveloped  by  desire.  Knowledge, 
O  son  of  Kuntl  1  is  enveloped  by  this  constant  foe 
of  the  man  of  knowledge,  in  the  shape  of  desire, 
which  is  like  a  fire 3  and  insatiable.  The  senses,  the 
mind,  and  the  understanding  are  said  to  be  its  seat4; 
with  these  it  deludes  the  embodied  (self)  after  en- 
veloping knowledge.  Therefore,  O  chief  of  the 
descendants  of  Bharata!  first  restrain  your  senses, 
then  cast  off  this  sinful  thing  which  destroys  know- 
ledge and  experience6.  It  has  been  said6,  Great 
are  the  senses,  greater  than  the  senses  is  the  mind, 
greater  than  the  mind  is  the  understanding.  What  is 
greater  than  the  understanding  is  that 7.  Thus  know- 
ing that  which  is  higher  than  the  understanding,  and 
restraining  (your)self  by  (your)self,  O  you  of  mighty 

1  Vide  p.  50  supra. 

2  I.  e.  knowledge,  mentioned  in  the  next  sentence,  for  which 
construction  p.  71  and  p.  98  may  be  compared. 

3  Which  becomes  more  powerful  the  more  it  is  fed. 

4  The  mind  is  that  which  ponders  over  things  as  such  or  such  ; 
the  understanding  is  that  which  finally  determines  (cf.  Lewes' 
History  of  Philosophy,  II,  463-465).  These  and  the  senses  are 
the  '  seat '  of  desire,  because  the  perception  of  an  object  by  the 
sense,  the  pondering  over  it  by  the  mind,  and  the  determination 
about  it  by  the  understanding  are  the  preliminaries  to  the 
awakening  of  the  desire ;  supra,  p.  50. 

5  Knowledge  is  from  books  or  teachers,  experience  is  the  result 
of  personal  perception. 

6  Ka/^opanishad,  p.  114;  and  see  also  pp.  148,  149. 

7  I.  e.  the  supreme  Being,  as  in  the  KaMopanishad. 


58  BHAGAVADGITA. 


arms !  destroy  this  unmanageable  enemy  in  the  shape 
of  desire. 


Chapter  IV. 

The   Deity  said : 

This  everlasting1  (system  of)  devotion  I  declared 
to  the  sun,  the  sun  declared  it  to  Manu2,  and  Manu 
communicated  it  to  Ikshvaku.  Coming  thus  by  steps, 
it  became  known  to  royal  sages.  But,  O  terror  of 
(your)  foes !  that  devotion  was  lost  to  the  world  by 
long  (lapse  of)  time.  That  same  primeval  devotion  I 
have  declared  to  you  to-day,  seeing  that  you  are  my 
devotee  and  friend,  for  it  is  the  highest  mystery. 

Ar^una  said : 
Later  is  your  birth ;  the  birth  of  the  sun  is  prior. 
How  then  shall  I  understand  that  you  declared  (this) 
first? 

The  Deity  said : 

I  have  passed  through  many  births,  O  Arf  una ! 
and  you  also.  I  know  them  all,  but  you,  O  terror 
of  (your)  foes !  do  not  know  them.  Even  though  I 
am  unborn  and  inexhaustible  in  (my)  essence,  even 
though  I  am  lord  of  all  beings,  still  I  take  up  the 
control  of  my  own  nature 3,  and  am  born  by  means 

1  Because  its  fruit  is  imperishable,  viz.  final  emancipation. 

2  In  the  -Oandogya-upanishad,  Manu  is  the  channel  of  com- 
munication for  some  doctrine  taught  by  Pra^apati,  which  Manu 
teaches  the  'people,'  interpreted  by  Sahkara  to  mean  Ikshvaku,  &c. 
(p.  178;  see  too  p.  625). 

3  Nature  is  what  goes  to  the  formation  of  the  material  form  in 
which  he  is  born ;  the  '  power '  includes  knowledge,  omnipotence, 
&c.    It  is  delusive  because  he  is  still  really  '  unborn/ 


CHAPTER   IV,  1 6.  59 


of  my  delusive  power.  Whensoever,  O  descendant 
of  Bharata !  piety  languishes,  and  impiety  is  in  the 
ascendant,  I  create  myself.  I  am  born  age  after  age, 
for  the  protection  of  the  good,  for  the  destruction  of 
evil-doers,  and  the  establishment  of  piety.  Whoever 
truly  knows  thus  my  divine  birth  and  work,  casts  off 
(this)  body  and  is  not  born  again.  He  comes  to  me, 
O  Ar^una!  Many  from  whom  affection,  fear1,  and 
wrath  have  departed,  who  are  full  of  me,  who  depend 
on  me,  and  who  are  purified  by  the  penance  of  know- 
ledge 2,  have  come  into  my  essence.  I  serve  men  in 
the  way  in  which  they  approach  me3.    In  every  way, 

0  son  of  Prztha!  men  follow  in  my  path4.  Desiring 
the  success  of  actions 5,  men  in  this  world  worship 
the  divinities,  for  in  this  world  of  mortals,  the  success 
produced  by  action  is  soon  obtained.  The  fourfold 
division  of  castes  was  created  by  me  according  to 
the  apportionment  of  qualities  and  duties.  But 
though  I  am  its  author,  know  me  to  be  inexhausti- 
ble, and  not  the   author.     Actions  defile  me  not. 

1  have  no  attachment  to  the  fruit  of  actions.  He 
who  knows  me  thus  is  not  tied  down  by  actions. 
Knowing  this,  the  men  of  old  who  wished  for  final 
emancipation,  performed  action.  Therefore  do  you, 
too,  perform  action  as  was  done  by  men  of  old  in 
olden  times.     Even  sages  are  confused  as  to  what 

1  Cf.  Sutta  Nip&ta,  p.  73.  2  Cf.  infra,  p.  61. 

3  I.  e.  I  give  to  each  worshipper  what  is  proper  for  him. 

4  The  original  words  used  here  occur  before  in  a  different  sense 
(see  p.  55).  Here  the  meaning  is  that  to  whomsoever  directly  ad- 
dressed, all  worship  is  worship  of  me  (see  p.  84).  In  the  whole 
passage,  Krishna,  says  that  the  Deity  is  not  chargeable  with  partiality 
on  account  of  the  variety  of  human  qualities  and  states. 

5  Such  as  acquisition  of  sons,  cattle,  &c. 


6o  bhagavadgitA. 


is  action,  what  inaction.  Therefore  I  will  speak  to 
you  about  action,  and  learning  that,  you  will  be  freed 
from  (this  world  of)  evil.  One  must  possess  know- 
ledge about  action ;  one  must  also  possess  knowledge 
about  prohibited  action ;  and  again  one  must  possess 
knowledge  about  inaction.  The  truth  regarding 
action  is  abstruse.  He  is  wise  among  men,  he  is 
possessed  of  devotion,  and  performs  all  actions  \ 
who  sees  inaction  in  action,  and  action  in  inaction. 
The  wise  call  him  learned,  whose  acts  are  all  free 
from  desires  and  fancies,  and  whose  actions  are 
burnt  down  by  the  fire  of  knowledge.  Forsaking 
all  attachment  to  the  fruit  of  action,  always  con- 
tented, dependent  on  none,  he  does  nothing  at  all, 
though  he  engages  in  action.  Devoid  of  expecta- 
tions, restraining  the  mind  and  the  self,  and 
casting  off  all  belongings2,  he  incurs  no  sin,  per- 
forming actions  merely  for  the  sake  of  the  body3. 
Satisfied  with  earnings  coming  spontaneously4,  rising 
above  the  pairs  of  opposites,  free  from  all  animosity, 
and  equable  on  success  or  ill-success,  he  is  not  fettered 
down,  even  though  he  performs  (actions).  The  acts  of 
one  who  is  devoid  of  attachment,  who  is  free5,  whose 
mind  is  fixed  on  knowledge,  and  who  performs  action 
for  (the  purpose  of)  the  sacrifice 6  are  all  destroyed. 

1  Devoted  though  performing  all  actions. 

2  'Appropriating  nothing/  at  Sutta  Nipata,  p.  101,  seems  to  be 
the  same  idea.    *  Self  just  before  this  means  senses. 

3  Preferably,  perhaps,  'with  the  body  only/  But  -Sankara 
rejects  this. 

4  Cf.  infra,  p.  ioi;  and  Sutta  Nip&ta,  p.  12. 

5  The  commentators  vary  in  their  interpretations  of  this  word 
(mukta),  but  the  common  point  appears  to  be  '  free  from  attachment 
to  worldly  concerns/     Cf.  Sutta  Nipata,  p.  8. 

6  Sacrifice  here  apparently  means  every  act  for  the  attainment  of 


CHAPTER   IV,  29.  6l 


Brahman  is  the  oblation ;  with  Brahman  (as  a  sacri- 
ficial instrument)  it  is  offered  up ;  Brahman  is  in  the 
fire ;  and  by  Brahman  it  is  thrown ;  and  Brahman, 
too,  is  the  goal  to  which  he  proceeds  who  meditates 
on  Brahman  in  the  action  \  Some  devotees  perform 
the  sacrifice  to  the  gods,  some  offer  up  the  sacrifice 
by  the  sacrifice  itself  in  the  fire  of  Brahman2.  Others 
offer  up  the  senses,  such  as  the  sense  of  hearing  and 
others,  in  the  fires  of  restraint3;  others  offer  up  the 
objects  of  sense,  such  as  sound  and  so  forth,  into 
the  fires  of  the  senses  \  Some  again  offer  up  all  the 
operations  of  the  senses  and  the  operations  of  the 
life-breaths  into  the  fire  of  devotion  by  self-restraint5, 
kindled  by  knowledge.  Others  perform  the  sacrifice 
of  wealth,  the  sacrifice  of  penance,  the  sacrifice  of 
concentration  of  mind,  the  sacrifice  of  Vedic  study6, 
and  of  knowledge,  and  others  are  ascetics  of  rigid 
vows.  Some  offer  up  the  upward  life-breath  into  the 
downward  life-breath,  and  the  downward  life-breath 
into  the  upper  life-breath,  and  stopping  up  the  motions 
of  the  upward  and  downward  life-breaths,  devote  them- 
selves to  the  restraint  of  the  life-breaths 7.  Others, 
who  (take)  limited  food,  offer  up  the  life-breaths  into 

the  supreme;  cf.  supra,  p.  53.  In  Ajval&yana  GrzTiya-sutra  I,  1,  5, 
a  text  is  cited  meaning  *  salutation  verily  is  a  sacrifice/ 

1  This  thorough  identification  with  the  Brahman  explains  why 
the  action  is  i  destroyed '  and  does  not '  fetter '  the  doer. 

2  I.  e.  all  acts,  religious  and  other,  offered  up  to  the  Brahman  in 
the  mode  above  stated. 

3  Practise  *  yoga '  and  other  like  exercises. 

4  Remaining  unattached  to  sensuous  enjoyments. 

5  Stopping  the  bodily  operations  mentioned,  and  engaging  in 
contemplation. 

6  This  is  called  Brahmaya^na,  Awalayana  Gr/hya-sutra  III,  1,  3. 

7  Maitrt-upanishad,  p.  129. 


62  BHAGAVADGITA. 


the  life-breaths.  All  of  these,  conversant  with  the 
sacrifice,  have  their  sins  destroyed  by  the  sacrifice. 
Those  who  eat  the  nectar-like  leavings  of  the  sacri- 
fice repair  to  the  eternal  Brahman1.  This  world 
is  not  for  those  who  perform  no  sacrifice,  whence 
(then)  the  other,  O  best  of  the  Kauravas !  Thus 
sacrifices  of  various  sorts  are  laid  down  in  the 
Vedas.  Know  them  all  to  be  produced  from  action2, 
and  knowing  this  you  will  be  released  (from  the 
fetters  of  this  world).  The  sacrifice  of  knowledge, 
O  terror  of  (your)  foes !  is  superior  to  the  sacrifice 
of  wealth,  for  action,  O  son  of  Prtth&l  is  wholly 
and  entirely  comprehended  in  knowledge.  That 3 
you  should  learn  by  salutation,  question,  and  service4. 
The  men  of  knowledge  who  perceive  the  truth  will 
teach  knowledge  to  you.  Having  learnt  that,  O 
son  of  F&ndul  you  will  not  again  fall  thus  into 
delusion;  and  by  means  of  it,  you  will  see  all  beings, 
without  exception,  first  in  yourself,  and  then  in  me5. 
Even  if  you  are  the  most  sinful  of  all  sinful  men, 
you  will  cross  over  all  trespasses  by  means  of  the 
boat  of  knowledge  alone.  As  a  fire  well  kindled, 
O  Ar^nna!  reduces  fuel  to  ashes,  so  the  fire  of 
knowledge  reduces  all  actions  to  ashes  6.  For  there 
is  in  this  world  no  means  of  sanctification  like  know- 
ledge 7,  and  that  one  perfected  by  devotion  finds 
within  one's  self  in  time.     He  who  has  faith,  whose 


1  Supra,  p.  53. 

2  Operations  of  mind,  senses,  &c. ;  cf.  supra,  p.  54. 

3  I.  e.  knowledge. 

4  Addressed  to  men  of  knowledge.  Cf.  Mu«dakopanishad,  p.  282. 

5  The  essential  unity  of  the  supreme  and  individual  soul  and  the 
whole  universe.     Cf.  iropanishad,  pp.  13,  14. 

6  Supra,  p.  60.  7  Sutta  Nip&ta,  p.  48. 


CHAPTER   V,  3.  63 


senses  are  restrained,  and  who  is  assiduous,  obtains 
knowledge  \  Obtaining  knowledge,  he  acquires, 
without  delay,  the  highest  tranquillity.  He  who  is 
ignorant  and  devoid  of  faith,  and  whose  self  is  full 
of  misgivings,  is  ruined.  Not  this  world,  not  the 
next,  nor  happiness,  is  for  him  whose  self  is  full 
of  misgivings.  Actions,  O  Dhanan^aya !  do  not 
fetter  one  who  is  self-possessed 2,  who  has  renounced 
action  by  devotion,  and  who  has  destroyed  mis- 
givings by  knowledge.  Therefore,  O  descendant 
of  Bharata!  destroy,  with  the  sword  of  knowledge, 
these  misgivings  of  yours  which  fill  your  mind,  and 
which  are  produced  from  ignorance.  Engage  in 
devotion.     Arise ! 


Chapter  V. 
Ar^una  said : 
O  Kr/sh^a!    you  praise  renunciation   of  actions 
and  also  the  pursuit  (of  them).   Tell  me  determinately 
which  one  of  these  two  is  superior. 

The  Deity  said : 
Renunciation  and  pursuit  of  action  are  both 
instruments  of  happiness.  But  of  the  two,  pursuit 
of  action  is  superior  to  renunciation  of  action.  He 
should  be  understood  to  be  always  an  ascetic 3, 
who  has  no  aversion  and  no  desire.  For,  O  you 
of  mighty  arms !  he  who  is  free  from  the  pairs  of 
opposites  is  easily  released  from  (all)  bonds.  Children 
— not  wise  men — talk  of  sllnkhya  and  yoga  as  dis- 

1  Sutta  Nip&ta,  p.  49. 

2  Cautious,  free  from  heedlessness. 

3  I.  e.  one  who  has  performed  '  renunciation/ 


64  BHAGAVADGITA. 


tinct.  One  who  pursues  either  well  obtains  the  fruit 
of  both.  The  seat  which  the  sankhyas  obtain  is 
reached  by  the  yogas x  also.  He  sees  (truly),  who 
sees  the  Sclnkhya  and  yoga  as  one.  Renunciation, 
O  you  of  mighty  arms  !  is  difficult  to  reach  without 
devotion;  the  sage  possessed  of  devotion  attains 
Brahman 2  without  delay.  He  who  is  possessed  of 
devotion,  whose  self  is  pure,  who  has  restrained 
his  self3,  and  who  has  controlled  his  senses,  and 
who  identifies  his  self  with  every  being,  is  not 
tainted  though  he  performs  (actions).  The  man  of 
devotion,  who  knows  the  truth,  thinks  he  does 
nothing  at  all,  when  he  sees4,  hears,  touches, 
smells,  eats,  moves,  sleeps,  breathes,  talks,  throws 
out 5,  takes,  opens  or  closes  the  eyelids  ;  he  holds 
that  the  senses  deal  with  the  objects  of  the  senses. 
He  who,  casting  off  (all)  attachment,  performs  actions 
dedicating  them  to  Brahman,  is  not  tainted  by  sin, 
as  the  lotus-leaf6  (is  not  tainted)  by  water.  De- 
votees, casting  off  attachment,  perform  actions  for 
attaining  purity  of  self,  with  the  body,  the  mind,  the 
understanding,  or  even  the  senses 7 — (all)  free  (from 

1  Those  who  follow  the  yoga  '  path/  The  form  is  noteworthy, 
grammatically. 

2  I.  e.  ( attains  true  renunciation/  says  *Sahkara ;  Sridhara  says, 
'  attains  Brahman,  after  becoming  a  "  renouncer." ' 

3  Here  self  is  explained  as  body;  in  the  line  which  goes  before 
it  is  explained  as  heart. 

4  These  are  the  various  operations  of  the  organs  of  perception, 
action,  &c. 

5  Excretions,  &c. 

6  A  very  common  simile.  Cf.  inter  alia  iTMndogya-upanishad, 
p.  276;  Sutta  NipSta,  pp.  107-134;  and  Davids'  Buddhism,  p,  158 
note. 

7  Body = bathing,  &c;  mind = meditation,  &c.;  understanding = 
ascertainment  of  truth;  senses = hearing  and  celebrating  God's  name. 


CHAPTER   V,   19.  65 


egoistic  notions).  He  who  is  possessed  of  devotion, 
abandoning  the  fruit  of  actions,  attains  the  highest 
tranquillity.  He  who  is  without  devotion,  and 
attached  to  the  fruit  (of  action),  is  tied  down  by 
(reason  of  his)  acting  in  consequence  of  (some) 
desire.  The  self-restrained,  embodied  (self)  lies  at 
ease  within  the  city  of  nine  portals  \  renouncing  all 
actions  by  the  mind,  not  doing  nor  causing  (any- 
thing) to  be  done.  The  Lord  is  not  the  cause  of 
actions,  or  of  the  capacity  of  performing  actions 
amongst  men,  or  of  the  connexion  of  action  and 
fruit.  But  nature  only  works.  The  Lord  receives 
no  one's  sin,  nor  merit  either.  Knowledge  is 
enveloped  by  ignorance,  hence  all  creatures  are 
deluded2.  But  to  those  who  have  destroyed  that 
ignorance  by  knowledge  of  the  self,  (such)  know- 
ledge, like  the  sun,  shows  forth  that  supreme 
(principle).  And  those  whose  mind  is  (centred)  on 
it,  whose  (very)  self  it  is,  who  are  thoroughly 
devoted  to  it,  and  whose  final  goal  it  is,  go 
never  to  return,  having  their  sins  destroyed  by 
knowledge.  The  wise  look  upon  a  Brahma/za  pos- 
sessed of  learning  and  humility,  on  a  cow,  an  ele- 
phant, a  dog,  and  a  .SVapaka,  as  alike 3.  Even  here, 
those  have  conquered  the  material  world,  whose 
mind  rests  in  equability4;  since  Brahman  is  free 
from    defects   and   equable,   therefore  they  rest   in 

1  Cf.  Pra^nopanishad,  p.  202 ;  -Svetasvatara,  p.  332 ;  Sutta  Nipata, 
p.  52.  The  Ka/^opanishad  has  eleven  portals  (p.  132).  The  nine 
are  the  eyes,  nostrils,  ears,  mouth,  and  the  two  for  excretions. 

2  As  regards  the  Lord's  relation  to  mans  merit  or  sin. 

3  As  manifestations  of  Brahman,  though  of  different  qualities 
and  classes.   As  to  -SVapaka,  a  very  low  caste,  see  Sutta  Nipata,  p.  36. 

4  As  stated  in  the  preceding  words. 

[8]  F 


66  BHAGAVADGITA. 


Brahman.  He  who  knows  Brahman,  whose  mind 
is  steady,  who  is  not  deluded,  and  who  rests  in 
Brahman,  does  not  exult  on  finding  anything  agree- 
able, nor  does  he  grieve  on  finding  anything  disagree- 
able \  One  whose  self  is  not  attached  to  external 
objects,  obtains  the  happiness  that  is  in  (one's)  self; 
and  by  means  of  concentration  of  mind,  joining  one's 
self  (with  the  Brahman),  one  obtains  indestructible 
happiness.  For  the  enjoyments  born  of  contact  (be- 
tween senses  and  their  objects)  are,  indeed,  sources 
of  misery;  they  have  a  beginning  as  well  as  an 
end2.  O  son  of  Kunt! !  a  wise  man  feels  no  pleasure 
in  them.  He  who  even  in  this  world,  before  his 
release  from  the  body,  is  able  to  bear  the  agitations 
produced  from  desire  and  wrath,  is  a  devoted  man, 
he  is  a  happy  man.  The  devotee  whose  happiness 
is  within  (himself),  whose  recreation  is  within  (him- 
self), and  whose  light  (of  knowledge)  also  is  within 
(himself),  becoming  (one  with)  the  Brahman3,  obtains 
the  Brahmic  bliss 4.  The  sages  whose  sins  have 
perished,  whose  misgivings  are  destroyed,  who  are 
self-restrained,  and  who  are  intent  on  the  welfare 
of  all  beings5,  obtain  the  Brahmic  bliss.  To  the 
ascetics,  who  are  free  from  desire  and  wrath  6,  and 
whose  minds  are  restrained,  and  who  have  know- 
ledge of  the  self,  the  Brahmic  bliss  is  on  both  sides 
(of  death).     The  sage  who  excludes  (from  his  mind) 

1  Ka/^opanishad,  p.  ioo.  2  Cf.  supra,  p.  44. 

3  He  is  one  with  the  Brahman  as  he  is  intent  exclusively  on  the 
Brahman. 

4  The  bliss  of  assimilation  with  the  Brahman,  or,  as  Ramanug-a 
puts  it,  the  bliss  of  direct  knowledge  of  the  self. 

5  Sutta  Nipata,  p.  39;  also  Davids'  Buddhism,  p.  109. 

6  Cf.  Sutta  Nipata,  p.  3. 


CHAPTER   VI,  5.  67 


external  objects,  (concentrates)  the  visual  power 
between  the  brows1,  and  making  the  upward  and 
downward  life-breaths  even,  confines  their  move- 
ments within  the  nose,  who  restrains  senses,  mind, 
and  understanding 2,  whose  highest  goal  is  final 
emancipation,  from  whom  desire,  fear,  and  wrath 
have  departed,  is,  indeed,  for  ever  released  (from 
birth  and  death).  He  knowing  me  to  be  the  enjoyer 
of  all  sacrifices  and  penances,  the  great  Lord  of  all 
worlds,  and  the  friend  of  all  beings,  attains  tran- 
quillity. 

Chapter  VI. 

The  Deity  said : 
He  who,  regardless  of  the  fruit  of  actions,  per- 
forms the  actions  which  ought  to  be  performed,  is 
the  devotee  and  renouncer;  not  he  who  discards  the 
(sacred)  fires3,  nor  he  who  performs  no  acts.  Know, 
O  son  of  Pa/zdii !  that  what  is  called  renunciation  is 
devotion ;  for  nobody  becomes  a  devotee  who  has 
not  renounced  (all)  fancies4.  To  the  sage  who  wishes 
to  rise  to  devotion,  action  is  said  to  be  a  means,  and 
to  him,  when  he  has  risen  to  devotion,  tranquillity 5 
is  said  to  be  a  means.  When  one  does  not  attach  one- 
self to  objects  of  sense,  nor  to  action,  renouncing  all 
fancies,  then  is  one  said  to  have  risen  to  devotion. 
(A  man)  should  elevate  his  self  by  his  self6;  he  should 
not  debase  his  self,  for  even  (a  man's)  own  self  is  his 

1  Cf.  infra,  p.  78.  2  P.  57  and  Ka/^opanishad,  p.  157. 

8  Which  are  required  for  ordinary  religious  rites. 

4  Which  are  the  cause  of  desires ;  see  supra,  p.  50. 

5  Abandonment  of  distracting  actions  ;   means  scil.  to  perfect 
knowledge,  says  £ridhara. 

6  I.  e.  by  means  of  a  mind  possessed  of  true  discrimination. 

F  2 


68  BHAGAVADGITA. 


friend,  (a  man's)  own  self  is  also  his  enemy1.  To 
him  who  has  subjugated  his  self  by  his  self2,  his 
self  is  a  friend ;  but  to  him  who  has  not  restrained 
his  self,  his  own  self  behaves  inimically,  like  an 
enemy.  The  self  of  one  who  has  subjugated  his  self 
and  is  tranquil,  is  absolutely  concentrated  (on  itself), 
in  the  midst  of  cold  and  heat,  pleasure  and  pain,  as 
well  as  honour  and  dishonour.  The  devotee  whose 
self  is  contented  with  knowledge  and  experience  3, 
who  is  unmoved4,  who  has  restrained  his  senses,  and 
to  whom  a  sod,  a  stone,  and  gold  are  alike,  is  said  to 
be  devoted.  And  he  is  esteemed  highest,  who 
thinks  alike5  about  well-wishers,  friends,  and  enemies, 
and  those  who  are  indifferent,  and  those  who  take 
part  with  both  sides,  and  those  who  are  objects  of 
hatred,  and  relatives,  as  well  as  about  the  good  and 
the  sinful.  A  devotee  should  constantly  devote  his 
self  to  abstraction,  remaining  in  a  secret  place  6? 
alone,  with  his  mind  and  self7  restrained,  without 
expectations,  and  without  belongings.  Fixing  his 
seat  firmly  in  a  clean 8  place,  not  too  high  nor  too 
low,  and  covered  over  with  a  sheet  of  cloth,  a  deer- 
skin, and  (blades  of)  Kara  (grass), — and  there  seated 
on  (that)  seat,  fixing  his  mind  exclusively  on  one 
point,  with   the  workings  of  the  mind   and  senses 

1  Self  is  here  explained  as  mind,  the  unsteadiness  of  which 
prevents  the  acquisition  of  devotion,  p.  71. 

2  This  means  restraining  senses  by  mind.  See  Maitri-upa- 
nishad,  p.  180. 

3  Supra,  p.  57.  4  By  any  of  the  vexations  of  the  world. 

5  I.  e.  is  free  from  affection  or  aversion  towards  them. 

6  '  Release  from  society '  is  insisted  on  at  Sutta  Nipata,  p.  55. 

7  Self  is  here  explained  as  senses ;  in  the  previous  clause  as  mind. 

8  This  requisite  is  prescribed  by  many  authorities.  Cf.  Kh&n- 
dogya-upanishad,p.62  6;  Maitrf,  p.  156;  -SVetawatara, pp.  318,  319; 
and  A^valayana  (Grzhya-sutra)  III,  2,  2,  for  Vedic  study  too. 


CHAPTER   VI,   1 8,  69 


restrained,  he  should  practice  devotion  for  purity  of 
self.  Holding  his  body,  head,  and  neck  even  and 
unmoved,  (remaining)  steady,  looking  at  the  tip  of 
his  own  nose 1,  and  not  looking  about  in  (all) 
directions,  with  a  tranquil  self,  devoid  of  fear,  and 
adhering  to  the  rules  of  Brahma^arins  2,  he  should 
restrain  his  mind,  and  (concentrate  it)  on  me,  and 
sit  down  engaged  in  devotion,  regarding  me  as  his 
final  goal.  Thus  constantly  devoting  his  self  to 
abstraction,  a  devotee  whose  mind  is  restrained, 
attains  that  tranquillity  which  culminates  in  final 
emancipation,  and  assimilation  with  me.  Devotion 
is  not  his,  O  Ar^una!  who  eats  too  much,  nor  his 
who  eats  not  at  all ;  not  his  who  is  addicted  to  too 
much  sleep,  nor  his  who  is  (ever)  awake.  That 
devotion  which  destroys  (all)  misery  is  his,  who 
takes  due  food  and  exercise  3,  who  toils  duly  in  all 
works,  and  who  sleeps  and  awakes  (in)  due  (time)  \ 
When  (a  man's)  mind  well  restrained  becomes  steady 
upon  the  self  alone,  then  he  being  indifferent  to  all 
objects  of  desire,  is  said  to  be  devoted.  As  a  light 
standing  in  a  windless  (place)  flickers  not,  that  is 
declared  to  be  the  parallel  for  a  devotee,  whose  mind 
is  restrained,  and  who  devotes  his  self  to  abstraction. 
That  (mental  condition),  in  which  the  mind  restrained 
by  practice  of  abstraction,  ceases  to  work  ;  in  which 
too,  one  seeing  the  self  by  the  self5,  is  pleased  in 

1  Cf.  Kumarasambhava,  Canto  III,  47.  This  is  done  in  order  to 
prevent  the  sight  from  rambling — a  total  closing  of  the  eyes  being 
objectionable  as  leading  to  sleep. 

2  See  these  in  Apastamba  (p.  7  in  this  series);  and  cf.  Sutta 
Nipata,  pp.  159, 160;  and  Miiller's  Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  158. 

3  Cf.  Sutta  Nipata,  pp.  28,  95. 

4  Buddhism  shows  similar  injunctions.  Cf.  Sutta  Nipata,  pp.  21, 
28,  95;  and  Dhammapada,  stanza  8. 

5  Sees  the  highest  principle  by  a  mind  purified  by  abstraction. 


JO  BHAGAVADGITA. 


the  self;  in  which  one  experiences  that  infinite  happi- 
ness which  transcends  the  senses,  and  which  can  be 
grasped  by  the  understanding  only ;  and  adhering  to 
which,  one  never  swerves  from  the  truth ;  acquiring 
which,  one  thinks  no  other  acquisition  higher  than  it; 
and  adhering  to  which,  one  is  not  shaken  off  even  by 
great  misery;  that  should  be  understood  to  be  called 
devotion  in  which  there  is  a  severance  of  all  con- 
nexion with  pain.  That  devotion  should  be  practised 
with  steadiness  and  with  an  undesponding  heart. 
Abandoning,  without  exception,  all  desires1,  which 
are  produced  from  fancies,  and  restraining  the  whole 
group  of  the  senses  on  all  sides  by  the  mind  only  2, 
one  should  by  slow  steps  become  quiescent 3,  with 
a  firm  resolve  coupled  with  courage4;  and  fixing 
his  mind  upon  the  self,  should  think  of  nothing. 
Wherever  the  active  and  unsteady  mind  breaks 
forth 5,  there  one  should  ever  restrain  it,  and  fix  it 
steadily  on  the  self  alone.  The  highest  happiness 
comes  to  such  a  devotee,  whose  mind  is  fully 
tranquil,  in  whom  the  quality  of  passion  has  been 
suppressed,  who  is  free  from  sin,  and  who  is  become 
(one  with)  the  Brahman.  Thus  constantly  devoting 
his  self  to  abstraction,  a  devotee,  freed  from  sin, 
easily  obtains  that  supreme  happiness — contact  with 
the  Brahman6.  He  who  has  devoted  his  self  to  ab- 
straction, by  devotion,  looking  alike  on  everything, 
sees  the  self  abiding  in  all  beings,  and  all  beings  in 


1  Cf.  Sutta  Nipata,  p.  62.  2  Cf.  supra,  p.  53. 

3  I.  e.  cease  to  think  of  objects  of  sense.    Cf.  supra,  p.  69. 

4  I.  e.  an  undespairing  and  firm  resolution  that  devotion  will  be 
achieved  ultimately. 

5  Cf.  Sutta  Nipata,  p.  106. 

6  Assimilation  with  the  Brahman. 


CHAPTER   VI,   36.  71 


the  self1.  To  him  who  sees  me  in  everything,  and 
everything  in  me,  I  am  never  lost,  and  he  is  not 
lost  to  me2.  The  devotee  who  worships  me  abiding 
in  all  beings,  holding  that  all  is  one  3,  lives  in  me, 
however  he  may  be  living4.  That  devotee,  O 
Ar^una !  is  deemed  to  be  the  best,  who  looks  alike 
on  pleasure  or  pain,  whatever  it  may  be,  in  all 
(creatures),  comparing  all  with  his  own  (pleasure  or 

pain) 5. 

Ar^una  said : 

I  cannot  see,  O  destroyer  of  Madhu !  (how) 
the  sustained  existence  (is  to  be  secured)  of  this 
devotion  by  means  of  equanimity  which  you  have 
declared — in  consequence  of  fickleness.  For,  O 
Krishna!  the  mind  is  fickle,  boisterous6,  strong,  and 
obstinate ;  and  I  think  that  to  restrain  it  is  as 
difficult  as  (to  restrain)  the  wind. 

The  Deity  said  : 
Doubtless,  O  you  of  mighty  arms !  the  mind  is 
difficult  to  restrain,  and  fickle 7.  Still,  O  son  of 
Kunti!  it  may  be  restrained  by  constant  practice  and 
by  indifference  (to  worldly  objects).  It  is  my  belief, 
that  devotion  is  hard  to  obtain  for  one  who  does  not 
restrain  his  self.     But  by  one  who  is  self-restrained 

1  Realises  the  essential  unity  of  everything. 

2  He  has  access  to  me,  and  I  am  kind  to  him. 

3  Cf.  Lyopanishad,  p.  13. 

4  '  Even  abandoning  all  action/  says  -SYidhara ;  and  cf.  infra, 
p.  105. 

5  Who  believes  that  pleasure  and  pain  are  as  much  liked  or 
disliked  by  others  as  by  himself,  and  puts  himself  in  fact  in  the 
place  of  others. 

6  Troublesome  to  the  body,  senses,  &c. 

7  Cf.  Dhammapada,  stanza  33  seq. 


72  BHAGAVADGitA. 


and  assiduous,  it  can  be  obtained  through  (proper) 
expedients. 

Ar^una  said  : 

What  is  the  end  of  him,  O  Krishna !  who  does 
not  attain  the  consummation  of  his  devotion,  being 
not  assiduous  *,  and  having  a  mind  shaken  off  from 
devotion,  (though)  full  of  faith  ?  Does  he,  fallen 
from  both  (paths)  2,  go  to  ruin  like  a  broken  cloud, 
being,  O  you  of  mighty  arms !  without  support,  and 
deluded  on  the  path  (leading)  to  the  Brahman  ?  Be 
pleased,  O  Krtshna, !  to  entirely  destroy  this  doubt  of 
mine,  for  none  else  than  you  can  destroy  this  doubt. 

The  Deity  said : 

0  son  of  Pntha !  neither  in  this  world  nor  the 
next,  is  ruin  for  him ;  for,  O  dear  friend  !  none  who 
performs  good  (deeds)  comes  to  an  evil  end.  He 
who  is  fallen  from  devotion  attains  the  worlds  of 
those  who  perform  meritorious  acts,  dwells  (there)  for 
many  a  year,  and  is  afterwards  born  into  a  family 
of  holy  and  illustrious  3  men.  Or  he  is  even  born 
into  a  family  of  talented  devotees;  for  such  a  birth  as 
that  in  this  world  is  more  difficult  to  obtain.  There 
he  comes  into  contact  with  the  knowledge  which 
belonged  to  him  in  his  former  body,  and  then  again, 
O  descendant  of  Kuru  !  he  works  for  perfection  4. 
For  even  though  reluctant 5,  he  is  led  away  by  the 

1  Cf.  p.  73  infra. 

2  The  path  to  heaven,  and  that  to  final  emancipation. 

3  '  Kings  or  emperors,'  says  Madhusudana. 

4  I.  e.  final  emancipation. 

5  *  As  Ar^una  himself/  says  Madhusudana,  '  receives  instruction 
in  knowledge,  though  he  comes  to  the  battle-field  without  any  such 
object;  hence  it  was  said  before,  "nothing  is  here  abortive."' 
See  p.  47. 


CHAPTER   VII,    4.  73 


self-same  former  practice,  and  although  he  only 
wishes  to  learn  devotion,  he  rises  above  the  (fruits 
of  action  laid  down  in  the)  divine  word.  But  the 
devotee  working  with  great  efforts  19  and  cleared  of 
his  sins,  attains  perfection  after  many  births,  and 
then  reaches  the  supreme  goal.  The  devotee  is 
esteemed  higher  than  the  performers  of  penances, 
higher  even  than  the  men  of  knowledge,  and  the 
devotee  is  higher  than  the  men  of  action ;  therefore, 
O  Ar^una !  become  a  devotee.  And  even  among 
all  devotees,  he  who,  being  full  of  faith,  worships 
me,  with  his  inmost  self  intent  on  me,  is  esteemed 
by  me  to  be  the  most  devoted. 


Chapter  VII. 


The  Deity  said : 
O  son  of  Pntha!  now  hear  how  you  can  without 
doubt  know  me  fully,  fixing  your  mind  on  me,  and 
resting  in  me,  and  practising  devotion.  I  will  now 
tell  you  exhaustively  about  knowledge  together  with 
experience ;  that  being  known,  there  is  nothing 
further  left  in  this  world  to  know.  Among  thou- 
sands of  men,  only  some 2  work  for  perfection 3  ; 
and  even  of  those  who  have  reached  perfection, 
and  who  are  assiduous,  only  some  know  me  truly. 
Earth,  water,  fire,  air,  space,  mind,  understanding, 

1  As  distinguished  from  the  others  who  work  half-heartedly,  so 
to  say.    See  p.  72. 

2  '  Some  one '  in  the  original. 

3  I.e.  knowledge  of  the  self,  ^ahkara  says,  as  to  the  next  clause, 
that  those  even  who  work  for  final  emancipation  must  be  deemed 
to  have  '  reached  perfection/ 


74  BHAGAVADGITA. 


and  egoism1,  thus  is  my  nature  divided  eightfold. 
But  this  is  a  lower  (form  of  my)  nature.  Know 
(that  there  is)  another  (form  of  my)  nature,  and 
higher  than  this,  which  is  animate,  O  you  of  mighty 
arms  !  and  by  which  this  universe  is  upheld.  Know 
that  all  things  have  these  (for  their)  source  2.  I  am 
the  producer  and  the  destroyer  of  the  whole  universe. 
There  is  nothing  else,  O  Dhanan^aya !  higher  than 
myself;  all  this  is  woven  upon  me,  like  numbers  of 
pearls  upon  a  thread  3.  I  am  the  taste  in  water,  O 
son  of  Kunti !  I  am  the  light  of  the  sun  and  moon. 
I  am  '  Om  4 '  in  all  the  Vedas,  sound 5  in  space,  and 
manliness  in  human  beings;  I  am  the  fragrant  smell 
in  the  earth,  refulgence  in  the  fire ;  I  am  life  in  all 
beings,  and  penance6  in  those  who  perform  penance. 
Know  me,  O  son  of  Prztha !  to  be  the  eternal  seed 
of  all  beings ;  I  am  the  discernment  of  the  discerning 
ones,  and  I  the  glory  of  the  glorious  7.  I  am  also 
the  strength,  unaccompanied  by  fondness  or  desire 8, 
of  the  strong.  And,  O  chief  of  the  descendants  of 
Bharata!   I  am  love  unopposed  to  piety9  among  all 

1  This  accords  with  the  Sahkhya  philosophy.  See  chapter  I, 
sutra  6 1  of  the  current  aphorisms. 

2  Cf.  infra,  p.  105.  3  Cf.  Mufld/akopanishad,  p.  298. 

4  Infra,  p.  79.  Cf.  Goldstiicker's  Remains,  I,  14,  122;  Yoga- 
sutras  I,  27. 

5  I.  e.  the  occult  essence  which  underlies  all  these  and  the  other 
qualities  of  the  various  things  mentioned. 

6  I.  e.  power  to  bear  the  pairs  of  opposites. 

7  Glory  here  seems  to  mean  dignity,  greatness. 

8  Desire  is  the  wish  to  obtain  new  things;  fondness  is  the 
anxiety  to  retain  what  has  been  obtained.  The  strength  here 
spoken  of,  therefore,  is  that  which  is  applied  to  the  performance 
of  one's  own  duties  only. 

9  I.  e.  indulged  within  the  bounds  allowed  by  the  rules  of  the 
*Sastras,  namely,  for  the  procreation  of  sons  &c.  only. 


CHAPTER    VII,    20.  75 


beings.  And  all  entities  which  are  of  the  quality  of 
goodness,  and  those  which  are  of  the  quality  of 
passion  and  of  darkness,  know  that  they  are,  indeed, 
all  from  me;  I  am  not  in  them,  but  they  are  in  me\  t- 
The  whole  universe  deluded  by  these  three  states  of 
mind,  developed  from  the  qualities,  does  not  know 
me,  who  am  beyond  them  and  inexhaustible  ;  for 
this  delusion  of  mine,  developed  from  the  qualities, 
is  divine  and  difficult  to  transcend.  Those  cross  be- 
yond this  delusion  who  resort  to  me  alone.  Wicked 
men,  doers  of  evil  (acts),  who  are  deluded,  who 
are  deprived  of  their  knowledge  by  (this)  delusion, 
and  who  incline  to  the  demoniac  state  of  mind 2,  do 
not  resort  to  me.  But,  O  Ar^una !  doers  of  good 
(acts)  of  four  classes  worship  me  :  one  who  is  dis- 
tressed, one  who  is  seeking  after  knowledge,  one  who 
wants  wealth,  and  one,  O  chief  of  the  descendants  of 
Bharata  !  who  is  possessed  of  knowledge.  Of  these, 
he  who  is  possessed  of  knowledge,  who  is  always 
devoted,  and  whose  worship  is  (addressed)  to  one 
(Being)  only,  is  esteemed  highest.  For  to  the  man 
of  knowledge  I  am  dear  above  all  things,  and  he  is 
dear  to  me.  All  these  are  noble.  But  the  man 
possessed  of  knowledge  is  deemed  by  me  to  be  my 
own  self.  For  he  with  (his)  self  devoted  to  abstrac- 
tion, has  taken  to  me  as  the  goal  than  which  there  is 
nothing  higher.  At  the  end  of  many  lives,  the  man 
possessed  of  knowledge  approaches  me,  (believing) 
that  Vasudeva  is  everything.  Such  a  high-souled 
man  is  very  hard  to  find.  Those  who  are  deprived 
of  knowledge    by  various    desires   approach   other 


1  They  do  not  dominate  over  me,  I  rule  them. 

2  Infra,  p.  115. 


76  BHAGAVADGITA. 


divinities,  observing  various  regulations1,  and  con- 
trolled by  their  own  natures 2.  Whichever  form  (of 
deity)  any  worshipper  wishes  to  worship  with  faith, 
to  that  form  I  render  his  faith  steady.  Possessed  of 
that  faith,  he  seeks  to  propitiate  (the  deity  in)  that 
(form),  and  obtains  from  it  those  beneficial  things 
which  he  desires,  (though  they  are)  really  given  by  me. 
But  the  fruit  thus  (obtained)  by  them,  who  have  little 
judgment,  is  perishable.  Those  who  worship  the 
divinities  go  to  the  divinities 3,  and  my  worshippers, 
too,  go  to  me.  The  undiscerning  ones,  not  knowing 
my  transcendent  and  inexhaustible  essence,  than 
which  there  is  nothing  higher,  think  me,  who  am  un- 
perceived,  to  have  become  perceptible4.  Surrounded 
by  the  delusion  of  my  mystic  power5,  I  am  not 
manifest  to  all.  This  deluded  world  knows  not  me 
unborn  and  inexhaustible.  I  know,  O  Arg'una !  the 
things  which  have  been,  those  which  are,  and  those 
which  are  to  be.  But  me  nobody  knows.  All  beings, 
O  terror  of  (your)  foes !  are  deluded  at  the  time  of 
birth  by  the  delusion,  O  descendant  of  Bharata ! 
caused  by  the  pairs  of  opposites  arising  from  desire 
and  aversion.  But  the  men  of  meritorious  actions, 
whose  sins  have  terminated,  worship  me,  being  re- 
leased from  the  delusion  (caused)  by  the  pairs  of 

1  Fasts  and  so  forth. 

2  Which  are  the  result  of  the  actions  done  in  previous  lives. 

3  And  the  divinities  are  not  eternal,  so  the  fruit  obtained  is 
ephemeral. 

4  The  ignorant  do  not  know  the  real  divinity  ofVishmi,  thinking 
him  to  be  no  higher  than  as  he  is  seen  in  the  human  form.  This 
gives  them  an  inadequate  notion  of  the  purity  and  eternity  of  the 
happiness  to  be  obtained  by  worshipping  him;  cf.  infra,  p.  83. 

5  The  veil  surrounding  me  is  created  by  my  mysterious  power, 
and  that  everybody  cannot  pierce  through;  cf.  Ka//$a,  p.  117. 


CHAPTER   VIII,    4.  77 


opposites,  and  being  firm  in  their  beliefs  1.  Those 
who,  resting  on  me,  work  for  release  from  old  age 
and  death  2,  know  the  Brahman  3,  the  whole  Adhya- 
tma,  and  all  action.  And  those  who  know  me  with 
the  Adhibhtita,  the  Adhidaiva,  and  the  Adhiya^na, 
having  minds  devoted  to  abstraction,  know  me  at 
the  time  of  departure  (from  this  world). 


Chapter  VIII. 

Ar^una  said : 
What  is  that  Brahman,  what  the  Adhyatma,  and 
what,  O  best  of  beings  !  is  action?  And  what  is 
called  the  Adhibhtita  ?  And  who  is  the  Adhiya^na, 
and  how  in  this  body,  O  destroyer  of  Madhu  ? 
And  how,  too,  are  you  to  be  known  at  the  time  of 
departure  (from  this  world)  by  those  who  restrain 
their  selfs  ? 

The  Deity  said  : 
The  Brahman  is  the  supreme,  the  indestructible. 
Its  manifestation  (as  an  individual  self)  is  called  the 
Adhyatma.  The  offering  (of  an  oblation  to  any 
divinity),  which  is  the  cause  of  the  production  and 
development  of  all  things,  is  named  action.  The 
Adhibhtita  is  all  perishable  things.  The  Adhidai- 
vata  is  the  (primal)  being.  And  the  Adhiya^na,  O 
best  of  embodied  (beings)!  is  I  myself  in  this  body4. 

1  Concerning   the  supreme   principle   and  the  mode    of  wor- 
shipping it. 

2  Cf.  infra,  p.  109.  3  See  the  next  chapter. 

4  Adhyatma  where  it  occurs  before  (e.  g.  p.  55)  has  been  ren- 
dered 'the  relation  between  the  supreme  and  individual  soul/  As  to 


78  bhagavadg!ta. 


And  he  who  leaves  this  body  and  departs  (from  this 
world)  remembering  me  in  (his)  last  moments,  comes 
into  my  essence.  There  is  no  doubt  of  that.  Also 
whichever  form  1  (of  deity)  he  remembers  when  he 
finally  leaves  this  body,  to  that  he  goes,  O  son  of 
Kunti!  having  been  used  to  ponder  on  it.  Therefore, 
at  all  times  remember  me,  and  engage  in  battle.  Fixing 
your  mind  and  understanding  on  me,  you  will  come  to 
me,  there  is  no  doubt.  He  who  thinks  of  the  supreme 
divine  Being,  O  son  of  Prztha!  with  a  mind  not  (running) 
to  other  (objects),  and  possessed  of  abstraction  in  the 
shape  of  continuous  meditation  (about  the  supreme), 
goes  to  him.  He  who,  possessed  of  reverence  (for 
the  supreme  Being)  with  a  steady  mind,  and  with 
the  power  of  devotion,  properly  concentrates  the 
life-breath  between  the  brows2,  and  meditates  on 
the  ancient  Seer,  the  ruler,  more  minute  than  the 
minutest  atom  3,  the  supporter  of  all,  who  is  of  an 
unthinkable  form,  whose  brilliance  is  like  that  of 
the  sun,  and  who  is  beyond  all  darkness4,  he  attains 
to  that  transcendent  and  divine  Being.  1 5  will  tell 
you  briefly  about  the  seat,  which  those  who  know 
the  Vedas  declare  to  be  indestructible ;  which  is 
entered  by  ascetics  from  whom  all  desires  have 
departed ;  and  wishing  for  which,  people  pursue  the 


action,  cf.  pp.  53,  54.  Adhibhuta  is  apparently  the  whole  inanimate 
creation,  and  Adhidaivata  is  the  being  supposed  to  dwell  in  the 
sun.     Adhiya^-na  is  Kr/sh/za.    Cf.  too  pp.  113,  114. 

1  Some  commentators  say  'whatever  thing'  generally.  The 
'form'  remembered  in  one's  last  moments  would  be  that  which 
had  been  most  often  meditated  on  during  life. 

2  Cf.  supra,  p.  67.  3  Ka/$a,  p.  105 ;  Svetarvatara,  p.  333. 
4  Cf.  *Sveta\yvatara-upanishad,  p.  327. 

6  Ka/^opanishad,  p.  102. 


CHAPTER   VIII,   17.  79 


mode  of  life  of  Brahma^arins 1.  He  who  leaves  the 
body  and  departs  (from  this  world),  stopping  up  all 
passages2,  and  confining  the  mind  within  the  heart3, 
placing  the  life-breath  in  the  head,  and  adhering 
to  uninterrupted  meditation4,  repeating  the  single 
syllable  'Om,'  (signifying)  the  eternal  Brahman5,  and 
meditating  on  me,  he  reaches  the  highest  goal. 
To  the  devotee  who  constantly  practises  abstraction, 
O  son  of  Prz'tha !  and  who  with  a  mind  not  (turned) 
to  anything  else,  is  ever  and  constantly  meditating 
on  me,  I  am  easy  of  access.  The  high-souled  ones, 
who  achieve  the  highest  perfection,  attaining  to  me, 
do  not  again  come  to  life,  which  is  transient,  a 
home  of  woes6.  All  worlds,  O  Ar^una!  up  to  the 
world  of  Brahman,  are  (destined)  to  return 7.  But, 
O  son  of  Kuntt !  after  attaining  to  me,  there  is  no 
birth  again.  Those  who  know  a  day  of  Brahman 
to  end  after  one  thousand  ages,  and  the  night  to 
terminate  after  one  thousand  ages,  are  the  persons 

1  As  to  BrahmaMrins,  see  supra,  p.  69. 

2  'The  senses/  say  the  commentators.  Might  it  not  refer  to  the 
'  nine  portals'  at  p.  65  supra  ?     See  also,  however,  p.  108. 

3  I.  e.  thinking  of  nothing,  making  the  mind  cease  to  work. 
Cf.  Maitri-upanishad,  p.  179. 

4  Cf.  Maitri-upanishad,  p.  130,  uninterrupted,  like  'oil  when 
poured  out/  says  the  commentator. 

5  Cf.  jOdndogya-upanishad,  p.  151;  Mandukya,  pp.  330-388 
(Om  is  all — past,  present,  and  future);  NWsi/rcha  Tapini,  pp.  no, 
117,  171;  Maitri,  p.  140;  Prajna,  p.  220.  On  the  opening  passage 
of  the  .A'Mndogya,  -Sahkara  says, '  Om  is  the  closest  designation  of 
the  supreme  Being.  He  is  pleased  when  it  is  pronounced,  as  people 
are  at  the  mention  of  a  favourite  name/  See  also  Max  Miiller, 
Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  84;  Goldstucker's  Remains,  I,  122. 

6  See  infra,  p.  86 ;  and  cf.  Sutta  Nipata,  p.  125. 

7  They  are  only  temporary,  not  the  everlasting  seats  of  the 
soul. 


8o  bhagavadgItA. 


who  know  day  and  night  K  On  the  advent  of  day, 
all  perceptible  things  are  produced  from  the  unper- 
ceived ;  and  on  the  advent  of  night  they  dissolve  in 
that  same  (principle)  called  the  unperceived.  This 
same  assemblage  of  entities,  being  produced  again  and 
again,  dissolves  on  the  advent  of  night,  and,  O  son 
of  Prz'tha!  issues  forth  on  the  advent  of  day,  without 
a  will  of  its  own 2.  But  there  is  another  entity, 
unperceived  and  eternal,  and  distinct  from  this  un- 
perceived (principle),  which  is  not  destroyed  when 
all  entities  are  destroyed.  It  is  called  the  unper- 
ceived, the  indestructible  ;  they  call  it  the  highest 
goal.  Attaining  to  it,  none  returns 3.  That  is  my 
supreme  abode.  That  supreme  Being,  O  son  of 
Prz'tha !  he  in  whom  all  these  entities  dwell 4,  and 
by  whom  all  this  is  permeated,  is  to  be  attained  to 
by  reverence  not  (directed)  to  another.  I  will  state 
the  times,  O  descendant  of  Bharata !  at  which 
devotees  departing  (from  this  world)  go,  never  to 
return,  or  to  return.    The  fire,  the  flame 5,  the  day, 

1  Cf.  Manu  I,  73.  Sankara  says,  that  this  explains  why  the 
abodes  of  Brahma  and  others  are  said  to  be  not  lasting.  They 
are  limited  by  time.  As  to  ages,  -Sridhara  says,  a  human  year 
is  a  day  and  night  of  the  gods.  Twelve  thousand  years  made 
of  such  days  and  nights  make  up  the  four  ages  :  one  thousand 
such  ' quaternions  of  ages'  make  up  a  day,  and  another  thousand 
a  night  of  Brahma.  Of  such  days  and  nights  Brahma  has  a 
hundred  years  to  live.  At  the  close  of  his  life,  the  universe  is 
destroyed. 

2  Cf.  p.  82  infra;  also  Manu-smnti  I,  52;  and  Kalidasa's  Ku- 
marasambhava  II,  8. 

3  Cf.  Ka/^opanishad,  p.  149  ;   and  also  p.  112  infra. 

4  I.  e.  by  whom,  as  the  cause  of  them,  all  these  entities  are  sup- 
ported; cf.  p.  82  infra. 

5  .Sridhara  understands  '  the  time  when,*  in  the  sentence  pre- 
ceding this,  to  mean  '  the  path  indicated  by  a  deity  presiding  over 


CHAPTER    IX,  2.  8 1 


the  bright  fortnight,  the  six  months  of  the  northern 
solstice,  departing  (from  the  world)  in  these,  those 
who  know  the  Brahman  go  to  the  Brahman.  Smoke, 
night,  the  dark  fortnight,  the  six  months  of  the 
southern  solstice,  (dying)  in  these,  the  devotee  goes 
to  the  lunar  light  and  returns  \  These  two  paths, 
bright  and  dark,  are  deemed  to  be  eternal  in  this 
world  2.  By  the  one,  (a  man)  goes  never  to  return, 
by  the  other  he  comes  back.  Knowing  these  two 
paths,  O  son  of  Pntha !  no  devotee  is  deluded3. 
Therefore  at  all  times  be  possessed  of  devotion,  O 
Ar£*una !  A  devotee  knowing  all  this  \  obtains  all 
the  holy  fruit  which  is  prescribed  for  (study  of)  the 
Vedas,  for  sacrifices,  and  also  for  penances  and  gifts, 
and  he  attains  to  the  highest  and  primeval  seat. 


Chapter  IX. 


Now  I  will  speak  to  you,  who  are  not  given  to 
carping,  of  that  most  mysterious  knowledge,  accom- 
panied by  experience,  by  knowing  which  you  will 
be  released  from  evil.  It  is  the  chief  among  the 
sciences,  the  chief  among  the  mysteries.  It  is  the 
best  means  of  sanctification.     It  is  imperishable,  not 

time,  by  which;'  and  the  fire-flame  as  included  in  this,  though 
having  no  connexion  with  time.  *Sarikara  agrees,  though  he  also 
suggests  that  fire  means  a  deity  presiding  over  time.  I  own  I  have 
no  clear  notion  of  the  meaning  of  these  verses.  Cf.  .Oandogya, 
p.  342 ;  Br/had-ara/zyaka-upanishad,  p.  1057  seq. 

1  Cf.  Prajna-upanishad,  p.  64;  and  *Sariraka  BMshya,  p.  747  seq. 

2  I.  e.  for  those  who  are  fitted  for  knowledge  or  action. 

3  I.e.  does  not  desire  heaven,  but  devotes  himself  to  the  supreme 
Being,  seeing  that  heavenly  bliss  is  only  temporary. 

4  All  that  is  stated  in  this  chapter. 

[8]  G 


82  BHAGAVADGfTA. 


opposed  to  the  sacred  law.  It  is  to  be  apprehended 
directly  *,  and  is  easy  to  practise.  O  terror  of  your 
foes!  those  men  who  have  no  faith  in  this  holy 
doctrine,  return  to  the  path  of  this  mortal  world, 
without  attaining  to  me.  This  whole  universe  is 
pervaded  by  me  in  an  unperceived  form.  All  entities 
live  in  me,  but  I  do  not  live  in  them2.  Nor  yet 
do  all  entities  live  in  me.  See  my  divine  power. 
Supporting  all  entities  and  producing  all  entities, 
my  self  lives  not  in  (those)  entities.  As  the  great 
and  ubiquitous  atmosphere  always  remains  in  space, 
know  that  similarly  all  entities  live  in  me 3.  At  the 
expiration  of  a  Kalpa,  O  son  of  Kuntl !  all  entities 
enter  my  nature  ;  and  at  the  beginning  of  a  Kalpa,  I 
again  bring  them  forth.  Taking  the  control  of  my 
own  nature 4,  I  bring  forth  again  and  again  this 
whole  collection  of  entities,  without  a  will  of  its 
own 5,  by  the  power  of  nature.  But,  O  Ar^una ! 
these  actions  do  not  fetter6  me,  who  remain  like 
one  unconcerned,  and  who  am  unattached  to  those 
actions.  Nature  gives  birth  to  movables  and  im- 
movables through  me,  the  supervisor,  and  by  reason 
of  that7,  O  son  of  Kuntl!  the  universe  revolves. 
Deluded  people  of  vain  hopes,  vain  acts,  vain  know- 

1  I.  e.  by  immediate  consciousness,  not  mediately ;  '  not  opposed 
to  the  sacred  law/  i.e.  like  the  *Syena  sacrifice  for  destroying  a  foe. 

2  Because  he  is  untainted  by  anything.  And  therefore  also  the 
entities  do  not  live  in  him,  as  said  in  the  next  sentence.  See  p.  8o 
supra. 

3  As  space  is  untainted  and  unaffected  by  the  air  which  remains 
in  it,  so  am  I  by  the  entities. 

4  Supra,  p.  58.     Nature  — the  unperceived  principle, 

5  Cf.  p.  80  supra. 

6  I  am  not  affected  by  the  differences  in  the  conditions  of  these 
entities. 

7  Viz.  the  supervision. 


CHAPTER   IX,   1 8.  83 


ledge1,  whose  minds  are  disordered,  and  who  are 
inclined  to  the  delusive  nature  of  Asuras  and  Ra- 
kshasas,  not  knowing  my  highest  nature  as  great 
lord  of  all  entities,  disregard  me  as  I  have  assumed 
a  human  body 2.  But  the  high-souled  ones,  O  son 
of  Przth& !  who  are  inclined  to  the  godlike  nature, 
knowing  me  as  the  inexhaustible  source  of  (all)  enti- 
ties, worship  me  with  minds  not  (turned)  elsewhere. 
Constantly  glorifying  me,  and  exerting  themselves  3, 
firm  in  their  vows  4,  and  saluting  me  with  reverence, 
they  worship  me,  being  always  devoted.  And  others 
again,  offering  up  the  sacrifice  of  knowledge,  worship 
me  as  one,  as  distinct,  and  as  all-pervading  in  nume- 
rous forms5.  I  am  the  Kratu6,  I  am  the  Ya^fia, 
I  am  the  Svadha,  I  the  product  of  the  herbs.  I  am 
the  sacred  verse.  I  too  am  the  sacrificial  butter, 
and  I  the  fire,  I  the  offering7.  I  am  the  father  of  this 
universe,  the  mother,  the  creator,  the  grandsire,  the 
thing  to  be  known,  the  means  of  sanctification, 
the  syllable  Om8,  the  Rik,  Saman,  and  Ya^us  also; 
the  goal,  the  sustainer,  the  lord,  the  supervisor,  the 


1  Hope,  viz.  that  some  other  deity  will  give  them  what  they  want; 
acts,  vain  as  not  offered  to  the  supreme;  knowledge,  vain  as 
abounding  in  foolish  doubts,  &c. 

2  Cf.  p.  76  supra. 

8  For  a  knowledge  of  the  supreme,  or  for  the  means  of  such 
knowledge. 

4  Vows = veracity,  harmlessness,  &c. 

5  Sacrifice  of  knowledge,  viz.  the  knowledge  that  Vasudeva  is  all; 
as  one = believing  that  all  is  one;  as  distinct = believing  that  sun, 
moon,  &c.  are  different  manifestations  of  *  me.' 

6  Kratu  is  a  Vedic  sacrifice;  Ya^-fia,  a  sacrifice  laid  down  in 
Smr/tis.  Svadha = offering  to  the  manes;  ' product  of  the  herbs'  = 
food  prepared  from  vegetables,  or  medicine. 

7  Cf.  p.  61  supra.  8  P.  79  supra. 

G    2 


84  bhagavadg!ta. 


residence  \  the  asylum,  the  friend,  the  source,  and 
that  in  which  it  merges,  the  support,  the  receptacle, 
and  the  inexhaustible  seed.  I  cause  heat  and  I  send 
forth  and  stop  showers.  I  am  immortality  and  also 
death;  and  I,  O  Ar^una!  am  that  which  is  and  that 
which  is  not2.  Those  who  know  the  three  (branches 
of)  knowledge,  who  drink  the  Soma  juice,  whose  sins 
are  washed  away,  offer  sacrifices  and  pray  to  me  for 
a  passage  into  heaven  ;  and  reaching  the  holy  world 
of  the  lord  of  gods,  they  enjoy  in  the  celestial 
regions  the  celestial  pleasures  of  the  gods.  And 
having  enjoyed  that  great  heavenly  world,  they 
enter  the  mortal  world  when  (their)  merit  is  ex- 
hausted 3.  Thus  those  who  wish  for  objects  of 
desire,  and  resort  to  the  ordinances  of  the  three 
(Vedas),  obtain  (as  the  fruit)  going  and  coming.  To 
those  men  who  worship  me,  meditating  on  me  and 
on  no  one  else,  and  who  are  constantly  devoted,  I 
give  new  gifts  and  preserve  what  is  acquired  by 
them 4.  Even  those,  O  son  of  Kuntt !  who  being 
devotees  of  other  divinities  worship  with  faith,  wor- 
ship me  only,  (but)  irregularly5.  For  I  am  the  en- 
joy er  as  well  as  the  lord  6  of  all  sacrifices.  But 
they  know  me  not  truly,  therefore  do  they  fall7. 
Those  who  make  vows 8  to  the  gods  go  to  the  gods  ; 

1  I.  e.  the  seat  of  enjoyment;  receptacle = where  things  are  pre- 
served for  future  use,  say  the  commentators. 

2  The  gross  and  the  subtle  elements,  or  causes  and  effects. 

3  Cf.  MuWakopanishad,  p.  279;  and  .Oandogya,  p.  344. 

4  Cf.  Dhammapada,  stanza  23.     I.e.  attainment  to  the  Brahman 
and  not  returning  from  it. —  Ramanu^a. 

5  Because  in  form  they  worship  other  divinities. 

6  Giver  of  the  fruit.     As  to  enjoyer,  cf.  p.  67  supra. 

7  I.  e.  return  to  the  mortal  world. 

8  I.e.  some  regulation  as  to  mode  of  worship.  Cf.  also  p.  76  supra. 


CHAPTER    IX,  32.  85 


those  who  make  vows  to  the  manes  go  to  the  manes ; 
those  who  worship  the  Bhutas  go  to  the  Bhtitas ; 
and  those  likewise  who  worship  me  go  to  me.  Who- 
ever with  devotion  offers  me  leaf,  flower,  fruit,  water, 
that,  presented  with  devotion,  I  accept  from  him 
whose  self  is  pure.  Whatever  you  do,  O  son 
of  Kuntl !  whatever  you  eat,  whatever  sacrifice 
you  make,  whatever  you  give,  whatever  penance  you 
perform,  do  that  as  offered  to  me  \  Thus  will  you 
be  released  from  the  bonds  of  action,  the  fruits  of 
which  are  agreeable  or  disagreeable.  And  with 
your  self  possessed  of  (this)  devotion,  (this)  renun- 
ciation2, you  will  be  released  (from  the  bonds  of 
action)  and  will  come  to  me.  I  am  alike  to  all 
beings ;  to  me  none  is  hateful,  none  dear.  But 
those  who  worship  me  with  devotion  (dwell)  in  me 3, 
and  I  too  in  them.  Even  if  a  very  ill-conducted 
man  worships  me,  not  worshipping  any  one  else,  he 
must  certainly  be  deemed  to  be  good,  for  he  has 
well  resolved4.  He  soon  becomes  devout  of  heart, 
and  obtains  lasting  tranquillity.  (You  may)  affirm, 
O  son  of  Kuntl !  that  my  devotee  is  never  ruined. 
For,  O  son  of  Prztha!  even  those  who  are  of  sinful 
birth5,  women,  Vai^yas,  and  .Sftdras  likewise,  resorting 
to  me,  attain  the  supreme  goal.     What  then  (need 

1  Cf.  p.  55  supra,  and  other  passages. 

2  This  mode  of  action  is  at  once  devotion  and  renunciation :  the 
first,  because  one  cares  not  for  fruit ;  the  second,  because  it  is  offered 
to  the  supreme. 

3  '  They  dwell  in  me '  by  their  devotion  to  me ;  I  dwell  in  them 
as  giver  of  happiness  to  them. 

4  Viz.  that  the  supreme  Being  alone  should  be  reverenced. 

5  Sankara  takes  Vaisyas  &c.  as  examples  of  this ;  not  so  Sridhara. 
Cf.  as  to  women  and  *Sudras,  Nrzsiwha-tapini,  p.  14.  'Of  sinful 
birth'=of  low  birth  (*Sridhara)= birth  resulting  from  sins  (Sankara). 


S6  BHAGAVADGITA. 


be  said  of)  holy  Brahma/zas  and  royal  saints  who 
are  (my)  devotees  ?  Coming  to  this  transient  un- 
happy1 world,  worship  me.  (Place  your)  mind  on 
me,  become  my  devotee,  my  worshipper ;  reverence 
me,  and  thus  making  me  your  highest  goal,  and 
devoting  your  self  to  abstraction,  you  will  certainly 
come  to  me. 


Chapter   X. 


Yet  again,  O  you  of  mighty  arms !  listen  to 
my  excellent 2  words,  which,  out  of  a  wish  for  your 
welfare,  I  speak  to  you  who  are  delighted  (with 
them).  Not  the  multitudes  of  gods,  nor  the  great 
sages  know  my  source;  for  I  am  in  every  way3 
the  origin  of  the  gods  and  great  sages.  Of  (all) 
mortals,  he  who  knows  me  to  be  unborn,  without 
beginning,  the  great  lord  of  the  world,  being  free 
from  delusion,  is  released  from  all  sins.  Intelligence, 
knowledge,  freedom  from  delusion,  forgiveness,  truth, 
restraint  of  the  senses,  tranquillity,  pleasure,  pain,  birth, 
death,  fear,  and  also  security,  harmlessness,  equability, 
contentment,  penance,  (making)  gifts,  glory,  disgrace, 
all  these  different  tempers4  of  living  beings  are  from 
me  alone.  The  seven  great  sages,  and  likewise  the 
four  ancient  Manus 5,  whose  descendants  are  (all) 
these  people  in  the  world,  were  all  born  from  my 


1  Cf.  p.  79  supra. 

2  As  referring  to  the  supreme  soul. 

3  As  creator,  as  moving  agent  in  workings  of  the  intellect,  &c. 

*  The  names  are  not  always  names  of '  tempers/  but  the  corre- 
sponding '  temper '  must  be  understood. 

6  The  words  are  also  otherwise  construed,  '  The  four  ancients 
(Sanaka,  Sanandana,  Sanatana,  Sanatkum&ra)  and  the  Manus/ 
According  to  the  later  mythology  the  Manus  are  fourteen. 


CHAPTER    X,   1 6.  87 


mind1,  (partaking)  of  my  powers.  Whoever  correctly 
knows  these  powers  and  emanations  of  mine,  be- 
comes possessed  of  devotion  free  from  indecision ; 
of  this  (there  is)  no  doubt.  The  wise,  full  of  love  2, 
worship  me,  believing  that  I  am  the  origin  of  all, 
and  that  all  moves  on  through  me.  (Placing  their) 
minds  on  me,  offering  (their)  lives  to  me,  instructing 
each  other,  and  speaking  about  me,  they  are  always 
contented  and  happy.  To  these,  who  are  con- 
stantly devoted,  and  who  worship  with  love,  I  give 
that  knowledge  by  which  they  attain  to  me.  And 
remaining  in  their  hearts,  I  destroy,  with  the  brilliant 
lamp  of  knowledge,  the  darkness  born  of  ignorance 
in  such  (men)  only,  out  of  compassion  for  them. 

Argima  said  : 
You  are  the  supreme  Brahman,  the  supreme  goal, 
the  holiest  of  the  holy.  All  sages,  as  well  as  the 
divine  sage  Narada,  Asita  3,  Devala,  and  Vyisa,  call 
you  the  eternal  being,  divine,  the  first  god,  the  un- 
born, the  all-pervading.  And  so,  too,  you  tell  me 
yourself,  O  Kesava!  I  believe  all  this  that  you  tell 
me  (to  be)  true ;  for,  O  lord !  neither  the  gods  nor 
demons  understand  your  manifestation4.  You  only 
know  your  self  by  your  self.  O  best  of  beings !  creator 
of  all  things  !  lord  of  all  things  !  god  of  gods  !  lord 
of  the  universe !  be  pleased  to  declare  without 
exception  your  divine  emanations,  by  which  emana- 

1  By  the  mere  operation  of  my  thought.     As  to  ancients,  cf* 
Aitareya-ararcyaka,  p.  136. 

2  -Sahkara  renders  the  word  here  by  perseverance  in  pursuit  of 
truth. 

3  Anandagiri  calls  Asita  father  of  Devala.     See   also  Davids' 
Buddhism,  p.  185;  Miiller's  Anc.  Sansk.  Lit.,  p.  463. 

4  Scil.  in  human  form  for  the  good  of  the  gods  and  the  destruc- 
tion of  demons. 


88  BHAGAVADGITA. 


tions  you  stand  pervading  all  these  worlds.  How 
shall  I  know  you,  O  you  of  mystic  power!  always 
meditating  on  you  ?    And  in  what  various  entities1, 

0  lord !  should  I  meditate  on  you  ?  Again,  O 
Ganclrdana !  do  you  yourself  declare  your  powers 
and  emanations ;  because  hearing  this  nectar,  I  (still) 
feel  no  satiety. 

The  Deity  said  : 
Well  then,  O  best  of  Kauravas !  I  will  state  to 
you  my  own  divine  emanations  ;  but  (only)  the  chief 
(ones),  for  there  is  no  end  to  the  extent  of  my  (ema- 
nations). I  am  the  self,  O  Gudakesa, !  seated  in  the 
hearts  of  all  beings 2.  I  am  the  beginning  and  the 
middle  and  the  end  also  of  all  beings.  I  am  Vishnu 
among  the  Adityas 3,  the  beaming  sun  among  the 
shining  (bodies) ;  I  am  MarL£i  among  the  Maruts4, 
and  the  moon  among  the  lunar  mansions 5.  Among 
the  Vedas,  I  am  the  Sama-veda6.  I  am  Indra 
among  the  gods.  And  I  am  mind  among  the 
senses 7.    I  am  consciousness  in  (living)  beings.    And 

1  am  6ankara8  among  the  Rudras,  the  lord  of 
wealth 9  among  Yakshas  and  Rakshases.  And  I  am 
fire  among  the  Vasus,  and  Meru10  among  the  high- 
topped  (mountains).     And  know  me,  O  Ar^una  !  to 

1  To  know  you  fully  being  impossible,  what  special  manifesta- 
tion of  you  should  we  resort  to  for  our  meditations  ? 

2  P.  129  infra. 

3  '  Aditya  is  used  in  the  Veda  chiefly  as  a  general  epithet  for  a 
number  of  solar  deities.'  Max  Mtiller,  Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  264. 

4  The  storm-gods,  as  Max  Mtiller  calls  them. 

5  Cf.  Sutta  Nipata,  p.  121. 

6  As  being,  probably,  full  of  music. 

7  Cf.  ^^andogya,  p.  121,  where  Sahkara  says, '  Mind  is  the  chief 
of  man's  inner  activities., 

8  Now  the  third  member  of  our  Trinity. 

Kubera.  10  The  Golden  Mount. 


CHAPTER   X,  30.  89 


be  Brzhaspati,  the  chief  among  domestic  priests. 
I  am  Skanda  among  generals.  I  am  the  ocean 
among  reservoirs  of  water  \  I  am  Bhrzgu  among  the 
great  sages.  I  am  the  single  syllable  (Om  2)  among 
words.  Among  sacrifices  I  am  the  Gapa  sacrifice a; 
the  Himalaya  among  the  firmly-fixed  (mountains); 
the  Asvattha 4  among  all  trees,  and  N&rada  among 
divine  sages ;  A^itraratha  among  the  heavenly  choris- 
ters, the  sage  Kapila  among  the  Siddhas5.  Among 
horses  know  me  to  be  U^ai^ravas 6,  brought  forth 
by  (the  labours  for)  the  nectar ;  and  Airavata  among 
the  great  elephants,  and  the  ruler  of  men  among 
men 7.  I  am  the  thunderbolt  among  weapons,  the 
wish-giving  (cow)  among  cows.  And  I  am  love 
which  generates  8.  Among  serpents  I  am  Vasuki. 
Among  Naga 9  snakes  I  am  Ananta ;  I  am  Varu/za 
among  aquatic  beings.  And  I  am  Aryaman  among  the 
manes,  and  Yama10  among  rulers.  Among  demons, 
too,  I  am  Pralhida.  I  am  the  king  of  death  (Kala, 
time)  among  those  that  count  n.     Among  beasts  I 

I  Cf.  Sutta  Nipata,  p.  121.  2  Vide  p.  79  supra. 

3  <7apa  is  the  silent  meditation.  Madhusudana  says  it  is  superior 
owing  to  its  not  involving  the  slaughter  of  any  animal,  &c. 

4  The  fig  tree.     It  is  the  symbol  of  '  life '  in  chapter  XV  infra. 

5  Those  who  even  from  birth  are  possessed  of  piety,  knowledge, 
indifference  to  the  world,  and  superhuman  power.  Cf.  £vet&- 
svatara-upanishad,  p.  357. 

6  This  islndra's  horse,  brought  out  at  the  churning  of  the  ocean. 
Airavata  is  Indra's  elephant. 

7  Cf.  Sutta  Nipata,  p.  121. 

8  I.  e.  not  the  merely  carnal  passion.     Cf.  p.  74  supra. 

9  Nagas  are  without  poison,  says  *Sridhara.  Varurca  is  the  sea-god. 

10  Yama  is  death,  and  Pralhada  the  virtuous  demon  for  whom 
Vishmi  became  incarnate  as  the  man-lion.  As  to  manes,  see 
Goldstucker's  Remains,  1, 133. 

II  f  Counts  the  number  of  men's  sins/  Rlmanu^a ;  -Sridhara  says 


90  bhagavadgIta. 


am  the  lord  of  beasts,  and  the  son  of  Vinata1  among 
birds.  I  am  the  wind  among  those  that  blow 2.  I 
am  Rama 3  among  those  that  wield  weapons. 
Among  fishes  I  am  Makara 4,  and  among  streams 
the  ^ahnavi5.  Of  created  things  I  am  the  begin- 
ning and  the  end  and  the  middle  also,  O  Ar^una ! 
Among  sciences,  I  am  the  science  of  the  Adhyatma, 
and  I  am  the  argument  of  controversialists.  Among 
letters  I  am  the  letter  A 6,  and  among  the  group  of 
compounds  the  copulative7  compound.  I  myself  am 
time  inexhaustible,  and  I  the  creator  whose  faces 
are  in  all  directions.  I  am  death  who  seizes  all,  and 
the  source  of  what  is  to  be.  And  among  females, 
fame 8,  fortune,  speech,  memory,  intellect,  courage, 
forgiveness.  Likewise  among  Saman  hymns,  I  am 
the  Brz'hat-saman9,  and  I  the  Gayatri10  among  metres. 
I   am   Margaslrsha  among   the  months,  the  spring 

this  refers  to  '  time,  with  its  divisions  into  years,  months/  &c. ; 
while  a  little  further  on  it  means  *  time  eternal.' 

1  I.  e.  the  Garikfa  or  eagle,  who  is  the  vehicle  of  Vishmi  in 
Hindu  mythology. 

2  '  Those  who  have  the  capacity  of  motion/  says  Ramanu^a. 

3  The  hero  of  the  Hindu  epos,  Ramayaw  a,  translated  into  verse 
by  Mr.  R.  T.  H.  Griffiths. 

4  The  dolphin.  5  The  Ganges. 

6  That  letter  is  supposed  to  comprehend  all  language.  Cf. 
Aitareya-arawyaka,  p.  346,  and  another  text  there  cited  by  Madhava 
in  his  commentary  (p.  348). 

7  This  is  said  to  be  the  best,  because  all  its  members  are  co-ordi- 
nate with  one  another,  not  one  depending  on  another. 

8  I.  e.  the  deities  of  fame,  &c. 

9  See,  as  to  this,  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  vol.  i,  p.  16.  *Sankara 
says  this  hymn  relates  to  final  emancipation. 

10  Cf.  .Oandogya-upanishad,  p.  181,  where  *Sahkara  says,  'Gayatri 
is  the  chief  metre,  because  it  is  the  means  to  a  knowledge  of  the 
Brahman.'  It  is  the  metre  of  the  celebrated  verse  'Om  Tat- 
savitur/  &c. 


CHAPTER   X,   42.  91 


among  the  seasons1;  of  cheats,  I  am  the  game  of 
dice  ;  I  am  the  glory  of  the  glorious ;  I  am  victory, 
I  am  industry,  I  am  the  goodness  of  the  good.  I 
am  Vasudeva  among  the  descendants  of  Vrtsh.nl 2, 
and  Ar^una  among  the  Pa^afavas.  Among  sages 
also,  I  am  Vyasa  3 ;  and  among  the  discerning  ones, 
I  am  the  discerning  Uianas4.  I  am  the  rod  of 
those  that  restrain,  and  the  policy5  of  those  that 
desire  victory.  I  am  silence  respecting  secrets.  I 
am  the  knowledge  of  those  that  have  knowledge. 
And,  O  Ar£*una  !  I  am  also  that  which  is  the  seed 
of  all  things.  There  is  nothing  movable  or  im- 
movable which  can  exist  without  me.  O  terror 
of  your  foes !  there  is  no  end  to  my  divine  emana- 
tions. Here  I  have  declared  the  extent  of  (those) 
emanations  only  in  part.  Whatever  thing  (there  is) 
of  power,  or  glorious,  or  splendid,  know  all  that 
to  be  produced  from  portions  of  my  energy.  Or 
rather,  O  Ar^una !  what  have  you  to  do,  knowing 
all  this  at  large  ?  I  stand  supporting  all  this  by 
(but)  a  single  portion  (of  myself) 6. 


1  Cf.  .Oandogya-upariishad,  p.  126.  Margasirsha  is  November- 
December.  Madhusudana  says  this  is  the  best  month,  as  being 
neither  too  hot  nor  too  cold ;  but  see  Schlegel's  Bhagavadgita,  ed. 
Lassen,  p.  276. 

2  One  of  Krishna's  ancestors. 

3  The  compiler  of  the  Vedas. 

4  The  preceptor  of  the  Daityas  or  demons.  A  work  on  politics 
is  ascribed  to  him. 

5  Making  peace,  bribing,  &c. 

6  Cf.  Purusha-sukta  (Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  vol.  i,  p.  9). 


92  BHAGAVADGiTA. 


Chapter    XI. 

Ar^una  said: 

In  consequence  of  the  excellent  and  mysterious 
words  concerning  the  relation  of  the  supreme  and 
individual  soul,  which  you  have  spoken  for  my  wel- 
fare, this  delusion  of  mine  is  gone  away.  O  you 
whose  eyes  are  like  lotus  leaves !  I  have  heard  from 
you  at  large  about  the  production  and  dissolution  of 
things,  and  also  about  your  inexhaustible  greatness. 
O  highest  lord!  what  you  have  said  about  yourself 
is  so.  I  wish,  O  best  of  beings!  to  see  your  divine 
form.  If,  O  lord !  you  think  that  it  is  possible  for 
me  to  look  upon  it,  then,  O  lord  of  the  possessors 
of  mystic  power 1 !  show  your  inexhaustible  form 
to  me. 

The  Deity  said  : 

In  hundreds  and  in  thousands  see  my  forms,  O 
son  of  Prz'tha!  various,  divine,  and  of  various  colours 
and  shapes.  See  the  Adityas,  Vasus,  Rudras,  the 
two  A^vins,  and  Maruts  likewise.  And  O  descen- 
dant of  Bharata !  see  wonders,  in  numbers,  unseen 
before.  Within  my  body,  O  Gu^ake^a!  see  to-day 
the  whole  universe,  including  (everything)  movable 
and  immovable,  (all)  in  one,  and  whatever  else 
you  wish  to  see.  But  you  will  not  be  able  to  see 
me  with  merely  this  eye  of  yours.  I  give  you  an 
eye  divine.     (Now)  see  my  divine  power. 

San^aya  said  : 
Having  spoken  thus,  O  king!     Hari,  the  great 

1  Madhusudana  takes  power  to  mean  capacity  of  becoming 
small  or  great,  of  obtaining  what  is  wanted,  &c;  the  so-called 
eight  Bhutis. 


CHAPTER    XT,   I  7.  93 


lord  of  the  possessors  of  mystic  power,  then  showed 
to  the  son  of  Pntha  his  supreme  divine  form,  having 
many  mouths  and  eyes,  having  (within  it)  many 
wonderful  sights,  having  many  celestial  ornaments, 
having  many  celestial  weapons  held  erect,  wearing 
celestial  flowers  and  vestments,  having  an  anoint- 
ment of  celestial  perfumes,  full  of  every  wonder,  the 
infinite  deity  with  faces  in  all  directions1.  If  in 
the  heavens,  the  lustre  of  a  thousand  suns  burst 
forth  all  at  once,  that  would  be  like  the  lustre  of 
that  mighty  one.  There  the  son  of  F&ndu  then 
observed  in  the  body  of  the  god  of  gods  the  whole 
universe  (all)  in  one,  and  divided  into  numerous  2 
(divisions).  Then  Dhanan^aya  filled  with  amaze- 
ment, and  with  hair  standing  on  end,  bowed  his 
head  before  the  god,  and  spoke  with  joined  hands. 

Ar^una  said : 

0  god !  I  see  within  your  body  the  gods,  as  also 
all  the  groups  of  various  beings ;  and  the  lord 
Brahman  seated  on  (his)  lotus  seat,  and  all  the 
sages  and  celestial  snakes.  I  see  you,  who  are  of 
countless  forms,  possessed  of  many  arms,  stomachs, 
mouths,  and  eyes  on  all  sides.  And,  O  lord  of  the 
universe !  O  you  of  all  forms !  I  do  not  see  your 
end  or  middle  or  beginning.  I  see  you  bearing  a 
coronet  and  a  mace  and  a  discus — a  mass  of  glory, 
brilliant  on  all  sides,  difficult  to  look  at,  having  on 

1  Cf.  p.  90  supra.  £afikara  explains  it  as  meaning  '  pervading 
everything/  The  expression  occurs  in  the  Nmiwha-tapini-upani- 
shad,  p.  50,  where  it  is  said,  '  as,  without  organs,  it  sees,  hears, 
goes,  takes  from  all  sides  and  pervades  everything,  therefore  it  has 
faces  on  all  sides.' 

2  Gods,  manes,  men,  and  so  forth. 


94  bhagavadg!tA. 


all  sides  the  effulgence  of  a  blazing  fire  or  sun,  and 
indefinable.  You  are  indestructible,  the  supreme 
one  to  be  known.  You  are  the  highest  support 1  of 
this  universe.  You  are  the  inexhaustible  protector 
of  everlasting  piety.  I  believe  you  to  be  the  eternal 
being.  I  see  you  void  of  beginning,  middle,  end — 
of  infinite  power,  of  unnumbered  arms,  having  the 
sun  and  moon  for  eyes,  having  a  mouth  like  a 
blazing  fire,  and  heating  the  universe  with  your 
radiance.  For  this  space  between  heaven  and 
earth  and  all  the  quarters  are  pervaded  by  you 
alone.  Looking  at  this  wonderful  and  terrible  form 
of  yours,  O  high-souled  one!  the  three  worlds  are 
affrighted.  For  here  these  groups  of  gods  are 
entering  into  you.  Some  being  afraid  are  praying 
with  joined  hands,  and  the  groups  of  great  sages 
and  Siddhas  are  saying  'Welfare2!'  and  praising 
you  with  abundant  (hymns)  of  praise.  The  Rudras, 
and  Adityas,  the  Vasus,  the  S&dhyas,  the  VLrvas,  the 
two  Asvins,  the  Maruts,  and  the  Ushmapas,  and  the 
groups  of  Gandharvas,  Yakshas,  demons,  and  Sid- 
dhas are  all  looking  at  you  amazed.  Seeing  your 
mighty  form,  with  many  mouths  and  eyes,  with 
many  arms,  thighs,  and  feet,  with  many  stomachs, 
and  fearful  with  many  jaws,  all  people,  and  I  like- 
wise, are  much  alarmed,  O  you  of  mighty  arms! 
Seeing  you,  O  Vishnu !  touching  the  skies,  radiant, 
possessed  of  many  hues,  with  a  gaping  mouth,  and 
with  large  blazing  eyes,  I  am  much  alarmed  in  my 
inmost  self,   and   feel    no   courage,  no   tranquillity. 


1  The  words  are  the  same  as  at  p.  97  infra,  where  see  the  note. 

2  Seeing  signs  of  some  great  cataclysm,  they  say, '  May  it  be  well 
with  the  universe/  and  then  proceed  to  pray  to  you. 


CHAPTER    XI,  32.  95 


And  seeing  your  mouths  terrible  by  the  jaws,  and 
resembling  the  fire  of  destruction,  I  cannot  recog- 
nise the  (various)  directions,  I  feel  no  comfort.  Be 
gracious,  O  lord  of  gods !  who  pervadest  the  uni- 
verse. And  all  these  sons  of  Dh^tarish/ra,  together 
with  all  the  bands  of  kings,  and  Bhishma  and  Dro^a, 
and  this  charioteers  son1  likewise,  together  with  our 
principal  warriors  also,  are  rapidly  entering  your 
mouths,  fearful  and  horrific2  by  (reason  of  your) 
jaws.  And  some  with  their  heads  smashed  are  seen 
(to  be)  stuck  in  the  spaces  between  the  teeth.  As 
the  many  rapid  currents  of  a  river's  waters  run 
towards  the  sea  alone,  so  do  these  heroes  of  the 
human  world  enter  your  mouths  blazing  all  round. 
As  butterflies,  with  increased  velocity,  enter  a  blazing 
fire  to  their  destruction,  so  too  do  these  people  enter 
your  mouths  with  increased  velocity  (only)  to  their 
destruction.  Swallowing  all  these  people,  you  are 
licking  them  over  and  over  again  from  all  sides, 
with  your  blazing  mouths.  Your  fierce  splendours, 
O  Vish/zu!  filling  the  whole  universe  with  (their) 
effulgence,  are  heating  it.  Tell  me  who  you  are  in 
this  fierce  form.  Salutations  be  to  thee,  O  chief  of 
the  gods !  Be  gracious.  I  wish  to  know  you,  the 
primeval  one,  for  I  do  not  understand  your  actions. 

The  Deity  said : 
I  am   death,  the  destroyer   of  the  worlds,  fully 
developed,   and   I   am  now  active  about  the  over- 

1  I.e.  Kanza,  who  was  really  the  eldest  brother  of  the  PaWavas, 
but  having  been  immediately  on  birth  abandoned  by  Kunti,  was 
brought  up  by  a  charioteer.  Kama  was  told  of  his  true  origin  by 
Bhishma  on  his  deathbed,  and  advised  to  join  the  PaWavas,  but  he 
declined. 

2  By  reason  of  the  ruggedness  and  distortion  of  face. 


96  bhagavadgitA. 


throw  of  the  worlds.  Even  without  you,  the  war- 
riors standing  in  the  adverse  hosts,  shall  all  cease  to 
be.  Therefore,  be  up,  obtain  glory,  and  vanquishing 
(your)  foes,  enjoy  a  prosperous  kingdom.  All  these 
have  been  already  killed  by  me.  Be  only  the  in- 
strument, O  Savyasa^in 1 !  Dro/za,  and  Bhfshma,  and 
^ayadratha,  and  Kama,  and  likewise  other  valiant 
warriors  also,  whom  I  have  killed,  do  you  kill.  Be 
not  alarmed.  Do  fight.  And  in  the  battle  you  will 
conquer  (your)  foes. 

San^aya  said : 
Hearing  these  words  of  Kesava,  the  wearer  of  the 
coronet2,  trembling,  and  with  joined  hands,  bowed 
down ;  and  sorely  afraid,  and  with  throat  choked  up, 
he  again  spoke  to  Krishna,  after  saluting  him. 

Ar^una  said : 
It  is  quite  proper,  O  Hrzshikesa  !  that  the  uni- 
verse is  delighted  and  charmed  by  your  renown, 
that  the  demons  run  away  affrighted  in  all  directions, 
and  that  all  the  assemblages  of  Siddhas  bow  down 
(to  you).  And  why,  O  high-souled  one !  should 
they  not  bow  down  to  you  (who  are)  greater  than 
Brahman,  and  first  cause  ?  O  infinite  lord  of 
gods !  O  you  pervading  the  universe !  you  are 
the  indestructible,  that  which  is,  that  which  is  not, 
and  what  is  beyond  them 3.     You  are  the  primal 

1  Argoma,  as  he  could  shoot  with  his  left  hand  as  well  as  the 
right. — Sridhara. 

2  Arg-una,  who  had  this  coronet  given  him  by  Indra. — Madhu- 
sudana. 

3  The  commentators  interpret  this  to  mean  the  perceptible,  the 
unperceived,  and  the  higher  principle.  Cf.  p.  84  supra,  and  also 
pp.  103, 113  infra  and  notes  there. 


CHAPTER   XI,  44.  97 


god,  the  ancient  being,  you  are  the  highest  support 
of  this  universe  l.  You  are  that  which  has  know- 
ledge, that  which  is  the  object  of  knowledge,  you 
are  the  highest  goal.  By  you  is  this  universe  per- 
vaded, O  you  of  infinite  forms !  You  are  the  wind, 
Yama,  fire,  Varu#a,  the  moon,  you  Pra^apati,  and 
the  great  grandsire 2.  Obeisance  be  to  thee  a  thou- 
sand times,  and  again  and  again  obeisance  to  thee  ! 
In  front  and  from  behind  obeisance  to  thee !  Obei- 
sance be  to  thee  from  all  sides,  O  you  who  are  all ! 
You  are  of  infinite  power,  of  unmeasured  glory  ; 
you  pervade  all,  and  therefore  you  are  all !  What- 
ever I  have  said  contemptuously, — for  instance,  *  O 
Krzshnal'  'O  YadavaP  'O  friend!' — thinking  you  to 
be  (my)  friend,  and  not  knowing  your  greatness  (as 
shown  in)  this  (universal  form),  or  through  friend- 
liness, or  incautiously;  and  whatever  disrespect  I 
have  shown  you  for  purposes  of  merriment,  on  (occa- 
sions of)  play,  sleep,  dinner,  or  sitting  (together), 
whether  alone  or  in  the  presence  (of  friends), — for 
all  that,  O  undegraded  one !  I  ask  pardon  of  you 
who  are  indefinable3.  You  are  the  father  of  the 
world — movable  and  immovable — you  its  great 
and  venerable  master ;  there  is  none  equal  to  you, 
whence  can  there  be  one  greater,  O  you  whose 
power  is  unparalleled  in  all  the  three  worlds  ? 
Therefore  I  bow  and  prostrate  myself,  and  would 
propitiate  you,  the  praiseworthy  lord.     Be  pleased, 

1  See  p.  94  supra.    Here  the  commentators  say  the  words  mean 
1  that  in  which  the  universe  is  placed  at  deluge-time/ 

2  Professor  Tiele  mentions  great-grandfather  as  a  name  for  the 
Creator  among  Kaffirs  (History  of  Religion,  p.  18).    Cf.  p.  83  supra. 

3  I.  e.  of  whom  it  is  impossible  to  ascertain  whether  he  is  such 
or  such.     Cf.  p.  94  supra. 

[8]  H 


98  bhagavadgIta. 


O  god  !  to  pardon  (my  guilt)  as  a  father  (that  of 
his)  son,  a  friend  (that  of  his)  friend,  or  a  husband 
(that  of  his)  beloved.  I  am  delighted  at  seeing 
what  I  had  never  seen  before,  and  my  heart  is  also 
alarmed  by  fear.  Show  me  that  same  form,  O  god ! 
Be  gracious,  O  lord  of  gods  !  O  you  pervading  the 
universe !  I  wish  to  see  you  bearing  the  coronet 
and  the  mace,  with  the  discus  in  hand,  just  the  same 
(as  before) 1.  O  you  of  thousand  arms !  O  you  of 
all  forms !  assume  that  same  four-handed  form. 

The  Deity  said : 

O  Ar^iina  !  being  pleased  (with  you),  I  have  by 
my  own  mystic  power  shown  you  this  supreme  form, 
full  of  glory,  universal,  infinite,  primeval,  and  which 
has  not  been  seen  before  by  any  one  else  but  you, 
O  you  hero  among  the  Kauravas !  I  cannot  be  seen 
in  this  form  by  any  one  but  you,  (even)  by  (the  help 
of)  the  study  of  the  Vedas,  or  of2  sacrifices,  nor  by 
gifts,  nor  by  actions,  nor  by  fierce  penances.  Be  not 
alarmed,  be  not  perplexed,  at  seeing  this  form  of 
mine,  fearful  like  this.  Free  from  fear  and  with 
delighted  heart,  see  now  again  that  same  form  of 

mine. 

San^aya  said : 

Having  thus  spoken  to  Ar^una,  Vasudeva  again 
showed  his  own  form,  and  the  high-souled  one  be- 
coming again  of  a  mild  form,  comforted  him  who 
had  been  affrighted. 


1  This  is  the  ordinary  form  of  Krishna,. 

2  This  is  the  original  construction.  One  suspects  that  sacri- 
fices and  study  of  the  Vedas  are  meant.  Cf.  the  speech  of  Krishna 
on  the  next  page. 


CHAPTER    XII,  3.  99 


Ar^una  said : 
O  Ganardana !   seeing  this  mild,  human  form  of 
yours,  I  am  now  in  my  right  mind,  and  have  come  to 
my  normal  state. 

The  Deity  said : 
Even  the  gods  are  always  desiring  to  see  this 
form  of  mine,  which  it  is  difficult  to  get  a  sight 
of,  and  which  you  have  seen.  I  cannot  be  seen,  as 
you  have  seen  me,  by  (means  of)  the  Vedas,  not  by 
penance,  not  by  gift,  nor  yet  by  sacrifice.  But,  O 
Ar^una  !  by  devotion  to  me  exclusively,  I  can  in 
this  form  be  truly  known,  seen,  and  assimilated 1 
with,  O  terror  of  your  foes  !  He  who  performs  acts 
for  (propitiating)  me,  to  whom  I  am  the  highest 
(object),  who  is  my  devotee,  who  is  free  from  attach- 
ment, and  who  has  no  enmity  towards  any  being,  he, 
O  son  of  F&ndu !  comes  to  me. 


Chapter    XII. 

Ar^una  said : 

Of  the  worshippers,  who  thus,  constantly  devoted, 

meditate  on  you,  and  those  who  (meditate)  on  the 

unperceived    and    indestructible,    which    best   know 

devotion  ? 

The  Deity  said : 

Those  who  being  constantly  devoted,  and  pos- 
sessed of  the  highest  faith,  worship  me  with  a  mind 
fixed  on  me,  are  deemed  by  me  to  be  the  most 
devoted.  But  those,  who,  restraining  the  (whole) 
group  of  the  senses,  and  with  a  mind  at  all  times 

1  Literally,  'entered  into;'  it  means  final  emancipation.  See  p.  128. 

H    2 


IOO  BHAGAVADGITA. 


equable,  meditate  on  the  indescribable,  indestructible, 
unperceived  (principle)  which  is  all-pervading,  un- 
thinkable, indifferent1,  immovable,  and  constant,  they, 
intent  on  the  good  of  all  beings,  necessarily  attain  to 
me.  For  those  whose  minds  are  attached  to  the  un- 
perceived, the  trouble  is  much  greater.  Because  the 
unperceived  goal 2  is  obtained  by  embodied  (beings) 
with  difficulty.  As  to  those,  however,  O  son  of  Prztha ! 
who,  dedicating  all  their  actions  to  me,  and  (holding) 
me  as  their  highest  (goal),  worship  me,  meditating 
on  me  with  a  devotion  towards  none  besides  me, 
and  whose  minds  are  fixed  on  me,  I,  without  delay, 
come  forward  as  their  deliverer  from  the  ocean  of 
this  world  of  death.  Place  your  mind  on  me  only;  fix 
your  understanding  on  me.  In  me  you  will  dwell 3 
hereafter,  (there  is)  no  doubt.  But  if  you  are 
unable  to  fix  your  mind  steadily  on  me,  then, 
O  Dhanan^aya !  endeavour 4  to  obtain  me  by  the 
abstraction  of  mind  (resulting)  from  continuous  medi- 
tation 5.  If  you  are  unequal  even  to  continuous 
meditation,  then  let  acts  for  (propitiating)  me  be 
your  highest  (aim).  Even  performing  actions  for 
(propitiating)  me,  you  will  attain  perfection.  If  you 
are  unable  to  do  even  this,  then  resort  to  devo- 
tion6 to  me,  and,  with  self-restraint,  abandon  all 
fruit  of  action.  For  knowledge  is  better  than  conti- 
nuous meditation;  concentration7  is  esteemed  higher 

1  Passively   looking   on  what  occurs   on  earth;   immovable  = 
changeless;  constant = eternal. 

2  Viz.  the  indestructible. 

3  I,  e,  assimilated  with  me,  as  expressed  before. 

4  Literally,  'wish.'  5  Cf.  p.  ?8  supra. 

6  Performing  actions,  but  dedicating  them  to  me. 

7  Fixing  the  mind  with  effort  on  the  object  of  contemplation. 
Cf.  Maitri-upanishad,  p.  130. 


CHAPTER    XII,   19.  IOI 


than  knowledge ;  and  the  abandonment  of  fruit  of 
action  than  concentration  ;  from  (that)  abandonment, 
tranquillity  soon  (results).  That  devotee  of  mine, 
who  hates  no  being,  who  is  friendly  and  compas- 
sionate, who  is  free  from  egoism,  and  from  (the 
idea  that  this  or  that  is)  mine,  to  whom  happiness 
and  misery  are  alike,  who  is  forgiving,  contented, 
constantly  devoted,  self-restrained,  and  firm  in  his 
determinations,  and  whose  mind  and  understanding 
are  devoted  to  me,  he  is  dear  to  me.  He  through 
whom  the  world  is  not  agitated  1,  and  who  is  not 
agitated  by  the  world,  who  is  free  from  joy  and 
anger  and  fear  and  agitation,  he  too  is  dear  to 
me.  That  devotee  of  mine,  who  is  unconcerned2, 
pure,  assiduous  3,  impartial,  free  from  distress  4,  who 
abandons  all  actions  (for  fruit  5),  he  is  dear  to  me. 
He  who  is  full  of  devotion  to  me,  who  feels  no  joy 
and  no  aversion,  who  does  not  grieve  and  does 
not  desire,  who  abandons  (both  what  is)  agreeable 
and  (what  is)  disagreeable,  he  is  dear  to  me.  He 
who  is  alike  to  friend  and  foe,  as  also  in  honour  and 
dishonour,  who  is  alike  in  cold  and  heat,  pleasure 
and  pain,  who  is  free  from  attachments,  to  whom 
praise  and  blame  are  alike,  who  is  taciturn6,  and 
contented  with  anything  whatever  (that  comes),  who 
is  homeless7,  and  of  a  steady  mind,  and  full  of  devo- 

1  No  disturbance  results  from  him  to  other  men,  or  from  other 
men  to  him.     Cf.  Sutta  Nipata,  p.  56. 

2  Indifferent  to  worldly  objects. 

3  Ready  to  do  work  as  it  arises. 

4  Not  feeling  afflicted  by  other  people's  doing  an  injury  to  him. 

5  *  For  fruit '  must  be  understood  here. 

6  I.  e.  governs  his  tongue  properly.     Cf.  Sutta  Nipata,  p.  55,  and 
Dhammapada,  stanza  96. 

7  Cf.  Sutta  Nipata,  pp.  94, 101,  122  ;  Apastamba,  Dharma-sutra, 


I02  BHAGAVADGITA. 


tion,  that  man  is  dear  to  me.  But  those  devotees 
who,  imbued  with  faith,  and  (regarding)  me  as  their 
highest  (goal),  resort  to  this  holy  (means  for  at- 
taining) immortality,  as  stated,  they  are  extremely 
dear  to  me. 


Chapter    XIII. 


The  Deity  said  : 
This  body,  O  son  of  Kuntt !  is  called  Kshetra1, 
and  the  learned  call  him  who  knows  it  the  Kshe- 
tra^na 2.  And  know  me  also,  O  descendant  of  Bha- 
rata  !  to  be  the  Kshetra^na  in  all  Kshetras.  The 
knowledge  of  Kshetra  and  Kshetra^na  is  deemed 
by  me  (to  be  real)  knowledge.  Now  hear  from  me 
in  brief  what  that  Kshetra  (is),  what  (it  is)  like, 
what  changes  (it  undergoes),  and  whence  (it  comes), 
and  what  is  he  3,  and  what  his  powers,  (all  which)  is 
sung  in  various  ways  by  sages  in  numerous  hymns4, 
distinctly,  and  in  well-settled  texts  full  of  argu- 
ment, giving  indications  or  full  instruction  about 
the  Brahman.  The  great  elements5,  egoism,  the 
understanding,  the  unperceived  also,  the  ten  senses, 
and  the  one,  and  the  five  objects  of  sense,  desire, 

p.  86  (p.  152  in  this  series);    and  Dhammapada,  stanzas  40-91 
(where  the  identical  word  is  used). 

1  I  retain  the  original  for  want  of  a  good  equivalent. 

2  Cf.  *SVeta\?vataropanishad,  p.  368,  and  Maitri,  pp.  25-72. 

3  I.  e.  the  Kshetra^-na. 

4  Hymns  =  scil.  from  the  Vedas  about  ordinary  or  special  actions 
and  so  forth.  Argument =e.  g.  in  texts  like  'How  can  entity  come 
from  non-entity  ?'  f  Who  could  breathe,  if  &c.  ?' 

5  Cf.  Aitareya-ararayaka,  p.  97.  The  subtle  elements,  earth,  fire, 
&c,  are  meant.  The  unperceived  =  nature ;  the  one  =  mind; 
courage  =  that  by  which  the  drooping  body  and  senses  are  sup- 
ported; egoism = self-consciousness — the  feeling  c  this  is  1/ 


CHAPTER    XIII,   13.  IO3 

aversion,  pleasure,  pain,  body,  consciousness,  cou- 
rage, thus  in  brief  has  been  declared  the  Kshetra 
with  changes  \  Absence  of  vanity,  absence  of  os- 
tentatiousness,  absence  of  hurtfulness,  forgiveness, 
straightforwardness,  devotion  to  a  preceptor,  purity2, 
steadiness,  self-restraint,  indifference  towards  objects 
of  sense,  and  also  absence  of  egoism  ;  perception  of 
the  misery  and  evil  of  birth,  death  3,  old  age,  and 
disease ;  absence  of  attachment,  absence  of  self- 
identifying  regard  for  son,  wife4,  home,  and  so  forth; 
and  constant  equability  on  the  approach  of  (both 
what  is)  agreeable  and  (what  is)  disagreeable  ;  un- 
swerving devotion  to  me,  without  meditation  on  any 
one  else ;  resorting  to  clean  places,  distaste  for 
assemblages  of  men 5,  constancy  in  knowledge  of  the 
relation  of  the  individual  self  to  the  supreme,  percep- 
tion of  the  object6  of  knowledge  of  the  truth,  this  is 
called  knowledge ;  that  is  ignorance  which  is  opposed 
to  this.  I  will  declare  that  which  is  the  object  of 
knowledge,  knowing  which,  one  reaches  immortality ; 
the  highest  Brahman,  having  no  beginning  nor  end, 
which  cannot  be  said  to  be  existent  or  non-existent7. 
It  has  hands  and  feet  on  all  sides,  it  has  eyes,  heads, 
and  faces  on  all  sides,  it  has  ears   on  all  sides,  it 

1  See  the  last  page.     Changes = development. 

2  Internal  as  well  as  external ;  as  to  devotion  to  a  preceptor,  cf. 
Apastamba,  p.  1 1  (p.  23  in  this  series);  Taittiriya-upanishad,  p.  38  ; 
*SVeta\rvatara,  p.  117;  and  Sutta  Nipata,  p.  87  ;  as  to  egoism,  see 
p.  52  supra. 

3  Cf.  Sutta  Nipata,  pp.  18-95. 

4  Cf.  Sutta  Nipata,  p.  12.  5  Cf.  Sutta  Nipata,  p.  n. 

6  Viz.  removal  of  ignorance  and  acquisition  of  happiness. 

7  Words  indicate  a  class,  a  quality,  an  action,  or  a  relation,  says 
*Sankara.  None  of  these  can  be  predicated  of  the  Brahman ;  so 
you  cannot  apply  either  of  these  words  to  it.  Cf.  pp.  84,  96  supra, 
also  *SVeta\rvatara,  p.  346. 


I€>4  BHAGAVADGITA. 


stands  pervading  everything  in  the  world.  Pos- 
sessed of  the  qualities  of  all  the  senses,  (but)  devoid 
of  all  senses1,  unattached,  it  supports  all,  is  devoid  of 
qualities,  and  the  enjoyer2  of  qualities.  It  is  within 
all  things  and  without  them ;  it  is  movable  and 
also  immovable ;  it  is  unknowable  through  (its) 
subtlety  ;  it  stands  afar  and  neara.  Not  different  in 
(different)  things  4,  but  standing  as  though  different, 
it  should  be  known  to  be  the  supporter  of  (all) 
things,  and  that  which  absorbs  and  creates  (them). 
It  is  the  radiance  even  of  the  radiant  (bodies) ;  it  is 
said  (to  be)  beyond  darkness.  It  is  knowledge,  the 
object  of  knowledge,  that  which  is  to  be  attained  to 
by  knowledge,  and  placed  in  the  heart  of  all5.  Thus 
in  brief  have  Kshetra,  knowledge,  and  the  object  of 
knowledge  been  declared.  My  devotee,  knowing 
this,  becomes  fit  for  assimilation  with  me.  Know 
nature  and  spirit  both  (to  be)  without  beginning, 
and  know  all  developments  and  qualities6  (to  be) 
produced  from  nature.  Nature  is  said  to  be  the 
origin  of  the  capacity  of  working  (residing)  in  the 
body  and  the  senses  ;  and  spirit  is  said  (to  be)  the 
origin  of  the    capacity  of  enjoying   pleasures    and 


1  Cf.  *SVeta\rvatara,  p.  331.  He  has  no  ears,  but  has  the  quality 
of  hearing,  and  so  forth ;  unattached  =  really  out  of  relation  to 
everything,  though  seeming  to  be  connected  with  other  things 
through  delusion. 

2  I.  e.  he  perceives  them. 

3  Iropanishad,  p.  12;  Mu/zdaka,  p.  313. 

4  Everything  being  really  one.  Cf.  inter  alia,  p.  124  infra.  The 
various  manifestations  of  the  Brahman  are  really  one  in  essence, 
though  apparently  different,  like  foam  and  water. 

5  Cf.  p.  88. 

6  Developments = body,  senses,  &c.  Qualities = pleasure,  pain,  &c; 
altogether  the  expression  means  the  body  and  feelings  and  so  forth. 


CHAPTER    XIII,  26.  I05 

pains  \  For  spirit  with  nature  joined,  enjoys  the 
qualities  born  of  nature.  And  the  cause  of  its  birth 
in  good  or  evil  wombs  is  the  connexion  with  the 
qualities 2.  The  supreme  spirit  in  this  body  is 
called  supervisor,  adviser3,  supporter,  enjoyer,  the 
great  lord,  and  the  supreme  self  also.  He  who 
thus  knows  nature  and  spirit,  together  with  the  quali- 
ties, is  not  born  again,  however  living4.  Some  by 
concentration  see  the  self  in  the  self  by  the  self; 
others  by  the  Sankhya-yoga ;  and  others  still  by  the 
Karma-yoga 5 ;  others  yet,  not  knowing  this,  practise 
concentration,  after  hearing  from  others6.  They,  too, 
being  (thus)  devoted  to  hearing  (instruction)  cross 
beyond  death.  Whatever  thing  movable  or  im- 
movable comes  into  existence,  know  that  to  be 
from  the  connexion  of  Kshetra  and  Kshetra^na,  O 
chief  of  the  descendants  of  Bharata  !     He  sees  (truly) 

1  £Yidhara  says  that  '  is  said  to  be '  means  by  Kapila  and  others. 
For  the  notion  that  activity  is  not  a  function  of  the  soul,  see  inter 
alia,  p.  55  supra.  Enjoyment,  however,  is,  according  to  this  pas- 
sage, the  function  of  the  soul,  not  of  nature.  See  also  Maitri-upa- 
nishad,  pp.  107,  108. 

2  I.e.  'the  senses,'  says  £ridhara;  good = gods,  &c. ;  evil  = 
beasts,  &c. 

3  Scil.  concerning  the  operations  of  the  body  and  senses.  Cf. 
Nrzsiflzha-tapini,  p.  224.  He  is  adviser  because,  though  he  does 
not  interfere,  he  sees  and  therefore  may  be  said  to  sanction  the 
operations  alluded  to.    Supporter,  i.  e.  of  body  &c.  in  their  workings. 

4  I.  e.  though  he  may  have  transgressed  rules. 

6  Concentration = fixing  of  the  mind  exclusively  on  the  soul,  the 
senses  being  quiescent.  '  See  the  self,'  i.  e.  the  soul ;  '  in  the  self,' 
i.  e.  within  themselves ;  '  by  the  self/  i.  e.  by  the  mind.  Sankhya- 
yoga= belief  that  qualities  are  distinct  from  the  self,  which  is  only 
a  passive  spectator  of  their  operations.  Cf.  *SVeta\rvatara,  p.  109. 
Karma-yoga = dedication  of  actions  to  the  supreme.  Cf.  as  to  this 
the  gloss  on  -Sahkara's  Bh&shya  on  Vedanta-sutra  IV,  2,  21. 

6  Cf.  Sutta  Nipata,  p.  49. 


io6  bhagavadgIta. 


who  sees  the  supreme  lord  abiding  alike  in  all 
entities,  and  not  destroyed  though  they  are  de- 
stroyed. For  he  who  sees  the  lord  abiding  every- 
where alike,  does  not  destroy  himself1  by  himself, 
and  then  reaches  the  highest  goal.  He  sees  (truly), 
who  sees  (all)  actions  (to  be)  in  every  way  done  by 
nature  alone,  and  likewise  the  self  (to  be)  not  the 
doer.  When  a  man  sees  all  the  variety  of  entities  as 
existing  in  one  2,  and  (all  as)  emanating  from  that, 
then  he  becomes  (one  with)  the  Brahman.  This 
inexhaustible  supreme  self,  being  without  begin- 
ning and  without  qualities,  does  not  act,  and  is  not 
tainted,  O  son  of  Kuntt !  though  stationed  in  the 
body.  As  by  (reason  of  its)  subtlety  the  all-per- 
vading space  is  not  tainted,  so  the  self  stationed  in 
every  body  is  not  tainted.  As  the  sun  singly  lights 
up  all  this  world,  so  the  Kshetra^fia,  O  descendant 
of  Bharata !  lights  up  the  whole  Kshetra.  Those 
who,  with  the  eye  of  knowledge,  thus  understand 
the  difference  between  Kshetra  and  Kshetra^fia,  and 
the  destruction  of  the  nature  of  all  entities  3,  go  to 
the  supreme. 


Chapter    XIV. 
The  Deity  said  : 
Again  I  will  declare  (to  you)  the  highest  know- 
ledge, the  best  of  (all  sorts  of)  knowledge,  having 

1  Not  to  have  true  knowledge  is  equivalent  to  self-destruction. 
Cf.  Iropanishad,  pp.  9,  15,  16. 

2  I.  e.  absorbed  at  the  time  of  the  deluge  in  nature,  one  of  the 
energies  of  the  supreme ;  c  emanating/  i.  e.  at  the  time  of  creation. 

3  Nature,  which  is  the  material  cause  from  which  all  entities 
are  produced ;  the  destruction  of  it  results  from  true  knowledge  of 
the  soul.    See  the  third  note  on  p.  107  infra. 


CHAPTER   XIV,  8.  IO7 


learnt  which,  all  sages  have  reached  perfection 
beyond  (the  bonds  of)  this  (body).  Those  who, 
resorting  to  this  knowledge,  reach  assimilation  with 
my  essence,  are  not  born  at  the  creation,  and  are 
not  afflicted  l  at  the  destruction  (of  the  universe). 
The  great  Brahman  2  is  a  womb  for  me,  in  which  I 
cast  the  seed.  From  that,  O  descendant  of  Bha~ 
rata  !  is  the  birth  of  all  things.  Of  the  bodies,  O  son 
of  Kuntf !  which  are  born  from  all  wombs,  the  (main) 
womb  is  the  great  Brahman,  and  I  (am)  the  father, 
the  giver  of  the  seed.  Goodness,  passion,  darkness, 
these  qualities  3  born  from  nature,  O  you  of  mighty 
arms !  bind  down  the  inexhaustible  soul  in  the  body. 
Of  these,  goodness,  which,  in  consequence  of  being 
untainted,  is  enlightening  and  free  from  (all)  misery, 
binds  the  soul,  O  sinless  one !  with  the  bond  of 
pleasure  and  the  bond  of  knowledge  4.  Know  that 
passion  consists  in  being  enamoured,  and  is  produced 
from  craving  and  attachment.  That,  O  son  of 
Kuntf !    binds  down  the  embodied  (self)  with  the 

1  I.e. ' are  not  destroyed,'  Madhusudana;  'do  not  fall/  Sankara; 
'  are  not  born/  *Srrdhara,  and  apparently  Ramanu^-a. 

2  I.  e.  the  f  nature '  spoken  of  before. 

3  These  constitute  nature.  We  must  understand  nature,  with 
Professor  Bha^arkar,  as  the  hypothetical  cause  of  the  soul's  feel- 
ing itself  limited  and  conditioned.  If  nature  is  understood,  as  it 
usually  is,  to  mean  matter,  its  being  made  up  of  the  qualities  is 
inexplicable.  Interpreted  idealistically,  as  suggested  by  Professor 
BhaWarkar,  the  destruction  of  it  spoken  of  at  the  close  of  the  last 
chapter  also  becomes  intelligible.  By  means  of  knowledge  of  the 
soul,  the  unreality  of  these  manifestations  is  understood  and  nature 
is  destroyed. 

4  Pleasure  and  knowledge  appertain  to  the  mind,  not  the  self, 
hence  they  are  described  as  constituting  bonds,  when  erroneously 
connected  with  the  self,  -Sankara  and  £ridhara.  They  constitute 
'  bonds/  because  the  self  when  brought  into  contact  with  them, 
strives  to  obtain  them,  R&manu^a. 


IOS  BHAGAVADGITA. 


bond  of  action.  Darkness  (you  must)  know  to  be 
born  of  ignorance,  it  deludes  all  embodied  (selfs). 
And  that,  O  descendant  of  Bharata  !  binds  down 
(the  self)  with  heedlessness  1y  indolence,  and  sleep. 
Goodness  unites  (the  self)  with  pleasure ;  passion, 
O  descendant  of  Bharata!  with  action ;  and  darkness 
with  heedlessness,  after  shrouding  up  knowledge. 
Passion  and  darkness  being  repressed,  goodness 
stands,  O  descendant  of  Bharata !  Passion  and 
goodness  (being  repressed),  darkness ;  and  likewise 
darkness  and  goodness  (being  repressed),  passion  2. 
When  in  this  body  at  all  portals 3  light  (that  is  to 
say)  knowledge  prevails,  then  should  one  know 
goodness  to  be  developed.  Avarice,  activity4,  per- 
formance of  actions,  want  of  tranquillity,  desire,  these 
are  produced,  O  chief  of  the  descendants  of  Bha- 
rata! when  passion  is  developed.  Want  of  light, 
want  of  activity  5,  heedlessness,  and  delusion,  these 
are  produced,  O  descendant  of  Kuru !  when  dark- 
ness is  developed.  When  an  embodied  (self)  en- 
counters death,  while  goodness  is  developed,  then  he 
reaches  the  untainted  worlds  of  those  who  know  the 
highest6.     Encountering  death  during  (the  preva- 

1  Carelessness  about  duty,  owing  to  being  intent  on  something 
else.  Cf.  Sutta  Nipata,  pp.  51-91  ;  Dhammapada,  stanza  21  ; 
Ka//$opanishad,  p.  152. 

2  The  effects  of  each  quality  assert  themselves,  when  the  other 
two  are  held  in  check. 

3  I.  e.  the  senses  of  perception. 

4  Activity = always  doing  something  or  another;  performance, 
&c.=rearing  large  mansions,  &c. ;  want  of  tranquillity = perpetual 
agitation  of  mind,  'this  I  will  do  now,  then  that,  and  next  the  other;' 
desire  =  to  obtain  everything  that  one  comes  across. 

5  I.  e.  doing  absolutely  nothing. 

6  The  highest  manifestations  of  Brahman,  viz.  the  Hira/zya- 
garbha,  &c,  say  *Sridhara  and  Madhusudana.  Nilaka«//$a  also 
suggests  that '  those  who  know  the  highest'  means  gods. 


CHAPTER   XIV,  21.  IO9 

lence  of)  passion,  he  is  born  among  those  attached  to 
action.  Likewise,  dying  during  (the  prevalence  of) 
darkness,  he  is  born  in  the  wombs  of  the  ignorant  \ 
The  fruit  of  meritorious  action  is  said  to  be  good, 
untainted  ;  while  the  fruit  of  passion  is  misery ;  and 
the  fruit  of  darkness  ignorance.  From  goodness  is 
produced  knowledge,  from  passion  avarice 2,  and 
from  darkness  heedlessness  and  delusion  and  igno- 
rance also.  Those  who  adhere  to  (the  ways  of) 
goodness  go  up3;  the  passionate  remain  in  the 
middle  ;  while  those  of  the  qualities  of  darkness, 
adhering  to  the  ways  of  the  lowest  quality,  go  dowrn. 
When  a  right-seeing  person  sees  none  but  the  qua- 
lities (to  be)  the  doers  (of  all  action),  and  knows 
what  is  above  the  qualities 4,  he  enters  into  my 
essence.  The  embodied  (self),  who  transcends  these 
three  qualities,  from  which  bodies  are  produced5, 
attains  immortality,  being  freed  from  birth  and 
death  and  old  age  and  misery. 

Ar^nina  said : 
What  are  the  characteristics,  O  lord  !  of  one  who 
has  transcended  these  three  qualities  ?     What  is  his 
conduct,  and   how  does   he   transcend  these   three 
qualities 6  ? 

1  Lower  creation,  such  as  birds,  beasts,  &c. 

2  Cf.  Sutta  Nipata,  p.  15. 

3  I.e.  are  born  as  gods,  &c;  'middle,'  as  men,  &c;  'down/ 
as  brutes,  &c. 

4  I.  e.  what  has  been  called  Kshetra^iia  before,  the  supervising 
principle  within  one. 

5  Bodies  are  developments  of  the  qualities,  say  the  commen- 
tators, which  is  not  incompatible  with  the  explanation  of  qualities 
given  above.     As  to  transcending  qualities,  cf.  p.  48  supra. 

6  Cf.  as  to  what  follows  what  is  said  in  chapter  II  about  <  one 
whose  mind  is  steady/ 


IIO  BHAGAVADGITA. 


The  Deity  said : 
He  is  said  to  have  transcended  the  qualities,  O 
son  of  F&ndu  !  who  is  not  averse  to  light  and  activity 
and  delusion  (when  they)  prevail,  and  who  does  not 
desire  (them  when  they)  cease 1 ;  who  sitting  like 
one  unconcerned  is  never  perturbed  by  the  qualities 2; 
who  remains  steady  and  moves 3  not,  (thinking) 
merely  that  the  qualities4  exist;  who  is  self-con- 
tained5; to  whom  pain  and  pleasure  are  alike  ;  to 
whom  a  sod  and  a  stone  and  gold  are  alike  ;  to  whom 
what  is  agreeable  and  what  is  disagreeable  are  alike ; 
who  has  discernment ;  to  whom  censure  and  praise 
of  himself  are  alike  ;  who  is  alike  in  honour  and  dis- 
honour; who  is  alike  towards  the  sides  of  friends 
and  foes ;  and  who  abandons  all  action 6.  And 
he  who  worships  me  with  an  unswerving  devotion, 
transcends  these  qualities,  and  becomes  fit  for 
(entrance  into)  the  essence  of  the  Brahman.  For 
I  am  the  embodiment  of  the  Brahman  7,  of  indefea- 
sible immortality,  of  eternal  piety,  and  of  unbroken 
happiness. 


1  I.e.  who  does  not  feel  troubled,  for  instance,  thinking  now  I  am 
actuated  by  a  motive  of  passion  or  darkness,  and  so  forth. 

2  So  as  to  lose  all  discrimination. 

3  I.  e.  from  his  determination  to  pursue  truth,  by  worldly  plea- 
sures or  pains. 

4  Cf.  p.  55  supra. 

5  Intent  on  the  self  only. 

6  For  the  whole  passage,  cf.  p.  ioi  supra. 

7  Nilaka^a  interprets  this  to  mean  '  the  ultimate  object  of  the 
Vedas/  I  here  means  Krishna.  -Sridhara  suggests  this  parallel, 
as  light  embodied  is  the  sun,  so  is  the  Brahman  embodied  identical 
with  V&sudeva. 


CHAPTER   XV,  5.  Ill 


Chapter  XV. 
The  Deity  said : 

They  say  the  inexhaustible  A^vattha l  has  (its) 
roots  above,  (its)  branches  below ;  the  jOandas  are 
its  leaves.  He  who  knows  it  knows  the  Vedas. 
Upwards  and  downwards  extend  its  branches,  which 
are  enlarged  by  the  qualities,  and  the  sprouts  of 
which  are  sensuous  objects.  And  downwards  to 
this  human  world  are  continued  its  roots  which  lead 
on  to  action.  Its  form  is  not  thus  known  here,  nor 
(its)  end,  nor  beginning,  nor  support.  But  having 
with  the  firm  weapon  of  unconcern,  cut  this  A^vat- 
tha,  whose  roots  are  firmly  fixed,  then  should  one 
seek  for  that  seat  from  which  those  that  go  there 
never  return,  (thinking)  that  one  rests  on  that  same 
primal  being  from  whom  the  ancient  course  (of 
worldly  life)  emanated.  Those  who  are  free  from 
pride  and  delusion,  who  have  overcome  the  evils 
of  attachment,  who  are  constant  in  (contemplating) 
the  relation  of  the  supreme  and  individual  self, 
from  whom  desire  has  departed,  who  are  free 
from  the  pairs  (of  opposites)  called  pleasure  and 
pain,  go  undeluded  to  that  imperishable  seat2.     The 

1  Cf.  Ka/^opanishad,  p.  70,  and  Sutta  Nipata,  p.  76. 

2  Awattha  stands  here  for  the  course  of  worldly  life.  Its  roots 
are  above,  viz.  the  supreme  being ;  its  boughs  are  Hira/zyagarbha 
and  others  of  the  higher  beings.  The  Vedas  are  its  leaves,  pre- 
serving it  as  leaves  preserve  trees  (another  interpretation  is  that 
they  are  the  causes  of  the  fruit  which  the  tree  bears,  i.  e.  salvation, 
&c.)  Upwards  and  downwards,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest  of 
created  things.  Enlarged  =  the  qualities  manifesting  themselves, 
as  body,  senses,  &c. ;  objects  of  sense  are  sprouts  as  they  are  at- 
tached to  the  senses,  which  are  the  tips  of  the  branches  above  stated. 
The  roots  which  extend  downwards  are  the  desires   for  various 


1 1  2  BHAGAVADGITA. 


sun  does  not  light  it,  nor  the  moon,  nor  fire 1.  That 
is  my  highest  abode,  going  to  which  none  returns. 
An  eternal  portion  of  me  it  is,  which,  becoming  an 
individual  soul  in  the  mortal  world,  draws  (to  itself) 
the  senses  with  the  mind  as  the  sixth  2.  Whenever 
the  ruler  (of  the  bodily  frame)  obtains  or  quits  a 
body,  he  goes  taking  these  (with  him)  as  the  wind 
(takes)  perfumes  from  (their)  seats  3.  And  presiding 
over  the  senses  of  hearing  and  seeing,  and  touch, 
and  taste,  and  smell,  and  the  mind,  he  enjoys  sen- 
suous objects.  Those  who  are  deluded  do  not  see 
(him)  remaining  in  or  quitting  (a  body),  enjoying  or 
joined  to  the  qualities4;  they  see,  who  have  eyes  of 
knowledge.  Devotees  making  efforts  perceive  him 
abiding  within  their  selfs5.  But  those  whose  selfs 
have  not  been  refined,  and  who  have  no  discern- 
ment, do  not  perceive  him  even  (after)  making  efforts. 
Know  that  glory  (to  be)  mine  which,  dwelling  in  the 
sun,  lights  up  the  whole  world,  or  in  the  moon  or  fire6. 

enjoyments.  Its  form  not  thus  known  here,  i.e.  to  those  who  live  and 
move  in  this  world,  thus  viz.  as  above  described.  The  man  who 
knows  the  tree  thus  is  said  to  know  the  Vedas,  because  knowledge 
of  it  is  knowledge  of  the  substance  of  the  Vedas,  which  is,  that  the 
course  of  worldly  life  springs  from  the  supreme,  is  kept  up  by 
Vedic  rites,  and  destroyed  by  knowledge  of  the  supreme.  As  to 
freedom  from  pride,  cf.  Sutta  Nipata,  p.  4. 

1  Cf.  Ka/^opanishad,  p.  142;  Mu^aka,  p.  304;  Nn'si^ha- 
tapini,  p.  106;   -SVetawatara,  p.  no. 

2  Five  senses  and  the  mind  issue  from  nature,  in  which  they  are 
absorbed  during  sleep  or  at  a  dissolution  of  the  world.  Cf.  Sutta 
Nipata,  p.  44. 

3  Cf.  Kaushitaki-upanishad,  pp.  86,  87. 

4  Perceiving  objects  of  sense,  or  feeling  pleasure,  pain,  &c. 

5  'Selfs '  =  bodies,  Ram&nu^a  and  £ridhara;  'understandings/ 
*Sarikara.    In  the  next  sentence  '  self  means  mind. 

6  Cf.  Maitri-upanishad,  p.  142.  This  sentence  continues  what 
has    been    stated    at    the    top    of  the    page.      The    intervening 


CHAPTER    XV,   1 8.  113 


Entering  the  earth1,  I  by  my  power  support  all 
things  ;  and  becoming  the  juicy  moon,  I  nourish 
all  herbs.  I  becoming  the  fire,  and  dwelling  in  the 
bodies  of  (all)  creatures,  and  united  with  the  upward 
and  downward  life-breaths,  cause  digestion  of  the 
fourfold  food  2.  And  I  am  placed  in  the  heart  of 
all 3 ;  from  me  (come)  memory,  knowledge,  and  their 
removal ;  I  alone  am  to  be  learnt  from  all  the 
Vedas;  I  am  the  author  of  the  Vedantas4;  and 
I  alone  know  the  Vedas.  There  are  these  two 
beings  in  the  world,  the  destructible  and  the  inde- 
structible 5.  The  destructible  (includes)  all  things. 
The  unconcerned  one  is  (what  is)  called  the  inde- 
structible. But  the  being  supreme  is  yet  another, 
called  the  highest  self,  who  as  the  inexhaustible 
lord,  pervading  the  three  worlds,  supports  (them). 
And  since  I  transcend  the  destructible,  and  since 
I  am  higher  also  than  the  indestructible 6,  therefore 

portion  explains  how  souls  do  come  back  in  some  cases.  As  a 
general  rule,  '  all  going  ends  in  returning/  But  the  soul  is  an 
exception  in  some  cases,  as  the  '  going'  to  the  Brahman  is  going 
to  the  fountain-head.  Then  the  question  arises,  How  does  the 
severance  come  off  at  all  ?  And  that  is  what  the  lines  up  to  this 
explain. 

1  *  Entering  in  the  form  of  the  goddess  earth/  say  Anandagiri 
and  Madhusudana.  Support,  i.  e.  by  keeping  the  earth  from  falling 
or  crumbling  away.  The  moon  is  said  to  nourish  herbs  by  commu- 
nicating to  them  some  of  her  'juice/  The  moon,  it  may  be  noted, 
is  called  '  watery  star'  by  Shakespeare.  As  to  her  relation  to  the 
vegetable  kingdom,  see  Matsya-pura/za  XXIII,  stanza  10  seq. 

2  I.  e.  what  is  drunk,  what  is  licked,  what  is  powdered  with  the 
teeth,  and  what  is  eaten  without  such  powdering. 

3  Cf.  p.  104  supra. 

4  See  Introduction,  p.  17. 

5  Cf.  -Sveta^vatara,  p.  294. 

6  The  two  are  the  whole  collection  of  things  as  they  appear  and 
their  material  cause.    The  supreme  being  is  a  third  principle. 

[8]  I 


1 1 4  bhagavadgItA. 


am  I  celebrated  in  the  world  and  in  the  Vedas  as  the 
best  of  beings.  He  who,  undeluded,  thus  knows 
me  the  best  of  beings,  worships  me  every  way  \  O 
descendant  of  Bharata!  knowing  everything.  Thus, 
O  sinless  one !  have  I  proclaimed  this  most  myste- 
rious science.  He  who  knows  this,  has  done  all  he 
need  do,  and  he  becomes  possessed  of  discernment. 


Chapter  XVI. 


Freedom  from  fear,  purity  of  heart,  perseverance 
in  (pursuit  of)  knowledge  and  abstraction  of  mind, 
gifts2,  self-restraint2,  and  sacrifice,  study  of  the  Vedas, 
penance,  straightforwardness,  harmlessness,  truth2, 
freedom  from  anger,  renunciation  3,  tranquillity,  free- 
dom from  the  habit  of  backbiting  4,  compassion  for 
(all)  beings,  freedom  from  avarice,  gentleness, 
modesty,  absence  of  vain  activity,  noblemindedness, 
forgiveness,  courage,  purity,  freedom  from  a  desire 
to  injure  others,  absence  of  vanity,  (these),  O  de- 
scendant of  Bharata  !  are  his  who  is  born  to  godlike 
endowments.  Ostentatiousness,  pride,  vanity5,  anger, 
and  also  harshness  and  ignorance  (are)  his,  O  son 
of  Prztha !  who  is  born  to  demoniac 6  endowments. 
Godlike  endowments  are  deemed  to  be  (means)  for 

1  Cf.  p.  129  infra.  Here  *Sankara  paraphrases  it  by '  thinking  me 
to  be  the  soul  of  everything/ 

2  Cf.  Sutta  Nipata,  p.  49.  8  See  next  chapter. 

4  Sutta  Nipata,  pp.  15,  101. 

5  Ostentatiousness  =  making  a  show  of  piety ;  pride  =  scil.  of 
wealth  and  learning  ;  vanity = esteeming  oneself  too  highly;  harsh- 
ness = mercilessness. 

6  Cf.  .Oandogya-upanishad,  p.  585,  and  Mtiller's  Hibbert  Lec- 
tures, p.  322. 


CHAPTER    XVI,   12.  115 

final  emancipation,  demoniac  for  bondage  \  Grieve 
not,  O  descendant  of  Bharata!  you  are  born  to  god- 
like endowments.  (There  are)  two  classes  of  created 
beings  in  this  world,  the  godlike  and  the  demoniac ; 
the  godlike  (class)  has  been  described  at  length; 
now  hear  from  me,  O  son  of  Prztha !  about  the 
demoniac.  Demoniac  persons  know  not  action  or 
inaction2,  neither  purity  nor  yet  (correct)  conduct 
nor  veracity  are  in  them.  They  say  the  universe 
is  devoid  of  truth  3,  devoid  of  fixed  principle  4,  and 
devoid  of  a  ruler,  produced  by  union  (of  male  and 
female)  caused  by  lust5,  and  nothing  else.  Holding 
this  view,  (these)  enemies  of  the  world,  of  ruined 6 
selfs,  of  little  knowledge,  and  of  ferocious  actions,  are 
born  for  the  destruction  (of  the  world).  Entertaining 
insatiable  desire,  full  of  vanity,  ostentatiousness,  and 
frenzy,  they  adopt  false  notions  7  through  delusion, 
and  engage  in  unholy  observances.  Indulging  in 
boundless  thoughts  ending  with  death8,  given  up  to 
the  enjoyment  of  objects  of  desire,  being  resolved 
that  that  is  all,  bound  down  by  nets  of  hopes  in 
hundreds,  given  up  to  anger  and  desire,  they  wish 


1  Scil.  to  birth  and  death  in  this  world. 

2  What  should  be  done  for  the  attainment  of  real  good,  and  what 
should  not  be  done  as  productive  of  mischief.    See  too  p.  125. 

3  I.e.  contains  nothing  that  is  entitled  to  belief,  as  the  Vedas,  &c. 

4  No  principle  based  on  virtue  and  vice  in  the  government  of 
the  world. 

5  They  do  not  believe  in  any  unseen  cause,  but  say  the  lust  of 
mankind  is  the  cause  of  the  universe. 

6  I.  e.  who  have  none  of  the  means  of  reaching  the  next  world. 

7  Such  as  that  by  propitiating  a  certain  divinity  by  a  certain  rite 
they  may  obtain  treasure  and  so  forth. 

8  Till  their  last  moments,  thinking  of  making  new  acquisitions 
and  preserving  old  ones. 

I    2 


1 1 6  BH AGAVADGITA. 


to  obtain  heaps  of  wealth  unfairly  for  enjoying 
objects  of  desire.  '  This  have  I  obtained  to-day; 
this  wish  I  will  obtain;  this  wealth  is  mine;  and  this 
also  shall  be  mine  ;  this  foe  I  have  killed ;  others 
too  I  will  destroy;  I  am  lord,  I  am  the  enjoyer,  I 
am  perfect1,  strong,  happy;  I  have  wealth  ;  I  am  of 
noble  birth ;  who  else  is  like  me  ?  I  will  sacrifice 2  ; 
I  will  make  gifts ;  I  will  rejoice/  Thus  deluded  by 
ignorance,  tossed  about  by  numerous  thoughts,  sur- 
rounded by  the  net  of  delusion,  and  attached  to  the 
enjoyment  of  objects  of  desire,  they  fall  down  into 
impure  hell.  Honoured  (only)  by  themselves,  void 
of  humility,  and  full  of  the  pride  and  frenzy  of 
wealth,  these  calumniators  (of  the  virtuous)  perform 
sacrifices,  which  are  sacrifices  only  in  name,  with 
ostentatiousness  and  against  prescribed  rules3;  in- 
dulging (their)  vanity,  brute  force,  arrogance,  lust, 
and  anger;  and  hating  me  in  their  own  bodies  and  in 
those  of  others  4.  These  enemies 5,  ferocious,  meanest 
of  men,  and  unholy,  I  continually  hurl  down  to  these 
worlds 6,  only  into  demoniac  wombs.  Coming  into 
demoniac  wombs,  deluded  in  every  birth,  they  go 
down  to  the  vilest  state,  O  son  of  Kunti !  without 
ever  coming  to  me.    Threefold  is  this  way  to  hell,— 


1  Blessed  with  children,  &c.  Sridhara  takes  it  to  mean,  <  one  who 
has  done  all  he  need  do/  and  Ramanu^a  « sufficient  in  himself.' 

2  I.  e.  get  higher  renown  for  sacrifices  than  others. 

3  That  is,  because  of  indulgence  in  vanity,  &c.  Vanity = believing 
oneself  to  have  virtues  which  one  has  not;  arrogance = proud  dis- 
dain of  others. 

4  There  is  trouble  to  oneself  in  sacrifices  and  to  the  animals 
killed  for  them. 

5  I.  e.  of  God. 

6  The  commentators  render  the  original  here  by  « the  paths  of 
life  and  death/  or  '  path  to  hell/ 


CHAPTER   XVII,  3.  117 

ruinous  to  the  self1, — lust, anger,  and  likewise  avarice; 
therefore  one  should  abandon  this  triad.  Released 
from  these  three  ways  to  darkness,  O  son  of  Kuntl ! 
a  man  works  out  his  own  welfare,  and  then  proceeds 
to  the  highest  goal.  He2  who  abandoning  scripture 
ordinances,  acts  under  the  impulse  of  desire,  does 
not  attain  perfection 3,  nor  happiness,  nor  the  high- 
est goal.  Therefore  in  discriminating  between  what 
should  be  done  and  what  should  not  be  done,  your 
authority  (must  be)  scripture.  And  knowing  what 
is  declared  by  the  ordinances  of  scripture,  you  should 
perform  action  in  this  world. 


Chapter    XVII. 


Argoina  said : 
What   is   the  state    of  those,  O  Krishna  I    who 
worship  with  faith,  (but)  abandoning  scripture  ordi- 
nances— goodness,  passion,  or  darkness  ? 

The  Deity  said  : 
Faith  is  of  three  kinds  in  embodied  (beings),  it  is 
produced  from  dispositions4.  It  is  of  the  quality  of 
goodness,  of  the  quality  of  passion,  and  of  the 
quality  of  darkness.  Hear  about  it.  The  faith  of 
all,  O  descendant  of  Bharata !  is  conformable  to  the 


1  I.e.  rendering  the  self  unfit  for  any  of  the  highest  ends  of  man. 

2  Here,  says  Sridhara,  it  is  laid  down  that  the*  triad  is  not  to  be 
got  rid  of  save  by  following  scripture  rules. 

3  I.e.  fitness  for  the  attainment  of  the  summum  bonum.    As 
to  acting  from  desire,  see  also  p.  65. 

4  I.e.  the  result  of  the  actions  in  a  former  birth,  cf.  p.  56  supra. 


1 1 8  BHAGAVADGf TA. 


heart  \  A  being  here  is  full  of  faith,  and  whatever 
is  a  mans  faith,  that  is  a  man  himself2.  Those  of 
the  quality  of  goodness  worship  the  gods  ;  those  of 
the  quality  of  passion  the  Yakshas  and  Rakshases 3 ; 
and  the  others,  the  people  of  the  quality  of  darkness, 
worship  departed  (spirits)  and  the  multitudes  of 
Bhfttas.  Know  those  to  be  of  demoniac  convictions, 
who  practise  fierce  penance  4  not  ordained  by  scrip- 
ture ;  who  are  full  of  ostentatiousness  and  egoism, 
and  of  desire,  attachment,  and  stubbornness;  who  are 
without  discernment ;  and  who  torment  the  groups 
of  organs  in  (their)  bodies,  and  me  also  seated 
within  (those)  bodies.  The  food  also,  which  is  liked 
by  all,  and  likewise  the  sacrifice,  the  penance,  and 
gifts,  are  of  three  kinds.  Listen  to  the  distinctions 
regarding  them  as  follows.  The  kinds  of  food  which 
increase  life,  energy,  strength,  health,  comfort,  and 
relish,  which  are  savoury,  oleaginous,  full  of  nutrition, 
and  agreeable,  are  liked  by  the  good.  The  kinds 
of  food  which  are  bitter,  acid,  saltish,  too  hot, 
sharp,  rough,  and  burning,  and  which  cause  pain, 
grief,  and  disease,  are  desired  by  the  passionate. 
And  the  food5  which  is  cold,  tasteless,  stinking, 
stale,  impure,  and  even  leavings,  are  liked  by  the 
dark.  That  sacrifice  is  good  which,  being  prescribed 
in  (scripture)  ordinances,   is  performed  by  persons 

1  The  hearts  of  gods  are  said  to  be  good,  those  of  Yakshas  &c. 
passionate,  those  of  men  mixed,  and  so  forth. 

2  Faith  is  the  dominant  principle  in  man,  and  he  is  good,  pas- 
sionate, or  dark,  as  his  faith  is. 

3  Goldstiicker,  Remains,  I,  154. 

4  Troublesome  to  oneself  and  others,  as  standing  on  heated 
stones,  &c.  ' Egoism'  (Ahankara)=the  feeling  that  one  is  worthy 
of  honour,  Nilaka«/^a. 

5  Cf.  Sutta  Nip&ta,  p.  109,  and  Apastamba,  p.  31  (p.  62  in  this 
series). 


CHAPTER   XVII,    1 8.  119 

not  wishing  for  the  fruit  (of  it),  and  after  determining 
(in  their)  mind  that  the  sacrifice  must  needs  be  per- 
formed. But  when  a  sacrifice  is  performed,  O  highest 
of  the  descendants  of  Bharata  !  with  an  expectation  of 
fruit  (from  it),  and  for  the  purpose  of  ostentation, 
know  that  sacrifice  (to  be)  passionate.  They  call 
that  sacrifice  dark,  which  is  against  the  ordinances 
(of  scripture),  in  which  no  food  is  dealt  out  (to  Brah- 
ma^as,  &c),  which  is  devoid  of  Mantras  *,  devoid  of 
Dakshi/za  presents,  and  which  is  without  faith. 
Paying  reverence  to  gods,  Brahma^as,  preceptors, 
and  men  of  knowledge  ;  purity 2,  straightforward- 
ness, life  as  Brahmaiarin,  and  harmlessness,  (this)  is 
called  the  penance  bodily.  The  speech  which  causes 
no  sorrow,  which  is  true,  agreeable,  and  beneficial, 
and  the  study3  of  the  Vedas,  (this)  is  called  the 
penance  vocal.  Calmness  of  mind,  mildness,  taci- 
turnity4, self-restraint,  and  purity  of  heart,  this  is 
called  the  penance  mental.  This  threefold  penance, 
practised  with  perfect  faith,  by  men  who  do  not  wish 
for  the  fruit,  and  who  are  possessed  of  devotion, 
is  called  good.  The  penance  which  is  done  for 
respect,  honour,  and  reverence  5,  and  with  ostenta- 

1  Texts  from  the  Vedas  which  ought  to  be  recited  on  such  occa- 
sions. Presents  (Dakshiwa)  to  Brahma/zas  are  insisted  on  in 
Bnhad-arawyaka-upanishad,  p.  661 ;  Awalayana  Gr/hya  I,  23,  14. 

2  Cleanliness  of  body;  straightforwardness = not  doing  prohibited 
acts;  harmlessness = not  injuring  any  living  beings.  These  are 
*  bodily/  because  the  body  is  the  main  instrument  in  these  actions. 

3  I.  e.  recitation  of  the  Vedas. 

4  This  is  part  of  the  '  mental  penance/  because  the  government 
of  the  tongue  is  a  consequence  of  mental  restraint ;  the  effect  being, 
according  to  *Sankara,  put  here  for  the  cause. 

5  Respect = people  rising  to  receive  one,  &c;  honour = people 
saying  *  this  is  a  holy  man/  &c;  reverence = people  washing  one's 
feet,  &c. 


120  BHAGAVADGITA. 


tiousness,  and  which  is  uncertain  and  transient1,  is 
here  called  passionate.  And  that  penance  is  de- 
scribed as  dark,  which  is  performed  under  a  mis- 
guided conviction,  with  pain  to  oneself,  or  for  the 
destruction  of  another.  That  gift  is  said  (to  be) 
good,  which  is  given,  because  it  ought  to  be  given, 
to  one  who  (can)  do  no  service  (in  return),  at  a 
(proper)  place  and  time,  and  to  a  (proper)  person. 
But  that  gift  which  is  given  with  much  difficulty,  for 
a  return  of  services,  or  even  with  an  expectation  of 
fruit 2,  is  said  to  be  passionate.  And  that  gift  is 
described  as  dark,  which  is  given  to  unfit  persons,  at 
an  unfit  place  and  time,  without  respect,  and  with 
contempt.  Om,  Tad,  and  Sat,  this  is  said  (to  be) 
the  threefold  designation  of  the  Brahman.  By  that3, 
the  Brihma^as  and  the  Vedas  and  sacrifices  were 
created  in  olden  times.  Hence,  the  performance  by 
those  who  study  the  Brahman,  of  sacrifices,  gifts, 
and  penances,  prescribed  by  the  ordinances  (of  scrip- 
ture), always  commence  after  saying  '  Om  V  Those 
who  desire  final  emancipation  perform  the  various 
acts  of  sacrifice  and  penance,  and  the  various  acts  of 
gift,  without  expectation  of  fruit,  after  (saying)  'Tad5/ 
'Sat'  is  employed  to  express  existence  and  good- 
ness; and  likewise,  O  son  of  Prztha!  the  word  'Sat' 
is  used  to  express  an  auspicious  act.     Constancy  in 

1  The  fruit  of  which  is  uncertain  or  perishable. 

2  Heaven  &c.  as  a  reward  for  liberality. 

3  I.  e.  the  Brahman,  according  to  £ridhara. 

4  Cf.  Apastamba,  p.  21  (p.  49  in  this  series).  Nilaka/*//&a  cites 
texts  to  show  that  this  and  the  other  two  words  are  used  to  designate 
the  Brahman.  The  texts  are  from  the  Taittiriya,  Aitareya,  and 
i^Mndogya-upanishads. 

5  Nilaka»/£a  says,  'after  "Tad"'  means  considering  the  act  and 
all  are  Brahman,  and  cites  p.  61  supra. 


CHAPTER   XVIII,  3.  121 

(making)  sacrifices,  penances,  and  gifts,  is  called  'Sat ;' 
and  (all)  action,  too,  of  which  that1  is  the  object,  is 
also  called  'Sat/  Whatever  oblation  is  offered,  what- 
ever is  given,  whatever  penance  is  performed,  and 
whatever  is  done,  without  faith  2,  that,  O  son  of 
Pntha !  is  called  'Asat/  and  that  is  nought,  both 
after  death  and  here3. 


Chapter  XVIII. 


Ar^una  said  : 

0  you  of  mighty  arms !  O  Hrzshikesa !  O  de- 
stroyer of  Kesin !  I  wish  to  know  the  truth  about 
renunciation  and  abandonment  distinctly. 

The  Deity  said : 
By  renunciation  the  sages  understand  the  rejection 
of  actions  done  with  desires.  The  wise  call  the 
abandonment  of  the  fruit  of  all  actions  (by  the  name) 
abandonment.  Some  wise  men  say,  that  action 
should  be  abandoned  as  being  full  of  evil ;  and 
others,  that  the  actions  of  sacrifice,  gift,  and  penance 

1  I.  e.  either  the  Brahman  itself,  or  sacrifice,  penance,  and  gift. 

2  Cf.  Sutta  Nipata,  p.  69. 

3  The  meaning  of  this  whole  passage  seems  to  be  that  these  three 
words,  which  designate  the  Brahman,  have  distinct  uses,  as  specified. 
cOm,'  says  Nilaka^a,  is  employed  whether  the  action  is  done 
with  any  special  desire  or  not.  Those  who  study  the  Brahman 
there  means  '  study  the  Vedas.'  '  Tad '  is  employed  in  case  of 
actions  without  desires  only.  '  Sat '  is  employed,  according  to 
-Sankara,  in  case  of  existence,  such  as  the  birth  of  a  first  son; 
1  goodness,'  the  reclamation  of  a  bad  man ;  '  auspicious  acts/  mar- 
riage, &c.  The  intelligent  use  of  these  terms  as  here  specified  is 
said  to  cure  any  defects  in  the  actions,  the  various  classes  of  which 
are  mentioned  before. 


12  2  BHAGAVADGITA. 


should  not  be  abandoned.  As  to  that  abandonment, 
O  best  of  the  descendants  of  Bharata !  listen  to  my 
decision ;  for  abandonment,  O  bravest  of  men !  is 
described  (to  be)  threefold.  The  actions  of  sacrifice, 
gift,  and  penance  should  not  be  abandoned ;  they 
must  needs  be  performed ;  for  sacrifices,  gifts,  and 
penances  are  means  of  sanctification  to  the  wise.  But 
even  these  actions,  O  son  of  Prz'tha !  should  be  per- 
formed, abandoning  attachment  and  fruit ;  such  is 
my  excellent  and  decided  opinion.  The  renunciation 
of  prescribed  action  is  not  proper.  Its  abandon- 
ment through  delusion1  is  described  as  of  the  quality 
of  darkness.  When  a  man  abandons  action,  merely 
as  being  troublesome,  through  fear  of  bodily  afflic- 
tion, he  does  not  obtain  the  fruit 2  of  abandonment 
by  making  (such)  passionate  abandonment.  When 
prescribed  action  is  performed,  O  Argoma!  aban- 
doning attachment  and  fruit  also,  merely  because  it 
ought  to  be  performed,  that  is  deemed  (to  be)  a  good 
abandonment.  He  who  is  possessed  of  abandon- 
ment3, being  full  of  goodness,  and  talented,  and 
having  his  doubts  destroyed,  is  not  averse  from 
unpleasant  actions,  is  not  attached  to  pleasant4 
(ones).  Since  no  embodied  (being)  can  abandon 
actions  without  exception  5,  he  is  said  to  be  pos- 
sessed of  abandonment,  who  abandons  the  fruit  of 
action.  The  threefold  fruit  of  action,  agreeable,  dis- 
agreeable, and  mixed,  accrues  after  death  to  those 
who  are  not  possessed  of  abandonment,  but  never  to 

1  Without  delusion  no  such  abandonment  will  occur. 

2  Namely,  final  emancipation,  by  means  of  purity  of  heart. 

3  I.e.  who  has  the  frame  of  mind  necessary  for  a  good  aban- 
donment. 

4  Such  as  bathing  at  midday  in  summer.  5  Cf.  p.  53  supra. 


CHAPTER    XVIII,   1 8.  123 

renouncers  \  Learn  from  me,  O  you  of  mighty  arms  ! 
these  five  causes  of  the  completion  of  all  actions, 
declared  in  the  Sankhya  system  2.  The  substratum, 
the  agent  likewise,  the  various  sorts  of  organs,  and 
the  various  and  distinct  movements,  and  with  these 
the  deities,  too,  as  the  fifth.  Whatever  action,  just 
or  otherwise,  a  man  performs  with  his  body,  speech, 
and  mind,  these  five  are  its  causes.  That  being  so,  the 
undiscerning  man,  who  being  of  an  unrefined  under- 
standing, sees  the  agent  in  the  immaculate  self,  sees 
not  (rightly)3.  He  who  has  no  feeling  of  egoism4, 
and  whose  mind  is  not  tainted,  even  though  he  kills 
(all)  these  people,  kills  not,  is  not  fettered5  (by  the 
action).  Knowledge6,  the  object  of  knowledge,  the 
knower — threefold  is  the  prompting  to  action.  The 
instrument,  the  action,  the  agent,  thus  in  brief  is 
action  threefold.     Knowledge  and  action  and  agent 

1  The  original  is  sannyasf,  but  -Srfdhara  is  probably  right  in  taking 
it  to  mean  one  who  has  command  of  'abandonment.'  *Sankara 
and  Madhusudana,  however,  take  the  word  in  its  ordinary  sense  of 
' ascetic'  What  follows  explains,  says  Sridhara,  why  *  the  fruit  does 
not  accrue  to  renouncers.' 

2  -Sankara  and  Madhusudana  say  this  means  Vedanta-^astra. 
*Sridhara  suggests  also  the  alternative  Sankhya-^astra.  Substratum 
=the  body,  in  which  desire,  aversion,  &c.  are  manifested;  agent= 
one  who  egoistically  thinks  himself  the  doer  of  actions  ;  organs = 
senses  of  perception,  action,  &c. ;  movements = of  the  vital  breaths 
in  the  body;  deities = the  deities  which  preside  over  the  eye  and 
other  senses  (as  to  this  cf.  Aitareya-upanishad,  p.  45;  Pragma,  pp.  216, 
217;  Mu^aka,  p.  3 1 4 ;  Aitareya-drarayaka,  pp.  88-270;  and  Max 
Muller's  Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  204,  note). 

3  Cf.  p.  1 06. 

4  Egoism = the  feeling  that  he  is  the  doer  of  the  action;  taint = 
the  feeling  that  the  fruit  of  the  action  must  accrue  to  him. 

5  Cf.  p.  45,  and  Dhammapada,  stanza  294. 

6  Knowledge,  i.  e.  that  something  is  a  means  to  what  is  desired ; 
object  is  the  means ;  the  knower  is  he  who  has  this  knowledge. 
When  these  co-exist  we  have  action.   The  instrument = senses,  &c. 


124  BHAGAVADGITA. 


are  declared  in  the  enumeration  of  qualities 1  (to  be) 
of  three  classes  only,  according  to  the  difference  of 
qualities.  Hear  about  these  also  as  they  really  are. 
Know  that  knowledge  to  be  good,  by  which  (a  man) 
sees  one  entity,  inexhaustible,  and  not  different  in 
all  things  (apparently)  different2  (from  one  another). 
Know  that  knowledge  to  be  passionate,  which  is 
(based)  on  distinctions 3  (between  different  entities), 
which  sees  in  all  things  various  entities  of  different 
kinds.  And  that  is  described  as  dark,  which  clings 
to  one  created  (thing)  only  as  everything,  which  is 
devoid  of  reason,  devoid  of  real  principle,  and  in- 
significant4. That  action  is  called  good,  which  is 
prescribed,  which  is  devoid  of  attachment,  which  is 
not  done  from  (motives  of)  affection  or  aversion, 
(and  which  is  done)  by  one  not  wishing  for  the 
fruit.  That  is  described  as  passionate,  which  (oc- 
casions) much  trouble,  is  performed  by  one  who 
wishes  for  objects  of  desire,  or  one  who  is  full  of 
egotism 5.  The  action  is  called  dark,  which  is  com- 
menced through  delusion,  without  regard  to  con- 
sequences, loss,  injury,  or  strength  6.  That  agent  is 
called  good,  who  has  cast  off  attachment,  who  is  free 
from  egotistic  talk,  who  is  possessed  of  courage  and 
energy,  and  unaffected  by  success  or  ill-success.  That 
agent  is  called  passionate,  who  is  full  of  affections 7, 

1  The  system  of  Kapila.  2  Cf.  p.  104. 

3  Cf.  Ka/^opanishad,  p.  129. 

4  Reason = argument  in  support;  real  principle = truth,  view  of 
things  as  they  are ;  insignificant,  i.  e.  in  comprehensiveness. 

5  I.e.  l pride  of  learning/  &c,  *Sankara;  'egoism/  Ramanug-a. 

6  Consequences  =  good  or  evil  resulting;    loss  =  of  wealth  or 
strength;  inj ury= to  others  ;  strength = one's  own  capacity. 

7  I.  e. l  for  children/  &c,  according  to  *Sndhara ;  '  for  the  action/ 
according  to  others. 


CHAPTER    XVIII,  34.  125 

who  wishes  for  the  fruit  of  actions,  who  is  covetous, 
cruel,  and  impure,  and  feels  joy  and  sorrow. 
That  agent  is  called  dark,  who  is  without  applica- 
tion1, void  of  discernment,  headstrong,  crafty,  ma- 
licious, lazy,  melancholy,  and  slow.  Now  hear,  O 
Dhanan^aya  !  the  threefold  division  of  intelligence 2 
and  courage,  according  to  qualities,  which  I  am 
about  to  declare  exhaustively  and  distinctly.  That 
intelligence,  O  son  of  Prztha !  is  good  which  under- 
stands action  and  inaction  3,  what  ought  to  be  done 
and  what  ought  not  to  be  done,  danger  and  the 
absence  of  danger,  emancipation  and  bondage. 
That  intelligence,  O  son  of  Prz'tha!  is  passionate, 
by  which  one  imperfectly  understands  piety  and 
impiety,  what  ought  to  be  done  and  also  what  ought 
not  to  be  done.  That  intelligence,  O  son  of  Pntha! 
is  dark,  which  shrouded  by  darkness,  understands 
impiety  (to  be)  piety,  and  all  things  incorrectly. 
That  courage,  O  son  of  Pr/thd!  is  good  courage, 
which  is  unswerving4,  and  by  which  one  controls 
the  operations  of  the  mind,  breath,  and  senses, 
through  abstraction.  But,  O  Ar^una !  that  courage 
is  passionate,  by  which  one  adheres  to  piety, 
lust,  and  wealth 5,  and  through  attachment 6  wishes, 

1  I.e.  attention  to  work;  melancholy = always  desponding  and 
wanting  in  energy. 

2  The  nature  of  the  faculty  of  understanding ;  and  courage  is  the 
firmness  of  that  faculty. 

3  See  p.  1 15.  iSahkara  takes  these  to  mean  the  '  paths '  of  action 
and  knowledge,  and  Nilaka^a  takes  the  next  expression  to  mean 
that  which  is  constant  and  that  which  is  not  constant— nitya,  anitya. 

4  Always  co-existing  with  mental  abstraction  and  supporting  it. 

5  Three  of  the  aims  of  mankind,  the  highest  being  final  emanci- 
pation. In  the  view  of  the  GM,  piety,  leading  only  to  heaven,  is 
of  doubtful  benefit. 

6  I.  e.  to  the  action  for  attaining  them,  in  the  belief  that  one  is 


126  BH  AGAVADGITA. 


O  son  of  Prztha !  for  the  fruit.  That  courage  is 
dark,  O  son  of  Prztha!  by  which  an  undiscerning 
man  does  not  give  up  sleep,  fear,  sorrow,  despon- 
dency, and  folly.  Now,  O  chief  of  the  descendants 
of  Bharata !  hear  from  me  about  the  three  sorts  of 
happiness.  That  happiness  is  called  good,  in  which 
one  is  pleased  after  repetition1  (of  enjoyment),  and 
reaches  the  close  of  all  misery,  which  is  like  poison 
first  and  comparable  to  nectar  in  the  long  run,  and 
which  is  produced  from  a  clear  knowledge  of  the 
self2.  That  happiness  is  called  passionate,  which 
(flows)  from  contact  between  the  senses  and  their 
objects,  and  which  is  at  first  comparable  to  nectar 
and  in  the  long  run  like  poison.  That  happiness  is 
described  as  dark,  which  arises  from  sleep,  laziness, 
heedlessness,  which  deludes  the  self,  both  at  first 
and  in  its  consequences.  There  is  no  entity  either 
on  earth  or  in  heaven  among  the  gods,  which  is  free 
from  these  three  qualities  born  of  nature.  The 
duties  of  Brihma^as,  Kshatriyas,  and  VaLryas,  and 
of  6ildras,  too,  O  terror  of  your  foes !  are  distin- 
guished according  to  the  qualities  born  of  nature 3. 
Tranquillity4,  restraint  of  the  senses,  penance,  purity, 
forgiveness,  straightforwardness,  also  knowledge,  ex- 
perience, and  belief  (in  a  future  world),  this  is  the 
natural  duty  of  Brahma^as.    Valour,  glory,  courage, 

the  doer  of  it;  the  'fruit'  scil.  of  the  action  performed  with  an  eye 
to  the  three  things  named. 

1  Not  at  once,  as  in  the  case  of  sensuous  pleasures. 

2  Cf.  p.  51.  The  original  has  also  been  rendered  by  'tranquillity 
of  one's  own  mind.' 

3  Cf.  p.  59. 

4  I.  e.  resulting  from  control  of  the  mind,  purity  here  is  both 
external  and  internal.     And  see  p.  119. 


CHAPTER   XVIII,  51.  127 

dexterity1,  not  slinking  away  from  battle,  gifts,  exer- 
cise of  lordly  power2,  this  is  the  natural  duty  of  Ksha- 
triyas.  Agriculture,  tending  cattle,  trade,  (this)  is  the 
natural  duty  of  VaLsyas.  And  the  natural  duty  of 
.Sudras,  too,  consists  in  service.  (Every)  man  intent  on 
his  own  respective  duties  obtains  perfection3.  Listen, 
now,  how  one  intent  on  one's  own  duty  obtains  per- 
fection. Worshipping,  by  (the  performance  of)  his 
own  duty,  him  from  whom  all  things  proceed,  and 
by  whom  all  this  is  permeated,  a  man  obtains  per- 
fection. One's  duty,  though  defective,  is  better  than 
another's  duty  well  performed4.  Performing  the 
duty  prescribed  by  nature,  one  does  not  incur  sin.  O 
son  of  Kuntl !  one  should  not  abandon  a  natural  duty 
though  tainted  with  evil ;  for  all  actions  are  enve- 
loped by  evil,  as  fire  by  smoke5.  One  who  is  self- 
restrained,  whose  understanding  is  unattached  every- 
where, from  whom  affections  have  departed,  obtains 
the  supreme  perfection  of  freedom  from  action 6  by 
renunciation.  Learn  from  me,  only  in  brief,  O  son 
of  Kunti !  how  one  who  has  obtained  perfection  at- 
tains the  Brahman,  which  is  the  highest  culmination 
of  knowledge.  A  man  possessed  of  a  pure  under- 
standing, controlling  his  self  by  courage,  discarding 
sound  and  other  objects  of  sense,  casting  off  affection 

1  I.  e.  in  battle,  Nilakaw/^a  seems  to  say.  *Sankara  says  it  means 
ready  resource  whenever  occasion  arises. 

2  I.  e. '  power  to  restrain  people  from  going  astray/  Nilaka«//$a. 

3  Eligibility  for  the  path  of  knowledge. 

4  Cf.  p.  56. 

5  Cf.  p.  1 2 1 ;  the  evil  appears  to  be  the  quality  of  '  fettering '  the 
soul. 

6  -Sridhara  compares  p.  65  (V,  13)  and  distinguishes  this  from 
p.  64  (V,  8  seq.)  *Sankara  says  the  perfection  here  spoken  of  is 
emancipation,  and  it  is  obtained  by  true  knowledge. 


128  EH  AGAVADGITA. 


and  aversion ;  who  frequents  clean  places,  who  eats 
little,  whose  speech,  body,  and  mind  are  restrained,  who 
is  always  intent  on  meditation  and  mental  abstrac- 
tion1, and  has  recourse  to  unconcern,  who  abandoning 
egoism2,  stubbornness,  arrogance,  desire,  anger,  and 
(all)  belongings,  has  no  (thought  that  this  or  that  is) 
mine,  and  who  is  tranquil,  becomes  fit  for  assimila- 
tion with  the  Brahman.  Thus  reaching  the  Brah- 
man3, and  with  a  tranquil  self,  he  grieves  not, 
wishes  not ;  but  being  alike  to  all  beings,  obtains 
the  highest  devotion  to  me.  By  (that)  devotion  he 
truly  understands  who  I  am  and  how  great.  And 
then  understanding  me  truly,  he  forthwith  enters 
into  my  (essence).  Even  performing  all  actions, 
always  depending  on  me,  he,  through  my  favour, 
obtains  the  imperishable  and  eternal  seat.  Dedi- 
cating in  thought 4  all  actions  to  me,  be  constantly 
given  up  to  me,  (placing)  your  thoughts  on  me, 
through  recourse  to  mental  abstraction.  (Placing) 
your  thoughts  on  me,  you  will  cross  over  all  difficulties 
by  my  favour.  But  if  you  will  not  listen  through 
egotism 5,  you  will  be  ruined.  If  entertaining  egotism, 
you  think  that  you  may  not  fight,  vain,  indeed,  is 
that  resolution  of  yours.  Nature 6  will  constrain 
you.  That,  O  son  of  Kunti !  which  through  delu- 
sion you  do  not  wish  to  do,  you  will  do  involuntarily, 


1  Abstraction  is  concentrated  and  exclusive  meditation,  -Sahkara. 
The  other  commentators  take  dhyanayoga  as  meditation  simply, — 
as  treated  of  in  chapter  VI,  says  Nilaka/z/^a. 

2  See  p.  52. 

3  I.  e.  comprehending  his  identity  with  the  Brahman. 

4  Cf.  p.  55. 

5  Pride  of  learning  and  cleverness,  or  of  piety.  See  p.  1 24,  note  5. 

6  The  nature  of  a  Kshatriya,  £ahkara. 


CHAPTER    XVIII,    69.  129 

tied  down  by  your  own  duty,  flowing  from  your 
nature.  The  lord,  O  Ar^una !  is  seated  in  the 
region  of  the  heart l  of  all  beings,  turning  round  all 
beings  (as  though)  mounted  on  a  machine,  by  his 
delusion.  With  him,  O  descendant  of  Bharata ! 
seek  shelter  in  every  way2;  by  his  favour  you  will 
obtain  the  highest  tranquillity,  the  eternal  seat. 
Thus  have  I  declared  to  you  the  knowledge  more 
mysterious  than  any  mystery.  Ponder  over  it 
thoroughly,  and  then  act  as  you  like.  Once  more, 
listen  to  my  excellent  words — most  mysterious  of  all. 
Strongly  I  like  you,  therefore  I  will  declare  what  is 
for  your  welfare.  On  me  (place)  your  mind,  become 
my  devotee,  sacrifice  to  me,  reverence  me,  you  will 
certainly  come  to  me.  I  declare  to  you  truly,  you 
are  dear  to  me.  Forsaking  all  duties  3,  come  to  me 
as  (your)  sole  refuge.  I  will  release  you  from  all 
sins.  Be  not  grieved.  This4  you  should  never 
declare  to  one  who  performs  no  penance5,  who  is  not 
a  devotee 6,  nor  to  one  who  does  not  wait  on  (some 
preceptor)7,  nor  yet  to  one  who  calumniates  me. 
He  who,  with  the  highest  devotion8  to  me,  will  pro- 
claim this  supreme  mystery  among  my  devotees, 
will  come  to  me,  freed  from  (all)  doubts.     No  one 

1  Svetawatara-upanishad,  pp.  333-345;  Ka/^opanishad,  p.  157. 

2  Cf.  p.  114;  by  thought,  word,  and  deed. 

3  Of  caste  or  order,  such  as  Agnihotra  and  so  forth. 

4  All  that  has  been  taught  in  the  GM. 

5  *Sridhara  renders  this  to  mean,  'who  performs  no  pious  acts/ 

6  I.  e.  of  God  and  a  preceptor.     Cf.  last  stanza  of  -SVeta^vataro- 
panishad. 

7  Cf.  p.  62.     *Sankara  says  all  these  elements  must  co-exist  to 
give  eligibility. 

8  I.e.  belief  that  in  disseminating  it,  he  is  serving  me.  Cf.  Ka/^o- 
panishad,  p.  120. 

L8]  K 


1 30  BHAGAVADGITA. 


amongst  men  is  superior  to  him  in  doing  what  is 
dear  to  me.  And  there  will  never  be  another  on 
earth  dearer  to  me  than  he.  And  he  who  will  study 
this  holy  dialogue  of  ours,  will,  such  is  my  opinion, 
have  offered  to  me  the  sacrifice  of  knowledge  \ 
And  the  man,  also,  who  with  faith  and  without 
carping  will  listen  (to  this),  will  be  freed  (from  sin), 
and  attain  to  the  holy  regions  of  those  who  perform 
pious  acts  2.  Have  you  listened  to  this,  O  son  of 
Prztha!  with  a  mind  (fixed)  on  (this)  one  point  only  ? 
Has  your  delusion  (caused)  by  ignorance  been  de- 
stroyed, O  Dhanan^aya  ? 

Ar^una  said : 

Destroyed  is  my  delusion ;  by  your  favour,  O 
undegraded  one !  I  (now)  recollect 3  myself.  I  stand 
freed  from  doubts  4.     I  will  do  your  bidding. 

San^aya  said  : 

Thus  did  I  hear  this  dialogue  between  V&sudeva 
and  the  high-minded  son  of  Prztha,  (a  dialogue) 
wonderful  and  causing  the  hair  to  stand  on  end.  By 
the  favour  of  Vy&sa,  I  heard  this  highest  mystery, 
(this)  devotion 5,  from  Krishna,  himself,  the  lord  of 
the  possessors  of  mystic  power,  who  proclaimed  it 
in  person.  O  king!  remembering  and  (again)  re- 
membering this  wonderful  and  holy  dialogue  of 
Kesava  and  Ar^una,  I  rejoice  over  and  over  again. 
And   remembering   and  (again)  remembering  that 


1  Which  is  the  best  of  sacrifices ;  see  p.  62. 

2  Cf.  p.  72. 

3  I.  e.  understand  my  real  essence,  what  I  am,  &c. 

4  As  to  whether  the  battle  was  right  or  not. 

5  The  work  is  so  called,  as  it  refers  to  devotion. 


CHAPTER    XVIII,    78.  131 

excessively  wonderful  form  of  Hari  also,  great  is 
my  amazement,  O  king !  and  I  rejoice  over  and 
over  again.  Wherever  (is)  K>zsh/za,  the  lord  of 
the  possessors  of  mystic  power,  wherever  (is) 
the  (great)  archer,  the  son  of  Pntha,  there  in  my 
opinion  (are)  fortune,  victory,  prosperity1,  and 
eternal  justice. 

1  Prosperity  is  the  greater  development  of  fortune. 


K    2 


SANATSUGATIYA. 


INTRODUCTION 

TO 

SANATSUGATfYA. 

THE  Sanatsuy^atiya  is,  like  the  Bhagavadgita,  one  of  the 
numerous  episodes  of  the  Mahabharata 1.  It  is  true,  that 
it  has  never  commanded  anything  like  that  unbounded 
veneration  which  has  always  been  paid  in  India  to  the 
Bhagavadgita.  Still  it  is  sometimes  studied  even  in  our 
days,  and  it  has  had  the  high  distinction  of  being  com- 
mented on  by  the  great  leader  of  the  modern  Vedantic 
school — wSankara^arya  2.  The  Sanatsu^-atiya  purports  to 
be  a  dialogue  mainly  between  Sanatsug*ata  on  the  one  side 
and  Dhrztarash/ra  on  the  other.  Sanatsu^ata,  from  whom 
it  takes  its  name,  is  said  to  be  identical  with  Sanatku- 
mara,  a  name  not  unfamiliar  to  students  of  our  Upanishad 
literature.  And  Dhrztarash/ra  is  the  old  father  of  those 
Kauravas  who  formed  one  of  the  belligerent  parties  in 
the  bellum  plusquam  civile  which  is  recorded  in  the 
Mahabharata.  The  connexion  of  this  particular  episode 
with  the  main  current  of  the  narrative  of  that  epos  is  one 
of  the  loosest  possible  character — much  looser,  for  instance, 
than  that  of  the  Bhagavadgita.  As  regards  the  latter,  it 
can  fairly  be  contended  that  it  is  in  accordance  with  poet- 
ical justice  for  Ar^una  to  feel  despondent  and  unwilling  to 
engage  in  battle,  after  actual  sight  of  'teachers,  fathers, 
sons/  and  all  the  rest  of  them,  arrayed  in  opposition  to  him ; 
and  that  therefore  it  was  necessary  for  the  poet  to  adduce 
some  specific  explanation  as  to  how  Ar^-una  was  ultimately 
enabled  to  get  over  such  natural  scruples.  But  as  regards 
the  Sanatsu^atiya,  even  such  a  contention  as  this  can  have 

1  Mahabharata,  Udyoga  Parvan,  Adhyaya  41-46. 

2  Madhava£arya,  in  speaking  of  Ankara's  works,  describes  him  as  having 
commented  on  the  Sanatsug-atiya,  which  is  '  far  from  evil  (persons) '  [asatsudu- 
ram].    tfankara-vig-aya,  chapter  VI,  stanza  62. 


1 36  SANATSUGATfYA. 


no  place.  For  this  is  how  the  matter  stands.  In  the 
course  of  the  negotiations  for  an  amicable  arrangement l 
between  the  Pa/^avas  and  the  Kauravas,  San^aya,  on  one 
occasion,  came  back  to  Dhrztarash/ra  with  a  message  from 
the  Pa^avas.  When  he  saw  Dhrztarash/ra,  however,  he 
said  that  he  would  deliver  the  message  in  the  public 
assembly  of  the  Kauravas  the  next  morning,  and  went  away 
after  pronouncing  a  severe  censure  on  Dhr/tarash/ra  for 
his  conduct.  The  suspense  thus  caused  was  a  source  of 
much  vexation  to  the  old  man,  and  so  he  sent  for  Vidura, 
in  order,  as  he  expresses  it,  that  Vidura  might  by  his  dis- 
course assuage  the  fire  that  was  raging  within  him.  Vidura 
accordingly  appears,  and  enters  upon  an  elaborate  prelection 
concerning  matters  spiritual,  or,  perhaps,  more  accurately 
quasi-spiritual,  and  at  the  outset  of  the  Sanatsu^atiya  he 
is  supposed  to  have  reached  a  stage  where,  as  being  born 
a  6udra,  he  hesitates  to  proceed.  After  some  discussion 
of  this  point,  between  Vidura  and  Dhrztarash/ra,  it  is  deter- 
mined to  call  in  the  aid  of  Sanatsu^ata,  to  explain  the 
spiritual  topics  which  Vidura  felt  a  delicacy  in  dealing 
with ;  and  Sanatsu^ata  is  accordingly  introduced  on  the 
scene  in  a  way  not  unusual  in  our  epic  and  puramc  litera- 
ture, viz.  by  Vidura  engaging  in  some  mystic  process  of 
meditation,  in  response  to  which  Sanatsu^-ata  appears.  He 
is  received  then  with  all  due  formalities,  and  after  he  has 
had  some  rest,  as  our  poem  takes  care  to  note,  he  is  cate- 
chised by  Dhrztarash/ra ;  and  with  one  or  two  exceptions, 
all  the  verses  which  constitute  the  Sanatsug-atiya  are  Sanat- 
su^ata's  answers  to  Dhrztarashfra's  questions  2. 

This  brief  statement  of  the  scheme  of  this  part  of  the 
Mahabharata  shows,  as  already  pointed  out,  that  the  con- 
nexion of  the  Sanatsu^atiya  with  the  central  story  of  that 
epic  is  very  loose  indeed  ;  and  that  it  might  have  been 
entirely  omitted  without  occasioning  any  aesthetical  or  other 
defect.     And  therefore,  although  there  is  nothing  positive 

1  See  p.  3  supra. 

2  After  this  dialogue  is  over,  trie  dawn  breaks,  and  Dhntarash/ra  and  the 
Kaurava  princes  meet  in  general  assembly. 


INTRODUCTION.  I  3  7 


tending  to  prove  the  Sanatsu^atiya  to  be  a  later  addition 
to  the  original  epos,  still  the  misgivings  which  are  often 
entertained  upon  such  points  may  well,  in  this  case,  be 
stronger  than  in  the  case  of  the  Bhagavadgtta.  The  text, 
too,  of  the  Sanatsu^atiya  is  not  preserved  in  nearly  so  satis- 
factory a  condition  as  that  of  the  Gita.  I  have  had  before 
me,  in  settling  my  text,  the  editions  of  the  Mahabharata 
respectively  printed  and  published  at  Bombay1,  Calcutta, 
and  Madras,  and  three  MSS.,  one  of  which  was  most  kindly 
and  readily  placed  at  my  disposal  by  my  friend  Professor 
RamkrzsriTza  Gopa/  Bha^arkar;  the  second  by  another 
friend,  Professor  Aba^t  Vishnu  Kathava/e ;  and  the  third 
was  a  copy  made  for  me  at  Sagar  in  the  Central  Provinces, 
through  the  good  offices  of  a  third  friend,  Mr.  Vaman  Maha- 
deva  Kolha/kar.  The  copy  lent  me  by  Professor  Bha^rfar- 
kar  comes  from  Pu/za,  and  that  lent  by  Professor  Kathavate 
also  from  Pu#a.  This  last,  as  well  as  the  Sagar  copy,  and 
the  edition  printed  at  Madras,  contains  the  commentary  of 
6ankara£arya.  And  the  text  I  have  adopted  is  that  which 
is  indicated  by  the  commentary  as  the  text  which  its  author 
had  before  him.  But  the  several  copies  of  the  commentary 
differ  so  much  from  one  another,  that  it  is  still  a  matter 
of  some  doubt  with  me,  whether  I  have  got  accurately  the 
text  which  5ankara  commented  upon.  For  instance,  the 
Sagar  copy  entirely  omits  chapter  V,  while  the  other 
copies  not  only  give  the  text  of  that  chapter,  but  also  a 
commentary  upon  it  which  calls  itself  5ankara£arya's  com- 
mentary2. Again,  take  the  stanzas  which  stand  within 
brackets  at  pp.  167,  168  3  of  our  translation.  There  is  in 
none  of  the  copies  we  have,  any  commentary  of  5arikara- 
/£arya  on  them.  And  yet  the  stanzas  exist  in  the  text  of 
the  Mahabharata  as  given  in  those  copies  which  do  contain 
5ankara's  commentary.  The  matter  is  evidently  one  for 
further  investigation.     I  have  not,  however,  thought  it  abso- 

1  This  contains  Nilaka/^/ea's  commentary,  but  his  text  avowedly  includes  the 
text  of  tfankara,  and  verses  and  readings  contained  in  more  modern  copies. 

2  The  commentary  on  the  sixth  chapter,  however,  takes  up  the  thread  from 
the  end  of  the  fourth  chapter. 

3  See  p.  182,  where  one  of  the  lines  recurs. 


138  sanatsugatIya. 


lutely  necessary  to  make  such  an  investigation  for  the  pur- 
poses of  the  present  translation.  But  to  be  on  the  safe  side, 
I  have  retained  in  the  translation  everything  which  is  to 
be  found  in  those  copies  of  the  Sanatsug*atiya  which  also 
contain  wSankara's  commentary.  As  to  other  stanzas  — 
and  there  are  some  of  this  description — which  other  MSS. 
or  commentators  vouch  for,  but  of  which  no  trace  is  to  be 
found  in  the  MSS.  containing  ^Sankara's  commentary1, 
I  have  simply  omitted  them. 

These  facts  show  that,  in  the  case  of  the  Sanatsu^atiya, 
the  materials  for  a  trustworthy  historical  account  of  the 
work  are  not  of  a  very  satisfactory  character.  The  mate- 
rials for  ascertaining  its  date  and  position  in  Sanskrit  litera- 
ture are,  indeed,  so  scanty,  that  poor  as  we  have  seen  the 
materials  for  the  Bhagavadgita  to  be,  they  must  be  called 
superlatively  rich  as  compared  with  those  we  have  now  to 
deal  with.  As  regards  external  evidence  on  the  points  now 
alluded  to,  the  first  and  almost  the  last  fact  falling  under 
that  head,  is  the  fact  of  the  work  being  quoted  from  and 
commented  upon  by  5ankara£arya.  In  his  commentary 
on  the  vSveta-svatara-upanishad 2,  vSankara  cites  the  pas- 
sage about  the  flamingo  at  p.  189,  introducing  it  with  the 
words,  '  And  in  the  Sanatsu^ata  also.'  In  the  same 3  com- 
mentary some  other  passages  from  the  Sanatsu£*atiya  are 
also  quoted,  but  without  naming  the  work  except  as  a 
Smr/ti,  and  mixing  up  together  verses  from  different  parts 
of  the  work. 

This  is  really  all  the  external  evidence,  that  I  am  aware 
of,  touching  the  date  of  the  Sanatsu^atiya.  There  is,  how- 
ever, one  other  point,  which  it  is  desirable  to  notice,  though 
not,  perhaps,  so  much  because  it  is  of  any  very  great  value 
in  itself,  as  because  it  may  hereafter  become  useful,  should 
further  research  into  the  Mahabharata  and  other  works 
yield  the  requisite  information.  There  are,  then,  eight 
stanzas  in  the  thirty-sixth,  thirty-seventh,  thirty-ninth,  and 
fortieth  chapters  of  the  Udyoga  Parvan  of  the  Mahabha- 
rata  (the    Sanatsug-atiya   commencing    at    the    forty-first 

1  See  note  1,  p.  137.  2  P.  283.  3  P.  252.     See, 

too,  tfariraka  Bhashya,  p.  828. 


INTRODUCTION.  1 39 


chapter),  seven  of  which  are  quoted  in  the  Pan^atantra  \  and 
the  eighth  in  the  Mahabhashya  2  of  Patang-ali.  Of  course, 
it  almost  goes  without  saying,  that  neither  the  Pan^atantra 
nor  the  Mahabhashya  mentions  the  source  from  which  they 
derive  the  verses  in  question.  But  I  do  not  think  it  unallow- 
able to  make  the  provisional  assumption,  that  they  were 
derived  from  the  Mahabharata,  so  long  as  we  cannot  produce 
any  other,  and  more  likely,  source.  It  is  true,  that  Professor 
Weber  has,  in  another  connexion,  impugned  the  cogency 
of  this  argument.  He  seems  to  think,  that  the  probability — 
in  the  case  he  was  actually  dealing  with — of  the  Ramaya^a 
having  borrowed  from  the  Mahabhashya,  is  quite  as  strong 
as  the  probability  of  the  Mahabhashya  having  borrowed 
from  the  Ramaya/za  3.  And  doubtless,  he  would  by  parity 
of  reason  contend,  in  the  case  before  us,  that  the  probabi- 
lities, as  between  the  Mahabharata  on  the  one  hand,  and  the 
Mahabhashya  and  the  Pan^atantra  on  the  other,  bear  the 
same  mutual  relation.  I  cannot  accept  this  view.  I  am  not 
now  concerned  to  discuss  the  merits  of  the  conclusion  in 
support  of  which  Professor  Weber  has  advanced  this  argu- 
ment4. I  am  only  considering,  how  far  it  affects  the 
question  now  before  us.  And  as  to  that  question,  I  may 
say,  that  the  Pan^atantra  expressly  introduces  the  stanzas 
now  under  consideration  with  some  such  expression  as, '  For 
it  has  been  said,'  indicating  clearly  that  it  was  there  quoting 
the  words  of  another.  And  so,  too,  does  the  Mahabhashya, 
where  the  passage  we  refer  to  runs  as  follows  :  '  (It  is)  laid 
down,  (that  there  is)  a  sin  in  one  of  tender  age  not  rising  to 

1  Cf.  Kosegarten's  PaMatantra,  p.  28  (I,  28,  Bombay  S.  C.  ed.),  with  Udyoga 
Parvan,  chap.  XL,  st.  7  (Bombay  ed.) ;  PaMatantra,  pp.  112  and  209  (II,  10; 
IV,  5,  Bombay  ed.),  with  Udyoga  Parvan,  chap.  XXX VIII,  9 ;  p.  35  (I,  37, 
Bombay  ed.)  with  chap.  XXX VI,  st.  34;  p.  140  (II,  40,  Bombay  ed.)  with 
chap.  XXXVII,  st.  15;  p.  160  (III,  62,  Bombay  ed.)  with  chap.  XXXVII, 
st.  17,  18 ;  p.  106  (II,  2,  Bombay  ed.)  with  chap.  XXXVI,  st.  59. 

2  Udyoga  Parvan,  chap.  XXXVIII,  st.  1,  and  Mahabhashya  VI,  1-4,  p.  35 
(Banaras  ed.) 

3  See  Indian  Antiquary  IV,  247.  The  parallel  from  Madhava  which  Professor 
Weber  adduces  is  quite  inconclusive,  and  as  far  as  it  goes  appears  to  me  to 
militate  against  the  Professor's  own  view. 

4  I  may,  however,  admit  at  once,  that  I  ought  not  to  have  expressed  myself 
as  strongly  as  I  did  in  the  note  which  Professor  Weber  criticises. 


1 40  sanatsugatIya. 


receive  (an  elderly  person),  and  (that  there  is)  merit  in  rising 
to  receive.  How  ?  Thus,  "The  life-winds  of  a  youth  depart 
upwards,  when  an  elderly  man  approaches  (him).  By  rising 
to  receive  (him),  and  salutation,  he  obtains  them  again." '  It 
appears  to  me,  that  the  indications  of  this  being  a  quotation 
in  the  Bhashya  are  very  strong.  But  apart  from  that,  I  do 
demur  to  the  proposition,  that  the  probabilities  are  equal, 
of  a  work  like  the  Mahabharata  or  Ramiya^a  borrowing 
a  verse  from  the  Mahabhashya,  and  vice  versa.  It  appears 
to  me  perfectly  plain,  I  own,  that  the  probability  of  a  gram- 
matical work  like  the  Bhashya  borrowing  a  verse  from 
a  standard  work  like  the  Bharata  or  Ramaya^a  for  pur- 
poses of  illustration  is  very  much  the  stronger  of  the  two. 
And  this,  quite  independently  of  any  inquiry  as  to  whether 
the  Bhashya  does  or  does  not  show  other  indications  of 
acquaintance  with  the  Bharata  or  the  Ramayazza. 

If  these  arguments  are  correct,  it  seems  to  me  that  they 
carry  us  thus  far  in  our  present  investigation — namely, 
that  we  may  now  say,  that  we  have  reason  to  believe  some 
parts,  at  all  events,  of  the  thirty-sixth,  thirty-seventh,  thirty- 
eighth,  and  fortieth  chapters  of  the  Udyoga  Parvan  of  the 
Mahabharata  to  have  probably  been  in  existence  prior  to  the 
sixth  century  A.C.1 ;  and  that  some  parts  of  the  thirty-seventh 
chapter  were  probably  extant  in  the  time  of  Patan^ali,  viz. 
the  second  century  B.  C.2  Now,  internal  evidence  does  not 
yield  any  indications  tending  to  show  that  the  several 
chapters  here  referred  to  must  have  been  prior  in  time  to 
the  chapters  composing  the  Sanatsu£*atiya,  which  come  so 
soon  after  them  in  the  Mahabharata.  On  the  contrary,  it 
is  not  too  much  to  maintain,  that  to  a  certain  extent  the 
style  and  language  of  the  Sanatsu^atiya  is,  if  anything, 
rather  indicative  of  its  priority  in  time  over  the  five  chapters 
immediately  preceding  it.  And,  therefore,  so  far  as  this 
argument  goes,  it  enables  us — provisionally  only,  it  must  be 
remembered — to  fix  the  second  century  B. C. as  a  terminus 
ad  quern  for  the  date  of  the  Sanatsu^attya. 

This  is  all  the  external  evidence  available  for  a  discussion 

1  See  p.  29  supra.  a  See  p.  32  supra. 


INTRODUCTION.  141 


of  the  question — when  the  Sanatsu^atiya  was  composed. 
We  now  turn  to  the  internal  evidence.  Standing  by  itself, 
internal  evidence  is  not,  in  my  opinion,  of  much  cogency 
in  any  case.  Still  in  ascertaining,  as  best  we  can,  the  history 
of  our  ancient  literature,  even  this  species  of  evidence  is  not 
to  be  despised ;  it  must  only  be  used  and  received  with 
caution.  Under  this  head,  then,  we  may  note  first  the 
persons  who  are  supposed  to  take  part  in  the  dialogue. 
Sanatsu^-ata r — or  Sanatkumara — as  already  pointed  out,  is 
a  name  already  familiar  to  the  readers  of  one  of  our  older 
Upanishads — the  .Oandogya.  Dhrztarash/ra  is  not  known 
in  the  Upanishads,  but  he  is  an  important  personage  in  the 
epic  literature.  And  it  is  to  be  remarked,  that  his  character 
as  disclosed  in  the  Sanatsu^atiya  is  not  at  all  similar  to 
that  which  has  attached  itself  to  his  name,  alike  in  the  later 
literature  of  our  country,  and  in  that  popular  opinion  which 
was  probably  formed  by  this  later  literature.  In  the  dialogue 
before  us,  he  figures  as  an  earnest  inquirer  after  truth ;  he 
is  described  as  the  'talented  king  Dhrztarash/ra  ;'  and  is 
addressed  by  Sanatsu^ata  as,  cO  acute  sir!'  'O  learned 
person!'  True  it  is,  that  Nilaka^/^a  in  one  place,  as  we 
have  noticed  in  our  note  there2,  endeavours  to  bring  out 
the  later  view  of  Dhr ztarash/ra's  character 3 ;  but  it  seems  to 
me  that  that  endeavour,  based  as  it  is  on  a  forced  and  far- 
fetched interpretation  of  a  single  word  in  our  poem,  is  an 
unsuccessful  one.  None  of  the  questions,  which  Dhrz'ta- 
rash/ra  puts  to  Sanatsu^-ata  in  the  course  of  their  dialogue, 
indicates  the  avaricious  old  man  who  wished  to  deprive  his 
innocent  nephews  of  their  just  rights  in  the  interests  of  his 
own  wicked  and  misguided  sons.  They  rather  indicate  the 
bona  fide  student  of  spiritual  lore,  and  thus  point  to  what 
is,  perhaps,  an  earlier  view  of  Dhrztarash/ra's  character. 

If  we  look  next  to  the  general  style  of  this  poem,  we  find 
that  it  has  none  of  that  elaboration  which  marks  what  I 


1  See  Hall's  Sankhyasara,  preface,  pp.  14,  15.  2  P.  151,  note  2. 

3  Nilakaw^a  himself,  however,  treats  Dhntarash/ra's  question  later  on  as 
showing  that  he  had  attained  indifference  to  worldly  concerns.  That  question 
does  not  occur  in  tfankara's  text,  but  is  given  at  p.  158  infra. 


142  SANATSUGATIYA. 


have  called  the  age  of  Kavyas  and  Na/akas.  The  remarks 
on  this  topic  in  the  Introduction  to  the  Gita  apply  pretty 
accurately  to  this  work  also.  We  observe  here  the  same 
paucity  of  long-drawn  compounds,  the  same  absence  of 
merely  ornamental  adjectives,  the  same  absence  of  figures 
and  tropes 1 ;  in  one  word,  the  same  directness  and  simplicity 
of  style.  Furthermore,  there  is  a  somewhat  greater  want 
of  finish  about  the  syntax  of  our  poem  than  there  is  even 
in  the  Gita.  Such  constructions  as  we  find  inter  alia  at 
chapter  II,  stanza  2,  or  35,  or  at  chapter  III,  stanza  14,  or 
chapter  IV,  stanza  12,  or  in  the  early  verses  of  the  last 
chapter,  indicate  a  period  in  the  history  of  the  language, 
when  probably  the  regulations  of  syntax  were  not  quite 
thoroughly  established  in  practice. 

If  we  turn  to  the  metre  of  the  poem,  an  analogous  phe- 
nomenon strikes  us  there.  Similar  irregularities  in  the 
collocation  of  long  and  short  syllables,  similar  superfluities 
and  deficiencies  of  syllables,  meet  us  in  the  Sanatsu^atiya 
and  the  Bhagavadgita.  And  in  the  former  work,  as  in  the 
latter,  the  irregularities  are  less  observable  in  the  Anush/ubh2 
than  in  the  other  metres  used.  Probably  the  explanation, 
apart  from  the  great  elasticity  of  that  metre,  is  that  the 
Anush/ubh  had  been  more  used,  and  had  in  consequence 
become  comparatively  more  settled  in  its  scheme  even  in 
practical  composition. 

Looking  now  more  particularly  to  the  language  of  the 
work  before  us,  we  find  one  word  to  be  of  most  frequent 
occurrence,  namely,  the  word  vai,  which  we  have  rendered 
'verily.'  It  is  not  a  common  word  in  the  later  literature, 
while  in  the  Upanishad  literature  we  meet  with  great 
frequency,  not  merely  vai,  but  the  words,  which  I  think  are 
cognate  with  it,  va  and  vava.  The  former  word,  indeed, 
appears  to  me  to  stand  in  some  passages  of  the  Upanishads 
for  vai  by  euphonic  alterations.     Thus  in  the  passage  tvaw 

1  The  five  similes  which  occur,  and  which  are  nearly  all  that  occur,  in  the 
poem,  are  the  very  primitive  ones — of  the  hunter,  of  water  on  grass  the  tiger  of 
straw,  death  eating  men  like  a  tiger,  dogs  eating  what  is  vomited,  a  branch  of  a 
tree  and  the  moon,  and  birds  and  their  nests. 

2  Cf.  as  to  this  the  Nnsiraha  Tapini,  p.  105. 


INTRODUCTION.  1 43 


va  aham  asmi  bhagavo  devate,  aham  vai  tvam  asi,  it  is 
difficult  not  to  suppose  that  the  va  of  the  first  part  of  the 
sentence  is  the  same  word  as  the  vai  of  the  second  part, 
only  altered  according  to  the  rules  of  Sandhi  in  Sanskrit. 

A  second  point  of  similarity  between  the  language  of  the 
Upanishads  and  that  of  the  Sanatsu^atiya  is  to  be  found  in 
the  phrase,  '  He  who  knows  this  becomes  immortal.'  This 
sentence,  or  one  of  like  signification,  is,  as  is  well  known, 
of  common  occurrence  in  the  Upanishads  and  in  the  Brah- 
ma/zas.  In  the  Bhagavadgtta,  the  verses  towards  the  end, 
which  come  after  Krzsh/za's  summing-up  of  his  instruction, 
seem  to  be  of  a  somewhat  analogous,  though  in  some  respects 
different,  nature.  And  in  the  Pura^as  we  meet  sometimes 
with  elaborate  passages  extolling  the  merits  of  a  particular 
rite,  or  a  particular  pilgrimage,  and  so  forth.  This  form  of 
the  Phala^ruti,  as  it  is  called,  appears  to  have  been  developed 
in  process  of  time  from  the  minute  germ  existing  in  the 
Brahma^as  and  the  Upanishads.  In  the  Sanatsu^atiya, 
however,  we  are  almost  at  the  beginning  of  those  develop- 
ments ;  indeed,  the  form  before  us  is  identically  the  same 
as  that  which  we  see  in  the  works  where  it  is  first  met  with. 
It  is  a  short  sentence,  which,  though  complete  in  itself,  still 
appears  merely  at  the  end  of  another  passage,  and  almost 
as  a  part  of  such  other  passage. 

There  is  one  other  point  of  a  kindred  nature  which  it  may 
be  well  to  notice  here.  As  in  the  Gita,  so  in  the  Sanatsu- 
^-atiya,  we  meet  with  a  considerable  number  of  words  used 
in  senses  not  familiar  in  the  later  literature.  They  are 
collected  in  the  Index  of  Sanskrit  words  in  this  volume ; 
but  a  few  remarks  on  some  of  them  will  not,  it  is  thought, 
be  entirely  out  of  place  here.  The  word  marga1 — in  the 
sense  of  'worldly  life' — is  rather  remarkable.  5ahkara 
renders  it  by  'the  path  of  sa^sara'  or  worldly  life.  And 
he  quotes  as  a  parallel  the  passage  from  the  .Oandogya- 
upanishad  which  speaks  of  returning  to  the  'path.'  There, 
however,  vSankara  explains  it  to  mean  the  '  path  by  which 


1  I  give  no  references  here,  as  they  can  be  found  in  the  Index  of  Sanskrit 
words  at  the  end  of  this  volume. 


1 44  sanatsugatIya. 


the  self  returns  to  worldly  life,'  namely,  from  space  to  the 
wind  and  so  forth  into  vegetables,  and  food,  ultimately 
appearing  as  a  foetus.  Another  remarkable  word  is  *  varga,' 
which  occurs  twice  in  the  Sanatsu^atiya.  6ankara  and 
Nilakantka,  differ  in  their  explanations  of  it,  and  Nilaka/z/^a 
indeed  gives  two  different  meanings  to  the  word  in  the  two 
passages  where  it  occurs.  We  may  also  refer  here  specially  to 
utsa,  rztvig;  and  matva.  In  Boehtlingk  and  Roth's  Lexicon 
the  only  passages  cited  under  'utsa'  are  from  Vedic  works, 
except  two  respectively  from  Samita  and  the  Da^akumara- 
£arita.  One  passage,  however,  there  cited,  viz.Vish^o^  pade 
parame  madhva  utsa^,  is  plainly  the  original  of  the  passage 
we  are  now  considering.  As  to  rztvig  in  the  sense  it  bears 
here,  we  see,  I  think,  what  was  the  earlier  signification  of 
that  word  before  it  settled  down  into  the  somewhat  technical 
meaning  in  which  it  is  now  familiar.  And  matva  in  the 
sense  of  meditating  upon'  is  to  be  found  in  the  Upanishads, 
but  not,  I  think,  in  any  work  of  the  classical  literature. 
These  words,  therefore,  seem  to  indicate  that  the  Sanatsu- 
£*atiya  was  composed  at  a  stage  in  the  development  of  the 
Sanskrit  language  which  is  a  good  deal  earlier  than  the 
stage  which  we  see  completely  reached  in  the  classical 
literature. 

Coming  now  to  the  matter  of  the  Sanatsu^atiya,  it  appears 
to  me,  that  we  there  see  indications  pointing  in  a  general 
way  to  the  same  conclusion  as  that  which  we  have  here 
arrived  at.  There  is,  in  the  first  place,  a  looseness  and  want 
of  rigid  system  in  the  mode  of  handling  the  subject,  similar 
to  that  which  we  have  already  observed  upon  as  charac- 
terising the  Bhagavadgita.  There  is  no  obvious  bond  of 
connexion  joining  together  the  various  subjects  discussed, 
nor  are  those  subjects  themselves  treated  after  any  very 
scientific  or  rigorous  method.  Again,  if  the  fourth  chapter 
is  a  genuine  part  of  the  Sanatsu£*atiya,  we  have  an  elaborate 
repetition  in  one  part,  of  what  has  been  said  in  another  part 
of  the  work,  with  only  a  few  variations  in  words,  and  perhaps 
fewer  still  in  signification.  As,  however,  I  am  not  at  present 
prepared  to  stand  finally  by  the  genuineness  of  that  chapter, 
I  do  not  consider  it  desirable  to  further  labour  this  argument 


INTRODUCTION.  1 45 


than  to  point  out,  that  similar  repetitions,  on  a  smaller  scale, 
perhaps,  are  not  uncommon  in  our  older  literature  \ 

Coming  now  to  the  manner  in  which  the  Vedas  are 
spoken  of  in  the  work  before  us,  there  are,  we  find,  one 
or  two  noteworthy  circumstances  proper  to  be  considered 
here.  In  the  first  place,  we  have  the  reference  to  the  four 
Vedas  together  with  Akhyanas  as  the  fifth  Veda.  This  is 
in  conformity  with  the  old  tradition  recorded  in  the  various 
works  to  which  we  have  referred  in  our  note  on  the  passage. 
The  mention  of  the  Atharva-veda,  which  is  implied  in  this 
passage,  and  expressly  contained  in  another,  might  be  re- 
garded as  some  mark  of  a  modern  age.  But  without  dwell- 
ing upon  the  fact,  that  the  Atharva-veda,  though  probably 
modern  as  compared  with  the  other  Vedas,  is  still  old 
enough  to  date  some  centuries  before  the  Christian  era2, 
it  must  suffice  to  draw  attention  here  to  the  fact  that  the 
iTMndogya-upanishad  mentions  that  Veda,  and  it  is  not 
here  argued  that  the  Sanatsu^-atiya  is  older  than  the  KMn- 
dogya-upanishad.  We  have  next  to  consider  the  reference 
to  the  Saman  hymns  as  'vimala,'  or  pure.  The  point 
involved  in  this  reference  has  been  already  sufficiently 
discussed  in  the  Introduction  to  the  Gita 3 ;  and  it  is  not 
necessary  here  to  say  more  than  that,  of  the  two  classes 
of  works  we  have  there  made,  the  Sanatsu^*atiya  appears 
from  the  passage  under  discussion  to  rank  itself  with  the 
class  which  is  prior  in  date. 

The  estimate  of  the  value  of  the  Vedas  which  is  implied 
in  the  Sanatsu^atiya  appears  to  coincide  very  nearly  with 
that  which  we  have  shown  to  be  the  estimate  implied  in  the 
Bhagavadgtta.  The  Vedas  are  not  here  cast  aside  as  useless 
any  more  than  they  are  in  the  Bhagavadgtta.  For,  I  do 
not  think  the  word  Anrz/kas  which  occurs  in  one  passage 
of  the  work  can  be  regarded  really  as  referring  to  those 
who  entirely  reject  the  Vedic  revelation.  But  without  going 
as  far  as  that,  the  Sanatsu^attya  seems  certainly  to  join  the 
Bhagavadgita  in  its  protest  against  those  men  of  extreme 
views,  who  could  see  nothing  beyond  the  rites  and  ceremonies 

1  See  p.  181,  note  1  infra.  2  P.  19  supra.  3  Pp.  19,  20. 

[8]  L 


1 46  SANATSUGATIYA. 


taught  in  the  Vedas.  A  study  of  the  Vedas  is,  indeed, 
insisted  on  in  sundry  passages  of  the  Sanatsu^atiya.  But 
it  is  equally  maintained,  that  the  performance  of  the  cere- 
monies laid  down  in  the  Vedas  is  not  the  true  means  of 
final  emancipation.  It  is  maintained,  that  action  done  with 
any  desire  is  a  cause  of  bondage  to  worldly  life ;  that  the 
gods  themselves  are  ordinary  creatures  who  have  reached 
a  certain  high  position  owing  to  the  practice  of  the  duties 
of  Brahma^arins,  but  that  they  are  not  only  not  superior 
to,  but  are  really  under  the  control  of,  the  man  who  has 
acquired  the  true  knowledge  of  the  universal  self.  On  all 
these  points,  we  have  opinions  expressed  in  the  Sanatsu- 
^•atiya,  which  conclusively  establish  an  identity  of  doctrine 
as  between  the  Upanishads  and  the  Bhagavadgita 1  on  the 
one  hand,  and  the  Sanatsu^atiya  on  the  other.  Lastly,  we 
have  an  explicit  statement,  that  the  mere  study  of  Vedic 
texts  avails  nothing,  and  that  sin  is  not  to  be  got  rid  of  by 
one  who  merely  '  studies  the  Rik  and  the  Ya^us  texts,  and 
the  Sama-veda.'  It  is  not  necessary  to  repeat  here  the 
chronological  deductions  which  may  be  based  upon  this 
relation  between  the  Sanatsu^atiya  and  the  Vedas.  We 
have  already  argued  in  the  Introduction  to  the  Bhagavad- 
gita, that  such  a  relation  points  to  a  period  of  Indian  reli- 
gious history  prior  to  the  great  movement  of  Gautama 
Buddha2. 

There  is,  however,  this  difference,  perhaps,  to  be  noted 
between  the  Gita  and  the  Sanatsu^attya — namely,  that  the 
latter  work  seems  to  afford  more  certain  indications  of  the 
recognition,  at  the  date  of  its  composition,  of  a  Gnanaka^a 
as  distinguished  from  a  Karmaka^a  in  the  Vedas,  than, 
we  have  seen,  are  contained  in  the  Bhagavadgita3.  The 
passage,  for  instance,  which  speaks  of  the  .Oandas  as 
referring  '  of  themselves '  to  the  Brahman,  and  the  passage 
which  refers  to  an  understanding  of  the  Brahman  by  means 
of  the  Vedas,  according  to  the  principle  of  the  moon  and 
the  branch — these  seem  rather  to  point  to  a  portion  of  the 
Vedas  which  was  regarded  as  giving  instruction  in  true 

1  Cf.  p.  16  supra.  2  Cf.  pp.  25,  26.  3  P.  17. 


INTRODUCTION.  I47 


knowledge,  as  distinguished  from  merely  laying  down 
various  sacrifices  and  ceremonials  for  special  purposes.  In 
fact,  in  one  passage  we  have  the  germ  of  the  whole  Ved&ntic 
theory  as  afterwards  settled.  For  there  we  are  told,  that 
sacrifices  and  penances  are  laid  down  as  the  preliminary 
steps  towards  the  acquisition  of  true  knowledge.  By  those 
sacrifices  one  is  purified  of  one's  sins,  and  then  acquires 
a  knowledge  of  the  supreme  self  as  described  in  the  Vedas — 
which,  I  apprehend,  must  mean  the  Upanishads. 

There  is  but  one  other  point  on  which  we  need  say 
anything  further.  And  that  is  connected  with  the  definition 
of  a  Brahma^a.  That  definition  appears  to  me,  to  point 
to  an  earlier  stage  in  religious  progress  than  is  indicated 
in  Apastamba  and  Manu.  The  true  Brihma^a  is  he  who 
is  attached  to  the  Brahman.  Perhaps,  this  marks  some 
little  advance  beyond  the  more  general  doctrine  of  the 
Gita,  but  it  is  still  very  far  short  of  the  petrified  doctrine, 
if  I  may  so  call  it,  of  the  later  law-givers.  The  Brahma^a 
has  not  yet  degenerated  into  the  mere  receiver  of  fees  and 
presents,  but  is  still  in  possession  of  the  truth. 

We  thus  see,  that  the  external  and  internal  evidence 
bearing  upon  the  question  of  the  position  of  the  Sanatsu- 
^atiya  in  Sanskrit  literature,  seems  to  point  to  nearly  the 
same  period  and  place  for  it  as  for  the  Bhagavadgita.  It 
is  plain  enough,  that  the  evidence  under  both  heads  is 
extremely  scanty  and  meagre.  But  such  as  it  is,  it  appears 
to  us  to  justify  a  provisional  conclusion,  that  the  Sanatsu- 
£*atiya  dates  from  a  period  prior  to  the  rise  of  Buddhism, 
and  forms  part  of  that  same  movement  in  the  religious 
history  of  ancient  India  of  which  the  Gita  is  another 
embodiment.  More  than  this,  we  are  not  at  present  in 
a  position  to  assert.  To  this  extent,  the  evidence  enables 
us,  I  think,  to  go.  And  we  accordingly  hold,  that  unless 
other  and  further  evidence  requires  a  reversal  of  this  judg- 
ment, the  Sanatsug-atlya  may  be  treated  as  a  work  nearly 
contemporary  with  the  Bhagavadgita,  and  occupying  gene- 
rally the  same  point  of  view. 

One  word,  finally,  about  the  translation.  As  stated 
already,  the  text  adopted  is  that  which  appears  to  have 

L  2 


1 48  SANATSUGATiYA. 


been  before  5ankara££rya.  And  the  translation  follows 
mainly  his  interpretations  in  his  commentary.  Sometimes 
we  have  followed  Nilaka^/^a,  whose  commentary  has  been 
consulted  as  well  as  a  very  incorrect  copy  of  another  com- 
mentary by  one  Sarva^na  Naraya^a,  contained  in  the  MS. 
from  Pu;za  lent  me  by  Professor  Bha^arkar.  In  some 
places  even  the  commentators  have  failed  to  clear  up  obscu- 
rities, and  there  we  have  given  the  best  translation  we  could 
suggest,  indicating  the  difficulties.  There  has  been  an 
endeavour  made  here,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Bhagavadgita, 
to  keep  the  translation  as  close  and  faithful  to  the  text  as 
the  exigencies  of  the  English  language  permitted.  The 
exegetical  notes  are  mostly  taken  from  the  commentaries, 
even  where  the  name  of  the  commentator  is  not  specified  ; 
while  the  references  to  parallel  passages  have  been  col- 
lected, mostly  by  myself,  in  the  same  way  as  in  the  case  of 
the  Bhagavadgita. 


SANATSUGATIYA. 


Chapter  I. 

Dhrztar&sh/ra  said : 
If,  O  Vidura !  there  is  anything  not  (yet)  said  by 
you   in  (your)  discourse,  then  do  impart  it  to  me 
who  wish  to  hear,  for  you  have  spoken  marvellous 
(things). 

Vidura  said : 

O  Dhrztar&sh/ra !  the  ancient  youth  Sanatsu^dta, 
(otherwise  called)  San&tana1,  who  declared  that  death 
exists  not — he,  O  descendant  of  Bharata  I  the  best 
of  all  talented  men,  will  explain  all  the  doubts  of 
your  mind,  both  those  (which  are)  secret2,  and  those 
openly  declared. 

Dhrztar&shfra  said : 
What,  do  you  not  yourself  know  more  about  this 
(subject),  that  San&tana  should  explain  (it)  to  me  ? 
Explain   (it)  yourself,  O  Vidura!    if  there   is   any 
remnant  of  intelligence  (left)  in  you. 

1  So  Nilaka«/#a.  *Sankara  says  Sanatsu^ita  is  Sanatkumara, 
and  the  component  parts  of  the  name  he  paraphrases  by  *  born 
from  Brahman/  For  Sanatana,  see  B/Yhadara«yaka,  p.  506,  and 
note  1,  p.  141  supra. 

2  I.  e.  relating  to  subjects  which  may  be  freely  discussed  by  all, 
and  those  which  may  not.  Nilaka#/^a  adopts  a  different  reading, 
which  he  interprets  to  mean  'doctrines  exoteric  and  esoteric/ 
e.  g.  self-restraint,  &c,  and  the  acquisition  of  mystic  power,  &c, 
respectively.  The  expression  '  doubts  of  the  mind '  occurs,  how- 
ever, further  on. 


1 50  SANATSUGATiYA. 


Vidura  said : 
I  am  born  of  a  .Siidra  womb,  and  do  not  like  to  say 
more  than  what  (I  have  said).  But  the  intelligence 
of  that  youth,  I  believe  to  be  eternal1.  He  who 
has  come  of  a  Brahma^a  womb,  even  though  he 
may  proclaim  a  great  mystery,  does  not  thereby 
become  liable  to  the  censure  of  the  gods.  There- 
fore do  I  say  this  to  you. 

Dhrztarash/ra  said : 
Do  you,  O  Vidura !   speak  to  the  ancient  Sand- 
tana  for  me,  so  that  there  may  be  a  meeting  even 
here,  between  (myself  in)  this  body  (and  him). 

Vaiiampayana 2  said  : 
(Then)  Vidura  meditated  on  that  sage  whose 
vows  are  laudable3.  And  he,  too,  O  descendant 
of  Bharata !  knowing  of  such  meditation,  made  his 
appearance.  And  he 4,  too,  received  him  with  the 
ceremonies  prescribed  in  the  ordinances.  After  he 
had  been  comfortably  seated,  and  had  taken  rest, 
Vidura  then  spoke  to  him  :  '  Venerable  sir !  there  is 
some  doubt  in  Dhrztarash/ras  mind,  which  cannot 

1  I.  e.,  I  suppose,  never-failing,  and  such  as  can  deal  with  all 
sorts  of  topics.  Sanatkum&ra,  it  need  scarcely  be  stated,  is  the 
teacher  of  Narada  in  the  famous  dialogue  in  the  .A'Mndogyopa- 
nishad,  p.  473. 

2  VaLrampayana  is  the  narrator  of  the  grand  story  of  which 
pieces  like  the  present  form  parts. 

3  The  reading  is  sometimes  different,  so  as  to  mean  '  of  rigid 
vows/  as  at  Gita,  p.  6 1  supra. 

4  The  pronouns  here  are  too  numerous.  Does  'he'  here  refer  to 
Dhr/tarash/ra  ?  Vidura  seems  more  likely,  though  the  express 
mention  of  him  in  the  next  sentence  might  be  treated  as  pointing 
the  other  way. 


CHAPTER    II,    2.  151 


be  explained  by  me.  Do  you  be  pleased  to  explain 
(it)  to  him.  Hearing  it  (explained),  this  lord  of  men 
may  cross  beyond  all  misery,  so  that  gain  and  loss x, 
(what  is)  agreeable  and  (what  is)  odious,  old  age  and 
death,  fear  and  vindictiveness,  hunger  and  thirst, 
frenzy  and  worldly  greatness,  disgust  and  also  lazi- 
ness, desire  and  wrath,  ruin  and  prosperity,  may  not 
trouble  him/ 


Chapter  IL 

VaLrampayana  said  : 
Then  the  talented  king,  Dhrztarash/ra,  bowed 2  to 
those  words  uttered  by  Vidura,  and,  in  a  secluded 
place  3,  interrogated  Sanatsu^ata  regarding  the 
highest  knowledge4,  wishing  to  become  (a)  high- 
souled  (man) 5. 

Dhr/tarash/ra  said : 

0  Sanatsu^dta !  which  of  the  two  is  correct,  your 
teaching6,  about  which  I  have  heard,  that  death 
exists  not,  or  that 7  the  gods  and  demons  practised 

1  Comp.  Gita  passim ;  disgust,  sciL  that  resulting  from  a  general 
dissatisfaction  with  everything.  As  to  '  ruin  and  prosperity,'  Nila- 
karc/yfca  adds,  '  and  their  causes,  sin  and  merit.' 

2  Literally  'respected.'  Nilaka«Ma  says  it  means  'rejoiced  over/ 
for  Dhr/tarash/ra  thought,  that  in  spite  of  his  treachery  he  was 
safe,  as  death  was  taught  by  Sanatsu^ata  to  have  no  existence. 

3  I.  e.  free  from  the  presence  of  ignorant  and  vulgar  people. 
Cf.  Gita,  p.  68  supra. 

4  I.  e.  knowledge  concerning  the  supreme  Self. 

5  Sahkara  s  construction  seems  different,  but  is  not  quite  clear. 
He  says, '  wishing  to  become — Brahman — the  meaning  is  wishing 
to  acquire  the  self  lost  through  ignorance.' 

6  I.  e.  imparted  to  your  pupils,  Sankara  adds ;  '  heard/  scil.  from 
Vidura. 

7  The  construction  is  imperfect,  but  the  sense  is  clear.    Is  your 


152  SANATSUGATIYA. 


the     life     of     Brahma/£arins l,    for    freedom    from 
death  ? 

Sanatsu^ta  said : 

Some  (say),  that  freedom  from  death  (results)  from 

action2;  and  others  that  death  exists  not.     Hear  me 

explain  (this),  O  king!  have  no  misgiving  about  it3. 

Both  truths,  O  Kshatriya!  have  been  current  from 

the  beginning  4.     The  wise  maintain  what  (is  called) 

delusion  (to  be)  death.     1 6  verily  call  heedlessness 

\  death,  and  likewise  I  call  freedom  from  heedlessness 
\.  . 

immortality.      Through    heedlessness,    verily,   were 

the    demons 6    vanquished ;     and   through    freedom 

view  correct,  or  the  view  involved  in  the  practice  of  gods  and 
demons  ? 

1  See  Gita,  p.  69  supra  ;  Ka/Aopanishad,  p.  102  ;  Prama,  p.  162. 
As  to  the  gods  being  afraid  of  death,  see  .Oandogya,  p.  50  ;  and 
NWsi/tfha  Tapini,  p.  32 ;  and  as  to  gods  and  demons  practising 
the  life  of  BrahmaMrinSj  see  .A'Mndogya,  p.  571;  and  cf.  Bn'had- 
ararcyaka,  p.  964. 

2  I.  e.  action  prescribed  in  the  Vedas. 

3  I.  e.  as  to  how  I  shall  be  able  to  reconcile  the  seeming  con- 
tradiction between  the  '  two  truths/ 

4  I.  e.  of  creation. 

5  Sanatsug^ta  says  he  differs  from 'the  wise;'  delusion = thinking 
the  not-self  to  be  the  self;  heedlessness = falling  off  from  one's 
natural  condition  as  the  Brahman — which  is  the  cause  of  delusion 
(iSahkara).  See  p.  153  infra;  Ka/^a,  p.  152 ;  andTaittiriya-upanishad, 
p.  80. 

6  *Sankara  suggests  that  demons  might  mean  creatures  attached 
to  worldly  objects ;  and  gods  those  who  are  pleased  in  their  own 
self;  and  he  cites  a  stanza  in  support  of  this  suggestion.  The 
allusion,  however,  seems  to  be  plainly  to  the  story  at  jO&ndogya, 
p.  571  seq.,  where  the  idea  and  expression  of 'being  vanquished7 
also  occurs  (p.  583).  That  word  -Sahkara  interprets  in  connexion 
with  his  suggested  interpretation  to  mean  '  are  born  in  lower 
species/  See  A^Mndogya,  p.  585,  and  Maitrt,  p.  211,  about  asuras 
or  demons.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  in  the  Introduction  to  the 
MaMbhashya,  there  is  an  allusion  to  a  story  of  the  'demons'  being 
'  vanquished '  in  consequence  of  their  grammatical  blunders. 


CHAPTER    II,  9.  153 


from  heedlessness  the  gods  attained  to  the  Brah- 
man. Death,  verily,  does  not  devour  living  crea- 
tures like  a  tiger ;  for,  indeed,  his  form  is  not  to  be 
perceived.  Some 1  say  that  death  is  different  from 
this,  (named)  Yama,  who  dwells  in  the  self2;  the 
(practice  of  the)  life  of  Brahma^arins  (being)  immor- 
tality. That  god  governs  his  kingdom  in  the  world 
of  the  PitWs,  (being)  good  to  the  good,  and  not  good 
to  (those  who  are)  not  good.  That  death,  (or)  heed- 
lessness, develops  in  men  as  desire,  and  afterwards  as 
wrath,  and  in  the  shape  of  delusion 3.  And  then 
travelling  in  devious  paths4  through  egoism,  one 
does  not  attain  to  union 5  with  the  self.  Those  who 
are  deluded  by  it6,  and  who  remain  under  its  in- 
fluence, depart  from  this  (world),  and  there  again 
fall  down 7.  Then  the  deities 8  gather  around 
them.  And  then  he  undergoes  death  after  death  9. 
Being  attached  to  the  fruit  of  action,  on  action  pre- 
senting itself,  they  follow  after  it10,  and  do  not  cross 

1  Those  deluded  by  worldly  objects;  'this'  means  'heedlessness.' 

2  £ankara  cites  a  stanza  from  Manu,  which  says  that  king 
Yama  Vaivasvata  dwells  in  the  heart  of  every  one.  Cf.  Aitareya- 
upanishad,  p.  187.  The  following  clause  he  understands  to  contain 
two  epithets  of  Yama,  meaning  '  immortal,  and  intent  on  the  Brah- 
man.'   I  follow  Nilakaw/^a,  but  not  very  confidently. 

8  Cf.  GM,  p.  57.  Here  we  have  the  developments,  the  varying 
forms,  of  death  or  heedlessness. 

4  I.  e.  paths  contrary  to  *Srutis  and  Sm/Ytis. 

5  Concentration  of  mind  on  the  self  or  Brahman. 

6  I.  e.  the  egoism  spoken  of  before. 

7  I.e.  to  this  mortal  world.  Cf.  GM,  p.  84,  and  Brzhad&ra/zyaka, 
PP-  855,  856.  There  =  from  the  next  world.  -Sankara  says, 
'having  lived  there.' 

8  I.e.  the  senses.  Cf.  GM,  p.  123,  and  inter  alia  lyopanishad, 
p.  10. 

9  Cf.  Ka/^a,  p.  129,  and  Br/hadara»yaka,  p.  889. 

10  I.  e.  the  fruit.     Cf.  KaMa,  p.  155,  and  Mu»daka,  p.  317. 


1 54  sanatsugatiaa. 


beyond  death.  And  the  embodied  (self),  in  conse- 
quence of  not  understanding  union1  with  the  real 
entity,  proceeds  on  all  hands 2  with  attachment  to 
enjoyments.  That3,  verily,  is  the  great  source  of 
delusion  to  the  senses  ;  for  by  contact  4  with  unreal 
entities,  his  migrations 5  are  (rendered)  inevitable ; 
because  having  his  inner  self  contaminated  by 
contact  with  unreal  entities,  he  devotes  himself  to 
objects  of  sense  on  all  sides,  pondering  on  them 
(only).  (That)  pondering,  verily,  first  ruins 6  him  ; 
and  soon  afterwards  desire  and  wrath,  after  at- 
tacking him.  These  7  lead  children  to  death.  But 
sensible  men  cross  beyond  death  by  their  good 
sense.  He  who  pondering  (on  the  self)  destroys  8 
(the)  fugitive  (objects  of  sense),  not  even  thinking 
of  them  through  contempt  (for  them),  and  who 
being  possessed  of  knowledge  destroys  desires  in 
this  way,  becomes,  as  it  were,  the  death  of  death 
(itself),  and    swallows    (it)    up9.       The   being  who 

1  I.  e.  its  identity  with  the  Brahman. 

2  I.  e.  in  various  forms  of  life,  Nilaka^Ma. 

3  The  going  about  in  search  of  enjoyments. 

4  The  contact  leads  to  pondering  on  them,  and  that  to  desire,  &c, 
as  described  further  on. 

5  Through  various  lives.     Birth  and  death  are  certain  for  him. 

6  I.e.  causes  oblivion  of  his  real  nature,  *Sankara.  Cf.  the 
whole  train  of  cause  and  effect  at  GM,  p.  50  supra. 

7  I.  e.  the  pondering,  desire,  wrath,  &c.  As  to  '  children/  cf. 
Ka/£a,  pp.  96  and  123,  where  bala  is  contrasted  with  dhira,  as 
here.  The  'good  sense'  is  of  help  in  withstanding  the  temptations 
of  worldly  objects. 

8  Destroys = abandons;  pondering,  just  before  this,  is  rendered  by 
*Sahkara  to  mean  'thinking  of  the  objects  as  transient,  impure,'  &c. 

9  Sahkara  cites  on  this  a  stanza  of  unknown  authorship,  which 
says,  'The  learned  and  clever  man  who  knows  the  self,  and  by 
discrimination  destroys  all  objects  of  sense,  is  said  to  be  the  death 
of  death/     See  too  p.  178  infra. 


CHAPTER   II,  17.  155 


pursues  desires,  is  destroyed  (in  pursuing)  after 
the  desires1.  But  casting  away  desires,  a  being 
gets  rid  of  all  taint 2  whatever.  This  body,  void  of 
enlightenment 3,  seems  (to  be)  a  hell  for  (all)  beings. 
Those  who  are  avaricious  run  about 4,  going  head- 
long to  a  ditch.  A  man,  O  Kshatriya !  who  con- 
temns everything  else 5  learns  nothing.  To  him 
(the  body  is)  like  a  tiger  made  of  straw 6.  And  this 
internal  self  (joined  to)  delusion  and  fear  7  in  conse- 
quence of  wrath  and  avarice,  within  your  body, — 
that  verily  is  death  8.  Understanding  death  9  to  be 
thus  produced,  and  adhering  to  knowledge,  one  is 
not  afraid  of  death 10  in  this  (world).  In  his  province 
death  is  destroyed,  as  a  mortal  (is  destroyed)  on 
arriving  in  the  province  of  death. 

Dhrztardsh/ra  said  : 
The  good,  eternal,  and  most  holy  worlds  u,  which 

1  On  this  Nilaka^/^a  quotes  these  lines,  'The  antelope,  elephant, 
butterfly,  bee,  and  fish — these  five  are  destroyed  by  the  five/ 
i.  e.  the  five  objects  of  sense,  sound,  &c.  See  Santi  Parvan  (Moksha 
Dharma),  chap.  174,  st.  45. 

2  I.  e.  misery,  Nilaka^/^a ;  merit  or  sin,  Sankara. 

3  I.  e.  void  of  discrimination  between  the  real  and  unreal,  Ntla- 
ka«//£a;  result  of  ignorance,  £arikara.  'A  hell,  as  being  full  of 
filth/  says  *Sarikara, '  such  as  phlegm,  blood,  excretions.'  Cf.  Maitri, 
p.  48. 

4  As  blind  men  groping  about  fall  into  a  ditch,  so  do  these, 
*Sankara. 

5  I.e.  other  than  the  sensuous  objects  he  loves;  'learns  nothing* 
about  the  supreme  Self  which  he  disregards. 

6  Useless  for  any  good  purpose. 

7  Cf.  Taittiriya-upanishad,  p.  102. 

8  As  being  ruinous  to  oneself.  *Sankara  compares  Gita,  p.  68. 
Cf.  also  Taittiriya-upanishad,  p.  103,  and  see  Br^*hadara«yaka,  p.  61. 

9  I.  e.  heedlessness  and  its  developments  as  stated. 

10  *Sankara  cites  on  this  Taittiriya-upanishad,  p.  78. 

11  Such  as  Satyaloka,  &c. 


156  s  anatsugatIya. 


are  mentioned  (as  attainable)  by  the  twice-born  by 
means  of  worship1,  those,  say  the  Vedas,  are  the 
highest  aim  2.  How  is  it,  then,  that  one  who  under- 
stands this  does  not  resort  to  action  ? 

Sanatsu^ata  said: 

(Thinking)  so,  an  ignorant  man  does  resort  to 
action.  The  Vedas  likewise  do  lay  down  various 
benefits3  (for  him).  But  that4  (man)  comes  not 
hither5.  (Becoming)  the  supreme  self6,  he  attains 
the  supreme,  by  the  (right)  path  destroying  the 
wrong  paths7. 

Dhrztarcish/ra  said : 

Who  8  is  it  that  constrains  this  unborn  primeval 
(self),  if  it  is  (itself)  all  this  severally9  ?     And  what 

1  (ryotish/oma,  Awamedha,  and  other  rites. 

2  As  leading  to  final  emancipation. 

3  I.  e.  objects  for  which  various  ceremonies  (or  ' actions')  should 
be  performed. 

4  I.  e.  the  man  of  knowledge. 

5  I.  e.  into  the  sphere  of  action.     Cf.  Gita,  p.  48. 

6  Knowing  the  supreme  self  is  identical  with  becoming  the 
supreme  self,  Mu«<faka,  p.  323. 

7  I.  e.  getting  rid  of  the  paths  which  keep  one  away  from  the 
Brahman  by  means  of  contemplation  of  the  Brahman,  &c.  Nila- 
ka«/^a  renders  ' right  path'  to  mean  the  Sushumwd  passage  by 
which  the  soul  proceeds  to  final  emancipation,  see  -Oandogya, 
p.  570;  Ka/^a,  p.  157. 

8  *Sahkara  says  :  '  Having  shown  that  true  death  is  heedlessness, 
and  having  shown  that  heedlessness  in  its  forms  of  anger  &c.  is  the 
cause  of  all  evil,  and  having  also  shown  that  death  is  destroyed  by 
true  knowledge,  and  having  shown  further  that  heaven  &c.  are 
really  not  man's  highest  goal ;  the  author  has  also  implied  the 
unity  of  the  supreme  and  individual  self.  On  that  arises  a  doubt, 
which  is  stated  in  this  passage/ 

9  All  this = all  the  developments  of  the  Brahman,  i.e.  space, 
wind,  fire,  water,  earth,  vegetation,  food,  living  creatures;  see 
Taittiriyopanishad,  p.  68. 


CHAPTER    II,    21.  I57 


has  it  to  do,  or  what  is  its  unhappiness *  ?     Tell  me 
all  that  accurately,  O  learned  person ! 

Sanatsu^ata  said : 

There  is  great  danger 2  in  attributing  distinctions 
to  it.  JXhe  everlasting3  (principles)  exist  by  con- 
nexion with  the  beginningless 4  (principle).  So  that 
his  greatness  is  not  lost  at  all5,  and  beings  exist 
by  connexion  with  the  beginningless4  (principle). 
That  which  is  the  real — the  supreme  Being6 — is 
eternal.  He  creates  the  universe  by  means  of 
changes 7,  for  such  is  his  power  held  to  be ;  and 
for  such  connexions  of  things  the  Vedas  are 
(authority) 8. 

1  What  is  the  purpose  of  its  existence,  and  what  misery  does  it 
undergo  on  entering  the  course  of  worldly  life  ? 

2  '  The  danger,'  says  -Saiikara,  '  is  that  of  contravening  Vedic 
texts  such  as  "  I  am  the  Brahman/'  "  Thou  art  that/'  &c/  May  it 
not  rather  be  that  pointed  out  at  Ka/^opanishad,  p.  129,  viz.  never 
attaining  final  emancipation?    Cf.  also  Nrzsiwha  T&pini,  p.  223. 

3  The  individual  selfs,  *Sahkara.  4  Nature  or  maya. 

5  The  appearance  of  degradation  to  an  inferior  state  being  delusive. 

6  The  original  word  implies  the  possession  of  awvarya,  dharma, 
ya^as,  sit,  vairagya,  moksha.  See  *SVeta\rvatara,  p.  329  (where  the  list 
is  slightly  different).   For  another  definition,  see  Maitri,  p.  6  (gloss). 

7  See  note  g,  p.  156. 

8  Sankara  says:  'The  question  of  Dhn'tarash/ra  having  suggested 
a  difference  between  two  principles,  one  of  which  constrains,  and  the 
other  of  which  is  constrained,  the  answer  is — Such  a  difference  ought 
not  to  be  alleged,  as  it  involves  "  danger."  Then  the  question  arises, 
How  is  the  difference,  which  does  appear, to  be  explained?  The  reply 
is,  It  is  due  to  the  beginningless  principle — delusion  or  ignorance. 
The  next  sentence  shows  that  the  universe  as  it  appears  is  also  a 
result  of  delusion/  Nilaka^a  says  expressly,  changes  =  delusion. 
He  renders  the  original  which  we  have  translated  by  'beginningless' 
first,  to  mean  'collection  of  objects  of  enjoyments.'  Sahkara's 
explanation  seems  tautological  as  regards  the  words  'connexion 
with  the  beginningless/  which  occur  twice  in  the  above.     Nila- 


1 58  SANATSUGATIYA. 

Dhrztarash/ra  said : 
Since  some  practise  piety 1  in  this  world,  and  some 
likewise  practise  impiety  in  this  world ;  is  the  piety 
destroyed  by  the  sin,  or  else  does  the  piety  destroy 
sin  ? 

Sanatsu/ata  said : 

Whichever2  he  adheres  to,  the  man  of  under- 
standing always  destroys  both  by  means  of  know- 
ledge ;  (that  is)  settled3.  Likewise,  in  the  other  case4, 
the  embodied  (self)  obtains  merit;  and  to  such  a 
one  sin  (also)  accrues ;  (that  too  is)  settled 3.  De- 
parting (from  this  world),  he  enjoys  by  his  actions 
both  (kinds  of)  fruit,  which  are  not  enduring 5 — of 
actions  (which  are)  pure,  and  of  (those  which  are) 
sinful.  The  man  of  understanding  casts  aside  sin 
by  piety  in  this  (world),  for  know  that  his  piety  is 
more  powerful 6.  Those  Br&hma^as,  in  whom  there 
is  emulation 7  about  (their)  piety,  as  there  is  in 
strong  men  about  (their)  strength,  after  departing 
from  this  world,  become  glorious  in  heaven 8.     And 

ka/z/^a's  is  not  quite  clear.  May  the  expression  on  the  second 
occasion  mean,  that  the  connexion  by  which  beings  are  stated 
before  to  exist  has  had  no  beginning — has  existed  from  eternity  ? 
The  translation  should  then  run  thus :  'And  beings  exist  by  a  con- 
nexion which  had  no  beginning;'  (see  Sariraka  Bhashya,  p.  494.) 
Connexions  of  things = creation  of  universe  by  his  power. 

1  E.  g.  Agnish/oma,  &c,  Safikara. 

2  I.  e.  impiety  or  piety,  sin  or  merit. 

3  In  *Srutis  and  Smrztis,  which  *Sankara  quotes.  ^TMndogya, 
p.  622;  Mu^aka,  p.  309;  Brz'hadara^yaka,  p.  911.  See,  too, 
Maitri,  p.  131.  4  Of  the  man  devoid  of  knowledge. 

5  Cf.  Gita,  p.  76,  and  Brzriadara^yaka,  p.  636. 

6  See  p.  164,  note  9  infra. 

7  The  feeling  of  one's  own  superiority  over  others  in  piety. 

8  '  In  the  shape  of  Nakshatras/  says  ASarikara,  which  is  not  quite 
intelligible.     See  .ATMndogya,  p.  258,  and  Anugitd  infra,  p.  240. 


CHAPTER    II,  31.  159 


to  those  in  whom  there  is  no  emulation  about 
(their)  piety,  that  (piety)  is  a  means  of  (acquiring) 
knowledge1.  Such  Brahma/zas  released  from  this 
(world),  go  to  the  heaven  which  is  free  from  the 
threefold  source  of  pain 2.  People  who  understand 
the  Vedas  call  his  conduct  good.  (But)  people 
closely  connected 3,  as  well  as  strangers,  do  not  pay 
much  regard  to  him.  Wherever  he  may  believe 
food  and  drink  for  a  Brcihma/za  to  exist  in  abun- 
dance, like  water  on  grass  in  the  autumn,  there 
would  he  live  and  not  be  vexed4.  (To  him)  only 
that  person  is  good,  and  no  other  (as  a  companion), 
who  does  nothing  in  excess,  and  who  occasions 
fear  and  injury  to  a  taciturn  man5.  And  his  food  is 
acceptable  to  the  good,  who  does  not  vex  the  self 
of  a  taciturn  man,  and  who  does  not  destroy  the 
property  of  a  Brihma^a6.  A  Brdhma^a  should 
hold,  that  living  in  the  midst  of  kinsmen,  his  actions 
should   be   always   unknown7;    and  he  should  not 

1  According  to  theVedantic  theory,  the  acts  of  piety  purify  the  inner 
man,  and  are  thus  a  stepping-stone  to  knowledge.  See  Introduction, 
p.  147  supra.    Cf.  Gita,  p.  122;  and  Brz'hadara/zyaka,  p.  899. 

2  I.  e.  physical,  mental,  and  such  as  is  caused  by  superhuman 
agency.  This  is  -Sankara's  explanation.  It  is  somewhat  far- 
fetched, but  I  can  find  none  better.  Cf.  Gita,  p.  49.  And  see  also 
B/Yhadara/zyaka,  p.  876,  and  the  commentary  of  *Sahkara  there  with 
Anandagiri's  gloss.  8  E.  g.  wife,  children,  &c. 

4  I.  e.  vexed  as  to  how  his  livelihood  is  to  be  earned,  &c. 

5  Excess,  e.g.  too  much  obsequiousness  towards  a  'taciturn 
man/  owing  to  his  holiness,  &c.  Taciturn  man  =  ascetic. 
Injury  =  disrespect,  &c.  Perhaps  the  protest  against  worldliness 
is  here  carried  to  an  extreme.  *Sahkara  cites  Manu  as  a  parallel, 
'  A  Brahmarca  should  be  afraid  of  (worldly)  respect  as  of  poison/ 

6  E.  g.  the  Kara  grass,  deerskin,  &c,  mentioned  at  GM,  p.  68. 

7  I.  e.  he  should  not  parade  his  actions.  *Sankara  compares 
VasishMa  and  a  Vedic  text.  See,  too,  the  quotation  at  Taitt.  Ara//. 
p.  902. 


1 60  SANATSUGATIYA. 


think1  (about  them).  What  Brahma/*a  ought  to 
think  of  the  inner  self,  which  is  void  of  symbols 2, 
immovable,  pure,  and  free  from  all  pairs  of  oppo- 
sites,  in  this  way 3  ?  What  sin  is  not  committed  by 
that  thief,  who  steals  away  his  own  self4,  who  re- 
gards his  self  as  one  thing,  when  it  is  a  different 
thing.  The  far-seeing  Brahma/za,  who  knows  the 
Brahman,  is  not  wearied5,  he  receives  nothing6;  he 
is  honoured,  free  from  trouble  7,  and  wise,  but  acts 
as  if  he  was  not  wise 8.  As  dogs  eat  what  is 
vomited,  so  do  they,  enjoying  their  own  bravery9, 
eat  what  is  vomited,  always  with  disaster  (to  them- 
selves).    Those    twice-born   persons,   who   are   not 

1  Cf.  Gita,  p.  103.  -Sahkara  suggests  an  alternative  explanation 
of  this  stanza,  which  will  make  it  mean  that  one  performing  the 
operations  of  the  senses,  should  devote  oneself  nevertheless  to  the 
unknown  principle,  and  not  consider  the  senses  to  be  the  self. 

2  I.e.  beyond  the  reach  of  inference;  'subtle/  says  -Sahkara.  Cf. 
*Sveta\yvatara,  p.  364;  Br/hadara^yaka,  p.  855;  Maitri,  p.  182;  and 
Ka//$a,  p.  149,  where  *Sankara  suggests  a  somewhat  different 
meaning.  As  to  immovable,  cf.  ira,  p.  10,  and  GM,  p.  104.  »San- 
kara  renders  it  by  '  void  of  activity ; '  and  pure  he  paraphrases  by 
'free  from  ignorance  and  other  taints.' 

8  It  is  difficult  to  say  what  'in  this  way*  refers  to.  ASankara 
renders  it  by  '  as  possessing  qualities  appertaining  to  the  two  kinds 
of  body/  On  ^ankara's  suggested  meaning  of  the  stanza  pre- 
ceding (see  note  1),  it  would  refer  to  the  confusion  of  the  senses 
with  the  self. 

*  Such  a  person  is  called  a  destroyer  of  his  own  self  at  Lropani- 
shad,  p.  9. 

5  I.  e.  by  the  troubles  of  worldly  life. 

6  Cf.  'without  belongings'  at  Gita,  p.  128. 

7  Anger  and  other  obstacles  to  concentration  of  mind. 

8  I.  e.  unintelligent.  The  text  of  Vasish/^a  referred  to  in  note  7, 
p.  159,  says  he  should  act  like  an  unintelligent  man.  Cf.  also 
Gau</apada-karikas,  p.  443,  and  -Sariraka  Bhashya,  p.  1041. 

9  I.  e.  singing  the  praises  of  their  own  greatness  and  worth, 
instead  of  keeping  their  '  conduct  unknown/ 


CHAPTER    II,    41.  l6l 


first1  in  respect  of  human  wealth,  but  who  are  first 
in  the  Vedas2,  are  unconquerable,  not  to  be  shaken3; 
they  should  be  understood  to  be  forms  of  the  Brah- 
man. Whosoever  may  in  this  (world)  know  all  the 
gods  4 — doers  of  favours — he  is  not  equal  to  a  Brah- 
ma/za,  (nor  even)  he5  for  whom  he  exerts  himself. 
The  man  who  makes  no  efforts  6,  and  is  respected, 
does  not,  being  respected,  think  himself  respected 7, 
nor  does  he  become  vexed  in  consequence  of  dis- 
respect. One  who  is  respected 8  should  think  it  to 
be  a  natural  operation  of  people,  like  their  opening 
or  closing  of  the  eyelids,  that  the  learned  respect 
him  in  this  world.  One  who  is  not  respected  should 
think,  that  the  deluded  people  who  do  not  under- 
stand piety,  and  who  are  devoid  of  (knowledge  of) 
the  world  and  the  6astras,  will  never  respect  one 
who  is  worthy  of  respect.  Respect  and  taciturnity9, 
verily,  never  dwell  together ;  for  this  world  is  (the 
field)  for  respect,  the  next  for  taciturnity,  as  is 
understood 10,     For   worldly  wealth    dwells    in   the 

1  Highly  esteemed  for  or  strongly  attached  to,  -Sankara.  Human 
wealth = wife,  offspring,  property,  &c.  Cf.  -Oandogya,  p.  319; 
Brz'hadara/zyaka,  p.  262. 

2  I.  e.  veracity  and  other  duties  taught  by  the  Vedas. 

3  '  They  need  fear  nought/  says  NilakawMa. 

4  I.  e.  may  sacrifice  to  them,  -Sankara. 

5  Not  even  the  deity  to  whom  the  sacrifice  is  offered  is  equal  to  one 
who  knows  the  Brahman.    Cf.  Taittiriya,  p.  23,  and  Anugita,  p.  250. 

6  I.  e.  one  who  is  '  taciturn '  and  does  not  parade  his  greatness. 

7  He  does  not  care  for  the  respect  shown  him. 
Because  he  knows  the  Brahman. 

9  I.  e.  restraint  of  all  senses,  not  of  speech  only.  For  the  con- 
trast compare  that  between  sreya  and  prey  a  at  Ka//£a,  p.  92. 

10  I.e.  by  all  men  of  understanding.  £ankara's  rendering  is 
different :  '  The  next,  which  is  known  as  Tad,  is  for  taciturnity/ 
He  cites  for  this  Gitd,  p.  120. 

[8]  M 


1 6  2  s  anatsugat!  ya. 


sphere  of  respect 1,  and  that,  too,  is  an  obstacle 2. 
While  the  Brahmic  wealth  3,  O  Kshatriya !  is  diffi- 
cult to  be  attained  by  any  one  devoid  of  knowledge. 
The  ways  (to  it)  are  stated  by  the  good  to  be  of 
various  descriptions,  and  difficult  to  reach— truth, 
straightforwardness,  modesty  4,  restraint  (of  senses), 

(     purity,  knowledge,  which   are  the  six  impediments 

^  (in  the  way)  of  respect  and  delusion. 


Chapter  III. 

Dhrztarash/ra  said : 
Who  possesses  this  taciturnity5,  and  which  of  the 
two  6  is  taciturnity  ?  Describe,  O  learned  person  ! 
the  condition  of  taciturnity  here.  Does  a  learned 
man  reach  taciturnity7  by  taciturnity?  And  how, 
O  sage  !  do  they  practise  taciturnity  in  this  world  ? 


1  I.  e.  they  both  follow  on  devotion  to  worldly  life. 

2  I.  e.  in  the  way  to  final  emancipation. 

3  The  enjoyment  of  supreme  felicity,  Brahmananda  (Sahkara) ; 
the  greatness  consisting  of  a  knowledge  of  Rik,  Ya^us,  Sdman, 
and  the  substance  of  their  teaching,  which  is  worthy  of  a  Brahma/za 
(Nilaka^a).    See,  too,  Anugita,  p.  232. 

4  Modesty = being  ashamed  of  doing  wrong;  restraint  (of  senses) 
= mental  restraint;  and  purity  is  both  internal  and  external, — An- 
kara ;  knowledge  is,  of  course,  knowledge  of  the  Brahman. 

5  I.  e.  that  spoken  of  in  the  last  chapter. 

6  Viz.  mere  silence,  or  the  contemplation  of  the  self  after  re- 
straining all  the  senses.  In  the  Brz'hadara/zyaka-upanishad,  Sahkara 
(p.  605)  renders  the  original  word,  mauna,  to  mean,  'The  fruit  of 
the  destruction  of  the  consciousness  of  any  thing  other  than  the  self/ 
And  his  commentator  makes  it  clearer  thus :  'The  conviction  in  the 
mind  that  one  is  the  self— the  supreme  Brahman— and  that  there 
is  nothing  else  existing  but  oneself/ 

7  I.  e.  the  highest  seat — the  Brahman  ;  for  mind,  sense,  &c.  are 
all  non-existent  there.     Cf.  Ka//za,  p.  151,  and  Maitri,  p.  161. 


CHAPTER    III,    4.  163 


Sanatsu£*ata  said : 

Since  the  Vedas,  together  with  the  mind1,  fail  to 
attain  to  him,  hence  (is  he)  taciturnity2 — he  about 
whom  the  words  of  the  Vedas  were  uttered3,  and 
who,  O  king !  shines  forth  as  consubstantial 4  with 
them. 

Dhr/tarash^ra  said  : 

Does5  the  twice-born  person  who  studies  the  Rik 
and  the  Ya^us  texts,  and  the  Sdma-veda,  committing 
sinful  (acts),  become  tainted,  or  does  he  not  become 
tainted  ? 

Sanatsu^ata  said  : 

Not  the  Saman  texts,  nor  yet  the  Rik  texts,  nor 
the  Ya^us  texts  6  save  him,  O  acute  sir !  from  sinful 

1  Cf.  Kenopanishad,  p.  39;  Ka/^a,  p.  152;  Taittirfya,  p.  119. 

2  *  Taciturnity  is  his  name,'  says  Nilaka^/^a. 

3  Or,  says  *Sankara, '  who  is  the  author  of  the  Vedas/ 

4  I.  e.  'with  the  Vedas/  says  Nilaka^a,  Om,  the  quintessence  of 
the  Vedas,  being  a  name  of  the  Brahman  (as  to  which  cf.  Gita,  p.  79, 
and  Maitri,  p.  84).  -Sankara  takes  the  whole  expression  to  mean 
^yotirmaya,  consisting  of  light.  Nilaka#/^a  says  this  stanza  answers 
the  five  following  questions  put  in  the  stanza  preceding,  viz.  of  what 
use  is  taciturnity?  which  of  the  two  is  taciturnity?  &c,  as  above. 
The  first  four  questions  are  answered  by  the  first  two  lines  of  this 
stanza — the  substance  of  the  answer  being,  that  the  use  of  taci- 
turnity is  to  attain  the  seat  which  is  not  to  be  grasped  even  by  the 
mind,  that  taciturnity  includes  both  restraint  of  mind  and  of  the 
external  senses.  By  means  of  such  restraint,  the  external  and 
internal  worlds  cease  to  be  perceived  as  existing,  and  the  highest 
goal  is  attained. 

5  This  question  arises  naturally  enough  on  Nilakafl/^a's  inter- 
pretation of  the  preceding  stanza,  the  meaning  of  which  is  in 
substance  that  the  Vedas  cannot  grasp  the  Brahman  fully,  but  they 
are  of  use  towards  a  rudimentary  comprehension  of  it,  as  is  said 
further  on,  see  p.  172  infra. 

6  Cf.  Svetawatara-upanishad,  p.  339  ;  see,  too,  Nrzsizrcha  Tapini, 
pp.  81-98. 

M    2 


1 64  SANATSUGATIYA. 


action.  I  do  not  tell  you  an  untruth.  The  Af^andas 
do  not  save  a  sinful  deceitful l  man  who  behaves 
deceitfully 2.  At  the  time  of  the  termination  (of  his 
life),  the  A^andas  abandon  3  him,  as  birds  who  have 
got  wings  (abandon  their)  nest. 

DhrztarashA*a  said  : 

If,  O  acute  sir !  the  Vedas  are  not  able  to  save 
one  who  understands  the  Vedas,  then  whence  is  this 
eternal  talk  4  of  the  Brahma/zas  ? 

Sanatsu^ata  said : 

O  you  of  great  glory !  this  universe  becomes 
manifest  through  his  special  forms — names5  and 
the  rest.  The  Vedas  proclaim  (his  form)  after 
describing  (it)  well 6,  and  (they 7  also)  state  his 
difference  from  the  universe.  For  that 8  are  this 
penance  and  sacrifice  prescribed.  By  these  a 
learned  man  acquires  merit,  and  afterwards  destroy- 
ing sin  by  merit 9,  he  has  his  self  illuminated  by 
knowledge.     By  knowledge  the  learned  man  attains 


1  I.  e.  one  who  parades  his  piety. 

2  I.  e.  hypocritically. 

3  I.  e.  do   not   rise  to   his   memory — Nilakaw/^a,  citing  Gita, 
p.  78  supra. 

4  Scil.  about  the  veneration  due  to  one  who  has  studied  the 
Vedas — Nilaka^/^a,  citing  one  or  two  passages  in  point. 

5  The  universe  consists  of  '  names  and  forms/  the  reality  being 
the  Brahman  only.     Cf.  iTMndogya,  p.  407  seq. 

6  .Sankara   refers  to   Taittiriya-upanishad,   p.  68 ;    -Oandogya, 
p.  596  seq.  &c. 

7  -Sahkara  takes  this  to  mean  '  sages/  who,  according  to  him, 
state  the  dilference.     He  quotes  Para^ara  for  this. 

8  I.e.  the  Brahman,  that  is  to  say,  for  attaining  to  it.    Penance  = 
Mndraya/za  and  other  observances;  sacrifice =gyotish/oma,  &c. 

9  Cf.  p.  158  supra,  and  Taittiriya-ara/zyaka,  p.  888. 


CHAPTER   III,   12.  165 


the  self1.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  one  who  wishes 
for  the  fruit — heaven 2 — takes  with  him 3  all  that  he 
has  done  in  this  (world),  enjoys  it  in  the  next,  and 
then  returns  to  the  path  4  (of  this  world).  Penance 
is  performed  in  this  world ;  the  fruit  is  enjoyed 
elsewhere.  But  the  penance  of  Brahma/zas  is  fur- 
ther developed  5 ;  that  of  others  remains  only  as 
much  (as  when  first  performed). 

Dhrztarashfra  said : 
How  does  the  pure  penance  become  developed 
and  well   developed 6  ?     O   Sanatsu^dta  !    tell  (me) 
how  I  should  understand  that,  O  Lord ! 

Sanatsu^dta  said  : 

This  penance,  free  from  sin  7,  is  called  pure 8 ;  and 
this  pure  penance  becomes  developed  and  well  de- 
veloped, not  otherwise 9.     All  this  10,  O  Kshatriya  ! 

1  Cf.  -SVetsLyvatara,  p.  327  ;  Mundaka,  p.  323. 

2  So  Sahkara.  NilakaraMa  takes  the  original  word  to  mean 
'  the  group  of  the  senses/  and  the  whole  phrase  to  mean  '  enjoy- 
ments of  sense/  Nilaka^Ma  is  supported  by  a  passage  further  on, 
p.  167.    But  as  to  'those  who  wish  for  heaven/  cf.  Gita,  pp.  48-84. 

3  I.  e.  in  the  form  of  merit,  &c. 

4  Cf.  Gita,  p.  84. 

8  Cf.  -Oandogya,  p.  23.  Brahma^as= those  that  know  the 
Brahman.     See  p.  171  infra. 

6  I  am  not  quite  sure  about  the  meaning  of  the  original  here. 
i?z*ddha,  which  I  have  rendered  '  developed/  Nilaka^a  understands 
to  mean  *  what  is  performed  merely  for  show/  What  has  been 
rendered  '  well  developed '  in  the  text,  Nilaka«/^a  takes  to  mean 
1  performed  from  some  desire/  &c. 

7  Anger,  desire,  &c. 

8  The  original  is  kevala.  Nilaka/zMa  says  it  is  so  called  as 
being  a  means  of  kaivalya, { final  emancipation/ 

9  I.  e.  not  that  which  is  not  free  from  sin,  which  latter  is  not 
developed  at  all. 

10  All  objects  of  enjoyment,  Nilaka#Ma. 


1 66  SANATSUGATIYA. 


\ 


has  for  its  root  that  penance  about  which  you 
question  me.  By  penance 1,  those  conversant  with 
the  Vedas  attained  immortality,  after  departing 
from  this  world. 

Dhrztar&sh/ra  said : 

I  have  heard  about  penance  free  from  sin,  O 
Sanatsu^ata !  Tell  me  what  is  the  sin  (connected) 
with  penance,  so  that  I  may  understand  the  eternal 
mystery 2. 

Sanatsu^dta  said : 

The  twelve  beginning  with  wrath,  and  likewise 
the  seven  cruelties,  are  the  defects  (connected)  with 
it ;  and  there  are  (stated)  in  the  6astras  twelve 
merits  (connected)  with  it,  beginning  with  know- 
ledge, which  are  known  to  the  twice-born,  and  may 
be  developed.  Wrath,  desire  3,  avarice,  delusion  4, 
craving5,  mercilessness,  censoriousness,  vanity,  grief6, 
attachment7,  envy8,  reviling  others — these  twelve 
should  always  be  avoided  by  a  man  of  high  quali- 

1  Cf.  Brzhad&ra/zyaka,  p.  899.  Tapas  is  variously  rendered.  See 
inter  alia,  Pragma,  pp.  162-170;  *Sveta\rvatara,  p.  307;  Muwdaka,  pp. 
270-280,  311-314;  ^"Mndogya,  p.  136;  AnugM,  pp.  247,  339. 

2  I.  e.  Brahma-vidy&,  or  science  of  the  Brahman,  Nilaka;z/^a ; 
the  Brahman  itself,  *Sankara. 

3  I.  e.  lust. 

4  Want  of  discrimination  between  right  and  wrong. 

5  Desire  to  taste  worldly  objects. 

6  For  the  loss  of  anything  desired. 

7  Desire  to  enjoy  worldly  objects.  The  difference  between  this 
and  craving,  according  to  *Sahkara,  appears  to  be  between  merely 
tasting  and  continual  enjoyment.  According  to  Nilakaw/^a,  the 
former  is  a  desire  which  is  never  contented ;  the  latter  is  merely 
a  general  liking. 

8  Impatience  of  other  people's  prosperity ;  censoriousness  being 
the  pointing  out  of  flaws  in  other  people's  merits ;  and  reviling 
being  an  ignoring  of  the  merits  and  merely  abusing. 


CHAPTER    III,   19.  167 


fications 1.  These,  O  king  of  kings !  attend  each 
and  every  man,  wishing  to  find  some  opening2, 
as  a  hunter  (watches)  animals.  [Boastful,  lustful,  | 
haughty,  irascible,  unsteady 3,  one  who  does  not  1 
protect  (those  dependent4  on  him),  these  six  sinful  I 
acts  are  performed  by  sinful  men  who  are  not  afraid 
(even)  in  the  midst  of  great  danger 5.]  One  whose 
thoughts  are  (all)  about  enjoyments,  who  prospers 
by  injuring  (others),  who  repents  of  generosity,  who 
is  miserly,  who  is  devoid  of  the  power 6  (of  know- 
ledge), who  esteems  the  group7  (of  the  senses), 
who  hates  his  wife 8 — these  seven,  different  (from 
those  previously  mentioned),  are  the  seven  forms 
of  cruelty.  Knowledge,  truth,  self-restraint,  sacred 
learning,  freedom  from  animosity  (towards  living 
beings),  modesty 9,  endurance  10,  freedom  from  cen- 
soriousness,  sacrifice,  gift,  courage  n,  quiescence 12, — 
these  are  the  twelve  great  observances  13  of  a  Brih- 
ma^a,  Whoever  is  not  devoid  of  these  twelve 
can  govern  this  whole  world,   and  those  who  are 

1  Scil.  for  attaining  to  the  Brahman. 

2  Some  weak  point  by  which  they  may  attack  a  man. 

3  Fickle  in  friendship,  &c. 
*  Such  as  a  wife,  &c. 

5  Connected  with  this  or  the  next  world,  Nilaka«/^a.  This  and 
a  stanza  further  on  I  place  within  brackets,  as  it  is  not  quite  certain 
whether  Sankara's  copy  had  them,  though  they  are  now  in  some 
of  our  copies  of  the  text  with  his  commentary.    See  Introduction. 

6  Cf.  Mundaka,  p.  319;  iTMndogya,  p.  494. 

7  See  note  2,  at  page  165. 

8  The  wife  having  no  other  protector. 

9  See  note  4,  at  page  162. 

10  Of  pairs  of  opposites,  such  as  heat  and  cold,  &c. 

11  Restraint  of  senses  in  presence  of  their  objects. 

12  Cf.  GM,  pp.  69,  70. 

13  Which  are  serviceable  in  attaining  the  highest  goal. 


1 68  SANATSUGATIYA. 


possessed  of  three,  two,  or  even  one  (of  these)  be- 
come, in  (due)  course,  distinguished  (for  knowledge) 
V  and  identified  with  the  Brahman l.  [Self-restraint, 
abandonment2,  and  freedom  from  heedlessness — on 
J  these  depends  immortality.  And  the  talented  Brah- 
lma;zas  say  that  truth  is  chief  over  them.]  Self- 
-restraint has  eighteen  defects  ;  if  (any  one  of  them 
is)  committed,  it  is  an  obstacle  (to  self-restraint). 
They  are  thus  stated.  Untruthfulness,  backbiting, 
thirst3,  antipathy  (to  all  beings),  darkness4,  repin- 
ing5, hatred6  of  people,  haughtiness,  quarrelsome- 
ness, injuring  living  creatures,  reviling  others,  gar- 
rulity, vexation 7,  want  of  endurance 8,  want  of 
courage9,  imperfection10,  sinful  conduct,  and  slaugh- 
ter. That  is  called  self-restraint  by  the  good,  which 
is  free  from  these  defects.  Frenzy  has  eighteen 
defects  n  ;  and  abandonment  is  of  six  kinds.  The 
contraries  of  those  which  have  been  laid  down 12  are 
stated  to  be  the  defects  of  frenzy.  Abandonment 
of  six  kinds  is  excellent.  Of  those  six,  the  third 
is  hard  to  achieve.     With  it  one  certainly  crosses 


1  The  original  is  the  word  'taciturnity '  as  at  p.  162  supra. 

2  Offering  one's  acts  to  God  (Nilaka«/#a),  as  to  which  cf.  GM, 
p.  64.    See  also  p.  182  infra  for  this  stanza. 

3  I.  e.  for  objects  of  sense.  4  Ignorance. 

5  Discontent  even  when  one  obtains  much. 

6  This  is  active ;  antipathy  is  passive  only. 

7  Of  oneself,  by  brooding  on  evil.  Cf.  Taittiriya,  p.  119.  One 
copy  of  Ankara's  commentary  says  this  means  '  thinking  ill  of 
others  without  cause/ 

8  Of  pairs  of  opposites. 

9  Restraint  of  senses  in  presence  of  their  objects. 

10  I.  e.  of  piety,  knowledge,  and  indifference  to  worldly  objects. 

11  I.  e.  qualities  which  destroy  it. 

12  Scil.  as  defects  of  self-restraint,  viz.  untruthfulness,  &c. 


CHAPTER    III,  27.  169 


beyond  all  misery  without  distinction  \  That  being 
achieved,  (everything)  is  accomplished  2.  The  (first 
is  the)  giving  away  of  sons  and  wealth  to  a  de- 
serving man  who  asks  (for  them) ;  the  second  is 
gifts  at  Vedic  ceremonies,  and  gifts  at  ceremonies 
laid  down  in  the  Smrztis 3.  The  abandonment  of 
desires,  O  king  of  kings !  by  means  of  indifference 
(to  worldly  objects)  is  laid  down  as  the  third4. 
With  these  one  should  become  free  from  heed- 
lessness. That  freedom  from  heedlessness,  too,  has 
eight  characteristics,  and  is  (a)  great  (merit).  Truth- 
fulness, concentration,  absorbed  contemplation,  re-  ' 
flexion  5,  and  also  indifference  (to  worldly  objects), 
not  stealing 6,  living  the  life  of  a  Brahma/£arin,  and  I 

1  Scil.  any  distinction  as  to  physical,  mental,  or  that  which  is 
caused  by  superhuman  agency. 

2  Literally,  '  all  is  conquered/  Everything  that  needs  to  be 
done  is  done.     Cf.  Ka/^opanishad,  p.  155  ;  Mu?/daka,  p.  317. 

3  Another  interpretation  of  ish/apurta  is  '  offerings  to  gods,  and 
offerings  to  the  manes;'  a  third  ' sacrifices,  &c,  and  works  of 
charity,  such  as  digging  tanks  and  wells;'  for  a  fourth,  see  Sankara 
on  Mu/zdaka,  p.  291. 

4  Each  of  the  three  classes  mentioned  contains  two  sub-classes, 
and  so  the  six  are  made  up.  It  is  not  quite  easy  to  see  the  two 
heads  under  the  third  class;  but  perhaps  indifference,  and  the 
consequent  abandonment  of  desire,  may  be  the  two  intended.  To 
indicate  that,  I  have  adopted  the  construction  which  takes  the 
words  'by  means  of  indifference '  with  abandonment,  instead  of 
with  '  gifts  at  Vedic  ceremonies/  &c.  *Sankara  seems  to  understand 
'  giving  away  of  wealth '  with  the  words  '  by  means  of  indifference/ 
and  thus  to  constitute  the  second  head  under  the  third  class.  But 
he  is  not  quite  clear. 

5  Concentration = fixing  the  mind  continuously  on  some  object, 
such  as  the  being  in  the  sun,  &c. ;  contemplation  is  that  in  which 
one  identifies  oneself  with  the  Brahman;  reflexion  as  to  what  one 
is,  whence  one  comes,  and  so  forth. 

6  *Sahkara  says  this  may  refer  to  the  '  stealing '  mentioned  at 
p.  160.    The  life  of  a  Brahma&irin  is  here  taken  to  mean  con- 


1 70  SANATSUGATIYA. 


likewise  freedom  from  all  belongings 1.  Thus  have 
the  defects  of  self-restraint  been  stated ;  one  should 
avoid  those  defects.  Freedom  from  (those)  defects 
is  freedom  from  heedlessness;  and  that,  too,  is 
deemed  to  have  eight  characteristics 2.  Let  truth 
be  your  (very)  self,  O  king  of  kings !  On  truth  all 
the  worlds  rest3.  Truth  is  said  to  be  their  main 
(principle).  Immortality  depends  on  truth4.  Get- 
ting rid  of  (these)  defects,  one  should  practise  the 
observance  of  penance.  This  is  the  conduct  pre- 
scribed by  the  Creator.  Truth  is  the  solemn  vow 
of  the  good.  The  pure  penance,  which  is  free  from 
these  defects,  and  possessed  of  these  characteristics, 
becomes  developed,  and  well  developed5.  I  will 
state  to  you,  in  brief,  O  king  of  kings!  what  you 
ask  of  me.  This  (observance) 6  is  destructive  of  sin, 
and  pure,  and  releases  (one)  from  birth  and  death  and 
old  age Y.  If  one  is  free  from  the  five  senses,  and  also 
from  the  mind8,  O  descendant  of  Bharata!  also  from 
(thoughts  regarding)  the  past  and  the  future9,  one 
becomes  happy. 

Dhrztarish/ra  said : 
Some  people  make  great  boasts  in  consequence 
of  (their  knowing)  the  Vedas  with  the  Akhyanas  as 

tinence  by  the  commentators,  as  also  at  Mu^aka,  p.  3 1 1  inter  alia. 
See  also  ,Oandogya,  p.  533. 

1  Son,  wife,  home,  &c. ;  as  to  which  cf.  Gita,  p.  103,  and.Nrz- 
siwha  Tapin?,  p.  198,  commentary. 

2  The  eight  mentioned  already.  3  Cf.  Taitt.  Araw.  p.  885. 

4  Cf.  Mu;zdaka,  p.  312;  *Santi  Parvan  (Moksha),  chap.  199, 
st.  64  seq.     Immortality = final  emancipation. 

5  P.  165  supra.  6  Of  penance,  that  is  to  say. 

7  Cf.  Gita,  p.  109  for  the  collocation. 

8  Ka/^opanishad,  p.  151;  Maitri,  p.  161.  Sankara  seems  to  take 
the  five  and  the  senses  separately;  the  five  meaning  the  five  classes  of 
sensuous  objects.  9  Past  losses  and  future  gains,  Nilaka^Ma. 


CHAPTER    III,  38.  171 


the  fifth1;  others,  likewise,  are  (masters)  of  four 
Vedas ;  others,  too,  of  three  Vedas ;  others  are 
(masters)  of  two  Vedas,  and  of  one  Veda ;  and 
others  of  no  Veda 2.  Tell  me  which  of  these  is  the 
greatest,  whom  I  may  know  (to  be)  a  Brahma;za. 

Sanatsu£&ta  said: 
Through  ignorance  of  the  one  Veda 3 — the  one 
truth — O  king  of  kings  I  numerous  Vedas  came  into 
existence.  Some 4  only  adhere  to  the  truth.  The 
fancies  of  those  who  have  fallen  away  from  the  truth 
are  abortive,  and  through  ignorance  of  the  truth, 
ceremonies  become  amplified 5.  One  should  under- 
stand a  Brahma/za,  who  (merely)  reads  much,  to  be  a 
man  of  many  words 6.  Know  him  only  to  be  the 
(true)  Br^hma^a,  who  swerves  not  from  the  truth  7. 
O  you  who  are  the  highest  among  men 8 !  the 
iOandas,  indeed,  refer  of  themselves 9  to  it.     There- 

1  Cf.,  as  to  tins,  Max  Miiller's  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature, 
p.  38  seq.;  and -Oandogya,  pp.  164,  474,  493;  Brzhadarawyaka, 
pp.  456,  687,  926 ;  Maitri,  p.  171;  NWsi/raha  Tapini,  p.  105. 

2  The  original  is  '  void  of  JZzks.'  The  commentators  give  no 
explanation.  Does  it  mean  those  who  abandon  thekarma-marga? 
Heretics  who  reject  all  Vedas  are  scarcely  likely  to  be  referred  to  in 
this  way.  Nilaka#//$a's  interpretation  of  all  this  is  very  different. 
See  his  gloss. 

3  /Sahkara  gives  various  interpretations  of  this.  Perhaps  the 
best  is  to  take  it  as  meaning  knowledge.  '  The  one  knowledge — 
the  one  truth' — would  then  be  like  the  famous  text — Taittiriya, 
p.  56 — '  The  Brahman  is  truth,  knowledge,'  &c. 

4  For  this  phrase  cf.  Gita,  p.  73. 

5  Those  who  do  not  understand  the  Brahman  lose  their  natural 
power  of  obtaining  what  they  wish,  and  so  go  in  for  various 
ceremonies  for  various  special  benefits.  Cf.  .Oandogya,  p.  541; 
Gita,  p.  47;  and  p.  184  infra. 

6  Cf.  Brz'hadarawyaka,  p.  893.  7  Ibid.  p.  636. 

8  Literally, '  highest  among  bipeds/  a  rather  unusual  expression. 

9  Nilakaw/^a  says,  '  The  part  of  the  Vedas  which  teaches  the 


1 72  SANATSUGATIYA. 


fore,  studying  them,  the  learned  persons  who  under- 
stand the  A^andas,  attain  to  the  Veda,  not  that 
which  is  to  be  known 1.  Among  the  Vedas,  there 
is  none  which  understands 2.  By  the  unintelligent 3, 
one  understands  not  the  Veda,  nor  the  object  of 
knowledge4.  He  who  knows  the  Veda  knows  the 
object  of  knowledge.  He  who  knows  the  object  of 
knowledge5  knows  not  the  truth.  He  who  under- 
stands the  Vedas  understands  also  the  object  of 
knowledge ;  but  that 6  is  not  understood  by  the  Vedas 
or  by  those  who  understand  the  Vedas.  Still  the 
Brahma/zas  who  understand  the  Vedas,  understand 
the  Veda  by  means  of  the  Vedas Y.  As  the  branch 
of  a  tree  with  regard  to  the  part  of  a  portion  of  the 
glorious  8  one,  so,  they  declare,  are  the  Vedas  with 

knowledge  of  the  supreme  is  enough  by  itself  for  its  purpose ; 
it  is  not  like  the  part  about  rites,  &c,  which  rites  must  be  per- 
formed before  they  serve  any  useful  purpose/  The  Gnanakanda 
is  enough  by  itself  for  understanding  the  Brahman.  -Sankara 
compares  Gita,  p.  113,  and  Ka/^a,  p.  102. 

1  The  Veda=the  Brahman,  as  above,  cf.  -Sveta^vatara,  p.  372 
and  commentary  ;  that  which  is  to  be  known  =  the  material  world, 
which  is  a  subject  for  human  knowledge. 

2  Scil.  understands  the  Veda — the  Brahman. 

3  '  The  mind/  says  Nilaka«/Aa ;  literally,  '  that  which  is  to  be 
understood.' 

4  Because  a  real  knowledge  of  it  requires  a  knowledge  of  the 
Brahman.  As  to  the  next  clause  cf.  inter  alia  .Oandogya,  p.  384  ; 
Brzliadara/zyaka,  p.  450. 

5  This  is  the  converse  of  the  last  sentence,  as  to  which  cf. 
Br/hadaraTzyaka,  p.  925. 

6  The  supreme. 

7  The  apparent  contradiction  is  explained  in  the  next  sentence. 

8  I.e.  the  moon.  This  refers  to  the  well-known  ^akha^andra- 
nyaya.  As  the  small  digit  of  the  moon,  which  cannot  be  perceived  by 
itself,  is  pointed  out  as  being  at  the  tip  of  a  branch  of  a  tree  pointing 
towards  the  moon,  so  the  Vedas  are  of  use  as  pointing  towards 
the  Brahman,  though  inaccurately  and  imperfectly. 


CHAPTER    III,    45.  I73 


regard  to  the  subject  of  understanding  the  supreme 
self.  I  understand  him  to  be  a  Brahma;za  who  is 
ingenious,  and  explains 1  (Vedic  texts).  He  who 
apprehends  (those  texts)  thus  2,  does  verily  know 
that  supreme  (principle).  One  should  not  go  in 
search  of  it  among  (things)  antagonistic 3  to  it  at  all. 
Not  looking  (for  him  there)  one  sees  that  Lord  by 
means  of  the  Veda 4.  Remaining  quiet,  one  should 
practise  devotion,  and  should  not  even  form  a  wish 
in  the  mind 5.  To  him  the  Brahman  presents 6 
itself,  and  directly  afterwards  he  attains  to  the 
perfect 7  (one).  By  taciturnity 8,  verily,  does  one 
become  a  sage ;  (one  does)  not  (become)  a  sage  by 
dwelling  in  a  forest 9.  And  he  is  called  the  highest 
sage,  who  understands  that  indestructible  (principle). 
One  is  called  an  analyser 10  (also)  in  consequence  of 

1  Scil.  in  the  manner  just  indicated. 

2  As  giving  an  idea  of  the  Brahman.  The  first  step  to  a 
knowledge  of  the  Brahman  is  to  '  hear '  about  it  from  Vedic  texts. 
Cf.  Brz'hadara/zyaka,  p.  925. 

3  Such  as  the  body,  the  senses,  &c,  which  must  be  distinguished  as 
quite  distinct  from  the  self,  though  most  often  confounded  with  it. 

4  Such  passages,  namely,  as '  Thou  art  that,  I  am  the  Brahman/  &c. 

5  About  the  objects  of  the  senses. 

6  Cf.  Ka/^a,  p.  155. 

7  Cf.  iTMndogya,  p.  516.  The  Bhuman  there  is  the  same  as 
the  Bahu  here,  viz.  the  Brahman.  -Sarikara  says  expressly  in  his 
comment  on  the  Upanishad  text,  that  Bahu  and  Bhuman,  among 
other  words,  are  synonyms. 

8  Self-restraint,  as  explained  before  at  p.  163. 

9  Though  this  is  not  unimportant,  as  may  be  seen  from  the 
contrast  between  town  and  forest  at  .A^andogya,  p.  340.  See  also 
Maitrt,  p.  100;  Mu^aka,  p.  240.  As  to  the  'highest  sage/  see 
BnTiadarawyaka,  p.  899,  where  the  passage  about  '  sacrifice,  gift, 
penance'  should  be  compared  with  Gita,  p.  122. 

10  The  construction  in  the  original  is  not  quite  clear.  I  under- 
stand the  sense  to  be  as  follows  :   In  the  science  of  the  soul,  the 


1 74  SANATSUGATIYA. 


analysing  all  objects.  The  analysis  (is)  from  that 
as  the  root ;  and  as  he  makes  (such  an)  analysis, 
hence  is  he  so  (called).  The  man  who  sees  the 
worlds  directly  sees  everything1.  A  Brahma/za, 
verily,  adhering  to  the  truth,  understands  it,  and 
becomes  omniscient.  I  say  to  you,  O  learned  person! 
that  adhering  to  knowledge  and  the  rest 2  in  this 
way,  one  sees  the  Brahman,  O  Kshatriya!  by  means 
of  a  course  (of  study)  in  the  Vedas  3. 


Chapter  IV. 

Dhretardsh/ra  said : 
O    Sanatsu^ata !    since   you    have  spoken    these 
words  of  highest  significance,  relating  to  the  Brah- 
man, and  of  numerous  forms  4,  give  me  that  advice 
which    is    excellent,   and   difficult  to    obtain  in  the 

analyser  (the  word  is  the  same  as  the  word  for  grammarian)  is  he 
who  analyses  objects,  not  words  merely.  Now  the  true  analysis 
of  objects  reduces  them  all  to  the  Brahman  (cf.  A^andogya,  p.  407  ; 
Brz'hadarawyaka,  p.  152);  and  the  sage  understands  this,  and  makes 
the  analysis  accordingly,  so  he  is  rightly  called  an  analyser. 

1  This  again  is  not  clear,  and  the  discrepancies  of  the  MSS. 
make  it  more  perplexing.  The  meaning,  I  take  to  be,  that  a  man 
may  perceive  all  material  things,  such  as  the  worlds,  Bhur,  &c. 
(as  the  commentators  put  it),  but  to  be  really  omniscient,  you  must 
have  knowledge  of  the  truth — the  Brahman.  See  Sabha  Parvan, 
chapter  V,  stanza  7.     And  see,  too,  Bn'hadara/zyaka,  p.  613. 

2  P.  167  supra. 

3  '  Hearing  the  Vedantas — Upanishads/  &c,  says  ^ahkara.  See 
note  2  supra,  p.  173. 

4  Does  this  mean  referring  to  many  aspects  of  the  Brahman  ? 
Sahkara  merely  says  nanarupa.  Nilaka#//$a  takes  it  differently, 
and  as  meaning  that  in  which  everything  is  elucidated ;  '  relating 
to  the  Brahman '  Nilakaw/^a  takes  to  mean  '  leading  to  the  Brah- 
man,' or  'instrument  for  attaining  to  the  Brahman.' 


CHAPTER    IV,  5.  175 


midst  of  these  created  objects1.    Such  is  my  request, 
O  youth  ! 

Sanatsu^ata  said: 

This  Brahman,  O  king !  about  which  you  question 
me  with  such  perseverance,  is  not  to  be  attained  by 
anybody  who  is  in  a  hurry.  When  the  mind  is  ab- 
sorbed in  the  understanding2,  then  can  that  know- 
ledge, which  must  be  deeply  pondered  over,  be 
attained  by  living  the  life  of  a  BrahmaMrin  3.  For 
you  are  speaking  of  that  primordial  knowledge4, 
which  consists  in  the  truth ;  which  is  obtained  by 
the  good  by  living  the  life  of  Brahma^arins5;  which 
being  obtained,  men  cast  off  this  mortal  world ;  and 
which  knowledge,  verily,  is  to  be  invariably  (found) 
in  those  who  have  been  brought  up  under  pre- 
ceptors 6. 

Dhretardsh/ra  said  : 

Since  that  knowledge  is  capable  of  being  truly 
acquired  by  living  the  life  of  a  Brahma^arin,  there- 
fore tell  me,  O  Brahma^a !  of  what  description  the 
life  of  a  Brahma/^arin  is  7. 

Sanatsu^ata  said  : 
Those  who  entering  (as  it  were)  the  womb 8  of  a 

1  In  this  material  world,  the  highest  knowledge  is  not  to  be  got. 
Cf.  Ka/$a,  p.  96. 

2  I.  e.  withdrawn  from  objects  and  fixed  on  the  self  only.  Cf. 
Gita,  p.  79,  and  Maitri,  p.  179,  where,  however,  we  have  hrz'd  for 
buddhi. 

3  Viro/£ana  and  Indra  do  so  according  to  the  iTMndogya,  p.  570. 
See  also  MuWaka,  p.  311. 

4  The  object  of  which  is  the  primal  Brahman. 

5  Cf.  -Oandogya,  p.  534  ;  and  Gita,  pp.  78,  79,  and  the  passage 
from  the  Ka/^a  there  cited. 

6  .ATMndogya,  pp.  264-459.  7  See  .Oandogya,  p,  553  seq. 
8  I.  e.  attending  closely  upon  him ;  foetus = pupil. 


1 76  SANATSUGATIYA. 


preceptor,  and  becoming  (as  it  were)  a  foetus,  prac- 
tise the  life  of  Brahmaiarins,  become  even  in  this 
world  authors  of  vSastras1,  and  they  repair  to  the 
highest  truth2  after  casting  off  (this)  body.  They 
subjugate  desires  here  in  this  world,  practising  for- 
bearance in  pursuit  of  the  Brahmic  state  3 ;  and  with 
courage,  they  even  here  remove  the  self  out  of  the 
body  4,  like  the  soft  fibres  from  the  Mun^a.  Father 
and  mother,  O  descendant  of  Bharata!  only  form 
the  body.  But  the  birth 5  obtained  from  the  pre- 
ceptor, that  verily  is  true  6,  and  likewise  immortal. 
He  perfects  7  (one),  giving  (one)  immortality.  Re- 
cognising what  he  has  done  (for  one),  one  should 
not  injure  him.  The  disciple  should  always  make 
obeisance  to  the  preceptor8;  and,  free  from  heedless- 
ness, should  always  desire  sacred  instruction.  When 
the  pure  man  obtains  knowledge  by  this  same 
course  of  discipleship 9,  that  is  the  first  quarter  of 
his    life    as    a    Brahma^arin.      As   (is)   his    conduct 


1  Learned,  men  of  knowledge,  -Sankara. 

2  The  supreme,  which  is  described  as  '  truth,  knowledge/  &c. 
In  our  ancient  works  the  truth  often  means  the  real. 

3  The  state  of  being  absorbed  in  the  Brahman.     Cf.  GM,  p.  52. 

4  Cf.  Ka/^a,  p.  158. 

5  iSankara  cites  Apastamba  (p.  1 1)  in  support  of  this,  and  Prajna- 
upanishad,  p.  256.  The  consciousness  of  being  one  with  the 
Brahman  is  a  new  birth.     See,  too,  Mundaka,  p.  282. 

6  That  birth  is  not  merely  delusive,  and  does  not  result  in  death. 
?  Immortality  or  final  emancipation  is  not  to  be  achieved  without 

knowledge,  which  can  only  be  got  from  a  preceptor.  And  one  is 
not  perfect  without  that  immortality ;  one  is  limited  by  the  con- 
ditions of  human  existence.     See  Nirukta  (Roth's  ed.),  p.  41. 

8  *Sankara  compares  *Sveta\yvatara,  p.  374.  The  necessity  of  having 
a  Guru  is  often  insisted  on  even  in  the  Upanishads.  Cf.  Mu/zdaka, 
p.  282  ;  .Oandogya,  p.  264. 

9  Stated  at  the  beginning  of  this  speech,  *Sahkara. 


CHAPTER    IV,   14.  177 


always  towards  his  preceptor,  so  likewise  should  he 
behave  towards  the  preceptor's  wife,  and  so  likewise 
should  he  act  towards  the  preceptor  s  son — (that)  is 
said  to  be  the  second  quarter.  What  one,  recog- 
nising what  the  preceptor  has  done  for  one,  and 
understanding  the  matter1  (taught),  feels  with  a 
delighted  heart  regarding  the  preceptor — believing 
that  one  has  been  brought  into  existence 2  by  him — 
that  is  the  third  quarter  of  life  as  a  BrahmaMrin. 
One  should  do  what  is  agreeable  to  the  preceptor, 
by  means  of  one's  life  and  riches,  and  in  deed, 
thought,  and  word 3 — that  is  said  to  be  the  fourth 
quarter.  (A  disciple)  obtains  a  quarter  by  time4, 
so  likewise  a  quarter  by  associating  with  the  pre- 
ceptor, he  also  obtains  a  quarter  by  means  of  his 
own  energy;  and  then  he  attains  to  a  quarter  by 
means  of  the  .Sastras.  The  life  as  a  Brahmaiarin 
of  that  man,  whose  beauty 5  consists  in  the  twelve 
beginning  with  knowledge,  and  whose  limbs  are 
the  other  (qualifications  mentioned),  and  who   has 

1  The  meaning  of  the  Vedic  texts,  &c,  *Sankara  in  one  copy ; 
the  highest  aim  of  man,  according  to  another  copy. 

2  See  note  5  on  p.  176. 

8  I  keep  the  order  of  the  original,  though  I  do  not  translate 
quite  literally;  'thought  and  word'  should  be  literally  'mind  and 
speech/     See,  on  the  collocation,  Gita,  p.  123  inter  alia. 

4  Time = maturity  of  understanding  which  comes  by  time; 
energy = intellectual  power;  Sastras  =  consultation  about  -Sastras 
with  fellow-students — -Sankara,  who  adds  that  the  order  is  not 
material  as  stated,  and  quotes  a  stanza  which  may  be  thus  ren- 
dered, 'The  pupil  receives  a  quarter  from  the  preceptor,  a 
quarter  by  his  own  talent ;  he  receives  a  quarter  by  time ;  and 
a  quarter  through  fellow-BrahmaMrins. 

5  The  body  being  disregarded,  these  qualities  are  attributed  to 
the  self  in  this  way.  For  the  twelve,  see  p.  167;  the  others  are 
abandonment,  truthfulness,  &c,  p.  169. 

[8]  N 


1 78  SANATSUGATIYA. 


strength  *,  bears  fruit,  they  say,  by  association  with 
a  preceptor,  in  (the  shape  of)  contact  with  that  entity 
— the  Brahman.  Whatever  wealth  may  come  to  a 
man  who  lives  in  this  way,  he  should  even  pay  that 
over  to  the  preceptor.  He  would  thus  be  adopting 
the  conduct  of  the  good  which  is  of  many  merits ; 
and  the  same  conduct  is  (to  be  adopted)  towards  the 
preceptors  son.  Living  thus,  he  prospers  greatly2 
on  all  sides  in  this  world ;  he  obtains  sons  and 
position ;  the  quarters 3  and  sub-quarters  shower 
(benefits4)  on  him,  and  men  pass  their  lives  as 
Brahmaiarins  under  him.  By  this  life  as  a  Brah- 
maMrin,  the  divinities  obtained  their  divinity.  And 
the  sages,  too,  became  great  by  living  the  life  of 
Brahma/§arins.  By  this  same  (means),  too,  the  Apsa- 
rasas,  together  with  the  Gandharvas,  achieved  for 
themselves  beautiful  forms.  And  by  this  life  as  a 
Brahmaiarin,  the  sun  illuminates  (the  universe). 
That  man  of  knowledge,  O  king!  who  practising 
penance,  may  by  penance  pierce  through  or  tear  off 
his  body,  crosses  beyond  childhood5  by  means  of  this 
(life  as  a  BrahmaMrin),  and  at  the  time  of  the 
termination  (of  life)  obstructs  death  6.  Those  who 
understand  this  (life  as  a  Brahma/£arin)  attain  to  a 

1  To  observe  the  duties  referred  to,  -Sahkara.  But  see,  too,  p.  167, 
note  6. 

2  '  Obtains  wealth,  learning,  and  greatness,'  says  a  commentator. 
For  similar  benefits,  cf.  .O&ndogya,  p.  122. 

3  Cf.  .Ajfcandogya,  p.  132. 

4  '  Wealth/  says  Nilaka^a,  as  well  as  another  commentator. 

5  Ignorance;  cf.  note  7  at  p.  154  supra.  Nilakaw/^a  reads 
'reaches'  instead  of  '  crosses  beyond/  and  interprets  'balya'  to 
mean  '  freedom  from  affection,  aversion/  &c.  Cf.  Br/"hadara«yaka, 
p.  605.    As  to  the  divinity  of  divinities,  cf.  Taitt.  Ara#.  p.  886. 

6  Nilaka«//£a  reads  i  vanquishes  death/  The  meaning  is,  he 
reaches  final  emancipation,    Cf.  p.  154  supra. 


CHAPTER   IV,  21.  I  79 


condition  like  that  of  those  who  ask  (for  what  they 
want)  from  the  wish-giving  stone1,  when  they  obtain 
the  thing  desired.  By  performing  action,  O  Ksha- 
triya !  people  conquer  (for  themselves  only)  perish- 
able worlds 2.  (But)  the  man  of  understanding 
attains  by  knowledge  to  the  everlasting  glory — for 
there  is  no  other  way  to  it 3. 

Dhrztarash/ra  said : 

Where  a  Br&hma^a  possessed  of  knowledge,  per- 
ceives it,  does  it  appear  as  white  4,  as  red,  or  again 
as  black,  or  again  as  grey  or  tawny  ?  What  is  the 
colour  of  that  immortal,  indestructible  goal  ? 

Sanatsu^ata  said : 

It  appears  not  as  white,  as  red,  nor  again  as  black, 
nor  again  as  grey,  nor  tawny5.  It  dwells  not  on 
earth,  nor  in  the  sky ;  nor  does  it  bear  a  body  in  this 
ocean6  (-like  world).  It  is  not  in  the  stars,  nor 
does  it  dwell  in  the  lightning ;  nor  is  its  form  7  to  be 
seen  in  the  clouds,  nor  even  in  the  air,  nor  in  the 
deities ;  it  is  not  to  be  seen  in  the  moon,  nor  in  the 
sun.     It   is    not   to   be  seen  in  Rik  texts,  nor   in 

1  Called  iTintamam.  The  effect  of  Brahma&irya  is  that  those 
who  practise  it  can  get  what  they  desire. 

2  Cf.  Gita,  p.  76  ;  .ATMndogya,  p.  538;  Mu^aka,  p.  279. 

8  Cf.  *SVeta\rvatara,  p.  327.  4  Cf.  Br/hadarawyaka,  p.  877. 

5  Cf.  Ka/^a,  p.  119  ;  and  MuWaka,  p.  267.  As  to  its  not  dwell- 
ing in  earth,  sky,  &c,  -Sahkara  refers  to  ^^andogya,  p.  518,  as 
implying  that. 

6  Literally, '  it  bears  no  water  in  the  ocean/  l  Water '  is  said  by 
the  commentators  to  mean  the  five  elements  of  which  the  body  is 
composed.  See  Manu  I,  5,  and  .Oandogya,  p.  330.  In  the  *SVeta- 
jvatara  it  signifies  mind  (see  p.  388).  For  ocean  meaning  world,  or 
sa#zsara;  cf.  Aitareya-upanishad,  p.  182. 

7  Here  I  do  not  render  rupa  by  colour,  as  before. 

N    2 


1 80  SANATSUGATIYA. 


Ya^iis  texts ;  nor  yet  in  the  Atharvan  texts,  nor  in 
the  pure  Saman  texts ;  nor  yet,  O  king,  in  the 
Rathantara  or  Brzhadratha1  hymns.  It  is  seen  in 
the  self  of  a  man  of  high  vows2.  It  is  invincible, 
beyond  darkness 3,  it  comes  forth  from  within 4  at 
the  time  of  destruction.  Its  form  is  minuter  than 
the  minutest  (things),  its  form  is  larger  even  than 
the  mountains5.  That  is  the  support6  (of  the  uni- 
verse) ;  that  is  immortal ;  (that  is)  all  things  percep- 
tible7. That  is  the  Brahman,  that  is  glory8.  From 
that  all  entities  were  produced9,  in  that  they  are 
dissolved.  All  this  shines  forth  as  dwelling  in  it  in 
the  form  of  light 10.  And  it  is  perceived  by  means 
of  knowledge11  by  one  who  understands  the  self; 
on  it  depends  this  whole  universe.  Those  who 
understand  this  become  immortal. 


1  See  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  vol.  i,  p.  16  ;  Ta^ya-brahmawa, 
p.  838;  Gitd,  p.  90;  and  Kaushitaki,  p.  21.  Br/hadratha=Brihat- 
saman  (?). 

2  The  twelve  great  vows — knowledge,  &c,  mentioned  above, 
see  p.  167.  Nilaka«//&a  takes  Mahavrata  to  refer  to  the  sacrifice 
of  that  name.     It  is  described  in  the  Aitareya  Arawyaka. 

3  See  Gita,  p.  78,  note  4. 

4  Cf.  Gita,  p.  82,  and  tropanishad,  p.  12. 

5  See  Gita,  p.  78,  note  3. 

6  Cf.  Gita,  p.  113 ;  Ka/^a  p.  99. 

7  So  Nilaka^a.     The  original  word  ordinarily  means  '  worlds/ 

8  Cf.  *SVeta\rvatara,  p.  347. 

9  Cf.  the  famous  passage  in  the  Taittiriya,  p.  123:  and  also 
MuWaka,  p.  289. 

10  The  explanations  of  the  commentators  are  not  quite  clear 
as  to  the  word  ahna, '  in  the  form  of  light/  Probably  the  meaning 
is  :  The  universe  depends  on  the  Brahman,  and  is,  as  it  were,  the 
light  of  the  Brahman.  *Sahkara  compares  the  passages  referred  to 
at  Gita4,  p.  112,  note  1. 

11  'Not  by  means  of  action/  says  Sahkara. 


CHAPTER   V,  3.  l8l 


Chapter  V1. 

Grief  and  wrath,  and  avarice,  desire,  delusion, 
laziness,  want  of  forgiveness,  vanity,  craving,  friend- 
ship2, censoriousness,  and  reviling  others — these 
twelve  great  enormities  are  destructive  of  a  man's 
life.  These,  O  king  of  kings !  attend  on  each  and 
every  man.  Beset  by  these,  a  man,  deluded  in  his 
understanding,  acts  sinfully.  A  man  full  of  at- 
tachments, merciless,  harsh  (of  speech),  talkative, 
cherishing  wrath  in  his  heart,  and  boastful — these 
are  the  men  of  cruel  qualities ;  (such)  persons,  even 
obtaining     wealth,     do     not    always     enjoy     (it)3. 

1  The  whole  of  this  chapter  is  wanting  in  one  of  our  copies 
of  Sarikara's  commentary.  In  the  copy  published  in  the  MaM- 
bharata  (Madras  edition)  there  is,  however,  this  passage  :  '  Wrath 
&c.  have  been  already  explained,  still  there  are  some  differences 
here  and  there,  and  those  only  are  now  explained.7  The  chapter 
is  for  the  most  part  a  repetition  of  what  we  have  already  had. 
For  such  repetitions  cf.  Brz'hadarawyaka,  pp.  31 7-1 01 6;  444-930. 
The  same  copy  of  *Sahkara's  commentary  gives  this  general  state- 
ment of  the  object  of  this  and  the  next  chapter:  'The  course  of  study 
of  the  science  of  the  Brahman,  in  which  knowledge  is  the  principal 
thing,  and  concentration  of  mind  &c.  are  subsidiary,  has  been 
described.  Now  is  described  the  course  of  study  in  which 
concentration  of  mind  is  principal,  and  knowledge  subsidiary. 
The  first  mode  consists  in  understanding  the  meaning  of  the 
word  "  you  "  by  means  of  concentration  of  mind,  and  then  identify- 
ing it  with  the  Brahman  by  means  of  a  study  of  the  Upanishads ; 
the  second,  in  first  intellectually  understanding  the  identity  of  the 
individual  self  and  Brahman,  by  such  study  of  the  Upanishads, 
and  then  realising  the  identity  to  consciousness  by  con- 
templation, &c.  In  both  modes  the  fruit  is  the  same,  and  the 
means  are  the  same;  and  to  show  this,  the  merits  and  defects 
already  stated  are  here  again  declared/  This  explanation  is 
verbatim  the  same  in  Nilaka^Ma's  commentary. 

2  The  original  is  'pity/  which  is  explained  to  mean  'friend- 
ship '  by  »Sahkara  and  Nilaka«/^a. 

3  '  Owing  to  there  being  in  it  no  enjoyment  for  the  self/  says  one 


1 8  2  SANATSUGATIYA. 


One  whose  thoughts  are  fixed  on  enjoyments,  who 
is  partial  19  proud 2,  boastful  when  he  makes  a  gift, 
miserly,  and  devoid  of  power3,  who  esteems  the 
group  (of  the  senses),  and  who  hates  (his)  wife — 
thus  have  been  stated  the  seven  (classes  of)  cruel 
persons  of  sinful  dispositions.  Piety,  and  truthful- 
Jness,  and  penance,  and  self-restraint,  freedom  from 
animosity,  modesty,  endurance,  freedom  from  cen- 
soriousness,  liberality,  sacred  learning,  courage,  for- 
giveness— these  are  the  twelve  great  observances  of 
a  Brcihma/za.  Whoever  does  not  swerve  from  these 
twelve  may  govern  this  whole  world.  And  one 
who  is  possessed  of  three,  two,  or  even  one,  of  these, 
must  be  understood  to  have  nothing  of  his  own4* 
V  Self-restraint,  abandonment,  freedom  from  delusion, 
on  these  immortality  depends 5.  These  are  possessed 
by  those  talented  Brahma/zas  to  whom  the  Brahman 
is  the  principal 6  (thing).  A  Brahma^a's  speaking  ill 
of  others,  whether  true  or  false,  is  not  commended. 

copy  of  -Sankara's  commentary.  Another  reading,  which  is  in  the 
Madras  edition  and  in  Nilaka#/#a,  may  be  rendered, '  even  obtaining 
benefits,  they  do  not  respect  one  (from  whom  they  obtain  them)., 

1  The  commentary  says  the  meaning  is  the  same  as  that  of  the 
expression  used  in  the  corresponding  place  before,  viz.  one  who 
prospers  by  injuring  others. 

2  One  copy  of  *Sarikara's  commentary  takes  this  to  mean  one 
who  thinks  the  not-self  to  be  the  self.  I  adopt  the  other  meaning, 
however,  as  agreeing  with  that  of  atimani,  which  is  the  reading 
of  some  copies  instead  of  abhimani. 

3  Nilaka«/y$a  reads  durbala  and  does  not  explain  it.    See  p.  167. 

4  One  commentator  says  this  means  that  he  should  not  be 
supposed  to  have  incurred  the  demerit  of  having  any  attachment 
to  this  world.  Nilaka#//$a  says,  he  gives  up  everything  in  the 
pursuit  of  even  one  of  these  observances. 

5  See  p.  168. 

6  I.  e.  the  goal  to  be  reached.  The  commentary  takes  Brahman 
to  mean  the  Vedas,  and  the  whole  phrase  to  mean  those  who  devote 
themselves  to  the  performance  of  actions  stated  in  the  Yedas. 


CHAPTER   V,   13.  T83 


The  men  who  act  thus  have  their  places  in  hell 
Frenzy  has  eighteen  defects — as  already  describe 
here — hatred  of  men,  factiousness1,  censoriousness, 
untruthful  speech,  lust,  wrath,  want  of  self-control 2, 
speaking  ill  of  others,  backbiting,  mismanagement 
in  business 3,  quarrelsomeness,  animosity,  troubling- 
living  creatures,  want  of  forgiveness,  delusion,  flip- 
pancy, loss  of  reason 4,  censoriousness 5 ;  therefore 
a  wise  man  should  not  be  subject  to  frenzy,  for  it 
is  always  censured.  Six  characteristics  should  be 
understood  as  (belonging)  to  friendship  —  that  one 
should  rejoice  at  (anything)  agreeable ;  and  feel 
grieved  at  (anything)  disagreeable ;  that  with  a 
pure  heart  one,  when  asked  by  a  deserving  (man), 
should  give  to  him  who  asks  what  can6  certainly 
be  given,  (though  it)  may  be  beneficial  to  oneself, 
and  even  though  it  ought  not  to  be  asked,  (namely) 
one's  favourites,  sons,  wealth,  and  one's  own  wife ; 
that  one  should  not  dwell  there  where  one  has  be- 
stowed (all  one's)  wealth,  through  a  desire  (to  get  a 
return  for  one's  liberality) ;  that  one  should  enjoy  (the 

1  One  copy  of  xSankara's  commentary  says  this  means  *  obstruct- 
ing other  people's  acts  of  piety/  &c. 

2  One  copy  of  -Sahkara's  commentary  says  this  means  '  being 
given  up  to  intoxicating  drinks/  &c. ;  another  copy  says,  '  doing 
another's  bidding  without  thought.' 

3  One  copy  says  this  means  'inattention  to  any  work  undertaken ;' 
another  renders  the  original  by 'destruction  of  property,  i.e.  squan- 
dering it  on  dancers/  &c. 

4  I.  e.  discrimination  between  right  and  wrong. 

5  This  seems  to  be  some  error,  for  'censoriousness'  has  occurred 
before.  But  neither  the  texts  nor  the  commentaries  give  any  help 
to  correct  the  error.  Perhaps  the  latter  is  to  be  distinguished  as 
referring  to  the  habit,  and  the  former  only  to  sporadic  acts,  of 
censoriousness.  These  qualities,  I  presume,  constitute  frenzy ;  they 
are  not  the  '  defects/ 

6  I.  e.  where  the  power  to  give  exists. 


1 84  SANATSUGATIYA. 


fruit  of  one  s 1  own)  toils  (only) ;  and  that  one  should 
forego  one's  own  profit2.  Such  a  man,  possessed  of 
wealth,  and  possessed  of  merits,  is  a  liberal  man  of 
the  quality  of  goodness 3 ;  such  a  one  diverts  the 
five  elements  from  the  five 4  (senses).  This 5  pure 
penance,  acquired  out  of  desire 6  by  those  who  are 
fallen  off  from  the  truth,  even  though  developed, 
leads  upwards 7 ;  since  sacrifices  are  performed 
owing  to  a  misapprehension  of  the  truth 8.     (The 

1  Not  a  friend's.  2  For  a  friend.  3  See  GM,  p.  120. 

4  The  commentators  take  this  to  mean  objects  of  sense,  and 
they  interpret  '  elements '  before  to  mean  senses. 

5  '  Viz.  the  turning  away  of  the  senses  from  their  objects/  says 
one  copy  of  -Sarikara. 

6  Scil.  to  enjoy  the  higher  enjoyments  of  superior  worlds. 

7  I.  e.  to  the  higher  worlds ;  it  does  not  lead  to  emancipation  here. 

8  Cf.  Mu«*/aka,  p.  277.  I  must  own  that  I  do  not  quite  under- 
stand this  passage,  nor  its  explanation  as  given  in  the  commentaries. 
I  do  not  quite  see  what  the  penance  here  mentioned  has  to  do 
with  sacrifice,  and  yet  the  commentators  seem  to  take  the  words 
*  since  sacrifices/  &c,  with  what  precedes  them,  not  with  what 
follows.  Taking  them,  however,  with  what  follows,  it  is  difficult  to 
explain  the  word  i  since/  As  far  as  I  can  understand  the  passage 
I  take  the  sense  of  it  to  be  as  follows :  The  author  having  said  that 
penance  performed  out  of  a  particular  motive  does  not  lead  to 
final  emancipation,  he  then  proceeds  to  point  out  that  all  '  action ' 
or  'sacrifice'  is  due  to  an  imperfect  understanding  of  the  truth  (cf. 
p.  171  supra),  being  mostly  due  to  some  particular  motive.  Then 
he  goes  on  to  show  the  different  classes  of  sacrifice,  and  finally 
points  out  that  he  who  is  free  from  desires  is  superior  to  one  who 
is  actuated  by  desires.  The  original  for  'misapprehension'  is  ava- 
bodha,  which  commonly  means  '  apprehension/  but  -Sarikara  finally 
makes  it  mean  moha  or '  delusion/  The  original  for  truth  is  rendered 
by  Nilaka^a  to  mean  '  fancies/  Nilaka^/^a  says  that  the  sacrifice 
by  the  mind  is  the  highest ;  that  by  speech,  viz.  Brahmaya^na, 
<2apa,  &c.,  is  middling ;  and  that  by  deed,  viz.  with  clarified  butter 
and  other  offerings,  of  the  lowest  class.  'Perfected  by  fancies '= 
one  whose  fancies  are  always  fulfilled  'through  a  knowledge/ 
says  Nilaka/2/$a, '  of  the  Brahma  as  possessing  qualities/ 


CHAPTER   V,  21.  185 


sacrifices)  of  some  are  by  the  mind,  of  others  by 
speech,  and  also  by  deed.  The  man  void  of  fancies 
takes  precedence  over  the  man  perfected  by  fancies, 
— especially  among  Brihma/zas  \  And  hear  this 
further  from  me.  One  should  teach  this  great  and 
glorious  2  (doctrine) ;  (other  doctrines)  the  wise  call 
mere  arrangements  of  words.  On  this  concentration 
of  mind 3,  all  this  4  depends.  Those  who  know  this 
become  immortal.  Not  by  meritorious  action  only, 
O  king !  does  one  conquer  the  truth 5.  One  may  offer 
offerings,  or  sacrifice.  By  that  the  child(-like  man) 
does  not  cross  beyond  death ;  nor,  O  king !  does  he 
obtain  happiness  in  his  last  moments 6.  One  should 
practise  devotion  quietly,  and  should  not  be  active 
even  in  the  mind 7 ;  and  then  one  should  avoid 
delight  and  wrath  (resulting)  from  praise  and  cen- 
sure 8.  I  say  to  you,  O  learned  person  !  that 
adhering  to  this9,  one  attains  the  Brahman  and 
perceives  it,  O  Kshatriya !  by  a  course  (of  study) 
of  the  Vedas. 

1  This  also  is  far  from  clear.  Should  it  be,  '  and  a  Brahmarca 
more  especially  ? '  This  might  be  taken  as  referring  to  one  who 
knows  the  Brahman  as  devoid  of  qualities,  as  Nilakaw/^a  does  take 
it.     But  his  construction  is  not  quite  clear. 

2  As  serviceable  in  attaining  to '  the  glory/  the  Brahman;  see  p.  1 80. 

3  See  note  1  at  p.  181.  As  to  'arrangements  of  words/  cf. 
Maitri,  p.  179. 

4  '  Everything/  says  one  copy  of  ^Sahkara's  commentary ;  '  all  that 
is  good  and  desirable/  says  another. 

5  Cf.  inter  alia,  Muw^aka,  pp.  281-314. 

6  For  he  has  got  to  undergo  migration  from  one  life  to  another 
as  the  result  of  the  action.  Cf.  Brz'hadarawyaka,  p.  856;  Mu^aka, 
p.  278. 

7  Cf.  Gita,  p.  70.  8  Ibid.  pp.  101-110. 

9  I.  e.  the  yoga  or  concentration  of  mind  here  described.  This 
stanza,  like  many  others  in  this  chapter,  occurs  in  chapter  III  with 
slight  variations. 


1 8  6  S  AN  ATSU  G  ATI  YA. 


Chapter  VI. 

That  pure  1)  great  light 2,  which  is  radiant ;  that 
great  glory3;  that,  verily,  which  the  gods  worship4; 
that  by  means  of  which  the  sun  shines  forth 5 — 
that  eternal  divine  being  is  perceived  by  devotees. 
From  (that)  pure  (principle)  the  Brahman  6  is  pro- 
duced ;  by  (that)  pure  (principle)  the  Brahman  is 
developed 7 ;  that  pure  (principle),  not  illumined 
among  all  radiant  (bodies),  is  (itself)  luminous  and 
illuminates  (them)8.  That  eternal  divine  being  is 
perceived  by  devotees.  The  perfect  is  raised  out 
of  the  perfect  It  (being  raised)  out  of  the  perfect 
is  called  the  perfect.  The  perfect  is  withdrawn 
from  the  perfect,  and  the  perfect  only  remains 9. 
That  eternal  divine  being  is  perceived  by  devotees. 

1  Free  from  ignorance  and  other  taints.     See  Ka/$a,  p.  144. 

2  -Sankara  compares  KaMa,  p.  142.  See,  too,  Muwdaka,  p.  303  ; 
and  note  4  infra. 

3  *Sveta\yvatara,  p.  347,  and  p.  180  supra. 

4  -Sankara  refers  to  Brz'hadara/zyaka,  p.  887. 

5  Cf.  Gita,  p.  112,  note  1. 

6  '  Named  Hirawyagarbha/  -Sahkara.  Cf.  Gitd,  p.  107 ;  »SVeta\rva- 
tara,  p.  354;  Mu/zdaka,  p.  309;  Maitri,  p.  130;  Taitt.  Ara#.  p.  894. 

7  '  In  the  form  of  Vira^/  says  -Sankara.  As  to  these  two,  cf. 
Mu^aka,  pp.  270-272;  and  /Sankara's  and  Anandagiri's  notes 
there.  See  also  £Veta\rvatara,  pp.  324,  325  ;  and  NWsi/#ha  Tapini, 
PP-  233,  234  ;  Colebrooke,  Essays,  pp.  344,  368  (Madras  reprint). 
The  Virag  corresponds  rather  to  the  gross  material  world  viewed  as 
a  whole  ;  the  Hira^yagarbha  to  the  subtle  elements  similarly  viewed, 
an  earlier  stage  in  the  development.     Cf.  the  Vedantasara. 

8  Cf.  Mu/z^aka,  p.  303,  and  Gita,  p.  112. 

9  The  individual  self  is  part  of  the  supreme  (Gita,  p.  1 12);  perfect 
=  not  limited  by  space,  time,  &c. ;  as  being  part  of  a  thing  perfect 
in  its  essence,  the  individual  soul  also  is  perfect.  The  individual 
self  is  withdrawn  from  the  perfect,  viz.  the  whole  aggregate  of  body, 
senses,  &c.  presided  over  by  the  self,  and  when  so  withdrawn  it 
appears  to  be  the  pure  self  only.     Cf.  B/Vhadara«yaka,  p.  948. 


CHAPTER  VI,  6.  187 


(From  the  Brahman),  the  waters1  (are  produced) ;  and 
then  from  the  waters,  the  gross  body.  In  the  space 
within  that2,  dwelt  the  two  divine  (principles).  Both 
enveloping  the  quarters  and  sub-quarters,  support 
earth  and  heaven3.  That  eternal  divine  being  is 
perceived  by  devotees.  The  horse4 (-like  senses) 
lead  towards  heaven  him,  who  is  possessed  of  know- 
ledge and  divine,  (who  is)  free  from  old  age,  and 
who  stands  on  the  wheel  of  this  chariot(-like  body), 
which  is  transient,  but  the  operations  of  which  are 
imperishable5.  That  eternal  divine  being6  is  per- 
ceived by  devotees.  His  form  has  no  parallel 7;  no 
one  sees  him  with  the  eye  8.  Those  who  apprehend 
him  by  means  of  the  understanding,  and  also  the 
mind  and  heart,  become  immortal 9.     That  eternal 

1  'The  five  elements/  says  -Sahkara,  cf.  Aitareya,  p.  189;  and 
for  '  gross  body,'  the  original  is  literally  '  water ; '  see  supra,  p.  179, 
note  6;  and  see,  too,  lyopanishad,  p.  n,  and  *SVeta\rvatara,  p.  368, 
for  different  but  kindred  meanings. 

2  Viz.  the  lotus-like  heart.     Cf.  iTMndogya,  p.  528. 

3  The  two  principles  between  them  pervade  the  universe,  the 
individual  self  being  connected  with  the  material  world,  the  other 
with  heaven;  '  divine'  is,  literally, ( the  brilliant,'  says  ^Sankara,  who 
quotes  Ka/^a,  p.  305,  as  a  parallel  for  the  whole  passage. 

4  Cf.  Ka/^a,  p.  in;  Maitri,  pp.  19-34;  and  Mahabharata  Stri 
Parvan,  chap. VII,  st.  13.  Heaven = the  Brahman  here  (see  Brz'hada- 
ra/zyaka,  p.  876) ;  divine = not  vulgar,  or  unrefined — -Sahkara,  who 
adds  that  though  the  senses  generally  lead  one  to  sensuous  objects, 
they  do  not  do  so  when  under  the  guidance  of  true  knowledge. 

5  The  body  is  perishable,  but  action  done  by  the  self  while  in 
the  body  leaves  its  effect. 

6  To  whom,  namely,  the  man  of  knowledge  goes,  as  before  stated. 

7  Cf.  -SVetajvatara,  p.  347. 

8  Cf.  Ka/^a,  p.  152,  and  comment  there,  where  the  eye  is  said  to 
stand  for  all  the  senses. 

9  Ka//$a,  p.  149;  Svetajvatara,  pp.  346-348,  also  p.  330  (should  it 
be  manisha,  there  instead  of  manviyo  ?).  The  meanings  of  the  three 
words  are  difficult  to  fix  accurately.   -Sankara  varies  in  his  interpre- 


1 88  SANATSUGATIYA. 


divine  being  is  perceived  by  devotees.  The  cur- 
rents of  twelve  collections  \  supported  by  the  Deity, 
regulate  the  honey 2 ;  and  those  who  follow  after  it 
move  about  in  (this)  dangerous  (world).  That 
eternal  divine  being 3  is  perceived  by  devotees. 
The  bee  4  drinks  that  accumulated  honey  for  half 
a  month 5.  The  Lord  created  the  oblation  for  all 
beings 6.  That  eternal  divine  being  is  perceived  by 
devotees.     Those  who  are  devoid  of  wings 7,  coming 

tations.  Probably  the  meaning  he  gives  here  is  the  best.  Mind  and 
understanding  have  been  explained  at  GM,  p.  57.  The  heart  is  the 
place  within,  where  the  self  is  said  to  be,  and  it  may  be  taken  as  indi- 
cating the  self,  the  meaning  would  then  be — a  direct  consciousness  in 
the  self  of  its  unity  with  the  Supreme.   See,  too,  Taitt.  Ararc.  p.  896. 

1  The  five  organs  of  action,  the  five  senses  of  perception,  the 
mind  and  understanding  make  the  twelve. 

2  Each  current  has  its  own  honey  regularly  distributed  to  it 
under  the  supervision  of  the  Deity,  the  Supreme.  Honey = material 
enjoyment.  Cf.  Ka//fca,  p.  126,  where  ^ahkara  renders  it  by  kar- 
maphala,  '  fruit  of  action/ 

3  Who  supervises  the  distribution  as  stated.  Cf .  Ved&nta-sutra 
III,  2,  28-31. 

4  Bhramara,  which  the  commentators  interpret  to  mean  '  one 
who  is  given  to  flying  about — the  individual  self/ 

5  I.  e.  in  one  life  in  respect  of  actions  done  in  a  previous  life. 

6  *Sarikara  says  this  is  in  answer  to  a  possible  difficulty  that 
action  performed  here  cannot  have  its  fruit  in  the  next  world, 
as  the  fruit  is  so  far  removed  in  time  from  the  action.  The 
answer  is,  The  Lord,  the  Supreme,  can  effect  this,  and  taking  his 
existence  into  account  there  is  no  difficulty.  Oblation = food,  &c., 
*Sarikara.  The  meaning  of  the  whole  passage,  which  is  not  very 
clear,  seems  to  be  that  the  Lord  has  arranged  things  so  that  each 
being  receives  some  of  this  honey,  this  food,  which  is  the  fruit 
of  his  own  action.  Then  the  question  arises,  Do  these  beings 
always  continue  taking  the  honey  and  '  migrating,'  or  are  they 
ever  released  ?    That  is  answered  by  the  following  sentence. 

7  ( The  wings  of  knowledge,'  says  -Sahkara,  citing  a  Brahma/za  text, 
'  those,  verily,  who  have  knowledge  are  possessed  of  wings,  those 
who  are  not  possessed  of  knowledge  are  devoid  of  wings/ 


CHAPTER   VI,   IO.  189 


to  the  Ai'vattha  of  golden  leaves1,  there  become 
possessed  of  wings,  and  fly  away  happily2.  That 
eternal  divine  being  3  is  perceived  by  devotees. 
The  upward  life-wind  swallows  up  the  downward 
life-wind;  the  moon  swallows  up  the  upward  life- 
wind;  the  sun  swallows  up  the  moon4;  and  another5 
swallows  up  the  sun.  Moving  about  above  the 
waters,  the  supreme  self 6  does  not  raise  one  leg 7. 
(Should  he  raise)  that,  which  is  always  performing 
sacrifices  8,  there  will  be  no  death,  no  immortality 9. 
That  eternal  divine  being10  is  perceived  by  devotees. 

1  So,  literally ;  Sahkara  explains  '  golden '  to  mean  '  beneficial 
and  pleasant/  by  a  somewhat  fanciful  derivation  of  the  word 
hira^ya.  He  refers  to  Gitd,  p.  in,  about  the  leaves  of  the  As- 
vattha.  Nilakaw/^a  takes  the  leaves  to  be  son,  wife,  &c,  which  are 
'  golden/  attractive  at  first  sight.  '  Coming  to  the  A^vattha/  Sah- 
kara says,  *  means  being  born  as  a  Brahmawa/  &c.  '  Flying  away' 
= obtaining  final  emancipation. 

2  The  'sehV  are  compared  to  birds  in  the  famous  passage  at 
Mu^daka,  p.  306  (also  Svetaxvatara,  p.  337).  See  also  Brzhada- 
rawyaka,  p.  499. 

3  Knowledge  of  whom  leads  to  '  flying  away  happily/ 

4  Cf.  .Oandogya,  p.  441.  Sahkara  says  that  the  author  here  ex- 
plains the  yoga  by  which  the  Supreme  is  to  be  attained.  As  to  the 
life- winds,  cf.  Gita,  p.  61.  'The  moon/  says  Sahkara/ means  the 
mind,  and  the  sun  the  understanding,  as  they  are  the  respective 
deities  of  those  organs'  (cf.  Br/hadarawyaka,  pp.  52 1-542,  and  Aita- 
reya,  p.  187,  where,  however,  the  sun  is  said  to  appertain  to  the  eye). 

5  I.  e.  the  Brahman ;  the  result  is,  one  remains  in  the  condition 
of  being  identified  with  the  Brahman. 

6  Literally,  flamingo.  Cf.  Sveta\rvatara,  pp.  332,  367;  see  also 
p.  289  ;  Maitri,  p.  99  ;  and  the  commentary  on  Svetawatara,  p.  283. 

7  Viz.  the  individual  self,  Sahkara ;  that  is,  as  it  were,  the  bond 
of  connexion  between  the  Supreme  and  the  world.  Cf.  Gita,  p.  1 12. 

8  This  is  the  meaning,  though  the  word  in  the  original  is  RitVig, 
which  in  the  later  literature  only  means  priest. 

9  As  the  whole  of  the  material  world  is  dissolved,  when  the 
self  is  dissevered  from  the  delusion  which  is  the  cause  of  it. 

10  Viz.  who  moves  about  on  the  waters,  as  above  stated. 


1 90  SANATSUGATIYA. 


The  being  which  is  the  inner  self,  and  which  is  of 
the  size  of  a  thumb  *,  is  always  migrating  in  con- 
sequence of  the  connexion  with  the  subtle  body2. 
The  deluded  ones  do  not  perceive  that  praiseworthy 
lord,  primeval  and  radiant,  and  possessed  of  creative 
power 3.  That  eternal  divine  being  is  perceived  by 
devotees.  Leading  mortals  to  destruction  by  their 
own  action4,  they  conceal  themselves  like  serpents 
in  secret  recesses 5.  The  deluded  men  then  become 
more  deluded  6.  The  enjoyments  afforded  by  them 
cause  delusion,  and  lead  to  worldly  life 7.  That 
eternal  divine  being8  is  perceived  by  devotees. 
This 9  seems  to  be  common  to  all  mankind — 
whether  possessed  of  resources  10  or  not  possessed 
of  resources — it  is  common  to  immortality  and  the 
other  n.  Those  who  are  possessed  (of  them) 12  attain 
there  to  the  source  of  the  honey13.  That  eternal 
divine  being  is  perceived  by  devotees.     They  go, 

1  *Sveta\yvatara,  pp.  330-355;  Taitt.  Ara/z.  p.  858,  and  comments 
there. 

2  The  life-winds,  the  ten  organs  or  senses,  mind,  and  under- 
standing. See  the  same  word  similarly  interpreted  at  *Sveta\rvatara, 
p.  306,  and  Sahkhya-sutra  III,  9. 

3  According  to  -Sahkara,  he  who  makes  the  distinct  entities,  after 
entering  into  them ;  he  alludes  apparently  to  -Oandogya,  p.  407. 

4  Namely,  that  of  giving  the  poison  of  sensuous  objects. 

5  I.  e.  the  eye,  ear,  &c,  like  the  holes  of  serpents. 

6  I.  e.  can  appreciate  nought  but  those  sensuous  objects. 

7  One  reading  is, 'lead  to  danger' = which  means  'to  hell,' 
according  to  Nilaka«/^a. 

8  Scil.  delusion  about  whom  leads  to  '  danger '  or  '  worldly  life/ 

9  The  quality  of  being  one  with  the  Brahman  in  essence. 

10  Self-restraint,  tranquillity,  &c. 

11  I.  e.  whether  in  the  midst  of  worldly  life,  or  in  the  state  of 
perfect  emancipation. 

12  Viz.  the  resources  spoken  of  before. 

13  Viz.  the  supreme  Brahman.  '  There '  *Sahkara  takes  to  mean '  in 
the  supreme  abode  of  Vishmi/    See  Introduction. 


CHAPTER   VI,  1 6.  I9I 


pervading  both  worlds  by  knowledge 1.  Then  the 
Agnihotra  though  not  performed  is  (as  good  as) 
performed 2.  Your  (knowledge)  of  the  Brahman, 
therefore,  will  not  lead  you  to  littleness 3.  Know- 
ledge is  (his)4  name.  To  that  the  talented  ones 
attain.  That  eternal  divine  being  is  perceived  by 
devotees.  The  self  of  this  description  absorbing 
the  material  cause6  becomes  great.  And  the  self 
of  him  who  understands  that  being  is  not  degraded 
here 6.  That  eternal  divine  being  is  perceived  by 
devotees.  One  should  ever  and  always  be  doing 
good.  (There  is)  no  death,  whence  (can  there  be) 
immortality  7  ?  The  real  and  the  unreal  have  both 
the  same  real  (entity)  as  their  basis.  The  source  of 
the  existent  and  the  non-existent  is  but  one8.  That 
eternal  divine  being  is  perceived  by  devotees.     The 

1  -Sankara  does  not  explain  this.  Nilaka^Ma  says  pervading  = 
fully  understanding;  both  worlds = the  self  and  the  not-self.  Is 
the  meaning  something  like  that  of  the  passage  last  cited  by 
*Sankara  under  Vedanta-sutra  IV,  2,  14  ? 

2  He  obtains  the  fruit  of  it,  *Sankara.  See  as  to  Agnihotra, 
-Oandogya,  p.  381  seq. ;  and  Vedanta-sutra  IV,  1,16. 

3  I.  e.  this  mortal  world,  as  action  &c.  would  do. 

4  I.  e.  of  one  who  understands  himself  to  be  the  Brahman. 
See  Aitareya-upanishad,  p.  246. 

5  -Sarikara  says,  'the  cause  in  which  all  is  absorbed.'  Cf.  a 
similar,  but  not  identical,  meaning  given  to  VaLrvanara  at  .Oan- 
dogya,  p.  264;  and  see  Vedanta-sutra  I,  2,  24.  Becomes  great= 
becomes  the  Brahman,  *Sankara. 

6  Even  in  this  body,  Sarikara;  degradation  he  takes  to  mean 
departure  from  the  body,  citing  Bnhadarawyaka,  p.  540. 

7  There  is  no  worldly  life  with  birth  and  death  for  one  who  does 
good,  and  thinks  his  self  to  be  the  Brahman ;  hence  no  emancipa- 
tion from  such  life  either. 

8  The  Brahman  is  the  real,  and  on  that  the  unreal  material  world 
is  imagined.  Cf.  Taittiriya,  p.  97,  and  Ankara's  comments  there, 
which  are  of  use  in  understanding  this  passage. 


192  SANATSUGATIYA. 


being  who  is  the  inner  self,  and  who  is  of  the 
size  of  a  thumb,  is  not  seen,  being  placed  in  the 
heart 1.  He  is  unborn,  is  moving  about  day  and 
night,  without  sloth.  Meditating  on  him,  a  wise 
man  remains  placid2.  That  eternal  divine  being 
is  perceived  by  devotees.  From  him  comes  the 
wind 3 ;  in  him,  likewise,  is  (everything)  dissolved. 
From  him  (come)  the  fire  and  the  moon ;  and  from 
him  comes  life4.  That  is  the  support  (of  the  uni- 
verse) ;  that  is  immortal ;  that  is  all  things  per- 
ceptible 5 ;  that  is  the  Brahman,  that  glory.  From 
that  all  entities  were  produced ;  and  in  that  (they) 
are  dissolved 6.  That  eternal  divine  being  is  per- 
ceived by  devotees.  The  brilliant  (Brahman)  sup- 
ports the  two  divine  principles7  and  the  universe, 
earth  and  heaven,  and  the  quarters.  He  from  whom 
the  rivers  flow  in  (various)  directions,  from  him  were 
created  the  great  oceans8.  That  eternal  divine  being 
is  perceived  by  devotees.  Should  one  fly,  even  after 
furnishing  oneself  with  thousands  upon  thousands 
of  wings,  and  even  though  one  should  have  the 
velocity  of  thought9,  one  would  never  reach  the 
end   of  the   (great)  cause 10.     That   eternal  divine 

1  Cf.  Ka/^a,  pp.  130, 157  ;  and  Bn'hadarawyaka,  p.  360. 

2  Cf.  £veta,rvatara,  p.  342;  Ka/^a,  pp.  100,  107;  Maitri,  p.  134. 
8  Cf.  Taittiriya,  p.  67 ;  Ka/^a,  p.  146 ;  Muw^aka,  p.  293. 

4  Ka/#a,  p.  298;  Mu^aka,  p.  288. 

5  See  p.  180,  note  7.  6  See  p.  180  supra. 

7  '  The  individual  soul,  and  God/  say  the  commentators,  the 
latter  being  distinct  from  the  supreme  self.  '  The  universe/  says 
Nilakaw/^a, '  means  earth,'  &c,  by  which  I  suppose  he  means  earth, 
heaven,  quarters,  mentioned  directly  afterwards. 

8  Ka/$a,  p.  293. 

9  This  figure  is  implied  in  the  tyopanishad,  p.  10. 

10  'Therefore  it  is  endless/  says  Sankara;  and  as  to  this,  cf. 
Taittiriya,  p.  51. 


CHAPTER  VI,  24.  193 


being  is  perceived  by  devotees.  His  form  dwells 
in  the  unperceived 1 ;  and  those  whose  understand- 
ings are  very  well  refined2  perceive  him.  The 
talented  man  who  has  got  rid  (of  affection  and 
aversion)  perceives  (him)  by  the  mind.  Those  who 
understand  him 3  become  immortal.  When  one 
sees  this  self  in  all  beings  stationed  in  various 
places  \  what  should  one  grieve  for  after  that 5  ? 
The  Brihma^a  has  (as  much  interest)  in  all  beings, 
as  in  a  big  reservoir  of  water,  to  which  waters  flow 
from  all  sides  6.     I  alone  am  your  mother 7,  father ; 

1  'In  a  sphere  beyond  the  reach  of  perception/  says  *Sahkara, 
who  also  quotes  Ka/#a,  p.  149,  or  *SVeta\yvatara,  p.  347,  where 
the  same  line  also  occurs. 

2  The  original  for  understandings  is  sattva,  which  Sarikara 
renders  to  mean  anta^kara^a.  ' Refined/  he  says,  'by  sacrifices 
and  other  sanctifying  operations/  In  the  Ka/^a  at  p.  148  sattva  is 
rendered  by  *Sarikara  to  mean  buddhi — a  common  use  of  the  word. 

3  '  As  being/  says  *Sankara,  '  identical  with  themselves/  It  will 
be  noted  that  the  form  of  expression  is  slightly  altered  here.  It 
is  not  '  those  who  understand  this.' 

4  I.e.  in  different  aggregates  of  body,  senses,  &c.  Cf.  Gita, 
pp.  104  and  124;  also  .ATMndogya,  pp.  475-551. 

5  Cf.  Brz'hadara/zyaka,  p.  882 ;  aSahkara  also  refers  to  Iropa- 
nishad,  p.  14. 

6  The  words  are  pretty  nearly  the  same  as  at  Gita,  p.  48.  *Sah- 
kara  says,  the  Brahma/za  '  who  has  done  all  he  need  do '  has  no 
interest  whatever  in  any  being,  as  he  has  none  in  a  big  reservoir, 
and  he  cites  Gita,  p.  54,  in  support  of  this.  One  copy  of  *Sahkara, 
however,  differs  from  this  ;  that  runs  thus  :  '  As  a  person  who  has 
done  all  he  need  do,  has  no  interest  in  a  big  reservoir  of  water,  so 
to  a  Brahma/za  who  sees  the  self  in  all  beings,  there  is  no  interest 
in  all  the  actions  laid  down  in  the  Vedas,  &c. ;  as  he  has  obtained 
everything  by  mere  perception  of  the  self/  Nilaka^a's  reading  is 
exactly  the  same  as  at  Gita,  p.  48. 

7  -Sankara  says  that  Sanatsuguta  states  here  his  own  experiences, 
like  Vamadeva  (about  whom  there  is  a  reference  at  Brzhadara/zyaka, 
p.  216)  and  others,  to  corroborate  what  he  has  already  said.  Cf. 
also  Gita,  p.  83,  as  to  the  whole  passage. 

[8]  O 


1 94  SANATSUGATIYA. 


and  I  too  am  the  son.  And  I  am  the  self  of  all 
this — that  which  exists  and  that  which  does  not 
exist  \  (I  am)  the  aged  grandfather  of  this,  the 
father,  and  the  son,  O  descendant  of  Bharata ! 
You  dwell  in  my  self  only2.  You  are  not  mine, 
nor  I  (yours).  The  self  only  is  my  seat 3 ;  the  self 
too  is  (the  source  of)  my  birth4.  I  am  woven 
through  and  through 5  (everything).  And  my  seat 
is  free  from  (the  attacks  of)  old  age6.  I  am 
unborn,  moving  about  day  and  night,  without 
sloth.  Knowing  (me),  verily,  a  wise  man  remains 
placid 7.  Minuter  than  an  atom 8,  possessed  of  a 
good  mind 9,  I  am  stationed  within  all  beings 10. 
(The  wise)  know  the  father  of  all  beings  to  be 
placed  in  the  lotus  n(4ike  heart  of  every  one). 

1  See  Gita,  p.  84.  Nilaka^/^a  takes  what  exists  to  mean 
'  present,'  and  what  does  not  exist  to  mean  '  past  and  future/  Cf. 
TsfMndogya,  p.  532. 

2  See  Gita,  p.  82,  where  there  is  also  a  similar  apparent  contra- 
diction. 

8  Cf.  JTMndogya,  p.  518. 

4  That  is  to  say  he  is  ' unborn,'  says  Nilaka«/^a.  -Sarikara  seems 
to  take  '  my '  with  '  seat '  only,  and  not  with  birth ;  for  he  says, 
1  everything  has  its  birth  from  the  self/ 

5  Cf.  Mundaka.,  p.  298;  Maitri,  p.  84,  and  comment  there. 

6  Cf.  Gita,  pp.  77,  109,  and  ^Mndogya,  pp.  535,  550. 

7  See  p.  192,  note  2. 

8  Cf.  Gita,  p.  78,  and  note  3  there. 

9  I.e.  a  mind  free  from  affection  and  aversion,  hatred,  &c, 
«Sankara. 

10  Cf.  Gita,  p.  113,  and  note  3;  and  also  Iropanishad,  p.  12. 

11  .ATMndogya,  p.  528;  and  cf.  Gita,  p.  113. 


A  N  U  GITA. 


O    2 


INTRODUCTION 

TO 

ANU  Gf  TA. 


Like  the  BhagavadgM  and  the  Sanatsu^attya,  the  Anu- 
gita  is  one  of  the  numerous  episodes  of  the  MahabMrata. 
And  like  the  Sanatsu^attya,  it  appears  here  for  the  first 
time  in  an  English,  or,  indeed,  it  is  believed,  in  any  European 
garb.  It  forms  part  of  the  A^vamedha  Parvan  of  the  Maha- 
bMrata, and  is  contained  in  thirty-six  chapters  of  that 
Parvan.  These  chapters — being  chapters  XVI  to  LI — toge- 
ther with  all  the  subsequent  chapters  of  the  A^vamedha 
Parvan,  form  by  themselves  what  in  some  of  our  copies  is 
called  the  AnugM  Parvan— -a  title  which  affords  a  parallel 
to  the  title  Bhagavadgiti  Parvan,  which  we  have  already 
referred  to.  The  AnugM  is  not  now  a  work  of  any  very 
great  or  extensive  reputation.  But  we  do  find  some  few 
quotations  from  it  in  the  Bhashyas  of  5ankar&Mrya,  and 
one  or  two  in  the  Sdnkhya-sara  of  Vi^nana  Bhikshu,  to  which 
reference  will  be  made  hereafter.  And  it  is  included  in  the 
present  volume,  partly  because  it  affords  an  interesting 
glimpse  of  sundry  old  passages  of  the  Upanishad  literature 
in  a  somewhat  modified,  and  presumably  later,  form ;  and 
partly,  perhaps  I  may  say  more  especially,  because  it  pro- 
fesses to  be  a  sort  of  continuation,  or  rather  recapitulation, 
of  the  Bhagavadgitl  At  the  very  outset  of  the  work,  we 
read,  that  after  the  great  fratricidal  war  of  the  MaMbharata 
was  over,  and  the  Pa^avas  had  become  sole  and  complete 
masters  of  their  ancestral  kingdom,  Krishna,  and  Ar^una— 
the  two  interlocutors  in  the  Bhagavadgita — happened  to 
take  a  stroll  together  in  the  great  magical  palace  built  for 
the  P&^avas  by  the  demon  Maya.  In  the  course  of  the 
conversation  which  they  held  on  the  occasion,  Krishna. 
communicated  to  Ar^una  his  wish  to  return  to  his  own 
people  at  Dvaraka,  now  that  the  business  which  had  called 


I98  ANUGITA. 


him  away  from  them  was  happily  terminated.  Anuria,  of 
course,  was  unable  to  resist  the  execution  of  this  wish ;  but 
he  requested  Kr/sh^a,  before  leaving  for  Dvaraka,  to  repeat 
the  instruction  which  had  been  already  conveyed  to  him  on 
'  the  holy  field  of  Kurukshetra,'  but  which  had  gone  out  of 
his  'degenerate  mind.'  Krishna,  thereupon  protests  that  he 
is  not  equal  to  a  verbatim  recapitulation  of  the  Bhagavad- 
gM,  but  agrees,  in  lieu  of  that,  to  impart  to  Ar^*una  the 
same  instruction  in  other  words,  through  the  medium  of 
a  certain  'ancient  story' — or  puratana  itihasa.  And  the 
instruction  thus  conveyed  constitutes  what  is  called  the 
Anugita,  a  name  which  is  in  itself  an  embodiment  of  this 
anecdote. 

Now  the  first  question  which  challenges  investigation  with 
reference  to  this  work  is,  if  we  may  so  call  it,  the  funda- 
mental one — how  much  is  properly  included  under  the 
name?  The  question  is  not  one  quite  easy  of  settlement, 
as  our  authorities  upon  it  are  not  all  reconcilable  with  one 
another.  In  the  general  list  of  contents  of  the  A^vamedha 
Parvan,  which  is  given  at  the  end  of  that  Parvan  in  the 
edition  printed  at  Bombay,  we  read  that  the  first  section 
is  the  Vyclsa  Vakya,  the  second  the  Samvartamaruttiya. 
With  neither  of  these  have  we  aught  to  do  here.  The  list 
then  goes  on  thus:  ' AnugM,  Visudevagamana,  Brahma^a 
Gita,  Gurujishyasawv&da,  Uttankopakhy&na,'  and  so  forth. 
With  the  later  sections,  again,  we  are  not  here  concerned. 
Now  let  us  compare  this  list  with  the  list  which  may  be 
obtained  from  the  titles  of  the  chapters  in  the  body  of  the 
work  itself.  With  the  sixteenth  chapter,  then,  of  the  Asva- 
medha  Parvan,  begins  what  is  here  called  the  Anugita 
Parvan ;  and  that  chapter  and  the  three  following  chapters 
are  described  as  the  sixteenth,  seventeenth,  eighteenth,  and 
nineteenth  chapters  respectively  of  the  Anugita  Parvan, 
which  forms  part  of  the  A^vamedha  Parvan.  The  title 
of  the  twentieth  chapter  contains  a  small,  but  important, 
addition.  It  runs  thus,  'Such  is  the  twentieth  chapter 
of  the  Anugita  Parvan,  forming  part  of  the  A^vamedha 
Parvan — being  the  Brahma  Gita.'  This  form  is  con- 
tinued down  to  the  thirty-fourth  chapter,  only  Brdhma^a 


INTRODUCTION.  1 99 


Gita  being  substituted  for  Brahma  Gita.  At  the  close  of  the 
thirty-fifth  chapter,  there  is  another  alteration  caused  by 
the  substitution  of  Gunmshyasa^vada  for  Brahma^a  Gita ; 
and  this  continues  down  to  the  fifty- first  chapter,  where  the 
thread  of  the  narrative  is  again  taken  up — the  philosophical 
parenthesis,  if  I  may  so  say,  having  come  to  an  end.  With 
the  fifty-first  chapter  our  present  translation  also  ends.  Now 
it  appears  from  the  above  comparison,  that  the  list  of  con- 
tents set  out  above  is  accurate,  save  in  so  far  as  it  mentions 
Vasudevagamana  as  a  distinct  section  of  the  A^vamedha 
Parvan.  No  such  section  seems  to  be  in  existence.  And 
there  appears  to  be  nothing  in  the  A^vamedha  Parvan  to 
which  that  title  could  be  appropriately  allotted.  The 
edition  printed  at  Madras  agrees  in  all  essential  particulars 
with  the  Bombay  edition ;  with  this  difference,  that  even  at 
the  close  of  the  twentieth  chapter,  the  name  is  Brahma^a 
Gita,  and  not  Brahma  Gita  as  it  is  in  the  Bombay  edition. 
The  Calcutta  edition  also  agrees  in  these  readings.  Turning 
now  to  a  MS.  procured  for  me  by  my  excellent  friend  Pro- 
fessor Aba^-i  Vishnu  Kathava/e  at  Ahmedabad,  and  bearing 
date  the  15th  of  Phalguna  Vadya  1833,  Sunday,  we  find 
there  at  the  end  of  the  A^vamedha  Parvan  a  list  of  contents 
like  that  which  we  have  seen  in  the  printed  edition.  The 
relevant  portion  of  that  list  is  as  follows  :  '  Samvartamarut- 
tiya,  Anugita,  Guruiishyasa/^vada,  and  Uttankopakhyana.' 
Here  we  find  neither  the  erroneous  entry  of  Vasudevaga- 
mana, nor  the  correct  entry  of  Brahma  Gita,  which  are  both 
contained  in  the  other  list.  In  another  MS.  which  I  have 
now  before  me,  and  which  has  been  lent  me  by  Professor 
Bha/z^arkar,  who  purchased  it  in  Pu/za  for  the  Government 
of  Bombay — in  this  MS.,  which  contains  the  commentary  of 
Ar^una  MLrra,  the  earlier  chapters  are  described  not  as 
chapters  of  the  Anugita  Parvan,  but  of  the  Anugita  con- 
tained in  the  A^vamedha  Parvan,  and  they  are  numbered 
there  as  they  are  numbered  in  our  translation,  not  con- 
tinuously with  the  numbering  of  the  previous  chapters  of 
the  Ai*vamedha  Parvan.  At  the  close  of  chapter  IV,  we 
have  an  explicit  statement  that  the  Anugita  ends  there. 
Then  the  Brahma  Gita  begins.     And  the  first  chapter  is 


200  anug!tA. 


described  as  a  chapter  of  the  Brahma  Gita  in  the  A.svamedha 
Parvan.  The  numbering  of  each  of  these  chapters  of  the 
Brahma  Gita  is  not  given  in  the  copy  before  us — the  titles 
and  descriptions  of  the  various  chapters  being  throughout 
incomplete.  Some  of  the  later  chapters  are  described  as 
chapters  of  the  Brahma  Gita,  and  some  as  chapters  of  the 
Brahma^a  Gita ;  but  this  discrepancy  is  probably  to  be  put 
to  the  account  of  the  particular  copyist  who  wrote  out  the 
copy  used  by  us.  With  what  is  chapter  XX  in  our  num- 
bering the  Guru^ishyasa^vada  begins.  This  MS.  omits  all 
reference  to  any  Anugita  Parvan,  and  fails  to  number  the 
various  chapters.  Its  list  of  sections  agrees  with  that  in  the 
Bombay  edition.     It  bears  no  date. 

So  much  for  what  may  be  described  as  our  primary 
sources  of  information  on  this  subject.  Let  us  now  glance 
at  the  secondary  sources.  And,  first,  Nilaka/^a  in  com- 
menting on  what  is,  according  to  his  numbering,  chapter 
XV,  stanza  43,  apparently  distinguishes  that  chapter  from 
what  he  speaks  of  as  the  Brahma/za  Gita  and  Gunmshya- 
sawvada,  which  he  implies  follow  after  that  chapter — thus 
indicating  that  he  accepted  in  substance  the  tradition  re- 
corded in  the  passages  we  have  already  set  forth,  viz.  that 
the  first  four  chapters  of  our  translation  form  the  Anugita, 
the  next  fifteen  the  Brahma^a  Gita,  and  the  last  seventeen 
the  Gurujishyasa/^vada.  This  is  also  the  view  of  Ar^*una 
Mura.  At  the  close  of  his  gloss  on  chapter  IV,  he  distinctly 
states  that  the  Anugita  ends  at  that  chapter ;  and  again  at 
the  close  of  the  gloss  on  chapter  XIX,  he  explicitly  says  that 
the  Brahma/za  Gita  ends  there.  He  also  adds  the  following 
interesting  observation  :  '  The  feminine  form  (Gita,  namely) 
is  used  in  consequence  of  (the  word)  Upanishad  being 
feminine.'  The  full  title  of  that  part  of  the  Mahabharata 
would  then  be,  according  to  this  remark  of  Ar^una  MLsra, 
'the  Upanishads  sung  by  the  Brahma/za,'  a  title  parallel 
to  that  of  the  Bhagavadgita,  '  the  Upanishads  sung  by  the 
Deity.'  It  is  to  be  further  remarked,  that  the  last  chapter 
of  the  Gurarishyasa/^vada  is  called  in  this  commentary 
the  eighteenth  chapter  of  the  Guru^ishyasa^zvada,  a  fact 
which  seems  to  indicate  that  Ar^*una  Mura  either  found 


INTRODUCTION.  201 


in  the  MS.  which  he  used,  or  himself  established,  a  separate 
numbering  for  the  chapters  in  the  several  sections 1  of  which 
the  A^vamedha  Parvan  is  made  up. 

Although  the  information  here  set  out  from  these  various 
sources  is  not  easily  to  be  harmonised  in  all  its  parts,  the 
preponderance  of  testimony  seems  to  be  in  favour  of  re- 
garding the  portion  of  the  A^vamedha  Parvan  embraced  in 
our  translation  as  containing  three  distinct  sections,  viz. 
the  Anugita,  the  Brahma/za  Gita,  and  the  Guru^ishyasa^- 
v&da.  And  some  indirect  support  may  be  derived  for  this 
conclusion,  from  one  or  two  other  circumstances.  In  the 
Sankhya-sara  of  Vig*nana  Bhikshu — a  work  which,  as  we 
shall  see  in  the  sequel,  expressly  mentions  the  Anugita — 
we  have  a  passage  cited  as  from  the  '  Bharata 2 '  which 
coincides  almost  precisely  with  a  passage  occurring  at 
chapter  XXVII  of  our  translation  (see  p.  335).  And  in  the 
Bhashya  of  6ankara£arya  on  the  Bhagavadgita,  chapter  XV, 
stanza  1,  we  have  a  citation  as  from  a '  Pura/za'  of  a  passage 
which  coincides  pretty  closely  with  one  which  occurs  at 
chapter  XX  of  our  translation  (see  p.  313).  If  the  dis- 
crepancies between  the  quotations  as  given  by  Vi^fiana 
Bhikshu  and  .Sankara,  and  the  passages  occurring  in  our 
text,  may  be  treated  merely  as  various  readings — and 
there  is  nothing  inherently  improbable  in  this  being  the 
case — it  may  be  fairly  contended,  that  neither  5ankara  nor 
Vi^nana  Bhikshu  would  have  used  the  vague  expressions, 
6  a  Pura/za,'  or  even  *  the  Bharata,'  if  they  could  have  cor- 
rectly substituted  in  lieu  of  them  the  specific  name  Anu- 
gita. And  this,  it  may  be  said,  is  a  contention  of  some 
weight,  when  it  is  remembered,  that  both  vSaiikara  and 
Vi^nana  show,  in  other  parts  of  their  writings,  an  acquaint- 
ance with  this  very  Anugita.     If  this  reasoning  is  correct, 

1  In  the  beginning  of  his  gloss  on  the  Anugita  he  says,  that  it  proposes  to 
explain  difficult  passages  in  the  Anugita,  &c. — Anugitadishu.  And  at  the 
outset  of  his  gloss  on  the  whole  Parvan  he  says,  that  in  the  Anugita  we  have  a 
statement  of  the  miseries  of  birth,  &c.  as  a  protest  against  worldly  life ;  in  the 
Brahma  Gita  we  have  a  recommendation  of  Prarcayama,  &c. ;  and  in  the  Guru- 
sishyasaravada  we  have  a  eulogium  on  the  perception  of  the  self  as  distinct  from 
Prakn'ti  or  nature,  and  incidentally  a  protest  against  Pravntti  or  action. 

2  P.  21. 


202  ANUGITA. 


the  conclusion  to  be  derived  from  it  must  be,  that  ^Sankara 
and  Vi^nana  must  have  considered  the  chapters  of  the 
A^vamedha  Parvan  from  which  their  respective  quotations 
are  taken  as  not  forming  part  of  the  Anugita. 

The  testimony  we  have  thus  collected  is  apparently  of 
considerable  weight.  Against  it,  however,  we  have  to  weigh 
some  testimony  which  appears  to  me  to  be  entitled,  upon 
the  whole,  to  even  greater  weight.  In  the  Sankhya-sara 
of  Vi^n&na  Bhikshu,  to  which  we  have  already  referred, 
we  have  two  quotations1  from  the  Anugita  which  are 
distinctly  stated  to  be  taken  from  that  work.  The  first 
occurs  in  our  translation  at  p.  332,  the  second  at  p.  313. 
Now,  if  we  adopt  the  conclusion  above  referred  to,  regarding 
the  correct  titles  of  the  thirty-six  chapters  which  we  have 
translated,  it  is  a  mistake  to  attribute  the  passages  in  ques- 
tion to  the  Anugtta.  They  would,  on  that  view,  form  part  of 
the  Gurarishyasa^vada.  Again,  in  his  commentary  on  the 
Sanatsu^atiya,  Sahkara  refers  to  sundry  passages  which  he 
expressly  says  are  taken  from  the  Anugita,  but  which  are 
not  contained  in  the  Anugita  as  limited  by  the  evidence  we 
have  considered  above.  One  of  the  passages  referred  to  is 
taken  from  chapter  XI  of  our  translation,  and  others  are  con- 
tained in  the  comments  on  Sanatsu^atiya  I,  6,  and  on  I,  %o 
and  I,  41 2.  It  is  difficult  to  resist  the  conclusion  to  which  this 
positive  evidence  leads.  One  cannot  possibly  explain  this 
evidence  upon  the  view  which  we  have  first  stated ;  while,  on 
the  other  hand,  the  points  which  apparently  support  that 
view  are  capable  of  some  explanation  on  the  theory  that 
the  Anugita  includes  all  the  chapters  here  translated.  And 
that  in  this  wise.  The  passages  which  we  have  referred 
to  as  cited  by  6ankara  and  Vi^nana  from  a  Pura/za  and 
from  the  Bharata  may  have  been  actually  taken  from  some 
other  work  than  the  Anugita.  Even  waiving  the  fact  that 
the  readings  are  different, — though  in  regard  especially  to  the 
quotation  given  by  .Sahkara  it  is  not  one  to  be  entirely  lost 
sight  of, —  there  is  this  fact  which  is  of  great  and  almost 
conclusive  weight  on  such  a  point  as  this,  namely,  that  we 

1  Pp.  15,  21.  The  latter  corresponds  to  tfankara's  quotation  above  referred  to. 

2  See  p.  206  note. 


INTRODUCTION.  203 


have  many  instances  of  passages  common,  almost  verbatim 
et  literatim,  to  the  Mahabharata  and  other  works.  For 
one  instance,  take  the  very  passage  on  which  a  chronolo- 
gical argument  has  been  founded  by  us  in  the  Introduction 
to  the  Sanatsu^attya  \  It  ought  to  have  been  there  pointed 
out,  that  the  stanza  about  a  young  man  being  bound  to 
rise  to  receive  an  elderly  person,  also  occurs  in  the  Manu 
Smrzti2  in  exactly  the  same  words.  The  omission  to  note 
this  circumstance  in  its  proper  place  in  the  Introduction 
to  the  S  ana  t  subtly  a  was  due  to  a  mere  inadvertence. 
But  the  conclusion  there  hinted  at  was  expressed  in  very 
cautious  language,  and  with  many  qualifications,  out  of  re- 
gard to  circumstances  such  as  those  which  we  are  now  con- 
sidering. Similar  repetitions  may  be  pointed  out  in  other 
places.  The  passage  about  the  Kshetra^na  and  Sattva 
and  their  mutual  relations  (see  p.  374)  occurs,  as  pointed 
out  in  the  note  there,  in  at  least  two  other  places  in  the 
MaMbMrata.  The  passage  likewise  which  occurs  at  Gita, 
p.  103,  about  the  '  hands,  feet,  &c,  on  all  sides,5  is  one 
which  may  be  seen,  to  my  own  knowledge,  in  about  half 
a  dozen  places  in  the  Mahabharata.  Such  cases,  I  believe, 
may  be  easily  multiplied  ;  and  they  illustrate  and  are  illus- 
trated by  Mr.  Freeman's  proposition  respecting  the  epic  age 
in  Greece,  to  which  we  have  already  alluded.  It  follows, 
consequently,  that  the  quotations  from  5ankara  and 
Vi^nana,  to  which  we  have  referred  above,  do  not  militate 
very  strongly  against  the  final  conclusion  at  which  we 
have  arrived.  The  testimony  of  the  MSS.  and  the  com- 
mentators is,  no  doubt,  of  considerably  greater  force.  But 
Nilaka^/^a,  whatever  his  merits  as  an  exegete — and  even 
these  are  often  marred  by  a  persistent  effort  to  read  his 
own  foregone  conclusions  into  the  text  he  comments  on — 
Nilaka^/^a  is  but  an  indifferent  authority  in  the  domain 
of  historical  criticism.  In  his  commentary  on  the  Sanatsu- 
^atiya,  for  instance,  he  tells  us  that  he  has  admitted  into 
his  text  sundry  verses  which  were  not  in  the  copy  used 
by  Sankara,  and  for  which  he  had  none  but  a  very  modern 
voucher,  and  he  very  naively  adds  that  he  has  done  so 

1  P.  139,  and  cf.  p.  176  with  Vishmi  XXX,  44  seq.  2  See  II,  120. 


204  ANUGITA. 


on  the  principle  of  collecting  all  good  things  to  a  focus. 
Ar^una  MLsra  is  a  very  much  more  satisfactory  com- 
mentator. But  he  is  not  likely  to  be  a  writer  of  much 
antiquity.  I  assume,  that  he  must  be  more  recent  than 
vSankara^arya,  though  I  cannot  say  that  I  have  any  very 
tenable  ground  for  the  assumption.  But  assuming  that, 
I  think  it  more  satisfactory  to  adopt  5ankara£arya's 
nomenclature,  and  to  treat  the  thirty-six  chapters  here 
translated  as  constituting  the  Anugita.  It  is  not  impro- 
bable, if  our  assumption  is  correct,  that  the  division  of  the 
thirty-six  chapters  in  the  manner  we  have  seen  may  have 
come  into  vogue  after  the  date  of  Vi^nana  Bhikshu,  who, 
according  to  Dr.  F.  E.  Hall, '  lived  in  all  probability  in  the 
sixteenth  or  seventeenth  century,  and  whom  there  is  some 
slight  reason  for  carrying  back  still  further  V 

Do  these  thirty-six  chapters,  then,  form  one  integral 
work  ?  Are  they  all  the  work  of  one  and  the  same  author  ? 
These  are  the  questions  which  next  present  themselves  for 
consideration.  The  evidence  bearing  upon  them,  however, 
is,  as  might  be  expected,  excessively  scanty.  Of  external 
evidence,  indeed,  we  have  really  none,  barring  vSankara's 
statement  in  his  commentary  on  the  Bnhadara/zyaka-upa- 
nishad2  that  the  verse  which  he  there  quotes  from  the 
Anugitcl  has  Vyasa  for  its  author.  That  statement  indi- 
cates that  vSankara  accepted  the  current  tradition  of 
Vyasa's  authorship  of  the  Anugita ;  and  such  acceptance, 
presumably,  followed  from  his  acceptance  of  the  tradition 
of  Vyasa's  authorship  of  the  entire  Mahabharata.  If  that 
tradition  is  incorrect,  and  Vyasa  is  not  the  author  of  the 
Anugita,  we  have  no  means  of  ascertaining  who  is  the 
author.  And  as  to  the  tradition  in  question,  it  is  difficult, 
in  the  present  state  of  our  materials,  to  form  any  satis- 
factory judgment.  We  therefore  proceed  at  once  to 
consider  whether  the  Anugita  is  really  one  work.  And 
I  must  admit  at  the  outset  that  I  find  it  difficult  to  answer 
this  question.  There  are  certainly  some  circumstances 
connected  with  the  work  which  might  be  regarded  as  indi- 

1  See  Preface,  Sankhya-sara,  p.  37.  2  P.  234. 


INTRODUCTION.  205 


eating  a  different  authorship  of  different  parts  of  it.  Thus 
in  an  early  portion  of  the  work,  we  find  the  first  personal 
pronoun  is  used,  where  the  Supreme  Being  is  evidently 
intended  to  be  signified,  and  yet  the  passage  is  not  put 
into  the  mouth  of  Krishna,  but  of  the  Brahma^a.  A  similar 
passage  occurs  a  little  later  on  also.  Now  it  must  be  taken 
to  be  a  somewhat  strained  interpretation  of  the  words  used 
in  the  passages  in  question  to  suppose  that  the  speaker 
there  used  the  first  personal  pronoun,  identifying  himself 
for  the  nonce  with  the  Supreme  Being1.  Again,  in  a  passage 
still  further  on,  we  have  the  vocative  O  Partha !  where  the 
person  addressed  is  not  Ar^-una  at  all,  but  the  Brahma^a's 
wife.  Now  these  lapses  are  susceptible  of  two  explana- 
tions— either  we  are  to  see  in  them  so  many  cases  of 
*  Homer  nodding,'  or  we  may  suppose  that  they  are  errors 
occasioned  by  one  writer  making  additions  to  the  work  of 
a  previous  writer,  without  a  vivid  recollection  of  the  frame- 
work of  the  original  composition  into  which  his  own  work 
had  to  be  set2.  I  own,  that  on  balancing  the  probabilities 
on  the  one  side  and  the  other,  my  mind  rather  leans  to  the 
hypothesis  of  one  author  making  a  slip  in  the  plexus  of 
his  own  story  within  story,  rather  than  the  hypothesis  of 
a  deliberate  interpolator  forgetting  the  actual  scheme  of  the 
original  work  into  which  he  was  about  to  foist  his  own 
additions3.  And  this  the  rather,  that  we  find  a  similar 
slip  towards  the  very  beginning  of  the  work,  where  we 
have  the  Brahma/za  Klsyapa  addressed  as  Parantapa,  or 
destroyer  of  foes — an  epithet  which,  I  think,  is  exclusively 
reserved  for  Kshatriyas,  and  is,  in  any  case,  a  very  inap- 
propriate one  to  apply  to  a  humble  seeker  for  spiritual 
light.  This  slip  appears  to  me  to  be  incapable  of  explana- 
tion on  any  theory  of  interpolation  4.  And  hence  the  other 
slips  above  noted  can  hardly  be  regarded  as  supporting 
any  such  theory.    Another  circumstance,  not  indeed  bearing 

1  In  fact  the  Brahmaraa  is  n  o  t  identified  with  the  Supreme  Being  afterwards. 
But  that  fact  has  not  much  bearing  on  the  question  here. 

2  Cf.  Wilson's  Dasakumara£arita,  Introd.  p.  22. 

3  The  third  alternative,  that  a  work  independently  written  was  afterwards 
bodily  thrown  into  the  Mahabharata,  is  one  which  in  the  circumstances  here 
seems  to  me  improbable.  *  See  also  pp.  235,  252,  299. 


206  ANUGITA. 


out  that  theory,  but  rendering  interpolations  possible,  de- 
serves to  be  noted.  The  scheme  of  the  Anugita  certainly 
lends  itself  to  interpolations.  A  story  might  without  much 
difficulty  be  added  to  the  series  of  story  joined  to  story 
which  it  contains.  Against  this,  however,  it  must  not 
be  forgotten,  that  the  Santi  Parvan  of  the  Mahabharata 
and  the  Yogavasish^a  exhibit  a  precisely  similar  frame- 
work of  contents,  and  that  the  Pan^atantra  and  the  Katha- 
saritsagara,  among  other  works,  follow  the  same  model. 
And  from  this  fact  it  may  be  fairly  argued,  that  while 
there  is,  doubtless,  room  for  suspecting  interpolations  in 
such  cases,  there  is  this  to  be  remembered,  that  with 
respect  to  any  particular  one  of  these  cases,  such  suspicion 
can  carry  us  but  a  very  short  way.  And  further,  it  is  to 
be  observed,  valeat  quantum,  that  the  connexion  of  the 
several  chapters  of  the  Anugita  one  with  the  other  is  not 
altogether  a  loose  one,  save  at  one  or  two  points  only, 
while  they  are  all  linked  on  to  the  main  body  of  the 
narrative,  only  in  what  we  have  treated  as  the  last  chapter 
of  the  Anugita,  without  any  trace  of  any  other  connecting 
link  anywhere  else.  Upon  the  whole,  therefore,  we  here 
conclude,  though  not  without  doubt,  that  the  whole  of  the 
Anugita  is  the  work  of  one  author. 

The  next  question  to  be  discussed  is  the  important  one 
of  the  age  of  the  work.  The  quotations  already  given 
above  from  vSankara^arya's  works,  and  one  other  which 
is  referred  to  in  the  note  below1,  suffice  to  show  that  the 
Anugita  must  have  been  some  few  centuries  old  in  the 
time  of  ,Sarikara/£arya.  For  whether  we  treat  the  Anu- 
gita as  a  part  of  the  original  Mahabharata  or  not,  it  is 
not  likely  that  such  a  scholar  as  6ankara  would  have 
accepted  the  book  as  a  genuine  part  of  the  Mahabharata, 
and  as  a  work  of  Vyasa,  if  it  had  not  been  in  his  day  of 
some  respectable  antiquity,  of  antiquity  sufficient  to  have 
thrown  the  real  author  into  oblivion,  and  to  have  substi- 

1  See  tfankara,  £ariraka  Bhashya,  p.  726.  That,  however,  may  be  a  quotation 
from  some  other  work.  It  may  be  noted  that  the  passages  quoted  in  the  Bhashya 
on  Sanatsug-atiya  I,  20  and  I,  41  are  not  to  be  traced  in  our  copies,  though 
expressly  stated  there  to  have  been  taken  from  the  Anugita. 


INTRODUCTION.  207 


tuted  in  his  place  Vyasa,  who  lived  at  the  junction  of 
the  Dvapara  and  Kali  ages1,  upwards  of  thirty  centuries 
before  the  Christian  era.  The  calculation  is  avowedly  a 
very  rough  one,  but  I  think  we  may,  as  the  result  of  it, 
safely  fix  the  third  century  of  the  Christian  era  as  the 
latest  date  at  which  the  Anugita  can  have  been  composed. 
Let  us  now  endeavour  to  find  out  whether  we  can  fix  the 
date  as  lying  within  any  better  defined  period.  It  is 
scarcely  needful  to  say,  that  the  Anugita  dates  from  a 
period  considerably  subsequent  to  the  age  of  the  Upani- 
shads.  The  passages  relating  to  the  Pra^asa/^vada  and 
so  forth,  which  occur  originally  in  the  Upanishads,  are 
referred  to  in  the  Anugita  as  'ancient  stories J — an  indication 
that  the  Upanishads  had  already  come  to  be  esteemed  as 
ancient  compositions  at  the  date  of  the  latter  work.  It  is 
not  necessary,  therefore,  to  go  through  an  elaborate  exa- 
mination of  the  versions  of  the  ancient  stories  alluded 
to  above,  as  contained  in  the  Upanishads  and  in  the 
Anugita,  more  especially  because  it  is  possible  for  us  to 
show  that  the  Anugita  is  later  than  the  Bhagavadgita, 
which  latter  work,  as  we  have  seen,  is  later  than  the  Upa- 
nishads. And  to  this  point  we  shall  now  address  ourselves. 
We  have  already  observed  upon  the  story  referred  to  at 
the  opening  of  this  Introduction,  which,  historically  inter- 
preted, indicates  the  priority  of  the  Bhagavadgita  to  the 
Anugita.  This  conclusion  is  confirmed  by  sundry  other 
circumstances,  which  we  must  now  discuss  in  some  detail, 
as  they  are  also  of  use  in  helping  to  fix  the  position  of  the 
work  in  the  history  of  Sanskrit  literature  and  philosophy. 
First,  then,  it  seems  to  me,  that  the  state  of  society  mirrored 
in  the  Anugitd  indicates  a  greater  advance  in  social  evolu- 
tion than  we  have  already  seen  is  disclosed  in  the  Bhaga- 
vadgita. Not  to  mention  decorations  of  houses  and  so 
forth,  which  are  alluded  to  in  one  passage  of  the  Anugita, 
we  are  here  told  of  royal  oppressions,  of  losses  of  wealth 
accumulated  with  great  difficulty,  and  of  fierce  captivities  ; 
we  are  told,  to  adapt  the  language  of  a  modern  English 
poet,  of  laws  grinding  the  weak,  for  strong  men  rule  the 


1  Cf.  Sariraka  Bhashya,  p.  913. 


208  anug!t1. 


law;  we  have  references  to  the  casting  of  images  with 
liquefied  iron,  and  to  the  use  of  elephants  as  vehicles1; 
and  we  meet  with  protests  against  the  amusements  of  music 
and  dancing,  and  against  the  occupation  of  artisans2.  True 
it  is,  that  all  these  indications  put  together,  fail  to  constitute 
what,  according  to  the  standard  of  modern  times,  would  be 
called  a  highly  artificial  state  of  society.  But  it  seems  to 
me  to  mark  a  very  perceptible  and  distinct  advance  beyond 
the  social  condition  in  which  mankind  was  divided  into  four 
castes  or  classes,  with  such  a  division  of  duties,  to  put  it 
briefly,  as  that  of  preparation  for  a  future  world,  govern- 
ment of  this  world,  agriculture  and  trade,  and  service  re- 
spectively3. Artisans,  it  will  be  observed,  are  not  even 
referred  to  in  the  Bhagavadgtta,  nor  is  there  any  trace  of 
royal  oppressions,  or  unequal  laws.  Then  as  regards 
music,  it  may  be  noted,  that  there  are  references  to  it  in 
the  Brzhadara^yaka  and  Kaushitaki-upanishads4,  without 
any  indications  of  disapprobation.  The  protest  against 
music,  therefore,  and  the  sister  art  of  dancing,  is  probably 
to  be  explained  as  evoked  by  some  abuses  of  the  two  arts 
which  must  have  come  into  prevalence  about  the  time  of 
the  composition  of  the  Anugtta.  A  similar  protest  is  found 
recorded  in  the  Dharma^astras  of  Manu  and  Apastamba 
and  Gautama5.  We  shall  consider  in  the  sequel  the  chrono- 
logical positions  of  the  Anugtta  with  reference  to  those 
Dharma^astras.  But  we  have  already  pointed  out  that  the 
Gita  stands  prior  to  them  both6. 

Look  again  at  the  views  on  caste  which  are  embodied 
in  the  Anugita  and  the  Bhagavadgtta  respectively.  The 
reference  to  the  Kshatriya  as  representing  the  quality  of 
passion,  while  the  Brahma^a  represents  the  quality  of  good- 
ness7, seems  to  place  a  considerably  larger  distance  between 
the  Brahma^a  and  the  Kshatriya  than  is  suggested  by  the 
Bhagavadgtta,  and  thus  marks  an  advance  in  the  direction 
of  the  later  doctrine  on  the  subject.     And  in  connexion 

1  Cf.  Lalita  Vistara,  p.  17.  2  See  pp.  325-365.  s  See  Gita,  p.  126. 

4  See  BWhadararcyaka,  p.  454,  and  Kaushitaki,  p.  68. 

5  See  Buhler's  Apastamba  1, 1,  3, 11,  Gautama  II,  13,  and  Manu  II,  178. 

6  P.  21  seq.  7  P.  329. 


INTRODUCTION.  209 


with  this,  perhaps,  the  discrepancy  between  the  reading  of 
the  Bhagavadgita  at  p.  85,  and  that  of  the  Anugita  at  p.  255, 
is  not  entirely  without  significance,  though  much  weight 
would  not  be  due  to  it,  if  it  stood  alone.     The  expression 
'devoted  royal  sages,'  which  we   find   in   the   one   work, 
makes  way  for  '  well-read  Kshatriyas  who  are  intent  on 
their  own  duties '  in  the  other.    Again,  although  the  pas- 
sage at  p.  353  is   undoubtedly  susceptible  of  a  different 
interpretation,  it  seems  to  me,  that  the  word  '  twice-born ' 
there  employed,  was  meant  to  be  interpreted  as  meaning 
the  Brahma/zas,  and  not  the  three  twice-born  castes  ;  and 
if  this  interpretation  is  correct,  we   have  here   the  very 
proposition  upon  the  absence  of  which  in  the  Bhagavad- 
gita we   have   already  made   some    observations1.     That 
twice-born  in  the  passage  in  question  means  Brahma/za 
only,  is,  of  course,  not  a  proved  fact.     But  having  regard 
to  the  passages  noted  above  and  to  the  passage  at  p.  320, 
where  reference  is  made  to  disparagement  of  Brahma^as — 
it  is  not  twice-born  there — and  in  the  same  clause  with 
disparagement  of  gods  and  Vedas,  it  seems  to  me  that  the 
interpretation  we  have  suggested  must  be  taken  to  be  the 
true  one.   And  it  is  to  be  further  noted,  that  this  conclusion 
is  corroborated  by  a  comparison  of  the  passage  now  under 
consideration  with  a  passage  occurring  in  the  vSanti  Parvan2, 
in  the  Ra^adharma  section  of  it,  where  we  read  that  '  the 
cow  is  the  first  among  quadrupeds,  gold  among  metals, 
a  mantra  among  words,  and  the   Brahma^a  is   the    first 
among  bipeds.'     The  cow  and  gold  occur  in  the  passage 
in  the  Anugita  also,  very  near  the  clause  we  are  now  dis- 
cussing.    And  it  is  allowable  to  argue,  that  reading  the 
two  together,  twice-born  in  the  Anugita  must  be  inter- 
preted to  be  synonymous  with  Brahma/za  in  the  Ra^a- 
dharma.  And  the  same  conclusion  is,  to  my  mind,  confirmed 
indirectly  by  comparing  the  clause  '  the  twice-born  among 
men'  of  the  Anugita  with  'the  ruler  of  men  among  men* 
of  that  Bhagavadgita,  the  teaching  of  which  the  former 
work  professes  to  recapitulate. 

1  P.  24  suprar  2  See  note  at  p.  353. 

[8]  P 


2IO  ANUGITA. 


A  similar  inference  seems  to  be  derivable  from  a  com- 
parison of  the  specific  doctrines  as  to  the  duties  of  Brah- 
ma/zas  which  are  enunciated  in  the  Gita  and  the  Anugita. 
In  the  latter  work,  the  famous  six  duties  are  expressly- 
mentioned.  We  have  already  argued  in  our  Introduction 
to  the  Gita,  that  a  comparison  of  the  teaching  of  that  work 
upon  this  point  with  the  teaching  of  Apastamba  and  Manu 
shows  the  former  to  have  been  older  than  the  latter.  The 
six  duties  mentioned  in  the  Anugita  are  those  also  mentioned 
by  Manu  and  Apastamba.  It  follows,  therefore,  that  the 
Gita  is  prior  to  the  Anugita  also.  Whether  the  Anugita  is 
prior  or  subsequent  to  Manu  and  Apastamba,  is  a  question 
which  will  have  to  be  discussed  in  the  sequel. 

The  net  result  of  the  whole  of  this  comparison  appears  to 
me  to  clearly  show  the  Anugita  to  be  a  work  of  considerably 
more  recent  date  than  the  Bhagavadgita.  What  interval 
of  time  lay  between  the  two,  is  a  most  interesting,  but  also 
a  most  difficult,  question.  The  differences  we  have  noted 
appear  to  me  to  indicate  a  pretty  wide  interval.  If  I  am 
right  in  regarding  the  Gita  as  a  work  of  what  may  be  called, 
for  practical  purposes,  the  age  of  the  older  Upanishads,  I 
am  inclined  to  think  that  the  interval  between  the  Gita  and 
the  Anugiti  must  have  been  one  of  larger  extent  than  even 
three  or  four  centuries.  For  as  we  have  already  pointed 
out,  the  description  of  the  various  'Itihasas'  mentioned  in 
the  Anugita  as  'pur&tana' — ancient — points  to  at  least 
three  or  four  centuries  having  elapsed  between  the  close  of 
the  Upanishad  period  and  the  composition  of  the  Anugita. 
It  is  obvious,  however,  that  this  result  is  not  one  with 
which  we  can  rest  satisfied.  Even  if  it  were  more  precise 
and  accurate,  it  would  only  fix  the  age  of  the  Anugita 
with  reference  to  the  age  of  another  work  itself  of  unknown 
and  unascertained  date.  We  must  therefore  endeavour  to 
compare  the  Anugita  with  some  other  work,  the  date  of 
which  is  better  known.  For  this  purpose,  it  seems  to  be  not 
of  any  great  use  to  refer  to  the  Sankhya  and  Yoga-sutras, 
although  it  is  not  improbable  that  some  materials  might  be 
forthcoming  for  a  useful  comparison  between  them  and  the 
Anugita.     Neither  the  Sankhya  nor  the  Yoga-sutras  can 


INTRODUCTION.  211 


be  said  to  have  their  ages  fixed  with  even  any  approach  to 
accuracy.  And  in  the  case  of  the  Sankhya-sutras,  there  is 
the  further  difficulty  presented  by  the  circumstance,  that 
there  is  room  for  very  serious  doubts  as  to  whether  the 
current  Sutras  are  really  of  the  authorship  of  Kapila,  or 
whoever  else  was  the  original  founder  of  the  system.  With 
regard  to  the  Yoga,  one  or  two  observations  from  a  different 
point  of  view  may  not,  however,  be  entirely  out  of  place. 
At  p.  348  the  Yoga  6astra  is  referred  to  eo  nomine.  What 
vSastra  is  here  alluded  to  ?  Is  it  Patan^ali's,  or  some  other 
vSastra  dealing  with  similar  topics?  Or,  again,  is  it  an 
entirely  different  matter  that  is  alluded  to,  and  are  we  not 
to  see  in  the  expression  in  question  an  allusion  to  any  sys- 
tem formally  propounded  ?  I  own,  as  stated  in  the  note  on 
the  passage,  that  my  mind  inclines  to  the  last  view.  There 
is  not  very  much  to  say  on  either  side  of  the  question,  as 
far  as  I  am  able  to  understand  it.  But  the  view  I  incline  to 
appears  to  have  one  small  circumstance  in  its  favour.  At 
p.  349  we  have  an  allusion  to  persons  who  understand  the 
Yoga,  and  to  a  certain  illustration  propounded  by  them. 
Now  who  are  these  persons?  My  limited  knowledge  of 
Yoga  literature  has  not  enabled  me  to  trace  the  illustration 
anywhere  else  than  in  the  Ka/^opanishad,  and  in  the  Sanat- 
su^-atiya.  It  seems  to  me  very  unlikely,  that  the  illustration 
can  have  been  put  forward  in  any  work  older  than  the 
Ka//fc>panishad.  And  we  may,  I  think,  assume  it  as  most 
probable  that  the  Sanatsu^atiya  borrowed  it  from  that  work. 
If  so,  it  is  not  likely  that  the  Anugita  can  have  referred  to 
any  other  master  of  the  Yoga  than  the  author  of  the  Ka//£o- 
panishad.  And  then  it  would  seem  to  follow,  that  the 
Anugita  must  have  been  composed  at  a  time  when,  although 
the  Upanishads  were  looked  on  with  reverence  and  as  works 
of  authority,  they  were  not  yet  regarded  as  part  and  parcel  of 
the  Vedic  revelation1.  It  is  impossible  not  to  perceive,  that 
the  train  of  reasoning  here  is  at  every  stage  hedged  round 
with  difficulties  and  doubts.  And  the  inference  therefore  to 
which  we  are  led  by  it  must  be  accepted  with  proportionate 

1  This  seems  to  be  also  the  implication  of  the  passage  at  p.  309,  where  the 
rules  for  final  emancipation  are  alluded  to. 

P    2 


212  ANUGf  TA. 


caution.  But  if  the  reasoning  is  correct,  it  seems  to  be 
certain,  that  the  Anugita  belongs  to  some  period  prior  to  the 
second,  and  probable,  that  it  belongs  to  some  period  prior 
to  the  third  century,  before  Christ.  For  in  the  second  cen- 
tury before  Christ  was  composed  the  Mahabhashya  of 
Patan^ali,  in  which  Rahasyas — which  is  another  name  for 
Upanishads — are  mentioned  as  forming  part  of  the  Vedic 
literature.  And  in  Apastamba's  Dharma-sutras,  which  are 
older  than  Patan^ali,  Upanishads1  are  mentioned  in  the 
same  way.  I  am  aware  that  it  may  be  said,  that  because 
Upanishads  as  a  class  of  works  are  mentioned  by  Patafi^ali 
and  Apastamba,  it  does  not  follow  that  any  particular  Upa- 
nishad,  such  as  the  Ka/^a,  for  instance,  also  existed  at  that 
time.  This  is  quite  true.  But  without  going  now  into  the 
general  question,  it  is  sufficient  to  point  out,  that  our  argu- 
ment here  is  concerned  merely  with  the  recognition  of  the 
Upanishads  as  a  class  of  works  forming  part  of  the  Vedic 
canon.  Such  recognition  must  have  come  later  than  the 
period  at  which  the  Anugita  could  speak  of  a  passage  in 
the  Ka/^a-upanishad  as  the  utterance  of  Yogavids,  or 
persons  who  understood  the  Yoga. 

Turning  now  to  the  materials  available  for  ascertaining 
the  relative  chronological  positions  of  the  Anugita  and 
the  rise  of  Buddhism,  we  have  again  to  complain  of  their 
unsatisfactory  character.  We  will  briefly  note  the  two  or 
three  circumstances  which  appear  to  have  a  bearing  upon 
this  question.  In  the  first  place,  we  have  the  word  Nir- 
vana used  in  one  passage  of  the  Anugita  in  the  sense  of 
the  highest  tranquillity,  and  there  the  simile  of  the  ex- 
tinction of  the  fire  is  expressly  adduced.  On  this  it  may 
be  argued,  that  if  the  term  Nirvana  had  become  the  well- 
understood  property  of  Buddhism,  such  a  use  of  it  as  we 
find  here  would  probably  not  have  occurred.  Again,  we 
have  the  injunction  that  an  ascetic  must  dwell  in  a 
town  only  for  one  day  and  no  more,  while  he  may  stay 
at  one  place  during  the  rains.  This  is  very  similar  to  an 
injunction  prescribed  by  the  Buddhistic  teachers  also.    But 

1  They  are  also  referred  to  in  the  Buddhistic  Lalita  Vistara,  p.  65. 


INTRODUCTION.  213 


this  fact  furnishes,  I  think,  no  safe  ground  for  a  chronolo- 
gical inference,  more  especially  because,  as  pointed  out  by 
Dr.  Blihler,  the  Buddhistic  injunction  is  itself  only  borrowed 
from  the  Brahminical  rules  on  the  subject1.  It  is  impos- 
sible, therefore,  to  say  that  the  Anugita  borrowed  its 
doctrine  from  Buddhism.  It  is,  of  course,  equally  impos- 
sible on  the  other  hand  to  say,  that  Buddhism  borrowed 
its  rule  from  the  Anugita.  And,  therefore,  we  can  build 
no  safe  inference  upon  this  fact  either.  We  have  next  the 
very  remarkable  passage  at  chapter  XXXIV,  where  various 
contradictory  and  mutually  exclusive  views  of  piety  are 
stated,  or  rather  passingly  and  briefly  indicated — a  passage 
which  one  most  devoutly  wishes  had  been  clearer  than  it 
is.  In  that  passage  I  can  find  no  reference  to  Buddhism. 
True  it  is  that  Nilaka/z^a's  commentary  refers  some  of 
the  doctrines  there  stated  to  Buddhistic  schools 2.  But  that 
commentary,  unsatisfactory  enough  in  other  places,  is  par- 
ticularly unsatisfactory  here.  And  its  critical  accuracy 
may  be  judged  from  its  reference  to  Saugatas  and  Yoga- 
Mras  apparently  as  two  distinct  schools,  whereas  in  truth 
the  Saugatas  are  Buddhists,  and  Yoga^aras  one  of  the 
four  principal  Buddhist  sects.  And  it  must  be  further 
remembered,  that  the  interpretations  of  Nilaka^^a,  upon 
which  his  specifications  of  the  different  schools  are  based, 
are  by  no  means  such  as  necessarily  claim  acceptance.  If 
then  we  do  not  find  any  reference  to  Buddhism  in  this 
passage,  that  fact  becomes  certainly  a  remarkable  one. 
Still,  on  the  other  hand,  I  am  not  prepared  to  apply  the 
'  negative  argument '  here,  and  to  say  that  inasmuch  as 
Buddhism  is  not  referred  to  where  so  many  different 
opinions  are  referred  to,  Buddhism  cannot  have  come 
into  existence  at  the  date  of  the  Anugita.  It  seems  to 
me  that  the  argument  will  here  be  a  very  hazardous  one, 
because  if  the  author  of  the  Anugita  was,  as  we  may  assume 
he  was,  an  orthodox  Hindu,  he  might  well  have  declined, 
although  not  unacquainted  with  Buddhism,  to  put  into 
the  mouths  of  the  seven  sages  even  as  a  possible  view,  that 

1  See  Gautama,  pp.  lv  and  191.     2  See  also  the  gloss  on  chap.  XXXIV,  st.  14. 


214  ANUGITA. 


which  was  the  view  of  a  school  esteemed  heretical  by  the 
author  and  his  co-religionists.  This  passage,  therefore, 
also  fails  to  furnish  any  tangible  ground  for  a  chronological 
inference,  at  all  events  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge. 
Lastly,  we  come  to  the  allusion  to  those  who  indulge  in  con- 
stant talk  in  disparagement  of  Vedas  and  Brahma^as,  the  two 
being  thus  bracketed  together  in  the  original.  That  seems, 
at  the  first  blush,  to  be  a  somewhat  more  distinct  allusion 
to  Buddhism  than  any  of  those  we  have  noted  above.  But 
even  that  is  not  unambiguous.  If  the  stanzas  quoted  by  Ma- 
dhava/£arya,  in  his  Sarvadar^anasahgraha  in  its  first  section, 
are  the  composition  of  the  original  founder  of  the  iTarvaka 
school,  or  even  if  they  correctly  represent  the  earliest 
opinions  of  that  school,  it  is  at  least  quite  as  likely  that 
the  iTarvikas  were  the  target  for  the  denunciations  of 
the  Anugita  in  the  passage  in  question  as  that  the 
Buddhists  were  so.  To  me,  indeed,  it  appears  to  be  more 
likely.  For  Buddha's  opinion  with  regard  to  the  Vedas 
is,  that  they  are  inadequate  ;  with  regard  to  the  Brahma^as, 
that  they  are  in  no  sense  the  chosen  of  God  as  they  claim 
to  be.  The  opinion  of  the  .AT&rvakas,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a 
far  more  aggressive  one,  so  to  say.  According  to  Madha- 
v^arya,  they  taught  that  the  Vedas  were  either  simple 
fatuity  or  imposture,  and  that  the  Brahma/zas  were  im- 
postors. It  seems  to  me  much  more  likely,  that  this, 
which  I  have  called  a  comparatively  aggressive  attitude,  was 
the  one  at  which  the  remarks  of  the  Anugita  were  levelled ; 
and  more  especially  does  this  appear  to  be  correct  when 
we  remember,  that  the  view  taught  by  Gautama  Buddha 
regarding  the  Vedas  and  the  Brahma^as  was  propounded 
by  him  only  in  its  strongest  form ;  and  that  even  before 
his  time,  the  doctrine  of  the  inadequacy  of  the  Vedas  for  the 
purpose  of  securing  the  summum  bonum  of  humanity 
had  been  taught  by  other  teachers.  It  is  further  to  be 
recollected,  that  we  have  evidence  showing  that  other 
thinkers  also  than  Buddha,  or  Br/haspati,  had  in  early 
days  attacked  the  authority  of  the  Vedas.  Kautsa  is  the 
name  of  one  who  was  probably  the  most  distinguished 
among  them.     It  is  certainly  possible  that  his  followers 


INTRODUCTION.  2  1 5 


were  the  people  branded  as  of  c  the  dark  quality '  by  the 
Anugita  in  the  passage  in  question.  We  have,  therefore, 
at  least  two  different  recognised  bodies  of  thinkers,  and 
one  individual  thinker,  to  whom  the  words  under  dis- 
cussion may  apply,  and  it  is  plainly  unsafe,  under  these 
circumstances,  to  draw  any  chronological  inference  based 
on  the  hypothesis  of  one  particular  body  out  of  those 
three  being  the  one  intended  by  the  author.  Before 
closing  this  part  of  the  investigation,  it  may  be  interesting 
to  note,  that  the  phrase  '  turning  the  wheel/  a  phrase  now 
so  familiar  to  us  as  one  of  the  household  words  of  Buddhism, 
is  used  in  the  Anugita  with  respect  to  King  (kanaka.  I  do 
not  think,  however,  that  either  alone,  or  even  coupled  with 
the  word  Nirvana,  that  phrase  can  be  made  the  basis  of  any 
legitimate  deduction  in  favour  of  the  priority  of  the  Anugita 
to  Buddhism.  At  the  outside,  the  only  deduction  admissible, 
if  any  deduction  were  admissible,  would  be,  that  the  Anu- 
gita was  composed  prior  to  the  recognition,  of  Nirvana  and 
iTakrapravartana  as  specially  Buddhistic  words.  But 
priority  to  such  recognition  is  not,  I  apprehend,  necessarily 
synonymous  with  priority  to  the  rise  of  Buddhism. 

The  net  result  of  this  part  of  the  investigation  appears 
to  be,  that  we  have  pretty  strong  grounds  for  holding  the 
Anugita  to  belong  to  a  period  very  considerably  removed 
from  the  period  of  the  Upanishads  and  the  Bhagavadgita ; 
but  that  we  have  no  tangible  grounds  on  which  to  base  any 
deduction  regarding  its  priority  or  otherwise  to  the  Sankhya 
and  Yoga  systems  of  philosophy,  or  to  the  great  movement 
of  Gautama  Buddha.  There  is  only  one  other  point,  which 
we  can  establish  in  a  not  entirely  unsatisfactory  way,  and 
which  enables  us  to  draw  closer  the  limits  within  which  the 
Anugita  must  have  been  composed.  That  point  is  the 
position  of  the  Anugita  with  reference  to  Apastamba's 
Dharma-sutra.  I  need  not  say  again,  that  I  accept  here 
the  proposition  about  the  age  of  Apastamba  which  has  been 
laid  down  by  Dr.  Blihler,  as  a  sufficiently  satisfactory  work- 
ing hypothesis.  And  accepting  that  proposition,  I  venture 
to  suggest  the  fourth  century  B.C.  as  a  not  unlikely  date 
for  the  Anugita.     It  appears  to  me,  that  a  comparison  of 


2l6  ANUGITA. 


the  Anugita  and  the  rules  of  Apastamba  upon  one  impor- 
tant point  which  they  both  deal  with  shows  the  priority  of 
the  former  work.  I  allude  to  the  rules  and  regulations 
touching  the  four  A-sramas  or  orders  contained  in  the  Anu- 
gita and  in  the  Dharma-sutra  of  Apastamba.  One  circum- 
stance strikes  us  at  once  on  comparing  the  two  works  on 
this  point.  Apastamba  goes  into  a  very  great  deal  of 
minute  details  more  than  the  Anugita,  although  the  latter 
work  does  not  deal  with  the  topic  in  any  very  summary 
mode.  Taking  all  the  differences  between  the  two  works 
together,  and  the  fact  that  the  Anugita  sets  about  the  dis- 
cussion of  the  topic  in  a  manner  which  seems  intended  to 
be — not,  indeed,  absolutely  exhaustive,  but  still — very  full, 
I  am  very  strongly  inclined  to  attribute  the  differences  to 
an  actual  development  and  progress  of  doctrine.  I  will 
endeavour  to  illustrate  this  view  by  means  of  a  few  detailed 
instances1.  And  let  us  first  take  the  order  of  householders 
to  which  the  Anugita  gives  precedence  over  the  others. 
One  of  the  injunctions  laid  down  by  the  Anugita  is  that  the 
householder  should  always  be  devoted  to  his  wife.  Against 
this  simple  precept,  we  have  a  very  minute  series  of  rules 
prescribed  by  Apastamba,  which  it  is  not  necessary  to  refer 
to  specifically,  but  which  may  be  seen  in  several  of  the 
Sutras  contained  in  the  first  Kha/z^a  of  the  first  Pa/ala  of 
the  second  Pra^na.  Compare  again  the  excessive  minute- 
ness of  the  rules  regarding  the  Bali-ofifering  or  the  reception 
of  guests,  as  given  by  Apastamba,  with  the  simple  statement 
of  the  Anugita  that  the  five  great  sacrifices  should  be  per- 
formed. There  again,  I  think,  we  are  to  see  in  this  difference 
of  treatment  the  result  of  a  pretty  long  course  of  ceremonial 
progress.  Proceeding  to  the  rules  regarding  the  Brahma- 
£arin  or  student,  an  analogous  phenomenon  meets  us  there. 
Taking  first  the  subject  of  food,  we  have  a  considerable 
number  of  detailed  injunctions  in  Apastamba,  compared  with 
the  simple  rule  of  the  Anugita,  that  the  student  should,  with 
the  leave  of  his  preceptor,  eat  his  food  without  decrying  it. 
Again  with  regard  to  alms,  whereas  the  Anugita  simply 

1  Cf.  pp.  358,  360  infra  with  Apastamba,  pp.  9  seq.,  103  seq.,  114  seq. 


INTRODUCTION.  21 J 


says  that  the  student  should  take  his  food  out  of  the  alms 
received  by  him,  Apastamba  has  an  elaborate  catena  of 
rules  as  to  how  the  alms  are  to  be  collected,  and  from  whom, 
and  so  forth.  Take  again  the  provisions  in  the  two  works 
regarding  the  description  of  the  cloth,  staff,  and  girdle  of  the 
student.  Apastamba  refers  to  various  opinions  on  this 
subject,  of  which  there  is  not  even  a  trace  in  the  Anugita1. 
It  appears  that  even  before  Apastamba's  time,  distinctions 
had  been  laid  down  as  to  the  description  of  girdle  staff  and 
cloth  to  be  used  by  the  different  castes — distinctions  of  which 
there  is  no  hint  in  the  Anugita,  where  all  students,  of  what- 
ever caste,  are  spoken  of  under  the  generic  name.  These 
distinctions  appear  to  me  to  point  very  strongly  to  that 
ceremonial  and  doctrinal  progress  of  which  we  have  spoken 
above.  The  tendency  is  visible  in  them  to  sever  the  Brah- 
ma/zas  from  the  other  castes — by  external  marks.  And  that 
tendency,  it  seems  to  me,  must  have  set  in,  as  the  merits 
which  had  given  the  Brahma/za  caste  its  original  position  at 
the  head  of  Hindu  society  were  ceasing  to  be  a  living  reality, 
and  that  caste  was  intrenching  itself,  so  to  say,  more  behind 
the  worth  and  work  of  the  early  founders  of  its  greatness,  than 
the  worth  and  work  of  their  degenerating  representatives. 
These  comparisons,  taken  together,  appear  to  me  to  warrant 
the  proposition  we  have  already  laid  down  with  regard  to 
the  priority  of  the  Anugita  to  Apastamba.  If  we  have  not 
referred  to  the  rules  relating  to  the  two  other  orders  of 
forester  and  ascetic,  it  is  because  the  scope  for  a  comparison 
of  those  is  very  limited.  Those  rules  alone  would  scarcely 
authorise  the  inference  drawn  above ;  but  I  can  perceive 
nothing  in  them  to  countervail  the  effect  of  the  comparisons 
already  made.  And  it  must  be  remembered,  that  the  rules 
as  to  foresters  and  ascetics  would  be  less  apt  to  undergo 
change  than  those  as  to  students  and  householders. 

It  appears  to  me  that  the  view  we  have  now  expressed 
may  be  also  supported  by  a  comparison  of  the  doctrines  of 
the  Anugita  and  Apastamba  touching  the  duties  of  Brah- 
ma^as.     According  to  Apastamba,  the  occupations  lawful 


Cf.  also  Biihler's  Gautama,  p.  175. 


218  anug!tA. 


to  Brahma/zas  are  the  famous  six  referred  to  in  our  Intro- 
duction to  the  Bhagavadgtta,  and  two  others  superadded, 
namely,  inheritance  and  gleaning  corn  in  the  fields.  These 
last  are  not  mentioned  in  the  Anugita,  or  in  Manu 
either,  and  are,  even  according  to  Apastamba,  common  to 
Brahma^as  with  Kshatriyas  and  Vauyas.  But  as  regards 
the  six  above  referred  to,  it  is  worthy  of  note,  that  the 
Anugita  apparently  groups  them  into  two  distinct  sets  of 
three.  The  first  set  of  three  consists  of  those  which,  in  our 
Introduction  to  the  Bhagavadgtta,  we  have  characterised  as 
constituting  rather  the  rights  than  the  duties  of  Brahma^as, 
and  which  the  Anugita  describes  as  '  means  of  livelihood  for 
Brahma/zas.'  The  other  set  of  three  consists  of  real  duties,  and 
these  the  AnugM  speaks  of  as  'pious  duties/  This  grouping 
appears  to  me  to  furnish  powerful  corroboration  of  the  view 
put  forward  in  our  Introduction  to  the  Bhagavadgtta.  It 
would  seem,  that  the  possession  of  the  moral  and  spiritual 
merits  which,  according  to  the  Gtta,  constituted  the  duty  of 
Brahma^as,  in  the  simple  and  archaic  society  there  disclosed, 
was  developed,  in  a  more  advanced  and  artificial  state  of 
society,  into  the  performance  of  the 'pious  duties'  of  the  Anu- 
gita and  the  duties  which  are '  the  means  of  livelihood.5  Then 
in  the  further  social  evolution,  in  the  course  of  which  the  old 
spiritual  view  began  to  be  forgotten,  and  the  actual  facts  of 
the  past  began  to  be  transmuted  into  the  dogmatic  rules  of 
the  future,  the  occupations  of  receiving  presents,  imparting 
instruction,  and  officiating  at  sacrifices,  became  the  special 
occupations  of  the  Brahma/zas,  and  the  distinction  between 
these  occupations  from  their  higher  duties  was  thrown  into 
the  background ;  and  accordingly  we  find  no  allusion  to  any 
such  distinction  in  Apastamba  or  Manu,  or,  as  far  as  I  know, 
in  any  other  later  embodiment  of  the  current  ideas  on  the 
subject1.  If  all  this  has  been  correctly  argued,  the  conclusion 
derivable  from  it  is  in  entire  accord  with  that  which  we  have 
already  drawn,  namely,  that  the  Bhagavadgtta,  the  Anugita, 
and  the  Dharma-sutra  of  Apastamba,  belong  to  different 

1  In  Gautama  X,  1-3,  the  '  pious  duties '  are  called  '  obligatory,'  the  others 
'  additional  for  Brahmaraas.'  See  the  note  on  the  passage  in  Biihler's  edition, 
and  cf.  Gautama  VIII,  9,  10. 


INTRODUCTION.  219 


stages  of  ancient  Indian  history,  and  that  the  stage  to 
which  the  Gita  belongs  is  the  earliest,  and  that  to  which 
Apastamba  belongs,  the  latest  of  such  stages. 

I  am  unable  to  find  anything  else  in  the  way  of  internal 
evidence  bearing  upon  the  date  of  the  Anugita.  It  appears 
to  me,  that  the  date  to  which  the  investigation  we  have 
now  gone  through  leads  us,  is  one  which,  in  the  present 
state  of  our  information,  may  be  fairly  accepted  as  a  pro- 
visional hypothesis.  It  does  not  appear  to  me  to  conflict 
with  any  ascertained  dates,  while  it  is  pointed  to  as  pro- 
bable by  the  various  lines  of  testimony  which  we  have  here 
considered.  We  now  proceed  to  discuss  one  or  two  other 
points  which  may  have  a  bearing  upon  this  topic,  but  which 
at  present  cannot  yield  us  any  positive  guidance  in  our 
search  for  the  date  of  the  Anugita.  And  first  among  these, 
let  us  consider  the  various  names  of  deities  that  occur 
in  different  parts  of  the  work.  We  have,  then,  Vish/zu, 
vSambhu,  Gishnu,  Soma,  Aditya,  Surya,  Mitra,  Agnij 
iTandra,  Rudra,  .Siva,  Varu^a,  Pra^apati,  Maghavat, 
Purandara,  Indra,  Brahman,  6atakratu,  Dharma,  Naraya^a, 
Vayu,  Yama,  Tvash^W,  Hari,  t^vara,  and  lastly  Uma  under 
three  different  names,  namely,  Uma,  Mahe^vari,  and  Par- 
vati.  Now,  leaving  aside  for  the  moment  the  three  names 
of  Uma,  which  appear  from  the  passage  where  they  are 
used  to  be  all  three  the  names  of  the  same  goddess,  there 
is  no  doubt  that  in  the  list  above  set  out,  some  of  the  names 
are  merely  used  in  different  passages,  but  still  to  indicate 
the  same  being.  Thus,  Indra,  vSatakratu,  Purandara,  and 
Maghavat  are  really  the  names  of  one  and  the  same  deity. 
But  when  Soma  is  mentioned  as  the  deity  presiding  over 
the  tongue,  and  iTandramas  as  the  deity  presiding  over 
the  mind,  it  becomes  doubtful  whether  the  two  names 
do  really  indicate  the  same  deity,  albeit  in  later  Sanskrit 
Soma  and  iTandramas  both  signify  the  moon.  Similarly, 
when  Arka  is  said  to  be  the  deity  presiding  over  the  eye, 
and  Mitra  over  another  organ,  it  seems  open  to  question 
whether  Arka  and  Mitra  both  signify  the  sun  there,  as 
they  undoubtedly  do  in  classical  Sanskrit.  True  it  is,  that 
even  in  such  a  recent  work  as  the  Sankhya-sara,  this  mention 


2  20  ANUGITA. 


of  Arka  and  Mitra  as  presiding  deities  of  two  several 
organs  does  occur.  But  it  is  plain,  that  that  circumstance 
can  have  no  bearing  on  the  inquiry  before  us,  for  the 
Sankhya-sara  is  avowedly  a  compilation  based  on  older 
authorities,  and  in  the  particular  part  under  consideration, 
really  reproduces  a  passage  from  some  older  work.  It  can- 
not, therefore,  be  argued,  that  because  Arka  and  Mitra  were 
identified  with  one  another  at  the  time  of  the  Sankhya-sara, 
and  yet  are  mentioned  as  deities  of  two  separate  organs, 
therefore,  they  must  have  also  been  regarded  as  one  in 
the  older  original  work  where  they  are  also  mentioned  as 
deities  of  two  separate  organs.  And  it  may,  perhaps,  be 
remarked  here  in  passing,  that  the  Vedanta  Paribhasha  has 
Mrztyu  instead  of  Mitra,  which  would  get  rid  of  the  diffi- 
culty here  altogether ;  while  as  regards  Soma  and  iTandra- 
mas,  the  passage  in  the  Sankhya-sara  reads  Pra^etas  instead 
of  Soma,  which  would  get  rid  of  the  other  difficulty  above 
pointed  out.  Whether  these  discrepancies  are  owing  to  any 
tampering  with  the  lists  of  organs  and  deities,  at  a  time 
when  the  later  identifications  between  different  deities  took 
place,  or  whether  they  are  to  be  explained  on  some  other 
theory,  it  is  impossible  at  present  to  say.  And,  therefore, 
it  is  also  unnecessary  to  pursue  the  inquiry  here  any  further. 
It  must  suffice  for  the  present  to  have  drawn  attention  to 
the  matter. 

Akin  to  this  point,  though  quite  distinct  from  it,  is  one 
which  arises  on  a  passage  where  the  emancipated  being 
is  identified  with  Vishnu,  Mitra,  Agni,  Varu^a,  and  Pra^a- 
pati1.  Now  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose,  that  the  deities  thus 
specified  here  must  have  been  among  those  held  in  highest 
repute  at  the  time,  the  whole  significance  of  the  passage 
where  they  are  mentioned  requiring  that  that  should  be 
so.  But  in  our  Pantheon  as  disclosed  by  our  later  litera- 
ture, Mitra  and  Agni  and  Varu/za  occupy  but  a  very  sub- 
ordinate position.  Even  in  Kalidasa2,  the  subordination 
of  these  deities  to  our  celebrated  Trinity  seems  to  be  quite 

1  See  p.  345. 

2  See  inter  alia,  Kumara  II,  20  seq.,  and  VII,  44  seq.,  and  cf.  our  Bhartnhari 
(Bombay  Sanskrit  Classics),  Introd.  p.  xix. 


INTRODUCTION.  221 


fully  established.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  in  the  Vedic 
theogony,  they  are  among  the  most  prominent  deities.  In 
the  Taittiriya-upanishad,  we  have  in  the  very  first  sentence 
Mitra,  Varu/za,  Vishnu,  and  Brahman  (who  may  be  iden- 
tified with  Pra^apati)  all  mentioned  together,  and  their 
blessings  invoked.  This  does  not  help  in  fixing  a  date  for 
the  Anugita ;  but  it  lends  some  support  to  the  conclusion 
already  arrived  at  on  that  point,  by  showing  that  the 
theogony  of  the  Anugita  is  not  yet  very  far  removed  from 
the  theogony  of  the  Vedic  times,  while  it  is  separated  by 
a  considerable  interval  from  the  theogony  disclosed  in  the 
works  of  even  such  an  early  writer  of  the  classical  period 
as  Kalidasa. 

Another  point  of  similar  bearing  on  our  present  investi- 
gation is  the  mode  in  which  the  story  of  Para^urama  is 
dealt  with  in  the  Anugita.  There  is  in  the  first  place  no 
allusion  to  his  being  an  incarnation  of  Vishnu,  nor  to  the 
encounter  between  him  and  his  namesake,  the  son  of 
Dai-aratha  and  the  hero  of  the  Rdmaya^a.  We  have,  on 
the  contrary,  an  explicit  statement,  that  after  the  advice 
of  the  '  Pitrzs '  he  entirely  abandons  the  slaughter  of  the 
Kshatriyas,  and  resorting  to  penance  thereby  achieves 
final  emancipation.  We  have  elsewhere  argued  1}  that  the 
theory  of  Parai-urama  being  an  incarnation  of  Vishnu,  must 
have  probably  originated  prior  to  the  time  of  Bhartrzhari, 
but  later  than  the  time  of  Kalidasa.  The  allusion  to 
Para^urama  in  the  work  before  us  does  not,  however,  enable 
us  to  judge  of  its  chronological  position  with  reference  to 
Kalidasa.  But  the  last  point  discussed  renders  it  unnecessary 
to  consider  this  question  further.  It  may  be  noted,  by  the 
way,  that  the  Anugita  represents  Para^urama,  although 
living  in  the  Aj-rama  or  hermitage  of  his  father,  who  was  a 
Rzshi,  as  mounting  a  chariot  for  the  purpose  of  sweeping 
away  the  kinsmen  of  Kartavirya.  Whence  he  obtained  a 
chariot  in  a  hermitage,  the  Anugita  does  not  explain. 

In  connexion  with  the  episode  of  Para^urama,  may  be 
noted  the  list  which  occurs  in   the   course   of  it,  of  the 


1  See  'Was  the  Ramayawa  copied  from  Homer V  pp.  56,  57. 


22  2  ANUg!tA. 


degraded  Kshatriya  tribes,  of  Dravk/as,  6abaras,  &c.  I  am 
unable  to  see  that  those  names  can  give  us  any  further 
help  in  our  present  investigation  than  in  so  far  as  they 
show  that,  at  the  time  of  the  Anugita,  there  must  have 
been  some  information  about  the  south  of  India  available 
in  the  districts  where  the  author  of  the  Anugita  lived. 
Some  of  the  tribes  mentioned  appear  to  have  been  located 
far  in  the  south  of  the  Indian  peninsula.  But  this  is  a 
point  on  which  we  shall  have  to  say  something  more  in 
discussing  the  next  item  of  internal  evidence  to  which  we 
shall  refer.  Here  it  is  enough  to  point  out  that  some  of 
the  tribes  mentioned  in  the  Anugita  are  also  referred  to 
in  no  less  a  work  than  the  Aitareya-brahma^a1. 

We  come  next  to  the  enumeration  of  the  principal 
mountains  which  is  contained  in  one  passage  of  the  Anu- 
gita. Those  mountains  are  the  Himalaya,  the  Pariyatra, 
the  Sahya,  the  Vindhya,  the  Triku^avat,  the  Sveta,  the 
Nila,  the  Bhasa,  the  Kosh^avat,  the  Mahendra,  the  Malya- 
vat,  and  perhaps  the  Guruskandha.  I  am  not  sure  whether 
the  last  name  is  intended  to  be  taken  as  a  proper  name, 
or  only  as  an  epithet  of  Mahendra.  Now  compared  with 
the  mountains  mentioned  in  the  Bhagavadgita,  this  is  cer- 
tainly a  remarkable  list.  The  Gita  mentions  only  Meru2 
and  Himalaya;  while  here  we  have  in  the  Anugita  the 
Sahya,  and  Malaya,  and  Triku/avat,  and  Nila  (the  same,  I 
presume,  with  the  modern  Nilgiri,  the  Sanatarium  of  the 
Madras  Presidency),  which  take  us  far  to  the  west  and 
south  of  the  Indian  peninsula;  and  the  Mahendra  and 
Malyavat,  which,  coupled  with  the  mention  of  the  river 
Ganges,  cover  a  considerable  part  of  the  eastern  districts. 
The  Pariyatra  and  Vindhya  occupy  the  regions  of  Central 
India.  The  Anugita,  therefore,  seems  to  belong  to  that 
period  in  the  history  of  India,  when  pretty  nearly  the  whole, 

1  Haug's  ed.,  p.  183.  And  see  generally  on  these  tribes,  Wils on' s  Vishmi  Purarca 
(Hall's  ed.),  vol.  ii,  p.  i7oseq.,  and  .Santi  Parvan  (Moksha),  chap.  207,  st.42. 

2  This  is  also  mentioned  in  the  Anugita,  but  in  a  different  passage.  The  Nila 
is  said  by  Professor  Wilson  to  be  a  mountain  in  Orissa.  But  our  suggestion  has, 
I  find,  been  already  made  by  Dr.  F.  E.  Hall  also ;  see  on  this,  and  generally, 
Wilsons  Vish/ra  Pura^a,  vol.  ii,  p.  141  seq.  (ed.  Hall).  See  also  Indian 
Antiquary,  VI,  133  seq. 


INTRODUCTION.  223 


if  not  absolutely  the  whole,  of  the  Indian  continent  was 
known  to  the  Sanskrit-speaking  population  of  the  country. 
When  was  this  knowledge  reached?  It  is  difficult  to  fix 
the  precise  period  ;  and  even  if  it  could  be  fixed,  it  would 
not  help  us  to  fix  satisfactorily  any  point  of  time  to  which 
the  Anugita  could  be  attributed.  But  it  may  be  pointed 
out  here,  that  in  Patafi^ali's  Mahabhashya  we  have  evidence 
of  such  knowledge  having  been  possessed  by  the  Aryas  in 
the  second  century  B.C.  In  truth,  the  evidence  available 
in  the  Mahabhashya  is  even  fuller  than  this  in  the  Anu- 
gita. For  Patan^ali  tells  us  of  a  town  or  city  in  the  south 
named  Kan^ipura 1 ;  he  speaks  of  the  dominions  of  the 
Pa^ya  kings,  and  of  the  Kola,  and  Kerala  districts 2 ; 
he  refers  also  to  the  large  tanks  of  the  south ;  and  he 
makes  allusions  to  linguistic  usages  current  in  the  southern 
and  other  provinces3.  Before  Patafi^ali's  time  there 
had  taken  place  Mahendra's  invasion  of  Ceylon,  and  the 
invading  army  must  have  penetrated  through  the  southern 
provinces.  And  there  had  been  also  put  up  the  great 
Inscriptions  of  A^oka,  which  have  attracted  so  much  in- 
terest, and  are  proving  such  prolific  sources  of  information 
in  various  departments  of  knowledge.  One  of  these  inscrip- 
tions was  at  Gafi^-am,  which  is  not  very  far  from  the 
Mahendra  mountain  alluded  to  in  the  Anugita4.  All  these 
facts  support  the  conclusion  drawn  by  General  Cunningham 
from  the  correctness  of  the  information  given  to  Alexander 
the  Great  by  the  Hindus  of  his  time,  namely,  that  '  the 
Indians,  even  at  that  early  date  in  their  history,  had  a  very 
accurate  knowledge  of  the  form  and  extent  of  their  native 
land5.'  And  not  only  do  they  support  that  conclusion, 
they  show  that  the  knowledge  covered  other  facts  regarding 


1  Banaras  ed.,  p.  74  (IV,  2,  2). 

2  P.  60  (IV,  1,  4).    See  also  p.  65. 

3  See  Mahabhashya,  p.  82  (1, 1,  5),  p.  16  (1, 1,1) ;  and  cf.  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts, 
vol.ii,  pp.  152,  355. 

*  See  Cunningham's  Corpus  Inscriptionum,  I,  p.  I. 

5  See  Ancient  Geography  of  India,  p.  3.  And  compare  also  the  information 
collected  in  the  Periplus  of  the  Eurythrysean  Sea  (translated  by  Mr.  McRindle), 
pp.  1 1 2-1 36,  where  a  large  number  of  ports  is  mentioned  as  existing  on  the 
Indian  coasts.  The  Periplus  seems  to  date  from  about  90  a.  d.  (see  ibid.  p.  5). 


224  ANUGITA. 


their  native  land  than  its  form  and  extent.  It  follows  con- 
sequently that  this  enumeration  of  mountains  does  not 
require  the  date  of  the  Anugita  to  be  brought  down  to 
a  later  period  than  the  fourth  century  B.  c,  and  leaves  it 
open  to  us,  therefore,  to  accept  whatever  conclusion  the 
other  evidence  available  may  seem  to  justify.  On  the 
other  hand,  it  is  plain  also,  that  it  affords  no  positive 
information  as  to  when  the  Anugita  was  composed,  and 
therefore  we  need  not  dwell  any  further  upon  the  point 
on  the  present  occasion. 

There  are  a  few  other  points  which  arise  upon  the  contents 
of  the  Anugita,  but  which  are  not,  in  the  present  condition 
of  our  knowledge,  capable  of  affording  any  certain  guidance 
in  our  present  investigation.  Thus  we  have  the  story  of 
Dharma  appearing  before  king  (kanaka  disguised  as  a  Brah- 
ma/za.  I  am  not  aware  of  any  case  of  such  disguises  occur- 
ring in  any  of  the  Upanishads,  although  there  are  numerous 
parallel  instances  throughout  the  Puranik  literature1.  It  is, 
however,  difficult  to  draw  any  definite  chronological  infer- 
ence from  this  fact.  There  is  further  the  reference  to  the 
attack  of  Rahu  on  the  sun.  It  is  difficult,  in  the  present 
state  of  our  knowledge,  to  say  for  certain,  when  the  theory 
of  eclipses  there  implied  was  prevalent.  In  the  KMndogya,- 
upanishad2  we  have  the  emancipated  self  compared  to  the 
moon  escaped  from  the  mouth  of  Rahu.  And  a  text  of  the 
Rig-veda,  quoted  by  Mr.  Ya^nesvara  Gastrin  in  his  Arya- 
vidyasudhakara3,  speaks  of  the  demon  Rahu  attacking  the 
sun  with  darkness.  Here  again  we  have  another  matter  of 
some  interest ;  but  I  cannot  see  that  any  safe  deduction  can 
be  derived  from  it,  without  a  more  ample  knowledge  of 
other  relevant  matters  than  is  at  present  accessible.  Take 
again  the  references  to  certain  practices  which  look  very 
much  like  the  practices  of  the  Gainas  of  the  present  day. 
Is  the  Anugita,  then,  earlier  or  later  than  the  rise  of  the 
Gaina  system  ?  It  is  not  safe,  I  think,  to  found  an  answer 
to  this  question  upon  the  very  narrow  basis  afforded  by  the 

1  And  see,  too,  Kalidasa  Kumara  V,  st.  84.  2  P.  622. 

3  P.  26.      In  Kalidasa's  Raghuvamsa  the   true   explanation   of  eclipses  is 
alluded  to.    See  Canto  XIV,  40. 


INTRODUCTION.  2  25 


passage  referred  to.  But  it  may  be  observed,  that  the  pre- 
cepts laid  down  in  the  passage  in  question  are  laid  down  as 
precepts  for  orthodox  Hindus,  and  not  as  the  doctrines  of 
a  heretical  sect.  They  are  also  very  general,  and  not  so 
minute  as  those  which  the  Cainas  of  the  present  day  observe 
as  binding  upon  them.  If,  therefore,  any  conclusion  is  to  be 
drawn  from  these  precepts,  it  must  be  that  the  Anugita 
must  have  been  composed  prior  to  the  rise  of  Cainism ;  and 
that  Gainism  must  have  appropriated  and  developed  this 
doctrine  which  it  obtained  from  the  current  Br&hmanism1. 
If  this  is  so,  the  Anugitd  must  be  a  very  ancient  work 
indeed.  It  is  not,  however,  necessary  to  further  work  out 
this  line  of  argument,  having  regard  to  the  opinions  recently 
expressed  by  Mr.  Thomas2,  rehabilitating  the  views  enun- 
ciated long  ago  by  Colebrooke  and  others.  If  those  views 
are  correct,  and  if  Cainism  was  a  dominant  system  in  this 
country  prior  even  to  the  time  of  Gautama  Buddha,  and  if, 
further,  we  are  right  in  the  suggestion — for  it  is  no  more, 
it  must  be  remembered — that  the  Anugttd  dates  from  a 
period  prior  to  the  rise  of  Gainism,  then  it  would  seem  to 
follow  that  the  Anugita  belongs  to  some  period  prior  to  the 
sixth  century  B.C.  All  this,  however,  is  at  present  very 
hypothetical,  and  we  draw  attention  to  it  only  that  the 
question  may  be  hereafter  considered  when  fuller  materials 
for  adjudicating  upon  it  become  accessible.  Meanwhile, 
having  regard  to  the  views  above  alluded  to  as  so  elabo- 
rately put  forward  by  Mr.  Thomas,  it  is  possible  for  us  still 
to  hold  that,,  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge,  the  third 
or  fourth  century  B.C.  is  not  too  early  a  date  to  assign  to 
the  Anugiti,  even  on  the  assumption  that  the  precepts 
contained  in  that  work  regarding  the  care  to  be  taken  of 
worms  and  insects  were  borrowed  by  it  from  the  Gaina 
system.  With  this  negative  result,  we  must  for  the  present 
rest  contented. 

One  other  fact  of  similar  nature  to  those  we  have  now 

1  As  the  Buddhists  did  in  sundry  instances.    Cf.  inter  alia  Buhler's  Gautama, 
pp.  lv  and  191.  And  cf.  also  *  Was  the  Ramayawa  copied  from  Homer?'  pp.  48,  49. 

2  See  Mr.  Thomas's  very  elaborate  discussion  of  the  whole  subject  in  the 
Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society  (New  Series),  vol.  ix,  p.  155  seq. 

[8]  Q 


226  ANUGiTA. 


dealt  with  may,  perhaps,  be  also  noticed  here.  We  allude 
to  the  stanzas  which  we  find  in  the  Anugita  and  also  in  the 
6anti  Parvan  of  the  MaMbharata  and  in  the  Manusmrzti. 
There  is  also  one  which  the  Anugita  has  in  common  with 
the  ParLrish/a  of  Y&ska's  Nirukta1.  It  is  not  possible,  I 
conceive,  to  say  finally  whether  one  of  these  works  borrowed 
these  stanzas  from  the  other  of  them ;  while,  on  the  other 
hand,  it  is  quite  possible,  as  already  argued  by  us  in  the 
Introduction  to  the  GM,  that  all  these  works  were  only  repro- 
ducing from  some  entirely  different  work,  or  that  the  stanzas 
in  question  were  the  common  property  of  the  thinkers  of 
the  time.  We  have  no  means  available  for  deciding  between 
these  conflicting  hypotheses. 

We  have  thus  noticed  all  the  salient  points  in  the  evidence, 
external  and  internal,  which  is  available  for  determining  the 
position  of  the  Anugita  in  our  ancient  literature.  Nobody 
who  has  seen  even  a  little  of  the  history  of  that  literature 
will  be  surprised  at  the  quantity  or  quality  of  that  evidence, 
or  the  nature  of  the  conclusions  legitimately  yielded  by  it. 
We  have  endeavoured  to  express  those  conclusions  in  lan- 
guage which  should  not  indicate  any  greater  certainty  as 
attaching  to  them  than  can  fairly  be  claimed  for  them. 
The  net  result  appears  to  be  this.  The  AnugM  may  be 
taken  with  historical  certainty  to  have  been  some  centuries 
old  in  the  time  of  the  great  *Sankar&£Arya.  It  was  very 
probably  older  than  the  Dharma-sutras  of  Apastamba,  but 
by  what  period  of  time  we  are  not  in  a  position  at  present 
to  define.  It  was,  perhaps,  older  also  than  the  rise  of 
Buddhism  and  Gainism,  and  of  the  Yoga  philosophy ;  but 
on  this  it  is  impossible  to  say  anything  with  any  approach 
to  confidence.  It  is,  on  the  other  hand,  almost  certain  that 
it  belongs  to  a  period  very  considerably  removed  from  the 
older  Upanishads  ;  probably  removed  by  a  distance  of  some 
centuries,  during  which  *  stories'  not  contained  in  the  Upa- 
nishads had  not  only  obtained  currency,  but  also  come  to  be 
regarded  as  belonging  to  antiquity2.    And  yet  the  period  to 

1  Cf.  Anugita  I,  36  with  Yaska  (ed.  Roth),  p.  190. 

2  Some  of  the  Puratana  Itihasas,  e.  g.  that  of  Narada  and  Devamata,  are 
not  traceable  in  any  Vedic  work  known  to  us.  Devamata's  name  I  do  not  find 
referred  to  anywhere  else. 


INTRODUCTION.  2  2  7 


which  the  work  belongs  was  one  in  which  the  Upanishads 
were  only  reverenced  as  the  authoritative  opinions  of  emi- 
nent men,  not  as  the  words  of  God  himself1.  In  this  respect, 
it  may  be  said  that  the  Anugita  seems  rather  to  belong  to 
an  earlier  stratum  of  thought  than  even  the  Sanatsu^-atiya, 
in  which  a  Gfianaka^a,  as  forming  a  part  of  the  Vedic 
canon,  seems  to  be  recognised2.  But  it  is  abundantly  clear, 
that  the  Anugita  stands  at  a  very  considerable  chronological 
distance  from  the  Bhagavadgita. 

Such  are  the  results  of  our  investigation.  We  have  not 
thought  it  necessary  to  discuss  the  verse  or  the  language  of 
the  work.  But  it  must  in  fairness  be  pointed  out,  that  upon 
the  whole,  the  verse  and  language  are  both  pretty  near  the 
classical  model.  There  are,  it  is  true,  a  few  instances  of  the 
metrical  anomalies  we  have  noticed  elsewhere,  but  having 
regard  to  the  extent  of  the  work,  those  instances  are  far 
from  being  very  numerous.  The  language  and  style,  too, 
are  not  quite  smooth  and  polished ;  though,  judging 
from  them  alone,  I  should  rather  be  inclined  to  place  the 
Sanatsu^-atiya  prior  to  the  Anugita.  But  that  suggests  a 
question  which  we  cannot  now  stop  to  discuss. 

One  word,  in  conclusion,  about  the  translation.  The  text 
used  has  been  chiefly  that  adopted  in  the  commentary  of 
Ar^una  Mura,  a  commentary  which  on  the  whole  I  prefer 
very  much  to  that  of  Nllaka»*Aa,  which  has  been  printed  in 
the  Bombay  edition  of  the  Mahabharata.  Ar^una  Mura, 
as  a  rule,  affords  some  explanation  where  explanation  is 
wanted,  and  does  not  endeavour  to  suit  his  text  to  any  fore- 
gone conclusion.  His  comments  have  been  of  the  greatest 
possible  help  to  me ;  and  my  only  regret  is  that  the  only 
copy  of  his  commentary  which  was  available  to  me,  and  the 
use  of  which  I  owe  to  the  kindness  of  my  friend  Professor 
Bha^a&rkar,  was  not  as  correct  a  one  as  could  be  desired. 
I  have  also  looked  into  the  Vishamadoki,  a  short  work 
containing  notes  on  difficult  passages  of  the  Mahabharata. 

1  See  p.  2 1 1  supra. 

2  See  p.  146  supra.  The  Buddhists  seem  to  have  borrowed  the  division  of 
Karma  and  Gflanakawtfas.  See  Dr.  Ra^endralala  Mitra's  Lalita Vistara  (transl.), 
p.  21.     The  division,  therefore,  was  probably  older  than  the  first  century  b.  g. 

Q  2 


2  28  ANUGITA. 


The  MS.  of  it  belonging  to  the  Government  Collection 
of  MSS.  deposited  in  Deccan  College  was  lent  me  also  by 
Professor  Bhd^arkar.  The  principles  adopted  in  the  trans- 
lation and  notes  have  been  the  same  as  those  followed  in 
the  other  pieces  contained  in  this  volume. 

P.  S.  I  take  this  opportunity  of  stating  that  it  is  not  at 
all  certain  that  Ar^*una  MLsra  is  the  name  of  the  author  of 
the  commentary  which  I  have  used.  I  find  that  in  sup- 
posing Ar^una  MLsra  to  be  the  author,  I  confounded  that 
commentary,  which  does  not  mention  its  author's  name, 
with  the  commentary  on  another  section  of  the  Maha- 
bharata  which  does  give  its  author's  name  as  Ar^*una  MLsra, 
and  which  is  also  among  the  MSS.  purchased  by  Professor 
Bha^arkar  for  the  Government  of  Bombay.  (See  with 
regard  to  these  MSS.  Professor  Bha^arkar's  recently  pub- 
lished Report  on  the  search  for  Sanskrit  MSS.  of  7th  July, 
1880.) 


A  N  U  G  I  T  A. 


Chapter  L 


Ganame^aya *  said: 

What  conversation,  O  twice-born  one 2 !  took 
place  between  the  high-souled  Ke^ava  and  Ar^ima, 
while  they  dwelt  in  that  palace 3  after  slaying  their 
enemies  ? 

Vaisamp&yana  said  : 

The  son  of  Prztha,  after  becoming  possessed  of 
his  kingdom  (in  an)  undisturbed  (state),  enjoyed 
himself  in  the  company  of  KWsh/za,  full  of  delight 
in  that  heavenly  palace.  And  once,  O  king !  they 
happened  to  go,  surrounded  by  their  people,  and 
rejoicing,  to  a  certain  portion  of  the  palace  which 
resembled  heaven.  Then  Ar^*una,  the  son  of  Pa^u, 
having  surveyed  with  delight  that  lovely  palace,  in 
the  company  of  Krishna,  spoke  these  words :  '  O 
you  of  mighty  arms !  O  you  whose  mother  is 
Devaki 4 !  when  the  battle  was  about  to  commence, 
I  became  aware  of  your  greatness,  and  that  divine 

1  This  is  the  prince  to  whom  the  Mahabharata,  as  we  have  it, 
purports  to  have  been  related. 

2  I.  e.  Vai-rampayana,  who  relates  the  Mahabharata  to  £ana- 
me^aya. 

3  This  appears  to  have  been  situated  at  Indraprastha,  and  to 
have  been  the  one  built  for  the  Pa#</avas  by  the  demon  Maya,  as 
related  in  the  SabM  Parvan. 

4  This  is  a  rather  unusual  form  of  address. 


23O  ANUGITA. 


form  of  yours1.  But  that,  O  Ke^ava!  which  through 
affection  (for  me)  you  explained  before 2,  has  all  dis- 
appeared, O  tiger-like  man !  from  my  degenerate 
mind.  Again  and  again,  however,  I  feel  a  curiosity 
about  those  topics.  But  (now),  O  Madhava !  you 
will  be  going  at  no  distant  date  to  Dv&raka.' 

Vaisamp&yana  said : 
Thus  addressed,  that  best  of  speakers,  Krishna, 
possessed  of  great  glory,  replied  in  these  words  after 
embracing  Ar^nna. 

V&sudeva  said: 
From  me,  O  son  of  Prztha !  you  heard  a  mystery, 
and  learnt  about  the  eternal3  (principle),  about 
piety  in  (its  true)  form,  and  about  all  the  everlasting 
worlds4.  It  is  excessively  disagreeable  to  me,  that 
you  should  not  have  grasped  it  through  want  of 
intelligence.  And  the  recollection  (of  it)  now  again 
is  not  possible  (to  me).  Really,  O  son  of  ¥a.ndu ! 
you  are  devoid  of  faith  and  of  a  bad  intellect.  And, 
O  Dhanan£uya !  it  is  not  possible  for  me  to  repeat 
in  full  (what  I  said  before).  For  that  doctrine  was 
perfectly  adequate  for  understanding  the  seat 5  of  the 
Brahman.  It  is  not  possible  for  me  to  state  it  again 
in  full  in  that  way.  For  then  accompanied  by  my 
mystic  power6,  I  declared  to  you  the  Supreme 
Brahman.     But  I  shall  relate  an  ancient  story  upon 

1  Cf.  BhagavadgM,  chapters  X  and  XI  passim. 

2  I.  e.  in  the  Bhagavadgita\ 

3  This  may  also  be  taken  with  piety  thus :  '  and  learnt  about  the 
eternal  piety  in  (its  true)  form/ 

4  As  to  the  plural,  see  Sarikara  on  Muw^aka,  p.  320. 

5  Cf. Gita,  p.  78.  For  'understanding'  here  we  might,  perhaps, 
substitute  'attaining/  The  original  word  means  both  understanding 
and  attaining.  •  Cf.  GttS,  p.  82. 


CHAPTER   I,  21.  231 


that  subject,  so  that  adhering  to  this  knowledge,  you 
may  attain  the  highest  goal.  O  best  of  the  sup- 
porters of  piety !  listen  to  all  that  I  say.  (Once),  O 
restrainer  of  foes!  there  came  from  the  heavenly 
world  and  the  world  of  Brahman  *,  a  Brahma^a 
difficult  to  withstand 2,  and  he  was  (duly)  honoured 
by  us.  (Now)  listen,  without  entertaining  any  mis- 
givings, O  chief  of  the  descendants  of  Bharata!  O 
son  of  PWtha !  to  what  he  said  on  being  interrogated 
by  us  according  to  heavenly  rules 3. 

The  Br&hma/za  said : 

0  Krishna. !  O  destroyer  of  Madhu !  I  will  explain 
to  you  accurately  what  you,  out  of  compassion  for 
(all)  beings  4,  have  asked  me  touching  the  duties  (to 
be  performed)  for  final  emancipation.  It  is  destructive 
of  delusion,  O  Lord !  Listen  to  me  with  attention 5, 
as  I  relate  it,  O  M&dhava !  A  certain  Brdhma^a 
named  Kasyapa,  who  had  performed  (much)  penance, 
and  who  best  understood  piety,  approached  a  certain 
twice-born  (person)  who  had  learnt  the  Scriptures 
relating  to  (all)  duties6,  having  heard  (of  him,  as 
one)  who  had  over  and  over  again  gone  through  all 
knowledge  and  experience  about  coming  and  going7, 
who  was  well  versed  in  the  true  nature  of  all  worlds 8, 

1  This  seems  to  mean  not  the  Supreme  Brahman,  but  the  Creator. 

2  Cf.  Sanatsu^-atiya,  p.  161,  'not  to  be  shaken.' 

3  I  suppose  this  to  mean  according  to  the  forms  proper  in  the 
case  of  such  a  being  as  the  one  in  question.  Cf.  GM,  p.  62, 
and  note  there. 

4  This  is  not  easy  to  understand.  Perhaps  the  allusion  is  to  the  doc- 
trine at  GM,  pp.  54,  55.  5  Cf.  Br/hadarawyaka,  p.  447. 

6  I.e.  all  prescribed  acts  of  piety. 

7  As  to  knowledge  and  experience,  cf.  GM,  p.  57;  and  as  to 
coming  and  going,  cf.  ibid.  p.  84. 

8 1,  e.  as  stated,  for  instance,  at  GM,  p.  7  9,  or  Br/hadara^yaka,p.  613. 


232  ANUGITA. 


who  knew  about  happiness  and  misery  \  who  knew 
the  truth  about  birth  and  death2,  who  was  con- 
versant with  merit  and  sin,  who  perceived  the  migra- 
tions of  embodied  (souls)  of  high  and  low  (degrees) 
in  consequence  of  (their)  actions,  who  moved  about 
like  an  emancipated  being,  who  had  reached  per- 
fection 3,  who  was  tranquil,  whose  senses  were  re- 
strained, who  was  illumined  with  the  Brahmic 
splendour4,  who  moved  about  in  every  direction, 
who  understood  concealed  movements5,  who  was 
going  in  company  of  invisible  Siddhas  and  celestial 
singers 6,  and  conversing  and  sitting  together  (with 
them)  in  secluded  (places),  who  went  about  as  he 
pleased,  and  was  unattached  (anywhere)  like  the 
wind.  Having  approached  him,  that  talented  ascetic 
possessed  of  concentration  (of  mind),  that  best  of 
the  twice-born,  wishing  to  acquire  piety,  fell  at  his 
feet,  after  seeing  that  great  marvel.  And  amazed  on 
seeing  that  marvellous  man,  the  best  of  the  twice- 
born,  Klryapa,  pleased  the  preceptor  by  his  great 
devotion.  That  was  all  appropriate  7,  (being)  joined 
to  sacred  learning  and  correct  conduct.  And,  O 
terror  of  your  foes !  he  pleased  that  (being)  by  (his 
purity  of)  heart  and  behaviour  (suitable)  towards 
a  preceptor 8.  Then  being  satisfied  and  pleased,  he 
spoke  to  the  pupil  these  words,  referring  to   the 


1  Cf.  infra,  p.  245.  2  Cf.  Gitd,  pp.  48, 103. 

3  Cf.  Gita,  passim.  4  Cf.  Sanatsu^atiya,  p.  162. 

5  I.  e.  moving  about  so  as  not  to  be  seen  by  everybody. 

6  Literally, « holders  of  wheels/  which  Ar^una  MLrra  interprets  to 
mean  '  J53ra«as/  At  S&nti  Parvan  (Moksha  Dharma)  CCXLIV,  26 
Nilaka^a  renders  ^akradhara  by  iTakravartin  or  Emperor. 

7  I.  e.  as  Ka\syapa  was  possessed  of  Vedic  lore,  and  behaved  as 
he  ought  to  behave  in  his  capacity  of  pupil,  it  was  natural  that  the 
other  should  be  pleased.  8  See  p.  176  seq.  supra. 


CHAPTER    I,    38.  233 


highest    perfection.       Hear    (them)    from    me,    O 
^anirdana ! 

The  Siddha  said: 
Mortals,  O  dear  friend * !  by  their  actions  which 
are  (of)  mixed  (character),  or  which  are  meritorious 
and  pure,  attain  to  this  world  as  the  goal,  or  to 
residence  in  the  world  of  the  gods2.  Nowhere  is 
there  everlasting  happiness;  nowhere  eternal  re- 
sidence3. Over  and  over  again  is  there  a  down- 
fall from  a  high  position  attained  with  difficulty. 
Overcome  by  lust  and  anger,  and  deluded  by  desire, 
I  fell  into  uncomfortable  and  harassing  states  (of 
life),  in  consequence  of  (my)  committing  sin.  Again 
and  again  death,  and  again  and  again  birth  4.  I  ate 
numerous  (kinds  of)  food,  sucked  at  various  breasts, 
saw  various  mothers,  and  fathers  of  different  sorts;  and, 
O  sinless  one !  (I  saw)  strange  pleasures  and  miseries. 
Frequently  (I  suffered)  separation  from  those  I  loved, 
association  with  those  I  did  not  love.  Loss  of 
wealth  also  came  on  me,  after  I  had  acquired  that 
wealth  with  difficulty;  ignominies  full  of  affliction 
from  princes  and  likewise  from  kinsmen ;  excessively 
poignant  pain,  mental  and  bodily.  I  also  underwent 
frightful  indignities,  and  fierce  deaths  and  captivities; 
(I  had  a)  fall  into  hell,  and  torments  in  the  house  of 
Yama5.  I  also  suffered  much  from  old  age,  continual 
ailments,  and  numerous  misfortunes  flowing  from  the 
pairs  of  opposites 6.  Then  on  one  occasion,  being 
much  afflicted  with  misery,  I  abandoned  the  whole 

1  The  same  word  as  at  Giti,  p.  72. 

2  Cf.  ^Mndogya-upanishad,  pp.  356-359,  and  Gita,  p.  84. 

3  See  GM,  p.  76,  and  cf.  Ka/^a,  p.  90. 

4  For  the  whole  of  this  passage,  cf.  Maitri-upanishad,  p.  8. 

5  See  Manu  VI,  61.  6  See  Gita,  p.  48. 


234  ANUGITA. 


course  of  worldly  life,  through  indifference  (to  worldly 
objects),  and  taking  refuge  with  the  formless  (prin- 
ciple) 1.  Having  learnt  about  this  path  in  this  world, 
I  exercised  myself  (in  it),  and  hence,  through  favour 
of  the  self2,  have  I  acquired  this  perfection3.  I  shall 
not  come  here  again4;  I  am  surveying  the  worlds, 
and  the  happy  migrations5  of  (my)  self  from  the 
creation  of  beings  to  (my  attaining)  perfection. 
Thus,  O  best  of  the  twice-born !  have  I  obtained 
this  highest  perfection.  From  here  I  go  to  the 
next6  (world),  and  from  there  again  to  the  still 
higher  (world) — the  imperceptible  seat  of  the  Brah- 
man. Have  no  doubt  on  that,  O  terror  of  your 
foes 7 !  I  shall  not  come  back  to  this  mortal  world. 
I  am  pleased  with  you,  O  you  of  great  intelligence ! 
Say,  what  can  I  do  for  you  ?  The  time  is  now 
come  for  that  which  you  desired  in  coming  to  me. 
I  know  for  what  you  have  come  to  me.  But  I  shall 
be  going  away  in  a  short  time,  hence  have  I  given 

1  Taking  refuge,  says  Nilaka^/^a,  in  the  belief  of  my  being 
identical  with  the  Brahman,  which  is  to  be  comprehended  by  means 
of  the  profound  contemplation  called  Asampra^nata  Samadhi. 

2  I.e.,  says  Nilaka«/^a,  the  mind,  and  he  cites  Maitrl,  p.  179.  Cf. 
Ka/^a,  p.  108.  The  rendering  at  p.  192  supra  will  also  suit  (through 
the  self  becoming  placid).  This  placidity  is  defined  at  xSanti  Parvan 
(Moksha  Dharma)  CCXLVII,  11,  with  which  cf.  Gita,  p.  69.  See 
GM,  p.  51. 

3  As  above  described. 

4  Cf.  ^"Mndogya,  p.  628 ;  see  also  ibid.  p.  282. 

5  He  calls  them  happy  because  they  have  ended  happily,  I  presume. 
'  Surveying  the  worlds'  Nilakaw/^a  takes  to  be  an  index  of  omni- 
science. Cf.  Sanatsugutiya,  p.  174.  See  also  Yoga-sutras  III,  25, 
and  commentary  there. 

6  I.  e.  the  world  of  Brahman,  or  the  Satyaloka ;  and  the  next 
step  is  assimilation  into  the  Brahman. 

7  So  read  all  the  copies  I  have  seen,  though  Kasyapa  is  the 
person  addressed. 


CHAPTER    II,  5.  235 


this  hint  to  you.  I  am  exceedingly  pleased,  O  clever 
one !  with  your  good  conduct.  Put  (your)  questions 
without  uneasiness,  I  will  tell  (you)  whatever  you  de- 
sire. I  highly  esteem  your  intelligence,  and  greatly 
respect  it,  inasmuch  as  you  have  made  me  out 1 ; 
for,  O  Klsyapa !  you  are  (a)  talented  (man). 


Chapter  II. 

Vasudeva 2  said : 
Then  grasping  his  feet,  Kasyapa  asked  questions 
very  difficult  to  explain,  and  all  of  them  that  (being), 
the  best  of  the  supporters  of  piety,  did  explain. 

Klsyapa  said: 
How  does  the  body  perish,  and  how,  too,  is  it 
produced  ?  How  does  one  who  moves  in  this 
harassing  course  of  worldly  life  become  freed  ?  And 
(how)  does  the  self,  getting  rid  of  nature,  abandon 
the  body  (produced)  from  it 3  ?  And  how,  being  freed 
from  the  body,  does  he  attain  to  the  other4?  How 
does  this  man  enjoy  the  good  and  evil  acts  done 
by  himself?  And  where  do  the  acts  of  one  who  is 
released  from  the  body  remain  ? 

The  Brahma/za  said : 
Thus  addressed,  O  descendant  of  Vrzshni  !   that 
Siddha  answered  these  questions  in  order.     Hear 
me  relate  what  (he  said). 

1  This  was  difficult,  as  the  Siddha  possessed  extraordinary  powers, 
such  as  that  of  concealed  movement,  &c.  2  Sic  in  MSS. 

8  Cf.  as  to  getting  rid  of  nature,  Gita,  pp.  75-106.  As  to  the 
body  produced  from  nature,  cf.  ibid.  p.  112,  and  pp.  317-318  infra. 

4  I.  e.  the  Brahman,  says  Nilaka«/y5a. 


236  ANUGITA. 

The  Siddha  said : 
When  those  actions,  productive  of  long  life  and 
fame1,  which  a  man  performs  here,  are  entirely 
exhausted,  after  his  assumption  of  another  body, 
he  performs  (actions  of  an)  opposite  character,  his 
self  being  overcome  at  the  exhaustion  of  life 2.  And 
his  ruin  being  impending,  his  understanding  goes 
astray.  Not  knowing  his  own  constitution3,  and 
strength,  and  likewise  the  (proper)  season,  the  man 
not  being  self-controlled,  does  unseasonably  what  is 
injurious  to  himself.  When  he  attaches  himself  to 
numerous  very  harassing  (actions);  eats  too  much4,  or 
does  not  eat  at  all ;  when  he  takes  bad  food,  or  meat 5, 
or  drinks,  or  (kinds  of  food)  incompatible  with  one 
another,  or  heavy  food  in  immoderate  quantities,  or 
without  (previously  taken  food)  being  properly  di- 
gested; or  takes  too  much  exercise,  or  is  incontinent;  or 
constantly,  through  attachment  to  action,  checks  the 
regular  course  (of  the  excretions6) ;  or  takes  juicy  food7; 
or  sleeps  by  clay8;  or  (takes  food)  not  thoroughly 
prepared ;  (such  a  man)  himself  aggravates  the  dis- 

1  One  reading  omits  '  fame/  as  to  which  cf.  Taittiriya-upanishad, 
p.  129;  .Oandogya,  pp.  122-227.  As  to  long  life,  cf.  iTMndogya, 
p.  272 ;  exhausted,  i.  e.  by  enjoyment  of  fruit  in  another  world. 

2  Cf.  *Sariraka  BMshya,  p.  753  seq.,  where  we  have  a  slightly 
different  view. 

3  Arg-una  Mi^ra  renders  the  original,  sattva,  by  svabh&va. 

4  Cf.  for  all  this,  GM,  pp.  62, 69, 118,  which  passages,  however,  are 
from  a  slightly  different  point  of  view.    See  also  -O&ndogya,  p.  526. 

5  A  various  reading  here  excludes  meat.  But  cf.  Apastamba  I, 
1,  2,  23;  Gautama  II,  13.  6  So  says  Nilaka«/^a. 

7  I.  e.  which  turns  to  juice  in  digestion,  much  juice  being  a  cause 
of  indigestion,  say  the  commentators. 

8  This  is  doubtful.  The  sense  may  be,  '  who  takes  juicy  or  not 
thoroughly  prepared  food  by  day  and  night.'  But  see  Asvalayana 
G/Yhya-sutra,  p.  90;  Apastamba  I,  1,  2,  24 ;  Gautama  II,  13. 


CHAPTER    II,    20.  237 


orders  (in  the  body)  when  the  time  comes  \  By 
aggravating  the  disorders  (in)  his  own  (body),  he 
contracts  a  disease  which  ends  in  death,  or  he  even 
engages  in  unreasonable  (acts),  such  as  hanging2 
(oneself).  From  these  causes,  the  living3  body  of 
that  creature  then  perishes.  Learn  about  that 
correctly  as  I  am  about  to  state  it.  Heat  being 
kindled  in  the  body,  and  being  urged  by  a  sharp 
wind  4,  pervades  the  whole  frame,  and,  verily,  checks 
the  (movements  of  all  the)  life-winds.  Know  this 
truly,  that  excessively  powerful  heat,  if  kindled  in 
the  body,  bursts  open  the  vital  parts — the  seats  of 
the  soul 5.  Then  the  soul,  full  of  torments,  forthwith 
falls  away  from  the  perishable  (body).  Know,  O 
best  of  the  twice-born !  that  (every)  creature  leaves 
the  body,  when  the  vital  parts  are  burst  open,  its  self 
being  overcome  with  torments.  All  beings  are  con- 
stantly distracted  with  birth  and  death  ;  and,  O  chief 
of  the  twice-born !  are  seen  abandoning  (their)  bodies, 
or  entering  the  womb  on  the  exhaustion  of  (their 
previous)  actions 6.  Again,  a  man  suffers  similar  tor- 
ments, having  his  joints  broken  and  suffering  from 

1  The  time  of  destruction,  says  Ar^oina  Misra. 

2  Which,  say  the  commentators,  leads  to  death,  even  without 
any  disease. 

3  So  I  construe  the  original,  having  regard  to  the  question, l  how 
does  the  body  perish  ?'  The  other  reading,  which  is  in  some  respects 
better,  is  equivalent  to  '  the  life  falls  away  from  the  body  of  that 
creature/ 

4  This  is  different,  as  the  commentators  point  out,  from  the 
ordinary  life-winds. 

B  The  original  here  is  £iva,  not  dtman,  which  we  have  rendered 
'  self/  This  refers  rather  to  the  vital  principle.  As  to  the  seats, 
cf.  Ya^-ftavalkya  Smnti  III,  93  seq. 

6  I  adopt  the  reading  karmawam,  which  I  find  in  one  of  the  MSS. 
I  consulted.  I  think  it  probable  that  that  was  the  reading  before 
the  commentators.     The  other  reading  is  marma^dm. 


238  ANUGITA 


cold,  in  consequence  of  water1.  As  the  compact 
association  of  the  five  elements  is  broken  up,  the 
wind  in  the  body, distributed  within  the  five  elements2, 
between  the  upward  and  downward  life-winds,  being 
aggravated  by  cold,  and  urged  by  a  sharp  wind 3,  goes 
upwards4,  abandoning  the  embodied  (self)  in  con- 
sequence of  pain.  Thus  it5  leaves  the  body,  which 
appears  devoid  of  breath.  Then  devoid  of  warmth, 
devoid  of  breath,  devoid  of  beauty,  and  with  con- 
sciousness destroyed,  the  man,  being  abandoned  by 
the  Brahman 6,  is  said  to  be  dead.  (Then)  he  ceases 
to  perceive  (anything)  with  those  very  currents 7 
with  which  the  supporter  of  the  body8  perceives 
objects  of  sense.  In  the  same  way,  it  is  the  eternal 
soul  which  preserves  in  the  body  the  life-winds  which 
are  produced  from  food9.  Whatever  (part  of  the 
body)  is  employed  in  the  collection 10  of  that,  know 

1  Having  spoken  of  heat,  he  now  speaks  of  the  effects  of  cold. 
I  am  not  sure  if  the  water  here  refers  to  the  water  of  the  l juicy' 
substances  before  referred  to. 

2  This  means,  I  presume,  within  the  dissolving  body.  Cf.  Maitri- 
upanishad,  p.  42. 

8  See  note  4,  last  page.  4  To  the  head,  Ar^una  Mixra. 

5  That  is,  the  wind,  I  suppose,  and  then  the  breath  departs  from 
the  body,  and  the  man  is  said  to  die.  '  Devoid  of  beauty/  further 
on,  means,  disfigured  in  the  state  of  death. 

6  I.  e.  the  mind,  Argrma  Mura. 

7  The  senses.    Cf.  Svetawatara,  p.  288. 

8  See  and  cf.  p.  262  infra. 

9  This,  says  Arg-una  MLsra,  is  in  answer  to  the  possible  question 
why  this  'sharp  wind'  does  not  work  with  the  life-winds.  The 
answer  is,  that  such  working  requires  the  presence  of  the  soul, 
which  Ar^una  Mi^ra  says  here  means  'mind.'  As  to  '  production 
from  food/  cf.  .A'Mndogya,  p.  421  seq.,  and  Taittiriya  Arawyaka, 
p.  893. 

10  Collection  of  that = turning  the  food  into  semen,  says  Ar^una 
Mura,  who  adds, '  in  those  vital  parts,  which  are  useful  for  this  pur- 
pose, the  life-wind  dwells/ 


CHAPTER    II,  34.  239 


that  to  be  a  vital  part,  for  thus  it  is  seen  (laid  down) 
in  the  Scriptures.  Those  vital  parts  being  wounded, 
that  (wind)  directly  comes  out  therefrom,  and  entering 
the  bosom  of  a  creature  obstructs  the  heart  \  Then 
the  possessor  of  consciousness  knows  nothing2. 
Having  his  knowledge  enveloped  by  darkness3, 
while  the  vitals  are  still  enveloped,  the  soul 4,  being 
without  a  fixed  seat,  is  shaken  about  by  the  wind. 
And  then  he  heaves  a  very  deep  and  alarming  gasp, 
and  makes  the  unconscious  body  quiver  as  he  goes 
out  (of  it).  That  soul,  dropping  out  of  the  body,  is 
surrounded  on  both  sides  by  his  own  actions 5,  his 
own  pure  and  meritorious,  as  also  his  sinful  (ones). 
Brihma^as,  possessed  of  knowledge,  whose  con- 
victions are  correctly  (formed)  from  sacred  learning, 
know  him  by  (his)  marks  as  one  who  has  performed 
meritorious  actions  or  the  reverse.  As  those  who 
have  eyes  see  a  glow-worm  disappear  here  and  there 
in  darkness,  so  likewise  do  those  who  have  eyes 
of  knowledge.  Such  a  soul,  the  Siddhas  see  with 
a  divine  eye,  departing  (from  the  body),  or  coming 
to  the  birth,  or  entering  into  a  womb 6.  Its  three 
descriptions 7  of  seats  are  here  learnt  from  the  Scrip- 
tures.    This  world  is  the  world  of  actions 8,  where 


1  Aig-una  Mwra  renders  this  to  mean  '  mind/ 

2  As  the  mind  is  obstructed,  says  Aig-una  MLrra.  The  possessor 
of  consciousness = the  self,  Ar^-una. 

3  I.  e.  pain,  Ar^una  Mwra. 

4  I.  e.  mind,  Arg-una  MLnra.  5  Cf.  Br/hadara/zyaka,  p.  843. 

6  See  Aitareya-upanishad,  p.  222,  and  *Sankara's  commentary 
there.  The  coming  to  the  birth  is  the  coming  out  of  the  womb 
into  the  world.     Cf.  also  Gita,  p.  112. 

7  As  stated  further  on,  viz.  this  world,  the  next  world,  and 
the  womb.    With  this  compare  .^Mndogya,  p.  359. 

8  Cf.  our  Bhartnhari  (Bombay  series),  Notes  (Nitirataka),  p.  27. 


24O  ANUGITA. 


creatures  dwell.  All  embodied  (selfs),  having  here 
performed  good  or  evil  (actions),  obtain  (the  fruit). 
It  is  here  they  obtain  higher  or  lower  enjoy- 
ments by  their  own  actions.  And  it  is  those  whose 
actions  here  are  evil,  who  by  their  actions  go  to  hell. 
Harassing  is  that  lower  place  where  men  are  tor- 
mented. Freedom  from  it  is  very  difficult,  and  the 
self  should  be  specially  protected  from  it.  Learn 
from  me  now  the  seats  in  which  creatures  going 
up1  dwell,  and  which  I  shall  describe  truly.  Hearing 
this,  you  will  learn  the  highest  knowledge,  and 
decision  regarding  action 2.  All  (the  worlds  in)  the 
forms  of  stars,  and  this  lunar  sphere 3,  and  also  this 
solar  sphere  which  shines  in  the  world  by  its  own 
lustre,  know  these  to  be  the  seats  of  men  who 
perform  meritorious  actions.  All  these,  verily,  fall 
down  again  and  again  in  consequence  of  the  ex- 
haustion of  their  actions4.  And  there,  too,  in 
heaven,  there  are  differences  of  low,  high,  and 
middling5.  Nor,  even  there,  is  there  satisfaction, 
(even)  after  a  sight  of  most  magnificent  splendour. 
Thus  have  I  stated  to  you  these  seats  distinctly. 
I  will  after  this  (proceed  to)  state  to  you  the  pro- 
duction of  the  foetus 6.  And,  O  twice-born  one ! 
hear  that  attentively  from  me  as  I  state  it. 

1  Cf.  on  this  and  'lower  place/  GM,  p.  109;  Sahkhya  Karika,  44. 

2  The  readings  here  are  most  unsatisfactory.  The  meaning  of 
the  printed  reading  adopted  above  would  seem  to  be, '  decision  as 
to  what  actions  should  be  performed/  &c. 

3  Cf.  GM,  p.  81,  and  Sanatsu^dtiya,  p.  158. 

4  Cf.  GM,  p.  84. 

5  Argnna  Mura  says,  'In  heaven = in  the  next  world,  low = infe- 
rior (?),  high = heaven,  and  middling = the  space  below  the  skies 
(antariksha)/  For  the  three  degrees  of  enjoyment  in  heaven,  see 
Yogavasish//$a  I,  35  seq. 

6  This  is  the  third  of  the  three  seats  above  referred  to. 


CHAPTER   III,    7.  24I 


Chapter  III. 

There  is  no  destruction  here  of  actions  good  or 
not  good 1.  Coming  to  one  body  after  another  they 
become  ripened  in  their  respective  ways2.  As  a 
fruitful  (tree)  producing  fruit  may  yield  much  fruit, 
so  does  merit  performed  with  a  pure  mind  become 
expanded 3.  Sin,  too,  performed  with  a  sinful  mind,  is 
similarly  (expanded).  For  the  self  engages  in  action, 
putting  forward  this  mind  4.  And  now  further,  hear 
how5  a  man,  overwhelmed  with  action,  and  enveloped 
in  desire  and  anger6,  enters  a  womb.  Within  the  womb 
of  a  woman,  (he)  obtains  as  the  result  of  action  a  body 
good  or  else  bad 7,  made  up  of  virile  semen  and  blood. 
Owing  to  (his)  subtlety  and  imperceptibility,  though 
he  obtains  a  body  appertaining  to  the  Brahman,  he 
is  not  attached  anywhere ;  hence  is  he  the  eternal 
Brahman 8.     That  is  the  seed  of  all  beings  ;  by  that 

1  Cf.  Maitri-upanishad,  p.  53,  and  Mu^daka,  p.  270.  And  see 
generally  as  to  this  passage,  -Sariraka  Bhashya,  pp.  751-760. 

2  I.  e.  they  yield  their  respective  fruits ;  cf.  Maitri,  p.  43,  and 
.A'Mndogya,  p.  358. 

3  This  explains,  say  the  commentators,  how  even  a  little  merit  or 
sin  requires  sometimes  more  than  one  birth  to  enjoy  and  exhaust. 

4  As  a  king  performs  sacrifices  '  putting  forward'  a  priest,  Ar^una 
Mijra ;  and  cf.  Dhammapada,  the  first  two  verses. 

5  Argoma  Mijra  has  tatha,  '  in  the  same  way,'  instead  of  this, 
and  renders  it  to  mean  '  putting  forward '  the  mind. 

6  Hence  he  does  not  get  rid  of  birth  and  death. 

7  Good = of  gods  or  men;  bad = of  the  lower  species  of  crea- 
tures, Ar^-una. 

8  He,  in  the  preceding  sentences,  according  to  Ar^una  MLrra, 
means  the  self,  through  the  mind,  or  *  putting  forward '  the  mind, 
as  said  above.  In  this  sentence,  he  takes  '  he '  to  mean  the  mind 
itself;  Brahman  ==  the  self;  and  the  mind,  he  says,  is  called  the 
Brahman,  as  it,  like  the  self,  is  the  cause  of  the  iTaitanya,  intelli- 
gence, in  all  creatures. 

[8]  R 


242  ANUGITA. 


all  creatures  exist.  That  soul,  entering  all  the  limbs 
of  the  foetus,  part  by  part,  and  dwelling  in  the  seat 
of  the  life-wind  19  supports  (them)  with  the  mind 2. 
Then  the  foetus,  becoming  possessed  of  consciousness, 
moves  about  its  limbs.  As  liquefied  iron  being 
poured  out  assumes  the  form  of  the  image3,  such 
you  must  know  is  the  entrance  of  the  soul  into  the 
foetus.  As  fire  entering  a  ball  of  iron,  heats  it,  such 
too,  you  must  understand,  is  the  manifestation  of 
the  soul  in  the  foetus.  And  as  a  blazing  lamp  shines 
in  a  house,  even  so  does  consciousness  light  up 
bodies  4.  And  whatever  action  he  performs,  whether 
good  or  bad,  everything  done  in  a  former  body  must 
necessarily  be  enjoyed  (or  suffered).  Then5  that  is 
exhausted,  and  again  other  (action)  is  accumulated, 
so  long  as  the  piety  which  dwells  in  the  practice 
of  concentration  of  mind  for  final  emancipation  6  has 
not  been  learnt.  As  to  that,  O  best  (of  men) !  I  will 
tell  you  about  that  action  by  which,  verily,  one  going 
the  round  of  various  births,  becomes  happy.  Gifts, 
penance,  life  as  a  Brahma^arin,  adherence  to  pre- 
scribed regulations,  restraint  of  the  senses  7,  and  also 

1  I.  e.  the  heart. 

2  Arg-una  Misra  says  that  the  soul  at  the  beginning  of  the  sen- 
tence means  the  mind,  and  mind  here  means  knowledge  or  intelli- 
gence.    Cf.  p.  238  supra. 

3  In  the  mould  of  which,  that  is  to  say,  it  is  poured. 

4  Cf.  Gita,  p.  106.  The  three  similes,  says  Nilaka^a,  show 
that  the  soul  pervades  the  whole  body,  is  yet  imperceptible,  and 
also  unattached  to  the  body.  Ar^-una  Misra's  explanation  is 
different,  but  I  prefer  Nilakara/^a's. 

5  I.  e.  by  the  enjoyment  or  suffering. 

6  I.  e.  while  he  does  not  possess  the  knowledge  which  leads  to 
the  piety  necessary  as  a  preliminary  for  final  emancipation,  and 
which  ultimately  destroys  action.     Cf.  Gita,  p.  62. 

7  I.  e.  keeping   the  senses  of  hearing  &c.  from  all  operations 


CHAPTER    III,    23.  243 


tranquillity,  compassion  to  (all)  beings,  self-restraint, 
and  absence  of  cruelty,  refraining  from  the  appro- 
priation of  the  wealth  of  others,  not  acting  dishonestly 
even  in  thought  towards  (any)  being  in  this  world, 
serving  mother  and  father,  honouring  deities  and 
guests,  honouring  preceptors,  pity,  purity,  constant 
restraint  of  the  organs 1,  and  causing  good  to  be 
done ;  this  is  said  to  be  the  conduct  of  the  good 2. 
From  this  is  produced  piety,  which  protects  people 
to  eternity.  Thus  one  should  look  (for  it)  among 
the  good,  for  among  them  it  constantly  abides.  The 
practice  to  which  the  good  adhere,  points  out  (what) 
piety  (is) 3.  And  among  them  dwells  that  (course  of) 
action  which  constitutes  eternal  piety.  He  who 
acquires  that,  never  comes  to  an  evil  end  4.  By  this 
are  people  held  in  check  from  making  a  slip  in  the 
paths  of  piety5.  But  the  devotee  who  is  released6 
is  esteemed  higher  than  these.  For  the  deliver- 
ance from  the  course  of  worldly  life  of  the  man  who 
acts  piously  and  well,  as  he  should  act,  takes  place 
after  a  long  time 7.  Thus  a  creature  always  meets 
with  (the  effects  of)  the  action  performed  (in  a) 
previous  (life).  And  that 8  is  the  sole  cause  by  which 
he  comes  here  (in  a)  degraded  (form).     There  is 

save  those  relating  to  the  Brahman.  Tranquillity  is  the  same  thing 
as  regards  the  mind. 

1  This  I  take  to  mean  restraint  of  the  active  organs,  such  as 
speech,  &c.  '  Self-restraint '  is  rendered  by  Nilaka/z/Aa  to  mean 
'  concentration  of  mind/ 

2  Cf.  Maitrf,  p.  57 ;  .Oandogya,  p.  136  ;  and  Gita,  pp.  103,119. 

3  Cf.  Apastambal,  1, 1,  2;  I,  7,  20,  7;  *Sakuntala,  p.  30  (Williams). 

4  Cf.  Gita,  p.  72. 

5  By  this,  i.  e.  by  the  practice  of  the  good,  Argnna  Mi^ra. 

6  From  delusion,  Ar^una  Mirra;  emancipated  by  force  of  his 
devotion,  Nilaka/z/6a. 

7  Cf.  Gita.  p.  73 ;  .Oandogya,  pp.  136,  137.       8  Scil.  the  action. 

R  2 


244  ANUGITA. 

in  the  world  a  doubt  as  to  what  originally  was  the 
source  from  which  he  became  invested  with  a  body. 
And  that  I  shall  now  proceed  to  state.  Brahman,  the 
grandfather  of  all  people,  having  made  a  body  for 
himself,  created  the  whole  of  the  three  worlds,  mov- 
ing and  fixed 1.  From  that  he  created  the  Pradhana, 
the  material  cause  of  all  embodied  (selfs),  by  which  all 
this  is  pervaded,  and  which  is  known  in  the  world  as 
the  highest 2.  This  is  what  is  called  the  destructible3; 
but  the  other  4  is  immortal  and  indestructible.  And 
Pra^apati,  who  had  been  first  created,  created  all 
creatures  and  (all)  the  fixed  entities,  (having)  as 
regards  the  moving  (creation),  a  pair  separately  for 
each5  (species).  Such  is  the  ancient  (tradition) 
heard  (by  us).  And  as  regards  that,  the  grandsire 
fixed  a  limit  of  time,  and  (a  rule)  about  migrations 
among  (various)  creatures,  and  about  the  return6. 
What  I  say  is  all  correct  and  proper,  like  (what 
may  be  said  by)  any  talented  person  who  has  in 

*  I.e.  animate  and  inanimate.  'A body  for  himself  '= undeveloped 
Aka\?a,  Nilaka«/£a.  But  see  Sankhya-s&ra,  p.  19,  and  Sahkhya  Prav. 
Bhashya  I,  122,  and  III,  10. 

2  Cf.  inter  alia  GM,  p.  58  and  note,  and  Sankhya-sara,  p.  11. 
As  to  the  words  at  the  beginning  of  this  sentence, '  from  that/  cf. 
Taittiriya-upanishad,  p.  67,  where  everything  is  derived  from  Akaya, 
mentioned  in  the  last  note,  and  Akstaa  from  the  Brahman. 

3  Cf.  Gita,  p.  113,  where  there  are  three  principles  distinguished 
from  each  other. 

4  I.  e.  the  self,  Ar^una  Mi.yra. 

5  A  pair,  i.e.  a  male  and  female  for  each  species,  such  as  man,  &c, 
Argrma  Mura. 

6  Pra^-apati  fixed  the  limit  of  life  for  every  'moving'  creature,  and 
the  rule  as  to  going  from  one  species  of  body  into  another,  and 
as  to  going  from  one  world  to  another.  As  to  a  part  of  'the 
ancient  tradition/  the  first  stanza  of  the  Muradaka-upanishad  may 
be  compared. 


CHAPTER    IV,   I.  245 


a  former  birth  perceived  the  self1.  He  who  properly 
perceives  pleasure  and  pain  to  be  inconstant,  the 
body  to  be  an  unholy  aggregate 2,  and  ruin  to  be 
connected  with  action3,  and  who  remembers  that 
whatever  little  there  is  of  happiness  is  all  misery4, 
he  will  cross  beyond  the  fearful  ocean  of  worldly 
life,  which  is  very  difficult  to  cross.  He  who  under- 
stands the  Pradhana5,  (though)  attacked  by  birth 
and  death  and  disease,  sees  one  (principle  of)  con- 
sciousness in  all  beings  possessed  of  consciousness 6. 
Then  seeking  after  the  supreme  seat,  he  becomes 
indifferent  to  everything 7.  O  best  (of  men) !  I  will 
give  you  accurate  instruction  concerning  it.  Learn 
from  me  exhaustively,  O  Brahma^a !  the  excellent 
knowledge  concerning  the  eternal  imperishable  seat, 
which  I  am  now  about  to  declare. 


Chapter  IV. 

He  who  becoming  placid8,  and  thinking  of  nought, 
may  become  absorbed  in  the  one  receptacle 9,  aban- 
doning each  previous  (element),  he  will  cross  beyond 

1  Argrma  Mirra  says  the  strength  of  the  impression  in  the  former 
birth  would  give  him  this  knowledge  in  the  subsequent  birth. 

2  Cf.  Sanatsu£-atiya,  p.  155.  3  Cf.  inter  alia  p.  256  infra. 
4  Cf.  GM,  p.  79.               5  Otherwise  called  Prakn'ti,  or  nature. 

6  Cf.  GM,  p.  124.  7  Cf.  GM,  p.  in. 

8  We  now  begin,  as  Nilaka/z//$a  points  out,  the  answer  to  the 
question  put  above  by  Kasyapa  about  the  emancipation  of  the  self. 
Placid,  Arg-una  MLrra  renders  to  mean  'silent,  taciturn/  See  p.  234 
supra. 

9  The  path  of  knowledge,  says  Ar^una  Mifra;  the  Brahman, 
says  Nilaka^a.  Abandoning  each  element = absorbing  the  gross 
into  the  subtle  elements,  and  so  forth,  Nilaka^a;  abandoning 
each  elementary  mode  of  worship  till  one  reaches  that  of  contem- 
plating the  absolute  Brahman,  Ar^una  MLrra. 


246  ANUGITA. 


(all)  bonds.  A  man  who  is  a  friend  of  all,  who  en- 
dures all,  who  is  devoted  to  tranquillity  *,  who  has 
subdued  his  senses,  and  from  whom  fear  and  wrath 
have  departed,  and  who  is  self-possessed2,  is  re- 
leased. He  who  moves  among  all  beings  as  if  they 
were  like  himself3,  who  is  self-controlled,  pure,  free 
from  vanity4  and  egoism,  he  is,  indeed,  released 
from  everything.  And  he,  too,  is  released  who  is 
equable  towards  both  life  and  death  5,  and  likewise 
pleasure  and  pain,  and  gain  and  loss,  and  (what  is) 
agreeable  and  odious6.  He  who  is  not  attached  to 
any  one,  who  contemns  no  one,  who  is  free  from 
the  pairs  of  opposites,  and  whose  self  is  free  from 
affections 7,  he  is,  indeed,  released  in  every  way. 
He  who  has  no  enemy,  who  has  no  kinsmen,  who 
has  no  child,  who  has  abandoned  piety,  wealth,  and 
lust  altogether,  and  who  has  no  desire,  is  released. 
He  who  is  not  pious  and  not  impious  8,  who  casts  off 
(the  merit  or  sin)  previously  accumulated,  whose 
self  is  tranquillised  by  the  exhaustion  of  the  primary 
elements  of  the  body 9,  and  who  is  free  from  the  pairs 
of  opposites,  is  released.  One  who  does  no  action 10, 
and  who  has  no  desire,  looks  on  this  universe  as  tran- 

1  This,  in  the  terminology  of  the  Vedanta,  means  keeping  the 
mind  from  everything  save  '  hearing '  &c.  about  the  Brahman. 

2  One  who  has  his  mind  under  his  control.    But  see  Gita,  p.  63. 

3  Cf.  GM,  p.  71. 

4  I.  e.  the  desire  to  be  honoured  or  respected,  Ar^una  Misra. 
Cf.  Sanatsu^atfya,  p.  161. 

5  Who  does  not  care  when  death  comes.         6  Cf.  p.  151  supra. 
7  Cf.Gita  for  all  this,  pp.  101,103, 125,  &c.        8  Cf.  Ka/^a,  p.  101. 

9  Nilaka/z/^a  says  this  means  the  constituents  of  the  body. 
Arg-una  Mura  says,  'Pra^a  or  life-wind/  &c.  They  are  seven.  See 
gloss  on  .Oandogya-upanishad,  p.  441,  and  p.  343  infra. 

10  Because,  says  Ar^una  MLrra,  he  has  no  desire.  Nilaka^a 
says  this  means  an  ascetic,  sannyasin.     See  p.  257  infra,  note  1. 


CHAPTER    IV,   13.  247 


sient,  like  an  Asvattha  tree 1,  always  full  of  birth, 
death,  and  old  age2.  Having  his  understanding 
always  (fixed)  upon  indifference  to  worldly  objects, 
searching  for  his  own  faults3,  he  procures  the  release 
of  his  self  from  bonds  in  no  long  time.  Seeing  the 
self  void  of  smell 4,  void  of  taste,  void  of  touch, 
void  of  sound,  void  of  belongings,  void  of  colour, 
and  unknowable,  he  is  released.  He  who  sees  the 
enjoyer  of  the  qualities 5,  devoid  of  qualities,  de- 
void of  the  qualities  of  the  five  elements 6,  devoid 
of  form,  and  having  no  cause,  is  released.  Aban- 
doning by  the  understanding 7  all  fancies  bodily  and 
mental 8,  he  gradually  obtains  tranquillity  9,  like  fire 
devoid  of  fuel.  He  who  is  free  from  all  impres- 
sions 10,  free  from  the  pairs'  of  opposites,  without 
belongings,  and  who  moves  among  the  collection  of 
organs  with  penance  n,  he  is  indeed  released.  Then 
freed  from  all  impressions,  he  attains  to  the  eternal 

1  Cf.  Gita,  p.  in,  where  -Sankara  explains  the  name  to  mean 
'  what  will  not  remain  even  till  to-morrow.' 

2  Cf.  Gita,  p.  109,  and  other  passages. 

g  Ar^-una  Mura  has  a  different  reading,  which  means  '  particu- 
larly observing  the  evils  of  (the  three  kinds  of)  misery.' 

4  Cf.  Ka/^a,  p.  119;  Mu/zdaka,  pp.  267 ;  and  Ma/zdukya,  p.  371. 

5  Cf.  GM,  pp.  104,  105,  and  Ka//&a,  p.  112. 

6  Nilaka^a  says  this  refers  to  the  gross  elements,  the  next 
expression  to  the  subtle  ones,  and  being  free  from  these  two,  he  is 
'  devoid  of  qualities,'  viz.  the  three  qualities.       7  Cf.  Gita,  p.  65. 

8  I.  e.  those  which  cause  bodily  and  mental  activity. 

9  Cf.  Maitri,  p.  178.  The  original  is  the  famous  word  '  Nirvana.' 

10  Scil.  derived  from  false  knowledge,  says  Ar^una  MLsra.  Nila- 
ka^a  says  all  impressions  from  outside  oneself  which  are  destroyed 
by  those  produced  from  concentration  of  mind,  &c.    See  p.  391  infra. 

11  I.  e.  all  those  operations  by  which  the  internal  man  is  rendered 
pure  and  free  from  all  taints ;  see  below, p.  248,  where  Nilaka////*a  ren- 
ders it  as '  the  performance  of  one's  duty  which  is  called  penance/  But 
see,  too,  pp.  74,  119,  166  supra.    The  meaning  seems  to  be  that  the 


248  ANUGITA. 

Supreme  Brahman,  tranquil,  unmoving,  constant,  in- 
destructible1. After  this  I  shall  explain  the  science 
of  concentration  of  mind,  than  which  there  is  nothing 
higher,  (and  which  teaches)  how  devotees  concen- 
trating (their  minds)  perceive  the  perfect  self2.  I 
will  impart  instruction  regarding  it  accurately.  Learn 
from  me  the  paths  3  by  which  one  directing  the  self 
within  the  self  perceives  the  eternal4  (principle). 
Restraining  the  senses,  one  should  fix  the  mind 
on  the  self;  and  having  first  performed  rigorous 
penance 5,  he  should  practise  concentration  of  mind 
for  final  emancipation.  Then  the  talented  Brah- 
ma^a,  who  has  practised  penance,  who  is  constantly 
practising  concentration  of  mind,  should  act  on  (the 
precepts  of)  the  science  of  concentration  of  mind 6, 
seeing  the  self  in  the  self  by  means  of  the  mind  7. 
If  such  a  good  man  is  able  to  concentrate  the  self 
on  the  self,  then  he,  being  habituated  to  exclusive 
meditation  8,  perceives  the  self  in  the  self.     Being 

man  in  question  lets  his  senses  work,  but  does  not  permit  himself  to 
be  in  any  way  identified  with  their  operations.  Cf.  Gita,  p.  64. 

1  Cf.  the  expressions  at  Gitd,  p.  45.  '  Unmoving/  which  occurs 
at  Ira,  p.  10,  is  there  explained  by  -Sankara  to  mean  'always  the  same/ 
The  same  sense  is  given  by  Mahidhara.  Weber's  -Satapatha,  p.  980. 

2  < Perfect'  would  seem  to  mean  here  free  from  all  bonds  or 
taints,  the  absolute. 

3  I.  e.  sources  of  knowledge,  says  Ar^una  Mura. 

4  Cf.  as  to  <  directing  the  self  within  the  self,'  Gita,  p.  69.  Nila- 
k&nfM  says, 'paths,  means  of  mental  restraint;  the  self,  mind;  in 
the  self,  in  the  body.' 

5  See  p.  247,  note  11.  Nilaka/z/^a's  note  there  referred  to  occurs 
on  this  passage.     See  also  p.  166,  note  1  supra. 

6  It  is  not  easy  to  say  what  this  science  is.  Is  it  Patan^ali's 
system  that  is  meant  ?  No  details  occur  to  enable  one  to  identify 
the  'science/     But,  probably,  no  system  is  alluded  to. 

7  See  note  4  above. 

8  Nilaka«/$a  has  a  very  forced  explanation  of  the  original  word, 


CHAPTER    IV,   25.  249 


self-restrained  and  self-possessed 1,  and  always  con- 
centrating his  mind,  and  having  his  senses  subju- 
gated, he  who  has  achieved  proper  concentration  of 
mind2  sees  the  self  in  the  self.  As  a  person  having 
seen  one  in  a  dream,  recognises  him  (afterwards), 
saying,  '  This  is  he ;'  so  does  one  who  has  achieved 
proper  concentration  of  mind  perceive  the  self3. 
And  as  one  may  show  the  soft  fibres,  after  extracting 
them  from  the  Mun^*a,  so  does  a  devotee  see  the 
self  extracted  from  the  body.  The  body  is  called 
the  Mun^a ;  the  soft  fibres  stand4  for  the  self.  This 
is  the  excellent  illustration  propounded  by  those 
who  understand  concentration  of  mind.  When  an 
embodied  (self)  properly  perceives  the  self  con- 
centrated 5,  then  there  is  no  ruler  over  him,  since  he 
is  the  lord  of  the  triple  world  6.  He  obtains  various 
bodies  as  he  pleases ;  and  casting  aside  old  age  and 
death,  he  grieves  not  and  exults  not.    The  man  who 

which  also  occurs  further  on;  he  takes  the  meaning  to  be,  'he 
who  is  habituated  to  that  by  which  the  One  is  attained,  viz.  medi- 
tation/ 

1  The  original  is  the  same  as  at  Gita,  p.  63. 

2  That  is  to  say,  one  who  has  got  the  power  of  concentrating 
his  mind  as  he  pleases;  and  the  words  'always  concentrating'  &c, 
just  before,  would  mean  '  one  who  always  exercises  that  power.' 

3  I.  e.  having  perceived  the  self  in  the  state  of  concentration,  he 
sees  the  whole  universe  to  be  the  self  in  this  state  when  the  concen- 
tration has  ceased,  Nilaka/z//£a.  Ar^una  Mura  says, '  having  per- 
ceived the  self  at  the  time  of  concentration,  he  recognises  it  as  the 
same  at  the  time  of  direct  perception,'  meaning,  apparently,  the 
time  of  final  emancipation. 

4  I.  e.  the  reality,  which  in  this  simile  forms  the  substratum  of 
what  are  called  the  fibres ;  the  simile  is  in  the  Ka/^a-upanishad ; 
see,  too,  Sanatsu^-atiya,  p.  176. 

5  I.  e.  on  the  supreme  self,  as  above  explained. 

8  Cf.  Sanatsu^atiya,  p.  161 ;  *SVeta\rvatara,  p.  290;  and  Bnhadara- 
tfyaka,  p.  218;  -Oandogya,p.523;  Aitareya,p.26;  Kaushitaki,p.i2  6. 


25O  ANUGITA. 


has  acquired  concentration  of  mind,  and  who  is  self- 
restrained,  creates  for  himself  even  the  divinity 
of  the  gods x ;  and  abandoning  the  transient  body, 
he  attains  to  the  inexhaustible  Brahman.  When 
(all)  beings  are  destroyed,  he  has  no  fear ;  when  (all) 
beings  are  afflicted,  he  is  not  afflicted  by  anything 2. 
He  whose  self  is  concentrated,  who  is  free  from 
attachment,  and  of  a  tranquil  mind,  is  not  shaken 
by  the  fearful  effects  of  attachment  and  affection 3, 
which  consist  in  pain  and  grief4.  Weapons  do  not 
pierce  him5;  there  is  no  death  for  him ;  nothing  can 
be  seen  anywhere  in  the  world  happier  than  he. 
Properly  concentrating  his  self,  he  remains  steady 
to  the  self;  and  freed  from  old  age  and  grief,  he 
sleeps  at  ease.  Leaving  this  human  frame,  he  as- 
sumes bodies  at  pleasure.  But  one  who  is  practising 
concentration  should  never  become  despondent6. 
When  one  who  has  properly  achieved  concentration 
perceives  the  self  in  the  self,  then  he  forthwith 
ceases  to  feel  any  attachment  to   Indra   himself7. 

1  I  do  not  quite  understand  the  original.  The  other  reading, 
dehatvam  for  devatvam,  is  not  more  intelligible.  But  comparing 
the  two,  the  meaning  seems  to  be,  that  the  divinity  of  the  gods,  i.  e. 
their  qualities  and  powers  as  gods,  are  within  his  reach,  if  he  likes 
to  have  them. 

2  Cf.  Gita,  p.  107. 

3  Affection  is  the  feeling  that  a  thing  is  one's  own ;  attachment 
is  the  feeling  of  liking  one  has  for  a  thing  acquired  with  difficulty, 
Ar^-una  Mi^ra. 

4  Pain  appears  to  be  the  feeling  immediately  following  on  hurt 
or  evil  suffered;  grief  is  the  constant  state  of  mind  which  is  a 
later  result.  5  Cf  Yoga-sutra  Bhashya,  p.  208. 

6  Cf.  Gita,  p.  70.  Despondency  is  the  feeling  that  one  has  not 
acquired  '  concentration '  after  much  practice,  and  that  therefore 
the  practice  should  be  abandoned. 

7  The  other  reading  here  may  be  rendered,  'Then  forthwith 
Indra  himself  esteems  him  highly.' 


CHAPTER    IV,   36.  25I 


Now  listen  how  one  habituated  to  exclusive  medita- 
tion attains  concentration.  Thinking  1  of  a  quarter 
seen  before,  he  should  steady  his  mind  within  and 
not  out  of  the  city  in  which  he  dwells.  Remaining 
within  (that)  city,  he  should  place  his  mind  both  in 
its  external  and  internal  (operations)  in  that  habita- 
tion in  which  he  dwells.  When,  meditating  in  that 
habitation,  he  perceives  the  perfect  one,  his  mind 
should  not  in  any  way  wander  outside.  Restraining  the 
group  of  the  senses,  in  a  forest 2  free  from  noises  and 
unpeopled,  he  should  meditate  on  the  perfect  one 
within  his  body  with  a  mind  fixed  on  one  point.    He 


1  This  is  all  rather  mystical.  Nilaka^a  takes  'city'  to  mean 
'body,'  and  'habitation'  to  mean  the  muladhara,  or  other  similar 
mystic  centre  within  the  body,  where,  according  to  the  Yoga  philo- 
sophy, the  soul  is  sometimes  to  be  kept  with  the  life-winds,  &c. 
'  Thinking  of  a  quarter,'  &c.,  he  explains  to  mean  '  meditating  on 
the  instruction  he  has  received  after  studying  the  Upanishads.' 
I  do  not  understand  the  passage  well.  'City*  for  'body'  is  a 
familiar  use  of  the  word.  Cf.  Gita\  p.  65.  The  original  word  for 
habitation  occurs  at  Aitareya-upanishad,  p.  199,  where  Sankara 
explains  it  to  mean  'seat'  Three  'seats'  are  there  mentioned, — 
the  organs  of  sights  &c. ;  the  mind ;  and  the  Aka^a  in  the  heart. 
There,  too,  the  body  is  described  as  a  '  city,'  and  Anandagiri 
explains  habitation  to  mean  '  seat  of  amusement  or  sport/  Here, 
however,  the  meaning  seems  to  be  that  one  should  work  for  con- 
centration in  the  manner  indicated,  viz.  first  fix  the  mind  on  the 
city  where  one  dwells,  then  on  the  particular  part  of  it  oftenest  seen 
before,  then  one's  own  habitation,  then  the  various  parts  of  one's 
body,  and  finally  one's  own  heart  and  the  Brahman  within  it.  Thus 
gradually  circumscribed  in  its  operations,  the  mind  is  better  fitted 
for  the  final  concentration  on  the  Brahman.  As  to  external  and 
internal  operations,  cf.  note  8,  p.  247.  The  perfect  one  is  the 
Brahman.  Cf.  Sanatsu^atiya,  p.  171.  As  to  avasatha,  which  we 
have  rendered  by  '  habitation,'  see  also  Ma/zdukya,  p.  34.0 ;  Bnfhada- 
rawyaka,  p.  751;  and  the  alternative  sense  suggested  by  -Sankara 
on  the  Aitareya,  loc.  cit. 

2  Cf.  Maitri-upanishad,  p.  100. 


252  ANUGfTA. 


should  meditate  on  his  teeth1,  palate,  tongue,  neck,  and 
throat  likewise,  and  also  the  heart,  and  likewise  the 
seat  of  the  heart.  That  talented  pupil,  O  destroyer 
of  Madhu  !  having  been  thus  instructed  by  me,  pro- 
ceeded further  to  interrogate  (me)  about  the  piety 
(required)  for  final  emancipation,  which  is  difficult 
to  explain.  '  How  does  this  food  eaten  from  time 
to  time  become  digested  in  the  stomach  ?  How 
does  it  turn  to  juice,  and  how  also  to  blood  ?  And 
how,  too,  do  the  flesh,  and  marrow,  and  muscles,  and 
bones — which  all  (form)  the  bodies  for  embodied 
(selfs) — develop  in  a  woman  as  that  (self)  develops? 
How,  too,  does  the  strength  develop  ?  (And  how  is 
it  also)  about  the  removal  of  non-nutritive  (sub- 
stances) 2,  and  of  the  excretions,  distinctly  ?  How, 
too,  does  he  breathe  inwards  or  outwards  ?  And 
what  place  does  the  self  occupy,  dwelling  in  the 
self3  ?  And  how  does  the  soul  moving  about  carry 
the  body  ?  And  of  what  colour  and  of  what 
description  (is  it  when)  he  leaves  it  ?  O  sinless 
venerable  sir !  be  pleased  to  state  this  accurately 
to  me/  Thus  questioned  by  that  Brdhma^a,  O 
M&dhava  !    I  replied 4,  '  O  you  of  mighty  arms !   O 

1  Nilaka^Ma  cites  numerous  passages  from  works  of  the  Yoga 
philosophy  in  illustration  of  this.  He  takes  '  heart'  to  mean  the 
Brahman  seated  in  the  heart  (cf.  .Oandogya,  p.  528),  and  'the  seat 
of  the  heart '  to  mean  the  one  hundred  and  one  passages  of  the 
heart.  The  latter  expression  Ar^una  Mi^ra  seems  to  render  by 
'mind/  See  also  generally  on  this  passage,  Maitri-upanishad, 
p.  133,  and  Yoga-sutra  III,  1  and  28  seq.,  and  commentary  there. 

2  Literally,  *  those  which  are  void  of  strength/  I  adopt  Arg-una 
MLrra's  reading.    The  other  reading  literally  means  '  obstructions.' 

3  The  self  here  means  the  body,  I  take  it.     See  p.  248  supra. 

4  The  reply  does  not  appear  here.  Nilaka«/Aa  says  that  the  suc- 
ceeding chapters  contain  it.  Arg-una  Mi^ra  seems  to  say  that  the 
answer  has  been  already  given.    The  context  here  is  obscure. 


CHAPTER    IV,    51.  253 


restrainer  of  (your)  foes !  according  to  what  (I  had) 
heard.  As  one  placing  any  property  in  his  store-room 
should  fix  his  mind  on  the  property1,  so  placing 
one's  mind  in  one's  body,  and  (keeping)  the  passages 
confined,  one  should  there  look  for  the  self  and 
avoid  heedlessness  2.  Being  thus  always  assiduous 
and  pleased  in  the  self,  he  attains  in  a  short  time 
to  that  Brahman,  after  perceiving  which  he  under- 
stands the  Pradhclna 3.  He  is  not  to  be  grasped 
by  the  eye,  nor  by  any  of  the  senses.  Only  by  the 
mind  (used)  as  a  lamp  is  the  great  self  perceived  4. 
He  has  hands  and  feet  on  all  sides  ;  he  has  eyes, 
heads,  and  faces  on  all  sides ;  he  has  ears  on  all 
sides;  he  stands  pervading  everything  in  the  world5. 
The  soul  sees  the  self6  come  out  from  the  body; 
and  abandoning  his  body,  he  perceives  the  self, — 
holding  it  to  be  the  immaculate  Brahman, — with, 
as  it  were,  a  mental  smile7.  And  then  depending 
upon  it  thus,  he  attains  final  emancipation  in  me  8. 

1  Nilakaw/^a  says  the  original  means  household  effects ;  Arguna 
Mirra  says  wealth,  and  adds,  the  mind  is  fixed  on  it  from  fear  of 
others  finding  it  out. 

2  Cf.  Sanatsu^atiya,  p.  152.  Here,  however,  the  sense  is  the 
ordinary  one. 

3  I.  e.  all  nature,  that  from  which  the  universe  is  developed. 

4  Cf.  Ka/fca,  pp.  1 1 7-130.   See  Santi  Parvan  (Moksha)  CCXL,  1 6. 

5  Cf.  GM,  p.  103.  The  stanza  occurs  often  in  the  Bh&rata.  This, 
says  Argima  MLrra,  answers  the. question  'how  the  soul  carries  the 
body.'    The  soul  can  do  that  as  it  is  all-pervading. 

6  The  individual  soul,  which  has  acquired  true  knowledge,  per- 
ceives the  self  to  be  distinct  from  the  body.     See  p.  249  supra. 

7  I.  e.  at  the  false  notions  which  he  entertained.  Nilaka^/^a 
says,  *  smile,  i.e.  amazement  that  he  should  have  been  deceived 
by  the  mirage  like  course  of  worldly  life/ 

8  I.  e.  final  emancipation  and  assimilation  with  the  supreme  ; 
'  depending  upon  it  thus '  =  taking  refuge  with  the  Brahman  in 
the  way  above  stated. 


2  54  ANUGITA. 


This  whole  mystery  I  have  declared  to  you,  O  best 
of  Brahma^as * !  I  will  now  Take  my  leave,  I  will  go 
away ;  and  do  you  (too)  go  away,  O  Brahma^a ! 
according  to  your  pleasure/  Thus  addressed  by  me, 
O  Krishna !  that  pupil,  possessed  of  great  penance, 
— that  Brclhma/za  of  rigid  vows, — went  away  as  he 
pleased. 

Vasudeva  said : 
Having  spoken  to  me,  O  son  of  Pmhd!  these 
good  words  relating  to  the  piety  (required)  for  final 
emancipation,  that  best  of  BrAhma^as  disappeared 
then  and  there.  Have  you  listened  to  this,  O  son 
of  Prztha!  with  a  mind  (fixed)  on  (this)  one  point 
only 2  ?  For  on  that  occasion,  too,  sitting  in  the 
chariot  you  heard  this  same  (instruction).  It  is  my 
belief,  O  son  of  Pntha!  that  this  is  not  easily 
understood  by  a  man  who  is  confused,  or  who  has 
not  acquired  knowledge  with  his  inmost  soul  purified3. 
What  I  have  spoken,  O  chief  of  the  descendants  of 
Bharata !  is  a  great  mystery  (even)  among  the  gods. 
And  it  has  never  yet  been  heard  by  any  man  in  this 
world,  O  son  of  Przthd !  For,  O  sinless  one !  there 
is  no  other  man  than  you  worthy  to  hear  it.  Nor 
is  it  easily  to  be  understood  by  (one  whose)  in- 
ternal self  (is)  confused.  The  world  of  the  gods4, 
O   son  of  Kunti!    is  filled  by  those  who  perform 

1  Ar^una  Mura  says,  the  only  questions  among  those  stated 
above,  which  are  of  use  for  final  emancipation,  have  been  here 
answered.     The  others  should  be  looked  for  elsewhere. 

2  The  original  words  here  are  identical  with  those  at  Gita,  p.  139. 

3  I  adopt  Nilaka^a's  reading  here.  Ar^una  Mijra  reads 
'  vi^-agdhena,'  which  he  explains  to  mean  '  one  who  eats  kinds 
of  food  incompatible  with  one  another.'  A  third  reading  is 
'  krz'taghnena/  ungrateful ! 

4  See  Gita,  p.  84. 


CHAPTER    IV,    66.  255 


actions.  And  the  gods  are  not  pleased  with  a 
cessation  of  the  mortal  form 1.  For  as  to  that 
eternal  Brahman,  O  son  of  Pntha  !  that  is  the  highest 
goal,  where  one,  forsaking  the  body,  reaches  immor- 
tality and  is  ever  happy.  Adopting  this  doctrine, 
even  those  who  are  of  sinful  birth,  women,  VaLsyas, 
and  6ttdras  likewise,  attain  the  supreme  goal.  What 
then  (need  be  said  of)  Brahma^as,  O  son  of  Pntha 2 ! 
or  well-read  Kshatriyas,  who  are  constantly  intent  on 
their  own  duties,  and  whose  highest  goal  is  the  world 
of  the  Brahman  ?  This  has  been  stated  with  reasons  ; 
and  also  the  means  for  its  acquisition ;  and  the  fruit 
of  its  full  accomplishment,  final  emancipation,  and 
determination  regarding  misery3.  O  chief  of  the 
descendants  of  Bharata !  there  can  be  no  other 
happiness  beyond  this.  The  mortal,  O  son  of 
Pa^u !  who,  possessed  of  talents,  full  of  faith,  and 
energetic 4,  casts  aside  as  unsubstantial  the  (whole) 
substance  of  this  world5,  he  forthwith  attains  the 
highest  goal  by  these  means.  This  is  all  that  is 
to  be  said,  there  is  nothing  further  than  this.  Con- 
centration of  mind  comes  to  him,  O  son  of  Prztha ! 
who  practises  concentration  of  mind  constantly 
throughout  six  months  6. 

1  Cf.  BrzTiadara;zyaka,  p.  234,  where  £ankara  quotes  the  original 
stanza,  but  with  a  reading  which  means, '  And  the  gods  are  not 
pleased  at  mortals  rising  above  (them)/    That  is  a  better  reading. 

2  See  GM,  pp.  85,  86,  where  the  words  are  nearly  identical 
with  those  in  the  text. 

3  This  is  not  quite  clear.  Does  '  determination  regarding 
misery,'  the  original  of  which  is  du^khasya  ka,  vininzaya^,  mean 
'  conclusion  of  all  misery  ?'     Comp.  Gita,  p.  79. 

4  Ar^una  MLrra  says  this  means  assiduous. 

5  I.  e.  wealth  and  so  forth,  says  Nilakaw/^a.  Cf.  '  human 
wealth'  at  Sanatsu^dtiya,  p.  161. 

6  Cf.  Maitn-upanishad,  p.  154.     The  copy  of  Arguna  Mijra's 


256  ANUGITA. 


Chapter  V. 

On  this1,  too,  O  chief  of  the  descendants  of  Bha- 
rata!  they  relate  this  ancient  story,  (in  the  form  of)  a 
dialogue,  which  occurred,  O  son  of  Prz'tha !  between 
a  husband  and  wife.  A  Brcihma^a's  wife,  seeing 
the  Brahma^a  her  husband,  who  had  gone  through 
all  knowledge  and  experience  2,  seated  in  seclusion, 
spoke  to  him  (thus) :  '  What  world,  indeed,  shall  I  go 
to,  depending  on  you  as  (my)  husband,  you  who  live 
renouncing  (all)  action,  and  who  are  harsh  and  un- 
discerning3.  We  have  heard  that  wives  attain  to 
the  worlds  acquired  by  (their)  husbands.  What  goal, 
verily,  shall  I  reach,  having  got  you  for  my  husband?' 
Thus  addressed,  that  man  of  a  tranquil  self,  spoke 
to  her  with  a  slight  smile  :  '  O  beautiful  one !  O 
sinless  one !  I  am  not  offended  at  these  words  of 
yours.  Whatever  action  there  is,  that  can  be  caught 
(by  the  touch)  4,  or  seen,  or  heard,  that  only  do  the 
men  of  action  engage  in  as  action.  Those  who  are 
devoid  of  knowledge  only  lodge 5  delusion  in  them- 
selves by  means  of  action.    And  freedom  from  action 

commentary  which  I  have  used,  says  that  the  Anugita  ends  here. 
But,  as  we  have  shown,  there  is  a  verse  coming  further  on,  which 
*Sahkara/£arya  cites  as  from  the  Anugita.  In  the  printed  copies  of 
the  Mahabharata  the  next  chapter  is  called  the  Brahma^agita. 

1  I.  e.  the  questions  at  p.  252,  Nilaka^Ma;  more  probably,  per- 
haps, the  '  doctrine '  mentioned  at  p.  254  is  what  is  alluded  to. 

2  Cf.  Gita,  p.  57  and  note. 

3  Ntlakaw/^a  says  this  means  'ignorant  that  the  wife  has  no 
other  support.'  Arg-una  Misra  interprets  kina\ra  to  mean  'indi- 
gent '  instead  of '  harsh/ 

4  So  Arg-una  Mirra.  Nilaka/zMa's  reading  and  his  interpretation 
of  the  passage  are  different. 

5  I  follow  Ar^-una  Miyra;  the  original  literally  means  'restrain.' 


CHAPTER   V,   12.  257 


is  not  to  be  attained  in  this  world  even  for  an  instant1, 
From  birth  to  the  destruction  of  the  body,  action, 
good  or  bad,  by  act,  mind  or  speech 2,  does  exist 
among  (all)  beings.  While  the  paths3  (of  action), 
in  which  the  materials  are  visible,  are  destroyed 
by  demons4,  I  have  perceived  by  means  of  the 
self  the  seat  abiding  in  the  self5 — (the  seat)  where 
dwells  the  Brahman  free  from  the  pairs  of  opposites, 
and  the  moon  together  with  the  fire 6,  upholding  (all) 
beings  (as)  the  mover  of  the  intellectual  principle 7 ; 
(the  seat)  for  which  8  Brahman  and  others  concen- 
trating (their  minds)  worship  that  indestructible 
(principle),  and  for  which  learned  men  have  their 
senses  restrained,  and  their  selfs  tranquil,  and 
(observe)  good  vows.  It  is  not  to  be  smelt  by 
the  nose,  and  not  to  be  tasted  by  the  tongue.  It 
is  not  to  be  touched  by  the  sense  of  touch,  but 
is  to  be  apprehended  by  the  mind.     It  cannot  be 

1  Cf.  Gitd,  pp.  52,  53;  see  also,  as  to  freedom  from  action, 
GM,  p.  127. 

2  I.  e.  thought,  word,  and  deed.  I  have  in  the  text  kept  to  a 
more  literal  rendering. 

8  This  is  Nilaka/zMa's  reading  and  interpretation.  Ar^-una  Mura 
reads  '  actions  visible  and  invisible/ 

4  Cf.  inter  alia  Kumara-sambhava  II,  46. 

5  I.  e.  says  Ar^una  MLrra,  the  safe  place,  within  the  body ;  and 
says  Nilakaw/^a,  the  seat  called  Avimukta,  between  the  nose  and 
the  brows;  as  to  which  cf.  GM,  p.  67.  In  the  Kenopanishad 
(p.  220)  the  word  ayatana  is  used  to  signify  a  means  to  the 
attainment  of  the  Brahman. 

6  The  moon  and  fire  constitute  the  universe,  says  Ar^una 
Misra.  Cf.  GM,  p.  1 1 3.  Nilakaw/^a  interprets  this  more  mystically 
as  referring  to  the  Ida.  and  Pingala  arteries. 

7  So  Nilaka^/^a,  but  he  takes  it  to  stand  for  '  vayu '  or  wind,  as 
a  distinct  principle.  The  sense  is  by  no  means  clear.  But  the 
moon  being  the  deity  of  the  mind  also  may,  perhaps,  be  described 
as  she  is  here,  on  that  account. 

8  This  is  Ar^-una  Mura's  interpretation  of  the  original  locative. 

[8]  S 


258  anug!ta. 

conquered  by  the  eyes,  and  is  entirely  beyond  the 
senses  of  hearing.  It  is  devoid  of  smell,  devoid  of 
taste  and  touch,  devoid  of  colour  and  sound,  and 
imperishable1.  (It  is  that)  from  which  (this  whole) 
expanse 2  (of  the  universe)  proceeds,  and  on  which 
it  rests.  From  this  the  Pra^a,  Ap&na,  Sam&na, 
Vyana,  and  Udana  also  proceed,  and  into  it  they 
enter3.  Between  the  Sam&na  and  the  Vyana,  the 
Pr&^a  and  the  Apana  moved.  When  that4  is 
asleep,  the  Samana  and  Vy&na  also  are  absorbed6; 
and  between  the  Prd^a  and  the  Apana  dwells  the 
Udclna  pervading  (all).  Therefore  the  Prd/za  and 
the  Apana  do  not  forsake  a  sleeping  person.  That 
is  called  the  Ud&na,  as  the  life-winds  are  controlled6 
(by  it).  And  therefore  those  who  study  the  Brahman 
engage  in  penance  7  of  which  I  am  the  goal 8.     In 

1  Cf.  note  4,  p.  247  supra,  and  p.  253. 

2  Argnna  Mirra  says  this  means  the  five  great  elements,  the 
eleven  organs  (active  and  perceptive,  and  the  mind),  the  life-wind, 
and  the  individual  soul. 

8  The  Pra#a  is  at  the  nose,  the  Apana  at  the  arms,  the  Sa- 
mana at  the  navel,  the  Vy&na  pervades  the  whole  body,  and  the 
Ud&na  is  at  all  the  joints  ;  cf.  Yoga-sutra  III,  38  seq.  Nilaka«/£a 
says  this  explains  how  the  '  expanse '  (meaning,  he  says,  the  opera- 
tions of  the  creation,  Sec.)  '  proceeds '  from  the  Brahman.  See  on 
the  life-winds,  Bnhadarawyaka,  p.  667;  .ATMndogya,  pp.  42-188; 
Sankhyatattvakaumudi,  p.  96;  Vedanta  Paribhasha,  p.  45;  p.  271 
infra. 

4  The  self,  Arg-una  MLyra.  Nilaka/z/y&a  says, '  the  PrS/z a  accom- 
panied by  the  Ap&na/ 

5  I.  e.  into  the  Pra^a  and  Apdna,  Argnna  Misra. 

6  Ntlakaw/^a  derives  the  word  thus,  utkarshe/za  anayati. 

7  I.e.  the  subjugation  of  the  life-winds  as  indicated  at  GM,  p.  61. 

8  The  meaning  of  the  passage  as  a  whole  is  not  very  clear, 
and  the  commentators  afford  but  little  help.  The  sense  appears 
to  be  this  ;  The  course  of  worldly  life  is  due  to  the  operations  of 
the  life-winds  which  are  attached  to  the  self  and  lead  to  its  manifes- 
tations as  individual  souls.     Of  these,  the  Sam&na  and  Vyana  are 


CHAPTER   V,    21.  259 


the  interior1,  in  the  midst  of  all  these  (life-winds) 
which  move  about  in  the  body  and  swallow  up  one 
another2,  blazes  the  Vaisv&na  fire3  sevenfold.  The 
nose,  and  the  tongue,  and  the  eye,  and  the  skin, 
and  the  ear  as  the  fifth,  the  mind  and  the  under- 
standing, these  are  the  seven  tongues 4  of  the  blaze 
of  Vai^vanara.  That  which  is  to  be  smelt,  that 
which  is  to  be  drunk,  that  which  is  to  be  seen,  that 
which  is  to  be  touched,  and  likewise  that  which  is 
to  be  heard,  and  also  that  which  is  to  be  thought 
of,  and  that  which  is  to  be  understood,  those  are 
the  seven  (kinds  of)  fuel  for  me5.  That  which 
smells,  that  which  eats,  that  which  sees,  that  which 
touches,  and  that  which  hears  as  the  fifth,  that  which 
thinks,  and  that  which  understands,  these  are  the 
seven  great  officiating  priests6.  And  mark  this  always, 

controlled  and  held  under  check  by  the  Pra«a  and  Ap&na,  into 
which  latter  the  former  are  absorbed  in  sleep.  The  latter  two 
are  held  in  check  and  controlled  by  the  Udana,  which  thus 
controls  all.  And  the  control  of  this,  which  is  the  control  of  all 
the  five,  and  which  is  otherwise  called  penance,  destroys  the 
course  of  worldly  life,  and  leads  to  the  supreme  self. 

1  I.  e.  within  the  body. 

2  As  explained  in  note  8,  p.  258. 

8  This,  says  Nilaka^/^a,  explains  the  word  '  I '  in  the  sentence 
preceding.  Vaiwanara  is  a  word  often  used  to  denote  the  self. 
The  Vishamadoki  derives  it  thus,  '  that  which  saves  all  beings 
from  hell ; '  seethe  Prama-upanishad,  pp.  167-188  (where  seven 
tongues  are  also  referred  to) ;  Mu^aka,  p.  292 ;  .Oandogya, 
p.  364;  Ma/^/ukya,  p.  341. 

4  Cf.  Taittiriya-arawyaka,  p.  802. 

5  I.  e.  the  Vaijvanara.     Cf.  Taittiriya-arawyaka,  p.  803  and  gloss. 

6  These  I  take  to  be  the  powers  of  hearing,  &c.,  which  are 
presided  over  by  the  several  deities  ;  or,  better,  perhaps,  they 
may  mean  the  soul  distinguished  as  so  many  with  reference  to 
these  several  powers;  cf.  Br/hadara/zyaka,  p.  169;  Maitri,  p.  96; 
Prasna,  pp.  214,  215;  Kaushitaki,  p.  96;  Aitareya,  p.  187;  jOan- 
dogya,  p.  616.     The  latter  sense  is  accepted  by  Ar^una  Mura. 

S    2 


260  anugItA. 


O  beautiful  one !  The  learned  sacrificers  throwing 
(in)  due  (form)  the  seven  offerings  into  the  seven 
fires  in  seven  ways,  produce  them  in  their  wombs * ; 
(namely),  that  which  is  to  be  smelt,  that  which  is 
to  be  drunk,  that  which  is  to  be  seen,  that  which 
is  to  be  touched,  and  likewise  that  which  is  to  be 
heard,  that  which  is  to  be  thought  of,  and  also  that 
which  is  to  be  understood.  Earth,  air,  space,  water, 
and  light  as  the  fifth,  mind  and  understanding,  these 
seven,  indeed,  are  named  wombs.  All  the  qualities 
which  stand2  as  offerings  are  absorbed  into  the 
mouth  of  the  fire3;  and  having  dwelt  within  that 
dwelling  are  born  in  their  respective  wombs  4.  And 
in  that  very  (principle),  which  is  the  generator  of  all 
entities,  they  remain  absorbed  during  (the  time  of) 
deluge.  From  that 5  is  produced  smell ;  from  that 
is  produced  taste ;  from  that  is  produced  colour  ; 
from  that  touch  is  produced ;  from  that  is  produced 
sound ;  from  that  doubt 6  is  produced ;  from  that 
is  produced  determination.  This  (is  what)  they  know 
as  the  sevenfold  production.  In  this  very  way  was 
it7  comprehended  by  the  ancients.  Becoming  per- 
fected by  the  perfect  sacrifice  8,  they  were  perfectly 
filled  with  light/ 

1  The  next  clause  explains  this ;  that  which  is  to  be  smelt  is 
earth,  and  so  on  throughout.  The  men  who  sacrifice  all  sensuous 
objects,  get  such  powers  that  they  can  create  the  objects  whenever 
they  like.     As  to  'in  their  wombs/  see  Yoga  Bhashya,  p.  108. 

2  I.  e.  are  so  treated  in  the  above  allegory. 

3  I.  e.  the  Brahman. 

4  I.  e.  when  the  sacrificer  wishes,  as  stated  in  note  i. 

5  That  principle — viz.  the  Brahman. 

6  This  is  the  operation  of  the  mind,  see  Gita,  p.  57  note. 

7  The  Brahman,  Ar^-una  Mura.  Or  it  may  be  the  '  sevenfold 
production/ 

8  The  wholesale   sacrifice  of  all   sensuous  perceptions.     The 


CHAPTER   VI,  6.  26l 


Chapter  VI. 

The  Br&hma/za  said : 
On  this,  too,  they  relate  this  ancient  story.  Learn 
now  of  what  description  is  the  institution  of  the  ten 
sacrificial  priests  \  The  ear 2,  the  skin,  the  two  eyes, 
the  tongue,  the  nose,  the  two  feet,  the  two  hands, 
speech,  the  genital  organ,  and  the  anus,  these,  verily, 
are  ten  sacrificial  priests,  O  beautiful  one !  Sound, 
touch,  colour,  and  taste,  smell,  words,  action,  motion, 
and  the  discharge  of  semen,  urine,  and  excrement, 
these  are  the  ten  oblations.  The  quarters,  wind, 
sun,  moon,  earth  and  fire,  and  Vish/m  also,  Indra, 
Pra^ipati,  and  Mitra,  these,  O  beautiful  one !  are 
the  ten  fires3.  The  ten  organs  are  the  makers 
of  the  offering;  the  offerings  are  ten,  O  beautiful 
one  !  Objects  of  sense,  verily,  are  the  fuel ;  and  they 
are  offered  up  into  the  ten  fires.  The  mind  is  the 
ladle 4 ;  and  the  wealth  is  the  pure,  highest  know- 
ledge5. (Thus)  we  have  heard,  was  the  universe 
duly  divided 6.     And  the  mind,  which  is  the  instru- 

root  corresponding  with  perfect  occurs  three  times  in  the  original, 
hence  the  repetition  of  perfect  above. 

1  Cf.  Taittiriya-bralimawa,  p.  411,  and  Arawyaka,  p.  281. 

2  Cf.  Br/had&rawyaka,  p.  459.  The  reading  in  the  printed  edition 
of  Bombay  is  defective  here. 

8  See  p.  337  seq.,  where  all  this  is  more  fully  explained.  And 
cf.  the  analogous  Buddhistic  doctrine  stated  at  Lalita  Vistara  (Trans- 
lation by  Dr.R.  Mitra),  p.  11. 

4  See  Taittiriya-ara/zyaka  loc.  cit.,  and  cf.  Gita,  p.  61.  'The 
wealth '  probably  means  the  Dakshi^a  to  be  given  to  the  priests, 
which  is  mentioned  at  Gita,  p.  119. 

5  The  'priests'  here  being  the  senses,  the  knowledge  would 
accrue  to  them,  as  to  which  cf,  Gita,  p.  108. 

6  See  note  3. 


262  ANUGITA. 


ment  of  knowledge,  requires  everything  knowable1 
(as  its  offering).  The  mind  is  within  the  body  the 
upholder  of  the  frame,  and  the  knower  is  the  upholder 
of  the  body 2.  That 3  upholder  of  the  body  is  the 
Garhapatya  fire ;  from  that  another  is  produced, 
and  the  mind  which  is  the  Ahavanlya ;  and  into  this 
the  offering  is  thrown.  Then  the  lord  of  speech 
was  produced 4 ;  that  (lord  of  speech)  looks  up  to 
the  mind.  First,  verily,  are  words  produced ;  and 
the  mind  runs  after  them. 

1  Each  sense  can  only  offer  up  its  own  perceptions — the  mind 
offers  up  all  knowledge  whatever. 

2  Ar^-una  Mi^ra  says  this  is  an  implied  simile,  the  mind  is  an 
upholder  of  the  body  as  the  '  knower '  or  self  is. 

3  Ar^una  MLyra  says  this  means  '  the  mind.'  I  think  it  better 
to  take  it  here  as  the  self  (see  p.  238  supra),  to  which  the  'mind' 
and  the  '  other,'  mentioned  further  on,  would  be  subordinate ;  the 
'  other '  Ar^-una  MLrra  renders  by  the  '  group  of  the  senses.'  The 
senses  are  compared  to  fires  at  GM,  p.  61.  The  passage  at 
Taittiriya-arawyaka  above  cited  refers  only  to  the  Garhapatya  and 
Ahavaniya  fires.  Nilaka/zMa's  text  and  explanation  of  this  passage 
are,  to  my  mind,  not  nearly  so  satisfactory  as  Ar^-una  MLrra's. 

4  In  the  Taittiriya-br&hmafla  and  Ara/zyaka  loc.  cit.,  the  equi- 
valent of  the  original  word  for  '  lord  of  speech '  here  occurs,  viz. 
Vakpati  for  Va^aspati  here;  but  that  is  there  described  as  the 
Hot/V  priest,  and  speech  itself  as  the  Vedi  or  altar.  The  com- 
mentator there  interprets  'lord  of  speech'  to  mean  the  wind 
which  causes  vocal  activity,  and  resides  in  the  throat,  palate,  &c. 
As  to  mind  and  speech,  see  also  isfMndogya,  pp.  285-441,  and 
comments  of  *Sarikara  there.  The  meaning  of  this  passage, 
however,  is  not  by  any  means  clear  to  my  mind.  The  Da^ahotr/ 
mantras  in  the  Taittiriya  are  stated  to  be  the  mantras  of  the  Ish/i, 
or  sacrifice,  performed  by  Pra^apati  for  creation.  It  is  possible, 
then,  that  the  meaning  here  is,  that  speech  which  is  to  be  learnt 
by  the  pupil,  as  stated  further  on — namely,  the  Vedas — was  first 
produced  from  that  Ish/i  (cf.  Kulluka  on  Manu  I,  21).  But  to 
understand  that  speech,  mind  is  necessary;  hence  it  is  said  to 
look  up  to  the  mind.  The  Brahma/za's  wife,  however,  seems  to 
understand  speech  as  ordinary  speech,  hence  her  question. 


CHAPTER   VI,   15.  263 


The  Brahma^as  wife  said : 
How  did  speech  come  into  existence  first,  and 
how  did  the  mind  come  into  existence  afterwards, 
seeing  that  words  are  uttered  (after  they  have  been) 
thought  over  by  the  mind  ?  By  means  of  what 
experience  does  intelligence  come  to  the  mind, 
and  (though)  developed,  does  not  comprehend *  ? 
What  verily  obstructs  it  ? 

The  Brahma^a  said: 
The  Ap&na  becoming  lord  changes  it  into  the 
state  of  the  Apana  in  consequence.  That  is  called 
the  movement  of  the  mind,  and  hence  the  mind  is 
in  need  (of  it)2.  But  since  you  ask  me  a  question 
regarding  speech  and  mind,  I  will  relate  to  you 
a  dialogue  between  themselves.  Both  speech  and 
mind  went  to  the  self  of  all  beings3  and  spoke 
(to  him  thus),  'Say  which  of  us  is  superior;  destroy 
our  doubts,  O  lord!'  Thereupon  the  lord  positively 
said  to  speech, '  Mind  (is  superior)/  But  speech  there- 
upon said  to  him,' I,  verily,  yield  (you)  your  desires4/ 

1  This,  again,  is  to  my  mind  very  hard  to  understand.  The 
original  word  for  '  intelligence '  is  mati,  which  at  -O&ndogya, 
p.  514,  Sankara  interprets  thus:  'intelligence  is  pondering,  ap- 
plication to  (literally,  respect  for)  the  subject  of  thought/  The 
original  for  '  developed/  Arg-una  Mirra  renders  by  '  mixed  or  assimi- 
lated with;'  and  '  does  not  comprehend/ he  takes  to  mean  'does 
not  understand — speech  or  words/  This  question  appears  to  be 
suggested  by  the  last  words  of  the  previous  speech. 

2  These  two  sentences  are  again  very  obscure.  Ntlakaw/^a,  as 
usual,  deserts  his  original,  giving  peculiar  meanings  to  the  words 
without  producing  any  authority.  Ar^una  Mura  is  very  meagre, 
and  besides  the  MS.  is  very  incorrect.     See  p.  264,  note  5  infra. 

3  I.  e.  Pra^apati,  says  Ar^una  MLsra,  which  seems  to  be  justified 
by  the  sequel.  Nilakara/^a  takes  it  to  mean  the  individual  self, 
which  doubtless  is  its  meaning  elsewhere,  e.  g.  Maitri,  p.  56. 

4  I.  e.  speech  conveys  information  on  all  matters,  Arg-una  MLrra ; 


264  ANUGITA. 


The  Brihma^a 1  said  : 
Know,  that  (in)  my  (view),  there  are  two  minds 2, 
immovable  and  also  movable.  The  immovable, 
verily,  is  with  me;  the  movable  is  in  your  dominion. 
Whatever  mantra,  or  letter,  or  tone  goes  to  your 
dominion,  that  indeed  is  the  movable  mind3.  To 
that  you  are  superior.  But  inasmuch,  O  beautiful 
one !  as  you  came  personally  to  speak  to  me  (in  the 
way  you  did)4,  therefore,  O  Sarasvatt !  you  shall 
never  speak  after  (hard)  exhalations 5.  The  goddess 
speech,  verily,  dwelt  always  between  the  Pra^a  and 
Apana 6.     But,  O  noble  one !  going  with  the  Apana 

as  the  means  of  acquiring  desired  fruit,  visible  or  invisible,  is 
learnt  by  speech,  Nilaka^Ma.  Cf.  as  to  all  this,  Brzliadara/zyaka- 
upanishad,  pp.  50  seq.  and  261. 

1  I.  e.  Nilaka^a  says,  '  the  Brahmawa  named  mind/  alluding 
apparently  to  p.  310  infra.  But  the  reading  of  some  of  the 
MSS.,  viz.  Brahman  for  the  Brdhmawa,  seems  preferable,  having 
regard  to  what  follows.  Apparently,  the  Brahma^a's  own  speech 
should  begin  at '  The  goddess  speech '  further  on. 

2  Nilaka«//£a  says,  immovable = to  be  understood  by  the  external 
senses;  movable=not  perceptible  by  senses,  such  as  heaven,  &c, 
which  is  not  quite  intelligible.  Ar^una  Mirra  says,  the  immovable 
mind  is  that  of  the  teacher,  which  is  fixed,  as  it  has  not  to  learn  or 
acquire  anything,  while  that  of  the  pupil  is  movable  as  acquiring 
new  impressions  and  knowledge. 

3  I.  e.  it  is  the  movable  mind  which  takes  cognisance  of  the 
significations  of  all  mantras  (sacred  texts),  letters,  tones,  in  which, 
I  presume,  sacred  instruction  is  conveyed.  To  this  mind,  speech 
is  superior,  as  that  mind  only  works  on  what  speech  places  before 
it ;  but  the  mind  which  is  '  with '  Pra^apati,  is  superior  to  speech 
as  it  is  not  dependent  on  speech  like  the  other. 

4  I.  e.  proudly,  about  her  being  the  giver  of  desires  to  Brahman. 

5  I.  e.,  says  Arg-una  MLrra,  the  words  will  not  come  out  with  the 
Pra/za  life-wind  and  convey  any  sense  to  the  hearer,  but  will  be 
absorbed  down  into  the  Ap&na  life-wind,  and  not  be  articulated  as 
speech  at  all.  Cf.  Kaushitaki,  p.  41 ;  Ka/^a,  p.  184  (with  glosses); 
and  A'Mndogya,  p.  42. 

6  I.  e.,  I  presume,  was  dependent  on  the  two  life-winds  named. 


CHAPTER   VI,  25.  265 


wind1,  though  impelled,  (in  consequence  of)  being 
without  the  Pra^a,  she  ran  up  to  Pra^apati,  saying, 
'  Be  pleased 2,  O  venerable  sir ! '  Then 3  the  Pra/za 
appeared  again  nourishing  speech.  And  therefore 
speech  never  speaks  after  (hard)  exhalation.  It  is 
always  noisy  or  noiseless.  Of  those  two,  the  noise- 
less is  superior  to  the  noisy  4  (speech).  This  excel- 
lent (speech),  like  a  cow,  yields  milk 5,  and  speaking 
of  the  Brahman  it  always  produces  the  eternal 
(emancipation).  This  cow-like  speech,  O  you  of  a 
bright  smile  !  is  divine,  with  divine6  power.  Observe 
the  difference  of  (its)  two  subtle,  flowing  (forms) 7. 

The  Br&hma/zas  wife  said  : 
What   did  the   goddess    of  speech    say  on   that 
occasion    in  days    of  old,  when,  though   (she  was) 
impelled  with  a  desire  to  speak,   words  could  not 
be  uttered  ? 

The  Brahma^a  said : 

The  (speech)  which  is  produced  in  the  body  by 

Cf.  p.  353  infra.  For  this  sense  of  the  word  'between/  see  p.  258 
supra,  and -Oandogya-upanishad,  p.  623. 

1  And  not  with  the  PraVza,  so  as  to  be  articulated.     Cf.  p.  264. 

2  I.e.  to  withdraw  the  ' curse'  pronounced,  as  above  stated. 

8  After  the  curse  was  withdrawn,  says  Arg-una  Misra.  Cf. 
Br/hadara/zyaka,  p.  317. 

4  Since,  says  Arg-una  MLrra,  noiseless  speech  is  the  source  of  all 
words — Vahmaya.  Perhaps  we  may  compare  Aitareya-brahmawa 
(Haug),  p.  47. 

5  Viz.  Vanmaya  ;  milk,  as  a  source  of  pleasure. 

6  I.  e.  enlightening,  Ar^-una  MLrra.  But,  perhaps,  the  translation 
should  be, '  has  powers  divine  and  not  divine/  As  to  this,  cf.  San- 
khya  Bhashya  on  III,  41,  and  Sarikhyatattvakaumudi,  p.  118,  and 
Wilson's  Sahkhya  Karika,  p.  37  (Sanskrit),  and  *SVeta\yvatara, 
p.  284  (gloss). 

7  Ar§nna  Mi^ra  refers  to  a  '  £atapatha  text '  in  praise  of  the 
subtle  speech.  I  cannot  trace  the  text.  But  see  Nirukta  (Roth), 
pp.  167-187. 


266  ANUGITA. 


means  of  the  Pra^a1,  and  which  then  goes  into  the 
Apana,  and  then  becoming  assimilated  with  the 
Ud&na  leaves  the  body2,  and  with  the  Vyana 
envelopes  all  the  quarters 3,  then  (finally)  dwells  in 
the  Samana4.  So  speech  formerly  spoke.  Hence 
the  mind  is  distinguished  by  reason  of  its  being 
immovable,  and  the  goddess  distinguished  by  reason 
of  her  being  movable 5. 


Chapter  VII. 

The  Brdhma^a  said : 

On  this,  too,  O  beautiful  one !   they   relate   this 

ancient  story,  (which  shows)  of  what  description  is 

the  institution  of  the  seven  sacrificial  priests6.     The 

1  Cf.  -Oandogya,  p.  285,  and  the  passage  there  quoted  by  *San- 
kara  as  well  as  Anandagiri's  gloss.     And  see,  too,  p.  353  infra. 

2  Viz.  the  part  of  it  which  specially  appertains  to  speech — the 
throat,  &c. 

3  All  the  n&dls  or  passages  of  the  body,  Arg-una  Mura. 

4  I.  e.  at  the  navel  in  the  form  of  sound,  as  the  material  cause  of 
all  words.  There  and  in  that  condition  speech  dwells  after  going 
through  the  body,  as  above  stated.  There,  adds  Ar^una  Mirra, 
devotees  are  to  meditate  on  speech. 

5  This  is  not  quite  clear,  but  the  meaning  seems  to  be,  that  the 
merit  of  the  immovable  mind  consists  in  its  unchangeability,  and 
that  of  speech  in  being  the  cause  of  variations  in  the  movable 
mind  by  conveying  new  knowledge  and  new  impressions.  Cf.  on 
this  result,  jOandogya-upanishad,  p.  482. 

6  Arg-una  MLrra  says,  the  last  chapter  explained  Pra/zayama,  and 
this  explains  PratyaMra.  Pra^ayama  is  the  restraint  of  the  life- 
winds,  Pratyahara  that  of  the  senses,  according  to  the  Yoga 
philosophy  (see  the  quotation  in  the  commentary  at  Yoga-sutra  III, 
1,  and  see  also  pp.  141- 145).  Cf.  also  GM,  p.  61.  The  Sapta- 
hotn-vidhana  as  taught  in  the  Taittirfya-brahmawa  and  Ara^yaka 
is  to  be  found  a  few  pages  after  the  pages  referred  to  for  the 
Dasahotr/'-vidhana  at  p.  261  supra.  And  the  other  Vidhanas  also 
are  to  be  found  in  the  same  parts  of  those  books. 


CHAPTER   VII,   12.  267 


nose,  and  the  eye,  and  the  tongue,  and  the  skin,  and 
the  ear  as  the  fifth,  mind  and  understanding,  these 
are  the  seven  sacrificial  priests  separately  stationed. 
Dwelling  in  a  minute  space,  they  do  not  perceive 
each  other.  Do  you,  verily,  O  beautiful  one !  learn 
about  these  sacrificial  priests,  (which  are)  seven 
according  to  (their  several)  natures. 

The  Brahma/zas  wife  said : 
How  (is    it)  these   do  not  perceive  each  other, 
dwelling  (as  they  do)  in  a  minute  space  ?    What 
are  their  natures,  O  venerable  sir  ?     Tell  me  this, 
O  lord! 

The  Br&hma/za  said: 

Not  knowing  the  qualities  (of  anything)  is  igno- 
rance (of  it).  Knowledge  of  the  qualities  is  know- 
ledge. And  these  never  know  the  qualities  of  each 
other.  The  tongue,  the  eye,  the  ear  likewise, 
the  skin,  the  mind,  and  the  understanding  also,  do 
not  apprehend  smells,  the  nose  apprehends  them. 
The  nose,  the  eye,  the  ear  likewise,  the  skin,  the 
mind,  and  the  understanding  also,  do  not  apprehend 
tastes,  the  tongue  apprehends  them.  The  nose,  the 
tongue,  the  ear  likewise,  the  skin,  the  mind,  and  the 
understanding  also,  do  not  apprehend  colours,  the 
eye  apprehends  them.  The  nose,  the  tongue,  and 
next  the  eye,  the  ear,  the  understanding,  the  mind 
likewise,  do  not  apprehend  (objects  of)  touch,  the  skin 
apprehends  them.  The  nose,  the  tongue,  and  the 
eye,  the  skin,  the  mind,  and  the  understanding  also, 
do  not  apprehend  sounds,  the  ear  apprehends  them. 
The  nose,  the  tongue,  and  the  eye,  the  skin,  the 
ear,  and  the  understanding  also,  do  not  apprehend 
doubt,  the  mind  apprehends  it.  The  nose,  the 
tongue,  and  the  eye,  the  skin,  the  ear,  and  the  mind 


268  ANUGITA. 


also,  do  not  apprehend  final  determination,  the  under- 
standing apprehends  it.  On  this,  too,  they  relate 
this  ancient  story,  —  a  dialogue,  O  beautiful  one! 
between  the  senses  and  the  mind. 

The  mind  said: 

The  nose  smells  not  without  me,  the  tongue  does 
not  perceive  taste,  the  eye  does  not  take  in  colour, 
the  skin  does  not  become  aware  of  any  (object  of) 
touch.  Without  me,  the  ear  does  not  in  any  way 
hear  sound.  I  am  the  eternal  chief  among  all 
elements1.  Without  me,  the  senses  never  shine, 
like  an  empty  dwelling,  or  like  fires  the  flames  of 
which  are  extinct.  Without  me,  all  beings,  like  fuel 
half  dried  and  half  moist,  fail  to  apprehend  qualities  or 
objects,  even  with  the  senses  exerting  themselves 2. 

The  senses  said  : 
This  would  be  true  as  you  believe,  if  you,  without 
us,  enjoyed  the  enjoyments  (derived from)  our  objects3. 
If  when  we  are  extinct,  (there  is)  pleasure  and  support 
of  life,  and  if  you  enjoy  enjoyments,  then  what  you 
believe  is  true ;  or  if  when  we  are  absorbed 4,  and 
objects  are  standing,  you  enjoy  objects  according 
to  their  natures  by  the  mere  operation  of  the  mind. 

1  Cf.  Kaushitaki-upanishad,  p.  93;  -Oandogya,  p.  297;  Maitri, 
p.  158  ;  and  Brzhad&ra/zyaka,  p.  284.  The  passages  in  the  last  two 
works  seem  to  be  identical  ones. 

2  I.  e.  in  their  respective  operations. 

3  The  implication,  of  course,  is,  as  Ar^oina  Mirra  says,  that  this 
is  not  so,  as  what  is  not  perceived  by  the  senses  cannot  be  the 
object  of  the  mind's  operations, —  a  proposition  which  reminds 
one  of  the  maxim, '  Nihil  est  in  intellectu  quod  non  fuerit  in  sensu,' 
apparently  without  Leibnitz's  limitation  of  it.  Cf.  Archbishop 
Thomson's  Laws  of  Thought,  p.  52. 

4  As  in  sleep,  &c. 


CHAPTER   VII,  27.  269 


If  again- you  think  your  power  over  our  objects 
is  constant  19  then  take  in  colours  by  the  nose,  take 
in  tastes  by  the  eye,  take  in  smells  by  the  ear,  take 
in  (objects  of)  touch  by* the  tongue,  and  take  in  sounds 
by  the  skin,  and  also  (objects  of) 2  touch  by  the  under- 
standing. For  those  who  are  powerful  have  no  rules 
(to  govern  them) ;  rules  are  for  the  weak.  You 
should  accept  enjoyments  unenjoyed  before ;  you 
ought  not  to  enjoy  what  has  been  tasted3  (by  others). 
As  a  pupil  goes  to  a  preceptor  for  Vedic  learning, 
and  having  acquired  Vedic  learning  from  him,  per- 
forms the  directions  of  the  Vedic  texts,  so  you  treat 
as  yours4  objects  shown5  by  us,  both  past  and 
future 6,  in  sleep  and  likewise  wakefulness.  Besides, 
when  creatures  of  little  intelligence  are  distracted 
in  mind,  life  is  seen  to  be  supported,  when  our 
objects  7  perform  their  functions.  And  even  after 
having  carried  on  numerous  mental  operations,  and 
indulged  in  dreams,  a  creature,  when  troubled  by 
desire  to  enjoy,  does  run  to  objects  of  sense  only. 
One  entering  upon  enjoyments,  resulting  from  mental 
operations  (alone),  and  not  connected  with  objects 

1  I.  e.  if  you  can  enjoy  objects  independently  of  the  senses, 
whenever  you  choose  to  perform  your  operations.  This,  says 
Arg-una  Mura,  meets  an  objection  which  might  be  made,  that  the 
mind  at  the  time  stated  does  not  desire  objects. 

2  Sic  in  original.     It  comes  twice. 

8  Eating  what  has  been  tasted  by  another  is  a  cause  of  degrada- 
tion.    Cf.  -Oandogya,  p.  81;  Maitri,  p.  103;  and  p.  363  infra. 

4  You  incorrectly  attribute  to  yourself  the  quality  of  appre- 
hending them. 

5  I.  e.  presented  before  you  by  us. 

6  This  is  not  quite  clear.  Ar^una  MLyra  has,  'not  past,  not 
future;'  literally,  'not  come,  not  gone/ 

7  Viz.  smell,  sound,  &c. ;  not  by  the  mere  operations  of  the 
mind,  but  by  obtaining  the  objects,  is  life  supported. 


270  anug!ta. 


of  sense,  (which  is)  like  entering  a  house  without 
a  door  \  always  meets  death,  on  the  exhaustion  of 
the  life-winds  2,  as  a  fire  which  is  kindled  (is  extin- 
guished) on  the  exhaustion  of  fuel.  Granted,  that 
we  have  connexions  with  our  (respective)  qualities, 
and  granted  that  we  have  no  perception  of  each 
others  qualities ;  still,  without  us,  you  have  no 
perception3,  and  so  long  no  happiness  can  accrue 
to  you. 


Chapter  VIII. 

The  Brahma/za  said : 
On  this,  too,  they  relate  an  ancient  story,  O 
beautiful  one !  (showing)  of  what  description  is  the 
institution  of  the  five  sacrificial  priests.  The  learned 
know  this  to  be  a  great  principle,  that  the  Prd/za 
and  the  Apana,  and  the  Udana,  and  also  the  Samana 
and  the  Vyana,  are  the  five  sacrificial  priests. 

The  Br&hma/zas  wife  said : 
My  former  belief  was  that  the  sacrificial  priests 
were  seven  by  (their)  nature 4.    State  how  the  great 
principle  is  that  there  are  verily  five  sacrificial  priests5. 

1  The  senses  are  the  doors  of  the  house  here,  as  they  are  among 
the  doors  of  the  city  at  GM,  p.  65. 

2  Owing  to  the  want  of  food,  &c.  Cf.  Maitri,  p.  112,  and  .Oan- 
dogya,  p.  422. 

3  Perception  of  pleasure,  says  Arg-una  Mi^ra ;  but  he  takes  the 
subsequent  clause  to  mean  this,  'and  without  you  no  pleasure 
accrues  to  us  either/    The  text  is  here  in  an  unsatisfactory  state. 

4  As  stated  in  the  last  chapter;  some  MSS.  read  'your'  for  'my* 
at  the  beginning  of  the  sentence. 

5  Ar^una  MLrra  says  that  in  this  Paii&thotn-vidhana  the  five 
chief  Hotrzs  only  are  stated  for  briefly  explaining  the  Prawayama, 


CHAPTER   VIII,   7.  27I 


The  Brahma^a  said : 
The  wind  prepared  by  the  Pra/za  afterwards  be- 
comes the  Apana.  The  wind  prepared  in  the  Apana 
then  works  as  the  Vyana.  The  wind  prepared  by  the 
Vyana  works  as  the  Udana.  And  the  wind  prepared 
in  the  Udana  is  produced  as  Samdna1.  They  for- 
merly went  to  the  grandsire,  who  was  born  first,  and 
said  to  him,  'Tell  us  which  is  greatest  among  us. 
He  shall  be  the  greatest  among  us2/ 

Brahman  said : 
He,  verily,  is  the  greatest,  who  being  extinct,  all 
the  life-winds  in  the  body  of  living  creatures  become 
extinct ;  and  on  whose  moving  about,  they  again  move 
about.     (Now)  go  where  (you)  like. 

The  Pra^a  said : 
When  I  am  extinct,  all  the  life-winds  in  the  body 

1  Ar^-una  Mi^ra  says, '  The  wind  going  to  the  Pra«a,  and  being 
obstructed  in  upward  progress  by  the  Pra/za,  goes  to  the  Apana, 
and  then  unable  to  go  upwards  or  downwards,  enters  the  passages 
or  naafts  of  the  body  and  becomes  Vyana.  In  the  same  way  Udana, 
by  the  collision  of  the  two,  produces  sound  in  the  throat,  and  de- 
pends on  Praraa  and  Apana ;  so,  too,  the  Samana  dwelling  in  the 
navel  and  kindling  the  gastric  fire  is  also  dependent  on  those  two/ 
The  meaning  seems  to  be  that  one  life- wind  is  distributed  in  the 
different  places,  and  gets  different  names,  as  stated,  in  the  order 
mentioned.     See  Maitri,  p.  28. 

2  A  similar  visit  on  the  part  of  the  Pra^as  (who,  however,  are  not 
there  the  life-winds  only,  but  the  Pra^a  life-wind  and  the  active 
organs)  to  Pra^apati  is  mentioned  at  Brz'hadarawyaka-upanishad, 
p.  1016,  and  -Oandogya,  p.  297.  Cf.  also  Pra^na,  p.  178;  Brz- 
haddrawyaka,  p.  317;  and  Kaushitaki,  p.  63.  See  also,  generally,  as 
to  the  life- winds  and  their  functions,  Br/haddrawyaka,  p.  280,  and 
iSahkara's  comment  there ;  Yoga-sutras  III,  38,  and  comment ; 
Cowell's  note  at  Maitri,  p.  247;  *Santi  Parvan  (Moksha  Dharma), 
chap.  184,  st.  24-25 ;  chap.  185,  st.  1  seq.;  and  p.  258  supra. 


272  ANUGITA. 


of  living  creatures  become  extinct;  and  on  my  moving 
about,  they  again  move  about.  I  am  the  greatest. 
See  I  am  extinct! 

The  Brahma^a  said : 
Then  the  Pra^a  became  extinct,  and  again  moved 
about.  Then  the  Samana  and  Udana  also1,  O 
beautiful  one!  spoke  these  words, 'You  do  not  per- 
vade all  this  here  as  we  do.  You  are  not  the  greatest 
among  us,  O  Pra/za,  because  the  Ap&na  is  subject 
to  you  V  The  Pra/za  again  moved  about 3,  and  the 
Ap&na  4  said  to  him. 

The  Ap&na  said : 
When  I  am  extinct,  all  the  life-winds  in  the  body 
of  living  creatures  become  extinct;  and  on  my  moving 
about,  they  again  move  about.     I  am  the  greatest. 
See  I  am  extinct ! 

The  Brahma^a  said : 
Then  the  Vy£na  and  the  Ud&na  addressed  him 
who  was  speaking  (thus)  :  '  You  are  not  the  greatest, 
O  Ap&na !  because  the  Pri^a  is  subject  to  you/ 
Then  the  Ap&na  moved  about,  and  the  Vy&na  spoke 
to  him  :  '  I  am  the  greatest  among  (you)  all.  Hear 
the  reason  why.  When  I  am  extinct,  all  the  life- 
winds  in  the  body  of  living  creatures  become  extinct. 

1  Ar^oina  Mwra  says,  Vyana  and  Apana  also  by  force  of  the  two 
' ands'  which  occur  in  the  original;  and  so  in  other  places  too. 

2  Ar^una  MLrra  says  on  this,  'The  Pra«a  moves  upwards  through 
the  help  of  the  Apana.  If  it  moved  downwards,  it  would  be  simply 
absorbed  into  the  Apana/ 

3  I.  e.  recommenced  its  proper  operation  in  its  proper  place. 

4  And  the  other  life-winds  also,  Arg-una  Mura  says,  the  name 
Pra«a  being  merely  '  indicative/  as  the  phrase  is,  of  the  class  to 
which  it  belongs. 


CHAPTER  VIII,  21.  273 


And  on  my  moving  about,  they  again  move  about. 
I  am  the  greatest    See  I  am  extinct ! ' 

The  Brahma^a  said: 
Then  the  Vyana  became  extinct,  and  again  moved 
about.  And  the  Pra/za  and  Apana,  and  the  Udana,  and 
the  Samana,  spoke  to  him, '  You  are  not  the  greatest 
among  us,  O  Vyana !  because  the  Samana1  is  subject 
to  you.'  The  Vy&na  moved  about  again,  and  the 
Samdna  spoke  again.  '  I  am  the  greatest  among 
(you)  all.  Hear  the  reason  why.  When  I  am  extinct, 
all  the  life-winds  in  the  body  of  living  creatures 
become  extinct ;  and  on  my  moving  about,  they  again 
move  about.  I  am  the  greatest.  See  I  am  extinct ! ' 
Then  the  Samdna  moved  about,  and  the  Udana  said 
to  him  :  '  I  am  the  greatest  among  (you)  all.  Hear  the 
reason  why.  When  I  am  extinct,  all  the  life-winds 
in  the  body  of  living  creatures  become  extinct ;  and 
on  my  moving  about,  they  again  move  about.  I  am 
the  greatest.  See  I  am  extinct!'  Then  the  Udana 
became  extinct,  and  again  moved  about.  And  the 
Pra/za  and  Apana,  and  the  Samana,  and  the  Vyana 
also,  spoke  to  him:  *0  Udcina!  you  are  not  the 
greatest.     The  Vyana2  only  is  subject  to  you/ 

The  Br&hma/za  said : 
Then  Brahman,  the  lord  of  (all)  creatures,  said  to 
them  who  were  assembled  together :   '  You  are  all 
greatest,  and  not  greatest 3.     You  are  all  possessed 

1  Because  the  Samana  helps  in  the  digestion  of  the  food  which 
afterwards  goes  to  the  Vyana  for  distribution  through  the  naafts. 

2  Because  the  Udana  is  able  to  generate  sound  after  the  na</is 
are  filled  up  by  the  Vyana. 

3  'Not  greatest'  because  none  of  them  is  independent  of  the 
other.     i  Greatest '  Arg-una  Mi^ra  renders  by  '  superior  to  objects/ 

[8]  T 


274  anugIta. 


of  one  another's  qualities1.  All  are  greatest  in  their 
own  spheres,  and  all  support  one  another.  There 
is  one  unmoving2  (life -wind).  There  are  others 
moving  about,  (which  are)  five,  owing  to  (their)  speci- 
fic qualities.  My  own  self  is  one  only3,  (but)  accumu- 
lated in  numerous  (forms).  Being  friendly  with  one 
another,  and  pleasing  one  another,  go  away  happily. 
Welfare  be  to  you !    Support  one  another/ 


Chapter  IX. 

The  Brdhma^a  said : 
On    this,   too,   they   relate  this   ancient   story,  a 
dialogue  between  Narada  and  the  sage  Devamata. 

Devamata  said : 
When  a  creature  is  about  to  be  born,  what  comes 
into  existence  first,  his  Pra/za,  or  Apana,  or  Samana, 
or  Vyana,  or  else  Udana  ? 

Narada  said : 
By  whichever  the  creature  is  produced,  that  which 
is  other  than  this  first  comes  to  him.     And  the  pairs 
of  the  life-winds  should  be  understood,  which  (move) 
upwards,  or  downwards,  or  transversely. 

1  This  is  not  quite  clear.  I  presume  it  means  that  each  one  has 
the  generic  qualities  which  make  the  others  great  in  their  own 
spheres  ;   but  the  specific  qualities  are  different. 

2  The  one  life-wind  is  supposed  here  to  be  generally  unmoving, 
but  its  distribution  among  the  different  parts  of  the  body  as  spe- 
cified, for  instance,  in  the  commentary  on  the  Yoga-sutra  III,  38, 
gives  it  the  different  names.  The  expression  does  not  seem  to  be 
quite  accurate  for  this,  which  nevertheless  seems  to  be  the  true,  sense. 

3  Another  reading  is,  '  That  one  is  my  own  self/  Cf.  Maitri, 
pp.  28  seq.,  105,  and  Bn'hadarawyaka,  p.  169. 


CHAPTER   IX,  9.  275 


Devamata  said  : 
By  which  (of  the  life-winds)  is  a  creature  produced  ? 
and  which  (of  them)  first  comes  to  him  ?     Explain 
to  me  also  the  pairs  of  the  life-winds,  which  (move) 
upwards,  or  downwards,  or  transversely. 

Narada  said  : 
Pleasure  is  produced  from  a  mental  operation 1, 
and  (it)  is  also  produced  from  a  sound,  (it)  is  also 
produced  from  taste,  and  (it)  is  also  produced  from 
colour,  and  (it)  is  also  produced  from  touch,  and 
(it)  is  also  produced  from  smell.  This  is  the  effect 2 
of  the  Udana ;  the  pleasure  is  produced  from  union 3. 
From  desire  the  semen  is  produced ;  and  from  the 
semen  is  produced  menstrual  excretion.  The  semen 
and  the  blood  are  produced  by  the  Sam&na  and  the 
Vyana  in  common  4.  From  the  combination  of  the 
semen  and  the  blood,  the  Prd^a  comes  first  into 
operation  ;  and  the  semen  being  developed  by  the 
Pra^a,  the  Ap&na  then  comes  into  operation.  The 
pair  Pra^a  and  Apana  go  upwards  and  downwards, 
and  the  Samana  and  Vyana  are  called  the  pair 
(moving)   transversely.     It  is  the  teaching   of  the 

1  I.  e.  desire.  '  Sound' = recollection  of  a  woman's  voice ;  ' taste,' 
scil.  of  chastity;  '  colour  '= the  beauty  of  a  woman,  Ar^una  MLsra. 
Cf.  Apastamba  I,  2,  7,  8,  and  Lalita  Vistara,  p.  19. 

2  Literally, '  form,'  which  Arg-una  MLsra  interprets  to  mean  effect, 
and  adds,  *  The  Udana  causes  mental  activity,  and  by  mental  acti- 
vity sound  &c.  are  apprehended. 

3  I.  e.  of  Udana  and  mind,  Arg-una  Mura ;  adding, l  the  result  is 
that  a  creature  is  produced  by  the  Udana.' 

4  Or,  perhaps,  generally,  that  is  to  say,  the  store  of  them,  the 
specific  semen  being  produced  from  desire,  as  before  stated.  The 
Samana's  function  is  the  digestion  of  food,  and  that  of  the  Vyana 
is  the  distribution  of  the  digested  food  to  the  whole  body  through 
the  nai/is,  hence  the  proposition  in  the  text. 

T   2 


276  ANUGITA. 


Veda,  that  the  fire  verily  is  all  the  deities1,  and 
knowledge  (of  it)  arises  among  Brahma^as,  being 
accompanied  by  intelligence2.  The  smoke  of  that 
(fire),  which  is  of  excellent  glory,  (appears)  in  the 
shape  of  (the  quality  of)  darkness ;  (its)  ashes,  (the 
quality  of)  passion ;  and  (the  quality  of)  goodness 
is  that  in  connexion  with  it 3,  in  which  the  offering 
is  thrown.  Those  who  understand  the  sacrifice  under- 
stand the  Samana  and  the  Vyana  as  the  principal 
(offering).  The  Pra^a  and  Apana  are  portions 4  of 
the  offering  of  clarified  butter,  and  between  them 
is  the  fire.  That  is  the  excellent  seat  of  the  Udana 
as  understood  by  Brihma^as5.  As  to  that  which 
is  distinct  from  these  pairs  6,  hear  me  speak  about 


1  Cf.  inter  alia,  Aitareya-brahmawa  (Haug's  ed.),  p.  1. 

2  Arg-una  Misra  says  intelligence  means  '  discussion,  or  argument/ 
The  connexion  of  this  with  what  has  gone  before,  according  to 
Arg-una  Mwra,  is  this,  that  the  author  having  first  stated  the  five 
Hotrzs  fully,  now  explains  in  what  the  Pra«a  and  Apana  are  to  be 
offered  up  for  acquiring  the  Pra/zayama.  The  fire  he  takes  to  mean 
the  self.     Cf.  what  has  been  said  about  Vauvanara  above,  p.  259. 

3  That  is  to  say,  the  flame,  I  take  it.  He  is  drawing  out  here 
the  figure  of  the  fire. 

4  These  are  only  a  subordinate  part  of  the  offering,  called  A^ya- 
bMga.  They  are  called  subordinate,  I  suppose,  as  the  operations 
of  the  Samana  and  Vyana  are  more  practically  important  for  vita- 
lity. The  fire  is  the  self.  The  place  of  the  principal  offering  is 
between  the  A^yabhagas,  as  stated  by  Ar^una  Mwra. 

6  The  Udana  is  here  treated  as  the  life-wind  into  which  the  others 
are  to  be  offered  up.     See  p.  258,  and  note  8  there. 

6  The  next  three  sentences  seem  to  indicate  what  is  to  be  de- 
stroyed in  common  with  the  life- winds.  One  has  to  get  rid  of  all 
notions  about  day  and  night,  good  and  evil,  existence  and  non- 
existence, and  then  final  emancipation  is  reached.  The  fire,  which 
is  common  to  all  the  passages,  stands  for  the  self;  into  that  appa- 
rently all  the  ideas  of  time,  and  good  and  evil,  and  so  forth,  are  to 
be  offered  as  the  life-winds  are ;  and  that  fire  stands  in  the  place  of 


CHAPTER    X,    2.  277 


that.  Day  and  night  are  a  pair,  between  them 
is  the  fire.  That  is  the  excellent  seat  of  the  Udana 
as  understood  by  Brahma^as.  That  which  exists 
and  that  which  does  not  exist  are  a  pair,  between 
them  is  the  fire.  That  is  the  excellent  seat  of  the 
Ud&na  as  understood  by  Brahma^as.  The  two — 
good  and  evil — are  a  pair,  between  them  is  the 
fire.  That  is  the  excellent  seat  of  the  Udana  as 
understood  by  Brclhma/zas.  First1,  the  Samana  and 
Vy&na,  their  function2  is  performed  :  then,  secondly, 
the  Samana  comes  into  operation  again.  Then  the 
Vimadevya 3  for  tranquillity,  and  tranquillity  is  the 
eternal  Brahman.  This  is  the  excellent  seat  of  the 
Udana  as  understood  by  Brahma^as. 


Chapter    X. 

On  this,  too,  they  relate  an  ancient  story  (showing) 
of  what  nature  is  the  institution  of  the  iTaturhotra4. 
The  due  performance  of  it  in  its  entirety  is  now 
taught.     Hear  me,  O  good  woman!  state  this  won- 

the  Udana,  for  this  purpose,  as  into  the  last  all  the  other  life-winds 
have  to  be  offered.  As  to  that  which  exists,  &c.,  cf.  Gita,  p.  103, 
and  p.  370,  note  9  infra.  As  to  good  and  evil  and  generally,  cf. 
.^TMndogya,  p.  60;  Kaushitaki,  p.  19.  They  are  nothing  to  one 
who  knows  the  Brahman.  Day  and  night  Arg-una  MLsra  takes  to 
mean  the  Ida  and  Pingala  naWis,  between  which  is  the  Sushurrma, 
as  they  are  connected  with  the  sun  and  moon.  But  the  sense  of 
the  whole  passage  is  far  from  clear. 

1  Ar^-una  MLrra  understands  these  to  be  three  Savanas. 

2  Of  taking  into  the  nadis  the  food  digested  in  the  night,  this  is 
the  morning  Savana ;  the  afternoon  Savana  is  the  kindling  of  the 
gastric  fire  for  digesting  new  food. 

3  The  Vamadevya  is  a  sukta  beginning  'Kaya  nas  &tra'  (Rv.  IV, 
31, 1).  The  singing  of  it  is  the  third  Savana,  Ar^una  Mwra.  And 
see  Taittiriya-ara^yaka,  p.  889. 

4  Cf.  Aitareya-brahmawa  (Haug),  pp.  132,  133. 


278  ANUGITA. 


derful  mystery.  The  instrument,  the  action,  the 
agent,  and  emancipation1,  these,  indeed,  O  you  of 
a  (pure)  heart!  are  the  four  Hotrzs  by  whom  this 
universe  is  enveloped.  Hear  also  the  assignment 
of  causes  exhaustively2.  The  nose,  and  the  tongue, 
and  the  eye,  and  the  skin,  and  the  ear  as  the  fifth, 
mind  and  understanding,  these  seven  should  be  un- 
derstood to  be  the  causes  of  (the  knowledge  of3) 
qualities.  Smell,  and  taste,  and  colour,  sound,  and 
touch  as  the  fifth,  the  object  of  the  mental  opera- 
tion and  the  object  of  the  understanding4,  these 
seven  are  causes  of  action.  He  who  smells,  he  who 
eats,  he  who  sees,  he  who  speaks,  and  he  who  hears 
as  the  fifth,  he  who  thinks,  and  he  who  understands, 
these  seven  should  be  understood  to  be  the  causes 
of  the  agents5.  These6,  being  possessed  of  qualities7, 
enjoy  their  own  qualities,  agreeable  and  disagree- 
able. And  I  am  here  devoid  of  qualities.  Thus 
these  seven  are  the  causes  of  emancipation8.  And 
among  the  learned  who  understand  (everything),  the 

1  Cf.  as  to  the  three  first,  GM,  p.  1 23.  They  are  the  four  categories, 
to  one  or  other  of  which  everything  in  the  world  may  be  referred. 

2  The  texts  here  differ.  Aignna  Mirra's  reading  he  interprets 
to  mean  '  the  subjugation  of  these  Hotr/s.'  The  reading  followed 
in  the  text  seems  to  some  extent  to  be  supported  by  the  sequel. 
But  the  passage  altogether  is  not  very  clear. 

3  So  Ar^una  Mura — through  these  the  knowledge  of  the  quali- 
ties of  objects  of  sense  is  acquired. 

4  The  sensations,  or  perceptions,  referred  to  lead  to  action. 

5  This  seems  to  mean,  that  the  powers  of  smelling,  &c,  when 
attributed  to  the  self,  make  him  appear  as  an  agent,  as  an  active 
principle. 

6  I.  e.  action,  agent,  and  instrument,  Ar^una  Mura. 

7  I.  e.  the  three,  goodness,  passion,  and  darkness. 

8  It  is  these  seven  from  which  the  self  is  to  be  emancipated. 
'  I '  must  mean  the  self,  not  the  Brahmaraa  who  speaks, 


CHAPTER   X,   14.  279 


qualities1  which  are  in  the  position  of  the  deities,  each 
in  its  own  place,  always  enjoy  the  offering  according 
to  prescribed  rules.  To  him  who  is  not  learned,  eating 
various  (kinds  of)  food,  the  (feeling  of  this  or  that 
being)  mine  adheres.  And  cooking  food  for  him- 
self, he,  through  the  (feeling  of  this  or  that  being) 
mine,  is  ruined2.  The  eating  of  that  which  should 
not  be  eaten,  and  drinking  of  intoxicating  drinks  also 
destroys  him.  He  destroys  the  food,  and  destroying 
that  food  he  is  destroyed  in  return.  The  learned 
man,  being  (himself)  a  ruler,  destroying  this  food 
again  produces  it3.  And  not  even  a  trifling  obstacle4 
arises  to  him  from  that  food.  Whatever  is  thought 
by  the  mind6,  whatever  is  spoken  by  speech,  what- 
ever is  heard  by  the  ear,  whatever  is  seen  by  the 
eye,  whatever  is  touched  by  the  sense  of  touch,  and 
whatever  is  smelt  by  the  nose,  absorbing  all  these 
offerings  from  all  sides,  together  with  those  (senses) 
which  with  the  mind  are  six6,  my  fire7  of  (high) 
qualifications8,  shines  dwelling  within  the  body.  My 
sacrifice  of  concentration  of  mind  is  in  progress,  the 
performance  of  which  yields  the  fire9  of  knowledge ; 

1  I.e.,  I  presume,  the  senses.  Cf.  Gita,  p.  55.  The  learned  do  not 
suppose  their  self  to  have  aught  to  do  with  them.    Cf.  Gita,  p.  64. 

2  Cf.  Gita,  p.  53;  Manu  III,  118. 

8  His  knowledge  gives  him  this  power.  He  is  not  '  destroyed ' 
by  the  food  as  the  other  man  is.  Nilaka«//$a  compares  Br/hadara- 
*zyaka,  p.  884.     See  too  p.  260,  note  1  supra. 

4  I.e.  mischief  owing  to  the  destruction  of  life  necessary  for 
getting  food,  says  Nilaka«/>^a  quoting  BrzTiadara/zyaka,  p.  913. 

5  This  includes  the  operation  of  the  understanding  also.  Nila- 
kan/M  says  this  verse  explains  what  the  word  '  food '  means  here. 

6  For  the  phrase  cf.  Gita,  p.  112. 

7  That  is  to  say,  my  self,  Ar^-una  Mura.   See  p.  259,  note  3  supra. 

8  As  the  objects  of  sense  &c.  are  all  absorbed  into  it. 

9  It  is  called  '  fire/  as  it  burns  up  all  action.     Cf.  Gita,  p.  62. 


280  ANUGiTA, 

the  Stotra  in  which,  is  the  upward  life-wind;  the6astra, 
the  downward  life-wind ;  and  which  is  very  beneficial 
on  account  of  the  abandonment  of  everything l ;  the 
Brahman  priest  in  which,  is  the  counsellor  in  all 
action2;  the  Hotrz  priest,  the  self;  the  Adhvaryu 
priest,  (the  self)  whose  hymn  of  praise3  is  the  offer- 
ing ;  the  6astra  of  the  Prasastrz,  truth ;  and  the 
Dakshi/zi,  final  emancipation.  On  this,  too,  Rik 
verses  are  recited  by  the  men  who  understand 
Naraya^a4 — the  god  N^riya^a  to  whom  they  for- 
merly offered  animal5  (offerings).  On  that  Saman 
hymns6  are  sung,  of  which  an  illustration  is  stated7. 

1  Aig-una  MLra's  commentary  is  not  intelligible  here,  so  I  follow 
Nilaka/z/$a,  but  diffidently. 

2  I.  e.  the  mind,  say  the  commentators.  '  Manta'  simply  is  given 
among  the  synonyms  of  Ahankara  at  Sarikhya-sara,  p.  16. 

3  I.  e.  the  actions  performed  for  knowledge  of  the  truth,  Arg-una 
MLn-a. 

4  Nilaka«/£a  refers  to  a  Rik  'Tapa  dsid-grzhapatih/  and  also  the 
famous  allegory  at  the  end  of  the  Taittiriya-ara^yaka.  These  are 
cited,  he  says,  as  authorities  for  this  '  sacrifice  (consisting  of)  con- 
centration of  mind/ 

5  I.  e.  the  senses,  Nilaka^a.  Ar^una  Miyra  compares  the 
whole  passage  with  the  Purusha  Sukta,  which  are  the  Rik  verses 
alluded  to,  according  to  him.  He  refers  for  further  explanations  to 
his  own  commentary  on  that  sukta  of  the  Rig-veda. 

6  They  sing  these  hymns,  out  of  the  gratification  produced  by 
knowledge  of  the  self,  says  Nilakaw/fo,  and  he  cites  Taittiriya- 
ara/zyaka,  p.  749.  See  also  Taittiriya-upanishad,  p.  138,  and  An- 
kara's commentary  there. 

7  The  readings  of  our  texts  here  are  not  very  satisfactory.  The 
illustration  is  stated,  says  Nilaka^/^a,  whose  reading  we  follow,  by 
the  Taittiriyas  in  the  passage  referred  to  in  the  last  note.  Ar^una 
Mwra^  reading  means  '  such  as  Tahu  /£ahu/  which  would  seem  to 
be  the  words  of  the  Saman  hymn  referred  to.  But  his  commentary 
does  not  show  what  the  words  before  him  were.  The  whole  figure 
as  drawn  out  in  this  passage  is  not  quite  clear,  though  the  general 
sense  is  pretty  intelligible.  Cf.  the  allegories  at  Aitareya-brahma«a, 
pp.  132,  133,  and  at  the  close  of  the  Taittiriya-ara/zyaka. 


CHAPTER    XI,  3.  28l 


O  modest  one !  understand  that  god  Naraya/za,  who 
is  the  self  of  everything. 


Chapter    XL 

There  is  one  director1;  there  is  no  second  di- 
rector. I  speak  concerning  him  who  abides  in  the 
heart.  This  being,  the  director,  dwells  in  the  heart 
and  directs  (all  creatures).  Impelled  by  that  same 
(being),  I  move  as  I  am  ordered,  like  water  on  a 
declivity.  There  is  one  instructor ;  there  is  no 
second  (different)  from  him.  I  speak  concerning 
him  who  abides  in  the  heart.  Taught  by  that  in- 
structor, all  snakes  whatever  are  ever  hated  in 
the  world2.  There  is  one  kinsman;  there  is  no 
second  (different)  from  him.  I  speak  concerning 
him  who  abides  in  the  heart.  Taught  by  him 
kinsmen  are  possessed  of  kinsmen3,  (and)  the  seven 
i?zshis,  O  son  of  Pntha4!  shine  in  heaven5.     There 

1  I.  e.  the  Supreme  Being,  Ar^una  Mura.  Nilakaw/fta  connects 
this  with  the  preceding  chapter  by  saying  that  this  describes  Nara- 
yawa,  who  is  there  mentioned.  See  *Santi  Parvan  (Moksha  Dharma), 
chap.  226,  st.  8  (Bombay  ed.) 

2  The  natural  feelings  of  animosity  are  caused  by  the  Supreme 
Being  within.  Such  seems  to  be  the  meaning.  Cf.  Gita,  pp.  128, 
129.  I  may  remark  that  Ar^una  Misra  seems  to  interpret  the 
original  words,  which  we  have  rendered  by  *  I  speak  concerning 
him,'  &c,  to  mean  '  I  repeat  what  has  been  said  by/  &c.  This 
does  not  seem  to  me  to  be  satisfactory ;  and  it  may  be  added,  too, 
that  Ar^una  Mora's  interpretation  appears  in  his  gloss  not  on  the 
first  verse,  about  the  '  director/  but  only  on  the  second,  about  the 
*  instructor/     Hated=full  of  animosity,  Nilaka«/£a. 

3  I.  e.  the  feeling  of  kinsmanship  arises  from  his  inspiration. 

4  The  poet  seems  to  be  nodding  here,  as  this  expression  cannot 
form  part  of  the  Brahma^a's  speech  to  his  wife. 

5  The  seven  sages  are  always  mentioned  together,  and  may 
well  be  spoken  of  as  types  of  the  feeling  of  kinship. 


282  ANUGITA. 


is  one  hearer1 ;  there  is  no  second  (different)  from 
him.  I  speak  concerning  him  who  abides  in  the 
heart.  Living  under  that  instructor,  (according  to 
the  proper  mode  of)  living  with  an  instructor, 
vSakra2  acquired  immortality  in  all  worlds.  There 
is  one  enemy ;  there  is  no  second  (different)  from 
him.  I  speak  concerning  him  who  abides  in  the 
heart.  Taught  by  that  instructor,  all  snakes  what- 
ever are  ever  hated  in  the  world3.  On  this,  too, 
they  relate  an  ancient  story,  (about  the)  instruction 
of  the  snakes,  and  the  gods,  and  sages,  by  Pra^apati. 
The  gods,  and  sages,  and  the  snakes,  and  the  de- 
mons, approaching  Pra^apati,  said  (to  him) :  '  Tell  us 
the  highest  good/  To  them  who  were  inquiring 
about  the  highest  good,  the  venerable  one  said, 
'  Om4,  the  Brahman,  in  a  single  syllable/  Hearing 
that,  they  ran  away  in  (various)  directions5.  When 
they  were  running  for  instruction  regarding  the  self, 
the  inclination  of  the  snakes  to  biting  had  been 
already  formed.  The  natural  inclination  of  the  de- 
mons towards  ostentatiousness  had  been  formed.  The 
gods  had  been  engaged  in  gifts,  and  the  great  sages 
in  restraint  of  the  senses.     Having  had  one  teacher, 


1  Nilakaw//^a  takes  this  to  mean  pupil,  but  it  is  difficult  to  recon- 
cile that  with  the  rest  of  the  passage.  Ar^-una  Misra  renders  it  by 
'  the  destroyer  of  every  one's  doubts/  For  that,  it  will  be  necessary 
to  take  the  word  as  a  form  of  the  causative,  and  not  the  simple  root 
jru,  to  hear.     But  see,  too,  p.  283,  'the  instructor  .  .  .  the  hearer.' 

2  Cf.  Sanatsug-atiya,  p.  152,  note  1. 

3  The  words  here  are  nearly  the  same  as  before;  the  commenta- 
tors give  no  explanation  of  the  repetition.    But  see  p.  281,  note  2. 

4  Cf.  Gita,  p.  79.  The  full  sense  is  that  from  the  study  of  this 
Om  the  highest  good  is  attained. 

5  I.  e.  to  their  own  dwellings,  believing  that  they  had  learnt  what 
they  wanted. 


CHAPTER    XI,   17.  283 


and  having  been  instructed  with  one  word,  the  snakes, 
the  gods,  the  sages,  and  the  demons,  all  engaged  in 
different1  (pursuits).  One  hears  what  is  said  (to 
one)  and  apprehends  it  duly;  (but  even)  to  one  who 
inquires  and  extols  highly,  there  is  no  other  in- 
structor 2.  And  by  his  counsel  does  action  afterwards 
take  place.  The  instructor,  the  learner,  the  hearer,  and 
the  enemy,  are  always  within  the  heart.  Acting  sin- 
fully in  the  world,  he  becomes  (a  man  of)  sinful 
conduct.  Acting  virtuously  in  the  world  he  becomes 
(a  man  of)  virtuous  conduct3.  And  he  becomes  a 
man  of  conduct  according  to  his  own  desire4,  who, 
owing  to  his  desires,  is  given  up  to  the  pleasures  of 
the  senses.  But  he  who,  casting  aside  vows5  and 
actions,  merely  adheres  to  the  Brahman,  he  moving 
about  in  the  world  identifying  himself  with  the 
Brahman,  becomes  a  Brahma^arin.  To  him  the 
Brahman  itself  is  the  fuel,  the  Brahman  the  fire, 
the  Brahman  his  origin,  the  Brahman  water,  the 
Brahman     the    instructor.       He    is     rapt    in    the 

1  The  meaning  seems  to  be  that  the  original  inclination  was 
not  altered  by  the  new  instruction  received  by  them.  Nilaka«/yfe 
seems  to  understand  the  passage  differently.  What  has  been  ren- 
dered in  the  text  by  '  when  they  were  running  for  instruction/ 
he  renders  by  '  when  they  were  practically  carrying  out  the  instruc- 
tion received  by  them ; '  but  this  rendering  seems  to  omit  all  consi- 
deration of  the  words  '  Purvameva  tu  ' — already.  Though,  therefore, 
there  are  one  or  two  circumstances  in  favour  of  this  construction, 
I  have  adopted  the  other.     Cf.  B/YhadaraTzyaka,  p.  964. 

2  The  meaning  is  that  the  real  instructor  is  within  oneself, 
( abiding  in  the  heart/  as  said  before,  although  instruction  may  in 
form  be  received  from  one  outside,  of  whom  one  seeks  to  learn, 
and  whom  one  respects  (or  extols  highly,  as  the  text  has  it),  and 
although  such  instruction  may  be  well  apprehended. 

3  Cf.  Br/hadarawyaka,  pp.  546-853.  4  See  Gita,  p.  117. 
6  I.  e.  fasts  and  other  like  observances. 


284  anugitA. 


Brahman1.  Such  is  this  subtle  life  as  a  Brahma/£arin 
understood  by  the  wise.  Understanding  it  they 
practised  it,  being  instructed  by  the  Kshetra^fia2. 


Chapter  XII. 
The  Br^hma^a  said : 
I  have  crossed  beyond  that  very  impassable 
place,  in  which  fancies  are  the  gadflies  and  mos- 
quitoes 3,  in  which  grief  and  joy  are  cold  and  heat, 
in  which  delusion  is  the  blinding  darkness,  in  which 
avarice  is  the  beasts  of  prey  and  reptiles,  in  which  de- 
sire and  anger  are  the  obstructors,  the  way  to  which 
consists  in  worldly  objects,  and  is  to  be  crossed  by 
one  singly 4.   And  I  have  entered  the  great  forest 5. 

The  Brahma^as  wife  said  : 
Where  is  that  forest,  O  very  intelligent  person ! 
what  are  the  trees  (there),  and  what  the  rivers,  and 
the   hills  and  mountains ;  and  at  what  distance  is 
that  forest? 

1  Cf.  Gita,  p.  61.  The  water  is  that  required  for  the  sacrifice. 
The  words  '  the  Brahman  is  his  origin '  are  not  quite  clear,  as  being 
not  connected  with  the  figure  employed.  Perhaps  it  might  be 
taken  otherwise  thus,  '  the  Brahman  (is)  the  fire  produced  from 
the  Brahman/  this  last  standing  for  the  aram. 

2  I.  e.  one  who  understands  the  truth,  Nilaka^a ;  God,  Ar^una 
Mi^ra.  The  same  sentence  winds  up  two  of  the  following  chapters; 
and  at  p.  310  Kr/sh«a  says  the  Kshetra^na  signifies  the  supreme 
self.     See  Gita,  p.  102  seq. 

3  Cf.  Lalita  Vistara,  p.  44. 

4  I.  e.  not  with  the  help  of  son,  wealth,  &c,  says  Nilaka#//$a,  as 
each  man's  salvation  after  having  got  into  the  course  of  worldly  life 
depends  on  himself.  Cf.  *Santi  Parvan  (Moksha  Dharma),  chap.  193, 
st.  32,  and  Manu  IV,  240;  obstructor,  thief,  Arg-una  MLsra. 

5  I.  e.  the  Brahman.  Nilakaw/^a  compares  a  text  from  the  *Sruti, 
'  Kim  svid  vanaw  ka  u  sa  vn'ksha  asa ;'  see  Rig-veda  X,  31,  7. 


CHAPTER    XII,    8.  285 


The  Brahma/za  said : 
There  is  nothing  else  more  delightful  than  that, 
when  there  is  no  distinction  from  it.  There  is 
nothing  more  afflicting  than  that,  when  there  is  a 
distinction  from  it  \  There  is  nothing  smaller  than 
that,  there  is  nothing  larger  than  that 2.  There  is 
nothing  more  subtle  than  that ;  there  is  no  other 
happiness  equal  to  that.  Entering  it,  the  twice- 
born  do  not  grieve,  and  do  not  exult 3.  They 
are  not  afraid  of  anybody,  and  nobody  is  afraid 
of  them.  In  that  forest4  are  seven  large  trees5, 
seven  fruits,  and  seven  guests ;  seven  hermitages, 
seven  (forms  of)  concentration,  and  seven  (forms 
of)  initiation.  This  is  the  description  of  the  forest. 
That  forest  is  filled  with  trees  producing  splendid 
flowers   and   fruits   of  five   colours 6.     That   forest 

1  Cf.  -O&ndogya,  pp.  516,  517. 

2  Cf.  Sanatsu^atiya,  p.  180  and  note  there. 

3  Cf.  as  to  all  this  GM,  p.  101. 

4  This  is  not  the  forest  spoken  of  before,  but  what  has  been 
before  called  the  'impassable  place/  but  which  also  at  p.  286  is 
by  implication  called  a  forest,  viz.  the  course  of  worldly  life. 

5  Viz.  the  eye,  ear,  tongue,  skin,  and  nose,  and  the  mind,  and 
understanding — these  are  called  trees,  as  being  producers  of  the 
fruits,  namely,  the  pleasures  and  pains  derived  from  their  several 
operations ;  the  guests  are  the  powers  of  each  sense  personified — 
they  receive  the  fruits  above  described ;  the  hermitages  are  the 
trees  above  mentioned,  in  which  the  guests  take  shelter ;  the  seven 
forms  of  concentration  are  the  exclusion  from  the  self  of  the  seven 
functions  of  the  seven  senses  &c.  already  referred  to ;  the  seven 
forms  of  initiation  refer  to  the  initiation  into  the  higher  life,  by  repu- 
diating as  not  one's  own  the  actions  of  each  member  out  of  the  group 
of  seven.    Cf.  as  to  this  .Oandogya,  p.  2 1 9,  and  commentary  there. 

6  Cf.  for  these  different  numbers  of  colours,  Yoga-sutra  II,  19,  and 
commentary,  p.  105,  and  Sarikhya-sara,  p.  1 8.  The  trees  here  meant 
are  the  Tanmatras,  or  subtle  elements,  and  the  theory  is  that  the 
Gandha-tanmatra,  or  subtle  element  of  smell,  has  five  qualities,  its 


286  ANUGITA. 


is  filled  with  trees  producing  flowers  and  fruits  of 
four  colours.  That  forest  is  filled  with  trees  pro- 
ducing flowers  and  fruits  of  three  colours,  and  mixed. 
That  forest  is  filled  with  trees  producing  flowers 
and  fruits  of  two  colours,  and  of  beautiful  colours. 
That  forest  is  filled  with  trees  producing  flowers 
and  fruits  of  one  colour,  and  fragrant.  That  forest 
is  filled  with  two  large  trees  producing  numerous 
flowers  and  fruits  of  undistinguished  colours  *. 
There  is  one  fire2  here,  connected  with  the  Brah- 
man 3,  and  having  a  good  mind 4.  And  there  is 
fuel  here,  (namely)  the  five  senses.  The  seven 
(forms  of)  emancipation  from  them  are  the  seven 
(forms  of)  initiation 5.  The  qualities  are  the  fruits, 
and  the  guests  eat  the  fruits.  There,  in  various 
places,  the  great  sages  receive  hospitality.  And 
when  they  have  been  worshipped  and  have  dis- 
appeared6, another  forest  shines  forth,  in  which 
intelligence  is  the  tree,  and  emancipation  the  fruit, 
and  which  possesses  shade  (in  the  form  of)  tran- 

own  special  one,  so  to  say,  and  the  four  special  ones  of  the  others ; 
the  next  is  taste,  the  next  colour,  the  next  touch,  and  the  last  sound; 
each  has  one  quality  less  than  its  predecessor.  See  Yoga-sutra,  p.  106, 
and  gloss  ;  Sankhya-sutra  I,  62 ;  and  Vedanta  Paribhasha,  p.  45. 

1  These  are  mind  and  understanding ;  the  fruits  and  flowers  are 
here  of ' undistinguished  colours/  as  the  text  expresses  it,  since  they 
include  the  colours  of  all  the  fruits  of  all  the  other  five  sets  of  trees; 
that  is  to  say,  the  subject-matter  of  their  operations  is  sound,  taste, 
&c,  the  subject-matters  of  all  the  senses  together.  'Undistinguished 
colours'  is,  perhaps,  more  literally  'of  colours  not  clear/  Argnna 
Misra  paraphrases  it  by  *  of  variegated  colours/  which  is  no  doubt 
the  true  ultimate  sense. 

2  The  self,  Nilaka^/^a.    See  p.  279,  note  7  supra. 

3  I.  e.,  I  presume,  devoted  to  the  Brahman. 

4  I.  e.  true  knowledge,  Ar^una  Mura.  5  See  note  5,  p.  285. 
6  I.  e.  when  the  senses  having  worked,  as  unconnected  with  the  self, 

are  finally  absorbed  into  it.  Cf.  Sankhya-karika  49andKa/^a,  p.  151. 


CHAPTER    XII,    21.  287 


quillity,  which  depends  on  knowledge,  which  has  con- 
tentment for  its  water,  and  which  has  the  Kshetra^fia 
within  for  the  sun.  The  good  who  attain  to  that, 
have  no  fear  afterwards.  Its  end  cannot  be  per- 
ceived upwards  or  downwards  or  horizontally  \ 
There  always  dwell  seven  females  there 2,  with  faces 
(turned)  downwards,  full  of  brilliance,  and  causes  of 
generation.  They  absorb  3  all  the  higher  delights 
of  people,  as  inconstancy  (absorbs)  everything4. 
In  that  same5  (principle)  the  seven  perfect  sages, 
together  with  their  chiefs,  the  richest6,  abide,  and 
again  emerge  from  the  same.  Glory,  brilliance,  and 
greatness,  enlightenment,  victory,  perfection,  and 
power  7 — these  seven  rays  follow  after  this  same 
sun.  Hills  and  mountains  also  are  there  collected 
together,  and  rivers  and  streams  flowing  with  water 
produced  from  the  Brahman8.  And  there  is  the  con- 
fluence of  the  rivers  in  the  secluded  place9  for  the 

1  It  extends  on  all  sides,  its  end  cannot  be  perceived  on  any  side. 

2  These  are,  according  to  Aigiina  Miira,  the  Mahat,  Ahankara, 
and  five  Tanmatras.  Their  faces  are  turned  downwards,  as  they 
are  obstacles  in  the  way  upwards,  viz.  the  way  of  final  emancipa- 
tion ;  they  are  brilliant,  as  they  light  up  the  course  of  worldly  life ; 
and  hence,  too,  they  are  '  causes  of  generation/  They  give  birth 
to  the  universe. 

3  They  conceal  the  higher  delight  of  final  emancipation. 

4  I  follow  Arg-una  Mura,  but  the  text  is  doubtful. 

5  Viz.  the  Brahman. 

6  Cf.  .Oandogya,  pp.  295-300.  The  word  sages  here,  as  before, 
means  the  various  organs.     See  Brz'hadarawyaka,  p.  415. 

7  Glory = renown;  brilliance  =  Brahmic  splendour  (Brahmate^as); 
perfection = obtaining  what  is  desired;  power = not  being  conquered 
by  others,  Argxma  Misra.    About  the  sun,  see  line  3  of  text  above. 

8  I.  e.  contentment.    See  the  second  line  in  the  text  above. 

9  I.  e.  the  space  in  the  heart,  the  sacrifice  being  that  of  ( con- 
centration of  mind/  yogaya^na, — Nilaka^a.  A  confluence  of 
rivers  is  very  sacred — here  the  meaning  intended  seems  to  be  the 
absorption  of  all  desires  by  contentment  into  the  heart. 


288  anugIta. 


sacrifice,  whence  those  who  are  contented  in  their 
own  selfs  repair  to  the  divine  grandsire  himself. 
Those  whose  wishes  are  reduced1,  whose  wishes 
are  (fixed)  on  good  vows,  whose  sins  are  burnt  up 
by  penance,  merging  the  self  in  the  self2,  devote 
themselves  to  Brahman.  Those  people  who  under- 
stand the  forest  of  knowledge  3,  praise  tranquillity. 
And  aspiring  to  that  forest,  they  are  born  so  as 
not  to  lose  courage4.  Such,  indeed,  is  this  holy 
forest,  as  understood  by  Br&hma/zas.  And  under- 
standing it,  they  act  (accordingly),  being  directed 
by  the  Kshetra^na. 


Chapter  XIII. 


The  Brahma/za  said : 
I  do  not  smell  smells,  I  perceive  no  tastes,  I  see 
no  colour,  and  I  do  not  touch,  nor  yet  do  I  hear 
various  sounds,  nor  even  do  I  entertain  any  fancies5. 
Nature  desires  objects  which  are  liked ;  nature 
hates  all  (objects)  which  are  hateful 6.  Desire  and 
hatred  are  born  from  nature7,  as  the  upward  and 

1  Literally, '  lean/ 

2  I.  e.  the  body  in  the  soul,  Arg-una  Mkra. 

3  Knowledge  is  Brahman,  which  is  described  as  a  forest  here, 
Arg-una  Mura. 

4  Cf.  Gita,  p.  70. 

5  This  is  the  name  for  the  operations  of  the  mind. 

6  The  sense  is  similar  to  that  at  Gita,,  p.  55.  The  self  has  nothing 
to  do  with  these  feelings ;  the  qualities  deal  with  the  qualities. 

7  Cf.  Gita,  p.  65.  The  meaning  of  nature  here,  as  in  the  Gita, 
is  in  substance  the  result  of  all  previous  action  with  which  the  self 
has  been  associated,  which  result,  of  course,  exists  connected  not 
with  the  self,  but  with  the  developments  of  nature,  in  the  form  of  body, 


CHAPTER   XIII,  7.  289 


downward  life-winds,  after  attaining  to  the  bodies  of 
living  creatures.  Apart  from  them,  and  as  the 
constant  entity  underlying  them,  I  see  the  individual 
self  in  the  body.  Dwelling  in  that  (self),  I  am  in 
no  wise  attached1  (to  anything)  through  desire  or 
anger,  or  old  age,  or  death.  Not  desiring  any 
object  of  desire,  not  hating  any  evil,  there  is  no 
taint  on  my  natures  2,  as  there  is  no  (taint)  of  a  drop 
of  water  on  lotuses 3.  They  are  inconstant  things 
appertaining  to  this  constant  (principle)  which  looks 
on  various  natures.  Although  actions  are  per- 
formed, the  net  of  enjoyments  does  not  attach  itself 
to  it,  as  the  net  of  the  sun's  rays  does  not  attach 
itself  to  the  sky4.  On  this5,  too,  they  relate  an 
ancient  story,  (in  the  shape  of)  a  dialogue  between 
an  Adhvaryu  priest  and  an  ascetic.  Understand 
that,  O  glorious  one!  Seeing  an  animal  being 
sprinkled 6  at  a  sacrificial  ceremony,  an  ascetic  who 
was  sitting  (there)  spoke  to  the  Adhvaryu,  censur- 
ing (the  act)  as  destruction  of  life.    The  Adhvaryu 

senses,  &c.  The  comparison  appears  to  mean  that  the  feelings  of 
desire  &c.  are,  like  the  life-winds,  unconnected  with  the  self,  though 
associated  with  it,  and  are  both  alike  manifestations  of  nature. 

1  Nilaka«/#a  compares  Brz'hadararayaka,  p.  770.  Arg-una  Mi^ra 
has  a  different  reading,  meaning  '  liable  (to  be  subjugated)/ 

2  The  plural,  which  is  in  the  original,  is  unusual.  The  various 
aspects  of  the  '  result'  stated  in  p.  288,  note  7,  being  looked  at 
separately,  are  described  as  'natures,'  like  the  leaves  of  a  lotus,  which 
in  their  ensemble  make  one  lotus. 

3  Lalita  Vistara,  p.  2,  and  p.  64  supra. 

4  The  figure  seems  to  be  somewhat  like  that  at  Gitd,  p.  82,  about 
the  atmosphere  and  space,  which  latter  remains  untainted  by  the 
former.   Looking  on  various  natures,  i.  e.  as  distinct  from  the  self. 

5  Viz.  the  remaining  untainted. 

6  I.  e.  with  water,  preparatory  to  its  being  offered  up  for  the 
sacrifice. 

[8]  U 


29O  ANUGITA. 


answered  him  (saying),  this  goat  will  not  be  de- 
stroyed. (This)  creature  will  obtain  welfare,  since 
the  Vedic  text  is  such.  For  that  part  of  him  which 
is  of  the  earth  will  go  to  the  earth  ;  whatever  in 
him  is  produced  from  water,  that  will  enter  water. 
His  eye  (will  enter)  the  sun,  (his)  ear  the  quarters, 
and  his  life-winds  likewise  the  sky1.  There  is  no 
offence  on  my  part,  adhering  (as  I  do)  to  the 
scriptures 2. 

The  Ascetic  said : 

If  you  perceive  (that)  good  (will)  result  upon  his 
life  being  severed  (from  him),  then  the  sacrifice 
is  for  the  goat,  what  benefit  (is  it)  to  you  ?  Let  the 
brother,  father,  mother,  and  friend  (of  the  goat)  give 
you  their  consent 3 ;  take  him  (to  them)  and  consult 
(them),  especially  as  he  is  dependent.  You  ought 
to  inquire  of  those  who  can  give  their  consent  thus. 
After  hearing  their  consent,  (the  matter)  will  be 
fit  for  consideration  4.  The  life-winds 5,  too,  of  this 
goat  have  gone  to  their  sources,  and  I  think  only 
his  unmoving  body  remains.  To  those  who  wish 
to  derive  enjoyment  from  the  slaughter  (of  a  living 
creature),  the  unconscious  body  being  comparable 
to   fuel,  that  which    is   called   an   animal  becomes 


1  Cf.  Br*hadara;zyaka,  p.  542,  and  p.  337  below. 

2  Cf.  .ffMndogya-upanishad,  p.  627,  and  also  -Sariraka  Bh&shya 
on  Sutra  III,  1,  25,  p.  774. 

8  I.  e.  for  his  slaughter,  which  is  to  bring  welfare  to  the  goat. 
Aignna  Mura  says  that  this  is  a  sort  of  reductio  ad  absurdum, 
as  the  sacrifice  is  in  truth  not  in  the  interests  of  the  goat  at  all. 

*  Viz.  whether  the  goat  should  be  killed.  Without  their  consent 
he  ought  not  to  be  slaughtered ;  with  their  consent,  it  becomes  a 
matter  for  consideration,  Arguna  Mirra. 

6  It  may  also  mean  the  senses,  as  in  the  iTMndogya,  p.  297. 


CHAPTER   XIII,  21.  29 1 

the  fuel1.  The  teaching  of  the  elders2  is,  that  re- 
fraining from  slaughter  (of  living  creatures)  is  (the 
duty)  among  all  duties.  We  maintain  that  that 
action  should  be  performed  which  involves  no 
slaughter.  (Our)  proposition  is  no  slaughter  (of  living 
creatures).  If  I  spoke  further,  it  would  be  possible 
to  find  fault  with  your  proceedings  in  many  ways  3. 
Always  refraining  from  the  slaughter  of  all  beings  is 
what  we  approve.  We  substantiate  (this)  from  what 
is  actually  visible  4,  we  do  not  rely  on  what  is  not 
visible. 

The  Adhvaryu  said : 

You  enjoy  the  earth's  quality  of  fragrance,  you 
drink  watery  juices,  you  see  the  colours  of  shining 
bodies,  you  touch  the  qualities  of  the  air,  you  hear 
the  sound  produced  in  space,  you  think  by  the  mind 
(on  the  objects  of)  mental  operations.  And  all 
these  entities,  you  believe,  have  life.  You  have  not 
(then)  abstained  from  taking  life.  You  are  (engaged) 
in  the  slaughter  (of  living  creatures) 5.  There  is  no 
movement6  without  slaughter  (of  living  creatures). 
Or  what  do  you  think,  O  twice-born  one  ? 

1  This  is  not  very  clear,  but  the  meaning  seems  to  be  that  the 
slaughter  is  committed  for  the  enjoyment  of  the  sacrificer;  the 
sacrificer  only  requires  fuel,  and  the  slaughtered  animal  is  then 
used  for  that  purpose. 

2  Cf.  ^^andogya,  p.  627,  and  next  note;  and  Gita,  inter  alia, 
p.  114,  and  p.  348  infra.  3  See  Sahkhyatattvakaumudi,  p.  7. 

4  I.  e.  a  rule  expressly  laid  down.  What  is  not  visible  means 
what  is  not  expressly  stated,  but  is  to  be  derived  by  inference,  and 
so  forth  (cf.  Apastamba  I,  1,  4,  8).  The  express  text  is  the  famous 
one, l  Na  himsyatsarva  bhutani.'  Hi/rasa,  which  is  rendered  slaughter 
here,  may  mean  also  c  giving  pain '  generally. 

5  This  is  the  tu  quo  que  argument.  The  sustentation  of  life 
requires  some  sort  of  slaughter. 

6  I.  e.  the  support  of  the  body,  says  Ar^una  Misra. 

U  2 


292  anug!ta. 


The  Ascetic  said  : 
The  indestructible  and  the  destructible,  such  is 
the  double  manifestation  of  the  self.  Of  these  the 
indestructible  is  the  existent  \  the  manifestation  as  an 
individual 2  (entity)  is  called  the  destructible 3.  The 
life-winds,  the  tongue,  the  mind,  and  (the  quality  of) 
goodness,  together  with  (the  quality  of)  passion4,  (these 
make  up)  the  manifestations  as  individual  entities. 
And  to  one  who  is  free  from  these  manifestations, 
who  is  free  from  the  pairs  of  opposites,  who  is  devoid 
of  expectations,  who  is  alike  to  all  beings,  who  is 
free  from  (the  thought  that  this  or  that  is)  mine, 
who  has  subdued  his  self,  and  who  is  released  on  all 
hands 5,  there  is  no  fear  anywhere 6. 

The  Adhvaryu  said : 

0  best  of  talented  men !  one  should  in  this  (world) 

1  Argum.  Mi^sra  takes  it  otherwise,  'the  true  nature  of  the  Sat, 
the  self/  Nilakaw/^a  renders  the  original  by  sadrupam  without 
further  explanation.  This  indestructible  seems  to  correspond  to 
that  mentioned  at  Gita,  p.  113,  which  should  be  considered  in  con- 
nection with  Gita,  pp.  73,  74.  The  note  at  the  former  page  is, 
perhaps,  not  quite  accurately  expressed,  as  the  word ' material  cause' 
conveys  some  inadmissible  associations.  Perhaps  '  underlying  prin- 
ciple' might  be  a  nearer  approach  to  the  correct  idea.  The  existent 
will  thus  be  that  which  really  exists,  as  it  is  indestructible. 

2  Cf.  Gita,  p.  77.         3  See  -Santi  Parvan  (Moksha),  ch.  240,  st.  3T. 

4  Arg-una  Mi^ra  says, l  The  life-winds  here  are  indicative  of  the 
operations  of  the  organs  of  action  (as  to  which  see  p.  290,  note  5 
supra),  the  tongue  of  the  perceptive  senses,  the  mind  of  the  internal 
activities,  the  quality  of  goodness  of  all  sources  of  pleasure,  and 
passion  of  all  sources  of  pain/  the  last  two  apparently  covering  the 
external  world,  the  previous  ones  the  human  activities,  internal  and 
external. 

5  Released  scil.  from  piety  or  impiety,  &c, — Ar^una  MLrra,  who 
says  *  self '  in  the  phrase  preceding  means  mind. 

6  Because,  says  Ar^una  MLrra,  according  to  the  very  authority 
which  says  there  is  sin  in  slaughter,  all  sin  is  destroyed  by  know- 
ledge.    Cf.  Gita,  p.  64. 


CHAPTER    XIV,    2.  1()'. 


dwell  in  company  of  good  men  only l.  For  having 
heard  your  opinion,  my  mind  is  enlightened.  O 
venerable  sir !  I  approach  you,  in  the  belief  (that  you 
are)  the  Lord  ;  and  I  say  (to  you),  O  twice-born  one  ! 
there  is  no  fault  (attaching)  to  me,  performing  (as  I 
have  done)  the  rites  performed  by  others  2. 

The  Brahma^a  said : 
With  this  explanation,  the  ascetic  thereafter  re- 
mained silent,  and  the  Adhvaryu  also  proceeded  with 
the  great  sacrifice,  freed  from  delusion.  Thus  Brah- 
ma/zas  understand  the  very  subtle  emancipation  to 
be  of  this  nature,  and  understanding  it,  they  act 
(accordingly),  being  directed  by  the  Kshetra^na. 


Chapter  XIV. 

The  Brahma/za  said : 
On  this 3,  too,  they  relate  an  old  story,  (in  the 
shape  of)  a  dialogue,  O  you  of  a  pure  heart !  between 
Kartavirya  and  the  ocean.  (There  lived  once)  a 
king  named  Ar^una 4,  a  descendant  of  Krztavirya, 
possessed  of  a  thousand  arms,  who  with  his  bow 
conquered  the  (whole)  earth  up  to  the  ocean.     Once 

1  Cf.  Taittiriya-upanishad,  p.  40. 

2  The  readings  here  in  the  MSS.  are  not  satisfactory.  I  adopt 
as  the  best  that  which  appears  to  have  been  before  Ar^una  Mi^ra. 
The  meaning  seems  to  be  this :  —I  have  now  understood  the  truth, 
but  I  cannot  be  blamed  for  having  hitherto  done  that  which  I  saw 
every  one  else  do.  Now  I  have  had  the  benefit  of  conversation  with 
a  good  man,  and  have  become  free  from  my  delusion. 

3  Namely,  that  final  emancipation  is  not  to  be  obtained  by  action, 
and  that  slaughter  is  sinful. 

4  He  is  also  called  a  Yogin  at  Raghuvaw^aVI,  38.  See  Mallinath's 
commentary  there. 


294  anugItA. 

on  a  time,  as  we  have  heard,  he  was  walking  about 
near  the  sea,  proud  of  his  strength,  and  showering 
hundreds  of  arrows  on  the  sea.  The  ocean,  saluting 
him,  and  with  joined  hands,  said,  '  O  brave  man !  do 
not  throw  arrows  (on  me).  Say,  what  shall  I  do  for 
you  ?  The  creatures,  who  take  shelter  with  me,  are 
being  destroyed,  O  tiger-like  king!  by  the  great 
arrows  thrown  by  you.    Give  them  security,  O  Lord  ! ' 

Ar^una  said  : 
If  there  is  anywhere  any  wielder  of  the  bow  equal 
to  me  in  battle,  who  might  stand  against  me  in  the 
field,  name  him  to  me. 

The  ocean  said : 

If,  O  king!  you  have  heard  of  the  great  sage 
Camadagni,  his  son  is  (the)  proper  (person)  to  show 
you  due  hospitality1. 

Then  the  king,  full  of  great  wrath,  went  away,  and 
arriving  at  that  hermitage  approached  Rama  only. 
In  company  with  his  kinsmen,  he  did  many  (acts) 
disagreeable  to  R£ma,  and  caused  much  trouble  to 
the  high-souled  Rama.  Then  the  power  of  Rama, 
whose  power  was  unbounded,  blazed  forth,  burning 
the  hosts  of  the  enemy,  O  lotus-eyed  one  !  And  then 
R&ma,  taking  up  his  axe,  hacked  away  that  man  of 
the  thousand  arms  in  battle,  like  a  tree  of  many 
branches.  Seeing  him  killed  and  fallen,  all  (his) 
kinsmen  assembled  together,  and  taking  swords  and 
lances,  surrounded  the  descendant  of  Bhrzgu.  Rama 
also  taking  up  a  bow,  and  hurriedly  mounting  a 
chariot,  shot  away  volleys  of  arrows,  and  blew 
away  the   army  of  the   king.     Then  some  of  the 

1  I.  e.  by  giving  him  what  he  desired— a  <  foeman  worthy  of  his 
steel' to  fight  with  him. 


CHAPTER    XIV,    20.  295 

Kshatriyas,  often  troubled  by  fear  of  the  son  of 
Gamadagni,  entered  mountains  and  inaccessible 
places,  like  antelopes  troubled  by  a  lion.  And  the 
subjects  of  those  (Kshatriyas)  who  were  not  per- 
forming their  prescribed  duties *  through  fear  of  him, 
became  Wzshalas,  owing  to  the  disappearance  of 
Brahma/zas 2.  Thus  the  DraviaJas,  Abhiras,  Pau^ras, 
together  with  the  6abaras,  became  Wzshalas3,  owing 
to  the  abandonment  of  their  duties  by  Kshatriyas. 
Then  when  the  heroic  (children)  of  Kshatriya  women 
were  destroyed  again  and  again,  the  Kshatriyas,  who 
were  produced  by  the  Brahma/zas4,  were  also  de- 
stroyed by  the  son  of  Gamadagni.  At  the  end  of 
the  twenty-first  slaughter,  a  bodiless  voice  from 
heaven,  which  was  heard  by  all  people,  spoke 
sweetly  to  R&ma, '  O  Rama !  O  Rama  !  desist  (from 
this  slaughter).  What  good,  dear  friend,  do  you 
perceive,  in  taking  away  the  lives  of  these  kins- 
men of  Kshatriyas  over  and  over  again  ? '  Then, 
too,  his  grandfathers5,  with  RikSkz  as  their  head, 
likewise  said  to  the  high-souled  (Rama),  *  Desist, 
O  noble  one 6!'    But  Rama,  not  forgiving  his  fathers 

1  Viz.  the  protection  of  their  subjects. 

2  As  the  kings  failed  to  protect  the  people,  the  Brahma^as  appa- 
rently were  nowhere  forthcoming. 

3  Cf.  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  vol.  i,  pp.  482  seq.,  358,  391;  vol.  ii, 
p.  423  ;  *Santi  Parvan,  ch.  65,  st.  13  ;  ch.  207,  st.  42  (Rag-adharma). 

4  As  Kshatriyas  were  required  for  the  protection  of  the  people, 
the  Br&hma^as  procreated  them  on  Kshatriya  women.  See  Muir, 
Sanskrit  Texts,  vol.  i,  p.  451  seq.  And  as  they  were  the  offspring  of 
these  anomalous  connexions  they  are  described  as  '  kinsmen  of 
Kshatriyas/  Cf.  .Oandogya,  p.  317;  Bnliadara/zyaka,  p.  1037  anc* 
comments  there.  As  to  heroic,  see  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  vol.  iv, 
p.  302  note. 

5  Cf.  Gita,  p.  40,  note  1. 

6  See  as  to  the  whole  story,  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  vol.  i,  p.  442. 


296  ANUGITA. 

murder,  said  to  those  sages,  'You  ought  not  to  keep 
me  back  from  this/ 

The  Vitris  said : 
O  best  of  victors !  you  ought  not  to  destroy  these 
kinsmen  of  Kshatriyas.     It  is  not  proper  for  you, 
being  a  Brahma/za,  to  slaughter  these  kings. 


Chapter  XV. 

The  Fitrts  said : 

On  this1,  too,  they  relate  an  ancient  story;  hearing 
that  (story),  O  best  of  the  twice-born !  you  should 
act  accordingly.  There  was  (once)  a  royal  sage, 
named  Alarka,  whose  penance  was  very  great,  who 
understood  duty,  who  was  veracious,  high-souled, 
and  very  firm  in  his  vows.  Having  with  his  bow 
conquered  this  world  as  far  as  the  ocean, — having 
performed  very  difficult  deeds2, — he  turned  his 
mind  to  subtle  3  (subjects).  While  he  was  sitting  at 
the  foot  of  a  tree,  O  you  of  great  intelligence !  his 
thoughts,  abandoning  (those)  great  deeds,  turned  to 
subtle  (questions). 

Alarka  said  : 

My  mind  is  become  (too)  strong4;  that  conquest  is 
constant  in  which  the  mind  is  conquered.  (Though) 
surrounded  by  enemies,  I  shall  direct  my  arrows 
elsewhere5.     As  by  its  unsteadiness,  it  wishes6  to 

1  The  impropriety  or  sinfulness  of  slaughter. 

2  Such  as  the  subjugation  of  enemies  and  so  forth. 

3  The  Brahman,  says  Nilaka/zMa. 

4  I.  e.  too  strong  to  be  under  control. 

5  That  is  to  say,  elsewhere  than  towards  the  external  foes  with 
whom  he  was  waging  war. 

6  The  text  is  unsatisfactory  here.    I  adopt  Nilaka^a's  reading. 


CHAPTER    XV,    12.  297 


make  all  mortals   perform  action,   I  will  cast  very 
sharp-edged  arrows  at  the  mind. 

The  mind  said  : 
These  arrows,  O  Alarka !  will  not  penetrate 
through  me  at  all.  They  will  only  pierce  your 
own  vital  part,  and  your  vital  part  being  pierced, 
you  will  die.  Look  out  for  other  arrows  by  which 
you  may  destroy  me. 

Hearing  that,  he  then  spoke  these  words  after 
consideration  : — 

Alarka  said : 
Smelling  very  many  perfumes,  one  hankers  after 
them  only.     Therefore  I  will  cast  sharp  arrows  at 
the  nose. 

The  nose1  said  : 

These  arrows,  O  Alarka!  will  not  penetrate 
through  me  at  all.  They  will  only  pierce  your 
own  vital  part,  and  your  vital  part  being  pierced, 
you  will  die.  Look  out  for  other  arrows  by  which 
you  may  destroy  me. 

Hearing  that,  he  then  spoke  these  words  after 
consideration  : — 

Alarka  said : 

Enjoying  savory  tastes,  this  (tongue)  hankers  after 

1  This  and  the  other  corresponding  words  must  be  understood 
to  refer  not  to  the  physical  nose  and  so  forth,  but  the  sense  seated 
there.  The  nose  here,  for  instance,  stands  for  the  sense  of  smell. 
Nilaka/zMa  understands  all  these  words  of  Alarka  as  indicating  the 
so-called  Ha//$a-yoga,  which,  he  adds,  invariably  occasions  death. 
As  to  the  throwing  of  arrows  at  the  mind,  he  says,  it  means, '  I  will 
subdue  the  mind  by  the  restraint  of  the  excretive  organs  by  means 
of  the  Ha/^a-yoga.'  And  finally  he  says,  'A  man,  having  restrained 
all  the  senses  by  means  of  the  Ha/$a-yoga,  merely  droops  away ; 
becoming  deficient  in  those  senses,  he  does  not  accomplish 
his  end. 


298  ANUGITA. 


them  only.     Therefore  I  will  cast  sharp  arrows  at 
the  tongue. 

The  tongue  said : 

These  arrows,  O  Alarka !  will  not  penetrate 
through  me  at  all.  They  will  only  pierce  your 
own  vital  part,  and  your  vital  part  being  pierced, 
you  will  die.  Look  out  for  other  arrows  by  which 
you  may  destroy  me. 

Hearing  that,  he  then  spoke  these  words  after 
consideration : — 

Alarka  said : 

Touching  various  (objects  of)  touch,  the  skin 
hankers  after  them  only.  Therefore  I  will  tear 
off  the  skin  by  various  feathered  arrows. 

The  skin  said  : 

These  arrows,  O  Alarka !  will  not  penetrate 
through  me  at  all.  They  will  only  pierce  your 
own  vital  part,  and  your  vital  part  being  pierced, 
you  will  die.  Look  out  for  other  arrows  by  which 
you  may  destroy  me. 

Hearing  that,  he  then  said  after  consideration  : — 

Alarka  said : 

Hearing  various  sounds,  the  (ear)  hankers  after 
them  only.  Therefore  I  (will)  cast  sharp  arrows 
at  the  ear. 

The  ear  said : 

These  arrows,  O  Alarka !  will  not  penetrate 
through  me  at  all.  They  will  only  pierce  your 
own  vital  part,  and  then  you  will  lose  (your)  life. 
Look  out  for  other  arrows  by  which  you  may 
destroy  me. 

Hearing  that,  he  then  said  after  consideration  : — 


CHAPTER   XV,    28.  299 


Alarka  said : 
Seeing  numerous  colours,  the  eye  hankers  after 
them  only.     Therefore  I  will  destroy  the  eye  with 
sharp  arrows. 

The  eye  said : 

These  arrows,  O  Alarka !  will  not  penetrate 
through  me  at  all.  They  will  only  pierce  your 
own  vital  part,  and  your  vital  part  being  pierced, 
you  will  die.  Look  out  for  other  arrows  by  which 
you  may  destroy  me. 

Hearing  that,  he  then  said  after  consideration: — 

Alarka  said : 
This    (understanding)    forms   various    determina- 
tions by  its  operation.     Therefore  I  will  cast  sharp 
arrows  at  the  understanding. 

The  understanding  said  : 
These  arrows,  O  Alarka!  will  not  penetrate 
through  me  at  all.  They  will  only  pierce  your  own 
vital  part,  and  your  vital  part  being  pierced,  you 
will  die.  Look  out  for  other  arrows  by  which  you 
may  destroy  me. 

The  Brahma^a1  said: 
Then  Alarka  even  there  employed  himself  in  a 
fearful  penance2  difficult  to  perform;  but  he  did  not 
obtain  any  arrows  for  these  seven  by  his  devotions. 
Then  that  king  deliberated  with  a  mind  very  intent 
on  one  (subject),  and  after  deliberating  for  a  long 
time,  O  best  of  the  twice-born !  Alarka,  the  best  of 
talented  (men),  could  not  arrive  at  anything  better 

1  Sic  in  our  copies.    It  should  be  the  Pitr/s,  seeing  that  they 
are  relating  Alarka*s  story  to  Para^urama. 

2  Meditation,  or  pondering,  according  to  Nilakaw/^a. 


300  ANUGITA. 

than  concentration  of  mind1.  Then  directing  his  mind 
to  one  point2,  he  became  steady,  and  applied  him- 
self to  concentration  of  mind.  And  (then)  the  brave 
man  forthwith  destroyed  the  senses  with  one  arrow ; 
and  entering  the  self  by  means  of  concentration  of 
mind,  he  reached  the  highest  perfection.  And  the 
royal  sage,  amazed,  then  uttered  this  verse,  '  O ! 
Alas !  that  we  should  have  engaged  in  all  external 
(matters) ;  that  being  possessed  of  a  desire  for  en- 
joyments, we  should  have  devoted  ourselves  before 
now  to  sovereignty !  I  have  now  subsequently  learnt 
that  there  is  no  higher  happiness  than  concentration 
of  mind/  Do  you  understand  this  too,  O  Rama ! 
and  do  not  kill  Kshatriyas.  Perform  a  fearful3 
penance,  thence  you  will  obtain  the  highest  good. 
Thus  spoken  to  by  (his)  grandfathers,  the  noble  son 
of  ^amadagni  engaged  himself  in  fearful  penance,  and 
attained  that  perfection  which  is  difficult  to  reach. 


Chapter    XVI. 

The  Brdhma/za  said : 
There  are,  verily,  three  foes  in  (this)  world,  and 
they  are  stated  to  be  (divided)  ninefold,  according 
to  qualities.     Exultation,  pleasure,  joy4,  these  three 

1  I.  e.  the  ra^a-yoga,  says  Nilaka#//za,  which  consists  in  mere 
control  of  the  mind.     Cf.  Sankhya-sara,  p.  39. 

2  See  Yoga-sutra,  p.  45. 

3  This  means  difficult,  and  occasioning  many  trials  to  one  who 
performs  it. 

4  Nilaka/z/^a  says  exultation  is  when  one  is  sure  of  obtaining 
what  is  desired,  pleasure  when  it  is  obtained,  and  joy  when  the 
thing  obtained  is  enjoyed.  Ar^una  Mi^ra  takes  a  different  distinc- 
tion ;  but  our  copy  of  his  commentary  is  not  quite  intelligible  in 


CHAPTER    XVI,  5.  3OI 


are  qualities  appertaining  to  the  quality  of  good- 
ness. Grief,  wrath,  persistent  hatred,  these  are 
stated  to  be  qualities  appertaining  to  the  quality  of 
passion.  Sleep,  sloth,  and  delusion,  these  three 
qualities  are  qualities  appertaining  to  the  quality 
of  darkness.  Cutting  these  off  by  multitudes  of 
arrows1,  a  courageous  man,  free  from  sloth,  having 
a  tranquil  self,  and  senses  controlled,  is  energetic 
about  subjugating  others2.  On  this,  people  who 
know  about  ancient  times  celebrate  verses  which 
were  sung  of  old  by  the  king  Ambarisha,  who  had 
become  tranquil  (in  mind).  When  vices  3  were  in 
the  ascendant,  and  good  (men)  were  oppressed, 
Ambarisha,  of  great  glory,  forceably  possessed  him- 

the  beginning.  Pleasure  he  takes  to  mean  '  pride  felt  in  supposing 
oneself  to  possess  some  merit/  and  joy  that  produced  when  im- 
pending danger  is  averted.  As  to  the  next  triad,  the  text  is  again 
unsatisfactory.  The  text  printed  in  the  edition  which  contains 
Nilaka#//£a's  commentary,  is  'desire,  anger/  &c.  There  is  nothing 
about  them  in  the  commentary.  Arg-una  Mora's  text  is  the  one 
we  have  adopted.  He  says,  '  grief,  pain  caused  by  loss  of  what  is 
desired ;  anger,  the  pain  caused  by  the  counteraction  of  one's 
attempts  to  injure  another ;  persistent  hatred,  the  pain  caused  by 
believing  another  to  be  doing  harm  to  oneself.'  Persistent  hatred 
is  Nilakaw/^a's  interpretation.  I  think  his  interpretation  is  prefer- 
able. The  two  triads  seem  to  be  based  on  one  principle  of  grada- 
tion. The  distinctive  marks  of  the  three  qualities  are  pleasure, 
pain,  and  delusion  respectively,  and  those  characterise  the  three 
triads  stated  in  the  text.  See  -Santi  Parvan  (Moksha),  chap.  194, 
st.  27  seq. 

1  Tranquillity  and  so  forth,  Nllaka#$a ;  practising  yoga  or 
concentration  of  mind,  Ar^nna  Mijra. 

2  I.  e.  external,  says  Arg-una  MLrra ;  external  foes  of  one's  own 
emancipation  is,  I  presume,  what  is  meant. 

3  Arg-una  Mirra  says, '  his  own  and  those  of  others/  Nilakaw/^a 
takes  good  to  mean  not  men,  but  tranquillity,  &c.  The  next  sen- 
tence seems  rather  to  militate  against  this  view,  which  in  itself 
is  not  a  well-founded  one. 


302  anugIta. 


self  of  the  kingdom1.  He  (then)  restraining  his  own 
vices,  and  honouring  good  men,  attained  high  per- 
fection, and  sang  these  verses :  '  I  have  conquered 
most  vices ;  destroyed  all  foes ;  but  there  is  one, 
the  greatest,  vice  which  should  be  destroyed  and 
which  I  have  not  destroyed — that  (vice),  being  im- 
pelled by  which,  a  creature  does  not  attain  freedom 
from  desire,  and  being  troubled  by  desire,  under- 
stands (nothing)  while  running  into  ditches2;  (that 
vice),  being  impelled  by  which,  a  man  even  does 
what  ought  not  to  be  done.  That  avarice — cut 
(it)  off,  cut  (it)  off  with  sharp  swords.  For  from 
avarice3  is  born  desire ;  then  anxiety  comes  into 
existence ;  and  he  who  desires,  mostly  acquires 
qualities  appertaining  to  the  quality  of  passion. 
Obtaining  those,  he  mostly  acquires  qualities  ap- 
pertaining to  the  quality  of  darkness4.  When  the 
bodily  frame  is  destroyed,  he,  owing  to  these  quali- 
ties, is  born  again  and  again,  and  engages  in  action. 
And  at  the  expiration  of  life,  again  with  his  body 
dismembered  and  scattered  about,  he  meets  death, 
and  again  birth.  Therefore,  properly  perceiving  this, 
and  restraining  avarice  by  courage,  one  should  wish 
for  sovereignty  in  the  self.  This  is  sovereignty5 ; 
there  is  no  other  sovereignty  here.  The  self  pro- 
perly understood  is  itself  the  sovereign/    Such  were 

1  For  the  good  of  the  people,  says  Ar^una  Mwra. 

2  I.  e.  base  actions,  Nilakaw/^a. 

3  Avarice,  according  to  Arg-una  Mi^ra,  is  the  belief  that  one  has 
not  got  that  which  one  has,  and  desire  is  the  wish  for  more  and 
more.  Avarice  seems,  however,  to  be  the  general  frame  of  mind, 
always  wishing  for  something,  never  being  contented,  and  desire 
is  the  wish  for  a  specific  object. 

*  Which  are  sources  of  delusion.  Cf.  a  similar  doctrine  at  Apa- 
stamba  II,  5, 140.  5  Nilakaw/^a  compares  Taittiriya,  p.  26. 


CHAPTER   XVII,    8.  303 


the  verses  sung  with  regard  to  the  great  sovereignty, 
by  the  glorious  Ambarlsha,  who  destroyed  the  one 
(chief  vice),  avarice. 


Chapter  XVII. 

The  Brihma^a  said : 
On  this  \  too,  they  relate  this  ancient  story  (in  the 
shape  of)  a  dialogue,  O  you  of  a  pure  heart !  between 
a  Brahma^a  and  kanaka.  King  kanaka,  by  way  of 
punishment,  said  to  a  Brcthma^a  who  had  fallen  into 
some  offence :  '  You  should  not  live  within  my  do- 
minions/ Thus  spoken  to,  the  Brahma/za  then 
replied  to  that  best  of  kings :  '  Tell  me,  O  king !  how 
far  (extend)  the  dominions  which  are  subject  to  you. 
I  wish,  O  Lord !  to  live  in  the  dominions  of  another 
king,  and,  O  master  of  the  earth !  I  wish  to  do  your 
bidding  according  to  the  •S&stras/  Thus  spoken 
to  by  that  glorious  Brahma/za,  the  king  then  heaved 
frequent  and  warm  sighs,  and  said  nothing  in  reply. 
While  that  king  of  unbounded  power  was  seated, 
engaged  in  meditation,  a  delusion  suddenly  came 
upon  him,  as  the  planet 2  upon  the  sun.  Then  when 
the  delusion  had  gone  off,  the  king  recovered  him- 
self, and  after  a  short  while  spoke  these  words  to 
the  Brihma^a. 

kanaka  said : 

Though  this  country,  which  is  the  kingdom  of  my 
father  and  grandfather,  is  subject  (to  me),  I  cannot 

1  On  getting  rid  of  the  notion  that  this,  that,  and  the  other 
thing  is  one's  own, — Arg-una  Mi^ra.  Nilaka«/£a  agrees,  and  adds 
also  on  the  subject  of  cutting  off  avarice. 

2  That  is  to  say,  Rahu. 


304  ANUGITA. 

find  my  domain1,  searching  through  the  (whole) 
earth.  When  I  did  not  find  it  on  the  earth,  I  looked 
for  Mithila ;  when  I  did  not  find  it  in  Mithila,  I  looked 
for  my  own  offspring.  When  I  did  not  find  it  among 
them,  then  came  the  delusion  on  me.  Then  on  the 
expiration  of  the  delusion,  intelligence  again  came 
to  me.  Now  I  think  that  there  is  no  domain  (of 
mine),  or  that  everything  is  my  domain.  Even  this 
self  is  not  mine,  or  the  whole  earth  is  mine.  And 
as  mine,  so  (is  it)  that  of  others  too,  I  believe,  O 
best  of  the  twice-born !  Live  (here,  therefore)  while 
you  desire,  and  enjoy  while  you  live  2. 

The  Brahma/za  said : 
Tell  me,  what  belief  you  have  resorted  to,  by  which, 
though  this  country,  which  is  the  kingdom  of  your 
father  and  grandfather,  is  subject  to  you,  you  have 
got  rid  of  (the  notion  that  this  or  that  is)  mine. 
What  conviction  have  you  adopted,  by  which  verily 
you  consider  your  whole  domain  as  not  (your) 
domain,  or  all  as  your  domain? 

kanaka  said : 
I  understand  (all)  conditions  here,  in  all  affairs,  to 
be  terminable3,  hence  I  could  not  find  anything  that 
should  be  (called)  mine  4.     (Considering)  whose  this 

1  Meaning,  apparently,  that  over  which  he  and  no  one  else  has 
power.  He  contracts  his  vision  gradually,  and  finds  nothing  at  all 
which  he  can  call  his  own  to  the  exclusion  of  others.  He  explains,  fur- 
ther on,  how  he  arrives  at  the  alternative  conviction  stated  towards 
the  close  of  this  speech.  In  the  Brrhadarawyaka  (p.  916)  he  is  said 
to  have  offered  his  kingdom  to  Ya^iiavalkya  and  himself  as  his  slave, 
after  learning  the  Brahma- vidya.  See  too  Muir,  SanskritTexts,  vol.  iv, 
p.  426  seq.  2  See  *Santi  Parvan  (Moksha)I,  13. 

8  Conditions  of  indigence  or  affluence,  Nilaka«/$a.  Ar^una 
Mfrra's  reading  is  different. 

4  There  is  a  familiar  verse,  ascribed  to  Ganaka,  which  says, l  If 


CHAPTER   XVII,    21.  305 

was,  (I  thought  of)  the  Vedic  text  about  anybody's 
property,  (hence)  I  could  not  find  by  my  intelligence 
anything  that  should  be  (called)  mine  \  Resorting 
to  this  conviction,  I  have  got  rid  of  (the  notion  that 
this  or  that  is)  mine.  Now  hear  the  conviction, 
holding  which,  my  domain  (appears  to  me  to  be) 
everywhere 2.  I  do  not  desire  for  myself  even  smells 
existing  in  the  nose3.  Therefore  the  earth4  being 
conquered  is  always  subject  to  me.  I  do  not  desire 
for  myself  tastes  even  dwelling  in  the  mouth. 
Therefore  water  being  conquered  is  always  subject 
to  me.  I  do  not  desire  for  myself  the  colour  (or)  light 
appertaining  to  the  eye.  Therefore  light  being  con- 
quered is  always  subject  to  me.  I  do  not  desire  for 
myself  the  (feelings  of  touch)  which  exist  in  the 
skin.      Therefore   air   being   conquered   is    always 

Mithild  is  on  fire,  nothing  of  mine  is  burnt  (in  it)/  The  verse 
occurs  in  the  Mahabharata,  £anti  Parvan  (Moksha  Dharma),  chap. 
178,  st.  2,  and  also  chap.  276,  st.  4.  See  too  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts, 
vol.  i,  p.  429. 

1  This  is  not  clear.  I  have  followed  Nllaka^a's  text.  Ar^aina 
Mwra's  is  in  the  earlier  part  more  intelligible, '  Whose  is  this  to-day, 
whose  to-morrow?'  But  I  cannot  find  that  there  is  any  Vedic 
text  to  this  effect.  Nilaka^a  cites  on  his  text  Iropanishad,  p.  5. 
The  meaning  here  seems  to  be,  '  When  I  considered  as  to  whom 
the  things  I  saw  in  my  thoughts  belonged  to,  I  remembered  the 
Vedic  text  that  one  should  not  wish  to  obtain  another's  property, 
and  so,  thinking  about  the  matter  with  that  caution,  I  could  not 
make  out  that  there  was  anything  which  I  could  call  my  own.' 

2  This  is  the  alternative  conclusion  he  has  come  to. 

3  The  sense  of  smell  enjoys  the  smell,  my  self  has  nothing  to 
do  with  it.    Cf.  GM,  p.  55,  also  Maitri,  pp.  112,  113. 

4  Whenever  there  is  any  smell,  it  is  supposed  that  particles  of 
earth  are  there ;  so  the  meaning  here  is  '  all  things  having  the 
quality  of  smell  are  subject  to  me/  and  so  throughout.  The 
objects  of  sense  are  all  used  for  the  purposes  of  the  prescribed 
actions,  the  benefits  of  which  accrue  to  gods,  &c.  Cf.  Gita,  pp.  53, 
54,  and  see  also  pp.  84,  85. 

[8]  X 


306  ANUGITA. 


subject  to  me.  I  do  not  desire  for  myself  sounds 
even  though  existing  in  the  ear.  Therefore  sounds 
being  conquered  are  always  subject  to  me.  I  do 
not  desire  for  myself  the  mind  always  within  me. 
Therefore  the  mind  being  conquered  is  always  sub- 
ject to  me.  All  these  actions  of  mine  are,  verily, 
for  this  purpose,  (namely)  for  the  gods,  the  Pitrzs,  the 
Bhfttas,  together  with  guests.  Then  the  Brahma^a, 
smiling,  again  said  to  (kanaka  :  '  Know  me  to  be 
Dharma,  come  here  to-day  to  learn  (something) 
about  you 1.  You  are  the  one  person  to  turn  this 
wheel,  the  nave  of  which  is  the  Brahman 2,  the  spoke 
the  understanding,  and  which  does  not  turn  backs, 
and  which  is  checked  by  the  quality  of  goodness  as 
its  circumference4/ 


Chapter  XVIII. 


The  Brahma/za  said : 

0  modest  one !  I  do  not  move  about  in  this  world 
in  the  way  which,  according  to  your  own  under- 
standing, you  have  guessed.    1 5  am  a  Brdhma^a,  I  am 

1  I.e.  to  put  him  to  the  test.  Such  examinations  are  often 
referred  to  in  our  later  literature. 

2  I.  e.  Veda,  says  Ar^una  Mijra. 

3  I.  e.  says  Arg-una  Mkra,  which  leads  to  the  seat  from  which 
there  is  no  return.     Cf.  GM,  p.  112. 

4  The  wheel  is  the  yoga,  says  Argnna  Mura.  The  expression 
is  noteworthy,  as  being  that  used  of  Buddha's  teaching.  See  on 
that  Davids'  Buddhism,  p.  45. 

5  The  man  who  has  achieved  final  emancipation  has  got  that,  in 
which  the  benefits  to  be  derived  from  the  course  of  life  of  a  Brah- 
xnawa,  &c,  are  included  (see  p.  191  supra).     Hence,  says  he,  the 


CHAPTER   XVIII,  8.  307 


emancipated,  I  am  a  forester,  and  I  likewise  perform 
the  duties  of  a  householder,  observing  vows.  I  am 
not  such,  O  beautiful  one !  as  you  see  me  with  the 
eye.  I  pervade  every  single  thing  that  is  in  this 
world.  Whatever  creatures  there  are  in  the  world, 
movable  or  not  moving,  know  me  to  be  the  de- 
stroyer of  them  as  fire  is  of  wood 1.  Sovereignty 
over  the  whole  world,  and  even  over  heaven ;  that, 
or  else  this  knowledge ;  (of  these  two)  knowledge 
is  my  only  wealth 2.  This 3  is  the  path  of  the 
Brihma^as,  by  which  those  who  understand  that4 
proceed,  to  households,  or  residence  in  forests,  or, 
dwelling  with  preceptors,  or  among  mendicants5. 
With  numerous  unconfused  symbols  only  one  know- 
ledge is  approached.  And  those  who,  adhering  to 
various  symbols  and  Airamas,  have  their  under- 
standing full  of  tranquillity 6,  go  to  the  single  entity 
as  rivers  to  the  ocean.  This  path  is  traversed 
by  the  understanding,  not  by  the  body7.  Actions 
have  a  beginning  and  an  end,  and  the  body  is  tied 
down   by   action.      Hence,   O    beautiful    one!    you 


doubt,  on  which  your  question  is  based  as  to  what  world  you  will 
go  to  by  being  joined  to  me,  is  wrong.     See  p.  256  supra. 

1  He  is  speaking  here  on  the  footing  of  the  essential  identity 
of  everything.     Cf.  Gita,  p.  62. 

2  The  expression  here  is  clumsy;  the  meaning  is  that  he  prefers 
knowledge  to  sovereignty,  if  the  alternative  is  offered  him. 

8  Viz.  knowledge.  4  I.  e.  the  Brahman. 

5  These  are  the  four  orders  or  Asramas. 

6  The  knowledge  to  be  acquired,  by  whatever  symbols  the 
attempt  to  acquire  it  is  made,  is  but  this,  that  all  is  one ;  and  that 
is  acquired  certainly  when  tranquillity  has  been  achieved. 

7  I.  e.  by  realising  the  identity  of  everything,  not  by  the  actions 
performed  with  the  body,  which,  as  he  goes  on  to  show,  are  perish- 
able, and  cannot  lead  to  any  lasting  result. 

X   2 


308  anugitA. 


(need)  have  no  fear  occasioned  by  the  other  world. 
With  your  heart  intent  upon  the  real  entity,  you  will 
certainly  come  into  my  self. 


Chapter  XIX. 

The  Brahma/za's  wife  said : 
This  is  not  possible  to  be  understood  by  one 
whose  self1  is  frivolous,  or  by  one  whose  self  is  not 
refined ;  and  my  intelligence  is  very  frivolous,  and 
narrow,  and  confused.  Tell  me  the  means  by  which 
this  knowledge  is  acquired.  I  (wish  to)  learn  from  you 
the  source  from  which  that  knowledge  proceeds. 

The  Brahma^a  said : 
Know  that  he  who  devotes  himself  to  the  Brah- 
man is  the  (lower)  Ara/zi,  the  instructor  is  the  upper 
Aram.  Penance  and  sacred  learning  cause  the  at- 
trition2, and  from  that  the  fire  of  knowledge  is 
produced. 

The  Brihma^as  wife  said: 
As  to  this  symbol  of  the  Brahman  which  is  de- 
nominated the  Kshetra^na,  where,  indeed,  is  (to  be 
found)  a  description  of  it,  by  which  it 3  is  capable 
of  being  comprehended  ? 


1  I.  e.  mind,  Argiina  MLrra. 

2  Scil.  of  the  Arams  (i.  e.  the  wood  used  for  kindling  fire) ;  the 
sense  is,  that  the  pupil  who  has  penance  and  Vedic  learning  goes  to 
a  teacher  for  knowledge.     See  *Sveta\rvatara,  pp.  307,  308. 

3  I.  e.  the  Brahman,  says  Ar^una  Mkra,  of  which  the  Kshetra^iia 
is  only  a  symbol.  For  a  definition  of  Kshetra^iia,  see  Santi 
Parvan  (Moksha),  chap.  187,  st.  23. 


CHAPTER   XIX,  9.  309 


The  Brahma/za  said  : 
He  is  without  symbols 1,  and  also  without  qualities; 
nothing  exists  that  is  a  cause  of  him.  I  will  only 
state  the  means  by  which  he  can  be  comprehended 
or  not.  A  good  means  is  found,  namely,  action2 
and  knowledge,  by  which  that3  (entity),  which  has 
the  symbols  (useful)  for  knowledge  4  attributed  to  it 
through  ignorance,  is  perceived  as  by  bees  5.  In  the 
(rules  for)  final  emancipation,  it  is  not  laid  down,  that 
a  certain  thing  should  be  done,  and  a  certain  thing 
should  not 6.  But  the  knowledge  of  the  things  bene- 
ficial to  the  self  is  produced  in  one  who  sees  and 
hears 7.  One  should  adopt  as  many  of  these  things, 
(which  are)  means  of  direct  perception,  as  may  here 
be  practicable — unperceived,  and  those  whose  form 
is  perceived 8,  in  hundreds  and  in  thousands,  all  of 
various  descriptions.  Then  one  reaches  near  that 
beyond  which  nothing  exists. 

The  Deity  said : 
Then  the  mind  of  the  Br^hma/za's  wife,  after  the 

1  See  Sanatsu^tiya,  p.  160. 

2  Viz.  that  which  is  required  as  a  preliminary  to  the  acquisition 
of  knowledge,  and  hence  is  necessary  for  final  emancipation. 

3  The  Brahman. 

4  I.  e.  symbols  which  are  to  convey  a  knowledge  of  the  Brahman. 

5  I.  e.  in  a  way  not  perfect ;  as  bees  hovering  above  a  flower 
get  the  fragrance  of  it  without  grasping  the  flower  itself,  so  these 
means  give  one  an  imperfect  knowledge  of  the  Brahman  to  be 
afterwards  perfected  by  constant  meditation  upon  it  (nididhyasa). 

6  As  it  is  in  the  prior  portion  of  the  Vedas,  as  to  sacrifices,  &c. 

7  Sees,  i.  e.  by  contemplation ;  hears,  i.  e.  from  a  teacher,  Ar^una 
Misra. 

8  This  seems  to  mean  such  things  as  hearing,  reading,  &c, 
which  would  be  '  perceived '  scil.  by  the  senses ;  and  all  intellectual 
operations  which  would  be  '  unperceived.' 


3IO  ANUG1TA. 


destruction  of  the  Kshetra^fia  1y  turned  to  that  which 
is  beyond  (all)  Kshetra^nas  by  means  of  a  knowledge 
of  the  Kshetra 2. 

Ar§"una  said ; 

Where,  indeed,  O  Krzshna.1  is  that  Brahma^as 
wife,  and  where  is  that  chief  of  Brihma^as,  by  both 
of  whom  this  perfection  was  attained  ?  Tell  me 
about  them  both,  O  undegraded  one ! 

The  Deity  said : 
Know  my  mind  to  be  the  Brihma^a,  and  know 
my  understanding  to  be  the  Brahma^a's  wife.     And 
he,  O  Dhanan^aya!  who  has  been  spoken  of  as  the 
Kshetra^fia,  is  I  myself  s. 


Chapter  XX. 

Ar^una  said : 
Be  pleased  to  explain  to  me  the  Brahman  which 
is  the  highest   object  of  knowledge ;    for  by  your 
favour  my  mind  is  much  interested  in  (these)  subtle  4 
(subjects), 

Vasudeva  said : 
On  this,  too,  they  relate  an  ancient  story  (in  the 
shape  of)  a  dialogue,  connected  with  final  emanci- 
pation, between  a  preceptor  and  a  pupil.    A  talented 

1  I.  e.  after  the  identification  of  the  individual  self  with  the  uni- 
versal self,  when  the  individual  ceases  to  be  perceived  as  such.  Cf. 
*Santi  Parvan  (Moksha),  chap.  187,  st.  23. 

2  That  beyond  Kshetra^nas=the  absolute  supreme  self.  Cf. 
Gita,  p.  106. 

3  The  substance  of  this  speech,  says  Argnna  Mijra,  is  that  the  mind 
and  understanding  devoted  to  the  supreme  lead  to  final  emancipation. 

4  See  p.  296  supra.  The  last  chapter  closes  what  in  some  of  the 
MSS.  is  called  the  Brahma  Gita,  or  Brahmawa  Gita  contained  in  the 
Anugita  Parvan.  See  further  as  to  this  our  Introduction,  where  the 
point  is  further  dwelt  on. 


CHAPTER   XX,  12.  311 


pupil,  O  terror  of  your  foes !  asked  a  Brahma/za  pre- 
ceptor of  rigid  vows,  (when  he  was)  seated,  something 
about  the  highest  good.  '  I '  (he  said),  *  whose  goal 
is  the  highest  good,  am  come  to  you  (who  are) 
venerable;  I  pray  of  you  with  (bowed)  head,  O 
Brahma^a!  that  you  should  explain  to  me  what  I 
ask/  The  preceptor,  O  son  of  Przthd !  said  to  the 
pupil  who  spoke  thus :  *  I  will  explain  to  you  every- 
thing, O  twice-born  one !  on  which  you  verily  have 
any  doubt/  Thus  addressed  by  the  preceptor,  O 
best  of  the  Kauravas !  he  who  was  devoted  to  the 
preceptor,  put  (his)  questions  with  joined  hands. 
Listen  to  that,  O  you  of  great  intelligence ! 

The  pupil  said : 
Whence  am  1 1,  and  whence  are  you  ?  Explain 
that  which  is  the  highest  truth.  From  what  were 
the  movable  and  immovable  entities  born  ?  By 
what  do  entities  live,  and  what  is  the  limit  of  their 
life  ?  What  is  truth,  what  penance,  O  Br&hma/za  ? 
What  are  called  the  qualities  by  the  good  ?  And  what 
paths  are  happy  ?  What  is  pleasure,  and  what  sin  ? 
These  questions  of  mine,  O  venerable  Brihma^a 
sage !  O  you  of  excellent  vows !  do  you  be  pleased 
to  explain 2  correctly,  truly,  and  accurately.  There 
is  none  else  here  who  can  explain  these  questions. 
Speak,  O  best  of  those  who  understand  piety !  I  feel 
the  highest  curiosity  (in  this  matter).  You  are  cele- 
brated in  the  worlds  as  skilled  in  topics  connected 
with  the  piety  (required  for)  final  emancipation.  And 
there  exists  none  else  but  you  who  can  destroy  all 

1  Compare  the  questions  at  the  beginning  of  the  *SVeta\rvatara- 
upanishad. 

2  A  similar  expression  to  that  in  the   Sanatsu^atiya,  p.  149, 
and  elsewhere. 


3 1 2  anugIta. 


doubts.    And  we l,  likewise,  are  afraid  of  worldly  life 
and  also  desirous  of  final  emancipation. 

Vasudeva  said  : 
That  talented  preceptor,  who  preserved  (all)  vows, 
O  son  of  Przth&  !  O  chief  of  the  family  of  the 
Kauravas !  O  restrainer  of  foes !  duly  explained  all 
those  questions  to  that  pupil,  who  had  approached 
him  (for  instruction),  who  put  (his)  questions  properly, 
who  was  possessed  of  (the  necessary)  qualifications, 
who  was  tranquil,  who  conducted  himself  in  an  agree- 
able manner,  who  was  like  (his)  shadow 2,  and  who 
was  a  self-restrained  ascetic  and  a  BrahmaMrin. 

The  preceptor  said : 
All  this,  which  is  connected  with  the  knowledge 
of  the  Vedas  3  and  involves  a  consideration  of  the 
real  entity,  and  which  is  cultivated  by  the  chief 
sages,  was  declared  by  Brahman.  We  consider 
knowledge  only  as  the  highest  thing ;  and  renuncia- 
tion 4  as  the  best  penance.  And  he  who  understands 
determinately  the  true  object  of  knowledge  which  is 
inexpugnable 5 — the  self  abiding  in  all  entities — and 
who  can  move  about  anywhere6,  is  esteemed  highest. 
The  learned  man  who  perceives  the  abiding  together7, 

1  It  is  not  easy  to  account  for  the  change  here  from  the  singular 
to  the  plural. 

2  I.  e.  always  attended  on  the  preceptor.  Cf.  generally,  Mu^^faka, 
p.  283. 

3  The  question  was  not  quite  from  his  own  imagination,  says 
Nilaka«/^a.  Ar^una  MLsra  has  a  different  reading,  which  he  inter- 
prets to  mean  '  that  on  which  the  Vedas  are  all  at  one/ 

4  Of  the  fruit  of  action,  Ar^una  Misra. 

5  I.  e.  not  such  as  to  require  modification  by  any  other  knowledge, 
as  knowledge  of  the  world  does. 

6  Nilaka«/$a  compares  .-Oandogya,  pp.  523-553. 

7  I.  e.  of  Kit  and  GWa,  says  Nilakaw/^a ;  of  Brahman  and  its 
manifestations,  as  alluded  to,  inter  alia,  at  pp.  105,  106,  191  supra. 


CHAPTER   XX,  2  2.  3I3 


and  the  severance  also,  and  likewise  unity  and 
variety1,  is  released  from  misery.  He  who  does 
not  desire  anything,  and  has  no  egoism  about  any- 
thing, becomes  eligible  for  assimilation  with  the 
Brahman,  even  while  dwelling  in  this  world2.  He 
who  knows  the  truth  about  the  qualities  of  nature, 
who  understands  the  creation  of  all  entities,  who  is 
devoid  of  (the  thought  that  this  or  that  is)  mine, 
and  who  is  devoid  of  egoism,  is  emancipated ;  there 
is  no  doubt  of  that.  Accurately  understanding  the 
great  (tree)  of  which  the  unperceived 3  is  the  sprout 
from  the  seed,  which  consists  of  the  understanding 
as  its  trunk,  the  branches  of  which  are  the  great 
egoism,  in  the  holes  of  which  are  the  sprouts,  namely, 
the  senses,  of  which  the  great  elements  are  the 
flower-bunches4,  the  gross  elements  the  smaller 
boughs,  which  is  always  possessed  of  leaves,  always 
possessed  of  flowers,  and  from  which  pleasant  fruits 
are  always  produced,  on  which  all  entities  subsist, 
which  is  eternal,  and  the  seed  of  which  is  the  Brah- 
man ;  and  cutting  it  with  that  excellent  sword — know- 
ledge— one  attains  immortality,  and  casts  off  birth 
and  death5.     I  will  state  to  you  to-day,  O  highly 

1  I.  e.  that  variety  is  only  in  this  world,  but  that  the  unity  of 
everything  is  the  true  proposition.     Cf.  inter  alia  Gita,  p.  104. 

2  Cf.  Br/hadara^yaka,  p.  858,  and  Gita,  p.  65. 

3  I.  e.  the  Prakr/ti  of  the  Sankhyas. 

4  The  great  elements  are  the  five  tanmatras  of  earth,  water,  fire, 
air,  and  space,  which  afterwards  produce  what  we  have  called  the 
gross  elements  in  the  text,  namely,  the  earth  &c.  which  we  perceive. 

5  The  tree  typifies  worldly  life.  Cf.  pp.  111-189  supra.  The 
leaves  and  flowers,  Arguna  MLrra  says,  stand  for  volition  and  action; 
and  Nilaka/z/^a  seems  to  agree.  The  tree  is  called  eternal,  as 
worldly  life  is  supposed  to  have  had  no  beginning.  Cf.  Sariraka 
Bhashya,  p.  494,  '  sprout  from  the  seed,'  this  rendering  is  neces- 
sitated by  Brahman  being  described  as  the  seed.  Cf.  Mu^aka, 
p.  288;  *SVeta\yvatara,  p.  362;  Ka/#a,  pp.  143,  144. 


314  anugitA. 


talented  one!  the  true  conclusion1  about  the  past, 
the  present,  the  future,  and  so  forth,  and  piety,  de- 
sire, and  wealth  2,  which  is  understood  by  the  mul- 
titudes of  Siddhas,  which  belongs  to  olden  times,  and 
is  eternal,  which  ought  to  be  apprehended,  and  under- 
standing which  talented  men  have  here  attained 
perfection.  Formerly3,  the  sages,  B/Vhaspati,  Bha- 
radva/a,  Gautama,  and  likewise  Bh£rgava,Vasish/^a, 
and  also  KcLsyapa,  and  Visvamitra,  and  Atri  also, 
desiring  knowledge,  met  each  other,  after  having 
travelled  over  all  paths  4,  and  becoming  wearied  of 
their  own  actions.  And  those  twice-born  (sages), 
giving  the  lead  to  the  old  sage  Angirasa,  saw  Brah- 
man, from  whom  (all)  sin  has  departed,  in  Brah- 
man's mansion.  Having  saluted  that  high-souled 
one  who  was  sitting  at  ease,  the  great  sages,  full 
of  humility,  asked  him  this  momentous  (question) 
concerning  the  highest  good:  '  How  should  one  per- 
form good  action  ?  how  is  one  released  from  sin  ? 
what  paths  are  happy  for  us  ?  what  is  truth  and 
what  vice  ?  By  what  action  are  the  two  paths  southern 
and  northern  obtained5  ?  (and  what  is)  destruction 6  and 
emancipation,  the  birth  and  death  of  entities?'  What 
the  grandsire  said  conformably  to  the  scriptures  7, 

1  I.  e.  the  means  of  arriving  at  it,  Ar^-una  Mijra. 

2  The  triad,  the  acquisition  of  which  worldly  men  aspire  to. 

3  He  explains  how  the  doctrine  belongs  to  olden  times. 

4  I.  e.  paths  of  action,  Nilakaw/^a.     See  Sanatsug-atfya,  p.  165. 

5  Namely,  the  Pitrzyana  and  Devayana  (Ar^una  MLrra),  as  to 
which  see  .Oandogya,  p.  341,  Kaushitaki,  p.  13,  and  Br/hadara- 
wyaka,  p.  1034. 

6  Nilakaw/^a  seems  to  interpret  this  to  mean  the  temporary  and 
final  dissolutions  of  the  worlds,  on  which  see,  inter  alia,  Vedanta 
Paribha-sha,  p.  48. 

7  So  Nilaka^a.  May  it  not  be  '  according  to  the  received 
tradition?' 


CHAPTER    XX,  37.  3T5 


when  thus  spoken  to  by  the  sages,  I  will  state  to  you. 
Listen  (to  that)  O  pupil ! 

Brahman  said : 
From  the  truth  were  the  entities  movable  and 
immovable  produced.  They  live  by  penance1. 
Understand  that,  O  you  of  excellent  vows !  By  their 
own  action  they  remain  transcending  their  own 
source 2.  For  the  truth  joined  with  the  qualities  is 
invariably  of  five  varieties.  The  Brahman 3  is  the 
truth  ;  penance  is  the  truth  ;  Pra^apati  also  is  truth  ; 
the  entities  are  born  from  the  truth ;  the  universe 
consisting  of  (all)  creatures  is  the  truth.  Therefore 
Brahma^as  whose  final  goal  is  always  concentration 
of  mind,  from  whom  anger  and  vexation  have  de- 
parted, and  who  are  invariably  devoting  themselves 
to  piety,  are  full  of  the  truth.  I  will  speak  about 
those  (Brahma/zas)  who  are  restrained  by  one 
another  4,  who  are  possessed  of  knowledge,  who  are 
the  establishers  of  the  bridge  of  piety,  and  who  are 
the  constant  creators  of  the  people 5.  I  will  speak 
of  the  four  (branches  of)  knowledge,  and  likewise 
of  the  castes,  and  of  the  four  orders,  distinctly.  The 
wise  always    speak  of  piety  as    one,  (but)  having 

1  I.e.  by  action,  NilakawMa.  Cf.  Mundaka,  p.  280,  and  see 
p.  166  supra,  note  1. 

2  I.  e.  they  remain  apart  from  the  Brahman,  being  engaged  in 
action.  This  answers  some  of  the  questions  put  by  the  pupil  to 
the  preceptor.    As  to  'the  truth/  see  p.  162,  note  2  supra. 

8  I.e.  Irvara,  or  god;  penance = piety;  Pra^apati=the  individual 
soul,  Nilaka/z/#a.  Brahman =' that'  (but  how  is  'that'  'joined  with 
qualities  V);  Pra^apati= Brahman,  Ar^-una  MLsra.  They  agree  about 
penance  and  entities  (which  they  take  to  mean  the  gross  elements) 
and  creatures.  Brahman  and  Pra^apati=Vira£-  and  Hirarcyagar- 
bha  (?),  p.  186  supra.    Cf.  *Santi  Parvan  (Moksha),  chap.  190,  st.  1. 

4  I.  e.  who  commit  no  breach  of  piety  through  fear  of  one 
another,  Nllaka«/^a.  5  Cf.  Gita,  p.  86. 


3i6  anugitA. 


four  quarters.  I  will  speak  to  you,  O  twice-born 
ones !  of  the  happy  path,  which  is  productive  of 
pleasure,  and  which  has  been  invariably  travelled 
over  by  talented  men  in  old  days  for  (obtaining) 
assimilation  with  the  Brahman.  Learn,  O  noble  ones ! 
from  me,  now  speaking  exhaustively,  of  that  highest 
path  which  is  difficult  to  understand,  and  of  the 
highest  seat.  The  first  step  is  said  to  be  the  order 
of  BrahmaMrins ;  the  second  is  that  of  householders ; 
next  after  that  is  that  of  foresters ;  and  next  after 
that  too,  the  highest  step  must  be  understood  to  be 
that  relating  to  the  Adhyatma  \  Light 2,  space,  sun, 
air,  Indra,  Pra^apati,  one  sees  not  these,  while  one 
does  not  attain  to  the  Adhyatma3.  I  will  subse- 
quently state  the  means  to  that,  which  you  should 
understand.  The  order  of  foresters,  (the  order)  of 
the  sages  who  dwell  in  forests  and  live  on  fruits 
roots  and  air,  is  prescribed  for  the  three  twice-born 
(castes).  The  order  of  householders  is  prescribed 
for  all  castes.  The  talented  ones  speak  of  piety 
as  having  faith  for  its  characteristic.  Thus  have 
I  described  to  you  the  paths  leading  to  the  gods 4, 
which  are  occupied  by  good  and  talented  men  by 
means  of  their  actions,  and  which  are  bridges  of 
piety.  He  who,  rigid  in  his  vows,  takes  up  any  one 
of  these  modes  of  piety  separately,  always  comes  in 
time  to  perceive  the  production  and  dissolution  of 

1  That  is  to  say,  that  of  the  ascetic,  who  specially  devotes  him- 
self to  the  acquisition  of  knowledge  about  the  relation  of  the 
supreme  and  individual  self  (Adhyatma). 

2  The  deity  presiding  over  the  bright  fortnight,  says  Arg-una  MLrra. 
The  words  space  and  sun  and  air  must  be  similarly  interpreted. 

3  Nilaka«/$a  says  '  one  sees  these  only  while  one  has  not  had  a 
perception  of  the  self/  He  takes  light  &c.  to  mean  the  '  universe/ 

4  I.  e.  the  means  of  reaching  the  Devayana  path  (mentioned  at 
p.  314,  note  5),  Nilakaw/^a.     Cf.  also  Mu/zdaka,  p.  312. 


CHAPTER   XXI,  2.  317 


(all)  entities1.  Now  I  shall  state  with  accuracy  and 
with  reasons,  all  the  elements  which  abide  in  parts 
in  all  objects.  The  great  self2,  the  unperceived 3  like- 
wise, and  likewise  also  egoism,  the  ten  senses  and 
the  one4  (sense),  and  the  five  great  elements,  and  the 
specific  characteristics  of  the  five  elements 6,  such  is 
the  eternal  creation.  The  number  of  the  elements  is 
celebrated  as  being  twenty-four  plus  one.  And  the 
talented  man  who  understands  the  production  and 
dissolution  of  (all)  elements,  he,  of  all  beings,  never 
comes  by  delusion.  He  who  accurately  understands 
the  elements,  the  whole  of  the  qualities 6,  and  also 
all  the  deities 7,  casting  aside  sin,  and  getting  rid  of 
(all)  bonds,  attains  to  all  the  spotless  worlds. 


Chapter    XXI. 

Brahman  said : 
That  unperceived  (principle),  all-pervading,  ever- 
lasting, and  immutable,  which  is  in  a  state  of  equi- 
librium 8,  should  be  understood  (to  become)  the  city 
of  nine  portals,  consisting  of  three  qualities,  and  five 

1  Namely,  how  they  are  all  manifestations  of  the  Brahman,  and 
are  all  dissolved  in  it.     Cf.  inter  alia  Gita,  pp.  74,  92. 

2  See  the  Ka/^opanishad,  p.  149.     See  also  p.  332  infra. 

3  See  p.  313,  note  3  supra. 

4  I.  e.  the  mind.    Cf.  Gita,  p.  102.       5  Viz.  smell,  sound,  &c. 

6  Tranquillity,  self-restraint,  &c,  Ar^-una  MLrra.  Are  they  not 
rather  the  three  qualities  ?  As  to  '  twenty-four  plus  one'  above, 
see  p.  368. 

7  Does  this  mean  the  senses,  as  at  Gitd,  p.  123?  An  accurate 
understanding  of  the  things  noted  requires  a  knowledge  of  their 
relation  to  the  supreme,  which  is  the  means  of  final  emancipation. 
And  see  p.  337  infra. 

8  See  Gita,  p.  107,  and  Sankhya-sara,  p.  11,  and  note  2,  p.  331 
infra. 


318  anugIta. 


constituent  principles1,  encircled  by  the  eleven2,  con- 
sisting of  mind3  as  the  distinguishing  power,  and  of 
the  understanding  as  ruler,  this  is  (an  aggregate 
made  up  of)  eleven4.  The  three  currents5  which 
are  within  this  (city)  support  (it)6  again  and  again, 
and  those  three  channels  run  on,  being  constituted 
by  the  three  qualities.  Darkness,  passion,  and 
goodness,  these  are  called  the  three  qualities, 
which  are  all  coupled  with  one  another,  and  like- 
wise serve  one  another,  which  depend  on  one 
another,  and  attend  on  one  another,  and  are  joined 
to  one  another7.     And  the  five  constituent  princi- 

1  The  five  gross  elements  of  which  the  body  is  composed  (cf. 
Mahabharata,  *Santi  Parvan,  Moksha  Dharma,  chap.  183,  st.  1  seq.) 
are  developments  of  the  unperceived  principle,  the  Prakrz'ti.  Cf. 
GM,  p.  112,  where  the  words ' which  remain  (absorbed)  in  nature* 
have  been  inadvertently  omitted  after  '  with  the  mind  as  the  sixth.' 
As  to  the  nine  portals  cf.  GM,  p.  65. 

2  The  five  active  organs,  the  five  perceptive  senses,  and  the  mind. 

3  This  Arguna  MLsra  takes  to  mean  '  egoism/  Nilakaw/^a  takes 
the  usual  meaning,  and  adds,  objects  are  produced  from  mental 
operations ;  '  distinguishing,'  that  is,  manifesting  as  distinct  entities. 

4  The  eleven  are,  according  to  Argnna  Miyra,  the  three  qualities, 
the  five  gross  elements,  the  group  of  organs  and  senses  as  one, 
egoism,  and  understanding. 

5  Viz.  the  n&/is,  Id&,  Pihgala*,  and  Sushum^d,  Argima  Mi^ra, 
who  adds  that  they  are  respectively  of  the  quality  of  darkness, 
passion,  and  goodness. 

6  The  three  nadis,  says  Arg-una  Misra,  support  the  life-winds. 
Nilaka/zMa  takes  the  three  currents  to  be  the  threefold  inclination 
of  the  mind,  viz.  towards  a  pure  piety,  towards  injuring  other  living 
creatures,  and  towards  that  mixed  piety  which  requires  the  destruc- 
tion of  life  for  its  performance.  Nilaka«/£a  also  has  a  different 
reading  from  Argxma  Mura,  which  means  'are  replenished '  instead 
of  '  support/  And  the  three  channels  are,  according  to  NilakawMa, 
the  Sawskaras,  or  effects  of  previous  actions  of  piety  or  impiety. 

7  Coupled = always  existing  in  association  with  one  another; 
serving = being  necessary  to  the  operations  of  one  another;  depend- 
ing =  supporting  one  another  like  three  staves,  says  Nilaka^/^a ; 


CHAPTER   XXI,   II.  319 


pies  (are  made  up  of)  the  three  qualities.  Good- 
ness is  the  match  of  darkness,  and  passion  is  the 
match  of  goodness ;  and  goodness  is  also  the  match 
of  passion,  and  darkness  the  match  of  goodness. 
Where  darkness  is  restrained,  passion  there  pre- 
vails. Where  passion  is  restrained,  goodness  there 
prevails1.  Darkness  should  be  understood  to  con- 
sist in  obscurity.  It  has  three  qualities2,  and  is 
called  delusion.  Its  characteristic  is  also  impiety, 
and  it  is  constant  in  sinful  actions.  This  is  the 
nature  of  darkness ;  it  also  appears  combined  (with 
others).  Passion  is  said  to  consist  in  activity,  and 
is  the  cause  of  successive3  (acts).  When  it  prevails, 
its  characteristic,  among  all  beings,  appears  to  be 
production4.  Light,  lightness5,  faith,  such  is  stated 
to  be  the  nature  of  goodness  (prevailing)  among 
all  beings,  as  accepted  by  good  men.  The  true 
nature  of  their  characteristics,  in  aggregation  and 
separation,  will  now  be  stated  together  with  the 
reasons ;  learn  those  accurately.   Delusion,  ignorance, 

upholding,  says  Ar^una  Mi^ra,  as  the  total  absence  of  one  would  lead 
to  the  absence  of  the  others  also;  attending = becoming  subordinate 
to  whichever  of  them  is  dominant  for  the  time  being;  joined=so 
as  to  become  one  organic  whole.  Cf.  as  to  all  this,  Yoga-sutra  II, 
18,  and  commentary,  p.  10 1;  Sankhya-karika,  Karika  12,  with 
Va^aspati  Mwra's  comments  on  it. 

1  Cf.  Git&,  p.  108,  and  the  quotation  in  the  Sahkhyatattvakau- 
mudi,  p.  64. 

2  I.e.  characteristics,  viz.  obscurity  (which  seems  to  stand  for 
ignorance),  delusion  (which  is  false  knowledge),  and  impiety  (doing 
that  which  is  known  to  be  sinful  and  wrong). 

3  The  original  means,  according  to  Nilaka«/^a,  wrong,  unlawful 
conduct.   As  to  all  this  cf.  *Santi  Parvan  (Moksha),  chap.  194,  st.  29. 

4  I.e.  apparently  perpetually  doing  something.   Cf.  Gita*,  p.  108. 

5  Cf.  as  to  this,  and  generally  also,  Sahkhya-Mrika  13,  and  com- 
mentary ofVa^aspati  Mirra  (p.  64).  The  blazing  upwards  of  fire 
is  said  to  illustrate  the  lightness  of  the  quality  of  goodness  which 
belongs  to  fire. 


320  anugSltA. 


want  of  liberality,  indecision  about  actions1,  sleep, 
haughtiness2,  fear,  avarice,  grief,  finding  fault  with 
good  acts,  want  of  memory3,  immaturity  (of  intel- 
lect), nihilism4,  violation  of  (the  rules  of)  conduct, 
want  of  discrimination3,  blindness,  behaviour  of  the 
lowest5  quality,  pride  of  performance  without  (actual) 
performance,  pride  of  knowledge  without  (actual) 
knowledge,  unfriendliness,  evil  disposition,  want  of 
faith,  deluded  convictions,  want  of  straightforward- 
ness, want  of  knowledge6,  sinful  action,  want  of 
knowledge  (of  the  subtle  principle),  stolidity7,  lassi- 
tude, want  of  self-restraint,  going  into  inferior  ways  ; 
all  these  qualities,  O  Brdhma^as !  are  celebrated  as 
being  dark.  And  whatever  other  states  of  mind, 
connected  with  delusion,  are  found  in  various  places 
in  this  world,  all  these  are  dark  qualities.  Constant 
talk  in  disparagement  of  gods  Brihma^as  and 
Vedas,  want  of  liberality,  vanity,  delusion8,  anger, 
want  of  forgiveness   likewise,  and   also   animosity 

1  According  to  Gitd,  p.  108,  doing  nothing — stolid  laziness — is 
a  mark  of  darkness.  Cf.  generally  on  this  passage  Gita,  pp.  107, 
118,  124  seq. ;  Maitrf,  p.  49. 

2  The  same  word  as  at  GitS,  pp.  116, 125  (headstrong  in  the 
latter  passage  should  have  been  haughty).  Cf.  as  to  the  word, 
^Mndogya,  p.  383.  8  Cf.  Gita\  p.  51. 

4  The  opposite  of  the  belief  mentioned  at  Gita,  p.  126. 

5  The  same  word  as  at  Gita,  p.  109.  But  the  commentators 
render  it  here  by  hiwsra,  i.  e.  destructive. 

6  I  am  not  sure  about  the  original  word  here,  and  the  word  next 
but  one  after  this.  The  latter  Ar^una  MLrra  renders  by  sukshma- 
tattvavedanam,  which  I  have  translated  above  in  the  text.  The 
former  seems  to  mean  general  unintelligence. 

7  Heaviness  and  dulness,  induced  by  indolence,  &c,  Nilaka^a. 
Lassitude  is  drooping  from  despondency.  Going  into  inferior  ways, 
Ar^una  Misra  says,  means  falling  into  the  inferior  castes ;  Nilakaw/^a 
says  it  means  love  for  base  actions. 

8  Not  being  cognisant  of  one's  own  shortcomings,  Ar^una  Mwra. 


CHAPTER   XXI,  1 8.  321 

towards  people,  this  is  considered  to  be  dark  con- 
duct. Whatever  vain1  actions  (there  are),  and  what- 
ever vain  gifts,  and  vain  eating,  that  is  considered 
to  be  dark  conduct.  Reviling,  and  want  of  forgive- 
ness, animosity,  vanity,  want  of  faith  also,  this  is 
considered  to  be  dark  conduct.  And  whatever  such 
people  there  are  in  this  world,  doers  of  sinful  acts, 
who  break  through  (all)  regulations,  they  are  all 
held  to  be  dark.  I  will  state  the  wombs  appointed 
for  these  (men)  of  sinful  actions.  They  go  to  the 
hell,  (namely)  the  brute  (species),  to  be  born  in  the 
lower  hell2;  (or  become)  the  immovable  entities3, 
animals,  beasts  of  burden,  demons,  and  serpents, 
and  worms,  insects,  birds,  and  also  creatures  born 
from  eggs,  and  all  quadrupeds,  and  idiots,  deaf 
and  dumb  men,  and  whatever  others  are  attacked 
by  diseases  generated  by  sin4.  These  dark,  evil- 
conducted  men,  who  are  sunk  in  darkness,  who 
bear  the  marks  of  their  own  actions,  the  current 
of  whose  (thoughts)  is  downwards5,  sink  into  dark- 
ness. I  will  now  proceed  to  state  their  improve- 
ment and  ascent ;  how,  becoming  men  of  meritorious 
actions,  they  attain  to  the  worlds  of  those  who  per- 
form good  acts6.  Resorting  to  a  contrary7  (course 
of  life),  and  growing  old  in  (good)  actions8,  they  exert 

1  Cf.  GM,  p.  83.  2  Cf.  GM,  p.  116. 

8  Such  as  trees  and  so  forth,  which  are  also  forms  of  life. 

4  This  is  alluded  to  in  some  Smrz'tis  too.  And  cf.  -Oandogya, 
p.  358,  and  the  quotation  in  the  commentary  on  Sarikhya-sutra 
V,  122. 

5  Such,  says  Nilaka«/^a,  as  to  fit  them  for  the  nether  world.  See 
Tattvakaumudi,  p.  1 13.    As  to  marks,  cf.  p.  239  supra. 

6  Cf.GM,p.  130. 

7  I.  e.  contrary  to  that  already  described  as  dark. 

8  Nilaka7z//$a  renders  this  to  mean  '  destroyed  for  Agnihotra  and 
such  ceremonies/  like  the  goat  referred  to  above  at  p.  290. 

[8]  Y 


32  2  ANUGiTA. 


themselves,  and  through  the  ceremonies  (performed 
for  them)  by  benevolent  Brahma^as  devoted  to  their 
own  duties,  they  go  upwards  to  the  same  world  (as 
the  Br&hma^as) — the  heaven  of  the  gods.  Such  is 
the  Vedic  text.  Resorting  to  a  contrary1  (course 
of  life),  and  growing  old  in  their  own  duties,  they 
become  men  in  this  world  whose  nature  is  to  return2. 
Coming  to  a  sinful  womb,  as  Aandalas3,  or  deaf,  or 
lisping  men,  they  attain  to  higher  and  higher  castes  in 
order ;  going  beyond  the  .Sudra  womb,  and  (beyond) 
whatever  other  dark  qualities  there  are  which  abide  in 
the  quality  of  darkness  4  in  the  current  (of  this  world). 
Attachment  to  objects  of  desire  is  laid  down  to  be 
the  great  delusion.  There,  sages  and  saints  and 
gods  become  deluded,  wishing  for  pleasure.  Dark- 
ness5, delusion,  the  great  delusion,  the  great  obscu- 
rity called  anger,  and  death  the  blinding  obscurity  ; 
anger  is  called  the  great  obscurity.  I  have  now 
duly  described  to  you,  O  Brahma^as !  this  quality 
of  darkness,  in  full  and  accurately  with  reference  to 

1  See  note  7  on  last  page.  The  sequence  of  ideas  seems  not  to 
be  properly  brought  out  here.  In  the  course  of  transmigration  after 
their  course  of  conduct  is  altered  they  become  men,  and  then  pro- 
ceed to  heaven.    This  seems  the  real  sense  here. 

2  To  return  to  life  and  death,  and  so  on,  until  they  fit  themselves 
for  final  emancipation.     Cf.  Apastamba  II,  5,  11,  10-11. 

3  Cf.  .Oandogya,  p.  359. 

4  This  is  not  very  clear,  and  the  commentators  give  but  little 
help.  The  meaning  probably  is,  that  they  gradually,  in  course  of 
improvement,  cross  beyond  the  -Sudra  caste,  and  all  those  qualities 
or  tempers  of  mind,  and  so  forth,  which  have  been  stated  to  apper- 
tain to  the  quality  of  darkness. 

5  Cf.S^hkhya-kariM,pp.  47,  48,  and Vatepati's  comment.  There 
these  are  identified  with  the  '  afflictions '  of  the  Yoga-^astra — igno- 
rance, self-consciousness,  affection,  aversion,  persistent  attachment, 
and  they  are  five  divisions  of  false  knowledge,  or  the  quality  of  dark- 
ness, as  it  is  here  called.    See,  too,  -SVetawatara  (comm.),  p.  284. 


CHAPTER    XXII,  5.  323 


its  nature,  and  also  its  qualities,  and  also  its  source. 
Who,  indeed,  understands  this  properly;  who,  in- 
deed, perceives  this  properly  ?  The  definition  of 
the  essence  of  darkness  is,  that  one  sees  the  real- 
in  what  is  unreal.  The  qualities  of  darkness  have 
been  described  to  you  in  many  ways.  And  dark- 
ness in  its  higher  and  lower1  (forms)  has  been  accu- 
rately stated.  The  man  who  always  understands 
these  qualities  gets  rid  of  all  dark  qualities. 


Chapter    XXII. 

Brahman  said : 

0  best  (of  men) !  I  will  explain  to  you  accurately 
the  quality  of  passion.  Learn,  O  noble  ones!  the 
action  of  the  quality  of  passion.  Injuring  (others), 
beauty2,  toil,  pleasure  and  pain,  cold  and  heat, 
power2,  war,  peace,  argument,  repining3,  endurance, 
strength,  valour,  frenzy,  wrath,  exercise  and  quarrel 
too,  vindictiveness,  desire,  backbiting,  battle,  the 
thought  (that  this  or  that  is)  mine,  preservation4, 
slaughter,  bonds,  affliction,  buying  and  selling, 
touching5  other  peoples  weak  points,  by  cutting, 
breaking,  piercing ;  fierceness  and  cruelty,  vilifying, 
pointing  out  others  weaknesses,  thinking  of  (this) 
world,  harbouring  evil  thoughts,  animosity,  abuse, 

1  Generally  and  specifically,  says  Ar^una  Mwra. 

2  Ar^una  Mijra  says  these  mean  pride  of  beauty  and  pride  of 
power  respectively.   Cf.  as  to  this  list  generally,  Maitri,  pp.  ^Oy^1- 

3  Cf.  Sanatsu^ata,  p.  168. 

4  I  presume  this  means  solicitude  for  preserving  what  one  has 
got.     Cf.  GM,  p.  48. 

5  Literally,  piercing.  '  Cutting,  breaking,  piercing/  further  on, 
seem  to  indicate  the  greater  or  less  offensiveness  of  the  operation 
of  *  touching  others'  weak  points.' 

Y    2 


324  anugIta. 


uttering  falsehoods,  bad1  gifts,  doubt,  boasting,  cen- 
sure, praise,  laudation 2,  prowess,  defiance,  attendance 
(on  another),  obedience3,  service,  harbouring  desire, 
management4,  policy,  heedlessness,  contumely,  belong- 
ings5, and  the  various  decorations  which  prevail  in 
this  world,  for  men,  for  women,  for  living  creatures, 
for  articles,  and  for  houses,  vexation,  and  also  want 
of  faith,  vows  and  regulations6,  and  actions  with  ex- 
pectations, and  the  various  acts  of  public  charity7, 
the  ceremony  of  Svclha,  the  ceremony  of  Svadhd, 
the  ceremony  of  Vashat8,  salutation,  both  officiat- 
ing at  sacrifices  and  imparting  instruction,  and  also 
sacrificing  and  study,  gifts  and  acceptance  of  gifts,  ex- 
piations, auspicious  rites,  the  wish  i  this  may  be  mine 
and  that  may  be  mine/ affection  generated  by  the  qua- 
lities9, treachery  and  likewise  deception,  disrespect 
and  respect,  theft,  slaughter,  disgust,  vexing  (oneself), 
wakefulness,  ostentation,  haughtiness,  and  attach- 
ment also,  devotion,  pleasure  and  delight,  gambling, 
common  scandal,  association  with  women,  devotion 

1  I.  e.  to  undeserving  persons,  Aiguna  MLsra.  Probably  it  in- 
cludes the  other  defects  also  pointed  out  at  Gitd,  p.  120.  As  to 
doubt,  see  GM,  p.  63. 

2  The  one  is  attributing  merits  which  do  not  exist,  the  other  is 
merely  parading  merits  which  do  exist. 

8  Argrma  Mirra  takes  this  literally  to  mean  '  wish  to  hear/ 

4  Cleverness  in  worldly  affairs,  Nilakaw/^a. 

5  Cf.  Gita,  passim,  and  see  also  Yoga-sutras  II,  30,  and  com- 
mentary (pp.  127-129,  Calc.  ed.) 

6  Fasts  and  other  observances  for  special  benefits. 

7  E.  g.  digging  tanks  and  wells,  &c. 

8  Vashat  and  Svah&  indicate  offerings  to  gods,  Svadha  to  the 
manes.  See  Br/hadara«yaka,  p.  982,  and  MaWukya  (Gaudapada 
Karika),  p.  443,  and  commentaries  there. 

9  I  presume  this  means  attachment  to  the  operations  of  the 
qualities.  Cf.  Gita,  p.  48.  As  to  the  wish  just  before,  see  GM, 
pp.115,  II6- 


CHAPTER    XXIII,   3.  325 

to  dancing,  and  instrumental  or  vocal  music,  all  these 
qualities,  O  Brahma/zas !  are  described  as  passionate. 
The  men  who  meditate  on  past,  present,  and  future 
entities  in  this  world1,  who  are  always  devoted  to 
the  triad — piety,  wealth,  and  lust  also2 — who  acting 
under  (the  impulse  of)  desires  exult  on  the  success 
of  all  their  desires,  these  men,  who  are  enveloped  by 
passion,  have  (their)  currents  downwards 3.  Born  again 
and  again  in  this  world,  they  rejoice4,  and  wish  for 
the  fruit  appertaining  to  the  life  after  death 5  and  that 
appertaining  to  this  world  also.  They  give  and  re- 
ceive, and  make  Tarpa/za6,  and  also  sacrifice.  The 
qualities  of  passion  have  been  described  to  you  in 
many  ways,  and  the  action  of  the  quality  has 
also  been  stated  accurately.  The  man  who  always 
understands  these  qualities,  gets  rid  of  all  passionate 
qualities. 

Chapter  XXIII. 

Brahman  said : 
Now  I  shall  proceed  to  describe  the  third — the 
best — quality,  beneficial  to  all  creatures,  and  unblam- 
able, the  duty  of  the  good.  Joy7,  pleasure,  nobility, 
enlightenment  and  happiness  also,  absence  of  stingi- 
ness, absence  of  fear,  contentment,  faith,  forgiveness, 
courage,  harmlessness,  equability,  truth,  straight- 
forwardness, absence  of  wrath,  absence  of  calumnia- 

1  I.  e.  who  are  always  thinking  of  what  they  have  done  and  what 
they  have  to  do,  and  so  forth.     Cf.  Gita,  pp.  1 15, 1 16. 

2  And  not  that  which  is  higher  than  these,  viz.  final  emancipation. 

3  See  p.  321  and  note  5  there.  4  Cf.  inter  alia,  Gitsi,  p.  48. 
5  Viz.  heaven.  Cf.  Gita,  p.  48.  6  I.e.  offerings  to  the  manes. 
7  Cf.  p.  300  supra,  and  *Santi  Parvan  (Moksha),  chap.  194,  st.  34; 

chap.  219,  st.  36.  For  nobility,  Ar^una  Mura  has  manifestation  of  joy. 


326  ANUGITA. 


tion,  purity,  dexterity,  valour.  He  who  possesses  the 
piety  of  concentration  of  mind,  (holding)  knowledge 
to  be  vain  x,  (good)  conduct  vain,  service  vain,  and 
labour  vain,  he  attains  the  highest  in  the  next 
world.  Devoid  of  (the  notion  that  this  or  that  is) 
mine,  devoid  of  egoism,  devoid  of  expectations, 
equable  everywhere,  not  full  of  desires,  (to  be)  such 
is  the  eternal  duty  of  the  good.  Confidence,  modesty2, 
forgiveness,  liberality,  purity,  freedom  from  laziness, 
absence  of  cruelty,  freedom  from  delusion,  com- 
passion to  (all)  creatures,  absence  of  backbiting,  joy, 
contentment,  joviality,  humility,  good  behaviour, 
purity  in  all  action  for  (acquiring)  tranquillity3, 
righteous  feelings,  emancipation4,  indifference5,  life 
as  a  Brahma/£arin,  abandonment  on  all  hands,  freedom 
from  (the  notion  that  this  or  that  is)  mine,  freedom 
from  expectations 6,  unbroken  piety 7,  (holding  that) 
gifts  (are)  vain,  sacrifices  vain,  learning  vain,  vows 
vain,  receipt  of  gifts  vain,  piety  vain,  penance  vain. 
Those  talented  Br&hma^as  in  this  world,  whose 
conduct  is  of  this  description,  who  adhere  to  the 
quality  of  goodness,  abiding  in  the  seat  of  the  Brah- 
man 8,  perceive  (everything)  aright.    Getting  rid  of  all 

1  Such  is  Nilakarc/^a's  reading,  and  he  takes  knowledge  to  mean 
mere  knowledge  derived  from  books,  &c.  Arg-una  Mi^ra  has  a  dif- 
ferent reading  for  vain,  which  he  interprets  to  mean  '  wish  for  fruit/ 

2  See  Sanatsug-atiya,  p.  162. 

3  I.  e.  pure  and  straightforward  conduct  in  the  performance  of 
whatever  is  done  for  attaining  final  emancipation. 

4  Of  other  people  from  sorrow,  Argima  MLrra. 

5  The  state  of  being  unconcerned,  udasina,  Nilaka^a. 

6  Cf.  Gita,  p.  60,  inter  alia. 

7  Ar^una  Mi^ra  understands  the  original  here  to  mean  fnot 
being  under  the  control  of  another/ 

8  I.  e.  the  source  of  the  Vedas,  according  to  Nilaka^a.  The 
supreme  is  called  Brahmayoni,  the  original  word  here,  at  *Svetii- 


CHAPTER   XXIII,   14.  327 

sins,  and  free  from  grief,  those  talented  men  reach 
heaven,  and  create  (various)  bodies 1.  The  power  of 
governing,  self-restraint,  minuteness2,  these  those  high- 
souled  ones  make  (for  themselves)  by  (the  operations 
of  their  own)  minds  like  the  gods  dwelling  in  heaven. 
They  are  said  to  have  their  currents  upwards 3,  and 
to  be  gods,  and  of  the  quality  of  goodness  4 ;  and 
having  gone  to  heaven  they  verily  change  in  various 
ways,  by  means  of  nature 5.  They  obtain  and  divide6 
whatever  they  desire.  Thus,  O  chiefs  of  the  twice- 
born  !  have  I  described  to  you  the  conduct  of  the 
quality  of  goodness.  Understanding  this  according  to 
rule,  one  obtains  whatever  one  desires.   The  qualities 

jvatara,  p.  354,  where  Brahman  is  rendered  to  mean  Prakrz'ti  by 
ASahkara.  See  Sanatsu^atiya,  p.  1 86,  note  6,  and  Taittiriya-ara^yaka, 
p.  894.    As  to  the  probable  sense  here,  see  p.  339,  note  2  infra. 

1  I.e.  for  themselves.  Cf.  p.  345  infra;  Yoga-sutras,  p.  227; 
and  Br/hadarawyaka,  p.  849. 

2  These  include,  according  to  Nilaka//$a,  the  other  qualities  of 
the  same  class  unnamed  here,  for  which  see  Yoga-sutra  III,  44 
(p.  207).  The  power  of  governing,  i.  e.  producing,  destroying,  or 
combining  worldly  objects  as  one  pleases;  self-restraint,  i.e.  in 
the  presence  of  tempting  objects ;  minuteness = power  of  becoming 
as  minute  as  one  pleases.  The  other  qualities  are  lightness,  large- 
ness, and  heaviness ;  power  of  attracting  everything  so  as  to  be 
near  oneself  (e.  g.  touching  the  moon  with  the  finger),  power  of 
obtaining  one's  wish. 

3  Cf.  p.  32 t  supra  and  note  5.  Arguna  Mi^ra,  and  Nilaka^a 
also,  here  render  it  by  '  those  who  go  upwards.'  As  to  which,  see 
Gita,  p.  109. 

4  Cf.  for  this  sense,  which  is  given  by  Ar^-una  Mijra,  Sahkhya- 
sara,  p.  19. 

6  Nilaka^a  says  this  means  that  they  change  their  minds  for 
purposes  of  enjoyment  by  means  of  the  impression  of  previous 
enjoyments.  The  changes,  however,  seem  to  be  those  above  referred 
to — minuteness,  &c,  and  the  acquisition  of  other  bodies.  As  to  na- 
ture, cf.Gita,  pp.  58  and  1 1 2,  with  the  correction  made  at  p.  3 1 8  supra. 

6  This  is  not  quite  clear.  Does  it  mean  distribute  among  them- 
selves or  others  ? 


328  ANUGITA. 


of  goodness  have  been  specifically  described,  and  the 
operation  of  the  qualities  has  been  accurately  stated. 
The  man  who  always  understands  these  qualities, 
enjoys  the  qualities1,  but  is  not  attached  to  the 
qualities. 

Chapter  XXIV. 

Brahman  said : 
The  qualities  cannot  be  explained  altogether  dis- 
tinctly (from  one  another).  Passion,  goodness,  and 
darkness  likewise  are  seen  mixed  up  (with  one 
another).  They  are  attached  to  one  another,  they 
feed  on  one  another.  They  all  depend  on  one 
another,  and  likewise  follow  one  another 2.  There 
is  no  doubt  of  this,  that  as  long3  as  there  is  goodness 
so  long  darkness  exists.  And  as  long  as  goodness 
and  darkness,  so  long  is  passion  said  (to  exist)  here. 
They  perform  their  journey  together,  in  union,  and 
moving  about  collectively.  For  they  act  with  cause 
or  without  cause  4,  moving  in  a  body.  Of  all  these 
acting  with  one  another,  but  differing  in  development, 
the  increase  and  diminution  will  now  be  stated. 
Where  darkness  is  increased,  abiding 5  in  the  lower 
entities,  there  passion  should  be  understood  to  be 
little,   and   goodness   likewise   to   be   less.     Where 

1  Cf.  GM  inter  alia,  p.  104.  2  Cf.  p.  318  supra. 

3  So  Aignna  Mura.  Nilaka^a  says  on  this, '  However  much 
goodness  may  be  increased,  it  is  still  held  in  check  by  darkness, 
and  thus  there  is  the  continual  relation  of  that  which  checks  and 
that  which  is  checked  between  the  three  qualities ;  hence  they  are 
alike.  So  also  passion  being  increased,  holds  goodness  and  darkness 
in  check.  The  sense  seems  to  be  that  the  qualities  dominate  all  in 
this  world  and  exist  together  though  varying  in  strength '  (Gitd,  p.  7  3). 

4  I.  e.  spontaneously,  Ar^iina  MLrra.  Cf.  *Santi  Parvan  (Moksha), 
chap.  194,  st.  35. 

5  It  is  in  the  lower  species  that  darkness  is  predominant. 


CHAPTER   XXIV,   14.  329 

passion  is  developed,  abiding  in  those  of  the  middle 
current  *,  there  darkness  should  be  understood  to  be 
little,  and  goodness  likewise  to  be  less.  And  where 
goodness  is  developed,  abiding  in  those  of  the  upward 
current 2,  there  darkness  should  be  understood  to  be 
little,  and  passion  likewise  to  be  less 3.  Goodness 
is  the  cause  of  the  modifications  in  the  senses,  and 
the  enlightener 4.  For  there  is  no  other  higher  duty 
laid  down  than  goodness.  Those  who  adhere  to 
(the  ways  of)  goodness  go  up ;  the  passionate  remain 
in  the  middle ;  the  men  of  the  quality  of  darkness, 
being  connected  with  the  lowest  quality,  go  down 5. 
The  three  qualities  abide  in  the  three  castes  thus : 
darkness  in  the  .Stidra,  passion  in  the  Kshatriya,  and 
the  highest,  goodness,  in  the  BrAhma^a6.  Even 
from  afar7,  darkness,  goodness,  and  passion  also, 
are  seen  to  have  been  together  and  moving  about 
collectively.  We  have  never  heard  of  them  (as 
existing)  separately.  Seeing  the  sun  rising,  evil- 
doers are  alarmed,  and  travellers,  suffering  trouble 
from  the  heat,  feel  the  warmth.  The  sun  is  good- 
ness developed,  evil-doers  likewise  are  darkness,  and 
the  heat  to  the  travellers  is  said  to  be  a  property  of 

1  I.  e.  the  human  species,  Argnna  MLsra.    Cf.  Gita,  p.  109. 

2  See  Gitd,  p.  109,  also  p.  327  supra.  In  his  Sahkhyatattva- 
kaumudt,  Va^aspati  MLnra  applies  the  epithet  to  Yogins  (see  p.  13 
of  Taranath's  edition,  and  the  editor's  note  there). 

3  Cf.  Gita,  p.  108. 

4  Cf.  Gita,  p.  108.  The  modifications  of  the  senses  constituting 
perception  by  them  is  an  operation  of  the  quality  of  goodness. 
This  seems  to  be  the  meaning  of  the  text ;  as  to  this,  cf.  Tattva- 
kaumudi,  p.  14  (Taranath's  edition). 

5  See  Gita,  p.  109 ;  the  words  are  nearly  identical. 

6  Cf.  Santi  Parvan  (Moksha),  chap.  188,  st.  15.  The  Vairya  is 
omitted  here. 

7  I.  e.  Ar^una  Mijra  says,  even  after  much  observation. 


330  ANUGITA. 

passion 1.  The  light  in  the  sun  is  goodness ;  the  heat 
is  the  quality  of  passion ;  and  its  eclipse  on  the 
Parvan2  days  must  be  understood  to  be  of  the  quality 
of  darkness.  So  in  all  shining  bodies,  there  exist 
three  qualities.  And  they  act  by  turns  in  the  several 
places  in  several  ways.  Among  immovable  entities, 
darkness  is  in  the  form  of  their  belonging  to  the 
lower  species;  the  qualities  of  passion  are  variable; 
and  the  oleaginous  property  is  of  the  quality  of 
goodness3.  The  day  should  be  understood  to  be 
threefold,  the  night  is  stated  to  be  threefold,  and 
likewise  months,  half-months,  years,  seasons,  and 
the  conjunctions  4.  Threefold  are  the  gifts  given 5, 
threefold  the  sacrifices  performed,  threefold  are  the 

1  This  illustrates  the  existence  of  the  qualities  as  one  body. 
Even  the  enlightening  sun,  which  embodies  the  quality  of  goodness, 
produces  effects  which  belong  to  the  other  qualities.  The  fear  and 
sorrow  which  evil-doers,  that  is  thieves,  feel,  is  an  effect  of  the  rising 
of  the  sun,  which  appertains  to  the  quality  of  darkness,  and  the  heat 
as  being  the  cause  of  vexation  and  consequent  delusion  to  travellers, 
appertains  to  the  quality  of  passion. 

2  I.  e.  the  days  of  the  moon's  conjunction  or  opposition. 

3  I  understand  this  to  mean  that  in  the  'immovable  entities'  the 
three  qualities  co-exist ;  the  birth  in  the  lower  species  is  an  effect 
of  darkness ;  the  variable  qualities,  viz.  the  heat,  &c,  as  Ar^oina 
MLsra  says,  are  the  properties  of  passion;  and  the  oleaginous 
properties  among  them  appertain  to  goodness,  as,  says  Argnna 
MLsra,  they  are  sources  of  pleasure  (cf.  Gita,  p.  n8).  Nilaka^Ma 
says,  'Immovable  entities  being  very  unintelligent,  darkness  is 
very  much  developed  among  them/  but  this  last,  as  an  interpreta- 
tion of  tiryagbhavagata,  appears  to  me  to  be  alike  unwarranted 
and  inappropriate  here. 

4  Does  this  mean  the  period  about  the  close  of  one  and  beginning 
of  another  yuga  or  age  ?  That  is  the  only  sense  ejusdem  generis 
with  the  words  preceding  it  that  I  can  think  of;  yet  the  jump  from 
years  to  yuga-sandhis  is  a  long  one. 

5  Cf.  Gita,  p.120.  With  reference  to  some,  at  least,  of  the  things 
enumerated  here,  the  division  would  be  rather  fanciful. 


CHAPTER    XXIV,   25.  33 1 

worlds,  threefold  the  gods,  threefold  the  (depart- 
ments of)  knowledge,  and  threefold  the  path \  The 
past,  the  present,  and  the  future ;  piety,  wealth,  and 
lust;  the  Pr&/za,  the  Apina,  and  the  Ud&na;  these 
are  the  three  qualities.  And  whatever  there  is  in 
this  world,  all  that  is  (made  of)  these  three  qualities2. 
The  three  qualities — goodness,  passion,  and  darkness 
also — are  always  acting  unperceived.  The  creation 
of  the  qualities  is  eternal.  Darkness,  unperceived, 
holy3,  constant,  unborn,  womb,  eternal,  nature, 
change4,  destruction,  Pradhina,  production  and  ab- 
sorption, not  developed,  not  small,  unshaking,  im- 
movable, immutable,  existent  and  also  non-existent5 — 
all  these,  the  unperceived,  (consisting)  of  the  three 
qualities,  is  said  to  be.  These  names  should  be  learnt 
by  men  who  ponder  on  matters  relating  to  the  self. 
He  who  understands  correctly  all  the  names  of  the 
unperceived,  and  the  qualities,  and  its  pure  opera- 
tions, he,  freed  from  the  body,  understanding  the 
truth  about  (all)  distinctions,  and  being  free  from  all 
misery,  is  released  from  all  qualities. 

1  See  these  three  mentioned  at  iTMndogya,  pp.  340-359.  As 
to  departments  of  knowledge,  cf.  Gita,  p.  84 ;  Arg-una  Misra  reads, 
1  threefold  the  Vedas/ 

2  The  universe  is  all  developed  from  the  Prakrz'ti,  which  is  merely 
the  three  'qualities  in  equilibrium/     Cf.  Sahkhya-sutra  I,  61. 

3  Because  it  gives  final  emancipation  to  one  who  discriminates 
it  from  Purusha,  Ar^una  Mijra.  Cf.  Sahkhya-sutra  II,  1  seq.,  and 
Sahkhya-karika,  p.  56  seq.,  and  commentary.  For  another  list  of 
names  of  Prakr/ti,  see  *SVeta\yvatara  (comm.),  p.  283. 

4  Nature  is  not  a  development  from  anything,  and  hence  is  called 
avikrz'ti  in  Sankhya-karika  3 ;  but  '  change '  here  probably  means 
the  whole  aggregate  of  Vikrz'tis,  '  changes '  or  developments,  which 
make  up  Prakrz'ti;  or  by  a  different  derivation  it  may,  perhaps,  also 
mean  that  from  which  all  development  or  change  takes  place. 

5  See  Sahkhya-sutra  V,  52-56  ;  and  also  I,  26,  and  commentary 
here.     The  Vedantins  speak  of  Maya — which  answers  to  what  the 


332  anugJta. 


Chapter  XXV. 
Brahman  said : 
From  the  unperceived  was  first  produced  the 
great  self1,  of  great  intelligence,  the  source  of 
all  qualities 2 ;  it  is  said  to  be  the  first  creation. 
That  great  self  is  signified  by  these  synonymous 
terms — the  great  self,  intelligence,  Vishnu 3,  Gishnu, 
6ambhu,  the  valiant,  the  understanding,  means  of 
knowledge,  means  of  perception,  and  likewise  cogni- 
tion, courage,  memory.  Knowing  that  (great  self),  a 
learned  Brahma^a  comes  not  by  delusion.  It  has 
hands  and  feet  on  all  sides  4,  it  has  eyes,  heads,  and 
faces  on  all  sides ;  it  stands  pervading  everything 
in  the  world 5.  The  being  of  great  power  is  stationed 
in  the  heart  of  all.  Minuteness6,  lightness,  (the  power 
of)  obtaining  (everything)  (are  his) ;  he  is  the 
governor,  the  light,  inexhaustible.  Now  people  who 
comprehend  the  understanding,  and  who  are  always 
possessed  of  a  good  heart,  who  practice  meditation, 
who  are  constant  at  concentration  of  mind,  who  are 
true  to  their  promises,  and  whose  senses  are  subdued, 
who  are  possessed  of  knowledge,  who  are  not  ava- 
ricious, who  have  subdued  wrath,  whose  minds  are 
clear,  who  are  talented,  who  are  devoid  of  (the  thought 
that  this  or  that  is)  mine,  who  are  devoid  of  egoism, 

Sahkhyas  call  Prakrz'ti  (see  *Sveta\yvatara,  p.  340,  and  Sahkhya-sutra 
I,  69,  and  commentary  there) — as  '  sattvasattvabhyamanirva^ya/ 

1  I.e.  the  understanding,  on  which  see  Sahkhya-sutra  1,61-64.  It 
is  called  being  (Purusha)  further  on,  as  it  dwells  in  the  body  (Puri). 

2  I.  e.  of  the  effects  of  all  qualities  (namely,  the  universe ;  cf. 
Gita,  p.  48),  Nilaka«/$a. 

3  I.  e.  all-pervading,  Argnna  MLsra.     On  the  wrhole  passage,  see 
Sahkhya-sara,  pp.  15, 16,  and  note  3  on  page  333  infra. 

4  As,  says  Argoina  Mi^ra,  it  is  the  source  of  all  activity. 

5  The  words  are  identical  with  those  at  Gita,  p.  103. 

6  See  p.  327  supra. 


CHAPTER    XXVI,  2.  333 


these  being  emancipated,  attain  greatness1.  And 
the  talented  man  who  understands  that  high  and 
holy  goal,  the  great  self2,  he  among  all  people  comes 
not  by  delusion.  The  self-existent  Vish/m  is  the 
Lord  in  the  primary  creations 3.  And  he  who  thus 
knows  the  lord  lying  in  the  cave  4,  the  transcendent, 
ancient  being,  of  universal  form,  and  golden5,  the 
highest  goal  of  those  possessed  of  understanding, 
that  talented  man,  abides  transcending  the  under- 


standing 6. 


Chapter  XXVI. 
Brahman  said : 
That  Mahat  which  was  first  produced,  is  (after- 
wards) called  egoism;  when  it  is  born  as  (the  feeling 
itself)  7 1,  that  is  said  to   be  the   second  creation. 
That  egoism  is  stated  to  be  the  source  of  all  entities*, 

1  I.  e.  says  Arg-una  Mura,  the  world  of  the  understanding.  Does 
this  mean  the  world  of  Hira/zyagarbha  ?  The  understanding  is  said 
to  be  the  *  subtle  body'  of  Hirawyagarbha  (Veddnta  ParibhashS, 
p.  46).  Probably  the  reference  spiritually  interpreted  is  to  the  state 
in  which  egoism  and  all  its  products  are  non-existent. 

2  Literally, '  the  high  and  holy  passage  to  the  great  self/ 

3  The  Mahat  first  manifests  itself  as  Vishmi  before  it  manifests 
itself  as  Brahman  or  -Siva  (Sahkhya-sara,  p.  16),  hence  he  is  said 
to  be  the  Lord  in  the  primary  creation.  It  may  be  added,  that 
in  the  Sahkhya-sara  where  this  passage  is  quoted  the  original  word 
rendered  '  cognition'  above  (khyati)  does  not  occur,  but  in  lieu  of 
it  occurs  Brahman.  The  sentence  '  And  the  talented  man '  &c.  is 
also  wanting  there. 

4  I.e.  the  understanding.  See  *Sahkara  on  *SVeta\rvatara,  p.  329; 
Ka/$a,  p.  100. 

5  Source  of  enlightenment,  Ar^una  MLfra.  Cf.  Mu^daka,  pp.  303- 
308  (gloss). 

6  I.  e.  attaching  himself  to  the  Purusha,  as  the  never-changing 
reality,  and  rising  above  Prakrz'ti  and  its  manifestations. 

7  I.  e.  when  the  Mahat  develops  into  the  feeling  of  self-conscious- 
ness— I — then  it  assumes  the  name  of  egoism. 

8  See  on  this  Sahkhya-sara,  Hall's  Introd.  p.  31,  note. 


334  ANUGITA. 


that  from  which  the  changes  take  place x ;  it  is  full 
of  light,  the  supporter  of  consciousness ;  it  is  that 
from  which  the  people  are  produced,  the  Pra^ipati. 
It  is  a  deity,  the  producer  of  the  deities,  and  of  the 
mind ;  it  is  the  creator  of  the  three  worlds.  That 
which  feels2  thus — 'I  am  all  this' — is  called  (by)  that 
(name).  That  eternal  world  is  for  those  sages  who 
are  contented  with  knowledge  relating  to  the  self, 
who  have  pondered  on  the  self,  and  who  are  perfected 
by  sacred  study  and  sacrifice.  By 3  consciousness  of 
self  one  enjoys  the  qualities ;  and  thus  that  source  of 
all  entities,  the  producer  of  the  entities,  creates  (them)  ; 
and  as  that  from  which  the  changes  take  place,  it 
causes  all  this  to  move  ;  and  by  its  own  light,  it 
likewise  charms  the  world. 

1  So  Ar^una  Mijra.  Nilaka«//£a  says  it  means  'born  from  the 
change,  or  development,  viz.  Mahat/  The  Sahkhya-sara,  p.  17, 
however,  shows  it  means  '  appertaining  to  the  quality  of  goodness.' 
See  also  Sahkhya-karikd  25,  and  commentary  there,  which  is  of  great 
help  here.  The  sense  is  this :  Egoism  is  of  three  descriptions ;  it 
appertains  to  the  quality  of  goodness,  and  as  such  is  the  creator 
of  the  deities  and  mind,  the  deities  being  those  presiding  over  the 
ten  senses  (cf.  Sankhya-s&ra,  p.  17);  it  is  full  of  light,  or  apper- 
tains to  the  quality  of  passion  (cf.  ibid.),  and  as  such  imparts  to 
the  other  two  qualities  their  virtue  of  activity  (cf.  Sahkhya-Mrika 
commentary,  p.  91,  Taranath's  ed.);  it  is  also  of  the  quality  of 
darkness,  and  as  such  the  producer  of  the  triple  world  (see  ibid.) 
See  Sahkhya-sutra  II,  17,  18,  and  comment,  where  a  view  some- 
what different  in  one  or  two  details  is  stated. 

2  Sankhya-s&ra,  p.  16;  Sahkhya-karika  24,  p.  89  (Taranath's  ed.) 
8  Arg-una  Mura  says  that  the  words  Ahahkara  &c.  are  here  ex- 
plained; qualities  here  means  objects,  as  at  Gita,  p.  55.  The 
meaning  of  the  first  clause  is,  that  the  feeling  that  the  objects  are 
for  oneself,  and  therefore  enjoying  them,  gives  the  name  of  Ahankara 
to  the  principle  in  question;  its  creation  of  all  the  elements  gives  it  the 
name  of  Bhutadi.  It  is  called  Vaikarika,  as  the  cause  of  the  various 
activities  and  developments  going  on.  The  last  clause  seems  to  be 
an  explanation  of  the  epithet  Tai^asa,  also  applied  to  egoism. 


CHAPTER    XXVII,  J.  335 


Chapter    XXVII. 

Brahman  said : 
From  egoism,  verily,  were  the  five  great  elements 
born — earth,  air,  space,  water,  and  light  as  the  fifth. 
In  these  five  great  elements,  in  the  operations  of 
(perceiving)  sound,  touch,  colour,  taste,  and  smell, 
creatures  are  deluded1.  When,  at  the  termination 
of  the  destruction  of  the  great  elements,  the  final 
dissolution  approaches,  O  talented  one !  a  great 
danger  for  all  living  beings  arises2.  Every  entity 
is  dissolved  into  that  from  which  it  is  produced. 
They  are  born  one  from  the  other,  and  are  dis- 
solved in  the  reverse  order3.  Then  when  every 
entity,  movable  or  immovable,  has  been  dissolved, 
the  talented  men  who  possess  a  (good)  memory4 
are  not  dissolved  at  all.  Sound,  touch,  and  like- 
wise colour,  taste,  and  smell  as  the  fifth ;  the 
operations  (connected  with  these)  have  causes5, 
and  are  inconstant,  and  their  name  is  delusion. 
Caused  by  the  production  of  avarice6,  not  different 
from  one  another7,  and  insignificant8,  connected  with 
flesh  and  blood,  and  depending  upon  one  another, 

1  The  contact  of  the  objects  of  sense  with  the  senses  is  the 
source  of  delusion. 

2  Cf.  Gita,  p.  107,  and  note  1  there. 

3  Cf.  Sankhya-sutra  1, 121,  and  p.  387  infra. 

4  I.  e.  knowledge  of  the  truth,  Arguna  Mi^ra. 

5  Hence,  as  they  have  a  beginning,  they  also  must  have  an  end, 
and  hence  they  are  inconstant. 

6  This  and  following  epithets  expand  the  idea  of  inconstancy. 

7  Being  all  in  substance  connected  with  the  Prakrzti,  the  material 
world,  so  to  say. 

8  Containing  no  reality,  Nilakaw/^a. 


336  ANUGfTA. 


excluded  from  the  self1,  these  are  helpless  and 
powerless.  The  Pri^a  and  the  Ap&na,  the  Ud&na, 
the  Sam&na,  and  the  Vyina  also,  these  five  winds 
are  also  joined  to  the  inner  self2,  and  together 
with  speech,  mind,  and  understanding  make  the 
eight  constituents  of  the  universe3.  He  whose  skin, 
nose,  ear,  eye,  tongue,  and  speech  are  restrained, 
and  whose  mind  is  pure,  and  understanding  un- 
swerving4, and  whose  mind  is  never  burnt  by  these 
eight  fires5,  he  attains  to  that  holy  Brahman  than 
which  nothing  greater  exists.  And  the  eleven 
organs,  which  are  stated  as  having  been  produced 
from  egoism — these,  O  twice-born  ones!  I  will 
describe  specifically.  The  ear,  the  skin,  the  two 
eyes,  the  tongue,  the  nose  also  as  the  fifth,  the 
two  feet,  the  organ  of  excretion,  and  the  organ  of 
generation,  the  two  hands,  and  speech  as  the  tenth ; 
such  is  the  group  of  organs,  the  mind  is  the  ele- 
venth. This  group  one  should  subdue  first,  then 
the  Brahman  shines  (before  him).  Five  (of  these) 
are  called  the  organs   of  perception,  and  five  the 


1  Nllaka«/$a  apparently  takes  the  original  here  to  mean  of  gross 
nature,  not  subtle,  such  as  anything  connected  with  the  self  would 
be.  They  are  helpless  and  powerless  without  support  from  other 
principles,  and  mainly  the  self. 

2  He  here  states  what  is  more  closely  connected  with  the  self, 
and,  as  Nilaka«/^a  puts  it,  accompanies  the  self  till  final  emancipa- 
tion. The  inner  self  Nilakaw/^a  takes  to  mean  the  self  associated 
with  egoism  or  self- consciousness. 

3  Nilaka^a  cites  certain  texts  to  show  that  the  perceptive  senses 
work  only  through  the  mind,  and  that  the  objects  of  the  senses  are 
produced  from  the  senses,  and  hence  the  universe,  he  says,  is  con- 
stituted of  the  eight  enumerated  above. 

4  I.  e.  from  the  truth. 

6  I.  e.  vexed  by  the  operations  of  any  of  these. 


CHAPTER    XXVII,  24.  337 

organs  of  action.  The  five  beginning  with  the 
ear  are  truly  said  to  be  connected  with  knowledge. 
And  all  the  rest  are  without  distinction  connected 
with  action.  The  mind  should  be  understood  to  be 
among  both1,  and  the  understanding  is  the  twelfth. 
Thus  have  been  stated  the  eleven  organs  in  order. 
Understanding  these2,  learned  men  think  they  have 
accomplished  (everything).  I  will  now  proceed  to 
state  all  the  various  organs.  Space3  is  the  first 
entity ;  as  connected  with  the  self  it  is  called  the 
ear ;  likewise  as  connected  with  objects  (it  is)  sound ; 
and  the  presiding  deity  there  is  the  quarters.  The 
second  entity  is  air;  it  is  known  as  the  skin  as 
connected  with  the  self;  as  connected  with  objects 
(it  is)  the  object  of  touch ;  and  the  presiding  deity 
there  is  lightning.  The  third  (entity)  is  said  to  be 
light ;  as  connected  with  the  self  it  is  called  the  eye  ; 
next  as  connected  with  objects  (it  is)  colour;  and 
the  presiding  deity  there  is  the  sun.  The  fourth 
(entity)  should  be  understood  to  be  water;  as  con- 
nected with  the  self  it  is  called  the  tongue ;  as  con- 
nected with  objects  it  is  taste ;  and  the  presiding 
deity  there  is  Soma.  The  fifth  entity  is  earth ; 
as  connected  with  the  self  it  is  the  nose;  as  con- 
nected with  objects  likewise  it  is  smell ;  and  the 
presiding  deity  there  is  the  wind.  Thus  are  the 
five  entities  stated  to  be  divided  among  the  three 4. 
I  will  now  proceed  to  state  all  the  various  organs. 

1  Cf.  Sankhya-karika  27  ;  S&nkhya-sara,  p.  17. 

2  Cf.  Ka/#a,  p.  148. 

3  Cf.  Lalita  Vistara  (translated  by  Dr.  R.  Mitra),  p.  11. 

4  The  above  sentences  show  the  entities  in  the  three  different 
aspects  mentioned,  which  correspond  to  each  other;  the  ear 
is  the  sense,  that  which  is  connected  with  the  self;  sound  is  the 
object  of  that  sense,  as  connected  with  the  external  world;  and  the 

[8]  Z 


338  anug!ta. 


As  connected  with  the  self,  the  feet  are  mentioned 
by  Brihma^as,  who  perceive  the  truth ;  as  connected 
with  objects  it  is  motion ;  the  presiding  deity  there 
is  Vishnu.  The  Ap&na  wind,  the  motion  of  which  is 
downward,  as  connected  with  the  self,  is  called  the 
organ  of  excretion ;  as  connected  with  objects  it  is 
excretion1 ;  and  the  presiding  deity  there  is  Mitra. 
As  connected  with  the  self  the  generative  organ  is 
mentioned,  the  producer  of  all  beings ;  as  connected 
with  objects  it  is  the  semen ;  and  the  presiding  deity 
there  is  Pra^&pati.  Men  who  understand  the  Adhya- 
tma  speak  of  the  two  hands  as  connected  with  the 
self;  as  connected  with  objects  it  is  actions;  and 
the  presiding  deity  there  is  Indra.  Then  first,  as 
connected  with  the  self,  is  speech  which  relates 
to  all  the  gods ;  as  connected  with  objects  it  is 
what  is  spoken;  and  the  presiding  deity  there  is 
fire.  As  connected  with  the  self  they  mention  the 
mind,  which  follows  after  the  five  entities2;  as  con- 
nected with  objects  it  is  the  mental  operation ;  the 
presiding  deity  there  is  the  moon.  Likewise  (there 
is)  egoism,  the  cause  of  the  whole  course  of  worldly 
life,  as  connected  with  the  self;  as  connected  with 
objects,  self-consciousness ;  the  presiding  deity  there 
is  Rudra.  As  connected  with  the  self,  they  men- 
tion the   understanding  impelling  the  six  senses3; 

quarters,  Dik,  are  the  deities  presiding  over  the  senses ;  as  to  this 
cf.  Sahkhya-sara,  p.  17,  and  Vedanta  Paribhasha,  p.  45,  which  show 
some  discrepancies.  The  distinctions  of  Adhyatma  &c.  are  to 
be  found  in  the  Upanishads;  cf.  inter  alia,  -Oandogya,  p.  227,  and 
cf.  Gita,  p.  77. 

1  As  to  the  original  word,  cf.  inter  alia,  *SVeta\fvatara,  pp.  197-202. 

2  This  probably  means  the  five  senses  which  can  perceive  only 
when  associated  with  the  mind.     See  p.  268  supra. 

3  The  understanding  is  called  the  charioteer  at  Ka//$a,  p.  1 1 1 . 


CHAPTER   XXVII,  39.  339 

as  connected  with  objects  that  which  is  to  be  un- 
derstood; and  the  presiding  deity  there  is  Brah- 
man. There  are  three  seats  for  all  entities — a  fourth 
is  not  possible — land,  water,  and  space.  And  the 
(mode  of)  birth  is  fourfold.  Those  born  from  eggs, 
those  born  from  germs,  those  born  from  perspira- 
tion, and  those  born  from  wombs — such  is  the  four- 
fold (mode  of)  birth  of  the  group  of  living  beings1. 
Now  there  are  the  inferior  beings  and  likewise  those 
moving  in  the  air.  Those  should  be  understood  to 
be  born  from  eggs,  as  also  all  reptiles.  Insects 
are  said  to  be  born  from  perspiration ;  and  worms 
of  the  like  description.  This  is  said  to  be  the 
second  (mode  of)  birth,  and  inferior.  Those  beings, 
however,  which  are  born  after  the  lapse  of  some 
time,  bursting  through  the  earth,  are  said  to  be 
born  from  germs,  O  best  of  the  twice -born! 
Beings  of  two  feet  or  more  than  two  feet,  and 
those  which  move  crookedly,  are  the  beings  born 
from  wombs.  Understand  about  them  also,  O 
best  of  men !  The  eternal  seat  (where)  the 
Brahman2  (is  to  be  attained)  should  be  under- 
stood to  be  twofold  —  penance  3  and  meritorious 
action.  Such  is  the  doctrine  of  the  learned. 
Action    should    be   understood   to   be    of  various4 

1  Cf.  .A^Mndogya,  pp.  404-406,  and  glosses;  Aitareya,  p.  243; 
Vedanta  ParibhdsM,  p.  47;  Sarikhya-sutra  V,  in;  Manu  I,  43; 
Max  Muller's  note  at  p.  94  of  his  -Oandogya  in  this  series. 

2  So  Nilakaw/^a,  but  he  also  adds  that  this  means  birth  as  a 
Brdhmawa,  which  seems  to  be  quite  wrong.  Ar^una  Miira's 
1  means  of  acquiring  Brahman*  is  right.     See  p.  369  infra. 

8  I.  e.,  I  presume, '  knowledge/  /Sarikara  has  so  interpreted  the 
word  at  Mu^aka,  p.  270,  and  Ka/^a,  p.  127,  and  elsewhere;  and 
see  Sanatsug-atiya,  p.  166  supra. 

4  Another  reading  is  '  of  two  kinds/  But  I  prefer  this,  as  three 
kinds  are  mentioned  further  on. 

Z    2 


34-0  ANUGITA. 


descriptions,  (namely)  sacrifice,  gift  at  a  sacrifice, 
and  sacred  study1,  for  (every  one)  who  is  born2. 
Such  is  the  teaching  of  the  ancients.  He  who 
duly  understands  this,  becomes  possessed  of  concen- 
tration of  mind,  O  chief  of  the  twice-born !  and 
know,  too,  that  he  is  released  from  all  sins.  Space 3 
is  the  first  entity;  as  connected  with  the  (indivi- 
dual) self  it  is  called  the  ear ;  as  connected  with 
objects  likewise  it  is  called  sound ;  and  the  presiding 
deity  there  is  the  quarters.  The  second  entity  is  air  ; 
as  connected  with  the  (individual)  self  it  is  called 
the  skin ;  as  connected  with  objects  it  is  the  object 
of  touch ;  and  the  presiding  deity  there  is  the 
lightning.  The  third  is  called  light;  as  connected 
with  the  (individual)  self  it  is  laid  down  to  be  the 
eye ;  next  as  connected  with  objects  it  is  colour ; 
the  presiding  deity  there  is  the  sun.  The  fourth 
should  be  understood  to  be  water;  as  connected 
with  the  (individual)  self  it  is  stated  to  be  the 
tongue ;  as  connected  with  objects  it  should  be 
understood  to  be  taste ;  the  presiding  deity  there 
is  Soma.  The  fifth  element  is  earth ;  as  connected 
with  the  (individual)  self  it  is  called  the  nose;  as 
connected  with  objects  likewise  it  is  called  smell  ; 
the  presiding   deity  there   is  Vdyu.     Thus  have  I 


1  Cf.  as  to  this  iTMndogya,  p.  136,  which  justifies  our  rendering, 
though  the  commentator  Argnna  Mi^ra  seems  to  understand  the 
passage  differently. 

2  Ar^-una  MLrra  seems  to  understand  this  to  mean  *  twice-born/ 

3  This  is  a  repetition  of  what  occurs  at  p.  337,  and  apparently  is 
spurious.  But  two  of  theMSS.,  both  those  containing  commentaries, 
contain  the  passage  twice.  One  of  the  other  MSS.  omits  the  pas- 
sage where  it  occurs  before,  and  has  it  here.  I  think  that  the 
passage  is  in  its  place  before,  and  probably  interpolated  here. 


CHAPTER   XXVII,    49.  34 1 

accurately  described  to  you  the  creation1  as  connected 
with  the  (individual)  self.  A  knowledge  of  this,  O  ye 
who  understand  piety!  is  here  obtained  by  those 
who  possess  knowledge.  One  should  place  all  these 
together,  (viz.)  the  senses,  the  objects  of  the  senses, 
and  the  five  great  elements,  and  hold  them  by  the 
mind2.  When  everything  is  absorbed  into  the  mind, 
the  pleasures  of  (worldly)  life3  are  not  esteemed. 
The  learned  (men)  whose  understandings  are  pos- 
sessed of  knowledge  esteem  the  pleasure  derived 
from  that4.  Now5  I  shall  proceed  to  describe  that 
discarding  of  all  entities  by  (means)  gentle  and 
hard6,  which  produces  attachment  to  subtle7  (topics), 
and  is  sanctifying.  The  (mode  of)  conduct  in  which 
qualities  are  not  (treated  as)  qualities8,  which  is  free 
from  attachment,  in  which  one  lives  alone 9,  which  is 
uninterrupted10,  and  which  is  full  of  the  Brahman11, 
is  called  happiness  (dwelling)  in   one  aggregate32. 

1  I  am  not  quite  sure  that  this  is  a  correct  rendering.  But  I  can 
think  of  none  better,  and  the  commentators  afford  no  help. 

2  Nilakaw/^a  says, '  Thinking  that  the  great  elements  are  not  dis- 
tinct from  the  senses,  one  should  hold  them  absorbed  in  the  mind/ 
Ar^una  Misra  says, '  In  the  mind  as  their  seat  they  should  be  placed,' 
as  being  not  distinct  from  the  mind,  I  presume.    Cf.  Ka/^a,  p.  148. 

3  Literally, '  birth.' 

4  From  knowledge,  I  presume.  The  commentators  afford  no  help. 

5  Ar^-una  MLrra's  text  appears  to  commence  a  new  chapter  here. 

6  Such  as  meditation  or  up&sana,  and  pra/zayama  or  restraint  of 
life-winds  respectively,  Aignna  Miira. 

7  Cf.  p.  310  supra. 

8  I.  e.  bravery,  learning,  &c.  are  treated  as  not  being  merits,  as 
they  cause  pride,  &c,  Nilaka^/^a. 

9  I.  e.  in  solitude,  Nilaka#/$a ;  devoting  oneself  to  the  self  only, 
Argnma  MLrra.     Cf.  also  p.  284  supra,  note  4. 

10  Or,  says  Nllaka^a,  free  from  any  belief  in  distinctions. 

11  Another  reading  would  mean  *  which  exists  among  Brahma«as.' 

12  I.  e.  all  collected  together,  I  presume. 


342  anugita. 


The  learned  man  who  absorbs  objects  of  desire 
from  all  sides,  as  a  tortoise  (draws  in)  his  limbs1, 
and  who  is  devoid  of  passion,  and  released  from 
everything2,  is  ever  happy.  Restraining  objects 
of  desire  within  the  self3,  he  becomes  fit  for  assi- 
milation with  the  Brahman4,  having  his  cravings 
destroyed,  and  being  concentrated  in  mind,  and 
friendly  and  affectionate5  to  all  beings.  The  fire 
of  the  Adhyatma6  is  kindled  in  a  sage  by  his 
abandoning  the  country7,  and  by  the  restraint  of 
all  the  senses  which  hanker  after  objects  of  sense. 
As  fire  kindled  with  fuel  shines  forth  with  a  great 
blaze,  so  the  great  self8  shines  forth  through  the 
restraint  of  the  senses.  When  one  with  a  tranquil 
self  perceives  all  entities  in  one's  own  heart,  then 
being  self-illumined9,  one  attains  to  that  which  is 
subtler  than  (the  most)  subtle  (thing) 10,  and  than 
which  there  is  nothing  higher.  It  is  settled,  that 
the  body  in  which  the  colour11  is  fire,  the  flowing12 

1  Cf.  Gita,  pp.  50,  51,  and  S&nti  Parvan  (Moksha  Dharma)  I,  51, 
where  the  phrase  is  precisely  the  same  as  here. 

2  I.  e.  from  all  bonds,  I  suppose.     See  p.  292  supra. 

3  Cf.  Gitd,  p.  51.  4  Cf.  GitS,  p.  no.  5  Cf.  GM,  p.  68. 

6  I.e.  experience,  Nilaka«/^a.  It  means  direct  perception  of  the 
relations  between  the  supreme  and  individual  self.    Cf.  Giti,  p.  1 1 1. 

7  As  opposed  to  forests.    See  Sanatsu^atiya,  p.  159,  note  9. 

8  This  must  mean  here  the  supreme  self,  apparently. 

9  I.  e.  being  devoted  to  the  self  only,  Arg-una  Mijra.  The 
ordinary  meaning  of  the  word,  however,  is  one  who  has  direct 
experience  or  perception  without  the  aid  of  senses,  &c,  Cf.  Br*ha- 
dara^yaka,  p.  765,  and  -Sariraka  Bhashya,  pp.  648,  784,  &c. 

10  Nilakaw/^a  says, '  The  supreme  Brahman  which  is  subtler  than 
the  Brahman  within  the  lotus-like  heart/ 

11  I.  e.  that  which  perceives  colour,  viz.  the  sense,  Ar^una  Mijra. 
This  applies  to  the  analogous  words  coming  further  on. 

12  I.  e.  taste,  says  Arguna  Mura,  which  seems  to  be  more  correct 
than  Nilaka/z/#a's  blood  and  such  other  liquid  elements  of  the  body. 


CHAPTER    XXVII,   59.  343 

(element)  water,  and  the  feeling  of  touch  is  air, 
the  hideous  holder  of  the  mud1  is  earth,  and 
likewise  the  sound  is  space ;  which  is  pervaded  by 
disease  and  sorrow ;  which  is  surrounded  by  the 
five  currents 2 ;  which  is  made  up  of  the  five  ele- 
ments;  which  has  nine  passages3  and  two  deities4; 
which  is  full  of  passion ;  unfit  to  be  seen 5 ;  made 
up  of  three  qualities  and  of  three  constituent  ele- 
ments6; pleased  with  contacts7;  and  full  of  delusion8; 
— this  same  (body),  which  is  difficult  to  move  in  this 
mortal  world,  and  which  rests  on  the  real  (entity)9, 
is  the  very  wheel  of  time  which  rotates  in  this 
world10.  It  is  a  great  ocean,  fearful  and  unfathom- 
able, and  is  named11  delusion.  The  world,  together 
with  the  immortals,  should  cast  it  aside,  curtail  it, 

1  I.  e.  the  flesh,  bone,  and  so  forth,  Nilaka«/#a ;  the  mucus  in 
the  nose,  Aiguna  Mm*a. 

2  I.e.  the  senses.    Cf.  p.  238  supra,  note  7. 

3  Cf.  Gita,  p.  65.  *  See  Sanatsug-atiya,  p.  187  supra. 

5  As  being  unholy,  Nilaka^a ;  as  the  bodies  of  KsWalas  &c. 
when  seen  are  productive  of  sin,  Ar^una  MLrra.    See  p.  155  supra. 

6  Viz.  vata,  pitta,  jleshma,  or  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm.  The 
dhatus  are  sometimes  spoken  of  as  seven.  See  Yoga-sutras, 
p.  192  ;  Taitt.  Ar.  p.  874,  commentary,  and  p.  246  supra.  See,  too, 
however,  *SVeta\rvatara,  commentary,  p.  287. 

7  Which  is  delighted  only  by  contact  with  food  and  so  forth,  not 
otherwise,  Nilaka/zMa. 

8  I.  e.  cause  of  delusion.  The  original  word  for  '  it  is  settled '  at  the 
beginning  of  this  sentence  is  otherwise  rendered  by  Ar^una  MLrra. 
He  takes  it  to  mean  '  in  this  light  (namely,  as  above  stated)  should 
one  contemplate  the  body.'    The  other  rendering  is  Nilaka^a's. 

9  I.  e.  the  self,  Ar^-una  MLrra ;  the  understanding,  Nilaka/^a  ; 
difficult  to  move  =  difficult  to  adjust  if  attacked  by  disease,  &c., 
Nllaka»/#a. 

10  It  is  owing  to  this  body  that  the  self  becomes  limited  by  time, 
Ar^una  MLrra.  Nilaka/z/^a's  gloss  I  do  not  follow.  Cf.  p.  187  supra, 
and  p.  355  infra. 

11  I.  e.  characterised  by  delusion,  Arg-una  MLnra. 


344  ANUGITA. 


and  restrain  it1.  Desire,  wrath,  fear,  avarice,  trea- 
chery, and  falsehood  also,  (all  these),  which  are 
difficult  to  get  rid  of,  the  good  do  get  rid  of  by 
restraint  of  the  senses 2.  And  he  who  in  this 
world  has  vanquished  the  three  qualities  and  the 
five  constituent  elements  3,  obtains  the  highest 4 —  ) 
the  infinite — seat  in  heaven.  Crossing  the  river  of 
which  the  five  senses  are  the  lofty  banks,  the  agita- 
tion of  mind5  the  mighty  waters,  and  delusion  the 
reservoir6,  one  should  vanquish  both  desire  and 
wrath.  Freed  from  all  sins,  he  then  perceives  that 
highest  (principle),  concentrating  the  mind  within 
the  mind7,  and  seeing  the  self  within  the  self8. 
Understanding  everything,  he  sees  the  self  with 
the  self  in  all  entities  as  one9,  and  also  as  various, 

1  I  am  not  sure  about  the  meaning  here.  Ar^-una  Mura  says, 
(reading  vimget, '  send  forth/  for  vikshipet,  '  cast  aside,') '  send  forth 
at  the  creation,  curtail  at  the  dissolution,  and  restrain  at  the  final 
emancipation/  The  commentary  reads  rodhayet,  which  we  have 
adopted  above.  The  text  in  the  same  copy,  however,  is  bodhayet. 
Argima  MLrra  adds,  as  far  as  I  can  make  out  from  an  incorrect 
copy  :  *  as  in  this  life  everything  is  accomplished  by  these  actions ' 
(namely,  I  suppose,  the  casting  aside,  &c.)  Nilaka/z/$a  says, '  This 
same  thing  is  the  cause  of  creation,  destruction,  and  knowledge,' 
reading  bodhayet.  2  Cf.  Giti,  p.  57. 

8  I.  e.  the  five  great  elements,  as  stated  in  Williams'  Dictionary, 
citing  Ya^iiavalkya  III,  145.  See  *Santi  Parvan  (Moksha),  chap.  182, 
st.  16;  chap.  1 84,  st.  1 .       4  I.  e.  the  seat  of  the  Brahman,  Nilaka«/^a. 

5  See  Gita,  p.  66,  where  the  word  is  the  same,  viz.  vega. 

6  From  which,  namely,  the  river  issues.  Cf.  for  the  whole  figure, 
S&nti  Parvan  (Moksha),  chap.  251,  st.  12. 

7  The  mind = the  lotus-like  heart,  Nilaka^/^a.  Cf.  Gita,  p.  79. 
Concentrating = withdrawing  from  external  objects,  &c. 

8  I.e.  in  the  body,  NilakawMa.    See  p.  248. 

9  Cf.  GM,  p.  83,  and  note  4  there.  Nilaka^a  says, '  as  one,  i.  e. 
by  direct  perception  of  the  unity  of  the  individual  and  supreme^ 
and  as  various,  i.  e.  in  the  all-comprehending  form.* 


CHAPTER   XXVIII,  2.  345 

changing  from  time  to  time1.  He  can  always  perceive 
(numerous)  bodies  like  a  hundred  lights  from  one 
light.  He  verily  is  Vishmi,  and  Mitra,  and  Varu/za, 
Agni,  and  Pra^apati.  He  is  the  supporter,  and  the 
creator.  He  is  the  lord  whose  faces  are  in  all  direc- 
tions2. (In  him)  the  great  self — the  heart  of  all 
beings — is  resplendent.  Him,  all  companies  of  Brah- 
ma/zas,  and  also  gods,  and  demons,  and  Yakshas,  and 
PLy&/£as,  and  Pitrzs,  and  birds,  and  the  bands  of 
Rakshases,  and  the  bands  of  Bhfttas3,  and  also  all 
the  great  sages,  ever  extol. 


Chapter  XXVIII. 

Brahman  said : 

Among  men  the  royal  Kshatriya  is  the  middle4 
quality ;  among  vehicles  the  elephant 5,  and  among 
denizens  of  the  forest  the  lion  ;  among  all  sacrificial 
animals  the  sheep,  and  among  the  dwellers  in  holes 
the  snake ;   among  cattle  also  the  bull,  and  among 

1  I.  e.  creating  or  acting,  Arg-una  MLrra.  I  think  it  probable 
that  it  was  meant  to  go  with  the  preceding  words.  See  Gita, 
p.  83  note;  but,  for  this,  'changing'  must  be  in  the  accusative. 
It  is  in  the  nominative.  As  the  original  stands,  and  on  Ar^una 
Mura's  interpretation,  the  sense  seems  to  be  that  when  he  is  about 
to  engage  in  the  work  of  creation,  he  can  obtain  as  many  bodies  as  he 
likes.  Nilaka/z/^a  compares  iTMndogya,  p.  526.  And  see  pp.  249, 
327  supra.    Can  always  perceive = invariably  obtains  when  he  wishes. 

2  Cf.  Gita,  pp.  83,  93,  and  note  1  there. 

3  Cf.  Gita,  pp.  85,118. 

4  I.e.  passion — that  quality  is  dominant  in  the  Kshatriya, 
Nilaka«//5a.     See  p.  329  supra. 

5  Commenting  on  Gitl  V,  18  (p.  65)  Sankara  calls  the  elephant 
atyantatamasa,  belonging  entirely  to  the  quality  of  darkness. 


346  ANUGITA. 


females  a  male  l.  The  Nyagrodha,  the  Gambu,  the 
Pippala,  and  likewise  the  .Salmali,  the  .Sinsapd,  and  the 
Meshasrmga,  and  likewise  the  bamboo  and  willow2; 
these  are  the  princes  among  trees  in  this  world, 
there  is  no  doubt  of  that.  The  Himavat,  the 
Pclriyatra,  the  Sahya,  the  Vindhya,  the  Trikti/avat, 
the  6Veta,  the  Nila,  the  Bh&sa,  and  the  Kosh/^avat 
mountain,  the  Mahendra,  the  Guruskandha,  and 
likewise  the  M&lyavat  mountain,  these  are  the 
princes  among  mountains3.  Likewise  the  Maruts 
are  (the  princes)  among  the  Ga^as ;  the  sun  is  the 
prince  among  the  planets,  and  the  moon4  among 
the  Nakshatras ;  Yama  is  the  prince  among  the 
Pitrzs,  and  the  ocean  among  rivers ;  Varu/za  is  the 
king  of  the  waters,  and  Indra  is  said  to  be  (the  king) 
of  the  Maruts.  Arka  is  the  king  of  hot  (bodies), 
and  Indu  is  said  to  be  (the  king)  of  shining  bodies. 
Fire  is  ever  the  lord  of  the  elements5,  and  Brzhaspati 
of  Brahma/zas ;  Soma  is  the  lord  of  herbs,  Vishnu 
is  the  chief  among  the  strong ;  Tvash/rz  is  the  prince 

1  As  to  the  constructions  here,  cf.  generally  Gita,  p.  88,  and  see 
the  remarks  of  Ramanu^a  and  -Sridhara  on  Gita  X,  2 1.  The  meaning 
here  is,  of  course,  the  male  is  ruler  over  females. 

2  I  do  not  know  what  distinction  is  intended  between  these  two. 
Generally  ki^aka  is  used  for  the  hollow  bamboo,  which  whistles 
when  the  wind  blows  through  it. 

3  Some  of  these  mountains  are  mentioned  in  Patafig-ali.  See 
Introduction. 

4  This  list  may  be  compared  with  that  at  Gita,  chapter  X. 
Sometimes  the  same  object  occurs  more  than  once  with  reference 
to  more  than  one  class ;  thus  the  moon  occurs  as  lord  of  Naksha- 
tras, of  shining  bodies,  and  of  herbs — unless  Soma  there  stands  for  the 
Soma  plant.  See  Gita,  p,  113.  Arg-una  Mirra  says  expressly  that  the 
moon  occurs  more  than  once  as  the  correlatives,  the  classes  with  re- 
ference to  which  she  is  mentioned,  are  different.  In  such  cases  I  have 
kept  the  original  names  untranslated;  Arka=sun;  Indu=moon. 

5  Cf.  Ka/^a,  p.  83. 


chapter  xxviii,  1 6.  347 

of  the  Rudras,  and  61  va  is  the  ruler  of  (all)  creatures  ; 
likewise,  sacrifice  of  (all)  initiatory  ceremonies1,  and 
Maghavat2  likewise  of  the  gods;  the  north  among 
the  quarters,  and  among  all  vipras  the  powerful 
king  Soma3;  Kubera  (is  lord)  of  all  jewels,  Puran- 
dara  of  (all)  deities.  Such  is  the  highest  creation 
among  all  entities.  Pra^apati  (is  lord)  of  all 
peoples;  and  of  all  entities  whatever  I,  who  am 
full  of  the  Brahman,  and  great,  (am  lord).  There 
is  no  higher  being  than  myself  or  Vishnu. 
The  great  Vishnu  full  of  the  Brahman  is  the 
king  of  kings  over  all.  Understand  him  to 
be  the  ruler,  the  creator,  the  uncreated  Hari.  For 
he  is  the  ruler  of  men,  Kinnaras,  and  Yakshas  ; 
of  Gandharvas,  snakes,  and  Rakshases ;  of  gods, 
demons,  and  Nigas.  Among  all  those  who  are 
followed  by  (men)  full  of  desires,  (the  chief)  is4  the 
great  goddess  Mahe^varl,  who  has  beautiful  eyes. 
She  is  called  Pdrvatl.  Know  the  goddess  Uma5  to 
be  the  best  and  (most)  holy  of  (all)  females.  Among 
women  who  are  (a  source6  of)  happiness,  likewise, 
the  brilliant7  Apsarases  (are  chief).     Kings  desire 

1  This  must  mean,  I  presume,  that  the  sacrifice  is  higher  than 
the  initiation,  as  male  than  female,  see  p.  346,  note  1. 

2  This  is  another  repetition.  Indra  has  been  mentioned  before, 
and  Purandara  is  mentioned  further  on. 

3  As  to  king  Soma,  see  inter  alia  BrzliadaraTzyaka,  p.  237; 
.ATMndogya,  p.  342,  where  *S"ahkara  explains  '  king  '  by  adding  '  of 
Brahmawas.'    Vipras =Brahma«as. 

4  I.  e.  Mahe^vari  is  the  most  beautiful  of  womankind. 

5  It  is  well  known  that  Uma,  Parvati,  Mahe^vari  are  names  of 
the  consort  of  the  third  member  of  the  Hindu  Trinity;  see  Kena, 
p.  13,  and  *Sankara's  comment  there.  See,  too,  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts, 
vol.  iv,  p.  421,  and  Taittiriya-ara^yaka,  p.  839. 

6  The  idea  of  '  source '  is  supplied  by  Ar^una  Mi^ra. 

7  Literally,  '  rich.'  Arg-una  Mi^ra  paraphrases  it  by  '  Gyotish- 
mati.'    Nilakatf/^a's  explanation  here  is  not  quite  clear. 


348  anugitA. 


piety;  and  Brahma^as  are  the  bridges1  of  piety. 
Therefore  a  king  should  always  endeavour  to  pro- 
tect the  twice-born2.  Those  kings  in  whose  domi- 
nions good  men  lie  low,  lose  all  their  qualifications3, 
and  go  into  wrong  paths  after  death.  But  those 
high-souled  kings  in  whose  dominions  good  men 
are  protected,  rejoice  in  this  world,  and  attain  the 
infinite  (seat)  after  death.  Understand  this,  O  chiefs 
of  the  twice-born !  I  shall  now  proceed  to  state  the 
invariable  characteristics  of  piety.  Non-destruction 
is  the  highest  piety4,  and  destruction  is  of  the 
nature  of  impiety.  Enlightenment 5  is  the  character- 
istic of  gods ;  action 6  the  characteristic  of  men ; 
sound  is  the  characteristic  of  space;  (the  sensation 
of)  touch  is  the  characteristic  of  air ;  colour  is  the 
characteristic  of  light ;  taste  is  the  characteristic  of 
water ;  the  characteristic  of  earth,  the  supporter  of 
all  beings,  is  smell ;  words  are  the  characteristic 
of  speech  7  refined  into  vowels  and  consonants ;  the 
characteristic  of  mind  is  thought.  Likewise  as  to 
what  is  described  here  as  understanding,  a  deter- 

1  I.  e.  instrumental  in  piety,  or  guides  to  piety.  Cf.  6Veta\yvatara, 
p.  370;  Muwdfoka,  p.  297. 

2  So  literally,  doubtless  Br&hmawas  only  are  intended  here. 

3  I.  e.,  I  presume,  they  lose  all  their  merits,  their  good  points  are 
destroyed  by  this  dereliction  of  duty. 

4  Cf.  p.  291  supra.  Ar^-una  Mura  begins  a  fresh  chapter  with  '  I 
shall  now/  &c.  6  Knowledge  of  the  truth,  Ar^-una  Miyra. 

6  I.  e.  action  performed  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  the  fruit  of 
it.  The  next  five  items  refer  to  the  five  elements  and  their  cha- 
racteristic properties.  Nilakara/^a's  explanation,  that  all  these  are 
merely  parallels  not  stated  for  their  own  relevancy  here,  but  as 
illustrations,  seems  to  be  the  only  available  one. 

7  I.  e.  the  learning  of  other  people,  Nilaka^a.  The  meaning 
seems  to  be  that  we  know  speech  only  in  its  manifestation  in  the 
form  of  words. 


CHAPTER   XXVIII,  2<J.  349 

mination  is  here  formed  by  (that)  understanding 
about  objects  which  have  been  thought  over  by  the 
mind1.  And  there  is  no  doubt  of  this  that  deter- 
mination is  the  characteristic  of  the  understanding. 
The  characteristic  of  mind  is  meditation2;  and  the 
characteristic  of  a  good  man  is  (living)  unperceived3. 
The  characteristic  of  devotion  is  action 4 ;  and  know- 
ledge the  characteristic  of  renunciation.  Therefore 
a  man  of  understanding  should  practice  renunciation, 
giving  prominence  to  knowledge 5.  The  renouncer 
possessed  of  knowledge  attains  the  highest  goal.  And 
crossing  beyond  darkness,  and  transcending  death 
and  old  age,  he  repairs  to  that  which  has  no  second8. 
Thus  have  I  duly  spoken  to  you  concerning  the 
characteristic  of  piety.  I  will  now  proceed  to  explain 
properly  the  comprehension7  of  the  qualities.  As 
to  the  smell  of  the  earth,  verily,  that  is  comprehended 
by  the  nose ;  and  the  wind 8  likewise  residing  in  the 
nose  is  appointed9  to  the  knowledge  of  smell.  Taste10, 

1  The  text  here  is  rather  unsatisfactory;  I  have  adopted  that 
which  I  find  in  the  copy  containing  Ar^una  MLsra's  commentary. 

2  Frequent  pondering  on  matters  learnt  from  *S*&stras  or  common 
life,  Nllaka^a.  Why  mind  comes  twice  the  commentators  do  not 
explain. 

3  Does  this  refer  to  what  is  said  at  Sanatsug-atiya,  p.  159  ? 

4  Devotion  means  here,  as  in  the  Gita,  action  without  desire  of  fruits. 
For  action  the  word  here  is  the  same  as  at  Gita",  p.  115,  note  2. 

5  Cf.  Git*,  p.  52,  note  7. 

6  This  is  Arg-una  MLsra's  interpretation,  and  appears  to  me  to  be 
correct.  Nilakatf/^a's  is  different,  but  seems  to  omit  all  account 
of  abhyeti, '  repairs.' 

7  Arg-una  MLsra's  interpretation  seems  to  be  different,  but  our 
copy  is  not  quite  intelligible. 

8  See  p.  337  supra.  The  wind  is  the  presiding  deity  of  the  nasal 
organ. 

9  I.  e.  that  is  its  function.  Arg-una  MLsra  says,  '  it  is  pondered 
on,'  which  is  not  clear.        10  Cf.  Gita,  p.  74,  as  to  taste  and  water. 


350  ANUGITA. 


the  essence  of  water,  is  always  comprehended  by  the 
tongue.  And  the  moon  likewise,  who  resides  in  the 
tongue,  is  appointed  to  the  knowledge  of  taste.  The 
quality  of  light  is  colour,  and  that  is  comprehended 
by  the  eye;  and  the  sun  residing  in  the  eye  is 
appointed  always  to  the  knowledge  of  colour.  The 
(sensation  of)  touch,  belonging  to  the  air,  is  perceived 
by  the  skin,  and  the  wind  1  residing  in  the  skin  is 
always  appointed  to  the  knowledge  of  (the  objects)  of 
touch.  The  quality  of  space  is  sound,  and  that  is 
comprehended  by  the  ear.  And  all  the  quarters  re- 
siding in  the  ear  are  celebrated  as  (being  appointed) 
to  the  knowledge  of  sound.  Thought  is  the  quality 
of  mind,  and  that  is  comprehended  by  the  under- 
standing. The  supporter  of  consciousness 2  residing 
in  the  heart  is  appointed  to  the  knowledge  of  mind3. 
The  understanding  (is  comprehended  in  the  form 
of)  determination,  and  the  Mahat4  of  knowledge. 
To  (this)  positive  comprehension,  the  unperceived5 
(is  appointed),  there  is  no  doubt  of  that.  The  Kshe- 
tra^fia,  which  is  in  its  essence  devoid  of  qualities 
and   eternal,  is   not   to   be   comprehended  by   any 

1  This  cannot  be  the  presiding  deity  here,  though  one  expects 
such  deity  to  be  mentioned;  see  p.  337  supra. 

2  The  text  of  more  than  one  of  the  lines  here  is  rather  doubtful ; 
we  follow  Nilaka^Ma,  who  takes  this  to  mean  the  giva,  the  indi- 
vidual soul.     Cf.  p.  239,  note  2  supra. 

3  I.  e.  thought,  as  Nilaka«/£a  points  out. 

4  Mahat  is  properly  the  same  as  buddhi,  understanding,  but  as 
it  is  here  mentioned  separately,  I  suppose,  it  signifies  Aharikara. 
Nilaka^a  takes  its  operation,  here  called  knowledge,  to  mean 
'  the  feeling  I  am,'  which  agrees  with  our  interpretation,  for  which 
some  support  is  also  to  be  derived  from  p.  333  supra. 

5  I  here  follow  Ar^una  Mirra,  though  somewhat  diffidently.  The 
knowledge  '  this  is  1/  and  the  knowledge  '  this  is  so  and  so  and 
nothing  else '  is  presided  over  by  the  unperceived — the  Prakr/ti. 


CHAPTER    XXVIII,  42.  35  I 

symbols.  Therefore  the  characteristic  of  the  Kshe- 
tra^na,  which  is  void  of  symbols  1)  is  purely  knowledge. 
The  unperceived  is  stated  to  be  the  Kshetra2  in 
which  the  qualities  are  produced  and  absorbed.  And 
I  always  see,  know,  and  hear  it,  (though)  concealed. 
The  Purusha  knows  it,  therefore  is  he  called  Kshe- 
tra^fia 3.  And  the  Kshetra^fia  likewise  perceives  all 
the  operations  of  the  qualities 4.  The  qualities  created 
again  and  again,  do  not  know  themselves 5,  being  non- 
intelligent,  to  be  created  and  tied  down  to  a  begin- 
ning, middle,  and  end6.  Only  the  Kshetra^fia  attains, 
no  one  (else)  attains,  to  the  truth,  which  is  great, 
transcendent,  and  beyond  the  qualities  and  the  entities 
(produced) 7  from  the  qualities.  Hence  a  man  who 
understands  piety,  abandoning  qualities,  and  the  cre- 
ation 8,  in  this  world,  and  transcending  the  qualities, 
and  having  his  sins  destroyed,  then  enters  into  the 
Kshetra^-na.  One  who  is  free  from  the  pairs  of 
opposites,  free  from  the  ceremony  of  salutations,  and 

1  See  Sanatsu^atiya,  p.  146.     See  also  p.  309  supra. 

2  See  Gita,  p.  102  seq.  8  I.  e.  he  who  knows  the  Kshetra. 

4  Enlightenment,  activity,  and  delusion,  Nilakaw/^a. 

5  I.  e.  do  not  know  the  self,  Nilaka/z/^a ;  better,  I  think,  '  the 
qualities  do  not  know  themselves,  only  the  Kshetra^na  knows 
them/    Cf.  A^anti  Parvan  (Moksha  Dharma),  chap.  194,  st.  41. 

6  I.  e.  production,  existence,  and  destruction,  Nilakaw/^a.  This 
must,  however,  mean  their  manifestation,  continuance,  and  dis- 
solution in  any  particular  form.  For  the  prakrz'ti,  which  is  made 
up  of  the  three  qualities,  is  beginningless.     Cf.  Gita,  p.  104. 

7  I.  e.  the  actual  physical  manifestations,  as  we  may  say,  of  the 
qualities. 

8  The  original,  sattva,  Nilaka^/^a  renders  by  buddhi,  and  qualities 
by  visible  objects.  In  the  familiar  Sahkhya  phrase  sattvapuru- 
sMnyatapratyaya  sattva  means  creation,  or  what  is  other  than 
purusha  (cf.  Sahkhyatattvakaumudf,  pp.  9-144).  That  is  the 
meaning  here.  See  too  p.  371  infra,  and  -Santi  Parvan  (Moksha 
Dharma),  chap.  194,  st.  38  seq.  and  comments  there. 


352  anug!ta. 

from  the  sv3M  ceremony1,  who  is  unmoving,  and 
homeless2,  is  the  Kshetra^na,  he  is  the  Supreme 
Lord. 


Chapter  XXIX. 

Brahman  said : 
I  will  state  truly  all  about  that  which  has  a  be- 
ginning, middle,  and  end 3,  and  about  the  means  for 
its  comprehension,  together  with  names  and  charac- 
teristics4. It  is  stated  that  day  was  first  and  then 
night ;  that  months  have  the  bright 5  first,  the  Nak- 
shatras  .Sravana6  as  the  first  (among  them),  and  the 
seasons  the  winter  as  the  first  (among  them).  The 
earth  is  the  source 7  of  smells,  water  of  tastes,  the 
light  (of)  the  sun  is  the  source  of  colours,  the  wind  is 
stated  to  be  the  source  of  (the  feelings  of)  touch ;  like- 
wise space  is  the  source  of  sound.  These  are  the 
qualities  of  the  elements.  Now  I  shall  proceed  to 
state  the  highest  and  first  of  all  entities.    The  sun  is 

1  See  p.  324  supra. 

2  See  Gita,  p.  101.  Unmoving  probably  means  'not  perturbed 
by  the  qualities' (GM,  p.  no),  or  perhaps  the  same  thing  as  'of 
steady  mind'  at  Gitd,  p.  101.  The  sense  is  pretty  much  the  same 
in  both  places. 

3  Which  has  birth  &c,  Nilaka#/$a,  i.e.  all  the  creation,  I  presume. 

4  The  names,  that  is  to  say,  of  the  various  elements,  and  their 
qualities. 

5  This  must  mean  fortnights. 

6  This  is  specified,  says  Ar^una  MLrra,  as  the  six  months  of  the 
northern  solstice  are  caused  by  the  sun  being  at  this  Nakshatra. 
As  to  those  six  months,  cf.  Gita,  p.  81.  For  the  same  reason, 
Aigxma  MLsra  adds,  the  winter  season  is  mentioned  as  the  best. 

7  The  word  adi,  literally  beginning,  is  used  in  the  whole  of  this 
passage  in  different  senses ;  it  means  the  source,  it  means  the  best, 
and  it  means  the  first  in  order. 


CHAPTER   XXIX,   IO.  353 

the  first  among  shining  bodies  * ;  fire  is  said  to  be 
the  first  of  the  elements 2 ;  S&vitrt 3  of  all  branches 
of  learning ;  Pra^pati  of  deities ;  the  syllable  Om 
of  all  the  Vedas ;  and  the  Pri^a  life-wind,  of  all 
words4;  whatever  is  prescribed  in  this  world,  all 
that  is  called  Savitri5.  The  G&yatrf  is  the  first 
among  metres  ;  among  (sacrificial)  animals,  the  goat6 
is  mentioned  (as  the  first).  Cows  are  the  first  among 
quadrupeds,  and  the  twice-born  among  men7.  The 
.Syena  is  first  among  birds ;  among  sacrifices,  the 
offering  (into  the  fire)  is  the  best ;  and  among  all 
reptiles,  O  best  of  the  twice-born!  the  snake8  is 
the  highest.  Of  all  ages  the  Krzta  is  the  first,  there 
is  no  doubt  of  that.  Among  all  precious  things, 
gold  (is  the  first),  and  among  vegetable  (products) 
likewise  the  barley  seed9.  Among  all  things  to 
be  eaten  or  swallowed  food  is  the  highest;   and  of 

1  This  should  be  compared  with  the  enumeration  at  p.  345  supra, 
and  that  in  the  Gita  there  referred  to. 

2  Cf.  p.  346  supra.  Nilaka#/$a  takes  fire  to  mean  the  gastric  fire, 
and  bhuta,  rendered  by  us  elements,  to  mean  the  species  of  beings 
born  from  eggs  and  wombs. 

3  The  famous  verse  'Tat  savitur,'  &c.  See  inter  alia  Bnhadara- 
wyaka,  p.  999;  Apastamba  I,  1, 1,  9;  Manu  II,  77  seq.,  104-170. 

4  See  pp.  264,  265  supra. 

5  Here  he  turns  back  to  the  Savitri, '  looking  back  in  the  manner 
of  the  lion,'  says  NilakawMa,  and  for  purposes  of  upasana.  He 
does  not  give  up  the  thread  of  his  discourse  entirely,  but  simply 
interjects  this  little  clause.  Nilakaw/^a  adds,  Savitri  here  includes 
every  mode  of  worship  prescribed  for  Brahma^as,  &c,  and  even 
for  Mle^/^as.    Cf.  note  3,  and  Gautama  (Btihler's  ed.),  p.  174  note. 

6  Cf.  .ATMndogya,  p.  109,  and  Ankara's  commentary.  Argnna 
MLyra  compares  this  text,  Tasmadesha  etesham  pajunam  sreshtM- 
tamo^ah.    Where  it  occurs  I  know  not. 

7  Cf.  *Santi  Parvan  (Ra^adharma),  chap,  n,  st.  11. 

8  I.e.  Vasuki,  Nilakaw/^a.    More  probably  it  refers  to  the  species. 

9  As  it  is  used  in  various  ceremonies. 

[8]  A  a 


354  ANUGITA. 


all  liquid  substances  which  are  to  be  drunk,  water 
is  the  best.  And  among  all  immovable  entities, 
without  distinction,  the  Plaksha,  the  ever  holy  field 
of  Brahman1,  is  stated  to  be  the  first.  I,  too,  (am 
the  first)  among  all  the  patriarchs 2,  there  is  no 
doubt  of  that.  And  the  unthinkable,  self-existent 
Vishnu  is  stated  to  be  my  own  self.  Of  all  moun- 
tains, the  great  Meru  is  stated  to  be  the  first-born. 
And  among  all  quarters  and  sub-quarters,  likewise, 
the  eastern  quarter 3  is  the  first.  Likewise  the  Ganga 
going  in  three  paths  is  stated  to  be  the  first-born 
among  rivers.  And  likewise  of  all  wells  and  reser- 
voirs of  water,  the  ocean  is  the  first-born.  And  of  all 
gods,  Ddnavas,  Bhtitas,  Piiiias,  snakes,  and  Rak- 
shases,  and  of  men,  Kinnaras,  and  Yakshas,  l^vara4 
is  the  lord.  The  great  Vishnu,  who  is  full  of  the 
Brahman,  and  than  whom  there  is  no  higher  being  in 
these  three  worlds,  is  the  source  of  all  the  universe. 
Of  all  orders5,  that  of  householders  (is  the  first),  there 
is  no  doubt  of  that.  The  unperceived  is  the  source 
of  the  worlds ;  and  the  same  is  also  the  end  of  every- 
thing. Daysendwith(thesuns)setting6;  thenightends 
with  (the  sun's)  rising;  the  end  of  pleasure  is  ever  grief; 

1  I.  e.  the  Creator ;  his  field  means,  I  presume,  his  special  seat. 

2  Beings  from  whom  all  creatures  were  born.  See  inter  alia  *Santi 
Parvan  (Moksha  Dharma),  chap.  208,  st.  5;  Manu  I,  34. 

3  At  p.  347  the  north  is  mentioned.  Ar^-una  MLsra  has  'urdhva/ 
or  upward  here,  and  yet  '  north '  before.  Is  the  north  the  best  as 
the  seat  of  the  higher  world  mentioned  at  S&nti  Parvan  (Moksha 
Dharma),  chap.  192,  st.  8  seq.  ? 

4  I.  e.  Rudra,  says  Nilakaw/^a. 

5  Viz.  Brahma^arin,  householder,  forester,  and  Samnyasin.  Cf. 
»Santi  Parvan  (Moksha),  ch.  191,  st.  10;  Manu  VI,  89;  Gautama,  p.  190. 

6  These  stanzas  also  occur  in  the  3anti  Parvan,  chap.  27,  st.  31 
seq.  (Ra^adharma).  Apart  of  them  appears  to  be  quoted  inSarikhya- 
sutra  V,  80.  And  the  commentator  Vi^-fiana  Bhikshu  introduces  it 
with  the  expression  'iti  .rruyate.'    But  it  is  not  a  Vedic  text. 


CHAPTER    XXX,   I.  355 


the  end  of  grief  ever  pleasure.  All  accumulations 
end  in  exhaustion ;  all  ascents  end  in  falls  ;  all  asso- 
ciations end  in  dissociations ;  and  life  ends  in  death. 
All  action  ends  in  destruction ;  death  is  certain  for 
whatever  is  born  * ;  (everything)  movable  or  immov- 
able in  this  world  is  ever  transient.  Sacrifice,  gift, 
penance,  study,  observances,  and  regulations,  all  this 
ends  in  destruction 2.  There  is  no  end  for  knowledge- 
Therefore  one  whose  self  is  tranquil,  whose  senses 
are  subjugated,  who  is  devoid  of  (the  idea  that  this 
or  that  is)  mine,  who  is  devoid  of  egoism,  is  released 
from  all  sins  by  pure  knowledge. 


Chapter  XXX. 
Brahman  said : 
The  wheel  of  life 3  moves  on ;  a  wheel  of  which 
the  spoke  is  the  understanding,  of  which  the  pole  4 
is  the  mind,  of  which  the  bonds  are  the  group  of 
the  senses,  of  which  the  outer  rim 5  is  the  five  great 
elements,  of  which  the  environment  is  home 6 ;  which 

1  Cf.  Gita,  p.  45. 

2  All  this  is  action,  the  fruit  of  which  is  perishable ;  the  fruit  of 
knowledge,  on  the  other  hand,  is  everlasting. 

3  Literally,  time ;  it  seems,  however,  to  stand  for  the  vicissitudes 
of  worldly  life.  Cf.  -SVetawatara,  p.  283.  The  body  is  called 
1  wheel  of  time*  at  p.  53  supra,  but  Argima  MLsra  there  says  'it  is 
the  wheel  which  causes  the  rotation  of  the  wheel  of  time.' 

4  The  cause  of  its  being  large  in  dimensions,  Argxina  MLsra ;  the 
supporting  pillar,  Nilaka/z/^a.  I  prefer  the  former,  and  take  the 
sense  to  be  that  worldly  life  is  co-extensive  with  the  operations  or 
'fancies'  of  the  mind. 

6  What  is  outside  the  elements,  the  physical  manifestations  of 
Prakrz'ti,  is  beyond  the  domain  of  worldly  life. 

6  The  possession  of '  home '  is  equivalent  to  a  dwelling  in  the 
midst  of  worldly  life.  Hence  the  idea  of  homelessness  at  inter  alia 
Gita,  pp.  101-103. 

A  a  2 


356  anugIta. 


abounds  in  old  age  and  grief,  which  moves  in  the 
midst  of  disease  and  misfortune,  which  rotates  in x 
space  and  time ;  the  noise  of  which  is  trouble  and 
toil,  the  rotations 2  of  which  (constitute)  day  and 
night;  which  is  encircled  with  cold  and  heat;  of 
which  pleasure  and  pain  are  the  joints,  and  hunger 
and  thirst  the  nails  fixed  into  it,  of  which  sunshine 
and  shade  are  the  ruts ;  which  staggers  in  the  opening 
or  closing  of  an  eyelid,  which  is  enveloped  in  the 
fearful  waters  of  delusion,  which  is  ever  revolving 
and  void  of  consciousness 3,  which  is  measured  by 
months  and  half  months,  is  ever-changing4,  which 
moves  through  (all)  the  worlds5;  the  mud6  for  which 
is  penance  and  regulations,  the  mover  of  which  is 
the  force  of  the  quality  of  passion7;  which  is  lit  up  8 
by  the  great  egoism,  which  is  sustained  by  the 
qualities;    the   fastenings  in  which  are  vexations9; 


1  This  means,  I  presume,  that  worldly  life  is  conditioned,  so  to 
say,  by  space  and  time.     See  p.  343  supra. 

2  I.  e.  the  cause  of  the  rotation,  Nilaka«/^a. 

3  I.  e.  unintelligent. 

4  Now  takes  the  form  of  a  man,  now  of  an  animal,  and  then  of 
some  other  thing,  Nilaka«/^a.  I  think,  however,  that  the  meaning 
is,  that  it  is  not  alike  to  all ;  different  persons  are  in  different  states 
in  this  world. 

5  Arg-una  MLrra  says  this  means  that  it  is  the  cause  of  the  move- 
ments in  all  the  worlds.  That  is  the  sense  I  extract  from  his  words, 
which  are  not  quite  clear,  lokanam  sam^arawe  hetus.  The  render- 
ing in  the  text  follows  Nilaka^Ma. 

6  I.e.,  I  presume,  that  which  retards  the  revolutions  of  the  'wheel/ 
Instead  of '  penance/  Nilaka/z/^a's  reading  is  *  the  quality  of  darkness.' 

7  Cf.  Sahkhya-karikd,  p.  1 3,  and  Va^aspati's  commentary  thereon. 

8  c  Animated,'  Nilaka«/^a.  Egoism  is  the  cause  of  the  world, 
and  of  all  knowledge  of  it.     Cf.  Sahkhya-karika,  p.  24. 

9  The  text  here  is  unsatisfactory.  I  follow  Nilaka#//£a,  who  says 
'  vexations = those  arising  from  not  obtaining  what  is  desired.' 


CHAPTER   XXX,   IO.  357 

which  revolves  in  the  midst  of  grief  and  destruction1, 
which  is  full  of  actions  and  instruments  of  action 2, 
which  is  large,  and  which  is  extended  by  means  of 
attachments3,  which  is  rendered  unsteady  by  avarice 
and  desire4,  which  is  produced  by  ignorance  of 
various  (matters) 6,  which  is  attended  upon  by  fear 
and  delusion,  and  which  is  the  cause  of  the  delusion 
of  all  beings,  which  moves  towards  joy  and  pleasure6, 
which  has  desire  and  wrath  as  its  appurtenances, 
which  is  made  up  of  (the  entities)  beginning  with 
the  Mahat  and  ending  with  the  gross  elements7, 
which  is  unchecked,  the  imperishable  source  (of  all) 8, 
the  speed  of  which  is  like  that  of  the  mind,  and 
which  is  (never)  fatigued.  This  wheel  of  life,  which 
is  associated  with  the  pairs  of  opposites,  and  which 
is  devoid  of  consciousness,  all  the  world,  together 
with  the  immortals,  should  cast  away,  abridge,  and 
check 9.    That  man,  among  all  creatures,  who  always 

1  Revolves  in  the  midst  of, = lives  upon,  is  fed  by,  Nilaka«/^a. 

2  I.  e.  the  organs  of  action,  I  presume. 

3  The  more  attachments  one  has,  the  more  one  is  tied  down  to 
worldly  life,  and  the  more  comprehensive  such  life  becomes. 

4  Avarice  is  coveting  another's  wealth  when  one  has  one's  own; 
desire  is  the  wish  for  that  which  one  has  not. 

5  Nilakafl//$a  reads  '  vi&tra,'  which  he  renders  to  mean  diversi- 
fied, as  being  made  up  of  the  three  qualities,  ignorance  there  being 
the  same  thing  as  Prakn'ti,  which  is  probably  a  better  sense  alto- 
gether than  that  obtainable  from  Ar^iina  Mora's  reading. 

6  Which  moves  by  attachment  to  external  pleasures,  &c, 
Nilaka/z/yfca.     See  p.  300  supra. 

7  I.  e.  all  the  world  developed  from  Prakrz'ti — a  common  phrase. 

8  This  is  Nflaka»/£a's  forced  meaning.  But  the  text  here  is 
doubtful.  Perhaps  the  sense  is  *  in  which  production  and  disso- 
lution are  going  on  unchecked/ 

9  See  p.  344  note.  For  the  last  word, the  variant  here  is  sthapayet, 
make  steady  or  stop. 


358  anug!ta. 


accurately  understands  the  movement  and  stoppage1 
of  the  wheel  of  life  is  never  deluded.  (That)  sage, 
released  from  all  impressions 2,  transcending  all 
pairs  of  opposites,  and  released  from  all  sins,  attains 
the  highest  goal.  The  householder,  and  the  Brah- 
maMrin,  the  forester,  and  also  the  beggar 3,  all 
these  four  orders  are  stated  to  have  the  order  of 
householder  for  their  basis.  Whatever  system  of 
rules4  is  prescribed  in  this  world,  to  follow  it  is 
good ;  this  has  been  celebrated  from  ancient  times 5. 
He  who  has  been  first  refined  by  ceremonies6,  and 
who  has  duly  observed  vows,  being  (born)  in  a  caste 
of  (high)  qualifications 7,  and  who  understands  the 
Vedas,  should  return  8  (from  his  preceptors  house). 
Always  devoted  to  his  own  wife,  behaving  like9 
good  men,  with  his  senses  restrained,  and  full  of 
faith,  one  should  perform  the  five  sacrifices10  in  this 
world.  The  sage  who  eats  what  remains  after 
(offerings)  to  deities11  and  guests,  who  is  devoted 
to  Vedic   rites,  who    duly   performs   sacrifices    and 


1  I.  e.  the  causes  of  the  revolution  and  stoppage,  Nilaka^a. 

2  Impressions  of  previous  actions,  delusions,  &c.  And  see  p.  247 
supra. 

3  I.  e.  the  Samny&sin.  4  -Sastra.    Cf.  Gita,  p.  117. 

5  '  Such  is  the  eternal  fame/  literally. 

6  I.  e.  on  whom  the  Vedic  rites  or  Sawskaras  are  duly  performed. 
And  see  Gita,  p.  122. 

7  I.  e.  one  of  the  three  higher  castes. 

8  The  original  is  the  technical  word  for  the  return  of  a  Brahma- 
Mrin  after  finishing  his  studies.    He  is  describing  the '  householder/ 

9  I.  e.  following  the  rule  of  conduct  sanctioned  by  the  good. 

10  Vide  Williams'  Dictionary,  s.v.  mah&ya^iia;  Arvalayana  Gr/hya 
III,  1,  3;  ManuII,  69;  IV,  21. 

11  Cf.  Gita,  p.  62 ;  a  guest  must  always  be  fed,  and  unless  he  is 
satisfied  the  host  must  not  eat.  Cf.  *Santi  Parvan  (Moksha),  chap. 
192,  st.  15;  Manu  III,  106;  Apastamball,  3,  7,  3. 


CHAPTER   XXX,  24.  359 

gifts  according  to  his  means,  who  is  not  thought- 
lessly active1  with  the  hand  or  foot,  who  is  not 
thoughtlessly  active  with  the  eye,  and  who  is  not 
thoughtlessly  active  with  his  speech  or  any  of  his 
limbs,  to  such  a  one  the  (word)  good  applies. 
One  should  always  have  the  sacred  thread  and  a 
clean  cloth,  and  be  of  pure  vows,  and  self-restrained, 
and  should  always  associate  with  good  men,  making 
gifts,  and  with  one's  external  organs  restrained ;  one 
should  restrain  one's  lust  and  hunger2,  should  be 
kind,  should  behave  like  the  good,  and  keep  a 
bamboo  stick  and  a  water-pot  filled  with  water3. 
One  should  learn  and  teach,  should  likewise  perform 
sacrifices  and  officiate  at  others'  sacrifices,  and  should 
give  and  receive  gifts, — (thus)  one  should  adopt  the 
sixfold  mode  of  life 4.  Know  that  three  (of  these) 
duties  are  the  means  of  livelihood  for  Brahma^as,  the 
two  teaching  and  officiating  at  sacrifices,  and  also 
receiving  untainted  gifts5.  And  as  to  the  other 
remaining  three  duties,  gift,  study,  and  sacrifice,  they 
are  pious 6  duties.  With  regard  to  those  three 
duties,  the  sage  who  understands  piety,  who  is  self- 
restrained,  kind,  possessed  of  forgiveness,  and  equable 
to  all  creatures,  should  avoid  heedlessness7.     The 

1  The  same  word  as  at  Gita,  p.  1 14,  there  rendered  'vain  activity.' 

2  Cf.  Apastamba  II,  1,1,  2  seq. 

8  Cf.  Manu  IV,  36 ;  Apastamba  II,  1,  1,  15. 

4  These  are  the  well-known  six  duties  of  Brahmawas  as  specified 
by  Manu  and  others.  See  the  discussion  of  this  point  in  the 
Introduction. 

5  Another  reading  is  l  gifts  from  an  untainted  (source)/ 

6  What  is  the  exact  meaning  of  this  here?  I  suppose  the 
meaning  is  that  the  performance  of  them  is  a  pure  performance  of 
duty;  the  others  are  duties  the  performance  of  which  supplies  one's 
own  wants,  and  is  therefore  interested.    Cf.  Gautama  X,  1  and  2. 

7  I.  e.  omission  or  mistake  in  performance. 


360  ANUGITA. 


Brahma/za  householder,  who  is  of  rigid  vows,  who 
is  thus  devoted,  discharging  all  these  duties  as 
much  as  is  in  his  power,  conquers  heaven. 


Chapter  XXXI. 
Brahman  said  : 
Thus1  duly  studying  to  the  best  of  his  power,  in 
the  way  above 2  stated,  and  likewise  living  as  a  Brah- 
ma^drin,  one  who  is  devoted  to  his  own  duty  and 
learned,  who  is  a  sage  with  all  his  senses  restrained, 
who  applies  himself  to  what  is  agreeable  and  bene- 
ficial to  the  preceptor,  who  is  pure3,  and  constant 
in  veracity  and  piety,  should,  with  the  permission 
of  the  preceptor,  take  food  without  decrying  it4, 
should  eat  (the  leavings)  of  sacrificial  offerings,  and 
alms,  and  should  stand,  sit,  and  take  exercise5  (duly), 
should  sacrifice  twice  to  the  fire  after  becoming 
clean  and  with  a  concentrated  (mind),  and  should 
always  bear  a  staff  of  the  Bilva  or  Pala^a 6  (wood). 
The  clothing  of  the  twice-born  (man)  should  be  of 
linen,  or  of  cotton,  or  also  a  deerskin,  or  a  cloth 
entirely  (dyed  with)  reddish  colour.  There  should 
also  be  a  girdle  of  mun^a ;  he  should  have  matted 
hair,  and  likewise  always  (carry)  water  (with  him), 
and  have  his  sacred  thread,  be  engaged  in  sacred 

1  Arg-una  MLsra  says, '  Having  described  first  the  order  of  house- 
holder, as  that  is  the  chief,  he  now  describes  that  of  Brahma^arin.' 
Cf.  Apastamba  II,  9,  21,  1,  and  note. 

2  Where  ?     This  is  obscure. 

3  Both  internally  and  externally,  I  presume. 

4  Cf.  Taittiriya,  p.  129  ;  *Santi  Parvan  (Moksha),  chap.  192,  st.  6. 

5  Cf.  Gita,  p.  69.  Ar^-una  MLsra  says,  '  Having  exercise  by 
means  of  standing  and  sitting;  the  meaning  is  not  sleeping  except 
at  the  proper  time/ 

6  Cf.  Manu  II,  41  seq. 


CHAPTER   XXXI,   1 4.  36 1 

study,  and  free  from  avarice,  and  of  rigid  observances. 
(Such)  a  Brahma/£&rin,  always  making  offerings  like- 
wise of  pure  water  to  satisfy  the  deities,  being 
restrained  in  mind1,  is  esteemed.  One  who  is  thus 
devoted2,  who  is  concentrated  in  mind,  and  con- 
tinent3, conquers  heaven,  and  reaching  the  highest 
seat,  does  not  return  to  birth.  Refined  by  means 
of  all  ceremonies,  and  likewise  living  as  a  Brahma- 
Mrin4,  a  sage  who  has  renounced5  (all)  should  go  out 
of  towns  and  dwell  in  forests6.  Wearing  a  skin  or 
the  bark  of  a  tree,  he  should  bathe  (every)  morning 
and  evening,  and  always  living  within  the  forest, 
should  not  enter  a  town  again.  He  should  honour 
guests,  and  should  also  give  them  shelter  at  (the 
proper)  time,  living  on  fruits  and  leaves,  and  roots 
and  .Sy&mcLka  grain.  He  should  without  sloth  feed  on 
water,  air,  and  all  forest-products  down  to  grass  as  they 
come,  in  order7,  in  accordance  with  the  (regulations8 
at  his)  initiation.  He  should  honour  a  guest  who 
comes,  by  (giving  him)  water  accompanied  with  roots, 
fruits,  and  leaves.  And  he  should  always  without 
sloth  give  alms  out  of  whatever  he  has  for  food.  He 
should  also  eat  always  after  the  deities  and  guests9 

1  Or  it  may  be,  '  being  self- restrained  and  with  (all  his)  heart/ 
The  constructions  in  the  original  vary  greatly,  and  so  they  do  in 
the  translation.  2  Applying  himself  to  his  duties. 

3  Cf.  Maitri,  p.  18,  and  comment  there. 

4  Cf.  Manu  VI,  1  seq.  5  I.  e.  who  is  a  mendicant  ascetic. 

6  Cf.  p.  173  supra,  note  9.  Here  he  gives  a  description  of  the 
third  order  of  forester,  as  to  which  compare  generally  Manu  VI. 

7  First  the  jungle-products,  then  air,  &c,  Ar^una  Mirra.  The 
sense  seems  to  be  that  the  restrictions  should  become  gradually 
harder.  Cf.  Manu VI,  24-31 ;  Apastamba  II,  9,  2 2, 2 seq.;  11,9, 23, 2. 

8  I.  e.  whatever  restriction  he  put  on  himself  when  entering  upon 
the  particular  mode  of  life. 

9  Supra,  p.  358,  and  cf.  Taittiriya,  p.  38. 


362  anugItA. 


(are  satisfied)  and  with  his  speech  restrained,  having 
a  mind  free  from  envy1,  eating  little,  and  depending 
on  the  deities.  Restraining  the  external  senses,  kind, 
full  of  forgiveness,  preserving  his  hair  and  moustache, 
performing  sacrifices,  addicted  to  sacred  study,  and 
devoted  to  veracity  and  piety,  pure  in  body2,  always 
dexterous3,  always  in  forests,  and  concentrated  in 
mind, — a  forester  whose  senses  are  subdued  and 
who  is  thus  devoted4  conquers  the  worlds.  A  house- 
holder, or  a  Brahma/£arin,  or  again  a  forester,  who 
wishes  to  apply  himself  to  final  emancipation  should 
adopt  the  best  (line  of)  conduct5.  Offering  safety 
to  all  beings,  the  sage  should  become  free  from  all 
action6,  and  be  agreeable  to  all  beings,  kind,  and 
restrained  in  all  his  senses.  He  should  make  a 
fire7  and  feed  on  the  alms  (obtained)  without  ask- 
ing8 and  without  trouble9,  and  which  have  come 
spontaneously10,  in  a  place  free  from  smoke  and 
where    people    have    already11    eaten.      One    who 

1  I.  e.  of  others  for  obtaining  more,  and  so  forth.  Ar^una 
Misra's  reading  is  different,  and  he  renders  it  to  mean,  '  one  by 
whom  the  rule  of  life  as  a  BrahmaHrin  has  not  been  violated/ 

2  Ar^iina  Mura's  reading,  '  one  who  has  cast  away  (all  attach- 
ment to)  the  body/  Compare  as  to  hair  and  moustache,  Manu  VI, 
6  seq. 

3  See  Gita,  p.  127.  Here  the  meaning  is  probably  assiduous  in 
the  performance  of  duties,  vows,  and  so  forth. 

4  I.  e.  applies  himself  to  his  duties. 

5  Arg-una  Mwra  says  this  means  anandajramam,  but  there  must 
be  some  bad  copying  here.  I  take  the  word  as  it  stands  to  mean 
something  like  the  'godlike  endowments'  at  Gita,  p.  114. 

6  See  Gita,  pp.  54,  127.  The  meaning  here  is  probably  that  of 
action  without  egoism.     See  Gita,  p.  55. 

7  I.  e.  Ar^una  Mura  says,  '  not  at  night/  The  readings  are 
unsatisfactory.  I  read  krz'tva  vahnim,  but  diffidently.  Is  the  allusion 
to  the  rule  at  Apastamba  II,  9,  21,  10  ?     Cf.  Gautama  III,  27. 

8  Cf.  Kaushitaki,  p.  32.  9  I.  e.  to  the  giver.  Cf.  Gita,  p.  120. 
30  See  Gft£,  p.  10.          u  Cf.  Manu  VI,  56;  Gautama  III,  15. 


CHAPTER   XXXI,  26.  363 

understands  final  emancipation  should  seek  to  ob- 
tain alms  after  the  cleaning1  of  the  vessels  (used 
for  cooking),  and  should  not  rejoice  if  he  obtains, 
and  should  not  be  dejected  if  he  does  not  obtain 
(alms).  Nor  should  he  beg  for  too  much  alms2, 
seeking  merely  to  sustain  life.  Eating  only  a  little, 
he  should  go  about  for  alms  with  a  concentrated 
mind,  looking  out  for  the  (proper)  time.  He  should 
not  wish  for  earnings  in  common  with  another,  nor 
should  he  eat  when  honoured ;  for  an  ascetic  should 
be  averse  from  all  earnings  (accompanied)  with 
honour3.  When  eating,  he  should  not  taste  any 
articles  of  food  which  have  been  eaten  by  others4, 
or  which  are  pungent,  astringent,  or  bitter,  and  like- 
wise no  sweet  juices.  He  should  eat  just  enough 
for  his  livelihood — for  the  support  of  life.  One 
who  understands  final  emancipation  should  seek  for 
a  livelihood  without  obstructing  (other)  creatures ; 
and  when  he  goes  about  for  alms,  he  should  not 
go  following  after  another5.  He  should  not  parade 
(his)  piety,  he  should  move  about  in  a  secluded 
place,  free  from  passion.  He  should  resort  for 
shelter  to  an  empty  house,  or  a  forest,  or  the  foot 
of  a  tree,  or  a  river  likewise,  or  the  cavern  of  a 
mountain.  In  summer,  (he  should  pass)  but  a 
single  night6  in  a  town ;  and  in  the  rains,  he  may 
dwell    in  one  place.     He   should  move  about  the 

1  I.  e.,  I  presume,  in  order  to  avoid  interfering  with  others' 
comforts.     And  see  last  note. 

2  See  Manu  VI,  55.    As  to  proper  time  further  on,  see  last  note. 

3  Cf.  Sanatsu^-atiya,  pp.  145-147;  'without  respect*  at  Gita, 
p.  120,  means  probably  with  disrespect,  otherwise  that  passage 
and  this  would  be  somewhat  inconsistent.    See  too  Manu  II,  162. 

4  Cf.  Manu  II,  56;  GM,  p.  118;  and  p.  269  supra. 

5  As  that  other  may  get  nothing  if  they  go  together,  Arg-una 
Mi^ra.     Cf.  Manu  VI,  51.  6  Cf.  Gautama  III,  21. 


364  anugitA. 

world  like  a  worm1,  his  path  being  pointed  out  by 
the  sun,  and  he  should  walk  with  circumspection 
over  the  earth  out  of  compassion  to  all  beings2. 
He  should  not  make  any  accumulations;  and  should 
eschew  dwelling  with  friends 3.  And  the  man  who 
understands  final  emancipation  should  verily  do  all 
acts  which  he  has  to  do,  always  with  clean  water. 
A  man  should  always  bathe  in  clean  water.  And 
with  his  senses  restrained,  he  should  devote  himself 
to  these  eight  observances4, — harmlessness,  life  as  a 
Brahma^drin,  veracity,  and  also  straightforwardness, 
freedom  from  anger,  freedom  from  (the  habit  of) 
carping,  restraint  of  the  external  organs,  and  habi- 
tual freedom  from  (the  habit  of)  backbiting.  He 
should  always  practice  a  sinless  (mode  of)  conduct, 
not  deceptive  and  not  crooked ;  and  free  from  attach- 
ment should  always  make  one  who  comes  (as  a  guest) 
take  a  morsel  of  food.  He  should  eat  just  enough 
for  livelihood — for  the  support  of  life.  And  he 
should  eat  (only)  what  has  been  obtained  with 
piety5,  and  should  not  follow  his  own  (mere)  desire6. 
He  should  not  accept  anything  at  all  other  than 
food  and  clothing.  And  he  should  accept  as  much 
as  he  eats  and  no  more.  He  should  not  receive 
from  others,  nor  should   he  ever  give  to  others7. 

1  I.  e.  not  very  fast,  Aig-una  Mura ;  '  the  path  being  pointed  out 
by  the  sun'rrnot  at  night,  for  fear  of  destroying  worms,  &c. 

2  This  seems  to  be  very  like  the  practice  of  the  Gainas  of  the 
present  day.    And  cf.  Manu  VI,  69.  3  Cf.  Gita,  pp.  68-103. 

4  Cf.  Gita,  p.  114,  and  cf.  also  Sanatsu^atiya,  p.  153. 

5  That  is  to  say,  obtained  without  violation  of  any  binding  obli- 
gation, or  rule  of  the  *Sastras.  6  Cf.  Gita,  p.  117. 

7  This  is  not  very  clear,  and  Ar^una  MLrra's  comments  are  not 
intelligible.  The  sense  seems  to  be  this,  'He  should  not  take  more 
than  is  wanted,  nor  should  he  keep  any  accumulations  from  which  to 
give  to  others,  but  should  a  t  o  n  c  e  share  with  others  all  that  is  earned/ 


CHAPTER    XXXI,  39.  365 

But   owing  to  the  helplessness   of  people,  a  wise 
man  should  always  share  (with  others).     He  should 
not  appropriate  another's  riches,  and  should  not  take 
(anything)  unasked.     Nor,  verily,  after  enjoying  any 
object  should  one  become  afterwards  attached  to  it. 
One  who  has  anything  to  do1  should  take  earth, 
water,   pebbles   likewise,   and   leaves,    flowers,    and 
fruits  which  are  not  secured2  (by  anybody),  as  they 
come3.     One  should  not  live  by  the  occupation  of 
an   artisan4,   nor   should    one  wish  for  gold.     One 
should  not  hate,  should  not  teach5,  and  should  be 
void  of  (all)  belongings 6.     One  should  eat  what  is 
consecrated  by  faith7,  and  should  avoid  (all)  con- 
troversies, should   act   without   a   purpose8,  should 
be  free  from  attachment,  and  without  fixed  appoint- 
ments with  people9.     One  should  not  perform,  or 
cause  to  be  performed,  any  action  involving  expec- 
tation of  fruit,  or  involving  any  destruction  of  life, 
or  the  assemblage  of  people10.    Rejecting  all  things, 

1  Ar^-una  Mwra  says  that  this  means  if  he  wants  them  for  any 
particular  purpose  he  should  take  the  earth,  &c. 

2  I.  e.  apparently,  taken  possession  of  and  preserved  as  one's  own 
by  anybody. 

3  Argnna  MLsra  renders  this  by  l  which  lead  to  action/  Is  it  not 
rather  the  '  spontaneous  earnings'  at  GM,  p.  60  ? 

4  Cf.  Manu  III,  64;  Apastamba  I,  6,  18, 18;  Gautama  XVII,  7. 
6  I.  e.  teach  one  who  does  not  ask  to  be  instructed.     Cf.  Manu 

II,no. 

6  Cf.  GM,  p.  60 ;  the  original  word,  however,  is  not  the  same. 

7  See  p.  360,  note  3  supra;  Manu  II,  54-55;  Gautama  IX,  59. 
'  Controversies ;'  the  original  is  nimitta,  and  the  interpretation  is 
what  appears  to  be  Ar^una  MLsra's.  It  may  also  mean  '  omens/ 
That  this  is  the  true  sense  appears  from  Manu  VI,  50. 

8  Cf.  Gita,  p.  48. 

9  ArgTina  MLrra  says,  '  e.  g.  I  shall  come  to  you  to-morrow  for 
alms/  &c.     Cf.  Apastamba  I,  6,  19,  12. 

10  The  words  are  the  same  as  at  Gita,  p.  54,  *  keeping  people  (to 


366  ANUGITA. 


and  being  equable  to  all  beings,  moving  and  un- 
moving,  one  should  become  an  ascetic  with  small 
belongings.  One  should  not  perturb  any  other  (per- 
son), nor  should  one  be  perturbed  by  any  other 
(person1).  He  who  is  trusted  by  all  beings  is  said 
to  be  the  foremost  among  those  who  understand 
final  emancipation.  One  should  not  think  of  what 
is  not  come2,  nor  reflect  on  that  which  is  past;  one 
should  disregard  the  present,  being  concentrated  (in 
mind)  and  indifferent  to  time3.  He  should  not  de- 
file4 anything  by  the  eye,  or  the  mind,  or  by  speech, 
nor  should  he  do  anything  wrong  openly  or  in  secret. 
One  who  draws  in  the  senses  from  all  sides  as  a  tor- 
toise (draws  in)  his  limbs5,  and  in  whom  the  senses, 
mind,  and  understanding  are  absorbed6,  who  is  free 
from  desires,  who  understands  all  truth,  who  is  free 
from  the  pairs  of  opposites,  and  from  the  ceremony 
of  svaha,  and  who  is  free  from  salutations7,  and 
who  is  free  from  (the  thought  that  this  or  that  is) 
mine,  who  is  free  from  egoism,  who  is  free  from 
anxiety  for  new  acquisitions  or  protection  of  old 
acquisitions,  and  self-controlled8,  who  is  free  from 

their  duties)/  but  the  sense  seems  to  be  different.  The  commen- 
tators say  nothing  on  this. 

1  Cf.  Gita,  p.  101. 

2  I.  e.  one  should  not  look  to  the  future  with  any  aspirations  or 
expectations,  and  should  not  look  back  on  the  past  with  grief, 
Argnna  Mura.     See  too  p.  170,  note  9  supra. 

3  I  am  not  sure  if  this  is  a  correct  interpretation.  But  it  does 
not  seem  likely  that  the  other  possible  sense — literally  'expecting 
time ' — can  be  intended  here. 

4  This  is  obscure.  Is  the  sense  this,  that  one  should  not  observe, 
or  think,  or  speak  badly  or  of  the  bad  side  of  things  ? 

5  Cf.  p.  342  supra,  note  1.  6  Cf.  KaMa,  p.  151. 

7  See  p.  352  supra,  note  1. 

8  Cf.  Gftl,  p.  48,  where  the  original  words  are  the  same. 


CHAPTER    XXXI,  5 1.  367 

expectations,  who  is  free  from  attachments  to  any 
entity,  and  who  is  dependent  on  none1,  who  is  at- 
tached to  the  self,  and  who  understands  the  truth, 
is  emancipated,  there  is  no  doubt  of  that.  Those 
who  perceive  the  self,  which  is  without  hands,  foot, 
or  back,  without  a  head,  without  a  stomach,  which 
is  free  from  the  operations  of  the  qualities2,  abso- 
lute, untainted,  and  stable,  devoid  of  smell,  devoid 
of  taste  or  touch,  devoid  of  colour,  and  also  devoid 
of  sound,  which  is  to  be  understood3,  which  is  un- 
attached, and  which  is  also  devoid  of  flesh,  which 
is  free  from  anxiety4,  imperishable,  divine,  and 
though  dwelling  in  a  house5,  always  dwelling  in  all 
entities,  they  never  die 6.  There  the  understanding 
reaches  not,  nor  the  senses,  nor  the  deities,  nor 
Vedas,  sacrifices,  nor  worlds7,  nor  penance,  nor 
valour8;  the  attainment  to  it  of  those  who  are 
possessed  of  knowledge  is  stated  to  be  without 
comprehension  of  symbols 9.  Therefore  the  learned 
man  who  knows  (the)  property  of  being  void  of 
symbols10,    being    devoted   to    pious    conduct,    and 

1  Cf.  Gita,  p.  60. 

2  These  are  effects  of  Prakrz'ti  by  which  the  Purushais  unaffected. 

3  Literally, '  pursued/ 

4  This  is  obscure.  Ar^una  Mura's  text  is  nis&tyam.  Does  that 
mean  '  which  should  be  accurately  understood  ?'  The  rendering  in 
the  text  of  NilakawMa's  reading  may  mean  that  the  Brahman  has 
no  such  thoughts  (&nta)  as  are  referred  to  at  Gita,  p.  115. 

5  Does  this  mean  the  body  ? 

6  I.  e.  are  free  from  birth  and  death.    Cf.  Apastamba  I,  8,  22, 4. 

7  This,  again,  is  not  quite  clear.  Probably  the  explanation  is 
to  be  found  in  the  passage  at  Gita,  p.  79. 

8  Nilaka^a's  reading  is  i  observances  or  vows/ 

9  I.  e.  'not  to  be  acquired  by  inference/  Ar^una  Mijra,  p. 33 1  supra, 

10  See  p.  309  supra ;  '  who  is  without  symbols,  and  knows  piety/ 
according  to  Ar^una  Mura's  reading. 


368  ANUGITA. 

resorting  to  concealed1  piety  should  adopt  the  mode 
of  life  (necessary)  for  experience2.  Though  unde- 
luded,  he  should  act  in  the  manner  of  the  deluded 3, 
not  finding  fault  with  piety4.  He  should  perform 
piety,  behaving  so  that  others  would  always  dis- 
respect him5,  and  should  not  find  fault  with  the 
ways  of  the  good6.  That  sage  is  said  to  be  the 
best  who  has  adopted  this  (line  of)  conduct.  The 
senses,  and  the  objects  of  the  senses,  and  the  five 
great  elements,  and  mind,  understanding,  egoism, 
the  unperceived,  and  the  Purusha  likewise7,  by  an 
accurate  determination  about  the  truth,  after  under- 
standing all  these,  one  attains  heaven8,  being 
released  from  all  bonds.  One  who  knows  the  truth, 
understanding  these  same  (entities)  at  the  time  of  the 
termination  (of  his  life),  should  meditate,  exclusively 
pondering  on  one  point9;  and  then,  depending  on 
none10,  he  gets  emancipation.  Freed  from  all  attach- 
ments, like  the  atmosphere  dwelling  in  space11,  with 
his  accumulations12  exhausted,  and  free  from  dis- 
tress13, he  attains  to  the  highest  seat. 

1  See  p.  159  supra,  note  7,  and  cf.  Manu  III,  109,  which  is  the 
text  referred  to  in  note  5  there. 

2  I.  e.  direct  perception  of  the  Brahman.    See  Gitsi,  p.  57,  note  5. 

3  See  p.  160  supra,  note  8,  and  cf.  also  Manu  II,  no. 

4  Ar^una  Mwra  compares  Gitd,  p. 55,  about  'shaking  convictions.' 

5  Cf.  pp.  1 59-1 6 1  supra. 

6  This  means,  I  presume,  the  good  devoted  to  action  and  not 
to  knowledge  only. 

7  These  are  the  famous  elements  of  the  Sarikhyas;  see  Sutra  1, 6 1. 

8  Cf.  p.  159  and  note  2.  9  Cf.  p.  300  supra. 

10  Cf.  Gtta,  p.  60.  n  Cf.  Gita,  p.  82,  note  3. 

12  Of  actions  previously  performed.     See  p.  246  supra. 

18  Cf.  Gitd,  p.  1 01,  where,  however,  the  original  word  is  different. 


CHAPTER   XXXII,  6.  369 


Chapter  XXXII. 

Brahman  said : 
The  ancients  who  perceived  the  established  (truth) 
call  renunciation 1  penance ;  and  the  Br&hma^as 
dwelling  in  the  seat  of  the  Brahman 2  understand 
knowledge  to  be  concerned  with  the  Brahman 3.  The 
highest  Brahman  is  very  far  off3,  and  (the  attain- 
ment of  it)  depends  on  Vedic  knowledge  4 ;  it  is  free 
from  the  pairs  of  opposites,  devoid  of  qualities 5,  ever- 
lasting, of  unthinkable  qualities,  and  supreme.  The 
men  of  talent,  who  are  pure 6,  and  whose  minds  are 
refined,  transcending  passion,  and  being  untainted, 
perceive  that  supreme  (principle)  by  means  of  know- 
ledge and  penance.  Those  who  are  constantly  de- 
voted to  renunciation 7,  and  understand  the  Brahman 
and  wish  for  the  supreme,  go  to  the  happy  path 
by  penance,  Penance8  is  said  to  be  a  light ;  (correct) 
conduct  is  the  means  to  piety;  knowledge  verily 
should  be  understood  to  be  the  highest,  and  re- 
nunciation the  best  penance.  He  who  understands 
determinately  the  self  which  is  unperturbed,  which 
abides   in   all    entities,  and  which   is   the    essential 

1  Abandoning  of  fruit,  Ar^una  MLsra.     Cf.  Gita,  p.  121. 

2  Cf.  p.  339  supra,  note  4,  dwelling  in=adhering  to. 

3  See  GM,  p.  104. 

4  Cf.  Sanatsu^-atiya,  p.  158  seq.      5  Viz.  the  three  famous  ones. 

6  Pure,  refined,  and  untainted  are  not  easily  distinguished.  Pro- 
bably 'pure'  refers  to  external  cleanliness  ;  'untainted'  to  freedom 
from  sin  and  such  taints;  and  ' refined '  to  freedom  from  error. 

7  I.  e.  who  have  no  '  belongings/  Ar^una  Mi-sra. 

8  Action  without  desire,  Argrma  MLsra,  who  adds  that  it  is  called 
a  light,  as  it  leads  to  knowledge.  See  too  p.  166,  and  p.  247, 
note  11,  and  p.  340  supra. 

[8]  B  b 


3  JO  ANUGITA. 


element  in  knowledge,  he  is  laid  down1  (as  being 
able)  to  move  everywhere.  The  learned  man  who 
perceives,  association  and  dissociation,  and  likewise 
unity  and  diversity2,  is  released  from  misery.  He 
who  desires  nothing,  and  despises  nothing3,  becomes 
eligible,  even  dwelling  in  this  world,  for  assimilation 
with  the  Brahman4.  He  who  knows  the  truth  about 
the  qualities  of  Pradhana5,  and  understands  the  Pra- 
dhana of  all  entities 6,  who  is  free  from  (the  thought 
that  this  or  that  is)  mine,  and  free  from  egoism 7,  is 
emancipated,  there  is  no  doubt  of  that.  One  who 
is  free  from  the  pairs  of  opposites,  free  from  the 
(ceremonies  of)  salutation,  free  from  (the  ceremony 
of)  svadhd8,  attains  to  that  everlasting  (principle) 
which  is  free  from  the  pairs  of  opposites,  and  devoid 
of  qualities,  by  tranquillity  only.  Abandoning  all 
action,  whether  agreeable  or  disagreeable,  developed 
from  the  qualities 9,  and  abandoning  both  truth  and 
falsehood10,  a  creature  is  emancipated,  there  is  no 
doubt  of  that.      The   great  tree   of  Brahman11  is 

1  'Laid  down'  is  literally  'wished/ 

2  I  presume  this  means  the  real  fact  underlying  the  appear- 
ances of  association  and  so  forth,  namely,  that  there  is  but  one 
reality,  and  all  appearances  of  difference  &c.  are  unreal.  Cf.  Gita, 
p.  124.     See  also  p.  313  supra,  note  1,  and  p.  374  infra. 

3  Cf.  Gita,  p.  65,  and  see  Ka/^a,  p.  155.  4  Cf.  Gita,  p.  65. 

5  The  qualities,  viz.  the  three,  of  Pradhana,  i.  e.  constituting  Pra- 
krz'ti,  or  nature.  6  See  Gita,  p.  106,  and  note  3  there. 

7  For  this  whole  expression  which  occurs  so  frequently,  cf. 
Maitri,  p.  44,  and  comment  there. 

8  See  p.324  supra,  note  8.     9  Cf.Gita,  p.  48;  *SVeta^vatara,p.36o. 

10  I.  e.,  I  presume,  what  is  real  and  unreal  in  a  worldly  view, — the 
great  truth  is  not  to  be  'abandoned.'  Cf.  Taittiriya,  pp.  97-99; 
p.  191  supra;  *Santi  Parvan  (Moksha),  chap.  174,  st.  53;  Apastamba 
II,  9,  21,  13. 

11  I.  e.,  says  Ar^una  MLrra,  the  tree  of  worldly  life  produced  from 
the  Brahman.     Compare  chapter  XII  supra. 


CHAPTER    XXXII,   I  7.  371 

eternal ;  a  tree  which  is  produced  from  the  unper- 
ceived  as  the  seed,  which  consists  of  the  under- 
standing as  its  trunk,  whose  collection  of  boughs 
is  the  great  egoism,  the  sprouts  within  which  are 
the  senses,  the  great  branches  of  which  are  the 
great  elements,  and  the  side  branches  the  objects 
of  sense,  which  is  always  possessed  of  leaves,  always 
possessed  of  flowers,  in  which  agreeable  and  dis- 
agreeable fruits  are  always  produced,  and  which  is 
fed  upon  by  all  creatures.  Cutting  and  piercing  this 
(tree)1  with  the  sword  of  knowledge  of  the  truth,  and 
abandoning  the  bonds  in  the  shape  of  attachment, 
which  cause  birth,  death,  and  old  age2,  a  wise  man  who 
is  free  from  (the  thought  that  this  or  that  is)  mine, 
and  who  is  devoid  of  egoism,  is  emancipated,  there 
is  no  doubt  of  that  There  are  these  two  birds3, 
(which  are)  unchanging,  and  which  should  also  be 
known  to  be  unintelligent4.  But  as  to  that  other 
who  is  above  them,  he  is  called  intelligent.  (When) 
the  inner  self,  devoid  of  knowledge  of  nature  5,  and 
(as  it  were)  non-intelligent6,  understands  that  which  is 

1  Cf.  Gita,  p.  in;  and  Mu/z^aka,  p.  307,  and  commentary  there. 

2  So  I  render  the  original,  though  the  sense  at  first  sight  appears 
to  be  '  which  are  caused  by  birth/  &c. 

3  Viz.  the  understanding  and  egoism,  which  dwell  in  the  '  tree/ 
Arguna  Misra.    Nilakaw/^a  says, '  the  great  and  the  individual  self.' 

4  Cf.  Sarikhya-karika  11,  and  comment  ofVa&tspati  Mura.  The 
self  is  not  unintelligent;  and  as  the  birds  are  so  described,  they 
must  stand  for  some  manifestation  of  Prakrz'ti,  which  understand- 
ing and  egoism  are.  Otherwise  '  bird '  does  stand  for  '  self/  See 
p.  189  supra. 

5  The  original  word  here  is  sattva,  on  which  see  p.  351  supra. 
Ar^-una  Mura  renders  it  here  by  Prakn'ti. 

6  So  Nilaka///£a;  'the  only  intelligent  principle/ — Ar^una  Mkra. 
On  Nilaka^a's  interpretation  'inner  self  must  be  the  same  thing 
as  Bhutatman  at  Maitri,  p.  41. 

B   b    2 


372  anugIta. 


beyond  nature,  then  understanding  the  Kshetra1,  and 
with  an  understanding  comprehending  all,  and  tran- 
scending the  qualities  2  he  is  released  from  all  sins. 


Chapter  XXXIII. 
Brahman  said: 
Some  (think  of)  the  Brahman  as  a  tree ;  some 
(think  of)  the  Brahman  as  a  great  forest ;  and  some 
(think  of)  the  Brahman  as  unperceived ;  and  some 
as  transcendent  and  without  misery3;  and  they4 
think  all  this  to  be  produced  from  and  absorbed 
into  the  unperceived.  He  who  even  for  (the  space 
of)  a  (single)  exhalation,  at  the  time  of  the  termina- 
tion (of  life5)  becomes  equable6,  attaining  to  the 
self,  becomes  fit  for  immortality.  Restraining  the 
self  in  the  self7,  even  for  (the  space  of)  a  wink,  he 
repairs  to  the  inexhaustible  acquisition8  of  those 
who  have  knowledge,  through  the  tranquillity  of  the 
self9.      And    restraining   the   life-winds   again   and 

1  See  p.  351  supra.  2  See  GM,  p.  109. 

3  As  to  the  first  two  clauses  comp.  pp.  284-371  supra;  the  last 
two  are  said  by  Ar^una  Mura  to  represent  the  Sahkhya  and  Yoga 
doctrines  respectively. 

4  I  presume  this  means  all  teachers.  But  Nilaka^a  takes  it  to 
mean  the  Sdhkhyas,  and  he  takes  the  preceding  words  as  indicating 
two  views  based  on  -Sruti  texts,  viz.  the  first,  that  the  world  is  a 
development  of  the  Brahman,  and  the  other  that  the  Brahman  does 
not  undergo  any  development  or  change.  Anamaya  he  takes  to 
mean  changeless,  and  Brahmamaya  he  takes  to  mean  developed 
from  the  Brahman. 

5  Cf.  Gita,  pp.  77,  78. 

6  One  who  sees  the  supreme  as  the  only  real  entity,  Ar^una 
Mirra.  Nilaka/z/£a  takes  it  to  mean  one  who  identifies  himself 
with  everything.     See  GM,  p.  6%,  and  note  4  there. 

7  See  p.  344  supra.  8  L  e.  the  goal  to  be  acquired. 

9  'Tranquillity' — the  original  may  also  be  rendered  by  'favour/ 


CHAPTER    XXXIII,  J.  ^7 2> 

again  by  control  of  the  life- winds  \  of  ten  or  twelve2 
(modes),  (he  repairs  to)  that  which  is  beyond  the 
twenty-four 3.  Thus  having  first  a  tranquil  self,  he 
obtains  whatever  he  desires.  When  the  quality 
of  goodness  predominates  in  the  unperceived 4,  that 
fits  one  for  immortality.  The  men  of  knowledge 
extol  nothing  else  beyond  goodness.  By  inference5 
we  understand  the  (attainment  to  the)  being  to  de- 
pend on  goodness.  It  is  not  possible  otherwise6  to 
attain  to  that  being,  O  best  of  the  twice-born !  For- 
giveness, courage,  harmlessness,  equability,  truth, 
straightforwardness,  knowledge,  abandonment7,  and 
also  renunciation  are  laid  down  as  (constituting)  con- 
as  to  which  cf.  p.  234  supra,  but  further  on  the  phrase  'having  a 
tranquil  self  occurs,  where  the  latter  sense  is  not  quite  suitable. 
See  GM,  p.  51,  and  Yoga-sutra  I,  33. 

1  I.e.  the  specific  modes  which  are  mentioned  of  control  of  life - 
winds,  e.g.  at  Gita,  p.  61,  or  Yoga--sutra  II,  49  seq. 

2  Nilakara/^a  proposes  two  interpretations  of  this.  He  says  the 
ten  are  the  eight  mentioned  in  Yoga-sutra  II,  29,  and  in  addition 
tarka  and  vairagya  (as  to  which  see  Yoga-sutra  I,  15  and  17).  To 
make  up  the  twelve  he  substitutes  for  the  last  two  the  four  named 
at  Yoga-sutra  I,  33.  He  also  suggests  that  'ten  or  twelve'  may 
mean  twenty-two,  which  he  makes  up  thus.  The  five  modes  of 
yama  (Yoga-sutra  II,  30),  five  of  niyama  (ibid.  32),  the  remaining 
six  in  Yoga-sutra  II,  29,  the  four  in  Yoga-sutra  I,  33,  and  tarka  and 
vairagya  as  before. 

3  The  twenty-four  are  the  elements  according  to  the  Sankhya 
system.  See  Sahkhya-s&ra,  p.  11,  and  p.  368  supra.  That  which 
is  beyond  them  is  Purusha. 

4  The  unperceived,  it  should  be  noted,  is  made  up  of  the  three 
qualities ;  the  predominance  of  goodness  indicates  enlightenment 
or  knowledge.     Cf.  Gita,  p.  108. 

5  The  middle  term  in  the  inference  being,  says  Ar^una  Mura, 
the  enlightening  effect  of  the  quality  in  question. 

6  Cf.  p.  167  supra. 

7  The  original  is  tyaga,  which  Arg-una  MLsra  renders  by  '  aban- 
donment of  all  belongings;'  renunciation,  scil.  of  fruit.  Cf.  Gita, 
p.  121,  and  p.  114. 


374  ANUGITA. 


duct  of  the  quality  of  goodness.  By  this  very  inference 
the  wise  verily  believe  in  the  Being  and  nature  as 
one,  there  is  no  doubt  of  that.  Some  learned  men, 
who  are  devoted  to  knowledge,  assert  the  unity  of 
the  Kshetra^na  and  nature 1.  But  that  is  not  correct. 
That  they  are  always  distinct  (from  one  another) 
is  also  (said)  without  (due)  consideration2.  Dis- 
tinction and  also  association  3  should  be  accurately 
understood.  Unity  and  diversity4  are  likewise  laid 
down.  Such  is  the  doctrine  of  the  learned.  Between 
the  gnat  and  the  udumbara5  there  is  observed 
unity  and  diversity  also.  As  a  fish  is  in  water 
distinct  (from  it),  such  is  their  relation  ;  (such  is) 
the  relation  of  the  drops  of  water  with  the  leaf  of 
the  lotus. 

The  preceptor  said  : 
Then    those    Brahma/zas,  who   were  the  best  of 
sages,  having  again   felt   doubts,   interrogated   the 
grandsire  of  the  people  who  spoke  to  them  thus. 

1  Here,  says  Nilaka^Ma,  the  author  indicates  an  objection  to  the 
proposition  stated  just  before.     But  the  passage  is  not  clear. 

2  This,  says  Nilaka»//$a,  is  a  reply  to  the  Sankhyas,  who  hold  the 
two  to  be  distinct.  Nilaka/z/^a  adds,  that  if  the  two  are  distinct, 
nature  will,  conceivably,  adhere  even  to  an  emancipated  creature ; 
and  if  they  are  one,  then  the  being  or  self  would  be  really  engaging 
in  action  and  so  forth,  and  that  activity  being  really  a  property  of 
the  self,  could  not  be  destroyed  save  by  the  destruction  of  the  self. 
Hence  that  view  is  also  wrong. 

8  Like  that  of  sea  and  wave,  Nilakaw/^a. 

4  Unity  of  Brahman  and  diversity  of  manifestation  of  nature, 
Ar^-una  Mi^ra,  who  adds — by  reason  of  the  association  they  are 
spoken  of  as  one,  by  reason  of  the  unity  and  diversity  they  are 
distinct.     The  next  sentence  contains  three  parallel  cases. 

5  Cf.  as  to  all  this,  -Santi  Parvan,  chap.  194,  st.  38  seq.  (Moksha 
Dharma);  chap.  249,  st.  20  seq. ;  chap.  285,  st.  33  seq. 


CHAPTER    XXXIV,   7.  375 


Chapter  XXXIV. 

The  sages  said : 
Which  (form  of)  piety  is  deemed  to  be  the  most 
worthy  of  being  performed  ?  We  observe  the  various 
modes  of  piety  to  be  as  it  were  contradictory.  Some  say 
(it 1  remains)  after  the  body  (is  destroyed) ;  some  say 
that  is  not  so.  Some  (say)  everything 2  is  doubtful ; 
and  others  that  there  is  no  doubt  Some  say  the 
permanent  (principle)  is  impermanent,  and  others,  too, 
that  it  exists,  and  (others)  that  it  exists  not 3.  Some 
(say  it  is)  of  one  form  or  twofold,  and  others  (that 
it  is)  mixed4.  Some  Brihma^as,  too,  who  know  the 
Brahman  and  perceive  the  truth,  believe  it  to  be  one  ; 
others  distinct;  and  others  again  (that  it  is)  manifold5. 
Some  say  both  time  and  space  (exist)  6,and  others  that 
that  is  not  so.  Some  have  matted  hair  and  skins  ; 
and  some  (are)  clean-shaven  and  without  covering. 
Some  people  are  for  bathing;  some  for  the  omission7 
of  bathing.  Some  are  for  taking  food ;  others  are 
intent  on  fasting.     Some  people  extol  action,  and 

1  I.  e.  the  piety,  Ar^una  MLrra  ;  the  self,  Nilaka^/^a. 

2  I.  e.  such  as  piety,  &c,  Argrma  Mura. 

3  I  follow  Aig-una  MLsra,  who  says  <  permanent '  means  soul,  &c. 
The  correct  expression  would  seem  to  be  '  that  which  is  called 
permanent  by  others  is  impermanent/ 

4  This  is  the  view  of  those  who  hold  the  theory  of  Parkama, 
or  development,  says  Ar^una  MLrra. 

5  'To  be  one*  =  knowledge  to  be  all  of  one  description,  '  dis- 
tinct '= knowledge  having  various  entities  for  its  distinct  objects 
(this  is  the  view  of  the  holders  of  the  Vi^nanavada,  says  Ar^una 
Mura) ;  manifold  =  that  the  selfs  are  numberless.  The  words  here 
are  nearly  identical  with  those  at  Gita,  p.  83,  see  note  4  there. 

6  I.  e.  help  in  action,  Ar^una  MLrra. 

7  See  Apastamba  I,  i,  1,  2  (comment). 


376  ANUGITA. 


others  tranquillity.  Some  extol  final  emancipation  ; 
some  various  kinds  of  enjoyments ;  some  wish  for 
riches,  and  others  indigence.  Some  (say)  means * 
should  be  resorted  to ;  others  that  that  is  not  so. 
Some  are  devoted  to  harmlessness,  and  some  given 
up  to  destruction ;  some  are  for  merit  and  glory  ; 
and  others  say  that  is  not  so.  Some  are  devoted 
to  goodness ;  some  are  in  the  midst  of  doubts  ;  some 
are  for  pleasure,  and  some  for  pain  2.  Some  people 
(say)  meditation3,  other  Brahma^as  (say)  sacrifice, 
and  others,  gifts;  but  others  extol  penance,  and  other 
persons  sacred  study;  some  knowledge,  and  renuncia- 
tion4; and  those  who  ponder  on  the  elements5, 
nature 6.   Some  extol  everything,  and  others  nothing7. 


1  I.  e.  for  the  acquisition  of  anything  desirable,  Arg-una  Mura, 
who  adds, '  by  those  who  wish  for  piety/  Nilaka^a  says  means = 
'meditation  and  so  forth;'  as  to  'that  is  not  so'  he  cites  what  he 
calls  a  *Sruti,  which  is  however  one  of  the  Karikas  of  Gaudapada 
on  the  Ma/^/ukya;  see  p.  432. 

2  This,  too,  is  not  quite  clear,  but  Nilaka«//&a  says,  'meditation 
should  be  practised  for  release  from  pain,  and  for  acquisition  of  plea- 
sure ;'  ' and  others  say  not  so,  it  should  be  done  without  desire/ 

3  That  is  to  say,  they  hold  that  meditation  should  be  practised. 

4  Ar^una  MLsra  seems  to  take  this  to  mean  'renunciation  of 
knowledge,'  i.e.  a  blank,  and  says  this  was  the  view  of  the  M&dhya- 
mikas,— I  suppose  the  Madhyamika  Bauddhas. 

5  I.  e.  the  iTarvakas,  Ar^una  Mura. 

6  Svetlyvatara,  p.  276,  and  -Sankara's  commentary  there. 

7  Were  there  optimists  and  pessimists  at  the  time  of  the  Anu- 
gita  in  India  ?  This  verse,  however,  does  not  occur  in  some  MSS. 
Nilaka^a's  note  on  this  passage  may  be  of  some  interest.  He  says, 
'Some  hold  that  the  self  exists  after  the  body  is  lost ;  others,  that  is 
the  LoMyatas  or  iTarvakas,  hold  the  contrary.  Everything  doubtful 
is  the  view  of  the  Syadvadins;  nothing  doubtful  that  of  the  Tairthikas, 
the  great  teachers  (I  presume,  about  their  own  respective  doctrines). 
Everything  impermanent,  Tarkikas;  permanent,  Mimawsakas;  no- 
thing exists,  the  Sunyav&dins;  something  exists,but  only  momentarily, 


CHAPTER   XXXIV,   I  7.  377 

And,  O  best  of  the  gods !  piety  being  thus  confused 
and  abounding  in  contradictions,  we  are  deluded, 
and  come  to  no  determination.  People  are  acting, 
(saying)  this  is  good,  this  is  good.  And  he  who  is 
attached  to  a  certain  (form  of)  piety,  always  esteems 
that.  Here  (therefore)  our  understanding  breaks 
down,  and  our  mind  is  distracted.  We  wish,  O  best 
(of  beings)!  to  be  informed  of  what  is  good.  Be 
pleased  now  to  proceed  to  state  what  is  (so)  myste- 
rious, and  what  is  the  cause  of  the  connexion  be- 
tween the  Kshetra^na  and  nature.  Thus  addressed 
by  those  Brahma^as,  the  venerable,  holy,  and  talented 
creator  of  worlds  told  them  accurately  (what  they 
asked). 

Saugatas ;  knowledge  is  one,  but  the  ego  and  non-ego  are  two 
different  principles,  theYogaMras;  mixed,  Udulomas;  one,  is  the 
view  of  the  worshippers  of  the  Brahman  as  possessed  of  qualities ; 
distinct,  other  Mimazrcsakas,  who  hold  that  the  special  actions  are 
the  cause  (of  everything,  is  meant,  I  presume) ;  manifold  —  the 
atomists  ;  time  and  space  =  astrologers.  Those  who  "  say  that  is 
not  so,"  that  is  to  say,  that  what  we  see  has  no  real  existence  at 
all,  are  the  Vrz'ddhas,  ancient  philosophers ;  omission  to  bathe  =  the 
condition  of  Naish/^ika  Brahma^arins ;  bathing  =  householder's 
condition ;  "  means  should  be  resorted  to,  that  is  not  so,"  those 
who  are  against  all  meditation,  &c,  according  to  the  Sruti  text, 
which  Nilaka«/^a  quotes ;  "  merit  and  glory,  that  is  not  so,"  some 
say  there  is  no  merit  as  the  Lokayatas  or  ^Tarvakas ;  "  know- 
ledge, renunciation,"  the  former  is  to  be  gained  only  by  means  of 
the  latter;  "ponder  on  elements "=  who  are  intent  on  the  inves- 
tigation of  the  true  nature  of  things ;  nature  =  abundance  of 
resources,  by  which  alone  knowledge  is  produced,  not  by  mere 
renunciation/  It  will  be  understood,  that  this  commentary  assumes 
a  different  syntactical  construction  of  the  original  in  some  places 
from  that  adopted  in  our  translation. 


378  ANUGITA. 


Chapter  XXXV. 

Brahman  said : 
Well  then,  I  will  declare  to  you  what  you  ask 
of  me,  O  best  (of  men)!  Learn  what  a  preceptor 
told  a  pupil  who  went  to  him.  Hearing  it  all, 
deliberate  on  it  properly.  Non-destruction  of  all 
creatures,  that  is  deemed  to  be  the  greatest  duty1. 
This  is  the  highest  seat2,  free  from  vexation  and 
holy  in  character.  The  ancients  who  perceived  the 
established  (truth)  call  knowledge  the  highest  hap- 
piness. Therefore  by  pure  knowledge  one  is  released 
from  all  sins.  And  those  who  are  constantly  engaged 
in  destruction,  and  who  are  infidels  3  in  their  conduct, 
and  who  entertain  avarice  and  delusion,  go  verily  to 
hell.  Those  who  without  sloth  perform  actions  with 
expectations,  rejoice  in  this  world,  being  born  agajn 
and  again.  But  those  wise  and  talented  men,  who  per- 
form actions  with  faith,  free  from  any  connexion  with 
expectations,  perceive  correctly4.  Now  I  will  proceed 
to  state  how  the  association  and  dissociation  of 
Kshetra^na  and  nature  (take  place).  Learn  that, 
O  best  (of  men) !  The  relation  here  is  said  to  be 
that  between  the  object  and  subject5.     The  subject 

1  See  p.  291  supra,  and  note  3  there. 

2  So  literally ;  the  sense  is — that  which  one  is  to  aim  at. 

3  The  original  is  nastika,  the  contrary  of  that  <  astikya,'  which  at 
Gita,  p.  126,  we  have  rendered  by  c  belief  (in  a  future  world)/  fol- 
lowing -Srfdhara.  R&m&nug-a,  whose  commentary  came  to  hand 
too  late  for  any  other  than  a  very  occasional  use  in  the  translation 
of  the  Gita,  renders  it  by  '  belief  in  the  truth  of  the  teaching  of 
the  Vedas/  4  I.  e.  learn  the  truth. 

5  I  use  the  terms  subject  and  object  here  in  the  philosophical 
sense  explained  by  Sir  W.  Hamilton,  viz.  the  thinking  agent  and  the 
object  of  thought  respectively.  And  cf.  also  the  passage  referred  to 
in  note  3  on  p.  379  infra. 


CHAPTER    XXXV,   1 5.  379 

is  always  the  being,  and  nature  is  stated  to  be  the 
object.  It  has  been  explained  in  the  above  mode, 
as  (having  the  relation)  of  the  gnat  and  the 
udumbara 1.  Nature  which  is  non-intelligent  knows 
nothing,  though  it  is  the  object  of  enjoyment 2.  Who 
enjoys  and  what  is  enjoyed3  is  learnt  from  the  .Sastras. 
Nature  is  said  always  to  abound  in  the  pairs  of 
opposites,  and  to  be  constituted  of  the  qualities ; 
the  Kshetra^na  is  free  from  the  pairs  of  opposites, 
devoid  of  parts,  and  in  essence  free  from  the 
qualities.  He  abides  in  everything  alike4,  and  is 
connected  with  (all)  knowledge 5 ;  and  he  always 
enjoys  nature  as  a  lotus-leaf  (enjoys)  water.  Even 
brought  into  contact  with  all  qualities,  a  learned 
man  remains  untainted 6.  There  is  no  doubt  that 
the  being  is  unattached  just  like  the  unsteady  drop 
of  water  placed  upon  a  lotus-leaf7.  It  is  established 
that  nature  is  the  property8  of  the  being.  And  the 
relation  of  the  two  is  like  that  of  matter  and  the 
maker9.  As  one  goes  into  (a)  dark  (place)  taking 
a  light  (with  him),  so  those  who  wish  for  the  supreme 
go  with  the  light  of  nature10.     While  there  is  oil 

1  P.  374  supra.  The  relation  is  one  of  close  connexion,  coupled 
with  some  identity  of  nature  (because,  says  Nilaka#/Aa,  an  entirely 
extraneous  thing  could  not  get  into  the  inside  of  the  fruit,  and  the 
gnat's  body  therefore  must  have  come  from  the  fruit  itself),  but 
still  the  elements  are  distinct.  2  See  p.  371  supra,  note  4. 

3  Cf.  Maitri,  p.  108.  4  Cf.  Gita,  pp.  105,  106. 

5  Knowledge  of  the  Kshetra^na  forms  part  of  all  real  knowledge. 
Aignna  Mura's  reading  and  interpretation  are  different.  He  says, 
'  As  he  is  seen  coming  to  light  everywhere  alike,  so/  &c. 

6  Cf.  Git&,  pp.  55-110.  7  Again  the  common  simile. 

8  The  original  is  dravya,  rendered  'matter'  in  the  next  sentence. 
Arguna  Mi^ra  paraphrases  it  by  '  upakarana/  paraphernalia. 

9  So  the  original,  the  sense  is  not  clear.  But  see  -SVeta^vatara,  p.  368. 

10  Knowledge,  which,  says  Nilakafl/^a,  is  a  manifestation  of 
nature.     Arg-una  Mirra  says  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  which  the 


380  anugIta. 


and  wick  19  the  light  shines ;  but  the  flame  is  ex- 
tinguished when  the  oil  and  wick  are  exhausted. 
Thus  nature  is  perceived  2 ;  the  being  is  laid  down 
(as  being)  unperceived.  Understand  this,  O  Brah- 
ma^as !  Well  now,  I  will  tell  you  something  more. 
One  who  has  a  bad  understanding  does  not  acquire 
knowledge  even  with  a  thousand  (admonitions). 
And  one  who  is  possessed  of  knowledge  enhances 
(his)  happiness  even  with  a  fourth  share 3.  Thus 
should  one  understand  the  accomplishment  of  piety 
by  (apt)  means.  For  the  talented  man  who  knows 
(these)  means,  attains  supreme  happiness4.  As  a 
man  travelling  along  some  way  without  provisions 
for  the  journey,  travels  with  great  discomfort,  and 
may  even  be  destroyed  on  the  way,  so  should  one 
understand,  that  by  action5  the  fruit  is  or  is  not 
produced.  For  a  man  to  see  within  (his)  self6 
what  is  agreeable  and  what  is  disagreeable  to  him 
is  good.  And  as  one  who  is  devoid  of  a  perception 
of  the  truth  rashly  travels  on  foot  by  a  long  way 
unseen  before 7,  while  (another)  goes  by  the  same 

self  acquires  is  by  means  of  nature.  Cf.  Sankhya-karika  56,  and 
comment. 

1  So  Nilaka;/Ma.  Ar^-una  MLrra  does  not  take  gu«a  here  to 
mean  '  wick/ 

2  I.  e.,  I  presume,  in  its  manifestations ;  it  is  perceived  for  some 
time  and  then  vanishes.  Cf.  Sankhya-karika  59-61;  the  Purusha 
is  not  '  perceived '  in  this  sense. 

8  Viz.  of  admonition,  Argnna  Misra. 

4  Cf.  Gita,  p.  70,  where  the  same  phrase  occurs. 

5  The  fruit  of  this  is  uncertain;  knowledge  which  is  in  one's 
self  is  the  thing  to  be  worked  for. 

6  I.  e.  the  mind,  Nilaka^a.  The  meaning  is,  he  should  not 
care  for  external  pleasure  and  pain.     Cf.  GM,  inter  alia,  p.  50. 

7  This  seems  to  be  so  left  imperfect  in  the  original.  The  con- 
struction seems  to  be  this:  the  progress  of  the  latter  is  as  great  as  that 
of  one  who  drives  in  a  chariot  as  compared  with  that  of  one  who  goes 
011  foot  with  much  suffering.    Cf.  the  construction  on  next  page. 


CHAPTER   XXXV,   28.  38 1 

way  in  a  carriage1  drawn  by  horses,  and  going 
swiftly,  such  is  the  progress  of  the  men  of  under- 
standing. Having  climbed  up  a  mountain  one 
should  not  look  at  the  surface  of  the  earth  2.  One 
sees  a  man  travelling  in  a  chariot,  and  void  of  intel- 
ligence, afflicted  by  reason  of  the  chariot.  As  far  as 
there  is  a  carriage-path,  he  goes  in  the  carriage ; 
where  the  carriage-path  stops,  a  learned  man  goes 
on  abandoning  the  carriage.  So  travels  the  talented 
man,  who  understands  the  procedure  respecting 
(knowledge  of  the)  truth  and  devotion 3,  and  who 
knows  about  the  qualities,  comprehending  the  grada- 
tions4 one  above  the  other.  As  one  who  without 
a  boat  dives  into  the  ocean  with  his  arms  only, 
through  delusion,  undoubtedly  wishes  for  destruction; 
while  a  wise  man  likewise  knowing  distinctions6, 
and  having  a  boat  with  good  oars,  goes  in  the  water 
without  fatigue,  and  soon  crosses  the  reservoir,  and 
having  crossed  (it)  goes  to  the  other  shore,  throwing 

1  I.  e.  the  -Sastras,  says  Nilaka/z/£a.     Cf.  Gita,  p.  117. 

2  When  one  has  arrived  at  knowledge, — the  highest  seat,  says 
Nilaka7z/$a, — one  need  not  perform  the  dictates  of  the  Sastras, 
which  are  only  preliminary  to  the  acquisition  of  knowledge.  Cf. 
Gita,  pp.  48,  73.  Cf.  as  to  this  figure  of  the  chariot  and  the  next 
one  about  the  boat,  Bn'hadara/zyaka,  p.  695. 

3  I  adopt  Arg-una's  rendering  of  the  original  here,  viz.  Yoga. 
The  meaning,  on  that  rendering,  is  the  same  as  it  is  in  the  Gita. 

4  According  to  Aigxma  Mura,  action  with  desire,  action  without 
desire,  and  lastly,  knowledge.  According  to  Nilaka«/#a,  action 
laid  down  in  the  *S3stras,  then  Yoga,  and  then  the  condition  of 
Hawsa,  Paramahazrasa,  &c. 

5  Literally,  one  knowing  divisions.  I  presume  the  meaning  is 
distinctions  between  various  things  as  to  which  suits  which,  and  so 
forth.  The  boat,  says  Nilaka^a,  is  a  preceptor,  and  even  a  pre- 
ceptor is  not  to  be  sought  for  after  a  man  has  achieved  Yoga ; 
hence  the  text  proceeds  to  speak  further  on  of  casting  aside  the 
boat.    Wishes  for  destruction = is  sure  to  meet  destruction. 


?82  ANUGITA. 


aside  the  boat,  and  devoid  of  (the  thought  that  this  or 
that  is)  mine.  This  has  been  already  explained  by  the 
parallel  of  the  carriage  and  pedestrian.  One  who 
has  come  by  delusion  through  affection,  adheres  to 
that  like  a  fisherman  to  his  boat,  being  overcome 
by  (the  thought  that  this  or  that  is)  mine.  It  is 
not  possible  to  move  on  land  after  embarking  in 
a  boat.  And  likewise  one  cannot  move  in  water 
after  entering  a  carriage.  Thus  there  are  various 
actions  in  regard  to  different  objects1.  And  as 
action  is  performed  in  this  world,  so  does  it  result 
to  them 2.  That  which  sages  by  their  understanding 
meditate  upon,  which  is  void  of  any  smell  whatever, 
void  of  taste,  and  void  of  colour,  touch,  or  sound, 
that  is  called  the  Pradhina3.  Now  that  Pradhana 
is  unperceived ;  a  development  of  the  unperceived 
is  the  Mahat ;  and  a  development  of  the  Pradhina 
(when  it  is)  become  Mahat  is  egoism.  From  egoism 
is  produced  the  development,  namely,  the  great 
elements ;  and  of  the  elements  respectively,  objects 
of  sense  are  verily  stated  to  be  the  development4. 
The  unperceived  is  of  the  nature  of  seed5,  and 
also  productive  in  its  essence.    And  we  have  heard 

1  I.  e.  appertaining  to  the  various  orders  of  householders,  &c, 
Nilaka^a.  But  I  am  not  aware  of  any  authority  for  this  sense  of 
vishaya. 

2  I.  e.  those  who  perform  them. 

3  Nilaka/z/^a  says,  'Having  stated  above  the  means  of  knowledge, 
he  now  states  the  proper  object  of  knowledge/ 

4  See  p.  332  supra.  The  original  for  development  is  gu^a, 
literally  quality. 

5  The  meaning  of  this  passage  seems  to  be  identical  with  that 
of  Sarikhya-karika  3.  Productive  (Prasavatmakam)  is  probably  to 
be  explained  as  Prasavadharmi  is  at  Sankhya-karika  1 1  (see  com- 
mentary of  Va^aspati,  pp.  59,  60),  viz.  always  undergoing  develop- 
ment.   The  great  elements  are  of  course  the  tanmatras. 


CHAPTER    XXXV,    42.  383 

that  the  great  self  is  of  the  nature  of  seed  and 
a  product.  Egoism  is  of  the  nature  of  seed  and  a 
product  also  again  and  again.  And  the  five  great 
elements  are  verily  of  the  nature  of  seed  and 
products.  The  objects  of  the  five  elements  are 
of  the  nature  of  seed  19  but  they  do  not  yield  pro- 
ducts. Learn  about  their  properties.  Now  space 
has  one  quality,  air  is  said  to  have  two  qualities ; 
it  is  said  that  light  has  three  qualities ;  and  water, 
too,  is  of  four  qualities ;  and  earth,  abounding  with 
movables  and  immovables,  the  divine  source  of  all 
entities,  full  of  examples  of  agreeable  and  disagree- 
able (things),  should  be  understood  to  be  of  five 
qualities 2.  Sound,  touch,  colour  likewise,  taste,  and 
smell  as  the  fifth — these,  O  best  of  the  twice-born! 
should  be  understood  to  be  the  five  qualities  of 
earth.  Smell  always  belongs  to  the  earth 3 ;  and 
smell  is  stated  to  be  (of)  numerous  descriptions. 
I  will  state  at  length  the  numerous  qualities  of 
smell4.  Smell  is  agreeable  or  disagreeable,  sweet, 
sour,  and  bitter  likewise,  diffusive  and  compact 
also,  soft,  and  rough,  and  clear  also 5 — thus  should 

1  This  is  not  clear,  unless  'product'  above  means  productive,  and 
seed  means  a  product,  it  being  a  product  of  the  ankura  or  sprout. 
Nilaka^a  says, '  seed = cause  ;  product = effect.  The  unperceived 
is  an  effect,  and  so  the  contrary  doctrine  of  the  Sarikhya  is  here 
shown  to  be  wrong.  The  objects  are  causes,  as  their  enjoyment 
causes  an  impression/  2  See  pp.  285,  286  supra. 

3  That  is  to  say,  smell  is  the  special  property  of  the  earth  only, 
the  other  qualities  are  common  to  it  with  the  other  elements.  The 
word  in  the  original  is  guzza  or  quality  everywhere. 

4  See  *Santi  Parvan  (Moksha  Dharma),  chap.  184,  st.  27. 

5  Bitter,  Nilaka«//£a  exemplifies  by  the  smell  of  the  chili,  appa- 
rently interpreting  ka/vi,  as  it  may  be  interpreted,  to  mean  sharp ; 
diffusive = overcoming  all  other  smells,  like  Asafoetida;  compact  = 
made  up  of  many  smells.    Nilaka«/^a  adds,  that  soft  is  like  that  of 


384  ANUGITA. 


smell,  which  belongs  to  the  earth,  be  understood 
to  be  of  ten  descriptions.  Sound,  touch,  and  colour 
likewise,  and  taste,  are  stated  to  be  the  qualities 
of  water.  I  will  now  give  (some)  information  about 
taste.  Taste  is  stated  to  be  of  numerous  descrip- 
tions. Sweet1,  sour,  bitter,  sharp,  astringent,  and 
saltish  likewise — thus  are  the  forms  of  taste,  which 
is  a  development  of  water,  said  to  be  of  six  descrip- 
tions. Sound,  touch,  and  likewise  colour;  thus  is 
light  said  to  have  three  qualities.  The  quality  of 
light  is  colour,  and  colour  is  stated  to  be  of  numerous 
descriptions.  White,  black,  red  likewise,  green, 
yellow,  and  grey  likewise,  short  long,  narrow2, 
broad,  square,  and  circular — thus  is  the  colour  of 
light  said  to  be  of  twelve  forms.  It  should  be 
understood3  by  aged  Brihma^as,  who  speak  the 
truth,  and  are  conversant  with  piety.  Sound  and 
touch  also  should  be  understood ;  air  is  said  to  have 
(these)  two  qualities.  And  touch  is  the  quality  of  air, 
and  touch  is  stated  to  be  of  numerous  descriptions. 
Rough,  cold  and  hot  likewise,  tender  and  clear  also, 
hard,  glutinous,  smooth,  slippery,  hurtful,  and  soft 4 
— thus  the  quality  of  air  is  properly  said  by  Br&h- 
ma^as  who  have  reached  perfection,  who  are  con- 
versant with  piety  and  perceive  the  truth,  to  be  of 
twelve  descriptions.     Now  space  has  one   quality, 

liquid  ghee,  rough  of  the  oil  of  mustard,  and  clear  as  of  cooked 
rice.    The  *Santi  Parvan  passage  omits  '  sour/         1  Cf.  Gita,  p.  1 18. 

2  Literally,  lean  and  fat.  These  are  rather  unusual  qualities  to 
attribute  to  colour.     The  *Santi  Parvan  passage  gives  more. 

3  Sic.     Does  it  mean  'it  is  understood  V  Cf.  Pacini  III,  3, 113. 

4  Tender  =  like  the  touch  of  a  son,  &c. ;  clear  =  like  that  of  an 
excellent  cloth,  Nilaka«/£a;  glutinous  =  like  that  of  oil;  smooth = 
like  that  of  a  gem  ;  slippery  =  not  really  smooth,  but  appearing  to 
be  such,  like  that  of  saliva  (?),  Arg-una  Mi^ra.  The  enumeration  of 
these  in  the  ^anti  Parvan  loc.  cit.  is  again  different. 


CHAPTER   XXXVI,  I.  385 


and  that  is  stated  to  be  sound  only.  I  will  speak 
at  length  of  the  numerous  qualities  of  sound. 
Shaa^a,  7?zshabha,  together  with  Gandh&ra,  Ma- 
dhyama,  and  likewise  Pafi/£ama,  and  beyond  these 
should  be  understood  to  be  Nish&da  and  Dhaivata 
likewise * ;  agreeable  and  disagreeable  sound  also, 
compact,  and  of  (many)  ingredients 2.  Thus  sound, 
which  is  produced  in  space,  should  be  understood 
to  be  of  ten  descriptions.  Space  is  the  highest 
element 3,  egoism  is  above  that ;  above  egoism  is 
understanding,  and  above  that  understanding  is  the 
self4;  above  that  is  the  unperceived,  and  above  the 
unperceived  is  the  being.  One  who  knows  which 
is  superior  and  inferior  among  entities,  and  who 
knows  the  proper  procedure  in  all  actions,  and  who 
identifies  himself  with  every  being5,  repairs  to  the 
imperishable  self. 


Chapter  XXXVL 
Brahman  said : 
Since  the  mind  is  ruler  of  these  five  elements,  in 
(the  matter  of)  absorbing  or  bringing  (them)  forth6, 

1  This  is  the  Hindu  Gamut. 

2  These  are  not  in  the  £anti  Parvan;  of  many  ingredients = 
collection  of  sounds,  Arg-una  MLsra. 

8  Being  all-pervading,  Arguna  MLrra.  Cf.  its  position  at  Taitti- 
riya,  p.  67. 

4  Cf.  KaMa,  pp.  114,  115,  149,  and  Sankara^&rya's  commentary 
there,  for  an  explanation  of  the  whole  passage.  And  see  S&hkhya- 
S&ra,  p.  16,  as  to  what  are  here  called  self  and  understanding. 

6  Cf.  GM,  p.  64,  where  the  words  are  identical. 

6  The  elements  are  perceived  or  are  not  perceived  by  the  senses 
under  the  direction  of  the  mind  ;  absorbing = destroying ;  bringing 
forth = producing,  Nilaka^a.  See  p.  268  supra,  and  *Santi  Parvan 
(Moksha),  chap.  240,  st.  12. 

[8]  C  C 


386  ANUGITA. 


the  mind  itself  is  the  individual  self1.  The  mind 
always  presides  over  the  great  elements.  The  un- 
derstanding proclaims  its  power2,  and  it  is  called  the 
Kshetra^fia.  The  mind  yokes  the  senses  as  a  cha- 
rioteer (yokes)  good  horses.  The  senses,  the  mind, 
and  the  understanding  are  always  joined  to  the 
Kshetra^fia 3.  That  individual  self,  mounting  the 
chariot  to  which  big  horses4  are  yoked,  and  in  which 
the  understanding  is  the  drag5,  drives  about  on  all 
sides.  The  great  chariot  which  is  pervaded  by  the 
Brahman6,  has  the  group  of  the  senses  yoked  (to  it), 
has  the  mind  for  a  charioteer,  and  the  understanding 
for  a  drag.  That  learned  and  talented  person  verily, 
who  always  understands  thus  the  chariot  pervaded 
by  the  Brahman,  comes  not  by  delusion  in  the  midst 
of  all  entities7.  This  forest  of  the  Brahman8  begins 
with  the  unperceived,and  ends  with  the  gross  objects9; 

1  The  word  is  the  same  as  at  Maitri,  p.  41,  the  comment  on 
which  should  be  seen. 

2  I.  e.  the  mind's  power  is  to  be  perceived  by  itself,  Nilaka^a. 
The  meaning  seems  to  be  that  the  understanding  can  only  operate 
on  what  the  mind  places  before  it. 

8  The  passage  at  Ka/^a,  p.  1 1 1  seq.,  and  Sankara's  commentary 
there,  throw  light  on  this,  though  the  figure  is  not  drawn  out  in  the 
same  way  in  both  places.  For  a  definition  of  Kshetra^fia,  see 
S&nti  Parvan  (Moksha),  chap.  187,  st.  23. 

4  I.  e.  the  senses. 

5  I.  e.  that  which  holds  the  horses  in  check.  Nilaka^a  seems 
to  render  it  by  '  whip/  but  that  is  not  correct,  I  think. 

6  So  Argima  Mura.  Nilaka«/^a  says,  '  The  senses,  &c.,  when 
they  turn  towards  the  outer  world  make  the  self  drive  about, 
as  an  individual  self;  when  turned  inwards  they  show  him  that  he 
is  the  Brahman/  Nilaka«//&a  thus  likens  this  to  the  KaMa  passage. 
See  also  p.  187  and  notes  there. 

7  Or  it  may  mean,  among  all  men. 

8  See  p.  164  supra,  note  2 ;  and  p.  285,  note  4. 

9  That  is  to  say,  it  includes  all  Sawsara,  all  the  elements  recog- 
nised by  the  Sankhya  philosophy,  save  the  Being  or  Purusha. 


CHAPTER    XXXVI,   12.  387 

and  includes  movables  and  immovables,  receives 
light  from  the  radiance  of  the  sun  and  moon,  is 
adorned  with  planets  and  nakshatras,  and  is  decked 
on  all  sides  with  nets  of  rivers  and  mountains,  and 
always  beautified  likewise  by  various  (descriptions 
of)  waters ;  it  is  (the  means  of)  subsistence  for  all 
entities1,  and  it  is  the  goal  of  all  living  crea- 
tures. In  this  the  Kshetra^fia  always  moves  about. 
Whatever  entities  (there  are)  in  this  world,  movable 
or  immovable,  they  are  the  very  first2  to  be  dis- 
solved ;  and  next  the  developments  produced  from  the 
elements3;  and  (after)  these  developments,  all  the  ele- 
ments. Such  is  the  upward  gradation4  among  entities. 
Gods,  men,  Gandharvas,  Pisakas,  Asuras,  R&kshasas, 
all  have  been  created  by  nature5,  not  by  actions,  nor 
by  a  cause.  These  Brdhma^as 6,  the  creators  of  the 
world,  are  born  here  again  and  again.     And  what- 

1  Cf.  p.  371  supra. 

2  Another  reading  means  'they  are  dissolved  in  the  waters/  As 
to  the  order,  cf.Vedanta  Paribhasha,  p.  48,  and  p.  335  supra. 

3  I  take  these  to  mean  the  gross  elements  of  which  things  mov- 
able and  immovable  may  be  said  to  be  made,  if  one  may  use 
a  non-idealist  phrase  in  the  Sankhya  philosophy.  Then  the  ele- 
ments next  spoken  of  are  the  subtle  ones  or  tanmatras.  Cf.  the 
references  in  note  2.     As  to  developments,  see  p.  382,  note  4. 

4  Viz.  gross  object,  gross  element,  subtle  element. 

5  The  original  is  svabhava,  which  Ar^una  Mura  renders  by 
Prakrzti.  'Actions'  both  Nilaka«/$a  and  Ar^una  Miara  take  to 
mean  sacrifices,  &c,  and  'cause'  the  former  interprets  by  Brahman; 
the  latter  by  tanmatras  or  subtle  elements,  and  adds, '  the  sense  is — 
not  by  sacrifice  or  tanmatras  only/  Nilakaw/^a  says,  'The  gods, 
&c,  are  produced  by  nature,  as  the  gods,  &c,  seen  in  a  dream/ 
The  meaning  seems  to  be  that  there  are  energies  in  nature  which 
evolve  these  forms  of  being.     Cf.  also  Gitd,  p.  65. 

6  I  presume  this  means  that  the  patriarchs  (Mari^i  and  others, 
says  Nilaka#//$a)  are  also  born  again  and  again — that  is  to  say,  in 
different  kalpas,  I  suppose — by  nature  only. 

C    C    2 


388  ANUGITA. 

ever  is  produced  from  them1  is  dissolved  in  due 
time  in  those  very  five  great  elements,  like  billows 
in  the  ocean.  The  great  elements  are  in  every  way 
(beyond)  the  elements  that  make  up  the  world2. 
And  he  who  is  released,  even  from  those  five  ele- 
ments, goes  to  the  highest  goal.  The  Lord  Prag£- 
pati  created  all  this  by  the  mind3  only.  And  in  the 
same  manner4  the  sages  attained  the  godhead5  by 
means  of  penance6.  And  in  like  manner,  those  who 
have  achieved  perfection,  who  have  acquired  concen- 
tration by  a  course  of  penance,  and  who  likewise  feed 
on  fruits  and  roots,  perceive  the  triple  world7  here 
by  penance.  Medicines,  and  herbs,  and  the  various 
sciences  are  all  acquired8  by  means  of  penance 
alone.  For  all  acquisition9  has  penance  for  its 
root.     Whatever  is  difficult  to  obtain10,  difficult  to 

1  I  think  this  must  mean  the  elements,  though  it  might  at  first 
sight  be  referred  to  the  Brahma^as. 

2  I.  e.  the  gross  elements,  I  take  it;  the  others  are  the  tanmatras. 

3  I.  e.  the  meditation  which  constitutes  true  knowledge,  Arg-una 
Mi^ra.     But  see  Git&,  p.  87,  note  1,  and  Sarikhya-siitra. 

4  I.  e.  by  the  mind,  as  to  which  cf.  Taittiriya,  p.  89;  Ka/^a,  p.  164. 
Ar^una  Mura  says,  *  This  apparent  deviation  from  the  ordinary 
modes  of  cause  and  effect  is  not  altogether  without  parallel,  so  he 
adds  this  to  show  that/ 

5  Literally,  '  the  gods/  but  the  meaning  seems  to  be  that  given 
in  the  text,  as  Argrma  MLrra  says. 

8  This  is  only  the  concentration  of  mind  and  senses  on  one 
object,  Nilaka«/^a.     See  p.  166,  note  1  supra. 

7  See  p.  174  supra. 

8  Literally,  '  are  accomplished/  which  seems  to  mean  that  they 
are  acquired  so  as  to  be  practically  at  one's  command  when 
required. 

9  The  original  word  is  derived  from  the  same  root  as  the  subject 
of  the  last  note. 

10  Difficult  to  obtain  =  the  seat  of  Indra,  &c;  to  learn  =Vedas, 
&c.;  to  vanquish  =  fire,  &c;  to  pass  through  =  a  great  deluge,  &c, 


CHAPTER    XXXVI,    23.  389 

learn,  difficult  to  vanquish,  and  difficult  to  pass 
through  ;  all  that  can  be  accomplished  by  penance,  for 
penance  is  difficult  to  overcome.  One  who  drinks 
spirituous  liquors,  one  who  kills  a  Brahma/za,  one 
who  steals,  one  who  destroys  an  embryo,  one  who 
violates  the  bed  of  his  preceptor1,  is  released  from 
that  sin  only  by  penance  well  performed.  (Those) 
men,  Pitrzs,  gods,  (sacrificial)  animals2,  beasts  and 
birds,  and  all  other  creatures  movable  or  im- 
movable, (who  are)  constantly  devoted  to  penance, 
always  reach  perfection  by  penance.  And  in  like 
manner  the  noble(-minded)  gods  went  to  heaven3. 
Those  who  without  sloth  perform  actions  with  ex- 
pectations, and  being  full  of  egoism,  they  go  near 
Pra^&pati4.  Those  high-souled  ones  who  are  devoid 
of  (the  thought  that  this  or  that  is)  mine,  and  devoid 
of  egoism,  by  means  of  a  pure  concentration  (of 
mind)  on  contemplation,  obtain  the  great  and  highest 
world.  Those  who  best  understand  the  self,  attain- 
ing concentration  (of  mind)  on  contemplation5,  and 
having  their  minds  always  tranquil,  enter  into  the 
unperceived    accumulation    of    happiness6.     Those 


Nilaka«/^a.    Aig-una  MLrra  seems  to  interpret  the  last  word,  where 
his  reading  is  doubtful,  to  mean  '  difficult  to  do/ 

1  Cf.  ZMndogya,  p.  361.  Except  the  destruction  of  the  embryo 
(see  Taitt.  Araw.  p.  870,  but  at  Br/hadara#yaka,  p.  795,  Kaushitaki, 
p.  77,  and  Apastamba  I,  6,  19,  16,  the  commentators  render  Bhru/za 
by  'learned  Brahma^a'),  the  rest  are  the  great  sins.  But  note  that 
stealing  gold,  not  theft  generally,  is  mentioned  as  a  great  sin. 

2  Or,  perhaps,  cattle.    The  original  is  pam. 

3  See  p.  160  supra,  and  cf.  p.  178. 

4  I.  e.  Kajyapa,  as  gods,  &c.  This  seems  to  be  Ar^una  Mora's 
interpretation.  This  condition  is  inferior  to  that  described  in  the 
following  sentence.  5  See  p.  162,  note  1. 

5  Nilaka^a's  rendering  is  '  that  by  which  (worldly)  happiness  is 


390  ANUGITA. 


who  are  free  from  (all  thought  that  this  or  that  is) 
mine,  and  who  are  free  from  egoism,  attaining  con- 
centration (of  mind)  on  contemplation1,  enter  the 
highest  world  of  the  great,  which  is  the  unperceived. 
Born  from  that  same  unperceived2  (principle),  again 
acquiring  knowledge,  and  getting  rid  of  the  (quali- 
ties of)  passion  and  darkness,  and  resorting  to  the 
pure  (quality  of)  goodness,  a  man  gets  rid  of  all  sins, 
and  abandons  everything  as  fruitless.  He  should 
be  understood  to  be  the  Kshetra^na.  He  who 
understands  him  understands  the  Vedas3.  With- 
drawing from  the  mind  the  objects4  of  mental  opera- 
tions, a  sage  should  sit  down  self-restrained.  (He) 
necessarily  (becomes)  that  on  which  his  mind5  (is 
fixed).  This  is  the  eternal  mystery.  That  which 
begins  with  the  unperceived  and  ends  with  the  gross 
objects6  is  stated  to  be  of  the  nature  of  ignorance7. 
But  (you  should)  learn  that  whose  nature  is  devoid 

heightened/  He  compares  Br/hadara/zyaka,  p.  816.  See  also 
Taittiriya,  p.  112. 

1  See  Gita,  p.  128,  note  1,  where  dhyana  and  yoga  are  taken 
separately.  Here  the  compound  is  in  the  singular.  Nilaka#//$a's 
reading  is  different. 

2  The  sense  here  is  not  quite  clear.  It  seems,  however,  to  be 
this.  The  acquisitions  mentioned  in  the  preceding  sentence  take 
the  acquirers  to  some  temporary  world  from  which  they  afterwards 
return ;  but  when  they  get  rid  of  the  qualities,  they  get  final  eman- 
cipation.   As  to  the  unperceived,  cf.  inter  alia  Gita,  p.  112,  note  2. 

3  Cf.  Gita,  p.  in,  and  note  2  there.  That  seems  to  approach 
the  question  from  the  opposite  point  of  view. 

4  So  Arg-una  Mi.rra.  At  Gita  XVI,  16,  &tta  means  the  opera- 
tion itself.     That  also  will  do  here. 

5  Cf.  Gita,  p.  78;  Maitri,  p.178;  Piuma,  p.  194;  and  the  quotations 
at  Sahkhya-s&ra,  p.  3. 

6  This  phrase  has  occurred  before;  it  means  all  the  developments 
which  make  up  worldly  life.     See  Sahkhya-sara,  p.  5. 

7  See  p.  371  supra. 


CHAPTER    XXXVI,    34.  39 1 

of  qualities.  Two  syllables1  are  death ;  three  syllables 
the  eternal  Brahman.  Mine  is  death,  and  not  mine 
is  the  eternal2.  Some  men  of  dull  understandings 
extol  action.  But  as  to  the  high-souled  ancients 
they  do  not  extol  action3.  By  action  a  creature  is 
born  with  a  body  and  made  up  of  the  sixteen4. 
Knowledge  brings  forth5  the  being,  and  that  is 
acceptable  and  constitutes  immortality.  Therefore 
those  who  are  far-sighted  have  no  attachment  to 
actions.  This  being  is  stated  to  be  full  of  know- 
ledge, not  full  of  action6.  The  self-restrained  man 
who  thus  understands  the  immortal,  changeless, 
incomprehensible,  and  ever  indestructible  and 
unattached  (principle),  he  dies  not7.  He  who  thus 
understands  the  self  to  which  there  is  nothing  prior, 
which  is  uncreated,  changeless,  unmoving8,  which 
is  incomprehensible  (even)  to  those  who  feed  on 
nectar,  he  certainly  becomes  immortal 7  and  not  to 
be   restrained9,  in   consequence   of  these   means10. 

1  See  *Santi  Parvan  (R%adharma)  XIII,  4.  Cf.  Maitri,  p.  180. 
This  means  the  two  and  three  syllables  of '  mama'  and  'na  mama/ 
mine  and  not  mine.  Cf.  Brz'hadara/zyaka,  p.  970,  and  -Oandogya, 
p.  118,  and  p.  548,  for  a  similar  conceit. 

2  Final  emancipation  follows  on  abandoning  the  idea  of  'mine;' 
bondage  on  harbouring  it.  3  See  Mu^daka,  p.  279. 

4  The  eleven  organs  and  the  five  great  elements  which  go  to  form 
the  body.  See  Sankhya-karika  3,  and  comment  thereon ;  -Santi  Par- 
van,  chap.  210,  st.  32  seq.;  chap.  242,  st.  7  seq.;  Prama,  p.  230. 

6  I.  e.  shows.  6  Cf.  Gita,  p.i  18 ;  £anti  Parvan,  ch.  242,  st. r 5. 

7  See  p.  367  supra,  note  6;  and  cf.  KaMa,  pp.  155,  156. 

8  I.  e.  which  remains  unconcerned,  cf.  Ira,  p.  10.  Apurvam  (to 
which  there  is  nothing  prior),  Ar^una  Misra  renders  by  'not  familiarly 
known/  and  Nilaka^a  by  'not  understood  by  any  other  means  of 
knowledge/    See  also  Bn'haddrawyaka,  p.  502,  and  £ankara  on  that. 

9  This  is  not  very  clear,  but  I  suppose  the  meaning  to  be  the 
same  as  that  of  '  unconquerable'  at  p.  161,  and  see  p.  231. 

10  I.  e.  the  means  mentioned  further  on,  says  Nilaka«/^a. 


392  ANUGITA. 


Expelling  all  impressions1,  and  restraining  the  self 
in  the  self2,  he  understands  that  holy  Brahman, 
than  which  nothing  greater  exists.  And  when  the 
understanding  is  clear,  he  attains  tranquillity3.  And 
the  nature  of  tranquillity  is  as  when  one  sees  a 
dream4.  This6  is  the  goal  of  those  emancipated 
ones  who  are  intent  on  knowledge.  And  they  see 
all  the  movements6  which  are  produced  by  develop- 
ment. This  is  the  goal  of  those  who  are  indifferent 
(to  the  world).  This  is  the  eternal  piety.  This  is 
what  is  acquired  by  men  of  knowledge.  This  is  the 
uncensured  (mode  of)  conduct.  This  goal  can  be 
reached  by  one  who  is  alike  to  all  beings7,  who  is 
without   attachment,  who    is  without   expectations, 

1  Impressions  from  external  causes.  Cf.  inter  alia  Sankhya-sutra 
III,  83;  see,  too,  pp.  247-358  supra  and  notes  there. 

2  L  e.  restraining  the  mind  in  the  lotus-like  heart,  Nilaka«/#a. 
Cf.  as  to  this,  pp.  248,  372  inter  alia. 

3  Cf.  Gttd,  p.  51.  See  also  Maitri-upanishad,  p.  176,  and  MuWaka, 
P.  3i4. 

4  Ar^-una  Mi^ra  says,  '  The  nature  of  tranquillity  is  this,  that  in 
that  state  you  perceive  everything  to  be  unreal  like  what  is  seen  in 
a  dream.'  Nilakaw/v&a  says,  '■  The  nature  of  tranquillity  is  this,  that 
in  that  state  the  self  abides  without  attachment  to  the  body  and  any 
external  objects,  but  working  within  itself  as  in  a  dream/  But  see 
on  this  Ka//fca,  p.  147. 

5  Viz.  tranquillity,  Nilaka#/^a. 

6  I.e.,  says  Nilaka#/#a,  they  see  all  worldly  objects  past  and 
future.  Arg-una  MLrra,  '  They  see  the  actions  performed  for  some 
wealth  and  so  forth/'  I  am  not  satisfied  with  either  meaning. 
Ar^una  Mwra's  is  besides  based  on  a  reading  different  from  that 
adopted  in  the  text,  namely,  Parimawa^ah,  instead  of  Pari/zama^ah. 
I  think  'parMma'  is  the  development  which,  according  to  the 
Sankhya  philosophy,  produces  the  universe,  and  the  movements 
are  the  actions  which  that  development — namely,  here  the  activity 
of  egoism  and  its  products — occasions.  Cf.  as  to  some  extent 
supporting  this,  Sankhya-sara,  p.  16. 

7  See  inter  alia  Git&,  pp.  68-70. 


CHAPTER    XXXVI,  46.  393 

and  who  looks  alike  on  everything1.  I  have  now 
declared  everything  to  you,  O  best  of  Brahma/za 
sages !  Act  thus  forthwith ;  then  you  will  acquire 
perfection. 

The  preceptor  said : 

Thus  instructed  by  the  preceptor  Brahman,  those 
high-souled  sages  acted  accordingly,  and  then  at- 
tained to  the  worlds2.  Do  you,  too,  O  noble  person, 
of  pure  self!  duly  act  according  to  the  words  of 
Brahman  which  I  have  stated.  Then  will  you 
attain   perfection. 

Vasudeva  said : 

That  pupil  thus  instructed  in  the  highest  piety 
by  the  preceptor,  did  everything  (accordingly),  O 
son  of  Kunti !  and  then  attained  final  emancipation. 
And  the  pupil,  having  done  all  he  should  have  done, 
attained  to  that  seat,  O  supporter  of  the  family  of 
the  Kauravas!  going  to  which  one  grieves  not3. 

Argnna  said : 
Who,  indeed,  was  that   Brihrna^a,  O   Krishna] 
and  who  the  pupil,  O   ^anirdana!     If  this  verily 
is  fit  to  be  heard  by  me,  O  Lord !  then  tell  it  me. 

Vasudeva  said : 
1 4  am  the  preceptor,  O  you  of  mighty  arms !  and 

1  See  inter  alia  Gita,  pp.  68-70. 

2  I.  e.,  I  presume,  Bhur  and  the  rest.  But  see  also  iTMndogya, 
pp.  272,  541,  620,  and  Brz'hadarawyaka,  pp.  302,  608. 

8  See  p.  285  supra,  and  cf.  inter  alia  -Oandogya,  p.  550. 

*  I.  e.  I,  the  Kshetrag-na,  am  the  preceptor,  and  the  mind  is  that 
which  has  to  be  taught.  This  shows  that  one's  instructor  must  be 
oneself,  Nilaka«/^a.  Ar^una  MLyra  says, '  I  am  the  preceptor,  the 
mind  is  the  pupil.  The  meaning  of  this  is  that  anybody  who  has 
not  acquired  knowledge  is  treated  here  as  a  pupil ;  there  is  no  other 
special  pupil  intended/    Cf.  also  p.  310  supra. 


394  ANUGITA. 


know  the  mind  to  be  my  pupil.  And,  O  Dhanan^aya ! 
I  have  related  this  mystery  to  you  out  of  love  for 
you.  If  you  have  love  for  me,  O  supporter  of  the 
family  of  the  Kauravas!  then  having  heard  this 
(instruction)  relating  to  the  self,  always  duly  act1 
(according  to  it).  Then  when  this  piety  is  duly 
practised,  you  will  attain  the  absolute  final  eman- 
cipation, getting  rid  of  all  sins.  It  was  this  same 
thing  I  stated  to  you  before2  when  the  time  for 
battle  had  come,  O  you  of  mighty  arms !  There- 
fore fix  your  mind  on  this.  And  now3,  O  chief  of 
the  descendants  of  Bharata!  it  is  long  since  I  saw 
the  lord  my  father.  I  wish  to  see  him,  with  your 
consent,  O  Phalguna4! 

VaLramp&yana  said : 
When  Krishna,  spoke  these  words,  Dhanan^aya 
replied  (saying),  '  O  Krishna !  let  us  verily  go  to-day 
to  the  city  of  Ga^asa5.  Be  pleased,  O  you  who 
understand  piety!  to  see  there  king  YudhishMira, 
who  is  of  a  devout  heart,  and  after  taking  leave  of 
him  to  go  to  your  own  city/ 

1  Nilaka^a  interprets  the  words  without  supplying  anything, 
thus  '  be  devoted  to  yama  niyama/  &c.  Yama  &c.  are  the  eight 
requisites  for  Yoga  or  concentration  of  mind  as  taught  by  Patan^ali. 

2  That  is  to  say,  in  the  Gita. 

8  Here  he  takes  up  the  thread  of  the  story.  In  the  first  chapter 
it  was  hinted  that  Krishna,  was  anxious  to  go  to  Dv&raka. 

4  This  is  a  name  of  Ar^una. 

6  I.  e.  Hastinapur,  the  capital  of  the  Pawdavas.  They  were,  when 
the  dialogue  was  held,  at  Indraprastha.     See  p.  229  supra. 


INDEX 

OF    PRINCIPAL    MATTERS. 


In  this  Index,  Roman  and  Italic  letters,  long  and  short  vowels 
have  been  classed  together. 


A,  the  letter,  page  90. 

Abandonment,  49,  67,  71,  101,  no, 
121, 122, 123, 154, 168, 177, 182, 
246,  280,  283,  326,  369,  370,  371, 
373?  39°*     See  Renunciation. 

Abhimanyu,  37,  39. 

Abhiras,  295. 

Abiding  in  everything.    See  Within. 

Abiding  together.     See  Unity. 

Abode  of  Brahman.  See  Identifica- 
tion, Seat,  and  Unity. 

Abortive,  nothing  in  Yoga,  47,  72. 
See  Action,  Life,  Resolution, 
and  Vain. 

Abridging,  357. 

Absolute,  248,  310,  367,  394. 

Absolution.     See  Release. 

Absorbent,  84, 104, 106, 112,191,  258, 
268,279,286,318.  See  Assimi- 
lation, Dissolution,  Life-winds. 

Absorption,  331,  341,  342,  351,  366, 
385.     See  Assimilation. 

Abstinence,  50. 

Abstraction,  10,  68,  69,  70,  75,  77, 
78,  79,  86,  100,  114,  125,  128. 
See  Concentration. 

Abuse,  166,  323. 

Acceptable,  391. 

Acceptance,  324,  325,  359,  364. 

Accessible,  Supreme  Being,  71,  79. 
See  Approaching  and  Attain- 
ment. 

Accomplishment  of  all  duty,  54, 1 14, 
169, 193,  337,  344,  380,  388,  389, 
393. 

Accumulation,  355,  364,  368. 

—  of  honey,  188. 

—  of  sin  and  merit.    See  Happiness, 

Merit,  and  Sin. 

Acid,  118. 

Acquisition,  48,  49,  55,  59,  70,  74, 
84,115,323,327*  332,  366,  372, 
376,  388,  392.     See  Body. 

—  highest,  70,  225. 

—  new,  for  Kr/'sh»a,  54. 

—  of  anything  desired.    See  Desire. 


Act,  auspicious.     See  Auspicious. 

—  thought  and   word.     See   Body, 

Mind,  and  Speech. 
Action,  48,  49,  52,  53,  54,  55,  56,  59, 
60,  62,  63,  65,  67,  77,  81,  82,  95, 
98,  99,  102,  103,  106,  108,  109, 
no,  in,  115,  117, 118,  i2i,  122, 
123,124,125,  127,128,152,153, 
156, 179,  180, 182, 184,  185, 188, 
191,193,232,  233,238,240,241, 
243,  244,  256,  261,  278,  279,  280, 
283,  286,  289,  293,  297,  302,  306, 
307,  309,  3i3,  3i4,  3i5,  316,  319, 
320,  321,  326,  338,  339,  348,  349, 
355,  357,  358,  365,  368,  369,  37o, 
374,  375,  377,  380,  381,  382,  3S5, 
387,389,391,  393. 

—  abandonment  of.    See  Abandon- 

ment and  Inaction. 

—  bond  of,  47,  53,  59,  60,  61,  62,  63, 

64,  65,  82,  85,  107,  108,   115, 
123,  125,  307.     See  Taint. 

—  burning  of.    See  Burning. 

—  capacity  for,  65,  104,  241. 

—  causes  of,  65,  123,  278. 

—  dedication  of,  to  Brahman,  55,  61, 

64,  83,  85,  100,  105,  128,  168. 
See  Renunciation. 

—  defect  in,  cured,  121. 

—  destruction  of,  241,  242.   See  De- 

struction. 

—  different  from  soul.     See  Soul. 

—  evil,  121,  127,  235,  238,  240,  242, 

257,  302,  320. 

—  exhaustion  of,  236,  237,  240,  241, 

242. 

—  ferocious.    See  Ferocious. 

—  freedom  from.     See  Freedom. 

—  fruit  of.     See  Fruit. 

—  instrument  of.     See  Instrument. 

—  man  of,  73,  255,  256. 

—  marks  of,  239,  321. 

—  meritorious,  72,  76, 109, 130,  233, 

238,  240,  242,  257,  314,  320,  321. 

—  motive  to,  48, 49.     See  Duty  and 

Fruit. 


396         BHAGAVADGITA,    SANATSUgAtIyA,    ANUGItA. 


Action,  ordinary  and  special,  102. 

—  organs  of,  337.    See  Organs  and 

Senses. 

—  performance  of,  108,  378. 

—  prescribed,  53,  54,  67,  115,  117, 

118, 120, 122,  124, 125, 126,  305, 
3°9,  353»  381.     See  Duty. 

—  prohibited,  60, 117,  119,  120,  125, 

309. 

—  prompting  to,  123. 

—  pursuit  of,  59,  60,  63. 

—  release  from.     See  Freedom. 

—  ripening  of,  241. 

—  success  of,  59. 

—  to  propitiate  Supreme.   See  Pro- 

pitiation. 

—  unnecessary,  54. 

— •  vain,  82.  And  see  Destruction, 
Success. 

—  world  of,  239. 
Active  mind,  70. 

—  principle.     See  Soul,  not  active. 
Activity,  65,  88,  104,  108,  no,  114, 

160, 185,  319,  332,  334,  351,  358, 
374.     See  Soul,  not  active. 

Acute,  163,  164. 

Adhibhuta,  77,  78. 

Adhidaiva,  77,  78. 

Adhiya^na,  77,  78. 

Adhvaryu.     See  Priest. 

Adhyatma,  77,  90,  316,  338,  342. 
See  Soul,  science  of. 

Adityas,  88,  92,  94,  219. 

Admonition.     See  Advice. 

Advice,  174,  380. 

Adviser,  105. 

iEon.     See  Kalpa. 

Afar,  104,  369. 

Aifection,  50,  51,  56,  59,  68,  103, 
124, 127, 166, 178, 193, 194,  246, 
250,  322,  324,  342,  382.  See 
also  Aversion,  Favourite. 

Affliction,  101,107, 122,284,  322,  323> 
381.     See  Trouble. 

Affluence,  304. 

Affright.     See  Fear. 

Age,  59, 79,  80,  330,  353.    See  Kalpa. 

—  old,  44, 77, 103, 109, 140, 151, 170, 

187, 194,  233,  247,  249,  250,  289, 

349,356,371,384. 
Agent,55, 65, 123,124,278.  See  Soul. 
Agitation,  42,  50,  56,  66,  68, 108, 1 10, 

344,  366,  369. 

—  of  world,  10 1.      And  see   Per- 

turbation, Vexation. 
Agni,  219,  220,  345. 


Agnihotra,  129, 191,  321. 

Agnishtoma,  158. 

Agreeable,  50,  66,  85,  101, 103,  no, 

118,119,122,151,177,183,189, 

246,  278,  312,  360,  362,  370,  371, 

380,383,385. 
Agriculture,  127. 
A^yabhaga,  276. 
Ahavaniya,  262. 
Ailment,  233,  237,    245,   321,    343, 

356.     See  Disease. 
Aims  of  life,  100,  117,  125,  156, 177, 

314,  33i,  378. 
Air,  73,  82,  179,  260,  289,  305,  316, 

a339,  343,  361,  368. 
Airavata,  89. 
Aitareya-ara#yaka,  87,  90,  102,  123, 

180,  239,  249,  250,  259,  339. 

—  brahmawa,  19,  221,  265,  276,  277, 

280. 

—  upanishad,  120, 123, 153, 179, 187, 

.      189,  191. 

Akhyanas,  145,  170. 

Alarka,  296,  297,  298,  299. 

Alarm  at  sight  of  universal  form,  94, 
96,  98. 

Alexander  the  Great,  223. 

Alike  to  all,  65,  68,  70,  71,  85,  101, 
106,  no,  128,  292,  356,  379, 
39 2 ,  393.     See  Equability. 

All- comprehending.  See  Universal 
form. 

All-pervading.  See  Pervading  prin- 
ciple. 

All,  supreme,  97. 

Alms,  43,  216,  360,  361,  362,  363. 

Alone.    See  Solitary. 

Altar,  262. 

Amazement,  93,  94,  130,  300.  See 
Alarm. 

Ambarisha,  301,  303. 

Ambiguous.     See  Equivocal. 

Amusement,  97,251.  See  Recreation. 

Analyser,  173. 

Analysis,  174. 

Anandagiri,  18,  49,  87, 113, 159, 186, 
251,  266. 

Ananta,  89. 

Anantagita,  28. 

Anantavi^aya,  38. 

Ancestors,  41.    See  Manes. 

Ancient  being.    See  Primeval. 

Ancients,  59,  78,  86,  87,  260,  340, 
369,  378,  391.    See  Elders. 

Ancient  times,  those  who  know  about, 
101.    See  Old  times. 


INDEX    OF   PRINCIPAL   MATTERS. 


397 


Anger.     See  Wrath. 

Angirasa,  314. 

Animals.    See  Beasts  and  Offerings. 

Animate,  74,  244,  356. 

Animating  new  body,  45,  112. 

Animosity,  60,  99, 167, 182,  183,  281, 

321.     See  Hatred. 
Anointment,  93. 
Antelope,  155,  295. 
Antipathy,  168.     See  Animosity. 
Antiquary,  Indian,  27,  28,  139,  222. 
Anugita,  158,  161,  162,  166,  256. 

—  age  of,  206  seq. 

—  authorship  of,  204  seq. 

—  comparison  of,  with  Apastamba, 

215  seq.;  with  Gita,  207  seq. 

—  divisions  of,  198,  200,  201,  204. 

—  extent  of,  198  seq.,  204. 

—  geography  of,  222. 

—  gods  mentioned  in,  219,  220. 

—  interpolations,  205. 

—  language  of,  226. 

—  mountains  mentioned  in,  222. 

—  numbering  of  chapters,  201. 

—  Parvan  of  Bharata,  197, 199,  200, 

—  recapitulation  of  Gita,  197. 

—  scheme  of,  197  seq.,  206. 

—  state  of  society  disclosed  in,  207, 

208. 

—  style  of.    See  language  of. 

—  substance  of  sections  of,  201. 

—  tribes  in,  222. 

—  upanishad,  200. 

—  verse  of,  226. 
Anus,  258,  261. 
AnushAibh,  142. 
Anxiety,  48,  302,  366,  367. 
Apana,  258,  338.     See  Life- winds. 
Apastamba,  14,  20,  21,  22  seq.,  24, 

29,  3°,  32, 69, 101, 103,  118, 120, 
147, 176, 177,  208,  210, 211,  215, 
216,  217,  218,  225,  236,  243,  275, 
291,  302,  322,  353,  358,  359,  360, 
361,  362,  365,  367,  370,  375,  389- 

Ape,  39. 

Appearance.     See  Entity  and  Real. 

Application.     See  Assiduous. 

Appointment,  365. 

Apportionment,  59. 

Apprehension,  82,  257,  283,  314. 

Approaching  Brahman,  59,  75.  See 
Accessible. 

—  preceptor.     See  Preceptor. 
Appropriating,  60,  243,  365. 
Appurtenances,  357.  See  Belongings. 


Apsarases,  178,  347. 

Aquatic  beings,  89. 

Ara«i,  284,  308. 

Ara/zyakas,  17. 

Argument,  90, 102,  124,  276,  323. 

Ar^una,  3,  4,  6,  9,  12, 17,  28,  34,  35, 
37,  38,  40,  42,  47,  48,  52,  53,  54, 
56,  58,  59,  62,63,69,71,72,73, 
75,  76,  77,79,81,82,84,87,88, 
89,  90,  91,  92,  93,  96,  98,  99, 109, 
117,  121, 122,  125,  128, 130, 131, 
135, 197, 198,  205,  229,  230,  293, 
294,  3io,  393,  394-  See  Bha- 
rata, Favourite,  Forgetfulness, 
Kunti,  and  Prz'tha. 

—  MLrra,  199, 200,  201,  204,  227,232, 

236,  237,  238,  239,  240,  241,  242, 
243,  244,  245,  246,  247,  248,  249, 
250,  252,  253,  254,  255,  256,  257, 
258,  259,  260,  262,  263,  264,  265, 
266,  269,  270,  271,  272,  273,  276, 
277,  278,  280,  281,  282,  284,  286, 
287,  288,  289,  290,  292,  293,  300, 
301,  302,  303,  304,  305,  306,  308, 
309,  310,  312,  313,  314,  315,  316, 
318,  319,  320,  323,  324,  325,  326, 
327,328,329,330,331,332,333, 
334,  335,  339,  34°,  34*,  342,  343, 
344,  345,  346,  347,  348,  349,  350, 
352,  353,  354,  355,  356,  357,  360, 
361,  362,  363,  364,  365,  366,  367, 
368,  369,  370,  371,  372,  373,  374, 
375,  376,  379,  38o,  381,  384,  385, 
386,  387,  388,  389,  390,  391,  392, 

393- 
Arka,  219,  346. 
Arms,  93,  94,  381. 

—  mighty,  39,  45,  51,  55,  58,  63,  64, 

71,72,74,  86,  94,  107,  121,  123, 
229,  252,  393,  394. 

—  thousand,  94,  98,  293,  294. 

—  unnumbered,  94. 
Army,  38,  294. 

Array.    See  Battle-array. 
Arrogance,  116,  128.     See  Boastful, 

Egotism,  Pride,  and  Vanity. 
Arrows,  42,  294,  296,  297,  298,  299, 

300,  301. 
Arteries,  257. 
Articulation.    See  Speech. 
Artisans,  208,  365. 
Aryaman,  89. 
Aryas,  222,  223. 

Aryavidyasudhakara,  27,  33,  224. 
Asad,  120,  121. 
Asafoetida,  383. 


398        BHAGAVADGITA,    SANATSUGAtIyA,    ANUgItA. 


Ascent,  321,  385. 

Ascertainment  of  truth,  64. 

Ascetics,  61,  63,  66, 78, 123, 159,  212, 
217,  232,  246,  289,  290,  292,  293, 
312,316,354,358,363. 

Ashes,  62,  276. 

Asita,  87. 

Asking  alms,  362. 

Ajoka,  223. 

Aspirations.     See  Expectations. 

Ajramas,  30,  216,  307,  315.  See 
Orders. 

Ass,  20. 

Assault,  41. 

Assemblages  of  men.     See  Society. 

Assiduous,  50,  63,  72,  73,  83,  101, 
112, 115, 125, 161,  253,  255,  360, 
361.    See  Industry. 

Assimilation  with  Brahman,  52,  59, 
66,  69,  70,  85,  99, 100,  104, 106, 
107, 109,  no,  128, 156, 176, 178, 
253,308,313,316,342,370. 

Association,  233,  355,  359,  370,  374? 
378.  See  Company,  Dissocia- 
tion, and  Society. 

—  with  preceptor,  177,  178. 

—  with  senses,  288. 
Astringent,  363,  384. 
Astrologers,  377. 
Asura,  83.    See  Demons. 
A-rvalayana,  61,  68,  119,  236,  358. 
Ajvamedha,  156. 

—  Parvan,  197. 

—  Parvan,  sections  of,  198  seq. 
Ajvattha,  89,  in,  189,  247. 
Ajvatthaman,  38. 

Ajvins,  92,  94. 

Asylum,  84,  129,  361,  363.    See  Re- 
sort. 
Atharva-veda,  18,  19,  180. 
Atheism,  115. 
Atmosphere.     See  Air. 
Atom,  78,  194. 
Atomists,  377. 
Atri,  314. 
Attachment,  48,  50,  52,  53,  54,  55, 

59,  60,  61,  64,  65,  66,  67,  82, 
99,  101,  103,  104, 107,  109,  in, 
116, 118, 122, 124, 125, 127, 154, 
161, 166, 181, 182,  232,  236,  241, 
242,  246,  250,  289,  322,  324,  328, 
34i,  357,  362,  364,  365,  367,  368, 
371,377,379,391,392. 

Attack  of  vice,  167. 

Attainment  to  Brahman,  52,  54,  59, 

60,  61,62,  64,71,75,76,78,79, 


80,  81,  82,  84, 85,  86,  87, 99, 100, 
104, 106, 116, 127, 129, 162, 164, 
167,  173,174,175,185,189,  191, 
230,  257,  287,  339,  348,  367,  369, 
37o,  372,  373,  385,  392.  See 
Brahman. 

Attendance,  324.     See  Preceptor. 

Attention,  231.     See  Assiduous. 

Attraction,  327. 

Attractive,  189. 

Attrition,  308. 

Auspicious  act,  120,  324. 

Austerity.     See  Penance. 

Author.     See  Creator. 

Authority,  54,  117,  243. 

Automaton.  See  Free-will  and  Ma- 
chine. 

Autumn,  159. 

Avarice,  41,  43,  108,  109,  114,  117, 
155, 166,  181,  284,  302,  303,  320, 
332,  335,  344,  357,  361,  378. 
See  Covetous. 

Aversion,  50,  51,  56,  62,  63,  68,  76, 
101,  103,  no,  122,  123,  124, 
128,  322,  363.     See  Affection. 

Avimukta,  257. 

Awake.     See  Day  and  Night. 

Axe,  294. 

Back,  367. 

Backbiting,  114,  168,  183,  323,  326, 

364. 
Badarayawa,  30,  33. 
Bahu.     See  Bhuman. 
Bali-offering,  216. 
Balls  of  food  for  ancestors,  41. 
Bamboo,  346,  359. 
Ba«a  Bha#a,  13,  27. 
Banks  of  rivers,  344. 
Bark,  361. 
Barley-seed,  353. 
Basis.     See  Real. 

Bathing,  48, 64, 1 22,361, 364, 375,377- 
Battle,  Ar^una  directed  to  engage 

™,  44,  47,  55,  78,  96,  127,  128. 

—  array,  4,  37. 

—  field,  3,  4,  5,  37,  38,  42,  294,  296, 

323,  394. 

—  righteous,  46. 

—  running  away  from,  127. 
Baudhayana,  32. 

Beams.     See  Rays. 

Beasts,  89, 90, 105, 109, 116,167,284, 

289,   290,   321,  345,  353,  356, 

389. 
Beauty,  177,  178,  238,  256,  260,  261, 


INDEX    OF    PRINCIPAL    MATTERS. 


399 


264,  267,  268,  270,  272,  275,  286, 

307,323^347. 
Bed,  389. 

Bees,  155,  188,  309. 
Beggar.     See  Ascetic  and  Asking. 
Beginning  and  end  and  middle,  44, 

46,  66,  88,  90,  93,  94,  in,  307, 

335,  35i,  352. 

—  void  of,  44,  86,  94,  103,  104,  106, 

157,  3i3. 
Behaviour.     See  Conduct. 
Being.     See  Spirits. 

—  Ancient,  96,  97.    See  Primal. 
— -  Best,  77,  87,  92, 113, 114,  377. 

—  Divine,  78,  87, 186, 187, 188, 189, 

190,  191,  192. 

—  Eternal,  87,  94. 

—  Primal,  in. 

—  Supreme,  54,  57,  78,  81,  83,  85, 

in,   113,   157,   188,  281,  284. 
See  Brahman  and  God. 
Beings,  beginning  of.     See  Source. 

—  created.     See  Creatures. 

—  embodied.    See  Embodied  souls. 

—  friend  of.     See  Friend. 

—  higher,  in. 

—  living.     See  Creatures. 

—  lord  of.     See  Lord. 

—  seed  of.     See  Seed. 

—  tempers  of.     See  Tempers. 

—  two,  113. 

—  two  classes  of,  93,  1 15. 

—  within  all,  113,  194.  See  Within. 
Belief.  See  Convictions  and  Faith. 
Belongings,  60,  68,  128,   160,  170, 

247,  324,  365,  369,  373.  See 
Appurtenances. 

Beloved.     See  Favourite,  Husband. 

Belt.    See  Girdle. 

Beneficial  speech,  119. 

Benefit,  76,  178,  182,  184,  185,  189, 
309,  324,  325,  360. 

Benevolence,  universal,  66,  94,  99, 
100,  101,  114,  322. 

Beyond.     See  Highest. 

Bhagavadgfta,  135,  137,  138,  142, 
143, 144, 145, 146,147, 148, 150, 
151,152,153,154,155,158,159, 
160, 164, 165, 167, 168, 170, 171, 
172, 173, 175,  J76,  !77, 179, 180, 
184, 185, 186, 188, 189, 193, 194, 
197,  203,207,208,210,  215,218, 
222,  226, 230,  231,  232,  233,234, 
235,  236,  239,  240,  242,  243,244, 
245,  246,  247,  248,  249,  250, 251, 
253,  254,  255,  256,  257,  258, 260, 


261,  262,  266,  270,  277,  278,279, 
28r,  282,  283,  284,  285,  288,  289, 
291,  292,295,  305,  306,  307,  310, 
313,315,317,318,319,320,321, 
323,  324,  325,  326,  327,  328,329, 
33o,33i,332,334,335,338,342, 
343,  344,  345,  346,  349,  35*,  352, 
353,  355,  358,  359,  36o,  362,363, 
364,  365,  366,  367,  368,  369,370, 
37i,372,373,375,378,38o,38i, 
384,  385,  387,  388,  390,  391,  392, 

393,  394. 
Bhagavadgita,  appropriateness  of,  4, 
6,  135. 

—  author  of,  6,  28. 

—  Brahmanization  of,  4,  6,  21,  22. 

—  character  of,  4,  7,  8,  10, 13, 17,  25. 

—  connexion  of,  with  Bharata.   See 

appropriateness,  supra. 

—  date  of,  17,  19,  and  Introduction, 

passim. 

—  dissemination  of,  129,  130. 

—  frame  of,  2,  3. 

—  genuineness  of,  2,  4,  5,  6. 

—  inconsistencies  of,  11. 

—  language.     See  style,  infra. 

—  names  of,  2,  28. 

—  non-systematic.     See  character, 

supra. 

—  Parvan  of  the  Mahabharata,  2. 

—  Phalajruti  in,  143. 

—  philosophy  of.      See   character, 

supra. 

—  position  in  Sanskrit  literature,  17, 

34,  138. 

—  relation  to  Buddhism,  24,  34. 

—  relation  to  Vedas,  16,  17.     See 

character,  supra. 

—  relation  to  Yoga-sutras,  8. 

—  responsible  for  want  of  history,  1 . 

—  scheme  of,  2,  3. 

—  stanzas,     common    with     other 

works,  18,  27. 

—  stanzas  of,  number  of,  35. 

—  study    of.      See    dissemination, 

supra. 

—  style  and  language  of,  4,  11,  13, 

14,  15. 

—  teaching  of,  16. 

—  terminology  of,  11. 

—  text  of,  34. 

—  upanishad,  2,  200. 

—  verse  of,  15.     See  History. 
Bhagavan,  meaning  of,  157. 
BhaWarkar,  Professor  R.G.,  28, 107, 

137,  199,  227. 


400        BHAGAVADGiTA,    SANATSUGATiYA,    ANUGITA. 


Bharadva^a,  314. 

Bharata,  39,  43,  44,  46,  55,  57,  59, 
63,  74,  75,  76,  79,  80,  92,  102, 
105,  106,  107,  108,  in,  114, 
115,  117,  119,  122,  126,  129, 
149,  150,  170,  176,  194,  231, 
254,  255,  256,  394. 

Bharata.  See  Bharata  and  Maha- 
bharata. 

—  varsha,  39. 
Bhargava,  314. 

Bhartr/hari,  14,  32,  220,  221,  239. 

Bhasa,  222,  346. 

Bhashya.     See  Patan^ali. 

Bhattogi,  33. 

Bhau  Daji,  Dr.,  27. 

Bhavabhuti,  13. 

Bhikshu-sutra,  32,  33. 

Bhima,  37,  38. 

Bhishma,  3,  38,  39,  42,  95,  96. 

—  Parvan,  2,  6,  40. 

—  roaring  of,  38. 
Bhramara,  188. 

Bhr/gu,  89,  294.     See  Bhargava. 

Bhuman,  173. 

Bhur,  174,  393. 

Bhutas,  85,  118,  306,  345,  354. 

Bhutis,  92. 

Bile,  343. 

Billow,  388. 

Bilva,  360. 

Bipeds,  171,  209,  339. 

Birds,  90, 109, 142,164,189,321,345, 

353,  37i,  389. 
Birth,  45,  48,  58,  59,  76,  86,  103, 
105, 109, 116, 170, 176, 177, 194, 
231, 233,  237,  239,  241,  245,  247, 
257,  302,  313,  339,  341,  390. 
See  Death,  and  Meditation  at 
time  of  death. 

—  after  lapse  of  time,  339. 

—  as  devotee,  72. 

—  bond  of,  49,  62,  115,  201. 

—  causes  of,  48,  105. 

—  certainty  of,  45,  154. 

—  divine,  29,  59. 

—  freedom  from,   56,   59,  67,   79, 

105,  107,  109,  188,  241. 

—  in  low  species,  152. 

—  knowledge  of,  58,  72. 

—  low,  85. 

—  number  of,  49,  58. 

—  of  deity,  59. 

—  previous.    See  Life. 

—  repeated,  49,  58,  59,  67,  73,  75, 

79,  105,  107, 154,  185,  191,  242, 


302,325,361,367,371,378,387. 

See  Return. 
Birth,  sinful,  85,  255. 
Biting,  282. 

Bitter,  118,  363,  383,  384. 
Black,  179,  384. 
Blame  and  praise,  101,  no,  185,  324, 

392. 
Blank,  376. 
Blind  man,  155. 
Blindness,  320,  322. 
Bliss,  52,  66.     See  Brahmic  state. 
Blood,  43, 155, 241, 252, 275, 335,  342. 
Boar,  37. 
Boastful,  167,  170,  181,  324.     See 

Arrogant. 
Boat,  51,  381,  382. 

—  of  knowledge,  62. 

Bodily  and  mental,  247,  251,  359, 
362,  364. 

Bodily,  mental,  vocal,  119  seq. 

Body,  55,  64,  69)  71,  72,  77,  83,  92, 
102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 
in,  112, 113, 118, 123, 128, 155, 
173,176,177,178,179,186,187, 
191, 193,  235,  236,  237, 240,242, 
245, 246,  248,  249, 250,  252, 253, 
257,  259,  262,  279,  288, 289,290, 
302,307,326,331,332,342,344, 
345,  362,  367,  376,  391,  392. 

—  acquisition  of,  44. 

—  city  of  nine  portals,  65,  108,  317. 

—  development  of,  252. 

—  distinct  from  soul,  44,  45,  375. 

—  distribution  of,  on  death,  290, 302, 

—  leaving,  59,  66,  78,  79,  112,  235, 

237,  238,  239,  250,  252,  253,  255, 
257,  266,  331. 

—  liquids  in,  342.     See  Liquids. 

—  movement  of,  343. 

—  of  Krishna,  92,  93. 

—  passages  of,  79.     See  Passages. 

—  perishable,  44,  45. 

—  produced  from  qualities,  109. 

—  release  from.    See  leaving,  supra. 

—  ruler  of,  112. 

—  source  of,  244. 

—  subtle,  190,  333. 

—  support  of,  53,  60,  159,  291,  318, 

359,  363,  366. 

—  supporter  of,  228,  262. 

—  two  kinds  of,  160. 

See  Bond  and  Deities. 
Boehtlingk,  144. 

Boisterous.     See  Mind  and  Senses. 
Bond,  66,  107,  146,  246,  247,  248, 


INDEX   OF    PRINCIPAL    MATTERS. 


40I 


317,  323,  342,  35i>  355,  368,  371, 
39i. 

Bond,  of  qualities,  107.  See  Action 
and  Birth. 

Bone,  252,  343. 

Books,  57,  326. 

Boon.     See  Present. 

Borrowing.     See  Common  passages. 

Bosom,  239. 

Boughs,  small,  313,  371.  See 
Branches. 

Bows,  37,  39,  42,  293,  294,  296,  311. 
See  Salutation. 

Brahma,  79,  80,  93,  96,  219,  220,  231, 
234,  244, 257,  264,  271,  312,  314, 
315,317,323,325,328,332,  333, 
337,  339,  345,  352,  354,  355,  360, 
372,  378,  385,  393.     See  Priest. 

Brahma  Gita,  198  seq.,  255,  310. 
See  Anugita. 

Brahma£arin,  69,  79,  119,  146,  152, 
i53»  169, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 
216,  242,  283,  284,  312,  316,  326, 
354,  358,  360,  361,  362,  364. 

—  Naish^ika,  377. 

Brahman,  52,  56,  61,  62,  64,  65,  66, 
7o,  72,  77,  79,  81,  84,  87,  90,  91, 
102, 103, 106, 107, 108,  no,  113, 
120,  121, 127, 128, 146, 147,  149, 
151,  152, 153, 156, 160,  161, 162, 
163,  164,  165,  166, 167, 168, 170, 
171,  172,  173, 174, 175, 178, 180, 
181, 182,  185,  186, 187, 189, 190, 
191,  192,  226,  230,  234,  235,  238, 
241,  243,  244,  245,  246,  248,  250, 

251,  252,  253,  255,  257,  258,  260, 
265,  277,  282,  283,  284,  286,  287, 
288,  296,  306,  307,  308,  309,  310, 
312,313,316,317,  326,327,336, 

339,  34i,  342,  344,  347,  354,  3^7, 
368,  369,  372,  375,  377,  386,  387, 
391,  392.  See  God,  Being-Su- 
preme, Seat,  and  Vedas. 

Brahmananda.     See  Felicity, 

Brahma-ya^na,  61,  184. 

Brahma-loka,  20. 

Brahma-vidya,  166. 

Brahma-sutras,  31. 

Brahmawa,  21,  22,  23,  24,  38,  48,  65, 
86,  119,  120,  126,  147, 150,  158, 
159, 160, 161, 165,  171, 172, 173, 
174, 175,  i79, 182,  185, 189, 193, 
209,  210,  217,  218,  239,  245,  248, 

252,  254,  255,  256,  261,  263,  264, 
265,  266,  267,  270,  271,  272,  273, 
274,  275,  276,  277,  281,  284,  285, 

[8] 


288,  293,  295,  296,  299,  300,  303, 
304,  306,  307,  308,  309,  310,  311, 
315,  320,  322,  325,  326,  329,  332, 
338,  339,  345,  346,  347,  348,  353, 
359,  360,  369,  374,  375,  376,  377, 
380,384,387,389,393. 

Brahma«a  Gita.     See  Brahma  Gita\ 

Brahmawa's  wife.     See  Brahmawa. 

Brahmawas.     See  Vedas. 

Brahmanical  age,  4. 

Brahmanism,  4,  6,  22,  25,  26. 

Brahmic  state,  52,  66,  176. 

Branch.     See  Knowledge. 

Branch  and  moon,  142,  146,  172. 

Branches  downwards,  in. 

—  many,  47,  294,  313,371. 
Brave,  122,  160,  294,  300,  341.    See 

Valour. 

Breach.    See  Regulation,  and  Duty. 

Breast,  233.     See  Bosom. 

Breath,  64,  67, 78,  201,  238,  252,  270, 
276,  341.     See  Life- winds. 

Bribing,  91. 

Bridge  of  piety,  315,  348. 

Br/hadarawyakopanishad,  6,  81,  119, 
149, 152, 153, 155, 158,  159,  160, 
161, 162, 166, 171, 172, 173,  174, 
178, 179, 181, 185, 186, 187,  189, 
192, 193,  204,  208,  231,  239,  249, 
251,  255,  258,  259,  261,  264,  268, 
271,  274,  279,  283,  287,  289,  290, 
295,  304,  3i3,  3i4,  324,  327,  342, 
347,353,38i,389,39o,39L 

BWhadratha,  180. 

Br/'haspati,  89,  214,  314,  346. 

Br/hatsaman,  90,  180. 

Brilliant,  78,  93,  187,  192,  287,  347. 

Bringing  forth.     See  Production. 

Broad,  384. 

Brooding  on  evil,  168. 

Brothers,  40,  290. 

Brothers-in-law,  40. 

Brow,  67,  78,  257.     See  Head. 

Brute  force,  116. 

Brutes.     See  Beasts. 

Buddhism,  9,  20,  23,  24,  25,  26,  69, 
146, 147,  212,  213,  214,  215,  224, 
225,226,  306,  376. 

Biihler,  J.  G.,  Dr.,  14,  20,  21,  27, 
32,  33,  208,  213,  215,  224,  353. 

Bull,  345. 

Burden,  beasts  of,  321. 

Burnell,  Dr.,  20,  31. 

Burning  taste,  118. 

—  ofaction  by  knowledge,  60,62, 279- 

—  of  Ar^una's  skin,  40. 

Dd 


402         BHAGAVADGITA,    SANATSUGATlYA,    ANUGiTA. 


Burning  of  soul,  45. 

Business,  183.     See  Management. 

Butter,  83,  184,  276. 

Butterflies,  95,  155. 

Buying  and  selling,  323. 

Calamity,  50.     See  Distress. 

Calmness,  119.     See  Tranquillity. 

Calumny,  116,  129,  325.  See  Carp- 
ing and  Censoriousness. 

Capacity  of  doing  action.  See  Ac- 
tion and  Activity. 

Capital,  394. 

Captivity,  207,  233.     See  Bond. 

Car,  great,  37,  38,  39,  42,  46,  381, 

382,  386. 

—  without  horse,  40. 
Carelessness.     See  Heedlessness. 
Carnal.     See  Love. 

Carping,  56,  81,  130,  320,  364,  368. 

See  Calumny. 
Carriage.     See  Car. 
Caste,  21,  23,  24,  25,  30,  59, 126, 129, 

208, 217,  315,  316,  320,  322,  329, 

358. 

—  author  of,  59. 

—  comminglings,  41,  55. 

—  rites  of,  41. 

Casting  aside,  343,  344,  357. 

Cataclysm,  94. 

Cattle,  59,  127,  345,  389. 

Cause,  96,  192,  247,  278,  309,  335, 

383,  387,  388,  392.     See  Con- 
sequence. 

—  material,  58,  106,  113,  191,  244. 

See  Action,  Inconstant,  Nature, 

and  Source. 
Caution,  63,  97.     See  Heedlessness 

and  Circumspection. 
Cave,  333,  363. 
Celebration   of  God's   name.     See 

Glorification. 
Celestial  pleasures,  84. 
Censoriousness,  166,  167,  181,  182, 

183. 
Censure,  150.     See  Blame. 
Centering.     See  Concentration. 
Ceremonies,  112,  169,  171,  172,  293, 

321,  322,  353,  358,  361,  366,  370. 

See  Rites. 
Ceylon,  223. 
Change,  157,  327,  331,  345,  356,  372. 

See     Development    and     Un- 
changeable. 
Channel.     See  Current. 
Chanting  verse,  15. 


Characteristics.     See  Qualities. 
Chariot,  187,  221, 294,  380.  See  Car. 
Charioteer,  4,  338,  386. 
Charioteer's  son.    See  Karwa. 
Charity,  169,  324. 
Charm.     See  Enamoured. 
Chastity,  275. 

Cheat,  91.  See  Crafty  and  Deceitful. 
Check,   243,   306,   328,    357.     See 

Restraint. 
Childhood,  178.     See  Infancy. 
Children,  63,  64,  116,  124,  154,  159, 

161,185,246,304.   See  Heroes. 
Chili,  383. 

Choristers.     See  Gandharvas. 
Churning,  89. 
Circular,  384. 
Circumference,  306. 
Circumspection,  364.    See  Caution. 
City,  251,  318,  394.     See  Body. 
Class,  65,  103. 

Classical  Sanskrit.     See  Kavyas. 
Cleanness,  68, 103, 114, 119, 126,128, 

359,  360,  363,  364.    See  Purity. 
Clear,   383,   384,  392.     See  Mind 

and  Undistinguished. 
Cleverness,  128,  324. 
Closing.     See  Eyelid. 
Cloth,  45,  68,  217,  359,  360,  3^4,  384* 
Cloud,  72,  179. 
Cognition,  332. 
Cold,  118,  238,  384. 
Cold  and  heat,  44,  48,  68,  88,  101, 

167,  284,  323,  356. 
Colebrooke,  H.  T.,  2,  7,  29,  32, 186, 

225. 
Collections,  188. 
Colour,  92,  93,  94,  179,  247,  252, 

258,   260,  285,  286,   342,  368. 

See  Objects  of  sense. 
Combination.     See  Production. 
Combustible,  45. 
Comfort,  95,  98,  118. 
Coming  and  going,  44,  80,  84,  231. 
Commentators  on  Gita,  11,  35. 
Commission.     See  Omission. 
Common  earnings.     See  Earnings. 

—  passages,   18,   27,   139,   140,  202 

seq.,  225,  354. 

—  people,  51. 
Compact,  383,  385. 
Companion,  40,  159.     See  Associa- 
tion. 

Company,  97,  293,  359. 
Comparison    of    one's     own    with 
others'  pleasures  and  pains,  7 1 . 


INDEX   OF   PRINCIPAL   MATTERS. 


403 


Compassion,  87,  101,  114,  231,  243, 
326,  359,  362,  364.  See  Affec- 
tion and  Pity. 

Compounds,  13,  90. 

Comprehension.  See  Understanding. 

Comprehensiveness,  124,  372. 

Compulsion.     See  Free-will. 

Concealed.     See  Nature. 

Concentration,  12,  61,  65,  66,  68,  69, 
73>  78,  79,  99, 100, 101, 105,  1 10, 
128, 153, 160, 169, 181, 185,  189, 
232,  242,  243,  247,  248,  249,  250, 
251,254,255,257,279,280,285, 
287,  299,  300,  301,  315,  326,  332, 
340,  342,  344,  360,  361,  362,  363, 
366,368,388,389,390,394.  See 
Intent. 

—  of  breath.     See  Breath. 
Conch,  38,  39. 

Conclusion.     See  Resolution. 
Condition.    See  State. 
Conditioning  of  soul,  107. 
Conduct,  9,  115,  159,  170,  178,  232, 

243,  283,  312,  320,  324,  341,  358, 
359,  362,  364,  367,  368,  369,  378, 
392.  See  Ill-conducted,  and 
Goodness,  Darkness,  Passion, 
and  Sinful. 

—  of   one    transcending    qualities. 

See  Qualities. 

—  of    steady-minded    man.       See 

Steady-minded. 

—  unknown.     See  Unknown. 
Confidence,  326. 

Confinement    of    mind,    79.      See 

Quiescence. 
Confluence,  287. 
Confusion,  43,  49,  50,  52,  59,  160, 

182,  254,  269,  308,  377.     See 

Distraction  and  Soul. 
Conjunction,  330. 
Connexions.     See  Kinsmen. 
Conquered.    See  Accomplishment. 
Conquest.     See  Victory. 
Conscience,  41. 
Consciousness,  82,  88,  102, 103, 176, 

181, 188,  238,  239,  242, 245,  290, 

334,  35o,  356,  359. 
Consequences,  56,  124,   126.     See 

Effect. 
Consonants,  348. 
Constancy.     See  Perseverance. 
Constant,   100,  120,  125,  248,  289, 

33i)  332,  360,  369,  375,  376. 
Constituents,  246,  318,  336,  343,  344. 

See  Ingredient. 


Constitution,  236, 
Constraint.     See  Free-will. 
Consubstantial,  163. 
Consummation  of  devotion,  72. 
Contact  with  Brahman.   See  Assimi- 
lation. 

—  with  knowledge,  72. 

—  with  objects,   44,  669   126,   154, 

335,  334. 
Contamination.     See  Taint. 
Contemn,  246.     See  Despise. 
Contemplation,  47,  49,  50,  61,  100, 

in,  156, 162, 169, 181,234,  245, 

283,  3°9>  389*  39o. 
Contemporary  Review,  5,  18. 
Contempt,  97,  120,  154. 
Contentment,  54,  60,  68,  86,  87,  101, 

166, 168,  240,  286,  288,  302,  325, 

326,  334,  361. 
Continence,  169,  361,  389. 
Continuous  meditation,  78,  79,  100, 

169. 
Control  of  nature.     See  Nature. 

—  of  senses.    See  Restraint,  Senses. 

—  of  tongue.     See  Taciturnity. 
Controversialists,  90,  365. 
Contumely,  324. 
Conversation,  87,  232. 
Convictions,  55,  239,  304,  305. 

—  demoniac,  118. 

—  wrong,  52, 120,  320.    See  Notion, 

false. 

Cooked  rice,  384. 

Cooking,  53,  279,  363. 

Copulative  compound.  See  Com- 
pounds. 

Copyright,  5, 18.  See  Common  pas- 
sages. 

Coronet,  93,  96,  98. 

Corruption  of  women,  41. 

Cotton,  300. 

Counsellor,  280,  283. 

Counting  of  sins,  89. 

Country,  342. 

Courage,  48,  70,  90,  94,  102,  103, 
114,  124,  125, 126, 127, 167, 168, 
176, 182,  288,  301,  302,  325,  332, 

373. 
Course  of  life.     See  Life. 
Cousin,  Victor,  1 . 
Covering,  375. 

Covetous,  125.    See  Avarice. 
Cow,  65,  89,  209,  265,  353. 
Cowell.     See  Maitri  Upanishad. 
Crafty,  125.     See  Cheat,  Deceitful. 
Craving,  107,  166,  181,  342. 

D  d  2 


404         BHAGAVADGiTA,    SANATSUGAliYA,    ANUgItA. 


Created  things,  124,  157,  190,  234, 

258,  260,  262. 
Creation,  90, 106, 107, 124,  313,  317, 

332,   333,    334,    340,    344,    345, 

347,  35i,  352,  388.     See  Power, 

Source,  and  World. 

—  of  man,  53.     See  Man. 

—  of  sacrifices,  52. 

Creator,  53,  59,  83,  86,  87,  90,  97, 
101, 104,  121, 170,  231,  315,  334, 

338,  347,  354,  377,  387. 

Creatures,  54,  65,  69,  71,  74,  76,  86, 
88,  113,  114,  115,  118,  119,  156, 
167, 168, 183, 193,  241,  243,  244, 
245,  246,  250,  257,  263,  268,  269, 
272,  273,  274,  275,  281,  289,  290, 
291,  294,  307,  315,  318,  321,  324, 
325,  326,  334,  335,  339,  342,  345, 
347,  354,  357,  359,  362,  3^3,  3^4, 
365,  37i,  374,  378,  385,  387,  389, 
391,392. 

Crooked.     See  Straightforward. 

—  movement,  339. 
Cruel,  125,  181,  182. 

Cruelties,  166, 167,168,  243,  323,  326. 

Crumbling  of  earth.     See  Earth. 

Culmination,  69.     See  Knowledge. 

Cunningham,  223. 

Curiosity,  311. 

Currents,  95, 187,  238,  318,  321,  322, 

325,  327,  329,  343. 
Curse.     See  Speech. 
Curtailing,  343,  344.   See  Abridging. 
Cutting.     See  Indivisible. 

Daityas.     See  Demons. 

Dakshiwa,  119,  261,  280. 

Danavas,  354. 

Dancers,  183,  208,  325. 

Dawdfin,  13,  144,  205. 

Danger,  47,  56,  125,  157,  167,  188, 
I9°,  335.     See  Fear. 

Darkness,  75,  78,  87,  104,  107,  108, 
109,  no,  117, 118, 119, 120,  122, 
124,  125, 126, 168, 180,  214,  239, 

276,  278,  284,  301,  302,  318,  319, 
320,  321,  322,  323,  328,  329,  330, 

331,  334,  345,  349,  35^,  379,  39<>. 
Da.rahotri  &c,  262  seq.,  266. 
Dajakumaraiarita.     See  DaWin. 
Dajaratha,  221. 
Davids,  T.  W.  R.,  23,  25,  64,  66, 

87,  306. 
Day  and  night,  51,  79,  80,  81,  276, 

277,  33o,  352,  354,  356. 
Deaf,  321,  322. 


Dear  to  God.     See  Favourite,  God. 

Death,  44,  45,  46,  52,  56,  66,  77,  78, 
81,  84,  86,  89,  90,  95,  103,  105, 
108, 109, 115, 122, 142,  150,  153, 
154,155,156,163,170,  176,178, 
185,189,191,232,233,237,238, 
249,  250,  270,  289,  290,  297,  298, 
322,  348,  349,  355,  368,  371,  372, 
380,381,391. 

—  according  to  quality,  prevailing, 

108. 

—  before  and  after,  bliss,  66. 

—  before  and  after,  faith  necessary, 

121. 

—  certainty  of,  45,  154,  355. 

—  death  of,  154. 

—  fear  of,  152. 

—  in  performing  one's  duty,  56. 

—  life  and  infancy,  44. 

—  meditation  at  time  of,  78. 

—  non-existent,  149,  151,  152. 

—  release  from,  77,  105,  152.     See 

Age,  old. 

—  time  of,  52,  80. 

—  world  of.     See  World,  mortal. 
Debasement  of  self,  68. 
Deceitful,  164,  324,  364.  See  Crafty. 
Decision.     See  Action. 
Declivity,  281. 

Decoration,  207,  324,  387. 

Decrying  food,  216,  360. 

Dedication.     See  Action. 

Deed.     See  Act. 

Deer-skin,  68,  159,  360. 

Defeat.     See  Victory. 

Defects,  56,  65,  121,  122,  127,  166, 
168,  170,  182. 

Defiance,  324. 

Defiling.     See  Taint. 

Degradation,  157,  191,  243. 

Degrees.     See  Gradation. 

Deities,  123, 153,  179,  220,  243,  259, 
276,  279,  317,  334,  337,  343,  347, 
353,  358,  361,  362,  367.  See 
Divinities,  Organs. 

Deity,  form  of,  76,  78,  80.  See 
Being-Supreme,  Brahman,  and 
Kr/shwa. 

Dejection,  42,  50.  See  Despondency. 

Deliberation.     See  Thought. 

Delight,  41, 177,  285,  324.  See  Joy, 
Pleasure. 

Deliverance.     See  Emancipation. 

Deliverer,  100. 

Deluge,  97, 106,  260,  388.  See  De- 
struction, Dissolution. 


INDEX    OF    PRINCIPAL    MATTERS. 


405 


Delusion,  42,  49,  52,  53,  55,  56,  57, 
58,  59,  62,  65,66,72,75,76,81, 
82,  83,  86,  92, 104, 107,  108, 109, 
no,  in,  112, 114, 115, 116,  122, 
124, 126, 128, 129, 130, 152,  153, 
154,155,157, 161,162,  166,  176, 
181,  182, 183, 184, 189, 190,  233, 
243,  256,  284,  293,  301,  302,  303, 
304,  3i7,  3i9,  320,  322,  326,  330, 
33i,332,333,335,343,344,35i, 
356,  357,  358,  368,  377,  378,  381, 
382, 386. 

—  net  of,  116. 

—  power  of,  59,  75,  76. 

—  release  from,  75,  76. 
Demerit.     See  Defects. 

Demon,  87,  89,  91,  94,  96,  151,  152, 

257,282,283,321,345,347,387. 
See  Asura. 
Demoniac,  75,  83,  115. 

—  birth,  116. 

• —  convictions,  118. 

—  endowments,  114,  115. 
Departed  spirits,  118.    See  Manes. 
Departure  from  world,  77,  78,  79, 

80,  81,  166, 191. 

—  of  soul.     See   Body-leaving  and 

Death. 
Dependence  on  God,  59,  66,  73,  75, 
76,  77,  85,  91,  in,  128,  253,  258, 
362. 

—  on  none,  54,  60,  367,  368. 
Dependent,  167,  256,  290.     See  In- 
dependent. 

Depreciation  of  Ar^una's  merits,  46, 

47. 

Descent,  321. 

Description  of  Brahman,  164. 

Desertion  of  man  by  God,  71. 

Deserving  man,  169, 183. 

Designation  of  Brahman,  120. 

Desire,  48,  49,  50,  51,  52,  53,  56,  57, 
58,  60,  63,  65,  66,  67,  69,  70,  74, 
75,  76,78,  83,  84,  101,  102,  108, 
110,111,115,116,117,118,121, 
123,128,151,153,154,155,165, 
166, 169, 173, 176, 181, 184,  233, 
241,  246,  263,  269,  275,  283,  284, 
288, 289,  300,  302,  313,  314,  322, 
323,  324,  325,  326,  327,  342,  344, 
347,  349,  356,  357,  364,  3^5,  366, 
369,  37o,  376,  381. 

—  capacity  of  obtaining,  92,171,287, 

327,  332,  373«     See  Objects  of 
desire. 
Despair.    See  Despondency. 


Despise,  370.     See  Contemn. 
Despondency,  40, 42,  43, 70, 1 25, 1 26, 

250,  320,  363.    See  Dejection. 
Destructible,  113,  244,  292. 
Destruction,  fire  of.     See  Fire. 

—  of  action,  60,  61,  355.  SeeAction, 

destruction  of. 

—  of  entities,  106, 154, 180,  250,  276, 

307,  335,  357,  365,  376,  378. 

—  of  food,  279. 

—  of  life.     See  of  entities,   supra, 

and  Death. 

—  of  men,  190. 

—  of  nature,  106. 

—  of  others,  120,  348. 

—  of  self.     See  Self-destruction. 

—  of  warriors,  95,  96. 

—  of  worlds,  55,  107, 115,  314.     See 

Creatures,  Deluge,  Dissolution, 
Life,  Nature,  Production  and 
destruction,  and  Ruin. 

—  time  of,  237. 
Determinate,  52,  63. 
Determination,  255,  260,  268,  299, 

348,  349,  35o,  368,  377.     See 

Resolution. 
Devadatta,  38. 
Devaki,  229. 
Devala,  87. 

Devamata,  226,  274,  275. 
Devatadhyaya-brahmawa,  20. 
Devayana,  314,  316. 
Development,  77,  103,  104,  109, 156, 

165, 166, 170, 184, 186,  288,  318, 

33i>  334,  37o,  372,  375,  382,  387, 

392. 

—  of  intelligence,  293. 

Devotee,  58,  61,  64,  66,  67,  68,  69, 
70,  71,  72,  73,  75,  79,  81,  84, 
85,  86,  87,  99,  100,  101,  102, 
104,  ii2, 129, 186,  187, 188, 189, 
190, 191, 192, 193,  209,  243,  248, 
249,  266. 

—  four  classes,  n,  75. 
Devotion,  9,  12,  17,  23,  48,  49,  50, 

52,  53,  55,  58,  60,  61,  62,  63, 
64,  65,  66,  67,  68,  69,  70,  71, 
73,  78,  79,  81,  83,  84,  85,  87, 
99,  100, 103,  no,  119, 128,  129, 
130, 173, 185,  232,  243,  255,  299, 

308,  310,  311,  324,  349,  360,  361, 
362,  368,  369,  381,  389. 

—  mode  of,  83. 

—  same    as    renunciation,   67,   85. 

See  Renunciation. 

—  unconsummated,  72. 


406         BHAGAVADGITA,    SANATSUGATIYA,    ANUGITA. 


Devout,  85,  394.    See  Pure. 
Dexterity,  38,  127,  326,  362. 
Dhaivata,  385. 
Dhammapada,  35,  50,  51,  52,  69,  71, 

84,  101,  102,  108,  no,  123,  241. 
Dhana%aya,  38,  48,  49,  63,  74,  93, 

100,  125,  130,  230,  310,  394. 
Dharma,  219,  223,  306. 
Dhatu.     See  Elements. 
Dhnsh/adyumna,  39. 
Dhr/sluaketu,  37. 
Dhritarash/ra,  3,  35,  37,  39,  40,  41, 

42,  43,  95,  135,  136,  141,  149, 
150,151,155,156,157,158,162, 
163, 164, 165, 166, 170, 174, 175, 
179. 

Dhyanayoga,  128. 

Diadem.     See  Coronet. 

Dialects  &c.  of  South  India,  222. 

Dialogue,  5,  130,  263.  And  see 
Itihasa. 

Dice,  91. 

Difference,  apparent,  104,  105,  124, 
193.     See  Soul,  State,  Unity. 

Difficult  deeds,  296. 

—  penance,  300. 
Difficulty,  120,  128,  388,  389. 

—  oflookingatUniversalform,93,99. 

—  of  worship,  100. 
Diffusive,  383. 

Digestion,  113,  236,  252,  273,  275. 

Dignity,  74. 

Din,  38,  39,  356. 

Dinner,  97. 

Directions.     See  Quarters. 

Direct  knowledge,  82. 

Director,  281,  385. 

Disagreeable.     See  Agreeable. 

Disaster,  160. 

Discarding  of  entities.  See  Indiffer- 
ence to  worldly  objects. 

Discernment,  50,  53,  56,  67,  74,  76, 
91,110, 112,  114,  117,  118,  123, 
125,126,154,155,166,183,256, 
320,  331. 

Disciple.     See  Pupil. 

Discomfort,  380. 

Discontent.     See  Contentment. 

Discrimination.    See  Discernment. 

Discus,  93,  98. 

Discussion,  276.  See  Controversial- 
ists. 

Disdain.     See  Arrogance. 

Disease,  103,  118.     See  Ailment. 

Disgrace,  42,  46,  86.    See  Honour. 

Disguise  of  Dharma,  223. 


Disgust,  151,  324. 
Dishonest,  243. 
Dishonour.     See  Honour. 
Disorder.     See  Body  and  Mind. 
Disparagement  of  gods  &c,  209, 214, 

320. 
Disposition,  43,  117,  182. 

—  evil,  320. 

Disrespect,  83,  97,  159,  324,  368. 

Dissatisfaction.     See  Disgust. 

Dissociation.  See  Association  and 
Severance. 

Dissolution,  80,  82,  84,  92,  112,  189, 
192,  3i7,  335,  344,  387.  See 
Destruction  and  Order  of  dis- 
solution. 

Distinction,  83,  124,  126,  157,  285, 
33i,  335,  34i,  370,  374,  375,  381. 
See  Difference. 

Distinguished,  168. 

Distinguishing  power,  318.  See 
Discernment. 

Distraction,  49,  67,  269,  377.  See 
Confusion. 

Distress,  75, 101,368.   See  Calamity. 

Distribution  of  food,  119,  273,  275. 

Ditch,  155,  302. 

Diversified.     See  Variegated. 

Diversity,  313,  344,  374. 

Dividing  soul.     See  Indivisible. 

Divine  Being.     See  Being. 

—  form.     See  Form. 

—  nature,  75,  83,  367,  383. 

—  speech,  265. 

—  state.     See  Brahmic  state. 
Divinities,  59,  75,  76,  77,  84,  115, 

123, 178.     See  Deities. 
Division,  327,  381. 

—  of  honey,  188. 
Doctrine,  esoteric  &c,  149. 

—  holy,  82,  185,  255,  256. 
Doer.     See  Agent  and  Soul. 
Dog,  20,  65,  142,  160. 
Dolphin,  90. 

Domain.     See  Kingdom. 
Domination  of  Supreme,  75. 
Dominion.     See  Kingdom. 
Door,  270. 

Doubt,  72,  260,  375,  376.  See  Mis- 
givings, Objects  of  sense. 

—  secret  and  open,  149. 
Downfall,  233,  355.     See  Fall. 
Downwards.    See  Branches  and  Up. 
Drag,  386. 

Drama.     See  Kavyas. 
Draupadt,  37,  39. 


INDEX   OF   PRINCIPAL   MATTERS. 


407 


Dravi^/as,  225,  295. 

Dream,  249,  269,  387,  392. 

Drink,  113,  159,  183,  236,  259.   See 

Objects  of  sense  and  Senses. 
Drinking,  48,  279,  354,  389. 
Driving.     See  Gar. 
Dro«a,  37,  39,  42,  95,  96. 
Drooping    of   Arg-una's    limbs,    40. 

See  Despondency. 
Drupada,  37,  39. 
Drying  up  of  mouth,  40. 

—  of  organs,  43. 

—  of  soul,  45. 

Dulness,  320,  391.     See  Ignorance. 
Dumb,  321. 
Duryodhana,  37,  38,  39. 

—  leaders  of  his  army,  39. 
Dushyanta,  39. 

Dust,  57. 

Duty,  21,  43,  46,  54,  55,  56,  59,  67, 
74,  108,  114,  115, 116, 117, 118, 
119, 120, 122, 125, 126, 127,128, 
129, 157, 178,  209,  210,  231,  247, 
255,  291,  295,  296,  302,  322,  325, 
326,  329,  348,  359,  360,  361,  362, 
364,  365,  378,  393.  See  Ac- 
complishment, Action,  pre- 
scribed and  prohibited,  Right 
and  wrong. 

Dvaraka,  198,  230,  394. 

Dwelling  in  Brahman,  71,  75,  80,  82, 
84,  85, 100, 106,  194.  See  Assi- 
milation and  Attainment. 

—  of  a   Brahmawa  &c,  159.     See 

House  and  Residence. 

—  of  a  donor,  185. 

Eagle,  90. 

Earnings,  54, 60,  363,  364.  See  Gain. 

Ears,  65, 103, 112,  253,  259,  261,  290. 

See  Senses. 
Earth,  73,  74,  94,  102, 112, 113, 126, 

!56, 179, 187, 192,  260,  261,  290, 

291,  303,  304,  305,  339,  343,  352, 

364,  365,  38r. 

—  sovereignty  of,  40. 
Ease,  65,  314. 

East,  354. 
Easy,  82. 
Eating  61,  62,  64,  69,  85,  113,  118, 

236,  269,  279,  321,353?  358,  362, 

363,  364,  365. 
Eclipses,  224,  330. 
Edge,  sharp.     See  Arrows. 
Effect,  119,  383,  388.     See  Cause. 
Effects,  household,  253. 


Effeminate,  42. 

Effort,  personal,  46.   See  Assiduous. 

Effulgence,  94,  95.  See  Radiance 
and  Refulgence. 

Eggs,  321,  339,  353- 

Ego  and  non-ego,  377. 

Egoism,  52,  55,  65,  74,  101,  102, 103, 
118, 123, 124, 128, 153,  246,  280, 
287,313,317,318,326,332,333, 
334,335,336,338,350,355,356, 
362,  366,  368,  370,  371,  382,  383, 
385,389,390,392. 

Egotism,  118, 124, 128,  268.  See  Ar- 
rogance, Pride,  and  Vanity. 

Eight,  373. 

Elders,  291.     See  Ancients. 

Elements,  84,  102, 179, 184,  238,  245, 
246,  247,  334,  335,  340,  343,  346, 
348,352,353,355,357,368,371, 
376,377,382,385,386,387,388, 

39i. 

—  gross.   See  Constituents  and  Ele- 

ments. 

—  subtle,  186,  285,  287,  313,  317. 
Elephant,  65,  89,  155,  208,  345. 
Elevated  place,  68. 

Elevation  of  self.     See  Exaltation. 

Eleven,  318,  336. 

Emanation,  87,  88,  89,  91,  106,  in, 
127. 

Emancipated.     See  Emancipation. 

Emancipation,  48,  50,  52,  54,  58,  59, 
67,  69,  72,  73,  89,  90,  99,  in, 
115, 120, 122, 125, 127, 146, 156, 
157, 162, 165, 170, 176, 178,  184, 
189, 190, 191,  221,  231,  232,  242, 
243,  245,  246,  247,  248,  249,  252, 
253,  254,  255,  265,  276,  278,  280, 
284,  286,  287,  293,  301,  306,  307, 
309,310,311,312,313,314,317, 
322,  325,  326,  331,  333,  336,  344, 
362,  363,  364,  366,  367,  368,  370, 
37i,374,375,388,39o,39i,392, 
393,394- 

—  path  of,  47,  48,  54,  58,  72,  73. 
Embodied  soul,  44,  45, 46, 50,  51,  57, 

63,  65,  77,  100,  107,  108,  109, 

117,  122,  154,  158. 
Embodiment  of  Brahman,  no. 
Embryo,  389. 
Emperor,  72,  232. 
Empty.     See  House. 
Emulation.     See  Superiority. 
Enamoured,  96,  107,  334. 
End,  evil,  72,  81,  103,  243. 

—  of  the  great  cause,  192,  287. 


408         BHAGAVADGITA,    SANATSUGATIYA,    ANUGITA. 


End  of  things,  46,  354,  355.  See 
Destruction  of  entities. 

—  of  worldly  life,  in.     See  Aims, 

Beginning,  and  Wicked. 
Endowments,  114,  115,  362,  388. 
Endurance,  167,  168, 182,  246,  323. 
Enemy,  43,  46,  56,  57,  58,  67,  68,  82, 

99,  101,  no,  115,  116,  246,  282, 

283,  296,  300. 

—  destroyer  of,  42. 

—  destruction  of,  48,  302. 

—  restrainer  of,  231,  253,  312. 
Energy,  91,  106,  118,  124,  125,  177, 

255,  387. 
Engagement.     See  Appointment. 
Enjoyer,  105,  116,  379. 

—  of  qualities.     See  Qualities. 

—  of  sacrifices,  67,  84. 
Enjoyment,  40, 43, 53, 61, 66,84, 105, 

in,  112, 115, 116, 126, 154,  165, 
166, 167, 181, 182, 184, 188,  190, 
236,  240,  241,  268,  269,  283,  289, 
290,  291,  300,  304,  327,  328,  334, 

365,375,379,383. 

—  capacity  of,  104. 

—  higher  and  lower,  240. 

—  nothing  beyond,  115. 

—  repeated,  126.    See  Pleasure. 
Enlightenment,  107,  155,  265,  287, 

293,325,329,333,348,351,356, 
373. 

Enmity,  99.     See  Benevolence. 

Enormity,  181.     See  Sin. 

Entities,  75,  76,  80,  82,  83,  88,  90, 
106, 107,  in,  113, 126, 180,  190, 
192,  244,  260,  292,  312,  313,  315, 
316,  317,  318,  333,  335,  337,  338, 
339,  34i,  342,  347,  35i,  352,  353, 
357,  367,  368,  369,  370,  386,  387. 

—  cause  of.     See  Source. 

—  distinctions  between,    104,    318, 

328,  352,  375. 

—  lord  of,  83,  88. 

—  supporter  of,  80. 

—  threefold   division  of,   337.    See 

Creation,  Destruction,  Produc- 
tion, Source,  Unity,  and  Within. 

Entity,  real,  124,  154,  157,  176,  191, 
307,  308,  309,  312,  333,  335,  343, 
37o,  372. 

Entrance  into  the  Supreme,  82,  94, 
95,  99, 128,  285.  See  Assimila- 
tion and  Essence. 

Enumeration  of  qualities,  124. 

Environment,  355. 

Envy,  166,  362.     See  Superiority. 


Ephemeral.     See  Perishable. 

Epic  Age.     See  Greek  poetry. 

Equability,  47,  48,  49,  60,  65,  71,  86, 
100,  101, 103,  no,  325,  326,  359, 
366,  372,  373.  See  Alike  and 
Impartial. 

Equal,  97,  116.  See  Power,  un- 
equalled. 

Equanimity.     See  Equability. 

Equilibrium,  217,  331. 

Equivocal  words,  52. 

Error,  65,  369.  See  Conviction  false. 

Esoteric.     See  Doctrine. 

Essence,  50,  58,  59,  74,  76,  78,  107, 
109,  no,  128, 130,  370,  379,  382. 

Eternal,  62,  74,  76,  79,  80,  81,  87,  94, 
100,  no,  112, 128, 157, 186,  187, 
188, 189, 190, 191, 192,  230,  233, 
238,  241,  245,  247,  248,  255,  265, 
277,3i3,3i4,3i7,33i,334,339, 
350,376,391. 

Eternity  of  soul,  43,  44,  45. 

Evening,  361. 

Evenness,  67,  69. 

Everlasting,  45,  58,  79, 157,  233,  317, 
355,  369,  37o. 

Evil,  103, 105, 115, 121,126, 127,  247, 
276,  277,289,366. 

—  action,  121. 

—  cause  of,  156. 

—  conduct.     See  Ill-conducted. 

—  doers,  59,  75.     See  Wicked. 

—  duty,  56, 127. 

—  end,  72. 

—  of  attachment.    See  Attachment. 

—  perception  of,  103. 

—  release  from,  60,  81. 

—  speaking,  182. 

—  world,  60. 
Exaltation  of  self,  67. 
Examination.     See  Test. 
Example,  41,  54,  59. 
Excellent,  86,  92. 
Excess,  159. 

Exclusion.     See  Objects  of  sense. 
Exclusive.     See  Concentration. 
Excretions,  4,  65,  155,  236,  252,  261, 
336,338.  See  Organs  and  Senses. 

—  menstrual,  275. 
Excretive  organs,  297. 
Exercise,  69,  236,  323,  360.      See 

Power. 
Exertion.     See  Assiduous. 
Exhalation,  264,  265,  372. 
Exhaustion,  355. 
Existence,  105, 120, 176, 292, 351, 377. 


INDEX    OF   PRINCIPAL   MATTERS. 


409 


Existence  and  non-existence,  44, 84, 
96, 103,  191,  194,  276,  277,  331, 

375,377- 
Exoteric.     See  Doctrine. 
Expanse,  258. 
Expectation,  60, 68, 119,120,292,324, 

326,  365,  366,  367,  378,  389,  392. 
Experience,  50,  57,  66,  68, 73,  81,  82, 

99,  112,  126,  179,  185,  186,  187, 

188, 189, 190, 191, 192, 193,  231, 

245,  248,  249,  250,  253,  256,  263, 

309,316,342,344,368. 
Expiation,  324. 
External  and  internal.     See  Bodily 

and  Mental. 

—  objects.     See  Objects  of  sense. 

—  world.  See  World. 
Extinction.  See  Fire. 
Exultation  and  grief,  50,  65,  249,  285, 

300,  325.     See  Joy. 
Eye,  65,  67,  69,  187,  189,  219,  253, 
258, 259,  260,  290,  307,  347,  359, 
366.     See  Senses. 

—  divine,  72,  239. 

—  many  an,  93,  94. 

—  of  knowledge.    See  Knowledge, 

eye  of. 

—  on  all  sides,  93,  103,  332. 

—  sun  and  moon,  94. 

Eyelid,  opening  and  closing,  64,  161, 
356,  372. 

Faces  downwards,  287. 

—  in  all  directions,  90,  93,  103,  253, 

332,  345. 

Factiousness,  182. 

Failure.     See  Success. 

Faith,  56, 62,  63, 72, 73,  76, 77,82,84, 
99,  i°2,  115,  H7>  n8,  119,121, 
126, 130,  220,  255,  316,  319,  320, 
321,324,325,358,365,366,378. 

Fall,  84,  107,  113,  116,  240.  See 
Downfall. 

Falsehood.     See  Truth. 

Faltering,  46. 

Fame,  46,  90, 116,  236,  287,  358. 

—  of  Kr/sh«a,  96. 
Family,  destruction  of,  41. 

—  extinction  of,  41. 

—  rites  of,  41,  42. 

Fancies,  60, 67, 70, 116, 171, 184,185, 
247,  284,  288,  355.  See  Pon- 
dering and  Thought. 

Far  and  near.     See  Afar. 

Far-seeing,  160,  391. 

Fastenings,  356. 


Fasts,  76,  283,  324. 
Fat,  384. 

Father,  40,  83,  97, 107, 176, 194,  233, 
243,  290,  303,  304,  394. 

—  and  son,  98. 
Father-in-law,  40. 
Fatigue,  357. 

Fault-finding.      See    Calumny  and 

Carping. 
Faults,  247,  293,  320. 
Fauriel,  M.,  6. 
Favour,  71,  128,  129,  130,  161,  310, 

372.     See  Soul. 
Favourite,  17,  75,  85,  86,  87,  101, 

102,  129,  183,  230,  394. 

—  name,  79. 

Favouritism,  59,  85,  182.  See  Im- 
partiality. 

Fear,  46, 50,  58,  67,  69, 86, 94, 96, 98, 
101, 114, 122, 126, 151, 155,  159, 
161, 167,  246,  250,  285,  287,  292, 
294,  295,  320,  325,  329,  330?  344? 
357,  362.     See  Danger. 

Fearful.    See  Difficult  and  Terrible. 

Feathered  arrows,  298. 

Feeling,  104,  112,  288.  See  Organs 
and  Senses. 

Fees.     See  Gift. 

Feet,  53,  94,  103,  119,  235,  253,  261, 
332,  339,  359,  367,  380. 

Felicity,  162. 

Fellow-student.     See  Student. 

Felons,  41. 

Females,  41,  85,  90,  241,  255,  275, 
277,287,295,324,346,347.  See 
Corruption  and  Male  and  fe- 
male. 

Ferocious,  115,  116,  323. 

Fetter,  53,  62,  64,  123,  127.  See 
Action  and  Bond. 

Fibres,  176,  249. 

Fickleness,  167.     See  Mind. 

Field,  41,  72,  354. 

Fierce.     See  Ferocious. 

Fig  tree,  89. 

Figure  and  trope.  See  Bhagavadgita 
and  Sanatsu^-atiya,  and  Simile. 

Finding  fault.     See  Carping. 

Fire,  45,  57,  61,  62,  67,  73, 74,  80,  83, 
88,  94,  95,  97,  102,  112,  113, 
127, 156, 192,  242,  247,  257,  259, 
260,  261,  262,  268,  270,  271,  276, 
277,  279,  283,  288,  307,  308,  319, 
336,  338,  342,  346,  353,  360,  362, 
380,388. 

—  and  smoke,  57, 127, 


4IO         BHAGAVADGITA,    SANATSUGATIYA,    ANUGITA. 


Fire,  discarding,  67. 

—  of  destruction,  95. 

—  of  knowledge,  60,  62. 

See  Brahman  and  Sense. 
Firm,  45,  49,  101.     See  Fixed. 
Firmness  in  vows,  83. 

—  of  belief,  77. 

—  of  mind,  49. 

—  of  resolution,  70, 125.     See  Cou- 

rage, Faith,  and  Understanding. 
First,  161,  345,  352  seq. 
First-born.     See  First. 
Fish,  90,  155,  374. 
Fisherman,  382. 
Fit  donee  &c.     See  Gift. 
Fixed  firmly,  29,  89,  in. 
Fixing.     See  Concentration. 
Flame.     See  Fire. 
Flamingo,  138,  189. 
Flesh,  252,  335,  343,  367. 
Flickerings,  69. 
Flippancy,  183. 
Flower  and  fruit,  85,  93,  285,  286, 

309,  313,  365,  371,  388. 

—  bunches,  313. 
Flowery  talk,  47. 
Flowing  element,  342. 
Foam  and  water,  104. 
Foe.     See  Enemy. 

—  terror  of,  42,  43,  58,  62,  76,  82,  84, 

9h  97,  99,  126,  232,  234,311. 

Foetus,  57,  144,  176,  240,  242. 

Following.  See  Imitation  and  Obe- 
dience. 

Folly,  126.     See  Frenzy. 

Fondness,  74.     See  Acquisition. 

Food,83,  118,  119,144,156, 159,188, 
216,  233,  235,  238, 252,  254,  270, 
279>  343,  353,  360,  363,364,  388. 
See  Eating. 

—  cooking  for  oneself  only,  53. 

—  digestion  and  distribution  of,  273, 

277. 

—  fourfold,  113. 

—  moderation  in.    See  Eating. 

—  origin  of  creatures,  54. 
Forbearance.     See  Forgiveness. 
Force.     See  Brute  force. 

Forest,  173,  259,  284,  285,  286,  288, 
307,  342,  361,  362,  363,  372,  386. 

Forester,  217,307,316,345,354,358, 
362. 

Forest-products,  361. 

Forgetfuiness  of  Ar^una,  230. 

—  of  Krishna,  230. 

—  of  one's  nature,  50,  152,  154. 


Forgiveness,  86,  90,  101,  103,  114, 
126, 176, 181, 182, 183,  320,  321, 
325,  326,  359,  362,  373. 

Form  divine,  92,  93,  229. 

—  divine,  entry  into.    See  Entrance. 

—  divine,  sight  of  desired  by  gods,  99. 

—  divine,  wonderful,  94. 

—  fierce,  95.     See  Terrible. 

—  human.     See  Human. 

—  infinite,  97,  98. 

—  material  of  Brahman,  58. 

—  of  Brahman.     See  Brahman. 

—  universal,  97,  98,  99,  130.     See 

Degradation. 
Former  life.     See  Life,  previous. 
Formless,  233,  247. 
Forms,  many,  83,  92,  93,  274.     See 

Real. 

—  of  all,  93. 

—  of  nature,  74. 

Fortnight,  81,188,316,330,352,356. 

Fortune,  90, 131. 

Four-handed,  98. 

Fragrance,  74,247,257,258,286,  291, 
309.  See  Objects  of  sense,  Per- 
fume, and  Senses. 

Free,  60,  65,  243,  342. 

Freedom  from  action,  52,54,56,  127, 
256,  257,  362. 

—  from  delusion,  75,  76. 

—  of  will.   See  Desire  and  Free-will. 
Freeman,  E.  A.,  5,  18,  203. 
Free-will,  53,56,80,82, 128,156, 157. 
Frenzy,  115,  116,  151,  168,  183,  323. 

See  Folly. 

Friend,  40,  41,  58,  67,  68,  72,  84, 97, 
98,  101,  no,  167,  181,  183,  184, 
233,  246,  290,  295,  364. 

Friendly,  101,  342. 

Frivolous,  308. 

Fruit,  connexion  of  with  action,  65. 

—  of  action,  48,  49,  58,  59,  60,  65, 

67,  73,  76,  81,  84,85,  100,  101, 
109, 118, 119, 120, 121,122, 123, 
124,125,126,153,156,158,165, 
188, 191,  236,  240,  243,  264,  307, 
312,  325,  326,  348,  355,  365,  369, 
373,380,382. 

—  of  Sankhya  and  Yoga,  64. 

—  of  worship,    76,    81,    84.      See 

Flower,  Phalajruti,  and  Tree. 
Frustration  of  desire,  50.  See  Desire. 
Fuel,  62,  247,  259,  261,  268,283,  286, 

290,291,307,308,342. 
Fugitive.     See  Perishable. 
Full  of  Brahman,  59. 


INDEX   OF   PRINCIPAL   MATTERS. 


411 


Funeral  rites.     See  Balls  of  food. 
Future,  76, 79, 90,  170, 194,  269, 314, 

325,  331,  366,  392.  See  Entities 

and  World. 

Gadfly,  284. 

Ga^asa,  394. 

Gahnavi.     See  Ganges. 

Gain  and  loss,  47, 151, 170,  246.    See 

Earnings. 
Gainas,  224,  225,  226,  364. 
Gamadagni,  294,  295,  300. 
Gambling,  324.     See  Game. 
Gambu,  346. 

Game,  91.     See  Gambling. 
Gamut,  385. 
Ganaka,  5,  54,  215,  222,  303,  304, 

306. 
Ganameg-aya,  229. 
Ganardana,  41,  42,  52,  88,  99,  233, 

393. 
Gawas,  346. 
Gandhara,  385. 

Gandharvas,  89,  94,  178,  347,  387. 
Gawiiva,  40. 
Gaf\g-am,  223. 
Ganges,  90,  222,  354. 
Gapa,  89,  184. 
Garhapatya,  262. 

Garrulity,  168, 181.  See  Taciturnity. 
Garu^/a,  90. 
Gasp,  239. 
Gastric.     See  Fire. 
Gau<sfopada,  160,  324,  376. 
Gautama,  208,  213,  218,   224,  236, 

3i4,  353>  354,359,362,  363,365. 
See  Buddhism. 

Gayadratha,  96. 

Gayatri,  90,  353. 

Gem,  384. 

General,  89. 

—  his  position  in  army,  38. 

Generation,  74,  89,  260,  287,  336. 
See  Organs  and  Senses. 

Generosity.     See  Gifts. 

Genital  organ,  261,  336,  338. 

Gentle,  114, 119,  341. 

Germs,  339. 

Ghee,  384. 

Gifts,  21,  22,  23,  81,  84,  85,  86,  98 
99,  114,  116,  118,  119,  120, 121 
122, 127, 147, 167, 169, 173, 182 
183, 184,  218,  242,  282,  320,  321 
324,  325,  326,  330,  340,  359,  364, 
376.     See  Dakshiwa. 

Girdle,  217,  360. 


Gish«u,  219,  332. 

Gita.     See  Bhagavadgita. 

Given  up  to  God.     See  Devotion. 

Gladstone,  W.  E.,  4. 

Gleaning  corn,  21,  217. 

Glorification,  64,  83. 

Glorious,  172,  289,  303. 

Glory,  43,  74,  86,  91,  93,  96,  97, 
98,  112,  126,  158,  164,  179,  180, 
185, 186, 192,  276,  287,  308,  376, 

377. 

Glow-worm,  239. 

Glutinous,  384. 

Gnanakanda.     See  Vedas. 

Gnanendra  Sarasvati,  33. 

Gnat,  374,  379. 

Goal,  59,  61,  65,  67,  69,  73,  75,  79, 
80,  81,  83,  85,  86,  87,  97,  99, 
100, 102, 104, 106, 107, 117, 156, 
163,167,182,231,233,255,256, 
258,3n,3i5,333,349,358,372, 
387,  388,  392. 

Goat,  290,  321,  353. 

God,  98,  192,  284. 

—  dear  to  man  of  knowledge,  75. 

—  form  of,  76,  78. 

—  full  of.     See  Full. 

—  manifest,  not  to  all,  76. 

—  mover  of  world.    See  Movement. 

—  not    active   agent,  59,   65,   106. 

See  Soul. 

—  primal,  96. 

—  source  unknown,  86. 

—  superior  none,  74.    See  Brahman, 

Deity,  Dependence,  Hatred,  and 
fjvara. 

Goddess,  347. 

Godlike.     See  Endowments. 

Gods,  16,  53,  61,  80,  84,  86,  87,  88, 
93,  94,  95,  99,  105,  108,  109, 
118, 119, 126, 146, 151, 153,  160, 
169, 186,  241,  250,  254,  255,  282, 
283,  305,  306,  316,  320,  322,  324, 
327,  33i,  338,  345,  347,  354,  377, 
387,  389,  390. 

—  censure  of,  150. 

—  disparagement  of.  See  Disparage- 

ment. 

—  first  of,  87,  93,  95,  97. 

—  lord  of,  84,  87,  93,  95,  96,  98. 

—  nature  of.     See  Endowments. 

—  sacrifice  to,  61. 

—  sovereignty  of,  43. 

—  world  of,  84,254, 322.  See  World. 
Going  and  returning.     See  Coming 

and  going,  and  Return. 


412         BHAGAVADGiTA,    SANATSUGATiYA,    ANUGITA. 


Gold,  68,  no,  189,  209,  333,353,  365, 
389. 

Goldstiicker,  Prof.,  3,  5,  6,  8,  14,  20, 
33,  74,  79?  89,118. 

Good,  42,  43,  52,  53,  59,  68,  85,  91, 
105, 108, 109, 115, 118, 120, 124, 
168, 175, 178, 191,  243,  276,  277, 
282,  287,  290,  292,  293,  300,  301, 
302,311,314,316,319,320,325, 
326,  348,  349,  358,  359,  368,377, 
39o- 

—  deeds, doers  of,  72,75,105,153, 243. 
Goodness,  75,  91, 106, 107,  108,  109, 

117,118, 120,  122,  124, 125, 126, 
184,  276,  278,  300,  306,  318,  319, 

326,  327,  328, 329,  330,  331,  334, 
373,  374,  376. 

Government  of  tongue.  See  Taci- 
turnity. 

—  of  world.     See  Universe. 
Governor.   See  Ruler  of  universe. 
Govinda,  40,  43. 

Gracious,  95,  98. 

Gradation,  381,  385,  387,  388. 

Gradual  progress,  70.  See  Improve- 
ment. 

Grain,  361. 

Grammarian,  174. 

Grammatical  blunders  of  demons, 
152. 

Grandsire,  38,  40,  83,  194,  244,  271, 
289,  295,  300,  303,  304,  314,  374. 

—  great,  97. 
Grandson,  40. 

Grass,  68,  142,  159,  360. 
Gratitude,  176,  177. 
Great,   capacity   of  becoming,   92. 
See  Large. 

—  men,  54,  72. 
Greatness,  333,  347,  354. 
Greatness  of  Supreme,  92,  97,  128, 

157,  287,  336. 

—  worldly,  151,  178. 
Greek  poetry,  5,  18,  203. 
Green,  384. 

Grey,  179,  384. 

Grief,  42,  43,  44,  45,  46,  66,  101, 
115, 118, 126, 128, 166, 181, 183, 
193,  250,  284,  285,  301,  320,  326, 

327,  343,  354,  355,  356,  357,  366, 
393.    See  Sorrow. 

Griffiths,  R.  T.  H.,  90. 
Grote,  G.,  5,  6. 
Group.     See  Collection. 

—  of  senses.     See  Senses. 
Gu^akeja,  39,  43,  88,  92, 


Guesses  at  truth,  8, 12. 

Guests,  216,  243,  285,  286,  306,  358, 

361,  364. 
Guide,  348. 
Guilt,  98.     See  Fault. 
Guru.     See  Preceptor. 
Gurujishyasawvada,   199   seq.     See 

Anugita. 
Guruskandha,  222,  346. 
Gyotishtoma,  156,  164. 

Habit  of  pondering,  78,  250. 
Habitation,  251.     See  Dwelling. 
Hair,  40,  93,  130,  362. 

—  matted.     See  Matted  hair. 

—  thick,  39. 
Half-hearted,  73. 

Hall,  F.  E.,  8,  10,  28,  141,  197,  201, 
202,  204,  219,  221,  222,  244,  280, 
285,300,317,327,332,333,334, 
337,  338,  373,  39o,  392. 

Hamilton,  Sir  W.,  378. 

Hawsa,  381. 

Hands,  53,  261,  359,  367. 

—  four,  98. 

—  joining,  93,  94,  96,  294,  311. 

—  on  all  sides,  103,  203,  253,  332. 

—  one  thousand.     See  Arms. 
Hanging,  237. 

Hankering.     See  Craving,  Desire. 

Hanumat.     See  Ape. 

Happiness,  51, 63,  65,  66,  70,  76,  85, 
87,  101,  103,  107, 108,  no,  116, 
117, 126, 170, 185, 189,  233,  242, 
250,  255,  270,  285,  300,  311,  314, 
325,  34i,  342,  347,  348,  369,  378, 
380,  389.  See  Enjoyment, 
Pleasure,  and  Unhappiness. 

Hard,  341,  384. 

Hari,  92,  130,  219,  347. 

Harmlessness,  83,  86,  101,  103,  114, 
119,  124,  325,  364,  373,  376. 

Harsha^arita,  28. 

Harshavardhana,  27,  28. 

Harshness,  114,  181,  256.  See  Mer- 
cilessness. 

Haste,  175. 

Hastinapur,  2,  394. 

Hateful  to  Supreme  Being,  85.  See 
Likes  and  dislikes. 

Haf^a-yoga,  297. 

Hatred,  68,  85,  99,  101,  116,  168, 
182, 194,  281,  288,  289,  301,  320, 
323,  365.     See  Antipathy. 

Haug,  M.,  19,  221,  276,  277. 

Haughty,  167,  168,  320,  324. 


INDEX   OF    PRINCIPAL    MATTERS. 


413 


Head,  69,  79,  93,  103,  238,  253,  332, 

367.  See  Bow. 
Heads  smashed,  95. 
Headstrong,  125,320.  SeeStubborn. 
Health,  118. 

Heard  instruction,  49,  105, 173,  283. 

Hearer,  282,  283. 

Hearing,  130,  246,  258,  259,309,  351. 
See  Heard,  Instruction,  Senses. 

Heart,  42,  43,  50,  51,  52,  64,  69,  70, 
79,  85,87,  88,98,104,113,114, 
118, 119, 122, 129, 153, 177, 183, 
187, 192, 194/232,  239,  242,251, 
252,  278,  281,  282,  283,  287,  293, 
3°3,  308,  332,  342,  345,  350,  361, 

394. 
Heat,  84,  95,  237,  329,  330.     See 
Warmth. 

—  and  cold.     See  Cold  and  heat. 
Heaven,  42, 46,  47, 48,  49, 72,  81,  84, 

93,  94,  120,  125,  126,  130,  156, 
158, 159, 165, 179, 187, 192,  240, 
264,  281,  289,  290,  307,  322,  325, 
327,  344,  360,  361,  362,  368,  389. 

—  degrees  in,  240. 

—  sovereignty  of,  43. 

—  touching,  94. 

—  voice  from,  295. 
Heaviness,  320,  327.     See  Lazy. 
Heedlessness,  63,  97,  108,  109,  126, 

152, 153,  155, 156, 168, 169, 170, 
176,  183,253,  324,  359. 
Hell,  41,  42, 116,  155,  183,190,233, 
240,  259,  321,  378. 

—  ways  to,  116. 
Helpless,  336,  365. 
Helplessness  of  Ar§-una,  43. 
Herbs,  83,  113,  346,  388.   See  Vege- 
tables. 

Heretics,  171. 
Hermitage,  221,  285,  294. 
Hero,  37,  95,  98,  295. 
Hidden.     See  Concealed. 
Hideous,  343. 

Highest,  74,  99,  108,  113,  244,  309, 
326,  336,  342,  344,  347,  35i,  354, 

368,  369,  372,  389,  390.  See 
Supreme. 

High  position,  68,  178,  233. 
High-souled,  75,  79,  83,  94,  96,  98, 
151,  294,  295,  296,  314,  327,  348, 

389,  39i,  393- 
Hill,  284,  287.     See  Mountain. 
Himalaya,  29,  89,  222,  346. 
Hira«yagarbha,io8,in,i86,3i5,333. 
History,  1. 


Holes,  dwellers  in,  345. 
Holiness.     See  Purity. 
Holy,  87,  119,  331,  333,  336,  347, 
354,377,378,392.  See  Devout. 

—  dialogue,  129,  130. 

—  means  of  immortality,  102. 

—  men,  72. 

—  world,  84. 
Home,  113,  170,  355. 

—  of  woes,  79. 
Homeless,  101,  103,  352,  355. 
Homeric  question,  4,  5. 
Honey,  188,  190. 

Honour,  116, 118, 119, 160,  243,  246, 
302,  361,  363. 

—  and  dishonour,  68, 101,  no. 
Hope,  82,  115. 
Horizontally,  287. 

Horrific.     See  Terrible. 
Horses,  89,  187,  381,  386. 

—  white,  of  Arg-una,  38. 
Hospitality,  286,  294.     See  Guest. 
Host,  358. 

Hosts.  See  Army. 
Hot,  118,  246,  384. 
Hotn.  See  Priest. 
House-decoration,  207,    324.     See 

Habitation. 
Householder,    307,   316,    354,   358, 

360,  362,  377. 
HWshikeja,  38,  39,  43,  96,  121,  242, 

248,  270,  363,  367. 
Hue.     See  Colour. 
Human  form,  76,  83,  87. 

—  world,  20.     See  World,  human. 
Humility,  65, 116,  314,  326.   Seealso 

Modesty. 
Hunger,  151,  356,  359. 
Hunter,  142,  167. 
Hurry.     See  Haste. 
Hurtful,  384. 

Hurtfulness.     See  Harmlessness. 
Husband  and  wife,  98,  256. 
Hymns,  94,  102,  280.     See  Saman. 
Hypocrite,  53,  164. 

Iia,  257,  277,  318. 

Idealism,  107,  387. 

Identification  with  Brahman,  52,  61, 
62,  64,  65,  69,  70,  71,  75,  83, 
106, 114, 120, 128, 156, 162, 164, 
167, 169, 176, 181, 188, 189, 190, 
191,  193,  234,  283,  385.  See 
Unity. 

—  of  self  with  all,  62,  64,  246,  307, 

310.    See  Unity. 


414         BHAGAVADGITA,    SANATSUGATIYA,    ANUGITA. 


Identification  of  self  with  wife  &c, 
64,  103,  248. 

Identity.     See  Soul. 

Idiots,  321. 

Ignominy,  233.     See  Disgrace. 

Ignorance,  63,  65,  76,  87,  100,  103, 
109, 114, 116, 120, 151, 155,  157, 
160, 168, 171, 178, 186,  267,  319, 
322,  357,  39o- 

—  about  Supreme,  75,  76,  309. 

Ignorant  people,  55,  63,  76,  109,  151, 
156, 158. 

Ikshvaku,  58. 

Ill-conducted,  71,  85,  105,  321. 

Ill-success.     See  Success. 

Illumination  of  world,  178,  186. 

Illustrious.     See  Great  men. 

Image,  208,  242.  See  Embodiment 
and  Representative. 

Imitation,  55. 

Immaculate.     See  Soul. 

Immaturity,  320. 

Immediate  knowledge.    See  Direct. 

Immortal,  43,  44,  45,  84,  86, 102, 103, 
109,  no,  143, 152,  153, 166,  168, 
170, 176, 179, 180, 182,  185,  187, 
189, 190, 191, 192, 193,  244,  255, 
282,313,343,357,367,372,373, 

39i- 

Immovable,  100,  159,  266,  307,  321, 
33o,  33i,  353,  355,  383,  387. 
See  Movable. 

Immutable.    See  Unchangeable. 

Impartiality,  85,101,128.  See  Alike 
and  Equability. 

Impassable,  284,  285,  389. 

Impatience,  166. 

Impediment.     See  Obstacle. 

Imperceptible,  234,  241.  See  Per- 
ceptible. 

Imperfect.     See  Knowledge. 

Imperfection,  168. 

Imperishable,  58,  81,  128,  245,  248, 

357,  367,  385. 
Impermanence.     See  Perishable. 
Impiety,  41,  125,  158,  246,  319,  348. 

See  Piety. 
Implement.     See  Instrument. 
Important.     See  Excellent. 
Impression,  247,  264,  266,  318,  358, 

383,  392. 
Improvement,  321. 
Impure,  118,  125,  154. 
Inaccessible,  295. 
Inaction,  48,  53,60,67, 115, 122, 125, 

320.   See  Freedom  from  action. 


Inanimate  creation,  77,  244. 

Inattention.    See  Heedlessness. 

Incarnation,  59,221.  See  Manifesta- 
tion. 

Incautious,  97.    See  Heedlessness. 

Incendiary,  41. 

Inclination,  282,  283,  318.  See  Dis- 
position. 

Incombustible,  44,  45. 

Incomprehensible,  391.  See  Un- 
knowable. 

Inconstancy,  287,  289,  335. 

Incontinent,  236. 

Incorrect.  See  Conviction  and 
Knowledge. 

Indecision.     See  Misgivings. 

Indefeasible,  no. 

Indefinable,  44,  94,  97. 

I  ndependence,  326.  See  Dependent 
on  none. 

Indescribable,  100. 

Indestructible,  44,  45,  46,  54,  66,  77, 
78,  80,  94,  96,  99, 100, 113, 173, 
179,  244,  248,  257,  292,  391. 

India,  South.  See  Dialect  and 
Tank. 

Indication  of  Brahman,  102. 

Indicative  use  of  words,  272. 

Indifference,  means  of,  341. 

—  to  ordinary  books,  49. 

—  to  worldly  objects,  9,  10,  69,  71, 

89,  101, 103,  in,  128,  168,  169, 
233,  247,  326,  341,  365,  366,  392. 

Indifferent,  68,  82,  100,  no,  113. 

Indigent,  256,  304,  376. 

Indignities,  233.     See  Ignominy. 

Indische  Studien,  33. 

Individual  soul.     See  Soul. 

Indivisible,  45. 

Indolence,  108,  320.    See  Lazy. 

Indra,  88,  89,  96,  175,  219,  250,  261, 
282,  316,  338,  346,  388. 

Indraprastha,  229,  394. 

Indu,  346. 

Indulgence  of  senses,  54.  See  Senses. 

Industry,  91.     See  Assiduous. 

Inexhaustible,  44,  45,  58,  59,  75,  76, 
83,  84,  90,92,  94,106,  107,111, 
113,  124,  187,  250,  332,  372. 

Inexpugnable,  312. 

Infamy.     See  Disgrace. 

Infancy  compared  to  death,  44. 

Inference,  160,  291,  367,  373,  374. 

Inferior.  See  Beasts,  Entities,  and 
Path. 

Infidel,  378. 


INDEX    OF    PRINCIPAL    MATTERS. 


415 


Infinite,  93,  96,  97,  98,  344,  348. 
Information.     See  Knowledge. 
Ingenious,  173. 
Ingredient,  385. 
Inheritance,  21,  217. 
Initiation,  285,  286,  347,  361. 
Injury,  101,  114,  119,  124,  159,  167, 

168,  176,  182,  318,  323.     See 

Harmlessness. 
Insatiable.     See  Desire. 
Inscriptions,  13,  28,  223. 
Insects,  225,  321,  339. 
Insignificant,  124,  335. 
Inspiration,  76,  281. 
Instruction,  21,  22,  23,  87,  102,  105^ 

172,  176, 177,  218,  248,  251,  254, 

264,  281,  282,  283,  290,  312,  324, 

359,  3^5,  393,394. 

Instructor.     See  Preceptor. 

Instrument,6i,i23,278,348,357,365. 

Intellect,  86,  90,  257,  309,  320. 

Intelligence,  86,  125,  127,  234,  241, 
242,  263,  269,  276,  284,  286,  296, 
304,305,308,311,332,371,381. 

Intelligent.     See  Unintelligent. 

Intent,  66,  73,  no,  308,  392.  See 
Concentration. 

Interest,  54, 193. 

Interminglings.     See  Caste. 

Interpolation  in  Mahabharata,  4,  34, 
340.    See  Anugita\ 

Interspace  between  earth  and  sky,  94. 

Intoxicating  drinks,  183,  279. 

Introspection,  105. 

Invincible,  180,  389.  See  Uncon- 
querable. 

Invisible,  192.  See  Movement,  con- 
cealed, and  Regulation. 

Involuntary  action.     See  Free-will. 

Irascible,  167.     See  Wrath. 

Iron,  208,  242. 

Irregular  worship,  84. 

f  jopanishad,  54, 62, 71, 104, 106, 153, 
160, 180, 187, 192, 193,  194,  248, 

305,391. 

pvara,  219,  315,  354. 

Ijvaragita,  2. 

Itihasa,  ancient,  198,  207,  210,  226, 
238,  256,  261,  268,  270,  274,  277, 
282,289,293,296,303,310. 

Jaws,  94,  95. 

Jewels,  347,  353. 

Joint,  237,  258,  356. 

—  earnings.     See  Earnings. 

Journey,  380. 


Joviality,  326. 

Joy,  86,  96,  98,  101,  116,  131,  183, 

185,  284,  300,  301,  325,  326,  357, 

363,378. 
Joy  and  sorrow,  125, 183. 
Judgment,  51,76.  See  Discernment. 
Juice,  113,  236,  238,  252,  363. 
Jungle.     See  Forest. 
Just,  123. 
Justice,  131. 

Kadambari,  27,  28. 

Kaffirs,  97. 

£akrapravartana.  See  Wheel,  turn- 
ing of. 

ATakravartin,  232. 

Kalidasa,  13,  14,  28,  29,  30,  80,  220, 
221,  224. 

Kalpa,  82,  387. 

Mlukyas,  28. 

Kamadhenu.     See  Cow. 

Kandala,  23,  322,  343. 

Sandra,  219,  220. 

jfif&ndr&ya/za,  164. 

.Kafiy&ipura,  222. 

Kapila,  89, 105, 124,  211. 

KarmakaWa.     See  Vedas. 

Karmamarga,  171. 

Karmayoga,  105. 

Kar«a,^7,  38,  95,  96- 

Kartavirya,  221,  293. 

Zarvaka,  24,  214,  376,  377. 

Kaji,  37,  39- 

Kajika,  32. 

Kajyapa,  205,  231,  232,  234,  235,  245, 

314,  389. 

Kathasaritsagara,  32,  206. 

Kathava/e,  A.V.,  Prof.,  137,  19 9- 

Ka^opanishad,  45,  46,  57, 65, 66,  67, 
76,  78,  79,80, Io8,  I",  "2, 124, 
129, 152, 153, 154, 156, 157, 158, 
160, 162, 163, 169, 170, 172, 173, 
175, 176, 179, 180, 186, 187,  188, 
192, 193,211,212,233,234,246, 
247,  249,  253,  264,  286,  313,  317, 
333,  337,  338,  339,  34*,  34^,  37°, 
385,386,388,391,392. 

.STaturhotra,  277. 

Katyayana,  32. 

Kaumudi.    See  Siddhanta-kaumudi. 

Kaunteya.     See  Kunti. 

Kauravas,  2, 3,  6,  26, 38, 39,  40,  62,88, 
98,  135,  136,  311,312,  393,  394. 

Kaushitaki-upanishad,  112,  180,  208, 
249,  259,  264,  268,  271,  277,  314, 
362,389. 


41 6         BHAGAVADGfTA,    SANATSUGATIYA,    ANUGiTA. 


Kautsa,  214. 

Kavyas  and  Nafakas,  13, 15, 142, 144. 

Keeping  people  to  duty.    See  Duty. 

JTekitana,  37. 

Kenopanishad,  163,  257. 

Kerala,  222. 

Kejava,  35,  40,  49,  52,  87,  96,  130, 
229,  230. 

Keshub  Ghunder  Sen,  26. 

Kejin,  121. 

Kettledrum,  38. 

jOandas,  16,  in,  146,  164,  171,  172. 
See  Vedas. 

jOandogya-upanishad,  17,  20,  58,  64, 
68,  79,  81,  84,  88,  90,  91,  114, 
120, 141, 143, 145, 150, 152, 156, 
158, 161, 164, 165, 166, 167,170, 

171. 172. 173. 174. 175. 176. 178, 
179, 187, 189, 190,  191, 193,194, 
224,  233,  234,  236,  238,  239, 241, 
243,  246,  249,  252,  258,  259, 262, 
263,  264,  265,  266,  268,  269,270, 
271,  277,  285,  287,  290,  291,295, 
312,  314, 320,  321,  322,  331,  337, 
339,  340,  345,  347,  353,  389,  39*, 
393. 

Killing,  96,  116.     See  Murder. 

Kind.     See  Compassion. 

King,  23,  30,  72,  82,  89,  90,  95,  162, 

167. 169. 170. 171. 175. 178. 179, 
181, 185,  233,  294,  296,  299,  303, 
346,  347,  348.    See  Ruler. 

Kingdom,  43,  96,  302,  303,  304,  305. 
See  Sovereignty. 

Kinnaras,  347,  354. 

Kinsmen,  40,  41,  42,  68,  159,  233, 
246,  281,  294. 

£mtama«i,  179. 

^Titraratha,  89. 

Knowable.  See  Knowledge,  object  of. 

Knower.  See  Knowledge,  subject  of. 

Knowledge,  12, 17,  44,46,  47,  52,  55, 
56,57,  58,59*60,61,62,63,65, 
67,  68,  72,  73,  75,  81,  82,  83, 
84,  86,  87,  89,  91,  99,  100,  101, 
102, 103, 104, 106, 107, 108,  109, 
113, 114,  115, 123, 124, 126, 127, 
128, 129,  147, 154,  156, 158,  159, 
162, 164, 166, 167, 168, 173,  174, 
175, 176,  177,  178, 179, 180, 181, 
187,  188,  189,  190,  194,  231, 
239,  242,  245,  247,  253,  254,  256, 
261,  262,  263,  264,  266,  267,  276, 
279,  280,  286,  287,  288,  292,  307, 
308,  309,  310,  312,  313,  3H,  3i5, 
316,317,319,320,322,326,331, 


332,  335,  337,  339,341,  344,  348, 
349,  35o,  35i,  352,  355,  367,  368, 
369,  37o,  37i,  372,  373,  374,375, 
377,378,379,380,381,388,389, 
390,  39i,  392. 
Knowledge,  boat  of.     See  Boat. 

—  branches  of,  84,  315. 

—  ceasing  of,  239.    See  Perception. 

—  clear,  126. 

—  complete,  73. 

—  constancy  in.    See  Perseverance. 

—  culmination  of,  127. 

—  deprivation  of  by  desire,  75. 

—  destruction  of,  113. 

—  devotion  better  than,  73. 

—  direct,  82. 

—  exhaustive,  73. 

—  eye  of,  106, 112,  239. 

—  fire  of.     See  Fire. 

—  goal  attainable  by,  104. 

—  highest,  73,  106,  151,  240,  261. 

—  immediate.    See  Direct. 

—  imperfect,  55,  125,  309. 

—  incorrect,  125. 

—  inexpugnable.  See  Inexpugnable. 

—  insignificant.    See  Insignificant. 

—  lamp  of,  87. 

—  light  of,  66. 

—  little,  115. 

—  loss  of,  75. 

—  man  of,  n,  51,  54,  56,  57,  62, 

72,  73,  75,  91,  119,  146,  156, 
158,  373,  392. 

—  modification  of,  312. 

—  mysterious,  81. 

—  object  of,  83,  94,  97,  103,  104, 

123,  172,  262,  310,  312,  382. 

—  of  creation,  341. 

—  of  everything,  114.  See  Universal. 

—  of  geography,  222  seq. 

—  of  God,  99. 

—  of  previous  lives,  58. 

—  of  self,  46,  51,  65,  87, 126,  334. 

—  of  supreme,  87. 

—  of  truth,  103,  335,  348,  381. 

—  practical,  349. 

—  prompting  to,  123. 

—  pursuit  of.     See  Perseverance. 

—  removal  of,  113. 

—  seeker  of,  75. 

—  source  of,  248,  308. 

—  subject  of,  97, 123,  262. 

—  sword  of,  63,  371. 

—  three  branches.     See  Branches, 

supra. 

—  through  faith,  63.    See  Faith. 


INDEX   OF   PRINCIPAL   MATTERS. 


417 


Knowledge,  want  of,  49,  73,  84, 162. 
See  Ignorance. 

—  within  oneself,  62,  66,  380. 

See  Progress,  Sacrifice,  and 
Understanding. 

ifola,  222. 

Kolhafkar,  V.  M.,  137. 

Kosegarten,  139. 

Kosh/£avat,  222,  346. 

Kratu,  83. 

Kr/pa,  38. 

Krishna,  3,  4,  9,  11,  12,  34,  40,  41, 
48,49,52,56,  58,59,63,67,71, 
72,  73,  78,  88,  91,  95,  96,  97,  98, 
99,  102,  106,  no,  in,  117,  121, 
130, 131, 197, 198,  205,229,  230, 
231,254,284,310,393,394.  See 
Being-Supreme  and  Brahman. 

—  Dvaipayana.     See  Vyasa. 

—  imitation  of,  55. 

—  nought  to  do,  54.     See  Embodi- 

ment. 
Kr/ta,  353. 

Kritavtrya.     See  Kartavirya. 
Kshatriyas,  22,  23,  24,  43,  46,  126, 

127, 128, 152, 155, 162, 165, 174, 

179, 185,  205,  209,  217,  221,  255, 

295,  300,  329,  345. 

—  kinsmen  of,  295,  296. 
Kshetra,   102,   104,   105,   106,  310, 

35o,  372. 
Kshetra^na,  102,  105,  106,  109,  253, 

284,  287,  288,  293,  308,  310,350, 

35i,  352,  374,  377,  378,  379?  386, 

387,  39o,  393. 
Kubera,  88,  347. 
Kulluka  Bha//a,  262. 
Kumarasambhava,  29,  69,  80,  220, 

257. 
Kumarila,  31. 
Kunte,  M.  M.,  30. 
Kunti,  38,  40,  44,  47,  5©,  53,  57,  66, 

7i,  74,  78,  79,  82,  84,  85,  95, 

102,   106,  107,   116,   117,   127, 

128,  254,  393. 
Kuntibho>g-a,  37. 

Kuru,  47,  72, 108.     See  Kauravas. 
Kurukshetra,  3,  37,  198. 
Kuja  grass,  68,  159. 

Labour,  69,  100,  184,  323,  324,  356. 

Ladle,  261. 

Lalita  Vistara,  146,  183,  208,  212, 

226,  261,  275,  284,  289,  337. 
Lamentation.     See  Grief. 
Lamp,  69,  242,  253. 

[8] 


Lamp  of  knowledge.  See  Knowledge. 

Lances,  294. 

Land,  339,  382. 

Language,  90.  See  Bhagavadgita, 
Dialects,  and  Style. 

Lapse  of  time,  58. 

Large,  285,  327,  357. 

Lassen,  2,  31,  34,  35,  91. 

Lassitude,  320. 

Last  moments.     See  Death. 

Laudation,  324.    See  Praise. 

Law,  4,  207,  268,  269.  See  Regu- 
lations. 

—  sacred,  82. 

Lazy,  125,  126,  151,  320,  326.     See 

Indolence  and  Stolidity. 
Leaf,  85,  313,  361,  365,  371,  374. 

—  of  Ajvattha,  in,  189. 
Lean,  288,  384. 

Learned,  44,  49,  50,  55,  56,  60,  63, 
64,65,66,87, 102, 121, 122, 152, 
154, 157, 160, 161, 162, 164, 172, 
174, 176, 185,  257,  260,  270,278, 
279,  284,  312,  315,  332,  337,339, 
341,  360,  367,  370,  371,  374,  378, 
379,381,386.    See  Well-read. 

Learner.     See  Pupil. 

Learning,  65, 114,  124, 128, 178, 182, 

232,  239,  269,  308,  326,  341,  348, 
353,  359,  388,  389.  See  In- 
struction and  Study. 

Leavings,  53,  62,  118,  358,  360. 

Left-hand,  shooting,  96. 

Leg,  189.     See  Feet. 

Leibnitz,  268. 

Letter,  single.     See  Om. 

Letters,  90,  264. 

Lewes,  G.  H.,  57. 

Libation  to  manes,  41. 

Liberality.     See  Gifts. 

Licking,  95,  113. 

Life,  40, 54, 74,  89, 118, 160, 162, 177, 
181, 192,  246,  268,  269,  276,  279, 
289, 290,  291,  295,  302,  317,  318, 
321,  325,  355,  357.  See  Birth 
and  Death. 

—  conditions  of,  233. 

—  course  of,  89,  in,  190,  191,  201, 

233,  235, 243,  245,  253,  258,  259, 
284,  285,  287,  306,  312,  313,  338, 
34i,355,357,359,36i,368,37o, 
386,  390. 

—  exhaustion  of,  236. 

—  form  unknown,  1 1 1. 

—  forms  of,  154,  321. 

—  higher,  285,  322. 

e  e 


41 8         BHAGAVADGITA,    SANATSUGATIYA,    ANUGITA. 


Life,  limit  of,  244,  311. 

—  long,  236. 

—  many  a,  58,  73,  75. 

—  offering  to  supreme,  87. 

—  previous,  56, 58,  72, 117, 188,  243, 

244. 

—  subtle,  284. 

—  transient  and  miserable,  79,  86. 

—  vain,  54. 

Life-winds,  6i,  62,  67,  78,  79,  113, 
123, 125, 140, 157, 189, 190,  237, 
238,  242,  246,  257,  258,  259,  263, 
264,  265,  266,  270,  271,  272,  273, 
274,  275,  276,  277,  280,  289,  290, 
292,318,331,336,353,372,373. 

—  concentration  of.    See  Breath. 

—  production  and  preservation  of, 

238. 
Light,  69, 74, 1 10,  163,  180,  186,  260, 
305,  316,  319,  330,  332,  334,  344, 
369,  379?  380,  387.    See  Object 
of  sense. 

—  of  knowledge,  66,  108. 

—  within  oneself,  66.    See  Enlight- 

enment. 

Lightness,  319,  327,  332. 

Lightning,  179,  337,  340. 

Likes  and  dislikes,  56,  71,  118,  288, 
289.  See  Affection  and  Aver- 
sion. 

Limbs,  50,  177,  242,  342,  359,  366. 

Limitation.  See  Perfection  and 
Time. 

Linen,  360. 

Lion,  38,  90,  295,  345. 

—  manner  of,  353. 

Liquid,  354.    See  Flowing  element. 

Liquors,  389. 

Lisping,  322. 

Literature,  1,  13,  15. 

Littleness,  46,  191. 

Livelihood.     See  Body,  support  of. 

Lokayatas.     See  £arvakas. 

Long,  384. 

Longing.     See  Desire. 

Looker  on,  55.  See  Activity,  Soul, 
passive  spectator. 

Looking-glass.     See  Mirror. 

Lord,  65,  83,  87,  88,  92,  97, 105, 109, 
113, 116, 128, 165, 173, 188, 190, 
231,  263,  267,  293,  294,  303,  333, 
345,  347,  388,  393,  394. 

—  in  the  bodies  of  all,  116,  118. 

—  of  all,  83. 

—  of  beings,  58,  273. 

—  of  gods.     See  Gods. 


Lord  of  sacrifices,  84. 

—  of  speech.     See  Speech. 

—  of  universe.  See  Universe,  lord  of. 

—  of  worlds.     See  Worlds,  master 

of. 

—  supreme,  106,  352. 
Loss,  124,  166. 

—  of  the  Brahman,  71. 
Lotus-eye,  92,  294. 

—  heart,  194,  342,  344,  392. 

—  leaf,  64,  92,  289,  374,  379. 

—  seat,  93. 

Love,  74,  87,  89,  394. 

Low.     See  High. 

Lower  species,  241,  330,  339.     See 

Beasts  and  Creatures. 
Lunar  light,  81. 

—  mansions,  88,  158,  346,  352,  387. 

—  world,  20,  240. 

Lust,  115,  116,  117,  125,  166,  167, 
183,  233,  246,  325,  331,  359. 

Mace,  93,  98. 

Machine,  129. 

Madhava,  38,  40,  230,  231,  252. 

Madhava^arya,  32,  90,  135,  139,  214. 

Madhu,  40,  42,  71,  77,  231,  252. 

Madhusudana,  5,  18,  35,  72,  89,  91, 
92,  96,  107,  108,  113,  123. 

Madhva^arya,  30,  31. 

Madhyama,  385. 

Madhyamika  Bauddhas,  376. 

Maghavat,  219,  347. 

Mahabharata,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  28,  34,  35, 
135, 136, 137, 138, 140, 155, 160, 
170, 181, 187, 197,  201,  202,  203, 
204,  205,  206,  209,  221,  225,  227, 
229,  234,  253, 256,  271,  281,  284, 
292,  295,  301,  304,  305,  308, 3 10, 
3i5,  318,  319,  325,  328,  329,342, 
344,  35i,  353,  354,  358,  360,  370, 
374,383,384,385,386,391.  See 
Bhishma  Par  van. 

Mahabhashya.     See  Patang-ali. 

Mahat,  157.     See  Understanding. 

Mahavrata,  180. 

Mahendra,  222,  223,  346. 

Mahejvari,  219,  347. 

Mahidhara,  248. 

Maintenance.  See  Body,  support  of. 

Maitri-upanishad,  50,  51,  52,  53,  61, 
68,  79,  100,  102,  105,  112,  152, 
155, 158, 160, 162, 170, 171, 173, 
175, 185, 186, 187, 189, 192, 194, 
233,  234,  238,  241,  243,  247,  251, 
252,  255,  259,  263,  268,  269,  270, 


INDEX    OF    PRINCIPAL    MATTERS. 


419 


271,  274,  277,  305,  320,  323,  361, 
37o,  37i,  378,  379,  386,  390,  391, 
392. 

Makara,  90. 

Maker,  379. 

Male,  346. 

—  and  female,  115,  244. 
Malicious,  125.    See  Malignity. 
Malignity.     See  Harmlessness   and 

Injury. 

Mallinath,  29,  293. 

Malyavat,  222,  346. 

Man,  creation  of,  74.  See  Crea- 
tion. 

—  descendant  of  Manus,  86. 

—  highest,  129. 

Management,  324.     See  Business. 
MaWukya-upanishad,  79,  247,  251, 

259,  324?  376. 

Manes,  83,  85,  89,  93,  153,  169,  221, 
296,  306,  324,  325,  345,  366,  389. 

Manifestation,  65,  76,  77,  83,  87,  88, 
104, 107, 108,  292,  312,  317,  318, 
374,  379,  380.  See  Form,  In- 
carnation, and  Nature. 

Manifold,  375,  377.  See  Forms, 
many. 

Mawipushpaka,  39. 

Mankind,  345,  347,  348,  353,  354, 
356,  378,  386,  387,  389. 

Manliness,  74. 

Man-lion,  89. 

Mansions,  108. 

Mantras,  119,  209,  264.  See  Verse, 
sacred. 

Manu,  20,  21,  22,  24,  27,  29,  30,  37, 
48,  58,  80,  86, 147, 153, 159,  179, 
203,  208,  210,  217,  218,  225,  233, 
262,  279,  284,  339,  353,  354,  358, 
359,  36°,  361,  362,  363,  364,  365, 
368. 

Margajirsha,  27,  90,  91. 

MarUi,  88,387. 

Marriage,  121. 

Marrow,  252. 

Maruts,  88,  92,  94,  346. 

Master  of  world,  97.     See  World. 

Match.     See  Equal. 

Material  cause.  See  Cause  and 
Nature. 

Materialists,  24,  27. 

Matsya-purawa,  113. 

Matted  hair,  360,  375. 

Matter,  379. 

Maturity,  177. 

Maurice,  F.  D.,  1. 


Maya,  197,  229. 

Maya.     See  Nature. 

McCrindle,  223. 

Mean,  116. 

Means,   376,  377,   380,    391.      See 

Wealth. 
Meat,  236. 
Medicine,  83,  388. 
Meditation,  64,  79,  84,  88,  100,  103, 

105, 128, 192,  248,  249,  251,  252, 

299,  300,  332,  341,  349,  353,  368, 

376,  377,  382,  388. 

—  at  time  of  death,  78,  390. 

—  continuous,  78,  79,  100,  309. 

—  exclusive,  78,  79,  84,  99. 

—  mystic,  136,  150. 

—  on  Supreme,  61,  78,  88,  99,  100, 

103,  128. 
See  Concentration  of  mind  and 

Pondering. 
Melancholy,  125. 
Memory,  90,  98,  113,  164,  320,  332, 

335- 

—  confusion  of,  50,  51. 

—  destruction  of,  113. 
Mendicancy,  307,  361. 
Mental  operation.     See  Mind. 

—  pain.     See  Pain. 

—  penance.     See  Penance. 
Mercilessness,  114,  166,  181.     See 

Harshness. 

Merging  in  Brahman.  See  Absorb- 
ent and  Assimilation. 

Merit,  12,  49,  65,  72,  76,  109,  151, 
158, 164,  165, 166, 169, 178, 184, 
185,  232,  241,  246,  341,  376,  377. 

—  exhaustion  of,  84.     See  Action. 
Merriment,  97. 

Meru,  88,  222,  354. 

Meshasringa,  346. 

Metals,  209. 

Metre,  15,  90,  142,  226,  353. 

Midday  bath,  122. 

Middle.     See  Beginning  and  Up. 

Migration,  153,  154,  185,  190,  232, 
234,  244. 

Mild.     See  Gentle. 

Military.     See  Kshatriyas. 

Milk,  265. 

Mimawsa,  31,  32,  376,  377. 

Mind,  9,  43,  47,  49,  50,  51,  53,  55, 
57,  60,  62,  63,  64,  65,  66,  67,  68, 
69,7o,7i,73,75,78,  79,83,86, 
87,88,  99, 100, 101, 102, 105, 107, 
112, 119, 122,  123, 125,  126,  128, 
129, 162, 163, 169, 170, 172, 173, 

e  e  2 


420        BHAGAVADGITA,    SANATSUGATIYA,    ANUGITA. 


175,177,181,184,185,187,188, 
189, 190, 193, 194,  219,  234,  238, 
239,  241,  242,  243,  246,  248,  250, 
251,  252,  253,  257,  258,  259,  260, 
261,  262,  263,  264,  267,  268,  269, 
275,  280,  286,  288,  292,  296,  300, 
301,  308,  310,  317,  318,  320,  322, 
327,332,334,336,337,338,341? 
344,  348,  349,  35o,  352,  355,  357, 
361,  362,  366,  368,  369,  377,  380, 
385,  386,  388,  390,  392,  393,  394. 
Mind,  Ar^una's,  whirls  round,  40. 

—  birth  from,  87. 

—  breaking  out  of  restraint,  70. 

—  ceasing  to  work.  See  Quiescence. 

—  fickle,  9,  71. 

—  friendly,  68. 

—  movable  and  immovable,  264. 

—  restraint  by,  53,  70. 

—  steady.     See  Steady-minded. 
Mine,  52,  56,  101, 128,  279,  292,  303, 

304,  305,  3i3,  323,  326,  332,  355, 
366>  37o,  37i,  381,  389,  39o,  39i. 

Minute,  78, 180,  194,  327,  332. 

Mirage,  253. 

Mirror,  57. 

Misapprehension,  184.  See  Convic- 
tion and  Knowledge. 

Mischief.     See  Evil. 

Miserly,  167,  182. 

Misery.  See  Pain  and  Unhappi- 
ness. 

Misfortune,  356. 

Misgivings,  63,  66,  72,  83,  87,  122, 
129, 130, 152,  231,  263,  282,  311, 
312,  320,  324,  374. 

Mismanagement,  183.  See  Manage- 
ment. 

Missile,  39. 

Mistake,  359.    See  Error. 

Mithila,  304,  305. 

Mitra,  219,  220,  261,  338,  345. 

—  Dr.  R.     See  Lalita  Vistara. 
Mixed,  118,  122,  286,  375. 
Mie£&6as,  353. 

Mode  of  life.     See  Conduct,  Life. 
Moderation.     See  Eating. 
Modesty,  114,  162,  167,   182,   281, 

306,  326.     See  Humility. 
Moistening,  45. 
Momentary  existence,  376. 
Monism.    See  Unity. 
Months,  81,  90,  188,  255,  330,  352, 

356. 
Moon,  74,  81,  83,  88,  97,  112,  113, 

142,  172, 179, 189, 192,  219,  224, 


257,261,277,327,330,338,346, 
35°,  387.     See  Lunar  light. 

Moon,  eye  of  divine  form,  94. 

Morals,  4. 

Morning,  361. 

Morsel,  364. 

Mortal,  form,  255. 

Mortals,  190,  255,  297. 

Mosquitoes,  284. 

Mother,  83,  176,  193,  233,  243,  290. 

Motion.     See  Moving. 

Motive.     See  Action. 

Mould,  242. 

Mountain,  88,  89,  180,  222,  284,  287, 

295,   346,  354,   363,    381,   387. 

See  Hill. 
Moustache,  362. 
Mouth,  65,  94,  95,  305. 

—  drying  up  of  Ar^una's,  40. 

—  like  fire,  94,  95. 

—  many  a,  93,  94. 

Movable,  82,  91,  92,  97,  104,  105, 
243,266,307,311,315,335,366, 
387,  389.     See  Immovable. 

Movement,  49,  87,  123,  274,  291, 
392. 

—  concealed,  232,  235. 

—  of  mind,  263.    See  Quiescence. 

—  of  world,  82,  89,  334,  340,  355, 

356,  358. 
Moving,  64,  90,  no,  192,  194,  261, 
338. 

—  among  objects,  51. 

—  everywhere,  232,  312,  370. 
Mr/'tyu,  220. 

Mucus,  343. 

Mud,  343,  350. 

Muir,  J.,  Dr.,  14,  16,  20,  23,  90,  91, 
180,  295,  304,  305,  347. 

Muladhara,  251. 

Mtiller,  Max,  Prof.,  1,  8,  12,  16,  17, 
23,  25,  69,  79,  87,  88,  114,  123, 
171,  339. 

Muw^akopanishad,  17,  62,  74,  84, 
104,112,123,  153,156,158,165, 
166, 167, 169, 170, 173, 175, 176, 
179, 180, 184, 185, 186, 189,  192, 
194,  230,  241,  244,  259,  312,  313, 
315,316,333,339,348,371,391, 
392. 

Mundane.     See  World. 

Muf\§-a,  176,  249,  360. 

Murder,  45,  89,  123,  290,  291,  293, 
295,  296,  323,  324,  389. 

Muscles,  252. 

Music,  88,  208,  325. 


INDEX   OF   PRINCIPAL   MATTERS. 


42  1 


Mustard,  384. 

Mystery,  58,  81,  92,  114,  129,  130, 

150, 166,  230,  254, 278,  377,  390, 

394. 

Nagas,  89,  347. 

Nago^-i  Bhatta,  33. 

Nails,  356. 

Nakshatras.     See  Lunar  mansions. 

Nakula,  38. 

Name,    164,  352.      See    Favourite 

and  Real. 
Nanda,  32. 
Narada,  17,  87,  89,  150,  226,  274, 

A275- 

Narayawa,  148,  219,  280,  281. 

Narrow,  308,  384. 

Na/akas.     See  Kavyas. 

Nature,  53,  55,  56,  58,  65,  74,  76, 
82,  102,  104,  105,  106,  107, 112, 
113, 126,  127, 128, 157, 186,  201, 
235,  244,  245,  253,  260,  288,  289, 
313,  318,327,331,333,335,350, 
35i,  355,  357,  367,  370,  371,  372, 
374,  376,  377,  378,  379,  380,  382, 
387,  390. 

—  active  principle,  65,  106. 

—  control  of,  58,  82. 

—  destruction  of,  106. 

—  divine  and  demoniac,  83. 

—  following,  157. 

—  names  of,  331. 

—  two  forms,  74. 
Nave,  306. 

Navel,  258,  266,  271. 

Near.     See  Afar. 

Neck,  69,  252. 

Nectar,  62,  88,  89,  126,  391. 

Negative  argument,  213. 

Nest,  142,  164. 

Net,  115,  116,  289,  387. 

Nether  world,  321.     See  Hell. 

Night,  362,  363.  See  Day  and  Night. 

—  of  sage  and  common  men,  5 1 » 
Nihilism,  320. 

Nila,  222,  346. 

Nilaka«^a,  35,  39,  44,  45,  108,  no, 
118, 120, 121, 125, 127, 128, 137, 
141, 144, 148, 149, 151, 153,  154, 
155,156,  157,158,161,162,163, 
164, 165, 166, 167,  168, 170, 171, 
174, 178, 180, 181, 182, 184,  189, 
192, 193, 194,  200,  203,  213,  227, 
231,  234,  235,  236,  242,  243,  245, 
246,  247,  248,  249,  251,  252,  253, 
254,  255,  256,  257,  258,  259,  262, 


263,  264,  279,  280,  281,  282,  283, 
284,  286,  287,  289,  292,  296,  297, 
299,  300,  301,  302,  303,  305,  312, 
313,314,315,316,318,319,320, 
321,326,330,332,334,335,336, 
339,  34i,  342,  343,  344,  345,  347, 
348,35o,35i,352,353,354,355, 
356,  357,  367,  37i,  372,  373,  374, 
376,  377,  379,  380,  381,  382,  383, 
384,  385,  386,  389,  390,  391,  392, 

393,  394. 
Nilgiri.     See  Nila. 
Nine  portals.     See  Body. 
Nirukta,  144,  176,  225,  265. 
Nirvana,  27,  212,  215. 
Nishada,  385. 

Nitijataka.     See  Bhartr/'hari. 
Noble  birth,  116. 

—  mind,  75,  114,  264,  295,  300,  316, 

323,  325,  389,  393. 
Noise,  251.     See  Din. 
Noiseless.     See  Noisy. 
Noisy  speech,  265. 
Non-destruction.     See  Destruction. 
Non-entity,  102. 
Non-existence.     See  Existence. 
Non-nutritive,  252. 
North,  347.     See  South  path. 
Nose,  67,  69,  257,  258,  259,  267,  343, 

349.    See  Senses. 
Nostrils,  65. 
Notion,  false,  52,  65,  115,  253.     See 

Conviction. 
Not-self,  377.     See  Soul. 
November,  91. 
Nnsiwha  Tapini,  20,  79,  85,  93, 105, 

112,142,152,157,163,170,  171, 

186. 
Numerous.     See  Forms,  many. 
Nushirvan,  29. 
Nutrition,  118. 
Nyagrodha,  346. 

Oars,  381. 

Obedience,  324,  358.    See  Scripture. 
Obeisance.     See  Salutation. 
Object,  123,  378,  379,  382.  See  Sub- 
ject. 

—  of  desire,  51,  69,  84,  115,  116, 

124,  154,  157,  289.  See  Desire 
and  Enjoyment. 

—  of  gift,  120,  324. 

—  of  knowledge,  83,  94.   See  Know- 

ledge, object  of. 

—  of  sense,  48,  50,  51,  53,  54,  56, 

57,  61,  64,  66,  67,  69,  71,  102, 


42  2         BHAGAVADGiTA,    SANATSUGATIYA,    ANUGITA. 


103,  III,  112,  121,  126,  127,  152, 

i54>  155, 166,  167, 168, 170, 173, 

174, 175, 184, 190, 238, 247, 259, 

260,  261,  267,  268,  269,  270,  273, 
275,  278,  279,  284,  286,  288,  291, 
297,  300,  305,  3<>6-  3i3?  317,  318, 
327,  334?  335,  336,  337,  34°,  34i, 
342,  344,  348,  349,  35o,  35i,  352, 
365,367,368,371,382,383,384, 
385,  386,  388,  390,  392.  See 
Destruction  of  entities  and 
Enjoyment,  Perceptible  and 
Perishable. 

Oblation,  61,  77,  83,  121,  188,  261. 
See  Offering. 

Obligation.     See  Duty. 

Oblivion.     See  Forgetfulness. 

Obscurity.     See  Darkness. 

Obsequies.     See  Balls  of  food. 

Obsequious,  159. 

Observances,  67,  112,  115,  143,  145, 
147, 156, 164, 167, 182,  283,  324, 

355,  364. 
Obstacles,  47, 162, 168, 183,  279,  363. 
Obstinate,  71.    See  Headstrong. 
Obstructors,  284. 
Occupancy,  21. 
Occupations.     See  Duties. 
Ocean,  51,  89,  95,  100, 179,  192,  245, 

293,  294,  296,  307,  343,  346,  354, 

374,38i,388. 
Odious.     See  Agreeable. 
Offence,  256,  303.     See  Sin. 
Offering,  61,  77,  83,  169,  184,  185, 

260,  261,  262,  276,  279,  280,  325, 

353,358,360,361.  See  Leavings. 

—  of  action.     See  Action,  dedica- 

tion of. 

—  of  life,  87. 

—  of  self,  128. 

Officiating  at  sacrifices,  21,  22,  218, 

324,  359. 
Offspring.     See  Children. 
Oil,  79,  379,  384- 
Old  age.     See  Age. 

—  times,  314,316,  358. 
Oleaginous,  118,  330. 

Om,  74,  79,  83,  89,  120,  121,  163, 

282,  353. 
Omens,  40,  365. 
Omission  and  commission,  54,  359. 

See  Action  and  Inaction. 
Omniscience  and  omnipotence,  58, 

234- 
Omniscient,  174. 
One,  102,  317,  375. 


One,  everything.     See  Mind,  Unity. 

Open.     See  Secret. 

Opening  eyelid.     See  Eyelid. 

Operation  of  mind.     See  Mind. 

Opinion  of  Krishna,  56. 

Opponent.     See  Enemy. 

Opposites.     See  Pairs. 

Opposition,  30. 

Oppression,  royal,  207,  208. 

Optimists,  376. 

Order,  129,  307,  354,  358,  382.  See 
Ajramas. 

—  of  dissolution  of  entities,  335,  387. 

Ordinances,  84,  117,  118,  119,  120. 
See  Rule  and  Scripture. 

Organs,  53,  64,  93, 118, 123, 189,  219, 
243,  247,  257,  258,  261,  271,  287, 
292,318,336,337,357,359,364, 
391.  See  Bodily  and  mental, 
Drying  up,  and  Senses. 

Origin.     See  Source  and  Species. 

Orissa,  222. 

Ornaments,  93,  326. 

Ostentation,  103,114,  115,  116,118, 
119,  159, 160, 161, 164, 165,  282, 

324,363. 
Overcome.    See  Invincible. 
Oviparous.     See  Eggs. 

Pain,  70,  76,  no,  118,  120, 159,  169, 
233,  238,  239,  245,  250,  291,  292, 
301.     See  Pleasure  and  pain. 

Pairs,  48,  60,  63,  74,  76,111,160,167, 
168,  233,  244,  246,  247,  257,  276, 
277,292,351,357,358,366,369, 
37o,  379. 

Palace,  magical,  197,  229. 

Palaja,  360. 

Palate,  252,  262. 

PaWava,  2,  6,  37,  38,  39,  62,  67,  91, 

93,  95,  99,  no,  136,  197,  229, 
230,  255,  394. 

PaWavas,  leaders  of  the  army  of,  13. 

PaWu.     See  PaWavas. 

PaWya,  222. 

Pa«ini,  32,  33. 

Pan^a^-anya,  38. 

Pan^ahotri,  270. 

Pan^ama,  385. 

Pan^atantra,  28,  29,  139,  206. 

Parade.     See  Ostentation. 

Parallel,  97,  116,  187. 

Paramahawsa,  381. 

Paraphernalia,  379.  See  Appurte- 
nances. 

Panbara,  33,  164. 


INDEX   OF   PRINCIPAL    MATTERS. 


423 


Pantaarya,  32. 

Parajurama,  221,  294,  295,  299. 

Pardon,  Arg-una  asks,  97,  98. 

Pariyatra,  222,  346. 

Part,  112,379.    See  Soul,  individual. 

Partha.     See  Pritha. 

Partiality.      See    Favouritism    and 

Impartiality. 
Parvati,  219,  347. 
Passages  of  body,  79,  253,  265,  273, 

275,  277,  318,  343.    See  Body. 

—  of  heart,  253. 

Passing  through,  388,  389.  See  Im- 
passable. 

Passion,  57,  70,  75,  89,  106,  107,  108, 
109,  no,  117,  118,  119,  120, 
122, 124, 125, 126,  276,  278,  292, 
301,302,318,319,323,325,328, 

3*9*  33°,  33i>334,342,  343,  345, 
356,  363,  369,  39o. 

Past.  See  Birth,  Entities,  and  Fu- 
ture life. 

Pata%ali.     See  Yoga-sutras. 

—  Mahabhashya,   19,    31,   32,    139, 

140,  152,  211,  222,  223,  346. 

Path,  47,  59,  64,  72,  80,  81,  82,  ti6, 
125,  127,  153,  156,  165,  248, 
257,  284,  307,  311,  314,  316,  320, 
33i,  348,  364,  369,  380,  381. 
See  Southern. 

Paths,  three,  354. 

—  of  emancipation,  47,  52. 

—  unfamiliar,  380. 
Patience.     See  Forgiveness. 
Patriarchs,  86,  354,  387. 
Pau/z^ra,  38,  295. 

Peace,  91,  323. 

Pearls,  simile  of,  74. 

Pebbles,  365. 

Pedestrian,  382. 

Penance,  11,  12,  59,  61,  67,  73,  74, 
81,85,86,  98,99,  114,  117,  118, 
119,  120,  121,  122,  126,  129, 
147,  164,  165,  166,  170,  173, 
178,  182,  184,  221,  231,  242, 
247,  248,  254,  258,  259,  288, 
296,   299,   300,   308,   311,  312, 

3i5,   326,   339,   355,   356,   367, 
369,  376,  388,  389. 
People.     See  Creatures. 

—  common.     See  Populace. 
Perceptible,  76,  80,   96,   180,   192, 

193,  257,   264,  309,   313,   377, 
380,  385,  386. 
Perception  of  worlds,  174. 

—  organs  of,  their  operations,  57, 


64,  108,  112,  123,  238,  270,  316, 
329,  331,  336.  See  Organs  and 
Senses. 

Perception,  personal.  See  Experi- 
ence. 

Perfect,  173,  186,  248,  251,  287. 

Perfection,  52,  54, 62,  72,  73,  79, 100, 
107,  116,  117,  127,  176,  232, 
233,  234,  287,  300,  302,  310, 
3H,  334,  384,  388,  389,  393- 

Performance.     See  Pride. 

Perfume,  93, 112.     See  Fragrance. 

Peril,  42.   See  Danger. 

Periplus,  223. 

Perishable,  44,  66f  76,  77,  79,  8r, 
120,   154,   158,   304,  307,    355, 

375,  376»     See  Inconstantly. 
Permanent.     See  Constant. 
Permeating.     See  Pervading. 
Permission.     See  Preceptor. 
Perplexed,  98. 

Perseverance,  51,  60,  79,  87,  103, 
in,  114,  120,  175,  255. 

Perspiration,  339. 

Perturbation,  no,  352.  See  Agita- 
tion. 

Pervading  principle,  44,  45,  80,  82, 
83,  87,  88,  93,  94,  95,  96,  97, 
98,  100,  104,  106,  113,  127, 
187,   242,   244,   253,  258,  307, 

3i7,  332,  385. 

Pessimists,  376. 

Phalanx,  38. 

Phalajruti,  143. 

Phalguna,  394. 

Philanthropy.     See  Benevolence. 

Philosopher,  44,  377. 

Philosophy,  Indian,  7,  26. 

Phlegm,  155,  343. 

Physical  pain.     See  Pain. 

Piety,  47,  59,  74,  89,  no,  114,  125, 
128,  158,  159,  161,  168,  182, 
183,  230,  231,  232,  242,  243, 
246,  252,  254,  311,  314,  315, 
316,  318,  325,  326,  331,  341, 
348,  349,  35i,  359,  36o,  362, 
363,   364,   367,   368,   369,   375, 

376,  377,  380,  384,  392,  393, 
394.     See  Merit. 

—  and  impiety,  59,  125,  292. 

—  protector  of,  59,  89,  94,  125,  130, 

231,  235. 
Pilgrimage,  143. 
Pillar.     See  Pole. 
Pingala,  16. 
Pingala,  257,  277,  318. 


424         BHAGAVADGITA,    SANATSUGATiYA,    ANUGITA. 


Pippala,  346. 

Pija£as,  345,  354,  387. 

Pitr/s.     See  Manes. 

Pitriyawa,  314. 

Pity,  40,  42,  181,  243.  See  Com- 
passion. 

Place  and  time.     See  Gift. 

Placid,  192,  194,  234,  245.  See 
Tranquillity. 

Plaksha,  354. 

Planet,  303,  346,  387. 

Play,  97.   See  Recreation  and  Sport. 

Pleasant  and  unpleasant.  See  Agree- 
able. 

Pleasure,  40,  42,  47,  50,  66,  107,  108, 
126,  265,  268,  270,  275,  280,  292, 
300,  301,  311,  316,  322,  324,  325, 

33°,  34i,  354,  355,  357,  389. 

—  and  pain,  44,  47,  48,  68,  71,  86, 

101, 103, 104,  no,  in,  112,  245, 
246,  285,  323,  356,  376. 

—  celestial,  84. 

—  higher,  287. 

—  within  oneself,  50,  54,  66,  69,  70, 

!52,  253,  288,  380.     See  Gods 

and  Happiness. 
Point,  one.     See  Concentration. 
Poison,  41,  89,  126,  159,  190. 
Pole,  355. 

Polemic.     See  Controversialist. 
Policy,  91,  324. 
Politics,  91. 
Pondering,  78,  175,  297,  33i>  334, 

349,  368. 

—  objects,  50,  57,   154,   263.     See 

Fancies. 
Poor.     See  Indigent. 
Populace  follow  great  men,  54. 

—  keeping  of  to  duty,  54,  55,  127. 
Portals,  nine,  79,  108.  See  Body. 
Position  in  army,  38. 

—  raised.     See  High  position. 
Possession,  365. 

Powder,  113. 

Power,  58,  88,  91,  97,  102,  113,  182, 
287,  303,  323,  332,  360,  385. 

—  creative,  170,  260,  279,  327. 

—  delusive,  59. 

—  desire  for,  47. 

—  divine.     See  mystic,  infra. 

—  exercise  of,  127. 

—  infinite,  94,  97. 

—  intellectual.     See  Energy. 

—  lordly,  127. 

—  mystic,  76,  82,  86,  88,  89,  92,  93, 

98,  120,  131,  149,  230. 


Powerof  Brahman, part  in  patriarchs, 
87. 

—  of  knowledge,  167. 

—  of  nature,  82. 

—  participation  in  divine,  87. 

—  regard  to  one's  own,  89,  237. 

—  superhuman,  76,  89,  260. 

—  unequalled,  97.     See  Equal. 

—  worldly,  47.     See  Strength. 
Powerful,  269. 

Powerless,  336. 

Practicable,  82. 

Practice,  9,  71,  73,  79.  See  Con- 
duct. 

Pra^apati,  58,  97,  219,  220,  244,  261, 
262,  263,  264,  265,  271,  282,  315, 
3i6,  334,  338,  345,  347,  353,  388, 
389.     See  Creator. 

Praise,  94,  280.  See  Blame  and 
Laudation. 

Praiseworthy,  97,  190. 

Praietas,  220. 

Prakr/ti.     See  Nature. 

Pralhada,  89. 

Pra«a,  258.     See  Life-winds. 

Prawayama    See  Breath,  control  of. 

Prajastri,  280. 

Pra^nopanishad,  20,  65,  79,  81,  123, 
152, 166, 176,  259,  271,  390,  391. 

Pratyahara.     See  Senses. 

Prayer,  94. 

Preceptor,  37,  40,  43,  57,  91,  ™3, 
119,129,175,176,177,178,232, 
243,  264,282,  283,  307,  308,  309, 
310,  311,  312,  358,  360, 372,  374, 
376,  378,  381,  389,  393. 

Precious  things,  353. 

Prescribed  action.  See  Action  and 
Duty. 

—  by  nature,  126,  127,  128. 
Presence  of  mind.     See  Courage. 
Present.     See  Future. 

—  made  by  god,  59,  76. 

—  to  god.     See  Flower. 

See  Dakshi/za  and  Gift. 
Preservation.     See  Acquisition. 
Previous  life.     See  Life,  previous. 
Preya.     See  Sreya. 
Pride,  52,  62,  in,  112, 114, 116,  124, 

128,  264,  294,  301,  320,  323,341. 

See  Arrogance  and  Vanity. 
Priest,  89,  189,  241,  259,  261,  266, 

267,  270,  276,  278,  279,  280,  289, 

290,  293. 
Primal   being,   77,   96,    in.       See 

Primeval. 


INDEX    OF    PRINCIPAL    MATTERS. 


425 


Primeval,  45,  58,  81,  95,  98,  190,  333. 
Prince.     See  King  and  Ruler. 
Principle,  170. 

—  none,  115,  124. 
Principles,  divine,  two,  187,  192. 
Prior  to  all,  391. 

Pr/'tha,  40,  42,  45,  46,  47,  49,  52,  54, 
55,  59?  62,  72,  73,  74,  78,  79, 
80,  8r,  83,  85,  92,  93,  100,  114, 
115, 120, 121, 12  2, 125, 126, 130, 
131,  205,  229,  230,  231,  254,  255, 
256,281,311,312. 

Procedure,  381,  385. 

Product,  383. 

Production  and  destruction,  74,  79, 
80,  82,  92,  106,  107,  127,  180, 
192,287,  314,  316,  317,  319,  327, 
33i,  351,  357,  372,  385,  388. 
See  Entities. 

—  and  development,  77,  82. 

—  sevenfold,  260. 
Productive,  382. 

Progress,  380,  381.  See  Improve- 
ment. 

Promises,  332. 

Prompting  to  action,  123.  See  Ac- 
tion. 

Propagation,  53.     See  Generation. 

—  of  truth,  129,  130. 

Property,  161,  182,  183,  255,  305, 

379,  383. 

—  destruction  of,  41,  159. 
Propitiation,  76,  97,  98,  99,  100,  115. 
Prosperity,  43,  96,   131,   151,    166, 

167,  178,  182. 

Prostration,  97,  232. 

Protection.  See  Acquisition,  De- 
pendents, Good,  and  Piety. 

Proud,  182.    See  Pride. 

Provisions,  380. 

Prowess,  324.    See  Valour. 

Publication  of  Gita,  129,  130. 

Pungent,  363. 

Punishment,  303. 

Pupil,  37,  43,  151,  175,  176,  177, 
252,  254,  262,  269,  282,283,  308, 
310,  311,  312,  315,  373,  378. 
See  Student. 

Purawas,  14,  18,  20,  26, 143,  224. 

Purandara,  219,  347. 

Pure,  101,  103,  114,  127,  158,  159, 
165, 170, 176, 183, 185,186,  246, 
247,  254,336,  355,  359,  360,  362, 
369,  390,  393.  See  Heart,  Holy, 
and  Sanctiiication. 

Purity,  52,  64,  68,  76,  85,  103,  114, 


115, 119,  122, 126, 127, 162,  233, 
243,320,  326. 

Purpose,  48,  365. 

Pursuit.  See  Abstraction,  Enjoy- 
ment, and  Knowledge. 

Purug-it,  37. 

Purusha.     See  Spirit. 

—  sukta,  91,  280. 
Purushottama.     See  Being,  best. 

Quadrupeds,  209,  321,  339,  353. 

Qualifications,  166,  177,  279,  312, 
348,  358. 

Qualities,  17,  21,  53,  55,  57,  59,  65, 
70,  75,  103,  104,  105,  106,  107, 
108, 109,  no,  111,112,  117,  124, 
125, 126,  184,  185,  247,  260,  267, 
268,  270,  274,  276,  278,  279,  285, 
286,  288,  292,  300,  301,  309,  311, 
313,315,317,318,319,320,322, 
323,  324,  325,  326,  327,  328,  329, 
330,  33i,  332,  334,  34i,  343,  344, 
345,  349,  350,  35i,  352,  356,  367, 
369,  37o,  372,  373,  374,  377,  379, 
381,383,390,391. 

—  all-pervading,  126,  331. 

—  beyond,  75,  109* 

—  connexion  with,  105,  in,  112. 

—  dealings  of,  55,  no. 

—  development  of,  108,  328,  329. 

—  different  from  soul.     See  Soul. 

—  doers  of  actions,  55,  109. 

—  effects  of,  48,  108,  332. 

—  enjoyer  of,  104,  105,  247,  328. 

—  enumeration  of,  124. 

—  forms  of,  higher  and  lower,  323. 

—  increase  and  diminution  of,  328. 

—  perturbation  by.     See  Perturba- 

tion. 

—  prevalence  of,  108,  319,  328,  373. 

—  repression  of,  108. 

—  ruled  by  supreme,  75. 

—  soul  above,  109. 

—  transcending,  48,  75, 109,  no. 
Quarrelsomeness,  168,  183,  323. 
Quarters,  69,  94,  95,  178,  186,  192, 

261,  268,  282,  290,  316,  337,34°, 

347,354- 

—  of  life  as  a  Brahma^arin.      See 

Brahma^arin. 
Question,  62,  175,  231,  235,  252,  283,. 

311,312,314,374- 
Quiescence,  69,  70, 79, 105, 167, 173, 

185,  245,  263.    See  Mind. 
Quitting  body.    See  Body,  leaving. 
Quiver.     See  Tremour. 


426         BHAGAVADGITA,    SANATSUGATIYA,    ANUGITA. 


Radiance,  94,  104,  186, 190,  387.  See 

Effulgence  and  Light. 
Ra^-adharma.     See  Mahabharata. 
Rag-a-yoga,  300. 
Raghuvawja,  29,  224,  293. 
Rahasyas.     See  Upanishads. 
Rahu,  224,  303. 
Rain,  54,  84,  363. 
Rakshas,  83,  88,  118,  345,  347,  354, 

387. 
Rama,  90,  294,  300. 
Ramamig-a,   30,  31,  32,  35,  66,  84, 

89,  90,  107,  112,  116,  124,  346, 

378. 
Ramayawa,  10,  28,  90,  139,  140,  221. 
Rambling.  See  Restraint  and  Senses. 
Rammohun  Roy,  26. 
Rash,  380. 
Rathantara,  180. 
Ravenous,  57.    See  Eating. 
Rays,  287,  289. 
Readiness  of  resource,  127. 
Reading  much,  171,  309. 
Real  and  unreal,  44,  154,  155,  164, 

i9ij323?392»   See  Entity,  real. 
Reason,  51,  124,  183.   See  Mind  and 

Understanding. 
Receipt.     See  Acceptance. 
Receptacle,  84,  245. 
Reception,  119,  150.    See  Youth. 
Recitation.     See  Vedas. 
Reclamation  of  bad  men,  121.     See 

Improvement. 
Recognition,  249. 
Recreation,  66.    See  Sport. 
Red,  179,  360,  384. 
Reduced.     See  Desire. 
Refinement,  112,  123, 193,  308,  358, 

361,  369. 
Reflexion,  169. 
Refuge.     See  Asylum. 
Refulgence,  74,  94.    See  Effulgence, 

Light,  and  Radiance. 
Regard.     See  Fruit. 
—  for   wife,  child,  &c,  103.     See 

Respect. 
Regulation,  6t,  76,  83,  84,  85,  150, 

170, 180,  254,  257,  269,  279,  283, 

288,291,296,307,311,312,315, 

316,  320,  321,  324,  326,  355,  356, 

358,359,360,361,367. 
Regulator,  89,  91. 
Rejection.     See  Casting  aside. 
Rejoicing,  116.    See  Joy. 
Relation,  103,  104.    See  Soul. 
Relative,  68.    See  Kinsmen. 


Release,  63.  See  Birth,  Body,  Bond, 
Delusion,  Free,  Nature,  Society. 

—  from  sin.     See  Sin. 
Relish,  118.   See  Taste. 
Reluctant,  72. 

Remainder  of  offerings.  See  Leavings. 
Remembrance  of  Deity,  78. 
Removal   of  knowledge,  &c.     See 

Destruction. 
Renouncer.    See  Renunciation. 
Renown.    See  Fame. 
Renunciation,  52,  63,  64,65,  67,  85, 

114, 12T,  122,123,127,257,312, 

349,   36r,    369,   373,  376,    377. 

See  Abandonment  and  Action, 

dedication  of. 
Repeated  happiness,  126. 

—  thought.     See  Continuous  medi- 

tation. 
Repentance,  167. 
Repetitions   of  passages,   144,  145, 

181. 

—  of  words  and  phrases,  14. 
Repining,  168,  323. 
Representative  of  Deity  for  medita- 
tion, 88. 

Repression.     See  Qualities. 
Reptiles,  284,  339,  353. 
Reservoir,  48,  89, 193,  344,  354,  381. 
Residence,  84,233,240,250,260,287. 

See  Dwelling. 
Residue.     See  Leavings. 
Resolution,  47,  70, 101, 110,115,119, 

314.     See  Determination. 

—  good,  85. 

—  vain,  128. 

Resort,  50,  59,  75,  85,  102,  107.  See 
Asylum. 

Resource,  190,  377.    See  Readiness. 

Respect,  83,  119,  120,  159, 161,  162, 
182,  246,  283,  324,  363. 

Rest,  150.    See  Dependence. 

Restraint,  9,  50,  53,  56,  57,  58,  60,  61, 
63,  64,  66,  67,  68,  69,  70,  71,  86, 
91,  99,  100,  103,  114,  119,  125, 
126,  127,  128,  161, 162,  163,  167, 
168,  232,  242,  243,  248,  251,  257, 
282,  296,  297,  301,  306,  336,  342, 
344,  355,  358,  36o,  361,  362,  364, 
372,391,392. 

—  mutual,  315. 

Result,  126.    See  Consequences. 
Retard.    See  Wheel. 
Retrogression.    See  Wheel. 
Return  of  service,  120,  183. 

—  time  of,  180,  244.  See  P.  eceptor. 


INDEX   OF   PRINCIPAL   MATTERS. 


427 


Return  to  birth,  65,79,  80,  81,82,84, 
in,  112, 113, 116, 165,  234,306, 
322,  390.    See  Birth. 

Revelation.    See  Vedas. 

Reverence,  42, 78,  80,  83,  85,  86, 119, 
129. 

Reviling,  166,  168,  181,  321. 

Revolution,  356,  357.  See  Universe 
and  Wheel. 

Riches.     See  Wealth. 

Richest,  287. 

Right  and  wrong,  50,  166,  183,  319, 
366.     See  Duty. 

Righteous  feeling,  326. 

Rigid.     See  Regulation. 

Rik,  18,  20,  83,  146,  162,  163,  179, 
224,  277,  280,  284. 

Rikika,  295. 

Rim,  355. 

i?/shabha,  385. 

ifrshis.     See  Sages. 

Rite.  See  Ceremony,  Family,  Fu- 
neral, and  Observances. 

Ritter,  1. 

River,  current  of,  95.    See  Stream. 

Roar  of  Bhishma,  38. 

Robber,  41.     See  Thief. 

Rod,  91. 

Roots,  in,  316,  361,  388. 

Rotation.   See  Universe  and  Wheel. 

Roth.     See  Nirukta. 

Rough,  118,  383,  384. 

Round.     See  Circular. 

Royal  sage,  58,  86,  296,  300. 

—  saint,  23,  86. 

Rudra,  88,  92,  94,  219,  338,  347,  354- 
Ruin,  51,  55,  56,  63,  72,  85,  128,  151, 

154. 

—  of  soul,  115,  117,  155,236,245, 

279.     See  Destruction. 
Rule.     See  Regulation  and  Scrip- 
ture. 

—  against,  116.     See  Ill-conducted 

and  Ordinances. 

—  heavenly,  231. 

Ruler,  249,  318,  385.     See  Body. 

—  of  men,  44,  89,  95,  209,  346.    See 

King. 

—  of  universe,  78,115,  167, 182,  249, 

279,  332,  347*     See  Atheism. 
Running  away.    See  Slinking  away. 
Ruts,  356. 

Sabaras,  221,  295. 
Sabarasvamin,  31. 
Sabha  Parvan,  174,  229. 


Sacred  learning.  See  Learning, 
Study,  and  Vedas. 

Sacrifice,  12,  21,  22,  23,  53,  54,  60, 61, 
62,  67,  81,  83,84,85,86,89,98, 
99,  114,  116, 118,  119,  120,  121, 
122, 129, 147, 161, 164, 167, 169, 
173, 180, 184, 185, 189, 193,  218, 
241,  260,  262,  276,  279,  280,  284, 
287,  288,  289,  290,  293, 309,  324, 
325,  326,  330?  334?  340,347,  353, 
355,  358,359,  360,  362,  367,  376, 
387. 

—  enjoyer  of,  12,  67. 

—  fire,  216. 

—  giver  of  desires,  53. 

—  instrument,  61. 

—  knowledge  of,  62,  83, 130. 

—  lord  of.     See  Enjoyer. 

—  not  performing,  62. 

—  rain  from,  54. 

—  result  of  action,  54,  62. 

—  various    classes,    61.      See,  too, 

Kratu  and  Ya^g-fia. 

Sad,  120,  121. 

Sadhyas,  94. 

Safety.     See  Fear. 

Sage,  50,  51,  59,  64,  66,  67,  86,  87, 
89,  91,  93,  94,  102,  107,  162, 
164,  173,  174,  178,  209,  221, 
281,  282,  283,  286,  294,  296, 
312,  314,  315,  316,  322,  334, 
342,  345,  358,  360,  361,  362, 
368,   374,   375,    382,   388,   390, 

393- 

—  ancient,  86. 

—  divine,  87,  89. 

—  seven,    29,   213,   281,    287.     See 

Royal  sage  and  Royal  saint. 
Sahadeva,  38. 
Sahya,  222,  346. 
Saibya,  37. 
Saint.     See  Sage. 
Sakra.     See  Indra. 
•Sakuntala,  29,  39,  243. 
Saliva,  384. 
Salmali,  346. 
Saltish,  118,  384. 
Salutation,  61,  62,  83,  93,  95,  96,  97, 

140,   176,   294,   314,  324,   351, 

366,  370. 
Salvation.     See  Emancipation. 
Saman,  18,  19,  20,  83,  88,  90,  145, 

146,  162,  163,  180,  280. 
Samana,  258. 
Samavidhana,  31. 
iSambhu,  219,  332. 


428         BHAGAVADGITA,    SANATSUGATIYA,    ANUGiTA. 


Samnyasin.     See  Ascetic. 

Sanaka,  86. 

Sanandana,  86. 

Sanatana,  86,  149. 

Sanatkum&ra,  17,  86,  135,  141,  150. 

Sanatsu^ata,  125,  136,  141,  149,  150, 
151,  152,  156,  157,  163,  164, 
165,   166,   174,    175,   179,   193, 

3°9>A3Ji>  314. 
Sanatsu^atiya,  48,  135,  136,  138, 143, 
144?  145)  146, 197?  202,  203,  206, 
211,  226,  227,  231,  232,  234,240, 
245,  246,  249,  251,  253,  255,282, 
285,  323,  326,  327,  339,  342,343, 
349,  351?  363,  364,  369. 

—  age  of,  140,  147,  et  passim. 

—  character  of,  144. 

—  connexion  with  Bharata,  135, 136. 

—  genuineness  of,  137. 

—  language  and  style,  140,  142,  143. 

—  metre  of,  142. 

—  name  of,  135,  138. 

—  position  of,  147. 

—  relation  to  Vedas,  145. 

—  text  of,  137,  138,  148,  203.     See 

Phalajruti. 
Sanctification,  59,  62,  64,  68,  69,  81, 

83,  85,  101,  103,  122,  193,  247, 

341.     See  Purity. 
San^aya,  3,  35,  37,  39,  42,  92,  96, 98, 

136. 
•Saiikara,  88. 
•SankarcUarya,  2,  6,  18,  20,  27,  30, 

3i»  32,  35,  45,  49,  52,  58,  59, 
60,  64,  73,  79,  80,  81,  85,  87, 
88,  90,  93,  103,  105,  107,  112, 
114,119,121,123,  124,125,127, 
128,129,135,137,138,141,143, 
144,151,152,153,154,155,156, 
157, 159, 160, 161, 162, 163,164, 
165,  166, 168, 169, 170, 171, 173, 
174, 176, 177, 179, 180,  181,184, 
186, 187, 188, 190, 193, 197,201, 
202,  203,  204,  206,  226,  230,231, 
239,  241,  247,  248,  251,  255,256, 
262,  263,  266,  271,  280,  290,313, 

327,333,339,342,345,347,353, 

376,385,  386,391. 
•Sankara-vi^aya,  135. 
Sankhya,  8,  27,  47,  52,  63,  64,  74, 

123,210,215,313,332,368,372, 

373,a374,  383,  386,  387,  392. 

—  Karika,  240,  258,  265,  286,  291, 

319,321,322,329,331,334,337, 
351,356,371,380,382,391. 

—  Sara.     See  Hall,  F.  E. 


Sankhya  Sutra,  123,  190,  244,  265, 
286,321,331,332,334,337,339, 
354,  368,  392. 

—  Tattvakaumudi.     See    Sankhya 

Karika. 

—  Yoga,  105. 
Sanskara.     See  Ceremony. 
Sanskrit  literature,  13,  15.    See  Ka- 

vyas. 
•Santi  Parvan,   155,  160,  170.     See 

Mahabharata. 
S aptahot ri,  266. 
Sarasvati.     See  Speech. 
Sariraka  Bhashya.  See  £ankara>£arya. 
Sarvadarjanasangraha,  32,  214. 
Sarva^na  Narayawa.     See  Narayawa. 
Sastra,  280. 
Sastras,  ir,  50,  56,  74,  161,  166,  176, 

177,  303. 
Sat.    See  Asad  and  Sad. 
•Satakratu,  219. 
Satapatha,  248,  265. 
Satiety,  88. 

Satisfaction.     See  Contentment. 
Sattva,  193. 
Satyaki,  39. 

Satyaloka.     See  World. 
Saugatas,  213,  377. 
Savana,  277. 
Saviour.     See  Deliverer. 
Savitri,  353. 

Savoury,  118.     See  Taste. 
Savyasaiin,  96. 
Scandal,  324. 
Scenes,  93. 
Sceptic.     See  Atheism,  Faith,  and 

Infidel. 
Schlegel,  34,  35,  38.    See  Lassen. 
Science,  6,  81,  90,  114,  388. 
Scripture,  117,  118,  119,  120,  231, 

238,  242,  290,  291,  314,  349,358, 

364,  379,  381.    See  Sastras. 
Sea.     See  Ocean. 
Search  for  Brahman,  173. 

—  for  faults.     See  Fault. 
Season,  91,  236,  330,  352. 

Seat,  49,  64,  68,  78,  79,  80,  81,  in, 
112, 128, 129, 162, 163, 194,230, 
234,  239,  240,  245,  251,  257, 306, 
316,  326,  339,  344,  348,  354,361, 
368,369,378,388,393. 

—  for  practising  abstraction,  68. 

—  of  desire  and  wrath,  57. 
Seclusion.     See  Solitary. 
Second,  without,  349. 
Secrecy.     See  Mystery. 


INDEX   OF   PRINCIPAL   MATTERS. 


429 


Secret,  68,  91,  366. 

Sects,  7. 

Securing,  365. 

Security.     See  Fear. 

Seed,  74,  84,  91,  107,  241,  313,  371, 
382,  383. 

Seeing,  309,  351.     See  Senses. 

Seeker  after  knowledge.  See  Know- 
ledge. 

Seer,  78. 

Self,  170,  317.  See  Atman  in  the 
Sanskrit  index  and  Embodied 
soul  and  Soul  in  this. 

Self-consciousness,  102,  322,  333, 
336,338. 

Self-contained,  no. 

Self-contemplation,  50. 

Self-control,  48,  126,  127,  183,  236, 
246,  366. 

Self-destruction,  106,  279. 

Self-existent,  333,  354. 

Self-illumined,  342. 

Self-knowledge.     See  Knowledge. 

Self-possessed,  63,  246,  248. 

Self-restraint,  9,  10,  21,  51,  61,  64, 
65,  66,  68,  71,  77,  86,  100,  101, 
103, 114, 119, 127, 149, 167,168, 
170, 173, 182, 190,  243,  249,250, 
292,  300,  312,  317,  320,327,  332, 

342,  359>39°>39i- 

Selling.     See  Buying. 

Semen,  238,  241,  261,  275,  338. 

Sen,  Keshab  Ghunder,  26. 

Sensation  not  permanent,  44. 

Sense,  good.     See  Learned. 

Senses,  26,  44,  50,  51,  53,  54,  55,  56, 
57,  60,  61,  62,  63,  64,  66,  67,  68, 
69,  70,  71,  79, 86,  88,  93,  99, 102, 
104, 105, 108,  in,  112, 123, 125, 
126, 153,  154, 160,  161, 162,  165, 
167,  168, 170, 173, 182,  185,  186, 
187,  188,  190,  193,232,  238,  242, 
246,  248,  249,  251,253,  256,  257, 
261,  262,  264,  266,267,  268,  269, 
278,  279,  280,  282,  283,  285,  286, 
290,  291,  292,  297  seq.,  300,  305, 
306,  313,  317,  318,  329,  332,  334, 
336,  337,  338,  34°,  34i,  342,  343, 
344,  348,  349,  35o,  355,  358,  360, 
362,  364,  366,  367,  368,  371,  386, 
388.  See  Absorbent,  Contact, 
Organs,  Soul, Bodily  and  mental. 

—  lord  of,  38. 

—  objects  of  enumerated,  102. 

—  operations  of,  61,  64. 
Separation,  233,  313. 


Serpent.     See  Snake. 
Service,  62, 127,  243,  324,  326. 

—  return  of.     See  Return. 
Serving  devotees,  59. 
Severance.  See  Separation  and  Dis- 
sociation. 

Shackle.     See  Bond. 

Shade,  286,  356.    See  Shadow. 

Sha^g-a,  385. 

Shadow,  312.    See  Shade. 

Shaken,  not  to  be,  161. 

Shakespeare,  113. 

Shapes,  various,  92. 

Sharing  with  others,  364,  365. 

Sharp  118,  383,  384. 

Shaving,  375. 

Sheep,  345. 

Shelter.     See  Asylum. 

Shining  bodies,  88,  291,330,341,353. 

Shore,  381. 

Short,  384. 

Shortcoming.     See  Fault. 

Show.     See  Ostentatiousness. 

Shower.    See  Rain. 

Siddhanta  Kaumudi,  32. 

Siddhas,  89,  94,  96,  232,  233,  235, 

236,  239,  314. 
Sides,  both,  68. 
Sighs,  303. 
Sight.   See  Scene  and  Visual  power. 

—  of  Brahman,  99. 

—  of  universal  form,  98,  99. 
Significance,  174. 
Slkhandin,  39. 

Silence,  91,  245.     See  Taciturnity. 

Similes,  142. 

Sin,  12,  41,  42,  46,  47,  49,  53,  54, 
56,  60,  62,  64,  65,  66,  68,  70, 
7i,  73,  76,  84,  86,  89,  127,  129, 
130, 139, 146, 149, 151, 157,160, 
163,  164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 170, 
181,  182,  232,  233,  241,246,288, 
290,  293,  296,  311,  314,  317,319, 
320,  321,  322,  327,  340,  343,  344, 
351,355,358,369,372,378,389, 
39°,  394*    See  Counting. 

Sinful,  57,  62,  68,  85,  164,  283,  293. 

Singers,  232. 

Single,  284. 

Sinless,  52,  107,  114,  233,  252,  254, 
256,  3H,  364. 

Sinjapa,  346. 

Sitting,  49,  97,  232,  360,  390. 

.Siva,  219,  333,  347. 

Sixteen,  371. 

Skanda,  89. 


430         BHAGAVADGITA,    SANATSUGATIYA,    ANUGtTA. 


Skin,  40,  259,  261,  267,  298,  305, 
36l>  375«     See  Senses. 

Sky.     See  Heaven. 

Slander.     See  Backbiting. 

Slaughter,  168.     See  Murder. 

Slave,  304. 

Sleep,  64,67,69,77,97, 108,112, 126, 
236,  258,  259,  268,  269,  301,  320, 
360. 

—  lord  of.     See  Gudakesa. 
Slinking  away  from  battle,  127. 
Slippery,  384. 

Sloth,  55,  192,  194,  301,  361,  378, 

389. 
Slow,  125.     See  Gradual. 
Small,  92,  285,  331. 
Smell.     See  Fragrance  and  Senses. 
Smile,  43,  253,  256,  265. 
Smoke,  57,  81, 127,  276,  362. 
Smooth,  384. 
Smr/ti,  Gita  regarded  as,  2,  6,  30. 

—  Sanatsu^atiya  regarded  as,  138. 
Smritis,  7,  27,  30,  83,  153,  158,  169, 

321. 
Snake,  89,  93,  190,  281,  282,  283, 

321,  345,  347,  353,  354- 
Society,  68,  103,  364,  365. 
Sod,  68,  no. 

Soft,  383,  384.    See  Gentle. 
Soilure.     See  Dust. 
Solar  world,  240. 
Solicitude.     See  Acquisition. 
Solitary,  68,  97,  151,  232,  251,  256, 

287,  341,  363. 
Solstices,  81,  352. 
Soma,  84,  219,  220,  337,  340,  346, 

347. 
Somadatta,  38. 
Son,  40,  59,  74,  103,  121,  169,  170, 

178,  183,  189,  194,  284,  384. 

—  of  preceptor.     See  Preceptor. 
Sorrow,  119,  126,  330.     See  Grief, 

Joy  and  sorrow. 
Soul,  44,  49,  50,  51,  54,  64,  65,  66, 
67,  68,  70,  73,  88,  105,  107,  108, 
152, 154,  159,  160,  162, 180, 190, 
191, 194,  224,  235,  237,  238,239, 
242,  246,  247,  248,  249,  250,  252, 
253,  254,  256,  257,  258,  262,  263, 
274,276,278,279,280,281,282, 
286,  288,  292,  300,  304,  308,  309, 
312,331,332,333,334,336,337, 
340,  341,  342,  343,  344,  345,  35i, 
354,  355,  367,  369,  37i,  372,  374, 
375,  376,  380,  382,  385,  389,  391, 
392,  393,  394. 


Soul,   all-pervading,   45,    193.     See 
Unity. 

—  association  with,  288,  336. 

—  beauty  of,  177. 

—  beginningless,  44,  45. 

—  destruction  of,  44  seq.,  160,  374. 

—  different  from  qualities  and  ac- 

tions, 55,  56,  105. 

—  distinct  from  nature,  201,  289. 

—  distinct  from  senses,  160, 173,285, 

289,  305. 

—  distinct  from  universe,  164. 

—  embodied,  44,  45,  46,  65,  77,  232, 

238,  240,  244,  249,  252. 

—  eternal.     See  Eternity. 

—  existence  of,  26. 

—  favour  of,  234. 

—  firm,  45. 

—  high  and  low,  232. 

—  highest.     See  Highest. 

—  immaculate,  123. 

—  immortal.     See  Immortality. 

—  indefinable,  44. 

—  indestructible,  44,  46. 

—  individual,    77,    112,    157,    188, 

192,    253,   258,  263,  289,  310, 

3i5,  337,  340,  34i,  350,  37i, 
386. 

—  individual's  relation  to  supreme, 

3o,55,  77,92,97,  103,  111,112, 
153,  i54, 156, 186, 189,  316,  342, 
35o. 

—  indivisible,  45. 

—  inexhaustible,  45. 

—  killing  and  being  killed,  44,  45. 

—  knowledge  of,  46,  66,  106,  163. 

—  loss  of,  151. 

—  manifestation  of.     See  Manifes- 

tation. 

—  migration  to  new  body,  44. 

—  not    active   agent,   55,  65,   105, 

106,  109,  123,  125,  285. 

—  primeval,  45. 

—  science  of,  49,  90,  173,  181.   See 

Adhyatma. 

—  seats  of,  237,  240. 

—  stable,  45. 

—  unchangeable,  45. 

—  union.  See  individual's  &c,  supra. 

—  wonder,  46. 

Soul,  supreme,  82,  86,  105,  106,  112, 
113,156,172,173,175,189,190, 
248,  259,  284,  310,  342. 

—  abode  of.     See  Seat. 

—  access  to.     See  Attainment. 

—  connexion  of  with  world,  189. 


INDEX   OF    PRINCIPAL    MATTERS. 


431 


Soul,  does  nothing,  64,  65,  106,  123. 

—  origin  of  all,  87. 

—  origin  of  gods  and  sages,  86. 

—  part  of,  individual,  30,  112,  186. 

—  passive  spectator,  100,  105. 

—  relation   of,   to   individual.     See 

Soul,  individual's  &c,  supra. 

—  source  unknown,  86. 

—  union  of  with  individual.     See 

Union. 
Sound,  61,  74,  127,  155,  247,  258, 

260,  266,  271,  273,  343.     See 

Objects  of  sense. 
Sour,  383,  384. 
Source  of  things,  46,  74,  75,  80,  83, 

84,  87,  90,  107,  112,  127,  191, 

194,  283,  284,  311,  315,  323,  333, 

334,  354,  357,  377,  383. 

—  and  end,  46,  84.    See  Beginning, 

Production,  and  Soul,  supreme. 
South  path,  314. 
Sovereignty,  great,  303. 

—  of  earth,  40,  42,  43,  47,  96,  300. 

—  of  three  worlds,  40,  307. 

—  within,  302. 

Space,  73,  74,  82, 106,  156,  186,  244, 
251,  260,  289,  316,  339,  343,  356, 
368,  375,  377.  See  Time  and 
place,  and  Objects  of  sense. 

Speaking  ill,  182,  183. 

Species,  origin  of,  244.    See  Eggs. 

Spectator,  soul  is,  105. 

Speech,  49,  87,  90,  119,  123,  128, 
161, 177, 184, 185,  243,  257,  261, 
262,  263,  264,  265,  266,  275,  295, 

336,   338,   348,   359,    364,   366. 
See  Objects  of  sense. 

—  forms  of,  265. 

Speed,  357,  364,  381.    See  Velocity. 
Spirit,  104,  105,  331,  333,  351,  367, 
368,  373,  380,  385,  386. 

—  departed.     See  Departed  spirits. 

—  supreme.     See  Soul,  supreme. 
Spiritual  topics,  51,  296,  310. 
Spirituous,  389. 

Splendour,  91,  95,  240. 

—  Brahmic,  162,  232,  287. 
Spoke,  306,  355. 

Spontaneous  earnings,  60,  101,  362, 

365. 
Sport,  251.  See  Play  and  Recreation. 
Spring,  90. 

Sprouts,  in,  313,  371,  383. 
Square,  384. 
Sravawa  352. 
Sreya  and  Preya,  161. 


Sridharasvamin,  35,  38,  45,  49,  54, 
64,  67,  71,  80,  85,  89,  96,  105, 
107, 108,  no,  112, 116, 117, 120, 
123,  124,  127,  129,  346,  378. 

Sruti.     See  Vedas. 

Stable,  45,  367. 

Staff,  37,  217,  359,  360. 

Staggering,  356. 

Stale,  118. 

Standard,  39. 

Standing,  360. 

Stars,  179,  240. 

State,  117,  304.  See  Brahmic,  Mind, 
and  Vilest  state. 

—  differences  of,  59,  82,  356. 

—  normal,  99. 
Staves,  three,  318. 

Steady,  49,  70,  103,  no,  167,  357. 

Steady-minded,  49,  50,  51,  52,  66,  68, 
69,  70,  78,  83, 100, 101, 103,  109, 
no,  117,  250,  296,  300,  352. 

Stealing.     See  Thief. 

Steeds,  white,  38. 

Steps.     See  Gradually. 

Stick.     See  Staff. 

Stinginess,  325.     See  Gifts. 

Stinking,  118. 

Stolidity,  320. 

Stomach,  93,  94,  252,  367. 

Stone,  68,  no,  179. 

—  heated,  standing  on,  1 1 8. 
Stoppage,  357,  358. 
Store.     See  Provisions. 
Store-room,  253. 
Storm-gods,  88. 

Story,  ancient.     See  Itihasa. 

Stotra,  280. 

Straightforward,  103,  114,  119,  126, 
161,  320,  325,  326,  364,  373. 

Strangers,  159. 

Straw,  142,  155. 

Stream,  90,  95,  192,  284,  287,  307, 
344,  346,  354,  363,  387.  See 
River. 

Strength,  74,  116,  118,  124, 178,  236, 
252,  294,  323.     See  Power. 

Stri  Parvan,  187. 

Strong,  71,  116,  158,  346. 

Stubborn,  118,  128.  See  Head- 
strong and  Obstinate. 

Student,  177,  216.    See  Pupil. 

Study,  21,  23,  61,  68,  81,  98,  99, 
114,  119,  120,  121,  164,  167, 
172,  174,  181,  185,  269,  324, 
334,  340,  355,  358,  360,  361, 
362,  376. 


432      bhagavadgJta,  sanatsugatIya,  anugita. 


Study  of  Gita,  130. 

—  of  Vedas.     See  Vedas. 

Style.     See  Anugita,  Bhagavadgita, 

and  Sanatsu^atiya. 
Subandhu,  13. 
Subdivision,  love  of,  10. 
Subduing.     See  Self-restraint. 
Subhadra,  37,  39. 
Subjects,  295,  378.     See  Object. 
Subjugation.     See  Self-restraint. 
Sub-quarters.     See  Quarters. 
Subsistence.     See  Entities. 
Substratum,  123,  249,  289,  292. 
Subtle  topics.     See  Spiritual. 
Subtlety,  104,  106,  160,  241,  285, 

296,  310,320,  336,  341,  342. 
Success,  47,  48,  49,  59,  60,  124. 
5udra,  22,  24,  85, 126,  127,  136, 150, 

322,  329. 
Sughosha,  39. 
Summer,  122,  363. 
Summum  bonum,    117,   214.     See 

Aim,  Emancipation,  Heaven. 
Sun,  58,  65,  74,  78,  83,  88,  94,  106, 

no,  in,  178, 179, 186, 189,  224, 

251,  277,  287,  289,  290,  303,  316, 

329?  33o,  337,  34o,  346,  350,  352, 

354,  364,  387. 

—  eye  of  divine  form,  94. 

—  one  thousand,  93. 
Sunrise.     See  Morning,  Sun. 
Sunset.    See  Evening,  Sun. 
Sunshine,  356. 
Sunyavadins,  376. 
Superhuman  cause  of  pain.      See 

Pain. 
Superior  to  God  none.     See  Equal. 
Superiority,  feeling  of,  158, 159.  See 

Envy. 
Supervisor,  82,  83,  105,  109,  188. 
Suppliant,  169,  183. 
Support  of  Ajvatth a,  in. 

—  of  body.     See  Body. 

—  without,  72. 

See  Dependent. 
Supporter,  83,  84,  105,  257,  348. 

—  of  universe,  78,  80,  82,  91,  94, 

97,  105,  113,  180,  192,  258. 
Supreme,  49,  50,  54,  64,  65,  69,  77, 
79,  81,  83,  85,  93,  94,  106,  113, 
176,  188,  192,  326,  369,  379. 

—  belongs  to  none,  194. 

—  form  of,  193. 

—  loss  of,  71. 

—  manifestation  of,  77.     See  Incar- 

nation. 


Supreme,  part  of,  supports  all,  91. 
See  Being- Supreme,  Brahman, 
and  Highest. 

Surface.     See  Earth. 

Surya,  219. 

Sushum«a,  156,  277,  318. 

Suspension.     See  Hanging. 

Sumita,  144. 

Sustainer,  83. 

Sustenance.     See  Body,  support  of. 

Sutras,  7,  14,  30. 

Sutta  Nipata,  14,  19,  23,  35,  36,  40, 
45,  46,  48,  49,  50,  51,  56,  59, 
60,  62,  63,  64,  65,  66,  68,  69, 
70,  79,  88,  89, 101, 103, 105,  108, 
109,  in,  112,  114,  118,  121. 

Svadha,  83,  324,  370. 

Svaha,  324,  352,  366. 

.Svapaka,  65. 

•SVeta,  222,  346. 

•Svetajvataropanishad,  65,  68,  78,  89, 
102, 103, 104, 105, 112, 113, 129, 
138, 157, 160, 163, 165, 166, 172, 
176, 179, 180, 186, 187, 189, 190, 
192, 193,  238,  249,  265,  308,  311, 
313,322,327,331,332,333,338, 

343,348,355,37o,376,379- 
Swallowing,  95,  353. 
Swamy,  Sir  M.  C.   See  Sutta  Nipata. 
Sweet,  363,  383,  384. 
Swerving.     See  Moving  and  Truth. 
Swift.     See  Speed. 
Sword,  63,  294,  302,  313. 
Syadvadin,  376. 
•Syamaka.     See  Grain. 
Syena,  82,  353. 
Syllable,  391.     See  Om. 
Symbols,  160,  307,308,  309,  350,  367. 
Systematic  arrangement,  7,  10,  13. 

See  Philosophy. 

Tabor,  38. 

Taciturnity,  101,  119,  159,  161,  162, 
163,  168,  173. 

Tad,  120,  161. 

Taint,  43,  49,  59,  64,  82,  106,  107, 
109, 123, 127, 154, 155, 160, 163, 
186,  247,  248,  289,  366.  See 
Bond. 

Tairthikas,376. 

Taittiriya  Arawyaka,  159,  164,  170, 
178, 186, 188, 190,  259,  261,  262, 
266,  277,  280,  327,  347,  389. 

—  Brahmawa,  261,  262,  266. 

—  Upanishad,  103, 120, 123,127, 152, 

155,  *56>  i6i>  i63;  i64, 168, 171, 


INDEX   OF   PRINCIPAL   MATTERS. 


433 


180, 191, 192,  220,  236,  238,  244, 
280,  293,  302,  343,  360,  361,  378, 
385,  388,  389,  390. 

Taking,  64. 

Talent,  37,  72,  120,  177,  182,  191, 
193, 255,  292,  299,  310,  312,  314, 
316,317,326,327,332,335,369, 
377,  378,  380,  381,  386. 

Talk,  47,  64,  124,  164,  320. 

TaWya  Brahmawa,  180. 

Tanks,  222,  324. 

Tapas,  166. 

Taranatha  Tarkava^aspati,  Prof.,  28, 

32,  33,  329,  334,  342. 
Tarkikas,  376. 
Tarpawa,  325. 
Taste,  74,  257,  258.    See  Objects  of 

sense,  Relish,  and  Savoury. 

—  by  another,  269,  270. 

—  for  objects  of  sense,  50, 166. 
Tasteless,  118,  247. 

Tawny,  179. 

Teacher.     See  Preceptor. 
Teaching.     See  Instruction. 
Tears,  42. 

Technical  terms,  10. 
Teeth,  95,  113. 

Temperate.     See  Food  and  Sleepi- 
ness. 
Tempers,  86,  322. 
Temporary.     See  Perishable. 
Temptation,  154,  327. 
Ten,  373. 
Tender,  384. 

Terminable.     See  Perishable. 
Termination  of  Life.     See  Death. 
Terrible,  94,  95,  98,  343. 
Test,  306. 
Texts,  102. 

—  Vedic,  48,  269,  290,  305,  322.  See 

Mantra. 

Thief,  53, 160,169,284,324,330,  389. 

Thigh,  94. 

Thirst,  151,  168,  356. 

Thomas,  E.,  224,  225. 

Thomson,  Archbishop,  268. 

Thought,  87, 115, 116, 192,  259,  263, 
321,  348,  350,  378.  See  Con- 
tinuous meditation  and  Mind. 

—  evil,  323. 

Thoughtless,  183,  359.    See  Rash. 
Thread,  74,  359,  360. 
Throat,  96,  252,  262,  266,  271. 
Throwing  out,  64. 
Thumb,  190,  192. 
Thunderbolt,  37,  89. 

[8] 


Tie.     See  Bond. 

Tiele,  G.  P.,  Prof.,  20,  23,  24,  27,  97. 

Tiger,  142, 153,  155. 

—  like,  230,  294. 

Time,  62,  81,  90, 120, 176, 186,  244, 

276,  316,  356,  357,  363,  366,  375, 
377. 

—  and  place,  soul  unlimited  by,  45, 

186,  343,  356. 

—  lapse  of,  58.     See  Birth. 

—  of  return,  &c,  80.     See  Death 

and  Gift. 

—  wheel  of,  343,  355. 
To-day,  305. 

Toil.     See  Labour. 

To-morrow,  305. 

Tone,  264. 

Tongue,  219,  252,  259,  261,  292. 
See  Senses  and  Taciturnity. 

Tooth.     See  Teeth. 

Tortoise,  50,  342,  366. 

Torture,  118,  237,  240. 

Touching,  247,  257,  258,  343.  See 
Senses. 

Town,  173,  212,  361,  363. 

Trade,  127. 

Tradition,  314. 

Tranquillity,  2 1, 5 1, 52, 63, 65, 67, 68, 
69,  70,  85,  86,  94,  101, 108,  114, 
119, 120, 126, 128, 129, 190,232, 
243,  246,  247,  248,  250,  256,  257, 

277,  287,  288,  301,  307,  312,  317, 
326,  342,  355,  370,  372,  373,  375, 
389,392. 

Transcendent  Brahman,  76,  78, 113, 

333,  35i,  372. 

—  happiness,  70. 

—  nature,  76. 

Transcending.  See  Qualities,  Source. 
Transgressing.     See    Ill-conducted 

and  Sin. 
Transient,  44,  79,  86,  154,  179,  187, 

246,  250,  355,  390.     See  Life. 

—  penance,  120. 
Transmigration,    322.      See    Life, 

higher. 
Travellers,  329,  380,  381. 
Treachery,  41,  151,  324,  344. 
Treasure,  115. 
Trees,  89,  in,  112,  142,  172,  241, 

284, 285, 286,  294,  296, 313,  316, 

321,  346,  361,  363,  365,  370,  371, 

373,  379,  388. 
Tremour,  40,  96,  239. 
Trespasses.     See  Sin. 
Triku/avat,  222,  346, 

Ff 


434         BHAGAVADGITA,    SANATSUGATIYA,    ANUGITA. 


Trinity,  88,  220,  347. 

Trouble,  56,  71,  118,  122,  124,  183, 
329,  356,  362.     See  Agitation. 

Trumpet,  38. 

Trunk,  313,  371. 

Trust.     See  Faith. 

Truth,  44,  60,  62,  64,  70,  83,  86,  87, 
92,  103,  no,  114,  115,  119,  124, 
160, 161, 162, 167, 168, 169, 170, 
171,172,174,175,176,  177,182, 
184, 185,  280,  284,  293,  296,  311, 
3i3?  3i4?  315,  324,  325?  326,  331, 
335,  336,  338,  344,  35i,  360,  362, 
364,  366,  367,  368,  369,  370,  371, 
373,  375,  378,  380,  381,  384. 

Turbid,  42. 

Turning  back.     See  Wheel. 

Tvash/r/,  219,  346. 

Twelve,  373. 

Twenty-four,  373. 

—  plus  one,  317. 

Twenty-two,  373. 

Twice-born,  156, 160, 163,  166,  209, 
231,  232,  285, 291,  293,  296,  299, 
304,  311,  314,  316,  327,  336,  339, 
340,  348,  353,  360,  373,  383. 

Twofold,  375. 

Ubiquitous,  82. 

Udana,  258. 

U^ulomas,  377. 

Udumbara,  374,  379. 

Udyoga  Parvan,  135,  138,  139,  140. 

U^aijjravas,  89. 

Uma,  219,  347. 

Unasked,  365. 

Unattached.     See  Attachment. 

Unavoidable,  46. 

Unborn,  45,  58,  76,  86,  87,  192,  194, 

33i. 
Uncertain,  120,  380. 
Unchangeable,  45, 100, 317,  331,  333, 

37i,  39i. 

Unchecked,  357. 

Uncle,  maternal,  40. 

Unconcern,  82,  no,  326,  391.  See 
Indifference. 

Unconfused,  307. 

Unconquerable,  161,  231.  See  In- 
vincible. 

Uncreated,  45,  347,  391.  See  Self- 
existent. 

Undegraded,  39,  97, 130,  310. 

Underlying  principle.  See  Substra- 
tum. 

Understanding,  47,  57,  64,  65,  67,  70, 


73,  78,  97,  100,  101,  102,  112, 
123,125,127,161,175,177,179, 
181,  187,  188, 189,  190,  193,  236, 
247,  259,  260,  267,  279,  284,  287, 
302,  306,  307,  308,  309,  310,  313, 
316,318,332,336,337,338,341, 
343,  344,  348,  349,  35©,  35i,  355, 
357,  366,  367,  368,  370,  372,  377, 
380,  381,  382,  385,  386,  391,  392. 
See  Knowledge. 

Understanding,  world  of,  333. 

Undesponding.     See  Despondency. 

Undeveloped,  331. 

Undiscerning.     See  Discernment. 

Undistinguished  colours,  286. 

Unfathomable,  343. 

Unfriendliness,  320.    See  Antipathy. 

Ungrateful,  254. 

Unhappiness,  49,  51,  53,  66,  69,70, 
78,  79,  86,  101,  103,  107,  109, 
126, 151, 157,  232,  233,  245,  247, 
255,  3i3,  33i,  37o,  372.  See 
Pain. 

Unholy,  116,  343. 

Unintelligent,  160, 172,  312,  320,  330. 

35i,  356,  371*379- 

Uninterrupted,  341. 

Union,  66,  70,  71,  115,  275. 

Unity  of  everything,  62,  71,  75,  83, 
104, 105, 106, 107, 112, 116, 124, 
128,  312,  313,  344,  370,  374.  See 
Difference,  Identification.  And 
Soul,  all-pervading. 

—  of  work,  6. 

Universal  benevolence.  See  Bene- 
volence. 

—  form,  92,  333,  344. 

—  knowledge,  76,  114. 
Universe,  constituents  of,  336. 

—  destruction  of,  80. 

—  devoid  of  truth,  115,  315. 

—  divisions  of,  93,  261. 

—  eternal,  158. 

—  government  of,  115,  327. 

—  heated    by  universal    form,   94, 

95- 

—  illumination  of,  178,  186. 

—  lord    of,    83,    86,   87,   93.     See 

Atheism  and  Ruler. 

—  movement  of,  82,  87.    See  Move- 

ment. 

—  producer  and  destroyer  of,   74, 

95,  157,  158,  287,  354,  392. 

—  support  of,  74,  78,  80,  82,  93,  94, 

97,  104,  112,  180,  192. 

—  upholding.     See  Support. 


INDEX   OF   PRINCIPAL  MATTERS. 


435 


Universe,  welfare  of,  29,  94.    See 
Benevolence. 

—  within  and  without.    See  Within. 

See  Body  of  Krishna  and  Ruler. 
Unknowable,  76,  104,  160,  247. 
Unknown,  159,  160,  349,  368.     See 

Incomprehensible. 
Unmanageable,  57. 
Unmoved,  51,  68,  69,  no,  248,  352, 

391. 
Unpeopled.     See  Solitary. 
Unperceived,  45,  46,  76,  80,  82,  88, 

96,  99,  100,  102,  193,  313,  317, 

318,  331,  332,  349,  350,  351,  354? 

368,  371,  372,  373,  380,  382,  383, 

385,386,389,390. 
Unpleasant,  122.    See  Agreeable. 
Unreal,  44. 
Unreasonable,  237. 
Unrighteous,  53. 
Unseen,  115.    See  Unperceived. 
Unshaking,  331. 
Unsteady.     See  Steady. 
Unsubstantial,  255. 
Unswerving,  125,  336. 
Untainted,  367,  369,  379.     See  Gift, 

Lotus-leaf,  and  Worlds. 
Unthinkable,  45,  78, 100,  354,  369. 
Untruthfulness,  168,  183. 
Unwilling,     See  Reluctant. 
Up  and  down,  going,  109,  240,  321, 

322,  325,  327,  329. 
Upanishads,  2,  5,  7,  8, 13, 15,  16,  17, 

18,  19,  23,  25,  26,  34,  35,  135, 

141, 142, 143, 144, 147, 174?  181, 

207,  210,  211,  212,  215,  22 3,  226, 

251. 

—  dialogues  in,  5. 
Upasana.     See  Meditation. 
Upavarsha,  32. 
Upholding.     See  Support. 
Upwards  and  downwards,  branches, 

in,   184,   287,   354.     See  Up 

and  down. 
Urine,  261. 
Ujanas,  91. 
Ushmapas,  94. 
Uttamau^as,  37. 

Vain,  321,  327.     See  Life. 
Vaisampayana,  150,  151,   229,  230, 

394. 
Vaisvanara,  191,  259,  276. 
Vaijyas,  22,  24,  85,  126,  127,  217, 

255,  329. 
Vaivasvata,  153. 


Va^aspati  Mbra,  319,  322,  329,  356, 

371,  382. 
Valiant,  332.     See  Valour. 
VallabhaHrya,  30,  31. 
Valour,  126,  323,  326,  367. 
Valuables.     See  Precious  things. 
Vamadeva,  193. 
Vamadevya,  277. 
Vanishing  of  nature,  380. 
Vanity,  103,  114,  115,  116,  166,  181, 

246,  320,  321.      See  Arrogance 

and  Pride. 
Vanquished,  96,  152,  388,  389.     See 

Victory. 
Variable,  330. 

Variegated  colours,  286,  357. 
Variety.     See  Diversity. 
Varu#a,  89,  97,  219,  220,  345,  346. 
Vasavadatta,  28. 
Vashat,  324. 
Vajikara  san^na,  9. 
Vasish^a,  159,  160,  314. 
Vasu,  88,  92,  94. 
Vasudeva,  75,  83,  91,  98,  no,  130, 

230,  235,  254,  310,  312,  393. 
Vasuki,  89,  353. 
Vayu,  219,  340.     See  Wind. 
Veda,  171,  172. 
Vedanta,  8,  17,  113,  123,  147,  159, 

174,  246^331. 

—  Paribhasha,  220,  258,  286,   314, 

333,  338,  339?  387. 

—  Sara,  186. 

—  Sutras,  30, 3 1, 32,  33,105,188,191. 
Vedas,  5,  14,  15,  16,  17,  18,  19,  25, 

26,48,54,61,62,68,  74,  78,  81, 
83,  84,  88,  91,  98,  99,  102,  no, 
111,112, 113,114,  115,  119,  120, 
121,143,144,145,146,  152,153? 
156, 157, 158, 159,  161, 162, 163, 
164, 166, 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 
174,177,182,185,193,211,214, 
226,  262,  269,  276,  306,  309,  312, 
320,  322,  326,  331,  353,  354,  358, 
367,369,378,388,390. 

—  Atharva,  18,  19,  145. 

—  consubstantialwith  Brahman,  163. 

—  disparagement  of.  See  Disparage- 

ment. 

—  like  reservoir,  48. 

—  theogony  of,  220. 

—  three,  19,  83?  84. 

—  two  KaWas  of,  17,  146. 
Vedic  words,  48. 

Vegetables,  83,  113,  144,  156,  353. 
See  Herbs. 

F  f  2 


436         BHAGAVADGITA,    SANATSUGATIYA,    ANUGITA. 


Vehicle,  345. 

Veil  concealing  Brahman,  76. 
Velocity,  192.    See  Speed. 
Venerable,  32,  97,  252,  267,  282,  293, 

3"»  377. 
Veracity.    See  Truth. 
Verse,  sacred,  83. 

—  Sanskrit,  15. 
Vessels,  363. 
Vestments,  93. 

Vexation,  43,  56,  68,  no,  159,  168, 

315,  324,  330,  336,   356,  378. 

See  Agitation. 
Vices,  301, 302,  303,  314.  See  Attack 

of  vices. 
Vicissitudes.    See  Life,  course  of. 
Victory,  40,  43,  47,  91, 131,  287,  296, 

305,  306,  344. 
Vidura,  136,  149,  150,  151. 
Vi^nana  Bhikshu,  197,  201,  202,  203, 

204,  354. 

—  Vada,  375. 
Vikanza,  38. 
Vilasavati,  28. 
Vilest  state,  116. 
Vilifying,  323.    See  Abuse. 
Vinata,  90. 

Vindhya,  222,  346. 

Vindictiveness,  151,  323. 

Violation.    See  Regulation. 

Vipra,  347. 

Vh%,  186,  315. 

Virata,  37,  39. 

Viroiana,  175. 

Virtue  and  vice,  56,  115. 

Virtuous,  116,  283. 

Vishamajlokf,  227,  259. 

Vishmi,  29,  76,  88,  89,  90,  94,  95, 
190, 219, 220,  221,  261,  332,  333, 
338,  345?  34<5,  347,  354. 

—  Purawa,  221,  222. 

Visible.  See  Perceptible  and  Regu- 
lation. 

Visual  power,  concentration  of,  67, 
69. 

VLfvamitra,  314. 

Vijvas,  94. 

Vital  parts,  237,  238,  239,  297,  298, 
299.     See  Soul,  seat  of. 

Vitality.     See  Life. 

Vocal.     See  Bodily  and  Speech. 

Voice.    See  Speech. 

Volition,  313. 

Vomited,  142,  160. 

Voracity.     See  Eating. 

Vow.    See  Firmness,  Regulation. 


Vowels,  348. 

Vr/ddhas,  377.    See  Elders. 
Vr/kodara.     See  Bhima. 
Vr/'shalas,  295. 
Vr/sh«is,  41,  46,  56,  91,  235. 
Vulgar,  151. 
Vultures,  40. 
Vyadi,  32. 
Vyana,  258. 

Vyasa,  3,  6,  32,  33,  87,  91,  130,  204, 
206,  207. 

—  author  of  Gita,  6. 
Vyuha,  38. 

Wain,  37. 

Wakefulness,  51,  69,  269,  324.  See 
Day  and  night. 

War.     See  Battle-field. 

Warmth,  238,  329.    See  Heat. 

Washing,  119. 

Water,  45,  64,  73,  74,  95,  156,  159, 
179, 187, 189, 193,  238,  260,  281, 
283,  284, 287, 289,  290,  339,  343, 
344,  346,  353,  356,  359,  360,  361, 

364,  365,  374,  379,  382,  384,  387. 

—  offering  to   Supreme,  85.     See 

Libations  and  Reservoir. 
Waterpot,  359. 
Wave,  374.    See  Billow. 
Way.     See  Hell  and  Path. 
Weak,  269. 

—  point,  touching,  &c,  323. 
Wealth,  40,  61,  62,  75,  88, 114,  115, 

116, 124, 125, 169, 177, 178, 181, 
183, 184, 233,  243, 246,  261,  284, 
307, 314,  325, 331, 347, 357,  359, 

365,  376,  392«  See  Belongings 
and  Property. 

—  Brahmic,  162. 

—  human,  161,  255. 

—  lord  of,  88. 

Weapons,  38,  41,  42,  45,  89,  90,  93, 
in,  250. 

—  do  not  cut  soul,  45,  250. 
Weary,  160,  314. 
Weaving,  74,  194. 

Weber,  A.,  Prof.,  6, 8,  23,  25,  28,  31, 

33,  139,  248. 
Welfare.     See  Good. 

—  of  all.    See  Benevolence. 

—  of  Ar^una,  86,  92, 129. 

—  of  oneself,  117. 
Well,  324,  354. 

Well-read,  209,  255.   See  Learned. 
Well-wishers,  68. 
Westminster  Review,  3*  5,  6. 


INDEX   OF   PRINCIPAL   MATTERS. 


437 


Wheel  of  the  world,  54.   See  Discus. 

—  holder  of,  232. 

—  turning  of,  215,  306. 

See  Time. 
Wheeler,  T.,  3,  5,  6. 
Whip,  386. 
Whirling  of  mind,  40. 
Whistling.     See  Bamboo. 
White,  179,  384. 
Wick,  380. 

Wicked,  75,  121,  153,  329,  330. 
Wife,  41, 97, 103,  159, 161, 167, 170, 

181, 183, 189, 216,  256,  307,  358. 

—  of  preceptor.    See  Preceptor. 
Wilkins,  C,  2. 

Will  of  entities.    See  Free-will. 
Williams,  M.,  Prof.,  243,  344,  358. 
Willow,  346.    See  Bamboo. 
Wilson,  H.  H.,  Prof.,  24,  50,  205, 

221,  222. 
Wind,  71,  90,  97, 156, 192,  232,  237, 

238, 239, 257,  261,  337,  343, 349, 

350. 

—  carries  astray  boat,  51. 

—  carries  away  perfumes,  112. 

—  does  not  dry  up  soul,  45. 

—  life.     See  Life-winds. 

—  restraint  of,  71. 

—  upward    and     downward.      See 

Life-winds. 
Windless  place,  69. 
Wing,  164,  188,  189,  192. 
Wink.     See  Eyelid. 
Winter,  332. 
Wisdom,  44,  49. 
Wise.    See  Learned,  Life,  and  Un- 

happiness. 
Wish.     See  Desire. 
Wish-giving  cow,  89. 

—  stone.     See  Stone. 

Within  all  things,  104,  112, 180, 190, 

367,  369,  379. 

Without.     See  Within. 

Withstand,  difficult  to.  See  Re- 
straint and  Unconquerable. 

Woe.     See  Home  and  Misery. 

Womb,  105,  107,  109,  116,  175, 
237, 239, 241,  260,  321,  322,  331, 
339?  353*  See  Foetus  and  Pre- 
ceptor. 

Women.    See  Female. 

Wonder,  92,  93. 

—  soul,  subject  of,  46. 
Wood.     See  Fuel  and  Staff. 
Word.     See  Speech. 

—  divine,  59,  73. 


Words,  89,  103,  185,  209,  261,  262, 
263,  266,  338,  348,  353. 

—  man  of,  171. 

—  of  wisdom,  44. 
Work,  divine,  29,  59. 

World,  52,  54,  55,  59,  60,  62,  63, 
66,  68,  72,  79,  84,  86,  100,  106, 
116, 161, 163, 164, 170, 174, 179, 
180, 190,  230,  231,  233,  234,  236, 
239,  240,  243,  246,  249,  253,255, 
256,  258,  278,  281,  282,  283,  287, 
292,  296,  307,  313,  314,  3i6,  325, 
33i,  332,  334,  343,  354,  35<5,  362, 
364,  367,  37o,  387,  388,  393. 

—  affairs  of,  55,  60,  304,  324. 

—  agitation  of  and  by,  10 r. 

—  beginning  of,   152.     See  Begin- 

ning, void  of. 

—  destroyer  of,  95. 

—  destruction  of,  55,  96,  115.     See 

Destruction. 

—  external  and  internal,  292,  337, 

386. 

—  foes  of,  115. 

—  future,  62,  63,  72,  115,  126,  165, 

167,  188,  308,  326,  378. 

—  government  of,  115. 

—  higher,  354,  389. 

—  holy.     See  Holy  world. 

—  human,  59,  84,  95,  in. 

—  knowledge  of,  161. 

—  master  of,  67,  86,  97. 

—  material,  65,  161,  163,  172,  175, 

186,  187,  189,  191,  335. 

—  mortal,  82,  84, 100, 112, 153, 175, 

i9i>  234,  343. 

—  nether.     See  Hell. 

—  of  death,  100.   See  mortal,  supra. 

—  of  meritorious  men,  72,  84,  130, 

184,  321. 

—  release  from,  62,  159,  235. 

—  spotless.    See  Untainted. 

—  survey  of,  234. 

—  thought  of,  323. 

—  three,  40,  54,  94,  97,  113,  244, 

249>  334,  354,  388. 

—  untainted,   108,    155,   317.     See 

Current,   Death,    Destruction, 

Evil,  Lord,  and  Transient. 
Worldliness,  51,  159,  314,  370. 
Worldly  life.     See  Life,  course  of. 
Worms,  225,  321,  339,  364. 
Worship,  59,  71,  73,  75,  76,  85,  86, 

87,  99,  no,  117,  127,  156,  186, 

257,  286,  377. 

—  complete,  114. 


438  BHAGAVADGITA,    SANATSUGATIYA,    ANUGiTA. 


Worship,  exclusive,  73,  75,  78,  79, 
80,  83, 84,  85,  99,  100, 103,  1 10. 

—  irregular.     See  Irregular. 

—  mode  of,  83,  114, 127,  245,  353. 

—  of  divinities,  59,  75, 118. 
Worshippers    go    to     deity    wor- 
shipped, 76,  84. 

—  receive  due  fruit,  59. 
Woven.     See  Weaving. 

Wrath,  50,  57,  59,  66,  67,  101,  114, 
115,116,117,128,151,154,155, 
156, 160, 165, 166, 181, 183, 185, 
233,  241,  246,  284,  289,  294,  301, 
315,  320,  322,  323,  325,  332,  343, 
357?  364.    See  Irascible. 

Wretched,  49. 

Wrong.  See  Modesty,  Right  and 
wrong. 

Yadava,  97. 

Ya^fia,  83. 

Ya^navalkya,  5,  237,  304,  344. 

Yaffle jvar  Gastrin,  33,  224. 


Ya^us,   18,   20,   83,  146,  162,  163, 

180. 
Yakshas,  88,  94, 118,  345,  347,  354. 
Yama,  89,  97,  153,  219,  233,  346. 
Yaska,  225. 
Years,  330. 
Yellow,  384. 
Yoga,  9,  10,  11,  27,  47,  61,  63,  64, 

74,  297,  306. 

—  Sutras,  8,  9,  10,  74,  210,  211,  212, 

215,  226,  234,  248,  250,  251,  252, 
260,  266,  271,  274,  285,  286,  300, 
319,322,324,327,343,372,373, 

394. 

—  V&sish^a,  206,  240. 
YogaHras,  213,  377. 
Yogin,  52,  293. 
Youth,  175. 

—  compared  to  death,  44. 

—  receiving  senior,  139,  203. 
Yudhamanyu,  37. 
Yudhish^ira,  38,  394. 
Yuyudhana,  37. 


SANSKRIT    INDEX. 


B.  =  Bhagavadgita ;  S.  =  Sanatsu^atiya ;  A.  =  Anugita. 

N.  B.  Only  in  some  cases  have  references  been  given  to  all  the  passages  in 
which  a  certain  word  occurs.  In  most  cases,  only  the  passages  in  which  words 
are  used  in  noteworthy  senses  are  referred  to. 


AkamabMta,  (A.)  XXIII,  5. 

Akshara,(B.)  Ill,  15;  VIII,  3,  it,  21; 
X,  2,  5,  33;  XI,  18,  37;  XII, 
1,  3;  XV,  16,  18.  (S.)  Ill,  18, 
45;IV,i8.  (A.)  Ill,  27;  IV,  14; 
V,  11;  XIII,  22;  XXXVI,  33. 

A/tetana,  (A.)  XXI,  15. 

Adhish^ana,(B.)III,4o;  XVIII,  14. 

Adhyatma,  (A.)  XX,  40;  LXI,  4. 

Anadiyoga,  (S.)  IV,  20. 

Anamaya,  (B.)  II,  51 ;  XIV,  6. 

Aniketa,(B.)  XII,  19;  (A.)  XXVIII, 
42. 

Anukalpa,  (S.)  VI,  11. 

Anr//£as,  (S.)  Ill,  37. 

Anta,  (B.)  II,  16. 

Antariksha,  (S.)  VI,  4. 

Apara,  (B.)  IV,  4;  VII,  5.  (A.) 
XXVII,  34;  XXXV,  56. 

Aparaspara  Sambhuta,  (A.)  XVI,  18. 

Aparyapta,  (B.)  I,  10. 

Apratish/£a.     See  Pratish/^a. 

Abhikrama,  (B.)  II,  40. 

Abhidhya,  (S.)  II,  11. 

Abhyasa,  (B.)  VI,  35,  44 ;  XII,  9, 10, 
12;  XVIII,  36. 

Ayana,  (B.)  I,  11. 

Alolutva,  (B.)  XVI,  2. 

Avyakta,  (B.)  II,  25,  28;  VII,  24; 
VIII,  18,20,  21;  IX,  4;  XII,  1, 
3,5;  XIII,  5.  (A.)  I,  42;  HI, 
6;  XII,  1,  3,  5;  XIX,  8;  XX, 
20,47;  XXI,  1 ;  XXIV,  22,  24, 
25;  XXV,  1;  XXVIII,  25,35, 
37;  XXIX,  17;  XXXI,  55; 
XXXII,  12;  XXXIII,  1,  5; 
XXXV,i6,33,34,55;XXXVII, 
7,  23  seq. 

Asangraha,  (S.)  Ill,  27. 

Asiddhi,  (S.)  Ill,  25. 

Ahankara,  (B.)  II,  71;  III,  27,  28; 
VII,  4;  VIII,  1,  3;  XII,  13; 
XIII,  5,8;  XVI,  18;  XVII,5; 
XVIII,  24,  53,  58,  59.  (A.)  XX, 


i9,  20,  47;  XXIII,  5;  XXV, 
9;    XXVI,   1,    2,  5;    XXVII, 

I,  12,  30;  XXIX,  22;  XXX, 
6;  XXXI,  45,  55  5  XXXII, 
9,  12,  15;  XXXV,  33  seq.,  54, 
55;  XXXVI,  21. 

Ahaiikrita,    (B.)    XVIII,    17.     (A.) 

XXXVI,  22. 
Ahangata,  (S.)  II,  7. 

Atman,  (B.)  II,  41,  43,  44,  45,  55,  64 ; 
III,  6,  13,  17,  27,  43;  IV,  6,  7, 
21,  27,  35,  38,  40,  41,  42;  V,  7, 

II,  16,  17,  21,  25,  26;  VI,  5,  6, 
7,  8, 10,  11,  12, 14,  15,  18,  19,  20, 
25,  26,  28,  29,  32,  36,  47;  VII, 
18,  19;  VIII,  2,  12,  15,  19;  IX, 

5,  26,  28,31,  34;  X,  11,  15,  16, 
18,19,  20;  XI,  3,4,  24,  47,  50; 
XII,  11,  14;  XIII,  7,  22,  24, 
28,  29,  31,  32;  XIV,  24;  XV, 

II,  13,  17;  XVI,  9,  17,  18,  21, 
22;  XVII,  16,  19;  XVIII,  16, 
27,  37,  39,  49,  5i,  54-     (S.)  I, 

6,  7;    II,   10,   15,   18,   30,    32; 

III,  8,  9,  41,  54;  IV,  22;  V, 
12  ;  VI,  11,  16,  25,  26.  (A.)  I, 
39,  40;  II,  3,  7,  8,  18,  36;  III, 
3  seq.,  30;  IV,  2,  3,  5,  7,  9,  10, 
15  seq.,  42,46,51,56,58;  V,  5, 
9,  11;    VIII,  23;    X,  9,  15,  17; 

XI,  9;  XII, 21, 22;  XIII,  22,  24; 

XV,  29;  XVI,  3, 12;  XVII,  11, 
18  seq.;  XVIII,  8;  XIX,  1,7; 
XX,  16,47;  XXV,  1,2,  3,8; 
XXVI,  4;  XXVII,  8,  9,  39,  5i, 
53,54,63,64,66;  XXIX, 12,22; 
XXXI,  45,  46,  49;  XXXII,  6, 
17;  XXXIII,  2,3,5;  XXXV, 
20,  35  seq.,  55,  56;  XXXVI, 
4,  23,  33  seq. 

Adadhriki,  (S.)  VI,  4. 

Apas,  (S.)  VI,  4. 

Apomaya,  (A.)  XIII,  19. 


440        BHAGAVADGITA,    SANATSUGATIYA,    ANUGiTA. 


Avasatha,  (A.)  IV,  34,  35. 
Avr/tti,  (B.)  V,  17  ;  VIII,  16,  23,  26. 
A      (A.)  Ill,  29. 
Asya,  (S.)  II,  7. 

Uta,(B.)I,39;  XIV,  9,  n.  (S.)  V, 
3.  (A.)XI,i4;XIV,2i;XXV, 
8;  XXXI,  3,7;  XXXV,  43; 
XXXVI,  28. 

Uttama,  (B.)  XIV,  14;  XV,  17. 

Utsa,  (S.)  VI,  13. 

Uddeja,  (B.)  X,  40.  (A.)  I,  3.  And 
see  (A.)  XXVIII,  37. 

Upapatti,  (A.)  II,  2,  30,  42 ;  III,  10. 

Ritvig,  (S.)  VI,  10. 

Karmayoga,  (B.)   Ill,  3,   7  ;  V,  2 ; 

XIII,  24. 
Kamakara,(B.)  V,  12;  XVI,  23. 
Kamayana,  (A.)  XIII,  4. 
Karyakarana,  (B.)  XIII,  20. 
Ku&ira,  (A.)  XXIV,  13,  14. 
Ku/astha,  (B.)  VI,  8;   XII,  3;  XV, 

16. 
Kr/ta,  (B.)XV,  11;  XVIII,  16. 
Ketu,  (S.)  VI,  5. 
Kshara,  (B.)  VIII,  4  ;    XIV,  16,  18. 

(A.)  Ill,  27.     See  Akshara. 
Kshema,  (B.)  I,  46  ;  11,45;  IX,  22. 

(A.)  XXXI,  45;  XXXII,  4. 

Gati,  (B.)  IV,  17  ;  VIII,  26  ;  XII,  5. 

(S.)  I,  10.     (A.)  XXXIV,  1. 
Gu»asankhyana,  (B.)  XVIII,  19. 
Grihita,  (B.)  VI,  25.    And  see  VI,  35. 
Graha«anika,  (A.)  XXX,  6. 

^Takradhara,  (S.)  I,  23. 

#ara,  (S.)  Ill,  17. 

iTitta,(B.)  XVI,  16.  (A.)  XXXVI,  27. 

ATodana,  (B.)  XVIII,  18. 

Kodya,  (S.)  Ill,  27. 

Gana,  (S.)  II,  27. 

Gati,  (A.)  I,  21;  II,  18;  III,  14,  33; 
XXXI   8 

Giva,  (B.)VIl',5;  XV,  7.  (A.)  II, 
16,17,  25,  28,  30,  33;  III,  7,9, 
10;  IV,  43,  50. 

Gnanayoga,  (B.)  Ill,  3;  XV,  1. 

Tanu,  (B.)  VII,  21.    (S.)  I,  36. 
Tyaga,  (B.)  XVIII,  1,  2,  4,  8,  9,  10, 

12.    (A.)  XXXIII,  7. 
Trivishmpa,(S.)  11,26.  (A.)XVIII,4. 


Duranvaya,  (A.)  XXXVI,  17. 
Deva,  (S.)II,  8;  VI,  4. 
Daiva,  (B.)  XVIII,  14. 
Dhamawja,  (S.)  Ill,  41. 
Dhara«a,(B.)VIII,i2.  (A.)  XXVII, 

57. 
Dharayan,  (B.)  V,  9.    (A.)  IV,  50. 
Dhish/£ita,  (B.)  XIII,  17. 

Niya>ta£ati,  (A.)  V,  7. 

Nirvana,  (B.)  VI,  15.     See  Brahma- 

nirva«a,  (A.)  IV,  12. 
Nirvuesha,  (A.)  XXI,  13. 
Nivr/tti,  (B.)  XVI,  7;  XVIII,  30. 
Nish^a,(B.)III,3;  V,i2,i7;  XVII, 

1;  XVIII,  5o.     (A.)  11,38;  V, 

27  ;  VII,  12  ;  XV,  24. 
Nyasta,  (A.)  V,  3. 

Pada,  (B.)  VIII,  11 ;  XIII,  4.     (A.) 
XX,  24;  XXXV,  3. 

Para.     See  Apara. 
Parasu,  (S.)  V,  1. 
Pariwama,  (A.)  XXXVI,  37. 
Parita,  (A.)  II,  13. 


'*>  "59  "y>  st  1  -«.».*»,  j,  .".  » , 
7;  XVIII,  40,  59.  (A.)  II,  3  5 
111,26;  XXIII,  13;  XXIV,  23. 
tish^a,  (B.)  Ill,  15;  VI,  38;  XIV, 
27;  XV,  3.  And  see  XVI,  8. 
Pradhana,  (A.)  Ill,  26,  33  ;  IV,  47; 
XX,  19;  XXIV,  23;  XXXII, 


mana,  {t\.j  111,  20,  33  ; 

XX,  19;  XXIV,  23; 

9  ;  XXXV,  32  seq. 
Pramada,  (S.)  II,  5,  7. 
Prayatamana,  (S.)  II,  39. 
Pravritti,  (B.)  XI,  31 ;  XIV,  12,  22; 

XV,  4;  XVI,  7;  XVII,  30,  46; 

XVIII,  30,  46.     (A.)  XXI,  9; 

XXVIII,    26;      XXXIII,    3; 

XXXVI,  37. 
Prasanga,  (B.)  XVIII,  34. 

Bala,  (B.)  XVI,  18;  XVII,  5;  XVIII, 

53. 
Bahu,  (S.)  Ill,  44. 
Buddhi,  (B.)  I,  23 ;  II,  39,  41,  44,  49, 

5°>  5i.  52,53,63,65,66;  III,  1, 


SANSKRIT   INDEX. 


441 


2,  4,  26,  40,  42,  43;  IV,  18;  V, 
11,17,  20,  28;  VI,  9,21,  23,  25, 
43  ;  VII,  4,  10,  24;  VIII,  7;  X, 
4,  10;  XII,  4,  8,  14;  XIII,  5, 
30;  XV,  20;  XVI,  9;  XVIII, 
16,  17,  29  seq.,  37,  49,  50,  51, 
57.  (S.)  II,  1,  31,  35,  37,  53, 
57;  III,  2;  IV,  11.  (A.)  I,  10, 
14,  46;  II,  7,  38;  IV,  8,  12, 
64;  V,  19,  24;  VII,  2,  6  seq.,  22; 
IX,  10;  X,  4;  XIII,  26;  XV, 
24;  XVII,  14, 16, 17;  XVIII,  1, 
4,  6,  7;  XIX,  6,  7,  12;  XX, 
20;  XXI,  2;  XXIII,  7;  XXV, 
2,   6,    13;    XXVII,  9,  10,  15, 

16,  31;  XXVIII,  24  seq.,  35; 
XXX,  1 ;  XXXI,  44,  50,  55; 
XXXII,  12,  1.7;  XXXIV,  17 
seq.;  XXXV,  17,  22,  32,  55; 
XXXVI,  2,  30. 

Buddhiyoga,  (B.)  II,  49;  X,  10; 
XVIII,  57. 

Brahman,  (B.)  Ill,  15;  IV,  24,  25,  31, 
32;  V,  6,  10,  19,  20,  21,  24; 
VI,  14,  20,  27,  28,  38,  44 ;  VII, 
29;  VIII,  1,  3,  11,  13,  16,  17, 
24;  X,  12;  XI,  2;  XIII,  4,  12, 
30;  XIV,  3,  4,  26,  27;  XVII, 
23,  24;  XVIII,  42,  50,  53,  54. 
(S.)  II,  5,  34,  36,  37;  III,  44, 
47  5  IV,  2,  14;  V,  7,  21;  VI,  2. 
(A.)  I,  12,  13,  15,  42;  II,  24; 
III,  6;  IV,  14,  26,  47,  50,  60, 
62  ;  V,  10,  17;  VI,  22 ;  IX,  17; 
XI,  8,  16,  17;  XII,  20;  XVII, 
26 ;  XIX,  4  ;  XX,  1, 18,  22,  34, 
38;  XXIII,  10;  XXVII,  11, 14, 
38,  49,  515  XXVIII,  12,  13; 
XXIX,  16;  XXXII,  1,  2,  4,8, 
14;  XXXIII,  1;  XXXIV,4,  6; 
XXXVI,  5  seq.,  9,  29,  35. 

Brahmanirvawa, (B.)  II,  72  ;  V,24seq. 

Bhakti,  (B.)  VII,  17  ;  VIII,  10,  22  ; 
IX,  14,  26,  29;   XI,  54;  XII, 

17,  19;  XIII,  10;  XIV,  26; 
XVIII,  54,  55,  68. 

Bhagadeva,  (A.)  XXVIII,  15. 
Bhavana,  (B.)  II,  66.   (A.)  XXI,  14. 
Bhavayata,  (B.)  Ill,  11, 12.    And  see 

(B.)  VIII,  6.      (A.)  VIII,  24; 

XXII,  15;  XXVI,  4. 
Bhasha,  (B.)  II,  54. 
Bhinnavr/tti,  (B.)  XXI,  13. 
Bhuta,  (B.)  II,  28,  30,  34, 69  ;  III,  14, 

i8,  335  IV,  6,  35;  V,  7,  25,  29; 


VI,  29,  31;  VII,  6,  9, 11,  26,  27; 
VIII,  3,19,  20,  22;  IX,  4,5,  6, 
7,8,11,13,25,29;  X,  5,  15,20, 

22,  39;  XI,  2,  15,  55;  XII,  4, 
13;  XIII,  5,  15,  16,  27,  30,  34  5 
XIV,  3;  XV,  13, 16;  XVI,  2,6; 

XVII,  4,  6;  XVIII,  20,21,46, 
54,61.  (A.)  I,  17;  II,  22;  III, 
7,  16,  28,  29,  33;  IV,  3,11,  27; 
V,8;  VII,  15;  XIII,  18,  20,24; 
XIV,  5;  XVII,24;XX,7,8,i6, 
19,  21,  22,  30,  32,  34,  47,  48,  49 ; 
XXI,  9,  10,  18,  23;  XXII,  8; 
XXIII,  1,  6;  XXV,  9,  10,  11; 
XXVI,  2,  5;  XXVII,  1  seq.,  18 
seq.,  32,  34,  37,  38,  41  seq.,  46, 
48,  51,  64,  66,  67;  XXVIII,  8, 
11,  12  ;  XXIX,  4,  5,  11,  15,  16 ; 
XXX,  1,  8,  11,  24;  XXXI,  18, 
24,  27,  34,  40,  41,  49,  54; 
XXXII,  6,  9,  13, 14;  XXXIV, 
12;  XXXV,  34,  36,  37,  39,  54, 
56;  XXXVI,  1,  2,  6,  9,  10,  12, 

13,  i9>  39. 
Bhfttatman,  (B.)  VI,  14;    XIII,  3; 

XXXVI,  4. 
Bhfitadi.     See  Bhfita. 

Matva,  (S.)  Ill,  17.  (A.)  XXXV,  32. 

Manasvin,  (S.)  Ill,  98. 

Mahat,   (A.)    XX,    47;    XXVI,  1; 

XXVIII,35;  XXX,9;  XXXV, 

33  seq.;  XXXVI,  4. 
Matra, (B.) II,  14.  (A.) XXXI, 21,40. 
Maya,  (B.)  IV,  6;  VII,  14,15,  25; 

XVIII,  61.   (A.)  XXXVI,  20. 
Marga,  (S.)  Ill,  9. 

Mukta,  (B.)  IV,  23.     (A.)  III,2i. 
Mauna,  (S.)  II,  41 ;  III,  1,  2,  20,  45. 

Yatra,  (A.)  XXXI,  23,  32;  XLVI, 

23.  And  see  (B.)  Ill,  8. 
Yukta,  (B.)  II,  61,  66;   III,  26;  IV, 

18;  V,  6,7,  8,  12,  21,  23;  VI,  8, 
14,18,29,47;  VII,i7,3o;  VIII, 
14;  IX,  14;  X,  4,  10;  XII,  1, 
2;  XIII,  2;  XVIII,  28.  (A.) 
IV,  18  seq.,  26,  66;  V,  11 ;  XI, 
1;  XXXI,  8,  16,30. 
Yoga,  (B.)  II,  39,  45,  48,  49,  50,  53 ; 
111,3,7;  IV,  1,  2,  3,  27,  28,  38, 
41,42;  V,  1,  2,4,5,6,7,  21;  VI, 
2,  3,  4,12,16,17,19,20,23,29, 
33,  36,  37,  41,  44;  VII,  1,  25; 
VIII,  8,  10,  12,  27;  IX,  5,  22, 
28;  X,  7,10,  18;  XI,  1,  4,  8,9, 


442         BHAGAVADGITA,    SANATSUGAtIyA,    ANUGITA. 


18,47;  XII,  1,6,9,  11;  XIII, 
10,  24;  XIV,  26;  XVI,  1; 
XVIII,  33,  52,  57,  75,  78.  (S.) 
11,7,9,  10?  20,  21;  V,  18.  (A.) 
I,  13,  29;  III,  13;  IV,  15,  17, 
18,33,66;  X,  14;  XV,  28  seq., 
XX,35;XXV,6;XXVIII,26; 

XXXV,  25;  XXXVI,  22  seq. 
See  Kshema. 

Yogin,(B.)III,3;IV,25;V,ii,24; 
VI,  1,2,8,  10,  15,19,  27,  28,  31, 
32,  42,  45,  46,  47;  VIII,  14, 
23,25,27,28;  X,  17;  XII,  14; 
XV,  11.  (S.)  VI,  1  seq.  (A.) 
Ill,  21 ;  IV,  15,  22,  23. 

Yoni,  (S.)  IV,  5.  (A.)  V,  24 ;  XX, 
32;  XXIV,  8;  XXVII,  38; 
XXXII,  1. 

Rati,  (S.)  V,  19.    (A.)  XXVIII,  16. 
Rupa,  (A.)  IV,  9,  13  seq. 

Linga,  (S.)  VI,  11. 

Vadanya,  (S.)  V,  2. 

Varga,  (S.)  Ill,  9,  18. 

Vikarman,  (B.)  IV,  17. 

Vikara,  (S.)  II,  21.    (A.)  XXIV,  23. 

Vi^nana,  (B.)  Ill,  41;  VI,  8;  VII, 

21;  IX,  1  ;  XVIII,  42.    (A.)  I, 

20;    V,   2;    VI,    11;    VII,   5; 

XXXI,  5. 
Vinirwaya,  (A.)  IV,  63. 
Vibhaga^na,  (A.)  XXXV,  27.     And 

see  XXIV,  25. 
Vimarga,  (S.)  II,  7. 
VLresha,  (A.)  XX,  21,  48;    XXX, 

9;  XXXII,  13;   XXXV,     7; 

XXXVI,  7,  28. 
Vijvarupa,  (S.)  IV,  1. 
Vishamedhamana,  (S.)  Ill,  18. 
VishM,  (S.)  VI,  4. 
Visarga,  (A.)  XXVII,  26. 
Vismaya,  (A.)  XXIII,  7. 
Vira,  (A.)  XIV,  17. 
Vr/gina,  (S.)  Ill,  5. 

Vega,   (S.)   II,    11.      (A.)    II,    11; 

XXVII,  62. 
Veda,  (S.)  Ill,  35,  38  seq. 
Vedya,  (S.)  Ill,  38  seq. 
Vaidya,  (A.)  XX,  36. 
Vyakarawa,  (S.)  Ill,  45. 


Vyutthana,(A.)XXIX,i6;XXXIV, 
13,14. 

Sastrakara,  (S.)  111,5. 
Sukra,  (S.)  VI,  2. 

Sankhya,  (A.)  XXXII,  17. 
Sangraha,  (B.)  Ill,  20,  25;  VIII,  12  ; 

XVIII,  18.    (A.)  XXXI,  39. 
Sanghata,  (B.)  XIII,  6. 
Sa%na,  (B.)  I,  7.    (S.)V,2,n.    (A.) 

XXI,i5;  XXXV,  11;  XXXVI, 

25. 
Safi^nita,  (B.)  XI,  1.    (A.)  XXVII, 

59. 
Sattva,  (B.)  II,  45  ;  X,  36,  41;  XIII, 

26;  XIV,  6;  XVI,  1 ;  XVII,  3, 

8;  XVIII,  10,  40.     (A.)  II,  8, 

27;    XIII,    23;    XXVII,  58; 

XXVIII,    41;     XXXII,    17; 

XXXIII,  6,  8  seq.;  XXXIV, 

16;  XXXV,  7  seq.;  XXXVI, 

36. 
Samadhi,  (B.)  II,  44,  53,  54;  IV,  24; 

VI,  7;  XII,  9;  XVII,  11. 
Samasita,  (A.)  XIV,  6. 
Samahvaya,  (A.)  VI,  13. 
Samudra,  (S.)  IV,  19. 
Sampratish^M.     See  Pratish^a. 
Samvid,  (A.)  XI,  6. 
Samstha,  (B.)  VI,  15. 
Salila,  (S.)  IV,  19;  VI,  4,  11. 
Savitri,  (A.)  XXIX,  6. 
Sutra,  (B.)  XIII,  4. 
Stabdha,  (B.)  XVI,  17;  XVIII,  28. 

And  see  (A.)  XXI,  12. 
Smr/ti,  (A.)  XXVI,  5. 
Srotas,  (A.)   II,   24;    XXI,  3,  31. 

And  see  XXII,  16;  XXIII,  13 ; 

XXIV,  7  seq. 
Svabhava,  (B.)  II,  7  ;  V,  14  ;  VIII,  3; 

XVII,  2;  XVIII,  41  seq.,  47, 

60.     (S.)II,  40.     (A.)  VII,  3; 

VIII,  3;   XI,  10;  XIII,  2,  4,5, 

22;  XXXIV,  12;  XXXVI,  11. 
Svarga,  (S.)  II,  26. 

Ha,  (B.)  II,  9.  (A.)  VIII,  9,15,18, 
20;  XIV,  4;  XV,  4 ;  XVIII, 
3^  XX,  5;  XXXI,  5. 

Hitakamya,  (B.)  X,  1. 

Hma,  (S.)  V,  21. 


TRANSLITERATION   OF    ORIENTAL   ALPHABETS. 


443 


V 

a 

a 

u 

^     ^        •        •        • 

^ "^     5       *        *       * 

A ... 

I 

n  n  *^  ^  n- 

'    nsscm:    •             ..... 

Si 

D     •     •     •  J0 

*   —    U  oJ-U  •                •     •    k)o^  • 

a 
.2 

-D    !\)   1  'o 

!     *>  _    kJoJ-U  •"             ^  .  b>  <x->  • 

1 
Ph 

*V  3    «10j    • 

?     ■ 

i ; ; ;     j-ac ; 

•a 
<u 
N 

•          ^-s       ^"N       ^ 

\~              .     •     bo    55    *? 

:  :  :  ;  !        ^  \  ^  \  \ 

! 

Iff  £  *T  pr     \      &      1* 

'.'.'.'.                 |F    1*  IF   i*  |T 

i 

8 

a 

1 

O 
En 
w 

r      «* 

S 
D 

3 

U 

^     ^  .^  r55              ^  g    *>  H>  l§ 

8 
.S 
O 

bo                                  * 

# 

H 

O 
to 

1 

GO 

'      c8 

•  .a 

►           •        00 

•  i  1 

QQ          1 

1    *    8      * 

!         p     - 

*  S       S 

:     ©    £ 

•    s  i 

:    § 

a, 
>      i>.  a 

:::::§ 
« 

:  I'lll  -II 

p    cm    ^    ^    £         y 

!  &-|  &•§    g3 
i  a  1  a  J   || 

z    8     s    a    *     £w g 

}    ft    O    h    N                       W 
»-(     f-H     rH                            «— 

:  1 

.2 

i-H     r- 

.  1  % 

•  "         03 

'       Ph     03 

00       ^ 

J 

|           *         c 

I 

>    CO    N. 

444 


TRANSLITERATION   OF   ORIENTAL   ALPHABETS 


V 
4> 

►» 

•    ** 

•     •     •     •               •     « 

-^     ^g      •      .       •       .     c!    ~-<       •       « 

OQ 

U 

• 

• 

•                «o       • 

t 

.       , 

•                     •                     •       • 

1 

•#*                                             • 

•        • 

C  c;    .  r  r    .  *-i^r\    . 

.9 

D   —   M     • 

k 

•      • 

•    « 

1 

*>.       ; 

"»  : 

9    •  0   ^     •  •*>    b*^>    •    « 

!) 

:  ^  ^  : 

< 

1 
I 

Ph 

**-^ 

S* 

*b^ 

0      •  <3    o      •  .o     D-o     .     . 

:®^^ 

1 

Ph 

*> 

9« 

.  .     .  .    ^  •  ■ 

1 

m  :  : 

•d 

init. 

^^  I  ^^  ■  -^  ;  I  ; 

8 

*T3 

'.  ?■« 

3 

.  ^  .  . 

in 

p- 

.   R.    ! 

|c  P    .  hr  St     *.  fr  |S  |8    ! 

£        '.         \ 

r  * 

0 

. 

•      #    8X8      • 

•      W       • 

•       • 

\         * 

s 

**=>  cs^ 

M 

•       •     H 

•     Q. 

< 

~ 

.    .    . 

•       • 

00      f 

N      N. 

51 

1 

£ 

o 

•                      "5 

Ji  "S>     <o       t« 

•     ">a 

s 

B 

1 

2 

>» 

•     •     •          -*»  -5     .  -d  jg     •    fl  ^     • 

•       QQ 

•      N       .       • 

•    =3    2 

•13 

•     rH     W 

to 
pi 

*  rS   '£ 

•  £    *S3 

OQ        • 

»          •        CQ        Of 

1         • 

3          • 

•        OQ        00 

•    *    3 

5? 
£  1 

I 

•  a  i 

2  «   .2 

3  £<  a 

3  i  .s  £ 

•      C8 
.£3    ^ 

CQ 

5  i-i 

Ph 

C3 

'E  'E 

3      Ph    Or 

^                              0 

§           s 
a         :\ 

Q 

3 

3              •»            •»            •» 

2 

•1         .a         * 

:  ? 

o 

*  •§  8 

;  go 

8 

DQ 

'a. 

§  £  a  a 
•*  •»  s  s 

00                    G 

b   o   th  d 

COTH«5COt^00050i-4C 

5    CO 

^    «)    CO    s 

tH                        i- 

H     CI     W     W 

NNNNMNNCOMCi 

3    CO 

CO     CO     CO    CO 

FOR   THE   SACRED   BOOKS   OF   THE   EAST. 


445 


•  •••••               • 

•  •••••&»• 

co       • 

p- -a  •   •   ; 

a   *    ; 

«H          •          •          • 

a    '    '    •    i  r    i! 
•    •    •    •        •    « 

uionn    1 

Q     i     1 

•      #"••• 

-*A  :  "^  :  ^  :  : 

•    •        •    « 

«-    • 

3  ^  :  : 

•a  ju     •     •     •    ->    •     • 

>  :  y  :  . 

t-   .     « 

■)->:: 

•  •     •  •  <<  •  ■ 

?  '■ 

.  -n;; 

N*    .     . 

50  !£  :  : 

•  •     •        • 

ia- 

:     *  :i  : 

':»* 

ts3 

lo  to  fr  &  &  *     • 

•    IX 

jy  F  r  * 

1  tr    ". 

I     -   Br  -P   |? 

•  •••••• 

•  ••••••p 

•  •••••• 

5      * 

»          •          •          •          • 

"•*    3S    ^    !§     8       •     «• 

.     .     .     .    s 

**    •     • 

'     •     •    S   ^ 

I 

.a 

3 


pd    J3 


p. -a*  3 


a  *  J  ^ 


03        W 


09 

Q 


■8 

Hi 


•§. 


03 
'3 

* 

2 

£ 

§ 

CO 

Oi 

o 

CO 

CO 

^ 

i-H     W 


CO    rH 


ft 


«   .2 

H  &  go 


a 


oq  qj 

-S  ^  IP 

'fa  *    §  £ 

•£,  C  .2 


OOQOHWCOTfi«5(OS0005 


446 


TRANSLITERATION   OF   ORIENTAL   ALPHABETS. 


6 

V 

.9 

JCti 

..                                                ^.                .                .        .        .        . 

•  03     <c«     —     on        .        .        •        •      3     <s      <1J     <v     <cg        „       •      O        •     ^ 

•  ..••                                  '5      •••••• 

:3       * 

i 

Jo 

I-  : 

:  j,  M.,|.  :  :  :  :  |,.„  |,  |,  :  :  :  |^  :  :  :  :  : 

o 

2 
< 

:  ,|  ^  |,  lj.  :  :  :  :.|^  :  ^  :  :  :  :.^  :  : :  :  : 

a 

.2 

1 

.  :  »i  ii  |,  y, :  :  :  :.|^  :  -^  :  :  :  :;j.  :  :  :  : 

•       ;£                          .                          .                         ••••                           

c§  !a  *    •  o ^    .  0  ....  ^    ....    . 

g 

....           So/  ...           ^    .    .    .    . 
'    •  *  3  i  **  •    •    •    •  ~  *s*C  •   •    '    :^-*^  ;    ;    ;    • 

.     .   ^    -*               ....             ^9     •     •     '             a     •     •     •     " 
.     .                         .     .     .     .            to  ^    *     *     "             a>    •     •     •     * 

J3 

in 

;  ip  ^  nriwr|g?  ^ip  i^^  ^  : ;  ^,rv  :  :  :^^  ;  i  :  • 

W 

m 
< 
S 

0, 

►J 
O 

55 

CO 

43 

'.  -  - 

8 

u 

*S*S ^"S*s    •    •    •  S  § 

Cfl 

0 

o   *u   >o    «  <i  -  •<  s  S  'C  ?    S   <S    »2.aS.»6|,3  £-S-  *  x  s  a 

w 

o 
> 

03 

*r=;                        .2 

Si 

I    i 

1      c 
3    c 

4              °     '  ^ 

rS                                    *           *       !S 

ctf                                  ••>*                                  . 

.2      08      &•                      *            »S 

•      e3 

+3 

.SrtP        *       *   '£      bD     P        E       2       _ 

'           '           '                              J3  _§    s               2    S    3 

c3 

•  -1  "-3   fe   ?  •§   &  .2   *  '£   8>  .a   *  3        *>           '-3        *           1  1 

:|iMsj §| fJJ 1  |1     1      1     1      * 

«    ?«  ^  3        ^  >S  ^  ,2    ro        ^oph.g              •?     *   e              .  3  * 
s    o         ^         .»         i2         a          «          o      *  _g                o      "    2               'S   .2 

*■•      C               fl               °3               e3               3             "^               3              -*f        *       *     3              ■+»        •»       «     «      c 

HNW^«5»N00OOH(NW^«5ON000}OHNM^« 

,-HrH,-HT-(,-lT-<r-l,-lrHrH<M<M<M<M<MO 

i  '-a 

-i    _2 
0      o 

«  1 

April  1882. 

BOOKS 

PUBLISHED  FOR  THE  UNIVERSITY  BY 

HENRY    FROWDE, 

AT     THE     OXFORD     UNIVERSITY    PRESS    WAREHOUSE, 
7    PATERNOSTER    ROW,    LONDON. 

ALSO  TO  BE  HAD  AT  THE 

CLARENDON    PRESS    DEPOSITORY,    OXFORD. 


LEXICONS,  GRAMMARS,  &c. 

{See  also  Clarendon  Press  Series  pp.  26,  29.) 

A  Greek-English  Lexicon,  by  Henry  George  Liddell,  D.D., 
and  Robert  Scott,  D.D.  Sixth  Edition,  Revised  and  Augmented, 
1870.  4to.  cloth,  i/.  1 6s. 

A  copious  Greek-English  Vocabulary,  compiled  from  the 
best  authorities.     1850.  241110.  bound,  3s. 

A  Practical  Introduction  to  Greek  Accentuation,  by  H.  W. 

Chandler,  M.A.     Second  Edition,  Revised,     1881.  8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

Etymologicon  Magnum.  Ad  Codd.  MSS.  recensuit  et  notis 
variorum  instruxit  Thomas  Gaisford,  S.T.P.     1848.  fol.  cloth,  il.  12s. 

Suidae  Lexicon.  Ad  Codd.  MSS.  recensuit  Thomas  Gaisford, 
S.T.P.     Tomi  III.     1834.  fol.  cloth,  2L  2s, 

Seheller's  Lexicon  of  the  Latin  Tongue,  with  the  German  ex- 
planations translated  into  English  by  J.  E.  Riddle,  M.A.  1835.  fol. 
cloth,  il,  is, 

A  Latin  Dictionary,  founded  on  Andrews'  edition  of  Freund's 
Latin  Dictionary,  revised,  enlarged,  and  in  great  part  rewritten  by 
Charlton  T.  Lewis,  Ph.D.,  and  Charles  Short,  LL.D.,  Professor  of 
Latin  in  Columbia  College,  New  York.     1879.  4t0*  c^oth  *'•  5S« 

Scriptores  Rei  Metricae.  Edidit  Thomas  Gaisford,  S.T.P. 
Tomi  III.     8vo.  cloth,  15s. 

Sold  separately: 
Hephaestion,  Terentianus  Maurus,  Proclus,  cum  annotationibus,  etc. 
Tomi  II.  10s.         Scriptores  Latini.  5s. 

[a]  b 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


The  Book  of  Hebrew  Hoots,  by  Abu  '1-Walid  Marwan  ibn 
Janah,  otherwise  called  Rabbi  Yonah.  Now  first  edited,  with  an 
Appendix,  by  Ad.  Neubauer.     1875.  4to.  cloth,  2I.  p.  6d. 

A  Treatise  on  the  use  of  the  Tenses  in  Hebrew.    By  S.  R. 

Driver,  M.A.  Second  Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged.  Extra  fcap.  8vo. 
cloth,  7s.  6d. 

Hebrew  Accentuation  of  Psalms,   Proverbs,  and  Job.     By 

William  Wickes,  D.D.     Demy  8vo.  stiff  cover,  5s. 

Thesaurus  Syriacus  :  collegerunt  Quatremere,  Bernstein,  Lors- 
bach,  Arnoldi,  Field :  edidit  R.  Payne  Smith,  S.T.P.R. 
Fasc.  I-V.  1868-79.   sm-  *°1'  eacn>  ^-  Is' 
Vol.  I,  containing  Fasc.  I-V.  sm.  fol.  cloth,  5/.  5s. 

A  Practical  Grammar  of  the  Sanskrit  Language,  arranged 
with  reference  to  the  Classical  Languages  of  Europe,  for  the  use  of 
English  Students,  by  Monier  Williams,  M.A.,  Boden  Professor  of  San- 
skrit.    Fourth  Edition,  1877.     8vo.  cloth,  15$. 

A  Sanskrit-English  Dictionary,  Etymologically  and  Philo- 
logically  arranged,  with  special  reference  to  Greek,  Latin,  German,  Anglo- 
Saxon,  English,  and  other  cognate  Indo-European  Languages.  By  Monier 
Williams,  M.  A.,  Boden  Professor  of  Sanskrit.  1872.  4to.  cloth,  4Z.i4s.6rf. 

Nalopdkhyanam.  Story  of  Nala,  an  Episode  of  the  Maha- 
Bharata :  the  Sanskrit  text,  with  a  copious  Vocabulary,  and  an  im- 
proved version  of  Dean  Milman's  Translation,  by  Monier  Williams,  M.A. 
Second  Edition,  Revised  and  Improved,     1879.  8vo.  cloth ,  15s. 

Sakuntala.  A  Sanskrit  Drama,  in  seven  Acts.  Edited  by 
Monier  Williams,  M.A.     Second  Edition,  1876.   8vo.  clotht  21s. 

An  Anglo-Saxon  Dictionary,  by  the  late  Joseph  Bosworth, 
D.D.,  Professor  of  Anglo-Saxon,  Oxford.   New  edition.   In  the  Press, 

An  Icelandic-English  Dictionary,  based  on  the  MS.  col- 
lections of  the  late  Richard  Cleasby.  Enlarged  and  completed  by 
G.  Vigfiisson.  With  an  Introduction,  and  Life  of  Richard  Cleasby, 
by  G.  Webbe  Dasent,  D.C.L.     1874.  4to.  cloth,  3/.  75. 

A  List  of  English  Words  the  Etymology  of  which  is 

illustrated  by  comparison  with  Icelandic.  Prepared  in  the  form 
of  an  Appendix  to  the  above.     By  W.  W.  Skeat,  M.A.,  stitched,  2s, 

A  Handbook  of  the  Chinese  Language.  Parts  I  and  II, 
Grammar  and  Chrestomathy.  By  James  Summers.  1 863.  8vo.  half 
bound,  ll.  8s. 

Cornish  Drama  (The  Ancient).  Edited  and  translated  by  E. 
Norris,  Esq.,  with  a  Sketch  of  Cornish  Grammar,  an  Ancient  Cornish 
Vocabulary,  etc.     2  vols.  1859.  8vo.  cloth,  ll.  is. 

The  Sketch  of  Cornish  Grammar  separately,  stitched,  2s.  6d. 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


An  Etymological  Dictionary  of  the  English  Language, 

arranged  on  an  Historical  Basis.  By  "W.  W.  Skeat,  M.A.,  Elrington 
and  Bosworth  Professor  of  Anglo-Saxon  in  the  University  of  Cambridge. 
4to.  cloth,  2l.  4s. 

Part  IV.,  completing  the  Work,  10s.  6 d. 

A  Concise  Etymological  Dictionary  of  the  English  Lan- 
guage. By  W.  W.  Skeat,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.  cloth,  5s.  6d. 

GREEK  CLASSICS,  See. 

Aeschyli  quae  supersunt  in  Codice  Laurentiano  quoad  effici 
potuit  et  ad  cognitionem  necesse  est  visum  typis  descripta  edidit 
R.  Merkel.     1861.     Small  folio,  cloth,  1/.  is. 

Aeschylus:  Tragoediae  et  Fragmenta,  ex  recensione  Guil. 
Dindorfli.    Second  Edition,  1851.  8vo.  cloth,  e,s.6d. 

Aeschylus:  Annotationes  Guil.  Dindorfii.  partes  II.  1841, 
8vo.  cloth,  1  os. 

Aeschylus :  Scholia  Graeca,  ex  Codicibus  aucta  et  emendata  a 
Guil.  Dindorfio.     1 851.  8vo.  cloth,  5s. 

Sophocles:  Tragoediae  et  Fragmenta,  ex  recensione  et  cum 
commentariis  Guil.  Dindorfii.  Third  Edition,  2  vols.  i860,  fcap.  8vo, 
cloth,  il.  is. 

Each  Play  separately,  limp,  2s.  6d. 
The  Text  alone,  printed    on    writing  paper,  with   large 

margin,  royal  i6mo.  cloth,  8s. 
The  Text  alone,  square  i6mo.  cloth,  is.6d. 

Each  Play  separately,  limp,  6d.     (See  also  pp.  31,  32.) 

Sophocles :  Tragoediae  et  Fragmenta  cum  Annotatt.  Guil, 
Dindorfii.    Tomi  II.     1849.  8vo.  cloth,  10s. 

The  Text,  Vol.  I.  5s.  6d.     The  Notes,  Vol.  II.  4s.  6d. 
Sophocles:  Scholia  Graeca: 

Vol.  I.  ed.  P.  Elmsley,  A.M.     1825.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 
Vol.  II.  ed.  Guil.  Dindorflus.     1 85 2.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

Euripides:  Tragoediae  et  Fragmenta, ex  recensione  Guil. Din- 
dorfii.   Tomi  II.     1834.  8vo.  cloth,  10s. 

Euripides :  Annotationes  Guil.  Dindorfii.  Partes  II.  1840. 
8vo.  cloth,  10s. 

Euripides:  Scholia  Graeca,  ex  Codicibus  aucta  et  emendata  a 
Guil.  Dindorfio.     Tomi  IV.     1863.  8vo.  cloth,  il.  16s. 

Euripides  :  Alcestis,ex  recensione  Guil.  Dindorfii.  1834.  8vo. 
sewed,  2s.  6d. 

Aristophanes :  Comoediae  et  Fragmenta,  ex  recensione  Guil. 
Dindorfii.    Tomi  II.     1835.  8vo.  cloth,  lis.    (See page  30.) 
B   2 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


Aristophanes:  Annotationes  Guil.  Dindorfii.    Partes  II.  1837. 
8vo.  cloth,  lis. 

Aristophanes :  Scholia  Graeca,  ex  Codicibus  aucta  et  emendata 
a  Guil.  Dindorfio.     Partes  III.     1839.  8vo.  cloth,  1/. 

Aristophanem,  Index  in:  J.Caravellae.     1822.  8vo.  cloth,  3/. 

Metra  Aeschyli  Sophoclis  Euripidis  et  Aristophanis.    De- 

scripta  a  Guil.  Dindorfio.  Accedit  Chronologia  Scenica.  1 842.  8vo. 
cloth,  5s. 

Anecdota  Graeca  Oxoniensia.  Edidit  J.  A.  Cramer,  S.T.P. 
Tomi  IV.     1835.  8vo.  cloth,  il.  2s. 

Anecdota  Graeca  e  Godd.  MSS.  Bibliothecae  Regiae  Parisien- 
sis.     Edidit  J.  A.  Cramer,  S.T.P.    Tomi  IV.    1839.  8vo.  cloth,  il.  2S. 

Apsinis  et  Longini  Rhetorica.  E  Codicibus  MSS.  recensuit 
Joh.  Bakius.     1849.  8vo.  cloth,  3s. 

Aristoteles;  ex  recensione  Immanuelis  Bekkeri.    Accedunt  In- 
dices Sylburgiani.    Tomi  XI.     1837.  8vo.  cloth,  2/.  10s. 
The  volumes  (except  vol.  IX.)  may  be  had  separately,  price  5s.  6d.  each. 

Aristotelis  Ethica  Kicomaehea,  ex  recensione  Immanuelis 

Bekkeri.     Crown  8vo.  cloth,  5s. 

Choerobosci  Dictata  in  Theodosii  Canones,  necnon  Epimerismi 
in  Psalmos.  E  Codicibus  MSS.  edidit  Thomas  Gaisford,  S.T.P.    Tomi 

III.  1842.  8vo.  cloth,  15s. 

Demosthenes  :  ex  recensione  Guil.  Dindorfii.    Tomi  I.  II.  III. 

IV.  1846.  8vo.  cloth,  il.  is. 

Demosthenes  :  Tomi  V.  VI.  VII.  Annotationes  Interpretum. 
1849.  8vo.  cloth,  15s. 

Demosthenes:  Tomi  VIII.  IX.  Scholia.   1851.  8vo.  cloth,  ioj, 

Harpocrationis  Lexicon,  ex  recensione  G.  Dindorfii.    Tomi 

II.     1854.  8vo.  cloth,  ios.6d. 

Heracliti  Ephesii  Beliquiae.     Recensuit  I.  Bywater,  M.A. 

Appendicis  loco  additae  sunt  Diogenis  Laertii  Vita  Heracliti,  Particulae 
Hippocratei  De  Diaeta  Libri  Primi,  Epistolae  Heracliteae.  1877.  8vo. 
cloth,  price  6s. 

Herculanensium Voluminum Partes II.  1824.  8vo. cloth,  1  o  j. 

Homerus :  Ilias,  cum  brevi  Annotatione  C.  G.  Heynii.  Acce- 
dunt Scholia  minora.     Tomi  II.     1834.  8vo.  cloth,  15s. 

Homerus:  Ilias,  ex  rec.  Guil. Dindorfii.  1856.  8vo.  cloth,  5s.  6d. 

Homerus :  Scholia  Graeca  in  Iliadem.  Edited  by  Prof.  W.  Din- 
dorf,  after  a  new  collation  of  the  Venetian  MSS.  by  D.  B.  Monro, 
M.A.,  Fellow  of  Oriel  College. 

Vols.  I.  II.  1875.   8vo.  cloth,  24s. 

Vols.  III.  IV.  1877.   8vo.  cloth,  26s. 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


Homerus:  Odyssea,  ex  rec.  Guil.  Dindorfii.  1855.  8vo.  cloth, 
55.  6d. 

Homerus :  Scholia  Graeca  in  Odysseam.  Edidit  Guil.  Dindorfius. 
Tomi  II.     1855.  8vo.  cloth,  15s.  6d. 

Homerum,  Index  in :  Seberi.      1780.   8vo.  cloth,  6s.  6d. 

Homer :  A  Complete  Concordance  to  the  Odyssey  and  Hymns 
of  Homer ;  to  which  is  added  a  Concordance  to  the  Parallel  Passages 
in  the  Iliad,  Odyssey,  and  Hymns.  By  Henry  Dunbar,  M.D.,  Member  of 
the  General  Council,  University  of  Edinburgh.    1880.    410.  cloth,  il.  is. 

Oratores  Attici  ex  recensione  Bekkeri : 

I.  Antiphon,  Andocides,  et  Lysias.     1822.  8vo.  cloth,  *js. 

II.  Isocrates.     1822.  8vo.  cloth,  *]s. 

III.  Isaeus,  Aeschines,  Lycurgus,Dinarchus,etc.   1823.  8vo.  cloth,  *js. 

Scholia  Graeca  in  Aeschinem  et  Isocratem.  Edidit  G.  Dindor- 
fius.    1852.  8vo.  cloth,  4s. 

Paroemiographi  Graeci,  quorum  pars  nunc  primum  ex  Codd. 
MSS.  vulgatur.     Edidit  T.Gaisford,  S.T.P.     1836.   8vo.   cloth,  5$.  6d. 

Plato :  The  Apology,  with  a  revised  Text  and  English  Notes, 
and  a  Digest  of  Platonic  Idioms,  by  James  Riddell,  M.A.  1878.  8vo. 
cloth,  8s.  6d. 

Plato :  Philebus,  with  a  revised  Text  and  English  Notes,  by 
Edward  Poste,  M.A.     i860.  8vo.  cloth,  p.  6d. 

Plato :  Sophistes  and  Politieus,  with  a  revised  Text  and  Eng- 
lish Notes,  by  L.  Campbell,  M.A.     1866.  8vo.  cloth,  iSs. 

Plato  :  Theaetetus,  with  a  revised  Text  and  English  Notes,  by 
L.Campbell,  M.A.     1 861.  8vo.  cloth,  gs. 

Plato :  The  Dialogues,  translated  into  English,  with  Analyses 
and  Introductions,  by  B.  Jowett,  M.A.,  Regius  Professor  of  Greek. 
A  new  Edition  in  5  volumes,  medium  8vo.  1875.  cloth,  3Z.  10s. 

Plato  :  The  Republic,  translated  into  English,  with  an  Analysis 
and  Introduction,  by  B.  Jowett,  M.A.    Medium  8vo.  cloth,  I2s.6d. 

Plato :  Index  to.  Compiled  for  the  Second  Edition  of  Professor 
Jowett's  Translation  of  the  Dialogues.  By  Evelyn  Abbott,  M.A.  1875. 
8vo.  paper  covers,  2s.6d, 

Plotinus.    Edidit  F.  Creuzer.    Tomi  III.     1835.  4to.  1/.  8j. 

Stobaei  Florilegium.  Ad  MSS.fidem  emendavit  et  supplevit 
T.  Gaisford,  S.T.P.     Tomi  IV.     1822.  8vo.  cloth,  1/. 

Stobaei  Eclogarum  Physicarum  et  Ethicarum  libri  duo.    Ac- 
cedit  Hieroclis  Commentarius  in  aurea  carmina  Pythagoreorum.     Ad 
MSS. Codd. recensuit T.Gaisford, S.T.P.  Tomill.  1850.  Zvo. cloth, us. 
B3 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


Thucydides  :  Translated  into  English,  with  Introduction,  Mar- 
ginal Analysis,  Notes,  and  Indices.  By  B.  Jowett,  M.A.,  Regius  Pro- 
fessor of  Greek.     2  vols.  1881.  Medium  8vo.  cloth,  i/.  12s. 

Xenophon :  Historia  Graeca,  ex  recensione  et  cum  annotatio- 
nibus  L.  Dindorfii.     Second  Edition,  1852.  8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

Xenophon:  Expeditio  Gyri,  ex  rec.  et  cum  annotatt.  L.  Din- 
dorfii.   Second  Edition,  1855.  8vo.  cloth,  10s,  6d. 

Xenophon :  Institutio  Gyri,  ex  rec.  et  cum  annotatt.  L.  Din- 
dorfii.    1857.  8vo.  cloth,  ios.6d. 

Xenophon :  Memorabilia  Socratis,  ex  rec.  et  cum  annotatt.  L. 
Dindorfii.     1862.  8vo.  cloth,  7s.  6d. 

Xenophon :  Opuscula  Politica  Equestria  et  Venatica  cum  Arri- 
ani  Libello  de  Venatione,  ex  rec.  et  cum  annotatt.  L.  Dindorfii.  1866. 
8vo.  cloth,  1  os.  6d. 


THE  HOLY  SCRIPTURES,  &c. 

The  Holy  Bible  in  the  earliest  English  Versions,  made  from  the 
Latin  Vulgate  by  John  Wycliffe  and  his  followers :  edited  by  the  Rev. 
J.  Forshall  and  Sir  F.  Madden.  4  vols.  1850.  royal  4to.  cloth,  3/.  3s. 

Also  reprinted  from  the  above,  with  Introduction  and  Glossary 
by  W.  W.  Skeat,  M.A., 

The  "New  Testament  in  English,  according  to  the  Version  by 
John  Wycliffe,  about  a.d.  1380,  and  Revised  by  John  Purvey,  about 
a.d.  1388.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  6s. 

The  Books  of  Job,  Psalms,  Proverbs,  Ecelesiastes,  and  the 
Song  of  Solomon:  according  to  the  Wycliffite  Version  made  by 
Nicholas  de  Hereford,  about  a.d.  1381,  and  Revised  by  John  Purvey, 
about  a.d.  1388.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

The  Holy  Bible:  an  exact  reprint,  page  for  page,  of  the  Author- 
ized Version  published  in  the  year  161 1.   Demy  4to.  half  bound,  i7.  is. 

Vetus  Testamentum  Graeee  cum  Variis  Lectionibus.  Edi- 
tionem  a  R.  Holmes,  S.T.P.  inchoatam  continuavit  J.  Parsons,  S.T.B. 
Tomi  V.  1 798-1 82 7.  folio,  7/. 

Vetus  Testamentum  ex  Versione  Septuaginta  Interpretum 
secundum  exemplar  Vaticanum  Romae  editum.  Accedit  potior  varietas 
Codicis  Alexandrini.    Tomi  III.    Editio  Altera.     i8mo.  cloth,   18s. 

Origenis  Hexaplorum  quae  supersunt;  sive,  Veterum  Inter- 
pretum Graecorum  in  totum  Vetus  Testamentum  Fragmenta.  Edidit 
Fridericus  Field,  A.M.     2  vols.  1 867-1 874.  4to.  cloth,  5/.  5s. 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


Libri  Psalmorum  Versio  antiqua  Latina,  cum  Paraphrasi 
Anglo-Saxonica.    Edidit  B.  Thorpe,  F.A.S.     1835.  8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

Libri  Psalmorum  Versio  antiqua  Gallica  e  Cod.  MS.  in  Bibl. 

Bodleiana  adservato,  una  cum  Versione  Metrica  aliisque  Monument  is 
pervetustis.  Nunc  primum  descripsit  et  edidit  Franciscus  Michel,  Phili 
Doct.     i860.  8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

The  Psalms  in  Hebrew  without  points.  1879.  Crown  8 vo, 
cloth,  3s.  6d. 

Libri  Prophetarum  Majorum,  cum  Lamentationibus  Jere- 
miae,  in  Dialecto  Linguae  Aegyptiacae  Memphitica  seu  Coptica.  Edidit 
cum  Versione  Latina  H.Tattam,S.T.P.  Tomi  II.    1852.  Svo.  cloth,  17s. 

Libri  duodecim  Prophetarum  Minorum  in  Ling.  Aegypt. 
vulgo  Coptica.    Edidit  H.  Tattam,  A.M.    1836.  8vo.  cloth,  8s.  6d. 

Novum  Testamentum  Graece.  Antiquissimorum  Codicum 
Textus  in  ordine  parallelo  dispositi.  Accedit  collatio  Codicis  Sinaitici. 
Edidit  E.  H.  Hansell,  S.T.B.  Tomi  III.  1864.  8vo.  half  morocco, 
2I.  12s.  6d. 

Novum  Testamentum  Graece.  Accedunt  parallela  S.  Scrip  - 
turae  loca,  necnon  vetus  capitulorum  notatio  et  canones  Eusebii.  Edidt. 
Carolus  Lloyd,  S.T.P.R., necnon  Episcopus Oxoniensis.  i8mo.  cloth,  3s. 

*he  same  on  writing  paper,  with  large  margin,  cloth,  ios. 

Novum   Testamentum  Graece  juxta  Exemplar  Millianum. 

i8mo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 
The  same  on  writing  paper,  with  large  margin,  cloth,  gs, 

Evangelia  Sacra  Graece.    fcap.  8vo.  limp,  is.  6d. 

The  Greek  Testament,  with  the  Readings  adopt ed  by  the  Re- 
visers of  the  Authorised  Version : — 

(1)  Pica  type.   Second  Edition,  with  Marginal  References.    Demy 

8vo.  cloth,  los.  6d. 

(2)  Long  Primer  type.    Fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

(3)  The  same,  on  writing  paper,  with  wide  margin,  cloth,  15s. 

The  New  Testament  in  Greek  and  English.  Edited  by 
E.  Cardwell,  D.D.     2  vols.  1837.  crown  8vo.  cloth,  6s. 

Novum  Testamentum  Coptice,  cura  D.  Wilkins.  17 16.  4to. 
cloth,  12s.  6d. 

Evangeliorum  Versio  Gothica,  cum  Interpr.  et  Annott.  E. 
Benzelii.  Edidit,  et  Gram.  Goth,  praemisit,  E.  Lye,  A.M.  1759.  4to. 
cloth,  1 25.  6d. 

Diatessaron ;  sive  Historia  Jesu  Christi  ex  ipsis  Evangelistarum 
verbis  apte  dispositis confecta.   Ed.  J.White.  1856.  1 2mo.  cloth,  3s.  6rf. 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


Canon  Muratorianus :  the  earliest  Catalogue  of  the  Books  of 

the  New  Testament.  Edited  with  Notes  and  a  Facsimile  of  the  MS.  in 
the  Ambrosian  Library  at  Milan,  by  S.P.  Tregelles,  LL.D.  1868.  4to. 
cloth,  1  os.  6d. 

The  Book  of  Tobit.  A  Ghaldee  Text,  from  a  unique  MS.  in 
the  Bodleian  Library;  with  other  Rabbinical  Texts,  English  Trans- 
lations, and  the  Itala.  Edited  by  Ad.  Neubauer,  M.A.  1878.  Crown 
8vo.  cloth,  6s. 

A  Commentary  on  the  Book  of  Proverbs.  Attributed  to 
Abraham  Ibn  Ezra.  Edited  from  a  Manuscript  in  the  Bodleian  Library 
by  S.  R.  Driver,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.  paper  cover,  3s.  6d. 

The  Book  of  Wisdom  :  the  Greek  Text,  the  Latin  Vulgate, 
and  the  Authorised  English  Version;  with  an  Introduction,  Critical 
Apparatus,  and  a  Commentary.  By  William  J.  Deane,  M.A.,  Oriel 
College,  Oxford;  Rector  of  Ashen,  Essex.    Small  4to.  cloth,  12s.  6d. 

The  Five  Books  of  Maccabees,  in  English,  with  Notes  and 
Illustrations  by  Henry  Cotton,  D.C.L.     1833.  8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

Horae  Hebraicae  et  Talmudicae,  a  J.  Lightfoot.  A  new 
Edition,  by  R.  Gandell,  M.A.     4  vols.  1859.  8vo.  cloth,  1/.  is. 

FATHERS  OF  THE  CHURCH,  &c. 

St.  Athanasius :  Orations  against  the  Arians.  With  an  Account 
of  his  Life  by  William  Bright,  D.D.    1873.    Crown  8vo.  cloth,  gs. 

St.  Athanasius :  Historical  Writings,  according  to  the  Benedic- 
tine Text.  With  an  Introduction  by  William  Bright,  D.D.,  Regius  Pro- 
fessor of  Ecclesiastical  History,  Oxford.  1881.  Crown  8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

St.  Augustine:  Select  Anti-Pelagian  Treatises,  and  the  Acts 
of  the  Second  Council  of  Orange.  With  an  Introduction  by  William 
Bright,  D.D.     Crown  8vo.  cloth,  gs. 

The  Canons  of  the  First  Four  General  Councils  of  Nicaea, 

Constantinople, Ephesus, and  Chalcedon.  1877.  Crown  8vo.  cloth,  2s.6d. 

Notes  on  the  Canons  of  the  First  Four  General  Councils. 

By  William  Bright,  D.D.     1882.  Crown  8vo.  cloth,  5s.  6d. 

Catenae  Graecorum  Patrum  in  Novum  Test  amentum.  Edidit 
J.  A.  Cramer,  S.T.P.     Tomi  VIII.     1838-1844.  8vo.  cloth,  2/.  4s. 

dementis  Alexandrini  Opera,  ex  recensione  Guil.  Dindorfii. 
Tomi  IV.     1869.  8vo.  cloth,  3/. 

Cyrilli  Archiepiscopi  Alexandrini  in  XII  Prophetas.  Edidit 
P.  E.  Pusey,  A.M.    Tomi  II.     1868.  8vo.  cloth,  2/.  2s. 

Cyrilli  Archiepiscopi  Alexandrini  in  D.  Joannis  Evangelium. 
Accedunt  FragmentaVarianecnonTractatus  adTiberium  Diaconum  Duo. 
Edidit  post  Aubertum  P.  E. Pusey,  A.M.   Tomi  III.    1872.  8vo.  2/.  5s. 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


Cyrilli  Archiepiscopi  Alexandrini  Commentarii  in  Lucae  Evan- 

gelium  quae  supersunt  Syriace.     E  MSS.  apud  Mus.  Britan.  edidit  R. 
Payne  Smith,  A.M.    1858.     4to.  cloth,  ll.  2s. 

The  same,  translated  by  R.  Payne  Smith,  M.A.  2  vols.  1859. 
8vo.  cloth,  14s. 

Ephraemi  Syri,  Rabulae  Episcopi  Edesseni,  Balaei,  aliorumque 
Opera  Selecta.  E  Codd.  Syriacis  MSS.  in  Museo  Britannico  et  Biblio- 
theca  Bodleiana  asservatis  primus  edidit  J.  J.  Overbeck.  1865.  8vo. 
cloth,  ll.  is. 

Eusebii  Pamphili  Evangelicae  Praeparationis  Libri  XV.  Ad 
Codd.  MSS.  recensuit  T.  Gaisford,  S.T.P.  Tomi  IV.  1843.  8vo. 
cloth,  ll.  1  os. 

Eusebii  Pamphili  Evangelicae  Demonstrationis  Libri  X.  Re- 
censuit T.  Gaisford,  S.T.P.    Tomi  II.     1852.  8vo.  cloth,  15s. 

Eusebii  Pamphili  contra  Hieroclem  et  Marcellum  Libri.  Re- 
censuit T.  Gaisford,  S.T.P.     1852.  8vo.  cloth,  7s. 

Eusebius*  Ecclesiastical  History,  according  to  the  text  of 
Burton,  with  an  Introduction  by  William  Bright,  D.D.  1872.  Crown 
8vo.  cloth,  8s.  6d. 

Eusebii  Pamphili   Hist.  Eccl. :    Annotationes  Variorum. 

Tomi  II.     1842.  8vo.  cloth,  17s. 

Evagrii  Historia  Ecclesiastica,  ex  recensione  H.Valesii.  1844. 
8vo.  cloth,  4s. 

Irenaeus:  The  Third  Book  of  St.  Irenaeus,  Bishop  of  Lyons, 
against  Heresies.  With  short  Notes  and  a  Glossary  by  H.  Deane,  B.D., 
Fellow  of  St.  John's  College,  Oxford.  1874.  Crown  8vo.  cloth,  5s.  6d. 

Origenis  Philosophumena ;  sive  omnium  Haeresium  Refutatio, 
e  Codice  Parisino  nunc  primum  edidit  Emmanuel  Miller.  1851.  8vo. 
cloth,  I  os. 

Patrum  Apostolicorum,  S.  Clementis  Romani,  S.  Ignatii,  S* 
Polycarpi,  quae  supersunt.  Edidit  Guil.  Jacobson,  S.T.P.R.  Tomi  II. 
Fourth  Edition,  1863.  8vo.  cloth,  ll.  is. 

Reliquiae  Sacrae  secundi  tertiique  saeculi.  Recensuit  M.  J. 
Routh,  S.T.P.    Tomi  V.  Second  Edition,  1 846-1 848. 8vo.  cloth,  ll.  5s. 

Scriptorum  Ecclesiasticorum  Opuscula.  Recensuit  M.  J. 
Routh,  S.T.P.     Tomi  II.     Third  Edition,  1858.  8vo.  cloth,  10s. 

Socratis  Scholastici  Historia  Ecclesiastica.  Gr.  et  Lat.  Edidit 
R.  Hussey,  S.T.B.    Tomi  III.     1853.  8vo.  cloth,  15s. 

Socrates'  Ecclesiastical  History?  according  to  the  Text  of 
Hussey,  with  an  Introduction  by  William  Bright,  D.D.  1878.  Crown 
8vo.  cloth,  'js.  6d. 


io  Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


Sozomeni  Historia  Ecclesiastica.  Edidit  R.  Hussey,  S.T.B. 
Tomi  III.     1859.  8vo.  cloth,  15s. 

Theodoreti  Ecclesiasticae  Historiae  Libri  V.  Recensuit  T. 
Gaisford,  S.T.P.     1854.  8vo.  cloth,  7s.  6d. 

Theodoreti  Graecarum  Affectionum  Curatio.  Ad  Codices  MSS. 
recensuit  T.  Gaisford,  S.T.P.     1839.  8vo.  cloth,  p.  6d. 

Bowling  (J.G.).  Notitia  Scriptorum  SS.  Patrum  aliorumque  vet. 
Eccles.  Mon.  quae  in  Collectionibus  Anecdotorum  post  annum  Christi 
mdcc.  in  lucem  editis  continentur.     1839.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

ECCLESIASTICAL  HISTORY,  BIOGRAPHY,  &c. 

Liturgies,  Eastern  and  Western.  Edited,  with  Introduction, 
Notes,  and  a  Liturgical  Glossary,  by  C.  E.  Hammond,  M.A.  1878. 
Crown  8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

An  Appendix  to  the  above.    1879.   Crown  8vo.  paper  covers,  is.  6d. 

Monumenta  Ritualia  Ecclesiae  Anglicanae.    The  occasional 

Offices  of  the  Church  of  England  according  to  the  old  use  of  Salisbury,  the 
Prymer  in  English,  and  other  prayers  and  forms,  with  dissertations  and 
notes.  By  William  Maskell,  M.A.  Second  Edition.  3  vols.  8vo.  cloth, 
2!.  1  OS. 

The  Ancient  Liturgy  of  the  Church  of  England,  according 
to  the  uses  of  Sarum,  York,  Hereford,  and  Bangor,  and  the  Roman 
Liturgy  arranged  in  parallel  columns,  with  preface  and  notes.  By 
William  Maskell,  M.A.     Third  Edition.     8vo.  cloth,  15s. 

Baedae  Historia  Ecclesiastica.  Edited,  with  English  Notes, 
by  G.  H.  Moberly,  M.A.  1881.  crown  8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

Bingham's  Antiquities  of  the  Christian  Church,  and  other 
Works.    10  vols.    1855.   8vo.  cloth,  3/.  3s. 

Bright  (W.,  D.D.).  Chapters  of  Early  English  Church  History. 
1878.  8vo.  cloth,  12s. 

Burnet's  History  of  the  Reformation  of  the  Church  of  Eng- 
land. A  new  Edition.  Carefully  revised,  and  the  Records  collated 
with  the  originals,  by  N.Pocock,  M.A.     7  vols.  1865.  8vo.  4/.  4s. 

Burnet's  Life  of  Sir  M.  Hale,  and  Fell's  Life  of  Dr.  Hammond. 
1856.  small  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

Cardwell's  Two  Books  of  Common  Prayer,  set  forth  by 
authority  in  the  Reign  of  King  Edward  VI,  compared  with  each  other, 
Third  Edition,  1852.  8vo.  cloth,  7s. 

Cardwell's  Documentary  Annals  of  the  Reformed  Church  of 
England;  being  a  Collection  of  Injunctions,  Declarations,  Orders,  Arti- 
cles of  Inquiry,  &c.  from  1546  to  1716.  2  vols.  1843.  8vo.  cloth,  iSs. 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford.  n 


Cardwell's  History  of  Conferences  on  the  Book  of  Common 
Prayer  from  155 1  to  1690.     Third  Edition,  1849.  8vo.  ff'°'&»  *js.6d. 

Councils  and  Ecclesiastical  Documents  relating  to  Great 
Britain  and  Ireland.  Edited,  after  Spelman  and  Wilkins,  by  A.  W. 
Haddan,  B.D.,  and  W.  Stubbs,  M.A.,  Regius  Professor  of  Modern 
History,  Oxford.  Vols.  I.  and  III.  1869-71.  Medium  8vo.  cloth, 
each  1/.  is. 

Vol.  II.  Part  I.  1873.  Medium  8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d. 
Vol.11.  Part  II.  1878.  Church  of  Ireland ;  Memorials  of  St.  Patrick* 
stiff" covers,  3s.  6d. 

Formularies  of  Faith  set  forth  by  the  King's  Authority  during 
the  Reign  of  Henry  VIII.     1856.  8vo.  cloth,  7s. 

Fuller's  Church  History  of  Britain.  Edited  by  J.  S.  Brewer, 
M.A.     6  vols.  1845.  8vo.  cloth,  il.  19s. 

Gibson's  Synodus  Anglicana.  Edited  by  E.  Cardwell,  D.D. 
1854.  8vo.  cloth,  6s, 

Hussey's  Rise  of  the  Papal  Power  traced  in  three  Lectures. 
Second  Edition,  1863.  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

Inett's  Origines  Anglicanae  (in  continuation  of  Stillingfleet). 
Edited  by  J.  Griffiths,  M.A.     3  vols.  1855.  8vo.  cloth,  15s. 

John,  Bishop  of  Ephesus.  The  Third  Part  of  his  Ecclesias- 
tical History.  [In  Syriac]  Now  first  edited  by  William  Cureton, 
M.A.     1853.  4to.  cloth,  il.  12s. 

The  same,  translated  by  R.  Payne  Smith,  M.A.  i860.  8vo. 
cloth,  I  os. 

Knight's  Life  of  Dean  Golet.    1823.  8vo.  cloth,  7s,  6d. 

Le  Neve's  Fasti  Ecclesiae  Anglicanae.  Corrected  and  continued 
from  1 715  to  1853  by  T.DufFus  Hardy.  3  vols.  1854.  Svo.  cloth,  il.  is. 

The  Liturgy  and  Ritual  of  the  Celtic  Church.    By  F.  E. 

Warren,  B.D.,  Fellow  of  St.  John's  College,  Oxford.     8vo.  cloth,  14s. 

The  Iieofrie  Missal.  Edited  by  F.  E.  Warren,  B.D.,  Fellow  of 
St.  John's  College,  Oxford.     In  the  Press. 

Noelli  (A.)  Catechismus  sive  prima  institutio  disciplinaque 
Pietatis  Christianae  Latine  explicata.  Editio  nova  cura  Guil.  Jacobson, 
A.M.     1844.  8vo.  cloth,  e>s.6d. 

Prideaux's  Connection  of  Sacred  and  Profane  History.    2  vols 
1 85 1.  8vo.  cloth,  ios. 

Primers  put  forth  in  the  Reign  of  Henry  VIII.  1848.  8vo. 
cloth,  5s. 

B3 


12  Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


Records  of  the  Reformation.  The  Divorce,  1527 — 1533. 
Mostly  now  for  the  first  time  printed  from  MSS.  in  the  British  Museum 
and  other  Libraries.  Collected  and  arranged  by  N.  Pocock,  M.A. 
1870.    2  vols.  8vo.  cloth \  1/.  1 6s. 

Reformatio  Legum  Bcclesiasticarum.  The  Reformation  of 
Ecclesiastical  Laws,  as  attempted  in  the  reigns  of  Henry  VIII,  Edward 
VI,  and  Elizabeth.  Edited  by  E.  Cardwell,  D.D.  1850.  8vo.  cloth, 
6s.  6d. 

Shirley's  (W.  W.)  Some  Account  of  the  Church  in  the  Apostolic 
Age.     Second  Edition,  1874.  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

Shuckford's  Sacred  and  Profane  History  connected  (in  con- 
tinuation of  Prideaux).     2  vols.  1848.  8vo.  cloth,  10s. 

Stillingfleet's  Origines  Britannicae,  with  Lloyd's  Historical 
Account  of  Church  Government.  Edited  by  T.  P.  Pantin,  M.A.  2  vols. 
1842.  8vo.  cloth,  10s. 

Stubbs  (W.),  Registrum  Sacrum  Anglicanum.  An  attempt 
to  exhibit  the  course  of  Episcopal  Succession  in  England.  1858.  small 
4to.  cloth,  8s.  6d, 

Strype's  Memorials  of  Cranmer.     2  vols.  1840.  8vo.  cloth,  in, 
Life  of  Parker.     3  vols.  1828.  8vo.  cloth,  16s.  6d. 
Life  of  Whitgift.     3  vols.  1822.  8vo.  cloth,  i6j.  6d. 
Life  of  Aylmer.     1820.  8vo.  cloth,  5s.  6d. 
Life  of  Cheke.     1821.  8vo.  cloth,  $s.  6d, 
General  Index.     2  vols.  1828.  8vo.  cloth,  us, 

Sylloge  Confessionum  sub  tempus  Reformandae  Ecclesiae  edi- 
tarum.  Subjiciuntur  Catechismus  Heidelbergensis  et  Canones  Synodi 
Dordrechtanae.    1827.  8vo.  cloth,  8s. 

ENGLISH  THEOLOGY. 

Beveridge's  Discourse  upon  the  XXXIX  Articles.  The  third 
complete  Edition,  1847.  8vo.  cloth,  8s. 

Bilson  on  the  Perpetual  Government  of  Christ's  Church,  with  a 
Biographical  Notice  by  R.Eden,  M.A.     1842.  8vo.  cloth,  4s. 

Biscoe's  Boyle  Lectures  on  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  T840.  8vo. 
cloth,  9s.  6d. 

Bull's  Works,  with  Nelson's  Life.  Edited  by  E.  Burton,  D.D. 
A  new  Edition,  1846.    8  vols.  8vo.  cloth,  2/.  9s. 

Burnet's  Exposition  of  the  XXXIX  Articles.  1845.  8vo.  cloth,  js. 

Burton's  (Edward)  Testimonies  of  the  Ante-Nicene  Fathers  to 
the  Divinity  of  Christ.    Second  Edition,  1829.  8vo.  cloth,  7s. 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford.  13 


Barton's  (Edward)  Testimonies  of  the  Ante-Nicene  Fathers  to 
the  Doctrine  of  the  Trinity  and  of  the  Divinity  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
1831.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

Butler's  Works,  with  an  Index  to  the  Analogy.  2  vols.  1874. 
8vo.  cloth,  lis. 

Butler's  Sermons.    8vo.  cloth,  5s.  6d. 

Butler's  Analogy  of  Religion.    8vo.  cloth,  5J.  6d. 

Chandler's  Critical  History  of  the  Life  of  David.  1853.  8vo. 
cloth,  8s.  6d. 

Chillingworth's  Works.     3  vols.  1838.  8vo.  cloth,  1l.1s.6d. 

Clergyman's  Instructor.    Sixth  Edition,  1855.  8vo.  cloth,  6s.  6d, 

Comber's  Companion  to  the  Temple ;  or  a  Help  to  Devotion  in 
the  use  of  the  Common  Prayer.     7  vols.  1841.  8vo.  cloth,  ll.  lis.  6d. 

Cranmer's  Works.  Collected  and  arranged  by  H.  Jenkyns, 
M.A.,  Fellow  of  Oriel  College.   4  vols.   1834.  8vo.  cloth,  ll.  10s. 

Enchiridion  Theologicum  Anti-Romanum. 

Vol.  I.     Jeremy  Taylor's  Dissuasive  from  Popery,  and  Treatise  on 

the  Real  Presence.     1852.  8vo.  cloth,  8s. 
Vol.  II.    Barrow  on  the  Supremacy  of  the  Pope,  with  his  Discourse 

on  the  Unity  of  the  Church.     1852.  8vo.  cloth,  7s.  6d. 
Vol.  III.  Tracts  selected  from  Wake,  Patrick,  Stillingfleet,  Clagett, 

and  others.     1 83 7.  8vo.  cloth,  lis. 

[Fell's]  Paraphrase  and  Annotations  on  the  Epistles  of  St.  Paul. 
1852.  8vo.  cloth,  7s. 

Greswell's  Harmonia  Evangelica.  Fifth  Edition,  1856.  8vo. 
cloth,  9s.  6d. 

Greswell's  Prolegomena  ad  Harmoniam  Evangelicam.  1840. 
8vo.  cloth,  gs.  6d. 

Greswell's  Dissertations  on  the  Principles  and  Arrangement 
of  a  Harmony  of  the  Gospels.     5  vols.  1837.  8vo.  cloth,  3/.  3s. 

Hall's  (Bp.)  Works.  A  new  Edition,  by  Philip  Wynter,  D.D. 
10  vols.  1863.  8vo.  cloth,  3/.  3s. 

Hammond's  Paraphrase  and  Annotations  on  the  New  Testa- 
ment.   4  vols.  1845.  8vo.  cloth,  il. 

Hammond's  Paraphrase  on  the  Book  of  Psalms.    2  vols.  1850. 

8vo.  cloth,  1  os. 
Heurtley's  Collection  of  Creeds.    1858.  8vo.  cloth,  6s.  6d. 

Homilies  appointed  to  be  read  in  Churches.  Edited  by  J. 
Griffiths,  M.A.    1859,  8vo.  cloth,  p.6d. 


14  Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


Hooker's  Works,  with  his  Life  by  Walton,  arranged  by  John 
Keble,  M.A.  Sixth  Edition,  1874.  3  vols.  8vo.  cloth,  ll.  lis  Ad, 

Hooker's  Works;  the  text  as  arranged  by  John  Keble,  M.A. 
2  vols.  1875.  8vo.  cloth,  lis. 

Hooper's  (Bp.  George)  Works.     2  vols.  1855.  8vo.  cloth,  $s. 

Jackson's  (Dr.  Thomas)  Works.  12  vols.  1844.  8vo.  cloth, 
31.  6s. 

Jewel's  Works.  Edited  by  R.  W.  Jelf,  D.D.  8  vols.  1847. 
8vo.  cloth,  ll.  10s. 

Patrick's  Theological  Works.    9  vols.  1859.  8vo.  cloth,  1/.  is. 

Pearson's  Exposition  of  the  Greed.  Revised  and  corrected  by 
E.  Burton,  D.D.    Sixth  Edition,  1877.  8vo«  clot^  IOS*  $d. 

Pearson's  Minor  Theological  Works.  Now  first  collected,  with 
a  Memoir  of  the  Author,  Notes,  and  Index,  by  Edward  Churton,  M.A. 
2  vols.  1844.  8vo.  cloth,  10s. 

Sanderson's  Works.  Edited  by  W.  Jacobson,  D.D.  6  vols. 
1854.  8vo.  cloth,  ll.  10s. 

Stanhope's  Paraphrase  and  Comment  upon  the  Epistles  and 
Gospels.     A  new  Edition.     2  vols.  1 85 1.  8vo.  cloth,  10s. 

Stillingfleet's  Origines  Sacrae.    2  vols.  1837.  8vo.  cloth,  qj. 

Stillingfleet's  Rational  Account  of  the  Grounds  of  Protestant 
Religion;  being  a  vindication  of  Abp.  Laud's  Relation  of  a  Conference, 
&c.     2  vols.  1844.  8vo.  cloth,  1  os. 

Wall's  History  of  Infant  Baptism,  with  Gale's  Reflections,  and 
Wall's  Defence.  A  new  Edition,  by  Henry  Cotton,  D.C.L.  2  vols. 
1862.  8vo.  cloth,  ll.  is. 

Waterland's  Works,  with  Life,  by  Bp.  Van  Mildert.  A  new 
Edition,  with  copious  Indexes.    6  vols.   1 85 7.  8vo.  cloth,  2/.  lis. 

Waterland's  Review  of  the  Doctrine  of  the  Eucharist,  with  a 
Preface  by  the  present  Bishop  of  London.  1880.  crown  8vo.  cloth, 
6s.  6d. 

Wheatly's  Illustration  of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer.  A 
new  Edition,  1846.  8vo.  cloth,  5s. 

Wyclif.  A  Catalogue  of  the  Original  Works  of  John  Wyclif,  by 
W.  W.  Shirley,  D.D.     1865.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

Wyclif.  Select  English  Works.  By  T.  Arnold,  M.A.  3  vols. 
1 871.  8vo.  cloth,  2I.  2s. 

Wyclif.  Trialogus.  With  the  Supplement  now  first  edited.  By 
Gotthard  Lechler.     1869.  8vo.  cloth,  14s. 


Clarendon  Press \  Oxford.  15 


ENGLISH  HISTORICAL  AND  DOCUMENTARY 
WORKS. 

British  Barrows,  a  Record  of  the  Examination  of  Sepulchral 
Mounds  in  various  parts  of  England.  By  William  Greenwell,  M.A., 
F.S.A.  Together  with  Description  of  Figures  of  Skulls,  General 
Remarks  on  Prehistoric  Crania,  and  an  Appendix  by  George  Rolleston, 
M.D.,  F.R.S.     1877.   Medium  8vo.  cloth,  25s. 

Two  of  the  Saxon  Chronicles  parallel,  with  Supplementary 
Extracts  from  the  Others.  Edited,  with  Introduction,  Notes,  and  a 
Glossarial  Index,  by  J.  Earle,  M.A.     1865.  8vo.  cloth,  1 6s. 

Magna  Carta,  a  careful  Reprint.  Edited  by  W.  Stubbs,  M.A., 
Regius  Professor  of  Modern  History.     1879.  4t0*  stitched,  is. 

Britton,  a  Treatise  upon  the  Common  Law  of  England,  com- 
posed by  order  of  King  Edward  I.  The  French  Text  carefully  revised, 
with  an  English  Translation,  Introduction,  and  Notes, by  F.  M.  Nichols, 
M.A.     2  vols.  1865.  royal  8vo.  cloth,  il.  1 6s. 

Burnet's  History  of  His  Own  Time,  with  the  suppressed  Pas- 
sages and  Notes.    6  vols.  1833.  8vo.  cloth,  til.  10s. 

Burnet's  History  of  James  II,  with  additional  Notes.  1852. 
8vo.  cloth,  gs.  6d. 

Carte's  Life  of  James  Duke  of  Ormond.  A  new  Edition,  care- 
fully compared  with  the  original  MSS.  6  vols.  1 851.  8vo.  cloth,  il.  5s. 

Clarendon's  (Edw.  Earl  of)  History  of  the  Rebellion  and  Civil 
Wars  in  England.  To  which  are  subjoined  the  Notes  of  Bishop  War- 
burton.     7  vols.  1849.  medium  8vo.  cloth,  til.  10s. 

Clarendon's  (Edw.  Earl  of)  History  of  the  Rebellion  and  Civil 
Wars  in  England.    7  vols.  1839.  i8mo.  cloth,  il.  is. 

Clarendon's  (Edw.  Earl  of)  History  of  the  Rebellion  and  Civil 
Wars  in  England.  Also  His  Life,  written  by  Himself,  in  which  is  in- 
cluded a  Continuation  of  his  History  of  the  Grand  Rebellion.  With 
copious  Indexes.    In  one  volume,  royal  Svo.  1842.  cloth,  il.  2s. 

Clarendon's  (Edw.  Earl  of)  Life,  including  a  Continuation  of 
his  History.     2  vols.  1857.  medium  8vo.  cloth,  il.  2s. 

Calendar  of  the  Clarendon  State  Papers,  preserved  in  the 
Bodleian  Library.     In  three  volumes.     1869-76. 

Vol.1.  From  1523  to  January  1649.   8vo.  cloth, 18s, 
Vol.  II.  From  1649  to  1654.     8vo.  cloth,  16s. 
Vol.  III.    From  1655  to  1657.     8vo*  cloth,  14s. 

Calendar  of  Charters  and  Bolls  preserved  in  the  Bodleian 
Library.     1878.     8vo.  cloth,  l/.  lis.  6d. 


1 6  Clarendon  Press  y  Oxford. 


Freeman's  (E.  A.)  History  of  the  Norman  Conquest  of  England; 
its  Causes  and  Results.     In  Six  Volumes,    8vo.  cloth,  5/.  9s.  6d. 
Vols.  I— II  together,  3rd  edition,  1877.  l7. 16s. 
Vol.  Ill,  2nd  edition,  1874.   iZ.  is. 
Vol.  IV,  and  edition,  1875.   il.  is. 
Vol.  V,  1876.  il.  is. 
Vol.  VI.     Index.     1879.    8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

Freeman  (E.  A.).  The  Reign  of  William  Rufus  and  the  Acces- 
sion of  Henry  the  First.     2  vols.  8vo.  cloth,  il.  1 6s. 

Gascoigne's  Theological  Dictionary  ("  Liber  Veritatum ") : 
Selected  Passages,  illustrating  the  condition  of  Church  and  State,  1403- 
1458.  With  an  Introduction  by  James  E.  Thorold  Rogers,  M.P. 
Small  4to.  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

Lloyd's  Prices  of  Corn  in  Oxford,  1 583-1 830.  8vo.  sewed,  is. 

Iiuttrell's  (Narcissus)  Diary.  A  Brief  Historical  Relation  of 
State  Affairs,  1678-1714.     6  vols.   1857.  8vo.  cloth,  il.  4s. 

Bogers's  History  of  Agriculture  and  Prices  in  England,  a.d. 
1259-1793- 
Vols.  I  and  II  (1 259-1400).    8vo.  cloth,  2I.  2s. 
Vols.  Ill  and  IV  (1401-1582).  8vo.  cloth,  2/.  10s. 

Sprigg's  England's  Recovery ;  being  the  History  of  the  Army 
under  Sir  Thomas  Fairfax.     1854.    8vo.  cloth,  6s. 

Whitelock's  Memorials  of  English  Affairs  from  1625  to  1660. 
4  vols.  1853.  8vo.  cloth,  il.  10s. 

Protests  of  the  Lords,  including  those  which  have  been 
expunged,  from  1624  to  1874;  with  Historical  Introductions.  Edited 
by  James  E.  Thorold  Rogers,  M.A.     1875.    3  vols.  8vo.  cloth,  2I.  2s. 

Enactments  in  Parliament,  specially  concerning  the  Universi- 
ties of  Oxford  and  Cambridge.  Collected  and  arranged  by  J.  GrifBths, 
M.A.     1869.  8vo.  cloth,  12s. 

Ordinances  and  Statutes  [for  Colleges  and  Halls]  framed  or 
approved  by  the  Oxford  University  Commissioners.  1863.  8vo.  cloth, 
125. — Sold  separately  (except  for  Exeter,  All  Souls,  Brasenose,  and 
Corpus),  at  is.  each. 

Statuta  Universitatis  Oxoniensis.    1881.  8vo.  cloth,  51. 

New  Statutes  made  for  the  University  by  the  University  of 
Oxford  Commissioners.     1882.    8vo.  stitched,  is.  6d. 

The  Student's  Handbook  to  the  University  and  Colleges 

of  Oxford.     Sixth  Edition.     1 881.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 
Index  to  "Wills  proved  in  the  Court  of  the  Chancellor  of  the 
University  of  Oxford,  &c.     Compiled  by  J.  Griffiths,  M.A.     1862. 
royal  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

Catalogue  of  Oxford  Graduates  from  1659  to  1850.  1851. 
8vo.  cloth,  p.  6d. 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford.  17 


CHRONOLOGY,  GEOGRAPHY,  &c. 

Clinton's  Fasti  Hellenici.  The  Civil  and  Literary  Chronology 
of  Greece,  from  the  LVIth  to  the  CXXIIIrd  Olympiad.  Third  edition, 
1841.  4to.  cloth,  ll.  14s.  6d. 

Clinton's  Fasti  Hellenici.  The  Civil  and  Literary  Chronology 
of  Greece,  from  the  CXXIVth  Olympiad  to  the  Death  of  Augustus. 
Second  edition,  1 85 1.  4to.  cloth,  ll.  12s. 

Clinton's  Epitome  of  the  Fasti  Hellenici.  185 1.  8vo.  clotht 
6s.  6d. 

Clinton's  Fasti  Romani.  The  Civil  and  Literary  Chronology 
of  Rome  and  Constantinople,  from  the  Death  of  Augustus  to  the  Death 
of  Heraclius.     2  vols.  1845,  1850.  4to.  cloth,  3/.  9s. 

Clinton's  Epitome  of  the  Fasti  Romani.    1854.  8vo.  cloth,  7j. 

Cramer's    Geographical    and    Historical    Description  of  Asia 

Minor.     2  vols.  1832.  8vo.  cloth,  us. 
Cramer's  Map  of  Asia  Minor,  15J. 
Cramer's  Map  of  Ancient  and  Modern  Italy,  on  two  sheets,  1  $s. 

Cramer's  Description  of  Ancient  Greece.  3  vols.  1828.  8vo« 
cloth,  1 6s.  6d. 

Cramer's  Map  of  Ancient  and  Modern  Greece,  on  two  sheets,  1 5 s. 

Greswell's  Fasti  Temporis  Catholici.    1852.  4  vols.  8vo.  cloth, 

2/.  I  OS. 

Greswell's  Tables  to  Fasti,  4to.,  and  Introduction  to  Tables, 

8vo.    1852.  cloth,  15s. 
Greswell's  Origines  Kalendarise  Italieae.  1854.  4  vols.  8vo.  cloth, 

2l.  2S. 

Greswell's  Origines  Kalendarise  Hellenieae.  6  vols.  1862. 
8vo.  cloth,  4/.  4s. 

MATHEMATICS,  PHYSICAL  SCIENCE,  &e. 

Archimedis  quae  supersunt  omnia  cum  Eutocii  commentariis 
ex  recensione  Josephi  Torelli,  cum  nova  versione  Latina.  1792.  fol. 
cloth,  ll.  5s. 

Bradley's  Miscellaneous  Works  and  Correspondence.    "With  an 
Account  of  Harriot's  Astronomical  Papers.     1832.  4to.  cloth,  l*]s. 
Reduction  of  Bradley's  Observations  by  Dr.  Busch.  1838. 4to.  cloth,  3s. 

Astronomical  Observations  made  at  the  University  Obser- 
vatory, Oxford,  under  the  direction  of  C.  Pritchard,  M.A.,  Savilian  Pro- 
fessor of  Astronomy.     No.  1.    1878.  Royal  8vo.  paper  covers,  $s.6d. 


1 8  Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


Treatise  on  Infinitesimal  Calculus.  By  Bartholomew  Price, 
M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of  Natural  Philosophy,  Oxford. 

Vol.  I.  Differential  Calculus.    Second  Edition,  8vo.  clothe  14s.  6d. 
Vol.  II.  Integral  Calculus,   Calculus  of  Variations,  and  Differential 

Equations.     Second  Edition,  1865.  8vo.  cloth,  iSs. 
Vol.  III.  Statics,  including  Attractions;    Dynamics   of   a   Material 

Particle.     Second  Edition,  1868.  8vo.  cloth,  16s. 
Vol.  IV.  Dynamics  of  Material  Systems;  together  with  a  Chapter  on 

Theoretical  Dynamics,  by  W.  F.  Donkin,  M.A.,  F.R.S.     1 862. 

8vo.  cloth,  16s. 

Rigaud's  Correspondence  of  Scientific  Men  of  the  17th  Century, 
with  Table  of  Contents  by  A.  de  Morgan,  and  Index  by  the  Rev.  J. 
Rigaud,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Magdalen  College, Oxford.  2  vols.  1841-1862. 
8vo.  cloth,  1 8s.  6d. 

Daubeny's  Introduction  to  the  Atomic  Theory.  i6mo.  cloth,  6s. 

Vesuvius.  By  John  Phillips,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of 
Geology,  Oxford.     1869.  Crown  8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

Geology  of  Oxford  and  the  Valley  of  the  Thames.  By  the  same 
Author.     1 87 1.   8vo.  cloth,  21s. 

Synopsis  of  the  Pathological  Series  in  the  Oxford  Museum. 
By  H.  W.  Acland,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  1867.  8vo,  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

Thesaurus  Entomologicus  Hopeianus,  or  a  Description  of 
the  rarest  Insects  in  the  Collection  given  to  the  University  by  the 
Rev.  William  Hope.  By  J.  O.  Westwood,  M.A.,  F.L.S.  With  40 
Plates.     1874.     Small  folio,  half  morocco,  7/.  1  as. 

Text-Book  of  Botany,  Morphological  and  Physiological.    By 

Dr.  Julius  Sachs,  Professor  of  Botany  in  the  University  of  Wiirzburg. 
Translated  by  S.  H.  Vines,  M.A.  Royal  8vo.  New  Edition,  in  the 
Press. 

Johannes  Miiller  on  Certain  Variations  in  the  Vocal  Organs 
of  the  Passeres  that  have  hitherto  escaped  notice.  Translated  by 
F.  J.  Bell,  B.A.,  and  edited  with  an  Appendix,  by  A.  H.  Garrod,  M.A,, 
F.R.S.     With  Plates.     1878.     4to.  paper  covers,  p.  6d. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY. 

Ebert's  Bibliographical  Dictionary,  translated  from  the  German. 
4  vols.  1837.  8vo.  cloth,  il.  105. 

Cotton's  List  of  Editions  of  the  Bible  in  English.  Second  Edition, 
corrected  and  enlarged.     1852.  8vo.  cloth,  8s.  6d. 

Cotton's  Typographical  Gazetteer.    183 1.  8vo.  cloth,  12s.  6d. 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford.  19 


Cotton's  Typographical  Gazetteer,  Second  Series.  1866.  8vo. 
cloth,  1 25.  6d. 

Cotton's  Rhemes  and  Doway.  An  attempt  to  shew  what  has 
been  done  by  Roman  Catholics  for  the  diffusion  of  the  Holy  Scriptures 
in  English.     1855.  8vo.  cloth,  9s. 

MISCELLANEOUS. 

&i«ct)ota  <&*otwngta: 

Classical  Series.  Vol.  I.  Part  I.  The  English  Manuscripts 
of  the  Nicomachean  Ethics,  described  in  relation  to  Bekker's 
Manuscripts  and  other  Sources.  By  J.  A.  Stewart,  M.A.,  Classical 
Lecturer,  Christ  Church.     Small  4*0.  3s.  6d. 

Classical  Series.  Vol.  I.  Part  II.  Wonius  Marcellus,  de  Com- 
pendiosa  Doctrina,  Harleian  MS.  2719.  Collated  by  J.  H.  Onions,  M.A., 
Senior  Student  of  Christ  Church.        Just  Ready. 

Semitic  Series.  Vol.  I.  Part  I.  Commentary  on  Ezra  and 
Nehemiah.  By  Rabbi  Saadiah.  Edited  by  H.  J.  Matthews,  M.A., 
Exeter  College,  Oxford.    Just  Ready. 

Aryan  Series.  Vol.  I.  Part  I.  Buddhist  Texts  from  Japan. 
Edited  by  F.  Max  Miiller.    Small  4to.  3s.  6d. 

Mediaeval  and  Modem  Series.  Vol.  I.  Part  I.  Sinonoma  Bar- 
tholomei ;  A  Glossary  from  a  Fourteenth-Century  MS.  in  the  Library 
of  Pembroke  College,  Oxford.  Edited  by  J.  L.  G.  Mowat,  M.A., 
Fellow  of  Pembroke  College.     Just  Ready. 

Bacon's  Novum  Organum.  Edited,  with  English  notes,  by 
G.  W.  Kitchin,  M.A.     1855.  8vo.  cloth,  gs.  6d. 

Bacon's  Novum  Organum.  Translated  by  G.  W.  Kitchin, 
M.A.  1855.  8vo.  cloth,  gs.  6d.     (See  also  p.  38.) 

The  Works  of  George  Berkeley,  D.D.,  formerly  Bishop  of 

Cloyne;  including  many  of  his  writings  hitherto  unpublished.     "With 

Prefaces,  Annotations,  and  an  Account  of  his  Life  and  Philosophy,  by 

Alexander  Campbell  Fraser,  M.A.     4  vols.  1871.   8vo.  cloth,  2/.  18s. 

The  Life,  Letters3  &c.     1  vol.cloth,  16s.     See  also  p.  38. 

Olaf.  Passio  et  Miracula  Beati  Olavi.  Edited  from  a  Twelfth- 
Century  MS.  in  the  Library  of  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford,  with 
an  Introduction  and  Notes,  by  Frederick  Metcalfe,  M.A.  small  4to. 
stiff  cover,  6s. 

The  Logic  of  Hegel;  translated  from  the  Encyclopaedia  of 
the  Philosophical  Sciences.  With  Prolegomena  by  William  Wallace, 
M.A.     1874.  8vo.  cloth,  14s. 

Smith's  "Wealth  of  Nations.  A  new  Edition,  with  Notes, 
by  J.  E.  Thorold  Rogers,  M.A.     2  vols.  1880.  cloth,  21s. 


20  Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


A  Course  of  Lectures  on  Art,  delivered  before  the  University 

of  Oxford    in    Hilary   Term,   1870,    by  John  Ruskin,  M.A.,  Slade 
Professor  of  Fine  Art.     8vo.  cloth,  6s. 

Aspects  of  Poetry ;  being  Lectures  delivered  at  Oxford  by 
John  Campbell  Shairp,  LL.D.,  Professor  of  Poetry,  Oxford.  Crown 
8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

A  Critical  Account  of  the  Drawings  by  Michel  Angelo 

and  Raffaello  in  the  University  Galleries,  Oxford.     By  J.  C.  Robinson, 
F.S.A.     1870.  Crown  8vo.  cloth,  4s. 

Catalogue  of  the  Castellani  Collection  of  Antiquities  in  the 
University  Galleries,  Oxford.  By  W.  S.  W.  Vaux,  M.A.,  F.R.S.  Crown 
8vo.  stiff  cover,  is. 

Sturlunga  Saga,  including  the  Islendinga  Saga  of  Lawman 
Sturla  Thordsson  and  other  works.  Edited  by  Dr.  Gudbrand  Vigftisson. 
In  2  vols.     1878.  8vo.  cloth,  2/.  2s. 

Casauboni  Ephemerides,  cum  praefatione  et  notis  J.  Russell, 
S.T.P.     Tomiil."    1850.  8 vo.  cloth,  i$s. 

The  Ormulum ;  with  the  Notes  and  Glossary  of  Dr.  R.  M.  White. 
Edited  by  Rev.  R.  Holt,  M.A.    1878.  2  vols.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  21s. 

The  Sacred   Books  of  the   East.      Translated  by  various 

Oriental  Scholars,  and  edited  by  F.  Max  Muller. 

Vol.  I.  The  TTpanishads.  Translated  by  F.  Max  Muller. 
Part  I.  The  jOandogya-upanishad,  The  Talavakara-upanishad,  The 
Aitareya-arawyaka,  The  Kaushttaki-brahmaraa-upanishad,  and  The 
Vag'asaneyi-samhita-upanishad.     8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

Vol.  II.  The  Sacred  Laws  of  the  Aryas,  as  taught  in  the 
Schools  of  Apastamba,  Gautama,  Vasish^a,Aand  Baudhayana.  Trans- 
lated by  Prof.  Georg  Buhler.  Part  I,  Apastamba  and  Gautama. 
8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d, 

Vol.  III.  The  Sacred  Books  of  China.  The  Texts  of  Con- 
fucianism. Translated  by  James  Legge.  Part  I.  The  Shu  King,  The 
Religious  portions  of  the  Shih  King,  and  The  Hsiao  King.  8vo.  cloth, 
1 2s.  6d. 

Vol.  IV.  The  Vendidad.  Translated  by  James  Darmesteter. 
8vo.  cloth,  1  os.  6d. 

Vol.  V.  The  Bundahir,  Bahman  Yajt,  and  Shayast-la- 

Shayast.     Pahlavi  Texts,  Part  I.     Translated  by  E.  W.  West.     8vo. 
cloth,  12s.  6d. 

Vols.  VI  and  IX.  The  Qur'an.  Parts  I  and  II.  Trans- 
lated by  Professor  E.  H.  Palmer.     8vo.  cloth,  21s. 

Vol.  VII.  The  Institutes  of  Vishmi.  Translated  by  Pro- 
fessor Julius  Jolly.     8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d» 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford.  21 


Vol.  X.  The  Dhammapada,  translated  by  Professor  F.  Max 
Miiller ;  and  The  Sutta  Nipata,  translated  by  Professor  Fausboll ; 
being  Canonical  Books  of  the  Buddhists.   8vo.  cloth,  ios.  6d. 

Vol.  XI.  The  Mahaparinibbana  Sutta,  The  Tevi^a 
Sutta,  The  Mahasudassana  Sutta,  The  Dhamma-.Kakkappa- 
vattana  Sutta.  Translated  by  T.  W.  Rhys  Davids.  8vo.  cloth,  \os.6d. 


The  following  Volumes  will  be  published  immediately,  viz : — 

Vol.  VIII.  TheBhagavadgita,  Sanatsu^atiya, and  Anugita. 

Translated  by  Kashinath  Trimbak  Telang. 

Vol.  XII.  The  Satapatha-Brahma«a.  Translated  by  Pro- 
fessor Eggeling.     Vol.  I. 

Vol.  XIII.  The  Patimokkha.  Translated  by  T.  W.  Rhys 
Davids.    The  Mahavagga,  Part  I.   Translated  by  Dr.  H.  Oldenberg. 

Vol.  XVI.  The  Yi  King,  with  an  Appendix  on  the  Philosophy 
of  the  Scholars  of  the  Sung  dynasty,  professedly  derived  from  the  Yi. 
Translated  by  James  Legge. 

The  following  Volumes  are  in  the  Press : — 

Vol.  XIV.  The  Sacred  Laws  of  the  Aryas,  as  taught  in  the 
Schools  of  Apastamba,  Gautama,  Vasish^a  and  Baudhayana.  Trans- 
lated by  Professor  Georg  Biihler.    Part  II,  Vasish/^a  and  Baudhayana. 

Vol.  XV.  The  Upanishads.  Part  II.  Translated  by  F.  Max 
Miiller. 

Vol.  XVII.  Mahavagga.  Part  II.  Translated  by  T.  W. 
Rhys  Davids  and  Dr.  H.  Oldenberg. 

Vol.  XVIII.  Da^/istan-i  Dinik,  and  Mainy6-i  Khar</.  Pah- 
lavi  Texts,  Part  II.     Translated  by  E.  W.  West. 

Vol.  XIX.  Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.  Translated  by  Samuel 
Beal. 

Vol.  XX.   Vayu  Pura«a.    Translated  by  Professor  Bhan- 

darkar,  of  Elphinstone  College,  Bombay. 

Vol .XXI.   Saddharma-pu/fc/arika.   Translated  by  P rofessor 

Kern. 


22  Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 

€hmxbmx  jfess  Storm 


The  Delegates  of  the  Clarendon  Press  having  undertaken 
the  publication  of  a  series  of  works,  chiefly  educational,  and 
entitled  the  €luxz\xhaix  |)rm  Sbtxittt  have  published,  or  have 
in  preparation,  the  following. 

Those  to  which  prices  are  attached  are  already  published;  the  others  are  in 
preparation. 

I.    ENGLISH. 

A  First  Reading  Book.  By  Marie  Eichens  of  Berlin;  and 
edited  by  Anne  J.  Clough.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  stiff  covers,  \d. 

Oxford  Beading  Book,  Part  I.  For  Little  Children.  Extra 
fcap.  8vo.  stiff  covers,  6d. 

Oxford  Beading  Book,  Part  II.  For  Junior  Glasses.  Extra 
fcap.  8vo.  stiff  covers,  6d. 

An  Elementary  English  Grammar  and  Exercise  Book. 

By  O.  W.  Tancock,  M.A.,  Head  Master  of  Norwich  School.    Second 
Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  is.  6d. 

An  English  Grammar  and  Beading  Book,  for  Lower  Forms 
in  Classical  Schools.  By  O.  W.  Tancock,  M.A.,  Head  Master  of 
Norwich  School.     Third  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

Typical  Selections  from  the  best  English  Writers,  with  Intro- 
ductory Notices.  Second  Edition.  In  Two  Volumes.  Extra  fcap.  8vo. 
cloth,  3s.  6d.  each. 

Vol.  I.  Latimer  to  Berkeley.         Vol.  II.  Pope  to  Macaulay. 

The  Philology  of  the  English  Tongue.  By  J.  Earle,  M.A., 
formerly  Fellow  of  Oriel  College,  and  Professor  of  Anglo-Saxon,  Oxford. 
Third  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  *js.  6d. 

A  Book  for  the  Beginner  in  Anglo-Saxon.  By  John  Earle, 
M.A.,  Professor  of  Anglo-Saxon,  Oxford.  Second  Edition.  Extra  fcap. 
8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

An  Anglo-Saxon    Beader.      In    Prose    and  Verse.     With 

Grammatical  Introduction,  Notes,  and  Glossary.     By  Henry  Sweet, 
M.A.     Third  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  8s.  6d. 

An  Anglo-Saxon  Primer,  with  Grammar,  Notes,  and  Glossary, 
By  the  same  Editor.     Nearly  Ready. 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford.  23 


Specimens  of  Early  English.  A  New  and  Revised  Edition. 
With  Introduction,  Notes,  and  Glossarial  Index.  By  R.  Morris,  LL.D., 
and  W.  W.  Skeat,  M.A. 

Part  I.     From  Old  English  Homilies  to  King  Horn  (a.d.  1150  to 

a.d.  1300).     Just  Ready. 
Part  II.  From  Robert  of  Gloucester  to  Govver  (a.d.  129810  a.d.  1393). 
Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  7s.  6d. 

Specimens  of  English  Literature,  from  the  '  Ploughmans 
C rede'  to  the  'Shepheardes  Calender*  (a.d.  1394  to  a.d.  1579).  With 
Introduction,  Notes,  and  Glossarial  Index.  By  W.  W.  Skeat,  M.A. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  *js.6d. 

The  Vision  of  William  concerning  Piers  the  Plowman, 

by  William  Langland.  Edited,  with  Notes,  by  W.  W.  Skeat,  M.A. 
Third  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

Chaucer.  The  Prioresses  Tale;  Sir  Thopas;  The  Monkes 
Tale;  The  Clerkes  Tale;  The  Squieres  Tale,  &c.  Edited  by 
W.  W.  Skeat,  M.A.    Second  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

Chaucer.  The  Tale  of  the  Man  of  Lawe ;  The  Pardoneres 
Tale ;  The  Second  Nonnes  Tale ;  The  Chanouns  Yemannes  Tale. 
By  the  same  Editor.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d.     (See  also  p.  24.) 

Old  English  Drama.     Marlowe's  Tragical  History  of  Dr. 

Faustus,  and  Greene's  Honourable  History  of  Friar  Bacon  and  Friar 
Bungay.  Edited  by  A.  W.  Ward,  M.A.,  Professor  of  History  and 
English  Literature  in  Owens  College,  Manchester.  1878.  Extra  fcap. 
8vo.  cloth,  5s.  6 d. 

Marlowe.  Edward  II.  With  Introduction,  Notes,  &c.  By 
O.  W.  Tancock,  M.A.,  Head  Master  of  Norwich  School.  Extra  fcap. 
8vo.  cloth,  3s. 

Shakespeare.  Hamlet.  Edited  by  W.  G.  Clark,  M.A.,  and 
W.  Aklis  Wright,  M.A.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  stiff  covers,  2s. 

Shakespeare.  Select  Plays.  Edited  by  W.  Aldis  Wright,  M.A. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  stiff  covers. 

The  Tempest,  is.  6d.  King  Lear,  is.  6d. 

As  You  Like  It,  is.  6d.  A  Midsummer  Night's  Dream,  is.  6d, 

Julius  Caesar,  2s.  Coriolanus,  2s.  6d. 

Richard  the  Third,  2s.  6d.  Henry  the  Fifth,  2s. 

(For  other  Plays,  see  p.  25.) 

Milton.  Areopagitica.  With  Introduction  and  Notes.  By 
John  W.  Hales,  M.A.,  late  Fellow  of  Christ's  College,  Cambridge. 
Second  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s. 


24  Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


Bunyan.  Holy  War.  Edited  by  E.  Venables,  M.A.  In  the  Press. 
(See  also  p.  25.) 

Locke's  Conduct  of  the  Understanding.  Edited,  with  Intro- 
duction, Notes,  etc.,  by  T.  Fowler,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Logic  in  the 
University  of  Oxford.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s. 

Addison.  Selections  from  Papers  in  the  Spectator.  With 
Notes.  By  T.  Arnold,  M.A.,  University  College.  Second  Edition. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

Burke.  Four  Letters  on  the  Proposals  for  Peace  with  the  Regi- 
cide Directory  of  France.  Edited,  with  Introduction  and  Notes,  by 
E.  J.  Payne,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  5s.     (See  also  p.  25.) 

Also  the  following  in  paper  covers  : — 

Goldsmith.    The  Deserted  Village.    2d. 

Gray.    Elegy,  and  Ode  on  Eton  College.    2d. 

Johnson.  Vanity  of  Human  Wishes.  With  Notes  by  E.  J. 
Payne,  M.A.     4^. 

Keats.  Hyperion,  Book  I.  With  Notes  byW.  T.Arnold,  B.A.  4^. 

Milton.    With  Notes  by  R.  G.  Browne,  M.A. 

Lycidas,  $d.         V Allegro,  3d.         II  Penseroso,  ^d.        Comus,  6d. 
Samson  Agonistes,  6d. 

Parnell.     The  Hermit.  2d. 


A  SEBIES  OP  ENGLISH  CLASSICS, 

Designed  to  meet  the  wants  of  Students  in  English  Literature^ 
by  the  late  Rev.  J.  S.  BREWER,  M.A.,  of  Queen's  College,  Oxford, 
and  Professor  of  English  Literature  at  King's  College,  London. 

1.  Chaucer.   The  Prologue  to  the  Canterbury  Tales;    The 

Knightes  Tale  ;  The  Nonne  Prestes  Tale.  Edited  by  R.  Morris, 
Editor  of  Specimens  of  Early  English,  &c,  &c.  Sixth  Edition.  Extra 
fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d.     (See  also  p.  23.) 

2 .  Spenser's  Faery  Queene.  Books  I  and  1 1.  Designed  chiefly 

for  the  use  of  Schools.    With  Introduction,  Notes,  and  Glossary.    By 

G.  W.  Kitchin,  M.A. 

Book  I.    Eighth  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.6d 
Book  II.     Third  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8  vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford.  25 


3.  Hooker.    Ecclesiastical  Polity,  Book  I.    Edited  by  R.  W. 

Church,  M.A.,  Dean  of  St.  Paul's  ;  formerly  Fellow  of  Oriel  College, 
Oxford.     Second  Edition.     Extra  feap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s. 

4.  Shakespeare.    Select  Plays.    Edited  by  W.  G.  Clark,  M.A., 

Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge ;  and  W.  Aldis  Wright,  M.A., 
Trinity  College,  Cambridge.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  stiff  covers. 

I.  The  Merchant  of  Venice,     is. 

II.  Richard  the  Second,     is.  6d. 

III.  Macbeth,     is.  6d.     (For  other  Plays,  see  p.  23.) 

5.  Bacon. 

I.  Advancement  of  Learning.     Edited  by  W.  Aldis  Wright,  M.A. 
Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo,  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

II.  The  Essays.    With  Introduction  and  Notes.     By  J.  R.  Thursfield, 
M.A.,  Fellow  and  formerly  Tutor  of  Jesus  College,  Oxford. 

6.  Milton.    Poems.    Edited  by  R.  C.  Browne,  M.A.     2  vols. 

Fourth  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  6s.  6d. 

Sold  separately,  Vol.  I.  4s.;  Vol.  II.  3s.    (See  also  p.  24.) 

7.  Dryden.     Select  Poems.    Stanzas  on  the  Death  of  Oliver 

Cromwell ;  Astraea  Redux ;  Annus  Mirabilis  ;  Absalom  and  Achitophel ; 
Religio  Laici;  The  Hind  and  the  Panther.  Edited  by  W.  D.  Christie, 
M.A.     Second  Edition.     Ext.  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6a. 

8.  Bunyan.  The  Pilgrim's  Progress,  Grace  Abounding,  Relation 

of  the  Imprisonment  of  Mr.  John  Bunyan.  Edited,  with  Biographical 
Introduction  and  Notes,  by  E.  Venables,  M.A.  1879.  Extra  fcap. 
8vo.  cloth,  5s. 

9.  Pope.   With  Introduction  and  Notes.    By  Mark  Pattison, 

B.D.,  Rector  of  Lincoln  College,  Oxford. 

I .  Essay  on  Man.     Sixth  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.     is.  6d. 

II.  Satires  and  Epistles.     Third  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.     2s. 

10.  Johnson.  Rasselas;  Lives  of  Pope  and  Dryden.  Edited 
by  Alfred  Milnes,  B.A.  (London),  late  Scholar  of  Lincoln  College, 
Oxford.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

11.  Burke.  Select  Works.  Edited,  with  Introduction  and  Notes, 
by  E.  J.  Payne,  M.A.,  of  Lincoln's  Inn,  Barrister-at-Law,  and  Fellow  of 
University  College,  Oxford. 

I.  Thoughts   on  the  Present  Discontents ;    the  two  Speeches  on 
America.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

II.  Reflections  on  the  French  Revolution.    Second  Edition.    Extra 
fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  5s.     (See  also  p.  24.) 


26  Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


12.  Cowper.    Edited,  with  Life,  Introductions,  and  Notes,  by 
H.  T.  Griffith,  B.A.,  formerly  Scholar  of  Pembroke  College,  Oxford. 

I.  The  Didactic  Poems  of  1782,  with  Selections  from  the  Minor 
Pieces,  a.d.  i 779—1 783.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s. 

II.  The  Task,  with  Tirocinium,  and  Selections  from  the  Minor  Poems, 
a.d.  1 784-1 799.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s. 


II.  LATIN. 

An  Elementary  Latin  Grammar.  By  John  B.  Allen,  M.A., 
Head  Master  of  Perse  Grammar  School,  Cambridge.  Third  Edition, 
Revised  and  Corrected.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

A  First  Latin  Exercise  Book.  By  the  same  Author. 
Third  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

Angliee  Reddenda,  or  Easy  Extracts,  Latin  and  Greek,  for 

Unseen  Translation.     By  C.  S.  Jerram,  M.A.     Second  Edition,  Revised 
and  Enlarged.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

Passages  for  Translation  into  Latin.  For  the  use  of  Pass- 
men and  others.  Selected  by  J.  Y.  Sargent,  M.A.,  Fellow  and  Tutor  of 
Hertford  College,  Oxford.  Fifth  Edition.  Ext.  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

First  Latin  Reader.  By  T.  J.  Nunns,  M.A.  Third  Edition. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s. 

Second  Latin  Header.     In  Preparation. 

Caesar.  The  Commentaries  (for  Schools).  With  Notes  and 
Maps.    By  Charles  E.  Moberly,  M.A. 

Part  I.  The  Gallic  War.  Third  Edition.  Extra  fcap.8vo.  cloth,  4s.6d. 
Part  II.     The  Civil  War.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d. 
The  Civil  War.     Book  I.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s. 

Cicero.  Selection  of  interesting  and  descriptive  passages.  With 
Notes.  By  Henry  Walford,  M.A.  In  three  Parts.  Second  Edition. 
Extra  fcap.  Svo.  cloth,  4s.  6d.     Each  Part  separately,  limp,  is.6d. 

Part  I.       Anecdotes  from  Grecian   and  Roman  History. 

Part  II.     Omens  and  Dreams:  Beauties  of  Nature. 

Part  HI.    Rome's  Rule  of  her  Provinces. 

Cicero.  Selected  Letters  (for  Schools).  With  Notes.  By  the 
late  C.  E.  Prichard,  M.A.,  and  E.  R.  Bernard,  M.A.  Second  Edition. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s. 

Cicero.  Select  Orations  (for  Schools).  With  Notes.  By  J.  R. 
King,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford.  27 


Cornelius  ETepos.  With  Notes.  By  Oscar  Browning,  M.A. 
Second  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

Livy.  Selections  (for  Schools).  With  Notes  and  Maps.  By 
H.  Lee-Warner,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.    In  Parts,  limp,  each  is.  6d. 

Part  I.     The  Caudine  Disaster. 

Part  II.    Hannibal's  Campaign  in  Italy. 

Part  III.  The  Macedonian  War. 

Livy.  Books  V — VII.  With  Introduction  and  Notes.  By 
A.  R.  Cluer,  B.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

Ovid.  Selections  for  the  use  of  Schools.  With  Introductions 
and  Notes,  and  an  Appendix  on  the  Roman  Calendar.  By  W.  Ramsay, 
M.A.  Edited  by  G.  G.  Ramsay,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Humanity,  Glas- 
gow.   Second  Edition.     Ext.  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  5s.  6d. 

Pliny.  Selected  Letters  (for  Schools).  With  Notes.  By 
the  late  C.  E.  Prichard,  M.A.,  and  E.  R.  Bernard,  M.A.  Second  Edition. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s. 

Virgil.    With  Introduction  and  Notes,  by  T.  L.  Papillon,  M.A., 

Fellow  of  New  College,  Oxford.     Nearly  Ready. 


Catulli  Veronensis  Liber.  Iterum  recognovit,  apparatum 
criticum  prolegomena  appendices  addidit,  Robinson  Ellis,  A.M.  1878. 
Demy  8vo.  cloth,  16s. 

A  Commentary  on  Catullus.  By  Robinson  Ellis,  M.A.  1876. 
Demy  8vo.  cloth,  16s. 

Catulli  Veronensis  Carmina  Seleeta,  secundum  recogni- 
tionem  Robinson  Ellis,  A.M.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

Cicero  de  Oratore.    With  Introduction  and  Notes,  by  A.  S. 
Wilkins,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Latin,  Owens  College,  Manchester. 
Book  I.  1879.  8vo.  cloth,  6s.        Book  II.  1881.  8vo.  cloth,  5s. 

Cicero's  Philippic  Orations.  WithNotes.  By  J.  R.  King,  M.A. 
Second  Edition.   1879.    8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

Cicero.  Select  Letters.  With  English  Introductions,  Notes, 
and  Appendices.  By  Albert  Watson,  M.A.  Third  Edition.  1881. 
Demy  8vo.  cloth,  1 8s. 

Cicero.  Select  Letters.  Text.  By  the  same  Editor.  Extra 
fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s. 


28  Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


Cicero  pro  Cluentio.  With  Introduction  and  Notes.  By  W. 
Ramsay,  M.A.  Edited  by  G.  G.  Ramsay,  M.A.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth, 
3s.  6d. 

Horace.  With  a  Commentary.  Volume  I.  The  Odes,  Carmen 
Seculare,  and  Epodes.  By  Edward  C.  Wickham,  M.A.,  Head  Master 
of  Wellington  College.  Second  Edition,    1877.   Demy  Svo.  cloth,  125. 

Horace.     A  reprint  of  the  above,  in  a  size  suitable  for  the  use 

of  Schools.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  $s.  6d. 

Iiivy,  Book  I.  With  Introduction,  Historical  Examination,  and 
Notes.  By  J.  R.  Seeley,  M.A.,  Regius  Professor  of  Modern  History, 
Cambridge.     Second  Edition.     1874.     8vo.  cloth,  6s. 

Ovid.  P.  Ovidii  Nasonis  Ibis.  Ex  Novis  Codicibus  Edidit. 
Scholia  Vetera  Commentarium  cum  Prolegomenis  Appendice  Indice 
addidit,  R.  Ellis,  A.M.     Demy  8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

Persius.  The  Satires.  With  a  Translation  and  Commentary. 
By  John  Conington,  M.A.  Edited  by  Henry  Nettleship,  M.A.  Second 
Edition,     1874.    8vo.  cloth,  *js.  6d. 

Selections  from  the  less  known  Latin  Poets.    By  North 

Pinder,  M.A.     1869.    Demy  8vo.  cloth,  15s. 

Fragments  and  Specimens  of  Early  Latin.  With  Introduc- 
tions and  Notes.  1874.    By  John  Wordsworth,  M.A.     8vo.  cloth,  iSs. 

Tacitus.  The  Annals.  Books  I-VI.  With  Essays  and  Notes, 
Preparing. 

Vergil :  Suggestions  Introductory  to  a  Study  of  the  Aeneid. 
By  H.  Nettleship,  M.A.   8vo.  sewed,  is.  6d, 

Ancient  Lives  of  Vergil ;  with  an  Essay  on  the  Poems  of  Vergil, 
in  connection  with  his  Life  and  Times.  By  H.  Nettleship,  M.A.  8vo. 
sewed,  2s. 

The  Roman  Satura :  its  original  form  in  connection  with  its 
literary  development.     By  H.  Nettleship,  M.A.  8vo.  sewed,  is. 

A  Manual  of  Comparative  Philology.  By  T.  L.  Papillon, 
M.A.,  Fellow  and  Lecturer  of  New  College.  Second  Edition.  Crown 
8vo.  cloth,  6s. 

The  Roman  Poets  of  the  Augustan  Age.  By  William 
Young  Sellar,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Humanity  in  the  University  of 
Edinburgh.     Virgil.     1877.    8vo.  cloth,  14s. 

The  Roman  Poets  of  the  Republic.  By  the  same  Author. 
New  Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged.    1 881.    8vo,  cloth,  14s. 


Clarendon  Press \  Oxford.  29 


III.  GREEK. 

A  Greek  Primer,  for  the  use  of  beginners  in  that  Language. 
By  the  Right  Rev.  Charles  Wordsworth,  D.C.L.,  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews. 
Sixth  Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  is.  6d. 

Graecae  Grammaticae  Rudimenta  in  usum  Scholarum.  Auctore 
Carolo  Wordsworth,  D.C.L.  Nineteenth  Edition,  1877.  i2mo. cloth,  4s. 

A  Greek-English  Lexicon,  abridged  from  Liddell  and  Scott's 
4to.  edition,  chiefly  for  the  use  of  Schools.  Nineteenth  Edition.  Care- 
fully Revised  throughout.     1880.    Square  1 2 mo.  cloth,  *]s.  6d. 

Greek  Verbs,  Irregular  and  Defective;  their  forms,  mean- 
ing, and  quantity ;  embracing  all  the  Tenses  used  by  Greek  writers, 
with  references  to  the  passages  in  which  they  are  found.  By  W.  Veitch, 
Fourth  Edition.     Crown  8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

The  Elements  of  Greek  Accentuation  (for  Schools):  abridged 
from  his  larger  work  by  H.  W.  Chandler,  M.A.,  Waynflete  Professor  of 
Moral  and  Metaphysical  Philosophy,  Oxford.  Ext.  f cap.  8vo.  cloth  ,2s.  6d. 

A  Series  of  Graduated  Greek  Readers; — 

First  Greek  Reader.  By  W.  G.  Rushbrooke,  MX.,  for- 
merly Fellow  of  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge,  Second  Classical 
Master  at  the  City  of  London  School.   Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

Second  Greek  Reader.  By  A.  M .  Bell,  M.A.  Extra  fcap. 
8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

Third  Greek  Reader.    In  Preparation. 

Fourth  Greek  Reader ;  being  Specimens  of  Greek 
Dialects.  With  Introductions  and  Notes.  By  W.  W.  Merry,  M.  A., 
Fellow  and  Lecturer  of  Lincoln  College.  Extra  fcap.  8  vo .  cloth,  4s.  6c?. 

Fifth  Greek  Reader.    Part  I.    Selections  from  Greek  Epic 

and  Dramatic  Poetry,  with  Introductions  and  Notes.     By  Evelyn 
Abbott,M.A., Fellow  of  Balliol College.  Ext.fcap.  8vo.cloth,4s.6d. 
Part  II.     By  the  same  Editor.     In  Preparation. 

The  Golden  Treasury  of  Ancient  Greek  Poetry ;  being  a  Col- 
lection of  the  finest  passages  in  the  Greek  Classic  Poets,  with  Introduc- 
tory Notices  and  Notes.  By  R.  S.  Wright,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Oriel 
College,  Oxford.    Ext.  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  8s.  6d. 

A  Golden  Treasury  of  Greek  Prose,  being  a  collection  of  the 
finest  passages  in  the  principal  Greek  Prose  Writers,  with  Introductory 
Notices  and  Notes.  By  R.  S.  Wright,  M.A.,  and  J.  E.  L.  Shadwell,  M.A. 
Ext.  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d,_ 


30  Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


Aeschylus.  Prometheus  Bound  (for  Schools).  With  Intro- 
duction and  Notes,  by  A.  O.  Prickard,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  New  College. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s. 

Aeschylus.    Agamemnon.     With  Introduction  and  Notes  by 
Arthur  Sidgwick,  M.A.,  Tutor  of  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford ;  late 
Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  and  Assistant  Master  of  Rugby- 
School.     Extra  foarr.  8vo.  cloth,  3s. 

Aeschylus.  The  Choephoroe.  With  Introduction  and  Notes 
by  the  same  Editor.     Preparing. 

Aristophanes.      In  Single  Plays,  edited,  with  English  Notes, 
Introductions,  etc.,  by  W.  W.  Merry,  M.A.    Extra  fcap.  8vo. 
The  Clouds,  2s.  The  Acharnians,  2s. 

Other  Plays  will  follow. 

Arrian.    Selections  (for  Schools).    With  Notes.  By  J.  S.  Phill- 

potts,  B.C.L.,  Head  Master  of  Bedford  School. 
Cebes.     Tabula.     With    Introduction    and  Notes    by  C.  S. 

Jerram,  M.A.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

Euripides.  Alcestis  (for  Schools).  By  C.  S.  Jerram,  M.A. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

Euripides.  Helena.  Edited  with  Introduction,  Notes,  and 
Critical  Appendix,  for  Upper  and  Middle  Forms.  By  C.  S.  Jerram,  M.A. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s. 

Herodotus.  Selections  from.  Edited,  with  Introduction,  Notes, 
and  a  Map,  by  W.  W.  Merry,  M.A.,  Fellow  and  Lecturer  of  Lincoln 
College.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

Homer.    Odyssey,  Books  I— XII  (for  Schools).    By  W.  W. 
Merry,  M.A.    Nineteenth  Thousand.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 
Book  II,  separately,  is.  6d. 

Homer.  Odyssey,  Books  XIII-XXIV  (for  Schools).  By  the 
same  Editor.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  55. 

Homer.    Iliad,  Book  I  (for  Schools).    By  D.  B.  Monro,  M.A. 

Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s. 

Homer.  Iliad,  Books  VI  and  XXI.  With  Introduction  and 
Notes.  By  Herbert  Hailstone,  M.A.,  late  Scholar  of  St.  Peter's  College, 
Cambridge.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  is.  6d.  each. 

Iiucian.  Vera  Historia  (for  Schools).  By  G.  S.  Jerram,  M.A. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  is.  6d. 

Plato.  Selections  (for  Schools).  With  Notes.  By  B.  Jowett, 
M.A.,  Regius  Professor  of  Greek ;  and  J.  Purves,  M.A.,  Fellow  and 
late  Lecturer  of  Balliol  College,  Oxford.    In  the  Press. 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford.  31 


Sophocles.  In  Single  Plays,  with  English  Notes,  &c.  By  Lewis 
Campbell,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Greek  in  the  University  of  St.  Andrew's, 
and  Evelyn  Abbott,  M.A.,  Balliol  College,  Oxford.  Extra  fcap.  8vo. 
limp. 

Oedipus  Tyrannus.    New  and  Revised  Edition.     2s. 

Oedipus  Coloneus,         Antigone,  is.  gd.  each. 

Ajax,  Electra,  Trachiniae,         Philoctetes,  2s.  each. 

Sophocles.  Oedipus  Rex  :  Dindorfs  Text,  with  Notes  by  the 
present  Bishop  of  St.  David's.     Ext.  fcap.  8vo.  limp,  is.  6d. 

Theocritus  (for  Schools).  With  Notes.  By  H.Kynaston,  M.A. 

(late  Snow),  Head  Master  of  Cheltenham  College.      Third  Edition. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

Xenophon.  Easy  Selections  (for  Junior  Classes).  With  a 
Vocabulary,  Notes,  and  Map.  By  J.  S.  Phillpotts,  B.C.L.,  and  C.  S. 
Jerram,  M.A.     Third  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.   cloth,  3s.  6d. 

Xenophon.  Selections  (for  Schools).  With  Notes  and  Maps. 
By  J.  S.  Phillpotts,  B.C.L.,  Head  Master  of  Bedford  School.  Fourth 
Edition.    Ext.  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  $s.6d. 

Xenophon.  Anabasis,  Book  II.  With  Notes  and  Map.  By  C.  S. 
Jerram,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s. 


Aristotle's  Politics.  By  W.  L.  Newman,  M.A.,  Fellow  of 
Balliol  College,  Oxford.     In  Preparation. 

Aristotelian  Studies.  I.  On  the  Structure  of  the  Seventh 
Book  of  the  Nicomachean  Ethics.  By  J.  C.  Wilson,  M.A.,  Fellow  of 
Oriel  College,  Oxford.     1879.     Medium  8vo.  stiff,  5s. 

Demosthenes  and  Aeschines.  The  Orations  of  Demosthenes 
and  iEschines  on  the  Crown.  With  Introductory  Essays  and  Notes. 
By  G.  A.  Simcox,  M,A.,and  W.H.Simcox.M.A.    1872.  8vo.  cloth,  1 2s. 

Homer.  Odyssey,  Books  I-XII.  Edited  with  English  Notes, 
Appendices,  etc.  By  W.  W.  Merry,  M.A.,  and  the  late  James  Riddell, 
M.A.     1876.     Demy  8 vo.  cloth,  1 6s. 

Homer.  Odyssey,  Books  XIII-XXIV.  With  Introduction 
and  Notes.     By  S.  H.  Butcher,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  University  College. 

Homer.  Iliad.  With  Introduction  and  Notes.  By  D.  B. 
Monro,  M.A.,  Vice-Provost  of  Oriel  College,  Oxford.     Preparing. 


32  Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 

A  Homeric  Grammar.    By  D.  B.  Monro,  M.A.    In  the  Press. 

Sophocles.  The  Plays  and  Fragments.  With  English  Notes 
and  Introductions,  by  Lewis  Campbell,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Greek,  St. 
Andrews,  formerly  Fellow  of  Queen's  College,  Oxford.     2  vols. 

Vol.  I.   Oedipus  Tyrannus.    Oedipus  Coloneus.    Antigone.    Second 

Edition.  1879.  8vo.  cloth,  16s. 
Vol.  II.    Ajax.    Electra.    Trachiniae.    Philoctetes.  Fragments.   1881. 
8vo.  cloth,  16s. 

Sophocles.  The  Text  of  the  Seven  Plays.  By  the  same  Editor. 
Ext.  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

A  Manual  of  Greek  Historical  Inscriptions.     By  E.  L. 

Hicks,  M.A.,  formerly  Fellow  and  Tutor  of  Corpus  Christi  College, 
Oxford.     Demy  8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

IV.  FRENCH. 

An  Etymological  Dictionary  of  the  French  Language,  with 
a  Preface  on  the  Principles  of  French  Etymology.  By  A.  Brachet. 
Translated  into  English  by  G.  W.  Kitchin,  M.A.  Second  Edition. 
Crown  8vo.  cloth,  Js.  6d. 

Brachet's  Historical  Grammar  of  the  French  Language. 
Translated  into  English  by  G.  W.  Kitchin,  M.A.  Fourth  Edition, 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

Historical  Outlines  of  French  Literature.  By  George 
Saintsbury,  M.A.     In  the  Press. 

A  Primer  of  French  Literature.  By  the  same  Author.  Extra 
fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s. 

French  Classics,  Edited  by  GUSTAVE  MASSON,  B.A. 

Corneille's  Ginna,  and  Moliere's  Les  Femmes  Savantes.  With 
Introduction  and  Notes.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

Racine's  Andromaque,  and  Corneille's  Le  Menteur.  With 
Louis  Racine's  Life  of  his  Father.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

Moliere's  Les  Fourberies  de  Scapin,  and  Racine's  Athalie. 

With  Voltaire's  Life  of  Moliere.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

Selections  from  the  Correspondence  of  Madame  de  Sevign6 

and  her   chief  Contemporaries.      Intended  more  especially  for  Girls' 
Schools.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s. 

Voyage  autour  de  ma  Ghambre,  by  Xavier  de  Maistre ;  Ourika, 
by  Madame  de  Duras  ;  La  Dot  de  Suzette,  by  Fievee ;  Les  Jumeaux 
de  l'Hotel  Corneille,  by  Edmond  About ;  M&aventures  d'un  ficolier, 
by  Rodolphe  Topffer.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 


Clarendon  Press \  Oxford.  33 


Regnard's    Le    Joueur,    and  Brueys    and    Falaprat's    Le 

Grondeur.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

Louis  XIV  and  his  Contemporaries ;  as  described  in  Extracts 

from  the  best  Memoirs  of  the  Seventeenth  Century.     With  English 
Notes,  Genealogical  Tables,  &c.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 


V.  GERMAN. 

LANGE'S  German  Course.   By  HERMANN  LANGE,  Teacher  of 
Modern  Languages,  Manchester: 

The  Germans  at  Home;  a  Practical  Introduction  to  German 

Conversation,  with  an  Appendix  containing  the  Essentials  of  German 
Grammar.     Second  Edition.     8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

The  German  Manual ;  a  German  Grammar,  a  Reading  Book, 
and  a  Handbook  of  German  Conversation.     8vo.  cloth,  7s.  6d. 

A  Grammar  of  the  German  Language.     8vo.  cloth,  3J.  6d. 

This  *  Grammar*  is  a  reprint  of  the  Grammar  contained  in  *  The  German 
Manual*  and,  in  this  separate  form,  is  intended  for  the  use  of  students 
who  wish  to  make  themselves  acquainted  with  German  Grammar 
chiefly  for  the  purpose  of  being  able  to  read  German  books. 

German  Composition;   Extracts  from  English  and  American 

writers  for  Translation  into  German,  with  Hints  for  Translation  in  foot- 
notes.   In  the  Press, 


Lessing's  Laokoon.  With  Introduction,  English  Notes,  etc. 
By  A.  Hamann,  Phil.  Doc,  M.A.   Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4$.  6d. 

Wilhelm  Tell.      A   Drama.      By   Schiller.      Translated  into 

English  Verse  by  E.  Massie,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  5s. 

Also,  Edited  by  G.  A.  BUCHHEIM,  Phil.  Doc,  Professor  in 
King's  College,  London : 

Goethe's  Egmont.  With  a  Life  of  Goethe,  &c.  Third  Edition, 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s. 

Schiller's  Wilhelm  Tell.  With  a  Life  of  Schiller  ;  an  historical 
and  critical  Introduction,  Arguments,  and  a  complete  Commentary. 
Fourth  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6 d. 

Lessing's  Minna  von  Barnhelm.  A  Comedy.  With  a  Life  of 
Lessing,  Critical  Analysis,  Complete  Commentary,  &c.  Fourth  Edition. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d, 


34  Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


Schiller's  Historische  Skizzen ;  Egmonts  Leben  und  Tod,  and 
Belagerung  von  Antwerpen.  Second  Edition.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth, 
2s.  6d. 

Goethe's  Iphigenie  auf  Tauris.  A  Drama.  With  a  Critical 
Introduction  and  Notes.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s. 

Modern  German  Reader.    A  Graduated  Collection  of  Prose 
Extracts  from  Modern  German  writers : — 
Part  I.     With  English  Notes,  a  Grammatical  Appendix,  and  a  complete 

Vocabulary.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6c?. 
Parts  II  and  III  in  preparation. 

Lessing's  Nathan  der  Weise.  With  Introduction,  Notes,  etc. 
In  the  Press. 

Selection  from  Heine's  Prose  Works.  With  Introduction  and 
Notes.     In  the  Press. 

In  Preparation. 
Schiller's  Maria  Stuart.    With  Notes,  Introduction,  &c. 
Schiller's  Jungfrau  von  Orleans.   With  Notes,  Introduction,  &c. 
Selections  from  the  Poems  of  Schiller  and  Goethe. 
Becker's  (K.  F.)  Friedrich  der  Grosse. 

VI.  MATHEMATICS,  &c. 

Figures  Made  Easy:  a  first  Arithmetic  Book.  (Introductory 
to  'The  Scholar's  Arithmetic.')  By  Lewis  Hensley,  M.A.,  formerly 
Fellow  and  Assistant  Tutor  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.  Crown  8vo. 
cloth,  6d. 

Answers  to  the  Examples  in  Figures  made  Easy,  together 

with  two  thousand  additional  Examples  formed  from  the  Tables  in  the 
same,  with  Answers.     By  the  same  Author.     Crown  Svo.  cloth,  Is. 

The  Scholar's  Arithmetic;  with  Answers  to  the  Examples, 
By  the  same  Author.     Crown  Svo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

The  Scholar's  Algebra.  An  Introductory  work  on  Algebra* 
By  the  same  Author.     Crown  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

Book-keeping.  By  R.  G.  G.  Hamilton,  Financial  Assistant 
Secretary  to  the  Board  of  Trade,  and  John  Ball  (of  the  Firm  of 
Quilter,  Ball,  &  Co.),  Co-Examiners  in  Book-keeping  for  the  Society 
of  Arts.     New  and  enlarged  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  limp  cloth,  2s. 

A  Course  of  Lectures  on  Pure  Geometry.     By  Henry  J. 

Stephen  Smith,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Fellow  of  Corpus  Christi  College,  and 
Savilian  Professor  of  Geometry  in  the  University  of  Oxford. 


Clarendon  Press \  Oxford.  35 


Acoustics.  By  W.  F.  Donkin,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Savilian  Professor 
of  Astronomy,  Oxford.     1870.     Crown  8 vo.  cloth,  Js.  6d. 

A  Treatise  on  Electricity  and  Magnetism.  By  J.  Clerk 
Maxwell,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of  Experimental  Physics  in  the  Uni- 
versity of  Cambridge.  Second  Edition.  2  vols.  Demy  8vo.  cloth, 
1/.  11s.  6d. 

An  Elementary  Treatise  on  Electricity.  By  the  same 
Author.     Edited  by  William  Garnett,  M.A.     Demy  8vo.  cloth,  Js.  6d. 

A  Treatise  on  Statics.  By  G.  M.  Minchin,  M.A.,  Professor  of 
Applied  Mathematics  in  the  Indian  Engineering  College,  Cooper's  Hill. 
Second  Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged.     1879.     8vo.  cloth,  14s. 

A  Treatise  on  the  Kinetic  Theory  of  Gases.     By  Henry 

William  Watson,  M.A.,  formerly  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge. 
1876.  8vo.  cloth,  $s.6d. 

A  Treatise  on  the  Application  of  Generalised  Coordinates 
to  the  Kinetics  of  a  Material  System.  By  H.  W.  Watson,  M.A.,  and 
S.  H.  Burbury,  M.A.    1879.     8vo.  cloth,  6s. 

Geodesy.  By  Colonel  Alexander  Ross  Clarke,  C.B.,  R.E.  1880. 
8vo.  cloth,  12s.  6d. 


VII.  PHYSICAL  SCIENCE. 

A    Handbook    of    Descriptive    Astronomy.      By   G.   F. 

Chambers,  F.R.A.S.     Third  Edition.     1877.     Demy  8vo.  c/o*A,  28s. 

A  Cycle  of  Celestial  Objects.  Observed,  Reduced,  and  Dis- 
cussed by  Admiral  W.  H.  Smyth,  R.N.  Revised,  condensed,  and 
greatly  enlarged  by  G.  F.  Chambers,  F.R.A.S.  1881.   8vo.  cloth,  21s. 

Chemistry  for  Students.  By  A.  W.  Williamson,  Phil.  Doc, 
F.R.S.,  Professor  of  Chemistry,  University  College,  London.  A  new 
Edition,  with  Solutions,     1873.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  8s.  6d. 

A  Treatise  on  Heat,  with  numerous  Woodcuts  and  Diagrams. 
By  Balfour  Stewart,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of  Natural  Philosophy  in 
Owens  College,  Manchester.  Fourth  Edition.  1 88 1.  Extra  fcap.  8 vo. 
cloth,  7*«  6d. 

Lessons  on  Thermodynamics.  By  R.  E.  Baynes,  M.A.,  Senior 
Student  of  Christ  Church,  Oxford,  and  Lee's  Reader  in  Physics.  1878. 
Crown  8vo.  cloth,  7s.  6d. 

Forms  of  Animal  Life.     By  G.  Rolleston,  M.D.,  F.R.S., 

Linacre  Professor  of  Physiology,  Oxford.    Illustrated  by  Descriptions 
and  Drawings  of  Dissections.    A  New  Edition  in  the  Press. 


36  Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


Exercises  in  Practical  Chemistry.  Vol.  I.  Elementary  Exer- 
cises. By  A.  G.  Vernon  Harcourt,  M.A. ;  and  H.  G.  Madan,  M.A. 
Third  Edition.    Revised  by  H.  G.  Madan,  M.A.   Crown  8vo.  cloth,  gs. 

Tables  of  Qualitative  Analysis.  Arranged  by  H.  G.  Madan, 
M.A.     Large  4to.  paper  covers,  4s.  6d. 

Crystallography.  By  M.  H.  N.  Story-Maskelyne,  M.A.,  Pro- 
fessor of  Mineralogy,  Oxford  ;  and  Deputy  Keeper  in  the  Department  of 
Minerals,  British  Museum.     In  the  Press. 

VIII.  HISTORY. 

The  Constitutional  History  of  England,  in  its  Origin  and 
Development.    By  William  Stubbs,  D.D.,  Regius  Professor  of  Modern 
History.     Library  Edition.    Three  vols,  demy  8vo.  cloth,  il.  8s. 
Also  in  3  vols,  crown  8vo.  price  12s.  each. 

Select  Charters  and  other  Illustrations  of  English  Con- 
stitutional History,  from  the  Earliest  Times  to  the  Reign  of  Edward  I. 
Arranged  and  Edited  by  W.  Stubbs,  M.A.  Fourth  Edition.  1881. 
Crown  8vo.  cloth,  8s.  6d. 

A  History  of  England,  principally  in  the  Seventeenth  Century. 
By  Leopold  Von  Ranke.  Translated  by  Resident  Members  of  the 
University  of  Oxford,  under  the  superintendence  of  G.  W.  Kitchin, 
M.A.,  and  C.  W.  Boase,  M.A.     1875.  6  vols.  8vo.  cloth,  3/.  3s. 

A  Short  History  of  the  Norman  Conquest  of  England.    By 

E.  A.  Freeman,  M.A.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

Genealogical  Tables  illustrative  of  Modern  History.    By 

H.  B.  George,  M.A.     Second  Edition.    Small  4to.  cloth,  12s. 

A  History  of  France.  With  numerous  Maps,  Plans,  and 
Tables.  By  G.  W.  Kitchin,  M.A.  In  Three  Volumes.  1873-77. 
Crown  8vo.  cloth,  each  10s.  6d. 

Vol.  I.     Second  Edition.     Down  to  the  Year  1453. 

Vol.  2.     From  1453-1624. 

Vol.  3.     From  1624-1793. 

A  History  of  Germany  and  of  the  Empire,  down  to  the  close 
of  the  Middle  Ages.  By  J.  Bryce,  D.C.L.,  Regius  Professor  of  Civil 
Law  in  the  University  of  Oxford. 

A  History  of  British  India.    By  S.  J.  Owen,  M.A.,  Reader  in 

Indian  History  in  the  University  of  Oxford. 

A  Selection  from  the  Despatches,  Treaties,  and  other  Papers 

of  the  Marquess  Wellesley,  K.G.,  during  his  Government  of  India. 
Edited  by  S.  J.  Owen,  M.A.,  formerly  Professor  of  History  in  the  Elphin- 
stone  College,  Bombay.     1877.  8vo.  cloth,  il.  4s. 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford.  37 


A  Selection  from  the  Despatches,  Treaties,  and  other  Papers 
relating  to  India  of  Field-Marshal  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  K.G.  By 
the  same  Editor.    1 880.  8vo.  cloth,  24s. 

A  History  of  the  United  States  of  America.   By  E.  J.  Payne, 

M.A.,  Barrister-at-Law,  and  Fellow  of  University  College,  Oxford.  In 
the  Press. 

A  History  of  Greece  from  its  Conquest  by  the  Romans  to 
the  present  time,  b.c.  146  to  a.d.  1864.  By  George  Finlay,  LL.D. 
A  new  Edition,  revised  throughout,  and  in  part  re-written,  with  con- 
siderable additions,  by  the  Author,  and  Edited  by  H.  F.  Tozer,  M.A., 
Tutor  and  late  Fellow  of  Exeter  College,  Oxford.  1877.  7  vols. 
8vo.  cloth,  3/.  10s. 

A  Manual  of  Ancient  History.  By  George  Rawlinson,  M.A., 
Camden  Professor  of  Ancient  History,  formerly  Fellow  of  Exeter 
College,  Oxford.     Second  Edition.    Demy  8vo.  cloth,  14s. 

A  History  of  Greece.    By  E.  A.  Freeman,  M.A.,  formerly 

Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Oxford. 

Italy  and  her  Invaders,    a.d.   376-476.    By  T.  Hodgkin, 

Fellow  of  University  College,  London.  Illustrated  with  Plates  and 
Maps.     2  vols.  8vo.  cloth,  il.  12s. 

IX.  LAW. 

The  Elements  of  Jurisprudence.  By  Thomas  Erskine 
Holland,  D.C.L.,  Chichele  Professor  of  International  Law  and  Diplo- 
macy, and  Fellow  of  All  Souls  College,  Oxford.  1880.  Demy  8vo. 
cloth,  1  os.  6d. 

The  Institutes  of  Justinian,  edited  as  a  recension  of  the  Insti- 
tutes of  Gaius.  By  the  same  Editor.  Second  Edition,  1881.  Extra 
fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  5s. 

Gaii  Institutionum  Juris  Civilis  Commentarii  Quatuor ; 

or,  Elements  of  Roman  Law  by  Gaius.  With  a  Translation  and  Com- 
mentary by  Edward  Poste,  M.A.,  Barrister-at-Law,  and  Fellow  of  Oriel 
College,  Oxford.     Second  Edition.    1875.    8vo.  cloth,  18s. 

Select  Titles  from  the  Digest  of  Justinian.  By  T.  E. 
Holland,  D.C.L.,  Chichele  Professor  of  International  Law  and  Diplo- 
macy, and  Fellow  of  All  Souls'  College,  Oxford,  and  C.  L.  Shadwell, 
B.C.L.,  Fellow  of  Oriel  College,  Oxford.     8vo.  cloth,  14s. 

Also  sold  in  Parts,  in  paper  covers,  as  follows  :— • 
Parti.      Introductory  Titles.     2s. 6d. 
Part  II.     Family  Law.     is. 
Part  III.  Property  Law.     2s.  6d. 
Part  IV.  Law  of  Obligations  (No.  1).     3-r.  6d. 
Part  IV.  Law  of  Obligations  (No.  2).    4J.  6d. 


38  Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


An  Introduction  to  the  Principles  of  Morals  and  Legisla- 
tion. By  Jeremy  Bentham.  Crown  8vo.  cloth,  6s.  6d. 

Elements  of  Law  considered  with  reference  to  Principles  of 
General  Jurisprudence.  By  William  Markby,  M. A.,  Judge  of  the  High 
Court  of  Judicature,  Calcutta.  Second  Edition,  with  Supplement, 
1874.  Crown  8vo.  cloth,  7s.  6d.     Supplement  separately,  2s. 

Alberici  Gentilis,  I.  G.  D.,  I.  G.  Professoris  Regii,  De  lure  Belli 
Libri  Tres.  Edidit  Thomas  Erskine  Holland  I.  CD.,  Iuris  Gentium 
Professor  Chicheleianus,  Coll.  Omn.  Anim.  Socius,  necnon  in  Univ. 
Perusin.  Iuris  Professor  Honorarius.  1877.  Small  4X0.  half  morocco,  21s. 

International  Law.  By  William  Edward  Hall,  M.A., 
Barrister-at-Law.     Demy  8vo.  cloth,  21s. 

An  Introduction  to   the  History  of  the  Law  of  Seal 

Property,  with  original  Authorities.  By  Kenelm  E.  Digby,  M.A.,  of 
Lincoln's  Inn,  Barrister-at-Law.  Second  Edition.  1876.  Crown  8 vo. 
cloth,  Js.  6d. 

Principles  of  the  English  Law  of  Contract.  By  Sir  William 
R.  Anson,  Bart.,  B.C.L.,  Vinerian  Reader  of  English  Law,  and  Fellow 
of  All  Souls  College,  Oxford.     1879.    Crown  8vo.  cloth,  gs. 


X.    MENTAL   AND   MORAL   PHILOSOPHY. 

Bacon.  Novum  Organum.  Edited,  with  Introduction,  Notes, 
&c,  by  T.  Fowler,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Logic  in  the  University  of 
Oxford.     1878.  8vo.  cloth,  14s. 

Locke's  Conduct  of  the  Understanding.  Edited,  with  In- 
troduction, Notes,  etc.,  by  T.  Fowler,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Logic  in  the 
University  of  Oxford.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s. 

Selections  from  Berkeley,  with  an  Introduction  and  Notes, 
For  the  use  of  Students  in  the  Universities.  By  Alexander  Campbell 
Fraser,  LL.D.  Second  Edition.  Crown  8vo.  cloth,  p.  6d.  (See  also 
p.  19.) 

The  Elements  of  Deductive  Logic,  designed  mainly  for  the 
use  of  Junior  Students  in  the  Universities.  By  T.  Fowler,  M.A., 
Professor  of  Logic  in  the  University  of  Oxford.  Seventh  Edition,  with 
a  Collection  of  Examples.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

The  Elements  of  Inductive  Logic,  designed  mainly  for  the 
use  of  Students  in  the  Universities.  By  the  same  Author.  Third 
Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  6s. 

A  Manual  of  Political  Economy,  for  the  use  of  Schools.  By 
J.  E.  Thorold  Rogers,  M.A.,  formerly  Professor  of  Political  Economy, 
Oxford.     Third  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d, 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford.  39 


XI.  ART,  &e. 

A  Handbook  of  Pictorial  Art.  By  R.  St.  J.  Tyrwhitt,  M.A., 
formerly  Student  and  Tutor  of  Christ  Church,  Oxford.  With  coloured 
Illustrations,  Photographs,  and  a  chapter  on  Perspective  by  A.  Mac- 
donald.     Second  Edition.     1875.  8vo.  half  morocco,  18s. 

A  Music  Primer  for  Schools.  By  J.  Troutbeck,  M.A.,  Music 
Master  in  "Westminster  School,  and  R.  F.  Dale,  M.A.,  B.  Mus.,  Assistant 
Master  in  Westminster  School.    Crown  8vo.  cloth,  is.  6d, 

A  Treatise  on  Harmony.  By  Sir  F.  A.  Gore  Ouseley,  Bart., 
Professor  of  Music  in  the  University  of  Oxford.  Second  Edition.  4to. 
cloth,  1  os. 

A  Treatise  on  Counterpoint,  Canon,  and  Fugue,  based  upon 
thatofCherubini.  By  the  same  Author.  Second  Edition.  4 to.  cloth,  16s. 

A  Treatise  on  Musical  Form  and  General  Composition. 

By  the  same  Author.  4to.  cloth,  10s. 

The  Cultivation  of  the  Speaking  Voice.  By  John  Hullah. 
Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s>  6d. 


XII.  MISCELLANEOUS. 

The  Construction  of  Healthy  Dwellings;  namely  Houses, 
Hospitals,  Barracks,  Asylums,  etc.  By  Douglas  Galton,  late  Royal 
Engineers,  C.B.,  F.R.S.,  etc.   Demy  8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

A  Treatise  on  Rivers  and  Canals,  relating  to  the  Control  and 

Improvement  of  Rivers,  and  the  Design,  Construction,  and  Development 
of  Canals.  By  Leveson  Francis  Vernon-Harcourt,  M.A.,  Balliol  College, 
Oxford,  Member  of  the  Institution  of  Civil  Engineers.  2  vols.  (Vol.  I, 
Text.   Vol.  II,  Plates).     8vo.  cloth,  21s.    Just  Published. 

A  Treatise  on  Harbours  and  Docks.  By  the  same  Author. 
Preparing. 

A  System  of  Physical  Education :  Theoretical  and  Practical. 
By  Archibald  Maclaren.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  *js.  6d. 

Specimens  of  Lowland  Scotch  and  Northern  English.  By 
Dr.  J.  A.  H.  Murray.     Preparing. 

English  Plant  Names  from  the  Tenth  to  the  Fifteenth  Century. 
By  J.  Earle,  M.A.     Small  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  5s. 


40  Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


An  Icelandic  Prose  Reader,  with  Notes,  Grammar,  and  Glos- 
sary. By  Dr.  Gudbrand  Vigfdsson  and  F.  York  Powell,  M.A.  1879. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

Dante.  Selections  from  the  Inferno.  With  Introduction  and 
Notes.     By  H.  B.  Cotterill,  B.  A.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

Tasso.  La  Gernsalemme  Liberata.  Cantos  i,  ii.  With  Intro- 
duction and  Notes.  By  the  same  Editor,  Extra  fcap.  Svo.  cloth,  is.  6d. 

The  Modern  Greek  Language  in  its  relation  to  Ancient  Greek. 
By  E.  M.  Geldart,  B.A.    Extra  fcap.  Svo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

Outlines  of  Textual  Criticism  applied  to  the  New  Testament. 
By  C.  E.  Hammond,  M.A.,  Fellow  and  Tutor  of  Exeter  College,  Oxford. 
Third  Edition.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

A  Handbook  of  Phonetics,  including  a  Popular  Exposition  of 
the  Principles  of  Spelling  Reform.  By  Henry  Sweet,  M.A.  Extra  fcap. 
8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 


♦  »•■♦ 


LONDON:   HENRY  FROWDE, 
Oxford   University  Press   Warehouse,   7  Paternoster   Row, 
OXFORD:   CLARENDON  PRESS  DEPOSITORY, 
116   High   Street. 

The  Delegates  of  the  Press  invite  suggestions  and  advice  from 
all  persons  interested  in  education;  and  will  be  thankful  for  hints,  &c. 
addressed  to  the  Secretary  To  the  Delegates,  Clarendon  Press, 
Oxford. 


$* 


THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  MICHIGAN 
GRADUATE  LIBRARY 


DATE  DUE 


Form  9584 


UNIVERSITY  OF  MICHIGAN 


III 


BOV     3  9015  02354  6784 
MAY  24 1948 


UNIV    Of  MtCH. 
LIBRARY 


GRAD 

BL 

1010 

.M946 

v.8 


