80 much bewildered that none of them could disti 


- with swans, ducks and other aqueous birds, rev 


GANESA-KHANDA, 
THIRD PART. 


CHAPTER I. 


1-8. One should bow to Narayana, Narottama, Nara and Saraswati before 
one recites the Pur&nas, Nárada said, “O lord, I already heard the part - 
of the Purána which relates to Nature, which is desired by all and which + 
is excellent like the Sea of nectar and which is edifying to fools. The 
account of the birth of Ganesa is the basis of endless good to mankind. How — 
was Ginesa, the foremost of the gods, born without ihe womb of Parvati? 
How could this goddess secure such a gem-like son? Whose digit ishe? Why 
did he voluntarily submit to the pain of birth? In the presence of Brahma 
Visnu and Mahesa who are respectively the creator, preserver and destro 
of the world, why is he entitled to pre-eminence in worship? The myste 
account of his birth is given in the Puranas. Why has he got the face | 
elephant with one tusk and why has he a big belly ? O most blessed 
lam anxious to know this interesting account in detail." Kindly rolate i 
mo from start to finish. Meu 


9-10. Narayana said :—“ O Narada, listen to that mysterious, essentia], 
interesting, auspicious, most wonderful aud delightful account which destroys sins, 
removes impediments, gives redemption and cuts asunder the ties of karma, 


11-19. O Narada, now I am going to describe to you a wonderful, esote- 
ric anecdote which removes sins, obstacles and sorrows. Listen. Ii is the cre 
of all narratives, the source of all good, delightful and beneficial to the andi 
auspicious, and likely to redeem people and remove the chainsof Karma, 
goddess who emanated from the energy of the gods oppressed by the d 
killed all the demons and was born as the daughter of Daksa, She was kn 
that time by the name of Sati. In days of yore, this goddess offended w: 
father for the slander of her husband, ended her life through (yoga), th 
centration of mental powers and was eventually born out of the 
Menak4, the favourite wife of Himalaya, the king of mou _ The 
cheerfully married his daughter to S’ankara, the chief of all gods (S’ 
took her to a solitary place. There S'iva cohabited with her erta 
of flowers situated on the coast of a river on a lovely be 
and besmeared with flowers and sandal paste. There t 
various ways, i. ¢.,in the ordinary process, reversed process 
course etc., for a thousand years. By the mer h of 
S'iva was overpowered by the darts of Cup rst 


mutual enjoyment of that lovely pair in that solit r 


1 o 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
Y 


4 
9 THE BRAHMA-V AIVARTA PURANA 
—_ T ————————— —— 
male cuckoos and bees, graced with blooming flowers of every description, 
redolent of the gentle breeze and void of beasts of prey was a source of indes- 


cribable solicitude to the gods who under the lead of Brahma went to Nár&yana ! 


at once, ; 


20-22. Brahm& bowed to Hari and related to him every thing in detail | 


as desired by him. Inthe meantime, the gods stood there immovable like 
pictures painted on the wall. Brahma said, * The great devotee, S'ankara, has 
been engaged in sensual pleasures for a celestial thousand years on account of 
which he is indifferent to everything else. He has not desisted from his 
amorous pastimes as yet. O Lord of the universe, please tell us how the 
nuptial pair will get a son as a resnlt of their sexual intercourse. 


28-38. Hari replied, ** O Brahmá, you need not fear; all will be well. 
Those who seek my protection never come to grief. Let the gods carefully 
devise a method whereby the semen of S’iva may be discharged on the ground ; 
for if the semen enter into the womb of Párvati,a son will be born who will 
subdue both the gods and the demons." Indra and other gods, at Hari’s 
command, went to the coast of the Narmada, and Brahma went home. ‘There- 
after the gods were very much afraid and, with crest-fallen features, went 
where S'iva was and stood up outside the cave of a mountain. There Indra 
requested Kuvera, Kuvera requested Varuna, Varuna requested the Wind, the 
god of Wind requested Yama, Yama requested Varuna, the god of Fire request- 
ed Yama, the Sun requested the god of Fire, the Moon ‘requested the Sun, 
Isán requested the Moon to disturb S'iva in his sexual intercourse. 
One requested the other with the same object in view, i. e., the interruption 
of S'iva. First Indra’ went to the mouth of the cavity; but with his face 
turned in another direction addressed Siva thus:--** O Siva, lord 
of ascetics, what are you doing? You are the Lord, the root cause of 
the universe: you remove the fear of the people devoted to you. I bow to 
you. So saying, Indra slipped away. Then tho Sun came to the mouth 
of the cavity, and looking at him slantingly through fear said thus: ** O great 
‘god, preeerver of the world, what are you doiug ? O excellent god, the blessed 
consort of Parvati, I bow to you.” So saying, the Sun bewildered with fear, 
‘ran away. Later on the Moon-god came and similarly turning away his face said 
thus: “O three-eyed Lord of the three worlds, what are you doing? You always 
delight in yourself or ego. Whatever you desire is immediately accomplished. 
The celebration of your name consecrates the earth. I bow to you. So saying, 
‘the frightened Moon, the lord of the night, slipped away. Next ‘the god of 
wind arrived at the threshold and looking archly said thus: “ O Lord and 
friend of the world, what are you doing ? You are Eternal and the source of 
the four-fold objects of human pursuit, viz., virtue, wealth, worldly enjoyment 
and redemption. I bow to you." 2 SE MUS 


39-47. By dintof bis knowledge of yoga i.e. union with the supreme spirit 
through abstract meditation, mental abstraction or the concentration of the 
mental powere, the learned S’iva heard the above hymns; and though inclined 
to giye Up his intercourse with Parvati, S'iva bad not the courage to do so for 
fear of offending his wife. But seeing that the gods were frightened and 
going to pray him again, he desisted from his sensual pleasures and. dis- 
engaged Parvati from his embrace, But as, he attempted to get up hastily 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


l 
i 
1 
| 
] 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


GANES'A-KHANDA. 3 


through fear and shame, his semen dropped on the ground, out of which- 
K&rtika was subsequently born. Thus I have narrated to you the interesting 
episode relating to the birth of Kártika. Now hear the main account, as 


desired by you. 


CHAPTER II/ 


1-7. Narayana said, ** S'iva gave up his sexual intercourse: but seeing tha 
gods before him, he was moved to: compassion through fear of Parvati and 
asked them to run away immediately. The gods,.afraid of being cursed by her 
hastily. fled away and Mahádeva himself, though the destroyer of the whole, 
universe, trembled through fear of Párvatt. The goddess Durgh, whem she got: 
up. from her bed, did not behold: the gods before her:and therefore restrained the 
fire of anger which was about to emanate from her body. But she was: 
highly incensed against them and cursed them saying: “ From this: day forth, 
the semen of the gods will be: ineffectual or sterile (i.e, incapable of 
begetting a son). When the god of gods, Mahadeva, saw that the goddess 


was flushed with rage, weeping, stooping: down, and very much aggrieved was. 


digging the earth with her nails, he lifted her by the hand, placed her on his 
breast and in great fright addressed her gently thus; 


Í 8-15. O daughter of the mountain, O mother of the universe, O paragon 
| of beauty, why are you angry? You are blessed and lovely. You are the presi- 
, ding goddess of my life and good fortune. Which of your desires shall I 
fulfil? What is impossible with either of us in the entire universe? I am 
innocent. Be propitiated with me. I£ I have done any wrong unintentionally 
and accidentally, T crave your pardon. I am S'iva by your association only : 
(S'iva, i.e. one who confers benefits on the, world). Though I am a god 
yet without your association, I am a S'avd or a corpse and a source 
of evil. You represent nature, intellect, forgiveness, mercy, contentment, 
| vigour, peace, lassitude, hunger, forbearance, shadow, sleep, esteem and consti- 
tute the root, and, prop of all. My spouse, deign to smile aud, use gentle and 
| tasteful words to me. Consumed by the poison of your wrath, I have been 
~ turned almost into a corpse. Kindly revive me.’ The angry goddess, at the 
words of her husband, restrained her temper and gently thus answered: 
16-31. You are omniscient ; you can take any form; you delight in 
self (i.e, you are self-contented). Whatever you wish is fulfilled. You reside 
in the body of every creature. Whatcan I say to you? A woman speaks 
| out her heart and cherished wishes only to her ignorant husband. But it is 

needless for me to doso: as you know the heart of every one and dwell in the 

heart of all persons. Every woman conceals carefully the cause of her shame; 
| and yet I shall divulge my shame to you, though a woman should not reveal 
it with her own mouth. O god, of. all the pleasures in the world, and of all 
| prosperity, the association of a woman with her virtuous husband in solitude is 
| most delightful to her. Disturbance of such an act before it is complete is 
| most painful to her. Separation from her husband is most intolerable to s 


| woman. As the moon gets thinner day by day in the dark half of the month, soa 


| woman gets emaciated every moment without her lord. Anxiety is the mental 


| fever of persons and is the cause of their waste. As the sun dries up a cloth, s9 ` 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


4 THE BRAHMA-V AIVARTA PURANA 
= ee 


separation wastes a chaste woman : and the fever caused by the want of inter. - 
course with a mare wastes a horse. My sorrow consists in the first placein thə 
break in the sexual intercourse: secondly, in the semen dropping else- 
where and thirdly in my barrenness. You are the most lovely of all 
things in the three worlds, being my husband and yet I did not get any 
issue. The life of a woman who has got no son is useless. Asceticism and 
charity yield fruits which are reaped in the next world bnt the birth of a good son, 
i. e., a son of noble blood, gives happiness in this world, as well as in the next. 
A bad son, like a flame of fire, consumes or ruins the family. He is born only 
to'cause compunction to the mind. The husband is born again through his 
digits, from the womb of his wife. A chaste woman ever ministers to her husband 
like his mother. An unchaste wife is troublesome to her husband like his 
enemy. A woman of sharp tongue anda woman of bad character are both 
unchaste. O Lord of meditative ascetics, what means shall I adopt to get 
ason? You are the ocean of devices and source of all benefit to people 
engaged in asceticism.” So saying, the goddess bowed low and shed tears. 
The supreme Lord, S'iva smiled gently and tried to console her. He addressed 
to her modest, delightful, tasteful, soothing and pleasant words, suggesting 
methods whereby she could get an issue. 


CHAPTER III. 


1-4. Siva said, “O Parvati, listen and you will be blessed. Every 
aci, in the world, is accomplished by devices. I am going to suggest to 
you a pleasing method which is the root of success. O fair one, adore Hari 
and perform a holy vow. The name of that vow is Pünyaka. It should 
be performed only fora year. Though it is austere, yet it is efficacious like 
the Kalpa treo. It is pleasing, sanctifying, substantial, excellent and calculated 
to give a son and all prosperity. 


5-30. As the Ganges among rivers, as Hari among tho gods, as 1 
among the Vaisnavas,as you among the goddesses, as the Brahmin among 
the pure, as Puskara among the shrines, as the Párijata among flowers, 
as the holy basil among leaves, as the Ekâdasi among festivals, as the 
Sunday among the days, as Agraháyana among the months, as the Satya among 
the ages, as the spring among the seasons, as tho teacher among revered persons, 
as the mother among tho elders, as the wife or husband among the beloved, as 
the mind among the trust-worthy, as the gem among riches, as the son among 
relations, as the Kalpa among trees, as the mango among fruits, as India 
among continents, as the Vrindá-vana among groves, as Salarupá among women, 
as K&881 among cities, as the sun among the effulgent bodies, as the moon 
among delightful orbs, as Cupid among the beautiful, as the Vedás among 
religious books, as Kapila among adepts, as Hanumána among monkeys, as the 
mouth of a Brahmin among sacred objects, as poetry among things which give 
fame, as the sky among pervading objects, as the eye among the members of 
the body, as the recitation of Hari among glorious acts, as the thought of Hari 
among enjoyments, as the touch of a son among things which can be felt by the 
hand, as a hypocrite among villains, as a whore among sinners, as truth among 
the virtues, as the service of Hari among devotions, as ghee among the pro- 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


GANES'A-K H AN DA. 5 


ductions of the cow, as Brahm among the anchorites, as nectar among victuals, 
as the paddy among crops, as the water among sanctifying articles, as 
the fire among pure objects, as the gold among metals, as sweet words among 
delicacies, as the divine eagle among birds, as the Airavata among elephants, 
as the god Kártika among ascetics, as Narada among godly saints, as Chitra- 


ratha among the Gandarvas, as Vrihaspati among the wise, as S’ukra among . 


poets, as the Purana among poems, as the ocean among torrents, as the earth 
among the forgiving, as redemption among objects of aspiration, as the faith 
in Hari among objects which yield prosperity, as the Vaisnava among the 
holy, as the Pranava (=Om) among letters, as the mantra of Visnu among 
mystic syllables, as Saraswati among Savants, as the Gaetri among 
metres, as Kuvera among the Yaksas, as Vásuki among snakes, as the Himalaya 
among mountains, as Surabhi among cows, as the Sám-Veda among the Vedas, as 
Ku£a (holy grass) among blades of grass, as the letter A among alphabets, as 
Laksmí among benefactors (male or female), as the mind among fleeting things, 
as mother among well-wishers, as the rib of Visnu among the skeletons of 
animals, as the lion among beasts, as the man among animals, as the self or 
ego or mind among passions, as indigestion among diseases, as energy or power 
among devices, as the Viráta among the dense, as an atom among the subtle, 
as Indra among the gods, as Bali among the demons, as Prahlada among the 
virtuous, as Dadhichi among the generous, as the Brahmástra among weapons, 
as the Sudargana among wheels, as Rama among kings, as Laksmana among 
archers, sois the Punyaka among vows. As Krisna is the prop of all, is 
served by all, is the root cause and cream of creation and is the source of all 
success, so is this vow. 


31-38. O blessed Parvati, perform this vow and you will obtain a son. 
Lord Krisna, the source of all bliss through whom millions of ancestors of a 
person are redeemed is worshipped by this vow. Whoever takes the 
Mantra of Hari and serves him blesses his own existence, redeems his ancestors, 
goes to the Vaikuntha and dwells there as a member of the retinue of Lord 
Krisna. He redeems his brother, servant, friend, companion and wife and 
merges into the feet of Hari. Therefore, O Parvati, take that rare mantra of 
Hari and recite it.” So saying, O saint, S’iva, the primeval god, went with 
his spouse to the coast of the Ganges, gave her the mantra of Hari, his ode 
and amulet and pointed out to her the methods of celebrating his worship. 


CHAPTER IV. 


1-12. Narayana said, “ Parvati was very pleased to hear of the vow and 
enquired of her lord the rites necessary to perform it. Párvati said: “ O lord, 
you are the best of the omniscient, the ocean of mercy: you are the 
refuge of the poor. Kindly tell me the rules of the vow. What 
articles and fruits are appropriate to the vow ? The time, the articles prescribed 
for food, the method and the fruits relating to the vow I should like to know. 
Kindly engage for me a good priest, a Brahmin who culls flowers and a servant 
who provides articles. lease also tell me about things which I do not know. 
For the husband is the lord of the wife. A woman has three stages of life,viz. 
. childhood, youth and old age. The father takes care of her in her infancy; the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Lis 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


. week hea 
6 THE BRAHMA-V AIV ARTA PURANA. 


husband in her youth and the son in her old age. The father is relieved from 
anxiety by making over his dear daughter to a suitable bridegroom. The husband 
passes his days happily by entrusting his wife to the care of his son. A woman 
who is maintained successively by three of her relations as mentioned above is 
traly blessed. ` I£ any one of the above relations be wanting, she is blessed to a 
moderate degree; if all of them are wanting, she is unfortunate. A woman 
who accepts her subordination to any of them is praised; a woman who dis- 
cards the control of any of them and depends on others is blamed. This is 
recited in the Vedas. O lord, you are the witness of all acts and’ are conver- 
sant with the mysteries of objects. For my satisfaction, grant me the boon of 
a son. Lord, I related to you the matter in the light of my feeble understand- 
ing. You know the heart of all. It is needlessto tell you anything.’ P&rvati, 
so saying, fell prostrate at his feet. Then the merciful S’iva said thus: 


13-62. O goddess, I am going to relate to you the method of the worship 
and everything, as desired by you. With a view to the collection of fruits and 
flowers for the vow, a hundred Brahmins should be engaged. To provide 
articles, a hundred servants should be employed. You should engage the wise, the 
learned, the pious, the all-knowing Sanat-Kumára as your priest. My dear, the 
initiation of the rite in the month of Mágha in the bright half of the lunar month 
on the 13th day of the said month is most auspicious. On the previous day, 
the person intent on her vow, should shave hor head, bathe, fast and carefully 
wash her clothes Next day, she should got up at dawn, rinse her mouth and 
bathe. in pure water. After recollecting Hari, she should utter the mantra for 
the purification of the body. ‘hen reverentially she should offer oblations to 
the feet of Hari and go home. She should put on a pair of washed clothes, sit 
down on a clean matting, rinse her monthagain, mark her forehead with sandal 
paste and perform her diurnal rites. First she should greet the priest, utter Swasti 
(the ceremony preparatory to a solemn sacrifice) fix the jar, make the avowal 
of the purpose to perform the rite and then commence the vow, as prescribed by 
the Vedas. She should daily present 16 ingredients to Lord Visnu, viz., the 
expression Swágata (welcome), water for washing the feet, offerings (barley eto.) 
for the feet, water torinse the mouth, oblations of milk and honey, water to 
bathe, cloth and ornaments, perfume, flower, frankincense, light, sacrificial offer- 
ings (rice, etc.), sacred thread, betel incensed with camphor and hymn. 


27-36. If any of the above articles be wanting, the act is defective. A 
defective act is like a defective man. A defective act brings forth defective 
fruits. The worshipper, to gain a graceful form, should present every day 
one hundred and eight Párijat flowers to Visnu. To add to the beauty of her 
person, she should offer a lakh of white Champaka flowers to Visnu. To add 
to the beauty of her face, she should present to him a like number of lotuses. 
To add to the lustre of her eyes, she should offer him a thousand mirrors 
(looking glasses) and for the grace of her eyes, she should offer him a lakh 
of blue lotuses. or the beauty of her hair, she should present to him a 
hundred white chowrios. For the beauty of her nose, she should offer him a 
thousand cups made of leaves. For the beauty of her lips, she should offer 
him a lakh of red flowers called Bandhuka. [or the beauty of her teeth, she 
should offer him one lakh pearls. For the beauty of her cheek, she should | 
offer him one lakh pillows inlaid with gems. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
GANES A4-K HAN DA. zt 


38-48. For the beauty of her lower lips, she should offer him one lakh 
diamond chains. For the grace of her ears, she should offer him one lakh 
ear-rings. For the beauty of her shoulders, she should offer him one lakh 
jars of honey. For the melody of her voice, she should offer him one lakh 
jars of honey. For the beauty c£ diction, she should offer him one lakh pits 
of nectar. For the lustre of her eye-sight, she should offer him one lakh 
lamps of diamond. For the beauty of her neck, she should offer him a 
thousand diamond cups resembling in form the thorn-apple. For the 
grace of her arm, she should present to bim a thousand stalks of lotus. 
For the grace of her hands she should offer him one lakh red lotuses. For the 
grace of her fingers, she should offer him a lakh of rings. For the grace 
of her nails, she shocld offer bim alakh of white diamonds. Forthe grace/of 
her breast, she should offer him one lakh wreaths of gems. 


49-58. For the grace of her rising breast, the worshipper shonld offer 
him ripe baels. For the grace of her body, she should offer him one lakh 
round cups. For the grace of her navel, she should offer him one lakh 
artificial diamond navels. For the grace of her buttocks, the worshipper 
should offer him a thousand diamond artificial nails. For the grace of her 
loin, the worshipper should offer him one lakh golden trunks of plantains. 
For the grace of her legs, the worhipper should offer him one lakh erops 
of barley or sunned rice and pure white lotuses. For the grace of her 
movements, the worshipper sbould offer him 1,000 artificial golden wag- 
tails. For the excellence of her gait, she should offer him a thousand golden 
swans and elephants. For the grace of her head, she should offer him a thou- 
sand golden umbrellas or parasols. For the beauty of her smile, she should 
offer him one lakh jasmine flowers. 


‘59-70. For the grace of behaviour, she should offer him one lakh 
invaluable gems. For the grace of her bedy, she should offer him one lakh pearls, 
white like crystals. To gain the affection of her relations, she should reveren- 
tially’ offer him a thousand pearls resembling excellent corals. She should 
offer-him one lakh superb gems to secure the good books and affections of ‘her 
husband for ten millions of births. To gain a-son, she should offer him the 
pumpkin gourd, cocoanut, lemon and bael. To add to the wealth of her 
husband, she should offer him a lakh of excellent gems. To increase her pros- 
perity, she should offer him musical instruments, bell-metal, a pair of cymbals, 
&c. To add to the enjoyments of her husband, she should offer Hari ghee, mik 
boiled with rice and sugar— cakes, &c. For the satisfaction of Hari, she should 
offer ‘him one lakh fragrant flowers. To gain the good will of Lord Krignila, 
she should present to him sweet and tasteful offerings and flowers of various 
kinds mixed with holy basil leaves. For the profuse growth of crops which 
abs is likely to secure at every birth, a thousand Brahmins should be fed every 

ay. : x 
71-72. To increase her faith in Hari, a hundred handfuls of flowera 
should be presented to him during worship and she should bow low to him, a 
hundred times. For six months, she should eat only boiled rice mixed with ghee : 
for five months, she should use only fruits ; fora fortnight, she should take only 
ghee and fora fortnight she should drink only water. A hundred diamond 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. i 
8 THE BRAHMA-VAIVARTA PURANA, 


lamps and fire should be burnt day and night. She should keep up the night 
seated only on a mat of holy grass. To be an expert in matters of sexual inter- 
course, the worshipper should abstain from eight kinds of cohabitation, viz, 
recollection, recitition, dallying, listening, use of indecent language, avowal 
of the purpose, perseverence and completion of the task. When the above rites 
are accomplished, there ought to be the consecration of the deity or invocation 
of the deity on the image. The worshipper should dedicate to Hari clothes, 
articles of food, sacred thread, 360 baskets full of delightful, presents, 1360 
Brahmins should be fed. Ghee and sesamum should be cast into the sacrificial 
fire, 1360 times. For the fulfilment of the vow, 1360 gold coins should be 
distributed to the Brahmins, as the priests fee. On the last day of the vow, I 
shall mention to you other matters in this connexion. Acquisition of firm 
faith in Hari is the object of this vow. A person, through this vow, is able to 
getason renowned throughout the world like Hari. A woman gets thereby 
beauty, and secnres the good graces and love of her husband, prosperity and 
vast wealtn. All her objects are accomplished in every birth. Thus I 
narrated to you every thing in connexion with the vow. Observe the vow 
and you will get a son." So saying, S’iva paused 


CHAPTER V. 


1-12. Náráyana said, Dürgà having learnt from S'iva the method of per- 
forming the vow again queried him anent this wonderful subject thus :—'* Lord, 
what an amazing subject I have heacd. Now describe to me everything con- 
nected with the vow. Please tell me by whom it was first performed." 
"Siva said: ** S'atarup&, the barren wife of Manu, afflicted in her heart for want of 
s son, went to Brahmá and said: “ O lord, you are the author of the universe: 
please tell me how a barren woman may get a son. Alas my life and prospe- 
rity are in —effectual. "The (useless) merits acquired by asceticism and gift bear 
fruits which are reaped only in the next world. But a son confers upon 
his parents immediate happiness, redemption and fruits of a hundred 
royal sacrifices, and saves them from the peril of the hell called Puta. 
Lord, tell me how to get a son; otherwise I will resort to the jungles. 
Please take away all our kingdom, wealth and prosperity which are useless to 
us (me and my husband) without a son. A learned manis not pleased with 
the sight of a man who is sonless and who is ashamed of even showing his own 
face to the world. Unless I get a son, I will take poison or enter into the 
flames. You had better remain with your unworthy son who has got no son 
and who will be denuded of a wife by my suicide.” So saying, she wept with 
grief. The merciful Brahma thereupon said : 


13-29. Child, I am going to tell you an auspicious and delightful 
method adapted to give a person’ all sorts of prosperity and fulfil all 
kinds of desire including the birth of a son. You should perform the 
Punyaka vow which should be observed in the bright half of the lunar 
month on the thirteenth day of the said month. Krisna is worshipped by this 
vow which lasts for a year. All things prescribed by the Vedas are offered 
to Him in the course of this vow. You will get a son valorous like Visnu 
by the performance of this vow, as stated by Kánwa Sakha.” Thereupon . 
S'atarupá performed the vow and got two sons named Priya-vrata and Uttánpáda. 


[ 


À 


{ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


GANES'A-KHANDA. $ 


Devahüti by this vow obtained a pious, virtuous, auspicious son named Kapila 
who isa digit of Hari and the lord of adepts. Arundhati distinguished by 
lucky marks or signs, by means of this vow, obtained a son named S'aktri. 
S'aktri's wife, thereby got a son named Parásara. By this vow, Aditi obtained 
Bamana, S’achi obtained Jayanta, Utt&np&da obtained Dhruva, Kuvera's wife 
obtained Nalkuvera, the Sun’s wife obtained Manu, Atri’s wife obtained the Moon, 
Anzirá's wife obtained Vrihaspati, Bhrigu’s wife obtained S'ukra (a digit of 
Narayana) as their respective sons. This is the best of all the vows, which 


you also should perform, O daughter of Himalaya. This vow can only be ` 


performed by goddesses and queens. By virtue of this vow, Náráyana himself 
will be born as your son.” Parvati, when she heard the words of her lord, 
became much pleased and performed the vow, as desired. ‘Ihe interestiag and 
redeeming account of the birth of Ganesa has been described to you. Now 


what do you want to hear ? 


CHAPTER VI. 


1-4, Saunaka said, “O best of hermits, what further questions were put 
by Narada to Narayana?” Suta replied, “Narada wanted to know the 
method of the initiation of the vow and queried Náráyana thus:—“ O best 
of saints, how did Parvati perform her rites at the command of her 
husband ? How was the Lord Krisna subsequently born through her womb” ? 


5-18. Nardyana said, “ S'iva, after having recited to his wife the 
method of performing the vow, went to the forest for dévotion, though 
he himself is the lord of devotion. Himself a modification of the image 
of Hari, full of supreme happiness and wisdom, the Eternal S'iva was 
s0 much absorbed in the contemplation of Hari internally and externally that he 
thad no idea of day or night. In the meantime, Parvati, as enjoined by S’iva, 
cheerfully engaged servants and priests for the performance of the vow and in 
‘an auspicious moment she began to celebrate the vow after having secured 
the necessary ingredients. Sanat-Kumára, the son of Brahmá&, effulgent with 
the lustre of Brahma, himself arrived there like light personified. The delight- 
ed Brah uà arrived with his wife from the Brahma-loka. Lord S'iva arrived 
there with impatient haste. Vignu, the ruler and preserver of the universe, 
decorated with four hands and a garland of wild flowers, of a dark-blue colour, 
got up from the bed of the Ksiroda-sea and attended by Lakg:ni and his follow- 
ers, mounted a diamond-car and arrived there hastily. 


14-22. The vow of Párvati was attended by Sanaka, Sananda, Kapila, 
San&tana, Asuri, Kratu, Hamsi, Bodhu, Pancha-sikha, Aruni, Yati, Sumati, 
Wasistha, Pulaha, Pulastya, Atri, Bhrigu, Angir&, Agastya, Prachet&é, Durvasa, 
Ohyavana, Marichi, Kasyapa, Kanwa, Jagat-kàru, Gautama, Vribaspati, 
JUtathya, Sambirta, Saubhari, Jávàla, Jamadagni, Jaigirsavya, Devala, Lok- 
&mukha, Chakra-ratha, Páribhadra, Paráéara, Visvá-Mitra, Bamdeva, Rişya 
S'ringa, Vivándaka, Mârkandeya, Mrikandu, Pugkara, Lomasa, Kautsa, 
Vatsya, Daksá, Kalagoi, Agha-marsana, Katyayana, Kanáda, Salindi, 
S'akatáyana, S’anku,  Apisali, S'Akalya. S’ankbya, ourselves (Nara and 
Nárüyana, sons.of Dharma) with all their retinue, the regents of the 
ieee the gods, the Yaksas, the Gandarvas and the Kinnars. 


` 


| 
į 4 CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


= DATDA Uo ee 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


A 
10 THE BRAHMA-VAIVARTA PURAN A. 


23-27. Himalaya, the mine of gems, out of curiosity, with his sons, fol- 
lowers and wife, decorated with ornaments, arrived at the spot with piles of | 
wealth and gems, one lakh elephants, three lakh horses, ten lakh cows, seven ` 
lakh gold pieces, seven lakh diamonds, seven lakh touch-stones, four lakh pearls, 
a thousand Kaustubhas and masses of sweetmeat. 


28-36. The Br&hmins, Manus, adepts, Vidyádharas, Yatis, beggars and 
bards also came to attend the ceremony. Fairies, nymphs, dancing girls and 
musicians likewise graced the occasion. The royal roads constructed with rubies 
were delightfully moistened with fragrant waters, decorated with mango leaves 
and columns of plantain, bent grass, paddy, fried rice, flowers and fruits. At that 
time, all the guests assembled at the Kailiga were greeted by S'iva and seated 
on elevated thrones. During this vow, Indra was the superintendent or 
manager in charge of gifts, Kuvera was in charge of the Treasury : the Sun 
was the keeper of Conscience, i. e. prescribed what was right or wrong : and 
Varuna was the dispenser of food. During that vow of Párvati,a thousand 
artificial rivers of curd, milk, molasses,’ ghee, honey, whey and butter were 
created. O Narada, During that vow, millions of pits of nectar, sweets and 
sugar were excavated. 


37-46. Heaps of cakes (Swastika) of wheat and barley, immense quantity 
of cakes of flour and fried rice purified with molasses were provided for the occa- 
sion, Numberless heaps of winter paddy and flattened rice were secured for the 
festival, There was no end to the heaps of rice There were mountains of 
gold, silver, corals and pearls, The goddess of fortune herself prepared milk 
with sugar and rice, food with winter-rice and curry with vegetables and ghee, 
Hari himself with the gods and one lakh Brahmans sat down to eat. A lakh 
of Brahmins dispensed food on the occasion. "These Bráhmins also distributed 
betel leaves seasoned with camphor to tho guests and set up thrones of gem 
sothat they might take rest after dinner. Vignu, seated on the throne, attended 
by white chowries, and eulogised by saints, adepts and gods witnessed with | 
a gentle smile the dance of tho fairies and heard the songs of the Gandarvas, 
Siva, being deputed by Brahma, at that godly assembly addressed Visnu 
with folded palms with reference to the vow thus. 


47-53. “O Lord, listen to my prayer. You yield the fruits of all. 
devotion. You are worshipped, first of all, on the occasion of every vow, rite and 
sacrifice. You are the root of every thing and the Kalpa tree of every desire. The 
afllicted Párvati performs the Punyak vow to get a son. As tho gods interfered 
with tho sexual intercourse of S'iva, the semen was rendered ineffectual. There- 
fore she was much afflicted and I consoled the pious goddess. Sho desires to 
have a virtuous son and wants to secure the good graces and affection of her 
husband. Without these, she can never be consoled. Without these, she is 
ready to sacrifice her life. Before this, i. e., in her previous birth, she 
sacrificed her life when she heard her husband slandered by her father 
on the occision of her paternal Yagna. Now she is born again as the 
daughter of the Mountain. You know all. What is your command now?! 
Let your order be such, O best of. scientists, as to secure good results, 
No one can turn a fickle-minded woman from her purpose. Her beauty 
is the source of all delusion. It is irresistible to us also, who- have 
subdued our passions. It is honey-oombed with delusion and the cause of 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


GANES'A-KHAN DA. ii 


| all worldly ties. It is like the Brahmástra in the hands of Cupid. It is 
even antecedent to Fate and no creation of Brahma. 


54-61. It shuts the gate of redemption on mankind, interferes with the 
worship of Hari, and fastens people with worldly fetters, It destroys ascetism, 
increases passions, gives impetus fo courage and is the harbour of all evils. 
Itis the field of mistrust, incarnation of hy pocrisy, refuge of pride, and 
a jar of poison with honey at the mouth. It is inaccessible to many and 
yet adored by everybody and hence it is the seed of all discord. O Supreme 
Lord, [have stated to yoy everything. Now be pleased to give me some 
effidacious advice. 


62-64. So saying, S’iva looked at Brahma, eulogised Visnu and paused. 
Lord Visnu sweetly smiled at hie words and answered gently, using soft and 
friendly words, thus:—‘‘ O Lord of Parvati, of all the vows, this vow is the 
most arduous, desirable, useful and redeeming. 


65-77. The Spirit, the lord and life of holy saints,}is eternal, effulgent, 
propless, dissociated, name-less and spotless: the Spirit, witnesses everything 
and is disposed to favour those who worship Hari. The Spirit is subservient 
to such worshipers and may also be controlled by other believers, the Spirit 
cannot be adored with ease. The Spirit is likewise perfect and not liable 
to decay or decrepitude. Brahm&, Visnu and Mahega are all the digits 
of that Supreme Being. Mahá-Viráta is likewise His digit. That Eternal 
Being is calm, free from calamity and wields a form out of compassion 
for His votaries. He is the planet of planets, removes the evil stars (or 
it may mean, calamities) of the planets and is attainable in millions of 
years. Without your grace, His devotion is impossible. A man born in 
India by the worship of small gods for seven consecutive lives acquires 
reverence for Hari. By your blessing alone he can obtain the Mantra of the 
| sun, after which he can get the mantra of S'iva. Then after serving you with 
great reverence for seven births he gets the Mantra of Maya or Durg&. After 
worshipping her for soven births, he attains the digits o£ Hari and acquires 

-reverence for Hari. This faith is immature at first, on account of which he 
bas to come to India, again and again. Later on, by serving pious men, his 
faith is ripened. Thon by the grace of holy men and |the gods, he gets the 
Mantra of Krisna, the stepping stone to redemption. ; 


78-88. Tho vow and tho Mantra of Krigna yield all desire. By the 
continual worship of Krigna, the worshipper attains the rank of Krisna, 
At the time of the eternal destruction of the world, every one perishes : 
but the ndhorents of Krigna do not perish. They simply enjoy superb 
bliss ia the Goloka and ridicule Brahma and other gods. O S'iva, you can 
delude all but my worshippers. Maya deludes all but the worshippers 
of Visnu. The MAy4 of Hari inspires avery one with reverence for Krişna. 

> Without Maya that faith cannot bo attained. That Maya is the prinordial 
| goddess Nature, She is the beloved spouse of Krisna and immortal like Him. 
She is effulgont and wields a form at her pleasure. Sho emanated from the 
energy of the gods in their fight with the demons. She destroyed the demons 
and in the next birth, as the result of the devotions of Dakga performed by 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


- å 
12 THE BRAHMA-VAIVARTA PURANA 


him in several previous births, she was born as his daughter in India, out of 
the womb of his wife. This goddess committed suicide when she heard 
the slanders against her husband and went to the Goloka. You in great 
mental distress bore the burden of her dead body, throughout India. I consoled 


you at S'/ri-S'aila on the const of the river, and the wife of Himalaya soon ' 
gave birth to her. 


89-98. Let your virtuous and meritorious spouse perform the vow of 
Punyaka which is efficacious like a thousand royal sacrifices. O three-eyed 
god, it is not possible for every one to perform this sacrifice which is as 
expensive as a thousand royal sacrifices. By virtue of this sacrifice, Krişna 
himself will be born through the womb of Parvati. That merciful Being is the 
Lord of all the gods, hence he will be styled Ganega. The recollection of this 
deity will remove all obstacles: hence he will be styled, the destroyer of obstacles 
or calamities, He will be born as the result of the Punyaka vow, on which 
occasion the stomach of the guests will be stuffed with food and hence ha will 
be called Lamobdara (or the god with a protuberant belly). As the head of an 
elephant will be substituted for his head removed by the glance of Saturn, he 
will be called Gajánana. Who can withstand the will of Providence ? ‘he 
axe of Parasnráma, will remove one of his tusks, hence he will be called the god 
with one tooth. This lord of the whole creation will be adored by the gods and 
all of us. By my boon men will worship him first of all and easily reap fruits of 


their worship. Unless ho is worshipped first, the worship of any other god will 
be ineffectual. 


99-106. The worship of other gods should be performed after the 
: worship of Ganesa, the Sun, Visnu, S’iva, the Fire and Durgé. The worshi 

of Ganesa removes all impediments, the worship of the Sun gives health, the 
worship of Visnu gives holiness, redemption, piety, fame and prosperity. The 
worship of S'iva gives the knowledge of ontology. ‘he auspicious worship of 
Durga gives wisdom, land, a beautiful wife, tenants and friends and is the 
source of all religious belief. The worship of Fire gives enjoyments and 
when the days of the worshipper are numbered, it preserves his consciousneses 
till the last moment and gives him purity characteristic of the sparks of flame ' 
at his funerals. Without the worship of these gods, there will surely be 
revolution in the world. This is, O S’iva, the order of worship in every age. 
These gods are omniprosent, eternal and intent upon the task of creation. 
Only by the will of the supreme god, they appear and disappear." So saying 
Hari paused. The god S’iva and Parvati were very much pleased to hear him. 


CHAPTER VII. 


1-9. Narayana said: '  S/ivaat the command of Hari described to Parvat} the 
auspicious fruits attainable by the vow. At tho bidding of S’iva, Parvati cheor- 
fully ordered the auspicious music to bo sounded on the occasion of the vow. . 
Then the fair Gauri bathed, put ona pair o£ well-washed clothes and fixed in the 
erops of white paddy a diamond jar perfumed with sandal paste, aloe, musk and ‘ 
saffron associated with leaves of mangos and decorated with fruits and barley. 


Then she decorated herself with gems; sat on a throne of diamond and afterwards | 
i | 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


ete a 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
GANES'A-KH AN DA. 13 


——— 


worshipped the Munis, the priests, the regents of the quarters and other gods. 
She subsequently worshipped Brahma, Visnu, and Maheéa with clothes pure like 
fire, excellent ornaments and other ingredients and with sandal paste, aloe, musk 
and saffron. After pronouncing Swasti (a ceremony preparatory to a solemn 
acrifice), she set herself to perform the vow. 


10-19. On that auspicious jar, she invoked Krisna and with esteem 
worshipped him with sixteen ingredients. She offered, one by one, the 
excellent and fructifying objects which are sacred to this vow. The 
excellent goddess made invaluable presents on the occasion of this vow. 
Next she made three lakh of oblations of ghee mixed with jinjile to the 
fire and feasted the gods, the guests and the Brahmins. Continually for one 
year, she performed the duties connected with the vow with great care. On 
the last day of the vow the priest addressed her thus, **O good nymph, hand 
over your husband to me by way of the priests fee." The great goddess began 
to lament at these cruel words and fell into a swoon. When the Munis, Brahma 
and Visnu beheld her condition, they smiled and sent S'iva to her for her 
consolation. S‘iva addressing her said thus, ʻO good goddess, get up and all 
will be well. Be restored to consciousness and listen to me. 


20-28. Sosaying, he clasped his afflicted wife whose throat, lips and 
palate were dried up to his breast, restored her to consciousness and addressed 
her with words beneficial, truthful, modest, delightful in the end and 
calculated to give fame and yield fruits. He said, “ O goddess, I am going to 
communicate to you before this assembly words having a virtuous significance, 
sanctioned by all and prescribed . by the Vedas. O pious nymph, Daksina is 
the cream of all acts and . the source of permanent fame and benefit, An act 
without Dakgina be it divine or ancestral, be it casual or permanent, is ineffect- 
ual, and the worshipper without it goes to the hell called the thread of time. 
He is also afflicted by his enemies and attacked by poverty. If one moment 
passes after the completion of the act without Dakgin& the priest's fee is 
doubled; if aday passes, it is increased four times; if a fortnight passes, 
it is increased a hundred times: if a month passes, it is increased 500 times : if 
six months pass, it is increased to an amount four times the amount specified 
last; if a year passes, the rites are ineffectual. In the last case, the 
worshipper (the person who performs the rites) suffers the torments of 
hell for a thousand years. He loses his son, grandson, wealth, prosperity 
and virtuo.” 


29-35. Vignu said, “O virtuous nymph, preserve your virtue in which 
case every oue will be preserved.” Brahma said, “If any person does not 
discharge his or her duties, he or she incurs sins.” Dharma said, “ Preserve 
me, goddess, by giving your husband as priest’s fee. If you maintain mae, all 
will be well." The gods said, “ O virtuous lady, observe the rites and preserve 
virtue: in which case, we will carry out your design." The Munis said, 
“ Qomplete the homa (lit. oblation of ghee to the fire) by giving priest’s fee to 
the Brahmin. No evil can befall you, while we are here.” Sanat-Kumara 
said, “ O goddess, give me your husband «s priests fee or in default 


the fruits of your devotion. It you do not give me my fee, I myself shal] | 


realise the fruits of your vow, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


" 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


: A 
14 THE BRAHM A-V AIVARTA PURANA 


36-46. Párvati said, * O gods, if I give away my husband as my 
fee, what is the necessity of a son or virtue ? If I give away land or tree, 
how can I get crops or fruits? I£ the cause be destroyed, the effect is nao 
where. If life is quitted, what is the use of a body ? If sight is gone, whet 
is the use of an eye? Toa virtuous woman the husband is equal to a hundrd 
sons. If he is gone, the vow or the son is useless.. The husband is the 
source of the son and lineage. If the capital is destroyed, the commerce 
vanishes.” Vignu said : “ A husband is, indeed, greater than the son; but virtue 
is greater than the husband. O pious lady, if virtue is destroyed, what 
is the use of a husband or son?” Brahma «aid : ** O virtuous nymph, virtue 
is greater than the husband, but truth is greater than virtue. Therefore 
do not deviate from truth.”  Párvati said: ‘In the Vedas swa means wealth, 
He who possesses this wealth (i, e. wife) is husband. The husband can give 
away this wealth: but the wealth (wife) cannot give away the husband. You 
know the Vedas and yet what an extraordinary doctrine of folly do yoa 
propound!” Dharma said, “O pious one, no other wealth can give away its 
proprietor, it is true, but the wife may give away the husbind, for both 
the husband and the wife constitute the same body. One (the husband 
or the wife) may give away the other.” Parvati said, “Tho father gives away 
his daughter to his son-in-law who accepts hor. O gods versed in religious 
books, this alono is prescribed by the Vedas. I have not heard anything 
opposed to the doctrine,” 


45-51. The gods said, “O Durga, you represent wisdom. We get 
wisdom through you. No ono can defeat you in Vedic controversy. In the vow 
of Punyaka, the husband has been described as the priest’s fee, What is 
prescribed by the Vedas is virtue, and tho opposite is vice.” Parvati said, 
“No one depends exclusively upon the Vedas. Tho social law is stronger 
than the Vedas. Who can give up tho social rites ? In the Vedas, the Pu- 
rusa or the Supreme Boing is greater than Prakriti or Nature. O gods, you 
know all, Iam buta female. What can Isay to you?" Vrihaspati said: 
*O chaste goddess, without tho Suprome Deing creationis not possible, but 
it is also not possible without Naturo. Krisna created both Purusa and 
Nature who consequently rest on an equal footing." 

52-84. Parvati said: “Lord Krigna who is the creator of all descends 
to the world through His digits and then takes the form of tho Purusa vested 
with attributes. It follows thereforothat Ho is greater than Prakriti ; the latter 
cannot be greater than the former." While this controversy was going 
on, every one beheld a car in the sky surrounded by beings dark in colour, 
each vested with four hands and decked with wreaths of wild flowers round 
his neck. Then Narayana descended from the car and approached the as- 
sembly. Ho was decked with conches, wheel, lotus and mace. All adored him. 
He is the husband of Laksmí and Saraswati, tranquil, lovely, but invisible 
to the sinners He vied in beauty with ten millions of Cupids and Moons. 
He was decked with ornaments, attended by Brahma and other gods, obs- 
‘cured by the grace of his own person and surrounded by the gods and all 
present in the assembly. Brahma, Vignu, S'iva, with Streaming eyes- and 
body quivering with raptures, bowed down to him and saluted him. with 
folded palms. ‘Then with a gentle smile he asked what the matter was and 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


esterna 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
GAN BS’ A-KH ANDA. 15 


when every thing was communicated to him, he said, “People of equal de- 
grees of intelligence and wisdom cannot instruct one another. Nature, the em- 
blem of energy, vests all creatures with strength. Everything from Brahm& 
down to a bush is the product of Nature. That primordial energy (Nature) 
is spontaneous, i. e., manifests herself without me. But this goddess of delu- 
sion (Nature) emanates from me at my pleasure and, at the time of Eternal 
destruction, dissolves in my essence. Nature is the creator and the mother 
of all she: represents my illusion and is equal to me in every way. Hence 
she is called Nár&yant. S'iva meditated me for a long time, this is why I 
gave the goddess May& (Durg&) to him as a fruit of his devotion. She 
is performing this vow for the edification of the people. She has no personal 
interest in the matter, inasmuch as she herself yields fruits or devotion to others 
in the three worlds. Every one is bewildered by her delusion, Really, she 
has no vow to perform. In every Kalpa she manifests herself and ostensibly 
performs a vow. Brahmá, Visnu and Mahega are all my digits. The 
other gods and creatures are partly my digits afd partly the digits 
of my digits. Asa potter cannot create a jar without earth, as a goldsmith 
can not construct an ear-ring without gold, so I cannot create the world with- 
out energy (goddess Nature). The pre-eminence of the goddess of Force or 
Energy is recognised by the Darsana (metaphysics or philosophy). lam the 
spirit, dissociated from all, invisible to all and bear testimony to every act, 
The body of a living or sentient being is natura] and composed of five 
elements. I am permanent, preside over the body of a person and take a form 
out of compassion for my worshippers. Nature is the container of all objects ; 
and I am the soul of all persons. / I am the soul, Brahma is the mind, S'iva is the 
knowledge, Visnu constitutes the five vital airs,and nature represents intellect. 
Intelligence, sleep, &c are the digits of Nature. The same goddess Nature 
has been born as the daughter of the mountain. This is specified in the 
Vedas, Iam the Lord of the Goloka and the Vaikuntha and am eternal. 
In the Goloka I am surrounded by the cow-herds and the cow-herdesses, 
Here I possess two arms. In the Vaikuntha, I possess four hands and am 
the Lord of Laksmi. Fifty crore yojans above the Vaikuntha, the Goloka is 
situated. ‘The two-handed Krigna is worshipped on the occasion of the pre- 
sent vow. I yield benefits to the people according to their desire. O Gouri, 
render your vow perfect by giving S iva as the priest's fee. But buy him 
back by paying the proper amount of consideration. he cows, like Siva, 
constituto the body of Visnu. Pay the Brahmin the price in the shape of 
cows, and your husband shall be restored to you. On the occasion of 
a vow, the husband may give the wife as his priest’s fee, and vice-versa, 
the wife may give the kusband as as her priest’s fee. This is sanctioned by the 
Sfrutis.” So saying, tbe lord of the Vaikuntha disappeared. Every one was 
pleased and Parvati became at once ready to give the fee. After having made a 
complete offering of ghee to the fire she gave S'iva to Sanat Kumara, asthe — 
priest’s fee. Sanat Kumara said Swasti and accepted him. Durgá's countenance 
fell and frightened and afflicted she said with folded hands to the Brahmin 
thus : ; 


85-101. “My husband is worth a cow. I am offering you one Jakh 
cowe, Please return my husband to me : in which case I shall be able to make — 


*i 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


oy 
v 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


A 
16 THE BRAHMAVAIVARTA PURANA. 


many gifts to the Brâhmiqs. ‘How can the body act without the soul"? 
Sanat Kumara said: * O goddess, I an a Brahnán OF what use will 
be one lakh cows to me? Who is such a fool as to return an invaluable 
gem for a number of cows? In the three worlds, every person is the master 
of his acts. Every thing is doneas he wishes. His act is not controlled by 
others. Iam a boy and shall wander throughout the universe with the naked 
Lord (S’iva), the object of ridicale to the boys.” So saying the effulgent son 
of Brahm& seated S'iva by his side, whereupon Párvatt looked extremely 
depressed. Then she cogitated in her mind thus: “Neither did I see my 
tutelary deity nor did I attain the object of my vow." So thinking she was 
about to commit suicide, when suddenly a light flashed across the sky. It 
illumined the quarters like millions of suns and heated the mount Kaildsa and 
the gods. This sphere of light was very expansive and eclipsed everything else. 
The gods adored the Supreme light. Vişņu said, Maháviráta who wields 
a world on each of the pores of his skin is but a sixteenth part of God. What 
are we, then, as compared to bim?" Brahma said, “The Vedas alone are able 
to cemprehend the Supreme Being. How can f adore or describe him?”  S^iva 
said, I preside over wisdom. How can I adore him who transcends the bounds 
of wisdom?"  Daarma said, * How can I adore a Being who is invisible and 
who is visible only when ne is incarnate?” Tne gods said, * How can we adore 
you, when we are but the digits of your digits and when the Vedas and the 
goddess of knowledge are uuable to recite your virtues?" The Munis said, 
“The knowledge of the Vedas has made us learned. How can we adore you, 
the cause of the Vedas imperceptible to the mind and indescribable by words? 
No word is sufficient to eulogise you. 


102-80. Saraswati said: © The Pandits call me the presiding deity of 
words. But you exceed the limits of language and mind. How can I adore 
you?" Savitri said: Ihave given birth to the Vedas, it is true, But you 
created me through your digits You are the final cause. lam a female. How can 
I adore you?”  Laksmi said: “Iam the spouse of Visnu who is the off- 
spring of your digits. I preserve the uuiverse. I am able to create through your 
digits. You are at the root of creation. How can I adore you?” Himalaya 
said: ‘*By my misfortune, I have become immoveable. I am very insignificant. 
People will laugh at the idea of an adoration of which I am incapable. How 
can I adore you?” In this way, the gods and the Munis adored the Supreme 
Being and paused. ‘Then Durga, the mother of the world, with white clothes 
on, and clusters of hair round her head, the very emblem of burning flame, and 
light incarnate was deputed by Brahma and others to pray the Supreme 
Being. 

109-120. She said, * O Krisna, you know me, but I cannot know you. 
No one can know you No one conversant with the Vedas can know you. 
Those who are the outcome of yourdigits cannot know you. How can they who 
are the digits of your digits know you ? You know your own essence; but 
others do not know you. You are the subtlest of the subtle and the densest of 
the dense. You are eternal the image and cause of the universe. You are 
the cause as well as the effect. You are the tinal cause. You are effulgent, 
invisible and propless. You are dissociated with all things, void of attributes 
and bear testimony to all actions. You delight in self. You are excellent. You 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


MEL ue ene 


Tus charming Pürvati, at the sight of this. Being, desired in hi 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


GANES'4-K HANDA. 17 


are the cause and image of Viráta. Wor purposes of creation, you vest yourself . 
with attributes and then partake of the character of Nature. You are the 
Nature as well as the Supreme Being. Without you the world is nil, and you 
are the Jiva (creature) the witness, the object of suffering or enjoyment as well 
as your own reflection. You are the Karma, the seed of Karma and yield fruits 
of Karma. The Yogis meditate your abstract light, others contemplate you 
as a Being vested with four hands, as the lovely consort of Laksmi. ‘The 
Vaisnavas regard you as corporeal vested with a lovely form, holding ia your 
hands conches, wheel, mace and lotus. Your votaries contemplate you as 
possessed of two hands, lovely, young, dark-blue in appearance, tranquil, 
husband of the cow-berdess decorated with gems and yet effulgent. 
Had you not been effulgent, why should the Yogis have meditated you 
at all? I was adored in days of old by Brahma with a view to the 
destruction of the demons: aud so I emanated fron the valour of the gods, I 
am eternal and represent your lustre, and yet L manifested myself in the form of 
a woman. I represent your illusion’ by which I was bewildered, killed the 
demons, and then went to the Himalayas. 


121-131. Later on, when the gods were oppressed by the demon called 
T&rakáksya I was born as the daughter of Dakga and married to S'iva, at the 
instance of Brahma, and others. In this birth, also, I got as my husband 
S'iva who married me, as he was pleased with my devotions. But being bewild- 
erd by the gods, I was unable to sustain in my womb the semen of S/iva. 
O god, Ladored you, therefore, to obtain a son. By means of this vow, I 
desire a son like yourself. The Vedas prescribe to the worshipper, O Lord, her 
husband as the priest’s fee on the occasion of this vow. O ocean of mercy, 
have compassion on me for the above reasons." So saying, O Nárada, Párvati 
paused. Whoever with a pure heart listens to the above ode gets a son valorous 
like Visnu. A person who eats only ghee and boiled rice for a year and for this 
period worships Hari reaps the benefit of the Punyaka vow. This excellent 
hymn of Visnu gives prc sperity, happiness and redemption to a woman, secure 
io her the good graces of her husband and contributes to her beauty and fame. 
It produces reverence for Hari, developes the knowledge of ontology and gives 
vigour to the intellect. 


CHAPTER VIII. 


1-10. Nár&yana said: * The mérciful Krisna, being pleased with the 
ode, manifested his form (invisible to others) to Parvati. This goddess having 
been deeply absorbed in meditation beheld the enchanting form of Lord Krisna 
mounted on achariot of gem, inlaid with pearls aod conjoined with diamond 
wreaths. That Being had a yellow dress on, a wreath of wild flowers round His 
neck and a flute in His hands. He was decked with gems. He was young and 
gorgeously dressed. His body was besmeared with sandal-paste. A gentle 
smile lighted up his face which vied with the autumnal moon. His head was 
deoked with a jasmine wreath anda diadem lighted up by the plumage of a 
peacock. He was surrounded by cow-herdesses. That form which harbours the 
charms of ten millions of Cupids was very lovely, delightful and ; spicious 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Fi 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


D 


18 THE BRAHMA-V AIV ARTA PURÁNA. 


ee, 


in His likeness. This boon was immediately granted to her by that effulgent 
Being. He likewise acceded to the prayers of the gods and then disappeared. 


11-22. Then the all-adorable Durgá distributed gold and gems to the 
mendicants, bards and the Brahmins. She feasted the gods, the Brahmins and 
the mountains, worshipped S’iva with several ingredients, ordered the beat of 
drums and caused the celebration of many auspicious deeds and the recitation 
of the name of Hari. When the vow was finished, she generously gave alms 
to the poor, entertained evory body and herself took food along with her 
husband. She entertained all with perfumed betel-leaves and chewed betel herself 
along with her husband. Then she slept with her husband on a lovely bed, 
white like the foam of milk, constructed with gems and perfumed with musk, 
saffron, sandal-paste and flowers. This jovial goddess merrily wantoned with 
her lord in the lovely forest of sandal in a portion of the Kailása, a mountain 
reverberating with the sound of cuckoos and the hum of bees and ventilated by 
the wind redolent of flowers After repeated amorous diversions, just at the time 
of the discharge of the semen, Visnu, by his extraordinary spell, assumed the 
form of a Brahmin and put in appearance in the house designed for their en- 
joyments. He was very ugly in appearance, as a result of his poverty. 
His hair was rough for want of oil. He was shabbily dressed, and looked 
like a beggar : his teeth were very white, he was perplexed with thirst, his body 
was emaciated, his forehead wielded a white mark, he was poverty-stricken 
and his voice had a supplicating tone. This decrepit, superannuated beggar 
stood up at the threshold of the pleasure-house of S'iva soliciting alms, 
rice, &c., and called out the name of Siva. 


23-28. The Brahmin said, “O S'iva, what are you doing? Iam your 
refugee, preserve my life. -I have been observing the vow of abstinence 
for seven days and now being very hungry I want to eat. O Sire, O ocean 
of mercy, look compassionately at this decrepit, thirsty old man. O mother 
Durga, daughter of the mountain that produces endless gems, get up and 
give me food and perfumed water. You are the mother of the world. I 
am not distinct from the world. While I have a mother in you, why 
should I remain thirsty ? At these entreaties, as S'iva was about to get 
up, his semen did uot enter into Párvati's womb but dropped on-the ground. 
Párvati was frightened, put on a thin dress and arrived at the door. Siva 
followed her." - 


29-32. They saw there a poverty-stricken, stooping, old Bráhmin, 
the flesh of whose body was loose, who had a staff in his hand, who looked 
like a devotee with parched throat and lips, who was constantly eulogising 
bothof them and was restless in disposition. S'iva smiled complacently at, 
his words and gently said thus: «O best of those versed in the Vedas, where 
is your home? What is your name ? Please tell me soon.” 


33-40. Párvati said, *Olearned Br&hmin, whence are you coming ? 
My good fortune has brought you hero. My life has been rendered blessed | 
to day, as a Brahmin is my guest. Whoever adores a: guest adores the three - 
"worlds: for the gods, Brahmins and religious preceptors preside over 8 - 
guest. The feet of a guest harbour all the sacred streams. A house-holder - 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


gy ay cal T 


obtains through the water wherewith the feet of a guest are washed the 
fruits of all kinds of pilgrimages. Whoever worships a guest and ministers 
to him to the best of his powers obtains the reward of bathing in all sacred 
rivera and the benefits of initiation in all sacrifices. In India, whoever 
reverentially ministers to a guest practically performs a. great act of charity. 
The pious acts prescribed by the Vedas are not equalin degree to the six- 
teenth part of the holy act which is performed by ministering to a guest. 
If a guest goes away disappointed from the house of a person, the manes 
and the gods leave it also. The person is thereby guilty of the sin of 
Brfhm{n-slaughter.” 


41-43. The Bráhmin said, “O you well versed in the Vedas, you 
ought to perform the aot as prescribed by the Vedas, I am oppressed by 
thirst and hunger. The Vedas hold, * The diseased, the hungry, and those 
who already observed the vow of abstinence are entitled to eat anything they 
desire.”  Párvati said, “ Kindly specify the food that could rarely be secured 
in the universe. Bless my life, O Brahmin, by partaking of that food.” 


44-58. The Brahmin replied, “O virtuous nymph, I have heard that 
you prepared many kinds of sweatmeat, while performing the vow. Those 
sweets I desire to eat. { am yourson First entertain me with those sweets. 
The Vedas have specified five kinds of fathers, many kinds of mothers and 
five kinds of sons. The fathers are as follows:—He who gives knowledge, 
he who gives food, he who preserves from danger, he who begets the son 
and the father-in-law. ‘he mothers are as follows:—the preceptor’s wife, 
tho actual mother, she who suckles the infant, the sister of the father, the 
sister of the mother, the step-mother, the daughter-in liw, the wife of the 
person who gives food. The sons are as follows:—the servant, the pupil, the 
adopted son, the begotten son and the refugee. The begotten son alone is 
entitled to property. The rest are godsons. You are barren; I am there- 
fore your orphan son. Cake, rico, boiled with sugar snd milk, ripe 
fruits, sweets varying according to time and locality, boiled grain, Swastika 
(a kind of cake), condensed milk, sugarcane, the produce of the sugar- 
cane, „hee, curd, winter rice, vegetables cooked with ghee, balls of 
molasses and fried sesamum, honey, préparations of barley are in your possession, 
O goddess. Fragrant water and betel-leaves perfumed with camphor you have 
like-wise got. Please give me the above things in such a large quantity to eat 
that my belly might swell. Your .basband is the lord of the three worlds and 
the source of all prosperity. You represent the great goddess of fortune and 
bestow all sorts of happiness on people. Kindly give me a throne of gem, 
valuable ornaments, and pure excellent clothes. O chaste goddess, give me like- 
wise the Mantra of Hari and implant in my mind firm faith in him. You are 
the spouse of Hari and represent his energy. 


59 67. © mo her, give me the knowledge called the “ Conquest of 
death,” the pleasing faculty of making any gifts and accomplishment or perfection 
in ail] matters. What can you not give to your son ? Purify my mind and 
engage it in virtue and asceticism. Do not engage it in the pursuit of desire 
or worldly enjoyments which occasion re-birth. Desire leads to action and 
action, to endurance (Bhoga). This Bhoga is of two kinds, good or bad. 
This endurance is the cause or ploasure of pain. Pleasure or pain does not 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
A 
20 THE BRAH M A-V AIV ARTA PURAN A. 


appear unexpectedly. The Karma isat the root of pleasure and paiu. ^ This 
is why savants desist from their Karma. They destroy it, root and branch, 
very joyfully and associate with the Vaisnavas for the meditation of Hari 
through asceticism. The pleasures of the senses last only so long as the sensual 
objects contributing to the above pleasures exist. But the pleasure derived 
from the recitation of Hari's name is eternal. Those who recollect Hari enjoy 
a period of longevity which is never exhausted. ‘ime has no hold over them, 
They live eternally and being conversant with all sorts of accomplishments, or 
being accomplished in every respect can go to any place they like. They know 
the conditions of ten millions of their past births. They also are subject to 
birth according to their pleasure. 


68-78. '"Lhey consecrate others and the shrines also with their movements, 
They consecrate the world with the dust of their feet, The place where they 
dwell only so long as the cow is milked is rendered sacred like a place frequented 
by pilgrims. He into whose ears the Mantra of the guru is poured is regarded 
by historians as holy as the person who has bathed in sacred streams. He 
can redeem a hundred ancestors of his, a hundred descendants in his line, his 
brother and mother. In the line of his maternal uncle, he relieves from the 
torments of hell ten ancestors, ten descentants and his grandmother. One who 
sees a worshipper of Hari reaps benofits secured by all kinds of pilgrimages and 
initiation in all sorts of rites. Asthe fire and the wind are not polluted by 
the consumption or contact of impure objects, so is a Vaignava never implicated 
in any kind of sin. After three crors of births, a person is subjected to ten births 
of a human being. ‘he seed of faith blossoms in his mind by his association 
with virtuous people. The sight of sinners dries it up. Communication with the 
Vaisnavas, again, rejuvenates and immortalises it and helps its development, 
birth by birth, into a tree. Ifit grows into a huge tree, the homage of Hari 
and subsequently the condition of one of the attendants of Hari are secured 
thereby. 


79-86 At the time of the eternal destruction of the world, every one, oven 
Brahma, is destroyed, but a Vaignava is never destroyed. O nother of Narayana, 
endow me with faith in Hari. Without your mercy, tbis faith cannot be attained. 
Your vow is simply meant to instruct people. You yield fruits of every action 
and are eternal In every Kalpa, Krisna is born as your son. He will soon 
grace your lap as your son” So saying, the Brahmin disappeared and, 
immediately wielding the form ofan infant, went to the bed of Párvati. He 
mixed himself up with the semen of S'iva and like a new-born infant began 
to look upwards at the roof of the house. His colour was pure like the Champaka : 
he vied with ten millions of moons in grace. His lovely charm was calculated 
to increase the lustre of the eye of the spectators. His body was exquisite and 
Jikely to enohant even: Cupid His face was incomparable and put to shame 
the autumnal moon. 


87-97. His eyes were very beautiful and put to blush even the lotus. 
His forehead and cheek were handsome. ‘he fore-part of his nose was supe- 


rior to the bill «£ the Divine esgle. The whcle cf his constitution was ' 


symmetrical and had no parallel iu the three wcrlds, The boys sleeping on 
the bed began to roll his hands and feet. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


. gacied rites. The merit acquired by the sight ofa son is sixteen | 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
GAN ES’ A-KHANDA. 2i 


CHAPTER IX. 


1-13. Náráyana said, “When Hari disappeared, Dufgáà and S'ankara 
wandered about in quest of the Brahmin.’  Párvati said, «O Brahmin, 
hungry and perplexed where did you go away? Lord, appear only 
once and save my life. O S'iva, get up soon and find out the Br&hmin. 
We were a little absent-minded and he disappeared. The guest is like a god: 
If such a guest goes away without accepting the hospitality of the host, - . 
the latter’s life is rendered» useless. The manes do not accept oblation and 
cakes from him. ‘The fire does not accept oblations of ghee from him : the gods 
do not accept from him the presents of flower and water. For all these articles’ 
coming from an impure man are impure like wine. His cakes.are impure, and 
his touch destroys piety.” Then there wasa voice from the sky (which the 
alarmed bewildered Durga heard), to the following effect: “O mother of 
the world, be of good cheer. As the result of your Punjaka vow, behold ! 
the Supreme, offulgent being Krigna who is adored by the saints, the Lord 
cf the Goloka, has manifested himself as your son in your house. -Go and 
behold that Being who is meditated by Brabma, Visnu, S'iva and other gods 
atevery Kalpa whose mere remembrance destroys all sins and who is the 
very embodiment of sanctity. : 

Behold that eternal, effulgent being whom you meditate at every Kalpa 
and who wields a form cut of compassion for his worshippers in the capacity 
of your son, He is the root cause of the achievement of all your desires and 
is, as it were, the fruit of the Kalpa-tree. He is so beautiful that he can _ 
crush the pride of ten millions of Cupids, : f 


14.18. He is not a hungry Brahmin, but Hari himself in the 
guise of a Brahmin. O Durgi, why are you lamenting in vain? 
Where is that old man and where is the guest?" The voice ceased ; 
and Durgå entered her seraglio and delightfully saw the boy lying down . 
on a bed. The boy was -looking upwards, and vied in grace with a 
hundred moons. By the radiance of his body, he lighted up the globe. He 
was rolling on the bed and his eyes were twinkling. Desirous to suck 
the breast of his mother, he was crying, ‘‘Uma, Uma.” The auspicious - 
Parvati, at this sight, went agitated to Siva to communicate to the lord of A 
her life this joy£ul tidings. ; hab. § 

19-27. She said, “ O lord of my life. come here fora time and behold 
him whom you meditate in every Kalpa as the dispenser of the ini its 
devotion. Pray, come quickly and look at the baby face of a son ) 
delivers his father from the hell called Put. The sight of a son is s 
times more efficacious than ablution in all holy rivers or initial 


efficacious than al! kinds of alms or even the gift of the world as thi 
fee. The merits acquired by asceticism andthe vow of abstinence are 
in degree. But the birth of a son is sixteen times more 
S'iva, when he heard her, went home cheerfully with hi 
beheld his son as offulgent as heated gold beneath the 

of his son was as exquisite as ihe image of tbe 

which is always manifest in his heart. 1 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
33 THE BRAHM A-V AIV ARTA PURANA. 


e x ———————— 


up overwhelmed with- joy, kissed him, again and again, and said, | 


“As a poor man is unexpectedly pleased with the sudden attainment of wealth, 
so my mind has been elated with joy, upon the acquisition of a gem like 
you. 

28-37. I am as much pleased as a woman who sees hor husband 
after a long course of separation or as a woman who sees her only son 
returning home after years or as a person who regains his lost wealth or ag 
people who are cheered with a shower of rains after a drought oras a help- 
less, blind man who gots back his eyes or as a person (merged in .the 
ocean) obtaining a pilot as well as a boat or asa thirsty person who is re- 
freshed by cool and fragrant water or as a person who in the midst of 
wild-fire gets à harbour or as a famished person who, after the religious vow 
of abstinence, finds cheering food for his entertainment."  Párvati, having 
Baid so, took the child in her lap and very gladly suckled her. Lord S’iva 
also held the boy in his lap with a cheerful heart, kissed his face and blessed 
him in the way as prescribed by the Vedas. 


GHAPTER X. 


1-11 Náráyana said, “The nuptial pair (S’iva and Parvati) thereafter came 
out and for the benefit of their son cheerfully distributed alms to the 
Br&hmins and caused music to be sounded on the occasion. Himalaya gave 
to the Brahmins one lakh gems, one thousand elephants, three lakhs of horses, 
ten lakhs of cows, five lakhs of goldpieces, excellent gems, pearls and diamonds, 
clothes, ornaments, rubies &c, Visnu with pleasure gave Kaustubha to 


the Brahmins. Brahmi gave many valuable objects to the Brihmins as | 


solicited by them. Dharma, the Sun, Indra, the gods, the Munis, the Gan- 
darvas, the mountains and the goddesses distributed to them many articles 
by turns. Laksmi distributed thousands of touch-stones, hundreds of golden 
ornaments for the neck (necklaces), hundreds “of Kaustubhas, hundreds of 
diamonds, yellow gems, cows, horses, elephants, heaps of gold and cloths 
to the Brahmins, 


12-20. Saraswati gaye them lovely wreaths decorated with Kaustubha, 
gems and diamonds brighter than the sun-light Sfvitri gave them excel- 
lent diamond-wreaths and apparels of various sorts, Kuver& gave them one 
lakh lumps of gold and a hundred invaluable gems. These deities on the occasion 
of the festival of the son of Siva made various gifts to the Brahmins 
and being very much delighted observed the. face of the infant. ‘The Bráh- 
mins and the bards unable to bear the load broke their journey from time to time. 
Out of them, the old beggars recited the Story of previous donorsand young 
men listened to them. Then Visnu very gladly ordered the beat of drums, 
the performance cf music and dance, the recital of the Vedas and the Puranas, 
the adoraticn of the Munis, and, the celebration cf auspicious deeds through the 
Munis and secured their blessings for the boy. He then himself blessed the 
boy along with other gods and goddesses, : 

2130. Visnu said, “O hoy, may. your wisdom and longevity be equal 
to those of S'iva and may. your valour resemble mine, And may you 
be the lord of all perfection!” Brahma said, “The world shall be filled with 
your celebrities : you .shall be adored by all people and worshipped 


748. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


GANES'A-KHANDA. 23 


first, i. e, before other gods.” Dharma said, “ May you be pious, omniscient, 
merciful and religious-minded like mel"  Sfiva, said, ʻO darling of my life, 
may you be generous, faithfal to Hari, tranquil, pious and wise like me!” 
Laksmíi said, * may I ever remain in your house and may you get a spouse 
tranquil, lovely and chaste like me |? Saraswati said, “O son, may you, like 
myself, get poetic genius, retentive faculty, memory and power of deliberation." 
S&vitri said, “O child, Iam the mother of the Vedas May you soon be my 
adherent and the best of those who know the Vedas!” Himalaya said, _ 
“May your faith in Krigna be eternal; and may you beas prosperous as 
Krisnal" Menaka said, *' May you be as deep as the ocean, as charming 
as Cupid, as graceful as Krigna and as pious as Dharma!" The Earth said, 
“May you be as forgiving as Il May you be the asylum of all people and 
the habour of gems! May you be free from all obstacles or calamities, the 
remover of impediments: and the receptacle of all good!” 


91-40. Párvati suid. ‘May you be an adept like your father, the 
conqueror of death, owner of all resources and past master in all sciences.” 
Narayana said, “The child was thus blessed by the saints, Munis and adepts. 
The bards and the Br&hmins chanted auspicious hymns. O Son, I have 
recited the auspicious accouut of the birrh of Ganesa. Any one who listens 
to this auspicious chapter with a pure heart attains all. good and becomes 
the harbour of all good. A person who has no son, if he listens to it, gets a 
son. A poor man becomes wealthy. A weak man gets lasting prosperity. A 
man anxious for a wife gets a wife, and a man anxious to get adherents secures 
them.. A deseased or an unfortunate man secures health or fortune. By 
virtue of this ode, a person who has lost husband, wealth or happiness 
regains the object lost. This one chapter of Ganega secures as much sanctit 
to the audience as the whole narrative of Ganesa. A person in- whose house this 
chapter is prescrved always secures prosperity. Whoever, on the eve of his 
departrre for any place or on any sacred day, listens to this chapter with rapt 
attention gains his object by the grace of Ganega. There can be no doubt 
about this point. 


CHAPTER XI. 


. 1-10 Nár&yana said, “Lord Hari after having blessed the child sat on 
an excellent throne of gem in the assembly attended by the gods and the 
Munis. On his right side, sat S’iva: on his left side, sat Brahmá ; on his front 
sat Dharmá, the witness of all acts. Near Dharms, sat we (Nara and 
Narayana), the Sun, Indra, the Moon, the gods and the Munis. The dancers 
danced. The Gandarvas (a class of demi-gods said to be the chorieters of 
Heaven) and the Kinnars (a class of demi-gods with human figures and head 
of a horse) begin to sing. The Vedas adored Hari with Vedic hymns. Then 
the great ascetic S'ani (Saturn), the son of the Sup, arrived there to see the 
face of the son of S/iva. He was very modest in appearance, bis eyes were 
half shut, his mind was fixed upon Krisna. He recollected Krigna, externally 
and internally. He was effulgent like a flame of fire, very handsome, dark- 
blue in hue and was olad in yellow dress. Saturn saluted Visnu, Brahma, 
Siva, Dharma, the Sun, the gods and the Munis and then went to see the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE — — 
Byer cS 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


A 
24 THE BRAHMA-V AIVARTA PURAN A. 


child. He first arrived at the main threshold and addressing the door-keeper 
Visilaksya who was armed with a spear and who was as valorous as Siva 
said thus “O myrmidon of S'iva, by the command of S'iva and at the request 
of Visnu, the gods and the Munis, I am going to see the child. 


11-17. O savant, there I shall worship the goddess Párvati and after 
observing the face of her son in her presence I shall return home. I am indif- 
ferent to wordly enjoyments. I have not come here to beg anything.” Vigálüksya 
answered:  * I am not a subordinate of the gods, noram I a myrmidon 
of S'iva. Without the permission of my mother, I cannot allow any one 
to enter". So saying he went inside, secured the permission of a Parvati and 
by a turn of his glance, (i. e., wink of his eye) asked the lord of the planets 
to enter, Wheu S'ani entered, he bowed low to Parvati seated on a throne 
of gem. At that time, she was being continuously attended by five of her 
female attendants with white chowries and chewing  betel-leaves pre- 
sented to her by her associates. She was decked with ornaments and 
white elothes and with the child in her lap sh» was witnessing the dance of 
female dancers. The auspicious Durgá at the sight of Saturn affection- 
ately enquired into his welfare and blessed him. 


18-25. Pârvatî said, “O lord of planets, why are you hanging down 
your head? O saint, why are you not looking at me or my son?" S'ani 
replied, ** O goddess, every one subservient to Karma reaps the fruits o£ his 
devotions, ‘The fruit of Karma, good or bad, does not disappear in 
millions of ages. One is born as a human being or a beast ‘as the result of' 
one's Karma. Asa result of the Said Karma, one goes to heaven or hell, 
one becomes a king or his slave, one becomes healthy or diseased, one is - 
addicted to worldly enjoyments or becomes an ascetic, one rolls in wealth or 
is poverty-stricken, one gets go»d or bad relations, one gets a good wife or 
a son or has none, one gets a bad wife or none. O beloved spouse of . 
S'iva, in this connexion, there is a mysterious anecdote which, though scanda- 
lous and ought not to be divulged I would reveal unto you.” 


20-34. Since my very childhood, my mind has been attracted to | 
Krisna. I have been incessantly engaged in devotions to that god and am always / 
adverse to worldly enjoyments. My father married me to the daughter of 
Chitra-ratha. My wife was chaste and effulgent and always engaged herself in ij 
asceticism. (Onco upon a time, this enchantress of the heart of the Munis, with | 
rolling eyes, clud herself in excellent dress, put on ornaments of gem and | 
approached me with a smile. Finding that I was absorbed in the meditation | 
of Hari, she announced to me her carnal desire. But seeing that I was inatten- | 
tive to her, void of all consciousness and lost in the devotion of Hari, she was | 
convince that her menses would be ineffectual or fruitless and cursed me thus: ' 
“OQ fool, as youdid not losk at me even out of deference to my menses, I | 
curse you. That direction at which you will cast your glance shall be destroyed. i 
O chaste goddess, Í propitiated her after my devotions were over. But she was | 

‘unable to do away with the result of her curse, though her mind was filled - 
with direction. This is why, O mother, L do not try seo anything with my own 
eyes, and since that day forth, for fear of killing lives, I have been hanging 
down my head.” Parvati laughed at his words, and the dancers, (male and — 
female) indulged ina very loud laugh at his expense. 


à ra CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


/ 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


GANES'A KHANDA. 1075 


CHAPTER XII. 


1.7. Náráyana said, *Durgá having heard this, remembered Hari and 
said, ‘The whole world is subservient to the will of God." A victim to predes- 
tination, she was prompted by curiosity and said to Saturn, “Look at me and 
my son." Who can resist the dispensation of fate? Saturn, when he heard 
Parvati, cogitated in his mind as to whether he should see Párvati's son or 
not. ‘Then having cited Dharma as his witness, he desired to see the child but 
not his mother. Before he saw him, however, his mind was very much dejected 
and his throat, lipsand palate were dried up. From the corner of his left eye 
he beheld the son's face whereupon the head of the boy was at once severed 
from his body. S/ani at once turned away his face and hung down his head. 
The headless trunk of the boy besmeared with blood entered into the lap of 
Párvati and his head passed to the Goloka and merged into Lord Krisna. 


8:14. At this sight, Párvati took his dead body into her lap and lamen- 
ting loudly again and again dropped down on the ground in a swoon. The gods, 
the mountains, the Gandarvas, Mahádeva and all the residents of Kailasa were 
simply astoanded at the scene and looked like pictures painted on the wall. 
When Hari saw all of them in a swoon, he rode on his eagle (Garuda) and went 
northwards towards the Puspabhadrá river and there, in the midst o£ a forest, 
he saw the king of elephants lying down with his mate. That elephant with 
his youug ones, here and there, turned his head towards the north and lay 
fainting through the efforts of sexual intercourse. Hari at once cnt off his head 
and cheerfully plaeed the lovely head of the beast besmeared with blood on the 
back of the Garuda. The dead body of the elephant having tumbled on his~ 
mate(spouse), she immediately awoke and began to lament the loss of her part- 
ner along with her young ones. 


15-21. Then the female elephant adored the preserver Hari, the Lord of 
destiny, who alone can preserve people from the cruel hands of Fate. Hari 
^ was pleased with her ode, dragged another head out of the head which was cut 
off and attached it to the body of the animal that was beheaded. He touched 
the body of the beast with his foot and animated it with Brahmá-gyána (the 
knowledge of Brahma). He then said to the elephant, “O elephant, live till 
the end of the Kalpa with all your young ones.” So saying, he went to the 
Kailàa with the speed of wind. He then came to Parvati, took the boy in 
his lap, extracted blood out of the elephant and attached it to the body of the 
infant. - Krigna similarly animated the boy by shoutng Hunkár (lit. a sound 
of defiance). He made over the “boy to Pfiryati and consoled her with psychic 
octrines, 


22-39, He said, “O S/iva, the whole world from Brahma down to an insect 
suffers the conseqneuces of Karma. You are the personification of intellect. 
What is unknown to you? A person suffers for his acts for a hundred crores 
of ages and the result of his act overtakes him at every birth. O virtuous 
nymph, even Indra is obliged to have at times the birth of a worm and subject 
to Karma, a worm is also sometimes elevated to the rank of lndra. Subject 
to the same law, a fly may kill an elephant, but au elephant may not killa 


- 


, A 
^ - 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


A 
26 THE BRAHMA-VAIV ARTA PURANA 


es 


fly. Karma causes pain, pleasure, fear and grief. Good act alone produces 
happiness, The evil or misery is the result of bad acts, The good and the evil 
as the result of Karma putin their appearance in this world as well as in the 
next. India is the country best suited to the attainment of the results of 
Karma. Lord Krisna alone is the dispenser of the fruits of Karma. He is the 
fate of fate, death of death, time of time, providence of providence, the preserver 


of the preserver. Brahma, Visnu and Mahea are the digits of Mah&-Visnu who. 


wields a world on each of the pores of his skin. This Maha-Visnu is only an 
outcome. of the digits of Krisna. O Durga in this universe teeming with 
animate and inanimate objects, some are parts of His digits; others are parts 
of the parts of His digits. This is why he is called Vináyaka." Parvati was 
pleased to hear his words, bowed to Krignia, the wielder of the mace, and suckled 
the infant. Being deputed by S'iva, she adored Vignu with folded hands, 
Visnu blessed the boy and his mother and placed his own ornament, the 
Kaustubha, round his neck. Brahma gave him his diadem, Dharma gave him 
an ornament of gem. By turns, all the goddesses made to the boy appropriate 
gifts. Siva, the gods, the Munis, the mountains, the Gandarvas and the ladies 
cheerfully adored Visnu. When Siva saw that the dead infant was restored 
to life, he gave numberless heaps of gold to the Br&hmins and thousands of 
horses aud elephants to bards. Himalaya, the gods and goddesses also distri- 
buted several articles to the bards and the Brahmins, 


40-49. Later on, Visnu ordered the Bráhmins to be feasted, auspicious 
deeds to be performed, the Vedas and the Puranas to be recited. Parvati 
seeing that Sarurn was very much perplexed with shame in the midst of the 
assembly cursed him saying, “Thou shalt be a cripple.” Thereupon the Sun, 
Kasyapa and Yama highly incensed stood up with a view to leave the house 
of S'iva. Their eyes and faces turned red; their lips quivered. Citing Dharma 
and Visnu as their witnesses, thoy prepared to curse Parvati. Brahma deputed 
by Visnu and gods consoled them as well as Parvati crimson with indignation. 
The frightened gods, Munis and mountains appeased Brahma with suitable 
expressions Kagyapa said: “Saturn has become evil-eyed through the curse of 
his wife. He saw the face of the boy as commanded by his mother. When 
Parvati cursed the innocent Saturn, her son's body shall be surely injured." 
Yama said: “You directed Saturn to see your son’s face. Then why did you 
curse him? We shall curse you likewise, _No sin is committed by injuring 
those who injure others.” 


50-58. Brahma said, “Parvati has cursed Saturn out of feminine levity - 


only. Therefore. O saints, excuse her at tho entreaty of others. - And, O Durg& 
you have cursed an innocent guest whom you yourself permitted to see your 
son" So saying he made over S'ani to her for the remission of the curse. 
Upon this. Párvati was pleased: and so were the Sun, Yama and Kasyapa. 
Then Parvati said to Saturn, “O friend of Hari, by my boon, you shall be the 
king of planets, tho best of ascetics and longevous. No danger can befall a 
worshipper of Hari. From this day forth, your faith in Hari shall be rendered 
frm. But my curse isbound to be effectual and you shall be a little bil lame." 
So saying the goddess took the boy in her lap, blessed S’ani and took her seat 


among female deities. S’ani threw himself prostrate before her and then went | 


to the gods, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE — 


Md. 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
_ GANES'A'KHANDÁ. - M 


CHAPTER XIII 


1-16. Subsequently, Visnu attended by the gods and the Munis worship» 

ped the boy with excellent ingredients and said: “O son, you are the best of 
the gods and the Yogis. I worshipped you first of all. Therefore you shall 

* be worshipped by all. So sayiag he gave him a wreath of wild flowers and 
the redeeming knowlédge of Brahma. He made him an adept like himself, 
presented him sixteen kinds of ingredients and performed his nomination 
ceremony (the ceremony of giving the child a name). He gave him eight 
names, (Vighneáa, Ganega, Heramba, Gajanana, Lambodara, Ekadanta, S'ürpa- 
Karna and Vináyaka) and secured for him the blessings of Munis Dharma 
provided him with the seat of an adept, Brahm& gave him the wooden water- 
pot. S'aukara gave him a throne for meditation. He also imparted to him 
abstruse metaphysical knowledge. Indra gave hima precious throne, the Sun 
gave him ear-rings, the Moon gave him a wreath of pearls, Kuvera gave him a 
wreath of pearls, the Fire gave him pure clothes. Varuna gave him an umbrella 
or parasol inlaid with gems; the Wind gave him diamond rings; Lakgmi gave 
him armlets, bracelets andanklets. S&vitrî gave him ornaments for the throat. 
Saraswati gave him a bright garland. In this way the gods and goddesses 
made him many presents. The Munis and the mountains gave him gems ; the 
Earth gave him a rat to serve himas his conveyance. In this way, the Manus, 
the Munis, the gods etc. after haviag made him several sorts of tasteful gifts 
worshipped him reverentially. Then Parvati, the mother of the world, gently 
smiled and seated her son ona throne of gem. She read the Vedas with the 
Munis and after having deposited a hundred jars full of the waters of all the holy 
streams bathed him and gave him a pair of pure clothes to serve as his apparel. 


17-29. Then Parvati prepared the Pádya water to wash the feet out of 
the water of the Godavari; the Arghya water for washing the feet with an 
offer of green grass, rice &c., out of the Ganges water: bent grass, sunned rice, 
flowers and sandal paste, made Achaman (water to rinse the mouth) out of the 
water of the Puskara, prepared the Madhu-parka, i.e., oblation of honey, milk 
and sugar, manufactured Visnu-oil and precious ornaments through Aswini- 
Kumara and placed on each side garlands ofall kinds of flowers except the 
holy basil, sandal, aloe, musk, saffron and frankincense. Balls of sesamum 
hugo like hills, equally big sugar Swastikas (a kind of cake), fried rice mixed 
with molasses, heaps of flattened rice, winter rice, with vegetables, heaps of 

. cakes, millions of jars'full of milk were gladly distributed by her. She 
distributed millions of jars full of curd, honey and ghee and likewise numborless 
baels, pomegranates, dates, carissa, carandas, black berries, mango, jacks, plan- 
E cocoanuts and other fruits varying with the nature of the time and 
place. 

30-40. She likewise gare pure, cooling Ganges water seasoned with 
camphor for rinsing the mouth. Himalaya with his ministers worshipped 
Ganega. Om Brim Hrim Hrim [bow to Ganesa, the form of Brahma the. 
sóuroe of all kinds of perfection, who gives all success and removes all impedi- 
ments. This mantra was first pronounced by Brahmá, Vigsnu and Mahega who 
thereafter made several kinds of gifts. This mantra consisting of thirty-two 
letters secures the four-fold objects of human pursuit. And if it is recited five 
lakhs of times, the worshipper becomes an adept and attains the rank of Visnu. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


, Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. À 
28 THE BRAHM A-V AIV ARTA PURANA 


n 


The recollections of Ganega’s name scares away impediments or calamities and 
makes the worshipper an orator and a past-master in e:ery uadertakiug. Even 
Vrihaspati is struck dumb before such a worshipper. He becomes a great poet, 
a savant and even the preceptor of Vrihaspati. The gods after haviug read this 
Mantra worshipped Ganesa and, being filled with joy caused several kinds of 
music to be sounded and the Brahmins to be feaste. They then made gifts to 
the bards. 


41-48. Visnu after having worshipped Ganesa recited his hymn. He 
said, “O Lord, having been unable to fathom your incontrovertible nature, I 
wish to eulogise you as the symbol of glory and effulgence, You are the best 
of the gods and the adepts; you are the preceptor even of the Yogis. You are 
unspeakable, imperishable, eternal, truthful aud 8piritnal. You are free like 
the wind, incorruptible and all-testifying. You are like a pilot to those who 
want to cross the sea of the world and you show compassion to your worshippers. 
You are beyond the scope of meditation. You are pious ond dispense the fruits 
of vir'ue and vice. You are the seed and the blossom of the tree of the world. 
You exceed the bounds of sense and represent the man, the woman and the 
eunuch. You existed in the beginning of creation. You have the right of 
being worshipped, firat of all and by all; and you are the ocean of virtue. 


49-6). You are equal to the goddess Nature, the product of Nature and 
yet distinct from Nature. Ananta with his thousand mouths, S/iva with his 
five mouths, Brahma with his four mouths, even Saraswati and the Vedas are 
unable to recite your virtues. What to talk of those who only know tho Vedas ? 
So saying, Vignu, the best of tho gods, paused. Whoover with rapt attention 
reads the above hymn in the morning, noon and evening reverentially is blessed 
by Ganega in every respect and all his calamities disappear. Whoever on the 
eve of his departure for any placo reads this hymn attains his object in every 
way. The bad dreams of a student of this hymn are turned into good dreams, 
The perusal of this hy mn dustroys one's foos removes impeliments and multiplies 
one's friends and prosperity. Onoe’s fortune remains stable in one’s house 
from generation to generation. One gets material resources in this world 
and attains the feet of Visnu on one's decease. By the grace of Ganesa, one 
certainly obtains all the benefits that can be secured by every kind of pilgrimage 
by the celebration of all sort of sacrifices and by great gifts of every description. 


61-72. Nárada said, “ Lord, I heard of his hymn and worship Now 
desoribe to me his sanotifying amulet. Nár&yana said, “When the worship of 
Ganesa was over, S'ani was struck with awe and said to Lord Visnu, ‘O best 
of savants, please describe to me the amulet of Ganesa for the destruction of 
sorrow and for the attainment of peace. I was much agitated in mind, when 

_ there was a feud between the gods and Mahá-Máyá. To remove that agitation 
from my mind, I want to hold this amulet. Visnu said, “This amulet is rare 
in the three worlds; it is mysteriously binted at in the Pur&nás and is attainable 
with difficulty even by the esoteric S’artras (holy scriptures). It is stated in 
the Kauthuma-S'&kha of the Sám-Veda. CO son of the Sun, l can part with 
kingdom, head and even my life, but this amulet can not be parted with 
even at the risk of my life. This Ganesa god of one tooth, is Eternal. He 
appears and disappears at his own will. Such is the case with his amulet also. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


pee oo 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
GANES'A KHANDA. 29 


eee 


Both the worship and hymn of this god are eternal. They exist in every Kalpa. 
The Munis worshipped him even before his present birth. As Iam born on 
the occasion of every incarnation, so is Ganesa born, again and again through 
the womb of Parvati. By wielding this amulet the Munis were redeemed in 
their life-time and gods, rendered fearless have destroyed their foes. Death 
does not overtake those who wield this amulet. They cannot be subdued by 
age or calamity. 

23-84, A person by reciting it ten lakhs of times becomos an adept. 
He cannot then be subdued by death. Even those who have not become 
adepts become orators, conquerors, adorable and longeval as soon as they 
wield this amnlet. This amulet is prepared out of a wreath or cluster of mantras. ' 
The wielding of this amulet destroys all sins. (Ghosts, spectres, demi-gods 
(that haunt funerals), false conceptions, Brahm&-Rákgases, the ghosts of 
Bráhmins who in their life-time indulge ina disdainful, spirit and carry away 
the wives and property of others, Dakinis or female imps. Yoginis, sorceress 
Vetálas, i.e. vampires or devils who occupy dead bodies, malignant gods, the 
inauspicious stars which oppress children, and the demi-gods who guard the 
field) run away when they get the scent of those who hold the amulet. The 
amulet-holders scare away anxiety, disease, mental distraction and grief as the 
divine eagle scares away the snakes. This amulet should be revealed by the 
preceptor to his own pupil. If it be revealed to the pupil of others or to a 
hypocrite by any body, he shalldie. The Rigi of this amulet is Prajapati or 
Brahma, its metre to Vrihati, and Ganesa isits god. It is meant to secure 
the fourfold objects of human pursuit. It is the essence of all amulets. Om 
Gaum Sam S/rí Ganegai Swáhá. This mantra might preserve my head. The 
above mantra consisting of thirty-two letters might preserve my forehead. Om 
Hrim Klim S^rím this mantra might preserve my eyes. Ganesa may preserve 
my palate. Om Hrim Srini Klim Sam. This mantra my preserve any nose. 
Om Gaum Sam Sürpa Karnáya Swahaé. May this mantra preservemy lips. 


85.98. The.mantra of sixteen letters may preserve my teeth, plate 
and tongue. Om lambodarai Swáhà, may this. mantra preserve my cheek. 
Om S/rim Sam Gaj&ánan&yai Swaha. May this mantra preserve my shoulders. 
Om Hrim Klim Vinéyakai Swáhà, May this-mantra preserve my back 
Om Klim Hrim. May this mantra preserve my skeleton. Sam: may this 
mantra preserve my chest. May the remover of impediments preserve my 
hands, legs and my entire body. On the east side may the long-bellied god, 
on the south-east may the remover of impediments, on the south side may 
the lord of obstacles, on the south-west may the elephant faced god, on the 
west may the son of Parvati, on the north-west. may the son of S'iva, on the 
north, may the digit of the perfect Krisna, on the north-east, may the one-toothed 
lord, in the upper region, may Heramba, in the lower region may the lord of 
orention and on all sides, may the all adorable deity preserve me. May-the lord 
of the Yogis preserve me, sleeping or awake. Son, I thus described to you 

' the most wonderful amulet called the Samsár-mohan or the enchanter of the 
world composed of the mantras of every kind. O son of the Sun, at first at 
the Goloka in the grove of Vrinda-vana, in the sphere of the Rasa, Krigna gave 
it to me, seeing that I was very. humble in spirit. Now I give it to you. 

- You should not give it to ordinary people. It excels other amulets, isuniver- 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-Mo 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
30 THE BRAHMA-VAIVARTA PURANA 
———————————— 
sally adored and shields people from all kinds of danger. O lord of the planets, 
thousands of horse-sacrifices or hundreds of B&j-peya are not equal in merit 
toa sixteenth part of thisamulet. Whoever worships Ganega withont knowing 


the nature of this spell never turns an adept. Lord Visnu, after having ‘spoken 
thus to Saturn, paused. Then the gods gladly sat by his side. 


CHAPTER XIV. 


1-10. Náráyna said: “In that assembly, the gods, the Gandarvas and 
the Munis were delighted to witness the grand festival of Visnu. In the mean- 
time, Durga addressed Lord Vignu with a bow and a gentle smile thus: ‘Lord, 
you are the preserve of the world. Lam not apart from the world. . Why 
did you not preserve the irresistible semen of my husband? When the sexual 
intercourse was disturbed by Brahma and other gods deputed by you, the semen 
fell on the ground. Who has stolen it? All the gods are here. You had 
better investigate into the-matter. Why should there bean anarchy in a world 
of which you are the king?" Visnu laughed at her words and said thus: ʻO 
gods, you have heard Parvati. Now who has thieved the infallible seman of 
Siva? Bring the offender to mo at onco so. that he may be justly punished. 
He is nota king who does not rule properly and who favours only one party. 
The gods when they heard this discussed the matter among themselves and 
were benumbed with fear. They then spoke by turns.  Brahmá said, whoever~ 
has stolen the semen shall bo deprived of tho worship of Visnu on a sacred day 
in the holy land of India. 


11-28. S'iva repeated the curse of Brahmá. Yama said thus: “Tho thief 
of the seman shall surely be deprived of the privileges cf tho: protection which 
a fugitive enjoys and also of the fruits of the rites o£-Jik&dasi." Indra“ said, 
“May the offender forfeit his sanctity and fame.” Varuna said? **May the 
offender be born in any othor place than India as the son of a Brahmin who 
begs alms of a S'udra? Kuyera said, “May the offender prove a traitor to his 


friend and to the cause of truth?” gana said, *May he be born asa thief, a 
traitor to his preceptor and a murderer, consecutively. The Rudras said, 
“May the wretch be consecutively born asa liar, an adulterer and the slanderer.” 
The Heavenly physicians the sons of Agwine Kumara, said thus: Cupid said, 
“May he be guilty of the sin of violating tho wife of his preceptor. The 
offender shall forfeit the right of supporting his parents, preceptor, wife and 
sons.” The gods said “May that offender be born as a perjurer, void of posterity 
and wealth.” The goddesses said, “If a woman has purloined it, she shall be ' 
false to the bed of her lord and friendless.” Thereupon Hari addressed Dharma, 
the Sun, the Moon, tho Fire, the Wind, the Earth, the Water; the Morning, 
the Hyening and the Day and said thus: 


24-34. Ifthe gods have not stolen the semen of S/iva, who else haa - 
stolen it? You sbould reveal tho fact.” ‘The gods (thus addressed) trembled 
at his wordsand, discussing the matier among themselves, approached Visnu 
by turns. Dharma said, “This I know that the semen of S’iva dropped on 

"the earth,” "The Earth said, “Lord, Lam buta frail femele, Unable to bear — 


~~ ey 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
GANES'A KHANDA. 31 


— 


the irresistible load of S'iva's semen, I tossed it into the flame; kindly excuse. 
me." The Fire said, *O lord of the universe, unable to sustain the above load, 
I threw it into the forest of reeds. What avails the manliness of the weak?" 
The Wind said, *Lord as soon «s it dropped into the forest of the reed, the 
semen turned into a beautiful bo , and this event took place on the coast of 
the Swarna-Rikh&.” The Sun said, “I set as soon as Isaw the boy weeping. 
For lam subject to the wheels (or rotation) of time. I cannot continue to 
shine in the night.” ‘The Moon said, “O Visnu the Krittikâs were passing by 
that way at that time. When they saw the child weeping, they took him from 
the hermitage of plums to their own place." ‘he Water said, "They brought 
the boy who was more effulgent than ihe Sun and by suckling him contributed 
to his developmeut. As the six Krittikás have nursed him, they were pleased 
to called him Kártikeya." z 

35-40. The Night said, “They never turn away their eyes from him. 
He is dearer to them. than their lives. She who nourishes a boy is his rnother. 
The Day said, “Now they are feeding him with the rarest delicacies in the 
universe.” Hari when he heard all this was pleased.. Párvati when she got 
the news of her son distributed immeasurable quantity of wealth, clothes and 
millions of gems to the BrAbmins. Thereafter, Laksmi, Saraswati, Menaka, 
S&vitri, Visnu and other gods made similar gifts. 


CHAPTER XYV. 


1-12. S'ankara and Parvati, when the obtained they news of their son, 
sent valant messengers to the Krittikss at the instance of Visnn, the gods, 
the Munis and the montains. The names of the messengers are as follows: 
Bira-Bhadra. Visalaksya, Sanku-Karna, Kavandhaka, Nendiswara, Mahá&- 
Kala, Vajra-Danta, Bha-nandana, Goka-Mukha and Dadhi-Muka. They were 
bright like flames of fire. They were attended by millions of field-guardians, 
evil spirits, Vetálas, Yakgas, false conceptions, Brahma-rakgases, millions of 
female imps, Rudras, Bhairayas three lakhs of Yoginis (witches or female 
ascetics) and other deformed beings. Armed with weapons and running 
wildly, they besieged the house of the Krittik&s. These damsels were bewil- 
dered with fear and addressing K &rtika, effulgent with the lustre of Brahm& 
said, “Child, we do not know whose vast army has besieged, our house. We 
are ata loss what to do.”  Kártika answered auspicions mothers, be of good 
cheer, You need not fear when I am here. Who can resist the dispensation 
of fate?” In the meantime the commander-in-chief named Nandikeswara 
approached them and said, “ O mothers, O brother Kártika, S'iva, the destroyer 
of the world, the best of gods, has sent us to you. Now hear bis auspicious 
message. í 


13-22. In the festival of the birth of Ganeéa, in the mount of Kailasa, 
Brahma, Visnu, S'iva and other gods are holding an assembly. In that 
meeting Parvati requested Visnu to find you out, Thereupon Lord Visnu 
enquired of the gods into the matter one by one, and they gave a suitable 
reply. Dharma, the witness of virtue and vice, and other gods informed 
Visnu that you were residing in the house of the Krittikas. Ere this, S'iva 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


A 
32 THE BRAHMA-V AIVARTA PURANA 


had committed sexual intercurse with Párvati in solitude. As the gods saw 
S'iva at that time, his semen fell into the ground (the earth). The earth 
tossed it into the fire and the Fire-god threw it into the forest of reed. The 
Krittikâs picked you up from that forest. Now come along with us, as 
Visnu will install you as a general of the gods. You will kill the demon named 
Táraka and obtain all sorts of weapons. You are the son of S/iva the destroyer. 
How can the Krittikás conceal you? Can a dry tree conceal the fire in its 
hollow? You are most effulgent of all beings in tbe world. Are you fit to 
remainin their house? Does it befit the Moon-god to cast his reflection or 
image into the water ofa great well? You light up the world with your own 
lustre. Can the light of the body of others eclipse you? Can the Sun be 
screened by the hand of man? 


23-83. O son of S'iva, you are the all-pervadimg Visnu: you cannot 
be absorbed by the Krittikás. The sky can obscure others, but others cannot 
obscure the sky. Like the’ soul that is not implicated in ^i. a, not responsible 
for) the consequenees of an act performed by the sentient being (Jiva), you 
are also the lord of adepts. You ought not to snbmit to Maya or delusion, 
You are the lord and harbour of the world. As it is impossible for the ocean 
that harbours all rivers to remain (or to be contained) in one river, so it is not 
possible for you to remain in this insignificant place. An eagle cannot remain 
in the womb of a sparrow. An incompetent person cannot comprehend the 
Supreme Being, the emblem of wisdom, though He may gracoiously be pleased 
to take a form out of compassion for His believers. A faithless fool cannot 
realise the faith of Hari, How can the Krittikas comprehend you, who 
accumulate in-your person all kinds of virtue and energy and who are indes- 
cribable? No one esteems, O brother, those persons whose glory he does not 
know. Look, the assocation of the frogs with thh lotus does not redound to 
its credit.”  Ká&rtika said, ‘‘ Brother, [ know all; I know the three ages, t. en 
the present, the past and the future. You are wise and dependent on Siva | 
the conqneror of Death. Brother, the womb that a man attains by virtue of 
his past acts is a source of supreme satisfaction to him. By the spell of 
Visnu that birth a person regards as the best that he is compelled to assume 
according to his Karma. The primordial goddess Nature (Mab&máyá) has 
been born through the womb of Menaka and as the result of her rigid 
asceticism, she has obtained S'/iva as her husband. 


24-44. Everything from Brahmá down toa bush isimaginary. Every 
thing springs from Krisna and in time merges into Krisna. In every Kalpa, 
at every birth, Durga is my mother; deluded by her, I am entangled for ever 
in the meshes of creation. Every woman in the world is an outcome of the 
digits of Nature. Some spring from her digits, others from the digits of her 
digits. These wise, ascetic Krittikas are the personal digits of Nature. They 
have benefited me by suckling me and thus helping my development. I am their 
adopted son; and they vre my mothers. But as I have been begotten by the 
semen of the husband of Durga, the mother of the world, L am her son also. 
I was not born out of her womb. As these Krittikas are my god-mothers ‘she 
is likewise my god-mother only. This view is sanctioued by the S/astras. There 
are sixteen kinds of mothers, They are as follows:—She who suokles the child 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


GANES'A-KHANDA. 33 


she who wieldsthe child in her womb and gives him food, the wife of the preceptor, 
the wife of the tutelary deity, the father's wife, the daughter, the brother's 
daughter, the sister, the daughter-in-law, the mother-in-law, the paternal 
grandmother, the maternal grandmother, the brother's wife, the mother's sister, 
the father's sister, the maternal unole's wife. These Krittikás are the daughters 
of Brahmá vested witb Divine attributes. They are accomplished in every 
matter and adored in the three worlds. They are not ordinary beings. O Nandi, 
Vispu has sent you tome. You, too, are very great, You are practically a 
son of Siva. Very well, let us go aad see the gods,” 


CHAPTER XVI. 


1-19. Narayana said, '*Kártika having said so addressed the Krittikás thus, 
using words which were full of ethical principles: —‘ I am going to S’iva to see 
the gods, my mother and friends. Adieu! The world, the Karma, birth, associa- 
tion and separation are all subject to the all-powerful Fate. But Fate itself 
is subject to Krişņa and therefore savants worship the Suprme Lord. 
Krisna alone can strengthen or weaken the hands of Fate. The worshipper of 
Krisna isalso not controlled by Fate. The Sástras hold that he is immortal. 
Therefore I request you io give up the ties of affection and adore Hari who 
bestows happiness and beautitude and removes the fear of death and rebirth. 
Even Brahma, Visnu and Mahesa always minister to Lord Krisna who cuts 
asunder the ties of worldly attachments. In this sea of the world, what am I to 
you and what are you to us? What relation subsists between you‘and me? As 
currents of water accumulate in the sea, so we have assembled here like currents 
of time. Union and separation depend on the will of God. ` Savants regard 
this universe as subject to the will of God and by no means free. These three 
worlds are unreal like bubbles of water. Bewildered fools alone are attached to 
the transitory objects of the world. The worshippers of Krisna never mingle 
with any thing and areas free as air. O mothers, get over your attachment 
and part with me." So saying he bowed to the Krittikás, recollected Hari and 
was about to depart with the myrmidons of S'iva. Then he beheld a chariot z 
sent by Parvati which was constructed by Viswa-Karm4, inlaid with gems, pearls NC 
and diamonds, decked with looking glasses, white chowries and. wreaths of 
Párijáta, vested with many picturesque cells, revolved by a hundred wheels and : 
as rapid asthe mind. When the Krittikàs saw Kártikeya mounted in that e 
chariot, they swooned. Whey they recovered, they saw Kártikeya in their is 
| prsence; for a time they were struck dumb through excess of grief; and - : 
| afterwards with their hair dishevelled, they began to lament thus like atace 
persons : 3 


20-32. “What shall we do now? Where shall we go? O child, you are 
sole refuge and yet you are going to leave us. ‘This is not just on your 
We have affectionately nursed you. You are our godson. A worth: 
should not abandon his mother.” The Krittikas, having lamented d 
Kártika i in their breast and again fainted. Then Kártika consoled - 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE s- 
E 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


Á 
34 THE BRAHMA-V AIV ARTA PURANA. 


the attendants of S’iva. At the time of departure, Kartika beheld a jar full of 
water, a Brahmin, a prostitute, white paddy, a looking-glass, curd, ghee, honey, 
fried rice, flower, bent grass, barley, bull, elephant, horse, fire, gold, betel, ripe 
fruits, a chaste woman, lamp, pearl, diamond, garland, meat and sandal; the sight 
of which was auspicious. On the left side, he saw jackal, mongoose, and a jar 
full of water.and on the right side he saw aswan, a peacock, a wag-tail, a parrot; 
acuckoo, a pigeon, a white kite, the black antelope, the ruddy goose, chamart (a 
variety of deer) white chowrie, milch cow, a banner and Surabhi (the famous 
cow of plenty). He also heard music, recitation of Hari’s name and the sound 
of the conches and the bell. Having enjoyed these auspicious sights and heard 
auspicions sounds he ascended the lovely car and started for his paternal house, 

33-45. When Kártika reached the Kailàsa, he waited for a while with the 
Krittikás and his attendants at the root of the imperishable fig-tree.. Parvati had 
in the meantime inlaid the royal roads with rubiesand diamonds. At her instance 
they were decorated with garlands of leaves stitched together with silken thread, 
the trunks of plantains, jars full of water and countless diamond-lamps and gems. 
These roads were moistened with the water of sandal and covered with fruits. 
They were merry with the music of dramatic actors, dancers and whores. They 
were frequented by Brahmins and bards holding bent grass and flowers in their 
hands. After having made all these arrangemenis, Parvati arrived there preced- 
ed by Laksmt, Saraswati, Gangá, Savitri, Tulsi, Rati, Arundhati, Ahalya, Diti, 
Tara, Manoramá, Aditi, S'atarupáà, S’achi, Sandhya, Rohini, Anusüy&, Swâhå 
Sangná, the wife of Varuna, Akriti, Prasüti, Vasundharà, Manasà.  Devahüti, 
Menakà, Eka-Pátalà Eka-parn& and the wife of Mainüka. O saint, Rambha, 
Tilottama, Mena, Ghritàchi, Mohini, Urvasi, Hatna-mál&, Su-silé, Lalita, 
Kala, Kadamba-málà, Surasé, Vanamala, Sundari and other celestial 
prostitutes arrived there in lovely dress and, smiling gently, they began to sing 
and dance to the. accompaniment of the pair of cymbals. The gods, Gandarvas, 
Munis, mountains and Kinnars likewise went there to greet Kumára. 


46-56. S‘iva himself escorted by various sorts of music, went there with | 
the Rudras, Bhairavas, Ksetrapálas and his attendants.  Kártika, as soon as he 
saw Párvati approaching him, dashed down from his carriage in hot haste 
and saluted her by throwing himself prostrate on the ground.  Párvati after | 
having secured the permission of Láksmi and other goddesses, the wives of the. 
Munis, S‘iva and other gods beheld the face of Kártika, took him in her lap 
and kissed him, S'iva and other gods, Parvati and other goddesses, the Munis, 
the mountains and their wives blessed Kumara. ‘Then Kártika went to the 
house of S’iva with his followers and beheld Visnu (whose, bed is in the milk- 
ocean) inthe midst of the assembly, seated on a throne of gem, decked with 
precious ornaments, surrounded by Dharma, Brahma, Indra, the Moon, the Sun; 
the Fire and the Wind, worshipped by the gods and the Munis, tended with white 
chowries, possessing a smiling and cheerful aspect and inclined to favour his 
votaries. The hair of Kartik& stood on end with raptures at his sight and his 
'head reverentially touched the ground to -salutehim. He then bowed low by 
turns to Brahma, Dharma and the other delighted gods and Munis and accepted 
their blessings. He cheerfully accosted all that were present in the assembly 
and then sat dawn ona golden throne. In the meantime, S'iya and Parvati 
distributed immense quantity of wealth to the Brahmins. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE i 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
GANÉES'A-KHA NDA. 35 


CHAPTER XV II. 


1-13. Nár&yana said, “ Lord Visnu in an auspicious moment gladly 
seated Párvati on a throne of gem. He ordered the musical instrument cons- 
tructed with bell-metal and the pair of cymbals and other music to be sounded 
or performed on the occasion He bathed Kártika, after having chanted 
the Vedas, with excellent jarfuls of water bronght from all the sacred rivers. 
He also gave him an excellent diadem of gem, crown, arm-plate, invaluable 
ornaments of gem, a pair of clothes purified by the heat of fire, the Kaustubha 
that came out from the sea while it was churned, a wreath of wild flowers and 
a wheel, Savitri initiated him in the Sandhy&-rites as prescribed by the Vedas 
offered to him the mantra, amulet and hymn sacred to Hari and gave him, a 
wooden water-pot, the Brahma weapous andthe knowledge of the way how to 
effect the destruction of the enemies. Dharma gave him 8 religious turn c£ 
mind and a merciful disposition. S’iva gave him the knowledge whereby he could 
be proficient in the S'ástras, the excellent science showing how to conquer 
death, the knowledge of Brahma which is secured with difficulty, the 
insight into the mysteries of Yoga, the knowledge of ontology which is always 
delightful and enchanting ; the secrets of the doctrine of perfection, the trident, 
the axe, the iron spear, the bow calle PAgupata and the use of the weapon of des- 
truction, and the method how to render it ineffectual. Varuna gave him a white 
parasol and a wreath of gems; Indra gave him a good elephant: the Moon gave 
him a jar of nectar; the Sun gave him a chariot and an amulet; the Fire gave 
him a big spear. The gods gave him many other things. Cupid gave him the 
knowledge of the sexual science, The sea o£ milk gave him diamond anklets. 


14-28. Pârvatî with a cheerful heart gaye him vast knowledge, a good 
disposition, intelligence, mercy, memory, peace, content, stamina, forbearance, 
firm faith in Hari and his bondage. BrahmA chanted the Vedas and married 
the fair, lovely, good-natured Devasena (whom the savants called Sastht) to 
Kártika: the gods, the Munis and the Gandarvas after having performed the 
installation of Kartika bowed low to Lord S/iva and went home. Then S’iva 
adored Hari, Dharma and Brahma ; Dharma embraced and saluted Lord Hari. 
Himalaya was worshipped hy S’iva and returned home with his followers. 
Every one else returned to his destination. After the lapse of a time, S’iva 
again invited the above gods, Munis §s. and married the magnanimous Ganesa 
with great eclat to Pusti In this way, Párvati merrily passed her days in the 
service of the feet of Lord Hari calculated to give success. Thus the subjects 
of the installation, marriage and worship of Kártika and the marriaga of 
Ganega have been described by me. T also said how Párvatt got a son and how 
the gods met together, Now what do you want to hear? 


CHAPTER XVIIL 


1-11. Narada said, *O blessed Narayana versed in the Vedas, and their 
auxiliary branches, kindly remove a doubt of mine on one point. Granesa is 
the son of the lord S'iva:and tke chief of the gods. He removes impediments 
and is the god incarnate. Why was be subject to inpedi.nents himself ? The 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


A 
36 THE BRAHMA-VAIVARTA PURANA 


Supreme Lord Krisna was born through his digits as the son of Párvatt, 
How could his head be possibly severedat the sight of Saturn?" Náráyana 
said, * O  Nárada, listen carefully to the history relating to the cause of this 
impediment or calamity. Once upon a time, the Sun was about to slay Malt 
and Sumáli, two of the worshippers of S'iva who was thereupon highly incensed 
and struck the Sun with his spear. The Sun became senseless and fell on the 
ground. Kasyapa, the father of the Sun, seeing that the Sun almost lost his life 
clasped him to his breast and, being overwhelmed with grief, wept again and 
again. The gods were afraid and lamented loudly. ‘The world was 
obscured and blinded by darkness. KaSyapa, the grandson of Brahma, effulgent 
with the lustre of Brahma, then cursed S’iva sayiug, “ʻO sin-less S'iva, as you 


have penetrated the heart of my son with a spear, your son will be likewise 
beheaded.” 


12-23, The god S'iva who is easily contented was appeased in a moment 
and, through his knowledge of Brahma, at once revived the Sun. The Sun who 
was the product of the digits of Brahma, Visnu and Mahesa then gotup before 
his father and bowed low to him and S/ankara. But when he heard that his 
father had cursed S'iva, he was angry with Kasyapa. He said, “I do not want 
worldly enjoyments, Iam going to renounce them and adore Lord Krigna. 
All objects except God are insignificant and unreal. A savant never gives 
preference to worldly pursuits as compared with the devotions of Hari. The 
gods, when they saw the Sun so very angry, appealed to Brahma who came, 
consoled the solar god and induced him again to resume worldly pursuits, Later 
on, S’iva, Brahma and Kagyapa blessed the Sun and cheerfully returned home. 
The Sun also resumed tho signs of the zodiac, Afterwards Malt and Sumalt had 
an attack of white leprosy (vitiligo). Their bodies began to drop off. They lost 
their strength and valour, Brahm’ said to them, ‘You have attained this 
condition through the wrath of the Sun. You should therefore adore him. So 
saying the eternal Brahma gave them the amulet, ode and the form of worship 
appropriate to ihe solar god and went back to his domain. Thon they 
obtained a boon from the Sun and regained their health. I answered all your 
questions. Now what do you want to hear? 


CHAPTER XIX. 


1-10. Narada said, “In days of yore, the merciful Brahm& gave the two 
demons the Sun’s ode and amulet, I want to know their nature as well as the 
form of worship sacred to the god.” Nár&yana thereupon began to dwell 
upon those points in detail. Ho said, “the subject-matter of my narrative 
exempts mankind from sins and diseases. The diseased Máli and Sumáli 
remembered Brahm& who is able to dispense the mantra of S/iva. Brahma 
went to the Vaikuntha where S'iva was seated by the side of Narayana, the 
Lord of Kamala, and said to S'iva thus: “O lord, Mali and Suiháli have been 


afflicted with leprosy. What is the remedy now?" Visnu said, let them serve | 


the Sun fora yearat the Puskara where by the grace of the solar god who 
destroys all diseases, they will be cured.” S'ankára said, “O Brabm&, be pleased 
to give them the amulet, hymn and mystic incantation of the Sun, which are 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


ke 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


GANES'A-KHANDA. 31 


as efficacious as the Kalpa-tree. The Sun and Hari give immediate fruits of 
action. Hari grants boons solicited ; and the Sun destroys diseases. Both 
of them perform their respective functions. 


11-19. Brahma thereupon went to the house of the demons, as commanded. 
They welcomed him, bowed to him low and provided him with a seat. The mer- 
ciful Brahm4 finding that they were dumb, paralysed, famish ed, and full of ulcers, 
pus, and bad smell said: *«) my sons, please secure the necessary hymn, ode and 
mantra, and then humbly adore the Sun at the Puskara.” They said, “O lord, 
how shall we worship the Sun? Please tell us the method.” Brahm& answered, 
"You should bathe in the morning, noonand eveningand then worship the Sun 
according to the mantra as stated below : in which case you will be restored to 
health. Om Hrim Namo Bhagavate Süryyái Param-Atmane Swaha: this 
mantra should be carefully read: and then the Sun should be carefully worshipped 
for a year, after the lapse of which period, you will recover. That wonderful 
amulet I am going to give to you. When Gautama cursed Indra for the act of 
ravishing Ahalyá, one thousand vaginas manifeshed themselves on his body. 
In that emergency, Vrihaspati was pleased to give Indra this amulet. 


20-35.  Vrihaspati said, “I am going to give you that amulet by wielding 
which the Munis were. redeemed in their life-time. As the divine eagle scares 
away snakes, so the wielder of this amulet scares away diseases. This 
amulet should be revealed by the preceptor to his own disciple. If it be 
revealed to the fraudulent disciple of another person, it will cause the death of 
the person who gives it out. It is called Jagat-Vilaksana. Its Risi or priest 


is Brahma, its metre is Gáetri, and the Sun is its god. It is meant to kill 
diseases and secure beauty. It sanctifies a person as soon as he puts it on. It 
is the essence of all mantras and calculaled to destroy all kinds of sins, Om 
Klim Hrim Krim S'rim Süryyái Swaha: May this mantra preserve my head. 
May this mantra of eighteen letters preserve my forehead. Om Hri Hrim S'/rim 
S'ri Süryy&i SwAba, may this mantra preserve my nose. May the sun preserve 
my eyes. May Vikartana preserve ihe pupilof my eyes. May Bhaskara 
preserve my lips. May Dinakara preserve my teeth. May Prachandaé preserve my 
cheek. May Mártanda preserve my ears. May Mihira preserve my shoulders, 
may Püsana preserve my thighs; may Rabi preserve my chest. May the Sun 
preserve my abdomen ; may the alladorable deity preserve my skeleton; may 
Vradhna preserve my arms; may Prabhákara preserve my feet. May Vibhakara 
preserve all my body.' O son, I have thus described to you the amulet of the 
Sun, most precious in the three worlds. In days of yore, Palastya gave it to 
Manu on the coast of the Pugkara. Now I give it to you. You should not give 
it to ordinary perscns. By the grace of this amulet, you will be cured of 
disease and acquire personal grace. À man acquires the same benefit by wielding 
itthat he does by eating only boiled ghee aud rice for a hundred thousand 
years. A fool who worships the Sun without understanding the nature of the 
amulet will not be an adept even if he recites it ten lakhs of times.” 

36-45. Brahma said, “My sons, by wielding it and worshipping the San, 
you will te cured. The hymn of the Sun is mentioned in the Sàm Veda. It 
cures malady, removes sins and gives delight.” Brahma said, “In that ‘eternal 
region, you represent the light of Brahma. You are permanent and show 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS. Me E 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


"E : : A 
38 THE BRAHMA-V AIVARTA PURANA. 


compassion to your worshippers. I wishto adore you. You are the oye of the 
three worlds, the lord of the universe: you take away sins, give fruits of devotion 
and action and punish the sinners. You are the germ of actions and the 
harbour of mercy. At the same time, you are the symbol of the action itself. 
You afflict people with diseases and cure them likewise. You relieve sorrow, 
mental agitation and fear. You bestow on men happiness, redemption, faith 
and all kinds of blessings. You are the essence of creation. You are the 
supreme lord, the image of everything and the witness of all acts. You are 
visible to all, and yet you exceed the bounds of the senses and are incontroveriible. 
You always create the juice or the sap of trees; youare the source of the said 
juice, you give all kinds of successand are utterly dissociated from all objects. 
You are the preceptor of adepts." The most mysterious of all mysterious hymns 
has been described to you. Whoever reads this hymn thrice a day is cured of 
all diseases. By the grace of the Sun, he gets rid of blindness, leprosy, poverty, 
disease, sorrow, fear aud dissension. 


46-50. A man afflicted with the higher kind of leprosy, (psoriasis), rotten 
constituticn, blindness, ulcers, consumption and colic, if he listens to this hymn 
for a month and subsists for this period merely upon boiled rice and ghee will 
surely be cured of all those diseases and acquire the benefits which could be 
secured by ablations in all holy rivers. My sons, go to the Puskara soon and 
worship the Sun there." Brahmá thus advising them) cheerfully went home 
and the demons were also breught round by the worship of the 
Sun. Son Narada, you asked why was the lord of impediments subjected to 
impedment. I have answered the question and also stated the hymn, amulet, 
&o., of the Sun. Now what do you want io hear? 


CHAPTER XX. 


1-18. Narada said, “You have sprung from the digits of Hari andare equal 
to him in intelligence, valour and might. Now I put this question to you, Please 
listen. The extraordinary narrative &c, anent ths cause of impediment to 
Ganesa, I just heard from the mouth of the author of the universe. I have another 
doubt. O father, among all animate beings when there are other beautiful animals 
in the world, how is it that the elephant’s head was attached to the body of 
Ganesa? Náráyana said, “I am going to tell you the cause, It is mysteriously 
hinted at in the Vedas and the Puranas This subject dispels sorrow, brings 
all sorts of prosperity and is the preventive of all calamities. The subject 
dealing with the expiation of sins is mysterious. The, auspicious, delightful, 
redeeming account of Mahi Laksmi which gives the four-fold objects of human. 
pursuit is included in the above subject. Son, listen attentively. Lam going to 
relate to you the ancient history which is a mystery of the Padma Kalpa. I 
heard it from my father. Once upon a time, Indra infatuated with the wine 
of prosperity put on a dress worthy of the royal goddess of fortune that 
presided over his kingdom and went to the coast of the Puspa-bhadrá river. 
A solitary lovely grove of flowers was situated on the coast of the river in the 
midst of an inaccessible forest void of animals. In the said grove redolent of 
flowers and reverberating with the sound of cuckoos and hum of bees, Indra 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


* 


- GAN ES'A-KHANDA. 39 


saw that Rambh& was returning from the region of the Moon, desirous to take 
rest after her efforts of sexual intercourse and enamoured of Kama (Cupid). 
At that time Rambhá was thinking of her amours with Káma and was proceeding 
to his house. 


14-22. Rambhé was very young. Her loins were well developed, 
her teeth were like pearls; her lips were like bimbas; her buttocks were huge; 
her gait was like that of anelephant; her face was like the autumnal Moon; 
she was gently smiling and casting arch glances in all directions. Her head 
was decked with lovely chignon and her neck, with jasmine wreath. She put on 
a pure dress. Her forehead was marked with vermilion and, below that, with 
musk; and the mark caused by the musk looked like a mark caused by catechu. 
Her eyes were like blue lotuses and tined with bright collyrium. . Her cheek 
flashed with the lustre of earrings, the nipples of her breast were elevated and 
hard, enchanting to the epicureans and dexterously marked with lines of paintings 
by cosmetics. Her toilet was excellent, Rambhá was very lovely, dearer to the 
gods than their lives, the best of the fair nymphs, perpetually young, tranquil 
in disposition, vested with all sorts of attributes and attractive to the Munis. 
Indra was excited with lust at her sight and unable to control his levity thus 
began:— “O handsome nymph, where are you going and whence are you 
coming? Who is your lover now? Isee you after a long time.” 


23.34. Being informed of your movements by my messengers, I have 
come here to find you out. You know I am enamoured of you aloneand 
think of no other damsel. One who desires perfumed water will never drink 
dirty water. One who wants the lotus will never value the white water lily. 
One who wants nectar will never be satisfied with wine. One who sleeps on the 
bed of down can not lie ona bed. of swords. A resident of heaven does 
not want bell. One who eats delicacies will never consume tasteless things. 
One who associates with savants will never desire the company of the ignorant. 
No one will substitute iron jewels for ornaments of gold. Is there such a fool 
who after having embraced you once will desire to associate with other females? 
Who will desire to bathe in other rivers in lieu of the Ganges? Whoever wants 
to pass his days happily in this world desires sensual pleasures." O Narada, 
Indra having said so hastily descended from his elephant, the Airávata and, 
being flushed with passion, confronted Rambha. The licentious Rambhá 
bowed down and gently smiled and her body fluttered with joy. By 
casting slanting glances, by the display of her rising breast and thigh and by 
the employment of language likely to excite lust, she destroyed the Gonsciousness 
of Indra. Then she addressed him thus, employing sweet, gentle and melodious 
words likely to dominate the hearts of men. j 


35-40. She said, “Lam going wherever I please. What means this 
enquiry on your part? I do not attempt to entico the hearts of people with coaxing 
words. Cunning people love only so long as they encounter the glance of 
the objects of their endearment. Asa greedy bee tastes all flowers and goes 
to that flower only which yields honey, licentious people behave similarly. 
They wander every where and settle and suck honey where they can get it. 
Like the wind, they are not confined to any particular place. As the branches 
are the members of a tree, so are handsome men the branches of the body of 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


A 
40 THE BRAHM A-V AIV ARTA PURANA. 


a woman. But as a crow flies elsewhere after having tasted the ripe fruits of 
a tree and thereafter keeps no connexion with it, a licentious man behaves in 
the same manner with a woman. He associates with her so long as his object 
is not gained. As the fire lingers in the fuel so long as its act is not complete, 
licentious people similarly court their beloved, out of selfish motive. Aqueous 
animals remain in the pond so long as there is water in it. But when the water 
begins to dry up, they seek other ponds. This is the case with licentious people: 
You are the king of the gods, and as such you are very much desired by the fair 
sex. For jovial women ever desire the societyof jovial men. A woman wants 
to secure the society of a youthful, humourous, calm, affectionate, handsome, 
talented, wealthy and clean person as her lover or husband. 


41-50. A woman never desires the society of an ill-natured, diseased, 
ungenerous and indiscreet gallant, You are the ocean of virtue. What foolish 
woman is there who will no* desire yoursociety? Now I am your obedient servant, 
I bide your pleasure." So saying, the lustful, impudent Rambhá smiled and 
drank Indra, as it were, with her oblique glances. Indra, a past master.in 
sexual matters, was excited with passion and knowing the heart of Rambhá 
set himself to commit sexual intercourse with her.. When Rambha kissed the 
king of the gods, Indra also kissed that}well-developed, naked, lovely and 
excellent Rambhá. Indra enjoyed her in several ways as if he were lust 
incarnate. Then both of them were excited to such a great extent that they 
could not distinguish the night from the day. Indra then took her to the 
river called the Puspa-bhadrá for recreation in the water. Indra dallied merrily 
with her, partly on the land and partly on the water. At that time the great 
Muni Durvásà was passing by that way from the Vaikuntha to the 
Kailása. 


51-62. When Indra saw the Muni, he came there almost in a state of 
unconsciousness and bowed low to him who blessed him in return. The great- 
minded Muni gave the same flower of Párijàta to Indra that he had obtained 
from the Lord Nár&yana aud then recited to a certain extent the extraordinary 
greatness of the flower. He said, “ This flower destroys all impediments. It 
was dedicated to Hari. He who wieldsit on his head attains victory every 
where and has a right to be worshipped first of all as the foremost of gods. 
The great goddess of fortune, like his shadow, never quits his side. He attains 
superiorty to. other gods in wisdom, valour and intelligence and becomes as 
mighty as Hari. A wretch who, in tho pride of his heart, doos not sustain on 
his head theflower dedicated to Hari loses. his grace and prosperity with all his 
attendants. So saying, the saint who was the outcome of the digits of S’iva 
went tothe domain of S'ankara. Indra then went to Rambhá and placed the 
flower on the head of his elephant. An unchaste, bad and fickle-minded 
woman wants a competent match. When Rambhá saw that Indra was deprived 
of his grace, she returned to Heaven. Thej powerful elephant by the use of 
brute force hurled Indra down to the ground from his back and went to 
the deep jungles. The elephant, being infatuated, cohabited in the forest 
with a female elephent by force. Females naturally desire pleasure. Therefore 
the female beast yielded tothe desire of the male. In that forest, she gave 
birth to many young ones. In the meantime Hari boheaded tho said elephant 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


GANES'A-KHAN.DA 41 


dwelling in that quarter and attached it to the shoulders of the boy (Ganesa). 
Now, O son, Ihave given you the account of the attachment of the head of the 3 
elephant to the body. of Ganesa. It destroys sins. Just tell me what you 
want to hear more.” 5 seta 


CHAPTER XXI 


1-10. Nárada said, “How, O lord, did the gods, cursed bya Br&hmin, 
lose their prosperity? How did they regain their fortune?" Narayana said, 
“The foolish Indra in his misfortune being deserted by Rambhá and the 
elephant went back to his capital. He saw that Amaráyati was teeming with his 
enemies and void of his friends. It presented a very sorry and miserable 
appearance. Having learnt every thing from his messengers, he went to his 
religious preceptor at first and then to Brahmá along with his preceptor and 
the gods. Indra bowed to Brahma and worshipped him according to the rites 
prescribed by the Vedas. Brahm, when he learnt every thing from Vrihas- 
pati; hung down his head and said, “Indra, you are my grandson and by the 
grace of fortune you have been effulgent. Your wife Sachi is like Laksmi; 
and yet you court other females. In days of old, your body was filled with 
vaginas by the curse of Gautama, Again you have co-habited with another 
nymph. One who courts the wife of another person forfeits one’s fortune, fame 
and reputation in society. ree 


11-19. The saint Durvâså gave you the flower dedicated to Hari. But 
as your mind was set upon Rambha, you cast it on the head of your elephant, 
Air&vata. Now where is Rambhá,a public whore? And where are yon now, . 
O king of the gods ? You lost your prosperity. So Laksmi quitted you ina 
moment; and so did Rambhá. A prostitute wants a wealthy and young lover. 
She slanders the old. © son, no one can check the inevitable. Now, in order 
to gain back your fortune (Laksmi), you should adore Hari.” So saying he 
gave Indra the amulet, hymn and incantations of Náráyana. Indra then 
departed with his guru and the gods and went to Puskara to adore Hari. He 
served him fora year and fasted all along. Hari appeared to him, gave him 
the necessary boon and the mantras and went back to the Vaikuntha. Indra : 
went to the sea of milk, wielded the amulet and obtained Kamala through 
adorations and hymns. He then subdued his foes and regained his kingdom. 
The gods also secured their former position. pe - 
— 


CHAPTER X XII. 


1-19. Narada said, “Now describe to me, O best of ascetic 
of Maha Lakemi.” Narayana answered thus: When Hrisikesé (lit 
the senses) said that Indra was much emaciated by his asceticism | 
he appeared to him and said, “Please accept a boon as desired by 3 
wanted to secure Laksmi. Hari granted him the boon an 
excellent counsel saying, “O Indra, wield this amulet . which 
destroys calamites and gives prosperity. At the time of the 
‘was given to Brahm& who, by wielding it, was vested with | 
and attained pre-eminence in the world. The Munis have b 
i . 6 4 E 


CC-0. In Public Domain 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


43 THE BRAHMA-VAIVARTA PURANA. 


——_ 


only by virtue of this amulet. The Rist (priest) of this amulet is Brahmá; itg 


‘metre is Pancti, its presiding deity is Laksmt, It is meant to secure perfection, 
‘prosperity and victory. By wielding it, peopleattain victory at every place, 
Please accept this amulet. May Padmá& preserve my head; may the spouse of 
Hari preserve my throat ; may Laksmi preserve my nose; and may Kamala 
preserve my eyes. May the wife of Kesava preserve my hair ; may the resident 
in the lotuses preserve my forehead; may the preserver of the universe preserve 
my cheek; and may the source of all prosperity preserve my shoulders. Om 
S/ri Krim Kamala-Vásinyai Swáhá: may this mantra preserve my forehead. 
Om S'/rim Padmá-layáyai Swáhà; may this mantra preserve my chest. Gri 
Amara Kamkála S'rim Namah. May this mantra preserve my arms. S/rim 
Krim Laksmi-yai Namah; may this mantra preserve my feet, Om Hrim Krim 
S'rim Namah Padmá-yai Sw&há: may this mantra preserve my loins. Om S/rim 
Maha-Laksmi-yai Swiha: may this mantra preserve all the parts of my body. 
Om Drim Krim S’rim Klim Maha-Laksmi-yai Swaha, may this mantra preserve 
me every-where. Child, I have now revealed to you an extraordinary amulet 
calculated to impart all sorts of prosperity. Whoever, after having worshipped 
his guru, wields it either round his throat or on his right arm attains success 
everywhere. Fortune never quits his house. A fool who adores the goddess 
of fortune (Mahá-Laksmi) without understanding the meaning of this amulet 
never becomes an adept, though he may recite it millions of times.” Narayana 
said, Lord Hari after having given Indra the above amulet gave him also the 
following mantra: “Om Hrim Krim §’rim Klim Namo Maha-Laksmi-yai Hari- 
Priyá-yai SwAha.” 


20-30. The following meditation sacred to the goddess which is abstruse, 
attainable by the Munis with very great difficulty and which is productive of all 
prosperity is mentioned in the Sám-Veda. Her colour is like the white 
champaká: her grace equals the charm of a hundred moons; sho is clad in dress 
chastened by the heat of fire; she is decorated with ornaments; she has a 
smiling, cheerful aspect; she is kind to her votaries, Her forehead is marked 
with vermilion and musk; she is decked with precious ear-rings; she wields on. 
her head the load of a chignon covered with jasmine wreath. Sho is seated merrily 
on thé lotus of a thousand petals. You should adore the spouse of Hari who 
enchants the heart and is vested with the attribute of tranquillity and who is” 
the mother of the universe. Then, you should offer her, O Indra, sixteen kinds 
of ingredients. After having worshipped her, with the following hymn, you. 
will obtain the boon desired. "The mysterious, delightful hymn is as follows: 
“O goddess, I want to adore you; but I am unable to.do so. You are a goddess 
beyond comprehension, eternal like the subtle Light and indescribable. O 
mother, you can accomplish anything that you desire; you have no form; you | 
only take a form to favour your' worshippers; you are imperceptible to the 
‘mind and baffle all powers of description. How can I adore you? You are the. 
limit or the extremity of the four Vedas and the pilot in this sea of the world, 
the mistress of the crops and the source of all prosperity. 


31-40. You are the mother of asceticism, ascetics, wisdom, the savants, 
the Vedas and the people versed in the Vedas. How can I describe you? As to 
an infant which sucks the breast of ils mother, everything is non-existent without 
its mother, so the whole world is nil without you. But conjoined with you it 

‘ 4 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE i 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


GANES'A-KHANDA. 45- 


is supposed to have an existence. O mother, afflicted I seek your protection. 
Be propitiated and preserve me. You are the mother of the world and represent | 
energy, Wisdom and intellect; you bestow everything on people. I bow to you. 

You endow your worshipper with faith in Hari and give him redemption; you 

give everything to the omniscient. I adore you. Bad sons are found some- 

where; but bad mothers are no where. A mother never forsakes her son even 

if she discovers any fault in him. O merciful goddess, spouse of the Being 

(who isthe ocean of mercy) kind to your votaries, be propitiated and manifest 

yourself to me as toan infant which sucks the breast of its mother. Thus 

I have related to you, O my son, the essential hymn of Mahá-Laksmi which 

gives happiness, prosperity and redemption. Whoever reads this sanctifying 

hymn at the time of worship is never abandoned by Mahá-Laksmi." So saying, 

Hari disappeared and Indra, at his command, went with the gods to the sea of” 

milk. 


CHAPTER XXIII 


1-10. Náráyana said, "Indra gladly wielded the amulet associated with | 
small balls of gem round his neck. - He recapitulated in his mind, again and 
again, the interesting hymn and attended by the gods and his spiritual preceptor 
cheerfully with a view to attain Kamal& to the sea of milk. The gods 
with tears in their eyes humbly and reverentially bent their shoulders and adored 
Kamal& who resides in lotuses. The mother of the universe who is gracious 
like the əutumnal moon, who pervades the whole world through her lustre, at 
once appeared before them, as she heard the hymn and addressed them thus:— 
*( my sons, you havo forfeited your grace by the curse of a Brahmin. I. 
do not wish to go to your house, nor have I the power to do so. For I, too, am 
afraid of the curse of a Br&hmin.. The Brahmins are dearer to me than my 
life and son. The things which they cffer to me are the means of my subsis- 
tence. Let the Brahmins be at first satisfied and give me the necessary 
command. Then I shall carry out their orders. The Brahmins, if they please, - 
caneven make me unworthy of adoration by the people.. A man beset by 
misfortune alone is cursed by hisreligious preceptor,a Brahmin, a god, a beggar. _ 
ora Vaisnava. Even the Eternal Hari, the cause of all, is afraid of the cursa 
of a Brahmin.” As she said so, the effulgent Bráhmins arrived there smiling. - 


11-19. Angira,- Prachetà, Kratu, Bhrigu, Pulaha, Pulastya, Marîchi, 
Atri, Sanaka, Sananda, Sanâtana, the god-like Kapila, Asuri, Bodhu, Pancha- 
Sikha, Durvásà, Kasyapa, Gautama, Nara, myself, Káty&-yana, Kanáda, " 
Pánini, Markandeya, Lomaga, Lord Vasistha and other Bráhmins all came in 5 
a body and worshipped the goddess with several ingredients. The gods besought 
her forgiveness and worshipped her with wild flowers. The Munis cheertully 
adored her and said, “O goddess, deign to descend to the house of the gods 
the mortal world.” ‘The goddess said, “By the order of the Brahmins, 
now proceed fearlessly to your house. But O Indra, I shall go onl 
following places. I shall go to the houses of the virtuous and 
holders, take up fixed quarters there and support them like my son 


20-29. I shall not go to the house of one who has incur 
of one's preceptor, friends, parents, guests, the gods and the Muni 


r 
E- 
1 
E 


3 CC-0. In Public Domain. Fundi 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


z 


A 
44 THE BRAHMA-V AIVARTA PURANA. 


= a ————————————— == 


the house of a liar, an atheist, an ill-natured man and one. who is void of virtue.: 
I shall likewise avoid the houses of the following: a per son who .misappropriateg 
hoarded wealth, a traitor, an evil-doer and a perjurer; a person who thinks 
constantly, a timid fellow; one who has got many enemies, a sinner, a debtor, 
and a miser; one who has not.been initiated in the mantras, one afllicted with 
sorrow, a fool, a hen-pecked husband, the husband of an unchaste woman, the 
son of a prostitute; one who has gota sharp tongue, a quarrelsome man, one 
whose house is the hot-bed of constant dissension, one who is under the petti-coat 
government of a woman, one who does not adore Hari or recite his virtues; 
one who is not inclined to eulogise Hari; one who sells one's self, one’s daughter 
or the Vedas; a murderer; one who injures others; a miser who does not support 
his parents, wife, preceptor's wife or son, widowed sister, daughter and helpless 
relations. 


30-35. I shall also abandon the houses of the following mortals:—One who 
does not cleanse one’s teeth, a person who puts on dirty dress, whose head is rough, 
who yawns and laughs in an ugly manner; a person who looks at a man while 
making water or clearing his bowels; a person who lies down with his feet 
moistened with water; a person who sleeps naked; a person who sleeps in the 
evening or in the day; a person who first annoints with oillhis head and then 
the other parts of his body; a person who, with oil on his head or over 
body, discharges stool or makes water or bows to any body or collects flowers; 
a person who with his nails cuts grass or digs the ground; a person whose body 
and feet are very dirty. 


:86-43. Ishall likewise abandon the houses of the following: a person 
who consciously appropriates the feo of a Brühmin or a god granted either by 
himself or by another; a fool or a traitor who performs a religious rite without 
Daksiná or priest’s fee: a person who earns his livelibood by means of knowledge 
or mystic incantations ; a village priest, a physician, a cook and a person who 
subsists upon the allowance .of a temple: a person who angrily disturbs 
marriage or other religious ceremonies; and a person who cobabits in the day.” 
So saying the great goddess of fortune disappeared and cast her eyes at heaven 
and earth. The gods and Munis bowed to ber and delightfully went back to their 
houses full of friends and free from enemies. There was a beat of drum in the 
heaven; and there was a rain of flowers from the sky. The gods regained their 
kingdom and fortune. Thus I have described to you the excellent, edifying, 
redeeming character of Laksmi. What more do you want to hear ? 


CHAPTER XXIV. 


1-11. Narada said, “O blessed saint, you are an outcome of the digits of 
Hari. By your grace, I have heard the auspicious account of Ganesa. O 
Br&hman, when the head of the elephant was attached to his body, why did he. 
become one-toothed ? What became of the other tusk or tooth? Lord, you 
are omniscient, be pleased to throw Jight on this point.” The lord smiled at . 
his word and said, “ That ancient history I am going to describe to you. . Once . 
upon a time, Kárta-viryya went to hunt; and after killing many deer, he became 
exhausted. In the evening, he fasted with his whole army in the hermitage | 


| 
CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE j 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


GANES'A-KHAN DA. X ER 45 


of Jamadagni. Next day iu the morning he bathed in the pond and having- 
purified and dressed himself, he reverentially chanted the mantra given by 
Datta-treya. The saint Jamadagni seeing that the king's lips and palate were’ 
dry enquired about his welfare. The king respectfully bowed to the saint 
bright Jike the sun who blessed him in return. Then the king told. him how 
he and his army had fasted, whereupon the saint invited them all. 


. 12-20. The Muni, on his return to his home, cheerfully stated the whole 
incident to the celestial cow (cow of plenty fulfilling all desire) who was, as it 
were, a mother to him like Laksmi." The cow said, “Saint, you need not fear 
anything when I dwell by your side. I can furnish you with the whole world. 
You have invited only the king. What is the anxiety about? I can supply you 
with anything for the ontertainment of kings, though the thing can rarely 
be had in the universe.” That celestial cow (K&ma-Dhenu) gave him geld 
and silver cups, vessels full of delicacies, cooking utensils, and countless dishes. 
She gave him many kinds of delicious mangoes, jacks, cocoanuts, baels (quinces) 
and heaps of sweetmeat balls, cakes of wheat and barley, ditches of sweetened 
rice, milk, ghee and curd, hills o£ sweetmeat, rice and flattened rice, 
betels perfumed with camphor and various other articles, dress and ornaments 
fit for kings. 


21-30. When Jamadagni secured all the necessary articles, he easily 


feasted the king and hisarmy. The king, when he witnessed the abundant 
supply of rare articles, was surprised and said to his minister, ‘‘Look here: 
objects which are unheard of and rare have been secured in this place. Please 
ascertain how." The minister enquired into the matter and said to the king, 
“O king, lam going to inform your majesty what I saw in the house of the 
saint. His house contains sacrificial pits, fuels for sacrifice, flowers, fruits, hides 
of black antelopes, garlands, and wreaths of flowers and teems with springs and 


his disciples. It does not contain gold, crops or wealth. His wives have no. 


ornaments and simply put on barks of trees. His sons put on the crust of trees 
and clusters of hair. But in a corner of his house, there is a Kapila or celestial 
cow that is lovely, having the colour of the moonlight, with eyes like the red- 
lotus, effulgent with her own lustre like the full Moon, looking like the asylum 
of all prosperity and virtue and personification of Laksmi herself.” Thereupon 
the foolish king, entangled in the meshes of time,(t. e. like one whose days were 
numbered) demanded Kapila from the saint, as advised by his minister. 


31-40. O Narada, Fate is more powerful thaa virtue, wisdom or anything, 
for even the wise and virtuous king demanded the cow from the Muni. In India 
food and holy deeds are the outcome of merits acquired by a person in his 
previous life; while evil acts hideous in their nature arise from sins. Men after 
having enjoyed the bliss of heaven are by virtue of their religious merits born in 
sacred places. Siu, after having consigned the wicked to hell, impels them later. 
on to birth in a family of ignoble rank. A man can not be saved, so long as 
there is Karma. Savants therefore try to do away :with the Karma. Know- 
ledge, devotion, wisdom, father, mother and son are worth their names if they 
respectively help a person to do away with his Karma. Persons are .liable 
toa dreadful disease which takes the form of enjoyment or suffering according 
to their actions. Then the Vaisnava physician heals that disease with the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


46: THE BRAHMA-V AIV ARTA PURANA. 


——————— 


administration of medicine which is styled the faithin Hari. Maha-maya, 


(the primordial goddess Nature) the source of wisdom, is pleased with that | 


indivi i ear by year and instead of deluding him with the 
TEN eee a a nin with the great boon, viz., faith in Hari, 
The bewildered king respectfully summoned the Muni in his presence and with 
folded palms humbly said to him thus:—‘O lord of worshippers, you are 
compassionate to your votaries. Iam devoted to you. I therefore beg of you 
the celestial cow, Kapila. 

41-51. O saint, a generous saint like you may giveanythiug. I have heard 


that in days of yore the suint Dadhichi gave his bones to the gods. Yoa are 
the symbol of all asceticism: by the wink of your eyes, many a cow like this 


may be created." The Muni said, ‘O traitor, O hyprocrite, O basest of kings, you | 


are turning the table upon me. How cana Brühmin make a gift to a Ksatriya? 
Lord Krisna had given this cow to Brahmá in the Goloka. i Brahma gave her 
to his son Bhrigu who gave her to me. ‘This cow, my heritage, is dearer to 
me than my life. I can never give her to you. Fool, Lam not a rustic: you 
will never be able to cause bewilderment in my mind. Had you not been my 
guest, I would have immediately reduced you to ashes. Wretch l your fate is 
adverse. Do not provoke my wrath, go home and see your children, The king, 
unfortunately, when he heard the words of the Muni, bowed to him and went 
direct to his army. Ina fit of temper he shook his head and sent a messenger 
to bring Kapila by force. Then Jamadagni went to Kapila and having almost 
lost his consciousness through grief related the whole incident to Kapila 
and wept. Thereupon Kapila, the very embodiment of Lakgmi, (when she saw 
that the Brahmin was weeping) ever ready to favour her votaries said : 


52-62. “Indra and even insignificant men can make a gift of their pro- 
porty voluntarily. O saint, if you give mo voluntarily to the king, I may 
go to him by your orders; otherwise I shall not leave your house. Expel the 
King through the army which I shall give you. You are omniscient, Why are 
you weeping like one bewildered? Conjunction and dissociation are brought 
about by time and not by one's discretion. What am I to you, O king, and what 
are you tome? Our mutual rélation has been established by time. Relation 
that subsists between persons only breeds attachment. The mind fondly imagines 


that a certain property is owned by acertain person. So longas the title in a 


thing subsists, sorrow is occasioned by its loss.” So saying that celestial cow 
gave birth to several weapons effulgent like the sun and many armies. Thirty — 


millions of soldiers armed with swords come oat from her mouth; fifty millions 
armed with spears, from her nose; a hundred crores of soldiers armed with bow, 
from her eyes; thirty millions armed with clubs, from her forehead ; thirty 


millions armed, with iron Spears, from her chest; and a hundred crores, armed 
with maces from her back. 


63-66. Thousands of bands of music or 
three hundred millions of princes came out from the Jeg beneath the knee and 
three hundred millions of infidels, from her piivate parts. She gave these to 
the Muni and encouraged him saying: ‘Let the whole army go to fight; but you 
should not go,” Jamadagni was much pleased to take over the chargo of the 
army. Then the servant deputed by the king submitted to him an account of the 


Concert came out from her feet; 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


GAN ES’ A-KHANDA, AT 


army of Kapila and the defeat of the party of the king. Karta-Viryya, the best 
of kings, through his messenger, very soon secured a large army from his own 
territory with a heavy heart. 


—— 


CHAPTER XXV. 


1-10, Náráyapa said, “The king in distress remembered Hari and angrily 
gent a messenger to the Muni." The messenger went to the Muni and said, 
“Listen to the command of my master. He hath said, “O best of Munis, Iam 
your servant, particularly your guest. Either give me the celestial cow or be 
ready to fight with me. Give me your answer after due deliberation.” ‘The 
Muni smiled and gave expression to maxims of truth and morality thus: “Seeing . 
that the king was oppressed by bunger, I brought him to my house and feasted 
him. But he now wants to take away by force Kapila dearer to me than my 
life. Unable to part with her, I shall surely fight with the king.” The messenger 
returned and communicated to the king (who was armed with a shield) the state- 
ment as wade by the Muni. On the other hand, the Muni said to Kapila, 
«What shall I do now? Asa boat is helpless without a pilot, so is the army 
without you.” Hearing this, Kapila gave many weapons to the king, instructed 
bim in military arts and explained to him the use of weapons. She then 
said, *O saint, you will surely gain victory, but you can not be killed, except by 
means of an infallible weapon. But the king is the pupil of Datt&-Treya and 
is an invincible warrior." : 

11-22. Subsequently, the great Muni in command of the vast army went 
out to fight. The king bowed to the saint and then began to fight. Both the 
parties battled very furiously. In the long run, the army of Kapila easily 
conquered the royal army and broke the king’s chariot, bow and shield. The 
king could not conquer Kapila’s army. He was disarmed and fainted. A 
portion of his army perished; the rest ran away. The merciful Muni seeing that 
his royal guest was in a swoon ceased to pursue the enemy. The imaginary 
army of Kapilá dissolved in her body. Then the saint gave the dust of his feet 
to the king, blessed him saying. *' May you be victorivus” ! and restored him to 
consciousness by sprinkling over his body the water of his pot. The king bowed 
low to him with folded hands. The saint embraced and blessed him again, 
bathed and feasted him with care. But the heart of a Brahmin is soft like 
butter; whereas the heart of others is keen like the sharp edge of a razor. It 
could not be easily controlled. The king went to him again and said, ‘O saint, 
give me the cow as desired by me; or, come and fight with me.” á 


CHAPTER XXVI. 


1-10. Jamadagni, at the words of the king, remembered Hari and gave 
expression to maxims of truth and ethios thus: ‘O blessed king, go home and 
preserve the eternal Dharma (virtue). A man who preserves it is constantly 
blessed. When I found you bungry, I brought you home and entertained you 
inevery way. Even now l saw you in a swoon and I blessed you with the dust 
of my feet I brought you back also to consciousness. It does not behove you 


now to uso words like these." Bot the king simply bowed to him, ascended’ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


A 
48 l THE BRAH M A-V AIV ARTA PURAN A. 


another car and challenged him to fight. Then the Muni put ona military 
dress and began to fight with the king. The king, mad with rage, fought 
with the Muni, The king was disarmed by the force of the weapons given by 
Kapila and again fainted. But reviving after a while, he resumed his militant 
attitude. In the battle-üeld, the king aimed at the Muni the weapon of fire 
which was extinguished by the weapon of water used by the Muni. The weapon 
of water used by the king was averted by the weapon of the wind used by the 
Muni. i 


11-20. The weapon of the wind hurled by the king was averted by the 
weapon of Gandarva used by the saint. The weapon called the “noose of snakes” 
„directed by the king was cut asunder by the weapon of eagles employed by 
his adversary. The S/aiva weapon effulgent like the sun aimed at by the king 
was baffled by the all-pervading Vaisnava weapon. Then the Muni directed at ` 
the king the Narayana weapon. The king thereupon bowed low and sought 
the protection of the weapon. When this weapon found that the king had 
sought its shelter, it wandered over the sky for a while, lighted up the quarters 
with its beams and spontaneously disappeared like the Fire which appears at 
the time of eternal destruction. Then the Muni discharged the ‘‘ yawning or 
gaping weapon” overpowered by which the king yawned or lay motionless on 
the ground like a dead man. Availing himself of this opportunity, the Muni, 
with the weapon of the half-moon, cut off the charioteer of the king, his bow, 
arrow and diadem; and with his sickle, cut off his parasol and amulet. And 
lastly with other weapons, he cut off his quiver and horses, With the meshes ot 
snakes, he fastened the ministers of the king and threw them on the ground. 


. 21-27. Then with his mantras he revived the king, showed to him the 
plight of his ministers, set them at liberty and said, “There is no use fighting 
any more, go home." The Ksatriya king, highly incensed, got up from the field 
and struck the Muni with an axe; and the Muni struck him with his spear. In 
the meantime, Brahma by dint of his devotions realised what was going on, 
arrived at the battle-field, and, by giving expression to ethical maxims, effected 
a reconciliation between the Muni and tha king. he Muni saluted and adored | 
Brahma. The king bowed low to the saint and lord Brahma and went home. 
Brahma and the Muni went to their respective homes.” Narayana said, ‘O 
Narada, I described to you the battle between the king and the Muni. Now 
what do you want to hear ? 


CHAPTER XXVII 


1-15. Náráyana said, “When the king went home, he was astonished at i 
the heroism of the Muni. But the disgrace of his defeat was intolerable to him. | 
He therefore remembered Hari and prepared to goto the hermitage of the | 
saint. The king assembled four lakh chariots, 10 lakh warriors who fought on 
chariots, countless horses, celebrated elephants, infantry and auxiliary sovereigns | 
With great pomp and show, with unbounded confidence in his ultimate conquest | 
of the three worlds and with a glad heart he besieged the hermitage of Jama- | 
dagni. The dwellers in the hermitage were bewildered with fear by the shout of | 
the'army and by the dreadful noise caused by the war-drums. ‘The foolish and. 
powerful king arrived at the hermitage, stole the auspicious cow Kapila and 


CG-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 2 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
GANES'A-KHANDA. 49 


attempted to go home. The Muni; being apprised of his arrival, remembered: 
Hari, bowed to the Muni Dattá-Treya and without taking the shield went alone 
to the battle-field armed with a bow. He consoled the frightened residents of 
the hermitage and fearlessly went to fight with the king. Asa man is beset 
by his own acts so was the hermitage of the saint beset by his own arrows. 
As birdsare confined in a cage, so was the royal army subdued or controlled 
by the missile of arrows. The king, seeing that his army was at bay, bowed 
low to the Muni with folded palms along with the auxiliary sovereigns. Blessed 
by the Muni, he delightfully ascended his car. His auxiliaries followed suit. 
The king then aimed at the Muni the sword, the arrow, the mace and the spear. 
The Muni easily cut them asunder and discharged his own weapons which were 
destroyed by the king. 

16-30. The king aimed at the Muni the spear. The latter rendered it 
ineffectual and discharged celestial weapons at the king. The king also in his 
turn destroyed those weapons. He.discharged a spear, but the Muni averted 
itand showered upon the king a missile of arrows. The bodies of the kings ` 
were lacerated by weapons; but as they were held fast by arrows, they could 
not run away, ‘hen the gaping or the yawning weapon which the muni 
discharged rendered insensible the king and other auxiliary sovereigns. The 
Muni finding that the king and all his army (infantry, horse etc) were asleep 
refrained from striking them. He then consoled the weeping Kapil& and was 
about to lead her home when the king suddenly awoke and restrained the Muni 
from his purpose. The frightened cow ran away to her pen; but the Muni re- 
mained there with his bow and arrow with a fearless heart Thereupon the king 
aimed at the Muni the Brahmá-weapon which was baffled by the Brahma weapon 
of the Muni, The Muni with his celestial weapon destroyed the bow, the arrow, 
the car, the charioteer and the amulet of the king. The king thus assailed 
was fled with anger and beheld in his presence the iron-spear named Bka- 
puruga-ná$ini which was given to him by Dattá-Treya. He bowed to Datta- 
Treya, held the weapon which was effulgent like hundreds of suns and revolved 
it in his hands. The gods who arrived there to witness the scene raised a hue 
and cry. Within that weapon, by means of mantra, the king invoked and 
focused the lustre of Brahma, Visnu and Mahesa wherewith he lighted up the 
sky and all the quarters. Then he hurled it with all his might. It assailed 
with a mighty force the heart of the Muni, penetrated it and went to Visnu. 
Vignu gave it, of old, to Datti-Treya who gave it to Karta-Viryya. The Muni 
expired and the lustre of his body passed through the sky to the Brahma-loka. 


31-42. Kapilà finding that the Muni (saint) lost his life loudly bemoaned 
his death saying, *O my ohild, where art thou gone?" So saying, she went to the 
Goloka and communicated to the Supreme Being, Lord Krisna, seated on & 
diamond throne, the news about the death of Jamadagni. Indays of yore, Visnu 
gave the cow to Brahma, Brahmá gave her to Bhrigu who was pleased to give 
herto Jamadagniat Puskara. When Kapila was passing to the Goloka with 
streaming eyes, the drops Of her tears fell upon the earth and were turned into 
pearls. Then the king Kárta-Viryya restored his army to consciousness, perform- 
ed the penance for the slaughter of a Brahmin and cheerfully went back to his 
capital. The chaste widow of the Muni named Renuka when she heard of his death 
clasped his dead body to her breast and swooned for a while. Onregaining her 
7 


5 CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


A 
. 50 THE BRAHMA-V AIV ARTA PURAN A. 


consciousness, she loudly lamented his death. Then she loudly called out her 
son, addressing him thus, ʻO Para$uráma, come here.” Her son who was at Pug- 
kara heard her voice and immediately came to her with the speed of mind. 
When he saw that his father was dead and his mother was afflicted, he en- 
quired into the matter and heard from her the description of his father's fight 
with the king and the departure of the cow Kapil& to the Goloka whereupon he 
bitterly lamented his loss, crying out ‘O my father! O my-mother!” Then he 
constructed a funeral pyre of sandal wood and poured plenty of ghee over it, 
Renuka clasped her son to her breast, kissed his head and cheek and wept again 
and again saying, “O my powerful son, O my beloved child, how can I go, 
leaving you behind?" 


43-50, But she was determined to immolate herself and said, “Child, you 
are dearer than my life. Therefore hear me. You should perform the funeral 
rites of myself and your father. But, O my child, you should never go to fight. 
You should remain in your house in peace and pass yourdays in constant 
devotions. You should not take part in an unpleasant war with the evil-mind- 
ed Ksatriyas.’ Then Para$ur&ma of Bhrigu’s race in spite of the prohibitions 
of his mother said, I will surely rid the earth of the Ksattriyas twenty-one times. 
Mother, I vow again that I will kill Kárta-Viryyár-Juna, who is a blot on the 
Ksattriya race. 1 will satiate the Manes, this I also promiso, with the blood of 
the Kgattriyas. So saying he wept and consoled his mother with ethical maxims 
and instructive counsel. He said, ** A man who does not carry out the orders of 
his father and cut off the head of the murderers of his parents is consigned to 
the hell called Raurava. There are eleven kinds of mischievous fellows in 
the world viz :—a person who sets fire to a house, a person who mixes 
poison with food, a person who wields a murderous weapon; a person who takes ' 
away things dishonestly, a person who misappropriates land (the only source of 
the livelihood of a cultivator), a person who commits rape, a person who murders 
the father or mother of another man, a person who injures his friends, a person 
who constantly thinks of injuring others, a back-bite who tries to undermine | 
the source of the livelihood of others, a person who insults others with abusive 
words, ‘he destruction of such men is sanctioned by the S'ástras. O my vir- 
iuous mother, even if a Brahmin commits or abets any of the above acts, his 


property should be confiscated, his head should te shayed and he should be 
exiled.” 


51-56. When Parasuráma was explaining these things to his mother, the 
magnanimous saint Bhrigu with a heavy heart arrived there of his own accord. | 
Renuka and her son bowed low to him with the greatest humility and reve- | 
rence, Saint Bhrigu then gave expression to beneficial words sanctioned 1 
by the Vedas thus: *O my son, you come out of my stook. Why do you. 
lament uselessly in this way? Every-thing, moveable or immoveable in this | 
world, is transitory like bubbles of water. Ina moment, every-thing is destroyed. 
You should therefore adore the eternal and truthful Hari. What is gone can- 
not return. You should not, therefore, think of the past. What is taking place 
at present is irresistible. What will take place (t. e. the future) is also inevitable. | 
The acts ordained by fate cannot be resisted by any one. 1 


57-60. Child, the acts ordained by God in the present, or future are 
bound to take place, The body of fools composed of five elements owes its 


Í 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE * - 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


GANES)A-KHAN DA 51 


genesis to delusion (the imaginative faculty) of God. The names given to things, 
such as jar or picture, are merely symbolic. They are artificial like morning 
dreams. Hunger, sleep, mercy, peace, forgiveness. grace, life, mind and cons- 
ciousness are faculties which disappear as soon as the supreme spirit disappears. 
As the servants follow the king, so do.all the attributes of the body including . 
its development and strength surely attend the heels of the Supreme Being. 


61-67. O child, nobody is the father or the son of any body. This 
relation is a pure fiction. AJl animals, driven by the currents of their acts, 
good or bad, are floating, here and there, on the surface in the sea of the 
world. The wise never weep on account of bereayement in their family. 
My son, being overwhelmed with grief, you should not weep for the death of 
your father. The S'ástras hold that the tears of the scn or the wife bring about 
the degradution of the deceased father or husband. It is mere folly to be—wail 
the loss of one’s relation; for lamentation even lasting for one year cannot bring 
him back to life. When a man’s body is quitted by the Supreme Being, the 
dust of his body returns to the dust, the watery portion goes into the water, the 
sky dissolves into the vast vacuum, the airy portion merges into the wind, the 
fery portion enters into the fire. Tbe deceased person does not listen any 
longer to the lamentations of his relations. When a person dies, the things 
which survive him are the name given to him by his parents, his knowledge, fame 
and good and bad acts: all the rest perish with him. O R&ma, for the benefit of 
your father in the next world, perform his funerals, oblations etc., as prescribed 
by the scriptures. He is really a kinsman or a son who performs the funerals 
of the deceased and contributes to his welfare.” Paragurama when he heard the 
consolatory words of the saint Bhrigu, composed himself and thinking that it 
was useless to mourn desisted from lamentations for the death of his father. 
At that time, the chaste and pious Renuka put questions to the szint Bhrigu. 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 


1-13. Renuka said, “I want to die by ascending the funeral piles of my 
husband. But, O revered preceptor, I am in my menses. Today is the fourth day 
of my menses. My revered husband has left mē. Butlam impure. You rank 
foremost among the learned. Kindly tell me what Iam'to do according to the 
S'&stras. The influence of my sanctity has brought you here, fortunately.” 
The most venerable saint Bbrigu replied, “O chaste lady, join your husband. 
Even to-day on the fourth day of the menses a woman is entitled to perform all 
sorts of rites in relation to her husband. On this day she is entitled to per- 
form any act relative to the gods or the Manes. The last-named act she can also 
do on the fifth day of her menses. As a man who subsists upon snakes forcibly 
drags out a snake out of the hole, so is a virtuons woman able to lift even her 
sinful husband to heaven. A virtuous woman enjoys the company of her 
husband for a period covered by fourteen Indrasand for the same period she sub- 
sequently dwells in Heaven.” So saying, Bhrigu addressed Parasurima thus: “A 
son devoted to his parents is worth his name. A woman devoted to her husband 
is worth the name of a wife. A friend who saves the life of another by gifts in 
emergency isa friend, indeed. A pupil is really be who serves his preceptor. 
He who saves the worshipper in danger is really a tutelary deity. He who is able 
to maintain his subjects is really a king. A true husband is he who inclines his 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 2 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


A 
52 THE BRAHMAVAIVARTA PURANA. 


ife: virtue, A true preceptor is he who inspires his pupil with 
me a een men have been ated in the Vedas : and the Pu ránas." 
The chaste Renuka said: “Lord, what sort of women in India can die along their 
husbands; and what sort of women can not ?" Bhrigu repied: ce The following 
women are not entitled to go to the next world along with their respective 
husbands after their decease, viz., a woman whose son has not attained as yet the 
age.of discretion; a pregnant woman, à woman who has not yet got her menses; 
an unchaste woman, a leprous woman, à woman who has not served her husband 
properly, a woman not devoted to her husband, a woman who always uses harsh 
language to her husband. Such woman rarely go to their respective husbands 
in this world and never enjoy their company in the next world. Other women 
should ascend the funeral piles of their respective husbands by setting fire to 
ihe pyre; in which case they will get them back in the next world. 

14-31. Ifa woman die with her husband who is a Vaisnava, she shall go 
to the Vaikuntha along with her husband and get a place there by the side of 
Visnu. Wherever a Vaisnva dies, either in a place resorted to by pilgrims or 
elsewhere, the result is the same; i.e., he goes to the Vaikuntha, Ifa man 
worsbips Hari and if a woman worships Laksmi, he or she never undergoes a fall 
from the Vaikuntha even at the time of the Eternal destruction. Whoever 
dies consciously in a place resorted to by pilgrims dwells with his wife in the 
Vaikuntha for a period covered by a hundred Brahmás." Narayana said, “Bhriga 
haying thus counselled Renuka on points of religion, described to Para$uráma the 
rules appropriate to the occasion as prescribed by the Vedas. He said, “O my 
child, get rid of your inauspicious sorrow and go to the crematorium. O best 


of the race of Bhrigu, lay the dead body of your father on tke funeral pile with . 


its head turned towards the south and with its face upwards, clothe it with new 
apparel and inyest it with new sacred thread. Then restrain your tears, turn 
your face southwards.and with reverence taking in your hands the fire excited 
by the attrition, emanating from a piece of dry wood, remember all the sacred 


places of the world: viz, the sanctifying hills, Gayá, Kurukéetra, the pure | 


Ganga, Yamuná, Kau-Sik}, Chandra-bhágà, Gandaki, Avakás8, Panasá, Saray(, 
Pugpa-bhadra, Bhadrá, Narmada, Saraswati, Godavari, Kavert, Swarna-Rekhá 


(rivers): Puskara, Raivata, Var&ha: Sri-Saila, Gandha-Mádan, Himalaya, Kailása, | 


Sumeru. Diamond hills, (mountains): Kasi, Prayâga, Vrindâ-vana, Hari-dwüra 
and Vadari-Ksetra. Then put sandal-wood, aloe, musk and fragrant flowers on 


the body of your father, dress it with a pair of clothes and placeit on the pile: 


Afterwards cover the ear, the eye, the nose, the mouth, &c, eonstituting the nine 
chief apertures of the body with pieces of gold. Lastly after having distributed 


vessels or cups full of sesamum, the milch cow with her calf and gold with the - 


priest’s fee to the Br&hmins, calmly set fire to the body. 


32-47, O descendant of Bhrigu, I give you the mantra. “Tho body which 
consciously or unconsciously committed sins has been disintegrated and dissolved 
into its elements on the approach of death. ‘The Jiva (sentient soul) having 


unfortunately used the body as a harbour or shelter was implicated in virtue or 
vice, i-e. reaped the consequences of virtue or vice. The body alone was susceptible 


to avarice, lust and other passions. Now I am going to consume the members 
of the body. Let the sentient soul pass to the celestial region.” After the 
recitation of the above mantra, circumambulate round your father's body; 

mo 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


GANES'A-KHANDA. 58 


—— 


remember Hari's name and utter the following mantra with your brothers : “O 
Fire, you emanated from him; now let him in his turn emanate from you: in the 
meantime, let him go to Heaven.” After uttering this mantra, apply fire to the 
head. Psra$uráma applied the fire as directed and performed the obsequies with 
his relations. Then Renuka placed Parasuráma on her breast and gave expression 
to certain maxims calculated to do good to him in future, She said, “ Not to 
fight with people is a very auspicious act in the world. Quarrel begets many 
evils and brings about self-destruction. It is not proper for you to fight with 
the cruel Kgattriyas. If you do not desist from fighting because of your vow, 
then listen to me. Consult Brahm& and the saint Bhrigu and do the needful 
after due deliberation. What is done with the counsel of savants proves useful 
in the end.” So saying, she placed the dead bady of her husband on her breast 
and with the recollection of Hari remained motionless on the pile. Then Paragu- 
ráma and his brothers set fire to it and lamented loudly the death of his parents 
along with the disciples of his father. - RenukA addressing her son and shouting 
Rama, Rima,” was at once reduced to ashers. ‘The messengers of Visnu arrived 
there as soon as they heard the name of the lord. They were all dark in colour, 
vested with four hands, conches, wheel, mace and lotus. Their neck was adorned 
with a wreath of wild flowers. Their heads were decked with crowns, their ears 
with rings and their body was covered with yellow, silken garments. Mounted 
on a car, they descended and placed into the chariot Jamadagni and his spouse 
and took them to the Vaikuntha through the Brahma-loka. The conjugal pair 
were provided with seats by the side of Hari and passed their days very happily. 


48-61. Paraéuráma when the bodies of his parents were burnt performed 
the first obsequies of his parents, gave immeasurable wealth, countless cows, heaps 
of gold, various kinds of cloth, lovely, excellent couches, four kinds of victuals, 
cold water, sandal, diamond lamps, artificial hills of silver, golden seats, betel- 
leaves perfumed with camphor along with golden receptacles, parasols, sandal 
shoes, fruits, garlands, vegetables, sweets and money to the Bráhmins as 
priest’s feo. Then he went to the Brahma loka. ‘This region is golden and the 
walls are built with bricks of gold. ‘The external portal is decked with golden 
jars. There he saw Brahma effulgent with his own lustre, decorated with gems 
and placed on a diamono throne. He wus surreunded by adepts, and godly and 
human saints, The Vidyá-dbaris were dancing and Brahmá was witnessing the 
dance cheerfully. The Kinnars were singing. The sandal, aloe, musk, saffron 
aad other perfume cortributed to the grace of the person of Brahma. He 
blessed the devotees with appropriate boons. On some he was bestowing constant 
prosperity. Brahma, the creator and ihe preserver of the world, the symbol of 
the eternal Brahma was reciting tbe name of Mari, He was lecturing his 
inquisitive disciples on the esoteric science of devotion. As soon as Parasuráma 
saw him, he bowed to him reverentially, wept very loudly and informed him of 

_ the death of his father. Paragarima said, “ Lord, I am descended from your 
stock. Saint Jamadagni was my father and you are my grand-father. To whom 
else shall I speak? The king Kártaviryyürjuna, afier hunting in-the forest; Was 
oppressed by hunger. Thereupon my merciful father. hospitably entertained 
him with ghee and milk presented by Kapil’. The wicked king, desirous to 
eae Kapila, has killed my father in the battle-field.” So saying he lamented 
oudly. i 


oe 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS- 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


A 
54 THE BRAHM A-V AIV ARTA PURANA 


62-70. Afterwards he wiped away his tears and said to Brahma, «Q 
author of the universe, my mother Renuk& got over her affection for me and 
followed suit. My father died. Now I am without daa Wem are my DE 
preceptor, master, preserver and tutelary deity. I now ns In. Bug SEA lease 
devise means for my rescue. Commanded by my mother, E ave o 0 you, 
Please destroy my enemy. He truly isa king, merciful and pious, who preser. 
ves the poor. He gets celebrity in the world, is revered by fte peopl and 
enjoys constant prosperity. I am very poor and humble. : "t esed d falfil 
my object (or grant my wishes). The goddess of fortune aban ones ing who 
swayed by the idea that such a person is superior in rank or such a person is 
inferior in rank or both the persons are equal in rank does not properly admi 
nister justice. His kingdom is doomed.” The mercifal Brahmá, at these words, 
embraced and blessed the boy. Bat the four-faced lord was surprised to hear 
the arduous, destructive and dreadful vow or promise taken by him. He 
thought, however, that the future was inevitable and it was useless to brood 
over the matter. He therefore gave expression to the following beneficial 
sentiments thus: “O child, it is difficult for you to fulfil a vow which entails the 
destruction of many mortals. The world has been created by the- will of God. 

71-82. Child, I created it with a great effort with the permission of Hari, 
I am filled with compassion and shocked to hear of a vow which is à source 
of calamity to the world. I am anxious to devise a plan for saving the 
Kgattriyas. For the fault of Kártaviryyárjuna alona, you want to extirpate 
the Ksattriyas twenty-one times. ‘his is not fair on your part, o best of 
Vipras, (learned Brahmins) the creation is composed of three castes, viz Ksat- 
triyas, Vaisyas and Sudras. Hari at his will creates them. At his will 
again he destroys them. ‘This repeated creation and dissolution are eternally 
brought about by the pleasure of the Supremo Boing. Fortunately for you 
your object willbe fulfilled. But child, you should go to Sankara, the 
creator, and seek his protection. The kings of the world are his servants. 

Most of them are very powerful and hold S/iva's amulet. No one will be able 
to kill them without S'/iva's consent. O Para$uráma, you should try your 
best to find out a scheme for the defeat of tho Ksattriyas. A work, initiated 
or handled with skill, is performed successfully. Please obtain the mantra 
of Krisna and the celestial amulet from S'iva. Who can overpower the extra- 
ordinary and indomitable energy of a V 

S‘iva is your religious preceptor in every birth. 
mantra from him and not from me. 
performed by one in ones previous birth, 
wife, a preceptor ora tulelary deity. T 
one birth come back to his possession 


reasonable ought to be performed. O Háma, after you have received the 
amulet called the conqueror of the t 


t i hree worlds from Siva, you will be able 
to extirpate the Ksattriyas twenty-one times in the world. The most generous 


Sfiva will give you the weapon Pá$upata of extr 
will, by meane of the mantras received from Siv 


You should therefore take 


one is able to secure one's husband, or 
he things which belong toa man in 


a, be able to kill the Ksattriyas. 


CHAPTER XXIX. 
1-13. Nárá&yana said, “Paraśurâma, 


: the ornament of Bhri u’s race, - 
bowed low and haying obtained the necessary boon (in Goo to the i 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


aisnava, a S'aiva, or a S'ákta? O Rama, | 
D ? 


According to the merits of the acts | 


in the next birth. An act which is | 


aordinary power; and you | 


AA. RUM. MN ee A 


Digitized. by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


GANES'A-KHANDA. $5 


advice of Brahm4), cheerfully went to the S/iva-loka. This Si^va-loka is situated 
at a height of one lakh yojans above the Brahma-loka and is vastly superior 

to the latter. Its beauty can not be described. It is suspended in the vaccuum 
or the wind. It is bounded on the right side by the Vaikuntha, on the left 
side, by the Gauri-loka and below it by Dhruva-loka. Fifty crores of yojans 
above these worlds, shines the Goloka above which there is no other loka. 
With the speed of mind the great yogi Para$uráma beheld the S'iva-loka. It 
can be compared with nothing else and nothing can be compared with it. He 
saw that it was most wonderful. It was conspicuous by the presence of holy 
devotees whose heart was chastened by the meditation of ten millions of ages and 
who had acquired celebrity in the world by adept lores. It was covered with 
Kalpa trees that yield desire. It was decked with countless celestial cows of plenty 
(Káma-dhenus,) and reverberated with the hum of numberless bees and the 
sound of male cuckoos. This region was created by the will and meditative 
faculties of S’iva. The great architect Viswa-karmé is unable to enjoy its vision 
even in dream, Paragurima saw that it was full.of robust and healthy people 
and adorned with lotuses and ponds. It contained groves of P&rijata which 
gave it a wonderful charm. It was constructed with excellent gems and 
contaiLed beautiful altars of gem. Its interior was embellished with royal 
roads and numberless houses of emerald. Series of jars which beautified the 
portico displayed considerable artistic skill. 


14-23  Para$uráma entered into the S'iva-loka and saw in the heart 
of the region the lovely dwelling house of S/ankara. It was surrounded by 
ramparts of diamond. The house was so high as.to touch the sky. It was 
all white like milk. It had sixteen doors. The stair-cases, the pillars, the 
rooms, the jars (all constructed with gems with masterly art) contributed to 
the beauty of the dwelling place. The main gate or the portal was decked 
with doors, inlaid with diamonds. In the interior and exterior of the house, 
the altars or platforms constructed with rubies and emeralds added to the 
grace of the mansion. Being ornamented with pictures, it afforded a pleasant 
sight to the residents, He saw at the threshold two dreadful door-keepers 
or sentinels. ‘Their teeth and faces were hideous; their forms were ugly; 
their eyes were red like burnt pieces of rock, they were very powerful: 
their body was besmeared with ashes; they were clad in tiger skins, they 
were superb in their habits; their eyes were tawny aud broad; thelr head was 
covered with clusters of knotted hair; they had three eyes. a trident and an 
axe each. Para$uráma when he saw them radiant with the lustre of Brahma 
was struck with awe. 

24-38. Hethen communicated to the rude and immodest door-keepers 
the whole history of the case. ‘The door-keepers were moved with compassion, 
at the words of the learned Brahmin boy, went inside, informed Siva of his 
arrival and having secured the necessary orders of the god, permitted Parasu- 
ráma to stepin. After having remembered Hari, Para$uráma the ornament of 
Bhrigu's race, entered. ie saw that each of the rocms had sixteen doors 
which were painted with pictures and well secured. Then he beheld 
the extraordinary court or durbár perfumed by the  Párijáta and 
crowded with numberless adepts devoted to Siva. Lastly he saw the 
most glorious Mahadeva, (in the midst of ihe hall) decorated with gems 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


56 GANES'A-KHANDA. 


[m TEE 


and seated ona throne of diamond. Lord S/’ankara wielded the moon ‘on 
his head and was armed witha trident and an axe. His loins were covered | 
with an excellent tiger-skin. His body was besmeared with ashes. Tha snakes. 
constituted his sacred thread. The god is ever bent upon doing good to his 
worshippers. He is the root and the container of every thing. that is good 
in the world. He revels in himself (ie. is self-contented). He fulfils the 
desire of those who solicit boons. He vies with ten millions of suns in lustre, 
He has a smiling and cheerful] aspect aud is ever inclined to favour his 
worshippers. He is eternal and full of light. He takes a form only out of 
compassion for his worshippers. His head is covered with clusters of knotted 
hair. His ornament consists of a garland composed of the bones of Sati, the 
daughter of Daksa who put an end to her life, as she was disgusted with the 
slanders uttered against her husband. He yields fruits of devotion to the 
Munis. ‘Io others, he gives material prosperity. Ho is white in appearance 
like pure alabaster or crystal. He has five faces, each of which is vested with 
three eyes. He was instructing his disciples on the abstrnse doctrines of 
the knowledge of Brahma by means of ontological mudrá (signs made by 
interwining the fingers in religlous worship). He was being adored by 
Narada and other yogis. He was constantly waited on by Nandi and other 
attendants with the flourish of white chowries. He was devoted to the worship. 
of Krigna who is excellent and supreme, who may do.anything as he pleases: who 
transcends the three attributes, (the principles of virtue, activity and ignorance) | 
who relieves His worshippers of decrepitude and fear of death; who is 
effulgent and supremely happy; who is the final cause and surpasses the 
bounds of nature. His body was agitated with raptures caused by the | 
contemplation of Lord Krisna. He lost himself in the recitation of the virtues | 
ofthe Supreme Being. His eyes were deluged with tears. He was surrounded | 
by eleven Rudras and Ksetrapáülas. At the sight of S'iva, the efficient canse of 
creation and the lord of Gaurt in this condition, Para$ur&ma with joy threw | 
himself prostrate upon the ground. He saw that on the left side of S'iva 
there Vig Kartika, onhis right side there was Ganesa; on his front, there 
Mero Nand? and Bir-bhadra; one portion of his lap was occupied by KAlt and | 
another pum. by Durgà.  Para$uráma reverentially bowed to them also. 
Petpet: sano he preparet rg, enlokigo the supreme Lord Siva; but only | 
Mee lied PAR DM feelings came out of his mouth. He shed | 
Parasurâma very humbl add with Poldi lad e bo of Bis MN 
Petr ing to adcre sm $ ith folded hands adored B'iva thus; “O god, | 
am you, but I have not the power to doit. Youare the | 
origin of all letters; and you are void of will How then can I adore you? | 
Nisi ie due DI R properly, by words. How then can fi 
by the Vedas? e UE: os eing who can not be sufficiently eulogised íl 
EN dh E a UR e scope of intellect, mind and languag 
adept yourself, you are ad n EU SEE MCA O EMO world ae 
skyi You Mee e y the adepts, You are all-pervading like the 
to matter and some lines abi no end, no death. At your will, you are subject 
religious ceremonies OMM E You are the author of the code of 
apprehended by ited (lations E o UO nada cE do poii den be 
ocean of kindness. I: t ut you cannot be comprehended. You are the 
+ żum too poor. Kindly preserve me. My life has been 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-M0E, 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
GAN ES'A-K H AN.DA. 37 


rendered blessed to-day. see you to-day with my own eyes, though your 
votaries are unable to see you even in dreams. No fortune can be greater 
than this. I bow to that god from whose digits, Indra, the other regents of 
the quarters, the world with its animate and inanimate objects have come out, 
I bow to Mahadeva who in the shape of the sun makes a division of time into 
years, days, hours, minutes, &c, and thus contributes to the good of the world; 
who, in the shape of the moon showers nectar; who, in the shape of the fire, 
boils food for the benefit of creation; who ia the shape of water favours the 
growth of crops; who in the shape of the wind sustains the life of the people: 
wio, in the shape of man, woman or eunuch, propagates species: who is the 
receptacle and symbol of all objects. 


51-56. lbow to lord S'iva whom the daughter of the mountain has 
seoured as her husband by means of asceticism, who can hardly be attained 
by meditation, who yields fruits of devotion to the people like the Kalpa tree, 
who is easily satisfed with his worshippers. I bow to S'/iva who, in a short 
time, takes the hideous form of Kalagni for the destruction of the world: 
who is the aymbol of time, the seed of time, the death of time. I bow to 
S'iva at whose instance the time revolves its wheels; who is the Supreme Being; 
who is never born; who is the eternal spirit; who incarnates himself for the 
destruction of the demons; who can wield any image at his pleasure.” So 
saying he fell prostrate at S'iva’s feet. ‘The lord Siva, the husband of Bhaváni 
was pleased with the ode and blessed him. Whoever reads the above hymn 
is relieved from his sins and goes to the Kailaéa after his death. 


CHAPTER XXX 


1-6. Siva then said, “O Brahmin boy, who are you ? where is your home? 
whose son are you ? why do you adore me? What can I do for you ?” Parvati 
also-said, “I see you much afflicted with sorrow. You seem to be .much 
absent-minded. Why do you look so much astounded ? From your appearance, 
l judge, you are a mere child. You are very tranquil in disposition. You 
seem to be the best of those who are virtuous.” Para$uráma said, “O asylum 
of mercy, lord S^iva, I am the son of Jamadagni. Iam descended from the 
stock of Bhrigu. ‘The chaste Renuká was my mother. My name 1s Parasuráma. 
Please purchase me with the price of knowledge or wisdom. Tommyouu slave 
and geek your protection. Listen to my tale: the king Kárta-Virryyárjuna 
went out to hunt; and oppressed by hunger he came to the hermitage of my 
father who entertained him with ghee, milk, etc., furnished by Kapila. The 
foolish king inspired with the desire to take possession of the cow killed my 
father in the battle-field; and the sorrowful Kapila went to the Gcloka. 


7-20. My mother died on the funeral pile of her husband. Iam now 
an orphan. © lord, you are now my father; and the goddess Ganl is my 
mother. Maintain me, lord, ag your son Bewildered with grief, i have 
takena very arduous vow which it is almost impossible for me to perform. 
I have promised to rid the earth of the Ksattriyas twenty-one times and 
kill Karta-Viryya, the murderer of my father in the battle-field.” At the 
qud of the boy, S’iva looked at Parvati and hong down his head in sorrow, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by | 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 2 
58 THE BRAHM A-V AIV ARTA PURANA. 


Eo 
He looked much afflicted. PA&rvati, said, “O son of a devotee, rendered 
insensible by anger, thou hast the audacity to cherish the aspiration to rid, 
the Ksattriyas. Thouart a mere ascetic and hast got no weapon and yet thou/ 
hast the bold effrontery to express the desire to effect the destruction of Kâårta. 
viryya and other kings. King Kárta-viryya, in the twinkling of an eye, 
subdued Ravana. From Dattá-treya he received the shield and the invincible 
spear wherewith he killed thy father. He recites day and night the name 
of Hari. Who ean kil him in this world? Thou arta mere boy, without 
weapons. It does not liein thy power to kill him: go home. What can Siva 
do iv the matter? Thou arta regular fool. Thou hast cherished a desire like 
a dwarf who wants to catch the moon. Therefore, desist. Fool, dost thou 
desire to slay my virtuous and valiant votaries with the help of S'iva?" When | 
Parašurâma heard the words of Gauri, he wept very bitterly and attempted 
to commit suicide in the presence of the god and the goddess. The merciful 
Siva was. filled with compassion at the lamentations of the son of the Br&hmin; 
and seeing that K&li and Gauri were very angry he appeased them with modest 
words and, then with the permission of the whole assembly, addressed Paragu- 
r&ma thus: 

21-32. Child, from this day forth you will be likea son to me. I give 
you very abstruse and mysterious mantras as well as my amulet. By my 
grace, you will be able to rid the earth of the Ksattiiyas twenty-one times | 
and kill Kárta-Viryya: your wonderful deeds will establish your fame | 
throughout the world. “So saying the lord gave him the amulet called the 
conqueror of the three worlds, abstruse mantras, an extraordinary hymn, the | 
rules of worship and Paras-charana (repetition of the name of a deity attended 
with oblations, burnt offerings etc.) He also told him how and where to mature 
the mantras. He then taught him the four Vedas and the six auxiliary 
branches of the Vedas. He also gave him the following weapons viz.. Naga, Siva, 
Brahma, Agneya, Narayana, V&yavya, Varuna, Gándarva, Garuda, the sapin 
weapon (Jrimbana), club, iron-spear, noose, the wonderful, iE EA 
taught him the mystic formula prescribing the method how to discharge 
them and their samhár i. e. the charm or spell for withdrawing magical weapons. 
He also gave him an inexhaustible quiver of arrows. He pointed out to him 
likewise the method of self-defence and also the secret of i He als 
explained to him the mysteries of battles foucht b delusi A d B. 
pointed out to him where to shout (Hunk&r) E SP to Va EE 3 
how to preserve one's own acm and d 1 conqaer, the, enemi 

) í y estroy the hostile force, what method to 
adopt with a view to preserve the army in the co £ : 
He also taught him the doctrin i Pt kasc Brave amera cnoi 

es of the Nár&yani knowledge whereby the | 

world could be enchanted or spell-bound and the £ f Ba y 
could be dispelled. Paragurâma lived in the K T ia rebirth and death | 
learnt from him several sorts of arts relating to th LUE c 

; g e mantras and the weapons | 
and acquired the knowledge of hymns and amulets. T} h aa 
acquired perfection with the help of the mantras endis DEA PUERTA 

E 


theseries of mystic incantations which he had learnt Baile Hubo son and 


| 
| 


A CHAPTER XXX], 
1-13. Narada said, “Kindly tell me, lord, abou 


È 2 t the incantati 
hymn and amulet which the god S'iva was pleased to give to Prati 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
GANES'4-KHANDA. 59 


Which deity did he worship with the mantras and what benefits did he derive 
from the worship ?" Nátáyana said, “The deity who should be worshipped 
through the mantra is the Supreme Being Lord Krisna himself, the master 
of the cow-herds and cow-herdesses. Mahadeva had given Paragurima a 
wonderful and powerful amulet called the ‘Conqueror of the three worlds” and 
an excellent and very sacred hymn which was the outcome of the yoga of 
Vibhüti or the super-human power of the god S'iva. (n the coast of the 
Swayam-prabh& river, in the valley of the diamond-hills, in the forest of the 
Párijáta in a certain hermitage, in the presence of Krisna who is the lord o£ 
the Goloka and the master of the three worlds, S’iva gave him a mantra 
celetrated by the name of the Kalpa-tree which yields all fruits. S/iva said to 
Para$uráma, “O blessed scion of the race of Bhrigu, I love you more than my 
son. Please accept this amulet. O Rama, this is the most valorous of all 
the amulets in the world and is called the conqueror of the three worlds, 
The god to be adored by this amulet is Lord Krisna. Its perusal secures 
victory to the reader in the battle-field. In the sphere of the Rása, in the 
grove of Radha, in the Goloka, Lord Krisna gave it to me. It is sacred and 
excellent. Ilove you very much and hence I give it to you. By wielding 
it, the primordial nature, i.e. the goddess Párvati killed S’umbha, Nisumbha, 
Mahisü-sura and other demons. By wielding it, Ihave become an onto- 
logist and the destroyer of the world and thereby I killed the demon ‘Tripura 
whom it was impossible for others to slay. By wielding it and by its perusal 
Brahma has become the creator and Ananta has been able to bear the 
earth on his head. 


14-24. By wielding it, Kürma sustains Ananta on his back, the wind 
which touches every person and preserves his life has become the refuge of 
the world; Varuna, the god of water, has become an adept, Indra has become 
the king of the gods; theSun by the assumption of a radiant form lights 
up the globe; the moon, the husband of the white water-lily, has become 
mighty and valorous; the saint Agastya was able to drink the seven oceans by 
putting them in the hollow of his hands; the earth is able to sustain the 
animate and inanimate creation, the moveable and immoveable property: 
the river Ganges is able t» consecrate the world; the pious Dharma ranges 
in the world as the witness of virtue and vice; Saraswati presides over all 
knowledge; Laksmí, the spouse of Hari, takes the form of crops and 
maintains the creat‘on; Savitri gave birth to the Vedas; the four Vedas 
(vz., Rik, Sama, Yajur and Atharva) have been able to propound virtue to 
the four castes, viz the Bráhmins, the Ksatriyas, the Vai$yas and the Südras; 
the effulgent fire has been able to bear the sacrificial ghee like the mouth of 
the gods; the great saint Sanat Kumára has attained a pre-eminent rank among 
Wise people. Such is the virtue of the amulet which I give to you. You 
may give it to any pious Vaignava disciple of yours. But you should not 
lve it toa traitor or to the disciple of any other Brahmin: foniy on can do 
So only at your peril, i.e. at the risk of your life.” Parasurâma said, O lord, 
I want to know the Rigi (saint), the metre and the god of this cade Sfiva 
said, Prajápati (Brahm) is its priest; its metre is gaetri; Lord Krigna is i 
god; it is meant to secure victory in the three worlds. In heaven, in the 
Mortal world or in the nether world, it is impossible to find an amulet 
Superior to this amulet. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. A 
60 THE BRAHM A-V AIV ARTA PURAN A. 


25-42. Om Sri Krisnài namah: may this mantra of six letters preserve 
my head, Krisnái Swàáhà; may this manra of five letters preserve amy | 
forehead. Krisna, may this mantra of two letters preserve my eyes. Krişna 
Swáhá; may this mantra of four letters preserve the pupils of my eyes 
Harae namah: may this mantra of five letters preserve my brow. Om. 
Gobindái swàhà, may this mantra always preserve my rose. Gopalái Namah, | 
may this mantra always preserve my cheeks. S'ri Krisnái Namah, may this 
mantra like a Kalpa-tree preserve my ears. Om Krisnái namah, may this 
mantra preserve my lips and my lower part. Om Govindái Swáhá, may this | 
mantra preserve the row of my teeth Om Krisnái Namah, may this mantra | 
preserve the hollow between my teeth. lim may this mantra of one letter | 
preserve the upper row of my teeth, Om S’ri Krisn&i Swáhá may this 
mantra always preserve my tongue; Râseswarâi Swühá&, may this mantra 
preserve.my palate. Radhikes4i Swab, may this mantra preserve my throat, 
Gopeoganesdi Swáhà, may this mantra always preserve my heart. Om 
Gopesái Swôhâ, may this mantra preserve my shoulders. Namah Kisor- | 
Vesi Swib4, may this mantra of ten letters preserve my back.  Mukundái 
namah, may this mantra of six letters preserve my stomach ; Om Hrim Klim 
Krisnai Swiha, may this mantra of eight letters preserve my hands and feet. 
Om Visnavenamah may this mantra preserve my arms. Om Hrim Bhagate 
Swáh&, may this mantra of eight letters preserve my nails. Om namo 
N&ráyanái may this mantra of eight letters preserve the bollow of my nails 
Om Hrim Hrim Padma Nábhái, may this mantra of eight letters preserve. 
my navel. Om Sarvesái Swáhá, may this mantra preserve my bones. Om - 
Gopi-ramanài Swáhá, may this mantra of nine letters preserve my buttocks; | 
Om Gopí-raman-náthài, may this mantra cf nine letters preserve the sole of | 
my feet. Om Hrim B'rim Rasikesdi, may this mantra preserve all the parts | 
MR ety. Om ose Swaha may this mantra of seven letters preserve 
mantra emn p an Namah Brite Syahiyumayuthis inoveu-debterud 
may this mantra of. carn len iamai epen my heatedOm Mádhv&i SwüH8 
Supreme in-carnation Lo Aa SRE ie poresgofimy skin. May the | 
isst eG (ft CABO ae riga preserve me on the east side. May the 
itc eee e a P serye ne ee the south-east side, may the eternal 
Tee e e in south. side. May Lord Krigna preserve me on | 

. y Lord Hari preserve me on the west side. 


43-49. May Govinda | 

: y j preserve me on the north-west . May. 

Krigna, thel prince of wits, preserve me on the north side, May Krisna the l 
se?) 


ranger of the Vrindá-vanà grove, preserve me 
the lord of Vrindá-vani FON: QM REM HE Md 


: e mein the upper regions. May Nri-Si 
o NM e ES IRAE always preset me a the frd NET 
in ERY. ay the husband of Lakamíi i 
may the Lord Náráyana, the soul axginl preserve me, asleep or awake. 


: of all creatures and yet i ith | 
any thing, preserve me at all times and in all places. © seh Pee M | 
e JU 


B LH P . | 
described to you the virtues of this excellent and wonderlul amulet. I heard | 
Í 

| 


cf this amulet from Lord Krişna. Do not reveal it to any one. Whoever 


afler baving worshipped his religious prece i 
1 ship s septor d is a 
his neck cr on his rigbt arm nudonbtedly M MM UD 


dwelling Louse is graced by the presence of La 
up their mutual animosity for his sake 


ins the rank of Visnu. His 
ksmi and Saraswat? who give | 
and dwell together in peace, } 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE j 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
GAN ES A-KHANDA. 61 


50-58. Whoever baving done Purascharan (repetition of the name of 

a deity with burnt offerings and oblations) with reference to this amulet can 
render it perfect is redeemed in his life-time : such an adept reaps the same 
benefits that can be secured by the worship of Lord Krisna for ten millions 
of years. The virtue of wielding this amulet called the “Conqueror of the three 
worlds” is sixteen times greater than any of the following acts: thousands 
of royal sacrilices, hundreds of Báj-peya sacrifices, countless horse or man- 
sacrifices, the great gift of mountains of crops, ie. heaps of crops, the cireum- 
ambulation round the world with all its seven oceans. The fasting on the 
days of Ohándráyana or Ekádasi, the wielding of the nails or hair, the study 
of the Vedas, Mahá-bhárata $c. the ablution in the holy waters or devotion 
to god is not equal in point of religious efficacy even to a digit of this amulet. 
A man who acquires perfection by mcans of this amulet can easily attain the 
osition of an adept or a god or even the bondage of Hari. Whoever recites 

it ten lakhs oË times becomes an adept and bence omniscient Hvery-thing 
becomes manifest before his eye of wisdom. But whoever worships Krigna 
without understanding the meaning of this amulet can never attain perfection, 
though he may recite it for ten millions of ages. O son Parasuráma, by 
wielding this amulet, you will be able cheerfully and fearlessly to rid the earth 
of the Ksatriyas twenty-one times. Rather leave for good your kizgdom, 
or jurisdiction, get yourself beheaded and thus sacrifice your life than part with 


this amulet even if your lifeis in danger. 


CHAPTER. XXXII. 


1-15. The scion of Bhrigu said, “O lord, Ihave obtained from you the 
all-preserving, delightful, redeeming, excellent emulet, the conqueror of 
enemies. Now, O preserver of those who seek your p:otection, kindly give 
me the mystic incantation, hymn and the rules of worship appertaining to 
Lord Krisna. I am an orphan. You are my lord.” S'iva said, Om S'rim 
Namah S’ri Krisnat Paripirnatmai Sw&ha. With this mantra you should 
worship Krisna, the master of the world and the lord of the cow-herdesses. This 
mystic formula of seven letters is better than any mantra. It is called 
maníra.rája or the king of the maniras? This mantra's Purascharana takes 
place when itis recited five lakhs of times, when oblations of ghee are made 
to the fire fifty thousand times, when water is presented to the manes five 
thousand times, when ablution is made in the waters five hundred times and 
when five hundred Brahmins are fed. The observance of these rites brings. 
perfection. The priest’s fee in this connexion isa hundred gold coins. The 
whole world is brought under the control of a person who attains perfaction 
by the methods stated above. He can drink the water of the four oceans, 
destroy the world and go to the Vaikuntha with the body composed of 
five elements. -The touch of the dust of his body consecrates places frequented 
by pilgrims, nay the whole world. Now, O boy, I am going to tell you the 


Dhyàn of the Sim Veda sacred to word Krigna. It gives redemption and 
ə lotuses. His face 


faith. He is dark like a new cloud. His eyes are like bla Ses. 
ts smiling and graceful like the autumnal full moon. He vies in charms 
with ten millions of Cupids. He harbours all sorts of armours and attracts 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by.IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


62 THE BRAHM A-V AIV ARTA PURANA. 


the mind of the people. He is seated on a gorgeous throne, decked with gems. 
and besmeared with white sandal-paste He has a yellow dress; He is very 
lovely in appearance; He is constantly observed by the smiling cow-herdesses 
His neck is adorned with garlands of jasmine. His diadem is covered with 
the plumage of peacock inlaid with flowers of kunda (a species of jasmine) 
on account of which he looks like the sky ornamented with the moon and 
stars. He resides in the heart of Radhika decked with precious ornaments. 
He is served in every way by the best of adepts, munis and gods. He is 
eulogised by Brahma, Visnu and S'iva with extiacts from the Vedas. I adore 
that lord Krişna. 


16-25. After having meditated Krisna in the way as stated above. He 
should be worsbipped with sixteen ingredients; in which case, the worshipper 
will surely become omniscient. Iam now going to tell you, O Parasuráma, 
the method of the presentation of the above ingredients. They will be presented 
in the following order: 1) Water for washing the feet, (2) matting or carpet 
used asa seat, (3) cloth, (4) ornament, 5) cow, (6) water for the feat mixed 
with barley, paddy, bent grass &c., (7) oblaton of honey, milk, (8) sacred 
thread, (9) frankincense (10) light or Jamp, (11) gilts of rice &c., (12) water 
for rinsing the mouth, (13) flowers of many kinds, (14) betel perfumed with 
camphor, (15) sandal, aloe und other perfume, (16) lovely bedstead. After 
having reverentially  pressnted the sixteen ingredients to the foet of Lord 
Krisna, the efficient cause of creation, you should present to him excellent 
wreaths of flowers and three handfuls of flowers. After the worship of 
Krisna with all its six parts or limbs is finished, you should worshi his atten- 
dants. S'ridáma, Sudáma, Vásudama, Hari Bhânu, Chahudra-bhánu and 
Subhánu: those are the six principal adlerents of Krisna whom you should 
also reverentialy worship. You should also worship with very great reverence 
the goddess Radha who is adored by Lord Krisna and represents his energy. 
Then you should worship the gopas, the gopis, S'iva, Himalaya, Brahma, 
Lakgini, Saraswati, the earth, all tho gods, the nine planets and the six 
principal deities, ciz, Ganega, the sun, the fire, Vienu, Siva and Siva. 

26-32, After the worship of these gods, 
You should worshlp Ganesa for the removal of impediments, the Sun for the 
Qu: senses, Se Dire for purity of Ps body, Vignu for redemption, S’iva 

Or prosperity. ‘he w i i iti 
dis ERRORES withent dU ist me orsbip of these six deities seoure 


ject of t do fis fas 
After the worship of Lord Krisn Ject of the worship is frustrated. 


te ( a is over, you should ask i 
spiritual guide, 1e. the tutelary deity i mee e 


s cording t i 

in the Sam-Veda. The eulogy is as follows. "e Stren c pred 
ultimate resort of those who seek redemption. He is brighter than nu other 
effulgent object, (god, planet, &c) in the world. He pervades the E world 
and yet is uuconnected' with any object of the world. He is the final cause 
of the universe. I bow to him. He is denser than the den d re 
subtle than the atom. He is visible as wellas invisible I ad x ib i d 
Sri Krigna. When He incarnates himself, He wields a Pur: E T m 
invisible. He is vested with the attribuies of virtue ANG a ne 1 
for the Preservation, creation and destruction of the dE He is the 
creator and image of all objects. Ho can do anything as He dene E I bow 


Krisna should be worshipped. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


valours, He is the fate among powerful agencies. 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
GAN ES'’A-KHANDA. 63 


to Him. For the destruction of Hiranyaka-sipu ofjiincomparable grace, He 
wielded the most hideous form of Nri-simha. I bow to Him. : 


33.49. Heis the witness of allacis. He represents all actions and 
the fruits of actions and dispenses the desired fruits to people according to their 
actions. I bow to the lord. Through his digits, he takes the form of Brahma 
for creation; of Visnu, for preservation; of S'iva, for destruction; of fish and 
tortoise, for the good of the world. I bow to him. Inthe form of nature, 
He creates the world; and subject to Máy& or Nature, He preserves ihe 
world. Above Nature and the Supreme Being he assumes the supreme dignity 
of Brahmá. I bow to that matchless Being. Through his Mâyâ or illusion, 
He takes somo times the form of a woman ora goddess vested with ten 
hands; and sometimes the form ofa man for the destruction of Ráyana, 
Sometimes He takes a neuter form (neither male nor female), for instance, 
water, sky &c., for the collection of seeds or germs. I bowto Him. He preserves 
the gods from danger. He is the final cause of the world and sustains the 
universe. 1 bow to Lord Krigna. He is the sun among objects effulgent, 
the Brüábmin amorg the castes, the moon among stars. I bow to Him, 
He isS'iva among the ltudras, Vaisnavas and the sages; He is the Ananta 
among snakes with His hundred heads sus‘uining tho whole world. I bow to 
Him. Heis the four-faced Brahma among the lords of creation; the saint 
Kapila among  adepts and Sanat-Kumára among the munis. I bow to 
Him. He is the eternal Visnu with four bands, Durgá, the goddess Nature, 
among the goddesses, the SwAyambhuva Manu (son of the self-existent 
Brahm&) among .the Manus, Vaisnava among men, S'/ata-rupàá among women. 
I bow to Him. He is the spring among seasons, the month of Agra-háyana, 
(November-December) among months, Ekádasi among the fifteen lunar days. 
I bow to Lord Náráyana. Ha is the holy basil among leaves, the sandal 
among timbers, Kalpa among trees. I bow to Him. He is the Párijáta 
among flowers, the paddy among crops, ihe nectar among victuals. I bow to 
Him. He is the -Airávata among elephants, the divine eagle among birds 
and the Kama cow (the cow of plenty) «mong cows. I bowto Him. He is the 
gold among metals, the paddy among riches, the lion among animals, Kuvera 
among the Yaksas, Vrihaspati among the nine planets, Indra among the 
regents cf the quarters. I bow to that Supreme Lord, Hari. He is the 
Vedas among religious books, Saraswati among the learned, the letter A 
among the letters. I bow to Him. 


50-58. He is Visnu—mantra among the mantras, Ganga among. 
tivers, the mind among the senses. I bow to Him. He is Sudarsana 
among weapons, Visnu—fever among fevers, the Brühmanic valour among 

the mind among speedy 
things; He is the time, the great judge of good and evil, among judges I bow 
to that Narayana, the best of all objects in the world. f He isthe preceptor of 
wisdom among preceptora, the mother among relations, the father among. 
friends. I bow to llim. He is Viswa-karm& among architects, 


Madan among the handsome, the chaste woman among women. I bow to 


Him. He is the son among affectionate relations, the king among men, the . 
GP 
S‘algram among stones. 


Ibow to Him. He is the Dharma among virtuous 
deeds, the SAm-Veda among the Vedas, truth among pious acts. I bow to 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE C 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. A 
64 THE BRAH M A-V AIV ARTA PURAN A. 


Him. He is the coldness of the water, the smell of the earth and the sound 
of the sky. I bow to Him. He is the grand royal sacrifice among sacrifices, 
the Gaetri among metres; Chitra-rathi among the Gandarvas. [I bow to 


Him. 


59-71, He is the milk among the productions of the cow, the fire among 
sacred articles, the water among sanctifying things. I bow to Him. He is 
the Kaga (the holy grass) among different kinds of grass, the disease among 
enemies, the peace of mind among human qualities. J bow to this wonderful 
Deity. Heis full of light and wisdom. He is the sum-total of all objects. 
He is all pervading and indescribable. I bow to Him. He is the soul of all 
permanent objects. He is omnipresent like the wind. Of all the pervading 
objects, He is the most pervading like the sky: J bow to Him. Who with 
his ordinary intelligence can adore lord Visnu that cannot be described 
even by the four Vedas? Saraswati, the goddess of knowledge, is struck dumb 
in her attempt to eulogise Him. His essence can not be determined by the 
mind or described by language. How isit possible for a savant, then, to adore 
Him? He is like pure light. Out of compassion for His worshippers He 
wields a form, gracious and lovely like a cloud. I bow to the Lord Krisna 
who has two hands and plays on the flute; whois very young; who smiles 
cheerfully; whois always obsorved by the merry wives of the cow-herds at 
Vrindivana. I bow to the Lord whe chews betels offered by Radha andis 
seated on an excellent lovely throne, Heis tended with white chowries by 
His associate cow-herds gorgeously clad; His heart is set upon the amorous 
deeds performed in the Rásá; He occupies the central position in the sphere 
of the Rás& and enjoys the society of the cow-herdesses. I bow to Him. He 
loves to sport at times on the mountain of a hundred summits; and at other 
times, on the diamond-hills, or on the coast of tho Virajf in the Goloka. I 
bow to Him. He is eternal, tranquil, lovely, truthful. He is the consort of 
Radha and identical with Brahma. I bow to Him. 


72-78, Whoever in the morning, noon and evening, reads the above 
hymn attains the four-fold objects of human pursuit and acquires the bondage 
of Hari as well as firm faith in him. He gains all sorts of perfection. He is 
adored by all and attains the rank of Visnu. On his death, he is provided with 
a seat by the side of Hari; and even in his life time, he acquires the glory and 
splendour of the Sun. He is rendered exempt from all kinds of disease and 
becomes the asylam of all the virtues. He acquires celebrity through his 
knowledge. He gets sons, grandsons, wealth, and paddy and because of his 
devotions to Krisna, he is redeemed in his life-time. He gains proficiency in 
the six Fees (systems of {ndian philosophy). With the speed of mind, he can 
63 aed lere he chooses. He acquires proficiency in every thing and is capable 
of bestowing on people all kinds of prosperity like the Kalpa-tree through the 
grace of Lord Krisna. O child Para$uráma, I have narrated t the ode 
of Krisna, Now goto the holy place i "D 
mature or perfect so that your object might be accomplished. By my blessing 


and by the grace of Lord Krisn i i 
"of the Ksatriyas twenty-one Gee will, no doubt, be able to rid the world 


NM E 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


of Puskara and render this mantra | 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
GANES'A-KHANDA. 65 


CHAPTER XXXIII. 


1-8. Nár&yana said, ‘O Narada, Parasuráma bowed to S/iva.and S/iva, 
went to Puskara and matured the mantra, as desired. He meditated the 
lotus feet of Lord Krigna, fasted fora month and thereby caused the purification 
of the vital airs of his body. After this, he perceived in the sky in the sphere 
of a glorions light a diamond car eclipsing all the quarters with the brilliance of 
its own rays. Within that chariot, he observed an extraordinary being with 
2 very fair appearance and smiling face ready to show kindness to His adherents. 
At this sight, Paragurdma fell prostrate on the ground before Him and humbly. 
besought a boon from the god. He ‘said, “O lord of the world, give me a boon 
so that I may be able to rid the earth twenty-one times of the Ksatriyas. May 
I ever remain devoted to your feet and may I acquire the perpetual bondage of 


‚your feet, which can so rarely be secured by any body." Lord Krisna gave 


him the boon solicited and disappeared. Parasur&ma then bowed to the Supreme 
Lord and went home. After the attainment of the boon, his right body began 
to quiver prognosticating good luck. 
9.23. During sleep, he also experienced auspicious dreams inspiring. 
confidence in his mind. Day and night, hefelt happy. There was no end to. 
his physical charms or to the bloom of his body. He revealed the whole history 
of his case to the members of his family from start to finish and passed his days 
cheerfully in his house. He invited his disciples, the disciples of his father, 
bis brothers and other relations to his house, communicated to them the whole 
incident from beginning to end, and after holding a conference with them. 
prepared with them to go to the battle-field at an auspicious moment. On 
the eve of his departure, he observed auspicious things and heard sounds 
indicative of victory. ‘Thence he concluded that the victory of his own party 
and the defeat of the enemy were certain. While starting, he heard shouts 
of “Hari” and the sound of the conches, the bell and the drum. There was- 
9 voice from the sky, ʻO son of Bhrigu, you will be crowned with victory.’ 
He saw people making auspicious signs and heard the clouds thundering in’ 
the sky and prognosticating his success. He saw at the time many Brahmins, 
bards, prophets, married women (who were blessed with sons) with burning 
lamps in their hands, and chaste girls decked with ornaments. While passing, 
he suw corpses, she-jackals, jars full of water, the mongoose, the bluejay and. 
perceived other auspicious omens. Healso saw the black antelope, the elephant,‘ 
the lion, the horse, the rhinoceros, the tiger, tbe reindeer, the swan, the ruddy’ $ 
goose, (ie. the Bráhmini duck), the parrot, the cuckoo, the peacock, the wag-tail, - 
the white-kite, the red-legged bartavelle, the pigeon, the row of herons, the 
swallow, the sparrow, the duck, the lightning flashing in the clouds, the rain-bow, 
the sun and his disc, fresh meat, that has been carved, living fish, conches, gold, dia- 
mond, silver, pearls, coral, the curd, fried rice, the white paddy, the white ae 
the saffron, green foliage, the standard, the parasol, tha mirror, the white c Query 
the miloh-cow with her calf, the land-lord seated on a car, milk the ghee 
produced from cow's milk, the betel-nut, honey, milk boiled with sugar and rice, 


: à à holy stone, a 
ripe fruit, candied sugar, nectar, the cat, a fat bull, the lamb, the holy | 
mountain, the. rat, erates after a cloudy sky, the sphere S RU Fe 
musk, a fan of palm-leaf, cool water, turmeric, the soil of a holy lanl, ms 
white mustard, mustard, bent grass, & Brahmin boy or girl, deer, a prostitute, 
9 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


A 
66 THE BRAHMA-V AIVARTA PURANA. 
RR A PH QE SÀN 


the bee, camphor, the yellow cloth, the urine of the cow, the way meant for the | 


passage of the cows, a lovely cow-pen, an anspicious intercourseof a bull with 
a cow, ornaments, the image of a god, flaming fire, a festival, the copper, the 
erystal, a physician, vermilion, a wreath of flowers, the sandal, perfume, ruby and 
gems. He smelled the fragrant wind and listened to the blessings of the 
Brahmins. 

29-41. He was pleased with these signs and at sunset arrived at the coast 
of the Narmad&. ‘There he saw a lovely, excellent and tall fig tree (also called 
banian). Beneath it, there was a hermitage rendered cool by the breeze. There 
the saint Pulastya used to pray, in days of yore. It was very close to the 
Kingdom of Kárta-Viryyárjuna. There Parasuráma, served by his followers, 
lay on a flower-bed and as he was exhausted, he slept immediately. Towards 
the latter part of the night, he experienced good dreams. He saw things 
(in dream) of which he never thought, while awake. He was not subject to 
any nervous, bilious or phlegmatic disorder. He dreamt that he ascended an 
elephant, horse, mountain, bull ora fruitful tree and that he was devoured by 
Worms on account of which he was weeping. Again he saw that he was 
riding on a boat with his neck covered with wreaths and body annointed with 
sandal paste. Again he dreamt that bis body was covered with ordure and 
pus and that he was playing upon the lute. Again he dreamt that on the coast 
of a river covered with lotus-leaves he was consuming curd, ghee and sweetened 
milk and chewing betel-leaves; that he was blessed by the Br&hmins; that 
fruits, flowers and lamps were placed before his eyes; that he was consuming 
ripe fruits, milk, warm victuals, candied sugar, and the food prepared out of 
pease; that he ran away in fear as soon as he saw that leeches, scorpions, fish 
and snakes were prepared to consume them. 


42-52. Then he dreamt that he entered into the spheres of the sun and 
the moon; that the women who were blessed with sons and husbands were looking 
at Brahmins with a smile. Again he dreamt that he saw in bigs presence a 
blossoming tree, an idol and a king, and that he was monnted on an elephant or 
a chariot. He also saw that a Brâbmin girl clad in yellow dress and decked 
with gems was entering into his house. He again saw in tle dream conches, 
erystal cups, garlands of white flowers, pearls, sandal, gold Aiea. and gems. 
Ho again dreamt that he was seated on a chariot, or present in the assembly of 
nine gems, (ie. men celebreted for their learning) or decorated with 


gom. Again he saw in the dream a 
rd, fried rice, ghee, honey, a parasol 
rella in his hands. Again he dreamt 


blessing him with expressions indicating hi 
of nectar, fruit, leaves and sandal from the sky j 

53-63. Again he saw in the dream tj : 

: : meat just carved, living fish, the 

peacock, the white wagtail, a pond, places of pilgrimage, the pi eot a rot, 

the white kite, the blue-jay, the spa t Eie Gow of és 

yellow pigment prepared out of the urine of the 


yellow paddy, flaming fire, a field of bent puc Rec qe Mq 


85, the adored male organ of 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


rrow, the lion, the tiger, the cow of plenty, . 


o 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
GAN ES' A-K HAN DA. ë 


S'iva, and the adored earthen image of Durga. Again he dreamt that he was 
eating cakes of barley and wheat, bales of sweet-meat and that being dressed 
gorgeously and decked with ornaments, he was committing sexual intercourse 
with women within the prohibited degrees. He again dreamt ihat female 
dancers were dancing; the whores were standing; there was a flow of blood; 
he was drinking wine and his body was besmeared with blood. At dawn, he 
dreamt that he was eating the flesh of yellow birds and men, that suddenly he 
was fastened with chains and that his body was wounded with weapons. He 
awoke aud seaing that it was break of day remembered the name of Hari. 
He cheerfully finished the morning rites and was convinced at heart of 
his victory in view of the happy omens in his dream. 


CHAPTER XXXI V. 


1-12. Then Parasuráma after finishing his morning rites and consulting 
his friends and relations sent a messenger to K árta-Viryyárjuna. The messenger 
went to the king and addressed him thus while he was seated-in his council 
with his ministers : “O king, there is an immortal fig-tree on the coast of the 
Narmadá. Beneath the tree, Bhrigurdma is encamped with his army and 
brothers. He has promised to rid the earth twentyoue times of Keatriyas. 
He requests you to go and fight with him.” So saying he went away. 
Thereupon the king made necessary arrangements for war. When his wife 
Manoramá saw this, she tried to dissuade hin from his purpose. he king 
was delighted to see the queen in the midst of the assembly and in suitable 
terms addressed her thus: “My dear, Paraguréma, the principal son of 
Jamadagni, has encimped hisarmy beneath the holy fig teee on the coast of the 
Narmadá and scorofally challenges me to fight. Having secured from S'iva 
weapons, and the amulet and mantra of Krisna, he has made a vow to rid the 
earth of the Ksatriyas twenty-one times. My mind is much agitated at the 
news and the left aide of my body is quivering. I have had bad dreams in 
night. Please listen, I dreamt that with my body annointed with oil, with a 
garland of java flower, (china-roses) round my neck, in red clothes and decked 
p iron oraaments, I was riding ona donkey and playing all the while with 
embers. 


13-24. Again I dreamt that the earth was covered with ashea and wreaths 
of JavA and that there was no sun or moon in the sky. Oaly the evening was 
giving its tinge to every place. A widow with her nose cut,and red clothes on, 
With dishevelled hair and indulging in a horse Jangh was dansing- Again I saw 

` that in the crematorium, there was n0 fire on the funeral pile; but it was fall 
of ashes and contuined a dead body. [saw in the dream, my dear, that there 
Was a rain of ashes, blood and embers. Aguia I beheld that ripe fruits in 
- Palm and piecas of bones were scattered here and there. Again I dreamt of 
the night that thcre were heaps of cowries, and a large quantity of lime and 
Oil. ['beheld again in the dream the blooming oliander, Asoka-trees, and 
fruitful palm trees Fruits wore dropping Érom the tree to ihe ground. Again 
I behold that a jar Eull of water fell from my hands and was shattered to pieces. 
Again 1 beheld that the moon and the sua had dropped to the ground. -There 
Was a fall of meteor; a comet had arisen iu the sky; and the sun and the moon 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. À 
68 THE BRAHM A-V AIV ARTA PURANA, 


were eclipsed. Again I beheld thata hideous and naked man with gaping 
mouth was running towards me. Again I saw thata girltwelve years old, 


‘decked with ornaments and clothes was running away from my house displeased. | 


My dear, you were telling mein grief thus: “O kiug, adieu!, I shall go else- 


where. Again I dreamt that I was cursed by the Brahmins, hermits and my | 


elders. On the walls of my house, (I saw in my dream,) toys were dancing. 


25-32. Again I beheld that I was assailed by vultures, crows and buffalos, | | 


Again I saw that oilmen were rolling their oil mill and dancers were dancing 
with noose intheir hands. Musicians were singing in my house and a pleasing 


marriage ceremony was going to be celebrated. Again I beheld that some 


persons were co-habiting with women and others were pulling one another by 
the hair. Again I beheld that crows were fighting with dogs Again I 


beheld that heaps of funeral cakes with broken blades of kusa grass used at the | 


funeral ceremony were lying on the ground. here wore corpses in the 
crematorium. Red and white cloths were lying on tne ground. Again I dreamt 
that a swarthy widow in black dress, with dishevelled hair, was putting off 
her clothes to embrace me. A barber was cutting my nails and shaving my 
head and chest. Again I dreamt that a hugo pile was constructed with the 
leather of shoes and pottors wero rolling a potter’s wheol on the ground. 


33-40. Again I beheld that brandished by the wiud dry leaves were 
flying in the sky in all directions and headless ghosts were running on all sides. 
Again I dreamt that garlands woven with skulls of corpsos having fearful teeth 
were whirled into the sky by the wind. Again I bebeld that ghosts and 
spectres with dishevelled hair were vomiting fre and constantly frightening 
me. Again! beheld that some people were wounded, the branches of a few. 
trees weie burnt, some men were laid up with diseases and the bodies of some 
horses were dismembered. Again I beheld that houses, hills and trees were 
falling with a crash and there were repeated thunder—bolts. In every house, 
dogs and jackals were crying. Again I beheld that a man with his head 
upwards and face downwards with dishevelled hair, stark-naked, was walking 
here and there. Towards the latter part of the night, I saw that the presiding 
deity of my kingdom was weeping and making a hideous outcry whereupon I 
was roused from slumber in the morning. [ have experienced all these 
bad dreams. Para$uráma has come here also to fight. What shall I do now? 
My dear, kindly give me counsel.” j 


41-94. Hearing this, the J i 
; g this, queen was much afflicted and began to weep 
She then addressed him with broken sentences thus:-—*O best of RR O Eich 
graceful monarch, O lord of my life, you are dearer tome tens life. 
Please listen to my beneficial advice. ^ Lord Pa y 
the digits of Narayana. He is very powerful. 
pupil PUE ivi, the destroyer of the world 
of the Kẹgatriyas twenty-one times. In my opini i 
: é t y opinion, you should ceaze to fight 
guh him, You consider yourself a hero, because rd Ner eau 
Bpr a did not conquer him. Ho was subdued by his own vices. He 
who does not preserve virtue is proseryad b sore T 
vit ros y none. In fact, he is bim:elt 
destroyed, His very life is death into him. God HES knows the Baa of 


At the sama time, he is a 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


ragurima has sprung out of | 


He has promised to rid the world 4 


|] 
| 


| 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
GANES'A-KHANDA. 69 


———— 
—— 


all people witnesses their good and bad deeds. The son, the wife, the relations 
‘and all worldly prosperity are transitory like bubbles of water. The world ig 
as imaginary as a dream. Knowing this, faints absorb themselves in 
asceticism and constantly think of virtue. You have forgotten the advice 
given to you by Lord Datta Treya. lf you feel that the advice is still green in 
your memory, then why, O fool, were you iuclined to kill the Br&hmins at all? 
For enjoyment of pleasure, you went to hunt in the forest and when you 
became hungry you were entertained in the hermitage of Jamadagni with 
sweets; and in return you killed your benefactor. Whoever injures a 
Brahmin, a preceptor or a god displeases his tutelary veity and encounters 
danger. O king, remember the lotus feet of Datt&-Treya; for faith in the 
preceptor alone destroys all calamity. Afterwards seek the protection of 
Para$uráma. ‘The Ksatriyas are safe if the gods and Brahmins are pleased 
with them. 


55-66. The Ksatriyas are the servants of the Brahmins, the Vaisyas 
are the servants of the Ksatriyas, the S'üdras are the servants of the Vaisyas. 
It follows that the S^üdras are the slaves of the slaves; of the Brahmins, If a 
Ksatriya seeks the protection of a Ksatriya, he acquires notoriety, it is true. But 
he attains distinction if he throws himself on the mercy of his preceptor, a god 
ora Bráhmin. The Brahmins are superior to the gods. If they are pleased, 
the gods are pleased. So saying, she took her husband in her lap, looked at 
him and wept again and again.” Then she said, “O king, tarry a while and 
bathe so that I may entertain you with delicacies. Annoint your body with 
sandal paste, aloe, musk, sandal, red powder and other perfume. O lord, ait 
down for a while on the throne and fix yourself in my heart as well. Lie 
down also for a short time on the well-furnished bed of the hall so that I may 
feast my eyos with the sight of your face, once for all. O king, the Vedas 
hold that a woman loves ber husband a huadred times more than her son." 
Then the learned king Kárta-Viryyárjuna consoled her and gave hera suitable 
reply thus: “My beloved, listen to me; the words of a person afflicted 
with grief are not valued in the council. Fair one, pain, pleasure, fear, grief 
and dissension overtake a person at the appointed time. Time causes death 
and rebirth; and time brings a kingdom. Timo creates and time destroys. 


67-72. Time also preserves in the form of Visnu. Krigna alone has 
been able to conquer time. He alone is the governor of fate, the preserver of 
the preserver and the destroyer of the destroyer. He alone allots destiny to 
mankind. That destiny gives to a devotee the fruits of devotion. No one 
can kill another unless impelled todo so by destiny. By the command of 
Krigna, Brahma creates, Vignu preserves and S'iva destroys the world; the 
winds blow and animate creatures; death swallows the creation and the sun 
rises every day; Indra rains and preserves the crops: the Fire helps a man to 
cook his food by imparting heat; the great Time moves through eternity; the 
earth with her animate and inanimate objects becomes motion-less; the trees 
grow, blossom and fructify at one time and decay at another time. 


73-81. At His command, the Universe alternately appears and disappears, 
Wion ondi fortia Exo, you ought to know that every thing is the outcome 
of His will. "Therefore, my beloved, desist. You must not think that I EUS 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. n 
70 THE BRAHMA-VAIVARTA PURANA. 


voluntarily going to consign myself to the flame lit by Paraguráma. The 
mighty Ráma is born out of the digits of Narayana, this I know. This also 
Iknow that he will rid the earth twenty-one times of Ksatriya kings. No/ 
body will be able to prevent him from this act. His promise can never go 
amiss. l must have todie at his hands. I know the future. Why then shall 
I acknowledge my inferiority by seeking his protection? Fora celebrated 
personage, death is better than infamy.” So saying the king prepared to go 
to the battle, ordered the musicians to play upon the war-trumpet and caused 
the performance of many auspicious deeds. A hundred crores of kings, three 
lakhs of emperors, a hundred mighty armies (Aksauhinis), countless horses 
countless infantries, countless elephants and chariots were got ready for the 
war. ‘The king wielded a shield and held in his hand an inexhaustible quiver. : 
This sight bewildered the chaste Manoramá who stood motionless for a while. 
Unable to dissuade her husband from his purpose she went with him 
to the pleasure-house, seated him on her breast and kissed his face again. 


CHAPTER XXXV. 


1-11. Then Manoramá cogilated in her mind the inevitable future. 
She called out her sons, relations aud servants, remembered the feet of Hari 
and thinking that the world was quite;unreal pierced, by dint of her yoga, the 
six mystic circles of her body. She then raised her vital air to a point above 
her head, eliminatel her restless mind from the attachments of the world, 
fixed it in the aperture at the crown of her head aud tying down the Supreme 
Being with the cord of wisdom brought under her absolute control the three 
kinds of Karmas, rendering impossible the genesis of such Karmas in future; 
In this way, she expired but with her beloved husband in her embrace. The 
king seeing that she was dead put off bis military dress, cried. bitterly, and - 
olasping her dead body said, “O Manorama get up. I will not go to the 
battle. Let us go home. Behold, how Iam lamenting your death. Fair one, 
let us go to the mountain of grace where I shall be engaged with you in 
amorous recreations. Ishall also play with you in the waters and also on the 
solitary coast of the Pugpa-bhadra river in the forests of Nandan. 


12-46. We shall also sport together in the -rang 

commit sexual intercourse with you in the a pya range) whore M 
hum of bees and sound of cuckoos and refreshed by fragrant breeze g Annoint 
my body, chaste. one, with sandal paste. aloe and musk and look 5 te with 
a smile. Use to me words sweet like nectar, Why do you not cast at mesly | 
pinnast pupon 2 aa aie fiony of the king, there SE a Nildegicon Meus 

ollowing effect, “O king, compose yourself and d th | 
grace of Datt&-Treya, you are the f E The Ei 
mona is transient like bubbles of Bt T Eo bene | 
fe Wakana gor ait e kanoet ama Altor fighting, canoe 

ntha, : in : 

wards, he constructeda funeral pile E MEE fhe nese P | 
it through his son and consumed her dead body. DELL ue) In e | 
Kinds of gems and cloths to the Br&hmins for the fodit ti ae EA l 
his wife. The only sound which was heard in the royal FERAM ui dou | 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE l 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
GANES'A-KH ANDA. 


71 


LLLA 
of the funeral ceremony of his wife was “Eat, eat" or Give, give." The king 
distributed all the wealth of his exchequer to the Brahmins for the salvation of 
his wife. Afterwards he went to the battle-field with a heavy heart, escorted 
by his army and attended by numberless trumpets. In the way he saw 
many ominous signs and yet he went to the battle-field and did not come 
back. He esaw inthe way in the first place a weeping naked woman with 
dishevelled hair and with her nose cut. Then he saw a widow in black dress. 
Then he saw a pimp (procuress) and a shrewish, unchaste and diseased witch 
having neither husband nor son. Then he saw a potter, an oilman, a fowler, 
one who subsists upon snakes, a naked person, a person in red dress, a person 
who solls the fat ot animals and a person who sells his daughters. Then he 
saw a funeral pile, a burnt corpse, ashes, extinguished flame, a man bitten 
by a snake, a snake, an iguana, a hare, poison, funeral cakes, a pair of broken 
blades of Kuga grass used ata funeral ceremony and grains of sesamum. He 
also saw a Brühmin who subsists upon the profits of temples, the carrier of 
a bullock, a village priest, one who burns toys made ofholy grass, one who 
dines at the funeral ceremony of a S'üdra, a Brahmin who cooks food for a 
S'üdra. He also witnessed an empty jar, a broken jar, oil, salt, bones, cotton, 
a tortoise, lime, a barking dog, a barking jackal on his right side, cowries, the 
shaving of hair, clipped hair, nail, dirt, quarrel, Jamentations, a perjurer, a thief, 
a murderer, the gallant and the son ofa prostitute, one who subsists upon the 
earnings of a whore, the thief of the property ofa god or a Bráhmin, a robber, 
a spy. a hypocrite, a Brahmin angry with his parents, one cutting the holy 
fip tree, a malefactor, the thief of deposited wealth, one false to a Brâbmin or 
a friend, n wounded person, a traitor, the slanderer of a god ora preceptor 
ora Br&hmin, one who injures one’s own body, a monster, a cruel man, one 
void of religious rites, one not initiated in the mantras, a eunuch, a leper, a 
blind man, a deaf man, a chandál, a drunkard, an intoxicated person vomiting 
blood, a buffalo, an ass, urine, ordure, phlegm, a man in rags, the fore-head 
of a dead man, a tempest, a shower of blood, the sound of a musical instrument, 
the fall ofa tree, a parrot, a pig, a vulture, a hawk, a heron, a bear, a noose, 
dry timber, a crow, sulphur, a Brahmin of lower order who receives the first 
oblation ata sacrifice, a physician who subsists upon talisman and mystic 
incantation, the flower called Ratna, medicine, husk of rice, a person delivering 
a bad message or tidings of death, or tidings of the enemy, stinking objects, 
the approaoh of a storm and people making ominous sounds. 

47-63. Then the mind of the king was agitated, the left side of his 
And yet he was 


body began to quiver and his limbs became inert. 2 
optimistic and entered into the battle-field. As soon as Para$uráma | 


appeared there, he descended from the chariot with other kings and reve- 
rentially threw himself along with them prostrate on tbe ground. o 
blessed them saying, ‘ Go to heaven." ‘This blessing was inviolable. e g 
Kárta-Viryya then ascended the car, clad in military dress. There nd S 
of drums and trumpets and riches were distributed to the Brahmins. en the 
learned Para$uráma addressed the king using words full of ethical AR 
thus: “ You belong, O king, to the lunar race; you are the disetplese n 2 
Treya, an offspring of the digits of Visnu. You have, acquired RO ES f 
through the teachings of those who are conversant with the Vedas. ow 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


A 
12 THE BRAHM A-V AIV ARTA PURANA. 


could your intelligence be preverted thus? With a view to win Kapilá, you 

killed an innocent Bráhmin. His consortalso in distress accompanied him 
to the next world. What will be your penalty after death for the destruction 
of the Br&hmin pair? This world is fleeting like a drop of water on a lotus. | 
leaf. Only fame, good or bad, survives a man. There is nothing more 

contemptible than infamy. Whore is Kapila now? Where is the saint? 

Where is that quarrel now? The work done by a Jearned king as you pose 

cannot be performed even by a ploughman or a farmer. The pious saint, my | 
father, seeing that you were a king and hungry at the time fed you; and you 

have well rewarded his hospitality. You have studied the S’Astras; you make 

daily gifts to Bráhmins. ‘The country rings with the tidings of your celebrities, 

Then why did you acquire infamy in your old age ? The old bards say that there | 
ig no one more generous, more magnanimous, more pious or more celebrated 

than king K&rta-Viryy&rjuna. You are even renowned in the Puranas. You 

should not have incurred such an ignominy. 


64-76. O King, hard words are more intolerable than a keen weapon. 

In ‘danger l shall not use hard words to you; for even on such occasions the 
virtuous control their tongue. But you should return a suitable reply before 
the kings of the solar and the lunar race to my question. For then they will 
be able to determine the right and th wrong. Wise men are impartial. They 
do not favour any party. Kárta-Viryya who wasan orator like Vrihaspati 
replied thus: “O Rama, you have sprung from the digits of Hari. You are 
devoted to Hari and have subdued your passions. You are the preceptor of 
the preceptors of those who propound virtue. A Bráhmin is so called 
because, born in a Brabmin family, pure in heart and demeanour, he meditates 
Brahma. A Muni is so called because internally and externally he makes a 
vow and observes taciturnity. A Yogi is so called because he makes no 
distinction between the gold and a Jump of eacth, clay and sandal. A Vaisnava is 
he who sees Visnu equally in all objects of creation and is devoted to Him. 
Meditz-tion is the cow of plenty, the Kalpa tree toa Brahmin. He is always 
or ined to pray. The desire of a Ksatriya to attain prosperity, that of the 
al8yas to deal in trade, that of tho S’adras to serve the Brahmins are sane: 


tioned by the Vedas. The spirit of devoliou in a Ksatriya and martial spirit: 
ina Brahmin are equally despicable. ile i 


17-105. A king is so called because prompted 


activity, he voluntari] by the. boon 


y desires to secure the Possession of material objects. O 


saint, the same desire prom ted me t i 
am I to blame? For I in a Ksat pO ReR CNW RIO 


never aspires o à. cow of plenty or to war or material enjoyments, You and 


rn cs ee EM ne only exceptions to the {general rule, By you, the 


j 4 : ll th f ki d. 
thirty large armies (Aksauhinis) ; but you will nevez b T i ‘No 


no penance enjoined by Brahma for killing thi Hed in the battle-field, There if 

i a igeny powerful kings. Now juvenilo princes haye assembled here, 

Z ee vowed to rid the earth of the Ksatriyas twenty-one times, You ought D. 
your vow. To fight is the duty ofa Ksentriya, His death in the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


GAN ES'A-KHAN DA. : 78 


battle-field is not despicable. Bat it is ridiculous, according to the Vedas and 

social laws, for Brahmins to fight. Inall ages, the maintenance of peace, the 

performance of religious rites with a view to secure welfare and avert calamity 
is the vocation of a Brahmin, Waris not his business. War is the strength 
of the Ksairiyas, trade is the strength of the Vaisyas; the service of the 

Bráhminsis the strength of the S'üdras. Begging is the strength of the men- 

dicants. Hari and faith in Hariconstitute the strength of a Vaisnava. Injury 

is the strength of the wicked: devotion is the strength of the devotee. Toilet 
is the strength of whores; youth is the strength of women; valour is the 
strength of kings; crying is the strength of children; truth is the strength of the 
virtuous; lie is the strength of the vicious; adherence to the leader is the 
strength of followers, accumulation of wealth is the strength of persons 
of moderate means; knowledge isthe strength of the learned; trade is the 
strength of merchants; wealth is the strength of the rich; intellect is the 
strength of pure and tranquil-minded persons; unity is the strength of the 
talented; dishonesty is the strength of thieves; sweet words and hypocrisy 
constitute the strength of pimps; ravenous propensity is the strength of the 
beasts of prey; chastity is the strength of virtuous women; the service of the 
preceptor is the strength of the disciple; virtue is the strength of the house- 
holder; loyalty to the king is the strength of subjects; eulogy is the strength 
of bards; the worship of Brahma is the strength ofthe Brahma-charis; purity 
of manners is the strength of the Yatis; resignation is the strength of the 
recluses (Sannyásis) sin is the strength of sinners; Hari is the strength of the 
helpless; religious sanctity or merit isthe strength of the holy; the king is the 
strength of his subjects; the fruit is the strength of trees. The water is the 
strength of oceans, fish and crops; peace is thestrength of kings, particularly 
the Brahmins. I have ;never seen or heard that a Brahmin is impatient for 
war. Alas! in the regime of Hari, even, matters have been thus perverted,” 

Every one was silenced by his words. Then the heroic brothers of Parasuráma 

armed with keen weapons began to ght at his command. [hen tue charitable 

and mighty Matsya-rája also took up arms and offered resistance to them. 

The sons of Jamadagni eut asunder his arrows. Matsya-rája discharged: a 

celestial weapon bright like a hundred suns. The Munis cut it asunder with 

the Máhegwara weapon. They likewise cut his bow, broke his chario:, killed 
his charioteer and tore his dress. 

106-120. Then they aimed at him the spear of S'iva with a view to kill him. 
But then there was a voice from the sky to the following effect, “O Munis, 
do not discharge this irresistible spear. For Matsya-raja wields round his neck 
an amulet given to him by Darvasa, which protects all his body. First beg this 
reviving amulet of him and then kill|.him." Then S/ringi, the son of Jamadagni, 
who was dressed like a hermit begged the amulet called the conqueror of 
Brahmánda (the universe) of the king. The valorous Matsya-r&ja of the 
lunar race, fair as the Moon, gave it to him at once. He was then killed by 
him with a spear.” Narada said: “O Lord Náráyana, kindly describa to me the 
amulet wielded by Matsya-réja and gratify my curiosity.” Narayana said, 
"Listen. It is the amulet of Siva which preservesall the members of the body 

and is called the Conqueror of the Universe. It was given to the wise 
datyerájn by Duryásá with a mantra consisting of six letters. So long ag 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


TÀ ` THE BRAHM A-V AIV ARTA PURÁNA. 


M 


e ——— 


i i dy ofa man, he cannot die and he attains perfection in 
Du on dis came Ei even a& the point of the sword, none of which is able 
is "il him. Through this amulet, the king. Bana attained the position of 
Siva; and Nandi attained the position of equality with S/iva. Through this 
amulet, Bir-bhadra, Hiranyáksa and Hiranyak-sipu became the conquerors of the © 
three worlds; and Durvásá, Bamdeva, Chyavana, Agastya and Pulastya became 
adepts and were adored throughout the worlds. Jaigisavya, by wielding it, 
became a great Yogi. 


121-139. Om Namah S’ivai, may this mantra always preserve my head, 
Om Hrim S'/rim Klim S'ivài Swáh&, may this mantra always preserve my 
eyes. Om Hrim Klim Him S'ivài namah, may ihis mantra preserve my 
nose, Om namah S'irái, S'ántài Sw&h&, may this mantra preserve my ears, 
Hrim S’rim Him Sanharkartre Swaha, may this mantra preserve my ears, 
Om Hrim S'rim Panch-baktrái Swáhá: may this mantra preserve my teeth, 
Om Hrim Mahes&i Swáhá: may this mantra preserve my lips. Om Hrím 
S/rim Klim Tri-netrài Swiha, may this mantra preserve my hair. Om Hrim 
Aim Mahádevài Swáhà, may this mantra preserve my chest. Om Hrim | 
S/rim Klim Aim Rudrái Swáhü, may this mantra preserve my navel. Om | 
Hrim Aim S'/rim Iswarài Swáhá, may this mantra always preserve my back. 
Om S/rim Klim Mrityun Jaiài Swáhá, may this mantra presorve my brow. Om 
Hrim S’rim Klim Igánài Swáhà, may this mantra preserve my sides. Om 
Hrtm Iáwarài Sw&há&, may this mantra preserve my back. Om Sjrim Klim 
Mrityun Jaydi Swâhâ, may this mantra always preserve my arms. Om Hrim 
S/rim Klim I$warái Swábà, may this mantra preserve my hands. Om Mahes- 
"warài Rudrái may this mantra preserve my buttocks. Om Hrim S'/rim Bhütnáth&i | 
Swiha, may this mantra preserve my feet. Om Sarveswarái Sary&i Swáhá, 
may this mantra preserve all the members of my body. May Bhtitesa preserve me 
on the east side; may S’ankara preserve me on the south-east corner; may Rudra | 
preserve me on the south ‘side; may Sthánu preserve me on the south west corner 
may Khanda-Para$u preserve me on] the west side, may Chandra-Sekhara 
preserve me on the north-west side; may Girisa preserve me on the north side; 
Igwara preserve me on the north-east side; may Mridha preserve me on the top; | 
may the conqueror of death preserve me atthe bottom; may Pináki preserve 
me on the land, water or in the sky. Recitation of this mantra. ten lakhs of 
times leads to perfection. One who thus becomes an adept nttains the position 
of S'iva. I tell you all this out of affection which I cherish for you. Itis 
mysterious and very rarely to be found. 1t is stated in Kanwa-SAkha. Itis 
sixteen times-superior to a thousand horse sacrifices or a bundred royal sacri- | 
ficos. By the grace of this amulet, aman is redeemed inhis life, becomes — 
omniscient, adept and fleeting (i. e. can go anywhere) like the mind. Whoever | 
without understanding the meaning of this amulet adores S’iva cannot be at 
adept, though he may recite his mantra ten millions of times. | 


CHAPTER XXXVI. 


1-15. When Matsyar&ja died, the king Kárta-Viryya sent Vrihadyala 
and other kings (viz, Vidarbha and the kings of Mithilà, Magadh and Nisádha), 
well versed in war to the battle-field. The heroes came with three Jarge armies 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 

GANES'A-KHANDA. 15 
—a Tt ttt ttt :i———— 
(aksauhints) to fight with Para$uráma. The heroic brothers of the latter 
armed with keen weapons valiantly resisted them. The kings also with a net work 
of arrows and celestial weapons zealously opposed them. ‘Then Para$urüma 
bright like a flame of fire seeing the defeat of his brothers came to fight with 
a trident in his hands. He discharged the weapon of the noose of snakeg 
which was cut asunder by Somdatta with the weapon of divine eagle or Garuda 
Then Parasurám killed Somdatta with his spear, Vrihad-val n a mace 
Vidarva with his fists, the king of Mithilà with his dumb-bell, the king of 
Nis&dha with his iron spear, the king of Magadha with his kicks and otber 
soldiers with his weapons. Like the fre of destruction, he killed several 
kings and then rushed towards Karta-Viryya. The heroic kings came to his 
rescue. Among them, the kings of Kanauj, Saurástra, Radha, Várendra 
Sauhma, Banga, Mahá-r&stra, Gurja and Kalinga surrounded R&ma with 
weapons. Rama cut of the weapons and began to shine like the sun released 
from the clouds. He fought with them for three days consecutively and with 
his axe destroyed twelve Aksauhinis of the enemy. 


.16-31. Then with his scimitar, he easily destroyed the soldiers of the 
Opponent as if they were columns of plantain and with the spear of S'iva began 
to killthe kings. Then Suchandra of the solar race rushed in anger at 
Para$uráma asa lion attacks another lion. Bhárgava at first wounded him 
with the spear of S'iva and annihilated twelve hostile Aksauhinis with his 
axe. Then he fought personally with Suchandra. The wespon of snakes 
discharged by the former was rendered ineffectual by the weapon of divine 
eagles used by the latter. Suchandra then mocked Parasuráma who in anger 
cast the weapon.of Narayana at his opponent. This weapon which was valiant 
like a hundred suns rushed towards king Suchandra, Suchandra immediately 
descended from his car, cast off his weapons, threw himself prostrate on the 
ground and worshipped the auspicious Nár&yan&-Para$uráma was surprised 
and hurled at the king the iron spear, pestle, axe, and lance. But the goddess 

: K&li entered into the car of the king and caught hold of the weapons. Then 
Paraguráma perceived in his presence the; hideous Bhadra-Kali wielding a 
garland of skulls round her neck. Upon this, he cast of his weapon and 
humbly adored her thus:—*You are the spouse of S/iya, O mighty goddess. 
I bow to you. You sustain the universe. You are the mother of the world; 
you are final cause; you preserve and destroy the world. I bow to you. O 
goddess, be propitiated with me. [ama refugee at your feet. Please keep my 


vow. 
32-36. Mother, i£ you turn away your face, who will save me ? Tam 
d your consort blessed mein 


Your worshipper, O auspicious goddess, You an e 
de S‘iva-loka with the Pridal a boon which you should makejgood." Upon 
this the goddess was pleased and saying “do not fear,” she disappeared. Who- 
ever with rapt attention roads the above hymn gets rid ofall his fear, gains 
esteem and success in the three worlds, is able to conquer his enemies and acquire 
o preeminent position among his relations. 
. 37-45. Inthe meantime Brahma came and revealed to him secret matters 
saying, “O Rama, in order to be able to accomplish your vow, you ought to 
now the mysteries connected with Suchandra. At first Durvásà gave to 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


“46 THE BRAHMA-V AIV ARTA PURANA. 


r mautra consisting of ten letters and the 
“precious amulet of Bhadra-Kali. Not to be secured even by the gods and ' 
calculated to conquer all enemies, the amalet adorns the neck of Suchandra, 
So long as he holds the amulet, no body will be able to conquer him. O son | 
of Bhrigu, go and beg it of him. ‘Che king of the solar race is very generous | 
and pious. If petitioned, he can part with the amulet, nay, even his life, 
Then Parasur&ma in the garb of a hermit solicited the amulet and the mantra 
from Suchandra who immediated acceded to his prayer. ‘Thea Parasurima | 
was able to kill him with the axe given to him by S'iva. j 


Suchandra the great knowledge o 


CHAPTER XXXVII. 


1-11, Nárada said, ʻO omnisoient lord, kindly describe to me the above 
amulet and the mantra, Narayana said, ʻO Nárada, they are very abstruse 
and mysterious. ‘The mantra of ten letters was at first given by Durvasa at 
Puskara to Suchandra. The mantra was rendered perfect when the king | 
recited it ten lakhs of times; and the amulet became perfect when it was recited | 
five lakhs of times. When he became an adept by virtue of the amulet, he 
went to Ayodhya and conquered the whole world." Narada said, “Lord, you | 
described the mantra, now I desire to learn particulars about the, amulet.” 
Nár&yana said, “Very well. In ancient times Hari gave it to S’iva to enable 
him to effect the destruction of the demon Tripura. Siva gave it to Durvas& 
and Durvásá gave it to Suchandra. Its secrets are very profound. Om Hrim 
S'rim Klim Kalikài Swiha, may this mantra preserve my head. Klim, may 
this mantra preserve my forehead. Hrim Hrim, Hrim may this mantra preserve 
my eyes. Om Hrim ‘Trilochane Swiha, may this mantra preserve my nose. 
Krim Kálike Rakga Raksa Swáhà, may this mantra preserve my toeth. 


12-24, Drim Bhadra Kalike, may this mantra preserve m lips. Om 
Hrim Hrim Kálikài Swaha, may this mm preserve E deme Om Hrim 
Kalikai Sw&há, may this mantra preserve my ears. Om Krim Krim Krim’ 
Kaly&i Swaha, may this mantra preserve my shoulders. Om Krim Bhadra 
Enyi Swaha, nay this mantra preserve my chest. Om Krim Kalikai 
jwà à, may this mantra preserve my abdomen. Om Hrim Kalikai Swáhá; 
may this mantra preserve my back.  Rakta- Vija Vináéinyái Swâbâ, may this | 
on preserve my arms. Om Hrim Klim Munda-Máliny&i Sw4ha, may | 
this mantra preserve my feet, Om Hrim Chamundai Swáhà, ma " this 
mantra preserve all my body. On the east side may ` Mahákált ue me; 
me e corner per kie Denta, on the south side may Chámundá on 
K orner may ika, on the west side may S’yâmâ, on the north- | 
west corner may Chandiká, on the north side ma Vikatasy à onth -east 
tet ay As rena me May the lena gea p 
: ma -Maya preser ; m: e 

versal goddess preserve me on the es E uite ates This ne 
Preparo? m prp EUN G iia and is the best of E By TM of 
s amulet king Suchandra ruled t ith i j 
Mándhátá became the king of the IE NUS ES D BE 
Sawrabhi and Pippa-làyana became the best of anchorites. A man sib ‘tains i 
perfection by virtue of this amulet is practically an adept m all matters: [ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eG i 
GANES ERHANDA. Ti 


This amulet is sixteen times superior to every kind of charity, devotion or vow 
in point of religious merit. Whoever worships KAli without understanding 


this amulet reaps no advantage though he may recite it ten millions of 


times. 


CHAPTER XXXVIII. 


1-13. On the demise of Suchandra his son Puskaráksa, effulgent like 
the sun, the worshipper of Mahá-Laksmi, went to fight along with three 
armies under bis command. He wielded round his neck the amulet of the 
great goddess of fortune by virtue of which he gained prosperity and conquered 
the three worlds. The wise brothers of Para$uráma came to the battle-field. 
The king Puskar&áksa besieged them with arrows. They too beset him with 
arrows. The Brahmin heroes cut off the chariot of the king with five arrows, 
his bow with seven arrows, his chrioteer with five arrows and the horses of the 
chariot with ten arrows. They also cut the quiver of the king with seven 
arrows, and killed his brothers with the spear of S'iva. The heroic saints 
destroyed three of the regiments of the king and hurled at him S'iva's spear 
for bis destruction. ‘That spear adorned the king's neck like a garland of 
lotus. Then the Br&hmins were highly incensed and hurled at him mace, 
dumb-bell, iron-spears, and clubs which were powdered to dust as soon as they 
came into contact with the body of theking. The brothers of Paraguréma 
were astonished at the sight. The king ascended his car and showered arrows 
on them. The armed saints resisted the missile of arrows but the king 
benumbed them with sleep by the discharge of the weapon called Praswá- 


pana. 

14-33. The valiant Parasurám roused them to consciousness and 
himself went to the battle-field. He then struck the king angrily with his 
axe which cut only his diadem. He then chastened with his mantra the 
spear of S/iva, held it in his hands and hurled it at the king, cutting only his 


ear-ring. The king himself discharged many weapons which he consecrated 
with his mantras —Bhrigu-ráma cut them off and discharged several weapons, 
Then Parasuráma hurled at him 


in his turn, The king destroyed them all. I | 
the Brahma-weapon which was artfully foiled by the king. Rama aimed at 
him all weapons (except PAsupata) which were defeated by the king. Then 
Bhargava bathed, bowed to S’iva and wasabout to hurl the Pásupat-weapon, 
when Náráyana appeared to bim in the guise of a Brahmin and said: "0 fore- 
most of the wise, are you so much deluded as to think of destroying an 
` ordinary human being by the discharge ofthe Pásupsta weapon? This weapon, 
if let off, will dastroy the whole world except Erisna. No one can check this 
weapon and Sudargana except Siva and myself. These are the best of all the 
weapons in the world. Do not discharge this weapon, I pray. I tell you Le 
way how to conquer the invincible Kárta-Viryya and the valiant Puskar-&ksa. 
The latter holds reverentially and duly round bis neck the amulet of Maha- 
Laksmi hardly to be secured in the three worlds and his son holds the 
: amulet of Durg&. The father and the son are thereby able to conquer the 
whole world. No one can défeat any of them protected by aho above amulets. 
In order to keep your vow, L shall beg of the father and the son their 


.amulets. 


* CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


A 
78 THE BRAHMA-V AIVARTA PURANA. 


34-39. Thereupon Parasuráíma was struck with awe and said *O sage, 
I do not know who you are in the guise of an old Bråhmiņ. Reveal your true 
self to me at first, O Lord, and then go to Puskaráksa. Visnu thereupon smiled 
and replied saying: I am Visnu. So saying he went to Pugkarákga and 
his son to demand the amulets. As soon ashe demanded them (i. e. the 
amulets) they were bewildered and unsuspectingly handed them over to bim," 
Narada said ‘ʻO creat saint, who'gave the amulet of Mah&-Laksmí to king 
Puskarüksa and who gave to hisson the rare amulet of Durg& who destroys 
calamities ? What aro the nature, the fruit and the mantra of this amulet? O 
Lord of the world, describe to me all this, as my curiosity is much excited.” 


40-49. Narayana replied, “At first Sanat-KKumára gave the amulet of 
Maha-Laksmi consisting of ten letters, the mantra, the hymn, the meditation 
according to the Sam-Veda to the wise Puskaráksa. And Durvásá gave 
Durgá's amulet consisting of ten letters, mantra &e., to the son of Puskaráksa. 
I will first describe to you Lakgmi’s amulet which was given at the commence- 
ment of a furious war upon the entreaties of Visnu. Om Sri Kamal- V&siny&i 
Swaha, this is the extraordinary mantra of the great goddess of fortune. Now I 
am going to tell you about the Dhyána (meditation) given by Sanat-Kumfra to 
the wise Pugkaráksa according to the Sim-Veda. The chaste wife of Visnu, 
Kamalá, concentrates herself in the lotus of a thousand leaves. Her face is fair 
like the lotus; her eyes are big like leaves of lotus. Tho lotus-flower is her 
favorite article. She sleeps on a bed of lotuses. She is herself the spirit of 
the lotus. She holds lotus in her hands, her neck is adorned with lotuses 
Decked with lotuses, she adds to the beauty of the lotus and always beholds. 
the forest of'lotases. I cheerfully adore that smiling, great goddess of for- 
tune. : $ 


50-65. After this meditation, tho goddess should be revorentialy worship- 
ped with sixteen ingredients, and the lotus of eight leaves annointed with 
sandal paste. Now Í am. going to describe to you her auspicious amulet, 
Vignu gave it to Brahma while he lay focused in tho lotus of His abdomen. 
By means of this amulet Brahma while dwellin 
created the three worlds. By the boon of Kamal 


and mastery over the world. Brahma gave it in the Pádma-Kalpa to his be- 
loyed sonSanait-Kumára who 


it, he has become accomplished, prosperous and vested it ri d 
By virtue of this amulet, ub "itg son MERE 


lord of the earth; Daksa h 


the witness of all acts. Visnu who fe Dente line beoga 


sleeps in the bed of the ocean of milk 
Wields it on his throat, By virtue of this 
son; Indra has become the king of gods, 
mehr kings; Khattánga has conquer- 
great an r d isi 

amulet is Prajápati; its metre is Vribati; its te di Tag EIS 9 E 
to obtain the four-fold objects cf human pursuit. etn tse ls mo 


66-75. Om rim Kamal-Vasiny, 


ayia Ai Swáhá, m: ; p ; 
my head. S'rim, may this mantr ' may this mantra preserve 


a preserve my forehead. S'rim. S^rí- yai 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


———— ee 


4 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. E 
GAN ES’ A-KHANDA. 19 


gv. m 
namah, may this mantra preserve my eyes. Om S/rim S'riy&ài Swaha; may 
this mantra preserve my ears. Om S’rim Hrim Klim Maha-Laksmi-yai 
Swaha; may this mantra preserve my nose. Om S'rim Padmá-làyài Swaha; 
may this mantra preserve my teeth. Oin S'rim Krigna-Priyái, may this 
mantra preserve the hollows of my teeth. Om S/rim Nárá&yane&yái, may 
this mantra preserve my thrcat. Om S'/rim Kesava-Kant&i, may this mantra 
always preserve my shoulders, Om S/rim Padma-nivá-sinyái, may this mantra 
preserve my navel. Om Hrim S’rim, may this mantra preserve my chest, 
Om S’rim S’rim Krisna Kantai Swühá, may this mantra preserve my back. 
Om Harim S’rim Striyai Swah», may this mantra preserve my hands, S/ri 
Sri S/ri Nivàsa Kantai Namah, may this mantra ever preserve my feet. Om 
Hrim Srim Klim Sri-yai Swáha, may this mantra preserve all the parts of 
my body. May the great LakşmîÎ preserve me on the east. May Kamalálay& 
preserve me on the south-east corner; may Padma preserve me, on the south 
side; Hari- Priy&, on the south-westcorner; Padmá-layá on the west; Laksmi on 
the north-west; Kamala, on the north side; the daughter of Sindhu, on the north- 
east angle. May the spouse of Hari preserve me at the top; the wife of Visnu, at 
the bottom. And.may the d&rliug of Visnu preserve me on all sides andat 


all times. 

76-82, I justrelated to you the extraordinary amulet of Kamala. Fruits 
of this amulet are greater than those secured by the gift of a mountain of 
gold as big as Sumeru to a Brahmin. Whoever after having duly worshipped 
his preceptor wields this amulet round his throat or on his right arm gains 
prosperity at every birth and secures good fortune from generation te genera- 
tion. Millions of kings either among the gods or the demons cannct kill him. 
He isrendered wise and virtuous and gains the fruits of all sacrifices and 
ablutions in ail noly waters. Actuated by fear, avarice or affection, you shculd 
not give this amulet to ordinary people. You should give it to an obedient - 
and submissive disciple of yours. Whoever without understanding this amulet 
adores Maha-Laksmi, (the mother of the universe,) will not attain accomplish- 
ment though be may recite the mantra ten millions of times. me 


——— 


OHAPTER. XXXIX. 


1-17: Náradasaid, “Lord, you stated to me the mysteries of Laksmi's 
amulet. Now l want to know the secrets of the amulet of Durgá;—the amulet 


which is as dear to the lotus-eyed Harias his life and which excels other 
amulets.” Nardyana said, “Very well. In the Goloka, „Krişna gave M to 
Brahmá. In the fight with Tripura, Brahma gave it to B'iva who, By me ne 
it, slew the demon. S/iva gave it to Gautama who gave 1t to Padmáksa. By 
means of this amulet, Padmáksa become a victor and the lord of the seven is- 
lands; Brahm’ become profoundly wis eand very mighty; Sfiva booome aaa 
and the lord of the Yogis; Gautama also attained the dignity ot viva. is 


5 : " abmánda) Its Risi is 
amulet is called the conqueror of the. universe (Brabmánd E 
Prajapati; its metre is Gaetri; its godd ctory of the world 


ess is Durga; the vi t the 
is its object. Itis regarded as holy asa place frequented by pilgrims by 
great men, Om S'rím Durgati-Násiny ai Sw ha, may th 


is mantra preserve my 
E r "| 
head. Hrim, may this mantra preserve my forehead. Om Hrim S rim: may 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
A 
80 THE BRAHMA-VAIV ARTA PURANA. 

E aa, 
this mantra preserve my eyes. Om Durgái Namah; may this mantra preserve 
my ears. Om Hrim S'rim, may this mantra preserve my nose by all means, 
Sim Hrim Klim may this mantra preserve my teeth. Klim: may this 
mantra preserve my lips. Krim Krim Krim may this mantra preserve my 
throat. Durge Rakgata, may this mantra preserve my neck. Durga-Vindsin. 
yai SwAb&, may this mantra always preserve my shoulders. Vipadavinsain- 
yai Swáhà, may this mantra preserve my chest by all means. Durge Durge 
Rakgani Swáhá, may this mantra always preserve my abdomen. Darga Durge 


Rakga Raksa, may this mantra preserve my back by all means. Om Hrim 
Durgá yai Swáhá, may tbis mantra preservo my hands and feet. S'rím Hrim 


Durg&-yai Swáhá, may this mantra preserve all my body. May Maha-Maya | 


preserve me on the east; Kéáliká, on the south-east angle; the daughter of 
Daksa, on the south side; the fair spouse of S’iva on the south-west corner; 
Parvati on the west side; Varahi on the north-west angle; the mother of Kuvera 
on the north side; and Isání on the north-east corner. May  Nárüyaníi preserve 
meat the top; Ambicá,at the bottom; may the eternal source of wisdom, 
preserve me while I am awake and the goddess of sleep, while I am helpless. 


18-23. Thus I told you this extraordinary amulet which is t.e essence 
of all amulets, Whoever after having worshipped his preceptor with cloth, 
ornaments and sandal wields this amulet round his neck or on the right hand 
is practically initiated in all sacrifices and bathed inall holy streams. He gets 
the fruits of the vows of abstinence. He conquers the world and subdues his 
foes. But  whcever without understanding the meaning of this amulet 
worships Durg& does not attain perfection though he may recite the mantra 
millions of times. This interesting amulet is mentioned in Kanwa-S'akha, It 


is very secret and rarely to be found. You should not give it to every one at 
random. 


CHAPTER XL. 


.1-13. When Hari in the guise of a Brahmin took these amulets and 
went to the Vaikuntha, Parasuráma easily slew Puskaráksa and his son. The 
! ing Puskaráksa fought without his amulet for a week and was at last killed 
by the Drahma weapon. Then the king Kárta-Viryya with a large army 


mounted a golden car, himself went to the battle-field and spread a net of arrows. 
EAM saw him surrounded by millions of kings. Kárta-Viryya was 

ecked with gems and parasols; his body was bestneared with sandal paste; his 
face was beaming with smiles an 


; da gentle grace. Ihe king al aw 
the Muni descended from the car and along with other kings ora maranti 
low. The Muni blessed them in retnrn. Then there was a fight between 
the hostile armies with the result that the brothers and disciples et Parasurám, 
Z unded in the battle, boata retreat. The warliko Parasurâma, blinded by 
the shower of weapons discharged by Kárta-Viryya, could not distinguish his 
on army from the royal army, ‘Then he discharged the weapon of fire, whereby 
the battle-field was set on fire. The king put it out with the weapon of water- 
Thea the saint aimed the Gandarva-weapon teeming with huge mountain-snakes. 
This was averted by the weapon of the divine eagles. : 


14-27. Tho saint cast the weapon of Maheswara-whi i 
í 4 Ə sai "which foiled by the 
king with the Vaisnava weapon. The Brahmástra of Rima E p the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


E 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
GAN ES' A-KHAN DA. 81 


Brahmástra of the king. Then the king aimed at R&ma the infallible iron 
spear given to him by Datt&-Treya after recitation of mantra for his destruction. 
Rama saw that it was effulgent like a hundred suns, resembled a flame that 
emanated from the fire of eternal destruction and could not be resisted even 
by the might of the gods. It struck Parasuráma who rem3mbered the name 
of Hari and fell into a swoon. When Parasuráma fell, Brahma, Visnu, Siva 
and other gods came there ina body. The wise Sankara at the command of 
Vignu, restored him to consciousness. ltima got upand saw the gods in his 
presence. He hung down his head io shame and adored them reverentially. 
Then the merciful Lord Dattá-Treya, for the rescue of his disciple Kárta- Viryya 
himself arrived at the battle-field. Then Para$uráma angrily held in his 
hands the weapon called Pagupata. But he was dumb-foundered by the sight 
of Dattá-Treya. Then he saw that the king was protected by Lord Krisna 
in the guise of a Brahmin, dark-blue like a new cloud, holding in His hand 
the revolving Sudarsana, playing upon a flute ‘and surrounded by a hundred 
cow- herds. 

98-39. Later on there was a voice from the sky to the following effect; 
the king wields on his right arm an amulet deposited in small bells of gems; 
given to him by Lord Datt&-Treya, ‘‘Let Siva, the lord of gurus, beg it of the 
king; and then only Paraéuráma will be able to slay him.” Upon this S'iva 
took the guise of a Brahmin, begged it of the king and gave it to Parasuráma. 
The gods went home and Ráma thus addressed the king:—''O king, get up 
and fight. A person wins in time and loses in time. You are learned. You 
have made many gifts. You have been ruling the whole world. This fame 
you have also acquired at my expense, viz, that you have rendered me 
senseless in the battle-field. You easily subdued Rávana and other kings. 
Rendered unconscious by the iron-spear given to you by Datta-Treya, I was 
revived by Siva.” Upon this, the king Karta-Viryya bowed and said, “I 
do not boast of my gifts, or studies or my rule. Hundre ls of kings like myself 
have disappeared. My intelligence, valour, counsel in war, grace, prosperity, 
wisdom, charity, social etiquette, manners, molesty, knowledge, fame and 
devotion have all vanished with Manor&má. 

.. 40-49. This chaste queen, a digit of Laksmi, was as dear to me as my 
life. In matters relating to sacrifice, she was my wife: in matters relating 
to affection she wasa mother to me; in play, she was my associate. She was 
My companion from my very childnood in sleeping, eating or fighting. 
Without her, Iam like a snake without poison. O BrAbmin, lam sorry in 
the first place that you did not witness my former fight. Secondly, I regret 


EE i ahmin. Io time, a lion may slay a jackal; 
ave to dieat the hands of a Bráhmin. lo tim n ey i a E 


a jackal may slay a lion; a fawn may slay a tiger, 
í a ; E 1 
snake may kill an eagle. In time, a servant adores the king, and pur P 
a servant. In time, Indra becomes a man and Brahma dies. Every thing 


disa TES ? sist time. Only the Supreme Lord Krisna 
Ppears in time. Wo one can resist tim the preserver of ‘the 


is the death of time, He is the creator of the creator, 

Preserver and the destroyer of the destroyer- Heis denser than the dene 
and thinner than an atom. He divides time. He. holds a world e eac 
Pore of his skin. ‘The. mighty Viráta is only a sixteenth part of Bue 
E small Virája, the cause of all, is only an outcome of the great Vir&ta. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. , 
82 THE BRAHM A-V AIVARTA PURAN A. 


ho come out of his navel wandered in the navel for a hundred 

ou Tad and could not find out the stem of the lotus situated in the 
navel Then subsisting only upon wind, he meditated Hari for a lakh of years, 
50-61. Thereupon he was able to percieve the Supreme Lord Krişna 
fixed in the heart of Radha, surrounded by cow-herds, cow-herdesses an 
His retinue, seated on a throne of gem .and holding a flute in His hands, He 


bowed to Him again and again, and according to His will, created this universe, | 
The destroyer S'iva bas come out of the forehead of the creator. Lord Visnu, | 


the small Viráta of the Swet-Dwipa, preserves this universe, Brahma, Visnu 
and S’iva, who are the outcome of the digits of Krisna reside 10 every universe. 
The gods and the great Viráta have sprung from Nature. From that primor- 


——— 


4 


dial Nature every one has derived his origin. Only Lord Krisna transcenda | 
Nature. Even Krisno can not create. This maya (Nature), the creating | 
and preserving agency of the world, dissoloves in Lord Krisna at the time of 


destruction and appears again at the time of creation. The goddess Nature 
is eternal. As a potter is unable to create a pot without. clay, ag a goldsmith 
cannot create an ear-ring without gold, so creation is impossible without 
Nature. At the time of creation, this primordial goddess divides herself into 
five parts, viz, Radha, Laksmi, Savitri, Durga and Saraswat’, 

62-80,  RAdhá is the presiding deity of the life of Lord Érisna and is 
dearer to Him than His life. Laksmi is the presiding deity of prosperity 


and the embodiment of supreme happiness. SAvitr? is the mother of the | 


Vedas aud the yoga and presides over knowledge. Durga presides over 
wisdom, intellect and strength. She destroys calamities. Saraswat? is the 


outcome of the throat of Lord Krisna. She presides over language and ig ' 


the source of the knowledge of all Sástras (scriptures), 
dial Nature in the beginning took only five forms, 
of creation, she took several other forms. 
Nature and the males are the outcome of the Supreme Being. The world 
could not be created witbout Máy&. Every world is created by Brahmá, 
Visüu is its preserver and S/iva is its destroyer. At the Mághi-Purnim& 
(on the occasion of the full moon in the month of Mágha,) Datta-Treya 
imparted tome this wisdom in the presence of the saintsat Puskara.” So 
saying, K&rta- Viryya bowed to Kama, ascended his chariot smiling and armed 
himself with bow and arrow. ‘hon Para$uráma with his Brahma weapon 


remembered Hari, destroyed the royal army with the Brahma: weapon and 
killed the king easily with the Pasu-pata weapon. In this way, he remembered 
S'iva and rid the earth of the I 


Ksatriyas twentyone times. For the fulfilment 
of his vow, he killed even the infants on the lap of their mothers, the young 


aod the old Ksatriyas. Kürta-Viryya, after his death, went to the Go-loka. 
Para$uráma recollected Hari and went home. Para$uráma was so called by 
S'iva as through his Paragu or axe, he displayed 
ihe earth void of the Keatriyas twenty-one times. 
Gandarvas and Kinnars rained flowers on his hea 
was the beat ofdrums as well as the shout of 
resounded with the glowing accounts of his vict 
Sukra, Chyavana, Valmiki &c agitated with joy 
flowers went to bless him, 


Though the primor- 
yet eventually at the time 
Ihe females are the outcome of 


The gods, goddesses, adepts, 


Hari in heayen. The world 
ory. Then Brahma, Bhrigu, 
and holding bent grass and 


if 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


his military iactics and made 


d on the occasion. There 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


GANES'A-K HAN DA. 83, 


81-104. Râma fell flat on the ground. They all took him in the lap, 
and called bim by turns, “my child." Brahm& addressed him with words 
fnll of ethical maxims thus: “O Para$uráma, listen to the truthful words 
which I tell you, words which will bring you prosperity, words sanctioned 
by all theorists and statedin Kánwa Sakha. The father is revered because 
he begets and supports the issue. But he who givesfood for the maintenance 
of the child is superior to the father, as without food, itis impossible for a 
man to live. The origin from father is only natural. But the mother who 
wields the childin her womb and supports him is a hundred times superior 
to both the kinds of father as specified above, The Vedas hold that the 
totelary deity is far superior to the above. But the religious preceptor excels 
all or any of tha above-named. The son of a preceptor is adorable like the 
preceptor; but the wife of the preceptor is more adorable. A preceptor 
preserves his disciple from the wrath of thetutelary deity. But if the gurü 
be displeased, no one’ can save the disciple. It therefore follows that the 
gurü is Brahma, Visnu, Mahesa or even the great Brahma. Hoe is dearer 
than the Brahmins. It is he who inspires in the mind faith for Hari. Who 
then, can bea greater friend than the religious preceptor ? Who, indeed, 
is a greater friend than the preceptor, when he points out the right path 
to people (benighted by the darkness of ignorance) with the burning lamp 
of knowledge in his hand? Who isa greater friend than the gurü by the 
recitation of whose mantra a man obtains omniscience and acquires all sorts of 
perfection ? By the dint of the knowledge obtained from him, a person easily 
gains victory in every place. No oneis a greater friend than the guru who 
imparts knowledge for which heis adored in the whole world. If actuated 
by the conceit of learning or owing to kinship, a man fails to revere his gurü, 
he is, unquestionsbly, implicated in a sin greater than the Bráhmin-slaughter. 
Whoever, (seeing that his gurü is poor or insignificant or fallen) hehayes 
with him as if he were an ordinary mortal is rever consecrated (though he 
may batho in holy streams) and is not privileged to do any act. © son, Lord 
Krigna is your tutelary deity and Siva is your preceptor. You should therefore 
seok the protection of the latter who has holped you to rid the earth twenty- 
one times of the Ksatriyas and who has inspired in your mind faith Pr pos 
He is tho auspicious lord of Durga and isa production of the digita uor. 
Krisna. Krigna represents the soul of a living being. S’iva Dues ae men 
ledge; I, his mind; the al-mighty Nature represents his life. ; S'iva is the au bl 
the source and root of wisdom and the death of time. S'iva is the symbo 
of the light of Brahmá and takes a from only to favour His worship Be 
The goddess Nature was able to secure this lovely Being as her huapan: y 
meditating Him -for one lakh years. Therefore seek the proteo on el a 
Omniscient eternal lord S‘iva who is the conqueror of death, ea w E 
omniscient and eternal. So saying, Brahma went away with the Munis; a 

ara$uráma intended to go to the Kailasa. 


—— 


CHAPTER XLI 
" 2 iuráma rid the earth 
1-18. By wielding Lord Haris amulet, Parasuran ae 7 
twenty-one Gass of the Letter and then went to m a Lr 
preceptor (S'iva)and his wife and to seo Kártika and Gane: 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


———————— 


C -——- 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. A 


84 THE BRAHM A-V AIV ARTA P URAN A. 


virtuous as Naráyana. With the speed of mind, he SIM ges and say 
the lovely city. "That city was built of alabaster pure like white crystal 
and decked with royal roads which resembled the land of gold. It had houseg 
of diamond and altars of gem, crimson like vermilion. The town was decked 
with portals, pillars and staircases of gem and contained a hundred krores of 
celestial yaksa-houses. The houses teemed with gems, gold, and golden jars 
and were peopled by numberless Yaksas with white chowries in their hands. 
They were also graced by the presence of lovely maidens decked yes Jewels 
of gem and playful and smiling children with toys in their hands. That city 
was redolent of the Parijata flowers growing on the coast of the Mandákini 
and attended by adepts who had taken shelter under the branches of the 
Kalpa trees, who were refreshed with the milk of the cows of plenty, and 
who were versed in adept lores. It was three lakh yojans high, and a hundred 
yojans broad. ‘The city was full of trees containing a hundred trunks, each 
frequented by birds and bending with fruits. It was refreshed by a „gentle 
breeze. lt contained countless ponds and houses of adepts. Parasuráma 
was delighted to see the town and before him he beheld also the hermitage or 
residence of S'iva. This hermitage was constructed by Viswa-Karmé and 
inlaid with countless gems of golden colour. It was four yojans wide and 
fifteen yojans high. It was in the form of a square and surrounded by 
ramparts. The portal consisted of diamond gates. It was Supported by pillars 
of diamond and associated with altars of emerald, 

19-35. On the right side of the portal, Para$uráma beheld the bull; on 
the left side, he bebeld the lion, Nandi, Mahákála and Visàlàksa of tawny eyes, 
Bana, Virupáksa, Mahávala, Vikataksa, Dhárkaráksa, Ruktiksa, Vikatodara, 
Samhára-Bhairuva, KAl-Bhairava, Krisnánga, Krodha-Bhairava, the adepts, 
Rudras, Vidyádharas, Guhyakas, ghosts, evil spirits, (spectres), malignant 
demi-gods, spirits like pumpkin-gourds, the Brahmá.domons, the Vetálas, the 
yogis with clusters of hah, the Yaksas and the Kinnaras. Râma accosted 
them and with the permision of Nandi entered inside, The inner portal, he 
beheld, was decked with diamond jars and doors of diamonds to which were 
attached lovely looking-glasses of pearl. [t was supported by columns or 
pillars containing the yellow pigmeat prepared out of tho urine of cows. It 
was decked also with a hundred temples made of sapphire and covered with 
wreaths inlaid with pearls and gems. On tho left side of this portal he saw 
Kartika; on the right side, he saw Ganega aud the chief Ksetra-pals (the 
guardians of the field) Seated on thrones of gem and gorgeously decked. with 
gems. The mighty Paraéuráma was about to enter whon Ganega interposed 
saying : “Brother, wait a bit. B'iva is sleeping just now, After a while, 
I shall take you inside with his permission." Then the mighty Paragurima 
who was an orator like Vrihaspati addressed him thus; 


CHAPTER X Iu n yt 

1-17. Parasurám said, ** Brother, I am going inside to take the dust 

of the feet of my father and mother, After bowing to them, [ shal] return 
home ZI am desirous to see the god S'i à 


3 tos iva, For, by his race, I have ridden 
the earth of the Ksatriyas twenty-one times and kiled Rárta-Viryya and 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


— 


Digitized by eGangotri.and Sarayu Trust. 


GANES'A-KHAN DA. 85 
Sucbandra. From him I have acquired the knowledge of the Sástras and 
many kinds of science. That lord of the universe, though void of property, 


takes a form to favour bis worshippers. He is truthful, eternal and effulgent. 
He can take any form he likes. He is the ocean of mercy, the friend of the 
the Lord of the Munis. He takes delight in self (t. e, he ig self-conten- 
He reveals himself and is yet invisible. He is supreme, invoked and adored 
He is ancient, indestructible, auspicious, tranquil-minded, cheerful 
in disposition, impartial, kind to those who seek his protection, and easily 
contented. He cheers up his afflicted followers and is the source of all prosperity. 
He is the eternal spirit and Iam inclined to see him at once." So saying, 
Para$urám confronted Ganesa. The latter gently answered thus: ‘Brother, 
tarry a while. One ought not to see a man who is in company ofa woman 
in solitude. A wretch who finding that a man is enjoying the society of a 
woman interrupts them is consigned to the hell called the Thread of Time 
where he dwells so long as ihe sun and the moon exist. Particularly an 
intelligent man ought not to see his father, preceptor or aking while any 
of these is engaged in sexual intercourse in solitude. Whoever out of anger 
or Just transgresses tho above injunction is deprived of his wife for seven 
births consecutively. A licentious fool who beholds the buttock, chest or 
face of the wife of another man is surely blinded." The scion of Bhrigu 
contemptuously laughed 'at these words and, highly incensed, used to 
him very cruel words. He said, “Ah! what a nice morality you have 
prenched! I have not heard of it even from a god. I have heard of such ethics 
in the religious books propounded by licentious men and persons of perverted 
intellect. The heart of an unsophisticated child is not rendered corrupt by the 
act you allude to. Brother, I will go to the seraglio. What does this matter 
to you? You area mere child. Compose yourself. 


18-33. I shall behave cn the occasion of my interview with S‘iva 
ina manner suited to my discretion, Siva andPárvati are not merely your. 
parents ‘hey are the father and mother of the world. Párvati is female 
and S/iva is male. Who has failed to ascertain this point ? i S'ankara is the 

: masculine represention of all forms; and Parvati is the fe.ninine representation 
of all forms. Siva transcends all attributes. To him, sexual intercourse or 
interference by any body with his sexual intercourse is a mea eoo 
of no consequence. People created by him are liable to amours, shame, tear, 


interruption in intercourse &c. God is above all this. How can parents be 
Shame of its mother or 


ashamed by seeing an infant that sucks the breast f 
the lord kahata tent be put to shame. How can fire be heated ? Is cold. 
afraid of coolness? Is sammer afraid of heat? Does fever kill foretlh AGER 
disease kill disease? Who can destroy the destroyer? Is time Ls o ane 
(death)? Does hunger feel hunger? Does thirst fel thirst? Does sleep 
i zi ire vigour. Has the 
acquire sleep? Does grace get grace? Does vigour acqui e mI 
soul got a soul? Is power afraid of power? Lust does not a: 7 8 age 
does not rush to anger; desire is not chained by desire. ` n 20. es i 
divided by wisdom. Can decrepitude preven! decrepitude n van a Ca, 
harass anxiety ? Can the eye see itself ? Can pleasure get aaa ma 
Sorrow interrupt sorrow ? Can danger be puí to danger an pr sper y. 
acquire prosperity? (an intelligence have intelligence ? Can memory have 


poor, 
ted). 
by many. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE so B" 
sz. — a r 


^ 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. A 
86 THE BRAHM A-V AIV ARTA PURANA. 


memory? The sun-god is not consumed by his own rays. But brother, you | 
have inverted the whole order of things. I have not heard things as described — 
by you even from my preceptor; nor have I seen such things. Nor do the 
.S8stras uphold your doctrine.” So saying, he was again about to enter inside 
uns a smile. The dispassionate, virtuous Ganesa also smiled at his words and | 
said: | 
34-55. “ An ignorant man may gain knowledge from the wise: but a man 
who is truly blessed acquires it through his father or brothers. O brother, 
you have obtained knowledge from the leained but deign tolisten to the words 
of an individual of small wisdom like myself. When God vested with 
three attributes does not cherish the desire to create the world, He is deprived 
of His might. And, conversely, when the Supreme Being who has no attributes 
desires to create the world, he is vested with might and attributes. ‘The bodies 
of all persons liable to enjoyment and suffering (barring the body of Lord 
Krisna), have emanated from Nature. The yogis adore Lord Krigna, who is 
distinct from Nature, who is merely a symbol of pure light and who has got 
no hands and feet. But the Vaignavas adore the image of Hari who is kind 
to His worshippers. Without a container, how can that light be contained? 
When the Vaisnavas perceive within that light tho image of Krigna, dark blue, 
smiling, in yellow dress, decked with precious ornaments and vested with two 
hands, they at poe accept His bondage, i e. become His servants. Yoga or 
quy pureUon o mind is not equal in morit to a sixteenth part of the bondage 
eh M Y TER He wants to create the universe, Ho creates Nature. 
] m Je He jesion of Nature, he pagses His semon, ‘that semen developes 
a 24 big ogg. A ter the lapse of a celestial lekh of years, the egg comes out 
of the womb of Naturo. At that time, Krisna exhales and thus creatos the 
ei Seng with tho breath (which He gives out,) comes out from His 
mout only a drop of water which suddenly devolopes into a mass of water. 
That egg remainsin tho water for a colostial lakh of years and as soon as it 
is hatched the great Virita, tho prop of the universe i i : 
ME iro aj S aug : se, comes into existence. 
are as many worlds as pores on the skin of the great Virat 
world there exist Brahma, Vi g TOM Uia 
xis Brahma, Visnu, the gods, the Munis i inani 
chicos D ERE TERR gods, 3, animate and inanimate 
J uni, Maha-Virdta i$ the support of the whole creati " 
of wind is the outcome of the breath of I : id aera tM = (3 
iS Mh Vis in : ath of Lore Krigna as described above and so 
gnu, "Phe small Viráta is tho c t irå 
Brahmá came out of bis navel: and S'iv n UNT cE he great Vi 
2 A 4 € D a tof bi : c m 
Visnu of the white islands is also an oute Mok hia end The proso 
Saso an outcome of his digits, When Hari tak 
several fori I : pare a B hen Hari takes. 
j orms through his digits, S'iva is vested with migl i ? 
When he is vested with faculties and the ca it p rand. a 
above shame? It is true that shamo h pae M 
ROTER Boidevoidbo® came? ae ccce shame ; but how can a bashful 
monníain, Therefore it is univoreall p d e 15 a natural production of the 
shame and other attributes, a cu Lerdne postessos) the Feelingigd 
56-69, Radha, Laksmi, Sávitr ^ 
Hive: e ous Narr a and Saraswati are the five ‘ 
sides over the life of Lord Krimis Sit : A eloved to Him than His life, pre- 
b ONUS DOE catia i: es ip His heart. Savitri, the spouse 
Narayana, presides over wealth par eres Laksmi, the spouse of 


: ae - The goddess Sara: i 
the mouth of Krisna divided herself into two TEMO us wife of pu 
` t 


B 
i 
] 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
GAN ES'ÀÁ-KHAN.DA. 87 


vitri; and inthe other form she is the wife of Narayana. How can 
Durga, the wife of S'iva, who gave birth to shame, get rid of shame? O 
brother, though Nature took but five forms in the Goloka, yet she takes other 
forms through her digits. It is said that the Vaikuntha transcends the 
bonds of the universe and is eternal. For even at the time of eternal 
' destruction it remains intact. Lord Nárá&yana, (the half of the body of Lord 
Krisna) vested with four hands, wielding a garland of wild flowers round his 
neck, in yellow dress, resides here with the mighty Laksmi. In the Goloka 
Lord Krisna, vested with two hands grasping a flute in His hands, witha 
and dark-blue in appearance dwells in the heart of Radha. He is 
cow-herds, (male and female) and Himself assumes the 
form of a cow-herd. He is eternal, graceful, void of attributes, above Nature, 
‘free, supremely happy and self-determining. The gods are the product of 
His digits. The great Virdta is a sixteenth part of this eternal Being, The 
whole world includiag the dense and the subtle emanates from Him and 
ultimately dissolves in Him. This process is repeated eternally. The Goloka 
is nituated ata height of fifty krors of yojans above the Vaikuntha. There 
is no other world above the Goloka, There is no lord superior to Krigna, 
I told you, brother, what I heard from S‘iva. Have patience for a while; 
S'iva is just engaged in sexual intercourse with Durga.” 


she is Då 


smiling face 
surrounded by cows, 


CHAPTER XLIII. 
with the axe in his hand attempted to 


enter inside with a dauntless heart. Seeing this, Ganega got up and affection- 
ately tried to dissuade him from his purpose. Parasuráma shouted in anger and 
refused to comply with his request. Thereupon, they had a quarrel; and 
blows were freely exchanged. Parasuráma, highly iacensed, raised his axe with 
a view to strike him; but Kartika raised a hue and cry and interposed saying : 
ʻO brother, why do you aim your irresistible weapon at your brother, who is your 
preceptor’s son? It is not proper for you to do 80." Then Ganesa tried to 
compose Para$uráma (who was flushed with anger like a red lotus and about to 
discharge his axe) saying ‘desist,’ which enraged him to such a great extent that 
he gave Ganeša a violent push. The humiliated Gunega fell down from an 
immense height. But the calm and dispassionate Ganesa got up and cited 
Dharma as his witness. He then explained the matter to ParaSurámm saying, 
“Lord, desist, without S’iva’s permission you cannot enter. You are a guest 
and according to the relation established by knowledge you are also a brother 


of mine. You are the favorite disciple of Siva. Thisis why Espacio the 
wrong. Iam neither Kárta-Viryya nor an insignificant king. Od am 
the son of S'iva You do not know me: Tarry ue E. 
Scr time, I shal take you to I 
NM E d RON E to discharge the axe. When 
his witness and extended 


d itround and with it he 


1-18. ‘Thereupon Para$urüma 


Parasurdma laughed at his words an 

Canet. perceived his intention, he cited ee as 
is proboscis for millions of yojans. He then urned 1} 

wrapped Parasuráma, a aantal Asan eagle raises a small ae xd he 

raised him above and dumb-foundered him by tho power of his mental abstrac oad 

In a moment, he exhibited to him seven islands, seven mountains, seven oceans 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE — 


S Crue v, " X s 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. A 
88 THE BRAHMA-VAIVARTA PURANA 


—————— 


and the golden town. Ganesa who humbles the pride of the wicked sent, | 
thrill to all the parts of the body of Para$uráma, paralysed his hands and feg | 
and whirled him round and round as if he were a dull mass of earth. 


19-33 The great god Ganeéa, in a trice, showed to him the eight lokas | 
of the world (viz, Bhurloka &c) and manifested to him in this way the whole 
universe. He then himself drank all the seven oceans and vomited all the 
waters teeming with crocodiles. He subsequently thrust Paragurdma into the 
waters. As he was floating on the waters in an unconscious condition, he got 
hold of him again and, turning him round and round, exhibited to him the | 
Vaikuntha with Nar&yana and his spouse Laksmi. After rolling him in this 
way, for a while, by the powers of yoga Ganega suddenly changed the direction 
of his wheeling proboscis and manifested to the bewildered Parasurima the | 
Goloka including Viraja, Vrindá-vana, Sata-S/ringa, the sphere of the Rasa 
and Lord Krisna himself, dark-blue in appearance, e/fulgent like millions of | 
suns, fixed in the heart of ltàdhá, seated on a throne of gems, with His two 
hands holding a flute and a smiling aspect, and surrounded by cow-herds, male 
and female. He caused Parasurüma to bow before the Supreme Lord again 
and again and himself beheld his spiritual guide (Krisna) whose sight is 
calculated to destroy all sins. By turning Parasuráma round in this way he 
destroyed the sins incurred by Parasuríma by the destruction of fetus and 
other evils acquired by him. Without suffering pain, no sin can be expiated 
or remitted. But Parasuráma had not to suffer much; as the sight of Krisna . 
removed his boundless sufferings. Ina moment he was restored to conscious: | 
ness. He fell flat on the ground and his stupor caused by Ganega was removed. 
He then recollected Lord Krisna, his tulelary deity, His amulet and His hymn, | 
He also remembered at the time his preceptor S’iva and discharged the irresis- | 
tible axe, powerful as S’iva himself and more effulgent than the midday sun | 


of summer. At the sight of this weapon given by S'iva, his father, he rendered 
it ineffectual with his left tusk. 


c cx CL lee 


-94-42. -The axe came down with a tremendous 
tusk went back to Paragurdma, ‘The gods in 
the Ksetrapals and other attendants of ‘Siva 
in great fear. The tusk of the eleph 
dropped to the ground with a mighty cr 
covered with red-chalk. ‘I'he earth shook 
crash and all the residents of the KKailfisa 


Gauri, the image of sleep, and S'iva, the lord ofsleep, were immediately 
roused from slumber. Bot: of them courteously came out and saw before 
them the dispassionate, smiling and abashed Ganesa with his tusk uprooted and 
body covered with blood. Then Parvati asked Kartika what the matter was. 
Kartika narrated the whole affair from start to finish, The chaste PArvati 

vn again and again ID anger, clasped Ganega to her breast and addressing 

Siva who alleviates all sorrow spoke to him modestly through fear and sorrow. _ 


clash and uprooting the 
the sky, Bir-bhadra, Kártikeya, 
raised a hue and cry and lamented 
ant-faced god besmeared with blood 
ash like a huge mountain of crystal 
at the terrible noise caused by the 

fellinto aswoon fora short time. 


CHAPTER XLIV. 


1-10. Párvati said, * O lord 
is your maid-seryant. But the life 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
 GANES'A-KHANDA. 89 


eo. 


pe eae 
not desired by her lord (husband) is useless. In the estimation of God, every 
ountain to a grass is equal; i. e. God is just to all. You 


jing from am 
thing z : : 7) 
in this case who is-to blame. For you are the foremost of 


ought to decide 
judges. In this case, Bir-bhadra, Kartika and your attendants are witnesses. 


Who will perjure himself in the matter? For they are both brethren. In 
matters dealing with evidence. (the saints hold in the scriptures) friends 
and foes should be treated on a footing of equality. Whoever voluntarily out 
of anger or avarice or fear gives false evidence is consigned to the Kumbhipaka 
where he has to dwell as long as the sun and the moon exist. I:m able 
personally to determine the guilt or innocence of the parties. But my orders 
or dictates while you ace here will be condemned according to the S’astras, As 
the fire-fly is insignificant when the sun is up, the servants do not matter in an 
assembly in the presence of their master. By a long course of asceticism, I 
have attained your lotus—fect and I am much afraid lest yoa might abandon 
O lord, out of affection for my son, if I have used any unbecoming 


me. 
words to you in anger or grief, you ought to excuse me, 


For toa chaste and 


11-27. Ifyou leave me, what is the use of a son? 
An ill-natured 


respectable woman, the husband is dearer than a hundred sons. 
and foolish woman, of low origin, slights her husband through the fault of her 
parents. A woman of noble rank, be her husband ugly, fallen, ignorant, poor 
or diseased, regards him like Visnu. The fre aud the sun, though they are 
foremost of the effulgent, cannot even hold candle to a chaste woman ín 
point of lustre, In this respect, she is sixteen times superior to both the sun 
and the fire. Devotion of a. wife to her husband is sixteen times superior in 
merit to great acts of charity, holy acts of vow and meditation. The son, the 
father, the relation or the brother of a woman cannot excel her husband, i. e., is 
not dearer to her than her husband.”  Durgà having said so saw that Parasa- 
ráma was ministering to the feet of S’iva. 1 Whereupon she said to him fearlessly 


thus: “O blessed Paragurama, you area learned Brahmin by origin. You are 
d S'/iva. The chaste 


the son of Jamadagni and the principal disciple of lor 

Renuka who sprang ont of the digits of Laksmi was your mother, Your 

maternal grand-father was devoted to Visnu; and still more devoted to him 
hter of a king descended 


was your maternal uncle. You are the son of the daug 
s your maternal uncle. But I 


from Manu; and the valorous king Visnu-Jasa wa Ee 
do not know through whose fault you have become s0 haughty and violent. 
Those persons who contaminate others with their vices or by their vicious 

After having acquired the 


examples are very pure in your estimation. ha 
infallible axe S ORAUO favour of the all-merciful lord Siva, you have been 
x t tested the efficacy of the weapon at the 


puffed up with conceit; and you firs à e 
expense of the Ksartiyas and ion at the cost of your preceptor's E s 
ought to pay fee to your religious preceptor for the knowledge ais K Cr 
Did yon pay that fee, (knowing as you do the S'ástras) by breaking in 
(tooth) of his son? Why do you not behead him now? You kpe s ue 

Ganesa and yet you have theface to meet us here. „For this fau me TS 
You willnever be held auspicious by the people mor will you be B PE x 
any one in the world. By the might of this irresistible axe an E e em 

of S'iva, a jackal or a cat may kill a lion ora tiger. Ganesa can millions 
the foremost of those who subdued 


qb Paragurdmas like you. But as he is 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. A 
90 THE BRAHMA-VAIVARTA PURANA. 


their passions, he does not kill evena fly. He is the outcome of the digits of | 
Lord Krisna and is as valorous as He. On this account, the gods who hay, : 
sprung only from one digit of Krigna worship Ganesa first of all. 


28-44, By austere rites and vows and through the grace of S'iva, I have 
obtained Ganesa as my son. There can be no pleasure without pain.” So 
saying, Parvati angrily ‘rushed to kill him.  Para$uráma also at heart bowed 
to his religious preceptor and remembered Hari. Anon, the goddess saw 
before her a Brahmin boy, dwarüsh in size and valorous like millions of suns, 
His teeth, clothes and sacred thread were white. He was decked with sandal- 
mark on the forehead, a wreath of wild flowers rouad his neck, armlet and, 
bracelet. He was cheerful, lovely and adorned with wreaths of gems, anklet 
diadem and ear-rings. With the left hand, he was pointing to the devoted 
Para$uráma the Mudra (a sign made by intertwining the fingers in religious 
worship) of patience; and with the right hand, he was pointing out to him the 
mudrá giving him assurance of his safety. He was surrounded by the smiling | 
children of the Kailaga and joyfully beheld by every body. S’iva, as soon | 
as he saw him, reverentially bowed low to him with Parvati, his children and | 
his adherents. The boy blessed them all. All the other boys were frightened | 
and astounded at the sight of the new comer. Then S'iva respectfully | 
worshipped him with sixteen ingredients according to the S'ástras and with | 
a thrill of joy in his body adored him according to the hymn as stated in the |- 
Kanwa-S/akha, He then said thus to the Supreme Being seated ona throne | 
obscuring every thing by the lustre of His body: “To question those who take | 
delight in self (who are self contonted) isa mockery. It is idle to enquire | 
of the welfare of those who are supremely good and the source of all welfare. | 
O Brahma, my life has been rendered blessed to-day : for I have got you asa | 
` guest at my place. My services have proved fruitful. You are the eternal ' 
and merciful Lord Krisna. You incarnated yourself in the sacred land of | 
India for the preservation of mankind. A man who worships a guest practi- | 
cally worships the gods. One who pleases a guest pleases Lord Hari. | 


, 45-97. The hospitality accorded to a guest is sixteen times superior in | 
merits to ablutions inall holy waters, fastings, initiations ia every sacrifice, | 
ascetioism and casual or permanent rites. If such a guest leaves the house of his 
host in anger and disappointment, the religious sanctity or merit accumulated 
by the latter in ten millions of years disappears. A Br&hmin who murders 
a woman, a cow, or a Brahmin; a person who cohabits with his preceptor's 
wife; a person who slanders his parents or his elders; a murderer; a person 
who does not observe his daily rites; one who cuts off the holy fig iro a liar; 
one who speaks ill of God; one whe purloins the property of a Brahmin or 
deposited wealth; a perjurer; ona who injures one's friends; a wrong-doer; 8 
Brahmin who causes the bullocks to bear a burden: a dons one who burns 
corpses; a village priest officiating uta sacrifice; a) Besbmin who co-habits 
with a S'üdra woman or eats the food of a S'üdra or the food connected with 
the funeral ceremony performed hy a S'ûdra ; a person who sells his daughter 
or the name of Hari or Jac, ment, iron, sesamum, salt. cow, horse or quiok- : 
silver; a Brahmin who does not serve Harion the day "afi Ek da these ar® 
yery great sinners who gre consigned: to the hell called the Thread OF 


| 
i 
| 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Diatas Iv ABAR mp Bap rst " 


S—— 


Time where they dwell for a hundred years of Brahm&. But he who disappoints 
a guest is a greater sinner than the persons last-named.” Lord Krigna was 
pleased to hear the words of Siva and answered in a voice deep like that of 
the clouds thus: onn know what is the vow about and have arrived here to 
rescue Para$uráma who is devoted to Lord Krigna. The worshippers of Krisna 
never come to grief. My Sudargana can preserve them from all dangers except 


the wrath of their guru. 

58-71. 1 cannot, indeed, preserve them from his wrath; for insult to the 
guru is the most abominable of all sins in the world. Whoever does not serve 
his guru is the greatest sinner. The father is adorable, as he begets the issue 
and shows him the world. The father, for the preservation of his issue and 
multiplication of his race, is also called Prajápati (or lord of creation) The 
mother who wields the child in her womb and represents the earth is a hundred 
times more respectable. But he who gives food to any body for his mainte- 
nance is a part of Visnu and a hundred times more venerable than the mother. 
For without food, it is impossible to live, The tutelary deity, however, is a 
hundred times more adorable than the last-named. But the religious preceptor, 
the source of knowledge and mantras, is the best of all. For he opens the 
and with the light of the lamp of wisdom. he dispela the 
There can be no friend greater than the guru. Through 
f asceticism a man obtains his desired 


eye of wisdom; 
darkness of ignorance. 
the influence of his mantra, by means o 
end, omniscience and all kinds of perfection. 
by means of the knowledge imparted to him by his guru. Who can bea 
greater friend than the guru? A man who, being blinded by the conceit o£ 
learning or pride of wealth, does not worship his guru is certainly guilty of 
the sin of Brahmin slaughter. Whoever behaves with his gura (be he poor, 
fallen or insignificant) as if the latter were an ordinary human being is never 
consecrated though he may bathe in all sacred rivers and is not privileged to 
perform any sacred work. O Siva, a man who, though competent, does not 
fraudulently support his parents, wife, preceptor or preceptor s wife is like- 
wise one of the greatest sinners. The guru is Brahma, Vignu, Siva, the 


eternal Brahma, Indra, the Sun, the Moon, the Wind and the fre. 3 
72-08. There is no religious book greater than the Vedas, thora is no god 
Superior to Lord Krisna ; there is no river more sacred than the soea; no 
ower better than o toy basil; none mote forgiving than the eart l; and no 
relation dearer than the son. There is no power greater than dem E 
greater than the Ekâdaśî; no stone greater than the S'&l-gram Cog b 
-and no land better than India. As the Vrindé-vana 5 the best of a * P D 
places, as Kasi pre-eminently gives redemption, as Párvati is the M ses 
all the females in the world, as knowledge excels all other friends, so the gar 


18 superior to every being. ‘The son and wife of a preceptor NE 
4s the preceptor himself.  Para$urá d asin by s'igbtiag 


a just incurre 7 
ma hos ie for the atonement of that sin 


Son and the wife of his religious preceptor : : x 

ave personally come ion vote house.” Then Lord Vigna apake MIN 
Words replete with truth. He said, “O Durga, Lam SE Dare listen to me. 
ment to you fraught with usefulness and ethical tka, Mahldeya or yourself 
To you, Parasuráma is the same as Ganesa and Batu. do therefore as you 


!5 not partial to any of them. O mother omniscient, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE Ec 
ad m — cL. 


He is able to conquer the world . 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. A 
92 THE BRAH M A-V AIV ARTA PURAN A. 


think proper. As ill-luck would have it, the brethren havé fought with ong 
another. Who can resist the course of destiny? Destiny is the most power. 
ful of all agencies. O fair daughter, rend the Vedas and you will find that 
your son is celebrated by the name of one-tooth which is one of the eight 
names of Gane$a, (viz, Heramba, Lambodara, &c). Now, O mother, spouse of 
Hara, hear the meanings of the names, for they are calculated to remove 
calamities. Ga means knowledge; and Na means redemption. I bow to 
Ganesa who gives both, i. e., knowledge and redemption. Eka means principal; 
and Danta means might; I bow to Eka-danta who is vested with the greatest 
might. He means poor and ramba means preserver; I bow to Heramba 
the preserver of the poor. Vighna means danger and Náyaka means removal : 
I bow to Vighnanayaka, the remover of danger. His belly was enlarged, being 
stuffed with the food given to him by Visnu and his father; hence I bow to 
that big-bellied god. I bow also to S'ürpa-karna (who has ears like the winnow- 
ing basket and who is the source of prosperity and wisdom). I bow to Gajanana 
(whose face is like that of an elephant) decorated with tho flower of Parijata 
which was cast on his head by the saint Durvás&. He manifested himself in 
the house of S'iva before Kártika or Guha turned up there. Hence he is 
called Guhágraja, or the elder brother of Kártika ; I bow to him. First, O 
goddess, see his eight names in the Vedas and then get angry, if you please, 
Whoever in the morn, eve and noon rends the above hymn of eight names 
secures happiness and victory everywhere. Obstacles vanish at his sight, like 
snakes before the divine eagle. By the grace of Ganega, he acquires profound 
wisdom. Any one who desires to have son ora fair wife gains his object; 
and even a stupid man acquires poetical genius by virtue of the hymn. 


CH AVE DER, Xb Vi 


1-20. Visnu consoled Parvati and next addressed Parasuré ma using 
words pregnant with ethical maxims and fraught with good results. He said, 
“O Para$uráma, you are aptly guilty according to the S'Astras, when you 
have broken the tooth of Ganesa in anger and are hostile to him at this 
moment. You should therefore adore Ganosa according to the ode stated by 
me and thereafter you should worship mother Durga according to the method 
prescribed in the K &nwa-S'/ákha, She represents the intellect of Lord Krisna. 
If she is angry with you, you will lose your intellect. She represents all 
energy. The world is vested with force, on her account. Brahmá is unable 
to create without her help. Brahma, Visnu and S'iva are the outcome of 
this goddess. ^O saint, in days of yore, when the Bods were attacked by the 
demonsin war, this goddess manifested herself from the valour of the gods; 
and at the command of Lord Krigna, she slew the demons, restored to the 
gods their position and was subsequently born as the daughter of Daksa as the 
result of his ascetic devotions. She was wedded to S'iva, but being mortified 
by the slanders to which her husband was subjected, she committed suicide and 
was subsequently born out of (he womb of tho wife of Himalaya. By a course 


of religious devotions and rites, she obtained S/iva, the lord of the chief yogis, 85 - 


her husband, and by the adoration of the Supreme Lord Krigna, she obtained 
Ganesa, the outcome of the digits of Krisna, as her son. Lord Krisna Himself 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


You x 


has descended here as the son of Parvati. Just bow down to her and with 
folded palms worship the benefactress of the world, the mistress, the cause, the 
source of all prosperity, as well as the outcome of prosperity with that ode 
which S'iva, (being deputed by BrahmA on the occasion of the destruction of 
the demon Tripura) had composed.” So saying, Krigna went back to the 
mansion of Laksmi.  Para$ur&áma then bathed in the Ganges, put on washed 
clothes, with folded palms saluted his spiritual guide, rinsed his mouth, reveren- 
tially bowed to the goddess, and with streaming eyes and with a thrill of 
raptures agitating his frame prepared to adore Durga, (the source of the four- 
fold objects of human pursuit) with the hymn given to him by Visnu. Para- 
$uráma said, “O Durga, in days of yore, in the Goloka, you- emanated from 
the body of Lord Krigna when He resolved to create the world. Decked with 
olothes and ornaments, you are effulgent like millions of suns ; and your apparel, 
pure like fire, coupled with your gentle smile, has added grace to your 
person. You are in the prime of your beauty; your forehead is marked with 
Vermilion and your fair lock is covered with a jasmine wreath. 


21-42. What an ineffable grace your. appearance wields! You giye 
redemption to those who desire it. You are the dispenser even of Mahá- 
Visnu. Every ono at the time was spell-bound at the sight of the universal 
enchantress, i. e, yourself. In the beginning just as you appeared in the sphere 
of the Rasa, you ran towards Krisna with a smiling face. Hence savants call 
the primordial Nature Rádh&. Then Lord Krisna called you and impregnated 
you with semen. That semen, developed into an egg; and from that egg came 
out the great Vir&ta who holds a world on each of the pores of his skin. The 
breath which you exhaled at the time of sexual intercourse developed into the 
wind which sustains the universe. The perspiration of your body at that time 
deluged the Goloka and in the shape of water became the container of the 
universe. Then you divided yourself into five parts or forms. Out of them, 
Radha. is the deity presiding over the life of Lord Krişna and is, acoording to 
historians, dearer to him than His life. The next form, Savitri, is the mother 
of the Vedas and presides over the Vedas. - The third is the form of the tranquil 
and virtuous Laksmt who presides over fortune. The white form that presides 
over the S'ástras and is the mother of saints is called Saraswati. The form 
that presides over knowledge, intellect and absolute energy and 1s the source 
of all prosperity and good is called Sarva-Mangalà. That universal benefactress 
Sarya- Mangalá in your person is now residing in the house of the great 
benefactress S/iva as the source of all good, the image of all good and friend 
of all good. Mother, with S'iva you are S'ivâ ; with Nârâyana, you are Loksm 
and Sávitri, the mother of the Vedas: with Brahmá, youare his spouse 
Saraswati, With the eternal, supreme, perfect and absolutely bappy Krian, 
the lord of the Rasa, you dwell in the shape of Radha, The gotta aa rj 
digits o£ your digits.: All wemen have sprung out of your pu E 
the seed (cause) of everything. You are the shadow to the sun, the enchan- 


ti : 7 © Sachi, the wife of India; Rati, the wife 
ing Rohint tothe moon. You are S'achi, RU Wind: you are Bwbd, 


of K&ma; you are also the spouse of Varuna i z 

the wife of the -Fire-god; a are Sundari, the wife of Kuvera; por the 
wife of Yama; Kaitavi, the wife of Nirita; S’astkala, the wife of Isa na: S alana 
the wife of Manu; Devahtti, the wife of Kardam; Arundhati, the wite % 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. A 
94 THE BRAHMA-V AIVARTA PURANA. 


Vasistha; Aditi, the mother of the gods; Lopà-mudrá, the wife of Agastya; |. 
Ahalyá, the wife of Gautama. You are Gangá, the refuge of all, Tulst and 

all other sacred rivers. Mother, these and all the women of the world hayg ( 
sprung from your digits. You are the household goddess of fortune to the i 
house-holders, the royal goddess of fortune to the kings. You are the devotion | 
of the devotees and the Gaetri of!the Bráhmins. | 


43-60. You are the symbol of virtue to the saints and the seed of 
dissension to the wicked. You are above all attributes. You are tbe very 
embodiment of light. You represent the energy of those who are vested | 
with attributes. You are the light of the sun, the heat of the fire, the coolness | 
of the water and the grace of the moon. You are the smell of the earth, the | 
sound of the sky, the hunger and thirst of animals and energy of every kind, | 
You are the essence of creation, you represent the intelligence, memory, intellect | 
and knowledge of the savants. You represent that auspicious knowledge or 
Mantra which Lord Krisna gave to S’iva and by virtue of which Siva has - 
become the conqueror of the world. You represent the energy of creation, | 
preservation and destruction vested in Brahma, Visnu and Mahesa respectively. | 
I bow to you. I bow to that goddess who relieved from fear Brahmá when 
he was trembling before the might of Madhu and Kaitava. I bow to that + 
goddess who imparted vigour to Lord Visnu when he was fighting with the 
demons, Madhu and Kaitava. I bow to that goddess who was remembered 
by Sfiva while he fell with his chariot from the sky in the hideous battle | 
which he fought with the demon Tripura. Ibow to Durgà who was adored | 
by Sfiva in that emergency, while riding on the bick of Visnu in the guise } 
of a bull and by whose might he was able to killthe demon. I bow to Durgi | 
at whose command the wind constantly blows, the sun gives heat, Indra showers 
rain, time wanders continually here and there; and death frequents animals: | 
by whose command, the creator creates, tho preserver preserves and the des- 
troyer destroys the universe. I bow to Durgà without whom the elfulgent | 
and transcendental Lord Krişna even is unable to create. O mother ofthe | 
universe, preserve me by all means; pardon my faults. A mother is never 
offended at tho faults of her children." So saying he fell prostrate at her foet | 
and wept again and again. Then Durga was pleased and affectionately said | 
thus, “Child, you will beimmortal. Be of good cheer. Let victory always attend — | 
you every where, by the grace of S/iva. May the omniscient Hari remain | 
always pléased with you and may your faith in Lord Krisna and your auspicious 
preceptor S’iva be firmly established in your heart! " Darga thus not only gave 
him assurance of safety but granted him the following boon also. 


61-76. Shesaid * A man who has firm belief in his household god and" 
religious preceptor cannot die, even if all the remainino gods become dis- 
pleased with hin and try to kill him. You are devoted to Lord Krisna. You 
are the favourite disciple of S’iva and you are adoring’ his wife, Who can 
destroy you in the world? No sort of evil can befall the worshippers of Krişna 
in particular. Those who worship other gods are not exempt from danger. 
When the powerful moon is pleased with a fortunate individual, what can the 
feeble stars do, even if they are displeased with him? If the king in council 
is pleased with any one, he becomes prosperous. What can the weak servants 
of the king do, if they are displeased with him?” Parvati being propitiated 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


ey igen: d cp Sep Trust 9 


said so to Para$uráma and blessed him and entered into her house, Thon the 
name of Hari was shouted repeatedly. Whoever at the time of worship 
departure or in the morning reads the above hymn as stated by Kánwa-S'ákha 
surely gains his desired object. Any one desiring to obtain a son or a daughter 
or to acquire knowledge or to gain adherents or to recover a lost kingdom 
- gecures the end which he has in view, by the perusal of the above ode. The 
god, kingor a friend, however much he may be displeased with a 
person, is easily propitiated if the offender reads the above hymu. A man 
oppressed by robbers, bitten by a snake, attacked by enemies or afflicted by 
disease gets rid of his calamities by virtue of this ode. In the court of justice, 
in the funerals, in jail, in confinement or while drowning in the water, a man 
is rescued from his peril if he reads the hymn. A woman separated from her 
husband, son or relation is reunited if she recollects the above hymn. A woman 
who subsists upon the diet of tere ghee and boiled rice and reverentially listens 
to the hymn for a year gives birth toa son, (wise, good and longevous) though 
she may be barren. A woman disliked by her husband secures his favours by 
listening to it for six months. A woman who has got only one son and is 
otherwise barren, or a woman whose son is dead surely gets a son if he 
listens to the ode reverentially for nine months. A woman who gets only 
daughters and no sons will surely get a son if she worship Durg& on a jar 


and listen to the above hymn for five months. 


preceptor, 


CHAPTER XLVI. E 


« Para$uráma after having worshipped Durga, 
art according tothe hymn as 
hipped bim with several sacri- 
and all ingredients except 
orshipped his brother Ganesa, 


1-17. Narayana said: 
worshipped Gane$a also with a delightful he 
recited by Lord Hari. He reverentially wors 
ficial offerings, frank-incense, lamp, perfume 
the holy basil. By the command of S ‘iva, he w 
bowed to his preceptor and Parvati and prepared to go. Nárada. asked : 
* Why did Pará$ur&áma exclude the holy basil from flowers and ingredients of 
sacrificial offering in his worship of Gane ga? Tulsi (the holy basil) is the 
most lovely, blessed and venerable of flowers. Why ail pa Ceneta cospi 
this holy and essential flower?” Narayana answered: “ʻO Narada, Tam goa 
describe the mysterious, interesting, ancient history relating toe s e 
the Brahma-Kalpa. Once upon a time, Yulst (devoted to Náráyana) E 
prime of her beauty and youth while wandering through ihe places be 
pilgrims resort beheld the youthful, graceful, holy, smiling p b l dal 
on the coast of the Ganges. His entire body was, Bude S feet ot 
paste. He was clad in a crimson dress und he was adoring E tee st de 
Lord Hari the recollection of which dispels rebirth, du of h Her a 
When she saw the dispassionate Ganesa, the lord of the chiefs o x e ien pu 
the best of those who subdued their passions, e deity Mer cau 
possibly be won over or enticed by beauty, she wa e d n hat are 
addressing him said thus, “Q you of tranquil mien opcs er Tid like 
you meditating about? Why is your belly so huge y ro What 
that of an elephant? O blessed god, why bave you gotton e p 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


mi A 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. dues 


THE BRAHMA-VAIVARTA PURANA. 
KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. eus 


(The part or canto relating to the birth of Lord Krisna.) 


CHAPTER I, 


1-9. You should first bow to Nár&yana, Narottama, Nara, the goddess 
Saraswatt and Veda-vyasa and then pronounce “‘victory.”’ Nárada said, “Lord, 
at first [ heard the most wonderfal and lovely Brahma-Khanda (part relating 
to Brahma) from the lotus-mouth of Brahma. Then, at his command, I came 
to you and duly heard from you the excellent Prakriti Khanda, (the part 
relating to Nature). Afterwards [ heard from you the pact of Ganesa, which 
is preventive of death. And yet my mind is not satisüed. It hankers after 
more knowledge. [ am your submissive, devoted disciple. Kindly relate 
to me that part of the Purána which relates to the birth of Lord Krisna; 
which is preventive of death and rebirth; which -is t^e lamp of wisdom; which 
cuts asunder the ties of Karma; which inspires faith in Hari; which produces 


asceticism in the mind and removes the attachments of the world; which is the - 


Source of redemption and the means of crossing the sea of the world; which i3 the 
panacea of all diseases; which is a stepping-stone to the attainment of the 
lotus feet of Hari; which is the life of the VaiSnava and the most sacred thing 
in the world. By whom was the perfect and supreme Lord Krisna besought 
to descend to the mortal world? In what age, for what reason and in what 
place did He manifest Himself? What were His parents, Vasudeva and 


Devaki? E: 

10-22. In what family was He born and how did He bewilder the world 
by his illusion? Why. through fearof Kamsa did He leave the room where 
He was born and go-to Gokula? Why was that fearless Being afraid of s 
worm like Kamsa? What did Hari doin the guise of a cow-herd ia Gokula? 
Why did the Lord sport with the milk-maids? Who were Nanda, Yagoda, 
the milk-maids and the young milkmen? What acts of sqanctity or merit did 
they perform? How could the virtuous Rádhà who used to wander in the 


Goloka be the favourite of Krisna inthe Vraja? How could the milk-maids 
secnre the company of the Supreme Lord who is almost inacessible even tothe 
devotees? Why did Krisna abandon the milk-maids and go to Mathura? ae 
methods did He adopt to relieve the earth of her barden before He ment pag 

to the Goloka? O merciful and blessed lord, deign to give me Mad 
reciting the narrative of Hari which like scissors snaps asunder "d ‘ee 
worldly enjoyments: which, like a flame of fire consumes the fuels of a 
which exempts the audience i. e. the listners froin sins aoonon aia En 3 
in millions o£ years and gives them redemption; which is pleasing to t os 
like drops of nectar; which removes oceans of calamities and entes a a boa 

to people trying to cross the ocean of the world. ‘The gift MR f Hari's 
act sixteen times superior in poiut of merit to devotion, oc RT 
name, great acts of charity, pilgrimage, the study of the Vedas, the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
100 THE BRAHMA-V AIV ARTA PURANA. 


abstinence, ‘and initiation in all sacrifices." I have been sent by my father 
Brahm to you to acquire wisdom. Who does not wish to drink the ocean of 
nectar, if it is within his reach? . 


23-34. Narayana said, “O consecretor of your family, truly are you 
blessed. Nay, you are virtue incarnate. You wander, here and there, to purify 


"the hearts of the people. A man’s heart is revealed by his words. A man's heart 


is disclosed by the following, viz his pupil, wife, daughter, daughter's son, friend, 
son, son's son, words, valour, fame, prosperity, wisdom, water and knowledge 
You have been redeemed in your life-time; you are a saint devoted to Hari, You 
are consecrating the earth, (the harbour of all creatures) with the dust of 
your feet. By the display of your form, you are purifying the three worlds; 
this is why you desire to attend to the narratives of Hari. The place where 
Haris account is recited is visited by geds, Munis and all the holy 
shrines of the world. ‘The saints, by attending to the recitations of . Hari's 
account, ultimately attain a position free from all danger: and the place 
where it is recited is turned into a shrine orboly land. He who recites 
it not only sancties the audience but hundreds of his own ancestors, 
One who queries on subjects relating to Hari at once consecrates one's geneology. 
The audience likewise consecrate their own families and friends. A man who 
drinks the nectar of the name of Hari consecrates his birth in India which he 
has been able to assume by a process of endless devotions. ‘There are nine 
indications of the faith in Hari. They are as follows: adoration of Hari, his 
worship, the recitation of his mantras, his service, his recollection, recitation of 
his hymns, listening to a description of his attributes, surrender of self to Hari 
and his bondage. 


35-47. A man devoted to Hari is free from danger and becomes longevous. 
Yama cannot go to him as the snakes cun not approach the divine eagle 
Harinever quits his vicinity or neighbourhood and he quickly attains all 
sorts of perfection (Anima, &c). ‘Lhe wheel of Sudarsana, at Hari's command, 
wanders by his side, day and night, to preserve him. No one is able to injure 
him. As the grasshoppers do not goto the fire, so the myrmidons of Yama 
do not approach him even in dream. He is not visited by disease, danger, grief 
or any sort of obstacle; death cannot touch him throngh fear. Ihe gods, 
saints and adepts are ali pleased with him. By the grace of Hari he is treo 
from fear and «emains ever happy. It is in the fitness of things that you 
are anxious to listen to Hari's narratives. This causes no surprise; for you 
have sprung out of the mind of Brahma, A man's mind is moulded according 
to his origin. Your father Brahmá has become the creator by ministering 
to the lotus-feet of Hari. He who cherishes for Hari the nine kinds of faith 
as specified above, who is fond of the narratives of Hari, whose mind is immersed 
in Hari, who feels a thrill of raptures in hig body and sheds tears at the mention 
of his name is styled a Bhukta (adherent of God) by the savants. He too, 
is a Bhakta who, internally and externally, regards his family and 
children as the creatures of Hari. He who is kind to all creatures and regards 
the world as full of Krigna is the best aud wisest of the Vaignavas. Whoever K 


in solitude, ina place where pilgrima resorts cheerfully adores the lotus feet 
of Hari isa Vaisnava, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


| 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
KRISNA JANMA-KRANDA. 101 


: 48-58. He truly isa very wise and holy Vaignaya who constantly 
recites Hari's name and his mantras and sings his glory ; who listens to his odes; 
who is delighted to dedicate sweet things which he obtains to the feet of 
Hari; who, externally, reaps the consequences of his acts done by him in his 
previous birth, but who internally, day and night, either asleep or awake, 
is absorbed in the meditations of Hari, and into whose ears the mantras relating 
‘to Hari have been poured by the mouth of his spiritual guide A devoted 
Vaignava redeems seven ascendants and seven descendants in his own Jine, 
seven generations in the line of hia maternal grand-father, his sister, mother 
mother's mother, wife, daughter, friend, pupil, daughter's son, servant, servant's 
son $c. The shrines or holy places always desire the sight or the touch of 
a holy Vaisnava; because the sins committed in such places are destroyed by 
their association with him. The place where a Vaisnava dwells even for so 
short a time as is necessary to milk a cow is turned into a holy Jana courted 
by pilgrims. If person dies in such a place, he is redeemed jn the same 
manner as a dying man is redeemed if in a state of conscicusness he recollects 
the name of Hari on the bosom ofthe Ganges. The very breath of the 
Vaisnavas destroys sins like the forest of the holy basil, the cow- pep, the holy 
temple of Krisna, the Vrindávana, Haridwára, or other holy places or ablutions 
in sacred streams. 

59-65. The touch of a Vaisnava scares away sins just asa flame of 
fire destroys hay. Ifa man only beholds a Vaisnava passing by his side, the 
sins accumulated by him in seven previous births are certainly consumed. 
Whoever slanders Hari or the holy—minded Vaisnayas loses al] the religious 
sanctities or merits which he accumulated in bis previous hundred births. 
He is bitten and devoured by worms and continues to rot in the dreadfal 
hell called the Kumbhípáka so long as the sun and the moon exist. The 
very sight of this hell extirpates all his merits or religious sanctifies. A wise 
man happening to see this hell is purified by ablutions in the Ganges and by 
ihe sight o£ the sun. A sinner is redeemed by the touch of a Vaisnava; and 
Hari who presides over the mind destroys his sins. O Nárada, I recited to 
you the virtues of Visnu and a Vaignava. Now I am going to describe to you 

the diversions afforded by the history of the birth of Krisna. Please listen 


with rapt attention. 


CHAPTER II 

1-12. Narayana said: “I am going duly and carefully to refer you to those 
at whose entreaties Lord Krisna descended to the eaith, to the deeds which 
the Lord performed before he went back to the cow-world and to the methods 
which he adopted for the destruction of the wicked. At first, I shall dwell 
upon the subject of the arrival of Lord Krisna in the Vraja, his rustic dress 
and upon tbe causes which led Radha to assume the form of a milk-maid, 
While I gaye you the account of S'ankhachüda, J alluded to the subject very 
briefly. Now Iam going to give you the details. Please listen- In days 
of yore, there was a quarrel in the Goloka between Radha and S ri-dáma. By 
Radha’s curse, S/ri-dáma was born as B'/ankba-chüda. Then S'ri-dàma also 
cursed Hádhà saying, “You will bə born asa woman and wander over the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


- Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. À 
102 THE BRAH M A-V AIV ARTA PURANA. 


SK Exec 


earth as a milk-maid.” ^ Rádhá was afraid of the curse and said to Lord Krign, 
thus: "S'/ri-dára has cursed me. -O destroyer of fear, what means shall I adopt? 
How can I live without you? A moment without you, O Lord, appears, 
be a hundred ages. A moments separation from you consumes my mind, 
Like the red-legged barta-velle, my eyes constantly drink the nectar of your 
face which resembles the full moon of autumn. You are my life, soul, vision 
and eye. Iam merely the body. Lord, my heart is set upon you and whether 
asleep or awake, I constantly recollect your lotus feet. My master, I cannot 
live without serving you fora single minute.” 


13-24. Lord Krisna thereupon consoled her, held his beloved to his 
breast, gave her assurance of safety and said, “Fair one, in the Var&ha age, 
I shall descend to the world. It has been pre-destined that you will go 
with me and bave your birth there. Goddess, there L shall go and make merry 
with you in the forests of Vraja (enclosure of the cow-herds). You ara dearer 
to me than my life. Why should you fear, when L am by your side? So - 
saying Lord Hari paused, This is why the Lord of the universe went to 
Gokul, the abode of Nanda. Krigna who dispels the fear of mankind does 
not fear any body. Simply on the groundless plea of fear he went to Rádhá. 
In the guise of a cow-herd, to fulfil his vow he sported with ádhá and the 
cow-herdesses. Lord Krigna, entreated hy Brahma, descended to the earth 
and after having relieved the earth of her burden, went back to his destination. | 
Narada said, * Kindly tell me briefly what led to the quarrel between Radha | 
and S'ri-dàma? You alluded to the subject briefly. Now, describe it to me 
in detail.” Narayana said, “Once upon a time, Lord Hari was ranging at 
pleasure in a solitary forest in the sphere of the Rasa, The excess of his 
enjoyments with Radha rendered him unable to distinguish between ego and 
other objects. Suddenly he quitted Radh& who was not yet satisfied and 
-Went to other nymphs with a view to sexual intercourse. At that time, Viraj | 
(who was as much desired by Lord Krişna as Radha) with millions of her fair. | 
female associates was dwelling at Vrindávana, Viraj& more beloved to Krigna | 


than his life, the best of damsels, the most blessed, seated on a throne of gem 
- beheld Hari by her side. 


25-38. Lord Krisna also beheld Virajà who w. 
nal moon, who was in the prime of her | 
in fine dress aud decked with gems was c 
ig always sixteen years old, When H 


— À— 


as lovely like the. autum- 
beauty and had a smiling aspect, who 
asting arch glances at the lord. She 
y c ari saw that her body was agitatel with 
passion he at once cohabited with her on the platform paved with gems. Viraja 
with Lord Hari, fair asa hundred Cupids in her embrace, fainted through the 
excess of pleasure. The female associates of Radh& when they saw this 
informed Radha of the matter, Radba thereupon highly incensed lay dowa 
on the bed. Her eyes flushed and looked crimson like a pair of lotuses. She 

wept loudly and said, “Can you show me Krisna enamoured of Viraja? It 

you are speaking the truth, come along with me and [ shall daly punish both 

Viraj& and Krişna? Who can save Viraja, i£ I chastise her? Let my favourite T 
attendant —maids fetch to me that Virajà and Hari, © maids, you must not 

allow that smiling Hari (whose heart is crooked like a jar ^u oison with 
"honey at the mouth) to come to my house. hin 


1 IUe Sw At present accomodate him 
in my beautiful pavilion. Some of the cowherdesses were frightened ab 
wv 


——— 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 103 


ccc - 
ds and, modestly bowing and with folded palms spoke to her thus, 


wor 
OI show you Virajà with the Lord. ‘he fair R&ádh& ascended her car and 
Ring attended by thirty miliions of waiting maids went to the mansion of 
Viraj&. 

39-58. ‘The car was constructed with emerald. It was bright like 
millions of suns. It was adorned with thirty millions of diamond jars, pictures 
and flags, It hada hundred thousand wheels and was as speedy as the miad. 


It was beautiful and decked with columns of excellent gems, ‘The interior of 
the chariot was decked with lovely rubies. On the upper side of the wheels, 
there were constructed many images with ringing anklets of gem round their 
feet. The top of the chariot was covered with gems. The chariot contained 
ahundred thousand cells of gem, furnished with excellent apparels, jars of 
emerald and several objects suited tc sensual enjoyment. The chariot was decked 
with bed—~steads and caskets of gems : it was red like saffron; it had millions of 
stair-cases constructed with gems and was inlaid with different kinds of preci- 
ous stones (viz, Syamantaka, Kaustubha, Ruchaka, &c). It cuntained many forests 
and ponds teeming with millions of lotuses. The summit of the car was 
constructed with emerald and decked with jars. It was seven yojans high: 
(a yojan is equivalent to nine miles nearly). It was ten yojans broad. It 
was decorated with countless wreaths of Párijat, Kunda, Oleander, Yuthi, 
fragrant yellow flower called Champaka rose, chestnut, Madhavi, (the spring 
creeper), jasmine, Malati and Kadamba. It cortained flower-gardens or 
orchards, ponds and groves, It was the best of all the chariots and was as 
speedy asthe wind. It was covered with thin, fine sheets of cloth and coníain- 
ed millions of diamond looking-glasses. It was besmeared with sandal, aloe, 
musk and saffron. It contained diamond Musti-dega (i. 2- the middle of a bow 
or that part of it which can be grasped in the hand) and countless white 
chowries. It was decked with thirty millions of bedsteads, ten millions of 


bells and countless flags. It hid bedsteads containiag pillows of champaka- 
à These bedsteads were furnished 


flowers besmeared with sandal and saffron. 2 SEDI 
with excellent coverings, apparels and sheets of cloth and pre-eminently E 
for sexual intercourse. The car also contained other objects not heard- of or 


seen before. , 

59-68. The goddess Radha hastily descending from her car went ia the 
diamond mansion of Viraja. At the portal of this mansion she saw S'ri- a 
the benefactor of Lord Krigna. whose face Was beaming with smiles and " "is 
was surrounded by a hundred thousand cow-herds. At this sight her Bo 
flushed red with anger and she said thus : «Thou servant of a debauchee, ov d 
Quit my sight. I shall see what sort of spouse thy master has got. E RE han 
even fairer than myself ?" The very powerful S/ri-dama with the sta 


hand thereupon fearlessly confronted her and did not permit her i es 
h iheir lips quivering with anger at his words, 


The waiting maids of Radha, wit 3 e d 
forcibly Ru S’ri-dama devcted to his lord into the manion Hari, 2 
ranger of the Goloka, as he heard the noise, perceived that ae E: wis 
and disappeared.  Virajà was so much afraid that in spite of ti S d Rea a 
of the Lord, she committed suicide by diat of her yoga- Her body was t I 
into a river which surrounded the Goloka like a circle. It was ten yojans 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


A 
104 THE BRAHMA-V AIVARTA PURANA, 


breadth and very deep ;and in length it was ten times as much. It was very 
lovely. It was converted into a mine of gems. j à 


——— 


CHAPTER III 


1-14. “O Narada, when Rádhà did not find Hari in that mansion of 
pleasure and saw that Virajá was changed into a river, she returned home, 
Krisna finding that his virtuous darling Viraj& was reduced to that condition, 
began tolament loudly saying, ‘Dearest and best damsel that I love so much, 
deign to come tome. How shall I be able to sustain my life without you? 
You are the very personification of chastity. By my blessing, you will be the 
presiding deity of the river and turn into a. nymph more beautiful and lucky 
than your former self. O chaste one, your former self has been turned into 
ariver. Now assume a new shipe, get up from the river and approach me.” 
Thereupon, the smiling Viraja, in yellow dress, beautiful like Radha, came out of 
the river and cast a glance at Hari, the lord of her life. She was bending 
with the weight of her buttocks and loins. She hada rising breast. Her 
gait was that of an elephant. She was the most honourable of the honorable 
nymphs, and the fairest of the fair. ‘The grace of her body was like the hue 
of Champaka; her lips wore like bimbas: her teeth were like grains of pome 
granate ; her face was like the full moon; har eyes were like blooming lotuses ; 
her forehead was marked with vermilion and musk. She was decorated with 
graceful leaves and her head was decked with a charming chignon. The 
ornament constructed with the pearl produced in the head of the elephant was 
suspended on thefront of her nose. Her neck was adored with a garland of 
pearls. Her arms were decked with armlet, brace-let and S’ankha (ornament 
made of shell for the wrists of women). She was also adorned with the tink- 
ling girdle of small bells and anklets. ‘he lord of the universe at the sight 
of the lustful Viraja at once clasped her and kissed her, again and again, 


—— eae — 


15-31. The Lord finding the maiden in solitude cohabited with her in 
various ways. ‘Then the attractive and chaste Virajà who was in her menses 
wasimpregnated with the irresistible semen discharged into her womb by Hari. 
She wielded the burden of Pregnancy for a celestial hundred years. ‘There 
she gave birth to seven beautiful sons and spent her days: happily in their 
company. Once upon a (ime, the chaste Viraja, excited with lust, was again 
flirting with Hari when her youngest son, being oppressed by his elder brothers, 
came to the lap of his mother, Tke merciful Hari seeing that his son was 
frightened quitted the soceity of Virajà. Viraj& took the child in her lap. 
She consoled him and thereatter could not find Hari by her side, Her 
passion not being gratified, she wept much and in anger cursed her son thus: 
** You will be turned into an ocean of salt. No one will drink your water." 
And tben with reference to all her sons she said, O fools, descend to the earth. 
Let the ocean of salt go andd ell in the lovely Jambu island. You shall 
“not remain there together; you must reside in different places. O my sons, 
dwell in different islands and sport in solitude with the rivers of those islands — 
which will respectively be assigned to you.” Thus she cursed her other sons. 
also. By the curse of his mother, the youngest son was turned into an ocean 
of salt. He went and informed his elder brothers of the curse pronounced by 


A 


€C-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri-and Sarayu Trust. 
KRISNA JANMA-KHANDA. - ah 105 


their mother. They in sorrow approached their mother and, having respectfully 
bowed to her, descended into the earth. These seven brothers according to 
the position allotted to them respectively, occup'ed the seven islands of the 
globe; and from the youngest to the eldest each brother successively increased 
double in size, as he attained the form of an ocean. The oceans were as follows: 
salt, sugarcane, wine, clarified butter, curd, milk and water. The waters of 
these oceans are used merely for cultivation. These boys surrounded the world 
of the seven islunds with seven oceans and in great mental agitation lamented 
their mutual separation and the separation from their mother. 


The chaste Virajà, also much afflicted, lamented the loss of her 


32-41. 
sons. Her sons also deeply lamented their separation from Hariand lost their 
consciousness. Lord Hari came to know that Virajá was overwhelmed with 


grief and he came to her again.  Viraj& when she saw him was consoled and 
cheered up. Excited with Just, she took him in her, arms and indulged in 
amorous sports. Lord Hari was, pleased with her, though she abandoned her 
sons. He then blessed her saying, ‘‘My beloved, I shall surely come to you. 
You will ba as dear to me as Radh& and you will always be able to preserve 
your sons," The associates of Itádhá& went and reported to her what Krişna had 
said to Viraja. Radha was much offended and went to sleep in anger. [n 
the meantime Krişna, came to her and accomodated himself along with S’ri- 
d&ma at the threshold of her mansion, Then H&dh&, ‘the lady of the Rasa, 
as she saw Krigna used to him unpleasant words. She said, “O Hari, you 
have got spouses in the Goloka better than myself. Please go to them. 
What have you got to do with me? : 

42-55 Viraja, through my fear, died and took the form of a river; 
and yet you are frequenting her company. You should get a temple constrac- 
ted at her coast and dwell there like her husband in the form of a male river. 


Such a conjunction is befitting ; for eating and sleeping performed by persons 
belonging to the same class are desirable. All great saints will laugh at the 
idea that Krigna, the best of gods, cohabited with a river. Those who call - 
you the lord of the universe do not know your heart. They do not know that 
Krisna, the universal spirit, desired the company of a stream.” The incensed 
i The cow-herdesses then 


Radha paused but cid not get up from her bed. j 1 
k me held the chowrie in their hands. Some were 


approached her thus. So vere 
clad in fines dress; some held betel-leaves or wreaths or perfumed water or 
lotus or anon some were decked with ornaments; some held the lamp- 
black, the flute, the lute, tie hair-comb or red powder, or instrument or cymbals 
“or balls or Small drums; some were playing on the flute; some were singiug and 
dancing; some held in their hands tovs or honey ora cup of sd or rape 
Or apparel; some were ministering to the’ feet of Radha; oe pat er 
with folded palms; some adored her will hymns. Millions remained outside. 
56-68. The female associates of Radha armed with canes or pial ees 
busy in preventing Krisna at the threshold „from entering insidan din 
again used to him unbecoming, unsuited, undignified and cruel words. She 


ub wc AS Tn . Olustful thief, O debauchee, why do you 
said, “O Lord of Viraj&, leavo me. O s Rettamald on Mancina: hanes 


trouble me? Wither go to Padmá-vati o 1 
mala of MATE UT beauty. © lord of the river, I know that you are the | 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 
bd 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. i 
106 THE BRAHMA-V AIVARTA PURANA 


spiritual guide even of the gods. May you prosper! But at this time, quit 
my house. O dissolute god, you are constantly associating with mortal women, 
You ought therefore to turn into a human being and descend into the world. () 
Sustlà, Sasi-knlà, Padmá-vati, Madhavi, you should. prevent this sly being 
from approaching me. I have no business with him.’ Thereupon the cow. 
herdesses used to Hari gentle, lovely and beneficial words. Some said, “O Hari, 
go away for some time. We shall conduct you hereafter Radha has been appen- 
sed.” Others said, “O Krisna, enter into the house ouly fora short time, 
You have re:red Radh&. Who else can protect her"? Others said, “Solong 
as Râdhâ’s displeasure continues rest at Vrindâ-vana.” Others said in jest, 
“O you ticentious creature, try your best to appease her." Others said, “Go 
to other females to whom you are devoted. We shall serve you rightly." 


69-81. Others laughed and said, “Go inside and pacify her wounded 
susceptibilities.” Others said rudely, “Who has got the power to see the 
lotus-face of Rádh&?" Others said, “Go elsewhere for the time being and 
come here when she is propitiated.” Some impertinent damsel exclaimed, 
“If vou do not go inside, we shall force you to doit.” Some virtuous, dispassion- 
ate and smiling maidens prevented the pure Hari from stepping inside. S'ri- 
fama thereupon was incensed. With flushed eyes, he addressed the angry 
Radha whose eyes resembled red lotuses thus, ‘O mother, why do you address 
harsh words to my lord? You rebuke him without discrimination. He is the 
lord of Brahma, Ananta, S'ankara, and Dharma. He is the final cause of the 
world. He isthe lord of Vani. Padmá-lay& and Maya. He has no attributes; 
he takes delight in self and ix the Supreme Being | You hold him up to scorn, 
Just consider that you have been the chief of goddesses by the worship 
of Krigna. Virtuous goddess, you have not been able to comprehend him. 
By a mere wink of his eyes he can create millions of goddesses like yourself, 
I myself am unable to describe him. In the Vaikontha, Kamala with the clusters 
of her hair polishes the lotus feet of Krisna and reverentially worships him. 


82-93. Tho goddess of knowledge with words delightful to the ears like 
the rain of nectar constantly adores him. Do you not know this god? O 
dignified goddess, the goddess Nature, the life of every one and the emblem of 
imagination, with g eat fear and esteem always reverentially adores him. Do 
you not know the Lord? © goddess, the Vedas oniy adore the sixteenth 
part of his digits and -et they are unable to compreherd him. Do you not 
know that Hari? Just compose yourself and adore the lotus feet of Hari 
who is adored and served by the four-faced Brahm&, the author of the Vedas; 


who is adored by S'iva, the lord of the Yogis, with his five mouths; by Ananta. 


with his hundred mouths; by Dharma; the 
mankind and the witness of every act; by the preserver Visnu, the resident of 
ihe white Islands; who eludes the worship of the gods, Goat saints, manus 
and savants even in dream. By a mere twinkle of his eye, the whole creation 
is destroyed. One moment of Krigna can end the life of Brahma ; and only 
one day of Krigna is equal to the time covered by twenty-eight Indras, 
One bundred and eight years composed of such days asare alluded to above 
constitute the length of Brabmâ’s age. Heis my lord who controls yon all.” 


lord of the world, the preserver of 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


| 
| 


KNHS By PANMI onde meyer EPA. 1607 


es 


94-104. Radha was highly incensed atthe hard and mortifying worda 
of S/ri-dama. Her lips quivered; her hair was dishevelled; her eyes lusked 
red like lotus. she said, “Wretch. fool, servant of a lecher! ‘Thou hast the 
presumption to say that thov hast been able to grasp the principles of ontology 
and I have not been able to know thy lord! O basest creature in the Vraja, is ^ 
Krisna thy lord and not mine? Thou always praisest thy father and slaüdetogt 
thy mother like the demons who always find fault with the gods. Fool ! As 
thou defamest me, thou shalt turn into a demon. Wretch, quit the Goloka. 
Lo! I have cursed thee. Let me see who can preserve thee.” Saying this, she 
lay down on the bed. Her attendant-maids secved her with chowries and 
dia nond handles” S'ri-dáma also became very hot. His lips quivered. He 
also cursed her saying, “You will also be born as a woman. Mother, your 
anger is human; and so you will be a woman; and I curse you likewise. - 
Subdued by your shadow and digits, you will be susceptible to pollutions. 
Fools will call you on earth the wife of Rayan. Cursed by you, a Vaisya 
hermit wil! be born in Vri nd à-vana through the digits of Lord Hari. 3 


105-116. You will secure the company of Krisna in Gokula and merrily 
dally with htm at Vrindá&-vana. You will be separated from Hari For a century; 
and being subsequently re-united with him you will come back to the Goloka.”’ 
So saying he bowed to her and went to Hari to whom he also bowed and with 
lamentations related the account of the curse from start to finish. While he 
was weeping and was about to proceed to the earth, Hari said to him, “You 
will be the best of demons. No body will be able to conquer you. After the 
lapse of fifty yugas, your body will be penetrated with a spear by Siva: and 
by my grace you wiil come back here after your death.” The .afilicted S'ri- 
dàma said, “Bless me so that my faith in you may over continue. So saying, 
he bowed and got out of the Goloka. Then Râdhå went to Krisna and lamen- 
ted the loss of S'/ri-Dáma, again and again, saying, “My son, where are you 
going?" This S’ri-dima became S’ankba-chûda, the husband of Tulst. When 
he was gone, Râdhâ narrated the whole incident (relating to the quarrel) to 


Krisna who gave a suitable answer to her questions and consoled his beloved 
^ ined the company. of Hari. (0) 


spouse, [n due course S'ankha-chüda rega m ; 
Nárada, in the Varáha-lvalpa, Radia went to the earth with Hari and was born 
in Gokula iu the house of Vrika-bhaau. Thus [ have related to pee 
excellent biography of Krisna, a subject whion is courted by every one. Now 
whit more do you desire to hear? 
2s 
CHAPTER IV. a 

1-12. Narada said, “Lord, you are the bast of those ero MEN 
Kindly let me know who deputed Lord Hari to dossor Ty E Er was 
said, “In days of yore, .in the Varaha-kalpa, the Barth Eu wh tho raa 
much afflicted and sought the protection of Brahma. ‘of Brahma, She 
Oppressed by the asso to the almost inaccessible gras NU. Hé val 
saw that the effulgent god was ministered to by eer prostitutes add 
Cheerfully witnessing at ‘the time the dance of the ve ld the time the 
Istening to the song of the Gandarvas He was muttering 


ters; He was shedding tears 
great mantra, viz Krisna consisting of only two letters. H 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


108 THE BRAHMA-V AIVARTA PURANA. 


a 


in raptures;-thera was a thrill of religious joy all over his body. The Earth 
bowed low to the four-faced god and submitted to him an account of the 
burden inflicted upon her by the demons. The hair of her body was on end 
and she wept. Drahmáasked why she was weeping, He also said, "O'nuspieious 
nymph, tell me why you haye come. All will be well with you. Compose 
yourself, You need not be afraid while Iam here After having console} 
the earth, he politely asked the gods the cause of their arrival. The' gods 
answered thus:—''The earth is over-loaded; we are also oppressed by the 
demons. Lord, you are the creator of the world. Kindly preserve us soon, 
You alone can rescue the Earth. You ought to preserve her. 


13-21. O paternal grand-father, we are sorry as the Ear th has been. 
over-loaded. You ought to relieve her of the burden. Thereupon the 
creator Brahmá said to the Earth, “Child, be of good cheer and remain with me 
O lotas-oyed nymph, tell me whose load you are unable to bear and Ishall surely | 
relieve you of tho burden. All will bo well with you. The Earth choerfully 
described to him the tale of her misery and said, “Siro, listen; [ am going to 
describe to you the agonies of my heart. This matter should not be communi- 
cated to any one excopt a confidential Friend. A helpless woman ought tobe 
! protected by her husband, sons, relations, father. &e; otherwise they will be 
condemned. O lord, you have created me. I need not bo ashamed of reveal- | 
ing to you all matters. "Lam going to tell you under whose pressure I am | 
going to be crushed. Iam unable to bear the burden of those great sinners | 
who have no faith in Hari and slander him; who aro void of tho permanent | 
religious rites i. e. Gaotri &c, and roveronco for the Vedas &c 


22-31. Iam unable to boar tho burden of those who do not support their | 
parents, wife, sons and dependants; who are void of morcy and virtue; who are | 
liars and slanderers of gods and thoir preceptors; who are treacherous to their frie . 
ends and ungrateful: who aro perjurers and mis-appropriators of deposited wealth; | 
who sell the auspicious mantras and the only useful thing in the world, viz, tho. | 
name of Hari; who kill animals and rebel against tho authority of their spiritual 
guide; who are village priests, and aro avaricious or ireachorous; who burn corpses 
and eat the Food offered by tho S'üdras; who do not take part in worship and 
sacrifices; who do not observo rites or the vow of abstinence &e; who are hostile 
to the cows, the Brahmins, geds, the Vaignavas, Hari and LHlari's narrativo and 
oherish no belief for Hari in their mind. Lord, [have been opprossed more by | 
demons this time than I was by S'ankhachüda &c on a former occasion. An 
orphan maiden like myself has submitted to you all hor grievances. I have got 


a patron only in you. Be graciously pleased to remedy the evil.” So saying 
the Earth wert again and again. 


| 
32-44. Brahma replied, “An object is accomplished by devices. 
Lord Krigna will relieve you of the burden in good time. © fair damsel, fools 
who will put on your surface a machine, an auspicious jar, the male organ of < 
S'ivn, saffron, honey, fuels, sandal, musk, the soil of the holy land, scimtar, 
sword made of the skin of rhinoceros, crystal, emerald, ruby, a glittering 
diamond the rosary of berries, tho roct of the holy grass called Kuga, tho 
holy stoue, conchos, tho holy basil, idol, water, Jamp, garland, bell, the water 
of the conches, remnants of offerings mado to a doity, sacrificial offerings, the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. ; 
KRISNA JANMA-KHANDA. 109 


ellow diamond, sacred thread with knots, a looking glass, the white chowrie, yel- 


low pigment made of cow—urine, pearl, gem, the code of the Puránas, a written 


hymn, fire, camphor, the philosopher’s stone, gold, silver, coral, an artificial 
Brahman made of kuşa grass, the water of a holy land, ghee &c. cow urine or 
cow—dung will be consigned to the hell called Kál-sutra where they will dwell 
for millions of years.” Brahma after having enccuraged the larth in this 
way went with her and the gods io the Kailasa. They saw that Sfiva was 
seatod thero at the -root of the immortal, holy fig tree on the coast of the 
Mandákini. He was-clad in tiger hide and ornamented with the bones of the 
daughter of Dakga. He held in his hands a trident and an axe. , He had . 
three eyes and five faces. He was surrounded by adepts and yogis and 
was cheerfully witnessing the dance of the celestial whores. He was attentive- 
ly listening to the song of the Gandarvas and looking archly at Parvati who 
was also a spectator of the scone 

45-55. Siva was muttering the auspicious name of Hari with the rosary- 
bead constructed with the seeds of lotus growing on the margin of the Mand&kint 
At this time Brahma with the earth and gods arrived thers, stooping low. 55'iya, 
seeing Brahmá there, got up, respectfully, inclined his head and obtained blessings 
from Brahma. The gods and the Earth respectfully saluted S‘iva who was 
crowned with the moon. Ihe god S'iva. blessed them all. Brahma related ‘to 
him the whole affair whereupon Lord S'iva hung down his head Both S'iva 
and his wife were very sorry to hear of the sufferings of their worshippers. 
They were consoled by Brahma. Then S'iva and Brahma held out assurances 
of safety to the gods and the Earth and sent them home. Foth these excellent 
gods soon went to the hermitage of Dharma and after due deliberations 
thoy made for Hari's abode. That supreme land Vaikuniha is sustained by the 
wind above the universe (Brahmanda) and is preventive of death and decrepi- 
tude, It is krors of yoj.ns higher than the Brahma—loka. It is constructed 
with wonderful gems and baffles the descriptive “power of poets. Its royal 
roads are constructed with sapphire and rubies. The gods fleeting like the wind 
arrived at the lovely Vaikuntha and entering into the inner ecmpartments of 


Hari behold that Supreme Lord. 
56-66. He was clad in yellow garments, decked with anklets, brace-lets 

and armlets of gem and was seated on a throno of gem. — His neck was adorned 
with a wreath of wild flowors and his face, with ear-rings, The four—handed 
smiling lord, the consort of Saraswati had the grace of ten 
Kamala was ministering to his lotus feet. His body was 


besmeaied with sandal paste; his hoad was crowned with diadem; he was surroun- 
ded by Su-nanda, Nanda, Kumuda and other attendants. The gods including 
Brahma f JI prostrate at the feet of the Lord who is supremely happy and ever 
inclined to favour his adherents and with a thrill of raptures animating their 
framo worshipped bim thus: ~“ Lord, you are tho husband of Kamala, the 
supremo ruler, immortal, incorroptiblo and possess a tranguil mien. Weare 


the outcome of vour digits, the gods bave sprung from the digita ot your digits: 
the manus, inferior gods, men and the universe full of animate and iuanimate ob- 
jects are tho outcome of ihe digits of the digits of your digits, We bow to you." 
Dfiva said, Lord, you are eternal, inexhaustible (C [27 uawartal), without 
beginning or «nd, the inal cause, the source of ali kinds o£ perfection (Animá& 


tranquil-minded, 
millions of Cupids. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE Lon 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. à 
110 THE BRAHMA-V AIV ARTA PURAN A. 


&c.), and an adept; and you take delight in self (i. e. you are self-contented), 
No one is capable of adoring you. Dharma said, “ Lord, the savants describe 
things only as specified in the Vedas. But what is not so specified cannot be 
described. You are incorruptible and void of attributes. Your attributes ang 
form are beyond the powers of thought," 


Whoever reads the above six verses as reluted by Brahma and others is re- 
lieved from all calamities and obtains the desired boon. Hari when he heard their 
prayers said, ‘Gods, go to the Goloka and I shall follow you soon with Laksmt, 
Nara, Narfyana, Saraswati, Ananta, Maya, Ganesa, Kartika, and Sávitrl, the 
mother of the Vedas must go tothe Goloka where I reveal myself as the twos 
handed lord Krişna courted by Radh& and the cow-heardesses. : Here I dwell 
with Kamala, attended by Sunanda and others. Náràyana of the white Islands 
and Kriena are my forms. Srahma and other chief gods have sprung out of my 
digits; the other gods, demons and men are the outcome of the digits of my digits, 
Just go to the Goloka and your object will be gained, Later on, we shall 
follow suit for the fulfilment of the desires cherished by all of you." So 
saying, Lord Hari paused. The gods bowed to him and went to the wonderful 
supreme land of the Goloko, void of death and decrepitude. ‘This inaccessible 
land is fifty krors of yojins above the Vaikuntha. It has been constructed by 
the will of Hari and is sustained on the void merely by the wind. 


78-91. The gods fleoting like the mind, while about to proceed tothe . 


indescribable Goloka, encountered the river Viraja in the way. ‘The gods 
were astonished to see the broad. lovely coast of the river which was white 
like pure crystal Some of the places on tha coast wero full of the quarries 
of pearls, gems, philosopher’s stones and diamonds. Other places were decora- 
ted with black, white, yellow and red gems. Corals germinated in some other 
places Other places were decked with rows of diamonds. Some places, even 
invisible to Brahwa, harboured mines of excellant wealth, rubies ard sapphire. 
Some places furnished quarries of emerald, Syamantaka, Ruchaka, Kaustubha, 
invaluable, yellow diamonds and excellent. indescribable, precious stones, 
Some places were very lively and meant for amorous diversions. After having 
seon these wonderful things, the gods crossed the river and saw the mountain 
of a hundred summits. . It abounded in trees of Parijata and Kalpa trees and 
was surrounded „by cows of plenty. This mountain was a kror of Yojans in 
height aud ten times as much in length. It was five hundred millions of yojana 
in breadth. Upon ite summit was visible like a rampart the sphere of the Rása, 
a hundred million yojans in breadth. It was circalar and excellent. It con- 
tained a thousand groves of flowers with clusters of bees and mansions of pleasure 
which were constructed with gems. Ithad millions of pavilions and staircases 


inlaid with gems. It was supported by pillars of yellow diamonds containing jars 
made of gems. g 


92-109, The pillars were inlaid with c di à ilion. 
The centre of the Rása was decked with are DA aS MM 
of gem and had four gates on each side, All the sides were decked with 
columns of plantains and jacks (which had foliages) fastened together with knots 
of adamant. It was besmearod with white paddy leaves fried rice, fruits, bent 
grass, sandal, aloo, saffron and musk, ‘Tho place was surrounded by ten millions 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


x 


————— OY aces 


Digitized s eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
KRISNA JANMA-KHANDA. - 111 


AnD 


of cow-herdesses decked with ornaments and wreaths of gems. They put on 
brace-lets, armlets, anklets and ear-ings of gems. At Râdhâ’s instance, this 
place was guarded by the fair, The fingers of these beauties were ornamented 
with diamond rings and ornaments called Pásakas (lit. traps or chains). ‘Their 
head was crowned with diamonds ‘The pearl produced in the head of the 
elephant was hanging in the centre of their nose. ‘heir forehead was bright 
and marked with vermilion. Their persons were besmeared with sandal-paste 
and had the hue of Champaka. "hey were clad in yellow apparel. Their face was 
fair like bimbas and vied with the full moon of autumn in grace and brightness. 
Their eyes were fair like the autumnal lotus and decorated with musk and lamp- 
black. Their chignon was covered with wreaths of jasmine whose fragrance 
enticed the bees. They excelled the gait of the elephant and the wag-tail. 
They possessed arch glances and gentle smiles. Their teeth were like grains of 
ripe pomegranate. They were bending under the pressure off their rising 
breast (resembling the cheek of elephants), buttocks and hard and thick loins. 
They were inflamed with passion; and they were also busy in admiring the 
beauty of their features in the looking glasses. They were ministering to the - 
lotus feet of Radha. All this was observed by the gods. 


110-114. The sphere of the R&sa contained millions of ponds (meant 
for pleasure) teeming with white and red lotuses. It resounded with the hum 
of bees and was decked with groves of blooming flowers. Iu each grove, there 
were millons of bowers or arbours. It was full of camphor, betel leaves, clothes 
‘and jewels. All the sides of the groves were adorned with white chowries, 
mirrors, shiniog lamps, gems and wreaths of flowars. The gods after having 
ebserved the sphere of the Rasa came out of the mountain. ‘Then they beheld 
the charming wood of the Viindá-vana dear to Radha aud Krisna. 


115-127. In that wood, there was a lovely place designed for the enjoy- 
ment of Radha and Krisna. That lovely place was tended by the breeze 
redolent of the leaves of musk : nd bearing the refreshing watery vapours of 
the river Virajá. Some parts of the Vrindá-vana were swarmed with bees 
making a delightful hum and were decorated with green foliage and merry 
Kadamba-flowers. Other parts were perfumed with sandal the Mandára ‘and 
Champaka. Other parts were rendered attractive by the production of orange, 
jack, palm, lime, plantain, mango, cocoanut, b'ack-berry, plum, date, bael, 
pomegranate and betel.nut, and also bv the growth of Sila, Piyala, the holy 
fig tree, und the tree: called the silk cotton, neem and tamarind. The wood con- 
tained also the Kalpa tree, the screw: pine tree, the climbing plant called Madhavt 
and various Species of jasmine, such as Malat!, Runda ete. 1 he Vrindá-vana had 
five hundred millions of bowers which were lighted up with diamond lamps, 
redolent of frankincense, replete with tasteful ubjects aud filled with bedsteads 
that were covered with wreaths and annointed with sandal, It resounded with 
ihe hum of bees attracted by honey and wus encircled by damsels, gorgeously 
Clad, : 

128 147. Tho Vrindá-vana contained thirty-two lovely forests guarded 
by five hundred millions of cow-herdesses at the instance of Radha. The gods 
also beheld that the Vriudâ-vana hid a solitary place which developed into an 
excellent, forest on account of the ripe and delicious fruits furnished by the trees. 


CC-0. In-Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. A 
112 THE BRAHMA-V AIV ARTA PURANA. 


————— = c 


It contained lovely dwelling huses of five hundred millions o£ cow-herds who 
were as fairas Lord Krişna himself. These houses contained cows, cow-sheil, t 
fragrant flowers, 2 thousand bowers and bees attracted by honey. When the 
gods saw the lovely Vrindàvana, they proceeded in the direction of the cow. 
world which was circular and ten millions of yojans wide. Lt was surrounded 
by diamond ramparts — It had four gaies guarded by sentinels. It contained 
various articles of enjoyment and was inlaid with goms. [t contained fiva | 
hundred millions of hermitages for the use of the cowhords, the servants of | 
Lord Krigna. A hunired crores of hermitages meant for the resideuce of the | 
worshippers of the Lord were superior in quality to the last-named hermitages, | 
Tne gems of these hermitages were also botter in quality. The attendants of 
Lord Krisna again owned a hundred millions of hermitages for their own 
accomodation. ‘ihese again were superior inquality £o the last-named hermitages, 
The attendants of Krisna again who wielded the torm of Lord Srisna owned 
millions of precious hermitages for their own habitation; and the cow-herdesses 
likewise owned three-hundred and twenty millions of hermitages inlaid with gemi | 
ete for their own use. he ationiant maidservants were like-wise provided | 
with graceful mansions numbering tan krors _ A hundred kroes of houses were 
likewise meant for the residonce of those who had besen consecrated in India | 
by a course of meditation in which they absorbod themselves for a hundred | 
births, who had firm Frith in Hari aud had cut asunder the ties of Karma; who | 
were devoted to Him and, whethor asleop or awake, recited tha names of Radha | 
and Krisna with rapt attention.  lhese adherents of Krisna owned in the | 
Goloka millions of houses made of goms, containing various articles suited to | 
sensual enjoymentsa, bedsteads and garlands of flowers, white chowries, yellow ! 
gems, and looking glasses of gem. The top of these houses was covered with | 
jars constructed with invaluable gems. Tho c-ntre of the houses was covered 
with line ani delicate cloths. The gods having beheld all this observed, ata | 
short distanco from the Goloka, the immortal holy fig-tree. Lt was five yojans l 
broad and ten yojana high. It possessed a thousand trunks with endless | 
branches It was decked with a sphere of diamond platform and covered with } 
ripe fruits bright like goms. | 


: 148-158. Then the gods beheld at the root of the tree. the cow-herd 
boya (resembling Krisna in form) besmeared with sandal-paste and ornamenied 
.with gems. After having beheld the retinue of Lord Krigna, they beheld the 
graceful royal rond rendered beantiful by the sphero oÉ rubies, sapphire; 
diamonds and precious stones called liuchaka. This royal road was moistened 
with the paste of aloe, sandal, musk and saffron, It was surrounded by diamond 
temples which were furnished with pulpits. On the margin of the royal road | 


columns of plantains annointed with saffron were fixed, here and there. [Leaves 
of sandal strung or tied together with fine thre 
Curd, leaves, fried rice, fruits, flowers, bent grass ete, were attached to the said 
column . The columns also contained auspicious diamond jars decorated with 
wreaths and besmeared with sandal-paste. ‘The royal road was crowded with 
playful maidens Then the gods beheld the royal palace decked with precious 
staircases, pure cloths, white chowries, looking-plasses, admirable bed-steads and 
wreaths of flowers, It was surrounded by ramparts having sixteen portals 


` and encircled by moats. It was besmeared with sandal, aloe and other per- 
fume and guarded by countless door-keepers. : 


ad were suspended on the columns. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
KRISNA JAN MA-KEHANDA. 113 


159-170. Ata short distanoe, they saw the lovely hermitage of the 
great goddess Rádhá dearer to Krisna than his life, Savants cannot suff- 
ciently describe this hermitage. It was circular and twenty-four miles in 
circumference. It was effulgent with the lustre of invaluable gems with 
which it was constructed. Jt contained a hundred temples encompassed by 
deep and unsurmountable moats and was covered with Kalpa trees. It contaiu- 
eda hundred bowers. The royal palace of Radha was surrounded by dia- 
mond ramparts and had precious altars and seven portals, The portals were 
adorned with pictures. Beginning from the main gate-way, the palace had on 
all sides fourteen portale, The rampart measured sixteen Dhanus, Uhanu 
. measures four cubits in length and was lighted up with diamond jars. 
After wandering round the hermitage of Radh& fora while, they cheerfully 
proceeded a little further. "his hermitage they left behind. e Then they. 
beheld millions of excellent hermitages occupied by cowherds and cowherd- 
esses, 


171-192. Afer having seen Vrind&-vana which was circular and lovely, 
they. went to the holy Goloka. They beheld that it was good and wonderful 
and was supported by the wind. It was constructed by the will of god with 
a view to contribute to the wisdom and knowledge of Rádh&. It contained a 
thousand ponds and was the source of infinite good. The gods also witnessed 
several sorts of lovely dance and heard excellent songs relating to Radha and 
Krisna. The gods fainted as they heard the songs whose measure and harmony 
were perfect. When they recovered their consciousness, they saw wonderful 
things. The female cow-herds were differently clad. Some held the small 
drum or lute or chowrie or musical instrument in their hands; some were playing 
upon a pair of cymbals. The anklets of a few were merrily ringing. Some 
of the girls with pitchers on their head were dancing. Some of them were 
dressed as males and others played the parts of heroines courted by the above 
males. Some assumed the form of Radha: and others, of Krisna. Some 
mixed freely with others. Some were embracing their companions : others 
were playing. The gods were astounded at the sight. After traversing a 
short distance, they saw the hermitages and houses of the female attendants of 

~ RAdh&, . These nymphs were equal to one another in beauty, virtue, age, dress, 
youth and in respect of good luck. The principal associates of Rádhà numbered 
thirty three. Their names are as follows: Susil&, S'asi-Kal&, Yamuna, Madhavi, 
Rati, Kadamba-mala, Kuntt, Jabnavi, Swayam-prabhá, Chandra mukhi, Padina- 
mukhi, Sávitrt, Sudha-mukhi, S'ubh&, Padma, Parijata, Gauri, Sarva- Mangala, 
Kalika, Kamala, Durgà, Bharati, Saraswati, Gang&, Ambika, Madbumatt, 
Champa, Aparna, Sundari, Krigna-Priya, Sati, Nandáni and Nandaná. Their 
houses were decorated with gems and metals and adorned with pictures On 
the top of these bouses were placed various jars of gems. They were constructed 
with excellent gems, white and lovely. This Goloka is outside and above 
the universe of "Brahmas There is no land above the Goloka. Above this 
World, there is vacuum. It marks the limit of the creation of Brahma. There 
isno land below the seven Rasátals (nether worlds). Below them, a is 
Only water coupled with darkness, invisible and inaccessible, which e "E e 
other extremity of the creation of Brahma and is outside its scope. tou haye 
ND heard everything. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. n 
114 THE BRAHMA-V AIVARTA PURANA. 


CHAPTER V. 


1-18. Having seen ihe whole Goloka, the gods arrived at the main gate 
of Rádhá's palace. It was constructed with excellent gems and had two plat. 
forms or altars attached to it. It contained doors inlaid with yellow gems and 
excellent diamonds. Bir-bhánu, one of the principal cow-herds was deputed to 
this place. He was clad in yellow dress. He was decked with gems through. 
out his body anda diadem on his head. The gods having arrived. at the thres- 
hold communicated their desire to the warder. The warder refused to give 
them admission without the permission of Lord Krişna. Bus he sent to the 
Lord a servant communicating to him the message of the gods. When he 


returned with the permission required, the warder let them enter. ‘Thereupon ` 


the gods proceaded and arrived at the second gate which was more graceful 
than the first. here they saw a cow-herd named Ohandrabbán, dark in 
appearance, youthful, surrounded by five lakhs of cowherds and seated ona 
throne of gem with a golden clubin his hand. After having greeted him, they 
arrived at the third gate which was more beautiful and effulgent than the last- 
named. It was guarded by a cow-herd, dark-blue in appearance, with a flute 


in his hands. He was tender in age. His face was adorned with diamond | 


ear-rings. He wasa great favourite of Radha and Krigna and attended by 
nine lakhs of cow-herds. ‘The gods accosted him also and arrived at the fourth 
gate which was more picturesque, radiant and lovely than the last-named. 
It was guarded by a youth named Vasu-bhán who was the lord of the Vraja. 
This boy, decked with diamonds, was guarding the entrance with a staff of gem 
in his hands, His chin and lips were graceful like ripe bimbas His face was 
lighted up with a graceful smile. The gods having greeted him arrived at the 
fifth gate which was adorned with several beautiful pictures. 


19-31. Ii was guarded by a cow-herd named Deva-bhán who was, | 


gorgeously clad and seated on a precious throne. He was decorated with 
Kadamba flowers and earrings and besmeared with aloe, musk and saffron 
He was surrounded by ten lakh subjects and guarding the entrance with 
a staff in his hand. His head was crowned with a plumage of peacock; and 
his neck was adorned with a wreath of gems. ‘The gods after having greeted 
him arrived at the sixth gate which was also decorated with wreaths of flowers 
and pictures. There they saw tbe woll-decorated cow-herd named S'akra-bhán 
guarding the threshold with ten lakh attendants. His face was adorned with 
ear-rings and his neck, with foliage of sandal. Tho gods, after having accosted 


— 


him, arrived at the picturesque seventh gate. It was guarded by a cow-herd ' 


named Ratna-bhin, the favourite cf Hari, with twelve lakh attendants. His 
body was besmeared with sandal paste. Hoe was 
with a club in hishand. The gods accosted him a 
which was better than the seventh gate. There they saw a very handsome 
door-keeper named Suparga who had a smiling face, whose forehead was illu- 
mined with the sandal mark, whose lips were lovely like the Vandhu diva and 
who was decked with ear-rings and other ornaments. He had a diamond cane 
in his hand and was encircled by ten lakh attendants. i: 


32-50. Then the gods arrived a 
with adamant and other excellent ge 


seated on a gorgeous throne 
nd arrived at the eighth gate- 


ms, containing four altars and decorated 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


t tho picturesque ninth gate constructed — 


m 


ISN A ANM AARHAN DA: 115 


with wreaths. There they saw a lovely cow-herd named Su-vala armed with 
a cane, decked with ornaments and surrounded by a number of cow-herds, 
They then proceeded and were astonished to see the tenth gate unseen and 
unheard of before. Tí was guarded by Sudáma, the cow-herd, with a staff in his 
hand who was surrounded by ten lakh. attendants, whose grace was indescrib- 
able and as enchanting as that of Lord Krişna himself. After haying inter- 
viewed him, they came to the most wonderful and picturesque eleventh gate 
guarded by S/rid&ma iu yellow dress, the lord of the Vraja and dear to Radha 
like her son. He was seated ona lovely throne of costly gem, decorated 
with invaluable ornaments, viz., ear-rings diadems, &c., besmeared with sandal. 
aloe, musk and saffron and covered with garlands of jasmine from head to foot. 
He was surrounded by ten millions of myrmidons. He was more dignified 
in dress than kings and monarchs. The gods accosted him and arrived at the 
twelvth gate which was very beautiful and picturesque, It contained diamond 
altars and was fixed in a wall of diamond, inaccessible, most wonderful, invisible 
to others and un-heard of before. They saw there beautiful and young 
cow-herdesses decorated with gems. They were clad in yellow dress. They 
were decked with chignon, wreaths of jasmine, bracelets, armlets and anklets, 
Their features were adorned with ear-rings. They were bending with the 
huge weight of their buttocks and loins, They were annointed with sandal, 
aloe, musk and saffron. They were the chief among countless cow-herdesses. 
They were also favourites of Lord Krisna, The gods were astonished at the 


sight. 


51-70. They accosted the nymphs, crossed the threshold and gradually 
went to the other three gates which were indescribable, invisible to others and 
They then arrived at the lovely sixteenth gate, the 
This gate was guarded by thirty-three 

young as 


very extraordinary. 
inner gate of Rádhá's mansion. 
principal female adherents of Râdhâ who were as beautiful and 
Rádh& herself; who were vested with numberiess attributes: and whose dress 
baffles all description. They were decked with diamond anklets, brace-lets 
and-armlets. Their loins were covered with jewels; their ears were decorated 
with diamond rings; and their breasts, with wreaths of blooming jasmine. 
Their faces excelled the autumnal moon in beauty. Their head was adorned 
with chignon, ornaments and garlands of Párijata. Their lips and chins 
were like ripe bimbas; their teeth were like seeds of ripe pomegranate. 
Their colour was like that of the beautiful champak; and a smile illumined 
their features. They were bending with the weight of their huge buttocks 
and rising breasts which resembled the cheeks of an elephant. Their heart 
was fixed upon the lotus feet of Hari. The gods after having beheld them 
observed with eyes, wide open, the wonderful inner gate of R$dhá's mansion 
inlaid with gems and diamonds and coataining a pair of altars. The gods 
whose bodies were agitated with raptures, who shed tears owing, to the 
predominance of religious zeal in their mind, accosted them in suitable language 
with a modest inclination of their heads and then advanced. dn their vicinity 
they saw within the temple the inner compartment of Radha with a square 


court. 


11-85. 
9f diamond a 


It was constructed with invaluable gems, supported on LAE 
nd decorated with wreaths of Párijàta, pearls, gems, white 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE i 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Å 
116 THE BRAHM A-V AIV ARTA PURANA. 


N 


chowries, looking-glasses and jars constructed with invaluable gems. Thes 
jars were conjoined with foliage or leaves of sandal by knots of silken thread, 
Yt had lovely court yards supported by columns of diamond. It was besméared 
with sandal, aloe, musk and saffron. It was covered with white paddy, white 
flowers, corals fruits, rice, glasses full of water, bent grass, sunned rice, fried 
rice, &c. It was decorated with jars of diamond which were covered with 
jewels, vermilion and wreaths of Páriját, It was ventilated by winds redolent of 
flowers It contained articles which could not be described or determined and 
could rarely be found in the universe. It contained lovely apparels of fine 
and delicate cloth, diamond bed-steads and clusters of Párijàt wreaths. It 
was full of invaluable, lovely ear-rings and diamond vessels and resounded 
with the notes of lutes, the music of the nymphs and the sound of small 
drums. Itwas-crowded with the female associates of Radh& and male associates 
of Krisna. Songs relating to the virtues of Radha and Krigna were being 
constantly heard there. The gods were surprised to see the interior of the 
mansion. They witnessed there excellent dance and heard good  sonegs, 
They loitered ‘there with a single-minded devotion. ‘Then the gods beheld thre 
the ‘lovely spherical throne of diamond onall sides, measuring seven dhanus: 
(a dhanu is a measure of ‘ength containing four cubits in circumference.) 


. 86-97. Thisthrone contained small diamond jars and pictures of toys 
.fowers and forests, O Nárada, then there was manifest an accumultion of 


light, effulgent and: radiant like millions of suns. [t measured sevean Tals | 


(Tàlis a particular measure) in length and covered the sky. It eclipsed all 
other lights and encompassed the whole hermitage. The gods absorbed 
themselves in meditation and observed the all-pervading Light which is the 
final cause of all and dazzles the eye. Thereupon with raptures and streaming 
eyes and with a reverential inclination of their heads they bowed to the said 
light. There was a thrill of joy animating their frame and the supreme object 
of their life was gained. Tho gods then got up and by dint of meditation 
they approached the Light. Brahma, the ruler of the world, seated S/iva on 
his right side and Dharma on bis left side and with folded palms a and single- 
minded devotion adored the Eternal Being who transcends the attributes or 
properties of natureand through ‘he excess of religious zeal in his mind, he 
prayed thus: “I bow to you, O Lord, in that you are excellent, adorable, the 
source of blessings, the author of those who bless others, the final cause of 
all creation and the embodiment of glory und light. You are conjoined with 
every thing in every place. You are the soul of tho universe. You are 
excellent and free from all desire. You are the image of light and above 
controversy,.Í bow to you. You are vested with attributes: and yet you have 


no attributes. You have been existing at all times. You are the light of - 


' Brahma. Youhavea form and yet you are formless. You are the symbol 
of light. I bow to you. 

98-111. You are indescribable; jyou are latent as well as patent; you 

are matchless; you take any form according to your pleasure; you are the 

symbol of any form and the image of light. I bow to you. For the 

distribution of the principles of ignoranco, activity and virtue, you assume 

three forms, viz Brahma, Gc. You transcend the Vedas. The «ods do not 
know you even through your digits. You are the container tyi (ihe cause of 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA-KHANDA. 117 


all. You can take any form. You spring from no cause. You are thé 
destroyer of all. You are the eternal light. We bow to you. The savants 
say that you have a hundred thousand virtues. How can we describe you? 
You are the very symbol of light. We bow to you. You are formless and 
yet you havea form. You are dispassionate and yet you have passions. You 
are no witness and yet you witness every thing. We bow to you. You haye 
no legs, eyes, hands and feet and yet you can walk see, eat, &c. We bow to 
you. Savants only describe things as specitied in the Vedas. But the Vedas 
have not specified you. We bow to you. Youare the god ofall. You have 
no god. You have no beginning or origin. You are the soul of all. No 
one is your soul, "We bow to you. Iam the dispenser of the Vedas and the 
creator of the universe. You preserve the universe in the shape of virtue, 
Hara destroys the world. No one is capable of eulogising your merits. 
Dharma is able to preserve because he serves you. S‘iva destroys only at 
your command at the specified time. By serving your lotus feet, I am able 
to inscribe the inevilable future on the forehead of creatures and yield to 
them the fruits of their actions. And yet have not been able to exercise 
dominion over your worshippers. In tbis universe which in form resembles 
an egg, we are engaged in the task which you have assigned to us. Num- 
berless are your excellent ministers in the worlds which are endless like atoms 
or molecules. Whois capable of eulogising you sufficiently who are the 
father and god of all? That Maha-Visnu who holds a universe on each of 
the pores of his skin is but a sixteenth part of yourself, 


112-124. The Yogis meditate your abstract virtues only. But your 
worshippers engaged in your service do otherwise. They meditate your lotus 
feet alone. Kindly oblige me by tbe manifestation of that youthful, lovely 
form as specified in your mantras and Dhyán. That form is dark-blue like 

. a new cloud in yellow dress, vested with two hands holding a fute, smiling 
and lovely. ‘The head of that form is decked with the plumage of a peacock 
and wreaths of jasmine besmeared with aloe, sandal, musk and saffron and 
graced witha splendid diadem of gem. Your face is as blooming as the 
autumnal lotus; your lips are like bimbas, your teeth are like the seeds of cipe 
pomegranate. You always sit at the root of the merry Kadamba tree aud 
are ever inclined to take part in the sports of the Rasa. Fixed in the heart _ 
of Radha, you once beheld with a smile the lotus faces of the female cow- 
herds. Deign to appear to us in that gay form.” So saying, the creator 
bowed to him, again and again: Dharma and S‘iva also adopted the hymn E 
bowed to him again and again. The gods there, obscured by the light of 
Krisna, prayed him again. Whoever at the time of worship reads the above 
hymn composed by Brahmá, S'iva and Dharma obtains a firm | and deep-rooted 
faith in Hari, sscures the homage of Huri (rarely to be acquired by the pus 
demons and saints) the different kinds of perfection, (Anima &c.) and the 
four-fold redemption (Sálokya &c.), undoubtedly. 
. 1925-198. A true Vaignava altaios the dignity of Visnu in this vom 
is worshipped by all and acquires perfection in speech and the a sc d Es 
Secures good luck of all kinds and health. His fame spreads throug Hs ts 
world and he-attains poetic genius, knowledge and permanent wealth, sibs 
a gocd-natured and chaste wife. He obtains sons and grandsous successively 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. A 
118 THE BRAHM A-V AIV ARTA PURAN AÀ. 


without any break. His fame is established in this world; and in ‘he end, 
he always dwells in the proximity of Lord Krisna. 


(EHSAUPATOBIR Ver 


1-13. The gods having adored him faced the light of Krisna and after a 
-while they beheld in it his lovely form. It was dark like a cloud charged 
with water. The form was most delighful, attractive to the three worlds 
and very lovely. His features were decorated with bright ear-rings having 
the cut of a fish. His feet were decked withanklets. He was clad in yellow 
dress chastened by fire. He was adorned with ornaments constructed with the 
best of gems adapted to his pleasure. His lips were like bimbas. He held 
a lovely flute in his hand. He was looking cheerfully at every one and was 
anxious to favour his worshippers. His chest was covered with a string of 
small balls of pure gold. It was broad and lighted up by the lXaustubha, 
Within that light, the gods were also able to see the fair Rádhà. She was | 
casting crooked glances at her Lord and looking at Him constantly. Her 
teeth shamed the pearls. She had a smiling and cheerful aspect. Her eyes 
were as lovely asthe lotus of autumn. Her face was beartiful like the tull 
moon of autumn. Her lips were red like the Vandhu-jiva flowers. Her feet 
were decorated with anklets. Her nails were so charming that they seemed to 
have thieved the lustre of diamonds. The hue of the soles of her fe et 
obscured the lustre of the saffron. She wielded round her firgers precious 
Pásakas, (P&saka isa kind of ornament). She was clad in valuable apparel 
purified by fre. The girdle of diamond bells round her waist gave it a superb 
charm. Her features were decked with ear-rings and other suitable ornaments. 


14-26, There was a pearl suspended on the front of her nose which | 
shamed the bills of the divine eagle. Her chignon was covered with jasmine. | 
Her breast was adorned with the Kaustubha and garlands of the Pårijâta: her — | 
fingers, with diamond rings. She was beautified with jewels (constructed of | 
fine conches of various colours) which were as thin and delicate asthe fibre of | 
leaves. The lustre of her body was like that of pure gold. She held on her Í 
breast a string of small diamond bells tied together with red thread. Her | 
buttocks and Joins added to her charms She bent with the weight of her | 
rising breast. She was decorated with ornaments which wero themselves 
adorned with the beauty of her person. ‘he gods were astonished at the 
sight; and the supreme object of their life having been gained, they prayed 
thus, Brahma said, *O Lord, may the bee of my mind ever hum at the lotus | 
of your feet with love and religious zeal! May you ever preserve me from | 
the disease of death with the medicine of the peace of mind by securing for | 
me firm faith in you and by engaging me in your services!" Siva said “Hord, | 
the fish of my mind is immersed in the sea of the world and ever wanders in | 
the weil of temporal enjoyments. Gracious lord, kindly release me from the — ' 
contemptible function of the destruction of the world and give me firm faith 
in your lotus feet!” Dharma said: “Lord, may Lever dwell with your worship- 
pers! For their society is like a sword which cuts asunder the ties of the 
world and pre-eminently enables a man to obtain harbour at your lotus feet. 
Oever merciful lord, give me firm faith in you from birth to birth.” ‘The 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


— 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
KRISNA JANMA-KHAN DA. 119 


gods having thus worshipped Lord Krişna who fulfils the desires of his votaries 
stood up before him with a gratified heart. Hari, the asylum of mercy, smiled 
with approbation and used to them words which were beneficial and truthful. 
He said, “O gods, just come to my house and rest a while. When you have 
sought my protection, it behoves me to enquire iuto your welfare. 


27-41. Set your heart at rest. You need not be anxious when I am here, 
I exist in a latent condition in all things; but I become manifest when I am 
adored. I have known all your purpose. O gods, the good and the evil are 
the outcome of time. Time determines big and small acts. Trees in time 
are loaded with raw or ripe fruits. Pleasure and pain, prosperity and calamity, 
grief and anxiety, good and evil deeds are occasioned by time, as the result of 
Karma. In the three worlds, no one is lovely or hateful ; but every one becomes 
so in process of time. Impelled by Karma, the kings aud manus are rendered 
subservient to time. Nay, the time that has just been passed in the Goloka 
is equivalent to seven Manwantaras of the earth; and in this interval, seven Indras 
have already disappeared. The jurisdiction of the eighth Indra has set in. 
Indra, Manu and the kings are all subject to time ; only their fame, land and 
infallible virtue survive them in name. The wheel of my time in this way 
constantly revolves. At present, the kings of the world are wicked, blasphemous 
and very powerful. But they shall submit to the yoke of time in due course. 
That time has now come. The wind blows constantly, the fire consumes, the 
sun gives heat, death haunts animals, and the cloud showers rain at my com- 
mand. Enjoined by me and through my fear the Br&hmins are engaged in 
devotion, the saints are devoted to the worship of Brahma and the Yogis are 
absorbed in meditation. But my votaries destroy Karma by the root and are 
hence fearless. 


49-52. gods, I am the time of time, the destiny of destiny, the destro- 
yer of the destroyer, the preserver of the preserver ana the Lord Supreme. 
Hara is called the destroyer because he destroys by my command. You, by: 
virtue of the function allotted to you, are called the creator. Dharma is so; 
called because of his preservation of virtue. lam the Lord of every thing 
from Brahma down to a bush. I give fruits according to Karma and eradicate 
them likewise. None cin preserve those whom I must destroy. None can 
destroy those whom I -must preserve. I am the destroyer, the preserver and 
creator of all. Put I can not destroy my worshippers who always wield forms. 
My adherents are always submissive to me and adore my feet. I always dwell 
by their side for their preservation. In this world a creature is born and des- 
troyed, again and again. But my worshippers are immortal, fearless and free 
from allanxieties, ‘This is why savants want to render me homage. Such men: 
are truly blessed. ‘The rest are deluded. Every one engaged in Karma has to 
Suffer torments occasioned by birth, death, decrepitude, disease and fear.. 
But these evils can, by no means, affect my worshippers. My worshippers are 
never implicated in acts of virtue or vice. I am, as it were, the life of my 
worshippers; and the worshippers also constitute my life. I always remember 
those who remember me. ~ 


_ 53-66. No animate being has got even 
which exists in this keen weapon of mine ca 


the sixteenth part of the radiance 
Ned the wheel of Sudarsana, I. 


D 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


" 
120 THE BRAHM A-V AIV ARTA PURANA, 


—— 


depute it for the preservation of my votaries; and yet not being assured of 
their safety, I personally go to them. I dwell constantly where my votaries 


are. Radha’ is ever fixed in my heart. She is dearer tome than my life, - 
Youtooare dear to me. But none is as dear to me as my votaries. (0) gods, 


En a S 


I eat the things offered to me by my worshippers, but not the things offered 
by those who are not my worshippers. The latter class of things is consumed 
by Baliraj. My worshippers abandon their family and relations and remember 
me constantly. Hence I too quit you all and remember my worshippers. 
Those who injure my worshippers, the Brahmins, the cows, the gods or an act 
of sacrifice are soon destroyed. None can save those whom I am determined to 
kill. O gods, go home. I will also descend tothe world, later on. You 
should also go to the world through your digits.” So saying, the Lord called 
the cowherds aud the cov herdesses and said, “Listen, O gopas and gopis. You 
had better go to the Vraja (a station of the cowherds) of Nanda. O Radha, 
go soon to the house of Vrisa-bhánu. The chaste Kalávati, a digit of 
Laksmi, the daughter of Suvala, is the wife of Vrisa-bhánu. She sprang out 
of the mind of the manes and is adorable and blessed, By the curse of 
Durvásà, she has been born in the Vraja asa woman. You had better go 
to the Vraja and assume your birth through Kalüvati's womb and I will accept | 
you there as my bride in the forest of lotus in the guise of a boy. | 
| 


67-77. O Radha, you are dearer to me than my life; and I am dearer 
to you than your life. There is no difference between you and me. We | 
constitute the same body.” Hearing this, Radha moved by affection for her | 
lord shed tears and with the red-legged bartavelle represented by her eyes, she « 
drank, as it were, the rays of the lunar face ot Krisna. Krigna said to the | 
cowherds, “O my attendants, descend to the earth and assume your birth in the i 
houses of the best milkmen."' At this time a fine chariot inlaid with gems | 
and diamonds was seen. It was ornamented with one lakh white chowries, 
looking-glasses, clothes dyed crimson, one-thousand diamond jars and wreath, 

_ of Párijàta. It was crowded with the principal attendants of Hari. It was 
effnigent like a hundred gems aud accommodated Narayana in yellow dress 
with four hands holding the conches, wheel, mace and lotus. On his left 
side was seated Saraswati, the graceful and wise goddess who presides over 
knowledge, who is white in complexion, who is ever inclined to favour her 
adherents, and who holds the lute and flute in her hands. 


78-84. On his right side was seated another enchanting goddess, lovely 
and graceful like the autumnal moon, who had a smiling aspect, whose complexion 
was Jike the hue of heated gold. Her name is Laksmi. She was ornamente 
with ear-rings and other jewels. The anklets which decked her feet were 
ringing merrily. Her arms were adored with bracelets and armlets. Her 
chest was decorated with wreaths of Parijat. She wielded on the head the 
chignon covered with wreaths of blooming jasmine. Her face shamed the 
autumnal moon in lustre. Her forehead was marked with vermilion and 
musk. Her eyes which were marked with collyrium and lined with lamp-black 
they looked like a pair of autumnal lotuses. She held in ber hand the merry lotus ( 
of a thousand petals and was constantly looking at Narayana. 

85-102, Nár&yana descended from the car and went with his wives and 
attendants to the assembly of the cow-herds, male and female. He saw that 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Ep 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
KRISNA JANMA-K HAN. DA. 121 


EREM——— o 0m 
godly saints were adoring Hari with hymns. As soon as Nár&yana arrived, he 
dissolved in the body of Lord Krisna, The whole assembly were astounded 
at the sight. At that time, Visnu, the Lord of the universe, effulgent like 
millions of suns, lovely and graceful, in yellow dress and covered witha wreath 
of wild Howers descended from the car and approached the assembly. The 
whole assembly got up at his sight, bowed low and worshipped him. He, too, 
dissolved in the person of the Lord of ltádh&. The whole congregation were 
astonished at this sight, In this way Narayana of the White Islands also 
merged in him. Suddenly Sankarsana, with a hundred heads, pure like crystal 
and elfulgent like a hundred suns, arrived there. The gathering bowed to 
him low and worshipped this form of Visnu. He fell prostrate with his hun- 
dred heads bsfore Lord Krişna. Afterwards we (Nara and Narayana) con- 
jointly went there. I merged in the lotus feet of Lord Krişna. Subsequently, 
I was again born as Arjuna. Later on, Brahma, S'iva, Dharma, Ananta, etc., 
arrived at that place. At this time, the gods saw an excellent chariot furnished 
with apparel pure like fire. White chowries, looking glasses, jars of dia- 
mond placed one after another, clusters of garlands of Páriját and a thousand 
wheels added to the grace of the chariot which was as fleeting as the mind. It 
was radiant like the mid-day summer sun, rendered graceful by the lustre of 
pearls, gems, thunder, flower, pond and forest. O Narada, thiscar was superior 
to the chariot of the gods or the demons. Viswa-Karma displayed consider- 
able artistic skill in its construction for the satisfaction of S'iva. It was fifty 
yojans high and four yojans broad. It contained a hundred chambers containing 

beds suited to sensual eujoyments. Then the assembly beheld in the car a noble 
goddess. She was decked with jewels. Her hands were so bright that they 
seemed to have abstracted the lustre of pure gold. She was the primordial 
goddess Nature. She hada thousand arms where-with she held weapons. She 
had a smiling and cheerful aspect and was inclined to favour her votaries. Her 
face was lighted up with ear-ringsand her feet was decked with anklets. Her 
waist was encircled with a fine zone. Her hands were decked with armlets and 
bracelets. Her chest was adorned with wreaths of Mandar. She bent with 
the weight o£ her buttocks, hard loins and rising breast. Her face was lovely 
and shamed in grace the autumnal Full-Moou. Her body was marked with 
lines of painting drawnon the body with aloe, cosmetics, sandal and musk. Hec 
lips were red like the blooming Vaadhu-Jiva flower. Her teath were like 
pearls and her chignon was covered with jasmine-wreaths. E 
111-134. Tho front of her nose resembled ihe bili of the prince of birds 
on which the pearl produced in the head of the elephant was hanging. She was 


clad in dress chastened by äre and with her two sons was seated on the back of a 
her sons on an excellent 


lion. 3 sended from the car and sat down with A 

io dent Ms Ganesa at first saluted Krigna and then S’ankara, Dharma, 
Ananta and Brahma. ‘Lhe gods gotup as they saw them, blessed them and 
provided them with seats. They cheerfully conversed with them. : In that 
assembly in front of Lord Hari sat the gods, goddesses and the primordial god- 
dess Durga. At this sight, the cow-herdesses were astonished. Then Krigna 
smiled aud said to Kamala, “O goddess, descend to the earth and Cp me 
birth in the house of. Bhismaka adorned with many gems through E v of 
Vaidarbhi. I shall go to the city of Kundin and marry you. en the other 


16 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


A 
122 THE BRAHMA-V AIVARTA PURANA. 
ERN I Ia 


goddesses of the assembly, when they saw Parvati, respectfully seated her on 
a throne of gem. Parvati, Laksmi and Saraswati, seated in one place, con. 
versed with one another. The cow-herdessess greeted them respectfully and 
some of them gladly sat by their side. Then Lord Krisna said to ‘Parvatt, 
“Goddess, you represent the principle of delusion and destroy creation. Go to 
Vrajaand acquire your birth in the womb of Ya$odá out of the loins of 
Nanda. 1 shall make your worship current on earth in every village, 
When you will descend men will worship you in every towa with several ingre. 
dients as their presiding deity. O auspicious nymph, as soon as you will be 
born, my father will carry you away and place me therein your stead in the 
room appropriated to the lying-in woman. As soon as you will see Kamsa, you 
will return te S'iva and I shall come back to the Goloka after having relieved 
the earth of her burden," Then he said to Kártika. “My son, you will be 
born by means of your digits in the earth through the womb of Jámbavati. 
O gods, descend to the world through your digits and I shall surely relieve: the 
earth of her burden." So saying, he sat down on the throne. The gods, god- 
desses, cow-herds and cow-herdesses sat by his side. At this time, Brahma stood 
up before Lord Hari and with folded hands s:id thus :—Lord, listen to the 
petition of a humble servant like myself. Kindly specify the places at which 
the gods and others will be respectively born. Æe is truly a master who main: 
tains, preserves and redeems his servants. eis truly a servant who carries 
out the commands of his master. 


135-145, Deign to command at which places and in what way, and through 
whose digits and by what names the gods and goddesses will respectively descend 
into the world." The Lord of the universe replied, “ O Brahmá, I am going to 
specify to you where and how the gods and goddesses will descend: KAm-deva 
will descend as the son of Rohini; Rati will descend into the house of Sambara as 
Máy&vati through her shadow; you will acquiro your birth as the son of Balarima 
out of the womb of MayAvati and be celebrated by the name of Aniruddha. Bhá- 
rati will be born as the daughter of Bana in Sonitpurá. Ananta, the lord of the 
world, will acquire his birth in the womb of Devakt, in tho first place. Afterwards 
the spirit of meditation (Yoga-Máy&) will drag him and fix him in the womb 
of Rohini. Therefore he will be known as Sankarsan, the son of Rohini. 
Let Ganga descend as the daughter of the Sun in the form of Kálindi ; Lulst as 
a princess through half of her digits characterised by lucky marks ; Savitri, as 


yeni di VÉ gn SACS RAE EE A : NI 
Nág-na Jati; Vasundhará as Satya-bhámá ; Saraswati as S'aivyà, Rohini as 


the princess Mitra-vrindå ; the wife of the Sun as Ratna-Mâlâ:; Swâhå as 
Su-sllà. I have thus described to you the destinations of Rukmini and eight 
other damsels, But Durg& will descend through her digits as Jawba-valt. 
This completes tho list of ten queens. In Kailasa, Parvati was accoste 
by S'iva thus, * My love, through half o£ your digits, acquire your birth in the 
house of J&mba-vyana and embrace Visnu of tho? White {íslands as your hus- 


band. Thereby you will not be polluted. ” A said, “ i 
SVP DISACH US D ge e polluted. Brahmá said, ** O Lord, why did 


146-163. Lord Krişna replied, * 


a time to see Ganesa at the Kailása. 
White Islands to worship S'iva. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


In days of yore, the gods came once upon - 
. Along with them came also Visnu of tho — 
Vignu saw Ganesa and cheerfully took his sea | 


) 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA-KHANDA. 123 


Every one looked at the most enchantiog form of Vignu. He wielded earrings 
and a diadem. He was clad in yellow dress : he was dark-blue like a new cloud 
and was in the prime of his youth. . His body was besmeared with sandal, 
musk and aloe and decked with ornaments of gem. His face was cheerful 
like the lotus. He was seated on a throne of gem, attended by his retinue and 
adored by the gods. S’iva worshipped and eulogised him. Parvati at his sight 
veiled her face and was much abashed. But she continued to look at him with 
eyes wide open, glanced at his wonderful dress and was filled with raptures. 


154-146. At one time she saw S'iva of golden hue, haying five faces and 
three eyes, armed with an axe and trident and fair as ten millions of Cupids. 
At other times she saw the dark-blue, four-handed Visnu in yellow dress hay- 
ing two eyes and one face only. She then concluded that both the forms are 
the modifications of the same indivisible Brahma. But being bewildered by 
the Maya or illusion of Visnu and excited by Just, she cogitated thus: “ S’iva, 
Brahma and Visnu are all the outcome of my digits. But of these three,” 
Visnu is vested with the attribute of virtue. Hence he is the best of the three.” 
A thrill of raptures agitated her frame and she worshipped the Supreme Being. 
Then the omniscient Lord S’ankara knew what was passing in her mind and 
addressed her, using truthful and beneficial words thus, * O daughter of the 
mountain, I request you to embrace the supreme Lord Hari. Brahma, Visnu 
and myself are not separate from the Supreme Brahma. But owing to change 
of circumstances, we have taken different forms. You, as Nature, are unique. 
You can take any form and are the mother of all. Youare the Vani of 
Brahma, the Laksmt residing in the heart of Narayana and Durga ruling my 
heart. O chaste one, you ought to know this psychic mystery. 


165-171. Durga replied, “ O friend of the poor, why are you so unkind 
tome? By a long course of meditation, I have obtained you as my husband. 
You will never be able to abandon your servant (myself). O great god, you 
mast not use such undignified language to me again. At any tate, I must 
carry out your command. In my next birth, I shall court Hari. ; S'iva was 
thus silenced. But Hari who gives assurance of safety to his volaries laughed 
loudly and cheered up Parvati. ‘Lo fulfil that vow she was born in the honse of 
Jàma-vána as his daughter." Brahma said, “Lord, there are many Bing 
in the world, Leaving them, why did Parvati acquire her birth in the bores o 
the bear-king Jámba-vána ? Krisna replied, ** O Lord, in the Tretà age, uring 
the incarnation of Rama, the monkeys were born in the world through the 
digits of the gods. Jámba-vàna, the king uf the bears, who was an outcome 
of the digits of Himalaya, was a myrmidon of Kama. 
vous, graceful and powerful 


172-181. By the grace of Ráma, he was loge he digits E HELM. 


like a hundred lions, Butashe was an outcome o 


g i heir 
i i d 2- våpa. Let all the gods, then, acquire t 
ati was born in the house of Jâmb i 


birth on earth as princes and support me in Ww 
plisbine iN ot destruction. AM goddesses, through the qur s 
vill be born as sixteen thousand princesses and subsequently RU d 
Married to me. ‘Through the digits of Dharma, Xe Be men 
as the son of Pándu ; Bhima will be born through the diei a fe 
Arjuna, through ‘the digits of Indra, Nakula and Sahadeva, throug g 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE " T. x 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


124 THE BRAHMA-V AIVARTA PURANA. 


of Asini-Kumár, the Heavenly physicians ; Karna, through the Sun; Vidura, 
through Yama; Duryyodhana, through Kali: S'ántanu; through the Ocean; 
A8wa-thámá through Siva : Drona through the fire-god ; Vigma through Vasu; 
Vasudeva through Kasyapa; Daivaki through Aditi ; Nanda, through Vasu; 
Yasodå, through Vasu's wife ; Draupadi, through Lak mi, out of the sacrifecial 
pit; the powerful Dhrisia Dyumna, through Fire P and Subhadrá through the 
digits of S’atarupa through tho womb of Devaki 


182-190. Brahmá thereupon continued to dwell there. On the left side 
of Krisna was seated Saraswati ; on his right side was seated Laksmíi; and on 
his front were seated Parvati, the gods, the cow-herds and cow-herdesses, 
Then Radha who was seated in his heart addressed him saying, “Kindly listen 
to me (thy humble servant) My heart is consumed and my mind is very much 
agitated. Lord, I do not even shut my eyes for fear of losing your company, 
How, then, is it possible for me to go to the world below by leaving you? My 
dear, after what time, shall I be reunited with you in the Goloka ? O Lord, 
of my life, one moment of separation from you appoxrs to me like a hundrel 
ages, Whither shall I go and whom shall I behold? Without you, O my 
Lord, I cannot think for a moment of my parents, brother, friend, relation, 
sister or son. 


191-199. O Lord, promise to me that you will not bewilder me in the world 
below by the manifestation of your glory. O destroyer of Madhu, may the boo of 
my mind ever wander in your lotus feet full of honey: this is my prayer. Wher- 
ever I am born and in whatever place, may I be ever engaged in your service. Í 
am Radha: you are Krisna, Our love has passed into a proverb. May I not forgot 
my love for you in the world below. ‘ihisis the first boon L ask. As life follows 
the body, as shadow follows the substance: so, let both of us be indissolubly 
united eyery-where, This is the second boon I solicit. May we not part with 
one another for a period covered by the twinkling of the eye. ‘This is the third 
boon that I ask. O Lord, I do not know which architect has constructed your 
body, flute and feet with my life. There are many men and women in the 
world. But thereis no damsel so lovely and so devoted to hér husband as 


myself. Some engineer has constructed my body with half of your body.- 


This is why there is no distinction between you and mo and I am go passionately 
attached to you. 


200-211. Or, perhaps, he has transferred my life and soul into your 
body and your life and soul into my body. ‘herefore a moment’s separation 
is so very painful tome; and the mere mention of the name of separation 

` consumes my life.” Radha, so saying, clasped his feet before the assembly of 
the gods and wept, again and again. hen Krisna took her in his lap, wiped 
her tears and consoled her with words fraught with truth and usefulness: 
Lord Krisna said, * I tell you, O goddess, the secrets of the psychic yoga or 
meditation which is inaccessible even to the meditative ascotics and which des- 
troys sorrow. Just consider. ‘his universe exists in the shape of the container 
.and the contained. There can be nothing contained without a container. The 
flower is the container of the fruit: the foliage is the container of the flower 
The branch is the container of the foliage; the treo is the container of the branch. 
The germ is the substratum of the treo, tha stone is the substratum of the germ. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. í 
KRISNA JANMA-KHAN DA. 195 


Ananta sustains Vasudhá, the tortoise sustains Ananta, the wind sustains the 
tortoise. I sustain the wind, and you sustain myself. [t follows, then, that 
I always reside in you. You are the symbol of all energy and the primordial 
nature. You represent the body and harbour the three attributes, I am your 
soul, free from all desire, but your association vests me with will-power. The 
semen emanates from the male and produces offsprings, but the woman, who 
is the outcome of the digits of Nature, is the receptacle of that semen. 


212-224. The body and the soul cannot reside apart from one another. 
Thus the superiority of both is equally established. Without the co-operation 
of both, creation is impossible. © Radha, why do you entreat me in vain ? We 
both constitute the germ of the world. There is no difference between you and 
me. ‘The soul remains where the body remains. Both of them are identical. 
As whiteness is inseparable from milk, heat from the fire, smell from the earth, 
coldness from the water, so I am inseparable from you. There is not the 
slightest chance of our separation. O beauty, as a potter cannot build a pot with- 
out clay, as a goldsmith can not construct a jewel without gold, so am I Incap- 
able of creation without you. Without me, you are life-less, and without you, 
Iam invisible, As the soul is eternal, so you who are all powerfal and the con- 
tainer of the universe are also eternal. fakgmi, the auspicious Saraswati, 
Brahmá, S'iva, Ananta, Dharma, &o., are dear to me as my life. But you are 
dearer to me than my life. Had it not been so, you would not have occupied 
my heart and the gods and goddesses would not have sat by my side. Radha, 
brush away your tears and giveup your idle deltfsions. Go, as I tell you 
without fear to the house of Vrisa-bhánu. O fair one, by your super-human 
powers obstruct with the wind the womb of Kalfvati for ten months, ' After the 
lapse of this period, quit your present form, take the shape of a child and at the 
time of the emanation of the wind from the womb, lie down on the ground, 
naked and weep. ; 

225-233. Thus you will be born in Gokula out of no womb, and I likewise 
shall not be born out of the womb of a woman, As soon as I shall be born, my 
father shall take me to Gokula. Under the pretext of the fear of Kamsa, I 
shall go there only for your sake, In the house of Nanda, Jagoda will always 
affectionately embraco me as her son and nurse me. By my boon, O Radha, 
you will remember all your antecedentsand both of us will roam at pleasure at 

Vrindávana. Fair one, descend to Gokula with two thousand one hundred krors 
of cow-herdesses and thirty-three good-natured female associates of yours. 
Afterwards you will console countless cow-herdesses with suitable words, leave 
them behind at Goloka and, accompanied by me and my countless cow-herds go 
to the hermitage of Vasudeya. Only those cow-herdesses who are dearer to me 
than the rest will resume their birth in the Vraja in the house cf the Vallabhas 
in order to sport with me.” So saying, the Lord paused. E 

234-240, "Then Brahma, S'iva, Arnta, Derg’ Laksmi and Saraswati by 
turns adored the Supreme Being. Afflicted by the pangs of separation and sub- 
dued by love, the cow-herds and the cow-herdesses reverentially bowed to 

Then RAdh& (whose heartfelt wishes were fultilled), in 
paration reverentially eulogised her belov- 
Seeing tho weeping Radha afflicted and 


him, again and again. 
mental distress caused by the idea oË se 
8d consort, dearer to her than her life. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. ix 


126 THE BRAHMA-V AIVARTA PURANA. 


agitated with fear, Lord Krisna consoled her saying: “O my beloved spouse, 
dearer than my life, be of good cheer. You and Lare the same. You need not 
be afraid, while [ am hero. Still, if you apprehend any evil, tell me: The 
curse of S/ri-dima will cause a .geparation between us for a hundred years, 
At that time Ishall go to Mathura. 


241-250. Then I shall relieve the earth of her burden, set my father at 
liberty and emancipate the gardener, the weaver and the humpbacked woman. 
J shall then kill the king of ihe infidels, recover Muchu-kunda and cons- 
truct Dwarki. Afterwards, I shall witness the grand royal sacrifice of 
Yudhisthira. Then I shall marry sixteen thousand princesses and, one hundred 
and ten women, over and above that number. Finally, I shall subdue 
my enomies. I shall do good to my friends, , burn Bánpuri, subdue 
Hara, cut off the arms of Bana aud steal Párijàáta. In the course of 
my pilgrimage, I shall also see the holy saints I shall greet my friends 
and relations, cause the performance of the sacrifice undertaken py my father, 
and at an auspicious moment behold that place along with you. At Mathura, I 
shall see the cow-hordesses, impart instructions to you on the metaphysical or 
psychic yoga and be united with you again in bonds of truth. My beloved, from 
you, there shall not be even one moment's separation, and 1 shall come back with 
you to the Vraja And yet, my dear, during the period of our separation for a 
hundred years, we shall be united with one another in dream,  Nár&yana, my 
digit, will go to Dwark& and for a hundred years I shall perform the above 
deeds. 


251-963, Subsequently I shal] dwell with you in the forest again, relieve the 
sorrow of my parents, the cow-herd and the cow-herdesses and after having relieved 


the earth of her burden, come back with you to the Goloka. Then, O Radha ' 


that digit of mine,tho eternal Nár&áy&na, with Lakgmi and Saraswati will also 
go back to the Vaikuntha. The digits of the gods and goddesses will return home: 
You will again dwell with me in the Goloka. I narrated to you, O goddess, the 
future, the good as wellas the evil. None can interfere with my dispensations. 
So saying Lord Krişna clasped her to his breast. ‘This sight astonished the 
gods. Lord Hari then addressed the gods and goddesses saying, “O gods, g0 
home and be ready to undertake the task allotted to you. O Parvati, go back 
to the Kailasa with your husband and both of your sons. But the 
events foretold by me shall take place at the specified time According to my 
statement all the gods, great and small, will descend to the earth, through 
their digits.’ Thereupon, the gods, Laksmi, and Saraswati bowed to Hari, 
the best of beings, and went home and afterwards, ready to fulfil the task assign- 
ed to them by Lord Hari, they descended to the earth. ‘The destination 
assigned by the Lord to his consort can hardly be secured even by the gods. 
Then Krigna said: ‘O Rádh&, you should now proceed to the house of Vriga- 
bháuu with the cov-herds, male and female, as specified by me. ` My beloved, 
I am also going to Mathurá “at the house of Vasudeva whence I shall join 
youat Gokula on the plea of Kamsa’s fear." : 


201-279. Then Ràdhà with eyes flushed like a pair of red-lotuses bowed 


to Lord Krişna, stood up before him and fearing lest she should forfeit his love, — 


wept, again and again. While ready to go, she loitered fora while, advanced a 


P 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


P 


KRI 


ee 
few steps, then came back and observed him, again and again. The red-leg- 
ged bartavelle represented by her eyes continually drank the rays of his 
honey-red lunar face. Radha, then, circumambulated round Lord Hari 
seven times, bowed to him seven times and stood up before him, 
Afterwards Rádhà with thirty-three female associates of hers and 
the cow-herds fell down prostrate at his feet. They then went to the 
places at Gokula assigned to them by Lord Krigna. Radha descended 
to the house of Vrisa-bhánu; and the cow-herds and the cow-herdesses 
descended to the houses of others. When all of them went away, Lord Hari, 
haying called them and assigned to them their respective functions, ascended 
the car and with the speed of mind, arrived at Mathura. Kamsa killed all the first 

six sons of Vasudeva and Daivaki, But at the command of Krisna, Maya ' 
dragged out the tenth off-spring, (the outcome of the digits of Ananta) from 

the womb of Daivaki while in its embryo and fixed it in the womb of Rohint. 


Donea A PANAR AN DA. JH 


CHAPTER XVII. 

1-16. Narada said, * O blessed Lord, now describe to me the birth of 
Lord Krisna which is calculated to give religious sanctity and end rebirth 
death, decrepitude, &ec. Whose daughter was  Daivaki ? Who were - 
Daivaki and Vasudeva? Why did the cruel Kamsa kill six of their sons? 
When was Hari born? My curiosity is highly excited on these points." Nâ- 

“O Muni, the great-minded Kasyapa was born as Vasudeva 


ráyana answered : 
and Aditi was born'as Daivaki. By virtue of their previous merits, they obtain- 


Deva Midha beget Vasudeva on Márisá. As soon as 


ed Hari as their son. 
Hence ancient saints 


Vasudeva was born the gods beat drum in the heavens. 
call him Anaka, the father of Hari, drum, &c. There wasa very wise and 
graceful king called Devaka. He was the son of Apuka, of the race of Yadu. 
Daivaki was born as his daughter. Muni Garga, the family priest of the 


Yadus, performed the betrothal ceremony of Vasu-deva and Daivaki who were 
ous moment with great eclat. Devaka gave 


subsequently wedded at an auspici : 
a thousand horses, golden vessels, a hundred well-ornamented beautiful maid- 
servants, many kinds of articles, cloths interlaced with.gems, cups of diamond 
to Vasudeva by way of dowry. Then Vasudeva accepted the hands of that 
girl who was graceful like the full moon and was decorated with gems, who was - 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
A A 
138 THE BRAH M A-V AIV ARTA PURANA. 


2 j 


be the cause of your death, then why do you acquire infamy and pave the path 
. which leads to hell by killing your sister ? _Pandits, even after killing small 
animals and other beasts of prey, atone for their sins by dedicating a value in sil- 
ver equal to 16 panas (twenty gandàs of cowries make one E ana) of ,Cowries at 
the time of their death. But the slaughter of innocent animals entalls a sin a 
hundred times greater than the slaughter o£ injurious animals. Brahma has 
acoordingly in the case of slaughter of innocent beasts üxed a penalty one hun- 
dred times more severo than the penalty incurred by killing beasts of prey. 

23-37. Manu holds that whoever kills superior animals incurs a sin one 
hundred times more culpable thau the last named sins. Whoever kills an in- 
fidel incurs a sin one hundred tires more cupable than the last named sin. 

` Whoever kills a S'üdra of good family incurs a sin 100 times more culpable 
than the last named sin. ‘Tne slaugther of a cow is as sinful as the slaughter 
ofa hundred S'udras. ‘The slaughter of a Brahmi’ is ten times more sinful 
than the slaugther of a cow. ‘The slaughter of * woman is equally sinful. 
Brahmá himself hath said so. In this particular case the victim is your sister, 
a refugee and dependant. ‘Therefore, O king, the slaughter of this woman will 
entail upon you the sin of the murder of a hundred women. Men perform devo- 
tion, worship, acts of charity and pilgrimage in order to go to heaven, But the 
saints regard this world which is fall of peril as a dream and as a more bubble of 
water. fence they carefully perform religious rites. 

38. O best of pious men, you are to your family what the sun is to the 
lotus. ‘Lhorefore it ba-hoves you to lot go your sister. Or, if you like, you can 
refer the mattor to the savants who are assembled here, Nay, you aro my friend 
and I shall haud over to you the eighth offsping of Daivak{. I do not stand in need 
of that son. best of sages, rather | shall make over to you all the sons and 
daughters that will be born tome, O king. release your sister who is as dear 
to you as your daughter. You have reared her with swoot-meat, &e., and it 
does not become you to kill her.’ Whon Kamsa heard the words of Vasudiva, 
ho released his sister. Vasudeva soon took away his wife home, Kamsa, to 
Fult) his vow, gave to Kamsi the first six sons that were born tohim. ‘ama 
killed all of them. When Daivaki was pregnant for the seventh time he 
appointed a guard ; but MayA dragged the fetus out of her womb and fixed it in . 

. the womb of Rohini, The guards could not perceive this and reportod to Kamsa 
that the seventh issue was an abortion. ‘The son of Rohini, (the fetus being 
dragged,) was called Sankargana, i 

38-14. Subsequently Daivaki becuue pregnant for the eighth time, her 
womb being filled with wind. When the L0th month of the pregnancy arrived, 
the all-soving Lord Krişna badan eye upou the fact. Then Daivaki, who 
was naturally very pretty, became ten times more handsome than what she was 
before, as the Lord beheld her constantly. Then Kamsa saw that Daivaki’s eyes 
and face were blooming,  Bifulient with her own radiance she, the very 
embodiment of Maya, was lighting up all the sides.. It seemed to him that she 
was the visible representation of all light heaped together. Tho king of the 

Asuras was much surprised to seo this. He thensaid * The child iu the 
womb will be the auther of my death " and appoiated guards to watch the time | 
of the birth. Up to the seventh gate of the house the sentinels mounted guard. f 
When the 10th month of the pregnancy was complete, Daiyaki lost her faculty | 

of moyoment and was reduced to the condition of inertia, : 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
KRISNA JAN MA-K HAN.DA. 12; 


45-53. When the womb was filled with wind, Lord Krisna who i 
never associated with matter, presided over the lotus of Daivaki’s heart, Thus she 
passed ber daysin very great pain. By turns she stood up, sat down, walked 
for a while and slept. The high-minded Vasu-Deva perceived that the time of 
delivery was approaching. He then remembered Hari. Agitated with fear, he 
introduced into the house (presided over by Daiyaki) sword, iron, fire, 
people versed in the mantras, the wives of his friends or relations, his kith and 
kin and the Brahmins. When two prabars of the night were passed, the sky 
was over-cast, lightning flashed and seven kinds of wind began to blow. The 
guards were benumbed with sleep and Jay like dead men on their beds. In the 
meantime the gods assembled there; and Brahma, S%iva and Dharma addressed 
the Lord in the womb. The gods said, ** Lord, you are the cause of the world; 
you do not emanate from the womb of any woman; you have no end; you 
are inexhaustible. You are full of light and glory aud free from sins. You 
are great. You have attributes and yet you are free fromattributes. You 
are uncontrolled and formless, but you take a form out of deference to your 
worshippers- You can do anything according to your will. You are the lord 
and prop of all. You are the source of pleasure and pain. You are inaccessible 
to all and destroy the wicked. You are indivisible and fearless. You are the 
receptacle of all things in the world. No calamity can subdue you. You are 
free from title or attributes, unassociated with anything, exempt from desire. 
You are the death of death. You are the eternal spirit, contented or absolutely 
satisfied, spotless, eternal, blessed (or very fortunate), Durbhaga, i. e., unfortu- 
nate or not possessed of good fortune, eloquent and indestructible and you 
can be adored with difficulty. You are the cause, the form and the auxiliary 
branch of the Vedas. You are God.’ With this hymn, the gods bowed 
to him, again and again; and with eyes streaming with raptures, they rained 
flowers on that sacred place. Whosver at break of day reads the above hymn 
consisting of forty-two names of the Lord acquires firm faith in Hari and 

secures the bondage of Hari, as desired by him. 


54-67. The gods -went home after having pronounced the above eulogy. 
All life seemed to be extinct at Mathurá ; and the land was flooded 
with rain-water. The night was very dark. When the seventh Muhürta. (One 
Muhürta is equal to forty-eight minutes) was passed and the eighth Muháürta 
arrived, in the midnight, atan auspicious moment marked by propitious Stars, 
shunned by evil stars and characterised by the predominance ot Rohint (the 
fourth lunar mansion), the eighth day of the lunar month, Jayanti— Yoga and 
the rise of the half-moon, the sun and the good and bad planets, feeling the 
approach of Lord Hari who isincomprehensible and outside the scope of the 
Vedas, transgressed their proper order and fixed themselves timidly at the sign 


of Pisces in the zodiac. All the planets were propitiated andat the instance 
ot Brahma gladly occupied the eleventh place in the zodiac. There was a 
shower of rains from the sky ; and the earth with allher quarters assumed a 
cheerful aspect, 

68-80. The Risis, munis, Yaksas, Gandharvas, Kinnars, gods and goddes- 
The heavenly prostitutes busied themselves with 


aes became much pleased. Rivers flowed 
owe 


dancing. The Gandharvas and the Vidyadhars chanted songs. 
17 A 


Ar 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. g 
A t 
130 THE BRAHM A-V AIVARTA PURANA, 


merrily, fire was kindled up: the sound of the drum and the trumpet filled the 
heavens and there was a shower of Párijàt from the sky. At that time the 
earth took the form of a damsel and entered the room of the child-birth. The 
sound of victory and the conches accompanied the shout of the name of Hari. 
At that time Daivaki dropped on the ground and at once all the pent-up wind 
emanated from her womb. At that time Lord Krisna wielded a celestial 
form and emanated from the heart of Daivaki, His face was lovely and 
enchanting. Hehad two hands holding a flute. Earrings of the cut of a fish 
decorated his features. His face was smiling and cheerful. He was deoked 
with gems and anxious to favour his votaries. He was clad in yellow 
and besmeared with musk, saffron and sandal paste. He was dark-blue like a 
new cloud. His face resembled the autumnal full moon. His lips were like 
the bimbas. His head was covered with the plumage of a peacock and a 
diadem constructed with pure gems. His waist was crooked. He was covered 
with wreaths of wild flowers. His breast was adorned with a whorl of hair and 
the gem called Kaustubha. Ho had three-fold curvatures in his body. He | 
was young in age, tranquil in disposition and looked more lovely than Brahma 

or S/iva. Both Vasudeva and Daivaki were very much astonished at the sight 
and with folded palms and streaming eyes, they reverentially adored him with 
the following hymn. 


81-91. Vasudeva said, “Lord, you transcend the senses. You are 
invisible, immortal and void of all attributes. You are beyond the scope of 
one's meditation. You are the supreme spirit and the Lord. You can do 
whatever you wish and you can take any form. You are unmixed with things; 
you are the great and eternal Brahma and the final cause, You are denser 
than the dense, all-pervading, extremely subtle and invisible. You occupy the 
body of every individual and witness his acts. You are tho Nature, the lord of 
Nature, partaking of the character of Nature and greater than Nature, You are 
the lord’and form of the universe, the destroyer of every thing though you your- 
self are not liable to destruction. You sustain every thing ol PUER by 
no one. You are indivisible O Lord, we are incapable of worshipping you. 
The god of the fivefaces, the god of the six faces, the god of the four faces 
and even Ganesa, the head of the spiritual guides of the Yogis, are incapable 
of worshipping you. Then how can I. an insignificant mortal, worship you? 
Him whom the saints, gods, munis, Manus, men do not perceive even in dreams, 
whom the S rutis cannot describe, how can any one else eulogise?" Whoever 
th lotas Toet of Har and nace f dn E every day acquires faith fo 

3 homage. He gets a well-qualified son 


like Hari, who is Hari’s servant, He is released f 0 i 1 
i bi l a fr cer fear 
odo: rom all kinds of da nger, 


-^ 


| 


92-101. The merciful lord was pleased at his w 
minded being, on account of the merits of 
birth, I have been born to you as your son. 
boon Nue me and all will be well with you. 
were known by the name of Prisni. * Afterwards rer r 
of creation, the best of tho Yogis, This Eu epum 
But you adored me much with meditations and hymns, ‘Thereupon I appeared 
In your presence and you solicited a boon from me to the effect that you 


ords'and said, “O great- 
the devotions of your previous 
O blessed personage, solicit a 

In your previous birth, you 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
KRISNA JANMA-KHAN DA. 131 


———————— ————— —- ————— 9 ————— ———— 


might get a son like myself. Then I pondered in my mind that there was no. 
one in the world like me. Hence I personally chose to become your son. 
Through the merits of your devotions, you were ona former occasion born 
as Kagyapa and your wife was born as the chaste Aditi. In the present age 
you have been my father and have acquired your birth as Vasudeya through the 
digits of Kasyapa; and Aditi, the mother of the gods, has become my mother 
and has been born as Daivaki. Sire, in days of yore, I was born out of 
your loins, through the womb of Aditi as a dwarf. And now again as the result 
of your devotions, I have descended to the earth in the guise of your son. 
O profound sage, whether you attain me as your son or the Supreme Being, 
you will be redeemed in your life-time. Sire, take me soon to the house of . 
Yasodá at the station of the cowherds, keep me there and substitute here in 
my place the girl who represents the spirit of delusion”. 


102-116. So saying, Hari wielded the form of a boy. Vasudeva was spell- 
bound at the sight of the boy, who was dark-blue in appearauce and lying naked 
on the ground and said, “ What an extraordinary vision I had ia my dream!” 
So saying, he discussed matters with his wife, took the infant in his lap and 
proceeded to the house of Nanda at Gokula. Vasudeva, having arrived there, 
hastily entered the room of the child-birth and saw that Yasodá, Nanda 
andallthe household members were asleep. He alsosaw a naked girl of the 
hue of heated gold and possessing a cheerful and smiling countenance. She 
was looking at the roof of the house. He was much astonished to see her, took 
her in his lap, placed the boy there and came io Mathura in great mental 
agitation. ‘Then he came to the room of his lying-in spouse and placed there 
the weeping child who represented the grand principle of illusion (Maha-Maya), 
Daivaki was much pleased to see the.girl. The sleeping guards were awakened 
by her cries. They took her to Kamsa. Daivaki and Vasudeva followed them 
in grief, The sight of the girl did not give much pleasure to Kamsa; he had 
not the slightest compassion for that weeping child. The cruel Kamsa was 
about to hurl her ona piece of stone with a view to kill her. At this sight 
Vasudeva and Daivaki modestly thus said to Kamsa: “O best of kings, you 
are a great politician ; therefore deign to hear my words full of truth and 
morality. O foremost of my relations, you have killed six of our sons. Haye 
yOu no compassion? How will the destruction of the eighth issue of Aum 
mere daughter, redound to your credit? She can never kill you in battle- 

ield. : 


117-131. So saying, both of them wept in the presence of the assembly. 
The hard-hearted Kamsa then said to them, “Listen to my words. I explain 
to you how matters stand. Providence is able to destroy a tiger through a 
Worm,an elephant through a gnat,a hero through a child, a ko pemi 
through a big animal, a cat through a rat, a snake through a frog, the aiena is l 
through the offspring, a devourer through the thing devoured, the water throug 


- Therefore, if fate hath so ordained, - 


5 4 
the fire, the fire through hay. A Brahmin once drank seven oceans. — Mysteri- E 


au and curious are the ways of Providencen 

this girl wi kzi no doubt, 5 

i girl will also be able to kill me, no ill her. O king. to no purpose. O 
hen Vasudeva said, “you are going to kill her. » Upon this, the disori- 

ocean of mercy, this child is mine: give her back to mo; ee € a voice 

Minating Kamsa was appeased to a certain extent. Then the ) 


will slay her most decidedly.” | 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


A 
132 THE BRAHM A-V AIV ARTA PURAN A. 


from the sky addressing Kamsa thus: * O fool, without knowing the Ways of 
God, whom are you going to kill? He who will kill you resides in some other 
place and will manifest himself in time." ‘Then Kamsa let the girl go and 
Vasudeva was as much pleased as if his dead daughter were restored to life, 
He brought her back to his house and distributed alms to the poor and the 
Brihmins ‘This girl who was the embodiment of the unequalled or matchless 
goddess Nature and the outcome of the digits of Párvati was the sister of 
Lord Krisna and celebrated by the name of Ams’. Vasudeva at the time of 
the marriage of Rukmini reverentially bestowed her in marriage on the saint 
Durvásà who emanated from the digits of S’iva. O muni, I have now narrated 
to you the account of the birth of Krisna calculated to destroy decrepitude, 
death, re-birth and danger. 


CHAR ESSE RA VICDOTITE 


1-19. “O great saint,” said Narada again, * kindly tell me in brief the 
fruits of the vow of Janmástami the ceremony of Jayanii-Yoga and the method 
whereby the vow is performed. What is the nature of the delinquency if the 
vow isnot observed and if people eat on that day ? On the other hand, what 
benefit does a person reap if he observes that vow, if he keeps fast and takes 
the first meal after the fast?” Náráyana said, “ In the first place, on the seventh 
lunar day, a person witha pure heart and clean body should take only boiled 
rice and ghee. While taking ihe first meal after fast, he should adopt the 
same course. On the eight lunar day, he should get up from bed at dawn, 
perform his morning rites and after bathing, he should make an avowal of 
the purpose for which the vow is observed. Abstinence observed in the course 
of a vow is only meant toatford satisfaction to Hari. The fruit which a 
person reaps by bathing and worshipping on the eighth lunar day in the month 
of Bhadra is ten millions of times as great as the fruit which he secures by 
ablutions and the worship of Hari lasting for a Manwantara. Whoever on this 
day offers even a drop of water to the manes reaps benefits equal to the benefit 
which he could secure by the performance of the funeral ceremony of his 
ancestors at Gay& for one-hundred years. On this day, the worshipper having 
bathed and performed the necessary or ordinary diurnal rites ought to construct 
a house of confinement for child-birth, place there iron, sword andifre and engage 
guards, He should also keep there a pair of scissors for cutting the navel-string 
of a new-born child and secure the services of a mid-wife there, Then he 
should provide there sixteen ingredients for the purpose of worship, fancy 
articles, eight kinds of fruits and sweet-meat. Nut-meoc h anita 
Kakkol, pomegranate, bael, cocoanut i Tue E 
fruits specified for the vow. Matting uten He KT MO M 
Peer ior Ae Mat De ress, oblation of „water for washing 
of as cn honey, water to rinse ie ie A EE Ee SE prepara 
Pee Te EE E ie i mon b water for bathing, bedstead, per- 
these are the sixteen in redionte hi h ae RU ene and oraren 
worshipper, after ie Fah "his f am ME nor ie Dunes he 
should take his seat im s PON Nee Ong pale ot d cloth 

a iouth and pronounce swasti, that is, hail or 
welcome. Then he should deposit the jar there and f ; 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


after haying worshipped - 


| 


—— 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA-KHANDA. 133 


the five gods, he should invoke on the jar the Supreme Lord Krisna. He 
should then invoke Daivaki, Vasudeva, Yasodá, Nanda, Rohini, Baladeya, 
Sasthi, Vasundhará, Brahmá, Astami, the local deity, Aswa-thima, Bali, 
Hanümána, Vibhisana, Kripá-cháryya, Parasurdma, Vyás- Deva, Markandeya, 
&c., on the jar and afterwards invoke Hari. A wise man after having for the 
first time put flower on his head should meditate him again, Brahmâin days 
of yore, specified the following Dhyana as stated inthe Sám-veda ; and that 


Dhyana I am going to tell you. Listen. 


20-29. Lord Krisna has the form of a child. He has got a fasteful 
appearance resembling a blue cloud. His round face resembles a lotus in full 
bloom. Brahm4, S'iva and Ananta adore him constantly. Saints, hermits and 
men cannot attain him by meditation. He cannot even be comprehended by 
adepts He is beyond the scope of the contemplation of the Yogis. He is 
incomparable and bears testimony to every act. I adore him.” The worship- 
per, after this meditation, should offer to him flowers, again, duly pronounce the 
mantra (the mystic formula) and then perform the yow. The mantra connected 
with the offerings or presentation of articles is as follows: ‘ Lord, I am going to 
offer you flower and pure water contained ina glass of gold for washing your 
feet. Please accept them. Lurd, Lam going to offer to you honey, ghee, curd, 
milk, and preparation of honey and milk contained in golden cups. Please 
Lord, am offering to you transparent water, sandal, aloe, 


accept them. 
Please accept 


barley and bent grass mixed with musk and white flowers. 
them. O great god, for rinsing your mouth, Iam going to present to you 
perfumed, transparent and tasteful water. Please accept it. O Hari, I am 
going to offer you perfumed Visnu oil and fragrant emblic myrobalan for 
bath; please accept them. Lord, Iam offering you pure gems and delightful 
bedsteads made of gems and covered with fine delicate cloths. Please accept 


them. 

30-42. Omy master, Iam going to offer you fragrant water mixed 
with the juice of musk and the liquid extracted from the powdered root of 
trees Please accept them. Lord, Iam going fo offer you sacrificial ingre- 
dients consisting of ripe fruits, sweetmeat, Swastika, Le. cake made of ground 
riceand sugar. Please accept them. O Hari, I am going to offer to you balls 
of sweet-meat, sweet-meat in general, ghee, condensed milk, molasses, honey, 
Please accept them. © great god, I reverentially offer 
betel-leaves perfumed with camphor, ke Please 
Iam going to give you red powder incensed 

Please accept it. © Lord, I cer you 
produced out of the excellent juice or sap 


O Hari, I am going to present 
d to dispel dismal | 


fresh curd, whey &c. 
to you excellent, enjoyable, 
accept them. O great God, 
with sandal, aloe, musk and saffron. 


Please accept it. f Mp 
am offerine y she ‘cious fruits which represent, as it were, the germ 
offering you lovely and delicious tr en PE offends Han 


dicata to Hari the | 


x n CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
à 


134 THE BRAHMA-V AIV ARTA PURANA. 


remnants of the articles (present at the place) fit for worship, adore the gods 
that have been invoked and reverentially present to them three handfuls of 


flowers, 


43-59. Then he should duly worship Nanda, Sunanda, Kumunda and other 
cowherds, the cowherdesses, Râdhâ, Ganesa, Kariikeya, Brabm&, Siva, Siva, 
Laksmt, Saraswati, the regents of the quarters, the planets, Ananta and the best of 
Krisna’s adherents Then he should lie prostrate on the ground before the 
gods ‘and present the offerings to themand pay the fee to the officiating priest, 
Afterwards the worshipper should listen reverentially to the chapter of the 
Purana relating to the birth of Lord Krisna and on the day of the vow ho 
should sit down on the matting made of holy grass and keep up the night, 
On the nextday at daybreak after having performed the necessary religious 
rites, he should worship Lord Hari, feast the Bráhmins and sing or recite the 
praises of Hari." Narada said, “O best of those who know the Vedas, what 
reward is secured by fasting and keeping up the night on the occasion? 
What is the time fixed for the observance of the vow ? What sin is incurred 
by eating on that day? Kindiy tell me all this, after due reference to the 
auxiliary branches of the Vedas and the code of tha Puranas.” Nárüyna 
said, “That day when in the midnight even a quarter of Astamt (the eighth 
day of ths lunar month) subsists is tho most celebrated occasion; and on that 
day Hari was born. ‘his conjunction of the times is calculated to give religious 
sanctity and victory. Hence it is called Jayanti-Yoga. Savants should 
fast, perform the vow and keep up tho night on this occasion. This time is 
pre-eminently suited to the vow and sanctioned by the Vedántists and Brahma. 


Whoever keeps up the night and fasts in the way specified above is redeemed . 


from the sins accumulated by him in ten millions of births. He who performs 
the vow should carefully leave out or exclude the Astimi which is combined 
with the Saptami (the seventh day of tho lunar month). Such an Astamt 
even if it be conjoined with Rohini should bo avoided 
during the predominance of the mansion of Rohini 
combined with Saptami. When this Rohini which is jealously conserved in 
the Vedasandin the commentary of the V»das and is particularly auspicious 
passes away, the worshipper should take his first meal aftor the fast, after having 
remembered Hari and the gods. his breakfast is most sacred and calculated 
to redeem the ancestors of the worshipper and give him reward and sancti y 

. 7 . o * £ < A ? 
Breakfast during the day is recommended by the saints: for in the night it is 
injurious. Hxcept in the case of the vow of Hohini (the fourth lunar mansion), 
breakíast is prohibited in the night. Bat in this vow ihe midnight alone 
may be left out for the purpose of the breakfast, x 


Lord Krişna was born 
confined to Amba and 


60-86. Breakfast in the fore-noon, O learned Brahmin, after the worship 
of the gods, isin every way preferable and sanctioned by all. This rule 
. so H 4 H 
however, is enjoined in the case of all vows oxcept the vow of Rohini, [f 
B person observe this vow during the Jayanti-Yoga which is combined with 
Mercury or the moon, he will not suffer the pangs of dwelling in the womb 
again, i.e. he will be redeemed and never be born again, A day which covers 
the Navami (the ninth vay of the lunar mon: t ine i 
ar month) throug} i i 
ERO S AN ; i ) ughout but on. ihe occasion 
sun y ams the remnants of Astami and which is conjoined 
with the moon, Mercury or the fourth lunar mansion is so sacred as rarely to 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


| 
Í 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA-KH AN DA. 185 


x m — ———— ——— MÀ —— 


recur in a century. He who observes the vow on this day cedeems ten millions 
of his ancestors thereby. Krisna is pleased even with those adherents of his 
who simply fast on that day bat cannot observe the vow through poverty, 
A man initiated in the Jayanti vow and keeping up the night with various 
ingredients sacred to the vow gets abundance of reward from the Lord, the 
enemy of the demons. Aman who does not misrepresent his wealth d e. 
who does not pretend to be poor in spiteof his wealth) gets ample reward. 
But a man making such idle pleas gets no reward. A savant should not 
break.his fast on the eighth day of the lanar month or during the predom- 
mance of the fourth lunar mansion, otherwise he will forfeit the religious 
sanctity previously acquired by him and also the fruits of his abstinence. The 
above lunar day destroys fruits eight times and the above mansion, four times, 
Therefore the observer of the vow should break his fast when the above lunar 
day and mansion are passed. If, however, they expire at mid-night, then he 
Should not break his fast at that time but on the third day. As soon as six 
Muhûrtas of the night pass away, midnight sets in: and eating at this time 
is as sinful as the murder ofa Brahmin. Let alone other food, even betel, 
fruit, water, &c., are prohibited in the midnight like beef, ordure and urine, 
The night consists of three watches leaving out four dandas of the day (a danda 

is equal to twenty-four minutes! in the beginning and ihe same period in the 
end. The portion thus left out is called Sandhya (evening or morning) 

A person who is awake and observes his vow on the pure day of Janmástamj 

is relieved from sins of a hundred births, A person who on that day does 
not keep up the night but merely fasts still gets the fruits secured by the 
ceremony of horse-sacrifice. A wretch who eats on that day practically ravishes 


his mother and is guilty of the sin of a hundred Brabmin-slaughters. The 


religious merits acquired by him in ten millions of births are lost by that act 
and he is not entitled to perform any religious rites relating to the gods or tha 
manes. He becomes impure and ultimately dwells in the hell called the thread ’ 
of time (being devoured by worms whose teeth are as sharp as spears) as long 
as the sun and the moon exist. Then he is born in India; but for sixty- 
thousand years he.has to range as a worm in the ordure. Afterwards fora 
thousand crores of years, he is born as a vulture; a hundred times as a boar,. 

a hoast of prev and a jackal and seven times as a snake and crow. Then he 
is born as a man afflicted with 'eprosy and physical pain. Next he. is born as 

a enake-catcher and afterwards as a wicked robber who kills people. Then 
he is born as a washerman, then as an oil-man, then as an impure Devala - 
Brahmin, I£ any one is unable to fast, he ought to feast at least one Brahmin 
or give bim wealth double the quantity of the food Or he ought to mutter 
the mantras of Savitri a thousand times or practise Pranáyám (stoppage of 
Tespiration) as an accessory to meditation, twelve times. I thus narrated - 
to you the subject relating to fasting and the method of the observances of the 
vow, as I heard from Dharma. 


CHAPTER IX, e 
1-18. Narada said : “When Vasudeva went back home, O Lord, after havi 


left Krisnain th s soda lid Nanda} perform the festival of — 
$n e house of Yasodà, how did Nanda} perform the | C 
9 birth of a son? How long did Hari remain in his house? How did h full = 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


A 
136 THE BRAHMA-V AIVARTA PURANA. 


c 


the promise he had held out to Radha before(?) What is the form of tho sphere 
of the Rasa? What is the nature of Vrindavana? Kindly relate to me also 
the sports of the Lord in the sphere of the Rasa and in the water of Yamuna, 
Lord, what was the nature of the devotion performed oy Rohini and Yasoda ? | 
Where was Baladeva born before Hari appeared? The wonderful account of Hari 
is as delightful as nectar ; and particularly if it comes from the mouth of a 
poet, it acquires a new aspect at every step. The descriptio. of ascene witnessed 
by the author with his own eyes is superior to a second-hand description of the 
same. You are a digit of Lord Krisna and the head of the preceptors of the 
gurus of the meditative ascetics. He from whose digits a person has come out 
thrills that person with the joy which he himself feels. You just said to 
mo that both of you brotbers had merged in the lotus feet of Hari. Therefore 
you are an outcome of the digits of the Lord of the Goloka and as magnani- 
mous as he.” Narayana said, “Brahma, S'iva, Avanta Ganesa, Dharma, Kürma, 
myself and Kartikeya are the produets of the digits of Krisna. Who can 
describe the glory of the lord of the Goloka? When we could not compre- 
hend him, how could savants do so? Varaha, Bamana, Kalki, Buddha, 
Mina have emanated from Hari’s digits. Besides these, there are countless 
incarnations, the product of time. Rama and Nrisimha are perfect incarna- 
tions of the deity and reside in the white islands; whereas in the Vaikuntha 
and Goloka, Lord Krisna is the Supreme Being Himself. 

14-21. AtGokula and inthe Goloka he is vested with two hands holding a 
flute and is the consort of Radha; whereas in the Vaikuntha he is vested with 
four hands and isthe lord of Kamala. The Yogis constantly contemplate 
his abstract light; but the Vaignavas adore his lotus feet. How is that Jight 
possible, unless there bea person who possesses that light? Now I tell you by 
what kind of devotions, Yosodà, Nanda and Rohini were able to behold the lotus 
feet of Hari. In the period gone by, Nanda was ihe best of the Vasus and a great 
ascetic named Drona. Dhara was his wife. That Dharà was born as Yasod&; and: 
Kadru, the mother of the snakes, was born as Rohini. Now listen to the descrip- 
tion of their births. Once upon atime, Dhar& and Drona went close to the 
hermitage of Gautama in the Gandha-mádan mountain in the sacred land of 
India and there on the coast of the Suprabha, they prayed for ten thousand. 
years in order to obtain a glimpse of Lord Krisna. After ihe Japse of that period 
when the Lord did not turn up they constructed a pit of fire and, led by a 
RM of stoic apathy to the world, were about to consign themselves to the 

ame. 


22-30. When they were about to commit suicide there was a voice 
from the sky to the following effect, O best of the Vasus, in your next birth 
you will behold on the earth at Gokul the Supreme Lord who is adored by the 
gods, contemplated by the saints and is invisible to the Yogis, born as your 
son. Hearing this, the couple were rejoiced and went home. In course of 
time, they were horn in India and beheld the lotus face of Hari. Now listen 
to the mysteries of the character of Rohini. Once upon a time Aditi, the 
mother of the gods, while in her monthly course, communicated the faot relating | 
to her menstruation to Kasyapa through a messenger on the day of the festival — 
of flowers. The fair Aditi bathed on the day fixed for a woman to bathe 
in her menses, decked herself with ornaments and dress and saw her image in 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


à 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA-KHAN DA, 


137 


herself with ornaments and dress and saw her image in the looking-gla 


88, 


She marked her forehead with vermilion and musk and decked herself with 
diamond ear-rings and leaves. She suspended the pearl produced in the 
head of the elephant on the front of her nose. Her face resembled the full 
moon; her eyes were graceful like the blooming lotuses of autumn. Her 


eyes had the charm of archness of vision and were lighted up with lines of co 
lyrium. Her teeth were like the grains of ripe pomegranate. 


l- 


31-47. Her lips were like the bimbas. She was very lovely and after 
having looked at the image o£ her face in the luoking-glass which by its superb 
charm could even bewilder the mind of saints, she awaited the arrival of 


her husband and was much perplexed with the darts of Cupid. While thus 
excited, she heard that Kasyapa was flirting with Kadra and reposing in 
her bosom. Then the chaste Aditi was highly incensed and, in dispair, 
instead of cursing her husband, she cursed Kadru, the mother of snakes, 
She said, * Kadru who lost her Dharma (virtue) is not fit for heaven. 
Let that wicked whore go away from this place and acquire her birth as a 
woman.” When Kadru heard of this curse from a messenger, she also cursed 
Aditi saying, “Let Aditi also be a prey to decrepitude, descend into the world 
below and be born as a woman.” When both of them were mutually cursed, 
Kasyapa consoled Kadru saying, *Fair nymph, be of good cheer. In course 
of time you will descend intothe world along with me and there we shall 
behold the lotus feet of Hari.” Then lord Kasyapa went to the house of 
Aditi and gratified her wish; and the offspring of this union was Indra, the 
king of the gods, who was born in due course. Then Aditi was born as 
Daivaki; Kadru as Rohini; and Ka$yapa as Vasudeva. Thus I told 
you about the mysteries of their birth. Now I am going to describe to 
you the birth of the mighty and huge Ananta of a thousand hoods 
who incarnated himself as the matchless Baladeva. At the command 
of Vasudeva the chaste Rohini ran away from that place through fear 
of Kamsa for the preservation of the life of Baladeva. Then Maya, the 
goddess of delusion, ordered by Lord Krisna, fixed the seventh issue of 
the Devaki while in its embryo into the : womb of Rohini and went EM 
Kailá$a A few days afterwards, Rohini gave birth to a Divine son fair like 
white silver who was the outcome of the digits of Lord Krişna in the house 
of Nanda. ‘This infant had a smiling, cheerful countenance and was bright 
with the radiance of Brahma. The gods were delighted at his n and 
there was a flourish of music with beat of drum, trumpet, etc., In the heavens. 


i i hes. 
Th d leased, raised a cry of victory and sounded cone 
eek See j alms to the Brahmins. The 


; n istributed 
48-64. Nanda, being pleased, distribute hild and bathed him. The 


midwife snapped asunder the navel string of the c T 
eab dod an with apparel shouted merrily. The ceremony of the birth 


was performed with great pomp by Nanda. E porn ERE 
distributed vermilion, oil, money and various sorts of articles P Vom dum 
Thus, O son, I have described to you the devotions of Nanda d iptio of th 
issue and the character of Rohini. Now listen to ma vida pq wd 
festival performed by Nanda which gives pleasure and redemp P sees i. 
rebirth, death and decrepitude, The character of Krisna Rr n E 
Just like life to tho Vaisņavas. It removes evils, produces fai 

18 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE > E 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


A 
THE BRAHMA-V AIV A RTA PURANA. 


ld out to Radha before(?) What is the form of the sphere ` 


the promise he had he } hat i 
of o Rása? What is the nature of Vrindavana? Kindly relate to me also 


the sports of the Lord in the sphere of the Rasa and in the water of Yamuna, | 
Lord, what was the nature of the devotion performed by Rohini and Yasoda ? 
Where was Baladeva born before Hari appeared? The wonderful acoount of Hari 
is as delightful as nectar; and particalarly if it comes from the mouth, of a 
poet, it acquires a new aspect at every step. The descriptio. of a scene witnessed 
by the author with his own eyes is superior to a second-hand description of the 
same. You are a digit of Lord Krisna and the head of the preceptors of the 
gurus of the meditative ascetics. He from whose digits a person has come out 
thrills that person with the joy which he himself feels. You just said to 
me that both of you brothers had merged in the lotus feet of Hari. Therefore 
you are an outcome of the digits of the Lord of the Goloka and as magnani- 
mous as he.” Narayana said, ‘Brahma, S/iva, Anania Ganesa, Dharma, Kürma, 
myself and Kartikeya are the products of the digits of Krisna. Who can 
describe the glory of the lord of the Goloka? When we could not compre- 
hend him, how could savants do so? Vardha, Bamana, Kalki, Buddha, 
Mina have emanated from Haris digits. Besides these, there are countless 
incarnations, the product of time. Rama and Nrisimha are perfect incarna- 
tions of the deity and reside in the white islands; whereas in the Vaikuntha | 
and Goloka, Lord Krisna is the Supreme Being Himself. | 


14-21. At Gokula and in the Goloka he is vested with two hands holding a 
flute and is the consort of Radha; whereas in the Vaikuntha ho is vested with 
four hands and is the lord of Kamala. The Yogís constantly contemplate ; 
his abstract light; but the Vaisnavas adore his lotus feet. How is that Jight 
possible, unless there bea person who possesses that light? Now I tell you by 
what kind of devotions, Yosodà, Nanda and Rohini were able to behold the lotus 
feet of Hari. ln the period gone by, Nanda was the best of the Vasus and a great 

. ascetic named Drona. Dhara was his wife. That Dhara was born as Yasodé; and: 
Kadru, the mother of the snakes, was born as Rohini. Now listen to the descrip- 
tion of their births. Once upon a time, Dhara and Drona went close to the 
hermitage of Gautama in the Gandha-mádan mountain in the sacred land of 
India and there on the coast of the Suprabhá, they prayed for ten thousand. 
years in order to obtain a glimpse of Lord Krisna. After ihe lapse of that period 
when the Lord did not. turn up they constructed a pit of fire and, led by & 
pane of stoic apathy to the world, were about to consign themselves to the 


22-30. When they were about to commit suicide there was a voice 
from the sky to the following effect, O bost of the Vasus, in your next birth 
you will behold on the earth at Gokul the Supreme Lord who is adored by the 
gods, contemplated by the saints and is invisible to the Yoois, born as your 
son. Hearing this, the couple were rejoiced and went fion In course 0 
time, they were born in India and beheld the lotus face of Hari. Now listen 
to the mysteries of the character of Rohini. Once upon a time Aditi, the 
mother of the gods, while in her monthly course, communicated the faot relating 1 
to her menstruation to Kasyapa through a messenger on the day of the festival | 
of flowers. The fair Aditi bathed on the day fixed for a woman to bathe 
in her menses, decked herself with ornaments and dress and saw her image in r4 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE - D c 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA-KHAN DA. 


137 


hersslf with ornaments and dress and saw her image in the looking-glass, 
She marked her forehead with vermilion and musk and decked herself with 
diamond ear-rings and leaves. She suspended the pearl produced in the 
head of the elephant on the front of her nose. Her face resembled the full 
moon; her eyes were graceful like the blooming lotuses of autumn. Her 
eyes had the charm of archness of vision and were lighted up with lines of col- 


lyrium. Her teeth were like the grains of ripe pomegranate. 


31-47, Her lips were like the bimbas. She was very lovely and afte 


r 


having looked at the image of her face in the luoking-glass which by its superb 
charm could even bewilder the mind of saints, she awaited the arriva] of 
her husband and was much perplexed with the darts of Cupid. While thus 


excited, she heard that Kasyapa was flirting with Kadru aud reposing in 
her bosom. Then the chaste Aditi was highly incensed and, in dispair, 
ingtead of cursiog her husband, she cursed Kadru, the mother of snakes. 
She said, * Kadru who lost her Dharma (virtue) is uot &t for heaven. 
Let that wicked whore go away from this place and acquire her birth as a 
woman.” When Kadru heard of this curse from a messenger, she also cursed 
Aditi saying, “Let Aditi also be a prey to decrepitude, descend into the world 
below and be born asa woman." When both of them were mutually cursed, 
Kasyapa consoled Kadru saying, “Fair nymph, be of good cheer. In course 
of time you will descend intothe world along with me and there we shall 
behold the lotus feet of Hari." Then lord Kasyapa went to the house of 
Aditi and gratified her wish; and the offspring of this union was Indra, the 
king of the gods, who was born in due course. Then Aditi was born as 
Daivaki; Kadru as Rohini; and Kasyapa as Vasudeva. Thus I told 
you about the mysteries of their birth. Now I am going to describe to 
you the birth of the mighty and huge Ananta of a thousand hoods 
who incarnated himself as the matchless Baladeva. At the command 
of Vasudeva the chaste Rohint ran away from that place through fear 
of Kamsa for the preservation of the life of Baladeva. Then Maya, the 
goddess of delusion, ordered by Lord Krisna, fixed the seventh issue of 
the Devaki while in its embryo into the -womb of Rohini and went Page ee 
Kailáéa A few days afterwards, Rohini gave birth to a Divine son fair like 
white silver who was the outcome of the digits of Lord Krisnain the house 
of Nanda. This infant had a smiling, cheerful countenance and M 
with the radiance of Brahma. The gods were delighted at his "s and 
there was a flourish of music with beat of drum, trampet, etc., n : enr 
The gods were pleased, raised a cry of victory and sounded conches. ; ; 
48-64. Nanda, being pleased, distributed alms to the Bratmine. The 
midwife snapped asunder the navel string gi the oe ah of the birth 
cowherdesses decked with apparel shouted merrily. T dar y (i eee 
was performed with great pomp by Sous TE b the UTC 
distributed vermilion, oil, money and various sorts of Dude i Yafodi. ds 
Thus, O son, I have described to you the devotions o£ Nanda an , 


; ini listen to the description of the 
issue and the character of Rohini. Now liste noci c n 


festival performed by Nanda which gives pleasure 2 z A 

rebirth, death and domes The character of Krigna BA d 

i like life to tho Vaisnavas. It removes evils, produces fai 
8 0 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 2a 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. z 
138 THE BRAHMA-V AIVARTA PURAN A. 


— 


secures his bondage. When Vasudeva went away, Yaśodå and Nanda kept 
up the night in the room of conGnement (where a child is born) which was 
all-good and attended with prosperity. Then they beheld the infant who was 
very handsome, dark-blue like a new cloud, naked, lying on the ground and 
looking at the'top of the house. His eyes resembled a pair of blue lotuses, 
His face was like the moon of autumn. He was smiling and weeping by 
turns. His body was besmeared with dust. He was attempting at times to 
stretch forth his legs-by fixing his arms into the ground Nanda and his wife 
were highly pleased at the sight. The mid-wife bathed the child in cold 
water and cut off his navel striag. The rejoiced milk-maids raised a shout 
of victory. At that time many young and old women possessing huge loins 
and agitated breasts came to the confinement-room. They blessed the infant. 
Some of them took embraced and kissed him and admired his beauty. Then 
Nanda put on a pair of well-washed clothes and cheerfully performed all the 
necessary rites, from start to finish. He feasted the Br&hmins, ordered music 
to be sounded and distributed wealth to the bards, 


65-78. He then presented with pleasure wealth, gems, corals and diamonds 
to the Brahmins. He likewise distributed to tham seven hills of sesamum, 
gold, silver, heaps of paddy, cloths, a thousand cows, curd, milk, sugar, butter, 
ghee, honey, sweets, cocoanut, balls of sweets, every kind of delicious sweet- 
meat, fertile plots of land, horses speedy like the wind, betel-leaves and oil, 
For protecting the room where the mother was lying in, he engaged Brahmins, 
men versed in the code of religious ceremonies and old cow-herds, Nanda 
caused the recitation of the Védas and the auspicious name of Hari 
and also the performance of the worship of the gods through the 
Brahmins. Then the old and young wives of the Brahmins came smiling 
with their children to the house of Nanda, Nanda gave them severa 
kinds of gems, ‘Then several old cow-herdesses, decked with ornaments 
arrived at the house of Nanda. Nanda gave them fino cloths, silver and a. 
thousand head of cattle. Astrologers also came with books in their hands. 
He bowed to them modestly. They saw and blessed the child. O best of 
learned Brahmins, Nanda, later on, with the burden of the child on his shoulders 
consulted the astrologers with regardto the future of the child, the good or 
the evil that might be instore for him. The child grew day by day like the 
moon of the bright half of the month. Hari passed his days merrily by 
sucking the brea-t of his mother. Both YaSod& and Rohini, pleased with the 
ceremony, distributed to the women wealth, vermilion, betel-leaves, eto. 


They blessed the boy and went home. Yagoda, Rohiní and Nanda oheerfully 
spent their times at home. 


CHAPTER X. 


1-12. On the other hand, Kamsa, happily seated in the assembly on a 
golden throne, heard a voice from the’eky to the following effect : «O foolish 
king, what are you doing? Now think well of yourself. Your destroyer 
has been born in the world, Devise means of rescue at this time. Vasu- 
dava with the help of Divine Illusion (May&) gave his son, your destroyer, 
to Nanda and fetched the daughter of Nanda to you in his place. This girl 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA-KHAN DA. 139 


is the goddess of delusion (Máy&) herself: and the son of Vasudeva is Hari 
himself, your destroyer. The message that was communicated to you about 
the abortion of the seventh issue is false. The goddess of delusion fixed this 
issue while in its embryo into the womb of Rohini out of which the very mighty 
Balaráma, an outcome of the digits of Ananta, has been born. Like your 
death incarnate, both of them are growing in the house of Nanda.” Hearing 
this the king was lost in deep reverie and, being distracted in mind, gave up 
eating, drinking, etc. Then the politician Kamsa brought to the assembly his 
dear sister Pütan& and said. ‘‘O my sister, go on some pretext to the house 
of Nanda, annoint your breast with poison and suckle therewith Nauda's 
infant. Myldear, you can run very fast and are well versed in witch-craft. By 
means of your art adopt a human form and go to the house of Nanda. You 
can go everywhere by means of the mantra given to you by Durvásá and you can 
weild any shape.” When the frightened Kamsa said so, the sorceress Pitana 
bowed to her brother and went away. 


13-29, By virtue of her witch-craft, she assumed the hue of heated 
gold and decked herself with various ornaments. Her chignon was adorned 
with jasmine wreaths; her forehead, with marks of vermilion and musk. The 
ornament round her waist and her anklets rang merrily on all sides, as she 
proceeded. Ata short distance she met the enclosure of the cows, i.e., the 
pasture or drove of cows. Within its limits, was situate the house of Nanda 
encompassed by a deep and insurmountable moat. Vigwa- Karma had constructed 
this town with precious stones and inlaid it with sapphire, ruby and emerald. 
The top of the mansion of Nanda was adorned with picturesque, golden jars. 
It was surrounded by ramparts, so high as to touch the sky, with iron doors 

- attached to each of them and guarded by sentinels. That city was decorated 
with lovely women, pearls, philosopher’s stone, wealth, gems, golden. cups and 
jars and millions of milch-cows. It contained myriads of the myrmidons of 
Nanda, supported by him and millions of busy milk-maids. The enchanting 
Pütan& went inside. None of the milk-maids could perceiye her wickedness or 
suspect anything wrong on her part. They thought that either tations 
Durga had come to see Lord Hari They bowed to her, enquired into her 
welfare, gave her water for washing the feet and provided her with a Ms 

‘The wicked Pütaná accepted what was offered to her, enquired into their 


we fa 8 Ww š Se oddess who are you? What is 

I r and gat do D. They asked her, G 3 = ; 
ne f W d ve y e here í Kindly giya us these parti- 

your nar n hat for have you com Á 5 i0 


culars.” She answered, “O cowherdesses, | 

Mathura. I heard the good tidings of the birth of a son to Nanda. 
I shall ace and bless the child and then go home. Therefore bring i d 
Yagod& was much pleased to hear this, bowed to her and put the ¢ 
in her lap. 

30-45. The beautiful Pütan& kissed - t 
him saying, “Aha! fair damsel, what a pre 
like Narayana.” The boy merrily sucked her breast, 
the poisoned milk which appeared to him like nectar, $ 
Fair one left the child, gave up her ghost and assuming 
on the ground with her countenance turned upwards. 
body, entered into a thin frame and soon mounied 


he child, sat down and suckled 
tty child you have got. He is 
smiled and along with 
acked also her life. The 
a hideous form dropped 
She quitted her dense 
acar made of gems. It 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. A 
140 THE BRAHM A-V AIVARTA PURANA, 


was crowded with the celestial myrmidons of the Lord and decked with. one 
hundred white chowries, one hundred thousand looking-glasses, pure, fine cloths, 
various kinds of pictures and diamond jars. The chariot contained a hundred 
wheels and was effulgent with the lustre of diamonds. "The: myrmidons of the 
Lord placed her in the car and carried her to the Goloka. The cow-herds and 
cowherdesses were astonished at the sight. Kamsa was much surprised 
when he heard the whole account. Ya$odà took the lad in her lap, suckled 
her and caused auspicious deeds to be performed onhis behalf through the 
Brahmins. Nanda gladly consumed the body of Pütaná and while setting 
fire to the funeral pile, he perceived the smell of sandal, aloe and musk in the 
smoke arising out of the pyre.’ Narada asked, * Who was this virtuous 
nymph inthe guise of a demoness? What merit enabled her to see Lord 
Krigna and go to the Goloka?"  Náráyana answered, ‘“Ratna-mAla, the 
daughter of Bali, was much enchanted at. the sight of Lord Bamana on the 


occasion of the sacrifice performed by her father. She was subdued by - 


maternal affection and cogitated in her mind thus , “ If this dwarf be unto me 
like my son, Í shall suckle him in my bosom,” The merciful Hari who fulfils 
the designs of his votaries knew her heart and in her next birth he sucked 
her breast and gave her redemption as to a mother. When Pfitana suckled 
the boy with the milk of her breast annointed with poison, she played tha 
part of a mother to him and afterwards obtained final beautitude. Whom else 
therefore, shall I adore without that merciful Hari?  Ithus recited to you 
the virtues of Lord Krisna; and I have been giving you an interesting and 
excellent desoription of Hari at every step. 


OHPTER XI. 

1-17. Nár&yüna said, “Once upcn a time the chaste Yasodà with the 
infant in her breast was busy in her domestic affairs at Gokula, when 
Lord Hari happened to know in his mind that the demon Trind-varta 
was arriving in the guise of a wind. Thereupon the Lord became very 
heavy in weight and burdensome, Yasoda feeling the weight of the child, 
left the child, laid him on the ground and went to the Yamuna. 
Then the demon in the guise of a wind seized Lord Hari, whirled him 
round and round and took him at a distance of a hundred Yojans. 
Many branches of the trees were broken. Gokula was filled with darkness. 
Then the wily demon came back and dropped down there with a mighty crash. 
As the demon came in contact with the body of Hari, his sufferings were over 
(4. e, he died) and he ascended a beautiful car and went to the region of Hari. 
In days of yore, this demon was the king of the Pandya regions. Through 
the curse of Durvásá, he had acquired the form of a demon, but was redeemed 
by the touch of the lotus feet of Hari. Everyone at Gokul was bewildered by 
the power of the wind ; and the cowherds and cowherdesses not finding the 
child on the bed were overwhelmed with fear and grief. They beat their 
breasts. Some faintedand others loudly wept. The inhabitants of the Vraja 
searched and discovered the boy weeping constantly, as if bewildered with 
fear, looking at the sky, besmeared with dust in an orchard and lying down 
in a place covered wiih Jctus. ‘hen Nanda at once clasped him to his breast 
and shed tears of joy at hissight. Both Rohini and Yasod& wept with pleasure, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


| 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. - 
KRISNA JANMA-KHANDA. 141 


Yasgoda bathed him, caused 


then embraced him and kissed him again and again. 1 
ire, avert calamities and to usher in peace. 


rites to be performed to secure his welfz 

She then suckled him cheerfully.” Narada said, “ Why was the king of 
Pandya curses by Durv&sá ? Please recite to me in detail that ancient history.” 
Nár&yana said, "This mighty king of Pandya named Sahasraksya was much 

excited with lust. So with his thousand wives he went to the lovely solitude | 
of the Gandha-mádan mountain and enjoyed their society in a grove of flowers 


on tbe coast of the river. 

18-35. He committed sexual'intercourse with them in an inverted order 
and in various other ways and marked their faces and breasts with his nails and 
teeth. In thousands of ways he indulged in the joy of their company and there- 
after sported with them in the waters. If the women became naked, healso be- 


came naked and flirted with them on the lovely coast of the river Puspa-bhadr&. 
At that time the great saint Durvasa with his bundred thousand pupils was 
passing by that way to S'iva's house. The infatuated king did not come out 
ot the waters, nor did he bow to Durvésa not greet him with words or by 
movements ofhis hands. ‘he muni was highly incensed; his lips quivered ; 
and he cursed the king thus, ‘‘Wretch, forfeit thy powers of Yoga, descend 
to the earth and there take the form of a demon. ‘here thou shalt remain 


fora hundred thousand years and afterwards touched by the lotus feet of Hari 
O queens, you, also, 


thou shalt be redeemed and come back to the Goloka. 

shall go to India and be born as fair princesses in the houses of kings in 

different places.” So saying the muni (saint) went to S'iva. The merciful 
When the 


disciples of the saint were deeply moved and lamented loudly. 
of the river and the beautiful 


gaint was gone the king wept on the coast l 
damsels afflicted with the prospective pangs of separation from their husband 
said to him, “O lord, most dexterous in matters of sexual intercourse, whither 
shall we go without you? Where will you yoursel£ go to ? Will you not enjoy 
our society, O lord, in solitude? Will you not enjoy your kingdom ? Shall 


we not go home and see your Junar face again ? Shall we not clasp you to 
our heart with extended arms?" The ladies lamented bitterly in this way, | 
held the king's feet and fainted. Then ths king constructed " pit of fire, i 
remembered the lotus feet of Hari and jumped into it along wit his wives. E 
The gods above were grieved at the sight and said, “Wate alone is mono a 
That king afterwards became ihe demon Triņâ-varta. He d e a 

the way mentioned above and went to the temple of Hari. o eens, t00, 

obtained their cherished desire. ‘Thus 1 have narrated to you the ro 

greatness of Lord Hari, the ourse of Dorvasé and the redemption o 8 

king. 
CHAPTER XII. 
Yagoda seated in her house was suckling the 
and young women came to ihe 

Before the hunger of the infant i 
bed and in order to perform 
the bed she bowed to 4 
3 


1-32. Once upona time, 
infant Govinda in her breast, when some old 
hermitage with a number of cowherd children. 
Hari was satisfied, Yasod& laid him on the A 
propitiatory rites connected with. his rise oe Co 
them and gave them oil, vermilion, sweet-meat, ornament 


d olothings. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


ET Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


A 
142 THE BRAHMA-V AIVARTA PURANA. 


Then the boy wept alone through hunger and spread his legs illusively ; | 
and as his feet came in contact with the ;huge chariot, it was crumbled to  , 
pieces and the curd, milk, ghee, butter and honey contained in the 
chariot dropped on the ground, The cow-herds and cow-herdesses were very 
much astonished at the sight and seeing the boy concealed among the broken 
fragments of wood ran away through fear, The cups were broken: and so Yasodá 
removed the honey, milk and broken planks, took the child who was crying 

for hunger in her lap, suckled him and then wept for mental agony. The cow- 
herds asked the children, ‘Boys, how was the car broken ? We cannot 
account for this extraordinary phenomenon.” The boys said, “O cow-herds, the 

boy kicked the car and it was broken.” Hearing this, people jaughed incre- | 
dulously and thought that the whole story was a mere iuvention. The best | 
of the Brahmins touched his body and performed Swastayana (a rite to secure 
welfare and avert calamity’, With a view to performing this ceremony, a 
Brahmin recited a certain amulet which [ am just going to describe, When 
Hari lay in water in days of antiquity, he gave this amulet to Brahma 
when the latter while roaming in his navel and afraid of the demons 
named Madhu and Kaitava sought his protection. Yoga-Nidra (the goddess 
of mystic devotion and sleep) said thus to Brahma, “ Lord, be of good cheer. 
You need not fear while Hari and I are ready to protect you. May Hari preserve 
your face. May the enemy of Madhu protect your head. May Lord Krişna 
preserve your eyes; may the lord of RAdh& Yours preserve nose. May Mádhava 
preserve your ears and forehead. May Govinda preserve your cheek. May 
KKesava preserve your hair, May Hrisi-kesa preserve your lips and chins, 
May Gadágraja preserve your teeth; ltáse$wara, your tongue, Bamana, your 
palate ; Mukunda, your chest; the enemy of the demons, your stomach; 
Janfirdana, your navel; Visnu, your jaws; Purusottama, your buttocks and 
private parts ; the lord of Jànki, your knees: Nrisimha, your arms; Varáüha, 
your feet. May Narayana preserve you above and Kamalapati, below. May 
Gopála preserve you in the east; may the destroyer of Hávana preserve you 
in the south-east corner; Vaikuntha, in the south-west corner, Vanamáli in the 
south, Vasudeva in the west; Aja Vistar-srav4, in the north-west corner; Ananta 
in the north; God, in the north-east corner ; and the victor c£ Indra, in all places. 
May Raghava preserve you in the sky and while you are asleep. This is the most 
wonderful amulet that I have narrated to you. In days of yore, while there 
was a dreadful tight with Sumbha, a fight which dazzled the eye-sight, Lord 
Krisna kindly gave it to meas soon as I remembered him. As I got this 
amulet, Hari at once came to the sky and prepared to devise means for my 
rescue. In days gone by, I fought a dreadful battle for a century with the 
demon called Sumbha and obtained this amulet by virtue of which I killed 
him. After the death of Sumbha the merciful Govinda gave to me in the sky 
the amulet and a wreath of flowers and went to the Goloka. Through the 
influence of this amulet, O godly saint, you need not fear: particularly when 
we are ready to support you, 


83-42, * I haye witnessed the fall of ten millions of Brahmas, But Hari 
and I exist in every age.” So saying the goddess vanished. Then Brahmá, 
fixed into the navel of Hari, was reassured. A wise man who weilds this amulet 
(deposited in a small ball of gold) on his right arm or round his neck need not 
be afraid of poison, fire, sna ko or his enemies. God himself preserves him on 


M 
Se SS , ———— 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. s P a 3 
KRISNA JANMA-KHANDA. i 143 


Jand 10 water, in the sky or while he is asleep. By the power of this amulet, he 
is rendered fearless in war, danger, peril of life or in the peril caused by 
thunder-bolt. By wielding it round the neck, S'iva easily destroyed the 
demun Tripura and the goddess Kali devoured Rakta-vija. The hundred- 
headed Ananta, through the influence of this amulet, sustains the earth on hig 
head as easily as if she were a grain of sesamum; by virtue of this amulet, 
Sanat-Kumara has been the witness of everv act; and we have become conquerors 
in all places." The Brahmin covered the neck of the boy with this amulet, 
Hari thus wielded his own amulet round his own neck. Thus, O saint, I haye 
related to you an account of the Eternal, infallible Hari and the incomparable 
prowess of his amulet. 


CHAPTER XIIL 


1-27. Nár&yana said, “O saint, now I am going to relate to you the other 
aspects of the grandeur of Lord Krisna which gives sanctity and destroys sins. 
Once upon a time, Yasodà, seated on a throne of gem, was suckling her 
bungry infant when a Br&hmin, effulgent with the lustre of Brahma, arrived 
there with his disciples. That saint was constantly adoring the supreme 
Brahma with his bead of white crystals. He held a mace anda parasol in his 
hands. His teeth were whits and his dress wasalso white. His attainments 
in astrology were unrivalled and he was versed in the Vedas and their auxiliary 
branches. He wielded clusters of hair on his head which resembled heated 
gold. His face resembled the autumnal moon, his complexion was fair and 
his eyes were similar toa pair of lotuses. He was the disciple of S‘iya, the 
worshipper of Krisna,and a great devotee. He taught his pupils, with a 
commentary of religious works in his hands. He so-easily commented on 
the Vedas and expatiated to sucha great length thathe seemed to be the 
sole impersonation of the four Vedas. The goddess of knowledge seemed to 
have been always present in his throat, He was well-versed in adept lore ; 
and day and night he was contemplating the lotus feet of Lord Hari. He 
has been redeemed in his life time. He was the lord of adepts, omniscient and 
all seeing. As soon as YaSodà saw him, she got up, bowed io him, greeted 
him with water to wash his feet, o lations of water for the feet with green grass 
and rice, the oblation of honey and wilk and a golden throne. She caused her 
son also to bow to him. ‘The saint adored hinragain and again in his mind. 
He then recited the Vedas and blessed him Yasodd bowed to his pupils who 
also blessed her. She greeted them also with ingredients to wash the feet and 


i it s. Having washed their feet, sheaeld the 
Provided them with separate seats aving everential inclination of her 


infant in her breast and with folded palms and r t 

head said thus:—“O great saint, ue sel f-con tented. Though Lin pot 

privileged to enquire into your name and welfare, yet I here S ee Tus 

doso. IfI incurany fault thereby, kindly excuse me c DE irá, Atri 

I am a stupid, helpless woman. Lord, are you the great samt 3E K > 3 E 
Martchi, Gautama, Kratu, Pracheta, Pulastya, Pulaha, f ae m e mE) 

Vasistha, Garga, Jaigisavya, Devala, lord Kapila, manals "Vise &- Mitra) 
Sananda, Sandtana, Bodhu, Panoha-B'ikha, Asuri, beasts W. Bhi j 
Valmiki, Bamdeva, Kasyapa, Sambarta, Utathya, Kacha, Vrihaspati, Bhrigu, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


> A 
144 THE BRAHMA-V AIV ARTA PURAN A. 


S'ukra, Chyavana, Nava, Narayana, S’aktri, Parásara, Vyasa, Jaimini, S'uka- 
deva, Markandeya, Lomasa, Kanwa, Káty&yana, Astika, Jarat- Karu, Risya- 
S’ringa, Vibhándaka, Paulastya, Agastya, S’aradwana, S'ringi, Samika, Arista- 
nemi, Mándavya, Paila, Panini, Kanád, S'&kalya, S’akatayana, Astá-bakra, 
Bhaguri, Sumantu, Vatsa, Javili, Yagna-Valka, Vaisampáyana, Yati, Hamst, 
Pippalada, Maitreya, Maratha, Upa-manyu, Gaur-Mukha, Aruni, Aurva, 
Káksivàna, Bharadwaj, Veda-S'irà, S’anku-Karna, or S'aunaka ? Who are 
you among these virtuous Saints ? If Ido not deserve a reply, still you 
should reply. 


28-34. A bondsman or a bondswoman may put these question to his 
or her god whom he or she serves. Truly am I blessed ; and it seems 1 have 
discharged my duties propérly. My life has been blessed ; for the dust ‘of your 
feet has consumed the sins accumulated by me in ten millions of births. The 
earth has been consecrated by the dust of your feet; and my hermitage has 
been turned into a temple by your arrival. Probably, you are one of the great 
personages described by the S'ruti. 1 have been able to see you by virtue 
of my previous religious merits; your disciples also who are, as it were, the 
Vedas incarnate and bright like the mid-day summer sun have purified my 
race and Gokula with the dust of their feet. Now be pleased to bless my son 
cheerfully ; for tue blessing of a Brahmin is very auspicious and is as efficacious 
as Swastyayana, (a rite to avert calamity and secure blessings). Hearing this, 
the great muni and his disciples smiled with complacency. 


35 55. Then the pure-minded saint Garga cheerfully addressed words to 
Yasoda that were beneficial, delightful and full of truth and ethical maxims. 
He said: “Your words conform to social law ; they are suited to the occasion and 
sweet like nectir. A noble person is worthy of the family to which he or 
she belongs. As the sun is to the lotus, sois Giri-bhünu to the cow-herds. 
His wife Padmávati is fair like the lotus. You are her daughter Yasod& born 
to add to the fame of your parents. You have been wedded to Nanda, the 
best of cowherds who is as dear to you as your life. I know who you, Nanda 
and this boy are. I shall tell you in private about them to Nanda. My 
name is Garga. Vasudeva has sent me here to do something which cannot be 
performed by others." In the meantime Nanda heard of his arrival through 
a messenger and arriving there he adored the saint by throwing himself prostrate 
on the ground. He likewise bowed low to the disciples who blessed him. 
Then the saint got up and conducted both Nanda and Yagoda with their child to 
a lovely and solitary room. He then gave out profound secrets saying : '*Listen 
io my auspicious words. I tell you why Vasudeva has sent me here." 


56-62. Vasudeva had exchanged this child with your daughter. 
He is the son of Vasudeva who is just like an elder brother to you. ^ hrough 
fear of Kamsa, he took your daughter to Kamsa. You should prepare to 
perform his Anna-Pragana (the ceremony of giving food to a new-born child 
for the first time, and Nam-Karan, (the ceremony of naming the child after 
his birth). he child is theSupreme Being. Through his “Maya (literally, 
illusion) he has come to the earth to relieve her of hee burden, pursuant to 
the entreaties of Brahma. He is the Lord Krisna, the hebed of RAdhå in 
the Goloka and the husband of Kamala in the Vaikuntha. Heis Vignu, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Pe 


KRISNA JANMA-KHANDA 145 


— 


resident of the White Islands. He is enborn, existing 
from all eternity : Kapila, Nara, Narayana, etc, are all his digits. The 
accumulation of all light, incarnate, manifested itself to Vasudeva in the first 
place and was then born as bis child. The child left the house where he was born 
and he has now come to you. He has not come out of the womb ofa woman, 
but has only descended into the world. By power of his illusion. he filled the 
womb of his mother with wind, displayed his real image first to Vasudeva and 
then manifested himself as his child. O cow-herd, his name and colour differ 
First he was white, then red and then yellow; and in this 
In the age of Satya or truth, he was white ; and 
the light of his body was very -brilliant; in the Treta, he wasred; in the 
Dwapara, he was yellow. He is black in hue, in the ageof Kali, graceful, 
effulgent and Supreme. This is why he is called Krisna. Ka means Brahma 
or the Supreme Being; Hi means eternal; Sa means S'ivaj "Na means 


Dharma ;-A means Visnu of the White Islands and the Visarga means Nara 
and Náráyana. Hence Krisna is the conjunction of all light. He is the 
emblem of all form, receptacle of all objects and the germ of everything. 
Hence Krisna is so called. Kris means final liberation of the soul ; Na means , 


your preserver, the 


in every age. 
age he has become black. 


redemption; A means donor. Krigna possesses all these virtues ; h 4 
n ; hence he-is so 


called. 

63-74. O Nanda, the recollection of ten millions of the names of god 
yields the same reward as the remembrance of the name of Krisna only for 
one time. lhe recollection of the name of Krisna gives the same fruit as the 
recitation of his name or listening to it. The recollection of Krisna or the 
recitation of his name destroys the sins accumulated by man in ten millions 
of births. Krişna is. the cream of all the names of Visnu. It is excellent, 
all good and calculated to give faith and bondage. As soon as the worshipper 
pronounces the original letter £a, he obtains the redemption which Consists in 
immunity from birth and desth. Ri destroys all his calamities. Sa destroys 
all his sins; Na, all his diseases; A kills death. When the pronunciation of 
a partis so efficacious, the pronunciation of the whole name will, no doubt, 
scare away all the evils. ‘he attendants of Krigna mounted on a car r...ü 
from the Goloka to the place where Hari's name is recited or heard. Savants 
may count the particles of dust of which the earth is composed. But no one 
can count the virtues or measure the greatness of the name of Hari. At first, 
I heard something of the glory of this name from Siva. My préespiop ae 
knows the virtues and prowess of the name to a certain extent. But Brahma, 


ant a, th dly Risi Manu, the men and the Vedas do not know 
a LEE that blessed name. O Nanda, in the 


( a sixteenth part of the ;randeur of 3 ) A I 
light ary ‘atellect and EON io the version of my spiritaal guide, I 
related to you the greatness of your son. i EM 
5-92. © Lord of the Vraja, Krigna has got the to -whi 
I ae from my spiritual aide viz, Pitámvara, Kamsa-Dhaamsis Weine 
S'ravà Daivaki-Nandan, S/risa. Yasod&-Nandana, Hari, Sau ARE e a, 
Wien. Sarvesa. Sarva-Rupa-Dhrik, Sarvadhar, Barras e x aie 
Radh’-Vandhu, Radhikatma, Rádhikà-Jivan, the thief i fs bei E 
life of Ragha, the associate of Radha, Radha-Maénas-Paraka, the h of 


19 
CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


j 
I 
i 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


2 1 A 
146 THE BRAHMAVAIVARTA PURANA. 


Radha, the body of Radha, one attached to Radha, the soul of Radha, the 
lord of Hádhá, one dearer to Rádhá than her life, the Lord, the Supreme 
Brahma, Govinda, Garuda-Dhwaja, hence one who presides over creation 
(i.e. the lord of creation) You should carefully cherish in your heart these 
names likely to do away with life and death. Ihave recited the names of 
the younger brother as I heard. Now hear the names of the elder brother, 
The fetus was dragged out of the womb;hence he is called Sankarsana No 
limit hasbeen assigned to him in the Vedas, hence he is called Ananta, He 
is very powerful, hence he is called Baladeva. He puts on a white or black 
dress or blue dress and holdsa pestle for husking the rice in his hands. Hence 
he is called Musali. He always enjoys the society of Revati, hence he is called 
the lover of Revati. He is the son of Rohini; bence he is called Rauhineya, 
Thus I have stated to you as. I heard, O King Nanda, now dwell in peace in 
your house and I am also going home." Nanda and Yasodd were struck 
dumb at these words and almost lost their locomotive powers. The boy smiled 
with joy. Then Nanda with folded palms and reverential irclination of his head 
bowed humbly to the saint and said, "OLord, if you go away, who is so great 
among us a: to be alle to perform the naming and eating ceremonies? You 
have just mentioned the names of Krisna connected with Radha. Why did 
you associate her name and whois this Râdbâ? Kindly tell me all this in 
detail.” The saint smiled at his words and said, “O King of the Vraja, I 
am going to tell youa profound secret. Listen. Iam about to narrate the 
ancient history of the Goloka which I heard from S'iva In days of yore, 
there wasa quarrel between S'ridima and Radha. By the curse of Rádbá, 
S'rizlàma.has attained the condition of a demcn and Radha, that of a cow- 
herdess. 


93-104. Radh& is the daughter of Vriga-bhánu. Her mother's namo is 
Kalavatt. Nalávati is the proper match of her husband who is the outcome 
of half of the body of Krisna He resides in tho Goloka with the permission 
of Krisna. Radh& isthe primordial goddess, Nature, and is born ont of the 
womb of no woman. Through powers of her Maya or illusion, she had filled 
the womb of her mother with wind. When the wind emanated from the womb, 
she assumed the form of a child and by Krisna’s command has just manifested 
herself in this world. ‘This RAdba is growing in the Vraja like the digits of 
the Moon of the bright half of the lunar month. She partakes of the moiety 


of the energy of Lord Krisna and has incarnated herself. The same Being 


bas split himself into two paris, vizą, R&dhà and Krisna. ‘he Vedas hold 
that they are indivisible. 


It has not been determined which of them is the 
male and which of them is the female. In beauty, virtue, intelligence, know- 
ledge and prosperity, both of them are equal. Radh& came down first from 
the Goloka ; hence she is older. Krisna a ways contemplates Rádhá as his 
spouse who also remembers him as her beloved consort. Radha ie, as it were, 
composed of his life. Krişņa is also embodied in her life He bas come to 

Gokul to ful] the promise which he held out‘to Radha in the Goloka. The | 
fear ot Kamsa is merely a pretext on his part. His main cbject is to keep the 

word which he had pledged to Hádhà. How is it possible for the lord of 
fear to cherish fear in his mind? The etymology of the word Rádhá is speci- 
Hed in the Sam-Veda. Hari stated the etymology ofthe word to Bruhmá, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
KRISNA JAN M A-K HAN DA. 147 


while he was settled in the navel of his lotus. Brahma stated it to S’ankara 
in the Brahmá-loka ; and.S/ankara stated it to me at the Kailása. niz 


105-132. O King Nanda, this etymology is mysterious even to the 
gods Tt is solicited by the gods and demons and calculated to give redemp- 
tion. The utterance of Ra, the first letter of the word Radha, destroys the 
sins accumulated in ten millions of births and the consequences ofall acts, 
The utterance of A dispenses with death, disease, and the neces- 
sity of dwelling again in the womb. The utierance of Dha prolongs longevity ; 
and the utterance of A relieves a person from the ties of the world. The pro- 
nunciation, audience and recollection of the name-of Rádhá unquestionably des- 
troy at one and the same time the sufferings occasioned by Karma, the ties of the 
world and the liability to take one's birth again in the womb of a woman. The 
utterance of Ita imparts to a person immoveable faith in the lotus feet of Hari 
as Wellas his bondage and enables him to attain Hari who is the mine of all 
sorts of happiness (desired by a person as well as perfection. he utterance of 
Dha gives him Sársti (a kind of emancipation vesting the individual soul with 
the power and attributes of the Supreme Being), Sárupya (a kind of emanci- 
pation in which the soul is identified with the Deity), Mukti (liberation from 
the ties of the world), an insight into the essence of Lord Krisna and his 
society for a period of time equa! to that assigned to Krisna, 2. e., till eternity, 
The utterance of A makes a man generous, energetic: devoted to Yoga or medita- 
tion like S’iva and perpetuates in his mind the remembrance of Hari. The 
recollection, utterance, audience, and contemplation of the entire name of Rauha 
dispel the cob-web of illusion and all kinds «f sins and scare away disease, 
sorrow, death and Yama. J have narrated to you what I heard. 1 give you 
only a pirtial account of Radha and Madhava in the light of my limited 
intellect. The description of the whole account is beyond my power, I 

shall marry them (Hálbà aud Krisn:) at Vrindá- vana, by citing the Fire- 
Brahmá will officiate on the occasion as priest. Your Krisna 


good or bad. 


od as my witness K 
will release the son of Kuvera, eat condensed milk and butieras well as the 


B hnn E t and easily kill the demons named Dhenuka, 
fruits of palmyra in the orena RE E C. ena : 


Vaka, Kesî and Pralamba. [ tamo : 
dol by the wives of the Brahuins, give them and ker ee 
turb Indra's sacritice “aad protect the cows from ne ands. ; E 
will perform the rite of stealing the clothes ga the anaie atid EA 
> as r 

to them the clothes later on, grant tham the» boons. fth 

sir rts wi i te (Rasa is a circular dance of the cow- 
their hearts with the music of the flute m E Epiese 


herdesses with Krişna at the centre). i é à l1 : 

ho ptt of the Full Moon wil) perform the bee Eee e 
Asa d k ås er ha 

ceremony of the Rûâsa in the sphere of the Ras. bu fi M wil. join | 


inter l 
: ith a xual intercourse newly will 
MEME mi Uh Through the curse of *Sridáma, 


them in amorous pastimes in the waters. 1 &1hà for a century: 
he will be Supe it from the cow-herds, cow lier desses and bun Rr | 
wherefore he will go to Mathura. The fab ey ibe niil Rd 
with grief on his departure for Mathura He p (a RH oh iuste 
then preserve his chariot anl Akrüra from their ME mount the car and j 

to the girls to the effect that he would be coming un Boyes Hà sill give 
cross the Yamunf with his father, brother and ths pee image reflected in the 
celestia] wisdom to Akrüra and show him bs evi x : 


«CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


A 
148 THE BRAH M A-V AIVARTÁ PURANA. 


waters Then in the evening he will merrily observe the festival celebrated in 
the town and set at liberty the gardener, the weaver and the hunch-backed 
woman. He will then break the bow of S'iva, witness the place designed for 
the performance of the sacrifice, visit the royal council and kill the elephants 
and the wrestlers. Then he will kill Kamsa, set at liberty his own futher, 
console his kith and kin and install Ugia-Sen in the kingdom. By imparting 
knowledge, he will relieve the sorrows of ihe daughters-in-law of Ugrasena. 
He and his brother will arrive at the house of their spiritual guide, acquire 
knowledge there and, by way of fee, present his deceased son to him by calling 
him back from the land of the shades. They will then return home and 
defraud the army commanded by Jarásandha and the wicked infidel. Then 
this boy will construct Dwárk&, release Muchukunda and go to Dwárká along 
with the Yadavas, There he will cohabit and sport with his women and add 
to their prosperity by multiplication of their sons and grandsons. He will 
then remove from his own character the blot or stigma caused by the false 
imputation that he had stolen a gem and with the help of the Pandavas 
relieve the earth of her burden. He will easily perform the grand royal: 
sacrifice cE King Yudhisthira, the son of Dharma, and eru:h the pride of 
Indra by stealing a Párijáta flower. 


133-143. He will fulfil the vow of Satya, cut off the hands of 
Bana, control Hara, abduct the daughter of Dna, release Aniruddha from 
the oapital of the region ruled by Bana, burn his town, remove the 
poverty of a Brahmin, give him a son and chastise the wicked. Then 
on the plea of pilgrimage, he will see you all and go back with Râdhå 
to the enclosure of the cow-herds. ‘hus the Lord of the Cow-world, after 
having finished all his work, will establish a digit of the Supreme Being at 
Dwürkà andcome back to the Goloka with Radha. Then Náráyana will 
follow suit with Laksm? and go to the Vaikuntha. The saints, Nara and 
Nár&yana, will go to the house of Dharma: and Visnu will go to the occan of 
milk. © Nanda, I just described to you the future as spccitied in the Vedas. 
Now I shall tell you the immediate object of my arrival. In the month of 
Mágha, on the 14th day of the bright half of the lunar month, the moon, the star 
and Revati, the last of the 27th lunar mansions, are auspicious in the interests 
of your scn. On that day ina favourable moment the ceremony in question 
ought to be performed. On that day of the lunar month, the moon stays in 
the sign Pisces in the Zodiac, in consequence of which the glance of the moon 
is perfect (i.e free from defect) and there is a conjunction of the moon with the 
Sign Libra of the Zodiac and there are many other favourable omens also. 
a D E cays in consultation with savants, the ceremony ought to 

performed. Xo saying, the saint came out and remained outside. Then 
Nanda and Yaśodâ prepared for the ceremony with alacrity. 


144-160. In the meantime, many cow-herds, male and female, came to the 
house of Nanda to see Garga. He looked like the mid-day summer anne while sur- 
rounded by his disciples and he was effulgent with the lustre of Brahma. His 
disciples were referring to him abstruse points of the Yoga sysiem. He was delight- 
fully witnessing the beauties of the house of Nanda, He was seated ona throne 
of gem and making signs by inter-twining the fingers in religious medi- 
tation, and with his eye of wisdom, he was beholding the present, the past and 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
KRISNA JANMA-KHAN DA. 149 


by the prowess which he acquired through his 
à in his mind and also seeing the Lord outside 
pis mind seated in the lap of Yasod4; and the form outside was the exact counter- 
part of the form which he beheld inside his heart. Hesaw in his presence the 
form which could be traced by the Dhyana given to him by Lord Siva. 
His mind was highly gratified : at tho time he was shedding tears of joy, and 
by means of Yoga or contemplative meditation, he was reverentially worship- 


ping him at heart. Seeing him in this condition, the spectators bowed low. 
home. ‘Zhen Nanda with a 


‘The Muni blessed them and they cheerfully went 
cheerful heart sent invitation-letters to his relations, far and near. Afterwards 
he set up artificial streams full of milk, curd, ghee, molasses, oil, honey, butter, 


whey, or sbarbet of candies sugar. Jn connection with the ceremony in 
question, he constructed a hundred hills of winter-rice, a hundred hills of gold, 
seven hills of salt, sixteen hills of ripe fru 


its, delicious balls of the flour of 
wheat and barley, cakes, swcet-meat in general, cakes of ground rice and seven 
hills of cowries. He then prepared a temple of betel-leaves 


without doors or 
apertures, perfumed with camphor, besprinkled with aloe, musk and sandal 
and containing incensed water. 


He also placed in heaps, here and there, gold, 
pearls, corals, cloths and ornaments. 1 


161-175. In connection with this ceremony of giving food to the 
child for the first time after his pirth, Nanda in great glee surround- 
ed the court-yard of his house with columns of plaintain which he deco- 
rated with gréen foliage and leaves cf mangoes by inter-weaving them 
with fine thread. ‘That court-yard was cleansed, sprinkled with sandal- 
paste and decked with sandal, aloe, musk, flowers, auspicious jars, wreaths and 
excellent cloths. That place teemed with cows, oblations of honey and milk, 
mattings, £ uits, lotus. and reverberated with ihe sound of trumpets, drums, 
flutes, mailed armour, etc. The Vidy 4-dbaris roamed about coquettishly and 
their Gandarva gallants sang with due modulations of sound. Golden thrones 
and ears were placed, here and there. In the meantime, a messenger came 
and informed Nanda of the arrival of Giri-bhánu with his family. He was 
attended by many myrmidons, four hundred thousand chariots and elephants, 
ten millions of horses and litters, scints, Brahmins, savants, bards and number- 
less cow-herds and cowherdesses. Nanda went out and- received them. He 


idea t ith suitable seats in the court- ard and properly worshipped 
AM tio ead he ae and honoured them with 


the future. The adept Muni, 
mantras, was observing the Lor 


them. He threw himself prostrate before t j u e 
water to wash the feet, with offers of green grass, ric? etc. Then tl e E r 
of Nanda was full of. men aud articles. One could not hear the voice ofthe | 1 


other. 
z Ud SA : ieee 
176 189. Kuvera, for the satisfaction of Lord Krişna, rained gold for ih 3 
Muhártas (A Muhürta = 48 minutes) and filled Gokhal with ea The reati 3H 
[No d l ith them for gifts to Arigna were 3 
of Nanda wip raae ue a bon Nanda performed his diurnal rites, 


at the sight of the above affluence. 
e ared himself vith sandal, aloe, musk, saffron, etc., 
put op meried eee golden ig Nana, the lord of the 


washed his feet and sat down on à : d 
Vraja, with the permission of Garga ant other saints, remembered non A 
pronounced Swasti, (benediction.) After having peona a He m» 
preseribed by the Vedas, he fed ihe cbild. As requested by E id ene 
him the auspicious name of Krisna, ie. he named him Krena Ee tee 77 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. A 
150 “THE BRAHMA-V AIVARTA PURANA. 


with rice and ghee and caused various auspicious rites to be performed with 
flourish of music, etc, He then distributed to the bards, Brahmins and 
beggars various kinds of gems, golden ornaments, cloths, articles of food and 
heaps of gem. ‘They were unable to bear the lose of so much gold, etc. Then 
Nanda feasted the BrAhmins, his relations and particularly the beggars with 
delicious sweet-meat in abundance. The Lord of the Vraja presented several 
gems, cloths, ornaments, corals, gold, diamonds, gold-cups constructed by 
Viswa-Karmé and every thing that was there. to Garga. He likewise gave 
to his disciples heaps of gold with the greatest humility. The remnants he 
distributed to the Brahmins. 


190-200. Then Garga took Lord Krisna toa salitory place, bowed 
to bim low and worshipped him reverentialy with folded palms and rap- 
tures thus. “O Lord of the Universe, O Krisna, by whose grace fear 
of the world is removed, be propitiated with me and give me the 
position of bondage so that I may serve your lotus feet. I have nothing to 
do with the treasure which your father has given me. Secure for me only 
firm faith in your lotus-feet which alone hold- out to his worshippers assurance 
of immunity from all danger. I do not want, O Lord, any kind of perfection, 
(Anima etc.), Yoga or mental abs!rastion, final emancipation, ontological 
knowledge, immortality, ete I do not care for the position of Indra, Manu or 
the eternal bliss of Heaven. I do not want any of tho four kinds of redemption, 
(Sa-lokya ete.) I simply want your bondago. To me it isimmaterial whether 
I livo in the Cow-world or in the Pata'a. But I pray that 1 may always 
remember your lotus feet. As tho result of my acts performed in several 
_ births, I have acquired the knowlelge of the Vedas from S^iva and have become 
omniscient, allseeing and capable cf going every where. But, O ocean òf 
mercy, © friend of tho poo-, sho v nerey tome. If you pressrve me by the 
side of your lotus-feet by giving me assurance of my safety, what can death 
do? Siva by youc worship has become the Conqueror of death, the destroyer 
and the spiritual guide of the Yogis. 

201-213. Brahm& one of whose days biings about the down-fall of 
fourteen Indras in succession has acquired the status of a creator by 
tee adoration of your lotus-feet, By ministering to your feet, the hundred- 
headed Ananta is able to sustain the world on his head as if it were a grain of 
sesamum. The supreme and excellent goddess, Laksmi, the source of all 
prosperity, always polishes your feet with her hair. ‘Tho primoraial Nature, 
the emblem of energy, always sets her heart upon your lotus-feet. By the 
adoration of your feet, Saraswati who presides over knowledge and is the 
mother of wisdom, has been revered by al‘; Savitri who is the mother of the 
Vedas and consecrates the threo worlds has become the sole refuge of Brahma 
and the Brahmins. Nay, Radh& who constitutes half of your body and is equal 
to you'in splendour in every respect wields the lotus of your feet in her hesrt. 
Lord, favour me as you have favoured S'iva and the gods, Padma and the 
goddesses. l'or you are equally msrciful to all. O Lord of the universe, 
.l shall not accept your wealth; nor shall I go home. Make me, i pray, a 
bondsman of your lotus-feot.” After this hymn, Garga with streaming 


eyes and with ,Taptures agitating his frame fell down prostrate at the 
Jotus feet of Hari and wept, again and again, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA-KHANDA. 151 


- 


214-230. The mercifal Lord Krisna laughed at his words with approbation 
and said: ** May your faith continue in me unshaken!” Whoever reads the hymn 
composed by Lord Krisna every day in the morning, noon and evening obti 
undying faith in Hari, secures his bondage, ( e. becomes his servant) and 
keeps up the recollection of Hari for ever in his mind, “He gets rid of birth 
death, decrepitude, disease, fear, perils and earthly attachments and remains eye. ; 
devoted to his service. He lives at ease with Krisna in his domain and a 
never separated from him. The saint, after pronouncing his eulogies, handed 
over Krisna to Nanda and said: “O Lord of the Vraja, kindly permit 
me now to go home For a wonder, this world is full of illusion. Like 
the foams or fioths | of the ocean, people are ever united and disunited 
here.” — Hearing this, Nanda wept. For separation from a virtuou 
and faithful friend is worse than death to a good man. The c 3 
herds, male and female, also wept. ‘hey all reyerentially bowed Tsai 
the excellent saint who blessed them in return and went to Mathura The 
holy sages and the relations of Nanda, fully provided with wealth EL 
the bards satisfied with sweet-meat, excellent clothes, first class horses ad 
golden ornaments went home. The beggars who ate to their fill were T 
walk. All who were overloaded with gifts were exhausted in the way. So s 
walked slowly, scme lay on the ground, others got up and resumed ibis JOE 
Some danced and sang, others recited old ballads, Some narrated the iat 
of Marutta, S’weta, Sagara, Mándhátà ÜUttanpáda, Nahvsa, Nala, the Foral 
sacrifice of Râma, the deeds of the god Ranti and other kings as they heard from 
their elders; others listened to these accounts. Some broke their journey in the 
way to take rest; others :lept, again aud again and then plodded their weary 


way. ‘Thus every one cheerfully went home. 

931-244 Then Nanda and Yasod& alternately clasped the infant to 
their breasts and spent their days merrily in the house which vied 
with Kuvera's mansion in splendour. Both Balaráma and Krigna grew, 
day by day, each like the moon of the bright half of the month. At 
one time, they would get up by holding in their hands the tail of 
the cow or by grasping the wall in the manner of infants; at other times, they 
would speak in a half audible voice. They would sometimes move about in the 
court-yard and {hus add to tha joys of their parents. In course of time, 
Hari could easily crawl on his knees and also walk a pace or two. Balarama 
was older than Krigna by a year. When they cvuld thas move, there was no 
limit to the joy of Nanda and Yagoda. These illusive or illusory boys could 
gradually walk, here and there, at Gokul and after a while they could speak 

then went to the house of Vasudeva at Mathura. Vasudeva, 
d low and enquired of him tidings about the 
d him of their welfare 


distinctly. Garga 

when he saw him, respectEully bowe ^ He. 

welfare of Krisna and Balaráma. The saint infor 0 

and told him about the ceremony which was performed with great pomp. 

Both Vasudeva and Daivaki were filled with joy at the news and shed tears in 

raptures. The Muni then blessed them and went home. Vasudeva and 

Daivaki passed their days happily in the house which resembled the mansion 

of Kuvera. O Narada, I am talking of that p n Bee is ined 
an avarhana and the husband of fifty damsels. ou 

of tho Gandarias ae nae iota than their lives and expert in sexual 


were a youth at that time dearer to 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


A 
152 THE BRAHMA-V AIVARTA PURANA. 


intercourse, Afterwards, by the curso of Brahma, you were begotten by a 
Brabmin upon a female slave. But, later on, you ate the remnants of food 
left by a Vaisnava; and, by virtue of this act, you have been born as the son 
of Brahma. By Hari’s service, you have become omniscient and all-seeing ; 
and every-thing relating to the past is always green in your memory. I have 
related to you every-thing connected with the ceremonies of naming and feeding 
the child. ~Now I am going to describe to you other features of his character 
calculated to destroy the germs of life, decrepitude and othor evils. 


CEARCAN PATIRIR = BCE: 


1-14. Once upon a time, Yasodá went to bathe in the Yamuná. 
- Krisna saw that the house was full of condensed milk, cream, butter, etc. He 
ate them up at once as well as the cakes of ground rice and the newly churned 
ghee deposited in the cirriage. After eating them, while he was rubbing or 
wiping his mouth with a piece of yellow cloth, Ya$odà returned and saw her 
son in the room. But seeing that the vessels of honey, butter, etc., were all 
empty and lying on the ground, she asked tho boys as to who the presump- 
tuous offender was. The boys said, “Krişna has eaten all and he gave nothing 
tous,” Hearing this, Yagod& was highly incensed and, flushing red like 
lotus, she ran after Krigna with a cane in hor hand. But she could not catch 
hold of the flying boy who eludes the grasp of even Siva and ascetics trying 
to hold him iu their hewt by meditation. She began to perspire ; her face be- 
came parched; she grew more and more angry. Then the merciful Lord Krigna, 
seeing that his mother was exhausted, stood up and confronted her witha 
smile. Yasoda held his hand and brought him to her house. She then fastened 
Hari to a tree with a piece of cloth and struck him, again and again. After 
having tied him thus, she left him in this condition and went hme. By the 
bare touch of the child, tho tree which was as huge as a mountain came down 
with a crash. ‘The lord of the universe remained at the root of the tree. When 
the tree fell, a celestial being, in the prime of his youth, of fair complexion, 
decked with gold and ornaments of gem, emanated from it and, bowing to the 
Lord, ascended a celestial car and went up to Heaven. When the tree fell with 
a mighty noise, Yasoda in great fear held the frightened and weoping boy in 
her lap. The whole Gokula then arrived at the house of Nanda ; some of the 
assembly rebuked Ya$o& and performed on a small scale propitiatory rites 
on behalf of the child. The Brahmins blessed him. Nanda, for the benefit 
of his son, distributed wealth to the bards and caused the name of Hari to be 
‘recited by the Bráhmins. 


15-34, The cowherds, male and female, rebuked Yasod& saying, '*O 
‘lady of the Vraja, we credit you with but small sense. In your 
old age you have got a son. Ifthe wealth, paddy and jewels accumulated by 
a person be not enjoyed by his son, they will beall fruitless. Cruel damsel, 
for ordinary milk and honey, you tied your son to the root of a tree and leaving 
hm in that condition you took part in domestic affairs. Foolish woman, of 
what use would these things have been unto you, had the boy perished?” So 
‘saying, they went away, Then Nanda with eyes flushed like a pair of red lotuses 
and highly incensed said thus: O Yasoda, [ will just undertake a pilgrimage 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Mx 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA-K HAN DA. 153: 


Or, you had better leave the house. I do not want 
an the gift of a hundred wells; the gift 


; ofa big poud is better than the gift of a hundred small ponds ; the performance 
of a sacrifice is better than the gift of a hundred big ponds ; and the attainment 
of a son is better than a hundred sacrifices. The religious sanctity obtained 

by a person by devotion and gift is beneficial to him in the next world; but a 

good son is a source of delight in this world as wellasin the next. An 
affectionate wife is,as it were, the embodiment of worldly desires and the 
chain which ties the husband to the concerns of the world; she is the very 
But the son is far dearer than 


emblem of illusion and temporal attachments. 
the wife or even than life. There isno one so dear as the son.” Nanda thus 


rebuked his spouse Yaśodâ and Rohini busied themselves in domestic 
matters. 


35-57. 


with the boy in my arms 
you. The gift of a pond is better th 


Narada said,“ © Lord, who was that well-dressed person that 


dwelt at Gokula in the shape of a tree 2 And why did he become a tree pA 
Nár&yana said, “Once upon a time, Nala- Kuvara, the son of Kuvera, went with 


Rambhå to the forest c£. Nandan with a view toamorous diversion. Fora 
f flowers, near the holy fg 


short time, on the coast of the pond in the grove o 
tree, redolent of the breeze that kissed the flowers, he made a delightful bed 
besmeared with sandal, aloe, musk, saffron, etc., covered with silk and wreath 
of flowers and lighted up with lamps and there co-habited with her in eight 
According to the method prescribed by books he kised her in six 
ways and by the conjunction of different members of the body, he gave her 
three kinds of embrace. ‘hen the witty and expert son of Kuvera flirted with 
her (using his teeth and nails for this purpose) from land to water and from 
water to land. While engaged in this act, he was suddenly seen by the great 
saint, Devala. The saint also marked ibat .Rambhá& naked, possessing thick 
buttocks and Joins, lacerated with teeth and nails, with dishevelled hair and 
with a frame agitated with passion, was looking at the son cf Nal-Kuyara, her 
gallant He too returned the glance. The lustful Rambha cast at him a 
decked with ear-rings, armlets, bracelets, 


rooked, graceful glance and she was 
US 3 She had girdles o£ small bells round her i 


ways. 


anklets and other ornaments of gem iac : 0 
feet: and her forehead was marked with vermilion, Nal-Kuvara was 60 much ex- 
saw the saint. Therefore the 


cited with passion that he did not get up when he 
saint was vighly incensed and said to him. “Wreich, take the form of a tree aud 


descend to Gokul. You will be subsequently released by the touch c Krigna and 

then you will return to your hou:e." To the wistful Rambhá, he said, “Wretch, 

assume a human form and b'come the blessed wife of Janmejaya. ; Asso- 

ciation with Indra will bring you back to Heaven." p saying, thesi went 

home and the graceful Nal-Kuvara also departed. 3 Now, listen. ; sm going 

to narrate to you the history of Wambhá. She was born in e à | 

daughter of a king called Suchandra and Was Very fair in spe pee e 3 

with ornaments, she was married by her father to dan ie ae p. ACA B 

and was granted a magnificient dowry. She was much love: i , er busban 
and became the principal queen The King cobabited m i E HA 

places in solitudo. When King Janmejaya was initiale in the Decr e 
grand royal sacrifice, Indra secretly rode on ilie sacrificial herse to b i oe 
of the King. Queen Vasustami, as she heurd the account o e lovely 


20 


" d 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. . 


154 THE BRAHMA-V AIV ARTA PURANA. 


horse, went to seo him (the horse) alone, out of curiosity. When Indra saw / 
her alone, he seized and raped her, in spite of her remonstrances. Indra wag so t 
much infatuated that he had no idea of day aud night. The Queen after her 
rape put an end io herself through the powers of yoga. Indra, through 
fear of the King, went: to heaven abashed. When the King heard all this 
and saw the dead body of the Queen, he wept bitterly. He then performed 
his sacrifice, made full offerings of ghee to the fire and gave fees to the priests. 
Rambb& went back to heaven. Thus, I narrated io you the history of the 
breaking (i.e. destruction) of the tree called Arjuna, and the redemption of 
Naia-Kuvara and Rambhá. Now listeu to the other accounts of Krisna which 
give religious sanctity an take away birth and death, 


CHAPTER XV. 


» 1-12. Once upon a time, Nanda went to Vrindávana with Krigna and near 
Vrindavana in the forest of fig-tress, he busied himself with grazing the cows, 
With the delicious water of the pond situated in the forest, he quenched the 
thirst of the cattle and himself drank it. ‘Then he rested at the root of the 
holy &g-tree with the boy in his lap. At this time, through the illusion and 
the supernatural powers of the boy, the sky was overcast. The forest assumed 
a dark-blue aspect. Thoro was an outburst of storm and tempest and the 
clouds thandered in the sky. Anon, there was a very heavy down-pour; and 
the trees, agitated by the wind with very great forco, quivored. Nanda was 
frighjened at the scene and said, **How can I go home by leaving the cow 
and the calves ? If I go home, what will be tho fate of this boy ?" When he 
was soliloquizing in this way, Ràdhà came to Krişna with the gait of a wag tail 
or swan Her face resembled the full moon of autumn. Her eyes possessed the 
grace of the lotus which blooms in autumn and wero beautitul'y lined with 
Jamp-black. Her nose put to shame the bills of the divine eagle. ‘The middle 
of her nose was thick and lighted up witha pearl Her head sustained a 
chignon and was decked with wreaths of jasmine, Her ear-rings were effulgent 
like the midday summer sun. Her lips were graceful like ripe bimbas, 


“13-20. Her teeth were bright like pearls he sweet smilo that played 
on her face surpassed the graco of the budding water-lily. ‘The charms of her 
features marked with musk and vermilion were extraordinary. The lock of 
hair on her head was enticing. Her breast was covered with a garland of- 
sapphire. The nipples of her breast were hard and graceful like bael. Sho 
was effulgent with the lustre of gems and the lines of painting by cosmetics. 
Her belly was round and her graceful navel was inclined downwards, The 
zoneround her waist was constructed with gems. She could even entice the 
heart of tho yogis with the graceful twist of her. brow, the only effectual weapon 
in the hands of Cupid, Her thighs were hard avd shame the trunk of ele- 
phants, Her feet were beauüifu! like land-lotuses: and covered with diamond 


chains, Pásakas and ringing anklets and painted with lac-dye. Her nails were 
likewise painted with lac dye. 


wee, = 


s .21-28. She put on clothes pure like fire. Her hands were decorated 
with the armlet, bracelet and ornaments made of conches Her fingers were 
de*oraí- with rings. The grace of her body was like the hue of the Champaka. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JAN MA-K HANDA. 155 


She held in her hand a lovely looking-glass rendered bright by an accompanying 
lotus of a thousand leaves. She lighted up the quarters with the radiance of 
her body when she arrived Nanda was astonished to see her in solitude and 
humbly said to her with tears in his eyes thus: “O goddess, I have heard every 
thing from Garga. You are, dearer to Hari than even Lakgmi. This also I 
know that the boy in my lap is the infallible Supreme Lord, superior even to 
Mahá-Visnu. But I have been spell-bound by the illusions of Visnu. Good 
nymph, accept, therefore, the lord of your life; and when your desire is fulfilled, 

return him to me " So saying, he gave the weeping child to Radha. Radha with 

a smile took him and said to Nanda, “ O lord of cowherds, you have seen me 
to-day, as a result of good deeds performed by you in several previous births. 


29-37. Garga has told you everything. The mysteries of our character 
ought not to be revealed to every one. You should go now to Gokula. Crave 
any boon that you desire ;and I can easily give it to you, thongh it could not 
bə attained even by the gods” Nanda replied, “Goddess, may my faith 
remain unshaken in your lotus feet! I do not want any other boon. O mother 
of the world, O great deity, may both of us be able to live by the side of your 
The goodess Rá&lhá replied, “ I shall bestow on both of 
you incomparable bondage. May your belief in us remain firm ; and may 
the lotus of our feet, though inaccessible, ever remain green in the memory. 
By my boon, illusion will never be able to cloud your 
intellect and you will go to the Vaikuntha after death." So saying, she took 
the child in her arms and went to a desirable place at a distance. Radha, 
excited with passion, clasped and kissed him, again and again, with a thrill of 
raptures. She was reminded of the sphere of the Rasa. At that time, 
through the illusions of Krisua, sh» beheld a houso construc od with gems and: 


containing diamond jars. 


inaccessible feet.” 


of yourselé and Yasodat 


lorned with pictures and picturesque 
bowers and suppo: ted by pillars red like vermilion. It containad several bad- 
steads besmeared with sandal, aloe, » usk and saffron and was adorned with 
It contained many articles of enjoyment, looking-glasses 
different places. It had diamond-gates and was 
rols and excullent flags. It had seven stair-cases 
f üowers which attracted the bees . The nya.ph 
ed with campkor, diamond jars full 
full of nectar and honey. Inside the 
bful being, dark-blue in appearance, 


38-49. ‘This imaginary house was ai 


jasmine- wre tths. 
and garlands of gems in 
decked with ornaments, appa 
of gen. - [t contained groves o 
*enterod and found there betel leaves season 
of fragrant and rotreshing water, and pots 
house, laid on a floral bed, she found a yout pea 
lovely and in the prime of his youth. His body had the grace of ae 
Cupids, He was smiling, goau-looking. and cheerful, clad in yellow dress. Sis 
bracelet and armlet; 


3 D: O m nan o bis hands, with 
feo; were decked with ringing anklets; his hands, wit è 
his face, with ear- rings; his breast, with the Kaustubha. His features seemed 


to have stolen the benu'io: of the Full moon; his eyes looked blooming {like the 


autumnal lotuses. 


50-64, This handsome youth w l 
hoad was decked with a crest of three bends conta niug. 
peacock. Ho was admiring the beauties cf the mansion. 
she was memory incarnate, wits asionished at the appearance 0 


jasmine wreaths His 
the plamage of the 
Radha, though 
Ë the youth aad. 


as covered -with 


- CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


156 THE BRAH M A-V AIV ARTA PURAN A. 


the absence of the boy from her lap. As the red-legged varta-velle drinks the 
rays of the moon, she with her eyes drank the beauties of his face. With open 
eyes, she passionately continued to stare at him. Then Lord Krisna looked 
at the smiling Rádh& in her puberty and said, “My beloved Radha, recollect 
the days of the Goloka I must fulfil the promise which I held out to you. 
You are dearer to me than my life. O my auspicious, affectionate Radbika, 
there is no difference between you and me, As whiteness always dwells in 
milk, heat in fire, smel] in soil, so I always dwell in you, As the potter or 
the goldsmith cannot construct a pot or an ear-ring without clay or gold, so 
I caunot create anything without you. You are the container of the world 
and I am the cause. Therefore, O chaste one, come and occupy my heart. 
As an ornament decks the body, come and deck me likewise. When I am 
dissociated from you, people call me merely IXrisna. But associated with you, 
I am S’ri-K risna. O Radha, you are female and I am male, as specified in the 
Vedas. You and I represent all kinds of form and energy. ‘The difference 
lies only in the sex. 


65-80. When by conjunction with you, I become the Vija or the germ of 
everything, you are also vested with absolute energy and assume the form of a 
female. You are the outcome of half of my body, the prin ordial nature. In 
valour, strength, intelligence and knowledge, both of us are on a par. A fool who 
regards us as separate dwells in the hell called the Thread of Timo as long as 
the sun and the moon exist. Seven of his generations in ihe upper degree 
and seyen, in the lower degree are degraded by his conduct: and religious 
merits acquired by him in millions of births are consumed. If a fool 
slanders us in the ignorance of his heart, he dwells in hell for the period 
of time allotted to a hundred Brahmas in succession. Whoever pronounces 
simply Rå acquires a feeling of profound devoutness. And in order to hear 
him pronounce the remaining words Dhà, I am tempted to go tohim. He 
acquires devoutness for his whole life, who worships me with sixteen ingredients. 
But he, too, is not so dear to me as the person who pronounces the name of 
Radha. The gods Brahm’, Ananta, S‘iva, Dharma, Nara, Nardyana (saint) 
Kapila, Kártika and Ganesa, and the goddesses Lakgm!, Saraswat}, Dargá and 
Sayitri are dear to me. But none of them is so dear to me as you. You are 


dearer to me than my life. They occupy other places, but you occupy my 
heart. My four-handed image at the Vaikuntha 


and I do likewise.” So saying, Krisna lay on his bed. Radha 
reverential bow, “Lord, how can I forget tho past ? By the grace of your 
lotus feet, I remember everything. © Lord of illusion, though I am so much 
devoted to you, yet I am bewildered by the magic of your illusion; or perbapa, 
many people have been bewildered by your illusion like myself I have been 
born as a woman through the carse of one of your yotaries. And then consider 
I shall be separated from you for a hundred years. 


81-102. Some incur the pleasure of God; and others, 
But God fayours his votaries according to the nature of 
turn a blade of grass into a mountain and a mou 
Therefore you are equally merciful to the competent and the incompetent and 
to a married couple. Lord, you are sleeping and | am standing, We are talking, 
and the time which has thus elapsed appears to me like a century; and that 


his displeasure. 
his prayers. You can 
ntain into a blado of grass 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


also sustains you in his heart; 
said with a - 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA-KHAN DA. 157 


time which has thus passed away, I shall be unable to recover or recall. Just 
» cast your lotus-feet on my head an J breast; the fire of your separation consumes 
my heart. First my eyes were cast at your feet; but I forcibly removed them 
from your feet to behold the other members of your body. My eyes, after 
having beheld the rest of your body, were ultimately fixed upon your lotus-face. 
Now I am unable to move them elsewhere." The best of beings, Lord Krigna, 
smiled at these words and addressed her with expressions likely to bring good 
` results and sanctioned by the Vedas and the Smritis thus: “Sly dear, I have 
preordained the line of action assigned to the people at every birth and in every 
No one can transgress it. My beloved, just wait a bit. I shall do 
you good. The time has arrived when your object will be gained. What has 
been allotted to you by destination must t ke place. Not to-talk of Brahma, 
I myself cannot alter the decrees of fate." While he was talking thus, the 
smiling, four-faced Brahma turned up with a rosary of beads and a wooden 
pot in bis hands Brahma first bowed low to Lord Krisna and with tears in 
his eyes, with a cheerful heart and reverential inclination of his head, adored 
him neoording to the hymn prescribed by the scriptures. He then bowed 
to him again and went to Radha He besieged (¢e, covered) her feet with 
the clusters of hair on his head, polished them with the water of his wooden 
pot and adored her with the hymn prescribed by the religious books thus, 
“O mother, to-day by the grace of Krisna, I haye been able to see your lotus- 
feet, which can so rarely be attained, particularly in India. At first in the 
holy place called Paskara, I prayed Lord Krigna forsixty thousand years. He 
was pleased and approached me saying. “Solicit any boon that you desire," I 
entreated the Lord saying, “© O Supreme Being. void of all attributes, may I 
be able to see the lotus feet of the unativinable Kadba : Please to confer upon 
me this boon.” Then Hari, when he witnessed my piety, paried with his illu- 
sions and said, ‘Son, wait for a time and I shall in process of time show you 
ther, a god’s word can never go amiss. This is 


tho lotus feet of Radha. O mo : | M ES L 
why I have been able to observe in India your feet courted universally in the 


Goloka,” 

103-113. Other goddesses are the digits of Neturei ted they are 
natural in tbe above sense; and they constitute the affect ve pur i s 
But you are the outcome of the body of Krigna and am to t UR ay Ae 
pect. No one can say which of you is Radha or E E mue hut 
determined even by the Vedas. O mother, you Rr Nok 3 nd the Vaikuntha: 
universe of Brahmá. You are eiernal like the oloka a e PNIS E 
As in the universe of Brahma, every creature is Dc ou aes a ee 
of Krisna, so you represent tho energy e eae ge E 

r roy. La RI E a : 
d gaaon g KR us O goddess, being associated n m ese 
Tevet you haye acquired the status of the mother of tha world; a sn 


i ain? g sition ef god. For 
i i i 7 life has attained to the posi ) 
uae sean ebd. out which architect is at the bottcm of this 


: a wonder, it is imposst t It isi ible to determine whether 
s i Sea IK i t is impossible 
Ch .. You are eternal like Krisna. : ER ae ld and 
Ed NC he is your digit. l am the dispenser of ME. KA 
: um Ee norem the Vedas. The teachings of Mey ya E " hundredth 
| man, But I, though the author of the Vedas, am unable to realist eo 
e V ) o LI 


place 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


158 THE BRAHMA-V AIV ARTA PURÀN A. 


part cf your virtues or the nature, of your eulogies. ‘The Vedas or the savants 
cannot describe your virtu s. Knowledge is at the root of the eulogies, And, 
mother, you are all-knowing. You have given birth to wisdom. Who is so 
wise as to be able to recite your praises ? A Jearned man can describe things 
which can be seen. But who can describe a thing nnseen, or unheard of 
befcre ? 


114-119. Ananta, S'iva or myself caunot sufficiently adore you. O mistress . 


- of the world, even the goddess of knowledge or the Vedas are unable to recite 
your praisos. [adored you as l humbly could, in the light of the scriptures. 
I ought not to be censured for this act For the gods and the goddesses ara 
equally kind to the competent and the incompetent, A son who is maintained 
by his parents performs good deeds and is liable to err at every step; but his 
parents out of affection excuse his misgivings. ‘ Brahma, after having 
worshipped her thus, bowed to the adorable and desired lotus feet of hádhá and 
Krigna and stood up before them with folded palms Whoever reads this ode 
composed by Brahma in the morning. noon or evening, no doubt, acquires 
reverence for the feet of Rådhå and Krisna and also secures their bondage. 
He'strikes an axe at the root of Karma, conquors the invincible death, trans- 
cends the bounds of all other worlds and goes direct to the Cow-world, 


120-125. Hádhá thon said “O Drahmá, solicit any boon that you desire”. 
Brahmá replied, goddess, may my faith remain unshaken in your lotus foet and 
the feet of Krigna!” — ádhá at once complied with vis wishes, Then Brahma 
reverontially bowed to them, kindled a fire in their midst and offered oblations 
of fire and ghee to tho flame.  Krigna too got up from the bed, sat down by 
the side of tho fiie aud cast clarified butter into it according vo tho method 
prescribed by Brahma. 


125-130. Then tho author of the Vedas bowed to Radha and Krigna and 
cireumambulaied round them seven times Radha also cireumambulated 
round tho fire; whereupon Drahmá bowed to Radha and Krisna and furnished 
the former with a seat, Then Brahna asked Krisna to hold Radha by the 
hand. When he did so, he caused him to recite the seven Mantras of the Vedas. 
Then Brahm’ placed the hands of Radia on the heart of Krişna and the hinds 
of Krisna on the back of Radha and made lRá&lbà recite all the mantras. He 
afterwards caused Râdhâ to place a wreath of Parijat round the neck of 
Krisna, which descended up to his knees. Thereafter Brahma bowed again to 
Krişņa and Radh& anl caused Krisna also to placea wroath round Radha’s 
neck. Then Brahma, ihe offspring of lotus, soated Nrisna and also seated 
Màdhà who represents the soul of Krigna on his loft side, “He, subsequently, 
caused both of them to read the five mantras of the Vedas with folded hands. 
As ths father gives away his daughter in marriage, ʻo Brahma bauded ovr 
Radha to Krişna and sat down before thom. In the meantime, the gods played 
upon drums and trumpets, Tie Gandarvas drank honoy; the Apsarás danced 
ina lovely manner, Brahma said, “In lieu of my priestly feo, I demand 
un:haken faith iv your lotus feet.’ fari replied, '* Let it be so, or ^ men! all 
will be well with you. Please go back to your destination now and be ready 
to fulfil the task which I assigned to you." Brahma, thereupon, bowed to 
Radha and Krisna and went home. After his departure, Rádháà basbfully 
‘observed the face of Hari, again and again, and covered her features with smil3s. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. E 
KRISNA JANMA-KHANDA. 15e 


181-153. She was excited with lust; and a ihrill of rapiures animated 
her frame. She then reverentially bowed to Hari, went to the sleeping-room 
and applied the past^ of aloe and sandal mixed with musk and saffron to the 
chest of Lord Krisna. She then gave a cup full of nectar and honey to Hari, 


Hari accepted it and divided the contents between himself and his love. — Rádbá - 


presented betel seasoned with camphor to Krişna who ate it and she herself ate 
the perfurmed betel offered by Krisna. The betel partly, chewed by 'Krigna 
was offered by him to Radha. Râdhå ate it reverentially and looked at him 
with a smile When he demanded from liádhà the betel chewed by her, she 
refused saying, “Kindly excuse me for failing to comply with your wishes.” 
He then annoited her body with sandal, aloe, musk, saffron and other per- 
fume. Lord Krigna „hose lotus feet are ever contemplated by Kama (the god 
of love) voluntarily submitted to the yoke of the ever subservient Kama for 
the satisfaction of Radha. Kama could be subdued by the servant of 
a servant of Krisna; and yet, he could, on this occasion, playfully subdue Lord 
Krisna to-day because he (Krişna) was a self-determining Being. Then Lord 
Krisna held Hádh& by the hand, embrace ' and ki:sed her and loosened the 
cloth which covered her body. O saint, in this war of love, the smal] bell worn 
by Rádhà as an ornament was torn fom her body; the hue of her lips was 
removed by kisses; the paintings with cosmetics were wiped out by Krisna's 
embrace; the chignon was dislocated, the mark of vermilion was obliterated by 
the sexual intercourse and tke paintings on her feet with fhe lac-dye were 
removed by the sexual intercourse performed in an inverse order, 


154-163. There was a thrill of raptures in her body owing to the 
excitement caused by the initial or primary sexual intercourse. She nearly 
lost her reason and could not distinguish day from night. Krişna expert in 
sexual science embraced all 1 0 
limb of his body and indulged in eight kinds of sexual intercourse. Then he 
dragged Râdhâ who had slanting glances and covered all her body with marks 
caused by nails and hands At that time, the hracelet and the anklet oa her 
person rang merrily. The expert Krişņa -play fully denied faa pa 
dress and ornaments; and Radha denuded him of his crest and apparel» 2 
both were expert in the game, no harm accrued to any of them a zo E 
away the looking-glass of gem from her hands; ani she PES $ MOS 
him his melodious flute. Radha enchanted the mind RE be Ren 


Kadha ret d to him his flute; and Krigna r j 
and s T Me m ¥ tog to play with, fastened her chignon, and marked 


her forehead with vermilion. 


164-173. ‘The toilet prepared for her by o mb 
painting with cosmetics with which the Lord ao pec Viena Niak 
to ba Ho the skill not only of her female associates | ue for the toilet of Krisna, 
When Radha busied herself in securing irigredients - He was, weeping 
he ceased to be a youth and took the form of an Laus S which Nanda iad 
out of hunger and resumed exactly the same onai heart, Râdbâ heaved 
left him. "He looked as timid as before. With b EG atte npt, was over: ` 
a deep sigh, tried to find her lover out, and me iey aciem COME of 
whelmed with grief. She then molestly entreate Bs 


Lord I rigna and the lines of 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE i 


the members of the body of Rádhá with every i: 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


a 
160 TUE BRAUMAVAIVARTA PURANA. 


illusion, why do you adopt this craft towards me, your bonds-woman ?" She * « 
ihen continued to weep and fell on the grouad. Krisna, too, cried as before, 1 
Anon, there was a voice from the sky to the following effect. “O Rádhà, e 
weep not. Cherish in your heart the lotus feet of Hari. As long as this house 
of Rasa exists, you will leave behind only your shadow at home But your 
substance, 7.e., you yourself, will co ne here and enjoy in this house the society 
of Hari, Hold this boy who is the lord of illusion and your husband in your 
lap, console yourself and go home.” R&dha was soothed and with the boy 
in her arms sho saw the grove and the wood and the mansion of gem. 


174-181. With the speed of wind, Râdhâ went in a trice to Nanda’s 
house and with eyes crimson and dishevelled hair, she handed over the child 
who was bathed in her own tours to Yasoda saying. , This child is plump and 
consequently very unwieldy. lle is constantly crying through press of hunger. 
Your husband handed him over to me in tha enclosure of cows. I had to suffer 
much in the way on his account. Now tike him back. [t was a bad day, the sky 
being overcast It was raining continually and my clothes have all bsen 
saturated with water. The ground was slipery ; henge I had a great diffioulty 
in carrying him. Good lady, take and suckle him Ihave been from home 
for a long time. Iam going to my place now and you should also go 
bome,” So saying, she went away. Yasoda took him in her lap, kissed and 
suckled him. Radha busied herself with domestic affairs, but every day she 
came to the sphere of Rasa and sported with Hari. Thus I described to you~ 
the character of Krigna which is sacred and gives delight and redemption Now 
I am going to describe to you other incidents connected witk his life. 


i 
| 
| 


CHAPTER XVI. | 


1-20. Once upon a time, Krigna after breakfast went with the children 
and the herd of cows to Vrindàvana to play. After playing and grazing the 
cattle, he went to Madhuvana where he drank refreshing water with Baladeva. | 
In the meantime, a dreadful demon named Vakásitra, huge like a mountain, 
appeared there and swallowed Krigna and all the boys in the same manner 4s 
Agastya had swallowed or seized the demon Vátápi. At this sight the gods 
raised a great hue and cry and rushed to that place with weapons in their | 
arms. Indra failing to adopt other means hurled the thunder constructed with | 
the bones of saint Dadhichi at Vaka with the result, that one of his wings" | 
only was destroyed. The Moon-god discharged the weapon of snow whereby the | 
demon was benumbed with cold. Yama stuck him with his mace, causing | 
him much pain. Kuvera cut off his legs with the weapon called the half-moon. | 
Tho wind with god his boisterous weapon transported him to another placo. The, | 
fire-god, with his weapon of flame, consumed all his feathers. ‘the frightened . | 
saints blessed Lord Krigna with all their heart. The demon, struck by S'iva — | 
with his spear, fainted. At this time, Lord Krisna, effulgent with the rays of d 
Brahma, consumed all the exterior and the interior parts of the } 
body of the demon who vomited all the “cows and ihe boys which he had - j 
swallowed and then «xpired. Both the brothers then went to the fore:t of 
the merry Kadamba. At this time, a demon named Pralamba, huge like a } 
mountain, arrived there in fhe guise vË a bull and turned Hari round and round 
with bis horns, The boys cried with fear and ran in all directions. Balarama 


ro 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA-KHANDA. 161 


; 
of the divinity of Krisna laughed and compos 
I a On the other band, Krisna held the demon ar. 
led him round in theskyand dropped him on the ground. The do 
and the children laughed and danced with joy. Krisna.then grazed the 
d with the boysarrived at the forest of the fig-trees. The powerful 


who had full knowledge 
saying, “Do not'fear.” 
whir 
expired; 
cattle an 
Keé!, the king of the demons, seeing that Hari was going 

him and engaged himself in the task of digging the aroari o M 


21-30. The wretch took Hari to the sky at a height of a hundred Yojans 
revolved bim with his hands and hurled him headlong on the ground. After 
wards, in anger he chewed the body of Hari with the result that all his teeth 
were broken as if he had chewed a mountain. By the valour of Krisnu, he 
was consumed, fell on the ground and immediately expired. -here “was a 
beat of drums in the heavens as wel! as a rain of flowers: from the sky. In ih 
meantime, the celestial retinue of Hari with two hands, in yellow dress and 
mounted on a car, arrived there. They were decked with diadems, ear-rings 
garlands of wild flowers, melodious flutes and ringing anklets. hey Sene 
besmeared with sandal paste and salfron They had smiling aspects and 
_were dressed like cow-herds. ‘hey were inclined to favour their worshippers 
They bowed to Hari and went back to the sacred Goloka. They quitted 
their demoniac bodies and were transformed into the attendants of Lord 


Krişna, 
31-40. Narada said “O blessed being, why these Vaisnavas had turned 
into demons: kindly relate this extraordinary account.” Narayana said 
O saint, I heard this ancient history at Puskara from Siva, when a question was 
put to him in this connexion by me, the Munis and Brahma. The history of 
this event sanctifies the three worlds and I am going to tell you every-thing in 
detail. In days of yore, on the heights of Gandha-Madan there used to 
named Gandhavaha who was the best of as- 


dwell a prince of the Gandarvas 
cotics and very mnch attached to Hari, He begat four sons who graced his 


lineage. They ever cherished in their heart the memory of the lotus-feet of 
Hari, whether asleep or awake. ‘they were the disciples of Durvásà and ever 
devoted to Lord Krisna. Without offering lotus to Krişna, they never tasted 
water, They were called Vasudeva, Suhotra, Suparswa and Sudarsaka respec- 
tively. They prayed for along time at Paskara and there enjoyed the society of 
The eldest o£ them obtained from Durvà:à the Yoga or abstract medita- 

nd adepts. He 


adepts. 
tion by virtue of which he became the foremost of the Yogis a 
d with the effulgence of Brahma. After his death, 


married and shone like a go 
he became an attendant of Kr 
49.49. Once upon 2 time, the three remain’ 
went to the pond called Chitra to collect lotuses for t 
The powerful myr-midons of S’iva who were guarding th 
these weak Gandarvas and produced them before Siva. ‘They threw themse]ves 
prostrate before him : and the smiling S’iva blessed them and said, “Who are 
Parvati’s lotus meant forher vow 


you that are thus engaged in purloining 
from the pond guarded by millions o£ Yaksas? Out of deference to her quar- 


terly vow, Parvati offers every day à thousand lotuses to Bari to secure the 
affection and good graces of her husband." The Vaig navas were afraid at these 


21 


ina. Ae 
ing brothers, at day-break, 
he worship of Krisna. 
e pond came, arrested 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE e 


| 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


162 THE BRAH M A-V AIV ARTA PURANA. 


words and with folded palms and modest inclination of their heads said, “O lord, 
we are the sons of Gandha-váha, the prince of the Gandharvas, We drink 
water only after having offered lotus to Hari, We did not know that this 
pond was protected by Gauri, Therefore accept the lotuses, O lord, and 
give us suitable reward. 


50-59. To-day, we cannot offer lotuses, nor can we drink water. But 
why should we not drink water, when we give all the lotuses to you? O lord, 
we have been consecrated to-day by the gift of lotuses to that deity in person 
whose lotus-feet are always contemplated by his worshippers and adored with 
the lotus. Brahma is one. He has no second; nor has he got any form or 
body. Bnt he wields a body to favour his adherents. By illusion he can take 
different forms. Lord, you are the same merciful deity. Therefore accept 
these lotuses and fulfil our design by manifesting to us the form of Krisna. 
He is vested with two arms. Ho is yoathful, dark-blue and lovely in appear- 
ance. He has got an enchanting flute in his hands aud is clad in yellow 
dress, He has got one face and two hands; and his body is besmeared with 
sandal and aloe. He has got a smiling and cheerful aspect. He is decked 
with ornaments of gem, the Kaustubha and the wreath of Párijàt. He har- 
bours the charms of millions of Cupids. The cowherdesses looked at him with 
a smiling face and arch-glances. He isin the prime of his youth and settled 
in the heart of Rådhâ. Brahma and other gods constantly adore him. He 
is revered by all, fit for every body's contemplation and desire. Ho is the 
supreme soul; all his desires have been fulfilled (i.e, ho is fully gratified) and he 
is gracefully bant upon showing compassion to his votaries.’’ 


60-74, So saying, the best of the Gandharvas recollected Hari’s name 
and with a thrill of raptures in their body stood up before S^iva. Mahüdeva 
with tears in his three eyes recalled the name of, Hari to his mind and replied, 
“O Gandharvas, this I realise that you are the best of the Vaisnavas. ‘To 
censecrate the world with the dust of your feet, you roam at ‘large. I always 
want to see the worshippers of Lord Krisna Saints like you can rarely be had 
svenin the three worlds. You are dear to me, Párvati and the gods. To 
me the Vaisnavas are dearer {han my own followers. But, © blessed saints, the 
promise which I held out to Parvati in connexion with her vow can never be 
ineffectual. Listen, then, to the promise which I had made. Any one who 
will collect Bowers within the time which has been prescribed for Párvati's 
vow will forth-with turn into a demon. But Vaisnavas never come to grief. 
Though you will become demons, y-t, subsequently, you will be able to attain 
the Goloka. O my sons, you are anxious to see Lord Krisna in person. You 
will see him at Vrindávana. O best of the Vaignavas, as soon as you will 
see him, you will quit the forms of demons, ascend a celestial car and go to the 
Supreme Land of Krisna. Now, behold the form which you are anxious to 
see." So saying S'iva showod them that enchanting form as desired by the Gan- 
dharvas. The kings of the demons saw that form with streaming eyes, bowed 
to S/iva and went away, Vasudeva, the eldest brother, was already emancipated. 
Suhotra took the form of Vaka; Sudars’ana, of Pralamba; and Supár$va of 
Kegí. Thus they were born as demons and, seeing the excellent form of Lord 
Krisna, they died at his hands and went to the Goloka. ThusI narrated to you 
ihe excellent account of Lord Hari and the final redemption of the demons. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


4 
1 


€ 


Sa 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA-K HAN DA. 163 


15-85. Narada said, “O lord, by your grace, I heard wonderful stories. 
Now tell ne why Parvati performed her vow. What is the nature of the 
vow and what reward is obtained by means of that vow ? What are its rules 
and who is its presiding deity ? What are the ingredients of t'ie vow and 
how long does it last ? How is the vow initiated ? I am carious to know 
all this. With due deliberation, deign to answer my queries.” Narayana 
said, “O saint, the vow lasts for three months: it is meant to secure the love 
and good graces of the husband; its presiding deities are hádhá and Krişna. 
It begins on the occasion of Visnu-Sankranti ( the passage of the sun from one 
sign to the next, hence the last day of the month) and ends on Daksináyana 
(the sun's motion towards the south of the equator). Oa the day preceding 
the vow, one should be abstemious by taking only ghee and boiled rice. The 
person observing the vow should bathe on the last day of the mouth of 
Vaisükha and make anavowal of the purpose for which she makes the vow - 
on the coast of the Ganges She should then worship either on a jar cons- 
trueted with gems or on the Holy stone or on the water. At first she should 
worship the five gods and then meditate the Lord of ltàdhá reverentially. 
That Dhy&na as mentioned in the Sam-veda, I am going to tell you. It isas 
follows --—His body is dark-blue like a new cloud. He is clad in yellow, 
silken dress, His smiling face is lovely like the autumnal full moon or like 
the blooming lotus. His eyes are lined with collyrium He constantly 
enchants the heart of the cowherdesses, He isincessantly observed sy Radha 
and settled in her heart. He is adored by Ananta, S'iya, and Brahma. He is 
the Supreme Being. I adore him.” She should then worship him. Afterwards 
she should give herself up to meditation again, according to the Dhyán a of 


Radha, as stated in Madhyan-din. 
86-93. The Dhy&na (mental representation of the figures of a deity) is 


as follows ;—RAdhà, the mistress of the Rasa, anxious to` indulge in amorous 
he Rasa and the presiding deity 


astimes, is the central figure in the sphere of t s deit, 
Pe tho Râsa. She always dwells in the heart of the Lord of the Rasa. She is 
humourous herself and is the beloved spouse of the humourous lord. She is | 
She is vested with the charms of autumnal lotuses. { 
of her eye-brows are lined with 
| like the full moon of autumn. 
h sandal paste. Her 

has got the lines of 


most lovely aud enticing. j 
Her curved eyes with the graceful contraction 
lamp black. Her faco is smiling and gracefa ə 
She has the hue of the Champaka and is besmeared Sih 
forehead is marked with vermilion and musk. She. Hen. 
painting on her body with cosmetics and she is clad H n is decked 
Her cheek has been lighted up with diamond ear-ring3- me ond armlets and 
witha wreath of gems Hor arms are ornamented pee ee bv: BEER 
brace-lets; her feet, with ringing anklets. Krişna, 2 vette E ET 
others, always ministers t» her. She is the fit ob (eum Leder 
the Supreme. Being and she is the primordial cause 0 


her.” 
94-106. After this Dhyana the person vi] Mantas 
worship RAdhà and Krisna with aint M one by one, to the deities. 


should present one thousand and eight lotuses, «cht oblations of clarified a 
Hvary day, she bond o KSN we. ould offer one thousand 


butter to tho fire;and every day 


e vow should 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


164 THE BRAHMA-V AIV ARTA PURÁN A. 


and eight grains of barley or sunned rice. After having pronounced 
the Mantra, vic * Krisná Swaha,” she should present flowers and jacks 
or ripe plantains to Rádhá and Krigna, and every day she ought to feast a 
hundred Brihmins. Along with the homa as mentioned above, she should 
dedicate all to R&dhá and Krişna, (Homa is casting cf ghee into the fire.) 
Then she should perform the homa of sesamum mixed with ghee, play upon 
the music every day and recite the praises of Hari. After baving continued 
this for three months, she should do Pratisthá (lit. c: nsecration) or lay the basis 
of the ceremony. On the day of the consecration, she should offer barley 
and ninety thousand lotuses and feast ninety thousand Brahmins with delicious 
cakes and rice boiled with milk and sugar. She should also offer ninety thousand 
sever hundred and ten fruits and other sacrificial ingredienis to Rádhà and 
Krisna. She should then establish there the Sacred Fire and with sesamum 
mixed with ghee she should make nintty thousand oblations to the fire and 
reverentially dedicate to the deities. cloth, edibles, sacred threads, ninety 
thousand baskets of fruits and ninety thousand jars of cool water. She 
should then give sacredotal fees to the Brahmins. 


107-120, The amount of the priest’s fee has been fixed in the Vedas, 
She should give as fee a thousand bulls with golden horns. Thus, O saint, 
I described to you the quarterly vow which secures the affection or the good 
graces of the worshipper’s husband and multiplies his race. A woman, by 
virtue of this vow, attains prosperity for a hundred births. She certainly 
becomes the mother of good sons fora hundred births. She is never separated 
from her husband or sons. Herson serves her lika a slave ; and her husband 
getsa melodious voice. This chaste woman sets her heart exclusively upon 
Radha and Krisna; end, whether asleep or awake, she never forgets Hari. 
Our mother also in days of yore performed this vow as stated in the S&ma- 
Veda. This is the best of all the vows. At first, the virtuous S'atarupá, the 
wife of Manu (the son of Brahm’), performed this vow and appointed Agastya 
as her priest. [ater on, Devahüii and Charu-h titi performed this vow 
and appointed Pulastya as their priest. Afterwards Rohini and Rati performed 
this vow and appointed Kratu and Gautama as their priests respectively. 
Then T&rà, the wife of the spiritual guide, performed it with great eclat and 
appointed Vasistha as her spiritual guide. S'achi was much delighted to 
witness the vow observed by Tira: and so she performed it herself with great 
pomp and appointed Brihaspati as her officiating priest. Then Swáhá performed 
it with unrivalled magnificence and appointed Mariclii as her priest. O saint, 
Parvati was delighted to see the ceremony and with folded palms and reveren- 
tial inclination of her head said to S'iva, “O lord of the universe, I wish to 


perform this excellent vow sacred to our irit i i i 
sanction my proposal. US AS CRM NIU 


121-131, The worship of Hari is the root of all good. It is sixteen times 
superior toacts of charity, the study of the Vedas and hely pilgrimage 
round the world. Whoever remembers Hari internally and exi sl is 
redeemed in his life-time, sanctifies the three worlds with hig presence the dien 
with the dust of his lotus feet. Brahm, Visnu. Dharma IT Ananta 
and Ganega are equal to Krişna, as they ever medidate his lotus feet. Who- 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


— 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA-K HAN DA. 165 
————————— MÀ ———V————————————————————ÉÉÉÉ D — 
ever meditates the said lotus feet are ona par with Lord Krisna in valour, 
intellect and wisdom. You are therefore equal to Krisna. By the service 
of Krisna, I have got a virtuous busband like you, sons like Kártika and 
Ganega and a father like Himalaya. My object has been gained in every way. 
There is nothing which is beyond my reach when I haye three competent 
relations as shown above.”  S'iva was very pleased to hear this and said gently 
thus, “O goddess, you represent great fortune, universal prosperity and 
inexhaustible energy. There is nothing impossible with you. 


132 143. The person in whose house you live becomes prosperous. The 
person whose house you shun ought to die rather than live. Brahma, Visnu 
and I are symbo!s of energy. By your grace we have ‘een vested with energy 
and thus create, preserve and destroy. Who are Himalaya, I, Kartika and 
Ganega ? Without you, we are powerless; and with you, we become gods. 
The S'rutis hold that it is proper for a virtuous woman to carry out the 
commands of her husband. Therefore, it seems, you await my orders to per- 
form the vow. Very well; but youshould perform it ona grander scale than 
others have done. Lord Sanatakumára will be your priest. I shall provide you 
with Brahmins, lotuses and ingredients. Fair one, appoint Kuvera as your 
treasurer. and myself as the superintendent of gifts. Laksmi will distribute 
gifts. The god of fire will be the cook; the Yaksas will be bearers of 
articles; Kartika will superintend the above articles; the god of wind will 
soavenge all places; Indra will dispense food; and the moon-god will be the 
presiding officer. The sun will decide who are the fit persons to whom gifts 
should be made. O beauty, after having duly presented the articles prescribed 
for the vow, a larger number of fruits and flowers should be offered to Hari. 
Goddess, feast as many Brahmins as have been fixed for the purpose of this 
vow; but invite countless Rrihmins. Afterwards on the seventh day distribute 

to them gold, corals and gems together with sacerdotal fees." 

Thus the vow was initiated and Parvati was more particular 
in her observances on this occasion. The Brahmins could not bear the load 
of their gifts owing to their super-abundance. Thus, O Narada, you have heard 
the whole history. Now listen to the main point in my description. .The 
story of the childhood of Lord Krigna is pathetic at every step. Krisma, 
having killed the princes of demons, arrived with the boys and the cattle at 
his house which resembled the mansion of Kuvera. Jhe children narrated 
the incidents of the wood to the residents and inmates of the house. Dverg 
body was surprised, but Nanda was much afraid. ‘ben Nanda called t erol 

milk-men and milk-maids and duly consulted themy p dare a 
consulted them he prepared to leave the place and'got Ee 3 EM 


a view to start for Vrindávana. Men, women and 
go at his bidding. ‘Then in various kinds of dress, they started for the forest 


of Vrindá-vana with Krisna and Balarama, reciting in the way the virtues of 


i 3 bals, lute or instruments 
Krigna. Some ofthe boys played on the flute, Ru Toe ect 


of reed or the horn; others decked their ear à Am 
flowers or the crest of their heads with foliage or Honors A s 
wreaths of flowers which extended up to the knee. y Ue t ae 
millions in number. ‘They were accompanied by millions an 

women with huge loins and hanging breasts. 


144-157. 


— 


f 
| 
F 
[- 
t 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


166 THE BRAHMA-V AIV ARTA PURANA. 


158-170. The female associates of Rádhà, decked with various kinds 
of ornaments and precious clo! hes, prepared to go to the forest with gracious 
ae a gorgeous chariot. Nanda Sunanda, S/ri-dàma, Giri-bhánu, Vihbá 
kara, Bira-bhánu, Chandra-bhánu etc., gladly mounted the back of elephants. 
Lord Krisna and Balaráma, decorated with ornaments of gem mounted a golden 
car. Thus the procession started. Out of millions of young and old cow- 
herds, some rode on elephants, horses or chariots; others, engaged in music, 
rode on the back of bulls or asses and proceeded with their myrmidons. Seven 
hundred krores of Rádhá&'s hand-maids decked with golden ornaments proceeded, 
some with vermilion in their hands, others with collyrium: others with sandal, 
aloe, musk, saffoon, others with white chowries, toys, balls or other articles 
of enjoyment or sport : others with implements of toilet, wreath, or lac-dye. 
They started together. 


171-179. Some of them were singing : others held in their hands tablets 
for painting; and others mounted litters. Millions and millions of horses. 
cars, waggons loaded with articles, accompanied the procession. Millions and 
millions of camels, horses, and birds; also elephants with iron-goads and equipped 
with carpets on their back proceeded in the direction of Vrindá-vana, When 
they reached Vrindá-vana, they saw that there was no house there and every 
place was desolate. So they settled at the root of a tree in a manner suited 
to the occasion. ‘Then Krisna said to tho cow-herds, “O residents of the 
Vraja, know you all, that you have got a lovely house here, hidden from your 
eyes, which has been constructed by gods. No onecan behold the said house 
without propitiating the deities. Therefore rest here to day after having 
worshipped the deity and tomorrow the house wil! be manifest before your eyes. 
You should worship the goddess Chandik& residing at the root of the holy 
fig tree with frankinconse, light, sacrificial offerings, flowers and sandal.” 
The cow-herds worshipped her accordingly and having eaten the articles 
available there during the course of the day and night slept at the root 
of the tree, i 


CHAPTER XVII 


1-20. When the cowherds, male and female, slept at Vrindávana in the 
night, Krigna, the lord of sleep, also slept in the bosom of His mother. ‘The 
cow-herdesses, infatuated with lust, enjoyed the Society of their lovers and 
also slept. Some of them slept in the car, others with infants in their arms, or 
in the waggon or by the side of their respective husbands. Then the full moon 
(god) spread a lattice of rays round Vrindávana and added to its beauty, ‘The 
place became redolent of flowers. Every one was deprived of his will power. 
When the fifth Muhürta of the night was passed, Viswakarmá, tl e divine architect 
arrived at the spot. His body was covered with a piece of tnin cloth, lovely wreaths, 
ear-rings having the cut of a fish and other ornaments. kle was old in years aud 
ripe in wisdom. But he looked young, handsome, graceful and bright like Kama. 
He arrived there with thirty millions ef archi-tects who held in their hands 
gold and diamonds. ‘he hideous Yaksas, the myrmidons of Kuvera, also 
arrived with precious stones in thoir hands, Their appearance was swarthy, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Some of them mounted the litter, others ascended the car. Radha > 


E 


I~ 


| 
| 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA-KHAN DA, 167 


their eyes were tawny; their bellies were protuberant; their hair was red 
like coloured crystals. Some took sapphire, others held rubies in their hands 
or sun-stones or moon-stones or axes or sandal wood or s’yémantak or chowries or 
looking glasses or golden jars. Viswa-karma seeing these delightful articles 
remembered God and applied himself to the task of constructing the city. 
The city, after its construotion, was found oa measurement to be fifty yojanas 
in breadth. It acquired the rank of the best and most sacred place on the 
surface of the globe and became the favourite city of Hari. It was -caloulated 
to give final emancipation and was the stepping stone to the attainment of the 
Goloka. It contained forty millions of houses having square-courts, doors, 
stone stair-cases and pillars. Picturesque toys .were attached to the houses, 
The front of those houses was painted black, The city was decorated with 
court-yards and pulpits of stones. It was surrounded by ramparts of stone 
with small gates attached very firmly to the walls. Then he constructed in 
the town ten millions of houses with square courts of crystal, 


21-27. He afterwards constructed stair-cases with sandal-wood, pillars 
with the wood of S’fila, and portals with iron; and he adorned the portals with 
silver jars. He surrounded the city by adamantine ramparts and assigned . 
appropriate dwellings to ihe cow-herds. Then he constructed a beautiful 
house for Vrisa-bhanu. This mansion contained a rampart, a moat and four 
gates. It hada square of four buildings constructed with precious gems. 
The pillars were constructed with sun-crystals; and the stair-cases which added 
to the beauty of the house were constructed with diamonds resembling gold. 
The gates were constructed with iron: and pictures were suspended on the wall. 
The temples, decorated here and there with golien jars, looked very bright 
and enchanting. 

28-32. At a certain extremity of this mansion, in a secluded place, a 
delightful garden of Champak was raised. In that garden a house of pleasure 
was constructed in order to enable Kalàvaii to enjoy the society of her hus- 


band. In this house, Viswa-karma constructed nine stair-cases with sapphire. 
built with sandal-wood; and  Kalávati's mansion 


“And who, pray, may this Kalavati be for whom the 
mansion was erected?” — Nár&yana answered, **Kalávati was a digit of Kamala 
and the intellectual daughter of the manes. Radha, dearer to Krişna than 
his life, was her daughter. Kalàvati, being an outcome of the digits of 
Krisna, was equal to him in the glory of her effulgence and used to sanctify 


the earth with the dust of her feet. 
t religious merit, O lord, did 


33-43. Narada ssid, “By virtue of what i c 
Vrisa-bhánu succeed in obtaining the hands of Kalavati, ths ee 
daughter of the manes, who is constantly adored by holy saints o was 


i i i i ‘th? By what act of virtue, did he obtain 
Vile: Dha gah dba ME Vires laughed with approbation 


i ghter?" The philosopher N 
SUN acts TS the ancient history thus, “There were we SEA 
that sprang from the mind of the manes, viz, Kalàvati, amd and 
Menaka, "Hatna-málà fell in love with king Janaka i w = he maS 
married. Menaká was wedded to Himalaya, a digit of Hari. e 
Sit&, theliving embodiment of the goddess of fortune, 


The gates of the city were 
was excellent, Narada said, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


was the daughter of © 


- s* 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


4 
168 THE BRAHMA-VAIVARTA PURANA. 


-málà and the product of no womb. She was the wife of Rama. Parvati 
Ee o aiophie: of enaka. She was at first Sati, the daughter of Dakga, 
the emblem of the illusion of the eternal Visnu and was likewise not born out 
of the womb of her mother, By the powers of her abstract meditations. she 
obtained Siva (whose spirit is Narayana) as her husband. Kalavati selected 
as her husband Su-chandra of the race of Manu. The king. considered „himsel 
very lucky in securing the hands of Kalávati and thus cogitated in his mind; 
Oh! Whata wonderful grace she has! Whata fascinating ap; arel ! How 
charming is her youth ! The members of her body are very delicate. Her 
face is lovely like the autumnal full moon. Her gait is as gentle as that of the 
elephant or the wagtail. The charms of her glances can be-witch even the 
mind of the saints. 


. 44.55, Her loins put to shame the tree of plantain and are very tender. 
Her rising breast is thick and elevated. Her buttocks surpass in symmetry 
the wheels of a chariot and are yet graceful. Her teeth are as fine as the grains 
of a ripe pomegranate. Her eyes are like lotuses blooming at noon in the season 
of autumn. She is decorated with gems and ornaments.” ‘Thinking this, the 
lustful king took her on a car to some solitary place. He enjoyed her society 
on the top of the lovely Malaya mountains redolent of sandal and aloe, on 
a delightful bed-stead of Champak flowers, on the coast of tho Puspa-bhadra 
river free from dust, on the shores of the Ganges, in the cave of the Gandha- 
mádan mountains, in the solitary forest of the screw-pine tree situated on the 
coast of the Godavari, in a certain forest free from animals, on the coast of the 
Western ocean, in the grove of Nandana, in a wood situated on the coast of 
the Kaveri, on every rock, on the coast of every river and in every island. 
The couple were so much infatuated with the pleasures of primary sexual inter- 
course that they oould not distinguish night from day and a thousand years ap- 
peared to them like one Muhürta ( 2 48 minutes). Atlast satiesy came; and 
Suchandra, quite disgusted went with Kalavati to pray at the shrine of the 
Vindhya-hills. 


56-71. The hermitage of Pulaha is the most sacred and blessed place in 
India. There the king prayed for a celestial thousand years. The king, 
desirous to obtain redemption, dispassionate and reduced to skeleton for want 
of food, fainted, while meditating the lotus feet of Hari. Then the chaste Kalávati 
removed from his body the hill of whiteants with which it was covered, Then 
she saw that the body of her husband was paralysed, deserted by the five vital 
airs, void of flesh and blood reduced to and merely a structure of bones, Where- 
upon she clasped him to her breast and wept loudly saying. ''O lord of my life!” 
When Brahma saw that the chaste Kalávati was frightened and weeping at the 
sight of the ead condition of her husband, his mind was filled with compassion. 
He appeared bef:re her and himself wept. Then he sprinkled the water of the 
wooden pot in his hand over the body of the king and revived him by means 
of the faculty which he acquired through his supreme knowledge of Brahma. 
The resuscitated king saw tho effulgent Brahma in his presence and bowed low to 
him The god was pleased and offered to him any boon he solicited. ‘Lhe king 
wanted the boon of final emancipation. ‘Lhe merciful lord with a face beaming 
with smiles likea blooming lotus was about to grant him the boon when the 
virtuous lady was agitated in her heart and interrupted him saying: “O 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


MEE ll 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
KRISNA JANM A-K HANDA. ; 169 


offspring of the lotus, if you grant him the boon, what wi! 

wretch like myself? O four-faced lord, the wife is useless uh ie Ru 
The S’rutis hold that the husband is the spiritual guide, the tutelary deity en 
virtuous woman. Devotion to her husband is her only vow and religion. Of 
all pious deeds tnat a woman can perform, ministering to the husband is the 
best. Without this act, all her other acts are ineffectual. 


72-86. This act is sixteen times superior to any of the following acts, viz. 
vow, gift, devotion, muttering of a prayer, oblation of ghee to the fire, bathiag in 
all holy rivers, circumambulation round the world, initiation, Koen Pai of 
charity, meditation, the knowledge of the Vedas, feasting the Brahmins. adoration 
of the gods and other pious deeds. Those unfortunate women who do not serve 
their respective husbands and use to them hard language dwell in the hell called 
the thread of time so long as the Sun and the Moon exist where they are bitten 
by worms as huge as snakes (on account of which they make a hideous noise) 
and subsist for their livelihood upon uriue, phlegm and ordure. The myrmidons 
of Yama cast burning torches into their mouths. After having undergone the 
sufferings to which they are respectively liable, they are born as worms and for 
a hundred births, they subsist upon flesh, blood and ordure. l am buta frail 
woman; I only repeat the words of the Vedas which I heard from savants. 
You are the progenitor of the goddesses, the sole lord and the spiritual guide 
of all. You are a savant, an ascetic and even the preceptor of the wise, You 
are omniscient and pervade the whole creation. What can I say more unto 


you? O Brahm4, if my lord dearer to me than my life be emancipated, who 


will preserve my virtue and youth ? During the virginity of a woman, she 
is preserved by he 


r father ; and, after her marriage, by her husband, In the 
absence of her husband, she is preserved by her son. But the women that are 
independent of the control of their respective husbands are wicked and excladed 
from the jurisdiction of virtue. They are evil-minded whores ; and all religious 
sanctities accumulated by them in a hundred births are destroyed by their sinful 
acts. Asa woman loves her son in his childhood, so a chaste woman always 
loves her husband, whether old or young. ‘he love whioh a chaste woman 
oherishes for her husb erior to the love which she 


and is sixteen times sap 
cherishes for her son; and the solicitude which she has in the interests o£ her 
husbard is sixteen times 


greater than her anxiety to relieve the sorrows of 
her son. 


easure at the sight of her infant son so long only 
ts the sweet meat presented to him ; but a 


chaste lady is always delighted at the sight of her husband, whether asleep or 
awake. Separation from a son is more painful to her than other kinds of 
sufferings or sufferings occasioned by her se tion from friends or relations ; 
but separation from the husband is most ;ainful toa woman A clever woman 
is consumed. by the fire of mental agony caused by the separation from her has- 
band in the same manner as she is consumed by the burning flame or by the use 
of poison. Without her husband, a chaste woman is not inclined to eat or 


drink. Her mind is consumed by the fire of agony caused by separation Ike hay 
or dry grass. There is no ar to a woman as her husband. 


friend in the world so de 
The gods or even the religious preceptor are not so dear to her as her husband. 
U A 


87-96. A woman feels pl 
as the latter sucks her breast or ea 


para 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


b EET 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
170 THE BRAHMA-VAIVARTA PURANA. 


Even virtue is not greater, noris wealth more precioas to her than her 
husband. ln fact, the husband is unsurpassed. The mind of a chasto woman 
is set upon her husband in the same manner as the mind of a Vaisnava is set 
upon the lotus feet of Hari, as the mother's heart upon her only son, as the 
miser’s mind upon his accumulated gold, as the mind of a timid person 
upon peril, as the mind of a learned man upon science, as the heart of 
a suckling upon the breast which it sucks, as the mind of an architect 
upon artistic work and as the mind of a prostitute upon her gallant. Death is 
welcome to a good woman who lives without her husband, Life to such a woman 
is more painful than death. 


97-106. Sorrow is relieved in course of time by eating and drinking, 
But the case is reverse with a woman afflicted with the sorrow caused by 
separation from her husband. For such sorrow is increased by eating and 
drinking. Karma, (causation), shadow and a chaste woman are the constant 
companions of a man. Of these, a chaste wife is the chief. Hyven after 
the body, the seat of enjoyment and suffering, is extinct, a chaste wife is 
the constant companion of a person at every birth. O ruler of the world, if you 
emancipate my husband without me, I will involve you in the sin of the murder 
of an inrocent woman." Brahma was astonished and frightened at her words 
and gently replied thus, “Child, I will not emancipate your husband without 
you ;but at present I cannot emancipate you both. O mother, it is a fact 
recognised by all that the emancipation of a porson is impossible unless he or she 
reaps the consequences of his or her act in the shape of enjoyment or suffering, 
When the sufferings and enjoyments of a person are over, he or she is then 
only entitled to emancipation. O chaste lady, you should under the circums- 
tances enjoy the bliss of heaven along with your husband for sometime. 
After a while, both of you will be born in India : and Rádhá will, in due course, 
be born as your dauguter in that place. After Hádhá's birth, both of you 
willbe redeemed in your life-time and go tothe Goloka. O best of kings, 
you had better enjoy the society of your wife for sometime. Saints are 
vested with the principle of virtue ; therefore it is impossible for you to curse 
me. Saints whose hoart is always set upon the lotus feet of Hari and who 


are impartial to all creatures always court the precious bondage of Hari They 
do not desire emancipation.” 


107-118. Brahma, after having blessed them, stood up for a while. 
Both Kalavati and Suchandra bowed to him, Brahmá then went home. 
Subsequently, both of them enjoyed the sweets provided by sacred objects 
which are oven desired by Brahma and others; and, in course of time, Suchandra 
was born at Gokula as Vrigabhánu. He was begotten by Surabhánu on Padmá- 
vati and springing out of the digits of Hari he grew up daily in that enclosure 
of the cow-herds like the moon of the bright half of the month. He was 
immersed in the thought of the lotus feet of Hari, He was a great ascetic, 
omniscient, generous, graceful and intelligent. He was Friendly to Nanda’s 
house, Kal&vati, too, who was not born out of the womb of a woman, was 
conversant with the conditions of her previous birth. She was beautiful! aud 
chaste, Bhalandan, the mighty king of Kananj, secured this girl as she 
arose out of the sacrificial pit at the end of his meditations. Then the king took 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


D < 
g- 


i 


= 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA-KHAN DA. 171 


that smiling, effulgent, naked girl subsisting upon the milk of the breast in 
his lap, came home and handed her over to bis wife. The queen suckled and 
cheerfully maintained her. On the day of the ceremony performed with a 
view to provide the child for the first time with food, at the time of giving her 
a name at an auspicious moment, there was a voice from the sky in the very pre- 
sence of the assembly. viz *O king, let her name be Kalávati." The king named 
her accordingly. Then the king distributed wealth to the beggars, Bráhmins 


and bards, feasted them and performed the ceremony with great pomp. 


119-127, In course of time, the girl grew up into a very sweet and youth- 
ful maiden likely to entice the heart of saints. She was fair like Champaka, 
had a smiling and cheerful appearance like the full moon; her eyes resembled 
a pair of blooming lotuses. With the weight of her huge buttocks, loins and 
rising breast she was bowing down. She was clad in celestial dress and decked 
with ornaments. Once she was passing by the way with the charming gait of 
an elephant when she was seen by Nanda in the course of his pilgrimage, 
Though he had subdued his passions and was very wise, yet he fainted at her 
sight. On recovery, he was very much agitated and enquired of the passers- 
by as to whose daughter she was. Some one told him that she was Kalávatí, 
daughter of king Bhalandan, that she was the outcome of the digits of Laksmi 
and had descended to his house; and that she was just at that time going to the 
house of one of her female associates for the sake of amusement. Nanda 
thereupon at once descended from his car and approached the royal council 
of king Bhalandan. ‘lhe king got up, accosted him with suitable words 
and provided him with a golden throne. 

128-131. After talking with him ona variety of other subjects, Nanda 
raised the question of marriage saying, «O king, listen to my counsel, You 
ought to select a suitable match for your daughter now. Vrisabhanu, the 
jaw ah dhe Vraja, the son of Surabhánu, is the outcome of the digits of 
Ho is very handsome and learned. He is young, devoted to Hari, 
sant with the history of his previous birth. Your daughter, 
from the sacrificial pit. She can 
] charns and is a digit of Laksmi. 

A clever hero when wedded 
The king replied humbly 


Narayana. 
youthful and conver 
likewise, has come out of no womb but 
entice the three worlds with her persona 
Both of them are suited to one another. A 
ioa clever heroine constitutes a guitable match. 


thus: 

139-145. “O lord of the Vraja, marriage is provid ena i Rene 
alone unites the bridegroom and the bride. P ean 2d mta alone gives 
world is anybody's wife or daughter or ND t as one sows cir 
reward to a person according to bis deeds. Une LM tr ie Te 
I have read in the S/rutis. Otherwise, every thing d ined that my daughter 
attempt ofa powerless man. If it has been pre p bel it I E 
will be the wife of Vrisabhánu, why, AL oy tae A bowed low 
possibly prevent the inevitable ; and noonecan. XO saying, S ) 


i i T Nanda went to Viaja at the 
and entertained him with sweetmeat. Den, E o eos 


^ 5 -i t th T 

instance of the king and arrived a : the matter and 
narrated every thing. Surabhan quoe gs "i ae settled through 
caused the bethrothal i.e, the preliminaries su Lus Bhalondan gave a large 
Garga and Nanda. At the time of marriage, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


A 
172 THE BRALLM A-V AIV ARTA PURANA. 


dowry including horses, elephants, gems, and ornaments. When Vrisabhánu 
was wedded to the enchanting Kaldvati, he took so much joy with ber in 
secret and she wasso much enraptured that neither of them had any idea of 
day or night. Kalávati and Vrisa-bhànu could not tolerate the absence of 
one another even for aminute. It was through illusion that both of them had 
taken human forms. They remembered fully the conditions of their former 
births. Their love increased, day by day. ‘The youthful Kalávati was 
passionately devoted to her husband and Vrisabhánu, young like Cupid, loved 
his wife very much. 


146-156. In course of time, through the curse of S'ridáma and at the 
instance of Lord hrisna, the chaste Râdhå was born as their daughter. She 
was the product of no womb and dearer to Krigna than his life. 


The mere 
sight of this girl redeemed her parents. 


Now I am going to narrate to you the 


main point in my acoount which destroys sins as fire consumes fuels. Viswa- 
karma, the best of engineers, after having constructed the mansion of Vrişa- 


bhánu went away with his attendants to some other place, This architect (who 
knows ontology) after due deliberation constructed there the lovely hermitage 
of Nanda only two miles in expanse. With great discrimination, he constructed 
the house which vastly excelled others. Hound it, he excavated four moats 
which were fortified with stones and could not possibly be surmounted by 
enemies, Near the moat, he set up many gardens where the wind redolent of 
the Champak and other flowers gladdened all the sides. Hundreds of trees 
of mangos, betels, jacks, dates, pomegranates, baels, oranges, limes, Bhringas 
(poisonous plants), hog-plums and black-berries came into existence. Screw- 
pine, kadam and others trees loaded with fruits and flowers surrounded the 
moat and added to its beauty. The solitudes of that place were fit for amorous 
pastimes and desirable in every respect. 


157-171. He also constructed a passage for communication in one of 
ihe secret places of the moat. It was so designed as to be impregnable to the 
enemies and to afford an easy access to the friends. For, across that passage, 
he constructed a pillar which was merged in a small-quantity of water. The 
Space covered by the pillar was neither very long nor broad, Above the 
moat, ho constructed a rampart very high and measuring four hundred cubits 
in length. It was twenty-five cubits broad. It was beautifully constructed 
with gems, scarlet like vermilion. Outside the rampart, he attached to the 
wall two gates of gem; and inside the rampart, he constructed seven gates and 
thus blocked up all the moats. With rubies he constructed for the mansion 
twenty four square-courts and attached to them columns of sandal, With 
gems resembling in hue the saffron, he constructed stair-cases : to the roof of 
the mansion, he attached jars of gem, of various colours ‘Ihe golden jars and 
the portals of diamond added considerably to the splendour of the upper story 
of the house. le then proceeded to construct lovely royal roads which he 
decked on all sides with platforms of ruby and, on their right and left sides, with 
splendid houses of gem fit for merchandise. ‘Then he went to the grove of 
Vrindávana wherein he constructed the sphere of the Risa with a beautiful 
Circular rampart of gem. Hound the sphere he constructed a platform with 
gems, which was one yojan in circumference, Within that sphere he con-tructed 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


n 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
KRISNA JANMA-KHANDA. 113 


ninety millions of houses furnished with bed-steads fit for sexual intercourse 
and adorned with pictures. They were ventilated by winds redolent of flowers 
and lighted up by lamps of diamond. Jars of gold fixed to the upper portions 
of the houses added to their lustre ‘The houses were surrounded by gardens 
of flowers and lovely ponds. s 
172-185. After baving completed the construction of above stupendous 


structure, Viéwakarmá occupied himself with other projects and was very pleased 


to see that Vrindávana was so lovely. Then at Vrindávana for the amusement 
of Radha and Krisna, Vis$wakarmá in the exercise of his discretion constructed 
thirty-three excellent and lovely groves. Near Madhuvana, east.of the grove 
of the Champak, by the side of the lovely and solitary fig tree, he constructed 
another mansion for the diversion of Radh& and Krisna. He constructed round 
it with precious stones which were a handred times more precious than gold 
four platforms or altars. The mansion was supported by pillars of precious 
stones and adorned with various pictures. He constructed nine doors and 
affixed them to the gates. ‘he exterior and the interior parts of the building 
together with its environments were decked with picturesque jars. Stair-cases 
of precious stone added to the beauty of the castle. He attached banners, win- 
dows and white chowries toit and fixed mirrors of diamcnd in all directions. He 
constructed round it a circular rampart, twelve hundred cubits high and a 
hundred hands high. ‘he interior of the house was covered with lovely bed- 
steads, cloths chastened by fire, wreaths, etc. The bedsteads were adorned 
with garlands of Parijat and pillows and rendered fragrant with sandal, aloe, 
musk and saffron. They were calculated to excite lust, fit for primary sexual 
intercourse and perfumed with flowers of jasmine, Champak, etc. 
186-193. Within the house, betel-leaves seasoned with camphor 
preserved in vases of diamond. Some places were inlaid with 
diamonds ; others, with a lattice of pearls. Some parts of the 
house teemed with diamond cups, jars and foot:tools ; others were fur- 
nished with peacock thrones and decked with pictures. Some places were 
moistened with water gushing out of the moon-stone ; other places were full 
of good things (which contributed to sensual enjoyments) and cool and refreshing 
water. Viáwakarmá saw that the city and the house meant for sensual 
enjoyment were very lovely He then cheerfully went to the city and 
inscribed the name of its owner on each of the temples. Then Viswakarma 
with his disciples and the Yaksas bowed to the sleeping Ha ri and Ka none 
Everything can be accomplished at the desire of the virtuous. No nee a 
then, tbat a city was constructed by the will of God. Thus I have related to 
you the sanctifying and delightful deeds of Hari. Now what more do you 
want to hear 2" Nárada said “O ontologist, why was that grove called Vinda- 
vana? What is its etymology ? Or is it merely the symbcl of a name * 


the. narration of ancient 
94-204, Narayana thereupon commenced E e 
HEKS thus “O Ae in the golden age, there was a truthful and p EE 
named Kedára who was the lord of seven Islands. He used m pes d 5 
happily with his family and children and p a qui PU 
the welfare of his subjects. Though he pertorme a hundred sa es, E 
i iti holy dispassionate an 

did pot accept the position of Indra. For he was W 

re For Re satisfaction of Lord Krisna alone, he ae wes 
the oasual and usual rites. No king was born 80 good as Kedára, 


were 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. n 
174 THE BRAHMA-V AIV ARTA PURANA. 


king be born like unto him. After a while, the king, according to the counsel of 
Jaigigavya, entrusted the charge of his kingdom and very beautiful queens to his 
son and wont over to the forest to pray. There he prayed Hari with his whole 
head and heart and was always preserved by the . wheel of the Lord called 
Sudargana mounting guard over him. After a continued devotion for a very long 
time, he went to the Goloka. ‘bat holy place, after his name, was afterwards 
celebrated by the name of Kedfra. Upto this day, if any body dies there, 
he is at once emancipated.  Kedára hada daughter namad Vrind& who was a 
digit of Kamala, devoted to the deity and expert in abstract meditations, 
Vrind& did not marry. ‘The great devotee Durvásá gave her the unattainable 
mystic formula (mantra) of Hari. ‘lhen with a stoic apathy or indifference she 
renounced the world, went to the fcrest and there in a solitary place she prayed 
God fora thousand years. 


205-219. The merciful Lord appeared and cheerfully offered a boon to 
her. Vrind& was excited with lust at the sight of the lovely features of the 
Supreme Being and fainted Sho thensolicited a boon to the following effect, 
“Lord, be my husband." Krişņa complied and enjoyed her society for several 
years. Jhen Vrindá went cheerfully with the Lord to the Goloka and was 
there regarded as the foremost of the fortunate cowherdesses. That place 
where she dallied with Krisna or where she prayed God was called Vrinda- 
vana. Listen to other sacred anecdotes furnishing an explanation of the above 
name. In days of yore, a king named Kusadhwaja had two daughters named 
Tulsi and Vedavati. They were well versed in religious books and having 
renounced the world they gave themselves up to meditations. Afterwards 
Vedavati obtained Narayana as her husband. She is every where known by 
the name of Sita, the daughter of Janaka. Tulsi, also desirous to get Hari 
as her husband, prayed God ; but accidentally through the curse of Durvásàá, 
she was married first to the demcn called S’ankha and eventually to Hari. 
This ‘Lulsi was turned intoa tree by the curse of Hari, aud Hari was turned 
into the Holy Stone by the curse of lulsi. This beautiful Tulsî always 
resides in the heart of Hari who hus assumed the image of a holy stone. I al- 
ready narrated to you in detail the account of ‘Lulst; and now incidentally 
I have again referred to that subject, ‘Tulsi is synonymous with Vrinda. 
She, too, prayed Hari at that place. Hence it is called Vrindávana. But 
there are other causes, too, why it is so called. Vrind& is one of the sixteen 
names of Rádhà, Radha was engaged in this place in her amorous pastimes. 
Hence it is so called. 


220-238. Lord Krisna constructed Vrindávana in the Goloka for the 
satisfaction of Râdhâ, and when a grove was set up on earth also for her 
gratification, it was famed by the name of Vrindávana," Narada said, “O lord 
of the universe, kindly reveal to your pupil the sixteen names of Radha as my 
curiosity is much excit-d on this score. 1 have heard that in the S'amveda, 
she has a thousand names ; but, from. your own mouth, I want to gather what 
these sixteen names are. I want to know if these sixteen names aro in the 
middle of the thousand names, or what is the order of these names or what 
position do they occupy. Lord, for the ediücation of a fool like myself, kindly 
tell me; the etymology and tie meanings of those names,” Narayana said, “O 
child, listen, Radha, ltáseswari Rasbasini, Rasikegwart, Krisna-Vranadhika, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


| 
| 
1 


NEA T NP 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Et È 


KRISNA JANMA-KHANDA. 175 E 

Krisna:Priyà, Krisna-Swarupint Krisna bámámsa-Sambhütá, Paramánanda- : 
rupini, Krisná, Vrisdivant, Vrinda, Vrindávan-vinodini, Chandrávati, Chandra i 
D ed a 


Kántá and S/ata-Chandra-Nibhánaná, Rå means gift and Dhá means emancipa- 
tion. She who gives emancipation is Râdhâ. She is the wife of the lord of the 
Rasa, hence Ktase$wari. She dwells in the sphere of the Rasa, hence she is Râs- 
básini, She is pre-eminently the chief of jovial and witty goddesses, hence 
Rasikeswart. She is dearer to Krisna than his life, hence Krigna-Pranadhika. 
She is the favourite consort of Krisna, hence Krisna-Priy& ; she can bestow 
on her votaries the form of Krisna and is equal to Krisna in every respect, 
hence she is called Krisna-Swarupini. 


234-245, She sprang out of the left side of Krigna, hence she is called 
Krisna-bàám&msa-Sambhütá, She is all-joy, happiness incarnate, hence 
Paramananda-rupini. She gives the best kind of redemption ; hence she is 
called Krisnà. She has got a Vrindávana, or she is the presiding deity of 
Vrindávana ; hence she is culled  Vrindávani. Vrinda means -female 
associates and A means exist. She has got female associates, hence she is called 
Vrindá, Vinod means pleasure ; she gets pleasure at Vrindávana ; hence she is 
called Vrindávana-vinodini, Her face and nails shine like the moon, hence 
she is styled Chandrávati by Krisna. The grace of her body is always like 
that of the moon ; hence she has been cheerfully named as Ohandia-K&ntá by 
Hari. Her features have the charms of a hundred moons ; hence she is called 
S'ata-Chandra Nibhánanà. Thus I related to you her sixteen names with their 
etymology and meanings. Hari recited them to Brahma, while the latter was 
residing in the lotus of bis navel. Afterwards, Brahma recited them to my 
father Dharma. Later on, on the occasion of the solar festival, in the 
assembly of the gods, at the great shrine of the Puskara, I raised the question 
of Radh&’s prowess. "Then Dharma was graciously pleased to give them 
(i. e., the etymology and meaning of her names) to me. O great saint, 1 just 
recited to you the holy hymn containing the sixteen names of Radha. 


246-251. Whoever throughout his life reads the above hymn in the * 
morning, noon and evening every day attains faith in the lotus-feet of Radha i 
and Mádhava and in the end secures all kinds of perfection, viz., Animá (an | 
esoteric subtle state, a faculty acquired by practice which enables a man to a 
assume atomic or invisible form) etc. He wieldsa body which never perishes 4 
and, engaged in the service of Radha and Krişna, passes his days merrily in 2m 
their company. The perusal of this hymn is sixteen times more beneficial, i 
than any of the following acts : the due celebration of all the rites, gift, fasting, 
the study of the Vedas with their commentaries, the due performance of all 
kinds of sacrifice, all sorts of pilgrimage or a journey to all holy shrines, seyen- 
fold ciroumambulation round the globe, the protection of fugitives. tha educa- — 
tion of the ignorant, the sigbt of the gods or the Vaignavas. Nay,a person, 
by virtue of this hymn, is redeemed in his life-time. usd 

252-967. Narada seid, “O Lord, I heard the wonderful, rare and 
consolatory hymn of Radha which you just recited as well as her am 
called the ‘Conqueror of the world" which you had recited to me, 
back. By the grace of your feet, I beard wonderful accounts of 
Now, I want to listen to the mysterious account of b 
what did the cowherds say, at break of day, whi 

city ?” Narayana said, "When they got up from the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Fund 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


n 
176 THE BRAHM A-V AIVARTA PURANA. 


saw the city which wss superior to heaven, they exclaimed, * Oh! what a 
wonder ! what a wonder !” One said to the other, ‘‘Who has constructed all 
this? Is there such a powerful being in the world ?" Then Nanda remember- 
ed the words of Garga and knew in his mind that the whole world containing 
animate and inaminate objects, from Brahma down to a bush, can be created 
or destroyed by the will of god, by a mere twinkle of his eye. There is 
nothing impossible with Hari whocontrols even that Mahá-Visnu sustaining a 
universe on each of the pores of his skin, whose lotus feet are constantly adored 
by Brahma, Visnu, Mahesa and Dharma, who has assumed the form of a man 
by virtue of his illusions. With this predominant idea, Nanda, the lord of the 
cow-herds, wandered, here and there, saw the housesand perused the name of 
the owner inscribed on the wall of each house. He allotted to every one the 
house meant for him. Then Nanda and Vrisabhánu, with their heart beating with 
curiosity entered into the house with their relations at an auspicious moment. 
The residents of Vrindfivana entered into their respective dwelling houses ; 
and their faces and eyes beamed forth with joy. They were all pleased with 
the places assigned to them. Thus I gave you an account of the construction 
of the city. The boys sported there merrily ; and Krisna and Baladeva took 
part in amusements along with the children in different places of the sphere of 
the Rasa and in the lovely groves. 
(Ol Tar AQ IPR IB IR x AIOE, 


1-19. S'aunaka said, “O Süta, whata delightful, wonderful, account of 
Lord Krişna calculated to give redemption and happiness did I hear ! O saint, 
what further questions did Narada put to Narayana, the son of Dharma, 
regarding the deeds of Hari?” Suta replied, “NArada, the best of saints, after 
hearing the account of the construction of the city, again queried him regarding 
the deeds performed by Hari, Narada said, “ O best of saints, you are the oceau 
of learning, ‘I'herefore recite to me who am your submissive pupil, other 
features of the beautiful character of Lord Krişna, which is delicious like 
honey." ‘Thereupon the s int Narayana delightfully commenced the narration 
of other wonderful deeds of Hari. He said, “Once upon a time, Krisna went 


with Baladeva and the children to Madhuvana situated on the coast of the- 


Yamun&,. There they grazed tho cow ; and the children who were very much 
exhausted with their play which lasted for a long time aad oppressed by 
hunger and thirst said to Lord Krisna, *O Krigna, we are very hungry, tell us 
thy servants, what to do,” The merciful Krisna, replied, “Boys, go to the 
place where the Brahmins are performing acts of sacrifice and demand food 
from them. These Brahmins who are descended from Angirá are well-versed 
in the Vedas and the Smritis. They are dispassionate Vaisnavas praying for 
redemption in their respective hermitages near Vrindàvana. But bewildered 
by my illusions, they do not realise my divinity, [f therefore they do not 
give you food, beg food of their wives who are kind to children.” There- 
upon the boys went to these Brahmins and humbly begged food of them. Some 
of them did not listen to the entreaties, others merely smiled. ‘hen the boys 
wentto the wives of the Brahmins inthe kitchen and begged food of them. 
The virtuous women smiled and said, *Whoare you? What are your names 2 
_ Who has sent you tous? [et na know all and then we shall give you nice 
- food with excellent curry.” * E 


43 CC:0. In Pub Iomain. Funding by IKS-MoE 
401 709 wv mn m 


LIBRARY 
^ashmir 


No 
Renewed or 


Digitized by Peod and Sarayu Trust. } 
RECENT PUBLICATIONS | 
PANINI OFFICE. | |j 


indian Medicinal Plants, by Lieut,-Col. |n 
Kirtikar, Major B. D. Basu and an 1.c.s., con- 


taining 1300 plates E Price el 2758] 
Folk Tales of Hindustan, by the Late Rai j 
Bahadur Srish Chandra Vidyarnava (printed in { 
36lb. lion ivory paper, with 36 full-page pictures) d 
3rd edition ... E 336 5 1.4 i 
Cloth-bound, gilt letters 1 8 


“Leasts of God,” by Zero, author of “ Leaves 

from the Diary of a Hindu Devotee” Price... 1 i} 
Diabetes Mellitus and its Dietetice treat- 

ment, by Major B. D. Basu, ims. (Retd.) 

eleventh edition . 2 Price vod | 8; 
Brahmavaivarta Purana, Part I, containing 

(Brahma and Prakriti Nibandhas), translated | 

into English by Rajendra Nath Sem M.A., ITA, | 


Price s 6-09 ; 
The Positive Background of Hindu 3 
. * Sociology, Book ll, Part I, Political, by d 


Prof. Benoy Kumar Sarkar, M.s., Price 
The Aitareya Brahmanam, Part I (English 
Translation) : 4b Price E dec) 
Narada Pancharatram, translated into Eng- 
lish by Swami 1 ynananda alias Hari Prasanna 


Chatterji, B.A., L.C. diete Price Bb: G Ot 
LM IN HINDI. 
al Nikhattu Guru ki kahani (Hindi Transla- ; o M 
tion of ^ Adventures of Guru Noodle ") E: 0 4d i3 
IN BENGALI. ee 
i 


Japji (Translated into Bengali), by Rev, Abinash 
Chandra Mauzumdar, T Price i 0 8. m 

Judaism (Written in Bengali), by B. 
Mohan Das She 


Gyanendra 
Price à 


For complete Catalogue, apply tc the Manager, 


. PANINI OFFICE, Bahadurgunj, | 


