Bhagavata Purana 


abridged translation by 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Copyright © 2016 Parama Karuna Devi 


All rights reserved. 


ISBN-13:978-1541290822 
ISBN-10:1541290828 


published by 


Jagannatha Vallabha Vedic Research Center 


phone: +91 94373 00906 
E-mail: paramakaruna@aol.in 
Blog: www.jagannathavallabhavedicresearch.wordpress.com 


Website: www.jagannathavallabha.com 


Correspondence address: 
Jagannatha Vallabha Vedic Research Center 
At Piteipur, P/O Alasana, PS Chandanpur, 


752012 Dist. Puri Orissa, India 


Table of Contents 


Preface s) 
The questions of the sages 7 
The teachings of Sukadeva on yoga 14 
Conversation between Maitreya and Vidura = 21 
The story of Varaha 26 
The teachings of Kapila va 
The sacrifice of Daksha 41 
The story of Dhruva 48 
The story of king Prithu Die 
The parable of Puranjana 60 
The story of Rishabha 66 
The story of Jada Bharata 70 
The structure of the universe 77 
The story of Ajamila 90 
The descendants of Daksha 92 
Indra and Vritrasura OF 
Diti decides to kill Indra 103 
The story of Prahlada 106 
The varnashrama dharma system DAT 
The story of Gajendra 116 
The nectar of immortality 120 
The story of Vamana 127 
The descendants of Sraddhadeva Manu 152 
The story of Ambarisha 138 
The descendants of Ikshvaku 141 
The story of Rama 147 


The dynasty of the Moon 152 


Parama Karuna Devi 


The advent of Krishna 

Krishna in the house of Nanda 

The gopis fall in love with Krishna 
Krishna dances with the gopes 
Krishna kills more Asuras 

Krishna goes to Mathura 

Krishna builds the city of Dvaraka 
Krishna marries Rukmini 

The other wives of Krishna 

The descendants of Krishna 

Other battles 

Conversation between Nimi and the Yogendras 
The Rajasuya sacrifice 

The eclipse at Kurukshetra 

Krishna instructs Vasudeva 
Balarama's pilgrimage 

The glories of Sri Vishnu 

The destruction of the Yadu dynasty 
The methods of spiritual realization 
The perfection of spiritual knowledge 
Kali yuga 

The death of Parikshit 

About the Author 


166 
174 
186 
195 
198 
202 
21 
215 
220 
227 
231 
236 
243 
249 
nod 
257 
263 
268 
273 
286 
301 
310 
316 


Bhagavata Purana 


Preface 


The Bhagavata Purana, also known as Srimad Bhagavatam, is the most famous 
among 18 main ancient Sanskrit texts (bvrana precisely means "ancient") 
handed over from teacher to student along the millennia in Hindu tradition. 
Typically structured in the form of dialogues (questions and answers) 
between various protagonists of the sacred histories, the Puranas elaborate 
on the knowledge of the universe, creation, the various dynasties of kings, 
the purpose of life and the science of God. 


The present work is aimed at giving a complete view of the Bhagavata 
Purana (all its 12 cantos) and its thread of narration, and translates almost 
word to word those passages that report the events and the general 
information among the 18,000 total verses of the entire text, merely 
avoiding repetitions. The sequence of the stories has been altered only very 
slightly, to help the flow of the stories and the logical connection between 
them. 


In this volume there are no commentaries or added philosophical or 
theological explanations. Also, the vocabulary has been kept as simple as 
possible to facilitate understanding. For the explanation of the Sanskrit 
words (usually in italics) the readers are recommended to consult our 
glossaty/ dictionary, published separately as an instrument for the study of 
all our publications and in general for the study of Vedic tradition. 


To avoid long and possibly confusing interruptions in the thread of the 
narration, we have chosen to summarize the passages that contain the 
prayers offered to God by great personalities such as queen Kunti, Brahma, 
Shiva, Daksha, Gajendra, the gopis and the Vedas personified. 


We have also summarized some of the major stories, such as the 
instructions of Kapila, and the adventures of Prahlada and Dhruva, the text 
of the Narayana kavacha and the story of Vamana, as well as famous 
prayers recommended for personal sadhana. We are planning to describe 


these passages in greater details in separate publications. 


Parama Karuna Devi 


These are some of the titles in the series "Jewels from the Bhagavata Purana", in 
otder of importance: 

Uddhava gita (ftom canto 10) 

Gopika gita (canto 10) 

Shankara gita (canto 4) 

The teachings of Prahlada (canto 7) 

The prayers of Gajendra (canto 8) 

The Hamsa guhya prayers (canto 6) 

Prayers to Shiva (canto 4) 

Narayana Ravacha (canto 6) 

Teachings of Kapila (canto 3) 

Teachings of the nine Yogendras (canto 10) 
Teachings of the four Kumaras (canto 4) 
Teachings of Rishabhadeva (canto 5) 
Krishna's instructions to Vasudeva (canto 10) 


We also recommend to our readers to become acquainted with the 
fundamentals of Vedic civilization and knowledge by going through our 
other publications, including: 


Introduction to Vedic knowledge 
Bhagavad gita (19 volumes) 

The 108 Upanishads 

The real meaning of Y oga 

The global Dharma for the third millenniu 
India, caste and birth prejudice 

Hindu awakening 


Bhagavata Purana 


The questions of the sages 


At the beginning of the Kali yuga, a number of sages had gathered in the 
Naimisharanya forest to perform a great religious ceremony. One morning, 
after completing the fire sacrifice and the other rituals, Sanaka Rishi (the 
sage presiding the assembly) offered a seat of honor to the old saint and 


scholar Suta Gosvami, and invited him to give a speech. 


"Please tell us about God", said the sages, "and his many appearances, 
including the most recent as Krishna, the son of Devaki and Vasudeva. 
Explain to us, in a simple way, what is the purpose of the Vedic scriptures, 
and the highest benefit that can be obtained by human beings. In the age of 
Kali people live short lives, full of problems and disasters, and there is no 
time to study all the various sacred texts. Therefore, please summarize for 
us the essence of the scriptures and tell us about God and the teachings of 
the great spiritual masters of history." 


Suta was the son of Romaharsana, the great scholar to whom Vyasa had 
entrusted the teaching of the Puranas, a narrative form of texts that are most 
suitable to convey positive messages to the mass of people who have scarce 
intellectual and philosophical abilities. After paying his respects to his guru 
Sukadeva, to the Supreme Lord who manifests in the form of Nara and 
Narayana, to Mother Sarasvati who blesses the human beings with wisdom, 
and to Vyasa the author of the Bhagavata, Suta began to speak of the 
knowledge contained in this extremely valuable work. 


"The most important occupation for a human being," he said, "is that 
which leads him to know and serve God in its various aspects - impersonal, 
localized and personal, respectively defined as Brahman, Paramatma and 
Bhagavan. Every human being should sincerely engage in his or her 
professional, social and family duties, with the purpose of pleasing God; in 
this way one remains free from karma and becomes gradually purified from 
all negativity." 


Parama Karuna Devi 


"Since the beginning of creation, the Supreme Lord manifests in various 
forms to bless the living beings. The first incarnation, called Purusha avatara 
ot Maha Vishnu, generates all the universes and penetrates within each one 
of them. 


The avataras of Vishnu are innumerable. For example, there are the four 
Kumaras who, at the beginning of creation, engaged in great austerities, 
Varaha the boar avatara who lifted the Earth up from the lower region of 
the universe, Narada Muni, who compiled the teachings on bhakiz, Nara and 
Narayana who retired to meditate on the Himalaya, Kapila who revealed the 
Sankhya philosophy, Dattatreya who instructed many great personalities 
about transcendental knowledge, Yajna the son of Ruci and Akuti, 
Rishabha who demonstrated the way of renunciation, king Prithu who 
made the Earth prosper, Matsya the fish avatara who saved Manu from the 
inundation of the world, Kurma the tortoise avatara who held the Mandara 
hill, Dhanvantari who revealed the science of medicine, Mohini who 
mesmerized the asuras with her female beauty, Nrisimha who destroyed the 
rakshasa Hiranyakasipu, Vamana the dwarf who asked Bali as much land as 
he could cover with three steps, Parasurama who killed the corrupt rulers, 
Rama who built a bridge over the ocean and defeated the demonic Ravana, 
and Rama and Krishna who alleviated the burden of the world. During the 
present age, Buddha and Kalki will appear, with the mission of fighting 


against increaing degradation. 


All these divine personalities are in fact manifestations of one God only, 
and remain transcendental unlike the conditioned souls who take birth in 
this world under the control of material nature. These topics were 
elaborated by the writer avatara Vyasa, who compiled the Vedic scriptures. 
In turn Vyasa's son Sukadeva narrated the Srimad Bhagavata Purana to king 
Parikshit, who had gone to the bank of the Ganges waiting for his own 
death." 


Saunaka wanted to know in which circumstances and on which inspiration 
Vyasa had composed the Bhagavata, how the great emperor Parikshit had 
abandoned the throne while he was still young, and how he had met 
Sukadeva. 


Suta obliged with good grace. "After compiling the various divisions of 
Vedic knowledge in a form suitable to the age that had started, Vyasa had 


Bhagavata Purana 


been wondering whether his work was really complete. Suddenly his guru 
Narada appeared to answer his doubts. Narada explained to Vyasa that in 
his writings he had neglected the most important thing: the detailed 
description of the glories of the Supreme Lord, Bhagavan Vishnu, of his 
forms and his activities. These transcendental stories have the power to 
transform the lives of those who hear them, as Narada himself had directly 
experienced. 


In his previous lifetime, Narada had been born from a maidservant of 
humble origins, and as a child he had helped his mother to serve a group of 
sadbus during a period of various months covering the rainy season and 
autumn. Those great sages were pleased with the boy and allowed him to 
listen to their discourses, that were specifically centered on the activities of 
the various divine manifestations. The company of the devotees had 
purified the child's consciousness to the point that he had lost all material 
attachments and he only wanted to engage in the search for the Lord. So 
when he left his body he obtained the blessing of taking a new birth as the 
direct son of Brahma, the creator. 


After Narada's visit, Vyasa focused on working on the Bhagavata and later 
he transmitted it to his son Sukadeva, another great spiritual personality 
who had already attained the level of complete liberation from all material 
attachments." 


The narration of the Bhagavata begins right after the battle of Kurukshetra, 
when the few survivors were resting in their tents. The five sons of Pandu 
(Yudhisthira, Bhima, Arjuna, Nakula and Sahadeva) were camping at the 
margins of the battlefield, together with their family. 


Drona's son, Asvatthama, was determined to avenge his master, the evil 
Duryodhana who had been defeated in battle, and in the middle of the 
night he sneaked into the tent of the five sons of Draupadi, the queen of 
the Pandavas. Then he beheaded them in their sleep. Caught red-handed, 
Asvatthama fled but was pursued by Arjuna, and when he realized he had 
no way to escape, he launched the terrible nuclear weapon called brahmastra. 
Arjuna destroyed the missile and captured Asvattham, taking him back to 
the camp in front of Krishna, Draupadi and the other Pandavas, for them 
to decide about his punishment. 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Asvatthama was stripped of the wealth and dignity he had inherited from 
his family, and was exiled forever from the kingdom. While Krishna was 
preparing to leave, however, the wretched Asvatthama returned to attack 
the Pandavas, this time aiming a brabmastra against Parikshit, the last 
descendent of the Pandavas, who was still in his mother's womb. Krishna 
intervened timely to protect the child, saving him from death, to the great 
joy of the Pandavas and their mother Kunti, who offered beautiful prayers 
of gratitude to the Lord. 


After the funeral rites for the deceased heroes, King Yudhisthira was 
overcome by despair, thinking about all those who had perished in the 
battle. He felt responsible for the war and its terrible results, and he wanted 
to visit the battlefield. There lay the old warrior Bhishma, reclining on a bed 
of arrows, already close to death, and offered his respect, in the presence of 


many rishis and great personalities. 


In spite of his many wounds and uncomfortable position, Bhishma was 
anxious to comfort Yudhisthira and patiently answered all his questions on 
Dharma, social organization and the duties of the various categories of 
persons, and especially on the duties of the King and the protection of the 
kingdom, for which Yudhisthira and the Pandavas had become responsible. 
Finally, when the auspicious moment arrived, Bhishma offered his respects 
and prayers to Lord Krishna, who was present in front of him, and 
surrendered to death. 


Then Lord Krishna accompanied the Pandavas to their capital Hastinapura 
and stayed with them for a few months before returning to Dvaraka. At the 
time of his departure he was affectionately met by his sister Subhadra, who 
had married Arjuna, and by the other ladies of the family - Draupadi, Kunti, 
Uttara, Satyavati and Gandhari. All the Pandavas were present, and also 
Dhritarastra, Kripacharya, Dhaumya and Yuyutsu, the son of Dhritarastra 
who had allied with the Pandavas in the war. After traveling through 
various provinces, Krishna happily arrived at Dvaraka and was triumphantly 
welcomed by his parents and by all the inhabitants of the city." 


After listening carefully to the narration of these events, Saunaka Rishi 
presented more questions to Suta, asking him to tell more about the 


emperor Parikshit, who was a great devotee, and about the circumstances of 
his death. 


Bhagavata Purana 


Suta then narrated the events in the Pandavas' family after the war. "When 
Asvatthama launched the brahmastra against little Parikshit, who was still in 
his mother's womb, the child saw Krishna coming to save him, and from 
that time onwards, he felt a deep desire to find the Lord. Therefore he was 
called Parikshit ("he who examines") because every time he met a person he 
watched him intently in the hope of recognizing the Lord who saved him. 
Parikshit was the heir to the throne, and his birth was celebrated with great 
festivities. The learned brahmanas calculated his horoscope and praised his 
wonderful natural qualities. 


Yudhisthira had now become the emperor of a vast kingdom, and 
performed another three great yajnas for the benefit of the subjects, also 
inviting Krishna and other relatives from the Yadu dynasty. In that period, 
uncle Vidura - brother to Pandu and Dhritarastra - returned from his long 
pilgrimage and was welcomed by great affection and joy by all his relatives. 
Vidura had left Hastinapura before the war, disgusted by the evil 
stubbornness of Duryodhana and by his plans to destroy the Pandavas. 
Now the circumstances had changed, and Vidura saw the possibility to 
convince Dhritarastra, Duryodhana's father, to raise his consciousness 
above the material attachments, greed and pride that had ruined his entire 


family, and to properly prepare for his imminent death. 


Vidura's words were in perfect timing: the old regent, who had been born 
blind, was increasingly fragile in health. He had also lost all his children and 
was in a very embarrassing situation, honored and royally maintained by 
those he had persecuted and tried to kill for many years. So Dhritarastra 
took a decision, and without saying anything to anyone he left the palace 
together with his faithful wife Gandhari, to retire to the Himalaya and 
engage in austerities to control his senses. When Yudhisthira found that his 
uncle Dhritarastra had gone, he felt a great pain and guilt, thinking that the 
old regent had lost all his sons because of him. At that time Narada Muni 
arrived to pacify him, and after reminding him that everything happens 
according to God's plan, he informed him that Dhritarastra and Gandhari 
had left with Vidura to go to Saptasrota, where the sacred Ganges divides 
into seven streams, to engage in the austerities of yoga and become free 
from bodily attachments. 


11 


Parama Karuna Devi 


During his brief visit to the court, Vidura had preferred not to give the 
Pandavas the bad news of Krishna's death and the destruction of his city, 
Dvaraka, because the tragedy would be soon discovered anyway. Arjuna 
went to Dvaraka to see Krishna, but was absent for seven months. 
Yudhisthira started to become worried, also because he had observed some 
bad omens - irregularities in the cycle of seasons, sudden cyclones, 
increased pollution due to dust and smoke, and a general degradation of the 
environment in inhabited areas and even in the water reservoirs. 
Degradation was also visible in the way of life among the people, with 
spreading depression and a growing tendency to quarrel and cheat. Even 
the animals seemed to suffer: the cows did not give milk any more, dogs 
and jackals howled all the time, and the crows were everywhere. 


Finally Arjuna returned, full of grief and tears, and to Yudhisthira's inquiry 
he revealed the tragic end of the Yadu dynasty and his own despair for the 
disappearance of Krishna, who had been the source of all blessings and 
protection for the Pandavas. Recalling the many occasions when he had 
shared Krishna's activities and the teachings he had received from the Lord, 
Arjuna found consolation and new inspiration to become detached from all 
material thoughts. Yudhisthira and the other brothers too were deeply 
touched by the news. 


After enthroning his grandson Parikshit and putting Vajra (son of 
Aniruddha and grandson of Krishna) in Mathura as king of Surasena, 
Yudhisthira performed the Prajapatya yajna to become free from the 
responsibilities of the kingdom. Abandoning all luxuries, Yudhisthira 
dressed in rags, loosened his hair and started to consume only liquid foods, 
giving up all interest for whatever happened around him. Then he started 
walking towards the Himalaya to become an ascetic, followed by his 
brothers. In the meantime Vidura, too, had left his body while he was on a 
pilgrimage at Prabhasa. Draupadi and Subhadra - the wives of the Pandavas 
- also retired to engage in meditation on the Lord and soon they also left 
this world. 


Young Parikshit Maharaja proved himself to be worthy of his grandparents' 
trust and ruled following the advice of the best ministers, choosing 
Kripacharya as court priest. He married the daughter of king Uttara and had 
four sons, the eldest of whom was named Janamejaya. 


Bhagavata Purana 


He performed three Asvamedha yajnas on the bank of the Ganges, and to 
make sure that everything was well in the kingdom, he often patrolled 
around on his chariot pulled by black horses and decorated with the Lion 
flag. One day he saw a totally unqualified man, disguised as a king, who was 
beating a cow and a bull. The bull was already standing on one leg only, and 
the cow was crying - and Parikshit realized that they were the 
pertsonifications of Dharma and Earth. The legs of Dharma are the four 
principles of religion - austerity, cleanliness, compassion and truthfulness. 
Truthfulness is the last divine quality that can still resist somehow in the age 


of Kali, and without which, religion has no more meaning. 


The Earth was crying because of the sufferings of innocent people, for all 
the abandoned women and children, for the brahminical class who had 
become awfully neglectful, for the ruthless rulers, for the increasing 
consumption of non-vegetarian foods, for famines and droughts, and for 
the general degradation of society. But above all, she was crying for the 
disappearance of Lord Krishna, who had descended to alleviate the burden 
of the earth, consisting of the uncontrolled growth of armies and weaponry. 


Parikshit was angered by the sight of the personification of Kali yuga, who 
was tormenting the cow and the bull so cruelly, and challenged the criminal 
to a fight, as this was the duty of a good king. Terrified, the Kali purusha 
immediately abandoned all pretence of arrogance and surrendered, begging 
the emperor for mercy. Because the evil doer had surrendered, Parikshit 
permitted him to remain in the kingdom, but only in those places where 
people chose to engage in slaughtering and eating animals, consuming 
liquors, spread prostitution and gambling, and where gold was hoarded. In 
this way, if the leaders of society - the rulers and the members of the 
government, the brahmanas and religious persons - remain away from these 


sources of contamination, society can stay healthy. 


However, the effects of the bad times started to show. One day, during his 
traveling, Maharaja Parikshit was alone, fatigued, tormented by hunger and 
thirst, in the middle of a forest. Looking for a water reservoir, he entered 
the hermitage of Samika Rishi, where he saw the Rishi sitting in silence with 
eyes closed, deeply immersed in meditation. The king asked for some water, 
but the Rishi did not answer or move at all. Annoyed, Parikshit retaliated 
against the apparent lack of respect of the Rishi with a prank in very bad 


13 


Parama Karuna Devi 


taste, hanging a dead serpent around his neck - in a mock imitation of the 


great ascetic Shiva, the Lord of yoga. 


Samika Rishi's son was a young and inexperienced boy. Entering the 
ashrama he saw the offense against his father and he was filled with rage. To 
show his great powers to his young companions, the boy cast a curse 
against Parikshit, condemning him to die within seven days for the bite of a 
winged serpent. Shaken from his meditation, Samika Rishi realized what 
had happened. He was very sorry for the turn of events, and scolded his 
son for behaving childishly in sentencing the protector of the kingdom to 


death because of a mere prank. 


From his side, Parikshit soon realized he had acted like a fool and 
uncivilized person in offending the Rishi, who had simply been unaware of 
his arrival. When he heard about the curse, he calmly accepted his destiny, 
and retired to the bank of the Ganges to prepare for imminent death. The 
news spread and all the great Rishis assembled around Parikshit to assist 
him in such a delicate moment. There arrived Narada, Vyasa, Atri, Vasistha, 
Visvamitra, Parasara, Angira, Parasurama, Bharadhvaja, Gautama, Maitreya, 
Devala, Cyavana and many others. The king immediately took advantage of 
the opportunity, and after offering them his homage, asked their advice on 
what he should do. At that time also Sukadeva, the son of Vyasa, arrived in 
that place, and the glorious assembly of saints and sages offered him the 


seat of honot. 


The teachings of Sukadeva on yoga 


Sukadeva serenely took the seat he had been offered, and Parikshit went to 
offer him his homage with folded hands. "O brahmana," Parikshit said, "you 
know Brahman and you live and act as Brahman. Your presence sanctifies 
this place and our lives, and we consider your arrival as a special blessing 
from Lord Krishna, who is very dear to the sons of Pandu. I pray you, 
teach me the path of perfection for the human being, and especially for one 
who is about to die. Tell me about what is to be listened to, recited, 


remembered and worshiped, and also what should not be done." 


14 


Bhagavata Purana 


The young saint, only sixteen years old, had already overcome all 
attachments and identifications with the material body, and his awareness 
was firmly established on the spiritual level. All the people present were 
extremely interested in listening to hi explanations. 


"My dear king," said Sukadeva, "your question is glorious, because it is 
beneficial for everyone, whatever is their level of evolution. Nobody knows 
when the time of death will come for them, and too often people waste the 
valuable time of human life in activities that do not give any real benefit, in 
mere survival at the animal level, such as sleeping, mating, finding food and 
shelter, and maintaining one's family. 


The really important thing is to achieve the perfection of human life, that 
consists in spiritual realization, the knowledge of God. Even one single 
moment of divine consciousness is worth more than one entire life wasted 
in ordinary occupations that do not give any lasting benefit - a benefit we 
will be able to take with us even after death. 


We should not fear death. In fact, we should prepare with the utmost care 
for the last moment of life, leaving one's home and living in a pure and 
solitary place, controlling the mind and focusing it on meditation on Lord 
Vishnu." 


Thrilled by the perfect answers of the great sage, Parikshit was very eager to 
apply the instructions he had just received. "I beg you," he said, "please 
explain to me in details what I should do, how I must focus my mind in 
order to purify it." 


Then Sukadeva explained him the practice of astanga yoga: “One should 
control the posture of one's body and breathing. This will help to control 
the mind, senses and intelligence, in order to apply them to the 
contemplation of the universal form of the Lord, the cosmic manifestation 


called Virat rupa, in the following way. 


The lowest planets, Patala, are the soles of the feet of the universal form, 
while the heels and toes are the Rasatala planets, the ankles are the Mahatala 
planets and the shins are the Talatala planets. His knees are the Sutala 
planets, the thighs are the Vitala and Atala planets, the hips are Mahitala 
and the outer space is the navel. The chest of the Universal Form consists 


15 


Parama Karuna Devi 


of the luminaries, the neck is the Mahar planets, the mouth is the Janas 
planets, the forehead the Tapas planets. The highest planetary system, 
known as Satyaloka, is the head. His arms are the celestial beings led by 
Indra, the ten directions (the 8 cardinal points, plus above and below) are 
the ears, and the sound is hearing. His nostrils are the Asvini kumaras, and 
scent is his sense of smell. His mouth is blazing fire. 


The external sphere of the universe constitutes his eye socket, his eye is the 
Sun and the faculty of sight. His eyelids are the day and the night, and the 
Devas such as Brahma reside in the movements of his eyebrows. His palate 
is Varuna, and the essence of everything is his tongue. The Vedic hymns are 
his brain and his jaws are Yama. Affection is his teeth, and the mesmerizing 
illusory energy is his smile. Modesty is his upper lip, desire is his chin, 
religion is the chest and irreligion the back. Brahma, who generates all 
beings, is his penis and the Mitra-Varuna are his testicles. The ocean is the 
waist, and the hills and mountains are his bones. The rivers are the veins, 
the trees the hair on his body, and air is his breath. 


The ages are his movements and his activities are the reactions of the three 
gunas. The raincloud are the hair on his head, the passage between the day 
and night is his clothing, and the supreme cause of material creation is his 
intelligence. His mind is the moon, and Rudra his ego. His face is 
represented in human society by the brahmanas, his arms by the &shatriyas, 
his legs by the vaisyas and his feet protect the sadras. All the worshipable 
Devas ate parts of his body. One who sincerely wants to obtain liberation 
must meditate on this universal form of the Lord." 


"Instead of dreaming about the heavenly pleasures of the celestial planets, 
we should minimize our needs and meditate on the Supreme Lord. While 
some people meditate on the universal form of the Lord, others 
contemplate him in his form of Paramatma or Supreme Soul, the four- 
armed form of Vishnu who resides in the heart of each living being - 
starting from the Lord's feet and going up towards his smiling face, where 
one can find the true happiness of the soul. This meditation is in fact a 
scientific procedure, by which we can control the life air and the mind, and 
leave our body in full awareness. 


God manifests in many forms through the functions of the personalities of 


the Devas, each one personifying a particular quality or blessing. However, 


16 


Bhagavata Purana 


the worship of the supreme form of Vishnu bestows the blessing of 


transcendental awareness." 


Parikshit was very eager to hear more about Lord Vishnu, and he prayed 
Sukadeva to talk to him about the activities of Vishnu in this world. 
Sukadeva immersed himself in meditation on the Lord and offered him his 
respects before answering to the questions. "God is the Supreme Soul of all 
souls, the personification of the Vedas, worshiped by all those who are free 
from false identification. 


This is the teaching that Brahma, the first living being and creator of the 
universe, offered his son Narada, who had asked him how the material 
world is created and preserved, and who controls it. 


Brahma replied that his work of creation is subordinate and subsequent to 
the primary creation, that directly emanates from Vishnu in the form of his 
radiance. This original Purusha is called Mahavishnu or Karanarnavasayi 
Vishnu because he remains reclining on the Causal Ocean, that mahat tattva 
ot non-differentiation great Reality that contains the germ of all existence. 
Then time comes into existence, and the three gumas or qualities of matter - 


sattva ot goodness, rajas ot passion, and amas or ignorance. 


The movement of these qualitie creates material identification and the 
necessity to act on the manifested level, which in turn produce the subtle 
and gross material elements - space, the gaseous elements, the liquid 
elements and the solid elements. Then the archetypes or personifications of 
the various universal manifestations appear, in the form of the various 


Devas." 


From the inconceivable and transcendental body of Mahavishnu the 
universes emanate like innumerable bubbles, and within each evolving 
universe the Lord manifests as Garbhodakasayi Vishnu, also called 
Hiranyagarbha, the radiant fetus inside the universal uterus, sleeping within 
the amniotic waters of creation. From this transcendental form of the Virat 
Purusha originates the particular Brahma who is in charge of the physical 
construction of the universe under his control. But apart from the 
manifestation of the Purusha avataras, the Lord also appears in the material 
world in other specific forms, according to the precise functions that 


constitute his divine mission. For example Varaha, Suyajna the son of 


17 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Akuti, Kapila the son of Devahuti, Datta the son of Atri, the four Kumaras, 
Nara and Narayana the sons of Murti, king Prithu, Rishabha, Hayagriva, 
Matsya, Kurma, Nrisimha, Vamana, Hamsa, Dhanvantari, Parasurama, 
Ramachandra and Krishna. The Lord also descends as Vyasa, Buddha and 
Kalki." 


Parikshit had other questions. "Narada Muni had the great fortune of 
hearing the glories of the Lord directly from his father Brahma. In what 
occasions did he transmit these teachings? I sincerely wish to hear more 
about this deep knowledge. I have understood that the transcendental spirit 
soul is different from the material body. How does it acquire a body, and 
for what purpose? 


You have said that the Supreme Lord manifests in the universal form, that 
is made of matter; so what is the difference between the body of the Lord 
and the body of the ordinary living being? I am also eager to hear more 
about the Supreme Soul, who resides in every heart without being touched 
by the external energy. 


I have heard your explanation on how the planets of the universe and their 
rulers are situated in the various part of the gigantic body of the Virat 
Purusha. However, I do not understand their functional position: can you 
explain better? I also want to understand the duration of time between the 
creation and the destruction of the universe and the subsequent creations, 
the nature of time constituted by past present and future, the duration and 
measure of life on the various planets of the universe, and why they are 
different. 


I would also like to know about the process of accumulation of the karmic 
reactions that cause the movements of the beings among the many species 
of life, from the celestial beings to the most insignificant creatures. What is 
the process of creation of the planets, of earth, of the mountains, rivers and 
seas, and their inhabitants? How is the interplanetary space divided? What 
are the characteristics of the vatious social categories? And what rules 
should one observe in case of emergency? 


I am also interested in hearing about the elementary principles of creation, 
of the mystic powers of yoga, of the subjects of Vedic literature, and the 


way in which the beings are born and develop. And above all, I want to 


18 


Bhagavata Purana 


hear about the benefits of devotional service to the Lord, in relation to the 
Vedic ritual, the procedures that enable one to attain success in dharma, 
artha, Rama and moksha - or ethical integrity, acquisition of valuable things, 
satisfaction of the senses and liberation from material conditionings. 


How do the living beings appear? And how the Asuras - the demonic 


beings - come to existence? And how do liberated beings live?" 


Sukadeva was very pleased by the sincerity of Parikshit, who was thirsty 
with knowledge and asked so many questions. "It is only because of the 
influence of the illusory energy," he said, "that one comes to believe he is 
the material body. The idea of 'I' and 'mine' is simply a misconception, that 


dissipates as soon we attain transcendental realization. 


At the beginning of creation, Brahma was trying to understand how to 
proceed in his work. While meditating, he heard the two syllable 'éa' and ‘pa’, 
that form the Sanskrit word “apa (‘austerity’), and although he could not 
understand where the sound had come from, he decided to follow that 
instruction and engaged in a very long meditation to control the self. The 
Lord was very pleased by Brahma's sincere service and granted him the 
vision of his wonderful spiritual abode, Vaikuntha, where Vishnu lives 
surrounded by his devotees. Besides, he revealed that he had given him the 
instruction to practice austerity, because the intensity in the engagement in 
one's duty is non-different from the Lord himself. 


On that occasion, Brahma asked the Lord questions that are similar to the 
ones you asked me, and in reply he obtained the four verses that are 
considered the heart of the Bhagavata. Vishnu told Brahma that his existence 
is eternal - it exists before the manifestation of the universe, in the present 
moment, and even after the destruction of the cosmos. Nothing exists 
without the Lord, who is in every thing as well as beyond all created things, 
just like the elements of the universe enter into the cosmos and at the same 
time they remain distinct from it. Those who seek the Absolute Truth must 
understand this secret knowledge in all circumstances, both directly and 
indirectly." 


Later, Brahma gave this knowledge to his son Narada, who taught it to his 
disciple Vyasa in the form of the Bhagavata, that deals with ten subjects: the 


creation of the universe, the secondary creation, the structure of the 


19 


Parama Karuna Devi 


planetary systems, the manner in which the Lord protects the universe, the 
creative impulse, the series of the Manus, the science of God, how to go 
back to God, and what is the most valuable treasure. 


The fundamental or primary creation, called sarga, consists of the sixteen 
elements of matter - the five gross elements called earth, water, fire, air and 
space; the subtle elements called sound, form, taste, smell and touch; and 
the senses that are eyes, eats, nose, tongue, skin and mind. The secondary 
creation follows, from the interaction of these sixteen primary elements, 


and it is called wisarga. 


The Lord's protection is obtained by obeying his laws, and the succession 
of the Manus has the purpose to express such laws to give the proper 
direction to the life of human beings. The creative impulse consists in the 
desire of obtaining the result of the action. The science of God describes 
the avataras of the Lord and the various activities performed by these 


incarnations together with his devotees. 


The dissolution of the cosmic manifestation occurs when the Lord 
withdraws all the universes into himself and the living beings merge again 
into his body together with their conditioned tendencies, while liberation is 
the permanent nature of the being when he leaves the subtle body besides 
the gross body. 


The Supreme is the source and the reservoir of the cosmic manifestation, 
that gives shelter to the physical manifestation called adbibhautika, to the 
archetypal manifestation called adhidaivika, and to the manifestation of the 
individuals called adbyatmika. In other words, these are the material bodies, 
the beings who control them and the beings that are controlled. 

All beings are created by the Supreme Lord and receive a body according to 
their past actions - including Brahma and his sons such as Daksha and the 
other Prajapatis, the Manus, Indra, Chandra and Varuna, the Rishis, the 
inhabitants of the higher planets such as Pitriloka, Siddhaloka, Charanaloka, 
Gandharvaloka, Vidyadharaloka, Kinnaraloka, as well as the Apsaras, 
Yakshas and Rakshasas, Kimpurushas, human beings, ghosts, animals, 


plants and so on. 


20 


Bhagavata Purana 


Conversation between 
Maitreya and Vidura 


Parikshit Maharaja then asked Sukadeva to tell him about the circumstances 
in which Vidura, the brother of Pandu and Dhritarastra, had met the sage 
Maitreya and had discussed important spiritual topics with him. Sukadeva 
continued to narrate: "The blind regent, Dhritarastra, had been degraded by 
his desire to please his evil sons, and allowed them to commit many 
offenses against the Pandavas. Duryodhana and his brothers tried many 
times to murder their cousins, mistreated Draupadi in public, and stripped 
Yudhisthira of all his possessions with a fixed dice game. 


Vidura had admonished his brother and nephews many times, warning 
them that such crimes would bring terrible consequences, also because the 
Pandavas were powerful Ashatriyas and were personally supported by Lord 
Krishna. Instead of heeding his uncle's wise advice, Duryodhana insulted 
him too, calling him the son of a maidservant, and ordering the guards to 
throw him out of the palace. 


Pained by those unwarranted offenses, Vidura did not wait to be mistreated 
further, and he immediately left the court to visit many pilgrimage places, 
such as Ayodhya, Dvaraka and Mathura. He traveled alone as a humble 
beggar, without depending on anyone, crossing through pure and sacred 
regions. When he reached Prabhasa he learned about the death of all his 
relatives in the battle and he turned west, towards the Sarasvati river, and 
went to the eleven “thas on her banks - Trita, Usana, Mahu, Prithu, Agni, 
Asita, Vayu, Sudasa, Go, Guha and Sraddhadeva - visiting many temples 
dedicated to the Lord. 


Then he traveled through the wealthy western provinces of Surat, Sauvira, 
Matsya and Kurujangala, and he finally came to the bank of the Yamuna 
tiver, where he met Uddhava, the great devotee of the Lord, and asked him 
for news about Krishna and the Yadu dynasty. 


21 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Remembering the Lord, Uddhava was overwhelmed by an intense 
sentiment of love, and wiping the tears from his eyes, he informed him 
about the disappearance of Krishna and the destruction of his dynasty. The 
two great devotees found comfort in discussing between themselves about 
Lord Krishna and his activities during his mission. 


Uddhava recalled the various stages of Krishna's life, up to the moment 
when he had left his family and had gone to the bank of the river Sarasvati. 
Sitting under a young banyan tree, Krishna appeared completely peaceful, 
although he had abandoned all the comforts of his palaces. Uddhava had 
followed him because he could not stay away from him, and this was how 
Maitreya found them during his pilgrimage, and he remained in their 
company to discuss about transcendental knowledge. So Uddhava advised 
Vidura to search for Maitreya, who was a friend of Vyasa and thus older 
than Vidura, to learn from him that same knowledge that had been 
explained by Lord Krishna." 


After spending some days in the company of Uddhava, talking about the 
disappearance of Lord Krishna and his dynasty, Vidura traveled towards the 
Ganges in search of Maitreya, who resided in Haradvara. When he arrived 
in the presence of the great sage, Vidura asked him to explain how the Lord 
incarnates in this world, and how we can serve the Lord with devotion. 
Maitreya welcomed him affectionately, accepting him as the worthy son of 
Vyasa and especially as the incarnation of Yamaraja, the Lord of Death, the 


eternal companion of God. 


He immediately started to explain how at the beginning of creation, Lord 
Vishnu awakens material energy, manifesting the universal form. He first 
created Brahma and the Devas - Agni, Varuna, the Asvini kumaras, Surya, 
Vayu and the directions of space - as manifestations of his own divine 
being, and gave them the knowledge and power to manifest and rule the 
universe. After one thousand celestial years, material energy generated the 
living beings according to their tendencies and identifications. 


Vidura asked: "In what way the unchangeable Lord, who is transcendental 
and always satisfied in himself, comes into contact with the material nature 
and her activities without being touched by the influence of the gwnas? How 
does the individual soul, who is pure awareness, slide into ignorance and 
remains trapped there? And since the Lord resides in the heart of all living 


22 


Bhagavata Purana 


beings, why do living beings engage in activities that lead to sufferings and 
disaster?" 


Maitreya replied: "The Supreme Lord is never overcome by illusion, but the 
individual beings are small enough to fall under her power, as in a 
temporaty dream. The misconception of identification with matter can be 
gradually dissipated by meditating on the Lord, the transcendental Reality, 
just like when we awaken from sleep we can return to the awareness of the 
waking state by focusing on what really exists." 


Vidura asked again: "Please tell me more about the secondary creation of 
Brahma, of the Manus and their descendants, of the planets, the various 
species, the divisions of society, the different methods of spiritual 
realization, the prescribed rituals and the activities of the Lord when he 
manifests in this world." 


Maitreya congratulated Vidura for his excellent question and said that the 
same subjects had been explained by Ananta Sankarshana to Sanat Kumara 
and his three brothers, sons of Brahma. In turn, the Kumara handed down 
the same teachings to Sankhyayana Muni, who gave them to Brihaspati and 


Parasara, Maitreya's guru. 


The Lord, the Supreme Soul of the universe, appears to be sleeping in the 
water of the Ocean and generates the living beings through the power of 
the external energy, the Kala shakti (the black Power" or "the Power of 
Time"), therefore his transcendental body has a dark blue complexion. The 
ageregate of the selfish activities of the living beings manifests in the form 
of a lotus bud growing from Vishnu's navel. Again the Lord enters that 
lotus flower as Kshirodakasayi Vishnu, the Supreme Soul of all beings, and 
generates the personification of the Vedic knowledge, Brahma. 
After meditating for a long time, Brahma became able to see the Lord and 
offered him beautiful prayers. With the Lord's blessing, Brahma established 
himself firmly in spiritual consciousness, that enabled him to perceive the 
presence of the Godhead in each being, and he started to shape the 
fourteen inhabited planetary systems and the bodies of the various living 
beings according to the different species. 


There are nine subsequent stages in creation: the first is the mabat-tattva (the 


total aggregate of matter), the second generates the sense of identification 


23 


Parama Karuna Devi 


with matter, the third manifests sense perception, the fourth manifests the 
sense of cognition and action, the fifth manifests the archetypes of the 
universal reality known as Devas, and the sixth manifests the sense of 
ignorance. The secondary creation by Brahma starts from the seventh 
phase, in which he manifests the immovable beings, such as the plants. The 
eighth phase manifests the lower animals, including mammals and birds, 
who ate listed in 28 wide categories. The ninth and last phase of creation 
manifests the human beings, the heavenly beings, the Rakshasas and 
Yakshas, Gandharvas and Apsaras, Siddhas and Charanas and Vidyadharas, 
and the various types of goblins and ghosts. 


The most elementary particle that is at the base of creation is the atom, 
almost invisible even after the dissolution of the bodies. The calculation of 
time is therefore based as a fundamental measure by reference to atomic 
time - the time in which an atom covers a particular space. An aggregate of 
six atoms is large enough to be seen in the sunlight that penetrates through 


a screen. 


The time required for the integration of three of these aggregates of six 
atoms (called srasarenus) is called trut, and is the shortest unit of time. One 
vedba is composed by 100 ¢ru#is, while one /ava consists of three vedhas, one 
nimesa cottesponds to three /avas, one kshana to three nimesas, one Rastha to 
five &shanas, one /aghu to fifteen Rasthas, one nadika ot danda to fifteen /aghus, 
one muhurta to two dandas, and six or seven dandas form a quarter of the day 
or night, according to the season. The instrument to measure one danda is 
prepared with a copper container of six pa/as in weight: we make a hole with 
a gold lancet weighing four masas and four angulas long. When the container 


is put over water, it sinks in exactly one danda. 


In each day and night of the human beings there are four praharas; fifteen 
days and nights form one paksha, and a month is composed by two pakshas 
- a white one and a black one. One human month equals to one day and 
night on the Pitri planets. Two months of Earth's time constitute a season, 
while six months are a complete movement of the sun from south to north 
and vice versa. Two of these complete movements, that constitute one 
complete cycle of the sun, correspond to one day and night of the heavenly 
beings, but an entire year of the earth calendar. The human beings have a 
duration of life of 100 of these years. 


24 


Bhagavata Purana 


There ate five different definitions for the orbits of the sun, the moon, the 
stars and other celestial bodies, and all have specific cycles. A cycle of four 
earth ages - Satya, Treta, Dvapara and Kali - constitutes 12,000 years of the 
heavenly beings. Satya yuga lasts 4,800 heavenly years, Treta 3,600, Dvapara 
2,400 years, and Kali 1,200. In the age of Satya the human beings follow the 
principles of religion perfectly, but in each of the three subsequent ages, 
one fourth of these principles become lost. 


One thousand cycles of four ages constitute one day and one night for 
Brahma; when his day is over there is a partial destruction of the universe, 
in which the sun and the moon loose their radiance and the inhabitants of 
the highest planets move to Janaloka because the rest of universe is 
devastated by fire. When Brahma gets up in the morning, a new cycle of 
creation begins. Within one day of Brahma there is a series of fourteen 
Manus, each living a little more than 71 cycles of four ages. At each new 
Manu there is a renovation of the seven Rishis, Indra and other celestial 
beings and the residents of the higher planets. Brahma lives for 100 of his 
years, 50 of which have already passed; the first cycle of ages in the second 
half of Brahma's life was characterized by the appearance of the Lord in the 
form of Varaha, the boar avatara. 


At the beginning of creation Brahma generated the four great sages called 
Sanaka, Sananda, Sanatana and Sanat Kumara. Brahma expected them to 
generate descendants in turn, but the Kumaras were not interested in 
procreation and chose to remain small boys forever, to avoid being 
involved in the complications due to the fact of being older than others. 
Brahma was not happy about this disobedience, and from his anger, 
concentrated between his brows, Rudra appeared manifesting in eleven 
forms that have the purpose to destroy the universe at the time of 
dissolution. 


Later Brahma generated, from various parts of his body, the Rishis named 
Marici, Atri, Angira, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Bhrigu, Vasistha, Kardama, 
Daksa and Narada. In the same way he generated the four Vedas (Rig, Yajur, 
Sama and Atharva), the secondary Vedas (Ayur, Dhanur, Gandbarva, and so 
on) and the fifth Veda (Puranas and Itihasas), together with the other forms 
of knowledge and ritual ceremonies. Finally, he generated the first couple of 
human beings - Svayambhuva Manu and Satarupa - who started to produce 


25 


Parama Karuna Devi 


a descendence through sexual union. Manu had two sons (Priyavrata and 
Uttanapada) and three daughters (Akuti, Devahuti and Prasuti). He gave 
Akuti in marriage to Ruci Rishi, Devahuti to Kardama Rishi, and Prasuti to 
Daksha Prajapat. 


The story of Varaha 


Sukadeva continued to narrate the teachings of Maitreya to Vidura about 
the creation of the universe. Maitreya said, "Svayambhuva Manu received 
from Brahma the task to populate the earth and rule it, but there was a 
problem. Earth had sunk into the Garbha Ocean, that is at the bottom of 


the universe, and it had to be restored to its proper orbit." 


While he was pondering this problem, Brahma sneezed and from his nostril 
appeared a tiny boar, who soon grew so big that his body occupied the 
entite sky. Immediately Brahma, the Rishis and Manu realized that it could 
not be an ordinary creature; when Brahma guessed that it might be Vishnu, 
the boar roared his approval and the echo of that powerful sound was 
accompanied by the reciting of Vedic hymns by all the great Rishis. 


The boat avatara, Varaha, flashed across the sky, bristling his hair and 
scattering the clouds with his hooves and sparkling tusks. Then, running 
merrily like an elephant, he entered into the waters, creating two enormous 
waves, that seemed like arms of the ocean raised in prayer. Using his long 
white tusks, he furrowed into the ocean bed searching for the earth, and 
finally he found her and lifted her up. While he was restoring the earth to 
her proper orbit, he was confronted by the aswra Hiranyaksha and engaged 
in battle with him, finally killing him with his divine mace. Happy at having 
witnessed that wonderful adventure, all the Rishis contemplated the form 
of Varaha with devotion and offered their respects and prayers to the Lord, 
who had accepted earth a his beloved consort. 


Vidura had listened carefully to Maitreya's discourse, and wanted to hear 
more. "O great Rishi," he said, "why had the Asura Hiranyaksha appeared 
to challenge Lord Varaha while he was rescuing Earth?" 


26 


Bhagavata Purana 


"The story of Hiranyaksha begins with his birth from Diti, the daughter of 
Prajapati Daksha," Maitreya replied. "Diti strongly desired to have a child, 
and she prayed her husband Kasyapa, son of Marici, to unite with her even 
if the moment was inauspicious. Sunset is a moment of the day when the 
forces of darkness stir and become more powerful - therefore it is better to 
engage in religious ceremonies that will protect our awareness, keeping it 
from sliding into the lower influences of matter. Kasyapa was sitting in 
meditation after completing the fire ceremony and was offering homage to 
Lord Shiva, who at that time travels around, accompanied by his retinue." 


Diti, however, was agitated by sexual desire and had no intention to wait 
any longer. Kasyapa consented to perform his conjugal duty, but warned 
her that there would be negative consequences: the two children conceived 
at that inauspicious time would be evil Asuras, tormentors of the universe, 
and for this reason they would be killed by the Supreme Lord, Vishnu. 


Later Diti repented for her lack of discipline, and Kasyapa said that the son 
of one of those sons would be a great devotee of the Lord, blessed and 
loved by all. Diti also tried to delay the birth of the two Asuras, but already 
during the pregnancy the universe was gradually covered by a great 
darkness, so that the Devas went to Brahma to ask him what was 


happening. 


Brahma explained that the problem had started when the four Kumaras had 
gone to Vaikuntha to meet Lord Vishnu. After crossing the first six gates 
and meeting many of the residents of Vaikuntha, who traveled in airplanes 
together with their consorts, the Kumaras came to the seventh gate and its 
two doormen Jaya and Vijaya. The two guards saw the Kumaras enter 
without hesitation and stopped them, treating them as ordinary children. 
Annoyed, the Rishis scolded the two guards for their narrow mindedness. 
Such a mentality was characteristic of the material world, and that was the 


place where they would soon end up. 


At that very moment, Vishu arrived personally to solve the controversy. 
After graciously accepting the prayers of the Kumaras, he declared he 
approved the punishment that had been given to his servants. Directly 
taking responsibility for the offense, he asked the Kumaras to allow the 
doormen to return to his presence in Vaikuntha after expiating their 
mistake by taking birth in the material world. The Kumaras replied 


27 


Parama Karuna Devi 


acknowledging the fact that everything always happens according to the 
Lord's plan and that the curse against the two innocent doormen was due 


to the influence of his illusory energy. 


Thus Jaya and Vijaya fell from their positions and entered Diti's womb as 
her two sons, Hiranyaksha and Hiranyakasipu. 


The birth of the two twins was accompanied by many bad omens: 
earthquakes, great fires, comets, meteorites, hurricanes and cyclones that 
hid the light of the sun and the moon, immersing the entire universe in 
deep darkness. The planets moved inauspiciously, often in retrograde path, 
and there were many eclipses. Mars and Saturn became more powerful than 
the other more peaceful planets such as Mercury, Jupiter and Venus. The 
ocean moaned, agitated by huge waves. Dogs and jackals were restless and 
continued to howl, wild donkeys ran around the land in herds, scaring the 
birds and the cows. 


Hiranyaksha and Hiranyakasipu were born already fully grown, with bodies 
as strong as steel, decorated with crowns and other ornaments. They did 
not fear anyone, and before them Indra and the other celestial beings fled 
and went into hiding. Not finding any opponents to fight with, Hiranyaksha 
ventured into the ocean and went to challenge the Deva Varuna in his 
capital, Vibhavari. Not desiring to fight against the arrogant Asura, Varuna 
convinced him to seek Vishnu, the Supreme and most powerful Being, and 
fight with him. 


Immediately Hiranyaksha went to search for Vishnu, and learning that he 
was rescuing earth from the waters, he hastened to challenge him, insulting 
and threatening him. Hiranyaksha had golden hair and terrifying tusks, and 
wore a golden armor and other beautiful ornaments. He was equipped with 
a huge mace and he rushed against the Lord without hesitation. Varaha 
patiently tolerated the insults and first of all focused on rescuing the earth, 
lifting her out of the water, like an elephant that is attacked by a crocodile 
first of all thinks about his female's safety. Then he turned to face the 
challenge, crushing the Asura's pride and threatening him. 


The fight was terrible, and all the Devas and Rishis and the inhabitants of 
the heavenly planets watched it anxiously. Both the opponents dealt many 
heavy blows on one another and intoxicated by the smell of the blood, they 


28 


Bhagavata Purana 


became even more engrossed in the fight. Suddenly Varaha's mace slid off 
his hand, and the Asura showed his chivalry by holding his attack. 


Brahma was scared, and offering his prayers to the Lord, he asked him not 
to play too long with his enemy, but to end the fight quickly. Then Varaha 
smacked Hiranyaksha's mace off his hand and again offered the weapon 
back to him. The Asura felt humiliated and grabbed a trident, that was soon 
shattered to pieces by the Lord's disc. Enraged, Hiranyaksha tried all the 
magic tricks he knew, evoking violent winds, darkness, hailstorms and a rain 
of sand and stones. There was a shower of pus, hair, blood, excrements, 
urine and bones, and armies of demons marched in full war gear. But the 
Lord's Sudarshana disc dissipated all those terrifying illusions and Varaha 
ended the fight with a hard slap just below the Asura's ear - and he fell 
dead. 


The teachings of Kapila 


On Vidura's request, Maitreya continued to narrate the Bhagavata, speaking 
about the descendants of Manu and especially of Devahuti and Ruci, who 


married respectively Kardama and Daksha. 


On Brahma's order, Kardama engaged in a long meditation on the bank of 
the Bindu Sarovara, a wonderful lake surrounded by the Sarasvati river: it 
was a vety beautiful place, the abode of noble Rishis, in the middle of 
scented forests full of flowers and resounding with the songs of auspicious 
bird as well as deer, elephants, monkeys, lions and mongooses. When finally 
Vishnu appeared to grant him a boon, Kardama offered him beautiful 
prayers and asked him for a suitable bride. The Lord blessed him, and told 
him that Svayambhuva Manu and his wife Satarupa were coming to that 
place, traveling with their daughter Devahuti, in search of a good husband 
for her. In the future, Devahuti would have nine daughters and Vishnu 
himself would appear as her son Kapila. 


29 


Parama Karuna Devi 


As Vishnu had predicted, as soon as Kardama had completed his 
austerities, Svayambhuva Manu arrived at the ashrama, accompanied by his 
wife and daughter, and was greeted with much honor. Svayambhuva told 
the Rishi that his daughter Devahuti had heard much about him and had 
decided to become his wife. Kardama was happy to accept the proposal, on 
the condition that - after giving children to Devahuti - he would be free to 
retire from family life to engage completely in spiritual meditation. 
Devahuti accepted and the marriage was solemnized. Her parents bade her 
farewell, leaving many gifts for her, and then returned to their capital, 
Barhismati. 


Devahuti lived in the ashrama of Kardama Muni, sincerely engaged in 
taking care of her great husband, observing all the religious rituals and 
working hard, even neglecting her own well-being and health. After some 
time, Kardama noticed that the princess had neglected the proper care of 
het own body, and so he became worried and saddened. 


Comforted by her husband, Devahuti reminded him about his promise to 
give her children, and also asked for a suitable house where she could raise 
them. Immediately Kardama Muni created, out of his own mystic powers, 
an airborne palace of wonderful beauty, and filled with all sorts of wealth. 
The castle was seven stories high, had floors made with emeralds with 
motifs of coral daisies, and was equipped by very valuable furniture, 
decorated with all types of gems and garlands of scented flowers. There 
were gardens and courtyards with swans and doves - both real and artificial 
- and many works of art. Kardama's power also created one thousand 
maidservants who bathed Devahuti in the Bindu Sarovara, massaging her 
with costly oils and dressing her with wonderful clothes and royal 
ornaments. Refreshed with delicious foods and tonic drinks, Devahuti 
traveled with her husband in her flying mansion for many years, visiting the 
valleys of mount Meru and those around the Manasa Sarovara lake, as well 
as the gardens called Vaisrambhaka, Surasana, Nandana, Puspabhadraka 
and Caitrarathya. They also traveled to various other planets, freely and 
without any difficulty. 


Devahuti gave birth to nine daughters, but as these would leave their home 
to marry, she asked her husband for a son who could stay and take care of 
her. After worshiping the Supreme Lord, Devahuti gave birth to Kapila, the 


30 


Bhagavata Purana 


avatara of Vishnu who expounded the teachings known as the Sankhya 
philosophy. 


Brahma came to see the divine newborn and Kardama offered him 
respects. Then Kardama gave his daughters in marriage to great Rishis: Kala 
to Marici, Anasuya to Atri, Sraddha to Angira, Havirbhu to Pulastya, Gati to 
Pulaya, Kriya to Kratu, Khyati to Bhrigu, Arundhati to Vasistha and Santi 
to Atharva. He then offered prayers to the Supreme Lord, who had 
incarnated as his son Kapila, and asked his permission to retire from family 
life and go to the forest to meditate alone and then to roam around the 
world following the strict rules of renunciation of sannyasa. Free from all 
identifications and material attachments, from all desires and repulsion, 


Kardama finally attained the supreme liberation. 


Kapila stayed with his mother Devahuti, and on her request he explained 
the method of devotional service to the Supreme Lord, that constitutes the 
supreme form of yoga. The mind becomes purified when it is completely 
free from the desires produced by the false identifications with the body 
and by material attachments. Awakened to its true spiritual nature, the soul 
transcends the joys and sorrows of this world and by practicing knowledge 
and renunciation it only accepts the company of the realized sages - who 
are tolerant, compassionate, peaceful and friendly towards all living beings. 
The sadbus live by practicing the teachings of the scriptures and do not see 
anyone as their enemies, but renounce all material ties because they only 
seek pleasure in the meditation on the Lord's activities. The company of 
such saintly people helps one to overcome material attachments and 
become firmly established in divine consciousness. 


To help Devahuti to better concentrate on this meditation, Kapila explained 
to her the Sankhya yoga, that is a combination of devotional service and 
mystic realization, that considers the senses as the symbolic representations 
of the Devas and the mind as the representative of the Supreme Lord. The 
natural tendency of the senses is to act according to the instructions of the 
Vedas and the tendency of the mind is to serve. The supreme service is the 
service offered to the Lord, in full knowledge and awareness of the Divine 
is the supreme perfection of self realization. 


The Supreme Lord is the Supreme Soul, who has no beginning or end; he 
transcends the world of matter but can be perceived everywhere in the 


31 


Parama Karuna Devi 


universe because he is omnipresent. Entering the material energy, the Lord 
starts the creation of the universe. The static combination of the three gunas, 
the three influences of nature, is the aggregate of the elements that 
compose nature, and is called pradhana. These elements are the five gross 
elements, the five subtle elements, the four internal senses, the five senses 


of perception and the five organs of action. 


The five gross elements are earth (energy in the solid form), water (energy 
in liquid form), fire (energy in the form of heat and light), air (energy in the 
form of gas) and space. The five corresponding subtle elements are smell, 
taste, color, touch and sound. The senses of perception are the sense of 
smell, taste, sight, touch and hearing, while the senses of action are those 
that enable us to speak, move, work, generate and evacuate. The internal 
subtle senses are the mind, intelligence, ego and material awareness. The 
25th element is time, the eternal manifestation of God that starts and ends 


creation, while the 26th element is the presence of the soul. 


In the beginning, the soul has a pure, clear and peaceful awareness, free 
from all distractions, but when it identifies with matter, the principles of 
creation manifest the various material elements. The false perception of the 
self is controlled by Ananta Sankarshana: this false perception, focused in 
goodness, manifests the mind, controlled by Aniruddha. Material 
identification focused in passion manifests intelligence, with its functions 
such as doubt, correct understanding, incorrect understanding, memory and 
sleep, as well as the senses of perception and action, that depend 


respectively on intelligence and life energy. 


Material identification focused in ignorance produces the material elements, 
beginning with the subtle element of sound, that in turn produces space and 
the sense of hearing. Sound is that which transmits the idea of an object 
and indicates the presence of a person even if we cannot see him or her. 
The characteristics of space are the power to contain the external and 
internal existence of all beings, as the field of action of prana, senses and 
mind. 


From the existence of space the element of touch develops, and then air. 
Touch is characterized by the feeling of hardness and softness, heat and 
cold, while the function of air is to move, mix, and enable access to the 
object of the sense of hearing and the other senses. 


32 


Bhagavata Purana 


The interaction of air with the sense of touch produces the forms of the 
bodies, determined by the destiny of each individual. The evolution of the 
forms generates the fire (light and heat) and the eyes become able to 
perceive forms and colors. The characteristics of form are size, quality and 
individuality. The form of fire is perceived by its radiance; fire is appreciated 
for its light, for the power to cook, digest, evaporate, destroy cold and 
stimulate hunger and thirst - the desire and the action to eat and drink. 


The interaction of fire with the visual perception evolves the element of 
taste, that produces water and the sense that perceives taste (the tongue). 
Although taste is originally one, it develops in various categories such as 
astringent, sweet, bitter, pungent, acid and salty, because of its contact wth 
different substances. 


The characteristics of water are the power to drench other substances, to 
coagulate various mixtures, destroy thirst, give satisfaction and sustain life, 


soften things, fight heat and constantly return to the water reservoirs. 


The interaction of water with the perception of taste develops the subtle 
element of odor, that manifests earth and the sense of smell. Odor is one, 
but it manifests in many ways - mixed, disgusting, fragrant, sweet, strong, 
acid and so on - according to the proportions of the associated substances. 


The characteristic functions of earth can be perceived by fashioning forms 
of the Supreme Brahman, building residences, preparing pots and 
containers for water and other substances and so on. In other words, earth 
is the support for all other elements. 


The sense that perceives sound is called hearing, the sense perceiving touch 
is called tact, the one perceiving form (the characteristic of fire) is called 
sight, the one perceiving taste (the characteristic of water) is called taste, the 
one perceiving odor (the characteristic of earth) is called smell. Because 
cause also exists in the effect, the characteristics of the cause are also found 
in the effect: therefore in earth we can found the characteristics of all other 


elements. 


When all these elements become differentiated, the Supreme Lord 
personally enters the creation together with time, action and the ganas (the 
fundamental qualities of nature, namely goodness, passion and ignorance), 


33 


Parama Karuna Devi 


giving birth to the Cosmic Egg. The universe has the shape of an egg, with 
layers of elements each 10 times thicker than the previous one, and it 
surrounded by non-manifested nature. 


Within the Cosmic Egg, Vishnu, Hari, divides it in fourteen planetary 
systems that compose its body. The parts of the body of the Virat Purusha, 
the universal Lord, manifest as the various components of nature - the 
mouth is the power to speak and the Deva of fire, the nostrils are the sense 
of smell and the prana, and so on. 


In this way we contemplate God as present in our own body and in the 
universe and simultaneously distinct from them. When the living being is in 
this position, he is not subject to the influence of the gwnas, of the 
temporary identifications and of the sense of possession, just like the sun 
remains detached from its own reflection in the water. 


If, on the other hand, he falls under the illusion of false material 
identification, believing himself to be the body, he focuses on material 
activities and considers himself as the owner of everything. In this 
conditioned state, he transmigrates into different species of life, higher or 
lower according to his association with the three influences of nature, and it 
forced to suffer the consequences of his actions. 


Actually the living being always transcends material energy, but because of 
his hunger for power and dominion on nature he is forced to remain in the 
material existence and suffer all its disadvantages, just like a sleeping man 
remains in his own nightmares and suffers because of them. By practicing 
the system of yoga, that is aimed at controlling the mind and the senses, 
one can rise to the level of pure devotional service, hearing and speaking 
about God. 


The liberated soul is aware of the absolute Personality of God, that is 
transcendental and manifests as reflection also in false identification. The 
presence of the Lord is perceived like the reflection of the sun on the water, 
projected on a wall in a room or situated in the sky. Similarly the realized 
soul perceives itself as reflected in the ego, in the senses and in the mind, 
although it always remains conscious and free from false identification. The 
illusion of material identification is like sleep, that confuses the nature and 


the identity of the dreamer and creates suffering and anxieties. 


34 


Bhagavata Purana 


In spite of its attraction for material nature, the living being can become 
liberated by regularly hearing about divine knowledge and performing his 
prescribed duties in a spirit of renunciation towards the results of action. 
He becomes independent and glorious by renouncing the idea of 
dominating matter, and cannot be touched by the influence of matter 
because he knows the reality of the Absolute, the nature of Brahman. After 
living many years and many lifetimes in this spiritual practice, one loses all 
desires to enjoy matter and any attraction for the mystic powers of yoga or 
even for the heavenly planets of this world. Thus he finally attains the 


transcendental position and never returns again to the material world. 


In order to engage in devotional service, one needs to see all living beings 
equally, without hostility or intimate relationships with anyone. One must 
be sincere in external activities and offer their results to God, be content 
with that income that can be obtained without too much difficulty, only eat 
what is strictly required and constantly live in a solitary place avoiding 


mundane social interactions. 


One should be always truthful, attentive, clean, peaceful, friendly, non- 
violent, compassionate and focused on one's spiritual nature. One should 
abstain from appropriating what does not belong to him and be satisfied 
with what he has. He must cultivate the ability to see and understand things 
through the knowledge of matter and spirit, but always avoid identifying 
with the body and being attracted to relationships based on the body. 


One should abandon conventional religious practices and focus only on 
those that lead to liberation, such as studying Vedic scriptures and 
worshiping the Deity, observing silence, controlling breathing, detaching 
the senses from the sense objects and focusing the mind on the heart. 
Fixing the prana and the mind on one of the six chakras of the body, he 
must focus the mind on the transcendental activities of God: this is called 


samadhi. 


When one has learned to control the mind and the body, he must sit 
comfortably in a solitary and sanctified place, keeping the body erect, and 
practice breathing control. He begins with deep breathing, holding the air 
between inhalation and exhalation, and then the other way around. The 
purpose of this practice is to stabilize and calm the mind, and to become 
free from the identification with the material body. 


35 


Parama Karuna Devi 


When the mind is perfectly purified by the practice of yoga, one should 
meditate on the form of the supreme Personality of God, who resides in 
the heart of his devotee. His charming ever-youthful face is smiling, his eyes 
are like the inner petals of the lotus flower, and his body looks like the 
petals of the blue lotus. His hands hold the conchshell, the disc and the 


mace. 


His hips are wrapped with a shining cloth, yellow like the center of the lotus 
flower, and on his chest one can see a small curl of white hair - the mark of 
Srivatsa - and the radiant Kaustubha jewel. His neck is decorated with a 
garland of forest flowers, surrounded by buzzing intoxicated bees. He wears 
a necklace of pearls, a crown and couples of bracelets, armlets and anklets. 


Meditating in this way on the Lord who resides in the heart, the yogi sees 
him reclining, moving and sitting with him, and contemplates the various 
parts of his body, starting from the lotus feet and the beautiful toenails, that 
are red like rubies. The Lord's feet, massaged by Lakshmi Devi, are like 
bolts of lightning that can shatter mountains of negative reactions 
accumulated in the mind of his devotee. 


His legs have a light blue complexion and appear particularly beautiful 
when the Lord rides on Garuda. His hips are surrounded by a golden belt 
gathering the wonderful yellow silken cloth that reaches down to his ankles. 
The Lord's navel, similar to the moon, is the place of birth of the lotus 
flower that contains all the planetary systems of the universe and is the 
abode of Brahma, the first created being. 


The Lord's chest is the resting place of Mahalakshmi, his nipples are like 
emeralds illuminated by the necklace of milk-white pearls. The four arms of 
the Lord are the source of the power of all the Devas. His disc, the 
Sudarshana chakra, has one thousand rays and shines dazzlingly, and his 
conchshell looks like a swan testing in his lotus hand. His Kaumodaki mace 
is very dear to him, and is covered with the blood of the Asuras. The pearl 
necklace on the Lord's neck represents the pure souls who are constantly 
engaged in his service. 


The Lord's face is surrounded by his dark curly hair and his eyebrows move 
like two fishes swimming in a pond. His glance is compassionate and 


affectionate, and dissipates all anxieties and sufferings in his devotees. His 


36 


Bhagavata Purana 


smile dries out the tears of anguish in those who bow to him. When Vishnu 
laughs, his teeth, similar to jasmine buds, shine with a rosy hue from his 
lips. 


Thus meditating intimately on the Person of the Lord, the yogi develops 
pure love for him and manifests ecstatic symptoms, such as the raising of 
hairs and tears of joy. Focused on the Lord, the mind remains free from all 
contamination, firm like the flame of a lamp that is not disturbed by the 
wind, and does not care any longer for the material body. There is no more 
sense of possession towards the relationships of the body, and the bodily 
activities are felt as if performed in a dream. 


There ate three types of devotional service, according to the personal 
qualities of the devotee. Service performed by an envious, arrogant, violent 
and angry person, who has a sectarian mentality, is under the influence of 
ignorance. Service offered in hope to obtain pleasure, fame and wealth for 
oneself is under the influence of passion. When a devotee worships the 
Lord offering him the result of his activities, to become free from 


attachments, his service is under the influence of goodness. 


Pure devotional service, that is above the ganas, is recognized by the 
spontaneous and joyful attraction towards the Lord, that can be compared 
to the flow of the Ganges, spontaneously rushing to the ocean because of 
its own nature. 


The pure devotee offers worship and prayers to the Deities in the temples, 
but treats all living entities with equal benevolence, only considering their 
spiritual nature. He must be compassionate to the needy, friendly with his 
peers and respectful to the great souls. He must engage as much as possible 
in listening about spiritual thing and in reciting the name of the Lord, 
avoiding the company of materialists. 


One who offers worship to the Deity in the temple but does not perceive 
the Supreme Soul in the hearts of all beings and is hostile or offensive 
towards the bodies of others is immersed in ignorance and his service is 
compared to pouring oblations of clarified butter into ashes rather than in 
the fire. The Lord is never pleased by such service and does not accept it 
even if it is performed with technically perfect rituals and using all the 
required ingredients. Actually, the Lord puts a terrible fear of death in the 


37 


Parama Karuna Devi 


heart of anyone who makes even the smallest discrimination based on 


bodily differences between himself and other living beings. 


According to their species, the living beings have different degrees of 
sensitivity, and among the human beings the best are those intelligent 
persons who have studied the Vedas and understood their meaning, 
especially if they are able to dissipate the doubts of those who ask them 
questions, and if they sincerely follow the brahminical principles. These 
great souls attain perfection by liberating themselves from material 
contamination and by performing devotional service without desiring any 
reward. The Lord is known as Brahman and Paramatma and also as Time, 
that transforms the various material manifestations. He does not consider 
anyone as enemy or friend, but he encourages those who remember him 
and destroys those who forget him. 


To better understand the extent of the sufferings connected to birth and 
death, Devahuti asked Kapila to describe them in detail and to tell also 
about eternal time, that impels people to perform virtuous activities. The 
avatara ‘Kapila continued to explain: just like the clouds are not aware of the 
strength of the wind, a person immersed in material consciousness does not 
realize the power of Time, that destroys everything that a materialist builds 
with so much effort and pain, and even his body. In his illusion, the 
materialist forgets Time and deludes himself into believing that everything 
will last forever. Pushed by anxiety, he commits criminal acts for the 
purpose of obtaining and preserving the feeling of satisfaction he feels in 
family and society, although such relationships are based on hypocrisy and 


power games. 


He is enthralled by his wife and by the sweet voices of his children, but 
when he is unable to fulfill their requests he is neglected, like an old and 
tired ox receives a poor treatment from a stingy farmer. In spite of all that, 
he is afflicted by attachment and identification, and therefore he remains in 
the family even when his life has become miserable because of old age, 
invalidity and many diseases. Finally he dies in a pathetic way, surrounded 
by crying relatives and friends, and is unable to speak with them in spite of 
his ardent desire - something that gives him immense sufferings. 


As during his life he has committed questionable actions, he sees the 
Yamadutas, the servants of Yamaraja, who ate coming to arrest him. He is 


38 


Bhagavata Purana 


bound and dragged away for the proper punishment, and while he is 
walking along the road under a scorching sun and between forest fires, he is 
attacked by dogs and whipped. There is no respite for him, no shelter, no 
food or drink that can alleviate hunger and thirst. And this is just the 
beginning of his sufferings, because in the dimensions of hellish existence 
he suffers much torment in his subtle body. After his punishment is over, 
the materialist takes birth again and again in various bodies in the lower 


forms of life, until he obtains the precious opportunity of human birth. 


To take birth in a human body, the living being must first enter a father's 
sperm and be inserted in a mother's womb. During the first night after 
conception the sperm fertilizes the egg, and in the fifth night the embryo 
starts forming. In the tenth night it has the shape of a plum, and within one 
month the head becomes distinct from the rest of the body. At two months 
the hands and feet are formed, at three months the fingers and toes, the 
bones and the skin, the genitals and the other openings of the body become 
distinct. At four months from conception all the elements of the body are 
formed, at five months the fetus begins to feel hunger and thirst, and at six 
months it starts moving, leaning to the right side of the abdomen. 


The unborn child subsists on the food and drink consumed by the mother 
and lives in the abdominal cavity together with blood, urine and 
excrements, where germs and sometimes even parasites multiply. The fetus! 
body is very delicate and suffers when the mother eats food that is too 
bitter or spicy, salty or acid. It is also forced into an uncomfortable position, 


its back arched, and cannot move freely. 


In the seventh month of pregnancy the child becomes conscious; if he is 
lucky he is able to remember his previous lifetimes and repents about the 
mistakes he has committed. His position in his mother's womb becomes 
more and more precarious, because of the descending life air that forces 
him to move often, and in his pain, the child who has become conscious 
starts to pray the Lord to deliver him from that suffering. 


However, the closer he comes to the moment of birth, the more the child 
becomes anxious at the idea that after birth he will again fall in the trap of 
material existence, constituted by the illusion of being the body. But 
naturally the moment has come for him to take birth, therefore the 
descending life air in his mother's body inexorably pushes him down 


39 


Parama Karuna Devi 


through the small opening in mother's body, and he comes into the world 
with much pain, breathless and devoid of memory. Covered in blood and 
excrements, he falls to the ground and wriggles faintly and vainly like a 
worm, crying and screaming. 


After birth, the child is given to the care of people who are unable to 
understand what he wants or needs, and he is fed and handled by them. 
Unable to refuse what is given or done to him, he must lie in a 
contaminated bed, damp with sweat, urine and stool, full of germs, and is at 
the mercy of mosquitoes, flies, fleas and other insects from which he 
cannot defend himself. Without memory or intellect, the child can only cry 
in bitterness. 


Childhood is spent in disease, sufferings and frustration. The child cannot 
obtain what he wants, and in his ignorance he is overwhelmed by anger, 
despair and sadness. Growing up, he develops greed and lust, and quarrels 
with other people who have the same defects, falling under the control of 
those who are interested only in the pleasures of tongue and sex. In such a 
disastrous situation he loses truthfulness, the sense of cleanliness, 
compassion, gtavity, spiritual intelligence, modesty, self-control, good 
name, fortune and good opportunities in life. 


Those who were strongly attracted to women in previous lifetimes take a 
new birth as females to become attracted by males, foolishly believing that 
the purpose of their life consists in finding a husband who will give them a 
home, children, nice clothes and ornaments, and other wealth. Actually all 
these things are a deathly trap for her, like the song of the hunter who 
attracts the doe only to kill her. 


The conditioned soul who lives in the center of a family performs the 
prescribed rituals for the purpose of obtaining material benefits and enjoys 
the acquisition of wealth and sense gratification, but as long as such 
religious activities are performed with a materialistic mentality, they can at 
most propitiate the Devas and the ancestors and elevate one to heaven, to 
the moon or to Pitriloka, but these ate temporary positions. After 
exhausting their merits, these people must again take birth on earth, and at 
the end of the cycle of creation and manifestation of the universe, they lose 
everything. 


40 


Bhagavata Purana 


On the other hand, one who becomes detached from the attraction to 
material benefits attains enlightenment and can easily enter the personal 
realm of God, who is the owner of all worlds, material and spiritual. For 
this purpose, a person who has understood the various methods of self 
realization serves the Supreme God, fulfills his or her own professional and 
family duties, observes the rituals of sacrifice, distributes charity, engages in 
austerities, controls mind and senses, accepts the order of renunciation, 
practices yoga, offers devotional service and makes efforts to understand 
the science of self realization. 


These instructions should not be offered to those who are envious, 
unfaithful or addicted to degraded practices, to hypocrites or those who are 
very proud of their material possessions, greedy or attached to family life. 
They are meant for those who are respectful towards spiritual science, 


friendly to all beings and sincerely eager to serve. 


After listening to Kapila's teachings, his mother Devahuti attained the 
perfect understanding of devotional service and transcendental knowledge, 
and offered loving prayer to her divine son, the avatara of Vishnu. Kapila's 
mission was now complete: he took leave from his mother and left home. 
Devahuti, too, engaged in austerities and meditation on God in the house 
of Kardama at Siddhapada, only accepting what was strictly required for her 
maintenance even among the great wealth and comforts at her disposal. 
Finally she established herself in samadbi and the elements of her body 
dissolved into water, becoming part of the most sacred of all rivers. Anyone 
who takes bath in those blessed waters attains perfection. 


After leaving his mother's house, Kapila traveled on towards north-eat to 


the shore of the ocean, where he established his own ashrama. 


The sacrifice of Daksha 


Maitreya continued to speak about the descendants of the daughters of 
Svayambhuva Manu: after telling the story of Devahuti, he spoke about 
Akuti and Prasuti. 


41 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Although he already had two sons, Svayambhuva Manu consulted with his 
wife Satarupa and then gave her daughter Akuti in marriage to Prajapati 
Ruci, on the condition of adopting their son. Akuti had a son, Yajna, who 
was an avatara of Vishnu, and a daughter, Dakshina, who was a partial 
incarnation of Lakshmi. According to the agreement, Yajna was adopted by 
Manu and became his son; later he married Dakshina, who had a strong 
desire to get him as a husband. The couple had twelve children, named 
Tosha, Pratosha, Santosha, Bhadra, Santi, Idaspati, Idhma, Kavi, Vibhu, 
Svahna, Sudeva and Rochana. Yajna took the position of Indra and his 


children became known as the Tushita Devas. 


As we have seen, the nine daughters of Devahuti married various Rishis. 
Kala married Marici, the first of the seven Rishis, and had twin sons, 
Kasyapa and Purnima. Purnima generated Viraja, Visvaga and Devakulya, 
the water that washed the feet of the Supreme Lord and later became the 
Ganga of the heavenly planets. 


Anasuya married Atri Rishi and had three sons: Soma, Dattatreya and 
Durvasa, partial manifestations respectively of Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva, 
who were attracted to take birth from Atri Rishi by watching the powerful 
austerities performed by the sage - so intense that his head emanated a 
blazing fire. When he saw Vishnu, Shiva and Brahma artiving in his 
ashrama, Atri was honored and delighted, and he rushed to welcome them. 
After graciously accepting his prayers, the three Devas appeared as his sons. 


Another of Devahuti's daughters, Sraddha, married Angira Rishi and had 
four daughters, named Sinivali, Kuhu, Raka and Anumati, and two sons 
named Utathya and Brihaspati. Havirbhu married Pulastya and had two 
sons: Agastya, who in his next life became Dahragni, and Visrava, who 
became a great saint. Visrava had two wives - Idavida who became the wife 
of Kuvera, and Kesini, who gave birth to three sons: Ravana, Kumbhakarna 
and Vibhisana. Gati married Pulaha Rishi and had three sons, named 
Karmarestha, Vartyan and Sahisnu. 


Kriya, who married Kratu, generated the 60,000 sages known as the 
Valakhilyas. Urja, also called Arundhati, married Vasistha and gave birth to 
seven great sages: Citraketu, Suroci, Viraja, Mitra, Ulbana, Vasubhrdyana 
and Dyuman. Citti, the wife of Atharva Rishi, had a son named Asvasira, 
due to performing the vow called Dadhyancha. 


42 


Bhagavata Purana 


Khyati married Bhrigu Rishi and had two sons named Dhata and Vidhata, 
and a daughter named Sri. Dhata and Vidhata married Ayati and Niyati, the 
two daughters of Meru Rishi, and gave birth to Mrikanda and Prana. 
Mrikanda gave birth to Markandeya Rishi and Prana gave birth to Vedaira, 
the father of Ushana, also known as Suktracharya or Kavi. Sukracharya 
therefore belongs to the descendance of Brighu Rishi. 


The other daughter of Svayambhuva Manu, Prasuti, married the son of 
Brahma named Daksha, who was one of the most important progenitors of 
all the living beings, and had sixteen beautiful daughters. Of these, thirteen 
martied Dharma: Sraddha, Maitri, Daya, Santi, Tusti, Pusti, Kriya, Unnati, 
Buddhi, Medha, Titiksha, Hri and Murti. 


Sraddha gave birth to Subha, Maitri gave birth to Prasada, Daya gave birth 
to Abhaya, Shanti gave birth to Sukha, Tusti gave birth to Muda, Pushti 
gave birth to Smaya, Kriya gave birth to Yoga, Unnati gave birth to Barpa, 
Buddhi gave birth to Artha, Medha gave birth to Smriti, Titiksha gave birth 
to Kshema, and Hri gave birth to Praraya. Murti gave birth to the avatara of 
Vishnu as the two twins Nara and Narayana, whose birth was celebrated all 
over the universe and was accompanied by many good omens. After 
blessing the Devas for their prayers, Nara and Narayana went to the 
Gandhamadana hill, where they engaged in meditation and sense control to 
establish a good example for human beings. Nara and Narayana appeared 
again in this age as Krishna and Arjuna respectively in the Yadu and Kuru 
dynasties. 


Another daughter of Prasuti and Daksha, Svaha, married Agni and had 
three sons named Pavaka, Pavamana and Suci, who in turn fathered 45 
descendants, all archetypal manifestations of fire. Together with their 
fathers and grandfather, these forms of fire are 49 in number, and the 
oblations of sacrifice are offered for them. 


Another daughter of Prasuti and Daksha, Svadha, married the Pitas named 
Agnisvatta, Barhisada, Saumya and Ajyapa, and gave birth to two daughters, 
Vayuna and Dharini, both very expert in Vedic knowledge and 
transcendence. The last daughter of Prasuti and Daksha, Sati, became the 
faithful wife of Lord Shiva, but she did not have children because she left 
her body at a very young age. 


43 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Vidura wanted to know why Sati had left her body and Maitreya told him 
the story of the ritual sacrifice performed by Daksha, in which Prajapati 
Daksha offended Lord Shiva and Sati became so annoyed that she gave up 
the body she had received from him. 


All the Devas, Rishis and Prajapatis had organized a grand ritual sacrifice, to 
which all the most important personalities of the universe were invited. 
When Daksha arrived at the arena of the celebrations, he was so radiant 
that all the persons present, except Brahma and Shiva, stood up to offer 
their respects. 


Daksha was not expecting to be honored as a superior by Brahma, who was 
his father, but he felt offended in seeing that Shiva - who having married 
his daughter Sati had become his son in law - had not risen to greet him. In 
his pride, Daksha started to publicly insult Shiva, then becoming 
overwhelmed by anger, he cursed him and left the assembly, going back 
home. 


These unwarranted offenses angered Nandisvara, one of the most 
prominent companions of Lord Shiva. In turn, Nandisvara cursed Daksha 
and his followers, arrogant family men who perform rituals for materialistic 
purposes and behave like goats because they are attached to sex above all 
else. Stung by that attack against the ritual ceremonies of the Karma kanda, 
Bhrigu Muni too turned against the followers of Lord Shiva who imitate 
him externally without understanding the Vedic principles and the rules of 
civilized society. Saddened by that bickering and insults, and by the cursing 
and counter-coursing, Lord Shiva left the arena of the sacrifice, followed by 
his devotees. After that, Daksha did not make any effort to reconcile with 
Shiva and the situation remained tense. 


When Brahma appointed him as leader of all the Prajapatis, Daksha became 
even more atrogant and started to perform great rituals, such as the 
Vajapeya and the Brihaspati sava, to which he invited all the Devas, Rishis, 
Pitas and the other prominent personalities of the universe together with 
their consorts - all of them, except Lord Shiva and his wife Sati. 


Eager to participate to that important social occasion and to see her own 
family, Sati said she wanted to go to the celebrations, but Shiva knew that 
they would not be properly welcomed by Daksha, and tried to dissuade her. 


44 


Bhagavata Purana 


True, there is nothing wrong in going to visit one's family even without 
being invited, but if the people we are going to meet are immersed in the 
identification with the body and find some reason of hostility against us, we 
will only be able to irritate them even more. The unkind actions of those we 
love can hurt us much more deeply and painfully than the arrows shot by 
enemies. Although she was the youngest of his daughters, Sati could be 
insulted and mistreated by her father simply because of her loyalty to Shiva. 
Sati was torn between the wise instructions of Shiva and her intense desire 
to see her relatives, and finally her attachment to her birth family prevailed. 


Sati departed to go to the great ceremonies, accompanied by a royal retinue 
organized by Shiva's followers, but when she entered the arena of the 
sacrifice she was greeted only by her mother and sisters, while Daksha 
totally ignored her. The other participants, too, pretended they had not 
even seen her, because they feared Daksha's anger. Sati looked around and 
noticed that no oblation had been prepared for Shiva. Daksha's offensive 
behavior against Shiva had not toned down with time, but it had rather 
worsened. Then Sati's anger exploded. Directly addressing her father in 
front of all the participants to the ritual, Sati firmly defended Shiva, who is 
so kind that he only finds the best qualities in people, without caring for 
their defects, and he fulfills the prayers of everyone, from the simplest 
persons to the greatest spiritualists. Only an envious materialist like Daksha 
- Sati said - could insult and mock a great, pure and merciful soul such as 
Shiva. Only a fool identified with the material body is unable to understand 
the glory of renunciation and detachment in those who are situated on the 


transcendental level. 


Disgusted by her own birth relationship with Daksha, Sati decided to 
renege the body she had received from her father, and through the practice 
of mystic yoga she evoked the inner fire and instantly left her body, 
meditating on Lord Shiva. The followers and attendants of Shiva, who had 
accompanied Sati in procession to the sacrificial arena roared with anger 
and despair at the sight of the suicide of their Lord's spouse, but Bhrigu, 
reciting some mantras from the Yajur Veda, evoked thousand of celestial 
beings known as Ribhus and ordered them to protect the ritual ceremonies. 
Brandishing fire weapons, the Ribhus attacked Shiva's followers, who fell 
back and scattered in all directions. 


45 


Parama Karuna Devi 


When Shiva heard that his wife Sati had killed herself because of Daksha's 
insults and his own army had been attacked by the Ribhus, he manifested a 
terrible anger. He tore a strand of his own hair, radiant like fire, and threw it 
to the ground evoking Virabhadra, the personification of God's anger: a 
terrifying being, as tall as the sky and radiant like three suns, with thousands 
of arms and innumerable weapons. 


On Shiva's order, Virabhadra moved towards the arena of the sacrifice, 
followed by many other warriors in Shiva's army, similar to a dust storm 
that obfuscates the sky in all directions. They fell upon the Rishis, the 
Prajapatis and the heavenly beings attending the ceremonies who had taken 
Daksha's side, and punished them severely in accordance to their offenses. 
Virabhadra himself ripped off Bhrigu's mustache, gouged Bhaga's eyes and 
knocked off the teeth of Daksha and Pusha. Then, brandishing the 
sacrificial knife, he decapitated Daksha and threw his head into the fire as if 
it was an oblation. After torching the seating arrangement and the other 
structures prepared for the ceremonies, Virabhadra and Shiva's ganas 
returned to mount Kailash to their Lord. 


Terrified and humiliated, the Rishis and the heavenly beings went to 
Brahma to inform him of what had happened. Neither Brahma nor Vishnu 
had gone to attend the sacrificial ritual, because they were expecting trouble 
to break out, and Brahma said it very clearly: "A religious ceremony where a 
saintly person is offended cannot have any success. You have no choice but 
to sincerely beg forgiveness from Lord Shiva, who is kind and 
compassionate by nature. You need to understand that Shiva is immensely 
powerful, and at any time he is able to destroy all the planets in the 
universe." 


Followed by all the Rishis, Pitris, Prajapatis and heavenly beings, Brahma 
himself went to Kailasa, the abode of Lord Shiva, who holds court among 
many divine beings, Kinnaras, Gandharvas and Apsaras. Mount Kailasa is a 
wonderful place, filled with forests and gardens, waterfalls and grottos, 
decorated by lake Alakananda, where Sati used to bathe, and by the two 
rivers Nanda and Alakananda, with ghats paved with diamonds. 


The forest Sugandhika is filled with a great varety of virtuous trees and 
g g y 

plants, heavy with sweet smelling flowers and fruits such as mandara, 

parijata, sarala, tamala, tala, Rovidara, asana, arjuna, Radamba, dhuli-kadamba, 


46 


Bhagavata Purana 


naga, punnaga, champaka, patala, asoka, bakula, Runda and kurabaka, mango and 
banana trees, banyans, cinnamon trees, jasmine of various kinds, 
blackberries, bamboos, and the plants known as malati, kubja, mallika, 
madhavi, Rata, jackfruit, julara, plaksa, nyagrodha, betel, bhurja-patra, rajapuga, 
priyala, madbuka, inguda and kichaka, and many varieties of lotus flowers. In 
its groves there are many deer, monkeys, boars, lions, tigers, buffaloes, 
elephants and other animals, as well as many varieties of birds, whose 


musical calls are mixed with the happy buzzing of bees. 


After arriving in the presence of Shiva, who was sitting under a gigantic 
banyan tree together with Kuvera, Narada and the four Kumaras, 
discussing about the Absolute Truth, the heavenly beings offered him their 
respects with folded hands. Shiva also stood up to greet Brahma, who 
offered him very meaningful prayers, meant to educate the heavenly beings 
who had come with him. Brahma addressed Shiva recognizing him as the 
Supreme Brahman, the father and mother of the entire cosmic 
manifestation, the creator of the system of sacrificial ceremonies and Vedic 
civilization. "Shiva, the source of all auspiciousness and blessings, is the 
Paramatma, and one who has obtained his darshana sees all living beings 
equally, without making foolish discriminations based on the material 


body." 


Appealing to his compassion, omniscience and omnipotence, Brahma 
prayed Shiva to accept the sacrificial oblations and allow the rituals to be 


completed successfully. 


Shiva explained that he had punished the heavenly beings simply to correct 
them and not because he had been hurt by their offenses, committed out of 
immaturity and lack of intelligence. To restore order in the universe, the 
Prajapatis must return to functionality: Daksha would receive a new head to 
teplace the one burned in the fire, but it would be a goat's head. Bhrigu 
would be given the goat's moustache and beard, Bhaga would use Mitra's 
eyes, Pusha would use the teeth of his disciples, while Pusha and the Asvini 
kumaras would give their hands to those who had been mutilated, but all 
those who had wanted to offer oblations to Shiva would be completely 
healed from all wounds. 


Brighu and the other Rishis solemnly invited Lord Shiva to preside the 
sacrificial ceremonies, and as soon he had received his new goat head, 


47 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Daksha awakened to life. Seeing Shiva in front of him, Daksha offered his 
sincere prayers because he had been purified from all offenses, and bitterly 
repented having caused the death of his beloved daughter Sati. The 
sacrificial arena was purified and the offering of oblations in the fire was 
resumed: this time, Lord Vishnu appeared to bless the ritual. Vishnu was 
sitting on Garuda's back and accompanied by the Goddess of fortune; his 
transcendental body was wrapped in a yellow cloth brilliant like gold, and 
decorated with many wonderful ornaments. Respectfully worshiped with 
beautiful prayers by Daksha and the other participants to the ceremony, 
Vishnu graced the rituals with his presence, thus ensuring their success. 


The story of Dhruva 


Maitreya had finished the description of the descendants of Manu's 
daughters. "I will now tell you about the descendants of the two sons of 
Svayambhuva Manu - Uttanapada and Priyavrata," he told Vidura. 
"Uttanapada had two queens, named Suniti and Suruci." 


Suruci, the king's favorite, had a son named Uttama, while Suniti's son was 
named Dhruva. One day Uttanapada, sitting on the royal throne, took 
Uttama on his lap but he did not treat Dhruva in the same way. Suruci 
wickedly rejoiced in the humiliation of little Dhruva and started to insult 
him, pretending to give him good advice. 


"Dear child," she said, "you cannot sit on the king's lap because you were 
not born from me, but from another woman, and therefore you are not 
qualified enough. If you want to sit on the throne you will have to perform 
many austerities and please the Supreme Lord with sincere worship, so that 


he will grant you the blessing of taking birth from me in your next life." 


Deeply wounded by those offensive words, little Dhruva - who was only 
five years old - ran to his mother to tell her what had happened. Even as 
she tried to pacify the child, Suniti herself was very much pained by that 


48 


Bhagavata Purana 


injustice, but instructed Dhruva never to wish ill to anyone, because 
everyone will have to suffer the reactions of the sufferings they inflict on 
others. 


"Your stepmother Suruci told you very unpleasant things, but she is correct: 
if you wish to sit on the same throne of your brother Uttama you must 
immediately start to pray the Supreme Lord. The Lord is so powerful that 
simply by worshiping his lotus feet, your ancestor Brahma acquired the 
qualities needed to create the universe, and your grandfather Svayambhuva 
Manu obtained great success in his enterprises, both material and spiritual. 
You too should engage in worshiping the Lord, because only the Lord can 
alleviate your sufferings." 


Little Dhruva deeply pondered his mother's instructions and immediately 
left home to go and worship Vishnu. 


When he heard what had happened, Narada Muni went to search for 
Dhruva and, amazed at the acute sensitivity of the &shatriyas, tried to pacify 
the child and convince him to go back to his mother. "You are so young," 
he said, "you should think about playing instead of being concerned about 
honor. Besides, the sufferings of living beings are due to the reactions 
caused by their previous activities, and constitute an aspect of the illusory 
energy of God. Your mother advised you to worship the Lord through the 
method of mystic yoga, but this is an extremely difficult task even for 


grown-ups, and many have failed even after many lifetimes of practice." 


However, Dhruva was determined. He thanked Narada for his good advice, 
but he said he was unable to oblige because of his own shortcomings and 
the seriousness of what had happened. 


Narada felt compassion for Dhruva and taught him how to worship 
Vishnu. Grateful, the child offered him respects and left towards the forest 
called Madhuvana, on the bank of the Yamuna river, where he engaged in 
great austerities. Three times a day he took bath and then sat to meditate on 
God, practicing pranayama to control the senses and the mind. 


Following Narada's instructions, Dhruva fashioned an image of the Lord 
using the river clay and, contemplating the wonderful form of Vishnu, he 
faithfully recited the mantra he had received from Narada, offering pure 


49 


Parama Karuna Devi 


water, flowers, fruits and other ingredients that could be found in the forest 
- freshly sprouted grass, flower buds or even tree bark, and whenever 
possible, “/asi leaves. 


While Dhruva was engaged in worshiping the Supreme Lord and meditating 
on his transcendental activities, Narada went to see king Uttanapada and 
found him sorry about having mistreated Dhruva and Suniti, and worried 
about the child, who had gone alone into the forest that is full of dangers. 
He reassured the king, saying that Dhruva was no ordinary person, and that 


he would soon attain success and return home. 


During the first month Dhruva only ate fruits and berries once every three 
days, in the second month he only ate grass and dry leaves once every six 
days, in the third month he only took water once every nine days, and in the 
fourth month he attained perfection in controlling breathing and life 
energy, keeping his body perfectly still and the mind totally focused on 
God. Because he had stopped breathing completely, Dhruva became so 
heavy that he compressed the earth and the entire universe started to choke. 
Scared, the Devas rushed to seek help from Vishnu, and to alleviate the 
sufferings of the Devas, Vishnu appeared in the Madhuvana forest and 
roused Dhruva from his intense meditation. 


Perceiving the Lord's personal presence, Dhruva immediately offered his 
respect and embraced him, and wanted to offer him suitable prayers. 
Vishnu blessed Dhruva by touching his forehead with his conchshell, which 
gave the child the perfect understanding of Vedic knowledge and success 


for all future ventures. 


Suddenly, Dhruva realized the futility of the reason for which he had 
searched for God, and he understood that for one who attained God, all 
issues of sense gratification, material success and possessions become 
insignificant. He felt like a beggar who, after obtaining the favor of a great 
emperor, had asked for a handful of broken rice. 


Besides perfect spiritual realization, Vishnu granted Dhruva the blessing to 
sit on Uttanapada's throne for 36,000 years in perpetual youth, ruling over 
the entire world. In the future Uttama would be killed while hunting in the 
forest, and his mother Suruci would lose her mind and perish in fire while 


searching for him. Vishnu also offered Dhruva the luminous planet known 


50 


Bhagavata Purana 


as the Pole Star, that continues to exist even after the destruction of the rest 
of the planets at the end of Brahma's day. All the luminaries in the sky 
revolve around Dhruvaloka as a mark of respect, and nobody had ruled on 
it before. And at the end of his life, Dhruva would be able to remember the 


Lord and attain liberation in his personal association. 


When he heard that Dhruva was retuning home, Uttanapada rushed to 
meet him and gave him a grand welcome with all his retinue. As soon as he 
saw Dhruva, the king got down from his chariot to go and embrace him, 
crying many tears, but Dhruva had deeply changed, because he had attained 
the perfection of spiritual realization. Not only Uttanapada and Suniti, but 
also Suruci and Uttama welcomed Dhruva with affectionate tears, and all 
the inhabitants of the capital decorated the city to celebrate the return of 
the prince, and presented auspicious offerings while he was walking by in 


ptocession. 


After many years of happy life in the palace with his family, Dhruva was 
installed on the throne, while Uttanapada retired to the forest to prepare 
himself for the passage of death. Dhruva married Brahmi, the daughter of 
Prajapati Sisumara, from whom he had two sons (Kalpa and Vatsara), and 
Ila, daughter of the Deva Vayu, who gave birth to a son named Utkala and 
to a beautiful daughter. 


Dhruva's younger brother, Uttama, left in a hunting expedition before 
getting married and was killed by a powerful Yaksha while he was roaming 
across the Himalayas. As it had been foretold, his mother Suruci perished 
while she was looking for him. When Dhruva heard the news of Uttama's 
death he felt a great anger and sadness, and immediately he marched into 
war against the capital of the Yakshas, Alakapuri. As he came in view of the 
city, he blew his conchshell in a challenge, and soon a terrible fight began. 


The Yaksha army was immense, equipped with many conventional weapons 
such as bows and feathered arrows, swords, tridents, spears, pikes, maces 
and bhusundis, as well as with magic weapons that caused storms, rains of 
blood and other impure substances, hailstorms of stones and visions of 
many ferocious animals and huge waves rising from the ocean. The great 
Rishis came to help Dhruva, reminding him that simply by chanting the 
name of Lord Vishnu one can neutralize all evil influences. Dhruva fixed 


the Narayana weapon to his bow, and as soon as the arrow was released, all 


51 


Parama Karuna Devi 


illusions immediately dissipated. The Yaksha army was defeated and the 
battle became a massacre. Seeing that Dhruva was killing a great number of 
innocent Yakshas, Svayambhuva Manu decided to ask his grandson to stop 
attacking them. Reminding him about the purpose of life and the presence 
of the Supreme Lord, who controls everything and resides in the hearts of 
all beings, Manu was able to appease Dhruva's anger. The Lord of the 
Yakshas, Kuvera, came forward to meet Dhruva Maharaja, accompanied by 
a respectful retinue of Yakshas, Kinnaras and Charanas, and offered him a 
boon. Dhruva asked for the blessing to be always able to remember the 
Supreme Lord in full faith, then he returned to his capital. 


During the period of his reign, Dhruva Maharaja performed many great 
sacrifice rituals and regularly offered devotional service to the Lord, 
exhausting the reactions of his pious activities by accepting the joys of life 
and at the same time exhausting the reactions of his negative activities 
through the practice of austerity. Finally after 36,000 years he retired to the 
forest of Badarikashrama, on the Himalaya, where he completely 
concentrated on the contemplation of God. When Dhruva was ready to 
leave his body, the two beautiful Vishnudutas named Nanda and Sunanda 
arrived on a divine spaceship to take him to the spiritual world, 
Dhruvaloka. Conquering death, Dhruva ascended the spacecraft in his 
spiritual body and attained his final destination, followed closely by his 


mother Suniti, who was traveling on a similar airplane. 


The story of king Prithu 


Maitreya continued to speak about the descendants of Dhruva Maharaja. 
Dhruva's eldest son, Utkala, had no attraction for the material world or 
interest for the matters of the kingdom, therefore the throne went to 
Vatsara, the son of Brahmi. Vatsara had six sons, and the eldest, Pusparna, 
also had six sons. One of them, Vyusta, became the father of the great king 
Sarvateja. Sarvateja's son, Chaksusha, became the next Manu and had 


twelve sons. 


52 


Bhagavata Purana 


One of them, Anga, was very worried because he had no heirs, and the 
sacrificial ritual he had arranged to propitiate the Devas seemed to be 
unsuccessful. Finally prince Vena was born, but he was a great 
disappointment: the boy was cruel and killed unnecessarily both animals 
and human beings, including his playmates. When he saw that all efforts to 
reform his son's behavior had failed, king Anga was disgusted and lost all 
interest for family or kingdom. So he retired to the forest to meditate on 


the vanity of material attachments. 


As there was no other successor, the Rishis installed prince Vena on the 
throne against the advice of the ministers. The reputation of great cruelty 
that had made Vena famous sent all the criminals running away from the 
kingdom, but his newly acquired power made Vena even mote arrogant and 
tyrannical, until he prohibited the performance of all sacrifices and religious 
cetemonies. The great Rishis assembled in council and decided that 
immediate intervention was necessary: if the king refused to follow their 


instructions, he would have to be eliminated without hesitation. 


Controlling their anger, the Rishis approached Vena with smiles and kindly 
asked him to act favorably for the material and spiritual progress of his 
subjects. However, Vena insulted them, saying that they did not understand 
anything. "There is no need to offer worship and respect to the Devas," 
Vena said, "because all the Devas reside in the body of the king, who is 
therefore God himself, the Supreme Personality of the Godhead. You 
should stop being envious of me, and you should worship me, because I am 


the Lord of all subjects and the source of your maintenance." 


Vena considered himself a great scholar, but his arrogant ignorance enraged 
the Rishis, who killed him with a mere curse. Vena's mother, Sunita, 
preserved his body by using a combination of ingredients and mantras. The 
Rishis gathered again to find a solution to the power void caused by king 


Vena's death, because criminals were taking over society. 


It would be inappropriate for them to directly engage in fighting against 
crime, but a brabmana who does not care for the sufferings of those who 
need help quickly loses his spiritual power, like a cracked pot loses the 
water it contained. Finally the Rishis decided to extract the genetic code 
from Vena's body by using a specific technique. From the lower part of 
Vena they obtained Bahuka, a being who was as black as a crow and had 


53 


Parama Karuna Devi 


very short limbs. He had large jaws, a flat nose and reddish eyes, but he was 
very humble and respectful. The Rishis told him to sit down ("nishida"), so 
the race that descended from him was called Nishada. Bahuka and _ his 
descendants accepted to bear the cruel tendencies of Vena, therefore they 
usually live by hunting, robbing and plundering, and therefore they are only 
allowed to live in forests and on hills. From the higher part of Vena's body 
the Rishis obtained a male who was an incarnation of Vishnu and a female 
who was an incarnation of the Goddess of fortune, the eternal consort of 
Vishnu. 


All the Rishis, the Devas and the heavenly beings welcomed the Prithu 
avatara with great joy, offering prayers, dancing and playing musical 
instruments. Brahma atrived, too, to confirm Prithu's identity and to 
arrange for his coronation. Together with his spouse Arci, Prithu sat on a 
golden throne offered by Kuvera. 


Varuna offered him a royal parasol that constantly sprayed tiny water 
particles and shone like the moon. Vayu offered two chamaras, Dharma a 
garland of great fame, Indra a valuable crown, and Yama a sceptre to rule 
the world. Brahma gave him a protective suit made of spiritual knowledge 
and Sarasvati a transcendental necklace, Vishnu gave him a Sudarshana disc, 
and Lakshmi everlasting wealth. Shiva gifted him with a sword and a sheath 
decorated with ten moons, and Durga gave him a shield decorated with one 
hundred moons. Agni gave him arrows blazing like the sun rays, the Earth 
gave him magic sandals, and the Devas who travel in space gave him the 
power of arts and the ability to disappear at will. The ocean gave him a 
conchshell. Seas, mountains and rivers gave him the blessing of being able 
to drive his chariot everywhere without obstruction, and the royal 
attendants came ready to perform their duties. 


Prithu accepted all these offerings with humility and affection, and the 
poets were inspired to compose and recite even vaster glorification for the 
king. 


Very soon, king Prithu proved to be an excellent monarch. He encouraged 
ritual ceremonies and procured sufficient rains, coming to the aid of all 
those who needed help, and he was always kind and tolerant towards all his 
subjects. Keeping all criminals and aggressors at bay like fire keeps 
ferocious beasts away, the king was indifferent to adulation and slandering 


54 


Bhagavata Purana 


against his person, and administered justice with perfect equanimity. He was 
always ready to punish bad deeds even if performed by his own children or 


supporters, and to reward good deeds or innocence even in his enemies' 
children. 


The king treated all women respectfully like his own mother, and his wife 
like the better half of his body. He treated all living beings like he would 
treat himself, and made close friendship with liberated souls. He leveled the 
hills and made the land prosper, so that under his protection Earth gave 
abundant food to everyone, like a cow who gives lots of milk. He 
performed one hundred Asvamedha yajnas, but during the last sacrifice, 
Indra stole the horse. 


Vidura became curious and asked Maitreya why king Prithu had decided to 
level the hills, and the earth had been compared to a milk cow. And 
especially why Indra, the king of the heavenly planets, had acted like an 
ordinary horse thief 


Maitreya was happy to continue telling the story of Prithu. When king 
Prithu ascended the throne, people had been suffering for a long famine 
and everybody was hungry. Angered at the earth for not giving any harvest, 
Prithu threatened her by aiming his bow and the earth started running in 
the form of a cow, but Prithu followed her everywhere, until earth 
surrendered. "You cannot punish me," said the earth. "I have done nothing 
wrong, but even if I had, nobody should attack a woman, even to punish 
her for some crime. Besides, I support everything: if you damage me, who 


will save you and your subjects from disaster?" 


Prithu replied that he had no intention to harm her, but that he would 
punish her for her disobedience. She had been offered the prescribed 
sacrifices, and if she did not agree to produce sufficient grains for everyone, 
he would cut her to pieces and feed her flesh to his subjects. Earth agreed 
to supply the required foods, on the condition that such food would be 
properly used and not wasted. Also, the king had to provide a calf, whose 
affection would stimulate her lactation, and a container for the milk. Bhumi 
- Mother Earth - told the king to level the hills to create new fields for 
agriculture that could be irrigated all year long and not only during the rainy 
season. 


35 


Parama Karuna Devi 


King Prithu brought Svayambhuva Manu as the calf for earth and 
personally milked Bhumi, obtaining grains and various vegetables, and 
collecting them in his hands. His example was followed by the Rishis, who 
presented Brihaspati as the calf and milked Vedic knowledge to purify 
words, mind and sense of hearing, using the senses as a container. The 
Devas brought Indra as the calf and milked the drink known as soma, that 
strengthens the mind, the body and the senses. The Daityas (the sons of 
Diti) and the Asuras brought Prahlada (who was born in their race) as the 
calf and milked various kinds of liquors, wine and beer, collecting them in 


an iron bucket. 


The Gandharvas and Apsaras brought Visvavasu as the calf and milked 
beauty and musical arts, using a lotus flower as a container. The inhabitants 
of Pitriloka, the Pitris, brought Aryama as the calf and milked the offerings 
for the ancestors, collecting them in a clay pot. The Siddhas and 
Vidyadharas brought Kapila as the calf and milked the powers of mystic 
yoga, especially the art of flying in the sky. 


The Kimpurushas brought Maya as the calf and milked their specific mystic 
powers, that enable them to disappear and reappear in any form at will. 
Yakshas, Rakshasas, Bhutas and Pishachas, who like eating meat, brought 
Shiva Bhutanatha as the calf and obtained blood-based drinks, collecting 
them in a skull. 


Snakes, scorpions and other poisonous animals brought Takshaka and 
milked the poisons they needed, collecting them in their nests. The 
quadrupeds brought Vrishabha, the bull carrier of Shiva, and using the 
forest as container they obtained a wealth of green and fresh grass. The 
ferocious beasts brought the lion as the calf and milked the animal flesh 
they ordinarily eat. The birds brought Garuda as their calf and obtained 
insects and many plants as their food. The trees brought the banyan as their 
calf and obtained many delicious juices and saps. The mountains 
transformed the Himalayas into a calf and milked a great variety of minerals 
in a container made with hill tops. 


Earth thus produced everything that was required for the sustenance and 
the pleasure of the various species of life, whatever represented for them 
Mother Nature's milk. Prithu leveled the hills and gave housing and jobs to 
everyone, ensuring that everyone got all the food they needed. Before king 


56 


Bhagavata Purana 


Prithu nobody had made specific plans to build cities, villages, pastures and 
agricultural fields: everything had been done according to the moment's 
needs from time to time. 


To please and propitiate the Devas, Prithu began the celebration of one 
hundred horse rituals at Brahmavarta, the residence of Svayambhuva Manu, 
who is where river Sarasvati turns east. The Supreme Personality of God, 
Vishnu, appeared in king Prithu's sacrificial arena, accompanied by all the 
Devas and the residents of the heavenly planets, as well as by the Daityas, 
Asuras and Yakshas. Also present were all the great Rishis and the personal 
companions of Vishnu at Vaikuntha, such as Nanda and Sunanda. The 
prosperity created by these sacrifices was immense, and everyone was 


enthusiastic. 


Indra started to become worried, thinking that due to that great number of 
sacrifices king Prithu would become more powerful than him, and so he 
disguised himself as a sannyasi, sneaked into the compound and, becoming 
invisible, stole the horse that was supposed to carry the king's insignia 
around the earth. Atri Rishi saw him and went to inform Prithu's son, who 
immediately started in pursuit, but without aiming any arrows at him, 
because Indta was dressed as a sadhu. Atti told him that there was nothing 
wrong in punishing a false sannyasi, and Prithu's son, reassured, engaged the 
thief in a fight. Seeing his fraud exposed, Indra gave up the sacrificial horse 
and fled. For that valiant deed, from that day on Prithu's son was called 


Vijitasva, "the winner of the horse". 


Indra, however, had not given up the idea of disturbing the ceremony. As 
soon as he could, he created a dense cloud of darkness over the sacrificial 
arena and again he stole the horse that was fastened to a golden chain. 
Again Vijitasva ran after the thief, and again Indra abandoned the horse to 
escape. Angry at Indra for that wicked and cowardly action, that started the 
bad habit to exploit a religious dress for committing criminal activities, the 
Rishis decided to ensnare Indra with some special mantras so that they could 
punish him severely, but Brahma stopped them. "Indra has important 
duties to perform," Brahma said, "and killing him would create great 
disturbances to the universe. Besides, in his despair he has already resorted 
to unfair means, and he could introduce more immoral activities if we put 
him under mote pressure." Then he told Prithu that 99 Asvamedha yajnas 


37 


Parama Karuna Devi 


were sufficient, and that he should be content and keep a good relationship 
with the Devas. After all, that was precisely the purpose of the rituals. 


When Prithu agreed not to complete the last ritual, for the sake of universal 
harmony, Vishnu appeared personally accompanied by Indra, who wanted 
to apologize for the offense he had committed. Interceding for the king of 
the heavenly planets, Vishnu offered his blessings to Prithu in return for his 
good will. The king readily forgave Indra, who had fallen to his feet begging 
forgiveness, and embraced him affectionately. Then he offered beautiful 
prayers to Vishnu, asking him the boon of the company of God's pure 
devotees, who could discuss with him about the glories of God. 


After granting his blessings to the king, Vishnu returned to his abode, and 
all other participants did the same. King Prithu, too, returned to his 
beautiful city, wonderfully decorated, and was triumphantly greeted by his 
subjects. There, in the tract of land between the Ganges and the Yamuna, 
Prithu lived a long life, ruling on all the seven continents of the planet, and 
performed more religious ceremonies for the prosperity and the happiness 
of his subjects. 


On those occasions, he eagerly gave speeches offering his teachings to the 
people, because the king has the duty to instruct people in the activities of 
the varnas and ashramas. If he merely collected taxes, he would be 
responsible for the wrong actions performed by his subjects. On the other 
hand, when the subjects perform good actions and progress materially and 
spiritually, the king shares their merits, therefore for his own good, the king 
should help the subjects to engage in devotional service to God - each 
according to their own abilities - and cooperate with the brabmanas, the 


preceptors of society. 


During one of the king's discourses to his subjects, the four Kumaras 
arrived to meet him. Radiant like the sun, the four young sages inspired 
respect and worship in all the people, and after honoring them adequately, 
the king offered beautiful prayers and asked them how one could attain the 
supreme goal of life in the shortest possible time. 


Sanat Kumara was very pleased by Prithu's welcome and prayers, presented 
for the benefit of his subjects. He replied that the highest benefit can be 


attained by leaving the company of materialists and making efforts to 


58 


Bhagavata Purana 


develop a genuine attachment for God. Then he explained that one who 
wants to make spiritual progress should renounce violence, follow the 
example of the great spiritual personalities, always remember God's 
activities, follow the rules of ethics, and avoid committing offenses to other 
living beings. He should live in a very simple way and tolerate dualities, 
transcending matter with its identifications and attachments and desires. In 
this way, he will not make any difference between himself and others, or 
between one condition of life and another, and he will completely rely on 
the Supreme Soul. The four Kumaras concluded their explanation on 
spiritual progress, accepted the king's thanks and praised him in turn, and 
then they disappeared. 


King Prithu lived a long life and had five sons, named Vijitasva, 
Dhumrakesa, Haryaksa, Dravina and Vrika. He was a perfect monarch 
under all aspects, and he became famous for his wonderful qualities. 
Towards the end of his life, when he felt he was becoming old, he 
distributed the wealth he had accumulated and arranged for the future 
maintenance of all his subjects. Then, accompanied by his wife, he left the 
capital to go to the forest and engage in austerities, fulfilling those duties 
with the same seriousness he had shown in managing the kingdom. 


Controlling his breathing and eating roots, fruits and leaves, he gradually 
reduced his food to simply consuming water, and then simply breathing air. 
Totally free from all bodily identifications, Prithu was constantly in touch 
with the Paramatma in his heart, and directly receiving his instructions, he 
also became detached from the practices of yoga and jnana. Finally he left 
his body, raising the life air to the top of the head, through the various 
chakras. He dissolved his life air in the totality of air, his body in the totality 
of earth, and the heat of his body in the totality of the fire element. Thus 
dissolving the elements of his body in the primordial form of the elements, 
he left the subtle body a well as the gross body. 


His wife Arci was not used to austerity, but she had faithfully followed her 
husband in the forest, and she was very happy in spite of the apparent 
difficulties. When she saw that her husband did not show any sign of life, 
she built a funeral pyre and cremated his body. After completing all the 
required rituals, queen Arci followed her husband in death, joining him on 
the spiritual planet where they lived forever. 


59 


Parama Karuna Devi 


The parable of Puranjana 


After narrating the story of Prithu Maharaja, Maitreya continued to speak of 
his descendants. 


Prithu's eldest son, Vijitasva, ascended the throne and distributed the Earth 
among his brothers: the east to Haryaksha, the south to Dhumrakesha, the 
west to Vrika and the north to Dravina. As for himself, he preferred to 
engage in the celebration of religious rituals. Vijitasva, also called 
Antatdhana, married Sikhandini and had three sons named Pavaka, 
Pavamana and Suci, who previously had been personifications of fire. From 
his second wife he had another son, Havirdhana, who married Havirdhani 
and had six sons; the eldest, Barhishat, was very expert in performing many 
sacrifices and in the practice of yoga, so that he became known as one of 
the Prajapatis with the name of Pracinabarhi. 


On Brahma's order, Pracinabarhi married Satadruti, the daughter of the 
Ocean; she was so beautiful that during the marriage ceremony she 
enchanted all the Devas including Agni. From Satadruti, Pracinabarhi had 
ten extraordinary sons called the Pracetas, who followed their father's 
instructions and went to perform austerities by meditating under water. The 
Pracetas arrived at a great peaceful and clean lake, filled with many varieties 
of lotus flowers and surrounded by wonderful forests. They were amazed to 
see Shiva emerging from the water in the company of his retinue. The 
Lord's complexion was like molten gold and his throat was bluish. 
Immediately the Pracetas offered their respects to Shiva by falling at his 
feet, and the Lord blessed them, knowing that they were determined to 
engage in deep meditation on God. In fact, he gave them special mantras for 
worshiping Vishnu, the Supreme Personality of God. These mantras are 
known as "The song of Shiva". 


The Pracetas remained under water to meditate for 10,000 years. In the 
meantime, Narada Muni went to see their father, Pracinabarhi, to help him 
become detached from the material activities he was engaged in, and for 
this purpose he told him the parable of king Puranjana. 


60 


Bhagavata Purana 


Puranjana ("he who lives in the city") was a king famous for his great deeds. 
He had a faithful friend named Avijnata ("he who is not known"), of whom 
nobody could understand the activities. Puranjana traveled all over the 
world seeking a suitable residence, but because he had unlimited desires for 
sense gratification he had problems in finding a place where he could fulfill 
them all; in fact, wherever he went, he found that something was missing. 


Finally, in his wanderings he found a city with nine gates, that offered many 
important advantages. The city was located south of the Himalayas, in the 
land called Bharata varsha, and had towers, canals, windows, streets, 
markets, restaurants and houses, all lavishly decorated. While he was 
roaming around that wonderful place, Puranjana met Pramada ("material 
illusion"), a young and beautiful woman who seemed free from all other 
engagements, and willing to find a suitable husband. She was accompanied 
by ten servants (the ten senses of perception and action) and each of these 
servants was followed by hundreds of wives (the sense activities). The 
woman was protected from all sides by a snake with five heads (the prana in 
its five forms) and eleven body guards (the ten senses and the mind). 


Enchanted by her graceful forms and sweet behavior, Puranjana offered her 
gentle words and many compliments, and the lady seemed to appreciate his 
company. However, she was unable to answer Puranjana's questions - who 
had generated her and who were her followers. The woman only knew that 
the snake never slept, and protected the city night and day. "I prepared this 
city of the nine gates especially for you," she said, "so that you can live here 
for 100 years and enjoy all possible pleasures. If we marry, we will be able 
to live together in this wonderful place." 


Puranjana joyfully accepted her proposal and lived in the city, discovering 
all its wonders. Seven of the gates were on the surface and two were 
underground; five (two eyes, two nostrils and one mouth) opened to the 
east, one to the north (right ear), one to south (left ear) and two to the west 
(anus and genital orifice). The two gates opening to the east, Khadyota 
("glow-worm") and Avirmukhi ("torchlight"), were next to each other, and 
the king used them to go to the city called Vibhrajita ("clear vision") 
accompanied by a friend named Dyuman (the sunlight). Again to the east 
there were two more twin gates, named Nalini and Naalini (the nostrils), 
through which the king went to the city of Saurabha (smell) accompanied 


61 


Parama Karuna Devi 


by Avadhuta (air, that goes everywhere). The fifth gate to the east was 
called Mukhya ("principal"), and the king used it to go to the places called 
Bahudana (the varieties of foods) and Apana (speech), accompanied by his 
friends Rasajna (the sense of taste) and Vipana (the faculty of speech). 


The gate to the south (right ear) of the city was known as Pitru, and the 
king used it to visit the city of Dakshina panchala (the instructions on 
pravritti, the path to enjoy the senses and attain Pitriloka), accompanied by 
Stutadhara ("who brings hearing"). To the north, the king went with 
Stutadhara through the gate called Devahu to visit Uttara panchala (the 
teachings on nivritti, the path to acquire knowledge and liberation, through 
which one attains Devaloka or God's abode). 


To the west there was a city called Asuri, through which the king passed 
with his friend Durmada (the faculty of procreation) to visit the city of 
Gramaka (sexual intercourse). Also to the west there was another door, 
known as Nirriti (anus), that the king crossed with his friend Lubdhaka to 
go to Vaisasa (the hellish worlds - as the souls conditioned by a very low 
consciousness generally leave their bodies through the anus). 


Among the many inhabitants of the city, Puranjana chose the company of 
two blind men, Nirvak and Pesaskrit (the hands and the feet). Sometimes 
he went into his private apartments (autah pura, the heart) with one of his 
main servants, Visucina (the mind), to enjoy the company of his wife and 
children, and he engaged in satisfying all the queen's desires. If she drank 
liquors, he also did. If she dined, he dined with her, and if she sang, he sang 
with her. Similarly when she laughed or cried, lamented or rejoiced, walked 
ot stood still, lay down in bed or sat up, or she watched, heard or touched 


something, the king would do the same. 


One day king Puranjana, who strongly desired to go hunting, took his great 
bow, a golden armor and a quiver with unending arrows, and accompanied 
by eleven generals he sat on his chariot and went to the forest called Pancha 
prastha. The chariot (symbol of the body) had five horses (the senses), two 
wheels (the good and bad deeds), three flags (the gunas), a charioteer 
(intelligence), a sitting place (the heart) and seven covers (the dhatus, the 
elements that compose the body). He carried five weapons (the senses of 
perception), he moved in five different ways (the senses of action) and had 
to face five types of obstacles (the five types of sense objects). 


62 


Bhagavata Purana 


On that day the king felt ruthless and killed many innocent animals in the 
forest. According to the rules prescribed by Vedic civilization, one can only 
hunt some types of animals, and in numbers limited by actual needs. The 
king, however, continued to kill without hesitation until he was very tired, 


and then he returned home, took bath and had a great dinner. 


When he went to look for the queen to enjoy her company, he found out 
she was very angry. The king did his best to pacify Puranjani's anger and 
getting into her good graces again, and she consented to forgive him, on 
condition that he would always remain under her control. With his queen, 
Puranjana generated 1,100 sons and 110 daughters and arranged their 
marriages consequently, until the city of Panchala was crowded by all the 


king's children and grandchildren, who consumed and looted his wealth. 


One day Puranjana's city was attacked by Chandavega (time), the king of 
the Gandharvas, who commanded 360 powerful warriors (the days in the 
year) and as many Gandharva women (the nights in the year). This army 
entered the city and started pillaging it, and the five headed snake came to 
defend it, fighting by himself for 100 years and finally becoming very weak. 


Another imminent danger was the arrival of the formidable daughter of 
Time, Kalakanya ("black girl"), also called Jara ("old age") and Durbhaga 
("misfortune"). Jara had approached the Yavana king Bhaya ("fear") and 
proposed a marriage, but Bhaya had introduced her to his brother Prajvara 
("fever") and together they had started traveling around the world, followed 
by a fearsome army. When Kalakanya attacked the city, her soldiers entered 
through the various gates and inflicted many sufferings to the inhabitants. 
Finally Kalakanya captured the king, who had lost all radiance, and the city 


was defeated. 


The king was overcome by a great anxiety, seeing that his queen, his family, 
relatives, friends and all others had turned against him and neglected him. 
All pleasures lost their attractiveness, and only a deep dissatisfaction and 
many regrets lingered. Finally, forced by Kalakanya, king Puranjana had to 
leave the city, that was destroyed and torched by Prajvara, the brother of 
the king of the Yavanas. Dragged away by the Yavana king, Puranjana was 
attacked by the many animals he had killed for his own selfish benefit, but 
above all he was very worried for his wife and thought about her very 
intensely, remembering their life together. So it happened that Puranjana 


63 


Parama Karuna Devi 


died while he was remembering his wife, and in his subsequent life he took 
birth as Vaidharbhi, the daughter of king Vidarbha. In that new birth she 
married Malayadhvaja, a powerful man who lived in the land of Pandu. 


King Malayadhvaja had a daughter and seven sons, who became the rulers 
of the lands known as Dravida. In turn, the sons of Malayadhvaja had 
thousands of children. Malayadhvaja's daughter married the great sage 
Agastya and begot Dridhacyuta, who became the father of Idmavaha. After 
dividing his kingdom among his sons, Malayadhvaja retired in Kulachala 
(among Chandravasa, Tamraparni and Vatodaka) to meditate on God, and 
he was followed by his faithful wife, who continued to serve him with 
devotion even in the forest. When finally she realized that her husband was 
dead, Vaidarbhi was overcome by a great anxiety, feeling alone and 
abandoned. 


A brahmana, who had been an old friend of king Puranjana, happened to be 
walking by, and revealed to Vaidarbhi her real identity, trying to help her 
remember her previous lifetime. The brahmana said, "Don't you recognize 
me? I have always been your friend and in the past you have consulted me 
many times. Unfortunately one day you chose to give up my company 
because you wanted to enjoy the material world. You and I are like two 
swans who live together in the same heart, that is like the lake Manasa, but 
you have gone away to live in a city created by a woman - a city with five 
gardens (the five objects of the senses), nine gates (the openings of the 
body), a protector (the prana), three apartments (fire, water and earth), six 
families (the five senses and the mind), five store rooms (the five organs of 
action), five material elements and a woman who is the owner of the house 
(material desire). Entering that body to fulfill your material desires, you 
have forgotten that you are neither a woman nor a man, but in fact you are 
pure spiritual identity, just like me. I am the Paramatma, the Supreme Soul, 
and you belong to my same nature." 


King Pracinabarhi had already guessed that the story was actually a parable 
and gladly accepted the instructions of Narada, who encouraged him to tise 
above the level of ritual sacrifices to focus on the study of transcendental 
knowledge to please God and attain liberation. Narada explained that the 
most important thing is to stop identifying with the material body, the 
subtle one as well as the gross one. "The subtle body carries the memories 


64 


Bhagavata Purana 


of previous lifetimes," Narada said, "and contains the germs of future 
lifetimes, so we can understand them by observing the mental condition or 
consciousness of a person. In order to attain liberation it is therefore 
necessaty to become detached from the subtle body as well as from the 


gross one.” 


After enlightening king Pracinabarhi with his transcendental teachings, 
Narada returned to Siddhaloka. Pracinabarhi decided to retire to meditate in 
the place known as Kapilashrama and gave his ministers instructions so that 
his sons would engage in ruling the kingdom and protect the subjects when 
they came back. 


After 10,000 years of intense meditation and austerity, the sons of 
Pracinabarhi, the Pracetas, obtained the vision of the Supreme Lord, who 
personally appeared to bless them. Vishnu instructed them to marry Marisa, 
the daughter of the Apsara Pramlocha and Rishi Kandu. She had been 
taken in by the trees and fed by the Deva of the Moon. After offering their 
respects and prayers to Vishnu, the Pracetas emerged from the ocean, 
where they had been performed their austerities, and saw that the land had 


been completely covered by very tall trees. 


Then they started to clear the ground by burning the trees with their mystic 
powers, until they found the daughter of Pramlocha. From the Pracetas, 
Marisa gave birth to Daksha, who in his previous life had disrespected 
Shiva Mahadeva. Now purified from his offenses, Daksha acquired a 
resplendent body and because he was very expert, he was again appointed 
as the first of the Prajapatis by Brahma. 


Finally, after ruling for thousands of years, the Pracetas left Marisa in the 
cate of Daksha and retired to the ocean beach in the west, in the ashrama 
of the great Jajali Rishi. There Narada went to meet them to discuss about 
spiritual knowledge. 


"A civilized human being," said Narada, "goes through three births. The 
first is the physical birth, that comes through the fertilization of the egg by 
the sperm. The second birth, called savitra, is the initiation that one receives 
from the Guru, and the third birth happens when we obtain the 
opportunity to worship Vishnu. This is the most important birth, that gives 
the deepest meaning to the other two births. Without attaining the 


65 


Parama Karuna Devi 


realization of God, all other practices - the mystic yoga, the analythical 
study of matter, austerities, renunciation and the study of Vedic literature - 


remain useless." 


The story of Rishabha 


Svayambhuva Manu had two sons: Uttanapada and Priyavrata. Uttanapada 
was the father of Dhruva. Priyavrata, the second son of Manu, was 
instructed by Narada Rishi but because his father had asked him to stay 
back and take care of family and kingdom, he had to reconcile two 
important but apparently opposed duties. To help Priyavrata to solve his 
dilemma, the father of Narada, Brahma, left his abode and went to see the 
prince to enlighten him. Priyavrata was sitting in conversation with Narada, 
in the presence of Svayambhuva Manu, and everyone stood up to offer 
respects to the first being of the universe. 


"Everyone must follow the orders of the Supreme Personality of God," said 
Brahma, "and under his command the living beings acquire different types 
of bodies, connected to specific types of activities. According to the Vedic 
system, each human being must perform his duty within the varnashrama, 
utilizing the body he has received for that purpose. Even a liberated person 
must use the body he has received, but with a higher level of awareness, by 
which he sees material activities as a dream, compared to spiritual 
consciousness. In this way he will not have to take another birth again in a 
material body. 


One who does not control his mind may travel from forest to forest, but he 
will always be tied by the chains of matter, because he still lives with six 
wives - the mind and the senses of perception. On the other hand, not even 
family life can hurt a man who has controlled his senses and remains on the 
proper level of awareness. This man is like a king in his fortress, defeating 


his powerful enemies from a safe and protected position.” 


Following Brahma's orders, Maharaja Priyavrata agreed to rule the world 


while remaining totally free from all material contamination. He married 


66 


Bhagavata Purana 


Barhismati, the daughter of Prajapati Visvakarma, begetting ten sons - 
Agnidhra, Idhmajihva, Yajnabahu, Mahavira, Hiranyareta, Ghritaprstha, 
Savana, Medhatithi, Vitihotra and Kavi - and a daughter named Usjasvati. 
Three of these sons - Kavi, Mahavira and Savana - chose to remain celibate 
and lived in the paramahamsa ashrama, the highest perfection of spiritual 


awareness. 


With the wheels of his great chariot, Priyavrata divided the earthly planetary 
systems into seven islands known as Jambu, Plaksa, Salmali, Kusa, Kraunca, 
Saka and Puskara - creating seven oceans respectively of salty water, 
sugarcane juice, liquor, clarified butter, yogurt and sweet water. Each 
subsequent island is twice as large as the previous one, and each ocean is as 


large as the island it surrounds. 


Priyavrata assigned the government of each island to one of his sons 
Agnidhra, Idhmajihva, Yajnabahu, Hiranyareta, Ghritaprstha, Medhatithi 
and Vitihotra. Then he gave his daughter Urjasvati in marriage to 
Sukracharya, who gave her a daughter named Devayani. After successfully 
performing his duties as a king, Maharaja Priyavrata happily returned to the 
life of renunciation to which he had always aspired for, thanks to the 
teachings he had received from Narada. 


Priyavrata's eldest son, Agnidhra, ruled successfully on Jambudvipa 
protecting his subject as his own children. To obtain Brahma's blessings he 
went to the valley of Mandara hill, where he engaged in meditation and 
austetities. 


Pleased, Brahma sent him an Apsara named Purvacitti, an extraordinarily 
beautiful woman, but at first Agnidhra mistook her for the young son of 
some Rishi who lived in the valley. When the misunderstanding was cleared, 
Agnidhra married Purvacitti and gave her nine sons, who were named 
Nabhi, Kimpurusa, Harivarsa, Ilavrta, Ramyaka, Hiranmaya, Kuru, 
Bhadrasva and Ketumala. Agnidhra distributed the land of Jambudvipa 
among his sons, then he left his body to join Purvacitti who had returned to 
the heavenly planets, to Pitriloka. 


After Agnidhra's disappearance, his sons married the nine daughters of 
Meru named Merudevi, Pratirupa, Ugradamstri, Lata, Ramya, Syama, Nati, 


Bhadra and Devaviti. The most prominent of these sons, Maharaja Nabhi, 


67 


Parama Karuna Devi 


married Merudevi, and both sincerely engaged in worshiping the Supreme 


Personality of God with ritual sacrifices to obtain a good son. 


The seven important factors in the performance of ritual sacrifices are the 
offering of valuable ingredients, the auspicious moment, the suitable place, 
the chanting of mantras, the presence of a qualified priest, the gifts to the 
priests and the observance of rules. Vishnu was pleased by the sincere 
efforts of Nabhi, who was performing the ceremonies with a pure and 
selfless mind, and appeared in front of him in his four armed form, dressed 
in yellow cloth and decorated with many valuable ornaments. The king, the 
officiating priests and all the people attending the sacrifice offered their 
respects. The priests offered praise and respectful prayers on behalf of the 
king, and asked the blessing of a son for the king - a son who would be as 
glorious as God himself. 


Vishnu granted that request literally, and announced that he would 
personally appear as an avatara from the womb of Merudevi, the wife of 
Maharaja Nabhi. At birth, the child showed all the characteristics of the 
Deity, including the special marks on the palms of the hands and the soles 
of the feet. He was called Rishabha ("the best") and from earliest childhood 
he was deeply admired and loved by all his subjects. After putting Rishabha 
on the earth's throne, Nabhi and his wife Merudevi retired to 
Badarikashrama, on the Himalaya, to engage joyfully in austerities and 
meditation worshiping the Supreme Personality of God in the form of the 
avatara Nata Narayana Rishi who resided in that place. 


After spending the usual training period in the ashrama of his Guru, 
Rishabha married Jayanti, who had been offered to him by the king of the 
heavenly planets, Indra, and had 100 sons, of whom the eldest, Bharata, was 
an enlightened king and a great devotee of God. In his honor the earth, that 
had previously been known as Ajanabha varsha, was called Bharata varsha. 


Among the other 99 sons of Rishabha, some became particularly famous - 
Kusavarta, Ilavarta, Brahmavarta, Malaya, Ketu, Bhadrasena, Indrasprik, 
Vidarbha, Kikata, Kavi, Havi, Antariksa, Prabuddha, Pippalayana, 
Avirhotra, Drumila, Camasa and Karabhajana - became geat sages and 
preachers of the transcendental knowledge. The other 81 sons, too, 
followed into Rishabha's footsteps and became all perfectly qualified as 
brahmanas. 


68 


Bhagavata Purana 


Rishabha carefully observed the duties of a king, and also performed many 
ritual ceremonies according to the instructions of Vedic scriptures, but he 
had a great love for the discussion of spiritual topics. On day, while he was 
traveling around the world, Rishabha arrived at a great assembly of 
brahbmanas in Brahmavarta, and took the opportunity to offer important 
instructions to his sons, in the presence of all the subjects. 


"A being who has obtained a human form in this life," said Rishabha, 
"should not waste it by merely working day and night to acquire some sense 
gratification, that is also available to lower animals. One should rather 
engage in self control to purify one's heart and attain spiritual awareness." 


One who wants to attain liberation should render service to those who are 
very advanced spiritually and do not make discriminations among living 
beings. These mahatmas are peaceful and work for the benefit of all, without 
ever committing any abominable action. They are not attached to home or 
family, although they continue to carefully perform their duties to family 
and society and collect the necessary funds to live decently. 


The attraction between male and female constitutes the fundamental 
principle of material existence and ties the two hearts together, creating a 
desire for home, properties, children, relatives and wealth. This bondage 
strengthens the illusions based on the concepts of "I" and "mine". On the 
other hand, when the knot is loosened, it is possible to become detached 


from illusion and established in the transcendental world. 


One should seek the direct guidance of a paramahamsa, a genuine spiritual 
teacher, and listen to the science of God to learn to see the spiritual soul in 
each individual. Abandoning the identification with the body, we will be 
able to easily give up the sense of hostility, anger and regret. One should 
live alone, in an isolated and peaceful place, avoiding unnecessary talking 
and acquiring knowledge from the suitable sources. When we become 
spiritual teachers, fathers or kings, we must continue to give instructions 
without getting angry even if the disciple, child or subject is unable to 
follow the instructions. Ignorant persons must be engaged in God's service 
by all means. In fact, one should never become spiritual teacher, father, 
husband, mother, king or Deva, if one is not able to skillfully guide one's 
subordinates to liberation from the cycle of births and deaths. 


69 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Brahmanas ate worthy of being honored because they have studied and 
absorbed the Vedas, that are the sound incarnation of the Godhead. They 
ate established in sattva guna, they control their own minds and senses and 
are dedicated to truthfulness. They are always willing to explain the original 
and deep sense of the ledas to all conditioned souls, they practice austerity 
and tolerance, and they are always aware of the position of the Atman in 
relationship with the Brahman. They do not want to possess anything, 


because they are very pure, and only engage in service to God." 


After installing his eldest son Bharata on the throne, Rishabha became free 
from all responsibilities and began living like an avadhuta, a renounced 
person who does not care at all for his body. Naked, dirty and with matted 
hair, Rishabha started to roam around the world without bothering about 
what people said about him or even about those who hanged around him to 
insult and provoke him, just like flies buzz around an elephant that comes 
out from the forest. Sometimes people threw stones at him, sometimes they 
pelted him with excrements or dirt, spat or urinated on him, threatened or 
hit him, insulted him or created some other kind of problems, but Rishabha 
always remained serene, in the awareness that the material body is anyway 
destined to perish. Finally he adopted the way of life of the python: lying 
down on the ground, smeared with the urine and excrements produced by 
his body so that nobody would come to disturb him any more. Rishabha 
disappeared in a forest fire in the province of Karnata in south India. The 
king of Konika, Venka and Kutaka in Karnata, named Arhat, heard about 
the activities of Rishabha and decided to imitate him, starting a tradition of 
renunciates that unfortunately lacked the spiritual knowledge and awareness 
of Rishabha. 


The story of Jada Bharata 


Bharata, the eldest son of Rishabha, followed his father's orders and ruled 
the earth assisted by his brothers. He married Panchajani, the daughter of 


Visvarupa, and had five sons - Sumati, Rastrabhrta, Sudarsana, Avarana and 


70 


Bhagavata Purana 


Dhumraketu. He performed the sacrificial ceremonies known as agni-hotra, 
darsha, purnamasa, chaturmasya, pasu-yajna and soma-yajna, but offering their 


results exclusively to the pleasure of God, considering the various Devas as 
the limbs of God's body. 


At the end of his reign, Bharata Maharaja retired from family life, dividing 
his properites among his sons and settling in the ashrama of Pulastya, at 
Hardvara on the river Gandaki, where one can find the salagrama silas. 
Collecting flowers, herbs and ‘/w/asi leaves, water from the Gandaki river, 
roots and fruits, he engaged in the worship to the Supreme Personality of 
God, free from all desires for sense gratification. Gradually he started to 
feel symptoms of devotional ecstasy, until he became situated in meditation 


on the lotus feet of Lord Narayana. 


One day, Bharata was sitting as usual on the bank of tiver Gandaki to 
meditate and chant the mantra after completing his morning duties. A doe 
arrived to drink water from the river, and frightened by the sudden roaring 
of a lion, jumped into the river to cross it. However, she was nearing the 
end of her pregnancy and in her rush she lost the baby, who was carried 


away by the current. Soon afterwards, the doe succumbed to her bleeding 


and died. 


Bharata saw the newborn deer in such a desperate situation, and out of 
compassion he rescued it from the river and took it into his ashrama. For 
several days he personally took care of the baby, feeding and protecting it, 
and he developed a strong attachment for the little animal. Bharata felt 
responsible for the baby, who trusted him, and he also knew that lack of 
compassion was a sefious sin, even if his new role as a foster parent for the 
deer was distracting him from his spiritual consciousness and he was 
neglecting his meditation on God. 


His affection for the little animal soon became an obsession. He ate and 
slept with it, and never left it alone even when he went into the forest to 


collect food. 


Charmed by the deer's childish behavior, he was often carrying it in his 
arms as if it was his son. Always worrying for its safety and well being, he 
was interrupting his worship to the Deity to check on it, and if he could not 
find it he became very upset. 


71 


Parama Karuna Devi 


At the time of his death, Bharata saw the young deer sadly sitting next to 
him, like a mourning son, and because he was intensely thinking about the 
deer, he took a new birth as a deer himself, on mount Kalanjara. Thanks to 
his spiritual practices, Bharata retained the memory of his previous lifetime 
and realized the mistake he had committed, so he immediately detached 
himself from all material thoughts. 


Leaving his mother, he returned to the Salagrama forest in the ashrama of 
Pulastya and Pulaha to resume his austerities. Eating only dry leaves and 
bathing often in the sacred river, he carefully avoided the company of other 
deer, and after a short time he died and took another birth as a human 


being, in the family of a qualified brabmana in the dynasty of Angira. 


The Rishi had nine sons from his first wife and two children - a son and a 
daughter - from his second wife. This son was named Bharata just like in 
his previous lifetime as a king. Although he had obtained a human body in 
the family of a brabmana, he had been so traumatized by his life experience 
as a deer (due to his mistake of developing a material attachment) that now 
he was extremely careful to avoid any relationship based on the body. 


For this reason, he decided to behave like a stupid and crazy person, so that 
nobody would be interested in him. He was always doing the opposite of 
what he was taught, and pretended he did not understand the mantras and 
ritual ceremonies that his father tried to teach him. After father's death, his 
brother started to mistreat him, insulting him and denying him proper food, 
but Jada Bharata ("Bharata the idiot") ate whatever he was given, without 
concerning himself about the taste or the quality of the food. Nonetheless, 
and although he never cared about his own body, Jada Bharata grew up 
strong and stout, and he often worked in the fields in exchange of some 
food. 


In these days, the chief of a gang of robbers decided to offer a sacrifice to 
Bhadra Kali to propitiate the birth of a son. He heard that for a human 
sacrifice one should choose a very degraded individual, who is no better 
than an animal, and when his servants found Jada Bharata, they believed 
they had found the perfect victim. 


The outlaws captured the young man and returned to their boss, who had 


invented his own sacrifice ritual that had no reference to the scriptures. 


72 


Bhagavata Purana 


They bathed Jada Bharata, smeared him with scented oils and dressed him 
in new clothes, decorating him with sandalwood paste and flower garlands. 
They fed him delicious foods and then took him in front of the Deity, they 
performed a ritual worship with incense, lamps, garlands, fruits and flowers, 
prayers, songs and musical instruments. Finally they seated Bharata in front 
of the Deity and the thief who acted as a priest prepared to behead him to 
offer his blood as a drink. 


Because they did not have true knowledge and understanding, the thieves 
had not realized that Jada Bharata was a pure and elevated soul, but Bhadra 
Kali was perfectly aware of the situation, and could not tolerate the idea 
that Bharata would be killed in that way. Suddenly the image of the Deity 
exploded, revealing Bhadra Kali in person, terribly angry and radiating a 
blazing light. Jumping on the thieves, she killed them instantly and drank 
their blood, distributing it also to the Dakhinis who are her servants. 


After that adventure Jada Bharata continued to live like he had always done. 
One day he found himself on the path of king Rahugana, the ruler of 
Sindhu and Sauvira, who was traveling on a palanquin along the bank of 
river Ikshumati. His porters decided to get one more man to share the 
weight, and because Jada Bharata looked strong and stout, they immediately 
put him to work. 


However, in his new role as a palanquin carrier Jada Bharata was unable to 
keep pace with his co-workers, and at each step he paused to check if there 
were any ants on the path, because he did not want to step on them. Thus 
the king was tossed back and forth in his palanquin, and loudly complained 
about that weird way of walking. When the other carriers explained that 
Jada Bharata was disrupting the pace, he became very angry. Talking 
sarcastically to his new employee, he said, "Poor thing, you must be very 
tired, because you have to do everything by yourself, and you are so old and 
weak." 


Jada Bharata was not touched by the king's offensive attitude because he 
had no sense of identification with the material body, and after pacifying 
the temporary waves of displeasure for that unjust treatment, he continued 
to walk in the same way. Getting angrier and angrier, king Rahugana 
verbally attacked Jada Bharata, reminding him that disobeying the king 
entails severe punishments. 


73 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Then Jada Bharata, in a sweet and peaceful tone, replied, "My dear king, 
you have spoken sarcastically, but what you said is actually true. I am 
making no efforts in carrying the palanquin, because it is only the body that 
does such work. In the same way I am not strong or sturdy or young, 
because such definitions only apply to the body. Certainly the soul is neither 
fat nor thin, or touched by the sufferings of the body and the mind, by 
hunger or thirst, by fear, dissent or desire for material happiness, by old age, 
by sleep, by attachment to material possessions, or by the illusion and 
identification with the body. As far as you are concerned, you believe you 
are the king and therefore my master, but these are simply temporary 
circumstances, and by inflicting a punishment on me, you will not obtain 
any true benefit.” 


Rahugana was astonished to hear such words of transcendental wisdom 
from the man he had engaged as a humble porter. He realized his own 
mistake and rushing down from the palanquin, he threw himself at the feet 
of Jada Bharata, begging to be forgiven for his offenses. Then he humbly 
entreated Jada Bharata to reveal his true identity and instruct him in the 


spiritual science. 


Jada Bharata said, "The relationship between master and servant is merely 
an external activity, and those who are interested in material activities 
certainly cannot progress on the spiritual path. As long as the mind of the 
living being is contaminated by the three gwnas - goodness, passion and 
ignorance - it remains uncontrollable like a wild elephant, and can only 
multiply the good and bad actions that bind one to the material world 
through joys and sufferings. 


On the other hand, when the mind becomes detached from material 
pleasures, it becomes an instrument for liberation. An uncontrolled mind is 
the greatest enemy of the living entity, and when it believes in the bodily 
identification it becomes the cause of all sufferings, creating diseases, 
illusion, depression, attachment, greed, hostility, and a false sense of 
intimacy with this world. All existing bodies are nothing but combinations 
of the earth element, and they will again become dust. Even the universe 
appears real only temporarily and will finally be dissolved, therefore all the 
differences between the bodies inside it are merely imaginary, as with pots 
made from the same clay. 


74 


Bhagavata Purana 


The only reality is spirit, that continues to exist eternally and is subsequently 
realized as Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan. To attain this realization 
we require the company of the great devotees. It is not sufficient to observe 
celibacy, strictly follow the rules of family life, accept the order of 
renunciation or engage in great austerities, such as remaining immersed in 
water during the winter or surrounding oneself with fire during the 
summer. On the other hand, the company of materialistic persons is as 
dangerous as a wild jungle, where one becomes losts and meets all kinds of 
troubles and sufferings." 


Jada Bharata forgave Rahugana as the king had humbly begged for his 
mercy. After offering the gift of transcendental knowledge, he resumed his 


usual free wanderings. 


Maharaja Parikshit, who was listening to the narration of these events from 
Sukadeva, asked him to elaborate more about the example of the material 


life compared to a forest, and Sukadeva obliged. 


"Merchants often travel to jungles, to collect wood and clay they will sell in 
the cities with a good profit. In the same way the conditioned soul, pushed 
by greed, enters the deep forest of the material world, where he becomes 
lost and remains deprived of the company of the wise people. The 
uncontrolled senses are like outlaws hiding in the forest, who will snatch 
away the wealth accumulated with so much effort by the living entity for 
the purpose of engaging it in the service of the religious principles - instead 
they will force him to spend his money for things to taste, smell, see, touch 


and so on." 


In the material world one's family members and relatives are like tigers and 
jackals, who devour the wealth of the conditioned soul even under his very 
eyes. The disturbing sounds of the crickets and owls that fill the forest are 
compared to the insults and threats of enemies. A shallow water reservoir is 
compared to the help we are trying to obtain from materialists - to escape 
the heat we jump in the water and crash on the stones that are just below 


the surface. 


This forest is also full of wild creatures, whose hostility is born from the 
fear of being attacked or robbed, and of shameless people who are only 


interested in sex and therefore jump from one body to the other like 


75 


Parama Karuna Devi 


monkeys leaping from one tree to the next, until they are caught by the 
hunter. Sometimes one hears the melodious singing of happy birds - the 
materialists who ate elated because they have obtained something 
pleasurable, and remain unable to see the snares waiting for them. 
However, the path of total renunciation shown by Jada Bharata is extremely 
difficult compared to the actual capabilities of ordinary persons, just like the 
path traced by Garuda soaring in the sky cannot be followed by ordinary 
flies. Jada Bharata was an extraordinary person, and even while living in a 
deer body he was able to maintain a clear remembrance of the Lord, and at 


the time of death he offered sublime prayers. 


Sukadeva continued to speak about the descendants of Priyavrata. One of 
the sons of Maharaja Bharata, Sumati, married Vriddhasena and had a son 
named Devatajit. Sumati followed the example of Rishabhadeva in 
becoming an avadbuta. His son Devatajit became the father of Devadyumna, 
father of Paramesthi, father of Pratiha, who became a great devotee of 
God. Pratiha had three sons - Pratiharta, Prastota and Udgata - who 
became very expert in the performance of ritual ceremonies. 


Pratiharta had two sons, named Aja and Bhuma; Bhuma was the father of 
Udgita, who became father of Prastava, father of Vibhu, father of 
Prithusena, father of Nakta, father of the great king Gaya. 


King Gaya earned the title of Mahapurusha because he gave full protection 
to all his subjects, making sure that everyone had sufficient food and often 
distributing gifts to everyone, calling people to praise them and offer good 
advice and recommendations. He made the land prosper by celebrating 
many sacrificial ceremonies producing a huge quantity of soma rasa, so that 
once Indra drank too much of it. Vishnu, too, appeared in the arena of the 
sacrifice to express his satisfaction for the success of those ritual 


ceremonies. 


Maharaja Gaja married Gayanti, from whom he had three sons named 
Citraratha, Sugati and Avarodhana. Citraratha became father of Samrat, 
who was the father of Marici, father of Bindu, father of Madhu, father of 
Viravrata, who had two sons named Manthu and Pramanthu. Manthu had a 
son named Bahuvana, who became father of Tvasta, father of Viraja, who 
had one hundred sons and one daughter. Among the sons, Satajit was the 


foremost. 


76 


Bhagavata Purana 


The structure of the universe 


After listening to the genealogy of the descendants of Svayambhuva Manu, 
Maharaja Parikshit asked Sukadeva to speak about the structure of the 


universe. 


Sukadeva replied, "My dear king, the material energy of God has no limits. 
We will now describe only the planetary system known as Bhu-mandala or 
Bhu-goloka, that is similar to a lotus flower, in which the seven islands are 
compared to the center. Among these, Jambudvipa sits in the middle. It is 
round like a lotus leaf, and its diameter is one million yojanas (about 13 


million kilometers). 


Within this island there are nine continents or varshas, each measuring 9,000 
yojanas (120,000 km), and mount Sumeru, that is made of gold and as tall as 
the highest reach of Jambudvipa, that is 100,000 _yojanas (1,300,000 km). Of 
these, 16,000 _yojanas are underground, therefore the height from the ground 
is 84,000 yojanas. This mountain is 32,000 yojanas wide at the top and 16,000 
_yojanas at the base." 


To the north of the continent named Ilavrita varsha there are the 
mountains called Nila, Sveta and Sringavan, marking the boundary with the 
varshas named Ramyaka, Hiranmaya and Kuru. These mountains are 2,000 
yojanas wide each, and extend in length to east and west to the shore of the 
salt ocean. From south to north, the length of each mountain range is one 
tenth of the previous one, but the height is the same. 


To the south of Ilavrita varsha, ranging from north to south, we find the 
mountains called Nishada, Hemakuta and Himalaya, each 10,000 yojanas 
high, marking the boundary with the three continents called Hari varsha, 
Kimpurusha varsha and Bharata varsha. To the east and west of Ilavrita 
varsha are the two great mountains called Gandhamadana and Malyavan, 
each 2,000 yojanas high, extending to the mount Nila at north and Nishada 
at south, marking the boundary to the varshas known as Ketumala and 
Bhadrasva. 


77 


Parama Karuna Devi 


To the four sides of the great mount Sumeru there are four smaller 
mountains known as Mandara, Merumandara, Suparsva and Kumuda, each 
10,000 yojanas high. On the top of these mountains there are four trees, 
respectively a mango tree, a jambu (rose apple tree), a kadamba tree and a 
banyan tree, each 100 yojanas wide and 1,100 yojanas tall, with branches 
extending for a radius of 1,100 yojanas. 


In the valleys between these mountains there are four great lakes; their 
waters taste respectively like milk, honey, sugarcane juice and fresh water. 
The mango tree on the Mandara mountain is called Devachuta and is 1,100 
Jyojanas tall; the ripened fruits fall from its branches releasing a fragrant juice 
that flows into the river Arunoda, running on the eastern side of Ilavrita. 
The Yaksha women ate the maidservants of the consort of Shiva, and 
because they drink the water of the Arunoda, their bodies become 
wonderfully fragrant. The fruits of the jambu tree have very small seeds and 
their plump flesh produces, while falling from the Merumandara, a flow of 
juice that enters the river Jambunadi. This river runs for 10,000 yojanas from 
the mountain to the southern side of Ilavrita, and its clay produces great 
amounts of gold, used by the heavenly beings for all sorts of ornaments. 


The Maha Kadamba tree growing on the Suparsva mountain has a hollow 
from which five rivulets of sweetly scented honey flow towards the western 
side of Ilavrita varsha. Finally, the great banyan tree of mount Kumuda, 
called Satavalsa because it has one hundred main branches, has miraculous 
water flowing from its roots. Because they drink this water, the residents of 
the heavenly planets never become fatigued or sick, and they never die 
prematurely. Their sweat has no bad odor, their hair never becomes grey, 
and their bodies never wrinkle. 


On the eastern side of the Sumeru, that mountain made of solid gold and 
radiant like fire, there are two mountains called Jathara and Devakuta, 
extending north and south for 18,000 yojanas, while the mountains Pavana 
and Partyatra, on the western side, extend from north to south for the same 
length. South of the Sumeru, the two mountains called Kailasa and Karavira 
extend from east to west for 18,000 yojanas, while at north the mountains 
Trisringa and Makara are 2,000_yojanas wide and tall. 


On top of the Meru sits Brahma's city, Brahmapuri, surrounded in all 
directions by the capitals of the Lords of the different planetary systems, 


78 


Bhagavata Purana 


starting from Indra. These cities are similar to Brahmapuri but only one 


quarter in size. 


The Ganges river, that flows through the entire universe, originated when 
the Vamana avafara put his foot through the roof of the universe, causing a 
leak of the water from the Karana Ocean. Because this water touched the 


feet of the Lord, it became particularly sacred and pure. 


Descending in this way, the Ganges first reaches Dhruvaloka, the pole star, 
and then the planets of the seven Rishis, that are directly under the pole 
star. Then it touches Chandraloka (the Moon) and finally the abode of 
Brahma on the top of the Meru, where it splits into four branches known as 
Sita, Alakananda, Chaksu and Bhadra, each flowing in a different direction. 
The Sita flows from Brahmapuri to the Kesarachala mountain, then to 
Gandhamadana and into the land of Bhadrasva varsha, to end in the salt 


ocean in the west. 


The branch of the Ganges known as Chaksu falls on the Malayavan 
mountain and descends into the lands of Ketumala varsha, flowing to the 
western ocean as well. The branch known as Bhadra flows on the northern 
side of the Meru and falls on the mountains named Kumuda, Nila, Sveta 
and Sringavan one after another, then it runs into the Kuru province and 
finally merges into the salt water ocean in the north. The Alakananda flows 
from Brahmapuri through many mountain peaks to Memakuta and 
Himakuta, and then runs into the lands of Bharata varsha and reaches the 


salt water ocean in the south. 


The land of Bharata varsha is particularly fortunate, and it is considered the 
field of fruitive activities for very virtuous people; from this place it is 
possible to achieve liberation by performing the proper activities to become 


free from the consequences of one's deeds in previous lifetimes. 


During Treta yuga, in these eight varshas people live 10,000 earth years and 
are not very different from the Devas. They enjoy a very long youth and use 
it to engage in sexual relationships; after many years of pleasure, when they 
only have one year left to live, the woman conceives a child, who is born 
already an adult. The Supreme Personality of God blesses the inhabitants of 
this varsha in the form of the Chatur-vyuha, the four-fold emanation of 
Vasudeva, Sankarshana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha. 


79 


Parama Karuna Devi 


The land known as Ilavrita varsha is the residence of Shiva and his consort 
Durga, who are served by 10 billion maids. No other male except Shiva is 
allowed to enter this region, unless they want to be immediately turned into 
a woman. There Shiva meditates on the form of Vishnu known as 


Sankarshana, Ananta Sesha. 


The land known as Bhadrasva varsha is ruled by Bhadrasrava, the son of 
Dharmaraja. Bhadrasrava meditates on the divine form of Vasudeva, 
known as Hayasirsha or Hayagriva, who saved the Vedas by rescuing them 
from the planet Rasatala, where they had been hidden, and returning them 
to Brahma. The land known as Hari varsha is the residence of Lord 
Nrisimha, worshiped by Prahlada Maharaja and his subjects. In the land 
known as Ketumala varsha, God resides in the form of Kamadeva or 
Pradyumna, worshiped by Lakshmi, by Prajapati Samvatsara and all his 
36,000 sons and daughters, considered as the archetypes that control 
respectively the days and the nights. 


In Hiranya varsha God resides in the form of Kurma, the tortoise avatara, 
worshiped by Aryama and the other inhabitants of that land. In the 
northern region of Jambudvipa, known as Uttarakuru varsha, God resides 
in the form of Varaha, the boar avafara, worshiped by all the residents with 
wonderful hymns and prayers. In Kimpurusha varsha the great Hanuman is 
engaged, together with the king of those lands, Arstisena, and his subjects, 
in the worship of Ramachandra, the elder brother of Lakshmana and 
beloved husband of Sitadevi. 


In the land of Bharata varsha, in the place known as Badarikashrama, God 
appeared in the form of Nara and Narayana to teach renunciation, spiritual 
power, knowledge, religion, control of the senses and freedom from ego. 
Narada Muni instructed Savarni Manu to guide his subjects in the 
performance of their duties in the varnashrama dharma and also wrote 
important texts on bhaktz, Meditating on Nata Narayana, Narada sings his 


glories and offers prayers. 


Bharata varsha has many other mountains, among which we may remember 
Malaya, Mangala-prastha, Mainaka, Trikuta, Rishabha, Kutaka, Kollaka, 
Sabya, Devagiri, Rishyamuka, Sri Saila, Venkata, Mahendra, Varidhara, 
Vindhya, Suktiman, Rikshagiri, Pariyatra, Drona, Citrakuta, Govardhana, 
Raivataka, Kakubha, Nila, Gokamukha, Indrakila and Kamagiri. 


80 


Bhagavata Purana 


The two most prominent rivers, Brahmaputra and Sona, are called nadas, or 
masculine rivers. The other important rivers are named Chandravasa, 
Tamraparni, Avatoda, Kritamala, Vaihayasi, Kaveri, Veni, Payasvini, 
Sarkaravarta, Tungabhadra, Krishnavenya, Bhimarathi, Godavari, 
Nirvindhya, Payosni, Tapi, Reva, Surasa, Narmada, Charmanvati, Mahanadi, 
Vedasmriti, Rishikulya, Trisama, Kausiki, Mandakini, Yamuna, Sarasvati, 
Drisadvati, Gomati, Sarayu, Rodhasvati, Saptavati, Susoma, Satadru, 
Chandrabhaga, Marudvridha, Vitasta, Asikni and Visva. The residents of 
those lands become purified by bathing in their waters, by touching them, 


and even simply by remembering them and reciting their names. 


It is said that Jambudvipa is surrounded by eight smaller islands, called 
Svarnaprastha, Candrasukla, Avartana, Ramanaka, Mandara-harina, 
Pancajanya, Simhala and Lanka. 


Around Jambudvipa there is the ocean of salt water, beyond which is the 
land of Plakshadvipa, that is 260,000 yojanas wide. In that land there is a 
plaksha tree as tall as the jambu tree in Jambudvipa, and at its roots there is a 
fire with seven flames. Plakshadvipa is ruled by Idhmajihva, one of the sons 
of Maharaja Priyavrata, who divided its seven islands among his seven sons 
Shiva, Yavasa, Subhadta, Shanta, Kshema, Amrita and Abhaya. 


In Plakshadvipa there are seven mountains - Manikuta, Vajrakuta, 
Indrasena, Jyotisman, Suparna, Hiranyasthiva and Meghamala - and seven 
rivers - Aruna, Nrimna, Anghirasi, Savitri, Suptabhata, Ritambhara and 
Satyambhara - whose contact immediately washes off all material 
contamination. The inhabitants are divided into four social categories called 
Hamsa, Patanga, Urdhvayana and Satyanga, and live 1,000 years enjoying 
the same pleasures of the heavenly beings and worshiping the Supreme 
Personality of God in the form of the Sun. 


Around Plakshadvipa lies the ocean of sugarcane juice, then the island of 
Salmalidvipa, that is 400,000 yojanas wide and takes its name from the salma 
tree, 100 yojanas wide and 1100 yojanas high. This tree is said to be the abode 
of Garuda, the great eagle that carries Vishnu. The ruler of this island is 
Yajnabahu, son of Priyavrata. He divided the island into seven territories, 
assigning one to each of his sons Surochana, Saumanasya, Ramanaka, Deva- 
vatsha, Paribhadra, Apyayana and Avijnata. Here, too, there are seven 
mountains - Svarasa, Sata-sringa, Vamadeva, Kunda, Mukunda, Pushpa- 


81 


Parama Karuna Devi 


varsha and Sahasra-sruti - and seven rivers - Anumati, Sinivali, Sarasvati, 
Kuhu, Rajani, Nanda and Raka. The inhabitants strictly follow the system 
of varnas, that are called Srutidhara, Viryadhara, Vasundhata and Isandhara, 
and worship the Supreme Personality of God in the form of Soma, the 


Moon. 


Beyond the lands of Plakshadvipa there is an ocean of liquor, called 
Surasagara, and then the land of Kushadvipa, 800,000 yojanas wide, 
surrounded by an ocean of liquid ghz. The island takes its name from the 
tufts of kusha grass growing there, radiant like fresh fires. The ruler of those 
lands is the son of Priyavrata named Hiranyareta; he, too, divided his 
kingdom among his seven sons Vasu, Vasudana, Kridharuci, Stutyavrata, 
Nabhigupta, Vivikta and Vamadeva. The seven mountains ate called 
Chakra, Chatuh-sringa, Kapila, Citrakuta, Devanika, Urdhvaroma and 
Dravina, and the seven rivers are Ramakulya, Madhukulya, Mitravinda, 
Srutavinda, Devagarbha, Ghritacyuta and Mantramala. The four social 
categories of the inhabitants are known as Kusala, Kovida, Abhiyukta and 
Kulaka, and they all worship the Supreme Personality of God in the form 
of the fire by performing the sacrifices prescribed in the Vedas. 


Beyond the ocean of clarified butter there is Kraunchadvipa, 1,600,000 
yojanas wide and surrounded by the ocean of milk. The island takes it name 
from the mountain Krauncha, protected by Varuna. The ruler of this island 
is the son of Priyavrata named Ghritapristha, who is a great scholar and has 
divided the lands among his seven sons Ama, Madhuruha, Meghapristha, 
Sudhama, Bhrajistha, Lohitarna and Vanaspati. The seven mountains are 
called Sukla, Vardhamana, Bhojana, Upabarhina, Nanda, Nandana and 
Satvatobhadra, while the seven rivers are Abhaya, Amritaugha, Aryaka, 
Tirthavati, Rupavati, Pavitravati and Sukla. The inhabitants are divided into 
the four varnas called Purusha, Rabha, Dravina and Devaka, and worship 
the Supreme Personality of God in the form of Varuna by offering water 
contained in their palms. 


After the ocean of milk there is Sakadvipa, 3,200,000 yojanas wide, which in 
turn is surrounded by an ocean of yogurt. The island takes its name from 
the saka tree whose scent spreads everywhere. The ruler of these lands is 
another son of Priyavrata, named Medhatithi, and has divided the kingdom 
among his seven sons Purojava, Manojava, Pavamana, Dhumranika, 


82 


Bhagavata Purana 


Citrarepha, Bahurupa and Visvadhara. The seven mountains of the island 
are Isana, Urusringa, Balabhadra, Satakesara, Sahasra-srota, Devapala and 
Mahanasa, and the seven rivers are Anagha, Ayurda, Ubhayaspristi, 
Aparajita, Panchapadi, Sahasra-sruti and Nijadhrti. The social varnas there 
are called Ritavrata, Satyavrata, Danavrata and Anuvrata, and worship the 
Supreme Personality of God in the form of Vayu by practicing the 


pranayama and mystic yoga. 


The last island, Pushkaradvipa, is 6,400,000 _yojanas wide, and is surrounded 
by an ocean of fresh water of a wonderfully sweet taste. The island takes 
the name from a great lotus flower with 100 millions of petals of pure gold, 
radiant like fire, that is considered the seat of Brahma. In the middle of the 
island there is the great mountain Manasottara, 10,000 yojanas wide and tall, 
and on it there is the abode of Indra, called Devadhani, which is the basis 
on which the Sun's chariot rotates on its path through the universe. The 
tuler of the island, a son of Priyavrata named Vitihotra, has two sons called 
Ramanaka and Dhataki, and has given each of them a half of the kingdom - 
one of which (Uttarayana) represents the day and the other (Dakshinayana) 
the night of the Devas. The inhabitants of the island worship the Supreme 
Personality of God in the form of Brahma, the personification of ritual 


ceremonies and the Vedas. 


After the fresh water ocean there is a mountain called Lokaloka, that 
divides the lands illuminated by the sun and those that always remain in the 
dark. Then there is Aloka varsha, a golden region that reflects light like a 
mirror and where nobody lives. It has been calculated that the distance 
between the Sumeru and Lokaloka is 125,000,000 yojanas (more than 1.5 
billion kilometers). On the Lokaloka live the four lords of the elephants - 
Rishabha, Pushkarachuda, Vamana and Aparajita - who are in charge of 
keeping the position of the planetary systems. Beyond Aloka varsha, that is 
125,000,000 yojanas wide, there is the border of the material universe. 


The sun, situated in the center of the universe, in the space called 
Antariksha between Bhurloka and Bhuvarloka, is also called Vairaja, the 
total manifestation of all living beings, and also Martanda, because it 
entered the egg of the universe at the beginning of creation, and 
Hiranyagarbha, the golden embryo. The movements of the Sun in its orbit, 
called samvatsara, are observed from earth as passages between zodiacal 


83 


Parama Karuna Devi 


signs. When the sun, traveling to north, enters Vrishabha (Taurus) the days 
lengthen until it enters in Karkata (Cancer), then it gradually shortens half 
an hour every month, until the day equals the night in Tula (Libra). Then 
the sun turns south, entering the sign of Vriscika (Scorpio) and the days 
shorten even more until Makara (Capricorn), and then day and night 
become equal again in Mesha (Aries). The orbit of the sun is 95,100,000 
yojanas, and is covered at a speed of 2,000 yojanas and 2 krosas (for a total of 
25,606 km) in a single moment. 


Just like east of the Sumeru there is Devadhani, the abode of Indra, to the 
south there is Samyamani, the capital of Yamaraja, to the west there is 
Nimlochani, the capital of Varuna, and to the north there is Vibhavari, the 
capital of Chandra. Each of these heavenly kingdoms rules over the 
passages of the day, namely sunrise, noon, sunset and midnight. Those who 
live in lands that are diametrically opposite experience respectively sunrise 
and sunset at the same time, and the same is for midday and midnight. 


The sun travels from Devadhani to Samyamani in 15 ghatikas (6 hours) 
covering a distance of 23,775,000 yojanas, and then similarly from 
Samyamani to the other capitals, and then returns to the city of Indra. The 
same movement is observed in the moon, the stars and the planets, that rise 


and set frome east to west and disappear from sight. 


The chariot of the sun has only one wheel, called Samvatsara ("orbit"), and 
its spokes are the twelve months. The six seasons are the edges, and the 
three periods called chatur-masya ("four months") are the hub of the wheel. 
One end of the axis rests on the mount Sumeru and the other on mount 
Manasottara, and the chariot keeps turning like an oil press. The second 
axis is fixed at Dhruvaloka with a rope made of wind. It is said that the 
chariot of the sun is 3,600,000 yojanas wide and 900,000 yojanas long. The 
horses are named after the Gayatri and the other poetic meters of the 
Vedas, and are driven by Aruna, who sits in front of Surya to control the 
horses but looks backwards to contemplate his master. 


There are also 60,000 Rishis called Valikhilyas, each as big as a thumb, who 
stand in front of Surya to offer praise and prayers. Also two representatives 
each of the Devas, Rishis, Gandharvas, Apsaras, Nagas, Yakshas and 
Rakshasas take different names and constantly perform various tritual 
ceremonies in honor of the Sun. 


84 


Bhagavata Purana 


The Sun, who is Narayana, Vishnu, the soul of all the worlds, travels in his 
otbit by keeping mount Sumeru and Dhruvaloka on its right, yet at the 
same time it faces the signs of the zodiac, and this seems to put Sumeru and 
Dhruvaloka on its left. But this is not a fact, because the movement of 
constellations, fixed on the great Wheel of Time, is different from the 
movement of the sun and the planets, just like the movement of a potter's 
wheel is different from the movement of ants sitting on it, and that will find 
themselves subsequently on either side of the wheel. According to the 
calculation of the stars, one earthly month corresponds to two and a quarter 
constellations, while on Pitriloka one earthly month corresponds to one day 
and one night. 


Above the sun rays, at a distance of 100,000 yojanas, the Moon travels at a 
speed greater than the Sun's. In two pakshas (lunar fortnights), the Moon 
covers the equivalent of one samvatsara (annual orbit) of the Sun, and in two 
days and a quarter it goes through a solar month. The waxing moon shows 
an increasingly luminous sickle, creating the day for the Devas and the night 
for the Pitris, and vice versa the waning moon creates the night for the 
Devas and the day for the Pitris. The Moon is the source of the nectarine 
coolness that nourishes the growth of grains, therefore it is also called Jiva, 
the most vital being in the universe. Furthermore, it influences the mind of 
the human beings, and so it is called Manomaya. It is called Annamaya 
because it gives life to all beings, and Sarvamaya and because it is pleasing 


to everyone. 


Besides the Moon and the Sun there are many stars, of which the most 
important is Abhijit; the stars are fixed to the wheel of time and rotate with 
a different motion from the Sun's. The planet Sukra (Venus) moves 
together with the Sun, but at different speeds, sometimes getting before the 
Sun, sometimes behind, and sometimes aside. Its presence facilitates rains. 
The planet Budha (Mercury) is similar to Sukra in its movement in respect 
to the Sun; generally it is considered auspicious, but when it does not move 
harmoniously with the Sun, it is said to bring cyclones and irregularities in 


rains. 


Beyond Budha there is Mangala (Mars), that normally travels through each 
sign of the zodiac in three pakshas; its influence is generally negative. Above 
Mangala there is Guru (Jupiter), that generally favors the brahmanas in the 


85 


Parama Karuna Devi 


universe, when it movement is direct. Above Guru there is Sani (Saturn), 
that moves through a zodiac sign in 30 months, and is always a very 
inauspicious planet. 


Above Sani there are the planets of the seven Rishis, who are always 
concerned about the benefit of the inhabitants of the universe, and together 
with the Sun and all the planets, circumambulates the supreme abode of 
Vishnu, known as Dhruvaloka, the pole star. Dhruvaloka is also the 
residence of Dhruva Maharaja, who is honored by Agni, Indra, Prajapati, 
Kasyapa and Dharma. 


The entire universe, with all its stars and planets, has the shape of a dolphin 
(sisumara), with its head downwards and the body spiraling towards the right 
side; the tip of the tail is Dhruvaloka, the middle part of the tail is the group 
of planets belonging to Prajapati Brahma, Agni, Indra and Dharma, and at 
the base of the tail there are the planets of Dhata and Vidhata. On the sides 
of this dolphin there are the seven Rishis. On the right side there are the 14 
constellations from Abhijit to Punarvasu, on the left side there are the 14 
constellations from Pusya to Uttarasadha. On its back there is the 
constellation Ajavithi, and on its belly there is the Ganges that runs in the 
sky (the Milky Way). At the height of its chin there are Agasti and Yamaraja, 
at the mouth Mangala, at the genitals Sani, at its head Guru, at its chest 
Surya, and at the center of the heart, Narayana. At its navel there is Sukra, 
in his mind Chandra, on its breasts the Asvini kumaras; in its prana Budha, 


in its neck Rahu, and its entire body is full of stars and comets. 


Sometimes yogis meditate on this form as a manifestation of Vasudeva, the 
Supreme Personality of God, that has become visible to material eyes in the 


form of Time. 


It is said that 10,000 yojanas under the Sun there is the planet known as 
Rahu, that moves like one of the stars. The Deity presiding this planet is an 
Asura, the son of Simhika, who acquired that position for the grace of the 
Supreme Personality of God. Once, when the nectar was being distributed, 
Rahu tried to create enmity between the Sun and the Moon by sneaking 
between them, and still he tries to overcome them in what we observe as 
eclipses in the full moon nights and in the new moon days. Under Rahu 
there are the planets known as Siddhaloka, Charanaloka and Vidyadhata- 
loka, and even lower in space, in the region called antariksha, 100 yojanas 


86 


Bhagavata Purana 


(1,300 km) above Earth, there are the subtle dimensions there are the 
abodes of Yakshas, Rakshasas, Pisachas, etc, which extend down to the 
limits of the atmosphere. The boundary of Earth is defined at the limit at 


which the great birds can fly - eagles, hawks, swans and so on. 


Below the Earth there are seven other planets known as Atala, Vitala, 
Sutala, Talatala, Mahatala, Rasatala and Patala, that are of the same size as 
Earth and are called bila svarga ("subterranean heavenly planets") because 
the Daityas, Danavas and Nagas who live there enjoy a very high level of 
life, possess great wealth and have many pleasures. The houses, gardens, 
lakes, parks and pleasure places are even more wonderful than the ones on 
the higher planets, but they never see the sun because they are 
subterranean. Their time is not divided into days and nights, and the main 
lighting comes from the valuable gems decorating the heads of the great 


serpents who live there. 


Those artificial cities have been built by Maya Danava, an extraordinary 
architect who can make excellent dwellings, walls and gates, assembly halls, 
temples and hotels for tourists. The residents drink and bathe from juices 
and elixirs made with wonderful herbs, so they do not suffer from diseases 
ot anxiety, and their bodies always remain young and strong. Like in 


heavenly beings, their sweat does not smell bad. 


The planet Atala is the residence of Bala, the son of Maya Danava, who 
created 96 types of mystic powers. On that planet there are three types of 
women, categorized as svairinis, Raminis and pumschalis. Svairinis marry men of 
their own group, Raminis marry men of all origins and pumschalis change 
husbands frequently. When a man arrives in Atala, these women 
immediately entice him and give him hataka (also called bhang, the juice of 
Cannabis indica) to drink to increase their sexual power. 


Under Atala there is Vitala, where Shiva drinks /ataka and resides with his 
army of Bhutas. There Shiva unites with his consort Bhavani, and from 
their power the river Hataki is created; when that river is devoured by fire 
and wind, it produces the gold called sataka, used by the inhabitants of that 


planet to manufacture their many ornaments. 


Under Vitala there is Sutala, the abode of Bali Maharaja, the son of 
Virochana and grandson of Prahlada. Bali is always engaged in the worship 


87 


Parama Karuna Devi 


of the Supreme Personality of God in the form of the Vamana avatara, who 


begged him for the gift of three paces of land. 


Under Sutala there is Talatala, ruled by Maya Danava. Shiva set fire to the 
three cities (Tripura) of Maya Danava to protect the universe, and then 
restored them to him when the Asura became his devotee. Under Talatala 
there is Mahatala, the abode of many-headed serpents, descendants of 
Kadru, who are always angry and anxious because they fear the arrival of 
Garuda. The dignitaries of the planet are Kuhaka, Takshaka, Kaliya and 


Susena. 


Under Mahatala there is Rasatala, abode of the Asuras sons of Diti and 
Danu, named Pani, Nivata kavacha, Kaleya and Hiranya-puravasi. These 
Asuras live in underground lairs like snakes, are enemies of the Devas and 
fear the Sudarshana disc and also Sarama, Indra's messenger, who recites 
special mantras. Under Rasatala there is Patala or Nagaloka, the abode of 
Vasuki and his Naga subjects, among which the most prominent are 
Sankha, Kulika, Mahasankha, Sveta, Dhananjaya, Dhritarastra, 
Sankhachuda, Kambala, Asvatara and Devadatta. All of them have many 
heads, decorated with valuable gems that illuminate the darkness of Bila 


svatga. 


Under Patala lives Ananta Sesha, also called Sankarshana, who is another 
incarnation of the Supreme Personality of God. On one of his heads the 
entite universe rests - compared to the body of Ananta, it is as small as a 
mustard seed. At the time of the dissolution of the universe, Ananta 
manifests Sankarshana Rudra, the incarnation of Shiva as the aggregate of 
the eleven Rudras. 


Lord Ananta, thus called because his spiritual qualities are unlimited, has a 
white complexion like polished silver and is served by the princesses, 
daughters of the kings of serpents, who smear his body with the pulp of 
aguru, sandalwood paste and kunkum. Ananta wears blue clothes, is 
decorated with a golden belt, sports one single ear-ring and holds a plow on 
his shoulder. He has a vaijayanti garland of ever-fresh /w/asi blossoms, with a 


scent as sweet as honey. 


The remembrance of Ananta wipes away all impurities from the hearts of 


those who meditate on him, and is constantly glorified by Narada Rishi in 


88 


Bhagavata Purana 


the assembly hall of Brahmaloka. The sound of his name, even pronounced 


by jest or chance, removes all sins from those who are listening. 


Besides these planets there are also subtle dimensions of a hellish nature 
called Naraka, situated in the intermediate space between the three worlds 
and the Garbhodaka ocean, on the southern side of the universe together 


with Pitriloka, the planet of the ancestors. 


All the residents of Pitriloka, headed by Agnisvatta, meditate on the 
Supreme Personality of God and are always benevolent towards the families 
of their descendants who live on earth. The king of the Pitris is Yamaraja, 
the powerful son of Surya. His messengers the Yamadutas are sent to earth 
to capture evil people at the time of death and drag them to justice and 


proper punishment. 


The Narakalokas are hundreds of thousands of planets; the most prominent 
are Tamishra, Andhatamishra, Raurava, Maharaurava, Kumbhipaka, 
Kalasutra, Asi-patravana, Sukaramukha, Andhakupa, Krimibhojana, 
Sandamsa, Taptasurmi, Vajrakantaka-salmali, Vaitarani, | Puyoda, 
Pranarodha, Visasana, Lalabhaksha, Sarameyadana, Avici, Ayahpana, 
Ksharakardama, Rakshogana-bhojana, Sulaprota, Dandasuka, Avata- 
nirodhana, Paryavartana and Sucimukha. 


These planets are like prisons to punish those who deprived others of wife, 
children or legitimate wealth, those who cheated and betrayed others, those 
who regularly committed violence against other beings as a means of 
livelihood, those who ate animals or killed wise and benevolent persons. 
Punishments are also given there to those kings and government 
representatives who caused sufferings to innocent people, those who 
neglected their social and religious duties, who had sex indiscriminately or 
had sex with unworthy persons, and also the sadras who did not make any 


effort to purify themselves and evolve. 


Other crimes that deserve a sentence on these planets are the pride for an 
important position, the unnecessary killing of animals during hunting and 
the practices meant to force a woman to sexual allegiance. Also punished 
are the rulers who oppressed the people with excessive taxes, the street 
robbers, those who bore false witness or committed frauds, those who 


drunk liquors indiscriminately, those who imprisoned animals for their own 


89 


Parama Karuna Devi 


pleasure, those who delighted in creating problems to others, those who did 
not treat guests well, and all those who committed violence and caused 
sufferings to other living beings for their own pleasure or profit. 


The story of Ajamila 


After hearing Sukadeva describe the hellish planets, Maharaja Parikshit felt 
a great compassion for those who stupidly fall into the trap of illusion and 
commit crimes in their lifetime. "O great sage," he said, "please explain how 


a human being can avoid falling into those hellish conditions." 


"One must repent and make amends for any damage before the time of 
death comes," Sukadeva replied. "Therefore one must follow the methods 
prescribed by Manu sambita and other scriptures, and carefully avoid falling 
into the same mistake again, otherwise atonement has no value - it would 
be like an elephant who takes bath and then, as soon as he gets back on the 
tiver bank, covers his body with dust again. This tendency to fall back into 
the same inauspicious activities is due to the desire to pursue happiness on 
the material level, therefore mere atonement does not eliminate the root of 
the problem. One should rather cultivate true knowledge, that is the 
purpose of the Vedas, and realize the absolute transcendental Truth. Only a 
person who has reached the level of spiritual awareness and pure devotion 
to God, through the direct contact with a perfectly realized guide, can 
eradicate the primary cause of bad actions. Pure devotion for the Supreme 
Personality of God destroys all sins. In this regard, I want to tell you the 
story of a brabmana named Ajamila, who lived in the city called 
Kanyakubja." 


Young Ajamila was a qualified brahmana, full of good qualities and with a 
spotless behavior. He observed all the rules in the scriptures, studied 
sincerely and was very respectful to his teachers, to fire, guests and the 
family elders. He was benevolent towards everyone, did not waste time in 


useless discussions and carefully controlled his senses and mind. One day, 


90 


Bhagavata Purana 


on the order or his father, Ajamila went into the forest to collect fruits, 
flowers and the two types of grass called samit and kusha. While walking 
down the street, he saw a sudra engaged in sexual intercourse with a 
prostitute; both of them were drunk, and seemed to be having a great time. 


Ajamila tried to remove all lusty thoughts from his mind, but just like the 
sun and the moon are eclipsed by a lower planet, his awareness was covered 
by an overwhelming sensual desire. On returning home, he immediately 
hired the prostitute as a housemaid and he quickly forgot all the religious 
knowledge and the rules he had learned and practiced. He unjustly 
abandoned his own good wife and old parents, and became a drunkard. He 
also took to cheating money out of people through gambling and frauds, 


and even to robbing people on the street. 


Thus he spent his entire life engaged in criminal activities to maintain the 
prostitute and her ten children. At the age of 88 he fathered one last son, 
Narayana, who became his favorite child. Totally absorbed in his 
attachment for the little boy, Ajamila did not realize that death was 
approaching, and when three Yamadutas came to take him away, Ajamila 
started to call out for little Narayana. Because Ajamila had pronounced the 
name of God in perfect sincerity, the messengers of Vishnu, the 


Vishnudutas, arrived to save him. 


"You ate the servants of Yama, who is Dharmaraja," they told the 
perplexed Yamadutas, "and therefore you should be able to understand the 
principles of religion, and recognize what kind of people must not be 


subject to punishment." 


The Yamadutas replied, "The principles of religion are the instructions 
contained in the Vedic texts, which are the incarnation of the Supreme 
Personality of God. Narayana is situated on the transcendental level, but 
through the three gwnas of material nature he controls the cosmic 
manifestation, assigning different qualities and names to living beings. The 
people to be punished are those who, according to many witnesses, have 
abandoned their prescribed duties and committed sinful actions in order to 


obtain personal benefits." 


The Vishnudutas replied, "Punishing a person who has already surrendered 
with sincerity is an act of injustice. This Ajamila has called the name of 


91 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Narayana in good faith and deep love. One who sincerely takes shelter in 
the name of the Supreme Personality of God is immediately purified from 
all sins he may have committed and is protected by the Lord." 


After listening to the wonderful conversation between the Vishnudutas and 
the Yamadutas, Ajamila realized his mistakes and repented sincerely. 
Abandoning all illicit activities, he saw he had been saved at the last 
moment by the beneficial results of the auspicious activities he had 
performed in his youth, and renouncing his bodily identifications and 
material attachments, he fully engaged in meditation on Vishnu. He went to 
live alone in a Vishnu temple at Hardvara, on the banks of the Ganges, and 
after some time the Vishnudutas came back to take him to Vaikuntha. 


In the meantime the messengers of Yama had returned to their Lord, and 
complained to him, saying that the good administration of justice requires 
one single supreme judiciary authority, otherwise they might be differences 
of opinion. "We believed you were the supreme magistrate," the Yamadutas 
said, "but now we have seen that Ajamila was saved by four men coming 
from Siddhaloka." 


"The supreme authority rests in the Supreme Personality of God, Vishnu, 
who is above all the Devas engaged in the administration of the universe," 
teplied Yamaraja. "The messengers of Vishnu, the Vishnudutas, are 
honored by all Devas and possess the power to protect the devotees of the 
Lord from all dangers. The arguments they presented to you ate perfectly 
valid, because the highest religious principle consists of the personal 
telationship of love and devotion to God, beginning with calling the holy 
name of God. Ajamila had pronounced the name of Narayana to call his 
son, but at that time he remembered the Lord with love and sincerity, and 
this immediately saved him from disaster." 


The descendants of Daksha 


After listening to the story of Ajamila, Maharaja Parikshit asked Sukadeva 


to tell him about the secondary creation of the universe, in which all the 


92 


Bhagavata Purana 


bodies of the living beings were created during the reign of Svayambhuva 


Manu. 


Sukadeva replied, "I have already told you how the ten Pracetas, the sons of 
Pracinabarhi, emerged from the ocean where they had meditated for long 
years, and after clearing many lands from the great forests that had covered 
them, they married Marisa, the daughter of the Apsara Pramlocha, who 
gave birth to Prajapati Daksha." 


Sukadeva continued by narrating how Daksha had created, fom his own 
mind, all the forms of the heavenly beings, the human beings and the 
demonic beings, and the various types of animals as well. To become more 
efficient in that work, Daksha went to perform difficult austerities and ritual 
cetemonies for the worship of God in the place called Aghamarshana, in 
the Vindhya mountains. The prayers and praise offered to God by Daksha 
became famous as the Hamsa guhya prayers. 


Pleased by his faith and sincere desire to engage in service, Vishnu went to 
bless Daksha and suggested him to marry Asikni, the daughter of Prajapati 
Panchajana. Following the order of Vishnu, Daksha generated 10,000 sons, 
who became known as the Haryasvas. When Daksha ordered them to 
produce a progeny in turn, the Haryasvas traveled west, to the holy place 
called Narayana sara at the estuary of river Sindhu, and there they engaged 
in deep meditation to acquire the power needed to perform their task. 


Narada Rishi had observed them thus engaged in austerity, and went to 
speak to them. "Your father knows everything," he said, "but you are still 
young and inexperienced, and you did not understand his order correctly. 
You have not travelled much, and so you do not know that there is a land 
where only one man lives, and where is a tunnel to a place from which, 
once entered, one can never get out. This man is the husband of a woman 
who likes to dress in many attractive clothes. In that land there is a river 
flowing in both directions, a wonderful house made of 25 materials, a swan 
singing in many ways, and an object made of thunderbolts and sharp razors 
that automatically revolves on itself." 


The Haryasvas understood the parable offered by Narada. There is only 
one male in the universe - God - and the place from which one does not 


return is Vaikuntha, the spiritual world. The restless woman is material 


93 


Parama Karuna Devi 


nature, that always creates and destroys at the same time, and the house 
made of 25 elements is the material body. The swan represents the Vedic 
scriptures, while the sharp cutting object is Time. Without knowing these 
things, engaging in family life is very dangerous. 


The Haryasvas offered their homage to Narada, recognizing him as their 
guru, and turned to the spiritual existence, thus disobeying their father. 


Daksha generated 1,000 more sons, who became known as Savalasvas, and 
gave them the same orders. The Savalasvas too went to the Narayana saras 
to engage in austerities by offering their homage to Narayana. Again, 
Narada approached these sons of Daksha and convinced them to follow 
the example of their elder brothers. 


When he learned that the second group of his sons had also disobeyed his 
orders because of Narada's preaching, he became very angry and cursed 
him for interfering with his service, pushing inexperienced boys on to the 
path of renunciation without having fulfilled their duties or really acquired 
the necessaty knowledge. Because of Daksha's curse, Narada cannot reside 
in any place, although he can travel all around the universe. Narada serenely 
accepted that restriction and did not even try to protest. 


On Brahma's request, Prajapati Daksha generated 60 daughters, of which 
10 married Yamaraja, 17 Kasyapa, 37 Chandra, and 2 each went to Bhuta, 
Krishasva and Angira. The wives of Yama were Bhanu, Lamba, Kakud, 
Yami, Visva, Sadhya, Marutvati, Vasu, Muhurta and Sankalpa. 


Bhanu gave birth to Deva Rishabha, who became father of Indrasena, and 
Lamba had a son named Vidyota, who is the origin of all the clouds. Kakud 
gave birth to a son named Sankata, the father of Kikata, who generated the 
group of heavenly beings called Durga. Yami gave birth to Svarga, who 
became the father of Nandi. Visva became the mother of the heavenly 
beings called Visvadevas, who did not have a progeny. Sadhya gave birth to 
the heavenly beings called Sadhyas, who had a son named Arthasiddhi. 
Marutvati gave birth to the twins named Marutvari and Jayanta, who is also 
called Upendra and is an emanation of Lord Vasudeva. Muhurta gave birth 
to the heavenly beings known as Mauhurtikas, in charge of assigning the 
proper time to the results of the actions of living beings. Sankalpa had a son 


named Sankalpa, who became the father of Kama. 


94 


Bhagavata Purana 


The sons of Vasu are known as the Vasus - Drona, Prana, Dhruva, Arka, 
Agni, Dosa, Vastu and Vibhavasu. Abhimati, the wife of the Vasu Drona, 
gave birth to many sons, including Harsha, Soka and Bhaya. Urjasvati, the 
wife of Prana, gave birth to Saha, Ayus and Purojava. Dharani, the wife of 
Dhruva, gave birth to many sons, who founded many cities. Vasana, the 
wife of Arka, gave birth to many sons including Tarsha. Agni generated 
many sons including Dravinaka with Vasana, and with Krittika he fathered 
Skanda (Karttikeya), who had many sons including Visakha. Sarvari, the 
wife of Dosa, gave birth to Sisumara, who was a divine manifestation. 
Angirasi, the wife of Vastu, gave birth to the great architect Visvakarma, 
who married Akriti and gave birth to the Manu named Chakshusa. In turn 
Chakshusa Manu fathered the Visvadevas and the Sadhyas. Usha, the wife 
of Vibhavasu, gave birth to Vyusta, Rocisa and Atapa, who became the 
father of Panchayama, who awakes the living beings to material activities 
evety morning. 


Among the other daughters of Daksha, Sarupa, the wife of Bhuta, gave 
birth to 10 millions of Rudras, of whom the most prominent are Raivata, 
Aja, Bhava, Bhima, Vama, Uegra, Vrishakapi, Ajaikapat, Ahirbradhna, 
Bahurupa and Mahan. The other wife of Bhuta gave birth to their 
companions, the Pretas and Vinayakas. Prajapati Angira had two wives, 
named Svadha and Sati. Svadha accepted all the Pitris as her own children, 
and Sati gave birth to the Atharva Angirasa. The daughters of Daksha who 
married Kasyapa were Aditi, Diti, Danu, Kastha, Arista, Surasa, Ila, Muni, 
Krodhavasa, Tamra, Surabhi, Sarama and Timi, and became the mothers to 
almost all beings in the universe. 


Aditi gave birth to the twelve Devas called Adityas. Diti gave birth to the 
Daityas. Arista gave birth to the Gandharvas; Muni gave birth to the 
Apsaras; Surasa gave birth to the Rakshasas. Kadru gave birth to Garuda 
(the eagle carrier of Vishnu) and Aruna (the charioteer of the Sun). Kadru 
gave birth to many varieties of serpents, Yamini to the locusts and Patangi 
to the birds. 


Surabhi gave birth to cattle such as cows, buffaloes and other animals with 
a split hoof; Kastha gave birth to the quadrupeds with an unsplit hoof, such 
as horses; Tamra gave birth to the eagles, the vultures and the other great 
ptey birds; Timi gave birth to the aquatics; Sarama gave birth to the fierce 


95 


Parama Karuna Devi 


predators such as lions and tigers; Krodhavasa gave birth to the snakes 
known as dandasukas and to mosquitoes; Ila gave birth to the various types 
of trees and creepers. 


Danu had 61 sons, of which the most prominent are Svarbhanu, 
Vrishaparva, Vaisvanara, Dvimurdha, Sambara, Arishta, Hayagtiva, 
Vibhavasu, Ayomukha, Sankusira, Kapila, Aruna, Puloma, Ekachakra, 
Anutapana, Dhumrakesha, Virupaksha, Vipracitti and Durjaya. 


The daughter of Svarbhanu named Suprabha married Namuci. The 
daughter of Vrishaparva named Sarmistha married the powerful king 


Yayati, son on Nabusa. 


Vaisvanara, son of Danu, had four beautiful daughters: Upadanavi, 
Hayasira, Puloma and Kalaka. Upadanavi married Hiranyaksha, Hayasira 
married Kratu, then on the request of Brahma, Puloma and Kalaka married 
Kasyapa and gave birth to 60,000 sons, known as the Paulomas and the 
Kalakeyas, of whom the most prominent was Nivatakavacha. These very 
powerful beings used to disturb the ceremonies performed by the great 
Rishis, and were killed by the Pandava Arjuna when he visited the heavenly 
planets. 


The text follows with the progeny of the twelve sons of Aditi, known as 
Vivasvan (Sutya), Aryama, Pusha, Tvasta, Savita, Bhaga, Dhata, Vidhata, 
Varuna, Mitra, Satru and Urukrama (the avatara Vamana). Vivasvan had two 
wives: the first, Samjna, became the mother of the Manu Sraddhadeva and 
the twins Yamuna and Yamaraja. Then, roaming the earth in the form of a 
mare, she gave birth to the Asvini kumaras. The second wife of Vivasvan, 
Chaya, gave birth to two sons Sanaischara (Sani) and Savarni Manu, and a 
daughter, Tapati, who married Samvarana. 


Aryama married Matrika and fathered many great scholars, who became the 
progenitors of the human dynasties. Pusha did not have children and lost 
his teeth when Daksha's sacrifice was interrupted by the servants of Shiva. 
Prajapati Tvasta married Rachana, the daughter of the Daityas, and fathered 
two extremely powerful sons: Sannivesa and Visvarupa. Although 
Visvarupa was a descendent of the Daityas, mortal enemies of the Devas, 
Indta chose him as the officiating priest for the Devas when Brihaspati 


abandoned them because of their lack of respect. 


96 


Bhagavata Purana 


Indra and Vritrasura 


Maharaja Parikshit asked Sukadeva why Brihaspati, the priest of the Devas, 
had abandoned them, and what offense had been committed. "The king of 
the heavenly planets Indra had become very proud of his immense wealth 
and glory," Sukadeva replied. "One day he was sitting with his consort Saci 
in the royal hall, surrounded by the greatest heavenly beings and served by 
his court." 


When Brihaspati, priest and guru of the Devas, entered the hall, Indra 
neglected to stand up to offer respect, and rather pretended he had not 
even seen him. Brihaspati was saddened but returned home in silence, 
without throwing any curse. Soon Indra realized that he had committed a 
serious mistake and decided to go and beg forgiveness from his guru, but 
Brihaspati made himself invisible and Indra was unable to find him. The 
Daityas came to know about it, and on the instructions of their priest 
Sukracharya they immediately went to war against the Devas, defeating 
them in battle. 


Sukadeva continued to say that the Devas, terrified at that bad turn of 
events, had gone to ask help from Brahma, and Brahma had recommended 
them to take shelter in Visvarupa, the son of the Aditya Tvasta, accepting 
him as guru even though he was younger than them. In fact seniority is not 
determined by the age of the body, but by the amount of knowledge 
possessed by a person. Visvarupa granted the request of the Devas, 
although he knew well that by taking up the role of priest and guru one loses 
his previously accumulated brahminical power. To protect the Devas, 
Visvarupa composed a mantra armor called Narayana kavacha, explaining in 
details how it should be donned and used in times of danger. After 
installing the syllables of Vishnu's names on one's body, one must evoke 
the manifestations and the weapons of the Lord. The mystical armor of 
Narayana is so powerful that it always remains installed in the body of one 
who weats it, protecting from all dangers and extending such protection 
also to those who come in contact with such person. 


97 


Parama Karuna Devi 


But not everything went well. Visvarupa loudly offered oblations to the 
Devas because he was related to them on his father's side, but as he was 
also related to the Daityas on his mother's side he was also secretly offering 
murmured oblations for the Daityas, the enemies of the Devas. When Indra 
found out, he became very angry and scared, and he beheaded Visvarupa. 
Immediately Indra was hit by the reaction of the killing of his guru, and he 
had to suffer immensely for one entire year. Finally he decided to offer 


blessings to anyone who accepted to take up a part of that karmic load. 


Earth obtained the blessing by which its holes fill up by themselves, and 
discharged one fourth of Indra's karmic load by creating the deserts. The 
trees obtained the blessing by which their branches grow back after being 
cut off, and discharged one fourth of Indra's sin in the form of sap, that is 
often poisonous and cannot be drunk. Water obtained the blessing of 
increasing the volume of any substance to which it would be mixed, and 
discharged one fourth of Indra's sin in the form of the foam and bubbles 
that appear in dirty water. Women obtained the blessing to be able to have 
unlimited sexual intercourses, and discharged one fourth of Indra's impurity 
through the menstrual fluids. 


However, Indra's troubles were not over. Visvarupa's father, Tvasta, 
celebrated a ritual sacrifice to cause the death of the king of the heavenly 
beings, evoking a terrible and gigantic Asura who was named Vritra. This 
sacrificial son of Tvasta had a black complexion, hair and beard of the color 
of molten copper, and resplended like the clouds at sunset. Dancing and 
screaming, he shook his trident and looked ready to devour the sky and the 
stars. And in fact he swallowed all the weapons of the Devas when they 
faced him in battle. 


Overwhelmed and despairing, the Devas gathered in meditation to ask 
Vishnu's help and soon Vishnu appeared, pleased by their prayers and 
praise. Vishnu recommended them not to forget that material possessions 
are only temporary and illusory, and that the best boon they could ask from 
God was simply to get the opportunity to engage in divine service. Then he 
advised them to approach Dadhici Rishi, also called Dadhyancha, who had 
instructed the Asvini kumaras in the powerful mantras known as Asvasita. 
Those same mantras had been given to Tvasta, who had taught them to 
Visvarupa in the form of the Narayana kavacha. Dadhici would gladly offer 


98 


Bhagavata Purana 


his body for the cause of the Devas, and from his bones Indra would be 
able to create a divine thunderbolt, charged with the power of the Narayana 
kavacha, that could defeat Vritrasura. 


As Vishnu had foretold, Dadhici Rishi graciously accepted to help the 
Devas in their mission to protect the universe. Armed with the thunderbolt 
produced by the bones of the Rishi and riding his elephant Airavata, Indra 
engaged in battle against Vritrasura, while all around them the Devas 
clashed with the Daityas. The battle was terrible and the valiant Vritrasura 
had the opportunity to show his great qualities, encouraging the Daityas to 
fight bravely to obtain a higher reward in their next lifetime, and rebuking 
the Devas for the immoral action of attacking their enemies' back while 


they retreated. 


"You killed your guru, who was a qualified brabmana," said Vritra to Indra, 
"after appointing him as your officiating priest, and therefore you have lost 
all glory and good fortune. You have become a lowly butcher, who cuts his 
victim's head shamelessly. After I kill you with my trident, your body will be 
only fit as a meal for vultures, because it is too impure for fire. If on the 
other hand I will be killed by you on the battlefield, I will be happy to offer 
my body as food to other beings, because by doing so I will fulfill my duty 
towards my brother Visvarupa and consume my karmic reactions. So throw 
your powerful thunderbolt, charged with the austerities performed by 
Dadhici Rishi, and I will be happy to die according to the plan 
recommended by Vishnu, because in this way I will be free from material 
conditionings and I will obtain the valuable opportunity to serve God." 


After saying these words, Vritra rushed against Indra, who just had the time 
to deal a blow with his thunderbolt, cutting off one of the Asura's arms. 
Vritra did not stop, and with his remaining arm he struck a terrible mace 
blow to Indra's jaw, so that Indra dropped his weapon, to the great shock 
of all the heavenly beings who watched the duel. 


"Take courage and fight, Indra," Vritra said. "Look at me, I continue to 
fight without respite, although I have lost one arm and my main weapon. 
Nobody is sure to win a battle, because everything depends on God's will. 
Our independence is similar to that of straw dolls or wooden puppets: it is 
only the desire of the Supreme Personality of God that makes us move, and 
that creates and destroys all bodies." 


99 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Amazed, Indra recognized the deep transcendental knowledge and devotion 
to God demonstrated by Vritra, and started again to fight in a spirit of duty 
and service for the good of the universe. Throwing his Sataparvana 
thunderbolt again, he destroyed the other arm of the Asura and the mace in 
it. Deprived of both arms, Vritra fell to the ground, and opening his mouth 
wide like a python he advanced against Indra by pushing on with his legs, 
and was able to swallow him and his elephant. However, Indra was 
protected by the Narayana kavacha and remained unhurt although he had 
been devoured by Vritra; by using his thunderbolt he cut his enemy's 
stomach open and then beheaded him. 


All the heavenly beings rejoiced at the death of the extremely powerful 
Asura, but Indra was obsessed by the guilt of having killed such an evolved 
soul. The Rishis comforted him, saying that they would perform a great 
sacrificial ceremony for his benefit, but immediately the karmic reaction 
started to harass Indta, and he had to hide in the Manasa lake inside the 
stem of a lotus flower, and remained without food because fire refused to 
enter the water to deliver him the sacrificial oblations. During Indra's 
absence, his place was occupied by Nahusha, who soon became very proud 
for that exalted position and even went to the point to making 


inappropriate proposals to Sachi, the wife of Indra. 


From his part, Indra purified himself from the consequences of Vritra's 
killing only by long austerities and by offering a sincere worship to Vishnu. 
Finally he was able to return to his capital to resume his functions, and 
Marici and the other Rishis celebrated for him the rituals of the Asvamedha 
sacrifice. 


Maharaja Parikshit had been very surprised hearing that an Asura had 
manifested such virtuous and devotional qualities, showing his nature of a 
highly realized soul and a devotee of God. "The explanation for these 
extraordinary facts," Sukadeva said, "is in the story of Vritra's previous 
lifetimes, that I heard as told by Vyasa, Narada and Devala. The story 
begins when Citraketu, the king of Surasena, had established his kingdom 


on the entire earth." 


Sukadeva continued by narrating how Citraketu was very unhappy about 
having no heirs, although he had married 10 million women. All his wealth, 
his learning and the other blessings were unable to console him about the 


100 


Bhagavata Purana 


fact that he was unable to have children, so when he received the visit of 
Angira Rishi, he begged help for getting a son. Angira, son of the mind of 
Brahma, performed a sacrifice offering oblations of rice pudding to Tvasta, 
and recommended the king to feed the leftovers of that sweet rice to his 
first queen Kritadyuti. However he warned the king, saying that the child 


who was going to be born would bring both joy and sorrow. 


Soon the queen gave birth to a child, and Citraketu manifested his great 
happiness by distributing gifts to all the brabmanas who had participated in 
the ceremonies. The fulfillment of his greatest desire created a deep 
attachment in the heart of Citraketu, and he spent almost all his time with 
the child and his mother, queen Kritadyuti. The other wives of the king 
were displeased and worried, because Citraketu's loss of interest towards 
them further reduced their chances of having a child of their own and thus 
regain their dignity. Finally, out of despair, they conspired to secretly poison 
the child. 


Citraketu was devastated by the news of his heir's death, and the entire 
court cried for the queen's mourning, including the other wives of the king, 
who had to pretend to be aggrieved so that their crime would not be 
discovered. Out of compassion for the deep sufferings of the king and his 
consort, Angira and Narada went to comfort them, offering words of 


eternal and transcendental wisdom. 


The sages said, "The living entities take bodies and meet each other in 
temporary relationships, but inevitably they will have to separate and 
continue in their journey, lifetime after lifetime. Sometimes seeds sprout 
and grow and sometimes they do not, or the plant dies prematurely. But the 
soul that appears in the various bodies is eternal, just like the material 
elements that keep gathering and dispersing. Nothing is really lost." 


Angira Rishi reminded Citraketu that when performing the ritual for the 
birth of his heir, he had warned him that he would experience both great 
joy and great sorrow. "Already at that time I could have offered you the 
supreme and transcendental knowledge, but because you were so anxious to 
engage in material life, I helped you to fulfill that aspiration. Now you know 
that material identification and its attachments are cause of sorrow, fear and 
illusion, because nothing of this is permanent. In fact, the body is the 
source of all sufferings, both when the pain is caused by the body itself or 


101 


Parama Karuna Devi 


by the mind, and when it is caused by other living beings or by external 
circumstances. Now, o king, you should meditate on your real identity. You 
are not this material body, but the a/wan, the eternal spirit, that existed 
before your birth and will continue to exist even after the death of this 
body. By realizing your true spiritual and transcendental nature, you will 
become free from all unnecessary attachments and will attain peace." 


Narada gave the king a mantra and said that by reciting it, within seven days 
he would obtain the blessing of seeing the Supreme Personality of God, 


Ananta Sankarshana. 


As the king was still overwhelmed by grief for the loss of his son, Narada 
called back the soul of the dead child and asked it to return into the body it 
had abandoned, to pacify his parents. "Because you died prematurely and 
unjustly," Narada said, "I am now giving you the opportunity to come back 
to live with your family and ascend the throne as everybody expected you to 
do." 


The child replied, "Who are truly my father and mother? In my many 
lifetimes I had several fathers and mothers, sometimes as a heavenly being, 
sometimes as a human being, and sometimes as an animal or a plant. This 
world is like a flowing river, in which we all travel in one body or another. 
But because our true nature is spiritual, non-different from God's nature, 
we have never been really touched or bound by the chains of conditionings 


and illusion." 


When his mind was purified from all sufferings caused by attachment, the 
king found the strength and determination to engage in transcendental 
meditation according to the instructions of Natada, and worshiped the 
Supreme Personality of God by offering the prayers he had learned from 
his spiritual master and by fasting for one entire week. Within a few days he 
was thus able to see the Lord, who has a complexion as white as a flower, 
and is dressed in blue clothes. Decorated with a radiant crown and other 
valuable ornaments, and surrounded by great liberated sages such as Sanat 
kumara, the Lord smiled accepting the king's homage and prayers, and 
blessed him. 


Thus Citraketu forgot his disappointment for the loss of his son, and 


continued to live for many years, wisely utilizing the blessings he had 


102 


Bhagavata Purana 


received and keeping his kingdom happy and prosperous. One day, while 
he was traveling on his airplane, he crossed the aircraft of Shiva, who was 
surrounded by his companions. Shiva's consort Parvati was sitting on the 
Lord's lap, and that sight deeply amazed Citraketu. Lord Shiva is the 
spiritual master for all, the highest authority on the principles of religion: 
how could he remain sitting in assembly with so many saints and sages, and 
at the same time embrace his wife like an ordinary man? 


Shiva heard the playful words of Citraketu and smiled, but Parvati became 
vety angry and cursed him to become an Asura as a punishment for his 
offensive and arrogant comments. Immediately Citraketu bowed to Parvati 
and begged her forgiveness, graciously accepting the curse he had received, 
because he was aware that joys and sufferings are a result of one's past 
activities, and in any case they are both temporary and one should not get 
too anxious about them. This Citraketu, who had become already free from 
material attachments and perfectly realized in his own transcendental 


identity, was born again as the Asura Vritra. 


Diti decides to kill Indra 


Continuing the description of the descendants of the Adityas, Sukadeva 
spoke about Savita, the fifth of the twelve sons of Aditi, who married 
Prishni and had three daughters and nine sons. The daughters were named 
Savitri, Vyahriti and Trayi, while the sons were Agnihotra, Pashu, Soma, 
Chaturmasya and the five Mahayajnas. 


Bhaga's wife, named Siddhi, had three sons - Mahima, Vibhu and Prabhu - 
and a beautiful daughter named Asi. Bhata, the sixth son of Aditi, had four 
wives named Kuhu, Sinivali, Raka and Anumati, who gave birth respectively 
to Sayam, Darsha, Pratah and Purnamasa. Vidhata, the seventh son of 
Aditi, married Kriya and fathered the five Devas of fire called Purishyas. 


Varuna, the eighth son of Aditi, married Charshani and became the father 
of Bhrigu. The other son of Varuna, Valmiki, was born from an anthill. 
Agastya and Vasistha were sons both of Varuna and Mitra, the ninth and 


103 


Parama Karuna Devi 


tenth of Aditi's sons, because they were born from the sperm of Mitra and 


Varuna, ejaculated at the sight of the Apsara Urvasi and preserved in a vase. 


Mitra married Revati and had three sons from her: Utsarga, Arishta and 
Pippala. Indra, the eleventh son of Aditi and king of the heavenly planets, 
married Paulomi (also known as Saci) and became the father of Jayanta, 
Rishabha and Midhusha. The Supreme Personality of God, Vishnu, 
appeared as Urukrama, the twelfth son of Aditi; he was also called Vamana 
because he was very short. Urukrama married Kirti and became the father 


of Brihatsloka, who had many sons including Saubhaga. 


Another of the wives of Kashyapa, Diti, gave birth to the Daityas, known as 
Asuras ot demonic beings. The first two were Hiranyaksha and 
Hiranyakashipu. Hiranyakashipu married Kayadhu, daughter of Jambha and 
descendant of Danu. Kayadhu gave birth to four sons - Sambhlada, 
Anuhlada, Hlada and Prahlada - and a daughter, Simhika, who married the 
Asura Vipracit and gave birth to the Asura Rahu, who was beheaded by the 
Lord when he disguised himself as a Deva to drink the nectar of 
immortality. 


Samhlada married Kriti, who gave birth to Panchajanya. Hlada married 
Dhamani, who had two sons, named Vatapi and Ilvala; these two amused 
themselves by killing people in a very original way. Vatapi took the form of 
a tam and had himself butchered, cooked and served to traveling guests, 
then from the stomach of the unfortunate victim he returned to life in his 
original form. The trick did not work with Agastya Muni, whose power was 
greater than Vatapi's and quickly digested his meal before Vatapi was able 
to resurrect himself and rip Agastya from within. 


Anuhlada married Surya, who had two sons, Baskala and Mahisha. Prahlada 
had one son only, Virochana, who became the father of Bali Maharaja. Bali 
married Asana and had 100 sons, the eldest of whom was Bana, a great 
devotee of Lord Shiva. Diti also gave birth to the 49 Maruts. None of them 
had children, but they obtained from Indra the position of controllers of 
the winds, due to their affinity for the time they spent together in the womb 
of Diti. 


The story of how Indra entered the womb of Diti is very interesting. When 
her sons Hiranyaksha and Hiranyakashipu were killed by Vishnu, Diti 


104 


Bhagavata Purana 


became angry with Indra because Vishnu always intervenes to protect the 
Devas, the administrators of the universe, against the attacks of the Asuras. 
Thus Diti decided to find a way to kill Indra, and first of all she tried to 
obtain that power by earning a special blessing from her husband Kasyapa, 
who was a great and powerful Rishi. Moved and pleased by Diti's service, 
Kasyapa promised her any boon she wished for, but he was shocked when 
she asked for a son who would be able to kill the king of the heavenly 
planets. "Alas," Kasyapa lamented, "in my delusion and attachment I 
convinced myself that my position as husband gave me the legitimate right 
to be devoutedly worshiped like God himself by my wife and the absolute 
power to grant boons to reward her faithfulness and service. This atrocious 
situation is my fault, and is due to my ignorance." 


Then he told Diti: "For one entire year you will have to observe a special 
vrata, and if any imperfection will happen, instead of a son who will kill 
Indra you will obtain a son who will be favorable to Indra. For the entire 
duration of the vrata you will carefully avoid committing any physical or 
verbal violence, pronounce curses or tell lies. You will avoid the company 
of bad people. You will not touch any impure object, cut your hair or nails, 
ot eat foods contaminated by impure substances. Do not drink water from 
your hands and do not enter the water while taking bath. Do not go out in 
the night, do not go out with your hair untied or without the required 
otnaments - indeed do not go out of the house at all, except in cases of 
important emergencies. Do not lie down with your head towards west or 
north, at sunrise or sunset, and do not go to bed without washing and 
drying your feet, without wearing any clothes or in the company of other 


women. 


Every day before dawn you will take bath, wear freshly cleaned clothes and 
suitable ornaments, and before breakfast you must offer worship to the 
cows, the brahmanas, Lakshmi Devi and Lord Vishnu, as well as to women 


who have children and are not widowed." 


Thus Diti became pregnant and went to live in an ashrama to better 
concentrate on her vrata. Indra was informed about it, and prepared a plan 
to neutralize Diti's efforts. He went to visit his aunt (as Diti is the sister of 
Aditi, Indra's mother) and remained with her, offering daily service: he 
brought flowers, fruits, roots, wood for the sacrificial fire, kusha grass, 


105 


Parama Karuna Devi 


leaves, sptouts, clay and water from the forest, always hoping she would 
break her vows at least once, which would afford him a valuable 
opportunity for action. 


One day Diti was feeling very tired and went to bed at sunset, immediately 
after eating and without washing her feet. Indra took advantage of the 
situation and while Diti was sleeping he entered her womb in a subtle form, 
determined to kill her unborn child. By using his thunderbolt, Indra 
chopped the golden and radiant embryo in seven parts, but he only 
obtained seven smaller children who immediately started to cry. Again 
Indra used his thunderbolt to cut each of those embryos in seven parts, but 
again each piece continued to live independently. Then the 49 Maruts 
addressed Indra by calling him brother, because they were together in Diti's 
womb, and Indra happily accepted their friendship. 


Diti's son was able to survive Indra's thunderbolt by dividing himself in 49 
embryos because Diti had purified herself through the meditation and 
worship offered to Vishnu for almost one year. Seeing that the Maruts were 
safe and sound, and had acquired the position of administrators of the 
universe due to Indra's friendship, Diti was very pleased and accepted the 
king of the heavenly planets as her own son. 


The story of Prahlada 


Parikshit Maharaja had been very impressed by the fact that Vishnu, the 
Supreme Personality of God, is impartial and benevolent towards all, yet he 
comes to the rescue of Indra and the Devas against the Asuras. To expand 
on this interesting issue of God's impartiality, Sukadeva repeated the 
explanation offered by Narada Rishi to Yudhisthira Maharaja on the 
occasion of the Rajasuya sacrifice he performed, and during which 
Sishupala had achieved liberation. 


Yudhisthira was amazed to see that Sishupala had merged into Krishna's 
body, because both Sishupala and Dantavakra had committed many 
offenses against Krishna, who was their cousin. Narada explained, 


106 


Bhagavata Purana 


"Conditioned souls obtain a body to experience joys and sorrows in 
material life, and because of the influence of ignorance they identify with 
this body and become attached to its relationships, as well as to the dualities 
constituted by insults and praise. On the contrary, God does not have such 
problems, because he is never touched by ignorance. He does not rejoice 
when he is praised and he does not suffer when he is insulted, and he has 
no friends or enemies. When he punishes the demons, it is only for the 


benefit of the universe and all the living beings." 


Narada revealed to Yudhisthira that Sishupala and Dantavakra originally 
were two door guards at Vaikuntha, named Jaya and Vijaya, and had already 
appeared as Hiranyaksha and Hiranyakashipu, killed respectively by the 
avataras Varaha and Nrisimha. Later they had appeared again as Ravana and 
Kumbhakarna to be killed by the Ramachandra avatara. Finally they had 
appeared as Sishupala and Dantavakra, and in that life they had been 
liberated by Krishna, who had killed them with his Sudarshana disc. 


The influence of goodness, called sattva guna, is favorable to the protection 
and preservation of the universe, which is the function of the Devas. Such 
protection is required to allow the evolution of the living beings. The very 
existence of the universe rests on the three gwnas, the three qualities of 
material nature: saftva is needed to maintain and protect, rajas to create, and 
tamas to destroy. Sattva favors the Devas, rajas favors the Asuras and famas 
favors Yakshas and Rakshasas, although all these are actually spiritual 
beings who are wearing different types of bodies. 


Narada then told the story of how Vishnu had appeared as the man-lion 
avatara to kill the Asura Hiranyakashipu and protect little Prahlada, who had 
been severely persecuted because of his devotion to God. Full of anger on 
the account of the killing of his brother Hiranyaksha, Hiranyakashipu had 
called all the Danavas and Daityas to assembly and declared that he would 
kill Vishnu, who had become partial towards the Devas because they 
worshiped him. Hiranyakasipu said, "When the root of a tree is destroyed, 
the entire tree perishes. In the same way by defeating Vishnu we will be able 
to destroy the Devas. While I go pursuing Vishnu, you will descend to earth 
and eliminate all those who feed Vishnu through the performance of 
sacrifices and austerities, the study of Vedic scriptures and the furthering of 
brahminical culture. Devastate all those places where the cows and the 


107 


Parama Karuna Devi 


brabmanas ate protected, where the varnashrama dharma is sincerely followed 


and where vegetarian foods are produced." 


Thrilled with enthusiasm, the Asuras fondly engaged in their destruction 
campaign and rampaged over cities, agricultural fields, forests, gardens, 
mines of useful metals and bridges, so that the lives of people became 
completely upset and the ritual ceremonies for Vishnu and the Devas were 


abandoned. 


Hiranyakashipu pacified his mother Diti and the wife of Hiranyaksha, 
named Rushabhanu, as well as his sons Sakuni, Sambara, Dhrishti, 
Bhutasantapana, Vrika, Kalanabha, Mahanabha, Harismashru and Utkacha, 
reminding them that it is a glorious death to fall fighting against a worthy 
opponent, and that the soul never dies but continues its journey after a brief 
period in one particular body. The soul feels that it is going through 
changes, but that is merely an impression, just like when we see the trees 
move along the river bank while we travel in a boat. Because of this illusory 
impression, the eternal and transcendental soul believes it is the temporary 
body it is wearing, and makes distinctions between those it sees as relatives 
and all the others. But such illusion is not harmless, and in fact it creates 
much suffering. To better illustrate these points, Hiranyakashipu narrated 
the story of Suyajna, the king of Usinara, who had been killed in battle. All 
his relatives had come to the battlefield to mourn him, especially his wives, 
and the queens were so desperate that Yamaraja himself appeared in the 
form of a child to offer them the transcendental knowledge that goes 
beyond death. 


Yamaraja said, "I am only a little boy, but you adults are more confused 
than me, yet you should have more experience about the world. Everyone, 
without exceptions, is born and dies, so why lament so much? In spite of 
my young age and my poor strength, I was able to survive even after the 
death of my parents, because God can protect us everywhere as he is 
omnipotent. Sometimes we happen to lose some money in the street, where 
everybody can see it, yet we are able to find it again. However, when destiny 
wants us to lose that money, we will lose it even if it is locked inside the 
house. In the same way, according to the will of God, we can survive in the 
jungle without any protection, or die in our own home surrounded by 
friends and family who are willing to do anything to save us. 


108 


Bhagavata Purana 


The body we have is not different from the house where we live, and with 
which we identify ourselves. It is made of material elements, too, and 
therefore it is destined to fall apart. This person you are mourning and 
calling Suyajna used to hear your voices and reply, but he cannot do that 
any more. Why? In truth, you have never really seen the person who was 
hearing and replying, and who has gone away now. What you are 
accustomed to see is the body, and the body is still here in front of you - it 
has not gone anywhere. Those who have the knowledge of spiritual 
realization know that the soul is eternal, and therefore they are not 
overwhelmed by grief in front of death, but it is very difficult to give good 
advice to those who are deeply immersed in illusion. 


In the forest, a hunter caught the female of a Rudinga bird. Her companion 
saw her cry, entangled in the mesh, and realized he was unable to help her. 
He remembered their helpless and hungry children waiting in the nest, and 
cried with his wife until the hunter killed him with an arrow. What is the 
point of crying? You can sit here and lament for hundreds of years, yet you 
will not be able to bring your relative back to life, and in the meantime your 
life will be wasted as well." 


After pacifying his family, Hiranyakashipu busied himself planning his 
battle against Vishnu. To begin with, he had to protect himself from death 
and physical decay due to old age, and to conquer the entire universe up to 
Brahmaloka. So he went to the valley of mount Mandara and started to 
perform great austerities in a very uncomfortable position, standing 
perfectly still with arms raised to the sky. Soon the power of his 
determination produced a great heat, fire and smoke that suffocated the 
planets. Disturbed, the Devas went to seek help from Brahma, who decided 
to offer a boon to Hiranyakashipu to put an end to his austerities. 


When Brahma arrived on the spot, Hiranyakashipu's body had been 
covered by an ant-hill and the insects had devoured his flesh. For the grace 
of Brahma, Hiranyakashipu's body was regenerated, stronger and more 
powerful than before, and after offering his prayers to the highest 
administrator of the universe, the Asura asked him for the boon of 
immortality. Brahma granted him that he would not be killed by any of his 
creatures - human beings or animals - or by any weapon, indoors or 
outdoors, during day or night, on land or in the sky. 


109 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Emboldened by his success, Hiranyakashipu focused on the conquest of the 
universe. He installed himself in the wonderful palace of Indra and forced 
all the Devas (except Vishnu, Shiva and Brahma), the Gandharvas and the 
Rishis to offer him homage and worship. The only one who could not be 
convinced in any way to worship Hiranyakashipu was one of his own sons, 
Prahlada, who was a great devotee of Vishnu. During the time when 
Hiranyakashipu was engaged in his severe austerities, his wife, already 
pregnant with little Prahlada, had escaped from the palace out of fear of an 
attack by the Devas, and had taken shelter with Narada Muni until her 
husband came back. While she was in the ashrama, the queen had often 
listened to the spiritual discourses by Narada, and the child in her womb 
had developed a deep devotion for the Supreme Personality of God. 


At the age of five, little Prahlada was sent to the school of the two sons of 
Sukracharya - Sanda and Amarka - who made all efforts to educate him in 
the life ideals of the Asuras, but without any success. In fact, Prahlada often 
took advantage of the temporary absence of the teachers to instruct his 
school friends on devotional service to God and transcendental science, 
encouraging them not to waste even a moment of their short lives in sense 
gratification and the accumulation of possessions. 


Hiranyakashipu was not happy at all to see that Prahlada had become a 
devotee of his greatest enemy, Vishnu, and tried in many ways to kill him, 
but without success. The weapons used against the child's tender body had 
no effect, the elephants that were meant to crush him simply stepped over 
him, the poison administered to him turned into nectar, and when they 
threw him from a precipice, Prahlada gently floated down to the ground 


without any damage. 


Frustrated at the sight of the serenity and determination of that child, 
Hiranyakashipu finally asked him how he could become so powerful, and 
from where his strength was coming. Prahlada answered that all powers in 
the entire universe derive from Vishnu, who is omnipresent. 


When Hiranyakashipu challenged him, asking whether Vishnu was also 
present within the pillars of his royal hall, Prahlada candidly confirmed so. 
Furious, the king of the Asuras hit one of the pillars to vent his anger, but 
from inside the pillar came a terrifying sound, that seems to crack the very 
covering of the universe. Then from the pillar emerged a wonderful form, 


110 


Bhagavata Purana 


half man and half lion - the avatara of Vishnu known as Nrisimha. Vishnu 
roared again: his gigantic and terrible form expressed immense anger, his 
open jaws showed pointed fangs; he had a resplendent mane and thousands 


of arms holding innumerable weapons. 


Hiranyakashipu rushed to fight against Vishnu like a moth rushes towards 
the fire, but after playing a bit with the Asura, Vishnu carried him to the 
threshold of the palace - which was neither indoors nor outdoors - and 
holding him on his lap, he tore him apart with his own fingernails. It was 
dusk, therefore it was neither day nor night, and the amazing form of the 


Lord was neither man nor animal or any other creature of Brahma's. 


After dispersing the armies of the Asuras, Nrisimha Vishnu received the 
prayers and praises of all the Devas, and blessed his devotee Prahlada. 


The varnashrama dharma system 


Sukadeva continued to narrate to Parikshit the conversation between 
Narada Rishi and Yudhisthira (Parikshit's grand uncle) on the occasion of 
the Rajasuya sacrifice performed by the king. Maharaja Yudhisthira took the 
opportunity of Narada's visit to ask him how society should be organized, 
and Narada explained him in detail the varnashrama dharma system and the 


specific duties of each category of people. 


The general principles that all human beings should observe are, in order of 
importance: truthfulness, compassion, austerity, cleanliness, tolerance, 
ability to distinguish good from evil, control of one's mind and senses, 
benevolence towards all beings, charity, study of the scriptures, simplicity 
and gradual detachment from all unnecessary things, both at physical and 
verbal level. Furthermore, one should see all beings as parts of God and 
make efforts to overcome one's identification with the material body, 
remember God's instructions and develop a spiritual relationship with God 


through worship and loving service. 


111 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Those who ate twice born, who have received the initiation to the three 
highest social categories such as brabmanas, kshatriyas and vaisyas, have the 
precise duty to perform the prescribed samskaras and actively practice 
religious activities, going through the four stages of personal life called 


ashramas. 


A brabmana has six specific duties: to accept charity and distribute it to those 
who need it, to study and teach the knowledge contained in the scriptures, 
and to perform the ritual ceremonies both for himself and for others. A 
kshatriya does not beg for alms, but can perform the other five activities 
mentioned before; besides, he can collect taxes (but not from brahmanas). 
Vaisyas engage in trade, agriculture, protection of cows and general 
entrepreneurship, while svdras can become servants of someone who is a 


brahmana, kshatriya ot vaisya. 


In case of need, a brabmana can earn his livelihood with the activities that 
are characteristic of the vaisyas, or beg alms or collect the agricultural 
products left behind in the fields or in the market places at the end of a 
work day. This activity is much more respectable than entering the service 
of sudras or materialistic and degraded persons. The characteristics by which 
one can recognize a brabmana are truthfulness, knowledge, cleanliness, self- 
control, austerity and simplicity of life, compassion and kindness, and 
complete surrender to the Supreme Personality of God. 


The characteristics by which one can recognize a &shatriya are valor in 
battle, determination and courage, patience, charity and forgiveness, the 
ability to control the needs of one's body, truthfulness and sense of humor. 
The characteristics by which one can recognize a vaisya are sincere effort 
and sense of responsibility in working, the ability to learn, the ability to 
develop natural resources making them fructify. A vaisya is respectful 
towards the Devas, the gwrv and the Supreme Lord, and always strives to 
support the religious principles. 


A good sudra is respectful, clean, sincere and honest. He does not steal and 
always tries to protect the cows and the brabmanas from any aggression. A 
faithful wife assists her husband in his material and spiritual duties and is 
kind with the husband's family and friends. She engages in keeping the 
house clean and tidy, and creating a pleasing environment for the family. 


112 


Bhagavata Purana 


The four stages of personal life, called ashramas, start with the celibate 
student life in the family of the Guru. The student, called brabmachari (‘one 
who acts as Brahman"), must practice controlling his senses, carefully 
follow the instructions and humbly serve the teacher. At the two main 
passages of the day - sunrise and sunset - he must meditate on Guru, Fire, 
Sun and Vishnu, reciting the Gayatri mantra. Under the guidance of the guru 
he must sincerely study the Vedic scriptures, go out collecting donations, 
and eat only when the guru gives him permission to do so. He must also 
obsetve the vow of sexual continence, by which one restricts the 
opportunities of company with women and people interested in women, he 
avoids to pamper and decorate one's body attractively, and follows a 
specific diet to help control his senses. These rules also apply to the 
subsequent ashramas, except for the grihastha ("who lives at home") ashrama 
ot family life, by which a married man has a license to indulge in material 
pleasures for the purpose of generating worthy children. 


The ashrama by which one leaves family life to engage in austerity is called 
vanaprastha (‘who tesides in the forest"). A vanaprastha must follow celibacy 
tules and an even stricter diet than a brabmachari. He can build a hut of mud 
and straw for himself or use a natural cave as a shelter, but only to maintain 
the sacrificial fire, and he should be ready to expose himself to the harsh 
weather as a form of austerity. He must never take care of his body, and he 
will let hair, beard and fingernails grow. He can wear clothes made of tree 
bark or a simple dress of the color of the fire. He must retire in the forest in 
a solitary place for a period of 12, 8, 4, 2 years or at least one year, and 
engage in austerity as much as possible. When old age or disease make him 
incapable of performing the prescribed spiritual activities, he must observe 
fasting. In this way the vanaprastha gradually attains detachment from the 
material body. 


A person who is expert in spiritual knowledge may enter the ashrama known 
as sannyasa, that consists in abandoning all material relationships and totally 
neglecting one's body and attire. A sannyasi ("who is renounced") can only 
own a walking staff and a water container, although it is not compulsory to 
keep them. He must renounce all residence, constantly traveling all over the 
world and stopping only for one night in each village, living on alms 
without depending on any particular person or place, but behaving in a 


benevolent way towards all beings. He must not try to get disciples or give 


113 


Parama Karuna Devi 


lectures or courses for a fee, or accumulate money in any way. A sannyasi 
who returns to materialistic activities and sense gratification, who gives 
importance to the body and identifies with it, is considered a rascal and an 
extremely degraded person. Similarly, it is abominable for a brabmachari not 
to follow the rules established by the guru, for a gribastha not to sincerely 
perform his duties, and for a vanaprasha to live in a city or a village engaging 
in social life. 


During his journeys, Prahlada Maharaja met a great saint who had 
renounced everything. On the bank of the Kaveri river, near the mount 
Sahya, lived this python sage, who always remained lying on the ground, 
covered with dust. Nobody among his previous friends and relatives would 
be able to recognize him. After offering his homage, Prahlada expressed his 
surprise in seeing that the body of the sage was definitely fat, like the body 
of a materialist who engages in sense gratification, eating, drinking, sleeping 
and not doing any work. 


The python sage gladly answered that question. "In the course of evolution, 
the soul obtains a human body, that enables us to attain the heavenly 
planets or liberation, and also to give us another human birth or to 
precipitate us into the lower species. In the human form of life, men and 
women unite because they seek sense pleasures, but in my experience 
nobody finds happiness in this way, and so I have given up patticipating to 
materialistic activities. 


All living beings constantly try to attain happiness and become free from 
the causes of suffering, but because they ignore that true happiness and 
satisfaction can be found only at the spiritual level, sooner or later all their 
plans fail. Even if for a certain period of time they attain success, they 
nonetheless remain subject to disease, old age, death, rebirth, and the 
consequences of their own actions. Think of a wealthy man, who has 
accumulated a lot of money to gratify his senses: he has trouble sleeping at 
night because he is tormented by the fear that his possessions will be taken 
away by someone - thieves, enemies, animals, or even his own family 
members. And in the end he will lose his possessions anyway because of the 
time factor. Why then one should take so much pain in trying to acquire 
prestige and money that we do not really need? That is the surest way to 
come to fear, anger, attachment, fatigue and sadness. 


114 


Bhagavata Purana 


I have learned from the bumblebees and the pythons to be content with 
whatever I find without too much effort. Sometimes I eat very little, 
sometimes I eat much, depending on what destiny brings me. Sometimes 
the food is delicious, sometimes it is old and stale, sometimes it is offered 
respectfully, and sometimes I pick up what has been discarded by others. 
Sometimes I eat in the day, sometimes at night, without worrying too much. 
To cover my body I use whatever I can find - silk, cotton or tree bark - and 
I am always happy about it. Sometimes I sleep on the ground, sometimes 
on leaves or grass, on stones or ashes, and when it happens, even on costly 
beds with soft pillows. Sometimes I travel like a king, sometimes I walk 
alone and naked like a person possessed by a ghost. Different people have 
different mentalities: it is not my job to praise or criticize them. I only wish 
them well." 


The conversation between Maharaja Yudhisthira and Narada Rishi then 
turned on how a family man can attain liberation and the perfection of life 
while still living in his own home. "A family man must honestly work to 
earn a livelihood," Narada explained, "and offer the results of his work to 
the Supreme Personality of God. To learn how to practice this principle, 
one needs to keep company with saintly persons and regularly listen to the 
activities of the Lord and his avataras described in the Bhagavata and in the 
other Puranas. In this way one becomes gradually free from attachment to 
one's wife and children, although externally he continues to carefully 
perform all his duties." 


A family man is kind with animals because they are innocent like children, 
and refrains from committing any bad action. He is also concerned about 
the well being of the degraded and untouchable people and the street dogs, 
and so much more he cares for guests and travelers. Every day he must 
perform the five sacrifices, offering respect and worship to the Supreme 
Lord in the form of the Devas, saints, human beings and all the other living 
beings in general, because the Supreme Soul resides in the hearts of 
everyone. This is done most prominently through the distribution of 
prasada, strictly vegetarian food that has become sanctified by offering it to 
the Deity. According to his financial possibilities, a family man must offer 
oblations to the ancestors in the waning moon fortnight of the month of 
Bhadra, and to the relatives of the ancestors during the rituals of Mahalaya 


in the month of Asvina. He must perform the sraddha rituals at Makara 


115 


Parama Karuna Devi 


sankranti or Karkata sankranti, Mesha or Tula sankranti, during a solar or 
lunar eclipse, on the day of dvadasi, on the day of Akshaya tritiya, in swk/a 
navami in the month of Kartika, on the full moon day and in other 
auspicious days. Ritual ceremonies may be performed in any place where a 
devotee of Vishnu lives, and especially in a temple where the Deity of the 
Lord is installed. Auspicious are all those places where expert brabmanas 
observe the Vedic principles of austerity, study and compassion, and near 
the sacred rivers described in the Puranas - at Pushkara, Kurukshetra, Gaya, 
Prayaga, Pulaha ashrama, Naimisharanya, Setubandha, Prabhasa, Dvaraka, 
Varanasi, Mathura, Bindu-sarovara, Badarika ashrama, and in the places 
where Ramachandra and mother Sita lived during their exile. 


One who wants to learn to control his mind and senses must abandon the 
luxuries of family life and settle in a sacred place to practice yoga. Sitting in 
a comfortable posture, his back straight, the yogi must practice gradual 
control of breathing, until he is able to stop it. This will enable him to 
detach himself from material desires and control his mind, making it stable 
and peaceful like a fire without flame and smoke. According to the Vedas, 
there are two types of activities, defined as pravritti and nivritti. Pravritt is the 
action that elevates the human being to a better condition, while mvrittt 
leads to the extinction of material desires. Pravritti includes the performance 
of ritual ceremonies and the sacrifices known as agni hotra, darsha, purnamasa, 
chaturmasya, pashu, soma, baliharana, as well as the building of temples, resting 
homes and gardens, public wells to draw water, centers for the distribution 
of food and so on. When such virtuous activities are purified by the 
offering of their results to the Supreme Personality of God, they become 
instruments to attain liberation and the perfection of life. 


After explaining all this to Yudhisthira Maharaja, Narada Rishi took leave 
and started again to travel around the universe. 


The story of Gajendra 


Sukadeva had already described to Maharaja Parikshit the dynasty of 
Svayambhuva Manu, and then he started to speak about the other Manus. 


116 


Bhagavata Purana 


In this present day of Brahma there have already been six Manus, of whom 
the first was Svayambhuva. The two daughters of Svayambhuva, Akuti and 
Devahuti, gave birth respectively to Yajna and Kapila, two manifestations 
of the Supreme Personality of God, who is eternal and transcendental, and 
has no beginning or end. Yajna protected Svayambhuva from the attack of 
the Rakshasas and took the position of Indra as king of the heavenly 
planets. 


The second Manu was Svarocisha, the son of Agni. He had many sons, 
among whom Dyumat, Sushena and Rocismat. During his reign, the 
position of Indra was assigned to Rochana, son of Yajna, the Tushitas 
became the main Devas and the position of the seven Rishis was taken by 
Urja, Stambha and their companions. In this period there was the 
appearance of the avatara Vibhu, son of Vedashira Rishi. Vibhu remained a 
brahmachari for his entire life and became the spiritual guide of 88,000 sages, 
who learned self-control and austerity from him. 


The third Manu, Uttama, was the son of Priyavrata. He had many sons, 
including Pavana, Srinjaya and Yajnahotra. During the reign of this Manu, 
Satyajit was chosen as Indra, the king of the heavenly planets; the 
Satyavratas, Vedasrutas and Bhadras became the Devas, and the sons of 
Vasistha became the seven Rishis. In this period there was the appearance 
of the avatara Satyasena, son of Dharma, to cooperate with the Devas (then 
called Satyavratas) to defeat the Asuras. 


The fourth Manu was Tamasa, brother of the previous Manu, Uttama. He 
had ten sons, including Prithu, Khyati, Nara and Ketu. During his reign, 
Trishika became Indra; the Satyakas, Haris, Viras, and Vadhritis became the 
Devas, and the seven Rishis were the companions of Jyotirdhama. In this 
period there was the appearance of the avafara Hari, the son of Harimedha 
and Harini. Hari saved Gajendra, the king of the elephants, who had been 
attacked by a crocodile. 


The mentioning of that story awakened the interest of Maharaja Parikshit, 
and Sukadeva agreed to branch out the conversation again, to narrate how 
Gajendra had been saved by Vishnu. 


Sukadeva said, "On the heavenly planets, in the middle of the milk ocean, 
there is a mountain 10,000 yojanas high, called Trikuta because it has three 


117 


Parama Karuna Devi 


main peaks, made respectively of iton, silver and gold. Also the other 
mountain peaks are rich in minerals and valuable gems, and decorated with 
trees, bushes and creepers, waterfalls and beautiful caves that are the 
playing grounds of the heavenly beings. Their valleys are delightful gardens 
with many animals and especially birds. There are many lakes and rivers, 
with beaches covered with small gems that look like sand grains. The water 
is crystal clear, perfumed by the scent of the bodies of the Apsaras who 
bathe there. In one of these gardens, called Ritumat and belonging to 
Varuna, there is a veritable collection of trees and bushes carrying flowers 
and fruits, and a great lake full of golden lotus flowers and other rare and 
wonderful plants, that are the joy of many honey bees." 


There lived Gajendra, a great and powerful king of elephants. One day 
Gajendra was attacked by a crocodile while he was taking bath in the lake. 
In spite of his huge strength, the elephant was unable to free his leg, that 
had been bitten, and struggled in vain for a very long time. Gradually his 
strength started to wean, while the crocodile, who was in its element, 
became even more determined to drag his big victim into the deep water. 
Realizing that he had no more hopes, Gajendra called out for Vishnu, the 
Supreme Personality of God, completely surrendering to him, and stopped 
fighting. With his trunk, he picked up a lotus flower and offering it to the 
Lord together with beautiful prayers. Lord Vishnu, carried by Garuda, 
instantly appeared in front of Gajendra, and pulled both the elephant of the 
crocodile out of the water, then by his Sudarshana disc he cut off the 
crocodile's head, thus delivering Gajendra. All the heavenly beings 
celebrated the rescuing of Gajendra and the appearance of the Lord, 
including the crocodile who had returned to his original form as the king of 
Gandharvas. Gajendta, too, became free from his elephant's form and 
attained the liberation called sarupya muku, taking a spiritual form similar to 
Vishnu's, in which he was elevated to Vaikuntha. 


In his previous lifetime, Gajendra had been a king in the Pandya province 
in south India, and was known as Indradyumna Maharaja. When he had 
retired from family life, the king had gone to the Malaya hills to engage in 
meditation on Vishnu. One day, while the king was engaged in a silence 
vow, Agastya Muni arrived with his disciples, and because the king failed to 
welcome him according to the custom, the Rishi cursed him to take a new 
birth as a stupid elephant. 


118 


Bhagavata Purana 


After narrating this story, Sukadeva continued to speak about the series of 
the Manus. The fifth Manu was Raivata, brother of Tamasa, who had many 
sons including Arjuna, Bali and Vindhya. Under his reign, Vibhu became 
Indra, the Bhutamyas became the Devas, and among the seven Rishis the 
most prominent were Hiranyaroma, Vedasira and Urdhvabahu. Lord 
Vishnu appeated as Vaikuntha, the son of Subhra and his wife Vikuntha, 
and created a new Vaikuntha planet in this universe. 


The sixth Manu was Chakshusa, son of Chakshu. He had many sons, 
including Puru, Purusha and Sudyumna. Under his reign, Mantradruma 
became Indra and the Apyas became the administrator Devas of the 
universe, while among the seven Rishis the most prominent were Havisman 
and Viraka. In this period Lord Vishnu appeared as Ajita, son of Vairaja 
and his wife Devasambhuti, and produced the nectar for the Devas. The 
Lord took the form of a tortoise (Kurma) and supported mount Mandara 
on his back to be used as a churning stick for the milk ocean. This also 
awakened a keen interest in king Parikshit, who begged Sukadeva to 
elaborate on the story, explaining in details what had happened. 


"This story begins when, during a battle between Devas and Asuras, many 
of the Devas fell and perished, having lost their stamina and power because 
of a cutse by Durvasa Muni. Indra, Varuna and the other Devas were 
worried, so they approached Brahma to ask for his help, and accompanied 
by him they went to Svetadvipa, the abode of Vishnu, situated within the 
milk ocean called Kshirodaka. Brahma and the Devas offered praise and 
prayers to the Lord, who is the origin of everything and lives in the hearts 
of all beings. 


"All the Devas are limbs of your transcendental body," Brahma said. "The 
entire universe is God's body. Chandra is his mind, and gives the life juices 
to plants. Agni is his mouth, and carries the oblations to the Devas, and he 
also exists in the depths of the ocean and in the abdomen of the living 
beings, where he digests the foods. Surya is God's eye, and shows the path 
to liberation. Vayu is his breath, and supports all beings in the form of their 
life air. Indra was created from the power of God, Shiva from his wrath, 
Brahma from his intelligence, and Lakshmi from his breast." 


Lord Vishnu, evoked by the prayers of Brahma and the Devas, appeared 
before them in his resplendent and wonderful form, and advised the Devas 


119 


Parama Karuna Devi 


to arrange a truce with the Asuras, because the time was not favorable for a 
victory. As they needed to obtain the nectar of immortality to bring back to 
life their fallen warriors, the Devas had to churn the milk ocean with the 
help of the Asuras. 


The nectar of immortality 


Thus the Devas approached Bali Maharaja, the powerful king of the Asuras, 
to ask for truce, and Bali accepted the proposal. Bali, the son of Virochana, 
son of Hiranyakashipu, had already conquered the entire universe and 
therefore he had nothing to fear and nothing to lose. Even Sambara and 
Aristanemi, the main dignitaries of the city of Tripura, voted in favor of the 


truce, and everybody got busy to produce the nectar of immortality. 


First of all they uprooted mount Mandara and started to carry it to the 
ocean of milk, with great effort because it was very heavy. At some point 
the mountain slipped and fell, crushing many of those who were supporting 
it. Vishnu himself immediately healed all those who had been wounded, and 
by raising the mountain with one hand, he put it on Garuda's back and 
cattied it to destination. As soon as Garuda had taken leave from the Lord, 
the Asuras called the king of the serpents, Vasuki, to become the rope for 
churning the mountain around. 


Lord Vishnu, in the form of the avatara Ajita, grabbed the head of Vasuki, 
followed by all the Devas. The Asuras complained, saying that they had 
been assigned to the tail, which was the lower par of the serpent, so they 
wanted to switch. Immediately the Lord granted their wish, knowing that 
the flames and smoke emitted by Vasuki's mouth under the immense effort 


would cause much suffering to anyone who was holding the head. 


Next they needed a support on which mount Mandara could rotate freely 
without sinking into the ocean; the Lord then took the form of Kurma, the 
avatara tortoise, and supported the mountain on his own shell, enjoying the 
movement that gently scratched its back. Then the Lord manifested in the 


Devas as sativa, in the Asuras as raas and in Vasuki as famas, inspiring 


120 


Bhagavata Purana 


everyone to engage in that amazing work. He also took a form with 
thousands of arms, and sat on the top of the mount Mandara to keep it in 
position with one hand. Then Devas and Asuras began to churn the great 
ocean of milk, and Ajita descended to help them. That movement disturbed 
all the aquatic animals and produced at first a very powerful poison called 
halahala or kalakuta. Scared, the Devas approached Lord Shiva begging for 
his help. 


They said, "O Lord, you are the Supreme Soul of all the living beings and 
can grant them liberation, therefore those who are evolved in spiritual 
awareness surrender to you. O Sadashiva, you have produced this material 
world through your personal energy, and you take the names of Brahma, 
Vishnu and Mahesvara for its creation, maintenance and destruction. O 
cause of all causes, you arte the imperishable Brahman, that cannot be 
comprehended even by Brahma, Vishnu or Indra. You are the original 
source of the Vedic scriptures, eternal time, determination and the path of 
religion that consists in truthfulness. You are the shelter of the sacred 
syllable Om. We pray you, please save us from this poison." 


Lord Shiva agreed to help the Devas, and because there was no other way 
to eliminate the poison, he decided to swallow it. The terrible power of the 
poison merely left a bluish discoloration on the Lord's throat, and this 
became one of his most glorious ornaments because it reminds us of his 
compassion towards all beings and of his spirit of sacrifice. Some drops of 
the poison fell on the ground and were in turn drunk by cobras, scorpions 
and other venomous animals, and absorbed by toxic plants. 


Devas and Asuras again started to churn the milk ocean enthusiastically, 
and at that time appeared the cow Surabhi, who produces unlimited 
quantities of milk, yogurt and clarified butter, that are required for the 
oblations to the fire. The great sages took Surabhi under their protection. 


Next appeared the horse Ucchaihsrava, as white as the moon, who was 
claimed by Bali Maharaja, and the elephant Airavata, who went to Indra, the 
king of the heavenly planets together with his eight female elephant 
companions. Then the ocean produced the two valuable gems known as 
Kaustubha and Padmaraga, that were claimed by Vishnu. The milk ocean 
also produced the heavenly tree called Parijata and the dancers of the 
heavenly planets called Apsaras. 


121 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Next appeared Lakshmi, the Goddess of fortune, who was welcomed with 
great honor and worshiped by all the Devas. All the holy rivers brought 
water for her installation, earth brought all the required medicinal herbs, the 
cows contributed their products and spring itself offered all the flowers. 
The Rishis performed the bathing ceremony, while Gandharvas and 
Apsatras sang and danced, and the clouds themselves played drums, horns 
and conchshells to express joy. The elephants who protect the four 
directions of the world carried great pots of water from the Ganges, the 
Ocean offered a dress consisting in two pieces, Varuna gave wonderful 
garlands, Visvakarma many ornaments, Sarasvati a necklace, Brahma a lotus 
flower, and the Nagas gave earrings. After the welcome ceremony, Lakshmi 
chose Vishnu as her consort, placing the garland around his neck. The 
Asuras were disappointed, but they consoled themselves when Varuni 


appeared and accepted their company. 


After Varuni, Dhanvantari appeared, with a black complexion and holding a 
pitcher full of nectar. Dhanvantari, emanation of Vishnu, is the father of 
medicine, and as a Deva, he is offered oblations in sacrifice. On seeing the 
nectar, the Asuras rushed to grab the pitcher and snatched it from 
Dhanvantari. The Lord reassured the Devas, saying that the Asuras would 
soon start to quarrel among themselves to decide who would drink the 
nectar first. 


Then Lord Vishnu took the form of a woman of an overwhelming beauty, 
named Mohini. Her complexion was as radiant as a fresh blue lotus flower, 
and her voluptuous body emanated a very sweet scent that attracted honey 
bees. Dressed and decorated attractively, Mohini smiled at the Asuras, who 
forgot everything else, and when they approached her, she started to play 
and tease them in a coquettish way. In the end the Asuras, completely 
conquered by her charm, decided to hand over the nectar pitcher to 
Mohini, asking her to choose how to distribute its content. 


All the Devas and Asuras went to purify themselves before sitting down in 
a tow to receive their share. Mohini had no intention to distribute the 
nectar to the Asuras, because they are always engaged in creating problems 
to the universe, therefore she asked Devas and Asuras to sit in two separate 
rows, and started to pour the nectar for the Devas. Afraid of irritating her, 
the Asuras did not protest and did not try to prevent her actions. Only 


122 


Bhagavata Purana 


Rahu, the son of Simhika, the Asura who causes the solar and lunar 
eclipses, disguised himself as a Deva and went to sit between Surya and 
Chandra. However, the Sun and the Moon recognized him, and Mohini 
called the Sudarshana disc and cut off Rahu's head. Because the nectar had 
not gone beyond the throat of the Asura, only the head survived, and 
became one of the planets. When the Devas had finished drinking the 
nectar, Mohini again manifested the form of Vishnu and the Asuras realized 
they had been tricked. Full of anger, they immediately rushed into battle 
against the Devas. The king of the Asuras, Maharaja Bali, was fighting from 
his wonderful airplane called Vaihayasa, that had been built by Maya 
Danava and equipped with all kinds of weapons and an optical 
dissimulation device that made it invisible. All the Asuras came to fight, 
eager to avenge themselves of the bad turn they had suffered; some were 
tiding buffaloes, sarabhas, arunas, rhinoceroses, bulls, jackals, boars, deers, 
rams, vulture, eagles or “mingilas. 


Indra was riding on his elephant Airavata, who has the power to go 
anywhere and always carries a store of water. The other Devas were fighting 
from their airplanes and decorated vehicles. In the melee, the warriors 
clashed in couples and groups, using maces, swords, spears, and the 
weapons known as bhusundi, chakra, rishti, pattisha, shakti, ulmuka, prasa, 
parasvadha, nistrimsha, parigha, mudgara and bhindipala. 


The ground trembled under the feet of the fighters, and the dust raised by 
them was so high as to obscure the sun. The battlefield was scattered with 
severed limbs and fallen bodies, and many ornaments dtopped in the 
clashes. Bali launched ten arrows simultaneously against Indra and three 
more against his elephant, four against the horsemen who protected the 
elephant's legs, and one against his driver. Indra counterattacked with as 
many atrows of the bhalla type, extremely sharp, and destroyed Bali's 
weapons while they were still soaring. Then Bali grabbed a shakit, a fire 
weapon that burns like a torch, but Indra destroyed it instantly. Every time 
Bali chose a new weapon, Indra cut it to pieces even before he could throw 
it. 


The king of the Asuras then decided to resort to magical weapons. First he 
created a huge mountain that appeared directly over the heads of the Devas, 
showering them with burning tree trunks, razor-sharp rocks, snakes, big 


123 


Parama Karuna Devi 


scorpions, elephants, lions, tigers and boars that devastated the ranks of the 
heavenly army. Hundreds of cannibal Rakshasas, naked and armed with 
tridents, appeared on the battlefield screaming in rage and accompanied by 
a roaring fire, as terrible as the Samvartaka that destroys the entire universe 
at the end of its manifestation cycle. Then gigantic waves appeared to 


sweep everything away. 


The Devas were unable to neutralize those phenomena, and despairing 
before the imminent defeat, they approached Vishnu begging for help. As 
soon as the Lord appeared on the battlefield, the magical tricks created by 
the Asuras disappeared. One of the Asuras, Kalanemi, attempted to attack 
Vishnu by throwing his trident against Garuda, but Vishnu immediately 
snatched the weapon and threw it back against his aggressor, killing 
Kalanemi and his lion carrier. Then Vishnu used his disc to kill the Asuras 
named Mali, Sumali and Malyavan, encouraging the Devas to resume 
fighting valiantly. 


Bali Maharaja appeared again on the battlefield and Indra attacked him with 
his Vajra, the thunderbolt weapon, throwing him to the ground. 
Jambhasura rushed to help his king and dealt two powerful blows with his 
mace, one to Indra's shoulder and one to his elephant, who collapsed to the 
ground senseless. Indra's charioteer, Matali, rushed in bringing his chariot in 
spite the wound he suffered from the fire trident thrown to him by 
Jambhasura, and then Indra hurled the thunderbolt against Jambhasura, 
beheading him. The friends of Jambhasura - Namuci, Bala and Paka - 
tushed to avenge him: Bala threw 1,000 arrows simultaneously against 
Indra's horses, Paka sent 200 arrows against Matali and the chariot, and 
Namuci was able to wound Indra with 15 very powerful arrows with golden 
feathers, that roared like hurricanes. Disentangling himself from the cage of 
arrows, Indra replied by killing Bala and Paka with his thunderbolt, cut 
Namuci's wonderful spear to pieces and then hit his neck to decapitate him. 
However, to his great surprise, he found that the mighty Vajra that had 
killed Vritrasura easily could not even scratch Namuci's neck skin. After 
reflecting on the problem, Indra followed a divine inspiration and used a 
foam weapon that was able to knock down the Asura. 


Now the Asura army was retreating, and on Narada's request the Devas 
stopped their pursuit, allowing them to take Maharaja Bali to safety to the 


124 


Bhagavata Purana 


Astagiri hill. There Sukracharya, the priest of the Asuras, used the Sanjivani 
mantra to bring back to life Bali and all the Asuras who had fallen on the 
battlefield but had not been seriously mutilated. 


At the end of the battle Shiva went to meet Vishnu, eager to see his 
feminine form. After offering his homage and praise, recognizing his 
supreme power and totally transcendental position, Shiva asked him to 
manifest the form of Mohini, as she must have been the most charming 
woman that ever existed. Vishnu smiled and granted that wish. 


Looking around, Shiva saw some movement in a nearby forest: suddenly a 
most beautiful woman came out, playing with a ball. Mohini's breasts 
slightly moved while the ball bounced, and seemed to fatigue her tiny waist 
and her soft coral-pink little feet. Her large wonderful eyes also followed 
the ball's movements, and her hair fell around her face in the enthusiasm of 
playing. Suddenly her dress slackened and her hair came loose - Mohini 
tried to gather her tresses with a hand while continuing to bounce the ball 
with her other hand. She shot a smiling shy glance at Shiva, who was 
watching her. On a gust of wind, the cloth that covered Mohini's bountiful 
graces slid off, revealing perfect beauty in all her body parts. 


Confused and overwhelmed by desire, Shiva approached Mohini and 
pursued her when she ran to hide among the trees. Grabbing her tresses, 
Shiva pulled her close and embraced her, but Mohini was able to sneak off 
graciously and escape laughing. Shiva ran after her everywhere, dropping 
sperm on the way and thus creating mines of gold and silver. When his 
desire was exhausted, Shiva became calm and was able to fully appreciate 
the inconceivable power of Yogamaya, the illusion by which the Supreme 
Personality of God binds his devotees with a variety of very strong 
sentiments and emotions. Seeing that Shiva had appreciated the experience 
and was now free from agitation and shame, Vishnu was very pleased and 
blessed him. 


After narrating the story of the nectar of immortality, Sukadeva returned to 
the subject of the various subsequent Manus in the administration of the 


universe. 


"The present Manu, Sraddhadeva, is the son of Vivasvan (Surya) and the 
seventh of the series. His sons are Ikshvaku, Nabhaga, Dhrista, Saryati, 


125 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Narishyanta, Nabhaga, Dishta, Tarusha, Prishadhra and Vasuman. Under 
his reign the Devas are the Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, Visvedevas, Maruts, the 
two Asvini kumaras and the Ribhus. The position of Indra, king of the 
heavenly planets, is occupied by Purandara. The seven Rishis are Kasyapa, 
Atri, Vasistha, Vishvamitra, Gautama, Jamadagni and Bharadvaja. In this 
age the Supreme Personality of God appears as the youngest of the Adityas, 
Vamana, son on Kasyapa and Aditi. Now I will speak about the future 
Manus. I have already explained that Vivasvan married Samjna and Chaya, 
the two daughters of Visvakarma. Samjna's children are Sraddhadeva Manu, 
Yama and Yami (the river Yamuna). The children of Chaya are Savarni 
Manu, Tapati (who married king Samvarana) and Sanaischara (planet 
Saturn). Vivasvan has a third wife, named Vadava, who became the mother 
of the Asvini kumaras." 


Savarni will become the eighth Manu. Under his reign, the Devas will be the 
Sutapas, Virajas and Amritaprabhas. Indra's post will be taken by Bali 
Maharaja, the son of Virochana, who has been the king of the Asuras. 
Vishnu went to Bali to seek an alm of three paces of land, and in this way 
he took away all the three worlds from him. Pleased by the sincere 
surrender and devotion of Bali, Vishnu blessed him and agreed to reside 
with him in Patala, that became even more wonderful than the heavenly 
planets. During the eighth Manvantara, the seven Rishis will be Galava, 
Diptimari, Parasurama, Asvatthama, Kripacharya, Rishyashringa and 
Vyasadeva, who presently lives on Earth. The Supreme Personality of God 
will appear as Sarvabhauma, the son of Devaguhya and Sarasvati, and will 
take the throne away from Purandara (the present Indra) to give it to Bali 
Maharaja. The ninth Manu will be Daksha savarni, the son of Varuna. 
Under his reign the Devas will be the Paras and Maricigarbhas, while the 
position of Indra will be occupied by Adbhuta and the seven Rishis will be 
headed by Dyutiman. The incarnation of the Supreme Personality of God 
for this age will be Rishabhadeva, the son of Ayushman and Ambudhara, 
who will assist Indra in ruling over the three worlds. The tenth Manu will 
be Brahma savarni, the son of Upasloka. Under his reign the Devas will be 
the Suvasanas and Viruddhas, the post of Indra will be taken by Sambhu, 
and among the seven Rishis there will be Havisman, Sukrita, Satya, Jaya and 
Murti. The Supreme Lord will take birth as Visvakshena, the son of 


Visvashrasta and Visuci, and will become the companion of Sambhu. 


126 


Bhagavata Purana 


The eleventh Manu, Dharma savarni, will be very learned in spiritual 
knowledge. He will have ten sons, headed by Satyadharma. The Devas will 
be the Vihangamas, Kamagamas and Nirvanarucis; Indra's post will be 
occupied by Vaidhrita, and the seven Rishis will be headed by Aruna. The 
Supreme Lord will then appear as Dharmasetu, the son of Aryaka and 
Vaidhrita, and will rule over the three worlds. The twelfth Manu will be 
Rudra savarni; among his sons will be Devavan, Upadeva and 
Devashrestha. The Devas will be the Maritas and Ritadhama will be Indra. 
The Rishis will be headed by Tapomurti, Tapasvi and Agnidhraka. The 


Lord will appear as Svadhama, the son of Satyasena and Suntita. 


Also the thirteenth Manu, Deva savarni, will have a deep spiritual 
knowledge; his sons will be headed by Citrasena and Vicitra. The Devas will 
be the Sukarmas and Sutramas, and Divaspati will be Indra. Nirmoka and 
Tattvadarsha will be among the seven Rishis. The Lord will appear as 
Yogesvara, the son of Devahotra and Brihati, and will help Indra Divaspati 
to rule the universe. The fourteenth and last Manu, Indra savarni, will be 
the father of Uru, Gambhira and Budha. The Devas will be the Pavitras and 
Chakshusas, and Suci will be Indra. The seven Rishis will he headed by 
Agni, Bahu, Suci, Suddha and Magadha. The Lord will appear as 
Brihadbhanu, the son of Satrayana and Vitana, and will teach the principles 
of religion. The total duration of the reigns of these fourteen Manus is one 
kalpa ot day of Brahma, that consists of 1,000 cycles of yagas. All the 
Manus, the Devas and the Rishis obtain their position by the order of the 
Supreme Lord and are engaged in re-establishing the principles of Dharma 
at the end of each yuga cycle. The Supreme Lord, too, directly participates to 
this mission by taking birth among the Siddhas, the human beings, the yogis 
and the Prajapatis, as for example in the case of Sanaka, Yajnavalkya, 


Dattatreya and Marici. 


The story of Vamana 


Parikshit was impressed by what Sukadeva had said regarding Bali Maharaja 
and the dwarf avatara, Vamana. "Why did the Lord, who owns the entire 


127 


Parama Karuna Devi 


universe, go to beg three paces of land from Bali, and why did he force Bali 
to remain in Patalaloka even after obtaining from him what he had asked? It 


seems strange to me." 


Then Sukadeva started to narrate in details the story of the appearance of 
the Vamana avatara. 


When Bali Maharaja had crashed with his airplane during the battle against 
the Devas, the Asura's priest Sukracharya, descendant of Brighu, had 
restored him to life and pleased with his gratitude he helped him to perform 
the ritual sacrifice known as Visvajit. From the sacrificial fire appeared a 
wonderful chariot, horses similar to Indra's, a flag with the effigy of the 
lion, a celestial armor, a bow and a quiver of infallible arrows. Bali's 
grandfather Prahlada gave him a garland of never-fading flowers, and 
Sukracharya gave him a war conchshell. Thus equipped with invincible 
weapons, Bali Maharaja gathered his army and marched on the splendid 
capital of Indra, full of wonderful gardens, palaces built with valuable gems 
and very powerful fortifications, protected by 100 million aircrafts. The 
residents of the heavenly planets, all very virtuous and well-mannered 
people, were immersed in the celestial pleasures of singing and dancing, 
enlivened by the scent of incense and the sweet breezes. On his arrival, Bali 
Maharaja blew his challenge into the war conchshell. Indra looked on the 
Asura king and his armies, and realized it would be impossible to defeat 
him. Brihaspati confirmed that the Devas would certainly lose the battle 
and advised him to immediately evacuate the city. Thus Bali triumphantly 
entered Indra's palace and performed mote sacrifice rituals, becoming the 
most powerful monarch of the universe. 


The mother of the Devas, Aditi, became very sad in learning that his sons 
had been forced to exile, and asked her husband Kasyapa for advice on 
how to help them recover their homes and wealth. Just like he had 
recommended the Pumsavana vrata to Diti, Kasyapa told Aditi to follow 
the vow called Payovrata or sarva_yajna, also meant to please the Supreme 
Personality of God. The ritual lasts twelve days, starting from the first day 
of the waxing moon in the month of Phaleguna (February-March) and 
consists in only consuming milk and engage in the worship of Vishnu. 


The day before the beginning of the vrafa, on the new moon day, one 
should offer homage to Mother Earth by smearing one's body with the 


128 


Bhagavata Purana 


eatth dug by a boar, and then take bath in a river. After completing the 
morning duties, one should offer respect to the Lord's Deity, to the altar, 
the sun, the water, the fire and the preceptor. One should meditate on the 
Supreme Personality of God as having two heads, three legs, four horns 
and seven hands, that represent respectively prayaniya and udaniya (the initial 
desire and the end of the desire), the savana traya (the three movements - 
creation, maintenance and destruction), the four Vedas and the seven 
metrics of the Vedic hymns. His heart consists of the three Aandas, that are 
karma (action), jnana (knowledge) and upasana (worship), that manifest in the 


form of the ritual ceremonies of sacrifices. 


The mantra that Aditi received from Kasyapa for this worship then offers 
homage to Shiva, Rudra, the source of all powers and knowledge, the guru 
of everyone, who manifests as Hiranyagarbha, the source of life and the 
Supreme Soul of all living beings. His body is the source of all mystic 
powers, and has appeared as Nara Narayana. Then Aditi would offer 
homage to Vishnu, also called Keshava, the consort of the Goddess of 
fortune, who can give all blessings and satisfies the desires of everyone. 


Then, reciting the 12 syllable mantra, that is om namo bhagavata vasudevaya ("I 
offer my homage to the Supreme Lord, who is omnipresent"), one should 
offer garlands, incense and other worship articles, bathe the Deity in milk 
and dress it in appropriate clothes, also offering the sacred thread and 
otnaments. After offering again water to the feet of the Deity, one should 
repeat the offering of flowers, incense and so on. If possible, one should 
present the Deity with good quality rice boiled in milk, with butter and 
molasses, and then offer these articles as oblations into the fire with the 
same mantra. Finally one should give the prasada to a vaishnava, consume 
some oneself, and then offer again water for the hands of the Deity and a 
complete worship. Then, after silently reciting the mantra for 108 times and 
offering prayers to praise the Lord, one should citcumambulate the Deity as 
a mark of respect and prostrate oneself. The offered water and flowers 
should be respectfully held on one's head and then disposed of in a sacred 
place, then one should offer the rice pudding very respectfully to at least 
two brabmanas. 


These rituals should be repeated every day, in the meantime one should 
observe continence and avoid unnecessary conversations. One should sleep 


129 


Parama Karuna Devi 


on the ground, take bath three times a day and subsist on milk only, 
regularly offer oblations to the fire and food to the brabmanas, sing 
devotional hymns to the Lord and recite his glories. 


On the 13th day of the moon one should bathe the Deity with five sweet 
substances called panchamrita (milk, yogurt, clarified butter, sugar and 
honey), offer oblations of rice boiled in milk and clarified butter, and recite 
the Purusha sukta mantra. The worship to the Deity on the last day of the 
vrata should be particularly lavish, with the offering of many different types 
of foods, followed by a distribution of clothes, ornaments and cows to the 


guru and the officiating priests, and by a great banquet for everyone. 


Aditi carefully followed the instructions of Kasyapa and her sincere 
devotion attracted the attention of Lord Vishnu, who appeared before her 
and agreed to take birth as her son to help the Devas recover their 
approptiate positions. Aditi, however, would keep the secret on the true 
identity of her last son. 


On the auspicious day of Vijaya Dvadasi, according to the blessing received 
from Vishnu, Aditi gave birth to Vamana, who immediately manifested in 
the four-armed form of Vishnu, and then he appeared as a young 
brabmachari, of very short height. All the Devas celebrated the appearance of 
the dwarf avafara and performed the initiation ceremony by offering him 


vatious gifts. 


Surya himself gave him the Gayatri mantra, Brihaspati gave him the sacred 
thread and Kasyapa the belt of kusha grass. Mother Earth offered him a 
deer-skin, Chandra gave him the brahma danda (the staff of a brahmana) and 
Indra an umbrella. Brahma gave him a kamandalu (water pot), the seven 
Rishis gave him some kasha grass and Sarasvati a necklace of rudraksha 
seeds. Kuvera gave him a begging bowl and Durga offered him his first 
alms. After performing the fire ritual, Vamana went to visit Bali Maharaja, 
who was engaged in performing the Asvamedha ritual in the holy place of 


Brighukaccha, on the northern side of the Narmada river. 


When Vamana arrived in the sacrificial arena, everyone was impressed by 
his radiance, and Bali Maharaja himself got up gladly to offer him a 
honored seat and a foot wash. After the appropriate welcome, Bali asked 
Vamana what he could do for him, and offered him anything he wanted. 


130 


Bhagavata Purana 


Vamana was very pleased with the welcome offered by Bali, the worthy 
grandson of the glorious Prahlada Maharaja, and replied that he would 
content himself with three paces of land. The Daitya king, surprised with 
such a modest request, said that as the ruler of all the three worlds he was in 
a position to give Vamana even one entire island for his maintenance, so 
that he would never have to beg alms again. Vamana smiled and repeated 
that three paces of land would be more than sufficient. Bali Maharaja 
agreed to deliver the gift and officially consecrated his promise with the 
ritual offering of water. At that time Sukracharya realized the danger and 
warned Bali that the young brahmachari was none other than Vishnu, the 
Supreme Personality of God, who had appeared to take away everything 
from the Daityas. Bali Maharaja carefully listened to the words of his priest, 
who advised him to break the promise made to Vamana, but decided to act 


against such advice. 


Bali Maharaja said, "No sin is worse than the violation of truthfulness. This 
is why Mother Earth has declared that she can bear any weight except for a 
liar's. I do not fear poverty, disgrace or even hell, but I cannot betray the 
promise to a brahmana. And what is the use of wealth anyway? At the time 
of death one must abandon everything. Great personalities such as Dadhici 
and Sibi readily sacrificed even their own lives for the benefit of the people, 
and how many people lose their lives on the battlefield? I am now offered 
the opportunity to sacrifice my possessions to serve a holy person, and it is 
even more extraordinary if this young brabmana really is Vishnu himself as 
you say, because that is more reason to serve him without reservations if he 


comes begging for alms." 


Daring the curse of his guru, Bali proceeded with the gifting ritual and as 
soon as the cetemony was completed, Vamana started to expand his own 
body, manifesting the vision of the universal form before the Daitya king. 
Then, with one single step, he covered all the lower planetary systems up to 
Earth, and with a second step he covered all the heavenly planetary systems, 
so that his big toe perforated the external covering of the universe. Furious, 
the Asuras tried to attack Vamana, but immediately from Vaikuntha arrived 
the companions of Lord Vishnu - Nanda, Sunanda, Jaya, Vijaya, Prabala, 
Bala, Kumuda, Kumudaksha, Visvakshena, Garuda, Jayanta, Srutadeva, 
Pushpadanta and Satvata - who drove the Asuras back. Bali Maharaja 
intervened, ordering his subjects to stop fighting and to retreat. 


131 


Parama Karuna Devi 


"With two steps only I have covered the entire universe," Vamana said, "so 
I find you unable to keep your promise of giving me a third step of land. As 
a punishment for breaking your oath, you will remain confined to the lower 
planets." 


Bali Maharaja replied, "I do not care about losing everything I possess, or 
about being imprisoned in the lower planets, but I want to keep my 
promise. Therefore I pray you put your foot on my head to take your third 
step: I offer myself to you as a gift.” 


At that time Bali's grandfather, Prahlada, appeared, resplendent like the 
moon at night, to offer his homage to the Lord. Also Bali's wife 
Vindhyavali and Brahma himself came forward to offer their prayers to 
Vishnu. The Lord replied, "Foolish people become proud and arrogant 
when they possess great wealth, are born in some aristocratic family, obtain 
a high position, perform extraordinary activities, or even when they are 
young and attractive, while a person who remains humble in spite of all 
these blessings is truly worthy of God's favor. Bali Maharaja has shown his 
extreme detachment and tolerance, as well as his love for the principles of 
religion, starting with loyalty. Because of these great qualities, Bali will 
become the king of the heavenly planets under the reign of Savarni Manu. 
In the meantime Bali will live with all his relatives and friends on planet 
Sutala, that has been prepared by Visvakarma according to my direct 
instructions, so that his residents will always be free from all physical and 
mental sufferings. Nobody will be able to defeat him or defy his authority, 
because Bali will be directly under my protection and I will permanently 
reside there with him, so that he will be able to see me every day." 


Happy with such blessings, Bali and Prahlada offered their homage to 
Vamana and gladly descended to Sutala. 


The descendants of Staddhadeva Manu 


Maharaja Parikshit had listened to the story of Vamana with great interest. 
He said, "It is wonderful to see how the Supreme Personality of God 


132 


Bhagavata Purana 


always remains on the transcendental level, yet he descends into this world 
in the form of the avataras. For example, I heard that the first Vishnu 
avatara was the fish, a lower form of life in which a conditioned being 
suffers very much. What was the purpose of that incarnation?" 


Sukadeva gladly replied telling the story of the Matsya avatara. "The Lord 
appears to protect Dharma, the eternal and universal principles of religion, 
Vedic scriptures, the devotees, the Devas, the brahmanas and the cows. He is 
not conditioned by the form he takes, because he is always above the 


qualities of material nature." 


The fish avatara appeared at the end of the last day of Brahma, when all the 
three worlds were covered by the waters of the ocean. At that time king 
Satyavrata (who in the next age would become Sraddhadeva Manu, the son 
of Vivasvan) was engaged in performing austerities on the bank of the river 
Kritamala. One day, while he was collecting water in his hands to offer 
oblations, he found a tiny fish and put it back into the river water. "Dear 
king Satyavrata," the little fish begged him, "you protect all those who need 
your help. Do not leave me here in this big river, where there are so many 


bigger fish who want to eat me." 


The king picked up the little fish in his water pot and took it home, but 
during the night the fish grew so large that he was unable to move freely. "I 
am very uncomfortable here," said the fish. "Please find me a bigger place 
where I will be able to live peacefully." 


Satyavrata put the fish in a well, but immediately the size of the fish 
increased: he had to pull it out again and find a lake where it could swim 
comfortably. However, as soon as he had entered the lake, the fish grew in 
size more and more, until it filled up the entire lake. Perplexed, Satyavrata 
carried the fish to the ocean, but when he pushed it into the water, Matsya 
("the fish") spoke again. "Do not leave me here," he said, "there are so 


many sharks infesting the ocean..." 


At that point Satyavrata could understand that the fish was certainly not an 
otdinary creature, but the Supreme Personality of God who was 
manifesting a wonderful adventure for some mysterious purpose. Thus he 
offered his homage to God. Then Matsya revealed to him that in seven days 
the three worlds would be submerged by the waters of devastation and 


133 


Parama Karuna Devi 


instructed him to prepare a big ship, on which he had to load a sample of 
all the herbs and plants and all animals. Then he was supposed to get on the 
boat with the seven Rishis. The ship would be tied to the horn of the fish 
with the help of serpent Vasuki, and would travel protected by Matsya 
during the entire period of Brahma's night. 


Satyavrata followed the instructions of the Lord and during the journey he 
listened to the Lord teaching him Vedic knowledge, from Sankhya to 
Bhakti, to the stories of the Puranas and the contents of the Samhitas. 


On the request of Parikshit, Sukadeva continued to speak about the 
descendants of king Satyavrata, who had appeared in the subsequent 
Manvantara as Sraddhadeva Manu, the son of Vivasvan. A sacrifice was 
performed to propitiate the birth of his first child. Sraddhadeva wanted a 
son, but his wife Sraddha wanted a daughter. When a daughter was born, 
she was called Ila, and Manu approached Vasistha, who directed the rituals, 
asking what happened. Vasistha decided to please the king by turning the 
baby girl into a male, who was named Sudyumna. 


One day, while he was traveling around the kingdom, prince Sudyumna 
entered a forest to kill the dangerous wild animals that lived there, without 
knowing that it was the Sukumara forest, a place sacred to Shiva where no 
male except Shiva is allowed to enter, unless he wants to be turned into a 
woman. This law had been established when Parvati became irritated for 
the intrusion of some Rishis who had entered the forest while Shiva and 
Parvati were immersed in their playful love exchanges. 


Suddenly the prince became a princess, and saw that also the horse and all 
the members of his retinue had changed sex. Surprised and confused for 
that unexpected development, the princess and her maidservants continued 
to travel through many forests. Budha, the son of Chandra, immediately fell 
in love with that beautiful lady and decided to marry her, fathering a son 
named Pururava. Finally Sudyumna arrived at Vasistha's ashrama and asked 
his help to become a man again. Under the guidance of Vasistha, Sudyumna 
offered worship to Lord Shiva and obtained his blessings. However, Shiva 
did not want to upset Parvati, so he decreed that the change of sex would 
happen every month: Sudyumna and his retinue would be males for one 


month and females for the next month, and so on. 


134 


Bhagavata Purana 


Besides Pururava, of whom he was the mother, Sudyumna had three more 
sons, named Utkala, Gaya and Vimala, who became kings in the Dakshina 
patha, south India. When the proper time came, Sudyumna retired into the 
forest to engage in austerities, leaving the kingdom to Pururava. 


Later Sraddhadeva Manu fathered ten more sons: Ikshvaku, Nriga, Saryati, 
Dishta, Dhrista, Karusha, Narishyanta, Prishadhra, Nabhaga and Kavi. 


Prishadhra was in charge of protecting the cows. During a rainy night, a 
tiger entered the area where the cows were grazing and attacked one of 
them. Hearing the screams of the pained cow, Prishadhra rushed in, sword 
in hand, but because the night was very dark his blow failed and he 
mistakenly decapitated the cow instead of killing the tiger. The predator was 
scared and ran away, but the next morning at sunrise Prishadhra saw what 
had happened, and to atone for the crime of killing a cow, the prince 
entered a life of severe austerities, abandoning all other occupations. Soon 
he became a great saint, and in the end he left his body in a forest fire. 


The youngest of Manu's sons, Kavi, also decided to renounce the kingdom 
while he was still in his full youth, and he retired into the forest to perform 
austerities and offer worship to the Deity. Karusha became the ancestor of 
a dynasty of &shatriyas who ruled the northern region and were loyal 
protectors of Vedic culture. On the other hand, Dhrishta became the 
progenitor of a dynasty of brabmanas known as Dhartstas. 


Nriga became the father of Sumati, the father of Bhutajyoti, the father of 
Vasu, the father of Pratika, the father of Oghavan. Oghavan's son was 
named after his father and had a daughter called Oghavati, who married 
Sudarshana. 


Narishyanta became the father of Citrasena, the father of Riksha, the father 
of Midhavan, the father of Purna, the father of Indrasena, the father of 
Vitihotra, the father of Satyasrava, the father of Urusrava, the father of 
Devadatta, the father of Agnivesya - a direct incarnation of the Deva Agni, 
who became famous also as Kanina and Jatukarnya. Agnivesya was the 


progenitor or a dynasty of brabmanas known as Agnivesyana. 


Dishta had a son, Nabhaga, who became a vaisya. Nabhaga's son was 
Bhalandana, the father of Vatsapriti, the father of Pramsu, the father of 


135, 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Pramati, the father of Khanitra, the father of Chakshusa, the father of 
Vivimsati, the father of Rambha, who was the father of the great king 
Khaninetra. Khaninetra became father of king Karandhama, the father of 
Avikshit, the father of emperor Marutta. 


Marutta performed a sacrifice ritual with the help of the great mystic 
Samvarta, the son of Angira: all the utensils of the ritual were made of pure 
gold and Indra, the king of the heavenly planets, drank so much soma rasa 
that he lost control of himself. Marutta became the father of Dama, the 
father of Rajyavardhana, the father of Sudhriti, the father of Nara, the 
father of Kevala, the father of Dhundhuman, the father of Vegavan, the 
father of Budha, the father of Trinabindhu, who became the ruler of the 
entite earth and married the Apsara Alambusha. From her, Trinabindhu 
had three sons (Visala, Sunyabandhu and Dhumraketu) and a daughter 
named Ilavila. Havila married the great mystic Visrava and became the 
mother of the Deva Kuvera. 


Of the three sons of Trinabindhu, Visala became the progenitor of a 
dynasty and built the palace known as Vaisali. He also became the father of 
Hemachandra, the father of Dhumraksha, the father of Samyama, the father 
of Devaja and Krishasva. Krishasva was the father of Somadatta, who by 
his worship to Vishnu obtained residence on a very high planet. Somadatta 
became the father of Sumati, the father of Janamejaya. 


Another of Manu's sons, Saryati, had a very beautiful daughter named 
Sukanya. Together they journeyed to visit the ashrama of Cyavana Muni. 
During a stop in the journey, Sukanya and her young friends entered the 
forest to collect some fruits and found an ant-hill with two holes, inside 
which they could see two tiny lights. Intrigued, Sukanya used a pointed twig 
to try to take those little lights from the ant-hill, but to her horror she saw 
that the holes started leaking bloodm as they were the Rishi's eyes. 


Immediately all the royal retinue of Saryati became afflicted by a bodily 
blockage by which they were unable to pass urine or stool. The king 
suspected that the problem was due to the reaction of some offense 
committed against Cyavana Muni, and princess Sukanya confessed her 
unwitting action. King Saryati went to beg the Muni to forgive that foolish 
and ignorant action, and Cyavana replied that now he was blind and needed 


to be taken care by someone. Sukanya agreed to remain with Cyavana 


136 


Bhagavata Purana 


becoming his wife, and the Muni immediately healed the king and all the 


members of his retinue. 


Cyavana was a grouchy old man, but Sukanya served him sincerely and 
developed a deep affection for him. Some time passed. One day the Asvini 
kumaras, the physicians of the Devas, went to visit Cyavana Muni. Cyavana 
welcomed them respectfully and asked them the boon to give him youth 
and handsome looks, because he wanted to please and attract Sukanya. In 
exchange, he promised the Asvini kumaras a pot full of soma rasa, that is 


generally is not offered to them during the sacrifices. 


The Asvini kumatas instructed Cyavana to immerse himself in the lake in 
their company and Cyavana emerged totally renewed, with a divine body, so 
much that Sukanya was unable to distinguish him from the Asvini kumaras. 
Seeing her embarrassment, the Asvini kumaras revealed themselves and 
showed her Cyavana, after which they returned to the heavenly planets. 


Some time later king Saryati went to visit Cyavana, and was surprised and 
angty to see that his daughter Sukanya was in the company of a man who 
was young and handsome like the sun. Thinking that Sukanya had 
abandoned her respectable husband who was old, wrinkled, sick and blind, 
to find a mote attractive lover, the king scolded her, but Sukanya laughed 
and told him the entire story. Cyavana Muni later helped the king to 
perform a sacrificial ceremony, and as promised he offered a pot of soma 
rasa to the Asvini kumaras as a token of gratitude for their favor. Indra felt 
offended because usually the soma rasa is offered only to him, while the 
Asvini kumara are not entitled to receive it. However, the powerful Cyavana 
Muni paralyzed Indra's arm while he was trying to attack him with this 
thunderbolt. 


Satyati had three sons, named Uttanabarhi, Anarta and Bhurisena. Anarta 
became the father of Revata, who built a kingdom called Kusasthali in the 
depths of the ocean, and had 100 sons, of whom the elder was named 
Kakudmi. Kakudmi approached Brahma to ask advice for the martiage of 
his daughter Revati, but he had to wait to be recetved because Brahma was 
listening to a Gandharva concert. When Kakudmi presented his request, 
Brahma said that all the prospective husbands he had considered for Revati 
had died and their descendants as well, because in the meantime on Earth 
27 cycles of four ages had passed. 


137 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Therefore he recommended him to give Revati in marriage to Baladeva, the 
Supreme Personality of God, who had appeared in the Yadu dynasty. 


Back to his kingdom, that in the meantime had been abandoned by all the 
residents, Kakudmi gave his daughter to Baladeva as suggested by Brahma, 
and then retired to Badarikashrama to meditate on God. 


The story of Ambarisha 


Nabhaga, the son of Sraddhadeva, had a son who was named after him. 
This Nabhaga remained in the house of the Guru for a very long time and 
his brothers thought that he had no intention to return home and marry, so 
without consulting him they divided the properties of the father among 
themselves. When finally Nabhaga arrived home, he asked his brothers 
what share of the inheritance they had kept for him, and they replied that 
he should get the father himself. 


Nabhaga went to his father to ask for explanations, and his father advised 
him to go to the arena of the sacrifice performed by Angira's descendants 
and assist them, because on the sixth day they would become confused 
about the procedures of the ritual. For that assistance, the sages would 
reward him by giving whatever was left from the funds collected for the 
performance of the sacrifice. 


Nabhaga followed the advice, but as soon as the Rishis had left, a black 
person appeared to claim all the wealth remaining after the completion of 
the rituals. To solve the controversy they all went to Nabhaga's father, who 
recognized Lord Shiva and confirmed that whatever is offered in sacrifices 
belongs to Shiva. Thus Nabhaga offered his respects to the Lord, who was 
pleased by his sincerity and gave him all the wealth he wished for. Later, 
Nabhaga married and had a son named Ambarisha. This Ambarisha was a 
great and famous devotee, and the Lord completely protected him from the 
cutse of a powerful sage. 


138 


Bhagavata Purana 


Intrigued by that information, Parikshit asked Sukadeva to tell him the 


entire story. 


Sukadeva said, "Maharaja Ambarisha became the ruler of the entire world, 
and possessed unimaginable wealth, but he never became proud because he 
knew that all positions or material assets are temporary. He rather wanted 
to serve the Supreme Personality of God and engaged all his senses in such 
service. With his mind, he meditated on the Lord's lotus feet, with his ears 
he listened to the teachings and the stories about the Lord, with his mouth 
he described the glories of the Lord and with his hands he cleaned his 
temple. He used his eyes to contemplate the Deity and the holy places, his 
touch to embrace the saintly people, his smell to absorb the scent of the 
tulasi \eaves that had been offered to the Lord, and his tongue to savor the 
prasada, consecrated food. He used his legs to walk to the holy places and 
temples, his head to offer respects to the Deity, and all his desires to further 
the various activities connected with the service to the Lord." 


Maharaja Ambarisha offered the Lord the results of his duties as a ruler as 
well, and always followed the advice of the brahmanas. On the bank of river 
Sarasvati he performed great sacrificial rituals such as the Asvamedha yajna 
and distributed charity to the great personalities who participated in it. The 
subjects of Ambarisha were happy because they used to listen to the 
glorious activities of God and did not even desire to attain the heavenly 
planets. 


On one particular occasion Ambarisha and his queen observed the Ekadasi 
fasting for one entire year. The vow was completed in the month of 
Kartika, and after having made his ablutions in the river Yamuna, 
Ambarisha performed a lavish ceremony to worship the Deity, with the 
solemn bathing ritual called abbisheka, the offering of clothes and ornaments 
and other similar articles. Then he distributed food to all guests and gave in 


charity a great number of well-decorated cows, accompanied by their calves. 


After completing all the rituals of the vrata, Ambarisha was going to break 
his fast, when the great mystic Durvasa Muni appeared together with his 
many disciples. Ambarisha welcomed Durvasa with great respect and 
invited him to lunch; the Muni accepted but said that he needed to take his 
bath in the river before sitting for lunch. 


139 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Durvasa and his disciples went to the river, took bath and sat down to 
meditate. In the meantime Ambarisha was in a difficult spot, because the 
fasting needed to be broken at a precise time, and the window of 
opportunity was going to close. The king did not want to offend Durvasa 
by consuming food before the guest had eaten, but at the same time he did 
not want to destroy all the benefit of the rituals that he had performed to 
observe the vrata. To solve his quandary, Ambarisha decided to break his 
fast by simply consuming some water, an action that could be considered 
eating and non-eating at the same time. After breaking his fast in this way, 
Ambarisha patiently remained waiting for Durvasa's return. Arrived at 
court, the Muni came to know that the king had taken some water without 
his permission, and he became extremely angry. Although he had been 
respectfully welcomed by Ambarisha, who stood humbly before him 
waiting with folded hands, Durvasa created from his anger a demon of fire 
that rushed against the king to kill him. 


Ambarisha did not try to defend himself or even to flee, but the demon was 
immediately stopped and destroyed by the Sudarshana, the sacred disk that 
is the weapon of Vishnu, always ready to protect his sincere devotees. 
Seeing that the demon created by him had perished miserably, Durvasa 
became scared and started to flee, but he was pursued by the Sudarshana 
disc. The Muni sought shelter everywhere - in the sky, in caves, inside the 
ocean, on various planets including the heavenly planets - but he was still 
always pursued by the shining fire of the Sudarshana. 


So he ran to Brahma and begged for his help. "I do not have the power to 
stop the destruction ordered by Vishnu," Brahma told him. "At the end of 
the cycle of creation, by the order of Vishnu the entire universe is 
destroyed, and my abode with it. When this happens, I can only offer my 


respects to the Supreme Personality of God and surrender." 


Then Durvasa ran to take shelter in Shiva. "Nobody," said Shiva, "has the 
power to oppose the will of the Supreme Personality of God. Not even I. 
The only thing that remains to be done is to approach Vishnu and ask for 


his protection." 


So Durvasa started to run again and reached Vaikuntha, where he threw 
himself to the feet of Vishnu, begging forgiveness for his offenses and 
protection from the fire of the Sudarshana chakra. "I am not independent," 


140 


Bhagavata Purana 


Vishnu replied. "I am under the control of my devotees, who have 
abandoned all selfish desires to serve me with love. You have committed a 
serious offense against Maharaja Ambarisha, who is completely innocent. 
So I suggest you go to ask forgiveness from him and seek his protection, 


because this is the only way you can be saved." 


Durvasa returned to Ambarisha and threw himself to his feet, and the king 
felt very embarrassed. Immediately Ambarisha approached the Sudarshana 
disc and offered his respect and prayers. "O Sudarshana chakra, you are 
fire, sun, moon, all the elements of matter, the objects of the senses and the 
senses themselves. O Lord of the material world, you can destroy every 
weapon. You are religion and truth, words of encouragement, sacrifice and 
the supreme power in the hand of Vishnu. By your radiance, you terrorize 
the demoniac beings, dissipate the darkness of the universe and manifest 
the knowledge of the sages. I pray, grant your favor to this brabmana: 1 ask 
this as a personal favor in grace of the charitable and religious activities 


performed by our family and in the name of our beloved Lord." 


Sudarshana listened to Ambarisha's prayers and ceased to pursue Durvasa, 
who became very grateful to the king and offered all his blessings. Finally 
Durvasa was able to take lunch and Ambarisha, who had waited for another 
year subsisting with water only while Durvasa was running around the 


universe, also took his meal. 


Ambarisha retired from family life when he was still young, leaving the 
kingdom to his three sons Virupa, Ketuman and Sambhu. Virupa had a son 
named Prishada, who became the father of Rathitara. Rathitara did not have 
children, so he asked the great Angira Rishi to generate for him; these sons 
were great brabmanas and became known as descendants both of Rathitara 
and Angira. 


The descendants of Ikshvaku 


The first son of Manu, Ikshvaku, was born from a sneeze. King Ikshvaku 


had 100 sons, among whom the most prominent were Vikukshi, Nimi and 


141 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Dandaka. Among the sons of Ikshvaku, 25 became kings in the western 
territory of Aryavarta between the Himalaya and the Vindhya mountains, 
while 25 others reigned on the eastern territories of Aryavarta, and the most 
prominent 3 ruled the central territories. The others became kings in 


various other regions. 


In those times people performed ritual ceremonies for the deceased 
ancestors, called astaka sraddha;, during the waning fortnights in the months 
of January, February and March the spirits were offered oblations with the 
flesh of wild animals, as the &shatriyas killed some of them. On the request 
of his father Ikshvaku, Vikukshi went hunting to gather the required 
offerings, but because he was tired and hungry, he took a share of the meat 
for himself. 


When he returned to the capital, Vikukshi delivered the rest of the kill but 
Vasistha, the court priest who was supposed to purify the animals for the 
offering, perceived that there had been some serious irregularity. Informed 
by Vasistha about the facts, Ikshvaku became angry and banished his son 
from the kingdom because of that violation. When Ikshvaku retired to the 
forest to engage in austerities for the last period of his life, Vikukshi 
returned home and ascended the throne with the name of Sasada. He 
became a good king and performed many ritual ceremonies for the worship 
of the Supreme Personality of God. 


Vikukshi had a son, Puranjaya ("conqueror of the city"), who also became 
famous as Indravahana ("who is carried by Indra") and Kakutsha ("sitting 
on the hump"), names that he was given to celebrate his deeds. Puranjaya 
fought on the side of the Devas against the Asuras and conquered their 


cities, but as a condition he asked to be allowed to ride Indra. 


After much protesting and a direct order from Vishnu, the king of the 
heavenly planets consented to be transformed into a great bull and allowed 
Puranjaya to ride him, sitting on the typical hump that is behind the neck of 
the Indian race of bulls. After defeating the Asuras, Puranjaya gave Indra all 
the conquered cities and all their wealth. 


Puranjaya became the father of Anena, the father of Prithu, father of 
Visvagandhi, father of Chandra, father of Yuvanasva, father of Sravasta, 


who built a city known as Sravasti Puri. Sravasta became father of 


142 


Bhagavata Purana 


Brihadasva, father of Kuvalayasva, who was helped by his 21,000 sons to 
kill a powerful Asura named Dhundhu and protect the sage Utanka. 
Because of this deed, Kuvalayasva is also known as Dhundhumara. After 
the battle against the Asura, of the 21,000 sons of Kuvalayasva only 
Dridhasva, Kapilasva and Bhadrasva remained alive. 


Dridhasva became the father of Haryasva, father of Nikumbha, father of 
Bahulasva, father of Krisasva, father of Senajit, father of Yuvanasva, who 
had no children and retired to the forest to engage in austerities with his 
100 wives. Moved to compassion by the sadness of the queens, the Rishis 
of the forest organized a ritual ceremony called Indra yajna to propitiate the 
birth of an heir, but there was some unexpected incident. 


The king got up at night terribly thirsty, and by mistake he drank the 
sanctified water that was supposed to be consumed by the queens to gave 
birth to a child. As a consequence, king Yuvanasva became pregnant and 
gave birth to a child who had developed in the lower right side of his belly. 
The newborn cried to be fed, but who would suckle him? Indra, who had 
been honored in the ritual ceremonies, personally came to pacify the baby 


and put a finger in his mouth for him to suck. 


Personally protected by the king of the heavenly planets, the son of 
Yuvanasva became a powerful king, known as Mandhata or Trasaddasyu 
because all criminals were terrified of him. Mandhata ruled over all the 
seven continents of Earth, from east to west. He married Bindumati, the 
daughter of Sasabindu, and had three sons - Purukutsa, Ambarisha and the 
great mystic Muchukunda - and 50 daughters, all of whom became the 
wives of the great Saubhari Rishi. 


Saubhari had spent many years in deep meditation immersed in the water of 
the Yamuna river, until one day, opening his eyes, he had seen a couple of 
fish engaged in sexual intercourse. Agitated by that sight, he desired to get a 
wife and went to king Mandhata to ask for one of the princesses. The king 
did not have objections and told the sage that his daughters were free to 
marry anyone they liked. 


The old yogi was aware that his looks were not particularly attractive for a 
young woman, so he engaged seriously in transforming his body, so that 


when he returned to the palace to see the princesses, all of them were so 


143 


Parama Karuna Devi 


anxious to marry him that they started to quarrel among themselves to 
establish which of them was to become the fortunate wife. In the end 
Saubhari married them all, and by the mystic powers he had developed 
through the practice of yoga he was able to maintain them on a royal level, 
with palaces, gardens, parks, many servants and maids. Saubhari gave 100 
children to each of the princesses. After some time Saubhari Muni realized 
he had fallen into material gratification and entered the order of life called 
vanaprastha, retiring into the forest to resume his austerities. The princesses 
loyally followed him and in turn they, too, attained liberation from material 


conditionings. 


The most famous among the sons of Mandhata was Ambarisha, who 
became the adopted son of his grandfather Yuvanasva. Ambarisha became 
the father of Yauvanasva, the father of Harita. Another son of Mandhata, 
Purukutsa, married Narmada, a Naga princess who took her husband to 
Rasatala, in the lower regions of the universe, where by the power he had 
received from Vishnu, he was able to kill all the rebellious Gandharvas. 
Purukutsa became the father of Trasaddasyu, father of Anaranya, father of 
Haryasva, father of Praruna, father of Tribandhana, father of Satyavrata, 
who became famous by the name of Trishanku. This Trishanku kidnapped 
a girl on her marriage day and her father cursed him to become a chandala, 
an uncivilized degraded human being who lives outside the regulated social 
system of the varnashrama. Trishanku asked for help from Visvamitra, who 
promised he would not only restore him to the position of royal shatriya, 
but even to raise him to the heavenly planets in that very same body he had 
at that time. A quarrel followed between Visvamitra and the heavenly 
beings, and Visvamitra displayed his mystic power by creating a heavenly 
planetary system especially for him, where Trishanku still remains 
suspended. 


Trishanku became the father of Harischandta, who was the object of a 
serious controversy between Visvamitra and Vasistha. Harischandra was 
agerieved because he was unable to get a child, so on the advice of Narada 
he went to ask help from Varuna, promising to repay the favor by 
sacrificing his son in a ritual ceremony. When Rohita was born, Varuna 
went to Harischandra to reclaim what had been promised to him, but 
Harischandra kept buying time and was able to postpone until Rohita grew 


up and could escape to the forest, armed with bow and arrows. 


144 


Bhagavata Purana 


When he learned that his father Harischandra had fallen ill because of 
Varuna's punishment, Rohita wanted to return to him, but Indra forbade 
him, telling him he should rather travel to pilgrimage places and perform 
virtuous activities. After six years of traveling, Rohita found a substitute to 
offer to Varuna: it was Sunahshepa, the son of Ajigarta. Rohita took 
Sunahshepa to his father Harischandra, who finally performed the ritual and 
was healed from his disease. 


Later Rohita became the father of Harita, father of Champa, who built the 
city of Champapuri. Champa became the father of Sudeva, father of Vijaya, 
father of Bharuka, father of Vrika, father of Bahuka, who lost all his 
possessions when he was defeated by his enemies and retired to the forest 
with all his wives. 


One of them gave birth to a posthumous son of Bakula, named Sagara, 
who became the emperor of the entire earth. Sagara married Sumati and 
Keshini. Following the instructions of Aurva Rishi, who had become his 
preceptor while he was living in the forest, Sagara organized various non- 
civilized tribes known as Talajangha, Yavana, Saka, Haihaya and Barbara, 
introducing different styles of attire and decorations. To worship the 
Supreme Lord, Sagata performed the sacrifice ceremony known as 
Asvamedha, but Indra stole the horse that was meant to play an important 
role in the rituals. 


The sons of queen Sumati left in search of the lost horse, and finally 
reached the hermitage of Kapila Muni, where the horse had escaped. Seeing 
Kapila sitting in meditation with closed eyes, the princes convinced 
themselves they had found the thief, and rushed to kill him. 


The seriousness of such action immediately reduced them to ashes. The 
other wife of king Sagara, Keshini, had a son named Asamanjasa, who 
became the father of Amsuman. In his previous lifetime, Asamanjasa had 
been a great mystic yogi, but because of bad companies he had fallen from 
his position. Thanks to the power of his past austerities he had taken birth 
in a royal family and enjoyed the special advantage of remembering his 
previous lifetimes, therefore he decided to act in such a way that he would 
be exiled from the kingdom. Because of the absence of Asamanjasa, 
Amsuman became very dear to his grandfather Sagara. 


145 


Parama Karuna Devi 


As the sons of Sumati had not returned from their mission to recover the 
sacrificial horse, Amsuman also left to search for them, and following their 
track he arrived at Kapila's ashrama, where he found the ashes of his uncles, 
not far from the place where the horse was still staying. Amsuman humbly 
offered his respects to Kapila Muni and Kapila informed him of what had 
happened, also telling him that his dead relatives could be purified and 
liberated only by the contact with the sacred waters of the Ganges. 


Prince Amsuman returned to his capital, Ayodhya, bringing the horse for 
the ritual and news about the death of Sumati's sons. Following the 
instructions of Aurva Muni, emperor Sagara gave the throne to his 
grandson and retired into the forest. Amsuman then became the father of 
Dilipa, father of Bhagiratha. In spite of many austerities, neither Amsuman 
nor Dilipa were able to bring the river Ganges to Earth. 


Dilipa's son Bhagiratha continued his father's mission, engaging in great 
austerities to obtain the descent of the Ganges. Finally, Mother Ganges 
appeared before him to grant her blessing. She said, "I will descend to earth 
as you wish, but when arriving, the impact of my waters will be powerful. If 
nobody will be there to sustain it, earth will be perforated and my waters 
will fall into the lower regions of the universe. Besides, when I will be on 
earth, people will take bath in my waters to become purified from the 
reactions of their crimes: how will I be able to eliminate all that 
contamination?" 


Bhagiratha replied, "Your waters will also be touched by people who deeply 
love God and are free from all material desires and therefore have the 
power to purify the degraded souls - these great saints will also take bath 
there and their contact will neutralize all negative reactions. And the impact 
of your descent will be sustained by Shiva, who is the Supreme Soul in the 
hearts of all beings." 


After receiving the blessings of the Ganges, Bhagiratha continued his 
austerities begging Shiva for his help, and the Lord gladly obliged. Thus 
Bhagiratha mounted a chariot and drove before the Ganges, guiding her 
waters to the place where his ancestors, the sons of Sagara, had been 
reduced to ashes, and they were immediately purified. Since then, that place 
is known as Ganga Sagara. 


146 


Bhagavata Purana 


The story of Rama 


Bhagiratha had a son named Sruta, who became father of Nabha, the father 
of Sindhudvipa, father of Ayutayu, father of Rituparna, father of Nalaraja, 
father of Sarvakama, father of Sudasa, father of Saudasa (Kalmasapada), 
who married Damayanti and was unjustly cursed by Vasistha to become a 
Rakshasa. 


Vasistha was tricked by an enemy of Saudasa, who had infiltrated into the 
king's palace becoming his personal cook and contaminating the food that 
the king was offering to Vasistha. When he realized what had really 
happened, Vasistha regretted having lost his temper and started a ritual that 
would neutralize the curse in twelve years. 


Unfortunately in the meantime Saudasa was left to struggle with his new 
cruel and violent tendencies, and one day in spite of himself he devoured a 
brahmana who had gone to a solitary place in the forest with his wife in 
otder to generate a child. Thus Saudasa got a fresh curse from the 
brahmana's wife, who condemned him to death if he had ever approached 
his own wife for sex; this curse continued to affect him even after 
Vasistha's original curse was neutralized, so that in order to get a child from 
the queen, Saudasa had to request Vasistha's personal assistance. 


This son was named Asmaka, who became father of Balika - also called 
Narikavacha because he escaped Parasurama's anger by surrounding himself 
with women. Later, Balika became the progenitor of a new generation of 
kshatriyas as he was one of the very few survivors of Parasurama's military 
campaigns. Balika became father of Dasaratha, father of Aidavidi, father of 
Visvasaha, father of the famous Maharaja Khatvanga, who was invincible in 
battle. Even the Devas asked for his help in the wars against the Asuras, 
and to reward him, they offered a boon. King Khatvanga wanted to know 
how much longer he would live and learned that he had very little time left, 
so he returned home, where he immersed himself deeply in meditation and 
service to God, thus attaining liberation. 


147 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Khatvanga became father of Dirghabahu, who was the father of the famous 
Maharaja Raghu, the ancestor of Ramachandra, who is also called 
Raghupati. Raghu became father of Aja, who was the father of Dasaratha, 
the father of Ramachandra, the avatara of Vishnu who appeared in Treta 
yuga together with his emanations in the form of his brothers Lakshmana, 
Bharata and Satrughna, and married Sita, the manifestation of Lakshmi 
Devi. 


To protect the sacrificial rituals performed by Visvamitra, Rama killed many 
Asuras and Rakshasas and other criminals. When he entered the assembly 
of the princes who aspired to the hand of Sita, Ramachandra picked up 
Shiva's bow and snapped it in the middle, like a young elephant breaks a 
sugar cane. Then he faced the avatara Parasurama and defeated him in 
battle. 


To honor the promise of his father, Ramachandra left the kingdom and 
went into exile, accompanied by his wife Sita and his brother Lakshmana, 
and they faced many difficulties and tribulations. One day they were 
attacked by the Asura Surpanakha, the sister of Ravana, who was defeated 
by them, together with the local Rakshasa garrison. Then Surpanakha took 
revenge by convincing Ravana to abduct Sita. 


The Rakshasa king hatched a clever plan: he lured Ramachandra and 
Lakshmana away from their cabin by using a fake golden deer, and 
disguised himself as a sannyasi beggar to approach Sita more easily. The king 
of the vultures, Jatayu, tried to rescue Sita because of his friendship with 
Rama, but was killed by the powerful Rakshasa. The Lord honored Jatayu 
by personally performing his funeral rites before rushing to pursue the 
kidnapper. While he was traveling in search of news about Sita, 
Ramachandra killed the Asura Kabandha, liberated Anasuya, and met 
Hanuman and Sugriva, the exiled king of the Vanaras, who helped him to 


build a bridge of floating stones over the ocean. 


How did that happen? For three days the Lord had remained on the beach, 
fasting and praying the Deva of the Ocean, Varuna, to grant him passage 
overt his waters, and when he received no reply, he took his bow and 
arrows, threatening the Ocean. Terrified, Varuna hastened to present 
himself and granted passage to the island of Lanka, the capital of Ravana. 


148 


Bhagavata Purana 


Accompanied by his army of monkey-men and bear-men, Rama went to 
wart against the wonderful kingdom of Ravana, and received the help of 
Vibhishana, the virtuous brother of the Rakshasa king. The great generals 
of Ramachandra's army were Hanuman (an incarnation of Vayu), Sugriva 
(the king of the Vanaras), Angada, Nila, Gandhamada, Jambavan and 
Panasa. Ravana's army included his son Indrajit, his brother Kumbhakarna 
and other powerful Rakshasas such as Nikumbha, Kumbha, Dhumraksha, 
Durmukha, Surantaka, Narantaka, Prahasta, Atikaya and Vikampana. 


The battle was terrible, and finally Rama killed Ravana, the ten-headed 
Asura, with an arrow that hit him directly in the heart. Sita was liberated 
from captivity and returned with Rama to their capital Ayodhya, to the 
great happiness of all the subjects and especially of Bharata, Rama's brother 
who in the meantime had agreed to take care of the kingdom but simply as 
a representative of Ramachandra, without accepting any of the royal 
privileges and insignia. After being welcomed by his three mothers, the 
widows of king Dasaratha, Ramachandra was crowned king by the family 
priest, Vasistha. 


Lord Ramachandra ruled the world from his capital Ayodhya for many 
years. He had taken the vow to marry once only, without ever having any 
relationship with other women, yet he did not hesitate to sacrifice his own 
matrimonial life for the benefit of his subjects. Ramachandra had two sons, 
Lava and Kusha, who were born in the ashrama of Valmiki Muni because 
Sita had retired to the forest. 


Lakshmana had two sons, named Angada and Citraketu; Bharata became 
the father of Taksha and Puskala, and Satrughna was father of Subahu and 
Srutasena. While Ramachandra remained in the capital to take care of the 
subjects and personally engage in the administration of the government, 
Bharata went to battle against the Gandharvas and offered Ramachandra 
their wealth as war booty. Satrughna killed a Rakshasa named Lavana, son 
of the Rakshasa Madhu, and founded the city of Mathura within the great 
forest called Madhuvana. The son of Ramachandra named Kusha became 
the father of Atithi, father of Nishadha, father of Nabha, father of 
Pundarika, father of Kshemadhanva, father of Devanika, father of Aniha, 
father of Pariyatra, father of Balasthala, father of Vajranabha, who is said to 
have been born from the radiance of the Sun. 


149 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Vajranabha became the father of Sagana, father of Vidhriti, father of 
Hiranyanabha, who became a disciple of Jaimini Rishi and a eteat 
Yogacharya. It was indeed from Hiranyanabha that the great Yajnavalkya 
learned the adhyatma_yoga, tha dissolves the knot of the attachments in the 
heart. 


Hiranyanabha was father of Pushpa, father of Dhruvasandhi, father of 
Sudarshana, father of Agnivama, father of Sighra, father of Maru, who 
achieved perfection in mystic yoga and still lives in his ashrama at Kalapa 
grama; at the end of the Kali yuga he will revive the Surya Vamsa, the 
dynasty of the Sun, generating another son. Maru became the father of 
Prasushruta, father of Sandhi, father of Amarshana, father of Mahasvan, 
father of Visvabahu, father of Prasenajit, father of Takshaka, father of 
Brihadbala, who was killed in battle by Abhimanyu, the father of Maharaja 
Parikshit. 


Sukadeva said, "I will now tell you the names of the future descendants of 
the dynasty of Ikshvaku. Brihadbala has a son named Brihadrana, who will 
become father of Urukriya, who will become father of Vatsavriddha, who 
will become father of Prativyoma, who will become father of Bhanu, who 
will become father of Divaka, a great military general. Divaka will become 
father of Sahadeva, the future father of the great hero Brihadasva, father of 
Bhanuman, father of Pratikasva, father of Supratika, father of Marudeva, 
father of Sunakshatra, father of Puskara, father of Antariksha, father of 
Sutapa, father of Amitrajit, father of Brihadraja, father of Barhi, father of 
Krtanjaya, father of Rananjaya, father of Sanjaya, father of Sakya, father of 
Suddhoda, father of Langala, father of Prasenajit, father of Kshudraka, 
father of Ranaka, father of Suratha, father of Sumitra, who will be the last 
of his dynasty." 


Sukadeva continued to speak to Parikshit, "As I have already explained, 
Sraddhadeva Manu had ten sons, headed by Ikshvaku. One of Ikshvaku's 
sons, named Nimi, became the progenitor of a long dynasty. Maharaja Nimi 
asked Vasistha to superintend over his sacrificial rituals, but Vasistha was 
already engaged in the ceremonies started by Indra and asked him to wait 
until their completion. Nimi thought that life is too short to postpone the 
performance of auspicious activities and decided to turn to other priests to 
proceed with his rituals. However, when Vasistha returned and found that 


150 


Bhagavata Purana 


Nimi had taken steps without his permission, he cursed him to die 
immediately. In turn, Nimi replied with a counter-curse of the same kind. 
Vasistha took a new birth from the sperm of Mitra and Varuna, while the 
body abandoned by Nimi was preserved in valuable ointments, so that at 
the end of Satya yuga the brabmanas asked the Devas to restore Nimi to his 
old body. The Devas granted such permission but Nimi was not happy with 
such course of action, therefore the Rishis extracted the genetic code from 
the body of the deceased king and cloned a son who was named Janaka, 
also known as Vaideha. This Janaka built the great city known as Mithila 


and had a son named Udavasu." 


Udavasu became the father of Nandivardhana, father of Suketu, father of 
Devarata, father of Brihadratha, father of Mahavirya, father of Sudhrti, 
father of Dhristaketu, father of Haryasva, father of Maru, father of 
Pratipaka, father of Kritaratha, father of Devamidha, father of Vishruta, 
father of Mahadhriti, father of Kritirata, father of Maharoma, father of 
Svamaroma, father of Hrasvaroma, father of Siradhvaja. Siradhvaja was also 
called Janaka, like his great ancestor the founder of Mithila. This Janaka 
became father of Sitadevi (appeared from earth during tilling, and who 
married Ramachandra) but he also had a son named Kusadhvaja. 
Kusadhvaja became father of Dharmadhvaja, who had two sons named 
Kritadhvaja and Mitadhvaja. Kritadhvaja became the father of Kesidhvaja, 
who was very expert in spiritual knowledge, while Mitadhvaja became the 
father of Khandikya, who was expert in the performance of ritual 
ceremonies. Kesidhvaja ascended the throne and became the father of 
Bhanuman, father of Satadyumna, father of Suci, father of Sanadvaja, father 
of Urjaketu, father of Aja, father of Purujit, father of Aristanemi, father of 
Stutayu, father of Suparsvaka, father of Citraratha, father of Kshemadhi, 
who became the king of Mithila. Kshemadhi was father of Samaratha, 
father of Satyaratha, father of Upaguru, father of Upagupta, a partial 
emanation of the Deva of fire. Upagupta became father of Vasvananta, 
father of Yuyudha, father of Subhasana, father of Sruta, father of Jaya, 
father of Vijaya, father of Rita, father of Sunaka, father of Vitahavya, father 
of Dhriti, father of Bahulasva, father of Kriti, father of Mahavasi. All the 
kings of the Mithila dynasty were liberated souls who continued to perform 
their social and familiar duties while remaining completely conscious of 
their true spiritual identity. 


151 


Parama Karuna Devi 


The dynasty of the Moon 


Sukadeva told to Parikshit, "Until now I have spoken about the Surya 
Vamsa, the dynasty descending from the Deva of the Sun, Vivasvan. Now I 
will tell you about the dynasty descending from the Deva of the Moon, 
called Soma Vamsa. This dynasty begins from Vishnu, from whose navel 
sprouts the mystic lotus flower on which is born Brahma, the creator of the 
universe. One of Brahma's son, Atri, became the father of Soma, the Deva 
of the Moon, also called Chandra, who was instructed by Brahma to take 
cate of brahmanas, medicines and stats." 


Sukadeva continued by saying that after performing the Rajasuya sacrifice, 
Soma became enamored by Tara, the wife of Brihaspati, and eloped with 
her in spite of the complaints of her husband. In the ensuing war, 
Sukracharya, the priest of the Asuras who is the rival of Brihaspati (the 
priest of the Devas) took sides with Soma, while Shiva came to defend 
Brihaspati. Informed by Angira Rishi, Brahma intervened to stop the 
hostilities and scolded Soma for his escapade. Tara returned to his husband, 
but she was already pregnant with Soma's son, a very handsome youth with 


a golden complexion and immense intelligence, who was named Budha. 


Budha married Ila and became father of king Pururava, whose qualities and 
activities were described by Narada in the heavenly court of Indra, the king 
of the higher planets. One of the Apsaras in the court of Indra, named 
Urvasi, developed a strong desire to meet Pururava and married him, on the 
condition she would eat only foods prepared with clarified butter, and she 
would never have to see him undressed except in the moments of sexual 
intimacy. Besides, Pururava was to guarantee the protection of the two 
lamb pets that Urvasi had brought from the heavenly planets, as she loved 
them as her own children. 


King Indta noticed the absence of Urvasi in his assembly hall, and 
instructed the Gandharvas to bring her back to court. Indra's emissaries 
decided to sneak into Pururava's palace in the night to abduct the two 


lambs, knowing that the king would be forced to rush out to retrieve them, 


152 


Bhagavata Purana 


without having the time to dress up. And so it happened. Running out in a 
hurry, Pururava was wearing nothing but his sword, and while he returned 
catrying the two little animals in his arms, the clever Gandharvas 
illuminated the night with a lightning, and Pururava appeared naked in front 
of Urvasi, thus violating a fundamental condition of their marriage 
agreement. 


Abandoned by Urvasi, Pururava wandered around the entire earth like a 
madman, begging the Apsara to return to him, and finally he found her at 
Kurukshetra, on the bank of the Sarasvati river. When Pururava told her 
that he would not be able to continue living without her and he preferred to 
die, Urvasi gratified him with a virtuous sermon about the defects of 
women, and agreed to spend with him one single day each year, giving him 
glorious children. To pacify the despairing king, the Gandharvas sent him 
another Apsara, Agnisthali, who looked very much like Urvasi, but after 
some time Pururava realized he had been tricked and he left her. 


In the meantime the Treta yuga began, and Pururava was inspired to engage 
in the ritual ceremonies that constitute the religious system prevailing in 
that age. In the place where he had left Agnisthali he found an asvattha 
banyan tree that had grown inside a sami tree, and from that wood he made 
two aranis (instruments for the fire). Since he wanted to attain the heavenly 
planets where Urvasi resided, Pururava started to rub the two aranis to make 
the fire, visualizing them as himself and Urvasi. This is why it is said that 
the fire is the son of Pururava. 


In Satya yuga all the Vedic mantras were contained in the pranava omkara, the 
root of all mantras, and the Atharva Veda was the source of all knowledge. 
The Deity was worshiped only in the supreme form, there was one fire 
only, and human society consisted of one single category of persons, called 
hamsas ("‘swans"). It was Pururava who started the Treta yuga by introducing 
the ritual ceremonies called karma kanda meant to attain the heavenly 
planets. 


From Urvasi, Pururava had six sons, named Ayu, Shrutayu, Satyayu, Raya, 
Vijaya and Jaya. Shrutayu became father of Satyayu; Raya became father of 
Shrutanjaya; Vijaya became father of Bhima. Bhima became father of 
Kanchana, father of Hotraka, father of Jahnu, who drank the water of the 
entite Ganges in one gulp. 


153 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Jahnu became father of Puru, father of Balaka, father of Ajaka, father of 
Kusha, who had four sons: Kushambu, Tanaya, Vasu and Kushanabha. 
Kushambu was father of Gadhi, who had a daughter named Satyavati and a 
son named Visvamitra. 


The brahmana Richika asked Gadhi for the hand of Satyavati, but Gadhi did 
not consider him a good candidate and therefore he asked for an impossible 
gift - at least 1,000 horses as radiant as moonlight, each with one black ear. 
Richika did not become irritated and obtained the horses from Varuna, thus 


succeeding in marrying the princess. 


Later, Richika performed a ritual to propitiate the birth of a son, both for 
his wife and for his mother in law. The Rishi prepared for his wife an 
oblation that would produce a brabmana son, and for the mother in law 
another oblation that would produce a &shatriya child, but Satyavati's 
mother, convinced that the oblation prepared for the young lady was better, 
asked to swap the two preparations. When Richika came to know what had 
happened, he told Satyavati what would happen, and Satyavati begged him 
to put some remedy to the embarrassing situation, so the Rishi moved the 
kshatriya spitit one generation further, assigning it to Satyavati's grandson. 
After the birth of his son Jamadagni, Satyavati became the sacred river 
known as Kaushiki. Jamadagni married Renuka and had many sons, of 
whom the eldest was Vasuman and the youngest was named Rama or 


Parasurama. 


Parasurama is considered an avatara of Vishnu, appeared to exterminate the 
kshatriyas who had tebelled against Vedic culture. The 21 war campaigns of 
Parasurama against the kings of the earth started with the offense 
committed by Kartavirya Arjuna, the king of the Haihayas. This Kartavirya 
Arjuna had offered worship to the avafara Dattatreya and received from him 
great mystic powers, 1,000 arms and other boons that made him invincible 
and extremely powerful. One day Kartavirya Arjuna was taking bath in the 
Narmada river in the company of very beautiful women, and to amuse 
himself he blocked the current of the river with his arms, forcing the waters 
to flow backwards and inundating the camp of Ravana, the king of the 
Rakshasas, who was in the region of Mahismati Puri, the capital of 
Kartavirya Arjuna. When Ravana tried to stop him, Kartavirya Arjuna 
captured him very easily and then released him with great indifference. 


154 


Bhagavata Purana 


Another day Kartavirya Arjuna was hunting in the forest and arrived at the 
ashrama of Jamadagni, the son of Richika Rishi. Jamadagni welcomed the 
king and his retinue with full honors, using the supplies provided by the 
kamadbenu cow who lived with him in the ashrama. The king was impressed 
by the value of the Ramadhenu and thought she would be perfect to supply 
all the provisions he needed for the Agnihotra sacrifice he wanted to 
perform. So he decided to snatch the kamadhenu and took her to Mahismati 
Puri aided by his men. 


When Parasurama, the youngest son of Jamadagni, came to know what had 
happened, he became extremely angry and taking many weapons pursued 
the king to his capital. Parasurama was radiant like the sun - he was dressed 
with a black antelope skin and kept his hair matted like the Rishis, but he 
was armed with his famous axle (parasw), a shield, and bow and arrows. 


Kartavirya Arjuna launched the attack with 17 akshauhini battalions, 
composed by elephants, chariots, horsemen and infantry, all equipped with 
many weapons, but Parasurama annihilated them all, cutting all the warriors 
into pieces and soaking the earth with blood. The king himself came to the 
battlefield, simultaneously raising 500 arrows on as many bows, but with 
one single bow, Parasurama shot enough arrows to neutralize all the king's 
arrows. Then Kartavirya Arjuna resorted to tree trunks and big rocks 
uprooted by his arms, and Parasurama replied by pruning off those arms 
with his axle. Then finally he beheaded him and took the kamadhenu cow 
back to his father's ashrama. 


Jamadagni was not very happy at the news that the king had been killed, 
and ordered Parasurama to purify himself from the consequences of such 
action by visiting the holy places for one entire year, and Parasurama 
immediately obeyed his order. 


One day Renuka, Jamadagni's wife, had gone to the bank of the Ganges to 
fetch water, but had remained fascinated by watching Citraratha, the king of 
the Gandharvas, who had descended to play in the river with the Apsaras. 
Renuka totally forgot her duties and came back to the ashrama carrying the 
water only when it was too late for the ritual ceremony. Jamadagni was very 
displeased and ordered her to be punished. Parasurama understood the 
reason of his father's anger and immediately killed his mother and his 
brothers too, who had remained indifferent to the fathet's orders. 


155 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Immediately afterwards, Parasurama asked his father to bring them all back 
to life without any memory of what had happened, and Jamadagni obliged. 


In the meantime the sons of Kartavirya Arjuna had not forgotten their 
defeat; they sneaked into the ashrama of Jamadagni and killed him while 
Parasurama and his brothers were in the forest. After returning to the 
ashrama and mourning his father's death, Parasurama decided to personally 
exterminate all the rebellious &shatriyas, beginning with the heirs of 
Kartavirya Arjuna. He went to Mahismati Puri and made a hillock in the 
middle of the city with the severed heads of the sons of Kartavirya Arjuna, 
then he went to war against all the &shatriya rebels, creating nine lakes with 
their blood in the place known as Samanta panchaka. Finally he returned to 
the ashrama and performed the ritual ceremonies to bring back his father to 
life and raise him to the position he still occupies among the seven Rishis. 
In the next manvantara, under the reign of the next Manu, Parasurama will 
also become one of the seven Rishis. In the meantime he still lives on 


Earth, in the hilly region known as Mahendra. 


Due to the exchange of oblations caused by his mother, Visvamitra (son of 
Gadhi and brother of Satyavati, the mother of Jamadagni) was born with 
the tendency to be a brabmana, and in fact from the position of &shatriya he 
attained the position of Brahma Rishi by performing powerful austerities. 
Visvamitra had 101 sons, of whom the eldest was Madhucchanda, but he 
adopted Sunahsepa, the son of Ajigarta born in the Bhrigu dynasty and also 
known as Devarata. This Sunahsepa had been meant to become the 
sacrificial victim in the yajna of Harischandra, but he was released by the 
Devas. When Visvamitra asked his sons to accept Sunahsepa as their eldest 
brother they refused, thus earning the curse that turned them into chandalas 
(uncivilized people who do not follow the rules of Vedic society). Half of 
them later decided to accept Visvamitra's order and were blessed to 
continue the dynasty. 


Purutava became the father of Ayu, who fathered Nahusha, 
Kshatravriddha, Raji, Rabha and Anena. These are the descendants of 
Kshatravriddha: his son Suhotra had three sons, named Kasya, Kusha and 
Gritsamada. Gritsamada became father of Sunaka, father of Saunaka, the 
great saint expert in the hymns of the Ri Veda. Kasya became father of 
Kasi, father of Rastra, father of Dirghatama, father of Dhanvantari, the 


156 


Bhagavata Purana 


incarnation of the Lord who started the science of medicine. Dhanvantari 
became father of Ketuman, father of Bhimaratha, father of Divodasa, 
father of Dyuman, also known by the names of Pratardana, Satrujit, Vatsa, 
Ritadhvaja and Kuvalayasva. Dyuman became father of Alarka, who ruled 
eatth for 66,000 years. Alarka became father of Santati, father of Sunitha, 
father of Niketana, father of Dharmaketu, father of Satyaketu, father of 
Dhristaketu, father of Sukumara, who was the emperor of the entire world. 
Sukumara had a son named Vitihotra, father of Bharga, father of 
Bhargabhumi. 


Pururava's grandson named Rabha (son of Ayu) became father of Rabhasa, 
father of Gambhira, father of Akriya, father of Brahmavit. Another 
grandson of Pururava named Anena (also son of Ayu) became father of 
Suddha, father of Suci, father of Dharmasarathi, also called Citrakrit. This 
Citrakrit had a son named Santaraja, a realized soul who performed all kinds 
of Vedic sacrifices and had no sons. The grandson of Pururava named Raji 
(also son of Ayu) had 500 extremely powerful sons. On the request of the 
Devas, Raji battled against the Asuras and killed them, restoring the 
kingdom of the heavenly planets to Indra. However, Indta feared the power 
of Prahlada, and asked Raji to personally take care of the heavenly kingdom. 
At the death of Raji, Indra went to Raji's sons to ask them to return the 
kingdom, but they refused. Then Indra turned to Brihaspati, who 
performed a ritual to cause the downfall of Raji's sons, who became 
degraded and abandoned the principles of ethics, thus becoming vulnerable 
- and Indra was able to kill them all. 


The grandson of Pururava named Kshatravriddha (also son of Ayu) had a 
grandson named Kusha, father of Prati, father of Sanjaya, father of Jaya, 
father of Krita, father of Haryabala, father of Sahadeva, father of Hina, 
father of Jayasena, father of Sankriti, father of Jaya, who was a very great 
warrior. The grandson of Pururava named Nahusha (also son of Ayu) had 
six sons named Yati, Yayati, Samyati, Ayati, Viyati and Kriti. The eldest of 
them, Yati, renouced the throne offered by his father and chose instead to 
engage in spiritual life. Yati's father Nahusha molested Saci, Indra's wife, 
and was cursed by the Rishis to become a python. Then his second son, 
Yayati, became king and married Devayani (the daughter of Sukracharya) 
and Sarmistha (the daughter of the Asura Vrishaparva). 


157 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Because it is usually the daughters of &shatriyas who marty brabmanas and 
not the other way around, Maharaja Parikshit asked Sukadeva to tell how it 
happened that the daughter of the great Sukracharya had become the wife 
of king Yayati. 


Sukadeva explained, "Devayani was the friend of Sarmistha, and one day 
they went together to take bath in the river. Suddenly they saw Shiva and 
his consort Parvati arriving, seated on the bull Vrishabha, and they quickly 
came out to the water to dress up. In the confusion, Sarmistha mistakenly 
put on Devayani's clothes and Devayani got very angry. She considered 
Sarmistha's father as a mere disciple of her own father, Sukracharya, so 
Devayani insulted her companion for committing such a disrespectful 
action, but Sarmistha replied harshly, and in a fit of rage she even tore 
Devayani's clothes off and threw her into a well. 


Not long afterwards, king Yayati arrived there and found that a beautiful 
girl without clothes was trapped in the well. Immediately he rescued her and 
gave her his own shawl to cover herself. After helping her to come out of 
the well, he saluted her with kind and affectionate words. Fascinated by the 
young and handsome king, Devayani immediately decided to marry him, 
and reassured him by saying that she would never marry a brahmana anyway 
because of a curse she had received from Kacha, the son of Brihaspati. 
Then she returned to the house of her father Sukracharya and complained 
about how she had been treated by Sarmistha. Weeping with anger, she 
asked him to order Sarmistha's father to send the girl to become one of 
thousands of maidservants when she went to marty the king. 


After avenging herself in this way, Devayani warned Yayati that he should 
never have sexual relationship with Sarmistha, but when Sarmistha saw that 
Devayani had given birth to a child, she decided to approach Yayati and 
convince him to give a child to her, too. Thus Devayani became the mother 
of Yadu and Turvasu, while Sarmistha gave birth to Druhyu, Anu and Putu. 
When Devayani came to know that Yayati had fathered the children of her 
tival Sarmistha, she was overwhelmed by a furious anger and abandoned 
her husband to return to her father's house. Yayati was very attached to her 
and he pursued to beg her to come back, but in vain. Furthermore, he was 
cursed by Sukracharya, who condemned him to become prematurely old 
and invalid. When Yayati reminded him that such a curse would also create 


158 


Bhagavata Purana 


problems to Devayani, Sukracharya agreed to allow him to exchange his 
invalidity with the youthful strength of another person who would be 
willing to give it to him. 


Yayati asked help from his various sons, and it was the youngest son of 
Sarmistha, Puru, who agreed to the exchange. So the king was able to enjoy 
one thousand years of material pleasure in the company of his wife 
Devayani and ruled wisely, also performing many sacrifices to worship the 
Deity. Finally he became free from material desires and took leave from 
Devayani, restoring his youth to Puru and accepting old age. After giving 
kingdoms to all his sons, he put Puru on the imperial throne over all his 
other brothers, who were older than him. 


The emperor Puru became father of king Janamejaya, father of Pracinvan, 
father of Pravira, father of Manusyu, father of Charupada, father of Sudyu, 
father of Bahugava, father of Samyati, father of Ahamyati, father of 
Raudrasva, who married the Apsara Ghritaci and had from her ten sons 
named Riteyu, Kaksheyu, Sthandileyu, Kriteyuka, Jaleyu, Sannateyu, 
Dharmeyu, Satyeyu, Vrateyu and Vaneyu. Riteyu became father of 
Rantinava, who had three sons named Sumati, Dhruva and Apratiratha. 
Apratiratha had only one son, Kanva. Kanva was father of Medhatithi, who 
became father of many brabmanas including Praskanna. The son of Riteyu 
called Rantinava became father of Sumati, father of Rebhi, father of the 
famous Maharaja Dusmanta. 


One day king Dusmanta was hunting in the forest, and while searching for 
a place to rest he arrived at the ashrama of Kanva Muni. There he saw 
Sakuntala, a girl of incredible beauty, who was the daughter of Visvamitra 
and the Apsara Menaka; she had been abandoned at birth by her mother 
and adopted by Kanva Muni. Completely fascinated by the beauty of the 
girl, Dusmanta immediately married her with the Gandharva ritual and the 
next morning he returned to his capital. In due time Sakuntaka gave birth to 
a son, Bharata, who was a pattial emanation of God, and who grew up in 
the forest becoming so strong that he used lions as toys. Later Sakuntala 
went to the court of Dusmanta to present his son, and when Dusmanta 
died, Bharata ascended the throne. 


Maharaja Bharata, the son of Dusmanta, carried the mark of the Sudarshana 
on his right palm and lotus flowers on the soles of his feet. Assisted by 


159 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Bhrigu Muni he performed 55 Asvamedha yajnas in various places along 
the bank of the Ganges, from the estuary to the source, and another 78 
along the river Yamuna, from the confluence of Prayaga up to the source. 
He fought successfully against the various uncivilized populations known as 
Kirata, Huna, Yavana, Paundra, Kanka, Khasa and Saka, and rescued the 
wifes and daughters of the Devas who had been kidnapped and imprisoned 
on Rasatala. 


Maharaja Bharata married the three daughters of the king of Vidarbha, but 
because their sons did not look like the father, the queens killed them. To 
obtain a worthy heir, Bharata performed the sacrifice known as Marut 
stoma, and from the Maruts he obtained a son called Bharadvaja. Actually 
this son had been fathered by Brihaspati with Mamata, his brother's wife, 
and had been taken in by the Maruts. Bharadhvaja, also known as Vitatha, 
became father of Manyu, who had five sons: Brihatkshatra, Jaya, Mahavirya, 
Nara and Garga. Among these, Nara became father of Sankriti, who had 


two sons, named Guru and Rantideva. 


Rantideva became famous among the human beings and the heavenly 
beings for his complete freedom from attachments and his generosity 
towards guests. One day, after remaining without food for 48 days, 
Rantideva received water and some food prepared with milk and clarified 
butter, but just as he was starting to eat together with his family, a brabmana 
guest arrived at his door. After offering a share of the food to the brahmana, 
Rantideva and his family again sat for dinner, but just at that moment a 
sudra arrived. The sudra, too, received his share, and after him a chandala who 
came accompanied by his dogs. Rantideva gave up all his food and water to 
please the last guest, and declared that his greatest ambition was to live to 
alleviate the sufferings of others. 


Among the sons of Manyu (son of Bharadhvaja), Garga became father of 
Sini, father of Gargya, who was a &shatriya but had many brabmana sons. 
Mahavirya, brother of Garga, became father of Duritakshaya, who fathered 
Trayyaruni, Kavi and Pushkararuni. Also these descendants of &shatriyas 
became brabmanas. Brihatkshatra, brother of Mahavirya and Garga, became 
the father of Hasti, who founded the city of Hastinapura. King Hasti had 
three sons named Ajamidha, Dvimidha and Purumidha. Dvimidha became 
father of Yavinara, father of Kritiman, father of Satyadhriti, father of 


160 


Bhagavata Purana 


Dridhanemi, father of Suparsva, father of Sumati, father of Sannatiman, 
father of Kriti, who obtained from Brahma mystic powers and taught six 
Sambitas from the Pracyasama verses of Sama Veda. Kriti became father of 
Nipa, father of Udgrayudha, father of Kshemya, father of Suvira, father of 
Ripunjaya, father of Bahuratha. The third son of Hasti, Purumidha, had no 
sons. 


All the descendants of Ajamidha became brahmanas. Ajamidha was father of 
Brihadishu, father of Brihaddhanu, father of Brihatkaya, father of 
Jayadratha, father of Vishada, father of Syenajit, father of Rucirasva, 
Kridhahanu, Kasya and Vatsa. Rucirasva became father of Para, father of 
Prithusena and Nipa, who had 100 sons. One of these, Brahmadatta, 
became a great yogi and was the father of Visvakshena, who following the 
instructions of the great Rishi Jaigisavya compiled an elaborate description 
of the system of mystic yoga. Visvakshena became father of Udakshena, 
father of Bhallata. 


Another son of Ajamidha, Nila (the son of queen Nalini), became father of 
Shanti, father of Sushanti, father of Puruja, father of Arka, father of 
Bharmyasva, who had five sons: Mudgala, Yavinara, Brihadvisva, Kampilla 
and Sanjaya. These sons became known as the Panchalas, and the regions 
where they ruled became known as Panchala desha. Mugdala was the 
progenitor of a dynasty of brabmanas known as Maudgalyas. He fathered 
two twins - a boy named Divodasa and a girl named Ahalya. Ahalya married 
Gautama and gave birth to Satananda, who became father of Satyadhriti, 
the famous archer. Satyadhriti became father of Saradvan, who by meeting 
the Apsara Urvasi had an ejaculation of sperm, which fell on a tuft of sara 
grass, and from which two children were born - a boy called Kripa and a 
girl called Kripi. The two children were adopted by Maharaja Santanu and 
later Kripi became the wife of Dronacharya. 


Divodasa (son of Bhimaratha, one of the descendants of Pururava that we 
have already mentioned) fathered Dyuman and also Mitrayu, who had four 
sons named Cyavana, Sudasa, Sahadeva and Somaka. Somaka became 
father of Jantu and other 99 sons, the eldest of whom was Prishata, who 
became the father of king Drupada. Drupada became the father of 
Draupadi and several sons, including Dhristadyumna, father of Dhristaketu. 
Another son of Ajamidha, Riksha, became father of Samvarana, who 


161 


Parama Karuna Devi 


married Tapati, the daughter of the Deva of the Sun and fathered Kuru, the 
king from whom Kurukshetra takes its name. Kuru had four sons: Parikshi, 
Sudhanu, Jahnu and Nishadha. Sudhanu became father of Suhotra, father 
of Cyavana, father of Kriti, father of Uparicara Vasu, who had many sons 
including Brihadratha, Kushamba, Matsya, Pratyagra and Cedipa. All the 
sons of Uparicara Vasu ruled over the kingdom of Cedi. 


Brihadratha became father of Kushagra, father of Rishabha, father of 
Satyahita, father of Pushpavan, father of Jahu. From another wife, 
Brihadratha fathered a son who was born in two pieces. Because he seemed 
stillborn, the baby was thrown into the forest, where a Rakshasi called Jara 
picked him up and brought him back to life. For this reason the child 
became known as Jarasandha. Jarasandha became father of Sahadeva, 
father of Somapi, father of Shrutashrava. 


The son of Kuru named Parikshi did not have any children, but his brother 
Jahnu had a son named Suratha. Suratha became father of Viduratha, father 
of Sarvabhauma, father of Jayasena, father of Radhika, father of Ayutayu, 
father of Akrodhana, father of Devatithi, father of Riksha, father of Dilipa, 
father of Pratipa, who fathered Devapi, Santanu and Bahlika. Because of a 
conspiracy plotted by a minister of Santanu, Devapi left his father's 
kingdom to go to the forest and the throne went to Santanu, who in a 
previous lifetime was known as Mahabhisa and had the power to restore 
youth to people simply by touching them with his hands. 


At some point the kingdom was hit by a terrible drought, and for twelve 
years there were no rains. The brabmanas consulted by the king said that the 
disaster was due to the condemnable action committed by Santanu in 
usurping the throne belonging to his elder brother, and they recommended 
to re-establish the proper order by asking Devapi to become king. 
However, when Devapi was presented with the proposal, he refused. 
Santanu then became the king again and the drought was ended by the 
blessing of Indra. On the other hand, Devapi took the path of mystic yoga 
and went to live at Kalapagrama, where he still resides waiting for the Kali 
yuga to end and for a new Satya yuga to start, for the renovation of the 
Moon dynasty. 


Santanu married Ganga and fathered Bhishma, the great devotee and 


scholar and the most famous among all warriors, who defeated Parasurama 


162 


Bhagavata Purana 


in battle and received his blessings. From Satyavati, the daughter of a 
fisherman, Santanu fathered Citrangada and Vicitravirya. Citrangada was 
killed by a Gandharva who had the same name. Before marrying Santanu, 
Satyavati had given birth to Vyasa from Parasara Rishi. 


"Vyasa is my father," Sukadeva told Maharaja Parikshit, "and I learned the 
Bhagavata Purana from him. He taught it to me rather than to his disciples 
because I was free from material desires. 


Vicitravirya married the two daughters of the king of Kasi, named Ambika 
and Ambalika, but he died before he could have any children. On the 
request of his mother Satyavati, Vyasa fathered Dhritarashtra, Pandu and 
Vidura respectively from Ambika, Ambalika and their maidservant. The 
wife of Dhritarastra, Gandhari, gave birth to 100 sons - the eldest being 
Duryodhana - and one daughter, Duhsala. 


Because of the curse of a brahmana, Pandu was not able to have children, 
therefore his three sons Yudhisthira, Bhima and Arjuna were generated by 
his wife Kunti respectively with Dharmaraja, Vayu and Indra. Pandu's 
second wife, named Madri, gave birth to Nakula and Sahadeva from the 


two Asvini kumaras. 


The queen of the Pandavas, Draupadi, gave birth to five sons, who are your 
uncles. From Yudhisthira she had Prativindhya, from Bhima she had 
Srutasena, from Arjuna she had Srutakirti, from Nakula she had Satanika, 
and ftom Sahadeva she had Srutakarma. The Pandavas also had other sons 
from other wives. Yudhisthira married Pauravi and fathered Devaka. Bhima 
fathered Ghatotkacha from Hidimbi and Sarvagata from Kali. Sahadeva 
married Vijaya, daughter of the mountains, and fathered Suhotra. Nakula 
married Karenumati and fathered Naramitra. Arjuna married Ulupi, 
princess of the Nagas, and fathered Iravan. He also married Chitrangada, 
princess of Maniputa, and fathered Babhruvahana, who was adopted as son 
and heir by the king of Manipur. Arjuna also married Subhadra, who gave 
birth to your father Abhimanyu, who married your mother Uttara, the 
daughter of king Viraja. The Kuru dynasty was annihilated in the battle of 
Kurukshetra and even you were going to be killed by the brahmastra nuclear 
weapon shot by Dronacharya's son, but you have been saved by the 
Supreme Personality of God." 


163 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Sukadeva continued, "My dear king, of your four sons - Janamejaya, 
Shrutasena, Bhimasena and Ugrasena - Janamejaya is the eldest, your heir 
and successor. Angered by your death due to the Takshaka serpent, he will 
perform a ritual to exterminate all the snakes of the world. Assisted by the 
priest Tura, son of Kalasa, Janamejaya will perform many Asvamedha 
yajnas, therefore he will be known as Turagamedhasat. Satanika, the son of 
Janamejaya, will learn the three Vedas from Yajnavalkya and became expert 
in the performance of sacrifices. From Kripacharya he will learn the military 
arts, and from Saunaka Rishi he will learn the transcendental science. 
Satanika will become father of Sahasranika, who will be father of 
Asvamedhaja, father of Asimakrishna, father of Nemichakra, who will 
move the capital from Hastinapura to Kausambi because of a great flood. 


Nemichakra will be father of Citraratha, father of Suciratha, father of 
Vristiman, father of Sushena, who will rule over the entire world. Sushena 
will become father of Sunitha, father of Nrichakshu, father of Sukhinala, 
father of Pariplava, father of Sunaya, father of Medhavi, father of 
Ntipanjaya, father of Durva, father of Timi, father of Brihadratha, father of 
Sudasa, father of Satanika, father of Durdamana, father of Mahinara, father 
of Dandapani, father of Nimi, who will be father of Kshemaka, the last king 
in Kali yuga." 


Sukadeva continued by describing the future of the Magadha dynasty: 
Shrutadeva, the son of Jarasandha, would become father of Marjari, father 
of Shrutasrava, father of Yutayu, father of Niramitra, father of Sunakshatra, 
father of Brihatsena, father of Karmajit, father of Sutanjaya, father of Vipra, 
father of Suci, father of Kshema, father of Suvrata, father of Dharmasutra, 
father of Sama, father of Dyumatsena, father of Sumati, father of Subala, 
father of Sunitha, father of Satyajit, father of Visvajit, father of Ripunjaya. 
Their dynasty would rule for 1,000 years. 


Among the sons of Yayati, the fourth was named Anu and had three sons: 
Sabhanara, Chakshu and Pareshnu. Sabhanara became father of Kalanara, 
father of Srinjaya, father of Janamejaya, father of Mahasala, father of 
Mahamana, who had two sons, named Usinara and Titikshu. The four sons 
of Usinara were Sibi, Vara, Krimi and Daksha, in this order. Sibi, too, had 
four sons - Vrisadarbha, Sudhira, Madra and Kekaya, who was a realized 
soul. Titikshu became father of Rushadratha, father of Homa, father of 


164 


Bhagavata Purana 


Sutapa, father of Bali. Bali became emperor, and with the help of 
Dirghatama he had six sons named Anga, Vanga, Kalinga, Suhma, Pundra 
and Odra - each of them became the ruler of one kindgom to which they 
gave their names. Anga became father of Khalapana, father of Diviratha, 
father of Dharmaratha, father of Citraratha, who became famous as 
Romapada. Romapada had no children and adopted Santa, the daughter of 
Maharaja Dasaratha, who was his friend. Santa married Rishyasringa, a Rishi 
who lived in the forest. 


In those times, the kingdom suffered from a serious drought and on the 
advice of the brabmanas the king put Rishyasringa in charge of the sacrificial 
ceremonies, attracting him out from the forest by a group of beautiful 
women who danced and played re-enactments for him. The arrival of the 
Rishi immediately brought the rains. Later, Rishyasringa performed a 
sacrifice for Dasaratha, who became father of Chaturanga, father of 
Prithulaksha, who had three sons: Brihadratha, Brihatkarma and 
Brihadbhanu. Brhadratha became father of Brihanmana, father of 
Jayadratha, father of Vijaya, father of Dhriti, father of Dhritavrata, father of 
Satkarma, father of Adhiratha. 


While he was on the bank of the Ganges, Adiratha found a baby in a 
floating basket - that was the son of Kunti, abandoned by his mother 
because he had been born before her marriage. Adiratha did not have any 
children and so he adopted the child, who became famous as Karna. Karna 


had only one son, Vrishasena. 


Druhyu, the third son of Yayati, became father of Babhru, father of Setu, 
father of Arabdha, father of Gandhara, father of Dharma, father of Dhrita, 
father of Durmada, father of Praceta, who had 100 sons who settled in the 
north, where there were no civilized human habitations. Turvasu, the 
second son of Yayati, became father of Vahni, father of Bharga, father of 
Bhanuman, father of Tribhanu, father of Karandhama, father of Maruta, 
who did not have children and thus adopted Dushmanta, descendant of the 
dynasty of Puru. Although he had been adopted by Maruta, Dushmanta 


returned to his original dynasty because he wanted to become emperor. 


Yayati's eldest son was Yadu, whose descendence became famous as 
Krishna, the Supreme Personality of God, appeared in this dynasty. 


165 


Parama Karuna Devi 


The advent of Krishna 


Sukadeva said, "The Supreme Personality of God appears in this world 
when the universal principles of religion and ethics deteriorate and people 
are degraded. No one forces him to appear or to perform any other action, 
because he is perfectly independent. Sri Krishna descended together with 
Sankarshana, also called Balarama, to manifest fascinating activities that are 
beyond the understanding of the most intelligent persons. I will now 


describe to you the descendants of Yadu, the ancestor of Krishna." 


Yadu had four sons: Sahasrajit, Krosta, Nala and Ripu. Sahasrajit, the eldest, 
became father of Satajit, who had three sons: Mahahaya, Renuhaya and 
Haihaya. Haihaya became father of Dharma, father of Netra, father of 
Kunti, father of Sohanji, father of Mahisman, father of Bhadrasena, who 
had two sons - Durmada and Dhanaka. Dhanaka became father of 
Kritavirya, Kritagni, Kritavarma and Kritauja. 


Kritavirya became the father of emperor Kartavirya Arjuna, who obtained 
the eight perfections of the mystic powers from the avatara Dattatreya and 
tuled for 85,000 years. Of the 1,000 sons of Kartavirya Arjuna only five 
sutvived the massacre by Parasurama: Jayadhvaja, Surasena, Vrishabha, 
Madhu and Urjita. 


Jayadhvaja became father of Talajangha, who had 100 sons, of all whom 
perished because of the great power that Maharaja Sagara had received 
from Autva Rishi. The eldest son of Talajangha, Vitihotra, became father of 
Madhu. Madhu had 100 sons, of whom the eldest was Vrishni. Yadu, 
Madhu and Vrishni were the progenitors of the dynasties known as Yadava, 
Madhava and Vrishni. 


Krosta, the son of Yadu, became father of Vrijinavan, father of Svahita, 
father of Vishadeu, father of Citramitha, father of Sasabindu, who was a 
great mystic yogi and possessed fourteen great magic jewels that enabled 
him to become the emperor of the entire world. Sasabindu had 10,000 
wives and 100,000 sons. 


166 


Bhagavata Purana 


The most important were Prithushrava and Prithukirti. Prithushrava 
became father of Dharma, father of Usana, who performed 100 Asvamedha 
yajnas. Usana became father of Ruchaka, who had five sons: Purujit, 
Rukma, Rukmeshu, Prithu and Jyamagha. 


Jyamagha had no sons, but he could not take another wife as he was afraid 
of his first queen Saibya. One day he brought home a prostitute, and when 
Saibya threateningly asked him who that woman was, Jyamagha answered 
she was a bride for their son. To honor his word, Jyamagha performed 
sacrificial rituals to the Pitris and with their blessings Saibya became the 
mother of Vidarbha, who actually later married the girl and had three sons 
known as Kusha, Kratha and Romapada. 


Romapada became father of Babhru, father of Kriti, father of Ushika, 
father of Cedi. Kratha became father of Kunti, who was father of Vrishni, 
father of Nirvriti, father of Dasarha, father of Vyoma, father of Jimuta, 
father of Vikriti, father of Bhimaratha, father of Navaratha, father of 
Dasaratha, father of Shakuni, father of Karambhi, father of Devarata, father 
of Devakshatra, father of Madhu, father of Kuruvasa, father of Anu, father 
of Puruhotra, father of Ayu, father of Satvata. 


Satvata had seven sons: Bhajamana, Bhaji, Divya, Vrishni, Devavridha, 
Andhaka and Mahabhoja. Bhajamana had two wives, who gave birth to 
three sons each, respectively Nimloci, Kinkana, Dhristi and Satajit, 
Sahashrajit and Ayutajit. Devavriddha was father of Babhru; both of them 
became very famous for their great spiritual qualities, and in fact it is said 


they earned liberation for all their descendants. 


Vrishni became father of Sumitra and Yudhajit. Yudhajit was father of Sini 
and Anamitra, who was father of Nighna, who had two sons, Satrajita and 
Prasena. Another son of Anamitra and brother of Nighna was Sini, father 
of Satyaka, father of Yuyudhana, father of Jaya, father of Kuni, father of 
Yugandhara. Another son of Anamitra, Vrishni, became father of 
Svaphalka and Citraratha. Svaphalka married Gandini and became father of 
thirteen sons, of whom the eldest was Akrura. The brothers of Akrura were 
Asanga, Sarameya, Mridura, Mriduvit, Giri, Dharmavriddha, Sukarma, 
Kshetropeksha, Arimardana, Satrughna, Gandhamada and Pratibahu. They 
also had a sister, named Suchara. Akrura had two sons: Devavan and 
Upadeva. 


167 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Among the seven sons of Satvata, Andhaka had four sons named Kukura, 
Bhajamana, Suci and Kambalabarhisa. Kukura was father of Vahni, father 
of Viloma, father of Kapotaroma, father of Anu, the friend of Tumburu. 
Anu was father of Andhaka, father of Dundubhi, father of Avidyota, father 
of Punarvasu. Punarvasu had a son and a daughter named Ahuka and 
Abuki. Ahuka had two sons, Devaka and Ugrasena. 


Devaka had four sons named Devavan, Upadeva, Sudeva and 
Devavardhana, and seven daughters named Dhritadeva, Santideva, 
Upadeva, Srideva, Devarakshita, Sahadeva and Devaki. All seven of them 
married Vasudeva, the father of Krishna. 


Uerasena, brother of Devaka, had nine sons named Kamsa, Sunama, 
Nyagtodha, Kanka, Sanku, Suhu, Rashtrapala, Dhristi and Tushtiman, and 
five daughters named Kamsa, Kamsavati, Kanka, Surabhumi and 
Rastrapalika, who married Vasudeva's younger brothers. 


Citraratha, brother of Svaphalka and son of Vrishni, had many sons 
including Prithu and Viduratha. Viduratha was father of Sura, father of 
Bhajamana, father of Sini, father of Bhoja, father of Hrdika, who had three 
sons: Devamidha, Satadhanu and Kritavarma. Devamidha was father of 
Sura, who married Marisa and fathered Vasudeva, Devabhaga, Devashrava, 
Anaka, Srinjaya, Syamaka, Kanka, Samika, Vatsaka and Vrika. The eldest of 
these ten sons, Vasudeva, was also known as Anakadundubhi because his 


birth was celebrated by the heavenly beings who played their drums. 


Furthermore, Sura had five daughters named Pritha, Shrutadeva, 
Shrutakirti, Shrutasrava and Rajadhidevi. King Kunti, a friend of Sura, had 
no children and so he adopted Pritha, who became known also as Kunti. 
One day Durvasa was guest in the house of Kunti's father and the girl 
enged sincerely in the Muni's service. To reward her, Durvasa gave her the 


power to call any Deva. 


A bit skeptic and in a playful mood, young Kunti decided to make an 
experiment and called the Deva of the Sun, without being aware that all her 
encounters with a Deva would produce a son. Immediately a child was 
born, radiant like the sun, but Kunti did not dare keep him because she was 
ashamed of her superficial action, so she put the child in a tarred basket and 
floated him down the river. 


168 


Bhagavata Purana 


Later Kunti married Pandu, while her sister Shrutadeva married the king of 
Karusha, Vriddhasharma, and gave birth to Dantavakra, who in a previous 
lifetime had appeared as Hiranyaksha, the son of Diti. 


Another sister of Kunti, Shrutakirti, married the king of Kekaya, 
Dhristaketu, and had five sons, of whom the eldest was Santardana. 
Rajadhidevi married Jayasena and had two sons, Vinda and Anuvinda. 
Shrutashrava married the king of Cedi, Damaghosha, and gave birth to 
Sishupala, who in a previous lifetime had appeared as Hiranyakashipu, 
brother of Hiranyaksha and son of Diti. 


The daughters of Ugrasena who married the brothers of Vasudeva also had 
children. Kamsa the wife of Devabhaga had two sons, Citraketu and 
Brihadbala. Kamsavati, the wife of Devashrava, had two sons, Suvita and 
Isuman. Kanka married Kanka and gave birth to Baka, Satyajit and Purujit. 
Rashtrapalika married king Srinjaya and had several sons, including Vrisha 
and Durmarshana. Surabhumi married king Syamaka and had two sons, 
Harikesha and Hiranyaksha. Among the brothers of Vasudeva, king 
Vatsaka married the Apsara Misrakeshi and had many sons, of whom the 
eldest was Vrika (who was named after his uncle). Vrika (the brother of 
Vasudeva and Vatsaka) married Durvakshi and had many sons, headed by 
Taksha, Pushkara and Sala. Samika married Sudamani and had many sons, 
headed by Sumitra and Arjunapala. Anaka married Karnika and had two 
sons, Ritadhama and Jaya. 


Vasudeva had many wives, headed by Devaki, Pauravi, Rohini, Bhadra, 
Madira, Rochana and Ila. Rohini, the eldest, had many sons, including Bala 
(Balarama), Gada, Sharana, Durmada, Vipula, Dhruva and Krita. 


Pauravi had twelve sons, of whom the most famous ate Bhuta, Subhadra, 
Bhadrabahu, Durmada and Bhadra. Madira had many sons, including 
Nanda, Upananda, Kritaka and Sura. Bhadra, also called Kausalya, had only 
one son named Kesi. Rochana gave birth to many sons, including Hasta 
and Hemangada. Ila had many sons including Uruvalka. Dhritadeva had 
one son only, named Vipristha. Santideva had many sons including Prasama 
and Prasita. Upadeva had ten sons, including Rajanya, Kalpa and Varsha. 
Srideva had six sons, including Vasu, Hamsa and Suvamsa. Devarakshita 
had nine sons, headed by Gada. Sahadeva had eight sons, headed by Shruta 
and Pravara, who were incarnations of the heavenly beings known as Vasus. 


169 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Devaki had eight sons: Kirtiman, Sushena, Bhadrasena, Riju, Saminardana, 
Bhadra and Sankarshana, who is the avatara of Sesha Naga. The eighth son 
of Devaki was Krishna, the Supreme Personality of God. Devaki also had a 
daughter, Subhadra, who was Parikshit's grandmother. 


Krishna performed many activities, assisted by the descendants of Bhoja, 
Vrishni, Andhaka, Madhu, Surasena, Dasarha, Kuru, Srinjaya and Pandu. 
He appeared as the son of Vasudeva, but immediately he left for 
Vrindavana to manifest loving relationships with his most intimate 
devotees. There he killed many demons, then he moved to Dvaraka, where 
he married many women, gave them many sons and performed ritual 
ceremonies. The Lord participated to the battle of Kurukshetra, in which 
many evil people were annihilated, and finally he instructed Uddhava on 
transcendental life and devotion before returning to his eternal abode. 


Maharaja Parikshit was very eager to hear about all these activities of 
Krishna, who was his benefactor and the friend and protector of his family, 
and Sukadeva obliged. Before the advent of Krishna, Mother Earth was 
burdened by the weight of the immense armies of many demoniac persons 
who occupied the positions of king without having the required qualities. In 
the form of a cow and accompanied by Brahma and all the other Devas, 
Bhumi Devi went to ask for help from Vishnu, who was resting on the milk 
ocean. Brahma offered worship to Vishnu reciting the Pwrusha sukfa, then 
he relayed the Lord's answer to the Devas. 


"Sri Vishnu was already aware of the situation and has decided to descend 
to the earth as the son of Vasudeva to personally take care of the problem. 
All you Devas should take birth in the Yadu dynasty together with your 


wives, to assist his mission." 


The city of Mathura, founded by the son of Ramachandra, had become the 
capital of the Yadu dynasty as Surasena had settled there. 


Vasudeva, a descendant of Surasena, had just married Devaki and climbed 
into the chariot to take her to her new home. To please her sister, Kamsa 
had volunteered to drive the chariot, but suddenly he heard a mysterious 
voice that said, "Kamsa, beware! The eighth son of the woman you are 
driving will kill you!" 


170 


Bhagavata Purana 


Immediately Kamsa grabbed her sister's hait and took up his sword to kill 
her, and only the timely intervention of Vasudeva stopped him from 
committing that crime. "Dear brother in law," Vasudeva said, "we all must 
die because the body is temporary, but a great hero like you should not 
degrade himself by slaughtering an innocent woman, your younger sister, 
and on her marriage day." 


Realizing that the argument was not sufficient, Vasudeva decided that first 
of all he would have to save his wife before thinking about the future. 
Maybe Kamsa would die before the birth of Devaki's children, or maybe he 
would change his mind in the course of time. So he hastened to add, "The 
prophecy does not say that Devaki is a danger for you, so you have no need 
to kill her. I promise that I will personally deliver to you all Devaki's 
children as soon as they ate born." 


When Devaki's first son was born, Vasudeva was compelled to take him to 
Kamsa, but Kamsa was so pleased by the loyalty shown by his brother in 
law that he spared the life of the baby. "Only the eighth son of my sister is a 
danger to me," he said, "so you can take your child back home." 


The relief for Vasudeva and Devaki did not last long. Narada Muni went to 
see Kamsa and explained to him that all the people of demoniac mentality 
would be eliminated by the Supreme Personality of God, who was going to 
appear from Devaki, and that all the Devas had already appeared in the 
Yadu dynasty to assist him in that mission. Because in his previous lifetime 
Kamsa had been the Asura Kalanemi and was killed personally by Vishnu, 


Devaki's brother was overwhelmed by a great fear and great anger. 


So Kamsa decided to seize the throne without any further delay, and get 
prepared against any attack. He imprisoned his own father, Ugrasena, who 
was the king of the dynasties Yadu, Bhoja and Andhaka, and locked him 
up. Then he made an alliance with Jarasandha, the powerful king of 
Magadha, and he obtained the cooperation of many Asuras and Rakshasas, 
such as Pralamba, Baka, Chanura, Trinavarta, Aghasura, Mushtika, Arishta, 
Dvivida, Putana, Keshi, Dhenuka, Banasura and Narakasura. 


Many Yadavas were forced into exile and took shelter in the neighboring 
kingdoms, such as Kuru, Panchala, Kekaya, Salva, Vidarbha, Nishadha, 
Videha and Koshala, while those who wanted to remain in the kingdom of 


171 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Mathura had to bend to the cruel orders of Kamsa. The six sons who were 
born from Devaki in the meantime were killed mercilessly, and Devaki and 
Vasudeva were imprisoned in the expectation of the birth of more children, 


who would get the same fate of their predecessors. 


At that time Devaki was going to have her seventh son, the incarnation of 
Ananta Sesha. By the power of Yogamaya, the internal illusory energy of 
God, Ananta was transfered to the womb of another of Vasudeva's wives, 
Rohini, who had gone into hiding outside the city, in the house of Nanda 
Maharaja, who was the friend of Vasudeva. Born as the son of Rohini, 
Ananta Sesha would be known also with the names of Sankarshana, Rama, 
and Balabhadra. Yogamaya herself, known with many names such as Durga, 
Bhadrakali, Vijaya, Vaishnavi, Kumuda, Chandika, Krishna, Madhavi, 
Kanyaka, Maya, Narayani, Ishani, Sarada and Ambika, would take birth in 
the house of Nanda. 


The people of Mathura believed that Devaki had suffered a miscarriage due 
to the stress and sufferings she had to endure. Not much later, Devaki 
found she was expecting the fatal eighth son, and immediately she realized 
that it was a really extraordinary personality. Like a bright flame hidden by 
the walls of a house, like a person who has knowledge but is not allowed to 
distribute it to the people for the benefit of the world, Devaki resplended 
with a happy divine light that illuminated the gloomy prison where she was 
confined, but she was often visited secretly by the Devas who offered 
respectful prayers to the unborn child and her mother. Kamsa noticed that, 
and understood that his enemy was soon going to appear: obsessed, 
terrified and fascinated at the same time by that idea, he had no more peace 


of mind. Day and night, he was unable to think of anything else. 


Finally, at the most auspicious moment, precisely at midnight, Vishnu 
appeared before the parents he had chosen - Vasudeva and Devaki - and 
who had already had him as a son twice in their previous lifetimes as 
Kasyapa and Aditi, and as Sutapa and Prishni. Vishnu appeared in his four- 
armed form, holding his sacred symbols, dressed in yellow silk and 


decorated with beautiful ornaments. 


All the Devas celebrated the happy event, scattering a shower of flowers 
and playing the celestial drums. Kinnaras and Gandharvas sang, Siddhas 
and Charanas offered prayers, and Vidhyadharas and Apsaras started 


172 


Bhagavata Purana 


dancing. The residents of the Earth felt a great peace and happiness they 


could not explain. 


Vasudeva mentally offered gifts to the brabmanas to celebrate the birth of 
Krishna, and bowed to the child to pay his homage. Krishna's parents 
offered him beautiful prayers, recognizing his divine nature, that is 
transcendental and eternal, but asked him to manifest a form that looked 


more ordinary, not to alarm Karma too much. 


By the power of Yogamaya, all the people in the palace including the guards 
had fallen into a deep sleep and all the door locks opened automatically. 
Vasudeva put baby Krishna in a basket and quickly traveled to Gokula, the 
home of Nanda Maharaja and his wife Yasoda, where the child would be 
safe. He easily crossed the Yamuna river, that was in spate due to abundant 
tains, and after reaching the house of Nanda, where everybody was 
sleeping, he switched Krishna with the child that had just been given birth 
by Yasoda. The mother was very tited because of delivery, and she did not 
remember clearly if she had had a son or a daughter. 


As soon as Vasudeva had returned to Kamsa's prison, the doors clicked 
closed again and the people in the palace were roused by the baby's crying. 
Kamsa jumped out of bed and rushed to face what he had been fearing for 
so many years, and although very surprised to see that it was a girl and not a 
boy, he grabbed her and tried to smash her against a stone. The baby 
slipped out of his hands and manifested in her glorious form of Mother 
Durga, with eight arms holding weapons, and dressed in wonderful clothes 
and ornaments. Before disappearing from his sight she said, "How stupid 
you are, Kamsa! Your old enemy, Vishnu, has already taken birth 
somewhere else and certainly he will kill you sooner or later. What will you 
gain by slaughtering innocent babies?" 


Shocked, Kamsa immediately set Devaki and Vasudeva free from their 
prison, and begged them for forgiveness. Then he called for a meeting with 
his ministers and allies, to study a new strategy in the light of Durga's 
revelations. Thus they decided that the safest course of action was to 
slaughter all the children born in that period and strike against all religious 
activities, persecuting brahmanas and saints, for the purpose of weakening 
Vishnu and the Devas. 


173 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Krishna in the house of Nanda 


In the town of Gokula, among the sweet forests of Vrindavana on the bank 
of the river Yamuna, Nanda Maharaja was celebrating the birth of little 
Krishna, whose dark complexion was exactly the same as Mother Yasoda's. 
All the inhabitants, who were mostly occupied in the care of the cows, 
decorated the streets, the courtyards and passages, cleaned everything 
carefully, dressed themselves in their best clothes and ornaments, and 
decorated cows, bulls and calves. Then they went to the house of their 


chief, Nanda, carrying many gifts. 


The king of the cowherd men reciprocated with a generous distribution of 
cows, grains and valuable clothes to the brahmanas, the cowherds and all the 
guests. The people had a lot of fun at the feast and sprayed one another 
with an auspicious mixture of water, yogurt and butter. 


Some days later Nanda traveled to Mathura with a small retinue to pay the 
annual tax to king Kamsa, and on that occasion he met his friend Vasudeva. 
Naturally Vasudeva inquired about the well-being of his own wife Rohini 
and her child, who was already looking to Nanda and Yasoda as his own 
parents. Then he congratulated Nanda for the birth of Krishna and 
recommended him to return home quickly, because the cruel plans of 


Kamsa and his companions would probably cause some troubles. 


The Rakshasi Putana was a member of the group of demoniac individuals 
who had allied with Kamsa, and she was specialized in killing new born 
babies by poisoning them under the pretense of suckling them. She had 
already left for Gokula, and reached there quickly. As she has taken a 
beautiful and virtuous looking form and a very motherly expression, 
nobody stopped her even when she entered Nanda's house and 
affectionately picked up Krishna from his crib to nurse him. 


Krishna, however, would not be duped by her looks, and he suckled out 
not just the poison but her life as well. Screaming in fear and unable to keep 
her disguise in that difficult predicament, Putana returned to her normal 


174 


Bhagavata Purana 


gigantic form of cruel Rakshasi, then she fell to the ground with a crash. 
Yasoda and the other adult gopis rushed to rescue Krishna, who was playing 
merrily on the Asura's body, and performed the traditional rituals of 
purification and protection from all evils. When he returned from Mathura, 
Nanda found the gigantic corpse of Putana and realized Vasudeva had been 
perfectly right. The Asura's body was hacked to pieces and burned on a 
great fire, and everyone was amazed about the celestial scent coming from 
the pyre, that smelled like agwrv incense. Putana had attained liberation 
because she had been personally killed by Vishnu and was elevated to the 
position of mother of the Lord in Vaikuntha because Krishna had allowed 
her to nurse him. 


Three months later they celebrated for Krishna the ritual called withana, that 
consecrates the moment when the child tries to get up and turn over by 
himself, signifying he is ready to go out of the house for the first time. At 
the end of the traditional ceremonies Krishna seemed to be sleepy and 
Yasoda put him down on a small bed in a corner of the courtyard, under 
the shade of a small cart, and then went back to take care of the guests. 
Suddenly Krishna woke up and started to cry for mother's milk. Yasoda did 
not hear him immediately, so the baby got angry and kicked his feet. As 
soon it was touched by Krishna's little feet, the cart was thrown into the air, 
smashing to the ground and upsetting all the utensils it contained. One of 
the servants sent by Kamsa, named Satakasura, had been hiding nearby, so 
he was crushed under the cart and died on the spot. Nanda and the other 
cowherd men came running to see what caused all that noise but could not 
understand what had happened. 


Several more months passed and one day when Krishna was one year old 
Yasoda put him on the ground to take some rest. Another of Kamsa's 
servants, the Asura Trinavarta, took advantage of the opportunity and after 
taking a tornado form he lifted up the child and took him away, covering 
the entire region with a dust storm. Yasoda collapsed in despair, crying and 
calling the child's name because she was unable to find him, but Krishna 
was enjoying his sky tour. When he got tired of the outing, he became so 
heavy that Trinavarta could not hold him any more and crashed to the 
ground, suffocated, eyes popping out. From his part, the child was perfectly 
unharmed, and Nanda and Yasoda rejoiced about their incredible good 


luck, together with all the gopas (cowherd men) and gopis (cowherd women). 


175 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Nobody ever thought that Krishna was Vishnu himself, not even when one 
day Yasoda, looking into Krishna's mouth while he was yawning, could see 
the entire universe with all the planets. This was because Vishnu's internal 
energy, known as Yogamaya, was influencing Krishna's family and friends 
to continue to show all their love for him, without being intimidated by the 
feeling of his divine nature. 


Nanda and Yasoda had the immense fortune to participate directly to the 
wonderful childhood activities of Krishna and Balarama because in a 
previous lifetime, as Drona (the eldest of the Devas known as Vasus) and 
his wife Dhara, they had obtained from Brahma the blessing of assisting 
Vishnu in his mission on Earth. 


Some time later Vasudeva sent the priest of the Yadu dynasty, Garga Muni, 
to Gokula to calculate the horoscope of little Krishna. Nanda asked the 
Muni to bless Krishna and Balarama by performing the purification rituals 
to give the name to a child, but Garga decided to do so secretly to avoid 
alerting Kamsa, who would suspect that the two children were actually the 
sons of Devaki. 


On that occasion the Muni revealed the nature and the names of Balarama, 
the eldest, also called Rama, Bala and Sankarshana, and of Krishna, who 
manifests forms of different color in various ages. After a brief surprise for 
the revelation of his own extraordinary fortune, Nanda immediately forgot 
the words of Garga Muni and continued to treat Krishna and Balarama like 
two perfectly normal children. And this was precisely the intention of the 
two brothers: they had a lot of fun crawling around Nanda's courtyard, in 
mud and cow dung, and eagerly listened to the sound of the gopis' 
anklebells, following them until suddenly they showed fear and rushed back 
to Yasoda and Rohini, who embraced them affectionately and suckled 
them. 


Sometimes the two toddlers grabbed the tail of calves to try to stand up and 
were dragged around the courtyard. Yasoda and Rohini were always 
wotried thinking about the dangers in the cows' horns, in fire, in biting 
animals such as monkeys and dogs, in thorns and weapons that might have 
been lying around, and always meditated intensely on Krishna and 


Balarama. 


176 


Bhagavata Purana 


Thus Krishna and Balarama happily spent their childhood among the 
cowherds of Gokula, manifesting many extraordinary activities, but always 
enjoying the intimate and unconditional love of Nanda and Yasoda. 
Sometimes Yasoda or Nanda asked Krishna to fetch some object, such as 
sandals, a piece of wood or a small pot, and Krishna put them on his head 
to carry them. Sometimes he merely touched the objects and remained 
standing nearby, as for saying that they were too heavy for him. Yasoda was 
deeply attached not only to Krishna but to Balarama as well, and in fact 
Balarama listened to her more than he listened to his own mother Rohini. 


"Krishna, my child," Yasoda called when Krishna and Balarama stayed out 
late playing with their friends, "come and drink my milk. You must be tired, 
you have been playing for so many hours. Aren't you hungry? Dear 
Baladeva, joy of your family, please bring home your little brother. You 
have not had any food since this morning and Nanda, the king of Vraja, is 
waiting at the table for you to come and dine with him. Your friends, too, 
should go home, it is so late. My children, you are all covered with dust and 
sand. Come back home, take a nice bath. Today is an auspicious day and to 
distribute charity to the brahmanas, you need to purify yourself properly. 
Wash up, eat, and then after dressing nicely you can go back to play with 


your friends." 


When the two children started to walk on their own, they played all sorts of 
pranks to the gopis, sneaking into their homes and untying the calves before 
the milking, stealing yogurt or butter or milk and giving to the monkeys 
whatever they were unable to eat themselves. If the gopis scolded them, 
Krishna and Balarama went to pinch their children until they started to cry, 
or they peed on the freshly washed floors. 


One day Balarama went to Yasoda to warn her that Krishna was eating dirt. 
Alarmed, Yasoda rebuked Krishna, who denied the accusation and said that 
she should look into his mouth if she could find any trace of dirt. Krishna 
opened his small mouth and Yasoda, looking into it, had another vision of 
the universal form of Vishnu. Confused and amazed, she thought she was 


dreaming, and then she forgot what she had seen. 


Another day, Yasoda was churning yogurt to make butter and Krishna 
became angry as she was not immediately ready to nurse him as usual. He 
went to grab the churning rod to stop her, and Yasoda left her work to pick 


177 


Parama Karuna Devi 


up the child. Soon, however, she realized the milk in the pot was starting to 
boil over, and she ran to remove it from the fire. Interrupted when he was 
still hungry, little Krishna became furious and broke the yogurt container, 
then he took the freshly made butter and went to hide to eat it, sitting on a 
mortar to grind spices. Yasoda soon found him and saw that the child was 
looking around anxiously, as he was aware he had done something wrong. 
When Krishna saw Yasoda arriving with a stick in her hand, he ran away in 
fear. Finally Yasoda caught him and Krishna started to weep, rubbing his 
eyes and smearing the black eye-balm that was moistened by his tears. 


Overwhelmed by her maternal love for Krishna, Yasoda took him by the 
hand and scolded him gently, then she decided to tie him up to the mortar 
so that he would remember his lesson. She found a rope and started to bind 
Krishna, but the rope was a few inches too short for the purpose; searching 
around she got another piece but after adding it to the first, the rope was 
still a few inches short. One piece after another, Yasoda used up all the 
pieces of rope of the house but still it was not enough. Yasoda was 
perplexed and a bit tired: after running around to catch the naughty child 
she had also rummaged everywhere for rope, and now she was perspiting 
copiously, and her hair was coming loose. Moved by the hardships faced by 
his mother for his own good, Krishna then allowed Yasoda to tie him up. 


While he was there alone, tied to the mortar, Krishna looked at the two 
yamala arjuna trees that were growing in Nanda's courtyard, and who in their 
previous lifetime had been two powerful sons of Kuvera, the Deva of 
wealth. 


Nalakuvara and Manieriva, the sons of Kuvera, had become very proud 
because of their high position, also because they belonged to the retinue of 
Shiva. One day they were in a garden on mount Kailasa, on the bank of the 
Mandakini river, and after drinking the liquor called Varuni (made with 
honey) they were having fun with some Yaksha girls. Suddenly Narada 
Muni arrived; the girls withdrew and covered up as a mark of respect, but 
the two sons of Kuvera did not bother to take notice. Narada realized that 
Kuvera's sons were drunk, but that inebriation was due more to the pride of 
their aristocratic birth and wealth than to the liquor, and to sober them up, 
he cursed them to become trees, as trees are not ashamed to remain naked 
in front of everyone. 


178 


Bhagavata Purana 


Krishna knew all the facts perfectly and decided to set Kuvera's sons free, 
as they had remained long enough in a tree body, so he walked to them, 
dragging along the heavy mortar to which he was tied, and that became 
stuck between the two trees. Pulling the mortar strongly to disentangle it, 
little Krishna uprooted the two great trees, that immediately crashed to the 
ground with a loud noise. 


Nalakuvara and Manietiva appeared in that same place, happy about having 
returned to their Yaksha form, and offered their prayers to the Lord, who 
blessed them and gave them leave to go. When the gopis and gopas rushed to 
the spot they only found Krishna tied to the mortar and could not 
understand what had happened. Krishna's little playmates, who had 
witnessed the liberation of the two sons of Kuvera, tried to tell the facts, 
but nobody believed them. 


Another day, at Nanda's house came a woman selling fruits. Krishna took a 
handful of grains and ran to buy some fruits, but in his impatience he 
dropped part of the grains. Even so, the fruit seller put a load of fruits in 
the toddler's arms, and to her great surprise, she found that her basket had 


instantly become filled with valuable golden jewels and gems. 


Nanda Maharaja and the cowherd men of Gokula were amazed at the 
extraordinary events they had seen or heard about, but above all they were 
worried, because it seemed that the Asuras had been targeting their 
settlement, just like Vasudeva had foreseen. So they gathered in assembly 
and decided to shift their residence into the thickest forest, between 
Nandesvara and Mahavana, in the place known as Vrindavana, that had 


excellent pastures and was more protected from sight. 


They uploaded all the luggage and provisions on the carts, organized the 
transportation of women, children and old people, and by keeping the cows 
in front, they moved all together. The first encampment was created by 
setting the carts in a semi-circle, and gradually they built their new homes. 


Krishna and Balarama grew up quickly and they were soon able to help in 
the work of the cowherds, taking care of the youngest calves. It was not 
heavy work: they just had to keep an eye on the animals while they amused 
themselves with the other little cowherd boys, playing the flute and the 


horn, having ball games, and dancing. 


179 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Sometimes they pretended to be bulls fighting each other, or imitated the 
sounds of the animals, like bumblebees, cuckoo birds and other birds, or 
shouting to the echo. They raced each other, leaped from one branch to the 
next like monkeys and grimaced, sat silently with the herons, or ran around 
with wide-spread arms, following the shadows of the birds that were flying 
above. They jumped around like frogs, or they went swimming or looking 
at their reflections in the water of the river. Often they went for picnic in 
the forest, and playfully snatched the food bag from each other, throwing it 
around until the owner started to cry - and then they gave it back. 


They also collected fruits, flowers, green leaves, twigs, peacock feathers and 
minerals, and used them to play and decorate themselves. Although they 
behaved innocently like normal children, the little cowherd companions of 
Krishna were actually great Devas and Rishis, saints and bhaktas who had 
earned a place in that extraordinary adventure thanks to the innumerable 
pious activities they had performed in many lifetimes. 


One day, while the boys were engaged in this way, the Asura Vatsa came 
sneaking to approach them, taking the shape of a calf to mix with the other 
animals, but Krishna saw it and catching him by the hind legs he whirled it 
around and on to the top of a tree. Immediately the Asura resumed its 


normal gigantic form, and the trick was exposed to everybody's eyes. 


Another Asura, named Baka, took the form of a gigantic crane with an 
extremely sharp beak, and attacked Krishna swallowing him up in one go, 
while the cowherd boys were watering their animals. In the crane's stomach, 
Krishna became like burning fire and the huge bird was forced to 
regurgitate him, then it tried to stab him with its long pointed beak. Krishna 
grabbed the two halves of the beak and bifurcated them, tearing the jaws as 
easily as if they were a blade of grass. 


Aghasura, the younger brother of Putana and Bakasura, took the form of a 
great serpent, with a body that was 10 km long and a gaping mouth that 
gave forth a hot wind. Intrigued, the cowherd boys entered the mouth of 
that python; as it looked like a strange cave, they thought it might be a 
cleverly carved image of a snake. Even if it really was a dangerous living 
Asura, they thought, Krishna would immediately kill it like he had done 
with Bakasura and the other Rakshasas. 


180 


Bhagavata Purana 


Agha remained still, mouth open, waiting for Krishna and Balarama, who 
were walking behind everybody else. After some reflection, Krishna entered 
the mouth of the huge snake and when he was in its throat, he started to 
expand and grow so much that Aghasura was suffocated and died. Krishna 
revived all the boys and calves that had been swallowed by the Asura, then 
he led them outside, to the great happiness of the inhabitants of the 
heavenly planets, who were watching all his adventures. Aghasura's episode 
happened when Krishna was five years old, but the boys informed their 
parents only one year later. 


Just after killing the Asura, Krishna and Balarama went to the river bank 
with all their friends to take lunch. While they were all sitting together 
enjoying the food packed by their mothers, they found that the calves had 
walked deeply into the forest and could not be seen any more. Krishna 
reassured his friends, "Do not be afraid, I will go to get them back. There is 
no need for you to stop eating." 


So Krishna, carrying his bowl of curd rice, wandered off searching for the 
calves but in vain, because the calves had been stolen by Brahma, the 
creator of the universe, who had been watching the amazing activities of 
little Krishna and wanted to verify to which extent the Lord would manifest 
his divine powers. While Krishna walked around the forest, calling for his 
calves, Brahma quickly stole the cowherd boys as well, so when he returned 
to the river bank, Krishna found they had disappeared, too. 


Reflecting on the events, Krishna could understand that Brahma was 
responsible for those mysterious facts, and he decided to solve the problem 
by expanding himself and manifesting as many forms as the missing calves 
and boys, each with their particular looks and characteristics, down to the 
details of their clothing and ornaments. So perfect was the transcendental 
illusion created by Yogamaya, the internal energy of the Lord, that not even 
the mothers of the boys and the calves were able to notice any difference, 
and rather their affection towards their children increased, together with 
their happiness. 


A few days before the completion of one entire year from the abduction of 
the calves and calves by Brahma, Balarama began to suspect something. 
One day, while pasturing their calves near the Govardhana hill, they came 
upon a herd of cows held by the cowherd men. Those cows had already 


181 


Parama Karuna Devi 


had new calves, but as soon as they saw their older children in the company 
of Krishna they rushed down the hill in their anxiety to nurse them, and 
licked their bodies eagerly and happily. The cowherd men ran after the 
cows, irritated for that unexpected behavior of their animals, but as soon as 
they came in sight of their children they forgot everything else and rushed 
to embrace them with great affection and emotion. 


Balarama was mystified. "What is going on here? Our calves have been 
weaned quite some time ago, and their mothers now have newborns. They 
should not be so eager to suckle them again! And how extraordinarily 
intense emotions ate shown by the cowherd men for their own sons, as if 
they were seeing them for the first time after a long separation! I thought 
these children and calves were Devas and Rishis, but now I realize they 
must be direct manifestations of Vishnu. Krishna, tell me what happened." 


Just at that time Brahma returned, after a moment of his time had passed, 
to verify how Krishna had coped with the absence of the boys and calves, 
and heard Balarama's questions and Krishna's explanation. He knew 
perfectly well that the original boys and calves were still sleeping under his 


power, but he was unable to tell the difference from the copies. 


Suddenly, while he was watching the new group of cowherd boys and 
calves, Brahma saw them turn into as many forms of Vishnu, each with 
four arms, clothed in yellow silk and with a complexion as dark as the 
monsoon clouds, decorated with divine jewels and the characteristic signs 
of Vishnu including the Srivatsa and Kaustubha. Struck with the realization 
of the events, again Brahma saw before him little Krishna, apparently alone 
and confused while he wandered in the forest with his bowl of curd rice, 
calling for his lost little friends. 


Brahma threw himself at Krishna's feet, begging forgiveness for his own 
arrogance and offering wonderful prayers to the Lord, in which he 
acknowledged the inconceivable power of Yogayama, the internal illusion 
energy of the Lord. Immediately he restored all the children and calves he 
had stolen one year earlier: neither children nor calves had any idea of what 
had transpired, and because they found themselves again sitting on the river 
bank enjoying their lunch like on the day they had disappeared, they did not 
feel that any time had passed at all. Happy to see that Krishna had come 
back so quickly with the calves, they called him to eat with them, and when 


182 


Bhagavata Purana 


they returned home in the evening they told their families how Krishna had 
killed the great snake Aghasura. 


Some time later, the cowherd men allowed their children to start taking care 
of the cows. Krishna and Balarama led them grazing into the forest as they 
had done previously with the calves, but their own interest had moved from 
the childish playing and frolicking of their earlier years and they were now 
enjoying the beauty of the forest, music, friendship with wild animals such 
as peacocks and deer, and attraction for the young cowherd girls. 


Sometimes Krishna danced like a peacock or cried out with the sounds of 
cuckoos, swans, peacocks and the birds known as chakora, krauncha, 
chakrabva and bharadvaja. Sometimes Balarama stretched out on the ground, 
his head resting on the legs of a boy, and Krishna massaged his feet to 
alleviate his fatigue. Sometimes Krishna received massage in the same way, 
while the boys sung about their love for the Supreme Lord. 


The Asuras who had allied with Kamsa were still eager to try and kill 
Krishna, because they realized that the child was very powerful as he had 
already killed many strong demoniac beings. One of such Asuras, Dhenuka, 
had taken the form of a donkey and went to live in the Talavana forest with 


some companions, preventing anyone else from getting into that place. 


So one day Krishna was approached by his friends Sridama, Subala and 
Stokakrishna, who told him, "Those sweet /a/a fruits are falling from the tall 
palms and rot on the ground because nobody is allowed to collect them. 
This demoniac Dhenuka eats people and even the birds are afraid of 
entering that forest. But the scent of those fruits is so intense that it would 
be wonderful to taste them. Why don't we go to Talavana?" 


Balarama and Krishna had a hearty laugh, then without hesitation they 
walked to Talavana and started to shake the trees to make the fruits fall 
down. Alerted by the noise, Dhenukasura rushed in and attacked Balarama 
with a tremendous kick in his chest, but Balarama grabbed the Asura by its 
hind legs and with one hand only he whirled it in the air and threw it on top 
of one of the palms, the tallest in the forest, that snapped under the weight. 
When the body of the Asura returned to its normal gigantic size, all the 
trees of the forest trembled and swayed against one another, as in a 


hurricane, and many palms broke down. 


183 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Dhenuka's friends also rushed in to fight, but they soon suffered the same 
fate, because Krishna and Balarama were ready to tackle them. Very soon 
the palm fruits were heaped on the ground, while the tops of the trees were 
decorated with the lifeless bodies of the Asuras, and the forest once again 


was open to the people and the cows. 


In the evening Krishna returned home with Balarama, accompanied by the 
cows and calves. His hair, powdered with the dust raised by the hooves of 
the cows, was decorated with peacock feathers and forest flowers, and he 
smiled while playing the flute, surrounded by friends singing his glories. The 
gitls of Vrindavana watched him intently, completely fascinated, and went 
to greet the cowherd boys with shy and happy smiles. Yasoda and Rohini 
immediately arranged for the bath of the two boys, and after washing and 
massaging them properly, they dressed and decorated them lavishly and 
served a dinner of delicious dishes. 


One day, in the summer, Krishna went to the Yamuna river with the 
cowherd boys to water the cows in a place where the current slowed down 
and formed a small lake. The boys were very thirsty too and everyone drank 
from the river water, without knowing that it had been poisoned by Kaliya, 
a huge black Naga who had taken residence there. The water in that spot of 
the river had become so toxic and polluted that the vapors and fumes rising 
from it stunned and killed the birds flying above, and caused them to fall 
into the water. Krishna saw their friends die on the spot because of the 
powerful poison and revived them by his merciful glance. Then he climbed 
to the top of a very tall Aadamba tree, tightened his belt in preparation for 
the fight and dived into the river to find the serpent. Kaliya heard the noise 
of Krishna swimming in its small lake and rushed to kill him, biting his 
chest and squeezing his body. 


Alarmed by the screams of the cowherd boys, all the people of Vrindavana 
tan to the river and their hearts faltered at the sight of Krishna in that 
apparently desperate situation. Even the cows, the bulls and the calves cried 
anxiously to call him, but nobody suffered more than Mother Yasoda, who 
had to be forcibly restrained because she wanted to enter the river, too. 
Nanda Maharaja and the other elder gopas were getting ready to fight against 
the evil snake, but Balarama convinced them to stop, explaining that 
Krishna was in no danger at all. 


184 


Bhagavata Purana 


Before the shocked eyes of everyone, Krishna began to expand his body to 
tid himself from the squeeze of the huge serpent, and to alleviate the 
sufferings and anxiety of his devotees. Forced to let go, Kaliya spread its 
many necks and remained still, breathing heavily and licking its lips with the 


forked tongue, while Krishna swam merrily around to attract pursuit. 


Then Krishna jumped on Kaliya and began to dance, leaping from one head 
to another, while his feet, as delicate as lotus flowers, were illuminated by 
the red radiance of the gems decorating the snake's heads. That 
extraordinary event immediately attracted all the heavenly beings and their 
wives, who accompanied Krishna's dance by playing various musical 
instruments, singing and throwing flowers. The pressure of Krishna's feet 
on its heads squashed all the poison from Kaliya, and the snake started to 
feel sick, and vomited blood. Worried, the Naga wives approached Krishna 
accompanied by their children, and begged him to forgive their evil 
husband, who had been punished enough. They said, "The touch of your 
lotus feet is a very rare blessing, and we thank you for offering us the 
special favor of correcting the evil tendencies of Kaliya." 


Offering praise and respect, with prayers filled with jewels of spiritual 
realization, the Naga patnis begged the Lord to liberate Kaliya and allow it 
to breathe. Released by Krishna, Kaliya slowly recuperated its strength, and 
in turn it offered its respect and prayers to the Lord. It said, "Because of the 
body I obtained by birth, I am afflicted by a very bad temper, and I am 
ignorant and easily angered. Please forgive me and help me to reform 
myself." 


Then Krishna ordered Kaliya to settle in the Ocean with all its wives and 
children, friends and relatives, forever leaving the river Yamuna. He said, "I 
know you had to flee from the island Ramanaka and came here in hiding 
out of fear of Garuda, but now your heads bear the mark of my feet and 


Garuda will not bother you any longer." 


Kaliya was originally from the Ramanaka island, and had attracted the anger 
of Garuda because it encroached on the offerings destined to Vishnu's 
carrier. As an eagle, Garuda gets its food by hunting snakes and it often 
went to the island Ramanaka, which was full of them. Tired of the constant 
anxiety for the danger of its attacks, the Nagas of that island proposed a 
monthly offering that would be put at the foot of a tree. In its arrogance, 


185 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Kaliya the son of Kadru decided to challenge Vishnu's carrier and ate the 
offerings destined to it; when Garuda came to punish it, Kaliya bit the great 
eagle and tried to poison it. A fierce fight had ensued, and Kaliya was 
forced to flee to the only place that could be considered safe, that peaceful 
bend of the Yamuna river. Garuda could not approach that place because 
of a curse of Saubhari Muni, who had been angered by the death of a fish 
that had been captured by the great eagle, and threatened Garuda with 
death if it dared come again to that lake. 


The people of Vrindavana spent the night camping on the river bank and 
went to sleep there, because they were all exhausted for the emotions and 
the fatigue of the day. While they were sleeping the forest caught fire and 
soon the cowherds were surrounded by flames. Terrified, the people of 
Vrindavana approached Krishna, who was their only hope, and Krishna 
immediately swallowed all the flames, extinguishing the trees and 


eliminating all danger. 


The gopis fall in love with Krishna 


Krishna and Balarama had grown up considerably and their activities with 
the cowherd boys had become more quiet. Krishna's favorite pastime was 
now flute playing, and in general the boys liked to dance and sing, playing 
small cymbals and buffalo horns, praising and encouraging one another in 
that artistic pursuit. Sometimes they had mock fights or played the king and 
court, tried to recognize each other while keeping their eyes closed, or 


enjoyed themselves on swings. 


One day the Asura Pralamba sneaked among them, taking the form of a 
cowherd boy, with the intention of abducting Krishna and Balarama. 
Krishna immediately detected him but decided to play along and suggested 
the boys to divide in two teams, headed by himself and Balarama, and the 
winners of the various games would ride on the shoulders of the losers to 
be carried around. Balarama's team, that included Sridama and Vrishabha, 
won the games and so Krishna took Sridama on his shoulders, Bhadrasena 
climbed on Vrishabha's back and Balarama was carried by Pralamba. 


186 


Bhagavata Purana 


Balarama's weight, however, was too much for the Asura's strength as 
Pralamba was totally devoid of bhaktz, so he was forced to resume his true 
gigantic form with fiery hair and eyes, dreadful fangs and many valuable 
otnaments. Balarama could understand the situation and he punched the 
Asura's head, splitting it and causing Pralamba's instant death. The Asura 
crashed to the ground while the boys cheered. 


The summer's heat had dried many trees, and one day the cowherd boys 
found themselves again in the middle of a fire when they tried to rescue the 
cows that had got lost after entering the Munja forest to graze. Flames 
suddenly surrounded them, swiftly running with the wind, and the sparks 
were flying everywhere. Scared, the boys approached Krishna and Balarama 
to be saved again, and Krishna instructed them to close theit eyes while he 
again swallowed all the fire. When the cowherd boys opened their eyes 
again, they were amazed to find out that the fire had disappeared and they 
were standing again outside the forest, just like before they had started 


pursuing the cows. 


Finally the heat of summer was broken by the first rains, the sky started 
rolling with thunder and the lightning resplended on the horizon. The 
dense black clouds covered the light of the sun, reminding one how the 
soul is covered by the influences of material nature, but the manner in 
which they dissolved, offering their life to distribute the vital water to 
ground and plants, was similar to the attitude of charitable people who live 
for the good of others. Dried by the summer heat, the earth was revived by 
the touch of the beneficial rains, just like a person who has engaged in long 
and strict austerities blossoms again when he has obtained the purpose of 
his efforts. During the rainy season, twilight is illuminated by light-worms 
rather than by the stars, just like in Kali yuga false doctrines appear to be 


more luminous than true Vedic knowledge. 


At the sound of thunder, all the frogs that had remained quiet began to 
croak all together, like brahmana students start to recite their lessons after 
silently completing their morning duties. The small creeks that had become 
shallow and dry in summer swelled in spate and ran around, just like the 
money, possessions and health of a man who is not able to control his 
senses. The freshly grown grass, of an intense emerald green, gave a stark 
contrast with the white mushrooms and the red of the édragopa insect (the 


187 


Parama Karuna Devi 


lady bug), and those colors were bright like a person who has suddenly 
become rich. All creatures prospered in happiness, like devotees whose 
beauty is amplified by the engagement in the service to the Lord. 


The sea rose under the impact of the mighty rivers in spate, like a neophyte 
yogi whose mind is still perturbed by the objects of sense gratification, 
unlike the devotees who are totally immersed in the contemplation of the 
Deity, and who are similar to mountains, peaceful and immovable even 
under the impact of the running clouds. 


Roads and paths became filled with weeds, and because they were not 
cleared regularly they made difficult walking, just like the ancient scriptures 
that are not studied by brahmanas ate covered by oblivion and become 
damaged. The clouds are the benevolent friends of all beings, but the 
lightning, so restless, jumps from one to the other, like a superficial woman 
who is not able to remain faithful to a virtuous husband. The rainbow is 
also called "Indra's bow" and is special, because it does not need a rope to 
bind it. Similarly, God appears in this world but not as an ordinary person, 
and remains independent from all material conditions. 


During the rainy season, the moon does not appear directly, but illuminates 
the clouds that appear to be lighter in color... just like the soul is not directly 
visible in the material world because of the false identification with the 
body veiling its true nature, but it gives light to the body itself. Peacocks 
dance and cry out for joy when they see the clouds coming, just like the 
people who suffer for the troubles of family life become immediately happy 
when they are visited by those who are dedicated to the service of the 
Supreme Personality of God. Like rulers properly instructed by brabmanas to 
distribute charity to the subjects, under the pressure of the wind the clouds 
shower their sweet water for the benefit of all beings. 


In this way the forest of Vrindavana prospered and became radiant, blessed 
by the rainy season. The cowherds collected the ripened dates and the other 
sweet and juicy fruits, and the cows walked slowly because of the weight of 
their udders full of milk, but they immediately came when Krishna called 
out their names. The trees dripped sap, and the tribal girls living in the 
forest were full of happiness. The waterfalls in the mountains echoed 
particularly loud when there was some cave behind them. When it rained, 


Krishna entered a cave or the hollow of a tree for shelter, to play or eat 


188 


Bhagavata Purana 


fruits or fresh roots. Together with Sankarshana and the other boys he 
enjoyed the curd rice brought from home, usually sitting on some big stone 
near the river. 


Finally the rains stopped and autumn came, with its blue skies without 
clouds, its clear and fresh waters, and the gentle breezes. The lotus flowers 
started to blossom again under the sun, like a fallen yogi returns to his 
original purity when he resumes his practices to control the mind, but the 
fish in the shallow ponds suffered under the intense rays of the autumn sun, 
just like the poor materialists immersed in family life because of their 
attachment to sense gratification, who see their life becoming shorter and 
death coming closer. The farmers built strong clay banks to keep the water 
inside the rice fields, far-sighted like those who practice yoga to control 
their senses and preserve their energies, engaging them to produce the 


evolution of awareness. 


After a day of scorching sun, the rising of the autumn moon brought relief 
to all creatures, just like the wisdom of spiritual realization relieves the 
sufferings caused by the identification with the body. In the same way 
Krishna alleviated the anxiety of the girls of Vrindavana, who were 
consumed by the desire to see him. Thus Krishna resplended on earth, 
sutrounded by his friends, just like the moon shines surrounded by one 
thousand bright stars. The gopis who had given their hearts to Krishna were 
feeling unsatisfied by the embrace of the gentle breezes blowing in the 
forest and carrying the scent of the flowers. Like the cows, does, and 
females of the various bird species, the girls felt stirred by the sweet 
atmosphere of autumn, that favors fertility because it is the mating season. 


All around the cities and villages there were great festivals to perform the 
fire ceremonies and offer the first grains of the new harvest according to 
the ancient traditions. Finally free to travel, merchants, sannyasis, kings and 
brabmacharis started to go around again, just like those who have achieved 
perfection in this lifetime leave their bodies at the appropriate time to attain 
the final destination. The forest of Vrindavana was dazzling with beauty. Its 
clear waters wete decorated with lotus flowers, its fresh breezes carried the 
scent ot flowers and fruits, and the bees buzzed pleasantly. 


Krishna and Balarama walked through the forest every day together with 
the other boys and the cows, but in the village of Vraja the girls could only 


189 


Parama Karuna Devi 


talk about the sweet flute of Krishna. Sitting in a secluded place to avoid 
being overheard by the elders of their families, the young gopis were 
discussing about Krishna, but the intensity of their feelings prevented them 
from speaking as much as they would have liked to. 


"Friends, it is a great fortune to be able to contemplate the two sons of 
Maharaja Nanda. They always dress so elegantly, and decorate themselves 
with peacock fathers, garlands of forest flowers, lotus flowers, budding 
mango twigs, and arnikara flowers for their ears. They look like dancers 
who enter on stage, and when they take the flute to their lips to fill it with 
the nectar of their lips, we are filled with envy and wish we were in the 
place of that flute! How proud must be the bamboos growing along the 


tiver, knowing that their child enjoys such honor! 


The wonderful song of that flute stirs the peacocks, who begin dancing 
madly, while all the other beings remain still and silent to listen... even the 
calves stop sucking their mothers’ teats and remain still with their mouth 
full of milk, while in their hearts they are embracing Krishna, Govinda, the 
Lord of the cows. The birds remain sitting on the branches, with closed 
eyes, fascinated by that melody, without caring for any other sounds, 
because they ate great sages and saints. Even the rivers are agitated and 
their current jumps around in whirlpools to remain there and listen to that 
song, then they raise their arms to offer worship to Krishna by presenting 
their lotus flowers. The girls of the forest tribes are filled with desire when 
they see the grass stained with red drops of kunkum, that have the same 
color of the soles of Krishna's feet. By smearing their faces and breasts with 
that kunkum, those tribal girls find relief to their anxiety." 


All the young gopis of Vrindavana were completely in love with Krishna and 
dreamed of being able to marry him. When the first month of winter came, 
they observed a vow in honor of Durga, also called Katyayani, to ask for 
that blessing. For one entire month they only ate /avisyanna, a special 
preparation of rice and pulses without spices that is offered during the ritual 
sacrifices. After taking bath in the river, they collected some clay from the 
Yamuna and shaped an image of Durga, then worshiped her on the river 
bank by offering sandalwood pulp, lamps of clarified butter, fruits, betel 
nuts, freshly sprouted leaves, scented garlands and incense. Offering their 
respects to the Mother Goddess, they prayed to become matried to 


190 


Bhagavata Purana 


Krishna, the son of Nanda Maharaja. Every day they got up at dawn and 
holding hands they went to take bath on the river bank, singing the glories 
of Krishna. After undressing, they left their clothes on the bank and entered 
the water, also taking some time to play among themselves. 


One day, Krishna, who had heard their prayers, wanted to fulfill their wish 
by developing a conjugal relationship with them. While the girls were 
engaged in playing in the river, he picked up their clothes and took them to 
the top of a Rkadamba tree. From there he called the girls, saying that he 
would give back the clothes to those who would come and claim them 
personally. The gopis were very excited at the idea that Krishna wanted to 
contemplate their beauty in that way, but they pretended to get angry. 
"Dear Krishna, do not be naughty. We know you are a very respectable 
boy, the son of Maharaja Nanda, and in Vrindavana everyone has a very 
good opinion of you. Why are you behaving with us in this way? Give our 
clothes back, the water is cold and we want to go home." 


Finally the gopis resolved to come out from the river, trying to cover 
themselves with their hands as much as possible to save the appearances, 
but Krishna was not satisfied yet. "It is not nice to take bath naked while 
engaged in a sacred vow," he told the girls. "It is disrespectful to the Devas, 
so you need to ask forgiveness. Now offer your respects to the Devas, then 
I will give your clothes back." Others would have become angry and 
offended for such a treatment, but the young gopis of Vrindavana were crazy 
for that clever naughty boy and felt a great joy and excitement in the 
company of Krishna in such intimate circumstances. "I know the desire of 
your heart," Krishna told the gopis, "and it is a perfectly legitimate, pure and 
commendable desire, therefore I have decided to fulfill it. In the coming 


nights we will meet in the forest and will enjoy each other's company." 


After giving leave to the young gopis, Krishna went back to take care of the 
cows and led them farther than usual. Krishna, Balarama and their friends 
the young cowherds, such as Stoka Krishna, Amsu, Sridama, Subala, 
Arjuna, Vrishabha, Ojasvi, Devaprastha and Varuthapa all sat in the shade 
of the trees, praising the generosity of those creatures, who offer fruits, 
leaves, flowers, roots, bark and wood, scent, sap, and even give their shade 
against heat. They soon began to feel hungry, and Krishna suggested they 
go to beg some food from the brahmanas who were sitting nearby 


191 


Parama Karuna Devi 


performing the Angirasa yajna to be elevated to the heavenly planets. 
"Mention my name and the name of my elder brother Balarama, and say we 
sent you." 


The young cowherds respectfully approached the brahmanas and presented 
their request with folded hands, adding that gifting food during the ritual 
does not constitute a violation of the rules. However, the brahmanas wete 
too attached to their material desires and so they did not listen to the young 
cowherds. Disappointed, the boys returned to tell what happened, and 
Krishna smiled. "Try again," he said, "but this time approach the wives of 
the brahmanas, who will give you all the food you want." 


Following Krishna's instructions, the boys went to the brahmanas' wives, 
who filled big containers with all the different types of foods they had, and 
rushed to meet Krishna and Balarama like rivers run to the ocean, and in 
fact they expressed the wish they could always remain with him without 


having to go back home ever again. 


When they understood what had happened, the brabmanas regretted having 
been so mean and greedy. "The Supreme Personality of God, in the garb of 
young cowherd boys, asks for food and we deny them. We have been 
fooled by our threefold birth, our great learning, our aristocratic 
background and our expertise in the sacrificial rituals. Now we realize that 
all this has been a damage rather than a benefit for us, because we have 
become arrogant and unable to see what our wives - sincere and simple 
women - could easily attain: pure love for God, that is the true purpose of 
life. We had already heard that Lord Vishnu, the husband of Lakshmi, who 
everyone wants to worship, had manifested by taking birth in the Yadyu 


dynasty, but we did not recognize him." 


One day Krishna observed that the cowherd men were organizing a great 
sacrificial ceremony in honor of Indra, the king of the heavenly planets. 
Although he knew perfectly well what it was about, he approached the 
village elders and asked them the purpose of the celebration and how it 
would be performed. 


Nanda Maharaja replied, "Lord Indra is the Deva of rains, and we honor 
him because he supplies the water required for the sustenance of all 


creatures. We offer him grains and other worship articles, and by accepting 


192 


Bhagavata Purana 


the leftovers of this sacrifice we obtain the purpose of religiousness, the 
acquisition of valuable goods and the satisfaction of the senses. Those who 


neglect these principles due to envy, greed or lust cannot have an auspicious 
life." 


Krishna objected, "The living beings are born and destroyed, and obtain 
happiness, sorrow, pleasure, fear and safety as a karmic reaction to their 
previous activities. Even if there was a Deva who assigns the results of such 
activities, he cannot grant anything if the appropriate activities have not 
been performed in such a way that they can produce the desired results. 
Indra cannot change the destiny of people or their nature: so what is the 
use of worshiping him? All living beings are controlled by their particular 
nature and therefore karma remains the main factor. So we should worship 
our own work, action in goodness, the prescribed duty, that gives us a 
livelihood and training for progress and to which we should be faithful. 


Each social category has religious duties towards its particular activities, that 
ate meant to sustain the entire society. The brahmanas study and teach, the 
kshatriyas protect the people, the vazsyas produce wealth and the sudras work 
with their hands. Specifically, the vaisyas are entrepreneurs who work in 
agriculture, trade and animal farming - and among such enterprises, our 
community is traditionally engaged in the protection of the cows. What has 
Indra to do with all this? We live in the forest and depend on the hills, so 
we should celebrate by performing a festival in honor of the cows, the 
Govardhana hill and the brahmanas| Let us prepare many different types of 
foods, such as rice pudding, vegetable soups, fried cakes, and all the milk 
sweets. The brahmanas will perform the fire ceremony, then we will give 
food and many gifts to the priests and distribute the prasada to everyone. 
We will feed lots of fresh hay to the cows and offer our respects to the 
Govardhana hill." 


Nanda and the elders decided to follow Krishna's advice, and by using the 
materials that had been collected for the worship to Indra, they celebrated 
the festival of Govardhana hill, feeding the brahmanas and the cows with the 
approptiate foods, and then all together they circumambulated the hill as a 
mark of respect. Krishna manifested a gigantic form and, declaring himself 
to be the personification of Govardhana hill, he ate the offerings that had 
been prepared. Amazed, the cowherd men and their wives bowed to the 


193 


Parama Karuna Devi 


hill, asking for protection for themselves and their animals, and finally 
returned home in great happiness. Indra, however, was not happy at all. 
The king of the heavenly planets felt offended by the cancellation of the 
festival dedicated to him, and wanted to teach a lesson to Nanda Maharaja 
and the people of Vrindavana, sending Samvartaka, the deluge cloud that 
inundates the planets at the time of the partial destruction of the universe. 
Indra said, "That Krishna is a good speaker, but in his foolish arrogance he 
disrespected me, the king of the Devas, and now he will get what he 
deserves." 


Soon the sky over Vrindavana was covered by the dreadful cloud, a violent 
wind began to blow and torrential rain fell mixed with hail, the waters ran 
and leveled everything submerging the ground. Wet and cold, the cowherd 
men, their families and their animals approached Krishna for protection. 
That terrible storm was totally out of season, and Krishna immediately 
understood that it was due to Indra's wrath, so he decided to give a 
practical demonstration to the king of the heavenly planets to destroy his 
vain pride and bring him back to the correct path. So with one hand only he 
lifted the great Govardhana hill and used it as an umbrella to shelter all the 
people of Vrindavana, together with their cows and calves. For seven days 
and nights Krishna protected the people of Vrindavana, who were so 
amazed that they totally forgot hunger, thirst and fatigue, and simply gazed 
at the wonderful son of Nanda. Indra was astonished, too. He realized he 
had made a big mistake and recalled his clouds, stopping rains and floods. 
Then Krishna told his relatives and friends that they could return home 
safely, and when everyone had cleared the place he again put the hill down 
to the ground, before the amazed eyes of everyone. Immediately the people 
of Vrindavana rushed to Krishna again, hugging him, offering respect and 


presenting gifts that expressed their love and veneration. 


While the cowherds still in awe were discussing about the extraordinary 
activities of young Krishna, wondering whether he really was Vishnu 
himself descended into their family, Indra, the king of the heavenly planets, 
approached the Lord accompanied by Surabhi, the Mother of all cows. 
Throwing himself at Krishna's feet, Indra acknowledged his mistake and 
begged for forgiveness. Saluting him as the father and teacher of the entire 
universe, the eternal and transcendental Lord, he thanked him for curbing 


his vain pride and correcting his ignorance. 


194 


Bhagavata Purana 


Surabhi, too, offered prayers and praise to Krishna, and together with Indra 
she performed the ceremony of abhisheka, bathing the Lord with milk and 
water from the celestial Ganges river, and calling out his name as Govinda. 
The people from the heavenly planets also participated in the ceremony by 
playing various musical instruments, showering earth with wonderful 
flowers and singing the glories of the Lord. 


Krishna dances with the gopis 


The moon was rising on the horizon, coloring it with a rosy hue, like a 
husband who coming back home after a long journey decorates the face of 
his beloved spouse with the red kunkum powder. Krishna glanced on the 
kumuda lotus flowers blooming under the bright and cool rays, and thinking 
about the beautiful eyes of the gopis, he began to play his flute. 


In their homes, the girls of Vrindavana heard that wonderful music and 
recognized the call of the Lord they adored so much. Their lover was 
waiting for them: so they rushed into the forest, abandoning all other 
thoughts and all duties. Some of them had been milking the cows, others 
had been boiling the milk or cooking. Some had been dressing up or 
nursing a child or serving their husband, others were having dinner, but 
immediately all of them forgot whatever they were doing and ran off, into 
the forest, towards their love. 


Krishna welcomed them with a smile. "Beautiful ladies, what are you doing 
in the forest at this time of night? Is there any problem at the village? This 
is not a place for girls: the woods ate always full of strange and wild 
creatures, and the night is dark. Your families must be worried for you: 
please, go back home. Maybe you wanted to contemplate the beauty of the 
blossoming forest in the moonlight... well, now you have seen it, and you 
can return home. Or maybe have you come to see me? Of course, your 
desire is completely natural, but a woman's duty is to be faithful to her 


husband, take cate of the children and the house. Your love for me can be 


195 


Parama Karuna Devi 


expressed simply by hearing and talking of my activities, meditating on me 
and contemplating my image - there is no need to meet me personally. 
Please go back home." 


Deeply disappointed and saddened, the gopis were at a loss about what to 
do. Their heads bowed, embarrassed, the tears running down their cheeks 
melting the black ointment on their eyes, they remained there in silence, 
feeling rejected although they had abandoned everything to go to Krishna. 


Finally they wiped their eyes and replied, "You should not talk so cruelly to 
us. You should not reject us, because we have renounced all material 
pleasures for the service to your lotus feet. You say we should serve our 
husbands faithfully, and it is right, but you are the one legitimate husband, 
friend and master of all beings. The great sages renounce all other 
relationships to search for you only, and so you have stolen our hearts and 
minds and we cannot go back. The presence of other men displeases us, 
because we are completely satisfied in you and in your amazing smile. All 
we want is to serve you. Please alleviate our suffering and allow us to fulfill 
our desire." 


Thus Krishna, who is always perfectly satisfied in himself, went with the 
gopis to the bank of the Yamuna river, where the breeze is scented with the 
fragrance of the lotus flowers. He embraced them and played with them, 
laughing and pleasing their desires. Proud with having won the special 
attention of the Supreme Personality of God, the gopis started to think they 
had attained that position because of their personal qualities. Immediately 
Krishna decided to bless them by correcting their pride and removed 
himself from their sight. Krishna's sudden disappearance threw all the gopis 
into complete despair. They started to run around looking for him 
everywhere, begging for news from the animals and plants they met, and 
totally immersed in his remembrance, they unconsciously imitated their 
smile and his way of moving. Indeed, because they were losing their minds, 
they told each other, "but I am Krishna!" 


Remembering the wonderful activities manifested by Krishna, they started 
to re-enact them. One gopi imitated Putana, while another played Krishna 
and pretended to suck her milk. Another gopi, crying like a baby, kicked her 
feet against a friend, who pretended to be the cart destroyed by Krishna 
when he was a small baby. Two gopis impersonated Krishna and Balarama, 


196 


Bhagavata Purana 


while others sat around them like the young cowherds do, and others still 
grazed on all fours like cows. The gopi who was playing the role of Krishna 
called the cows and the others replied by mooing in happiness. In the same 
way, the young gopis re-enacted the punishment of the serpent Kaliya, the 
episode in which Krishna had lifted the Govardhana hill, and when Yasoda 
had tied little Krishna to the mortar to teach him not to steal butter. 


Suddenly one of the gopis saw the tracks of Krishna's feet on the ground, 
walking away accompanied by a girl, and they fell into an even deeper 
despair. The gopi cried out, "Look here! Krishna's footprints get deeper, 
while the girl's disappear: evidently he picked her up in his arms or on his 
shoulders, abandoning us to go with her in a secluded place. And there he 
stopped to collect flowers for his beloved... here is where he stood on his 
toes to reach the tallest branches, because the imprints of the toes are more 
distinct than the heels'. And here they have been sitting down, see! Krishna 
must have entwined flowers in her hair!" 


This was exactly what had happened. The gop that Krishna had taken with 
him while distancing himself from the others also started to become proud 
because of the special attention she was receiving. So she told Krishna, "I 


can't walk any longer. Please Krishna, carry me wherever you want." 


However, as soon as she tried to climb his shoulders, Krishna had suddenly 
disappeared to her great consternation. And in that piteous conditions her 
companions found her, weeping in despair just like them. When the forest 
became too thick and dark, the distraught gopis returned to the river bank to 
sing about Krishna and pray him to come back. "We pray you, Lord and 
master of our souls, Lord of our love, please show yourself again to us, 
because otherwise we will soon die, and you will be responsible for that. 
Many times you have saved us from great dangers, because you are the 
witness who lives in the hearts of all living beings, appeared in the Satvata 
dynasty to fulfill the prayers of Brahma. Just like you put your lotus feet on 
the heads of the serpent Kaliya to purify him from his anger, please touch 
out heads too, to liberate us from this tearing desire and restore out lives 
with the nectar of your lips that alleviates all sufferings. 


Dear love, when in the morning you leave the village to take the cows out 
grazing, our mind is agitated by the thought that your feet, so delicate and 
wonderful like lotus flowers, can be wounded by the coarse grass and the 


197 


Parama Karuna Devi 


sharp pebbles on the path, and each moment of the day we spend without 
seeing you seems to last forever. And when we see you returning in the 
evening, all covered with dust and with ruffled hair, our hearts burn with 
desire for you, and our eyelids become an obstacle because by moving they 
deprive us of your sight for some fractions of a second. Our only ambition 
is the happiness to feel the touch of your feet on our breasts, and to taste 
the nectar of your lips." 


Then Sri Krishna appeared in the middle of the crying gopis and pacified 
them, alleviating the pain of their separation. Surrounded by the gopis who 
worshiped him with their love, Krishna was shining like the autumn moon 
among the brightest stars, but each of the gopis had the impression of being 
alone with Krishna and to enjoy his full attention, because the Lord 
multiplied into as many identical forms as were the young cowherd girls. 
Sitting with them on the soft sand on the bank of the river, exchanging 
smiles and affectionate gestures, Krishna engaged in sweet conversations 
with his lovers, reassuring them and telling them that their totally 
unconditional love would bind him to them forever. "I just wanted to test 
you," he said, "and the demonstration of love you have given me exceeds all 
expectations. I am eternally indebted to you." 


The gopis played and danced each with her own Krishna for the entire night, 
while the heavenly beings, amazed by such wonderful event, showered 
flowers on the circle of the rasa dance. Then, to refresh themselves from 
the fatigue of dance and love, Krishna and the gopis entered the waters of 
the Yamuna river and began to merrily throw water on each other, just like 
an elephant plays with his female companions. For one entire month, 
during the period of Kartika, Krishna went every night into the forest to 
dance with the gopzs, but their husbands were convinced that the girls were 
sleeping next to them in their beds. 


Krishna kills more Asuras 


Krishna and Balarama spent their days taking out the cows grazing, and the 
nights playing, singing and dancing with the gopis, but the Asuras allied of 


198 


Bhagavata Purana 


Kamsa were always trying to get the opportunity to attack them. And they 


were not the only danger. 


One night Vrindavana was visited by a Guhyaka servant of Kuvera, named 
Sankhachuda, who saw all those gorgeous young women and overwhelmed 
by lust, he tried to abduct them. Krishna and Balarama heard the gopis 
screaming and calling their names and rushed to the rescue. Sankhachuda 
had been under the impression that Krishna and Balarama were too drunk 
to react and was surprised and scared by their immediate reaction, so he let 
the girls go and fled. Balarama stayed with the gopis to reassure them and 
Krishna went after Sankhachuda in quick pursuit, and finally he decapitated 
him. As a trophy of his victory, Krishna took the jewel that decorated the 
Asura's head as a gift for his brother Balarama. 


Immersed in infinite happiness, the gopis sang the glories of Krishna. 


"When Mukunda, Krishna, takes the flute to his lips to play it, he rests his 
left cheek on his arm and moves his eyebrows, to the great amazement of 
the wives of the heavenly beings, who are immediately overwhelmed by 
desire. The cows stop grazing and prick their ears up to listen, as still as if 
they were sleeping or painted pictures. Even the rivers stop their flow to 
hear that wonderful song. When Krishna walks through the forest, calling 
the cows, surrounded by friends who sing his glories, the trees and creepers 
blossom and bend under the weight of flowers and fruits, anxious to offer 
him worship. Their stems stand out in ecstasy and a sweet sap runs along 
their trunks, the bees become maddened around his ¢w/asi garland and sing 
his glories aloud. The clouds shower flowers and spread an umbrella over 
Krishna to shade him from the sun. 


Sometimes Krishna dresses as a wrestler and moves with the grace and 
elegance of a young royal elephant, and by contemplating him we feel 
swooning with desire. Even the does are fascinated by the song of his flute 
and come to sit next to him to listen better: just like us, they have 
abandoned all hopes of happiness in family life. When Krishna comes back 
home in the evening, the great Devas wait for him on the dusty path to 
offer their respects to his lotus feet, while his companions sing his glories. 
While he respectfully accepts the greetings from his friends, his eyes roll 
slightly as if he was drunk, and his smile is like a necklace of valuable 
jewels." 


199 


Parama Karuna Devi 


One day the village of Vraja awakened to the ground shaking and to a 
roaring challenge from a gigantic bull, that pawed the soil of the river bank 
with a terrifying fury. All the domestic animals fled from the pasture 
grounds and the pregnant cows had miscarriages. Responding to the 
terrified cries of the people of Vrindavana, Krishna went to face the Asura 
and standing in front of him, he scolded it severely for having caused so 
much havoc. When the bull charged, head down and bloodshot eyes, 
Krishna grabbed its horns and threw it aside, like an elephant would do 
with a rival in a fight. Arishta charged again, and again grabbing its horns 
Krishna threw it to the ground by kicking it, then he tore one horn out and 
used it to hit the Asura until it was unable to get up again. 


After Krishna had killed Arishta, Narada Rishi went to Kamsa and revealed 
him that Vasudeva had switched the babies, and that in fact Krishna was 
the eighth son of Devaki. Furious, Kamsa again threw his sister and brother 
in law into jail, then studied new attack strategies, all focused on Krishna 


and Balarama. 


First of all he sent to Vrindavana his most trusted ally, the Asura Keshi, and 
anticipating a possible failure like the previous ones, he organized a grand 
festival to attract Krishna and Balarama to Mathura, so they could be killed 
more easily. He gave detailed instructions to his elephant handler and to the 
wrestlers Chanuta, Mushtika, Sala and Toshala, and alerted his allies 
Jarasandha, Dvivida, Sambara, Naraka and Bana. Then he summoned 
Akrura, the most respected Yadava among those who had remained in the 
capital, and ordered him to go to Vrindavana to bring the two brothers to 
Mathura for the festival. 


The Asura Keshi arrived in Vrindavana, assuming the form of a huge horse, 
whose hooves made the ground tremble. Krishna came out to challenge it. 
Immediately Keshi attacked, but it was grabbed by the hind legs and 
whirled through the air for about one hundred meters. Keshi got up and 
attacked again, opening its jaws wide, and Krishna coolly stuck his left arm 
into its throat, knocking its teeth out and suffocating it. After the Asura's 
death, Narada Rishi approached Krishna and while they were alone he 
informed him about Kamsa's plans. Foretelling the upcoming glorious 
activities of the Lord, Narada bowed to him to offer his homage and 
prayers. 


200 


Bhagavata Purana 


Some time afterwards another Asura arrived in Vrindavana. It was Vyoma, 
a son of Maya Danava and a powerful sorcerer. Vyoma took the form of a 
young cowherd and sneaked among the others, while they were playing 
sheeps and thieves, and kidnapped many of the boys, hiding them in a cave 
and blocking the opening with a big boulder. Krishna saw that only very 
few boys were remaining, and caught Vyoma while it was trying to take 
away more. Then Vyoma was forced to resume its true form, but it realized 
that it had lost all powers in Krishna's lethal grip. After killing the Asura, 
Krishna immediately set his friends free by shattering the boulder closing 


the cave, and they all returned home safe and sound. 


Nanda Maharaja had observed the Ekadasi fast, and before completing the 
ritual, on the next morning (Dvadasi), he went to take bath in the river very 
eatly. Actually he had miscalculated the time and immersed himself in the 
water while it was still night, at an inauspicious moment, and he was taken 
prisoner by a servant of Varuna, the Deva of the waters. Informed that his 
father was missing, Krishna immediately went to the court of Varuna to 
obtain his release. The Deva of the waters, Varuna, was very happy to 
receive Krishna's visit and welcomed him with all honors, then he 
immediately set Nanda Maharaja free and apologized for the inconvenience 


caused by his own foolish servant. 


Doubly amazed for having seen the immense opulence of the water-world 
of Varuna and the extraordinary welcome that the powerful Deva had given 
to young Krishna, Nanda described the events to the other cowherd men, 
and everybody was wondering whether Krishna would take them to his 
supreme and transcendental realm. To reassure his father and the other 
gopas, Krishna asked them to immerse themselves in the Brahmahrada and 
manifested to their eyes the eternal glory of Vaikuntha, where they saw 
Krishna in the form of Vishnu, surrounded by the Vedas personified 
engaged in offering their respect. 


Another similar episode happened a few days later. Nanda and the cowherd 
men had gone to the Ambika forest to offer worship to Shiva and his 
consort Parvati. After completing the prescribed rituals, they camped on the 
bank of the Sarasvati river, going to sleep without dining. In the night, a 
huge snake crawled out of the nearby thickets and started to swallow Nanda 
Maharaja, who screamed calling for Krishna's help, while the men tried to 


201 


Parama Karuna Devi 


kill the snake by hitting it with flaming torches, but without much effect. 
Finally Krishna arrived there and touched the serpent with his foot: 
immediately the negative karmic reactions of the snake were destroyed and 
it took the form of a radiant Vidyadhara decorated with valuable jewels. 
Offering his respects to the Lord, the heavenly being explained, "My name 
is Sudarshana and I am a famous Vidyadhara. In my foolish pride for my 
own beauty and power, one day I derided some sages descendants of 
Angira Rishi, and they cursed me to take the disgusting form of a snake. 
Now I realize that such curse was in fact a blessing, because it enabled me 


to obtain the rare opportunity to meet you and become liberated by you." 


After obtaining Krishna's permission, the happy Vidyadhara returned to the 
heavenly planets. 


Krishna goes to Mathura 


Akrura, the son of Svaphalka and Gandini, went to Vrindavana on the 
order of Kamsa, but his mind was overwhelmed by joy at the thought he 
would finally be able to meet the Lord. He knew that the evil Kamsa would 
never succeed in killing Krishna and he was anxious to see the defeat of the 
tyrant. While traveling, he imagined the happy moment when, arriving in 
the presence of the Lord, he would leap from the chariot to throw himself 
to the ground as a mark of respect. 


He was certain that the Lord would understand his real intentions and 
would bless him by touching his head and smiling to him - a glorious 
moment that would purify all his old sins or negative actions that still 
contaminated his mind. He arrived at Vraja as the sun was setting. 
Immediately Akrura recognized the imprints of the Lord's feet in the dust 


of the road and was overwhelmed by devotional ecstasy. 


Krishna welcomed him warmly, embracing him, then he took him home, 
where Balarama looked after the comfort of the guest offering a seat, 
washing his feet, and presenting milk sweetened with honey and many 
delicious foods. 


202 


Bhagavata Purana 


Nanda Maharaja addressed Akrura, "O descendant of Dasarha, it is a 
pleasure to see you. How do you manage to survive under the heel of cruel 
Kamsa, that wicked selfish man who slaughtered the sons of his sisters in 
front of her eyes? I do not ask you if you ate well, because it would be like 
asking such question to sheep in the hands of a butcher. Tell us, what can 
we do for you? What is the purpose of your visit?" 


Comforted by the sweet words of Nanda and Krishna, Akrura told them 
about the situation in Mathura and Kamsa's plans, also saying that Narada 
Rishi had revealed to Kamsa the true identity of Krishna and Balarama. 


The two brothers simply laughed. Nanda sent word to the village people 
that everybody would go to Mathura for the festival, with all their carts and 
luggage. Everybody except the young gopis, who were to remain in the 
village and fell into the deepest despair, realizing that Krishna and Balarama 
would not come back from Mathura, but would stay there to live with their 
relatives, the descendants of Dasarha, Bhoja, Andhaka, Vrishni and Satvata. 
They cried, "This Akrura (without cruelty’) should rather be called Krura 
(‘cruel’), because he is tearing out our hearts and our very lives, taking away 
Krishna and Balarama!" 


At the end of a sleepless night, all the young gopis went to the house of 
Nanda while the sun was about to rise, and saw that Akrura was preparing 
to leave with the two divine brothers. Forgetting all modesty, they called 
out loudly to Krishna, begging him to remain with them. Krishna tried to 
pacify as much as possible, and promised that he would come back - but 
now they had to let him go, because he had an important mission to 
perform, for the benefit of everyone. 


On the way to Mathura, Akrura stopped by the bank of the Yamuna river, 
and after drinking from its waters, Krishna and Balarama went to sit on the 
chariot again while Akrura took his bath in the sacred river, reciting Vedic 
mantras as prescribed in such situations. He was immersed in the water, 
when suddenly he saw Krishna and Balarama in front of him and was 
amazed, because he knew they were on the chariot. He went to check and 
they were still sitting in the chariot. Again Akrura returned to the river and 
saw Krishna and Balarama appearing in their form of Narayana and Ananta 
Sesha, surrounded by a crowd of Vishnudutas, saints and heavenly beings 
who offered their respects and prayers. The Lord was accompanied by his 


203 


Parama Karuna Devi 


main potencies called Sri, Pushti, Gur, Kanti, Kirti, Tushti, Ila, Urja, Shakti, 
Vidya, Avidya and Maya. 


Overwhelmed by the ecstasy of revelation, Akrura threw himself to the 
ground in front of the Lord and offered prayers of praise, recognizing him 
as the Supreme Personality of God, omnipresent and omnipotent and 
omniscient, who descends out of his sweet will in this world to fulfill the 
divine mission to protect the good people, annihilate the evil doers and re- 
establish the eternal principles of religion. Suddenly the vision disappeared 
and Akrura completed his ablutions and returned to the chariot. Krishna 
affectionately teased him, saying, "Dear uncle, it looks like you have seen 
something extraordinary, isn't it?” 


Full of happiness from that wonderful experience, Akrura replied, "I have 
seen you, and this surpasses any other thing that one could see on earth, in 
the sky or in the water." 


At the end of the day Krishna and Balarama arrived at Mathura, after a 
comfortable journey during which all the villagers along the road had been 
coming out to watch them with great pleasure. On Krishna's request, 
Akrura stopped the chariot outside the city, leaving the two brothers to rest 
in a garden while waiting for the cowherd men's caravan. Akrura protested 
that he could not leave without taking them to visit his home, so that it 
would be purified by their presence, and Krishna reassured him, "We will 


come to see you soon." 


Thus Krishna and Balarama entered Mathura by themselves and 
contemplated its wealth and beauty - the high gates, the portals made of 
solid gold, the thresholds of the houses in carved crystal, the lavish gopuras 
over the roads, the granaries, the shops of copper and brass utensils, the 
enchanting parks and gardens, the balconies studded with valuable gems, on 
which domesticated peacocks and doves were sitting. The streets had been 
sprinkled with perfumed water and scattered with roasted cereals and 
sprouts as auspicious offerings for the animals. The doors of the houses 
were flanked with pots full of water, decorated with mango leaves, ribbons 
and flowers, and smeared with yogurt and sandalwood paste, together with 
tows of burning lamps, trunks of young banana trees, bouquets of flowers 
and flags. 


204 


Bhagavata Purana 


The women of Mathura rushed to their terraces to see the two sons of 
Vasudeva, abandoning all other activities, and the Lord smiled to them 
while he strolled around with the majestic stride of a young king of the 
elephants. The ladies of Mathura had heard much about Krishna, and in 
their joy they showered the two brothers with many scented flowers, 
praising the gopis who had the great fortune of enjoying his personal 
company regularly. The brahmanas welcomed Krishna and Balarama in the 
traditional way, presenting auspicious ritual substances - yogurt, whole 
barley grains, pots of water, garlands, sandalwood paste and other articles of 
worship. 


Krishna and Balarama saw a washerman coming with a load of clothes that 
had just been dyed and asked for some, but the man insulted them and 
threatened dire punishment if the two brothers had dared try to appropriate 
those clothes, that belonged to the king. Without much discussion, Krishna 
quickly detached the washerman's head by using the tips of his fingers, and 
the servants carrying the clothes dropped the load and fled precipitously. 
Krishna and Balarama took their time to choose the clothes they liked best 
and put them on, while a weaver approached them and offered decorations 
suitable for those clothes. 


Walking on, Krishna and Balarama arrived at the house of the florist 
Sudama. Immediately the man offered his homage and worshiped them 
with various ritual articles and prayers of praise. Recognizing them as the 
Supreme Personality of God, Sudama offered himself as their servant, and 
when Krishna and Balarama granted him a boon, he asked to obtain a firm 
devotion to God. After taking leave from the florist, Krishna and Balarama 
continued to walk down the street. They met a hunchbacked woman named 
Trivakra, who was carrying a tray with ointments. "Pretty girl," said 
Krishna, "whose are these ointments? If you give us some, you will get a 
great blessing.” 


Impressed with the beauty of those two boys, their sweet and kind words 
and their smiles, Trivakra happily gave them all the ointments they wanted. 
Pleased, Krishna decided to give a special treat to the girl: placing his own 
feet on hers, he lifted her chin with two fingers, straightening her back. 
Now the girl was really very beautiful, as her body was well shaped and 
attractive. Fascinated by that handsome boy, Trivakra grabbed him by his 


205 


Parama Karuna Devi 


cloth and begged him to go home with her, because she wanted to enjoy his 
company. Laughing, Krishna promised to go to her without delay, as soon 
as his mission was fulfilled. 


Finally arrived at the sacrificial arena, Krishna and Balarama saw the great 
bow, similar to Indra's, protected by a garrison of soldiers. Making his way 
through the crowd, Krishna went to seize the bow and lifted it, then he 
pulled its string so strongly that the bow snapped in two pieces with a great 
noise. When the guards rushed in, Krishna and Balarama fought them off 
by using the two halves of the bow, and then they also defeated the 
reinforcements sent by Kamsa who had been informed about the situation. 


Krishna and Balarama left the arena through the main gate and continued 
to walk around the city undisturbed, then they took bath, consumed some 
tice with milk and went happily to sleep. On his part, Kamsa was unable to 
sleep, obsessed by the worrisome news that he had received, and continued 
to see inauspicious signs. When finally the morning arrived, the king went 
to sit on his dais in the sacrificial arena, tormented by doubts and fear, and 


waited for the events to develop. 


The first obstacle that Krishna and Balarama had to overcome to enter the 
arena was the gigantic Kuvalayapida, the most ferocious among Kamsa's 
wart elephants, who tried to crush them as soon as it saw them, goaded by 
its driver. Krishna tied his hair back and tightened his belt, then replied to 
the elephant's challenge. Kuvalayapida charged, grabbing Krishna with its 
trunk, but Krishna easily disentangled himself, then punched the animal and 
sneaked between its legs to get behind it. He grabbed its tail and dragged 
the pachyderm merrily for about 90 feet, while the animal tried to pull away 
left and right. Finally he released it, ran around and slapped its face, and 
then ran off. 


Furious, Kuvalayapida pursued him, trying to catch him but in vain. 
Krishna tripped the animal, rolled merrily on the ground and got up again, 
while the elephant dug its tusks into the ground trying to gore him. Goaded 
by its handlers, Kuvalayapida got on its feet and charged again, and this 
time Krishna grabbed its trunk and killed the beast on the spot. Then he 
tore a tusk away from the elephant's body and used it to fight off the 
guards. 


206 


Bhagavata Purana 


Finally Krishna and Balarama entered the arena, each carrying a tusk on his 
shoulder like a weapon. All those who were there looked at them in awe, 
but each individual saw them in a different way, according to their 
particular sentiments. Good people rejoiced, recognizing them as the 
Supreme Personality of God and remembering their activities in 


Vrindavana. 


Chanura was not afraid, and invited Krishna and Balarama to a fight: "We 
have heard that at your place, in Vrindavana, you boys do some wrestling. 
Do not try to avoid this fight, because we know that you are not ordinary 
boys or men: we have seen how you faced the mighty elephant 
Kuvalayapida." 


The two sons of Vasudeva accepted the challenge. Krishna faced Chanura 
and Balarama faced Mushtika. Hand to hand, leg to leg, the wrestlers 
engaged each other with full strikes, dragging one another through the 
arena, pushing and pulling, and throwing one another to the ground. They 
stood up and pinned one another to the ground in turn, without caring for 
possible damage, and the ladies in the public were horrified and terribly 
anxious for the two boys, who appeared so young and delicate. 


To relieve the anxiety of the people and especially of his parents Vasudeva 
and Devaki, Krishna decided to end the game, and grabbing Chanura's 
arms, he whirled him around so powerfully that the man died. In turn, 
Balarama felled Mushtika with one single slap. Then the other wrestlers in 
Kamsa's employ - such Sala, Toshala, Kuta - came forward all together and 
they were killed immediately in a few moments, while their friends took to 
flight. 


Furious, Kamsa jumped from his seat, ordering the immediate arrest of 
Nanda and all the cowherd people, and the execution of Vasudeva and 
Ugrasena. At that point Krishna became angry and leaped on the royal dais: 
rushing against the king like a lion attacks an elephant, Krishna knocked the 
crown off his head, then grabbed him by the hair and threw him into the 
arena and killed him immediately with his bare hands. Kamsa had spent 
many years intensely meditating on the Lord, obsessed by the fear of being 
killed by him, and although his meditation was unfavorable, he was blessed 


and purified from his crimes. 


207 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Balarama seized and killed the eight younger brothers of Kamsa, who had 
rushed towards Krishna to avenge the king, and while the wives of Kamsa 
and his brothers descended into the arena to mourn the death of their 
husbands, Krishna and Balarama ran to set Vasudeva and Devaki free. 
Krishna said, "Forgive our, dear parents, because we were unable to stay 
with you in these past years, serving and protecting you as it was our duty 
to do. Destiny decreed that we would be deprived of the affection of our 


family and the comfort of our home." 


Then Krishna restored Ugrasena on the throne and sent for all the relatives 
who had been exiled or had fled in foreign lands because they did not want 
to submit to Kamsa. Finally he pacified Nanda Maharaja, who was in 
despair at the thought he was going to return to Vrindavana without 
Krishna and Balarama. "Dear father, now you should go back home. We 
will soon come to see you, after we have fulfilled our duty by comforting 
the relatives and friends who have suffered so much because of us. We will 
never forget your love, because you and Yasoda have really been our father 
and mother, taking care of us when we had been abandoned." 


After the departure of Nanda and the cowherds, Vasudeva sent for the 
brabmanas and Garga Muni to perform the initiation ceremony for his two 
sons and distributed many cows and other gifts as he had wanted to do in 
the past. Then he went with his sons to the ashrama of Sandipani Muni, 
who had moved from Kashi to the city of Avanti (Ujjain). 


Krishna and Balarama remained in the Gurukula of Sandipani, who happily 
took care of their education. They quickly learned all the Vedic scriptures 
and commentaries, the six darshanas, and the secondary scriptures such as 
the Dhanur Veda, Niti shastra, political sciences, logic and philosophy, and 
the 64 arts. When their education was complete, they offered their respects 
to the teacher, asking how they could serve him. As guru dakshina (gift of 
reciprocation to the gurv#) Sandipani asked for the return of his own son, 
who had drowned in the sacred place of Prabhasa, and immediately Krishna 
and Balarama went to the ocean. Varuna welcomed them with great honors, 
but when Krishna and Balarama asked for the return of Sandipani's son, he 
revealed that the boy had not been taken away by its waves but by an Asura 
named Panchajanya, a son of Diti who roamed in the ocean in the form of 
a conchshell. 


208 


Bhagavata Purana 


After tracking down and killing the Asura, Krishna searched for his 
teacher's son, but in vain. Then he decided to go to Samyamani, the abode 
of Yama, who is the Lord of death. Hearing the sound of Krishna's 
conchshell, Yama hastened to meet him and offered his respects, and at 
Krishna's request, the Lord of death returned Sandipani's son without 
hesitation. Overjoyed in seeing his child coming back, Sandipani blessed 
Krishna and Balarama, and gave them leave to return home. 


Krishna had not forgotten the people of Vrindavana, and immediately upon 
reaching the capital city he asked Uddhava, disciple of Brihaspati and 
advisor to the Vrishni dynasty, to go to the cowherds to alleviate their 
feelings of separation, and deliver a message to thank them and reassure 
them of his eternal affection. Uddhava arrived at Vrindavana after a long 
day of traveling. Gokula was filled with the calls of the cows returning from 
the pastures, the music of the flutes and the songs of the cowherds praising 
Krishna and Balarama. Nanda and Yasoda welcomed him with joy and 
honored him as a tfepresentative of Krishna. After offering him 
refreshments and a resting place, foot massage and other services, they 
inquired about the well-being of the two boys and their family, that was 


now freed from the oppression of Kamsa. 


Nanda asked, "Does he still remember us, Krishna? Does he still think 
about his mother and his friends, the cowherd people of Vraja, the cows, 
the forest and the Govardhana hill? Will he ever come back to visit us? It 
would be wonderful for us to be able to see his face again, his eyes, his 
smile. He saved us from so many dangers and we have witnessed his 
amazing deeds, here in our village, and every time we see the places where 


Krishna has been, we forget everything else." 


Listening to Nanda's words, mother Yasoda melted into tears, and the milk 
from her breasts dampened her dress because of the maternal affection she 
felt in remembering her Krishna. Uddhava pacified Nanda and Yasoda by 
talking about Krishna, the Supreme Personality of God, who enters into the 
hearts of all living beings and controls their awareness. Anyone who 
meditates on him, even for one single moment, even on his deathbed, is 
immediately purified from all sins and attains the supreme abode in a pure, 
spiritual, and eternal form, as radiant as the sun. He told them, "The 
infallible Lord, Krishna, sends you a message. He will come back very soon, 


209 


Parama Karuna Devi 


to fulfill his promise to you. However, you must remember that, although 
he has no mother, father, wife, children or other relatives - as he has no 
material body - nobody is a stranger to him, and at the same time he is the 
child, the father, the mother and the soul of everybody." 


Uddhava had been talking with Nanda and Yasoda for the entire night. At 
dawn the gopis got up, and after offering worship to the Deity in their 
homes, they began churning the yogurt to make butter, singing loudly about 
Krishna's activities. The people of the village noticed Uddhava's chariot 
outside the house of Nanda, and wondered if Akrura had returned to 
torment them, stealing their lives away after taking Krishna from them. 


When Uddhava came out from the house, the gopis saw him and were 
amazed to see how much he resembled Krishna, even in the dressing style. 
They had him sit in a quiet and secluded place, because they had 
immediately guessed that he was a servant of Krishna, and they were 
anxious for news. "We know you are the envoy of Krishna, the Lord of the 
Yadus, and you have come to comfort his parents. But evidently there is 
nothing else that he cares to remember, here in Vrindavana. The interest of 
a person towards those who are not his parents is temporary and unstable, 
like the interest that a man has for a woman, or a bee for a flower. A 
prostitute abandons her penniless customer, the subjects abandon an 
incompetent king, the students leave the teacher when they have completed 
their education, the birds abandon the tree at the end of the fruit season, 
and a lover abandons the woman he enjoyed, even if she is in love with 
him." 

The gopis wept openly and started talking among themselves, remembering 
the activities of Krishna. One of the gopis, seeing a bumblebee approaching, 
addressed him, "Ah! Friend of a cheater! Do not try to touch my feet with 
your mustache - that is reddened by the Avnkum that Krishna's garland has 
collected from the breasts of our rival in love. Krishna is certainly busy with 
the women of Mathura... after allowing us to drink once the nectar of his 
lips, Krishna has abandoned us, throwing us aside like wilted flowers. Why 
are you coming here to sing about him, the friend of Arjuna? You should 
rather go to his new lovers, because they will give you the gifts you desire. I 
have nothing to give you. And why should I make peace with that 
ungrateful boy? Because of him we have left our homes, husbands, 


210 


Bhagavata Purana 


children, everything. And many others have done the same thing, as after 
hearing about Krishna, they have become totally destitute and now they live 
as beggars here in Vrindavana." Suddenly, horrified by what she had said, 
the gopi spoke again to Uddhava. "O friend of our beloved Krishna! Thank 
you for coming. Does Krishna ever speak about us, his humble servants? 
Will he ever come back to grace our heads with his hand, that carries the 
scent of the aguru?" 


Amazed at the deep ecstatic meditation of the gopis, Uddhava tried to pacify 
them. "I bring you a message from your beloved. The Lord said, I am 
never really separated from you, because I am the soul of the entire creation 
and therefore I am present everywhere, in all created things, in the minds of 
all beings and in the elements of the universe. The true purpose of my 
leaving was to intensify your meditation on me. When her lover is away, a 
woman thinks about him more intensely, and through your contemplation 


you will be able to remain constantly in my company." 


Uddhava stayed in Vrindavana for many months, talking with the gopis and 
the other villagers, alleviating their sufferings and anxiety, and constantly 
speaking about Krishna. Finally, after praising the love of the gopis for the 
Lord, he took leave from Nanda and the other cowherds and returned to 


Mathura, to report his experience to Krishna. 


Krishna builds the city of Dvaraka 


Krishna had not forgotten young Trivakra either, and his promise to go and 
visit her. One day, accompanied by Uddhava, he went to the house of the 
young woman, who lived in a very beautiful building with some other 
courtisanes. When she learned that Krishna had arrived, Trivakra quickly 
prepared herself, taking a bath and putting on make-up, chewing fragrant 
substances and choosing the most elegant clothes and ornaments. Then she 
went to meet him, affecting shyness in a very coquettish way, and Krishna 
took her hand and led her to the bed. 


211 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Then Krishna went with Uddhava and Balarama to the house of Akrura, 
who welcomed them with great joy, offering them the traditional worship 
for honored guests and prayers of praise that acknowledged his supreme 
transcendental position. After accepting his devotion and respect, Krishna 
asked Akrura to go to the city of Hastinapura to give a message to his 
cousins the Pandavas, who lived there with Dhritarashtra, the regent of the 
throne. 


In Hastinapura, Akrura met Bhisma, Vidura and Kunti, Bahlika and his son 
Somadatta, Dronacharya, Kripacharya, Karna, Duryodhana, Asvatthama 
and the five sons of Pandu. Kunti and Vidura explained clearly the situation 
to him: the sons of Dhritarashtra could not tolerate the great qualities of the 
sons of Pandu and their popularity among the subjects, so they had been 
trying to kill them in various ways. While narrating their misadventures and 
the dangers to which her children were constantly exposed, Kunti started to 
weep, invoking Krishna and his help. 


Before returning to Mathura, Akrura approached Dhritarashtra and tried to 
convince him to change his attitude towards his innocent and qualified 
nephews, to behave with justice without allowing himself to be influenced 
by the attachment to the temporary ties of the material body, because only a 
foolish man will identify with something he will soon lose. Dhritarashtra 
thanked him for the good instructions, but replied that his attachment was 
too strong and could not be overcome. He said, "And who am I to oppose 
the plans of the Supreme Lord? Vishnu has appeared to alleviate the burden 
of the world, and I must play my part as well.” 


In the meantime the two widows of Kamsa, named Asti and Prapti, had 
returned to their father's house - the king Jarasandha of Magadha - and 
begged him to avenge them. So Jarasandha collected 23 akshaubinis - 
503,010 war chariots and as many war elephants, 1,509,030 horsemen and 
2,515,050 foot soldiers - and together with his allies he went to besiege 
Mathura. The immense army surrounded the city like an unsurmountable 
ocean and created great fear in its inhabitants. Krishna evoked two 
wonderful divine chariots that descended from the sky loaded with 
extraordinary weapons, and accompanied by Sankarshana he went to war, 
followed by a small battalion. Just outside the city, he blew his conchshell as 
a challenge to the aggressors, but Jarasandha derided him, calling him 


212 


Bhagavata Purana 


"young boy" and refusing to engage him in fight. "Real heroes do not just 
prattle," Krishna replied, "but show their valor by their deeds." 


Furious, Jarasandha moved against the two brothers, covering them with a 
shower of arrows, but Krishna twanged his Saringa bow and retaliated by 
shooting a veritable hurricane of weapons, that massacred the enemies 
easily. Hundreds of rivers of blood ran through the battlefield, among the 
severed limbs of the fallen warriors - human arms and heads and carcasses 
of elephants and horses, that appeared respectively like snakes, tortoises, 
islands and crocodiles. The wheels of the destroyed chariots appeared like 
whirlpools, the severed hands and feet looked like fish, human hair floated 
like seaweeds, and the weapons seemed like reed thickets. The terrible scene 
inspired fear in cowards and joy to the wise. Soon Jarasandha remained 
alone, deprived of his immense army and even of his chariot, and he was 
going to be tied up as a prisoner by Balarama, when Krishna intervened and 
let him off. Humiliated by that hard defeat and even more so by the 
clemency of his victorious enemies, Jarasandha the son of Brihadratha 
returned home to meditate on revenge, while Krishna and Balarama 
triumphantly entered the city. 


For 17 times Jarasandha marched into war against Mathura, and each time 
he was defeated and his armies were annihilated. On his 18th attempt he 
allied himself with a barbarian king, named Kalayavana, who had been 
recommended by Narada Rishi. That Yavana king arrived with an army of 
30 million soldiers, and Jarasandha with his new army were expected any 
moment. Krishna evaluated the situation and thought that while they were 
engaged in fighting against Kalayavana, Jarasandha could take advantage of 
the situation and enter the city to kill the people or capture them. Therefore 
he decided to build an impregnable fortress in the ocean, surrounded by 
walls 12 yojanas long, and ordered Visvakarma to complete the project. Each 
house would have a temple and a watch tower, and all the Devas would 
offer wealth and special blessings for the new city. 


After transferring all the inhabitants of Mathura to Dvaraka, Krishna and 
Balarama decorated themselves with garlands of lotus flowers, and without 
carrying any weapon they stepped out of the main gates of the city. 
Kalayavana saw them rising from the gates, resplendent like twin moons. 
Krishna had taken the four-armed form of Narayana and Kalayavana 


213 


Parama Karuna Devi 


recognized him from the description made by Narada, so he rushed 
towards the Lord, but Krishna ran off to invite the Yavana king to pursuit. 


Always running within a short distance, Krishna led Kalayavana to a 
mountain cave without caring for his insults, and then he disappeared into 
the opening. Kalayavana followed him into the cave, and in the dim light he 
saw a shape lying on the ground. Believing it to be Krishna, resting after the 
long pursuit, Kalayavana kicked him with all his might, shouting and calling 
for a fight. 


The man sleeping in the cave, however, was not Krishna. It was king 
Muchukunda, the son of Mandhata of the dynasty of Ikshvaku. Many ages 
eatlier, he had been summoned by the Devas to assist them in their war 
against the Asuras. When after a long fight he had been relieved by the 
atrtival of Kartikkeya to the lead of the army, Muchukunda asked for the 
favor of being left undisturbed for some time, so that he could sleep in 
peace. This was the man that the unfortunate Kalayavana had kicked. The 
great Muchukunda awoke, and opening his eyes he manifested such anger 
against his maladroit aggressor, that the Yavana king was reduced to ashes 
on the spot. Then Muchukunda looked around and saw Krishna, 
resplendent before his eyes, in the four-armed form of Vishnu. 


He asked who he was and Krishna replied, "My dear friend, I have 
appeared in thousands of births, I have lived thousands of lives and taken 
thousands of names. In fact, my names and activities are unlimited and 
cannot be counted even by me, because they are more numerous than the 
grains of dust on earth. But I can tell you about my present life. Some time 
ago Brahma asked me to descend to this earth to protect the principles of 
teligion and destroy the demoniac beings who burdened the world. 
Therefore I have appeared in the house of Vasudeva and killed Kalanemi - 
in his new incarnation as Kamsa - and Pralamba and other enemies of the 
good people. I have come to seek you in this cave because in the past you 
offered me your prayers, and now I want to grant you a boon." 


Muchukunda realized he was in the presence of Vishnu, and bowing to him, 
he offered beautiful prayers of praise. Muchukunda said, "The men and 
women of this world are confused by your illusory energy and therefore 
they neglect the true benefit offered by human life and instead of serving 
and worshiping you, they seek happiness by engaging in family life. I was 


214 


Bhagavata Purana 


among those fools, and because of my false identification and attachments I 
suffered much. Puffed up with pride for my body, that is nothing but a 
material object like a vase or a wall, I was strutting around leading my 
armies, forgetting that death is always on the prowl, and that which is today 
called ‘king’, tomorrow will be called 'excrements' or 'worms' or ‘ashes’. My 
Lord, I believe you have already blessed me, because I find that my old 
attachments have now disappeared and I only desire to obtain the shelter of 


your lotus feet." 


After offering again his homage to the Lord, Muchukunda took leave from 
him, and coming out from the cave where he had slept so long, he walked 
towards the mountain Gandhamadana at Badarikashrama, where he 


engaged in austerities worshiping Nara Narayana. 


Krishna and Balarama returned to Mathura, where they annihilated the 
Yavana army and collected their spoils of war. Then Jarasandha arrived with 
a new army, and Krishna and Balarama pretended to flee, luring Jarasandha 
to the pursuit. Finally, Krishna and Balarama climbed the mountain 
Pravarshana. As he had not been able to find them, Jarasandha decided to 
torch the entire mountain, and gave fire to the woods around. Krishna and 
Balarama jumped from the mountain top, 11 yoyanas tall, and went to 
Dvaraka without being spotted by Jarasandha. Convinced he had succeeded 
in killing the two brothers and finding the city of Mathura empty, 
Jarasandha gathered his army and returned home. 


Krishna marries Rukmini 


The king of Anarta, Raivata, gave his daughter Revati to Balarama as a 
bride, and Krishna married Rukmini, also called Vaidarbhi, the daughter of 
Bhismaka, who was a direct expansion of Lakshmi Devi. Bhismaka had five 
sons - Rukmi, Rukmaratha, Rukmabahu, Rukmakesha and Rukmamali - and 
a gorgeous daughter named Rukmini. Rukmini had heard much about 
Krishna and decided to become his wife, but her brother Rukmi, who did 


215 


Parama Karuna Devi 


not like Krishna at all, was planning for her to marry Sishupala. Very upset, 
Rukmini secretly sent a brabmana to Dvaraka with a letter addressed to 
Krishna. 


The letter said: "Wonderful Lord, I have heard so much about you and your 
qualities, that alleviate the sufferings of anyone who listens to them, and I 
am shamelessly in love with you, because you have no equals in birth, 
character, knowledge, wealth and power. O lion among men, which well- 
born girl would not want to marry you, when the proper moment has 
come? My dear Lord, I have chosen you as my husband, and I am relying 
on you. Tomorrow is the day for my marriage ceremony, organized by my 
brother against my will. I beg you to come and take me away, so that 
Sishupala jackal will not touch what naturally belongs to the lion. I desire 
that only the younger brother of Balarama will have my hand, and not the 
son of Damaghosa or anybody else. If you reach Vidarbha tonight with 
your army without being announced, you will be able to crush the forces of 
the kings of Cedi and Magadha and marry me as the Rakshasas do, by 
forcibly abducting me, while I am going in procession to the temple of the 
Mother Goddess, Durga, who is the Deity protecting our family." 


After reading Rukmini's request, Krishna reassured the brahmana messenger, 
revealing that he, too, desired to marry Rukmini and that he would take 
action according the proposed plan. He immediately ordered Daruka to 
prepare his chariot and left, reaching Vidarbha in one night only. 


Under Rukmi's orders, everything had been organized for the marriage, and 
the city was decorated and ready for the festivities. Sishupala and his father, 
Damaghosha the king of Cedi, arrived accompanied by a powerful army 
and many brabmanas engaged in the traditional rituals. Sishupala's retinue 
also included his friends Salva, Jarasandha, Dantavakra and Viduratha, 
together with Paundraka and many other allied kings. Bhismaka, the king of 
Vidarbha, came out of the city to welcome them, and took them to a 
residence that had been specifically prepared for them. 


Balarama came to know about the situation and rejoined Krishna bringing a 
large army, because he knew that the kings who were enemies of Krishna 
were expecting a move from him. In the meantime Rukmini was anxious, 
because dawn was approaching and yet she had not had any news about the 
arrival of Krishna or the messenger brahmana. She was tormented, 


216 


Bhagavata Purana 


wondering if Krishna had maybe found some defect in her and decided not 
to consider her proposal. Or maybe Shiva and Durga were displeased with 
her and had not blessed her desire. Suddenly she felt a small quiver in the 
left side of her body, in her eye, arm, and leg: an auspicious sign, that 
indicated some happy event was imminent. Just then she saw the messenger 
brahbmana coming, merry and smiling, and she realized he was bringing good 
news. 


The king of Vidarbha heard that Krishna and Balarama had come to see the 
wedding and went to welcome them, arranging for a residence for them and 
their retinue as well. The inhabitants of the city were anxious to see the 
Lord; knowing the wishes of Rukmini, they prayed for their fulfillment, and 
praised that appropriate choice. 


Princess Rukmini walked out of the palace, accompanied by her mother and 
surrounded by her friends and maids and by their escort, while many 
musical instruments played festively. The procession was followed by 
thousands of ganikas and wives of brabmanas, who carried beautiful offerings 
for the Goddess. Before entering the temple, Rukmini washed her hands 
and feet and purified her mouth, then she went to offer homage to Mother 
Durga and presented the ritual worship with water, scents, whole grains, 


incense, clothes, garlands, ornaments and many lamps. 


The brahmana wives, too, offered worship and presented many delicious 
foods, betel nuts, sacred thread, fruits and sugarcane juice. Rukmini bowed 
to them, received the prasada (the sanctified leftovers from the offerings) 
and left the temple with their blessings, holding a maid's hand and walking 
before the kings who had gathered for the festivities. Everyone was in awe 
contemplating the beauty of Rukmini, whose breasts were just beginning to 
blossom. The princess walked with the graceful movements of a royal swan, 
her hips decorated by a belt studded with jewels, that set off her small waist, 
and her sweet smile slightly showed her teeth, similar to jasmine buds. 


Moving a lock of hair from her face, she looked around avidly searching for 
Krishna among the crowd of enthralled princes, and as soon as their eyes 
met, Krishna stepped forward and lifting the princess, he put her on his 
chariot, that carried the flag with the effigy of Garuda. Without hurrying, 
like a lion that takes his prey from a circle of jackals, Krishna moved away 
together with Balarama and their escort. The princes and kings who saw 


217 


Parama Karuna Devi 


that scene became furious and rushed to don their armors; they climbed 
into their vehicles to run in pursuit of Krishna, armed with many weapons. 
The generals of the Yadu army saw them arriving, so they turned their 
chariots waiting for the attack, facing the shower of arrows shot by the 
enemies. Rukmini looked at the Lord with her large eyes filled with fear, but 
he reassured her: "Do not worry, your soldiers will protect you." 


Responding to the attack, the Yadu warriors shot their arrows on the 
pursuing army, quickly routing them. The other kings approached Sisupala, 
whose promised bride had been snatched away, and tried to comfort him. 
Jarasandha told him how he had personally been defeated seventeen times 
by Krishna, and encouraged him to be patient, because maybe they could 
take revenge in the future. Rukmi did not want to listen to anyone and 
continued his pursuit with an entire battalion, swearing in front of all the 
kings that he would never return to his own city unless he had killed 
Krishna and recovered Rukmini from her kidnapper. 


Arrived in view of Krishna's chariot, he challenged him with insults and 
threats, but Krishna smiled and with a shower of arrows he broke Rukmi's 
bow and flag, and killed his charioteer and horses. Rukmi hit Krishna with 
five arrows, but Krishna replied by breaking a second bow and all the other 
weapons of Rukmi. Seeing that Krishna was going to kill her brother, 
Rukmini intervened, begging with tearful eyes Krishna to spare him. Then 
Krishna merely tied up his brother in law with a strip of cloth and punished 
him by cutting off tufts of hair, beard and mustache. 


In the meantime Balarama came to release poor Rukmi and scolded 
Krishna for having derided him so cruelly, but he also explained to Rukmini 
that the &shatriya code requires them to fight to support dharma even against 
their own relatives, and if needs be, even to kill them. So by addressing 
Krishna and Rukmini one after the other, Baladeva tried to minimize the 
seriousness of the events. After being released, Rukmi did not have the 
courage to return home and went to found a new city, that he named 
Bhojakata. All obstacles temoved, Krishna and Balarama returned to 
Dvaraka, taking Rukmini with them, and immediately the marriage was 
solemnized with great festivities, to the joy of all inhabitants. All the dynasty 
members participated to the ceremony and the minstrels composed songs 
to celebrate the love of Rukmini and Krishna. 


218 


Bhagavata Purana 


Rukmini's first son, Pradyumna, was an incarnation of Kamadeva, who had 
been burned to ashes by the angry glance of Shiva. The Asura Sambara 
kidnapped Pradyumna ftom his crib when he was less than ten days old, 
and he threw him into the sea to kill him. The baby was swallowed by a 
large fish, that was immediately captured by the fishermen and sold right to 
the kitchen of Sambara. When the cooks opened the fish they found the 


baby was still alive and entrusted him to a palace maid, named Mayavati. 


Narada Rishi appeared to unveil the mystery and explained that actually 
Mayavati was none other than Rati, the consort of Kama, who had become 
a setvant in the kitchen of the Asura while she was waiting for the 
reappearance of her husband. Soon Pradyumna became a very handsome 
youth and realized that Mayavati had for him feelings that one could not 
consider maternal. 


Mayavati explained everything and encouraged him to punish the evil Asura 
Sambara, who had kidnapped and tried to kill him as a baby. Then she 
taught him the mystic knowledge known as Mahamaya, that overcomes all 
other spells and was required for the fight, because Sambara had learned the 
black magic of the Daityas from Maya Danava. Pradyumna went to 
challenge the Asura and after a fierce battle with the mystic weapons of the 
Guhyakas, Gandharvas, Pisachas, Uragas and Rakshasas, the son of Krishna 
decapitated the Asura with his sharp sword. 


While the Devas praised him for that amazing deed, Pradyumna flew with 
his wife Mayavati to the palace of Krishna in Dvaraka. All the women of 
the palace were fascinated by young Pradyumna, that looked exactly like his 
illustrious father, and Rukmini felt overwhelmed by a strong emotion. 


She said, "If my poor son was still alive, today he would be of the same age, 
and probably also have the same looks of this young man". Feeling an 
auspicious shiver in the left side of his body, Rukmini realized that he could 
indeed by her son Pradyumna. Once again Narada Rishi intervened to 
explain everything that happened and the news spread, to the great joy of all 
the inhabitants of the city. 


219 


Parama Karuna Devi 


The other wives of Krishna 


Satrajit was a devotee of Surya, the Deva of the Sun. As a mark of affection, 
Surya had gifted him a jewel endowed with great powers, called 
Syamantaka. Every day the jewel produced eight measures of gold, and 
furthermore it kept away all diseases, poisonous snakes, famine and 


cheaters. 


One day Satrajit went to Dvaraka wearing that jewel, and because of the 
great radiance that emanated from it, people thought that he was Surya 
himself. Krishna asked him to donate the jewel to king Ugrasena for the 
benefit of the entire kingdom, but Satrajit refused. Later Prasena, the 
brother of Satrajit, took the jewel on himself to go hunting in the forest and 
was killed by a lion. The beast dragged the young man's body into a cave to 
devour it with ease, but the cave was the abode of Jambavan, a bear warrior 
of the tribe that had assisted Ramachandra in his war against Ravana. 
Jambavan killed the lion and appropriated that beautiful jewel, that he saw 
as the ideal gift for his youngest son. 


Satrajit waited in vain for his brother's return, and after a few days he 
started to suspect that he had been robbed and killed by Krishna. The 
rumor spread around the city and Krishna was informed. To wash that 
unjust spot from his reputation, he gathered a small group of citizens and 
went to search for the disappeared Prasena, following his tracks to the 
forest. Very soon they found the horse killed by the lion and the blood trail 
leading to the cave, then they also found Prasena's body and the dead lion. 


Krishna left his companions outside the cave and entered alone into the 
darkness, finally arriving in the place where Jambavan's son was playing 
with the jewel. The maidservant who was taking care of the boy became 
scared and started to scream, and immediately Jambavan rushed in to repeal 
the intruder. After a fierce fight, similar to that of two hawks wrestling for 
the same prey, and that lasted several days, Jambavan began to wonder 
about the identity of that extraordinarily powerful opponent. Then he 


220 


Bhagavata Purana 


realized it was Vishnu himself, who had already appeared in the form of 
Ramachandra, and falling to his feet he offered the Syamantaka jewel and 
the hand of his daughter Jambavati as well. Pleased by Jambavan's devotion, 
Krishna blessed him and accepted his offering. 


In the meantime the citizens of Dvaraka who had remained waiting outside 
the cave felt discouraged and returned to town tired and depressed, 
spreading the news of Krishna's disappearance. All the people, extremely 
worried, went to pray Chandrabhaga, Mother Durga, so that their beloved 
Krishna could return safe and sound. Mother Durga heard their prayers and 
replied they would be fulfilled. Just at that time Krishna entered the town 
again, accompanied by his new bride, to the great happiness of everyone. 
Then Krishna summoned Satrajit in the presence of the entite assembly, 
and in front of king Ugrasena announced that Prasena's body had been 
found and officially restored the Syamantaka jewel to Satrajit. Deeply 
ashamed for having defamed Krishna so unjustly, Satrajit meditated on the 
best way to remedy his mistake, and finally decided to present the Lord 
with the jewel and the hand of her own daughter Satyabhama. Krishna 
accepted Satyabhama but asked Satrajit to keep the jewel in the name of the 
king, and to pray Surya for the benefit of the entire kingdom. 


After that, Krishna and Balarama departed for Hastinapura because they 
had heard that Kunti and the five Pandavas had been killed in a fire. There 
they met Bhishma, Kripa, Vidura, Gandhari and Drona, who were 
distraught because of the news. In the meantime at Dvaraka, Akrura and 
Kritavarma went to Satadhanva and together they plotted to kill Satrajit and 
appropriate the jewel. Satadhanva took action and broke into the house of 
Satrajit, killed him treacherously and stole the Syamantaka. Satyabhama 
preserved her father's body in an oil tub and went to give the sad news to 
Krishna and Balarama. Out of consideration for Satyabhama, the two 
brothers expressed grief and wept, like ordinary human beings. 


Returning immediately to Dvaraka, Krishna prepared to punish Satadhanva 
and recover the jewel. After learning that Krishna was determined to kill 
him to avenge the death of his father in law, Satadhanva was overwhelmed 
by terror and went for help from Kritavarma and Akrura, but they did not 
dare oppose Krishna and Balarama. Satadhanva then entrusted the jewel to 
Akrura and fled from Dvaraka, but Krishna and Balarama pursued him and 


221 


Parama Karuna Devi 


caught up with him in the vicinity of Mithila, where Krishna beheaded him 
with the Sudarshana disc. 


Krishna returned to Dvaraka, and after performing the funeral rituals for 
Satrajit he continued the investigation to recover the jewel, but Akrura and 
Kritavarma too, had fled from the city, carrying away the Syamantaka. 
Krishna then sent a message to Akrura asking him to return to the city and 
hand over the jewel to Satyabhama, who was the heir of Satrajit. Terribly 
ashamed, Akrura returned the jewel in the presence of the city assembly, 


and the defamatory rumors against Krishna immediately ceased. 


After some time the Pandavas reappeared at Hastinapura, belying the 
rumors of their death, and Krishna went to see them, accompanied by 
Satyaki. According to social etiquette, Krishna bowed to Yudhisthira amd 
Bhima, who were older than him, then he warmly embraced Arjuna who 
was of his same age, and accepted the respects of Nakula and Sahadeva and 
of the new bride of the Pandavas, Draupadi. Finally Krishna went to greet 
his aunt, queen Kunti, who hugged him with much affection. 


During his stay at Hastinapura, Krishna traveled with Arjuna in forest 
expeditions, where he hunted ferocious animals as the &shatriyas are 
expected to do. Tired and thirsty, the two friends went down to the bank of 
the Yamuna river to drink from its crystal clear waters, and they saw a 
wonderfully beautiful girl strolling along. When Arjuna inquired, the young 
woman said she was the daughter of the Sun and her name was Kalindi. She 
said, "I live here, in the home built inside the river by my father, and I 
engage in austerities for the purpose of obtaining Sri Vishnu as a husband." 


Then Krishna accepted Kalindi's hand and took her on her chariot to 
Hastinapura and to Dvaraka as his bride. 


On the request of the Pandavas, Krishna summoned Visvakarma and 
otdered him to build them a new city, that would be called Indraprastha. To 
clear the grounds, Krishna offered the Khandava forest to the Deva Agni. 
To repay the favor, Agni offered Arjuna a wonderful chariot, together with 
white horses, a bow and a quiver that was always full of arrows, and an 
invincible armor. Maya Danava was in the forest when the fire started, and 
because he was saved by Arjuna he showed his gratitude by building for 
him a very special assembly hall, rich in optical illusions. 


222 


Bhagavata Purana 


Krishna's friendship for the Pandavas also had other effects. The two kings 
of Avanti (Ujjain) were allied with Duryodhana, but their sister Mitravinda 
wanted to marry Krishna. So Krishna challenged the royal suitors, including 
Duryodhana, and took off with Mitravinda, the daughter of his aunt 
Rajadhidevi. 


Another of the main wives of Krishna, Satya (also called Nagnajiti), was the 
daughter of king Nagnajit of Kausalya. The king had established a special 
test for those who aspired to the hand of the princess: they had to tame 
seven vety ferocious wild bulls. When the princess saw Krishna, she 
immediately fell in love with him and fervidly prayed for his victory. 


Krishna immediately manifested seven duplicates of himself, easily faced 
the seven bulls and subjugated them, earning Satya's hand. The other 
suitors attacked Krishna while he was leaving the city with his new bride, 
but just like he had tamed and tied the seven bulls, Krishna easily defeated 


the rival princes, routing them. 


Bhadra, princess of the kingdom of Kaikeya, was the daughter of Krishna's 
paternal aunt Srutakirti. The brothers of Bhadra were happy to offer her in 
marriage to Krishna. Lord Krishna also married Lakshmana, the daughter 
of the king of Madra, winning her hand during the traditional ceremony 
called svayamvara. 


When the Asura Bhauma had stolen the earrings of Aditi, the mother of the 
Devas, and the umbrella of Varuna, Indra went to Dvaraka to ask Krishna's 
help. Then Krishna summoned Garuda and together with his wife 
Satyabhama flew to the capital city of Bhauma, called Pragjyotishapura ("the 
city where the sun rises first"), that is east of the Himalaya. 


Krishna demolished the massive rock fortifications and the other defences 
of the city constituted by fire, air and wind, then blowing into his 
conchshell, he broke the spells that protected it. The Asura named Mura, 
who had five heads and was sleeping on the bottom of the city trench, rose 
to face his challenge, throwing his dreadful trident against Garuda, but 
Krishna used two arrows to break that weapon and a shower of other 
arrows against Mura himself. The Asura hurled a mace, but Krishna 
shattered in thousands of pieces, then he beheaded Mura, who fell back 


into the trench. The seven sons of Mura - Tamra, Antariksha, Shravana, 


223 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Vibhavasu, Vasu, Nabhasvan and Aruna - came forth to battle to avenge 
their father, accompanied by Pitha, the general of Bhauma's army, but they 
were soon hacked to pieces. 


Finally Bhauma, who was also called Naraka, left his fortress to fight against 
Krishna personally, but Krishna cut down all the weapons and missiles 
thrown at him, while Garuda used his beak and claws to attack the 
elephants of the Asura's army. 


Bhauma was able to strike a blow with his spear wounding Garuda, but 
Garuda did not care at all. Then Krishna beheaded Bhauma and after 
entering the city he recovered the divine objects that had been stolen by the 
Asura and released the 16,000 princesses that had been kept captive in the 
city. All those aristocratic young women fell in love with their savior and 
wanted to marry him, so Krishna arranged for them to be carried in 
palanquins to Dvaraka, together with the great treasures amassed in 
Pragjyotishapura, including 64 white elephants descendants of Airavata, 
each having four tusks. 


Then, accompanied by Satyabhama, Krishna journeyed to the abode of the 
king of the heavenly planets Indra to restore Aditi's earrings, and graciously 
accepted his thanks. While they were visiting the city, Satyabhama saw the 
wonderful parijata tree that decorated the gardens of Indra's capital and 
asked Krishna to take one for their palace in Dvaraka. To please his wife, 
the Lord uprooted a small tree and kept it on Garuda's back, but Indra felt 
offended and in spite of having received so many favors, he protested 


against Krishna's action and pursued him to get the tree back, but in vain. 


So Krishna had 16,108 queens, each of them with her own private palace, 
where she lived with one of the emanations that Krishna manifested to 
remain in their company simultaneously. Because they saw that Krishna 
never left their palaces, each one of them was convinced she was his 
favorite, and all of them were fascinated by his handsome face, his arms, his 


loving and smiling glances, and his conversation. 


Each queen had hundreds of maids, but was anxious to personally serve the 
Lord, welcoming him, offering him a seat, worshiping him with the 
traditional ritual articles, bathing him and massaging his feet, fanning him, 
smearing his body with sandalwood pulp, offering flower garlands, combing 


224 


Bhagavata Purana 


his hair, preparing his bed and presenting gifts. Each queen had ten sons, all 
resembling their father. Here are the names of the main queens and their 
children: 


Rumini gave birth to Pradyumna, Charudesna, Sudeshna, Charudeha, 
Sucharu, Charugupta, Bhadracharu, Charuchandra, Vicharu and Charu. 

The sons of Satyabhama were Bhanu, Subhanu, Svarbhanu, Prabhanu, 
Bhanuman, Chandrabhanu, Brihadbhanu, Atibhanu, Sribhanu and 
Pratibhanu. 

The sons of Jambavati were Samba, Sumitra, Purujit, Satajit, Sahasrajit, 
Vijaya, Citraketu, Vasuman, Dravida and Kratu. These, and especially 
Samba, were most deeply attached to their father. 

The sons of Nagnajiti were Vira, Chandra, Ashvasena, Citragu, Vegavan, 
Vrisha, Ama, Shanku, Vasu and Kunti. 

The sons of Kalindi were Shruta, Kavi, Vrisha, Vira, Subahu, Bhadra, 
Shanti, Darsha, Purnamasa and Somaka. 

The sons of Madra were Praghosa, Gatravan, Simha, Bala, Prabala, 
Urdhaga, Mahashakti, Saha, Oja and Aparajita. 

The sons of Mitravinda were Vrika, Harsha, Anila, Gridhra, Vardhana, 
Unnada, Mahamsa, Pavana, Vahni and Kshudhi. 

The sons of Bhadra were Sangramajit, Brihatsena, Sura, Praharana, Arijit, 
Jaya, Subhadra, Vama, Ayur and Satyaka. 


The family of Krishna was constituted by the Devas who had descended on 
Earth to assist the Lord's mission. All together, they were 101 clans, and 
nobody could count all the great personalities who appeared in the Yadu 
dynasty and their wonderful deeds. It is said that 38 million teachers were 
engaged in the education of the children of the Yadus. 


Among all the queens, Rukmini was the first and foremost. One evening, 
Krishna was resting on his bed, covered by a canopy with strings of pearls 
and garlands of scented flowers, while the sweet moonlight filtered from 
the windows, together with the perfume of the agurv incense. Queen 
Rukmini was near the bed and fanning Krishna with a bejeweled chamara, 
when Krishna decided to play a game to her. 


"My dear princess,” he told her seriously, "many kings wanted to marry you, 
all of them very wealthy, strong, powerful, generous and handsome, and 


225 


Parama Karuna Devi 


above all, deeply in love with you. I do not understand why you instead 
chose me, as I am so much below your level. As you know I am a coward, 
who renounced the throne and took shelter in the ocean out of fear of 
those kings. I do not possess any material assets, and I am always in the 
company of mendicants who have abandoned all possessions, while wealthy 
people rarely bother about me. I believe you should search for a better 
husband than me, someone who will truly make you happy. I am not 
interested in wives, children and material assets, and I do not even have a 


professional occupation." 


At those incredible words, Rukmini was struck as by lightning, because she 
took Krishna's speech seriously. Her cheeks streaked with tears, her voice 
choked, her eyes lowered in fear and unhappiness, she was trying to say 
something, but she fainted due to the excessive emotion. Concerned, 
Krishna leaped to his feet to raise her, and after embracing her, he arranged 
her hair and caressed her face, wiping her tears. "My love," he said, "please 
do not be angry with me. I was just joking. I was curious to find out what 
you would reply, that is all. And then, you know that I like you when you 
are a little angry, when you frown your beautiful eyebrows and shoot those 


sidelong glances." 


Rukmini was relieved and forgot the terrible fear that had overwhelmed her 
at the idea of being abandoned by Krishna. 


Then she said, "My dear husband, your arguments are very good. You and 
me - we are certainly not an equal match. You are the Supreme Personality 
of God, and if you sleep in the ocean, it is to appear in the hearts of all 
living beings as the Supreme Soul. You have no need for material 
possessions, and this also applies to your devotees, who are not attracted 
even by a position of monarch. In fact, the greatest among the kings, such 
as Anga, Vainya, Jayanta, Nahusa, Gaya and still others, have abandoned 
everything to go in search of you. You do not possess anything because 
there is nothing outside you, and you are the purpose of life itself. I 
remember very well when the mere sound of your bow string chased away 
all the miserable kings of this earth, who live like animals attached to 
activities that can be interesting for donkeys, dogs and cats. I know that you 
have no attachment for me or your other wives, because you ate always 
balanced and happy in yourself." 


226 


Bhagavata Purana 


Krishna was very happy to hear his wife's answers and praised her pure 
love, remembering how she had organized her own abduction to marry 
him. 


The descendants of Krishna 


Pradyumna, the son of Krishna, married his cousin Rukmavati and became 
the father of the powerful Aniruddha. Rukmavati, the daughter of Rukmi 
(Rukmini's brother) saw Pradyumna enter the arena of the svayamvara and 
immediately fell in love with him and decided to marry him. From his part, 
Pradyumna easily defeated all the princes and kings who had gathered for 
the ceremonies and took away Rukmavati just like his father had done with 
Rukmini. After some hesitation, Rukmi finally gave his consent to the 
marriage, to please his sister Rukmini. 


Rukmini also had a daughter, Charumati, who married Bali, the son of 
Kritavarma. Later, Rukmi gave his grand-daughter Rochana to his 
daughter's son, Aniruddha. For the happy celebration of that marriage, 
Krishna and Balarama went to Rukmi's city, Bhojakata, together with many 
of their youngsters, such as Samba and Pradyumna. 


At the end of the rituals some arrogant monarchs, including the king of 
Kalinga, suggested Rukmi to challenge Balarama to a game of dice, because 
Balarama was not very expert but he liked to play. In that way he would 
take some revenge by humiliating Balarama. Balarama lost 100 coins first, 
then, 10,000, with great pleasure of the king of Kalinga, who burst out 
openly with laughter, showing his teeth - and Balarama was very annoyed. 
Then Rukmi accepted a bet of 100,000 coins and this time Balarama won, 
but Rukmi refused to accept defeat and declared himself the winner, in 
spite of the evidence. Then Balarama raised the stakes to 100 million coins: 
he won this time, too, and again Rukmi protested, claiming to be the real 


winner, and calling for witnesses. 


"You ate nothing but cowherds,” said Rukmi, amidst the laughter of the 


other people present, "and you roam around the forest without knowing 


227 


Parama Karuna Devi 


anything about the game of dice. Dice and arrows ate made for kings, not 
for the rabble like you people." 


At that point Balarama could not restrain himself any more, and raising his 
mace, felled Rukmi with one single stroke. He smote down the teeth of the 
king of Kalinga, who had shown them in laughter to insult him. All the 
others fled precipitously, although many of the strokes of Balarama's mace 
hit the targets, breaking arms, legs and skulls. Krishna came to know about 
it but he did not say anything, because he did not want to displease 


Balarama ot Rukmini. 


Aniruddha also married Usha, the daughter of the Asura Bana, the eldest of 
the 100 sons of Bali Maharaja, who had donated the entire world in charity 
to the Vishnu avatara called Vamana. Banasuta, the king of the beautiful city 
of Sonitapura, was a great devotee of Shiva. Always respectable, he honored 
his promises, and he was generous and intelligent. Once he offered a very 
pleasing service to the Lord by creating a musical accompaniment with his 
1,000 arms, while Shiva danced. 


When Shiva offered him a boon, Banasura bowed and said that the 1,000 
arms he had received had become a burden, because he was not able to find 
a worthy opponent in a fight. "If this is the boon you desire," said Shiva, 
"so be it. Very soon you will find an opponent that is as powerful as me, 
and who will defeat you in battle." 


One night Usha, the daughter of Bana, had a strange dream in which she 
saw Aniruddha, the son of Pradyumna, of whom she had never heard 
about. In the dream, Usha and Aniruddha were in love and enjoyed each 
other's company, but then Aniruddha disappeared. Awakening suddenly, 
Usha cried, "Where ate you, my lover" and when she realized what had 
happened, she felt very embarrassed and perturbed. 


The princess had a very intimate friend, Citralekha, the daughter of 
Kumbhanda, a minister of Bana. Citralekha slept in the same apartment and 
when she heard Usha crying, she rushed in to see what had happened, and 
wanted to know who was Usha's lover, because she had never seen Usha in 
the company of men or boys. Usha said, "I was dreaming, and I saw a man 
with a dark complexion, almost blue, dressed in yellow. His arms were very 


strong and he was extremely handsome. I immediately fell in love with him. 


228 


Bhagavata Purana 


I drank the nectar from his lips, but he suddenly disappeared, and I was 
overwhelmed by despair." 


Citralekha knew many magical arts and pacified her friend. "I will find him 
for you, do not worry. Now I will draw some portraits: if you recognize 
your mysterious lover, point him out for me and I will go and fetch him for 
you." 

Usha remained indifferent in front of many portraits of Devas, Gandharvas, 
Siddhas, Charanas, Pannagas, Daityas, Vidyadharas and Yakshas. Then 
Citralekha drew the portraits of human beings and especially of the 
Vrishnis; seeing Pradyumna, Usha blushed a little. When she drew 
Aniruddha, the son of Pradyumna, Usha recognized him instantly and 
begged her friend for help. Citralekha precisely knew where to find 
Aniruddha, so she flew to Dvaraka, where she lifted Aniruddha in his sleep 
and carried him to Sonitapura, presenting him to her friend Usha. Happy, 
Usha took Aniruddha's hand and led him to her private apartments, where 
no man was allowed to enter, and there they enjoyed each other's company. 


Usha was vety much in love and constantly concerned about Anituddha's 
well being, offering valuable clothes, garlands, scents, incense, lamps as as 
well as drinks, delicious foods and sweet words. After some time the guards 
stationed outside Usha's apartments noticed that the girl was showing 
peculiar symptoms, and they went to report to Bana. 


Furious, Banasura rushed to his daughter's apartments and found 
Aniruddha serenely engaged in a game of dice with Usha. Leaping to his 
feet, Aniruddha grabbed a mace and prepared to fight, fending off all the 
guards who were trying to capture him. In the end Banasura himself caught 
Aniruddha with the magic ropes called naga pasa and he threw him in a 
dungeon. 


At Dvaraka, Aniruddha's relatives became worried about his absence. 
Narada came to bring the news that Aniruddha had been made captive by 
Banasura and immediately they organized a rescue mission, headed by 
Krishna and Balarama, and including Pradyumna, Satyaki, Gada, Samba, 
Sharana, Nanda, Upananda, Bhadra and the other chiefs of the Satvata clan, 
together with an army composed by 12 akshauhinis. The city of Sonitapura 


was besieged and Banasura came out to the field with as large an army. 


229 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Shiva had come to assist Bana, sitting on the bull Nandi and accompanied 
by Kartikkeya and his Pramatha followers. In the ensuing battle Shiva 
fought against Krishna, Pradyumna against Kartikeya, Balarama against 
Kumbhanda and Kupakarna, Samba against the son of Bana and Satyaki 
against Banasura himself. Brahma and all the heavenly beings came to 
watch this amazing event as Krishna and Shiva played fighting, manifesting 
their respective heroic qualities. 


Soon Banasura's army was routed and the Asura himself rushed on to fight 
personally against Krishna, the rival that had been predestined for him, but 
he was immediately pushed back. Then he resorted to the ultimate Shiva 
weapon, called Shiva-jvara, that has three heads and three feet. Krishna 
responded by shooting the Vishnu-jvara and the two weapons clashed. 
Unable to tolerate the radiance of the Vishnu-jvara, the Shiva-jvara 
surrendered to Krishna, offering prayers of praise and acknowledging his 
supreme power, and was liberated. Then Banasura attacked again riding his 
chariot equipped with many weapons, but Krishna replied systematically 
cutting off the 1,000 arms of Banasura, as if they were branches to prune 
off from a tree. Finally Shiva approached Krishna to intercede in favor of 
Bana, and Krishna stopped, leaving two only arms to the Asura. He said, "I 
promised Prahlada not to kill his descendants, and now Bana will be 
immune from old age and death, and will become one of your most 


prominent attendants. He has nothing to fear." 


Pacified, Bana went to get Aniruddha and his wife Usha, and seating them 
comfortably on his chariot, he took them to Krishna's presence, blessing 
their union. 


One day Samba, Pradyumna, Charu, Bhanu, Gada and the other boys of the 
Yadu dynasty went to see a forest, and as they were thirsty they searched 
for a well that contained some water. In a dry well they saw a very strange 
creature, a large lizard, and feeling compassion they tried to set it free. In 
spite of their efforts they were unable to take it out of the hole, so they ran 
to call Krishna. Krishna came, and by his left hand he took the big lizard 
and lifted it, but at his touch the animal immediately changed his form and 
appeared as a heavenly being, dressed in rich clothes and ornaments. 


Questioned by Krishna, the heavenly being replied, "I am king Nriga, son 
of Ikshvaku. I was famous for my generosity, because I gifted as many cows 


230 


Bhagavata Purana 


as there are grains of sand on this earth, the stars in the sky, or the water 
drops in the rain. They were all young cows, brown colored, full of good 
qualities, acquited honestly, and they were decorated with gold and garlands 
and accompanied by their young. I gifted them very respectfully to young 
brabmanas who were perfectly qualified and needed support for their 
families, and I accompanied the gift with lands, houses, gold, jewels, silver, 
comfortable beds and other furniture, carts, clothes and sesame seeds. 


One day a cow that had been gifted to one of such brahmanas strayed from 
her group to return to my herd, and without realizing it, I gave her in 
charity to another brahmana. This accident caused a controversy and I 
offered to replace the contended cow with 100,000 others that I would give 
to each of the two brahmanas, but they refused and went away, leaving me in 
a very embarrassing situation. At my death, Yamaraja asked me if I 
preferred to receive first the reactions of my bad actions or my good 
actions, and I chose the bad ones. I was compelled to take birth as a lizard, 
but I always preserved the memory of my previous lifetime, anxiously 


waiting for your arrival so that I could be released." 


After offering his homage to Krishna, Nriga happily ascended to the 
heavenly planets to enjoy the merits he had accumulated through his 
munificence during his life on earth. Krishna took advantage of that 
opportunity to explain to the boys that the property of a brabmana is sacred, 
and anyone who tries to appropriate it to his own advantage becomes 
poisoned by such act, and all his family is destroyed. Also severely punished 
is the indirect action of those who use the government or other people's 
help to deprive a brahmana of his sustenance, even if the culprit was the 


same person who had given the property to the brahmana as a gift. 


Other battles 


One day Balarama went to visit his friends and relatives who lived in 
Vrindavana, because he missed their company. Arrived at Vrindavana he 
offered his respects to Nanda and Yasoda, who welcomed him with tears of 


joy, hugged him and made him sit on their laps, as if he were still a child. 


231 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Then he went to meet the cowherd men, from the eldest to the youngest, 
saluting each one of them according to their seniority and the degree of 
friendship, with respectful homage, hand shakes, smiles and kind words. 
The gopas were anxious to get news about Krishna and all his relatives, and 
discussed about the wonderful things they had seen and those they had 
heard about, such as the death of Kamsa the tyrant and the building of the 
great fortress at Dvaraka. 


The gopis were depressed as they had been abandoned by Krishna. They 
asked whether Krishna still remembered them and their service, but soon 
they became silent, deeply absorbed in their contemplation, and Balarama 
consoled them by delivering a message from Krishna. 


Balarama remained for two months in Vrindavana and spent many nights 
with the gopis, especially in a beautiful garden on the bank of river Yamuna, 
where the personification of honey, Varuni, flowed from a tree hollow and 
perfumed the entire region with its sweet scent. Balarama and her 
companions drank deeply of this honey, then they played together like the 
king of the celestial elephants Airavata plays with his female companions. 


At some point Balarama was tired and sweaty, and wanted to bathe in the 
tiver. So he called the Yamuna, but the river ignored his summons, 
believing him to be drunk. Irritated, Balarama threatened to use his plow to 
dig deep trenches in the river bed and force it to come to him in a thousand 
streams, and the terrified Yamuna immediately came to him to offer 
homage. 


On another day, during his stay in Vrindavana, Balarama fought against 
Dvivida, a wicked man-ape who was an ally of Narakasura, and roamed 
around causing devastation merely to amuse himself, and imprisoned men 
and women by locking them up in caves. Dvivida found Balarama in the 
company of many girls and started a disturbance by playing buffoon, 
breaking the pot of the Varuni and pulling at the girls' clothes. 


At first Balarama threw some stones at him to chase him away, but 
Dvivida's behavior only became worse. Then the Lord picked his mace and 
plough, deciding to kill the aggressor, and a big fight ensued. Dvivida 
uprooted a tree and used it as a weapon, but Balarama grabbed that trunk 


with one hand and replied by striking his mace on the head of his adversary. 


232 


Bhagavata Purana 


Furious, Dvivida uprooted many more trees and boulders to throw them, 
one after another, against Balarama, but always in vain. Finally Balarama 
killed him by punching his collar bone. 


While Balarama was in Vrindavana, the king of Karusha, Paundraka, 
challenged Krishna to a battle. Confused by the adulation of some of his 
courtiers, Paundraka had actually started to believe he was God and dressed 
exactly like Vishnu, with the four characteristic symbols, and also carried 
weapons imitating Vishnu's and similar jewels. He also had a flag made with 
the effigy of Garuda. 


Paundraka's messenger approached Krishna in the royal assembly of the 
Yadus and conveyed the words of his master: "I am the only God, Vishnu, 
the Supreme Lord, descended into this world to show my compassion to 
the living beings. You, o descendant of the Yadus, are merely a vulgar 
imitation. Therefore you must abandon your deceitful act, leave the 
weapons you ate carrying without any rights, and take shelter in me, 
otherwise I will punish you on the battlefield." 


King Ugrasena and the other people present burst out in great peals of 
laughter, exchanging jokes. Krishna replied, "I will certainly let my weapons 
go, but only to throw them against that impostor. When Paundraka will be 
lying dead on the battlefield, he will be in a position to give shelter to all the 
vultures and dogs he likes." 


Preparing for battle, Krishna went to Kasi, where Paundraka lived with his 
friend, the king of Kasi, and announced his challenge by blowing into his 
wart conchshell. The two allies launched an army of 3 akshauhinis against 
Krishna, but Krishna wiped it away easily, fending off all the various 
weapons shot against him, and slaughtering the warriors and their mounts. 
Finally he decapitated both Paundraka and the king of Kasi, throwing their 
heads into the city, and then he returned to Dvaraka. 


The son of the king of Kasi, Sudakshina, became furious and decided to 
avenge his father's death. After completing the funeral rituals, he began a 
special ceremony to evoke an Avenger, and from the sacrificial fire there 
arose a gigantic and terrifying being, with hair and beard of a coppery red, 
pointed fangs and a fiery trident. Sudakshina sent this demon towards 


Dvaraka, ordering him to destroy it, but as soon as it had come near the 


233 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Lord's city, Krishna responded with the Sudarshana disc, that fought the 
demon back. Frustrated in his mission, the huge Avenger turned back 
pursued by the Sudarshana disc and razed the city of Kasi to the ground, 
burning it with its raging fire. 


Samba, son of Krishna and Jambavati, had fallen in love with Duryodhana's 
daughter, Lakshmana, and kidnapped her during the svayamvara ceremony, 
in which a &shatriya princess chooses her husband by comparing the valor 
of the various suitors. The Kurus became very angry and a number of 
prominent warriors went to pursue him. Karna, Sala, Bhuri, Yajnaketu and 
Suyodhana caught up with him and he turned to face them without any 
fear. Although he had battled valiantly, Samba was finally deprived of his 
chariot and captured. When the news reached Dvaraka, the Yadus were 
outraged and demanded war against the Kurus. Only the intervention of 
Balarama, who had in the meantime returned from Vrindavana, could 
pacify them a little. 


Balarama himself went to Hastinapura together with Uddhava to try and 
solve the dispute amicably. Balarama remained in a garden in the outskirts 
of the city and sent Uddhava to test the intentions of king Dhritarastra, and 
when the news of Balarama's arrival spread, all the main members of the 
Kuru dynasty happily went to greet him. Immediately addressing the issue, 
Balarama clearly mentioned the unequal fight in which the great Kuru 
warriors had engaged young Samba. At those words, the Kurus became 
furious and started to insult the Yadus and Balarama, too. "The Yadus ate 
good for nothing, and we have allowed them to use the royal symbols only 
because they are our relatives. But now that we have favored them, they 
want to give orders to us, who are their superiors in every way and allowed 
them to live out of our charity." 


At those words Balarama started to laugh. He let the Kurus go back to the 
city, then he lifted his plough, deeply dug it into the ground, and began to 
drag off the entire city with the intention of throwing it into the Ganges. 
Terrified, the Kurus repented their arrogance, and immediately set Samba 
free and drove him and Lakshmana to the presence of Balarama, begging 
him to forgive them. Duryodhana gave his permission to the marriage and 
gifted her only daughter with a rich dowry, then the marriage procession 
departed for Dvaraka for the festivities there. 


234 


Bhagavata Purana 


Narada Muni had heard how Krishna had defeated Narakasura and married 
many princesses, and desired to go and visit the Lord in Dvaraka to 
contemplate the wonders of his daily family life. 


After entering the city, Narada gazed at the beautiful gardens and parks, 
filled with small lakes decorated with many varieties of lotus flowers. The 
city had 900,000 royal palaces, all made of crystal and silver, studded with 
huge emeralds and fitted with jeweled golden furniture. The traffic of 
vehicles moved along a rational system of avenues, streets, crossings and 
market places. There were many assembly halls and temples, and all the 
roads were regularly sprinkled with perfumed water and decorated with 
flags and banners shading the sun. 


The 16,000 palaces of Krishna's queens had coral pillars with diamond 
designs, walls studded with sapphires and shining floors. There were 
canopies decorated with strings of pearls and ivory seats, and lamps of 
gems that amplified and reflected light. Clouds of incense filtered from the 
latticed windows and delighted peacocks danced on the terraces. 


Seeing Narada arriving, Krishna hastened to welcome him, he seated him 
on his own couch and washed his feet, then he offered various articles of 
ritual worship. After staying for some time, Narada took leave to enter 
another palace, where the scene was repeated in exactly the same way, 
although at Narada's arrival in each palace Krishna was engaged in different 
activities: in the first palace Krishna had been resting on a bed with her 
wife, in the second palace he was playing dice with his wife and his friend 
Uddhava, in the third he played with his children. In the fourth palace he 
was taking bath, in the fifth he was offering oblations in the sacrificial fire, 
in the sixth he was performing other rituals, in the seventh he was serving 
food to the brahmanas, in the eighth he was sitting at lunch, and in the ninth 
he was practicing with weapons. 


In another palace he was consulting with ministers, in another still he was in 
the swimming pool playing with many girls, and in another he was listening 
to the recitation of the Puranas, in another he examined the accountings, in 
another he was sitting alone in meditation, or conversing with the family 
elders, or studied battle strategies or peace alliances, or organizing social 
activities for the public good, such as the construction of wells, parks and 
homes for the travelers. 


235 


Parama Karuna Devi 


The queens of Krishna, deeply and love with their Lord, composed poems 
talking about Krishna to the moon, the clouds, the sweet breezes, the 
ocean, the rivers, the swans and the &urari and chakravaki birds, reading their 
behavior as symptoms of ecstatic love for their husband. It is very difficult 
to understand the austerities that those women had performed in their 
previous lifetimes to obtain the Supreme Personality of God as their 
beloved husband, who lived with them every day in the intimacy of their 
loving relationship. At dawn the queens awakened to the songs of the birds, 
but they were sad because the Lord would soon get us, leaving their 


company to engage in his daily duties. 


And indeed Krishna got up a little before dawn, at the moment of the day 
called brahma muhburta, and performed the ritual purification by touching the 
water. Then he sat down to meditate on Brahman. After taking a complete 
bath, he dressed and offered oblations to the sacred fire, silently recited the 
Gayatti mantra, offered worship to the rising Sun and to the Devas, the 
Rishis and the Pitris, then he went to offer homage to the family elders and 
the brahmanas. 


Every day he donated many sets of 13,084 cows to as many brahmanas, 
accompanying the gift with clothes and sesame seeds. Then he went to 
verify that all his subjects were happy and not wanting for anything, and 
distributed to everyone whatever they needed. After honoring friends, 
ministers and wives, he had breakfast and went out to the assembly hall, the 
Sudharma, where he sat with the greatest of the Yadus, surrounded by a 
court of comedians, dancers, poets and panegyrists, while the brahbmanas 
recited the Vedic hymns. 


The conversation between 

Nimi and the Yogendras 
Narada remained for some time in Dvaraka to be near the Lord and his 
family. One day he went to see Vasudeva and had a conversation with him 


about what one should do in order to become free from material existence. 
To answer Vasudeva's questions, Narada related a conversation between 


236 


Bhagavata Purana 


king Videha, also called Nimi, and the nine sons of Rishabha called 
Yogendras - Kavi, Havir, Antariksha, Prabuddha, Pippalayana, Avirhotra, 
Drumila, Chamasa and Karabhajana. 


We remember here that Svayambhuva Manu became the father of Maharaja 
Priyavrata, who was father of Agnidhra, father of Nabhi, father of 
Rishabhadeva, considered a manifestation of God. The elder among the 
sons of Rishabha, Bharata, became so famous that the Earth took its name 
from him. Bharata left his family to engage in austerities and in only three 
lives he attained the abode of the Supreme Lord. 


Nine of the sons of Rishabha became the monarchs of the nine continents 
of Bharata varsha, while the other 81 became brahmanas and dedicated 
themselves to develop the path of ritual ceremonies known as karma kanda. 
Nine other sons of Rishabha became Rishis, renouncing all identifications 
and material possessions; these nine Yogendras - Kavi, Havir, Antariksha, 
Prabuddha, Pippalayana, Avirhotra, Drumila, Chamasa and Karabhajana - 
are liberated souls who freely travel from one planet to another. 


One day the Yogendras arrived in the place where Maharaja Nimi was 
performing an important ritual under the direction of great sages. Seeing all 
those powerful spiritual personalities arriving, all the people present stood 
up respectfully to welcome them. King Nimi thanked the nine Yogendras 
for blessing him with their presence and asked them to instruct him on the 


best way to achieve the supreme benefit, divine service to the Lord. 


Kavi said, "A person confused by false identification with the material 
world can attain the level of true freedom from fear by offering worship to 
the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of God, following the method 
prescribed by the Lord and known as bhagavata dharma. \t is a very simple 


process. 


According to the particular nature that the individual soul has acquired due 
to his past actions, he must engage body, words, mind, senses, intelligence 
and awareness by offering all actions solely to the pleasure of the Supreme. 
Fear starts when the living being mistakenly identifies with the material 
body because of the external illusory potency of the Lord, and lives in the 
duality of attraction and repulsion towards the various objects of the senses, 


based on the perspective of his own personal gratification. 


237 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Therefore it is essential to control the mind, learning to see everything as 
connected to God. This will dissipate all fears. Constantly immersed in the 
meditation on the Lord, reciting his holy names, a liberated person will 
experience the symptoms of devotional ecstasy and will not care any more 
for what people think. The direct experience of the Lord is accompanied by 
pure devotion and by the detachment from all other things, just like a 
person who eats some food simultaneously experiences pleasure, 


nourishment and freedom from hunger." 


King Nimi asked how it was possible to recognize a person who has 
reached such a level of spiritual realization. Havir replied, "The devotees of 
the Lord who are on this level, called wttama adhikari, see the Supreme Soul 
in everything. Less advanced devotees, called madhyama adbikaris, worship 
the Supreme Personality of God, are friendly with all devotees, 
compassionate towards ignorant but innocent people, and avoid all contacts 
with those who ate envious of God. On the other hand a Aanistha adbikari, 
also called prakrita bhakta (“materialistic devotee"), faithfully engages in the 
worship of God in the temple but he does not behave appropriately 
towards other devotees or the people in general. 


In all conditions of life, the material body is subject to birth and decay. The 
life airs are subject to hunger and thirst, the mind is subject to anxiety, 
intelligence to the desire of what we cannot obtain, and the senses to the 
continued struggle in material nature. A person who remains stable in 
awareness in spite of all these inevitable problems, is considered a great 
devotee of the Lord. In his mind there is no more space for obtaining social 


prestige, benefits or profit, or even for sexual pleasure. 


Often, birth in an aristocratic family and the performance of austerities and 
pious activities create a sense of pride; especially those who have been born 
in families that are highly respected in the system of the varnas tisk 
becoming arrogant. Those who, in spite of such material advantages, remain 
vety humble, detached and ready to serve to allieviate the sufferings of 
others, without being discouraged by difficulties, are considered the dearest 
devotees of the Lord." 


King Nimi asked the sages to speak about the illusory potency of the Lord, 
that confuses even the greatest personalities. Antariksha said, "By activating 
the material energy, the Lord manifests all the living beings in the various 


238 


Bhagavata Purana 


species, so that they can cultivate sense gratification and finally arrive at 
liberation. The Supreme Soul enters the bodies of the created beings and 
guides them in their evolutionary journey, until the time of the dissolution 
of the universe, when the sun becomes increasingly hot and the various 
planetary systems are consumed by the fire emanated by Lord Ananta 
Sesha. In the end the Samvartaka clouds pour a torrential rain over all the 
planets, completely flooding the universe and extinguishing the fire. Then 
Brahma leaves his body and all the material elements enter again into their 
matrix, one after the other, until the fundamental identification with matter 


dissolves in the mahat tattva, the non-manifested form of existence." 


When king Nimi asked how foolish materialists would be able to overcome 
the illusion of material identification, Prabuddha answered, "The root of the 
identification with the body consists in the roles of males and females in 
human society, that entice the conditioned souls to unite in sexual 
relationships. On this level, the conditioned soul constantly tries to 
eliminate unhappiness and increase pleasure unlimitedly, but he inevitably 
obtains the opposite result. The wealth that is required for sense 
gratification is very difficult to obtain, and in fact does not give any real 
satisfaction. The happiness sought by the conditioned souls in the material 
world cannot be found even on the higher planets, that are afflicted by 
quarrel, enmity and fear, because even in paradise, life is interrupted by 
death. One who wants to attain true happiness must therefore find a 
genuine spiritual master, who has truly realized the teachings of the 
scriptures and is able to explain them adequately to others, and is focused 


only on God, without being concerned about anything else. 


A genuine spiritual master teaches the disciple how to worship God and 
serve the Lord to obtain his mercy. He trains the disciple to become clean, 
austere, tolerant, quiet, simple and non-violent, to study Vedic knowledge, 
to observe celibacy and equanimity before the many difficulties of life. A 
disciple must constantly practice meditation by living in an isolated place, 
leaving all attachments to the comforts of home, and avoid decorating and 
cating for his body. He should wear discarded rags or tree bark. He must 
abstain from criticizing other genuine methods of spiritual realization, 
always tell the truth and control the senses, the mind and the activities of 
the body. Engaging in hearing and reciting the wonderful transcendental 
activities of the Lord, he should dedicate everything to the Lord - all 


239 


Parama Karuna Devi 


actions, sacrifices, austerities, charity, by offering everything to his lotus 
feet. Those who walk on the spiritual path should try to meet together to 
speak about the glories of the Lord, encouraging and supporting each other 
in a transcendental friendship that will give them a great happiness." 


King Nimi again asked the sages to speak about the transcendental position 
of the Supreme Personality of God. Pippalayana answered, "The Supreme 
Personality of God is the origin of creation, preservation and destruction of 
the universe, and has no other cause except himself. He pervades the states 
of awareness called wakefulness, dream and deep sleep, and exists beyond 
them. Neither the mind or the words, eyesight, intelligence, life air or senses 
are able to penetrate the Supreme Brahman, more than fire sparks can 
influence the fire that has produced them. Not even the authoritative 
descriptions of the Vedas can define him perfectly, because the Vedas 
themselves state that Brahman is beyond words - however they are useful as 
an indirect reference to Brahman. 


Originally One, the Brahman manifests in a threefold form, that gives 
otigin to all the manifestations of the universe. It is the eternal Spirit, that is 
never born and will never die, does not grow and is not subject to decay. 
Thus the individual soul is never touched by the bodies it wears and by the 
material conditions it experiences. We can have a very similar feeling when 
we awaken from a deep and dreamless sleep, in which the senses, the mind 
and the identification were not active, and yet we ate conscious that we 
existed even during sleep. When the heart is purified, we become able to 
perceive both the Supreme Lord and our individual self as transcendental 
existence, just like it is possible to directly experience sunlight when we 


keep our eyes closed." 


When Nimi asked explanations about the method of karma _yoga, or practical 
action dedicated to God, Avirhotra replied, "Karma is prescribed activity, 
akarma means abstaining from action, and wkarma is prohibited action. The 
science of action is a very difficult subject to understand through material 
logic, and this is why we need to resort to Vedic knowledge. 


Foolish and childish persons ate attached to selfish activities although the 
very purpose of life is to become free from them, so the teachings of the 
Vedas trace a path that leads gradually to liberation through the 
performance of the prescribed virtuous activities, just like a father promises 


240 


Bhagavata Purana 


sweetmeats to a child if he will take his medicine. If an ignorant person who 
does not control his senses neglects to perform the duties prescribed in the 
Vedas, he will certainly engage in irreligious and criminal activities, and will 
have to suffer the bad consequences. 


On the other hand by performing the regulated activities prescribed in the 
Vedas, but without selfish attachment, and offering the merit of such 
actions to the Lord, one attains liberation from the ties of action. Therefore 
the actions prescribed in the Vedas constitute a stimulus to attract 
materialists towards goodness and knowledge. The prescribed rituals 
require the purification of the body through pranayama, bhuta suddhi and so 
on, the application of “#/aka or sacred marks, the purification of the sitting 
place and the articles of worship that will be offered. Then follows the 
worship proper, with the presentation of water to wash the feet, scented 
water to rinse mouth and hands, a complete bath, clothes and ornaments, 


perfumed oils, flower garlands, grains of cereals, incense and lamps." 


To answer another question by king Nimi, Drumila summarized the various 
manifestations of God in this way: "Anyone who tries to make a complete 
list of the avataras of the unlimited Lord is just a fool, because they are more 
numerous than the particles of dust on earth. However, it is possible to 
speak about his most famous incarnations. Lord Vishnu enters the universe 
firstly in the form of the three Purushas (Karanodakashayi, Garbhodakasayi 
and Kshirodakasayi) and in the form of the three Lords of the gunas 
(Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva). Another important avafara is Nara Narayana Rishi, 
who descended to teach the path of meditation to the human beings by his 
own example. Indra feared that the Lord was engaging in austerities in 
Badarikashrama because he wanted to take his place, and sent Kamadeva 
with most beautiful Apsaras to distract him. Instead of being disturbed or 
getting angry, the Lord kindly welcomed his visitors and dissipated all the 
fears of the Devas. Furthermore, through his Yogamaya the Lord 
manifested a host of even more attractive women, who eclipsed the beauty 


of the heavenly society girls. 


The Lord also appeared as Hamsa, Dattatreya, the four Kumaras, 
Rishabhadeva and Hayagtiva, who killed the Asura Madhu and recovered 
the Vedas that had been hidden in Patalaloka. In the form of Matsya, the 
Lord protected Satyavrata Manu from the universal flood, as Varaha 


241 


Parama Karuna Devi 


protected the Earth and killed Hiranyaksha, as Kurma supported mount 
Mandara so that the ocean of milk could be churned. Then the Lord saved 
elephant Gajendra and the tiny Rishis named Valakhilyas, who had fallen 
into the water contained in the imprint of a cow's hoof and were going to 
drown. He saved Indra who had been covered by the darkness as a reaction 
to the killing of Vritra, and the wives of the heavenly beings who had been 
taken captive by the Asuras. As Nrisimha, the Lord killed Hiranyakashipu 
to protect the devotees. As Vamana, he took the entire world from Bali 
Maharaja with the pretext of asking him three paces of land in charity, as 
Parashurama exterminated the rebellious &shatriyas, as Rama he killed the 
Asura Ravana, and as Krishna he has appeared in the Yadu dynasty. As 
Buddha, the Lord will appear to confuse those who perform the Vedic 
sacrifices without being qualified to do so, and as Kalki he will exterminate 


all the degraded people who pass as rulers." 


Nimi asked again, "What is the destination of those who never worship 


God and continue to pursue material desires"? 


Chamasa replied, "All the four varnas of Vedic society have the duty to 
worship the Lord according to their possibilities. Those who have a simpler 
intellect, such as sadras and superficial women, need more help in the 
performance of their duties, while the brahmanas, kshatriyas and vaisyas have 
greater responsibilities, symbolized by the second birth that is initiation. If 
these people abandon Vedic knowledge and their prescribed duties because 
of lust, pride and greed, utilizing the Vedic rituals to attain materialistic 
purposes, they fall prey to their own arrogance and deceit, and slide into 
material identification with the body, arriving to the point of sacrificing 
innocent animals in unauthorized rituals without understanding the terrible 


consequences of their actions. 


Such cruel and selfish people are blinded by the pride deriving from a high 
birth, wealth, education, physical strength and success in the performance 
of ceremonies, to the point of becoming offensive towards God and his 
true devotees. In the material world conditioned souls have a tendency to 
seek sexual pleasure, consume intoxicating substances and eat non- 
vegetarian foods, therefore Vedic ritual ceremonies offer the opportunity to 
obtain sense gratification in the most virtuous way, so that one can 
gradually purify his awareness and guide it to liberation." 


242 


Bhagavata Purana 


Karabhajana continued to explain in which forms and colors the Lord 
appears in different ages. "In Satya yuga he appears with a white 
complexion and four arms; he has matted locks and he looks like a 
renounced brabmachari. He is known by the names of Hansa, Suparna, 
Vaikuntha, Dharma, Yogeshvara, Amala, Isvara, Purusha, Avyakta and 
Paramatma. In that age people are peaceful, friendly, and worship God 
through austerity, meditation and sense control. In Treta yuga the Lord 
appears with a red complexion, four arms and golden hair, and wears the 
triple belt symbolizing initiation to the three Vedas - Rig, Sama and Yajur. 
His symbols are the instruments used for the fire ceremony, such as the 
ladle and so on. He is known with the names of Vishnu, Yajna, 
Prishnigarbha, Sarvadeva, Urukrama, Vrishakapi, Jayanta and Urugaya. In 
that age, people worship the Lord through the ritual sacrifices described in 
the Vedas. 


In Dvapara yuga the Lord appears with a dark blue complexion and yellow 
clothes; his transcendental body carries the marks of Srivatsa and 
Kaustubha and his personal weapons. He is known as Vasudeva, 
Sankarshana, Pradyumna, Aniruddha and Narayana Rishi, and is worshiped 
by the offering of the articles usually presented to a king or honored guest. 
In the age of Kali intelligent people worship the Lord by assembly together 
to sing his glories. This age can be very auspicious because it offers the 
opportunity to achieve perfection in life simply by applying this easy 
method, therefore even heavenly beings aspire to take birth on earth in this 
period. In Kali yuga the Lord appears in the form of his companions, 
servants and devotees, and religious sentiments will be particularly strong in 
the lands called Dravida desha, around the rivers Tamraparni, Kritamala, 
Payasvini, Kaveri and Pratici Mahanadi." 


Very pleased by the wonderful instructions received from the nine sages, 
king Nimi offered his homage, and the Yogendras disappeared. 


The Rajasuya sacrifice 


One day a foreigner arrived in the assembly hall in Dvaraka, and standing 
humbly before king Ugrasena, he declared he was a messenger; He said that 


243 


Parama Karuna Devi 


20,000 kings had been taken prisoner by Jarasandha, who had locked them 
up in the fortress called Gitivraja. Those kings had refused to submit to the 
wicked tyrant of Magadha and were now begging Krishna, who had already 
defeated Jarasandha seventeen times, to go and set them free. 


At that time Narada Muni arrived and Krishna asked him what was the 
Pandavas' opinion about that situation. Narada offered his respects to the 
Lord and replied that Maharaja Yudhisthira was planning to perform a great 
Rajasuya sacrifice, a plan that seemed to be in contrast to the mission of the 
campaign against Jarasandha. Krishna asked Uddhava's advice, and 
Uddhava replied that the two things could be reconciled with an alliance 
between the Yadus and the Pandavas. The Pandavas could disguise 
themselves as brabmanas to approach Jarasandha and ask for a single 
combat. Bhima was strong enough to defeat Jarasandha, especially if he was 
supported by Krishna's advice. So Krishna organized the journey to 
Indraprastha, an event to which also the wives and children of Krishna 
would participate. The queens were carried in golden palanquins and 
protected each by a strong escort. The caravan also had many carts with 
luggage and provisions, blankets and extra clothing, and included many 
maidservants and practically the entire Yadu army. 


When they arrived in the new city of the Pandavas, Krishna and his family 
were merrily welcomed by Yudhisthira, Bhima, Arjuna, Nakula and 
Sahadeva, accompanied by friends and subjects. At the palace, Krishna was 
saluted by Kunti, who was sitting with her daughters in law, Draupadi and 
Subhadra. Draupadi greeted Krishna's queens by honoring them with many 
gifts of clothes, flower garlands and ornaments. Yudhisthira arranged a 
residence for all the guests, who stayed for several months, then on 
Krishna's advice sent his brothers into the various directions to collect 
tributes in neighboring kingdoms. Finally Bhimasena, Arjuna and Krishna 
dressed as brabmanas and went to Girivraja, the residence of Jarasandha. 


They approached the king at the time when he was receiving his guests and 
the brahmanas and asked for a favor, reminding him about the great 
personalities of ancient times, who had become famous because of their 
generosity - Harischandra, Rantideva, Unchavritti Mudgala, Sibi and Bali. 


Observing their posture, stature and body structure, and the marks left by 
the bow string on their arms, and hearing their deep and strong voices, 


244 


Bhagavata Purana 


Jarasandha immediately realized that his guests were no brabmanas, but 
kshatriyas of the royal order. However he decided that circumstances did not 
leave him any choice, so he promised to give them anything they would ask 


for. 


Then Krishna revealed his own identity and that of Bhima and Arjuna, and 
asked for single combat. Jarasandha said, "I will not fight with you, Krishna, 
because you are a coward. I will not fight with Arjuna, who is too young 
and frail. But I can fight with Bhima, who is as strong as me." 
Jatasandha and Bhima went outside the city and started to fight with maces, 
walking around each other like dancers and striking at each other, while the 
clash of their weapons sounded like the tusks of two fighting elephants or 
the roll of thunder. When the maces became too damaged, they started to 
use their own fists, but the fight continued for a long time without either 


combatants prevailing. 


Krishna was aware of the secret of the invulnerability of Jarasandha, whose 
body had been joined by the Rakshasi Jara, and knew how to defeat him. 
Tearing a twig into two halves, he indirectly showed Bhima to separate the 
two halves of Jarasandha's body. Bhima immediately got the clue and 
pushed his opponent to the ground, then pinning his leg with a foot, he 
caught hold of the other leg and tore upwards, thus separating the two 
halves of his enemy's body. 


After killing Jarasandha, Krishna and the two Pandavas went to deliver all 
the kings who had been defeated and imprisoned by the tyrant. The poor 
fellows emerged from Giridroni dungeons emaciated and weakened for 
their imprisonment, and offered their homage and gratitude to the Lord 
who had set them free. Krishna received the respect and tribute of 
Jarasandha's successor and then returned triumphantly to Indraprastha with 
Bhima and Arjuna, and Yudhisthira chose an auspicious day for the 
Rajasuya_ sacrifice. Yudhisthira appointed the various priests for the 
ceremonies: Vyasa, Bharadvaja, Sumantu, Gotama, Asita, Vasistha, 
Cyavana, Kanva, Maitreya, Kavasa, Trita, Visvamitra, Vamadeva, Sumati, 
Jaimini, Kratu, Paila, Parasara, Garga, Vaisampayana, Atharva, Kashyapa, 
Dhaumya, Parasurama, Asuri, Vitihotra, Madhucchanda, Virasena and 
Akrtavrana. Then he sent invitations to Drona, Bhisma, Kripa, the wise 
Vidura, Dhritarastra and his sons, and a great number of neighboring kings. 


245 


Parama Karuna Devi 


On the day when the soma juice was to be extracted, Yudhisthira offered his 
homage to all participants. The ritual required a formal worship to the most 
respectable person present in the assembly. Sahadeva stood up to speak, 
stating that without any doubt such honor belonged to Krishna, the 
Supreme Personality of God, who was present among them as their 
benefactor and protector. The proposal was approved and to the general 
satisfaction, Yudhisthira performed the special worship called agra puja. 
Only one person in the crowd seemed to be annoyed by the respect shown 
to Krishna: it was Sishupala, the son of Damaghosha, who had always been 


hostile and envious of Krishna. 


He cried out, "It is a shame that the silly proposal of a boy was accepted 
with such favor by wise and respectable people. When so many saintly and 
powerful personalities are here in your presence, you choose to honor a 
cowherd who is the disgrace of his family! This Krishna you are honoring 
does not even follow the principles of the varna system, he behaves 
whimsically and has no good qualities. His entire dynasty, cursed by Yayati, 
is addicted to alcoholic drinks. The Yadus have abandoned the civilized 
lands where saints and sages reside, to hide in a fortress in the middle of the 
sea, where brahminical principles are not observed and the subjects are 


constantly mistreated." 


Many people present started to shout, insulting Sishupala and trying to 
silence him, but Krishna did not say anything. The Pandavas breathed 
heavily in their anger, and together with the warriors of Matsya, Kaikaya 
and Srinjaya they jumped to their feet, ready with weapons for a fight. Then 
Sishupala grabbed sword and shield, preparing to fight, and poured more 
insults against Krishna and all those who were supporting him. Suddenly 
Krishna evoked his Sudarshana disc and hurled it, decapitating Sishupala in 
the middle of the assembly. To the great surprise of everybody, a radiant 
light emerged from the body of Sishupala and went to merge into the body 
of Krishna: Sishupala had achieved liberation. 


After that, the Rajasuya sacrifice was completed without further problems, 
and when Yudhisthira had distributed gifts to all participants, Krishna took 
leave from him to return to his capital. Everyone was pleased and praised 
the king of Indraprastha - everyone except Duryodhana, who was very 
envious and could not tolerate the idea that his cousin Yudhisthira, exiled 


246 


Bhagavata Purana 


from the Kuru capital Hastinapura, had made himself a new kingdom, so 
prosperous and happy. 


There was also another reason why Duryodhana was so angry. During the 
festivities, each member of Yudhisthira's family had been entrusted with a 
task in the event organization. For example, Sahadeva welcomed the 
arriving guests, Krishna washed their feet, Arjuna took care of the elders, 
Nakula went collecting the requirements, Bhima cooked and Draupadi 
served food to the guests. Duryodhana had been put in charge of the 
treasury and Karna distributed the gifts. 


Spellbound at the sight of the immense wealth collected by the Pandavas, 
Duryodhana wanted to visit their palace. Also, queen Draupadi lived there, 
and Duryodhana had always been attracted to her. Striding proudly into the 
atrtum, Duryodhana was fooled by the optical effects created by the 
architect, and mistaking the floor for a sheet of water, he lifted his clothes 
to get through it. A bit further he came to an actual pool imitating a normal 
floor and fell into it, totally unprepared. The situation was rather comical, 
and several people laughed, especially Bhima, Draupadi and other ladies. 
Yudhisthira tried to stop them, but Krishna told him to let it go. 
Duryodhana felt deeply humiliated and returned to his capital without 
saying another word. 


When he received the news of Sishupala's death, his friend Salva became 
very angry and decided to avenge him by waging war against Krishna's city. 
So he obtained a wonderful spacecraft, named Saubha, built by Maya 
Danava, and followed by a large army he reached Dvaraka and besieged it, 
while Krishna was in Indraprastha for the Rajasuya sacrifice of Maharaja 
Yudhisthira. From the spacecraft, Salva dropped a shower of weapons, 
rocks, tree trunks, lightnings, snakes and hailstorms, and swept the city with 
violent winds carrying dust, just like the spaceship of the Asura Tripura had 
tormented Earth in ancient times. 


Pradyumna had been left to defend the city, and together with other Yadu 
wattiors - Satyaki, Charudesna, Samba, Akrura and his brothers, Hardikya, 
Bhanuvinda, Gada, Suka and Sharana - he led the counter-attack. 
Pradyumna's divine weapons immediately dispelled the magical tricks of 
Salva, then with 25 golden arrows with iron tip, Krishna's son felled Salva's 
general Dyuman, and shot 100 arrows against Salva himself. Then he also 


247 


Parama Karuna Devi 


shot one arrow against each of the officers of the army, ten each against the 
chariot drivers and the horses, and three against the other fighters. 


The spacecraft activated its power of optical illusion, by which it produced 
many reflections of itself in the sky, so that one could never be certain of its 
true position. It also began to appear and disappear, and re-appear again 
sometimes on land, sometimes in the sky and sometimes in the water, 
moving constantly, but the Yadu warriors kept covering it with a shower of 
arrows immediately on spotting it. The Yadus continued to fight valiantly, 
not bothering about the weapons shot by the enemy. At some point 
Pradyumna was attacked by Dyuman, the general of Salva's he had 
wounded with an arrow, and was hit on his chest with a tremendous mace 
blow. Pradyumna's charioteer (who was the son of Daruka, the charioteer 
of Krishna) thought that his master was dead and took him away from the 
battlefield, but soon Pradyumna returned to consciousness and scolded 
him, fearing that his own reputation had been stained by a suspicion of him 
fleeing, and ordered him to return immediately into the battle. Rushing 
again into the fight, Pradyumna shot a cloud of naracha arrows against 
Salva's general and finally killed him. However, the result of the battle was 
still uncertain, so that the fight continued for 27 more days and nights. 


In the meantime in Indraprastha the Rajasuya sacrifice had been completed, 
and Krishna started to notice inauspicious omens. He immediately 
suspected that some of Sishupala's allies had taken advantage of his absence 
from Dvaraka to attack the city, and hurried back. When he reached 
Dvatraka - not a moment too soon - he saw Salva and the slaughtering on 
the battlefield. He quickly went to Salva and engaged him in fighting. Salva 
succeeded in shooting an arrow into Krishna's left arm, and emboldened by 
that success he started to insult the Lord. 


He shouted, "Miserable fool! You believe you are invincible! Relying on 
your own power, you have treacherously abducted the wife of my cousin 
Sishupala and then you have killed him unfairly, in a sacred assembly, while 
he was distracted during the Rajasuya sacrifice. Today I will kill you, 
avenging my relative!" 


Krishna responded to those insults by inviting him to put al that chattering 
to practice, then he struck him so powerfully with his mace that Salva 


vomited blood. Soon afterwards, however, Salva disappeared from sight, 


248 


Bhagavata Purana 


and Krishna was approached by a sobbing man, who claimed he had been 
sent by Devaki, Krishna's mother. He said, "Salva has taken your father 
captive, and dragged him away like a butcher with an animal." 


Just at that moment Salva appeared again, seemingly dragging Vasudeva 
along. When he was in front of Krishna, he challenged him, "Here is your 
dear father, who has given you life... now I will kill him before your eyes! 
Save him if you can!" And Salva swung his sword cutting his prisoner's 
head, then he took it inside the spacecraft. 


For one moment Krishna remained immersed in his feelings of love for his 
father, then he realized it was a magical illusion and focused his anger on 
Salva's spacecraft. He hit it with his mace, breaking it into pieces and 
sinking it within the ocean waters. Salva abandoned the ship by jumping to 
land, and rushed to fight on foot. Krishna shot a bhalla arrow, cutting 
Salva's arm that held the mace, then he beheaded him with his Sudarshana 
disc. Dantavakra hastened on to avenge his friend and relative. Furious at 
the idea that Krishna had killed all his companions - Paundraka, Sishupala 
and now Salva as well - he rushed against Krishna holding his mace high. 
He shouted, "You may be my cousin, but you have killed all my friends and 
now you would like to kill me too. So I will destroy you." 


Krishna took up his mace and faced his aggressor, like the ocean shore 
stands before the waves. Dantavakra struck Krishna's head, but the Lord 
did not budge an inch and replied by hitting his enemy on the chest with 
the Kaumodaki. Dantavakra's heart was smashed and he collapsed to the 
ground, vomiting blood, spreading arms and legs, and a spark of light rose 
from his body to merge into Krishna, just as it had happened for Sishupala. 


The eclipse at Kurukshetra 


While Krishna and Balarama lived in Dvaraka, there was a rare solar eclipse. 
Many pilgrims went to Samanta panchaka, the holy place established by 
Parasurama, to perform austerities at that auspicious time, and the Yadus, 
too, decided to go. Leaving Aniruddha to defend the city together with 


249 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Suchandra, Suka, Sarana and Kritavarma, the supreme general of the Yadu 
army, all the others traveled to Kurukshetra to observe the prescribed 
rituals. 


Arrived at Samanta panchaka they took bath and started fasting, then they 
offered many gifts to brahmanas. Finally after the end of the eclipse, they 
again took bath and distributed food to everyone. Many other pilgrims had 
come from the neighboring kingdoms - Matsya, Usinara, Kaushalya, 
Vidarbha, Kuru, Srinjaya, Kamboja, Kaikaya, Madra, Kunti - and also the 
kings of Anarta and Kerala were present. Queen Kunti was very happy to 
see her brothers and sisters again, with their children, parents and all the 
other relatives, especially Vasudeva, who had been under Kamsa's 


oppression for such a long time. 


At Samanta panchaka came also the inhabitants of Vrindavana, headed by 
Nanda Maharaja, and their meeting with Krishna's family was very 
emotional. They immediately searched for Krishna and hugged him 
affectionately, their throats choked with tears. Rohini and Devaki embraced 
mother Yasoda, the queen of Vraja, thanking her for her generosity and for 


the love she had always shown to Krishna and Balarama. 


The gopis were drinking Krishna with their eyes, cursing the creator that had 
made eyelids preventing them to look at him without interruption. The 
Lord left his relatives and sat with the gopis in a secluded place, embracing 
them and smiling to them. He said, "My dear friends, I hope you are not 
angry with me. Unfortunately I had to remain away from you for such a 
long time because I had serious duties to perform for my family, and I had 
to fight against my enemies. Maybe you are thinking that I am ungrateful 
and that I abandoned you, but all our fortunes and misfortunes ate decreed 
by Destiny, and we cannot stop what must happen. All beings meet and 
separate again like leaves in the wind, and rarely they can go where they like. 
You, however, with your love and service, have conquered my heart 
eternally and I am always present in your hearts." 


In the meantime Draupadi, the queen of the Pandavas, was meeting 
Krishna's wives and asked them to tell their stories. One after the other, 
Krishna's queens narrated how they had married the Lord. Rukmini had 
herself abducted on the day of her marriage to Sishupala, Satyabhama had 
been presented by her father together with the Syamantaka jewel, and so 


250 


Bhagavata Purana 


had Jambavati the daughter of Jambavan, while Kalindi had met Krishna 


while he was traveling in the company of Arjuna. 


Krishna had won the hand of Mitravinda during the svayamvara ceremony 
and the same had happened to Satya, while Bhadra and Lakshmana had 
specifically asked to marry him. The svayamvara of Lakshmana had been very 
similar to Draupadi's, but the golden fish used as a target was hidden, and 
one could see only its reflection in a water pot. The many suitors - including 
Arjuna, Bhima, Jarasandha, Sishupala, Duryodhana, Karna and the king of 
Ambastha - had failed, some by little, others by much, and only Krishna 
had been able to complete the test. Also Rohini, the wife of Krishna who 
spoke representing the 16,000 princesses delivered from Bhaumasura's 
captivity, told their story, and all the wives of Krishna agreed on the point 
that the Lord had married them only to show them kindness, and from 
their part they only considered themselves his humble servants. 


While the ladies were discussing among themselves in this way, many Rishis 
and saints arrived at Samanta panchaka, all anxious to see Krishna and 
Balarama. Among these great personalities there were Vyasa, Narada, 
Cyavana, Devala and Asita, Visvamitra, Satananda, Bharadvaja and 
Gautama, Parasurama with his disciples, Vasistha, Galava, Bhrigu, Pulastya 
and Kasyapa, Atri, Markandeya and Brihaspati, Dvita, Trita, Ekata and the 
four Kumaras, Angira, Agastya, Yajnavalkya and Vamadeva. All the kings 
and the other people present stood up to greet them respectfully, and when 
the sages had been honored properly according to tradition, everyone sat 
down to listen to the Lord. 


Krishna said, "Now we can say that our lives have been crowned by 
success, because we have obtained the blessing of meeting so many great 
masters of yoga. Many recognize God only in the temples but remain 
incapable of seeing you, who are the true places of pilgrimage, more than 
any water reservoir or any image made of stone or metal, because they can 
purify only after a long time, while your presence gives purity immediately. 


One who identifies with the body - made of material elements - who 
believes that his wife and family permanently belong to him, who thinks 
that the land of his birth is worthy of worship, who thinks that a pilgrimage 
place simply consists in a water reservoir, but does not seek those who are 
wise and know spiritual truth, is not better than an animal.” 


251 


Parama Karuna Devi 


The great sages reflected on the Lord's words and understood that he was 
giving instructions for human society. So they replied, "Your illusory power, 
your Yogamaya, had confused us completely, although we are the greatest 
experts in knowledge, and prominent creators of this world. The activities 
of God are mysterious, especially when he takes a human form and 
descends among us, pretending to be under superior control. In this way 
you protect and preserve the social order, demonstrating by your example 
how a human being should behave. We are the ones honored by your 
presence and we offer you our homage. Neither these kings or your 
relatives the Yadus can perceive your greatness, because this is concealed by 
the veil of your Maya." 


After offering their prayers to the Lord, the Rishis prepared to return to 
their ashramas. However, Vasudeva still wished to speak with them, and 
begged them to give some instructions regarding karma. Surprised, Narada 
Muni commented: "Vasudeva is asking us how he needs to behave, because 
he sees Krishna simply as his boy. The people who live on the bank of the 
Ganges often goes to pilgrimage to other places, embarking in titesome 
journeys, because familiarity and habit create a lack of appreciation for what 
is already near to us." 


The Rishis consented to answer Vasudeva's questions in the presence of 
Krishna and Balarama. They said, "Action or karma is neutralized by further 
actions, when Vedic sacrifices are performed for the purpose of worshiping 
Vishnu, the Lord of the sacrifice, investing in his service the wealth one has 
earned honestly. This is the simplest method to control one's mind and 
attain liberation. It is a sacred duty that enlivens the heart and the 
auspicious path for family men. 


An intelligent person can renounce the desire for wealth by distributing 
charity and performing sacrifices. He must learn to renounce sexual desire 
by experiencing family life, and must learn to renounce the desire to attain 
the heavenly planets by studying the effects of time. The sages who have 
thus renounced attachment for family life go to the forest to engage in 


austerities. 


The twice born - brahmanas, kshatriyas and vaisyas - must repay the debt they 
have to the Devas, the Rishis and Pitris, the virtuous ancestors. To repay 
such debts they must perform sacrifices and rituals, study the scriptures and 


252 


Bhagavata Purana 


beget children; if they die before having fulfilled these three duties, they fall 
into a hellish condition. You, Vasudeva, are a great soul and have already 
fulfilled two of such debts, towards the Rishis and the Pitris. Now you have 
to pay your debt towards the Devas by performing the Vedic rituals, and 
then you will be perfectly free from all responsibility." 


Vasudeva offered his homage to the Rishis and under their direction he 
performed the prescribed rituals in the holy place of Kurukshetra, in the 
presence of all the great kings and their wives. His eyes decorated by black 
ointment and the body smeared with fresh butter, Vasudeva received the 
initiation to the sacrifice according to the rules of the scriptures, and 
sutrounded by his eighteen wives he appeared like the moon among the 
stars. The wives of Vasudeva were wearing silken saris and were decorated 
with bangles, necklaces, anklets and ear-rings, and the officiating priests, 


too, were dressed in silk and wore valuable ornaments. 


At the end of the ritual ceremony of worship, Vasudeva and hiw wives took 
bath in the lake and distributed in charity the clothes and ornaments they 
had been wearing. Then they donned new clothes and after honoring with 
gifts all the relatives and the other participants to the ceremonies, Vasudeva 
felt perfectly satisfied. Bound by a deep reciprocal affection, the Yadus and 
the inhabitants of Vrindavana remained at Kurukshetra for three months, 
because they were unable to leave each other's company. Finally, after 
another exchange of gifts and show of affection, Nanda returned to 


Vrindavana and the Yadus returned to Dvaraka. 


Krishna instructs Vasudeva 


One day Krishna and Balarama went as usual to visit their father Vasudeva. 
Remembering the words of the Rishis during the celebrations at 
Kurukshetra, Vasudeva addressed them recognizing them as the Supreme 
Personality of God. "I now believe that you are the source of the universal 
creation and the Supreme Soul in the hearts of all beings. I want to give up 
the illusion that makes me identify with this body and makes me think that 


you ate simply my children." 


253 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Krishna smiled, bowed to Vasudeva and replied kindly, "What you said is 
true, but you too, as my brother and all the inhabitants of Dvaraka, as also 
all moving and non-moving beings, should be considered as parts of the 
same supteme existence, the eternal and omni-present Brahman. The 
Supreme Soul is this Brahman who, although one, manifests in so many 
forms, through the qualities of nature that he created himself." 


Devaki listened in awe to her son speaking about such high realizations, and 
thinking about her six sons who had been cruelly killed by Kamsa, she felt a 
great pain and addressed Krishna and Balarama. 


"O Rama, supreme and immeasurable Soul! O Krishna, Lord of all the 
masters of yoga! Now I know that you are the Supreme Personality of God, 
descended in this world with the mission of eliminating the degraded 
people who defy the authority of the genuine scriptures and increase the 
burden of the earth. With a mere expansion of an expansion of your 
expansion, you take care of the creation, preservation and destruction of 
the universe. So I take shelter in you, because you are omnipotent. I heard 
that when your Guru asked you to bring back to life his son, who had been 
long lost in the realm of the ancestors, you fulfilled this extraordinary task 
to reciprocate his teachings. I beg you, do the same thing for me. Bring 
back my sons who were killed by the king of the Bhojas, so that I can see 
them again." 


To this heartfelt request of their mother, Krishna and Balarama 
immediately entered the Sutala region through their Yogamaya and went to 
see Bali Maharaja who lives there. Bali was very happy to see them, and 
honored them with the traditional rituals to welcome important guests, 
offering a complete worship and anything else they desired. Immersed in 
devotional ecstasy in the presence of his beloved Lord, Bali offered his 
homage to Ananta Sesha, Balarama, and to Krishna, who appears to teach 
the principles of sankhya and yoga. Then he prayed he could be freed from 
the ignorance of the attachment to familiar and social life, compared to a 
dry well, and to find shelter only in the Lord. Krishna replied, "During the 
period of the first Manu, Marici Rishi had six children from his wife Uma. 
Once these heavenly beings derided Brahma and therefore they were 
condemned to enter a demoniac life form, and were born again as the sons 
of Hiranyakashipu. Later they were born as the six sons of Devaki and were 


254 


Bhagavata Purana 


killed by Kamsa. Devaki still suffers for their loss, thinking of them as her 
children. I know they are now living with you, and we would like to take 
them to earth to alleviate the sufferings of their mother. Then they will be 
free from all curses and sufferings, and will be able to return to their 
heavenly abode. Now send for Smara, Udgitha, Parisvanga, Patanga, 
Kshudrabhrit and Ghrini, so that we can leave." 


Immediately, Krishna and Balarama reappeared with the six children in 
front of Devaki, who was overwhelmed with joy and maternal love. She 
hugged the children, sat them on her lap and nursed them, and because of 
the contact with the milk that had fed Krishna himself, the six boys were 
purified and instantly returned to their form of heavenly beings. Bowing to 
their mother and father, and to Krishna and Balarama, they ascended to 
heavens. Having experienced the return and final departure of her six 
children, Devaki was amazed and concluded that everything was caused by 
the illusion created by Krishna. 


During the period when he was traveling around many places of pilgrimage, 
Arjuna arrived at Prabhasa (Somanatha) and learned that Balarama had 
been thinking of giving Subhadra in marriage to Duryodhana, but that 
nobody else in the family was happy with that idea. 


Arjuna thought that maybe he could marty Krishna's sister, so he disguised 
himself as a sannyasi and went to Dvaraka incognito. Arjuna remained in the 
city during the four months of the rainy season and was honored guest of 
the Yadus. One day Balarama invited him for lunch, and on that occasion 
Arjuna was able to see the beautiful Subhadra, and he immediately fell in 
love with her. He saw his love was reciprocated: from that day, he could not 
think of anything else and continued to meditate on how he would be able 
to fulfill his dream. 


The abduction was organized with the approval of Krishna and the other 
telatives. Subhadra left the city on a chariot on the occasion of a great 
festival in a temple, and Arjuna approached, armed with bow and arrows. 
After easily fending off the security guards, Arjuna lifted Subhadra and 
carried her away to Dvaraka. Balarama became very angry when he was 
informed, but Krishna pacified him, explaining fully what had happened, 
and that Subhadra preferred to marry Arjuna. Then Balarama relented and 
sent many presents to the happy couple, with his blessings for the marriage. 


255 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Shrutadeva was a brahmana who lived in the city of Mithila, in the kingdom 
of Videha. He was very qualified, peaceful, learned and free from all 
attachments to sense gratification, and he was content with whatever 
destiny had sent him from day to day. Another great devotee who lived in 
the same city was king Bahulasva, a descendant of Janaka, king of the 
dynasty of Mithila. 


One day Krishna decided to go visit them and left, accompanied by a group 
of Rishis - Narada, Vamadeva, Atri, Vyasa, Parasurama, Asita, Aruni, 
Brihaspati, Kanva, Maitreya, Cyavana and Sukadeva. During the journey 
people came forward to Krishna's chariot with many offerings and words 
ot praise. In this way the travelers went through the kingdoms of Anarta, 
Dhanva, Kuru-jangala, Kanka, Matsya, Panchala, Kunti, Madhu, Kekaya, 
Koshala, Arna and others still, blessing their inhabitants with their divine 


presence. 


Finally they reached Videha. Bahulasva and Shrutadeva hurried forward, 
followed by the people of the city, to offer their homage to the Lord, and 
both invited him in their homes. So Krishna simultaneously went to both 
the houses, but both his hosts believed they were having him exclusively in 
their home. Bahulasva welcomed the Lord with great devotion, offering the 
ritual worship and then sitting at his feet to massage them, after serving a 
tich meal, and praising him with many prayers. 


At the same time, Shrutadeva welcomed the Lord in his home, and he was 
so happy that his heart was swelling with joy and he was jumping up and 
down, waving his shawl. Then he washed the Lord's feet and with that 
water he sprinkled himself, his wife and all his house to purify it. The ritual 
worship he presented to Krishna included the offering of flowers, wsira 
roots, fresh water, fragrant clay, /w/asi leaves, kusha grass and flowers. The 
meal he served was made of perfectly sattvic ingredients. 


Shrutadeva too sat at the Lord's feet to massage them, and spoke at length 
about Krishna's glories, recognizing him as the Supreme Soul and the 
Supreme Personality of God. After listening affectionately to him, Krishna 
also praised the qualities of the brahmana and invited him to offer worship 
to the great Rishis who accompanied him. Krishna stayed in Videha for 
several months, enjoying the company of his devotees. 


256 


Bhagavata Purana 


Balarama's pilgrimage 


When Balarama knew that a great battle was being prepared between the 
Pandavas and the Kurus, he decided to leave in a pilgrimage because he did 


not want to take either side. 


He went first to Prabhasa (Somanatha), where he honored the Devas, the 
Rishis and Pitris, then in the company of some brabmanas he traveled along 
the branch of the Sarasvati that flows to the west, visiting the great lake 
Bindusara, Tritakupa, Sudarshana, Vishala, Brahma-tirtha and Chakra-tirtha, 
then he went along the east-bound branch. He also visited all the holy 
places on the banks of the Yamuna and Gange, and finally he reached the 
forest called Naimisharanya, where the great Rishis were performing a 
complicated sacrifice. 


All the Rishis present stood up to welcome him - all of them except 
Romaharshana, who remained sitting without taking notice. Romaharshana 
had been born in a sudra family but was accepted as a disciple by Vyasa, 
who had elevated him to the position of brabmana. However, it seemed that 
all his studies had not taught him much, because he had become arrogant 
and evidently he considered himself superior to Balarama and to all the 
other sages that had risen to welcome the Lord. So Balarama picked up a 
blade of &usha grass and poked Romaharshana, who died on the spot. 


All the Rishis were shocked by such an action and scolded Balarama: "The 
action you have performed is against the principles of religion. We had 
given Romaharshana the position of acharya in this sacrifice, guaranteeing 
him longevity and health for the entire duration of the ceremonies, 
therefore you have become guilty of the killing of a brahmana. Of course we 
know you are the Supreme Lord and nothing affects you, even the rules of 
the scriptures, but because you have chosen to take the role of a human 
being to accomplish your mission, if you accept to submit to the 
purification required for such an action, human society will be greatly 
benefited." 


257 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Balarama accepted the deep truth of those words and asked the brabmanas 
for instructions on how to proceed. Finally it was decided that 
Romaharsana's son would become the authority on the Puranas, receiving all 
the blessings and honors that had been conferred to his father. Besides, the 
brahmanas asked Balarama to kill the Asura Balvala, son of Ilvala, who lived 
in that forest and once a month, in the days of new moon, came to 
contaminate the sacrificial arena by throwing blood, excrements, urine, wine 
and flesh. After eliminating that cause for disturbance for the ceremonies, 
Balarama would be allowed to continue his pilgrimage for another twelve 


months. 


That was indeed a new moon day, and Balvala announced his arrival with a 
dust storm, a violent wind that smelled of pus. The sacrificial arena was 
submerged with all sorts of abominable substances, then Balvala himself 
appeared, holding a trident. His immense body was black as coal, his hair 
and beard were red like molten copper, and he had terrifying fangs. 


Balarama evoked his mace and plough, that appeared immediately, and he 
used them to hook and drag the demon closer and throw it on the ground, 
after which he smashed its forehead. The Rishis praised Balarama for that 
amazing deed and performed his ritual bathing, just like the Devas had 
done for Indra when he killed Vritrasura. Then they offered him a vaijayanti 
garland made of lotus flowers, new clothes and ornaments, and blessed 
him. 


After taking leave from the Rishis, Balarama went to the Kaushiki river, 
then to the lake from which the Sarayu river flowed. Following the course 
of the Sarayu he came to Prayaga, where he bathed and performed 
auspicious rituals. Then he visited the ashrama of Pulaha Rishi. Balarama 
also bathed in the rivers Gomati, Gandaki, Vipasha and Sona. He went to 
Gaya, where he offered worship to the ancestors, and to the mouth of the 
Ganges, where he performed his ablutions. 


He met Parasurama on mount Mahendra and offered his homage, then he 
bathed in the seven branches of river Godavari and also in the rivers Vena, 
Pampa and Bhimarathi. He met Kartikeya and visited Sri Saila, the abode of 
Lord Shiva. In the southern provinces of Dravida desha, the Lord visited 
the sacred hill Venkata and the cities of Kamakoti and Kanchi, the famous 
tiver Kaveri and the sacred Sri Ranga. Then he went to mount Rishabha, 


258 


Bhagavata Purana 


that is sacred to Krishna, and then to the southern Mathura, called Madurai. 
Finally he arrived at Setubandha, also known as Ramesvaram, where all sins 
are destroyed. There Balarama distributed 10,000 in charity to the 
brahmanas. 


Then he visited the rivers Kritamala and Tamraparni, and the great 
mountains Malaya, where he found Agastya Rishi sitting in meditation and 
received his blessings. Finally he reached Kanyakumari, where he saw 
Goddess Durga. Then he traveled to Phalguna tirtha, bathing in the sacred 
lake Panchapsara, where Vishnu had manifested, and in that place he gave 
10,000 more cows in charity. Then he traveled through the kingdoms of 
Kerala and Trigarta, visititing the city of Gokarna, sacred to Shiva, where 
the Lord manifested spontaneously and where Parvati resides on its island. 
He also visited Surparaka and bathed in the rivers Tapi, Payoshni and 
Nirvindhya, he entered the Dandaka forest and visited the Reva river, near 
the city of Mahismati. After taking bath at Manu tirtha, he finally returned 
to Prabhasa. 


There he heard that the battle of Kurukshetra had ended, and all the kings 
who had participated had died. Only Bhima and Duryodhana continued to 
fight, and Balarama wanted to go there and stop them. Arriving at 
Kurukshetra, he was respectfully greeted by the Pandavas, but nobody 
wanted to talk, even when Balarama directly addressed Bhima and 
Duryodhana, asking them to end that useless fight. But to no avail: the two 
opponents continued to clash, one strike after another, impelled by destiny, 
so Balarama returned to Dvaraka, where he was warmly welcomed by 
Uerasena. After some time Balarama decided to go back to Naimisharanya, 
where the Rishis welcomed him with joy. He was accompanied by his wife, 
and it was clear that he had retired from all battles and from life at court. 


One day at Dvaraka Krishna received the visit of an old friend, Sudama, 
who had lived with him in Sandipani Muni's Gurukula in their youth. 
Sudama was a brabmana, very expert in Vedic knowledge and detached from 
all gratification and sense of possession; his mind was always peaceful and 
his senses were controlled. He maintained his family with whatever little he 
obtained spontaneously and he was perfectly satisfied. 


Sudama's wife, emaciated by hunger and dressed in rags, tolerated those 
hardships as serenely as she could, but one day she asked him why he could 


259 


Parama Karuna Devi 


not go and ask for help from his old friend and companion Krishna, the 
husband of the Goddess of fortune, who lived in Dvaraka among 
unimaginable wealth. 


Sudama listened to his wife's request and thought that in fact it would be 
wonderful to be able to see Krishna again, therefore he decided to leave for 
Dvaraka. He wanted to carry a present for his old friend, so he asked his 
wife what they had in the house. Sudama's wife went to the neighboring 
houses and begged for a few handfuls of broken rice, then she made a small 
package wrapped in cloth and handed it to her husband. The journey to 
Dvaraka required many days of walking, but finally Sudama arrived in 
Krishna's wonderful city. After finding the palace where his old friend lived, 
Sudama entered and found him sitting on his wife's bed. 


On seeing him entering, Krishna instantly leaped to his feet and rushed to 
greet him. He seated him on a beautiful coach and affectionately washed his 
feet, then he offered some cooling sandalwood paste, aguru and kunkum, 
and presented incense and lamps. Rukmini personally engaged in serving 
the guest, fanning him with her chamara. That royal welcome astonished the 
palace servants, because the brahmana was dirty, dressed in horrible rags and 
so skinny that all his bones showed. 


Krishna took Sudama's hand and they talked together about the days they 
spent in the school of the Guru and what they had done since then. 


Krishna said, "You are certainly free from all desires of material pleasure, 
but I think that after completing your education and reciprocating the 
Gutu's kindness with your gifts, you returned home to marry a good gitl. 
Do you remember that time that our Guru's wife sent us to the forest to 
collect firewood, and that storm broke out, and we were lost? Confused by 
the rain and wind, we could not find the path and we spent the night in the 
dark forest, keeping hands and looking for the way to go back. At dawn, 
Sandipani Muni himself came to look for us and blessed us for the 
sufferings we had endured to serve him." 


Sudama smiled and replied that Krishna, the Supreme Personality of God, 
had recited the role of the student only to give a good example to human 
society, and had no need for blessings from anyone. Then Krishna laughed 
and, noticing the little bundle that Sudama was carrying on his shoulder, 


260 


Bhagavata Purana 


asked him, "What do I see here? Have you brought me a present? Let me 


see!" 


Extremely embarrassed, Sudama realized the futility of that paltry gift, but 
Krishna snatched the parcel from his hand and opened it, showing great 
happiness. "Ah! Broken rice! Wonderful!l", and immediately started to eat it. 
He already had swallowed a handful, when Rukmini stayed his hand. "That 
is enough, Krishna! What you have eaten is sufficient to guarantee Sudama 
all kinds of wealth in this life and in the next." 


The brabmana spent the night as a guest in Krishna's house, after eating and 
drinking his fill, and he felt as if he had arrived in Vaikuntha. The next day, 
after being again honored by Krishna, Sudama left to return home, 
immersed in the greatest happiness, unable to think of anything else except 
his wonderful friend. "The Supreme Lord is so kind that he treated me like 
a Deva, although I am a wretched man, a brahmana without qualifications. 
He sat me on his wife's bed, washed and massaged my feet, and hugged me 
like a brother. He did not give me anything to bring back home, but that is 
because he knows very well that the arrogance created by the possession of 
material wealth would soon cause me to forget him." Contemplating these 
thoughts, Sudama finally reached home. 


But instead of the hut where he used to live, he found a gorgeous palace, 
surrounded by gardens, parks and other beautiful buildings. At the news of 
his return, Sudama's wife rushed to meet him. She, too, was unrecognizable: 
dressed in valuable clothes and beautiful ornaments, she was surrounded by 
a number of maids and appeared as radiant as a Goddess. Accompanied by 
his wife, Sudama entered the palace and was astonished in seeing how 
much wealth it contained. The beds had mattresses and linen as white as 
milk foam, and the crystal walls were decorated by jeweled lamps. Sudama 
realized that such an incredible change was due to the kindness of his friend 
Krishna, and accepted his new life as a blessing from the Lord, enjoying the 
pleasures that he had been granted, but without remaining attached to 
them. 


One day at Dvaraka the wife of a brahmana gave birth to a child, but the 
newborn died as soon as he touched the ground. The brahmana took the 
little lifeless body and went to king Ugrasena; in his agitation he accused the 
king of having caused the death of his son by failing somehow in his duties 


261 


Parama Karuna Devi 


as a monarch. When a king is virtuous and carefully performs his duties, all 
the inhabitants of the kingdom are perfectly protected from all evils. There 
are no premature deaths, famines or drought, there is no poverty, there are 
no crimes and sufferings are reduced to a minimum. 


The same tragedy happened again with the second and third child and so 
on, and each time the brabmana went to cry at the king's door. Arjuna was 
present when the brabmwana arrived crying for his ninth dead child; 
immediately he offered to help him, swearing that if he failed in that sacred 
task, he would commit suicide by entering the fire. 


The brahmana was uncettain and commented that neither Balarama, nor 
Vasudeva, Pradyumna or Anitruddha had been able to help him, but when 
Arjuna reassured him, he went back home with some hope. In due time the 
brahmana's wife got into labor to give birth to her tenth child, and Arjuna 
rushed in, bow in hand to protect the child and built a protective cage all 
around the house. But as soon as the baby was born, it disappeared from 
sight, to the great dismay of Arjuna, while the brabmana became mad with 


grief and started to openly insult the great warrior. 


Arjuna used a special mantra to immediately attain Samyamani, the abode of 
Yamaraja, but he could not find the child. It was not even in the abodes of 
Agni, Nirriti, Soma, Vayu or Varuna, and Arjuna began to lose hope. He 
was going to keep his word and commit suicide, when Krishna came to 
stop him. Krishna said, "I know where the brahmana's children are. Now we 


will go to recover them, so nobody will be able to speak ill of us." 


Krishna mounted on his divine chariot and had Arjuna sit with him, then 
they started to travel and soon went beyond the seven islands of the middle 
part of the universe, then they crossed the region of Lokaloka and entered 
the darkness of the external space, where Krishna's horses - Saibya, Sugrtiva, 
Meghapushpa and Balahaka - stopped in confusion, not knowing where to 
go. The Lord evoked his Sudarshana disc, that illuminated all directions 
shining like thousands of suns, and the chariot started forward again, like an 
arrow shot from Rama's bow penetrates the army of the enemies. 


Beyond the darkness of outer space, Krishna's divine chariot reached the 
eternal radiance of the brahmajyoti and then entered a great ocean of 


luminous waves, where they found an amazing palace, unlike any Arjuna 


262 


Bhagavata Purana 


had ever seen. That was the residence of Ananta Sesha, as white as the 
Kailasa mountain covered with snow, and the gems decorating his thousand 
heads reflected the light from his eyes. Maha Vishnu was reclining on the 
soft body of Ananta with a blue complexion, dressed in silken yellow 
clothes, with eight wonderful arms. The Lord was surrounded by his 
personal servants and consorts, the various manifestations of power. 
Krishna and Arjuna offered their homage to Maha Vishnu, who smiled and 
told them, "I took away the sons of the brahmana in Dvataka because I 
wanted to see you. You are my emanations, descended to the earth to save 
the principles of religion, and you will soon come back in me after 
completing your mission." So Maha Vishnu presented them the ten children 
of the brabmana, and Arjuna happily returned to Dvaraka with Krishna, 
amazed by everything he had seen. 


The glories of Sri Vishnu 


Maharaja Parikshit said, "I have noticed that those who desire to get wealth 
and material pleasures tend to offer worship to Lord Shiva, who is a great 
ascetic, while Lord Vishnu, the husband of the Goddess of fortune, is 
worshiped by those who have renounced all material attachments." 


Sukadeva replied, "Lord Shiva is engaged in the material manifestation, 
while Lord Vishnu is completely transcendental. I remember that your 
grandfather, king Yudhisthira, asked a similar question from Krishna while 
they were talking after the completion of the rituals of the Asvamedha 
yajna." 


Krishna said, "When I want to show special favor to a devotee, I take away 
everything he has, and then his relatives and friends abandon him, and he is 
forced to face great sufferings until he becomes humble, realizes the 
temporary and illusory nature of this world and focuses his efforts on 
spiritual realization. When a person obtains material blessings from God, he 


often becomes atrogant and neglects his duties, even going to the point of 


263 


Parama Karuna Devi 


offending those same benefactors who had blessed him. In this regard there 
is a very interesting story, about how Shiva had to face the unpleasant 
results of a boon he had granted to an Asura." 


Vrika, the son of Sakuni, was a very arrogant Asura and wished to obtain 
lots of power. One day he met Narada and asked him which form of God 
was easier to worship, and Narada replied, "By worshiping Shiva one 
quickly attains success, but his blessings often work in mysterious ways, and 
may create difficulties in the long run. For example Ravana and Banasura 


obtained great powers from him, but the results were not very good." 


Without caring for Narada's mysterious warning, Vrikasura went to 
Kedarnatha and started to offer worship to Shiva, cutting off pieces of flesh 
from his own body and offering them as oblations into the fire, that is the 
mouth of Shiva. Because by the seventh day he had not yet been able to 
evoke the presence of the Lord, he decided to cut his own head off. At that 
time Shiva appeared from the sacrificial fire to stop him from committing 
that action, and at his touch, Vrika's body was completely healed. Shiva 
said, "Stop this nonsense. I will give you the boon you desire. You have 
tortured your body unnecessarily, because I am pleased even by the simple 
offering of water by those who take shelter in me." 


The wicked Vrika asked for a terrible power: his hand would instantly kill 
anyone whose head was touched. Shiva was very perplexed, but as he had 
given his promise, he granted that strange boon, smiling ironically like one 
who is feeding milk to a snake. Immediately the Asura wanted to 


experiment his new power by touching the head of Shiva himself. 


Shiva rushed to Vaikuntha to ask for Vishnu's help. Vishnu had already 
observed the events and was ready to solve the problem: he took the form 
of a young brabmachari, dressed in the traditional way, and he went to meet 
the Asura. He said, "Dear son of Sakuni, you seem to be very tited. What 
happened to your Please take some rest. It seems you are trying to get 


something that is escaping from you: how can we help your" 


Comforted by the kind words of that sympathetic boy, Vrika told him 
everything, and said he was pursuing Shiva. "Bah," the brabmachari replied, 
"all this situation seems to be rather strange. Shiva is always in the company 


of ghosts and crazy people, and in your position I would suspect some trick 


264 


Bhagavata Purana 


from his part. Very likely, the boon he gave you is fake and is not working 


at all. You will be able to see that easily, if you touch your own head." 


Confused by the illusory potency of the Lord, Vrika foolishly put a hand on 
his own head and he instantly fell dead, his head shattered as if it had been 
stricken by lightning. The evil Asura had been killed by the reactions of his 
own crimes. What living being can hope to be lucky if he offends good and 
innocent people? Even more so, punishment awaits those who offend 
Shiva, who is the Lord and the spiritual master of the entire universe. 


Another time, a group of Rishis had gathered on the bank of river Sarasvati 
to perform a Vedic sacrifice, when the theological discussion came to a halt, 
with different opinions on which one among the three most prominent 
Personalities of God was most generous. Bhrigu Rishi was asked to test the 
behavior of Brahma, Shiva and Vishnu, so he went to them, one after the 


other, to see how they would react to a lack of respect from his part. 


When he arrived in the presence of Brahma and stood before him without 
bowing and offering prayers, Brahma got quite angry but he did not show 
it. Then Bhrigu went to Shiva, who stood up to greet him in a friendly way; 
Brighu insulted him openly by rejecting his welcome, and Shiva flared up 
and lifted his trident to kill him, but Devi intervened to pacify him. Finally 
Bhrigu went to Vishnu, who was lying down, his head in the lap of his 
consort the Goddess of fortune, and attacked him by kicking his chest. The 
Lord immediately rose from the bed, bowed to the Rishi and begged his 
forgiveness for failing to greet him immediately. Vishnu told the Rishi, 
"Please, make yourself comfortable and rest for a little. I wish to purify 
myself and my home with the water that washed your feet, that are a source 
of sanctity for all the places of pilgrimage. Thanks to the touch of your feet, 
my chest has now become the worthy residence of the Goddess of 
fortune." Moved by that extraordinary manifestation of affection, 
generosity and tolerance by the Lord, Bhrigu returned to the assembly of 
the Rishis and told them what had happened. 


Maharaja Pariskhit had carefully listened to Sukadeva narrating the 
wonderful activities of the Supreme Personality of God, Krishna, who had 
descended in this world to fulfill his mission - to relieve the burden of 
earth, protect good people and re-establish the knowledge of the self and 
the principles of religion. 


265 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Parikshit told Sukadeva, "Sri Krishna has been recognized as the Absolute 
Truth, the Supreme Brahman, by all the great sages present during his 
incarnation. Yet, to give the example to the individual souls, he meditated 
on Brahman and God, and recommended the study of the scriptures to 
understand Brahman. But there is one thing I do not understand: as the 
nature of Brahman is transcendental, it cannot be described in words or 
understood intellectually. On the other hand, Vedic texts consist of words 
and are studied through the intellect." 


Sukadeva replied, "Material intelligence and the senses have been 
specifically created to enable the conditioned soul to engage in gratification, 
through a gradual process of personal evolution that culminates in 
liberation from conditionings. Thus the scriptures have been composed in 
the awareness of the needs and the understanding capabilities of the 
conditioned souls. However, because the confidential knowledge of the 
Supreme Personality of God transcends the material level, by meditating on 
the Supreme Lord, Bhagavan, people can attain the ultimate purpose of life. 
In this regard, I remember a conversation between Narayana Rishi and 
Narada Muni, where this very topic was discussed. 


One day Narada visited the ashrama of Nara and Narayana Rishi at Kalapa, 
on the Himalaya, and Narayana Rishi spoke of a discussion about Brahman 
that had taken place on Janaloka among Sanandana Kumara and other 
Rishis. According to Sanandana, the personified Vedas had appeared as the 
first emanation from the breath of Lord Narayana and recited prayers to 
ptaise him before the beginning of creation. 


"Victory to you, o invincible Lord! As you are omniscient, we beg you to 
dissipate the eternal power of illusion, that through the three influences of 
material nature creates troubles to the conditioned souls. The world that 
can be perceived through the senses is seen as the supreme truth, because 
the Brahman is the foundation of all creations, that remains eternally 
unchanged. 


You are that Supreme Brahman, o Lord, and therefore the sages always 
meditate on you, on your teachings and your activities, that purify all 
contamination in the universe. What to say of those who are serving you 
after attaining the transcendental level? 


266 


Bhagavata Purana 


Because of your mercy, the material elements create the egg of the universe, 
and you enter it, to bless all beings and guide them as the Supreme Soul that 
resides in all hearts. The yogis meditate on you as Surya, who resides in the 
solar plexus in the microcosm of the human body, and when they progtess 
in their spiritual practice they become able to perceive you as Paramatma, 
who resides in the chakra of the heart, the subtle center from which all the 
prana channels emanate. From the heart, the most advanced yogis tise with 
you up to the crown chakra, where they can perceive you even more clearly, 
and where they leave their bodies, not to return to this world any more. 


To inspire the living beings to action, you appear in the various species of 
life that you have created yourself, just like the fire takes various forms 
according to the materials it burns. The individual being, too, remains free 
from the subtle and gross coverings while inhabiting the material bodies its 
has created through its own actions, because it is a part of you. This is why 
the great sages know that by meditating on you, one attains liberation. 
These fortunate souls taste the nectar of your activities, and are indifferent 
even to liberation; they renounce the joys of home and family to remain in 
the company of those who only seek the transcendental nectar. 


When the human body is used in divine service, it finds its proper 
engagement and becomes a great advantage, while when it is used to engage 
in the illusory search for material happiness, it binds the being to an 
increasingly degraded existence. Simply by meditating constantly on the 
Lord, even his enemies attained liberation; what to speak then of those who 
constantly think of God with love and devotion? We, too, aspire to the 
nectar tasted by your wives, who ate fascinated by your arms. O 
transcendental Lord, for you there are no close friends or enemies, just like 
the space of the sky has nothing to do with the qualities that can be 
perceived through the senses, and therefore it is considered empty. Thus 
the beings who become liberated from their conditionings return to merge 
into you, like the rivers flow into the ocean, or like the nectar of many 


flowers goes into the bees' honey. 


Although it is real and valuable, like the various golden ornaments are 
desirable because they are made with that pure metal, the manifestation of 
this material world is not real in a permanent way, just like the bubbles of 


foam that are created by the meeting of the waters of the eternal ocean with 


267 


Parama Karuna Devi 


the ever-moving air. The sannyasis who are unable to uproot the last traces 
of material desire from their hearts remain impure, and thus they are unable 
to understand you truly. Although you are always present in the hearts of 
everyone, one who is covered by illusion forgets your presence, just like one 
forgets a valuable gem closed in a medallion that is always worn on one's 


neck. 


There are also people who practice yoga with the purpose to obtain greater 
sense gratification: these people will be punished in this life and in the next, 
and will remain unable to attain you. On the other hand, those who have 
realized you are not concerned about the reactions to their past actions, or 
about what other people may say about them, but concentrate all their 
attention on meditating about your glories, that are recited in each age by 
the descendants of Manu." 


The destruction of the Yadu dynasty 


Krishna remained in Dvaraka living among his relatives and friends, the 
descendants of Yadu, for many years. The main queen of Krishna, Rukmini, 
gave birth to Pradyumna, who became father of Aniruddha, who became 
father of Vajra, who was one of the few survivors of the destruction of the 
Yadu dynasty. Vajra became the father of Pratibahu, the father of Subahu, 


father of Santasena, father of Satasena. 


Krishna and Balarama had descended to earth to alleviate its burden, 
eliminating many Asuras and the vast armaments of the materialistic kings. 
When that work was completed, the time came to end the mission, so that 
the various heavenly beings could return to their normal position, therefore 
Krishna organized the disappearance of his great dynasty and of the 
Pandavas, who had helped him in his work. As no external force would be 
able to destroy the Yadus, Krishna arranged for the annihilation to be 
caused from inside the dynasty itself, like a bamboo forest is reduced to 


ashes by the fire caused by the friction of the dry reeds. 


268 


Bhagavata Purana 


One day Vasudeva had invited many great sages, including Narada, 
Visvamitra, Asita, Kanva, Durvasa, Bhrigu, Angira, Kashyapa, Vamadeva, 
Atri and Vasistha, to perform some ceremonies in his house. When the 
rituals were completed, the sages went to the holy place known as 
Pindaraka. The boys of the Yadu dynasty were in a mood to have fun, so 
they chose Samba, the son of Jambavati, and dressed him up as a woman. 
Then they approached the great sages and begged them, pretending to be 
serious and humble, to reveal what that woman would give birth to - a boy 
or a gitl. The sages immediately understood the trick, and angered by that 
lack of respect, replied with a curse. "You fools! This person you call a 
woman will give birth to an iton mace, that will be the doom of your entire 
dynasty." 


Terrified, the boys discovered that in fact Samba immediately gave birth to 
a deathly mace. Not knowing what else to do, they carried the mace to king 
Ugtasena who was sitting in assembly and told him what had happened. 
Ugrasena ordered the mace to be ground to dust and thrown into the 
ocean. So they did. The iron dust and the last small piece of iron remaining 
were thrown into the waters, but the iron bit was swallowed by a fish, that 
was later caught by Jara the hunter. Jara used it to make an arrow tip, while 
the iron dust was brought back to the beach by the waves and it grew into a 
thicket of bamboos that were as hard as iron. Krishna did not say anything 


and did not intervene, because everything was going according to his plan. 


When they learned that Krishna was going to close his mission on earth, all 
the heavenly beings went to Dvaraka to offer their homage, recognizing 
that in fact the Lord had kept his promise. Then Krishna went to the royal 
assembly of the Yadus and explained the inauspicious omens that were 
manifesting in the city: "Our dynasty has been stricken by the curse of the 
brabmanas, and there is nothing we can do to avoid destruction. We should 
go immediately to the holy place of Prabhasa (Somanatha), where the Deva 
of the Moon performed austerities to find relief from Daksha's curse. By 
bathing in the waters of the ocean and offering oblations to the ancestors 
and the Devas, and by distributing rich gifts to the brahmanas, we will be 
able to face this danger in the best possible way." 


Uddhava observed the preparations for the departure and approached 
Krishna to express his perplexity. "Lord, you are the God of all Devas and 


269 


Parama Karuna Devi 


know very well that simply by hearing and reciting your transcendental 
glories one can neutralize any evil. Furthermore, although you have the 
power to annihilate the curse, you have no intention to do so. I must 
therefore conclude that you have decided to cause the disappearance of 
your dynasty and your departure from this world. So I am begging you, 
Lord, I cannot remain separated from you even for one moment: please 
take me with you, wherever you go." 


Krishna smiled, confirming Uddhava's words. "I have completed my 
mission here, and now the Devas have asked me to return to my residence 
in Vaikuntha. The Yadu dynasty will be almost completely destroyed and in 
seven days the ocean will rise to reclaim the city of Dvaraka. I, too, will 
disappear soon and the earth will fall into the darkness of Kali yuga. You 
should leave these places and roam the earth, abandoning all attachments to 
friends and relatives. Firmly established in the awareness of the spiritual 
self, you will see I am everywhere and in everything, and you will always 


remain free from all conditionings." | 


Uddhava replied, "O Supreme Soul, for those who have no devotion for 
you it is very difficult to renounce material pleasures, because they are 
attached to the body and the relationships of the body. Nobody in this 
world can help those poor wretches, because you are the only perfect 
teacher." 


Krishna said, "A little intelligence is sufficient. By observing the world 
around himself, a sober person can make logical conclusions and act as his 
own spiritual master. The human form of life provides the instruments that 
are required to seek the transcendental Truth that is beyond the perception 
of the senses. In this regard I will tell you the story of the meeting of 
Maharaja Yadu with an avadhuta brahmana, who in spite of being young and 
learned, did not engage in the religious rituals, but roamed free like an 


innocent child, without fear and without company." 


To answer Yadu's questions, the brahmana explained that he had many 
spiritual teachers: earth, the mountain, the tree, air, the sky, water, fire, the 
moon, the sun, the pigeon, the python, the sea, the moth, the bee, the 
elephant, the honey thief, the deer, the fish, Pingala the prostitute, the 
kurara bird, the child, the girl, the arrow maker, the snake, the spider and 
the wasp. 


270 


Bhagavata Purana 


From the earth he had learned that a sober person will not be agitated even 
when put in difficulties by others, because he knows that everyone acts 
under God's control. From the mountain and the tree he had learned to 
dedicate all efforts to the benefit of others, without being attached to one's 
own advantage, and without being distracted from spiritual contemplation. 
From the air he had learned to remain always detached from everything, 
even when coming in contact with the good and bad qualities of the various 
objects. Like air, a sage lives in various material bodies but never identifies 
with them, just like air penetrates all bodies but always remains distinct 
from them. This is also demonstrated by the sky or the space: the soul is 
omnipresent like space and cannot be divided. 


From water, he had learned to remain always free from all contamination, 
to be always sweet and gentle, and produce pleasurable sounds. Like water 
purifies everything, so a sage purifies all those who come in contact with 
him. From fire, he had learned to consume what was offered to him, 
burning all contaminations, and to manifest or not manifest according to 
the circumstances. From the moon he had learned that there are phases in 
life, by which one grows or declines, but our eternal nature remains 
untouched. From the sun he had learned that a saintly person accepts 
vatious types of material objects by utilizing his senses and gives them back 
at the proper time, without being affected in accepting or rejecting, just like 
the sun evaporates great quantities of water and then restores it to the earth 
in the form of rains. Furthermore, like the sun is never divided although it 
appears reflected in many objects, the soul always remains one and 
transcendental. 


From the pigeon, he had learned that excessive attachment to family leads 
to disaster, as it happened to that couple of pigeons who had made their 
nest in the forest, and saw their young ones carried away by the hunter. 
From the python he had learned to have patience and to content himself 
with whatever he obtained, and if necessary, to go without food. From the 
sea, he had learned to remain soberly within his boundaries, no matter how 
many tivers in spate rush their waters after the rainy season, and not to dry 
up during the summer. In the same way the sage accepts prosperity and 
deprivations without being distracted from the transcendental awareness. 
From the moth, he had learned not to yield to the temptation of rushing 


into sense gratification, and not to lose one's head at the sight of womanly 


271 


Parama Karuna Devi 


beauty. From the bee, he had learned to collect only the small quantity of 
food required to remain in life, without depending on one benefactor only. 
When the bee collects more than what is strictly necessary, it ends up 
accumulating honey, which becomes its doom. Furthermore, like the bee 
collects nectar from many flowers, the sage must learn to take the essential 
meaning from all the sacred scriptures. 


From the elephant, he had learned to be wary of physical contact, because 
the desire to rub one's body with the bodies of females creates rivalry 
among the males and causes furious clashes. From the honey thief, he had 
learned to remain free from guilt while accepting the gifts of family men, 
who accumulate more than what they really need. From the deer, he had 
learned to live in the forest, avoiding the materialistic songs and music that 
speak of sense gratification. From the fish, he had learned not to be caught 
on the hook lured by tasty morsels: fasting controls all senses except taste, 


that becomes even more powerful. 


Pingala was a prostitute who lived in the city of Videha; one evening she 
was sitting in front of her door waiting for customers, watching all the men 
who passed by, but nobody came to her. So she spent the night uselessly 
and in the end she became disappointed with material life: thus she attained 
the required detachment to find true happiness, that already exists in the 
heart of each being. The £urara bird or falcon is a fierce predator, and when 
it does not find food directly, it tries to snatch it away from other falcons; 
from that he learned that when an enterprise becomes too difficult, it is 
better to abandon it and save oneself. From the child, he had learned not to 
cate about honor or dishonor, and to remain always innocent and free from 


wotrties. 


The girl was alone in the house, because parents and other relatives had 
gone out. Suddenly some people came bringing a marriage proposal, and 
she welcomed them with all honors. She went to the kitchen to prepare 
some food for the guests, but while she was beating the rice, her bangles 
clashed noisily. Fearing that the guests would think that her family was 
extremely poor and not able to afford any servants so that the daughter was 
compelled to engaged in the humblest chores, the girl removed most of her 
bangles, leaving only one on each wrist, so that they would not make noise. 
In the same way, when many people live together there will certainly be 


272 


Bhagavata Purana 


frivolous conversations, quarrels and a lot of noise, therefore it is always 


better to live alone and to be really at peace. 


From the arrow maker, he learned how to focus on important things: that 
craftsman was so immersed in his work that he did not notice the royal 
procession that was passing in front of his shop. From the serpent, he had 
learned to live happily and without worries, using the holes dug by others or 
the houses built by others, without giving importance to the desire of 
building one's own house according to one's specific wishes. From the 
spider, he had understood how the Supreme Lord, Vishnu, manifests the 
universal creation from himself and then reabsorbs it within himself at the 
moment of the cosmic destruction, because the spider builds its web with 
the saliva of its own mouth, it adjusts it constantly to keep it in good 
conditions, and in the end it swallows it again. Once a wasp had imprisoned 
a small insect in its lair; the small insect constantly meditated on the wasp 
because of fear, and ended up taking birth as a wasp itself. 


Furthermore, from his own body he had learned detachment: he used it to 
acquire knowledge but he knew very well that he would have to leave it 
soon. Like many anxious wives, the senses pull the mind here and there, 
constantly demanding satisfaction - delicious foods, refreshing drinks, 
sexual pleasures, soft and smooth objects, the feeling of a full stomach, 
pleasing sounds to hear, scents to smell, beautiful views to see. But the 
human body can transcend all this and engage in search of the realization of 
the transcendental self. 


The great king Yadu understood the teachings of the avadhuta brahmana and 
offered his homage. 


The methods of spiritual realization 


Krishna continued to summarize the spiritual science for Uddhava. After 
demonstrating, through the story of the avadhuta brahmana, that it is possible 
to learn and evolve even simply by looking around oneself with sufficient 


attention, he illustrated the essence of the Vedic teachings on varnashrama 


273 


Parama Karuna Devi 


dharma, that enables one to serve God through the performance of one's 
own duty, remaining free from selfishness and desire for personal 


advantages. 


The material world is full of promises for sense gratification, created by the 
illusory energy as mirages that only offer a temporary relief from suffering. 
For those who cannot fully engage in transcendental awareness, the 
varnasharama system offers the possibility of enjoying sattvic pleasures in a 
regulated way and to develop at the same time qualities and activities that 
take us closer and closer to liberation, from the sudra level to the brahmana 
level. 


The system starts at the Gurukula, the residential school or "family" of the 
Guru, where all children live for a period in order to be educated in the 
fundamental principles of spiritual science and dharma, and trained in the 
professional duties they will perform later in life, according to their natural 
tendencies and their potential. The student, called brabmachari, should never 
be arrogant or lazy, and he must learn to work sincerely while remaining 
detached from the sense of possession and dominion, from the 
identification with family, social class, home, and so on. He must always 
think about progressing in the understanding of spiritual science, abandon 


all sense of envy and avoid all silly and useless conversations. 


The material bodies, both the gross and the subtle one, are created by the 
influences of nature, and the student must learn to observe them, 
developing the awareness of being distinct from them: through the 
knowledge of the self he must approach God who is situated in the heart of 
everyone, and establish himself on the level of transcendental awareness. By 
hearing and humbly trying to understand the instructions of the teacher, 
who is expert in knowledge, it is possible to overcome the three influences 
of matter and finally move from theoretical to practical and applied 


knowledge, that is direct realization. 


The Guru trains the disciples also in the performance of ritual ceremonies, 
that are simply a means to gradually arrive at spiritual knowledge. By 
perfectly performing the rituals one obtains the friendship of the Devas, 
their help in the daily work in this world and the elevation to heavenly 
planets. However perfect material happiness does not exist on the heavenly 
planets, just as it does not exist in this earthly world, because the Devas, 


274 


Bhagavata Purana 


too, can fall victim to envy, hostility, decay and death, just like all 
agricultural harvests are constantly threatened by pests and drought, and 
must finally be reaped and consumed. Similarly a virtuous person who has 
attained the heavenly planets for the merits accumulated on earth will earn a 
wonderful body and a very wealthy home, surrounded by flower gardens, 
and travel in the company of beautiful women in a resplendent airplane, 
free to go wherever he likes. The day when his karmic credit is exhausted, 
however, he will have to return to earth to begin again the hard work to 


earn some mote credit. 


The path of ritual ceremonies also has other dangers. One who follows it 
without having learned to control his senses, and yields to the temptation of 
actions that are opposed to the principles of religion, will obtain the result 
of amplifying his own defects and become greedy, arrogant, violent and 
lusty. By persisting on this path one even comes to the point of slaughtering 
harmless animals for his own gratification and to resort to evil ghosts 
instead of interacting with the Devas, who are virtuous. Thus, instead of 
rising to the heavenly planets, one sinks down into the levels of demoniac 


existence. 


Uddhava said, "Lord, there is something I do not understand. The living 
being is always in the middle of the action of the influences of material 
nature: how can he become free from them? And then, if the soul is 
transcendental by nature, always pure and never touched by matter and 


illusion, how can it be conditioned?" 


Krishna replied, "This is not easy to understand. The soul - the self - is at 
the same time liberated and conditioned, and at the same time it is never 
liberated or conditioned. A dream is a creation of our own intelligence but 
it effectively exists, and in the same way the conditions of material nature 
are created by the illusory energy. Both knowledge and ignorance are 
without beginning and eternally offer both liberation and slavery to the 
embodied beings. 


The individual being, called jiva atman, is integral part of the Brahman, but 
he allows himself to be covered by ignorance and therefore he suffers 
because of his material conditionings, although they are illusory. 
Knowledge, however, can liberate him instantly. In the same body we find 
both happiness and suffering, because both the supreme self and the 


275 


Parama Karuna Devi 


individual self reside there - one liberated, the other conditioned. They are 
like two birds sitting on the same tree: one eats the fruits and the other 
simply observes, because he is not attracted by the fruits. 


The realization of the self leads to perceive, clearly and directly, one's own 
transcendental and spiritual nature even while living in the material body, 
just like in a lucid dream we realize that we are dreaming, and that the body 
we seem to possess is not real. In this way it is possible to perform all the 
various types of activities without ever identifying with them, but remaining 
detached witnesses of the functions of body and mind, even in the 
performance of one's duties. This is perfect liberation. 


Sometimes the body is attacked by ferocious animals or cruel persons, at 
other times it is treated with care and respect, but the wise is never 
confused by these apparently different situations. Even at the cost of 
seeming stupid to the eyes of those who look at him superficially, the sage 
remains detached from external activities and only seeks happiness in the 
soul. This is the purpose of the entire Vedic system. One who meticulously 
studies and practices all the details of the rituals and scriptures, but does not 
attain transcendental awareness, cannot really attain the results of the Vedic 
system and can be compared to a man who is trying to milk a cow that has 
no milk. 


A saintly person is always tolerant and compassionate, and does not hurt 
anyone. He invests his time and energies for the good of the people, is not 
greedy or rude, or confused by the material desires of the senses. He strictly 
controls his diet, is always meditative, peaceful and balanced, and only 
trusts in God. He does not want personal honors and is friendly and 
respectful to everyone, he perfectly understands the purpose of the 
scriptures and of ordinary religious duties and he knows that neglecting 
such duties leads to degradation. He is expert in awakening spiritual 


awareness in others and he never cheats anyone." 


Krishna continued to explain to Uddhava: "There are many devotional 
practices that help to overcome the false material identification. For 
example, the worship and personal service offered to the Deity, the study 
and recital of my qualities, my teachings and my glories, my appearances 
and adventures, especially during the celebration of festivals in the various 
seasons of the year. 


276 


Bhagavata Purana 


Also offering to the Deity whatever one obtains, singing devotional songs 
with accompaniment of musical instruments and dancing, visiting sacred 
places of pilgrimage, observing religious vows such as Ekadasi, participating 
to the construction of temples and gardens to grow flowers and fruits for 
the Deity, keeping the temple clean and in general working in the spirit of 
setvice to the Deity. 


A devotee should not use his service to become famous or respected, or 
put to other uses the lamps or other articles that are destined to the service 
of the Deities, or offer something that has already been used by others. On 
the other hand, it is good to offer the Deity the things one likes best in this 
world personally, according to one's personal tastes. 


Besides the ritual worship offered to the Deity, it is possible to honor God 
in the Sun, the Fire, the brahmanas, the cows, the vaishnavas, the Space, the 
Wind, the Water, the Earth, and also in all living beings and in the 
individual soul. One who worships me in the Sun recites the Vedic mantras 
by offering his homage, while one who worships me in the Fire offers 
oblations of clarified butter. 


One can worship me in the brabmanas by greeting them respectfully as 
honored guests even when they come without being invited. One can 
worship me in cows by offering grass and other suitable foods, such as 
grains or jaggery or things that are good for nourishment and health. One 
can worship me in vaishnavas by making friends with them and respecting 
them. One can worship me in the inner Space of the heart and in the Wind 
through the knowledge of prana, the life air. One can worship me in Water 
by offering water with flowers and /w/asi, and in Earth by properly applying 
the secret bija mantras. One can worship me in the living beings by offering 
food and other pleasurable things, and in the individual soul by 
contemplating the Supreme Soul in all souls. 


It is also recommended to practice astanga_yoga, engage in the philosophical 
analysis of the elements of matter, practice non-violence and the other 
principles of goodness, recite the Vedas, engage in austerities, accept the 
renounced order, perform sacrifices, dig wells, plant trees and engage in 
other works of public welfare, distribute charity, observe vows, worship the 
Devas, recite secret mantras and visit pilgrimage places, but all these 
activities by themselves are not sufficient to conquer me. 


277 


Parama Karuna Devi 


On the other hand, the company of persons who have a deep devotional 
love for me can help anyone reach me - even those who are less intelligent, 
who never studied the scriptures or performed vows or austetities, as we 
can see from many examples in history. Even women who have a simple 
and naive mentality, laborers who have no academic education or 
knowledge of the scriptures, materially engrossed merchants and even 
Asuras such as Bali, Bana, Maya, and son on, have attained this success. 
The gopis of Vrindavana are the most glorious example, because their 
immense love for me ovetcomes all other considerations and absorbs all 


their awareness. 


The functions of the senses constitute the manifested form of God, just like 
a tree that is born from a seed and develops with various branches and 
roots. The living being must first try to become established under the 
influence of goodness, to facilitate the cultivation of religious principles and 
the knowledge that destroy ignorance and passion. The sages who 
understand Vedic knowledge praise those who are controlled by goodness, 
criticize those who are in ignorance and show indifference to those who are 
in passion. 


Gradually one should rise also above material goodness and attain the 
transcendental level with the direct knowledge of the spirit soul. By using 
body and mind to cultivate knowledge and goodness, one attains 
enlightenment, that dissolves the power of the material influences. The 
genuine system of yoga enables one to attain these results: it simply consists 
in withdrawing the mind from all other sense objects and focusing it only 
on the contemplation of God. With attention and seriousness, with a joyful 
and dedicated mind, one should control breathing and consciousness, and 


meditate on God three times a day - at suntise, noon and sunset." 


Uddhava said, "Please, Krishna, speak to me about the origin of the science 
of yoga." 


Krishna replied, "The four Kumaras were the first sons of Brahma. Because 
they wanted to practice yoga, they approached Brahma and asked him how 
to detach the senses and the mind from sense objects and meditate on God. 
Brahma was meditating on that difficult question, when Hamsa, the avatara 
of Vishnu, appeared there. After being respectfully greeted by Brahma and 
the Kumaras, Hamsa instructed them on the science of yoga. 


278 


Bhagavata Purana 


The first step consists in reflecting on one's true nature and identity, 
applying the teachings of Sankhya, that is the analysis of the elements of the 
universe. All material bodies are composed by the five gross elements, 
therefore there are no important distinctions between one body and 
another. The material mind and the sense objects too are nothing but 
designations that cover the spirit souls, that is part of the Brahman. 


When one understands that Brahman is the true nature of the soul, he can 
easily become detached from the body, the mind and the sense objects. 
Wakefulness, sleep and dreamless sleep are the three functions of 
intelligence caused by the three influences of material nature, but the living 
being always remains separated from these three types of experiences. 
There is also a fourth state of awareness, that is the original state of the 
spirit and that we could call 'super-consciousness'. This is the only true 
existence, while the other three experiences are illusory, like the red line that 
we perceive when we quickly rotate a burning torch. 


The most powerful and elevated yoga system is certainly Bhakti yoga, by 
which one develops a deep attachment for the divine and an ecstatic 
happiness that cancels all other thoughts, purifying the awareness and 
healing it from the attachment to sense gratification. 


Meditation means fully concentrating one's awareness on God. Abandoning 
lust and fear, one should sit in a secluded place and focus his mind on God. 
The place where one sits should be level, not too low or too high, and one 
should keep the body comfortable and erect, resting one's hands in the lap 
and focusing the gaze before the eyes, at the level with one's nose. One 
should purify the respiratory system by practicing the mechanical exercises 
called rechaka, kumbhaka and puraka, that consists in stopping breath 
between inhaling and exhaling, and vice versa. The subtle life air must be 
raised from the muladhara chakra along the stem of the lotus flower that 
constitutes the subtle equivalent of the spine, up to the heart, where the 
sacted syllable om is situated in the form of sound of a bell. 


Then one keeps raising the sacred syllable for 12 angulas, to the place where 
the omkara is united to the 15 vibrations produced with the anusvara. 
Remaining focused on the omkara, carefully practicing pranayama ten times a 


day at sunrise, noon and sunset, within one month one comes to control 
the life air. 


279 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Keeping one's eyes half-closed and fixed before him, well alert and 
attentive, he should meditate on the 8-petaled lotus flower that is inside the 
heart. Meditating on the Sun, the Moon and Fire, one must evoke them in 
the center of the lotus and within this radiance, he must visualize the form 
of the Supreme Personality of God, who is the purpose of all meditation. 
This form is perfectly proportioned, sweet and smiling, with four beautiful 
arms, an exquisite face and ear pendants in the shape of sharks. His 
complexion is the color of the black clouds full of rain, he wears silken 
clothes of a golden yellow color, and many wonderful ornaments. After 
contemplating the body of this form, one should concentrate only on his 
face, then focus one's awareness on space and merge it into the Lord 
himself. This is the perfection of yoga. 


The practice of yoga also produces eighteen perfections, ten of which are 
secondary because they are produced by goodness and eight are primary 
because they are produced by meditation on God. 


The secondary siddbis or perfections are the ability to become free from 
hunger, thirst and other problems that ate characteristic of the body; to see 
and hear things that are distant in space and time, including the past and the 
future; to control fire, sun, water, poisons and so on; to move one's body at 
mind speed; to take any form one wishes; to enter the body of someone 
else and read the mind of others; to choose the moment of one's death; to 
observe the activities of the Devas and the Apsaras; to complete what one 
had decided to do and give orders that are executed. Among the primary 
siddhis, three have the power to modify the yogi's body: they are called anima 
(becoming extremely small), wahima (becoming extremely big) and /aghima 
(becoming extremely light). Prap#i consists in being able to take anything 
one desires, and prakamya consists in being able to enjoy anything one 
desires. Ist#a is the ability to control the secondary powers of maya (such as 
the minds of other people) and vasifa or the power of not being controlled 
by the primary influences of nature. Kamavasayita enables one to obtain 
anything in this world. Anima siddhi is attained by meditating on God in his 
atomic form that pervades all the subtle elements, while mahima siddhi is 
obtained by meditating on the form of God as the mahat tattva, the Supreme 
Soul of material existence. By absorbing the mind in the essence of 
individual elements - space, air, fire, and so on, one acquires the powers of 


each one of them. 


280 


Bhagavata Purana 


By meditating on God as the essence of the atomic components of the 
various elements, one realizes the subtle atomic substance of time, that 
confers laghima siddhi. Prapti siddhi is acquired by focusing the mind on God 
in the element of identification with matter, the ahankara created by sattva 
guna; this gives possession of the senses of all living beings. Prakamya siddhi 
is obtained by focusing all mental activities on God as the Supreme Soul of 
that phase of mahat tattva that manifests fruitive activities. Isifa siddbi is 
attained by merging one's awareness in Vishnu, the Supreme Soul in the 
hearts of all beings, who controls material energy; this gives control over 
the conditioned souls, their identification and the bodies they wear. Vasita 
siddbi is obtained by meditating on the form of Narayana, the fourth factor 
of existence, and acquiring his same nature. One who completely 
concentrates on God in the form of Brahman will get all his desires 
satisfied. 


One who meditates on God as the Lord of Svetadvipa, who protects the 
principles of religion and personifies purity, attains the level of pure 
existence where one is not disturbed any more by the six waves of matter - 
hunger, thirst, decay, death, pain and illusion. One who meditates on the 
extraordinary sound vibrations that exist in God as the personification of 
space becomes able to hear all the conversations of living beings in space. 
By merging one's sense of sight into the Sun planet, and the Sun in one's 
eyes, and meditating on God existing in the connection between Sun and 
eyesight, one obtains the power of seeing distant things. By absorbing one's 
consciousness in God and using the wind that follows the mind to merge 
one's material body in God himself, becomes able to take his body 
anywhere the mind goes. Entering someone else's body is possible by 
meditating on oneself within that body and then leaving his present body, 
like a bee goes from one flower to another. 


To leave one's body at one's chosen time, one must block the anus with the 
heel and raising the awareness from the heart to the throat and then the 
head; from the brabma randbra (the crown chakra) the yogi can leave the 
body and go wherever he likes. A person who perfectly meditates on God 
acquires his same nature and power, therefore his orders will be followed 
and he will obtain the success he desires. Just like the body of a fish cannot 
be damaged by water, one who has established his awareness in God cannot 


be damaged by fire, sun, water, poison or other things. 


281 


Parama Karuna Devi 


These mystic perfections however can be an obstacle and a waste of time 
for those who ate interested in the true purpose of yoga, that is 
transcendental liberation. The effort of perfecting one's material body, 
immensely increasing its powers or even just gaining freedom from disease 
and old age, constitutes a very serious danger because it reinforces 
identification and attachment to the material body rather than weakening 
them. 


One who engages in yoga must avoid praising or criticizing the behavior of 
others, because that is a distraction from the practice of meditation, that is 
meant to dissipate material identification based on duality. Spiritual 
knowledge is based on the factual discrimination between spirit and matter, 
not on the illusory distinction between one spirit and another, or between 
one matter and another. It is based on the teachings of the scriptures, on 
the application of austerity in the sober observation of reality, on direct 
perception through purified senses, on listening to the examples contained 


in the stories of the Puranas, and on logical reasoning. 


Sometimes progress in yoga is obstructed by attachment for family 
members or disciples, or by some other material condition, or by 
disturbances created by envious Devas, but even if someone abandons 
regular practice, it can be resumed at any time, in this lifetime or in the next. 
The yogi should observe the activities of the body as detached from his true 
nature and identity; it is the body that moves, walks, sits, lies down, eats or 
performs other physical activities, and this happens automatically, without 
out specific attention. The same applies to impure objects or activities: the 
yogi does not consider them as real, but merely as temporary manifestations 


of nature, mitages created by the mind and senses. 


It may happen that the yogi faces some difficulties in his meditation, that 
his mind and senses become agitated for some reason, but it is like clouds 
that come and go, and can never really affect the sun. Space can manifest 
the qualities of air, fire, water, earth that it occupies, and also the qualities of 
heat and cold according to the seasons, but all this does not affect it. 
Disturbances can be neutralized with mantras, medicinal herbs or special 
techniques, and by constantly meditating on God." 


Krishna continued, "As I have explained to Arjuna on the battlefield of 
Kurukshetra, God is the Supreme Soul of all existence, and is represented 


282 


Bhagavata Purana 


by whatever is extraordinary in its particular category - such as Time among 
the dominators, the omkara among all the mantras, the A among all the 
letters of the alphabet, Indra among the Devas, Agni among the Vasus, 
Vishnu among the Adityas and Shiva among the Rudras. Among the 
Yakshas and Rakshasas, God is represented by Kuvera, the Lord of wealth, 
among the elephants he is Airavata, among the horses Ucchaishrava, among 
the Kimpurushas he is Hanuman, and among the plants he is the grains. 
Everything that is powerful, beautiful, famous, strong, pleasing and 
wonderful simply constitutes a fragment of the glories of God. 


In Satya yuga there is only one Veda, expressed simply as the sacred syllable 
Om, and human beings only meditate on God, worshiping him in the form 
of Hamsa. At the beginning of Treta yuga the Veda becomes divided in 
three parts - Ri, Sama and Yajur - and creates the sacrificial rituals. As a 
consequence, these manifest the four varnas or social orders, that appear as 
the various parts of the body of God: the brabmanas as the face, the 
kshatriyas as the arms, the vazsyas as the legs and the sadras as the feet. The 
ashramas also appear: the brabmacharya as the heart, the grihastha as the loins, 
the vanaprastha as the chest, and the sannyasa as the head." 


The human beings work in the varnas according to their individual qualities 
and natural tendencies. Brahmanas are characterized by austerity, self- 
control, cleanliness, peacefulness, tolerance, truthfulness, simplicity, 
devotion to God and compassion. The &shatriyas are characterized by 
dynamicity, physical strength, determination, heroism, endurance, 
generosity and leadership. aisyas are recognized because they have faith in 
Vedic civilization, are generous, sincere and straightforward, free from 
hypocrisy, and always eager to produce wealth. A good sudra is honest and 
sincete, satisfied with whatever he receives. 


All the worthy members of society should practice non-violence, 
truthfulness, honesty; they should be eager to help others achieve happiness 
and well-being, and to become free from lust, anger and greed. Those who 
are dirty or dishonest, who have no faith in the scriptures, who quarrel 
unnecessarily, who allow themselves to be controlled by lust, anger and 
greed are on a degraded level, below the varnas. 


A. brahmachari must reside in the ashrama of the gurw and following his 
otders, control the mind focusing it on the careful study of Vedic 


283 


Parama Karuna Devi 


scriptures. He should dress in deer skin, with a straw belt, grow matted hair 
and avoid clipping his nails; he should carry kasha grass in his hand and 
have a staff and a water pot. He should not bleach or press his clothes, and 
he must keep silent when he takes bath, eats, takes part in rituals and recites 


Japa mentally. 


At dawn and sunset, reciting the appropriate mantras, he should offer 
worship to the Fire, the Sun, the Acharya, the cows, the brahmanas, the 
teachers, respectable persons and Devas. He must honor the Acharya 
deeply and collect donations for him morning and evening, accepting 
whatever the guru allows him to keep for himself, and always behaving 
humbly towards him. For example he should walk behind him, go to lie 


down when the gvrv goes to sleep, get up when the guru awakens. 


The vow of brahmacharya requires complete sexual continence, even on the 
mental level, and should be followed by all those who are not in the 
gribastha order. All the members of society must observe the fundamental 
tules of cleanliness and hygiene, washing their hands often and taking bath, 
perform the sandhya meditations at the junctions of day and night, visit the 
sacred places and worship the Deity, chant the japa, avoid what should not 
be touched or eaten, abstain from speaking of what should not be 
discussed, and remember God who is always present in the hearts of each 
being as the Supreme Soul. 


When the brabmachari has completed his basic education, if he wishes so he 
can go back home, after cutting nails and hair, taking a bath and wearing 
appropriate clothes, and thanking the teacher with suitable gifts. If he wants 
to marry, he should choose a girl of a similar nature, and if he wants to 
marry more than one wife, each one should be less qualified than the 
previous one. However, he will have sexual intercourse with his wife or 
wives only if he wants to have a child, and always maintain purity, 
cleanliness and benevolence to all beings, giving shelter and protection to all 
those who need them. 


A family man is responsible for the proper maintenance of all the family 
members including the servants, and must perform the rituals according to 
his possibilities. He must always remain free from arrogance and sense of 
possession and dominion, and in fact consider himself merely a temporary 


guest of the Lord, who is the real owner of everything. 


284 


Bhagavata Purana 


One who wants to enter the order of vanaprastha must leave his home and 
live in the forest, preferably entrusting his wife to the care of his adult 
children. A vanaprastha lives on fruits, roots and tubers he collects in the 
forest, smashing them with a stone to soften them, and occasionally he can 
cook wild grains. His clothes ate made with tree bark, grass or leaves, he 
must not take care of his hair or beard, clip his nails or give special attention 
to the care of his teeth. He must take bath three times a day, sleep on the 
ground and perform austerities, for example remaining under the sun in the 
summer or under the rain or immersed in water during the winter, for the 
purpose of realizing the difference between the soul and the body, and to 
detach himself from the body. He must continue to perform the rituals 
called agnibotra, darsha and paurnamasa as he used to do in his home, and also 
observe the chaturmasya. When he becomes too weak to perform the rituals 
he should meditate on the sacrifice within his own body, and entering the 
fire he should leave the body. 


A vanaprastha who wants to attain complete renunciation can enter the order 
of sannyasa, that consists in abandoning all possessions and concerns, 
patiently tolerating even the difficulties sent by the Devas. If he wants to 
wear something more than a loincloth, he can wrap a piece of cloth around 
his hips, but he can also renounce everything and just keep a staff and a 
water pot. While walking, he must watch the ground carefully to avoid 
stepping on some insects, and for the same reason he must filter the water 
with a piece of the cloth he wears: non-violence is in fact a stringent 


obligation. 


All his words must be perfectly truthful, each physical and mental action 
must be pure, and he must be equally disposed towards all beings, without 
making discriminations based on the body or on birth. To sustain himself, 
he can beg alms from seven families, chosen at random among those that 
observe the Vedic rules of cleanliness, then he should take the food 
collected and go to a river bank, in a peaceful place, wash his hands, 
distribute food to those who may ask for it, without saying anything, then 
he must clean what is left and consume everything, without leaving 
anything for later. 


A sannyasi must travel always alone, roaming the earth without attachment 
for any particular place, stopping from time to time in peaceful and 


285 


Parama Karuna Devi 


sanctified places along the rivers, on mountains and in forests. He may 
enter in cities and villages and approach ordinary people only to beg what is 
strictly required to survive. 


Brahmanas, kshatriyas and vaisyas teceive initiation, and therefore they are 
expected to study the scriptures, perform the sacrificial rituals and distribute 
charity, while only brahmanas may receive charity, teach Vedic knowledge 
and perform rituals in the name of others. If a brahmana does not wish to 
live on charity because he wants to protect his spiritual progress, he can 
earn a livelihood by teaching or performing rituals, or collect the grains left 
in the fields and in the markets after hours. Helping a brahmana who is 
facing difficulties for his own maintenance and the care of his family 
constitutes the best act of charity, that brings enormous benefits for those 
who perform it, and it is a precise duty for kings, who are responsible for 


the well-being of all the subjects. 


In case of emergency, if he cannot find financial support or abandoned 
grains, a brahmana may earn a livelihood by trade or take up the profession 
of a &shatriya, but under no circumstances he may become a servant of 
others. Not even a &shatriya can take up the profession of swdra; in case of 
emergency he can work as a vaisya, live on hunting and gathering in the 
forest, or become a teacher. A vaisya who is unable to maintain himself may 
temporarily take up the occupation of sudra, and a sudra who cannot find an 
employer may engage for survival in manual activities such as handicrafts, 


for example manufacturing baskets and mats. 


The perfection of spiritual knowledge 


Uddhava had carefully listened to Krishna's instructions on the various 
methods for spiritual realization, and especially on the regulated life of the 
varnasharama dharma system, that enables one to purify his existence to the 
point of realizing God. Krishna continued, "My dear Uddhava, you know 
me as the Supreme Personality of God. All these methods that I have 
described for you have only one supreme purpose: to attain the level of the 


setvice of pure love and devotion to me, God. 


286 


Bhagavata Purana 


Iam the Supreme Lord of all worlds and their original cause, therefore I am 
the Absolute Truth. By performing one's duties in the varnashrama with the 
putpose of offering to me the results of those actions, one remains 
established in the perfection of spiritual knowledge, that cannot be attained 
in any other way, by performing austerities or visiting the holy places or 
chanting apa or distributing charity. This supreme path of Bhakti yoga was 
explained to Maharaja Yudhisthira by Bhishma, the great warrior of the 
Kuru dynasty, at the end of the war." 


The vision of bhakti is above the 28 categories of the elements of the 
universe, and only focuses on their cause, the Personality of God, through 
the specific practices of bhaki: faith in the narration of my activities, the 
constant chanting of my glories, the deep and solid attachment for my 
worship, the recitation of hymns glorifying my person, a great respect for 
my devotional service, the offering of homage, the service offered to my 
devotees, the perception of my presence in all beings, the performance of 
some humble work for my pleasure, the concentration of the mind on my 
person and the offering of all auspicious activities as an offering to me, 
abandoning all material pleasures. 


The twelve primary regulative principles of the bhak# path are non-violence, 
the absence of selfish desires and abstaining from stealing the property of 
others, detachment, humility, the freedom from the sense of possession, 
trust in the principles of religion, sexual continence, silence, stability, 
forgiveness, and fearlessness. The twelve prescribed duties are internal and 
external cleanliness, the chanting of the holy names of God, austerity, 
sacrifice, faith, hospitality, worship to God, visiting the holy places, acting 


only for the supreme good, and service to the spiritual master. 


Tolerance means patiently enduring difficulties, and stability is attained 
when one controls one's tongue and genitals. The greatest form of charity 
consists in abandoning aggressiveness, real austerity consists in renouncing 
lust, and real heroism is about conquering one's natural tendencies for the 
seatch of pleasure. Real education consists in dissipating the false 
perception of duality in the soul, while stupidity consists in identifying with 
the material body and mind. True modesty consists in feeling disgust for 


inappropriate activities, and paradise is predominance of goodness. 


God is the true friend and spiritual master of all beings, and the only true 


287 


Parama Karuna Devi 


home in this world is the human body. A poor man is one who is never 
satisfied with what he obtains from life, and always runs after sense 


gratification. 


The three paths that lead to perfection are called jana or knowledge, karma 
ot action, and bhakti or devotion. The path of knowledge is preferred by 
those who are tired of ordinary fruitive activities, while the path of action is 
suitable for those who still have some desires to fulfill. On the other hand, 
the path of devotion is perfect for everyone. 


An intelligent person does not wish to rise to the heavenly planets or live 
very long on this earth, but rather seeks the permanent benefit of liberation 
from the material conditions of life. The human body can be compared to 
an extraordinary ship that, steered by the spiritual master and pushed by the 
winds of divine instructions, can carry the living being across the ocean of 
material existence. An expert person who wants to tame a stubborn horse 
at first lets it run wild for some time, and then gradually pulls the reins to 
lead it on the proper path. In the same way the yogi carefully observes the 
movements and the desires of the mind, and gradually brings them under 


control. 


The true virtue of the yogi consists in remaining fixed in his spiritual 
position, while sin consists in abandoning one's prescribed duty and losing 
transcendental awareness to engage in sense gratification. Such downfall 
causes one to take birth repeatedly in the world. One should also be careful 
about choosing his place of residence. One should avoid the places where 
there are no brahmanas ot tespectable people, where people neglect 
cleanliness and purification rituals, where many people eat non-vegetarian 
foods, or where the land is not very fertile. The auspicious moments are 
those appropriate to perform one's duty, because of their nature or because 
one obtains what is required for such activities. 


Impure objects can contaminate a person according to the strength or 
weakness of that individual, of his intelligence, of his wealth, of the place 
where he stays or his physical conditions. The purity of an object is 
established by applying another object, or words or a ritual, for the effect of 
time or in virtue of their greatness. For example grains, wooden utensils, 
objects carved from bone, thread (for stitching), liquids, objects derived 
from fire, hides and objects made from clay are purified by time, wind, fire, 


288 


Bhagavata Purana 


earth and water, separately or by a combination of these elements. The 
application of the elements of purification is appropriate when it removes 
unpleasant smells or the covering of dirt of the contaminated object and 


restores it to its original nature. 


A person is purified by taking bath, distributing charity, performing 
austetities, attaining the suitable age or the required strength, performing 
the purification rituals and the prescribed duties, and especially by 
remembering God. All the twice born men must purify themselves 
adequately before engaging in their specific activities. Religiosity requires 
purity of the place, time, substance, performer of the action, mantras and 
action itself. A mantra is purified when it is recited with the proper 
knowledge, and action is purified when offered to God. By neglecting these 
six factors one falls into irreligiousness, and even activities that superficially 
appear to be pious become negative and degrading. However, the same 
activities that would degrade an elevated person do not cause problems to 
someone who is already fallen, and when one stops engaging in materialistic 
ot negative activities he becomes free from its karmic ties and starts 


evolving. 


Because of material birth, human beings develop attachment for sense 
pleasures, survival or longevity, sense activities, physical strength, sexual 
potency and interaction with relatives and friends: all these are opposed to 
the true interest of the soul, and in fact they lead to darkness. Foolish 
people, controlled by greed and lust, choose the flower mistaking it for the 
fruit, and the smoke mistaking it for the fire. Thus they let themselves be 
lured by the mirage of the heavenly planets and neglect to utilize the 
valuable human life to obtain that transcendental liberation that is the true 


purpose of existence. 


I am the only one who knows the secret purpose of Vedic existence in its 
three branches - the ritual ceremonies of arma Randa, the ritual worship of 
upasana kanda and the acquisition of knowledge of jnana Randa. 1 create the 
Veda in their various metric forms - Gayatri, Ushnik, Anushtup, Brihati, 
Pankti, Trishtup, Jagati, Aticchanda, Atyasti, Atijagati and Ativirat - each 
having four syllables more than the previous one. From my will the 
different perceptions of knowledge are created, and therefore they can be 
reconciled perfectly by one who had attained the awareness of my person. 


289 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Creation is caused by the movements of matter - the mahat tattva - that 
manifests the three modes of being - the gunas - and from these all the sense 
objects, the senses and the mind, the material elements and so on. 


Some say that the supreme soul and the individual soul are in the same 
category, some put the material self and the spiritual self together, and 
others yet keep the subtle elements in one category. Among these 
classifications there is not much difference. The real difference is rather 
between matter and spirit. 


Material energy, composed by the three gwnas, manifests the variety of 
creations in three aspects, called adhyatmic (the identification of the being), 
adhidaivic (the archetypal principles that govern the laws of matter and 
adhibhautic (the gross elements). These can be compared to eyesight, to the 
visible form and to the reflection of the sun, that continues to exist 
independently from these three existences. All the sense organs of the gross 
body and even the functions of the subtle body can therefore be analyzed 
according to the three distinctions of sense organ, object of perception and 
archetype (or the Deity that presides to that particular manifestation). 


The endless discussions of philosophers that argue to determine whether 
this world is real or unreal are due to a lack of understanding of the 
Supreme and are based on a dualistic mentality, therefore they cannot bring 
any benefit. 


The soul moves from one body to another, transported by the mind, that is 
tied to the reactions of the fruitive action, and meditates on the sense 
objects. The attachment for the new body causes the soul to forget 
everything that pertained to the previous body: this condition is called 
death. In fact each human being dies gradually, even along the course of a 
particular lifetime, because he changes many bodies. The different stages of 
transformation of the bodies can be compared to the flame of a candle, to 
the current of a river or to the fruits of a tree. 


The light of a lamp consists of innumerable rays or waves that are emitted 
and disappear constantly, yet a person who has a limited intelligence will 
just see a lamp. When one looks at a river flowing, he understands he is 
watching at ever new water that comes and goes, but for a foolish person 


there is no difference: it is all water of the river. A seed germinates, 


290 


Bhagavata Purana 


becomes a sprout and then a tree with many leaves, then it blossoms and 
produces fruits: similarly, a human being develops as an embryo, he is born, 
grows through childhood and youth, then becomes an adult and ages until 
the moment of death. Only a fortunate person can perceive his true nature 
and identity beyond this phantasmagoria of bodies in constant 
transformation. 


Spiritual awareness is the greatest treasure, to be preserved carefully 
regardless of the mistreatment and difficulties caused by people who are 
ignorant, envious or wicked. However, it is certainly very difficult to control 
one's mind when one is disturbed by the insults of uncivilized people, that 


cause greater pain than arrows hitting the body. 


In the kingdom of Avanti there lived a so-called brabmana who had been 
blessed with all opulences, but had a bad temper, he was full of greed and 
lust, and ready to anger. He engaged in trade and neglected religious duties, 
guests were not received kindly in his house, and even family members were 
neglected. So miserly was this man, that he even denied his own body the 
necessaty pleasures at the proper time. All his relatives hated him and 
responded with similar coldness and lack of care, therefore the Deities of 
the five family sacrifices were displeased with him and his future was dark, 
both in this life and in the next. 


At length his wealth was finally lost - partly consumed by his relatives, 
partly stolen by thieves, taken away by the government or damaged by time 
ot neglect. Because he had lost all his karmic merits and the joy of life and 
affectionate relationships, too, his life became intolerable. Finally he became 
disgusted with himself an realized that the wealth of misers does not give 
any joy, but it is simply a cause of suffering in this life and leads to hell in 
the next. Greed destroys the good name of a person and all his good 
qualities, just like physical beauty is destroyed by leprosy, even if it appears 
in a small measure. Wealth causes great fatigue, fear, anxiety and 
disappointment both when one tries to earn it, and when one tries to collect 
it, protect, spend or utilize it. 


Wealth is also subject to fifteen types of contaminations: theft, violence, 
lies, hypocrisy, lust, anger, confusion, pride, disputes, hostility, mistrust, 
envy, and the dangers connected with prostitution, gambling and 
intoxicants. Even one's near and dear - brothers, wife, parents, friends - 


291 


Parama Karuna Devi 


become dangerous and can behave in hostile way when money is involved. 
If one has obtained the rare blessing of human life, it is stupid to waste it by 
attachment to wealth. One should rather utilize the money for the benefit 
of worthy persons - the Devas, Rishi, Pitris and human beings in general, 
besides taking care of one's family and oneself. By wisely utilizing money, 
youth and strength one can attain perfection, but when youth and strength 
are wasted just to accumulate money, as a Yaksha would do, what shall one 
do in old age? 


Realizing these bitter truths, the so-called brabmana of Avanti finally came to 
wisdom and decided to engage in austerities in a conscious way, meditating 
on the Supreme Lord and renouncing all desire for possessions. By 
following a strict vow of silence he patiently endured the mistreatment of 
stupid people who mocked and tormented him, insulting him mercilessly. 


Remaining fixed in his transcendental determination, he composed this 
song: "Those people are not the cause of my happiness or distress, and 
neither are the Devas, my own body, the planets, my previous activities or 
time. It is simply the mind that causes joy or pain and perpetuates the cycle 
of material life, activating the functions of the qualities of matter and 
creating the various activities in goodness, passion and ignorance, as well as 
the corresponding conditions of life. The Supreme Soul does not make any 
effort and does not suffer, because it is always on the level of 
transcendental enlightenment, while I, as an infinitesimal soul, have 
accepted to follow the mind, that reflects like a mirror the images of the 
material world. In this way I have fallen into the trap of enjoying the objects 
of desires. All the religious activities, such as the performance of the 
prescribed duties, the observance of primary and secondary regulative 
principles, charity, the study of scriptures and ritual purification, are meant 
to help control the mind and focus it on God. When the mind is perfectly 
stable and peaceful, what is the need of performing ritual ceremonies and 
distributing charityy And if the mind remains out of control, lost in 
ignorance, what is the value of such virtuous activities? One who controls 
the mind becomes master of all senses, but one who allows himself to be 
controlled by the mind lives a miserable life, quarreling with others and 
dividing the world into friends and enemies. Those who identify with the 
body - which is a mere product of the mind - are confused and think in 


terms of me and mine, constantly wandering in the darkness of illusion. 


292 


Bhagavata Purana 


Joys and sufferings have nothing to do with the soul, because they only 
refer to the interactions between bodies, therefore the true root of suffering 
is in one's body. On the other hand, the soul is always transcendental to 
matter and is never touched by material joys or sufferings." 


Krishna continued to instruct Uddhava: "In Satya yuga everybody had 
proper spiritual discrimination. Even before that, during the period of the 
destruction of the universe, there was no differentiation between the 
observer and the observed. Then the One Absolute Truth, that is always 
free from material dualities, separated into two categories - material nature 
and the living beings who try to enjoy the manifestations of matter. 
Agitated by the glance of Vishnu, material nature manifests the three gunas 
to satisfy the still unfulfilled desires of the conditioned souls. From the 
gunas the primordial sutra rises, together with the mabat tattva, that produces 
the false identification with matter, which in turn causes the illusion of the 
living beings and produces physical sensations, the senses and the mind. 


False identification in ignorance gives rise to the subtle physical 
perceptions, from which the gross elements develop. From false ego in 
passion, the senses rise, and from false ego in goodness the eleven Devas 
appear. All together, these factors contribute to form the universal egg, 
where God resides in the form of Garbhodakasayi Vishnu, from whose 
navel Brahma is born. Brahma creates the three planetary systems - Bhur, 
Bhuvar, Svar - and the Deities that preside over them. Bhur is the earthly 
dimension of the human beings, Bhuvar is the dimension of ghosts and 
spirits, and Svar is the residence of the heavenly beings. One who aspires to 


liberation overcomes all these three dimensions. 


During the period of its preservation, the universe continues to transform 
by moving around its constituents, like clay continues to produce so many 
different objects, and is dissolved again and again to create various 
ornaments. At the time of destruction, the mortal bodies of the living 
beings become food, food turns into grains, grains become earth again, and 
earth merges into its subtle feeling - smell. The sense of smell merges into 
water, and the water into its subtle quality - taste. Taste dissolves into fire, 
that dissolves into form, that merges into touch, that merges into space, 
which in turn dissolves into the feeling of sound. All the senses then 
dissolve into their origin, the heavenly beings, who dissolve into the mind, 


293 


Parama Karuna Devi 


which in turn merges into material identification in goodness. Sound 
merges into material identification in ignorance, and material identification 
itself dissolves into the ganas, that re-enter the totality of nature, which 
dissolves into time. Time is withdrawn into the Supreme Lord, the 


omniscient Maha purusha, who remains established in himself. 


The characteristics of goodness are control of senses and mind, tolerance, 
intelligent discrimination, dedication to one's duty, truthfulness, 
compassion, careful study of past and future, contentment in any condition 
of life, generosity, renunciation to sense gratification, faith in the spiritual 
master, embarrassment before inappropriate actions, charity, simplicity, 
humility and self-satisfaction. The characteristics of passion are material 
desires, great effort, audacity, dissatisfaction even after obtaining 
something, false pride, the desire to advance in career, the idea of being 
different and better than others, sense gratification, the desire to fight, the 
desire to be glorified, and the tendency to ridicule others, highlight one's 
qualities and justify one's actions by force. The characteristics of ignorance 
are intolerant rage, greed and avarice, speaking without reference to the 
scriptures, violent hatred, living at the expenses of others like a parasite, 
hypocrisy, chronic fatigue, quarreling, complaining, illusion, sadness, 


depression, sleeping too much, illusory expectations, fear and laziness. 


The interaction between the three influences pervades the entire universe 
and is the foundation of the concept of me and mine. It affects religious 
practices, economic development, sense gratification, personal beliefs and 
so on. For example, a person who worships God with love and offering the 
performance of his prescribed duties, without material attachments, is in 
goodness. On the other hand, one who offers worship to God or performs 
his duty with the hope of obtaining some material benefit is in passion. One 
who worships God with the intention of committing violence or creating 
problems to others is in ignorance. Goodness brings light, purity and 
auspiciousness and produces happiness, kindness, knowledge and all other 
good qualities. Passion causes attachment, duality and hard work to acquire 
prestige and fortune, and brings anxiety and difficulties in life. When 
ignorance defeats goodness and passion, it covers the awareness making the 
mind stupid and obtuse, throwing the living being into lamentation and 


illusion, excessive sleep, false hopes and violence against others. 


294 


Bhagavata Purana 


When the consciousness is purified and the senses become detached from 
matter, one becomes free from fear and capable of realizing God. The 
influence of passion distorts intelligence because of excessive activity, 
inability to detach the senses from material objects, bad health of the sense 
organs and confusion of the mind. The symptoms of ignorance are the 
disappearance of higher awareness, inability to focus one's attention, 
depression and loss of mental faculties. 


The learned persons dedicated to Vedic knowledge are raised to higher and 
higher positions due to the influence of goodness, while ignorance 
precipitates one into lower and more degraded positions, and the influence 
of passion makes one take another birth at the human level. One who 
overcomes all the three influences of matter attains the transcendental and 
divine level. 


Integrated knowledge is in goodness, knowledge based on duality is in 
passion, and merely materialistic knowledge is in ignorance. Living in the 
forest belongs to goodness, living in a city belongs to passion, and living in 
a gambling house belongs to ignorance - while living in a place where the 
Deity resides is on the transcendental level. Action free from selfishness is 
in goodness, action dictated by personal advantage is in passion, and the 
mechanical action of one who is unable to tell what is right from what is 
wrong is in ignorance - while action that is purely dedicated to God 
transcends all the influences of matter. 


Faith directed to spiritual life is in goodness, faith in fruitive action is in 
passion, and faith in the activities that are opposed to the principles of 
teligion is in ignorance - but faith in the loving service to God is purely 
transcendental. Healthy, clean food, that is obtained without too much 
difficulty is in goodness, food that gives immediate pleasure to the senses is 
in passion, and food that is dirty and causes suffering is in ignorance. 
Happiness derived from the inner self is in goodness, happiness derived 
from sense gratification is in passion, and happiness based on illusion and 
degradation is in ignorance - while happiness found in God is 


transcendental. 


Birth in a human body offers the opportunity to realize God and attain the 
divine level through devotional service. By abandoning false identification 
with the products of the material influences, a human being becomes firmly 


295 


Parama Karuna Devi 


established in transcendental knowledge and does not remain tied to matter, 
although he continues to live in the material world. One should never keep 
company with materialists, who are only interested in gratifying their bellies 
and genitals, because this is the surest path to degradation. 


The famous emperor Pururava, also called Aila, composed a song when he 
was abandoned by his wife Urvasi. 


"Alas, how deep is my illusion! My heart was so full of lust that I did not 
realize the passing of time, and while that terrible woman held my neck, I 
could not see either sunrise or sunset, and I wasted my days without any 
benefit. And in spite of my high position as a king of the entire earth, I have 
been dumped without regrets, like one throws away a piece of straw, and 


yet I pursued her desperately, naked and screaming like a madman. 


I considered myself so intelligent and learned, but I did not behave better 
than a donkey that passively endures the kicks of a female that does not like 
his advances. Fire can never be extinguished by oblations of clarified butter, 
and similarly the taste of Urvasi's lips never gave me permanent satisfaction, 
even after many years dedicated to her pleasure. But whose fault is this, if 
not mine only? Urvasi had warned me. I am the cause of all my troubles, 
because I was unable to control my own senses and I gave supreme 
importance to this material body, that is dirty and foul smelling by nature. 


To whom does this body belong? To the parents who gave birth to it, to 
the wife who cares for it, or to the employer that engages it in various 
activities? Does it belong to the fire of cremation, to the dogs and jackals 
that will devour it, or to the friends who help and support it? Or is it 
property of the soul, who shares its joys and pains? Thus the solution lies in 
avoiding the company of materialists, of those who are attached to sense 
gratification." 


On Uddhava's request, Krishna also explained how one should offer 
worship to the form of the Deity. 


"There ate three main methods: the Vedic one, the Tantric one, and the 
mixed one. The Vedic method consists in offering suitable objects to 
worship the Deity that appears in earth, fire, sun, water or in the heart of 
the devotee. First of all one must purify oneself by brushing one's teeth and 


296 


Bhagavata Purana 


taking bath, then one smears his body with clay reciting mantras for 
purification. Worship proper is performed while reciting the Gayatri mantra 
at the three junctions of the day (sunrise, noon and sunset). The image of 
the Deity can be shaped in stone, wood, metal, clay, paint, sand, mind or 


gems, and be installed in a temporary or permanent way. 


With the temporary installation one calls the Deity and then uninstalls him 
at the end of the worship, something that is specifically required when the 
titual is performed on the ground, as in the case of the yantras. The Deity is 
offered a water bath, except when the image is made of clay, paint or wood 
- as the cleaning is done without water. The articles and ingredients offered 
in the ritual should be of best quality, but devotion is more important than 
the price, and a sincere devotee can offer whatever he can obtain without 
too much difficulty, or even simply perform it in meditation, without using 


material objects. 


In temple ceremonies, the two most pleasing offerings are bathing and 
decorations. For the Deity drawn on the sacred ground, the best method is 
the sattva vinyasa, the acknowledgment of the various expansions of the 
Deity in the different parts of the yantra, installing them with mantras. For 
the worship to the sacrificial fire, the best offering is of sesame and barley 
soaked in clarified butter, while for the worship to the Sun the best offering 
is of homage and consecrated water, and for the worship to water, one 
offers pure water. Actually even just a small offering of water to God is 
sufficient: great solemn ceremonies with many articles of worship remain 
unsatisfactory when they are presented by people who are devoid of 
devotion, while even a small offering presented with love is very dear to me. 


The best and simplest form of worship consists in presenting scented oil, 
incense, flowers and tasty foods. After taking bath and collecting whatever 
is required, the devotee sits facing east or north, on a mat made with kusha 
grass pointing east. Then he sanctifies the various parts of his body by 
touching them with mantras and performs the same procedure with the 
body of the image of the Deity. 


By directly using his hands, he removes the old flowers and the leftovers 
from the previous offerings, then he sprinkles some water from the 
container to purify the area where the worship will be offered, the offerings 
to be presented, and his own body as well. By using the water from the 


297 


Parama Karuna Devi 


largest container, he must purify the water to wash the Deity's feet, hands 
and mouth, and chant the Gayatri mantra for all the three containers. Then 
he must meditate on the subtle form of the Deity, situated now within the 
body of the devotee himself, purified by air and fire, like the origin of all 
living beings and the final sound of the sacred syllable Om. 


By touching the various parts of the body of the Deity with the proper 
mantras, he must invoke the divine presence in that image and present the 
articles of worship. He must visualize the seat of the Deity, as a lotus flower 
with eight petals, decorated by dharma and other religious qualities, and by 
the nine spiritual energies. Then he offers padya, achamaniya, arghya and the 
various articles he has collected, worshiping subsequently the Sudarshana 
disc, the Panchajanya conchshell, the Kaumodaki mace, the Nandaka 
sword, the Sarnga bow, Vishnu's arrows and quiver, the Kaustubha gem, 
the Vaijayanti garland, and the Srivatsa mark on his chest. He also offers 
worship to the companions of Vishnu - Nanda and Sunanda, Garuda, 
Prachanda and Chanda, Mahabala and Bala, Kumuda and Kumudekshana, 
then Durga, Ganesha, Vyasa, Visvakshena, the various spiritual masters and 
the Devas. 


The image of the Deity must be offered a daily bath, if possible by using 
water perfumed with sandalwood pulp, ashira root, camphor, kankum and 
agurn, reciting various Vedic mantras such as Svarna gharma, Mahapurusha 
vidya, Purusha sukta, Rajana and other hymns from the Sama Veda. Then 
one must offer a change of clothes, the sacred thread, various ornaments, 
garlands and scents in the prescribed way, then again padya and achamaniya, 
perfume oil, flowers and whole grains, incense and lamps. 


The offering should also include delicious foods such as gr (brown sugar), 
payasa (tice pudding), saskuli (sweet fritters made with rice flour and sesame 
seeds), apupa (sweet pancakes), modaka (steamed rice flour dumpling filled 
with sweet coconut), samyava (sweet fritters made with wheat flour), yogurt, 
vegetable soups and other tasty preparations. On special occasions, one can 
offer the Deity a massage, a mirror, a stick to clean the teeth, songs and 
dances, special foods and any other particular offering the devotee can 
afford. 


The fire sacrifice must be performed in a place prepared according to the 
instructions of the scriptures, delimited by the sacred rope, with the 


298 


Bhagavata Purana 


sacrificial well and the altar mound. The officiating person must pile the 
firewood personally and light it according to the ritual. After placing kusha 
grass on the ground and sprinkling it with water, he must perform the 
anvadbana (preliminary feeding of the fire), then prepare the oblations to be 
offered and purify them by sprinkling with water. Then, meditating on the 
Deity of Vishnu present in the fire, the devotee should perform the aghara, 
soaking small pieces of wood in clarified butter and offering them to the 
fire, and with the svas# ritual offer oblations to the Devas, starting with 
Dharma, through the mula mantras for each Deity. Worshiping Lord Vishnu 
and his companions with adequate offerings, he must then silently recite the 
Japa of the mula mantra. After completing the fire sacrifice, the devotee 
should again offer the Deity the achamana and tambula (a scented preparation 
for chewing, made with betel nuts). 


A. festival should then follow, with songs and dances, dramatic re- 
enactment of the Lord's activities, narration of the sacred stories, recitation 
of the hymns and prayers contained in the Pwranas and in other ancient 
scriptures and popular stories. After offering his homage, bowing down 
with his head to the feet of the Deity, the devotee must stand up, and with 
folded hands in front of the Deity, must pray the Lord for protection. 


If the installation of the Deity was temporary, the devotee should then 
recall the presence of the Lord within the light of the lotus flower in his 
own heart. If the installation was permanent, the devotee should build a 
solid temple and surround it with nice gardens to produce flowers for daily 
worship, and space for the processions and other special rituals during 
festivals. One who offers the Deity gifts of land, markets, cities and villages 
to provide ingredients and wealth for the daily worship and the celebration 
of festivals for the Deity will obtain the Lord's blessings, whether he desires 
to get great wealth, a kingdom, elevation to the heavenly planets, liberation, 
ot pure love for God. On the other hand, one who takes away the property 
of the Devas or brabmanas, even if he had gifted it himself or was gifted by 
others, will be severely punished together with all those who have 
contributed to the crime, actively or even passively, simply by approving it. 


Uddhava was perplexed. "My Lord, I am afraid that the method you have 
described is rather difficult for those who are unable to control their minds. 


Success in yoga and karma feeds false pride and reinforces material 


Parama Karuna Devi 


identification and attachment to this world, which take one away from the 
true purpose of spiritual realization. One who practices yoga to perfect 
one's body and obtain mystic powers, abandoning the service to the lotus 
feet of the Supreme Personality of God, is showing stupidity and 
ungratefulness, because he does not appreciate the valuable gifts he has 
received." 


Krishna replied, "This is true. The path of bhak# is much safer and simpler. 
It is sufficient to always remember me, while performing one's duty 
seriously and in a detached way. It is also useful to live in the holy places 
and follow the example of great devotees, who appear among the Devas, 
the Daityas and the human beings, participate to the celebrations in my 
honor both privately and in public, and especially remember that I am 
present in the hearts of all living beings. In this way my devotee does not 
make distinctions based on birth and is equal to everybody, therefore he 
conquers false material identification, pride, envy and rivality, and becomes 
indifferent to what other people may think. This is the absolutely best 
method to attain spiritual enlightenment: to use one's mind, body and 


activities to realize my presence in all living beings. 


The teachings I have offered to you are a special facility to understand the 
science of Absolute Truth, that is difficult even for the heavenly beings. 
One who understands it attains liberation and fulfills the true purpose of 
Vedic knowledge. One who disseminates it among those who are favorable 
to devotional service earns my eternal gratitude. One who regularly recites 
these sublime teachings becomes purified, day after day, and who regularly 
listens to this knowledge will always remain free from karmic reactions. 


In this sacred task there are no birth considerations - even the mere 
uneducated laborers and superficially minded women can engage in it. 
However, one should avoid revealing this knowledge to those who are 
dishonest, hypocrites, atheists, or lack humility." 


After listening to these wonderful teachings of the Lord, known as Uddbava 
Gita, Uddhava offered him his homage and thanked him for his mercy, 
recognizing that transcendental knowledge had been able to cut the ties of 
his deep attachment for his relatives and friends, the Yadus. He also asked 
the Lord for personal instructions on how to engage the rest of his life. 


300 


Bhagavata Purana 


Krishna said, "My dear Uddhava, I recommend you to go to 
Badarikashrama, on the Himalaya. Purify your body and mind with the 
sacred waters of river Alakananda that flows there and that emanated from 
my lotus feet. Clothe yourself in tree bark and eat what is easily found in the 
forest, always remaining satisfied and free from desires, tolerating dualities, 
and constantly meditate on the transcendental knowledge that I have given 
you, focusing your thoughts and words on me. In this way you will be able 


to overcome the realm of the ganas and attain me." 


Uddhava again offered his homage to the Lord, and with much difficulty 
and suffering he left him to execute his orders. 


Kali yuga 


After Uddhava had gone to Badarikashrama, Krishna went to the assembly 
of the Yadus to warn them about the imminent destruction. 


"Please observe the signs of destiny. In Dvaraka we have seen many deeply 
inauspicious omens. You must immediately leave the city, without even one 
moment of hesitation. Women, children and elders should take shelter at 
Sankhoddhara, and we will go to Prabhasa kshetra (Somanatha), where the 
Sarasvati flows towards west. There we will purify ourselves with ritual 
ablutions, we will fast and meditate on God, then we will offer the 
prescribed worship to the Devas, presenting them various offerings, and we 
will distribute our wealth to the brabmanas." 


The Yadus accepted Krishna's order and left the island on many boats, then 
they proceeded by chariots to Prabhasa, where they performed all the 
traditional rituals. They took breakfast, accompanying the food with an 
intoxicating beverage, and unfortunately they drank too much. Their minds 
became clouded by intoxication, they started to quarrel among themselves, 
and then to fight fiercely with all sorts of weapons. Finally, because they 
had exhausted normal weapons, they grabbed the bamboo canes that had 
grown on the beach from the iron dust produced by the fatal mace, and 
with renewed fury they clashed, killing one another. When Krishna and 


301 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Balarama tried to stop them, the Yadus attacked them too, involving them 
in the fight. 


In the end only Krishna and Balarama remained. Balarama sat on the ocean 
beach and left this mortal world, and Krishna sat under a banyan tree, 
resting his left foot on his right thigh, immersed in meditation. Just at that 
time the hunter Jara, who had used the iron bit remaining from the fatal 
mace to make the tip of an arrow, came to that place and while he was 
hiding in the bushes he saw Krishna's foot and mistook it for a deer's face. 
So he shot his arrow, and remained shocked and terrified when he realized 
what had happened; Jara threw himself to Krishna's feet begging 
forgiveness and expecting punishment, but Krishna comforted and 
reassured him, explaining that everything had been organized by himself to 
close his mission on earth. 


Daruka, the charioteer of Krishna, was searching for his master, and found 
him resting at the feet of the banyan tree, surrounded by his weapons. 
Seeing him in such conditions he was taken by despair, but Krishna 
reassured him and asked him to return to his family and tell them what had 
happened. While they were talking, Krishna's chariot and weapons rose to 
the sky, disappearing from sight. 


Krishna told Daruka, "Do not return to Dvaraka, because the city will be 
submerged by the ocean. You should instead gather all the survivors, 
including my parents, and go to Indraprastha under the protection of 
Asjuna." 


Warned by Daruka, the Vrishnis rushed to Prabhasa. Devaki, Rohini and 
Vasudeva were unable to find their sons, Krishna and Balarama, and in the 
pain of separation they immediately left their bodies. Also the other wives 
of Vasudeva, the wives of Balarama, the wives of Krishna and his sons left 
their bodies, because they did not tolerate the idea of being separated from 
their husbands. Arjuna performed the funeral rituals for Krishna's family, in 
which no adult males had remained, then he took the survivors to 
Indraprastha, where he crowned Vajra, Krishna's grandchild, as the king of 
the Yadus. 


After describing the last days of the Yadu dynasty, Sukadeva continued, "I 


have already mentioned the descendants of the various dynasties during 


302 


Bhagavata Purana 


Kali yuga. In the Magadha dynasty, Puranjaya will be born as the 
descendant of Brihadratha. His minister Sunaka will murder him to 
enthrone his own son Pradyota, who will be father of Palaka, father of 
Visakhayupa, father of Rajaka, father of Nandivardhana. The dynasty of 
Pradyota will have five kings and rule for 138 years." 


Nandivardhana will start a new dynasty called Sisunaga, that will have ten 
kings and will rule for 360 years. Nandivardhana's son, Sisunaga, will 
become the father of Kshemadharma, father of Kshetrajna, father of 
Vidhisara, father of Ajatasatru, father of Darbhaka, father of Ajaya. Ajaya 
will be father of a second Nandivardhana, father of Mahanandi, who will 
have a very powerful son from a sudra woman. This son will be named 
Nanda and will become the master of millions of soldiers and fabulous 
wealth, but he will bring chaos among the &shatriyas: from that moment on, 
practically all kings will be simply sadras without real qualifications, 
dedicated to irreligious practices. 


Nanda will have eight sons, including Sumalya, who will rule the entire 
earth for 100 years. The disappearing of Nanda's dynasty will be caused by a 
brabmana who will install instead the Maurya dynasty, inaugurated by the 
emperor Chandragupta, who will be father of Varisara, father of 
Ashokavardhana, father of Suyasa, father of Sangata, father of Salisuka, 
father of Somasharma, father of Satadhanva, father of Brihadratha. These 
ten kings of the Maurya dynasty will rule for 137 years. 


After them the rulers will be Agnimitra, Sujyestha, Vasumitra, Bhadraka and 
his son Pulinda. After Ghosa, the son of Pulinda, the next kings will be 
Vajramitra, Bhagavata and Devabhuti. These ten kings will rule for over 100 
years; the last one will be a lustful wretch, who will be killed by his 
intelligent minister Vasudeva, a member of the Kanva dynasty. 


Vasudeva will be the first of the Kanva dynasty and will be followed by 
descendants devoid of qualifications - his son Bhumitra, his grandson 
Narayana, and so on. The last of the Kanvas, Susharma, will be assassinated 
by one servant, a sadra of the Andhra race, who will ascend the throne with 
the name of Bali Maharaja. Bali's brother, named Krishna, will succeed him 
on the throne. This Krishna will be father of Santakarna, father of 
Paurnamasa, father of Lambodara, father of Cibilaka, father of Meghasvati, 
father of Atamana, father of Anistakarma, father of Haleya, father of 


303 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Talaka, father of Purishabhiru, who will be succeeded by Sunandana. After 
Sunandana there will be Chakora and the eight Bahus, including the great 
warriot Sivasvati. Sivasvati will be father of Gomati, father of Puriman, 
father of Medashira, father of Shivaskanda, father of Yajnashri, father of 
Vijaya, who will have two sons: Chandravijna and Lomadhi. These 30 kings 
will rule for a total of 465 years. 


After them, there will be seven kings of the Abhita race from the city of 
Avabhriti, then ten kings of Gadarbhi and sixteen of Kanka, who will 
become famous for their great greed. They will be succeeded by eight 
Yavanas, fourteen Turuskas, ten Garundas and eleven kings of the Maula 
dynasty, for a total of 1399 years. When these will have disappeared, there 
will be a dynasty of kings in the city of Kilakila, that will reign for 106 years: 
Bhutananda, Vangiri, Sishunandi, his brother Yasonandi and Praviraka. 
After them there will be thirteen Bahlikas, their descendants, then the king 
Pushpamitra and his son Durmitra, then seven Andhtas, seven Kaushalas 
and the kings of the Viduras and Nishadhas, who will dominate on various 
regions of the world. 


In the kingdom of Magadha there will be a king named Visvasphurji, who 
will rule from the capital Padmavati on a territory from the source of the 
Ganges to Prayaga, and will cause the degradation of society by lowering 
even civilized families to the same level of Pulindas, Yadavas and Madrakas. 
In the provinces of Saurastra, Avanti, Abhira, Sura, Arbuda and Malava the 
brabmanas will forget the rules of progressive civilization and royal families 
will not be better than sudras. The lands along the Sindhu, as well as the 
regions of Chandrabhaga, Kaunti and Kashmita will be ruled by sudras, false 
caste brahmanas and meat-eaters, who will lose all their spiritual power 
because they have abandoned the path of Vedic civilization. These kings 
will become barbarians in spite of their noble ancestry, and because they are 
devoid of qualifications, they will exploit their subjects, killing brahmanas, 
cows, innocent women and children, and will engage in irreligiousness and 
falseness. Their bad example will corrupt the subjects, who will adopt 
similar behaviors thus creating a hellish situation for the entire society. 


Because of the influence of Kali yuga all the good qualities of the people 
will decrease - religiosity, truthfulness, cleanliness, compassion, tolerance, 
longevity, physical strength and memory. Wealth will be the only proof of 


304 


Bhagavata Purana 


the value of a person, and justice and laws will be applied only to facilitate 
the powerful. A person will be deemed good if he earns sufficient money, 
while those who do not have money will be treated as impure, and the 
purpose of life will be reduced to being able to fill one's belly. One who can 


maintain a family will be considered a very successful man. 


Men and women will live together only on the basis of superficial attraction, 
and women will pass whimsically from a man to another, they will eat too 
much and have more children than they can care for adequately. They will 
become shameless and immoral, selfish and cruel. From their part, men will 
be easily controlled and misled, they will abandon their family and establish 
deeper relationships with their wife's family. They will stop protecting their 
elder parents, their children and respectable wife, and they will only be 
concerned about their own selfish satisfaction, based on the tongue and 


genitals. 


Masculinity and femininity will simply by judged from sexual skills. Marriage 
will be merely a verbal contract, and the principles of religion will be 
observed only for the purpose of getting a reputation. To be considered a 
brabmana, it will be sufficient to wear a sacred thread, and the spiritual 
position of a person and his belonging to one of the stages of life 
(brabmacharya, etc) will be judged only from external appearance. The system 
of varnashrama will be totally forgotten and distorted, and religion will be 
based on atheistic principles. 


Hypocrisy will be considered a virtue, impudence will be considered a proof 
of sincerity, and one who is expert in word jugglery will be considered a 
great scholar. Persons devoid of culture and knowledge, who do now know 
anything about dharma, will sit on honored seats and speak about religious 
principles, they will accept charity in the name of God and use the sannyasi 
dress as a professional instrument to earn a livelihood, making a false show 
of austerity. Any water reservoir that is distant enough will be considered a 
holy place. 


The so-called priests and intellectuals will be devoted mainly to their own 
belly and genitals. Nobody will offer homage or sacrifices to the Supreme 
Personality of God, who is the supreme spiritual master of the universe. 
Brahmacharis will neglect cleanliness and the rules of their training, family 


men will become beggars, vanaprasthas will live in cities and sannyasis will be 


305 


Parama Karuna Devi 


avid of wealth and material luxuries. Even hermitages will be no better than 
ordinary houses, and the beauty of a person will depend on his or het 
hairdo. The bodies of creatures will be shrunk in size - cows will be as small 


as goats, and trees will not grow adequately. 


Vaisyas will make their profit on cheating and everyone will accept 
degrading occupations even without considerations of emergency. The 
sudras will abandon an employer that is in financial difficulty, even if he is a 
good person, honest and knowledgeable. Employers will dismiss servants 
who have become invalid, even if they have been in the family for 
generations. The cows will be neglected or killed when they are unable to 
give milk any longer. 


With the increasing degradation of society, anyone who shows greater 
strength will obtain political prominence, and will use it to loot and torment 
the people, directly or indirectly. The cities will be dominated by thieves and 
criminals, the population will be afflicted by taxes and unjust laws, drought 
and famine, and will be deprived of the basic necessities to eat and drink, 
clothe themselves, rest adequately, satisfy their sexual needs or wash, and 


will have no ornaments to decorate their bodies. 


Men will kill one another for a few coins and forget friendship and 
relations, always ready to kill or be killed. They will disturbed by deep 
anxieties, scatcity of water, floods, excessive heat and cold, violent winds, 
diseases, hunger and thirst, and the maximum duration of life will fall to 50 
years. Abandoning family and properties, men will flee to the mountains 
and forests, where they will survive by eating wild animals, roots, leaves, 
fruits, flowers, seeds and wild honey. 


In the end the Lord will appear as Kalki, the son of Vishnuyasha in the 
village of Shambhala, and on his horse Devadatta he will roam the earth 
killing millions of those who have dared to take the position of rulers 
without having the required qualities. After all the false leaders have been 
eliminated, the people will feel free and will start again to live happily, 
multiplying and spreading over the earth and inaugurating a new Satya yuga. 
That time will be marked by the conjunction of the Moon, the Sun and 
Brihaspati (Jupiter) in the constellation of Karkata (Cancrer), that will 
simultaneously enter the lunar house of Pushya. 


306 


Bhagavata Purana 


Devapi (the brother of Maharaja Santanu) and Maru (a descendent of 
Ikshvaku) are still living in the village of Kalapa, and at the end of Kali yuga 
they will reappear in human society according to the instructions of the 
Supreme Personality of God, and will re-establish the original system of the 
varnashrama dharma. All the power-thirsty people who are trying to rule the 
earth during Kali yuga are ignorant of their true interest, because they create 
damage to others in order to get some personal profit. They will all be 
destroyed. 


Observing their stupid and wicked activities, Mother Earth will laugh at 
them. Bhumi says, "These wretches are toys in the hands of Death, yet they 
sttive to possess me. Even those who are truly great and have knowledge 
may sometimes face frustration and failure because of their material lust, 
what to speak of these poor fools who have no qualities! In their ignorance 
they think, I will control my mind to become determined, then through 
political tricks I will gradually subjugate my ministers, my advisors and 
finally I will achieve total control on the entire earth. And when they have 
covered all the dry land, they even venture into the ocean to conquer that 
too. 


The real purpose of controlling the mind and senses is to seek spiritual 
liberation. But because these deluded people put their hopes in the material 
body - a mere bubble of foam among the waves of life - even the austerities 
they perform by controlling their senses and mind are wasted. Inevitably 
they are forced to leave their bodies and the world, as impotent as they have 
entered it, even if they are kings who became famous all over the world. Yet 
during their short span of life they insist in fighting one another, causing 
great sufferings to themselves and others, and further shortening the time 
that destiny assigned to them.” 


In Kali yuga this illusion becomes even more powerful. In Satya yuga, 
dharma is strongly established on its four legs - truthfulness, compassion, 
austerity and charity. Due to the influence of goodness, the general 
tendency is towards knowledge and austerity; people are peaceful, sober, 
tolerant, friendly, they find happiness in inner life and always sttive to 
achieve spiritual perfection. 


In Treta yuga, dharma is reduced by a fourth because of the growing 
influence of the four pillars of adbarma - deceit, violence, dissatisfaction and 


307 


Parama Karuna Devi 


quarreling. Because of the influence of passion, the general tendency is 
towards personal prestige and interest. People perform ritual ceremonies 
and austerities, and is interested in developing religiousness, economic 
prosperity and regulated sense gratification by following the instructions of 
the Vedas. Society is composed mainly by brahmanas, but some other less 
qualified people appear with the characteristics of the other three social 
classes. 


In Dvapara the four principles of dharma are reduced to half their potency 
and the four principles of adbarma acquire an equal power. People are 
interested in glory and nobility, engage in the study of the Vedas, own great 
wealth, maintain numerous families and vigorously enjoy life. Among the 
four social classes, the &shatriyas and brahmanas ate the most numerous. 
Because of the mixed influence of passion and ignorance, there is a gradual 


increase of arrogance, hypocrisy, envy, vanity and greed. 


In the age of Kali only one fourth of the dharma principles remain, and even 
this small percentage continues to decline until it disappears completely. 
People are greedy, rude, cruel, devoid of compassion, unfortunate and 
obsessed by material desires, and quarrel unnecessarily. Almost all people 
are sudra or even uncivilized, and because of the predominant influence of 
ignorance, the general tendency is to cheat, lie, sleep too much and 
complain. People are lazy, aggressive, violent, depressed, confused, afraid, 
destitute, unable to anticipate the future, unfortunate, lusty and greedy for 
food. In Kali yuga everything becomes polluted - objects, places and people 
- but the Supreme Personality of God can eliminate this contamination 
from the lives of those who meditate on God. 


By hearing, glorifying, worshiping the Lord, meditating on him and offering 
one's homage, one can destroy the impurities accumulated during many 
thousands of lifetimes. Just like fire eliminates all impurities from gold, the 
Lord who resides in the hearts of all beings destroys the contamination in 
the minds of his devotees and enables them to achieve the supreme 
destination. By always focusing one's mind on the Lord, at the time of 


death one is blessed with his presence. 


Although Kali yuga is full of defects, it has one big advantage: simply by 
chanting the names of the Lord one can become free from material 
bondage and rise to the transcendental realm. The results obtained in Satya 


308 


Bhagavata Purana 


yuga with meditation, Treta yuga with the performance of sacrifices and 
Dvapara yuga with the worship to the Deities, can be obtained in Kali yuga 
simply by chanting or reciting the name of the Supreme Personality of God. 


As we have seen, the end of Kali yuga marks the beginning of a new Satya 
yuga. In the same way, the entire universe and its duration are subject to 
minor cycles of destruction: to be precise, there are four categories of 


destruction of the universe. 


One thousand cycles of four ages constitute one day of Brahma, during 
which there are fourteen Manus. Brahma's night is equally as long, but 
everything stops and all the three planetary systems are destroyed. During 
this destruction (called naimittika) Garbhodakasayi Vishnu remains reclining 
on Ananta while Brahma sleeps. Brahma lives 100 of his years, but then his 
life ends and the cosmos is dissolved too. This destruction of the universe, 
called prakritika, includes the seven fundamental elements of creation. On 
earth there will be a 100 years drought that will cause terrible famine and 
people will eat one another. Then the sun will become extremely hot and 
will dry the waters from the oceans, from the bodies of living beings and 


from earth itself, but without returning moisture in the form of rains. 


Then from the mouth of Ananta Sankarshana will come the great fire of 
destruction, and carried by violent winds, it will consume the entire 
universe. Smoke and dust will turn space grey, until the entire universe is 
flooded and the water dissolves the quality of earth. Fire will consume the 
water and its characteristics, dissolving it into air or gas, in which the subtle 
elements and the archetypes will dissolve, and finally only the pradbana will 
remain - the non-differentiated state of matter. 


Sukadeva concluded, "Thus everything will be destroyed, but the soul will 
always remain intact, because it cannot be affected even by the total 
annihilation of matter. Therefore, dear Parikshit, you should abandon the 
identification with the material body and stop thinking that you, the eternal 
soul, are subject to death, because this is not a fact. Unlike the body you are 
weating, you were never born and therefore you will never die. There has 
never been a moment in time when you did not exist, and similarly you will 
never be destroyed. When a pot is broken, the space that existed inside the 
pot continue to be exactly as it was before. Therefore you should become 


conscious of your true identity, by focusing your attention on the Supreme 


309 


Parama Karuna Devi 


Personality of God, and you will not even notice what is happening to the 
body." 


The death of Parikshit 


Maharaja Parikshit offered his homage to Sukadeva, thanking him for the 
teachings he had imparted to him and the answers to his many questions. 
Parikshit said, "I consider myself very lucky for having obtained the 
blessing of your company and your compassion. I am not afraid of 
Takshaka or anyone else and even of death itself, because now my mind is 
perfectly fixed on the absolute and transcendental Truth. Now please allow 
me to become silent and leave this body." 


Then Sukadeva blessed Parikshit and took leave. Parikshit sat in silence, 
facing north, on the bank of the Ganges, on a mat made from darbha grass, 
its points facing east. Deeply immersed in the meditation on the Lord, he 
became as still as a tree and his life airs stopped circulating. 


At that time Takshaka arrived, the winged snake that had been sent by the 
son of the brahmana to kill Parikshit. After ensuring that there were no 
antidotes available, the snake bird took the form of a brahmana and 
approached the king without difficulties, then he bit him. Immediately 
Parikshit's body was reduced to ashes by the fiery venom, to the great pain 
and anguish of all beings. 


When he learned that his father had been killed by Takshaka's bite, 
Maharaja Janamejaya became extremely angry and asked the brahmanas to 
otganize a great sacrifice to exterminate all the snakes of the world. The 
rituals had already begun and Takshaka, who saw even the strongest snakes 
reduced to ashes by the power of the sacrifice, became scared and went to 
ask protection from Indra. 


Janamejaya, who was observing the procedures, realized that his father's 
killer was missing and when he asked an explanation from the brahmanas, 
they told him what had happened. Then Janamejaya asked the brahmanas to 


310 


Bhagavata Purana 


evoke Indra together with Takshaka, so that both would be consumed by 
the sacrificial flames, together with all the Devas. 


The power of the sacrificial mantras actually hit Indra, destabilizing his 
aircraft and making it crash. Worried, Brihaspati, approached Janamejaya to 
make him stop that action, that was dangerous for the entire universe. He 
said, "O king of men, Takshaka is the king of the snakes and has drunk the 
nectar of the heavenly planets, therefore you should not try to kill him. 
Everyone has to face death in their own time, because of the reactions of 
their previous activities, and not because of someone else's fault - snakes, 
robbers, fire, and so on. Please stop these rituals, that are aimed at causing 
damage to other beings: many innocent snakes have already died because of 


them." 


Honoring the request of the Devas' priest, Maharaja Janamejaya stopped 
the sacrifice and offered his homage. 


"This is the conclusion of the story of the Bhagavata Purana," Suta told the 
sages gathered in the Naimisharanya forest. "Vyasadeva, who is an avatara 
of Vishnu, compiled the Vedic knowledge for this age of Kali, dividing it 
into four sections called Riz, Yajur, Sama and Atharva, jast like one divides 
jewels in four heaps. Then he entrusted the first samhita, the Rig Veda, to 
Paila Rishi and gave the second, the Yajur, to Vaisampayana; he taught the 
mantras of the Sama Veda to Jaimini and the Atharva Veda to Sumantu. 


Paila divided the Rig Veda, also called Babvricha sambita, in two patts, 
entrusting them respectively to Indrapramiti and Bashkala. Bashkala divided 
his part in four sections, transmitting them to his disciples Bodhya, 
Yajnavalkya, Parasara and Agnimitra. Indrapramiti taught the text 
committed to him to Mandukeya, whose disciple Devamitra transmitted it 
to Saubhari and others. Mandukeya's son Sakalya divided the text entrusted 
to him into five sections, distributing them to Vatsya, Mudgala, Saliya, 
Gokhalya and Sisira. Another disciple of Sakalya, named Jatukarnya, divided 
his text in three parts and added a glossary, entrusting these divisions 
respectively to his disciples Balaka, Paila, Jabala and Viraja. 


From the various texts of the Rg Veda, Baskali compiled an antology 
entitled Valakhilya-sambita, and transmitted it to Valayani, Bhajya and 
Kasara. The disciples of Vaisampayana became the recognized authorities 


311 


Parama Karuna Devi 


on the Yajur Veda. One of them, Yajnavalkya the son of Devarata, 
abandoned Vaisampayana and returned the hymns that had been given to 
him; the other disciples immediately took them, like quails (##zrab) do when 
they eat what has been regurgitated by other animals. So that particular 
collection of Yajur Veda hymns has been called Tatttirya samhita. 


From his part, Yajnavalkya directly approached Surya, the Deva of the Sun, 
begging him to reveal the secret mantras of the Yajur Veda. Taking the form 
of a horse, Surya appeared to Yajnavalkya and gave him fifteen new 
chapters of Vedic knowledge, that are known as Vajasaneyi-sambita (because 
they emanated from the mane of Surya). These new chapters were entrusted 
to the disciples of Kanva, Madhyandhina and other Rishis. Jamini Rishi, the 
authority on the Sama Veda, had a son named Sumantu, who was the father 
of Sutvan; to both - son and grandson - Jaimini entrusted one of the 
divisions of the Sama Veda sambita. Another disciple of Jaimini, named 
Sukarma, divided his text of the Sama Veda in 1,000 samhitas, that were 
entrusted to Hiranyanabha (the son of Kushala), Paushyanji and Avantya. 
The 500 disciples of Paushyanji and Avantya became known as the 
northern reciters. 


Other five disciples of Paushyanji - Laugakshi, Mangali, Kulya, Kushida and 
Kukshi, received 100 sambitas each. Krita, disciple of Hiranyanabha, 
transmitted 24 sambitas to his own disciples, and the remaining text was 
given to the sage Avantya. Sumantu Rishi, the authority on the Aztharva 
Veda, taught his sambita to his disciple Kabandha, who in turn gave it to 
Pathya and Vedadarsha. The main disciples of Pathya were Kumuda, 
Sunaka and Jajali, while those of Vedadarsha were Sauklayani, Brahmabali, 
Modosha and Pippalayani. 


Furthermore, the Atharva Veda was commented by two disciples of Sunaka, 
named Babhru and Saindhavayana, and by the disciple of Saindhavayana, 
named Savarna. Among the acharyas of the Atharva Veda are also 
remembered Nakshatrakalpa, Santikalpa, Kashyapa and Angirasa. 


The compilation of the Puranas was given to Trayyaruni, Kasyapa, Savarni, 
Akritavrana, Vaisampayana and Harita; each one of them studied one of the 
six antologies from Romaharshana, my father, who was a disciple of 
Vyasadeva. Romaharshana organized the Puranas in four categories, 
entrusting them to me, Kashyapa, Savarni and Akritavrana, disciple of 


312 


Bhagavata Purana 


Rama. The main characteristic of the Puranas is they elaborate on ten 
subjects: the primary creation of the universe, the subsequent creations, the 
protection and maintenance of the living beings, the reign of the various 
Manus, the dynasties of the great kings and their activities, the destruction 
of the universe, the purpose of life and the supreme shelter. The eighteen 
main Puranas ate called Brahma (10,000 verses), Padma (55,000), Veshnu 
(23,000), Shiva (24,000), Linga (11,000), Garuda (19,000), Narada (25,000), 
Bhagavata (18,000), Agni (15,400), Skanda (81,100), Bhavishya (4,500), Brahma- 
vaivarta (18,000), Markandeya (9,000), Vamana (10,000), Varaha (24,000), 
Matsya (14,000), Karma (17,000) and Brahmanda (12,000), for a total of 
400,000 verses." 


The sages assembled at Naimisharanya thanked Suta for his exhaustive 
elaboration and asked him to speak about Markandeya Rishi, the son of 
Mrikandu, who is said to be the only survivor at the end of Brahma's day. 
Within the waters of the universal flood, he sees an extraordinary child that 


floats alone on a banyan leaf. 


Saunaka said, "I know that Markandeya, the famous descendant of Bhrigu, 
was born in my family in this very day of Brahma and therefore he has not 
faced the destruction of the universe yet. How can we explain this?" 


Suta replied, "After his initiation, performed by his father, Markandeya 
studied the Vedic hymns, strictly following the prescribed rules and 
remaining a naistika brabmachari, a life-long celibate student. He wore the 
dress characteristic of his ashrama, and at the three sandhyas he faithfully 
performed the worship to the Lord in five forms: the sacrificial fire, the 
Sun, the spiritual master, the brahmanas and the Supreme Soul. Morning and 
evening he went out to beg alms, and after presenting his collection to the 
spiritual master, he ate what he was given. In this way he lived for millions 
of years, to the great amazement of the heavenly beings. 


After six manvantaras, Indra started to become concerned about the 
austerities of Markandeya and to break them he sent Kamadeva, 
accompanied by an escort of Apsaras and Gandharvas, together with spring 
and its sandalwood scented breezes, and the personifications of intoxication 
and lust. Indra's envoys arrived at Markandeya's ashrama, that is north of 
the Himalayas, where river Pushpabhadra flows beyond the Citra mountain. 
The hermitage of the saintly brabmanas was already beautiful, decorated with 


313 


Parama Karuna Devi 


virtuous trees and sacred ponds, bees intoxicated with the nectar of the 
flowers and melodious birds. Kamadeva and his court tried in vain to 
disturb the senses of the Rishi, and suddenly they felt very uncomfortable, 


as if they were going to be burned alive. Indra was very surprised. 


The Lord wanted to bless Markandeya personally, so he appeared before 
him in the form of Nara and Narayana Rishi, one with a white complexion 
and the other with a black complexion. The two divine personalities were 
dressed with the traditional ascetics’ garb, had four arms and emanated a 
golden radiance. Markandeya offered his homage and prayers of praise, 
recognizing their divinity and thanking them for their mercy. The Lord 
granted a boon to the Rishi, and Markandeya expressed the wish to be able 
to see the action of God's illusory potency. 


After some time, while Markandeya was engaged in his evening meditation 
on the river bank, a terrible howling wind rose, dragging dreadful clouds, 
loaded with lightning and thunder. Torrents of rain started to fall, and from 
all sides came such a gteat flood that four oceans seemed to have arrived to 
cover all the directions, with high waves, whirlpools and frightening sea 
monsters. The Rishi saw that all the inhabitants of the universe were 
suffering like him because of the storm and the inundation, that was 
covering all lands, the islands and the mountains and even the sky and the 
interplanetary space. Soon only Markandeya was left, tossed here and there 
by the waves, besieged by large fishes, tortured by hunger and thirst, 
exhausted and confused by a darkness without limits. Innumerable millions 
of years passed in that situation, and he experienced many emotions, until 
at some point the Rishi arrived at an island, where a young banyan tree was 


blossoming and producing fruits. 


On one branch he saw a very small child, lying on one leaf. The radiance of 
that baby dissipated the darkness: his complexion was the color of 
emeralds, his body was beautiful and perfectly proportioned. Markandeya 
watched him in awe. The child grabbed one of his own small feet, put his 
big toe in his mouth and started sucking. 


The Rishi felt instantly free from all fatigue and inexplicably happy. He 
approached the baby and was sucked into his breath, entering his body as if 
he were a tiny insect. There he found the entire universe, exactly as it was 
before destruction - the sky and the earth, the oceans, the continents, the 


314 


Bhagavata Purana 


forests, the cities and the cultivated fields, and all the inhabitants of the 
many worlds. He also saw his own ashrama on the bank of river 
Pushpabhadtra, where he had been blessed by the darshana of Nara Narayana 
Rishi. Just then the child exhaled and Markandeya was expelled from his 
body, and found himself again in the ocean of the dissolution of the 
universe, next to the banyan tree with the baby, who glanced at him in a 
sort of affectionate oblique way and then disappeared. 


Then Markandeya Rishi understood what had happened, and took shelter in 
the Supreme Personality of God. Just at that time Shiva was traveling in the 
sky, accompanied by his consort Parvati, and decided to stop and meet the 
sage. Markandeya's material mind was not active, therefore he did not 
notice the arrival of Shiva, but the Lord entered directly into his heart, 
manifesting himself to his awareness. 


In his meditation, Markandeya saw Lord Shiva - tall, with a body as radiant 
as the rising sun, golden hair like lightning, ten arms and three eyes. He was 
dressed in a tiger skin and carried a trident, a bow, arrows, a sword and a 
shield, as well as a japa mala, a damaru drum, a skull and an axle. Markandeya 
opened his eyes and saw the Lord and his consort before him, and greeted 
them very respectfully, offering the ritual worship and prayers of praise. 
Pleased, Shiva praised him in turn and offered him a boon. Grateful, 
Markandeya Rishi asked to be able to always have a deep devotion to God, 
and Shiva also granted him great fame and freedom from old age and death 
to the end of the cycle of creation, the perfect knowledge of past present 
and future, and the transcendental realization of the Supreme." 


Suta concluded his speech to the sages of Naimisharanya describing the 
Lord in his universal form of Mahapurusha, because by meditating on this 
form it is possible to always remember the Lord. After summarizing the 
vatious topics of the Bhagavata Purana, he praised its great qualities and 
transcendental virtues and explained the benefits that one can obtain by 
honoring and studying it regularly. Finally, he offered his homage to the 
Supreme Lord and to his own spiritual master, Sukadeva. 


315 


Parama Karuna Devi 


About the Author 


Mataji Parama Karuna Devi is a writer, a teacher, a social worker and a religious person, who 
came to reside in Purushottama kshetra in 1994. 

She was born in Italy in 1957. She started studying and practicing Vedic religion in 1970, in 
Italy. In February 1979 she received her Diksha name with a Vedic homa consecration 
ceremony to dedicate herself completely to spiritual life and service to all living entities as the 
family of God. From 1978 to 1986 she lived full time in local ashramas as a dedicated 
brahmacharini, engaging in the direct ritual worship of Deities and religious rituals, and serving 
in the ashrama's gurukula by teaching an introductory course on Sanskrit and the Vedic 
scriptures. In 1980 she was one of the core Sevakas during the organization and the 
celebration of the first Ratha Yatra in Italy (Viareggio). In the same period she also worked 
at translating most of the books written by the founder of the ashrama organization. In a 
later period, she also worked at the translation and publication of various other texts 
distributed by other religious organizations and publishing houses. In 1989 she founded a 
Vegetarian Society in Italy based on spiritual and ethical ideals, and developed it to about 
3000 members, through several initiatives such as cooking courses, social dinners, 
presentations, radio programs, conferences etc. From 1989 to 1993 she authored and 
published a series of very successful small manuals called Libretti Verdi (“Green Booklets’), 
covering various subjects and especially ethical vegetarianism, vegetarian recipes and 
techniques, international vegetarian cooking, Indian cooking, nutritional information, natural 
medicine, yoga, karma, reincarnation, devotional songs, sustainable development, etc. 

From 1986 onwards she has traveled extensively in India meeting religious teachers from 
many lineages and traditions and visiting and living in many holy places, also participating to 
the 1989 Kumbha Mela. Under the guidance of Sj Bhagavan Mishra (Deula purohita of Sri 
Jagannatha Puri Mandir) and Sj Jagannatha Mahapatra (Mukti mandapa brahmana of Sti 
Jagannatha Puri Mandir) and other prominent brahmanas of the orthodox community in Putri, 
she underwent the traditional ceremonies called suddbi, prayaschitta, vratyastoma and diksha, 
thus officially becoming a Vratya member of the orthodox Hindu community. 

In 1994 she started the Jagannatha Vallabha Vedic Research Center, for the production and 
publication of religious and spiritual literature. She has written and published several books, 
including a pilgrimage guide to Jagannatha Puri entitled "Puri the Home of Lord Jagannatha" 
(2008), a translation and commentary of Adi Shankara's "Prasnottara ratna malika" (1998), 
"The power of Kalpa Vriksha" (1998), "Sustainable Development in Rural and Tribal Areas" 
(1996), "Spiritual Vegetarianism" (2000), "Vegetarian World" (2001), "Bhagavata purana" 
(2011), "Introduction to Vedic Knowledge" (4 volumes, 2012-2014), an extensive translation 
with commentaries on Bhagavad gita (19 volumes, 2014-2016) and the first of a 7 volume 
series on "The Life and Teachings of Krishna Chaitanya" (2015). 

In 1995 she founded PAVAN (a non-profit organization for vegetarian awareness based on 
spiritual ideals), and developed a rural development center outside Puri. In 2005 she 
established the Jagannatha Vallabha Ashram, near Puri, with charitable primary school for 
the local children and a small temple with traditional worship. 

She is presently working at several new publication projects, such as "Guide to Religious 
Observances" (a 3 volume puja manual for different levels of sadhakas), a book on "The 
Global Dharma for the Third Millennium", a manual on "Integration of past life memories 
and astral traveling", and others. She regularly publishes spiritual articles on internet, also 
corresponding with her students of different nationalities who reside both in India and 
abroad. 


316 


