The Hatha Yoga Pradipika 


The Hatha Yoga Pradipika is an important text in which are enumerated 
the essentials of yoga. It explains in clear terms the asanas, pranayama, 
mudras, and the samadhi which are essential in the practice of yoga and 
describes the stages and the correct methods for doing these. It also 
discusses the philosophy underlying the yoga and is a manual of 
instructions for the students of yoga. 

The importance of this text for teacher and student of yoga alike 
cannot be overestimated as this treatise is of immense practical value. 
The present work contains the original Sanskrit text and its translation 
into English alongwith an Introduction. 


“iach? ge aeny a en 
oa alt; lore “Cl yey: 


na See 


‘d nies 
’ 4 
~e — = 
7 
X ; 
: Wai 
Se cre 
= 
— » , 
. sy “ 
met 
j aa 
= i - 
a ~ ~ 
= a 
— ‘Sten 
5 
; r 
f om 
Ts q 
oe 
ms 
B ; est 
% 
4 
A Are 
i 
i 


The Hatha Yoga Pradipika 


Translated into English by 
PANCHAM SINH 


MUNSHIRAM 
MANO! 
NaS 
- 3 ‘ Ji 
2, 


= 


SSIES 
Munshiram Mancharla! 
Publishers Pvt. Ltd. 


ISBN 978-81-215-0575-8 
Reprinted 1985, 1992, 1997, 2001, 2002, 2007, 2014 
First published 1915 


© Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers Pvt. Ltd. 


All rights reserved, including those of translation into other languages. 
No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, 
or transmitted in any form, or by any means, electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, 
without the written permission of the publisher. 


PRINTED IN INDIA 
Published by Vikram Jain for 
Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers Pvt. Ltd. 
PO Box 5715, 54 Rani Jhansi Road, New Delhi 110 055, INDIA 


www.mrmlbooks.com 


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


Introduction 

Ohapter I—on Asanas 
» ll ,, Pranayama 
» II ,, Mudras 
» IV ,, Samadhi 


INTRODUCTION. 


There exists at present a good deal of misconception with regard to 
the practices of the Hatha Yoga. People easily believe in the stories told 
by those who themselves heard them second hand, and no attempt is 
made to find out the truth by a direct reference to any good treatise. It 
is generally believed that the six practices, (9258) in Hatha Yoga are com- 
pulsory on the student and that besides being dirty, they are fraught with 
danger to the practiser. This is not true, for these practices are necessary 
only in the existence of impurities in the Nadis, and not otherwise. 

There is the same amount of misunderstanding with regard to the 
Pranéyaéma. People put their faith implicitly in the stories told thom 
about the dangers attending the practice, without ever taking the trouble 
of ascertaining the fact themselves. We have been inspiring and expiring 
air from our birth, and will continue to do so till death ; and this 
is done without the help of any teacher. Pranayama is nothing but a 
properly regulated form of the otherwise irregular and hurried flow of air, 
without using much force or undue restraint ; and if this is accomplished 
by patiently keeping the flow slow and steady, there can be no danger. 
It is the impatience for the Siddhis which cause undue pressure on the 
organs and thereby causes pains in the ears, the eyes, the chest, etc. 
If the three bandhas (qq) be carefully performed while practising the 
Pranay4ma, there is no possibility of any danger. 

There are two classes of students of Yoga: (1) those who study it 
theoretically ; (2) those who combine the theory with practice. 

Yoga is of very little use, if studied theoretically. It was never 
meant for such a study. In its practical form, however, the path of the 
student is beset with difficulties. The books on Yoga give instructions 
so far as it is possible to express the methods in words, but all persons, 
not being careful enough to follow these instructions to the very letter, 
fail in their object. Such persons require a teacher versed in the 
practice of Yoga. It is easy to find a teacher who will explain the language 
of the books, but this is far from being satisfactory. For instance, a 
Pandit without any knowledge of the science of Materia Medica will 
explain *eHnt as HeHet: Henle: or an enemy of thorns, te, shoes, 
while it is in reality the name of a medicinal plant, 


ii INTRODUCTION. » 
” oe) EE eee 


The importance of a practical Yogi as a guide to a student of 
Yoga cannot be overestimated ; and without such a teacher it is next to 
impossible for him to achieve anything. The methods followed by the 
founders of the system and followed ever afterwards by their followers, 
have been wisely and advisedly kept secret; and this is not without a 
deep meaning. Looking to the gravity of the subject and the practices 
which have a very close relation with the vital organs of the human body, 
it is of paramount importance that the instructions should be received by 
students of ordinary capacity, through a practical teacher only, in order 
to avoid any possibility of mistake in practice. Speaking broadly, all men 
are not equally fitted to receive the instructions on equal terms. Man inherits 
on birth his mental and physical capitals, according to his actions in past 
births, and has to increase them by manipulation, but there are, even 
among such, different grades. Hence, one cannot become a Yogi in one 
incarnation, as says Sri Krisna agAAAATATA araggefaatza | and again 
aqsareut aay ahaeale ea | aaataftrarat afarnsafa aeaa: | 
atari 


There are men who, impelled by the force of their actions of previous 
births, go headlong and accomplish their liberation ina single attempt; 
but others have to earn it in their successive births. Ifthe student 
belongs to one of such souls and being earnest, desires from his heart to 
get rid of the pains of birth and death, he will find the means too. It is 
well-known that a true Yogi is above temptations and so to think that he 
keeps his knowledge secret for selling it to the highest bidder is simply 
absurd. Yoga is meant for the good of all creatures, and a true Yogi is 
always desirous of benefitting as many men as possible. But he is 
not to throw away this precious treasure indiscriminately. He carefully 
chooses its recipients, and when be finds a true and earnest student, who 
will not trifle with this knowledge, he never hesitates in placing his 
valuable treasure at the disposal of the man. What is essential in him is 
that he should have a real thirst for such knowledge—a thirst which will 
make him restless till satisfied ; the thirst that will make him blind to 
the world and its enjoyments. He should be, in short, fired with qaqa 
or desire for emancipation. To such a one, there is nothing dearer than 
the accomplishment of this object. A true lover will risk his very life to 
gain union with his beloved like Tulasidaés. A true lover will see every- 
where, in every direction, in every tree and leaf, in every blade of grass 
his own beloved. The whole of the world, with all its beauties, is a dreary 
waste in his eyes, without his beloved. And he will court death, fall into 


INTRODUCTION. ili 


the mouth of a gaping grave, for the sake of his beloved. The student 
whose heart burns with such intense desire for union with Paramatma, 
is sure to find a teacher, and through him he will surely find Him It is a 
tried experience that Paramatma will try to meet you half way, with the 
degree of intensity with which you will go to meet Him. Even He 
Himself will become your guide, direct you on to the road to success, or 
put you on the track to find a teacher, or lead him to you. 

Well has it been said fa gr fara argat mat qrat A 1 A avait gaa 
aT Tal Prarz as i Itis the half-hearted who fail. They hold their 
worldly pleasures dearer to their hearts than their God, and therefore He 
in His turn does not consider them worthy of His favours. Says the 
Upanisad :— 

AIGAKAT Taaaa GEN a HII a AEA Aaa | WaT Twa Aaa 

acat srw aatany ti 

The Atma will choose you its abode only if it considers you worthy 
of such a favour, and not otherwise. It is therefore necessary that one 
should first make oneself worthy of His acceptance. Having prepared 
the temple (your heart) well fitted for His installation there, having 
cleared it of all the impurities which stink and make the place unsuitable 
for the highest personage to live in, and having decorated it beautifully 
with objects as befit that Lord of the creation, you need not wait long 
for Him to adorn this temple of yours which you have taken pains to 
make it worthy of Him. If you have done all this, He will shine in you 
in all His glory. In your difficult moments, when you are embarrassed, 
sit in a contemplative mood, and approach your Parama Guru submissively 
and refer your difficulties to Him, you are sure to get the proper 
advice from Him. He is the Guru of the ancients, for He is not limited 
by Time. He instructed the ancients in bygone times, like a Guru, and 
if you have been unable to find a teacher in the human form, enter your 
inner temple and consult this Great Guru who accompanies you everywhere, 
and ask Him to show you the way. He knows best what is best for you. 
Unlike mortal beings, He is beyond the past and the future, will either 
send one of His agents to guide you or lead you to one and put you on the 
right track. He is always anxious to teach the earnest seekers, and waits 
for vou to offer Him an opportunity to doso. But if you have not done 
your duty and prepared yourself worthy of entering His door, and try 
to gain access to His presence, laden with your unclean burden, stinking 
with Kama, Krodha, Lobha, and Moha, be sure He will keep you off from 


Him. 


iv INTRODUCTION. 


enn 


The Asanas are a means of gaining steadiness of position and help 
to gain success in contemplation, without any distraction of the mind. If 
the position be not comfortable, the slightest inconvenience will draw the 
mind away from the lakdya (aim), and so no peace of mind will be possible 
till the posture has ceased to cause pain by regular exercise. 


Of all the various methods for concentrating the mind, repetition of 
Pranava or Ajapa Japa and contemplation on its meaning is the best. 
It is impossible for the mind to sit idle even for a single moment, and, 
therefore, in order to keep it well occupied and to keep other antagonistic 
thoughts from entering it, repetition of Pranava should be practised. 
It should be repeated till Yoga Nidra is induced which, when experienced, 
should be encouraged by slackening all the muscles of the body. This 
will fill the mind with sacred and divine thoughts and will bring about 
its one-pointedness, without much effort. 

Andhata Nada is awakened by the exercise of Pranayama. A couple 
of weeks’ practice with &0 praéndydmas inthe morning and the same 
number in the evening will cause distinct sounds to be heard ; and, as the 
practice will go on increasing, varied sounds become audible to the 
practiser. By hearing these sounds attentively one gets concentration 
of the mind, and thence Sahaja Samadhi. When Yoga sleep is experienced, 
the student should give himself up to it and make no efforts to check it. 
By and by, these sounds become subtle and they bocome less and less 
intense, so the mind loses its waywardness and becomes calm and docile ; 
and, on this practice becoming well-established, Samadhi becomes a 
voluntary act. This is, however, the highest stage and is the lot of the 
favoured and fortunate few only. 

During contempiation one sees, not with his eyes, as he does the 
objects of the world, various colours, which the writers on Yoga call the 
colours of the five elements. Sometimes, stars are seen glittering, and 
lightning flashes in the sky. But these are all fleeting in their nature. 

At first these colours are seen in greatly agitated waves which show 
the unsteady condition of the mind ; and as the practice increases and the 
mind becomes calm, these colour-waves become steady and motionless 
and appear as one deep ocean of light. This is the ocean in which one 
should dive and forget the world and become one with his Lord— which is 
the condition of highest bliss. 

Faith in the practices of Yoga, and in one’s own powers to accomplish 
what others have done before, is of great importance to insure speedy 
success. I mean “faith that will move mountains,’ will accomplish 


INTRODUCTION. v 


anything, be it howsoever difficult. There is nothing which cannot be 
accomplished by practice. Says Siva in Siva Samhita. 
TaATatstad fenaeararrarcsyarg | 
aidartsarar attraqracsraaa | 
qatatatacarea qarargrgaraaq 
RSASAAVA AAMT IS AMAIA | 
areata: arrariter wageaTaarra: Il Ho BATH L— LE 

Through practice success is obtained ; through practice one gains 
liberation. 

Perfect consciousness is gained through practice ; Yoga is attained 
through practice ; success in mudras comes by practice. Through practice 
is gained success in pranayama. Death can be evaded of its prey through 
practice, and man becomes the conqueror of death by practice. And then 
let us gird up our loins, and with a firm resolutian engage in the practice, 
having faith in RAVMAIfARITA AT HSg HzTaAa, and the success must be 
ours. May the Almighty Father, be pleased to shower His blessings on 
those who thus engage in the performance of their duties. Om Sam. 


AJMER: 
\ PANCHAM SING. 
3lst January, 1915. 


st 
“ 


= 


THE HATHA: YOGA PRADIPIKA. 


CHAPTER I. 
On Asanas. 
pinta aAseg TA Aarahrer esarwrar 1 
frard ctaracstintartateatchraeates ti 2 


Salutation to Adinatha (Siva) who expounded the knowledge of Hatha 
Yoga, which like a staircase leads the aspirant to the high pinnacled Raja 


Yoga. 1. 
sary sige art earearcrtra anftrar ti 
HAS Tara Esrataeeas ii 2 i 
Yogin Switmardma, after saluting first his Gurd Srindtha explains 
Hatha Yoga for the attainment of Raja Yoga. 2. 


Bia auras Usa | 
CSU TA TAA: HATHT: tt 2 
Owing to the darkness arising from the multiplicity of opinions 
people are unable to know the Raja Yoga. Compassionate Swétmaérdma 
composes the Hatha Yoga Pradipika like a torch to dispel it. 3. 


wotret & aeeigitearen fara tt 
TATANTATSAT AVA Arata ASTATTaT: 3 
Matsyendra, Goraksa, etc., knew Hatha Vidya, and by their favour 
Yogi Sw4tmaréma also learnt it from them. 4. 
SAAT ATT: 
are atarncearremaeran: tt 4 i 
The following Siddhas (masters) are said to have existed in former 


times :— 
Sri Adinatha (Siva), Matsyendra, Natha, Sabar, Anand, Bhairava, 


Chaurangi, Mina natha, Goraksanatha, Virupaksa, Bilesaya. 5. 
surat Acat abt Raa aes Has: 1 
aren: qaag: Rages ae: 1 & 
Manth4na, Bhairava, Siddhi Buddha, Kanthadi, Karantaka, Sura- 
nanda, Siddhip4da, Charapati. 6. 


2 THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 


BTA THINS MATA STA: 
HS ASAMATA HTHASPHATTSTT: U1 9 Ut 
Kaneri, Pajyapada, Nityanatha, Nirafjana, Kapéli, Vindunitha, 
Kaka Chandiswara. 7. 
Wea: Meas Tera a Sree: 
WGA ALATA AS: HTATISHRTAAT Ut < I 
Allama, Prabhudeva, Ghodé, Choli, Tintini, Bhanuki, Nardeva,_ 
Khanda Kapalika, ete. 5. 
TGA Aaa CSaITATAa: I 
wetren Beds said faatta Fue i 
These Mahasiddhas (great masters), breaking the sceptre of death, 
are roaming in the universe. 9. 
TATATAA A AATATAST TS: I 
PATAVTTHIAUATA CHAS ES: Ut Lo tl 
Like a house protecting one from the heat of the sun, Hatha Yoga 
protects its practiser from the burning heat of the three Tapas ; and, 


similarly, it is the supporting tortoise, as it were, for those who are 
constantly devoted to the practice of Yoga. 10. 


wofrant at men attr feesar u 
wagtaaat war Mafat g wearar u Ve u 


A Yogi desirous of success should keep the knowledge of Hatha 
Yoga secret ; for it becomes potent by concealing, and impotent by expos- 


ing. “LL. 
ques ahaa 2a gftet Fears 
ag: TaTNTae Kreis 0 
ania ASA Caraed SARA th 22 I 
The Yogi should practise Hatha Yoga in a small room, situated in a 
sulitary place, being 4 cubits square, and free from stones, fire, water, 
disturbances of all kinds, and ina country where justice is properly 


administered, where good people live, and food can be obtained easily 
and plentifully. 12. 


ssa Seater 
cerrirastiiaace a eae eee 
Tel AST HIERaT ora 

The Invsey ceraies ssa 22 


THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 3 


The room should have a small door, be free from holes, hollows, 
neither too high nor too low, well plastered with cow-dung and free from 
dirt, filth and insects. On its outside there should be bowers, raised 
platform (chabootra), a well, and a compound. These characteristics of 
a room for Hatha Yogis have been described by adepts in the practice 
of Hatha. 13. 

cafes ad feacat aahrarfratta: 1 
TRA sarTT Yeas TTTAT Ut 2 

Having seated in such a room and free from all anxieties, he should 

practise Yoga, as instructed by his guru. 14. 


FUR: TUATA THT MAAAE! II 
wae Steg a weheatir Aaa uv 24 ut 


Yoga is destroyed by the following six causes :—Over-eating, exer- 
tion, talkativeness, adhering to rules,te., cold bath in the morning, 
eating at night, or eating fruits only, company of :nen, and unsteadi- 


TARA CATS NAAT PATA 
TAATTLSATTTS HAT: TATA LE At 


The following six bring speedy success:—-Courage, daring, 
perseverance, discriminative knowledge, faith, aloofness from company. 


16. 
DY TATA: I 
* o & 
ate aauaeag sera sar aft: 
qos Maree: Ara Aa AAT Tar UW Wo 
The ten rules of conduct are: ahimsa (non-injuring), truth, non-steal- 
ing, continence, forgiveness, endurance, compassion, meekness, sparing 


ness, 15. 


diet and cleanliness. 17. 
aa: aaa shear qratdbargeray 
fata gaat a aM Tay | 
Raa aa asta anraerfranca: WL 


The ten niyamas mentioned by those proficient in the knowledge 
of yoga are: ‘Tapa, patience, belief in God, charity, adoration of God, 
hearing discourses on the principles of religion, shame, intellect, Tapa 
and Yajna. 18. 

AY DAA tt 


ESCA WaAiTNgraaqageaa I 
FAA VITAL ATATAHT tt Ll 


4 THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 


Asanas. 
Being the first accessory of Hatha Yoga, Asana is described first. 
It should be practised for gaining steady posture, health and lightness 
of body. 19. 


qtpriga qairieedgracs arith: u 
WUSATAMATM RAT HUMAAA Uo Ul 
I am going to describe certain Asanas which have been adopted by 
Munis like Vasistha, etc., and Yogis like Matsyendra, ete. 20. 


MPACAL AIATRBAM WITS TH I 
RG: Aareta: cakes AT AATT Il 22 
Swastika-dsana. 
Having kept both the hands under both the thighs, with the body 
straight, when one sitscalmly in this posture, it is called Swastika. 21. 
aor qhramen 7 Tes PTA II 
qfartsft aan aed Trae ara ti 22 UN 


Gomukha-ésana. 
Placing the right ankle on the left side and the left ankle on the 
right side, makes Gomukha-dsana, having the appearance of acow. 22. 


ah Ug TaAPaIaTa ere tl 
cache are’ Frereaterartarz tt 22 
Virdsana. 


One foot is to be placed on the thigh of the opposite side; and so 
also the other foot on the opposite thigh. This is called Virdsana. 23. 


Tq Reg Jenna sqenka aariea: i 
qatar vacate Aefaar fag vw u 
Kurmédsana. 


Placing the right ankle on the left side of anus, and the left ankle 
on the right side of it, makes what the Yogis call Karma-asana. 24. 


Tare FT Teng srakat wer i 
Prete AT Creeey Are PaTTAAT | AE 
Kukkuta dsana. 
Taking the posture of Padma-dsana and carrying the hands under 


the thighs, when the Yogi raises himself above the ground, with his 
palms resting on the ground, it becomes Kukkuta-Asana. 25. 


THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIRKA. 5 


PRAT TN BNA GT HITT I 
VAHAITUA TATAAHAHT It 2E tl 


Uttana Kirma-dsana. 
Having assumed Kukkuta-Asana, when one grasps his neck by 
crossing his hands behind his head, and lies in this posture with his back 


touching the ground, it becomes Uttana Karma-dsana, from its appearanc8 
like that of a tortoise. 26. 


Urgtayer a aritreat eter Srerarrer er it 
AFTIHI FAS ACAATAT Ul VS I 
Dhanura dsana. 


Having caught the toes of the feet with both the hands and carried 
them to the ears by drawing the body like a bow, it becomes Dhanura 


dsana. 27. 
qareqeriagaag snareaeararaay 
ome fasertafiatt: sitaccaarntzaarerdt Sarg tt 2 
aeagie Kecrdiia cdeedsoteaey ti 
Mase F sonra age a Farle Tanz ut ze ti 
Matsya-dsana. 

Having placed the right foot at the root of the left thigh, let the 
toe be grasped with the right hand passing over the back, and having 
placed the left foot on the right thigh at its root, let it be grasped with 
the left hand passing behind the back. Thisis the Asana, as explained 
by Sri Matsyanatha. It increases appetite and is an instrument for 
destroying the group of the most deadly diseases. Its practice awakens 
the Kundalini, stops the nectar shedding from the moon in people. 28-29, 

TAT Tal yt Feat Fray aqrafead peter 1 
MAGA AAISTA™gaA TAT TWRAAATAATE: Ul Ro tt 
Paschima Tana. 

Having stretched the feet on the ground, like a stick, and having 
grasped the toes of both the feet with both the hands, when one sits with 
his forehead resting on the thighs, it is called Paschima Tana. 30. 

cla oanararearca var afearartes weer tt 
‘sqa Wecaser Falgqe HeUArrat ST Fay tt BL | 

This Pagchima Tana carries the air from the front to the back part 
of the body (2.e., to the susumna). It kindles gastric fire, reduces obesity 
and cures all diseases of men. 3l. 


6 THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 


qua HEA aaRICeMr aa: 
THA ghar: araqrasragts NSA NW 3z 
Maytra-dsana. 
Place the palms of both the hands on the ground, and place the 
navel on both the elbows and balancing thus, the body should be 
stretched backward like a stick. This is called Mayfira-Asana. 32. 


aang gequetaaa a erred stray tl 
TY HAUMAYA WET FAAT Aaale AS aAsHSFSA Ul 22 tl 
This Asana soon destroys all diseases, and removes abdominal dis- 
orders, and also those arising from irregularities of phlegm, bile and wind, 
digests unwholesome food taken in excess, increases appetite and destroys 
the most deadly poison. 33. 


TUM TATRA WI TSSATAAT It 
ware sifat Rrafasiftrenrcay tl 82 


Sava-dsana. 


Lying down on the ground, like a corpse, is called Sava-Asana. It 
removes fatigue and gives rest to the mind. 34. 


eapgeatrerreratin Rrra HAT AT 
NAAT HAN ATT TATE U1 BY A 
Siva taught 84 dsanas. Of these the first four being essential ones, 
Iam going to explain them here. 35. 
fee ca aun fe ag af aqeaq ui 
ag aaa a ga fasearaa ear ui 28 ti 
These four are:—The Siddha, Padma, Sinha and Bhadra. Even of 


these, the Siddha-Asana, being very comfortable, one should always 
practise it. 36. 


rewranayorzd SMT ee Araq 

a onesies equ wareg gaz i 

SMT: aaftdfxinsacem waITTAAat 

aaeaternaeagsat Mara gaz 39 
The Siddhdsana 
Press firmly the heel of the left foot against the perineum, and the 

right heel above the male organ. With the chin pressing on the chest, one 
should sit calmly, having restrained the senses, and gaze steadily the space 


between the eyebrows. This is called the Siddha Asana, the opener of the 
door of salvation. 37. 


THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 7 


Aatat J 
Rargut faerer weg Ten’ aaa 1 
Tenet & Mfr Rrareaatts wag ui 3c 
This Siddhasana is performed also by placing the left heel on 
Medhra (above the male organ), and then placing the right one on it. 38. 


qakaarad TETY THA A 
FHA ACA TTT AAA TE Ut BE tt 
Some call this Siddhésana, some Vajrasana. Others call it Mukta 
Asana or Gupta Asana. 39. 


wataa frareraizet Raattas 
Tai aaraaadhitanr: area fxs: ut go ti 
Just as sparing food is among Yamas, and Ahims& among the. 


Niyamas, so is Siddh&sana called by adepts the chief of all the 
dsanas. 40. 


agqaitensy Sera aaa ti 
FTAMAATSM AT ASA ASATATT Be 


Out of the 84 Asanas Siddhasana should always be practised, because 
it cleanses the impurities of 72,000 nadis. 41. 


MANA MaERt Aagsrqaacaay ti 
aq MarearaTraraht ereqfaAaag tt 22 


By contemplating on oneself, by eating sparingly, and by practising 
Siddh4asana for 12 years, the Yogi obtains success. 42. 


Patagn: Te: &s ara at ii 
TMS AAMT TS RAITH AH 1 83 
Other postures are of no use, when success has been achieved in 
Siddhasana, and Prana Vaya becomes calm and restrained by Kevala Kum- 


bhaka. 43. 
STS MCATAATAArAA HAT | 
adnrearaa 22 fre Para ae | 
TITIAAAMAATAATATAgT tl VS Il 


Success in one Siddhasana alone becoming firmly established, one 
geis Unmani at. once, and the three bonds (Bandhas) are accomplished 
of themselves. 44. 

area aaea A HA: RACTIA: Ul 
A AACA FAI A AGATA SA: UN Ve Ul 


8 THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 


There is no Asana like the Siddhasana and no Kumbhaka like the 
Kevala. There is no mudr& like the Khechari and no laya like the Nada 
(Anfhata Nada.) 45. 

WY TAA Il 
aareakt axa a aca gery ani a 
wat aut gana fare wear trai zeq | 
WIS Eel Fra Fah arararereag 
cagaaarant Atrat TATA MEAT tt VE tt 


Padmdasana. 


Place the right foot on theleft thigh and the left foot on the right thigh, 
and grasp the toes with the hands crossed over the back. Press the chin 
against the chest and gaze on the tip of the nose. This is called the 
PadmAsana, the destroyer of the diseases of the Yamis, 46. 


SAAT ALT BAT FRM TAA: 1 
HSTY TATAAT WA HAT TAT FAM Ul Bo I 


Place the feet on the thighs, with the soles upwards, and place the. 
hands on the thighs, with the palms upwards. 47. 


~ @ 
area Frretararg aye g fre ti 
Sey Paph Teer Waa TA: tt Be 
Gaze on the tip of the nose, keeping the tongue pressed against the 
root of the teeth of the upper jaw, and the chin against the chest, and raise 
the air up slowly, 7.e., pull the apana-véya gently upwards. 48. 
CS TMA Stes aae ary UN 
oa Fa Farka Frat Seas Bly uve 
This is called the Padmdasana, the destroyer of all diseases. It is 
difficult of attainment by everybody, but can be learnt by intelligent 
people in this world. 49. 
HAT Agar Het Zeat eT TF Taras 
me aate ara Rack erage asic | 
ae TANITA AS 


marca 
sierarUgate stage TRETATATAT: 1k Go 


Having kept both the hands together in the lap, performing the 
Padmasana firmly, keeping the chin fixed to the chest and contemplating 
on Him in the mind, by drawing the apéna-véy@ up (performing Mala 
Bandha) and pushing down the air after inhaling it, joining thus the prana 


THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 9 


and apana in the navel, one gets the highest intelligence by awakening 
the Sakti (kundalini) thus. 50. 


N.B.—When Apana Vaya is drawn gently up and after filling in the lungs with the air 
from outside, the prana is forced down by and by so as to join both of them in the navel, 
they both enter then the Kundalini and, reaching the Brahma randhra (the great hole), 
they make the mind calm. Then the mind can contemplate on the nature of the ftmana 
and can enjoy the highest bliss. 


qorert feat Ari arsrartar qty 
ATS ALATEST FT Feit ATT AAT: Ut 4F Ut 


The Yogi who, sitting with Padmasana, can control breathing, 
there is no doubt, is free from bondage. 51. 


ay feereas | 
Teh a gqwaems: dam: waar: Rta | 
qa Genen F TATeH FT ATH Il 42 Ul 
The Simhdsana. 


Press the heels on both sides of the seam of Perineum, in such a way 
that the left heel touches the right side and the right heel touches the left 
side of it. 52. 


Sat F AM: Tearey aS: STAT Ft 
SHAT MCAT a AAT FAA: Ut 43 
Place the hands on the thighs, with stretched fingers, and keeping 
the mouth open and the mind collected, gaze on the tip of the nose. 53. 
Rieraa aazacyfad infirg’na: 0 
AIMATAITA HEA ATA AAT | 4S Ut 
This is Simhasana, held sacred by the best of Yogis. This excellent 
Asana effects the completion of the three Bandhas (The Malabandha, 
Kantha or Jalandhar Bandha and Uddiyana Bandha). 54. 


WY UATAA Ul 
geht @ qrwers: ata: qed a: fea | 
ATLA TM AHI TATTH F FAIA Ue 


gpd gat st wtnat es Te GRA It 
HATA AATARTAATAAATAATT Wt AE 
The Bhadrdsana. 
Place the heels on either side of the seam of the Perineum, keeping 


the left heel on the left side and the right one an the right side, hold the 
0 


10 THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 


feet firmly joined to one another with both the hands. This Bhadrasana 
is the destroyer of all the diseases. 55 and 56. 
Trearaaeangre & Raat: u 
CaATAAT IAG Aaitat faetrasyA: U4 Ut 
The expert Yogis call this Gorakéa Asana. By sitting with this 
Asana, the Yogt gets rid of fatigue 57. 
MAVA Haha AANLITA HAN I 
Dad Hw PIT AAT BCA Ta Ul 4e 
The Nadis should be cleansed of their impurities by performing 
the mudras, etc., (which are the practices relating to the air) Asanas, 
Kumbhakas and various curious madras. 58. 
WY ACZFAAATVAMATHAT FS | 
TATA TaTaTet BATT ATTA: | 
MATS TATA ATT HTT ATTA 11 42 1 
By regular and close attention to Nada (anahata nada) in*Hatha 
Yoga, a Brahmachari, sparing in diet, unattached to objects of enjoyment, 
and devoted to Yoga, gains success, no doubt, within a year. 59. 
gharamguensagat a frafia: | 
asad Rraasitet Hrarerc: & TeaF Ui Fo tl 
Abstemious feeding is thatin which $ of hunger is satisfied with food, 
well cooked with ghee and swects, and eaten with the offering of it to 


Siva. 60. 
HES TAU TIUTEM TATA 
SraAcaaIasawy AT AIL | 
DMs Ata Ta aH HIT Hs 
roar FEI SAAT ATA ATE: i RV Ul 
Foods injurious to a Yogi. 
Bitter, sour, saltish, hot, green vegetables, fermented, oily, mixed 
with til seed, rape seed, intoxicating liquors, fish, meat, curds, chhaasa 


pulses, plums, oil-cake, asafoetida (hinga), garlic, onion, etc., should 
not be eaten. 61. 


afastahaareanat ATAATALT UN FE I 
Food heated again, dry, having too much salt, sour, minor grains, 
and vegetables that cause burning sensation, should not be eaten, 
Fire, women, travelling, etc., should he avoided. 62, 


THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 11 


aants Tress I 
TAT HAMcarE St TAT TT 
TAATATTATANS HAHA TAT WEB 
aA anise aa fsa | 
atisras vata ary 
By satennsisH TT UT | 
AIM A TATA Nl Bs 
Ge qagt fears Teg ag warsary 
AAAS AVG ATT AAAATATT Ut BS Ut 

As said by Goraksa, one should keep aloof from the society of the 
evil-minded, fire, women, travelling, early morning bath, fasting, and all 
kinds of bodily exertion. 63. 

Wheat, rice, barley, shastik (a kind of rice), good corns, milk, ghee, 
sugar, butter, sugarcandy, honey, dried ginger, Parwal (a vegetable) 
the five vegetables, moong, pure water, these are very beneficial to those 
who practise Yoga. 64. 

A Yogi should eat tonics (things giving strength), well sweetened, 
greasy (made with ghee), milk, butter, etc., which may increase humors 
of the body, according to his desire. 65. 


aM Teisrat wT sabszar saershs ar 
srarenteahearata Gaara eg NRE 
Whether young, old or too old, sick or lean, one who discards 
laziness, gets success if he practises Yoga. 60. 


frags ais: ergata WaT I 
qT MSTA T Aas: TATAT UB MI 
Success comes to him who is engaged in the practice. How can one 
get success without practice ; for by merely reading books on Yoga, one can 
never get success. 67, 
a apace fas: RIC a AHA I 
facta Hite es: Tea AAT Ut Be A 
Success cannot be attained by adopting a particular dress (Vesa). 
It cannot be gained by telling tales. Practice alone is the means to 
success. ‘This is true, there is no doubt. 68. 
Hate Haars Reales RTA T IN 
AACA CSAS TAATHSTART Ul GS Ul 


12 THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 


Asanas (postures), various Kumbhakas, and other divine means, all 
should be practised in the practice of Hatha Yoga, till the fruit—Raja 
Yoga—is obtained. 69. 


gfe gendtiterany seAaraaa: 


End of chapter Ist, on the method of forming the Asanas. 


CHAPTER II. 


On ‘Pranayama. 


fedtataea: i 
maraa eS Avi aatt Rakrarara: 0 
TRUTATT TMA ttf I 


Posture becoming established, a Yogi, master of himself, eating 
salutary and moderate food, should practise pranayama, as instructed by 
his guru, 1. 


ad aa ad fad fea Bead wa 
anit earucaaratfe gat aT era 2 
Respiration being disturbed, the mind becomes disturbed. By 
restraining respiration, the Yogi gets steadiness of mind 2. 


aaa: feaat Se aaASTaTAAEae I 
ace cet erentirecat ary era 2 
So long as the (breathing) air stays in the body, it is called life. 
Death consists in the passing out of the (breathing) air. It is, therefore, 


9 


necessary to restrain the breath. 3. 


WMHS ATG ATSAT AT WET: I 
a QCA: HART: He AIT NU 
The breath does not pass through the middle channel (sugumné), 
owing to the impurities of the nadis._ How can then success be attained, 
and how can there be the unmani avastha. 4. 


: ghar ger aa aera WeTH | 
aes Haas Avie WaT VTA: WU 


When the whole system of nAdis which is full of Earnie is 
cleaned, then the Yogi becomes able to control the Prana. 5. 


TMA aa: Father aka Rear v 
BMT GAAS AST: Bre saith Tun eu 


Therefore, Pranéyéma should be performed daily with s&twika 
buddhi (intellect free from raja and tama or activity and sloth), in order 
to drive out the impurities of the sugumna. 6. 


14 THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 


TAIT ATT Mra aw TAT | 
archren arate ye: Gare THAT NG 1 
OTe FAM AH ALATA Tea: I 
fabraeg ah Hea GaaaT TAT Ml < 
Method of performing Prandyama. 

Sitting in the Padm&sana posture the Yogi should fill in the air 
through the left nostril (closing the right one); and, keeping it confined 
according to one’s ability, it should be expelled slowly through the sfrya 
(right nostril). Then, drawing in the air through the sarya (right nostril) 
slowly, the belly should be filled, and after performing Kumbhaka as before, 
it should be expelled slowly through the chandra (left nostril). 7 and 8. 

aa UHAA Tear aTrcratrza: 1 
takes aaa Tata a ATA: WS 

Inhaling thus through the one, through which it was expelled, and 
having restrained it there, till possible, it should be exhaled through 
the other, slowly and not forcibly. 9. 

arei Stigeen Reatferated yonseen bee 
Ten fire atta TATA | 
Bar asa wale akrat ATTA AT? It Lo 1 

If the air be inhaled through the left nostril, it should be expelled 
again through the other, and filling it through the right nostril, confining 
it there, it should be expelled through the left nostril. By practising 
in this way, through the right and the left nostrils alternately, the whole 
of the collection of the nadis of the yamis (practisers) becomes clean, 7.e., 
free from impurities, after 3 months and over. 10. 

MANTA SATA TH ATL Ul 
TATA AGA GMAIT Nl VLU 

Kumbhakas should be performed gradually 4 times during day and 
night, z.e., (morning, noon, evening and midnight), till the number of 
Kumbhakas for one time is 8U0 and for day and night together it is 320. 11. 


HATA aceag HAT al WAT 
SAA ToT TAT aT” AAT UW 22 Ut 
In the beginning there is perspiration, in the middle stage there is 


quivering, and in the last or the 3rd stage one obtains steadiness; and 
then the breath should be made steady or motionless. 12. 


THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 15 


TSA MAM AA MAATAATATT Il 
CEA VYAT Va AA MAS ATA tt V2 Ul 


The perspiration exuding from exertion of practice should be 
rubbed into the body (and not wiped), as by so doing the body becomes 


strong. 13. 
TUARTS THA Det SAIS tl 
TAHT CYS A AES MITAAE: i Le 


During the first stage of practice the food consisting of milk and 
ghee is wholesome. When the practice becomes established, no such 
restriction is necessary. 14. 


aor FART TAT SATE WARTA: Ta: TA Ht 
aaa Saar agree ef anrHT it 84 I 
Just as lions, elephants and tigers are controlled by and by, so the 
breath is controlled by slow degrees, otherwise (7.e., by being hasty or 
using too much force) it kills the practiser himself. 15, 
TUTMAT THA SATAN AAT Ul 
TTAVMANTA AATTATRT Wt LE Al 
~~) 
When Pranayama, etc., are performed properly, they eradicate all 
diseases ; but an improper practice generates diseases. 16. 


fiat saraza arara Rromateagan: 1 
water frferar tet: TaraeSt THT: tl WS 


Hiccough, asthma, cough, pain in the head, the ears, and the eyes; 
these and other various kinds of diseases are generated by the disturbance 
of the breath. 17. 

Tt TH GAT FH TH ATT 
aH Ae a patents Refer | Le 

The air should be expelled with proper tact and should be filled 

in skilfully ; and when it has been kept confined properly it brings 


success. 18, 

N.B.—The above caution is necessary to warn the aspirants against omitting any 
instruction ; and, in their zcal] to gain success or siddhis early, to begin the practice, either 
by using too much force in filling in, confining and expelling the air, or by omitting any 
instructions, it may cause unnecessary pressure on their ears, eyes, &c,, and cause pain. 
Every word in the instructions is full of meaning and is necessarily used in the slokas, 
and should be followed very carefully and with due attention. Thus there will be 
nothing to fear whatsoever. We are inhaling and exhaling the air throughout our lives 
without any sort of danger, and Pranayéma being only a regular form of it, there should 
be no cause to fear. 


16 THE HATHA YOGA. PRADIPIKA. 


UT F ASAE: Cara Rahs aera: 
HI Haat Hifreaar aa Maz ui Le 
When the naédis become free from impurities, and there appear 
the outward signs of success, such as lean body and glowing colour, 
then one should feel certain of success. 19. 
VION AMNCAGE TATA I 
ATSIUARTS AAS ATSANTA Ul Ro i 
By removing the impurities, the air can be restrained, according 
to one’s wish and the appetite is increased, the divine sound is awakened, 
and the body becomes healthy. 20. 
aqesunire: Ya sz ate aaraty tl 
MICT AACA SATU AAAI: tt Vz tl 
If there be excess of fat or phlegm in the body, the six kinds of kriya 
(duties) should be performed first. But others, not suffering from the 
excess of these, should not perform them. 21. 
Onferdfereten Afrenres Ares ara 
HUAMACAAT TE HAT TAT NRE Ut 
The six kinds of duties are: Dhauti, Basti, Neti, Trataka, Nauti 
and Kapala Bhati. These are called the six actions wena oer 
RAISHAT NT TEATTHTC RT UI 
farraeparenae goad arfirgra: tt 22 
These six kinds of actions which cleanse the body should be kept 
secret. They produce extraordinary attributes and are performed with 
earnestness by the best of Yogis. 23. 


ae Sift: 
agent ceamcaqaay tt 
TRIED a Tes WAT | 
qa: Teetsagied Stet ay ee tl 
The Dhauti (Si) 
A strip of cloth, about 3 inches wide and 15 cubits long, is pushed 
in (swallowed), when moist with warm water, through the passage shown 


by the guru, and is taken out again. This is called Dhauti Karma. 24. 

N.B.—The strip should be moistened with a little warm water, and the end should 
be held with the teeth. It is swallowed slowly, little by little; thus, first day 1 cubit, 2nd 
day 2 cubits, 3rd day 8 cubits, and so on. After swallowing it the stomach should be given 
a good, round motion from left to right, and then it should be taken out slowly and 
gently. 


THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 17 


ATVMAREHS HHT Rae: 1 
Sreretonaraa waar A TTT: 2 
There is no doubt, that cough, asthma, enlargement of the spleen, 
leprosy, and 20 kinds of diseases born of phlegm, disappear by the 
practice of Dhauti Karma. 25. 
ATAITAAS TAN ATETASTEHTTAA: 
MINIS aa Hales THA ATU Rv I 
The Basti (@tt*a) 
Squatting in navel-deep water, and introducing a six inches long, 
smooth piece of $an inch diameter pipe, open at both ends, half inside 


the anus; it (anus) should he drawn up (contracted) and then expelled. 
This washing 1s called the Basti Karma. 26. 


Teageret any arakraRarxan: | 
Sanaa Sts AHSTAT WN 2s tl 
By practising this Basti Karma, colic, enlarged spleen, and dropsy, 


arising from the disorders of Vata (air), pitta (bile) and kapha (phlegm’, 
are all cured. 27. 


TAA ATARAHA Ul Ve 1 
By practising Basti with water, the Dhatds, the Indriyas and the 
mind become calm. It gives glow and tone to the body and increases the 
appetite. All the disorders disappear. 28. 


ara att: 
aa fake ghard arate | Tag | 
earfertar Bator Afar: rarer we, 
The Neti (afa). 
A cord made of threads ard about six inches long, should be passed 


through the passage of the nose and the end taken out in the mouth. 
This is called by adepts the Neti Karma. 29. 


_ aaah Sa Reve fisrerkratr 
serait afrcry Prefs au Ro 
The Neti is the cleaner of the brain and giver of divine sight. It 


soon destroys all the diseases of the cervical and scapular regions, 30, 
D 


18 THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 


wey TSH 
Pete fear qenaed Gated: It 
PLATA ATMAASH GATT UI 2K ut 


The Trdtaka (Ate). 


Being calm, one should gaze steadily at a small mark, till eyes are 
filled with tears. This is called Trataka by ach4ryas. 31. 


araa Aateat aarstat Hare Ha 
AACA SH AG BM STSHATH Ul Az Il 


Trdtaka destroys the eye diseases and removes sloth, etc. It should 
be kept secret very carefully, like a box of jewellery. 32. 


AAT: 
Maga Fs SANTA: | 
avatar arava ate: Rrssraeaag BR 
The Nauli (arf). 
Sitting on the toes with heels raised above the ground, and the palms 
resting on the ground, and in this bent posture the belly is moved 


forcibly from left to right just, as in vomiting. This is called by adepts 
the Nauli Karma. 33. 


darreadieaararans Sartre aeatt ATT tt 
wae sraraarait a coharatiett a Ar: u Be 


It removes dyspepsia, increases appetite and digestion, and is like 
the goddess of creation, and causes happiness. It dries up all the dis- 
orders, ‘I'his Nauli is an excellent exercise in Hatha Yoga. 34. 


By HITS ATA: 
STAIN target aeaAAar 
HATTA ATT HATTA NTAAY BS 
The Kapéla Bhdti ear are. 
When inhalation and exhalation are performed very quickly, like 


a pair of bellows of a blacksmith, it dries up all the disorders from the 
excess of phlegm, and is known as Kapala Bhati. 35. 


TSHAMTTENTATH HATTA: IN 
TUT at: SAAT Vesa i BB 


When Pranfydma is performed after getting rid of obesity born 


of the defects phlegm, by the performance of the six duties, it easily brings 
success. 36, 


THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 19 


TUMTMAata aa TySis Wet xh i 
aaa ¢ Raia A AAT It As 
Some acharyds (teachers) do not advocate any other practice, being 
of opinion that all the impurities are dried up by the practice of 
Pranayama. 37. 
WY TART 
5 Crs 
Sat TATA WAATTA HSATS 1 
RATS TEAST TCA Reva aes Re 
Gajs Karani (THR). 
By carrying the Apana Vayu up to the throat, the food, etc., in 
the stomach are vomited. By degrees, the system of N&dis (Sankhini) 
becomes known. This is called in Hatha as Gaja Karani. 38. 


Taqarsty Frqan: TIAA AAT: 
MYTATHAMASATA AVANT UW B® i 


Brahma and other Devas were always engaged in the exercise of 
Praénayaéma, and, by means of it, got rid of the fear of death. ‘Therefore, 
one should practise pranayama regularly. 39. 

WaATa Heese Tad ParHe tt 
aaa fig are ATARI FA: Ul Bo 

So long as the breath is restrained in the body, so long as the mind is 
undisturbed, and so long as the gaze is fixed between the eyebrows, 
there is no fear from Death. 40. 


fatracraranaarsran Prana 
agaraga freat qarfarta Ared: 8% I 
When the system of Nadis becomes clear of the impurities by 
properly controlling the prina, then the air, piercing the entrance of the 
Susumné, enters it easily. 41. 


BY WAKA 
° Sd 
MES MARTA ATT THAT 
at Aaa: GATT AAT AAT Mt Be I 
; Manomant. (HatAat) 
Steadiness of mind comes when the air moves freely in the middle. 
That is the manonmant! (W&teAat) condition, which is attained when the 


mind becomes calm. 42. 


20 THE HATHA YOGA PRADTIPIKA. 


aees frearenkasrepater Far 
rae aararenaraat Rares tt B30 

To accomplish it, various Kumbhakas are performed by those who 
are expert inthe methods; for, by the practice of different Kambhakas, 
wonderful success is attained. 43. 

WY H WHAT I 
qangagesrent stent atacet aur 
vferat art Feat gifattere F AAT: Ut Bs Ut 
Different kinds of kumbhakas. 

Kumbbakas are of eight kinds, viz., Sarya Bhedan, Ujjayi, Sitkari, 

Sitali, Bhastrika, Bhramari, Marchha, and Plavint. 44. 
Gena J Hae Tet ATSC: I 
SH veHts Tara HAsaEG YAAK: 1 Vs Ut 

At the end of Paraka, Jailandhara Bandha should be performed, 
and at the end of Kumbhaka, and at the beginning of Rechaka, Uddiyana 
Bandha should be performed. 45. 

N,B.—Piraka is filling in of the air from outside. 

Kumbhaka is the keeping the air confined inside. Rechaka is expel- 
ling the confined air. The instructions for Puraka, Kumbhaka and Rechaka 
will be found at their proper place and should be carefully followed. 

WARS FANT HOTHTAT HF 
WY TRAAA AT LATTA HATATIST: Ut BE Ul 

By drawing up from below (Mala Bandha) and contracting the 
throat (Jalandhara Bandha) and by pulling back the middle of the 
front portion of the body (i.e., belly), the Prina goes to the Brahma Nadi 
(Susumnéa). 46. 

The middle hole, through the vertebral column, through which the spinal cord passes, 


is callea the Susumné Nédi of the Yogis. The two other sympathetic cords, one on each 
side of the spinal cord, are called the Id4 and the Pingala Nadis. These will be described 


later on. 
MATATATAMNA Ma KoA AAT | 
ant Haag: Al Wea AAT Ul Bo tt 
By pulling up the Apana Vayu and by forcing the Prana Vayu down 
the throat, the Yogi, liberated from old age, becomes young, as it were 
16 years old. 47. 
Note. —Qiy ara WRsqra: Barat araw~s | 
Q ° 
Sqta: Hvsgaet ara: aaaeten: | RraaRaranq wo y wo | 
The seat of the Prana is the heart; of the Ap4na anus; of the Samana the region 
about the navel ; of the Udana the throat ; while the Vydna moves throughout the body. 


THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 21 


meat gaz Init Tea Baraat Ta: I 
GAA SAT ARTSY TET TIT TTA 1 Be tl 
Stirya Bhedana (qa aaa). 


Taking any comfortable posture and performing the Asana, the 
Yogi should draw in the air slowly, through the right nostril. 48. 
WAM AS MITA BAT 
Aa: ets STATS TAATTT TA: 1 Be 
Then it should be confined within, so that, it fills from the nails to 


the tips of the hair, and then let out through the left nostril slowly. 49. 


Note.—This is to be done alternately with both the nostrils, drawing in through the 
one, expelling through the other, and vice versa. 


HUSAUTAT AAI HASTIST | 
Ga: Gaited Re GAATATAAT I 4o 

This excellent Sdrya Bhedana cleanses the forehead (frontal sinuses), 
destroys the disorders of Vata, and removes the worms, and, therefore, it 
should be performed again and again. 50. 

Note.— 
animes He at Aritat anags ( sa: Bret BYAT BasHIAsaaT FA: a 
qe deze Rue eet aedaag | tiga erage Agere wera 2 I 
UA at as wt sfaerarad ag | aatwaea Gera aaa Teas 2 tl 
agar a attr aera ffinier 1 sears stawdamecas aafe ane 
Areata Ts BRA | ot TURE ani TisfAsa ue 
afttarnmacaasatedadsaarara ams: | aateadaaatl at aa 
aaa | sed GIS WA AANA J AVTAT NX 
aeai fotareat dares | siete TATE SRAIErTATa: We 
Rraaraat eal ait orate | Antignrsa slaitg Raa: uo u 
Ba Te | 

ana antign akteata Aeraay | oe Sarat anit asta gama: usu 
agnaa fats eartaTEy | saa Tac Targa fea few eu 
erat weit gad Serer: Galea: | Arig: seed galeears Sze go 
aqarmaaaea ad srgaifia: lqadgmaea tages: 99 
ssa aa: Fale staviad: | afasts aaeqe galeeraarar 4 I 
Qa: GMAATaAG TS TMT THAT | aa: Ta ATE Famera aT tl 43 Il 
snare aed FadawrIwara: | waraghaa: eam Falgeda artar uae 
wareat anraaheed ea aera: Eat: | wea aes Aira tiovT i ae I 


22 THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 


ee 


Bila Nittal eaageraegiaa || catarhy warat wists a wea 9 EU 

Sheng reg atat teva aa) Waa eed ved TaaaTAATATT | fo Il 

aamtateaintrearanaaeag | grasaaate ara aatadt rat: was Ul 

ara aera sar qageras | ag frafear star Raatsearaarata Uae Wl 

SVaaa sat aaa Aa Ta: | ara esa Ageaeqaaaat ti Re Ul 

facta ¢ eat’ ariaraniaat: | aeaaginged Fa: AT A TTEAT _RIUl 
Translation : Iam going to describe the procedure of the practice of Yoga, in order 


that Yogis may succeed. A wise man should leave his bed in the Usa Kala (ie., at the 
peep of dawn or 4 o'clock) in the morning. i. 


Remembering his guru over his head, and his desired deity in his heart, after an- 
swering the calls of nature, and cleaning his mouth, he should apply Bhasma (ashes). 2. 

In a clean spot, clean room and charming ground, he should spread a soft 4sana 
(cloth for sitting on), Having seated on it and remembering in his mind his guru and his 
God. 3, 

Having extolled the place and the time and taking up the vow thus: ‘To day by the 
grace of God, I will perform Pranayamas with 4sanas for gaining samadhi (trance) and its 
fruits.’ He should salute the infinite Deva, Lord of the Nagas, to ensure success in the 
Asanas (postures). 4. 

Salutation to the Lord of the Nagas, who is adorned with thousands of heads, set with 
brilliant jewels (manis), and who has sustained the whole universe, nourishes it, and is 
infinite. After this he should begin his exercise of Asanas and when fatigued, he should 
practise Sava d4sana. Should there be no fatigue, he should not practise it. 5. 

Before Kumbhaka, he sbould perform Viparita Karui mudr4, in order that he may be 
able to perform Jalandhar bandha comfortably. 6. 

Sipping alittle water, he should begin the exercise of Pranfydma, after saluting 
Yogindras, as described in the Karma Purdaa, in the words of Siva. 7. 

Such as “Saluting Yogindras and their disciples aud gurd Vinayaka, the Yogi should 
unite with me with composed mind.” 8. 

While practising, he should’ sit with Siddhdsana, and having performed bandhu and 
Kumbhaka, should begin with 10 Pranaydimas the first day, and goon increasing 5 daily. 9. 

With composed mind 80 Kumbhakas should be performed at a time; beginning first 
with the chandra (the left nostril) and then sfrya (the right nostril). 10. 

This has been spoken of by wise men as Anguloma and Viloma. Having practised 
Sarya Bhedan, with Bandhas, the wise man should practise Ujjayi and then Sitkari 
Sitali, and Bhastrika, he:may practice others or not. 11-12. 

He should practise mudras properly, as instructed by his gura. Then sitting with 
Padmasana, he should hear anahata nada attentively. 13. 

He should resign the fruits of all his practice reverently to God, and, on rising on 
the completion of the practice, a warm bath should be taken, 14. 

The bath should bring all the daily duties briefly to an end. At noon also a little rest 
should be taken at the end of the exercise, and then food should be taken. 15. 

Yogis should always take wholesome food and never anything unwholesome. After 
dinner he should eat Ilachi or lavanga. 16. 

Some like camphor, and betel leaf. To the Yogis, practising PranSyama, betel leaf 
without powders, i. e., lime, nuts and kAtha, is beneficial. 17. 


After taking food he should read books treating of salvation, or hear Par&nas and 
repeat the name of God. 18, 


THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 93 


In the evening the exercise should be begun after finishing sandyh§4, as before, 
beginning the practice 8 ghatika or one hour before the sun sets. 19, 

Evening sandhya should always be performed after practice, and Hatha Yoga should 
be practised at midnight. 20. 

Viparita Karni is to be practised in the evening and at midnight, and not just after 
eating, as it does no good at this time. 21. 


THRTATT I 
FS SRY ASKAMATHA THA Tet: I 
BM SA HOTT STATA ACTA GL Wl 
Uijayt (eset). 
Having closed the opening of the Nadi (Larynx), the air should be 


drawn in such a way that it goes touching from the throat to the chest, 
and making noise while passing. 51. 


qaace ater Taras aa: 1 
ROMA He SeTAahIasAaT N42 I 
It should be restrained, as before, and then let out through Ida (the 


left nostril). This removes glesmi (phlegm) in the throat and increases 
the appetite. 52. 


ASAT TATA TATATT It 
TEST SAT BATA FT FART 4 
It destroys the defects of the nddis, dropsy and disorders of Dh&tu 
(humours). Ujjaéyi should be performed in all conditions of life, even while 
walking or sitting. 53. 


wey Stare tt 
erent galaen wast arta fer Arernz 0 
CARMA HATA AAR: UW 4s 
Sithdrt (etveanret). 
Sitkari is performed by drawing in the air through the mouth, keep- 
ing the tongue between the lips. The air thus drawn in should not be 


expelled through the mouth. By practising in this way, one becomes next 
to the God of Love in beauty. 54. 
NRA ARATATT: GATT: I 
aq gar a aT Mar Aarees TTA 1&4 
He is regarded adorable by the Yoginis and becomes the destroyer of 
the cycle of creation. He is not afflicted with hunger, thirst, sleep or 
lassitude. 55. 


24 THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 


waa @ teeq aatagaahta: 
wae Rr et ATT RASS WE Ut 


The Satwa of his body becomes free from all the disturbances. In 
truth, he becomes the lord of the Yogis in this world. 56. 


BY AMAT Ul 


PEA ARTATHA WaaH ANITA 
TAs Tag GAT: WHS Ut 
Sitali (atraet) 

Asin the above (Sitkari), the tongue to be protruded a little out of 
the lips, when the air is drawn in. It is kept confined, as before, and then 
expelled slowly through the nostrils. 57. 

Tengen tons sat frat sat Tay | 
Pratt atrastara a Area Prefer fe use 
This Sitali Kumbhika cures colic, (enlarged) spleen, fever, disorders 
of bile, hunger, thirst, and counteracts poisons. 58. 


wa ARS 


Sateakt Geray JA gas FA | 
TMA HATARTAT TATA tt 4% Ut 


The Bhastrikd (aferat) 


The Padma Asana consists in crossing the feet and placing them 
on both the thighs ; it is the destroyer of all sins. 59. 


SIR THAT TAN AAAs TA: 
FA VAT Jota AMA Tas TaAAT Ul Fo tt 
Binding the Padma-Asana and keeping the body straight, closing 
the mouth carefully, let the air be expelled through the nose. 60. 


am ana gah HASAN aera | 
attr Trent eerarahy area wt RE 
It should be filled up to the lotus of the heart, by drawing it in with 
force, making noise and touching the throat, the chest and the head. 61. 
galtaraaegere ga: Ga: 1 
aig Beata wet Ba areas tt RR Ui 
It should be expelled again and filled again and again as before, just 
as a pair of bellows of the blacksmith is worked. 62. 


THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 25 


ade cariver areterat Brea it 
UT AAT HAT T AST TAT FLAT Mt 3A 
In the same way, the air of the body should be moved intelligently, 
filling it through Sarya when fatigue is experienced. 63. 
NGC WALA TUT ST | 
arcrantent merasranat fren ze tl Ge tl 
The air should be drawn in through the right nostril by pressing the 
thumb against the left side of the nose, so as to close the left nostril; and 
when filled to the full, it should be closed with the fourth finger (the one 
next to the little finger) and kept confined. 64. 
fatrace wh eat taheearktaq | 
arahragecrat actif herent tl 
_—Having confined it properly, it shonld be expelled through the Ida 
(left nostril). This destroys Vata, pitta (bile) and phlegm and increases the 
digestive power (the gastric fire). 65. 
@ scrarrh fast war, Ri teary | 
ar aS eereeeE TSAR, A BRN 


Tt quickly awakens the Kundalini, purifies the system, gives pleasure, 
and is beneficial. It destroys phlegm and the impurities accumulated at 
the entrance of the Brahma Nadi. 66. 

ARMA H TATA ANT H | 
ratte aaeg weared Bark Raz tt Bo 0 

This BhastrikA should be performed plentifully, for it breaks the 
three knots: Bralma granthi (in the chest), Vignu granthi (in the throat), 
and Rudra granthi (between the eyebrows) of the body. 67. 

WI ATA I 
Sess Ges a ars aie Tas ATATT | 
UTA MTATRATAATT AT ATA HUTPAG TAGS NN KC Ut 
The Bhramari (are), 

By filling the air with force, making noise like Bhringi (wasp), and 
expelling it slowly, making noise in the same way ; this practice causes a 
sort of ecstacy in the minds of Yogindras. 68. 


TI TST I 
qenid Meat Tea: Ul 
aIySATS AAAI FANT i ES 


+ 


26 THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 
) 


The Marchha. (sy). 
Closing the passages with Jalandhar Bandha firmly at the end of 
Paraka, and expelling the air slowly, is called Marchha, from its causing 
the mind to swoon and giving comfort. 69. 


rer gta 
Ba: TAAATSTATVATYRATST: | 
GEATATIGAKZaAt TITTAT tt Go 
The Plévint. (gift). 
When the belly is filled with air and the inside of the body is filled 


to its utmost with air, the body floats on the deepest water, like the leaf of 
a lotus. 70. 


STMT Treat Paes aR | 
afea: Haerate Haar fafa wa: tt 6% 
Considering Pdaraka (Filling), Rechaka (expelling) and Kumbhaka 
(confining), Pranayama is of three kinds, but considering it accompanied 


by Paraka and Rechaka, and without these, it is of two kinds only, 4.8, 
Sahita (with) and Kevala (alone). 71. e 


MARAG: Vater AAPA | 
TAH TH FRAT TA ACTA Il G2 Il 
Exercise in Sahita should be continued till success in Kevala is 


gained. This latter is simply confining the air with ease, without | 
Rechaka and Piraka. 72. 


mraTTasateape: @ ft RASH WAH: | 
QAw Ras Kes taqenahsay 9% 


In the practice of Kevala Pranfiyéma when it can be performed suc- 


cessfully without Rechaka and Pfraka, then it is called Kevala Kumbhaka. 
73. 


a ae goa Parafag Srhy rere | 
Teh? HASH VA WIE AIANTATT | se tt 
There is nothing in the three worlds which may be difficult to obtain 


for him who is able to keep the air confined according to pleasure, by. 
means of Kevala Kumbhaka. 74. 


THATS] ANY SAS ATTA: | 
Ea SAT: H SHANA WAIT Ut 9 tt 
He obtains the position of Raja Yoga undoubtedly. Kundalini 


THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIRKA. 27 


—— 


awakens by Kumbhaka, and by its awakening, Susumn4 becomes free from 
itapurities. 75. 
WHS Gyr a eseheea aaa | 
ae frat carat cat erat Es: 
a frente Ta BATTS: AAAT Ul 9% Ul 
No success in RAja Yoga without Hatha Yoga, and no success in 


Hatha Yoga without Raja Yoga. One should, therefore, practise both of 
these well, till complete success is gained. 76. 


e z ta IE Ad Re \ 
CAAT AMI THAT TAT UGS 
On the completion of Kumbhaka, the mind should be given rest. By 


practising in this way one is raised to the position of (succeeds in getting) 
Raja Yoga. 77. 


ay: HUI AGATA Aqegeal vA rae | 
aire fa eaarshidies Wey reesIrTsa My Wt oc i 
Indications of successin the practice of Hatha Yoga. 


When the bedy becomes lean, the face glows with delight, Anahata- 
nada manifests, and eyes are clear, body is healthy, bindu under control, 
and appetite increases, then one should know that the Nadis are puritied and 
success in Hatha Yoga is approaching. 78. 


End of Chapter II. 


ala zomattenrat fadrearasar: 2 ul 


—so°— 


CHAPTER III. 
On Mudras. 


aatataea: | 
PASAT BIMTTISAT: | 
aaat aercarat carat & HF sST UT 
As the chief of the snakes is the support of the earth with all the 
mountains and forests on it, so all the Tantras (Yoga practices) rest 
on the Kundalini. (The Vertebral column.) 1. 
GM Tararea Val Aes H sect | 
aal Gar gare Ararat aeatshrst uv 2 I 
When the sleeping Kundalini awakens by favour of a guru, then all 
the lotuses (in the six chakras or centres) and all the knots are pierced 
through. 2, 


TIME BRTTTA TAT TATMAg | 
aa fad Rasa aaqr Heat TAT Ul 2 tl 
Susumna (Sanya Padavi) becomes a main road for the passage of 
Prana, and the mind then becomes free from all connections (with its 
objects of enjoyments) and Death is then evaded. 3. 
AIA YRAITa HAT ARTA: | 
AU TAT WIAA THT Ul 8 I 
Susumna, Sunya Padavi, Brahma Randhra, Maha Patha, Smasana, 
Sambhavi, Madhya Marga, are names of one and the same thing. 4. 
Tea TATRA AHL | 
TALRAS Gat FAVA AATATT tt & Ul 
In order, therefore, to awaken this goddess, who is sleeping at the 
entrance of Brahma Dwara (the great door), mudras should be practised 


well. 5. 
Wea Tava: 
Aaa! Hela Mt ARTA Va | 
Bal FST ATT TAM ATS ACTA: tl & i 
The mudrds. 
Mahé Mudra, Maha Bandha, Maha Vedha, Khechari, Uddiyéna 
Bandha, Mala Bandha, Jélandhara Bandha. 6. 


THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 29 


eit faactaren aatet aaa | 
ag f& Aaeah ATAU U9 Ut 
Viparita Karani, Vajroli, and Sakti Chalana. These are the ten 
Mudras which annihilate old age and death. 7. 
Maa Rerrssaaarany | 
TH AAASTAT Teal ATKATAHY tl < 
They have been explained by Adi Natha (Siva) and give eight kinds 
of divine wealth. They are loved by all the Siddhas and are hard to 


attain even by the Marutas. 8. 

Note—The eight Aiswaryas are: Anim& (becoming small, like an atom), Mahima 
(becoming great, like 4kas, by drawing in atoms of Prakriti), Garim4 (light things, like 
cotton becoming very heavy like mountains.) 

Prapti (coming within easy reach of everything; as touching the moon with the little 
finger, while standing on the earth.) 

Prakamya (non-resistance to the desires, as entering the earth like water.) 

isata (mastery over matter and objects made of it.) 

Vasitwa (controlling the animate and inanimate objects.) 


TIA Test BT TRS | 
RAAT The HoMtgTd Ba Ul & 
These Mudras should be kept secret by every means, as one keeps 


one’s {box of jewellery, and should, on no account be told to any one, just 
as husband and wife keep their dealings secret. 9. 


We AETART 
mngaere avira Safa ender afar | 
TA TF HAT ROA ACT FET Ut Lo ti 
The mahé mudra. 

Pressing the Yoni (perineum) with the heel of the left foot, and 
stretching forth the right foot, its toe should be grasped by the thumb 
and first finger. 10. 

fe TT GARTT IATA: I 

WN SSCA: ATT FSTHIT: THTAgT Nt LLU 
ROAM AM fH: F SSt ATA WAT I 
aal Al ALIEN HAg FRGTTAAT Lz tl 

By stopping the throat (by Jalandhara Bandha) the air is drawn in 
from the outside and carried down. Just asa snake struck with a stick 
becomes straight like a stick, in the same way, sakti (susumn4) becomes 
straight at once. Then the Kundalini, becoming as it were dead, and, 


30 THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 


‘leaving both the Idi and the Pingald, enters the sugumna (the middle 
passage). 11-12. 

aa: wa: Tata Tae aera: I 

wetgai @ aaa aghea frqaraan: 

Ta VY ARIGal Gelera: Tafatar Ni 2 W 

AIS ANGAT Ir: afta ACUTE: ti 

aelgat a aaa agit faaraar: wee 

It should be expelled then, slowly only and not violently. For this 

very reason, the best of the wise men call it the Maha Mudra. This Maha 
Mudra has been propounded by great masters. 13. 


Great evils and pains, like death, are destroyed by it, and for 
this reason wise men call it the Mahé Mudra. 14. 


aa ¢ ama aa t FATA 
MTA VAT TAT Fat Ha WLS 
Having practised with the left nostril, it should be practised with 
the right one; and, when the number on both sides becomes equal, then 
the mudr4 should be discontinued. 15. 


ae wea ar Tet: Bashy ATA: 
wate aah fart See Hepa Sree w 2 
There is nothing wholesome or injurious; for the practice of this 
mudra destroys the injurious effects of all the rasas (chemicals). Even 
the deadliest of poisons, if taken, acts like nectar. 16. 
ATAPSTSTATATAAGUTAT: Ul 
Teg ST: ata’ ifr Aargat F AseAaT W Vo ti 
Consumption, leprosy, prolapsus anii, colic, and the diseases due 


to indigestion,—all these irregularities are removed by the practice of this 
Maha Mudra. 17. 

Ras ARR ARTA HT FANT 

TTA THAT A TA DAHA tt Le tt 

This Maha Mudra has been described as the giver of great success 
(Siddhi) to men. It should be kept secret by every effort, and not revealed 
to any and everyone. 18. 
WY ASAT: UN 
anita art OTeeT Brera PRATT AT 
TATRA Seey erat ACA TT UW LS Wl 


THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 31 


The Maha Bandha. 


Press the left heel to the perineum and place theright foot on the 
left thigh. 19. 


Tehran sat ay’ Eat ITH CSA 
Petter qaaTs Sa AAT PATAAT Ut Ro Ut 
Fill in the air, keeping the chin firm against the chest, and, having 
pressed the air, the mind should he fixed on the middle of the eyebrows 
or in the susumna (the spine). 20. 
archreat auras Tayg AS WA: 
GAT F AMAA FAT FARAAT | Bf tl 
Having kept it confined so long as possible, it should be expelled 
slowly. Having practised on the left side,it should be practised on the 
right side. 21. 
Aaa Ff Rvieeksdd Pasa 
CASTRATE TT: TTT AAT tt 22 
Some are of opinion that the closing of throat is not necessary here, 
for keeping the tongue pressed against the roots of the upper teeth makes 
a good bandha (stop). 22: 
wea F waarsrarpes Teer: 
WA AZ ATA WEAR AGAR: Wt V2 
This stops the upward motion of all the Nadis. Verily this Maha 
Bandha is the giver of great Siddhis. 23. 
HTSUTAACTAT AAA TAAT: I 
Prather Ta Hart ATTA: Ut 2 I 
This Maha Bandha is the most skilful means for cutting away the 
snares of death. It brings about the conjunction of the Triveni (Idé, 
Pingala and Susumn4) and carries the mind to Kedar (the space between 
the eyebrows, which is the seat of Siva). 24, 
SISTATAATAT BMT Sit Fer far ti 
meTqaraersen Pree Arafat wl 2% tl 


As beauty and loveliness, do not avail a woman without husband, 
so the Maha Mudri and the Mah4-Bandha are useless without the Maha 


Vedha. 25. 
TY ARTAT: I 
Reraaherat Avi HAT THAR: 
TGA MCAT TA FHI SATA Ut AE Ul 


32 THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 


The Maha Vedha. 
Sitting with Maha Bandha, the Yogt should fill in the air and keep 
his mind collected. The movemenis of the Vayus (Prana and Ap4na) should 
be stopped by closing the throat.) 26. 


RRA ar Peart Sarsaese: 1 
Geert ag: KAT AKT: Ul VS Ul 
Resting both the hands equally on the ground, he should raise him- 


self a little and strike his buttocks against the ground gently. The air, 
leaving both the passages (Ida and Pingala), starts into the middle 


one. 27. 
armaqaiwaara sas ArTrara J 
ATA AReTAt TAT a fata tt Re 


The union of the Ida and the Pingala is effected, in order to bring 
about immortality. When the air becomes as it were dead (by leaving its 
course through the Idé and the Pingala) (i.e, when it has been kept 
confined), then it should be expelled. 28. 


AETAMSAMAATATA ATA I 
AAHUSATIA: AAT ATTRTAA: tt 2% 1 
The practice of this Maha Vedha, the giver of great Siddhis, destroys 
old agg, grey hair, and shaking of the body, and therefore it is practised 
by the best masters. 29. 
CAAT ALAM ACTA It 
afeaheat Qa aitemzaasray tt Ro 1 
These THREE are the great secrets. They are the destroyers of old age 
and death, increase the appetite, confer the accomplishments of Anima, etc. 


30. 
wen Prat Sa at art A RA 
Greenacre Wakes aa WN 
PARRAATAT ATT THAT TTT tt BE I 
They should, be practised in 8 ways, daily and hourly. They increase 


collection of good actions and lessen the evil ones. People, instructed. well, 
should begin their practice, little by little, first. 31. 


aq Vat |i 


arepec Gra sfrer facta ti 
waar efey ar val Sat ui 32 


THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 33 


The Khechari. 
The Khechari Mudra is accomplished by thrusting the tongue into 


the gullet, by turning it over itself, and keeping the eyesight in the 
middle of the eyebrows. 32. 


SqrASAe: Hat HAT PAA AT | 
OT WATAA Wala Aart Vata: i BB 
To accomplish this, the tongue is lengthened by cutting the freenum 
lingue, moving, and pulling it. When it can touch the space between 
the eyebrows, then Khechari can be accomplished. 33. 
CRIT Tat TaTeU farsa it 
Saag aceaa Maras SAAT Ul Be i 
Taking a sharp, smooth, and clean instrument, of the shape of a 
cactus leaf, the frenum of the tongue should be cut a little (as much 
as a hair’s thickness), ata time. 34. 
ad: Sarat yhiareat THAT | 
Ga: Aaa Ia Caras GARSAT  Rs U 
-Then rock salt and yellow myrobalan (both powdered) should he 
rubbed in. On the 7th day, it should again be cut a hair’s breadth. 35. 
Cet HAT WATS AA WH AATATT I 
TATATTAAMAH STAT: TURAT RE N 
One should go on doing thus, regularly for six months. At the end 
of six months, the frenum of the tongue will be completely cut. 36. 
met Tes Fat Sear Fras Wears 
QM WAAL Fal Alaa TATAT Ui 9 
Turning the tongue upwards, it is fixed on the three ways {cesophagus, 


windpipe and palate.) Thus it makes the Khechari Mudra, and is called 
the Vyoma Chakra, 37. 


Tam Tet Heart aansaty fersk 
faa saa Ant arbres: 0 3 


The Yogi who sits for a minute turning his tongue upwards, is saved 
from poisons, diseases, death, old age, etc. 38. 


a tr aca aa a far a ger Tar I 
aa Hea WAY At Fat Aha Vac tt 22 1 
He who knows the Khechari Mudra is not afflicted with disease, 


death, sloth, sleep, hunger, thirst, and swooning. 39. 
F 


34 THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 


era a a theta eat a a HAT 
area 7 @ Haat at gat Aha Vat Ul vo I 


He who knows the Khechari Mudra, is not troubled by diseases, is 
not stained with karmas, and is not snared by time. 40. 


fad act @ wenirat acl & Tar tl 
adorn Sart ara gar Rrafrefrar uve 
The Siddhas have devised this Khechari Mudra from the fact that 
the mind and the tongue reach 4kasa by its practice. 41. 


ararat afd fa Prat dfeareta: 
a wer ara fig: aitrargehtaers Ul Bz Ul 
If the hole behind the palate be stopped with Khechari by turning 


the tongue upwards, then bindu cannot leave its place even if a woman 
were embraced. 42. 


qreathrg: Rertr ayer Srarart HU a: A 
rand 4 Seer aay’ sale Ara ut v8 
If the Yogi drinks Somarasa (juice) by sitting with the tongue turned 


backwards and mind concentrated, there is no doubt he conquers death 
within 15 days. 43. 


Pet ArrHaTqa it ser Are: 1 
aerate seer ft AST a ATA Nl ve I 


If the Yogi, whose body is full of Somarasa (juice), were bitten by 
Takshaka (snake), its poison cannot permeate his body. 44. 


orate cer afgedoahs a Fre: 1 
aren Srarnerqa Tet TE A Aa vs u 
As fire is inseparably connected with the wood and light is connected 
with the wick and oil, so does the soul not leave the body full of nectar 
exuding from the Soma. 465. 


Note.—Soma (Chandra) is described later on located in the thousand-petalled lotus 
in the human brain, and is the same as is seen on Sivas’ head in pictures, and from which 
a sort of juice exudes. It is the retaining of this exudation which makes one immortal, 


Tata aaa Raacaracey 
FS TAC AKI CAL FOAMAHT: tt ve tl 


Those who eat the flesh of the cow and drink the immortal liquor 


daily, are regarded by me men of noble family. Others are but a disgrace 
to their families. 46. 


THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 35 


Note.— Bata Matt ta qa Fa ges aA aT | 
wat amar qaaaarat axq ht 
ee: arava: ege: Gane Banas | 
aaa aarara’ gare ara garg 
aaa 
Translation : Fortunate are the parents and blessed is the country and the family 
where a Yogi is born. Anything given to such a Yogi, becomes immortal. One,-who dis- 


criminates between Purusa and Prakriti, purges the sins ofa million incarnations, by 
seeing, speaking, and touching such men (i.e., Yogi.) 


sy ~ 
Wetat aeaa qarugaaa | Aaattaea a Ararat Areas it rats 
A Yogi far exceeds a thousand householders, a hundred vanaprasthas, and a thousand 
Brahmacharis. 


crsarsrea aglea Sifaarafaaaa: | asaritaadas atargeawarsray n 
quaqaage franges aga: | werghnadaria A qazacauaor 4 
saath afeale a srshraea: ara aaeatiae aaeg sea i 
THAT, HATTA 
an ate fear at free Raaaar | Y qyqaaeant Ae aa aac 


Who can know the reality of the Raja Yoga? That country is very sacred where 
resides 2 man who knows it. By seeing and honouring him, generations of ignorant men 
get moksa, what to speak of those who are actually engaged init. He who knows internal 
and external yoga, deserves adoration from you and me, what if he is adored by the rest_ 


of mankind ! 
Those who engage in the great yoga, once, twice or thrice daily, are to be known as 


masters of great wealth (maheshwaras) or Lords, 
areeeangear Gat aaraan fe are tt 
TATA TA ALT AHA Nl BS U 
The word #f means tongue; eating it is thrusting it in the gullet 
which destroys great sins. 47, . 
farrredaateacnad: ag tl 
aqaraaa a: AC: A Alqacaraahy i Ve 
Immortal liquor is the nectar exuding from the moon (Chandra 
situated on the left side of the space between the eyebrows). It is pro- 
duced by the fire which is generated by thrusting the tongue. 48. 
Sad ae araraaeat Rrarceredzat tt 
SAT HRT ITEAT WATIM TAAT I 
one SUM WiaHcTa WerTATeIca 
EY AACA RetrATHT AT tl ve 
If the tongue can touch with its end the hole from which falls the 
rasa (juice) which is saltish, bitter, sour, milky and similar to ghee and 


36 THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 


honey, one can drive away disease, destroy old age, can evade an attack 
of arms, become immortal in eight ways and can attract fairies. 49. 


qa: Nenad cua esigalat caat arr frat ake 
qct faa sagivnaias a aas aicaa a: aRsath: a 


AQUSRASATaP Fat Safer i Ko 


He who drinks the clear stream of liquor of the moon (soma) falling 
from the brain to the sixteen-petalled lotus (in the heart), obtained by 
means of Prana, by applying the tongue to the hole of the pendant in the 
palate, and by meditating on the great power (Kundalint), becomes free 
from disease and tender in body, like the stalk of a lotus, and the Yoyi 
lives a very long life. 50. 

TAs Weegee Rapa aces At 

dhieed sag qarerye Peamreany 
aareent: Sales TTT ATTA I 
ATTRA RTUAT ATTA HTT 4S Ul 

On the top of the Mera (vertebral column), concealed in a hole, is the 
Somarasa (nectar of Chandra); the wise, whose intellect is not over- 
powered by Raja and Tama gunas, but in whom Satwa guna is pre- 
dominant, say there is the (universal spirit) 4tma in it. It is the 
source of the down-going Ida, Pingalé and Susumn4 Nadis, which are 
the Ganges, the Yamuna and the Sarasvati. From that Chandra is shed 
the essence of the body which causes death of men. It should, therefore, 
be stopped from shedding. This (Khechari Mudra) is a very good instru- 


ment for this purpose. There is no other means of achieving this end. 
51. 


ht aeastan daeta: aaa 
fasa @art gar af er ACTA Ge U1 
This hole is the generator of knowledge and is the source of the 


five streams (1da, Pingala, &c.). In that colorless vacuum, Khechart Mudra 
should be established. 52. 


as afsaa store gar a Sat 1 
CAT SAT MISA TANTS AAA U4. 
There is only one seed germinating the whole universe from it; and 
there is only one Mudra, called Khechari. There is only one deva (god) 
without any one’s support, and there is one condition called Manonmani. 


53. 


THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 37 


MAGAATT: I 
Ta! tt Ayqarat waeagtaas Ta: | 
THTTAATSMsa Ati: aAsEa? ti 4s 
The Uddiyina Bandha. 
Uddiyana is so called by the Yogis, because by its practice the 
Prana (Vayu,) flies (flows) in the Susumna. 54. 
Seta Fea Garaget wera: 1 
SHAM ATA ATATT TATSAATAT 1 4 Ut 
Uddiyana is so called, because the great bird, Prana, tied to it, flies 
without being fatigued. It is explained below. 55. 
Set CR ara AT ST TAT I 
SHATAT TAT TIM ETATAT HAT HR U 


The belly above the navel is pressed backwards towards the spine. 
This Uddiyana Bandha is like a lion for the elephant of death. 56. 


sar g aes Dea Hast |ar it 
maa AT Tats TEATAT i 4o 1 


Uddiyana is always very easy, when learnt froma guru. The 
practiser of this, if old, becomes young again. 57. 


ASAMATAY ata HAKATA: WN 
TOMNAMAAAY AIAT A ATA 4S tt 
The portions above and below the navel, should be drawn backwards 
towards the spine. By practising this for six months one can undoubtedly 
conquer death. 58. 
wares sarergTar afgarse: | 
sfeart 22 aa aie: cannfaat wag u 48 
Of all the Bandhas, Uddiy4na is the best; for by binding it firmly 
liberation comes spontaneously. 59. 
WT STA: II 
afttata eier Mears aa | 
PUALAAEA TSTASHTPTAT ti Ro 
The Mila Bandha. 


Pressing Yoni (perineum) with the heel, contract up the anus. By 
drawing the Apina thus, Mala Bandha is made. 60. 


38 THE HATHA YOGA PRADEIPIKA. 


PAUAAATA TA RAT BVI TAT 
ME aaa & orem wast fe Arita: ue 
The Apna, naturally inclining downward, is made to go up by force. 
This Mala Bandha is spoken of by Yogis as done by contracting the anus, 
61. 
Te TMA F ARS AAAS AAT FSTT tl 
e ° ~ & a 
atat Jat arest BAarala AATTA: |i &z tl 
Pressing the heel well against the anus, draw up the air by force, 
again and again till it (air) goes up. 62. 
oraTatat argiag AatIa ATT It 
TAT ATT ART ASAT ATT ATTA: 0 G3. 
Prana, Apina, Nada and Bindu uniting into one in this way, give 
success in Yoga, undoubtedly. 63. 


DUA MANET AAT FTF: UI 
gat vale pats aad ASIA i Fe tl 
By the purification of Prana, and Apana, urine and excrements 
decrease. Even an old man becomes young by constantly practising 


Mila Bandha. 64. 
TA Heat Aa Tara ale ASAT tI 
ACISASRTET AA AAT ARTATSTAT Ut && Ut 


Going up, the Apana enters the zone of fire, 7.e., the stomach. The 

flame of fire struck by the air is thereby lengthened. 65. 
Note.—@eaet fifeert aamqagna | ewig aacanat yaw’ aaTIErs ji 
asa g Tina aaadagadif dl aaetg faracdt aar fash aaa nu 


In the centre of the body is the seat of fire, like heated gold. 

In men it is triangular, in quadrupeds square, in birds circular, There is a long 
thin flame in this fire. 

It is gastric fire. 


Tat AAT TAWA TAMAR TT | 
AMGATNA FAGAT STHETAT Ut BE Ui 
These, fire and Apana, go to the naturally hot Prana, which, becoming 
inflamed thereby, causes burning sensation in the body. 66. 
aa & Sloat Jat Aca ATTA | 
ESSA YSN PEA RAAT ART lt Bo Il 
The Kundalini, which has been sleeping all this time, becomes well 
heated by this means and awakens well. It becomes straight like a ser- 
pent, struck dead with a stick. 67. 


THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 39° 


fre ohisa cat seraretat vag | 
Tae Aaa a: Kae Ar: Baw i Re 
It enters the Brahma Nadi, just as a serpent enters its hole. There- 
fore, the Yogi should always practise this Mala Bandha. 68. 
WY ATS ATA: 
HOTS TA qT VITAATH Fey | 
TM ASIST ACTA 1 BS 
The Jélandhara Bandha. 
Contract the throat and press the chin firmly against the chest. 
This is called Jalandhara Bandha, which destroys old age and death. 69. 


ante f& Rrosreasaent ater | 
TAT HTSAL TT: HST ATTATATA: 1 Go I 
It stops the opening (hole) of the group of the Nadis, through which 
the juice from the sky (from the Soma or Chandra in the brain) falls down. 
It is, therefore, called the Jélandhara Bandhba—the destroyer of a host of 
diseases of the throat. 70. 
MSI FA TA HSAHTATATT | 
@ GGT WaT AT aT: THAT Ui GR It 
In Jalandhara Bandha, the indications of a perfect contraction of 
throat are, that the nectar does not fall into the fire (the Sarya situated in 
the navel), and the air is not disturbed. 71. 
qeearaaAT F ASN KATST | 
HITHAT TS WSMTMNTATAL i Sz Ul 
The two Nadis should be stopped firmly by contracting the throat. 
This is called the middle circuit or centre (Madhya Chakra), and it stops 
the 16 Adharas (7.e., vital parts). 72. 
Note— sag geE wIAS oat aaa: | eazeteat ssdaea effet anser aa | 
gaa a amd a gata mained | cate steamer: erat afiraaa: 


The sixteen vital parts mentioned by renowned Yogis are the (J) thumbs, (2) ankles, 
(8) knees, (4) thighs, (5) the prepuce, (6) organs of generation, (17) the navel, (&) the 
heart, (9) the neck, (10) the throat, (11) the palate, (12) the nose, (18) the middle of the 
eyebrows, (14) the forehead, (15) the head and (16) the Brahma randhra. 
Fowl AATH =A Sta TF RITA I 
o e ig’ 
est a fartet sear areata Ger WN 92 
By drawing up the mialasthana (anus,) Uddiyana Bandha should be 
My & up ) Vy 
performed. The flow of the air should be directed to the Susumna, by 
closing the I1d& and the Pingala. 73. 


40 THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 


sada frarta scarf gaat Sey | 
aa A MIs BAHAI TAT Ut Ses tt 


The Prana becomes calm and latent by this means, and thus 
there is no death, old age, disease, etc. 74. 
saqae TE ares Vhraq | 
aut escarat anra Abra fs: ul ws 
These three Bandhas are the best of all and have been practised by 
the masters. Of all the means of success in the Hatha Yoga, they are 
known to the Yogis as the chief ones. 75. 
akamcaaa agiqad Bereta: | 
ARTS TAT GUAA FHI ACTA: 1 9% 1 
The whole of the nectar, possessing divine qualities, which exudes 
from the Soma (Chandra) is devoured by the Surya; and, owing to this, 
the body becomes old. 76. 
aatha aca Red quer qed | 
WRIT TA AT MALTA: to I 
To remedy this, the opening of the Sarya is avoided by excellent 


means. It is to be learnt best by instructions from a guru; but not by 
even a million discussions. 77. 


ay ferattaacait it 
RST ANOS ATCT: STAT | 
HUM TULA WRATAIA TAT Ul 9c Il 
The Viparita Karant. 
Above the navel and below the palate respectively, are the Sfrya 


and the Chandra. ‘The exercise, called the Viparita Karani, is learnt from 
the guru’s instructions. 78. 


PERPATIHE Tarra ahTar | 
WERT FSM AMA: ATH FT 1 
FETE ay ag hreats TeTUTT Ni Se 1 
This exercise increases the appetite; and, therefore, one who 
practises it, should obtain a good supply of food. If the food be scanty, 
it will burn him at once. 79. 
WIERTITAVATT: ATT VATA AF i 
aura faatrnmaras Ra Ra ce ui 
Place the head on the ground andthe feet up into the sky, fora 
second only the first day, and increase this time daily. 80. 


THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 41 


ated qed Aa waaay a zea I 
aa F it Menara F Heh Ul <2 tt 
After six months, the wrinkles and grey hair are not seen. He who 
practises it daily, even for two hours, conquers death. 81. 


WY THT I 
Aram Tas Ae AA TAT I 
astet a fara @ anit farsa ce ui 
The Vajrolt. 
Even if one who lives a wayward life, without observing any rules of 
Yoga, but performs Vajroli, deserves success and is a Yogi. 82. 
ATA TS we Te Tea eA aq! 
aft th fears g ant a azafaar ul c3 
Two things are necessary for this, and these are difficult to get for 
the ordinary people—(1) milk and (2) a woman behaving, as desired. 83. 
aaa Ue: aeRpaly aaa I 
Geass ant asatstahaaaMy Wl cz 
By practising to draw in the bindu, discharged during cohabitation, 


whether one be a man or a woman, one obtains success in the practice of 


Vajroli. 84. 
FAT: TAASA FAL THAT | 
Ia: Ta: THAl ATAACHTTAT Mt cs 
By means of a pipe, one should blow air slowly into the passage in 
the male organ. 85. 


att qarhigaaretaraaretg | 
Siee ot hot figyperaracs TAA i c% tl 
By practice, the discharged bindu is drawn out. One can draw back 
and preserve one’s own discharged bindu. 86. 
od ecaag fig aay safer arrag | 
aca faguraa staat fATATTCAT Nt <9 Ul 
The Yogi. who can protect his bindu thus, overcomes death ; 
because death comes by discharging bindu, and life is prolonged by its 
preservation. 87. 
wren Stra ee aaa fagarae | 
arag fag: Ratt 22 avacntead Fa: ce 


42 THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 


By preserving bindu, the body of the Yogi emits a pleasing smell. 
There is no fear of death, so long as the bindu is well-established in the 


body. 88. 
arad gut yw Baad a slay | 
TAS AAT Taras TATA: ce 
The bindu of men is under the control of the mind, and life is 


dependent on the bindu. Hence, mind and bindu should be protected by 
all means, 89. 


DY ATAU I 
AEMSAMNSAMIM AT THAT: | 
TSy we Mery TaTITATAENTHT Ul So tl 
The Sahajoli. 


Sahajoli and Amaroli are only the different kinds of Vajroli. Ashes 
from burnt up cowdung should be mixed with water. 90. 


AMAATAGS SGA: TaMST AT 
MATAM: FART FHSAIAT: TUT UW Sev 


Being free from the exercise of Vajroli, man and woman should both 
rub it on their bodies. 91. 


aesiiaka seat sear art: war i 
A BAHT ae Arras afews: uw Sz Ut 
This is called Sahajoli, and should be relied on by Yogis. It 
does good and gives moksa. 92. 
wa an: qearat Frecrat aaq raz tt 
Raeacrat eta A F AATAMNTAT NN 3 


This Yoga is achieved by courageous wise men, who are free from 
sloth, and cannot be accomplished by the slothful. 93. 


DATALTST I 
Priierarcemigact fer Pearceaiepae | 
MISA MASTAIRT HTAMSH BSAaAsSATSH | Vv 1 
The Amarolt. 


In the doctrine of the sect of the Kapalikas, the Amaroli ig the drink- 


ing of the mid stream ; leaving the Ist, as it is a mixture of too much bile 
and the last, which is useless. 94. 


THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 43 


aad &: frafrer aed eat Ra BA 
TMA AAAPHAUS A KAT |S UI 
He who drinks Amari, snuffs it daily, and practices Vajroli, is called 
practising Amaroli. 95. 


WIM Att fryen ae ewaq 
wagaaing Resets: wars 1 2k 
The bindu discharged in the practice of Vajroli should be mixed 
with ashes, and the rubbing it on the best parts of the body gives divine 
sight. 96. 
Bey UPHAM 
sfroit a steht gain afta 
HSeITS TAT BT Teg: TATATATHT: 1 Ss tt 
The Sakti chilana. 


Kutilangt (crooked-bodied), Kundalini, Bhujangi (a she-serpent) 
Sakti, IShwari, Kundali, Arundhati,—all these wordsare synonymous, 97. 


FIMSAHMS FAM FH IHAM CST I 
aston war ait avagré Peter Qe It 
As a door is opened with a key, so the Yogt opens the door of mukti 
by opening Kundalini by means of Hatha yoga. 98. 
a ANTM ares Tare PTAA 
FAAS Tae TYAT THAT A 
The Parameswari (Kundalini) sleeps, covering the hole of the passage 
by which one can go to the seat of Brahma which is free from pains. 99. 
Hara SSA Uf: Gar Areas Awaz 
PIA A Aetat Feat Aha a ArTaAT it Loo 1 
Kundali Sakti sleeps on the bulb, for the purpose of giving moksa to 
Yogis and bondage to the ignorant. He who knows it, knows Yoga. 100. 
HSA Hora aaa eataan it 
Qt ansaticat Aa A Feat ATT AAT: tt Loe ii 
Kundali is of a bent shape, and has been described to be like a 
serpent. He who has moved that Sakti is no doubt Mukta (released from 


bondage). 101. 
AMAA TALS TTSTAT It 
FAH AAA: TA TAT Mt Rok I 


44 THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 
Ee eee eee 
Youngster Tapaswini (a she-ascetic), lying between the Ganges and 
the Yamuni, ([di and Pingal4) should be caught hold of by force, to get 
the highest position. 102. 
EST Tag ae Pita AMAT AT Ut 
TSASAAA TWSCST A F SST Ml RoR I 
Ida is called goddess Ganges, Pingalé goddess Yamuna. In the 
middle of the Ida and the Pingala is the infant widow, Kundali. 103. 
Ges TIE yt qardeqhaas avz It 
Rat fara at akregragss Tareq Loe Ul 
This sleeping she-serpent should be awakened by catching hold of 
her tail. By the force of Hatha, the Sakti leaves her sleep, and starts 
upwards. 104. 
wakuer Seq naTaat At MATa ATs TECTTATAT I 
may quater carer Pret aftaretra 20% i 
This she-serpent is situated in Ma@ladhar. She should be caught 
and moved daily, morning and evening, for $ a prahar (14 hours), by 
filling with air through Pingala by the Paridhana method. 105. 
oat Rafat g rent sates 
DSS WAS Tie Afvatacearay it Lok Ul 
The bulb is above the anus, a vitasti (12 angulas) long, and measures 
4 angulas (3 inches) in extent and is soft and white, and appears as if a 
folded cloth. 106. 
ale aaa war Renal TIT SAN 
TERT FT He TT THSAT Ul Vo ul 
Keeping the feet in Vajra-Asana (Padma-dsana), hold them firmly 
with the hands. The position of the bulb then will be near the ankle joint, 
where it should be pressed. 107. 
qarad Raat Int arekreant a se Scrq 1 
HUA wet F ssiary MeazIgT un oe ti 
The Yogi, sitting with Vajra-Asana and having moved Kundali, 
should perfom Bhastriké to awaken the Kundalt soon. 108. 
WAH At HAH Sat ASAI: I 
AITTATAATY TAA AMAT HA Wt Loe it 
Bhanu (Sfrya, near the navel) should be contracted (by contracting 
the navel) which will move the Kundali. There is no fear for him who 
does so, even if he has entered the mouth of death. 109, 


THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 45 


qed Paid ATATTay I 
WaAEaTs Pcagarat ATTA Ni Lo tt 
By moving this, for two muh@rtas, it is drawn up alittle by entering 
the Susumné4 (spinal column). 110, 
aa F sioal Ta: GABA FS war | 
Serle aeaeITansa Beat aA Tapa: WLLL Uy 
By this Kuardlini leaves the entrance of the Susumné at once, and 
the Prana enters it of itself. 111. 


THIAMAUAT TAGAAS TANT I 
dem: Garaata Int TA: cASAT Lez 
Therefore, this comfortably sleeping Arundhatt should always be 
moved ; for by so doing the Yogi gets rid of diseases. 112. 


aa Satieat af: @ ant rasa i 
fears agarna wre sale sear ti L223 


The Yogi, who has been able to move the Sakti deserves success. It 
is useless to say more, suffice it to say that he conquers death playfully. 


113. 
re aacaeeas Ret eaters: 
asare wae fate: H Sema TA: MN LL8 I 
The Yogi observing Brahmacharya (continence’ and always eating 
sparingly, gets success within 40 days by practice with the Kundalini. 114. 


@ set arate g wet yarfeataa: 1 
cama wer ara aT: Ha: Ww LV Ut 


After moving the Kundali, plenty of Bhastra should be per- 
formed. By such practice, he has no fear from the god of death. 115. 


gaalaaeanrant asa ASNT | 
Ba: TATSAT: H SAVAAAES Ul VLE I 
There is no other way, but the practice of the Knadali, for washing 
away the impurities of 72,000 Nadis. 116. 
wa Gf WET Ast Fenareaa Arranz | 
DAA UAMATT AT: ALS AAT Ul LRG 
This middle Nadi becomes straight by steady practice of postures ; 
Praniyama and Mudras of Yogis. 117. 


smreare Ff fake rat wat geet GAA | 
egret av agt gat ant Past TATE it LVS UI 


46 THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 


Those whose sleep has decreased by practice and mind has become 
calm by samadhi, get beneficial accomplishments by Sambhavi and other 
Mudras, 118. | 

Tan frat gest TsATT frat ra | 
creat fra Far aT FT MTT Ww LLe tt 
Without Raja Yoga, this earth, the night, and the Mudras, be they 


howsoever wonderful, do not appear beautiful. 119. 

Note.—Raja Yoga==dsana. Earth=steadiness, calmness. Night—Kumbhaka; cessa- 
tions of the activity of the Pr4na, just as King’s officials cease moving at night. Hence 
night means absence of motion, i.e, Kumbhaka. 


aredea fat aa aa GNAaT | 
TACT A Hea Harr haAairar ii zo i 
All the practices relating to the air should be performed with con- 
centrated mind. A wise man should notallow his mind to wander away.— 


120. 
eft gar qa iter aA TAT 
Gaal ag atrat waraReratett un eek U 
These are the Mudrés, as explained by Adinatha (Siva). Every one 
of them is the giver of great accomplishments to the practiser. 121. 
saaat f& gqarat at ga einer | 
@ ag shige: carat areargeact TT TH tl L2z MN 
He is really the guru and to be considered as Ivara in human form 
who teaches the Mudras as handed down from guru to guru. 122. 


TEA AAT YETI FaNara Gare: | 
MUA: AIT TAT HISTTTT | L223 I 
Engaging in practice, by putting faith in his words, one gets the 
Siddhis of Anim, etc., as also evades death. 123. 


tla 96 genaifverat aaarastar: ti 3 


End of chapter III, on the Exposition of the Mudrds. 


CHAPTER IV. 


On Saméadhr. 
se 
ATA: | 
aa: Rrara Weaarqignarare | 
Rosa ale Heat BT TAT: tf tl 
Salutation to the Gurd, the dispenser of happiness to all, appearing 
as Nada, Vinda and Kala. One who is devoted to Him, obtains the 
highest bliss. 1. 
BIg Ta Baa AA | 
WYN A GANT TATATHL TAL Ml @ Il 
Now I will describe a regular method of attaining to Samadhi, which 
destroys death, is the means for obtaining happiness, and gives the 
Brahmananda, 2. 
UMASS TAA A AeA | 
TAT SAA WATT WT Tan 2 
° ar 2a a + ne | 
HAHA AEM Fal AHA: Us 
Raja Yogi, Samidhi, Unmani, Manonmant, Amaratwa, Laya, Tatwa, 
Sanya, Aganya, Parama Pada, Amanaska, Adwaitama, Niralamba, Niran- 
jana, Jiwana Mukti, Sahaja, Turyd, are all Synonymons, 3-4. 
alse cart agcarea asker arta: 1 
aaa ATCA UN A 
As salt being dissolved in water becomes one with it, so when Atma 
and mind become one, it is called Sam4édhi. 5. 
Tat Baas MUM A ST TTA | 
al Gata VS GATT ATTAT i & A 
When the Prana becomes lean (vigourless) and the mind becomes 
absorbed, then their becoming equal is called Samadhi. 6. 
ARTA A FACT TATATTTATEATAT: | 
TALAATHST: AAT: Arsrsag v9 
This equality and oneness of the self and the ultra self, when all 
Samkalpas cease to exist, is called Samadhi. 7. 


48 THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 


TIAAVTEY ATETR FT MT STAT TRA? | 
ara ain: feafa: Rafa eared a Brae Ut ¢ tl 
Or, who can know the true greatness of the Raja Yoga. Knowledge, 
mukti, condition, and Siddhis can be learnt by instructions from a gurt 
alone. 8. 
Sot erat Tad TATA | 
SEM SEMAN GIT: HEAT TAT uel 
Indifference to worldly enjoyments is very difficult to obtain, and 
equally difficult is the knowledge of the Realities to obtain. It is very 
difficult to get the condition of Samadhi, without the favour of a true 
guru. 9. 


faritcrad: ARS: scarce | 
THAT HAMA ATW: BAT THAT Ul Lo tt 
By means of various postures and different Kumbhakas, when the 


great power (Kundali) awakens, then the Prana becomes absorbed in Sanya 
(Samadhi). 10. 


SHAM MANIAST WHAT: | 
ia ARMA TAMAT ASAT 1 LZ Ul 


The Yogi whose sgakti has awakened, and who has renounced all 
actions, attains to the condition of Samadhi, without any effort. 11. 


agaraee st ayer Peas arse | 
aat Vale Have May wats Aerts tt 2 tt 
When the Prana flows in the Susumnd, and the mind has entered 
sainya, then the Yog! is free from the effects of Karmas. 12. 


TA WEA aslatexaa Ha: | 
afae aga Fal TSA STATTT tt 23 
O Immortal one (that is, the yogé who has attained to the condition 


of Samadhi), I salute thee! Even death itself, into whose mouth the 
whole of this movable and immovable world has fallen, has been conquered 


by thee. 13. 
Prat GAAS aay are MeTT | : 
ACHUG AMG ATH AAT i Ve I 


_ Amaroli, Vajroli and Sahjoli are accomplished when the mind 
becomes calm and Prana has entered the middle channel. 14. 


THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 49 


Mat HAT AA Maa aay 
orinsfstrafa wat Prat a area 
Arel Bt Teas att aj Hays: Uh V4 
How can it be possible to get knowledge, so long as the Prana is 
living and the mind has not died? No one else can get moksa, except 
one who can make one’s Prana and mind latent. 15. 


MAN FYAARS HAT AY A WITT I 
ferent ata Gena waros ATA LEU 
Always living in a good locality and having known the secret of 
the Susumné, which has a middle course, and making the Vayu move in it, 
(the Yogi) should restrain the Vayu in the Brabmarandhra. 16. 


WaagAa 3a: He Utara tt 
ATA FIAT RISA WIAATTTSATTN V9 i 
Time, in the form of night and day, is made by the sun and the moon. 
That the Susumné devours this time (death) even, is a great secret. 17. 


grantaeantr astarerit Gat 
AIA TATA ae: Aaa TTT Le 

In this body there are 72,009 openings of Nidis; of these, the 
Susumna, which has the Sambhavi Sakti in it, is the only important one, 
the rest are useless. 18. 

arg: ata aaah AE FITS tt 
arate qyarat sferatgaerza: W k& 

The Vayu should be made to enter the Susumn4 without restraint by 
him who has practised the control of breathing and has awakened the 
Kundali by the (gastric) fire. 19 

agar afer sat arta AAA I 
aan RATATAT: TATATAAT ATPTATL N20 

The Prana, flowing through the Susumna, brings about the condi- 

tion of manonmant ; other practices are simply futile for the Yogi. 20. 


qaat TAA Fa AALAAT TAT 
AACA TAS AA TAACTA TAT Ul 22 


By whom the breathing has been controlled, by him the activities of 
the mind also have been controlled ; and, conversely, by whom the activities 
of the mind have been controlled, by him the breathing also has been 


controlled. 21. 
H 


50 THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 


dasa F rast areet & aaltca: 1 
aafias caterer grate fragaa: 0 2e 
There are two causes of the activities of the mind: (1) Vasana 
(desires) and (2) the respiration (the Préna). Of these, the destruction of 
the one is the destruction of both. 22. 


Far aa facia WaaRTT Sa I 
Gaat Stas AT AAS HASTAT Ut 22 tl 


Breathing is lessened when the mind becomes absorbed, and the mind 
becomes absorbed when the Praaa is restrained. 23. 


graigacaticar gar at qeatndrarra areas tt 
Fal AKAAAATTAAT AAMT ASTSAS: Il ve Ul 
Both the mind and the breath are united together, like milk and 
water; and both of them are equal in their activities. Mind begins its 
activities where there is the breath, and the Parana begins its activities 
where there is the mind. 24. 


a 
TARAMMGIUS AT THITUTITT a: 
~ As) 
PAC M TAS ATT Pa TTA ATT FART: th 2% Ut 
By the suspension of the one, therefore, comes the suspension of the 
other, and by the operations of the one are brought about the operations of 
the other. When they are present, the Indriyas (the senses) remain 
engaged in their proper functions, and when they become latent then there 
is moksa. 295. 
THEA AAARAT AAS SATA: I 
TAT Tat Ae TH reat real wars tt 2k 11 
By nature, Mercury and mind are unsteady : there is nothing in the 
world which cannot be accomplished when these are made steady. 26 
g S ‘ 
Ako tera aritagar srarale caqaz i 
. iN 
TE: VACA TS TAT AAT TAA ti 2s tt 
O Parvati! Mercury and breathing, when made steady, destroy 


diseases and the dead himself comes’to life (by their means). By their 
(proper) control, moving in the air is attained. 27, 


AAC ° 
mat wire featr argerat fag: Fert wag tt 
figetatcagt eet fisehy seat it 2c i 
The breathing is calmed when the mind becomes steady and calm; 
and hence the preservation of bindu. The preservation of this ine 
makes the satwa established in the body. 28, 


THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 51 


SAA AAT ATT HATA ATE: I 
MVACISATA A: ASAT ATATT: | ze 
Mind is the master of the senses, and the breath is the master of the 
mind. The breath in its turn is subordinate to the laya (absorption), and 
that laya depends on the nada. 29. 


arsaaareg Aare areg aie aatazt i 
Wa crea Haare: ATTAg tt Ro ti 
This very laya is what is called moksa, or, being a sectarian, you may 
not call it moksa ; but when the mind becomes absorbed, a sort of ecstacy 
is experienced. 30. 


TAS ATAPAa: THAATIAE: 
Peat Aare war Tale arity ut Bh 0 
By the suspension of respiration and the annihilation of the enjoy- 


ments of the senses, when the mind becomes devoid of all the activities and 
remains changeless, then the Yogi attains to the Laya Stage. 31. 


siamaaeaen Rettartrafia: 
MAT SA HITT HAT APHITAT: tt BZ Ut 


When all the thoughts and activities are destroyed, then the Laya 


Stage is produced, to describe which is beyond the power of speech, being 
known by self-experience alone. 32. 


SM GA ela Mes Heal DASAI Wl 
farafrenta: i 23 
They often speak of Laya, Laya; but what is meant by it ? 
Laya is simply the forgetting of the objects of senses when the 
Vasanas (desires) do not rise into existence again. 33. 
EP ORUC CELL 
FTAA ATATATAAT ZT A 
CRT UTA FAT DAT FST TTT Wt Bs 
The Sdmbhavi Mudra. 
The Vedas and the Sastras are like ordinary public women. Sam- 
bhavi Madr is the one, which is secluded like a respectable lady. 34. 
adores ae tet aaeraasiar tt 
Oa At Aha Fat Aga Arar tt Bs 
Aiming at Brahman inwardly, while keeping the sight directed to 
the external objects, without blinking the eyes, is called the Sambhavi 
Mudré, hidden in the Vedas and the Sistras. 35. 


52 THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 


arama It aqr Tada, 
con Peaadren afect: cera Ul 
qed ag Utah wala At SM Tage Tet, 
i HUA TAT TW ATT Mt BE Ul 

When the Yogi remains inwardly attentive to the Brahman, keeping 
the mind and the Prana absorbed, and the sight steady, as if seeing 
everything while in reality seeing nothing outside, below, or above, verily 
then it is called the Sambhavi Mudra, which is learnt by the favour of a 
guru. Whatever, wonderful, Sfinya or Asdnya is perceived, is to be 

-regarded as the manifestation of that great Gambht (Siva.) ob: 
Shee Gaal AAI AAT: I 
WARPASAAg: WHI ATARI tt Ao 

The two states, the Sdmbhavi and the Khechari, are different because 
of their seats (being the heart and the space between the eyebrows respec- 
tively); but both cause happiness, for the mind becomes absorbed in the 
Chita-sukha-Rupa-Atmana which is void. 37. 

WAAAT It 
are Srfatt ease Rifas AAT 
TAA AAT ATC: TUT N Be 
The Unmani. 

Fix the gaze on the light (seen on the tip of the nose) and raise the 
eyebrows a little, with the mind contemplating as before (in the Sambhavi 
Mudra, that is, inwardly thinking of Brahma, but apparently looking 
outside.) This will create the Unmant avastha at once. 38. 

Smarases APTS: 
Sfrage weiter Ra Trae ATH Be 
The Téraka. 

Some are devoted to the Vedas, some to Nigama, while others are 
enwrapt in Logic, but none knows the value of this mudra, which 
enables one to cross the ocean of existence 39. 


aatdiisaaraa: Rerarat arama: 
aaTHra sMAagyaararedaa4raas BI 
wraraqaasdisatas Bier aw 

ana aeagala Teg ToT Tea Pera vo 


With steady calm mind and half closed eyes, fixed on the tip 
of the nose, stopping the Idd and the Pingala without blinking, he who 


THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 53 


can see the light which is theall, the seed, the entire brilliant, great 
Tatwama, approaches Him, who is the great object. What is the use 
of more talk? 40. 


Rat a qeatiet cat Sa a AT 
aaa Gaafet Raratsatrara: tt Ve 
One should not meditate on the Linga (ie., Atman) in the day (ve, 
while Sarya or Pingalaé is working) or at night (when [da is working), 
but should always contemplate after restraining both. 41. 


By Sat I 
aaqamansen ay act area: | 
fasa Bat gar ater wart GAA: Ul Bz Ul 
Lhe Khechart. 


When the air has ceased to move in the right and the left nostrils, 
and has begun to flow in the middle path, then the Khechari Mudra can be 
accomplished there. There is no doubt of this, 42. 


TiN ARG Aas AAT I 
faga Gat Fal TA AS TA FA: Ul 82 I 
If the Prana can be drawn into the Sanya (Susumn4), which is 


between the Ida and the Pingalé, and made motionless there, then the 
Khecharit Mudra can truly become steady there. 43. 


qaraaranns Pareatat ya: i 
aera Aaa A AT AAT aA Vat ti Be 
That Mudra is called Khechari which is performed in the supportless 


space between the Sairya and the Chandra (the Ida and the Pingala) and 
called the Vyoma Chakra, 44. 


Araraaay AT Aratean RraTagAT 1 
Tega Fat qgat wera Fa vs 
The Khechari which causes the stream to flow from the Chsndra 
(Soma) is beloved of Siva. The incomparable divine Susumné should be 
closed by the tongue drawn back. 45. 
grea gad aaa Sat wag | 
MAM GAC FATAAA AIT tl Be Ul 
It can be closed from the front also (by stopping the movements of 


the Prana), and then surely it becomes the Khechart. By practice, this 
Khechari leads to Unmani. 46. 


54. THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 


qa Rrerearat AaETT faa | 
Maes AIS Ta TT Haq a ATA ui Bo Wl 
The seat of Siva is between the eyebrows, and the mind becomes 
absorbed there. This condition (in which the mind is thus absorbed) is 
known as Tarya, and death has no access there. 47. 
MAAVA AAA Ta: | 
AMAATTATA BIST Aft RATATAT Ul BE Il 
The Khechari should be practised till there is Yoga-nidraé (Samadhi). 
One who has induced Yoga-nidra, cannot fall a victim to death. 48. 
Pasa va: Heat a Praaht Prat 
aaangat aka azakagia way vk 
Freeing the mind from all thoughts and thinking of nothing, one 
should sit firmly like a pot in the space ‘surrounded and filled with 
the ether). 49. 
TANGA HAAN WY A ITA: | 
ere Rearcarala gaat AAT AE Ul 4o 
As the air, in and out of the body, remains unmoved, so the breath 
with mind becomes steady in its place (7.e., in Brahma randhra). 50. 
CAA ATAT ART TTTAT! FATTETE | 
MAAC AGAAATT HAT 4 
By thus practising, night and day, the breathing is brought under 
control, and, as the practice increases, the mind becomes calm and steady. 51. 
WHA: YAALTATTASART AT | 
RESIST ASTHAT ACTASICTHA: tl &2 I 
alt Sat 1 
By rubbing the body over with Amrita (exuding from the moon), 
from head to foot, one gets Mahakaya, z.e., great strength and energy. 52. 
End of the Khechart. 


afaarel wa: Seat Uke AAT | 
AAA AA MATT ACAI TAAL Ut 4B 
Placing the mind into the Kundalini, and getting the latter into the 
mind, by looking upon the Buddhi (intellect) with mind (reflexively), the 
Param Pada (Brahma) should be obtained. 53. 


GAN FE AAA FF FE | 
ae FT BAY FAT A Prag Rr un 4s 


THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIRA. 55 


Keep the 4tm4 inside the Kha (Brahma) and place Brahma inside 
your atma. Having made everything pervaded with Kha (Brahma), 
think of nothing else. 54. 

Ud: Beat A: Wea We Ha Tatar | 
a: gat ae: gah: ooh: ear TATA GS tl 

One should become void in and void out, and void like a pot in the 

space. Full in and full outside, like a jar in the ocean. 535. 
Telfyat A HAM Akaachiaaz | 
aafiat esa a fematy Rar 4k 

He should be neither of his inside nor of outside world ; and, leaving 

all thoughts, he should think of nothing. 56. 


AHA AHGAT STATA tt 

AHTATAHGAT AATASTA: | 

aacrmaaageas | Afra 

aba Prasat aif tt 49 tt 

The whole of this world and all the schemes of the mind are but the 

creations of thought. Discarding these thoughts and taking leave of all 
conjectures, O Rama! obtain peace. 57, 

HYCAAS ATTA AS TM | 

aan Setar ST AAaCATS fASTAT te tt 


As camphor disappears in fire, and rock salt in water, so the mind 
united with the 4tma loses its identity. 58. 


Py aa Wald FT Aa BA AA Te | 
Ma Ta Ga as area: Gar fearerH: 4 tl 
When the knowable, and the knowledge, are both destroyed equally, 
then there is no second way (1.e., Duality is destroyed). 59, 


meg oa ahaa aay | 
AAA MAAS AATTRAT W Ro 
All this movable and immovable world is mind. When the mind 
has attained to the unmani avastha, there is no dwaita (from the absence of 
the working of the mind.) 60. 
a aaeg Terns ats ATEAT | 
waar fray ora HacaTARTEAT UW RLU 
Mind disappears by removing the knowable, and, on its disappearance, 
Atma only remains behind. 61. 


56 THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 


ae ATA: Ae KATA TAT TAT: | 
SATA: HAT: TaraaS TAT: WE 
The high-souled Acharyas (Teachers) of yore gained experience in 
the various methods of Samadhi themselves, and then they preached them 
to others. 62. 
GIA F sid PTA aaa | 
WAAAY AEG AAT Pg UN B3 U 
Salutations to Thee, O Susumna, to Thee O Kundalini, to Thee 
O Sudha, born of Chandra, to Thee O Manonmant! to Thee O great power, 
energy and the intelligent spirit. 63. 
MUPTATAM ATA STAAL AAAT | 
TH MATA AA ATATITAATSAT Ul BV Ul 
I will describe now the practice of anihata nada, as propounded by 
Goraksa Natha, for the henefit of those who are unable to understand the 


principles of knowledge--a method, which is liked by the ignorant also. 
64 
Hania AUTHASITHN: BIAT Take | 
ACIAITUAHAHAT AAAS FIAA SATAUT Ul SS tl 
Adinatha propounded 14 crore methods of trance, and they are all 
extant. Of these, the hearing of the andhata nada is the only one, the 
chief, in my opinion. 65. 


Tara feaat Aet gar ara aaa | 
UTED Ha aq: RE 
Sitting with Mukta Asana and with the Sambhavi Mudrd, the Yogt 
should hear the sound inside his right ear, with collected mind. 66. 
TAUGSAIATNSM UTA MNT BTA | 
YRTIGATAT VHTAAS: MAT AT? WK tt 
The ears, the eyes, the nose, and the mouth should be closed and 
then the clear sound is heard in the passage of the Susumnaé which has 
been cleansed of all its impurities. 67. 


mre sega aon afters sr 
Praha: aay VITATIMTAGTAT Ni Se 
In all the Yogas, there are four states: (1) Arambha or the prelimi- 
nary, (2) Ghata, or the state of a jar, (3) Parichaya (known), (4) nispatti 
(consumate.) 68. 


THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 57 


DACAAR It 
TAAIAARAATAG: AANA: | 
faterr: Sqr SeserEa: WAT VaR UR, 1 
Arambha Avastha, 

When the Brahma granthi(in the heart) is pierced through by Prana- 
yama, then a sort of happiness is experienced in the vacuum of the heart, 
and the anahat sounds, like various tinkling sounds of ornaments, are 
heard in the body. 69. 

eagara awed earTEaaTs | 
VMSA: BT AA Bray AAT Ul Vo tt 
In the arambha, a Yogi’s body becomes divine, glowing, healthy, and 
emits a divine smell. The whole of his heart becomes void. 70. 
BA ACTHCAT Il 
fadrarai aster argrater went: | 
FEAT AAT Atal FTAACAGT 9% Il 
The Ghata Avastha, 

In the second stage, the airs are united into one and begin moving 
in the middle channel. The Yogi’s posture becomes firm, and he becomes 
wise like a god. 71. 

fasquaaerat AqKacAMggqan: | 
afar rages AtiqegeaT AAT 92 UI 

By this means the Visnu knot (in the throat) is pierced which is indi- 
cated by highest pleasure experienced, and then the Bheri sound (like the 
beating of a kettle drum) is evolved in the vacuum in the throat. 72. 

WT TATA 
sararat g fae at erage: | 
HET ATT Ale AARARTAATRAT Al 93 I 
The Parichaya Avastha. 

In the third stage, the sound of a drum is known to arise in 
the Sfinya between the eyebrows, and then the Vayu goes to the 
Mahasanya, which is the home of all the siddhis. 73. 

Rrareg aq Great aastrerqenra: | 
rag acre regan ferahsta: oe 

Conquering, then, the pleasures of the mind, ecstacy is spontaneously 
produced which is devoid of evils, pains, old age, disease, hunger and 
sleep. 74. 


I 


58 THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 


eat aan Pear arheratshrs | 
Preqel aaa: aeq: FAUST UTTTA WAT Nk 
When the Rudra granthi is pierced and the air enters the seat of 
the Lord (the space between the eyebrows), then the perfect sound like 
that of a flute is produced. 75. 


anyd aq Fret Usa I 
aiberercratan Inieacaar WAT Ul Ut 
The union of the mind and the sound is called the Raja-Yoga. The 
(real) Yogi becomes the creator and destroyer of the universe, like God. 76. 
weg TM areg aT gkacstaaisd Tay | 
BATRANST AY TAAATTATAT tl 9s 
Perpetual Happiness is achieved by this; I do not care if the mukti 
be not attained. This happiness, resulting from absorption [in Brahma], 
is obtained by means of Raja-Yuga. 77. 
TMA: Fad conta: | 
CATARARAAT AAT TIARA ATL Ut 9S 
Those who are ignorant of the Raja-Yoga and practise only the 
Hatha-Yoga, will, in my opinion, waste their energy fruitlessly. 78. 
THAT UT PMT AA Gaz! 
TST TA FATTATseTaaTa Il 
AT: TARA HAT ATAT SA: tl GR tl 
Contemplation on the space between the eyebrows is, in my opinion, 
best for accomplishing soon the Unmant state. For people of small intel- 
lect, it is a very easy method for obtaining perfection in the R&ja-Yoga. 
The Laya produced by nada, at once gives experience (of spiritual 
powers). 79. 
aaa Iniearcrat TeTTATAT | 
Magn aaa Atala cf shears TH tl co 
The happiness which increases in the hearts of Yogiswaras, who 
have gained success in Samadhi by means of attention to the nada, is 
beyond description, and is known to Sri Gurtt Ndtha alone. 80. 


eat fara cereat & oats watt wet: 

aa fad feerctqateraiercad aH <8 
WRAATA ATSTSA TMNT TMA “aha AA: | 
aa Foret feertiqateraieercad TAG ch 


THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIRA. 59 


The sound which a muni hears by closing his ears with his fingers, 
should be heard attentively, till the mind becomes steady in it. 81. 
MARAT ASA TRIATTTA Laz Ut 
artigar caries rear anit Rat Aa <2 Ut 
By practising with this nada, all other external sounds are stopped. 
The Yogi becomes happy by overcoming all distractions within 15 days, 


82. 


TTA TIAA AAT ATA ARTA | 
AAAS TATA TAT BATH: 13 


In the beginning, the sounds heard are of great variety and very 
loud ; but, as the practice increases, they become more and more subtle. 83. 
A . Pars 
Mal ASAMATACO HATTA: | 
is} ° « 
WY ATSAALA ASTHESATTAT Ut <8 
In the first stage, the sounds are surging, thundering like the beating 


of kettle drums and jingling ones. In the intermediate stage, they are 


like those produced by conch, Mridanga, bells, &e. 84. 
aa g Pateitatarrargachteaat: | 
afer atarferat ATat: aa PEAT <4 Ul 
In the last stage, the sounds resemble those from tinklets, flute, 


Vina, bee, &c. These various kinds of sounds are heard as being produced 
in the body. 85. 


wrefer 2 garish AAAS AA | 
TH TRARAAAL AAT TTTAT 1% tt 
Though hearing loud sounds like those of thunder, kettle drums, etc., 
one should practise with the subtle sounds also. 86. 
TARAS TT FAA AAAS TT TA | 
TATU faa AAT ATT ASAT tl 69 1 
Leaving the loudest, taking up the subtle one, and leaving the subtle 


one, taking up the loudest, thus practising, the distracted mind does not 
wander elsewhere. 87. 


aaTHAT at ars are sent Aa: 
aaa Gferhya Fa ans AAT ui <e 


Wherever the mind attaches itself first, it becomes steady there ; 
and then it becomes absorbed in it. 88. 


He Pray a'at set ATS Ja Wi 
arate aur Rad rears atara ti ce it 


69 THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 


Just as a bee, drinking sweet juice, does not care for the smell of 
the flower; so the mind, absorbed in the nAda, does not desire the objects 
of enjoyment. 89. 

AAMT ATATA ATATATATATTAT: 
Aaaa amass RargeRratHar: So tt 

The mind, like an elephant habituated to wander in the garden of 
enjoyments, is capable of being controlled by the sharp goad of anéahata 
nida. 90. 

TS F ATIIA AA: AIHATIAT II 
rane Bact SAT Bort: STAT WE 

The mind, captivated in the snare of nida, gives up all its activity ; 

and, like a bird with clipped wings, becomes calm at once. 91. 
wafaat gees aTrarta TAT I 
AS TATSTAIAT AVTATSSAASSAT 1&2 

Those desirous of the kingdom of Yoga, should take up the practice 
of hearing the anahata nada, with mind collected and free from all cares. 
2 

Ag SATA TS ATLAS 
HACTHTT TI TATATASHT ST 1&3 

Nada is the snare for catching the mind ; and, when it is caught like 

a deer, it can be killed also like it. 3. 


vaares aren aris: aita4raay 
ararartacart Memes fF Arkrar 1 ee i 
Nada is the bolt of the stable door for the horse (the minds of the 
Yogis). A Yogi should determine to practise constantly in the hearing of 
the nada sounds. 94. 
ae PaaS APTASTTANTT 11 
Aa: CCGA PRIATSIASTAT 11 It 
Mind gets the properties of caleined mereury. When deprived of its 


unsteadiness it is calcined, combined with the sulphur of nfda, and 
then it roams like it in the supportless 4kaga or Brahma. 95. 


aAeaMa: RAaITAATTyST: I 
frere aaa: Hara ara ee 1 


The mind is like a serpent, forgetting all its unsteadiness by hearing 
the nada, it does not run away anywhere. 96. 


THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 61 


as Tafsat are: ara ae Near 
ae cafe Ard ASA BE SAT i Qo 1 
The fire, catching firewood, is extinguished along with it (after 
burning it up); and so the mind also, working with the nada, becomes 
latent along with it. 97. 


TATA AMAT a HCMTLAMT II 
TELM FRC MLATATTATA UAT Ul Se 
The antahkarana (mind), like a deer, becomes absorbed and motion- 
less on hearing the sound of bells, etc.; and then it is very easy for an 
expert archer to kill it. 98. 
DACA WTA ART TINA I 
waa HA Tata AA It 
Aart we athe afyrat: qT ti ee 11 
The knowable interpenetrates the anihata sound which is heard, 


and the mind interpenetrates the knowable. The mind becomes absorbed 
there, which is the seat of the all-pervading, almighty Lord. 99. 


ATASTHTAAHSN WISI: TAT It 
PUREE AAT Hat ATA AMAT lt Roo I 
So long as the sounds continue, there is the idea of Akéga. When 
they disappear, then it is called Para Brahma, Paramftmana. 100. 


UUM AA TIM TAI UPHLA AT Ut 
GAA MAHI: A TT TTAPAT: It Lok tt 
Whatever is leard in the form of nada, is the sakti (power). That 
which is formless, the final state of the 'Tatwas, is the Parameswara. 101. 
AA CSSATATAT TAT RT 
UTSAVTAATSES: FET: HTSTAR: Ut Loz tt 
All the methods of Hatha are meant for gaining success in the Raja- 
Yoga; for, the man, who is well-established in the Raja-Yoga, overcomes 
death. 102. 
aed ofist ee: a sata se FR: 11 
THA HISAR TT TT TAIT | Lo} tt 
Tatwa is the seed, Hatha the field ; and Indifference (Vair§gya) the 
water. By the action of these three, the creeper Unmani thrives very 
rapidly. 103. 
AA ASAI Mar Wea: 1 
Rise fies Aiea Rraaredt ui foe 


62 THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 


All the accumulations of sins are destroyed by practising always with 
the nada ; and the mind and the airs do certainly become latent in the 
colorless (Paramatmana). 104. 

vaggting a a wane Hers Ul 
HSMN FF TAATHRIMATT MN L0% Ul 
Such a one. does not hear the noise of the conch and Dundubhi. 
Being in the Unmani avastha, his body becomes like a piece of wood. 105. 
© ° 
aatteatieg a: aahrarrahta: 
aaatasa anit @ Feat AT AA: tt Lok tt 

There is no doubt, such a Yogi becomes free from all states, from all 

cares, and remains like one dead. 106. | 


ead Aa Hlsa area A A HAT Il 
QNead FF KATY AUT TH: ATATHAAT i Los tt 


He is not devoured by death, is not bound by his actions. The Yogi 
who is engaged in SamAdhi is overpowered by none. 107. 
a iret ATS SE A Se eat a Pera tl 
ATTA A OT ARS ANT Ae: AATHTAT i Le ut 
The Yogi, engaged in Samadhi, feels neither smell, taste, color, touch, 
sound, nor is conscious of his own self. 108. 
fad a gd annacentaegkraRterr i 
a arate are aera Fa TT T Ut Lok, i 
He whose mind is neither sleeping, waking, remembering, destitute 
of memory, disappearing nor appearing, is liberated. 109. 
a fasratfer attareat a ger 4 Ga aa 
4 ATA ATA FT AV AM: AAT Ml Vo Ui 
He feels neither heat, cold, pain, pleasure, respect nor disrespect. 
Such a Yogi is absorbed in Samadhi. 110. 


aN TAGTeTa Garensaags 
Pearersareimed Maa FH TT A Lee 
He who, though awake, appears like one sleeping, and is without 
inspiration and expiration, is certainly free. 111. 
TTA: TITSTUMANT: TITAN 
HMM ALAA AVA Te: AATHTAT it Lz I 
The Yogi, engaged in Sainadhi, cannot be killed by any instrument, 
and is beyond the controlling power of beings. He is beyond the reach 
of incantations and charms. 112. 


THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA. 63 


masa ofa acrea WaT | 
maghiga waft gerrwTaTayTa are It 
Waa Aataea Haas Aa aa i 
arasara aah alee eaitearrara: tl 22 tl 


As long as the Prana does not enter and flow in the middle channel 
and the vindu does not become firm by the control of the movements of the 
Prana ; as long as the mind does not assume the form of Brahma without 
any effort in contemplation, so long all the talk of knowledge and wisdom 
is merely the nonsensical babbling of a mad man. 113. 


ef geraifierat aartieara ara aquraga: tt 8 tl 


. 


THE END. 


Si 7 
r 


- ~~ - 
7 ve 
. 


-_ 


- 
7 


Related Books 

Ancient Yoga and Modern Science 

TR. Anantharaman 

The Gheranda Samhita 

Rai Bahadur Srisa Chandra Vasu 

The Gods Within 

Mind, Consciousness and the Vedic Traditions 
Subhash Kak 
Hindu Concept of Life and Death 
Shyam Ghosh 
An Introduction to the Yoga Philosophy 


Srisa Chandra Vasu 


The Joys of Death 
How to Conquer the Fear of Death 


Lake Singh 


The Original Yoga 
As expounded in Sivasamhita, Gherandasamhita and Patanjala Yogasutra, 


Original Text in Sanskrit, translated, edited and annotated with an 


introduction 
Shyam Ghosh 
Patanjali's Yoga Sutras 
with the Commentary of Vyasa and the Gloss of Vachaspati, Misra, Sanskrit 
text into English translation. 
Rama Prasada 
Science and Spirituality 
A Quantum Introduction 
Amit Goswami with Maggie Goswami 


Siva Samhita 
Srisa Chandra Vasu 


be 
I 


TM 00 0M 


8M 


ISBN 978-81-215-05 8 


Munshiram Manoharlal : | | 
78812148057 


q 


Publishers Pvt. Ltd. 
New Delhi 


www.mrmibooks.com 


9VE-DO 


TT 


~ 150 


