KUNDALINI SCIENCE 

A SPIRITUAL 

PSYCHOLOGY 
BOOK-4 


j! 


7; 
HUMAN MIND IS LIKE A FLYING KITE 


KUNDALINI YOGA SCIENCE CAN PEEP 
INTO BLACK HOLES TOO 


Kundalini science- A spiritual 


psychology 
Book-4 


Author- Premyogi vajra 


2022 


Book introduction 


This book is fourth part (book-4) of the Kundalini science series. Its first part, 
second part (book-2), and third part (book-3) are also available. It is the 
compiled form of blog-posts. Those posts are written by Premyogi vajra, a mystic 
yogi. He is enlightened as well as he has his kundalini awakened. These all posts 
are related to kundalini. One post corresponds to one chapter. Premyogi vajra is 
writing about Kundalini since 4 years ago, when his kundalini awakened after 
one year long continued kundalini yoga meditation. He became amazed on 
seeing that nowhere Kundalini had been mentioned or described completely. 
Even Kundalini had not been defined properly. He searched and read many 
kundalini awakening experiences, but he found none as genuine and complete. 
Although he found Samadhi as mentioned in Patanjali Yoga Sutras as equivalent 
to Kundalini, but that was described in a mystic and ancient way that was 
difficult to be understood by the laymen type general public. Therefore inspired 
by these shortcomings, he decided to present every know-how about kundalini 
in very simple or childish way keeping everything at ground level, true, 
experiential, scientific, original, practical and intuitive. That genuine, honest and 
humane effort resulted into the origination of this wonderful book. That is why 
this book appears as a blessing for kundalini seekers. Because it is not 
comfortable to read so many blog posts together on glare producing screens, 
therefore those posts were presented in the form of a kindle e-book that is 
comfortable and enjoying to read. As a result, it is fully hoped that readers will 


find this book spiritually uplifting and comfortable to read. 


Author introduction 


Premayogi Vajra was born in the year 1975 in a small village in the beautiful 
basket valley of Himachal Pradesh, India. He is naturally fond of writing, 
philosophy, spirituality, yoga, public service, applied science and tourism. He 
has also done commendable work in the field of animal husbandry and 
veterinary medicine. He is also fond of polyhouse farming, organic farming, 
scientific and water conserving irrigation, rainwater harvesting, kitchen 
gardening, cow farming, vermicomposting, website development, self- 
publishing, music (especially flute playing) and singing. He has also written 
close to ten books on almost all these subjects, whose descriptions are 
available on Amazone Author Central, Author Page, Premyogi vajra. The 
description of these books is also available on his personal website 
demystifyingkundalini.com. He had also been a Vedic priest for a short period 
of time, when he performed religious rituals in people's homes with the help of 
his Vedic priestly grandfather. He has gained some advanced spiritual 
experiences (enlightenment and Kundalini awakening). His autobiography, 
along with his unique experiences, is particularly shared in the book 
"Physiology Philosophy - A Modern Kundalini Tantra (A Yogi's Love Story)" 
written in Hindi. The matching equivalent of this book in English is “Love story 
of a Yogi- what Patanjali says”. This book is the most prominent and ambitious 
book of his life. This book contains the most important 25 years of his life’s 
philosophy. He has worked very hard for this book. In a quality and unbiased 
review on Amazon.com, this book has been reviewed as a five-star, best, must- 
read and excellent book. Google Play Book Review also found five stars for this 
book, and this book was rated as good (cool). 


Premyogi vajra is a mysterious person. He is like a polymorphic man, who has 
no fixed form of his own. His actual form depends on the size and type of the 
trance/Samadhi that he is continuously experiencing in his mind, no matter 
what he looks like from outside. He is enlightened (self realized), and his 
Kundalini has also awakened. He had self realization or enlightenment 
naturally / through love yoga, and Kundalini awakening through artificial 
means / Kundalini yoga. At the time of natural samadhi, he was assisted by 
symbolic and uni-vehicular Tantra yoga, while at the time of artificial 
trance/Samadhi he got the help of complete and bi-vehicular Tantra yoga 
along with the majority of his own efforts. 


For more information, please feel free to visit the following place- 


https://demystifyingkundalini.com 


©2023 premyogi vajra. All rights reserved. 

Legal disclaimer:- 

This tantric book has not been designed to offend any other notions. The reader will be responsible for 
such situation arising from reading it. We are not lawyers. This book and all the information written in 
it have been provided as a promotion of education, and cannot replace any legal advice provided by 
your judicial adviser. At the time of creation, it has been taken care of that all the information given on 
this book is correct and useful for readers; even then, it is not a very serious effort. Therefore, book- 
publisher fully rejects its responsibilities and accountability when there is any harm to anyone. 
Readers are self responsible for their choice, work and their results. They should contact their judicial 


adviser if there is any doubt regarding this. 


Kundalini Yoga as the Varaha 
avatar of Lord Vishnu 
mythological story 


Friends, in the previous post | was sharing some Spiritual 
secrets related to nose and lIda-pingala. | remembered a 
mythological story related to this, so thought that in this 
post, let’s try to make its yoga-based revelation. It is said 
that in the olden days, the demon Hiranyaksha stole the 
earth and hid it deep inside the ocean. Distressed by this, all 
the gods took Brahma along with them to Lord Vishnu and 
obtained a promise of help from him. Only then a small pig 
came out of Brahma’s nose. Actually Lord Vishnu had taken 
the form of that boar. As soon as he saw it, it grew up and 
entered the sea. There he saw the demon Hiranyaksha hiding 
in the depths and started fighting with him. In no time, he 
killed Hiranyaksha and by extending both his long and sharp 
edged molars one at each corner of mouth forward he picked 
up the earth along with the Vedas and balanced the round 
earth on them. Then he came over the ocean and he set the 
earth in place. Even then Lord Varah was not getting calm. 
Lord Shiva pacified him by taking an avatar. 


Yoga based mystical analysis of Varaha 
Avatar story 


By meditating on the nostrils and especially on the breath 
coming in and out of the nostrils, the rising energy shifts to 
the central line that’s in the way of the Sushumna Nadi. It is 
said that the boar came out through the exhaled breath 
going out of the nasika. By paying attention to the outgoing 
breath, the energy descends through the front channel, and 
penetrates all the chakras and reaches the Muladhara. This is 
Varaha’s going under the sea to reach Patal Lok. Even if 


Muladhara is considered as an ocean instead of Patal Lok, 
then the lowest rung of the ocean of the world is Muladhar, 
because the whole world is settled in different chakras. 
Probably it has been called sea because the reservoir of 
water in the form of semen comes under Muladhar area only, 
where shakti is hidden as subconscious mind. Hiranyaksha 
means ignorance in the form of duality. Hiranya means gold, 
Aksha means eye. The one who has respect for gold i.e. 
prosperity in his eyes, and behind it who is blinded by duality, 
he is Hiranyaksha. Due to this, Kundalini Shakti hides in the 
darkness of Mooladhara, that is, it sleeps. Means the shakti of 
the thoughts of the mind becomes unmanifested in the form 
of subconscious thoughts and gets buried in the base chakra. 
It’s the kundalini sleeping there. Along with that mental 
world, the Vedas also get buried in the Muladhar, because 
pure and sattvaguni or light-full conducts and thoughts are in 
the form of Vedas. After reaching Muladhar, shakti starts 
turning upwards passing through the back. Shakti prefers Ida 
and Pingala to rise, mostly try to rise through Ida Nadi, as 
there is less blockage in it. Sometimes the energy starts 
swinging alternately in Ida and Pingala for a few moments in 
each. In such a situation, by keeping attention on the Ajna 
Chakra also, the energy stays in the Sushumna too for a few 
moments in between. Ida and Pingala are shown 
metaphorically as the two sharp teeth on both sides of 
Varaha’s mouth. The Sushumna Nadi or Ajna Chakra is the 
round earth balanced on top of those two teeth. The chakra 
is also round like earth. Sushumna has been called earth 
because all the experiences of the world take place in the 
brain, nowhere outside, and energy is transmitted to the 
brain only through the Sushumna nadi. Varah is the 
Kundalini-Purush i.e. meditation image. This is the meditation 
of Lord Vishnu. Like Vishnu, he is also shown in quadrilateral 
form with conch, chakra, mace, padma, one thing in each 
hand. That is why it is said that Lord Vishnu incarnated in the 
form of a boar. The boar has been chosen for the metaphor 
because it is the boar that digs the ground in search of its 
shakti hidden in the form of food in the depths. That is why 
the earth is dear to the boar. That’s why he even enters the 
sea to bring it up. In order to get the sleeping or suppressed 
earth or shakti in the form of mind, he gropes and digs the 


muladhara and carries up it with the teeth in the form of Ida 
and Pingala channels. Then by balancing it in the form of 
Sushumna, it brings it out of the water that’s nadi or channel 
as it also flows like water, and restores it to its original place. 
Its real place is the Sahasrara of the brain, because that is 
the center of all experiences. Sushumna Nadi also goes 
directly from Muladhar to Sahasrar straight up. With this, the 
thoughts buried in the subconscious mind start coming back 
to experience, and starts merging into the blissful emptiness 
of the Self. Means cleansing happens. Means sleeping shakti 
in the form of subconscious thoughts starts waking up. This is 
Vipassana. Vipassana can be done in any part of the brain, 
except the Sahasrara, as it requires less energy. In Sahasrar, 
only the Kundalini picture is meditated upon, which is in the 
form of an idol or a Guru or a transcendental body etc. This 
picture feels almost like a real physical form with practice, 
that is why it takes much more energy than Vipassana. 
Although it happens in Sahasrara only, but due to less 
energy, it appears outside. The less energy a thought has, 
the further away it seems from the Sahasrara. By the way, 
the place of the soul has been described as Sahasrar. If 
someone starts awakening the image of a common man in 
Sahasrar, then he will reach him or her automatically while 
walking in his sleep at night. Then how will meditation 
happen? Then all the gods and sages are happy and praise 
Lord Varah with folded hands. Anyway, the purpose of all 
these is to remove the living beings from the beginning less 
suffering in the form of birth and death, which is only 
possible in the Sahasrar Chakra in the form of awakening, 
that is why they are happy. To pacify or kill the boar by Shivji 
means that Yogi left the fascination of Kundalini and became 
a non-dual Tantrik like Shiva. Anyway, the principle is that 
after the awakening of the Kundalini, the non-dual tantra is 
the supreme understanding, which Osho Maharaj also 
explains to the world in the form of one of his books, “tantra- 
a supreme understanding “. 


Kundalini yoga science is the 
pinnacle of quantum mechanics, 
Space science, cosmology and 
astronomy-physics 


Kundalini awakening proves that the non- 
existent void does not exist 


Friends, | was thinking of transmitting my recently awakened 
experiences to the scientists, so that they can solve the 
mystery of the origin of the universe, on which they are badly 
stuck. But | could not find any comment box on their sites nor 
did | find any such appeal from their side on Google. After 
getting the address of one or two, contacted them on Gmail, 
but did not get any response. If you know any such platform 
please do share. 


Spiritual science and space science are interrelated, and are 
incomplete without each other. That’s why the science 
of astrology was also included with Sanatan Vedic 
philosophy, and it had a special respectable place. 


Nihilism is the root of all problems 


Nihilism IS the biggest duality producing spiritual 
ignorance. If science had not resorted to nihilism, then 
nature and humanity would not have been destroyed today. 
Due to this, there would not have been hue and cry in the 
form of wars, natural calamities etc. all around today. Then 
science and spirituality as nonduality would have been 
progressing together and complete and all-round 
development of mankind would have been ensured. 
Buddhism was almost thrown out of ancient India for the 
Same reason, because it resorted to nihilism. Although 
Buddhists argue a lot that their worship object is not void but 
conscious Brahman, this is also true, but from the external 
ethics of Buddhism it appears to be void. Common people 


only see superficially, they cannot understand the deep 
things. 

It appears that the most anti-zero culture in the world is 
the Hindu Sanatan culture. In this, along with soil-stone 
etc. inanimate objects, the dark black sky is also worshipped. 
For example Shani Dev and Kali Mata. 


Origin of the universe and its basic 
structure based on the experience of 
awakening 


What we think of as void or darkness or blissless sky, and 
also feel it as our soul, does not feel like that at the time of 
awakening, that is, it feels like non-zero, light and 
blissful sky. | am saying non-zero because it looks like the 
full physical world. The visible physical world and the mental 
images or thoughts created from it are felt like waves in it. 
Just like there are waves in the ocean. The same has been 
described in various theology. So is science ignoring this? 


Space is soul in its original form 


Whole world is virtual and unreal 


Original means real, that is, in a viceless form. This was 
already evident from Einstein’s theory of gravitation, but 
no one had understood it in this metaphysical form. Einstein 
was so great but it seems he did not encounter a true 
awakened person. Lol. Einstein proved that spacetime can 
be twisted like a three-dimensional sheet, can have holes or 
pits in it. By the way, what is already like an empty pit, how 
can another empty pit be made in it. From this, it is clear that 
Space is not empty as the common man thinks. It is empty 
and not empty at the same time, though it is void in form, it 
is soul, it is God, it’s supreme soul. Its pit is like a boat 
making a depression in the water of a pond. The wave also 
moves in the same way making a depression. Means waves 
can be formed in space. Then how did it become zero? Many 
may even say that it is such a void in which falsely 


assumed virtual waves can be formed. Rishimuni also tells 
the same experience of the soul. It means that it is not such 
a wave that can distort the soul in reality. Even the water 
seems to be distorted by the wave only for a short time, after 
the wave has passed, its surface also becomes completely 
flat and as before. The same happens with the air. Then 
Space or sky is even more subtle than them, how can it be 
distorted. It cannot be perverted even for a short while, 
because where will it go after being perverted. Because there 
is Sky everywhere. Water and air move to the empty space, 
but where will the space move? This means that space waves 
are more virtual than water and air waves. Means the wave 
does not move anywhere, it only appears. Isn’t it a Surprising 
fact. Amazing zero brother. Probably this is the magic or 
illusion of God which shows everything even though it is not 
there. 

As classical evidence, the Mahabharata-sized 
epic Maharamayana, aka Yogavasistha, repeatedly and 
everywhere refers to the soulful void-form sky or space as 
the Supreme Soul. Everywhere in it the world has been 
called false and virtual. 


If the whole world exists in zero, then it 
must have the same qualities as the real 
physical world 


Now let us give an edge of logic to the above scientific 
analysis. All the activities that take place in the physical 
world take place in the void of space as well, as we said 
above. This means that the nature of the void must be the 
same as that of the world. This is possible only if the Sattva 
guna, Rajo guna and Tamo guna, all these three gunas of 
nature are present together in that void, because the 
material world is made of these three gunas, as stated in 
the scriptures. That’s why that zero soul has been 
called trigunateet, means outside of three gunas, because 
having all the three gunas in equal quantity cancel each 
other’s effect, although all the three are present always. That 
is why, in spiritual scriptures, God is also 
called indescribable, that means he has all the three 


qualities, he doesn’t have them, he has both these things 
and he doesn’t have both. These qualities cannot be more or 
less than each other in the void, because with the change of 
material things with time, the qualities keep becoming more 
or less, but zero cannot change. This means that the zero 
soul is present with light in the form of Sattva, activity in the 
form of Raja (in the form of a virtual wave together with 
wave’s absence too) and darkness in the form of Tama 
altogether simultaneously. This all proves the scriptures 
saying that the all pervading real space that’s supreme soul 
is conscious though in a far superior way than all the worldly 
living beings and it’s attainable. 


void space also behave like physical 
substances 


However, the only difference is that what void space does 
everything in virtual form, physical matter does that 
everything in reality. That’s why called in scriptures that 
supreme soul is the biggest actor, dramatist and magician. 
For example, water from sea water bounces out in small 
pieces to form real drops. But in the ocean of void space, first 
thing, void cannot jump as a piece, secondly there is no 
existence of such an empty space, which is not in the form of 
one continuous void sky. That’s why there is only one way 
left, that is to make falsehood, that is, to make appearances, 
that is, to make virtual drops. According to science, we call 
them the basic particles i.e. Elementary Particles, which 
keep on popping out of the empty space, that is, they keep 
On appearing and also keep on merging in it. Just like the 
drops of water keep coming out of the ocean, and keep 
merging in it. Then why not accept this experience of self- 
awakening scientific and correct that the whole universe is a 
virtual wave inside the soul. The problem is that experience 
cannot be shown to anyone else and no machine can verify 
it. It has to be experienced by oneself. 


Transformation of Science-era into Yoga- 
era 


It is abundantly written in the scriptures that the world 
Cannot arise out of nothing. From long time ago sages knew 
from self-experience that this world originated from self- 
illuminating soul in the form of sky, not from any dark 
empty space. Many scientific arguments were given for this, 
which also proved the same. Self- 
awakened means Kundalini-awakened people also tell the 
Same experience. That soul cannot be grasped by the 
material senses, but is experienced only as one’s own true 
nature. That’s why one thing is clear that it can only be 
guessed by science, but it can be seen only through yoga. 
Science will calm down after guessing it, and then move 
towards yoga to experience it. All scientists will become 
yogis, and the science-age will be transformed into the yoga- 


yuga. 


There is no difference between the outer 
and inner universe 


If the universe of the mind is experienced inside the soul, 
then the physical universe outside too, because we can know 
it only in an approximation from the mental universe, never 
directly and in reality. But this much is certain that the real 
form of the external universe is also like the mental universe. 
The only difference is that the outer universe is more stable 
than the inner universe, that’s why it looks almost the same 
to everyone for thousands of years, but the mental universe 
keeps changing every moment with thoughts and 
experiences. 


Many deep mysteries of science can be 
solved by Kundalini awakening 


For example, what is the deepest core of the universe, what 
is the principle of quantum entanglement, what is an 
electromagnetic wave and how it moves, vacuum energy, 
quantum fluctuations, dark energy, big bang, expansion of 
the universe, black hole, multiverse, parallel universe , 
Anti Universe, Fourth Dimension, Spacetime’ Travel, 
Teleportation, Alien Hunting etc., and many more. Caleb 


Scharf, an astrophysicist, says that the entire universe may 
just be a giant alien. For Einstein, time is an illusion. All such 
thoughts and theories match with the thinking of 
learned sages and philosophers. That’s why scientists 
should leave one-sided physical thinking and include yoga 
and spirituality in their study, only then all 
the mysteries of the world can be revealed. Many quantum 
theories can be understood from yoga science, such as 
the wave particle dual nature of matter, standing 
wave, the double slit experiment, the de Broglie principle, 
the Casimir effect, and many more. The theory of 
everything for which scientists have been trying for a long 
time, it seems that yoga can meet it. Some scientists are also 
moving in Spiritually truthful direction, such as Stephen 
Hawking’'s string theory Robert Lanza‘s Biocentrism 
Theory, the theory of aliens being hidden in every 
object, Adam Frank's theory considering Earth as a living 
being, A theory considering Earth as a prison for criminals 
and Moon as prison monitoring center etc, and many others. 
Although these are all scientific guesses, like | said above. To 
prove these, there is a need to take along those people who 
have directly experienced Kundalini awakening through yoga. 
Nowadays, the atmosphere of discussion on such inexplicable 
types of science riddles is heated everywhere. The iron is hot, 
and scientists should not hesitate to take the hammer. If you 
also want to contribute in solving these riddles, then do write 
in the comment box. 


Kundalini Yogi is like a truly 
quantum scientist who is the 
master of subtle physical world 


Kundalini Yoga can fulfill man’s curiosity to 
learn and move forward 


Friends, in the previous post | was telling about the space- 
form nature of the soul. In practice it is seen that everything 
keeps on breaking down to below and below to successive 
finer constituents. In the end the smallest thing will be 
remaining which will not break. That is the sky. Then again in 
the beginning of the creation when things start to be made 
from it, the first thing to be made will be a virtual wave in the 
Sky because there was nothing except the sky. There is only 
one way to make it look like a wave or a particle by making 
a running or standing wave respectively. | was also telling 
in the previous post that when the medium and the particle 
are the same thing and the particle is nothing other than the 
medium, then the particle will also be called a wave. A 
particle of water can be formed inside the air, but how can a 
particle of water be formed inside the water. The only way is 
to make it look like a particle by creating a virtual standing 
wave. That’s why in the scriptures 
that Chidakash i.e. conscious sky has been called as Neti- 
Neti. The Sanskrit word neti is made up of two 
words, na and iti. Na means no, and iti means this. That’s 
what neti means, this is not, means this is not God. 
Whatever is seen, will be considered neti. All the particles 
and waves will also be considered neti, as long as they are 
found. In the end, the invisible dark sky that remains will also 
be neti. That is because we are able to see or know it in 
another from self form. Any kind of thought or feeling will 
be considered as neti. In the end, such an element will 
remain, towards which we will not be able to point, that 
means it will be our own self. Because we will not be able to 
address it by saying iti i.e. this, therefore it cannot be neti. 
Neti can be what we call iti. It means, the silence is the top 
knowledge. This self is experienced during Kundalini 


awakening. Nonliving or dark sky can’t be self-sky because 
it can’t show glistening world inside it as its waves. Only 
living or conscious sky can be the self-sky as it does so. 
Means a mental feeling of light and consciousness is a small 
wave inside infinite ocean of it, not as a particle inside 
unrelated base medium as per physical experiments and 
awakening experiences. Both goes side by side to prove fully. 
Although inner experience of awakening is alone enough for 
more philosophicals and intellectuals. What can be a bigger 
proof about God than this? Most of the scientists and 
modernists who think that such-and-such particle will be 
found or such-and-such force will be known or such-and-such 
theory will be proved, then probably all the secrets of the 
universe will be exposed. But this is not true. Whatever you 
get will be iti, that’s why it will come under neti. There will 
always be something left to find. Means the origin of the 
universe will not be known. The ultimate origin means the 
ultimate soul will be known only when one will feel his self- 
form without meeting any iti i.e. something different from 
oneself. This is possible only through Kundalini Yoga. This 
proves that only through Kundalini Yoga, all the mysteries of 
the universe can be revealed at the root level and it fulfills 
the curiosity of man to learn and move forward. A long- 
standing mental thirst appears having been quenched. 


As many creatures as the universe means 
multiverse 


The universe is like a disorderless wave inside the Chidakash 
that’s conscious sky. It is as pure as Brahman. What can be 
the difference between water and water wave. But man 
colors it with his feelings, beliefs, and thoughts. That’s why 
this universe is different for each person or creature. That is 
why it is said that the universe is not somewhere outside, it is 
only the product of man’s mind. This point has been made 
clear in the entire Yogavasishtha book with many stories 
and examples. We can also call this the multiverse. With 
Kundalini Yoga, when the mind’s thoughts and feelings are 
purified, means the attachment to these is removed, then 
the noise of the restlessness of the mind calms down, then 


only the experience of the original Brahma-like universe 
along with its wavy world is realized, due to which the person 
starts living as self-satisfied. Kundalini itself is Advaita. 
Advaita is to see all the things of the world as same and 
inseparable from self meaning as waves in the self-form sky. 
Quantum scientists also see true nature of subtle substances 
as inseparable from space, wave-like and similar to each 
other. There’s no difference between light or photon wave 
and electron wave. Both are waves. But particle nature 
varies. This means duality resides in untrue particle nature 
and nonduality resides in true form wave nature. Also, it’s 
only possible to show a wave as particle, not particle as a 
wave. This also proves that wave nature is true nature of the 
quantum objects. This is the true view of gross world too, 
because it is only the subtle substances that join together to 
form the gross world. This means the wave form of the world 
is the truth, the particle or physical form is imaginary and 
unreal, as it has been said everywhere in the scriptures. The 
particle view is dualistic vision thats full of 
falsehood, illusion, distraction and saddening virtues in the 
world, and arises from looking at the world with attachment. 
It is like if you try to see the elementary particles in the 
double slit experiment, they behave like particles, 
otherwise they are in their true wave form. If you want to 
enjoy double, then stand near the double slit and sometimes 
look at it with a slant and sometimes turn away shyly. Haha. 


Innumerable universes at one place means 
the existence of parallel universe 


The existence of infinite dimensions 


because the physical world is a virtual wave inside the space, 
so innumerable types of virtual waves can be formed at the 
same place. One type of wave may not interact at all with 
another type of wave. Therefore there can be innumerable 
independent universes located simultaneously at one place. 
It is possible that where | am sitting at this moment, exactly 
there means in the space occupied by me, all the things of 


the universe and all the activities of the universe are present, 
because there will be something in the universe of one 
dimension, and something in another, like this, everything 
will be covered in countless universes. It may also happen 
that there are countless entire universes present in this same 
place, because small and big are also relative, not real. This 
means that in this way innumerable dimensions exist. We 
can never know them, because the virtual wave dimension in 
which our universe is located will not be affected at all by the 
dimensions created by other types of virtual waves. It is 
possible that the Great Attractor, which is inflating the 
universe like a balloon, may be in the form of countless and 
enormous universes in unknown dimensions. We are 
considering it to be the natural gravitational force of space, 
while it is being created from invisible universes. 


Scientific experiment in the form of 
personal experience of the dual nature of 
matter 


Once a spark of lightning struck my hand. | felt as if 
someone had hit a stone hard on the back surface of my 
hand. Even | started looking here and there for who had 
thrown the stone. That sparkling electric ring fell on an iron 
Sheet about ten meters away around which children were 
also playing but they were saved luckily. Amazing thing that 
there was no scratch on that iron sheet, it was exactly like 
before. There was no sound of hitting anything etc. This 
means that the fundamental particle of matter, the electron, 
behaved like a particle on my hand, while it behaved like a 
wave on the iron sheet. Photoelectric effect and double 
slit experiment was an experiment with inanimate 
substances, but | felt this experiment on my living body. You 
must have also seen how the whole building collapses due to 
lightning, or a big hole is formed on its roof. Also as it 
happens with a tall tree, a lot of its wood gets chipped from 
the middle or the tree falls down in two pieces. It is 
called Vajrapata in Sanskrit, meaning the falling of an iron- 
like sphere from the sky, like a bomb falling. This means that 
the people of ancient times had knowledge of the particle 


effect of the electron-wave. There is a Bijli Mahadev 
temple in Kullu of Himachal Pradesh. The 
stone Shivling located in it is struck by lightning once 
every year, due to which it splits into two pieces. Then both 
those pieces are joined with butter by the priests of the 
temple. This is also a particle nature of electron. A 
fundamental particle is so small that it can only be detected 
indirectly at the Large Hadron Collider by measuring the 
impact of its collision, just as it produced the sensation of a 
collision on my hand. Even it can never be detected directly, 
it is a distant thing to be seen. 


Kundalini Yoga is the origin of 


Quantum elements like 
fundamental particles, wave and 
planck length of the 


physical universe 


both inside and outside the mind are 
relative and illusory 


The existence of anything or the world outside the mind cannot be proved 


Friends, in the previous post | was telling how the mental 
world is not real, but a virtual wave inside the soul. Similarly, 
the physical world does also not exist, it is also created by 
the mind. This is not today’s invention, as is being shown in 
many places. This was experienced by sages and many 
other awakened persons thousands of years ago, which they 
left by writing in spiritual scriptures for the benefit of future 
generations like US. Especially in the 
book Yogavasishtha there is a very beautiful and scientific 
description of these facts. Once upon a time there was so 
much attraction for it that to read it peacefully or after 
reading it many people used to leave their homes and go to 
secluded ashrams to gain knowledge. It places the reader in 
a quantum or otherworldly dimension. It’s too repetitive, so 
repeating the same thing over and over again in different 
catchy ways makes it like mindwashing. The staunch 
materialists may say that this is true about the mental subtle 
world inside the soul-space as experienced through 
awakening, but how to accept it about the gross physical 
world outside. But they forget at the same moment that 
there is no existence of such a thing as the physical world 
apart from the mind, because man cannot know anything 
apart from the mind. One can only imagine that world, but 
that imagination is also subtle and inside the mind. Then 
some logical and curious people can imagine that why 
the conscious sky should be considered as the root, why 


not the inert sky, because sorrow, absence etc. are pieces of 
the inert sky. 


The unconscious space is also virtual and 
false inside the conscious space that’s true 
soul like the expressed world 


Awakened people answer this in such a way that 
like Chidakash-wave, the unconscious sky also does not 
exist. It is illusoryly felt as one’s own soul. That illusion 
increases with attachmentto the world, and decreases 
with non-attachment. Just as the expressed world is virtual 
in the conscious sky, so is the unconscious sky that’s 
the unexpressed world. That IS why Sankhya 
philosophy considers the unconscious sky as eternal as the 
conscious sky. However, the highest school of 
thought Vedanta philosophy clarifies that the unconscious 
space is virtual and not real in the conscious soul-space. 


Perfection is felt only through the 
experience of the conscious sky as 
presence-form, not through the experience 
of the unconscious sky as lack or absence- 
form 


If you think deeply, it is also empirically proven. One does not 
feel through the experience of the unconscious soul that he 
has realized everything or is complete, and that he has 
nothing left to know, do and experience. But this all is felt 
through the experience of the conscious soul. The meaning 
becomes clear from this that in reality the consciousness- 
Space is true and infinite, the physical world that comes in 
common experience is like a minor and illusion, that is, like 
a virtual wave in it. 


Creation iS indescribable and 
experienceable like Brahman 


The world is imaginary, means the physical world is 
imaginary, because we do not have access to it. The mental 
microcosm is not imaginary because it is experienced. 
Although the subtle is also relative to the gross. When there 
is not gross and outside anywhere existent then how can 
anything be subtle and inside. Means that all opposite and 
dualistic feelings like gross-subtle etc. are imaginary. That’s 
why the world is just a form of experience, it is indescribable. 
This is called jaggery of the dumb. Everyone is situated 
in Brahman, only there is a difference of level. The 
awakened individual at a higher level, others at variety of 
lower levels. No one is perfect. 


a philosophical thought experiment 


Science, which considers itself to be staunchly experimental, 
real and objective, is also nowadays presenting many 
philosophical thought experiments, which cannot be proved 
by physical experiments at all. Then why should we hesitate 
to do thought experiments, because the field of Kundalini is 
more philosophical and experiential than physical science. 
It is a thought-experiment to consider the subtlest element of 
the universe as the practice of Kundalini Yoga. By the way, 
this thing iS proof-proven from _ the scriptures. 
The Vedas and scriptures are also considered to be direct 
evidence like physical evidence, in many cases more so than 
physical evidence, such as in the case of God and 
awakening. 


The Ida and Pingala nadis are the crest and 
trough of the subtlest wave 


The standing wave in the form of Moolakan_ that’s 
fundamental particle can be that when the pair 
of Swadhishthan Chakra and Ajna Chakraor the pair 
of Mooladhara and Sahasrara points are pressed together 
or meditated together with the finger and the wave of energy 
runs between them sometimes through Ida, sometimes 
through Pingala, and in between both through Sushumna at 
intervals. Muladhara is Yin or Patala abode or Prakriti, and 


Ajna or Sahasrara is Yang or Heaven or Purusha. The 
middle Sushumna Nadi is the original particle or the real form 
of the world, because it is from it that the Kundalini i.e. mind 
i.e. the world emerges. 


The temporary fundamental particle is in 
the form of partial yoga practice while the 
permanent particle is in the form of 
complete yoga 


Just as there is a constant flow of energy between 
Mooladhara and Sahasrara in man, in the same way between 
Prakriti and Purusha in Mulakana. That’s why the wave 
keeps on moving, it never stops. It is like a stable or real 
particle. The virtual particle is like the initial yoga practice by 
a learner, in which the flow of energy in Ida and Pingala is 
temporary or intermittent, and less effective. That’s why 
these temporary particles keep appearing for a short time, 
and keep getting absorbed in the sky. 


The particle is in the form of a wave 
traveling from Muladhara to Sahasrara, 
while the antiparticle is in the form of a 
wave returning from  Sahasrara to 
Muladhara 


At the end of the universe, antiparticles of all the particles will be 
expressed, which will destroy each other and bring holocaust 


Muladhara is the symbol of nature that’s prakriti here, and 
Sahasrara of Purusha. The above temporary virtual particles 
as two opposite particles of plus and minus form keep on 
being born. This means that sooner or later the permanent 
particle-wave will also end, of course at the end of the 
universe. Then the wave in the form of opposite particles will 
move in the opposite direction from Sahasrara to Mooladhara 
i.e. Purush towards Prakriti. In this case, just opposite to 
each plus particle, negative particles will be formed. Due 


to this, the particle and the antiparticle will swallow each 
other by joining each other, and the creation will come to an 
end. This is called holocaust. Then there will be no wave for 
a long time. This is called God Narayan going 
into Yognidra. Means he is in sleep, but he is situated in his 
fully awakened form at the same time. Science says that as 
soon as a particle is formed, an antiparticle is also formed, 
but it disappears somewhere. It is possible that at the end of 
the universe those antiparticles appear again. 


At this moment the antiparticles are in the 
form of gravity 


| am saying this because many scientific type people are also 
saying the same. Gravity is like a hole in space. Half of the 
wave is also like a pit. Both cannot meet due to some force. 
That’s why gravity pulls the particle towards itself into 
a virtual pit inside the sky, but it cannot completely 
merge with it. When only the top half of a wave is visible, it 
looks like a particle. When the crater of gravity is also seen 
with it, then that particle comes in wave form. This means 
that at the time of doomsday, gravity will swallow up the 
entire universe. 


quantum gravity exists 


It is clear from the above analysis that even elementary 
particles like electrons, quarks etc. have gravity. It is in the 
form of an antiparticle like a microscopic virtual pit in the 
Space created by the particle. Science is not able to find it, 
but it is also not able to deny the existence of quantum 
gravity. 


The first node of the original wave is 
Prakriti, and the second node is Purusha 


These pictorial points are the two nodes of the most 
basic standing wave. The blue dot on one corner is the 
negative or north pole node and the red dot on the other 


corner is the positive orsouth polenode. The wave 
swinging between these is the desire or thought to create the 
universe. The assumed central line is the Sushumna in the 
form of meditation, which is the firm determination to 
create the universe. Assumed central line means particle 
nature is assumed, real nature is wave. That’s why it is said 
that Brahma created the universe with penance in the form 
of meditation. Means Prakriti is one node and Purusha is the 
other node. Anyway, the origin of the universe is believed 
to be due to the combination of Prakriti and Purush. Prakriti is 
the dark sky, and Purusha is the self-illuminated sky. Both 
are eternal. Prakriti is the negative node, and Purusha is the 
positive node. The stable wave formed between these two is 
the smallest fundamental particle. Such particles keep 
popping out in the sky and merge in it. When they get 
stability from something, they join together to form countless 
particles. This leads to the expansion of the universe. This 
means that every particle of the universe is doing yoga. The 
whole universe is yogic. 


Fundamental quantum particle is a 
Kundalini Yogi doing Kundalini meditation 


Planck length is the minimum distance between node and anti node of the 
smallest wave 


Scientists haven’t found any particle smaller than a quark. It 
may also be possible that there are waves smaller than 
quarks as assumed in string theory, but they can show 
themselves as particles only after rising to the level of 
quarks. Waves are detected only at the particle level. Maybe 
the shortest wavelength is exactly equal to the Planck length, 
which is the smallest length possible. One node of that Planck 
wave is nature, and the other is Purusha. Well, Prakriti and 
Purusha are one and the same, there is only virtual 
difference. In this way the Planck length is also not real but 
virtual. Waves in the sky can also be virtual, not real. From 
Prakriti means Muladhar, a wave of shakti rises towards 
Purush means Sahasrar, means God Brahma meditates for 
yogic penance. That wave swings alternately to the left and 


right in the form of Ida and Pingala, meaning Brahma tries to 
immerse himself in meditation. When the meditation is a 
little stable, the wave of energy starts flowing in the virtual 
type Sushumna channel in the middle. This makes 
the Kundalini picture stable in the mind, which means the 
first and smallest particle is formed. Then the world goes on 
increasing further and further. Even today, the whole 
creation is running towards the open and empty space 
outside, which means that the same basic habit is intact that 
there is racing of the nature that’s prakriti towards the 
Purusha. Every object and creature of the universe has only 
one basic habit, running from unconsciousness to 
consciousness. 


Fundamental particle 


Kundalini Yoga is also a wave 


Friends, in the previous post | was telling through a thought- 
experiment how gravity will swallow all things at the end of 
creation. Some Scientists are also making a similar guess, 
which has been named Big Crunch. 

Along with this, there was also talk about the wave nature of 
the fundamental particles. In the case of physical waves like 
wind, water etc. it is seen that crest and trough cannot form 
simultaneously. When water rises above the surface to form 
a crest, it cannot sink below the surface as a trough at the 
same location at the same time. But this can happen in the 
case of a Sky wave, because it is virtual, and does not require 
any physical object or medium. That’s why the three 
dimensional fundamental wave looks and behaves like a 
fundamental particle, as illustrated in the previous post. The 
wave in the form of particles keeps moving forward making 
such three dimensional crest and trough, because 
prakriti and Purusha are present everywhere, and the race 
from prakriti to Purusha goes on everywhere. That is why 
fundamental particles appear together in many places. The 
next trough is formed from the previous crest, and the next 
crest from the previous trough, because nature 
loves symmetry. In this way, in the form of countless waves, 
countless subtle loops are formed in space. Means the whole 
Sky seems to be divided into loops. Quantum loop 
theory also says that space is not flat but divided into the 
smallest pieces. There cannot be smaller pieces than that. 
But if it is seen from the principle, then everything will 
definitely become the smallest after breaking. It is nothing 
but the empty sky without attributes. What has been called 
the quantum loop of space is not actually the natural form 
of void space, but a virtual fundamental particle in space. 
This gives the answer to all these things that why wave 
behaves like a particle, how standing wave and 
propagating wave are formed etc. Any wave is actually a 
form of meditation. Ida, Pingala and Sushumna 
nadis move in wave form only. Actually nothing moves in a 
wave, the thing making the wave just comes back to its 
original place by vibrating back and forth or up and down. 


Only the wave moves forward. Anyway there is nothing in the 
Space like zero to appear. So the only option left is wave. 
Even there is nothing to tremble at its place to make a space 
wave. That’s why vibrations are shown only in falsehood. 
Don’t know how. Light, which is considered to be God or 
devata, moves only in the form of waves. So is Agni. 


The movement of the nadi is also in the 
form of a wave 


Sensation in the nadi moves forward in the form of waves. 
The sodium-potassium pump works in this. Sodium and 
potassium ions keep coming in and out of the nerve fibre wall 
at their own place, and the wave of sensation continues to 
move forward. 


wave carries information 


If a pebble is thrown somewhere in the pond, a wave is 
created on its water and spreads everywhere. Due to this, 
aquatic animals become alert from the possible danger. By 
walking on the ground, a wave is created on it, by which 
animals like snakes become alert or run away. Everyone 
knows about the transmission of information in the form of 
sound waves through the air. From Mooladhara, the wave of 
sensation goes to Sahasrara, due to which Sahasrara 
becomes alert i.e. active. The alert is from the enemy as 
passing time, which always stands in front of the man in the 
form of inevitable death early or late. Hence Sahasrara 
strives for awakening or spiritual lifestyle in the form of 
worldly experiences with Advaita. Actually worldly goals too 
are achieved with the healthy Sahasrar because it’s the site 
of feeling. 


The soul feels the virtual world inside itself 
with the help of electromagnetic waves 


The movement of charged particles in the nadi creates an 
electromagnetic wave in the surrounding sky. That wave is 


felt virtually dividing the self-sky of Sahasrar in to varying 
patterns according to the em waves being made through 
varying physical experiences brought about by senses. That 
is why it is said that the place of the soul is Sahasrar. It is 
surprising that innumerable virtual artifacts are created in 
the sky by electromagnetic waves at innumerable places, but 
they are felt by the soul only in the Sahasrara of the brain of 
the living being. If we get the correct information about its 
structure and its functioning, then it is possible that science 
will also be able to create an artificial organism and 
artificial brain. 


Kundalini yoga makes the 
universe a giant alien or Devata 


electromagnetic wave in vacuum 


Friends, | was telling in the previous post that the mental 
world is created by electromagnetic field or waves. Then 
why not assume that the physical world outside is also made 
of these waves. The only difference is that in the mental 
world, these waves are unstable, and keep on changing 
according to the information being brought from outside 
through the senses like eyes, but in the gross world outside, 
after getting stability from some force, they behave like 
permanent particles. Through this the world keeps moving 
forward. In the brain, the electromagnetic wave is created by 
the energy coming from the Muladhara, but from where this 
energy comes in the empty space outside, it is a matter of 
search. 


Origin of field from particle and particle 
from field 


Quantum field theory is the most modern and accepted 
one today. According to this, there exists an omnipresent 
field of every particle and force. Space is not empty but filled 
with these fields. Field means potential. Field means ability 
to create particle and the effect of particle. I think it as small 
accompanied waves with a main wave when a pebble is 
dropped in to a water body. The main big wave is like a 
particle and small waves are as its field. The area up to which 
these subtle waves are felt is the field area of that main wave 
as particle. This field is a lightest level wave. When a point in 
the electron field receives energy, the amplitude of this 
subtle wave increases, and a particle is generated there. That 
is electron. These fundamental fields are smaller than the 
smallest particle that’s quark. Similarly, a field is also formed 
around the electron. It also connects with 
the proton through the electromagnetic field itself. In the 
field of this attraction also a special particle is probably 


produced that’s photon, which establishes this attraction. 
In this way, by creating particles from fields and fields from 
particles, they both continue to move forward along with the 
physical world outside. 


The rise of the manifest from the 
unmanifest and the unmanifest from the 
manifest 


Mind is also like a quantum field. In this, every type of 
resolution remains in the form of unmanifest i.e. invisible 
wave. It IS called Avyakt according to Samkhya 
philosophy. When it gets energy from Mooladhara, then 
the subtle waves of this mental quantum field start getting 
bigger, which creates a bizarre mental world as counterparts 
of gross particles in outside world. From that more fields are 
born, from which more thoughts are born. In this way this 
cycle goes on and the thoughts of the man do not come to 
stop. Being the unmanifest born from the manifest and 
manifest from the  unmanifest, the inner mental 
world continues to move forward like the physical world 
outside. 


Similarities Between Quantum Physics and 
Spiritual Psychology 


Mool prakriti or Avyakt is the basic wave of lightest level. 
Avyakt is made of unmanifest only, avyakt means subtle 
level of vyakt or manifest. However, in its origin also, there is 
a waveless indescribable Purusha or soul. In the last 
paragraph, | will explain why a fully actionless man is unable 
to do any work. Why is he considered like a silent spectator, 
who helps nature by his mere presence, but does nothing 
himself. Nature or prakriti does all the work. Purush means 
pure soul is like a magnet by pulling towards which all the 
work gets done spontaneously by nature. That’s why it is said 
that the one who is dependent on God, his life ends well by 
itself. But God must be real and well understood, which is 
possible only through Kundalini Yoga. Just as our every 


action and thought is pre-existing in a subtle form in the form 
of unmanifested nature called the subtle body, similarly 
every quantum particle is pre-existing in the form of its 
own quantum field. Shakti coming from Vyashti 
Muladhar means individual Muladhara creates disturbance 
in the Vyashti Avyakt means individual Avyakt or Vyashti 
quantum field, due to which thoughts in the form of 
different waves i.e. Vyashti Mool or 
fundamental particles emerge. In the same way, due to 
the shakti or energy generated from the cosmic 
Muladhara that is, the universe-pervading Muladhara, 
disturbance is created in the cosmic quantum field, due to 
which the fundamental particles are born. But where does 
this energy come from in the universe? Philosophically and 
psychologically, the basic nature or mool prakriti can be 
considered as the universal basis or cosmic Muladhara, 
because the word mool means origin is attached to both, and 
both are the first stones of the basic foundation or adhar of 
all worldly creations whether inside or outside, but how will it 
be proved physically scientifically? Like the Muladhara of the 
individual, there should be some sex act and sex power 
generated from it in the cosmic Muladhara. So why not 
consider it as sex between cosmic Purusha and cosmic 
prakriti, which is indicated in the scriptures. 


The process of childbirth is the minor 
physical path of Tantric Kundalini Yoga 


Actually, the unmanifest subtle body of the living beings 
becomes even more subtle after death, because at that time 
it is not getting any energy from the gross body at all. It 
becomes like a thick dark soul-space whose darkness varies 
according to the unmanifest world hidden in it. That 
unmanifest world also varies according to the manifest world. 
That is why the subtle bodies of all living beings differ 
according to their living time gross nature. In this way, when 
the unmanifest soul-space of many living beings joins 
shoulder to shoulder with the collective unmanifest i.e. basic 
nature or mool prakriti to form the united unmanifest spirit 
i.e. darkness of the soul-sky beyond a certain limit, then from 


there a wave of energy jumps towards the Purusha. Due to 
this an increase in the amplitude of waves in the basic 
quantum field occurs resulting in to the rise of the 
fundamental particles and the beginning of the expansion of 
the world. It is like when a man starts sinking into the 
darkness of sorrow or depression beyond his tolerance 
limit, then with the help of sex, his unmanifest mental 
world drowned in the darkness of Muladhara rises up with 
shakti to the Sahasrar, so that the mental world of his 
thoughts can start re-illuminating. It is also said in 
the scriptures that when the actions of the living beings 
become oriented to bear fruit, that is, when the living beings 
seem to be bored with the darkness, then they appear 
physically collectively in the world being remade after 
the annihilation. It gives inspiration to start the world again. 
It is a universal ie collective creation and holocaust. 
Individual creation and destruction go on with the birth and 
death of every living being. After spontaneous or ordinary 
natural death, the soul rests in the unmanifest for some time 
playing the flute of peace, then soon gets bored of it. That’s 
why Shakti hidden or unmanifest in it wants to try to move 
towards Purusha to express that unmanifested soul. In fact, 
shakti does not move anywhere, because Purush, Prakriti and 
Shakti all three live together in Purusha or brain. The 
unmanifest, the manifest and the shakti that creates them 
remain in the brain or Purusha or soul, but the unmanifested 
world is felt to rise up from the Muladhara or individual mool 
prakriti, because the special sexual force that drives the 
Shakti of the brain rises up from the Muladhara or individual 
mool prakriti. For that a mutual meeting of a man and a 
woman is necessary through sex. Coincidentally, the nature 
of that dead soul matches with the unmanifested world 
situated in the mixed Mooladhara of a specific sexualized 
man and woman couple. The mixed unmanifest world in 
Muladharas of both rising up through the power of sex, taking 
with it the suppressed feelings and hidden thoughts 
throughout all the chakras, manifests with joy in Sahasrara, 
and mixed with each other in both Sahasrara Chakras. From 
the man’s Sahasrar, that mixed world descends with the 
Shakti through the front channel, transforms into semen and 
enters the woman’s womb to create a child. That is why 


the qualities of both mother and father are mixed in the 
child. That is why the behavior of the parents has a deep 
impact on the children, because the energy of all three is 
interlinked. That’s why it is seen in practice that the 
children of a couple who enjoy sexual pleasure with 
love progress a lot, materially as well as spiritually. 
On the contrary, the children of couples living like 
strangers often remain frustrated. It is a different matter 
that many people with good fortune make a living from here 
and there. Haha. Experienced tantra yogis focus the 
Kundalini shakti of sexual intercourse on only one 
meditation picture in their Sahasrara instead of expressing 
the whole world with it, and keep it there for a long time 
without lowering it down into the seed in the form of semen, 
so that it becomes mental birth of a child that’s the kundalini 
image wakes up. This is called Tantric Kundalini 
awakening. 


the whole universe is an alien 


These above facts mean that the universe also behaves like a 
giant organism or human being. Due to this the Vedic saying, 
“Yatpinde tat brahmande” is proved scientifically here also. It 
means that whatever is there in a small thing like body, it is 
also there in the universe, nothing else. Here only the body is 
called Pind, not anything else, because after someone’s 
death, when his soul is given food and drink through Shradh 
etc., it is called Pinda-daan. Because if every little thing had 
to be including in the word Pinda then other words like Ande, 
khande etc. would have been better, not Pinda. Secondly, in 
Punjabi language the place where people live collectively in a 
close group that’s the village is called Pinda. Moola Prakriti is 
the foundation or Muladhara of the universe, and Chetan 
Purusha or Paramatma is its Sahasrara or Kundalini 
awakening in it. In the form of the creation of picturesque 
worlds, its living or Karmayoga has to move towards 
Kundalini awakening. It does this with Advaita. It is written in 
the scriptures that Brahma himself says that he creates the 
world with non-duality, so that he does not fall in the 
bondage of birth and death. That’s why this is his Kundalini 


Yoga. Advaita and Kundalini Yoga are interrelated. The 
creation of the whole universe in totality is its Kundalini 
awakening. As a man feels after Kundalini Jagran that he has 
done everything, similarly Brahma gets Kundalini Jagran after 
doing everything, this is what it means. After this, taking 
retirement from it is the slowing down and stopping of the 
expansion of the universe. After death, its mixing in the 
ultimate element or supreme soul is the holocaust. That’s 
why in the scriptures, God Brahma has been imagined, 
whose body is the whole universe. Nowadays science has 
also started believing in this concept. That is why a scientific 
theory is also emerging that the whole universe may be a 
giant alien. 


What we call dark void or unmanifest is also 
not empty but is full of cosmic waves with 
limited ups and downs 


If someone becomes too much situated in the conscious soul- 
Space or the Supreme Soul or if he remains constantly in the 
soul-space, then he cannot do any work. He remains 
dependent and innocent like a monk. This means that at that 
time the manifested world in him is no longer in the form of 
unmanifested sky. Means they become pure soul. It means 
that there are no vibrations called quantum field in their soul 
Space at all. It becomes complete Chidakash or waveless 
conscious sky. For this reason, even in the gross universe 
too, the sky is empty at that place, where there are no 
vibrations. Other places are filled with planets and stars. 
Virtual particles keep on being created due to a little 
vibration. Means, even those sannyasins do a little bit of 
work, but they are not able to run any decisive work- 
Campaign or world-business. Yes, there is an intermediate all- 
round way that through Tantric Yoga, continuously keep 
creating and destroying vibrations in the soul space to get 
the benefits of both. 


Kundalini yoga science can peep 
into black holes too 


Shakti is eternal like Shiva 


Friends, in the previous post | was telling from where the 
shakti comes. Shakta sect says that like Shiva, Shakti is also 
eternal. It has to be accepted, because if Shakti is perishable, 
then from where does it come in the initial void of creation. If 
Shiva is considered to be the only indestructible and original 
element, then there is a new explanation. The quantum 
fluctuations of the subtle body get recorded in the soul. 
There is darkness in the soul according to those quantum 
fluctuations. Means the darkness of the soul varies according 
to the type and quantity of quantum fluctuations. This rule is 
applicable in both individual and macro cases. This is called 
the causal body. The same darkness of the soul again 
creates quantum fluctuations according to itself in the 
beginning of the universe. Means the causal body or the 
causal universe comes in the form of a subtle body or a 
subtle universe. From that then the gross body or the gross 
universe is formed. But still the question remains. 
Immediately, this answer is made that cosmic Shakti i.e. 
the cosmic causal body remains in the form of dark space, 
but it does not have its own existence in the form of 
experience of illusion of darkness by any soul, and that 
unaffected Supreme Soul is only Shiva. Or say that Shakti as 
dark zero becomes one with Shiva. 


At the beginning of the creation, Shakti 
separates from Shiva and starts the 
creation of the universe 


Just like the water of the lake always keeps moving, in the 
same way subtle waves always keep rising in the space. In 
both, sometimes the waves increase more due to wind etc. 
This is the rise of particle from energy. These waves in 
Space are created by the collision of celestial 
bodies. Scientists also say that when there is more 


upheaval in space, more new planets and stars etc. are 
formed. But how this upheaval takes place in the zero space 
of the beginning is a matter of research. 


The secret of the birth and death of the 
universe may be hidden in the black hole 


When a star dies, it compresses to a singularity and 
becomes a black hole. That singularity dissolves into the 
unmanifested sky, because the final limit to the smallness of 
something ends in nothingness. Meaning it first becomes 
the smallest fundamental particle. Its gravity is very high. 
Meaning it is quantum gravity. The secret of the creation of 
the universe from a single particle, that is, the secret of 
the Big Bang is hidden in it. When a whole star can fit inside 
a single particle, then the whole star can also emerge from it. 
That re-creation can happen through a 
. That is why it is said that a black hole can be a factory of 
creation. It is possible that at the end time of the universe, 
gravity dominates and destroys the entire universe by 
making it a black hole. Then the whole space itself will 
become black hole i.e. unmanifest sky i.e. dark sky i.e. 
Original nature or mool prakriti. However, the whole 
universe will be contained in it under high pressure. Now it is 
not known in what form it will be there. When the pressure in 
the form of darkness of that ultimate black hole will cross a 
certain amount or time limit, then the holocaust will end 
and the unmanifest substances buried in it will start erupting 
out in the form of luminous waves i.e. moving towards the 
ultimate manifestation that’s the ultimate Purusha. This is 
called the attraction and sexual intercourse 
between Prakriti and Purusha, i.e. Yin and Yang. This will 
lead to the rebirth and development of the new creation in 
infant form. It is natural that the world will be created in the 
Same way as it was before because only the buried matter of 
the previous world is creating it. The process and order of 
new creation will also be like the old one because it is often 
seen that in the order in which a thing breaks down and gets 
destroyed, it gets re-created in almost the same order and 
process by connecting further. It is also possible that instead 


of the Big Crunch, the Big Bang continues, so that in the 
end all the fundamental particles also get scattered away 
from each other and merge into the sky. But even then black 
hole type will be formed. In that too everything, even light, 
will disintegrate and disappear into the darkness of the 
Original space. 


The subtle body of man is also a black hole 


Man also dies like this. He builds up the mental universe 
throughout life. In the end everything merges into the 
unmanifest like a dark blackhole. On the new birth of that 
man, his new mental universe is created from this mental or 
individual blackhole. Meaning, as the information is 
recorded in that darkness, the new universe also becomes 
like that. That’s why it is said that a man’s new birth is 
according to his old births. 

Light can be included in a black hole as much as countless 
stars, but it is suppressed or latent. It is like the subtle body 
of the soul i.e. the ghost after death. The light of the world 
of many births is contained in it, but it is suppressed, that is, 
unexpressed. It seems that the light is desperate to come 
out. 


Every living being receives birth and death 
in the form of a universe and a black hole 


Empirical Description of Black Holes 


| was telling in the previous post that the soul is reborn in the 
womb of a mother. This is one of many possibilities. The soul 
can go through the sun-etc routes, it can also go through 
the lunar path, it can go to heaven as well as hell, it can 
go to any planet or the other world, it can be liberated, 
and it can remain bound. The real experience of this was 
done by the wise sages only, which they have described in 
the Vedas and scriptures. We try to explain their 
experiences scientifically. My experience is that once | had 
encountered the soul of a close acquaintance. It was like a 


black hole, meaning it contained the man’s entire 
personality, | experiencing them more than his living time 
state, even with the effects of all his past lives, but still 
everything was dark, though like an endless open sky. Just 
like the whole world is contained in a black hole. It seemed as 
if the luminous world of his living state i.e. his whole previous 
personality till now from eternity was suppressed by some 
pressure, due to this that state 
was kajjali that’s mascara like or shiny black, meaning it 
was having consciousness and self-awareness not as fully 
darkness, inertness or foolishness as generally thought. It 
was not having ordinary physical light although having 
consciousness type of experiential light, and so there was 
also a peaceful joy in it, although the joy was incomplete 
because of the lack of well expressed light. Looked just like 
giving someone happiness but keeping him locked in a dark 
room. Perhaps it’s this bondage like animal tied in a dark 
room but well fed and watered that’s why God is called 
as pashupati nath or master of animals. It was as if that 
suppressed background light wanted to burst out in full 
force and explosion in the form of expression. Probably 
black holes are also like this. That’s what it looks like when 
viewed with Event Horizon. You can call the event horizon 
as the gross body or manifestation form of man, and the 
black hole as its subtle body or suppressed form. In the 
event horizon, the entire visible world is bright and gross, 
while inside the black hole it goes into subtlety and darkness, 
remaining there as well. The subtle body is in a strange state. 
Then after many days that soul was felt walking in 
a divine like state. Probably she was going towards heaven 
or liberation. | have explained this in detail in an earlier post. 
| was deeply practicing Tantric Kundalini Yoga during this 
experience. Perhaps this is what made me worthy of that 
divine experience. She was a well wisher spirit. Similarly, 
once in the middle of my yoga practice, | also had the 
experience of the subtle bodies of some inauspicious 
spirits. They looked violent and angry and bloodthirsty. 
Actually the subtle bodies are felt by one inside his soul or in 
the form of his soul directly. It is a feeling, for which there is 
no need to run the horse of thoughts. Do thoughts tell you 
the sweetness of sugar? No, it is an inner feeling. Good ideas 


and thoughts can come from behind with it, that’s a different 
matter. Similarly, with the feeling of those evil spirits, some 
bone-like, red-eyed and big sharp teeth and angry pictures 
were formed in the mind, but they were thoughts chasing 
feelings, not feelings itself. The astral body is just a feeling, 
without any physical form. The brain is like a theater man, 
which creates pictures according to the feeling or mood. | 
pacified that bad feeling by remembering Guru. That feeling 
must have been for 10-20 seconds only. After a day or two, 
we got the good news of a bad incident being averted. In the 
Same way | had told in the previous post how the soul is 
born. This too, | was giving scientific explanation to the 
things written in the scriptures, with some of my own light 
experience, although it is not a deep or conclusive 
experience. In one Upanishad, it has even been said at one 
place that after reaching the clouds, the soul dissolves in the 
rain water and comes to the ground, then enters the food 
plant through the roots. When a man eats the grain of that 
plant, it passes through his body and reaches his semen. 
From him enters the womb of his wife and takes birth. 


That which is beyond the reach of physical 
science can be reached only through 
Spiritual science 


Physicists are unable to peer into the darkness of a black 
hole. But Yoga science is pointing out that all the substances 
exist in it in the form of invisible soul, that is, particular 
invisible sky, which can be directly experienced by the soul in 
the form of special dark sky, but not through physical 
senses. The subtle body of the living being is also like that. 


Black hole is the subtle body and causal 
body of the universe-body i.e. Brahma 


Aliens are closest to us yet farthest by being present in every physical 
form 


This is proved by the above facts. | don’t see much of a 
difference between the disembodied subtle body and the 
causal body. In both the quantum fluctuations 
get recorded in the soul. The only slight difference is that 
the subtle body lasts for a short time, because the material 
creation exists to manifest it in a gross form, while the causal 
body lasts for a long time, because at that time there 
is annihilation of creation, and Nothing happens in physical 
form anywhere. Also, causal body appears fully calm because 
it has not remaining any quantum fluctuations in the form of 
flashy ghostly expression for so long as that occasionally 
happens in case of subtle body. This means that a living 
entity named Brahma also exists like an ordinary living 
being, as stated in the scriptures. The universe itself is his 
body. It is a different matter that he is not bound by it. At the 
time of annihilation, the universe gets recorded in the soul of 
Brahma. At the time of creation, it again appears in its old 
gross form. But the scriptures say that Brahma becomes 
liberated with his death at the time of annihilation. Then 
where does that recording remain for the new world? The 
meaning is clear that he becomes Jivanmukt or lively 
liberated, not Videhmukt or liberated after death. Means 
his body and the cycle of birth and death always remain, but 
with the feeling of liberation. But he was Jivanmukt earlier 
also. This is probably written to show that the movement of 
the Jiva and Brahma is the same. There is no difference 
between Brahma and Jiva. Whatever you think about 
Jivanmukt, it is right, because he is not influenced by anyone. 
It’s like some space scientists are speculating that the reason 
we don’t see aliens is because they’ve been molded into 
physical objects, and made to be either they are and they 
aren’t together. The entire universe could also be one such 
giant alien. Probably knowing this, the tradition of 
considering all things as deities and worshiping them in 
different forms started. Only people who are liberated in life 
are like this. Then the scriptures say that any living being can 
progress to become Brahma. This means to me that one can 


become a complete Jivanmukta like Brahma, not the real 
Brahma. 


If Shiva is a lake, then Shakti is a gust of 
wind that stirs it 


Let us assume that like the movement of water in a lake, 
quantum fluctuations always exist in space, which we 
call latent creation. Let’s also assume that at the time 
of Mahapralaya, space becomes like a completely calm 
water-lake, in which there is no movement at all, which 
means quantum fluctuations also stop. Just as the same type 
of wave patterns are formed again and again in the same 
order on the surface of the water due to a gust of wind, in the 
Same way, the same type of creation in space also gets 
formed again and again in the same definite order. But still 
the question remains in the end that when everything is zero 
at the end of holocaust, where does that energy or power 
come from, which starts or increases that movement. Where 
does that gust of wind come from in the void, which creates 
the initial movement. Later on, it can also be accepted that 
due to upheaval, the upheaval itself continues to move 
forward. That gust of wind that shakes the space is the 
shakti, which the people of the Shakta community believe to 
be eternal and indestructible like Shiva. If Shiva is the still 
space, then Shakti is the gust of wind that creates movement 
in it. 


Kundalini Yoga prefers the wave 
nature by ignoring the particle 
nature from the dual nature 
of matter 


Friends, | was telling in the previous post that black hole is 
the subtle body of the universe. Consider the Galaxy as its 
gross body, and the black hole at its center as its subtle 
body. Every living being is a sky, and there is a separate 
universe in it. All are independent and can never destroy 
each other. It is possible that in the same way there are 
countless independent gross universes in the same sky. 


A man never dies 


Not only | am saying this, but scientists are also expressing 
apprehension that man actually does not die, but after death 
goes into a black hole and passes through it to another 
universe. This is the same thing that the scriptures say that 
after death a man becomes a subtle body and takes a new 
birth. New birth is a new universe, because as 
many souls as many universes. Every living being is an 
infinite space, and the collection of thoughts and experiences 
in it is the whole universe. Interestingly, like the gross 
universe, the subtle mental universe is also created 
in infinite space itself, and not in the body or mind of the 
living being, as is often believed. The brain is just a 
machine for generating those virtual waves in space that 
Space can feel within itself. In scriptures like Yogavasistha, 
it is explained that the soul is like the sky imprisoned inside 
the pot hanging in the sky. It appears to be separate only by 
illusion, in reality it is one with the infinite sky. Virtual 
waves keep on forming in the sky inside the pitcher, by 
which the living being is fascinated. Let me refer to the 
previous post that with attachment to a small part of the 
infinite sky, means experiencing the waves as separate from 
the self-sky, the whole bright self-sky feels dark in itself. 
Actually it is an illusion. This leads to attachment to 


the quantum fluctuations created by those waves too even 
after death, leading to the illusory darkness that | probably 
experienced in the astral body. It is similar to how 
inquantum physics, when fundamental elements are 
viewed in particle form, they abandon their wave-like infinite 
form and behave as finite particles. Meaning infinite energy 
becomes confined in the form of a particle. Think of it as the 
light of infinite space is turned off, and only finite light 
remains in the form of particles. Glowing particles in the dark 
sky. When we see them as their true ‘waves of the infinite 
sky’ form, they behave that way as waves of space. Meaning 
that wave is luminous because the space in which it is 
created is itself luminous. Means the light of the entire 
infinite space remains on along with the light of wave. A 
wave made in water can be colored only if that water is also 
colored. If the water is black, then the wave created by it 
cannot be colourful. When that wave is to be felt as a 
particle, meaning independent of water, then the color of the 
basic water needs to be destroyed, but the color of the wave 
needs to be allowed to remain. But this is not possible. 
Therefore the color of the wave-medium that’s water has to 
be made to disappear in virtual form, ie, by creating an 
illusion, like a magician’s illusionary trick. That’s why even 
though the real form of matter is waves, they seem to be 
particles by illusion created by attachment and duality. It’s 
a simple matter. Meaning that spiritual ignorance seems 
to be based on quantum ignorance in physics. 


Kundalini Yoga shows the same 
infinite space as all black holes, 
universes, and living beings 


It is not known where a living being went after death. 
Similarly, it is not known in which universe a galaxy has 
gone after coming out of a black hole. Just as there are 
innumerable subtle universes in the form of innumerable 
living beings in the same infinite space, in the same way 
there can be innumerable gross universes in the same 
infinite space. Take out as many copies of infinite space as 
you want. Each copy is as complete as the original, not a 
duplicate, because more than one infinite space is not 
possible. Similarly, there is no existence or independent 
existence of anything other than the only one experiential- 
form infinite space. Whatever wave, particle etc. is felt in 
the virtual form in the infinite space, it is felt with its base 
infinite-space, not independently. Means it’s felt by infinite 
Space as a virtual wave inside itself. If those virtual artifacts 
had their own independent existence, then 
every inanimate object such as chair, stone, picture, statue 
etc. would be alive, as shown in many animation films. The 
world, thoughts etc. are virtual waves in that sky-soul, which 
are not real at all. That’s why only one option remains that 
only one infinite space is shown as all living beings and 
universes. This is explained in the scriptures by a verse or 


shloka, “Om  purnamadah - purnamidam purnāt 
purnamuduchyate, purnasya purnmadaya 
purnmevavasishyate”. It means that ‘that’ means 


the supreme element named Omis complete, means 
infinite space form, ‘this’ means soul is also infinite space, 
even after ‘this’ infinite space leaves ‘that’ infinite space, the 
same infinite space remains in ‘that’, there is no reduction in 
it. How can anyone extract anything from the void of infinite 
Space? Because all infinite space is one, therefore all living 
beings are also one. Just as the mental universes of the 
living beings located at different places inside different 
bodies are ‘one space form’, in the same way, the gross 
universes located at different places, although appearing in 


the same space, but having different independent local 
existence, have each independent infinite space along with 
them as their soul. This proves the point of multiverse itself. 
Just as the subtle universes are innumerable in the form of 
living beings, similarly the gross universes are also 
innumerable. Although everyone has their own infinite space, 
so everyone is an infinite space form, and someday they will 
merge into it. Although we have always merged, but we will 
be seen merging virtually. In the same way as there is 
liberation of the subtle universe in the form of a living being, 
in the same way it must have happened in the case of gross 
universe as well. It is a different matter that the prideful 
soul of the gross universe i.e. Brahma is 
already unattached, non-dual and liberated in his life, as 
stated in the scriptures. The scriptures themselves believe 
in the multiverse. They say that Brahma is innumerable like 
the innumerable living entities. Probably they says that every 
living being crossing the progressive order of development 
near the last stage of the journey of life definitely becomes 
Brahma. It is in this context that it is said in the Gita that the 
soul is neither born nor destroyed. Meaning that man never 
dies. The same is being proved from the above scientific 
facts that the infinite and void sky can neither be created nor 
destroyed. Yes, it is definitely that the confused infinite 
Space in the form of soul can be united with the original 
infinite space i.e. the Supreme Soul by removing 
its virtual illusion in the form of ignorance’ through 
Kundalini Yoga. The union is already there, just the cloud of 
virtual illusion has to be removed. 


Kundalini Awakening VS. 
Subtle Body-Samadhi 


Friends, in the last few posts | was talking about experiences 
like blackhole and subtle body. Spiritual scientists analy 
ze it a little more deeply. | think that what is in physical form, 
different from the soul that’s infinite and void space, no 
matter how small the particle is, we cannot experience it as 
self. Only soul can connect with soul, nothing else. By the 
way, the virtual wave of the soul-sky can also connect, not 
the particles at all. Because particle is the symbol 
of duality. That is different from the self-sky, like the sky- 
flower or sky-garden, as the scriptures say. If we feel 
the Kundalini image in the form of self through yoga 
Samadhi, then it will be experienced as a wave in self-sky, 
integral with our soul, not as a separate physical object or 
particle. What | experienced in the subtle body form was not 
a wave form. Meaning it was not the same as all physical 
things are ripples in the form of thoughts of the mind. Means 
their power or brightness keeps on decreasing-increasing. 
But that subtle body was dark with a uniform sooty glow. 
Then how | was feeling the full details of it, even more so 
than one gets from its living physical form. This means that 
there were subtle waves in it, which were not felt, but all the 
information recorded in them was fully felt. These waves can 
be in the form of quantum fluctuations or movements, 
which were not getting energy without the body, due to 
which they were not able to express in the form of 
gross mental waves. Those subtle waves can be also like 
physical waves. We can understand this in a way that if the 
energy of throwing a stone in a pond of water creates 
macro waves for a short time, then even after the energy 
received from the stone is exhausted, micro waves of the 
Same pattern continue to be created for a long time. This is 
because waves behave like pendulums, meaning they rise 
and fall by their own intrinsic energy. Then after death the 
vibrations of the subtle body of a man should continue to 
decrease and ultimately one should become a 
vibrationless Chidakash i.e. superconscious 

sky or Paramatmai.e. man himself should become 


liberated. In many places the scriptures also point out that 
this happens, although it is not clearly said, but one who 
does not have spiritual knowledge or who has lived a life full 
of attachment and duality, being afraid of that darkness or 
getting tired of it, soon becomes desirous to be expressed. A 
new body is chosen by him, and the body gotten is good or 
bad according to his subtle vibrations. This also means that 
in the same way, the subtle waves of the blackhole also calm 
down with time, and it becomes completely one with the 
infinite and void space like the still ocean. Although it may 
take millions of years, because it is not a vibration in water 
but in empty space. But the scriptures also clearly say 
that salvation does not come automatically. Even in 
the doomsday that continues for millions and billions of 
years, the causal body remains binding the soul with itself. | 
think both are true, according to the time and circumstances, 
although the second would fit most cases. 

By repeatedly meditating on the Kundalini picture, it 
becomes one with the soul in the form of samadhi i.e. 
Kundalini awakening. Means by meditating about anything 
and awakening it, we come to know everything about it 
completely, as the scriptures say. It has been said 
in Yogavasishtha that on connecting with Vayu in 
Yogasamadhi one gets all the powers of Vayu, such 
as flying in the sky, becoming invisible etc. Similarly, by 
connecting with other substances like fire, water etc., having 
complete and direct knowledge of those substances gives all 
their powers. Now | cannot do their scientific analysis at this 
time. But whom shall we meditate upon to awaken someone 
else’s or our own subtle body. Will do for the subtle body 
only. Don’t know how. Probably similar to what is done 
to ghosts. It is said in the Gita that those who worship God 
become gods, and those who worship ghosts become ghosts. 
So it is natural that the one who meditates on the subtle 
body will become a subtle body. Because there is the rule 
of darkness in the subtle body, therefore it seems to me 
that the ghost or the subtle body is experienced in the form 
of self by tantric Kundalini yoga 
with Panchamakaras like meat and alcohol along 

with sex that create darkness and energy together. Ghosts 
want to contact people and give or take help, but for this 


man must have the power to withstand the high pressure 
energy charge of the ghost, which seems to be possible only 
through dedicated Tantric Kundalini Yoga. If the Kundalini 
picture is related to that particular ghost or subtle body, then 
meditation becomes successful and effective more quickly. 
But for how this happens, a little in-depth analysis has to be 
done. 

| got a new insight. The above Samadhi experience was not 
like Kundalini awakening. Means in that experience | did not 
get united with the Supreme Soul, but got united with 
another soul. If | had become one with God, | would have 
been filled with infinite light, sky and bliss for a few 
moments like Kundalini awakening. Along with this, pleasant 
thoughts in the mind or brain would rise like waves in the 
ocean, as | have written in a previous post that the brain 
works like a theater man, who presents scenes according to 
the mood. However, after experiencing the subtle body for a 
few moments, the brain started forming thoughts related to 
it, such as people saddened by his death, etc. Although these 
experiences were not felt like waves in the ocean, because | 
was not experiencing that divine-ocean in which everything 
is in the form of waves. Pure experience ends with the rise of 
thoughts. Thoughts create a noise or confusion. Yogis have 
more such experiences because they can 
remain thoughtless for longer periods of time. They happen 
to everyone, but due to the noise of thoughts, they remain 
for such a short time that they are not recognized at all. 
As Osho Maharaj says that everyone experiences samadhi 
during the few moments of ejaculation experience during 
intercourse, but it lasts for such a short time that it is not 
detected. That’s why they ask to increase that time 
through meditation. Animals are said to be having some 
idea of future because they are more thoughtless than 
human beings, although in a different or ignorance filled way. 
My this above experience cannot even be called oneness, 
because oneness can only happen with God. It can be said 
like this that | left my self for a few moments and became 
another subtle body. It was as if there was only one astral 
body, but two souls experiencing it simultaneously. The real 
or host soul was that of the departed acquaintance. The fake 
or guest or intruder soul was mine. The subtle body can be 


contacted in the same way. What other way can there be to 
know the dark void sky. To know their problem or their 
question, | connected with their subtle body. His words could 
not be heard by the ears, but were directly felt in the soul. 
Neither his body, nor his face, nor his words. Still | was able 
to know everything about him and was able to hear 
everything he said. Staying in his subtle body, | also replied 
to him, which he listened to attentively, but in the same self- 
language. Then probably when | started coming into my 
subtle body to remember my awakening experience, then 
the noise of thoughts in my head started increasing, due to 
which the connection was lost. But | had told the main thing. 
May be that the host had kicked out the intruder. Haha. 
There may have been many reasons, but the main reason 
was the fear that | might be imprisoned in his astral body 
forever, and knowing my astral body to be empty, his soul 
might occupy it. Brother, first we had to save our house, not 
help anyone. Anyway, in most of cases one cannot stay in 
another’s subtle body for a long time, just as one cannot 
occupy someone’s house by being a guest. 
Probably, Parakaya Pravesh Siddhior another body 
entrance accomplishment is the improved form of this, in 
which the guest soul resides permanently by driving away 
the master soul of the subtle body. It’s hesrd that Indian 
mystic adiguru shankaracharya was master in this art. 
There is a story in the scriptures, in which 
Prince Puru donated his youth to his old father and 
King Yayati. This can happen only if they have mutually 
exchanged their subtle bodies. In my childhood, | had read 
and heard the description of a so-called true incident, 
according to which a British officer says that he saw an old 
Yogi Baba dragging the dead body of a young man through 
the bushes. After some time, that young man was alive and 
crossing the river in a boat. The meaning is clear that the 
Yogi had taken out his subtle body from his old body and 
inserted it in the dead body of the young man so that he 
could do yoga for a long time. Now don’t know whether it is 
true or it is a pretense when someone’s body is possessed by 
an external spirit, due to which the mind and body of that 
person comes under its possession. It is rectified by tantra- 
mantra etc. There is definitely something, which only 


Spiritual science can understand better, not the physical 
science. 


Kundalini awakening differs from 
black hole visualization 


Friends, the previous post was getting long so the topic had 
to be stopped there. Now let’s continue it in this post. When 
the experiences of all people are taking place within the 
same infinite space, then any man can relate to the 
experience of any other man. | mean to say that | am also 
an infinite cosmic form like every living being. | am 
attached to the subtle body created in the brain of a man 
named Premyogi Vajra. Then why can’t | connect with the 
subtle body created in the brain of my friends, Ramu and 
Shyamu. As my own real form is infinite space, similarly the 
real form of Ramu and Shamu is also that infinite space. The 
same infinite space is associated with three different subtle 
bodies. Due to that my infinite space form became different 
experience, theirs became different experience. Means the 
same infinite space started appearing as the three of us as 
different people, although it is the same. Perhaps | had 
become attached for a few moments to the astral body of 
my aforesaid acquaintance. This IS not 
a miracle but spiritual psychology. A conditioned person 
becomes what he is feeling at that time. That’s why while 
experiencing that subtle body, | became the same subtle 
body. On the contrary, during the experience of Kundalini 
awakening, man is in a completely liberated state. At that 
time he is situated in his real infinite consciousness-space. 
At that time all his experiences, whether they are related to 
his gross body or his subtle body in himself are in wave form 
i.e. false or say virtual. He doesn’t feel these even when he 
feels these. As soon as the experience of a few moments of 
awakening is over, the light of the consciousness of that 
shining infinite sky is extinguished, and he again feels 
himself to be the dark infinite sky as before. In the form of 
that darkness, the subtle body of that person is recorded. So 
why not understand that the subtle body does not exist in the 
form of any quantum movement but in the form of virtual 
darkness covering the light of the soul-sky. | am saying this 
because the acquaintance whose subtle body | experienced 
had died and therefore did not have his own body. The soul 


or infinite space cannot feel any movement outside the body 
by connecting with it. If this were so, then there would be 
innumerable movements outside the body in the form of 
innumerable waves having self existence. Then every 
electromagnetic wave would be alive. Even soil, stone, chair 
etc. everything is alive and contains soul, but it is not so. This 
means that from the beginning of the journey of life, the 
entire details of a man’s life of many births are recorded in 
the form of a special kind and amount of darkness 
experienced in his infinite soul-sky. That is called the subtle 
body. Now let’s take it on black hole. Understand that 
the star is completely destroyed like the death of a man. 
Means it is left with nothing in physical form. Only | am not 
saying this. Einstein has also proved through 
complex mathematical calculations that the blackhole 
gets compressed till the singularity. It is a different matter 
that most of the scientists are considering the smallest 
single particle as singularity, but | am going one step down 
to zero sky. Of course sky seems to be the biggest, but it is 
also the smallest. Means blackhole becomes a dark sky like a 
subtle body. Of course there is no one to experience it, 
because when no special soul was tied to the star when it 
was alive, then how can a soul be tied to it after its death. 
The machine for the bondage of the soul is only the 
body made of flesh and bones. When there is no one to 
experience, then what is the justification of the dark sky. We 
can’t even say that. If this is so, then what is the justification 
of countless waves in the form of objects like soil, stone, 
when they themselves are not experiencing themselves, 
means they cannot experience themselves. Just 
as Chidakasha that’s consciousness sky cannot perceive 
these things in it, similarly it cannot perceive its virtual 
darkness created by their destruction. That virtual darkness 
is dark matter and dark energy. After the death of a person, 
many people are drawn towards him due to grief. Perhaps 
the initial ghost is dark matter itself. A black hole is 
also dark matter in the beginning, that is why it pulls 
everyone towards itself with its strong gravity. After some 
time everyone forgets the ghost, and while hating it, 
everyone gets busy in their work as before. Means the evil 
spirit pushes everyone away from itself. Probably at that time 


the ghost becomes dark energy, because it also has the 
power to push everyone away. Probably, in the same way, 
with time, the dark matter of the black hole also becomes 
dark energy by getting absorbed in the infinite sky. It has 
also been proved by science that blackholes_ also 
continuously release radiation called Hawking radiation, 
and in this way they get destroyed after a very long time. As 
dark energy, then it does not work to pull other bodies but to 
push. Don’t know in which universe the information recorded 
in the subtle body of the departed man in the form of dark 
infinite space can be expressed inside the man born. That 
man can be reborn in any corner of the infinite space. In the 
same way, the information recorded in the macro subtle 
body called Blackhole, the dark infinite space of a destroyed 
star, may go to which universe and manifest itself in the form 
of the birth of a new star, nothing can be said. White 
hole and teleportation are hidden inside this principle. This 
also maintains the principle of science that quantum 
information is never destroyed. Information passed from 
the star to dark matter, from dark matter to dark energy, and 
from dark energy back to the star. In this way this cycle 
continues like the birth and death of a man. Many people will 
say that the ghost does not remain contained in a sphere like 
a black hole. Haha. Brother, this is spiritual science. In this, 
like in physics, one plus one cannot do two. Yes, it can show 
equality. After the death of a person, his soul remains 
localized like a black hole for some time. It is called a 
wandering or attached soul. Many people feel this soul. Then 
it goes infinite like dark energy by fully merging into infinite 
space. Different spiritual acts are performed in 
different religions so that it can speed up as soon as 
possible and it can take a new birth through the infinite 
space. 

From the above scientific description, it is clear that the old 
people knew about wormholes, white holes and 
teleportation etc., though in their own way. They knew that 
this is not possible with the gross body, but it is possible with 
the subtle body. So they used to make their astral body as 
good as possible by doing good deeds, so that it can take 
them to a good planet, star or universe, because they also 
knew that quantum information is never destroyed. 


Kundalini Shakti protects from 
inauspicious and ghostly events 


Friends, | was telling in the previous post that old people 
knew about wormhole, white hole and teleportation etc., 
though in their own way. They knew that this is not possible 
with the physical body, but it is possible with the subtle body. 
So they used to make their astral body as good as possible 
by doing good deeds, so that it can take them to a 
good planet, star or universe, because they also knew 
that quantum information is never destroyed. For this 
reason, we see that today’s children are hi-tech from birth. 
They don’t even eat food without a smartphone. Actually 
the hi-tech information of their recent past birth is recorded 
in their subtle body. As for passing through a white hole 
with the body or doing teleportation, | don’t think it is 
possible. Let’s assume that some miraculous power made 
this possible. Still, where will we go because till now no 
completely habitable planet has been found. Some are 
planning to go to Mars, some to the moon. Go there later, 
first go to the higher Himalayas and see. Even a one-degree 
drop in temperature can cause shivering and put life at risk. 
Go to another planet later, because there will be innumerable 
such problems, that too in a gigantic form. There are many 
such places on earth itself, which science is not able to 
make habitable, let alone other planets. There is nothing 
wrong in maintaining enthusiasm and positivity. 

Scientists are speculating that the matter hidden in 
the black hole can go to the hidden universe in some other 
dimension. An infinite number of dimensions of space can 
mean an infinite number of copies, as explained in a recent 
previous post. Now don’t know in which copy it goes and take 
birth again in physical form. It is as if a man goes to who 
knows which copy after his death. We creatures are in 
another copy means we cannot experience the universe 
located in other copies at all. Although we can feel the body 
of another living being. In the same way, we can know the 
other universe in external means in gross form. But other 
universes are beyond our reach. It is like a person sitting at 


the North Pole cannot see the person sitting at the South 
Pole. 

Now this evidence has also been found that all the matter in 
the black hole is buried under very explosive pressure. They 
probably want to go out with a bang, because no matter what 
the person or thing, they don’t like to be under pressure. 
Things like air, water etc. move from the area of high 
pressure to the area of low pressure. Every year thousands of 
employees change their companies due to unnecessary 
pressure of work, otherwise they fall ill. But those buried 
substances of the black hole are not able to run away from 
the gravitational force of the black hole. This is similar to 
what | was talking about in a recent post about the spirit in 
the form of a subtle body. However, in some cases, black 
holes have been observed spewing out a small amount of 
material. Similarly, ghosts can also scare people by making 
scary appearances in rare cases. These are called lost 
or wandering souls. This happens more with those who die 
of premature death. Premature death means the sudden 
death of a man immersed in worldly illusion. The same can 
happen to a man with attachment and duality towards the 
world. In this man does not get a chance to lighten and 
reduce his mental universe. Due to this their subtle body 
suddenly becomes made with a lot of pressure. Due to the 
Same pressure, they keep on making scary forms like virtual 
forms. Don’t know how. Some have more pressure of good 
thoughts, that is why they experience heaven. Many have a 
lot of pressure of bad thoughts, that’s why the same 
thoughts continue to erupt outside in the form of an 
experience of hell. By the way, the ghost lives in the form 
of darkness. There are no resolutions or thoughts in it. But 
the thoughts and choices are hidden in it in the form of 
darkness of the soul. When a man comes in contact with such 
a soul, those hidden thoughts come alive in his mind. They 
can be so powerful that they can even appear to him in their 
true physical form. This is called seeing a ghost. Bhoot in 
Sanskrit means past. Means it happened in the old time, not 
now. That’s why in ghostly movies, the poignant incident of 
the living time of the soul which became the ghost of a man 
is shown as a ghost and scares. If someone encounters such 
an imaginary ghost, then it is said that one should not talk to 


it. Because don’t know what a scary sight the clever mind 
can show in a falsehood, due to which heartfail will happen. 
Another example of a trick of the mind is the arrival of the 
black Yamraj sitting on a black buffalo to carry a dying man 
with him. It is also written in the scriptures and it is also a 
universal experience, meaning it is not limited to any country 
or religion. Actually at that time there is such a mental state 
that the mind creates such an imaginary scene which seems 
like real. Physically, no buffalo or Yama comes anywhere. 
Once, in a vivid dream, a black buffalo led me on its back 
through a dense dark forest towards the top from lower side 
of the hill. That darkness was divine and blissful, like the 
subtle body of a great man or a saint. That buffalo ran away 
leaving me in the middle of the way. Then | climbed up and 
reached that lonely and medium height hill. It was 
a supernatural scene. There was a two or three storied 
divine hut. The light was divine and like the moon or a 
candle, yet dazzling. When | came out in the open courtyard 
or terrace of the second floor, there was a divine Sadhu 
Baba. My newly written book was in his hand and was smiling 
happily saying that he had received it from the post etc. and 
he was waiting for me. He respected me affectionately and 
divinely. Soon the dream broke and | passed out of that 
divine feeling. | have also described this on the about page of 
this website. 

Let me narrate an incident regarding the lost soul. | used to 
go to a dhaba on a beautiful hill to have lunch occasionally. 
Veg and non-veg food was prepared in it. It was heard that 
once at night some miscreant customers, after an altercation 
over the bill, forced their car over dhaba owner’s father and 
fled. The death was sudden, and painful, so it was a 
premature death. After that whenever | used to go to that 
dhaba, | used to feel strange energy there. Along with this, 
every time one or the other bad incident happened with my 
relatives, it was averted. Probably Kundalini used to save me, 
but due to not doing Kundalini Yoga, it used to affect the 
weak minded relatives. Probably some effect of Kundalini 
used to reach them as well. After that | completely stopped 
going there. Ordinary religious rituals are performed by 
everyone, but after special death they should be special and 
powerful, so that the departed soul may rest in peace. 


Similarly, once | slept in an acquaintance’s house. At night | 
Saw burning wood falling on me from the roof. | screamed 
too. Then | meditated on Guru and Kundalini. This removed 
the ghostly vision and | fell asleep. There was an old history 
of such ghostly incidents and premature death there. In brief, 
the incidents heard by the eyewitnesses, a person used to 
see lights floating on the water at night, which kept on 
burning and extinguishing. A nearby haunted family had 
buried the ghost in that water by tying it in ballasts. Perhaps 
small pieces of stones or such instruments 
that’s yantras are called ballast. A friend saw children 
playing near a deserted road in the middle of the night who 
were growing up and going small too. A friend used to hear 
door knocking at night in a haunted house, on opening the 
door it seemed that something ran inside and came out with 
the sound of some objects from a hole etc., but nothing was 
visible. My past gentleman and innocent neighbor as directed 
by a tantrik went to the crematorium or burial 
ground alone at night so that his endangered business 
would be safe. In the morning he was found dead there. The 
report revealed that he had heart failure. But my 
grandfather was so brave that he used to say that he could 
sleep comfortably alone in the crematorium. Just a bed sheet 
is needed to cover the top. He had a lot of Kundalini 
shakti inside him. Hanuman Chalisa is considered best in 
exorcism. | also feel that Hanuman Chalisa immediately 
activates the Kundalini Shakti and Kundalini 
picture strongly. Yes, the same Lord Hanuman gives power 
through this chalisa, which has been perfected 
by pundit Dhirendra Shastri of Bageshwar 
Dham sarkar, and by which he shows many miracles. What 
| found most thrilling, saving from fake gurus and highlighting 
family love, is that his grandfather is his godfather or 
Guru. Many SO- 
called magicians, secular and heretical people came 
forward to expose him, but could not succeed. Nowadays it 
has become a burning topic. 

Then it is said that black holes pull the shining stars towards 
them and swallow them. Meaning they are mortality-inducer. 
The subtle body is also a form of death. Life revolves around 
it. It is at the center of life, and with increasing age pulls life 


more and more towards it. In the end life ends by falling into 
it. The subtle body of a man exercises control over every 
activity of his life. It is said that those impressions remain in 
the subtle body that’s subconscious mind only called 
as Sanskaras, which affect the behavior of a man. Similarly, 
the black hole also keeps all the planets, stars and 
other celestial bodies attached to it under its control and 
rotates them around itself. Similarly, dark energy and dark 
matter also maintain the balance of the entire universe. 
Then it is said that a black hole not only swallows its parent 
star, but many also swallow countless other stars. Even the 
subtle body of a great soul such as a 
great leader, sportsperson or any other 
great artist attracts countless followers towards it. After his 
death, his followers live in an atmosphere of mourning and 
despair for many days, many commit suicide, and by 
Spreading riots, many commit Genocide, that is, mass 
death. Of course they all get absorbed in a big blackhole, but 
their separate existence also remains. 


Kundalini yoga shows Quantum 
entangled particles are bound 
together by dark matter in the 
Same way just as two lovers are 
bound together by their 
subtle bodies 


Friends, there is frequent contact with the subtle body. The 
one with whom there is a loving relationship, there is contact 
with his subtle body. Similarly, with whose subtle body 
contact is established, love is also experienced. There 
cannot be love with only physical body. Just look at 
the soulmate. It seems to them that they are mirror 
images of each other. Of course their outer looks may not 
match each other, but their minds match a lot. One of them 
is a boy, and one is a girl. Of course, sexual attraction also 
brings them closer to each other, but it can only bring them 
closer to each other, it cannot create love. That’s why you 
must have seen that man is never satisfied with sex. If sex 
had the power to create love, man would never have 
been divorced, man would never have had more than 
one marriage, nor would he have had sex with more than 
one woman. | feel that sexual contact is an inspection 
Campaign, by which a man goes closer to find out whether he 
is in love with so-and-so or not. It is a different matter that 
many people get so deeply involved in this survey that they 
are unable to come out and compromise by staying there 
under compulsion. Some would think that | am talking 
contradictory. | like to keep an open mind, not to stick to any 
particular thought. | have said many times that sex has the 
power to create love. This is also true, but the condition 
applies. This requires a lot of time, effort and resources. 
When there is hope of getting ready made food, then why 
make it yourself brother. 

In deep man-woman love, the subtle-bodies may be 
interconnected, but they cannot replace each other. In deep 
love, telepathic contact is made with each other, each other’s 


thinking and life start influencing each other. If one partner 
thinks something, the same thing happens to the other, no 
matter how far away they are. It is clear that they are 
influenced by each other’s subtle body. But don’t know why 
everyone starts getting worried after entering the arena of 
the third subtle body. Haha. This also proves that the subtle 
body is all-pervading like the infinite sky. Once 
my university friend’s father had passed away. | had also 
met him many times in a loving atmosphere. He was 
hundreds of kilometers away from me. | didn’t know anything 
about him. The same night | saw a vivid picture of my 
father’s death in my sleep. | could not understand its reason. 
It made sense the next day when I got the news. During that 
time | used to practice intense Tantric Kundalini Yoga, 
which is probably why | felt so alive. It seems 
that quantum entanglement is also the same. The two 
entangled quantum particles may be associated with each 
other as a microscopic loving pair. It is obvious that at the 
base of the visible universe is an infinite space filled 
with dark matter and dark energy. It is also known that 
the same appears as the visible world, remains under its 
control, and when destroyed becomes the same and merges 
into it. This means that dark matter and the visible universe 
mutate into each other over and over again, never creating 
anything new, nor destroying what has been created. This 
world was there before, it is there today, and it will always be 
there in the future. New role-playing actors will continue to 
come in this, and in the form of liberation will continue to go 
to the background permanently. Entangled quantum particles 
have the same microscopic body. That subtle body is the 
dark matter of the particles they are made of. That’s why 
when one particle is manipulated, it affects the other at the 
same time, no matter how far they are from each other, even 
if one is at one end of the galaxy and the other at the other 
end. This means that each fundamental particle has its own 
separate dark matter, which is spread out in infinite space. 
Similarly, each living being iS a separate 
infinite cosmic form, of its own kind. Just as every activity of 
a man gets recorded in his subtle body, and accordingly 
keeps on repeating itself, similarly every activity of every 
particle gets recorded in its dark matter. After 


the holocaust, when the time comes for the re-creation, 
then that dark matter again becomes the original element, 
and according to the information recorded in it, it starts 
creating the universe from the front. In this way, with the 
cooperation of all the fundamental particles, the creation is 
recreated. It has been said in the scriptures that 
first Brahma was born, then mmany Prajapatis were born 
from him etc. etc. It means that even in the scriptures, the 
basic particles have been given the form of human beings, 
because the nature of both is the same. It seems 
that physical science is understanding the subtle body ina 
different way. According to it, the wavefunction of 
entangled quantum particles is connected to each other. 
They remain connected even to the distance of infinite space. 
Then it is said that two fundamental particles can be 
entangled if they are brought close enough to each other. 
Probably due to this, their dark matter reaches each other. It 
is like the subtle-bodies of two close lovers reaching each 
other, as mentioned above. 


The above description also proves the claim of some 
scientists and scriptures that past, future and present are all 
interrelated, meaning time does not exist. What is 
happening today, and what will happen in the future, the 
Same happened before, nothing different. Everything is 
predetermined. However, there is also the importance of 
man’s work and effort. 


Kundalini yoga shows the DNA 
as subtle body and the dark 
energy or dark matter 


subtle body is made up of five sense organs, five 
action senses, five pranas, one mind and one intellect. 
It is the subtle body that goes to the other world, not 
the gross body made of flesh. One can say that when the 
gross body is destroyed, then how can these senses, life 
force etc. remain, because all these are the dependents of 
the gross body. This is the trick. You can also call it the art of 
describing in writing. If the author wanted, he could have 
written directly that the body and all its activities get 
recorded in its subtle body. But this description would not 
have been attractive and easy to understand. Because the 
body and all its activities are dependent on 
its mind, intellect, knowledge based sense organs, 
action based sense organs, and the five pranas, so it is 
said that the subtle body is made up of these five types of 
things. | didn’t have such an experience. | did not feel these 
things separately in the astral body, but felt one undivided 
darkness in which the impression of all these things was felt. 
The meaning is clear that the subtle body perceives through 
its soul only, decides through the soul, works through the 
soul, receives the experiences of all the senses through the 
soul, and performs all the activities of daily life through the 
soul. Means all the past lives of the Jiva are fully recorded in 
the subtle body, which he continues to experience in himself 
as self. In a way, it is a combined average form of all the 
previous births. Many people would think that the subtle 
body would be a mind without a body, in which waves of 
thoughts would keep rising in the empty space, but then 
what was the difference between the gross and the subtle 
body. Anyway, the existence of the gross mind is not possible 
without the support of the gross body. For example, consider 
the diamond in your ring as a subtle body. All the 
information from its birth is recorded in it. Once upon a time 
it was pure energy. With the creation of the universe, it 
became a tree on earth. Then, due 


to earthquakes etc., coal was formed by tree being buried 
hundreds of kilometers below the earth. Then stone coal was 
made. For millions of years it has withstood extreme 
temperatures and pressures. There were many changes in 
this. It performed innumerable actions and reactions. It took 
countless years. Then it was dug out. Then carved. Then you 
bought it and put it on your ring. All these information are 
recorded in this diamond. Although we do not get to know 
these information in gross form by looking at the diamond, 
but we do experience those information in subtle form, only 
then we find diamond very beautiful, attractive and precious. 
Similarly, from the experience of someone's subtle body, the 
whole past details of it are not known in the gross form, but it 
is experienced in the subtle form, by experiencing its 
average nature. In the Gita, Maha Yogi Sri Krishna says 
that he knows all the previous births of Arjuna. It does not 
mean that he was feeling all the scenes in his mind like tv 
screen, rather it means that he was feeling the essence of 
them all in the form of his subtle body. The style of 
the scriptures is such that they often do not analyze the 
facts completely and leave them in 
a miraculous or mystic form, so that the reader becomes 
bewildered. These experiences are subtler than experiences 
from the gross body, although it seems to us, instead to the 
subtle body, they may seem as powerful as the gross 
experience, because in that state there is no interference 
from the noise of thoughts of the living state, which cloud the 
experiences. In addition, the experiences of all past lives 
remain in the soul all the time in a subtle form, while in the 
gross body it remains buried in the noise of gross thoughts. 
Yes, it cannot take new experiences, because for this the 
physical body is necessary. That’s why there is no further 
development of it. It has to take birth as a gross body for 
further development. To me, the subtle body seems to record 
all the information of the organism like DNA. Similarly, to 
me dark energy or dark matter also seems to be 
the eternal DNA of the gross universe. 

The equivalence of dark energy and the subtle body can be 
proved only if we do not divide subtle body into 
compartments and consider it as a single dark sky in which 
all the information of its gross form is recorded in the form of 


subtle form as waveless or unchanging experiences in self- 
sky. Please don’t mistake this as complete self- 
realization i.e. self-knowledge. This is the highest level of 
self-experience, which is of a single kind, and in which no 
information is recorded i.e. it’s the pure self-form, while the 
subtle-body as self-experience is of a very mild degree, and 
contain many hidden information. According to the 
experiences attained in the gross body state there are 
innumerable types or levels of subtle bodies. Hence only in 
this undivided encoded form, subtle body will be fully like 
dark matter or black hole as described earlier according to 
famous verse “Yatpinde tat brahmande”. 


Kundalini Yoga opens 
anandamaya kosha with all 
Koshas of body simultaneously 


According to the scriptures, the name of our gross body 
is Annamaya Kosha, which ends with death. The group of 
five air that’s pranas and five organs of action located in the 
body is called pranamaya kosha. The group of the five 
sense organs along with mind has been called Manomaya 
Kosha. The group of five sense organs 
containing intelligence is called Vigyanmaya Kosha. The 
innermost and subtlest sheath is the anandamaya kosha, it 
is governed by satvaguni avidya that’s light-dominated or 
existence-dominated darkness. But the soul is untouched by 
all these. Let’s analyze it a bit. The gross body means the 
food sheath that’s annamaya kosha is visible to 
everyone. Karmendriyas that’s action senses have been 
included in Pranamaya Kosha because first of all the clear 
effect of Prana is visible on the action senses only. During 
Kundalini Yoga, when Prana is concentrated on a 
particular chakra, there is a contraction-like movement there 
along with rapid, blissful and satisfying breathing, and the 
karmendriyas associated with it get power. That’s why the 
breath moves fast due to exercise, sports, running and heavy 
work, due to which the flow of prana to the physical senses 
increases. Mental work does not cause such breath, so it is 
kept in Manomaya Kosha. There is no breathlessness while 
watching or listening to television. There is no breathlessness 
even after smelling and tasting any food or even touching it. 
That is why the skin, eyes, ears, nose and tongue have 
been placed in the five sense organs. That means they are 
knowledge oriented rather than action oriented. Although 
littlebit karma is also done through them. Genital organs 
have also been kept in Karmendriya, because by its use also 
the breath becomes inflated. The anal sense has also been 
placed along with the action-oriented organs. The five sense 
Organs are kept with the mind in the Manomaya Kosha 
because the mind becomes active through the experience of 
sensations through them. Seeing beautiful scenery or 


listening to beautiful music brings beautiful thoughts to the 
mind. Thoughts can be called common knowledge. Special 
knowledge is born only with the help of intelligence. Like 
many ordinary thoughts come in the showroom of the car. 
When a man decides to buy a car wisely, then the thoughts 
related to his purchase are more powerful, effective, practical 
and action-motivating. “Vi” means special, so “vigyan” 
means special knowledge. This creates joy. Who doesn’t 
enjoy being the owner of a car. It is felt from the blissful 
Sheath that’s anandmaya kosha. Actually bliss is felt in 
the soul without waves. The powerfully expressed waves of 
vigyan and karma leave a powerful imprint on the subtle 
body. That impression has been called above as “sattva 
guni avidya”. That means, you can call the act of buying a 
car virtuous, because this work is done comfortably, with joy, 
with satisfaction, with hope, with humanity and courtesy. 
That’s why the impression it makes on the subtle body as 
ignorance i.e. special darkness is also the same type. For a 
limited time only, this impression has more influence than 
the rest of the infinite subtle body, because this impression is 
fresh, later it dissolves in the innumerable impressions 
present in the subtle body. With this it becomes ordinary like 
them. That’s why the pleasure derived from materiality does 
not last forever. For another example, imagine that you are 
sitting in a beautiful resort after arriving in a beautiful car 
with your family and a good relative. Sunbathing in a 
comfortable chair outside on the lawn. There is pure water 
for drinking on a round glass table in front. And even for food 
and drink, it is available on order. Your family is happily 
walking nearby. Children are playing in the park in front. 
There is aswimming pool in front. You are languishing by 
taking long and slow breaths. You will feel great joy in the 
darkness of your soul. Although it is like the ordinary 
darkness called avidya, but it will be full of bliss unlike other 
ordinary darknesses. This is because this darkness will be full 
of being and existence of one’s own. This is Sattvaguni 
darkness. Means all the facilities that increase power or 
existence that’s Satta in Sanskrit are available in front of you, 
but you are enjoying the bliss of ignorance. There is also a 
limit to the enjoyment of man’s comforts. After getting tired 
of it, happiness comes only from Sattvaguni Avidya. In fact, 


the source of happiness is Sattva Guni Avidya only, not 
directly the pleasures. Avidya means negation of Vidya 
or knowledge. That’s why it is the darkness of ignorance. 
Let me give you another example of sattvaguni avidya. 
Suppose you are at such a place, from where a plain starts 
on one side. The mountain range is visible on the other side 
in front of you. You will enjoy more in that mixed plain area 
than in the pure plain area, because the inaccessible and 
difficult mountain in front will make you feel more existential 
power relatively than the real one as that’s felt in pure plain 
area. Anandpur is one such place. Probably because of this 
special joy, it has got this name. The famous Gurdwara 
Anandpur Sahib of Sikhism is located here. The darkness 
that arises with anger, fear, lack, anxiety, etc., in contrast 
to sattvaguni avidya, does not bring joy. In these, the 
darkness of ignorance is against self existence. The same 
darkness is felt in different ways in different circumstances. 
This is interesting psychology. One step deeper than the 
Anandamaya Kosha is the Absolute Pure Self or soul. There is 
no word like bliss associated with it, because it 
is indescribable, above bliss. Most of the people are 
fascinated by the Bliss or Anand of Anandamaya Kosha as 
pure soul, and do not make special efforts for self-awakening. 
There is no impression of the gross world on a pure soul. 
That’s why it is fully luminous in its original form. Actually the 
word light or luminosity is also worldly, the soul is beyond 
this. That is why the soul has been called the most 
unaffected, that is, untouched. 

All the koshas or treasures are best opened in turn and in 
sequence, as if the security fences of a palace are crossed. 
Eating and drinking in childhood develops and opens the 
Annamaya Kosh. By playing sports, exercising and learning 
various works, the Pranamaya Kosha develops and opens. 
Then after reaching the higher classes of secondary 
school level, one opens Manomaya Kosh by taking education 
of complex and special subjects. By taking technical and 
practical education at the college or university level, he 
opens the vigyanmaya kosha. Then he starts earning money 
while doing job or business, and with the help of 
Vigyanmaya Kosha opens Anandamaya Kosh. By developing 


that too completely, he tries to reach the soul by getting 
himself attracted towards Tantrik Kundalini Yoga. 

With Kundalini Yoga, all the koshas can also be opened 
together. Yogasana and Pranayama induce hunger, and the 
body remains healthy. This keeps the Annamaya Kosh open. 
Pranayama keeps the Pranamaya Kosha open. When the 
Pranamaya Kosha opens, it causes Manomaya Kosha to open. 
Then with Kundalini meditation on the chakras, the 
Vigyanmaya Kosh opens. When the Vigyanmay Kosh opens, 
the Blissful anandmaya Kosha automatically opens. In the 
end, when the Kundalini is awakened, man reaches 
the ultimate soul as well. 

Let me show you an easy way to cross the treasure of 
bliss. Sit comfortably on a chair in the sun. Looking at the 
whole body, meditate on it. This will open the Annamaya 
Kosh. Relax and de-stress the mind by meditating on Nidra 
Devi and chanting the word sleep mentally. Deep 
breath will come. Focus on that. Slow and deep breaths will 
start. That will open the Pranamaya Kosh. It will awaken 
other thoughts along with old memories in the mind. This 
will open the Manomaya Kosh. Then by making a 
determination with the intellect, keeping witnessing on 
those thoughts, continue to meditate on the body, on the 
breath and on the sleep. This will awaken the vigyanmaya 
kosha. In a short, the thoughts will merge into the soul. This 
will make feel like a darkness of thoughtlessness in the 
mind. This will be called sattvaguni avidya. This is because it 
was deliberately created from auspicious sattva guna. This 
isn’t Rajoguni avidya that’s born out of fighting or daily 
struggle of life. Nor was it born from Tamoguna that’s born 
from intoxication, overconsumption of flash etc. By feeling 
bliss from Sattva-Guni darkness, the Anandamaya Kosha 
will also open. In about an hour this complete meditation will 
be done. If a person continues to practice Tantric Kundalini 
Yoga for about one or two hours beyond the Anandamaya 
Kosh is open, then the Kundalini will continue to move 
towards the soul in the form of awakening. 

Death is an unchanging truth. But dying is an art for some, 
while it is luck for others. Some die with happiness and joy 
through satoguni avidya, while some have to die with great 


sorrow and pain by being forced by rajoguni and tamoguni 
avidya. 


Kundalini Yoga as a Spiritual 
Science Machine 


The mental body that’s manomaya sharir is also the man 
himself. He would not have been anyone else. That body 
would be very detailed. When it is experienced as one’s own 
self, then it begins to wane, and takes the form of 
the Kundalini image. There is also a feeling of emptiness, 
lightness and joy. Similarly, knowledge or gyana is actually 
of the soul. But Vigyan means special knowledge, ‘vi’ 
meaning special or vishesh in Sanskrit, it’s that when the 
mind means the mental body is also connected with the 
soul. The mind is a special form of the soul. That’s why 
when the knowledge of the mind is done in the form of 
special knowledge of the soul, then this is the Vijnanamaya 
Kosha. Knowledge of the mind in the form of an ordinary and 
alien object is Manomaya Kosha. But when it is understood 
as one’s own form, then it is the Vijnanamaya Kosha. This is 
also our part or body attached to the main body, but it seems 
as if it is spread out in infinite directions and 
distances. Actually human being is like a flying kite. 
The mind is the flying colored paper, the feeling of its 
being attached to the body is the string, and the 
physical body is catching that string. As long as the 
string is there, the kite is safe, otherwise it will go 
astray and get destroyed. At one place | read written on the 
dashboard of the bus that the mind is like a parachute, it 
works well only when it is open. Perhaps this is the same 
what it means. In the scriptures, it has been said that 
instead of considering the mind as a visible or seen form, it 
has to be understood as a seer or own form. Witnessing is 
also the same, it is a simple and easy way of doing this. Even 
when the soul observes the mind being itself as a silent 
witness, the meditative image of the mind begins to 
manifest itself. This also proves that the mind is a special 
form of the soul, that means the mind is the form of vigyan. 
The mind exists only as long as it is considered external or 
alien. When it is understood as one’s own self, then it starts 
to dim. Self possessions are always undermined and other’s 
possessions seem better. Importance is for external or other 


things, not for one’s own thing or self. The mind is not 
destroyed in this self form, rather it becomes insignificant 
and slows down. This creates joy. The Kundalini image gets 
the extra power that the mind had taken in the earlier 
wandering state. This adds to the joy, because the Kundalini 
image remains for a long time and without 
any philosophical effort on the part of the man, it removes 
the extra fat from the wandering mind and sucks it, due to 
which the joy remains for a long time or even permanently in 
the far reached Kundalini Yogis. The light attitude of the 
mind is of Sattva guna. Thats why the mind- 
mixed darkness that arises due to the weakening of the 
mind is called satoguni avidya, as explained in the previous 
post. This is why there is joy in it. This is the blissful 
treasure. On the contrary, the complete destruction of the 
mind is tamogun, and when the mind is in full swing, and it 
seems to be real, it is rajogun. The darkness of ignorance 
associated with these is Tamoguni ignorance and 
Rajoguni ignorance respectively. In the first stage there 
is sorrow and in the second stage there is happiness, not joy 
or bliss. Happiness and sadness live with each other. Bliss is 
beyond happiness and sorrow, and always remains the same. 
Bliss can also be called a mixed form of happiness and 
sorrow, because in this both mind and darkness live 
together in equal balance. In Rajogun, the mind is very 
bright, with which there is no darkness at all, hence it is 
happiness. When the mind gets tired and sits down, then it 
becomes completely lifeless, due to which darkness envelops 
the brain. This is sadness. This is also the extreme mode of 
ignorance. The cycle of happiness and sorrow continues, due 
to which the soul is not purified. | did not know such a deep 
analysis of it at the time of my initial book, although such a 
practical experience was definitely there. In that | have 
written it in such a way that happiness arises only from non- 
attachment. What has been said is correct. With non- 
attachment the mind moves slowly. By the way, attachment 
is only towards others, not towards oneself. That’s why by 
considering the mind as the soul, non-attachment 
automatically arises. | had given there many examples of the 
principle of detachment. For example, pleasure is not 
derived directly from alcohol but from slowing down of the 


mind with it, which is a sign of non-attachment and sattva 
guna. Similarly, bliss is born not directly from meat-eating, 
but from non-attachment born of dispassion born of mortal 
intelligence towards the life arising from it. Many such 
examples were given. This effect is also created by Kundalini 
Yoga. Non-attachment that’s Advaita and Kundalini live 
together. That’s why with Kundaliniyoga, happiness arises 
when the Kundalini image stays in the mind. Therefore, 
Kundaliniyoga is like a metaphysical machine or technique 
or trick, which automatically creates its effect, avoiding the 
philosophical mess of detachment. | give my own example of 
this. | had done some developmental work by spending 
enough money. But due to some invariable reasons some of 
them were left out and some got lost. | regretted it and didn’t 
too, because walking is life. When a man keeps looking 
outside, then he is not satisfied with what he has. His own joy 
also vanishes from it. | started feeling disturbed. | learned 
Kundalini Yoga from somewhere and thought everything 
would be fine. Yoga returned my lost happiness, that too with 
interest. | also made a lot of spiritual progress. At that time 
its basic psychological principle was not known, but today it 
seems well known to me. Kundalini is a miraculous 
mental meditation image, which benefits in every way like 
an automatic machine. What happened that Kundalini took 
away the power of my lost mind. Due to this, my Manomaya 
Kosha changed with Kundalini to Vigyanmay Kosha. 
Vigyanmaya Kosh was transformed into Anandamaya Kosh. 
Due to the said developmental worldliness, my three primary 
koshas had developed a lot. By the way, with the help of 
Advaita, | was also developing Vigyanmaya Kosh and 
Anandamaya Kosh little bit along with them, but the rocket 
speed of the last two koshas was achieved only by Kundalini 
Yoga, due to which the so-called minor glimpse of Kundalini 
awakening was also received. 


Kundalini Yoga helps the 
Manomaya Kosh in the form of 
kite connect with Pranamaya 
Kosh means string and 
Annamaya Kosh means chakra 
and fly in the form of 
Vigyanmaya Kosh and gives 
pleasure in the form of 
Anandamaya Kosh 


What happens is that when while doing yoga, the mental 
body means manomaya kosh becomes active as soon as 
the food body means annamaya kosh and vital body 
means pranmaya kosh are active, then this belief is 
affirmed that the mental body may feel spread in the outer 
and infinite space, but it is connected to our body. It is our 
form. Although Annamaya Kosha, Pranamaya Kosha and 
Manomaya Kosha get activated together during all the 
worldly works, games and exercises, but they get activated 
so fast that they do not get a chance to feel unity among 
themselves. At the same time man’s attention remains on 
the intricacies of work, the technology associated with it, the 
fruits associated with it and other puzzling worldliness, due to 
which the feeling of oneness is not taken care of. Anyway, 
the feeling of oneness is against worldliness full of duality. 
Two opposite things cannot co-exist. Water and fire cannot 
live together. Due to this self-consciousness towards the 
mental body, the scientific body means vigyanmaya 
kosha also becomes functional. Every type of worldly 
knowledge comes under the category of ordinary 
knowledge. Some have knowledge of medicine, some of 
tailoring, some of barber, some of teaching, some of 
preaching, some of performing Yagya or rituals or following 
other religious traditions. All come in common sense means 
common knowledge or gyana because all are for livelihood 


and worldly behavior. Special knowledge or vigyan is 
different and unique from all these, which is neither for 
earning a living, nor for the accomplishment of worldly 
behavior, but only for the complete and direct realization of 
the soul. Vigyanmaya body means a body with special 
knowledge. On being situated in it, the seeker feels as if he is 
a combination of gross body, vital force and mind. As | 
explained in the previous post also with the example of kite. 
Even if you cannot feel the wandering mind as your self, then 
you can feel that it is connected to the body through 
the breath in the same way as a kite is connected to a gatu 
or chakri means rod roll or ringed role respectively through a 
manjha means string. Kite flying will be a lot of fun. 
Sometimes above the clouds, sometimes in a distant land, 
sometimes on a distant planet or star, sometimes in 
another universe, sometimes in the other world, sometimes 
very near or wrapped in the base wheel, sometimes it will 
disappear from the eyes and only the wheel and thread will 
be seen, Then suddenly it will appear somewhere, sometimes 
it will fly clumsily like caught in a storm and look clumsy, like 
this it will fly everywhere in the infinite sky, but will always 
be connected with the chakras of the body. Perhaps the 
name Chakra is derived from Chakri itself. Haha. 
Now psychologists are also saying that the subtle body is 
connected with the gross body by a silver cord. This thread 
is attached to the navel. Just as the string is tied to the 
wheel, similarly the yoga breath moves from the navel. It is 
a simple matter, the kite in the form of experience is always 
attached to the self, that is, to the soul, that is, to one’s own 
body. Probably that is why the navel chakra is called the 
center point of the human body. There is also a feeling of an 
inward stretch at the navel when meditation of the body is 
done along with the subtle body. Probably the name of the 
kite’s string-disc is derived from the navel chakra itself. The 
soul will definitely get the light of the physical world from it, 
because then self-feeling is connected with everything. Then, 
according to the aforesaid, happiness will also arise and 
Kundalini will also manifest itself, because Kundalini picture is 
such a physical thing, which is most connected to the soul 
through meditation. Means Kundalini is representative of the 
connection of the physical world with the soul. General 


knowledge, as opposed to specialized knowledge or vigyan, 
is a matter of worldliness. Knowledge quickly turns into 
ignorance if it is not Supported by vigyan. This doesn’t mean 
science as it seems. Pranamaya sharira means not only 
meditation on the breath, but also meditation on the 
movement of the body produced by the breath and other 
activities. In this case, walking seems to be the 
best spiritual exercise. In this, attention is paid to the 
whole body, its movements, its sensations and the breath. 
Along with this, along with purity means sattvaguna in the 
mind, the activity of thoughts is also very good. 


Kundalini Yoga shows the body 
never dies, sometimes it is 
visible, sometimes not visible, 
however it exists always there in 
the form of experience 


Happy Holi to all friends 


Friends, in the previous post | was telling how the mobility of 
the mind is like the flight of a kite. Pranayama is like giving 
controlled motion to the string of a kite, so that the kite-like 
mind can fly smoothly and create bliss in the form of self- 
development. | even feel that the pleasure that comes during 
sexual play is largely contributed by the complete opening of 
the naked body. In that both the food body and the vital body 
are together close to the highest manifestation. Many people 
say that real love comes from the mind, not from the body. 
What is all of this about. How can one directly reach the 
innermost dungeon without crossing the outer ones? When a 
girl’s body is lightly touched sexually, of course indirectly or 
mentally, then the Annamaya Kosha of the girl gets 
activated. You get a good chance on Holi, don’t miss 
it. Haha. She feels for the first time the deepest identity of 
her body. She starts becoming more and more active bodily 
day by day. There is redness and a smile on her face. This 
activates her pranamaya kosha too. After getting the power 
available from Prana, her mind runs a lot in colors. She 
enjoys lucid dreams. In dreams she travels to different worlds 
and other worlds. With this her mental body also becomes 
active. Because due to sexual attraction, her attention 
remains on her body and soul all the time, therefore her 
vigyanmaya kosha itself also remains active. Naturally, with 
this the blissful body will also remain active. It’s all like a 
chain reaction. This is love. This blissful kosha remains active 
for a long time. After it is completely opened, only the soul 
remains to be attained. That too is found after marriage in 
Tantric Kundalini Yoga based Sambhogyoga. Not that this 
happens only with women. The same happens with men too. | 


think that seeing the graceful gesture of a woman, the body 
and mind of a man starts jumping to have a physical 
relationship with her, that is the activation of his soul or 
prana or kundalini. It is a different matter that someone 
makes good use of that life force, while someone misuses it. 
Some use it in spiritual development, some in physical 
development, and some in a balanced way in both. 

Let the kite of the mind fly for a while, don’t take it off 
completely. Have a slight slant to the feeling that it is 
connected. Then after a while the kite itself will land 
comfortably. There will be no shock. There will be fun too. 
After landing, let it go back as per its wish. It will come back 
itself. If the kite is going up violently, and you pull it down 
forcefully, either the kite may tear, or the thread may break. 
Both will be weak, and there will be pressure on them. The 
Same happens with the mind by forcing it. 


Whenever there is a feeling of tiredness, pressure or 
headache in the mind, at that time Kapalbhati-like breathing 
takes place on its own. Meditation is done on the breath 
coming out of it, due to which the Kundalini descends. Means 
the exhaling breath is like pulling down the thread, due to 
which the kite flying in the form of mind comes down, and 
avoids being torn by the strong storm in the form of mental 
fatigue. 


Not only in the light of thoughts, but also in the darkness of 
their absence, the experience is related to the body only, 
because some or the other activity of the brain remains in it 
as well. Even after death, the particular self form that the 
soul experiences is also attached to the body, because it is 
created by the body. It means that the body never dies. 
Sometimes it is visible, sometimes it is not visible, it is always 
there, in the form of experience. 


Kundalini Yoga have Kapalbhati 
Pranayama as a main component 


Inhale and exhale alternately through the left and right 
nostrils, so that the Kundalini energy continues to circulate in 
the Ida and Pingala nadis on both sides, and gradually 
rises up in the middle Sushumna nadi. Kites also fly like this. 
When the string is loosened, sometimes it spreads in the sky 
on the left side due to the slap of the flowing wind, and then 
when pulled, it climbs straight up. Sometimes due to wind 
blowing in the opposite direction, it spreads in the sky on the 
right side, and then when pulled, it rises straight up. By 
swinging both the sides, it remains straight above the man’s 
head even after reaching a great height. This straightness is 
equivalent to Sushumna Nadi. Even at the time of Kundalini 
Yoga, when there is a lack of prana in the left side of the 
body, and the body is left loose, the Kundalini starts flowing 
in the left side of the body i.e. Ida Nadi. Similarly, when there 
is a lack of prana in the right side of the body, the Kundalini 
is felt to flow in the right side i.e. Pingala Nadi. It seems as if 
there is a energizing movement that’s blissful, | do not feel 
the pulse like a thin wire with any current. It may be 
impractical book talk or realized in high level practice. | feel a 
lot of power just from its simple experience. Even in the sky, 
the wind blows towards that part, in which the pressure of 
the air decreases, that means the life force decreases, 
because air is the life force. It is natural from this that 
Kundalini or mind or kite moves in the same direction with 
the flow of prana or wind. Then when the wind or Prana 
increases there, it runs back a little in the opposite direction, 
along with which the kite or Kundalini also flows, and 
suppose it comes directly above the head or in Sushumna. 
Stopping there for a moment, the Vayu or Prana reaches the 
right sky or Pingala, along with which the kite or Kundalini is 
also there. From there the journey on the left side starts 
again. This kind of pendulum-like oscillation of the 
Kundalini-like mind or kite goes on, and it keeps rising up in 
the Sushumna or in the sky. 

When the kite rises very high, then it is brought down by 
pulling on the string. Similarly, when the Kundalini rises high 


enough to cause pressure, fatigue, and headache in the 
brain, then the exhalation starts moving with jerks. This 
happens in Kapalbhati Pranayama, where the outgoing 
breath moves with jerks and pressure, but the incoming 
breath moves so quietly and slowly that it is not detected. 
Due to this, there is more awareness on the exhalation. Along 
with this, the muscles of the body also push down. Due to 
both these things, the Kundalini energy descends down the 
front channel, due to which the pressure in the brain 
decreases and the person gets refreshed and ready for 
mental work again. Kapalbhati produces miraculous effects. 
That’s why only this kind of breathing is done during work 
pressure and lack of time, it gives a lot of benefits. Let us tell 
one thing here that the mind-kite does not stay down 
permanently, it then rises up through the back channel. It 
keeps on rotating up and down. It is like if a kite is given a 
slight pull or tunka or jerk, it rises higher. Breaths are 
actually the strings of the mind, as it is often said that the 
string of breaths of so-and-so has been drawn long means 
someone survived, or the string of breaths broken means 
someone has died. In Shrimad Bhagwat Gita, when Arjuna 
says to Shri Krishna that Lord, it is very difficult to control the 
mind, even more difficult than controlling the wind, 
then Lord Krishna says that O Kaunteya, the mind is 
controlled by practice, Especially through the practice of 
Pranayama. 

While taking a bath with cold water, the breath starts moving 
out rapidly and with jerks. Most of the time the mouth is also 
completely open, through which the breath comes out like a 
bellows. Due to this the pressure of the brain comes down, 
which prevents headache. Probably the risk of brain 
hemorrhage also decreases. This increases the ability to 
withstand cold water and it starts to feel pleasant. Similarly, 
almost the same thing happens with Vajrasana after eating 
food. With this, the power of the brain descends to the 
digestive organs, due to which digestion is cured. This style 
of breath is Kapalbhati only. 


Kundalini Yoga guides the 
natural instinct to attain the Self 


Many times a man gets so immersed in the mind-kite that he 
does not even realize that it is connected to his body. Neither 
the thread nor the one who pulls it is visible, only the kite is 
visible. Perhaps this is ignorance. In this it seems that the 
visions of the mind have their own separate existence, and 
we start fearing them by making them artificial ghosts. By 
the way, in Kundalini Yoga also the meditation picture is 
visible, but it is the same singled out, and it is seen in one’s 
own form and inside his body. Moreover, in most cases it 
does not have a physical existence or its physical existence is 
denied. For example, if a deity, an ancestor, a departed or 
completely separated lover is in the form of a meditation 
picture, then the intellect of physical reality towards it will 
not be there by itself. But if the Kundalini picture is in the 
form of a living lover, guru or other physical object, then 
one has to maintain non-attachment to its physical form, 
and treat it non-dual. By the way, such nature and behavior 
starts being formed by Kundalini Yoga itself. As | told in a 
previous post, how Kundalini Yoga realizes that Annamaya 
Kosha, Pranamaya Kosha, Manomaya 
Kosha, Vigyanmaya Kosha and Anandamaya Kosha are 
all interconnected. This maintains the belief that the 
Kundalini picture is within one’s own mind, a part of one’s 
own composite body, one’s own self, not an external 
separate physical object. This itself enhances one’s own 
nature of Non-attachment and nonduality. Because one 
cannot be attached to himself, nor can one feel duality in 
himself. No one realizes that he is not one man but a mixture 
of two men. That man alone has to bear the fruits of his 
actions, no one else comes. Even if someone keeps on 
making up in the mirror day and night, he or she does it out 
of love for someone else or God, not for himself. It is 
necessary to have two for love. There is no love alone. There 
is no theoretical difference between attachment and love, 
there is only a difference of level, behavior and attitude. 
According to this psychological principle, the soul gets 
purified itself by considering the Kundalini picture as one’s 


own self. Meaning that the Kundalini picture is adopted as a 
Support to know your complete self. | think when kundalini 
meditation reaches a particular critical point, it gives power 
of existential self expression to soul so much that it is unable 
to be unexpressed beyond that resulting in to kundalini 
awakening. Probably, thoughts come in the mind only in the 
form of a natural effort to know the Self. But the way of 
understanding and adopting those thoughts is opposite to the 
correct one. Instead of considering them as our self, we start 
considering them as external, alien, gross and physical. Due 
to this, instead of soul getting strength from those thoughts, 
the confusions of the world keep increasing further and 
further. Meaning that instead of becoming pure, the soul 
becomes more and more impure. Perhaps this is the illusion. 
Kundaliniyoga tries to straighten this method. Due to this, the 
daily behavior of a man also starts getting transformed 
positively. The effect of non-attachment and Advaita starts 
increasing in his life. It is natural that the confusions of his 
mind start getting resolved. When the mind is healthy, the 
body also starts to be healthy. Individual health also 
improves social health. With social health, all the people of 
the society also feel their good health. In this way, the reform 
from society to person and from person to society spreads in 
the whole world like a chain reaction, which is also called era 
change. 


Kundalini Chitra develops 
Vigyanmaya Kosha 


There are many descriptions in the scriptures that happiness 
is within, that is, it is in the soul, not outside. But | could not 
find any scientific explanation for this. Probably the form of 
the soul is like the existential void or the 
sky. In avidya or darkness there is one quality of the soul 
remaining, the void or the sky or the being. The quality of 
light disappears in it. That’s why the joy in it is greatly 
reduced, because all the qualities of the soul are related to 
each other more or less. In any form, the light that is 
experienced through the experience of the world, tries to 
fulfill the lack of light in the soul. What happens is that when 
that worldly light feeling is very fast, changing, i.e. dynamic 
or flamboyant or real like, then it cannot be mixed with the 
soul, because the soul is non undulating or changeless, like 
the nature of the sky, but on the contrary, the fast worldly 
feelings fluctuate quickly like waves of ups and downs means 
they are of the nature of change. One gets momentary 
happiness from them, as long as they remain, but as soon as 
they are removed, the darkness of the soul becomes more 
dense even from earlier. It is similar to how a person 
becomes blind for a while after coming out of bright light at 
night. When those worldly luminous experiences become dull 
due tonon-attachment or Kundalini meditation etc., 
then they start matching with the empty soul. By this they 
give their light to the soul. Due to this, the lack of the soul is 
fulfilled and so bliss is felt, because according to the 
above scriptures, there is happiness in the soul itself, not 
outside. This is called satoguni avidya. Satogun is Prakash 
Pradhan. This is not only a matter of spiritual importance 
but also a matter of practical importance. Everyone likes a 
man who is calm and not the flamboyant one. The mental 
darkness of a person with a calm nature is also calm, while 
the mental darkness of a person with a fierce nature, 
ignorance of passion, is also fierce, deep and painful. This is 
the main difference between a gentleman and a scoundrel. 
The ignorance of asageis due to being born of sattva 


guna, whereas that of a wicked person is due to being born 
of rajo guna and tamo guna. 

When thoughts or mental images are changing rapidly due to 
passion, then their identity with 
the Pranamaya and Annamaya Kosha cannot be felt. 
Because later both are much more slow moving. Means it is 
difficult to consider them as one with the same combined 
body composition. Also the mental images related to 
common worldliness or livelihood are physical, because they 
are associated with the so-called material world, but the soul 
is immaterial, so they do not match. It is easy to associate 
mental images that are like static or slow and immaterial 
with this body group. In the Punjabi language and in 
the Sanskrit language, there is long path style or slowness, 
which increases the quality of goodness or sattvaguna. That’s 
why the use of these languages creates joy. The darkness of 
avidya that keeps on arising during worldliness through 
them, is the form of satoguni avidya. It is blissful. Similarly, 
keeping a beard like Sadhu Baba also makes a man’s 
behavior slow, contemplative, that is, satvik. This is why 
Baba remains intoxicated with bliss. 

When a man attains a high position or object, the elders of 
the house keep him calm by preventing him from jumping 
too much. In our childhood, our mother used to bring us 
down from the sky to the ground immediately after some big 
achievement. In most of the cases, she did not let us fly in 
the sky of ego. She belonged to a family lineage of good 
and Vedic rites. If there is no contact of elders and sages in 
someone’s circle, then he flies far away with the 
achievements for a short time. Then, when the intoxication of 
flying breaks, he falls and starts drowning in the pit of 
depression, and the world starts considering him as crazy or 
mad, then he comes to his senses. But by then he would 
have lost a lot of joy and progress of the soul. That’s why it is 
not that this psychological principle of sattva guna avidya is 
applicable only in spirituality. This is equally applicable in 
worldly dealings too. Perhaps that’s why it comes in 
abundance in the scriptures that one has to suffer or 
do penance to attain knowledge. The scriptures believe that 
a person troubled by the sufferings of penance or lack of 
worldly goods will definitely find happiness in the soul. 


When the gross body is also felt along with the thoughts, 
then the body gets their power and the burden of the brain is 
reduced. Means the force which was causing pressure in the 
brain gets transformed into the contraction of the muscles. 
Thoughts remain but fading with joy, they come to 
different chakras and dissolve. This happens because the 
chakras are not flooded with changing thoughts like the brain 
or mind. Infact chakra is not a dedicated organ for feelings 
like brain. Only one picture, mainly the Kundalini picture, 
remains on the chakras for a long time. This long stay of a 
sharp, quiet but unique mental image is a symbol of virtue. 
The avidya that arises from this is satoguni avidya. This is the 
bliss treasure. It is like a quiet and bright and non physical 
though unique candle flame mixed in the dark and quiet self 
more than other vibrant thoughts comparatively. Only the 
Kundalini picture that remains stable for a long time makes 
the best vigyanmaya kosha. It is a knowledge of immanent 
existence like the soul, but still a special knowledge. 
Meaning it is neither enlightenment or awakening, nor 
ordinary cosmic knowledge, but special knowledge 
or vigyan which is undoubtedly close to enlightenment. 


Kundalini Yoga does not talk 
about rejecting the world 


Friends, there is a lot to write, words are few. The riddles of 
Spirituality are very strange, which have been written hard to 
understand. How everyone can believe. It is said that don’t 
run outside, feel inside yourself. It is like a double edged 
sword. If someone sits down with his eyes completely closed, 
he is sure to suffocate and die, but if someone pretends to 
keep his eyes closed even with his eyes open, he will survive. 
Now | have become Premyogi Vajra. | have nothing to hide 
about myself. | have seen countless beautiful sights of all 
kinds. But | kept distance from those views. | didn’t even 
speak a word to some, but drank them with my mind’s eye. It 
also happened because of my family’s spiritual 
environment, and there must have been many other 
favorable circumstances due to the influence of previous 
lives. But theory being theory, it applies Knowingly as much 
as unknowingly. What happened is that by not running 


obsessively towards the beautiful sights, the principle felt 
that | was experiencing all the sights inside myself, inside my 
mind, inside my body or inside my soul. This is also true. The 
external views are just a means to reveal the inner view. As | 
have been trying to go to the root of the body’s blissful 
kosha through the last several posts. Don’t know why it feels 
like something is missing. The scriptures need scientific 
explanation. It is said that Yoga is scientific. But it doesn’t 
happen just by saying. Today it needs to be proved. Sexual 
love is at the top in worldly colors and sights. If one can 
remain detached from sex even with love, then what can be 
greater detachment than that? From that the soul will get 
miraculous power and it will be awakened the fastest, just 
within a year or two. Lord Shiva was also like that. Goddess 
Parvati used to shower her life on him, but he remained 
unattached and immersed in his meditation. He also used to 
love Goddess Parvati very much, but used to pretend to be 
neutral. Due to this, according to the 
above psychological principle, all his love used to be 
attached to his soul itself. Then why doesn’t his soul always 
remain awake? This shows that no one can be a greater actor 
than a Yogi, especially a Tantra Yogi. Contrary to Lord 
Shiva, if someone was a fanatic or an idealist or a 
scripturalist etc or mindless, then he would have rejected a 
girlfriend like Goddess Parvati calling her a spiritual obstacle 
and gone away or would have become attached to her like a 
bumble bee on a flower. You can understand what would 
have happened then. The meaning is clear that the middle 
path of Shiva or Buddhist is the best. Well easy to say, 
difficult to do. In the scriptures the term rejection has been 
given to non-attachment because it is closer to rejection than 
to adoption. The scriptures are emotional. People do not 
understand their feelings and start blindly following them. If a 
common man had seen Mahadev Shiva, he would have said 
that he has rejected Goddess Parvati. To say that he got 
married later means that it happened after the attainment of 
knowledge. At first he used to be meditating somewhere and 
Goddess Parvati searching for him somewhere else. Of 
course, Shiva had settled Parvati in his mind as meditation 
image and always remained blissful in her meditation. People 
must have thought that was his penance. Little do they know 


that the matter is something else. Who has seen by going 
into the mind? Actually the real detached man has adopted 
the whole world as his soul. He does not feel that he has 
rejected the world. But the people of the world feel like this. 
That’s why common people with little understanding start 
talking about rejecting the world they see. Even the lover 
sometimes feels that his lover is rejecting or ignoring her. 
That’s why when this happened, Shiva used to appear in 
front of Parvati for a few moments to console her, and then 
disappeared. Let me tell you that the power of expression 
reaches the soul through Kundalini i.e. meditation. You can 
say that with non-attachment you feel the meditation 
picture manifesting, no soul etc. The pure soul is like the 
empty sky, it cannot be felt directly in the presence of the 
body, it can be felt only in the form of meditation. Shiva 
became the biggest Rasbihari or spiritually romancing. 
How can anyone compete with him? It takes many years for 
the common man to gain ultimate knowledge through love. 
Till then he cannot even console his girlfriend like Shiva. If he 
starts giving, he gets carried away by feelings and remains 
deprived of attaining knowledge. Worldly honour related 
restrictions are also there. Everything changes after years, 
even the mind of the girlfriend. Some even distance 
themselves in the beginning by accusing them of infidelity. 
Haha. Wow to Lord Shiva’s luck and leela with the love of 
Goddess Parvati, getting complete knowledge from her, then 
marriage with her and romancing only with her. No one else 
should come in the way of love. If this happens in common 
worldliness, then there will be a shower 
of heaven and nectar. In the same way, one should keep on 
loving God without considering him unfaithful. They love 
humans a lot, that’s why they keep on showering countless 
facilities like air, sunlight, water etc. on man, of course they 
remain completely unattached and like distant. Someday or 
the other they will definitely adopt. 


Kundalini Yoga showing us or 
aliens the techniques of long 
distance interstellar travel 


Friends, | was telling in the previous post that meditation on 
the body is very important to open the Annamaya Kosha. It 
is necessary to have knowledge before meditation. That is 
why there is an abundance of descriptions of the body as 
a universe in the scriptures. At the same time, the 
description of the universe in spiritual terms is more than the 
body. Probably because at that time there was no practical 
scientific technique to check the subtlety of the body, so this 
method survived. Physiological philosophy blends modern 
science and ancient spiritual knowledge, resulting in an 
excellent understanding of the body. Probably that is why the 
book shrirvigyan darshan has become an object of praise. 
It can be called a gateway from science to spirituality. The 
last few posts were more inclined towards quantum 
physics and space science. Although those were also 
associated with the science of Kundalini Yoga. This is 
because nowadays most of the people consider physical 
science as science and not spiritual science as 
science. Teleportation can be possible only through 
Spiritual science. It is possible that the spiritual science will 
become so advanced that the man of this earth becomes a 
subtle body and goes on a tour of the whole universe, and 
after living in the body of some living being somewhere on 
some planet, comes back to the earth. It is also possible to 
exchange subtle-bodies with equally advanced beings for 
some time and return to their respective planets after 
spending some lives on each other’s planets. The infinite 
universe can be crossed only through the subtle body, not 
through the gross body. Yogis used to go on such journeys in 
the olden times. On the whole, being enlightened, man 
becomes situated everywhere at all times, which is 
the highest level of space travel. This seems to me the 
easiest and correct way of time travel and space travel, of 
course anyone can try with physical body too. It is possible 
that the aliens came to know about the earth through that 


only, after which they started coming here through UFOs as 
well. Cryosleep, light sails, wormholes and 
warp drives offer possible solutions. Unfortunately, these 
may only be daydreams, which would mean that long 
distance interstellar travel is not possible. Not me, many 
scientists are saying this. Means 
only Tantrik Kundalini Yoga and Karma-principle can 
take human from earth to other planets. Direct teleportation 
of the body can also be imagined for entertainment and 
excitement. A similar concept has been dramatized in the 
web series “Lost in Space”. | saw this recently. | found it nice 
and binding. | am not campaigning for anyone, but speaking 
from my heart. The truth should be told, if someone’s 
publicity is hidden in it, then let it be, why to bother. 


Some diseases seem like man’s attempt to 
become superman 


Scientists are even claiming that the genetic diseases that 
are happening in man are due to the DNA of aliens. Once 
the aliens had taken away the women from here and sent 
them back after impregnating them or gave birth to children 
there. Then that DNA spread to everyone. This happened to 
make man superhuman. l think of 
my ankylosing spondyloarthritis as a foreign disease. This 
disease forces me to do yoga. This proves the claim of the 
scientists to some extent. | think that prostate and piles are 
also such genetic diseases. These also make a man like 
a yogi. Old people must have understood it in such a way 
that yoga becomes successful by suffering, due to which the 
word penance would have increased. Nowadays cancer is 
also increasing. This is also a disease related to genetics. 
May be it is a defect born during nature’s attempt to make 
man a superhuman. Anyway, many great yogis have had 
cancer, especially throat cancer. The second purpose of 
writing about quantum and space was to be of some help to 
scientists, as they appear a bit puzzled and frustrated in 
these areas. Now back to spiritual science, because the fun 
that is in it, is nowhere else. Materialism increases the 
thirst, then spirituality quenches the thirst. Both have 


their own importance. Even in the Gita, Shri 
Krishna says in clear words that 
“Adhyatmvidya Vidyanam”“. Means | am spiritual science 
among the sciences. Meaning, he has considered spiritual 
science to be the best among all the sciences. Nevertheless, 
as the puzzles of physics continue to be solved, we will keep 
mentioning them from time to time. 


Kundalini Shakti can revive even 
a dead body 


One such spiritual practice is Parakaya Pravesh that’s body 
exchange, which | was referring to in a recent post. Legend is 
that Adiguru Shankaracharya defeated the scholar Mandan 
Mishra in a debate. Then his wife Bharti started discussing. 
Bharati asked him practical questions related to Kamashastra 
that’s romantic matters, but because he was an unmarried 
celibate, he could not answer. To get the answer, he had 
entered the body of a householder king who had died. A film 
has also been made on this. Contact can be made with the 
subtle body of a dead person, as | was telling my experience, 
but it is not known whether it is possible to enter the subtle 
body of a living body. It is also not known that how the subtle 
body can make it alive by entering the dead body. Science 
says that the cells of the body die shortly after death. They 
get irreparable damage, which means they are so damaged 
that they cannot be revived. Science can say only as far as it 
has access. We actually take science as final, and do not 
think beyond it. The truth is that science keeps challenging 
science, while making progress. New theories reject previous 
theories. It is possible that the dead cells which science 
considers unworthy of repair, can be repaired by spiritual 
science. Means dead cells can also become alive by yoga. 
The common man should not know about this because he 
does not know how to do such yoga. It comes in the 
Scriptures that  Rakshasguru that’s demon master 
Shukracharya used to revive dead demons with his Sanjivani 
Vidya that’s resurrection trick. An eyewitness friend of mine 
had told that he himself had seen a monk in the Kumbh Mela 
bringing alive a dead bird with the help of Pranavidya. Now | 
cannot say whether he was telling the truth or a lie. | even 
feel at times he lied. Still, let me be open minded. Not only 
this, many more Siddhas claim, especially in the scriptures. 
Although it would also have some condition or limit, which 
would be more liberal than the condition and limit of physical 
scienc. When the body can remain healthy by the Prana 
Shakti of Kundalini Yoga, and the sick body can be healthy, 
which is called Yoga Healing, then the dead body can also be 


alive, if today’s science is put aside. If yoga can repair a 
living cell, why can’t a dead cell be repaired? It is possible, 
but more yogic power will be required. If a slightly broken 
chair can be repaired, then why not a completely broken 
chair. It is possible, but it will take more energy of the body. 


It comes in Ramcharitmanas that Hanuman ji had brought 
Sanjivani herb from the mountain, by eating which the dead 
body of Laxman became alive. It was necessary to feed it 
before sunrise, otherwise it would not be effective. | think it 
means that within twenty four hours a dead body can be 
revived even by spiritual science, after that its cells are so 
damaged that they cannot be repaired even by spiritual 
science. Nowadays Ramcharitmanas is also in discussion. A 
scientific explanation was given to counter the 
misinformation spread about one or two sentences of this 
Scripture by some elements under the influence of 
misunderstanding and vested interests. For not accepting 
that truth also, they faced human opposition too. Still, on 
which side the camel of democracy sits, cannot say anything. 


Kundalini Yoga makes peahen 
become pregnant by drinking 
peacock’s tears 


Friends, in the previous post | was talking about how some 
diseases especially genetic diseases lead a man to become 
a superhuman. | have myself observed that those who are 
affected by those diseases in the later part of their life are 
very sharp minded in the early part of life. Meaning that they 
are very close to awakening. Some even become awake. 
Perhaps their energy, which is saved by the failure of any 
system of the body, is spent in increasing the intellect and 
creating awareness from it. By the way, those type of people 
seem a little different from the general society. They shine 
differently among all. Their behavior is also like different and 
special from most, and their work too. No doubt they are 
attractive. Many people long to be friends with them. People 
also get a lot of benefits by making friendship with them, 
although it may be difficult at times due to their strange 
nature. Similarly, in the previous post there was discussion 
on the possibility whether a dead or dying body can be 
revived by Kundalini Yoga. | think it can happen if the energy 
is correctly focused on the diseased parts of the body with its 
proper rotation. But it requires a lot of time and subtle yoga 
techniques. This is a very subtle science. | read in 
Autobiography of a Yogi and many other places a true story 
that a daughter-in-law who eats a lot, was sitting in a 
secluded place, saddened by the taunts of her mother-in-law, 
when a yogi taught her yoga to concentrate the life force at 
the throat pit, After which she never needed to eat food. 
One can concentrate energy in the pit of the throat, but one 
does not know the subtle techniques that produce that effect. 
Some will have a heavy head, some will have a headache, 
etc. The biggest thing is how to believe that the effect has 
been created. Because even after being affected, a person 
will continue to eat forcefully out of fear that he may die of 
hunger. The same happens in the case of all learning, when a 
man does not believe or does not know that he has learned. 
That’s why a knowledgeable teacher or Guru is needed. Now, 


just as a loving couple transmits energy or Shakti or 
whatever named within each other, similarly an adept yogi 
can transmit power to a dead body as well, so the theory 
says. Perhaps this is the basis of the Mrit Sanjivani Vidya. 

Many people keep breaking or rejecting friendship because of 
small things, due to which they remain deprived of their 
benefits. For example, one day a Facebook friend of mine 
shared a post making fun of the unscientific myth that 
peahens get pregnant by drinking peacock tears. 
A sadhvi who gave such discourse was also ridiculed. It had 
become his habit to do propaganda without any argument. | 
gave him a Spiritual explanation for this. | said brother, such 
stories have very entertaining and enlightening spiritual 
meaning, please don’t connect them with the material world. 
The peacock dances looking at the clouds. Means he knows 
how to be happy even in the atmosphere of depression. 
Peacock is like a Yogi. Probably that is why Yogishwar 
Lord Krishna used to wear Mormukut that’s peacock 
feathered crown. Meaning peacock let the tears of sorrow or 
depression fall. He didn’t stop them. He allowed the mood of 
depression to express itself. Thoughts of depression were 
allowed to rise a bit. The peahen here symbolizes the 
intellect and the peacock the soul. Peacock means the soul 
is experiencing depression in the form of darkness of bitter or 
sluggish thoughts. Wisdom accepted the power of bitter 
thoughts expressed in those tears, and gave birth to a son in 
the form of beautiful and powerful thoughts. In 
the scriptures, there is a trend of calling strong beautiful 
thoughts of the mind as sons. Kundalini picture is the most 
beautiful and powerful thought of mind, so she is given the 
form of the best son or Kartikeya. According to the best 
method, the intellect decided to do Kundalini Yoga. Due to 
this, the power of bad thoughts got attached to the 
brightening Kundalini picture, due to which the darkness of 
depression ended, and possibly Kundalini awakening also 
happened along with it. The intellect of the one who was not 
a Kundalini Yogi, in an artistic way made the man do such 
activities, which generate beautiful thoughts, such as writing, 
painting, music-playing, acting etc. In this case too, these 
beautiful thoughts took the power of the foggy thoughts of 
depression. It is clear that the balloon of depression should 


be allowed to burst, it should not be kept locked inside. The 
same thing happened to me once, when many roads in the 
world were closed in front of me. There was no new work, so 
old sluggish thoughts were pouring out like peacock’s tears. 
Then | gave the power of those thoughts to Kundalini Chitra 
through Tantrik Kundalini Yoga. The friend did not discuss 
the above explanation, but got out of the friend list. This 
pretty much proves that my unanswerable analysis was 
correct. The propagandists disappear by initial verbal firing 
like this. What is your opinion? 


Kundalini Yogi destroys ego and 
tantric sins in the form of 
Hiranyakashipu with the help of 
meditation picture as Lord 
Nrisimha and saves soulful 
intellect as Prahlad 


Friends, in the previous post, how the peacock became a 
Yogi. Yogi’s back energy channel is male peacock, 
while the front channel is peahen. In an atmosphere full 
of depression, the power of Muladhara creates many faulty 
thoughts in his mind, because the power does not find any 
other way to be spent. He drinks the same thoughts i.e. tears 
by touching the inverted tongue to the soft palate inside the 
mouth as Khechari mudra. The same tears descending 
through the front channel take the form of Kundalini image 
on the chakras, especially on the navel chakra, which means 
the peahen becomes pregnant. 

According to a legend in the Puranas, ademon named 
Hiranyakashipu sought a boon from Brahma that he 
should not be killed by humans or animals, neither in the day 
nor in the night, neither inside nor outside the house, nor by 
astra that’s fired weapons or shastra that’s handheld 
weapons. Hiranyakashipu considered Lord Vishnu as his 
worst enemy. But his son Prahlad was a devotee of Vishnu. 
Hiranyakashipu explained a lot to him but when he did not 
agree, he made many attempts to kill him. Once he got the 
iron pole red hot and asked Prahlad to stick to it. When 
Prahlad saw an ant crawling on it, he hugged the pillar 
without fear. Only then a strange creature came out of it, 
whose face was of a lion but it was a man from below. His 
name was Narasimha. He took him to the door of the house 
in the evening, took him on his lap and killed him with his 
nails. 

Hiranyakashipu is also a symbol of tantric sin. 
Tantrik Panchamakar is sinful mostly. The tendency of sinful 
energy iS more towards the material world. That’s why it 


does not allow man to go towards spirituality. But by Guru’s 
grace, a man’s trend becomes towards spirituality. It has 
been said in the story that the teacher of the school turned 
Prahlad towards spirituality. Then Hiranyakashipu removed 
that teacher and appointed a new teacher who gives physical 
education full of deceit. But Prahlad’s nature did not change. 
The meaning is clear that the blind power tries to take away 
even from the true Guru, but even if a little contact is 
established with the true Guru, it does not succeed. As a 
result, these tantric sins inclined towards spirituality make 
the Sushumna of man activated. This is the making of red 
hot iron pole by Hiranyakashipu. The yogi’s joining the 
meditation picture with it is his embracing it, for man’s own 
form is also that which he is meditating on every moment. 
The awakening of Dhyanachitra that’s meditation image 
means the manifestation of Lord Narasimha, by whom along 
with all other sins, those tantric sins committed for the 
success of Kundalini Sadhana are also destroyed. This is 
the killing of Hiranyakashipu by Nrisimha. The appearance of 
Narasimha from that burning pillar in the evening means that 
at that time Sushumna becomes more active than other 
times and most likely awakens the image of meditation in 
Sahasrara. Sushumna Nadi is that fiery red iron 
pillar. Sushumna also resides inside backbone stiff like iron. 
Because many people consider the picture of Kundalini as 
scary like a ghost, because it does not have a physical 
existence, that is why it has been given the form of a 
fearsome Narasimha. Meditation picture is neither human nor 
animal. It can be understood in such a way that when half- 
human forms like Hanuman, Ganesha are meditated upon, 
then Dhyanachitra is most expressive. He is neither inside 
nor outside. This means that Dhyanachitra is not a physical 
object, but only an imaginary picture. It is formed neither 
during the day nor at night, but it is formed in the evening 
while doing Kundalini Yoga. He takes Hiranyakashipu in his 
lap and punctures his belly with his fingernail, that means by 
lifting up the subconscious and unconscious mind from 
Muladhar hidden there as ego, he eliminates them by 
manifesting them on the chakras, means this is Vipasana 
Sadhana. In Sahasrar Chakra, it remains fully 
manifested, and remains asleep in Mooladhara, so it 


does not come to die in both the places. It remains 
semi-awake or semi-conscious only in the middle 
chakras, that’s why it comes to die in the middle. This 
is also the principle of witnessing in Vipassana 
practice. This is Chakrabhedan that’s chakra piercing 
through Shakti. First the dormant thoughts and desires from 
the surface of the subconscious mind are awakened by life 
force and expressed on the chakras, then they are 
penetrated by the flow of life force on the chakras. In fact, 
those desires and rituals are pierced or destroyed, but 
chakras are believed to be pierced. Because 
the navel chakra of the stomach is the most prominent, 
hence Hiranyakashipu’s stomach has been said to be torn 
open. Because most yogis strengthen their meditation by 
placing the tip of the fingernail or atleast finger on the chakra 
point causing the sharp prickling sensation at the chakra with 
the fingernail, that is why it is said that Narasimha tore 
Hiranyakashipu with the fingernail. Neither a human nor 
an animal can kill the ego. It cannot be killed by any 
type of weapon. It can be killed neither completely 
being outside i.e. extroverted, nor completely being 
inside i.e. introverted, but only by a suitable mixture 
of both. In this, the killing of Hiranyakshipu in the balanced 
or middle states tells that Sushumna is active only in the 
state of Sangam or union i.e. Yinyang. The Kundalini Yogi 
who feels a slight sensation like crawling in the back i.e. 
Sushumna, makes him believe about awakening of Kundalini, 
due to which he engages in yoga practice and activates 
Sushumna and achieves Kundalini awakening. It is said as 
Prahlad saw a worm crawling on that burning iron pillar, 
convinced with that he embraced it, from which Lord 
Narasimha appeared. 


Kundalini meditation as a mental 
illness streamlined by sexual 
energy based Tantra 


Continuing from the last post, only Prahlad went to persuade 
Hiranyakashipu, because he was not agreeing to the 
persuasion of any deity. This often happens after awakening. 
Understand it in such a way that a man who has fallen from 
infinite Consciousness is very energetic and active. He will 
also try to bring other people on the path because no man 
can move forward without the society. Well this mostly 
happens when a man gets awakening at a time when he is 
full of healthy energy, like adolescence and puberty. How can 
a sick, weak and old person change the society, even if he 
changes himself, it is enough. Prahlad was in the energetic 
childhood stage when he got awakened. This will make 
people jealous of him, angry at him, and may even persecute 
him, as happened with Jesus. This can cause sin to the 
society, which can lead to the misery of the people living in 
it. Means on their part people try to pacify the awakening, 
because the gods in the form of different organs or parts of 
the people are situated in their bodies. Gods never want 
anyone to become like a sage, because they work to excite 
and expand the world. But the sage pacifies the world. That’s 
why people inspire him to do Kundalini Yoga. This happens 
even itself, when people make him a type of boycotted. Then 
in the boring atmosphere of loneliness, what will the 
awakened person do if he does not do Kundalini meditation. 
Others do not see the meditation picture. They guess that it 
is a scary ghost. That’s why the deities imagined it as the lion 
form Narasimha. But Prahlad knew that it is the ultimate 
lover and well wisher, not an imaginary ghost etc. Perhaps 
people also compare meditation with states of insanity or 
hallucination or demonic possession or depression or 
intoxication etc., unknowingly of course, due to centuries of 
confusion in their subconscious mind. And of course, a man 
who has been cheated in love also lives madly in the memory 
of his lover like a corrupt dhyana-yogi. Probably that’s why it 
is emphasized to get him married somewhere soon, so that 


he can get some support from tantric sex power. Most of the 
films are made on this issue. It’s strange brother. Once upon 
a time | accidentally consumed tobacco, once cannabis, and 
once an anti-anxiety medicine. In all three cases, the 
meditation picture was jumping in my mind. Looked clearly 
like a real man to the extent of hallucination. But it was 
accompanied by dullness and stupidity. There was less joy. It 
seems like depression as | was not willing to talk to anybody 
but to be immersed in maddening type self bliss. There was 
also restlessness and weakness to some extent. That’s why a 
great attention on health is given in Yoga. | think that the 
sexual sensation of Muladhara has a great contribution in the 
joy of meditation. By eliminating the so-called negative and 
depressive symptoms associated with meditation, it makes a 
person more properly normal ie even healthier than the 
normal. Perhaps it stems from yinyang, because without a 
sexual pair, sensation has no proper meaning. This sensation 
enables the brain to bear the pressure of Kundalini 
awakening, because the nature of both is the same i.e. the 
form of bliss. Where mental illness or mental fatigue or 
disturbance of mental chemicals or other mental 
irregularities or intoxication etc. are the main reasons behind 
the appearance of things in the form of illusion, whereas in 
the state of meditation or Kundalini awakening the mind is 
completely healthy and fresh, even more than a normal 
healthy person. Where a man in a state of mental illness is 
almost incapable of functioning, on the other hand, in a state 
of meditation, he is fully capable, even more so than an 
ordinary man. Where in the state of meditation man gets 
pleasure due to witnessing towards worldly works and 
resolutions, the mental patient does not. That’s why a mental 
patient looks anxious and withered. One can only bear 
witnessing to healthy thoughts of worldly works as usually 
formed in the mind of a healthy person. But often this does 
not happen to mental patient due to bodily and mental 
weaknesses and defects. The truth is that only a healthy man 
can do healthy meditation. When the yogi becomes 
engrossed in Kundalini meditation, then people get good 
chance to get rid of his so-called insanity and go about their 
business with the same enthusiasm, attachment and duality 
as earlier and usual so that the deities are pleased. This is 


why it is said that Prahlad pleased Lord Nrisimha with praise. 
With this, leaving anger, he became calm, due to which the 
gods and the world were saved from destruction. 


Kundalini based sexual Yoga 
prepares the brain 
for awakening 


Friends, in the previous post we were talking about the 
comparative study between Kundalini meditation and 
psychiatry. In the same episode, it also seems that such and 
such psychopaths can be treated with love therapy. That’s 
why it’s often common saying that Love makes one helping 
de-addiction. Love is a supertonic. Mental illness is not 
always bad, as is commonly believed, but it can also be a 
godgift. Probably that is why mental patients are seen from a 
special divine perspective in Hinduism, they are seen with 
respect. Here they are rarely sent to a mental hospital, 
unless there is a serious danger. They are the main source of 
entertainment, and the main point of attraction in 
ceremonies etc. Yet for the most part they are treated with 
respect, and they are not hurt. They are not even considered 
a big burden on the society. 
| feel like Muladharvasini Kundalini Shakti enables the brain 
to withstand the pressure. It probably increases the flexibility 
of the blood vessels, helping them to increase blood flow 
without having to bear much pressure. It used to be strange 
when common people used to sit holding their heads in the 
name of meditation, but in my mind there was dhyana 
Samadhi all the time due to the power of sexual yoga. | was 
in full influence of Tantric Sexual Yoga when | had a 
momentary Kundalini awakening. Otherwise it would not 
have happened to me. The body knows when to do what with 
itself. It fully opened the back channel for awakening only 
when the brain became capable of withstanding maximum 
pressure by being under the influence of Kundalini Shakti of 
sexual yoga continuously for two to three months. | 
unknowingly lowered the Kundalini not because | could not 
bear its pressure, but because | was afraid that | might fall 
behind materially. Because | had the same experience in the 
past. Don’t know what magic this orgasmic power does. It is 
a blissful power. 
Sexual yinyang grows out of devotion and surrender to each 


other. That’s why a lot of emphasis is laid on these two 
Spiritual attributes. What happens is that only with full 
dedication towards each other, Yin and Yang immerse into 
each other completely. What can be better than sexual 
surrender? Yinyang is there in everything, but surrender is 
only or best between man and woman. The closeness and 
interconnectedness that is formed between a pair of a loving 
man and woman, is not so much formed between anyone. 
That’s why loving relationship and surrendered sex is the 
best storehouse of yinyang unity. Therefore it is natural that 
this is also the best basis for physical and spiritual progress. 
Yinyang is completeness, Kundalini awakening is 
completeness, Godliness is completeness. The material world 
also comes under this perfection, it is not different from it. 


Kundalini meditation and 
awareness meditation are not 
different from each other 


Friends, in the previous post, we saw the miracles produced 
by true and surrendered love. You can guess for yourself 
what will happen if the reverse happens. The same reverse 
game is going on in Love Jihad. Due to such terrible 
contagious diseases, there has been a gap of mistrust 
between men and women for centuries. It is not from today, 
it has been going on for centuries more or less, in this name 
or that name. Today it is coming in front of the world in this 
way. It takes years to build trust, but only moments to break 
it. The body can be won by force, but the heart can be won 
only by love and faith. The wonderful film “Kerala Story” 
made on this has nowadays become the center of 
international discussion and attraction. But this is not the 
subject of this blog, it was talked about in relation to such a 
post, so this current issue got added by itself. 


When attention is focused on an idol etc., then the power of 
wandering thoughts gets concentrated there. There is only 
one way left for the latent power of thoughts to appear, to 
appear in the form of meditation picture. Yogis focus on the 
chakras of their body rather than on the idol. The same thing 
happens to them. Along with chakra meditation, the body 
also remains healthy. Those who do not believe in them 
imagine some invisible God living in or on the sky. The same 
thing happens to them. The meaning is clear that no one is a 
disbeliever or SO called infidel or Kafir. 
At the same time, by meditating on the river, mountain, tree, 
that is, by worshiping them, all of them also remain healthy 
like the chakras of the body, because the life force of man is 
felt and incorporated in them too. The protection of the 
environment is hidden in this basic mantra. The same 
principle applies to awareness meditation. It is said that 
awareness meditation is very beneficial. | recently had the 
chance to meet a new friend. He also does a good practice of 
Homeopathic Medicine. Anyway, homeopathy is very similar 


to the Indian sage tradition. Had gone there in this 
connection and got to know a little. Knowing his hobby for 
literature and spirituality, | also started talking about it. It is 
said that only the jeweler should be shown the diamond, the 
common man will throw it in the drain thinking it as a stone. | 
was very impressed by his statement that one should live 
with awareness all the time. Osho Maharaj also says exactly 
the same thing that do every work with awareness. He 
himself seemed like a follower of Osho to me. One gets 
benefit from satsang, as | got. | could get to the bottom of its 
psychological principle. | feel that when we are paying 
attention to any sensation that the body is feeling at present 
in real time, then the manomaya kosha, annamaya kosha 
and pranamaya kosha are mixing together, as | explained in 
detail in the last few posts. By paying attention to the 
sensation of the present, attention automatically goes to the 
body and the breath, because all three are connected to each 
other. Although thoughts of past and future events also come 
under mental sensation, but body and breath are less 
associated with them, because there is no real time physical 
body of present time situated in the past, nor in the future, it 
is Only in the present time. That is why it is said that one 
should remain situated in the present. | think that when one 
meditates on the physical sensations associated with the 
present situation, it leads to enforce the belief that they are 
connected to one’s body. This automatically leads to the 
belief that his non-present mental sensations such as various 
feelings and thoughts are also part of his body, because the 
sensations, whether physical or mental, whether related to 
present, past or future, all have exactly the same basic 
nature and experience. This calms them down, because then 
there is no attachment, or love for anyone. None gets 
attachment with himself, because one’s own self is already 
and forever attached to him, nothing can separate it,as it’s 
one’s own form. Attachment only happens to other or 
separate one. Means mental defects like lust, anger, greed, 
attachment, pride and jealousy calm down and make life 
happy for oneself and for others too. Spiritual progress also 
happens in this peaceful environment alongwith physical 
progress too. The proof of this is the clear manifestation of 
the Kundalini meditation picture in mind in such a cool state. 


In addition, Kundalini meditation makes the brain so agile 
and sensitive that it begins to deeply feel each and every 
physical sensation, which in itself creates a habit of 
practicing awareness. Along with this, man also feels that 
when all the sensations are the same, then why is he more 
attached to one sensation and less to the other. He should be 
equal and impartial towards everyone. That’s why he 
becomes calm by being fair and neutral. Or understand that 
the attention is diverted from the sensations of attachment 
to the normal present time physical sensations. 


Kundalini Yoga and Sigmund 
Freud’s psychology say the 
same thing 


From the analysis of some of the recent past posts, it seems 
that what we consider to be mental illness may actually be 
symptoms of the mind moving towards awakening, but 
because of not being able to handle them properly, they 
become mental illness. | can also prove it from my own 
experience. At any particular place where | got sexual power, 
my meditation picture made me top in every field, be it 
Spiritual or physical. But where | didn’t get that, it also made 
me look like a psychopath. Of course, that sexual force may 
be imaginary intercourse, even if it is a permanent mental 
picture of the imaginary sexual partner like a samadhi. Even 
if of course it is a man instead of a woman. In such a 
situation, | did not feel any harm in homosexuality. 
However, it is a different matter and what | feel that 
Kundalini awakening comes only from man-woman love, 
because the complete combination of yin and yang can 
happen only between man and woman. Readers may find 
this strange. 

Sigmund Freud, the great western psychologist, says that 
there is sexual ecstasy ie orgasm in every part of the body. 
This has been said in Tantra since a long time ago. That’s 
why the arrival of Kundalini Shakti on the chakras means to 
experience sexual ecstasy there. The meaning of Kundalini 
Yoga is to provide all the chakras turn by turn that sensual or 
orgasmic sensation by elevating it up from Mooladhara. This 
orgasmic and blissful sensation is like a super tonic. It 
enhances and balances all the biological activities of the 
chakra it reaches. All the organs and biological parts that 
come under the influence of that chakra, they also get 
benefited like the chakra itself. Because the whole body is 
covered in all the seven chakras, therefore the whole body 
becomes healthy and balanced, diseases stay away from it. 
In fact, sexual ecstasy of the genitals only works to increase 
the natural or inherent sex ecstasy of the chakras, as their 
own ecstatic sex is already inside them. This inner sex drive 


of theirs is at the base of various biological reactions and 
processes. The genitals only give it an extra push. Think of it 
as their own orgasm is like an engine running on its own at 
idling, and the orgasm of the genitals is like the accelerator 
pedal of a car. If sexual ecstasy of the genitals was 
everything, then even a failing heart would have been 
triggered by it. But this does not happen. It’s like pressing 
the accelerator pedal won’t start the engine if it is stalled or 
is stalling due to faulty parts like pistons etc. 

At one place, Sigmund Freud takes a slightly different view. 
He says that sexual power is the biggest, that is, it is the 
prime motivator, but in our Tantra philosophy it has been 
said from the beginning that willpower is a bigger motivator 
than that. If Freud was right, everyone would have been 
awakened, because everyone has sex. The truth is that even 
through sexual intercourse, only those people get awakening, 
who have already made a determination in their mind to 
attain Guru and awakening through yoga practice and 
other spiritual methods. Will try to discuss this in detail in a 
new post. 


Klundalini tantra can curb 
religion born mental illness 


Friends, in the previous post | was telling how Kundalini Yoga 
used to make my mental state stable and healthy. A friend 
was saying that a crippled mind cannot be cured by love etc. 
According to this, even Kundalini cannot be awakened by 
love. But it happens. There are different levels of brain 
degeneration. We do not say that everyone will become 
healthy, but there will be some improvement in everyone. 
Even all physical patients especially congenital or genetic 
patients are not cured by medicine. | meant to say that when 
Kundalini Yoga looks like a mental illness, then even mental 
illness can be made like Kundalini Yoga. Perhaps this is why 
mental illness is viewed from a divine perspective in most 
religions. When meditation is spoken, but the 
necessary energy is not arranged for it, then mental 
diseases will surely spread. I will not pinpoint any 
particular religion. But it is known to everyone that 
most of the extremist type people who hardly believe 
in religion appear like mental patients or are real mental 
patients at this time. Pakistan is a living example of this, 
where according to a report there are about more than fifty 
millions mental patients. /t also appears if there is excess 
energy in any religion, then there is no meditation in the 
right way, or there is no meditation at all and vice versa. 
Only Kundalini Tantra seems to me to be an exception in this, 
because it also speaks for meditation, and also arranges the 
additional energy required for it. Due to the lack of proper 
meditative dhyana and energy, religion or spirituality 
becomes something else, it becomes completely opposite, it 
does not remain in its original form. Eckhort Talle got the 
experience of awakening at the peak of depression. Means 
he was not mentally ill but was undergoing natural Kundalini 
Sadhana, which he and the people of the world mistook for 
depression, that’s why they were not able to handle it 
properly. There are many such examples. A cerebral palsy 
used to come into our office quite often, running with his foot 
shoes on his head. One had to shake hands with him 
cheerfully and jocularly, or else he had to pay a rupee. If not 


found, he used to run away by picking up a small piece of 
soap. Once in front of us he slapped a stranger so hard that 
he was completely shaken. | felt that he was angry with me 
but fearing my tantric power, he took his anger out on him. 
To this day, | see the regret of that incident on his face. It is 
love that was keeping him on the line. Similarly, an 
unmarried and low-level differently-abled person, influenced 
by my Kundalini Yogashakti, used to do many works for me 
almost without any remuneration, but | used to give it to his 
family members in his name. Why shouldn’t it be understood 
that in mental diseases like Alzheimer’s, due to the 
deterioration of the main parts of the brain, the excess 
neurotransmitters that accumulate, they create an imaginary 
picture that looks real in the form of hallucination. Similarly, 
the same thing happens when the mind is controlled and 
pacified by yoga that’s how Samadhi develops. But in the 
first case, this samadhi-like image is unhealthy, 
uncontrollable and devoid of the purpose of awakening, but 
in the second case it is a healthy, controlled meditative 
image, which brings about awakening. Have 
the communists invented the phrase “religion-form 
opium intoxication” because of this confusion? The rest, 
we leave this topic to psychologists and psychiatrists, 
because we do not want to stray from our original topic. 


Kundalini image takes over the 
entire creation by taking the 
incarnation of Lord Vamana, 
awakens and sends the egoistic 
King Bali to the underworld 


Friends, in the previous post, there was a little talk about 
religion. Religion or Dharma in Sanskrit literally means 
lifestyle. Whose lifestyle is fanatic, he lags behind. Nokia 
didn’t keep up with the times. At the same time, it was also 
concluded that many people who are thought to be 
psychopaths and are suppressed by drugs, exploitation or 
social ostracism, are actually patients of awakening. | wish 
psychology could differentiate between the symptoms of 
Kundalini and the symptoms of psychiatry or foolishness. | 
think it is difficult for a culture like western civilization to 
make this difference, but people of eastern culture are 
comparatively habitual in it as they have experienced it since 
ancient times. So, You must have seen, how lion had become 
a Yogi in a recent previous post. By the way, there is also a 
Yogasan named Singhasan. Anyway, Kundalini Yogi has been 
given a dragon-like form, whose mouth is also open like a 
lion. Yoga is a game of breath, and even a lion roars with the 
power of breath and makes his face menacing. There is a 
similar mythical story in Hindu Puranas that Lord Vamana 
had measured the whole earth in three steps. Actually the 
three steps are the symbols of the three gunas, sattva, rajas 
and tamas. Ida Nadi is mother Aditi, and Pingala Nadi is 
mother Diti. Pingala increases worldly discrimination, 
intelligence and ego, which means it increases demonic 
dualist gunas, Rajoguna and Tamoguna. But Ida Nadi creates 
divine feelings of sattvaguna like peace, tensionlessness, non 
duality and other pure qualities. That is why it is said that 
Aditi is the mother of all the gods and Diti is the mother of all 
the demons. These two were the wives of Kashyap Muni. 
Kashyapa was the son of Brahma. Brahma is the main 
expressed mind. Because the mind creates the whole world. 
He sits on a lotus, on a lotus in the form of sahasrar chakra. 


As the place of the soul is described as Sahasrar, the same 
has happened to the mind because both are interrelated, one 
isn’t without the other. Sage Kashyap is the subconscious 
mind, because it is born from the mind. He lives in hellish 
Muladhara as opposed to his father brahma who lives in 
heavenly sahasrara. Ka means water, and Shya is derived 
from the word Shayan or sleep, meaning one who sleeps in 
water. Water is in the form of semen and the cerebrospinal 
fluid flowing in the spinal cord, and the subconscious mind is 
shown as the sleeping man, because it is in it that all 
emotions remain suppressed. This subconscious mind resides 
in deep and dark pit like places like Muladhara and 
Swadhishthana Chakras. When its expressing feelings get the 
support of Advaita Bhava i.e. Ida Nadi, then they become his 
sons as gods, but when they get the support of Dvaita Bhava 
i.e. Pingala Nadi, then they become his sons as demons. 
These waking thoughts are the sons of Kashyapa and Aditi or 
Diti. Ida and Pingala nadis are his two wives in the form of 
Aditi and Diti respectively, because with their help he 
awakens in the form of thought-form sons, which means he 
becomes strong. Ida and Pingala nadis are his two wives, 
because with their help he becomes expressed, that means 
he becomes strong. The mental Kundalini image itself is Lord 
Vamana. It is the best among all thought-form sons, hence it 
is called the incarnation of Lord Vishnu. Very cool 
psychology. Brahma is the original mind. In fact, it is He who 
builds various worldly creations like houses, gardens, roads, 
bridges etc. He does not give birth straight to thought-form 
sons. He first creates the subconscious mind-like Kashyapa 
Muni. Thought-form sons are made from that. You must have 
also seen that if you do not do any work in the world, then no 
strong thoughts will be formed directly. By doing work, its 
memories get absorbed in the subconscious mind, which 
later keep on emerging in the form of powerful thoughts. The 
left brain under the jurisdiction of Pingala Nadi is under the 
authority of the demon king Bali, the Ida-ruled right brain is 
under the authority of the gods. Raja Bali is ego. The name 
Bali seems to have been given to him because he sacrifices 
(means giving bali in sanskrit) living beings, commits 
violence to maintain the power of his ego. Also, Bali name 
Originates from Sanskrit word Balin that means powerful. Ego 


is too powerful in fact. Kundalini image is formed by the 
influence of Ida. Although both Ida and Pingala should be ina 
balanced form, because the existence of both is dependent 
on each other, but Ida should be comparatively more 
effective. Under the influence of Ida Nadi, a person becomes 
calm, stress-free, with good appetite and good digestion. In 
this state of peace, the picture of Kundalini resides in the 
mind, which means Lord Vamana is born from Mother 
Goddess Aditi. To see, he is a small lonely mental picture, 
that is why he is called a dwarf or vamana. He asks King Bali 
for only three steps of land in the universe. How much space 
will a mental image take up? Like every mental object, that 
meditation picture is also made of three gunas, sattva, rajas 
and tamas. These are the three steps. Man as ego promises 
to give him even that much space, and thinks what harm it 
will do to him. Ego is very powerful. He does the biggest 
things in the world. He takes the small Kundalini picture as a 
joke. The backbone is secretly depicted as the conch shell. It 
has the same shape as a conch shell, wide at the head and 
thin at the tail or bottom. The spinal cord or Sushumna Nadi 
located in it is the drain inside the conch. The word nadi is 
derived from the word river (Nadi in Hindi). The water flowing 
in that drain is the sensation of Kundalini Shakti. Energy also 
flows like water flow. Because Kundalini-meditation or 
kundalini-thought as Sankalpa that’s sharp thought or 
resolution is mixed in it, hence it is called Sankalpa-jal. 
Meditation itself is called resolution or sankalpa in Sanskrit. 
During every religious ritual in Hinduism, while pouring water 
from a conch or argha (a special vessel for worship), a 
sankalpa is made for a few moments about the reason for the 
ritual, the process of the ritual, the priest, and its resulting 
fruit. Deep meditation itself occurs with it for a moment. Due 
to this, the karma becomes fruitful quickly and more. While 
sitting in the Yagya, Bali had pledged to give three steps of 
land to Lord Vaman while pouring water from the conch. It is 
possible that by pouring water, the Kundalini energy starts 
flowing, because there is a similarity between the two, which 
strengthens the meditation. Along with the falling stream of 
water from the Arghe or conch, the Kundalini Shakti also 
starts flowing down the front channel, due to which it passes 
through the back channel and climbs up the back, taking with 


it the additional and special orgasmic Kundalini Shakti of 
Muladhara. It also carries along Vamana in the form of the 
meditation image because vamana is the main purpose, in 
the Sushumna-conch channel in the form of a thin spinal 
cord, with the push of the flowing water or Shakti in the form 
of meditation or Sankalp, and this way vamana keeps on 
growing through Yogasadhana, and finally awakens and 
pervades the entire creation. This is to measure the three 
worlds with three steps. Due to this the ego itself gets buried 
in the underworld in the form of subconscious. It has been 
said this way that Vamana placed the third step on the head 
of Bali. This story continues in the next post as well. 


Kundalini as Lord Vamana 
pierces Shukracharya’s duality- 
form eyes 


Friends, continuing the previous post, that sacrificial ego 
that’s king Bali let Vamana come under compulsion, and he 
also gets apprehension that he may not survive after 
Kundalini awakening. By the way, the glory has been sung in 
such a way that King Bali was the biggest donor, who 
donated three steps of land to Vamana despite knowing his 
future destruction. Every living being is the supreme donor 
like King Bali. Knowing that his ego will be destroyed by 
Kundalini Yoga, his boundless material world will be 
destroyed, still he does Kundalini Sadhana at some point or 
the other. When a man is engaged in good deeds like King 
Bali, then sometimes Lord Vishnu comes to him in the form of 
a meditation picture to do good to him. He can be a friend, 
lover, guru or deity in any form. Guru is also considered as 
the form of God. Anyway, for everyone, their lover is God. For 
example, suppose a woman enters a man’s life. Men have 
tens of businesses, and hundreds of relationships. Because of 
them, innumerable images are formed in his mind. So he 
takes that woman for granted, and thinks that a woman is 
nothing in front of his vast material world. He allows her to 
take up space in his mind, that is, he allows the first step 
associated with it in the form of her Bhava or existence or 
Sattva Guna, the second step in the form of her motion or 
Rajo Guna, and the third step in the form of Darkness or 
Tamo Guna to fall into his mind-like kingdom. But gradually 
his love for her grows, and with time she occupies more and 
more space in his mind. In the end, she spreads throughout 
his empire, and then awakens and destroys man’s ego as 
king Bali. The same happens in Kundalini Yoga. This means 
that there is no difference in essence between yoga and love. 
King Bali was also doing a great Yagya, which means he was 
doing a good deed. A man knows that he will become a crazy 
yogi or crazy lover by falling in the circle of meditation, yet 
he adopts it and moves forward. Through the awakening, 
kundalini captured the entire heaven with one step, that is, 


with Sattvagun. Heaven is dominated by goodness. Because 
all the three gunas become infinite at the time of Kundalini 
awakening, that is why it has been said that Kundalini or 
Vamana has completely permeated all the three worlds. The 
second step means that the Kundalini picture spread in the 
whole earth with Rajoguna, because the earth is 
Rajogunapradhan. With the third step in the form of 
Tamoguna, the ego and its associated thoughts of karma go 
into the dark subconscious of the Mooladhara. Since 
tamoguna is created by killing or destroying someone, it is 
created by destroying the ego and the mental creation it 
feeds on. The position of Lord Vishnu as the gatekeeper of 
Patal Lok or pit abode means that Dhyanachitra keeps on 
purifying those demons i.e. thoughts buried in the 
subconscious by letting them go up, i.e. to the brain or 
heaven, so that everyone becomes gods. At the same time, 
Vishnuswarupa Dhyanchitra is focused on the Swadhishthana 
and Muladhara chakras by Kundalini Yoga, so that the 
demonic emotions that are suppressed in them are exposed 
and become pure when they comes in contact with it, so that 
they do not bind the yogi, that is, demons are not able to 
trouble the deities, because all the deities reside in the body 
itself. Anyway, Swadhishthan Chakra is called emotional 
baggage. 

Shukra Acharya, the rakshasguru who became Bali’s priest in 
the yagya, first explains a lot to Bali that he should not trust 
Vamana because he will snatch everything from him in three 
steps. But when Bali does not agree, then Shukracharya 
enters the hole of the conch shell being used to pour out 
water as a mark of strong will power to donate, but Vaman 
enters kusha that’s a special grass stick in it and breaks his 
eye? One more thing, because the conch shell is also on the 
back of the living being, and like the spinal cord gives it 
protection, it becomes even more confirmed that the 
sushumna nadi itself has been called the conch shell. In 
addition, the shape of the conch is similar to that of a hooded 
serpent or dragon, which is equated with the spinal cord and 
the Sushumna located in it. An experienced patriarch never 
wants to let his host get lost in the wilderness of spirituality, 
no matter how beneficial it for the host may be. He knows 
that if the host comes to know the truth, then it will not be 


easy to cheat him and extract money from him in the name 
of Yagya etc. rituals. Although rituals are right at their place 
and are an important ladder for awakening, but who cares 
about the ladder when the destination is reached. 
Shukracharya i.e. priest or Guru by pouring out Shukra i.e. 
semen to block the energy flow of Sushumna is depicted as 
entering the conch shell. Vaman’s opening it with the Kusha 
stick is the raising of the Shakti from the Muladhar with the 
help of the Kundalini Dhyanachitra. It is the line of sensation 
extending from Muladhara to Sahasrara which is in the spinal 
cord. It is a thin light streak felt like a broom stick or the stick 
of kusha grass. This is Sushumna activation or awakening. If 
the back, especially the spine, is massaged before sexual 
intercourse, then this sensation line is felt easily and with 
pleasure. Then the semen power easily rises up, making the 
sexual intercourse very blissful and spiritual. The pressure of 
the sexual organs also ends. Man often does this inspired by 
the greed for Kundalini bliss, that is why the myth says that 
Vamana did this. Due to this, Shukracharya’s eye bursting 
means due to the effect of Kundalini, the dual vision of 
semen power or Shukracharya is destroyed. Shukra means 
semen in Sanskrit. When the semen power will not flow 
towards the world full of duality but will flow towards the soul 
full of non duality, then it is natural that the duality filled 
vision of semen power will be destroyed. Bali or ego goes to 
Patala, means after Kundalini awakening man cannot express 
ego in the form of luminous world because he has 
experienced the most luminous Kundalini awakening. 
Therefore, being detached from the gross world, he becomes 
unmanifested in the form of his subtle body. Moreover, he 
finds himself too down in front of awakening. This down 
feeling is depicted as patal or submerged abode. It is like 
darkness. This is his hellish abode. However, due to the 
gradual purification of the subtle body, it continues to be 
purified. It is said as Lord Vishnu guards it as its gatekeeper. 


Kundalini Shakti kills the demon 
Vritrasur by becoming Indra- 
Vajra 


Friends, in the previous post we have seen how the worldly 
intelligence in the form of Shukracharya wants to deprive the 
soul as King Bali from awakening. Very beautiful story. One 
such yoga-mystical story of Vritrasura killing comes in the 
Puranas. The gods made a thunderbolt from the bones of 
Dadhichi Rishi to kill the demon Vritrasura. The word Vritra 
seems to be derived from the word Vritti. It means the 
thoughts of the mind. There are thoughts in the mind or 
chitta. Chitta means the collection of thoughts that happened 
physically earlier, and are now stored in memory. That’s why 
remembering is also called coming to mind or coming Cheta. 
Only Kundalini awakening can weaken or paralyze them. It 
seems that Kundalini awakening can be achieved only when 
Sushumna located in the spinal cord is activated, otherwise 
not. Vritrasura died due to thunderbolt, which means 
Kundalini was awakened only because of the awakening of 
Sushumna in the spinal cord. It is said that along with the 
thunderbolt, Vishwakarma also made an arrow. The shape of 
Vajra has been called Dandavat or cylindrical. The spinal cord 
is also a bit cylindrical. The name of the arrow is Brahmashir, 
meaning it goes up to Brahmarandhra, which is at the top of 
the head that’s the opening of sahasrar chakra. This arrow is 
the Sushumna Nadi. Vishwakarma had made many other 
weapons from the bones of Dadhichi Rishi. Meaning that 
Yogasanas are possible only with the help of bones. Different 
joints of bones help us to perform different postures. Then 
energy is transmitted in the body through those asanas, 
which helps in awakening the power. That Vritrasura used to 
trouble all the gods. This means that the body’s metabolism 
gets disturbed due to restlessness of the mind, and various 
diseases enter it. The body is made of gods only. The literal 
meaning of Vishwakarma is, the doer of all the work of the 
world, means the creator of the world. The whole world 
resides in the body only. It is said in the story that the Vajra 
and the arrow named Brahmashir were made from the bones 


of the spine. It is also said that Indra called Surbhi cow and 
made her lick the bones and then ordered Vishwakarma to 
make vajra from them. Indra, enhanced by the effulgence of 
Lord Shiva, picked up that thunderbolt and ran furiously at 
Vritrasura, as if Rudra was running towards Yama. After this, 
that Indra, being well prepared, quickly cut off Vritrasura’s 
head like a mountain peak with that thunderbolt. This is 
figurative language. With the glory of Shiva, it means with 
the help of Tantra, because Shiva is the originator of Tantra. 
This is the description of the energetic state of Kundalini 
awakening. Because the thoughts of the mind are born in the 
head, that is why it is said to behead Vritrasura. This story 
continues in the next post as well. 


When all the gods work together, it is said that Indra did that 
work, because Indra is the king of the gods. Kundalini Yoga is 
accomplished only by the combined efforts of all the parts of 
the body, that is, all the deities. That is why it is said that 
Indra killed Vritrasura. | think khechari mudra is said as 
licking by surabhi cow, in which the opposite surface of 
tongue is touched with the soft palate. Because the head is 
directly connected with the spinal cord, hence it is a part of 
Vajra. Due to this the energy circulates easily in the channel 
loop. After that Vajra manufacturing starts, that means 
energy starts running in the spinal cord. 


Vishwakarma made it, means it is made automatically by 
scientific principle, no man makes it. All you have to do is 
create favorable conditions for being itself. The world is also 
created by itself. The name of Vishwakarma has been given 
to decorate this very being. 


Kundalini help is sought out 
even by gods to succeed 


Well, continuing with the previous post, that is why the 
branch of Tantra in Buddhism is named Vajrayana. That is 
why the name Premyogi Vajra has also been given. Basically, 
there is Premyoga in his practice, but Tantra also has a good 
contribution in it. The deities fought with Vritrasura for a long 
time. But they could not defeat him. In the end, accepting 
defeat, they left their weapons near Dadhichi Muni’s 
hermitage and ran away. It means that the gods put many 
organs like hands, feet, eyes, ears, brain etc. in the man’s 
body to avoid the thoughts of sorrows. Earlier man was a 
unicellular organism like a virus. It was a state full of sorrow. 
To remove that sorrow, the gods developed that primary 
creature for many ages. In the end, the human body became 
existant. Where did the sorrows end even after so much hard 
work? On the contrary, it started growing. Today, the more 
progress science is making, the more tampering with nature 
is increasing, due to which the devastation of life and 
property is also increasing. Natural disasters are increasing. 
Crimes like murder, robbery etc. are increasing. The main 
five defects of the mind, lust, anger, greed, attachment, 
pride, jealousy and the innumerable mental disorders arising 
from them such as depression, loneliness, violence, 
selfishness etc. are on the rise. Means Vritrasur attacked him 
in the form of a mountain of sorrows as ego. The gods were 
forced to raise their hands. Dadhichi Muni here called is the 
soul. Near his hermitage, the gods left their weapons, 
meaning they created all the parts of the body, because the 
body is closest to the soul. The gods accepted defeat, 
meaning that the supreme sorrow or enemy of the mind in 
the form of ego could never be destroyed by the power of 
senses and organs, it was completely proved, minor physical 
and mental sorrows would have definitely gone away. This 
supreme sorrow was the demon Vritrasur. Due to the boon of 
Shiva, the bones of Dadhichi Muni had become like a 
thunderbolt. It means that due to Shiva provided Yoga, there 
was so much elasticity and liveliness in the bones, especially 
in the spinal cord, that the Kundalini energy could easily flow 


in it. Just see the lightning. It breaks even the hard rock, and 
along with it electricity also flows in it. Similarly, the 
movement of the luminous energy line in the sushumna nadi 
of the spinal cord is like a lightning strike, and the 
destruction of the ego by it is like the breaking of a rock. Ego 
is the hardest thing in the world, which is the most difficult to 
break. 

It is said that sage Dadhichi also had a wife named Suvarcha. 
When the deities went to Brahma seeking help, it was he who 
advised them to ask for the bones from Dadhichi. Suvarcha 
was in the inner chamber, and the deities demanded his 
bones from Dadhichi, who was sitting in the outer chamber. 
Dadhichi left the body after applying Yogasamadhi and he 
merged into Brahman. When Suvarcha found out she became 
very angry, and cursed the gods. Suvarcha was pregnant at 
that time. With the semen power of the sage, she got a son 
as great as another Shiva. His name was Pippalad. Brahma is 
the original creator of the universe. He knows that the gods 
may exert as much force as they like, but they cannot 
remove spiritual ignorance. He also knew that when the 
Kundalini is awakened by the energy flow in the Sushumna 
located in the spine of the Yogi, it can be destroyed. With 
awakening, not only will ignorance disappear, the ego will 
also vanish. Ego is the form of man’s own ordinary worldly 
experience. When there is no ego, then how can a human 
being exist. It is said that Dadhichi Muni himself left his body 
and went away. Actually the ego has already ended before 
awakening. Only then there is an experience of awakening. 
How can one experience awakening if there is even an iota of 
ego, because both are diametrically opposite to each other. 
When the yogi’s ego is destroyed by tantric yoga practice, 
then only the real awakening begins. Due to the elimination 
of ego, the worldly garbage in the mind of the yogi also 
remains to a minimum, due to which sufficient nervine power 
is available for the awakening of the Kundalini. Suvarcha, the 
wife of Rishi Dadhichi, is actually Buddhi or intellect. The 
destruction of the ego leads to the transformation of man. 
Through this, old thoughts and memories become destroyed 
like a roasted seed. but that luminous intelligence or good 
sense remains, which puts one on a good path. Old 
experiences are also remembered. The Sanskrit word varchas 


means shining. She cursed the gods, which means that the 
body does not act arbitrarily under the control of the gods, 
but behaves rationally under the guidance of good sense. 
After the transformation of a man, his new, awakened and 
godlike state comes, he is called son Pippalad. That state has 
a tantric nature like Rudra i.e. Shiva, that is why he is called 
Rudravatar. 


Kundalini Tantra Thrives better 
in an Eco-Friendly Lifestyle 


Friends, in the previous post, we were seeing how nowadays 
the physical progress a man is making, his material, spiritual 
and natural sorrows are also increasing. All the vices of the 
mind are nearing their peak, and are ready to become 
demons and devour man. Also, that demon can be killed only 
by Kundalini Shakti. The meaning is clear that today human 
civilization is standing at that point, where only Kundalini 
Yoga can Save it. | recently went on a trip to the mountains. 
Where there was such a cooler in the plains, in the mountains 
people were sleeping covered with quilts and blankets, and 
were getting heated by burning fire. All the seasons of the 
year could be seen within a day. Saw a wonderful sight. A 
local acquaintance was also found there. He has land at 
every prime location on its way from the depths of the river 
to the top of the mountain. He wanted to use that route as a 
tourist trekking route and to realize the fantasy of hut-like 
tourist rooms and flower gardens at the prime points of the 
track. Although it requires initial investment and manpower, 
but he wanted to do it cheaply and in a natural way so that 
the least artificial resources are used, and the risk in the 
business can be removed, because he appeared not more 
prosperous financially. This is often the case. Those who want 
to do it don’t have money and those with money can’t do it. 
He also practices Homeopathy and Naturopathy. He said that 
such patients and other people come to him every day, who 
spend up to four lakhs by going to a distant and expensive 
place like Goa to reduce their weight by 2 kg. So he says that 
he can lose their four kilos of weight just near to them and in 
much less time and money. But it is the same thing that 
people don’t even like 100% natural, some artificial 
construction has to be done to create attraction. Nowadays 
people have a great hunger to live in the midst of nature, 
because there is indiscriminate abundance of artificiality 
everywhere. There is just a shortage of those who serve 
properly to satisfy that hunger. Nevertheless, the horses of 
the mind can be made to fly. The biggest problem seems the 
decreasing graph of courtesy and discipline among the 


tourists day by day, the fear of anti-social elements remains 
separate. By the way, there is also a shortage of efficient 
tourism related staff to guide and serve them properly. 
Concrete forests are taking the place of the natural forests of 
the mountains. There seems to be little and insufficient 
control over the rising population. | found success in my 
tantric yoga practice leaving the big, grandiose and beautiful 
concrete mansion and in a small, old and dilapidated house 
built in a quiet area, allowing natural air, water and Sun to 
enter inside and having lovely harmless microorganisms and 
tiny lives like ants, lizards, cockroaches, wood and soil eating 
insects etc. Even snakes and scorpions live around 
meditative Shiva. Although it’s deadly extreme in case of us 
human beings. Of course my old house was also visited by 
bats and rats twice or thrice. The bats were chased away 
through the window with great difficulty because they cannot 
see. Then the holes and cracks in the walls were sealed with 
packing of envelopes etc., because they penetrate even 
through small spaces. Similarly, the rats also had to be driven 
away due to the fear of snakes. Its roof was not of RCC, but 
thin beams of RCC were laid at intervals. The gaps between 
the beams were covered with tiles, which rested on the 
beams on the both sides. There was a very thick layer of clay 
like smooth soil over the tiles. Tiles were then again joined 
together on top of the soil, so that rain water does not enter 
inside. The soil would have absorbed some leakage and 
evaporated it out. Due to this, the roof did not get too hot 
from the sun, and it did not get too cold in winter. See, things 
open up like layers of onion. Circumstances like darkness are 
the symbol of Muladhara. Under the influence of such an 
environment, the energy easily ascends to the Sahasrara, 
provided proper spiritual practice is done. That’s why Shiva 
lives in the crematorium. Perhaps it happened only later, 
because of the subtle and indirect force of the same 
magnificence, because the day feels good only after the 
night. Anyway, after spending more than one’s capacity on 
building, vehicle etc., or giving them unnecessary expansion, 
a man gets entangled in their maintenance and other 
worries, due to which he is not able to give enough time and 
energy to Yoga. Think, an average grand house is built for at 
least fifty lakh rupees. Putting this much money in the 


pension scheme, a pension of fifty thousand is made every 
month, for the whole life, and the principal amount of fifty 
lakhs remains safe as it is. There is no need to worry about 
earning for the whole life. Living comfortably in a shanty-like 
environment-friendly and health-friendly house, continue 
doing yoga with a blissful life and keep playing guitar. Playing 
the guitar is also a high-quality meditation, witnessing 
meditation. Many people take a loan from the bank, then by 
paying the installments, that house doubles, that is, costs 
around one crore. Many clever people borrow money from 
relatives or friends to avoid interest. Innocent people even 
give them loans, but forget the interest from them, they are 
unable to even recover the principal amount. Due to this, 
there is a rift in the relationship and friendship. Some people 
even grind their children in the mill of loans. The hobby of a 
fool’s house is very expensive. Ego also grows with grandeur, 
and when it is destroyed, it is also destroyed. Anyway, the 
old and raw concrete still seems to be alive and little 
breathing, it seems like suffocating in the strong and new 
concrete. The real life takes place in a house made of mud, 
that’s why nowadays people’s craze towards mudhouse is 
increasing. It is also earthquake resistant. Now-a-days many 
people are making pillars and lenter made of RCC, like an 
earthquake resistant net and keeping the walls wide with 
rammed soil, and providing sealing of wooden slabs under 
the lenter or asbestos sheets. Due to this, it is getting the 
double benefit of strength and naturalness. Natural looking, 
wide and breathable tiles can also be installed on the floor 
and on the walls upto two or three feet of the ground floor. 
The partition between the rooms can be made of thin or thick 
mud wall as per space available or wood instead of brick. 
Kitchen and washroom cum toilet can also be kept earthen 
and natural, provided tiles are fixed on the floor and on the 
working wall and shelf up to some height. | have been living 
comfortably for many years in this type of British-era 
luxurious and completely natural, made of mud and stone, 
about twenty feet height till the ceiling, environment friendly 
kothi means bungalow just like as shown in this post’s header 
image. Of course, tiles etc. have been added to it later. It had 
an iron sheet roof over its wooden plank ceiling. It is said that 
it is also of the same old age, no new one has been inserted. 


The electrical fittings on the mud walls were also rare to see. 
It looked like it might fall down, but we were not to hang onto 
it. In a house where even the walls breathe, the mind will do 
pranayama, yoga etc. on its own. Soil is also flexible, and 
yoga also has flexibility. Soil has the basic strength of the 
earth. It keeps the man balanced, controlled and practical 
while working for Muladhar Chakra. The danger of 
earthquake remains every moment. Mild tremors were felt 
again today. For a long time, these tremors are coming 
continuously, which can also be an indication towards some 
untoward incident. | pray to God with folded hands that this 
Should not happen, of course if they want the excess and 
destructive energy of the earth may be spent in small 
tremors only. Don’t know why people ignore earthquake so 
much. Why do they believe that an earthquake cannot 
happen if they are there? They take care of everything while 
building houses but not earthquakes. Perhaps everyone 
considers the person who talks about earthquake to be a fool 
and a coward. Maybe it’s like death is real, but no one wants 
to talk about it. | also think that one of the reasons for this is 
that nowadays people are already very sad and upset in the 
world, maybe they consider the earthquake as the solution to 
all the problems unconsciously in the subconscious mind, but 
in practice it is a form of ignoring it. Would have given The 
qualities of a house definitely have an impact on the person 
living in it. The more solid and strong a house | see, the more 
solid and strong the ego of the people living in it seems. Soil 
is malleable and connected to the earth, hence the ego of the 
people living in it is raw and malleable, and they also appear 
to be down to earth, and less temperamental to me. This 
means that modern houses also have a big contribution in 
the downfall of today’s man. They pollute the environment a 
lot. It is believed that cement plays a major role in the 
emission of greenhouse gases. In fact, cement is very raw. It 
gets strength only by mixing iron bars etc. in it. For big 
buildings in cities or for big bridges, flyovers, dams, and 
other water storage bodies cemented structure is also 
necessary, but what is the need for common houses in 
villages, countryside or sparsely populated places, because 
there is no need for much strength. There it is being adopted 
like a sheep run or a fashion symbol. It also consumes more 


electricity and water. When it was first used in Switzerland to 
build huge dams, it was considered a national pride, and it 
was considered immortal. But later it came to be known that 
the maximum age of concrete is only 100 years. Where there 
is no constraint in the availability of land, a single storey 
house is sufficient. It also looks beautiful, and is also 
connected to the ground. | think that building a home more 
than one storey height in the mountains is an insult to the 
deity, because high mountains are the form of the deity. 
Anyway, there trees, plants and other natural views should 
be visible mainly, not man-made artificial structures like 
buildings etc. A principle of Vastu Shastra has come recently 
in my own experience, | have not read it anywhere. In an 
open and airy place, such a crossroad where opposite paths 
wear almost equal compositions, Kundalini starts functioning 
there. In fact, such an intersection makes a symbol like a 
swastika. 


Kundalini Yoga Exposes the 
Biggest Lie 


Friends, in the previous post we were talking about the 
environmental side effects of cement. That’s all, but those 
who use it, they also don’t use properly. Most laxity is given 
to that curing in the form of water irrigation, especially in 
government and contractual works, which is most important 
for its strength. This wastes resources, and there is a 
possibility of heavy loss of life and property due to accidents. 
Well, we don’t want to stray from the main topic by going 
into these technical matters. | have another book on this, 
“Basic pillars of multi-tech organic farming and rainwater 
harvesting” in Hindi. In this post we will discuss the biggest 
lie. 


To observe thoughts calmly means that we are accepting 
their existence. Their real or true nature. Their subtle nature. 
Their spiritual nature. Their mental nature. Accepting their 
independent nature. Accepting their authority based on 
something. Accepting their incomplete authority. We are 
accepting their existence with an extinguished mind. With 
this, when the thought disappears, we will not feel the 
darkness of their absence or feel-less. Along with this, 
indirectly it will also be proved or believed that the absence 
which we think of as darkness is actually light, because from 
there these thoughts keep popping out and merging their in. 
With this, the soul will gradually become clean and move 
towards liberation. If we get carried away in thoughts’ flow, it 
would mean that we are accepting their unreal existence. 
Accepting their physical nature. Accepting their gross 
authority. Accepting their physical authority. Accepting their 
independent nature. Accepting their absolute power. When 
the thought disappears with this attitude, we will feel dark. In 
case of third type of attitude, If we try to deny or remove 
them, it would mean that we are denying their existence 
alright. This will also indirectly mean that we are accepting 
the nature of darkness. Due to this, life will go towards 
darkness. Means witnessing is the biggest spiritual practice. 


This is the best middle path of the Buddhists. In witnessing, 
that’s why the soul gets pleasure. Harm even by chasing 
away thoughts and harm even by embracing them. So keep 
paying attention to your breath and your body, and let the 
thoughts come and go. 
It is a matter of saying that witnessing is everything, there is 
no need to do yoga etc. anything else. It is like saying that 
the fruit is everything, there is no need for trees etc. The real 
practice of witnessing happens only during yoga practice. At 
that time thoughts are coming to the brain, and attention and 
vision are on the lower parts of the body or chakras like 
Muladhara etc.. This does two things at once. One is that yin 
means the lower part and yang means the brain part merge 
together, and the second is that the thoughts of the brain 
remain ignored even when they come, which leads to the 
best witnessing. Welcome thoughts like uninvited guests. Just 
as we remain neutral towards uninvited guests while 
welcoming them, so should we be towards thoughts. The 
main thing is that people prefer to watch scenes made of 4K 
signals, not scenes with SD signals. Consider the signal 
generated in the brain during yoga as 4k, and in common 
worldly condition as SD or at most HD. That’s why maximum 
witnessing feeling i.e. mute viewer feeling arises during yoga. 
In normal worldly condition, we can react according to mental 
visions, but how will we react during yoga, because apart 
from mental vision, nothing exists in physical form. That’s 
why we have to remain calm and keep watching the scene. 
That’s why many people call television also a good 
witnessing instrument, because we cannot give any reaction 
for that also. That’s why fictional movies give more fun than 
movies based on true events. Because where the sense of 
the truthfulness of the intellect wakes up towards such 
visions, there will be a disturbance in the mute viewing 
stance and self-bliss. 


Witnessing practice means yoga practice can be done three 
times a day. It seems most important in the mid day. At that 
time the energy of the body is at its peak, due to which a lot 
of suppressed thoughts emerge, which are well witnessed. If 
there is a shortage of space etc., then at least Pranayama 
can be done. If there is a problem in sitting, then this can be 


done even on a chair. Deep Kundalini meditation by holding 
the breath on the chakras can cause headache etc., so light 
Pranayam is enough during the day. The best time for 
meditation is in the morning and evening at Sandhya that’s 
day-night union time, when the brain gets extra energy from 
the Muladhara. At that time, the burden of worldly works also 
seems to be removed. Perhaps that is why Trikal or three 
times Sandhya was very prevalent in the olden times. Not 
everyone can be self-aware all the time, because some 
people’s work is strange and complicated. Those who have a 
long practice or who have access to satsang, they can stay 
however. Karmayogi also remains self-aware all the time, but 
Karmayoga Is also not easy. That’s why for the benefit of the 
common man there is a provision of sadhana three times a 
day, rest of the time keep doing any practical work, keeping 
sadhana on the table. 


The problem arises when man does not see reality. Does not 
see the truth. There is no harm in seeing, there is no harm in 
seeing the real thing. The evil is in seeing things in their false 
forms. Seeing thoughts in subtle form is Satyadarshan or true 
viewing, but seeing them in gross and physical form is 
Asatyadarshan or false viewing. Seeing thoughts inside your 
body or mind is Satya Darshan, but seeing them outside 
yourself is Asatya Darshan. Seeing thoughts in one’s own 
form means non-dual form and self-form is true vision, but 
seeing them in other’s form means in dual form and non-self 
form is false vision. Not that these are only the philosophical 
things. This is scientific truth. In fact, worldliness is 
completely based on lies. Subtle thoughts are given a false 
gross form. Spiritual (Chidakasha-Atman or consciousness- 
Sky-form soul) thoughts are given a false physical (just 
opposite of Atman) form. Thoughts located inside the body 
are falsely understood to be outside the body. If we consider 
thoughts in their true form, then the world has disappeared 
and only soul and soul is everywhere. It is a great thing that 
this vision is itself maintained without any special effort while 
doing yoga, because at that time the activity of thoughts 
changes rapidly according to the rapid changes in the activity 
of Prana in the form of body postures and breath, due to 
which the belief that all these are connected with each other 


is self-affirmed, and always remains maintained in the 
subconscious that manufacturers habit of an individual. | am 
saying body instead of mind or brain because different 
thoughts carry different energy levels, so they fit on different 
chakras of the body. The ones with more energy are towards 
Sahasrara and the ones with less energy are towards 
Muladhara. The energy of thoughts should not be tampered 
with, otherwise the burden on the brain will increase which 
can also cause headache. That is why the real form of man is 
not the mind or brain, as is commonly understood, but the 
front channel from the Sahasrara Chakra to the Muladhara 
Chakra and the group of chakras located on it. Understand 
that it is a bamboo stick with seven knots. Thoughts are not 
necessarily attached to the chakras, they can be felt at the 
height or level of the chakras over any long distance. Perhaps 
the thoughts of Sahasrara cover the whole distance towards 
the sky, and the thoughts of Muladhara the whole distance 
towards the lower worlds down. Wherever thoughts are felt, 
they should be welcomed there, but in their real subtle and 
Spiritual form, not in their false gross and physical form. Also 
during yoga, by looking at the thoughts with a true eye, they 
do not disappear at once like in the normal worldly condition, 
but they disappear comfortably and slowly giving joy to the 
soul, because the energy level is high while doing yoga. 
Calmness with little clearing of Atman is felt too with 
dissolving thought waves. Along with this, various technical 
experiments like holding of breath, i.e. Pranayama during 
yoga also reduce the restlessness of the mind. With this the 
soul feels well satisfied. In the normal state, they disappear 
before they can provide proper bliss to the soul and get 
burried as darkness in subconscious leaving the soul blurred 
like the scar on the moon, because the energy level is low, so 
leaving the soul as if thirsty of cleaning water. If we accept 
thoughts in their false form, then the soul has disappeared 
and the world and the world is everywhere. It is a simple 
matter that thoughts become so much more clear by yoga, 
which is not even in the condition of common material 
worldliness. Due to this, their true subtle form automatically 
comes to the fore. Means Kundalini Yoga exposes the biggest 
lie in the best way. Anyway, the soul gets strength from this 
exposure to get exposed itself. If there is no lie, there will be 


no exposure either. This means that the lie and its exposure 
must go hand in hand. Meaning that materialism and 
Spiritualism should go hand in hand in a balanced way. 
Balanced means that there should not be so much materiality 
that it becomes on the life of a man or the life-giving earth 
starts getting destroyed. There is less lie in an animal, so it 
has less chance to be exposed, due to which its self- 
development is also very low or slow. This biggest lie is called 
ignorance in the language of spirituality, and its exposure is 
knowledge. Beware of those who try to extract money by 
mixing worldliness with spirituality, because when they are in 
worldly mode with money, there is no spiritual mode at that 
time. Yogi and writer Shri Om Swami is right in saying that 
Yogi should be financially self-reliant, along with that he 
Should also be an industrialist who can provide financial 
Support to the society. What a yogi who goes on begging 
even for himself. 


| think that some initial spiritual practice can better be done 
in a group etc. Later, probably in most of the cases higher 
stage spiritual practice is fruitful only in solitude, not in a 
crowd. Anyway, the sadhna that can be done in the crowd is 
Karmayog, not doing yoga by holding the nose. Come on, no 
problem, let’s flow with the times. There is no compulsion in 
this. Whatever you find good and suitable for yourself, do it. 
This promotion is for those who are entitled to it, but are not 
able to get used to it due to various reasons like hesitation 
etc. Promotion of a film does not mean that it should be seen 
by everyone, but that it should be accessible to the curious 
and needy person. Valentine’s Day does not mean that on 
this day everyone should make a couple and fall in love with 
each other, but that those who feel the need and scope for it, 
but are unable to do so due to hesitation etc., should get a 
chance to do so. Best wishes on World Yoga Day week to all. 


Kundalini Yoga practice will 
make our universe liberated 
one day 


Friends, in the previous post, we were talking about how a 
man has to go against the course of nature for salvation. 
Nature developed life only by taking the support of lies, 
which has reached almost the highest development of man 
today. But now there is a need to stop this false flow of 
nature, there is a need to expose the lie of nature i.e. illusion, 
there is a need to take support of the truth. It would be better 
if everyone does this together, because everyone needs 
liberation. This is possible only through witnessing or 
Vipassana, which is most effective during yoga. In this post 
we will explain the salvation of man with the help of salvation 
of blackhole. No one says anything about man, why there are 
as many space or universe as there are men. Only physical 
spaces are being searched. Every man is an infinite space, a 
universe of his own kind. Are not all the many creatures as 
many pits or blackholes in the same infinite sky. A new 
infinite space is formed from a blackhole. The original space 
remains the same. There is no shortage in that. Science says 
that space is infinitely warped by a blackhole, meaning that 
the crater of space never ends. That’s why the light that has 
gone into it never turns back. It goes on and on in that new 
direction. There is no reduction in the original space, because 
it is like an infinitely wide three-dimensional sheet. The same 
is also said in the scriptures about the soul that it is infinite 
and complete, the God from whom it emanates is also infinite 
and complete, yet there is no reduction in the original 
infinite. This is a mantra,” Om purnamadh purnamidam.....” , 
which was also written in an earlier post. People say where 
do so many souls come from, where do they go etc. It is a 
similar question that where do so many black holes come 
from and where do they go. Both are infinite and identical. 
Once a soul starts its journey after leaving the Supreme Soul, 
it keeps on gathering information within itself. Where does 
the initial cratering information come from in the Chidakash, 
such that the mass of the star forms the crater of the 


blackhole. Will explain this later. Science also says that 
information is never destroyed, it sometimes appears and 
sometimes becomes invisible. In this way the soul remains 
trapped in the web of information, and keeps on taking birth 
and dying again and again. In the end, sometimes it merges 
its mind-like information with the supreme divine through 
yoga etc., and it becomes free. In that case too information 
does not get destroyed, but gets united with the divine. By 
being destroyed, it keeps on being born again and again in 
the same plus developed form. The meaning is clear that 
after death a man is born again, but the yogi who does not 
die, because he merges his mind with the divine through 
yoga before the body is destroyed, does not take birth again. 
The original space of all, which survives even when 
everything is finished, is God. 


The same happens with stars. Due to its destruction, its 
information ie. its material is not destroyed, but it gets 
encoded in the form of blackhole in a subtle form. The other 
information that gets absorbed inside it due to gravity also 
gets encoded. Those inputs reappear as another star or 
universe is born inside the blackhole. Sometimes they 
disappear again, and then they reappear. This cycle 
continues. Sometime it must have happened, when those 
informations get merged in the Supreme Soul i.e. Original or 
Parent infinite sky, without getting destroyed. That may be 
called the liberation of the star. So far scientists have 
probably not found anything like this, because they have so 
far believed that information never gets destroyed. They are 
also fine because information did not get destroyed even in 
the end, but merged with the original space. But maybe it is 
not known that that information will never come back from 
the original space again, other new information will surely 
keep coming. But human psychological theory of liberation 
says that information can sometimes be completely 
destroyed. Without a separate symbol or encoding inside 
ultimate as super microform, it is not the destruction of the 
information, but the non-revealing of the information in 
separate form, from where it appears again in the microform 
and then macroform. This means that someday all the 
information in this universe will be ultimately destroyed or 


liberated. Then a completely new universe will be created, in 
which all the information will be new, because there’s no 
encoding of previous creation’s information anywhere. Now 
don’t know in what form this new form will be. Meaning that 
the universe can be of countless types and forms. Means as 
laws of conservation of mass and energy are obeyed in 
closed system, the same is obeyed in open system of infinite 
Space too. Means countless mass and energy in the form of 
countless worlds can emerge from space with nowhere origin 
because space itself is infinite form of mass and energy, 
infinite coming out of infinite and going to infinite, in this way 
too everything is conserved. Means the universe will also do 
Kundalini Yoga someday, and will be liberated. Means such a 
time will come when the universe will not be encoded in the 
blackhole, instead will completely merge in the great space, 
which means the liberation of the universe or Brahma. It is 
also said in the scriptures that even Brahma has a certain 
age limit, after which he becomes liberated, he does not die. 
But | did not read in the scriptures that Brahma also takes 
birth and dies again and again like a common man. Climbing 
the stairs of self-develooment, even an ant can become 
Brahma. Perhaps the birth and death of Brahma is not shown 
because he is not bound to the universe like an ordinary 
living being is to his body. Brahma is always liberated. The 
liberation of the universe itself has been called symbolic 
liberation of Brahma. It may also be that Brahma is 
associated with the universe by a very crude bond. When the 
universe is encoded, that Brahma becomes liberated, and the 
new upgraded Brahma joins the encoded universe to become 
expressed in gross form later on with it. Anyway, the 
universe that is formed inside the blackhole will be smaller 
than the original universe. This means that its stars will also 
get smaller and smaller. Such a generation of blackholes will 
come, in which the stars of the universe inside will become 
so small that they will not be able to make blackholes. Then, 
instead of being encoded, the universe will merge into the 
original sky, which means it will be liberated. In a way, it can 
be understood that the universe continuously removed the 
garbage of information from inside itself by the practice of 
Kundalini Yoga. At one stage its garbage was reduced to such 
an extent that it could not take birth again from it, but simply 


became liberated. Meaning that as a man is freed with yoga 
practice, so is the universe. Anyway, the stars which are less 
than a certain mass, they cannot form blackholes so they 
merge directly into the sky, which means they become free. 
According to the scriptures, King Khatwang attained 
liberation within two and a half gharis or one hour when he 
came to know that he would die within this time. No one can 
dump all the garbage of the mind in this much short period. 
Yes, it can definitely be reduced to such a low level that there 
is no bondage. Consider King Khatwang as a large mass star. 
By colliding with some other body, etc., he reduced his mass 
below that limit, which is necessary to make a black hole. 
You can consider that confrontation as any energy-rich 
intense meditation. That’s why one should keep doing yoga, 
whether one gets awakening or not. Lord Krishna has also 
given the most importance to Yoga and has told Arjuna that 
O Arjuna, you become a Yogi. Because human psychological 
theory says that when the mind of man or mental garbage or 
simply ego reaches below a certain limit, then it will definitely 
be liberated, as we told about the case with a star as well. If 
only awakening was necessary for liberation, then there 
would have been upheaval in the world. The liberation of so 
few people would have likely stopped the life flow of so many 
souls. 


Kundalini Yoga shows Om is the 
singularity in which the 
blackhole is contained 


Whatever matter-like information goes into the blackhole, it 
remains in destroyed or inaccessible form. In the same way, 
the subconscious mind of a man also preserves all his 
information in the form of thoughts from time immemorial in 
its destroyed form. When those thoughts are brought back in 
a visible or manifest form through witnessing, meditation 
etc., then they gradually become loose and merge into the 
divine. When all thoughts dissolve, the soul or the subtle 
body becomes free. Probably, due to the formation of 
physical world again and again in the same way from the 
blackhole, those informations keep getting loose and in the 
end they get united with the God in the form of supreme sky 
and never come back again. Meaning the blackhole becomes 
free. There is a catch here. A black hole does not become 
free by being a gross creation again and again, just as a man 
does not become free simply by being born again and again. 
When the information from the blackhole continues to come 
out in subtle form, in that form it merges into the supreme 
soul, not directly. Perhaps those microscopic information are 
Hawking radiation, in whose form the entire blackhole will 
someday dissolve. Of course it takes a lot of time. Where 
does it take less time for the liberation of the soul. Hawkins 
radiation also emanates from the blackhole, and it also 
creates new creations simultaneously, of course, the size of 
the new creations gradually decreases. In the same way, 
man’s practice of witnessing also goes on in more or less 
form, and along with it new births also keep on taking place, 
of course, in the future births, the noise of the mind’s 
thoughts keeps on decreasing, the ego keeps on decreasing. 
Science says that the more matter enters inside the black 
hole, the more its gravitational force will increase, and the 
thicker the accretion disk outside it will be. At first | 
wondered how it could happen that when the new infinite sky 
was formed, then the matter that entered it should spread 
out into the infinite sky, and that should not affect the 


accretion disk. Also, once an infinite hole has been formed in 
the original infinite sky, how can that hole get bigger as more 
matter enters inside, because nothing is bigger than infinity. 
And increasing gravity actually means increasing the depth 
of the pit in space. But | found the solution by comparing it 
with the soul. When the individual-infinite space in the form 
of soul is formed for the first time, it is like a newly formed 
blackhole. First thing, how the soul is made. When the first 
thought of the mind is formed in the smallest creature, 
Chidakasha or conscious sky i.e. Paramakasha Paramatma 
bound with it feels it within itself. Being attached to that 
thought wave, he immediately forgets his Paramakash or 
Mahakasha or supreme sky form. He lives in the same great 
Space, but forgets its super existence, knowledge (true 
knowledge) and bliss to a great extent due to delusion. This 
became the origin of the living space within the great space. 
However, the cosmic God remains the same, without change, 
in his original form. It means that the soul has originated 
inside the Supreme Soul. Now coming to blackhole. A big star 
ran out of fuel inside it. So there is no force of hot gases 
towards the outside to counter the gravitational force 
towards its inside. This causes it to continually shrink within 
itself to the smallest possible form. | think that form is the 
most subtle thought of the mind. Because in front of it even 
the fundamental particles like proton, electron etc. are gross. 
The smallest thought is the mental sound of Om. The proof of 
this is that with it the soul has the least illusion of its absolute 
form. Even the illusion seems to end. That’s why Om is 
uttered spontaneously from the mouth of Brahmagyanis and 
accomplished Yogis. The more the other thoughts keep on 
increasing, the more the confusion keeps on increasing. So 
the smallest thing became the sound Om. The origin of the 
soul is probably from Om itself, because Yatpinde tat 
brahmande. A gross object cannot pierce the sky. If it were 
so, then each stone would be a separate soul or living being, 
each particle would be alive, and would feel its own separate 
existence in the infinite sky. But this does not happen. Only 
the thought of the mind can pierce the sky. That’s why as 
many living bodies i.e. brain or mind, there are as many 
separate infinite skies as souls of living beings. That’s why 
mind is needed to create a new universe, because it will be 


created only when there is a hole in the sky. Om is the 
subtlest mind. That is why it is said in scriptures that the 
universe originated from the thought of God or Brahma. From 
Om made of super compressed star, Moolakaash or original 
sky bound to it forgets its original form and becomes a new 
complete sky. Although the original sky remains the same. 
This has been said in the language of science that a 
singularity made of a star creates a pit of infinite depth in 
Space. Perhaps Om itself has been called singularity in 
science, because it is not known what it is. Just figured it’s 
the tiniest thing. Probably we have proved that the smallest 
thing is Om. Then it is said that due to the explosion in that 
singularity, the creation of the universe starts spreading. It 
has been said in the scriptures as well that the universe 
originates from Om. It also means that even a small thought 
has a mass equal to hundreds of suns, that is why it makes 
such a big hole in the three-dimensional sheet of the original 
Sky that a new sky is formed, means a new independent 
universe in the form of a new independent soul comes into 
existence. But it iS surprising how the creature who can 
create the universe remains pathetic and dependent. So if 
warp drive were to be built tomorrow, it would be some kind 
of machine that could fold the sky as much as it is wanted. 
This would take you on a trip to space. It is possible that 
aliens come to earth with the help of such a Om machine. 
People involved in the case of alien interviews after the so- 
called UFO crash claim that aliens have spiritual techniques, 
and that they recognize their true nature very well, like yogis. 
To them the human civilization on earth is like a monkey 
civilization. Then after birth, the soul expands its scope. It 
keeps on receiving information from outside through different 
senses like eyes, ears etc., and keeps on growing. It is as if 
the blackhole keeps on swallowing the outside matter, and 
keeps on increasing its mass. The greater the soul, the 
greater is the scope of its influence. Where the range of 
insects is up to a few inches or feet, there is so much 
information inside the minds of great men that their sphere 
of influence extends to the whole nation or the world. People 
from all over the world are drawn to them. Their sphere of 
influence can be compared to the accretion disk of a black 
hole. 


The universe continues to be created from Om and also 
remains absorbed in it. Someday instead of just one star, the 
mass of the entire universe will shrink and merge inside Om. 
This would be called the formation of the ultimate blackhole. 
It will not get anything to swallow. Due to this, it will die of 
hunger soon, that means then that Om will also merge in the 
supreme sky. This is called holocaust. The holocaust will 
continue for a long time. Then at the beginning of the 
creation Om will appear again containing the mass of all the 
old creation. There will be a big bang or great explosion in it 
and the creation of the universe will start again. This process 
IS repeated again and again. 
Now many people will say that the black hole has swallowed 
only a negligible amount of matter in comparison to the 
universe, how can such a big new universe be formed from it. 
But brother, the eternal sky would have been formed by Om. 
New substances can also be formed in it. The swallowed 
material from the old universe is just a beginning. It is also 
like a child carrying information from his past life in a very 
subtle form or most primitive organism feeling first Om sound 
as first thought in its mind, which appears to be negligible 
compared to the whole of the past life or its mental creations 
to be created later on. Then he collects some information 
from outside also, that too is negligible. He himself creates 
most of the information within himself through his creativity, 
through his actions, thoughts etc. In the same way, the first 
micro organism to be formed has only the subtlest thought of 
Om, but as it develops, it also becomes Brahma, in which the 
whole universe is contained. This also means that no matter 
how small a black hole is, it can form the largest universe, 
because it forms a vessel of infinite size in the form of an 
infinite sky. And where there is a vessel, rain water also gets 
collected there. 


Kundalini Yoga’s Sankalp Purush 
confirms the origin of the 
universe inside the blackhole 


Even the crater of the infinite space became the same infinite 
Space. How can it be called second infinity? The hole made in 


the sheet is also made of the same sheet, it cannot be called 
a second sheet. A limited sheet can make only a limited pit. 
Why can’t there be an infinite crater in the infinite sky? While 
a small mass of an object can make a small crater in the sky, 
an object of infinite mass can also make a crater of infinite 
size in an infinite sky. Because the size of the singularity 
formed by the collapse of the star is infinitely small, its mass 
is also infinitely large. That’s why it makes a pit of infinite 
size in space means blackhole. That’s why a blackhole is a 
crater. Meaning, of course, its origin is in the sky, but it is 
empty, that is, it is untouched by its creator’s composition. 
How to consider the size of Om as infinite small. Infinite big 
size is zero sky. But the infinite small size is also zero sky. 
Virtual appearance can be different. Call former as super 
consciousness sky and later as super dark sky. Means a new 
sky was formed from a dead star. That is why the sky of the 
blackhole does not end, because the new infinite sky was 
formed due to the continuous shrinking of the star in it. But it 
is impossible to have more than one sky, that’s why it is not a 
separate infinite sky but there is a pit of infinite size in it. Om 
is probably the name and form of the indescribable sky. 
Because sound is a wave, which spreads everywhere in the 
Sky like a light wave. It is a different matter that it cannot be 
detected everywhere. Anyway, the word or sound has been 
called the quality of the sky. Then why only Om sound has 
been given the form of sky. Perhaps because it is the most 
simple and basic. The word Om is made up of three letters A, 
U and M, which mean creation, sustenance and destruction 
respectively. The sky also does the same. It first creates the 
world within itself, maintains it for some time, and then 
dissolves into itself. Means Om is the name of the infinite sky. 
To be precise, perhaps an infinitesimal pit, because it is 
formed from the most fundamental thought. But a hole in the 
sky is not that simple. There is some secret hidden in it. 
Then, if God is the infinite sky, then the soul is an infinite 
dark hole in it. The crater in the empty sky will also be 
special, not ordinary. We cannot make a hole in the sky. Yes, 
there is a way, to show it like a pit through illusion or 
virtually. Then there will be infinite sky, and infinite pit in it, 
both together. The soul is such an illusion in the Supreme 
Soul, it not being the real one, as written in the scriptures. 


But if such an illusory pit is formed in the material sky also, 
then all matter and even light, confused, fall into it. Even in 
the pit like soul, the outside world keeps falling, of course in 
a subtle form. Various senses keep increasing the effect of 
the soul by collecting various information from outside. Of 
course blackholes can’t feel the illusions like souls as it’s non- 
living. Everyone falls towards the dark well, whether the well 
feels it or not. Now it is not known, what underlines that pit. 
May be, there is a virtual wave of the sky. Just like a sheet is 
made of thread, similarly the sky is also full of virtual threads 
or waves. Air, which is not as dense as the thread, fills the 
empty space in the pit of the sheet, so the ball placed on the 
sheet rolls towards its pit. Similarly, due to the weight of a 
heavy body, a hole is formed in the virtual fabric of the sky. 
In the empty space of that crater, a less dense virtual fabric 
than in the unbroken sky outside is woven. That’s why other 
small bodies around roll towards that pit, but it seems to us 
that the big body is pulling the small body towards itself with 
the force of gravity. It is like air flowing from an area of high 
pressure to an area of low pressure. The void sky is the only 
one, but due to virtual waves, a virtual pit is formed in it. This 
means that all the time virtual waves and particles in space 
exert pressure on objects. This has also been proved in the 
experiment of Casimir effect. Probably this pressure also 
pushes the bodies towards the pits made in the sky, which is 
called gravity. 
Man is actually a special kind of sky. His body is just a 
machine to create that virtual sky, like a blackhole. Virtual 
waves are always being formed and disappearing in the sky, 
but no one, not even God, experiences them, just like the 
ocean does not feel its waves. The example of this ocean and 
its waves is found in many places in the scriptures. The brain 
also creates similar virtual waves in it, but it is felt by the 
virtual supreme soul, and in confusion forgets its full divine 
form and becomes the living soul. Think of it as an infinite 
crater in the sky like a blackhole. 
It seems that the universe will not form again in the sky of 
the blackhole. Because that network of virtual waves is in the 
outer original space from which substances are made. But 
the mass of the star in the sky of the blackhole is also 
encoded, probably in the form of dark energy or dark matter 


whatever. It creates a new universe. Or in the sky of the 
blackhole, other and lighter types of virtual waves are 
created which make matter and the universe. Then sometime 
a blackhole will also form in that. Which will again create a 
new universe. Don’t know where this series will stop. 
However, with Kundalini Yoga, the cycle stops soon. The word 
Sankalp Purush is written in many places in Yogavasishtha. 
Perhaps it is said of man that is a man of the mind of 
Brahma, not a real man, but a dream. Similarly, when a man 
meditates on a deity, guru, lover etc., he or it becomes his 
resolution man. But whether that dream-man feels his 
separate existence like us, it is worth considering. Many 
civilizations believe that as long as an ancestor is 
remembered by his descendants and worshiped through 
religious ceremonies such as Shraddha, he resides in heaven. 
An excellent animation film named Coco has also been made 
on this. This means that we cannot create a new existence by 
meditation, but if we meditate on the pre-created existence, 
it gets nourishment from it. Then it can also happen that a 
Yogi of a high order can create a new human being with his 
mind like Brahma. There are many such stories in the 
scriptures. A sage had created the desired worldly furnishings 
and natural scenery for his post-marriage romantic touring 
with his yogic power. It’s just like a black hole creates 
another universe exactly like its progenitor universe. If the 
Sankalp Purush of the scriptures is possible, then the origin of 
the universe is also possible inside the blackhole. 
A black hole is a crater because it is devoid of the virtual 
waves of the original sky, which means it is empty. Meaning, 
of course, its origin is still inside the sky, but it is empty, that 
is, it is untouched by its creator. Although, parent sky’s 
virtual waves are still there at their original place but a new 
Space has also been formed overlaid over it but devoid of the 
effect of parent sky’s virtual waves. How can it be. Simply 
said, it is only one and one space, but its countless forms are 
there at the same time wrt virtual waves. Amazing stuff. | 
was also telling in a previous post that there can be 
innumerable universes at one place in the same infinite sky. 
Probably the virtual waves of all of them remain unaffected 
by each other. The same happens in case of soul to. There 
are innumerable number of souls or individual infinite spaces 


in the same single infinite space not noticing or affecting 
each other’s virtual and subtle creations or subtle universes 
in the form of thoughts. In the case of living beings, the 
virtual waves of all living beings are the similar, yet they are 
out of reach of each other, perhaps it is the same in the case 
of gross universes too, that means the virtual waves in all are 
similar, but one universe is Completely unaffected and 
disconnected from all other universes at the same place. 
Everything in the departed soul resides in subtle means 
unmanifested form, hence there is darkness in it. That’s why 
there is darkness in blackholes as well. Probably, this dark 
feel is the dark energy, not any physical stuff, that’s why it 
appears to have been the so called smallest physical entity 
or singularity or Om. It would be better to say dark matter, 
because it has mass, which has the force of gravity. | think 
both are the same thing, sometimes it behaves as energy, 
sometimes as matter, just as the darkness of a man’s mind 
sometimes appears calm, light and blissful, and sometimes 
dense, heavy and sad. With the first type of darkness man 
tries to run away from the world by turning towards yoga 
etc., but with the second type of darkness he attracts 
worldliness towards himself. The special feature of yoga is 
that it tries to lighten the dark matter and convert it into dark 
energy. This is similar to how dark energy has the property of 
repelling, but dark matter has the property of attracting. We 
find a description of this in the scriptures when someone asks 
a sage that how is the creation after the holocaust, the sage 
says that there is such a dense darkness that if one wishes, it 
can be filled in a fist. This is talking about dark matter, 
because only matter can be filled in a fist, not an empty sky. | 
think that of course it is not ordinary matter but it feels solid 
like it, just as quantum particles are actually wave forms not 
matter, but also behave like matter. 


Kundalini Yoga transforms dark 
matter into dark energy 


Friends, in the previous post it was being talked about that 
dark energy runs out to be free, and dark matter shrinks in to 
get bound. That’s why yoga should be done so that the 
portion of dark energy remains more in the mind, and the 
possibility of man’s liberation remains more, as darkness 
cannot be completely eradicated. Together, it is also 
concluded that the countless black holes of the universe are 
like the countless creatures of the earth. Just as there is a 
microcosm inside every living being, similarly there is a 
macrocosm inside every blackhole. Thus there are 
innumerable universes in the single and same infinite sky. As 
there are subtle universes of different sizes and types inside 
the brain of different living beings, similarly there are 
different sizes and types of physical universes inside different 
blackholes. 

Bored of its darkness, the blackhole starts eating the bright 
bodies outside, so that the brightness inside it can increase. 
But after a momentary glow, those bodies increase its 
darkness by entering into its own darkness. If the blackhole 
does not get anything to eat for a long time, then it gradually 
merges with the original sky and becomes free, probably 
through emitting the microscopic Hawkins radiations. 


The creature or man also behaves in the same way. He 
perceives the outside world through various senses to reduce 
the darkness of his mind. He perceives the world in the form 
of sight through the eyes, in the form of hearing through the 
ears, in the form of taste through the tongue, and in the form 
of sexual intercourse through the genitals. For a while he 
feels light with joy, but that world also works to increase his 
darkness by merging into the dense darkness of his inner 
self. It has been repeatedly said in the scriptures that the 
more a man tries to get materialistic happiness, the more he 
becomes unhappy. Sometimes he practices yoga by avoiding 
the temptation of worldliness. Due to this, the garbage of his 


mind keeps coming out, due to which he sometimes becomes 
quite clean and soon gets liberated. 


Our universe may have formed inside a very large black hole 
inside another very large universe. As many blackholes as 
there are in our universe, there are universes of different 
sizes according to their own size and swallowed substances. 
The blackholes inside them also have separate universes. In 
this way, this tradition can go to very small black holes and 
microscopic universes, or it may be that this tradition does 
not end anywhere. But to become a black hole, the star must 
have a certain mass. It may be that in other universe that 
limit is more or smaller. The boundary of our universe is the 
boundary of the blackhole, outside which we cannot see 
because the ray of light that comes from outside does not 
come freely but comes from the attraction of gravity of the 
blackhole, so it can be in the form of such an invisible wave. 
Such thing has not been seen yet. Or it should not be in the 
form of wave but in the form of individual and virtual photon 
particles. The biggest reason seems to be distance. The limit 
of the universe is very far. By the time it reaches us from 
there, the light beam must have become so weak that it 
cannot be caught. Oppositely, it seems that we neither go 
out of blackhole nor can get anything from outside it, 
because it’s already infinite sky and infinity never ends. It 
also seems that the amount of matter in the universe is 
limited and determined. The same cycle keeps appearing and 
unmanifesting again and again. It may also happen that 
when the universe starts forming in the black hole, then it 
leaves or reduces its gravity, because then the universe is 
expanding outwards from the big bang. Even if gravity 
remains the same, its effect will not be visible, because the 
push of the big bang will also be felt outwards. This will 
probably happen when the dark matter of the black hole is 
converted into dark energy. This dark energy keeps pushing 
all matter and objects away from each other after the Big 
Bang, causing the universe to balloon. The same thing 
happens in humans too. When he is tired of worldliness, he 
engulfs the whole world in the darkness of his mind and sit 
calm. It remains like that way for some time. Then for some 
reason he turns to yoga. Yoga reduces the darkness of his 


mind, or it becomes light. He feels empty in his mind. 
Inspired by that, he again starts expanding the world of his 
mind. Perhaps due to Hawking radiation exiting from the 
blackhole or some other extraction, its dark matter becomes 
light and turns into dark energy. Then the Big Bang and the 
expansion of the universe starts inside it. 


Man bears a great deal of resemblance to a blackhole. The 
more information a person is filled with, the bigger the 
blackhole it creates after his death. From him those 
informations then appear in the form of his reincarnation. | 
think that the dark matter that holds his old life together 
after death remains the same for some time. Then with the 
passage of time it turns into dark energy. It wants to increase 
his mental world again, but for that it is necessary to take 
birth in the body of some living being first. This can be called 
the creation of a new subtle universe. Going forward, he also 
builds another human life, by giving employment to 
someone, or by giving education to someone. One creates a 
new man in the form of his son. Meaning, he creates 
blackholes in the future as well, some man creates less 
number, and some more. That son will be called younger 
than him in terms of blackhole’s buried information. In a way, 
a micro universe from the black hole inside itself has a new 
black hole as a son or other progeny. He also takes that 
tradition forward. The information that is buried in the mind 
is the blackhole. Means the subconscious mind is the 
blackhole. It never sleeps. It keeps on eating all the 
information like a blackhole. Countless information is buried 
in it from the countless births of a man. And to say that 
blackholes are also not completely stationary, but like other 
celestial bodies, they seem to be moving in space. It means 
that due to their movement, the infinite space inside them 
also continues to move. But there should be no surprise in 
this, because when the living beings move, even at that time 
the infinite space inside them is moving. 


Kundalini Yoga Shakti helps in 
scientific thought experiment 


Space is expanding, galaxies are not running away. Even 
before the Big Bang, there was space. Then the space inside 
the blackhole began to expand into infinite space itself, 
illusionarily. AS a man increases his knowledge, he feels that 
he is expanding like space. In normal condition, his space 
form seems to have been shrunk. Actually the space is not 
spreading but the dark energy captured inside the blackhole 
IS spreading. Infinite space has been created inside the 
blackhole, but the dark energy has not spread in that entire 
Space. Because dark energy has no physical form, it appears 
that space is expanding, meaning the space of the blackhole 
is expanding inside the progenitor space. Of course the whole 
star was shrunk to a singularity, and that singularity is dark 
matter, which is as subtle as space itself, i.e. infinitely small 
in size, yet it is localized somewhere, and not spread 
throughout infinite space. This is also like an illusion. Of 
course, we humans are also infinite space, but we do not feel 
so. We perceive our nature as a localized darkness confined 
to the body or mind. Blahhole seems to get delusional like 
man. That’s why it becomes dark. It is the supreme energy 
but its light is felt missing. That’s dark matter. This inspires a 
wave to form and grow in the same Supreme Light means 
God, like a wave of mind in the dark soul of man. 
The dark energy increasing worldliness expands the universe 
only for liberation, because it knows that the path to 
liberation passes through the world. 
If the black hole does not pull the outside celestial body with 
great force, it will remain on its surface and will probably 
often come out in the form of radiation flame. Similarly, if a 
person does not enjoy the world with a lot of attachment, 
then it does not sit deep in his mind, and it is easily removed 
by doing yoga etc. With it, the other celestial bodies buried 
deep inside may also come out, due to which the dark matter 
keeps on diluting and turning itself into dark energy. The 
same happens with Yoga when deep inside is also cleared 
with it. 


Nature tries to create balance by following maths. It is like 
that nature has to change the speed of time in order to keep 
the speed of light same in all conditions. This is what the 
theory of relativity says. Now when the mass of the blackhole 
has become infinitely high and it has become infinite subtle, 
then according to the formula of mathematics, a pit of infinite 
size will also have to be made in the sky. This is probably not 
possible, so it is created in falsehood or illusion. The illusion 
is that due to the blackhole the light of the original i.e. Parent 
infinite sky disappears. This is dark matter. In fact, this 
supreme sky is the Supreme Soul, but its light is missing in 
illusion, not in reality. That’s why it is like a mass even 
though it is not a physical object. There is mass because the 
substances of other parallel universes exist in it, and 
darkness because there is no our universe’s contact or 
interaction with them. This mass creates a crater in the sky, 
it cannot be avoided. That’s why dark matter shows gravity. 
Gravity is a property of space, not matter, so its interaction 
cannot be avoided. This also conceptually proves Einstein’s 
theory that gravity, being a property of space, arises from 
the twisting and folding of space. There are two sets of 
properties of matter. One group is of the properties of the 
substance itself. The second group is the properties of the 
Space in which the substance is located. There are many 
properties in the first category such as emission of radiations 
like light, reflection and absorption of light etc. The second 
category has only one property, that is gravity. The 
disappearance of all material properties in dark matter and 
only the presence of gravity suggests that gravity is not a 
property of matter but a property of space. Because it is 
dark, one can treat it like a blind well. Everything falls into 
the well. The light that has gone inside remains in the original 
sky, but it is not visible because of the darkness. Meaning 
that light then does not react with anything in the original 
sky. That’s why many scientists are speculating that the light 
going inside must have come out from the other end and 
goes to some other universe. This is also correct, because 
there is another universe inside the blackhole, which is 
completely different and untouched by our universe. The 
infinite sky is the same for both. The well of the field remains 
untouched by it even though it is on its land. A world of its 


own gets created inside it. Understand this in such a way that 
according to mathematics, an infinite pit should be formed in 
Space, which means a new infinite space should be formed, 
but this is not possible. Where nature cannot actually run on 
mathematical formula, it runs on it in virtual form. That’s why 
that pit is not real but virtual. Because a pit is called an 
empty space made on the ground, where nothing of that 
ground is present, therefore the pit of the sky is the place 
where there is nothing of the sky. That’s why due to the 
virtual disappearance of its things in the infinite sky, an 
infinite pit was formed in it. In fact, it cannot be made to 
disappear, but its effect, reaction, interaction etc. wrt new 
universe are probably made to disappear. This is the kind of 
illusion that happens to a man who is in ignorance. Means he 
himself is God full of light and energy, but due to illusion he 
does not feel like this and feels quite the opposite, means 
instead of ultimate light, feels ultimate darkness. Call it like 
this, it has become its own new space in virtual form, not in 
reality. So the existence of the infinite number of 
independent spaces and the infinite creations in them is 
proved. It is important to understand this in order to maintain 
an optimistic and positive outlook in life. Now only space 
scientists can investigate in depth how this happens. One 
suspects that if there were an infinite number of parallel 
universes like onion peels at one place, dark matter would 
exhibit infinite gravity. But this does not happen. Its gravity 
also has a limit. This shows that the number of overlapping 
universes in one place is limited. It may also be possible that 
there are infinite universes, but the gravity generated from 
them remains limited due to some unknown reason. So there 
is no need to get discouraged. life is endless. It may also 
happen that dark matter is made of special waves, such as 
the waves in our brain in the form of mind. Just as artificial 
virtual waves in mind create properties similar to gravity, 
they show same in dark matter too, meaning producing 
gravity without any substance or mass. Perhaps that is why it 
is said that God is running this universe according to his wish. 
Dark matter means the mind-wish of God. The possibilities 
are many. We can only do thought experiments with the help 
of Kundalini Yoga Shakti. The universe itself begins to form in 
dark matter, because it contains all the energy of the original 


Sky, but it is covered like a veil. By this forcefully, like sparks, 
fundamental waves and fundamental particles keep jumping 
out, which continue the process of creating the universe 
more and more. This illusory darkness acts as a stimulus to 
create creation from the original divine space. This is called 
Prakriti or Mahamaya or Shakti in Indian philosophy. That 
which is the truth and the original sky in its basis, is called 
Purusha or Paramatma or Shiva. That’s why many people are 
rightly raising the possibility that black holes are factories for 
the creation of the universe. Like the illusion that man feels 
in his soul, the blackhole must not have felt the same. Of 
course not, but an illusory physical situation is created, which 
is in the form of a star shrinking to infinite minuteness. In this 
way, the universe from the blackhole and the blackhole from 
the universe continue to emerge. But what happened first? It 
is like a question which came first the chicken or the egg. 
First the blackhole formed or the universe. First became 
darkness or light. First became the original nature or the 
visible world. First became individual nature or soul. The 
scriptures say about this that both are eternal, and keep on 
creating each other successively. 


Kundalini Yoga removes out dark 
energy from black hole to make 
it liberated 


Virtual particles are also being created in the sky all the time, 
and also keep merging in it. Means they also make sky or 
singularity, then why blackhole is not made from them. Why 
does only the shrinking of a star into nothingness type 
singularity create a blackhole? It is probably also a matter of 
mass. There should also be infinite mass shrinked to 
singularity. How mind’s thought is infinite mass. Maybe 
because it can imagine infinity. First of all, we have to know 
what is the physical form of thought. Perhaps the same 
physical form is formed while the star shrinks. Suppose the 
idea of a mountain came or while looking at the mountain, 
one made a picture of it in the mind. In that thought picture, 
you can feel that the whole mass of the physical mountain is 
pressed there. It means that if a thought picture of the whole 
world is made, then the weight of the whole world would also 
be contained in it. That’s why the thought of the mind makes 
such a big hole in the sky that a new living space or infinite 
Space is created. But how can the mass of thoughts be 
infinite. This is possible only if the physical wave that creates 
the thought occupies the space equal to void or nothing. It is 
so actually. It is neither a wave nor a particle. Means thought- 
like space-fluctuation does not have its own separate 
existence. There is a vibration inside nothingness that 
creates a virtual image like an external object, it does not 
have its own existence. It may not even be vibration, 
because even vibration lasts for a while, but thought can 
disappear in less than a second. That’s why thought occupies 
absolute zero space. Anyway, when thought is not having its 
own existence, but it is a reflection of the outside, then it is 
already void. Then even if a picture of a small stone is made 
in the mind, it will also have infinite mass. Then it can also be 
said that if it is so, then the photo of a tree made in water will 
also have infinite mass and will create an independent 
infinite living space. But this does not happen. Perhaps this is 
the special feature of the photograph made in the brain, 


which is nowhere else. Or it can be said simply that the 
thought created in the mind is absolute void. It’s a matter to 
think how we are troubled by our own thoughts which even 
do not exist. We are always under stress because we 
consider thoughts to be gross and materialistic. It is also a 
matter of scientific research that what is the nature of 
thought. But with the help of thought experiment, we have 
told grossly. If we infer from the blackhole, then maybe only 
the shadow of the huge star remains in it, that too like a 
picture made in the brain, nothing else. The shadow is 
formed on Chidakaash i.e. Moolakash i.e. Paramatman, not 
on Atman like Jiva. The entire mass of the star is contained in 
that shadow. And that shadow casts across the infinite sky, 
like an unexpressed picture made in the soul or unconscious 
mind of man, we cannot mark where it is. It is a shadow in 
the whole soul. This is called the creation of a new sky. The 
separate existence of each blackhole-turned star lives as a 
separate shadow within the same sky. It is like the separate 
existence of each individual soul within the same Supreme 
Soul as a separate shadow. Perhaps this shadow or image is 
called dark energy. Those stars that do not form black holes, 
they merge into super dark energy. This super dark energy is 
a kind of general pool spread in the original infinite sky, from 
which cosmic bodies are formed, and merge into it. Perhaps 
virtual particles also keep jumping in and out of it. This is 
what | had said in a previous post that stars with less weight 
are freed from the cycle of birth and death unlike going to 
form blackholes. This super dark energy is like the basic 
Nature or Mool Prakriti of Indian philosophy. There is an exact 
similarity between the two. Both are eternal. Creation takes 
place from both. From the original nature, the soul or 
creature originates to start birth-death cycle and also the 
whole universe originates at my most beginning to start its 
life -death cycle. likewise from the supar dark energy the 
whole universe originates in physical sense. Means to say 
both are same thing. Whatever physical matter is formed, it 
is not formed directly from the original conscious infinite sky, 
but is formed from the super dark energy permeating it. 
Similarly, no living entity comes directly from the Supreme 
Soul, but comes from the original nature or mool prakriti. 
However, they can end into either of both, although not into 


super dark energy but into individually encoded dark energy. 
Ending can never be into super dark energy as it is illusionary 
or virtual and actually doesn’t exist. Kundalini yogis can end 
into supreme soul. It can also be called as virtual super dark 
energy. Now someone can say that if the soul or the star 
went to the original nature, then when did it get free and 
meet the God. The meaning is clear that the original nature 
and the supreme soul are two sides of the same coin. God is 
the infinite conscious sky, then the original nature is its 
shadow. Actually that shadow is not an separate experience, 
yet it exists. It doesn’t even exist. It means that if one went 
to the original nature, then it went to the supreme soul only, 
because it would experience it’s supreme divine form only. 
For the soul to come, it is okay to assume if the soul starts its 
journey of life from the shadow of that Supreme Soul that’s 
super dark energy, because Supreme Soul can never get 
bound in the bondage of the journey of life. But the journey 
ends only in God, not in his shadow. 
Scientists are also expressing doubt that dark energy may 
have been created by blackholes. It is as if many Indian 
philosophies used to argue on this and say that the original 
nature does not have its own existence, it is created by the 
living beings through their self-ignorance. But according to 
the conclusion of some of the scriptures, this cannot happen 
because the super dark energy or the original nature is 
eternal. Yes, the opposite has definitely happened that 
cosmic bodies have been made from it, from which black 
holes have been made. Of course they merge into it again 
and again until liberation, and take birth from it, like the soul 
merging into it although keeping its information separately 
encoded until liberated. But according to the scriptures, both 
the things seem correct to me. Meaning that super dark 
energy and blackhole keep making each other. Probably the 
Hawking radiation that keeps coming out of the blackhole 
keeps on adding up to the super dark energy. It is not that by 
taking out all the dark energy of a black hole through 
Hawking radiation, it becomes free to come out of darkness, 
but even by taking out a little dark energy, that work is done. 
Who can take out so much dark energy completely at such a 
low emission rate? If it’s so it will take very long time that’s 
impractical. Similarly, one does not need to take out all the 


dark garbage of the mind by Kundalini Yoga, but by taking 
out little by little garbage over a long period of time, one gets 
awakening or liberation. Who can completely remove the 
unlimited waste accumulated since innumerable births. 


It comes in the scriptures that only one thought was born in 
the mind of God, ‘Ekoham Bahusyam’, meaning ‘ʻI am one, 
may | become many’. Perhaps this thought is infinite mass 
shrunk down to the so-called singularity. Perhaps that 
thought caused a hole in the sky. A new infinite sky had 
become. But by confusion he forgot his full light, although the 
original supreme soul remained unaffected. This is super dark 
energy. This is what created the universe and caused its 
expansion, just as the world of thoughts develops in the mind 
of a man. The same super dark energy is the original mind of 
Brahma, and the development of thoughts in his mind is the 
creation of the universe. Then Brahma asked how to create 
the universe, then super Brahma or God told him just to do 
as before. This means that the information of the previous 
creation in coded form remains as the memory of Brahma. 


Hindu philosophy says that attachment to the thoughts of the 
mind leads to ignorance or darkness. This thing is scientific. 
Attachment means holding or clinging. Even a black hole 
holds the thought form singularity within itself. It is a 
different matter that Hawking radiation also tries to throw it 
out. Man also keeps on driving the thoughts out through 
yoga, vipassana, non-attachment living etc. It is a different 
matter when we get complete success in this. 


Scientists say that spacetime becomes zero in the singularity 
of a blackhole. Then at the time of the Big Bang, it starts 
expanding again, which starts the creation of the universe, 
and it starts expanding further. If you think carefully, it is a 
simple matter. No need to do any more maths. Think from 
within. The outside is the same as the inside. This is the 
specialty of spirituality that it understands the inside, but 
science understands the outside. It is easy to understand 
inside, it is also cheap and it is also accessible to everyone. 
Outside, there is a lot of chaos and trouble. Expensive, and 


not easily accessible. When there is darkness of ignorance in 
the bright sky of soul, then it is void even though it is there. If 
there is God that’s everything in it, then what is the use of it 
in darkness. What is the use of a five star hotel if it gets 
dark? It is just like not being there. This is said to be 
Spacetime being zero. Then it starts expanding, as a universe 
or creation of thoughts. That spacetime is called expanding 
because its virtual waves are there in the form of thoughts. It 
will stop spreading only when it will reach its end, that is, the 
infinite consciousness space, that is, liberation. 


Kundalini awakening as 
Brahmastra_ side effects are 
prevented by Shaivastra 
aka Pashupatastra 


Friends, there is a great personal character named 
Ashwatthama in Mahabharata. He has been called the 
incarnation of Lord Shiva. He was the son of Guru 
Dronacharya. Dronacharya was the teacher of Kauravas and 
Pandavas. He was proficient in all the sciences, even in the 
transcendental theology. He was a Brahmin, and at that time 
the real Brahmin was considered to be the one who knew 
Brahmavidya. There were many Brahmins by name. 
Brahmavidya is synonymous with Kundalinividya, because 
both lead to spiritual awakening. Dronacharya also had the 
biggest war weapon named Brahmastra. Brahmastra has the 
ability to burn the entire universe, like a nuclear weapon. 
Dronacharya had given that highly secret Brahmastravidya 
only to his son Ashwatthama, not even to his most beloved 
disciple Arjuna. When the Kauravas were defeated, 
Duryodhana, desperate and saddened by it, asked 
Ashwatthama for help. He too could not turn down the 
demand of his dear friend. He cut off the heads of five 
sleeping men from the Pandava house in the dark of night 
thinking those as pandavas. But actually they were five sons 
of Pandavas. Furious with their mother Draupadi’s 
lamentation, Arjuna sat on the chariot with Krishna and 
started following Ashvatthama. Ashwatthama ran away in 
fear and fired Brahmastra i.e. Brahmashir astra on Arjuna. It 
posed a threat to the entire universe. The universe started 
burning due to its bright glow. It created a huge fire in all 
directions. Seeing the danger to his life, Arjuna was saddened 
and his brightness was destroyed. Even Shri Krishna was not 
able to stop that weapon. Ashwatthama did not learn the art 
of stopping it from his father. Ashwatthama was also realizing 
his mistake, but was unable to do anything. He was scolded 
by everyone including Shri Krishna that when he did not 
know how to stop the Brahmastra, then why did he use it. 


Then, with the advice of Shri Krishna, Arjuna remembering 
Lord Shiva pacified it by firing the Shaivastra i.e. Pashupat 
weapon given by Lord Shiva while meditating on him in the 
past. The damage caused by it was averted, although it was 
trying to burn Abhimanyu’s wife Uttara’s womb, but Sri 
Krishna saved it until the Pashupat weapon was fired. 


Spirituo-scientific explanation of the above story 

Firstly, this Brahmastra is also called the same Brahmashir 
arrow in a neighbouring verse, which was made from the 
spine of sage Dadhichi and that had killed the demon 
Vritrasura. In the recent old post, we proved that it is the 
energy line in the form of awakened Sushumna. Second, 
Ashwatthama was a learned Brahmin, to whom his father 
Dronacharya, who was well versed in the Vedas, had given all 
the education. Brahmin’s job is to study and teach Vedas, 
what do they have to do with weapons. If someone says that 
of course fighting was the work of the Kshatriyas or warrior 
group people, but teaching how to fight was the work of the 
Brahmins, then this statement does not suit. The one who 
does not know how to fight himself, how can he teach others 
how to fight. | find the language of weapons used for them to 
be figurative. This must have been done so that it does not 
happen that the warrior Kshatriyas do not come under the 
control of Brahmins by coming into the ego. Anyway, 
intelligence has been considered the biggest weapon, 
because even the biggest war can be won or avoided by 
intelligence, and intelligence is in abundance with a Brahmin. 
Even the war of Mahabharata seems like a mental war to me. 
A long time ago, news about radioactive radiation of 
Mahabharata war in Kurukshetra field was read in 
newspapers and social media. It was written that when so- 
and-so scientists investigated, the tests turned out to be 
positive. Don’t know how they present fabricated things as 
truth, from where they bring scientists, and where they get 
them investigated. On probing deeply, it was found that 
there is no scientific confirmation of this, and it is still 
considered as Mythology. It is a different matter that it 
cannot be completely denied, because what is happening 
inside in a subtle form, that is also happening outside in a 
gross form. Brahmasna destroys the subtle world of the 


mind, and the nuclear weapon destroys the gross world of 
exactly the same form outside. In fact everything is subtle. 
Perhaps such stories like half-truths are created only to 
increase the curiosity towards spirituality in the common 
man. One more thing, if the wars described in the Puranas 
were real physical wars, then the Hindu community would 
have been the most fighting community, but it is not so, it’s 
quite the opposite seemingly. Hindus appear shrinking today. 
In addition, the war was kept closed from sunset to sunrise. 
This happens only in the war of life, when people work during 
the day and sleep at night. All this shows that those battles 
were against the defects of the mind that were fought with 
the help of Kundalini Shakti in the body itself. To make them 
interesting they are shown as outside and real. Although it’s 
a different matter whatever takes place inside body,the same 
happens outside too. Duryodhana means the person who is 
hardly won in the war seems to me a symbol of ego. The 
Kauravas were one hundred brothers. There is also a popular 
saying that there are hundred bad qualities in such and such 
person. | am also not denying that Mahabharata is history. 
May be both things are true. It is also evident from this that 
Brahmastra is awakened Sushumna only. Ashwatthama 
made it run on Arjuna, meaning he started awakening 
Kundalini inside Arjuna with the power of his vision also 
called as eye born shaktipat. Anyway, Ashwatthama was an 
awakened person. The proof of this is the gem burried on his 
forehead. Actually it is the awakened agya chakra or opened 
third eye. A sudden awakening of the Kundalini will cause the 
Same uneasiness as a man who has lived in a dark cave for 
years is brought out into the sun suddenly. Due to this, great 
light was created in all directions, which means that Arjuna’s 
brain was shining all around, because the whole universe is 
inside the brain. At the time of awakening, there is a fear of 
strange untoward happening, though it’s different from 
normal fear. It is full of bliss, light and peace. Together with 
the destroyed ego, which means that one’s personality ends, 
there can also be a feeling of impending death. This feeling is 
also different from death and is luminous and fully 
expressional. One may feel that he is going towards a 
peaceful divine world or Muktiloka that’s liberated abode. 
Arjuna was saddened by this and his glory was destroyed. 


Actually the glory of the ego was destroyed, the glory of 
Brahman was increasing. Fighting sharpens the ego, but 
Brahmatej causes forget everything and makes one like a 
monk. Understand that Arjuna got Kundalini awakening or 
started getting. Due to this, side effects of Kundalini 
awakening were born on him. These are being described 
figuratively. Life is a war. If a man is suppressed by the 
burden of Kundalini, then how will he fight in the battle of life, 
how will he kill the ego like Duryodhana. The problem is that 
from where a pure and sattvic Brahmin like Ashwatthama can 
bring so much energy, which helps destroy those Kundalini 
Doshas. He was a bachelor boy at that time, so Guru 
Dronacharya did not teach him energy rich tantric 
techniques. But the married Arjuna had already learned those 
Vamachari or leftist techniques from Lord Shiva, which have 
been named Shaivastra or Pashupatastra. Shri Krishna 
reminded Arjuna of that. Ashwatthama was an incarnation of 
Shiva, because he was supporting the Kauravas that were in 
the form of bad qualities. Even Shiva looks like a vicious 
tantrik when seen from outside. He is always on the side of 
the demons, but when the gods persuade him, he comes 
over to the side of the gods. He’s innocent, isn’t he? Anyone 
can easily mislead and convince him.The Pandavas along 
with Krishna removed the gem from his forehead as a 
punishment. This means that if one tries to become like Shiva 
without proper knowledge of Shaivism, he will be misguided 
even after being awakened. It is tantamount to death 
sentence for him. Why didn’t Dronacharya teach Brahmastra 
Vidya to his disciples, and why only to his son Ashwatthama. 
In worldly education, it is the other way round, that means a 
teacher can teach everything to his students, but cannot 
teach anything to his son, for whom separate tuition has to 
be arranged. This also proves that it was a transcendental 
yoga science. It’s understandable less by someone’s 
teaching, but by the constant company and rituals of one’s 
present family and ancestors, it comes to be learnt itself 
without teaching. One more thing, the physical weapon does 
not allow itself to reach the child in a woman’s womb without 
harming her. Yes, the radiation from a nuclear weapon can 
do that. But it damages the womb of countless women, not 
just the womb of a single chosen woman. Kundalini is said to 


influence DNA. Because they were all members of the same 
family, their DNA was intertwined. Because the fetus was the 
most delicate, his DNA was most affected. He felt that there 
was a bright and burning radiance all around, which Lord 
Krishna was pacifying with his Sudarshan Chakra. In fact, 
when Kundalini Shakti reaches the brain, a meditation image 
automatically appears in the middle of it to protect one from 
its side effects. Probably Shri Krishna was in this form. Shri 
Krishna only because he was the closest, dearest and most 
respected of his family. 


Mahabharata is called the fifth Veda. There is an experiential 
and esoteric description of the Supreme in the Vedas. The 
same has been simplified in Puranas and Mahabharata with 
mythological stories. What is the use of physical science in 
them? Although the same is inside the gross physical world, 
which is inside the mind and soul, but the main focus is 
placed on the aspects of the mind, soul, and the body 
associated with it. Lord Krishna is the soul. The five Pandavas 
are his five Pranas or life forces. Shri Krishna himself has also 
said this. Arjuna is the main prana. Hundreds of worldly 
thoughts are hundred Kaurav brothers. They constantly keep 
on snatching the power of the pranas. They want to keep 
them away from the soul. Krishna’s dearest friend is Arjuna. 
He acts as main Prana that help kundalini Shakti rise up to 
meet the Atman. Prana gives strength to the breaths. It 
remains closest to the soul. That’s why at the time of 
awakening the breath becomes calm. It is only with the 
power of the breath that the power ascends up. 
Ashwatthama fired Brahmastra on Arjuna means Yoga 
provoked Prana to awakening. The seven chakras are the 
seven sons of the Pandavas. The chakras are activated by 
the vital force or prana. Five sons were killed by 
Ashwatthama means good worldly activity in the form of 
yoga etc. stuck in the midst of hundreds of evils pierced the 
five chakras. Anyway, due to physical activity, maximum 
pressure falls on Muladhar Chakra, because it is close to the 
waist joint. Yoga increases this pressure, because in this we 
bend more, bend for a longer time, and bend while holding 
the breath with awareness. The rear Swadhishthana Chakra 
which is the raised hip bone, seems to have a depression on 


the adjoining upper side, | think that is the real Mooladhara 
or directly connected to mooladhara. By massaging deeply in 
it, there is a feeling of intense sensation like sexual pleasure 
which ascends upwards. Abhimanyu and Ghatotkacha were 
left among the sons of Pandavas, which means that the top 
two main chakras were not penetrated. That’s why the 
symptoms of Kundalini were not tolerated by Arjuna. Now call 
it a fabricated story or a real yoga story created by a epic 
writer Rishi, but it is well made and factful. 


There is another side to this story as well. Drauna is also the 
name of a mountain. Dronacharya means Acharya who 
controls the mountains. Anyway, he had done penance on 
Mount Drauna. Bones have been called mountains at many 
places. Yoga etc. is done with the bones only. That’s why | 
am telling Ashwatthama Yogasadhana. When the chakras 
were penetrated by yoga, the suppressed emotions came out 
and became extinct, that means they died completely. Due 
to this, their mother Buddhi or intellect i.e. Draupadi started 
crying with sorrow, because those feelings were created 
because of her actions. Prana Arjuna along with the soul 
Krishna also got disturbed by this and they ran to stop the 
yoga i.e. to catch Ashwatthama. But by then Sushumna had 
awakened, which means it had left the Brahmastra. Anyway, 
Sahasrar Chakra is also called Brahmarandhra. Ashwatthama 
was maintaining the friendship of Duryodhana, because when 
a man gets tired or bored of selfish worldliness, then he 
himself adopts yoga. Prana could not bear the radiance of 
that awakened Kundalini, so he brought it down to the agya 
chakra by rubbing his forehead. Then don’t know where it got 
merged. This is to extract a gem from the forehead of 
Ashwatthama. After awakening man feels like a new birth like 
a child. This is the complete shaving of hair on head and face 
of Ashwatthama. If the Brahmastra was a physical weapon, 
its radiance and other effects would be felt by all, but it was 
felt only by Arjuna, because it was inside him. Krishna is the 
real soul, it doesn’t matter to him, because he is always 
awake. Shaivastra is a worldly mind like an open style of 
living. Panchamkar of Tantra is the biggest worldliness. After 
meditating or seeing it, the Shaivastra was launched, due to 
which the Brahmastra became calm. It is possible that some 


dance or ceremony of women etc. is going on nearby. As 
soon as you pay attention to it, the Shaivastra must have 
launched. In fact, Ajna Chakra and Sahasrar Chakra should 
also become active, only then the Kundalini awakening can 
be tolerated well. The manifest and unmanifest complex 
thoughts of the intellect are reduced to ashes by the 
activation of the agya chakra. Similarly, the activation of the 
Sahasrar Chakra increases blood circulation there, so that the 
pressure of awakening can be tolerated. Along with this, the 
active and repressed unrestrained visual thoughts are also 
consumed. 


Arjuna’s son was Abhimanyu and his son was Parikshit who 
was watching Krishna in Uttara’s womb. He used to test 
Krishna in everyone even after coming out, that is why he 
was named Parikshit that literally means to judge. 
Abhimanyu literally means very angry. Actually, anger is 
expressed through the prana. That anger was towards the 
deceitful worldliness like Duryodhana. But it was downgraded 
inside superficial thinking, not upgraded with deep thinking. 
Means Arjuna hated him superficially, not deeply. ‘Ut’ literally 
means above, and Tara means floating. Due to this the power 
of anger was being transformed into the image form of 
Kundalini meditation. Due to this, the Navjeev or newborn as 
Parikshit was feeling kundalini in the form of Krishna’s 
Dhyanachitra. The new soul is because the soul is 
transformed into a new one by meditation. Then that 
transformed person, even after growing up, used to search 
and test the same meditation picture everywhere, because it 
is very blissful and benevolent. When it is so good in the 
subtle form in the mind, then how much better it will be in 
the physical form. But the physical form has its own 
compulsions. That’s why it is nowhere to be found. A man 
keeps on testing it everywhere. Every man especially 
awakened man is Parikshit. 


One more thing, the war chakravyuh in which Abhimanyu 
entered had seven layers. Firstly, the name is also chakra, 
and the count is also equal to the chakras of the body. Both 
are in the form of a layer on top of each other. Muladhara 


Chakra is limited to itself, Swadhishthana Chakra covers it 
too etc. In this way, the upper chakra covers the lower ones 
as well. Sahasrara covers all the chakras. When a person 
enters Chakra meditation due to anger on someone, then he 
can enter inside, but cannot come out, because anger ends 
with the effect of Sadhana or meditation. Dhruva went out to 
find Lord Vishnu filled with anger towards his step mother, 
but when lord Vishnu met, his anger ended and he started 
loving the same mother very much. Perhaps the same 
happened with Lord Rama, that’s why his ill-wishing 
stepmother was most dear to him. 


Kundalini tantra and eunuchs 
have an inherent relationship 


Shiva Parvati travels on different chakras after meeting in 
Sahasrar. In fact, the real Shiva is the complete non-dual 
form of supreme. Real Parvati is the mental meditation 
picture. The bodies of man and woman who are bound in love 
are only a medium or a helper to bring about the union of the 
real Shiva and Parvati inside. Both those bodies first go to a 
secluded place, where there is no disturbance from anyone. 
Shiva and Parvati went to a cave for this where they courted 
for a thousand years. This secluded place can be called 
Sahasrar Chakra. There Shiva got awakening. Then both 
started roaming at different places. In fact, some place is 
associated with a particular chakra and some with another. 
That’s why sometimes some chakra was active and 
sometimes the other. The chakra which is active, the 
meditation picture i.e. the real Parvati also gets focused 
there, this is the rule of yoga. That is why there nondual and 
bliss form Atman i.e. real Shiva is also more expressed, 
because Shiva and Parvati want to live together. Embodied 
Shivparvati are co-operative with bodiless Shivparvati, not 
opponents. So if someone says that the real awakening is 
due to the union of the real Shiva and Parvati within the 
mind, physical romance ie love has no contribution in it, then 
it doesn’t appear correct. 


The bodiless Shiva inside the embodied Shiva is in the form 
of nondual supreme, and the bodiless Parvati there is in the 
form of mental Kundalini meditation image. When the 
bodiless Parvati residing inside the embodied Shiva becomes 
completely united with the bodiless Shiva therein, it is called 
Kundalini awakening of the embodied Shiva. In this, the 
embodied Parvati helps embodied Shiva through romantic 
love relationship. This gives the bodiless Parvati the sexual 
energy necessary for maximum manifestation that’s for the 
formation of clear mental meditation images. Due to which 
she rises up to the Sahasrar Chakra and becomes united with 
bodiless Shiva inside. 


Now let’s describe embodied Parvati. The bodiless Shiva of 
embodied Parvati is also in the form of same nondual 
supreme or formless lord, and similarly bodiless Parvati as 
her mental meditation image. When the bodiless Parvati 
residing inside the embodied Parvati becomes completely 
united with bodiless Shiva, that is called the Kundalini 
awakening of the embodied Parvati. In this, embodied Shiva 
helps embodied Parvati through romantic love relationship. 
This gives the bodiless Parvati inside the necessary energy to 
manifest as much as possible that’s create a clear mental 
picture. Due to which she rises up to the Sahasrar and 
becomes united with bodiless Shiva there. 


Now when awakening has occurred that’s bodiless 
shivaaparvati has been fully united in sahasrar, then this 
union descends down through front channel. Although at 
lower chakras they aren’t fully united, it’s as if sharp 
meditation image is experienced with profound bliss. First 
this union drops down to agya chakra. There meditation is 
strongest of all chakras except sahasrara. Then it descends 
to throat chakra. Then to heart chakra,then to manipura 
chakra, then to swadhishthan chakra and lastly to 
mooladhara chakra. Here this union becomes ready to return 
back to sahasrara chakra through back channel, however 
awakening doesn’t happen again for long time due to many 
reasons. This shivaaparvati union goes on wandering the 
entire planet stationing temporarily at different places akin to 
chakras. You can call sahasrara as shiva loka or mount 
Kailash, agya chakra as alkapuri and likewise all others. You 
can also call all twelve chakras as dvadash jyotirlingas, in 
which Kashi is also one that’s very favourite to Shiva and 
there Shivparvati are often seen wandering blissfully. 


Bodiless Shiva and Parvati are equally situated within both 
man and woman. The female body has been given the form 
of bodiless Parvati or mental meditation image because the 
qualities of both are found more matching. The male body 
has been given the form of bodiless Shiva or formless 
supreme because the qualities of both are more similar to 
each other. This means that all people are bisexual to some 


degree, because both have same bodiless shivaaparvati 
inside and both have bodily characteristics matching to 
bodiless shivaaparvati, although proportion of bodiless Shiva 
and bodiless Parvati gets varying. But one who boldly reveals 
both these genders outside, is insulted by being called Hijra 
or Kinnar or eunuch. Although some physiological defects can 
also be behind these expressions. They were highly 
respected in ancient India, and were considered special. This 
thinking had changed during the period of slavery. Now even 
the third gender has got official and legal status. Eunuchs are 
a good example of Yinyang i.e. Shivashakti union. In these, 
Kundalini Shakti appears abundant as | think. When coming 
in contact with a woman, you feel the similar essence as that 
with a familiar man, then understand that the yinyang is 
bound very much and strongly in her. This type of masculine 
woman helps much in awakening. With her, a meditation 
picture is always firmly fixed in one’s mind, without any 
special spiritual effort or yogic practice or only little of these 
is enough. From this it can also be possible that when being 
in contact with a man, one starts feeling the contact of a 
woman with the same nature as him, then he is also a 
storehouse of yinyang. Surely it happens as many people’s 
experience says this. This type of womanized man also helps 
much in Yoga meditation and awakening. Yes, one more 
thing, | don’t feel the need to write separately about gay, 
lesbian, etc. people, because they also seem to me to be 
bisexual or Shivshakti like eunuchs, meaning both men and 
women are seen in them. Actually, what happens as a basic 
principle is that the feeling of sexual intercourse that arises 
towards eunuchs, has more restraint in comparison to a 
perfect woman or man. This happens because a man is seen 
in a woman and a woman is seen in a man. In this opposite 
view, the sex drive is always present in a controlled form, 
that is, it neither disappears like a normal state, nor grows 
uncontrollably, pushing a man into the quagmire of sexual 
vulgarity. Because of this, the energy that goes from 
Sahasrara and other chakras to Swadhishthana and 
Muladhara chakra due to sexual desire, it turns back and 
goes up amplified through the back channel and again turns 
down through front channel chakras creating activity in the 
organs related to them. Meaning that energy does not come 


out in the form of sexual intercourse or ejaculation. The 
energy circulating in the chromosmic orbit is considered to 
be excellent, as it refreshes the entire body, and also 
amplifies itself through the influence of Muladhara. Now no 
one may give me the status of kinnarologist or eunuchs 
expert. That’s why | will not go into much detail. Both these 
types of yinyang personality help a lot in Kundalini Yoga and 
awakening. So why not consider eunuchs on the same lines 
as Yinyang machine or Kundalini machine. Probably this was 
the main reason for their respect in ancient India. That is why 
their number is considerable in India, and here they also 
have their own separate society. They worship 
Ardhanarishwar. Otherwise, people keep saying that their 
blessings are not false, their sooken words prove to be true, 
etc. All these are Siddhis like Kundalini Yoga Shakti evoked. 
Recently, | saw a biopic webseries named Tali, which is based 
on the life of transgender Gauri Sawant, who played a major 
role in getting transgenders a constitutional status. It showed 
how she was a victim of atrocities and hatred since childhood 
for revealing her bisexual nature, and how she helped society 
to change such attitudes. 


Kundalini Yoga is important for 
environmental protection 


When Arjun was doing penance to Lord Shiva for the 
Pashupat weapon, a demon named Mook sent by 
Duryodhana came there in the form of a pig. He was going 
through the same route where Arjun was, breaking the peaks 
of the mountains, uprooting many trees and shouting various 
types of meaningless words. Seeing him, Arjun started 
remembering Shiva. Shiva came in the form of Bhilraj or 
jungle tribe’s king to kill him. That boar between Arjuna and 
Shiva looked like a wonderful peak. Both of them fired arrows 
together. Lord Shiva’s arrow entered the tail, came out of its 
mouth and soon disappeared into the earth. Arjun’s arrow 
(probably after entering the mouth) came out of its tail and 
fell on the ground in the side. The pig fell down dead at that 
very moment. 


Explanation of the above myth 


Duryodhana means ego makes Arjun’s Karmayogi soul do so 
much work that his Ida and Pingala nadis become active, 
meaning Arjun’s body itself becomes like a pig. The 
mooladhara itself is its tail. Ida and Pingala are the two sharp 
teeth on its sides. The diverse thoughts of the wandering 
mind in the duality-forest are its face. Only the wandering 
mind can break the mountains, not the body. The Mook name 
is Hindi word for dumb. Because the wandering mind never 
tells a man that he is his enemy and has come to fight with 
him, but keeps on attacking by deceit, that is why it is called 
dumb demon. Just as the mind feels like a mountain between 
the soul and the Supreme Soul, similarly it was feeling like a 
pig. Due to the alternate activation of Ida and Pingala nadis, 
a person becomes so active as if he is ready to break a 
mountain. When lda is activated, he does the work of the 
world in a frenzy, and when Pingala is activated, he falls 
asleep. After waking up from sleep and so getting refreshed, 
again starts running to do sinful deeds like looting and 
hunting. He oscillates between this duality of darkness and 


light, and does not see the equanimity or non-duality of the 
sushumna nadi between them. The color of the Indian wild 
boar is also a mixture of black and brown, indicating the 
duality. Filled with stupidity like an animal, he keeps on doing 
bad and environmental-killing work. Nowadays man is like 
this. There is no brake on activity. He is hitting his head 
everywhere like a blind man. Hollowing out the ground. The 
forests are being destroyed. After polluting the air, land and 
water, he is roaming in it with joy and fun. All these are 
characteristics of a pig. Shiva inserted an arrow through its 
tail, which means Shiva caused activation of the sushumna 
channel through mooladhara. Actually, this is what happens 
by meditating and worshiping Shivalinga. That arrow came 
out of his mouth i.e. Sahasrar Chakra and merged into the 
body through the front channel called as getting lost in the 
earth. 

Arjun was anyway meditating and worshiping Shivalinga. It is 
natural that his Sushumna became active. This Brahmashir 
arrow emerges out of the Brahmarandhra. The whole body of 
the pig is the face. It can also be understood that the arrow 
turned down and merged into the agya chakra. From there it 
reaches the mouth, through the secretions of the palate. 
There that secretion goes into the land, that is, the stomach, 
and there it is spent or merged in the form of energy in 
digesting food. Just as food is made in the soil, similarly it is 
made in the stomach too, of course in the form of light and 
broken micro pieces to be absorbed by the body. 
By touching the tongue with the palate, Arjun brought down 
the energy of the brain through the front channel. Due to 
this, that previously ascended power went back to Muladhar 
down. That which is meditated by Arjuna by his will inside the 
brain, is the arrow released by Arjuna. It comes from top to 
bottom through the front channel. Suppose that Shaktibaan 
or energy arrow reached the Muladhar and came out and fell 
on the ground in the lateral part. But how did it fall out? 
There is a possibility that Shakti fell out in the form of semen. 
But why did Arjun have to run out to get it. By the way, great 
things are done with the power of semen, big industries and 
businesses run, and material prosperity spreads all around. 
Perhaps Arjun ran here and there to collect them, calling 
them his own. There is also a possibility that Shakti came in 


the form of semen to the Vajra tip, which Arjuna tried to pull 
back up through the yoga. But how did it fall to the ground? It 
may have fallen in the vagina, which is being pulled back 
through Vajroli Mudra. But Shivganas should not have 
objected in this, because it is a personal matter. Shivgan said 
that the pig was killed by Shiva’s arrow and it is the arrow of 
Shiva that fell to the ground. In fact, due to the effect of 
Shivlingam, the power of Mooladhar itself was going up to 
Sahasrar and then turning and coming down through the 
front channel. Arjuna thought that he created that power by 
meditating in his mind, but in reality he was able to meditate 
in the mind only by the power of the Shakti coming up from 
Muladhara, not by his self-power or will. With the awakening 
of Muladhara Chakra, Sushumna was activated, due to which 
Ida and Pingala became like inactive. Means the pig in the 
form of ignorance had died and also the mischief caused by 
ignorance alongwith. Arjuna leaving the shelter of Shivling 
forced to do so by his ego or not giving credit to Shivling for 
killing the ignorance form pig is his fighting with Shiva form 
Bhilraj. In the end, he has to understand the greatness of 
Shivling through his defeat by Bhilraj. The Shaktibaan that 
fell on the side of Arjuna could be in any form of food, grass, 
flower etc., which he had grown by walking with his legs. 
Energy descends mainly from the mooladhara to the legs. 
And Muladhar got power from Shivling. That’s why Shivgan 
was asserting his rights on them. The animals, birds and 
insects that eat food grains, grass, leaves, flowers etc. are 
Shivagana, who are dependent on the cooperation of man for 
their life. 
Arjuna said that the arrow was painted with back lines and 
his name was inscribed on it. We can call the lines the ridges 
of the ribs situated transversely on the front channel, which 
are at its beginning. We can say that the name is engraved in 
the form of heart chakra, because in it the whole attitude of a 
man, meaning his identity, is hidden. Arrogant man would 
have fought only with God, to collect his wealth. God keeps 
on punishing him for that selfishness. This is the fight 
between Shiva and Arjuna which reaches to the wrestling 
match. Then a time comes when man rubs his head in the 
temple of God to fulfill his selfishness. This is the same part 
of the story, in which Arjuna grabs Shiva by his feet and tries 


to throw him around, but at the same time, pleased with his 
feet being held, Shiva reverts to his real form and gives him 
the Pashupat weapon as a boon. It is like when a man goes to 
the temple of God with any sense and attains good wisdom, 
and unknowingly obtains the boon of being saved from 
calamity. Pashupat Astra means Shiva had explained to him 
through the above incident that only Mooladhar can control 
Shakti well, not Sahasrara or brain. With this understanding, 
he calmed the irritation of the brain caused by the 
Brahmastra shot by Ashwatthama. 
This phenomenon can be understood more clearly in the 
following way. Arjuna fought with Shiva in the form of Bhil for 
many years, first with arrows and then with wrestling. 
Actually such a war can happen only between ego and truth, 
because two persons cannot fight continuously for years. Ego 
first spends all the equipments and all the prosperity of its 
life in denying the God. God destroys them one by one so 
that man can improve. Of course he destroys them in his 
mind in the form of boredom with them, not in the outer 
physical form. In the end, when nothing is left, man fights 
with the Lord with the help of the memories and desires of 
those material achievements within him, that means he 
maintains his existence separate from the divine. If any 
member of the family leaves the house, he will go after 
fighting, not by hugging with love. Sanskrit word Vasna 
seems to be derived from the Punjabi word vashana or vice 
versa, which means smell. All the joy is in the smell. When 
there is no sense of smell due to cold etc., then food does not 
taste tasty at all. You must have noticed that sometimes an 
old memory comes to mind with great pleasure. It seems that 
the pleasure which might not have occurred even at the time 
of that actual physical event, comes in a very vague memory. 
This is the lust or smell of that event. It is just like the 
fragrance of a perfume. Perhaps this is the most subtle form 
of the world which is also called Tanmatra. If such smells of 
past events or the past world are coming, then understand 
that the Yogi is situated at a high stage of spiritual practice 
and his worldly waste is getting purified and merging into the 
soul. Soon he may even get a glimpse of awakening. When 
the last weapon of Vasana is destroyed, then one starts 
drowning in darkness, which is also called the Dark Night of 


the Soul. Then he goes to the temple of Lord Shiva to defeat 
him, which means he grabs Shiva’s feet to throw him away. It 
is like a man going to a temple to seek material prosperity. 
Then God becomes pleased and reveals His true form before 
him, due to which he accepts defeat at that very moment. 
The darkness of ego cannot stand in front of the light of God. 
Maybe this is awakening. 


Kundalini Yoga powered Ganges 
flow irrigates the chakras in the 
form of Shivlinga 


Famous legend of Atri-Anasuya 


The story of Anasuya comes in Shivpuran. Anasuya means 
one who does not criticize or condemn anyone. Once there 
was a great famine. There was shortage of water 
everywhere. People and animals started dying due to thirst. 
Saints cannot see the sufferings of the world. Therefore, Sage 
Atri started doing penance for water. His disciples also left 
him. Only Anasuya continued to serve her husband and 
worshiped the Shivling everyday. One day Atri asked for 
water. Anasuya took the kamandal that’s sacred handheld 
pitcher and started searching for water. On the way she met 
Ganga. Ganga was pleased with Anasuya’s devotion to her 
husband. Anasuya asked for water from Ganga. Ganga asked 
her to dig a pit. That pit became filled with water. Anasuya 
went away with water. He gave water to Atri. Atri said that it 
was not like everyday drinking water. Anasuya told the whole 
story. She took Atri to that pit. Both of them took bath in it 
and drank it. All the people were satisfied with that. When 
Ganga started leaving, Anasuya prayed to her to stay there 
forever. Ganga in return demanded from her the fruit of her 
one year’s husband’s service and worship of Shiva. Ganga 
said that she likes husband service the most. When Anasuya 
gave it, Ganga settled there. Along with this, Shiva also sat 
there forever in the form of Atrishwar Linga. 


the explanation for mythological story 


Atri is a living soul. Atri literally means devoid of all three 
qualities or gunas. Only the soul is like this. Anasuya is 
intelligence or intellect. Intelligence does not condemn 
anyone, because it wants everyone to get its work done. Only 
a useless mind condemns. Intelligence is like a devoted wife 
to her husband as soul. She serves the living being soul in 
every way, along with worshiping Lord Shiva. An idle mind 


does nothing. Actually work is done by intellect, and work 
itself has been called worship. Work is the worship of Shivling 
because the world is made up of a combination of Purush 
meaning Shiva and Prakriti meaning Shakti. The body itself is 
that drought-stricken country. All the cells of the body are its 
people and creatures. They were thirsty means deprived of 
water in the form of energy. Energy flows like water. Intellect 
used to provide the soul in the form of Rishi Atri with enough 
energy or simple water for living. But the whole body country 
could not survive well with it. That’s why sage does penance 
i.e. Kundalini Yogasadhana for extra energy. One day, on 
asking for Shakti-jal by Rishi-jiva, Anasuya-buddhi started 
wandering all over the body in search of it. By the grace of 
Shivling, she felt the sexual based Kundalini Shakti i.e. Ganga 
around Muladhar. She inspired the prana of the body i.e. the 
workers of Dahdesh or body-country to make a pit there i.e. 
to press Muladhara with the heel in Siddhasana or to make a 
sensory pit in the front Manipur Chakra by yogasanas, 
massages etc. It seems to me that this pit is the deep pit 
above the base of the back or the hip bone prominence. At 
the time of massage, by pressing hard with the base of the 
straight palm and slowly sliding upwards, a sharp and blissful 
sensation is felt, which starts climbing upwards in the spinal 
cord. It seems to be directly related to the real or textual 
Mooladhara, because Mooladhara is also often referred to as 
the pit. Massage should not be done in the spine with the 
force of fingers, because there can be a fear of damage like 
injury to the delicate bone. Divine water was filled there, 
which means there was a feeling of blissful energy. She fed 
that water to the sage means the soul felt that sensation. The 
soul found it different and divine from other days because 
sexual pleasure was also mixed in it. Both of them took bath 
in it, which means that it climbed up from the coccyx to the 
brain, due to which both of them got refreshed along with the 
whole body. Both the intellect and the soul reside in the brain 
and are connected to each other, so they feel everything 
together. It can also be taken in another way that a tantric 
couple is consuming energy together in Yabyum posture. All 
living beings were satisfied after drinking water, which means 
all the cells of the body were refreshed and recharged with 
energy. Ganga liked Anasuya’s chastity. Surely she must 


have taken hes test, only then came to know. Nowadays 
there are many examiners of the religion of chastity. For 
women going to office or work, various men peeping at them 
and talking to them with love-filled obscenities, being in the 
mood to misbehave with them, etc. is their test. There will be 
no exam while sitting inside the house. The meaning is clear 
that stay with everyone but serve your husband only. Ganga 
asked Anasuya for a year’s good deeds in exchange for 
permanently settling there, which means that Sushumna can 
be permanently awakened by one year’s Tantric 
Yogasadhana and Shivling worship. There the Atriswar Linga 
was also established permanently. To me it seems to be the 
awakened Muladhar Chakra. Chakras are in the form of 
lingas, because the same sensation as linga-based is 
experienced there. Twelve Jyotirlingas are twelve chakras 
only. The light is created there by the shining of the 
meditation picture. That meditation picture can be the form 
of Shiva, Guru, lover etc. According to Shivpuran, there are 
many lingas and upalingas, but these twelve Jyotirlingas are 
the main ones. Other lingas are called sub or upa lingas only, 
not Jyotirlingas, because the brightness of the Kundalini 
picture is felt only on the chakras. By the way, every cell of 
the body can be called a linga, because they become active 
only when Ganges water in the form of energy falls on them. 
As far as the Kundalini Shakti in the form of Ganga reaches to 
bathe, there is linga’s presence. Anyway, cerebrospinal fluid 
flows in the spinal cord, which is just like water. Many 
scientists claim that energy flows in the same way as the 
flow of a fluid. Although at the time of Sushumna awakening, 
energy flows in the form of sensationally bright line. It is 
possible that flow can occur in both ways, especially in the 
common and simple energy flow, the contribution of fluid 
flow is more. From this story it seems that any sage 
discovered Kundalini Shakti and realized it, which he told in 
the form of a myth rather than telling it directly. 


Kundalini awakening course 
seems to be attached with 
materialistic worldly degree 


| don’t know whether a scientific and thrilling event like 
Kundalini awakening was shown as strange, different from 
others, supernatural, related to religion or sect or related to 
the spirituality only. | don’t know why people consider the 
soul to be a radish grown in a neighbor’s field. The soul is 
one’s own self. The English word “self” still seems more 
accurate. The Sanskrit word Atman is also correct, because it 
is the same word used for oneself. People in other languages 
can make a mess of things. Kundalini awakening is like the 
pinnacle of physical happiness. This is like the pinnacle of 
material achievements. When a man considers it separate 
from the physical world, then he starts living isolated from 
the world, in search of some different supernatural joy or 
awakening but in reality he does not get anything. People say 
about an awakened person with wide eyes filled with surprise 
and strangeness that he is a resident of the special world of 
Babas or renunciates, away from the worldly goals. Probably 
most of the people seems like afraid of him just like someone 
is afraid of an alien. Well, it is so and also not so. It depends 
on society and culture. People of Sanatan Vedic society and 
culture may find him as their hero or lover, whereas non- 
Vedic elements may find him just opposite. The reason for 
this is that Vedic culture is closest to and favors awakening. 
Non-vedic type people don’t even understand that he has 
probably drunk the entire pot of that material pleasure 
offcourse for a moment of which they are chasing every drop. 
It seems nothing transcendental or anything like that in real 
sense. This is because they have heard it like this, they have 
been taught like this since birth. If awakening had been 
achieved by staying away from the world, then all the 
renunciate Babas would have achieved it, but | have not seen 
even a single one till date. | have read and heard about many 
Babas, but | have never heard of them experiencing 
awakening. Even talked to many Babas, they could not even 
give the definition of awakening. Imagine several climbing 


friends climbing Everest. Suddenly one of them said that he 
had reached a greater height than this in the form of Jagriti 
just by staying in the valley down, but no one would believe 
it. Everyone will say that awakening is a different subject, 
and material achievement is different. What happens from 
this is that even when a man achieves great material 
achievements, he is still not motivated to achieve awakening, 
because he has not recognized that all his material efforts 
are attempts to achieve a kind of awakening. Even after 
reaching the pinnacle of material development, he remains 
just one step away from awakening because of his foolish 
beliefs. He is thirsty like a fish in the sea. One who remains 
situated in the right belief begins to realize awakening near 
the peak of materialism, and with the help of Tantra, Yoga 
etc., he takes the final leap of one step and attains it. One 
who lives in the wrong belief of discrimination, he considers 
the end of his journey after reaching the peak of worldly 
enjoyment or development of material worldly life, and 
decides that now the matter of materialism will end and now 
the matter of spirituality will start from the beginning. 
Meaning, he keeps the incomplete degree of four out of five 
years in the box and looking at the subject of awakening of 
the fifth and last year, he says that this is a subject of 
Spirituality, what does it mean to him. After some time, he 
even forgets the four-year degree, and due to the time gap, 
he is not able to get admission in the fifth year. He is forced 
to start studying the subject of spirituality from Nursery KG. 
Imagine how much time it will take. Leaving aside the easy 
course of one year of attached awakening, he chooses the 
degree of awakening of seventeen years. By the time it’s 
earned, the man has grown old and is about to die. Then 
don’t know in which birth one will get it. It would be good if 
awakening is found while still in a young body, after that we 
can trust Lord Rama. Such narrow thinking has not come 
suddenly, it has gradually spread in the society through blind 
imitation of the old sect. Therefore, one must believe in the 
old good things, but one must also have independent 
thinking. | am not against limited fanaticism. Wherever | have 
talked about opposition to fundamentalism, it should be 
understood as opposition to extreme fundamentalism. Now 
we cannot write the word extreme everywhere. These are all 


games of words, which can easily create a mess. Some 
fanaticism is also necessary for religion. Extremism is bad. All 
inhuman acts are done out of extreme fanaticism, not limited 
or ordinary fanaticism. Due to fanaticism, man sticks firmly to 
his human rules and religion. Is religion necessary for every 
man in the world? Yes, ofcourse. Some fanaticism is 
necessary for it. If there was no fanaticism among Hindus, 
their precious Vedas and Puranas would not have been 
preserved till date, especially as they have been attacked. 
Countless social achievements of a country like culture, 
technology and teachings etc. are preserved by fanaticism 
and are handed down from generation to generation. 
Nowadays the situation is such that even the minor 
fanaticism adopted by the poor Hindus to protect themselves 
and their culture is being questioned, and the extreme 
fanaticism of many other sections is being ignored. This trick 
needs to be understood. For example for self-defense, some 
so-called fundamentalist Hindus are advocating a uniform 
civil code in the country, while a large section of Hindus, 
being deceived by other sections and being lured by some 
personal interests, are opposing them to prove themselves 
completely non-fundamentalist. This is the reason that 
despite being in majority by a huge margin, Hindus are 
divided and are not able to even protect their Sanatan 
culture, leave alone its development. Inauspicious fanaticism 
has troubled the auspicious fanaticism. It is said that 
Kundalini awakening is achieved after twelve years of 
meditation. This does not mean that sitting holding one’s 
nose for twelve years leads to awakening. This means that if 
one stays in the material world rationally for twelve years 
with the above correct beliefs, then Kundalini awakening can 
be achieved by the practice of the thirteenth year. This is just 
like if four year B.Tech degree completing students are told 
that a one year M.Tech degree is also being added to it, then 
more than half of the students will leave because they were 
not mentally prepared for it. But if the five-year 
B.Tech.M.Tech integrated degree is done from the beginning, 
then all the children can do it easily, because they have 
always been mentally prepared for it right from the 
beginning. Trust and dedication are important in every area 
of life. | did all the pilgrimages in my childhood, which is 


called Char Dham Yatra. Maybe that’s why there was 
awakening. l'Il make separate post on it if time permits. Many 
people start claiming that they have attained awakening 
after doing yoga for four days. They consider the movement 
of nerves as awakening. It is believed that doing yoga brings 
awakening, but it can take a lot of spiritual practice to reach 
the right yoga practice. That is why there are elaborate 
Spiritual processes in Sanatan Vedic religion. It is like it is 
very easy to jump out of the Earth’s outer orbit into space, 
but it takes a lot of hard work to reach there. It is a different 
matter that a sharp minded person can learn immediately 
from an experienced person, but such people are very rare. 
Faith in these pilgrimages etc. has been created in the 
scriptures. Almost all places across India are associated with 
Spiritual stories and pilgrimage. This gives divinity to all of 
those places. There is great strength in belief or faith. Only 
by wrong belief does the infinite soul become a limited world. 
When belief is straightened, the finite world returns to its true 
infinite self. Quantum science also proves that if you consider 
matter as a fragment or particle form, it will appear the 
same, and if you consider it as a monolithic or wave form, it 
will appear the same. Of course, the real form or form of 
happiness and salvation is the second type that’s wave form 
or non-dual form. | feel that the rituals of Sanatan Dharma 
are actually spirituo-biological things and actions taking place 
in the body, which are given a physical form and are shown 
in the form of physical objects and actions in the physical 
world. It has two benefits. Firstly, divinity comes into all 
worldly things and activities, due to which everything 
becomes worship. If you believe then God is there even in 
stone, if you don’t believe then God is not present anywhere. 
Secondly, they continuously have a subtle impact on the 
subconscious mind of people, due to which people turn 
towards yoga involuntarily. In ancient times, people had a lot 
of extra or surplus free time, especially in India because the 
yield of natural resources like grains was good and there was 
no technological interference or stress arising from it. It is the 
monsoon season of India. Here people would have grown a 
lot of crops during the monsoon and stored them and would 
have been comfortably consuming them throughout the year, 
because it rains here only during the monsoon season, and 


the rest of the year there is pleasant sunshine. Therefore, 
Vedas and Puranas must have been written after a lot of 
thinking so that they can be accepted in the society. There 
must have been debates on them, and then there must have 
been amendments to them. Today everyone is writing books 
on which there is neither discussion nor debate. Therefore, 
there is more doubt on their authenticity than the Vedas and 
Puranas. Not all myths can be revealed with the ordinary 
intellect. This does not mean that they are completely 
speculative or without any psychological basis. But the 
biggest message that comes from the revelations of many 
myths on this website is that all the myths of the Vedas and 
Puranas are classical, worldly bound, principled and spirituo- 
scientific. Therefore, it is good to believe because faith has 
great power. Unlike other religions or sects, Sanatan Hindu 
Dharma has not been created by any one person but has 
been watered by countless Brahmins, sages, yogis and 
philosophers through the stream of eternity. That is why it 
appears to be the most democratic religion. 


Kundalini Yoga as the story of 
demon Mahishasura killing 


The method of writing in Puranas is Vedic i.e. classical or 
social. There is decency, etiquette and discipline in their 
stories. There are limited words. Anti-social mysteries are 
also described in them in a social manner. For example, 
Muladhara is described as a dark deep pit or underworld on 
earth somewhere or the ocean. The attached thoughts of the 
wandering mind or the ego are likened to demons or animals. 
They are shown entering the pit or living there. They are 
Shown killing and harassing all living beings and gods 
including humans. Then Indra and other gods are shown 
going to Brahma and he alongwith them to the divine hero 
for help and pray for that. Then the hero of the story enters 
that pit and takes out the demons and their overlord. Fights 
them and by killing them or purifying them grants them the 
highest position of salvation. In fact, all thoughts merge in 
God only. This is the spiritual science of Kundalini Yoga. 
Meaning, God has installed Yogakundalini shakti in the body 
himself to fight ignorance. The yogi concentrates on the 
meditation image in the Muladhara chakra area. When that 
image reaches the brain through the nerves, it also brings 
with it the suppressed thoughts and emotions of the 
subconscious mind. Due to this, they get expressed in the 
mind with the feeling of witnessing and merge into the soul. 
In reality, Shakti ascends from the base, with the help of 
meditation image. The same Shakti exposes the emotions 
buried in the mind. To explain, it is said that the meditative 
image in the form of Shiva brought out with itself all the 
suppressed images in the form of demons from the pit in the 
form of Muladhar and liberated them by killing them. Shakti 
is Sleeping in Muladhar, due to which due to lack of energy in 
the brain, its Kundalini-like buried or hidden or subconscious 
or unconscious thoughts are also sleeping. It is explained that 
those thoughts also sleep in the Mooladhar. When that Shakti 
starts awakening due to strengthening of Mooladhar, it also 
starts awakening or expressing the thoughts of the brain. It is 
explained that the Kundalini Shakti of Muladhar is awakening, 
that is, the mixture of Shakti and thoughts is awakening. That 


IS why people who live longer are taking special care of their 
perineum area. | was watching the webseries Live to 100 
Years, where one of the secrets of longevity of the people of 
Okinawa, Japan was to keep their base strong through 
exercise, physical labor etc. The story is built on the base. 
God himself just make the Shakti accessible and agreeable 
and also provide favourable conditions for her waking up. 
This is according to the statement of Patanjali Yoga that while 
doing Yoga, one should remain surrendered to God and also 
worship Him because He helps in making Yoga successful. He 
has called this Ishwar Pranidhan. There is almost a similar 
trend in all the stories. Similar stories keep coming in 
between few verses or pages direct spiritual knowledge with 
changes in name and form to make all interesting. In 
Shivpuran, Shiva is shown as the hero who kills those 
demons, whereas in Vishnupuran, Vishnu is shown. The same 
non-dual principle is called by the names of different gods, 
which is the experience of awakening. The body is shown as 
the universe, and the special organs and senses are shown 
as ordinary gods. People or body cells or simple organs are 
shown as common people or public. These are all 
interconnected. 


For example, there is a story in Devibhagwat purana that a 
demon named Mahishasur was in the shape of a buffalo. 
Sometimes he would take the form of a handsome young 
man and sometimes he would become a buffalo because he 
was an impersonator. The common ignorant man is also such 
an impersonator. Sometimes he creates a beautiful 
appearance with the external garb and glitter of the attached 
thoughts of the mind, and sometimes it comes in its true and 
hidden form, which is in the form of darkness and ego. 
Sometimes he is shown fused, half buffalo and half man. This 
is like when there is depression inside a person. At that time, 
dark and blurry pictures are being formed in his mind. Or 
there is that condition of man in which he cleverly faces his 
dark state and tries to get illuminated with good thoughts. 
That demon used to torture humans and gods, killing them 
and causing pain to them. Everyone dies due to ignorance. 
Ignorance is also the cause of sorrow. He had driven away 
the gods from heaven and took charge of the governance of 


all the worlds. In reality, the gods are the representatives of 
the Supreme Soul, hence, they ensure the material progress 
of man and take him towards him i.e. towards salvation. Not 
only do they control the physical world, they also stay in the 
body and keep the body under control. But when man comes 
under the control of ego born out of ignorance, then he 
behaves arbitrarily, due to which even his material progress 
becomes cosmetic and ultimately painful, and he moves 
away from God. Heaven is the brain in which Sahasrara and 
Ajna Chakra are the main places. The brain itself is a world as 
luminous as heaven. In a knowledgeable person, god means 
the luminous non-dual feeling and by keeping him under his 
control, he makes the man’s body and mind perform 
auspicious deeds. But in an ignorant person, this demon i.e. 
darkness or duality in the form of ego takes control of the 
body and mind and makes one perform inauspicious deeds. 
Gods are still doing all the work of the body, but they do their 
work secretly in other worlds, away from heaven. In a way 
they become slaves of demons. It is like the workers in a 
state do all the work, whether the king is of their choice or of 
their dislike. If it is of their choice, they get proper respect 
and facilities, and get proper position or representation in the 
palace, if it is of their dislike, they remain like slaves. The 
king of the body is the soul, which resides in the brain. 
Through satsang or spiritual company it remains under the 
influence of gods, and through bad company it remains under 
the influence of demons. As he associates, so does he 
become. That Mahishasura expressed his desire to marry the 
goddess. The goddess played with him a lot. In the end she 
fought with him and killed him. He became free by merging 
with the goddess. An ignorant common man also wants and 
tries to do the same. When he is in the darkness of spiritual 
ignorance, his Kundalini Shakti is in Mooladhara. She wants 
to get up from there. For that he wishes for love and 
marriage with the woman. A woman like Devi does not 
accept his proposal at all. She makes him dance a lot behind 
her. Due to this, the charming image of that woman gets 
settled in the man’s mind in the form of a continuous trance. 
Gradually, all his actions and thoughts are burnt to ashes by 
that samadhi picture, and he also becomes awakened by his 
continuous natural meditation. After awakening him, the 


goddess also leaves him. The man has died in a way, 
because due to transformation his previous world comes to 
an end. Because Goddess has the biggest contribution in this 
awakening and transformation, so it was believed that he 
was killed by the goddess. Actually it seems like that too. 
That goddess seems to be both an enemy and a friend. An 
enemy because she destroyed a man’s world or killed him 
and a friend because she awakened him or liberated him by 
merging him with herself. That is why most of the demons, 
despite being enmity with the god all their life, praise and 
thank him while dying at his hands. Instead of goddess, there 
can be a god too in male form. This is the general style and 
principle of the stories of the Puranas, which applies to most 
of the mystical stories. It also seems that in other Puranas 
these have been kept more secret than Shivpuran. In most of 
the stories of Shivpuran, there are some key words or key 
sentences which help in solving the story. The reason for this 
seems to be that Shivpuran is mainly written for people 
engrossed in ecstasy and worldly illusion, whose intelligence 
is not very subtle, and who do not find the revelation of such 
stories odd or strange. Although this is a common principle of 
common household life, it is rarely experienced before 
awakening. We can also call this natural Kundalini Yoga. It is 
said in the scriptures that the one who is killed by an 
incarnation of God becomes free by merging with him. 
Probably this principle is at the core of this story also. 


Kundalini Yoga consuming 
surplus tantric power 


Friends, there is a story in the scriptures mainly the 
Shivapuran that once Devraj Indra along with Lord Brahma 
and other gods left his house with the desire to go to Kailash 
and have the darshan of Lord Shiva. Lord Shiva came to 
know about this because he is trikaldarshi or all time viewer. 
He thought of testing him. He disguised himself as an 
Avadhoot or badly posed renunciate type with matted hair 
and stood in his way. Devraj Indra asked him who he was, 
and asked him to leave the path. Also asked about the here 
about of Shiva if he was at Kailash or not. But he did not 
answer. He was asked again and again, yet he did not 
answer. At last, in anger, Indra fired his deadly weapon Vajra 
at him. At the same time Shiva came into his true form so 
that the vajra could not do any harm to him. Lord Shiva was 
very angry at Indra and was about to kill him when Brahma 
fell at his feet and started placating him. Due to this Shiva 
felt pity on him. Shiva asked him where he should vent his 
anger. Once the anger of a Purnayogi or accomplished yogi 
comes out, it never returns. Brahma asked him to pour that 
anger into the sea. From it the demon Jalandhar was born 
from the sea. 


Spiritual analysis of the above story 


Shiva means the awakened one here. Indra here means 
ordinary Tantrik or ordinary Panchamkari. The power 
obtained by him from simple tantra is not used for Kundalini 
meditation, but for the growth of worldly life. It also includes 
Kali Tantrasiddhis or black magic like Maran, Taran etc. 
Probably the use of Marana or killing Shakti by Indra has 
been called Vajraprahar, because like awakening, the basic 
source of such tantric powers also seems to be the 
Vajrashakti or Sushumna Shakti passing through the spinal 
cord. There seems no other way to attain supernatural power 
in the body than this. But it does not harm a real Tantra Yogi 
in the same way as fireflies cannot harm a lamp, on the 


contrary they can burn themselves. Sometimes, if many 
fireflies gather, they can cover the lamp a littlebit. Similarly, 
very powerful Vajra Shakti or hateful tantric Vajra Shakti 
launched by many people can also cause some harm to the 
awakened Yogi too. However, he keeps walking on the path 
of truth without caring about his own loss, but when his life is 
in danger, then anger comes out naturally for self-protection, 
it is not a common anger that is expressed deliberately, nor it 
sounds like anger. His anger may come out in a transformed 
form. Like in the form of some social reform movement or as 
a boon to someone. That anger does not harm anyone, 
because an awakened person does not harm anyone at all. 
Now, it is not known what good of the society is hidden in the 
origin of Jalandhar, but Indra was saved from destruction, 
meaning the entire creation was saved from destruction, 
because Indra is the king of the gods. Anger is man’s biggest 
enemy. Anger weakens or destroys one’s own body, and all 
the gods including Indra are situated in the universe of our 
own body. It can be said that Jalandhar is the energy of anger 
that has descended to Muladhar. This is called drinking 
anger. At that time it was drunk but later it can also come out 
of Muladhar in the form of immoral love affair. This is 
Jalandhar who had become enamored with goddess Parvati 
and Lakshmi. Only his devoted wife Vrinda saved him from 
death. This means that he had become as powerful as Shiva 
and Vishnu through the power of Tantra. He is already 
considered to be a part of Shiva. He defeated all the gods, 
meaning he was no longer under the control of the nature 
governed by the gods, and despite giving pain to everyone, 
remained happy through the power of Tantra. When Vishnu 
violated Vrinda’s modesty by deceit, she committed suicide 
through burning in the fire and the Tulsi plant grew there 
with her ashes. Tulsi is the most sacred plant of Hindu 
religion which can be found growing in the courtyard of 
almost every Hindu family. It is a storehouse of medicinal and 
Spiritual properties. The meaning is clear that a devoted 
woman is superior to all types of human beings and should 
be present in every family. Jalandhar city of Punjab is named 
after this demon. There is also a temple of Vrinda here. In 
fact, the wife plays a big role in the success of a tantra yogi. 
If the wife does not cooperate, even the gods do not 


cooperate. Failing in this path of salvation is considered 
death. In reality, the extra tantric power of a meditative yogi 
gets spent in Kundalini meditation, due to which he has not 
any strength remaining to think bad or do bad. But those who 
use tantric practices and techniques but do not do proper 
meditation, their excess tantric energy remains accumulated 
in the body. Only it can make them do wrong. Call it black 
magic or sorcery or posing bad eye or creating ruckus by 
eating and drinking or keeping jihadist type mentality in local 
language. It would not be an exaggeration to say that many 
organisations, nations, religions or sects have been using this 
excess or uncontrolled Tantric energy for centuries for their 
illegal and immoral growth. Even demons were born from 
this, although they also died from this. It depends on the 
method of use. Energy has to be released. Anyway, Shiva is 
having fun. Meaning he is happy with himself. This means 
that he possesses all the qualities within himself as per his 
need. That is why they are called ghostly, because they also 
accept dark Tamoguna when needed. Perhaps this is how the 
concept of Tantrik Panchamakar originated. Others depend 
on each other for balance of basic qualities or gunas. Some 
people always remain in state of Satoguni, such as Vishnu, 
some in Tamoguni, such as Asuras or demons and animals 
and still others in Rajoguni, such as Brahma and Indra. These 
three types of people remain dependent on each other. 
Therefore, they avoid angering or disturbing each other as 
much as possible. Especially people with good qualities or 
satoguna, because it’s the weakest, and it needs both the 
other gunas even for its sustenance. But Shiva does not care 
about anyone. He is completely capable in his own right. That 
is why he’s not in a mood to forgive Indra, but it has to be 
done for the public good, not to fulfill his selfishness, because 
he does not need anyone. The state of awakening cannot be 
called Satoguni, although it is achieved by abundance of 
Satoguna. Of course, there is a light like good quality in it, 
but it is different from the common worldly good quality. It 
also has the appearance of Tamoguna and Rajoguna, but 
they also seem different from worldly gunas. It cannot even 
be called a mixture of all three qualities, of course one has to 
take help of them to describe it, and it feels like a mixture of 
them, but according to the scriptures it is not even a mixture 


of them. Perhaps that is why it has been called Trigunatit or 
devoid of any Guna. It is like if lemon, sugar and salt are 
mixed in equal quantity in water then that water will appear 
plain but in reality it is not pure plain water. Similarly, if all 
the three gunas remain equal then that state will appear to 
be trigunateet but in reality it is not a pure trigunateet or 
nirgun state of the soul. Perhaps because of this deception 
many Spiritual leaders consider themselves God. It is for this 
reason that the experience of awakening does not seem 
different in nature from the worldly experience. But in reality 
there is a world of difference between the two. While the 
experience of awakening is like pure water, the worldly 
experience is like water mixed with salt, lemon and sugar. 
The ratio of all three keeps changing every moment. When it 
becomes equal, then light and happiness like awakening is 
felt. This mainly happens due to the balance of Idapingala i.e. 
Yinyang through Yoga. It gives us a feeling of a state of 
awakening. This inspires one to achieve real awakening. The 
meaning from these talks is clear that the so-called Tamogun 
of Shiva does not hinder but helps in his awakening. Although 
it is not Tamogun but it looks like Tamogun. If it happens 
then it is of good nature. Perhaps this happens by eliminating 
the ego of good qualities or Satoguna. It is also said in the 
scriptures that awakening from good qualities is achieved 
only when the egoistic feeling towards it is destroyed. Due to 
destruction of ego, despite having good qualities, one does 
not focus on these much. It is because of the lack of attention 
or attachment towards it that it appears to be like the state 
of Tamo Guna. All this means Shiva’s Tamoguna is virtual, 
not real. 


Kundalini Yoga based Hindu 
Mythology is a source of 
inspiration for the whole world 


Friends, although reviews of this series have already 
appeared online. But everyone has their own perspective. | 
watched it with my family. The children also sat with us to 
watch it without any provocation. This is the biggest proof of 
its quality. Nowadays children have no leisure from game 
videos or Hollywood masala. Although it is a different matter 
that we kept applauding every scene, perhaps that also 
inspired the children. Nowadays this is the way to make 
children aware of their values. G5 seems to be playing a 
somewhat good role in this. | had the good fortune to visit 
Char Dham pilgrimage at the age of just three years. At that 
time when medical science was not so developed and 
medical facilities were also not easily available. | had also 
contracted typhoid during the journey, it is not known 
whether it was cured by my own immunity or by medicine or 
by the grace of gods. No train reservation was available at 
that time. Imagine traveling almost the entire country, that 
too in a general bogie. At many places, people in the crowd 
started sitting on our laps. | remember running alone into the 
river bed and taking a bath in a small pit in Gaya, Bihar, 
when I was lost, or getting my foot stuck in a hole near the 
seat of a standing train, when a kind passenger miraculously 
pulled it out, | remember it all. Be it spending the night 
sleeping on the platform of the railway station in 
Changalpetu or watching English children playing drums in 
Dwarka, | remember everything. There, | used to gather 
Shells collected from the sea and drop them while roaming 
around Lord Krishna of Dwarka and muttering something. | 
also remember that the priests were overwhelmed with 
devotion seeing that. For me, it was a fun game while 
watching others. At one place, when we were staying in a big 
Dharamshala that’s a spiritual guest house, | also remember 
that to make me laugh, an elder brother from the nearby 
house used to throw something like a pumpkin at the 
monkey. That’s all | remember. Yes, in Gaya a married 


woman was being taken towards the river after being 
decorated like a queen. | found her to be a real queen and 
very beautiful. There is much that lies ahead as too faint 
memory to be written or spoken. Maybe that’s why | liked 
this series. Visiting pilgrimage sites while sitting at home. The 
places of pilgrimage | visited would definitely be included in 
it, that is why | felt a sense of belonging. Childhood values 
are very important. Nowadays it has become so easy to 
travel across the country. Still, where do people go and 
where do they take their children? How this will inculcate 
values in them and how Sanatan Dharma or Indian culture 
will be protected is a matter to be thought about. Both the 
words are synonyms of each other. Indian culture is 
incomplete without Sanatan Dharma, and Sanatan Dharma is 
incomplete without Indian culture. We are talking about the 
web series Sarvam-Shaktimayam recently released on Zee 
Five. In this, a curious seeker comes from America and in the 
end he considers faith as everything and writes a book on it. 
A family from my country goes in search of peace, and gets 
the peace it wants. Whoever wants whatever, he gets it. 
Some have scientific findings and some have experience. The 
series only has ten episodes and each episode is about half 
an hour long, meaning a total of five hours, equivalent to two 
big movies. We saw it all in one day, and we enjoyed it so 
much. By the way, the next day my wife had planned to go to 
Khatu Shyam and Pushkar with a group of women, so she 
finished it, so that there is a good mood for the pilgrimage 
and there is no suspense in the mind. 


Our mother was very spiritual. Of course, as a solution to 
some children related problems at a young age, she made 
clay moulded Shivlingas every day for a whole year in the 
morning, worshiped them during the day and washed them in 
the evening. After that, she kept making this rule every year 
throughout the month of Shravan that’s the rainy month 
throughout her life. | believe that most of the Hindus remain 
limited to these basic spiritual rituals throughout their life 
and are unable to give the liberating momentum to their 
Sadhana which can lead to awakening and liberation. But this 
is not the fault of spiritual tradition. The traditions are world 
famous. Many western people are also becoming crazy about 


them and adopting them. Recently | was sitting in a 
neighboring temple. Just then the kirtan that’s spiritual music 
started there. The women were singing very well. | closed my 
eyes, kept my head and back straight and started clapping 
vigorously along with the beat of the bhajan. Khechari Mudra 
was performed by keeping the tongue close to the palate. 
With meditation the Kundalini Shakti started rotating very 
well with the spasm of the chakras. There was a sound as 
well as a sensation due to the collision of the palms. It was 
also helping in the descent of Kundalini and also in its 
manifestation at the heart chakra. It is clear that probably 
the rest of the devotees were engaged in Easy Going Way for 
temporary peace of mind, but | was trying to give Muktigami 
velocity i.e. escape velocity to Kundalini. When the mind is 
satisfied with spirituality then it feels like to do some material 
progress and vice versa. Seeing this, | think that people of 
Western countries once lived in India or Asia or were in touch 
with it and therefore were connected to the spiritual 
traditions of it. Later they went to western countries like 
Europe etc. 


YMCA, a Christian organisation is also teaching yoga along 
with fitness classes. Steve Jobs the founder of 
apple wrote how ‘Autobiography of a Yogi’ influenced him. 
Mark Zuckerberg spent time at Neem Karoli Baba Ashram. 
Larry Page, founder of Google, Jeff Skoll co-founder of E-bay 
and other leading business leaders visited the Ashram of this 
guru, a devotee of God Hanuman, to find purpose in their life. 
Beatles of the 70’s and also the Hollywood of today is not 
escaping from this mythical concept. From Julia Roberts to 
Will Smith, Oppenheimer and many quantum physicists 
such as Heisenberg, Bohr, Schordinger etc. are 
influenced by Hinduism. CERN institute near Geneva have 
statue of nataraja, a mythical dancer. 14 top German 
universities are teaching Sanskrit and European universities 
are getting higher demands. Joseph Campbell, the famous 
mythologist of the last century was well influenced by hindu 
pauranik mythology. Carl Sagan, the well known astro- 
physicist was also influenced by it. most followed spiritual 
teachers of the Christian world today, such as Eckhart Tolle, 
Mike Singer, Wayne Dyer, Stephen Wolpert (Ram Dass) and 


many others are also deep believers of Hinduism and 
Buddhism teachings. Lisa Miller had once stated that ‘We 
(Christians) are all Hindus now’. 


Hindus under attack: a weekly 
roundup of hate crimes, 
persecution, and discrimination 
against Hindus 


Friends, in the incidents like present scenario of Israil-Hamas 
conflict, the common fanatic or extremist factor responsible 
for such incidents was always ignored. Had it been attended 
and dealt sternly as being voiced out by Hindus since the 
time immemorial ago mainly by those belonging to India aka 
Bharat and its neighbouring nations, it wouldn’t have become 
so much complicated and uncontrollable today. It’s still little 
time left if all nations worldwide take a firm step by taking 
cognizance of its root cause and making strict international 
laws in UNO to save the humanity from it otherwise it will be 
too late. Just as it can not be curbed by one nation alone 
today, the same way it will be out of control even for the 
entire world if it’s delayed more. Just as Google CEO 
addressed to avoid anti-Semitism, he should had also added 
avoiding anti-hinduism alongwith as both are equally affected 
since the ages even the later more. Although this article from 
Hindupost.in is not directly related to this blog, but | found it 
informative and eye opening so sharing it. Moreover, 
Kundalini Yoga is directly related to Hinduism aka Sanatan 
Dharma. 


Attacks on Hindus and Hindu Dharma, both in Bharat and 
overseas, are frequent and unrelenting. In many regions of 
the world, this persecution is like a genocide slowly unfolding 
before our eyes. For decades, the world has ignored the 
actual depth and breadth of these attacks, driven by 
disturbing anti-Hindu bigotry. From murders, forced 
conversions, land grabs, assault on festivals, desecration of 
temples and murtis, hate speech, and sexual violence to 
institutionalized & legal discrimination, Hindus are facing an 
increasing assault on their very existence along with an 
unprecedented Hindu hatred. 


In this weekly summary for the period from 08 October to 14 
October 2023, we hope to provide a snapshot of such crimes 
and hopefully awaken more people around the world to this 
human rights crisis: 


https://hindupost.in/dharma-religion/hindus-under-attack- 


roundup-week-151/? 
utm_source=mailpoet&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign= 
hindupost-daily-newsletter_6 


Kundalini yoga one benefits 
so many 


Friends, now the time has come to create a global religion by 
taking the scientific and humanitarian aspects of all the 
religions. Well, this topic is beyond the scope of this blog, so 
we do not want to go into it in depth. Recently, | had written 
a short article on Yoga for my daughter for a university 
program, | am presenting it here in a little detail. 


Yoga is made up of breath, power, movement, and 
meditation. We will study these four in some detail. 


Breath is life, life is breath. Friends, breath controls the entire 
body including the mind. And yoga controls the breath. Rich 
is not he who eats and drinks, but rich is he who breathes. 
Through yoga, breathing is focused on various chakras of the 
body, thereby providing them with adequate oxygen. Real 
breathing is deep and feels good to the entire body. One 
enjoys taking it. It feels like giving satisfaction. Body 
movements like muscle contraction is also associated with it. 
After holding the breath for a while, the body begins to feel 
cramps. When paying attention to the whole body, they feel 
deeper, especially in the stomach. When holding the breath 
becomes unbearable, such a breath comes out. For some 
time it keeps the breaths as Yoga breaths. Then that process 
has to be repeated. No matter how much you keep taking 
fast breaths, you do not get complete satisfaction; on the 
contrary, fatigue also increases and the mind also gets 
distracted and wandering. 


Our body operates on energy or shakti. And Shakti is 
controlled by Yoga. With yoga, we can concentrate energy on 
different parts of the body as per need. This prevents much 
burden on the organs, due to which they remain healthy. 
When meditation is done on a particular chakra by holding 
the breath, then a spasm is felt along with pleasure there. 
Perhaps this is the Shakti which is being going to the chakra. 
This is called the breath being concentrated on the chakra. It 


is also said that Prana and Apana are joining together here. 
Prana is the breath of the upper part of the body and Apana 
is the breath of the lower part. That is why Chakra is also 
called Sangam Sthal at many places. The confluence point is 
where two oppositely flowing rivers meet. 


Our life is also affected by the mobility of the body. While 
necessary mobility is beneficial, unnecessary mobility is also 
harmful. Yogasana controls the mobility of the body and 
prevents power’s misuse. 


Meditation or dhyana has great importance in our life. Quality 
comes only by working with concentration that’s pinpointed 
dhyana or ekagrata in Hindi. With efficiency in work, a person 
starts making all-round development rapidly. That is why the 
word meditation or dhyana or carefully is associated with 
every work, like walking carefully, reading carefully, playing 
carefully etc. The practice of meditation develops through 
yoga. Meaning that life develops through yoga. 


Friends, by getting all the above benefits from yoga, the body 
itself remains healthy. One gets sufficient oxygen i.e. vital air 
through breathing. With power that’s shakti all his organs 
function properly. Necessary mobility maintains flexibility in 
the body. With meditation, the power gets concentrated at 
one place instead of getting scattered here and there, due to 
which it shows more effect. A healthy mind resides only in a 
healthy body. By having a healthy mind, our nature becomes 
balanced, in which there is proper participation of both 
Spirituality or religiosity and materialism or worldliness. 
Therefore friends, no matter what happens, yoga should be 
done always and every day. 


Yoga wins 


Kundalini Yoga can make 
understand the psychology of a 
cow lover named Hassan from 
the Iranian film Gaav or the Cow 


Friends, recently watched an Iranian film named Gaav, the 
Cow, which is available on ‘Old Films Revival Project’ named 
channel on YouTube. In it, a man named Hasan falls so 
deeply in love with the cow that after its death, he first starts 
seeing her in its shed, and then he starts behaving 
completely like that cow. This appears like Kundalini Yoga in 
theory. ‘Kund’ means dark well which arose as a depression 
due to the death of a cow. ‘Kundalini’ means mental picture 
of a cow. It was repeatedly attacking his Sahasrara chakra 
rising up from the darkness of his Muladhar and making him 
look like a mad Baba. The literal meaning of Kund is well or 
pit. The pit is always dark. Kundalini means a mental image 
in its limited or contracted form like the coil of a snake. The 
whole mind is widespread, which reaches till the infinity of 
God. But its single image is very limited. Meaning that just as 
a long snake coils and shrinks itself, the infinitely vast mind is 
compressed to the size of a lonely mental image, during the 
concentrated meditation. That is also called meditation 
image. Now there are many such things which shrink their 
expanded form, then why only the example of snake was 
given. There are two main reasons for this. Firstly, that image 
gets awakened by passing through the Sushumna Nadi that’s 
likened to a hooded snake. Secondly, it is meditated in a dark 
environment of loneliness or solitude or absence i.e. likened 
to a pit just like a white dot is best visible on dark 
background. The extreme solitude of the crematorium is also 
like a pit, where Lord Shiva meditates. The pit is the form of 
Muladhar. That is why it is described at many places in the 
Scriptures that a certain demon or a yogi worshiped and 
meditated on the favorite deity or guru in a certain pit. The 
image meditated in the same crater-like Muladhar has been 
given the scientific and short name ‘Kundalini’. This single 
word describes Yoga in detail. Now in the said film, that cow 


lover named Hasan was probably not able to give enough 
strength to his cow form Kundalini, hence he became like a 
madman in the eyes of the world. However, he had become 
completely identified with the mental picture of the cow and 
hence behaved like it. This is like a Samadhi, but it must 
reach awakening. | don’t know if this is a real story filmed, or 
just pure fiction, but the topic is interesting. The real problem 
is how to reach the end. Until the meditation picture awakens 
in a person’s mind, he needs maximum solitude and 
sufficient energy, so that the common people do not think of 
him otherwise or as a joke. After awakening, everything is 
understood and one becomes satisfied. Even if you keep 
playing drums in front of him, he doesn’t care much. After 
awakening, Dhyanachitra aka meditation image gradually 
calms down and leaves the man behind. First, it sticks to the 
man’s mind like a leech and keeps sucking his energy. Many 
people go crazy remembering their dead relatives. Some 
devotees deliberately meditates on his beloved deceased 
Guru and after reaching the end, they awaken him. Even if 
many people are not able to awaken it, they take many 
benefits from it by keeping it under control, and hoist the flag 
of their material and spiritual progress in the world. The 
same knife gives different results when used in different 
ways and for different purposes. 


Kundalini Shakti assisted 
Goddess Bhagwati creates the 
entire universe 
including Brahma-Vishnu 


Happy Navratri festival to all friends 


Friends, the description of creation is almost the same in all 
the Puranas. Everyone considers their own deity as supreme. 
Meaning, in Vishnu Purana, Vishnu is considered favourable, 
in Shiv Purana, Shiva is considered favourable, and in Devi 
Purana, Goddess Bhagwati is considered favourable. There is 
a story in Shiva Purana that Shiva was alone, although 
complete in himself. Just like for a fun, once a desire arose in 
his mind to make himself into two. Therefore, he manifested 
His body in two bodies, Shiva and Parvati. Then from Shiva 
and Parvati, man and nature aka Prakriti (woman) were born 
respectively. Original Nirgun Shiva asked both of them 
through Akashvani aka sky voice to perform penance. When 
both of them asked for a place to do penance, Nirgun Shiva 
created the city of Kashi inside his own form. Due to their 
penance, many streams of water emerged from their bodies, 
which filled the entire void. Nothing was visible at that time. 
When Vishnu in the male form nodded his head to see that 
surprise, the gem fell down from his ear. It became 
Manikarnika Tirtha or pilgrimage. When the city of Kashi 
(Panchkoshatmika/five kosha in area) started sinking in 
water, Shiva established it on his trident. After that Vishnu 
slept there with his wife named Prakriti. Then, on the orders 
of Shankar, Brahma appeared from his navel. Then, with the 
permission of Shiva, he created a wonderful creation. He 
created fourteen worlds. The expansion of this universe is 
fifty crore yojanas in area. Thinking that how will | get the 
beings bound by karma in the universe, Shiva kept Kashi 
away from the universe. Shiva established his salvation- 
giving Linga named Avimukta there. Even after completion of 
one day of Brahma, that Kashi is not destroyed. At that time 


Shiva wears it on his trident. When Brahma re-creates 
creation, he re-establishes Kashi. 


Explanation of the above story 


The initial part of the story itself is descriptive. A man and a 
woman will marry and think of building a house only if they 
have the space to do so. The basic requirement is space. 
They can also add resources and assets later. Asking them 
for marriage is asking them for penance. Marriage is also a 
Yagya, which we can consider as an initiation ceremony for 
the asceticism of a householder. His father etc. gave him a 
piece of land to establish his household or rather gave him a 
place in his earthly world. That is Kashi given by the Supreme 
Father. He is the form of Shiva, because everything is 
Shivamay or Shiva form. Anyway, everyone has a sense of 
self or ego attached to their land and property. They do 
penance there, that is, keeping in mind the auspicious idea of 
world development, they do lovemaking, dating etc. among 
themselves. Due to this both of them get immersed in love. 
Water is also a form of juice. Love has been compared to 
water. Water all around, means love only love. Lovers see 
nothing but love. The void is filled meaning the state of 
depression is filled with love. When a man sees this with 
surprise, an idea arises in his mind to do something, which 
means he starts developing some practical intelligence. This 
is shown in the story that due to the gem falling from his ear, 
Manikarnika becomes a pilgrimage site. Pilgrim because 
immense love is mixed in his behavior, intelligence or 
creation, due to which purity, divinity and intimacy remain in 
him and his creation. Still, their love kept on increasing, due 
to which they started forgetting their daily routine due to 
love madness. They are not even able to remember where 
they are, what time it is and what they have to do. It is said 
this way that the city of Kashi started drowning in water. 
Then his worldly inclination returned by remembering Shiva. 
Trishul or trident is a symbol of three qualities, and worldly 
life is also basically three qualities or gunas in nature. Then, 
with the inspiration of elders and gurus and their instinct, 
they started sleeping together to have children. Then the 


woman became pregnant. Foetus is also in the form of 
Vishnu. He was also situated in water, because the womb is 
filled with water. Vishnu was said to be sleeping in Kshirsagar 
or milk dessert ocean. The water of the womb is also full of 
nutrition like kheer that’s a dessert made of milk and rice 
which nurtures the child. That can also be called love interest 
between mother and her son. It can also be called the city of 
Kashi because on it or because of it, the mother does 
penance for the creation of her son, that is, she endures the 
great pain of pregnancy. During sleep, both of them sleep 
together. Only then does the fetus, connected to the 
umbilical cord, start growing and takes the shape of a human 
being. It is called the Lotus because all the chakras are 
shown as lotus, especially the Sahasrara Chakra, which is the 
largest lotus with a thousand petals. When the brain 
develops, the mind i.e. Brahma is born on it. In the mind, 
strange scenes, thoughts and experiences keep developing in 
the form of the universe. Readers may have a doubt that 
Vishnu was called the father and not the son in the womb. So 
its meaning is that in the scriptures the son has been called 
the father’s form, that is why the son is also addressed as the 
father’s self. It has been said that even after the destruction 
of the universe, the city of Kashi remains the same, which 
means that even if a man dies, the womb of the mother 
remains the same. After the birth of the child, the uterus 
shrinks and returns to its original form ready for the next 
fetus form universe to form. It is probably said that with the 
destruction of the universe it becomes situated on Shiva’s 
trident. This means the triple form in the state of equilibrium, 
because in such a situation nature remains present in its 
original form, but does not do any work in the universe. That 
womb is the best land of penance and the land of liberation, 
because there one has to endure hardships, but it is there 
that the sanskars are imparted, which in the future help a 
person attain salvation. That is why it is said that a woman 
should do spiritual fellowship and good deeds during 
pregnancy. There are many such examples in history, when a 
man had done spiritual practice while still in the womb. 
Uterus can also be called a dark place like a pit. Darkness is 
considered to be the form of Mooladhar. From there the 
power goes directly to Sahasrara for awakening. Doing 


penance in the cremation ground by Shiva is like doing 
sadhana in the pit. Ravana also got the darshan of Shiva by 
worshiping him in the pit. If the Kundalini Shakti is 
concentrated there, then the subsequent liberation of the 
fetus is certain or immediate and special. A means firm or 
immediate, and Vi means special. That is why it is said that 
Avimukt Linga is situated there, whose bath should be done 
with Ganga water i.e. Kundalini Shakti and one should 
definitely continue meditating and worshiping it. Probably it 
is around the navel. Probably, the sound made by the 
movement of the fetus in water reaches the ear and is as 
pleasant as the tinkling of a gem. Because she feels it from 
within, hence her name is Manikarnika. Meaning, like a gem, 
it flows through the white bones and reaches the ear, and not 
through the air. 
Then it is said that whatever creature (even insect) is born or 
dies in Kashi, definitely attains salvation. It is said 
everywhere in the scriptures that only man has the right to 
salvation. Meaning, the creature that comes into the womb of 
a human being will definitely be freed, provided it remains a 
human being. Then came the question of dying. This seems 
tantric to me. There is a child in the womb, and by nature he 
is as free as innocent Shankar. One who remains non-dual 
like a child while fulfilling all the worldly duties correctly, will 
definitely become free even at the time of death. The energy 
of the sexual tantra does not go to the birth of a child but to 
awakening. Meaning, in the same Kashi where a child is born, 
an awakened person is also born in the same Kashi. An 
awakened person also dies in it. A common man can die in 
any ordinary condition. ‘Ka’ means water, and shayan is 
formed from ‘shi’. Meaning sleeping in water. It is Lord 
Vishnu who sleeps on Sheshnag. It seems that Kashi is a 
metaphor for something like a uterus. 


It is said that the goddess first created water in the void sky. 
Then Lord Vishnu woke up with the power of Goddess 
Bhagwati who was sleeping on Sheshnag in the water. 
Actually Vishnu is the sleeping Kundalini Shakti i.e. 
unmanifested soul. When a woman is pregnant, the fetus 
appears in the water of her womb. He takes the form of a 
developed humanoid little child, and starts experiencing 


everything, i.e. becomes awake. It is connected to the 
woman’s body through the umbilical cord. In fact, the true 
form of man is like a snake with its hood raised. The same 
female form has been shown. It is said that it used to protect 
the snake Vishnu. What protection does a mother not give to 
her womb? In Devi Purana, Devi has been shown to be 
greater than Vishnu and the creator of the universe. It has 
been argued that who would willingly take birth in a woman’s 
womb, because the womb is a prison, and the problems 
faced in it are no less than the tortures of hell. It is the 
goddess who forces him to be conceived. Meaning, the 
Purana itself is making it clear that Vishnu is a fetus, Brahma 
is his mind born from him, and the various thoughts in him 
are the creation full of diversity. Along with this, the mother 
who brought that child into the womb is Goddess Bhagwati. 
By dying in the nearby shrine of Prayagraj, one attains 
auspicious worlds like heaven etc. ‘Pra’ means abundant and 
‘Yag’ means Yajna or Yagya. Yagya is called virtuous action. 
Prayag may possibly be referred to Manipur Chakra. Because 
here Yagya is said to be performed through sacrifice of lives, 
grains etc digested in belly. Anyway, hunger comes from the 
stomach itself, and good deeds are done by the movement of 
its muscles. Meaning, deep and long yogic breath comes 
from the stomach, and with this type of breath, sins are burnt 
away and virtuous deeds are accomplished. Shallow, fast and 
chest breathing increases mental defects like anger, due to 
which sins increase instead of being destroyed. The name 
Manikarnika may also be because when the fetus moves or 
nods its head, its sound can be heard by placing the ear in 
the navel area. Manipur Chakra is called Tirtha as mentioned 
above. Now it may be that all parts of this analysis are 
correct. Even if nothing happens, it is still beneficial to 
remember the story. 


Two demons named Madhu and Kaitabh, who were born from 
the earwax of Narayan, had threatened the existence of 
Vedapuran i.e. consciousness or knowledge of the entire 
universe. Then the Goddess gave power to Vishnu and got 
him killed. In fact, when a person has earwax of infection, he 
keeps his head tilted to one side due to pain etc. The 
deviation of the fetus’s head sideways has been called 


earwax. Due to this, he is not able to come out of the uterus 
when the time comes, and his life is in danger. Then he tries 
to straighten his head with the power obtained from his 
mother’s blood. With the power of the mother, the uterus 
also helps him in this by exerting force. Due to this he 
becomes erect, meaning Madhukaitbha dies and the child is 
born, meaning the universe is saved. 


Kundalini Yoga helps to be 
aware of the present moment 


Friends, in a recent post we were talking about how a man 
named Hasan had become a cow. Actually his cow had died 
behind his back when he had gone to the market. People, 
fearing that he might be shocked by this grief, because he 
loved her very much, told him that she had run away 
somewhere and was being searched for. Meaning he did not 
see the dead body of his cow. That’s why she settled in his 
mind. Perhaps for this reason, even after their death, famous 
Sages or Babas are buried with respect in the form of a living 
man sitting on a seat in a happy posture, so that their 
disciples and devotees always feel them alive in their minds 
and can even meditate on them. That is why only the living 
state of great men and incarnations remains dominant. 
Death of incarnations is not considered at all. They are shown 
going to the divine world along with their body, like Lord 
Rama or Krishna. Even today someone is shown moving 
around in a subtle form like Parashurama. Well, let’s move on 
to the topic of this post. 


By taking long, deep and slow breaths, problems like nausea, 
feeling like vomiting etc. completely disappear. | learned this 
formula in merry go round aka Chandol and while sitting in 
the bus. First hold your breath. Go to the tolerable last limit 
and take such advanced breaths in and out, paying attention 
to them. The breath will feel very sweet and also satisfying. 
With this the Kundalini picture will also start shining which 
will remove the darkness of Tamoguna. The defects arising 
from that darkness like fear, worry, remorse, disorientation 
and restlessness of the mind etc. will also be removed. That 
is why it is said that sins are destroyed by Pranayam. When 
one feels suffocated by deliberately stopping the breath, it is 
tantamount to death. Death is the biggest punishment for 
sin. If this punishment is given, what else is left? Perhaps this 
is the spiritual principle behind it. 


Holding the breath helps to settle into the present. Anyway, 
to observe the wandering thoughts closely, the breathing has 
to be slowed down and it should be imperceptible. It is like 
breathing stops in a fearful state or when a person walks 
quietly and holds his breath to hide himself. By holding the 
breath, a person comes to the present and becomes alert 
due to which he can deal with any adverse situation 
immediately. The same principle is used to increase 
awareness of the present by holding the breath. Holding the 
breath and concentrating on something is Kundalini Yoga. 
This shows that the practice of Kundalini Yoga helps in 
becoming established in the present. With practice, there 
comes a time when the breath stops on its own, after 
exhaling normally, meaning not forcefully. It is called Keval 
Kumbhaka. Meaning, it is neither Puraka Kumbhaka i.e. 
Kumbhaka done after inhaling nor Rechak Kumbhaka i.e. 
Kumbhaka done after exhalation. This gives a feeling of 
relaxation and relief from the burden of world or burden of 
breathing. With the completion of Keval-Kumbhaka, 
breathing starts to become so quiet and shallow that it is not 
even felt by oneself, leave alone its sound. Probably, in this 
state, there is a divine feeling of Sushumna opening 
completely and the power rising in it, as written by JJ Semple, 
an American yogi. He greatly admired the Indian yogi Shri 
Gopikrishna and had also met him. 


By paying attention to the present, the light thoughts that 
come to mind also get connected to the present and become 
like it. Meaning, just as the present experiences are just pure 
experiences without any judgment or decision, in the same 
way the thoughts of the mind also remain just pure 
experiences, which cannot be binding. At the same time, just 
as the thoughts of the mind are felt within oneself, in the 
same way the physical world of the present also begins to be 
felt within, because there is no difference in the nature of 
both types of experiences. Double benefit. The insider helps 
the outsider, and the outsider helps the insider. With this 
double benefit, every kind of experience becomes subtle and 
free from judgment i.e. test-comparison etc. The same 
happens by listening to music, and that too easily. That is 
why music sounds pleasant. But along with the music, one 


should also pay attention to the current events around, not 
just the music, so that when the music ends, one does not 
feel a strange absence of it or develop an attachment 
towards it. 
Eckhart Tolle’s organization writes on the awareness of this 
present and considers it to be the only easiest door to 
liberation. Its trading method is also very good, psychological 
and user friendly. Pay the fee for one year, if you don't like it 
then return the money. Most of the people do not withdraw 
the money because they get some knowledge and benefit. It 
is the result of spiritual fraud that people have lost faith in it. 
Money back offers are given to build this trust. 


Kundalini awakening kills 
demons and ghosts hidden 
inside the ocean in entirety 


Friends, there is a story in Shivpuran that due to the boon of 
Parvati, there was a demon named Daruki who was 
immersed in ego. Her husband Daruk was also very powerful. 
She used to torment good men by taking many demons with 
him. She had a forest on the shore of the Western Sea, which 
was very prosperous. Daruki had given the responsibility of 
taking care of it to her husband Daruk. People prayed to the 
sages to drive them away. So the sages said that if these 
demons continue to kill creatures on earth and destroy the 
Yagya, then they themselves will also die. Hearing the curse, 
the gods took advantage of the opportunity and started 
fighting with them. Fearing the curse, the demons thought 
that even if they fight, they will be killed, and if they don’t 
fight, what will they eat, they will still be killed. Then Daruki 
remembered the boon granted by Parvati that she could go 
wherever she wanted with her forest and kin. On the advice 
of the demons, she blew up the entire forest and went on the 
water in the middle of the ocean. Seeing that incident, it 
seemed as if the mountains were flying in the sky with wings. 
Due to fear of the curse of Sage Aurva, those demons did not 
come to the land. Rather, they kept roaming in water only. 
They would bring people sitting on boats to their city, put 
them in jail and even kill some. Even while staying there, 
they continued to torment people in some way or the other. 
Just as people used to remain afraid when they were on land 
earlier, the same now started to remain when they were in 
water also. Once she came out of her city located in the 
demonic waters and stopped the way to earth to torment 
people. At the same time, many beautiful boats filled with 
people arrived from all around. Pleased with that, the 
demons soon caught them. They tied them in strong chains 
and put them in jail. There they were also reprimanded by 
demons, due to which they remained unhappy. Among those 
people, a devotee of Shiva named Supriya used to perform 
Shiva puja and used to teach it to all the other people and 


make them do it. Shiva also used to directly accept his 
offering material, but even Vaishya did not know this. One 
day the servant of the demon Daruk saw Lord Shiva directly 
in front of the Vaishya. When Daruk asked the merchant, he 
denied knowing. Daruk ordered him to be killed. When the 
demons came running to kill him, he started chanting 
Shivkirtan continuously. Due to this, Shiva appeared from 
that pit i.e. prison with a beautiful temple with four doors all 
around. Shiva killed all the demons by giving Pashupat 
weapon to Vaishya. Then he gave a boon that in this forest, 
the religions of all the four varnas will remain stable and 
there will be only devotees of Shiva here, there will never be 
any Tamoguni. Saddened by this, Daruki went crying to 
Parvati. Parvati quarreled with Shiva to protect those 
demons. With this Shiva told her to then do whatever she e 
wanted. Then Parvati told Shiva that your promise or boon 
would be implemented at the end of the era. Till then the evil 
world will remain. And said that this Daruki Rakshasi is my 
power, she is the strongest among all the Rakshasas, she 
should rule over the Rakshasas. These demons’ wives will 
give birth to their sons here. All of them together will reside 
in this forest with my permission. Then Shiva said that | will 
also reside in this forest to protect my devotees. The one who 
will see me lovingly while being established in his varna- 
ashrama-dharma, will be a Chakravarti king. Then after the 
end of Kaliyuga and the beginning of Satyayuga, the famous 
king named Veersen with his big army will become very 
mighty due to my devotion, and will come here and see me, 
and as a result will become the Chakravarti king. In this way, 
Shiva and Parvati, having fun and enjoying the pastimes, 
settled there. Shiva became famous by the name of 
Nageshwar Jyotirlinga and Parvati became famous by the 
name Nageshwari. 


investigative analysis of myth 


Daruk demon is the ego. His demonic wife Daruki is intellect. 
Many ideas arise from it. They are the demon children of 
these two. These keep people wandering here and there, 
make them worried, create fear etc. in them and create 


many vices. Many even die due to these defects. The west 
direction is the back part of the body. Forest is the area of 
the brain filled with hair, which is spread more towards the 
back of the body. Sagar aka ocean is the Muladhar area as 
both are situated at the lowest place. This mental confusion 
spreads in the brain itself. It is the ego that protects the body 
along with it. People go to gurus and sages for peace of this 
mess. The sage says that if the mental confusion continues 
to distract people like this, then how will they be able to 
work. And if they do not work, what will they earn and what 
will they eat? Due to this, if there are no people who become 
victims, then this mental mess which has become a hunter, 
whom it will eat to sustain life. Reassured by this, people 
keep this mental confusion under control and start doing 
their work. It is said in this way that knowing the opportunity, 
the gods started a war with those demons, because people 
are able to work only through the senses situated in the body 
in the form of gods. If this mental confusion keeps re- 
emerging from the mindset of yoga or meditation, then there 
occurs a witnessing of it itself, because people are busy in 
their work. This will itself destroy it. If it does not continue to 
appear, then how can it maintain its existence, that is, how 
can it remain alive? It has been said that if the demons fight 
with the gods, they will still be killed, and if they don’t, then 
what will they eat, hence they will still be killed. Meaning, 
people’s problems are their food, and the darkness of 
ignorance that increases due to them is their increased 
health. Due to this, the mental confusion becomes hidden in 
a subtle or latent or subconscious form. In a way, it hides in 
the dark sea of Mooladhar. In the middle of the ocean, in the 
depths, there is darkness because no ray of light can reach 
there. Any person who gets tired or upset with life and 
becomes depressed, in a way, goes boating in the sea of 
Muladhar, thinking that there are no earthly troubles of 
worldly life here. He gets peace for a short time, but then he 
falls into the trap of the dark subconscious mind. It is possible 
that during times of poverty, famine, epidemic, political or 
geographical crisis, many people may have collectively fallen 
prey to distress and depression. This is what many people 
going together in boats and descending into the sea has 
been said. The darkness experienced through the 


unconsciousness of the subconscious mind is likened to 
putting people by those demons into a dark prison cell. It is in 
the form of darkness that those demons haunt them. When 
old misdeeds buried in the subconscious mind are felt in the 
form of angry creatures or humans, perhaps this is the 
demons reprimanding those people. Many people get killed, 
meaning many people get sick and die from depression, and 
many commit suicide. A Shiva devotee meditates on 
Kundalini at Mooladhar in that dark state. Other people also 
get benefit from his satsang. The more darkness there is in 
that dark chamber of the subconscious mind, the more the 
Kundalini shines. Perhaps it is said that a demon saw Lord 
Shiva directly. The world of darkness prevents the Yogi from 
doing sadhana. Due to this, neither the light of the world 
remains in his mind because he has already left the world, 
nor of Sadhana, not of anyone. This state is similar to death. 
Perhaps it is said that the ego of the people in the form of 
Daruk ordered the death of Vaishya through worldly thoughts 
and things in the form of demons. Due to this, the seeker, out 
of fear of the world or stubborn anger towards it, intensifies 
his sadhana and awakens his Kundalini. Perhaps it is said that 
out of fear of those demons, the Vaishya started chanting 
Shivkirtan continuously and loudly. Then a temple with four 
doors appears, and Shiva is seated in it. Muladhara Chakra 
also has four petals. Kundalini awakening is the manifestation 
of Shiva. He destroys the demons in the form of mental 
confusion. Actually the subconscious mind is stuck to the soul 
in the form of darkness of the soul. When light is born in the 
soul, it itself gets destroyed. 


Parvati is the form of nature aka Prakriti. She wants the 
expansion of the world, which is not possible without 
Tamoguna. Intellect or intelligence in the form of Daruki 
demon is her power. Meaning, the world expands only 
through intelligence. Intelligence is the most powerful sense. 
She creates many demonic thoughts by making the egoistic 
creature her husband i.e. her protector. Those thoughts, by 
marrying the demonic senses like hands and feet, i.e. by 
meeting them and with their cooperation, produce various 
types of worldly things. All those things are said to be the 
sons of those demons and demonesses. All of them live in the 


same forest-like brain which resides in the subtle form in the 
Muladhar. Worldly things may appear external, but they all 
exist in the mind only. It is only through the intellect that 
they are permitted to stay there, because if it wishes, it can 
get them all thrown out through yoga etc. Shivalinga, Shiva 
temple and Shivamurthy are also part of this forest, which 
protects the devotees. The person who will follow Varnochit 
Dharma i.e. Karmayoga and with the power generated from it 
will awaken kundalini by loving it in the form of Shiva , i.e. 
will have the darshan of Shiva, he will be a Chakravarti king, 
iie. he will be such a soul whose all the chakras will be 
awakened or active. Kaliyug, Satyayug, all these are stages 
of life of people. Kaliyuga stage means man’s worldly stage 
full of competition and materialism. As long as this state 
exists, the defects of the mind will remain. When man 
evolves and enters the stage of Satyayuga, i.e. the stage of 
Spiritual practice, then he kills these vices like a mighty 
warrior. This happens due to the power of Shiva, which 
means meditation of Shiva. From this he gets Kundalini 
awakening which means seeing Shiva, which is a state like 
Chakravarti king. Because the Muladhar Chakra, Kundalini 
Shakti and Sushumna Nadi are all associated with the 
serpent, the name of the Linga situated in Muladhar is 
Nageshwar and the Shakti associated with it is Nageshwari. 
The mysterious story of King Veersen related to this will be 
described in the next post. 


Kundalini Shakti gets activated 
by entering the pit with the 
wooden fish and worshiping 
Shiva there 


Salutations to Shiva Salutations to Guru 
Shiva is the Guru Guru is Shiva 


Friends, in a beautiful country called Nishadha, in a family of 
Kshatriyas, a son named Veersen who was Mahasen was born 
and who was very dear to Shiva. Veersen performed severe 
penance for 12 years while worshiping Lord Shiva. Then 
Shiva became pleased and told the same grown up king that 
he was making a fish out of wood, applying Ranga paste on it 
and enriching it with Yogamaya and giving it to him. Taking 
it, he should immediately sail towards that hole while sitting 
in the boat. Then reaching there enter the hole made by him 
and worship Nageshwar and get Pashupatastra from him and 
destroy these major demons like Daruki etc. Shiva again said, 
“With the effect of my darshan aka visualisation, you will not 
face any kind of shortage. By that time, Parvati’s boon will 
also be completed, due to which the other Maleccha-form aka 
dirty form people there will also become virtuous. Then Shiva 
disappeared.” In this way Lord Nageshwar Dev, in the form of 
Linga, the lord of lights, was born. He is the one who always 
fulfills all the wishes of the three worlds. 


Scientific analysis of the above myth 


The word Nishadha is derived from the word prohibition. That 
country where there is prohibition of ugly or ignorant sexual 
conduct, prohibition of violation of Vedas, prohibition of 
indecency, prohibition of indolence, prohibition of misdeeds 
etc. Every man is the king of his body form country. Mahasen 
literally meaning great army means one with a huge army. 
Meaning, he is a well-known, famous and respected person in 
the world or his society, who has a crowd of people following 
him. Veersen means the man in that army of the world, who 


bravely faces problems and does not retreat from the Vedic 
path of humanity. He was also proficient in meditation. This 
means that he was deeply in love with someone. Love can be 
with Shiva, any other god, guru, girlfriend or anyone. That is 
why he is called a devotee of Shiva because Shiva is a 
symbol of meditation and love. There are 12 chakras in the 
body. On those chakras he meditated on Kundalini or Shiva 
form. If the sadhana of one chakra is considered to be for one 
year, then there are 12 chakras in 12 years. Man keeps 
developing like this since birth. For some years after birth 
man remains in the darkness of ignorance of Muladhara 
Chakra. Then when adolescence comes, due to hormonal 
changes, he comes to Swadhisthana Chakra. Due to increase 
in strength and increase in love during youth, he comes to 
Manipur Chakra and Anahata Chakra respectively. By 
developing expertise in love and worldly affairs, he also 
becomes adept in conversation and negotiations. It can be 
said that his consciousness reaches the level of Vishuddhi 
Chakra. Then to get employment or success in business he 
has to use his intelligence a lot. With that he comes to Ajna 
Chakra. By becoming proficient in his professional matters, 
he becomes certain about his earning, and so getting some 
worldly relief he starts trying for his liberation through the 
practice of spirituality etc. Due to this his consciousness 
comes into Sahasrara Chakra. Actually, if a man gets the 
right environment, he can awaken his Kundalini at just the 
age of 17-18 years. But in this story we are talking about 
Satyayug aka truth age, hence 12 years have been written. 
At that time, child marriage was probably prevalent, which 
would have taken place till the age of 12-13 years. That is 
why marriage is considered to be the stage of Sahasrar 
awakening, because through this, Sahasrar gets direct and 
tremendous power from Muladhar. This is also clear from the 
entire story, in which after the completion of twelve years of 
sadhana, he is asked to put the fish in a hole. By thinking a 
little deeply, its meaning becomes clear on its own. Shiva has 
created the body of all of us and also of King Veersen. 
Meaning, Shiva himself has created all the body parts, which 
also includes the fish-shaped genitalia. Science also believes 
that wooden fish means wood is also a biological substance 
like flesh, and both are components of living beings. The 


hormonal system in the body and the stimulation generated 
by it which causes stiffness in it, all this is also a system 
created by God Shiva. Ranga is called tin metal. It is 
moderately hard, not as much as iron, and not as little as 
loose flesh or wood. Similarly, the sexual cavity in the body is 
also created by Shiva. As far as the fish enters the hole, the 
hole should be considered finished there. The boat is left 
behind. A fish with Maya means it has divine sexual 
sensibility, which can fascinate anyone. Probably that is the 
crest of the organ, the rest of the part has been called boat. 
Now the place where the hole ends should be considered as 
the floor of the pit just as described in case of Mooladhar. It 
falls at almost the same place between the two organs, 
where the location of Muladhar Chakra has been mentioned 
in the yoga scriptures. To me, this seems to be the real 
muladhara, because this is it provides energy. The rest of the 
details seem symbolic or close to it, not real. There is no dark 
pit outside where the position of the Muladhara Chakra point 
is shown. The dark pit is inside in its line. However, as the 
plexuses of intense genital sensations are located inside, 
some of their effects are also felt externally. Well, meditating 
on Nageshwar Linga in that hole means meditating the 
meditation picture of Nageshwar Shiva on the Linga. This is a 
tantric practice of the highest order called Meditation at Tip. 
The term naga aka serpent also indicates the perineum and 
its associated structures. Because all these structures have 
been built by Lord Shiva for his attainment, hence one of his 
names is Nageshwar. By worshiping Shiva there, one will get 
Pashupat weapon, which means one will get the power to 
uncover the demonic thoughts buried in the pit of 
subconscious mind. Due to this, the main demons like Daruk 
etc. will be destroyed, meaning the main thoughts of the 
intellect and mind will come out and merge into the real void 
soul. These are the main obstacles in awakening. Countless 
other small thoughts continue to dissolve even after 
awakening, throughout life. Darshan of Shiva means means 
awakening after which there is no shortage of anything. The 
people of the world also have cyclic pattern of behaviour like 
the ages. After the environment like Kaliyug, they create an 
environment like Satyayug. They all are also present in the 
brain forest of the meditating man as everything is inside by 


default. With the help of their good deeds, it becomes easier 
to kill the demons. Means it becomes easier if such favorable 
conditions continue to prevail. Reading this story, it does not 
seem at all that the sages did not experience sexual 
pleasure, as is often seen in common belief. On the contrary, 
it seems that only after being completely fulfilled in the 
householder state, they were able to write all this for the 
good of the world in the later ascetic states like Vanaprastha 
and Sannyasa. 


Kundalini science can make the 
Ravana-story somewhat clear 


Friends, there is a story in Shivpuran that once an arrogant 
demon named Ravana started worshiping Shiva devotedly on 
Mount Kailash. When Lord Shiva was not pleased with this, he 
took another solution. He made a fine pit in the land full of 
trees to the south of the Himalayan Mountains, lit a fire in it, 
installed Lord Shiva near it and started performing yajana 
havan. He started doing penance in three ways - sitting 
amidst the five fires during the summer season, sitting on a 
platform during the rainy season and staying under water 
during the winter season. In this way, he performed severe 
penance, yet Lord Shiva, who was fierce for the evil spirits, 
was not pleased. Then Ravana cut off his head and started 
worshiping Shiva. In this way he cut off his nine heads one by 
one. Then Sadashiv became happy and appeared before him 
when only one head remained. Shiva healed his heads as 
before and gave him the desired results and immense 
strength. Then Ravana folded his hands and said to Shiva, 
“Swami, please come with me to Lankapuri, | am under your 
protection.” Due to this, Lord Shiva, feeling distressed, told 
him with an upset heart that of course he should take away 
his best Shivalinga, but wherever he placed it on the ground, 
it would be established there. But on the way, Ravana felt 
like having an urge to pee. He handed it over to the Gop 
standing nearby and went slightly away to pee. The Gop 
could not bear its weight for long, so he kept it there on the 
ground. In this way, that Linga, which originated from 
Vajrasara, became established there, which can remove sins 
and fulfill all the desires just by seeing it. Its name was 
Vaidyanatheshwar who is the giver of enjoyment and 
Salvation and the destroyer of all sins. Ravana then went 
home. All the gods gathered together and worshiped and 
established that Linga properly. All the gods and sages got 
worried and went to Narad and said that this evil Ravana is 
already troubling them a lot, after getting the boon of Shiva, 
he will make them more sad. Narad went to Ravana’s house 
to help them and praised him falsely. When asked by Narada, 
Ravana proudly narrated the entire incident of Shiva’s boon, 


how he kept increasing his ferocity in the way of pleasing 
Shiva and when he started cutting off his tenth and last head, 
Shiva appeared and stopped him and like a physician 
attached all his heads as before. Along with this he was also 
blessed with immense strength. Ravana then said that now 
he has come home to conquer the three worlds after 
worshiping the Jyotirlinga. Narad laughingly told him that 
Shiva is vicious, he lives casually under the influence of 
cannabis, what lie he can’t tell, so he should not believe him. 
Saying this, he instigated Ravana to uproot Kailash and said 
that this would test Shiva’s boon. Doing the same, he lifted 
Mount Kailash in his arms. Due to this, everything situated on 
Kailash started shaking and everything started colliding with 
each other and falling. When Shiva surprisingly asked Parvati 
about this, she sarcastically replied that his best disciple 
Ravana was doing all that. Due to this, Shiva considered 
Ravana ungrateful and egoistic of his power and cursed him 
that soon someone would be born there who could take away 
the pride of his arms. Narad heard the curse of Shiva and 
Ravana also kept Kailash down and went home happily. Thus, 
accepting Shiva’s boon as true, Ravana controlled the entire 
world with his power. At that time, there was no enemy of 
Ravana who could match him with the powerful divine 
weapon obtained by the order of Shiva. 


Psychological explanation of the above 
myth 


Ravana means one who makes one cry. A person who is full 
of mental defects makes the world cry, not laugh. Meaning 
that he can only give sorrow to everyone, not happiness. 
When people oppose him, he is unable to compete with 
them. Therefore, he meditates on Shiva in the brain or 
Sahasrara called black magic in common language to gain 
strength to fight with them. Guilty people often like Shiva, 
because they see Shiva as full of faults like them. How can 
Shiva be pleased with simple meditation? Shiva demands 
complete dedication towards himself. Whether you consider 
it as Shiva’s wish or the principle of awakening that only by 
inculcating the only image of Shiva or any other single image 


in the mind fully, one gets awakened. Right now Ravana had 
many faulty thoughts inside him, that is why he was not able 
to concentrate properly on the image of Shiva. Then, with the 
inspiration of Shiva, he tried the second solution i.e. leftist 
tantric solution. The second one can be completely different 
from the first one. If the first was a pure Vaishnav, the 
second automatically proved to be a Tantrik. It is not the 
other that gives the sense of number, but the one that gives 
the sense of otherness or oppositeness. If the Himalayas are 
the brain or Sahasrara and are considered to be in the north, 
because the geographical location of the Himalayas is also in 
the north of India, then its southern part is the ocean or 
Mooladhar region. The pit dug in that area is the muladhara 
chakra. The powerful deity named Gaddha of a particular 
caste group is probably created by the power of Mooladhar, 
that is why its name is Gaddha or pit. It is notorious for 
witchcraft, and black exploits. It is said that no one, only 
Hanuman can protect from him. Perhaps Hanuman’s sattvik 
power would have defeated his tamasic power. Ravana 
established fire in that pit, which means he concentrated his 
life force there through breathing pranayama. The 
establishment of Lord Shiva near it means that the idol or 
picture of Lord Shiva was meditated there. Havan means 
burning the glucose, fat etc. stored in one’s body in the fire 
of life force or prana, which generates power or energy. At 
the time of emergency, Kundalini Shakti located at Muladhar 
inside body is required, due to which it becomes active. That 
is why it has been said to bear the heat of five types of fire in 
summer, to sit on a platform in the rainy season and to 
practice meditation by being submerged in water till neck in 
the winter season. It is only when Muladhar becomes active 
that lovers remember each other in times of sorrow or 
distress. That is why loving couples like to stay together even 
in good times and at the time of death. That is why penance 
and control over luxuries are considered great in most 
religions. Yet Shiva did not appear before Ravana because he 
was an evil spirit and was full of the defects of the senses. 
The conscience is made up of four types of subtle organs, 
mind, intellect, chitta and ego. Similarly, the senses are 
made up of five subtle organs or elements, eyes, ears, smell, 
skin and genitals. Ravana disabled all these nine organs one 


by one. This is called cutting off his nine heads by Ravana. 
Because each organ provides a different type of knowledge, 
each organ has been considered a separate head in the 
story. When he started preparing to cut off the last tenth 
head i.e. his real head on which all the other heads are 
supported, Shiva appeared. This means that he had become 
so weak while doing sadhana that he was close to dying, 
when he got awakening. When a man is in a “do or die” 
situation, he has the maximum chances of success. Then 
Shiva restored his head and gave him the desired boon, 
meaning Ravana became eligible to return to the worldly life 
again. In worldly life, all the senses and also the ego are 
needed. Anyway, perhaps Ravana had only got a momentary 
glimpse of awakening, due to which he became exactly the 
same as before immediately without any sudden 
transformation. Whatever a man can desire or achieve, the 
ultimate limit is awakening. When one gets awakening, it 
feels as if he has got everything. This is Shiva’s way of giving 
him the desired results and immense strength. Strength 
arises from weapons and the attainment of power. All these 
also come under the attainment of awakening. He who has 
something left to achieve is afraid. Zero fear means infinite 
strength, because strength exists only to attain fearlessness. 
Ravana wanted to take the power awakened in Muladhar to 
his favorite chakra. It is said that he wanted to take his 
Shivalinga to golden Lanka. Perhaps it is some special chakra 
or point of the body, which is not known to us, and by 
awakening which one gets incomparable demonic power. 
That’s why Shiva felt sad because he could misuse it. Gopa 
means cowherd watchman, that is, one who grazes cows, 
and cow means senses. Ravana could take that semen power 
only to a nearby chakra and then he went for peeing. Due to 
this, the sense organ related to Muladhara became relaxed, 
and the Shakti remained stuck there, because it is from this 
sense that Shakti gets the strength to climb up. Where the 
power got stuck on a particular chakra in the middle, that too 
appears to be an unknown chakra. It was named 
Vaidyanatheshwar Linga. It is said in the story that that Linga 
was made of Vajrasara. This also indicates that it was 
sublimated semen. Vajra is formed from the spinal cord, 
hence its essence is the power passing through the 


sushumna inside the spinal cord, which kills the Vritrasur 
demon or ignorance by striking the Vajra in the form of 
awakening. That sensory power is formed in Muladhar, in the 
formation of which semen plays a major role. Because Shiva, 
like a doctor aka vaidya, had joined all the heads of Ravana, 
that is why that Linga was named Vaidyanatheshwar. All the 
gods came to worship it. This gives an indication that no 
matter where this Linga Shakti was located, it had not 
reached the area of the brain that could be experienced by 
the soul. It is only over this area that the living beings 
themselves have complete control, not the gods. Meaning, 
the will of the living being operates in this area. All other 
parts of the body are under the control of the gods. Like we 
can move around as per our wish, we can think, we can work, 
but we cannot digest food, our heart cannot beat on our will, 
and we cannot do countless other body functions. Perhaps 
this voluntary area is Sahasrara itself. If Shakti had reached 
there, Ravana would have caused so much harm to the 
world. The mind itself is Narad Muni. After ravana’s 
momentary awakening or shiva darshan whatever, he 
realized that now he can trouble the gods to his heart’s 
content. This is what the gods have to complain to Narad 
Muni. Encouraged by this, Ravana’s mind thought that why 
not go to Sahasrara once again and see whether he has 
really got power. He was engrossed in the devotion of Shiva 
and was looking only at Shiva in everything, although of 
course under the influence of selfishness. Suddenly, when he 
went to Sahasrara, his flow of devotion to Shiva stopped, 
because there is an atmosphere of non-dualism in Sahasrar, 
and where there is non-dualism, there is no devotion. 
Devotion happens only in duality. Therefore for a short time 
the worldly objects related to the devotion of Shiva fell away. 
It is said that everything turned upside down in Kailash. One 
should know Kailash here with a mind filled with devotion and 
as concerned to raising it up, it should be Sahasrara area. 
One who lives too much in non-duality does not know the 
loving brotherhood full of worldly duality. Due to this, ego can 
also develop in him. It is natural that he has many enemies, 
one of whom may become his death. This is said to be cursed 
by Shiva after getting angry. This made the gods happy, 
because if everyone became completely monistic then how 


would the world created by them be able to function. It is 
heard that erotic paintings were made in the ancient temples 
and caves of India because of the wave of monism. People 
were leaving their homes and going to the forest. Now I don’t 
know how correct this analysis is, but it seems necessary to 
make the story scientifically fit into Kundalini Yoga and to 
remember it. 


What else can we call the darshan aka visualisation of Shiva 
other than awakening of Kundalini, because both are 
supreme achievements. There can be only one supreme 
achievement, not two, hence both are one and the same. It is 
also possible that darshan of gods is such a deep state of 
meditation in which the gods are clearly visible and one can 
also talk to them. Of course, this should be a little below the 
highest level of Kundalini awakening. Because if Devdarshan 
itself was Kundalini awakening, then at least one demon 
would have gained wisdom from Devdarshan, but it appears 
that no one got it, on the contrary, whatever was there also 
went away due to the arrogance of power. Secondly, in the 
state of Kundalini awakening, one cannot ask for anything 
because by feeling complete unity with the Supreme, a 
person also feels his own completeness, then what is left to 
ask for. On the other hand, during Devdarshan, the demons 
used to place a long and detailed demand letter in front of 
the deity. Well, even if both experiences are similar, this 
story also refutes the belief that an awakened person can do 
no wrong. In fact, awakening inspires to do good work, but 
there is no guarantee that good work will be done. It is like 
someone getting the company of a great person but ignoring 
his inspiration and not doing any great work. Culture, 
mentality and practices are responsible for good or bad work. 
This story also shows that just as good deeds are done by 
power, bad deeds are also done by power. The powerless 
cannot do anything. Mischievous people have a lot of power. 
If their power is channeled in the right direction they can 
awaken most quickly. Perhaps the same happened with 
Ravana also. He was a mischievous person but with the 
desire for more power, he started worshiping Shiva. The mind 
of mischievous people wants immediate results, just as a 
thief cannot wait to earn money, so he steals something to 


get it immediately. Similarly, when Ravana did not see any 
benefit from worship, he adopted another method. Meaning, 
when did the vicious mind start liking the simple, slow, 
idealistic and ordinary way like the general public? Therefore 
he adopted a crooked, sharp, idealless and extraordinary 
Tantric method. Perhaps due to the success of Tantric 
method, he might have been under the illusion that he is 
expert in sexual activity and can do it with anyone without 
any restrictions. Due to this confusion, he might have 
violated the modesty of Rambha Apsara, Kubera’s future 
daughter-in-law, and under this confusion, he might have 
abducted Sita, due to which he was killed by Sitapati Ram. 


| think Ravana’s own home was Sahasrara Chakra, because it 
is believed that the soul resides there. That is why Lanka is 
called the city of gold. In Chinese Tao philosophy, the Golden 
Flower is felt on the Ajna Chakra under Golden Flower 
Meditation. Ajna Chakra can also be a golden Lanka because 
an egoistic man like Ravana is not going to live in a divine 
place like Sahasrara, certainly he can live in a materialistic 
and rationalistic Ajna Chakra. There is a mythological story 
that a tunnel like a lotus stem used to go from Lanka to the 
underworld. This suggests that Lanka was agya chakra 
connected by nadi to Muladhara, as Muladhara is often 
referred to as Patala. Lanka has been described as lying 
between Trikuta Parvat meaning between three mountain 
peaks. If one peak is considered to be the left brow bone, the 
second peak is considered to be the right brow bone and the 
third is considered to be the nose bone, then Lanka appears 
to be Ajna Chakra. 


Shiva knew that Ravana was evil by nature, hence if his 
intelligence got the brilliance of Shivalinga then he would 
become more evil. It is also possible that Sahasrara was his 
home, but he misused its divinity. This means that it is not 
necessary that by visiting Sahasrara a man himself becomes 
a gentleman. He will still have to try. The heads of many 
particular religions probably awakened the Sahasrara and 
always resided in it, but they carried out endless massacres 
in the name of religion and God, which continues till today. If 


such people get derailed then they can become the 
embodiment of death. No one can do any harm to them 
because they themselves are situated at the supreme 
position. Probably that is why theology would have been kept 
secret in ancient times. Now even the nuclear bomb is no 
longer a secret, what to fear now? | also feel that those who 
try forcefully for awakening through Tantra etc., get only 
momentary or partial awakening, like Ravana got, not 
complete awakening. Ravana was seeking the same 
complete awakening from Shiva, who is said to have wanted 
to keep the Shivalinga permanently in his house. But Shiva 
did not allow this to happen considering him as unauthorized. 
Meaning, before becoming awakened one has to become 
human. 


This story can also be given a little more twist. Ravana is ego 
only. The tenth head was the ego form itself. An attempt to 
cut it meant he had become very weak and was about to die 
when Shiva appeared. Meaning, if the ego becomes zero, the 
person will definitely die, then who will attain awakening and 
how? Giving darshan by Shiva means the remaining ego gets 
merged into Shiva, not destroyed. Ravana’s Lanka is also 
Mooladhara, as it is in the middle of the ocean, and in most 
stories Mooladhara is shown as the ocean. The ten senses of 
Ravana steal the Shakti as Sita and carry that to muladhara 
as Lanka. Meaning that man wanders in worldly affairs 
through ten senses. Due to this, the pictures of the world 
become powerful in his mind. These come into expressed 
form and called as expressed shakti or dancing goddess, and 
then soon get buried and registered in the subconscious 
mind in latent form. This is where the power in the form of 
Sita has to go to the muladhara chakra in the form of Lanka. 
Now the readers will say that earlier Ajna Chakra was called 
Lanka, and now they are calling it as Muladhar Chakra. There 
IS no contradiction in this, because Muladhara and Ajna 
Chakra are directly connected. 


There can also be a doubt that earlier the mind was called 
Brahma, and now it is called Narad Muni. There is no 
contradiction in this either. Narada Muni is the son of 


Brahma, meaning only a small part of the entire mind in the 
form of Brahma is the messenger mind in the form of Narada. 


Kundalini Shakti is the water and 
Ishta Dhyana is the fish, which 
help the awakened Lord Manu in 
Saving the creation from 
destruction as per the Matsya 
Purana mythology 


Friends, in the original and main story of Matsya Purana, it is 
said that in ancient times, Maharaj Vaivaswat Manu, the 
enlightened son of Surya, handed over the kingdom to his 
son and performed severe penance in a part of Malayachal. 
Through this he attained the best yoga. After millions of 
years of his penance, Brahma appeared and asked him to ask 
for a boon. On this Manu asked for a boon that he would be 
able to protect all living beings in case of cataclysm. Brahma 
gave this boon. Once, while performing Pitru Tarpan in the 
Ashram, Manu found a fish falling on his palm along with 
water. Out of pity he put that in Kamandalu. In a single day 
and night it grew sixteen fingers and started saying protect 
me, protect me. Then the king put it in an earthen pot. There 
also that fish grew three feet in one night. Then she started 
saying that she is under their protection, please protect her. 
Then Manu kept that fish in the well. There she again became 
one yojan bigger. And she e started saying the same thing. 
Then Manu left her in the Ganga. When she became huge 
there too, Manu threw her into the sea. Manu asked in fear 
whether she e was a demon king or a god. Then God in 
Matsya form said that she is fine, saying that he has 
recognized him. The Lord said, “King, in a short time this 
earth along with the mountains, forests and banks will be 
submerged in water. Therefore, to protect all the living 
beings, the gods have created this boat. You protect creation 
by putting all the living beings on it. When this boat begins to 
waver due to the winds of the Yugaant that’s age end, at that 
time you tie it to my horn. Then at the end of the destruction, 
you will be the creator of all the living beings of the world. In 
this way, at the beginning of Kritayuga, you will appear as an 


omniscient and patient king in Manvantara that’s manu age. 
You will be the ruler of the world. At that time the gods will 
worship you. Then Manu asked some questions to which 
Madhusudan answered in the following manner. From today 
till hundred years there will be no rain on this earth. This will 
cause a terrible famine. Then in the presence of that final 
cataclysm When this happens, the seven fierce rays of the 
Sun, which will shower hot embers, will start tormenting all 
the living beings. Badwanal will also take a very terrible form. 
The poisonous fire coming out from the mouth of 
Sankarshana that’s Cosmic serpent rising above the 
underworld and emerging from the forehead of Lord Rudra at 
third eye. The fire will also rage, destroying all the three 
worlds. In this way, when the entire earth will be burnt to 
ashes and the sky will be saturated with heat, then the entire 
world including the gods and stars will be destroyed. At that 
time, seven types of clouds will drown the earth with heavy 
rain of water generated from the sweat of fire. Then the 
seven oceans will get angry and become one, and will 
convert the three worlds into one cosmic ocean. At that time, 
you take this boat in the form of Vedas, load all the living 
beings and seeds on it and tie it to my horn. In such a 
situation, even when the entire group of gods gets destroyed, 
you will still remain alive with my power. In this inner 
destruction, only Soma, Surya, |, Brahma along with the four 
worlds, Narmada River, Maharishi Markandeya, Shankar, the 
four Vedas, the Puranas surrounded by knowledge and this 
world (in the form of a boat) along with you, will survive. 
During the doomsday period of Chakshusha Manvantar, when 
the entire earth will be immersed in Ekarnava that’s single 
cosmic ocean and the creation will begin through you, then | 
will save the Vedas again. Saying this, Lord Matsya 
disappeared. 


Main myth plot of Matsya Purana exposed 


The soul must have been called Suryaputra, because the 
luminous Sun is often said to be the true form of God. Manu 
means a pro human being. Malayachal means a mountain 
filled with white sandalwood trees. Millions of years have 


passed while doing penance, which means man has evolved 
from an ordinary creature over millions of years. To give a 
boon from Brahma means to be naturally capable of that 
because only Brahma does everything in nature. When a 
cataclysm occurs, it means that when a man dies, he should 
be able to protect all living beings, that is, through 
reproduction, he should be able to create new humans. 
Power or shakti is called fish. It is called God because there is 
no difference in principle between Shiva and Shakti. That is 
the same Kundalini Shakti which rises above the Muladhar 
and takes the form of the rapidly growing Sheshnag or 
mythical serpent, which spreads across the entire body as 
cosmic ocean. Boat probably refers to the reproductive 
organ. Because the gods have created all the parts of the 
body. That Yugantak Vayu means vital air will become shaky 
i.e. active. The boat was tied to the front part of the body of 
fish with its horn, meaning a fish-like mouth having organ. At 
the end of the Pralaya, it means at the birth of a child, you 
will become the father of all the living beings, because the 
entire creation including all the living beings is in the mind 
and body of man or child. Manvantar means difference of 
births of a man. After the death of a human being, when in 
another body he’s reborn, that is the Manvantara or different 
human life. That second birth is Kritayuga or Satyayuga, 
because a person who is spoiled in one human birth often 
improves in his next birth. Just as the cycle of ages rotates 
outside, so does it inside. Lord of Manvantar means father. 
Omniscient because he knows everything about the previous 
birth of that new human being born, of course in a subtle or 
subconscious form. Being patient because the creation of a 
new creation means the development of a new human being 
took a lot of time, for which Manu waited patiently. The gods 
worship the father. The son’s body is made of gods. The son 
will serve or worship his father, which means he will be 
worshipped by the gods. The life span of a human being is 
only hundred years. During that time, the creation that takes 
place in his mind takes place without rain, because rain occur 
in the physical world, not in its subtle form in the brain. This 
is called famine. Then the holocaust is described as the death 
of a man after completing one hundred years of age. There 
are seven types of body fever. These are called the seven 


types of rays of the Sun. Badwanal means fire in the sea. In 
the scriptures, Muladhar has been compared to the ocean. 
Fire in it means meditation of Shiv Shakti in it, as Ravana did. 
Badwanal has been given the form of a horse in the 
scriptures. The shape of the horse somewhat resembles that 
of a dragon. This means that the Kundalini Shakti itself is 
Badwanal, which ascends up through the horse-shaped nadi. 
That is why Badwanal is also shown being used as a weapon 
on the enemy. Power itself is like a weapon. Anyway, horses 
have special hair on the back, just above the Sushumna nadi, 
in the central line of the body, from the tail to the head, and 
even in some species up to the midpoint of the brow. Maybe 
that’s why horses have a sharp mind. In emergency or 
trouble, Muladhara starts getting activated to give strength 
to the body. The dying man’s breathing becomes rapid and 
deep. With the force of those breaths, the power of the 
Muladhara also starts rising rapidly, and rises up through the 
Sushumna nadi and spreads throughout the brain and takes 
the form of Sheshnag i.e. Sankarshana. The air coming out of 
the mouth is its poison. It is called poison because ancient 
people knew that if fresh air is not available from outside, 
then breathing in one’s own exhaled air can lead to death 
due to suffocation. When the power rises, it is natural that it 
will concentrate on the Ajna Chakra. This is the third eye of 
Shiva that spews fire. Since both of these types of events 
result in death, it is said that the body will be burnt to ashes. 
Anyway, dead bodies are burnt. After fever, sweating occurs. 
Seven types of fever resulted in seven types of sweat. They 
have been called seven types of oceans. All the oceans have 
gathered, which means in the end the body becomes 
completely cold. The entire body including the mind gets 
absorbed in a subtle form in the ocean i.e. Mooladhara. 
Meaning someone died. The entire world of the dead person 
gets transformed in a subtle form and gets situated in the 
Muladhar of the future father i.e. Manu. ‘Shya’ means one 
who sleeps. The creature that slept in Manu’s Muladhar 
became a human being. In the same sea of Mooladhar, there 
is a boat in the form of related sense organ situated. On the 
same boat, he loads the dead person present in subtle form 
in the form of living beings and seeds i.e. semen. Seed is also 
a living being. The further story of fish etc. becomes 


understandable on its own. Because the body was destroyed, 
the gods were also destroyed. Due to the dead person not 
breathing, the Vayudevs were destroyed, due to not 
producing heat, the Fire gods were destroyed, and due to 
lack of blood circulation, the Water gods were destroyed. 
These are the three main deities. All the other deities related 
to different organs were also destroyed. Some eternal things 
like Soma, Surya, and | (Matsya in the form of God), 
Markandeya, Narmada etc. have been mentioned. Perhaps 
these are such things which are related to the eternal nature 
of God. Soma means things related to mind, Surya means 
soul etc. Everything happens in the subtle body, but it has 
been described in brief as the subtle world. The subtle body 
is actually the universal form, because it enters the body 
through the senses and gets suppressed and becomes 
subtle. We can call the body a machine that suppresses the 
world. In detail, the soul, intellect, mind, senses etc. have 
been described in the subtle body, but this is only a 
philosophical expansion only, because all these things come 
under the world. When the womb of creation is established 
by Manu, then Lord Hayagriva will rescue the Vedas from the 
demon, which will be explained in the next post. In this way, 
when Lord Matsya was pulling the boat in the cosmic ocean, 
at that time he was telling the things of knowledge and 
science to Manu, which became Matsya Purana. By the way, 
due to the activity of the so-called Matsya, the Shakti itself 
remains active in the Sushumna which keeps providing new 
knowledge and scientific experiences to a man. Just as every 
particle of the universe is a form of God, similarly every part 
and particle of the body is also. 


Because power rises rapidly only through penance and yoga 
practice, that is why the water came into the sage’s hands 
while performing tarpan or ritualistic water pouring. In 
Tarpan, water is dropped on the hands from a sacred copper 
spoon. The fish in the hand means power shakti is felt on 
Anahata chakra, because at the time of tarpan a strong 
feeling is done from the heart. In a way, Shakti gets 
entangled in the world by the senses of the body. This is why 
the fish is afraid of the predatory aquatic creatures and seeks 
protection from Manu. Due to this Manu started the practice 


of energy cultivation. When that power increased, it 
descended to Kamandalu in the form of grown up fish to 
navel chakra. As she grew further, she descended into the 
well in the form of Muladhar. As it progressed there, it 
climbed up the back channel i.e. Sushumna i.e. Ganga. In this 
way, it became widespread like Sheshnag with its hood 
raised up. It was then lowered through the front channel into 
the ocean of Muladhar. Meaning the huge fish was released 
into the sea. 


| think Kundalini awakening itself is shown metaphorically as 
Devdarshan or god visualisation. The thing with which a 
person engages in Kundalini Sadhana in his mind will be 
fulfilled after awakening. It is said as a metaphor that the 
God appeared and gave a boon. According to Yoga, the pure 
scientific and theoretical awakening of Kundalini is such that 
a person becomes one with the mental picture of an image 
and becomes completely open to the infinite form, there is no 
verbal talk etc. with that picture. Rishis used to do sadhana 
with good intentions in their mind, but demons used to do 
Sadhana with bad intentions. The goal of protecting the 
universe was in Manu’s mind, as is the mind of every father. 
But Ravana had the goal of defeating the whole world. That’s 
why the demand for the same boons came out of their 
mouths. Manu had just awakened the Kundalini when he saw 
a fish the size of several crores of yojanas. One crore yojana 
is equal to approximately 13 crore kilometers, which is 
approximately the distance from the Earth to the Sun. Seeing 
such fish spread over such distances seems to be nothing 
other than awakening of Kundalini. Matsya spread so much, 
meaning the snake-shaped Shakti spread through Sahasrara 
in the entire universe. Shakti became one with Shiva. 
Because without any meditation picture, Manu’s power got 
awakened and spread into infinity, that is why Manu is not 
shown asking for boon from any deity like Shiva, Vishnu, 
Ganesha etc., but directly asking for help from Shakti molded 
in the metaphor of fish. This means that Matsya Purana may 
be much older than other Puranas. At that time perhaps the 
benefits of meditation image had not been discovered or well 
documented, and people used to do Spiritual work directly. 
Although the meditation picture itself is formed from 


Spirituality, but perhaps they did not give special emphasis to 
awaken it, because due to not knowing its scientific principle, 
there was no complete faith in it. A man does not take his car 
across a pit full of water whose depth is not known. Due to 
this, the spiritual energy that had been accumulating for a 
long time was suddenly felt as a glimpse of surprise 
awakening. Patanjali’s scientific Ashtanga Yoga would have 
been written later, which would have revealed the 
importance of meditation image and its quick awakening. 
That is why meditation aka dhyana and meditation images 
are prevalent everywhere in the Puranas. Later on, 
Ramayana was also written on this basis, in which Ram is 
sent to Muladhar in the form of Lanka after making him a 
meditation picture, from where he lifts the sleeping Kundalini 
Shakti in the form of Sita through the Pushpak Viman in the 
form of Sushumna channel and brings it to Ayodhya in the 
form of Sahasrara and awakens it. 


It is also possible that the transformation after awakening is 
shown to be the birth of a new creation after the destruction. 
Awakening is anyway called new birth. That is why Manu 
does not die in that holocaust. Everything old in the brain 
gets destroyed, but its subtle seed remains, only then it 
takes birth again in a new form. This means that just as the 
old creation became distorted and filled with suffering over 
time, so too can the new one. That is why even after 
awakening, one has to be careful and continue doing Yoga so 
that the new creation remains protected from getting 
distorted. The power in the form of Matsya helps in his 
transformation. During transformation man learns new and 
good things, this is what is said by Matsya Lord narrating 
Matsya Purana to Manu. Both types of analysis can also be 
correct, because the stories of the Puranas often have 
multiple meanings. 


Malaya is the name given to white sandalwood. Malayachal 
means a mountain full of white sandalwood trees. It seems to 
be the brain only. In this, bright and joyful resolution pictures 
emerge. Meditation happens in the brain only. Fish can also 
be a symbol of meditation image. Both are delicate, actively 


moving and actively growing. The falling of Sankalp water 
symbolizes the movement of Kundalini Shakti in the 
microcosmic orbit. Therefore, due to the rotation of Shakti, a 
meditation picture itself came into Manu’s grip, meaning it 
came into his hand. It is also commonly said that a certain 
thing or fish fell into his hands or got trapped in his net. The 
Puranas use mostly colloquial words. The fish in the form of 
meditation picture survives only in the water in the form of 
Shakti. That meditation picture grows very fast through 
tantric practice. The hand is connected to the Anahata 
Chakra. This chakra represents the heart and emotions. The 
love with which Kundalini Yoga begins, originates in the heart 
itself. With this love mixed with kindness, he took care of the 
beloved mental image as a fish in his heart and on its 
overgrowth transported it to Kamandalu i.e. the more 
powerful and widespread lower Chakra Manipur Chakra. 
When meditation image becomes strong in the heart, then it 
automatically descends to the navel. It is also commonly said 
that after love one feels hungry. The shape of the navel is 
also like Kamandalu, which means a crooked pit like the 
sacred pot of worship. In the ocean of the world, there are big 
carnivores in the form of material defects, that is, pain giving 
mental images as larger fishes, from which single beloved 
image as isolated cute fish has to be saved. By continuing to 
give it loving attention, it continued to grow rapidly. With 
this, it itself descended to the Swadhisthana Chakra in the 
form of a pitcher. Anyway, this chakra is called baggage i.e. 
bag or pitcher shaped container of emotions. There too, it 
grew with the love of Manu, due to which it descended into 
the well of Mooladhar. The biggest pit is Muladhar itself, and 
what can be bigger pit than a well. From there, through 
Manu’s Yogasadhana, it went up through Sushumna with the 
help of Kundalini Shakti. This is called putting the fish in the 
Ganga by Manu. It is written in the beginning of the story that 
Manu attained Uttam or perfect Yoga while doing penance. 
This indicates that Kundalini Yoga is being described, 
because Kundalini Yoga is the best among all types of yoga. 
From Ganga it went to the Samudra i.e. Sahasrar Chakra. 
Many people will say that earlier Muladhar was called 
Samudra aka ocean and now they are calling Sahasrar. There 
is no contradiction in this. Both chakras are directly 


connected to each other through the Sushumna Nadi. 
Muladhara and Sahasrara are two sides of the same coin. As 
soon as it reached Sahasrar, its shape became like a huge 
serpent or fish with its hood raised. Meaning Manu’s 
Kundalini was awakened, due to which his transformation 
began. 


Kundalini Shakti transmission is 
as Lord Hayagriva in all 
mythological vedas and puranas 


Friends, the story of Hayagriva appears in many Puranas. In 
some, Hayagriva is shown in the incarnation of a god, in 
some as a demon, and in some in both the forms. Like other 
mythological characters, Hayagriva is also taken from the 
Vedas. “Haya” means horse and “griva” means neck. The 
one who has the body of a human being or a god, the neck 
and the head of a horse, is Hayagriva. 


According to a story in Bhagwat, when Brahma was going to 
sleep at the beginning of the Doomsday, the Vedas that 
came out of his mouth were stolen by the demon Hayagriva, 
who was killed by Vishnu in the form of a fish. He took the 
Vedas from him and returned them to Brahma, who had 
awakened after the cataclysm. 


It is almost similar in Agni Purana also that when the world 
was reduced to ashes during the cataclysm, the demon 
Hayagriva started destroying the Vedas, but Vishnu took the 
form of a fish and killed him. 


It is mentioned in Matsya Purana that when the world was 
burnt due to the cataclysm, Vishnu saved the Vedas by 
taking the form of Hayagriva. 


It is mentioned in a story of Bhagwat that Vishnu in the form 
of Hayagriva had killed the demons Madhu and Kaitabh and 
obtained the Vedas from them. 


According to Devipuran, the demon Hayagriva got a boon 
from the goddess that he would be killed only by Hayagriva 
and not by anyone else. Therefore Vishnu has to come in 
Hayagriva avatar to kill him. 


According to Skanda Purana, the gods started the Yagya and 
they located Vishnu, who was performing meditation 
somewhere on an island etc. in the middle of the ocean with 
a bow. He lifted Vishnu, due to which one end of the bow 
string broke and cut Vishnu’s neck, which had been eaten 
raw by ants. Vishwakarma then gave him the head of a 
horse. Vishnu was pleased and gave gods the Vedas, which 
completed the yagya. Then termites and Vishwakarma also 
asked for their share in the yagya. 


Meaning Hayagriva is somewhere in all three forms, 
somewhere in divine form, somewhere in demonic form and 
somewhere in a combination of both together. He has both 
forms in Bhagwat Purana, but each form is in different 
stories, not both together in the same story, because Vishnu 
is the main one in this Purana. But in Devi Bhagwat Purana, 
both the forms are shown in the same story, because in it 
Devi is the main one, not Vishnu. 


Spiritual analysis of the legendary myth of 
Lord Hayagriva 


Although the situation becomes more clear only by reading 
the Purana in original Sanskrit, but still you can try like this. 
So many Puranas can be found together in the library itself. | 
couldn’t find these available even online. There is a 
Shivpuran lying at home, in which | feel like gaining 
expertise, because | find it to be the most simple, and 
scientific. Anyway, we are part-time or hobby researchers, 
not full-time. Therefore, we want to limit ourselves to 
Shivpuran only. Anyway, the theme of the stories of all the 
Puranas is the same, which is mainly Yoga, only the stories 
change. The stories of Hayagriva, Matsya etc. from other 
Puranas are often mentioned due to the context. Even in 
printed Shivpuran, many times there is a problem that it 
takes more time to find anything, whereas online search is 
done in the blink of an eye. Found a site by the name of 
SanskritBooksOnline.com but the PDF books in it are such 
that Nothing inside these is searchable. Then how will 
scientific research happen? There is a need for a single PDF 


that contains at least all 18 Puranas, with a search function. If 
found please let me know. If all the Vedas, Puranas, 
Upanishads and other Sanskrit literature are in one PDF, then 
great research can be done. | think that the best use of 
today’s online communication facilities is to read and 
understand the ancient Sanatan culture. Today’s technology 
and old culture, this is the best combination. Today’s culture 
is such that there is nothing much except technology. 
Spiritual awakening and liberation, which is the ultimate goal 
of mankind, to which the old, especially Sanatan culture was 
completely dedicated, there is not their even a trace visible 
in today’s culture. 


The time of doomsday means when the entire knowledge of 
Brahma in the form of man was immersed in the darkness of 
Mooladhar, meaning Brahma had fallen asleep. Many people 
will say that the lifespan of man and his expressed mind is 
hundred years, then why is the age of Brahma said to be 
many ages long. This is because the mind can go far beyond 
the body. By the time an organism evolves and becomes a 
human being, millions and billions of years have passed since 
the creation of the universe. Therefore, the influence of that 
entire time is accumulated in the mind of man, also because 
he can think so much and also through DNA during evolution. 
The longer the day, the longer the night. The time a person 
spends awake working, he sleeps for the same amount of 
time. Meaning that as long as he lived as Brahma, even after 
death he would remain in that state for the same amount of 
time, which would be Brahma’s night and sleep. 


A unique feature of the horse’s body is that it has special and 
large hair in the central line on its back, just above the path 
of the Sushumna Nadi. They are very beautiful and large in 
size in the neck and head, forming mane of its body. That is 
why in Hayagriva incarnation only the neck and head of the 
horse have been taken, the rest of the body is of a human 
being only, because only he can do yoga properly. It means 
that the figure of a Yogi is like that of Hayagriva. From this 
body, Shakti ascends from Mooladhar through Sushumna to 
Sahasrara located in the brain. This power is the basis of all 


knowledge and science. It is natural that through which body 
the energy ascends, it also descends through the same body. 
The ladder by which a person climbs to the roof of the house, 
he also descends by the same ladder. When at the time of 
death, the power of a person’s brain descends through the 
front channel to the Muladhara, then it is said that Brahma 
was going into sleep, and at the same time the Vedas came 
out of his mouth, because the front channel passes down 
through the mouth. Demon Hayagriva hid in the sea with 
those Vedas. When that person is reborn, he realizes the 
power and consciousness in his brain, because then the 
power is ascending from the muladhara to the brain. The 
proof of this is the growth and deepening of the mutual love 
affair between the newly conceived or newborn child’s 
parents. Their mind is receiving power from their Mooladhara 
through their bodies like Hayagriva. Due to extreme 
closeness and love, the same power is being transmitted to 
their child also, due to which he develops rapidly. Parents 
also keep raising the power of the child from his Mooladhar 
level in his Hayagriva-like body by lovingly caressing the 
child’s body and massaging it well. It is said for him that 
Brahma has woken up from sleep, and Lord Vishnu has 
incarnated as Hayagriva and killed the demon Hayagriva, 
freed the Vedas from him and returned them to Brahma. 


At many places the birth of Brahma is said to be from the 
lotus in the navel of Vishnu. Here Vishnu in the form of 
Hayagriva helps Brahma awaken. It’s the same thing, only 
the words are different. Only one who is awake can be said to 
be born. What is the birth of someone who is asleep or of a 
person devoid of knowledge? Meaning here also Vishnu is 
creating Brahma. In the first case, Vishnu is lying on 
Sheshnaga aka cosmic serpent in the sea, in the second, 
Vishnu is searching for the Vedas in the sea. In the first case 
also Vishnu creates Brahma by the development of his body, 
the same happens in the second case also. The lotus of 
consciousness that blossoms in the minds of parents due to 
mutual love is also the awakening of Brahma from sleep. This 
can also be called the birth of Brahma, because what kind of 
birth is that of a sleeping person? Just as Brahma is born in 
their brain, the same can happen in the potential child 


growing in their womb. In a way, the Kundalini sleeping in 
Muladhar is also Brahma sleeping in Pralyarnav aka 
doomsday ocean. When Vishnu or Yogi in the form of 
Hayagriva lifts it up, it starts awakening in Sahasrara, and 
starts the process of creation. Complete awakening i.e. 
awakening of Kundalini should be understood as the 
completion of creation. This is a matter of the scriptures 
about Brahma’s sleeping and waking up. But it is also 
mentioned in the scriptures that Brahma himself becomes 
liberated after the completion of creation. Man is also like 
this. One who has not attained the perfection of awakening, 
wakes up or takes birth again after sleeping or dying, but one 
who has attained it, becomes free after the completion of his 
life. 


Now let us understand a little more how the demon 
Hayagriva steals the Vedas and keeps Brahma unconscious. 
It is known that the energy of the brain goes to the perineum 
through the front channel. Consider the front channel as the 
demon Hayagriva, and the back channel as Lord Hayagriva, 
because in both, most of the energy travels through the 
central line. If Lord Hayagriva is not there, then all the energy 
in the form of Vedas will remain buried in the ocean of 
Mooladhar. Such up and down movement of power happens 
in everyone, but because only yogis have direct and clear 
experience of it, that is why the things of yoga have been 
linked to it. 


The forms of fish, Sheshnag, Hayagriva etc. are 
philosophically related, hence anything can be said. At the 
time of the cataclysm, at some places the world is said to be 
a pile of burnt ashes and at other places it is said to be 
submerged in the ocean. Both indicate darkness and absence 
as that’s there at Mooladhara. 


According to a story, Hayagriva killed and the fish saved 
vedas or creation, let us understand this. This seems to me a 
tantric matter like Matsya Purana. How a small sensitive fish 
in the form of Kundalini picture becomes a huge fish and 
provides worldly happiness and awakening in the form of 


creation to the living beings trapped in the bondage of 
karma. 


| think Madhu kaitabha is the epitome of Ida Pingala. These 
nadis cover the left and right sides of the body. Due to this, 
the body remains extroverted, due to which the person 
becomes distant from spirituality. Energy remains in the body 
only, and the body also remains healthy, but it is not able to 
circulate in the central loop or ring, due to which there is a 
lack of energy in the Sahasrara. Sahasrara is the most 
important chakra of Spirituality. The knowledge that is 
present in Sahasrara is the entire form of creation, because 
in it the knowledge of the world is non-dual, and the creation 
is also non-dual. Due to Hayagriva’s meditation the energy 
comes into the central ring, meaning Madhu Kaitabh dies, 
and the Vedas which correctly describe the creation become 
active. Anyway, when any unnecessary thought is troubling 
the mind, then in the meditation of Hayagriva, it disappears 
and in its place comes the Kundalini picture. The horse 
listens less to his brain and more to his heart. The donkey 
seems to be one step ahead in this matter, that is why it is 
the vehicle of Mata Shitala Devi and Kalratri Devi. It is 
possible that the names or faces of the two goddesses may 
not get much attention, that is why the donkey has been kept 
with them. This means that if there is any worry about facial 
beauty etc., then by meditating on Hayagriva it gets 
eliminated and Kundalini appears. 


The wavy wooden base of the bow is the back channel of the 
man’s wavy spine, and the string tied to it is the front 
channel of the body. It is said that Vishnu was doing sadhana 
with the bow, because yoga is done with the help of these 
two main channels. His energy was not going down from the 
brain due to the useless thoughts clinging to it. These 
thoughts are called termites, because they keep eating the 
life of a person like wood. Due to this, his front channel was 
already weak, when the gods lifted him from yoga, it broke 
completely, meaning the neck was cut, because the channel 
itself is called neck. Then the horse’s head was placed so that 
the front channel ran best. From this Lord Hayagriva became 


apparent. When this energy loop was completed, it was 
natural that the Vedas in the form of creation were restored 
in Sahasrara. With this the yagya of the gods was completed. 
Yagya is performed for the welfare of the universe. 
Worldliness with Advaita, what better welfare of the universe 
can there be than this. Vishnu is called Yagyapati because 
only he can complete the Yagya in human form with correct 
behavior. Other gods are like slave servants, who are 
engaged in the service of the body of Vishnu i.e. the place of 
sacrifice and Vishnu himself in the form of soul. The final 
decision regarding life behavior and attitude has to be taken 
by the soul himself. That is why only Vishnu gets the largest 
Share of the fruits of the yagya. Through Hayagriva 
meditation, one gets good attention on Manipur Chakra, and 
Manipur Chakra is also called the place of Yagya, where the 
offering of food is always given through the fire god in the 
form of Jathragni or stomach fire for the satisfaction of all the 
gods in the body, but the Yagya is finally performed by the 
Yagya Purusha. It is completed only with the participation of 
Lord Vishnu or Lord Rama or a noble human being. 


Kundalini Shakti must have 
emerged as the Ganges river 
water from the branch of a 
sycamore aka Gular tree 


There is a myth in Shivpuran about sage Gautam and his wife 
Ahalya. He meditated on Brahmagiri mountain in the south 
direction for ten thousand years. There was no rain there for 
100 years. Not a single green leaf was visible. Then where 
would we get the water that sustains living beings? All the 
Sages, humans, animals and birds ran away in ten directions. 
Some sages started passing that terrible period by doing 
pranayam and meditation. Gautam also meditated with 
Pranayam for 6 months. Due to this, Varun Dev appeared 
before him and he asked for the boon of rain. Varun said that 
he cannot disobey the orders of God. Then Gautam asked 
him for water which is inexhaustible, divine and gives eternal 
fruits. Varun asked to dig a pit. Gautam dug a hole of one 
hand size. Varun filled it with divine water. Varun said that 
any religious and noble deed done at this place would be 
inexhaustible. Gautam performed daily routine rituals with 
that rare water. He sowed various grains there for Havan. 
Various fruitful trees grew there. Seeing this, thousands of 
other sages came there and started living as householders 
with their families. One day, the sages’ wives who came to 
collect water stopped Gautam’s disciples from taking water, 
saying that they would take the water first. When the 
disciples complained to Gautama’s wife Ahalya, she herself 
went with them to get water and gave it to the sage, with 
which he completed his daily routine. Those sages’ wives 
reprimanded Gautama’s wife and returned home and 
complained directly to their husbands. Enraged, the sages 
did penance to Ganesha and forcibly took the boon from him 
to harm Rishi Gautam. Ganesh was forced to become a very 
weak cow and started eating the vegetables grown by 
Gautam. She died as soon as Gautam removed her from the 
straw. All the sages were happy with that and started cursing 
the sage by calling him a cow killer. They ordered Gautam to 


leave their area and started pelting him with stones. He also 
said that as long as he is guilty of the sin of cow slaughter, he 
Cannot do any religious work. When Gautam apologized, the 
Sages asked him to atone for his sin of cow slaughter by 
circling the earth three times. Then come back there and 
observe the month’s fast and after that circumambulate that 
Brahmagiri mountain, and then take a bath with hundred 
pitchers of Ganga water and worship the earthen shivling 
again. Or in return they were asked to bring the Ganga there 
and take a bath in it, then make one crore earthly Lingas of 
Shiva and worship them, then circumambulate Brahmagiri 11 
times, and then after bathing with a hundred pitchers of 
Ganga water, perform the earthly worship again. Gautama 
and Ahalya adopted that second method, and their disciples 
continued to serve them during that time. Then Shiva Parvati 
appeared pleased and asked for a boon, then Gautam asked 
him for the boon of eradicating his sins. Shiva said that his 
devotee can never remain a sinner. He also told Gautam all 
the misdeeds of those wicked sages and asked what 
punishment he should give them. Gautama asked him to 
forgive them saying that if they had not been evil they would 
not have seen him. Shiva was very pleased with this and then 
asked him to ask for a boon. Gautam asked for this boon that 
the words of these sages should not be false. 


After that, the water which was the essence of earth and 
heaven and had been taken out and kept in the past, and 
whatever water was left which was given by Brahma during 
the marriage, Shiva gave it to that sage. That Ganges water 
appeared in the form of a woman. Gautam bowed to her and 
requested her to purify him. Shiva also requested Ganga. 
Then Ganga informed about her return after purifying 
Gautam’s family. Stopping Ganga, Shiva asked her to reside 
there till the twenty-eighth Kaliyuga of Vaivaswat 
Manvantara. Then Ganga said that she would reside on earth 
only if her importance would be highest here. She also 
requested Shiva to reside near her along with his Ganas and 
Parvati. On this Shiva said that he is not separate from her, 
because she is his Shakti, yet he will reside there. Then all 
the divine souls including the gods came there, who started 
cheering Gautama, Shiva and Ganga. Shiva was pleased and 


asked the gods to ask for a boon. So the gods requested 
Shiva and Ganga to reside there. Then Ganga asked the gods 
how they would maintain her uniqueness. Then the gods said 
that when Jupiter will remain in Leo, then all those will remain 
close to her. And when they become dirty by washing 
people’s sins for 11 years, they will come to her to wash 
them off. There she became famous by the name Gautami 
Ganga and Shivalinga by the name Triyambak. During the 
above mentioned Muhurta, all the divine souls along with the 
Gods come there, and as long as they stay there, they do not 
get the results, meaning they get the results only after 
returning from there. 


Ganga appeared from Brahmagiri mountain. When its stream 
gushed out from the branch of the sycamore tree, Gautama, 
his disciples, and all the other people present took bath in it. 
Since then that area was named Gangadwar. By seeing it all 
sins are destroyed. When those sages who had spoken ill of 
Gautam also came to take bath, then the Ganga got 
disappeared. When Gautam requested Ganga to appear, 
Ganga said that the deceitful sages should first repent by 
circumambulating this mountain 101 times with your 
permission, only then they can have darshan of her. When 
they had done this, Ganga again appeared for them at 
Kushavarta, the place below Gangadwar as named for by 
Gautama. The one who takes bath here gives up all the sins 
and attains rare knowledge and becomes entitled to salvation 
soon. 


Explanation of the above myth 


What happens that due to the stories of the Puranas, one 
gets the habit of detachment from worldliness. Because 
these stories seem both true and artificial. Therefore the 
mind remains detached from them. That is why there is joy in 
them. Someone will say that even Harry Potter stories are 
like this. But they are devoid of the main purpose. The main 
objective is Kundalini awakening. The mythological stories of 
the Puranas are based on the scientific principles of Yoga, 
Kundalini and awakening, hence the person studying them 


unknowingly takes him towards them. This story of Rishi 
Gautam seems to me to be a mixed Spiritual and physical. It 
is not that the ancient people lacked understanding, that is 
why innumerable scriptures were created on the same simple 
yoga. Rather, it is because a person should remain in touch 
with Yoga throughout his life and at every moment. Man can 
get bored by reading the same thing over and over again, so 
yoga was adapted into countless stories and activities in 
various forms. For example, theoretically the meditative 
picture of Shiva itself remains near the Shakti passing 
through the Sushumna. It is said in this way that Shiva 
promised Ganga to be staying close to her. Perhaps Kundalini 
Shakti appeals to meditation because it is sexual based, and 
everyone knows that sexual matters are disclosed only to 
very close relatives or lovers. The closest and most intimate 
lover is the most favoured mental picture. Not only do you 
feel ashamed of a material object or person, you may also be 
left with an impression of their personality. But Guru or God 
is devoid of separate personality or is a form of impersonal 
God, hence they do not hinder the personality of a man, but 
only indirectly or silently helps in improving him further. That 
is why most of the time they are made to be considered as 
meditation pictures. Actually anything repeatedly favoured in 
mind can happen to be a meditation image, because every 
pure mental thing is sacred, impurity comes from materiality. 
That is why such a picture can also be called Kundalini 
picture. Through Sushumna, Shakti goes directly to 
Sahasrara, where the companion of non-duality is the lonely 
Kundalini picture. That is why these Kundalini based stories 
are called classical or shastriya stories or scriptures. Music 
can be anything, but that which is made up of a lot of 
thought and direct experience and helps in taking man to his 
ultimate goal, that is classical music. Similarly, classical 
dance, sports etc. can be any worldly activity. 


Rain is that in which there is abundance of water in the form 
of knowledge or power. No god can do this, because when 
materialism and evil are prevalent all around, then what can 
the gods do, because no one can forcefully change people’s 
thinking. Yes, the deity can give darshan and advise his 
devotee to do something so that the external environment 


does not affect him badly. Therefore Varun Dev advises 
Gautam Muni to dig a one hand deep pit. This is to activate 
the Muladhar, into which the water in the form of sleeping 
Kundalini Shakti as suppressed thoughts seeps. The same 
missing water gets filled in it. Although earlier also he was 
making his living through pranayama and meditation, but 
this was insufficient in front of the rain of awakening. It is 
common in the Puranas to mention a famine of a hundred 
years. In the scriptures, the age of a man is stated to be 100 
years. Not being awake within a hundred years of lifetime 
seems to me like a famine of a hundred years, which is said 
to be the death of living beings. This is because the entire 
creation including all living beings exists in the mind of man 
only. Brain dead means everything is dead. Deep pits also 
get filled with underground water, but pits of one hand’s 
length i.e. 10 or 12 inches were never seen filling with water 
on their own. If it was so then why would you have meditated 
and asked for a boon, you would have dug it up in the first 
place. Anyway, ordinary water does not give inexhaustible 
results and is not even divine. It also seems to me to mean 
that doing sadhana in a dark pit means in solitude, away 
from comforts and worldly tendencies, so that the energy 
saved from being spent in the world, which remains captured 
in darkness, is spent in brightening the Kundalini picture. And 
at the same time, he also gets the additional booster force of 
sexual tantra so that he can awaken faster, before the 
troubles of worldly life start again. Many times what happens 
is that we get a chance to stay away from worldly matters for 
a short period of time. During that time, if meditation is done 
like a tortoise or an ordinary move, then awakening cannot 
be achieved. The sages had indirectly done good to Rishi 
Gautam by banishing him, only then he could awaken 
Kundalini through intense meditation in solitude. Had he not 
been able to do it in that limited time, a new world would 
have been created for him in the new country and the same 
old story would have started. Because he attained awakening 
even before joining the new country heartily, seeing his 
achievement the old countrymen invited him back among 
them. These stories seem strange when seen superficially, 
but when seen deeply, they appear to be extremely practical 
and beneficial. This happens often with the common man. 


Not only the people of the world but also the family members 
and relatives are jealous of the person who actually does 
Spiritual work and keeps giving spiritual messages through it, 
and they keep looking for an excuse to fight with him. 
Actually, | am saying this because fake, and hypocritical 
religious people keep getting cheered. Then they feel at 
peace only by driving him away from them. However, they 
are deceived because when the lamp is removed, they are 
falling into darkness. When he awakens again in remote 
solitude, his old opponents seem to disappear, but some of 
those who had a soft spot for him at heart appear to be 
repenting. But an awakened person does not have any 
resentment towards those opponents in his mind, because it 
is their bad intentions that indirectly inspired him to get 
awakenings. This happens to many because this is the 
worldly principle, that is why it is written in the Puranas. 
What is the benefit of just writing empty stories? 


| think that at that time a person with the name Gautam or 
with the changed name would have searched for attaining 
awakening from Muladhar along with worldly pleasures. 
These discoveries may have been described indirectly or in 
the form of myths, so that people do not misunderstand or 
misuse them. Such sages were scientists or say Spiritual 
scientists who searched for truth. Learning from him, other 
sages also did the same, meaning everyone got water. First 
they ran here and there in search of water meaning 
knowledge or shakti. Anyway, in olden times people used to 
travel far and wide in search of knowledge. The further story 
that there was a fight on water etc., etc., seems to be 
ordinary physical events added to make the story interesting, 
which has not much to do with spirituality. It is possible that 
they too have some deep secret. Then Shiva appeared. 
Gautama requested Shiva to forgive his enemies. It is natural 
that when a man is rebuked and tortured by the world, then 
only he is able to meditate in solitude. He was awakened by 
meditation on Shiva, but now the effect of that awakening 
had to be maintained continuously throughout his life. This 
could have been possible only due to the functioning of 
Sushumna. This is said to be the descent of Ganga and its 
permanent existence through yoga etc. Momentary 


awakening can be achieved even without the experience of 
Sushumna, but Sushumna has its own importance in daily 
activities, because it keeps supplying power continuously. 
Sins continue to be destroyed by this power. 


| think one should be skeptical of mythology. Due to this the 
man runs his mind everywhere as to what could be its 
meaning. Due to this, doors of secrets open to him 
unknowingly. If these stories are accepted as true literally, 
then man becomes superstitious, unscientific and foolish. 
Meaning, they should be accepted as true but in the form of 
a hidden mystery, not literally in the ordinary physical way. 
Through such unusual mythological stories, our right brain 
becomes active, which remains dormant most of the time. To 
awaken, both parts of the brain must remain active in a 
balanced manner. Even this child can understand that the 
river Ganga cannot gush out of a branch of a tree. Similarly, 
the lack of physical water cannot be fulfilled by pranayam 
and meditation. Yes, the lack of power can definitely be 
compensated to some extent. Then if we understand it as a 
mysterious metaphor, then mountain means brain, from it 
worldly achievements means Shakti or Ganga descending 
through front channel reaching sycamore tree means 
muladhara chakra and going through its branch means 
sushumna channel aka Brahm Nadi and coming out of branch 
tip at gangadvar means sahasrar chakra, in which bathing by 
Gautam rishi means jivatma or soul resulted in destruction of 
all his sins. His discovery was also adopted by his disciples. 
His family members benefited from his good company. 
Sycamore tree is a divine plant, which is considered to be 
ruled by Venus, which is the representative planet of love, 
beauty, attraction, sexual pleasure, love marriage, wealth 
etc. From this it can be understood in itself what would have 
been called the branch of the sycamore. It also seems 
somewhat tantric. | also think that lovers get strength from 
each other’s Mooladhar. That is why Ganga seems to have 
been given the form of a woman. Anyway, Shakti is 
considered feminine. Now when the crooked sages also 
started imitating him, they did not succeed, because for the 
functioning of Sushumna one has to become innocent like a 
child, that a crooked person can’t become. Love and 


wickedness are against each other. The element of 
Swadhisthana Chakra is water. Water is also a symbol of 
love. For those sinners, Gautama made him descend to the 
lower world. This would have been called Kushavarta. 
Anyway, the consciousness of sinners is stuck on the lower 
chakras only. 


Reproduction happens only through Shakti. And from it a new 
man is created, in whom heaven and earth are included. The 
power that was left from that activity was the same power 
that Brahma, meaning the mind that created the entire 
universe including the body, gave it to Shiva at the time of 
his marriage. With the inspiration of Shiva, the mind in the 
form of Brahma passed the same through Sushumna in the 
form of Ganga. Well, it also has a tantric and scientific basis. 
Scientific discoveries so far have revealed that water was not 
created on Earth, rather it came from outer space bodies like 
comets. Ancient people also had this apprehension because 
they did not see water forming anywhere on earth. The same 
water kept changing its form in the form of ice, steam, clouds 
etc. That is why it would have been considered more divine. 


The burden of sins falls most heavily on the gods, which 
operates the body. The body keeps protecting a person from 
those sins through fasts, pilgrimages, yoga and other 
Spiritual practices. Perhaps it is from these reasons that 11 
years have been taken in the story, because in Hindu religion 
most of the things and activities are of 11 types. But the 
subtle imprints of those sins keep getting deposited on the 
chakras of the body. That is why the power of Sushumna is 
required to cleanse the chakras. 


The presence of Jupiter in Leo is a very good combination. In 
this the man is advanced in every field. Presence of Jupiter in 
Leo also helps in building deep relationships in love and 
relationships. Leo people have a sense of possessiveness 
towards their partner, but their love is also loyal and devoted. 
The presence of Jupiter in Leo is the reason for many yogas 
more than any one yoga. Jupiter is considered the most 
auspicious planet, which gives auspicious results in the fields 


of religion, knowledge, luck, wealth, marriage, children, 
education, business, politics etc. Leo is also a higher zodiac 
sign of Jupiter, which is regal, sunny, bright, proud, 
leadership, creative and generous. Therefore, Jupiter being in 
Leo is a combination of the qualities of both, which gives 
many auspicious results to the person. In fact, at such times 
of all-round development and adaptability, there is the 
highest possibility of Sushumna awakening and Kundalini 
awakening. It is said that the gods will remain near Ganga 
during such yoga. Because this combination seems rare, that 
is why it is said to come after 11 years. Because one does not 
get the benefit immediately at the time of Kundalini 
awakening but gradually gets it over the years with spiritual 
practice, when one’s conscience becomes quite clear. 
At the beginning of the story, | leave the answer to the 
readers as to what would be the meaning of doing penance 
for ten thousand years by Rishi Gautam and Ahalya. 


Kundalini Yoga Is the 
background music of life 


Friends, in the previous post we were talking about Shakti 
water. | think that the rain that Indra makes is the rain of 
awakening, he is the one who fires the thunderbolt in the 
form of Sushumna Shakti. Indra’s happiness means 
happiness or favor of all the gods. This is Chaddi kala aka 
allround development. | am not saying that Indra is not 
associated with physical rainfall. That is also definitely there 
because whatever is inside is also outside. Just as for rain to 
occur, favorable conditions are required with the help of all 
the Gods, similarly for awakening too. If there is love and 
faith in the Puranas, then all the paths start opening on their 
own. Then it came in the story that Gautam Muni got 
inexhaustible water with the boon of Varun Dev. Varun Devta 
is a major deity of the Vedas. He is the presiding deity of 
water. Without the power depicted as water, it is not possible 
to have correct knowledge of the esoteric spiritual Vedas. 
Varundev can give only limited water. Khwaja was also one 
such god of the Indus Valley civilization, who was the ruler of 
the sea, rivers and water. | had heard of a man who used to 
discover underground waters and made very accurate 
measurements, and was an accomplished worshiper of the 
Khwaja. By the way, even today in many villages Khwaja is 
worshiped as water god. It is possible that in the Vedas, in 
the secret language, Varundev has been mentioned as the 
symbol of that with the help of which the availability of 
Shakti-water in the body is maintained, but its readers or 
interpreters may have considered him as the god of physical 
water. Whatever may be the case, there is similarity on the 
inside and outside, hence they must be influencing each 
other. | myself feel that Kundalini Shakti starts moving very 
well near water sources like lakes, ponds etc. filled with pure 
water, because it is in the nature of both to flow. There is 
definitely a relation between the two. Among Hindus and 
Buddhists, Nagdevata is also considered the god of water. 
Kundalini Shakti or Nadi is also in the shape of a snake. In our 
village, both Neua meaning divine serpent or snake and 
Khwaja were considered to be the lords of the local waters 


and the vegetation growing around them. Anyone who cut 
vegetation around water was made to fear being chased by 
the Neua snake, which resulted in good protection of the 
forests. At many places | also saw Khwaja in the form of a 
fish-like idol. It means that Varun, Naga and Khwaja are 
connected and all three are gods of water-like power. It is 
also believed that they not only provide water, but also other 
worldly prosperity and protection. Meaning, they look more 
like a god of power or Shakti. 


Similarly, Lord Indra is also mentioned in abundance in the 
Vedas. There will be more description of a god who is 
necessary for the awakening. Because the basic aim of Veda 
is awakening. Perhaps in a secret way it has been written as 
rain. Where there is rain, there are deeds, sacrifices, yajanas, 
wealth and all the glory. It is from these that everyone 
remains in Chaddi kala or allround development. Awakening 
occurs in such a state. Of course it has both physical and 
Spiritual meanings, but the latter seems more accurate, 
because the Vedas seem to deal with Spirituality, not 
materiality. 


| think there is a difference between awakening and self 
realization. The first one is the beginning, while the second 
one is the peak or end of spiritual development. | found this 
through Al powered Bing search. It is said that the Kundalini 
of many people is awakened since childhood. If Kundalini 
awakening was completion of the development then why 
would there be rebirth after that. It is also possible that even 
after experiencing perfection, complete purification of the 
soul is necessary, for which many times a new birth is 
required. It is also said that the Kundalini of great people like 
artists and leaders also is already awakened. Bing Al is free 
and | found it to provide the best information, both in Hindi 
and English. Nowadays, Al is helping a lot in writing blogs and 
doing research. Further exploring, when a person feels 
darkness without physical contact with his body and 
functional mind, it is said that the Shakti is sleeping. But 
when a meditation picture always shines even in the midst of 
darkness, then it is said that the Shakti is awakened. From 


here the meditation begins, due to which the meditation 
picture gradually brightens, meaning the Kundalini Shakti is 
awakened more and more. Then there comes a time when 
the meditation image becomes so strong that the seeker 
does not feel any difference between himself and the 
meditation image, nor does he feel that he is meditating on 
it. Meaning, in this the meditator, the meditation picture and 
the process of meditation, all three become one. This is 
called Samadhi. During this period one can experience self- 
realization i.e. enlightenment at any time. Perhaps | was 
describing this earlier by calling it Kundalini awakening. No 
problem, it’s just a difference of terminology, there is no 
difference in experience. 


According to the previous story, the Shakti-water in the form 
of Ganga had told the gods to always reside in Sushumna on 
the condition that it would have to be given utmost 
importance. The meaning is clear that if the power flowing in 
Sushumna is not felt while doing yoga daily, then it will fade 
away. Meaning, of course, you may miss some work, but you 
should not miss yoga. What often happens is that only the 
physical karma is visible, not the mental or spiritual karma. In 
ancient India, people were engaged in mental activities like 
knowledge, devotion etc. more, which is the greatest activity 
because it gives liberation and the right pace to the cycle of 
creation. In the rest of the world, especially in the West, 
people were busy with materialism, cleanliness etc., which 
are clearly visible in the form of work. However, the best 
method is Karmayoga, in which physical work and yoga 
practice itself go together. 


Actually, Kundalini Yoga is the background music that 
connects the various tunes of life. When for some reason the 
main music stops playing, this background music becomes 
the basis for a happy life. Just as when the main music stops, 
the background music becomes very loud, in the same way, 
when the noise of worldly activities of life subsides, the 
meditation picture of Yoga starts shining very brightly, due to 
which it can also be awakened. Probably, in the Puranas, this 


has been compared to meditation in a pit or meditation in a 
dark prison inside the sea, etc. 


There is also another variation of the previous story of Rishi 
Gautam. In this, after the death of the cow, Gautam comes to 
know about the conspiracy of the crooked sages. Angered by 
this, he curses them and their children to remain ostracized 
from Shaivism and become hell-bound from it. It is said that 
then Kaliyuga was filled with people like them. There is no 
mention of him having seen Shiva in that version of the story. 
The meaning is clear that he did not take the conspiracy of 
the evil sages positively and did not do Shiv Sadhana 
properly, rather he used his accumulated energy in anger 
and cursing, that is why he did not attain awakening. Every 
action has a reaction. 


Kundalini awakening and self- 
realization aka enlightenment 
are basically one and the 
same thing 


| got information from Bing Al that self-realization aka 
enlightenment is achieved gradually and not all at once 
through any technique like yoga etc. But self-knowledge is 
called realizing oneself. How it can be delayed. Many people 
have realized this through yoga techniques. Luckily, with 
God’s countless grace | too had experienced its ordinary 
glimpse through the tantra-assisted Kundalini Yoga, which 
has been described on this website as the so-called 10- 
second Kundalini awakening momentary glimpse. 
Unfortunately, most people may not have been able to reach 
this level and may have been limited to Kundalini activation 
or so-called Kundalini awakening, and similar descriptions 
they may have made online, which may have been picked up 
by Bing Al. Perhaps chat gpt catches only what is more. Their 
Kundalini awakening would be of lower level than self- 
realization. There are levels of awakening or samadhi too. 
Just like some man sits awake, some walks, some runs, and 
even some conquers the world. Similarly, the final 
culmination of Kundalini awakening is self-realization. If by 
my Purana-reader guru’s indirect inspiration and gods’ 
proximity generated blessings, | had not given tantric 
strength to the ordinary Kundalini awakening, it would not 
have been fully awakened though momentarily. This 
complete awakening is self-realization. Meaning in this the 
mind has awakened and become as expanded as the soul or 
God. There is only a difference of level, nothing else. This can 
also be called complete samadhi. Samadhi in so called 
common language is also a very high level of Kundalini 
awakening. Actually, every experience is some level of 
Samadhi. We cannot experience something without being 
connected to it. But complete awakening means self- 
realization is one step ahead of the so-called or popular 
Yogasamadhi. In most cases, Samadhi is considered to be the 


final stage achieved through Yoga. This is because very few 
people would have gone beyond samadhi with the help of 
yoga, whose voices would have been ignored. In this world, 
there is great hearing for the lute. Most of the people would 
not be able to give sexual tantric strength to their Samadhi 
due to not being able to leave their homes due to social 
embarrassment or attachment to family life. Perhaps for this 
reason, Patanjali has also considered Samadhi as the last 
stage of Yoga in his Ashtangayoga Sutra. It is possible that he 
may not have been able to hear the voices of minority yogis. 
Patanjali also says that if after Samadhi, life is lived with the 
help of God, then by His grace one attains enlightenment 
soon. Whatever work a man can do on his own, one should 
try for it, after all God always helps everyone. It often 
happens that help is sought from God to fulfill the 
shortcomings of one’s work. | also think there has been a 
misunderstanding. Because Samadhi is often experienced 
during the practice of Yoga, but not the awakening. 
Awakening happens more often at some beautiful place like 
near a lake, on a mountain, or at a ceremony etc. But it 
should not be forgotten that even at that time, only the 
Kundalini energy gathered through regular Tantric Yoga 
practice running at that time leads to awakening. Because 
only through tantric method, yoga practice can give 
enlightenment scientifically and in a short time, i.e. within a 
few months, but with ordinary yoga, it is completely 
uncertain. Who knows whether Yoga will deliver final result in 
how many years, whether it will take a lifetime or not even in 
the lifespan. It seems that most people do not have a life. 
Whether people hide or tell is a different matter. A complete 
miracle or special grace is required, as Patanjali says. Well, 
this might have been Patanjali’s compulsion because if 
Tantra had been mentioned in his book, it might not have 
been very acceptable to the over idealistic society of that 
time. To become a successful writer, sometimes one has to 
cover up the truth. That is why | consider Shiva to be the 
greatest god, because he openly presents the truth to 
everyone. What is described on online portals as being 
achieved gradually with age, is not self-realization but the 
cleansing of the filth of thoughts of the soul. Only a few 
moments are enough to know the soul. We do not take more 


than a few moments to recognize a friend, then how can we 
take more time to recognize ourselves, the one who is closest 
to us. 


Kundalini tantra IS based 
on Shiva-linga 


Friends, according to a story of Shivpuran, once some 
disciples asked the Purana narrator whether Shivlinga is 
worshiped everywhere because of being a linga or there is 
some other reason. On this, he narrates a story that in a 
great forest named Daruk, devotees of Lord Shiva used to 
always meditate on Lord Shiva. Some time they had gone to 
the forest to collect Samidha. At the same time, Shiva came 
in the guise of a Tantrik Avadhoot to teach them and test 
them, who was making evil attempts while holding the Linga 
in his hand. The sages’ wives got very scared after seeing 
him. And others came there desperate and surprised. Some 
other women held each other’s hands and hugged each 
other. Some women became ecstatic with the friction of that 
embrace. At the same time Rishivars came and seeing that 
behavior became sad and distraught with anger. They started 
saying among themselves, who is this, who is this. When 
Tantrik Avadhoot did not say anything, they cursed him 
saying that he was behaving against the Vedas so his Linga 
should fall on the ground. So did happen. That Linga burnt all 
the objects in front like fire. Wherever it went, it would burn 
everything. It went to hell, went to heaven, went everywhere 
on earth, but did not settle anywhere. All the people became 
distraught, and those sages also became very sad. No god or 
sage found peace. The gods and sages who did not recognize 
Shiva took refuge in Brahma. Brahma scolded them a lot for 
unrecognising Shiva like illetrates though they being 
knowledgeables and scholars and said that if Goddess Parvati 
becomes Yonirupa then it will become stable. To please the 
Goddess, they were told the following method. An eight- 
petalled lotus should be made and a Kalash should be placed 
on top of it and water from the pilgrimage site containing 
Durva and Yavankurs should be filled in it. Then that Kumbh 
that’s holy handheld small pitcher should be invoked through 
Veda mantras. Then, after worshiping it in the Vedic manner, 
one should anoint the Shivalinga with the water from the 
Kalash while remembering Shiva and reciting Shatrudriya 
mantras. Then sprinkle the Linga with the same mantras, 


then it will become calm. Then after installing the arrow or 
Bana in the form of Girija yoni, the Linga should be placed on 
it and then it should be invoked. Then Shodashopachara 
pujan means God should be worshiped with sixteen types of 
ingredients, and then He should be praised. This will make 
the Linga stable and healthy, and all three abodes will 
become free from disorders and happy. 


However, this story cannot be explained. This is a sensitive 
religious matter connected with the faith. This can be 
understood by one himself. Yes, it can definitely be said that 
every man wanders in search of his sexual partner at some 
time or the other. During that time, the picture of trance that 
is formed in his mind can definitely make him irritable and 
jealous. This is because samadhi requires additional energy, 
which can be obtained only with the help of a close 
companion. The octagonal lotus is a symbol of the Anahata 
Chakra, and love originates on it only. Placing a pot filled with 
water from the holy places on it means gathering and 
concentrating the meditative power on it. Different 
pilgrimages mean different chakras. Durva grass symbolizes 
fertility, growth and development. Yav Ankur means sprouted 
barley, which appears the symbol of Chaddi Kala or all-round 
development, because it contains all types of tonics, vitamins 
and minerals, that is why it is also called green blood. In 
common language, it seems to mean to sacrifice everything 
for the heart, i.e. for love. Yogis are also like this, who leave 
their families and engage in worshiping their deity and attain 
knowledge. Worshiping that Kalash means worshiping the 
deity image etc. associated with shakti on the heart. Due to 
which it becomes more enlightened i.e. happy, just as by 
serving a person that person becomes happy. Worshiping 
with Veda mantras means giving more sharpness to that 
picture and making it clear, pure and luminous. Beejmantra 
also does the same. That mental meditation picture can be of 
anyone, Guru, beloved, deity, seed mantra etc. The amplified 
shakti along with that worshiped picture is then descended 
from Anahata Chakra to Swadhisthana and Muladhar Chakra. 
This is the anointing of that divine Linga with the water of the 
Kalash. In Abhishek, the stream of sacred power in the form 
of water flows continuously. Prokshan is called sprinkling of 


water. To bring down the Shakti from the heart pot again and 
again through morning and evening sadhana is the divine 
prokshan. Shatrudriya Mantra has various secret Mantras 
etc., which release various invisible waves, which have 
invisible divine spiritual effect on the mind of man. Although 
natural banalinga is found in the Narmada river, yet it seems 
that the arrow has been described as the seat or peetha of 
the Linga. When | inquired from Bing Al, it replied that a 
consecrated arrow is buried in the ground, and Shivalinga is 
installed on top of it. Maybe it is right. Because at many 
places such Shivalingas are seen which do not have a peetha 
or base. When asked, the priests etc. there tell that this 
Shivalinga is dug deep in the ground. It is possible that the 
arrow inside the ground may be its peetha. By the way, the 
Shape of the peetha also resembles an arrow. Then beyond 
that, in common man’s language, only tantric or divine 
sexual intercourse is considered. Well, everyone may have 
their own opinion. Due to this, all the three worlds i.e. the 
entire body becomes calm and healthy i.e. it becomes 
established in its pure self, because all the worlds are 
present in the body itself. This is often seen in the world, that 
is why spoiled or spoiling youth are married off by their 
families in a hurry. After that | have seen many 
improvements in them. But nothing improves in someones. | 
also blame their wives for this, yet males may appear more 
responsible for this too. That is why it is said that only Parvati 
as the peetha can hold the Shivalinga. That’s why Imparting 
Spiritual values to women was considered more important 
than to men, because woman is the foundation of the entire 
family. | heard a grown man express his personal opinion that 
if men were not married, they would eat each other raw, 
because wives control men. He himself married another 
woman after the death of his first wife. What has been said is 
correct. A friend was also saying that Tantric sex does not 
seem like sex at all, it becomes some other very sacred 
Spiritual act. | think only foolish, negative, unsuccessful and 
heretical people vent their anger by putting both in one 
category. In a book, Love Story of a Yogi, when the author 
was asked by a woman about the main reason for his recent 
Kundalini awakening, instead of marking out his experience 
to the questioner, he narrated his experience to everyone 


and said that while meditating on the Kundalini picture on 
the sensation of Vajrashikha, he got his awakening. He 
attained awakening by moving it in and out of its receptacle, 
but what he did was not sexual intercourse. On this, that 
Western or possibly American woman asking the question 
present on the online Kundalini group pinpoints him with 
loving surprise and little funny style and tells him that in their 
country it was called sexual intercourse, she don’t know 
which strange culture or land he belongs to. After reading 
that by all group members, everyone’s communication in 
that group on that topic had stopped, but diverted it to the 
usefulness of tantra accepting its utmost importance in 
awakening. Meaning, the author had expressed his feelings 
and indirectly answered the main question. This story also 
seems like the ankhing technique of Egypt. 


It is clear that the false propaganda spread by heretics or 
hindu opponents has been refuted in this story. The sage was 
very far-sighted. He knew that this could happen in the 
future. This story also reflects a common incident happening 
in the society, not any divine transcendental type etc. 
Unmarried teenagers are like that. They keep making 
gender-oriented jokes with girls whenever they get a chance. 
One of them is also the real knower of Shiva type Tantra. But 
people consider everyone to be the same lewd and 
scoundrel. It is said that along with the grain the mite also 
gets ground. How do public know who is true and who is a 
liar? Therefore, along with others, they also insult Shaiva and 
curse him, which means they also look upon him with evil 
eyes. In fact, the Shaiva linga is not a normal Linga. Due to 
the influence of Shaiva Tantra, it actually becomes the 
favorite deity. In a way, due to the effect of Sadhana, that 
Shaiva person becomes Linga form. Wherever he goes, in a 
way, his favorite linga is going in his form. The displeasure of 
that presiding deity troubles everyone, i.e. burns them. This 
can also happen, because the whole world is in the 
wandering minds of the people, and by being in the company 
of that presiding deity in the form of Shivalinga, they are 
getting disillusioned with their wandering minds, this can be 
called the burning of the world. Only a Tantrayogini like 
Parvati can wear that Maheshwar Linga properly, so that the 


meditation picture of the presiding deity can also be 
meditated along with it. An ordinary woman will not be able 
to cooperate in meditation. This means that the presiding 
deity will be angry and will remain without awakening. 
Kundalini activity without awakening can also be harmful, as 
it can go out of control. Uncontrolled power will burn 
everyone. Awakening shows man the true and complete form 
of power. And that form, though most beautiful and powerful, 
is also extremely peaceful. This keeps the man calm, 
meaning he remains in control of his awakened awareness. 


| found this story to be the one of most meaningful story of 
Shivpuran. One can write as much as one wants on this. The 
answer to the question raised by the sages in the beginning 
whether Shivalinga is worshiped only because it is a Linga or 
there is some other reason, has been given in a very civilized 
manner. This is similar to the answer given by the above 
author. Meaning, Shivlinga is not the ordinary worldly linga, 
as the wicked, foolish, lustful scoundrel, Entangled in the 
illusion of materialism, very work-oriented, anti-religious or 
sexy type of people understand or talk about. It is surprising 
when many Hindus also fall under their influence and 
provocation, and start thinking the same way. Everywhere on 
social media etc. they ban considering Shivalinga as a part of 
Shiva’s body, saying that it is only a sign or symbol of Shiva, 
or only a symbol of union of Shivashakti, or a cosmic union, 
not of any physical so and so. Well, at their place and ina 
spirituoscientific sense they are right too, because there is 
nothing like ordinary worldly object or organ in it. Learning 
from them, Bing Al also says the same. In this case, if the 
heretics fall very low, then those so-called Hindu protectors 
rise very high. No one lives in the middle of the practical 
world i.e. on the middle path. Extremism is prohibited 
everywhere. The middle path is the best. This can be 
understood with an example. There is only one gun. One 
civilized man kills a terrorist with it, while another madman 
kills the general public. What is the fault of the gun in this? 
Similarly, the Shivalinga controlled by Yogi Shiva kills the 
demon in the form of ignorance, while on the contrary, the 
ordinary one used by the common people kills the gods in the 
form of knowledge. Once | met a tantric person, who was a 


friend of my friend. He had taken initiation from Guru in the 
famous Kamakshi temple. He was telling that in front of him 
a Tantrik had used his mind controlling art aka Vashikaran 
Vidya on a common and unknown woman passing through a 
crowded road, due to which she was ready to follow him and 
do anything with him when he called her. However, he was 
just testing his knowledge, so he stopped the vashikaran, due 
to which the woman went back on her way. True Tantriks 
never do wrong things, if they do they go straight to hell. It 
means that there is a similar Vashikaran secret hidden in the 
above mythological story, because for the people of old 
times, awakening was the most important achievement, for 
which they used to make the most efforts. Nowadays, many 
other sciences and arts are prevalent, for which people 
struggle a lot. Yet those mythological teachings may still 
survive in Guru traditions, which, if supported by the Crown, 
can be discovered and preserved for posterity. 


Kundalini Yoga is just an add-on 
feature over the regular 
worldly life 


Friends, there is a story in Shivpuran about a demon named 
Andhak. It is said as that demon, the enemy of God, had 
taken all three worlds under his control. He lived in the 
Shelter of a pit in the sea. That extremely powerful demon 
would come out of that pit and after tormenting the people, 
would enter the same pit again. Then being sad, all the gods 
repeatedly prayed to Shiva and expressed all their sorrows to 
him. On this Shiva assured them that he would kill him and 
told them to go there with his army, he himself was coming 
there with the Ganas. Then when that terrible darkness, 
which hated the gods and sages, came out of that pit, and 
the gods entered that pit. Then the gods and demons fought 
a very terrible war with each other. By the grace of Lord 
Shiva, the gods became victorious in that war. As soon as he 
entered the pit after being tormented by the gods, Lord Shiva 
pierced and lifted him with his trident. Then, sitting in the 
trident, he meditated on Lord Shiva and started praying, “O 
God, after seeing you at the end, the living being becomes 
like you.” Shivji became happy and asked him to ask for a 
boon. Then the demon, having attained Sattvik Bhava, bowed 
to Lord Shiva and praised him and sought his devotion for 
himself and requested him to reside there. On this, Shankar 
threw the demon in the same pit and with the wish of public 
welfare, he settled there in the form of a linga. 


Spirituo-psychological or scientific analysis 
of the above pauranik mythological story 


| think the subconscious mind itself has been called a dark 
demon. This is what controls the man. Whatever happens to 
a person unknowingly comes under his influence. That is why 
a person, under the influence of alcohol etc., reveals deeply 
buried thoughts, feelings and physical actions. At that time 
the present conscious mind remains inactive, due to which 


the subconscious mind gets more opportunity to control the 
body. The pit of the ocean is the Muladhara Chakra. There is 
water in the ocean too, and there is water in the form of 
Shakti in the chakras also. The ocean is also located at the 
lowest point on the land, and the Muladhara Chakra is also 
considered to be located at the lowest point in the body. The 
empty hole in the middle of the chakra is that pit. Just as 
Muladhara Chakra is the most remote and inactive part of the 
body, similarly the subconscious mind is also the most 
remote and inactive part of the entire mind. Just as there is 
darkness in the depths of the ocean due to lack of light, 
similarly there is darkness in the subconscious mind. 
Therefore, both Muladhar and subconscious mind are shown 
living together at one place. Andhak means blind or one who 
causes darkness. When a man is under the influence of the 
Subconscious mind, it also makes him blind or in darkness. 
Just aS a person wakes up and becomes active with vigor 
after remaining in the subconscious mind for some time in 
the form of sleep etc., in the same way, the power sleeping in 
the form of subconscious mind in Muladhar wakes up and 
rises up, making the entire body and mind chakras healthy 
and active. Old desires and habits are suppressed in the 
Subconscious mind in the form of subtle desires. These 
determine the behavior of man. When a man’s mental 
strength becomes weak, these desires can awaken and 
create six vices like lust, anger etc. in his mind, due to which 
he often commits bad deeds, which leads to his downfall or 
destruction. These two keep increasing each other, desires 
leading to bad actions and bad actions creating desires 
again, and again so and so cyclically. Even a good work will 
be considered bad if attachment is joined to it, because this 
attachment helps in the formation of lust. Yes, compared to 
bad work, it will be beneficial that good work will also get 
good results. However, by enjoying a good fruit with 
attachment, it will also become a lust and get registered in 
the subconscious mind, which will make the person do good 
work again. Whatever type be the action or result, if 
attachment comes along then it will definitely bind one. 
Consider good deeds and their fruits as chains of gold, and 
the action and fruits of bad deeds as chains of iron. Both will 
surely trap a man in the cycle of birth and death. After that 


Short attack of andhak rising up from muladhara or 
subconscious, when the man regains consciousness, that lust 
that remained awake for a while again goes into the pit of his 
subconscious mind. This happens again and again. Andhaka 
means subconscious mind and the various doshas aka vices 
arising from it mean the various demons in his army. As soon 
as the vices like lust, anger etc. start dominating a person 
means andhak coming out of pit, at the same time the 
meditation picture in the form of Shiva starts appearing on 
the lower chakras by meditating on the nondual deities 
expressed by him with the help of nondual literatures like 
physiology philosophy aka sharirvigyan darshan etc. or 
nondual enhancing deeds like worship of gods etc. Same 
thing happens with yoga also. Through yoga, when the life 
force of the body revolves and reaches the Muladhar, then it 
can be called the arrival of the gods there, because the gods 
are associated with the body parts and the power that moves 
them. The army of gods would have been said to be Spiritual 
acts and the army of Shiva i.e. Ganasena would have been 
said to be tantric acts. Both complement each other. It is 
natural for the meditation picture of Shiva to be expressed 
along with Shakti. There the war with the demons means the 
manifestation of the suppressed thoughts that are gross or 
associated with this birth and thereby their weakening or 
destruction. Thoughts from countless births are buried in the 
subconscious mind. Therefore it is not so easy to defeat it. 
When power reaches the brain, it continues to appear in the 
form of gross thoughts and actions, and when power reaches 
the Mooladhar, which is farthest from it, it keeps hiding in its 
dark original form. Meaning the man is completely under its 
control, although he may feel that he is doing everything as 
per his own will. As soon as it reaches Muladhara with Shakti, 
it rises again with Shakti going up through the back channels. 
Meaning, aS soon as it reaches the Muladhar Chakra while 
going down, it starts rising up through the ida, pingla and 
Sushumna nadis. This is hanging of Andhak on his trident by 
Shiva. After reaching the brain through those channels it 
becomes pure by the company of shiva form meditation 
image. From there it then falls down through the front 
channel and again reaches the Muladhara Chakra. This cycle 
continues. Because Muladhar Chakra keeps purifying that 


Andhaka by lifting it on the trident, hence this is a type of 
Andhakeshwar Linga. Shivalinga means Shiva’s linga as it is 
associated with the Shiva-form meditation picture. Because 
Dhyanachitra, like background music, protects man from the 
jolts of the noisy music of life, hence the story says that 
Shiva protected the gods and people from darkness. 
Meaning, if Yoga brings out the old suppressed thoughts and 
desires to purify them, then the meditation used in it keeps 
the Yogi from falling prey to them. If one falls prey to these 
then despite weakening of those, new lustful desires will be 
again formed. The meaning is clear that without meditation, 
yoga is incomplete and can also be harmful. Meaning there 
should also be a meditation session at the end of the yoga 
session. It takes a lot of time to cleanse the desires. 
Therefore, yoga should be continued and practiced regularly 
throughout life. By the way, it is worth noting that even with 
common worldly tasks, Shakti keeps moving around. When a 
person does physical work, the body and mind get a lot of 
blissful freshness and energy due to blood circulation. Then, 
when a person gets tired and takes rest, the body does not 
have the activity to circulate the blood, due to which the 
running blood gets deposited on the Muladhara Chakra due 
to its heaviness, and along with it the power also gets 
deposited there. Due to this, the man again falls into the trap 
of darkness of subconscious mind. Bored with that, he then 
tries to divert the power accumulated on that Mooladhar by 
adopting worldly activities. Due to this, energy reaches the 
entire body and brain and the person becomes happy again. 
Meaning, darkness comes out of the pit and starts controlling 
the physical world. Because the actions of a man are those 
which are buried in his subconscious mind. However, due to 
the company of elders, gurus and knowledgeable people, he 
also avoids doing bad deeds by coming under its influence. 
But for how long? There is no complete security until it is 
completely destroyed. Checked 


If the old thoughts keep getting weakened due to worldly 
activities, then new thoughts also keep getting deposited in 
the subconscious mind. Meaning running ahead, gap 
widening behind. That is why work is said to be done in the 
form of Karmayoga. In this there is no attachment to the 


doer, action and result. Due to non-attachment, they do not 
settle deeply in the subconscious mind but instead remain on 
the surface and soon come out and get destroyed. Due to 
this, overall destruction of thoughts is more than the birth of 
thoughts, due to which the darkness in the form of 
subconscious mind gets purified gradually. 


Secondly, during yoga we allow the suppressed thoughts to 
be expressed openly. This is because they cannot make us 
do ridiculous work or behavior, because at that time we are 
not working at all but are doing yoga in solitude. Due to this, 
they keep appearing and getting destroyed again and again. 
These can be called misfires of wet gunpowder. On the other 
hand, at work we do not allow bad thoughts to appear 
openly, because they can mislead us and make us do bad 
deeds and behave badly. 


Thirdly, meditation aka dhyana is more effective during yoga. 
They reduce the ill effects of the manifestation of ludicrous 
suppressed thoughts. This is because more attention is paid 
to meditation, due to which less attention is paid to the bad 
mental tendencies that are grossly expressing. Although 
meditation is effective even during Karmayoga, but not as 
much as during Yoga. Although during my Karma Yoga, 
meditation image was more effective than ordinary yoga, yet 
it was Slightly less effective than meditation image in Tantra 
Yoga. There was only a little difference. Of course, the power 
worthy of awakening was obtained only through Tantra Yoga. 
There is a lot of power in Karmayoga also. Considering this 
Spiritual scientific benefit of Dhyanachitra, the author of 
Shivpuran has given it the form of Shiva. With the help of 
yoga, he keeps lifting Andhak on the trident again and again, 
purifying it and throwing it back into the pit. Meaning, the 
subconscious mind keeps rising up with Shakti and Shivchitra 
through the nadis of the back channel, keeps getting purified 
by releasing its energy, and keeps falling down through the 
front channel. Then again rises up from behind. This cycle 
continues. 


Fourthly, worldly activities cannot revolve the power aka 
shakti as much and as quickly as through yoga. By doing 
yoga throughout the day, Shakti can be rotated hundreds of 
times, whereas while working, Shakti can be rotated only 
maximum 4-5 times. Shakti rotates once in the morning after 
breakfast. Then there is rest during lunch time. After rest, the 
power rotates once again through work. Everyone rotates the 
power approximately 1 or 2 times. Many people relax and 
have tea in the evening. The subsequent work rotates the 
power for the third time. Fast people rotate it fourth time 
doing everything from waking up early to having breakfast. 
Very active people even rotate the Shakti for the fifth time 
between the time of evening puja and after eating food till 
sleeping. Meaning, for the energy to circulate, rest along with 
work is also necessary. 


This is all a game of gunpowder. The gunpowder of thoughts 
stored in the subconscious mind has to be burnt in such a 
way that there is no explosion and it keeps burning. For this, 
little water as detachment can be sprayed on it. This is the 
aim of yoga. Natural efforts are also a mild form of Yoga, in 
which a man keeps getting the results or fruits of his 
thoughts of action buried in his subconscious mind. With this, 
those associated old Karmic thoughts are remembered by 
them, by this they releasing their energy, meaning they were 
in the form of suppressed energy, which comes out and 
merges into the soul. Energy is neither created nor 
destroyed. It keeps appearing from the soul and keeps 
merging in it. The suppressed thoughts of this birth are 
remembered, but the thoughts of the previous birth keep 
disappearing without being remembered. Although it is 
definitely felt. That is why after getting any good or bad 
results, a person feels lightness and happiness arising in 
himself. Because a person is afraid of bad results and takes 
them in a different and negative form, hence even though 
there is joy in it, he is not able to feel it. If a person adopts 
the attitude of non-attachment and non-duality, then there is 
only happiness, whether the result is good or bad. Kundalini 
Yoga has been created to speed up this natural Yoga. 


Kundalini Yoga assisted by 
Beeja Mantras 


Friends, there is a seed mantra associated with each chakra. 
Om is associated with Sahasrara Chakra, Om or Sham with 
Ajna Chakra, Haam with Vishuddhi Chakra, Yam with Anahata 
Chakra, Ram with Manipura Chakra, Vam with Swadhisthana 
Chakra, and Lam with Muladhara Chakra. In this article we 
will try to understand the science related to them. The dot 
above the Beej Mantra is in the form of a Chakra. This makes 
the attention more pinpoint, meaning more focused and 
effective. By meditating on the Chakra in the visual form of 
the Beej Mantra and reciting its sound in the mind, the upper 
Prana and the lower Apana reach that Beej Mantra and get 
together. This is a good scientific technique to concentrate 
the power of the entire body at one point. Many people find it 
difficult to concentrate directly on the chakra. This is a good 
option for them. Due to this, the meditation picture on the 
chakra also becomes more clear. | did not need that kind of 
Bija Mantra, because | already had a clear experience of 
meditation image on the Chakras. It seems that | tworked as 
a seed mantra for me. With that | was able to give power to 
the chakras. Only now have | understood the usefulness of 
Beej Mantras. Earlier | used to take them lightly. For those 
who have not yet developed their meditation image, Beeja 
Mantras are very important, because these develop their 
meditation. Attach the point aka bindu at the top of the Bija 
Mantra to the most sensitive place of the Chakra, and add 
the remaining part of the Bija Mantra to it as per your wish, 
diagonally, straight, upside down, even rotating around the 
point and let the complete Bija Mantra be formed. If you 
chant it in your mind, you will immediately feel the benefits. 
For example, make the navel hole the point of Ram Beeja 
Mantra. Ham is associated with the throat chakra because 
perhaps it is a symbol of ego, and the sound of ‘Main Main’ 
means ‘Aham, Aham’ or I, | in English comes from the throat 
itself. The letter Om has been given to Sahasrara and Ajna 
Chakra because there is a sense of non-duality in all three. 
The Sham # Bija Mantra is given to the Ajna Chakra because 


it means peace in Sanskrit, and distraction, fatigue or 
restlessness of the mind has a greater impact on the Ajna 
Chakra, as it is associated with the intellect and worldly 
functions of the mind. Sahasrara is already a transcendental 
chakra, hence there is no sense of disturbance in it. These 
are the two main chakras of the brain. Yam is given to the 
Heart Chakra because the feeling of compassion resides in 
the heart, and both have the letter Ya. t or ram may have 


been given to the navel because food burns in the stomach, 
and burning is also called radna in Hindi. The mantra of Ba 
Bam Bam Bam Bam Lahari is the main mantra to please 
Shiva. Perhaps this is the seed mantra of Swadhisthana 
Chakra that’s vam. Lam might have been given to Muladhar 
because the letter La has sexual connotation. The point 
located above the Bijamantra has two benefits. Firstly, it 
gives a non-dual sound like Om, and secondly it helps in 
concentrating of energy on the sensational acupoints or 
chakra points. Actually, lotuses of different colors and petals 
are also associated with different chakras. Colors increase 
the resolution i.e. clarity of the picture. The petals reveal the 
connection of the chakras to the body. Due to this, sufficient 
life force reaches the chakras from the body. For example, 
the two petals on the Ajna Chakra mean two nadis from both 
the eyebrows. It is Ida and Pingala that bring power to the 
Ajna Chakra. Similarly, the hexagon of the heart chakra 
brings power from all sides here. Sky blue color has been 
given to the throat chakra because sound travels only in the 
sky. Green color has been given to the heart chakra because 
it symbolizes peace, kindness, greenery, growth and 
development. Yellow color has been given to the navel 
chakra because the food gets burnt in the stomach and turns 
yellow, just as the leaves of a tree turn yellow due to excess 
sunlight. Turmeric is yellow and so are the laddus. 
Swadhisthana Chakra gets more attention with orange color. 
Sexual desire is associated with sour taste and orange is also 
sour and sweet. Muladhar Chakra has been given red color 
because red blood is associated with violence etc. in the 
darkness of ignorance etc. Purple color helps in meditation on 
Sahasrara Chakra. Similarly, dark blue or black color gives 
good attention to Ajna Chakra. Although the practice of 
colors and lotus flower is a bit difficult, but it seems that the 


benefits are equally great. Only colors or colored circles can 
also be meditated upon. The point on top of Vam bijamantra 
in Sanskrit can be considered an orange. Similarly, the 
sensory point of the Muladhara Chakra, i.e. the point of Lam 
bijamantra can be considered as a red tomato. The navel 
hole can be considered the point of ram bijamantra and a 
yellow colour laddu. The green hexagon on the heart chakra 
can be considered as the point of Yam. The central dense 
sphere of Sahasrara of lotus flower or any other flower can be 
considered as the point of Om. It has petals all around. Lotus 
flower has been taken because the lotus leaf remains 
detached from water even when it is in it, and perhaps by 
meditating on it man too will learn to remain detached from 
the world. The shape of the circle from petal to petal through 
the central knot is also similar, like there is an oblique 
bracket above Om. The point can be considered as the seed 
of that flower inside that sphere. There are no set rules. You 
can meditate in any way that seems easy and effective. 
Similarly, the flowers of Ajna Chakra and Vishuddhi Chakra 
can also be considered a part of the syllables Om and Ham 
respectively. Whatever seed mantra comes to your mind, you 
should keep meditating on it, it automatically settles in its 
place. All chakras are interconnected. If only ‘Ham’ is being 
concentrated on the throat, then it does not matter, when it 
will draw energy, then the middle chakras like Anahata, 
Manipura etc. will themselves receive energy because they 
lie in the middle path. Due to this, the seed mantras of those 
chakras like Yam, Ram etc. automatically come to mind. 
When the chain of energy rotates, all the chakras are 
automatically massaged. By strengthening one chakra, all 
the chakras themselves get strengthened. It is like pushing 
one box seat of Chandol i.e. Merry Go Round gives motion to 
all the box seats. With practice, their seed mantras can be 
meditated on all the chakras from head to toe like beads of a 
rosary. Perhaps this is the real rosary and the physical rosary 
also makes it active. 


Kundalini yoga can make a dead 
person alive 


There is a story of Sudharma Brahmin in Shivpuran. He 
remained satisfied, happy and in a non-dual state. He had a 
devout wife named Sudeha. Much of his life passed but he 
did not have any son. Still the philosopher Sudharma did not 
feel sad at all. But his wife was very sad about not having a 
son. She asked her husband to try for a son. Then Sudharma 
would scold him and explain what his son would do. Who is 
whose mother and who is whose father, who is the son and 
who is the brother or friend. Everyone is selfish. Once a 
neighbor woman scolded Sudeha for not having a son. She 
again started complaining to her husband. He explained to 
her a lot but when she still did not understand, he placed two 
flowers in front of her and asked her to pick one of them. 
Sudeha picked up the flower on which the Brahmin had 
thought about not having a son. Still she did not agree and 
threatened to commit suicide without her son. Then Sudeha 
brought her real sister Ghushma and asked her husband to 
marry her for a son. Sudharma explained to her that she 
would become jealous of her if she had a son, which would 
hurt her. On that Ghushma said how could she be jealous of 
her real sister. Ghushma used to make, worship and immerse 
one hundred and one earthly Lingas every day. In this way, 
when the number of one lakh Lingas was completed, she was 
blessed with a beautiful son. Sudharma was very happy to 
see him and started enjoying pleasures without attachment. 
After that Sudeha became very jealous of Ghushma. All the 
relatives started respecting Ghushma. Although Sudharma 
still gave more respect and love to Sudeha, there was deceit 
in her mind. Ghushma’s son also got married. Burning 
Sudeha Couldn’t stay calm on a day. She killed the stepson 
who slept with his wife, dismembered his body and threw 
those pieces into the river. Coincidentally, Sudeha also used 
to immerse the earthly shivlingas at the same place. When 
the daughter-in-law woke up in the morning and saw 
splattered blood and pieces of her husband’s body scattered 
on the bed, she cried. Sudeha also started crying while 
acting. But Ghushma did not feel sad at all and continued 


fasting for the Shiva’s prayers. Her husband also did not pay 
any attention until the Shivling worship was completed. With 
a steady mind, she took the name of Shiva and went to leave 
the earthly Shivalingas and when she turned back, she saw 
her son on the banks of that lake. Ghushma was not very 
happy to see her son alive, just as she was not sad at his 
death, but remained ready to meditate on Lord Shiva. At the 
same time, Satisfied Sadashiv appeared from there and 
asked Ghushma to ask for a boon. Then she asked for the 
boon of protecting her sister Sudeha. When Shiva expressed 
surprise at this, Ghushma said that all the sins are destroyed 
by the mere sight of the one who does good to the one who 
does harm. Then Shiva became happy with this and asked 
her to ask for another boon. Then Ghushma asked Shiva to 
always stay with her. On this, Shiva settled there under the 
name Ghushmeshwar Linga. Seeing her son alive, Sudeha 
felt ashamed and sought forgiveness from both of them and 
started fasting to erase her sins. 


Psychological analysis of the 
ghushmeshwar linga story 


The glory of Karmayoga, non-attachment and non-duality has 
been described in this story. Ghushma was not very happy 
even after seeing her son. Meaning, a Karmayogi also feels 
happy for the benefit of another person, but not much, that 
is, not so much that he becomes attached to him. Ghushma 
did not feel sad at all after seeing her dead son. The one who 
had to go, has gone. What was the use of feeling sad for him? 
There was no sorrow for herself at all, meaning the 
Karmayogi does not accept sorrow for himself at all. Perhaps 
he doesn’t even consider happiness for himself. The little 
happiness she felt on seeing his living son must have been 
for him, not for herself. By living in a non-duality, one 
automatically starts concentrating on the desired aka ishta. It 
is said that she was not happy to see her son alive, but 
remained attentive to Lord Shiva. As far as justice is 
concerned, meditation on God should give rise to a feeling of 
non-duality, perhaps this is what has happened. This is the 
principle reason behind the development of spiritual qualities 


through Kundalini meditation. A dead person can never come 
alive. Whatever she saw as her dead son, she saw him in her 
mind only because of her deep meditation due to the 
influence of her Shiv Sadhana. Then she also saw Shiva, 
which means she became awakened by that meditation. If 
her son had really come alive then why would Sudeha do 
penance and atone for it, because then the sin of killing her 
son would itself have been destroyed if her son was alive. 
The story tells indirectly that seeing her killed son in the 
meditative imagination of sudeha by ghushma made her 
remember her that sin repeatedly that propelled her to do 
penance. Many films have been made on such types of 
stepmothers. A Punjabi film Saunkan Saunkne seems to have 
exactly the same story. The difference is that the daughter- 
in-law in this herself separated and went to her maternal 
home before any harm could be done by her. As far as 
forgiving the one who has done wrong is concerned, the 
Vedas and Puranas are full of such examples. Perhaps that is 
why Hinduism is the most tolerant community. But many 
communities also took unfair advantage of it. It is said that if 
Prithviraj Chauhan had not forgiven Muhammad Gauri in the 
battle of Tarain, India would not have become like a slave of 
the Mughals for hundreds of years. Glimpse of slavery still 
appears existing in some form or the other. Everyone knows 
which communities can create the most obstacles in 
implementing the population control law and uniform civil 
code. There are many such examples. Now take Myanmar’s 
Buddhist saint Wirathu. His statement was widely shared on 
social media that love and tolerance are good but you cannot 
sleep next to a mad dog. Well, this thing started based on 
Purana, it has no separate purpose. Overall, extremism is 
harmful everywhere. Meaning that forgiving others is 
certainly very virtuous, but if the person in front is inclined to 
kill you then what will you do with that virtue, because 
everything depends on the body. However, Lord Shiva seems 
to be against this extremism, because almost everywhere he 
expresses surprise at such a boon of extreme tolerance. He 
would not have been surprised if asking for such a boon was 
natural or absolutely right. By the way, he was also very 
happy about this. Meaning that the line dividing tolerance 
and over-tolerance is very thin, and reactions should be 


tailored to the occasion. | think people like Ghushma, Atri etc. 
were great devotees of Shiva who attained awakening with 
the help of Shivalinga. To honor them, permanent Shivalingas 
would have been built in their names at their residences so 
that people could continue to get inspiration from them. 
When physical scientists are also given such credit then why 
not spiritual scientists? This seems to be the reason behind 
the origin of Ghushmeshwar Linga, Atrishwar Linga etc. This 
story also gives an idea that remembering someone after 
death gives him/her benefits in the next world. It is possible 
that when Ghushma, through intense meditation, saw her 
son alive, he may have become alive in a subtle way, 
although of course not visible to anyone. That is why many 
cultures have a tradition of remembering and worshiping 
dead relatives every year. Perhaps this is a relationship 
similar to that between a mother and the child growing in her 
womb. Many times, when an evil spirit resides in someone’s 
body, it also makes him do wrong things. Then he has to be 
chased away with the help of Tantrikas. That is why it is said 
to avoid bad company. Good souls do not interfere much in 
anyone’s body because they understand their limitations, 
however, they keep guiding them on the right path whenever 
the need arises. Therefore, there is no need to chase them 
away, rather it is done by calling them, like invocation of the 
gods. Well, moreover what strange can not happen in this 
world full of wonders. 


Kundalini awakens’ from the 
Kunda and activates the 
vaikalpik Kalachakra as 
Sudarshan Chakra in which 
sharirvigyan darshan ek adhunik 
kundalini tantra book helps a lot 


It is said that the word Kundalini is not in the scriptures. But 
the word Kund is there a lot in Shivpuran. In Sanskrit 
language, a masculine object shaped like an earring or ring is 
called Kundalin and a feminine object having such shape is 
called Kundalini. Perhaps the word Kundal is also derived 
from the word Kund. The relation between the two is clearly 
visible. The literal meaning of Kund is round pit, and Kundal 
means round ring. The only difference between the two is 
that the pit has a bottom surface, but the rings do not, 
otherwise both are the same. Just as word Harshil is made 
from Harsh, similarly Kundal can be made from Kund. Harsh 
means full of joy and Kundal means accompanied with pit. 
This is because kundal fits properly inside kund. Only any 
Sanskrit grammar scholar can check this guess of mine, if he 
is reading this article. Even if a kundal is not formed from the 
word kund, the snake gets molded into the shape of the coil 
and hides in the kund i.e. the pit. That is why it is said that 
the snake has made its kundali. It should not be surprising if 
the pit in which a snake coils itself and hides is called a kund. 
In the dark pit of Mooladhar, the widespread power of the 
mind shrinks and gets hidden in the form of a meditation 
picture. That is why that power is called Kundalini. It climbs 
up through all the chakras and spreads in the nadis of the 
back and brain shaped like a hooded snake. Vishnu installed 
Shivalinga in the pit. Since it is related to religious faith, not 
much can be said about it because some staunch Hindus 
start doubting the fact that the one who calls the stories of 
the Puranas mythical is a Hindu. Well, in their opinion they 
are also right, because these stories are not fabricated. 
Myths are also of two types, one apocryphal or useless type 


and one based on scientific truth or useful type. The myths of 
the Puranas are of a different type, meaning that although 
they may seem like myths, they are completely based on 
scientific truth. That is why we highlight their scientific truth 
so that they are not considered fabricated myths and their 
lost respect can be regained. However, with common worldly 
thinking, it can be understood that the above Shivalinga 
worship by Lord Vishnu is similar to the way some skilled 
Tantra yogis gave Shivdhyan-superimposed sexual power to 
Muladhar as generated from Yabyum Asana. It is only by 
Shiva’s meditation on the Linga that it becomes pure and 
becomes Shivlinga. The method of great and ideal yogis like 
Dev Vishnu may certainly be advanced and sattvik, but the 
aim of all is the same, and that is to awaken the Shakti. 


Vishnu was trying to worship Shiva with a thousand lotus 
flowers, that is, he was trying to lift the Shivadhyanachitra 
from the perineum up to the Sahasrara Chakra through the 
spine. Shiva hid a flower with his Maya shakti, which means 
that Vishnu, being fascinated by Shiva’s illusive power, was 
not able to offer his ego to Shiva. Vishnu searched for that 
last flower everywhere on earth but could not find it, 
meaning ego is within, not outside. Even if the entire external 
creation is offered to Shiva, the offering will still remain 
incomplete, because the ego residing inside the brain has not 
been offered. Vishnu then offered his one eye i.e. by 
awakening the third eye i.e. Ajna Chakra, he brought its 
power down from the front channel to the Muladhar Chakra. 
Being completely satisfied with that, Shiva present there 
climbed up to the Sahasrara Chakra and became fully 
awakened, that is, being pleased, he presented himself in 
visual form to Vishnu. The web of ego resides in the form of 
intelligence, and the symbol of intelligence is the 
Agyachakra. Meaning, the power of the mind which was 
trapped in the web of intellectualistic worldliness, got freed 
and got attached to Shivdhyan Chitra i.e. Kundalini picture, 
due to which it woke up. Then Shiva gave him Sudarshan 
Chakra, meaning the Sahasrara Chakra formed after su 
darshan or good visualisation or Shivadarshan i.e. 
awakening, is Sudarshan Chakra. Killing evil and demons 
means eliminating bad thoughts. At many places it is also 


shown like a rod, which seems to symbolize the Sushumna 
Nadi. 


Shri Krishna had lifted Govardhan Mountain on the Sudarshan 
Chakra itself, that is, through the awakened Sahasrara 
Chakra, the form of knowledge, he made the physical world 
so light, subtle and ethereal that it rose up and came in the 
middle of the void sky. With this, the cowherds men, i.e. the 
common worldly people under the influence of senses, were 
saved from the indiscriminate rain of sorrows, which was 
being caused by Indra in the form of ego. Cow is called the 
senses and the one who grazes the cow means an ignorant 
human being suffering from the influence of senses. This 
seems to be a similar case of Ravana lifting Mount Kailash on 
his arms. Sudarshan Chakra moving only at will and coming 
back on its own after striking and always rotating indicates 
that it is a divine chakra i.e. Sahasrara Chakra. Its spokes, 
axles etc. indicate seasons etc. Kalachakra is also compared 
to this among Buddhists. Even in Kalachakra, there are 
spokes etc. equal to Sudarshan Chakra which indicate the 
movement of time, seasons etc. Both contain thunder and 
electricity. This is the energy flowing in Sushumna and giving 
instant awakening. Like Sudarshan Chakra, Kalachakra is also 
associated with Vishnu, Krishna, Shiva etc. Both are 
described in the Vedas. However, Kalachakra is mainly used 
among Buddhists. 


There are three types of Kalachakra, baahya or external, 
aantarik or internal and gupta or secret. External macro 
universe is included in external, internal is micro universe 
inside the body and secret is included in mysterious 
liberating sciences like yoga etc. | think that having complete 
knowledge of one leads to knowledge of all three. For an 
extroverted person, it is the sadhana of the external 
Kalachakra. internal for an introvert and Gupt Kalachakra is 
made for Sanyasin or renunciate type of person. Knowledge 
and liberation come from all three. Premyogi Vajra’s 
philosophy of physiological science or sharirvigyan darshan 
can be called a kind of internal Kalachakra, because it 
describes the universe inside the body. Kalachakra is a circle 


in which various deities, symbols and figures are displayed. 
In fact, there is a world with similar diverse forms in all the 
three time cycles aka kalchakras. By its sadhana it is natural 
that Sushumna, Sahasrara and Kundalini etc. get awakened, 
which then destroy the demons in the form of evil thoughts 
and nature. In this case also Kalachakra and Sudarshan 
Chakra are same. It can be said that the Kalachakra is 
available to a common man, whereas the Kalachakra 
available to an ideal man like Vishnu has been called 
Sudarshan Chakra. The common man destroys only his own 
ignorance whereas Vishnu and his incarnations like Ram, 
Krishna, Buddha etc. destroy the ignorance of countless 
devotees. That is why Sudarshan Chakra can be called a 
special Kalachakra. 


In Vamana Purana also this chakra has been called 
Kalachakra. Its twelve spokes indicate the twelve months and 
six navels indicate the six seasons. It is also said that the 
mantra ‘Sahasrat Hum Phat’ is inscribed on its spokes. This 
sounds like a Buddhist mantra. The Sikhs also used the 
Chakra as a weapon, which could be used directly or by 
throwing. At many places it is also said that the center of 
Sudarshan Chakra is made of Vajra. Vajra is the same spinal 
cord through which Vajra Shakti passes to Sahasrara. This 
article will be completely understood after reading the next 
article because its original story described in Shivpuran will 
be written in it. 


Even in Rigveda, Sudarshan Chakra has been called 
Kalachakra. Apart from the three Kalachakras, there is also a 
fourth alternative Kalachakra, in which the mind is not 
allowed to be affected by the movement of time. This is the 
chakra of enlightenment and spiritual knowledge. This is 
Advaita, this is Dvaitadvaita, meaning Advaita is living amidst 
duality. This is the concept of tantra philosophy called body 
science philosophy created by Premyogi Vajra. This is 
Vishnu’s evil destroying Sudarshan Chakra. These are the 
three previous Kaalchakras, which due to the blows of time 
are going to put the common man’s mind in duality, 
ignorance and sorrow and put him in the cycle of birth and 


death again and again. The benevolent Sudarshan Chakra, 
the fourth and last one is the alternative Kalachakra, which 
undoubtedly rotates at the speed of time, but by teaching 
man to live non-dually in it, gives him happiness, prosperity 
and liberation. Anyone can have the time cycle that can kill, 
but only a knowledgeable person like Vishnu can have the 
one to save. That is achieved when the Sahasrara Chakra is 
awakened. This time continues like a cycle and never stops. 
Birth is followed by death, death is followed by birth and then 
again death. Creation is followed by destruction, destruction 
is followed by creation and then again destruction. Seasons 
keep changing in cycles, happiness and sorrow keep coming 
and going in cycles. We cannot run away from this cycle. The 
cycle itself cuts the cycle. Varadayi that’s boon providing 
Sudarshan or Alternative Chakra is the only way to escape. 
Meaning, keep moving with the cycle but do not let it disturb 
your non-dual peace. This is the praise and worship of 
Sudarshan Chakra. 


Sudarshan Chakra cut Shishupala’s throat, which means that 
due to Shishupala’s duplicitous behavior his power did not 
rise above Vishuddhi Chakra. Because a person speaks with 
the power of Vishuddhi Chakra of the throat, then the power 
rising up is stopped by the throat and ends in abusive 
language, which means the path of power near the throat is 
cut, which means the throat is cut. Shishupala was abusing 
Krishna a lot. Kundalini chakras are also called chakras 
because the level of power on them also keeps changing 
cyclically. Sometimes the power increases and reaches a 
peak, which is called awakening of the chakra, and then 
decreases and reaches a minimum. For example, sometimes 
the heart’s emotions are in full swing and sometimes it 
becomes emotionless. After some time, the heart again gets 
filled with emotions, which sometimes leads to creation of a 
good poem. This cycle continues. If the Chakra is awakened, 
it does not mean that it will remain awakened forever. Its 
power will keep increasing and decreasing. Don’t be afraid of 
this nor be affected by it. This is the vaikalpik Kalachakra, 
meaning the Buddhist thinking kalchakra i.e. through truthful 
imagination or philosophy, we have to eliminate the ill effects 
of Kalachakra and create positive effects from it. Similarly, 


Sahasrara Chakra is also sometimes at its peak power. At 
that time, this can give material prosperity and liberation to 
deserving person by giving knowledge or boon, and by 
cursing the sinful person, it can also put him in material loss 
and bondage. Then the Sahasrara Chakra also occurs at a 
lower Shakti level, at which time Shri Krishna used to behave 
like a common man. He behaved like an incarnational man 
only when the Sahasrara was in a state of extreme power, at 
which time the Sudarshan Chakra was shown rotating on his 
finger as an external and physical symbol of the Sahasrara 
Chakra. Common people cannot feel the subtle Sahasrara 
Chakra inside the mind or brain. Through awakened 
Sahasrara Chakra that’s Sudarshan Chakra there is divinity, 
prophecy and greatness. 


Man is born in the external kalchakra and learns a lot by 
living in it for a long time. This is the time cycle or kalchakra 
of initial practice. Then, being troubled by the blows of 
sorrow arising from it, he starts imposing it on the internal 
kalchakra. Meaning, he starts giving solace to his mind that 
whatever is there in the vast universe is also there in his own 
small body. Meaning ‘Yatpinde tat brahmande’. To do this 
becomes very easy with the book titled “sharirvigyan 
darshan, ek adhunik Kundalini Tantra, ek yogi ki 
premkatha”. This gives him a feeling of non-duality due to 
which he feels some protection from the blows of time. This 
happens because despite the entire Kalachakra running 
inside the body, none of its components fall into the bondage 
of duality. After remaining stable in it for a long time, when 
he becomes pure enough, then his tendency automatically 
leans towards the secret time cycle or gupta kalchakra of 
Yoga Sadhana. While doing yoga and moving forward, he 
himself turns towards Tantric Kundalini Yoga. Through Tantra 
Yoga, his Kundalini is awakened in the Sahasrara Chakra, 
which means he becomes the possessor of the vaikalpik 
Kalachakra or Sudarshan Chakra. Yet whenever he keeps 
coming down from this supreme Kalachakra due to lack of 
energy in Sahasrara, he easily reaches there with a little 
push of tantric energy. 

The infinitely wide external kalchakra becomes smaller and 
smaller. First it reaches the level of the internal kalchakra. 


Then it becomes more subtle and limited to seven Kundalini 
Chakras and becomes the Gupta Kalachakra. It’s called Gupta 
or secret because not everyone can feel it but only the 
Kundalini yogis. Then after awakening, it becomes subtle to 
the level of the point of sahasrar chakra and becomes an 
vaikalpik Kalachakra. The kalchakra continues from the 
beginning till the end, but earlier it was the one who puts you 
in the bondage of ignorance, in the end it becomes the giver 
of knowledge and liberation. This is a very effective and 
practical meditation which must be adopted. To put it in the 
simplest terms, it is like that in between the material worldly 
life, one should keep experiencing one’s body as well, the 
paths ahead open up on their own. Yoga is made only to 
develop its habit. While doing Yogasana, worldly 
thoughts keep coming due to the activity of Prana and 
along with this, attention is also focused on the 
special posture of the body and breath, which means 
the external Kalachakra keeps getting transformed 
into the internal Kalachakra. 


Kundalini Yoga Is Gupta 
Kalachakra in Buddhism 


At some time the demons had become very powerful. They 
started tormenting people and destroying Dharma. 
Distressed, the gods expressed their grief to the protector of 
gods, Vishnu. To fulfill the task of the gods, Vishnu himself 
went near Mount Kailash, built a pit, lit a fire in it and started 
performing penance in front of it. He kept worshiping Lord 
Shiva with joy with the lotuses born in Manasarovar by 
chanting various types of mantras and hymns in the earthly 
manner. Hari Vishnu himself remained seated and did not get 
distracted. Shiva did not appear for a long time. Vishnu was 
surprised at this and started chanting the Sahasranama of 
Shiva. He started worshiping Shambhu by chanting his name 
mantras one by one and offering him a lotus with each name 
mantra. At that time, Shiva abducted one of the thousand 
lotuses to test the devotion of Vishnu. Vishnu, not 
understanding Shiva’s illusive act, started searching for a 
lotus. Vishnu traveled the entire earth for that lotus. When he 
did not receive it, he offered one of his eyes in its place, 
although Shiva had stopped him from doing so. Then Shiva 
appeared pleased and got ready to grant a boon to Vishnu. 
When asked, Vishnu told that his weapon was not able to kill 
the demons. Hearing this word of Vishnu, Shiva gave him his 
very brilliant Sudarshan Chakra. After receiving it, Vishnu 
quickly destroyed those mighty demons without any effort. In 
this way there was peace in the world. The gods became 
happy and Vishnu also became extremely happy after 
receiving the beautiful Sudarshan Chakra. 


Psychological analysis of the above story 


Vishnu or Vishnu Avatar is the soul that operates the body, 
and Parabrahma Vishnu is the indescribable Supreme Being 
from whom it descends. He nourishes the three worlds in the 
form of the body and also provides nourishment to various 
gods in it. Similarly, Shiva incarnation Rudra is the state of 
the same soul which destroys the body near death. Brahma is 


also in the state of creating the creation as per the mind of 
the same soul. There is no Parabrahma form of Brahma, 
because he is only the mind generated from the soul in the 
form of Vishnu. That is why it is said that Brahma is born 
from the navel of Vishnu. The body, governed by the gods, 
tries hard to escape from the clutches of the deadly demons 
of ignorance, but is unable to succeed. The last support is 
Vishnu in the form of a living being soul. For this he does 
Shiva Sadhana through Tantric method. Kailash is the 
Sahasrara Chakra where the Supreme Lord Shiva resides. 
Near it is the Muladhar Chakra which is like a pit. Both the 
chakras are said to be close to each other because both are 
directly connected through the nadi, although the physical 
distance is greater for Muladhara than for other chakras. The 
word Kund has been used a lot in Shivpuran for pit or pond. 
This means that the word Kundalini is derived from this Kund. 
The snake sits coiled in the pit. The coiled he snake became 
Kundalin and the she snake became Kundalini. Similarly, 
Dhanin means a man with wealth and Dhanini means a 
woman with wealth. Rings worn in the ears are called kundal. 
Therefore, Kundalin means a male one shaped like earrings. 
And Kundalini means a female one shaped like earrings. 
There is a connection between the earrings and the ear pit. 
Similarly, there is a connection between Kundalini and the pit 
or pool of Muladhar. Establishing fire in the pond means 
activating the Muladhar Chakra with vital air. Shiv Sadhana in 
that pond means special meditation on Muladhar Chakra. 
Shiva was worshiped in the earthly manner, meaning a 
Shivalinga was made of clay. The human body is also called 
the earthly body. So his body parts became earthly parts. 
Flowers of Manasarovar mean flowers of mind or meditation. 
He offered thousand lotus flowers, that is, he established the 
energy of the chakras on the Muladhar one thousand times 
and did Ishta meditation on it. Meaning the energy revolved 
around one thousand times. The flower here is called the 
chakra. Shiva stole the thousandth flower which means the 
energy was not fully reaching the Sahasrara Chakra. Due to 
this, Vishnu opened his third eye i.e. Ajna Chakra and by 
meditating on it i.e. by meditating on it in Shambhavi Mudra, 
the energy became centralized. That energy first reached 
Mooladhar, where he meditated deeply on Shiva and then 


went to Sahasrara along with Shivdhyanachitra where he got 
the direct darshan of Shiva, which means he attained 
awakening. 


The above story can be understood in another way also. One 
petal can be called a flower because offering a few petals of 
a flower during ritual worship is considered as offering the 
entire flower. This also saves flowers and many deities can 
be worshiped with a single flower. The lotus flower in the 
form of Sahasrarachakra has a thousand petals. Offering a 
flower in the name of Shiva meant that a petal of flower in 
the form of a certain amount of meditation on Shiva was 
offered to muladhara from where it was straight redirected to 
sahasrara. It’s difficult to offer energy directly to sahasrar, so 
practical method appears offering it to muladhara from 
where it gets itself redirected straight to sahasrar easily. 
Actually full energy of all the chakras is to be offered to 
sahasrar to get awakening. When Sahasrara is a flower and it 
blooms with meditation then it is natural that meditation is 
also a flower. Just like pouring water into a vessel filled with 
water increases its water content, similarly adding flowers to 
the Sahasrara flower will increase that flower. Sahasrara was 
about to bloom completely, meaning awakening was about to 
happen but its last petal was not blooming. It also blossomed 
with the flower of meditation in the form of Agya Chakra. In 
ritual puja, while meditating, the flower is placed inside the 
closed hands in Namaskar position. As a means of dedicating 
that meditation in the end to the deity, the flower situated in 
Anjali or closed praying hands is offered at the feet of the 
deity. 


This article is connected to the previous and next article. 
There is also a good research discussion on Kaalachakra. 
Gaining Advaita Bhava in the outer Kalachakra is the main 
aim of the inner Kalachakra. This is because there is no 
visible duality-born and attachment born bondage anywhere 
within the internal chakra. All the gods, rituals etc. are part of 
the internal kalchakra. Meditating on the gods in human form 
in every external object in the form of their presiding deities 
is to meditate on the internal kalchakra. Due to this, man 


gradually becomes pure and moves towards Gupt Kalachakra 
i.e. Kundalini Yogasadhana. The sharirvigyan darshan 
philosophy gives further strength to Devsadhana because it 
scientifically shows that the entire universe including gods as 
well as human beings i.e. external Kalachakra is present 
inside the body of all living beings. 


Kundalini Shakti creates the 
entire universe from darkness 


The secret time cycle aka gupta kalchakra seems to me to be 
a game of the subconscious mind. Information related to 
each organ of man is hidden in the chakra related to it. These 
are the information of countless past lives, because the 
bodies of all living beings, their activities, emotions and 
chakras associated with them are all almost the same, there 
may be a difference in quantity or shape. By meditating on 
the chakras, that information keeps on appearing and 
disappearing in direct or indirect form. When the gross mind 
is purified, then man himself turns to Chakrasadhana to 
purify the subtle mind. Just as the state of the gross mind 
keeps changing every moment with time, similarly the state 
of the subtle subconscious mind also keeps changing, 
because the subtle mind is a reflection of the gross mind, but 
we cannot see it. That is why it is called Gupta Kalachakra. 
Meaning that even if the subconscious mind is completely 
cleaned, there is no guarantee that it will not become dirty 
again. The practitioner will continue to feel the energy level 
of all the chakras changing. Nothing can escape the blows of 
time. Therefore, it is best to accept whatever is there while 
remaining equanimous and unaffected in every situation. 
This is vaikalpik kalchakra. This seems to me to be the main 
objective of Guptakaalchakra Sadhana. 


Kundalini Shakti creates the universe, whatever it is said 
does not mean that it creates physical and gross celestial 
bodies like planets, stars etc. in space. Rather, it seems to 
make more sense that it is like the reproductive sexual power 
that gives birth to a child and creates the entire universe in 
the form of its body and mind. Although the first statement 
may also be indirectly true, because what is there in the 
universe the same is there inside the body, but the second 
statement appears to be directly, practically and clearly true. 


Many people may say that sexual power is for increasing the 
progeny or lineage, where does Kundalini come from in it. 


Man can derive any meaning from that power. If we want to 
know its real purpose then we should see the animals. They 
do not move according to their thinking or goals but more 
according to natural inspiration or instinct. The purpose of 
procreating offsprings is not in their mind regarding sexual 
intercourse. They are motivated to have sex only to expand 
their mind which is narrowed in the darkness of ignorance, 
that too when natural favorable circumstances motivate 
them for it, even then the desire for this does not arise in 
them automatically. A buffalo pair will be motivated to do this 
only when the buffalo is in estrus i.e. in heat which comes for 
one or two days in a month. Even that heat stops coming in 
the summer season. Other times, both will not have sexual 
intercourse even when they are together. Man is an evolved 
creature. He knows how to take advantage of natural laws. 
Tantrayogi is one step further. He lights a small flame in the 
darkness of the narrowed mind as a meditation image. Then 
he enhances it so much through sex-assisted yoga that it 
becomes awakened. This is Kundalini awakening. Now 
whether you call the mind constricted in the form of 
meditation picture as Kundalini or the mind constricted in 
darkness as kundalini. It is the same thing because the same 
darkness develops through meditation and becomes a 
meditation picture. The sexual power which gives it the 
strength to develop, resides in Muladhar i.e. the dark pool or 
pit or kunda, that is why it is named Kundalini. Meaning, 
Dhyanachitra got the name Kundalini only when it got the 
strength of sexual power i.e. semen power. Meaning the word 
Kundalini itself is tantric. The common man directly interacts 
with the narrowed mind in darkness or in countless small and 
sluggish thoughts, due to which that power gets distributed 
among countless thoughts. Through this he may get worldly 
expansion or progress, but he gets less benefits of 
awakening. 


When Shakti enters the darkness of the pool of Muladhar, 
only then the living being gets attracted towards sexual 
intercourse. A person who always lives in the light of 
complete knowledge does not feel like having sex. | had a 
senior foodie and experienced friend who once told me that if 
| did not eat nonveg, how would | be able to have sex. | could 


not accept that thing in my mind. Today | am able to 
understand the Tantra philosophy hidden in his words. 
Darkness is not created by eating and drinking alone. It is 
born out of attachment to worldly matters while remaining 
active. | think the structure of the body is such that as the 
darkness of the brain or mind increases, the power goes 
down. Highest or darkest darkness means that Shakti has 
gathered at Muladhara. It is the blood circulation that 
naturally keeps gathering downwards. After reaching the 
perineum, the energy then passes through the back and goes 
straight to the brain. When power reaches the perineum, it is 
natural that the sexual organs there will become active. 
Many exercises, physical activities and Yoga etc. give that 
power a chance to rise up through back. Many amplifies it at 
muladhara using Tantrik method and then raise the 
increased amount, and some even lower it to fall out. Due to 
the fall of Shakti, Shakti starts accumulating in Muladhara 
again, which takes more time than before. With good 
nutrition it accumulates quickly but it can also involve sinful 
activities. Also, energy is consumed by digestion and 
assimilation of nutrients causing net loss of life energy. Then 
it will be like this, running ahead and wide or coiled behind. 
These simple proverbs have very deep meanings. Chaud or 
coil means coil of Kundalini serpent. Meaning power sleeps in 
the form of darkness of sin, although it has been elevated by 
the power of that darkness itself. But | think that eating and 
drinking does not cause as much sin as we do through 
attachment behavior in the world. That is why Shiva, despite 
looking like a ghost, keeps roaming around looking cheerful, 
carefree and sinless. But what will happen when a man’s 
mind or soul becomes so clean that there will be no darkness 
in it, of course, the power has gone to the Mooladhar. 
Perhaps then without sex his power would continue to roam 
like this. He will also have sexual ecstasy and an erection, 
but he will not be very motivated towards physical 
intercourse, because he will feel that it is a loss of power, no 
matter how careful one is. At the time of Shakti in Muladhar, 
an image of a sensual woman may appear in his mind, and at 
the time of Shakti in Sahasrara, an image of a Guru or a 
Spiritual person or a loving man may appear in his mind. But 
he will remain unattached to both and will remain busy in his 


work, due to which that power will continue to swing in him 
and he will always remain immersed in bliss. 


When the energy goes to the base, there will be a lack of it in 
the brain, just like when rain water seeps into the ground, the 
surface pits filled with water will dry up. Due to this, there will 
definitely be some darkness in the mind, no matter how pure 
and perfect the person has become. In this corrupt world, no 
one can be so perfect whose mind is always filled with light. 
The light in the mind of a common worldly person exists only 
with the help of energy. Only a very rare saint can be a 
Sanyasi who has the light without physical energy. Still, 
complete illumination is possible only in the state of 
complete liberation, which is not possible while living in the 
body. How can one remain completely free from vices when 
associated with a vicious body? How can a person sitting ina 
bullock cart avoid hiccups? Those who maintain light in their 
mind without sexual intercourse, have mastered the sattvik 
techniques other than sexual intercourse, through which the 
energy of the mooladhara keeps rising up through the back. 
These are meditation on breath, meditation on body, 
meditation on present, meditation on chakras with simple or 
seed mantras, Vipassana, Devpuja etc. For example, 
meditating on the Bija Mantras on the Chakras opens the life 
force, opens the breath, increases the consciousness and the 
brightness of the mind’s thoughts, increases the intellect, 
and exerts upward contraction force on the Muladhara. 
Whether the glow is inside or outside the body, it comes with 
energy only. 


Mental darkness is also of two types. One is darkness caused 
by eating, drinking, physical labour, sleep, rest etc. There is a 
lot of energy in the body, but it is lacking in the mind, 
because the consciousness of the mind is suppressed due to 
violence, intoxication, sleep etc. and the illusion of worldly 
attachment accompanied afterwards with loneliness. The 
meaning is clear that when it is not in the brain, then it is 
concentrated in the realm of Muladhara. There are only two 
main areas of the body. One is of Sahasrar and the other is of 
Muladhar. If the energy is not in one realm then it is natural 


that it will be in another realm. If the coin does not come up 
with head then only tail will come up, there is no other 
option. In such a situation, tantric sexual intercourse is 
beneficial. The second type of darkness is that in which there 
is lack of energy in the entire body. This is a condition like 
illness or depression or fatigue or weakness. That’s why one 
doesn’t feel like having sex. If one does, he may fall ill, 
because first of all, there is already a lack of energy in the 
body, and on top of that, one is also wasting energy in sexual 
intercourse. Everyone knows that water in the rooftop tank of 
the house helps in completing many tasks of life. But energy 
is also required to raise the water to the roof and there 
should also be water in the underground tank. If one runs the 
pump in a dry tank or at low voltage, the pump will definitely 
get damaged. By the way, there is also a saintly way of 
Tantric sexual intercourse, due to which minimum energy is 
consumed and maximum energy goes upwards. It is most 
important to have energy in the brain, because it controls the 
entire body. Even if the energy in the lower chakras, 
especially the bottom two chakras, is somewhat less, there is 
not much harm. 


Many people can talk about how a thought-like creation is 
created from void of darkness. Darkness itself means subtle 
or latent or hidden creation. Darkness is not actually void as 
is often believed. The real zero for Buddhists means the 
Supreme God. Only two things are required for creation, 
darkness and power aka shakti i.e. energy. If there is no 
energy then darkness will not be able to express itself in the 
form of creation. It is only to express the darkness in the 
form of a living soul in the form of creation that it gets a 
body, which provides energy. It is a different matter whether 
he will be able to nullify that creation through the practice of 
Yoga or hide it in the same darkness or even more, through 
attachment to the world, he will convert himself into even 
greater darkness, for which he will have to take a new birth 
and a new body. One will get a new body according to your 
deeds. If good deeds are done then the human body will be 
found again which will again give the opportunity to bring the 
universe to zero. If the karma is bad, then by getting the 
body of an animal, the burden of darkness will be reduced to 


some extent but it will not be reduced to zero, because 
animals cannot do yoga. Like this, | don’t know when one will 
get the chance again. This is what Vedas say. 


Scientists have proved through experiments that the same 
thing happens in the physical universe also. They found that 
everywhere in space those fundamental particles or waves 
are present in the form of quantum fluctuations which 
constitute the universe. Because they are so subtle and 
unmanifested, they are felt as darkness as they are not 
grasped. For example, dark energy, dark matter, all this is 
darkness. When they get energy from somewhere, their 
vibration starts increasing due to which the creation of the 
universe or physical substances starts. For thoughts, this 
energy is obtained from the body, but for the physical 
creation, where does it come from? There is no clarity and 
unanimity regarding this yet. Some say that the gravitational 
waves etc. which are created due to the collision of celestial 
bodies like black holes and other movements in space, 
provide that energy. Where there is more movement in 
Space, more stars have been found to be formed. But it is not 
known from where the energy came for the first movement 
of space in the beginning of creation. The scriptures say that 
the sound of Om came from which the creation of the 
universe began. The sound of Om & is a wave or movement 


of space. It is possible that it may have started the process of 
further movements and constructions. The question of where 
the energy for the movement in the form of OM sound came 
from remains unanswered. This is perhaps God’s own 
unimaginable power, the answer to which cannot be found 
through science except Yoga. If there is no Shakti, then Shiva 
will remain dark like a dead body, both inside the individual 
body and also in the macro body in the form of physical 
creation. 


Kundalini Shakti never sleeps 


The Shakti in the body does all the work while remaining 
hidden. It digests food, makes the heart beat, and does 
countless other small and big functions of the body. She can’t 
be sleeping. If she had slept, how could she have done so 
much work? Perhaps we call it sleeping because even when a 
man’s body is in deep sleep, it continues to do innumerable 
tasks of life, otherwise would he not have died? It doesn’t do 
just one thing, just generate conscious thoughts. Similarly, 
sleeping Shakti means that all the functions of the body are 
being carried out by it, but awakened thoughts are not being 
generated. This can be called a semi-dormant state because 
ordinary or vague thoughts are still arising. Light thoughts 
come to a person even during sleep in the form of dreams. 
To awaken Shakti means to bring it into its most expressed 
form and that is Kundalini awakening. Just as there can be 
countless levels of awakening of a man, but the real 
awakening is the one in which he is most expressed, which is 
Kundalini awakening. Other states can also be called sleep. It 
is mentioned many times in the scriptures that this world is 
like a dream. The ordinary life we are living is just a dream, 
meaning we are asleep. Real awakening is the state of 
Kundalini awakening. Below Sahasrara, there are all the pits, 
Mooladhar is the biggest pit. Because a little amount of 
energy leaks from other pits to Sahasrara, there is no 
complete darkness there. But when Kundalini is present in 
Mooladhara, it is most dark, because it is the farthest from 
Sahasrara. This movement of energy is of special importance 
in human being, because he walks while standing, and 
special strength is required to deliver blood high up to the 
brain. When there is a contraction of the muscles due to 
Shakti reaching the chakra through yoga or physical activity, 
then the consumption of nutrients increases there, which 
automatically increases the blood circulation there. That is 
why it is said that Shakti controls blood circulation. However, 
it appears directly controlling the speed of contraction and 
relaxation of muscles, thereby controlling blood circulation 
indirectly. This does not often appears happening in animals 
because their backs are straight. Because monkeys, langurs, 


chimpanzees etc. also become quite upright, that is why they 
are also playful so that the Shakti keeps flowing and the 
blood circulation continues smoothly in the whole body. 


According to physiology, not only nerve fibers control the 
body, but biochemicals called hormones also control them 
and the organs also have their own local control. But the 
nerves keep the entire body functioning smoothly. It has 
never been heard that in such and such a yogi, some organs 
were cured by Nadi Chalana, but there was no effect on other 
organs, especially the organs controlled by hormones. From 
this it also seems that nerve fibers are not called nadis. It is 
said that electrical energy flows in the nerve fibers and life 
energy or Shakti flows in the nadis. However, when there is 
movement in the chakras, the hormone producing cells will 
also become active and the local systems will also become 
active. 


There are many similarities between Shakti and energy, but 
both are different. Energy is inanimate, whereas Shakti is 
conscious due to the presence of Shiva with it. Energy can be 
present in any inanimate thing or machine etc., but Shakti 
can be present only in a conscious being. The sex-based 
energy rising from the perineum through Kundalini Yoga is 
called Shakti because it feels like bliss of samadhi. In simple 
words, this strengthens the Samadhi picture or Kundalini 
picture. And in simple words it leads towards God. Because it 
provides energy to the brain, the energy suppressed in the 
subconscious mind gets destroyed by coming out or getting 
expressed. Although this also happens through physical 
activity, Shakti there also travels through the same path. 
Meaning that due to physical movement, Shakti keeps 
gathering on the perineum and keeps rising up through the 
back. That is why Kundalini Yoga is very beneficial for 
physically hard working people also. 


Kundalini Tantra is the base of 
transcendental knowledge 


A successful education policy is that students can choose any 
subject of their choice. A science student can pursue subjects 
like spirituality, music, yoga etc. and a student of spirituality 
can pursue science. This leads to complete development of 
the man and his hobbies are also fulfilled. While making 
fulfilling his hobby, he also studies his main subjects well. 
Nowadays the trend of such education policy is increasing. 
My profession is related to science but | fulfill my passion for 
Spirituality through writing. 


Someone asked a question on Quora whether the soul can 
think and evolve without the body. | said that absolutely this 
could happen. When | had an encounter with the spirit of my 
deceased relative, he said that he did not even feel that he 
had died. | also did not feel at all that that person had died a 
few days ago, rather it seemed as if he was clearly alive in 
front of me as before. It is a different matter that when | 
realized about his death with some old memories, he also 
disappeared at that very moment. Along with this it was 
asked by her whether that her very state itself was the 
ultimate state of liberation. First of all, if the disembodied 
soul did not have the power to think and understand, it would 
not have said such things or asked such things. Together, it 
wouldn’t have disappeared immediately after getting the 
presumably satisfactory answer. This means that the 
disembodied soul has all the qualities of the physical mind 
and senses, and they function just as they do in the body. 
But not like the body. Meaning, all the work done by the 
senses is done by the invisible soul. It is heard, seen, thought 
etc. by the soul with the help of the soul. Perhaps the soul’s 
experiences are felt directly only by connecting with another 
soul. That soul was connecting with my soul and asking 
something, but no one was visible to speak the words, nor 
were the words coming from anywhere outside. Words were 
felt but as deep and invisible as the soul. | was feeling his 
invisible soul along with his invisible words through my soul 


and | too was not responding with any external physical 
words but my soul itself was conveying it to his soul in the 
form of words. | have described this in detail in an old post. | 
was feeling connected to that soul, hence she was sensing 
what I was thinking. The thinking was not ordinary but it was 
a deep thinking of the heart-soul. The soul gets the body so 
that it can experience the physical world directly through the 
body, without any expectation of connection with any other 
soul. It is possible that the soul can directly connect with 
physical objects and feel them, as can be seen from the 
incidents of haunted castle etc. However, this connection 
would be different and lesser than the connection with the 
physical body, because if there was a similar connection then 
why would the soul acquire a body full of sufferings and 
diseases. What the soul said that it did not feel as if died is 
correct because nothing dies. If someone says that only the 
body dies and not the soul, that too is wrong, because the 
body also does not die. In fact, the physical body also exists 
within the mind and not anywhere outside. How can the 
picture of the shape and size of the body which is settled in 
the mind be destroyed? Yes, this picture may sometimes 
become gross and sometimes subtle, but it is always there. 
Just as when a bulb in a room is extinguished, one feels deep 
darkness for a while, but then a little visibility starts 
appearing in the room, the same happens after death. The 
images of all the bodies we have had in our countless 
previous births are recorded in our subconscious mind, 
meaning none of our bodies have died till now. That’s why | 
felt in the soul of that familiar person his entire previous 
resume, meaning his average appearance. His body of that 
birth was a small part of that subtle database. That is why | 
was able to recognize him completely because the imprint of 
that database is also on the present body. That form of his 
self was similar to the body of his birth and even more than 
that. Meaning that no one dies due to the destruction of the 
body but comes back to its original subtle form which other 
physical bodies cannot grasp. The subtle body is a complete 
body in itself. The physical body gets to provide it with 
physicality. Whatever the physical body can do, the subtle 
body can also do it. There may be difference in size and 
speed. Then it is said that after the death of a human being, 


he can be reborn as the body of any living being. This also 
doesn’t seem right. When no one has died then how can 
there be birth? The body also actually resides in the mind. 
Also, animals other than humans do not keep looking at their 
body or face etc. in the mirror. Meaning, they are not even 
aware of their appearance. They can only guess about 
themselves by looking at others like them, but they don’t 
have that much brain. Inside him is the mind of the same 
person who was reborn in his form. What kind of rebirth is 
there when the mind has not changed? 


That departed soul tried to establish contact with me several 
times. Many times during that time, fluid like from my 
stomach would come into my throat and | felt as if | was 
suffocating. Perhaps this was due to the rising of Kundalini 
Shakti in the Nadi. Then | would explain things to him lovingly 
and respectfully and ask him not to come again. It seemed as 
if that soul heard everything and agreed. In fact, to connect 
with other souls, deep yoga practice and perfectly healthy 
body is necessary, which is not always possible to do in 
ordinary life. Initially | used to practice Tantric Kundalini 
Yoga, which is probably why | got that power. Even Tantric 
Yoga practice cannot always be done in household life. It is 
possible that many souls remain attached to our body and 
keep taking information about the world, but we do not even 
realize it. | even feel that that spirit came to wake me up so 
that the oxygen level in my vital organs does not drop to 
dangerous levels. | sometimes had increased gastric reflux 
due to spondylitis inflammation. She was a charitable soul 
and was very friendly towards me, right from her lifetime. 


The existence of the subtle body has also been considered in 
the scriptures. It contains the mind, intellect, all the vital 
forces and all the senses. Meaning, it can do all the work and 
enjoy all the fruits like the physical body, but in a subtle 
form. This means that there is a micro world that is much 
more extensive than the macro world, in which everything 
happens like the macro world, but in a micro form. Only great 
Tantra Yogis realize it. 


Kundalini yoga meditation 
makes a person a believer 


Friends, | was recently reading a blogpost that | liked. 
However, | did not get any response to my comment. It was 
written in it that only Hindu religion is theistic religion, all 
others are atheists. The Sanskrit word Aastik is derived from 
the word ‘Asti’, which means ‘is’. Meaning, the one who 
believes only in ‘Is’ i.e. existence without name and form, is a 
theist. ‘Na Asti i.e. Naasti’ means ‘does not exist’. One who 
believes in ‘nothing’ is an atheist. Anyway, name and form do 
not exist. Ice forms water, water forms steam, steam forms 
clouds and water forms again. Despite changing so many 
names and forms, everything remains water. If we continue 
this tradition of cause and effect from back to back, 
everything becomes finer and finer, and in the end only the 
Sky is left. Meaning everything is sky or void or soul form. 
Void is not void of absence or darkness but void of 
indescribable form. That is why Hinduism seems escapist, but 
in reality it is not so. The real believer is not the one who 
completely rejects name and form. Rather, the real theist is 
the one who considers the true and real existence to be 
higher than the false and fake existence in the form of name. 
If we do not accept name and form at all, then how will 
worldly life run and how will human civilization develop? In 
such a situation, everyone will become like detached monks. 
The whole science is dependent on name and form. If you 
don’t give a name or form to a thing then you will not be able 
to understand it and how will you be able to control it. 
Science will not be possible without accepting name and 
form. On the other hand, other religions are also not 
completely atheistic. The real atheist is not one who believes 
only in name and form and denies pure existence. Rather, 
the real atheist is the one who gives more importance to the 
existence of name and form than the pure and real 
existence. While accepting the existence of name and form, 
pure existence itself comes to be accepted, because ‘is’ 
seems to be with everyone. The existence of pure ‘is’ and the 
existence of name and form are dependent on each other, 
and both co-exist with each other. They cannot remain 


separate from each other. The difference is who is given 
more importance in the mind. Meaning, the difference is only 
in the perception of the mind. The worldly life of a theist is 
the same as that of an atheist. The difference lies in the 
ideology or perception of the mind of both. Just by changing 
the perception of the mind, adverse effects like heaven and 
hell are created. It means clearly that no one can be a 
complete theist or a complete atheist. In behaviour, everyone 
is of mixed nature. Various theological scriptures have been 
created only to keep the mind's perception theistic. 
Spirituality only improves the perception of the mind. 
Worldliness will work only through science. Formation and 
improvement of mental perception is a natural tendency, just 
as man himself gets drawn towards the experience of 
happiness. | don’t see much contribution of religion in this. 
Religion does not teach man which situation is pleasant, 
rather man learns it himself from his own experience. 
Anyway, human psychology is very complex and diverse. No 
such general rule can be made in this regard, as is made for 
inanimate objects like general rules like gravity etc. Here, 
every person’s mind is unique in itself, for which the rules 
should also be unique. Yes, a religious book can declare a 
general principle for everyone, but that too should be 
unanimous and scientifically or spiritually proven. Although 
there may be human exceptions to that too. Man has to take 
worldly practical steps himself according to time and 
circumstances. Meaning everything cannot be written or told. 
That is why people of all types of beliefs will be found in 
every religion. Yes, proportion can vary due to different 
reasons. For example, the Yaksha asked Yudhishthira what 
was the greatest wonder of the world. To this Yudhishthir 
replied that people die every day, but despite seeing this, 
living people think that they will never die. There is no bigger 
surprise than this. Yaksha was satisfied with this answer. A 
person with positive perception will take this story in such a 
way that even while living life with full enthusiasm, a person 
should always remember that someday his life will end, 
hence one should not be attached to life. Meaning, do not be 
attached to name and form, that is, while handling worldly 
affairs according to the time and place, adopt theistic belief, 
not atheistic belief. But a person with negative thoughts will 


take it as if there is nothing left in life, hence one should 
always remain as if dead. Completely give up the worldly 
world full of name and form and become a staunch believer. 
Dharmashastra had written a good story from its side, but 
how did its author know that many people might misinterpret 
it. Similarly, Guru can also explain only general rules and 
principles from his life experience, even he cannot follow 
every step. 


Holding the breath for a few moments and then taking long 
deep breaths brings more attention to the pure existence of 
thoughts, and less to their nominal diversity. If Kundalini 
Shakti is also combined with that Pranayama, then the effect 
increases manifold, because it gives more strength to the 
revelation of suppressed thoughts, due to which theism 
becomes more effective. With Tantric power the effect 
increases further many times more. With fast and shallow 
breathing, thoughts keep changing continuously with the 
breath. Due to this, attention is focused only on their 
superficial names and there is no time to go into their depth. 
But when the breath is slow, long or stopped, then the same 
thought of the mind remains till the breath stops or till the 
completion of one breath or for many consecutive breaths. 
Due to this, those thoughts fell as if rise from, grow and 


merge into soul repeatedly. The word Om Æ also reflects the 


Same process, in which the letters A, U and Ma represent 
birth, growth, stopping and dissolution respectively. Om is 
the seed mantra of Sahasrara because the entire universe 
keeps on arising, growing and dissolving in the form of 
thoughts in the mind itself. The two sharp curves or rings on 


the two sides of this letter 3 are three-dimensional, but 


appear two-dimensional on paper. The ring on the left curves 
to the other side along the curvature of the left brain, and the 
curvature on the right covers the posterior side of the right 
brain. Meaning the entire brain is covered with Om. The lunar 
dot above it is the Sahasrara Chakra point. From this we 
realize that the names and forms were false, the real form of 
thoughts is like the void sky or soul, that is, only the 
existence without names and forms is real, from where they 
appear to be born and also appear to merge into it. Thoughts 


change quickly due to fast and shallow breathing. Therefore 
neither do we see them being born from the void soul nor do 
we see them merging into the void soul. This makes them 
visible to us truthfully. We think that the old idea that has 
now been replaced by the new idea is true, and our brain 
itself has taken hold of the new idea in its place. Anyway, it is 
difficult to pay attention to shallow fast breaths. 


The meaning is clear that Kundalini Yoga helps in becoming a 
believer. One of the reasons for this is that during Kundalini 
Yoga, by maintaining focus on the breath and body, one does 
not pay much attention to the name and form of thoughts 
and only their existence remains aware. This is like the 
practice of witnessing, meaning we are watching them like a 
witness. And are not affected by them. Additionally, the body 
remains in a fixed posture during yoga asanas, and resists 
reaction or movement according to thoughts. Even with this 
the nominalization of thoughts does not become effective. 


The handle of thoughts is breath. This is because thoughts 
move in sync with the breath. It is very difficult to capture 
thoughts without breathing. Watching the breath means 
watching the thoughts, meaning witnessing. When we are not 
watching the breath, we are not watching the thoughts 
either. At that time we ourselves become thoughts. When we 
are not watching the breath, we ourselves become the 
breath. No one can see oneself. If seen, it goes to someone 
else only. Meaning then there is no witnessing. There can be 
only two feelings, either spectator feeling or visual feeling. If 
the viewer does not have the feeling of being a spectator 
then the visual feeling is created automatically. Meaning, the 
viewer doesn’t remain detached from the scene but becomes 
the scene itself. This can happen to a father while watching 
his son playing in the field. If there is spectator sentiment 
then there cannot be visual sentiment. Both feelings cannot 
live together. It is a characteristic of the spectator’s feeling 
that he is not affected by the joys and sorrows of the scene. If 
a man is being influenced by his thoughts, it means that he 
does not have a spectator or witness attitude towards his 
visible thoughts but has a visual or self-conscious attitude. If 


thoughts are considered as the form of self then it is 
knowledge, but if the self i.e. man becomes the form of 
thoughts then it is ignorance. 


In this matter, | liked the words of a Tibetan Buddhist yogi 
that pay attention to the breath as well as the thoughts, that 
is, leave the thoughts open, only then meditation takes 
place. Meaning, neither suppress thoughts nor ignore them. 
When the attention remains on the breath or keeps going 
there intermittently, then the attachment to them will 
automatically reduce and the feeling of being a spectator 
towards them will arise. 


Perhaps what is often thought that the uniform darkness of 
lifelessness is devoid of name and form is wrong. In fact, in 
the form of that darkness, the worldly thoughts in the form of 
name are located in a subtle form, which when given a 
chance, appear again in a gross form. The real existence 
without name and form is that of the completely pure soul 
i.e. God, which is indescribable. However, it is attained only 
from the world of name and form, because it resides in every 
particle. 


It is written in the scriptures that darkness of lifelessness 
does not actually exist. We feel it due to the illusion created 
by worldly attachment. This is the same illusion as after 
spinning on a circular wheel, after getting out of it, all the 
things around it also appear to be rotating for some time. The 
faster or the longer we move around, the faster and longer 
we feel the things moving around. Similarly, whatever kind of 
worldly life will happen, the darkness of lifelessness that 
follows will also be felt in the same way. This is called the 
subtle body. Then just as the feeling of spinning ends after 
some time itself, similarly the darkness of the subtle body 
should also disappear after some time. Meaning man himself 
should become free after death. But this is not written 
anywhere in the scriptures. Logically, it seems that just as a 
man returns to his previous worldly state after the false 
feeling of wandering, in the same way, after the illusion of 
lifelessness, a man should re-enter his old worldly life, that is, 


he should be reborn. But the one who has previously 
experienced complete liberation or awakening, perhaps he 
goes back to his previous liberated state, that is, he becomes 
free. Still, this seems to be somewhat scriptural. 


The more massive a black hole is, the more light it swallows 
and the more darkness it creates inside itself. The 
information about its original star would be stored in it in the 
form of the same virtual darkness. It is possible that after 
some time that darkness will be born again in the form of a 
similar star. Scientists call this the release of energy through 
the white hole to another unknown universe. Whereas those 
stars which are of lesser weight, their destruction leads to 
darkness for a short period of time, and they merge into the 
infinite sky full of infinite energy, meaning they become free. 
They must be like our ascetics and recluses, who keep their 
worldliness light. 


Kundalini Yoga’s Ida-Pingla as 
the erectus spinae muscle and 
Sushumna Nadi as the 
spinal cord 


Friends, many times | feel that some important thing is being 
hidden or is not being discovered. It is being said that Naadis 
are subtle pathways which have no physical existence, but 
this is not possible. Whatever experience you take, it 
definitely has a corresponding physical existence. No matter 
how subtle any emotion, behavior, thinking, etc. are, they 
definitely have a physical form in the brain or body. Without 
physical expression there is only a bodyless soul. However, it 
also contains coded data of physical experiences of past lives 
in subtle or latent form. Then when a line of light is felt in the 
Sushumna, it must definitely have some corresponding 
physical form that generates it. It is the spinal chord. | think 
that the erectus spinae muscles that run from the sacrum to 
the skull, on either side of the spine, provide physical 
expression to ida and pingala. However, such a rope-like 
muscle can be felt only when touched, especially in the lower 
part of the body up to the sacrum. Generally, one feels a 
upward surge of energy or enthusiasm in some left or right 
part of the body, like yawning. It seems as if it is 
disappearing into the sink of Ajnachakra point. The skin on 
the forehead or face seems to be pulled in the direction in 
which the energy is flowing.When | touch these two main 
muscle bands, they feel like tight ropes. Both sides of the 
spinae muscle sometimes become tight and sometimes 
loose. When it is tight, mainly happening with muladhara 
tucking, it seems that some inner pleasure sensation has 
gone up through it and due to this the energy pressure of the 
perineal organ has reduced. Looking at the anatomy, they 
are spread out in the back just like | feel. These begin around 
the sacrum. First they are a little less wide, while going up, 
they are less spread at the level of the navel and are wider at 
the level of the heart and become less wide at the base of 
the skull and get connected to the skull by turning on both 


sides. Science also says that just as chemical sensation flows 
in the nerves, it also flows in the muscles. It may be that it 
flows faster in or easier in the muscles, that is why the 
sensation of the perineum does not go through the spinal 
cord and passes through these two muscles which are called 
Ida and Pingala. You imagine that there are three parallel 
pipes. There is a thin pipe in the middle and a thick pipe on 
either side. If you leave the left pipe completely open and 
close the right pipe completely, all the water will pass 
through the left pipe. If you leave the right pipe completely 
open and close the left pipe completely, all the water will 
pass through the right pipe. If you leave both of them half 
open then the excess water will flow towards the other side 
pipe and during this time it will also pass through the middle 
pipe. Only the remaining water will reach the other pipe. 
Perhaps the same thing happens when Ida and Pingala are 
activated together. Meaning, the sensation also starts flowing 
through the Sushumna. Both the pipes cannot be kept fully 
open simultaneously because there is not that much water. 
Meaning, the more you close one nadi, the more the other 
nadi will open. | feel that when the sensation of the perineum 
goes up, sometimes the stretched muscle on the left side 
becomes taut and feels like a rope and sometimes the one on 
the right side. When both are equally and lightly stretched, it 
seems as if some sensation goes up through inside the spinal 
cord too. That’s why then one feels a different and special 
balanced bliss and freshness. 


Kundalini based cleaning 
techniques of Hatha Yoga do not 
mean to clean 


Friends, there are many techniques in Hatha Yoga. In Shank 
Prakshalan, so much water is drunk that the bowel is 
completely cleaned. In yogic vomiting, the drunk water is 
pulled back from the stomach and out through the mouth. In 
Jal Neti, water is drunk from one nostril and taken out 
through the other nostril. The water in all should be 
lukewarm and slightly salty. In common language these 
actions are called cleaning actions, but in reality it is not so. 
Dirty things are cleaned. Our body is not dirty at all. 
Removing mucus is called cleansing, but a healthy person 
produces healthy mucus, which has many benefits for the 
body. Its coming out should not be called cleansing of the 
body. Saying this, one does not feel like doing these yogic 
activities. It seems that we were dirty before and are now 
being cleaned. | think that the meditation benefit that seems 
to be gained by taking them out is not from their coming out, 
but in its absence, from the touch of environmental 
substances with various body parts. This is a kind of effect 
like acupressure. When the inner surface of the stomach and 
intestines becomes bare due to the expulsion of mucus, then 
the touch of water and food etc. on it works as acupressure. 
Due to this, the Nadi sensation from their surface reaches the 
brain and activates it. Similarly, due to mucus coming out 
from inside the nose, the touch of air on its inner bare 
Surface creates acupressure. Such acu points or Marma 
points (Sanskrit word for acupoints) are described on the 
outer surface of the body, but not anywhere on the inner 
surface. | think this also needs research. Naturally, even after 
vomiting, diarrhea or cold, one experiences similar freshness 
and a type of Kundalini samadhi. Probably, these healthy and 
artificial cleaning techniques have been created by copying 
them. Perhaps they have been called cleaning because such 
physical reactions at the time of illness help in cleaning. 
Because through these activities one feels samadhi i.e. purity 
of mind, perhaps this might have been confused with the 


purity of body, because mind and body are interconnected. 
Because perhaps such diseases arise to give the mind the 
benefit of samadhi, that is why it would be said that these 
activities do not let diseases to overcome the body defence. 
Therefore, in a healthy body their name should be Mind 
cleaning activities. 


Similarly, there is a need for systematic research on Nadi 
also. If the form of Nadis were only so-called non-physical 
and subtle, then the Ayurvedic physicians would not have 
examined the Nadis by holding the wrist of the hand. Of 
course, we cannot experience the pulse or nerve directly, but 
we can definitely experience its physical and experiential 
effects. Its effect on the muscles is in the form of vibration, 
contraction etc. and its effect on the brain is in the form of 
thoughts. What is more, the physical functions which we 
consider to be happening without Nadis i.e. nerves and only 
under the influence of hormones, are also indirectly done by 
the influence of these. The hormone or enzymes producing 
cells are squeezed like a lemon by the power of nerves, due 
to which these biochemicals come out from inside them. | 
feel that the electrical line which is felt in the form of 
Sushumna Nadi from the perineum to the brain, is the 
vibration of the same which is felt in the form of a line due to 
the hyperactivity of the spinal cord. It creates vibrations in 
the form of a line in the spinal cord, and in the brain it is 
expressed in the form of a very clear, lively and stable 
mental picture, which is called Samadhi. From these things it 
seems that the experiential and physical effect of a nerve is 
called Nadi. Nerve fiber is a physical structure of the physical 
body, which helps in the transmission of messages in the 
body. If Nadi transmission is considered completely 
immaterial or miraculous, the disadvantage would be that 
man would become indifferent towards the healthy 
maintenance of his body. He will think that Nadi will become 
active only with special Sadhana. What happens is that one 
feels like doing sadhana only when one has a healthy body, 
and it is successful only with a healthy body. 


Audiobooks for studying 
the Spirituality 


Audiobooks are a boon for those who cannot read for some or 
that reason. Many may have vision problems, many do not 
have time to sit, many cannot always carry books with them, 
many spend most of their time in buses, cars, trains, and 
many feel reading books like boring. Nowadays Google’s Text 
to Speech Al has created a revolution in the field of audio 
books. While it used to take months and years to create an 
audio book, it was very expensive, resources were not 
available, and even if they were, it was a lot of trouble, 
whereas Google’s Auto Narration service can produce 
hundreds of audiobooks simultaneously within two hours. 


Since listening to spiritual texts in the form of stories was 
considered the best way to gain spiritual knowledge, it 
follows that in the form of audiobooks it can be more 
interesting and resonate better. However, do not forget to 
listen responsibally mainly with earphones as too long 
hearing may cause temporary or permanent hearing loss. As 
per WHO, up to maximum of one hour daily listening with 
earphone is recommended. Sound more than 60 decibels can 
be damaging. 


There is a web page of free audio books on this website, the 
link of which is given below, so that the interested people can 
acquire the unique knowledge about the country and the 
world effortlessly and with entertainment. These can be 
listened to by installing Google Play Book app from Play Store 
on Android phone. 


https://demystifyingkundalini.com/audiobooks/ 


Kundalini Yoga 
versus Investment 


Friends, Kundalini Yoga and investment seem to be opposite 
subjects to each other, but there is also a deep connection 
between them. Just as a man wants to get maximum profit 
immediately with a short-term investment, Similarly, with 
Kundalini Yoga also, but both are accomplished with long- 
term practice. Just as investment fails due to uncontrolled 
mind, similarly Yoga can also fail due to uncontrolled mind. 
For example, due to greed, a person can invest more in the 
wrong company. Similarly, in the greed for more yoga 
benefits, a person can do yoga in the wrong way or beyond 
the tolerance limit of the body. There can be loss in both the 
situations. Just as investing without adequate information can 
result in losses, similarly practising Yoga without basic 
information and etiquettes can also result in minor losses. 
Just as long term investments bear fruit after a long time, so 
does Kundalini Yoga. Just as short term investment can be 
successful very quickly only with proper information, time, 
power and good opportunity, in the same way Tantric 
Kundalini Yoga also proves fruitful very quickly only if done 
with adequate knowledge, time, power and good opportunity. 
Just as if a short-term investment is not always successful, 
and a person can lose his capital and become a pauper, in 
the same way, if Tantric Yoga is not successful, a person’s 
old bodily power can also get weakened. Just as successful 
short-term investment takes a lot of man’s money at stake 
and returns even more money in the form of profit, similarly 
successful Tantric Kundalini Yoga also takes a man’s more 
power at stake and returns it amplified in the form of 
Kundalini awakening. Just as in short term trading the risk is 
also high despite the potential for high profits, so too is the 
case with Tantric Kundalini Yoga. Just as money gradually 
increases money, similarly the practice of yoga also gradually 
increases yoga. Just aS wrongly spent money is destroyed, 
similarly wrongly used yoga power is destroyed. Just as 
money invested in the right direction keeps on increasing, 
similarly the power of yoga invested in the right direction 
keeps on increasing. Just as increased wealth helps in 


increasing itself by forcing one to perform religious activities 
and with this also helps in attaining God, in the same way, 
increased Kundalini Yoga also helps in increasing itself by 
forcing one to perform religious activities and in this way also 
helps in attaining God. Just as the desire for more money 
makes a man do all kinds of good and bad deeds, in the 
same way the desire for more Yoga-happiness i.e. perfection 
i.e. God makes a man do all kinds of deeds. Just as a person 
does innumerable deceitful things to attain wealth, in the 
same way many people do sinful Panchamakarika type 
meditation or work to attain the best Tantrik Yoga. Just as 
growth of wealth is the main goal of life, similarly growth of 
yoga and happiness is also the main goal of life. Just as 
money increases by investing in good companies, similarly 
by sharing the knowledge of Yoga among deserving people, 
Yoga increases. Just like investing money in a bad company 
leads to loss of money, in the same way, sharing the 
knowledge of yoga among undeserving and negative people 
can also lead to loss of yoga. Just as moving away from 
everyone else and investing by one with his own personal 
understanding and style increases his wealth, in the same 
way, tailoring yoga to one’s needs can also increase his Yoga 
benefits exponentially. Just as money neither belongs to 
anyone nor it has enmity to anyone, but its purpose depends 
on the person who uses it, in the same way, someone can do 
good deeds through Yoga, and someone can do bad deeds 
like Tantric black rituals through Tanta Yoga. Yoga itself has 
nothing to do with these. Just as the common people increase 
the wealth in the treasury by paying taxes, but only a few 
people can claim their rights on it, not all, similarly all the 
gentlemen have a hand in creating a yogic environment, but 
only a select few people have the facilities of a yogi, not all. 
Just as the common worldly man attains satisfaction and 
happiness in his silence, similarly the common gentleman 
attains his true Yogananda within his own mind by staying 
away from the desire for fame etc. 


Kundalini Yoga with Ragas 


Friends, classical music based raga is an excellent example 
of ancient Indian tradition. and Kundalini Yoga. Both make 
the body and mind stress free. Controls blood pressure. Helps 
in concentrating. Actually, the basis of Ragas is Kundalini 
Yoga. Like “Wake up, wake up Mohan Pyare, Bhor Bhai, let 
your darshan come to Jogi Jangam, Jati, Niranjan” etc. Here 
dawn or Bhor means the growth of abundant sattoguna 
within the mind of Kundalini Yogi. Mohan Here is the 
Kundalini meditation picture. Mohan’s awakening here is 
Kundalini awakening. Ragas help in holding the breath for a 
longer period during yoga because in a raga, the same tune 
is prolonged by holding the breath for a longer period. In 
common songs, the lyrics and tune keep changing frequently 
due to which the attention becomes difficult to concentrate. 
People say that melody brings sleep. Actually, ragas calm the 
mind. In times of mental fatigue and restlessness, by 
listening to a raga, the breathing becomes deep and slow 
due to which the mind feels completely healthy. When the 
practice of yoga helps in singing a raga, then why can’t 
listening and singing a raga help in yoga, because in both the 
practice of breathing i.e. Pranayama contributes. Listening to 
the raga according to the time of the day freshens the mood. 
One such app that | like is Ragya. | am not doing any 
promotion. In this, ragas keep playing continuously according 
to the time of the day and innumerable ragas come in 
change. Earlier | used Saregama app but due to some bug in 
it, it forgot my 3 months subscription, which could not be 
recovered even from customer care. During yoga, listening to 
a raga does not reveal the thoughts suppressed in the mind 
because the power of the brain remains engaged in listening 
to the raga. Perhaps those suppressed thoughts keep getting 
destroyed, but without erupting outside, that is, silently. 
Perhaps what we consider expression of thoughts to be the 
process of destruction of thoughts, may actually be a way of 
keeping thoughts alive. How can a habit be destroyed by 
repeating it again and again? A habit will be destroyed only if 
it is not repeated. Similarly, how will the above thought be 
destroyed by repeatedly expressing it? It will be destroyed 


only when the power of that thought is used in some other 
good thought or feeling. Perhaps this is what happens with 
ragas. The power generated by Yoga does not get absorbed 
in the dormant thoughts but gets absorbed in the raga music, 
due to which the thoughts and feelings associated with 
Spiritual sanskars get strengthened, and the useless and 
suppressed thoughts of the previous life get destroyed. This 
is the middle way of manifesting the dormant thoughts in a 
light form and giving their power to the new Kundalini 
thought, so that the power of those thoughts can also be 
extracted and they cannot become material or material like 
after being expressed violently. If dormant thoughts do not 
emerge from the mind at all, their power will not be 
extracted. Similarly, even if they emerge too much, there will 
be no power left to draw from them. The basic theme of 
ragas is spiritual or yogic. Along with Ragas are in Surtaal 
means they are in rhythm. Therefore they are good for the 
mind. Among these, natural and simple instruments with 
beautiful sound like drum, dholki, sitar, flute etc. sound very 
dear to the ears. Which are better than the so-called modern 
deafening musical instruments, especially for yogis and 
blissful lifestyle. | find ragas tantric. Just as through Kundalini 
Tantra the so-called trivial worldliness is transformed into 
sublime spiritual practice, similarly through Raga too. The 
love relationship between a lover and his or her beloved 
usually seems to be physical, but when it is connected to a 
raga, it becomes sophisticated and spiritual. Similarly, take 
any worldly subject, Raga passion purifies it. Therefore, if we 
call Raaga musical laundering, it would not be an 
exaggeration. If we observe its basic principle in depth, only 
Kundalini is visible. Ragas improve breathing and body 
movements, because both are interconnected. Due to this, 
the Kundalini Shakti becomes active, due to which the 
Kundalini picture starts residing continuously in the mind. 
Due to this, the Kundalini picture remains connected with all 
thoughts, feelings and actions. Due to this, even after being 
immersed in a world full of duality, a feeling of perfect non- 
duality remains in the mind. This non-dual feeling purifies 
everyone. One special thing about ragas is that even if their 
words or lyrics are not understood, they still provide yoga 
benefits through their way of speaking and music. Anyway, 


there are not many words in them. Even on a single sentence 
or word, an entire raga of one hour is formed. For example, 
“Saavre se man laga, mori mae”, is a forty-five minute 
Khayal-based melodious raga on two or four lyrics like this. It 
seems that ragas are emotion based rather than word based. 


Kundalini Yoga makes Piharava 
means husband return home 


Friends, just look at the Raga Megh based raga named 
“Piharva Azhu Na Aaye”. In this the woman is waiting for her 
husband to return. She says feeling scared. Dark clouds have 
gathered, lightning is flashing. Rain drops have also started 
falling. The husband has settled abroad and has not yet 
returned. This is a spiritual story only, not a physical one. 
Here the wife is the soul, the husband is God. God is far away 
i.e. abroad. Sometimes both were together, but with time 
they separated. Black clouds mean darkness of ignorance 
looks scary. If lightning is flashing, it means that sadness 
producing thoughts like lust, anger, etc. are running in the 
mind. Just as lightning can kill a man, so too can unresolved 
lust. Meaning that lust can cause a man to be reborn. And it 
is self-evident that a living being will be reborn only if it first 
dies. Rain drops have started falling, which means tears have 
also started falling from the eyes due to sadness. 


This is the real movement and picture of the soul, which is 
depicted in the raga. This is a scientific fact, not a fantasy. 
This is spiritual psychology. This is also similar in the physical 
life too. In fact, when the head of the family reaches home, 
there is light all around. Dark defects like disappointment, 
sadness, hopelessness, lack etc. disappear for some time. 
Meaning, ragas have double meanings. Those who make and 
sing them must be no less than saints. On similar lines, 
Kundalini Yogis also strengthen the picture of Guru, God etc. 
in their mind, which is like the hope of husband coming 
home. While remembered, he may even return home in the 
form of Kundalini awakening. Further, it depends on the 
kundalini yogi whether he is able to keep him tied to the 
home through regular sadhana or gives him a chance to go 
far away and abroad again through uncontrolled behavior. 


Similarly, “Aajhun na aaye piya, aali (friend) mori, woh na 
aaye, tum/piya bin Raina katat na, aajhun na aaye piya”. This 
raga is in Khayal, sung by Adrija Basu. This raga is about a 


quarter of an hour long, and the same lyrics are used with 
ups and downs throughout the raga. In the last five-ten 
minutes, there are some words of Shiva praise like “Salalal 
Hilat/kilat Ganga, Jatajut Vyal (Serpent)”. This also proves 
that most of the ragas are based on the same theme of 
Kundalini Yoga. Very beautifully sung raga. In this, every 
effort has been made to prolong a single breath and to give 
deep ups and downs to the note associated with it. 


Kundalini Yoga gives man the 
power to become invisible 


Friends, in Shiva Purana, Shiva tells Parvati the way to 
become immortal and free by defeating Kaal means time. He 
says there are three ways of meditation. Meditation on sky 
means Anahata Naad, meditation on air means pranayam 
and meditation on fire means meditation on Ajna Chakra 
point, in the form of sun, luminous deity images etc. It is 
worth noting here that this description comes after the 
description in which so-called strange symptoms of death 
have been described. Such as death due to continuous 
twitching of the left limb for several days or attack by 
vultures as a symptom of death etc. However, Shiva has also 
clearly said that he is describing this only for the welfare of 
the people and to increase feelings of renunciation among 
them. The meaning is clear that this effort is to create fear of 
death so that people can quickly overcome death by taking 
the help of yoga etc. As a result of the description of Yoga 
that follows, the so-called transcendental achievements have 
also been described only to create attraction towards Yoga. 
Meaning, on one hand, imaginary fear of death has been 
created and on the other hand, imaginary achievements of 
Yoga have been shown. Imaginary means having double 
meaning, not pure imaginary. For example, Yogi becoming 
invisible. It does not happen that the body of a Yogi is not 
visible to anyone. This means that due to Kundalini Yoga, he 
becomes so calm, neutral and situated in his own self that 
even in a crowd of people, no attention is paid to him. | have 
a Yogi friend. He had been living among the people of an 


unfamiliar type society for ten years. But the people of that 
society did not know about him. Spies are also like this. 


Can Kundalini Yoga make 
one fly? 


Friends, many things in the Puranas do not appear to be true 
in physical form, but they provide benefits to people, that is, 
they move them forward on the path of spirituality. Of course 
with the side effect that they can also be physically 
disorienting. The proof of my point is that the scriptures 
themselves have said that speak the truth but do not speak 
the bitter truth, meaning clearly that whatever brings 
sweetness in people’s lives i.e. spiritual development, but is 
undoubtedly like a lie or having double meaning, speak it. For 
example, in the scriptures, the faults of women are 
mentioned somewhere, so that there is no excessive sexual 
feeling or lust towards women, as is often the case, because 
excess is bad everywhere. In one such story, a woman of bad 
character and engaged in prostitution tells about this when 
asked by Shri Narad. She leaves no stone unturned in 
highlighting the shamelessness of women, which further 
strengthens Narad’s hatred towards women in his mind. He 
was a sSannyasi and wanted to hear the same so that he 
could raise his harp of renunciation even higher. It is 
possible, that woman may have considered all women to be 
equal to herself. To a thief everyone seems to be a thief. 
Similarly, there is often low value for freebies. That is why 
there are many descriptions in Hindu religion that taking 
donations by Brahmins or Babas is acceptable. Of course, it is 
said in the scriptures that whatever is received without 
asking or demanding for it, a Brahmin should accept it. Also, 
in the scriptures it is said that by donating various things to 
Brahmins, one can get various worldly and transcendental 
fruits. This too is also a demand, of course with discipline, 
sociability and cleverness, but there have been many 
misuses of it too. It is my own experience that giving 
donations to a deserving Brahmin gives such results, but 
these have been greatly exaggerated. The simple thing is 
that real Brahmins remain ready to attain Brahmagyan or 
have attained it. It is possible that by donating to them one 
gets the fruit of Brahmagyan. Helping a reader inspires 
reading, helping a singer inspires singing, and helping 


someone with spiritual knowledge inspires one to attain 
spiritual knowledge. Simple. Brahma has been found, means 
everything has been found. Now, whatever you can imagine 
equivalent to attaining Brahm, like getting the ownership of 
the infinite universe, getting the position of the king of 
heaven, getting the entire kingdom or getting the position of 
Lord Vishnu etc. etc., that all is okay. There is no end to such 
fantasies. But | like sharing knowledge by a Karmayogi the 
most. A Karma Yogi does not need to take donations or 
anything else in return because he has already received 
enough through his Karma Yoga. Raja Janak is the biggest 
example of this, who along with being a honoured king was 
also a supreme yogi. 
Similarly, most of the supernatural achievements also seem 
like white lies or sweet lies. If Yogis had so many 
Supernatural powers, our nation would never have been 
under the trap of enemies or never have been in poverty. 
Here every person was a yogi. If the Yogis had the ability to 
travel through the sky or through the air, they would have 
flown over the enemy armies and destroyed them from the 
sky itself. In reality, this accomplishment is symbolic and 
experiential, not physical or real. The yogi keeps moving air 
in and out of the body all the time with full attention and 
rhythm, like a fish living in water moves water. When a fish 
doing this is seen moving in the water, similarly, a yogi doing 
the same but with the air can be understood as moving in the 
air or in the sky. It is possible that such an experience may 
occur in advanced yoga practice, but it will not be that he will 
start flying in the air. | also have many dreams that | am 
flying in the sky like a bird. It feels like a real flight, brother, 
and it is a lot of fun too. One feels as if such flight was 
possible even while awake, but it is not so. This experience 
occurs due to the effect of yoga and pranayam. But these 
experiences also have the disadvantage that most people 
consider them to be everything and start deviating from the 
main goal of awakening. 


Kundalini Yoga transforms 
the ego 


Friends, it has been said in the scriptures that one can attain 
Anima Siddhi through Yoga. Anima is derived from the word 
Anu, which means subtle. Therefore Anima Siddhi means the 
accomplishment of becoming a subtle form. But I think most 
of the people understood it in such a way that it would have 
reduced the body size of a person from 6 feet to 6 inches ora 
person weighing 60 kg would have been reduced to 5 kg. But 
this is not possible. On the basis of experience, it comes out 
that due to Kundalini Yoga, man’s ego becomes so weak that 
he gets into the habit of living in harmony even with 
creatures smaller in size than him. This means that he 
becomes as small as them. After attaining enlightenment, 
the yogi establishes contact with subtle spirits like soil, 
water, air, sky etc. Meaning he becomes the most subtle. A 
similar Yoga Siddhi is Garima Siddhi, which is the exact 
opposite of Anima. Meaning, with this a man can become as 
big aS a mountain. We should not understand these in 
physical perspective. Because it is impossible for this to 
happen. This means that he rises above or becomes equal to 
people with great power or great ego such as great 
industrialists, rich people, leaders, artists, presidents and 
kings or even above the gods like Brahma etc. Means he 
ecomes the biggest or heaviest. The ego being subtle or 
destroyed does not mean that the existence of the Yogi does 
not remain, or that the existence becomes smaller. This is 
not a situation like deprivation or death. This means 
transformation of ego feeling into non-dual feeling. This is the 
transformation of ego feeling into Kundalini feeling. This is 
the transformation of ego feeling into Samadhi or meditation 
feeling. This is the transformation of ego or self feeling into 
divine feeling. One who is established in the sense of God, 
becomes established in the form of all things, because even 
in the form of the smallest thing, God is there, and even in 
the form of the biggest thing, God is there. This is the anima 
or laghima and garima Siddhis. Ego is the basic nature of 
consciousness. Without this, life and consciousness are not 
possible. What people do is that they try to kill the ego, 


because of which their consciousness also dies, and they 
become inert. It is true that false ego tied to ignorance is 
harmful, but the absence of ego can be even more harmful. 
Therefore it is important to adopt the middle path. Meaning, 
there may be ego, but it is tied to true knowledge. Therefore, 
poor ego should be transformed into good ego. This great 
ego resides with Advaita. It accepts the feelings of an ant in 
the same way as it accepts the feelings of an elephant. It 
accepts even a particle of soil with the same respect as it 
accepts a mountain. It accepts a poor person with the same 
egoism as it accepts a king. These are Anima, Laghima and 
Garima. But there is a catch here. We do not have to 
forcefully create such pure egoism, rather we have to create 
so much power through Kundalini Yoga that it arises on its 
own. | feel that if we create it through drama, we will 
continue to act in drama all our life and will not be able to 
reach the real Kundalini Yoga. This is a completely simple 
and practical experience. Writing too much only creates 
confusion. Actually, words are not available to write like this, 
hence mainstream words like ego have to be used. Many 
times people misunderstand them. Someone may say that 
ego has been said everywhere to be abandoned, but we are 
talking about adopting it. But they might not be 
understanding the basic meaning of this. In fact, when the 
ego becomes impure to pure, then it gets converted from 
aggressive to calm and extroverted to introverted or 
meditative. It is difficult to directly create a pure ego, but it is 
easy to transform an impure ego into a pure ego. Just as 
worldliness is flourished more by impure ego, similarly 
Spirituality and Kundalini Yoga is flourished more by pure 
ego. Similarly, writing well does not make a thing true. For 
example, in the Puranas, many things that seem 
conservative and unscientific have been written in very 
beautiful verses. A lot of hard work has gone into creating 
those verses. But this does not make them logical or 
scientific. It may be so indirectly, but ignoring what is clearly 
visible, how can one live on the basis of faith alone. The 
biggest evidence is considered direct. The proofs like guess, 
belief in the spoken word etc. are less than the direct 
evidence. Yes, if no direct harm is visible from them, then 
other evidence can be taken. The obvious cannot be ignored. 


If there is direct harm from it, then it can also be understood 
that it is not the truth in physical form, but an attempt is 
being made to explain some spiritual aspect from it in the 
form of a metaphor. But not everyone thinks so. Many people 
start taking them as true literally. If non-dual belief somehow 
persists along with the impure ego, then its transformation 
into pure ego becomes easier. 


Actually, with such verses, the right part of the brain 
becomes active, which becomes dormant due to becoming 
too logical and scientific. For awakening, it is necessary for 
both parts of the brain to remain equally active. With so 
much effort, such beautiful and grammatically correct verses 
cannot be composed even on imaginary matters. They 
definitely have some purpose. If the aim was to earn money 
or gain fame from these, then they could have been made on 
logical and secular facts also. Meaning that there may be a 
hidden meaning in them which is not visible on the surface. 
Meaning that if only their superficial meaning is considered to 
be completely true in physical form, then man can become a 
fool. If these are understood more true as fiction and less 
true as a physical base, then the right brain will become 
more active. If the imaginary story is also considered true 
and its basic scientific fact is also considered true, then both 
parts of the brain will become active simultaneously. Perhaps 
this is the aim of mythologies and this blog. 


Kundalini Yoga is a bot remover 
eScanner app that scans, makes 
malware-free, virus-free, and 
updates smartphone software 


The information we collect from the world becomes our ego 
and continues to grow it. Ego is like a software, which runs 
the smartphone in the form of our life. It cannot be 
destroyed. A smartphone without software is like a dead 
person. Just as software can be updated and made malware 
free, so too can the ego. Just as a smartphone gets infected 


with malware while working, similarly the ego also gets 
polluted by worldly behaviour. Just like the phone has to be 
updated continuously, similarly the ego also has to be 
continuously purified through spiritual practice etc. Accepting 
ego as truth is the impurity of ego. When the ego starts 
appearing unreal through non-dual practice like physiology 
philosophy aka Sharirvigyan Darshan etc., then it starts 
getting purified with the feeling of joy and peace. As it gets 
purified, it starts transforming into Kundalini-ego, i.e. 
meditation-ego. Kundalini-ego also gets formed and 
strengthened by Kundalini Yoga. Meaning, Kundalini Yoga is 
like a bot remover e-scanner application, which runs the 
software code in the form of Kundalini-thought. That 
Kundalini-thought scrutinizes all the thoughts of the mind, 
destroys the attachment to them i.e. the impurity of truth- 
intellect and transforms them into the form of pure Kundalini- 
ego. Meaning the Kundalini-picture gets connected with all 
the thoughts. By running this application daily in the morning 
and evening at least twice a day as Kundalini Yoga, this 
software keeps working continuously, and keeps us safe from 
ego i.e. impure ego. Ego actually means impure ego. Pure 
ego is the form of self and the form of happiness. Therefore, 
instead of calling it ego, calling it self-consciousness or 
meditation or self-awareness would be more appropriate and 
people would not have misunderstandings. 


Kundalini Yoga has equal 
importance in Karma Yoga and 
Sanyasa Yoga 


Friends, by meditating on the philosophy of physiology as 
described in the book “mythological body, a new age 
physiology philosophy (Sharirvigyan darshan)”, the 
worldliness does not dissolve, but is moderated, which leads 
to the birth of excellent Karmayoga. Whereas from such a 
feeling that worldliness is not true or it’s not outside but it’s 
false or it’s inside the body, Sanyasa Yoga arises. This 
creates lysis of worldliness. Physiological philosophy gives 
the feeling that worldliness is true and exactly the same 
exists inside the body too as it’s outside. Because everything 
is calm inside the body. Also, there is no screaming or hustle 
and bustle anywhere inside it. Whereas the entire universe is 
contained inside the body, according to the verse “Yatpinde 
Tat Brahmande”. This means that the worldliness inside the 
body is with Advaita. With this feeling, our worldliness also 
becomes nondual, knowledgeable and noble. It means 
worldliness is not destroyed or lysed. This is a big difference 
between a Karma Yogi and a Sanyasa yogi. Some people get 
deceived by this. They start considering Karmayogi or 
physiology philosopher as like renunciate Baba, and 
sometimes even try to harass or ignore him. But when he 
sets an example as per the place and time, then even the 
biggest people keep watching. Perhaps from this the famous 
Punjabi proverb has been coined that look at the oil and see 
the stream of oil. Meaning, look at the body and see the 
consciousness of the infinite universe falling into it. Karma 
yogi has an inherent habit of acting as per time and place. He 
has neither regard nor disregard for any karma. Whatever he 
does, he does it with detail, quality and in an unsurpassed or 
exemplary manner. He carries the work to its peak and never 
leave it in between getting bored if it’s worth doing. He isa 
scientist, expert, writer, poet, musician type of person. 
What’s more, to me, all the special tasks in the world seem to 
be the result of Karmayoga. So what we were Saying is that 
Karma Yoga also happens only through meditation on the 


body, and Sannyasa Yoga also happens only through 
meditation on the body. The best attention to the body is 
given during Kundalini Yoga. With the accompanying mental 
attitude of Philosophy of physiology, the same body- 
meditation gets transformed into Karma Yoga, and with the 
mental attitude of Sannyasa, the same meditation gets 
transformed into Sanyasa Yoga. Karmayoga is the middle 
path. Common worldly behavior is highly instinctive. Whereas 
Sanyas Yoga is like extreme escapism. Karmayoga is the life 
behavior with the best combination of rational action and 
rational escape. Yes, one more thing. Paying attention to the 
breath also focuses attention on the body itself, because the 
entire body moves with the breath. This also produces the 
same physiology philosophy effect. The entire body actually 
exists in the breath, because it is recognisable and alive only 
through the breath. Means the whole universe is situated 
inside the breath. 


Kundalini Yoga transforms 
advanced cognition into 
basic cognition 


Friends, man is an advanced creature. Advanced cognition is 
present in it. But one side effect of improved cognition is that 
it creates attachment, due to which the person becomes 
bound to it. It is like a life-saving medicine is the most 
helpful, but it also has the most side effects. 


Basic cognition is present in all the cells of our body. 
Similarly, all the lowest and most microscopic organisms also 
have basic cognition. All of them adapt themselves according 
to their surrounding environment. To survive they follow a 
lifestyle similar to ours. Learn new things, and remember old 
things. But for this, no brain like structure has been seen in 
them yet. Meaning that they are controlled by a series of 
different and countless chemical reactions. So why not 
consider those chemical reactions as their brain. Our brain 
also runs on chemical reactions only. It is possible that even 
inanimate objects like stones and air may have a lower level 
of basic cognition than this, which science has not yet been 
able to understand. The flow of air is controlled by 
atmospheric pressure. So why not consider air pressure as 
the basic cognition of air. Similarly, every time air has a 
specific reaction at a particular air pressure. So why not 
consider it as the memory power of air pressure. With basic 
cognition there is no sense of good and bad. For example, 
due to low air pressure at a place, air entering there does not 
give a good experience to the air. Nor does the movement of 
air from there when there is high air pressure give a bad 
experience to the air. Similarly, a bacteria does not feel 
happy when it receives a particle of food and does not feel 
sad when faced with an enemy. Meaning that with basic 
cognition there is no attachment or hatred. At the same time, 
in higher cognition, that intermediate state of equality turns 
into attachment and hatred. Just like a neutron gets 
converted into a positive proton and a negative electron. 
When both are mixed, a neutral neutron is formed again. The 


plus and minus charges cannot be destroyed separately. 
These two will be destroyed only when they meet each other. 
Similarly, we cannot eliminate attachment and hatred by 
keeping them separate. If we keep attachment to passion 
and aversion, they will remain separate and grow stronger. 
When passion arises, hatred will also arise somewhere, 
because like electric charges, these also arise in pairs, not 
alone. Detachment is the process which connects positive 
passion and negative hatred and destroys both. Call positive 
Yang and negative Yin. Their union is the much talked about 
confluence, or Advaita. 


The development of cognition is like a necessary evil. When 
man was only in the form of air, water or micro-organism, he 
had basic cognition. There was neither passion nor hatred in 
him. He was neutral. He was neither happy nor sad. But as 
cognition developed, he started experiencing good and bad. 
Due to this, happiness and sorrow arose in him. Life and 
death came into existence. Earlier he neither lived nor died. 
Perhaps this is the indescribable liberation which has been 
talked about in the Vedas. There was neither light nor 
darkness in it. Meaning there was no conflict in it. That 
situation can also be understood in such a way that in that 
situation all the conflicts were there together. A neutron 
contains both a proton and an electron, yet not both. 
Similarly it is said that everything is there in God and also not 
there. 


Now the description of the universe in the Vedas which is 
similar to that of human society, and the description of 
various animate gods and demons etc. in it is exactly like 
that of the people of human society, actually seems to be an 
attempt to return towards basic cognition. Similarly, in Tantra 
based physiology philosophy aka Sharirvigyan darshan, the 
description of the body like the universe and human society 
is also an attempt to achieve the same primitive basic 
cognition. Both have the same theme, but the philosophy of 
physiology seems more contemporary and scientific. 
However, both methods work better when combined with 
each other. According to a previous post, Kundalini Yoga 


strengthens the philosophy of physiology. This means that 
Kundalini Yoga strengthens the basic i.e. pure cognition. 


So will we accept the existence of only electrons and protons 
and not neutrons? Meaning, will we accept the existence of 
consciousness only in advanced organisms and not in lower 
organisms and inanimate substances? The meaning is clear 
that there is no such time, place and substance in the 
universe which does not have consciousness. 


Kundalini Yoga as prana-healing 
medicine in Mythological story 
of Vishuchika 


Friends, it seems that an interesting discussion has started 
again. There is a story in Yoga Vashishtha also. In this, a 
cannibalistic demon becomes a tiny needle due to some 
curse. She drinks people’s blood but is unable to taste it 
because her mouth is very small. Visuchika means cholera or 
diarrhea caused by its bite. “Vi” means special and Visuchika 
means special suchika means needle-like shape. Even in 
ancient times, people had an idea of bacteria. Of course, due 
to lack of microscope they could not see them. It is clear that 
microorganisms also have consciousness, but they are not 
able to feel happiness, sorrow or good or bad. Let’s delve into 
some details. 


The Curious Case of Soochika: Demon or 
Microbe? 


The ancient Indian text, the Yogavasishtha, tells the story of 
Soochika, a terrifying demoness who feasted on human 
blood. But unlike other bloodthirsty creatures, Soochika’s 
curse was not her hunger, but the fact that her minuscule 
mouth prevented her from ever tasting and enjoying her 
meals. This strange detail has led some to wonder if Soochika 
might be more than just a demon; could she be an allegory 
for an unseen enemy - the microbe? 


Soochika’s Link to the Unseen 


The Yogavasishtha portrays Soochika as an invisible entity, a 
characteristic that aligns perfectly with the nature of 
microbes. These tiny organisms, invisible to the naked eye, 
were unknown in ancient times. People often attributed 
sickness to supernatural forces, and Soochika’s form could be 
seen as a reflection of this lack of scientific understanding. 


Similarities to Infectious Diseases 


Soochika’s ability to inflict illness without any apparent cause 
resonates with the concept of contagious diseases. In the 
absence of knowledge about germs, the Yogavasishtha might 
have attempted to explain the spread of illness through the 
figure of Soochika. 


Vasistha’s Cure: A Metaphor for Yoga 
Healing? 


The story mentions Vasistha, a revered sage, curing Soochika 
by stripping away her demonic form. This could be 
interpreted as a metaphor for the power of medicine and 
Spiritual practices in overcoming illness. The method of 
treatment could also be that Rishi Vashishtha made his mind 
as detached as that visuchika through Kundalini Yoga. 
Detached means a mind which feels equality in good and 
bad, and which does not taste worldly things with 
attachment. This may have given him the invisible power to 
understand the vishuchika and control it, because only iron 
cuts iron. Meaning, this could be an allegorical story of yoga 
or pranic healing. 


Unraveling the Mystery 


While the possibility of Soochika symbolizing microbes is 
intriguing, it’s important to acknowledge the limitations of 
this interpretation. The Yogavasishtha primarily portrays 
Soochika as a demonic entity, and attributing a scientific 
meaning to the story might be a stretch. 


Had Leeuwenhoek discovered the 
microorganism 


Ancient Indian system was aware of bacterial cause of 
diseases. There comes this type of topic in the 
yogvaasishtha, an ultimate vedantic scripture till date. 
Bacteria have been guessed there in dirty places as a cause 


of enteritis. The bacteria have been named as 
jeevasoochikaa (jeeva =organism, soochikaa =micro). This 
has been described as lady Damon (raakshsikaa) blessed by 
the God to turn into invisibly small body to eat flesh of live 
people ad lib as per her begging but side by side having too 
small a mouth to have a sense of taste so regretting to 
having been blessed. 


A Call for Further Exploration 


The tale of Soochika offers a fascinating glimpse into how 
ancient cultures perceived illness. Whether she is a literal 
demon or a metaphorical representation of disease, her story 
sheds light on humanity’s ongoing battle against the unseen 
forces that threaten our health. Further exploration of the 
Yogavasishtha and other ancient texts could provide valuable 
insights into the history of medicine and our relationship with 
the invisible world. 


Kundalini Yoga as an Alien- 
hunt weapon 


Today we are going to discuss another interesting topic - the 
connection between Kundalini Yoga and aliens. 

Some scientists believe that aliens may exist only in the form 
of inanimate substances. They do not feel wavy happiness- 
sorrow or good-bad. They may be around us in the form of 
sun, mountains, rivers, stones, planets, constellations etc., 
but we do not recognize them. 

It is also possible that they may have hidden themselves. 
Perhaps they have understood that conscious decisions only 
bring suffering and pain. 

Therefore they have developed themselves so much that 
they do not need to do anything thoughtfully or with ego. 
They also do not discriminate between good and bad. 


It is also possible that their consciousness is not separate but 
collective. 

Some scientists believe that they may be computers or Al- 
like. They will not be organic, but made of inorganic elements 
such as semiconductors and metals. 

Whatever it may be, inanimate matter certainly exists in its 
own right. 

If this were not the case then why would Mars look so 
beautiful? There is no life there. 

Had it not been there the conscious existence of the 
inanimate world, astonishing power would not have been felt 
in the chaotic movements of inanimate elements in hellish 
planets like Venus. 

If there was no cognitive existence of inanimate objects then 
there would be no noise in the infinite space filled with the 
movements of inanimate objects. 

There is no action without purpose. 

This means that even inanimate objects have basic cognition. 
The sensation in all is certainly similar, but there are slight 
differences depending on the type of substance. 

If it were exactly the same, it would be impossible for us to 
recognize and work with different types of substances, 
because then they would all appear exactly the same to us. 


When a person is experienced having some special human 
nature, we do not deny it by saying that it is a lie. The nature 
of man is made up of the nature of natural or inanimate 
elements with whom he interacts day and night. Meaning 
that if the nature of man is true, then the nature of inanimate 
objects composing him should also be true. Yes, that nature 
can be understood as duality mixed nonduality i.e. truth- 
false, because it is possible that we are feeling his nature, 
but he himself is not able to feel that nature. Similarly, we 
should also consider the nature of inanimate substances like 
air and water as true-false or dual-non-dual. Meaning that of 
course we may be able to feel the nature of those inanimate 
elements, but they themselves may not be able to feel those 
natures. This type of mixed dualism is the real Advaita. 


It can be understood that everything is similar to each other 
and also different from each other. This is Dvaita-Advaita and 
this is the truth. Complete dualism is also false, and complete 
Advaita is also false. Spiritual scriptures and sages also say 
the same. This means that the aliens are neither of different 
forms nor of the same form. But they are a mixture of both. 
Meaning that aliens are dual-nondual or dvaitaadvaita form. 


This also means that there are different types of aliens 
everywhere around us. It is a different matter that we have 
not been able to find biological aliens like us, because such 
aliens are extremely rare. Only through Kundalini Yoga, we 
can know each and every element of nature in depth by 
applying samadhi. In Yoga Shastras, by attaining Samadhi on 
Vayu and fully understanding the nature of Vayu, one attains 
the powers of Vayu. Similarly, samadhi on fire leads to fire, 
and samadhi on water leads to water, or samadhi on sky 
leads to sky, etc. Meaning that we can talk to countless 
aliens in the form of countless substances, and gain 
understanding of their technologies. We have also achieved it 
to some extent. Understanding the power of air-alien and 
fire-alien, powerful engines have been created. 
Understanding the power of atom-alien, human have built 
nuclear powerhouses. The camera is made by copying the 
eyes-alien. There are countless such examples. If we take the 
Spiritual field, Kundalini Tantra has been created by 
understanding the body-alien, through which Kundalini 
awakening has been achieved with countless spiritual 
accomplishments. The meaning seems clear that there is 
more chance of encountering aliens through Kundalini Yoga 
than through space exploration. 


Connection between Kundalini Yoga and 
Aliens: 


Kundalini Yoga is an ancient Indian yoga practice that 
focuses on awakening spiritual energy. 

Some people believe that practicing Kundalini Yoga can lead 
to the ability to communicate with aliens. 

The idea is based on the belief that Kundalini Yoga can help 


us reach higher levels of consciousness, allowing us to 
connect to other dimensions and realities. 

Some people also believe that Kundalini Yoga can give us 
access to the technologies and knowledge of aliens. 


Is it true? 


It is difficult to say with certainty whether Kundalini Yoga can 
actually help in communicating with aliens. 

There is no scientific evidence to support this claim. 
However, there are many people who have claimed to have 
had experiences with aliens after practicing Kundalini Yoga. 


conclusion: 


The connection between Kundalini Yoga and aliens is an 
interesting and controversial topic. 

It is impossible to say with certainty whether Kundalini Yoga 
can actually help in communicating with aliens. 

However, this is certainly a topic that deserves further study 
and research. 


Kundalini Yoga can make the 
inanimate alive 


Friends, when | asked Al for a one-sentence definition of a 
living being, it told me that a living being is one that is 
capable of reproduction, growth, metabolism, adaptation to 
the environment, responding to stimuli and maintaining 
homeostasis, while non-living beings are capable of none of 
these. In this post, we will prove through Kundalini Yoga that 
all these activities take place even in non-living things. 


reproduction in non-living things 


If there was no reproduction in non-living things then how 
would the universe develop? Then we would not have seen 
the sky full of planets and stars. The number of things or 
living beings increases only through reproduction. Because 
there are innumerable non-living things in the universe, 
reproduction also occurs in non-living things. That 
reproduction takes place from the original sky i.e. original 
nature aka mool Prakriti in Sanskrit. It is also said in the 
scriptures that the universe is born from the original nature. 
From that original space the original fundamental particles 
are born. Consider the original sky as a mother and the 
fundamental particles as children. Then those fundamental 
particles continue to grow through mutual actions and 
reactions and spread throughout the universe. In fact, this 
entire creation must have been made up of only a few 
hundred or thousand fundamental particles. Their mutual 
reactions create different substances, which fill the entire 
universe. 


metabolism in non-living things 


According to Al definition, metabolism is the set of chemical 
reactions occurring in living organisms that are necessary for 
energy production, growth, development and repair. In the 
so-called lifeless Sun, energy is produced by nuclear 
reactions. Due to this, there is continuous growth and 


development in the fundamental particles. Due to this, all the 
elements that create the universe are produced in sufficient 
quantities in the Sun. 


Adaptation to environment in non-living 
things 


By kicking, not only the dog runs away but also a ball runs 
away. Galaxies live in groups like families so that new stars 
can be formed properly. Just as living beings want to run 
away from the suffocating dense population and go towards 
peace, similarly all the non-living things like air and water 
also run from high pressure to low pressure area. Meaning 
that even non-living things adapt themselves for their 
betterment. 


response to stimuli by nonliving things 


A piece of metal expands when heated. Meaning it tries to 
spread out its heat or tries to run away from there. The same 
piece of metal shrinks as the cold increases. Meaning it tries 
to save its heat by crouching there. There are innumerable 
examples, such as explosions, electrical conduction, and 
chemical reactions, of inanimate objects responding to 
stimuli to a greater extent and more rapidly than even the 
living beings. 


Maintenance of homeostasis by non-living 
things 


Homeostasis means maintaining the same conditions 
necessary for life. As a healthy body has a fixed and uniform 
temperature, at which the body is most efficient. Similarly, if 
we consider it in non-living things, then when the 
temperature increases too much, clouds start gathering and 
it rains. Due to this the temperature of the environment 
becomes normal again. Greenhouse gases help in 
maintaining uniform and stable temperature on Earth. The 
fixed and determined force of gravity helps galaxies maintain 


a stable structure, ensuring the proper evolution of the 
universe. The mutual balance between the force of expansion 
and the force of gravity keeps the universe alive. 

It is clear from the facts arising from such out of the box or 
offbeat thinking that there is basically no difference between 
non-living and living. The line dividing them is not real but 
imaginary. This also proves that non-living beings also have 
their own level of basic cognition like living beings. When a 
person attains samadhi through Kundalini Yoga, he 
experiences the basic cognition of that object. That is a 
primitive cognitive experience, and very close to the ultimate 
experience of complete enlightenment. That is why it is said 
that God can be reached only through Samadhi. 


Kundalini Yoga can format mind- 
hard disk fully 


Friends, nature aka Prakriti and man aka Purusha in Sankhya 
school of thought are known as the mother and father of this 
creation respectively. Every thing is created with the 
cooperation of Prakriti and Purusha. Prakriti is a blackboard 
and Purusha is a movie running on it. If there is no 
blackboard, there is no movie. If there is no movie then there 
is no blackboard either. Both are fully dependent on each 
other. It is not possible for them to live separately and 
purposefully. Similarly, if there is no darkness of Tamoguna in 
prakriti then the light-form world cannot be expressed. 


White chalk cannot write on a white board. Writing can be 
done with the white chalk only on the black black board. 
Similarly, a conscious picture of the world cannot be created 
using only the conscious Purusha. For constructing the 
conscious world-picture, the background of unconscious 
Prakriti should also be available. This is all spirituality. Here 
the whole world is inside the mind and brain. We do not need 
to go down to the fundamental particle physically. Here the 
birth and death of the world is going on every moment. New 
pictures are being created, old ones are being erased. Prakriti 
is the blackboard of mind filled with emptiness and darkness, 
whereas Purusha is the ink of conscious experience. It is 
constantly being written and erased. The blackboard is never 
destroyed, and neither is the ink. Both are imperishable, 
immortal and eternal. Both are two opposite poles of 
existence. One is yin and one is yang. There is a mother who 
accepts the play of the bright ink of consciousness on her. 
There is a father who keeps drawing his beloved Prakriti for 
his bright paintings. As he continues to draw pictures, objects 
continue to be born. This entire creation is pictorial, not real. 
Also look at the gross physicality outside the brain. So that 
too is pictorial, only the gross pictures are a little more 
stable, and are created sequentially and slowly. As if first of 
all pictures of fundamental particles will be formed in the 
macro space outside. Then, while acting and reacting with 


each other, they will continue to grow and create new 
pictures according to a specified sequence and scientific 
principle. Only pictures of the original particle are engraved 
outside the brain. Later they become different pictures of the 
developed world growing in the womb of Mother Prakriti. But 
any desired picture is created in the sky of the mind ina 
moment. This happens because it is a reflection of the 
outside picture, not the real picture. However, there is no 
difference in the nature of image and reflection. It is like 
seeing the reflection of Mount Kailash in the water of 
Manasarovar lake with one’s own eyes. That reflection of the 
mountain would remain in the water throughout the day and 
it was formed slowly. It will not be there at night at all. Then 
as the Sun rises and climbs, that image will gradually become 
clearer and larger. Many factors are necessary to create it. 
But the eye immediately created that image in the brain 
because it was already fully made. To create it, nothing else 
was needed, just a body with eyes and a brain. So both the 
pictures are the same. Similarly, it took billions and trillions of 
years to create the pictures of the world in the outer sky. But 
to draw those pictures, only a body is needed which can draw 
those pictures in a moment. We are not even aware of the 
pictures outside, because we cannot feel them. We feel only 
the pictures within. We can judge outside only from within. 
When the inner picture of the world disappears, its trace 
remains on the mental blackboard. This is what we call the 
subtle body on which the pictures of all the previous births of 
the man remain buried in subtle form. It is like even after 
deleting data from the phone’s memory, it remains hidden in 
it, which can be found and retrieved again. It can be 
completely erased only through the special app called 
Kundalini Yoga. This body is like a unique electronic camera. 
Due to damage to the camera, all the pictures inside it get 
erased, but the electricity remains, and so do the materials 
that make up the camera’s screen. Meaning, with the 
destruction of the body, the world-images inside are 
destroyed, but Purusha and prakriti still remain. Both of them 
are eternal. The eternal can only be void-space, nothing else. 
Meaning, Purusha is the same void-sky, and Prakriti is also 
the same void-sky. Both are like two sides of the same coin. 


Conscious void-space meaning Purusha becomes 
unconscious void-space meaning Prakriti by illusion produced 
by spiritual ignorance. However the original Purusha-Akash 
remains the same and conscious as earlier. By the same 
Original Purusha-sky, images continue to be carved on its 
own confused form. The original Purusha i.e. Purushottam or 
Supreme Soul is there as such, while the confused Purusha 
becomes the soul or Prakriti. It is just like it is said in Shiva 
Purana that from the one and only Shiva was born the pair of 
man and woman i.e. Purusha and Prakriti. 


Kundalini Yoga can reunite the 
son with his father most easily 


Friends, Lord Krishna says in Geeta that he is the father of 
the universe, who in the form of Brahma puts his semen as 
seed inside his wife Prakriti. The entire creation originates 
from him. Come, let us understand this scientifically. If we go 
deeper into the scriptures, we will find many secrets hidden 
in them. A ring was formed with the luminous line of Purusha 
or luminous sky within the tamas-sky means dark or 
unconscious sky or Prakriti. That virtual sohere was the 
original fundamental particle. It was like drawing a ring with 
chalk on a blackboard. It is made up of light meaning Purusha 
and darkness meaning nature. Even in the ring made on the 
black board, the circular area inside the boundary wall of the 
line of light is in the form of darkness. The semen of the 
purushottam was in the form of the luminous boundary wall 
of that ring-shaped drawing. That semen was called Purusha. 
Actually, all the essence of an male organism is hidden in its 
semen. So basically, there’s no difference purusa and 
purushottam. It’s like just as the whole tree is hidden inside 
its seed. 


The dark circular area inside the ring was the egg of Mother 
prakriti. Similarly, all the essence of a female organism is 
hidden in its egg or ovum. So, basically there’s no difference 
between orginal limitless prakriti and an egg bound prakriti. 
This combination of both means the egg was fertilized by the 
sperm. That is why in Gita, Prakriti has been called Kshetra 
meaning field and Purusha has been called Kshetragya 
meaning one who knows the field or is also called a seed 
sowing farmer. Only the one who understands the field will 
want to plow it and also want to sow seeds in it. Then in the 
womb of Mother Nature, that fertilized egg became the 
Original fundamental particle and became active for growth 
and development. It created more fundamental particles like 
itself by its repeated divisions. Those fundamental particles 
started joining together to form bigger and bigger structures. 
Perhaps it was the only fundamental particle formed just 


before the Big Bang at the beginning of the universe. The 
explosion in it and its further expansion means the formation 
of a unicellular zygote in the womb and its outward 
expansive growth through rapid and explosive divisions. Note 
that the development of the fetus takes place in the mother’s 
womb in exactly the same way. Till today this growth and 
development of the universe is going on continuously, and 
will continue in future also. Because Mother Nature’s womb is 
in the form of infinite sky, there is no shortage of space in it. 
That is why creation never needs to come out of the womb. 
On the contrary, due to limited space in the womb of a 
woman, the child has to be taken out of the womb after some 
time. Its subsequent development takes place outside the 
womb. A child is also made up of parts of both the mother 
and father. The first round cell called zygote, which is formed 
by the union of sperm and egg, has half the characteristics of 
the mother and half the characteristics of the father. Due to 
this, the qualities of each of the both parents are added in 
half and equal proportion in the entire new body of the child. 
That is why the child’s appearance resembles that of both 
the parents. In the same way, because the first fundamental 
particle contains half and equal qualities of each of its 
parents that’s Purusha and Prakriti, the entire creation has 
equal and half qualities of both, because from that single 
Original particle the entire creation developed. That is why 
seeing anything reminds us of God and nature. It happens 
just like seeing a child, one gets an idea about his/her 
parents. That is why idols made of metal, stone etc. are 
worshipped. We cannot see God the Father, but we can 
definitely see the physical creation as his children. Children 
always try to be like their parents by imitating their parents, 
growing and developing and taking over their work and 
business. In the same way, the creation, which is the child of 
Prakriti and Purusha, and all its substances keep on 
developing, inspired by the supreme height of their father, 
the Supreme Soul, and also keep taking strength from their 
mother Prakriti to create the best creation. 


Just as the Purusha-Father resides in the Sahasrara of the 
body, in the same way Mother Nature also remains asleep in 
the form of Shakti in the Muladhara of the body. Children 


have more direct contact with their mother. The father is 
busy in his work, business etc. It is the mother who keeps 
him in touch with his father. Similarly, man also cannot 
directly meet the Father-purusha or Shiva located in the 
Sahasrara Chakra. To meet him, he has to take the help of 
peaceful lap of Mother Prakriti or Shakti located in Muladhar. 
Mother Shakti unites him with father Shiva. This is called 
Kundalini Yoga and Kundali Jagran. 


Kundalini Yoga helping in 
Marriage, romance 
and procreation 


Friends, Prakriti is like a giant mother. Space is its belly. 
When it was conceived by the Purusha-father, then the tiniest 
fundamental particle got established in its womb. Division 
and development started in it in the form of a big explosion. 
As this mega-embryo of the universe kept growing, the size 
of its belly also kept increasing. This is what scientists call 
the expansion of space. Even today space is expanding. 
When this child-universe grows up and becomes fully 
developed, then its further growth will stop. At that time the 
size of Prakriti’s belly will also become stable. This situation 
will remain for a long time. Then this man-form universe will 
start becoming old and weak. Due to this its size will also 
start decreasing. Due to this the size of mother Prakriti’s 
belly will also start decreasing. This is what scientists call the 
Big Crunch, when the expansion of space will stop and it will 
start shrinking slowly. Then in the end this mega-giant man 
will die and shrink in the form of the same original embryo 
cell from where its development started. Then that last root 
cell will also merge with the same Prakriti from which it was 
made. The last root cell was made from Prakriti itself, and it 
grew by getting nourishment from the same. That is why 
Prakriti or Shakti is also called mother. Purusha only helped 
Prakriti a little, by giving her his seed. Prakriti itself needs the 
son-form creation more, because through him she wants to 
compensate for her supposed deficiency and inferiority. 
Purusha is like a happy madman. He is complete in himself. 
He does not need anyone. Something similar is seen in real 
worldliness also. Yes, clever people keep uniting Prakriti and 
Purusha through Kundalini Yoga every day, and keep creating 
the creation-child of their choice. 


An empty egg never sprout. An empty female seed never 
becomes a tree. Empty soil can also never make a tree. A 
tree has parts of male seed, female seed and soil. But in 

creation, there are only parts of purusha and prakriti. Soil 


provides nourishment to the seed. The male seed gets 
diversity by mixing with the female seed. The female seed 
also gets diversity by mixing with the male seed. On the 
other hand, prakriti is also the female seed and also the soil. 
It means that it provides diversity to the male seed and also 
works as soil to nourish it. This is because in the beginning of 
creation, there was nothing other than purusha and prakriti. 
The very subtle elements hidden in prakriti in the 
unmanifested form keep growing the fundamental particle 
made from the mixture of male seed and female seed. At the 
time of Pralaya, the entire creation ends and gets absorbed 
in prakriti in a subtle form. It is called Avyakta or 
unmanifested in the language of Sankhya school of thought. 
From the same unmanifested, a new creation is created 
again. It is like all the animals and plants die and decay and 
get absorbed in the soil in the form of micro elements, and 
then by getting nutrition from the same micro elements of 
the soil, new animals are born and new trees and plants grow 
up. Along with this, by combining in different quantities and 
in different ways, the purusha-seed and the prakriti-seed also 
create diversity in the world. In the same way, the female 
seed and male seed of a tree also combine with each other in 
different quantities and in different ways and produce 
different varieties of trees. 


Kundalini Yoga decoding death, 
doom, birth and creation 


Friends! Spiritual scriptures are full of high level knowledge. 
If they are also spiced up with experience, then the matter 
becomes something else. It’s important to know that we are 
all human beings entangled in worldly affairs. Our experience 
cannot be so powerful that it can independently prove the 
transcendental facts. Yes, if our experience is like the 
authentic facts of the scriptures, then our experience can be 
considered authentic. | will also share my similar little 
experience at the end of this post. 


In the scriptures, the nature of the time of Pralaya has been 
described as a state of equilibrium. It means that in this, all 
its three qualities aka gunas remain at the same level. They 
do not change. It is not necessary that as much as there is 
Sattva Guna, there is as much Rajoguna and as much 
Tamoguna. Rather, it means that although there are different 
quantities of all, but each Guna remains the same at its 
specific quantity. It does not decrease or increase. For 
example, if the ratio of Sattva Guna is 1, then it will remain 
the same. If Tamoguna is 5, then it will remain 5 and if 
Rajoguna is three, then it will remain three. If all the three 
Gunas were equal to each other, then there would be no 
difference in different creations, rather all creations would be 
exactly the same. Along with this, all humans would also be 
the same, there would be no difference in them either. 
Moreover, then all living souls would be the same. But this is 
not possible, because diversity is seen at every level in the 
universe. Some souls are pure, who do good in every way. 
But some souls are also sinful, who do not hesitate at all in 
causing harm. Of course, due to not having a body, the 
departed souls cannot intentionally do good or bad, but their 
positive or negative energy field causes good or bad on its 
own. Perhaps this is what is called ghostly existence or 
Pretayoni in the scriptures. Although it means a departed and 
bodiless soul, but due to not getting a body for a very long 
time, it is considered a physical existence aka yoni like 


human existence or manushya yoni. Of course this is a subtle 
yoni. For example, at the places of many terrible road 
accidents, accidents keep happening again and again. For 
this, the evil spirit wandering or not getting body or not 
getting physical yoni is considered responsible and a temple 
or idol of Lord Hanuman etc. is established there. It is said 
that this stops the series of accidents. Perhaps the positive 
energy generated by the deity neutralizes the negative 
energy of the evil spirit. Perhaps a very high level of positive 
energy is called Dev yoni. 


Nothing changes by re-creating the universe. Only 
disturbance is created in the qualities already present in 
nature. It means that sometimes Satva Guna suddenly 
increases from its basic level, sometimes Tamo Guna and 
sometimes Rajo Guna. In this way, the level of every quality 
keeps changing continuously. In a person who is more active, 
it keeps changing more quickly. In a person who is less 
active, it keeps changing at a slower pace. You will think why 
| have come from nature to man here. In fact, nature has 
been estimated from man only. No one can directly 
experience the Samashti i.e. the omnipresent nature. But the 
birth and death of a man situated in the form of Vyashti i.e. 
limited nature can definitely be experienced. Yogis have 
experienced this, on the basis of which Indian philosophy and 
scriptures have been made. 


After death, all the three qualities of a man come to their 
average level and then do not change. A body is needed to 
create disturbance in the qualities. That does not happen 
after death. Sattva Guna increases with the good thoughts of 
the mind during the lifetime. Rajoguna increases with the 
increased activity of the mind, and Tamoguna increases in a 
state like loneliness or depression. All these Gunas remain 
even after death, but they do not change. It means that a 
person never dies. We feel that a person is dead because we 
are entangled in a storm of Gunas. Due to this, we are unable 
to see the subtle state of the Gunas. It is like, after a dazzling 
light, even the normal darkness seems pitch dark. Yes, when 
the storm of Gunas calms down due to Kundalini Yoga, then 


the possibility of meeting the departed soul increases. Now 
you will ask how that basic state of Gunas is determined after 
death. Actually, it is the average of the Gunas of all the 
previous births of the person. It means that if someone has 
lived more in Sattva Guna, then the basic Sattva Guna 
remains more. Because Sattva Guna is formed by virtuous 
deeds, it means that the account of all his good deeds is also 
present in it in a subtle form. The person whose average 
Rajoguna is more, his deeds will be more of entrepreneurship 
and business etc. More Tamoguna means accumulation of 
more sinful deeds. It means that all the deeds in the form of 
Gunas remain in their basic state. It is possible that this 
system is so efficient that instead of being average, every 
karma exists separately in the form of different qualities. The 
scriptures point to this and write that the result of every 
karma is to be born exactly according to that karma. 


Well, in the experience of the holy departed soul, | felt the 
unchanging and average state of qualities. Meaning that the 
soul was feeling like a dark sky. But the complete personality 
of the person whose departed soul it was could be seen in it. 
Meaning that he did not even seem dead to me, but he 
seemed more alive than alive. That person was appearing 
more alive than alive. Strange. Meaning that soul also had 
the imprint of its previous births. Meaning that it was as the 
nature in the equilibrium state at the time of Pralaya or 
doom, in which no disturbance was arising. | have described 
the experience of this soul in detail in some old posts of this 
blog. Now you tell me what is the difference between the still 
water of the ocean and the waves of the same water, 
nothing? Similarly, there is no difference between the soul in 
the body and the departed soul. When the departed soul gets 
a new body due to the combination of qualities and deeds, 
then the disturbance in its qualities starts again, which we 
call the beginning of a new creation. 


| think that to meet a soul, the soul must also desire to meet 
and the person must also have enough mental strength to 
endure that meeting for some crucial moments and to talk to 
the soul. This seems to be possible only through aggressive 


Tantric Kundalini Yoga, not through ordinary yoga. Also, since 
the soul does not have its own body, it cannot have any wish 
to meet etc. This means that the soul must have that wish in 
its living state with a body, especially at the time of its death. 
This is called the last wish. That is why it is given a lot of 
importance. It is fulfilled and the dying person is promised of 
it to be fulfilled, so that his soul does not get astrayed due to 
that wish. These puzzles get solved gradually, not all at once. 
| too alongwith my family had reached a little late to meet 
that person in his dying state. He wanted to talk to me, but 
was unable to speak. Only a little scream came out of his 
mouth and then he became unconscious again. He could not 
see. Perhaps he was able to hear and understand something, 
but was unable to see or speak. Two to three hours later, his 
soul departed from his body. There is a lot in spirituality. This 
is just the tip of the iceberg. 


Kundalini Yoga increases 
Satva Guna 


Best wishes to all friends on International 
Yoga Day 


Friends, According to the scriptures, the universe is made 
with the cooperation of Purusha and Prakriti. Only Prakriti has 
all the three Gunas, not Purusha. Purusha is Gunaatita means 
he is beyond the three Gunas. Purusha is pure soul. Prakriti is 
inert. It means that Prakriti does not have its own existence. 
Prakriti is virtual. Then who feels the three Gunas of Prakriti? 
It is Purusha only who feels the Gunas of Prakriti. Nature or 
prakriti has been given a feminine form because there is 
more similarity between the two. A woman wants to show her 
beauty and looks to the world as much as possible by 
dressing up and so does nature. Seeing beautiful nature 
reminds one of a beautiful woman. Similarly, seeing a 
beautiful woman brings alive the charming nature. A man 
does not enjoy going anywhere without a woman. Actually, a 
man is connected to nature, that is, he is bound. This is what 
we call a bound soul. When he separates himself from nature 
by behaving indifferently towards its qualities, then he again 
becomes a free soul, that is, a pure soul. It is worth noting 
here that to be free, it is necessary to be bound. The first 
step to liberation is bondage. How can an animal that is not 
even tied to a peg be free from it? In the living state of a 
man, his soul feels the rising and falling waves of the three 
Gunas of Prakriti. This is considered to be the sign of a man’s 
living state. The more and faster the waves are formed in 
him, the more alive he is considered to be. When one meets 
a lover, the wave of Satva Guna rises. Love and happiness 
overflow all around the mind. Old memories become fresh in 
beautiful forms. There is a smile and glow on the face. There 
is a good appetite, one feels like working. The person is filled 
with a good mentality. When there is separation from her or 
him, the rising wave of Sattva Guna descends and falls below 
the base or ground level. All the happiness seems to 
disappear. The mind turns into depression. Old beautiful 


memories disappear in the deep darkness. A feeling of hatred 
and sadness engulfs the mind. There is a wrinkle and 
darkness on the face. Hunger disappears. One does not feel 
like working. What was earlier a wave of Sattva Guna, 
becomes a wave of Tamo Guna. During the mutual change 
between Sattva Guna and Tamo Guna, there is also a state of 
a small wave of Rajo Guna. It means that there is no 
immediate change from Sattva Guna to Tamo Guna and 
Tamo Guna to Sattva Guna, but it goes through Rajo Guna. 
We can call Rajo Guna a slightly rising wave. The basic 
nature of a human being is considered to be Rajo Guni. 
Meaning he is so busy in work that he is rarely able to raise 
the mental wave to the high level of Satva Guna. Sadhus 
raise it through meditation. Gods are called Satva Guni. 
Meaning their Satva Guna is of a high level. Of course there is 
no wave in it because they do not have a physical body. The 
various human-like idol forms given to the various gods are 
all imaginary, although they are very similar to their real 
forms. Similarly, all animal species are called Tamo Guni. This 
happens due to the lack of brain i.e. mind in them. That is 
why it is said that Satva Guni people go to Devlok or get 
liberated, Rajo Guni people attain human life again and Tamo 
Guni people attain animal life. 


Now the question is that after death, till the time a body is 
not gotten, in what state do the gunas remain in the soul. In 
the previous article also we had thrown light on this fact of 
the scriptures that at that time all the three basic qualities 
that’s gunas remain in equilibrium. Equilibrium means that 
the quantity of the three qualities can vary among 
themselves, but each quality will be at a certain fixed level 
only. Meaning it will not change. Because without a body 
waves will not be formed in it. | had experienced a greater 
amount of Sattva Guna in the pure soul. It seemed as if the 
sun like an endless sky was covered by a thin membrane or 
veil and darkness was created from it. But that darkness was 
as bright as mascara, and as if the pressure of the sun rays 
wanted to burst that covering membrane. Sattva Guna is also 
a symbol of light. Still nothing was changing. There was no 
movement anywhere. The invisible movement like boiling 
that was felt was probably the basic Rajoguna. However, it 


was only an apparent movement, not real. Tamoguna was 
already there in the form of darkness like kajal or mascara. 
Consider the shine in kajal as Sattva Guna. Still that soul 
seemed pure and Satvik to me. Once during yoga | also felt 
an evil soul for a few moments. Its darkness seemed scary 
and full of sin, hatred and feelings of revenge. That soul had 
also harmed an acquaintance of mine that day, but he had 
survived safely. Meaning that there are subtle variations 
among souls in the form of different guna-groups. 
Superficially all souls look the same to us, but it is not so. The 
soul of a person is the same as the gunas and karmas of all 
his births. 


There is also a psychological fact here which is related to 
yoga. Tamoguna is formed by worldliness adopted with 
attachment. But if attachment is removed from it through 
Kundalini yoga, then the same worldliness becomes 
Satoguna. Meaning that Satoguna increases with yoga. 
Rajoguna is the name of movement. Meaning that while 
Tamoguna is going towards Satoguna, it passes through 
Rajoguna. Meaning that the process of Satoguna turning into 
tamoguna and tamoguna turning into Satoguna is called 
Rajoguna. Both Satoguna and Tamoguna have a Share in this, 
because one guna is getting destroyed and the other guna is 
getting formed. The soul’s natural tendency to move from 
Tamoguna to Satvaguna is Rajoguna, and that is what | felt 
as a virtual boiling or surge in the soul. Ignoring the natural 
tendency, people deliberately go from Satoguna to 
Tamoguna by doing bad or mean or sinful deeds. Sometimes 
they go directly from Satoguna to Tamoguna and sometimes 
go slowly through Rajoguna. Rajoguna comes in between in 
both situations. Of course, a little in the first situation and 
more in the second. Many Yogis enter into satoguna from 
Tamoguna immediately with aggressive tantric Kundalini 
Yoga. Many people reach Satva Guna from tamoguna after 
going through the worldly life alongwith Rajoguna for a long 
time. This process of change of Guna or transformation of 
Guna continues like this. 


Kundalini Yoga reduces the 
potential difference as Rajo guna 
between Sattva Guna and 

Tamo Guna 


Even if a person wants, he cannot stop the disturbance in his 
Gunas. The Prana Vayu keeps creating waves in the Gunas, 
just like the wind creates a storm in the ocean. However, the 
Yogis who have controlled the Prana Vayu through 
Pranayama etc., to a large extent, control the waves and so 
know well their real and basic level of the soul made of base 
level unchanging gunas. Take a person who has always seen 
a stormy sea, and has never seen a calm and still sea. He will 
think that the sea is always like this and that is its real form. 
Means in a way he will not have any knowledge of the calm 
soul form like the real and basic form of the sea without 
waves. If he ever sees a completely calm sea instead of 
regular stormy sea or say, the sea frozen due to cold in the 
polar region, then he will say that the sea has dried up or 
ended. Similarly, when people see a living person dead, they 
say that he is dead, but a person never dies. It’s worth 
mentioning here that it’s not the positive appraisal of 
negligence towards body like self harming instincts or suicide 
etc. The body always dies. Then one doesn’t know when one 
will get a new body, which one to get, with how much 
hardship it'll be got, even after getting it one don’t know how 
long it will remain alive, who knows. Therefore one must take 
good care of the body. It only means that the soul of a person 
never dies, because the soul is the real form of a person. It is 
like a person who has always felt his form as the form of 
waves of his mind, i.e., with changing qualities. He does not 
know that this form of waves is not his basic form. He has 
never pacified his mind with yoga, meditation, etc. All the 
seas in a storm look the same, because the water is not 
visible properly in them. But when the storm calms down, 
then the water of some appears blue, while some appear 
green. The water of some is less, while some have more. 
Some have less sea vegetation like algae, while some have 


more. In some, there will be one type of sea creatures, while 
in some, there will be some other type. Similarly, people with 
frequent mental storms also look the same. As soon as we 
start focusing on any of their qualities, it changes at that very 
moment. This is why only by meeting the soul after death, we 
can get accurate and detailed information about its basic 
qualities. 


There are as many oceans as there are 
living beings in the universe 


This is a very interesting subject and by continuing to write, 
new puzzles keep getting solved. And if there is some 
experience along with it, then what can be said. Consider the 
rising wave to be happiness or Satva Guna and the wave 
falling below the normal surface of the ocean to be sorrow or 
Tamo Guna. This keeps happening in the mind throughout 
life. After death, the mind or soul becomes like the normal 
surface of the ocean. Neither the wave goes up nor down. 
Neither happiness nor sorrow. But this is not so, because if 
there are three gunas, then happiness and sorrow will always 
be there. This is the Trigunatita Parmatma in whom there is 
neither happiness nor sorrow, but there is only absolute bliss. 
Understand that both Satva Guna and Tamo Guna are 
present in the soul. However, both are in less quantity 
because there is no body to highly lift or drop them, that is, 
to create huge waves in them. This is the equilibrium state of 
the gunas. Meaning Satva Guna is also at its constant level 
and Tamo Guna is also at its fixed constant level. Someone 
will say that then how will the quantity of all the three gunas 
be different in all people. See, the one who has more Satva 
Guna at the time of death, will be fixed there after death, 
meaning it will remain more even later. It is like if the wave 
of the polar sea rises up when it freezes, then it will remain 
raised at the same level even after freezing, it will not 
change from there. However due to gravity it can’t be frozen 
at very high level. It is also true that at the time of death, the 
gunas often remain at the level as the sum average form of 
all its previous gunas and deeds. Meaning, there will be 
different amounts of darkness in the soul of all people. No 


matter how close two people are to each other, the amount 
of darkness in the souls of both cannot be the same. This is 
impossible. There will always be some difference. That is why 
there is never any deception in the matter of soul that the 
soul of so and so entered the body of so and so by mistake. 
Whatever happens in stories seems to be an educational 
metaphor. When a ghost etc. occupies someone’s body, it 
clearly tells that he is a ghost. That is why he is driven away 
by tantriks etc. If someone had the power to become a 
photocopy of someone’s soul, then the ghost would have also 
become so. Then no one would know and no one would even 
drive him out of the other’s body. But this does not happen. 
That is why it is said that the mental state at the time of 
death determines the future after death. That is why many 
people go to pilgrimage places like Kashi to die, many listen 
to spiritual texts like Gita etc. at the time of death. Here 
another problem opens up. Of course, after death the soul 
becomes changeless and unrest-free, peaceful and all- 
pervasive like God, but there is a huge difference between 
the two. The soul, though it seems like Nirgun, is bound by all 
three Gunas, but God is actually Nirgun i.e. beyond Gunas. 
That is why he is more than the soul and you can say that he 
is the form of the ultimate subtle, the ultimate all-pervasive, 
the ultimate changeless, the ultimate peaceful, and the 
ultimate Sachchidananda. This should be understood 
especially by those people who are under the illusion of 
considering God and the soul to be almost the same. Many 
worship buried dead bodies etc. Many think that after death 
their ticket to heaven is booked. 


Kundalini Yoga assist in successfull sex 


Another secret fact | tell you is that during sexual contact 
also this base level soul contact is most profound. This is 
because at times of sex one wants to be in full loneliness 
except only two sexual partners. This instinct is the origin of 
shying stance in sexual matters. No one wants to do sex in 
public as then it’s not sex but a dramma only. Even no one 
wants to talk about his real sexual experience leave away 
sexual drama that’s advertised heavily by cheaters. So said, 


what’s more loneliness than the basic soul form fully away 
from worldly chaos whether physical or mental. Although 
everything of base level soul is not visible like scenes ona 
TV, but its average subtle form is experienced. It’s like a 
special or unique darkness. Of course, that form may seem 
suffocating to us, because we are not used to it. But the free 
soul that has got accustomed to it will not feel so. Even 
sexual energy is so much high that it provides more than 
enough bliss in that short lived basal soul form contact. This 
way love also grows. It’s common observation that departed 
soul contact often occur in tantric mixed sexual environment. 
The reason is same that intense sexual energy of tantra 
provides enough energy to withstand that short lived 
suffocating soul contact. Simple sex don’t suffice much as 
there’s less mind control in it and also, it’s of shorter 
duration. Kundalini Yoga based tantra boosts the sexual 
experience because it further increases the level of 
loneliness with help of kundalini meditation that’s 
prerequisite for blissful and successful Sex. Kundalini 
meditation rules out every worldly chaos except a single 
mental kundalini image. It’s necessary because we can not 
keep mental energy on hold, and while doing so it’s 
suffocating and bliss also goes on hold. Then what a sex 
without bliss. But with kundalini image in mind, it becomes 
the source of profound bliss. It’s fully akin to complete 
loneliness as mental kundalini image is nothing physical but 
only a mental creation. That is why it is said that true love 
can happen with only one person at a time, not with two. 
Tantra also advocate going solely with single partner for long 
period of time. However it’s important and interesting to 
know one reprimanded by multiple partners severely only 
wishes to go in perfect solace only with single one. Perhaps 
sex is pleasurable because it attempts to reach the deepest 
depths of the soul, the top treasure of bliss. In fact sex 
science is much deep and vast than supposed as truly told by 
Osho Maharaj. 


Soul and world is the gameplay of light and 
darkness 


Kundalini Yoga is an integral part of Sex 


| feel that what we consider as Satva Guna is becoming Tamo 
Guna in the background. It is like the shade is formed from 
sunlight. It means that whatever the soul has experienced 
from the beginning, all of it is present in it in the form of 
Tamo Guna i.e. darkness. Whatever it will continue to feel in 
the future, it will also keep getting recorded as darkness. It is 
like according to intensity and the nature of sunlight, the 
intensity and the nature of shade will be formed. As the type 
of leaves of the tree, the type of shade will be formed. That 
is, the shade in the form of Tamoguna will be formed 
according to the nature of the body, mind or brain. This 
means that the shade has all the information about the 
sunlight that forms it or the sunlight that has filtered through 
its leaves. Satvaguna is the pure form of the soul. It will 
remain by default. It cannot be erased. It is possible that it 
may be visible more or less according to the amount of 
Tamoguna. If Tamoguna is more, Satoguna will be less and if 
Tamoguna is less, Satoguna will be more. Rajoguna will also 
be in the form of the natural tendency of the soul under 
which it wants to go from Tamoguna to Satoguna. This 
means that if we do not feel the world, it will not be recorded 
in the soul as Tamoguna. But it is also not possible to stay 
away from the world. That way tamoguna will come later, 
first one may have to die of hunger. The middle path is of 
detachment. It means to experience worldly matters without 
attachment. Due to this, worldliness will continue and its 
shadow will also not be able to settle on the soul or it will 
settle less. This is easily possible through yoga. In the 
scriptures, it is said to adopt sattvik methods without 
attachment so that its sattvik sanskars keep on getting into 
the mind. It takes less effort to remove sattvik sanskars from 
the mind than rajasik and tamasik ones, which increases the 
possibility of liberation. If these are not put into the mind, 
then absurd sanskars will keep getting into the mind because 
the mind cannot remain empty. It is very difficult to remove 
them, which reduces the possibility of liberation to a great 
extent. But only this will not work. The soot of the impression 
of worldliness of countless past births which has settled on 
the soul will also have to be cleaned. That too will be done 


through Kundalini yoga, especially aggressive tantric 
Kundalini yoga. Due to this, Sattva Guna will increase in the 
soul and Tamo Guna and Rajo Guna will decrease. Rajo Guna 
will decrease because now the nominal Tamo Guna does not 
have enough potential to move towards Sattva Guna at a fast 
pace. This latent Rajoguna is also like the potential difference 
between two opposite poles of electricity. The greater the 
difference between their opposite charges, the more rapidly 
will be the flow of more electric current in the circuit 
connecting them. The Sattva Guna of the pure soul is 
supreme and definite. The amount of Tamoguna of the bound 
soul will determine whether the potential difference of 
Rajoguna between them will be less or more. See, the circuit 
between the two will be connected only when the soul gets a 
body. Then a lot of electric current will flow between them in 
the form of mental thoughts. It will keep increasing or 
decreasing according to the Tamoguna of the soul. That is 
why after drinking etc. in a party, people feel refreshed and 
get involved in their work with new zeal and enthusiasm even 
more than before. This is just an example. And it can also be 
harmful in matters of spirituality. Many people, after 
spending a long time in solitude, enter the world with new 
and increased energy. This is the power of the Tamoguna of 
loneliness. As said above, Tamoguna decreases with 
Kundalini Yoga. This reduces the potential difference of 
Rajoguna between Satvaguna and Tamoguna. That is why 
the behavior of a Yogi is not impulsive or short-tempered or 
blindly progressive, but is patient, serious and systematic. 
Many times, Tantra Yogis can temporarily accept Tamoguna 
to achieve temporary impulsive behavior according to the 
demand of time and place. This Rajoguna remains in the form 
of latent potential difference in the soul without a body. 
Meaning, there is a force to go from darkness to light, but 
due to the absence of the electrical circuit of the body, the 
darkness is unable to reach the light. Meaning, Tamoguna 
Cannot express as Satoguna. 


Kundalini Yoga removes the dark 
mark on the soul 


The formation of a wave in the mind is called Satvaguna. The 
disappearance of that wave is called Tamoguna. The dynamic 
state of change between the formation and disappearance of 
a wave Is called Rajoguna. When a thought is formed, it is a 
wave of Satvaguna and when it disappears, the darkness of 
Tamoguna prevails. It is also a wave but it is not visible due 
to darkness or Say it’s in the form of type and extent of 
darkness that’s hard to differentiate. The more a wave rises 
upwards, the more it sinks downwards, meaning it goes 
towards the netherworld or the pit or darkness. If seen, the 
initial virtual existence is of Satoguna only. Tamoguna is its 
virtual mark on the soul which is in the form of darkness. 
Both the Gunas are false or virtual, but first a wave of 
Satoguna was created in the Nirgun soul. Then Tamoguna 
was formed from it, then Satoguna from it, then Tamoguna 
from it, then Satoguna and this sequence has been going on 
since time immemorial. The Nirgun soul is also like Sattva 
Guna, as it is luminous, full of bliss, and full of existence, but 
there are no virtual waves in it. Due to the creation of virtual 
waves in it by the body, it became a living soul with Sattva 
Guna. However, the original God always remains the same 
Nirgun. There is no change in it. Then once Sattva was 
created in the living soul, then the sequence of changes of 
gunas was bound to continue as mentioned above. A seed 
keeps getting created from a tree and a tree from a seed. 
This is the game or disease of birth and death, whatever you 
may call it. It is not me saying this, but the scriptures are 
saying this. A man or any living being is afraid of death 
because he fears that he will have to go through the process 
of a new birth full of sufferings again. He fears this because 
he sees the cyclical change of gunas in his life every day. 
After experiencing darkness, he has to experience light as 
well. He cannot remain in darkness continuously. Because 
both are relative to each other. That is why he feels in his 
subconscious mind that he is going from the darkness of 
death to the light of birth. If death were to continue 


permanently, then it would be like liberation that’s free of all 
sufferings. Then no one would be afraid of it. 


All the information of the luminous wave of thought is 
recorded in its darkness. The soul is the middle level of the 
water-like living being. | called the living being water-like 
because waves keep rising in it like water. Perhaps that is 
why water is called a deity. When the wave buried or say 
submerged below ends and existence-water reaches the 
surface level, then the soul starts feeling its peaceful state. 
Before it is fully felt, a new wave rises again, and the same 
process is repeated. This sequence continues indefinitely. In 
this way man is not able to attain peace of soul. Although 
soul is a calm state between the high wave of Satva Guna 
and the low wave of Tamo Guna. But it is said that it is 
experienced in the form of Kundalini awakening only when 
Satva Guna is at its peak. This peak of Satva Guna is attained 
only through the meditation of Kundalini Yoga. By the way, 
the intermediate state which we are calling Atma (soul) is not 
the pure Atma but the living soul that have all three gunas in 
equilibrium. What is experienced by Kundalini awakening is 
the pure Atma that’s nirguna or devoid of gunas, not the 
impure living soul. Hence, there is no contradiction here. | 
think Buddhists find the changing Atman true because of this 
very same reason as only changing Atman though changing 
gunas has more chance to touch the peak of satoguna in the 
form of kundalini awakening rather than unchanging Atman. 


In this way we can see that soul feels the three qualities of 
nature by imposing them on itself. It means that soul takes 
the form of nature itself. It means that it takes the form of 
the three qualities of virtual nature. When nature itself is 
non-existent, then how can its three qualities exist. This is 
called the illusory world. It means that all changes are false, 
but Buddhists consider momentaryism i.e. changeability to 
be true. Perhaps they have considered the union of Purusha 
and Prakriti as pure soul. Or it can be something else also. 
This is what is said in the scriptures that the world is made of 
the union of prakriti and Purusha. In reality, prakriti does not 
exist. It is virtual like a computer game, but the soul assumes 


the form of this virtual prakriti and gives it existence. The 
real existence is only of the soul. That is why it is said in 
Advaita Vedanta that the soul is everything. There is nothing 
else. 


But of course prakriti is virtual, but in practice it leaves its 
effect, which is visible on the soul. That is why the dualistic 
philosophy of Sankhya darshan in the form of Prakriti- 
Purushvaad is called a more practical philosophy. Although 
the influence of each other is visible in all the philosophies. 
Just look at the Apurvavaad of Purva Mimamsa philosophy. 
This philosophy says that Apurva that’s ‘as not before’ is born 
in the soul due to any action done by its embodied being. 
That Apurva is destroyed only when the fruit of that action is 
received. That Apurva is the impression of darkness that falls 
on the soul due to that action, in which all the information of 
that action is hidden. When this imprint appears in the form 
of an event in a physical form, then we call it the fruit of that 
karma. Because the energy of that imprint or Apurva got 
weakened or destroyed by coming out. Therefore, the imprint 
of darkness recorded on the soul also gets erased. Perhaps, 
this is how karmas get weakened by yoga. Due to Kundalini 
Yoga, thoughts related to old karmas keep on pouring in the 
mind, due to which the shadow of darkness created by them 
on the soul keeps on getting erased. Of course, it gets erased 
more slowly than getting the fruit, but it does get erased. 
That is why it is said that sins get destroyed by yoga. Every 
activity of a person gets recorded on the soul. Whether it is 
physical or mental. No matter how cleverly or with how much 
detachment that activity was carried out. Perhaps, that is 
why it is said that nothing is hidden from God. The imprint 
recorded on the soul is what we call the sanskaras or 
subconscious mind. Whatever we learn or read, we do not 
remember it all. But we feel a kind of transformation inside 
us because of it. This is felt only because of the imprint they 
leave on the soul. This is why I feel that old memories are 
stored in the soul. The brain only works to express them in 
the gross form of waves. Consider the soul to be a subtle 
wave. Consider the old memories to be subtle audio-visual 
signals Superimposed on it. Consider the brain to be a 
decoder and amplifier, which converts and amplifies the 


subtle signals present on the soul back into gross audio- 
visual thoughts. The proof of this is that many people 
remember the events of their previous births correctly. Their 
body, brain, mind etc. of the previous birth were all burnt to 
ashes. Then how did those memories go to the next birth? 
They can go only by remaining on the soul, there is no other 
way. 


Friends, I think | was connected to music in my previous life. 
In my dreams, | often sing songs in clear, sweet and soulful 
tunes, in an enthusiastic way alone or in crowd of procession, 
especially devotional bhajans of Goddess Mother. I have even 
recorded many songs after immediately waking up from 
sleep. I know an acquaintance of mine who prepares the 
entire song on the computer itself. Everything like music etc. 
is added by software. If the Goddess blesses, it is possible 
that an album of the bhajans of my dreams will be released 
soon. 


Kundalini Yoga dispels the 
darkness of thought waves 


Friends, in this post we are going towards a little deeper 
philosophy. If someone does not want to go too deep, he can 
even Skip this post. Let us first understand the beginning of 
the formation of waves in the soul. First of all, the soul was 
completely pure. It was like God. Then it got attached to a 
body. The brain created a virtual movement or wave in that 
soul. The wave that was formed covered the eternal light of 
the soul. How much did it cover? As much as the effect of one 
wave was. Then the darkness of the soul increased further 
with the second wave. More with the third, more with the 
fourth. This continued. It is like the lesser number of leaves 
on a tree makes a less dense shadow on the ground. But as 
the number of leaves increases, the density of the shadow 
also increases. Single leave has been likened here to a single 
thought wave. In a way, the shadow of the denser leaves 
contains the information of each level of the less dense 
leaves. This is because the greater quantity of something 
includes all the lesser quantities of that thing itself. The same 
happens with the soul. The darkness created by its higher 
waves includes the darkness created by each level of its 
lower waves. Or you can say that each type of wave created 
its kind of darkness in the soul. It means that whatever 
waves have been created till today, the darkness of their 
kinds has been created in the soul. It means that every 
thought wave is recorded in the soul as a special darkness 
like that wave. Of course, superficially we may not feel those 
darknesses separately in the soul. It is like the information of 
each type of leaves of a tree was recorded in the shade of 
that tree in its own time. When the shade of the new level of 
leaves is formed, the shadow of the old level of leaves gets 
erased. But when new darkness is formed in the soul from 
the new wave, all the old darkness created by the old waves 
remains recorded, they do not get erased. That is why by 
looking at the shade of the tree, only one shade is felt and 
the other older shades are not experienced. But on feeling 
the darkness of the soul, it feels like that darkness is one, but 
in it, various information of its countless living states or births 


with countless bodies are recorded. However, this is a very 
subtle feeling and doesn’t look like differentiated but a single 
one. This can happen only if every information is present in 
the form of a separate darkness. If all the other small 
darknesses of the soul were erased or suppressed in the big 
darkness of the soul like the shade of a tree, then all souls 
would be the same. And then the principle of karma-phala 
would also not be applicable. Meaning that if the information 
of any karma is not present in the soul, then its fruit would 
also not be received. But nothing like this happens? 


It is worth noticing here that God did not forcefully bind 
anyone. He had just shown nature aka Prakriti to the soul aka 
Purusha. If the soul wanted, it could have rejected it. But it 
chose it by leaving its own eternal form. Due to this, it got 
bound. Meaning God wanted to give it the additional bliss of 
nature. But due to the attachment of the soul, the opposite 
happened, meaning its eternal bliss also went away. 


If some leaves fall after the dense shade of the tree, then 
that old dense shade vanishes on its own and is replaced by 
light shade. But if a light wave is formed in the soul after the 
deep waves, then the darkness created by the old deep wave 
does not vanish on its own. Of course, a new and light 
darkness gets added to the soul with a new and light or non- 
attached thought wave. The shade of the tree does not stick 
to the ground, but it vanishes immediately with the removal 
of the leaves that create the shade. But the darkness of the 
soul remains attached to the soul. Of course, the thought 
wave that creates that darkness may go away, but the 
darkness does not go away. Perhaps it gradually goes away 
by regularly remembering that thought wave. Perhaps this is 
what happens with Kundalini Yoga. 


Kundalini Yoga can reduce the 
ill-effects of the modern 
communication age 


Friends, nowadays the mind does not have the same kind of 
emotions as it used to have before the advent of the modern 
communication age. In the old times, the mind used to have 
very sweet and subtle emotions. There were all kinds of 
emotions. There were feelings of love, kindness, friendship, 
happiness and many other kinds of emotions that came to 
mind. Those emotions were clearly reflected on the face as 
well. Even when in a high state, all these emotions were 
controlled and restrained. Nowadays, a person starts getting 
carried away by emotions very quickly. Now the mind does 
not have that power which can save it from the attachment 
of emotions and can stop a person from getting carried away 
by them. Today’s generation seems emotionless to me. That 
childishness is not seen in children, even teenagers seem 
less like teenagers and more like children, and that youth is 
not seen in the youth as well. We have seen the old age as 
well, so we are not much affected by the new age, but what 
will happen to that new generation which has not enjoyed the 
experience of the old age at all. We can transmit our 
experiences to them with love. If they understand, they can 
transmit them to the new generation. In this way, human 
civilization can avoid going astray from the path of nature. 
Moreover, if in the olden times there were feelings of hatred, 
anger, jealousy, enmity etc., then they too were controlled 
and balanced. Man had so much control that he could reduce 
them and prevent their impression from appearing on the 
face. 


| feel that invisible waves of communication are responsible 
for today’s frustrated mentality. We call them 
electromagnetic waves in the language of science. At the 
physical level, they cannot cause any harm to this body, 
because they have very little energy. They are like the waves 
of sunlight. But | feel that even the waves of light have some 
effect on the subtle thoughts of the mind. That is why in the 


evening when the sunlight is very low, at that time very 
beautiful thoughts arise in the mind. Similarly, yogis used to 
like to meditate in dark caves because there was no 
interference of light there. Also, films full of VFX mainly those 
of shady graphics appear much more blissful and full of 
emotions than the films full of natural light. Similarly, birds 
are seen in greater numbers at places where the signals of 
phones, TV etc. are weak. A film has also been made on this. 
Once | had to live in a remote valley where there was no 
mobile network. There | felt a unique peace like the old 
times. The emotions of the mind were also being formed well 
there. This means that although normal electromagnetic 
waves have minimum energy, they can affect the soul and its 
ability to experience. Scientists say that the pulsating electric 
current formed in the neurons of the brain generates the 
pulsating and invisible electromagnetic field that is what the 
soul experiences in the form of thoughts. If seen, 
communication based electromagnetic waves also exist in 
the form of changing electromagnetic fields. Therefore, if 
both affect each other, then there should be no surprise. 


It is not difficult to guess from this that electromagnetic 
waves of communication means affect the thoughts of the 
mind. But still there is no need to be afraid of them. It is 
rightly said that where there is a will there is a way. Kundalini 
yoga increases the electromagnetic power of the brain so 
much that external electromagnetic waves have little effect 
on it. This happens during yoga but if yoga is done two or 
three times a day then this power remains throughout the 
day. In today’s era, spending more time in an area free from 
electromagnetic waves seems like a dream. We cannot cover 
the entire earth with leather, but we can definitely wear 
leather shoes. It means that we cannot change the world 
immediately but we can definitely change ourselves 
according to the times. 


Kundalini Yoga is the mother 
of minimalism 


Friends, according to the common popular belief, minimalism 
is considered synonymous with liberation. This belief is 
formed by the scriptures. But I think the meaning of the 
scriptures is something else. If minimalism was the identity of 
liberation, then all the poor and beggars would be free and 
supremely knowledgeable. But in reality their condition is the 
worst. | think the meaning of this statement of the scriptures 
is that if a person is climbing the ladder of success in yoga 
practice, then he does not need to run towards materialism 
more than the minimum requirement. Because his race 
towards materialism can create obstacles in his yoga 
practice. Meaning, yoga practice is more important, not 
minimalism. Yes, if materialism is not creating obstacles in 
his yoga practice, then there is no harm in materialism. In 
fact, it is not materialism, but the race towards materialism 
that creates obstacles. Due to this, the energy that should 
have been spent in yoga practice is wasted in materialism or 
in achieving materialism. If someone is getting material 
happiness and prosperity for free, then it will only save his 
energy. He can use that saved extra energy in yoga practice. 
In the scriptures, minimalism like that of the fakirs or sages 
has been supported so that energy is not wasted by too 
much physical work and too much physical consumption. On 
the contrary, some physical labour should also be done and 
some physical consumption should also be enjoyed. This 
Saves energy. This saved energy can be used in yoga 
practice. This is the middle path of Buddha. If someone is 
completely poor, then how will he consume pleasures in 
moderation in the absence of food and how will he be able to 
do moderate physical labour? This will certainly not lead to 
wastage of energy, but it will not save energy either. 
Similarly, if someone is very rich, then due to carelessness 
and ego, he will also not do any physical work and along with 
that he will also consume pleasures excessively. Due to this, 
his energy will not be saved and the remaining energy will 
also be wasted in enjoying pleasures. Then how will he do 
yoga. But if someone, despite being rich, does moderate 


labour and moderate consumption of pleasures, and does 
yoga with the energy saved from that, then he will be 
considered a minimalist or a fakir. Meaning, by referring to 
minimalism in the scriptures, yoga has been indirectly 
supported. King Janak was very wealthy, but was still a yogi. 
Due to this, a minimalist nature developed in him by itself. 
Actually, the common people of the world have a low 
intellect, so they understand more about the basic things. 
People do not easily pay attention to yoga. That is why at 
many places in the scriptures, minimalism has been 
described as a synonym for salvation, not yoga. The sages 
must have been of the opinion that perhaps people will get 
into the habit of yoga by themselves due to minimalism. This 
must have happened in many cases, but | see very few such 
cases. Most people are entangled in minimalism and do not 
seem to be moving towards yoga. “Neither Maya nor Ram” 
means not getting enjoyment neither of this and nor of that 
world, seems to be a saying meant for those people who 
become minimalists but do not practice yoga. However, the 
most real and meaningful minimalism is the one that is born 
out of yoga. 


Kundalini Yoga helped by 
green energy 


Friends, life on earth has come under threat due to the 
indiscriminate use of fossil fuels. Global warming is 
increasing. The earth is constantly getting hotter. Glaciers 
are melting. There are chances that beautiful coastal regions 
may get completely submerged in water in the near future. 
The amount of greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide in the 
atmosphere has increased a lot and is continuously 
increasing. This has also changed the weather. There is 
drought during the rainy season and it is raining during the 
drought. This is causing huge damage to life, wealth, food 
and all other things. Farmers are in a bad condition. Their 
standing, ripe and harvested crops are falling prey to heavy 
rains. Heavy landslides are taking place due to excessive 
rainfall. Weather and nature seem to be angry and suddenly 
wreak havoc. There are severe floods, storms and hurricanes. 
Due to blockage of drainages by plastic waste, dirty water is 
filling the streets and causing diseases. The number of cities 
is constantly increasing, and villages are becoming empty. 
Getting peaceful solitude away from industrial noise has 
become a dream for people. 


| see the solution to all these problems in green energy. Solar 
energy and wind energy are the best sources of green 
energy. If solar panels and windmills are installed on the 
roofs of all houses, then not only will the electricity needs of 
the houses be met, but additional electricity can also be 
supplied to industries and multi-storey buildings. With the 
development of technology, solar electricity has now become 
cheaper than electricity generated from fossil sources. One 
reason for this is that solar electricity can be generated only 
at the required place. This also prevents transmission loss. A 
lot of thermal energy is needed in areas like metallurgy. 
Direct solar thermal plants can be used for there. In it, solar 
energy is not converted into electrical energy but directly 
into thermal energy. This prevents the loss of energy during 


the conversion of solar energy into electrical energy and 
electrical energy into thermal energy. 


Now the best batteries are being made for storing electricity. 
Lithium ion batteries are more efficient and convenient than 
lead acid batteries. But even while extracting lithium from 
the earth, the environment suffers huge damage in the form 
of mining etc. Then its waste is also harmful. Sodium ion 
batteries are also developing rapidly. In the coming times, it 
can become the most environmentally friendly battery. Work 
is also going on green hydrogen, but its safety problem and 
storage problem are the two main problems. Their solution is 
also being found. Biofuels like ethanol prepared with the help 
of green energy are also being developed. This will also stop 
net carbon emission. 


For all these reasons, green energy stocks are on the rise 
these days because people are expecting a growth in them in 
the future. The era of green energy will definitely come, the 
time may be little less or more. Although it is everyone’s 
responsibility to support green energy, still a person should 
take a decision according to his financial situation, and 
should also take advice from a financial expert. 


The biggest benefit of adopting green energy will be that 
people’s habits will improve. This will make people’s thinking 
positive. Due to this, people will start adopting an 
environmentally friendly lifestyle. Such a lifestyle is a yoga- 
oriented lifestyle. Because excessive activity harms the 
environment, people will stop it. Since hyperactivity also 
harms yoga, that is, the soul, so by stopping it, the soul or 
yoga will also benefit. Soul and yoga are synonymous words. 
Soul develops through yoga and yoga develops through the 
development of the soul. In this way, by adopting 
minimalism, man will manage his life with less 
environmentally destructive resources. Also, by producing 
green energy at home, man will not need to live in crowded 
energy intensive areas. This will reduce the burden of cities. 
By living in solitude, man will be able to produce all the 
energy he needs naturally. Water can be extracted from the 


ground with it. Kitchen gardening can be done with it. He will 
be able to charge his vehicle with green energy and transport 
the goods he needs. By using clean solar energy, his mind 
will also remain clean. Due to this and the effect of solitude, 
his inclination towards Kundalini yoga will increase 
automatically. When his soul becomes very pure due to yoga, 
then a time will come when he will like to use only natural 
things. For example, instead of an electric bulb, he will like 
an natural oil lamp for it’s too natural to be spiritually 
exciting. He would prefer to travel by bicycle or on foot 
instead of using a car etc. Then in a way, green era will 
transform into the yoga era. 


Kundalini Yoga is the main 
motive of the soul getting birth 
inside a body 


Friends, how can one’s complete personality be seen in 
darkness? | mean how can a living person be felt in the 
darkness of his soul. This can only happen if all the things 
said and thought by him, all his behavior and all his work 
done in his lifetime are recorded in that darkness. Everything 
should be recorded separately in that darkness. If the same 
darkness keeps increasing or decreasing by all, then that 
darkness will be considered inert. Just like different types of 
light in the form of different objects on gradually fading keep 
increasing the single and the same darkness of the night. By 
looking at the darkness, it is not known that which types of 
light in the form of different types of objects are contained in 
it. But while feeling the darkness of a person’s soul, we feel 
that different types of light in the form of different types of 
objects present in that person’s mind are contained there. 
However, still one undivided darkness is felt. This is 
surprising. Perhaps the same thing happens in black holes as 
well. There is only one undivided darkness in it, but if 
someone feels it through yoga etc. then perhaps all the 
substances swallowed by it can be felt in it, of course in 
subtle form. Science also says that information never gets 
destroyed. It is possible that in a black hole also, information 
of all separate substances is recorded or encoded in separate 
form. Then when a new universe or star is formed from that 
black hole, then that information again appears in the same 
gross form as earlier. However, science does not believe this. 
Therefore, consider it a thought experiment. Anyway, there 
are many areas, which are beyond the understanding of 
modern science. Spirituality is also one of them. That is why 
it is said that the soul is conscious. It means that it has 
everything that is in the mind of a living being in various 
forms. Of course, it is in gross form in the mind and in subtle 
form in the soul. But this is just a matter of saying and it is 
relative. While feeling the soul, we do not feel even the 
slightest difference between gross and subtle. We feel the 


entire living person as that dark soul. Even the soul itself 
feels that it is fully alive as before. Although it knows that 
now it has been freed from the bondage of the body, but it 
does not see any change in itself. It means the same old 
personality but in a new form such that it acquires additional 
qualities like comprehensiveness, immortality, of course not 
fully like God but in a relative form. It means that the soul 
itself is present in the form of what is called subtle body in 
the scriptures. 


The subtle body of the scriptures is the soul itself. The subtle 
body has been described in detail only to embellish the 
words. The subtle body is said to consist of the soul, intellect, 
mind, ego, five sense organs, five organs of action and five 
breaths. It means that the soul can think, take decisions, feel 
its ego, can breathe, can listen, can speak, can smell, can 
feel the touch, can see, can work with hands, can walk with 
feet, can taste with tongue, can do the work of genitals and 
genitals. Then why does the soul take a body? Perhaps so 
that it can get waves. And also so that it can develop and 
reach God. It is said in the scriptures that the soul takes birth 
only to attain love. It is the same thing. Love is created from 
the waves of the mind. Why not say in simple words that the 
soul takes the body only for Kundalini Yoga, because only 
through Kundalini Yoga, love increases and by removing the 
impurities of the soul, the soul also develops. 


So | am saying that the soul had talked to me. If it talked, it 
must have thought as well. If it thought, it must have taken a 
decision as well. If it talked to me, it must have seen me and 
listened to me as well. It must have felt itself or its ego, only 
then it would be able to talk. It means it had all the sense 
organs. Speech, that is, organ of speaking, is considered a 
sense of action. It means it also had sense of action. Along 
with that, it was telling me about a special activity going on 
at a faraway place which could have influenced me. It means 
it went there on its feet. It enquired about it and informed me 
about it. Feet are also sense of action. At the time of its 
physical state, that soul did not know anything about that 
activity. The body needs life and vital air to do so many 


things. Without air, even a leaf cannot move. It means the 
soul was doing the work of life without inhaling vital air or 
breathing. In other words or to explain, the sages have 
written that the subtle body i.e. the soul also has five vital 
breaths, which help in performing various tasks of the subtle 
body. The soul is the most important element in the subtle 
body as it is its base. All the other elements are dependent 
on the soul as they are based on it. 


Kundalini Yoga increases the 
soul’s consciousness that 
propels it to heaven 


Friends, knowing the state of the soul after death is a very 
complicated task. Yamraj had told this secret to Nachiketa of 
Kathopanishad out of compulsion to fulfill his promise of 
giving a boon. Yamraj had said that no one knows the 
complete secret except him, even the gods etc. The soul is 
endowed with a subtle body. It means that the soul can do all 
the work done by a living being. Then does the Supreme Soul 
also have a subtle body? The scriptures say that the Supreme 
Soul is beyond the gross, subtle and causal bodies. But then 
how can the consciousness of the Supreme Soul be proved 
like that of the soul? Consciousness is proved only by the 
body and the work done by it. 


It is said in the scriptures that when the time of Pralaya was 
over, the Supreme Soul expressed his wish that he was 
getting bored alone, so he should change his form from one 
to many. This started the development of the universe. 
Desire comes from the mind, and decision is made by the 
intellect. The ego of one’s own feeling is present in the 
Supreme Soul too. This is pure ego, not distorted arrogance. 
Then the work of creation and development of the universe, 
which is supposed to be done through the organs of action 
and knowledge, was being done by God in a way. He is doing 
the same even today. The life force or pranas that operated 
those organs was also inside God in a way. This means that 
all the organs or qualities of consciousness are originally of 
God. The Gita also describes the Lord’s form with a huge 
body. In this form, the Lord has innumerable characteristics, 
such as He has many faces, many eyes, many arms, and 
many legs. Later these consciousness expressing organs and 
qualities were created in the ordinary organismic or human 
body, in which the soul started residing. The soul is also a 
part of God. After coming into the body, it forgot the infinite 
consciousness of its original God-form and got bound to the 
limited consciousness of the body. Then whatever 


consciousness the body had, the same amount started 
residing in it. After the death of the body, the consciousness 
of the body used to merge into it as subtle body. That is why 
the consciousness of the soul of animals is less developed. 
That is why the soul of an animal does not come to meet 
anyone nor can it talk to anyone, because the animals 
themselves are not able to talk. The fact that God has been 
described as being beyond the three bodies, it seems to 
mean that these three bodies are of God too, but He is not 
bound by them, and does not waver even a bit from His 
complete Sachchidananda form. Isn’t this surprising? This is 
the highest level of detachment. Overall, there seems to be 
no religion greater than detachment. | feel that all religions 
and rules are contained in this. Humanity, which is the most 
basic foundation of religion, is also connected to detachment. 


Yes, SO we were Saying that a person’s consciousness goes 
into his subtle body after his death. The scriptures also prove 
this point of mine. It is mentioned in the scriptures that one 
attains heaven by doing good deeds. By doing good deeds, a 
person’s nature and outlook also become good. Due to this, 
his subtle body also becomes good. It is said that only a good 
subtle body can attain heaven. The gross body cannot go to 
heaven. There is also a saying that one cannot go to heaven 
without dying. It means that the consciousness of a person’s 
subtle body which increases due to his good deeds, is what 
gives him the happiness of heaven after death. 
Consciousness is happiness, consciousness is knowledge, 
consciousness is bliss. Heaven is happiness, heaven is 
knowledge, heaven is bliss. Similarly, the scriptures say that 
one goes to hell by doing bad deeds. By doing bad deeds, a 
person’s nature and outlook also become bad. Due to this, 
his subtle body also becomes bad. Bad subtle body is said to 
go to hell. It means that the consciousness of a person’s 
subtle body decreases due to his bad deeds, that is, its 
inertia increases, and that itself gives him the pain of hell 
after death. Inertia or unconsciousness is ignorance, inertia is 
sorrow. Hell is ignorance, hell is sorrow. 


It is clear from these things that the consciousness of the 
soul increases through Kundalini Yoga. Soul is synonymous 
with the living soul here. The pure soul should be called the 
Supreme Soul. It is already supremely conscious. How can its 
consciousness increase? At many places, confusion is created 
by differentiating between soul and living soul. Well, it is not 
like that. They are explaining in detail. However, even if the 
word soul is used for both soul and God, the meaning of the 
word should be understood according to the subject. But not 
all people have the same level of intelligence. Kundalini Yoga 
clears the garbage of thoughts in the subtle body. This gives 
the man the power to work and to acquire knowledge. He 
does this with detachment because yoga makes his nature 
like this. Also , detachment saves his power from being 
wasted uselessly. He does good work because most good 
works are done with detachment. 


Kundalini Yoga makes an artist 
get rid of the clutches of the 
fake image of his film character 
and recognize his real self 


Friends, all the experiences of the world are experienced by 
the soul. The soul itself becomes like the waves of the mind 
and feels itself as waves. This means that the soul is like an 
imitating monkey. It keeps on imitating the mind. The soul 
cannot feel anything else. It can only feel itself. To feel 
someone else, it takes the form of someone else and feels 
itself. Not someone else directly. This means that even if it 
does not become like someone else and remains in its 
original form or real form, it will still keep feeling itself. An 
artist takes the form of a joker and feels himself as a joker. 
Even if he does not become a joker, he will still feel himself 
as his original artist form. Sometimes he takes the form of a 
villain and feels himself as a villain, and sometimes as a hero. 
But his original artist form remains unchanged. A joker also 
eats food, a villain also eats food. A hero also eats food, and 
the original actor also eats food. This means that all the 
forms of the original actor do the same basic work. They only 
look different from the outside. Similarly, the original soul 
also does all the work. It does all the work in the form of a 
human being, and also in the form of an animal, work means 
all the basic works of life. All the forms look different only 
from the outside. There are many actors who get so 
immersed in their fake forms that they do not even notice 
their real form. It is said that the legendary film actor Rajesh 
Khanna was also one such artist. He used to play the role of 
his character very well. He used to bring life to his character. 
So it is natural that it would be difficult for a person to come 
out of that character. Due to this, he used to get depressed 
in his real life, and often remained lost in the memories and 
emotions of the fake forms of his art. 


Almost the same thing happens with the soul. It remains 
happy in the memories of its various forms of bodies and 


almost forgets its real original form. Perhaps this happens 
more with those who work in the world with a lot of 
materialism and quality or with dedication or attachment. 
However, they soon understand this problem and come out 
of it. Those who spend their lives in such an easy going way 
or in comfort, do not come to know about this problem till 
their last breath, due to which they are not able to come out 
of it. This is a complicated matter to understand. 


The scriptures say that the soul is full of consciousness. It 
needs to be simplified through writing art. Consciousness in 
the soul means that the soul does all the work like a 
conscious human being and also enjoys all the fruits in a 
similar way. Now if the soul does all the work like a human 
being, then the presence of all the organs of action is 
automatically proved inside it. It means that the five organs 
of action, hands, legs, speech, genitals and excretory ones, 
which do different work, are present inside the soul. Similarly, 
if the soul enjoys all the fruits like a human being, then the 
presence of all the sense organs in it is automatically proved. 
It means that the soul has all the five sense organs, eyes, 
ears, Skin, nose and tongue, which enjoy the fruits or 
knowledge. Look, there is a need to understand a little. We 
have to grasp the effect, not the method. The main effect 
that expresses consciousness is bliss. All the organs of action 
and sense organs manifest this effect as bliss or say 
happiness, that is, they all manifest consciousness. So the 
consciousness of a creature varies according to the 
developmental status of its action oragans and sense organs. 
Because the original soul is the form of supreme bliss, 
therefore, since the effect of consciousness is infinite there, 
the consciousness will also be considered infinite in it or say 
it will be called supreme consciousness. When the effect 
became infinite in it, then the methods that produce that 
effect are automatically proved to be infinite. It means that 
all the organs of action and sense organs are present in the 
soul in an infinite form. This is the description of the Virat 
Roop in the Gita, in which his thousand hands, thousand feet, 
thousand faces etc. are mentioned. 

When the soul takes birth in the form of a human body, it is 
acting as a person with limited consciousness. Means its 


consciousness Is limited by the limited capability of its body. 
It is like a billionaire actor playing the role of a beggar ina 
film. By being in the role of a beggar, his consciousness 
decreases a lot. His organs of action are weak and they 
perform very few actions. Similarly, his sense organs are also 
weak and they experience very few fruits. It is possible that a 
billionaire actor may forget his real form and remain trapped 
as a beggar for the rest of his life. This happens with most 
souls. They forget their supreme conscious form and remain 
bound in the form of human bodies with limited 
consciousness. Perhaps this happens due to attachment. 
When attachment is eradicated through Kundalini Yoga, the 
soul recognizes its pure original form in the form of 
awakening. Recognizing is a different thing and attaining it is 
different. Yes, it is definitely true that recognizing something 
makes it easier to attain it. From my dream soul interview, it 
seems that the soul can do all the work of the concerned 
body at the base level. The basis of experience is the soul 
itself. With the help of the body, that experience gets more 
grossness, fluctuation and changeability. But man, caught in 
this glitz and glamour, forgets the basic experiences of the 
soul. 


When the soul takes birth in the form of a human body, it is 
acting as a person with limited consciousness. Means its 
consciousness is limited by the limited capability of its body. 
It is like a billionaire actor playing the role of a beggar ina 
film. By being in the role of a beggar, his consciousness 
decreases a lot. His organs of action are weak and they 
perform very few actions. Similarly, his sense organs are also 
weak and they experience very few fruits. It is possible that a 
billionaire actor may forget his real form and remain trapped 
as a beggar for the rest of his life. This happens with most 
souls. They forget their supreme conscious form and remain 
bound in the form of human bodies with limited 
consciousness. Perhaps this happens due to attachment. 
When attachment is eradicated through Kundalini Yoga, the 
soul recognizes its pure original form in the form of 
awakening. Recognizing is a different thing and attaining it is 
different. Yes, it is definitely true that recognizing something 
makes it easier to attain it. From my dream soul interview, it 


seems that the soul can do all the work of the concerned 
body at the base level. The basis of experience is the soul 
itself. With the help of the body, that experience gets more 
grossness, fluctuation and changeability. But man, caught in 
this glitz and glamour, forgets the basic experiences of the 
soul. 


Kundalini Yoga can decode the 
subtle body completely 


Friends, we were talking about how action and effect are 
interconnected. This mutual effect is often called the karya 
karana sambandh parampara or cause effect relationship in 
scriptural philosophies. The soul produces effect through 
action and the Supreme Soul produces action through effect. 
It can be understood like this. The soul enjoys consciousness 
through the activity of its body. But the Supreme Soul is 
already full of consciousness, so his body keeps on 
functioning on its own. Not the activity of the common body, 
but the activity of the colossal body in the form of the 
universe. Because the consciousness of the Supreme Soul is 
infinite, so the body that acts due to it will also be infinite. 
Infinite air flows in the form of His breath. Innumerable suns 
shine in the form of His eyes. Innumerable works of the 
universe take place in the form of His arms. All the works of 
the universe are connected to each other in the form of His 
feet. Just as a man walks from home to the field and from the 
field to home on his feet. Therefore, the works of his house 
and field are connected to each other. Because all the 
activities of the entire universe are connected to each other. 
This will mean that God has innumerable legs, with which he 
can go everywhere at every moment. Similarly, if we start 
describing all the qualities of God, then not just one but 
innumerable books will be published. That is already well 
done in scriptures. The main question here is how does the 
bodiless soul or subtle body do all the work of the gross 
body? 


Of course, the subtle body does all the work in a subtle form, 
but how does it do it? Here also, perhaps the story of action 
and effect will work. All the actions that a particular body has 
done from the beginning, get recorded on its soul in the form 
of a shadow of darkness. Meaning, the effect of those actions 
was received by it in the form of consciousness during its 
lifetime. But after death, it got recorded in its soul in the form 
of unconsciousness. Both consciousness and 


unconsciousness are relative to each other. In a living being, 
both of these are connected to each other. But God has 
absolute consciousness, because it is not dependent on any 
physical substance. The consciousness of a living being is 
dependent on its physical body. Hence, when its body gets 
destroyed, its consciousness also gets destroyed. However, 
consciousness is never destroyed, rather it remains encoded 
in his subtle body as unconsciousness. This means that his 
subtle body is made up of unconsciousness. However, this 
unconsciousness is aS much as his consciousness used to be. 
All the data of his consciousness remains recorded in his 
unconsciousness. Perhaps this is the reason why he gets the 
fruits of his actions. Just as night becomes day and day 
becomes night, similarly the consciousness and 
unconsciousness of the soul keep on creating each other 
sequentially. 


Now we go back to the mutual relationship between action 
and effect. The effect as consciousness in the soul is not 
unlimited like God. This effect in the soul is limited, hence the 
action or cause from it will also be limited. Because the effect 
in the soul without a body will be the opposite of the soul 
with a body, hence the action will be the opposite. The 
opposite does not mean that the opposite works will keep 
happening, but that those works will be in the imprint or 
subtle form. Therefore, whatever the soul with a body in the 
gross form thought, its consciousness increased from that. 
That consciousness will be recorded in the soul. With that 
recorded information, it will experience its thinking in its 
bodiless state. However, not the same experience as its living 
body used to have, but in a subtle and waveless or 
unchangeable form. This becomes the mind of its subtle 
body. The decisions that the living soul used to take while in 
the body, with the help of intelligence, also increased its 
consciousness. That too will be recorded in the soul. With 
that recorded information, it will experience its decision 
making after death. However, not the same experience as its 
living body used to have, but in a subtle and waveless or 
unchangeable form. This will be the intelligence of its subtle 
body. The egoistic feeling that the embodied soul used to 
experience, increased its consciousness. That consciousness 


will be recorded in his soul in a subtle form, that is, it will be 
recorded in the form of equivalent unconsciousness. With 
that recorded information, it will experience its egoistic 
feeling. However, not the same experience as its living body 
used to have, but in a subtle or waveless or unchangeable 
form. When there is no body, then waves cannot be formed. 
The consciousness that the embodied soul used to 
experience due to the work done by the organs of action, 
increased with it. Whatever it was, got recorded in the soul in 
a subtle form. From that recorded information, it will get the 
experience of its organs of action. However, not the same as 
its living body used to experience, but in a subtle and 
waveless or unchangeable form. The embodied soul, which 
experienced the work done by the sense organs, increased 
its consciousness with that. That consciousness will be 
recorded in the soul in a subtle form. From that recorded 
information, it will get the experience of its sense organs. 
However, not the same as its living body used to experience, 
but in a subtle and waveless or unchangeable form. The 
embodied soul, which experienced the five pranas (breaths) 
within itself, increased its consciousness. That consciousness 
will also be recorded in the soul in a subtle form. From that 
recorded information, it will get the experience of its pranas 
or breathing. However, not the same as its living body used 
to experience, but in a subtle and waveless or unchangeable 
form. In this way, the complete subtle body of the soul is 
formed. It is completely like its nearest gross body, because 
it has the greatest influence. Although the living soul has 
taken birth in countless species, therefore the soul 
experiences mainly its latest birth events in the form of its 
changeless and waveless dark subtle body even after death. 
Means It keeps experiencing its nearest body more. It does 
not feel that its body has been destroyed or has died. The 
only way to completely decode this subtle body is through 
Kundalini Yoga. 


Kundalini Yoga makes the world 
dissolve into the senses, the 
senses into the mind, the mind 
into the intellect, the intellect 
into the ego and the ego into 
the soul 


Friends, this discussion on the subtle body is much 
progressing. | wanted to start a new discussion, but what is 
that the discussion goes through stages just like the 
evolutionary process of the universe. It begins, grows, and 
ends by producing a conclusion. No one can control it. This 
post also seems to be concluding to me. But still | don’t know 
how far it should go further. 


We were talking about how the bodiless soul experiences 
itself as a subtle body. The stories of all its previous births 
are present inside the soul in a subtle form. It feels them as a 
subtle body. All this is fine, but without a gross body, how will 
it Communicate with others? And how will it develop? See, 
sometimes it feels one part of the previous births more and 
sometimes another. It is like the soul with a body sometimes 
has one thought in its mind, sometimes another. First that 
thought is also felt in the soul as a subtle experience. After 
that experience, through the waves of the mind, assumes 
grossness in the form of that thought. That thought then 
comes out of the mouth in the form of words and becomes 
even grosser. When that word does a similar work, then it 
becomes even grosser in the form of the effect of the work or 
the world. In this way, grossness keeps on increasing. In this 
way, the soul expands in the entire world. In the end, this 
world shrinks and again gets absorbed in the soul. Then the 
whole process starts moving in the reverse direction. The 
gross objects of the world become subtle and get absorbed in 
the organs of action and knowledge. It is like this that the 
world gets absorbed in the chakras. That is why chakra 
sadhana is the most important part of Kundalini yoga. By 


meditating on the chakras, the memories related to the 
actions and the fruits produced by them or say senses for all 
of them come in the mind. Anyway, it is said that all the 
seven chakras are connected to all the senses of the body. It 
is said in this way that senses get absorbed in the mind. The 
mind then becomes even more subtle and gets absorbed in 
the intellect. Meaning that when the thoughts of the mind are 
dissolved, the intellect becomes sharper because the energy 
of the brain which was being consumed by the mind is now 
given to the intellect. The intellect then becomes more subtle 
and merges into the ego. Meaning that when the energy used 
by the intellect is not wasted in worldly affairs, it also merges 
into the ego. Ego means darkness. When a man rejects 
everything, only darkness will remain. In this darkness, when 
a man lights the flame of Kundalini through Kundalini Yoga, 
then in the awakened state it dissolves the ego into the soul, 
meaning that the experience of the soul is attained for a few 
moments in the form of Kundalini awakening. This whole 
game is of energy. When it was extrovert, it kept expanding 
outwards in the form of vibrant world. When it became 
introvert, it kept shrinking inwards and finally through 
Kundalini Yoga, Kundalini got expressed and through that 
energy it merged into the soul. 


This ego is like the soul but it has less consciousness than the 
soul. Call it the living soul because the entire past history of 
man is hidden in it in the form of subtle codes. In the end, 
when the body is left, the ego also merges into the soul. After 
leaving the body, the ego does not merge into the soul but 
merges into the living soul. To merge into the soul, one has 
to experience the awakening of the Kundalini. During the 
experience of a few moments of awakening of the Kundalini, 
that ego, that is, the man’s own basic form of the living soul, 
merges into the soul. However, after that experience, the ego 
comes back again because no one can live life without the 
ego. Without it one would be as a perfect and pure soul, but 
the man having it will be completely like a stump of wood. He 
will have no reaction left towards the world. Well, when the 
energy of the ego does not escape, that energy gives rise to 
Kundalini awakening. All this happens only through Kundalini 
Yoga. All these elements live in the soul in a subtle form. 


Sometimes they come out of the soul, sometimes they get 
absorbed in it. In the scriptures, we find a similar description 
of creation and destruction, life and death. Even the journey 
from ignorance to knowledge, that is, from bondage to 
liberation, through yoga sadhana, is also described in a 
similar way. Actually, all these processes are the same. There 
is only a difference in the mindset, purpose, and methods of 
the process. Here, merging of something into something does 
not mean that the thing ends. Rather, it means that it 
becomes subtle, that is, it gets transformed into energy and 
appears in some other similar form. This is like the saying 
that the ocean is contained in a pot. It is said in the scriptures 
that the soul keeps expanding and withdrawing this world 
from within itself, just like a tortoise takes out its limbs from 
its shell and keeps withdrawing them inside its shell. Another 
example given is that just like a spider weaves its web with 
its mouth and then swallows that web in its mouth, similarly 
God also creates the entire world from himself, and finally 
merges it in himself. 


Kundalini Awakening can help 
ego to be properly identified and 
properly removed 


Friends, the things said in the scriptures have deep 
meanings. As we were discussing that Yoga goes from 
grossness to subtlety. Death or Pralaya is also called going 
from grossness to subtlety. Then what is the difference 
between Yoga and death, let us understand it a little more 
deeply. The subtlety of death stops at the ego. But the 
subtlety of Yoga reaches the soul. The soul is the last limit of 
subtlety. There is nothing more subtle than the soul. It also 
has an attraction like a black hole. The one who finds it, 
never returns to the physical world again. Then forever the 
subtle and infinite world of the soul becomes his world. On 
the other hand, the subtlety of death stops at the ego. Man’s 
ego is undoubtedly subtle, and all the past activities of man 
are recorded in it in the form of subtle codes. But still it is as 
gross as a mountain in front of the most subtle soul. There is 
absolutely no trace of the gross world in the soul, not even in 
a subtle or code form. 


Some people call this ego the soul. Some people call it the 
subconscious mind. Some call it as subtle body. All this is a 
jugglery of words. It is the same thing. It is called ego or 
ahankar because it appears to everyone in their own form, 
not in an alien form. But in reality, it is not one’s own form. 
That is why ego is called false and deceptive in the 
scriptures. The Sanskrit word “aham” of ahamkar itself 
means “I”. The world with which a man deals is in an alien 
form. Like a man says that he drove a car. He does not say 
that he drove himself. But he does not realize that those 
alien things of the world, while in a subtle form, create and 
increase his ego as his own form. 


As per the above, man’s ego i.e. subconscious mind is filled 
with all alien things. But man never considers them alien. 
That is because they are in a very subtle form. They are so 
closely attached to the soul that they do not leave it even 


after death. They always travel with the soul of a man in 
different births and in different worlds. That is why they 
appear as its own form to the soul. In a way, man keeps 
roaming around the whole world with them. It is said that so 
and so’s life is over and he has left this world. But the world 
never leaves him. It remains with him in the form of his ego. 


The shadow of every alien object or alien thought remains 
recorded in the soul of a man in the form of ego. Many 
people skilled in worldly affairs make big claims or pretend 
that they do not have ego, but it is impossible. Many great 
egoists roam around pretending to be enlightened. | am not 
talking about the originator of any religion. The shadow of 
the world will remain on the soul, no matter how much the 
man tries to protect himself. Yes, if he keeps doing Kundalini 
Yoga along with it daily, then that shadow will become weak 
and the shadow formed will start disappearing. Then we can 
say that a certain man has very little ego. The meaning is 
clear that Kundalini Yoga is the measure of someone’s ego, 
not worldliness. 


Either a person should consider the gross world as his own 
form like the subtle world of his ego or he should not consider 
anyone as his own form. The problem arises when the gross 
world is considered as someone else’s form and the subtle 
world is considered as one’s own form. When a person 
considers the gross world as his own form like his ego, then 
his attachment towards it will reduce. Who gets attached to 
himself? This will create a less deep shadow on the soul. This 
will reduce the ego itself. If a person considers the ego as 
someone else along with the world, then he will incline 
towards Kundalini Yoga Sadhana and with its help will surely 
want to remove the alien and putrid thing stuck to his pure 
soul. 


The common man does not know about his pure soul. That is 
why he considers his ego as his soul. But with Kundalini 
awakening, a person experiences his pure soul. Of course, 
the experience of Kundalini awakening and the experience of 
the soul associated with it lasts only for a few moments. Due 


to this, the ego clearly appears as someone else and stuck to 
the pure soul due to ignorance. This ignorance is the 
ignorance of the soul, which has been advised to be 
eradicated by knowledge of the soul everywhere in the 
scriptures. It means that indirectly the advice of Kundalini 
awakening has been given, because only then will the 
knowledge of the soul be attained, that is, the experience of 
the soul. The knowledge of the soul is not like bookish 
knowledge that you read and it is done, as many people 
think. Rather, it is the direct experience of the soul. In any 
case, one can only read about something else. How can one 
read about oneself? One can only feel oneself directly. 
Therefore, an awakened person, that is, a self-aware person, 
keeps trying to remove the ego in the form of a poisonous 
vine through various types of sadhnas including Kundalini 
Yoga. Perhaps in a philosophical style, the ego itself has been 
called the poisonous vine aka Vishabel, because both tend to 
cling, and kill the one they cling to. Similarly, the ego itself 
has been called the Akashbel that’s sky vine. Akashbel 
means a vine that clings to the sky. The soul is clean and 
empty like the sky. Only the ego can cling to it, nothing else 
can cling to the sky. It is also surprising that ego does not 
leave safe even the empty sky. 


The meaning is clear that Kundalini Jagran is not a 
permanent achievement. But its importance lies in the fact 
that it keeps motivating a person towards Yoga. Yes, not 
everyone gets Kundalini Jagran. That is why one is asked to 
keep company with an awakened person. Just like a person 
who knows about gold tells the entire world how to identify 
gold. In the same way, only an awakened person can tell the 
entire society the true identity of ego. 

This is why Kundalini awakening has been given a lot of 
importance in the scriptures. In today’s satsangs etc., of 
course the main preacher etc. are not awakened, but they 
repeat the words of awakened people written in the 
scriptures. This also works. That is why Vyas or Spiritual 
storyteller is also given a lot of importance and respect. Of 
course they are not awakened, but they explain the words of 
awakened people to the listeners well with their philosophical 
cleverness and eloquence. We also try to do almost the same 


on this website, because we keep trying to understand and 
present the spiritual facts of the scriptures to the world ina 
modern, scientific and logical form. 


Kundalini Yoga destroys weeds 
in the nursery itself 


Friends, the bullet train can stop, but once pen starts, it 
cannot stop. A thought came to my mind that in the 
scriptures, the ego has been called the subtle body. Although 
the subtle body has been described as being made up of the 
soul, ego, intellect, mind, five breaths, five sense organs and 
five organs of action. But it has also been said that all the 
deeds done by a man and all the fruits he enjoys dissolve in 
his sense organs. The sense organs dissolve in the breath. 
The breath dissolves in the mind. The mind dissolves in the 
intellect, and the intellect dissolves in the ego. So why not 
understand it in such a way that only the ego remains after 
death. It means that the entire life of a man is recorded in his 
ego. That is why there is a saying that the rope burned but 
the twist did not go away. It means that the body is 
destroyed but the ego attached to it is not destroyed. It is 
destroyed only when salvation is attained. Rishis often tell 
the wicked and demons that hey wicked, your ego will soon 
be destroyed. It means that man’s ego does not last forever. 
It means that knowledge will be attained. Ego is not eternal 
like the soul. Being a shadow of the world, it is as false as it 
is. Someday or the other, it has to be destroyed. That is why 
it is said that Ram naam satya hai. It means that the soul is 
the truth which never gets destroyed. 


The merger of karmas and fruits into the senses means that 
the experiences related to them got recorded in a subtle 
form in the chakras of the body. Yogis eliminate them by 
taking them out through Kundalini Yoga, so that they are not 
able to reach the ego and are not able to bind them with the 
fruits of karma. The merger of senses into life does not mean 
that the senses have been destroyed. It means that due to 
the decrease in the activity of the body, the senses have 
become weak. This saved the life force of the body that they 
used to get. That extra power became available to the body 
in the form of life force aka prana. The mind started feeling 
the power of that extra life force. That is why the mind of a 


person wanders a lot while sitting. Those who practice 
Sakshibhaav Sadhna means witnessing meditation or 
Rajyogis weaken these thoughts arising in mind by remaining 
indifferent towards them. By doing this, they also do not get 
bound by the karmaphalam. But the method of Kundalini 
Yoga to crush the thoughts at the chakras itself is much 
easier and effective. If you destroy the weed in the nursery 
itself, it is better, because after reaching the field, it grows a 
lot and spreads in a very large area. When the mind is also 
controlled by yoga, its power is used by the intellect. That is 
why the one who controls the mind becomes proficient in 
many creative works such as writing, singing, poetry art, 
painting, etc. and gives the best creations to the world. All 
these works are done only by the concentrated mind as 
intellect, not by the ordinary mind as the wandering mind. 
Then when the intellect is also controlled or subdued by 
yoga, then the power of the intellect is used by the ego. 
Meaning, the intellect does not get destroyed but gets 
absorbed in the ego. Its all information gets locked in ego. 
That is why the ego of the one who makes a mark in the 
world with his intellect increases a lot. People start taunting 
him that his pride has increased a lot. People start getting 
jealous of him. When a man controls his ego through 
Kundalini Yoga, then its power starts to be felt by the soul. 
After the ego, only the soul remains to be attained. Although 
an egoistic man keeps running around in the world blowing 
his own trumpet, but when he starts doing Kundalini Yoga, 
the ego itself starts getting transformed into the experience 
of soul or Kundalini awakening. This is because only the soul 
is greater and wider than the ego. Ego is called Mahatattva 
because it is the greatest element or tattva. The things from 
which the world is made are called elements aka tattvas. Ego 
is the biggest among them. It is as wide as the sky. Of 
course, it is not the supreme consciousness like the soul. The 
soul is beyond all the elements of the world. It is because of 
this vastness of the ego that the soul that leaves the body 
has many supernatural powers. Many tantriks attain those 
powers by perfecting those souls. It is clear from all these 
things that the ego comprises the entire subtle body. 
However, it is like a sky as bright and dark as mascara. 


After enlightenment, this process also goes on in reverse 
direction. Especially when the yogi starts entering the worldly 
life. His soul becomes a little dirty and turns into ego. Ego 
first comes out in the form of intellect. Then intellect 
becomes grosser in the form of mind, mind in the form of 
breath and breath in the form of senses. That’s why it’s seen 
that with good thoughts, good breathes start flowing. Also, 
with good breathes, senses are energized enough and cause 
good actions to be performed. Then the senses spread in the 
whole world in the form of various actions and fruits and 
create that man’s own personal and limited world. However, 
then he becomes a Karmayogi like King Janak, and rarely 
gets into worldly bondage. 


Kundalini awakening confirms 
that the truth is within rather 
than outside 


Friends, according to the scriptures, the five senses form the 
five tanmatras. Tanmatras are the subtle forms of the 
Mahabhutas, which are experienced by the senses. This is an 
undivided experience, for example, the form tanmatra is the 
visible common form of all types of substances. It is common 
for stones, water, trees, etc. It means that water and earth 
are two different Mahabhutas, but their form tanmatra is the 
same. Both of them are visible due to this form tanmatra. 
The eyes senses receive only the form tanmatra of both of 
them, nothing else. This form tanmatra reaches the eyes 
through the rays of light. Similarly, the nose sense perceives 
the smell tanmatra. The ear perceives the sound tanmatra 
and the skin perceives the touch tanmatra. The tongue sense 
perceives the taste tanmatra. These tanmatras work to give 
experience to the senses and make them realize the five 
mahabhutas. This is why it is said that the Mahabhutas are 
formed from the tanmatras. When we perceive the form 
tanmatra of a stone, we feel the presence of something. 
When we also feel its touch tanmatra, we feel that it is hard. 
When we perceive its smell tanmatra and rasa tanmatra, we 
come to know that it is not food. When we also perceive its 
shabda tanmatra, we come to know that it is not an 
unbreakable metal, but a breakable stone. In this way, we 
come to know all the characteristics of any substance from 
the five tanmatras. Then why is it said that earth is created 
from the smell tanmatra, water from the rasa tanmatra, fire 
from the form tanmatra, air from the touch tanmatra, and sky 
from the shabda tanmatra. This is because out of all these 
tanmatras, only one tanmatra is the main one in any one 
Mahabhuta. The rest of the tanmatras are normal, or are 
available by mixing with other mahabhutas. Pure water is 
odorless. Therefore, the presence of odor tanmatra is not 
considered in it. But if hard pulses are cooked in it, then it will 
have a smell. That is why earth, which means a hard object, 
has been given the main quality of smell. Whatever we can 


taste, we can taste it only when the food is mixed with the 
Saliva fluid of our mouth. This fluid is like water. If the mouth 
is dry due to lack of hunger, then we cannot taste anything. 
That is why the water mahabhuta has been given the main 
quality called rasa. Rasa means taste as well as liquid. When 
the sun shines or a lamp is lit, only then we get the feeling of 
all the forms. That is why fire has been given the main 
quality of form. The most sensitive, good and pleasant touch 
is obtained from air only. That is why air is considered to be 
produced from the touch tanmatra. If there is a wall or 
mountain between two people, then their voice does not 
reach each other. That means there should be open sky to 
carry the voice or word. That is why the sky is said to be 
made of shabda tanmatra. Meaning, if we do not feel the 
Panchmahabhutas, then they will not be considered to exist. 
What is the significance of having a palace in darkness. All 
the Mahabhutas and the entire world made of them are in 
darkness, if no one can feel them. Then they are as good as 
non-existent. We feel them only through the tanmatras. 
Meaning they originated from the subtle tanmatras. This is 
the approach from inside to outside. This is spirituality. This 
is the true approach. The approach from outside to inside is 
physical science. This is a Spiritually false approach. Yes, it 
can be true physically. But physicality itself is also false, of 
course, for practical purposes it has to be accepted as the 
working truth. 


The truth is inside, not outside. This is the reality. This reality 
is directly experienced during Kundalini awakening, when the 
entire world is felt in that inner soul, which is located deep 
inside the heart or brain, and is generally felt as the darkness 
of the ego. 


The dissolution of the Pancha Mahabhuta into the Tanmatra 
does not mean that the Pancha Mahabhuta like water, air etc. 
were destroyed. It means that the senses did not perceive 
the Pancha Mahabhuta as clear or separate objects or in 
separate forms. Rather, they were perceived as Tanmatras. 
The sea was not perceived as any separate and real entity. 
But it was felt as a mixture of Rupa Tanmatra, Rasa 


Tanmatra, Touch Tanmatra, Smell Tanmatra and Shabda 
Tanmatra. It is like the computer was not felt as a separate 
object but was felt as a mixture of CPU, hard disk, 
motherboard etc. Meaning, in a way, the computer did not 
get destroyed but remained the same, but merged into its 
components. Anyway, Advaita philosophy says that the 
components are the truth, not the object made from the 
components. It can also be understood like this that the Rupa 
Tanmatra felt the form and shape of all things but the eyes 
could not observe those things deeply. Meaning, only the 
general form was known, not the differences in the forms. 
This general form itself is the Rupa Tanmatra. When the 
difference is felt in it, this general form starts appearing in 
the form of different objects. This means that Agni 
Mahabhoot is generated from the form tanmatra. The 
quantity of this Agni Mahabhoot is different in all objects. This 
is what happens with all the Mahabhoots. 


Kundalini as the gatekeeper 
allows entry into the infinite 
kingdom of the soul 


Friends, many people might think that if they reach the ego, 
they will automatically reach the soul. But this is not so. 
Nothing happens on its own. One has to make efforts for the 
soul till the end. Mind, intellect, ego etc. are just different 
levels to reach the soul. Those who do not make efforts will 
soon return from the ego as well. From the ego, one will 
come to the level of intellect. Then to the level of mind, then 
to the level of prana, then to the senses, then to the 
tanmaatras and then to the level of mahabhutas i.e. 
complete materiality. This cycle continues. Only yogis can 
reach from the ego to the soul. Although the soul can be 
attained by any means. But like everything else, there is a 
very easy and scientific way to attain the soul. That is, first 
behave like a karma yogi at the level of the five mahabhutas. 
Karma yoga lays the foundation stone to reach the soul. Then 
with the passage of time or after working hard at this level 
for a few years, the man himself feels that he is being 
transformed. He himself enters the higher level of 
Panchtanmatra. It means that when he looks at something, 
he feels that he is feeling the form. While looking at different 
objects, he does not feel anything different except the 
common form. This is a feeling similar to Advaita. Similarly, 
while hearing different types of sounds, he feels only a 
common sound. He does not feel much difference between 
those sounds. While experiencing different types of taste, he 
only feels the common rasa bhaav. He does not see them 
separately. While feeling different types of touch, he does not 
feel different substances. He only feels the sensation of 
touch, which is sometimes more, sometimes less, sometimes 
of one kind, sometimes of another. It means that he does not 
feel the difference between substances, but feels fluctuations 
in sensation. Still, it is only sensation that occurs. He does 
not see different types of odorous substances separately, 
rather he feels only the smell tanmatra in all of them in 
different virtual forms. If he maintains Karma Yoga and 


Advaita Bhaav, then he enters the higher level of Panch 
Karmandriyas and Panch Gyanendriyas from the level of 
Panchtanmatra. It means that now he does not feel the 
sensations of these five senses and the sensations of the five 
karmendriyas in external objects but in his own senses. It 
means he feels that these sensations are not arising outside 
but in his senses. Then what kind of attraction is there 
towards the senses of his own body. Therefore, he does not 
get attracted by those sensations and starts moving inward 
automatically. However, if he gives up spiritual efforts, then 
he can fall down from this level and again fall to the level of 
Panchtanmatra and Panchmahabhoot. 


If he maintains Karma Yoga and Advaita Bhaav, then he gets 
elevated to the level of Prana. In this, his breath starts 
becoming long and deep in at times. If we see, each level 
lasts for a long time and also all the levels keep working 
together. Especially with the Karmayoga obtained from 
Sharirvigyan Darshan, all these levels also keep working 
together. Yes, then the mind becomes active by taking a long 
and deep breath on its own. When a person takes this long 
breath for a long time with Kundalini Yoga, then he gets more 
benefits. It also seems that on reaching the level of Prana, 
one gets more benefits from Kundalini Yoga. Although, it can 
be done before this also. When the mind also starts getting 
controlled by Sharirvigyan Darshan and Kundalini Yoga, then 
the person reaches the level of intellect. The intellect will also 
start searching for the soul only if it is deliberately directed. 
When the intellect is also controlled by Kundalini Yoga, then 
it will dissolve in the ego. Everything will be hidden in the ego 
in the form of dark soul. That is why in this state the image of 
Kundalini always remains in the mind. This is because the 
energy of the brain has to be spent somewhere or the other. 
If the Kundalini picture is forcefully removed, then that 
energy can again run towards the world. Therefore, to reach 
the soul, the help of Kundalini will have to be taken. At this 
level, if intense and tantric Kundalini sadhana is done, then 
the ego dissolves in the soul due to Kundalini awakening. If 
this is not done, then the person can gradually come out of 
the ego to get expanded and lost in the outside physical 
world again. It means that Kundalini is like a gatekeeper 


standing outside the divine palace of the soul. Only if it is 
respected and supported, only then one will get entry into 
the infinite palace of the soul, otherwise one will have to 
keep wandering in the jungle of the outside world. 


Kundalini Tantra protects us 
from ego 


Friends, after awakening, man’s intelligence almost 
vanishes. It would be better if we call it the destruction of 
dualistic physical intelligence. He keeps making spiritual 
progress. This is because physical intelligence is born from 
ego. But immediately after awakening, ego almost vanishes. 
The man is always surrounded by a non-duality form light. | 
am not talking about sleep. Everyone feels darkness in sleep, 
but even the darkness of sleep does not hurt because of the 
nondual light while awake. It also becomes pleasurable. Ego 
is just a name for darkness. It is the darkness of ignorance. 
Many lucky people get a chance to live in this ego-less state 
for a long time. But many people start adopting ego soon 
because they feel troubled or deprived by the world. Many 
people, who are completely healthy physically, remain safe 
from ego even in the midst of that worldly chaos by 
practising advanced Tantric Kundalini Yoga. They also 
maintain a working intelligence and do not let ego gain a 
foothold. But when they are unable to do tantric kundalini 
yoga properly due to physical weakness or illness, they also 
start getting caught in the clutches of ego. As soon as they 
come under the grip of ego, their intellect starts running like 
a bullet train. Do this, do that. This responsibility, that 
problem. In this way, the intellect establishes itself 
completely by making hundreds of imaginary excuses. When 
darkness settles inside, then darkness will be seen 
everywhere outside as well and man will keep struggling to 
escape from it. If the darkness inside is eradicated, then it 
will disappear outside on its own and man will be able to sit 
peacefully. Wearing dark glasses, everything outside looks 
dark. If you remove the glasses, everything starts appearing 
clear. Then with growing intellect how can the mind stay 
behind. When the intellect has generated a good income, 
then the mind will definitely tempt to enjoy it. Sometimes it 
will dream of going to the cinema, sometimes of a picnic. 
Sometimes of a trip to the mountain, sometimes of eating 
and drinking. Sometimes of doing this, sometimes of doing 
that. Along with these dreams, countless other thoughts also 


start arising. In this way, the whole world is created in his 
mind. 


When a person starts following the thoughts of his mind, then 
his breath will definitely become fast. Because it involves 
hard work. It means that a person reaches the level of prana. 
Those breaths give the senses the power to enjoy pleasures 
and work with them. Initially, he feels the bliss of pleasures in 
the senses, not outside. Later, when he starts paying more 
attention to the object being enjoyed, then he feels that 
some subtle things come out of them and come in contact 
with his senses, which they feel. They are tanmatra only. 
Then, by singing more praises of the objects being enjoyed, 
he starts feeling that this experience of pleasure is in the 
objects of enjoyment only. This increases his attachment to 
those objects, due to which he starts studying those objects 
in depth. It means that the Pancha Mahabhutas that’s five 
major elements are created. 


We want to make it clear here that we are not saying 
anywhere on this website that this should be done or that 
should not be done. Everyone has their own personal 
problems and needs, according to which everyone has to act. 
It is better if a person takes a decision himself after 
understanding it rather than it being forced upon him. 
Perhaps this started happening in our culture, that is why 
spiritual and scientific knowledge declined. We only present 
the principle side. The truth must be known, whether to 
follow it or not depends on the person’s own choice. 
Mahatma Buddha says that rising and falling continues in life. 
But the evil lies in the fact that a person is fallen and does 
not understand that he has fallen. The one who is aware of 
his fallen state will definitely try to rise when he gets a 
chance. But the one who is not aware of his fallen state will 
continue to live in the illusion of considering his state as 
normal state or raised state and will not be able to try to rise 
even when he gets a chance. 


All this is described in detail in the scriptures, but nowadays 
people’s understanding about them has become distorted. | 


once read in an article that respected Mahesh Yogi ji also 
said about similar. He has a good influence in foreign 
countries. However, some allegations have been made 
against him by his opponents. As per that article the ancient 
Hindu Sanskriti in India has become distorted. Means | also 
think these scientific facts have been covered by defects like 
unscientificity, helplessness, slavery, poverty, conservatism, 
stupidity and fanaticism. However, this feeling depends on 
various factors like the way of looking at something, level of 
Spiritual and material development, cultural environment, 
place and time etc. One person may find something bad, 
while another person may find the same thing good. The 
feeling towards which more people or more power centres 
are inclined is considered acceptable in the society or the 
world. Still These facts need to be brought out of these 
defects. With time, every culture starts getting blamed. Many 
cultures of the world have become history due to this reason, 
but despite being among the oldest cultures, Hindu culture 
has survived till today because from time to time various 
philosophers and social reformers have been trying to 
remove the allegations on it. Today, this allegation seems to 
be at its peak. Therefore, to remove this also, positive 
intellectuals with a scientific outlook will have to come 
forward. By the way, we want to tell that we are not with any 
religion etc. but with the truth. 


Kundalini yoga with television 
films and cinema movies 


Friends, we can understand the illusion of senses with one 
more example. When we listen to the sound of a television 
placed far away through Bluetooth earbuds, we feel that the 
sound is being produced in the television, whereas it is being 
produced in our ears. The more we are attached to a scene 
on television, the more we feel that scene inside the 
television. When we start watching without attachment or get 
bored, or our ears get tired, then we feel that sound inside 
our ears. Meaning, the sounds produced in the ears and the 
images formed in the eyes together had created the Pancha 


Mahabhutas present in the scenes shown on television. When 
we got bored or tired, we did not pay much attention to the 
scenes on TV, due to which only the sounds and images 
remained, as if the Pancha Mahabhutas merged into 
Tanmatras. When we got bored of the sounds in our ears and 
the images in our eyes, we stopped paying attention to them. 
Our ears and eyes were tired, that is why we were feeling 
tired. Or you can say we fell asleep or switched off the TV. 
Due to this, the tanmatras also vanished, and only the ears 
and eyes remained. It means that the tanmatras merged with 
the senses. After waking up, the senses became fresh, but 
those sounds and images were no longer there. The senses 
did not have the strength to start working immediately, 
because they were still compensating for themselves. When 
the senses became calm, the prana vayu started flowing 
properly. When the senses were busy watching TV, the 
attention was diverted from the breath and was on the TV. 
You must have noticed that when we are watching an 
entertaining program on TV, our breaths get stuck. If at that 
time we try to take long and regular breaths while 
concentrating on the breath, then watching TV becomes less 
enjoyable and we feel like switching it off. This also proves 
the importance of breathing and pranayam for becoming 
introvert. This also gives the message that when the senses 
are tired, one should do pranayam. This also relaxes the 
senses, and when the mind becomes active, happiness and 
light remain in life. Yes, so when the senses became calm, 
the sensations that were being felt by them, got merged in 
the prana. Prana is just the breath and those sensations 
Cannot remain in it for long. Prana in a way takes the 
sensations from the senses to the mind. It does not feel those 
sensations. We can understand it like a postman who carries 
letters from here to there, but does not read them himself. 
The mind comes into action with support of the prana. The 
sensations felt by the senses start overflowing in it, although 
now in the form of the mind, because now the TV scenes that 
helped in the creation of those sensations are no longer 
there. This is like remembering. Then along with those 
sensations, other various thoughts also start overflowing in 
the mind. This is the merging of prana in the mind. Then after 
getting lost in the dream world of such thoughts for some 


time, the man realizes that he should also do some worldly 
work. Meaning the intellect becomes active. The mind does 
not get destroyed but it starts transforming into intellect or 
starts merging into intellect. Meaning his intellect will start 
working in the same way as his mind was. That is why it is 
said that if you keep your mind good, then only your work will 
be good. Children of today who watch and play video games 
full of horrific violence day and night, how will they be able to 
do good work in future. They must be taught and explained 
this post. With a good intellect, he maintains good 
worldliness for some days, and also makes good progress. 
Then he gets tired, and also gets bored of worldliness. Due to 
this his intellect starts becoming calm, due to which darkness 
starts increasing inside his soul. Meaning his intellect gets 
transformed into his ego. Then if any Kundalini Yogi wants, 
he can attain the soul after this. But the common man 
returns from here. After spending a few days comfortably and 
restfully in the darkness of ego, he returns to worldliness, 
and with the help of intellect, he again establishes his 
foothold. Then after making some progress, he takes the 
refuge of the mind again followed by harboring hundreds of 
desires. It means that the intellect merges with the mind. 
Then, under the instigation of the mind, he goes to the 
cinema theatre to watch a movie. He would like to watch a 
movie that is similar to his intellect and worldliness, because 
the intellect itself appeared in the form of the mind. The 
farther the cinema hall is from home, the more enjoyable it 
is, because the mind also needs time to transform into the 
form of life by force or prana. On the way to the cinema, he 
breathes very nicely, long, regularly and pleasurably, 
because the mind’s desire to watch a movie is ending as the 
goal is near, meaning the mind is ending, and its power is 
being given to the prana. Even then, the subtle thoughts of 
the mind remain in the prana, because the cause is never 
destroyed, but remains present in the form of the effect. As 
soon as he starts watching the movie, his breath comes to 
near halt, and he starts enjoying the sweet sensations in his 
eyes and ears. It means that his prana transforms into the 
senses. As long as the advertisements are running on the 
screen, he does not observe those scenes deeply. It means 
that he feels the sensations in his eyes and ears only, they do 


not seem to be coming from anywhere outside. This is the 
state of expression of the senses. After a while, when the 
movie starts and he starts understanding the movie, then he 
feels those sensations as coming from the cinema screen. It 
means that his senses dissolve into tanmaatras. Later, when 
he gets deeply immersed in the film, the mountains, palaces 
etc. shown on the screen start appearing real to him. It 
means that the tanmatras appear in the form of the five 
elements. It means that the creation of his universe is 
complete. 


Now the film ends. All the scenes end. Means the pralay or 
holocaust of his personal mini universe is set up. 
Advertisements start appearing on the screen. Now the 
mountains and palaces shown in those advertisements do 
not seem real to him, because he does not watch them 
carefully. He is just seeing something with his eyes and 
hearing with his ears. Man likes to watch them for a while. 
Because everyone likes to come and go from grossness to 
subtlety in a sequential manner. It means that the five 
elements have merged into tanmatras. Then after a while, 
man starts feeling those sensations in his senses only, not 
outside. Getting bored of that too and feeling tiredness in his 
eyes and ears, he comes out of the cinema hall. It means 
that the tanmatras have merged into the senses. He 
refreshes himself by drinking some tea. Then his breathing 
becomes good, deep and regular. When attention is drawn to 
the eyes and ears by rubbing them, the breath starts moving 
on its own to give them strength. However, they can only be 
refreshed by this, but cannot work again. Because they are 
repairing their damage after doing so much work. Then the 
extra power of the breath gets applied to the mind. It means 
that the senses have merged into Prana and prana into mind. 
Then the mind starts running here and there due to the 
power of Prana or breath. By chasing away the mind, the 
breath again becomes shallow and irregular. It means that 
Prana has transformed into the mind. Inspired by the hustle 
and bustle of that mind, he enters the shopping mall. There, 
while checking the quality of various things with bargaining 
scope, his intellect becomes active and the mind becomes 
lethargic. It means that the mind has transformed into the 


intellect. When the darkness of ego starts increasing in his 
soul due to the intellect also getting tired, then he sits in the 
car with his family and leaves for home. It means that the 
intellect has transformed into the ego. In that ego, the outline 
of his entire day’s activities gets recorded in a subtle form. 
Coming home, he illuminates the darkness of his soul with 
tantric Kundalini meditation through Kundalini Yoga. It means 
that the ego dissolves in the soul. Of course, if not the 
complete soul, then at least a part of it. The next day, even if 
he does not want to, he has to gradually fall down from the 
soul, so that he can once again live the worldly life properly. 
This all continues in a cyclic manner. This happens with all 
kinds of experiences, all kinds of activities, all kinds of 
worldliness, all kinds of people, all senses and all kinds of 
bodies. This is a general principle. Many such principles have 
been described in the scriptures with great subtlety and 
depth, to the extent that | doubt modern psychology has not 
been able to reach even today. The above example of a 
movie or television is just a small point to explain. Whatever 
a man does, he does it under the influence of his nature i.e. 
ego, although he may feel that he does it freely. This is ego, 
this is nature, this is subconscious mind, this is sanskar. All 
this is a play of words. The thing is the same. The one who 
has not conquered the ego, he always remains under its 
control. Complete freedom is attained only by the yogi. 


Kundalini awakening is possible 
only through the subtle body of 
a human being 


Friends, finally the discussion comes back to the subtle body. 
It is clear from the previous discussions that the world 
shrinks and reaches the ego. It means that only the ego 
remains in the form of the transcendental subtle body. Of 
course, the mundane subtle body also includes intellect, 
mind, prana and senses. In many places, it has been said 
that it is made up of only ego, intellect and mind. In many 
places, Panch Tanmatras and Panch Mahabhutas have also 
been added to it. All this is fine for the worldly subtle body, 
but in the transcendental subtle body, all these should not be 
there. It should only have ego. In many places, this ego has 
been considered as the causal body. Karma and sanskars are 
hidden in it, which determine the next birth. Suppose, the 
transcendental subtle body is made up of mind, intellect and 
ego. But how can it think and contemplate without the gross 
body. If it cannot, then what is the need to believe in mind 
and intellect in it. This is a complex subject. 


Let us take a single-celled bacterium. It is the tiniest living 
creature, which cannot be seen with the naked eye. Let us 
assume that its soul or its self is a transcendental subtle 
body. This is because such a small physical body cannot have 
a perceiving brain. Even scientists have not found any clue 
about it yet. That bacterium does all the activities of a normal 
life like a creature with a developed brain like man. It walks, 
eats, drinks, hunts, fears, runs, mates, produces children, 
fights, understands friendship and enmity and maintains it, 
etc. The list is very long. Understand, it does all the things. In 
some places, it does even more than a man. This means that 
it has everything along with the soul, ego, intellect, mind, 
prana, five sense organs, five work organs, five tanmatras 
and five mahabhutas. But it does not feel all these. So is it 
necessary to feel all these to have all these? Absolutely not. 
Meaning that the soul itself behaves like a subtle body. Let us 
assume that the living soul behaves like this. That is because 


the living soul is trapped in the darkness of ignorance. It has 
to evolve. That evolution can only happen through the body. 
But why does God behave like a microscopic body, He is fully 
evolved. The inanimate world also behaves like a living 
being. For example, stars are also born, grow, fight, 
reproduce, eat, spit, hunt, fight, run away, maintain 
friendship and enmity, etc. So, do inanimate objects also 
have a living soul? Of course they do. Sankhya philosophy 
also says that Prakriti is also eternal, infinite and omnipresent 
like Purush i.e. God. Meaning this Prakriti is also a living soul. 
A huge, omnipresent, global or collective living soul. It can 
also be called the subtle body of Brahma. Brahma also does 
not feel it. Still the subtle body exists and works. In a way, for 
the development of the soul, it is necessary to have ego, 
intellect, mind, prana, ten senses, five tanmatras, and five 
mahabhutas. Anyway, the ego itself is in the form of the soul. 
Because all these are necessary, that is why all these 
elements came together. By their coming together, a body 
was formed. The soul got attached to it. The soul was already 
present everywhere and at all times in the form of prakriti. 
Understand that an imaginary part of it got attached to the 
newly formed body. That was the first soul. That first body 
was of a bacterium. Then the body of the bacterium evolved 
and became the body of insects. Then of fish, frog, then of 
big animals, monkeys and finally of humans. The subtle body 
is the same in all. There has been no development in the 
subtle body. The same senses, the same prana, the same 
mind, the same intellect etc. This means that for the 
development of the soul, no other element other than the 
subtle body is necessary. What definitely happened was that 
the scope of the subtle body increased in big creatures and 
humans. Therefore, the development of the soul also 
accelerated. But the subtle body was the same primordial 
one. The one thing that is special in the subtle body of man, 
which is not present in the subtle body of any other living 
being, is the ability to practice Kundalini Yoga. With this, a 
man can raise his subtle body so high that Kundalini 
awakening happens. 


Other books written by Premayogi Vajra and some other recommended 
books- 


1) 
2) 


3) 
4) 
5) 
6) 
7) 


Love story of a Yogi- what Patanjali says 
Kundalini demystified- what Premyogi vajra says 


posad Ama- vay sreaicras AAAA (FaF 1, 2, air 3) 

The art of self publishing and website creation 

Faima FT Aage Pra AY Hear 

posd eraa- wah ag FAT Hea È 

sedate sift AA va aaa r H AA MUREAFN- TH GAETA 


vd Aada ata A Herel, wy aA t Ar gadt 


8) 

9) 

10) 
11) 
12) 
13) 
14) 
15) 
16) 
17) 
18) 


19) 
20) 


gA n Af posf dange 

My kundalini website on e-reader 

Aaaa aia- va aAa posd aa (wa A Ar aPN) 
Apon AAAA 

ataa Al ada aT 

arrafersal A rarat 

afa Aa nga 

aaa aoa 

AAR caftaca & a ga 

amled AT ofA 

FENT Fale 

ma YAA: Uh MAAP pAg Aa 

Kundalini science~a spiritual psychology (book-1,2, and3) 


The description of these above books is available on Amazon, Author Central, Author Page, Premyogi 


vajra. The description of these books is also available on the web page "Shop (Library)" of his 
personal website https://demystifyingkundalini.com/shop/ 


To receive new posts weekly (especially related to Kundalini) and keep yourself in regular contact 
with Kundalini, please follow / subscribe to this website, https://demystifyingkundalini.com/ for free. 


Good luck 


