Mathura Yatra 
The Advent Place of Lord Sri Krishna 


Important places to visit in Mathura: 
1. Sri Krishna Janmasthana 
2. Sri Lal Varaha and 3. Sri Sveta Varaha Temples 


(Useful information: Sveta Varaha temple can be reached by taking the left-side lane just 
besides the famous Dvarakadisa temple towards the Manik Chowk. At the chowk there is a 
signboard for the temple. Along the same street, on top of the hill is the Sri Lal Varaha 
Temple. ) 


4. Sri Kaliya Mardana, Sri Dauji Ki Haveli and Sri Laxmi Narayana Temples 
(Useful information: They are situated adjacent to Sri Lal Varaha Temple at Manik chowk.) 
5. Sri Padmanabha Ji Temple 


(Useful information: This temple is located on the Inner Parikrama Marg of Mathura, which is 
locally known as Sri Mathura-puri Antargrahi Parikrama Marg. Take the Papad Wali Gali and 
walk towards Gopal Mandir on a narrow side road and climb further up. The exact location is: 
808 Ratan Kund, Mathura. Satrughna Temple and Padmanabha Ji Temple are located nearby.) 


6. Kubja Bhavan - The House of Kubja 


(Useful information: Kubja’s House is at a short distance from Rangesvara Mahadeva Temple 
and can be reached by taking a path going from just behind. Alternatively, one can also visit 
here by coming from Vraja Mandala Parikrama Marg. The exact location is: House No- 1698, 
Holi Gate, Krishna Puri Colony, Antapara. Located in Sri Rangesvara Mahadeva Bagichi.) 


7. Kamsa Tila and Rangabhumi - The Wrestling arena of Kamsa 


(Useful information: This is located a short walk from the famous Sri Rangesvara Mahadeva 
temple.) 


8. Sri Rangesvara Mahadeva Temple 
9. Visrama Ghata and Yamuna-Yamaraja Temple 
10. Sri Kapila Varaha Temple 


(Useful information: This temple is on the banks of Ashkunda ghata near famous Dwarkadisa 
temple and close to Visrama-ghata. ) 


11. Satrughna Temple 


(Useful information: This temple is located on Papad Wali Gali near Gopal Mandir in downtown 
Mathura. It is a short walk from the famous Dwarkadisa temple. There is a big signboard in 
front of the temple.) 


12. Dhruva Ghata 


(Useful information: It is situated to the south of the Bengali ghata in Mathura on the banks of 
Yamuna River. It is on Vraja Mandala Parikrama Marg.) 


13. Sapta Rsi Mandira - Rsi Tirtha 


(Useful information: It is a 5 mins walk from Dhruva-ghata to the north of Bengali-ghata on 
Vraja Mandala Parikrama Marg.) 


14. Bali Tila 


(Useful information: It is on a small hillock near Surya-ghata, 200 meters walk from Sapta Rsi 
Mandira, while going towards Kubja’s House through the back road leading to the famous 
Rangesvara Mahadeva temple.) 


15. Ambarisa Tila, Cakra Tirtha and Durvasa Muni Asrama 


(Useful information: It is not easy to locate Ambarisa-tila as there is no signboard, and not 
many locals know the significance of this important tirtha. Entrance is through Sri Baba 
Jaharveer Mandir. On top of this board, "Taposthali of Maharaja Ambarish" is engraved in a 
black stone. The nearest landmark is RCA College, Kacchi Sadak, Vrindavan Road. ) 


16. Lord Nrsimhadeva Temple 


(Useful information: This is located directly across the main lane that goes to Sri Bhutesvara 
Mahadeva Temple. ) 


17. Sri Adi Varaha, Balabhadra Kunda, Uddhava Ji Temple, Baldeo Ji Temple and 
Gaudiya Matha 


(Useful information: It is located near the Bhuteswara Mahadeva temple at Panchayati Halwai 
Bagichi, directly opposite to Balabhadra Kunda on the lane that goes besides Lord 
Nrsimhadeva temple.) 


18. Sri Bhutesvara Mahadeva Temple 


19. Sri Dirgha Vishnu Temple 


(Useful information: It is situated near Bharatpura Gate on the Ghiya Mandi Road. From 
Mathura Railway Junction head towards west and turn right towards Hathras-Mathura Road 
then turn right at Chandra Software technologies, pass the Mathura Roadways Bus workshop 
and take first left towards Junction road. Turn left at SR Computer Annexe onto Junction Road. 
Pass by Bagh Bahadur Chowki. On the left is Dirgha Vishnu Temple at Kotwali Road, Chowk 
Bazaar, Mathura.) 


20. Sri Kesava Ji Gaudiya Matha —- Where A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada 
accepted Sannyasa 


(Useful information: It is situated close to Sri Rangesvara Mahadeva Temple and a short walk 
from Kamsa-tila.) 


21. Sri Dwarkadisa Temple 
22. Sri Vijaya Govind Ji and Sri Govardhana Nathji Maharaja Temples 


(Useful information: Sri Vijaya Govind Ji temple is located at Chatta Bazar. Sri Govardhana 
Nathji Maharaja Temple is located near Sri Dwarakadhisa Mandira.) 


23. Kamsa Qila - Residence of Kamsa 
24, Sri Gaura Govinda Gaudiya Matha 


(Useful information: It is situated close to Potra Kunda and Sri Krishna Janmabhoomi.) 


PS: This article is also published on website - 


Mathura Yatra | The Advent Place of Lord Sri Krishna | Vraja Mandala Parikrama 


The glorious city of Mathura, the advent place of Lord Sri Krishna, is situated 10 km from 
Vrindavana and is one of the seven most sacred cities (sapta-puris). Srila Rupa Gosvami 
describes in Upadesamrta (Nectar of Instructions), Mathura as superior even to Vaikuntha. 
Mathura is shaped like a half-moon. When Lord Caitanya travelled to Vrindavana, He came to 
Mathura first. Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, Madhya-lila 17.156 describes, "When Sri Caitanya 
Mahaprabhu entered the city of Mathura, He took His bath at Visrama-ghata. He then visited 
the birthplace of Krishna and saw the Deity named Kesavaji. He offered His respectful 
obeisances to this Deity." 


Mathura-puri is endowed with unique temples and ancient deities. Apart from Sri Krishna 
Janmasthana, the Advent place of Lord Krishna, there are several important places worth 
visiting as per the list above. Mathura is situated on seven hills and surrounded by various 
forests (vanas) and kundas. In the Nectar of Devotion, Chapter 12, the glories of Mathura are 
described as follows: In the Varaha Purana there is a statement praising the residential 
quarters of Mathura. Lord Varaha tells the men of earth, "Any person who becomes attracted 
to places other than Mathura will certainly be captivated by the illusory energy." In the 
Brahmanda Purana it is said that all the results of traveling on all the pilgrimages within the 
three worlds can be achieved simply by touching the holy land of Mathura. 


Visrama Ghata is at the centre of Mathura city. Along its edge are 25 ghatas, 12 on either 
side. ‘Visrama’ means “rest”. Lord Krishna rested here on the banks of Yamuna River after 
killing Kamsa. Lord Varaha also rested here after His victory over Hiranyaksa. Bhakti-ratnakara 
describes the glories of Visrama-ghata and Mathura. Lord Varaha is known as Dharani-dhara 
because He held the earth on His tusk. At Visrama-ghata, He is still holding the earth, 
highlighting the fact that Mathura is spiritual and not part of the earth. On 9 October 1932, 


Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura initiated the first Vraja Mandala Parikrama from 
Visrama-ghata. 


Mathura is ordained by four ancient and exquisitely beautiful deities of Lord Varaha, namely Sri 
Sveta Varaha, Sri Lal Varaha, Sri Kapila Varaha and Sri Adi Varaha. Sri Sveta Varaha 
Temple is a very important temple in Mathura and is home of the white (sveta) deity of Lord 
Varaha. It can be reached by taking the left-side lane beside the famous Dwarakadisa temple 
towards the Manik Chowk. Srimad-Bhagavatam 3.11.35 states, “The Sveta-varaha appearance 
of the Lord is the first birthday of Brahma. The birth date of Brahma is in the month of March, 
according to Hindu astronomical calculation. This statement is reproduced from the 
explanation of Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura. In the beginning of the first half of 
Brahma’s life, there was a millennium called Brahma-kalpa, wherein Lord Brahma appeared. 
The birth of the Vedas was simultaneous with Brahma’s birth.” 


Sri Lal Varaha Temple is adjacent to Sveta Varaha, on top of the hill. This exquisitely 
beautiful Sri Lal Varaha is reddish in color. In Varaha Purana, chapter 163, verses 15-69, Lord 
Varaha personally narrates the appearance and history of the Sri Lal-Varaha murti. There was 
a great brahmana by name Kapila who was devoted to Lord Varaha. He made by his mind an 
image of Varaha and was worshiping it every day. Kapila was propitiated by Indra, and pleased 
at this, he gave him this deity. Indra worshiped this deity with devotion and delight. When the 
demon Ravana conquered Indra-loka, he saw this deity in the splendid palace of Indra. He 
prostrated before the Lord. Ravana then went near and attempted to raise the deity to put it in 
his Puspaka vimana, but he could not. Surprised at this, he profusely offered his prayers to the 
deity. The Lord then assumed a little form, and so he was able to lift him and place him in his 
Puspaka. Ravana installed this deity in Lanka. When Lord Ramacandra slayed Ravana in the 
battle, Vibhisana offered everything to Rama. Lord Rama said, "O Vibhisana, I shall not have 
anything to do with all this. You may give Me that deity of Varaha alone which was taken from 
the city of Indra. I shall take it to Ayodhya and worship it every day". Vibhisana then gave 
Rama the Lord Varaha deity and Sri Rama installed it at Ayodhya and worshipped it there for 
110 years. Ramayana describes that when the demon Lavanasura was creating disturbances in 
Mathura, Lord Rama sent Satrughna to Madhuvana to kill him. Lord Rama gave Satrughna this 
deity of Lord Varaha for His protection. When Lavanasura was slayed, Satrughna installed the 
deity of Lord Varaha in this old temple. In the 1930s, when Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati 
Thakura took his parikrama party to this temple, he certified the history of this ancient Deity. 
The pujari here has the signature of Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati. Being requested by Lord 
Rama, Satrughna ruled Mathura after slaying Lavanasura. 


Adjacent to Sri Lal Varaha temple are the exquisitely beautiful and unique deities of Sri Kaliya 
Mardana, Sri Dauji Ki Haveli and Sri Laxmi Narayana. Sri Kapila Varaha Temple is on 
the banks of Ashkunda ghata near the famous Sri Dwarkadisa temple. Lord Varaha washed His 
hair here after slaying the demon Hiranyaksa. Sri Adi Varaha Temple is opposite Balabhadra 
Kunda near Sri Bhutesvara Mahadeva temple. Ancient Satrughna Temple is located on Papad 
Wali Gali near Gopal Mandir in downtown Mathura. Satrughna ruled Mathura after He slayed 
Lavanasura. This temple stands as a testimony of this pastime. Sri Padmanabha Ji Temple 
is the abode of the two magnificent deities of Lord Vishnu. It is located on the Inner Parikrama 
Marg of Mathura and was also visited by Lord Caitanya. 


Kubja Bhavan is the house of Kubja, the hunchback maidservant of Kamsa. Srimad- 
Bhagavatam 10.42 describes that when Krishna and Balarama were walking on the streets of 
Mathura, Kubja gave Them the fine ointments that she was carrying for Kamsa. In return, 
Krishna stepped on her toes with His lotus feet, took hold of her chin and lifted it, thus 
straightening her spine, transforming her into a beautiful woman. Lord Krishna also 
reciprocated by visiting her house sometime after killing Kamsa as described in Srimad- 


Bhagavatam 10.48. Kubja’s house is a short walk by taking the backroad from Rangesvara 
Mahadeva temple and has beautiful Krishna-Kubja deities. 


Dhruva Ghata is where Narada Muni instructed Dhruva to go to Madhuvana to worship the 
Supreme Lord. Situated to the south of the Bengali ghata on the banks of Yamuna River, there 
is an ancient temple here on a small hillock, where we can have the unique and rare darsana 
of Dhruva Maharaja. At Sapta Rsi Mandira, the sapta rsis, namely Kasyapa, Atri, Vasistha, 
Visvamitra, Gautama, Jamadagni and Bharadvaja performed the yajnas. It is a 5 mins walk 
from Dhruva-ghata. Bali Tila is the sacrificial arena of Bali Maharaja and where the 
astonishing pastime of offering three steps of land to Lord Vamana took place. It is a 200- 
meter walk from Sapta Rsi Mandira. 


At Ambarisa Tila, Maharaja Ambarisa observed the Ekadasi fast for an entire year, and the 
pastime with Durvasa Muni took place when he arrived as an unexpected guest at the time of 
breaking the fast, as described in Srimad-Bhagavatam Canto 9 chapters 4-5. Nearby is Cakra- 
tirttha where Maharaja Ambarisa pacified the Sudarsana cakra by offering various prayers. 
Durvasa Muni Asrama is just across the Yamuna River from here. At Sri Kesava Ji Gaudiya 
Matha, A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada accepted sannyasa in 1959 from Bhakti 
Prajnana Kesava Gosvami Maharaj. Sri Sri Radha-Vinoda-bihari are the presiding deities. It is 
near Sri Rangesvara Mahadeva temple. Ancient Lord Nrsimhadeva Temple is directly across 
the main lane that goes to Bhutesvara Mahadeva Temple. The rare and unique Sri Uddhava Ji 
and Baldeo Ji Temples are located next to Balabhadra kunda near Bhutesvara Mahadeva 
temple. Sri Bhutesvara Mahadeva is a dik-pala, protector of Mathura. He is also one of the four 
kseta-palas, protectors, of Vrajabhumi. 


Sri Dirgha Vishnu Temple is the oldest temple in Mathura, established by Vajranabha, the 
grandson of Lord Krishna. Exquisitely beautiful, Sri Dirgha Vishnu with Lakshmi Ji standing 
behind with folded hands grace the altar. Lord Caitanya visited this temple as mentioned in Sri 
Caitanya-caritamrta Madhya-lila 17.191. At Sri Dvarkadisa Temple one can have the blessed 
darshans of Lord Dvarakadisa. Sri Vijaya Govind Ji Temple, Sri Govardhana Nathji 
Maharaja Temple, Kamsa Qila - the residence of Kamsa is nearby. Under a tree near Sri 
Gaura Govinda Gaudiya Matha, Lord Caitanya chanted His japa, gazing at Sri Krishna 
Janmasthana which is nearby. 


Lord Caitanya’s Visit to Mathura: Sri Caitanya-caritamrta Madhya-lila chapter 17 verses 
154 to 191 describes Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s pastimes in Mathura. When He visited the 
birthplace of Krishna and saw Kesavaji, He chanted, danced and made loud vibrations. 
Everyone was astonished to see His ecstatic love. Simply by seeing Him, everyone was 
maddened with love for Krishna. Everyone began to chant, “Hari Hari” and there was a great 
uproar. He met a Sanodiya brahmana who was a disciple of Srila Madhavendra Puri. Although 
he belonged to a lower class, seeing his pure unalloyed devotion to Lord Krishna, Lord 
Caitanya bestowed His blessings upon him by accepting lunch at his place. The Lord visited all 
the places of pilgrimage in Mathura. Thereafter, He visited the twelve forests of Vrindavana 
and was filled with great ecstatic love. Sri Caitanya-caritamrta Madhya-lila chapter 18 verses 
35 to 48 describes that the famous Gopala Deity that was worshiped by Sri Madhavendra Puri 
at Govardhana came to Mathura for a month at the house of Viththalesvara to bestow His 
audience to Srila Rupa Gosvami when he became old. 


Lord Krishna and Balarama in Mathura: Krishna has three-fold pastimes - the Vraja-/ila, 
Mathura-lila and Dwarka-lila. Srimad-Bhagavatam Canto 10 chapters 1 to 3 and 41 to 51 
describe the pastimes of Lord Krishna in Mathura. Hearing about Krishna-lila is the boat by 
which to achieve the ultimate goal of life. Except for an animal killer or one who is following a 
policy of suicide, every intelligent person must strive to understand Krishna and His activities. 


Sankarsana appears in order to increase the love of Krishna. He is known as Baladeva. One 
may take auspicious strength from Him to become a devotee of the Lord. Therefore, He is also 
known as Balabhadra. (Srimad-Bhagavatam Canto 10 chapter 1) 


Reaching Mathura: Mathura is located between the golden triangle of Delhi, Jaipur and Agra 
and can be reached from all three cities via roadways, railways or by air. It is 10 km from 
Vrindavana, 145 km to the south of Delhi and 50 km to the north of Agra. All the major 
express trains stop at Mathura. 


1. Sri Krishna Janmasthana 
Lord Krishna appeared here as the eighth son of Devaki and Vasudeva inside the prison cell of 
Kamsa. The actual spot inside the prison cell where the Lord appeared has beautiful bas-relief 
portraits of Vasudeva carrying baby Krishna across the Yamuna, four-handed Krishna 
appearing to Vasudeva and Devaki, and demigods offering prayers with folded hands. 


Outside the prison cell is a magnificent building called Bhagavata Bhavan, which is the abode 
of the most gorgeous and breathtaking deity of Sri Kesavadeva. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu 
stands on a separate platform facing Them. Sri Sri Sita, Rama, and Laksmana are on the right 
altar and Sri Sri Jagannatha, Baladeva, and Subhadra are on the left altar. All 18,000 verses 
from the Srimad-Bhagavatam are engraved in copper along the path that circumambulates 
this altar. The original Kesavadeva deity was one of Vraja’s four main deities installed by 
Vajranabha. Lord Krishna’s grandson, Vajranabha, built a temple here to commemorate 
Krishna’s birth. Padma Purana describes the glories of visiting the Lord’s birthplace during the 
month of Karttika: “Those persons who have entered into the birthplace of Krishna even once 
in the month of Karttika certainly obtain the inexhaustible Supreme Lord Krishna.” (Mathura- 
mahatmya, text 220) 


Sri Caitanya-caritamrta Madhya-lila 17.156 purport states, “At the present moment, the 
temple of Kesavaji is very much improved. At one time, Kesavaji-mandira was attacked by the 
emperor Aurangzeb, who constructed such a big mosque there that the temple of Kesavaji was 
insignificant in comparison. But with the help of many rich Marwaris, the temple has been 
improved, and a very large temple is now being constructed, so that the mosque is now 
appearing diminished in comparison. Many archaeological discoveries have been made there, 
and many people from foreign countries are beginning to appreciate Krishna’s birthplace. This 
Krishna consciousness movement is attracting many foreigners to the Kesavaji temple, and 
now they will also be attracted by the Krishna-Balarama temple in Vrindavana.” Potra Kunda 
is a large kunda situated next to Krishna Janmasthana. It was the bathing ghat for Devaki and 
Vasudeva. 


(eS 
Si 
4> 

Mi 


A 
ben, ah 
eer 
- oe 
out 
"7 v,; 


They 


¢ 
FR 


sent Pega aad in 
Sei 
— one 
< A : : 


Potra Kund - Bathing ghat for Devaki and Vasudeva 


es 
>S 
* 
4 
i] 
= 
= 
aR 
ut 
2 
. 


~a 3 
> 


When Lord Krishna took His birth as the son of Vasudeva and Devaki, He told them that He 
had appeared in His Vishnu form just to convince them that He was the same Supreme 
Personality of Godhead. 


Sri Lal Varaha Temple is adjacent to Sveta Varaha, on top of the hill. It is the most charismatic 
and exceptionally beautiful Lal-Varaha or Syama Varaha. It is reddish black in complexion. The 
important pastime of the appearance of Sri Lal Varaha is described above in detail. 


, 
. 
5 
¥. 
a. 
HS 
: 
oh 
- 
a 
’ 
u 


Sri Sveta Varaha Temple is on the left-side lane beside the famous Dvarakadisa temple 
towards the Manik Chowk. Sveta-Varaha is the white (sveta) deity of Lord Varaha. Srimad- 
Bhagavatam 3.11.35 describes “The Sveta-varaha appearance of the Lord is the first birthday 


of Brahma. The birth date of Brahma is in the month of March, according to Hindu 
astronomical calculation. This statement is reproduced from the explanation of Srila 
Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura. At the beginning of the first half of Brahma’s life, there was a 
millennium called Brahma-kalpa, wherein Lord Brahma appeared. The birth of the Vedas was 
simultaneous with Brahma’s birth.” 


el 


ae al 


PP ned 
. Oe aaa 


CLA Ae Ae 
* ears 


eeree 
CAA 


* 
-- 


Sri Kapila Varaha Temple is located on the banks of Ashkunda ghata near Dvarakadisa 
temple. Lord Varaha washed His hair here after slaying the demon Hiranyaksa. Sri Adi 
Varaha Temple is located near the Bhuteswara Mahadeva temple near Halwai wali bagichi, 


directly opposite Balabhadra Kunda, and on the lane that goes besides Lord Nrsimhadeva 
temple. This is an ancient deity of Lord Varaha. 


Sri Kaliya Mardana, Sri Dauji Ji Ki Haveli and Sri Laxmi Narayana Temples are situated in front 
of Sri Lal Varaha Temple in Manik Chowk. 


Sri Kaliya Mardana Temple: Sri Kaliya Mardana Maharaja is an exquisitely beautiful and 
unique deity of Lord Sri Krishna dancing upon the hoods of the Kaliya serpent. The deity is 
blackish. One can clearly have the unique darshans of Lord Krishna dancing on the hoods of 
Kaliya. Srimad-Bhagavatam Canto 10, chapters 16 and 17 describes Lord Krishna’s pastime of 
subduing the gigantic Kaliya serpent (Sri Kaliya Mardana lila). 


Sri Dauji Ji Ki Haveli Temple, the house of the elder brother, is in front of Kaliya Mardana 
Temple and on the side of Lal Varaha Temple. The darshans of this unique and extremely 
blissful deity of Sri Dauji Ji are most charming. 


Sri Laxmi Narayana Temple is located on the side of Kaliya Mardana Temple. Again, like 
Sveta Varaha, Lal Varaha, Sri Kaliya Mardana and Sri Dauji Ji Maharaja, Sri Laxmi Narayana’s 
deity is extremely captivating, endowed with Their blessings to advance in our Krishna 
Consciousness. 


0 iL Aletta beh eakiah <oo 
~ - — \ 


uA 


mre. 


— 


ee 
= <— 
a ay 
4 % — a 


% 
= 


. 
; 
ba 
% 
. 
5 
» 
% 
ul 3 
s 
Py 
. 
Ls 


Sri Padmanabha Ji is an ancient, exquisitely beautiful black, self-manifested deity of Lord 
Vishnu. Lord Caitanya visited this temple during His tour of Mathura. Fondly addressed as 
Thakura Sri Padmanabha Ji Maharaja, Their Lordships grace everyone with Their most merciful 
and blessed darshans. This temple is located on the Inner Parikrama Marg of Mathura, which is 
locally known as Sri Mathura-puri Antargrahi Parikrama Marg. Take the Papad Wali Gali and 
walk towards Gopal Mandir to a narrow side road and climb further up. The exact location is: 
808 Ratan Kund, Mathura. 


Kubja is the blessed hunchback woman who smeared Krishna and Balarama with the fine 
ointments that she was carrying for Kamsa. Kubja’s House is at a short distance from 
Rangesvara Mahadeva Temple and can be reached by taking a path going from just behind. 
Alternatively, one can also visit here by coming from Vraja Mandala Parikrama Marg. The exact 
location is: House No- 1698, Holi Gate, Krishna Puri Colony, Antapara, located in Sri 
Rangesvara Mahadeva Bagichi. The temple has the beautiful Krishna-Kubja deities. In the 
course of time, so many pastime places have been forgotten, but fortunately Kubja's house, 
although dilapidated, remains. 


Srimad-Bhagavatam Canto 10, chapters 42 and 48 describe the pastime of Kubja (also known 
as Trivakra). While Krishna and Balarama were walking on the streets of Mathura, They saw 
her carrying a tray of fine ointments. Lord asked her who she was and requested some 
ointment from her. Entranced by the Lord's beauty, Kubja gave both Krishna and Balarama a 
good deal of ointment. In return, Krishna stepped on her toes with His lotus feet, took hold of 
her chin, and lifted, straightened her spine, and transformed her into an extremely beautiful 
woman. Kubja then grabbed the edge of Krishna’s upper cloth and asked Him to come to her 
house. Krishna replied that after He had taken care of some business, He would certainly come 
and relieve her mental torment. Sometime after killing Kamsa, Krishna went to Kubja’s house. 
She welcomed Krishna with great respect, giving Him a raised seat and, together with her 
female companions, worshipped Him. By embracing Lord Krishna, Kubja freed herself of the 
torment of lust. Apart from offering sandal paste to Krishna, she had never performed any 
pious acts, yet simply on the strength of the piety of this single act, she attained the rare 
personal association of Sri Krishna. Srimad-Bhagavatam 10.48.11 explains the esoteric 
meaning behind this pastime. 


Garga-samhita states that in her previous birth, Kubja was Ravana's sister Surpanakha. She 
wanted Lord Rama as her husband, but the Lord had vowed to have only one wife. When He 


informed her of this, she became angry and tried to devour Sita-devi. Laksmana swung His 
sharp sword and cut off her nose and ears. After inciting Ravana to steal Sita, and then 
watching several of her brothers die at the Lord's hands, a disheartened Surpanakha went to 
Puskara, where she performed 10,000 years of austerities underwater. As a result, Lord Siva 
became pleased with her and blessed her to attain the Lord's association in the coming 
Dvapara-yuga. 


, 


Pw Raga) ete of oe Gn Foe Sy ee vee’ ee € 


ws Ae RS EW R| 


Krishna at the House of Kubja 


7. Kamsa Tila and Rangabhumi - The Wrestling Arena of Kamsa 
Kamsa Tila is a small hillock where the ruins of Rangabhumi of Kamsa stand. It is located 50 
meters up the road from the famous Rangesvara Mahadeva Temple. Ranga means 
“entertainment.” In the grand arena that once stood here, the cunning Kamsa arranged for 
Krishna and Balarama to wrestle with Canura, Mustika, Kuta, Sala and Tosala. Walking up the 
staircase, one can see the wrestling arena that still exists. Also, there are murti’s of Lord 
Krishna and Balarama standing side-by-side of Kamsa. On the day of the match, Krishna killed 
the elephant Kuvalayapida at the gate of Rangabhumi. Carrying one of the tusks on His 
shoulder, Lord Krishna appeared unprecedentedly beautiful as He entered the wrestling arena. 


Srimad-Bhagavatam Canto 10, chapters 41 to 44 describe the wonderful chivalrous pastimes 
of Lord Krishna in Mathura. “The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the shelter of the 
complete creation and from whose lotus navel the whole creation is manifested, immediately 
knocked the crown from the head of Kamsa and grabbed his long hair in His hand. He then 
dragged Kamsa from his seat to the wrestling dais and threw him down. Then Krishna at once 
straddled his chest and began to strike him over and over again. Simply from the strokes of 
Krishna's fist, Kamsa lost his vital force.” (Krishna book, chapter 44) 


ee 
fi 


i 
= 7 
> a 

: 


Dae, 


Rangabhumi - The Wrestling Arena of Kamsa 


2? & 


‘ 


~ 
~ 


reo ‘es 


}fy \W 


; 


a 


Krishna Receives a Garland 
Krishna and Balarama went to a florist by the name of Sudama. The florist immediately came 
out and with great devotion fell down to offer respectful obeisances. The florist very humbly 
prayed, "My dear Lord, because You have come to my place, I think all my forefathers and all 
my worshipable superiors are pleased and delivered. My dear Lord, You are the supreme cause 
of all causes of this cosmic manifestation, but for the benefit of the residents of this earthly 
planet, You have appeared with Your plenary portion to give protection to Your devotees and 
annihilate the demons. You are equally disposed as the friend of all living entities; You are the 
Supersoul, and You do not discriminate between friend and enemy. Yet You are pleased to give 
Your devotees the special result of their devotional activities. My Lord, I am praying that You 
please tell me whatever You wish me to do, because I am Your eternal servant. If You will 
allow me to do something, it will be a great favor to me." Then the florist Sudama made two 
exquisite garlands for Krishna and Balarama and presented them to the Lord. 


Krishna breaks sacrificial bow 
> = 


Krishna Kills the Elephant Kuvalayapida 


Lord Krishna Kills the Tyrant Kamsa 


8. Sri Rangesvara Mahadeva Temple 
Sri Rangesvara Mahadeva is the 5500-years-old deity of Lord Siva that Kamsa personally 
worshipped. He is the protector of south Mathura. On the day before the wrestling match, 
Kamsa offered worship to Lord Siva in this temple. On Siva-ratri, a wrestling match was 
organized, and Lord Sri Krishna killed Kamsa. On seeing this, Lord Siva became overjoyed. 
Thus, Lord Siva got the name “Sri Rangeshwar Mahadeva” and the temple is known as 
Rangesvara Mahadeva Temple. Every year on Kartika Shukla Dasami, the Chaube community 
organizes a festival in which a 30-foot Kamsa will be killed by Lord Krishna. It is a famous 
temple and is a good landmark to visit Kamsa-tila. 


Visrama means “rest”. Lord Krishna rested here on the banks of Yamuna River after killing 
Kamsa. Lord Varaha also rested here after His victory over Hiranyaksa. Around this beautiful 
ghata, there are several small temples. The devotees enthusiastically come and take a holy dip 
in the Yamuna River. In the evening, a spectacular Yamana Arati ceremony takes place. The 
devotees thong both on the various nicely decorated boats and on the ghata to take Arati 
darshans. On 9 October 1932, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura initiated the first Vraja 
Mandala parikrama from Visrama Ghata. 


Sri Caitanya-caritamrta Madhya 17.190 mentions that Lord Caitanya bathed in the twenty-four 
ghats along the banks of the Yamuna, and the brahmana showed Him all the places of 
pilgrimage. The twenty-four ghats (bathing places) along the Yamuna are (1) Avimukta, (2) 
Adhirudha, (3) Guhya-tirtha, (4) Prayaga-tirtha, (5) Kanakhala-tirtha, (6) Tinduka, (7) Surya- 
tirtha, (8) Vata-svami, (9) Dhruva-ghata, (10) Rsi-tirtha, (11) Moksa-tirtha, (12) Bodha-tirtha, 
(13) Gokarna, (14) Krishna-ganga, (15) Vaikuntha, (16) Asi-kunda, (17) Catua-samudrika- 
kupa, (18) Akrura-tirtha, (19) Yajnika-vipra-sthana, (20) Kubja-kupa, (21) Ranga-sthala, (22) 
Manca-sthala, (23) Mallayuddha-sthana and (24) Dasasvamedha. 


a 
Pe ee 


Na 


Every evenin 


“A ; est te : yaety 3 7a 4 % 


+ 


Beautiful deities of Lord Krishna at Visrama Ghata 


Yamuna-Yamaraja temple: Overlooking Visrama-ghata is a small temple where Yamuna- 
devi and her brother Yamaraja are worshiped. Yamuna is the daughter of Suryadeva and sister 
of Yamaraja. In the Lord’s Dvaraka pastimes, she is Kalindi, one of His eight principal queens. 
Once Yamuna-devi served Yamaraja such an excellent meal that he promised her he would not 


judge anybody who bathed in her waters on Yama-dvitiya (Bhaiya Duj) day, which is the day 
after Govardhana Puja. In an alcove near Visrama-ghata is Pippalesvara Mahadeva, 


protector of the eastern quarter of Mathura. 


~~» 


Brother's Temple) ve 


het, 'Sister-Brother's Temple se 


als 
ewe 
=] = -. 
— _ <<a 


ee i fara: oft oft 108 stage ait wercen, oft adhe aren, SRE ATM 
(aT UTS, WALT 281001, Wat Weer, wea 


SS 


* « aN 


Fae. 08 sen ot 
a Deeg: a 


Yamuna Ji and her brother Yamaraja 


Sri Kapila Varaha Temple is located on the banks of Ashkunda ghata near the famous Sri 
Dwarkadisa temple. Lord Varaha washed His hair here after slaying the demon Hiranyaksa. 
One can have the very beautiful and blessed darsana of Sri Kapila Varaha here. 


2 Ba Oe" 


Kapila Varaha 


Sri 
11. Satrughna Temple 
Ramayana describes that, being requested by Lord Rama, Satrughna ruled Mathura after He 
slayed Lavanasura. The ancient Satrughna Temple is located on Papad Wali Gali near Gopal 
Mandir in downtown Mathura near Sri Dwarkadisa temple, and stands as a testimony of this 
pastime. There is a big signboard in front of the temple. Satrughna, the youngest brother of 
Lord Sri Ramacandra, along with His wife, Srutakirti, grace the main altar at the temple. 
Several years after Lord Rama had returned to Ayodhya from exile, a demon, Lavanasura, 
attacked the city of Mathura. Lord Rama asked Satrughna to protect the citizens of Mathura 
and thereafter rule it after killing Lavanasura. Satrughna felt extremely morose hearing Lord 
Rama’s request as He didn’t want to forgo personal association with the Lord. However, to 
fulfill the desire of Lord Rama, Satrughna went to Mathura with Lal Varaha deity for His 
protection. After slaying Lavanasura, Satrughna ruled Mathura. This is one of the temples 
dedicated to Lord Satrughna. Nearby is the ancient Gopal Ji Temple. 


~ 
LF 


VLBI 


Ly 
Z 
| 
A 
Z 
le 
Ee 
iA 


Bhakti-ratnakara describes that at Dhruva-ghata, upon the insistence of five-year-old Dhruva 
and seeing his unflinching devotion and determination, Narada Muni told him to go to 
Madhuvana to worship the Supreme Lord. It is situated to the south of the Bengali ghata in 
Mathura on the banks of Yamuna River. On a small tila (hillock), there is an ancient temple 
where we can have the unique and rare darsana of Dhruva Maharaja! In the courtyard of the 
temple, there are lotus footprints of Narada Muni. The pujari at Dhruva-ghata Temple says that 
during the Vraja Mandala Parikrama in the Kartika month, a large contingent of devotees come 
to visit Dhruva-ghata. During his stay in Madhuvana, Dhruva used to take his bath here in 
Yamuna. Madhuvana is 13 km from Mathura. At Dhruva-tila in Maholi village of Madhuvana, 
Dhruva performed his penance until he was bestowed with the darshans of the Supreme Lord. 


Srimad-Bhagavatam Canto 4 chapters 8 to 12 describes the wonderful pastime of Dhruva 
Maharaja. Having been tormented by the harsh words of his stepmother and taking 
instructions from his mother, Suniti, Dhruva left for the forest to worship the lotus feet of the 
Supreme Lord. When Narada Muni heard this news, he went to meet Dhruva. When Narada 
saw the unswayed determination of the 5-year-old Dhruva, he asked him to go to Madhuvana 
forest and gave him specific instructions to worship the Supreme Lord, giving him the mantra: 
Om namo bhagavata vasudevaya. After five months, his meditation broke, and he saw the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Narayana, personally present before him. 


+ 
tae 


Nati a SY 4 LOS 


v 


is 


Cae 
i 

> 

. 


(ke 
' 
= 
} 


—_ 


Lf 
eae ee 
Dhruva Maharaja 


ha 2 ’ ty 4 ~ Th ‘ eve ‘ - , 
¢ » ‘ a“ r. Ail” Rs wat | SY it f Pg) A 
we . C6 = . %, y* . ‘ * a ye \ 

» : ae 333 i 2D Aa Va i 4 read ~*~ : 


Beautif 


ea 
Kat & 


ul Sri Sri Radha Krishna at Dhruva Ghata 
7 rs SE a Sr 


a 


ag 


ove +s 


z ee oe 
Footprints of great sage Narada Muni 


we. 


s> 
a 


<>) od ~~ 
a 5. - —_ 


Narada Instructs Dhruva 
The boy Dhruva told Narada Muni of his desire to have a position and kingdom more exalted 
than any yet achieved by anyone, even his fathers and grandfathers, and he asked Narada 
what was the best way to achieve this. When Narada saw that Dhruva would not be swayed 
from his determination to fulfill his desires, he instructed him on the path of devotional service 
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. 


13. Sapta Rsi Mandira - Rsi Tirtha 
Sapta Rsi Mandira is in the Rsi-tirtha area of Mathura. It is a 5 min walk from Dhruva-ghata to 
the north of Bengali-ghata on Vraja Mandala Parikrama Marg. This is where the sapta (seven) 
rsis, namely Kasyapa, Atri, Vasistha, Visvamitra, Gautama, Jamadagni and Bharadvaja 
performed the yajnas. At the main temple altar, there are deities of the Sapta Rsis. In front of 
the altar, there is a hillock, which is the actual spot where they performed the yajnas. Digging 
a little into the top of the hill, one finds the soil is ashy. The Chief Mahant of this Temple is 
amicable and welcomes the devotees. The ancient hillock where the yajnas were performed is 
nicely protected. The entire area is tranquil and soaked with devotion. Srimad-Bhagavatam 
Canto 4 chapter 8 verse 42 mentions Rsi-tirtha, Dhruva-ghata and other prominent holy 
places in Mathura. Srimad-Bhagavatam Canto 8 chapter 13 describes the Sapta Rsis. Their 
planets form the constellation known as “the Big Dipper.” The exact address is: 1211/6 Sapt 
Rishi Temple, Mathura. 


Sapta rsis, namely Kasyapa, Atri, Vasistha, Visvamitra, Gautama, Jamadagni and 
Bharadvaja performed the yajna 


F ™~ 


Ashy soil of the yajna performed by the Sapta Rsis 


14. Bali Tila 


Bali-tila is the sacrificial arena of Bali Maharaja and where the astonishing pastime of Bali 
Maharaja offering three steps of land to Lord Vamana and thereafter, Lord Vamana enveloping 


the entire cosmic creation took place. It is on a small hillock near Surya-ghata, 200 meters 
walk from Sapta Rsi Mandira, while going towards Kubja’s House via the back road leading to 
the famous Rangesvara Mahadeva temple. On top of the hill there is an ancient temple with 
the remarkably beautiful deities of Lord Vamana on one altar and Bali Maharaja along with 
Sukracarya on another altar. Srimad-Bhagavatam Canto 8 chapters 15 to 22 describe the 
astonishing pastime of Lord Vamana and Bali Maharaja. 


<ias 


ape ET ate Ce 


° 


CC) Caras, 


ee See ee an 
WR 


Blessed Lotus Feet of Lord Vamana 


Lord Vamanadeva Expands His Footstep To The Edge Of The Universe 


15. Ambarisa Tila 
Ambarisa-tila stands as witness to the glories of the great devotee Ambarisa. It is not easy to 
locate Ambarisa-tila as there is no signboard, and not many locals know the significance of this 
important tirtha. Entrance is through Sri Baba Jaharveer Mandir. On top of this board, 
"Taposthali of Maharaja Ambarish" is engraved on black stone. The nearest landmark is RCA 
College, Kacchi Sadak, Vrindavan Road. Ambrisa-tila is on a small hillock. On top of the hill, 
there is Hanuman Ji temple. Cakra Tirtha is located 100 meters from Ambarisa Tila. This is 
the place where Maharaja Ambarisa pacified the Sudarsana cakra by offering various prayers. 
The Sudarsana cakra of the Supreme Lord remained here after this pastime to continue 
protecting Ambarisa Maharaja. At Cakra-tirtha there is a deep kunda. On the side of the 
kunda, there is an ancient Lord Siva temple. Durvasa Muni Asrama is just across the 
Yamuna River from here. This pastime duly reminds of the havoc caused by Vaisnava aparadha 
and that we strengthen our efforts to avoid having history repeat itself. Srimad-Bhagavatam 
Canto 9 chapters 4 to 5 describes this wonderful pastime of Maharaja Ambarisa and Durvasa 
Muni. 


ie 


merge ETT ae ST a] PUPP’ 


; Sr elie coe 
a. Sse aaa cra ser trer Vig \ & 
4 NED ere an Moka aR ae, rere A UA BI. Ut . ' 
ry 


ce Se ecoerty ap dee 92 Garay hsb 
at Ay cm apie tear ee eee ae coe anahegayey | 
PAE c ROOT OT Merges A era : 


re 


» 
. 


eal 


q 


Entrance is through Sri Baba Jaharveer Mandir 
On this board, "Taposthali of Maharaja Ambarish" is engraved on black stone 


| i id 


BT i 


Chakra Tirtha where Maharaja Ambarisa pacified the Sudarsana cakra sent by the 
Supreme Lord 


The ancient and unique Lord Nrsimhadeva Temple is located directly across the main lane that 
goes to Sri Bhutesvara Mahadeva Temple. Fondly addressed as Thakura Sri Nrsimhadeva Ji 
Maharaja, one can also have the blessed darshans of Prahlada Maharaja standing next to 
Nrsimhadeva. This temple is served and maintained by Mathura Vyapar Samiti. 


; 
ors , 
7 > 3 

+i 

‘ hes 

+ aS 
- , 
sac. 

5 5 

“Sel 

. , 


Balabhadra Kunda is a large pond that is situated opposite the road near the famous Sri 
Bhutesvara Mahadeva Temple. 


Sri Adi Varaha Temple is located near the Bhuteswara Mahadeva temple at Panchayati 
Halwai Bagichi, directly opposite to Balabhadra Kunda on the lane that goes besides Lord 
Nrsimhadeva temple. This is an ancient, very charming deity of Lord Varaha. Srimad- 
Bhagavatam Canto 3 chapters 13 to 19 describes Lord Varaha’s pastimes. 


Sri Uddhava Ji Temple: Rare and unique Sri Uddhava Ji Temple is located next to Balabhadra 
kunda. Here one can have the rare darsana of Uddhava, the eternal associate of Lord Krishna. 


Sri Baldeo Ji Temple is located behind Sri Uddhava Ji Temple near Balabhadra kunda. The 
beautiful and most merciful deity of Lord Balarama and His eternal consort Revati grace the 
altar. Near the temple, there is a nice Gaushala. This temple is maintained by the Rajasthan 
government. 


Gaudiya Matha is located opposite Sri Uddhava Ji Temple near Balabhadra kunda. There is no 
sign outside except ‘Vaitika Sri Krishna Balarama Mandira and Siva Mandira’ written on top of 
the main gate. Inside the temple, there are beautiful deities of Sri Sri Krishna Balarama, small 
deities of Sri Sri Radha Krishna and Sri Sri Gaura-Nitai. On the side, there is a large deity of 
Ganesa Ji. In the temple courtyard, there is an ancient banyan tree. 


ey 
ES 
a\T 
R 
- 
* 
i 
£y 
: 


The famous Bhutesvara Mahadeva, lord of the bhutas (ghosts), is a tall, white Siva-linga. In 
addition to being a dik-pala, protector of Mathura, Bhutesvara Mahadeva is also one of the four 
kseta-palas, protectors, of Vrajabhumi. To the right of the Bhutesvara temple are some old, 


steep steps that lead down into an incense-filled temple room dedicated to Patalesvari-devi, 
Bhutesvara Mahadeva’s wife. Lord Caitanya visited this temple. In the Adi Varaha Purana, Lord 
Varaha glorifies Bhutesvara Mahadeva, as described in Bhakti-ratnakara. 


This 5000-year-old Dirgha Vishnu beautiful deity of Dirgha was established by Vajranabha, the 
grandson of Lord Krishna. Dirgha means huge. When Krishna, Balarama and Their cowherd 
friends were proceeding to Kamsa's wrestling arena, Sridama and other sakhas asked Krishna, 
"Friend, are You going to the wrestling arena? Your body is small and tender. How will You kill 
the mighty Kamsa?" Sri Krishna then displayed His huge (dirgha) form, carrying a conch shell, 
disk, club, and a lotus flower. Thus, the sakhas were convinced that their Kanhaiya could do 
anything by the mercy of Narayana and that Narayana sometimes manifested through Him. 
Happily, they danced towards the wrestling arena with Sri Krishna. 


Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu visited Dirgha Vishnu Temple. A small deity of Lakshmi Ji is also 
present. One time, Lakshmi, the eternal consort of Lord Vishnu, developed a sense of pride of 
her beauty. So, when the Lord appeared, He manifested His beautiful form to break Lakshmi 
Ji’s pride. That is why Lakshmi Ji is praying behind the Lord with folded hand feeling 

guilty. Aurangzeb attacked this temple 21 times because his brother whom he wanted to kill 
was hidden in this temple at that time. Local people tried many plans to save the temple. They 
made a tiger statue in front of the temple so that Aurangzeb think that it was Durga devi 
temple, because Aurangzeb feared and didn’t demolish Durga temple. This temple is situated 
near Bharatpura Gate on the Ghiya Mandi Road. 


20. Sri Kesava Ji Gaudiya Matha - Where A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami 


Prabhupada accepted Sannyasa 
In 1959, His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada accepted sannyasa here 
from Bhakti Prajnana Keshava Gosvami Maharaja. Stunningly beautiful Sri Sri Radha-Vinoda- 
Bihari are the presiding deities. A neem wood deity of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was personally 
donated to the Matha by Srila Prabhupada. The Temple has beautiful dioramas of the Lord’s 
pastimes. It is situated near Sri Rangesvara Mahadeva Temple and a short walk from Kamsa- 
tila. 


Sannyasa ceremony of His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada 


21. Sri Dwarkadisa Temple 
Sri Dwarakadhisa Mandira is popular in Mathura. Built in 1814 by Seth Gokul Das Parikh, the 
treasurer of then Gwalior State (Scindia), the Lord is worshiped in this palatial temple in full 
opulence as Raja di Raja Dvarkadhisa, meaning, the King of Kings. The interiors of the temple 
are finely carved in Rajasthani architecture. On another altar in the courtyard of the temple, 
there is a Saligrama Temple. The temple has unusual opening and closing timings. Inside the 
temple, one can get the traditional style Dvarakadhisa Maha-Prasada. It is walking distance 
from Visrama-ghata. Festivals like Holi, Janmastami and Diwali are celebrated with a lot of 
pomp and grandeur in the temple. Presently, the management of the temple is looked after by 
the followers of Sripad Vallabhacharya. 


~ te Ch Ge Le 
ments. a a. 


a 

a 
s: 

v4 


>, 
A 


wide ADIAL g 


nt itaiai eta 


Sri Dwarkadisha Maha-Prasada 


22. Sri Vijaya Govind Ji and Sri Govardhana Nathji Maharaja Temples 
The beautiful and majestic Sri Vijaya Govind Ji temple is located at Chatta Bazar. The darsana 
of Sri Vijaya Govind Ji is extremely charming. Sri Govardhana Nathji Maharaja Temple is 
located near Sri Dvarakadhisa Mandira. 


This is the actual spot where Kamsa’s palace stood. It is located on a hillock overseeing the 
picturesque banks of the Yamuna River. Vasudeva-ghata, Brahma-ghata and Vaikuntha-ghata 
are the famous ghatas near Kamsa Qila. Currently, Qila is in ruins. 


It is situated close to Potra Kunda and Sri Krishna Janmabhumi. Under the tree, next to the 
Matha, Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu chanted His japa constantly when He was in Mathura. One 
can have the darsana of the beautiful Sri Sri Gaura-Nitai deities. 


A Gokamesvara- 
Mahadeva 4 


Mathura Parikramda 


North 
A 
i %. Wes _E 
Ty SOR ROT: - he . ‘ 
Masant Y ; 
RF junction 


y ‘Cakmetirtha 
: : Ambarisa-tila « i 
} Fu ahavidya-deviP Ambarts 


Mandira 


pee ¢ aoe, 
Ps ~~ 

t 

Sri Krsna- } 
janmasthana 


Potra-kunda 


Adi-varaha 


; A 
a Dirgha Dvarakidisa Nei Visrima-ghata 
Visnu 
THI Atarapa a 


Ra ma Mandira, 
a> 


Sveta-varaha 
Gaura-Govinda b] 


a a 
"i Pippalesvara ‘ 
Gaudiya Matha Sri Padmanabha , Mahadeva ghagls i 
Sriji dharmasala Mandira 
; * 
~ ss 
f. eh Se ; , 
Cod We iS R Eda L f 
Bhaotesvara ~~. ee 2 / x *~._,-00f 
Mahiideva xy A es J a 
Rangesvara Mahadeva  \ . om 
f danoalh LN ee G8 b 
Rangabham ¢_4 ‘ Lae 
Sri Kesavaji Gaudiya Matha a Pa 


Being extremely fearful of the prophecy of imminent death at the hands of Krishna, Kamsa 
inflicted atrocities upon Yadus and sent several powerful demons over the years to kill Krishna 


Having heard about the tremendous prowess of Krishna and Balarama, Kamsa was in great 
anxiety. He asked Akrura to bring Them to Mathura on the pretext of Dhanur-yajna. As the two 
Lords walked through the streets of Mathura, the inhabitants welcomed Them with great 
respect. They showered flowers on the Lord, embracing Them in their joyful hearts. They had 
often heard about Him and had developed a deep attraction to Him. They were overwhelmed 
with happiness, and all their distress due to His absence was eradicated. Lord met a 
washerman who was faithful to Kamsa and refused Their request for new clothes. Krishna 
struck the impudent man with His fingertips, separating his head from his body. The Lord and 
His cowherd friends then took the clothes they wanted. Next, Krishna and Balarama met a 
tailor who lovingly adorned Them with cloth ornaments. They then met the florist Sudama, 
whose welcome overflowed with devotion. He offered Them beautiful flower garlands with 
heartfelt prayers. Lord then met Kubja, the hunchback maidservant of Kamsa. She applied 
Them with fine ointments that she was carrying for Kamsa. In return, Krishna stepped on her 
toes with His lotus feet, took hold of her chin and lifted it, straightening her spine and 
transforming her into a beautiful woman. Next, Krishna went to the sacrificial arena where the 
mighty bow was kept. He forcibly picked up the bow, easily strung it and in an instant broke it 
in half, producing an ear-splitting sound that filled the heavens and struck terror in the heart 
of Kamsa. The many guards attacked Krishna, but Krishna and Balarama simply picked up the 
two halves of the bow and beat the guards to death. Next, the Lords annihilated a company of 
soldiers sent by Kamsa, and then They left the arena. When the wicked Kamsa heard how the 
Lord had easily broken the mighty bow and destroyed his soldiers, he spent the night in great 
anxiety. He saw many ill omens portending his imminent death. Next morning, when Krishna 
and Balarama were entering the wrestling arena, They encountered the elephant 
Kuvalayapida. The mighty elephant grabbed Krishna with his trunk, but the Lord struck back 
and then disappeared from the beast’s sight between his legs. Finally, Krishna removed one of 
his tusks and beat him and his keepers to death. Sprinkled with the elephant’s blood and 
carrying one of his tusks on His shoulder as a weapon, Lord Krishna appeared unprecedentedly 
beautiful as He entered the wrestling arena. There, the various classes of people saw Him in 
different ways, according to their specific relationship with Him. Deciding to wrestle, Lord 
Krishna faced off against Canura, and Baladeva took on Mustika. Seeing the violent battle, 
everyone condemned Kamsa. Krishna then grabbed Canura’s arms, whirled him around several 
times and threw him to the ground, killing him. Mustika met a similar fate. 


Except for Kamsa, everyone present cheered Krishna and Balarama. In a rage, he stopped the 
festive music and ordered that Vasudeva, Nanda, Ugrasena and all the cowherds be severely 
punished, and that Krishna and Balarama be driven from the assembly. Krishna became 
furious when He heard Kamsa speak this way. He instantly leapt onto the lofty royal dais and 
grabbed Kamsa by the hair, hurled him down onto the floor of the wrestling ring and threw 
Himself on top of him. In this way, Kamsa met his death. Because of fear, Kamsa had always 
thought of Krishna. After his death, he gained the liberation of having a form like the Lord’s. 
Kettledrums resounded in the sky as the joyful demigods rained flowers and chanted the 
glories of Lord Krishna and Balarama. The wives of Kamsa, grieving for their husband, 
lamented that he had died because of his violence toward other living beings and his lack of 
respect for Krishna, the Supreme Soul, who creates, maintains and destroys the entire 
universe. The Lord then released Vasudeva and Devaki from bondage. Krishna offered 
obeisances at His parent’s feet, but they, now understanding Him to be the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, did not embrace Him. Seeing that His parents had realized His true 
position, Sri Krishna expanded His Yogamaya to again make them think of Him as their dear 
child. He then offered Kamsa’s kingdom to Ugrasena. Later, Jarasandha attacked the Yadavas 
in Mathura seventeen times. Each time, Krishna and Balarama destroyed his armies totally. 
When Jarasandha prepared to attack for the 18th time, Kalayavana, who had been searching 
for a worthy opponent, was sent by Narada Muni to fight the Yadavas. With thirty million 
soldiers, he laid siege at Mathura. Upon seeing the Yadavas in danger, Lord Krishna 


constructed a wonderful city of Dwarka within the sea as a safe haven. He then brought them 
all there by His mystic power. Lord Krishna lived in Mathura for 18 years before moving to 
Dwarka. 


Useful Resources: 
Vraja Mandala Darsana - A 30 Day Parikrama Experience: 
https://www.amazon.com/Vraja-Mandala-Darsana-Parikrama-Experience/dp/8193563557 (book) 


Glories of Mathura: https://vedabase.io/en/library/nod/12 
Mathura Yatra by HH Indradyumna Swami: 
https://www. youtube.com/watch?v=mCWIQIYRGic 


The Advent of Lord Krishna: https: //vedabase.io/en/library/sb/10/1 
Prayers by the Demigods for Lord Krishna in the womb: 
https://vedabase.io/en/library/sb/10/2 
The Birth of Lord Krishna: https://vedabase.io/en/library/sb/10/3 


Krishna and Balarama Enter Mathura: hittps://vedabase.io/en/library/sb/10/41 
The Breaking of the Sacrificial Bow: https://vedabase.io/en/library/sb/10/42 
Krishna Kills the Elephant Kuvalayapida: https://vedabase.io/en/library/sb/10/43 


The Killing of Kamsa: https://vedabase.io/en/library/sb/10/44 
Krishna Pleases His Devotees: https://vedabase.io/en/library/sb/10/48 


Kubja’s pastime with Lord Krishna in Mathura (Srimad-Bhagavatam Canto 10, 
chapters 42 and 48): 
https://vedabase.io/en/library/sb/10/42 (chapter 42) 
https://vedabase.io/en/library/sb/10/48 (chapter 48) 


https://iskcondesiretree.com/profiles/blogs/vraja-mandala-parikrama (check) 


Vraja Mandala Parikrama (Set of 4 DVDs) - A documentary on ISKCON's Vrindavan 
Vraja Mandal Parikrama by HH Bhakti Caitanya Swami: 
https://www.touchstonemedia.com/products/vraja-mandal-parikram-set-4-dvds-touchstone-media 


Vraja Mandala Parikrama: https://vrajamandaladarsana.com 


Mayapur TV: https://www.youtube.com/@MayapurTVOfficial 


Holy Pilgrimages —- Journey to Holy Dhamas: www.Holy-Pilgrimages.com 
Facebook: www.facebook.com/HolyPilgrimages 


Downloadable PDFs of Articles (Archive): 
https://archive.org/details/@chandan_yatra_das 


Downloadable PDFs of Articles (Scribd): 
https://www.scribd.com/user/737943473/chandanyatradas/uploads 


Holy Dham: www.HolyDham.com 


Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare | 
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare || 


