NY 
& 


a 


Vom, 


ve 


“Das ’ FES 


a , 


Sey: 


Sti Krsna Dvaipayana Vedavyasa 


Haritvamsa 
Purana 


Sri Krsna Dvaipayana Vedavyasa 


Harivamsa and Mahabharata are complementary to each other. 
Harivamsa especially describes the pastimes of the Supreme 

Lord that took place after the battle at Kuruksetra, including 

His pastimes of disappearance. Harivarmsa is considered to be 

a supplement of Mahabharata. It is divided into three parts— 
HarivamS$a-parva, Visnu-parva and Bhavisya-parva. Harivamsa-parva 
has fifty-five chapters, Visnu-parva has one hundred twenty-eight 
chapters and Bhavisya-parva has one hundred thirty-five chapters. 
Harivamsa consists of about sixteen thousand verses. 


Harivarsa was first recited by the great sage, Vaisampayana, to 
King Janmejaya. In that assembly, Ugrasrava or Sauti was also 
present. Later on, by the request of the sages at Naimisaranya, 
headed by Saunaka, Sauti again recited it. Many Gaudiya- 
vaisnava acaryas have quoted evidence from Harivamsa in their 
writings. There is no doubt that the readers of this book will find 
it both interesting and beneficial for their cultivation of Krsna 


CONSCIOUSNESS. 


Kamsa Kills the Sons of Devaki 
Text 1 
vaisampayana uvaca 
krte garbha-vidhane 
tu devaki devatopma 
jagraha sapta tan garbhan 
yathavat samudahrtan 


Vasamapayana said: O Janamejaya, after being impregnated by her 
husband, the chaste and powerful Devaki gave birth to seven male 


children, as described above. 


Text 2 
sad-garbhan nissrtan kamsas 
tan jaghana Silatale 
apannam saptamam garbham 
sa nunayatha rohinim 


The first six children were mercilessly killed by Karhsa, one after 
another, by smashing them on the marble floor. When the seventh 
child was conceived, Yogamaya transferred Him to the womb of 
Rohini. 


Text 3 
ardha-ratre sthitam garbham 
patayanti rajasvala 
nidraya sahasa “vista 
papata dharni-tale 


Rohini, who was in her menstrual period, tried to abort her embryo 


during the dead of night. However, being influenced by sleep, she 
fell to the floor, 


Text 4 
Sa svapnam iva tam drstva 
garbham nihsrtam atmanah 


af 


a5 


SRI VISNU-PARVA 


apasyanti ca tam garbham 
muhurtam vyathitabhavat 


She was asleep and so she could not understand that she had given 
birth to a child. This arrangement was made by Yogamaya. For some 
time, she remained oblivious of what had occurred. 


Text 5 
tam aha nidra samvignam 
naise tamasi rohinim 
rohinim iva somasya 
vasudevasya dhimatah 


In the dark of night, Rohini, the wife of intelligent Vasudeva, 
appeared exactly like Rohini, the wife of moon-god. She became 


very anxious about the new-born child and so, Nidra-devi spoke to 
her. 


Text 6 
Rarsanenasya garbhasya 
sva-garbhe cahitasya vai 
sankarsano nama sutah 
subhe tava bhavisyati 


“O auspicious one, the child from your womb was attracted to you 
and so He will be known by the name, Sankarsana.” 


Text 7 
sa tam putram avapyaivam 
Arsta kiticid avanmukhi 
vivesa rohini vesma 


suprabha rohini yatha 


Rohini became jubilant upon hearing the news that she had 


received such a celebrated son. Her face bent down with modesty, 
she happily went inside the Palace. 


KAMSA KILLS THE SONS OF DEVAK]I 


Text 8 
tasya garbhasya margena 
garbham dadhaita devaki 
yad artham sapta te garbhah 
kamsena vinipatitah 


Meanwhile, people began to wonder what happened to Devaki’s 
seventh pregnancy. Then, in due course of time, she became 
pregnant for the eighth time, even though Karhsa had killed her 
children. 


Text 9 
tam tu garbham prayatnena 
raraksus tasya manirinah 
so ‘py atra garbha-vasatau 
vasaty atmecchaya harth 


The ministers of Karnsa began to watch Devaki’s pregnancy very 
carefully, not understanding that Lord Hari was residing within her 
womb, out of His own sweet will. 


Text 10 
yasodapi samadhatta 
garbham tad ahar eva tu 
visnoh Sarirajam nidram 
visnu-nirdesa-karinim 
That same day, Yasoda, the obedient servant of Lord Visnu, received 
Nidradevi, who had been manifested from the body of the Supreme 
Lord, within her womb, in Gokula. 


Text 11 
garbha-kale tu asampiurne 
astame mast te strryau 
devaki ca yasoda ca 
susuvate samam tada 


Prior to the completion of the normal period of 
pregnancy, both Yasoda and Rohini delivered their children, 


40 


SRI VISNU-PARVA 


almost at the same time. This was during the eighth Month of 


their pregnancies. 
Text 12 


yam eva rajanim kysno 
jayne vrsni-kulodvahah 

tam eva rajanim kanyam 
yasodapi vyajayata 


On the same night when Lord Krsna, who maintains the Vrsgnj 
dynasty, appeared, Yasoda gave birth to a baby girl. 


Text 13 
nanda-gopasya bharyaika 
vasudevasya capara 
tulya-kalam ca garbhinyau 
yasoda devaki tatha 


Yasoda was the wife of the cowherd man, Nanda, and Devaki was 
the wife of Vasudeva. Both of them became pregnant at almost the 
same time. 


Text 14 
devaky ajanayad visnum 
yasoda tam tu darikam 
muhurte ‘bhiite prapte 
sardha-ratre vibhisite 


At midnight, during the eighth month of pregnancy, Devaki gave 
birth to Lord Visnu at the auspicious moment, abhijit-yoga, and 
Yasoda gave birth to a female child. 


Text 15 
sagarah sama-kampanta 
celus ca dharani-dharah 
jajvalus cagnayah santa 
jayamane janardane 


KAMSA KILLS THE SONS OF DeEvaky 


When Lord Krsna appeared, the oceans seems to swell with 
ecstasy, Ananta SeSa, who sustains the universe, became 
perturbed so that fire became manifest. 


Text 16 
Sivas ca pravavur vatah 
prasantam abhavad rajah 
Jyotimsy ativyakasanta 


jayamane janardane 


At that auspicious time, cool breezes gently blew, swirling dust 
became pacified, and the stars and planets shone brightly. 


Text 17 
abhijin nama naksatram 
Jayanti nama Sarvari 
muhurto vyayo nama 
yatra jato janardanah 


When Lord Krsna made His appearance, it was at the auspicious 
moment known as abhijit-muhirta. That particular night was called 
jayantt because of the appearance of the Rohini naksatra. It was an 
especially auspicious moment because the period known as Vijaya 
was present. 


Text 18 
avyaktiah sasvatah siksmo 
hanrir navayanah prabhuh 
jayamano hi bhagavan 
nayanair mohayan prabhuh 


As soon as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Narayana, who 
1s beyond material perception, eternal, very subtle, most powerful, 


and the destroyer of all sins appeared, He enchanted everyone with 
His eyes, 


4] 


SRI VISNU-PARVA 
Text 19 
anahata dundubhayo 
devanam pranadan divi 
Gkasat puspa-vyrstim ca 
vavarsa tridasesvarah 


Due to ecstasy, the demigods in the heavenly planets began to 
sound drums. Indra, the king of the demigods, personally showered 


flowers from the sky. 


Text 20 
girbhir mangala-yuktabhih 
stuvanto madhusidanam 
maharsayah sagandharva 
upatasthuh sahapsarah 


The great sages, accompanied by the Gandharvas and Apsaras, quickly 
arrived while offering auspicious prayers to Lord Madhustdana. 


Text 21 

3 jayamane hrsikese 
prahrstam abhavaj jagat 
endras ca tridasaih saérdham 
tustava madhustidanam 


As soon as Lord Krsna appeared, the entire world became filled 


with joy. All the demigods, headed by Indra, offered prayers to Lord 
Madhustdana. 


Text 22 
vasudevas ca tam ratrau 
jatam putram adhoksajam 
srtvatsa-laksanam drstua 


yutam divyats ca laksanaih 


uvaca vasudevas tu ripam 
samhara vai prabho 


Vasudeva also glorified the Supreme Lord, who had appeares 
as his son that night. Upon seeing auspicious marks, such 4 


KAMSA KILLS THE SONS OF DEVAKI 43 


Srivastsa, on the body of his son, Vasudeva said, “O my om, 
please withdraw this form of Yours.” 


Text 23 
bhito ‘ham deva kamsasya 
tasmad evam bravimy aham 
mama putra hatas tena 
tava jyesthambujeksana 


“My dear Lord, I am greatly distressed, due to fear of Karhsa. O 
lotus-eyed one, he has already killed many of my sons, who were 


Your elder brothers.” 


Text 24 
vasudeva-vacah srutua 
rupam caharad acyutah 
anujnapya pitrivena 
nanda-gopa-grham naya 


After hearing this request of His father, Vasudeva, Lord Acyuta 
gave His assent and then transformed Himself into a human-like 
child, saying, “Take me to the house of the cowherd, Nanda, and 
keep Me there.” 


Text 25 
vasudevas tu sangrhya 
darakam ksipram eva ca 
yasodaya grham ratrau 
vivesa suta-vatsalah 


Vasudeva, who was very affectionate toward his son, quickly took 
Him on his lap and went to the house of Yasoda during the dead of 
night. 


Text 26 
yasodayas tv avijnatas 
tatra niksipya darakam 
pragrhya darikam caiva 
devaki-Sayane nyasat 


44 


SRI VISNU-PARVA 


Yasoda did not notice anything when Vasudeva came and placed the 
male child by her side and picked up the female child that was born 
to her. Vasudeva then returned to Kamsa’s palace and placed the 
daughter by the side of Devaki. 


Text 27 
parivarte kyte tabhyam 
garbhabhyam bhaya-viklavah 
vasudevah krtartho vai 
nirjagama nivesanat 


In this way, the two new-born babies were exchanged by Vasudeva, 
He was so overwhelmed by fear that he immediately went to inform 


the king. 


Text 28 
ugrasena-sutayatha 
hamsayanaka-dundubhih 
nivedayamasa tada tam 


hanyam vara-varninim 


Vasudeva, who is also called Anakadundbhi, quickly approached 
Kamsa, the son of Ugrasena, and informed him of the birth of his 
daughter. 


Text 29 
tac chrutva tuaritah kamso 
raksibhih saha vegibhih 
aqagama grha-dvaram 
vasudevasya viryavan 


As soon as mighty Karnsa heard this, he rushed to Vasudeva’s house; 


along with his guards, to see with his own eyes. 


Text 30 
sa tatra tuantam dvan 
kim jatam iti cabravit 
diyatam sighram ity evam 
vagbhi samabhitarjayat 


KAMSA KILLS THE SONS OF DEVAKI 


Upon arriving at the gate of Vasudeva’s residence, he anxiously 
inquired, “What kind of child has taken birth? Hand him over to 
me immediately.” 


Text 31 
tato hahd-krtah sarva 
devaki-bhavane striyah 
uvaca devaki dina 


vaspa-gadgadaya gira 


The ladies, who had gathered at Devaki’s house, began to lament 
aud cry. Devaki, with terrified eyes and a choked voice, began to 


speak: 


Text 32 
darika tu prajateti 
kamsam samabhiyacati 
srimanto me hatah sapta 
putra-garbhas tvaya vibho 


“O. lord, here is the daughter that I have given birth to. My dear 
brother, you already killed my seven children, as soon as they were 


born.” 


Text 33 
darikeyam hataivaisa 
pasyasva yadi manyase 
drstua kamsas tu tam 
kanyam akrsyata muda yutah 


“Look, this one a girl. She appears almost dead. If you please, kindly 
return her to me.” Karhsa became attracted to the girl and within 
his mind, he felt happiness. 


Texts 34-37 
hatawaisa yada kanya 
jatety uktva vrtha-matih 
sa garbha-Sayane klista 
garbhambu-kinnamurdhaja 


46 


Sri ViSNU-PARVA 
kamsasya purato nyasta 
prthivyam prthivi-sama 
sa cainam grhya-purusah 
samavidhyavadhuya ca 


udyac channeva sahasa 
silayam samapothayat 

savadhuta sila-prsthe 
‘nispista divam utpatat 


hitva garbha-tanum sa 
tu sahasa mukta-muirdhaja 
jagama kamsam adisya 
divya-srag anulepana 
“If this child is already dead then do not uselessly lament for her. 
She was in a very pathetic condition within the womb. Her hair is 


still wet with the water of the embryo.” 


The child was placed before Karnsa and lay motionless. The wicked 
Karnsa then grabbed her feet, whirled her around, and suddenly 
began to dash her against the stone. Although she was about to be 
thrown against the stone, she slipped out of Karhsa’s hands and 
flew into the sky before she hit the floor. She gave up the body of 
a newly-born child and assumed her actual form and challenged 
Karhsa. Indeed, she looked fearful, with scattered long hair. She was 
decorated with a flower garland and divine cosmetics. 


Text 38 
hara-Sobhita-sarvangi 
mukutojjvala-bhusita 
kanyaiva sabhavan nityam 
divya devairabhistuta 


d 
Her beauty was enhanced by her garlands and necklaces. Her hea 
was adorned with a brightly shining crown. She appear ed asa yours’ 


unmarried girl. Her appearance was divine and all the 
offered her prayers, 


demigos 


KAMSA KILLS THE SONS OF DEVAK]I 
Text 39 
nila-pitambara-dhara 
gaja-kumbhopama-stani 
ratha-vistirna-jaghand 
candra-vaktra caturbhuja 


She was dressed in blue and yellow garments. Her breasts resembled 
elephants’ heads. Her thighs were as broad as a chariot. Her face 
looked beautiful, like the moon, and she possessed four arms. 


Text 40 
vidyud-vispasta-varnabha 
balarka-sadrseksana 
payodhara-stanavati 
sandhy eva sapayodhara 


Her complexion appeared just like lightning. Her two eyes were 
red, like the morning sun. Her breasts resembled clouds and her 
form looked like an evening cloud. 


Text 41 
sa vai nist tamogras te 
babhau bhita-ganakule 
nrtyatt hasatt caiva 
viparitena bhasvati 


In the dense darkness of midnight, when all living entities were fast 
asleep, the dazzling goddess laughed, danced, and jumped up and 
down in the four directions. 


Text 42 
vthayast gata raudra 
papau panam anutiamam 
jahasa ca maha-hasam | 
kamsam ca rusitabravit 


Her form was extremely frightening. In outer space, she began to 
enjoy excellent honey and laugh loudly. Then, in an angry mood, 
she said to Karnsa. 


47 


48 SRI VisSnu-PARVA 
Texts 43-44 
kamsa kamsadtma-nasaya 
yad aham ghatita tuaya 
sahasa ca samutksipya 
silayam abhipothita 
tasmat tavantakale ‘ham 
krsyamanasya satruna 
patayitva karaiy deham 
usnam pasyami Sonitam 


“O Karhsa, you attempted to kill me, hoping to avoid your own 
destruction. You suddenly dashed me against the stone and because 
of this, I will tear apart your body with my bare hands and drink 
your warm blood, when you are dragged by your enemy, at the time 


of death.” 


Text 45 
evam uktva vaco ghoram 
s@ yathestena vartmana 
kham sa devalayam devi 


sagana vicacara ha 


After speaking these words in a thundering voice, the goddess began 
to freely wander about outer space, accompanied by her followers. 


Text 46 
s@ kanya vavrdhe tatra 
vrsni-sanghasu-pusita 
putravat palyamana sa 
vasudevajnaya tada 


She was worshiped by the members of the Vrsni dynasty, with great 


affection. By the order of Vasudeva, she was taken care of like a 


son. 
Text 47 
viddhi cainam athotbannam 
amsad devin prajapateh 


KAMSA KILLS THE SONS OF DEVAKI 49 


chan amsam yoga-kanyam 
raksartham kesavasya tu 


O Janmejaya, you should understand that this goddess is an 
expansion of the energy of Lord Visnu, who maintains al] living 
entities. As such, she is simultaneously one with and different from 
the Supreme Lord. By the strength of her divine prowess, she has 
appeared for the protection of Lord Krsna’s pastimes. 


Text 48 
tam vai sarve sumanasah 
pujayanti sma yadavah 
devavad divya-vapusa 
krsnah samraksito yaya 


All the members of the Yadu dynasty worshiped her as their family 
goddess because she protected Krsna by offering her divine body. 


Text 49 
tasyam gatayam kamsas tu 
tam mene mrtyum atmanah 
vivikte devakim caiva 
vriditah samabhasata 


After she disappeared, Karhsa thought her to be the cause of his own 
death. He then approached his sister, Devaki, in a solitary place and 
spoke in an embarrassed mood. 


Text 50 
Ramsa uvdca 
mrtyoh suasah kyrto yatnas 
tava garbha maya hatah 
anya evanyato devi 
mama mriyur upasthitah 


Karhsa said, “My dear sister, I tried to avoid my death and in the 
Process, I have killed your children. O Devi, it now appears that 
Someone else has appeared to bring about my death.” 


50 


SRI VISNU-PARVA 
Text 51 
nairasyena krto yatnah 
svajane prahrtam maya 
daivam purusakarena na 
catikrantavan aham 


“To fulfill my aim, I have taken shelter of the path of cruelty and 
violence and have thereby tortured my own people. I could not 
reverse the destiny that was arranged for me by providence.” 


Text 52 
tyaja garbha-kriam cintam 
santapam putrajam tyaja 
hetubhitas tu aham 
tesam sati kala-viparyaye 


“O sister, please do not worry about your children. Give up lamenting 
about your dead sons. It is the time factor that has taken them and 


I am only an instrument.” 


Text 53 
kala eva nrnam Satruh 
kalas ca parinamakah 
kalo nayati sarvam vai 
hetubhitas tu mad-vidhah 


“Time is the enemy of all human beings. It constantly changes their 
situation and finally devours all living entities as unavoidable death. 
People like me are only an instrument in the hands of time.” 


Text 54 
agamisyanti vai devi 
yatha-bhagam upadravah 
idam tu kastam yaj jantuh 
kartaham iti manyate 
“O Devi, according to our karma, we face various difficulties and 


* 1 ae 
disturbances. However, out of ignorance, we consider ourselves 
the doer of everything.” 


KAMSA KILLS THE SONS OF DrVak!i I 


Text 55 
ma karsth putrajam cintam 
vilapam Sokajam tyaja 
evam prayo nrnam yonir 
nasti kalasya samsthitih 


“Do not plunge into the pool of lamentation on account of the loss 
of your children. Give up your grief and lamentation. Such reverses 


are inevitable in human society. It is impossible to evade or destroy 


the influence of time.” 
Text 56 
esa te padayor murdhna 
putravat tava devaki 
mad-gatas tyajyatam roso 
janamy apakrtam tvayr 


“O Devaki, I fall down at your feet. I know that I have committed a 
grave offense and so, kindly give up your anger upon me.” 


Text 57 
ity uktavantam kamsam sa 
devaki vakyam abravit 
sasru-purna-mukha dina 
bhartaram upaviksati 


uttisthottistha vatseti 
kamsam mateva jalpati 


While Karnsa was speaking in this way, tears glided down Devaki’s 
cheeks. She looked at her husband and then began to speak to 
Karhsa, like a mother. “O my son, get up! get up!” 


Text 58 
devaky uvdca 
mamagrato hata garbha 
ye tuaya kama-rupina 
karanam tvam na vai putra 
krtanto ‘py atra karanam 


SRI VISNU-PARVA 


Devaki said: “O child, you are capable of assuming any form you desire 
I do not consider you to be the only cause of my children’s death, I 
know that they were killed under the influence of the time factor.” 


Text 59 
garbha-kartanam etan me 
sahaniyam tvaya krtam 
padayoh patata murdhna 
svam ca karma jugupsata 


“By your act of falling down at my feet while condemning your 
actions, f will somehow manage to tolerate the unbearable pain that 
I have received as a result of your killing my sons.” 


Text 60 
garbhe ca nwyato mrtyurbalye 
‘pi na nivartate 
yuvapi mrtyor vasagah 
sthaviro mrta eva tu 


“People sometimes die within the womb, some die in their childhood, 
young people are also seen to embrace death, and old people are 
almost as good as dead.” 


Text 61 
kala-pakvam idam sarvam 
hetu-bhitas tu tuad-vidhah 
ajate darsanam nasti 
yatha vadyus tathaiva ca 


“It is the time factor that annihilates the entire creation. People like 
you are only an instrument. An unborn child cannot be seen, just as 
air cannot be seen, although it exists.” 


Text 62 
jaio ‘py ajatatam yati 
vidhatra yatra niyate 
tad gaccha putra ma te bhiun 


mad-gatam mrtyu-karanam 


KAMSA KILLS THE SONS OF DEVAK! 5s 


ee) 


“After death, a person will cease to be seen and vanish. He will gO 
wherever the creator takes him. Therefore, O son, you may go now. 
Do not worry about my feelings of distress due to the loss of my 
sons.” 


Text 63 
mrtyuna prahrie purvam 
Sseso hetuh pravartate 
vidhina purva-drstena 
praja-sargena tatvatah 


“First, death strikes, and then the cause of death displays its prowess. 
Death can occur due to prejudice, fate, unfructified karma, time, 
circumstances, the parents’ habit of eating abominable food, and 
other natural causes.” 


Texts 64-65 
vaisampayana uvaca — 
mata-pitros tu karyena 

janmatas tupapadyate 
nisamya devaki-vakyam 
sa kamsah svam nivesanam 


pravivesa sasamrabdho 
dahyamanena cetasa 

krtye pratihate dino 
jagama vimana bhrsam 


Vaisampayana said: O Janmejaya, upon hearing these words of 
Devaki, Karhsa became very displeased with himself because of his 
failure. He went back to his residence in a tense mood. He was so 
disappointed because his plan did not work that he quietly left and 
returned home. 


Thus ends the translation of the fourth chapter of the Visnu 
Parva of Sri Harivaméa. 


CHAPTER FIVE 


Vasudeva Advises Nanda to Reside at Vraja 


Text 1 
vaisampayana uvaca — 
prag eva vasudevas tu 

vraje Susrava rohinim 
prajatam putram evagre 


candrat kantataradnanam 


Vaisampayana said: O Janmejaya, Vasudeva had sent Rohini to Vraja, 
even before she had delivered her child. On realizing that she gave 
birth to a moon-like son, Vasudeva approached Nanda, who came to 
Mathura to pay the tax, and said, “My dear friend! You, along with 
your good wife, Yasoda, should soon return to Vraja.” 


Text 2 
sa nanda-gopam tvaritah 
provaca Subhaya gira 
gacchanaya sahawva tvam 


vrajam eva yasodaya 


“O gentle one, after completing your two sons’ head-shaving 
ceremony, and other rituals, in Gokula, you should go Vraja and 
raise and nourish our children carefully.” 


Texts 3-7 
tatra tau darakau gatva 
jata-karmadibhir gunath 
yojayitua vraje tata 
samvardhaya yatha-sukham 
rauhineyam ca putram me 
pariraksa sisum vraje 
aham vacyo bhavisyami 
pitr-paksesu putrinam 


DD 


56 


Sri VISNU-PARVA 


yo ‘ham ekasya putrasya 
na pasyami Sisor mukham 
hryate hi balai prajna 
prajnasyapi sato mama 


asmaddhi me bhayam kamsan 
nirghrnad vai sisor vadhe 

tad-yatha rauhineyam tuam 
nanda-gopa mamatmajam 


gopayasi yatha tata 
tatvanvesi tatha kurt 

vighna hi bahavo loke 
balan uttrdsayanti hi 


“My dear brother, please take care of my son, who was born from 
the womb of Rohini, at Vraja. I will certainly be condemned by 
everyone because I could not see the face of my only son even once. 
Although I know that happiness and distress, or loss and gain, are 
under the control of destiny, ever-existing fear forcibly takes away 
the intelligence of learned persons like me. I am always afraid that 
merciless Karnsa might kill this son as well.” 


“Therefore O Nanda, you should take special care of this son of 


~ Rohini. There are child-killers lurking here and there and so, give 


Him protection as best as you can. There are always many dangers, 
especially for children.” 


Text 8 
Sa ca putro mama jyayan 
kaniyams ca tavapy ayam 
ubhav api samam namna 
niriksasva yatha-sukham | 
“My son is elder and your son is younger. You should happily a 


e 
both of Them with equal vision. Just as Their names bear the sa™ 
meaning, you should display affection to Them equally. ‘ 


VASUDEVA ADVISES NANDA TO RESIDE AT VRAJA 


Text 9 
vardhamanav ubhav etau 
samana-vayasau yatha 
Sobhetam go-vraje tasmin 
nanda-gopa tatha kuru 


“O cowherd, Nanda, the conditions of both are similar. Try and 
make sure that They nicely grow up together under your care and 
affection in Vraja.” 


Text 10 
balye kelt-kilah sarvo 
balye muhyatt manavah 
balye candatamah sarvas 
tatra yatna-paro bhava 


“During childhood, people take pleasure in playing and jumping. 
At that time, they remain bewildered. They do not possess the sense 
of what is good or what is bad. They get upset easily. So, knowing all 
these facts, you should take care of Them nicely.” 


Text 11 
na ca vrndavane karyo 
gavam ghosah kathaficana 
bhetavyam tatra vasatah 
kesinah papa-darsinah 


“Never think that any arrangement for the cows you make in 


Vrndavana is secure. You should always guard yourself from the 
sinful demon, Keéi.” 


Text 12 
sarisrpebhyah kitebhyah 
Sakunibhyas tathaiva ca 
gosthesu gobhyo vatsebhyo 
raksyau te dvav imau sist 


or 


SRI VISNU-PARVA 


“You should carefully protect these two children, Krsnaand Balar4 
from snakes, scorpions, insects, worms, and birds in the fores 
well as from the cows and calves in the pasturing ground.” 


Ma, 
t, as 


Text 13 
nanda-gopa gata rairth 
Sighra-yano vrajasugah 
ime tuam vyaharantiva 
paksinah savya-daksinah 


“O cowherd, Nanda, it is late at night. You should ride a fast- 
moving vehicle and leave this place immediately. It seems that these 
scurrying birds around us are signaling you to depart.” | 


Text 14 
rahasyam vasudevena 
so ‘nujnato mahadtmana 
yanam yasodaya sardham 
aruroha mudanvitah 


After exalted Vasudeva spoke these confidential words, Nanda, 
along with his wife, Yasoda, happily sat down on their chariot. 


Text 15 
kumara-skandha-vahyayam 
Sibtkayam samahitah 
samvesayamasa sisum 
Sayaniyam mahamatth 
To protect the two children, the most intelligent Nanda Maharaja 
took a palanquin, so that They could safely sleep in it. 


Text 16 
jagama ca viviktena 
sitalanila-sarpina 
bahidakena margena 
yamunda-tira-gamina 


VASUDEVA ADVISES NANDA TO RESIDE AT VRATA 


Nanda and Yasoda took the safe and solitary road by the side of 
the Yamuna and left. It was very pleasant as cool breezes from the 


Yamuna gently blew. 


Text 17 
sa dadarsa sSubhe dese 
govardhana-samipage 
yamuna-tira-sambaddham 
Stta-maruta-sevitam 


When Nanda reached somewhere near Govardhana Hill, he saw a 
beautiful place that was very suitable for the cows to graze. This 
pasturing ground was adjacent to the bank of Yamuna, where cool 


breezes always blew. 


Text 18 
virutasvapadai ramyam 
lata-valli-maha-drumam 
gobhis trna-vilagnabhih 
syandantibhir alankrtam 


The beauty of this place was enhanced by the many creatures found 
there, making their various sounds. There were many trees and 
creepers at that place and it was decorated with many cows that 
were grazing and whose milk bags were full of milk. 


Text 19 
samapracaram ca gavam 
samatirtha-alasayam 
vrsanam skandha-ghatats ca 
visanodghrsta-padapam 


This particular pasturing ground was even and thus suitable for the 
cows. There were nice reservoirs of water nearby. The bark of the 
many trees at that place fell off due to the rubbing of the bulls and 
oxen with their bodies and horns. 


59 


60 


Sri VISNU-PARVA 
Text 20 
bhasamisadanusrtath syenais 
camisa-grdhnubhth 
srgala-mrga-simhais ca 
vasa-medasibhir vrtam 


Many foxes and jackals, who were fond of eating flesh, also lived 
there. There were also many hawks, vultures, leopards, tigers ang 
lions. The entire forest was infested with various types of animals 


Text 21 
sarditla-sabdabhirutam 
nana-paksi-samakulam 
suadu-vrksa-phalam ramyam 
paryapta-trna-virudham 


The forest would vibrate with the sound of a lion’s roaring. The 
entire forest was filled with many kinds of birds. All the trees there 
were laden with sweet and tasty fruit. There was an abundance of 


fresh, green grass, creepers and bushes. 


Text 22 
go-vrajam gorutam ramyam 
gopa-nariblir avrtam | 
hambha-ravais ca vatsanam 
sarvatah krta-nihsvanam 


The entire pasturing ground was saturated with the sounds made 
by the cows and calves. It looked especially enchanting because a 
entire tract of land was filled with cowherd girls. The bellowing © 


the calves made the scene wonderful. 


Text 23 
Sakatavarta-vipulam 
hantakivata-sankulam 
paryantesv Gurtam vanyair 
brhadbhih patitair drumaih 


VASUDEVA ADVISES NANDA TO RESIDE AT VRAJA 


The land appeared vast as it was surrounded by rows of bullock 
carts. Beyond the carts were bushes and thorny trees in the four 
directions. The boundary was marked by huge trees that had fallen 
down in the forest. 


Text 24 
vatsanam ropitath kilair 
damabhis ca vibhisitam 
karisakirna-vasudham 


katacchanna-kuti-matham 


There were many wooden pillars and pegs placed here and there, 
which were used to tie the cows and calves. This increased the 
beauty of the place. There were heaps of dry cow dung stacked here 
and there. Sleeping and sitting mats made of straw were also seen 
everywhere. 


Text 25 
ksemya-pracara-bahulam 
hrsta-pustayanavrtam 
damani-pasa-bahulam 
gargarodgara-mhsvanam 


There was a lot of open space and by walking constantly, the 
inhabitants of that place were healthy and strong. In that place, there 
was an abundance of rope. There were also many pots, grinding 
stones, and other implements needed for churning butter. 


Text 26 
takra-nihsrava-bahulam 
dadhi-mandardra-mritikam 
manthana-valayodgarair 
gopinam janita-suanam 


There were many narrow drains which were used to clear the excess 
of butter milk. Indeed, the ground was moistened by the thick top 
layer of yogurt. When the gopis churned butter, their bangles made 
a sweet sound that filled the four directions. 


61 


62 


SRI VISNU-PARVA 


Text 27 
kaka-paksa-dharair bdlair 
gopala-kridanakulam 
sargala-dvara-govatam 
madhye go-sthana-sankulam 


Many young cowherd boys played in that forest while decoratin 
their heads with peacock feathers. The whole area was filled with 
the residences of the cowherd men. There were many cowsheds 
whose doors were made of wood. In each cowshed, innumerable 


cows could be kept. 


Text 28 
sarpisd pacyamanena 
surabhi-krta-marutam 
nila-pitambarabhis 
ca taruntbhir alankrtam 


The air of that place was permeated by the sweet aroma of clarified 
butter. It was decorated with many young cowherd girls, who were 
beautifully dressed in blue or yellow garments. 


Texts 29-31 
vanya-puspavatamsabhir 
gopa-kanydabhir dvurtam 
Strobhir dhrta-kumbhabhir 
baddhair agra-stanambaraih 


yamuna-tira-margena 
jala-haribhir aurtam 

sa tatra pravisan hrsto 
go-vrajam gopanaditam 


pratyudgato gopa-vrddhath 
stribhir vrddhabhir eva ca 

nivesam rocayamasa 
panwvarte sukhasraye 


VASUDEVA ADVISES NANDA TO RESIDE AT VRAJA 


The gopis of Vraja wandered about, carrying pitchers on their heads. 
Their ears were adorned with earrings made of forest flowers. Their 
breasts were covered with fine cloth. They carried water from the 
Yamuna throughout the day. When Maharaja Nanda entered such 
a beautiful place, which was filled with the sounds of the cowherd 
boys, he became extremely happy. The elderly cowherd men and 
women came forward and greeted him. Upon seeing this beautiful 
place, Nanda immediately made up his mind to make his residence 


there. 


Text 32 
s@ yatra rohini devi 
vasudeva-sukhavaha 
tatra tam bala-suryabham 
krsnam gudham nyavesayat 


Nanda slowly went to the house of Rohini, who gave pleasure to 
Vasudeva, and placed baby Krsna, who lived in Vraja incognito, and 
who appeared as brilliant as the sun, by the side of Balarama. 


Thus ends the translation of the fifth chapter of the Visnu Parva of 
Sri Harivamsa. 


63 


CHAPTER Stix 


The Killing of Sakatasura and Putana 


Text 1 
vaisampayana uvdaca 
tatra tasyasatah kalah 
sumahan aty avartata 
go-vraje nanda-gopasya 
ballavatvam prakurvatah 


Vaisampayana said: O Janmejaya, Maharaja Nanda lived for a long 
time in Vraja while engaging in his profession as a cowherd. 


Text 2 
darakau krta-namanau 
vavrdhate sukham ca tau 
Jyesthah sankarsano nama 


kaniyan krsna eva tu 


At first, he arranged the name-giving ceremony of his two sons, who 
joyfully spent their days together in Vrndavana. The elder son was 


named Sankarsana, or Balarama, and the younger son was named 
Krsna. 


Text 3 
megha-krsnas tu krsno ‘bhid 
dehantara-gato harih 
vyavardhata gavam madhye 
sdgarasya tvambudah 


The Supreme Personality of Godhead personally appeared as 
Krsna. His complexion was the color of a dark cloud. As clouds keep 
increasing above the ocean, Krsna grew up in the midst of the cows, 
day by day. 


Text 4 
Sakatasya tu adhah suptam 
kadacit putra-grddhini 


BB 


66 


SRI VISNU-PARVA 


yasoda tam samutsrjya 
jagama yamunadm nadim 
Mother Yasoda had intense attachment for Krsna. It so happened 
that one day, as the child, Krsna, was sleeping under ds dchaie: « 
cart, mother Yasoda left Him in that condition and went to bathe ia 
the Yamuna. 


Text 5 
sisu-lilam tatah kurvan 
sa hasta-caranau-ksipan 
ruroda madhuram krsnah 
padav tirdhvam prasarayan 


This made Krsna angry. Displaying His childhood pastimes, Krsna 
began to throw His hands and legs into the air while weeeping in a 
sweet voice. 


Text 6 
sa tatraikena padena 
Sakatam paryavartayat 
nyubjam payodharakanksi 
cakara ca ruroda ca 


In an angry mood, Krsna kicked the cart under which He was 
sleeping. As a result, the cart immediately turned upside down with 
a loud sound. He did this because He was hungry and after doing 
so, He began to cry. 


Text 7 
etasminn antare prapta 
yasoda bhaya-viklava 
snata prasravadigdhangi 
baddha-vatseva saurabhi 


' : . fear 
In the meantime, mother Yagoda returned after bathing with 4 


; jmbs 
in her mind. Milk flowed from her breasts and as a result, her! as a 

z is t 
became soaked. She was anxious to breast-feed her child, jus 
cow becomes anxious to feed her calf. 


THE KILLING OF SAKATASURA AND PUTANA 


Text 8 
s@ dadarsa viparyas tam 
Sakatam vayuna vina 
haheti krtua tuanta 
darakam jagrhe tada 


She was amazed to see the cart lying upside down without any trace 
of a storm. She said, “Alas! Alas! How did this happen?” Saying this, 
she quickly picked up Krsna and placed Him on her lap. 


Text 9 
na sa bubodha tattvena 
Sakatam parnivartitam 
svasti me darakdayeti 
prita-bhita ca sabhavat 


She could not understand how the cart had overturned. She simply 
prayed to the Supreme Lord for her child’s well-being, becoming 
fully absorbed in affection for her baby, Krsna. At the same time, 
she was frightened, wondering whether Krsna was hurt or not. 


Text 10 
kim tu vaksyati te putra 
pita parama-kopanah 
tvayy adhah-sakate supte 
akasmac ca vilodite 


Yasoda looked at Krsna and said, “My dear son, Your father will be 
very angry. You were sleeping under this cart and suddenly it broke. 
Now, I don’t know what Your father will say to me when he comes 
to know of this.” 


Text 11 
kim me snanena duhsnanam 
kim ca me gamane nadim 
paryas te Sakate putra ya 
tuam pasyamy apavrtam 


67 


68 


SRI ViSNU-PARVA 

“O child, what would I have gained by bathing if something had 
happened to You? Why did I go to the bank of the river? When | 
returned, I saw the cart lying upside down and You were sleeping 


under the open sky.” 
Text 12 
etasminn antare gobhir 
djagama vanecarah 
hasaya-vasasi bibhran 
nanda-gopo vrajantikam 
At what very moment, Nanda Maharaja, along with the cows and 
calves, returned home from the pasturing ground. He was dressed 
in a saffron dhoti and cadara. 


Text 13 


sa dadarsa viparyas tam 
bhinna-bhanda-ghati-ghatam 

apastadhur vibhinnaksam 
sakatam cakra-maulinam 


Upon entering the courtyard, he saw the cart turned upside down 
and all the pots, pitchers, and other utensils broken. The axle of the 
cart was broken in half and the yoke was lying at a distance. 


Text 14 
bhitas tvaritam agatya 
sahasa sasru-locanah 
api me svastt putrayety 
asakrd vacanam vadan 


When Nanda saw this, he became extremely frightened and hurriedly 
went inside to see what had happened. Tears began to flow from his 


eyes as he said to himself, “Is my son alright?” 


Text 15 
pibantam stanam dlaksya 
putram svastho ‘bravit punah 


THE KILLING OF SAKATASURA Anp PUTANA 69 


ursa-yuddham vind kena 


paryastam Sakatam mama 


Only when he saw his son drinking His mother’s breast-milk did he 
regain his composure. He asked Yasoda, “Was there a fight between 
two or more bulls? Otherwise, how did this cart overturn?” 


Texts 16-17 
praty uvaca yasoda tam 
bhita gadgada-bhasini 
na vyanamy aham kena 


sakatam parwvarititam 


aham nadim gata saumya 
caila-praksalanarthini 
agata ca viparyas tam 


apasyam sakatam bhuvi 


With a fearful heart, Yasoda replied with a choked voice, “My dear 
lord, I do not know who has put this cart upside down. O handsome 
one, I went to the Yamuna to wash clothes. When I returned home, 
I saw the cart lying upside down.” 


Texts 18-21 
tayoh kathayator evuam 
abruvams tatra darakah 
anena sisuna yanam 


etat padena loditam 


asmabhih sampatadbhis ca 
drstam etad yad rcchaya 
nanda-gopas tu tac chrutua 


vismayam paramam yayau 


prahrstas caiva bhitas ca 
kim etad iti cintayan 
na ca te sraddadhur gopah 


sarve manusa-buddhayah 


70 


Srl VISNU-PARVA 
ascaryam itt te sarve 
vismayotphulla-locanah 
sve sthane sakatam sthapya 
cakra-bandham akarayan 


While Nanda and Yasoda were speaking in this way, the young 
cowherd boys who were playing nearby came and said, “O father, 
s turned this cart upside down by kicking His feet. We 


your son ha ; ; 
a loud noise and saw it with our 


came rushing here after hearing 
own eyes.” 

After hearing these words of the cowherd boys, Nanda Maharaja 
became struck with wonder. At first he became very happy but later, 
he thought, “What is this? How did this happen?” Thinking in this 


way, he became somewhat fearful. 


The other elderly cowherd men did not believe the boys’ story 
because they considered them to be ordinary children. And yet, 
they were very surprised by this incident. Indeed, their eyes flashed 
due to amazement. Thereafter, they put the cart back upright and 
tried to put the wheels back on. 


Texts 22-23 
vaisampayana uvaca — 
kasyacit tv atha kalasya 

Sakuni vesa-dharini 
dhairt kamsasya bhojasya 
puiianett parisruta 


putana nama sakuni 
ghora prani-bhayankari 
agjagamarddha-ratre vai 
paksau krodhad vidhunvati 
t, one 


Vaisampayana said: O Janmejaya, some time after this jnciden 
e O 


night, a witch came to Vrndavana in an angry mood in the gol 
eee bird, flapping her wings. She was the sister of Karnsa, ' 
“ing of the Bhoja dynasty, and her name was Putana. This for midabl 
witch was terrifying for all living entities. 


THE KILLING OF SAKATASURA AND PUTANA 


Text 24 
tato ‘rdha-ratra-samaye 
putana praty adrsyata 
vyaghra-gambhira-nirghosam 
vyaharanti punah punah 


She approached Vraja in the dead of night and began to scream so 
loudly that the noise resembled the roaring of a lion. 


Text 25 
nililye Sakatasyakse 
prasravotpida-varsini 
dadau sianam ca krsnaya 
tasmin supte jane nisi 


She then assumed the form of a woman and hid herself under the 
axle of a cart. Her breasts were so full of milk that she felt uneasy 
with pain. When everyone fell asleep that night, she stealthily went 
before Krsna and began to breast-feed Him. 


Text 26 
tasyah stanam papau krsnah 
pranath saha vinadya ca 
chinna-stani tu sahasa 
papaia sakuni bhuvi 


Krsna, in a playful manner, not only drank her breast milk but also 
sucked out her life-air. That fearful witch screamed in pain and 
suddenly fell down to the ground, manifesting her original form. 


Text 27 
tena sabdena vitrastas 
tato bubudhire bhayat 
sa nanda-gopo gopa vai 
yasoda ca suviklava 
Because of her screaming, everyone, including Nanda Maharaja, 


Yasoda and the other cowherd men and women, woke up with great 
fear in their minds. 


71 


72 SRI VISNU-PARVA 


Text 28 
te tam apasyan patitam 
visanjnam vipayodharam 
 piittanam patitam bhimau 

vajreneva vidantam 
They saw the formidable witch, Putana, lying on the ground 
unconscious, with her breasts bitten off. It appeared that she has 
been attacked by a thunderbolt. : 


Text 29 
idam kim tv iti samtrastah 
hasyedam karma cety apt 
nanda-gopam puraskrtya 
gopas te paryavarayan 


“What is this? Who has done this?” Speaking in this way, the greatly 
frightened cowherd men stood around Putana, keeping Nanda in 
front. 


Text 30 
nadhy agacchanta ca tada 
hetum tatra kadacana 
ascaryam ascaryam ttt 
bruvanto ‘nuyayur grhan 


They could not imagine how such a thing could happen. “This is 
very strange, this is unbelievable.” Saying this, they returned to 
their houses. 


Text 31 
gatesu tesu gopesu 
vismitesu yatha-grham 
yasodam nanda-gopas tu 
papraccha gata-sambhramah 
yn and women 


After some time, when all the assembled cowherd me Yasoda: 


had left, Nanda, who was still struck with wonder, spoke to 


THE KILLING OF SAKATASURA AND PUTANA 


Text 32 
ko yam vidhir na janami 
vismayo me mahan ayam 
putrasya me bhayam tivram 
bhirutvam samupagatam 


“What kind ofarrangement of providence is this? Idonot understand. 
| am very surprised by this incident. There is always danger to my 
son’s life, so that we are always filled with fear.” 


Text 33 
yaSoda tu abravid bhita 
narya janami kim tv idam 
darakena sahanena 
supta sabdena bodhita 


Upon hearing these words, Yasoda became more and more fearful. 
She said, “O gentle one, I also do not know what is going on. I 
was sleeping with the child and I woke up when I heard the witch 
screaming.” | 


Text 34 
yasodayam ajanantyam 
nanda-gopah sabandhavah 
kamsad bhayam cakarogram 


vismayam ca jagama ha 


When Yasoda thus expressed her ignorance about this incident, 
Nanda Maharaja, along with the other cowherd men and women, 


developed a great fear of Karnsa. As a result, their minds became > 
filled with anxiety. 


Thus ends the translation of the sixth chapter of the Visnu Parva of 
Srt Harivamsa, - 


CHAPTER SEVEN 


Krsna Learns to Crawl 
The Uprooting of the Yamala-arjuna Trees 


Text 1 
vaisampayana uvaca — 
kale gacchati tau saumyau 

darakau krta-namakau 
krsna-sankarsanau cobhau 
nnginau samapadyatam 


Vaisampayana said: O Janmejaya, after some time had passed in 
this way, the two handsome boys, Krsna and Balarama, began to 
craw] in the courtyard of Nanda Maharaja. 


Text 2 
tav anyonya-gatau balau 
balyad evaikatam gatau 
eha-murti-dharau kantau 
bala-candrarka-varcasau 


From the very beginning of Their lives, Krsna and Balarama were 
like one soul with two bodies. Everything about Them was identical. 
They appeared like the young sun and young moon. 


Text 3 
eha-nirmana-nirmuktav 
ehaSayyasanasanau 
eka-vesa-dharav ekam 
pusyamanau sisu-vratam 


They were nondifferent from one another and They shared 
everything, including Their bed, seat, and food. They both dressed 
in the same manner and displayed similar childish proclivities. 


75 


76 


SRI VISNU-PARVA 


Text 4 
eha-karyantara-gatav 
eka-dehau dvidha-kriau 
eka-caryau maha-viryav 
ekasya Sisutam gatau 


They both were engaged in the same mission, and They appeared as 
one, although They had separate bodies. Their daily activities Were 
similar. These two most powerful boys were the sons of the same 
father. 


Text 5 
eka-pramanau lokanam 
deva-vrttanta-manusau 
krisnasya jagato gopau 
samorttau gopa-darakau 


In the vision of the people, Their height was similar. They appeared 
in the human form to carry out the mission of annihilating the 
demons and re-establishing the principles of religion. Although 
They were the protectors of the whole world, They appeared as 
cowherd boys. 


Text 6 
anyonya-vyatisaktabhih 
kridabhir abhisobhitau 
anyonya-kirana-grastau 
candra-stryavi vambare 


The two brothers always played together in complete harmony, Just 
as the rays of the sun and moon merge together. 


Text 7 
visarpaniau tu sarvatra sarpa- 
bhoga-bhujav ubhau 
rejaiuh pamsudigdhangau 
drptau kalabhakav iva 


THE UPROOTING OF THE YAMALA-ARJUNA TREES 


Their arms looked like snakes. With the help of their soft hands, 
They moved around. When They crawled in the courtyard, Their 
bodies became smeared with dust, making them appear like proud 


baby elephants. 


Text 8 
kvacid bhasma-pradiptangau 
Rarisa-proksitau kvacit 
tau tatra paryadhav etam 
kumarav iva pavaki 


Sometimes, Their bodily limbs became covered with ashes and 
sometimes, with cow dung. When They ran around wildly, They 
looked like the two sons of the fire-god, known as Sakha and 
Visakha. 
Text 9 
kvacy janubhir udghrstaih 
sarpamanau virejatuh 
kridantau vatsa-sadlasu akrd 


digdhanga-murdhajau 


They looked very enchanting as They crawled. Sometimes, Krsna 
and Balarama would go to the cowshed and play with the calves. As 
a result, Their bodies became covered with cow dung. 


Text 10 
Susubhate sriya justavu 
ananda-yananau pituh 
janam ca viprakurvanau 
vihasantau kvacit kvacit 


The two brothers were endowed with immense opulence, and 
appeared matchless. By Their behavior, They gave great pleasure to 
Nanda and Yasoda. Sometimes, due to Their childish proclivities, 
They would perform some mischief and laugh loudly, enjoying 
Their actions. 


78 


Sri ViSNU-PARVA 
Text 11 
tau tatra kautuhalinau 
mirdhaja-vyakuleksanau 
rejatus candra-vadanau 
darakau sukumarakau 


They spent most of Their time playing and joking. They had long 
curly hair, which would fall upon Their eyes and thus make Them 
more restless. Their faces looked exactly like the moon and SO, They 


were lovely and handsome. 


Text 12 
atiprasaktau tau drstua 
sarva-vraja-vicadrinau 
nasakat tau varayitum 
nanda-gopah sudurmadau 


They wandered about Vraja, enjoying various sporting activities. 
Their father, Nanda Maharaja, could not check Them, despite 
seeing Their whimsical behavior. 


Texts 13-14 
tato yasoda sankruddha 
krsnam kamala-locanam 
anayya Sakati-mile 
bhartsayantt punah punah 


damna caivodare baddhva 
praty abandhad ulikhale 

yadi Sakto ‘si gaccheti tam 
uktva karma sakarot 


One day, mother Yagoda became very angry with Krsna, whose oF" 
resembled lotus flowers. She took Him by the side of a i i 
mortar and began to chastise Him severely while binding Him i 
rope to the grinding mortar. She challenged, “Now, let me ee 5 
You move around.” Saying this, she returned to her mou 
chores. 


THE UPROOTING OF THE YAMALA-ARJUNA TREES 


Texts 15-16 
vyagrayam tu yasodayam 
ninjagama tato ‘nganat 
sisu-lilam tatah kurvan 
krsno vismapayan vrajam 


so ‘nganan nihsrtah krsnah 
karsamana uliikhalam 
yamalabhyam pravrddhabhyam 


arjunabhyam caran vane 


madhyannis cakrama tayoh 
karsamana ulikhalam 


As soon as mother Yasoda left, naughty Krsna began to relish His 
childhood pastimes. He crawled on the ground, dragging the mortar 
towards the courtyard. There were a pair of tall trees, named Yamala 
and Arjuna, standing in the courtyard. Krsna purposely pulled the 
mortar in between the two giant trees. 


Text 17 
tat tasya karsato baddham 
tiryag-gatam ulukhalam 
lagnam tabhyam samiulabhyam 
arjunabhyam cakarsa ca 


As Krsna crawled, dragging the wooden mortar through the twin 
trees, the mortar stuck horizontally between them. With great 
strength, Krsna pulled the rope that was tied to the mortar. 


Texts 18-20 
tav arjunau krsyamanau 
tena balena ramhasa 
samila-vitapau bhagnau 
sa tu madhye jahasa vai 


nidarsanartham gopanam 
divyam sva-balam asthitah 


79 


0 SRE VISNU-PARVA 


tad-dama tasya balasya 
prabhavad abhavad drdham 


yamuna-tira-margastha 
gopyas tam dadrsuh sisum 
krandantyo vismayantyas ca 
_ yasodam yayur anganah 


As soon as Krsna pulled, the two trees, with all their branches ang 
leaves, fell down with a great sound. Just to display Him immense 
prowess to the residents of Vraja, Krsna stood between the twin trees 
and laughed. The rope had become stronger because of Krsna’s 
influence. When the gopis, who were on their way to the Yamuna, 
saw Krsna in such a situation, they immediately rushed to mother 
Yasoda, being highly astonished. 


Texts 21-22 
tas tu sambhranta-vadana 
yasodam tcur anganah 
ehy agaccha yasode tuam 
sambhramat kim vilambase 


yau tav arjuna-vrksau tu 
vraje satyopayacanau 

putrasyopan tav etau 
patitau te mahiruhau 


Their faces pale and dry, the cowherd girls said, “O mother Yasoda, 
come quickly, come quickly. Do not waste time. The two giant 
anjuna trees that fulfilled our desires whenever we prayed to them: 
fell upon your two sons.” 


Text 23 
drdhena damna tatraiva 
baddho vatsa ivodare 
jahasa vrksayor madhye 
tava putrah sa balakah 


THE UPROOTING OF THE YAMALA-ARJUNA TREES 


“lust like a tied calf, your son, whose belly was bound by strong 
ropes, 1s standing in the middle of the twin trees and laughing.” 


Text 24 
uttistha gaccha durmedhe 
mudhe pandita-manini 
putram anaya jivantam 
muktam mrtyu-mukhad iva 


“O innocent Yasoda, O ignorant one, you consider yourself wise. 
Just get up and come with us. Quickly take your son, who has just 
returned from the jaws of death, home.” 


Text 25 
sa bhita sahasotthaya 
hahakaram prakurvati 
tam desam agamad yatra 
patitau tav ubhau drumau | 


Mother Yasoda hurriedly got up with great fear and rushed to where 
her beloved son, Krsna, had felled the twin trees. 


Text 26 
sa dadarsa tayor madhye 
drumayor atmajam sisum 
damna nibaddham udare 
karsamanam ulikhalam 


Mother Yasoda saw her son standing between the twin trees. He was 
pulling the rope that was tied to the wooden mortar. 


Text 27 
sa-gopi-gopa-vrddhas ca 
samuvaca vrajas tada 
pary agacchanta te drastum 
gopesu mahad adbhutam 


All the elderly cowherd men and women of Vraja began to discuss 
this incident. People from the four directions came running to see 
what had happened. 


8) 


82 Sri VISNU-PARVA 


Text 28 
jajalpus te yatha-kamam 
gopa vana-vicarinah 
henemau patitau vrksau 
ghosasyayatanopamau 


The cowherd men, who were fond of living in the forest, arrived 
there and said, “Alas! These twin trees were like two temples for the 
residents of Vraja. Who has uprooted them?” 


Text 29 
vind vatam vind varsam 
vidyut-prapatanam vind 
ving hasti-krtam dosa 


kenemau patitau drumau 


“There was neither any storm nor any heavy rain, nor was there any 
lightning in Gokula. No elephant has come here and pushed the 
trees with its body. How then did the twin trees fall down?” 


Text 30 
aho bata na sobhetam 
vimulav arjundv imau 
bhiimau nipatitau vrksau 
vitoyau jaladdav iva 


“Alas! The twin trees were completely uprooted, making them fall to 


the ground. Now, these trees look dry and dead, like clouds without 
water.” 


Text 31 
yadimau ghosa-racitau 
ghosa-kalyana-karinau 
nanda-gopa prasannau te 
drumau evam gatav apr 


yac ca te darako mukto 
vipulabhyam api ksitau 


THE UPROOTING OF THE YAMALA-~ARJUNA TREES 


“OQ Nanda Maharaja, if these twin trees were planted here in Gokula, 
and if they really were beneficial to all the inhabitants of Vraja then 
know for certain that even today, they are happy with you because 
they spared the life of your son.” 


Text 32 
autpatikam idam ghose 
_trtiyam vartate tu tha 
pitandya vinasas ca 
drumayoh Ssakatasya ca 
“This is the third calamity that has occurred in Gokula. 
Putana was killed, the cart collapsed, and now these trees 
were uprooted.” 
Text 33 
asmin sthane ca vaso ‘yam 
ghosasyasya na yujyate 
utpata hy atra drsyante 
kathayanto na sobhanam 


“Therefore, we think that we should not live here any longer. This 
place is not safe anymore. We have witnessed too many untoward 
incidents recently.” 


Texts 34-36 
nanda-gopas tu sahasa 
muktva krsnam ulakhalat 
niesya canke suciram 
mrtam punar ivagatam 


natrpyat preksamano vat 
krsnam kamala-locanam 

tato yasodam garhan vai 
nanda-gopo vivesa ha 


sa ca gopa-janah sarvo 
vrajam eva jagama ha 

Sa ca tenatva namna tu 
krsno vai-dama-bandhanat 


83 


84 


SRI ViSNU-PARVA 


goshe damodara iti 
gopibhih parigiyate 


Nanda hurriedly freed Krsna from the ropes that were tied to the 
wooden mortar and embraced Him tghtly with great affection, 
as if He had just returned from the jaws of death. He lookeq at 
the lotus-like face of Krsna, again and again, but could not fee] 
satiation. Nanda chastised Yasoda severely when he returned home. 
Thereafter, all the Vrajabvasis returned to their respective homes, 


Text 37 
etad ascaryabhutam hi 
balasyasid vicestitam 
krsnasya bharata-srestha 
ghose nivasatas tada 


Because of being bound around the udara, or belly, by dama, or 
ropes, Krsna became known as Damodara. The gopis of Vraja began 
to sing this pastime of Krsna with great joy. 


Thus ends the translation of the seventh chapter of the Visnu Parva 
of Sri Harivaméa. 


CHAPTER EIGHT 
Krsna’s Childhood Pastimes 


Text 1 
vaisampayana uvaca — 
evam tau balyam uttirnau 
krsna-sankarsandav ubhau 
tasminn eva vraja-sthane 


sapta-varsau babhivatuh 


Vaisampayana said: O Janmeyjaya, in this way, Krsna and Balarama 
began to grow, day by day, in Vraja. Gradually, They became seven- 
year-old boys. 


Text 2 
nila-pitambara-dharau 
pita-svetanulepanau 
babhivatur vatsa-palau 
kaka-paksa-dharav ubhau 


Balarama would dress in blue garments and Krsna would dress in 
yellow garments. Their bodies were decorated with yellow and white 
sandalwood paste, respectively. Their heads were decorated with 
peacock feathers and They passed Their days, tending the calves. 


Text 3 
parna-vadyam Sruti-sukham 
vaddayantau varananau 
Susubhate vana-gatau 


irisirsav va pannagau 


The faces of Krsna and Balarama was transcendentally enchanting. 
They would blow whistles made from palm leaves and when They 


did so, holding the leaves in Their two hands to Their mouths, They 
appeared like three-headed snakes. 


86 


SRI ViISNU-PARVA 


Text 4 
mayurangada-karnau tu 
pallavapida-dharinau 
vanamala-kuloraskau 
drumapotav ivodgatau 


Their armlets and earrings were made of peacock feathers and 
They wore turbans made of leaves. Their chests was adorned with 
garlands of forest flowers. In this way, They looked like two newly- 
grown plants. 


Text 5 
aravinda-kriapidau 
rayu-yajnopavitinau 
sasikya-tumba-karakau 


gopa-venu-pravadakau 


Their heads were decorated with lotus flowers and They had sacred 
threads draped over Their shoulders. They both played Their flutes, 
in the company of the cowherd boys. They carried buffalo horns 
and ropes in Their hands. 


Text 6 
kvacid dhasantav anyonyam 
kridamanau kvacit 
parna-sayyasu samsuptau 


kvacin nidrantareksanau 


They would joke with one another, enjoy various pastimes, engage 


in sporting play, and sometimes enjoy a nap on a bed made of twigs 
and leaves. 


Text 7 
evam vatsan palayantau 
Sobhayantau mahavanam 
cancuryantau ramantau 
sma kisorav iva cancalau 


in and 
In this way, the two brothers would take care of the calves, ™ 


KRSNA’S CHILDHOOD PASTIMES 


around Mahavana. They freely wandered about within the forests, 
just like two baby horses. 


Texts 8-9 
atha damodarah sriman 
sankarsanam uvaca ha 
arya nasmin vane Sakyam 
gopalath saha kriditum 


avagitam idam sarvam 
avabhyam bhukta-kananam 

praksina-trna-kastham ca 
gopair mathita-padapam 


One day, most handsome Krsna said to His brother, Balarama, “My 
dear brother, I think it is not good to play in this forest any more. 
We, the cowherd boys, have spoiled the beauty of this forest by using 
it recklessly. ‘There is no more grass left for the cows, and no more 
dry wood for cooking. Each and every tree in this forest has been 
used to its fullest extent.” 


Text 10 
ghanibhutan yany asan 
kananani vanani ca 
tany akasa-nikasani drsyante 
‘dya yatha ‘sukham 
“The density of the forest now appears thin, like the sky. We no 
longer find any pleasure while looking at the forest.” 


Text 11 
govatesv api ye urksah 
parwritargalesu ca 
sarve gosthagnisu gatah 
ksayam aksaya-varcasah 
“There were many beautiful trees in and around the cowshed, 


the gates of which have round locks. But those trees are no more 
because they were burnt by the forest fire.” 


87 


88 SRI VISNU-PARVA 
Text 12 
sannikrstant yany adsan 
kasthani ca trnadni ca 
tani dirav akrstasu 
margitavyani bhumisu 


“Formerly, there was an abundance of grass and wood at our 
doorsteps but now, we have to look for them in distance places,” 


Text 13 
aranyam tdam alpodam 
alpakaksam nirasrayam 
anvesitavya-visramam 
darunam virala-drumam 


“There is very little water left in this forest, and very little grass and 
wood. Therefore, it is not wise to stay here any longer. One has to 
search for a place here to rest. Only a few trees remain and so, the 


situation appears quite pathetic.” 


Text 14 
akarmanyesu vrksesu 
sthita-viprasthita-dviyjam 
samvasasyasya mahato 
janenotsadita-drumam 


“These trees no longer produce flowers and fruit, like before. 
Even the birds that lived in these trees have all flown elsewhere. 
Besides, the inhabitants of this place have cut down many tree® in 


this forest.” 


Text 15 
niranandam nirasvadam 
nisprayojana-marutam 
niruihangam idam sunyam 
nirvyanjanam wasanam 
any fruit 


“There is no happiness here anymore. We can har sad san does 29! 


and even the air appears stale. This forest, devoid of birds, 


KRSNA’S CHILDHOOD PASTIMES 


give us any delight, just as rice without any vegetable preparations 
does not give one the happiness of eating.” 


Text 16 
vikriyamanath kasthais ca 
sakats ca vana-sambhavaih 
ucchinna-sancaya-trnair 
ghoso ‘yam nagarayate 


“The wood and green leafy vegetables of this forest are being sold 
for earning a livelihood. There is a scarcity of green grass here. This 
forest now looks like the residential area of the cowherd men.” 


Text 17 
Sailanam bhisanam ghoso 
ghosanam bhisanam vanam 
vananam bhisanam gavas 
tas casmakam para gatih 
“Pasturing fields are the ornaments of a mountain, forests are the 
ornaments of pasturing fields, and cows are the ornaments of a forest. 
Therefore, it is actually the cows that are our greatest assets.” 


Text 18 
tasmad anyam vanam yamah 
praty agrayavasendhanam 
icchanty anupabhuktant 
gavo bhoktum trnani ca 


“Therefore, we should go to anew forest where there is an abundance 
of green grass and fuel. Our cows are desperately looking for new 
pasturing grounds.” 


Text 19 . 
tasmad vanam nava-trnam 
gacchantu dhanino vrajah 
na dvarabandhavarana na 
grha-ksetrinas tatha 


89 


90 SRI VISNU-PARVA 


prasasta vai vraja loke 
yatha vai cakra-carinah 


“Those who actually desire happiness should leave this place and go 
to a forest where everything is available, where the area is secure 
where there are good residential quarters, where there is enough 


land for farming and, where only good people reside. We should 
move about freely and reside at different places, like swans.” 


Text 20 
sakrn mutresu tesv eva 
jata-ksara-rasayanam 
na trnam bhunjate gavo 
napt tat payase hitam 


“When cow dung and cow urine are dropped in the field, they act 
as fertilizer and help produce more grass. However, the cows do not 
eat such grass with great satisfaction and as such, the milk produced 


by eating this grass is not very beneficial.” 


Text 21 
sthali-prayasu rathyasu 
navasu vana-rajisu 
caravah sahitau gobhih 
ksipram samvahyatam vrajah 


“Nowadays, all the solitary paths in this forest have become crowded. 
There is no trace of green grass here. Therefore, let us all go with the 
cows to new pasturing grounds and forests. We should immediately 
change our place of residence, settling somewhere else.” 


Text 22 
Srityate hi vanam ramyam 
paryapia-trna-samstaram 
namna vrndavanam nama 


suddu-vrksa-phalodakam 
6 = t 
I have heard that there is a beautiful forest called Vrndavané. i” 


place is filled with green grass. The trees there produce sweet, juicy 


KRSNA’S CHILDHOOD PASTIMES 
fruit, and the water there is very tasty.” 


Text 23 
ajhilli-kantaka-vanam sarvair 
vana-gunair yutam 
kadamba-padapa-prayam 
yamuna-tira-samsntam 


“There are no thorny bushes in that forest. Moreover, it has all the 
necessary things that a suitable forest should possess. There are 
plenty of kadam6a trees in that forest, and it is situated on the bank 


of the river Yamuna.” 


Text 24 
snigdha-Sttanila-vanam 
sarvartu-nilayam Subham 
gopinam sukha-sancaram 


caru-citra-vanantaram 


“There is always a cool breeze blowing in that forest. Indeed, all the 
seasons are always present there simultaneously. For this reason, it 
is very beautiful and pleasant. The cowherd girls can roam freely 
there. Within that forest of Vrndavana, there are many small forests 


and gardens.” 


Text 25 
tatra govardhano nama 
natidire girir mahan 
bhrajate dirgha-sikharo 
nandanasyeva mandarah 


“There is a great mountain by the name of Govardhana, which is not 
very far from Vrndavanaa. It has many tall peaks. As the Mandaracala 


mountain looks enchanting by the side of Nandanavana, Govardhana 


mountain looks splendid by the side of Vrndavana.” 


Text 26 
madhye casya maha-sakho 
nyagrodho yojanocchritah 


91 


92 


Sri ViSNU-PARVA 


bhandiro nama susubhe 
nila-megha wambare 


“In the middle of that forest there is a huge bhandira tree that is 
lovely to look at, with its many branches and sub-branches. The 
height of that tree is about eight miles. It is actually a banyan tree 
and it appears very beautiful, like an evening cloud.” 


Text 27 
madhyena casya kalindi 
stmantam iva kurvati 
prayata nandanasy eva 
nalini saritam vara 
“The best of rivers, Nalini, flows in the midst of the Nandanavana 
forest, just as the beautiful river, Kalindi, flows in the middle of 


Vrndavana.” 


Text 28 
tatra govardhanam caiva 
bhandiram ca vanaspatim 
kalindim ca nadim ramyam 
draksyavas caratah sukham 
“If we go there, we will certainly enjoy the beauty of Govardhana 
Hill, Bhandira-vata, and the Kalindi river.” 


Text 29 
tatrayam kalpyatam ghosas 
tyajyatam nirgunam vanam 
santrasayavo bhadram te 
kificid utpadya karanam 


“Let us move to that place and leave this useless forest without age 
int 
My dear brother, we must do something to create some fear in his 
. ° ‘ 
minds of the Vrajavasis, so that they will be compelled tocar 


place.” 


KRSNA’S CHILDHOOD PASTIMES 93 
Texts 30-31 
evam kathayatas tasya 
vasudevasya dhimatah 
pradurbabhivuh sataso 
rakta-mamsa-vasasanah 


ghoras cintayatas tasya 
sva-tantruhajas tada 

vinispetur bhayakarah 
sarvasah Sataso vrkah 


As Krsna, the son of Vasudeva, was speaking like this, hundreds and 
thousands of wolves suddenly emerged from the pores of His body. 
They looked formidable and were fond of blood, flesh, and marrow. 
After appearing, they spread everywhere, just by thinking about 
them. 


Texts 32-34 
nispatanti sma bahavo 
vrajasyotsadanaya vat 
urkan nispatitan drstva 


gosu vatsesv atho nrsu 


gopisu ca yatha-kamam 
vraje traso ‘bhavan mahan 
te vrkah parica-baddhas ca 
dasa-baddhas tatha pare 


trimsadvuimsati-baddhas ca 
Sata-baddhdas tatha pare 

niscerus tasya gatrebhyah 
$ri-vatsa-krta-laksanah 


When, with a desire to make Gokula desolate, thousands of wolves 
began to manifest from Krsna’s transcendental body, by His own 
will, upon seeing them, all the cows, calves, and cowherd men and 
women became extremely frightened. These wolves manifested 
from Krsna’s body in groups of five, ten, twenty, thirty, and one 
hundred, and were decorated with the mark of Srivatsa. 


94 


SRI VISNU-PARVA 


Texts 35-38 

krsnasya krsna-vadana 

gopanam bhaya-vardhanah 
bhaksayadbhis ca tair 

vatsamstrasayadbhis ca go-vrajan 
nisi balan haradbhis ca 

vrkair utsadyate vrajah 
na vane Sakyate ganium 

na gas ca partraksitum 


na vanat kincid aharm tu 
na ca va taritum nadim 
trasta hy udvigna-manaso 
gatas tasmin vane ‘vasan 


evam vrkair udirnais tu 
vyaghra-tulya-parakramath 

vrajo nispanda-cestah sa 
ekasthana-carah krtah 


These black-faced wolves that appeared from Krsna’s body constantly 
increased the fear of the Vrajavasis. They ate the calves, frightened 
the herds of cows, and at night, would steal young boys. In this way, 
gradually, the whole of Gokula became depopulated. At that time, 
it was impossible to go to the forest, to protect the cows, to collect 
anything from the forest, or to cross the river. All the inhabitants 
of Gokula became overwhelmed by fear and anxiety, so that they 
were unable to move about freely. Out of fear, they simply sat down 
together in one place. In this way, the wolves, who looked formidable 
like tigers, rendered the entire area of Gokula most desolate. 


Thus ends the translation of the eighth chapter of the Visnu Parva 


of Sri Harivamsa. 


CHAPTER NINE 


Due to the Disturbance Created by the Wolves, 
the Vrajavasis Move from Gokula to Vrndavana 


Text 1 
vaisampayana uvaca — 
evam vrkams ca tan drstva 

vardhamanan durasadan 
sastripuman sa ghoso vat 


samasto ‘mantrayat tada 


Vaisampayana said: O Janmejaya, as these invincible wolves terrified 
the residents of Gokula more and more, they assembled and began 
to discuss among themselves as follows. 


Text 2 
sthane neha na nah karyam 
vrajamo ‘nyan mahad vanam 
yacchivam ca sukhosyam ca 
gavam cava sukhavaham 


“Now there is no need for us to stay here any longer. Let us all go 
to a new and vast forest that will be beneficial and safe for both us 
and the cows.” 


Text 3 
adyaiva kim cirena sma 
vrajamah saha go-dhanath 
yavad vrkair vadham ghoram 


na nah sarvo vrajo vrajet 


“What is the use of delaying? We should move from here today. We 


had better leave this place before the wolves destroy everything in 
Gokula.” 


95 


96 


Sri VISNU-PARVA 


Text 4 
esam dhimrarunanganam 
damstrinam nakha-karsinam 
vrkanam krsna-vakiranam 
bibhibho nisi garjatam 
“The wolves are grey and red. They have long jaws and they attack 


with their sharp nails. Their mouths are black. At night, they roar 
so loudly that we become very frightened.” 


Text 5 
mama putro mama bhrata 
mama vaiso ‘tha gaur mama 
urkair vyapadita hy evam 
krandanti sma grhe grhe 


“lust see how the women of each and every house are crying 
pathetically and lamenting. Alas! These wolves have killed our 
children, brothers, cows, and calves.” 


Text 6 
tasam rudita-sabdena 
gavam hambharavena ca 
vrajasyotthapanam cakrur 
ghosa-vrddhah samagatah 


Being greatly worried and frightened by the roaring of the wolves, 
and the bellowing of the cows, the elderly inhabitants of Vraja who 
had assembled resolved to move from Gokula as soon as possible. 


Texts 7-8 
tesam matam athajnaya 
gantum vrnddvanam pratt 
vrajasya vinivesaya 
gavam catva hitaya ca 


urndavana-nivasaya tan 
jnatva krta-niscayan 


THE VRAJAVASIS MOVE FROM GOKULA TO VRNDAVANA 97 


nanda-gopo brhad-vakyam 
brhaspatir ivadade 


When Nanda Maharaja understood the intention of the Vrajavasis 
to go to Vrndavana and their firm determination to reside there, 
which would be beneficial for both the cowherd residents and cows 
of Vraja, he spoke these words of wisdom, just like Brhaspasti. 


Text 9 
adyaiva niscaya-praptir 
yadi gantavyam eva nah 
Sighram ajnapyatam ghosah 
sayibhavata ma ciram 


“Ifwe have decided to go and are ready then we should leave this place 
today. Make this announcement all over Gokula, so that everyone 
can get ready to depart quickly, without any further delay.” 


Texts 10-11 
tato ‘vaghusyata tada ghose 
tat prakrtair janath 
Sighram gavah prakalpyantam 
bhandam samabhiropyatam 


vatsa-yuthani kalyantam 
yujyantam Sakatani ca 

vrndavanam itah sthanan 
nivesaya ca gamyatam 


Immediately, an announcementwas flashed all over Gokula: “Quickly 
prepare to leave. Get your cows and household items together. Place 
your belongings on the bullock carts. Gather all your calves, mount 
your carts, and proceed to Vrndavana.” 


Text 12 
tac chrutvad nanda-gopasya 
vacanam sadhu bhasitam 
udatisthad vrajah sarvah 
sighram gamana-lalasah 


98 


SRI VISNU-PARVA 


As soon as the inhabitants of Gokula heard this announceme 
of Nanda Maharaja, they became very excited and quickly bea 
preparations to depart. 


Text 13 
prayahy uttistha gacchamah 
kim sese yahi yojaya 
uttesthati vraje tasmin 
gopa-kolahalo hy abhit 


When the Vrajavasis were preparing to leave, a commotion could be 
heard as people shouted: “O you, let us go. Get up, we are all going 
now. Why are sleeping? Go and mount the bullock cart.” 


Text 14 
ultisthamanah susubhe 
Sakati-sakatas tu sah 
vyaghra-ghosa-maha-ghoso 
ghosah sdgara-ghosavan 


When all the bullock carts, other vehicles, and residents of Vraja 
began moving, a huge commotion was heard. The loud noise 
appeared just like the roaring of tigers, or the rumbling of the 
ocean. 


Text 15 
gopinam gargaribhis ca mirdhni 
cottambhitair ghataih 
nispapata vrajat panktis 
tara-panktir tuambarat 
The gopis of Vraja followed the carts in rows, with pitchers of butter 


milk or milk on their heads. It appeared as if a cluster of stars had 
come down to the earth. 


Text 16 
nila-pitarunais tasém vasrair 
agra-stanocchnitath 


THE VRAJAVASIS MOVE FROM GOKULA TO VRNDAVANA 


sakra-capayate panktir 
gopinadm marga-gamini 


Their blue, yellow, and red garments nicely covered their raised 
preasts. When the gopis, who were dressed in colorful garments, 


walked, they appeared just like a rainbow. 


Text 17 
damani-damabharais ca 
kecit kayavalambibhih 
gopa marga-gata bhanti 
savaroha iva drumaéh 


Some of the cowherd men walked, carrying luggage tied with ropes. 
These ropes were hung about their bodies. As a result, they looked 
just like banyan trees with fibrous roots. 


Text 18 
sa vrajo vrajata bhati 
Sakataughena bhasvata 
potath pavana-viksiptair 
nispatadbhir wvuarnavah 


The beauty of this moving entourage consisting of bullock carts 
and other vehicles appeared just like a vast ocean containing 
innumerable ships, moving by the force of the wind. 


Text 19 
ksanena tad vraja-sthanam 
innam samapadyata 
dravyavayava-nirdhitam 
kirnam vayasa-mandalath 


Within a very short time, Gokula became vacant, appearing like 
barren land. Soon, the whole area became filled with crows because 
there were particles of food grains scattered here and there. 


Text 20 
tatah kramena ghosah sa 
_ prapto vrndadvanam vanam 


100 


Sri VISNU-PARVA 


nivesam vipulam cakre 


gavam catva hitaya ca 


Gradually, the caravan of Vrajavasis arrived at the beautify] forest 
of Vrndavana. They built their residences over a vast area, for the 
benefit of the cows. 


Text 21 
Ssakatavarta-paryaniam 
candrarddhakara-samsthitam 
madhye yojana-vistirnam 
tavad-dvigunam ayatam 


The bullock carts were kept so as to make a boundary wall around 
the entire area, giving it the shape of a half moon. The length of 


that tract of land was about sixteen miles, and the breadth was eight 
miles. 


Text 22 
kantakibhih pravrddhabhis 
tatha kantakita-drumath 
nikhatocchnita-sakhagrair 
abhiguptam samantatah 


The newly established village of Vrndavana was well protected by 


thorny bushes, branches of trees, and other thorny plants and 
trees. 


Texts 23-30 
manthair Gropyamanais ca 
mantha-bandhanukarsanath 
adbhih praksalyamanabhir 
gargaribhir itas tatah 


kilair dropyamanais ca 
damani-pasa-pasitaih 

stambhanibhir dhrtabhis ca 
Sakatath parivartitaih 


THE VRAJAVASIS MOVE FROM GOKULA TO VRNDAVANA 


niyoga-pasair asaktair 
gargari-stambha-mirdhasu 
chadanartham prakirnais ca 
katakais trna-sankataih 
sakha-vitankatr vrksanam 
kriyamanair itas tatah 
Sodhyamanair gavam sthanaih 
sthapyamanair ulukhalath 


pranmukhath sicyamanais ca 
sandipyadbhis ca pavakaih 
savatsa-carmas taranath 


paryankais cavaropitaih 


toyam uttarayantibhih 
preksantibhis ca tad vanam 
sakhas cakarsamanabhir 
gopibhis ca samantatah 
yuvabhih sthavirais cawa 
gopair vyagrakarair bhrsam 
visasadbhih kutharats ca 
kasthany api tarin apt 


tad vraja-sthanam adhikam 
susubhe kanandavriam 

ramyam vana-nivesam vai 
svadu-mila-phalodakam 


All the cowherd men and women began to engage themselves in 
Various household chores. Some of them churned milk or yogurt 
Into butter, some of them pulled ropes to move the churning rod, 
‘ome of them washed pots and pitchers, making a rumbling noise, 
some drove pegs into the ground, some tied ropes on theses pegs, 
‘ome erected pillars, some of them were selling bullock carts, some 
ree Soe the churning rods and tying them with ropes, some 

ng ready to build cottages with thatched roofs, some were 


10] 


102 Sri ViSNU-PARVA 


gathering materials for building cottages, some were engaged in 
building nests or resting places for birds, some were clearing places 
for building cow sheds, some were keeping the grinding mortars 
in order, some were washing them while facing east, some were 
igniting a fire, some were unloading their belongings from thei; 
carts, some of the gopis were taking the pitchers from their heads 
and setting them onto the floor, some of them simply enjoyed the 
beauty of the forest, and some of the gopis walked around, pulling 
the branches of the trees. 


In this way, everyone, including the young and the old, were busy 
with different activities. Some of them were cutting wood with axes, 
Because the people were engaged in all these activities, Vrndavana 
looked exceedingly enchanting. The entire forest of Vrndavana was 
filled with fruit, roots, and fresh water. 


Text 31 
tas tu kama-dugha gavah 
sarva-paksi-rutam vanam 
vrndavanam anuprapta 
nandanopama-kananam 


All the cows, who gave an abundance of milk, happily entered the 
forest of Vrndavana, which vibrated with the sweet sounds of birds, 
and which resembled the famous Nandana-kanana forest. 


Text 32 
purvam eva tu krsnena 
gavam vai hita-karina 
Sivena manasa drstam tad 


vanam vana-canind 


Lord Krsna, who is very fond of the cows, always thinking about 


their welfare, carefully studied all the facilities that were available 
for the cows. 


THE VRAJAVASIS MOVE FROM GOKULA TO VRNDAVANA 


Text 33 
pascime tu tato rikse 
gharme mase niramaye 
varsativamrtam deve 
trnam tatra vyavardhata 


Although it was the end of the summer, an abundance of green © 
grass was available. It appeared as if the rain-god, Indra, had sent 


heavy showers to this place. 


Text 34 
na tatra vatsah sidanti 
na gavo netare janah 
yatra tisthati lokanam 
bhavaya madhusudanah 


Where Lord Madhustdana, the benefactor of everyone, is present, 
the cows, calves, and human beings cannot face any difficulty. 


| Text 35 
tas ca gavah sa ghosas tu 
sa ca sankarsano yuva 
kysnena vihitam vasam 
tam adhyasata nirvriah 


In this way, all the cows and inhabitants of Vraja, along with Balarama, 
began to reside in the abode of Vrndavana with great delight. 


103 


Thus ends the translation of the ninth chapter of the Visnu Parva of 


Sn Harivamsa. 


CHAPTER TEN 
A Description of the Rainy Season 


Text 1 
vaisampayana uvaca 
tau tu vrndavanam praptau 
vasudeva-sutav ubhau 
ceratur vatsa-yuthani 


carayantau suripinau 


Vaisampayana said: O Janamejaya, after arriving at Vrndavana, the 
two sons of Vasudeva, Krsna and Balarama, who were most beautiful, 
began to wander about the forest while tending the calves. 


Text 2 
purnas tu gharma-samayas 
tayos tatra vane sukham 
kridatoh saha gopalair 
yamunam cavagahatoh 


In Vrndavana, Krsna and Balarama enjoyed performing Their 
pastimes, along with the cowherd boys. They bathed in the river 
Yamuna, and in this way, They joyfully passed the two months of 
summer in Vrndavana. 


Text 3 
tatah pravrd anuprapta 
manasah kama-dipini 
pravavarsur maha-meghah 
sakra-capankitodarah 


When summer was over, the rainy season arrived in Vrndavana. 
There were dark clouds covering the entire sky and then, it started 


raining heavily. Sometimes, a rainbow could be seen in the midst of 
the clouds. 


105 


106 Sri Visnu-PARVA 


Texts 4-5 
babhivadarsanah stiryo 
bhimis cadarsana trnaih 
patata megha-vatena 
nava-toyanukarsina 


sammarjpta-tala bhumir 
yauvanastheva laksyate 


It was difficult to see the sun at that time. The grass and weeds 
became so long that one could not see the surface of the earth. 
All the ponds and lakes became filled with water and strong winds 
sometimes blew. 


Text 6 
nava-varsavastktant 
Sakra-gopa-kulani ca 
nasta-davagni-dhumani 
vanani pracakasire 


The most insignificant insects, known as indragopa, were drenched 
by the rain water. The blazing forest fires and their smoke were 
completely extinguished. This made the forest look even more 
charming. 


Text 7 
nrtya-vyapara-kalas ca 
mayuranam kalapinam 
madaraktah pravrttas ca 
kekah paturavas tatha 


The time had come for the peacocks to dance while spreading their 


long feathers, so that the sounds of their joyful mingling could be 
heard everywhere. 


Text 8 
nava-pravrsi kantanam 
_ Sat-padahara-dayinam 


A DESCRIPTION OF THE RAINY SEASON 


yauvanastha-kadambanam 
navabhrair bhrajate vapuh 


Because of the arrival of the rainy season, the kadamba trees became 
more attractive and full of life. They supplied an abundance of food 
to the bumblebees. These trees looked strong and beautiful because 
of the arrival of new clouds. 


Text 9 
hasitam kutajair vrksaih 
kadambair vasitam vanam 
nasitam jaladair usnam 
tosita vasudha jalath 


Kitaja trees made the entire forest delightful by manifesting their 
wonderful flowers in the four directions. The kadamba trees similarly 
enhanced the beauty of the forest. The new clouds removed the 
scorching heat of the summer and thus fully satisfied and soothed 
the earth. 


Text 10 
santapta bhaskara-karair 
abhitapta davagnibhith 
jalair balahakotsrstair 
ucchvasantiva parvatah 


The same mountains that were afflicted by the scorching heat of the 
sun and were burnt by blazing forest fires now regained their lives 
after being soaked by the rain. 


Text 11 
maha-vata-samudbhitam 
maha-megha-ganarpitam 
mahi-maha-raja-purais 
tulyam apadyate nabhah 
Strong winds blew everywhere in Vrndavana. Huge, dark clouds 


appeared like palaces. Because of this, it appeared as if the sky had 
taken over the rule of the earth. 


107 


108 SRI VISNU-PARVA 


Text 12 
kvacit kadamba-hasadhyam 
silindhrabharanam kvacit 
sampradiptam twabhati phulla- 
nipa-drumam vanam 


In some places, the fully-blossomed kadamba flowers made the 
entire area most enchanting by their sweet aroma and beauty. In 
some places, the mushrooms increased the beauty of the forest by 
manifesting themselves as ornaments. There were many nipa trees, 
everywhere one looked. Because of this, the entire Vindavana forest 
appeared extremely beautiful. 


Text 13 
aindrena payasa siktam 
marutena ca vistrtam 
parthivam gandham aghraya 
lokah ksubhita-manasah 


Being soaked by heavy downpours caused by Indra, the sweet aroma 
emanating from the earth filled the four directions, with the help 
of the wind. This aroma agitated the minds of the inhabitants of 
Vrndavana. 


Text 14 
drpta-saranga-nadena 
dardura-vyahriena ca 
navats ca sikhi-vikrustair 
avakirna vasundhara 


The entire land of Vrndavana became filled with the sounds of 
intoxicated humming bees, croking frogs, and the singing of the 
peacocks. 


Text 15 
bhramattirna-mahavarta 
varsa-prapta-maharayah 
harantyas tirajan vrksan 
vistaram yanti nimnagah 


A DESCRIPTION OF THE RAINY SEASON 109 


There were numerous giant whirlpools in the rivers. The rivers 
flowed very forcefully due to excessive water. The rivers gradfally 
‘ncreased their breadth and while flowing, uprooted trees from 
their banks with their strong currents. 


Text 16 
santatasara-niryainah 
kliinna-yatnottaracchadah 
na tyajanti nagagrant 
sranta tva patatirinah 


Many birds that could not freely fly due to the heavy rain, whose 
wings had thus become ineffective, hesitated to leave the tree tops, 
like old and exhausted eagles. 


Text 17 
toya-gambhira-lambesu 
sravatsu ca nadatsu ca 
udaresu navabhranam 
majjativa divakarah 


The sun played hide and seek within the clouds. It was overcome 


by the rumbling sounds of the clouds and the incessant shower of 
rain. 


Text 18 
mahiruhair utpatitath 
salilotpida-sankula 
anvisya-marga vasudha 
bhati Sadvala-malini 
The land of Vrndavana was covered with green grass and drenched 
by heavy rain. As a result, it was difficult to find the paths. It was by 


the presence of trees that stood by the two sides of the roads that 
people could find their way. 


Text 19 
vajrenevavarugnanam 


naganam naga-salinam 


110 Set Vigsnu-PARVA 


srotobhih parikritani 
patanti Sikharany adhah 
The peaks of the mountains that were decorated with many tree 
§ 


crumbled due to the strong currents of water. It appeared ag if the 


mountains had fallen down, being struck by a thunderbolt. 


Text 20 
patata megha-varsena 
yatha nimnadnusarina 
palvalotkirna-mukten 


puryante vana-rajayah 


The heavy rainwater flowed forcefully through the mountainoys 
regions and accumulated in the lower land. When these lowlands 


became filled, the water spread in the four directions and flooded 
the entire forest. 


Text 21 
hastocchrita-mukha@ vanya 
megha-nadanusarinah 
bhrantatiurstya matanga 


gam gata wa toyadah 


Being bewildered by the excessive rain, the wild elephants raised 
their heads and trunks upwards, imitating the thundering noise of 


the clouds. At such times, it looked as if the personified clouds had 
come down to the surface of the earth. 


Text 22 
pravrt-pravritim sandrsya 
drstua cambudharan ghanan 
rauhineyo mithah kdle 


krsnam vacanam abravit 


; ith 
The rainy season had arrived and the entire sky was covered WI 
clouds. Seeing this, Balarama, the son of Rohini, spoke to Krs@ 


A DESCRIPTION OF THE RAINY SEASON 


Text 23 
pasya krsna ghandan krsnan 
balakojvala-bhisanan 
gagane tava gatrasya 
varna-coran samucchritan 


“My dear Krsna, just see the dark clouds high up in the sky. They are 
decorated with a shining garland of swarms of birds.” 


Text 24 
tava nidra-karah kdlastava 
gatropamam nabhah 
ivam wajnata-vasatim 
candro vasati varsikim 


“This is the time when You usually sleep. Because of the dark clouds, 
the sky resembles Your body. ‘The moon is remaining incognito, just 
like You during the rainy season.” 


Text 25 
etan nilambuda-syamam 
nilotpala-dala-prabham 
samprapte durdine kale 
durdinam bhati vai nabhah 


“The sky, which appears blackish due to the presence of dark clouds, 
and the luster of which becomes like a blue lotus flower, looks 
pathetic and helpless because of the arrival of the rainy season.” 


Text 26 
pasya krsna jalodagrath 
krsnair udgrathitair ghanath 
" govardhano yatha ramyo 
bhatt govardhano ginh 


“O Krsna, Just see how beautiful Govardhana Hill looks! Especially 


when it is surrounded by dark clouds, the hill is the only shelter of 
the cows.” 


11) 


112 Sri ViSNU-PARVA 


Text 27 
patitenambhasa hy ete 
samantan mada-darpitah 
bhrajante krsna-sarangah 
kananesu mudanvitah 


“Look, these black deer have become intoxicated because of the 
rainfall. They look very joyful as they wander about freely within the 
forest.” 


Text 28 
etany ambu-prahrstani 
haritani mrdini ca 
irnani Sata-patraksa 


patrair guhanti medinim 


“O lotus-eyed one, being nourished by the fresh rainwater, the green 
grass has become so blissful that it is trying to cover the surface of 
the earth by spreading its tender leaves.” 


Text 29 
ksaraj jalanam sailanam 
vananam jalad adgame 
SASASYANGM ca simanadm 
na laksmir vyatiricyate 
“Because of the rainfall, the mountains, from which many streams 


emanate, the forests, and the agricultural land, look more 
beautiful.” 


Text 30 
Sighra-vata-samudbhitah 
prositautsukya-karinah 
damodarod damaravah 
pragalbhyam yanti toyadah 
“O Damodara, by rumbling and roaring, these clouds that move am 
fast and high due to being pushed by the forceful wind, and which 


A DESCRIPTIO 
N OF THE R 
LASON 


induce a person who is living in a foreign land to return ho 


1 ” me, ar 
g that they are impudent. e 


provin 
Text 31 
hare haryasva-capena 
trivarnena tri-vikrama 
vibanajyena racitam tavedam 
madhyamam padam 


“OQ Hari, who assumed the form of Trivikrama, look how so many 
rainbows without arrows have appeared in the sky, as if to beautifully 


decorate it.” 


Text 32 
nabhasyesa nabhas caksur 
na bhaty eva caran nabhah 
meghath sitatapa-karo 
virasmir iva rasmivan 
“In the month of Sravana, the sun, which is said to be the eye of the 
sky, does not look very attractive while rising. Its heat and light have 
vanished because of being covered by the clouds.” 


Text 33 
dyava-prthivyoh samsargah 
satatam vitatath krtah 
avyavacchinna-dharaughath 
samudraugha-samair ghanath 


By showering incessant rain, these clouds, which have assembled 
in the four directions and which resemble an agitated ocean, are 
trying to unite the sky with the earth.” 


Text 34 
niparjuna-kadambanam 
prthwyam cativrstibhih 
gandhath kolahala vanti 
vata madana-dipanah 


114 SRI ViISNU-PARVA 


“Due to heavy rain, the strong wind carries the sweet fra 
the flowers of arjuna, nipa and kadamba trees, thus agit 
stimulating the minds of human beings.” 


Text 35 
sampravrita-maha-varsam 
lambamana-mahambudam 
bhatya agadhama paryantam 
sasagaram twambaram 


“It has started raining heavily and the clouds have come closer to the 
surface of the earth. From this, it appears that the sky has merged 
into an unfathomable and unlimited ocean.” 


Text 36 
dhara-nirmala-naracam 
vidyut-kavaca-varminam 
Sakra-capayudha-dharam 


yuddha-sayjam ivambaram 


_ “It appears as if the sky is getting ready for a great battle with a 
sword in the form of uninterrupted rain, with an amulet in the form 
of lightning, and with a bow in the form of rainbow.” 


Text 37 
Sailanam ca vandnam ca 
drumanam ca vardnana 
praticchannani bhasante 
stkharani ghanair ghanaih 


“O beautiful Krsna, just see how the mountain peaks, the forests, 


and the treetops look enchanting because they are covered by dar k 
clouds.” 


Text 38 
gajanikair ivakirnam 
salilodgaribhir ghanath 
varna-sarupyatam yati 
gaganam sagarasya ca 


A DESCRIPTION OF THE RAINY SEASON 


“The sky; which is covered with dark clouds that resemble elephants 


their trunks, appears like a ” 
spraying water from PP swollen ocean. 


Text 39 
samudroddhutayanita 
lolasad vala-kampinah 
sitah saprsatoddamah 
karkasa vanti marutah 


“The cool, strong wind, which has emanated from the waves of the 
ocean, is blowing while shaking the grass and creepers and carrying 


small drops of water.” 


Text 40 
nisasu sputa-candrasu 
makta-toyasu toyadath 
magna-suryasya nabhaso 
na vibhant: diso dasa 
“The moon has disappeared behind the dark clouds. The clouds have 
started pouring heavy torrents of rain. The sun is no longer visible. 
In such a night, it is difficult to ascertain the four directions.” 


Text 4] 
cetanam puskaram kosath 
ksudha-dhmatath samaniatah 
na ghrninam na ramyanam 
vivekam yanti krstayah 


“The entire sky looks lively because of the presence of clouds and 


wind. The farmers find it difficult to understand whether it was day 
Or night.” 


Text 42 
gharma-dosa-parityaktam 
megha-toya-vibhisitam 
pasya vrndavanam krsna 
vanam caitra-ratham yatha 


116 Sri ViSNU-PARVA 


“My dear Krsna, look at the forest of Vrndavana, which j 
any contamination and which is decorated with the water 
season. It looks as beautiful as the Caitraratha forest of 


S devoid of 
Of the rainy 
heaven,” 
Text 43 

evam pravrd-gunan sarvan 

chriman krsnasya pitrvajah 
kathayann eva balavan 

vrajam eva jagama ha 


In this way, while glorifying the rainy season in Vrndavana, Krsna’s 
elder brother, Balarama, who is greatly powerful, accompanied 
Krsna in the forest. 


Text 44 
anyonyam ramamanau tu 
krsna-sankarsanav ubhau 
tatkala-jnatibhih sarddham 
ceratus tad vanam mahat 


The two brothers, Krsna and Balarama, enjoyed many pleasure 
pastimes within the forest of Vrndavana in the company of their 
cowherd boy friends. 


Thus ends the translation of the tenth chapter of the Visnu Parva of 
Sn Harivamsa. 


CHAPTER ELEVEN 


A Description of Krsna’s beauty. Descriptions of 
Bhandiravana, the Yamuna, and Kaliya lake. 


Text 1 
vaisampayana uvaca 
kadact tu tada krsno 

vind sankarsanena vai 
cacara tad vanam ramyam 
kama-rupi varananah 


Vaisampayana said: O Janamejaya, one day, most attractive Krsna, 
who can assume any form He desires, went for a walk in the forest 
of Vrndavana without His brother, Balarama. 


Text 2 
kaka-paksa-dharah sriman 
chyamah padma-daleksanah 
Ssri-vat-senorasa yukiah 
sasanka wa laksmana 


He tucked a bunch of peacock feathers in His curly hair. His eyes 
were broad, resembling lotus petals. His complexion was blackish 
and His beauty was extraordinary. His chest was decorated with the 
mark of Srivatsa. In this way, He appeared like a brightly shining 


moon. 


Text 3 
sangadenagra-hastena 
pankajodbhinna-varcasa 
sukumara abhitamrena 
kranta-vikranta-gamina 


His arms were adorned with armlets and His palms looked like fully 
blossomed lotus flowers. His legs were very beautiful and tender. 


SRI Visnu-PpARVvA 
When He walked, He looked most enchan ting. 
Text 4 
pite pritt-kare nrnam 
padma-kinjalka-saprabhe 


stiksme vasano vasane 
sasandhya tva toyadah 


He was dressed in two pieces of fine yellow cloth. His P€rsonality 
constantly increased the happiness of everyone who saw Him. 
When the blackish personality, Krsna, would dress in this way, He 
would appear like a dark cloud beautified by the golden effulgence 
of twilight. 


Text 5 
vatsa-vyapara-yuktabhyam 
vyagrabhyam ganda-rajjubhih 
bhujabhyam sadhu-vrttabhyam 
pupitabhyam divaukasaih 
His two arms were attractive, round, and worshiped by the demigods. 
He used these hands to take care of the cows, to tie bells around 
the necks of the calves, and to tie the calves with rope. With His 
beautiful arms, Krsna looked very attractive. 


Text 6 
sadrsam pundartkasya 
gandhena kamalasya ca 
raraja casya tad balye rucir 
austha-putam mukham 


As Krsna gradually surpassed the stage of childhood and ae 
the age of youth, His face became as beautiful as a lotus flower ni 
a sweet aroma, similar to that of a lotus flower, emanated from 
body. 


Text 7 
sikhabhis tasya muktabhi 
raraja mukha-pankajam 


A DESCRIPTION OF KRSNA’S BEAUTY 


vrtam satpada-panktibhir 
yatha syat padma-mandalam 


His lotus-like face, which was adorned with dots of tilaka, looked 
very beautiful, like a lotus flower surrounded by a swarms of bees. 


Text 8 
tasyarjuna-kadamb adhya 
nipa-kandala-malini 
raraja mala sirasi 
naksatranam yatha divi 
His head was decorated with a garland of arjuna and kadamba 
flowers. This garland also had flowers from a nipa tree and some 
fresh twigs. As Krsna walked, the entire forest was brightened by 
His bodily effulgence so that He appeared like a moon shining in 
the sky. 


Text 9 
sa taya malaya virah 
susubhe hantha-saktaya 
megha-malambuda-syamo 


nabhasya wa murtiman 


He was adorned with another garland made of forest flowers. In 
this way, dark-complexioned Krsna, the almighty Lord, looked like 
the personified month of Bhadra, when the sky is filled with dark 
clouds. 


Text 10 
ekenamala-patrena 
kantha-sitravalambina 
raraja barhi-patrena 
manda-maruta-kampina 


He wore a chain around His neck that had a peacock feather hanging 
from it. When Krsna walked, this peacock feather would swing, to 
and fro, enhancing His great beauty. 


119 


IRIE VISNU-PARVA 


Text 11 
kvacid gayan kvacit kridams 
cancuryams ca kvacit kvacit 
parna-vadyam sruti-sukham 
vadayams ca kvacid vane 


Sometimes Krsna would sing, sometimes He would play sometime 

, S 
He would wander about here and there, and sometimes He 
would play on a flute made of green leaves that gave pleasure to 


everyone. 


Text 12 
gopa-venum sumadhuram 
hamat tam api vddayan 
prahladanartham ca gavam 
kvacid vanagato yuva 


Sometimes Krsna would go to the forest and, to give happiness to 
the cows, He would joyfully play His flute in an enchanting manner. 
The sound of Krsna’s flute was the most beloved experience for the 


cowherd boys and girls of Vrndavana. 


Text 13 
gokule ‘mbudhara-syamas 
cacara dyutiman prabhuh 
reme ca tatra ramyasu 
citrasu vana-rayisu 


In this way, the brightly shining Supreme Lord, Krsna, whose 


complexion was just like a dark cloud, wandered about in and 
around Gokula, as well as within the beautiful forests and gardens. 


Text 14 
mayura-rava-ghustasu 
madanoddipanisu ca 
megha-nada-prativyuher 
naditasu samantatah 


A DESCRIPTION OF KRSNA’S BEAUTY 


The entire forest of Vrndavana was filled with the singing of 
peacocks. Indeed, the forest was certainly capable of agitating the 
minds of everyone. There was always a commotion because of the 
rumbling sound of the clouds. 


Text 15 
Sadvalac channa-margasu 
silindhrabharanasu ca 
kandalamala-patrasu 
sravantisu navam jalam 


The pathways of the forest were covered by grass. In some places, 
there were tadpoles and mushrooms, appearing like the ornaments 
of the forest. There were many freshly-grown plants and twigs from 


which water was dripping. 


Text 16 
kesaranam navair gandhair 
mada-nihsvasitopamath 
abhiksnam nihsvasantisu 
kaminisv iva nityasah 


Appearing to be intoxicated by the sweet aroma of flowers, the 
entire land of Vrndavana seemed to repeatedly take deep breaths, 


out of excitement, just like a young woman. 


Text 17 
sevyamano navair vatair | 
druma-sanghata-nihsriath 
tasu krsno mudam lebhe 
saumyasu vana-rapisu 


Krsna enjoyed the cool breezes emanating from the trees and plants 
of Vrndavana. He took great pleasure in wandering about within 


the beautiful forests. 


Text 18 
sa kadacid vane tasmin 
gobhih saha paribhraman 


iZ} 


N 
N 
S 
2) 


VISNU-PARVA 


dadarsa vipulodagram 
sakhinam Sakhinam varam 
One day, while tending the cows in the forest of Vrndavana Krsn 
| > AYsna 
suddenly saw a tree that was extremely tall. 


Text 19 
sthitam dharanyam meghabham 
nibidam patra-sancayath 
gaganardhocchntakaram 
parvatabhoga-dhannam 


The tree had such big and thick leaves that it looked likea personified 
cloud on the earth. With its great height, the tree covered half of 
the entire sky. From a distance, it looked like a huge mountain. 


Text 20 
nila-citranga-varnais ca 
sevitam bahubhih khagath 
phalaih pravalais ca ghanath 


S endra-capa-g: hanopamam 


There were many peacocks having blue necks and colorful feathers 
in that tree. With its coral-like red fruit, the tree appeared like a 
rainbow within the clouds. 


Text 21 
bhavanakara-vitapam 
lata-puspa-sumanditam 
visdla-mitlavanatam 
pavanambhoda-dhannam 


The tree was so large that each of its branches looked like a big 
house. It was adorned with many creepers and flowers. Its roots 


; ir and 
spread out for a long distance. This tree was a source of alt 
rain. 


Text 22 
adhipatyam ivanyesam 
tasya desasya Sakhinam 


A DESCRIPTION OF KRSNA’S BEAUTY 


kurvanam subha-karmaénam 
niravarsam andtapam 


It appeared that this tree was the king of all the other trees in the 
area. It was very beneficial for everyone because it gave protection 
from rain and sunshine. 


Text 23 
nyagrodham parvatagrabham 
bhandiram nama namatah 
drstua tatra matim cakre 
nivasaya tatah prabhuh 


This huge tree appeared just like a massive mountain. The name of 
this tree was Bhandira-vata. As soon as Krsna saw this beautiful tree, 
He decided to reside there. 


Text 24 
sa tatra vayasa tulyair 
vatsa-palaih sahanagha 
reme vai vasaram krsnah 
pura svarga-gato yatha 


O sinless Janamejaya, Krsna enjoyed performing pastimes in the 
association of His cowherd boy friends under this tree. He would 
play under this tree the entire day, and feel the same happiness He 


felt when He was at home. 


Text 25 
tam kridamanam gopalah 
krsnam bhandira-vasinam 
ramayanti sma bahavo 
vanyath kridanakais tada 


When Krsna resided at Bhandiravan and enjoyed many childhood 
pastimes, His cowherd boyfriends would satisfy Him by offering 
Him gifts obtained from the forest. 


123 


SRI VisSNuU-PARVA 
Text 26 
anye sma pangayanti 
gopa mudita-manasah 
gopalah krsnam evanye 
gayanti sma rati-priyah 


Some of His friends would sing in a sweet voice to please Him. Some 
would glorify Krsna’s wonderful pastimes, especially those that were 


very pleasing to Him. 
Text 27 
tesam Sa gayaiam eva 
vadayamasa viryavan 
parnavadyantare venum 
tumbim vinam ca tatra ha 


When the cowherd boys would sing, powerful Krsna would sometimes 
play His flute, made of green leaves. Sometimes he would play the 


tambura, and sometimes He would play a stringed instrument. 


Text 28 
kadacic carayann eva 
gah sa go-vrsabheksanah 
jagama yamunda-tiram 
latalankyta-padapam 


One day, Krsna, whose eyes were as broad as those of the cows and 
bulls, went to the bank of the Yamuna while tending the cows. There 
were many trees on the bank of the Yamuna that were decorated 


with creepers and flowers. 


Text 29 
tarangapanga-kutilam 
vari-sparsa-sukhanilam 
tam ca padmotpalavatim 


dadarsa yamunam nadim 
b ose 

Krsna became very pleased to see the beautiful Yamuna: ae : 
oun 


restless waves resembled crooked glances, which released ©° 


A DESCRIPTION OF KRgNna’s BEAUTY 


and pleasing breezes, and which was decorated with many fully 
blossomed lotus flowers and water lilies. 


Text 30 
sutirtham suvadu-salilam 
hradinim vega-gaminim 
toyavatodyatair vegair 
avanamita-padapam 


There were beautiful bathing ghats and pathways leading to the 
Yamuna. The water of the Yamuna was most sanctified and tasty. 
There were many kundas within that river and its water flowed with 
great force. By the force of her water and its resultant wind, the 
trees on the bank were bent. 


Text 31 
hamsa-karandavodghustam 
sarasais ca ninaditam 
anyonya-mithunais caiva 
sevitam mithune-carath 


The atmosphere by the side of the Yamuna was always filled with the 
sounds of swans, ka@randavas, and cranes. Male and female cakravakas 
happily enjoyed intimate association in the water of the Yamuna. 


Text 32 
jalajath pranibhih kirnam 
jalajair bhisitam gunath 
jalajath kusumais citram 
jalajair hantodakam 
The Yamuna was the residence of many aquatics that increased the 


beauty of the river. The lotus flowers and other flowers enhanced the 
Yamuna’s beauty. The water of the Yamuna appeared greenish. 


Text 33 
prasrta-srota-caranam 
pulina-sroni-mandalam 


125 


126 


SRI VISNU-PARVA 


avarta-nabhi-gambhiram 
padma-romanuranyitam 


The waves were Yamuna’s feet and the two banks were hey i 

The whirlpool was her navel. She was decorated with bodily ite 
r 

the form of lotus flowers. ar 


Text 34 
tatac chedodaram kantam 
tritaranga-vali-dharam 
phena-prahrsta-vadanam 
prasannam hamsa-hasinim 


The smaller waves or currents near the bank were her thin waist. She 
looked charming because of her enchanting effulgence. The waves 
resembled the three lines on her throat. The foam was considered 
to be her blissful mouth. The swans were compared to her smile. 


Text 35 
ructroipala-raktosthim 
nata-bhrum jalajeksanam 
hrada-dirgha-lalatantam 
kantam Saivalamirddhajam 
Beautiful red lotus flowers were considered to be her red lips. The 
under current was compared to her eyebrows and the blue lotuses 
were her eyes. The lake within the Yamuna was like her forehead. 
The moss in the water resembled her hair. With all of these features, 


she appeared very beautiful. 


Text 36 
cakravaka-stana-tatim 
ttra-parsvayatananam 
dirgha-strotayata-bhujam 
abhoga-sravanayatam 


; was 
A pair of cakravaka birds were her two breasts. Her broad face 


ms. 
the two banks. The lengthy waves were compared to her long 
The objects on the bank were like her ears. 


A DESCRIPTION OF KRSNA’S BEAUTY 


Texts 37-38 
karandava-kundalinim 
srimat-pankaja-locanam 
tatajabharanopetam 
mina-nirmala-mekhalam 


vari-plavaplava-ksaumam 
sara-sarava-nupuram 

kasa-camikaram vaso 
vasanam hamsa-laksanam 


The river Yamuna was decorated with earrings in the form of 
karandavas. Her eyes were beautiful blue lotus flowers. The trees 
and plants on her banks were her ornaments. The shoal of fish was 
her girdle. The vast body of water was her cddara. ‘The sound of a 
crane was compared to the tinkling sound of her ankle bells. The 
crystal clear water was her garment. 


Text 39 
bhima-nakranuliptangim 
kurma-laksana-bhisitam 
nipanasvapadapidam 
nrbhih pita-payodharam 
Formidable crocodiles were like anointment on her body. Tortoises 
were the marks on her hands and feet. Wild animals who came to 
drink her water were her ornaments and the people were drinking 
her water were her breasts. 


Texts 40-42 
suapadocchista-salilam 
asrama-sthana-sankulam 
tam samudrasya mahisim 
iksamadnah samantatah 


cacara ruciram krsno 
yamunam upasobhayan 

tam caran sa nadim srestham 
dadarsa hradam uttamam 


127 


Sri ViSNU-PARVA 
dirgham yojana-vistaram 
dustaram inidasair api 
gambhiram aksobhyazyalam 
niskampam iva sdgaram 


The water of the Yamuna became contaminated because the wilg 
animals drank from it. There were many hermitages on the banks 
of the Yamuna. While observing the beauty of the Yamuna, who = 
the queen of the ocean, Krsna freely wandered about in the four 
directions. While wandering in this way on the bank of the Yamuna, 
the best of all rivers, Krsna came upon a huge lake, eight miles long, 
It was difficult even for the demigods to cross it. It was very deep 
and peaceful, being a vast body of water. 


Text 43 
toyajath Svapadais tyaktam 
sunyam toyacarath khagath 
agadhenambhasa purnam 
megha-purnam ivambaram 


Even aquatics, such as crocodiles, avoided that lake. There were no 
water birds present in or around it. It looked unfathomable, like the 
sky covered by clouds. 


Text 44 
duhkhopasarpyam tiresu 
sasarpair vipulair bilaih 
visaranibhavasyagner 
dhimena parivestitam 


There were many holes on the banks of that lake wherein lived many 
poisonous snakes. For this reason, it was difficult for the residents 


_of Vindavana to approach it. Indeed, the entire lake was filled with 


the fire and smoke that emanated from the snakes’ poison. 


Text 45 
abhogyam tat pasinam 
hi apeyam ca jalarthinam 


A DESCRIPTION OF KRSNA’S BEAUTY 199 


upabhogath panityaktam 
surats trisavanarthibhih 


Because of this, the water of the lake within the Yamuna was unfit for 
drinking, both for animals and human beings. Even the demigods, 
who bathe three times daily, gave up using that water because it was 
polluted. 


Text 46 
akasad apy asaficaryam 
khagair akasa-gocaraih 
irnesv api patatsv apsu 
jualantam iva tejasa 


Even the birds were unable to fly over that lake. If a blade of dry 
straw fell into the water, it was immediately burnt to ashes. 


Text 47 
samantad yojanam sagram 
devair apt durasadam 
visanalena ghorena 
juala-prajvahiia-drumam 


Even the demigods found it hard to walk within eight miles of either 
side of the lake. At that place, there were no trees on both banks of 
the Yamuna because they had been burnt to ashes by the formidable 
poison. 


Texts 48-53 
vrajasyottaratas tasya 
krosa-matre niramaye 
tam drstuva cintayamasa 
krsno vai vipulam hradam 


agadham dyotamadnam ca 
kasyayam mahato hradah 

asmin sa kaliyo nama 
kalanjanacayopamah 


130 


Sri Visnu-ParRva 


uragadhipatih saksad 
dhrade vasati darunah 
utsriya sagaravadsam 
yo maya viditah pura 


bhayat pataga-rajasya 
suparnasyoragasinah 
teneyam dusita sarva 


yamuna sagarangama 


bhayat tasyoragapater 
nayam deso nisevyate 

tad idam darunadkadram 
aranyam rudhasaddvalam 


savaroha-drumam ghoram 
kirnam nana-lata-drumaih 

raksitam sarpa-rdjasya 
sactuair apta-kanibhih 


There was a two-mile stretch of land on the northern side of the 
Yamuna that was unaffected by the poison, however. When Krsna 
saw that unfathomable lake, which was very attractive, He thought, 
“Who does this lake belong to? Actually, this lake is the residence o 
the poisonous serpent, Kaliya, the king of the snakes, whose body is 
black, like black ointment, and who is very fierce. I had heard that, 
long ago, Kaliya had left his residence in the ocean out ot fear of 
Garuda, the king of birds, and took shelter of this lake. It}s Se 
who has poisoned the water of the river Yamuna, which flows '° ‘ 
sea. Out of fear of him, no one dares live nearby. That 1s why fe 
otherwise beautiful forest has became a dangerous place. ren ig 
Kaliya and his sinful ministers rule this part of the forest, W 


thick with trees, plants, creepers, and bushes.” 


Text 54 
vanam nirvisayakaram 
visannam iva duhsprsam 


A DESCRIPT 
ION OF KRsna’s BEAUTY 131 


tair apta-karibhir nityam 
sarvatah pariraksitam 


“For this reason, the forest here has become empty, like the sky. The 
water of this lake has become deadly, like food mixed with poison. 
This entire area is well protected by Kaliya’s guards.” 


Text 55 
Savvala-nalinats capri 
urksath ksudra-lata-kulath 
kartavya-margau bhrajete 
hradasyasya tatav ubhau 


“The river is full of moss and its banks are crowded with bushes, 
creepers and lotus flowers. I will have to find a way to reach the 


heart of this lake.” 


Text 56 
tad asya sarpa-rajasya 
kartavyo nigraho maya 
yatheyam saridambhoda 
bhavec chiva-jalasaya 


“I must destroy this king of serpents, Kaliya, somehow or other, so 
that this lake, which supplies water to the residents of Vrndavana, 


can again become their shelter.” 


Text 57 
vrajopabhogya ca yatha 
nage ca damite maya 
sarvatra sukha-sanicara 
sarva-tirtha-sukhasraya 


‘If I chastise this serpent then the water of the Yamuna will again 
be useful for the inhabitants of Vrndavana. People will be able to 
Maes! about freely within this area once again and this river will 
“8ain be accepted as sacred and the abode of happiness.” 


1382 SRI Visnu-PARVA 


Text 58 
etad artham ca vaso ‘yam 
vraje ‘smin gopa-janma ca 
amisam utpatha-sthanam 
nigrahartham duratmanam 


“For this reason, I have appeared as a cowherd boy and made My 
residence in Vraja. I have appeared in this world simply to destroy 
the miscreants who always obstruct the path of righteousness.” 


Texts 59-60 
enam kadambam aruhya 
tad eva sisu-lilaya 
vinipatya hrade ghore 
damayisyami kaliyam 
evam krte bahu-viryam 
loke khyatum gamisyati 
“To enjoy My pastimes, I will climb the kadamba tree that situated 
on the bank of this lake and jump into the water to chastise the 


serpent, Kaliya. By doing so, My fame will spread throughout the 


universe.” 


Thus ends the translation of the eleventh chapter of the Vispu Parva 


of Sn Harivamésa. 


CHAPTER TWELVE 


Krsna Chastises Kaliya 
Text 1 
vaisampayana uvaca 
sopasrtya nadi-tiram baddhva 
parnkaram drdham 
arohac capalah krsnah 
kadamba-sikharam muda 


Vaisampayana said: O Janamejaya, realizing the necessity of driving 
away the serpent, Kaliya, from the Yamuna, restless Krsna slowly 
approached the bank of river. He tightened His cloth and climbed 


onto a branch of the kadamba tree. 


Text 2 
krsnah kadamba-sikharal 
lambamano ghandakrtih 
hrada-madhye ‘karoc chabdam 
nipatann ambujeksanah 


Krsna, whose complexion was like the color of a dark cloud, 
and whose eyes were like lotus petals, made a loud noise before 
jumping into the lake within the Yamuna where Kaliya had taken 


up residence. 


Text 3 
krsnena tatra patata 
ksubhito yamunda-hradah 
samprasicyata vegena 
bhidyamana ivambudah 


AS soon as Krsna jumped into the water, the lake became disturbed. 
The waves spilled over onto the banks, inundating the nearby land. 
It appeared as if the clouds had fallen onto the earth. 


134 


Sri VISNU-PARVA 
Text 4 
tena sabdena sanksubdham 
sarpasya bhavanam mahat 
udatisthaj jalat sarpo 
rosa-paryakuleksanah 


The loud sound disturbed the king of the serpents. To fing out 
the cause, Kaliya slowly emerged from the water and came to the 
surface. His eyes were red with anger. 


Text 5 
sa coraga-patth kruddho 
megha-rasi-samaprabhah 
tato raktanta-nayanah 2 
kaliyah samadrsyata 


Kaliya, the king of the serpents, was as black as a dark cloud. He was 
furious so that the corners of his eyes were blood-red. 


Text 6 
pancasyah pavakocchvasas 
calayithvo ‘nalananah 
prthubhih pancabhir ghorath 
sirobhih panivaritah 


Kaliya had five hoods and he breathed fire. His tongue was restless 
and his mouth was filled with fire. His five heads were enormous 
and terrifying. 


Text 7 
purayitua hradam sarvam 
bhogenanala-varcasa 
Sphurann iva ca rosena 
jvalann iva ca tejasa 


r 
In fact, he almost covered the entire lake with his powerful ane oe 
ing 


body. He was trembling with anger and his body was burn 
rage. 


KRSNA CHASTISES KALIYVA 


Text 8 
krodhena jvalatas tasya 
jalam srtam tvabhavat 
pratisrotas ca bhiteva 
jagama yamuna nadi 


Because of the fiery poison emanating from Kaliya’s mouth. the 
whole lake was disturbed and the course of the river Yamuna was 
altered. It appeared as if the river ran in retreat, out of fear. 


Texts 9-12 
tasya krodhagni-purnebhyo 
vakirebhyo ‘bhic ca marutah 
drstua krsnam hrada-gatam 
kridantam Sisu-lilaya 
sadhumah pannagendrasya 
mukhan niscerurarcisah 
srjata tena rosagnim 
samipe tiraja drumah 


ksanena bhasmasan nita 
yuganta-pratimena vat 

tasya putras ca daras ca 
bhrtyas canye mahoragah 


vamantah pavakam ghoram 
vaktrebhyo visa-sambhavam 
sadhimam pannagendras 


te nipetur amitaujasah 
‘ ff f 
like _a chilo 


When Kaliya saw Krsna playing with-His-cowherd-bey friends within 
the lake, he became ablaze with anger. He exhaled fiery balls 
accompanied by smoke from his mouth. With his fire of anger, the 
serpent, Kaliya, who was as dangerous as the time of devastation, 
began to burn to ashes the trees and plants that grew around 
the lake. He was supported by his wives, son, servants and other 
poisonous snakes, who were all very powerful. They also began to 


L36 


SRI Viénu«parva 


release fiery poison from their mouths. Being led by Kaliya, all of 
them forcefully attacked Krsna. 


Text 13 
pravesitas ca tath sarpath 
sa krsno bhoga-bandhanam 
niryatna-caranakaras 
tasthau girir ivacalah 


Kaliya and the other snakes captured Krsna within their coils. Within 
a short while, Krsna’s hands, legs, and other limbs were rendered 
motionless. He appeared just like an unmovable mountain. 


Text 14 
adasan dasanais tiksnair 
visotpida-jalavilaih 
te krsnam sarpa-patayo na 
mamara ca viryavan 


The water of the Yamuna was already contaminated by the poison 
released by those snakes. Then, they began to bite Krsna with their 
sharp teeth. However, Krsna was so powerful that they could not 
harm Him. 


Text 15 
etasminn antare bhita 
gopalah sarva eva te 
krandamana vrajam jagmur 
vaspa-gadgadaya gira 


Meanwhile, all the cowherd boys became mortified to see Krsna 
captured by Kaliya. They went home crying and informed everyon€ 
of the situation with choked voices. 


Text 16 
gopa ucuh 
esa moham gatah krsno 
magno vai kaliye hrade 


KRSNA CHASTISES KALIYA 


bhaksyate sarpa-rajena 
tad agacchata ma ciram 


The cowherd boys said: “Listen everyone, our Krsna has become 
unconscious due to being submerged in the Kaliya lake. The king 
of snakes, Kaliya, is about to swallow Him. Therefore, come quickly, 
do not delay.” 


Text 17 
nanda-gopaya vai ksipram 
sabalaya nivedyatam 

esa te krsyate krsnah 
sarpeneti maha-hrade 


“Somebody should immediately go to the house of Nanda Maharaja 
and tell him that his Krsna is being dragged by the serpent, Kaliya, 
within his lake.” 


Text 18 
nanda-gopas tu tac chrutva 
vajrapatopamam vacah 
artah skhalita-vikrantas 
tam jagama hradottamam 


In no time, this news reached Nanda Maharaja, who became 
overwhelmed with fear and grief. Indeed, this harsh news struck 
him like a thunderbolt. With great difficulty, he somehow managed 
to approach the Kaliya lake. 


Text 19 
sabala-yuvati-vrddhah 
sa ca sankarsano yuva 
akridam pannagendrasya 
jalastham samupadgamat 
Many cowherd men, women, and young boys followed Nanda 


Maharaja. Balarama, the son of Rohini, also arrived on the shore of 
the Kaliya lake. Everyone gathered to view the situation. 


[38 


Sri VISNU-PARVA 
Text 20 
nanda-gopa-mukha gopas 
te sarve sasru-locanah 
hahakaram prakurvantas 
tasthus tive hradasya vai 


Nanda and the other cowherd inhabitants of Vrndavana cried 
profusely. Tears incessantly fell from their eyes as they approached 
the Kaliya lake and stood before it. 


Text 21 
vriditad vismitas caiva 
Sokartas ca punah punah 
kecit tu putra ha heta 
ha dhig-ity apare punah 


They felt impotent and ashamed because they were unable to help 
Krsna. They were amazed to see Krsna’s heroic posture but they 
were overwhelmed by fear for Krsna’s well-being. They said, “Alas! 
O my son! Shame on our lives!” 


Text 22 
apare ha hatah smeti 
rurudur bhrsa-duhkhitah 
striyas cavva yasodam 
tam ha hatasiti cukrusuh 


ya pasyasi priyam putram 
sarpa-raja-vasam gatam 

spanditam sarpa-bhogena 
kysyamanam yatha mrtam 


Some of the cowherds became very distressed and lamented, “Alas! 
We are finished.” In this way, they cried out loudly. The wome? of 
Vraja looked at Yasoda and agonized, “Alas! O Yasoda, your life 1s 
finished although you are still alive because today, you are seeing 
your beloved child within the grip of Kaliya. Alas! Your child, Krso* 
1s completely in the clutches of the serpent, awaiting death.” 


KRSNA CHASTISES KALIVA 


Text 24 
asmasadramayam niinam 
hrdayam te vilaksyate 
putram katham imam 
drstua yasode navadiryase 


“O Yasoda, it appears that your heart is made of hardened steel. 
Even after finding your beloved son in such a condition, why has 
your heart not broken into pieces?” 


Text 25 
duhkhitam bata pasyamo 
nanda-gopam hradantike 
nyasya putra-mukhe drstim 
niscetanam avasthitam 


“Alas! We can see Nanda Maharaja standing on the shore of the 
Kaliya lake in an extremely painful condition, looking at Krsna’s 
face without blinking his eyes.” 


Text 26 
yaSodam anugacchantyah 
sarpavasam imam hradam 
pravisamo na yasyamo 
vina damodaram vrajam 


“We will enter Kaliya lake, which is the residence of the king of 
serpents, keeping Yasoda in front. It is our resolve that we will not 


return to Vrndavana without Krsna.” 


Text 27 
divasah ko vind stryam 
vind candrena ka nisa 
vind vrsena ka gavo 
vind krsnena ko vrajah 


vind krsnam na yasyamo 
vivatsa iva dhenavah 


40 


Sri ViSNU-PARVA 


“Where is the question of day if there is no sun? How can 
be night without the moon? How can there be cows withoyt 
How can there be Vrndavana without Krsna? We will not 
home without Krsna, just as Cows do not return home witho 


there 
bulls 
return 
Ut their 
calves.” 
Texts 28-29 
tasam vilapitam srutua 
tesam ca vraja-vasinam 
vilapam nanda-gopasya 
yasoda-ruditam tatha 


eka-bhava-Sarivajna 
eka-deho dvidha krtah 

sankarsanas tu sankruddho 
babhase krsnam avyayam 


When Balarama, who knew the glories of Krsna and who was non- 
different from Krsna, heard these lamentations of the cowherd men 
and women, headed by Nanda Maharaja and mother Yasoda, He 


became very angry at Kaliya and gave the following advice to His 
younger brother, Krsna. 


Text 30 
krsna krsna maha-baho 
gopanam nanda-varddhana 
damyatam esa vai ksipram 


sarparajo visayudhah 


"O Krsna! O mighty-armed Krsna! You always enhance the pleasure 
of the cowherd residents of Vraja. Quickly destroy this king of 
serpents, Kaliya, whose only weapon is his poison.” 


Text 31 
ime no bandhavas tata 
vam matué manusam vibho 
pandevanti Rarunam sarve 
manusa-buddhayah 


KRSNA CHASTISES KALrya 


“O most dear one! O master ofall, Our relatives and friends consider 
You to be an ordinary human being and so they are lamenting and 
crying most pathetically.” 


Text 32 
tac chrutva rauhineyasya 
vakyam sanjfidsam iritam 
vikramyasphotayad bahia 
bhittva tan naga-bandhanam 


When Krsna heard these words of Sankarsana, the son of Rohini, 
He immediately freed Himself from the clutches of Kaliya and, just 
to display His supreme prowess, began to challenge him. 


Text 33 
tasya padbhyam athakramya 
bhoga-rasim jalotthitam 
Stras tu krsno jagraha 
sva-hastenavanamya ca 


Thereafter, Krsna repeatedly pushed Kaliya’s heads down, kicking 
them with His lotus feet. Then, with His lotus-like hands, Krsna 
grabbed one of Kaliya’s heads. 


Text 34 
tasyaruroha sahasad madhyamam 
tan mahacchirah 
so ‘sya murdhni sthitah krsno 
nanarta rucirangadah 


Suddenly, Krsna jumped onto the broad heads of Kaliya and began 
to dance. At that time, Krsna looked very beautiful, His arms being 


adorned with armlets. 


Text 35 
mrdyamanah sa krsnena 
Santa-mirdha bhujangamah 
asyath sarudhirodgarath 
kataro vakyam abravit 


14] 


ho 


Sri Visnu-PARVA 


After Krsna had kicked and chastised Kaliya sufficiently by Hig 
dancing, the serpent’s pride having been smashed, he spoke ‘ 
blood issued forth from his mouth. 


Text 36 
avijnanan maya krsna 
roso ‘yam sampradarsitah 
damito ‘ham hata-viso 
vasagas te varanana 


“CO beautiful Krsna, with a most charming face, out of foolishness, | 
displayed my anger before You. You have rightly chastised me. Now, 
my pride and poison have been vanquished and so, I surrender unto 


” 


You. 


Text 37 
tad ajnapaya kim kuryam 
sada sapatya-bandhavah 
Rasya va vasatam yami 
jivitam me pradiyatam 


“Kindly give me permission so that, along with my sons, relatives, 


and friends, I can always serve You. Please spare my life because | 
am taking shelter of You.” 


Text 38 
panca-miurddhanatam drstuva 
sarpam sarpari-ketanah 

akruddha eva bhagavan 


praty uvdcoragesvaram 


When the Supreme Lord, Krsna, whose flag is decorated with the 


image of Garuda, saw Kaliya offering Him obeisances with his five 
hoods, He spoke to him. 


Text 39 
lavasmin yamund-toye naiva 
sthanam dadamy aham 


gaccharnava-yjalam sarpa 
sabharyah saha-bandhavah 


“O serpent, Kaliya, I cannot allow you to remain here in this lake of 
the Yamuna. Along with your wives, brothers, and friends, you must 
immediately leave and go reside in the ocean.” 


Text 40 
yas ceha bhityo drsyeta 
sthane va yadi va jale 
tava bhrtyas tanijo va ksipram 
vadhyah sa me bhavet 


“If I ever find a snake within the water of the Yamuna, even if he is 
your servant or son, I will kill him without a doubt.” 


Text 41 
Stvam casya jalasyas tu tvam 
ca gaccha mahadrnavam 
sthane tv tha bhaved dosas 
tavantakarano mahan 


“I desire that the water becomes purified so that it will be beneficial 
for all the inhabitants of Vrndavana. Therefore, you must go away 


and take up residence in the ocean. If you disobey My order, your 
life will not be spared.” 


Text 42 
mat-padani ca te sarpa 
drstuad murdhasu sdgare 
garudah pannaga-ripus 
tvayt na praharisyati 


“O serpent, as you continue to reside in the ocean, the marks of My 
lotus feet will be clearly visible on your five hoods. Because of this, 
Garuda, who is your natural enemy, will never harm you.” 


Text 43 
grhya mirdhna tu caranau 
krsnasyoraga-pungavah 


itt ONRI NR SAN Se ee ee 


pasyatam eva gopanam 
jagamadarsanam hradat 


Thereafter, the great serpent, Kaliya, offered his respectful o 


unto the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord, Krsna. Before th 
all the residents of Vraja, Kaliya departed from that lake, 


beisance 


© €yes of 


Text 44 
nirjte tu gate sarpe 
krsnam uttirya dhisthitam 
vismitas tustuvur gopas 
cakrus caiva pradaksinam 


When Kaliya thus accepted defeat and left the Yamuna, and when 
Krsna came out of the water onto the shore, all the cowherd men 
and women were certainly astonished. While glorifying Krsna, they 
happily circumambulated Him. 


Text 45 
ucuh sarve ca samprita 
nanda-gopam vanecarah 
dhanyo ‘sy anugrhito ‘si 
yasya te putra idrsah 


All the cowherd men, who are residents of the forest, were extremely 
joyful. They said to Nanda Maharaja, “O king of the cowherds, 
your life is glorious because you have been greatly favored by the 
Supreme Lord, who has given you such a wonderful son.” 


Text 46 
adya-prabhrti gopanam 
gavam gosthasya canagha 
mightyimpetoriam krona 
~ “prabhus cayata-locanah 
“O sinless Nanda, fro 
Vraja will take Shelte 
for our protection,” 


en of 

mM today onwards, all of us men and wom 
our master d Krsna 

r of the-Supreme-Lord, the lotus-eye¢ ™ 


RSNA CHASTISEg§ KALIVA 
Text 47 
jata stva-jala sarva 
Yamuna muni-sevita 
tive casyah sukham gavo 
vicarisyanti nah sada 


“It is our great fortune that the water of the Yamuna, which is 
worshiped by all the sages, had become pure and auspicious for 
everyone. Now, our cows and calves can drink the water to their full 
satisfaction.” . 


Text 48 
vyakiam eva vayam gopa 
vane yat krsnam idrsam 
mahadbhitam na janimas 
channam agnim iva vraje 


“We are village people who live in the forest and yet, the-exalted- 
‘Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is present among us, just as 
fire may remain within ashes. Still, we cannot properly understand 
His supremacy and greatness.” 


Text 49 
evam te vismitah sarve 
stuvantah krsnam avyayam 
jagmur gopa-gana ghosam 
devas caitra-ratham yatha 


In this way, being struck with wonder, all the inhabitants of 
Vrndavana offered prayers to the indestructible Supreme Lord, 
Krsna, and then returned home, just as the demigods return home 
after visiting the Caitraratha forest. 


Thus ends the translation of the twelfth chapter of Visnu 
Parva of Sy Harivamsa. 


CHAPTER THIRTEEN 
Balarama kills Dhenukasura 


Text 1 
vaisampayana uvaca 
damite sarpa-raje tu 

krsnena yamunda-hrade 
tam eva ceratur desam 
sahitau rama-kesavau 


Vaigampayana said: O Janamejaya, after He had subdued the king of 
the serpents, Kaliya, who lived within a lake of the Yamuna, Krsna 
and Balarama often wandered about that area together. 


Text 2 
aqjagmatus tau sahitau 
godhanath saha gaminau 
ginm govarddhanam ramyam 
vasudeva-sutav ubhau 


One day, the two sons of Vasudeva took the cows and entered a 
beautiful forest situated at the foot of Govardhana Hill. 


Text 3 
govarddhanasyottarato 
yamuna-tiram asnitam 
dadrsate ca tau virau 
ramyam tala-vanam mahat 


There, the two great heroes saw that to the north of Govardhana 


Hill, by the side of the Yamuna, there was a vast and beautiful forest 
of palm trees. 


Text 4 
tau tala-parna-pratate 
ramye tala-vane ratau 


ceratuh parama-pritau 


ursapotav woddhatau 


That forest was most enchanting and full of various kinds of t 
r 


3 r eae Tiagi eeyees e . Es, 
especially palm trees. The two brothers joyfully played in that fo 


just like two calves. - 
Text 5 
sa tu desah sada snigdho 
losta-pasana-varpitah 
darbhapraya-sthalibhutah 
sumahan krsna-mrttikah 


The entire forest was cool and the paths were always moist and 
slippery because there was no clay or small stones on them. The 
whole tract of land was covered with kusa and durbé grass. The color 
of the soil in that forest was black. 


Text 6 
talais tatr vipula-skandhair 
ucchritath syama-parvabhih 
phalagra-sakhibhir bhaia 
naga-hastair tvocchntath 


The palm trees of that forest were tall and broad, and they were 
black and full of ripe fruit. By looking at these tall palm trees, it 


appeared as if many elephants were standing while raising their 
trunks upwards. 


Texts 7-8 
tatra damodaro vakyam 
uvaca vadatam varah 
aho tala-phalath pakvair 
uasiteyam vanasthali 


suadinyarya sugandhini 
syamani rasavanti ca 
pakva-talani sahitau 


patayavo laghu-kramau 


BALARAMA KILLS DHENUKASURA {4 


Upon seeing this wonderful Talavana forest, Krsna, who is the crest- 


jewel among eloquent speakers, said to His brother, Balarama, “My 
dear brother, this forest is intoxicating, due to the sweet fragrant of 


the ripe palm fruit. I am sure that these black aromatic palm fruit 
are tasty and juicy. We should quickly go and relish them.” 


Text 9 
yady esam idrso gandho 
madhurya-ghrana-tarpanah 
rasenamrta-kalpena 


bhavitavyam ca me matih 


“Just imagine—if the fragrance of the fruit is satisfying our sense of 
smell then I am sure that they will be as palatable as nectar.” 


Text 10 
damodara-vacah srutua 
rauhineyo hasann twa 
patayan pakva-talani 
calayamasa tams tarun 
Upon hearing these words of Damodara, Balarama, the son of 


Rohini, began to smile. Thereafter, they went to the Talavana forest 
and Balarama began to shake the palm trees vigorously. 


Text 11 
tat tu tala-vanam nrnam 
asevyam duratikramam 
nirmana-bhitam irinam 


purusad alayopamam 


The inhabitants of Vrndavana had been unable to relish these palm 
fruits. It was difficult for them to even enter the forest. Even though 


it was extremely pleasant, it was devoid of human habitation, like 
the residences of the demons. 


Text 12 
daruno dhenuko nama 


daityo gardabha-ritpadhrk 


150 Sri VisSnu-PARVA 


khara-yithena mahata 
urtah samanusevate 


A terrible demon named Dhenukasura, whose form was like that of 
an ass, and who had a gigantic body, lived in that forest. This demon 
was always surrounded by many female asses. 


Text 13 
sa tu tala-vanam ghoram 
gardabhah pariraksati 
ny-paksi-Suapada-ganams 
trasayanah sudurmatih 


This demon, Dhenukasura, always guarded the forest from all sides. 
He was a very foolish creature because he would not allow anyone, 
not even birds or animals, to pass through this forest. 


Text 14 
tala-sabdam sa tam Srutva 
sanghustam phala-patanat 
namarsayat sa sankruddhas 
tala-suanam iva dvipah 


When Balarama shook the palm trees, it made a tumultuous sound. 
The demon could not tolerate this, just as an elephant cannot tolerate 
the sound of a challenge, and so he became extremely angry. 


Texts 15-16 
Sabdanusart sankruddho 
darpa aviddhasatanar th 
stabdhakso hresita-patuh — 
khurair nirdarayan mahim 


aviddha-puccho hrsito 
vyattanana tvdntakah 
apatann eva dadrse 


rauhineyam upasthitam 


Dhenukasura went in the direction from where the noise 
coming. In an angry mood, and filled with pride, the demon hurrie 


BALARAMA KILLS DHENUKASURA 


along the path while raising his tail and moving his head. His eyes 
were red with rage. In an angry mood, he tore apart the surface 
of the earth with his hooves. His bodily hair stood on end and his 
appearance was terrible. As soon as he came near the palm trees, he 
saw Balarama, the son of Rohini, standing there. 


Text 17 
talanam tam adho drstuva 
sa dhvajakaram avyayam 
rauhineyam kharo dustah 
so ‘dasad dasanayudhah 


On seeing the son of Rohini, Balarama, who is the indestructible 
Lord, standing under the palm trees, the wicked demon, using his 
teeth as a weapon, tried to bite Balarama. 


Text 18 
padbhyam ubhabhyam ca punah 
pascimabhyam paran-mukhah 
jaghanorasi daityendro 
rauhineyam nirayudham 


Dhenukasura, the king of the demons, then turned his back on the 
son of Rohini and violently kicked His chest with his hind legs. 


Text 19 
tabhyam eva sa jagraha 
padbhyam tam daitya-gardabham 
avarpita-mukha-skandham 
prerayams tala-mirdhani 


At this, Balarama deftly caught hold of the demon’s hind legs, 
wheeled him around and around, and then threw him into the 
treetops. . 


Text 20 
sambhagnoru-kati-grivo 
bhagna-prstho durakrtih 


SRI ViSnu-pARVA 


kharas tala-phalath sardham 
papata dharani-tale 


As a result, the demon’s thighs, waist, back, and neck were al] 
broken. With his body thus deformed, the demon fell from the 
treetop, along with many palm fruits. 


Text 21 
tam gatasum gata-srikam 
patitam viksya gardabham 
jnatims tathaparams tasya 
trna-rajant so ‘ksipat 


When Dhenukasura was thus lying dead on the ground, Balarama 
was attacked by the demon’s associates. He also grabbed their hind 
legs and threw them into the treetops. 


Text 22 
s@ bhir-gardabha-dehais 
ca talath pakvais ca patitath 
babhdase channa-jalada 


dyaur tuavyakta-sdradi 


The entire forest thus became covered with dead asses and ripe palm 


fruits. It appeared like the sky covered with dark clouds, although 
this was not characteristic of the autumn season. 


Text 23 
tasmin gardabha-daitye 
tu sanuge vinipatite 
ramyam tala-vanam tad-dhi 
bhityo ramyataram babhau.- 
When the ass-demon, Dhenukasura, was thus kilied, along with hs 


5 ing an 
servants, the Talavan forest resumed its naturally enchanting 
pleasant appearance. 


BALARAMA KILLS DHENUKASURA 


Text 24 
vipramukia-bhayam subhram 
viviktakara-darsanam 

caranti sma sukham gédvas 


tat tala-vanam uttamam 


All fear of going to Talavana was thus dispelled. Thereafter, the 
inhabitants of Vrndavana were free to wander there and the cows of 
Vraja could enjoy the green grass. 


Text 25 
tatah pravistas te sarve 
gopa vana-vicarinah 
vita-Soka-bhayayasas 


cancuryante samantatah 


Following this incident, being freed from all fear, the cowherd boys 
cheerfully entered the Talavana forest. 


Text 26 
tatah sukham prakirnasu 
gosu nagendra-vikramau 
druma-parnasanam kriva 
tau yathaérham nisidatuh 


As the cows and calves began to joyfully graze in that forest, Krsna 
and Balarama, who appeared like two king of elephants, blissfully 
sat down there on dsanas made of beautiful green leaves. 


Thus ends the translation of the thirteenth chapter of the Visnu 
Parva of Sri Harivamsa. 


Xt 


CHAPTER FOURTEEN 


Balarama Kills Pralambasura 


Text 1 
vaisampayana uvaca — 
atha tau jata-harsau tu 

vasudeva-sutav ubhau 
tat tala-vanam utsriya 


bhiyo bhandiram agatau 


Vaisampayana said: O Janamejaya, after relishing the palm fruit, 
the two sons of Vasudeva, Krsna and Balarama, left the Talavana 
forest and returned to Bhandiravana in a happy mood. 


Text 2 
carayantau vivrddhani 
go-dhanani subhani ca 
sphita-sasya-prarudhani 


viksamanau vandni ca 


In this way, Krsna and Balarama engaged in tending Their healthy 
cows and calves while enjoying the beautiful atmosphere of 
Bhandiravana forest, which was full of nice trees and plants. 


Text 3 
ksvedayaniau pragayantau 
pracinvantau ca padapan 
namabhir vyaharantau ca 


savatsa gah parantapau 


The two brothers, Krsna and Balarama, the chastisers of Their 
enemies, would sometimes challenge each other, sometimes sing 
together, sometimes pick flowers, fruit, and leaves from the trees, 
and sometimes call the cows and calves by their names. 


Text 4 
niryoga-pasair asaktath 
skandhabhyam subha-laksanau 


Sei ViISnuePARVA 


vanamala-kuloraskau 


bala-srngav pvarsabhau 


With ropes for tying the cows on Their shoulders, with most Attractive 
bodily features, and with beautiful garlands of forest flowers ne 
Their chests, the two greal heroes looked handsome, like calves 


whose horns have just grown, 


Text 5 
suvarnanjana-curnabhav 
anyonya-sadysam barau 
mahendrayudha-samsaktau 


sukla-krsnav wambudau 


Balarama’s complexion was just like the color of golden powder and 
Krsna’s complexion was just like the color of black ointment. The 
colors of Their garments were the color of each other's body. They 
appeared like two white and dark clouds, attached by a rainbow. 


Text 6 
kusadgra-kusumanam ca 
harna-piirau manoramau 
vana-margesu kurvanau 
vanya-vesa-dharav ubhau 


They shone brightly whenever They walked in the forest, decorating 
Themselves with wild flowers and adorning Their ears with 


enchanting earrings made of forest flowers and the tips of kusa 
grass. 


Text 7 
govardhanasyanu carau 
vane sanucarau tu tau 
ceratur loka-siddhabhih 
kridabhir aparajitau 


ama 
There Nate many cowherd boys always following Krsna and Bala! pas 
in the forest. They would regularly go near Govardhana Hill to play: 


BALARAMA KILLS PRALAMBASURA 


No one could stop Them as they executed Their infallible will. In 
this way, Krsna and Balarama enjoyed many childhood pastimes in 


the Bhandiravana forest. 


Text 8 
idv evam madnusim diksam 
vahaniau sura-pujitau 
tajjatr-guna-yuktabhih 
kridabhis ceratur-vanam 


Although They are worshiped by the demigods, They accepted 
human-like forms and performed Their pastimes, imitating ordinary 


human beings. 


Text § 
tau tu bhandiram asritya 
bala-kridanuvartinau 
praptau parama-sakhadhyam 
nyagrodham sékhinam varam 


While wandering about here and there, relishing many childhood 
pastimes, the two transcendental brothers arrived at the foot of the 
giant Bhandira-vata tree. 


Text 10 
taira tu Gndolikabhis ca 
yuddha-mdarga-visaradau 
asmabhih ksepaniyais ca 
tau vyayamam akurvatam 


The two brothers, who are expert in the art of fighting, would 
sometimes play ona swing and sometimes throw stones. 


Text li 
yuddha-méargats ca vividhair 
gopalath sahitav ubheu 
muditau simha-vikréniau 
yatha-kamam wiceratisit 


Sri VIsSNuU-PARVA 


They played joyfully, according to Their own sweet will, while 
displaying various fighting skills in the company of Their lion-like 
cowherd boyfriends. 


Texts 12-13 
tayo ramayator eva 
tal-lipsur asuroittamah 
pralambo ‘bhyagamat tatra 
cchidranvesi tayos tada 


gopala-vesam asthaya 
vanya-puspa-vibhisitah 

lobhayanah sa tau virau 
hasyath kridanakais tatha 


While They were enjoying various sports in this way, a great demon 
named Pralamba came there in the guise of a cowherd boy with 
a desire to kidnap Them. He also decorated himself with forest 


flowers. He was simply waiting for an opportunity while tempting 
the two heroes with his pretentious smile. 


Text 14 
so ‘vagahata nissankas 
tesam madhyama-manusah 
manusam vapur asthaya 


pralambo danavottamah 


Although not a human being, the formidable demon, Pralamba, 


assumed the form of a cowherd boy and mixed freely with the other 
boys. | 


Text 15 
prakriditas ca te sarve 
saha tenédmararina 
gopala-vapusam gopa 


manyamanah sva-bandhavam 


BALARAMA KILLS PRALAMBASURA 


wherd boys happily began to play with the demon-in-disguise, 
Ne nemy of the demigods. Because he came there in the 


who was an © a 
herd boy, they treated him like a friend, or brother. 


guise of a COW 
Text 16 
sa tu cchidrantara-prepsuh 
pralambo gopatam gatah 
drstim pranidadhe krsne 
rauhineye ca darunam 


Pralambasura, who had disguised himself as a cowherd boy, was 
waiting for an opportune moment when the two heroes would 
display some weakness. Therefore, he constantly kept a cruel eye 


on Krsna and Balarama. 


Text 17 
avisahyam tato matva 
krsnam adbhuta-vikramam 
rauhineya-vadhe yatnam 
akarod danavottamah 


Krsna’s prowess was most extraordinary because factually, He was 
invincible. Realizing this, Pralambasura decided to kidnap Balarama, 
the son of Rohini, rather than Krsna. 


Text 18 
harinakridanam nama 
bala-kridanakam tatah 
prakriditas tu te sarve 
dvau dvau yugapad utpatan 


All the cowherd boys decided to play in pairs, challenging one 
another in a game known as harind. 


Texts 19-20 
krsnah sridama-sahitah 
pupluve gopa-sununa 
sankarsanas tu plutavan 
pralambena sahanagha 


ss Sri VISNu-PARVA 
gopalas tua pare dva ndvam 
gopalair aparath saha 
pradruta langhayanto vai 
te ‘nyonyam laghu-vikramah 
O sinless Janamejaya, Krsna played with Sridama while Balariy 
; F ? ; arama 
played the game with Pralamba, who came there, disguised as 
Mas a 
cowherd boy. All the other cowherd boys also began playing white 
hopping as fast as they could. 
Text 21 
sridamain ajayat krsnah 
pralamban rohini-sutah 
gopalath krsna-paksiyaty 
gopalas tv apare jitah 


In that game, Krsna was defeated by Sridama and had to carry him 
on His back, and Pralamba had to carry Balarama. In this way, other 
boys also had to carry their victorious opponents. 


Text 22 
te vahayantas tua anyonyam 
samharsat sahasa drutah 
bhandira-skandham uddisya 
manyddam punar dgaman 


As per the rules, the defeated boys began to carry their victorious 
opponents in a joyful mood. They started from the root o! the 
Bhandira tree and went up to the marked line and returned. 


Text 23 
sankarsanam tu skandienc 
Sighram uiksipya danavak 
drutam jagama vimukhah 
sacandra wa toyadah 


However, 1 
» the demon Pralamba took Balarama on his 


began to run qui “4 tt 
oer © run quickly towards an isolated place in te sky. 


1 ‘ al ‘ 18 
tume, he appeared like a giant dark cloud with the 100? oad 


Text 24 
sa bharam asahams tasyd 
rauhineyasya dhimatah 
vavrdhe sumahakayah 
sakrakranta wwambudah 


tofeel the heavy burden ofthe transcendental 
ract this, be began to expand his body. 
ared like a huge cloud who is an order 


soon, the demon began 
son of Rohini. To counte 
Within a short while, he appe 
carrier of Indra. 


Text 25 
sa bhandira-vata-prakhyam 
dagdhanjana-gini-prabham 
svam vapur darsayamasa 
pralambo danavottamah 


The gigantic form of the king of demons, Pralamba, looked just like 
the huge Bhandira tree, or like a huge black mountain. 


Text 26 
pancu-slabaka-yuktena 
mukutenarka-varcasa 
dipyamananano daityah 
suryakranta tuambudah 


The demon’s head was decorated with a crown adomed with five 
bunches of flowers and it shone like the sun. With this crown on his 
head, he looked like a cloud attacked by the sun. 


Text 27 
mahanano mahd-grivah 
sumahaénantakopamah 
raudrah sakata-cakrakso 
namayams caranair mahini 


ig demon, had a giant mouth and his shoulders were similarly 
‘arge. With his huge body, he looked very formidable, like Yamaraja. 


Sri VisNU-PARVA 


His eyes were rolling like a wheel and the earth trembled by the 


touch of his feet. 


Text 28 
srag-damalambabharanah 
pralambambara-bhisanah 
virah pralambah prayayau 
lamba-toya ivambudah 


He was decorated with a long garland of flowers. His garments and 
ornaments were also very big. Feeling great pressure, Pralamba 
began to fall from the sky, just as rain clouds sometimes move 


swiftly. 


Text 29 
sa jaharatha vegena 
rauhineyam mahasurah 
sagaropaplava-gatam 
krtsnam lokam ivantakah 


Rohini’s son, Balarama, was kidnapped by this great demon in the 
same manner as the time factor takes away all the universes at the 
time of devastation. 


Text 30 
hryamanah pralambena sa 
tu sankarsano babhau 
uhyamana ivakase kala- 


meghena candramah 


When Pralambasura carried Balarama into outer space, it appeared 
asifa gigantic dark cloud was carrying the moon on its back. 


Text 31 
sa sandigdham ivatmanam 
mene sankarsanas tada 
daitya-skandha-gatah sruman 
krsnam cedam uvaca ha 


BALARAMA KILLS PRALAMBASURA 


In this Way, Balarama found Himself in a seemingly precarious 
condition. While sitting on the shoulder of the demon, Balarama 
spoke to Krsna. 


Text 32 
hriye ‘ham krsna daityena 
parvatodagra-varsmana 
pradarsayitva mahatim 
mayam manusa-rupinim 


“My dear Krsna, look! A gigantic mountain-like demon is kidnapping 
Me. He has taken the help of illusion and assumed the form of a 
human being. He is trying to bewilder Me with his illusory power.” 


Text 33 
hatham asya maya karyam 
Sasanam dusta-cetasah 
pralambasya pravrddhasya 
darpad dviguna-varcasah 


“This wicked demon has expanded his body. Because of this, his 
strength has increased greatly. Tell Me, how should I destroy 
him?” 


Text 34 
tam aha sasmitam krsnah 
samna harsdkulena vat 
abhijno rauhineyasya 
vrttasya ca balasya ca 


Krsna, who was completely aware of Balarama’s strength and 
characteristics, smiled and replied in a solacing voice. 


Texts 35-36 
aho ‘yam manuso bhavo 
vyaktam evanupalyate 
yas tuam jaganmayam devam 
guhyad guhyataram gatah 


smara narayanatmanam 
lokanam tuam viparyaye 
avagacchaitmana “tmadnan 


samudranam samagame 


“Alas! you are clearly acting as an ordinary human bein 
Your glories pervade the entire universe. Indeed, You are a 
form of the universe. Your form is transcendental and You 
are the most confidential among all confidential personalities. 
When all the planets are annihilated, You remain in You; 
form as Narayana. Now, remember this form of Yours, Also, 
remember Your form who lies on the bed of Ananta Sesa when 
the universe is merged within the water of devastation.” 


Text 37 
puratananam devanam 
brahmanah salilasya ca 
dtmavrita-prabhavanam 
samsmaradyam ca vai vapuh 


“Also, remember that You are the original cause of the demigods, 
beginning with Brahma. You are the cause of the material elements, 
beginning with water. You are the master of Your own personality 
and prowess. Everything is inconceivably simultaneously one with 


and different from You.” 


Text 38 
Sirah kham te jalam mirtith 
padau bhiir dahano mukham 
vayur lokayur uchvaso 
manah somo hy abhiit tava 


Your legs, fire 


“The sky is Your head, water is Your body, the earth is | 
Your breath, 


is Your mouth, the air that sustains ail living entities 1S 
and the moon ts Your mind.” 


Text 39 
sahasrasyah sahasrangah 
sahasra-caraneksanah 


sahasra-padmanabhas fvam 
sahasramsudharo ‘riha 


“You possess thousands of bodies, thousands of hands, thousands 
of legs and thousands of eyes. Thousands of lotus flowers sprout 
from Your navel. You destroy the demons by your Sudarsana cakra, 
whose effulgence is equal to the effulgence of thousands of suns.” 


Text 40 
yat tuaya darsitam loke tat 
pasyanti divaukasah 
yat tuaya nokita-purvam hi 
kas tad anvestum arhati 


“The demigods follow the ideal standards set by You in ancient 
times. Who can understand or discover that which you have never 


before revealed?” 


Text 41 
yad veditavyam loke ‘smims 
tat tuaya samudahriam 
viditam yat tavaikasya 
deva api na tad viduh 


“You alone are the source of whatever there is in this world to be 
known. Even the greatest personalities and demigods do not know 


the most confidential knowledge that is known by You.” 


Text 42 
atmajam te vapur vyomnt na 
pasyanty dtma-sambhavam 
yat tu te kririmam rupam 
tad arcanti divaukasah 


; < erstood 
Your self-manifested transcendental form is not seen OF a in Your 
ee in 
by even the demigods. Only when You appear 10 nts do the 
on to Your devotees, ¢° 


Original divine form, to display compass! 
demigods worship You.” 


(66 SRI ViISNU-PARVA 
Text 43 
devair na drstas cantas te 
tendnanta tt smrtah 
tvam hi siksmo mahdn ekah 
stiksmair api durdsadah 


“The demigods are unable to find the limit of Your glories, This jg 
why You are addressed as Ananta. You are smaller than the smallest, 
greater than the greatest, and one without a second. It igs very 
difficult to realize You with material senses and mind.” 


Text 44 
tvayy eva jagatah stambhe 
Sasvati jagati sthita 
acala pranindm yonirdharayaty 
akhilam jagat 


“You are the shelter of the universe. Being situated on Your hood, 
the earth is maintaining all moving and non-moving living beings.” 


Text 45 
catuh sagara-bhogas tuam 
catur varnya-vibhagavit 
catur yugesu lokanam 
catur-hotra-phalasanah 


“The four seas are Your expansions. You are the creator of the four 
varnas. You are the object and enjoyer of the four different sacrifices 
practiced during the four yugas.” 


Text 46 
yathaham api lokanam tatha 
tvam tac ca me matam 
ubhav eha-Sarirau svo jagad 
arthe dvidha-kriau 


“ e 
Just as I am the Supersoul of all living entities, You are also th 


Supersoul of all. That is my opinion. We two are one without 4 


BALARAMA KILLS PRALAMBASURA 


second. We have manifested as two for the benefit of the people of 
the universe.” 


Text 47 
aham va sasvatah krsnas 
tvam va sesah puratanah 
lokanam sasvato devas 
tvam hi sesah sanatanah 


avayor deha-matrena 
dvidhedam dharyate jagat 


“I am the eternal Lord Visnu and You are the eternal Ananta Sesa. 
You are the primeval Lord and the ultimate goal of the three worlds. 
Our transcendental forms are the shelter of all moving and non- 


moving living entities within the universe.” 


Text 48 
aham yah sa bhavan eva yas 
tvam so ‘ham sanatanah 
dvav eva vilitau hy avam 
eha-dehau mahabalau 


“You are non-different from Me. Actually, there is no difference 
between Us. You are the eternal Personality of Godhead. We two are 
one but have assumed these forms for Our purpose.” 


Text 49 
tad aste mudhavat tuam kim 
pranena jahit danavam 
murdhni deva-ripum deva 
vajra-kalpena mustina 


“O Lord, why are You remaining silent, like a confused person? You 
have the capacity to kill this demon without any effort. Therefore, 
Strike Your powerful fist on the head of this demon.” 


Text 50 
vaisampayana uvaca 
samsmaritas tu krsnena 


] 


Sri VISNU-PARVA 


rauhineyah puratanam 
balenapiryata tada 
trailokyantara-carinad 


Vaisampayana said: O Janamejaya, when the Supreme Lord, Krsna, 
thus reminded Balarama of His original position, Balarama, the 
son of Rohini, became filled with all the power that is manifested 
throughout the world.” 


Text 51 
tatah pralambam durortiam sa 
baddhena maha-bhujah 
mustinad vajra-kalpena 
murdhni cainam samahanat 


As ordered, mighty-armed Balarama hit the sinful demon, Pralamba, 
on the head with His fist, just like lightening strikes a mountain. 


Text 52 
tasyottamangam sve kaye 
vikapalam vivesa ha 
janubhyam cahatah Sete 
gatasur ddnavotiamah 


Being struck by Balarama’s powerful blow, the demon’s head 
cracked, so that he began to bleed profusely. The king of the demons 
fell down on the surface of the earth, on his knees, and soon, his 
life-air left his body. 


Text 53 
Jagatyam viprakirnasya tasya 
rupam abhit tada 
pralambasyambarasthasya 
meghasyeva vidiryata 
sky, 


The condition of Pralambasura became like the clouds in uA tly 
as 


which sometimes are scattered by a strong wind. It was 4 gh 
scene as he fell dead onto the ground. 


BALARAMA KILLS PRALAMBASURA 


Text 54 
tasya bhagnottamangasya 
dehat susrava Sonitam 
bahu-gairika-samyukttam 
saila-srngadivodakam 


Pools of blood began to flow from the shattered body of the demon. 


It looked as if saffron water was flowing from a mountain peak. 


Text 55 
tam nihatya pralambam tu 
samhrtya balam dimanah 
paryasvajata vai krsnam 
rauhineyah pratapavan 


After annihilating Pralambasura in this way and regaining His 
stature, the mighty Balarama, the son of Rohini, embraced Krsna 


with great affection. 


Text 56 
tam tu krsnas ca gopas ca 
divisthas ca divaukasah 
tustuvur nihate daitye 
jayasirbhir maha-balam 


When the demon was thus eliminated, Krsna, the cowherd boys, and 
the demigods in the sky offered their blessings and congratulated 
mighty Balarama. 


Text 57 
balenayam hato daityo 
balenaklista-karmana 
vivadanty asaririnyo 
vacah sura-samintah 
A voice in the sky announced that the small boy, Balarama, was 


capable of performing great acts effortlessly and thus had easily 
killed the formidable demon, Pralambasura. 


If 


70 


SRI VISNU-PARVA 


Text 58 
baladevett namasya devair 
ukttam divi sthitath 

balam tu baladevasya 
tada bhuvi jana viduh 


Because of this extraordinary act, the denizens of heaven gave Him 
the name, Baladeva. Since that time, the people of the earth came 
to know about the incomparable strength of Balarama. 


Text 59 
karmajam nihate daitye 
devair api durasade 


By killing the demon, Pralambasura, who was unconquerable even 
by the demigods, Balarama became known as Baladeva. 


Thus ends the translation of the fourteenth chapter of the Visny 
Parva of Sri Harivamsa. 


CHAPTER FIFTEEN 
Krsna Inquires about the Sacrifice to Please Indra 


Text | 
vaisampayana Uvaca 
tayoh pravrttayor evam 
krsnasya ca balasya ca 
vane vicarator masau 
vyatidtau sma varsikau 


Vaigampayana said: O Janamejaya, in this way, Krsna and Balarama 
spent the months of the rainy season in Vrndavana, relishing Their 
wonderful childhood pastimes. 


Text 2 
vrajam Gjagmatus tau tu 
vraje Susruvatus tada 
praptam sakram aham virau 
gopams cotsava-ldlasan 


One day, the two great heroes learnt that the time for offering a 
sacrifice to please Indra had come. They could understand that 
all the inhabitants of Vrndavana were very eager to celebrate this 
festival with great pomp. 


Text 3 
kautihalad idam vakyam 
krsnah provaca tatra tan 
ko ‘yam Sakramaho nama 
yena vo harsa agatah 


As if, due to curiosity, Krsna asked one of the cowherd men, “What 
is this festival of Indra-yajfia all about? I can see that you all are very 
excited and happy.” 


Srt Visnu-PARVA 
Text 4 
tatra vrddhatamas tv eko 
gopo vakyam uvaca ha 
srayatam tata sakrasya yad 


artham dhvaja yyate 


The most experienced among the cowherd men replied, “My dear 
child, listen as I explain to You about the reason we devotedly 


worship Indra in Vraja.” 


Text 5 
devanam isvarah sakro 
meghanam cari-sidana 
tasya cayam mahah krsna 
loka-nathasya sasvatah 


“O killer of the enemies! O Krsna! Indra is the king of the demigods 
and the clouds are under his control. Actually, he is the protector of 
the entire world. This festival is held for his pleasure.” 


Text 6 
tena sancodita meghas 
tasya cayudha-bhusitah 
tasyaivajnakarah sasyam 


janayanti navambubhih 


“Being ordered by Indra and adorned by his weapon, the rainbow, 
all the clouds shower rain that helps produce food grains.” 


Text 7 
meghasya payaso data 
puruhitah purandarah 
samprahrstah sa bhagavan 
prinayaty akhilam jagat 
“Lord Indra is glorified with many names. He is the supplier of the 


“rants 
clouds and water. When he is pleased, he satisfies the inhabitar 
of the earth.” 


NQUIRES ABOUT THE SACRIFICE TO PLEASE INDRA 
sNA } 


KR 
Text 8 
tena sampaditam sasyam 
vayam anye ca manavah 
vartayamopayunjanas 
tarpayamas ca devatah 


“A}] living entities subsist upon food grains that are produced by 
the water supplied by Indra. He also assists the demigods in their 


performance of sacrifice in various ways.” 


Text 9 
deve varsatt loke ‘smims tatah 
sasyam pravardhate 
prthivyam tarpitayam tu 
samrtam laksyate jagat 
“It is only because of the rain supplied by Indradeva that all kinds 


of food grains are produced in this world. It is only because of rain 
that the world looks so green, full of life, and satisfied.” 


Text 10 
kstravatyas tu ima gavo 
vatsavatyas ca nirvrtah 
tena samvardhitais tata 
trnaih pustah sapungavah 


“My dear son, all the cows, bulls and calves are maintained by the 
green grass that grows as a result of rainfall. Because of the rain, the 
cows becomes healthy and give an abundance of milk.” 


Text 11 
nasasya natrna bhumir na 
bubhuksGrdito janah 
drsyate yatra drsyante 
urstimanto balahakah 


¢ 
‘Wherever there is sufficient rain, there is no dearth of green grass 


and food grains. As a result of sufficient rainfall, people never suffer 
the pangs of poverty.” 


4 


Sri ViSNU-PARVA 


Text 12 
dudoha savitur ga vat Sakro 
divyah payasvinih 
tah ksaranti navam ksiram 
medhyam meghaugha-dhanitam 


“Clouds are formed when the sun evaporates water from the ocean 
Then, Indra directs the clouds to supply rain wherever there js M 


need, according to his will.” 


Text 13 
vayviritam tu meghesu 
karoti ninadam mahat 
javenavartitam caiva 
garjatiti jana viduh 
“When clouds are forcefully pushed by a strong wind, it produces 
a roaring and rumbling noise so that people think that the clouds 
themselves are making that sound.” | 


Text 14 
tasya caivohyamanasya 
vayu-yukitatr balahakaih 
vajrasani-samah sabdah 
Sruyante naga-bhedinah 


“A thunderbolt is a combination of a strong wind, clouds filled 
with water, and the roaring noise born of their hitting one another, 
which can even pierce a mountain.” 


Text 15 
tajjalam vajra-nispesair 
vimuncati nabhogataih 
bahubhih kamagair meghaih 
sakro bhrtyair ivesvarah 


&“ : € 
Just as a king knows how to get work out of his servants, Indra, a 


king of the demigods, employs an unlimited number of clouds that 


KRSNA INQUIRES ABOUT THE SACRIFICE TO FLEABQE INDRA 


wander freely in the sky, as well as the terrifying sound produced by 


lightning, to shower rain upon the earth.” 


Texts 16-17 
kvacid durdina-sankasath 
kvacic chinnabhra-sannibhaih 
kvacid bhinnanjanakaraih 
kvacic chikara-vasibhih 


mandayativa devendro visvam 
evam nabho ghanath 

kvacic chikara-mukttabham 
kurute gaganam ghanah 


“Sometimes, these clouds look fierce and are spread throughout 
the entire sky. Sometimes, they appear scattered here and there, 
sometimes they look as black as coal that was just taken from a 
mine, and sometimes they cause drizzling. In this way, with the help 
of different types of clouds, Indra keeps the sky nicely decorated. 
Sometimes, the sky becomes adorned with pearls that are tiny drops 
of water showered by the clouds.” 


Text 18 
evam etat payo dugdham 
gobhih suryasya varidath 
parjanyah sarva-bhitanam 
bhavaya bhuvi varsati 


“Indra causes the water of the earth to evaporate, with the help of 
sun rays, and form clouds. Then, for the maintenance of all living 
entities, he showers rain from the clouds that falls upon the surface 
of the earth.” 


Text 19 
yasmat pravrd tyam krsna 
Sakrasya bhuvi bhavint 
tasmat pravrsi rajanah sarve 
Sakram mudd yutah 


175 


Sri VISNU-PARVA 


mahath suresam arcant 
vayam anye ca manavah 


“O Krsna, this is why the rainy season is considered to be the pro 
time for worshiping and pleasing Indradeva. Therefore, all the ae 
worship Indra by holding big festivals during the rainy season. ar 
also follow this procedure.” 


Thus ends the translation of the fifteenth chapter of the Visny Pary 
of Sri Harivamsa. : ; 


GHAPTER SIXTEKENTH 


Krsna Proposes the Worship of Govardhana Hill 
instead of an Indra sacrifice. 


Text 1 
vatsampayana uvaca 
gopa-vrddhasya vacanam 

srutud sakra-parigrahe 
prabhdvajno ‘pi sakrasya 
vakyam damodaro ‘bravit 


Vaisampayana said: O Janamejaya, after Krsna had been informed 
of the importance of Indra’s sacrifice by the elderly cowherd men 
of Vraja, He replied to them, knowing very well the actual influence 


of Indra. 


Text 2 
vayam vanacara gopah 
sada godhana-yjivinah 
gavo ‘smad daivatam viddhi 
girayas ca vanani ca 


“O respected one, we are cowherds by birth and we live in the forest. 
We earn our livelihood by taking care of the cows. Therefore, you 
should consider the cows, mountains, and forests are to be our 


worshipable protectors.” 


Text 3 
harsukanam krsir vrttih 
panyam vipanijivinam 
gavo ‘smakam para vrttir 
etat tratvidyam ucyate 
“Agriculture is the means of livelihood for farmers. Trading is the 


means of livelihood for vaisyas, and maintaining cows is the means 
of livelihood for people like us. This is the understanding that we 


have received from authoritative sources.” 


177 


8 


SRI Visnu-pPparva 


Text 4 
vidyayd yo yayd yuktlas 
lasya sa davvatam param 
satvd pujyarcaniya ca 
sarua tasyopakarini 
“According to one’s natural propensities, one should be eng 
in performing his occupational duties. This is the 
understanding, which is very beneficial for human society,” 


agec| 
Prope r 


Text 5 
yo ‘nyasya phalamasnanah 
karoly anyasya satkriyam 
dvav anarthau sa labhate 


pretya ceha ca manavah 


“One who receives benefit from someone but then worships and 


serves someone else becomes a sharer of his miseries, both in this 
life and in the next.” 


Text 6 
krsyanta prathita stma 
simantam sruyate vanam 
vananta girayah sarve te 
casmakam gatir dhruva 


“The entire land of Vrndavana is full of agricultural fields. Beyond 


the agricultural land are forests, and beyond them is Govardhana 
Hill, which is certainly our shelter.” 


Text 7 
sruyante girayas capt vane 
smin kama-ripinah 
pravisya tastastanavo 


ramante svesu SANUSU 


6 ume 
‘It has been heard by us that the hills of the forest can or 

° ° bd J 
various forms, according to their sweet will. Thus, they ae 
various forms and then wander about on their peaks.” 


Kee" 
Text 8 


bhiutva kesarinah simha 
vyaghras ca nakhinam varah 

vanani svani raksanti 
trasayanto vanacchidah 


“It is a mountain that takes the form of a lion or tiger, which are 
considered to be the kings of the jungle. In this way, the mountain 
protects itself and the surrounding area by frightening those who 
come to cut down the trees and thereby harm the forest.” 


Text 9 
yada caisam vikurvanit 
te vandlaya-jivinah 
ghnanti tan eva durorttan 
paurusdd ena karmana 


“When persons who earn their livelihood by taking advantage of the 
forest try to harm its predominating deity, that powerful lord will 
certainly kill such sinful people.” 


Text 10 
mantra-yajna-para viprah 
sitd-yajnas ca karsukah 
giri-yajnas tatha gopa iyo 
‘smabhir girir vane 


“The brahmanas remain engaged in chanting mantras and farmers 
engage in tilling the land and producing food grains. They worship 
the agricultural land and the plough, as well. The profession of the 
cowherds indicates that they should perform a Govardhana sacrifice. 


Therefore, we should arrange a sacrifice to please Govardhana 


Hill.” 


Texts 11-12 


tan mahyam rocate gopa 
giri-yajnah pravartaiam 


) 


Srt Visnu-PARVA 


karma krtva sukha-sthane 
padapesv athava girau 


tatra hatva pasun medhyan 
vitatyayatane subhe 

sarva-ghosasya sandohah 
kriyatam kim vicaryate 


“C) cowherd men, it is My desire that the worship of Govardhana 
Hill be introduced. We should select a suitable place, either under 
a tree or at the foot of the hill and, after cleaning it thoroughly, 
we should assemble, along with our cows, and worship Govardhana 
Hill. We can bring all the milk from our cowshed and use it to bathe 
Govardhana Hill. What do you think of this proposal?” 


Text 13 
tam Sarat-kusumapidah 
parivarya pradaksinam 
gavo girtvaram sarvas tato 


yan tu punar vrajam 


“We should make all the cows, their heads decorated with the flowers 
of the autumn season, circumambulate the entire Govardhana Hill, 


keeping it on their right.” 


Text 14 
prapta kileyam ht gavam 
svadu-toya-trna gunath 
Sarat pramudita ramya 
gata-megha-jalasaya 


“The very pleasant autumn season has already arrived, so that the 
water and green grass of Vrndavana are very tasty for the cows. Much 
of the time, there is hardly a hint of a cloud in the sky. Indeed, the 
atmosphere has become most pleasing.” 


Text 15 
priyakath puspitair gauram 
Ssyama vanasanaih kvacit 


KRSNA PROPOSES THE WORSHIP OF GOVARDHANA HILL 


kathora-trnam abhati 
nirmayurarutam vanam 


“The forest of Vrndavana has a golden hue because of the presence 
of so many fully-blossomed kadamba flowers. Due to the countless 
bushes and small plants here and there, the forest sometimes 
appears dark. The grass is no longer tender because it has grown, 


and we no longer hear the crowing of peacocks.” 


Text 16 
vijala vimala vyomnt 
vibalaka vividyutah 
vivardhante jaladhara 
vidanta iva kuftyarah 


“The clouds in the sky are devoid of water, dirt, and lightening, and 
so they appear like elephants without tusks.” 


Text 17 
patuna megha-vatena 
nava-toyanukarsina 
parnotkara-ghanah sarve 
prasadam yanit padapah 


“During the rainy season, the forest looked very green and dense 
because of the heavy rainfall and strong wind. Now, the trees are 
beginning to lose their leaves, so that the forest looks thinner and 


bright.” 


Text 18 
sita-varnambudosnisam 
hamsa-camara-vijitam 
purna-candramalac chatram 
sabhisekam ivambaram 


“At present, the sky looks like a king with a crown on his head. The 
white clouds resembles his white turban. The swans are the white 
camaras with which the king 1s fanned. The full moon is the white 


umbrella over his head.” 


SRY VISNUSPARVA 


Tent 19 
hansah prahasitantoa 
samuthystant savasaih 
sarvanl tanulam yank 
yalani jala-daksaye 


“After the rainy season is over, the water in all kinds of renervoiry 
begins to decrease, as if the swans have taken away their luster and 
the cranes have condemned them.” 


Text 20 
cakravaka-stana-latah 
pulina-sroni-mandalah 
hansa-laksana-hasinyah 
patim yank samudragah 


“The rivers that flow towards the ocean have a smile in the form of 
swans sporting in their water. The pair of cakravdka birds are the 
river’s two breasts and the river’s two banks are its hips.” 


Text 21 
kumudotphullam udakam 
tdrabhis citram ambaram 
samam abhyutsmayantiva 
Sarvarisy itaretaram 


“At night, innumerable lotus flowers bloom in the water of the lake. 
The entire sky becomes decorated with countless stars. It appears 


that they are competing with one another, saying, ‘My beauty is 
superior to yours.’ ” 


Text 22 
matta-krauncavaghustesu 
kalamapakva-pandusu 
nirvista-ramaniyesu 
vanesu ramate manah 


sweetly 


“The forest of Vrndavana, where numerous kinds of birds : 
se the 


sing, like intoxicated persons; where the paddy fields incre@ 


KRSNA PROPOSES THE WORSHIP OF GOVARDHANA HILL 


beauty of the forest, like fully-decorated beautiful girls; and where a 
pleasant atmosphere is always found, like in the house of a married 


couple who truly enjoy each other’s association; awards great 
pleasure to the minds of everyone.” 


Text 23 
puskarinyas tadagani 
vapyas ca vikacotpalah 
kedarah santas caiva 
saramsi ca Sriyajvalan 
“The land of Vrndavana is adorned with many beautiful reservoirs 
of water—ponds, lakes, kundas, streams, and rivers.” 


Text 24 
pankajani ca tamrani 
tathanyani sitany api 
utpalani ca nilani bhejire 
varyam Sriyam 
“In the water of those reservoirs, there are many red, white, yellow, 
and blue lotus flowers that increase the beauty of the entire area.” 


Text 25 
madam jahuh sitapanga 
mandam vavrdhire ‘nilah 
abhavad vyabhram akasam 
abhic ca nibhrto ‘rnavah 


“The intoxication of the peacocks has come to an end. The cool 
breezes do not blow as before. There are hardly any clouds in the 
sky and the ocean looks completely filled and grave.” 


Text 26 
rtu-paryaya-sithilair vrtta- 
nrtya-samuphitath 
mayuranga-ruhair bhimir 
bahu-netreva laksyate 


1¢ 


4 SRI ViSnu-PARVA 


“Because the rainy season is over and the peacocks have stopped 
dancing in ecstasy, their enthusiasm ended, the whole of Vrndavana 
appears to be full of eyes, peacock feathers being scattered here 
and there.” 


Text 27 
sva-panka-malinais tirath 
kasa-puspa-latakulath 
hamsa-sdrasa-vinyasair 


yamuna bhati Sobhana 


“The two banks of the Yamuna, which became dirty with mire, 
where many kdsa flowers have bloomed, where thickets of creepers 
and bushes are present, and where swans and cranes have made 
their residences, look beautiful.” 


Text 28 
Ralamapaka-ramyesu 
kedaresu jalesu ca 
sasyada jalajadas ca 
matta viruruvuh khagah 
“The agricultural land appears wonderful with rice paddy, giving 
it a yellow hue. Many cranes and other birds have come there to 
eat the particles of grain. Some of the cranes are fighting amongst 
themselves over the fish in the lake.” 


Text 29 
sisicuryani jalada 
jalena jaladagame 
tani sasyani balani 
kathinatvam gatani vai 


“All the plants and creepers that grew tender leaves and twigs when 
there was abundant rainfall have now become hard and grown Up. 


Text 30 
tyaktud meghamayam vasah 
Sarad-guna-vidipitah 


KRSNA PROPOSES THE WORSHIP OF GOVARDHANA HILL! 


esa vai vimale vyomni 
hrsto vasati candramah 


“Now, the moon has relinquished his garments of clouds and has 
become celebrated due to the good qualities of the autumn season. 
He looks very joyful in the clear sky.” 


Text 31 
ksirinyo dvigunam gavah 
pramatta dvigunam vrsah 
vandnam dviguna laksmih 
sasyair gunavati mahi 


“In autuinn, the cows give double the quantity of milk and the 
bulls become doubly intoxicated. The beauty of the forest becomes 
doubie, and because of the arrival of the time for harvesting the 
crops, the earth looks unlimitedly more beautiful.” 


Text 32 
jyotimst dhana-muktani 
padmavanti jalani ca 
manamsi ca manusyanam 
prasadam upayant vai 


“The stars and planets, which have become freed from the covering 
of clouds, appear most pleasing, like water overgrown with lotus 
flowers, or the clear mind of a devotee.” 


Text 33 
asrjat savita vyomnt 
nirmukto jaladair bhrsam 
sarat-prajvalitam tejas 
ftksna-rasmir visosayan 


“Because there are no clouds in the sky, the sun in autumn appears 
much brighter, while spreading its brilliant rays. Indeed, the sun 
appears to suck the water from the earth, by means of its scorching 
rays.” 


3% 0 60SRI VISNU-PARVA 
Text 34 
nivdjayuvad sainyant 
prayanit vyigisavah 
anyonya-rastrabhimukhah 
parthivah prihiviksiiah 


“The kings of the earth have ordered their servants to sharpen 
their weapons. They are getting ready to invade and defeat their 
enemies.” 


Text 35 
bandhu-jivabhitamrasu 
baddha-pankavaitisu ca 
manas tisthati kantasu 
citrasu vana-rajisu 


“The mind is certainly attracted to the vision of rows of charming 
forests that are nicely decorated with many red bandhujiva flowers, 
and where the mud has completely dried up.” 


Texts 36-37 
vanesu ca virajante padapa 
vana-sobhinah 
asanah sapta-parnas ca 
kovidaras ca puspitah 


susahva nikumbhas ca 
priyakah svarnakas tatha 

srmarah pecakds caiva 
ketakyas ca samantatah 


Trees, such as the asana, saptaparna, kovidara, vanasan4, nikumbha, 
priyaka, and svarnaka are now decorated with fully-blossomed 
flowers. There are Many other trees, such as the ketaki, which have 
increased the beauty of the forests. Many kinds of deer and owls ca? 
be seen roaming in a joyful mood.” 


KRSNA PROPOSES THE WORSHIP OF GOVARDHANA HILL 


Text 38 
vrajesu ca viSesena 
gargarodgara-hasisu 
Sarat-prakasayoseva 
gosthesv atati rupini 


“The autumn season appears like a young girl in the pasturing 
grounds of Vrndavana, where there are many containers of milk 
and yogurt lying here and there.” 


Text 39 
nunam tridasa-bhiyistham 
megha-kala-sukhositam 
patattnketanam devam 
bodhayanti divaukasah 


“The demigods must be cautiously trying to wake up the Supreme 
Lord, whose flag is marked with the emblem of Garuda, who rests 
during the months of the rainy season, and who is the best among 
the controllers.” 


- Texts 40-42 
Sarady evam susasyayam 
praptayam pravrsah ksaye 
nila-candrarka-varnais ca 
racitam bahubhir dviyjaih 


phalath pravalais ca ghanam 
indra-capa-ghanopamam 

bhavanakara-vitapam lata- 
parama-mandiiam 


visala-milavanatam 
pavanabhoga-manditam 
arcayamo girim devam gas 


caiva ca visesatah 


Srl VISNU-PARVA 


“The arrival of autumn, which comes after the rainy Season, can 
be gauged by looking at the new crops. The forest appears with 
a multitude of colors because it is the playground of blue bj 
appearing like dark clouds; white birds, appearing like Moonsh 
and yellow birds, appearing like sunshine.” 


rds, 
ine; 


“Now, the forest appears thicker and more dense because the trees 
are full of flowers, fresh twigs, and fruit. Govardhana Hill, which 
looks beautiful, like an evening cloud accompanied by a rainbow; 
the trees of which look like tall buildings; which is nicely decorated 
with creepers and bushes; which extends for a long distance and 
which is served by a cool breeze; is certainly our worshipable Lord. 
Therefore, it is our foremost duty to worship Govardhana Hill, as 
well as the cows of Vraja.” 


Texts 43-44 
savatamsair visdnais ca 
barhapidais ca damsitaih 
ghantabhis ca pralambabhih 
puspath saradtkais tatha 


Swaya gavah pujayantam 
gin-yajnah pravartyatam 
puyjyaiam tridasaih sakro 
girir asmabhir ijyatam 
“The horns of the cows should be decorated with gold, peacock 
feathers, and other ornaments. A necklace of bells should be 
placed around their necks. For the benefit of the inhabitants of 
Vraja, we should worship the cows with autumn flowers. We should 
immediately begin to perform Govardhana-pija. Let the demigods 
worship Indra, and let us worship Giriraja Govardhana.” 


Text 45 
karayisyami go-yajnam 
balad api na samsayah 
yady asti mayi vah pritir 


yadi va suhrdo vayam 


KRSNA PROPOSES THE WORSHIP OF GOVARDHANA HILL 


gavo ht pijyah satatam 
sarvesam natra samsayah 


“If you have any love and affection for Me, and if we are the well- 
wishers of one another, I compel you to worship the cows and 
Govardhana hill. There is no doubt that cows are always beneficial 
for human society, and thus worshipable for all classes of men.” 


Text 46 
yadt samna bhavet pritir 
bhavatam vaibhavaya ca 
etan mama vacas tathyam 
kriyatam avicaritam 


“If you are pleased by My instructions then kindly accept them 
without any hesitation and follow whatever I have indicated, for 


your own benefit.” 


Thus ends the translation of the sixteenth chapter of the Visnu 


Parva of Sri Harvamsa. 


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 


The Cowherd Men Accept Krsna’s Proposal 


and Worship Govardhana Hil] 


Text 1 
vaisampayana uvaca- 
damodara-vacah srutvd 

hrstas te gosu jivinah 
tad-vag amrtam asadya 


praty ucur avisankaya 


Vaisampayana said: O Janamejaya, when Krsna, who is also known as 
Damodara, spoke in this way, the cowherd men, who earned their 


livelihood by trading cow products, joyfully consented and fearlessly 
spoke as follows. 


Text 2 
tavaisa bala mahati 
gopanam hita-varddhini 
prinayaty eva nah sarvan 
buddhir vrddhikari gavam 


“O child, Krsna, Your advice, filled with logic and reasoning, is 
essential for the welfare of the cowherd men and cows. We are very 
happy to accept Your proposal.” 


Text 3 
tvam gatis tvam ratis caiva 
tvam vetia tuam parayanam 
bhayesv abhayadas tvam nas 
tvam eva suhrdam suhrt 


You are our goal of life, You are our happiness, You are our only 
shelter, and You know everything. When we are in danger, it is You 
who give us assurances. You are the true well-wisher of all of us. 


Lext 4 
tvat-krte krsna ghoso yam 
ksemit mudita-gokulah 
krisno vasati Santarir 
yatha svargam gatas tathg 
“My dear Krsna, it is because of You that Vrndavana is 


the cows are very happy, our enemies have become 
all the inhabitants of Vraja are living so happily, 


rot 
P ected, 
Silent, and 
as | 
eaven. 
Text 5 
janma-prabhrti karmaitad 
devair asukaram bhuvi 
boddhavyac cabhimandac ca 
vismitant manadmsi nah 


“Even the demigods are incapable of performing the wonderful 
activities that You have effortlessly performed as a small child, such 
as breaking the bullock cart and killing the witch, Putana. By seeing 
these wonderful pastimes and by hearing your nectarean advice, we 
have become astonished.” 


Text 6 
balena ca parardhyena 
yasasa vikramena ca 
uttamas tuam manusyesu 
devesv iva purandarah 
hless 
inion 


(<4 


zr ‘ c 
You are the best among all human beings because of Your mat 
, ee: Jaur pos 
strength, incomparable fame, and unlimited prowess. 1our P 
is similar to that of Indra, the king of the demigods. 


Text 7 
pratapena ca tiksnena 
diptya pirnatayapr ca 
uttamas tvuam ca martyesu 
devesv iva divadkarah 


ie ee Oe ee eo le eee ee, ee vw PN WE VO A Ls 


“with Your incomparable knowledge and influence, unrivaled 
effulgence, and perfect vision, You are the foremost personality, 
just as the sun is most prominent among the demigods.” 


Text 8 
kantyd laksmya prasaddena 
vadanena smitena ca 
uttamas tuam ca martyesu 
devesv va nisakarah 


“Because of Your sublime complexion, opulence, compassion, 
attractive face, and enchanting smile, You are the best among 
all persons, just as the moon shines prominently among the 


demigods. : 


Texts 9-10 
balena vapusa cava 
balyena caritena ca 
syat te Saktidharas tulyo 
na tu kascana manusah 


yat tuayabhihitam vakyam 
giri-yajnam prati prabho 

kas tal-langhayitum sakto 
velam iva mahodadhih 


“There is no powerful human being who can match your appearance 
and strength, childhood pastimes, and enchanting characteristics. 
O Lord, who can contradict whatever you have said regarding 
Govardhana-puja? Can an ocean overtake its shore?” 


Text 11 
sthitah sakra-mahas tata 
sriman giri-mahas tv.ayam 
tvat-pranito ‘dya gopanam 
gavam hetoh pravartyatam 


“M : 
a ies) child, from today onwards, we will stop the Indra sacrifice 
stead, perform the Govardhana sacrifice, which you have 


4 SRI VISNU-PARVA 


introduced for the benefit of the cows and cowherg reside 
Vraja.” se 
Texts 12-15 
bhajanany upakalpyantam 
payasah pesalani ca 
kumbhd4s ca vinivesyantam 
udapanesu sobhanah 


puryantam payasa nadyo 
dronyas ca vipulayatah 

bhaksyam bhojyam ca peyam 
ca tat sarvam upaniyatam 


bhajanani ca mamsasya 
nyasyantam odanasya ca 

tri-ratram caiva sandohah 
sarva-ghosasya grhyatam 


visasyantam ca pasavo 
bhojya ye mahisddayah 

pravartyatam ca yajfio ‘yam 
sarva-gopa-susankulah 


“Let us prepare for the performance of Govardhana-puja. Let us 
gather together many beautiful pots of milk and let us place rows 
of pitchers by the side of the well. Let us fill the newly-built canals 
and ponds with milk. Let us arrange for all kinds of food and drink. 
Let us fill this place with innumerable pots filled with fruit and food 
grains. Let us collect all the milk from Vraja that we obtained duns 
the last three days. We should take very nice care of our domestic 
animals, the cows and buffaloes—feeding them sumptuously. a 
this way, let us begin to celebrate the festival of Govardhana-py” 
with the help of all the cowherd residents of Vraja.” 


Texts 16-18 
anandayanano ghoso 
mahan mudita-gokulah 


THe COV ee eM EN OCR PT Ree & Ph ae oa ew 


turya-pranddaghosais ca 
ursabhanam ca garjitaih 


hambharavais ca vatsanam 
gopanam harsa-vardhanah 

dadhno hrado ghrtavartah 
payah-kulyadsamakulah 


mamsa-rasih prabhitadhyah 
prakdsaudana-parvatah 

sampravartata yajno ‘sya 
girer gobhih samakulah 


tusta-gopa-janakirno 
gopa-nari-manoharah 


Thereafter, all of Vraja became filled with jubilation. There were 
feelings of happiness within the minds of everyone. The residents 
of Vrndavana drowned in an ocean of joy. The combined sounds 
of musical instruments and the bellowing of the bulls and cows 
increased the pleasure of the cowherd men. The yogurt in large 
containers had a layer of thick cream. There were unlimited pots 
of milk. Baskets of fruit began to come from all directions. Many 
ingredients for performing the preliminary rituals were collected. 
Heaps of cooked rice became as tall as a mountain. In this way, the 
sacrifice of worshiping Govardhana Hill began. All the cowherd men 
were fully satisfied as they assembled together and began carrying 
out their respective duties. The presence of the cowherd women 
made the festival even more attractive. 


_Text 19 
_ bhaksyanam rasayas tatra 
Satasas copakalpitah 
gandha-malyais ca vividhair 

dhupair uccadvacais tatha 
i amount of cooked food was collected. There hes an 
vee ae of sandalwood paste, flower garlands, and incense 
ound the sacrificial arena. 


Text 20 
athadhisrta-paryante 
samprapte yajna-samvidhay 
yajnam gires tathau sSaumye 
cakrur gopa dvijaih saha 


After the sacrificial fire was ignited, all the ingredients 
kept on large plates were offered into it. On an auspicio 
brahmanas, along with the cowherd men, began to p 
great sacrifice. 


that were 


us day, the 
€rform this 


Text 21 
yajanante tad annam tu 
tat payo dadhi cottamam 
mamsam ca mayaya krsno 
girir bhutvad samasnute 


At the completion of the sacrifice of worshiping Govardhana Hill, 
Krsna, by His own supreme potency, assumed the form of the 
predominating deity of Govardhana Hill and began to eat all the 
cooked food, yogurt, milk, and fruit. 


Text 22 
tarpitas capi vipragryas 
tustah sampurna-manasah 
uttasthuh prita-manasah 
svastt vacyam yatha-sukham 


All the assembled brahmanas were sufficiently satisfied by food, 
drink, and daksina. They had no desire that was left unfulfilled. 
They blessed everyone and prayed for their well-being. 


Text 23 
bhukiva cavabhrthe krsnah 
payah pita ca kamatah 
sanirpto ‘smiti divyena 
riipena prajahasa vat 


THE COWHERD MEN ACCEPT KRSNA’S PROPOSAL 


When the time came for taking the ritualistic bath at the conclusion 
of the sacrifice, Krsna, after eating all the food and drinking all the 
milk, said, “I am fully satisfied.” Saying this, Krsna, who had assumed 
the transcendental form of Govardhana Hill, began to laugh. 


Text 24 
tam gopah parvatakaram 
divya-srag anulepanam 
girt-murdhni sthitam drstua 
krsnam jagmuh pradhanatah 


When all the inhabitants of Vraja saw Krsna, who was adorned 
with fragrant sandalwood paste and a beautiful flower garland, 
standing on the peak of Govardhana Hill, they took shelter of Him, 
considering Him to be their beloved Krsna. 


Text 25 
bhagavan api tenaiva 
rupenacchaditah prabhuh 
sahitath pranato gopatr 
vavandadtmanam atmana 


Most powerful Krsna then offered His obeisances to Himeself, in 
the form of Govardhana Hill, along with all the assembled cowherd 
men and women. 


Text 26 
tam ucur vismita gopa 
devam girwvare sthitam 
bhagavams tvad-vase yukta 
dasah kim kurma kinkarah 


Thereafter, all the cowherd men who had gathered there spoke to 
the Supreme Lord, who was standing on top of Govardhana Hill: “O 
Supreme Lord, we take shelter of You because we are Your servants. 


P 
lease tell us—how Can we serve You?” 


Text 27 
sa uvaca tato gopan 
- giri-prabhavaya gira 
padya-prabhrti cejyo ‘ham 
gosu yadyastu vo daya 


Krsna replied with a voice from Govardhana Hill: “If you have an 
respect for Me within your hearts then from today onwards = 
should worship Me through the worship of the cows.” 


Text 28 
aham vah prathamo devah 
sarva-kamakarah subhah 
mama prabhavac ca gavam 
ayutany eva bhoksyatha 


“I am your worshipable Lord. I am the one who fulfills all your 
desires. I am your well-wisher. By My mercy, you will have ten. 
thousand cows in your possession, so that you can amply enjoy their 
milk products.” 


Text 29 
Sivas ca vo bhavisyami 
mad-bhaktanam vane vane 
ramsye ca saha yusmabhir 
yatha divigatas tatha 


“T will always be helpful to all of you who display great devotion for 
Me. I will always happily remain in your association, just as I do 1n 
My transcendental abode.” 


Text 30 
ye ceme prathita gopa 
nanda-gopa-purogamah 
esam pritah prayacchami 
gopanam vipulam dhanam 


alth 


“Being pleased by your devotion, I will award an abundance of we 
to all the cowherd inhabitants of Vraja, headed by Nanda. 


THE COWHERD MEN ACCEPT KRSNA’S PROPOSAL 


Text 31 
paryapnuvantu ksipram mam 
gavo vatsa-samakulah 

evam mama para pritir 
bhavisyati na samsayah 


“Now, arrange for all the cows and calves to circumambulate Me 
without delay. There is no doubt that by doing so, I will become 
very pleased.” 


Text 32 
tato nirajanartham hi 
vrndaso gokulani tam 
parivavrur ginvaram 
savrsani samantatah 


Thereafter, as ordered by the Lord, numerous groups of cows and 
bulls were assembled near Govardhana Hill. 


Text 33 
ta gavah pradruta hrstah 
apida-stabakangadah 
sasrajapida-srngagrah 
Sataso ‘tha sahasrasah 


The heads of all these cows were decorated with flowers and their 
legs were decorated with bunches of flowers. The tips of their 
horns were adorned with garlands of buds. In this way, hundreds 


of thousands of cows joyfully began to circumambulate Govardhana 
Hill. 


Texts 34-39 
anujagmus ca gopalah 
kalayanto dhanani ca 
bhakticchedanuliptanga 
rakta-pita-sitambarah 


mayutra-citrangadino 
bhujath praharanavrtath 


If 


mayura-patra-urntanam 
kesa-bandhath suyojitaih 


babhrajur adhikam gopah 
samavaye tadadbhute 

anye vrsan aruruhur 
nrtyantt sma pare muda 


gopalas tv apare gas 
ca jagrhur vega-gaminah 
tasmin paryaya-nirvrite 
gavam nirajanotsave 


antardhanam jagamasu 
tena dehena so ‘calah 

krsno ‘pt gopa-sahito 
vivesa vrajam eva ha 


giri-yajna-pravritena 
tenascaryena vismitah 
gopah sabala-vrddha v 
ai tustuvur madhusidanam 


The cowherd men followed the cows from behind while loudly 
exclaiming their happiness. These cowherd men were decorated 
with colorful pulp and powder. They were dressed in red, yellow, 
and white garments. Their arms were adorned with armlets and 
decorated with peacock feathers. Each of them carried a stick in his 
hand. Their heads were decorated with peacock feathers. Because 
of all these ornaments, the cowherd inhabitants of Vraja looked 
most enchanting. 


Some of the men rode on the backs of bulls while others were 
dancing in ecstasy. Some of the cowherd boys enjoyed catching the 
running cows and calves. When all the cows, calves, and cowherd 
men completed their circumambulation, the predominating Deity 
of Govardhana Hill disappeared from the mountain peak. 


THE COWHERD MEN ACCEPT KRSNA’S PROPOSAL 


Thereafter, Krsna returned to Vrndavana with all the cowherd 
habitants of Vraja. Being astonished by the wonderful performance 
: Govardhana-puja, all the cowherd boys and elderly men of Vraja 
slorified Krsna, the killer of the Madhu demon. 


Thus ends the translation of the seventeenth chapter of the Visnu 
Parva of Sri Harivamsa. 


Indra Sends Devastating rainfall to Vrndavana 
Krsna lifts Govardhana Hill 


Text 1 
vaisampayana uvaca 
mahe pratthate sakrah 
sakrodhas tridasesvarah 
samvartakam nama ganam 
toyadanam athabravit 


Vaisampayana said: O Janamejaya, when Indra understood that the 
sacrifice intended for his satisfaction had been stopped by Krsna, 
he became very angry. He summoned his most powerful clouds, 
known as Sammvartaka, and ordered them. 


Text 2 
bho balahaka-matangah. 
Sruyatam mama bhasitam 
yadi vo mat-priyam karyam 
raja-bhakti-puraskytam 


“O powerful clouds, you are as intoxicated as mad elephants. If you are 
actually loyal to me, and if you wish to please me, then do as I say.” 


Text 3 
ete vrndavana-gata 
damodara-parayanah 
nanda-gopadayo gopa 
vidvisanti mamotsavam 


“All the cowherd men of Vrndavana, headed’ by Nanda Maharaja, 
have Stopped worshiping me at the instigation of Krsna because 
they consider Him to be their only support.” 


Text 4 
ajtvo yah paras tesam 
gopatvam ca yatah smrtam 


ta gavah sapta-ratrena 


pidyaniam varsa-marutaih 


“Therefore, my order is that you destroy all the cows and ¢ 
of Vrndavana, whose products are the means of livelihoog fo 
people there, headed by Nanda, by showering incessant rai 


Alves 
r the 
N for 
seven days.” 
Text 5 
aivavata-gatas caham svayam 
evambu darunam 
sraksyami vrstim vatam ca 
vajrasani-samaprabham 


“I will personally go there, riding on the back of my carrier, Airavata, 
and supervise this great natural disaster, accompanied by my 
thunderbolt, lightning, heavy rain, and strong winds.” 


Text 6 
bhavadbhis canda-varsena 
carata marutena ca 
hatas tah savraja gavas 
tyaksyantt bhuvi jivitam 


“When you begin showering heavy rain, accompanied by hurricane 
winds, the cows and residents of Vraja will be put into such distress 
that they will be forced to give up their lives.” 


Text 7 
evam ajnapayamasa sarvan 
jaladharan prabhuh 
pratyahate vai krsnena 
Sdsane paka-Sdsanah 


eee t] 
Being insulted because his worship had been curtailed, the great 


; no 
powerful Indra thus gave instructions to the host of clouds * 
as Sarnvartaka. 


KRSNA LIFTS GOVARDHANA HILL 


Text 8 
tatas te jaladah krsna 
ghora-nada bhayavahah 
akasam chadayamasuh 
sarvatah parvatopamah 


Thereafter, formidable dark clouds that resembled mountains 
began to rumble as they covered the entire sky. 


Text 9 
vidyut-sampatayananah 
Sakva-capa-vibhisitah 
tumiravrtam Gkasam 
cakrus te jaladas tada 


These powerful clouds were accompanied by a rainbow and 
lightning. By their presence, the atmosphere became very dark. 


Text 10 
gaja wanya-samyukiah 
kecin makara-varcasah 
naga ivanye gagane 
cerur jalada-pungavah 


Some clouds appeared as if many elephants were walking, side by 
side. Some of them looked like huge crocodiles, and some of them 
looked like great serpents. 


Text 11 
te ‘nyonyam vapusa baddha 
naga-yuthayutopamah 
durdinam vipulam cakrus 
chadayanto nabhas talam 


The entire atmosphere became frightening as thousands of dark 


beer that looked like thousands of huge elephants, gathered in 
the sky, 


Text 12 
nr-hasta-naga-hastabhyam 
venunam caiva sarvatah 
dharabhis tulya-ritpabhir 
vavrsus te balahakah 


Thereafter, the clouds began to shower a devastatin 
resembled the hands of human beings, the trunks of ¢ 


bamboo sticks. 


5 Tain that 
] 
€phants, Or 


Text 13 
samudram menire tam hi 
kham aridham nr-caksusah 
durvigahyam aparyantam 
agadham durdinam mahat 


When the inhabitants of Vraja saw these unlimited 
and unfathomable clouds spreading across the sky, they 
considered the situation to be very grave, like the ocean. 

Text 14 
naivapatan vat khagama 
dudrudhur mrga-jatayah 
parvatabhesu meghesu khe 
nandatsu samantatah 


Mountain-like clouds began to rumble in the four directions 


throughout the sky. Birds stop flying and the animals ran here and 
there due to fear. 


Text 15 
nasta-siiryendu-sadrsair 
meghair nabhasi darunaih 
ativrstena lokasya 
viriipam abhavad vapuh 


a ee ered 
i “ausing incessant rain, the formidable clouds that a oe the 
entire sky, just as they do at the time of annihilation, ah 


f 
appe 
sunlight and Moonlight and thus made the entire earth 4P 
deformed. 


Text 16 
meghaughair nisprabhakaram 
adrsya-graha-tarakam 
candra-sitryamsu-rahitam 
kham babhivati-nisprabham 


Because of the presence of the dark clouds, there was no light visible 
in the sky. The planets and stars seemed to disappear. There was no 
trace of the sun or the moon. Indeed, the entire sky became filled 
with darkness. 


Text 17 
varina megha-muktena 
mucyamanena casakrt 
ababhau sarvatas tatra 
bhimis toyamayi yatha 


Gradually, the surface of the earth became filled with water as 
incessant rainfall from the clouds spread everywhere. 


Text 18 
vinedur barhinas tatra toka- 
kalparutah khagah 
vivrddhim nimnaga yatah 
plavagah samplavam gatah 


The peacocks panicked, crowing loudly, all at a time. The other birds 
stopped chirping. The rivers overflowed their banks and the trees 
on the banks of the rivers were swept away by the strong current. 


Text 19 
garjitena ca meghanam 
parjanya-ninadena ca 
tarjitaniva kampante 
trnani tarubhih saha 


Because of the thundering of the clouds, and the loud roaring of 
the rain, all the trees, creepers, and grass began to tremble. 


Text 20 
prapto ‘ntakalo lokanam 
vyaktam ekarnava mahi 
iti gopagana vakyam 
vyaharanti bhayarditah 


Being greatly frightened by the heavy rain and strong wing, the 
cowherd men discussed among themselves: “Certainly the time of 


universal annihilation has arrived and the entire earth will become 
inundated.” 


Text 21 
tenotpatambu-varsena 
gavo viprahata bhrsam 
hambharavath krandamané na 


celuh stambhitopamah 


Because of this calamity inflicted upon Vrndavana by Indra, the cows 
were greatly affected. They bellowed pathetically while remaining 
stationary. It appeared as if they have turned into statues. 


Text 22 
niskampa-sakthi-carana 
nisprayatna-khurananah 
hrsta-romardra-tanavah 


ksama-kuksi-payodharah 


Being unable to move their legs, they simply stood still. Their hooves 
and mouths also did not function. The hair on their soaked bodes 


stood on end. Their stomachs and milk bags shrunk considerably: 


Text 23 
Rascit pranan jahuh sranta 
nipetuh kascid aturah 
kascit savatsah patita 
gavah stharavetah 
Some of the cows gave up their lives, being unable to rolerate 1 
fatigue caused by the calamity. Some of them fell to the gt? 


FS EE RR Re! EU NE | Bec 


nconscious, and some cows, along with their calves, tried to protect 
u | 

hemselves from the forceful rain and wind. 

t 


Text 24 
kascid akramya krodena 
vatsams tisthanti matarah 
vimukhah sranta-sakthyas ca 
nivaharah krsodarah 


peturarta vepamand gavo 
varsa-parajitah 


Some cows stood still, keeping their calves underneath their bodies. 
Many of them were separated from their offspring, many cows’ 
legs lost all sensation, and all became hungry, being unable to 


receive food. Being totally devastated by the rain, all the cows were 
shivering. 


Text 25 
vatsas conmukhaka bala 
damodara-mukhah sthitah 
trahitti vadanair dinaih 
krsnam tcur warditah 


The calves, with their tiny legs, raised their heads and fixed their eyes 
on Damodara. It appeared as if these afflicted calves were humbly 
addr essing Krsna, saying, “My dear Lord, please protect us.” 


Text 26 
gavam tat kadanam drstva 
durdinagamajam mahat 
gopams casanna-nidhanan 
krsnah kopam samddadhe 


ae: d the 
When Krsna observed that the annihilation of the cows = es 

; eca 
death of the cowherd residents of Vraja was imminent, me 


©xtremely angry with Indra. 


Text 27 
sa cintayitua samrabdho 
drsto yogo mayeti ca 
atmanam aimana vakyam 
idam tice priyamvadah 


Krsna considered the matter very carefully for some time. Comin 
to a conclusion, He said to Himself, ‘I will perform a wonderfy] 
pastime to protect everyone from this devastating rainfall.’ 


Text 28 
adyaham imam utpatya 
sakanana-vanam girim 
kalpayeyam gavam sthanam 
varsa-tranaya durdharam 


“Today, I will uproot Govardhana Hill, along with the surrounding 
forests, and lift it so that the cows and cowherd residents of Vraja 
can take shelter underneath”. 


Text 29 
ayam dhrto maya sailah 
prthvi-grha-nibhopamah 
trasyate savraja ga vat 
mad-vasyas ca bhavisyati 


“When I lift Govardhana Hill it will act as an umbrella, covering the 


cows and inhabitants of Vraja. In this way, I will keep everything 
under My control.” 


Text 30 
evam sa cintayitua tu krsnah 
satya-parakramah | 
bahvor balam darsayisyan 
samipam tam mahidharam 


dorbhyam utpatayamasa 
krsno girir tvaparah 


KRSNA LIFTS GOVARDHANA Hit 


After contemplating in this way, Krsna, whois always fixed in the truth, 
extended His hands and, while displaying His immense prowess, 
carefully picked up Govardhana Hill. As He lifted Govardhana Hill, 
Krsna appeared like a second hill. 


Text 31 
sa dhrtah sangato maghair 
girth savyena panina 
grhabhavam gatas tatra 
grhakarena varcasa 


Massive Govardhana Hill, which was effortlessly lifted by Krsna with 
His left hand, appeared like an expansive palace in which everyone 
could happily reside. 


Text 32 
bhiumer utpatyamanasya 
tasya Sailasya sdnusu 
Silah prasithilas celur 
vinispetus ca padapah 
While Krsna was lifting Govardhana Hil, the stones and pebbles 


from the peak of the mountain began to fall and many trees were 
uprooted. 


Text 33 
sikharatr ghirnamanais ca 
sidamanais ca padapath 
vidhitats cocchnitath srngatr 
agamah khagamo ‘bhavat 
Govardhana Hill appeared like a gigantic bird in flight as the 
stones and uprooted trees fell to the ground, although it remained 
Stationary on Krsna’s left hand. 


Text 34 
calat prasravanath parsvair 
meghaughair ehatam gatath 


bhidyamanasmanicayas 


cacala dharani-dharah 


It appeared as if the streams on Govardhana Hill had merged with 
the clouds. The hill shook as Krsna lifted it and as a resyjt man 
stones fell. : 


Text 35 
na meghanam pravrstanam 
na satlasyasma-varsinah 
vividus te jana rupam 


vayos tasya ca garjatah 


All the cowherd residents of Vraja took shelter underneath 
Govardhana Hill and were thus saved from the devastating rainfall, 
Being protected, they could not see the falling stones nor feel the 
raging wind. 


Text 36 
maghath sasaila-samsthanair 
nilath prasravanarpitath 
misrikyta wabhati girir 
uddama-barhavan 


As the streams entered the dark clouds, Govardhana Hill appeared 
like a peacock with its wings spread. 


Text 37 
Gpluto ‘yam girth paksair 
itt vidyadharoragah 
gandharvapsarasas caiva 


vaco muncanti sarvasah 


This wonderful feat of Krsna’s became the subject for discussion by 
the Vidyadharas, Nagas, Gandharvas and Apsaras. They said that 
the hill appeared as if it was about to take off and fly. 


Text 38 
sahasta-tala-vinyasto 
mukta-mulah ksites talat 


ruiy NITVATLAYAMASA 


kancananjana-rajatih 


The gigantic mountain was thus firmly held by Krsna. Being uprooted 
and thus separated from the surface of the earth, the hil] produced 


gold, silver, coal, and various minerals. 


Text 39 
kanicic chithilaniva 
saricchinnarddhani kanicit 
girer megha-pravistani 


tasya srngani cabhavan 


Some portions of the mountain peak appeared to have been 
loosened. There were cracks visible in some parts of the mountain 
while other portions were covered by clouds. 


Text 40 
girind kampamanena 
Rampitanam tu sakhinam 
puspam uccavacam bhimau 
vyasiryata samantatah 


As the mountain shook, the trees on top also began to shake, so that 
showers of flowers fell to the ground. 


Text 41 
nihsrtah prthu-murdhanah 
svastikardha-vibhisitah 
dvizthva-patatah kruddhah 
khecarah khe samantatah 


At that time, many poisonous snakes having huge bodies and 
Possessing the power to fly in the sky came out from their holes in 


an angry mood. The bodies of some of these snakes bore marks of 
Svastikas. 


Text 42 
artim jagmuh khagagana 
varsena ca bhayena ca 


utpatiyotpattya gaganat 
punah petur avan-mukhah 


The birds were in a very pathetic condition. They flew UP into the 
sky, again and again, and then fell to the ground, being tormented 
by the rain and strong wind. 


Text 43 
resur Grositah simhah 
sajala wa toyadah 
gargara iva mathyanto 


neduh sardula-pungavah 


The lions, being very angry, loudly roared, like clouds. Many tigers 


also growled, making a sound that resembled that of a grinding 
mortar. 


Text 44 
visamais ca samibhitath 
samais catyanta-durgamath 
vyavrita-dehah sa girir 


anya evopalaksyate 


The uneven land became even, and flatlands became hilly. The 
appearance of the hill changed so much that it was difficult to 
recognize it as the same Govardhana Hill. 


Text 45 
atturstasya tair meghats 
tasya rupam babhiva ha 
stambhitasyeva rudrena 
inpurasya vihayasi 
Because of excessive rain, the condition of the hill resembled that 
of Tripura, when it was attacked by Lord Siva. 
Text 46 
bahu-dandena krsnasya 


vidhrtam sumahat tada 


tiuw WWVYVPW VARY PILAR AH iSLEML he 


nilabhra-patalac channam 
_tad-giricchatramababhau 


Being lifted by Lord Krsna and being surrounded by dark clouds, 
Govardhana Hill looked beautiful, like a giant umbrella. 


Text 47 
svapnayamano jaladair 
nimilita-guha-mukhah 
bahipadhane krsnasya 
prasupta wa khe girth 


It appeared that Govardhana Hill was resting in the sky using Krsna’s 
left hand as a pillow. Its mouth in the form of caves remained closed 
by the clouds. 


Text 48 
nirvihanga-rutair vrksatr 
nirmayura-rutair vanath 
niralamba wabhati ginh 
sva-Stkharair vrtah 
The birds sitting on the trees on top of Govardhana Hill stopped 
chirping. The peacocks no longer crowed. Thus, Govardhana Hill, 
surrounded by trees, forests, and peaks, appeared desolate. | 


Text 49 
paryastair ghiirnamanais ca 
pracaladbhis ca sanubhih 
sajvaraniva Sailasya 
vanani Sikharani ca 
The peaks of the hill began to crumble. As a result of this, the trees 
on the hill appeared to be greatly afflicted. 


Text 50 
uttamanga-gatas tasya 
meghah pavana-vahanah 
tvaryamana mahendrena 
toyam mumucur aksayam 


The Sarmvartaka clouds, under the order of Indra, the King of th 
demigods, continuously showered torrents of rain upon Vraja. ; 


Text 51 


sa lambamanah krsnasya 
bhujagre saghano girth 
cakraridha wabhati 
deso nrpati-piditah 


Govardhana Hill, being nicely situated on the hand of Lord Krsna, 
looked like a kingdom tormented by its enemies and thus on the 
verge of annihilation. 


Text 52 
sa megha-nicayas tasthau 
girim tam parwarya ha 
puram puraskrtya yatha 
sphito janapado mahan 


The hosts of clouds surrounding Govardhana Hill in the four 
directions appeared just like subjects of a kingdom residing in the 
four directions, keeping their opulent capital in the middle. 


Text 53 
nivesya tam kare sailam 
tolayitva ca sasmitam 
provaca gopta gopanam 
prajapatir iva sthitah 


Krsna, the protector and maintainer of the cowherd residents of 
Vraja, while balancing Govardhana Hill on the tip of His finge! 
smiled and spoke as follows. 


Text 54 
etad devair asambhavyam 
divyena vidhinad maya 
kriam giri-grham gopa 
nirvatam Saranam gavam 


rte ee eee eS Ral De 


“CQ cowherd men, by My divine potency, I have made Govardhana 
Hill a shelter for all of you. This feat would be impossible even for 
the demigods to perform. No rain or wind can enter now and so it 
‘sa fit shelter for the cows.” 


Text 55 
ksipram visantu yiuthani 
gavam tha hi santaye 
nirvatesu ca desesu 


nivasantu yatha-sukham 


“Quickly bring all the cows here and let them rest underneath the 
hill. Here, they can live peacefully, without being disturbed by the 
rain or wind.” 


Text 56 
yatha-Ssrestham yatha-yutham 
yatha-saram yatha-sukham 
vibhajyatam ayam desah 


krtam varsa-nivaranam 


“All of you, whether old or young, alone or in a group, with many 
possessions or nothing, come and take shelter under the hill. Rest 
assured that I will protect you from this onslaught of rain.” 


Text57 
Satlotpatana-bhir esa 
mahati nirmita maya 
panca-krosa-pramanena 
krosaika-vistaro mahan 


trailokyam apy utsahate 
raksitum kim punar vrajam 


“By lifting Govardhana Hill, I have made a large area suitable for all — 


of you to live comfortably. The length of this shelter is ten miles and 
the breadth is two miles. What to speak of residents of Vraja, this 
tract of land can protect the inhabitants of the three worlds.” 


*S SSOVARDHANA Hit 


Text 58 
tatah kila-kilasabdo gavam 
hambharavath saha 
gopanam tumulo jajne 
megha-nadas ca bahyatah 
When the cowherd men and women heard Krsna speak in this 
reassuring manner, they felt secure and happy. As they came 
underneath the hill, there was a huge commotion, augmented by 
the bellowing of the cows and the rumbling of the clouds. 


Text 59 
pravisanta tato gavo 
| gopair yutha-prakalpitah 
tasya Sailasya vipulam 


pradaram gahvarodaram 


The cows were divided in groups by the cowherd men of Vraja and 
were placed in various caves within the vast tract of land. 


Text 60 
krsno ‘pi mule satlasya 
satla-stambha ivocchnitah 
dadharatkena hastena 
Sailam priyam watithim 
Lord Krsna remained stationary underneath massive Govardhana 


Hill, like a stone pillar. He held the hill as if it were His honored 
guest. 


Text 61 
tato vrajasya bhandani 
yuktani Sakatani ca 
vivisur varsa-bhitas te tad 
grham giri-nirmitam 


Thereafter, being very afraid of the devastating rainfall, the cowherd 


men brought their utensils, pitchers, bullock carts, and other 
household items under the hill. 


Text 62 
atidawvam tu krsnasya drstua 
tat karma vajrabhrt 
mithya-pratuno jaladan 
varayamasa vai vibhuh 


When Indra, who carries a thunderbolt in his hand, saw this 
extraordinary feat of Lord Krsna, who can perform activities that 
are inconceivable to the demigods, he immediately ordered the 
clouds to stop their showers. His intention of destroying Vraja was 
thus baffled. 


Text 63 
sapta-ratre tu nirvurite 
dharanyam vigatotsavah 
jagama samvrto meghair — 


vriraha svargam uttamam 


After causing a devastating rainfall over Vraja for seven continuous 
days, Indra, who had killed the demon, Vrtra, being surrounded 
by clouds, appeared disappointed and lusterless. In that way, he 
returned to his kingdom in heaven. 


Texts 64-65 
nivrite sapta-ratre tu 
nisprayatne sata-kratau 
gatabhre vimale vyomni 
divase dipta-bhaskare 


gavas tenaiva margena 
pariyagmur yathagatam 

svam ca sthanam tato ghosah 
pratyayat punar eva sah 


After seven nights had thus passed and Indra’s attack had become 
futile, the clouds disappeared, the sky once again became clear, and 
the sun rose brightly. The cows then returned to their cowsheds 


and the inhabitants of Vraja also returned to their respective 
residences. 


a Nh YidsNV*tsrAaN V&A 


Text 66 
krsno ‘pi tam gint-Srestham 
sva-sthane sthavaratmavan 
prito nivesayamasa sivaya 
varado vibhith 
Lord Sri Krsna, who had stood still for seven days, happily reinstateg 


Govardhana Hill in its original position, from where He had lifted jt 
for the benefit of the entire world. 


Thus ends the translation of the eighteenth chapter of the Visnu 
Parva of Sri Harivamsa. 


Indra Offers Prayers to Krsna 
and Performs the Abhiseka 


Text 1 
vaisampayana uvaca 
dhrtam govarddhanam 
drstua pantratam ca gokulam 
krsnasya darsanam sakro 


rocayamasa vismitah 


Vaisampayana said: O Janamejaya, when Indra saw that Krsna had 
protected Gokula by lifting Govardhana Hill, he became struck with 
wonder and developed a keen desire to see the Lord. 


Text 2 
sa nirjalambudakaram 
mattam mada-jaloksitam 
aruhyairavatam nagam 


aqjagama mahitalam 


Indra sat on the back of his carrier, Airavata, whose complexion was 


white, like the cloud without water, and who was completely soaked 
with water, and arrived on earth. 


Text 3 
sa dadarsopavistam vat 
govarddhana-sila-tale 
krsnam aklista-karmanam 


puruhitah purandarah 
Ind 
“a, Who is addressed by many names, came and saw that Lord 


‘Sa, who } ; oe 
Nar oe “xpert in performing wonderful pastimes, was sitting 
ck of Govardhana Full | 


Text 4 
tam viksya balam mahata 
tejasa diptam avyayam 
gopa-vesa-dharam visnum 
pritim lebhe purandarah 


As Indra, the king of the demigods, looked at indestructible child 
Krsna, who appeared very effulgent, who was dressed as a cowherd 
boy, and who is non-different from Lord Visnu, he became very 


pleased. 


Text 5 
tam so ‘mbuja-dala-syamam 
krsnam Srivatsa-laksanam 
paryapta-nayanah sakrah 
sarvatr netrair udaiksata 


Upon seeing Lord Syamasundara, whose complexion resembled the 
color of the blue lotus and whose chest was adorned with the mark 
of Srivatsa, Indra considered his eyes to be successful. He looked at 
Krsna to his eyes’ full satisfaction. 


Text 6 
drstua cainam Sriya justam 
martya-loke ‘maropamam 
supavistam sila-prsthe 
Sakrah sa vridito ‘bhavat 


When Indra saw Krsna, whose beauty surpassed the beauty of the 
demigods, even though He is present in this world of birth and 


death, sitting peacefully on the top of a rock, he felt exceedingly 
ashamed. 


Text 7 
tasyopavistasya mukham 
paksabhyam paksi-pungavah 
antarddhanam gatas chayam 
cakdroraga-bhojanah 


=e i A ee SS SR Ne eS ee Ee ae) Ses — aN eS Se ee SS Ne a NS am PR EP aw Ld 


Lord Hari was sitting in a very relaxed manner as Garuda, the king 
of birds who sustains his existence by eating snakes, fanned Him 
with his wings while remaining hidden from view. 


Text 8 
tam vivikte vana-gatam 
loka-vritanta-tatparam 
upatasthe gajam hitua 
krsnam balanistidanah 


Powerful Indra got down from his carrier and slowly approached 
Lord Krsna, who is expert in all kinds of dealings, in a solitary 


place. 


Text 9 
sa samipa-gatas tasya 
divya-srag anulepanah 
raraja deva-rajo vat 
vajra-purnakarah prabhuh 


Indra, the king of the demigods, who possesses great influence, and 
who was decorated with a garland of forest flowers and sandalwood 
paste, looked very attractive in front of Krsna. He had his weapon, 
the thunderbolt, in his hand. 


Text 10 
kirttenarka-tulyena 
vidyududyota-karina 
kundalabhyam sa divyabhyam 
satatam sobhitananah 


Indra was adorned with a crown that was effulgent, like lightening, 
a . = . _ 
nd as bright as the sun. His ears were decorated with celestial 


Carr] . . 
Ings and his face appeared very enchanting. 


Text 11 
panca-stabaka-lambena 
harenorasi bhisitah 


sahasra-patra-kantena 
deha-bhisana-karina 


tksamanah sahasrena 
netranam kama-rupinam 


He wore a celestial garland that was made with five bunches of 
flowers. His beauty resembled that of a fully-blossomed lotus flower. 
Indra, whose entire body was nicely decorated, who can assume 
any form at will, and who has one thousand eyes, fixed his eyes on 
Krsna. 


Text 12 
tridasajnapanarthena 
megha-nirghosa-karina 
atha divyena madhuram 
vyajahara svarena tam 


By nature, Indra was accustomed to issuing orders to the demigods. 
His voice is as grave as the sound of a cloud. He folded his hands 
and spoke to Lord Krsna in a very sweet voice. 


Text 13 
indra uvaca 
krsna krsna maha-baho 
jnatinam nandi-varddhana 
ati-divyam kriam karma 
tvaya pritimata gavam 


Indra said: “O Krsna! O Krsna! O mighty armed one, You enhance 
the happiness of pious-minded people. Whatever you have done for 
the benefit of the cows is certainly glorious.” 


Text 14 
mayotsrstesu meghesu 
yugantavarta-karisu 
yat-tuaya raksita gavas 
tenasmi paritositah 


INDRA OFFERS PRAYERS TO KRSNA ‘ 


“| am very pleased with the way You have protected the cows and 
habitants of Vraja, even though I tried to inundate Gokula by 
i 


showering devastating rain, through the agency of my clouds.” 


Text 15 
suayambhuvena yogena 
yas cayam parvatottamah 
dhrto vesmavadakase ko 
hy etena na vismayet 


«With the help of Your mystic power, You effortlessly lifted 
Govardhana Hill. Who would not become astonished upon seeing 


such extraordinary acts of Yours?” 


Text 16 
prati-siddhe mama mahe 
mayeyam rusitena vat 
ativrstth kria krsna gavam 
vat sapta-rainnki 


“O Supreme Lord, Krsna, when my traditional worship was stopped, 
I became very angry. To display my anger against the cows, I caused 
a devastating rainfall in Gokula for seven days and nights.” 


Text 17 
sa tuaya prati-siddheyam 
megha-vrstir durasada 
devath sadanava-ganair 
durnivarya may sthite 


“However, You easily frustrated my attempt. Even all the demigods 
and demons combined would not have been capable of stopping 
the heavy rainfall ordered by me.” | 


Text 18 
aho me supriyam krsna 
yat tuam manusa-dehavan 
samagram vaisnavam 
tejo vinigihasi rositah 


Sri ViISNU-PARVA 


“My dear Krsna, what You have done is simply wonderful]! ie 
extremely pleased to see how You have accepted a human-like form 
and yet are always ready to display your supreme prowess When 
required.” 


Text 19 
sadhitam devatanam hi manye 
‘ham karyam avyayam 
tvayt manusyam apanne 
yukte cava sva-tejasa 


“Although You have assumed a human-life form, You remain fully 
situated.in Your transcendental position. I think that our mission, 
to annihilate the demons, will surely become successful.” 


Text 20 
setsyate sarva-karyartho 
na kinct parihasyate 
devanam yad bhavan neta 
sarva-karya-purogamah 


“Because You are the leader of the demigods, we are confident that 
Your mission will be accomplished and all our desires fulfilled, so 
that the demons will no longer be able to disturb us.” 


Text 21 
ekas tvuam asi devanam 
lokanadm ca sanadtanah 
dvitiyam natra pasyami 
yas tesam ca dhuram vahet 
“O Supreme Lord, You alone are the eternal master and protector 
of the demigods and the planets of the universe. I cannot see anyon’ 
other than You who can give us all protection.” 


Text 22 
yatha hi pungavah srestho 
hy agre dhuri niyojyate 


evam tvam asi devanam 
magnanam dvija-vahanah 


“ust as the best bulls are placed in front, You are always at the 
head of the demigods, to deliver them when they are merged into 
an ocean of distress. Garuda, the king of birds, assists You as Your 


carrier.” 
Text 23 
tuac-chariragatam krsna 
jagat-prakaranam tv idam 
brahmana sadhu nirdistam 
dhatubhya wa karicanam 


“O Krsna, the entire cosmic manifestation is within Your body. 
Brahma has only a limited understanding of this truth. As gold is 
best among all metals, You are best of all gods.” 


Text 24 
svayam svayambhir bhagavan 
buddhyatha vayasapi va 
na tuanugantum Saknoti 
pangur druta-gatim yatha 


“Even self-manifested Brahma cannot properly understand You with 
his vast knowledge and exalted position. He is not at all comparable 
to You, just as a lame man has no hope of chasing a running man.” 


Text 25 
sthanubhyo himavan chrestho 
hradadnadm varundlayah 
garuiman paksinam srestho 
devanam ca bhavan varah 


“Among all mountains, the Himalayas are considered the best. 
Among all reservoirs of water, the ocean is considered the best. 
Among all birds, Garuda is considered the best and among all the 
demigods, You are certainly the best.” 


Text 26 
apam adhastal-loko vai 
tasyopart mahi-dharah 
naganam uparistad bhih 
prthivy upari manusah 


“There is water at the bottom of the universe 
and above the water, there is the earth, filled with oreat 
mountains. The earth, which is the sustainer of human 
society, is resting on a hood of Ananta Sesa.” 

Text 27 
manusya-lokad urdhva tu 
khaganam gatir ucyate 
akasasyopari ravir dvaram 
svargasya bhanuman 


“Birds fly in outer space, above the surface of the earth. Above outer 
space is the planet of the sun-god, which is said to be the gateway 
to heaven.” 


Text 28 
deva-lokah paras tasmad 
vimana-gamano mahan 
yatraham krsna devanam 
aindre vinthitah pade 


“Above the sun are the divine planets of the demigods, which are 
difficult to approach. O Krsna, I am the lord of the heavenly planets 
and the king of the demigods.” 


Text 29 
svargad urdhvam brahma-loko 
brahmarsi-gana-sevitah 
tatra somagatis caiva 
Jyotisam ca mahatmanam 

“Above the heavenly planets is Brahmaloka, which 1s served by si 
great sages. The moon, planets, and stars are allowed to move OMY 
within the area up to Brahmaloka.” 


Text 30 
tasyopan gavam lokah 
sadhyas tam palayants hi 
sa hi sarva-gatah krsna 
mahakasa-gato mahan 


“Above Brahmaloka is the transcendental abode called Goloka, 
where only the devotees of the Supreme Lord are allowed to enter. 
O Krsna, that supreme planet is all-pervading and situated in the 
spiritual sky.” 
Text 31 
uparyupan tatrapt 
gatis tava tapomayt. 
yam na vidmo vayam sarve — 
prechanto ‘pi pitamaham 


“You can travel anywhere You desire, by means of Your supreme 
potency. Even though we inquired from the grandsire, Brahma, 
about the transcendental abode, we were unable to obtain a clear 


understanding from him.” 


Text 32 
lokas tu adho duskrtinam 
naga-lokas tu darunah 
prihivi karma-silanam 
ksetram sarvasya karmanah 


“Below the earth is a planet called Nagaloka, where sinful living 
entities are born. Those who are active by nature are born in a 
family on the earth. This planet is the place for performing fruitive 


activities.” 


Text 33 
_ kham asthiranam visayo 
vayuna tulya-vrttinam 
gatih sama-damadhyanam 
svargah sukrta-karmanam 


“Those who are very restless and whose minds are very flickering, 
take shelter of the sky, which is called antariksa-loka. Those who 
engage in pious activities while controlling the mind and senses can 
ascend to heaven.” 


Text 34 
brahme tapasi yuktanam 
brahma-lokah para gatih 
gavam eva tu goloko 
duraroha hi sa gatih 


“Those who engage themselves in performing severe austerities can 
attain the highest planet in the material world, which is known as 
Brahmaloka. Goloka is meant for cows and devotees of the Lord and 
as such, is rarely attained by others.” 


Text 35 
sa tu lokas tuaya krsna 
stdamanah kriatmana 
dhrto dhrtimata vira 


nighnatopadravan gavam 


“O almighty Krsna, when the cows of Vraja were greatly oppressed 
by the devastating rainfall brought by me, You, while exhibiting 
sublime patience, effortlessly saved them from all distress.” 


Text 36 
tad aham sam anuprapto 
gavam vakyena coditah 
brahmanas ca mahabhaga 
gauravat tava cagatah 


“O greatly fortunate one, I have come here, being instructed by 
_ Brahma and the celestial cows. I was compelled to come here 
because of the mercy You have displayed toward me.” 


Text 37 
aham bhita-patih krsna 
deva-rajah purandarah 


aditer garbha-paryaye 
purvajas te purakrtah 


“O Krsna, Jam the same Indra, the king of the demigods and master 
of all living entities, who You have previously addressed as Your 


elder brother, after entering the womb of Aditi.” 


Text 38 
sua-tejas tejasad caiva yat 
te darsitavan aham 
deva-ripena tat sarvam 
ksantum arhasi me vibho 


“My dear Lord, kindly forgive all my offenses, which were committed 
due to ignorance. Thinking You to be an ordinary boy, I tried to 
display my prowess before You, being influenced by false prestige.” 


Text 39 
evam ksanta-manah krsna 
svena saumyena tejasa 
brahmanah srnu me vakyam 
gavam ca gaja-vikrama 


“O Krsna, You are powerful like an elephant. Please forgive me by 
Your own good qualities and hear from me these words spoken by 


Brahma and the celestial cows.” 
Text 40 
aha tuam bhagavan brahma 
gavas cakdsaga divi 
karmabhis tosita divyais 
tava samraksanadibhth 


“This is the message conveyed by Brahma and the cows that wander 
about in the heavenly realm, residing in the planet known as 
Dyuloka.: ‘We are very pleased by your transcendental pastimes of 


Protecting the cows.’ ” 


Text 41 
bhavata raksita gavo 
golokas ca mahan ayam 
yad vayam pungavath sarddham 
varddhamah prasavais tatha 
“ “The compassion you have exhibited by rescuing the cows certainly 
deserves praise. We cows, bulls, and calves are very pleased and 
satisfied.’ ” 


Text 42 
karsakan pungavair bahyair 
medhyena havisad suran 
sryam Ssakyrt-pravrttena 
tarpayisyama kamadah 


“ “Cows fulfill all the desires of human beings. Farmers utilize the 
service of the bulls by engaging them in pulling carts and tilling the 
land. The demigods are pleased when they are offered milk and 
ghee through the sacrificial fire. Laksmi is pleased when we supply 
ail abundance of cow dung.’ ” 


Text 43 
tad asmakam gurus tuam 
hi pranadas ca mahé-balah 
adya-prabhrti no raja tuam 
endro vai bhava prabho 


“ “My Lord, You are immensely powerful. You are to be considered 
our spiritual master because you have delivered us from a great 
danger. Therefore, from today onwards, may You be known. as 
Govinda, one who gives pleasure to the cows.’ ” 


Text 44 
tasmat tvuam kavicanath 
pirnair divyasya payaso ghatath 
ebhir adyabhisincasva 
maya hastavanamitath 


ANDRA OFFERS PRAYERS TO KRSNA 


(Indra continued:) “Please allow us to perform Your abhiseka with 
celestial water and milk that has been kept in the golden pitchers 
that we hold in our hands.” 


Text 45 
aham kilendro devanam 
tvam gavam indratam gatah 
govinda iti lokas tuam 
stosyantt bhuvi sasvatam 


“I am the king of the demigods and You are the worshipable Deity 
of the cows. From today onwards, when Your devotees glorify You, 
they will address You as Govinda.” 


Text 46, 
mamopari yathendras tvam 
sthapito gobhir isvarah 
upendra iti krsna tuam 
gasyants divi devatah 


“O Krsna, because the cows have established You, the supreme 
controller, as their leader, the demigods will sing Your glories in 
Dyuloka while addressing you as Upendra.” 


Text 47 
ye ceme varsika masas 
catvaro vihita mama 
esam arddham prayacchami 
carat-kalam tu pascimam 


“Let me donate to You the last two months of the rainy season, 
which are generally meant for my worship. These two months will 
be known as autumn.” 


Text 48 
adya-prabhrti masau dvau 
jnasyanti mama manavah 
varsarddhe ca dhvajo mahyam 
tatah pujam avapsyast 


mamambu-prabhavam darpam 
tada tyaksyanti barhinah 


From this time onward, people will worship me and agk ae 
benedictions in the months of Sravana and Bhadra, When this 
period is over, people will place a flag as a mark of the completion 
of my worship. Then, Your worship will begin. During that time, 
peacocks will behave in a most pleasing manner.” 


= Text 49 


alpa-vaco gata-mada ye 
canye megha-nadinah 

Santim sarve gamisyantt 
mama kala-vicarinah 


“The peacocks will crow less and their mood of excitement will 
diminish. The other animals that are generally frightened by the 
thundering sounds of the clouds will remain quiet.” 


Text 50 
trisankv agastya 
caritamasam ca pracansyati 
sahastra-rasmir Gdityas 
tapayan svena tejasa 


“During the rainy season, the sun-god supplies heat and light to 
the world with his thousands of rays while slowly moving towards 
the southern hemisphere, for the benefit of Trisanku and Agastya 
Muni.” 


Texts 51-59 
tatah Saradi yuktayam 
mauna-kamesu barhisu 
yacamane khage toyam 
viplutesu plavesu ca 


hamsa-sdrasa-pirnesu 
nadinam pulinesu ca 


matta-kraunca-pranddesu 
pramattia-brsabhesu ca 


gosu caiva prahrstasu 
ksarantisu payo bahu 
nivritesu ca meghesu 
niryatya jagato jalam 
akase sastra-sankase 
hamsesu ca caratsu ca 
jata-padmesu toyesu 
VapisU CA SAYASSU Ca 


tadagesu ca kantesu 
toyesu vimalesu ca 

Ralamavanatagrasu 
krsna-kedara-panktisu 


madhyastham salilarambham 
Rurvantisu nadisu ca 
susasyayam ca simayam 
manoharyam muner apt 
prihiwyam prthu-rastrayam 
ramyayam varsa-sanksaye 
Srimatsu pankti-margesu 
phalavatsu trnesu ca 


tksumatsu ca desesu 
pravritesu makhesu ca 

tatah pravartsyate punya 
Sarat suptotthite tvayr 


loke ‘smin krsna nikhile 
yathawva tridive tatha 
naras tuam caiva mam 
caiva dhvajakarasu yastisu 


_. ‘ahendram capy upendram 
ca mahayanti mahitale 


Nd Va OUNUSTARVA 


“O Supreme Lord, Krsna! Thereafter, when autumn arrives, 
peacocks will remain silent, parrots will long for water, there will 
be no boats sailing on the river, the banks of the rivers will be filled 
with meandering ducks and cranes, intoxicated krauncha birds wi} 
constantly chirp, bulls will wander about freely, cows will happily 
give an abundance of milk, after showering rain, the clouds will 
disappear, the sky will become as bright as the sharp edge of a 
weapon, swans will move about, here and there, lotus flowers wil] 
sprout within the water of the lakes and ponds, whose beauty will 
thus be enhanced, the water of the ponds and lakes will become 
crystal clear, the paddy fields will look beautiful when the time for 
harvesting has arrived, the agricultural land of Vraja will be filled 
with crops, and the forest of Vrndavana will be so enchanting that it 
will attract the minds of great sages.” 


“After the rainy season is over, the earth will look very pleasant, 
the forest pathways will appear beautiful, the grass, creepers and 
medicinal herbs will grow abundantly, there will be fields full of 
sugar cane, people will begin the performance of various kinds of 
sacrifices, and when You wake up from Your sleep, it will be the 
time for the auspicious autumn season to commence.” 


“My dear Krsna, at the arrival of autumn, like they.do in the heavenly 
planets, the people of this world will erect nice flags and worship 
me, Mahendra, and You, Upendra.” 


Text 60 
ye cavayoh sthire vrtte 
mahendropendra-sanjnite 
manavah pranamisyanti 


tesam nasty anayagamah 


“Those who celebrate this eternal festival of worshiping You and me, 
and offer their obeisances to us, will never have to face difficulty.” 


Text 61 
tatah sakras tu tan grhya 
ghatan divya-payodharan 


abhisekena govindam 
yojayamasa yogavit 


Thereafter, Indra, who is expert in the science of devotional service, 
picked up the golden pitchers filled with the water of the Mandakini 
and performed the abhiseka of Krsna by establishing Him as Govinda, 
the protector of the cows. 


Text 62 
drstua tam abhisiktam tu 
gavas tah saha yuthapath 
stanath prasrava-yuktats 
ca sisicuh krsnam avyayam 


After Indra performed the abhiseka with celestial water, the divine 
Surabhi cows performed the abhiseka of Krsna by offering an 
abundance of milk from their milk bags. 


Text 63 
meghas ca divi yuktabhih 
samrtabhih samantatah 
sisicus toya-dharabhir 
abhisicya tam avyayam 


Following this, the clouds bathed Krsna, the indestructible supreme 


controller, with a nectarean flow of water from all the directions of 
the sky. 


Text 64 
vanaspatinam sarvesam 
susravendu-nibham payah 
vavarsuh puspa-varsam 
ca nedus turyant cambare 


Milk came from the branches of the trees and plants, as if they 
Were bathing Krsna. The demigods showered flowers upon Krsna 


from the sky. Musical instruments could be heard in the heavenly 
planets. 


Text 09 
astuvan munayah sarve 
vagbhir mantra-parayanah 
eharnave vivikiam ca 
dadhara vasudha vapuh 


Thereafter, many great sages, who were conversant with the chanting 
of mantras, offered suitable prayers to Krsna. The earth assumeg the 
form that she manifested after emerging from the Ekarnava Ocean 


Text 66 
prasadam sagara jagmur 
vavur vata jagaddhitah 
margastho ‘pi babhau bhanus 
candro naksatra-samyutah 


The water of the oceans became clear. The air began to blow gently, 
giving relief to all living entities. The sun-god moved in his orbit, 


supplying heat and light. The moon and stars appeared in the sky 
in a most pleasing manner. 


Text 67 
itayah prasamam jagmur 
nirvaira-racana nrpah 
pravala-patra-sabalah 
puspavantasra padapah 


There was no natural disturbances. Kings gave up their enmity. 
Trees became filled with flowers, fresh twigs, and green leaves, 
thereby appearing very beautiful. 


Text 68 
madam prasusruvur naga 
yatastosam vane mrgah 
alankrtia gatra-ruhair 
dhatubhir bhanti parvatah 
Elephants became intoxicated. Animals, such as the deer, appeare’ 


ee “r trees 
satisfied within the forest. The mountains, along with their tre 
and various minerals, appeared delighted. 


Text 69 
devalokopamo lokas 
trpto ‘mrta-rasatr tva 
asit krsnabhiseko hi 
divya-svarga-rasoksitah 


The entire world appeared pleasant and joyful, like a planet of the 
demigods. It seemed as if the entire earth had become inundated 
with nectar. In this way, after the bathing by divine water and milk, 
the abhiseka ceremony of Lord Krsna was completed. 


Text 70 
abhisikiam tu tam gobhih 
Sakro govindam avyayam 
divya-malyambaradharam 
deva-devo ‘bravid idam 


Lord Krsna was bathed by Surabhi cows, a transcendental garland 
was then placed around His neck, and He was dressed in a most 
opulent fashion. Thereafter, Indra, the master of the demigods, 
spoke to indestructible Lord Govinda, as follows. 


Text 71 
esa te prathamah krsna 
niyogo gosu yah krtah 
sruyatam aparam krsna 
mamagamana-karanam 


O Krsna, I have explained to You the first reason for my coming 


here, by which the desire of the cows was fulfilled. Now, kindly hear 
the second reason for my coming here.” 


Text 72 
ksipram prasddhyatam kamsah 
kest ca turagadhamah 
aristas ca mad dvisto raja- 
rajyam tatah kuru 


—— a | OE Bs Oe. SS Oe * an au VY 4A 


“My humble appeal to You is that You kill the demons, Karn 
Kesi, as soon as possible. Send the intoxicated Aristasura 
abode of Yamaraja. Thereafter, You should bring all the ki 
the earth under Your control.” 


Sa and 
to the 
N8s of 


Text 73 
piirsvasan jatas te 
mamamso ‘ham iva sthitah 
sa te raksyas ca manyas 
ca sakhye ca viniyujyatam 


“My plenary portion has been born from the womb of Your paternal 
aunt, Kunti. I request You to protect him, love him, and make him 
Your friend.” 


Text 74 
tuaya hy anugrhitah sa 
tava vritanuvartakah 
tvad vase vartamanas ca 
prapsyate vipulam yasah 


“Being favored by You, he will faithfully follow Your instructions and 
become a celebrated friend in this world, while remaining under 
Your care and guidance.” 


Text 75 
bharatasya ca vamSasya sa 
varistho dhanurdharah 
bhavisyaty anuriipas ca 
tuad rte na ca ramsyate 


“He will be renowned as the greatest archer of the Bharata dynasty: 
He will always follow Your instructions and he will never be hapPY 
anywhere without You.” 


Text 76 
bharatam tvayi cayattam 
tasmims ca purusottame 


ubhabhyam api samyoge 
yasyanti nidhanam nrpah 


The battle of the Mahabharata will be centered around You and 


the son of Kunti. By the combined effort of You and Arjuna, all the 


sinful kings will be eliminated.” 
Text 77 
pratynatam maya krsna 
rsi-madhye suresu ca 
maya putro ‘rjuno nama 
srstah kuntyam kulodvahah 


“O Krsna, I have already revealed this to the sages and demigods— 
that the glorious son who will be born from the womb of Kunti will 


be known as Arjuna.” 


Text 78 
so ‘stranam paratattvajnah 
Ssresthas capa-vikarsane 
tam praveksyantt vai sarve 
rajanah Sastra-yodhinah 


“He will become very expert in the art of releasing weapons. He 
will become the foremost of archers. No enemy king will be able to 
defeat him in battle. Rather, they themselves will be vanquished.” 


Text 79 
aksauhinis tu siranam 
rajnam sangrama-salinam 
sa ekah ksatra-dharmena 
yojayisyat. mrtyuna 
“He will alone fight with many valiant kings and their vast armies 


and, according to the principles of ksatriya-dharma, he will effortlessly 
defeat them, sending them to the abode of death.” 


Text 80 
tasyastra-cantam margam 
dhanuso laghaven ca 


nanuyasyant rajano deva 
va tvam vind prabho 
“O my Lord, other than You, no demigod or earthly kin 


able to conquer Arjuna in battle. No one will be able to 
expertise with the bow. 


8 will be 
Match hig 


Text 81 
sa te bandhuh sahayas ca 
sangramesu bhavisyati 
tasya yogo vidhatavyas 
tvaya govinda mat-krte 


“O Govinda, Arjuna will always remain Your true friend and 
companion, even when he is not on the battlefield. For the benefit 
of Arjuna, as well as all people of the world, You should instruct him 
in the science of spiritual understanding.” 


Text 82 
drastavyas ca yathaham vai 
tvayad manyas ca nityasah 
qnata tvuam eva lokanam 
arjunasya ca nityasah 


“You should treat Arjuna in the same affectionate way that You have 
treated me. Please take care of him in all respects. Because You 
know everything that is happening within the three worlds, please 
protect Arjuna at all times.” 


Text 83 
tvaya ca nityam samraksya 
Ghavesu mahatsu sah 
raksitasya tvaya tasya na 
mrtyuh prabhavisyat 


sae 
“Fyen after a great battle, You should protect him in all ee * 
n 


he is protected by You then the influence of death will certal 


act on him.” 


INDRA OFFERS PRAYERS TO KRSNA 


Text 84 
arjunam viddhi mam krsna 
mam caivatmanam atmana 
aima te ‘ham yatha sasvat 
tathaiva tava so ‘rjunah 
“CQ Krsna, please consider Arjuna as my second self and consider 
me as Your obedient servant. As I am always a soul surrendered to 
You, treat Arjuna as a soul surrendered unto You.” 


Text 85 
ivaya lokan iman situa 
baler hastat tribhih kramaih 
devatanam krto raja pura 
jyestha-kramad aham 


“In ancient times, You took everything from Bali Maharaja by Your 
three steps. After securing the rule of the kingdom from him, You 
handed it over to me. You did this because You treat me as Your 
elder brother. In this way, I regained my post as the king of the 
demigods.” 


Text 86 
tua ca satyamayam jnatoda 
satyestam satya-vikramam 
satyenopetya deva vat 
yojayanti ripu-ksaye 


“You are always fixed in the truth. You are worshiped by the sacrifice 
of truthfulness and You always protect the existence of truth. 
Knowing this, the demigods always take shelter of You and beg for 
Your favor, so that they can destroy their enemies.” 


Text 87 
so ‘rjuno nama me putrah 
pitus te bhagini-sutah 
tha sauhardamayatu 
bhituad sahacaras tava 


24 


Sri VISNU-PARVA 


“My famous son, Arjuna, will be the son of Your father’s Ge 
er, 
He will become Your constant companion and will have inten 
; Se 
affection for You. 


Text 88 
tasya te yudhyatah krsna 
sva-sthane ‘pi grhe ‘pi va 
vodhavya pungaveneva 
dhih sada rana-mirdhani 


“My dear Krsna, whether he is fighting on the battle field, Sitting 
at home, or engaged in some kind of activity, You should always 
protect Arjuna, like a strong bull, especially when he is engaged in 
combat with his enemies.” 


Text 89 
kamse vinthate krsna 
tuaya bhavyartha-darsina 
abhitas tan mahad yuddham 
bhavisyati mahi-ksitam 


“O Krsna, You know everything that is going to happen in the 
future. After you kill Karnsa, all the kings of the earth will come 
together and engage in a great war that will be discussed in the 
great literature, Mahabharata.” 


Text 90 
tatra tesam ny-viranam 
atumanusa-karmanam 
vyayasyarjuno bhokta yasasa 
tvam ca yoksyase 


“In that battle, Arjuna will defeat all the powerful kings and warriors 


who are certainly very heroic, so that he will enjoy the happines of 
victory and achieve unending fame.” 


Text 91 
etan-me krsna kartsnyena 
kartum arhasi bhasitam 


AWWNWMWNAL WP PEN OD PRA FEN YD | B® FR oy IN ES 


yady aham te suras catva 
satyam ca priyam acyuta 


“O Krsna, You never fall down from Your glorious position. It is my 
request that You carry out everything as I have indicated, if I and 
the demigods are at all dear to You. This is my appeal.” 


Text 92 
Sakrasya vacanam Srutva 
krsno govindaiam gatah 
pritena manasa yukiah 
prati-vakyam jagada ha 


After hearing Indra’s prayers, Krsna, who had received the name, 
Govinda, became very pleased and replied to him as follows. — 


Text 93 
prito ‘smi darsandad deva 
tava Sakra Sacipate 
yat tuayabhihitam cedam 
na kinct panhasyate 
“O demigod! O Sakra! O beloved lord of Saci! I am very pleased by 
your attitude of submission. Whatever you have requested will be 
carried out. Of this there is no doubt.” 


Text 94 
janami bhavato bhavam 
janamy arjuna-sambhavam 
jane pitrsvasaram ca pandor 
dattam mahadtmanah 


“I am well aware of your intentions and I know about the birth 
of Arjuna, the son of My paternal aunt, Kunti, who was given in 
Marriage to the exalted personality, Pandu.” 


Text 95 
yudhisthiram ca janami 
kumaram dharma-nirmitam 


bhimasenam ca janami 
vayoh santdnajam sutam 


“I am also very inclined toward Yudhistira, who was begotten 5 


Dharmraja in the womb of Kunti, as well as Bhimsena, who was : 


_ begotten within her womb by Vayu.” 


Text 96 
asvibhyam sadhu janami 
srstam putra-dvayam subham 
nakulam sahadevam ca 
madri-kuksi-gatav ubhau 


“I am also very familiar with the two brothers, Nakula and Sahadeva, 
who are reservoirs of good qualities and who were begotten by the 
twin Asvini-kumaras within the womb of Madri.” 


Text 97 
kaninam capi janami 
savituh prathamam sutam 
pitrsvasan karnam vai 
prasutam sutatam gatam 


“IT am also know about Karna, who was begotten by Surya within 
the womb of Kunti before her DOOR: After his birth, Karna was 
taised i in a siita family.” 


Text 98 
dhartarastras ca me sarve 
vidita yuddha-kanksinah 
pandor uparamam caiva 
sapasani-nipatajam 
“I am also well aware of the sons of Dhrtarastra, who are very €age 


_ to engage in battle. I was informed of the death of King Pandu as 4 
‘result of a curse.” 


Text 99 
tad gaccha tridivam sakra 
sukhaya tridivaukasam 


INDRA OFFERS PRAYERS TO KRSNA 


narjunasya ripuh kascin 
mamagre prabhavisyati 


“O king of the demigods, Indra, you may now return to heaven, for 
the satisfaction of the demigods. As long as I remain present in this 
world, no one will be able to harm Arjuna.” 


Text 100 
arjunarthe ca tan sarvan 
pandavanaksatan yudhi 
kuntya niryatayisyami 
nivrtte bharate mrdhe 


“Because of Arjuna, I will return to Kunti all of the Pandavas, 
healthy and unharmed, after the completion of the battle of the 
Mahabharata.” 


Text 101 
yac ca vaksyati mam Sakra  — 
tanujas tava so ‘rjunah 
bhrtyavat tat karisyami 
tava snehena yantritah 


“O king of the demigods, whatever your son, Arjuna, may ask of 
Me, I will certainly do it as a true well-wisher because of My strong 
affection for him.” 


Text 102 
satya-sandhasya tac-chrutua 
priyam pritasya bhasitam 
krsnasya saksat tridivam 
jagama tridasesvarah 
When Krsna, who is always determined to protect the truth, finished 


Speaking to Indra, the lord of the demigods, he returned to his 
abode in Svargaloka. 


Thus ends the translation of the nineteenth chapter of the Visnu 
Purana of Sri Harivaméa. 


CHAPTER TWENTY 
Conversation Between the Cowherd Men and Krsna 


Text 1 
vaisampayana uvdaca 
gate sakre tatah krsnah 
pujyamano vrajalayath 
govardhana-dharah sriman 
vivesa vrajam eva ha 


Vaisampayana said: O Janamejaya, after Indra, the king of the 
demigods, had departed for his own abode, Krsna, the lifter of 
Govardhana Hill, entered Vrndavana while being glorified by the 
residents of Vraja. 


Texts 2-3 
tasya vrddhabhinandanti 
jnatayas ca sahositah 
dhanyah smo ‘nugrhitah smas 
tvad-vrttena nayena ca 


gavo varsa-bhayat tirna 
vayam tirna maha-bhayat 

tava prasddad govinda 
deva-tulya-parakrama 


All the elderly cowherd men congratulated Krsna, saying, “O 
Govinda, You are as powerful as the Supreme Lord. Our lives are 
also glorious because, by Your instructions and activities, You have 
exhibited great compassion toward us. By Your mercy, the cows 
were delivered from the onslaught of heavy rain and we also were 
relieved from a great calamity.” 


Text 4 
amdnusadni karmani 
tava pasyama gopate 


dharanenasya Sailasya vidmas 
tvam krsna daivatam 


“O Lord of the cows, we see that all of Your activities are Most 
uncommon. My dear Krsna, because You had lifted Govardhana 
Hill with one hand, we can understand that You are not an ordinary 
human being, but certainly a demigod.” 


Text 5 
kas tuam bhavasi rudranam 
marutam ca maha-balah 
vasinam va kim artham 
ca vasudevah pita tava 


“Your prowess is extraordinary. Kindly tell us who are You. Are You 
one of the Rudras, Maruts, or Vasus? How did Nanda become Your 
father?” 


Text 6 
balam ca balye krida ca 
janma casmasu garhitam 
krsna divya ca te cesta 
sankitant manamsi nah 
“O Krsna, even in childhood, Your activities are extraordinary. 
Your prowess, pastimes, and everything else about You are most 
uncommon. Still, we become very anxious when we wonder for what 
purpose You have appeared amongst us. Indeed, when we think of 
this, our hearts become filled with fear.” 


Text 7 
kim artham gopa-vesena 
ramase ‘smasu garhitam 
loka-palopamas caiva 
gas tuam kim pariraksasi 


“Why are You bewildering us by accepting the guise of a cowherd 
boy? This act of Yours does not seem to befit Your exalted positio” 


CONVERSATION BETWEEN THE COWHERD MEN AND KRSNA 


Although You are as powerful as the rulers of the earth, why do You | | 


spend Your time tending the cows?” 


Text 8 
devo va ddnavo va tuam 
yakso gandharva eva va 
asmakam bandhavo jato 


yo ‘st so ‘si namo ‘stu te 


“Are You a demigod or a demon? Are You a Yaksa or a Gandharva | 


who has appeared amongst us as our friend and relative? O Krsna, 
whoever You may be, our obeisances unto You!” 


Text 9 
kenacid yadi karyena 
vasastha yadrcchaya 
vayam tavanugah sarve 
bhavantam saranam gatah 


“Whatever Your mission may be, we are all Your followers and 
servants. Thinking in this way, we take shelter of You.” 


Text 10 
vaisampayana uvaca 
gopanam vacanam srutva 
krsnah padma-daleksanah 
praty uvaca smitam krtva 
jnatin sarvan samagaian 
Vaisampaya said: O Janamejaya, after hearing these statements of 
the elderly cowherd men of Vraja, Krsna, whose eyes are beautiful, 
like lotus petals, smiled and replied as follows. 


Text 11 
manyante mam yatha sarve 
bhavanto bhima-vikramam 
tathaham navamantavyah 
sva-jatiyo ‘smi bandhavah 


y 


ORE VisnNUK-PAKVA 


“Please do not do Me the injustice of thinking Me to be 4 great] 


powerful personality. I am simply a friend of all you cowherq 
inhabitants of Vraja.” 


Text 12 
yadi tu avasyam Srotavyam 
kalah samprati-palyatam 
tato bhavantah Srosyantt mam 
ca draksyantt tativatah 


“If you are really interested to know My identity then you will have 
to wait for the appropriate time. Only then will you will be able to 
hear about, see, and understand Me.” 


Text 13 
yady ayam bhavatam slaghyo 
bandhavo devasaprabhah 
parynanena kim karyam 
yady eso ‘nugraho mama 

“Although I certainly possesses prowess equal to the demigods, if 
you relate to Me as your dear relative and friend, I think that there 
is no need for you to inquire about My actual identity. It is My desire 
that you simply think of Me in this way.” 


Text 14 
evam uktas tu te gopa 
vasudeva-sutena vai 
baddha-mauna disah 


sarve bhejire pihitananah 


When Krsna, the son of Vasudeva, spoke in this way, all the cowheré 
men refrained from further questioning and returned to thet! 
respective residences. 


Text 15 
krsnas tu yauvanam drstva 
nist candramaso vanam 


Sadradim ca nisam ramyam 
manas cakre ratim prati 
Thereafter, when Krsna gazed at the enchanting forest on a bright 


full moon night in autumn, He considered it to be a most suitable 
time to enjoy amorous pastimes. 


Text 16 
sa hanisdnga-vagasu 
vraja-rathyasu viryavan 
vrsanam jata-darpanam 
yuddhani sama-yojayat 


Powerful Krsna then arranged for a contest of bulls in the streets of 
Vraja, which were covered by the dust of dried cow dung. 


Text 17 
gopalams ca balodagran 
yodhayamasa viryavan 
vane $a viro gas cava 
jagraha grahavad vibhuh 


Unlimitedly powerful Lord Govinda also arranged for a wrestling 
competition for the strongest cowherd men of Vraja. He enacted a 
delightful pastime of catching the cows that were wandering in the 
forest of Vrndavana. 


Text 18 
yuvatir gopa-kanyas ca 
ratrau sankdlya kdlavit 
kaisorakam manayan vai 
sah tabhir mumoda ha 


Lord Hari, appearing to be in the prime of His youth, invited 
the young gopis of Vrndavana to the forest and enjoyed amorous 
pastimes with them. 


Text 19 
tas tasya vadanam kantam 
kanta gopa-striyo nist 


pibantt nayanaksepair gam 
gatam sasinam yatha 


The beautiful gopis, with sidelong glances, looked at the attractive 
face of Krsna who, at night, appeared as if the moon had come down 
to the earth. 


Text 20 
haritalardra-pitena 
sa kauseyena vasasa 
vasano bhadra-vasanam 
krsnah kantataro ‘bhavat 


Being surrounded by the gopisand dressed in very attractive garments 
of fine yellow silk, Krsna appeared unlimitedly enchanting. 


Text 21 
sa baddhangada-nirvythas 
citraya vana-mdlaya 
sobhamano hi govindah 


Sobhayamasa tad vrajam 


Krsna’s arms were adorned with jeweled armlets and a nice crown 
decorated His head. Govinda wore a garland of forest flowers and in 
this way, He enhanced the beauty of Vrndavana forest. 


Text 22 
nama damodarety evam 
gopa-kanyas tadabravan 
vicitram caritam ghose 
drstua tat tasya bhadsvatah 


The gopis of Vraja were very pleased to take part in Krsna’s wonderful 
pastimes in the forest. With great feelings of love, they addressed 
Him as Damodara. 


Text 23 
tas tam payodharottungair 
urobhih samapidayan 


CONVERSATION BETWEEN THE COWHERD MEN AND KRSNA 


bhramitaksais ca vadanair 
nirtksante varanganah 


The gopis embraced Krsna firmly to their chests. They continuously 
gazed at Krsna’s moon-like face without satiation. 


Text 24 
ta varyamanah patibhir 
matrbhir bhratrbhis tatha 
krsnam gopangana ratrau 
mrgayante rati-priyah 


The gopis of Vrndavana had transgressed the orders of their 
husbands, fathers, mothers and brothers. At night, they went to the 
forest to search for Krsna because they were absolutely attached to 
Him. 


Text 25 
tas tu pankti-krtah sarva 
ramayanti manoramam 
gayantyah krsna-cantam 
dvandvaso gopa-kanyakah 


In the forest, the young gopis stood in a circle and Krsna placed 
Himself between each one, holding their hands. In this way, they 
danced while singing the glories of Krsna, thereby giving Him great 
pleasure. 


Text 26 
krsna-lilanukarinyah 
krsna-pranthiteksanah 
krsnasya gatigaminyas 
tarunyas ta varanganah 
Their eyes were fixed on Krsna. These young and beautiful gopis 


sometimes imitated Krsna’s pastimes and walked with Him, side by 
side, 


€ 
4 


Text 27 
vanesu tala hastagraih 
kujayantyas tathaparah 
cerur vai caritam tasya 
krsnasya vraja-yositah 


There were other gopis in Vrndavana who also wandered about in 
the forest while singing songs that glorified Krsna’s pastimes, 


Text 28 
tas tasya nrtyam gitam 
ca vilasa-smita-viksitam 
muditas canukurvantyah 
kridanti vraja-yosttah 


In Krsna’s absence, the gopis would imitate His pastimes while 
dancing, singing, and smiling with great restlessness. 


Text 29 
bhava-nispanda-madhuram 
gayantyas ta varanganah 
vrajam gatah sukham 
cerur damodara parayanah 


The intense attachment of the gopis of Vraja for Krsna was clearly 
visible in the way they glorified Krsna without cessation. By doing 
so, their taste for relishing Krsna’s sweetness only increased. In this 
way, being fixed in thought of Krsna, the gopis joyfully passed their 
days and nights. 


Text 30 
karisapamsudigdhangyas 
tah krsnam anuvavrire 
ramayantyo yatha nadgam 
sampramatiam karenavah 


Their bodies were decorated with powder made from dry cow dung 
instead of costly cosmetics. Their only business was to give pleasur® 


CONVERSATION BETWEEN THE COWHERD MEN AND KRSNA 


to Krsna. They would surround Krsna in the way female elephants 
surround an intoxicated king of elephants. 


Text 31 
tam anya bhava-vikacair 
netrath prahasitananah 
pibanty atrpta-vanitah 
krsnam krsna-mrgeksanah 


The gopis of Vraja, whose eyes resembled those of antelopes, would 
drink the nectar emanating from the beautiful form of Syamasundara 
and yet, they were never satisfied. They were always seen smiling 
with ecstasy. 


Text 32 
mukham asyabja-sankasam 
trsita gopa-kanyakah 
ratyantaragata ratrau 
pibanti rasa-lalasch 


The gopis always hankered after relishing the mellows of Krsna’s 
transcendental pastimes. For this reason, they would assemble 
at night for the rasa dance and drink the nectar of Krsna’s lotus 
mouth. 


Text 33 
ha hett kurvatas tasya 
prahrstasta varanganah 
jagrhur nissrtam vanim 
namna damodarenitam 


When Krsna addressed them with love, saying, “O Radhe! O Gopis!” 
the hearts of the gopis would become filled with ecstasy. Their 


happiness knew no bounds when they were lovingly addressed by 
Damodara. 


Text 34 
tasam grathita-simanta 
ratim nitvad “huli-kriah 


caru visramsire kesah 
hucagre gopa-yositam 


In the course of enjoying the rasa dance, the gopis’ braideq hair 
would become loosened, scattering over their breasts. 


They would 
look very beautiful in that condition. 


Text 35 
evam sa krsno gopinam 
cakravalair alankrtah 
Sadradisu sacandrasu 


nisasu mumude sukhi 


In this way, Krsna enjoyed rasa dance pastimes in the company of 


the gopis at night during the autumn and thus merged into an ocean 
of transcendental bliss. 


Thus ends the translation of the twentieth chapter of the Visnu 
Parva of Sri Harivamsa. 


CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE 
The Killing of Aristasura 


Text 1 
vaisampayana uvaca 
pradosarddhe kadacit tu 

krsne rati-parayane 
trasayan samado gostham 
aristah praty adrsyata 


Vaisampayana said: One day, early in the morning, as Krsna was 
about to return home after performing His rasa dance pastimes, He 
saw that the inhabitants of Vraja were greatly frightened by a demon 


named Aristasura. 


Text 2 
nirvanangara-meghabhas 
tiksna-srngo ‘rka-locanah 
ksura ttksnagra-caranah 
kalah kala waparah 


The demon looked as black as coal or ashes, his horns were sharp, 
and his eyes were red, like the sun. The hooves of that demon 
appeared to be like sharp knives. Indeed, the black demon appeared 
like death personified. 


Text 3 
leihanah sanispesam 
jihvayosthau punah punah 
garvitaviddha-langiilah 
kathina-skandha-bandhanah 
Asthe bull demon a 
‘1 anger and lick t 


of his Strength, he 
and hard. 


pproached Vrndavana, he began to chew his lips 
hem, again and again. Being puffed up because 
raised his tail. The hump on his back was large 


Text 4 
kakudodagra-nirmanah 
pramanad duratikramah 
sakrn mutropaliptango 
gavam udvejano bhrsam 


The demon could fell huge buildings by the forceful push of his 
hump. He was so tall that no one could surpass him. The rear of 
his body was smeared with dung and urine. He created a fearfy] 
situation for all the cows. 


Text 5 
mahaékatih sthila-mukho 
drdha-yjanur mahodarah 
visdnavalgita-gatir 


lambata kantha-carmana 


The waist of the demon, Aristasura, was broad and his mouth was 
large. His knees were strong and firm and his belly was very big. His 
throat was very wide. The demon jumped and then charged into 
town while pointing his horns towards the ground. 


Text 6 
gavarohesu capalas 
taru-ghatankitananah 
yuddha-sayja-visandgro 
dvisad-vrsabha-sidanah 


The demon appeared to be agitated because he was very anxious 
to mate with the cows. His head had bruises as a result of forcefully 
hitting big trees. His horns were always ready to pierce anyone, and 
he had already killed many bulls. 


Text 7 
aristo nama hi gavam 
aristo darunakrtth 
daityo vrsabha-ripena 
gosthan viparidhavati 


THE KILLING oF ARISTASURA oF 


The fierce-looking demon, Aristasura, was very frightening for all to 
see, especially the cows. The demon had assumed the form of a bull 
and was creating havoc in the pasturing grounds of Vraja. 


Text 8 
patayano gavam garbhan 
drpto gacchaty anartavam re 
bhajamanas ca capalo 
grstih sampracacara ha 


He attacked the pregnant cows, causing them to have miscarriages. 
Being intoxicated with pride, the demon mated with cows, even 
when it was not their time. The restless demon chased the cows that 
had recently given birth to calves. 


Text 9 
srnga-praharano raudrah 
praharan gosu durmadah 
gosthesu na ratim lebhe 
vind yuddhena govrsah 


His biggest weapons were his horns. The demon looked very 
formidable and wicked by nature. His daily routine was to torture 
cows. Whenever this bull demon entered the pasturing grounds, he 
would not return home without engaging in fights. 


Text 10 
kasyacit tv atha kdlasya 
sa ursah kesavagratah 
agagama balodagro 
vaivasvata-vase sthitah 


One day, the formidable bull demon, whose fate was sealed in hands 


of Yamaraja, forcibly made his entry into Vrndavana and came face- 
to-face with Lord Krsna. 


Text 11 
Sa tatra gas tu prasabham 
badhamdano madotkatah 


cakara nirvrsam gostham 


nirvatsa-sisu-pungavam 


As soon as the maddened demon entered Vraja, he began to harass 
the cows. With his onslaught, the demon made all the bulls, cows 
calves, and cowherd boys flee the pasturing grounds. 


Text 12 
etasminn eva kale tu 
gavah krsna-samipagah 
trasayamasa dustatma 


vaivasvata-vase sthitah 


The evil-minded demon, who was ready to travel to the abode of 


Yama, slowly approached Krsna while terrorizing the cows that were 
standing by His side. 


Text 13 
sendrasanir ivambhodo 
nardamano maha-surah 
tala-sabdena tam krsnah 


simha-naddats ca mohayan 


When Aristasura roared, he seemed like a vast cloud in the sky, 
accompanied by the thundering of lightning caused by Indra. In 
response, Krsna challenged the demon and also roared loudly. 


Text 14 
abhyadhavata govindo 
daityam vrsabha-rupinam 
sa krsnam govyrso drstua 
hrsta-langila-locanah 


Then, Lord Govinda charged the bull demon. Upon seeing Krsna, 


the demon became happy and raised his tail, his eyes turning red 
with rage. 


Text 15 
rositas tala-sabdena 
yuddhakanksi nanarda ha 


tam apatantam durvrttam 
drstva vrsabha-riipi nam 


tasmat sthanadn na vyacalat 
krsno girir tvacalah 


Being thus challenged by Krsna, the demon became enraged 
and made a frightful noise, desiring to fight. Although Krsna saw 
Aristasura rushing towards Him in great anger, He did not flinch 
but instead, stood firmly like a mountain. 


Text 16 
sa kuksau vrsabho drstim 
pranidhaya dhrtananah 
krsnasya nidhanakanksi 
turnam abhyutpapata ha 


The demon, Aristasura, charged Krsna with his head down, aiming 
at His stomach. He then angrily lunged at Krsna, hoping to kill 
Him. : 


Text 17 
tam apatantam vegena 
pratijagraha durddharam 
krsnah krsnaryjana-nibho 
ursam prati vrsopamah 


Krsna, whose complexion is like that of black ointment, appeared 
like a powerful bull as He faced the demon. He then deftly caught 
hold of the charging demon as he approached. 


Text 18 
sa samsaktas tu krsno vai 
urseneva mahd-vrsah 
mumoca vaktrajam phenam 
nastas catha sasabdavat 


There was a fierce battle between Krsna and the demon, like a bull 
fighting another powerful bull. Soon, the demon became exhausted 


Sri VISNU-PARVA 


so that foam and saliva came from his mouth and nose as he breathed 
heavily. 


Text 19 
tav anyonyavaruddhangau 
yuddhe krsna-vrsav ubhau 
rejatur megha-samaye 
samsaktaviva toyadau 


While wrestling, Krsna and the demon held each other’s bodies 
tightly. In that condition, they appeared like two dark clouds coming 
together in the sky during the rainy season. 


Text 20 
tasya darpa-balam hatva 
krtva srngantare padam 
apidayad aristasya kantham 
kinnam ivambaram 


After exhausting the demon’s strength and pride, Krsna placed one 
of His lotus feet between his horns and twisted his head forcefully, 
as one squeezes a wet cloth. 


Text 21 
srngam casya punah savyam 
utpatya yama-dandavat 
tenaiva praharad vaktre 


sa mamara bhrsam hatah 


Krsna pulled out the demon’s left horn, which looked like the rod 
of Yamaraja, and began to hit him in the face. Being struck in this 
way by Krsna, Aristasura helplessly fell to the ground. 


Text 22 
sa bhinna-srngo bhagnasyo 
bhagna-skandhas ca danavah 
papata rudhirodgan 
sambudhara ivambudah 


THE KILLING OF ARISTASURA 


His horns uprooted, his face smashed, and his neck broken by Krsna, 
the demon began to vomit blood, just as a cloud showers rain. 


Text 23 
govindena hatam drstuva 
drptam vrsabha-danavam 
sadhu sadhv iti bhitani 


tat-karmasyabhitustuvuh 


When the inhabitants of Vraja saw that Krsna had killed the 
formidable demon who had come in the form of a bull, and who 
was intoxicated with pride, they congratulated Him, saying, “Sadhu! 
Sadhu!” 


Text 24 
sa copendro vrsam hatva 
kanta-candre nisa-mukhe 
aravindabha-nayanah 
punar eva rarasa ha 


At the end of the night, when the moon shone brilliantly, lotus-eyed 
Krsna, who is also known as Upendra, killed the bull demon and 
then returned to His rasa dance. 


Text 25 
te ‘pi go-vritayah sarve 
krsnam kamala-locanam 
upasancaknre hrstah 


sarve Sakram wamarah 


The cowherd men and women, whose livelihood is the cows, happily 
Worshiped lotus-eyed Krsna, just as the demigods worship Indra. 


Thus ends the translation of the twenty-first chapter of the Visnu 
Parva of Sri H artvamsa. 


CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO 


Kamsa’s sends Akrura to Vrndavana, 
to Bring Krsna and Balarama. 


Text 1 
vaisampayana uvaca 
krsnam vraja-gatam srutud 

vardhamanam tvanalam 
udvegam agamat kamsah 
Sankamanas tato bhayam 


Vaisampayana said: O Janamejaya, Kamsa became filled with anxiety 
when he heard that Krsna was being brought up in Vraja, and that, 
like a blazing fire, was day by day shining more brilliantly. The fear 
of Krsna began to root itself firmly within his mind. 


Texts 2-6 
putanayam hatayam ca 
kaliye ca parajite 
dhenuke pralayam nite 

pralambe ca nipatite 


dhrie govardhane saile 
viphale sakra-sasane 

gosu tratasu ca tatha 
sprhaniyena karmana 


kakudmini hate ‘riste 
gopesu muditesu ca 

drsamane vindse ca 
sannikyste maha-bhaye 


karsane vrksayos catva 
Sakatasya tathaiva ca 

acintyam karma tac chrutva 
vardhamdanesu Satrusu 


praplanistam tatmanam 
mene sa mathuresvarah 
visanjnendnya-bhutatma 


gatasu-pratimo babhau 


Kamsa began to contemplate as follows: “Putana has been killed, 
the serpent, Kaliya, has been chastised, Dhenukasura has been 
sent to the abode of Yamaraja, Pralambasura has been eliminated, 
Govardhana Hill has been lifted by Krsna, Indra’s authority has been 
overruled and all the cows have been protected, the giant demon, 
Aristasura, has been killed, the cowherd men are enjoying life very 
nicely, the threat to my life appears imminent, the yamala-arjuna 
trees were effortlessly uprooted, the breaking of the cart and many 
other superhuman feats have been performed by Krsna.” 


Thinking in this way, Karhsa, the king of Mathura, concluded that 
his days are numbered. This conviction made his senses, body, 


mind and intelligence stunned, so that he began to look practically 
devoid of life. 


Text 7 
iato jnatin samanayya 
pitaram cogra-sdsanah 
nisi Stimitamukayam 
mathurayam janadhipah 
Thereafter, in the dead of night, when everything was quiet, Kamsa, 
the formidable king of Mathura, called his ministers, associates, 
friends, and his father, Ugrasena, for council. 


Texts 8-11 
vasudevam ca devabham 
kankam cahiya yadavam 
satyakam darukam caiva 


Rankadvarajam eva ca 


bhojam vaitaranam caiva 
vikadrum ca mahda-balam 


as Os £2Y BF At ALAN NU KR A Lt VRNDAVANA 


bhaya-sankham ca dharmajnam 
viprthum ca prthu-sriyam 


babhrum dana-patim caiva 
kriavarmanam eva ca 

bhuriteja-samaksobhyam 
bhirisravasam eva ca 


etan sa yadavan sarvan 
abhasya srnuteti ca 

ugrasena-suto raja 
provaca mathuresvarah 


When Vasudeva, who was as powerful as a demigod; Kanka, a 
descendent in the Yadu dynasty; Satyaka; Daruka; Kanka’s brother, 
Bhoja; Vaitarana; the powerful Vikadra; Bhayasankha, who knew 
religious principles; Prthula; Viprthu, an aristocratic king; the 
magnanimous Akrura; Krtavarma; Bhuriteja; Aksobhya; and 
Bhurisrava, as well as many other members of the Yadu dynasty, 
assembled, Kamsa, the king of Mathura and son of Ugrasena, 
addressed them: “O friends, listen with attention as I speak.” 


Texts 12-13 
bhavantah sarva-karyajna 
vedesu parinisthitah 
nyaya-vritanta-kusalas 
tri-vargasya pravartakah 


Rartavyanam ca kartaro 
lokasya vibudhopamah 

tasthivamso maha-vrite 
niskampa iva parvatah 


“You are all conversant with the duties of men. You all are learned in 
the Vedas. Your dealings are always exemplary. You teach others to 
Work to achieve the four objectives of human life. You are expert in 
Performing your duties. You all are worshipable, like the demigods. 
You are as firm as mountains with regards to maintaining the proper 
Code of conduct.” 


Text 14 
adambha-vritayah sarve 
sarve guru-kulositah 
raja mantra-dharah sarve 
sarve dhanusi paragah 


“You remain aloof from the cheating propensity and all kinds of 
sinful activities. You have studied while living at the houses of your 
spiritual masters. You are all expert in the science of archery and 
you know the value of keeping one’s plans undisclosed.” 


Text 15 
yasah-pradipa lokanam 
vedarthanam vivaksavah 
asramanam nisargajna 
varnanam karma-paragah 
“The light of your fame has spread throughout the world. You all 
are capable of understanding the real purport of the Vedas. You are 
well aware of the duties that must be performed by members of the 
four spiritual orders. You also know the prescribed duties for the 


four social orders.” 


Text 16 
pravaktarah suniyatam 
netaro naya-darsinam 
bhettarah para-rastranam 
tratarah saranarthinam 


“You are all expert in giving direction to those who lack 
understanding. You are the leaders of those who are considered 
moralists. You know how to penetrate the secrets of enemy kings. 
You are the protectors of surrendered souls.” 


Text 17 
evam aksata-caritraih 
Srimadbhir uditoditaih 
dyaur apy anugrhita syad 
bhavadbhih kim punar mahi 


KAMSA’S SENDS AKRURA TO VRNDAVANA 


“There is no tinge of infamy in your characters. You are all full of 
opulence and energy. Your names are always mentioned whenever 
the activities of great personalities are discussed. If you wished, you 
could supply benefit to even the heavenly planets. What then can 


be said of the earth?” 


Text 18 
rsinam iva vo vrttam 
prabhavo marutam tva 
rudranam iva vah krodho 
diptir angirasam iva 
“Your behavior is similar to that of sages, your influence is similar to 
that of the Maruts, your anger is similar to that of the Rudras, and 
your prowess is similar to that of the fire-god.” 


Text 19 
vyavartamanam sumahad 
bhavadbhih khyata-kirtibhih 
dhrtam yadu-kulam virair 
bhitalam parvatair iva 


“Whenever the Yadu dynasty appeared ready to fall from grace, 
many famous and glorious kings like you appeared to re-establish 
its glories, Just as mountains sustain the earth with a firm grip.” 


Text 20 
evam bhavatsu yuktesu 
mama cittanuvartisu 
vardhamano mamdanartho 
bhavadbhih kim upeksitah 


“You are all very talented personalities and have always endeavored 
ao my benefit. But, in spite of your presence, I now face great 
difficulty. How is it that you have all ignored my plight?” 


Text 21 
esa krsna iti khyato 
nanda-gopa-suto vraje 


SRI VISNU-PARVA 


vardhamana tvambhodhir 
milam nah pankrntati 


“This boy who is the son of the cowherd, Nanda, and who is famous 
in Vraja as Krsna, has transgressed all etiquette and is steadily trying 
to uproot our very existence.” 


Text 22 
anamatyasya sunyasya 
carandhasya mamaiva tu 
kéranan nanda-gopasya 
sa suto gopito grhe 


“My ministers do not give me good advice and so, I cannot decide 
what to do. I have become blind because I no longer have good 


spies assisting me. Because of this weakness, the son of Nanda is 
able to peacefully remain at home.” 


Text 23 
upeksita wa vyadhih 
puryamana iwwambudah 
nadan megha ivosnante sa 
duratma vivardhate 


That wicked person is flourishing in Vraja, like a thundering cloud 


filled with water in the rainy season, which causes various types of 
disease.” 


Text 24 
tasya naham gatim jane na 
yogam na parakramam 
nanda-gopasya bhavane 
jatasyadbhuta-karmanah 


(14 ‘ E 

I cannot comprehend the position of that boy who was born 18 ie 
house of Nanda. I do not know how to bring Him under my contro”™ 
I cannot conceive of the strength of His transcendental body. 


Text 25 
kim tad-bhutam samudbhitam 
devapatyam na vidmahe 
atidevair amanusyath 
karmabhih so ‘numiyate 


“| do not know what kind of person has appeared in the form of this 
boy. Is He the son of a demigod? Whatever He does is impossible 
even for the demigods to accomplish and so, what to speak of mere 
human beings. From His activities, it appears to me that He is more 
powerful than the demigods.” 


Text 26 
putana sakuni balye 
sisunottana-sayind 
stana-panepsuna pita 
pranath saha durasada 


“The witch, Putana was invincible. When she went to kill that boy by 
feeding Him her breast milk when He was only a baby, he sucked 
out her life air while drinking her milk.” 


Text 27 
yamunaya hrade nagah 
kaltyo damitas tatha 
rasatala-caro nitah 
ksanenddarsanam hradat 


You know the serpent, Kaliya, who had lived within a lake of the 


Yamuna, and was chastised by this boy, Krsna, so that he had to take 
Shelter in a distant place.” 


Text 28 
nanda-gopa-suto yogam 
krtua sa punar utthitah 
dhenukas tala-sikharat 


patito jivitam vind 


SRI VISNU-PARVA 


“After making the serpent leave the Yamuna forever, this 
Nanda came out of the water and killed Dhenukasura by th 
him into a treetop.” 


r OWing 


Text 29 
- pralambam yam mrdhe 
deva na Sekur ativartitum 
balena mustinaikena sa 
hatah prakrto yatha 


“This boy sent Pralambasura, who even the demigods were not able 
to defeat in battle, into the mouth of death with a punch from his 
fist.” 


Text 30 
vasavasyotsavam bhanktva 
varsam vasavarosajam 
nirjitya go-grharthaya dhrto 
govardhano girth | 


“He then stopped the worship of Indra and protected the inhabitants 
of Vraja from the heavy rain sent by the enraged king of heaven. 
He lifted Govardhana Hill to create a shelter for the cows and 
inhabitants of Vraja.” 


Text 31 
hatas tv aristo balavan 
nth-srngas ca krto vraje 
abalo balyam asthaya 
ramate sisu-lilaya 


P d 

“He killed the very powerful Aristasura in the pasturing ground an 
tore out his horns. Actually, He is not a small boy but is playn8 tha 
role for the pleasure of His devotees.” 


Text 32 
prabandhah karmandm evam 


tasya go-vraja-vasinah 


sannikrstam bhayam caiva 
kesino mama ca dhruvam 


“The way this boy, who lives amongst the cows of Vraja, conducts 
Himself, I think that Kesi and I are going to be put into difficulty.” 
-ril p) 


Text 33 
bhiita-purvas ca me mrtyuh 
satatam pirva-daihikah 
yuddhakanksi ca sa yatha 
testhattha mamagratah 


“In my previous life, He was the cause of my death: In this life also, 
He always stands before me like death personified.” 


Text 34 
kva ca gopatvam asubham 
manusyam mrtyu-durbalam 
kva ca deva-prabhavena 
kriditavyam vraje mama 


“It is very strange how an insignificant cowherd boy, who is always 
threatened with death because He possesses a human body, can live 
in Vraja and perform such wonderful activities, which are befitting 
the demigods.” 


Text 35 
aho nicena vapusac 
chadayituad’tmano vapuh 
ko ‘py esa ramate devah 
smasanastha ivanalah 


Alas! How wonderful it is that a demigod has concealed his identity 
an he 
dassumed the form of a cowherd boy in our midst, just as the fire 
oe pas 
80€s on burning In a crematorium.” 


Text 36 
sruyate hi pura visnuh 
suranam kdranantare 


1) IN EG yY @gWwWwax 


vamanena tu rupena 
jahara prthivim mam 


“It has been heard that in ancient times, Lord Visnu, to accomplish 
the mission of the demigods, accepted the form of a dwarf and took 
away the reign of the earth by deceiving Bali Maharaja.” 


Text 37 
krtud kesarino rupam 
visnund prabha-visnuna 
hato hiranyakasipur 
danavanam pitamahah 


“That same supremely powerful Visnu next assumed a form that was 
half man and half lion and killed Hiranyakasipu, the grandfather of 


the demons.” 


Text 38 
acintya-rupam asthaya 
sveta-Satlasya murdhani 
bhavena cyavita daityah 
pura tat-tnpuram ghnata 


“In the same way, long ago, Visnu took the form of Rudra and threw 
the demon, Tripura, from the peak of Svetacala Mountain, after 
defeating him in the battle.” 


Text 39 
calito guru-putrena 
bhargavo ‘ngirasena vai 
pravisya dardurim madyam 
anavrstim cakara ha 
“Brhaspati’s son, Kaca, distracted Sukracarya from his pr omise with 
the help of the Darduri illusory power. Because of him, there sca 


dearth of demons on earth. This Kaca is said to be an empower 
incarnation of Lord Visnu.” 


Text 40 
anantah sasvato devah 
sahasra-siraso ‘vyayah 
varaham riupam asthaya 
projjahararnavan mahim. 


“Lord Visnu is unlimited, eternal, almighty, and possesses thousands 
of heads. He is indestructible. He delivered the earth from the depths 
of the ocean by assuming the form of the Boar Incarnation.” 


Text 41 
amrte nirmite pirvam 
visnuh stri-rupam asthitah 
SUYGNGM asuranam ca 
yuddham cakre sudarunam 


“In ancient times, when nectar was produced by churning the ocean 
of milk, Lord Visnu assumed the form of an enchanting woman, 
named Mohini, and caused a fierce battle between the demigods 
and the demons.” 


Text 42 
amrtarthe pura capi 
deva-dattya-samagame 
dadhara mandaram — 
visnur akupara ite Srutih 


“When the demigods and the demons cooperated to produce 
nectar by churning the milk ocean, Lord Visnu assumed the form 
of'a tortoise and held the Mandara mountain, which was being used 
asa churning rod, on His back. This is what I have heard.” 


Text 43 
vapur vamanam asthaya 
nandaniyam pura baleh 
tribhih kramais tu triml 
lokan jahara tridivalayam 


SRI VisNU-PARVA 


“The same Visnu, in His form as Vamana, covered the three Worlds 


by His three steps and took away the kingdom of heaven from the 
rule of Bali Maharaja.” 


Text 44 
caturdha tejaso bhagar 
krtva dasarathe grhe 
Sa eva rama-sanjno vai 


ravanam vyanasat tada 


“That same Visnu appeared in the house of King Dasaratha and 
divided Himself into four. In that incarnation, He was known as 
Rama and later on, killed Ravana.” 


Text 45 
evam esa nikrtya@ vai tat- 
tad rupam upagatah 
sadhayaty dtmanah karyam 
suranam artha-siddhaye 


“In this way, Lord Visnu deceitfully accepts various forms of 


incarnation to fulfill the desires of demigods and at the same 
accomplish His own purpose.” 


Text 46 
tad esa niinam visnur va 
sakro vad marutam patih 
mat-sadhanecchaya prapto. 
narado mam yad uktavan 


ae 


“Therefore, this Krsna must be Visnu, or else Indra, the king of the 
demigods. He has come to Vraja just to kill me. This information 
was given to me by the great sage, Narada, long ago.” 


Text 47 
atra me Sankate buddhir 
vasudevam prati dhruva 
asya buddhi-visesena 


vayam kdtaratam gatah ae 


KAMSA S SENDS ABRURA TO VRNDPA VY AGS A 


tn this regard, my suspicion turns to Vasudeva. I think that we are 
“ n 3 


being afflicted in this way because of Vasudeva’s cleverness.” 
e 


Text 48 
aham hi khatuanga-vane 
naradena samagatah 
dvitiyam sa hi mam viprah 
punar evabravid vacah 


“When I met Narada, who is endowed with all brahmanical qualities, 
at Khatvanga forest the second time, he again warned me by speaking 


as follows.” 


Text 49 
yas tvaya hi krto yatnah 
kamsa garbha-krie mahan 
vasudevena te ratrau 
tat-karma viphalikriam 


Narada said: “O Karhsa, the great endeavor that you made to destroy 
the embryo of Devaki has been frustrated by Vasudeva, in the dead 
of night.” 


Text 50 
danka ya tuvaya ratrau 
Silayam kamsa patita 
tam yasoda-sutam viddhi 
krsnam ca vasudevajam 


“You should know for certain that the daughter you smashed 
against the stone at night was actually the daughter of Yasoda and 
that Krsna, who lives with Yasoda, is actually the son of Vasudeva.” 


4 


Text 51 
ratrau vyadvartitav etau 
garbhau tava vadhaya vat 
vasudevena sandhaya 
mitra-rupena satruna 


es 


ed ¥ £8 GN Ww 2 SR RS OA 


“Your false friend, Vasudeva, deceitfully exchanged thes es 
children in the dead of night, for your future destruction,” 


Text 52 
sa tu kanya yasodaya 
vindhye parvata-sattame 
hatva sumbha-nisumbhau 
dvau danavau naga-carinau 


“Now, this daughter of Yasoda lives in the Vindhya mountains, which 
are considered to be the greatest of all mountains. She establisheq 
herself at that place after killing the fearful demons, Sumbha and 
Nisumbha.” 


Text 53 
krtabhiseka varada bhita- 
sangha-nisevita 
arcyate dasyubhir ghorair 
maha-bali-pasu-pniya 


“This goddess is worshiped by all living entities and she fulfills all of 
their material desires. She is fond of opulent worship and the animals 


_ that wander in the forest. Many powerful rogues and plunderers 


worship her before performing their heinous activities.” 


Text 54 
sura-pisita-pirnabhyam 
kumbhabhyam upasobhita 
mayurangada-citrais ca 
barhabharair vibhisita 


“She has two pitchers kept by her sides, filled with honey 24 
fruit. Her armlets are decorated with peacock feathers. Her other 
ornaments are also made of peacock feathers.” 


Texts 55-61 
hrsta-kukkuta-sannadam 


vanam vayasandaditam 


EES ES Sie TG a eae 
mrga-sanghais ca sampirnam 
aviruddhats ca paksibhih 


simha-vyaghra-varahanam 
nadena pratinaditam 

urksa-gambhira-nibidam 
Rantarath sarvato vrtam 


divya-bhrngaru-camarair 
adarsair upasobhitam 

deva-tuirya-ninadais ca 
satasah pratinaditam 


sthanam tasya nage vindhye 
nirmitam svena tejasa 

npinam trasajanani nityam 
tatra manorame 

vasate parama-prita 
devatair api pujita 

yas tv ayam nanda-gopasya 
krsna ity ucyate sutah 


atra me naradah praha 
sumahat-karma-karanam 

dvitiyo vasudevad vai 
vasudevo bhavisyati 


sa hi te sahajo mrtyur 
bandhavas ca bhavisyati 

sa eva vasudevo vai 
vasudeva-suto bali 


bandhavo dharmato mahyam 
hrdayenantako ripuh 


“In the Vindhya mountains, she has a beautiful forest of her own. In 
that forest, there are many hens joyfully roaming about. The sounds 
of the crows can be heard everywhere in that forest. There are also 
many wild animals, such as deer, in that forest. The entire forest is 


282 


SRI ViSNU-PARVA 


filled with various kinds of birds. One always hears the roaring of 
lions, tigers, and wild bears.” 


“That forest appears dense and dark because of the trees, Indeed, it 
appears insurmountable. Cdamaras, water pots, and mirrors can be 
seen around her temple. The forest is filled with the sounds of the 
celestial musical instruments. The goddess who creates fear in the 
minds of her enemies resides very happily in that enchanting forest. 
Even the demigods offer respect to her in that forest.” 


Kamsa continued speaking: “Narada had previously told me about 
this son of Nanda’s, Krsna. He told me that whatever uncommon 
activities, such as the killing of Putana, are being performed in Vraja 
are being carried out by this Krsna, the second son of Vasudeva. 
Being the son of Vasudeva, He is commonly known as Vasudeva. 
He told me that the same Krsna would be the cause of my death, 
although He is actually my well-wisher. I know Krsna to be my eternal 
friend but from within, I feel that He is acting as My enemy.” 


Texts 62-63 
yatha hi vayaso murdhni 
padbhyam yasyavatisthait 
netre tudati tasyaiva 
vaktrenamisa-grddhina 


vasudevas tathavvayam 
saputra-nati-bandhavah 

chinatti mama milani bhunkte 
ca mama parsvatah 


“Just as a crow sometimes sits on someone’s head and then plucks 
out his eyes with his sharp beak, this Vasudeva, along with his 
brothers, sons, and friends lives and eats with me while at the sam° 
time, tries to bring about my destruction.” 


| Text 64 
bhrina-hatyapi santarya 
go-vadhah stri-vadho ‘pi va 


na krtaghnasya loko ‘sti 
bandhavasya visesatah 


“Yuman beings can be delivered from the sin of abortion. The sin 
of killing a cow or a woman can be atoned for but there is no escape 
for an ungrateful person, especially one who betrays his brothers 
and well-wishers.” 
Text 65 
patitanugatam margam 
nisevaty acirena sah 
yah krtaghno ‘nubandhena 
pritim vahati darundm 
“One who is internally ungrateful but externally makes a show of 
love and affection, just to serve his purposes, quickly traverses the 


path to destruction without fail.” 
Text 66 
narakadhyusitah pantha 
gantavyas tena darunah 
apape papa-hrdayo 
yah papam anutisthat 
“Tt is said that if a sinful-minded person tries to harm someone 
honest by nature, he will certainly have to traverse the fearful path 


of hell.” 
Text 67 
aham va svajanah slaghyah 
sa va Slaghyatarah sutah 
niyamair guna-vrtiena 
tvaya bandhava-kamyaya 
ae should always establish friendship while simultaneously 
keeping strict discipline. Tell me, do you consider me to be your 
well-wisher or do you consider those two sons of Vasudeava to be 


better friends than me?” 


Texts 68-69 
hastinam kalahe ghore 
vadham rechanti virudhah 
yuddhavyuparame te tu 
sahasnanti maha-vane 


bandhavandm api tatha 
bheda-kale samutthite 

vadhyate yo ‘ntara-prepsuh 
svajano yadi vetarah 


“When there is a fight between elephants, many trees, plants, and 
creepers are crushed and when the fighting is over, they again grow 
back in the forest. Similarly, one who tries to find fault whenever 
there is a quarrel between brothers or friends will himself become 
ruined.” 


Text 70 
kalas tuam hi vinasaya 
maya pusto vydnata 
vasudeva kulasyasya 
yad virodhayase bhrsam 


“O Vasudeva, you are the disgrace of this family. I had unknowingly 
given you shelter and had looked after you, just for my own 
ruination. That is why you are now opposing me and putting me in 
great trouble.” 


Text 71 
amarsi vairasilas ca sada 
papa-matih sathah 
sthane yadu-kulam midha 
Socaniyam tvaya krtam 


“O foolish one, you are restless by nature and always envious of me: 
Your mind is polluted by sinful propensities. You are a big cheater: 
It is highly improper of you to drag the Yadu dynasty to such @ 
precarious condition.” 


Texts 72-73 
vasudeva vrtha vrddha 
yan-maya tvam puraskrtah 
svetena sirasa vrddho 
naiva varsa-satatr bhavet 


yasya buddhih parinata 
sa vai vrddhataro nrnam 


“Old Vasudeva, I had rewarded you in many ways and had taken 
care of you as my Own. But now, all this has proven to be futile. One 
does not become a respected elder simply by living for one hundred 
years Or having grey hair on his head. Rather, one whose intelligence 
has matured is said to be a wise and respected person.” 


Text 74 
tvuam ca karkasasilas ca 
buddhya ca na bahu-srutah 
kevalam vayasa vrddho 
yatha Saradi toyadah 


“You are very cruel by nature. Your intelligence is not very developed. 


You have grown old in years but not in experience, just like clouds 
in autumn.” | 


Text 75 
kim ca tuam sadhu janise 
vasudeva vrtha-mate 
mrte kamse mama suto 
mathuram palayisyati 


O Vasudeva, your intelligence is very meager. You are thinking, 


ter Karnsa’s death, my son, Krsna, will become the ruler of 
Mathura.’ 


Text 76 
chinnasas tuam vrtha-vrddho 
mithya tv evam vicanitam 


jytwvisur na so ‘py ast 
yo ‘vatisthen mamagratah 


“However, this ambition of yours will never be realized. You have 
grown old for nothing. Your plans are all futile. Anyone who tries 
to oppose me must be understood as having no desire to continue 


living.” 
Text 77 
prahartukamo visvas te 
yas tuam dustena cetasa 
tat te pratikarisye ‘ham 
putrayos tava pasyatah 


“T always had full faith in you while you had always desired to harm 
me in various ways. For this, I will take revenge against your two 
sons. You will see this with your own eyes.” 


Text 78 
na me vrddha-vadhah kascid 
duiya-stri-vadha eva ca 
kria-purvah karisye va 
visesena tu bandhave 


“I have never before killed an old man, a brahmana, or a woman. Nor 
will I do any such thing in the future. Specifically, I will never cause 


harm to my relatives or friends.” 


Text 79 
tha tuam jata-samvrddho 
mama pitra vivardhitah 
prtrsvasus ca me bharta 
yadtinam prathamo guruh 


“O Vasudeva, you were born here, you were raised here, and my 
father looked after you very carefully. You are the husband of my 
sister and you are treated as a most respectable person by the 
members of the Yadu dynasty.” 


NRAMSA S SENDS AKRURA TO YVRNDAVANA 


Text 80 
kule mahati vikhyatah 
prathite cakravartinam 
guru artham pujitah sadbhir 
mahadbhir dharma-buddhibhih 


“you were born in a family in which many famous emperors had 
appeared. You are also widely known. Because you know the 
principles of religion very well, you are respected, worshiped, and 
loved by everyone.” 


Text 81 
kim karisyamahe sarve 
satsu vakiavyatam gatah 
yadunam yutha-mukhyasya 
yasya te vrttam idrsam 


“You are a leader of the Yadu dynasty. When your behavior is like 
Pa what we can expected from others? What can we do? Because 
bf you, we have become an object of people’s condemnation.” 


Text 82 
mad-vadho va jayo 
vatha vasudevasya durnayath 
satsu yasyantt purusa 


yadinam avagunthitah 


“Whether I am killed or achieve victory, from today, by your 


immoral behavior, all the honest members of the Yadu dynasty will 
feel ashamed.” 


Text 83 
tvaya ht mad-vadhopayam 
tarkamanena vai mrdhe 
avisuasyam krtam karma 
vacyas ca yadavah krtah 


ORI VISNU-PARVA 


“O Vasudeva, you made a plan for my elimination by which everyone 
will lose faith in the members of the Yadu dynasty. You have pollute 
the Yadavas and thereby made them objects of ridicule.” 


Text 84 
asamyam vairam utpannamn 
mama krsnasya cobhayoh 
santim ekatare santim 
gate yasyanti yadavah 
“There will never be any peace or harmony between me and your 


son, Krsna. The members of the Yadu dynasty will be at peace only 
when one of us is killed.” 


Text 85 
gaccha danapate ksipram 
tavihanayitum vrajat 
nanda-gopam ca gopams 


ca karadan mama Sadsanat 


“O magnanimous Akrura, by my order, quickly go to Vrndavana 
and bring the two sons of Vasudeva here. Also bring the cowherd, 
Nanda, and the other gopas, so that they can pay their tax.” 


Text 86 
vacyas ca nanda-gopo vai 
karam ddaya varsikam 
Sighram agaccha nagaram 
gopath saha samanvitah 


“Tell the cowherd, Nanda, that he should immediately come 0 
Mathura, along with the other cowherd men, to pay the yearly tax. 


Text 87 
kysna-sankarsanau caiva 
vasudeva-sutav ubhau 
drastum icchati vai kamsah 
sabhrtyah sapurohitah 


66 . * . i ts, 
‘Also, tell him that king Karnsa, along with his associates and pries 


eee eS aS Be EE VY aoe Pe 


wants to see Vasudeva’s two sons, Krsna and Balarama.” 


Text 88 
etau yuddha-vidau range 
kala-nirmana-yodhinau 
drdhau ca krtinau caiva 
srnomi vyayatodyamau 


“I had heard that these two boys are expert in the art of wrestling, 
They have worked hard and mastered this art over a long period 
of time. I know that these two brothers are very strong and 


intelligent.” 


Text 89 
asmakam api mallau dvau 
sajjau yuddha-krtotsavau 
tabhyam saha ntyotsyete tau 
yuddha-kusalav ubhau 


“We also have wrestlers here in Mathura. They are very fond of 
wrestling and they are expert. I think that we should have a wrestling 
competition.” 


Text 90 
drastavyau ca mayavasyam 
balau tav amaropamau 
pitrsvasuh sutau mukhyau 
vrajavasau vanecarau 


“The two young boys, who are as glorious as demigods, are the sons 
of my sister. At present, they live in Vrndavana, where they play in 
the forest. | would very much like to see them.” 


Text 91 
vaktavyam ca vraje tasmin 
samipe vrajavasinam 
raja dhanur makham nama 
karayisyati vai sukhi 


© Akrura, go to Vndavana and tell all the Vrajavasis that King 


* 


O SRI VISNU-PARVA 


Karhsa has arranged a gala festival where a grand sacrifice kn 


” Own 
Dhanur-yajfia will be performed. as 


Text 92 
sannikrste vane te tu 
nivasantu yatha-sukham 
janasyamantritasyarthe yatha 
syat sarvam avyayam 


“I will make all arrangements for the comfortable stay of inviteg 
guests who come to participate in the festival. The residents of 
Vrndavana can live in the forest near Mathura.” 


Text 93 
payasah sarpisas caiva 
dadhno dadhy uttarasya ca 
yatha-kama-pradanaya 
bhojyadhisrayanaya ca 


- “These cowherd men have a responsibility to fulfill. They must 
supply yogurt, milk, ghee, and butter milk, as much as necessary for 
the satisfaction of all the invited guests. That is why they should live 
outside Mathura and arrange for all these things to be supplied.” 


Text 94 
akrira gaccha sighram tuam 
tau anaya mamajnaya 
sankarsanam ca krsnam ca 
drastum kautihalam hi me 


“O Akrura, go quickly! By my order, bring Krsna and Balaramé to 


Mathura because I am very anxious to see them.” 


Text 95 
tayor dgamane pritih 
parama mat-krta bhavet 
drstud tu tau maha-viryau tad 
vidhasyami yaddhitam 


KaMSA'’S SENDS AKRURA TO VRNDAVANA 


| will be greatly pleased when They come here. I will deal with 
oc wl 


Them in such a way that I will be ultimately benefited.” 
e 


Text 96 
Sasanam yadi va srutua 
mama tau paribhasitam 
nagacchetam yatha-kalam 
nigrahyav api tau mama 


“If after receiving my order, They refuse to come, or show no interest 
in participating in my festival then according to my opinion, They 
should be arrested and brought here.” 


Text 97 
santvam eva tu balesu 
pradhanam prathamo nayah 
madhurenaiva tau mandau 
suayam evanayasu vat 


“The best way to get children to do something is to speak to them 
in a polite and loving manner. Therefore, you should speak to the 
two brothers in a very sweet way and thus convince Them to come 
here without delay.” 


Text 98 
akrira kuru me pritim 
etam parama-durlabham 
yadi va nopajapto ‘si 
vasudevena suvrata 


tatha kartavyam etad-dhi 
yatha tav agamisyatah 


ike ruta, you always follow excellent vows. If Vasudeva has not yet 
Polluted your mind then do as I have told you, for my pleasure. Try 


your b 
est to atrange for the two boys to come here.” 


Text 99 
evam aksipyamano ‘pi 
vasudevo vasiipamah 


ORT VISNUSPARYVA 


sagarakaram atmanam 
nisprakampam adharayat 


Even after hearing these harsh words from Karhsa, Vasudeva, who 
was powerful, like the Vasus, did not allow his expansive heart 
to become agitated. Rather, he kept his mind under contro] by 
exhibiting great patience. 


Text 100 
vak-chalyais tadyamanas tu 
hamsenadirgha-darsina 
ksamam manasi sandhaya 
nottaram praty abhasata 


Karnsa, who lacked foresight, repeatedly struck Vasudeva with the 
arrows of his harsh words. Still, Vasudeva was by nature forgiving 
and so he did not say anything in retaliation. 


Text 101 
ye tu tam dadrsus tatra 
ksipyamanam anekadha 
dhig-dhig ity asakrt te vai 
Sanatir ucur avan-mukhah 


Those who witnessed this chastisement of Vasudeva lowered their 
heads in shame and hurriedly left that place. 


Text 102 
akriras tu mahé-teja 
janan divyena caksusa 
jalam drstveva trsitah 
presitah pritiman abhit 


Greatly-exalted Akrira, with his divine vision, knew everything about 
Krsna and Balarama. He was very happy to receive the opportunlly 
to see Krsna and Balarama, Just as one who is thirsty become 
overjoyed upon seeing water. 


. 9 
KAMSA’S SENDS AKRURA To VRNDAVANA 


Text 103 
tasminn eva muhirte tu 
mathurayah sa niryayau 
pritiman pundarikaksam 
drastum dana-patih svayam 
Magnanimous Akrura was extremely pleased that he would have 


the darsana of lotus-eyed Krsna in Vrndavana. Therefore, he did not 
waste time but soon left Mathura to see his beloved Lord. 


Thus ends the translation of the twenty-second chapter of the Visnu 
Parva of Sri Harivamsa. 


King Andhaka Protests Kamsa’s Abuse of Vasudeva 


Text 1 
vaisampayana uvaca 
ksiptam yadu-vrsam drstua 

sarve te yadu-pungavah 
nipidya Ssravanan hastair 


menire tam gatayusam 


Vaisampayana said: O Janmejaya, upon hearing these blasphemous 
statements made by Kamsa against Vasudeva, who was a foremost 
member of the Yadu dynasty, the greatly heroic members of the 
Yadu dynasty hurriedly blocked their ears with their hands. They 
became convinced that Kamsa was not destined to live long. 


Text 2 
andhako ‘nudvigna-mana 
dhairyad avikytam vacah 
provaca vadatam Ssresthah 
samaje kamsam ojasa 


In that assembly, the eloquent speaker, Andhaka, was also present. 
He had no fear of Kamsa within his heart. Being fully self-controlled, 
he addressed King Kammsa in a grave and befitting manner. 


Text 3 
aslaghyo me matah putra 
tavayam vak-panisramah 
ayukto garhitah sadbhir 
bandhavesu visesatah 


“My dear son, although you have worked very hard while delivering 
your lengthy speech, I think that it was a complete waste of time and 
not at all praiseworthy. Indeed, it was highly inappropriate. Great 
Personalities have always condemned such tactics. It is especially 


deplorable that such language was used to describe your friends 
and relatives.” 


295 


Text 4 
ayadavo yadi bhavan 
chrnu tavad yad ucyate 
na hi tuam yadavam vira 
balat kurvantt yadavah 


“O great hero, now it is your turn to hear me with attention. If you do 
not want to consider yourself to be a member of the Yadu dynasty 
we have no intention of trying to force you.” 


Text 5 
aslaghya vrsnayah putra 
yesam tuam anusasita 
tksudku-vamsajo raja 
vinivrttah suayam sakrt 
“O child, the members of the Vrsni dynasty, of whom you are the 
ruler, are not worthy of praise. There once appeared a king in the 


Iksvaku dynasty who tortured his subjects. Ultimately, he had to 
relinquish his kingdom.” 


Text 6 
bhojo va yadavo vast 
kamso vast yatha tatha 
sahajam te Siras tata 
jatti mundo ‘pi va bhava 


“O dear one, whether you belong to the Bhoja or Yadu dynasty, 
whether you are Kariisa or someone else, you have been born with 
a head on your shoulders. Now, you may keep long hair, shave your 
head, or be anything else you want to be.” 


Text 7 
ugrasenas tu ayam Ssocyo 
yo ‘smakam kula-pamsanah 
dunjatiyena yena tuam 
idrso janitah sutah 


Kinc ANDHAKA PROTESTS KAMSA’S ABUSE OF VASUDEVA 297 


“According to me, the condition of Ugrasena is regrettable. He isa 
disgrace to our family because he begot a son like you.” 


Text 8 
na catmano gunams 
tata pravadanti manisinah 
parenokia guna gaunyam 
yantt vedartha-sammitah 


“O dear one, thoughtful men never glorify their own qualities. Only 
when one’s qualities are described or praised by others are such 
statements considered authoritative, like the statements of the 


Vedas.” 
Text 9 
prthivyam yadu-vamso 
yam nindaniyo mahiksitam 
balah kulantakrn-midho 
yesam tvam anusasita 


“The Yadu dynasty has now become an object of ridicule by the 
kings of this earth because it has a ruler who is the destroyer of 
his family, who is foolish, and who does not possess the power of 


discrimination.” 


Text 10 
asadhumadbhir vakyais 
ca tuaya sadhv ite bhasitath 
na capy asaditam karyam 
aima ca vivrtah kriah 
“The regrettable words that you have spoken in this assembly, while 
considering them to be excellent, will not yield any tangible result. 
They have simply disclosed your real identity.” 


Text 11 
guror anavaliptasya 
manyasya mahatam apr 


ksepanam kah subham 
manye dvijasyeva vadhe krte 


“To blaspheme respectable personalities who are completely free 
from false ego is more serious than killing a brahmana. By doing a 
who can expect any benefit for himself?” 


Text 12 
manyas caivabhigamyas ca 
vrddhas tata yathagnayah 
krodho hi tesam pradahel 
lokan antargatan api 


“My dear child, elderly persons should always be respected like 
fire otherwise, their anger can burn even exalted personalities to 
ashes.” 


Text 13 
budhena taia dantena 
nityam abhy ucchnitatmana 
dharmasya gatir anvesya 
matsyasya gatir apsv va 


“One who is on the path of self-progress, who is self-controlled, and 
who is a learned scholar, should always act according to religious 
principles. The intricacies of religious principles are very subtle, 


Just as the movement of fish within the water is very difficult to 
perceive.” 


Text 14 
kevalam tvam tu darpena 
vrddhan agni-saman iha 
vaca tudasi marmaghnya 
amantrokia yatha “hutih 


“Being controlled by your false ego, you simply hurt the feelings 
of elderly and respectable people, who are as brilliant as fire, by 
speaking against them with harsh language. Just as an offering made 


KinGc ANDHAKA PROTESTS KAMSA’S ABUSE OF VASUDEVA 296 


without chanting the proper mantra is useless, all your blasphemous 
words are of no consequence.” 


Text 15 
vasudevam ca putrarthe 
yad imam pangarhasi 
tatra mithya pralapam te 
nindami krpanam vacah 


“Whatever Vasudeva has done for the well-being of his two sons was 
his duty as a responsible father. Therefore, your criticisms of his 
behavior are nothing but expressions of utter madness. I strongly 
condemn this cowardly act of yours.” 


Text 16 
darune ca pita putre 
naiva darunatam vrajet 
putrarthe hy Gpadah kastah 
pitarah prapnuvanti hi 


“Even if a son becomes envious of him, the father can never act 
cruelly toward him. A father is always prepared to face many 
difficulties for the sake of his son.” 


Text 17 
chadito vasudevena yadi 
putrah sisus tada 
manyase yady akartavyam 
tat precha pitaram svakam 


“If Vasudeva had hidden his son for His protection when He was 
born—that certainly cannot be considered a fault. If you think this 
to be improper, why don’t you ask your father’s opinion?” 


Text 18 
garhata vasudevam ca 
yadu-vamsam ca nindata 
vaya yadava-putranam 


vairajam visam arjitam 


“By criticizing Vasudeva and blaspheming the entire Yady dynas 
you have only created poison, in the form of enmity with 
members of the Yadu dynasty.” 


ly, 
he 


Text 19 
akartavyam yadi krtam 
vasudevena putrajam 
kimartham ugrasenena 
sisus tuam na vindsitah 


“If Vasudeva has acted unjustly by protecting the life of his son then 
why did your father, Ugrasena, give you all protection when you 
were.a child?” 


Text 20 
pun namno narakat putro 
yasmat trata pitrmstada 
tasmad bruvants putreti 
putram dharmavido janah 


“A real putra, or son, is he who saves his father from the hell known 
as put. That is why people who are conversant with the codes of 
religion refer to their sons as putra.” 


Text 21 
jatyam ht yadavah krsnah 
sa ca sankarsano yuva 
tvam capi vidhrtas tabhyam 


jata-vairena cetasa 


“Krsna and Balarama also belong to the Yadu dynasty but you have 
considered Them to be your enemies, ever since They were born. 
Now, They accept you as Their enemy, as well.” 


Text 22 
uddhitdanitha sarvesam 
yadunam hrdayani vat 
vasudeve tvaya “ksipte 
vasudeve ca kopite 


v 3 
Kinc ANDHAKA PROTESTS KAMSA’S ABUSE OF VASUDEVA 301 


“By severely criticizing Vasudeva, you have certainly ignited the fire 


of anger within the mind of his son, Krsna. This has made the hearts 
of the Yadavas tremble.” 


Text 23 
krsne ca bhavato dvesye 
vasudeva-vigarhanat 
Samsanti cemani bhayam 
nimittany asubhani te 
“You had already exhibited your hatred towards Krsna and now you 
have spoken harshly against Vasudeva. Because of this, you have 


created a very fearful condition for yourself.” 


Text 24 
sarpanam darsanam tivram 
duhsvapnanam nisa-ksaye 
purya vaidhavya-samsini 
kadranair anumimahe 


“To dream about snakes and other such creatures at the end of the 
night is very inauspicious. The bad omens that are visible these days 
are a sure indication of future destruction. This is our conclusion.” 


Text 25 
esa ghoro grahah svatim 
ullikhan khe gabhastibhih 
vakram angarakas cakre 
citrayam ghora-darsanah 


At present, the inauspicious planet, Rahu, is covering the star, Svati. 
oe fierce-looking planet, Mars, appears to be devouring the star, 
itra, while casting a crooked glance at the sarvato-badra cakra.” 


Text 26 
budhena pascima sandhya 
vyapta ghorena tejasa 
vaisvanara-pathe sukro 
hy aticdram cacara ha 


“The planet, Mercury, appears near the western horizon 
indicates the end of the rule of a king. The planet, Venus, is m 
fast toward the path of Vaisvanara.” 


This 


Oving 


Text 27 
ketuna dhimaketos tu 
naksatrani trayodasa 
bharany adini bhinnani 
nanuyant nisakaram 
“The inauspicious presence of Ketu has diminished the effulgence 
of thirteen stars, headed by Bharani. It no longer follows the orbit 
of the moon.” 


Text 28 
prak-sandhya pangha-grasta 
bhabhir badhati bhaskaram 
pratilomam ca yanty eva 
vyaharanto mrga-dvyjah 


“The previous sandhyd was under the influence of Parigha. She 
obstructs the sun by her effulgence. As a result of this, birds and 
animals cry wildly, as if they have lost their sense of direction.” 


Text 29 
Stud Smasanan niskramya 
nihsvadsangara-varsini 
ubhe sandhye purim 
ghora paryeti bahu vasati 


“In the evening and at dawn, a fierce-looking female jackal emerge 
from the crematorium and circles the entire city of Mathura, while 
crying and showering balls of fire from her mouth.” 


Text 30 
ulka nirghata-nadena 
papata dharani-tale 
calaty aparvani mahi 
girinam sikharani ca 


King ANDHAKA PROTESTS KAMSA’S ABUSE OF VASUDEVA 303 


“Some time ago, there were suddenly streaks of lightning and a 


shower of meteors. Because of this, the entire earth shook and the 
peaks of mountains began to crumble.” | 


Text 31 
grastah svar-bhanuna stiryo 
diva nakiam ajayata 
dhimotpatair diso vyaptah 
suskasani-samahatah 


“Only a few days ago, the planet, Rahu, eclipsed the sun. As a 
result, it was dark during the daytime. We see clouds of smoke and 
various disturbances in the four directions. There is the presence of 


lightning even without any clouds in the sky.” 


Text 32 
prasravanti ghana rakiam 
saSanistanayitnavah 
calita devatah sthanat 
tyajanti vihaga nagan 
“Clouds shower blood instead of rain, accompanied by lightning 


and thundering sounds. The deities of the demigods disappear 
from their altars and birds do not remain in the trees.” 


Text 33 
yani raja-vinasaya 
daivajnah kathayanti ha 
tani sarvani pasyamo 
nimittany asubhani vai 
“We directly experience all these inauspicious symptoms that 
indicate the destruction of a king, as told by expert astrologers.” 


Text 34 
tvam capi svajana-dvesi 
raja-dharma-paran-mukhah 
animittagata-krodhah 
sannikrsta-bhayo hy asi 


O4 ORI VISNUnPARYVA 


“You are envious of your own relatives. You have become avers 
to performing your duties. You get angry unnecessarily, From all 
this, it appears that some misfortune will overcome you in the tear 
future.” 


Text 35 
yas tvam devopamam 
vrddham vasudevam vastipamam 
mohat ksipasi durbuddhe 
kutas te Santir atmanah 


“O sinful-minded one, how can you expect to be peaceful and 


happy when you have blasphemed Vasudeva, who is powerful like 
the demigods and Vasus?” 


Text 36 
tvad-gato yo ht nah snehas 
iam tyajamo ‘dya vai vayam 
ahitam svasya vamsasya na 


tuam ksanam upasmahe 


“From this time onwards, we will not have any affection or sympathy 


for you. You are a disgrace to your family! Therefore, we will no 
longer sit with you, even for a moment.” 


Text 37 
sa hi dana-patir dhanyo 
yo draksyati vane gatam 
pundarika-visdlaksam 
krsnam aklista-karinam 


Noble Akrira is glorious because today he went to Vrndavana 


and will certainly directly see the lotus-eyed Krsna, who can easily 
perform any seemingly impossible task.” 


Text 38 
chinna-milo hy ayam vamso 
yadiinam tvat krte kritah 


KING Ane 
krsno jnatin samanayya 
sa sandhanam karisyata 


It is because of you that the Yadu dynasty is on the verge of 

6 1 

destruction Now, it is Krsna who will come to the rescue and again 
e ° 9 eve 


bring all the brothers, friends, and well-wishers together.” 


Text 39 
ksantam eva tavanena 
vasudevena dhimata 
kala-samyak-panjnano 
brihi tuam yad-yad icchast 


‘Intelligent Vasudeva has already forgiven your offenses. Your 
power of discrimination has been taken away by the all-powerful 
time factor. Therefore, you will certainly speak like a madman and 


do whatever you want.” 


Text 40 
mahyam tu rocate kamsa 
vasudeva-sahayavan 
gaccha krsnasya nilayam 
sandhis tena ca rocatam 


O Karhsa, my advice is that you go, along with Vasudeva, and 
“PProach Krsna. Try to make an alliance of friendship with Him.” 


Th : 
P ae ends the translation of the twenty-third chapter of the Visnu 
“rea of Sri Harivamsea, 


Krsna Kills the Kesi Demon 
Text 1 
vaisampayana uvaca 
andhakasya vacah srutuvd 
kamsah samrakta-locanah 
na kinicid abravit krodhad 
vivesa svam niketanam 


Vaisampayana said: O Janamejaya, after hearing Andhaka’s speech, 
Karnsa’s eyes became red, like fire. While remaining silent, he got 
up in an angry mood, stormed out of the assembly, and entered his 


palace. 


Text 2 
te ca sarve yathavesma 
yadavah sruta-vistarah 
jagmur vigata-sankalpah 
kamsa-vatkrta-samsinah 


All the assembled members of the Yadu dynasty were very 
disappointed after hearing the discussions. They unhurriedly 
got up from their seats and returned home. On the way, they 
discussed among themselves how Kamsa’s intelligence had been 
misdirected. 


Text 3 
akritro ‘pi yatha “inaptah 
Rrsna-darsana-lalasah 
jagama ratha-mukhyena 
manasa tulya-gamina 


Akrira had a strong desire to go and see his beloved Lord Krsna. 
He also got up, and according to the order of Karnsa, mounted an 
€xcellent chariot and departed. 


Text 4 
krsnasyapi nimiitani 
subhany anga-gatani vai 
pita-tulyena samsanti 
bandhavena samagamam 


Meanwhile, Krsna witnessed some auspicious omens that indicateq 
He would surely meet someone near and dear, such as a Close 


relative. 


Text 5 
prag eva ca narendrena 
mathurena ugraseninad 
kesinah presito dito 
vadhayopendra-karanat 


Before Akrura was dispatched to Vrndavana, Ugrasena’s son, 
Kamsa, sent a messenger to the demon, Keési, saying that he should 
immediately go to Vrndavana and kill Krsna. 


Text 6 
sa ca ditta-vacah srutuva 
kesi-klesakaro nrnadm 
urndavana-gato gopan 
badhate sma durasadah 


Being thus ordered by Karisa, Kesi, who always inflicted pain upon 
others and who was very difficult to defeat, went to Vrndavana and 
began to harass the cowherd men. 


Text 7 
manusam mamsam asnanah 
kruddho dusta-parakramah 
durdanto vajidaityo 
Ssavakarot kadanam mahat 


Kesi was a very formidable demon who had assumed the form o 


nt 
a horse. He ate human flesh. In an angry mood, the demon We 


wee PNA BELLS THE KESI DEMON 309 


to Vrndavana and engaged in killing all kinds of living entities 
indiscriminately. 


Text 8 
nighnan ga vat sagopalan 
gavam pisita-bhojanah 
durmadah kamacari ca 
sa kest niravagrahah 


He killed cows and cowherd boys and ate their flesh. The intoxicated 
demon, Kesi, wandered freely about Vrndavana, acting in a most 


licentious manner. 


Text 9 
tad aranyam Smasanabham 
nrnam mamsasthibhir vrtam 
yatraste sa hi dustatma 
kesi turaga-danavah 


Wherever the sinful demon, Keési, remained became covered with 
human flesh and bones so that it appeared like a crematorium. 


Text 10 
khurair darayate bhimim 
vegenarujate druman 
hesitath sparddhate vayum 
plutair langhayate nabhah 


He pierced the surface of the earth with his sharp hooves and felled 
many trees with his forceful push. He would wildly jump into the sky 
and neigh so loudly that everyone became frightened. 


Text 11 
atipravrddho mattas ca 
dusto ‘Svo vana-gocarah 
akampita-sato raudrah 
kamsasya caritanugah 


The sinful horse demon roamed the forest at will. He was exceeding] 
proud of his strength and his jaws always moved in anger. Be 
formidable demon was a staunch follower of Kamsa. 


Text 12 
irinam tad vanam sarvam 
tenasit papa-karmana 
krtam turaga-daityena 
saruan gopan jighamsata 
It appeared as if the sinful-minded horse demon, whose only aim 
was to eat human flesh, would make the Vrndavana forest devoid of 
inhabitants. 


Text 13 
tena dusta-pracarena dusitam 
tad vanam mahat 
na nrblir go-dhanair vapi 
sevyate vana-vrttibhih 


The evil-minded demon created havoc and polluted the entire 
forest of Vrndavana. The cowherds and cows, who depended heavily 
on the forest, were afraid to enter it. 


. Text 14 
nihsampatah krtah panthas 
tena tad visayasrayah 

madac calita-vrttena 


nr-mamsany asnata bhrsam 


Due to excessive pride, the demon had no sense of proper behavior 
and he was very fond of eating human flesh. It was impossible for 


anyone to walk on the path near his residence because of the foul 
smell. 


Text 15 
nr-sabdanusarah kruddhah 
sa kadacid vanagame 


jagama ghosa-samvdsam 
coditah kala-dharmana 


One day, while following the sound of human beings, the demon, 
Kesi, entered the locality of the cowherd men in an angry mood. At 
that time, he looked desperate and fully intoxicated. 


Text 16 
tam drstua dudruvur gopah 
strayas ca sisubhih saha 
krandamana jagannatham 
krsnam natham upasritah 


As soon as the cowherd men and women saw the ferocious demon, 
they picked up their children and ran away. They cried pathetically 
and approached Krsna, who is the supreme protector and Lord of 
the universe. 


Text 17 
tasam rudita-sabdena 
gopanam kranditena ca 
datvabhayam tu krsno vai 
kesinam so ‘bhidudruve 


Krsna, whose heart became softened by hearing the crying of the 
cowherd men and women, gave them assurances, thus freeing them 
from fear, and then turned towards the demon in an angry mood. 


Text 18 
_ Rest capy unnata-grivah 
prakasa-dasaneksanah 
hesamano javodagro | 
govindabhimukho yayau 
The demon, Kesi, lifted his head and charged at Krsna, while 


neighing loudly. He displayed his sharp teeth and looked at Krsna 
with reddish eyes. 


Text 19 
tam apatantam sampreksya 
kesinam haya-danavam 
pratyujjagama govindas 
toyadah sasinam yatha 


When Krsna saw that the horse demon. Ke$Si, was approaching Him 
with great force, He came to challenge him. It thus appeared as if 
an evening cloud was approaching the moon. 


Text 20 
kesinas tu tamabhyase 
drstua krsnam avasthitam 
manusya-buddhayo gopah 
krsnam ucur hitaisinah 


When all the Vrajavasis, who considered Krsna to be an ordinary 
human child, and who was His well-wisher, saw Him standing before 
the demon, Kesi, they spoke as follows. 


Text 21 
krsna tata na khalv esa 
sahasa te hayadhamah 
upasarpyo bhavan balah 
papas caisa durasadah 


“O beloved Krsna, don’t go near this wretched horse because You 
are still a young boy and this sinful demon is very formidable.” 


Text 22 
esa Ramsasya sahajah 
pranas tata bahiscarah 
uttamas ca hayendranam 
danavo ‘pratimo yudhi 


“O child, he is Karhsa’s life and soul. He is the foremost among all 
kings of horses. There is no one here who can hope to defeat this 


demon.” 


Text 23 
trasanah sarva-bhiitanam 
turaganam maha-balah 
avadhyah sarva-bhitandm 
prathamah papa-karmanaém 


“This demon, who terrifies all living entities, is the most powerful 
among all horses. He cannot be killed by any living entity. He is 
foremost among all sinful beings.” 


Text 24 
gopanam tad vacah srutva 
vadatam madhustiidanah 
kesina saha yuddhaya 
matim cakre ‘nistidanah 


After the cowherd men had thus advised Krsna, the killer of the 
demon, Madhu, He decided to fight with Kesi. : 


Text 25 
tatah sabyam daksinam ca 
mandalam sa panbhraman 
padbhyam ubhabhyam sa hayah 
krodhenarujate druman 


Thereafter, the demon began to move restlessly, sometimes to the 
right and sometimes to the left. In a fit of anger, he broke many 
trees, kicking them with his hind legs. 


Text 26 
mukhe lambasate casya 
skandhe kesa-ghanavrte 
valayo ‘bhra-tarangabhah 
susruvuh krodhajam jalam 


The demon became covered with perspiration, matting his thick 
hair. His fearsome mouth contained two long and powerful jaws. 


Text 27 
sa phenam vaktrajam 
caiva vavarsa rajasavrtam 
hima-kale yatha vyomni 
niharam iva cadramah 


Foam mixed with dust came from his mouth. It appeared as if the 
moon created fog during the dewy season. 


Text 28 
govindam aravindaksam 
hesttodgara-stkarath 
sa phenair vaktra-nirgirnath 
proksayamasa bharata 


O descendent of Bharata, with the saliva that gushed from the 
demon’s mouth when he neighed, and with the foam that also came 
from his mouth, he soaked lotus-eyed Krsna’s transcendental body. 


Text 29 
khuroddhitavasiktena 
madhukaksoda-panduna 
rajasa sa hayah krsnam 
cakararuna-murdhajam 


With the dust stirred up when the demon’s hooves struck the earth, 
the color of which resembled the pollen of madhuka flowers, the 
color of Krsna’s hair turned from black to red. 


Text 30 
pluta-valgita-padas tu 
taksamano dharam khuraih 
dantan nirdasamanas tu 
kest krsnam upadravat 


Kesi thrust his legs here and there out of anger. With his sharp 
hooves, he pierced the earth. As he forcefully charged Krsna, ue 
gnashed his teeth. 


Text 31 
sa samsaktas tu krsnena 
kesi turaga-sattamah 
purvabhyam caranabhyam 
vat krsnam vaksasy atadayat 


The demon, Kesi, who was very powerful, began fighting with Krsna 
by lifting his front legs and then kicking Him in the chest. 


Text 32 
punah punah sa ca bali 
prahinot parsvatah khuran 
krsnasya danavo ghoram 
praharam amitaujasah 


The powerful demon tried every possible way to attack Krsna from 
all sides and while doing so, he appeared to torment the Lord, who 
possesses unlimited prowess. 


Text 33 
vaktrena casya ghorena 
ttksna-damstrayudhena vai 
adasad bahu-sikharam 
krsnasya rusito hayah 


Kesi, whose principal weapon was his sharp teeth, opened his mouth 
and in an angry mood, bit the tip of Krsna’s hand, thus injuring 
Him. 


Text 34 
sa lamba-kesarasatah 
krsnena saha sangatah 
raraja kest meghena 
samsaktah kha wamsuman 


Kesi, who had broad and powerful jaws, and who was desperately 


fighting with Krsna, appeared like the sun confronting clouds in 
the sky. 


Text 35 
uras tasyorasa hantumtyesa 
balavan hayah 
vegena vasudevasya krodhad 
dviguna-vikramah 


Because of his great anger, the demon’s strength seemed to double. 
He then hit Krsna’s chest by pushing Him with his own chest, 


Text 36 
tasyotsiktasya balavan krsno 
‘py amita-vikramah 
bahumabhoginam krtva mukhe 
kruddhah samddadhat 


‘However, Krsna, who is unlimitedly powerful, and who was very 
angry with Kesi, extended His hand and inserted it into the mouth 
of the puffed-up demon. 


Text 37 
sa tam bahum asakto vai 
khaditum bhettum eva ca 
dasanair mila-nirmuktaih 
saphenam rudhiram vaman 


Although the demon tried his best to chew Krsna’s hand, he could 
not do so. Instead, his teeth became uprooted so that blood and 
foam oozed from his mouth. 


Text 38 
vipatitabhyam osthabhyam 
Ratabhyam vidalikrtah 
aksini vivrte cakre visrte 
mukta-bandhane 


. . . ra? es 
His lips and checks torn apart and his throat choked, Kesi's ¢Y 
came out from their sockets. 


Text 39 
nirastahanur avistah 
sonitakta-vilocanah 
utkarno nasta-cetds tu 
sa kest bahvacestata 


With his chin fractured, blood coming from his eye sockets, and his 
ears fallen off, the Kesi demon lost consciousness as his legs flayed 


in all directions. 


Text 40 
utpatann asakrt padaih 
sakrn mutram samutsrjan 
khinnanga-roma srantas tu 
niryatna-carano ‘bhavat 


Passing stool and urine and every limb of his body fractured and 
bleeding, the demon fell to the ground, motionless. 


Text 41 
kesi-vaktra-vilagnas tu 
krsna-bahur asobhata 
vyabhugna iva gharmante 
candrardha-kivanair ghanah 


Krsna’s hand that remained within Kesi’s mouth appeared like a 
cloud surrounded by the rays of the crescent moon during the 
rainy season. 


Text 42 
kest ca krsna-samsaktah 
Santa-gatro vyarocata 
prabhatavanatas candrah 


Ssranto merum ivasritah 


The body of the demon, Keéi, which was clasping the body of Lord 
Krsna remained motionless. At that time, the demon appeared like 
the moon that had taken shelter of the peak of a mountain early in 


the morning, being exhausicd from traveling. 


OLs 


Text 43 
tasya krsna-bhujoddhiutah 
kesino dasana mukhat 
petuh Saradi nistoyah 
sutabhravayava wa 


Being hit by Krsna’s powerful blow, the demon’s teeth fel] from 
his mouth. These teeth appeared like small white clouds devoid of 
water in autumn. 


Text 44 
sa tu kest bhrsam Santah 
krsnenaklista-karmana 
svabhujam svayatam krtva 
patito balavat tada 


When Kesi fell to the ground, Krsna, who is capable of performing 
wonderful activities, removed His hand from his mouth. 


Text 45 
sa patito bhujenajau 
krsnena vikrtananah 
kesi nadan maha-nadam 
danavo vyathitas tada 


The demon’s mouth was disfigured, having been torn apart by the 
extended hand of Krsna. As a result, the demon had screamed 
loudly with intense pain at the time of death. 


Text 46 
vighurnamanas trastango 
mukhad rudhiram udvaman 
bhrsam vyangtkrta-vapur 
nikrttarddha ivacalah 
While spinning around and vomiting blood, the demon had fallen 


‘ t 
to the ground, his body smashed. He appeared like a mountain nn 
had been split into two parts. 


Text 47 
vyaditasyo mahd-raudrah so 
‘surah krsna-baéhuna 
nipapata yatha krtto nago 

hi dvidalikrtah 


The body of the Kesi demon had been spilt into two parts by Krsna. 
The terrible demon fell down to the ground like a big elephant with 


its body split into two. 


Text 48 
bahuna krtta-dehasya 
kesino rupam ababhau 
pasor iva maha-ghoram 
nihatasya pinakina 


Kesi’s body, which was torn into two pieces by Krsna, looked 
extremely fearful, like the body of Mahisasura, who was killed by 
the wife of Lord Siva, who carries a bow in his hand. 


Text 49 
dvipada-prstha-puccharddhe 
Sravanatkaksi-nasike 
kesinas tadvidhabhute dve 

cardhe rejatuh ksitau 


The gigantic body of the Kesi demon lay on the ground in two 
pieces, each having two legs, half of a back, half of a tail, one ear, 


one eye, and one nostril. 


Text 50 
kesi-danta-ksatasyapi 
krsnasya susubhe bhujah 
vrddhah sala waranye 
gajendra-dasanankitah 
Krsna’s hand, which had been injured by Keéi’s sharp teeth, 


appeared like a huge sdla tree, marred by the sharp teeth of the 
king of elephants. 


Text 51 
tam hatva kesinam yuddhe 
kalpayitva ca bhagasah 
krsnah padma-palasakso 
hamsas tatraiva tasthivan 


After killing the demon, Kesi, in this way and tearing his body into 
pieces, lotus-eyed Krsna stood, smiling beautifully. 


Text 52 
tam hatam kesinam drstuva 
gopa gopa-stnyas tatha 
babhiivur muditah sarve 
hata-vighna gata-klamah 


When the cowherd men and women of Vraja saw that the demon 
had been killed by Krsna, they became jubilant, their distress having 
been vanquished. 


| Text 53 

damodaram tu srimantam 
yatha-sthanam yatha-vayah 

abhyanandan priyair vakyath 
piyjayantah punah punah 


According to their ages and positions, all the cowherd residents 


of Vraja repeatedly congratulated Damodara with very attractive 
words. 


Text 54 
gopa ucuh 
aho tata krtam karma hato— 
yam loka-kantakah 
daityah ksiticarah krsna 
haya-rupam samasthitah 
The cowherd men said: My dear child, what you have done is simply 


wonderful. Krsna, You killed the demon in the form of a horse, who 
created a very fearful situation for everyone. 


IONE INE Eye 
Text 55 
krtam vrndavanan ksemani 
seuyam nr-mrga-paksinam 
ghnata papam imam tata 
kesinam hayadanavam 


O beloved child, by killing the sinful horse demon, Kesi, You have 
enabled the forest of Vrndavana to revert to its original condition. fit 
for the habitation of human beings, as well as animals and birds. 


Text 56 
haia no bahavo gopa 
gavo vaisesu vatsalah 
natke canye janapada 
hatanena duratmana 


This mischievous demon had killed many of our friends, as well 
as many cows and calves. Indeed, he had killed countless living 


entities. 


Text 57 
esa samvartakam kartum 
udyatah khalu papakrt 
ny-lokam nirnaram krtva 
cartukamo yatha-sukham 


This sinful demon appeared to desire to destroy the entire world, as 
if he wanted to make the earth devoid of human habitation so that 


he could live happily alone. 


Text 58 
naitasya pramukhe sthatum 
kascic chakto jyivisuh 
api deva-samtihesu kim 
punah prthivi-tale 
No one who valued his life would dare stand before this demon. 


Even the demigods were afraid of him and so, what to speak of the 
Inhabitants of the earth. 


Text 59 
vaisampayana uvaca 
athahaniarhito vipro naradah 

khagamo munih 
prito ‘smi visno devesa 
krsna krsneti cabravit 


Vaisampayana said: O Janamejaya, at that moment, the great 
sage, Narada, who wanders about the universe at will, spoke while 
remaining in the sky, “O master of the demigods, Lord Visnu! O 
Lord Krsna, what you have done is very pleasing for us.” 


Text 60 
narada uvaca 
yad idam duskaram karma 
krtam kesi-sighamsaya 
tvayy eva kevalam yuktam 
tridive tryambakasya va 


Narada said: The extraordinary act that You performed by killing the 
demon, KeSi, is most befitting Your exalted position. Besides You, 
only three-eyed Lord Siva would have been capable of performing 
this wonderful act. 


Text 61 
aham yuddhotsukas tata 
tvad-gatenantaratmana 
idam nara-hayam yuddham 
drastum svargad ihagatah 


I am always very eager to watch You battle the demons. I quickly 
came here from the heavenly planets while meditating on Your 
lotus feet. 


Text 62 
putana-nidhanadini 
karmani tava drstavan 
aham tv anena govinda 
karmana paritositah 


KRSNA KILLS THE KES] DEMON 393 


© Govinda, I had witnessed Your pastimes of killing other great 
demons, such as Putana, but I am particularly pleased by Your 
killing this demon, Kesi. 


Text 63 
hayad asman mahendro 
‘pt bibheit balastidanah 
kurvanac ca vapur ghoram 
kesino dusta-cetasah 


What to speak of human beings, even powerful Indra, the king 
of the demigods, was afraid of this formidable evil-minded horse 
demon, Kesi. 


Text 64 
yat-tuaya patito deho 
bhujenayata-parvana 
eso ‘sya mrtyur antaya 
uthito visva-yonina 
Long ago, Lord Brahma, the creator of the universe, had predicted 


how You would kill this demon by placing Your hand within his 
mouth and breaking his body into two parts. 


Text 65 
yasmat tvaya hatah kesi tasman 
mac-chasanam srnu 
kesavo nama namna tvam 
khyato loke bhavisyast 


It is my wish that because You have killed the demon, Kesi, from 


this time onward, You should be known throughout the world as 
KeSava. 


Text 66 
svasty astu bhavato loke sadhu 
yamy aham asugah 
krty aSesam ca te karyam 
Saktas tuam ast ma ciram 


Get ORE VISNU-PARVA 


May all good fortune be Yours! I will now continue my wanderings 
over the universe while You continue to execute Your Mission, ee 
are capable of performing activities as You please and so, accomplish 
Your mission without delay. 


Text 67 
tvayt Raryantara-gate 
nara wa divaukasah 
vidambayantah kridanti 
lilam tvad balam asritah 
When You appear to diminish the burden of the earth, the demigods, 
being protected by You, take part in relishing Your pastimes as a 
human being. 


Text 68 
abhyase vartate kalo 
bharatasyahavodadheh 
hasta-praptani yuddhani 
rajnam tnidiva-gaminadm 
The time for the great battle of the Mahdbhdrata is approaching. 


Those fortunate kings who die in that battle will attain exalted 
destinations. 


Text 69 
panthanah sodhita vyomni 
vimanarohanordhvagah 
avakasa vibhajyante sakra- 
loke mahiksitam 


The pathway to heaven has been cleared so that when the fortunate 
kings ascend to Indraloka, they will find that all facilities are available 
for their enjoyment. 


Text 70 
ugrasena-sute sante 
padasthe tvayi kesava 


abhitas tan mahad yuddham 
bhavisyati mahiksitam 


O Kesava, when, after the death of Ugrasena’s son, Karnsa, You 
assume the responsibility for protecting the members of the Yadu 
dynasty, a great battle of kings will take place. 


Text 71 
tvam capraiima-karmanam 
samSrayisyanti pandavah 
bheda-kale narendranam 
paksa-graho bhavisyasi 


The Pandavas will take shelter of You, whose activities are beyond 
compare. A dispute will arise, resulting in a fierce battle and at that 
time, You will take the side of the Pandavas. 


Text 72 
tvayt rajasanasthe hi 
raja-srryam anuttamam 
subham tyaksyanti rajanas 
tvat-prabhavan na samsayah 


There is no doubt that when You sit upon the throne, by Your 
influence, all other powerful kings will give up their false pride and 
surrender unto You. 


Text 73 
esa me krsna sandesah 
Srutibhih khyatim esyate 
devatanam divisthanam 
jagatas ca jagatpate 
O supreme controller of the universe! O Krsna, I have come to advise 


You to now reveal Your supreme personality, which is unknown even 
to the Vedas. 


Text 74 
drstam me bhavatah karma 
drstas casi maya prabho 


kamse bhiyah samesyami 
sadhite sadhu yamy aham 


O my Lord, I have witnessed Your incomparable prowess, Al] glories 


to You! I beg permission to depart and I will return after You kill 
Kamsa. 


Texts 75-76 
evam ukiva tu sa tada 
naradah kham jagama ha 
naradasya vacah srutva 


deva-sangita-yoninah 


tatheti sa samabhasya 
punar-gopan samasadat 

gopah krsnam samasadya 
vivisur vrajam eva ha 


After speaking these words, Narada departed through the sky. After 
hearing these words of Narada, who is very expert in the art of 
music, Krsna accepted them, saying, “So be it.” Thereafter, Krsna, 
along with his cowherd friends, returned home. 


Thus ends the translation of the twenty-fourth chapter of the Visnu 
Parva of Sri Harivamsa. 


CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE 


Akrura’s Arrival in Vrndavana 
Texts 1-13 
vaisampayana uvaca 
athas tam gacchati tada 
manda-rasmau divakare 
sandhyarakta-tale vyomni 
sasanke pandu-mandale 


nidasthesu vihangesu 
satsu praduskrtagnisu 

isattamah-samvrtasu 
diksu sarvasu sarvasah 


ghosa-vasisu suptesu 
vasantisu Sivasu ca 
naktan-caresu hrstesu 


Cm ae! -—-7 


Sakra-gopahvayamode 
pradose ‘bhyasa-taskare 

sandhyamayim iva guham 
sampratisthe drvakare 


adhisrayana-velayam 
praptayam grhamedhinam 

vanyair vaitkhanasair mantrair 
huyamane hutasane 


upavrttasu vai gosu 
duhyamanasu ca vraje 

asakrd vyaharantisu 
baddha-vatsdsu dhenusu 


prakirna-damanikesu gas 
tathawwahvayatsu ca 


saninaddesu gopesu 
kalyamane ca go-dhane 


karisesu prakiptesu 
dipyamanesu sarvasah 

kastha-bharanata-skandhair 
gopair abhyagatais tatha 


kinicid abhyudyate some 
manda-rasmau virajati 
isad-vigahamanayam 
rajanyam divase gate 
prapte dinavyuparame 
pravrtte ksanada-mukhe 
bhaskare tejast gate 
saumye tejasy upasthite 


agnihotrakule kale 
saumyendau samupasthite 

agni-somatmake sandhau 
vartamane jaganmaye 


pascimenagni-diptena 
purvenotpala-varcasa 

dagdhadri-sadrse vyomni 
kinicit taraganakule 


vayobhir vasam usatam 
bandhubhis ca samagamam 

Samsadbhith syandanenasu 
prapto dana-patir vrajam 


Vaisampayana said: O Janamejaya, late in the afternoon, when 
the sun was about to set so that daylight was fading, as the sky 
began to get dark, as the moonlight became clearly visible, vee 
the birds returned to their nests to rest, when the best of priests 
began to ignite the sacred fire for performing sacrifice, when a 
four directions slowly darkened, when female jackals began to pai 


_ a? a—_ Se aS eh VV se ae a IN YRNDAVANA 329 


when nocturnal animals that eat flesh became enlivened, when 
evening, which gives joy to the indragopa germ and marks the end 
of the study of the Vedas, as the sun entered the cave of twilight, 
when the time for householders to offer ghee into the sacrificial 
fire arrived, when the vdnaprasthas began of offer oblations into the 
sacred fire, after the cows had returned home from the pasturing 
grounds and had been milked, as the cows and calves were being 
tied with ropes, as the cows repeatedly bellowed, as the cowherd 
men gathered their cows into the cowsheds, as the cowherd men 
returned home after collecting dry wood from the forest, as they 
began to make their fires with dry cow dung and wood, as the dim 
moonlight began to slowly manifest, as darkness began to cover all 
directions, when the first prahara of the night commenced, as the 
heat of the sun continued to diminish and the coolness of the moon 
began to manifest, as the sweet aroma emanating from the agnihotra 
sacrifices spread on all sides, as the beautiful moon began to shine 
in the sky, when the period known as agnisomatmaka commenced, 
when a reddish radiance filled the western horizon, making the sky 
appear like a burnt mountain, when a few stars began to a twinkle 
in the sky, and as the birds gave indications to travelers that they 
would soon meet their friends, most magnanimous Akrira arrived 


in Vrndavana on his chariot. 


Text 14 
pravisann eva papraccha 
sannidhyam kesavasya sah 
rauhineyasya cakriro 
nanda-gopasya casakyt 


When Akriara arrived at the outskirts of Vrndavana, he inquired 
from various people about the residence of Krsna, Balarama, the 
son of Rohini, and Nanda Maharaja. 


Text 15 
sa nanda-gopasya grham 
vasaya vibudhopamah 


avatirya tato yanat 
pravivesa maha-balah 


Powerful Akrara, who was as good as a demigod, got down from his 
chariot and entered the residence of the cowherd, Nanda. 


Texts 16-19 
harsa-purnena vaktrena 
sasru-netrena caiva hi 
pravisann eva ca dvari 
dadarsadohane gavam 


vatsa-madhye sthitam krsnam 
savatsam iva govrsam 

sa tam harsa-paritena 
vacasa gadgadena vat 


ehi kesava tateta 
pravyaharata dharmavit 
utiana-sayinam drstua 


punar drstua Sriya vrtam 


avyakta-yauvanam krsnam 
akrurah prasasamsa ha 

ayam sa pundarikaksah 
simha-sardila-vikramah 


sampurna-jala-meghabhah 
parvata-pravarakrtth 


Akrura became ecstatic and tears of love flowed from his eyes. Upon 
entering the courtyard of Nanda Maharaja’s house, he saw Krsna 
standing in the midst of many calves inside a cowshed where the 
cows were being milked. It seemed as if a great ox was standing in 
the midst of many calves. When Akrara, who knew very well the 
principles of religion, saw Krsna, he spoke in a voice that was choked 
due to intense emotion, “My dear Kesgava, I have come to see YOU: 
Upon seeing Krsna, who he had seen crawling in His childhood: 
now grown up as a youth full of beauty and enthusiasm, Akruré 


9 
AKRURA’S ARRIVAL IN VRNDAVANA 33] 


thought, “He must be lotus-eyed Krsna, who is as powerful as a lion. 
His complexion is just like that of a dark cloud filled with water and 
He appears as tall as a mountain. 


Text 20 
myrdhesvadharsaniyena 
sasrivatsena vaksasa 
dvisan nidhana-daksabhyam 
bhujabhyam sadhu bhisitah 


“He whose chest is marked with Srivatsa is invincible in battle. 
His hands are expert in killing His enemies. His broad chest and 
graceful hands greatly enhance His beauty.” 


Text 21 
murtiman sa rahasyatma 
jagato ‘gryasya bhajanam 
gopa-vesadharo visnur — 
udagragrya-tanur uhah 


“He is that most confidential personality who is unknown by the 
Upanisads. He alone deserves the first worship of the people of this 
world. He is Lord Visnu Himself, appearing as a cowherd boy. The 
hair on His body stands on end when He sees His pure devotees.” 


Text 22 
kivita-lanchanenapr 
Sirasa chatra-varcasa 
kundalottama-yogyabhyam 
Sravanabhyam vibhusitah 


“His head is adorned with a crown and a glittering effulgence. His 
ears are decorated with two attractive earrings.” 


Text 23 
hararhena ca pinena 
suvistirnena vaksasa 
dvabhyam bhujabhyam vrttabhyam 
dirghabhyam upasobhitah 


fF IN | FROQOING UE ABV 


“He looks very handsome with His broad chest, which is decor 


4 : 39 ated 
with a necklace, and His two powerful arms. 


Text 24 
stri-sahasropacaryena 
vapusa manmathadhina 
pite vasano vasane so 
yam visnuh sanatanah 


“He has reached the conjunction of the pauganda and yauvang 
ages, where one becomes blessed by Cupid. His form is worthy 
of being served by thousands of young girls. He is dressed in two 
pieces of yellow cloth. He is the eternal Lord Visnu, present upon 
the earth.” 


Text 25 
dharany asraya-bhitabhyam 
caranabhyam arindamah 
trailokyakranti-bhutabhyam 
bhuvi padbhyam vyavasthitah 


“This Krsna who is standing before me is the shelter of the entire 
universe. He is capable of destroying the three worlds, simply by His 
will. He is expert at killing the demons and with His two lotus feet, 
He is now standing before me.” 


Text 26 
rucir agrakaras casya 
cakrankita iveksate 
dvitiya udyatas capi 
gadda-samyogam icchati 


“In one of His hands, which are very attractive, He holds a cakra and 
in His other hand, He holds a club.” 


Text 27 
avatirno bavayeha prathamam 
padam atmanah 


sobhate ‘dya bhuvt sresthas 
tridasanam dhurandharah 


“He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, transcendental to the 
three modes of material nature. He has appeared for the welfare 
of the world. He always gives protection to the demigods as the 
supreme controller and today, He is standing before me.” 


Text 28 
ayam bhavisye kathito 
bhavisya-kuSalair naraih 
gopalo yadavam vamsam 
ksinam vistarayisyati 


“Many expert astrologers predicted that this cowherd boy, Krsna, 
would revive the good reputation of the Yadu dynasty.” 


Text 29 
tejasa yadavas casya 
Sataso ‘tha sahasrasah . 
vamsam apirayisyanti hy 
ogha tva maharnavam 


Justas many streams forcefully enter the ocean, the number of Yadus 
will increase by the hundreds and thousands, by His influence.” 


Text 30 
asyedam Sdsane sarvam 
Jagat sthasyati sasvatam 
nthatamitrasamantam sphitam 
krta-yuge tatha 


‘This world, which has been existing since time immemorial, will 
be maintained by His good administration. All kinds of sinful 
miscreants will be vanquished and the world will again become 
| Peaceful and prosperous, as it was in the Satya-yuga.” 


Text 31 
ayam asthaya vasudham 
sthapayitua jagad vase 


rajnam bhavisyaty upari 
na ca raja bhavisyati 


“This transcendental personality will remain in this world 
conquering all the kings by His power and influence, ang yet He 
will not personally accept the rule of the earth.” 


Texts 32-33 
nunam iribhih kramair jitva 
yathanena prabhuh krtah 
pura purandaro raja 
devatanam trivistape 


tathaiva vasudham jitva jita- 
purvam tribhih kramath 

sthapayisyati rajanam 
ugrasenam na samsayah 


‘Just as, in the ancient times, He conquered the three worlds simply 
by taking three steps and then entrusted the responsibility of ruling 
the kingdom to Indra, He will again conquer the earth and entrust 
the responsibility of ruling it to Ugrasena. Of this, there is no 
doubt.” 


Text 34 
prasrsta-vairagadho ‘yam 
prasnais ca bahubhih srutah 
brahmanair brahmavadais 
ca purano ‘yam hi giyat 


“He has descended to remove the envy and hatred that has spread 
everywhere. Discussions of this Supreme Personality of Godhead 
are found in the Vedic literature, Prasna Upanisad.” 


Text 35 
sprhaniyo hi lokasya 
bhavisyati ca kesavah 
tatha hy asyotthita buddhir 
manusyam upajivitum 


AKRURA’S ARRIVAL IN VRNDAVANA 334 


“Lord Kesava will be the most treasured object for the people of the 
entire universe because He has descended with the mission of re- 


establishing the eternal principles of religion.” 


Text 36 
aham tvasyaddya vasatim 
pujayisye yathavidhi 
visnutvam manasa caiva 
pijayisyami mantravat 


“Today, I will worship His residence with love and devotion. While 
concentrating my mind on His form as Lord Visnu, I will worship 


Him by chanting Vedic mantras.” 


Text 37 
yac-ca Jnati-parijnanam 
pradurbhavas ca vai nrsu 
amanusam vedmi cainam ye 
canye divya-caksusah 


“It is our great fortune that the Lord is always grateful to His friends 
and relatives and that He has appeared amongst us in a human-like 
form. I consider Him to be a transcendental personality. Learned 


authorities also consider Him in the same way.” 


Text 38 
so ‘ham krsnena vai ratrau 
sammantrya viditatmana 
sahanena gamisyami 
savrajo yadi mamsyate 


“Tonight, I will frankly disclose to Lord Krsna, the life and soul of 
His devotees, the purpose of my visit. If He and the other Vrajavasis 
obey the order of the king, tomorrow we will depart for Mathura. 


Text 39 
evam bahuvidham krsnam 
drstua hetvartha-karanath 


vivesa nanda-gopasya 
krsnena saha samsadam 
After contemplating his future course of action in this way, Akrira 


gazed upon Krsna without satiation and then entered Nanda 
Maharaja’s house, along with Him. | 


Thus ends the translation of the twenty-fifth chapter of the Visny, 
Parva of Sri Harivamsa. 


Wahainne bun Zj w Ein t’ YrSBOILX 


Akrura Brings Krsna and Balarama to Mathura 
Texts 1-2 
vaisampayana uvaca 
sa nanda-gopasya grham 
pravistah saha-kesavah 
gopa-vrddhan samaniya 
provacamita-daksinah 


krsnam catvabravit pritya 
rauhineyena sangatam 

Svah purim mathuram tata 
gamisyamah sukhdaya vat 


Vaisampayana said: O Janamejaya, after being comfortably seated 
in Nanda Maharaja’s house, Akrira, the giver of unlimited charity, 
called for all the elderly cowherd men. He then spoke to them, 
addressing Krsna, who was seated next to Balarama: “My dear son, 
tomorrow morning, we must go to Mathura. I am sure that You will 
derive great pleasure from visiting this most opulent city.” 


Text 3 
yasyants ca vrajah sarve 
gopalah sapangrahah 
kamsdjnaya samucitam 
karam ddaya varsikam 
“All the Vrajavasis have been ordered by Karnsa to come to Mathura, 
along with their family members, and pay the tax to the king.” 


Text 4 
samrddhas tatra kamsasya 
bhavisyati dhanurmahah 
tam draksyatha samrddham 
Ca sva-yanats ca samesyatha 


FO ORI VISNU-PARVA 


“Kamsa has arranged a grand dhanur-yajna, which is to be held with 
great pomp. You can watch this opulent yajia and then meet Your 
relatives.” 


Text 5 
pitaram vasudevam ca 
satatam duhkha-bhajanam 
dinam putra-vadha-srantam 
yuvam adya samesyathah 


“You two brothers can meet Your father, Vasudeva, who has become 
weak and afflicted because six of his sons were killed by Karhsa, thus 
putting him into great distress.” 


Text 6 
satatam pidyamanam ca 
kamsenasubha-buddhina 
dasante sositam vrddham 
duhkhath sithilatam gatam 


“The evil-minded Kamsa has always plagued Vasudeva. He has 


become old and emaciated. Due to experiencing various miseries, 
Vasudeva has become morose.” 


Text 7 
kamsasya bhaya-santrastam 
bhavadbhyam ca vina krtam 
dahyamanam diva ratrau 


sotkhanthendntaratmana 


First of all, he is always afraid of Karnsa’s wrath and besides this, he 
1s Separated from You, his two sons. He is very anxious to see You 


because he burns in the fire of separation throughout the day and 
night.” 


Texts 8-9 
tam ca draksyasi govinda 
putratr amrdita-stanim 


devakim deva-sankasam 
sidantim vihata-prabham © 

putra-Sokena susyantim 
tuad-darsana-parayanam 

viyoga-soka-santaptam 
vivatsam iva saurabhim 


“My dear Govinda, You can also see Your mother. She laments 
because she never had the opportunity to breast-feed You. Although 
she is like a goddess, she has become lusterless, as if suffering 
from various miseries. She has become thin because of grief and 
Jamentation. She is in great anxiety, longing to see You, just as a cow 
is most unhappy when she is separated from her calf.” 


Text 10 
upapluteksanam dinam 
nityam malina-vasasam 
svarbhanu-vadana-grastam 
sasankasya prabham wa 


“She appears to be most pathetic—constantly shedding tears. She 
dresses in old clothes. She appears like the dim rays of the moon 
that has been swallowed by Rahu.” 


Text 11 
tvad-darsanaparam nityam 
tavagamana-kanksinim 
tvat pravrttena sokena 
sidantim vai tapasvinim 


Be always thinks of the time when she will see You. Every day, she 
oe waits for the chance to see You. That most austere lady has 
“come Practically devoid of life because of separation from You.” 


Text 12 
tvat-pralapesv akusalam 


tvaya balye viyojitam 


Vv FV IBJRI YIIONUYT"PTAN VY A 


arupajnam tava vibho 
vaktrasyasyendu-varcasah 
“O Lord, You were separated from Your mother immediately after 
birth. Therefore, she does not know how much You have grown and 


how sweetly You speak. She does not know how beautiful you look 
because she is bereft of seeing Your moon-like face.” 


Text 13 
yadi tuam janayitua sa 
devaki tata tapyate 
apatyartho nu kas tasya 
varam hyevanapatyata 


“My dear child, if, by giving birth to a son like You, Devaki had to 
suffer so much then what is the use of having a child at all? Perhaps 
it would have been better for her to remain childless.” 


Text 14 
aputranam hi narinadm 
ekah soko vidhiyate 
saputra tv aphale putre 
dhik-prajatena tapyate 


“Women who have no children have only one grief but a woman who 
has a son and is bereft of his association is thoroughly miserable. 
Such a woman remains afflicted by constant lamentation.” 


Text 15 
tvam tu Sakra-samah putro 
yasyas tuat-sadrso gunath 
paresam apy abhayado 
na sa Socitum arhati 


A mother who has sons that are as talented as You, as powerful as 
Indra, and who are capable of giving protection to others, should 
never have cause to lament.” 


Text 16 
vrddhau tavamba-pitarau 
para-bhrtyatvam adgatau 
bharisitau tvat-krte nityam 
kamsenasubha-buddhina 


“CO dear one, Your elderly parents are living like slaves in Mathura. 
Karnsa, whose mind is always filled with sinful thoughts, constantly 


chastises them because of You.” 


Text 17 
yadt te devaki manya 
prthivivatma-dharini 
tam soka-salile magnam 
uttarayitum arhasi 


“If You respect Your mother, Devaki, who gave birth to You and 
so is like the earth that sustains all living beings then just as You 
delivered the earth when it was submerged within the water, You 
should now deliver Your mother from the ocean of lamentation.” 


Text 18 
tam ca vrddham priya-sutam 
vasudevam sukhocitam 
putra-yogena samyojya 
krsna dharmam avapsyast 


“O Krsna, Your elderly father, Vasudeva, considers You to be his most 
precious object. If You give him the pleasure of Your association 
then You will certainly accumulate immense pious merit.” 


Texts 19-21 
yatha nagah sudurortto 
damito yamuna-hrade 
vimilah sa krtah sailo yatha 
vai bhiidharas tuaya 


darpotsiktas ca balavan 
aristo vinipatitah 


para-prana-harah kesi 
dustatma ca hayo hatah 


etenaiva prayatnena vrddhav 
uddhrtya duhkhitau 
yatha dharmam avapnosi 
tat krsna pancntyatam 


“My dear Krsna, just as You chastised the sinful serpent, Kaliya, 
and drove him away from the Yamuna—just as You effortlessly 
lifted Govardhana Hill—just as You killed the powerful demon, 
Aristasura—and just as You eliminated the evil-minded horse 
demon, Kesi, who was fond of killing others—You should deliver 
Your old father and mother and thus become famous as a righteous 
person.” | 


Text 22 
nirbhartsyamano yair drstah 
pita te kamsa-samsadi 
te sarve cakrur asrini netrair 
duhkhanuita bhrsam 


“Those who saw how sinful Karhsa chastised Your father in the 
assembly were extremely unhappy and shed tears of grief.” 


Text 23 
garbhavakartanadini 
duhkhani subahiny api 
mata te devaki krsna 


kamsasya sahate ‘vasa 


"O Krsna, being completely helpless, Your mother, Devaki, has been 
suffering terrible miseries, the foremost of which was the killing of 
her sons by evil-minded Karnsa.” 


Text 24 
mata-pitrbhyam sarvena 
jatena tanayena vai 


yam vai pratikartavyam 
yatha-yogam udahrtam 


“Eyery son is duty-bound to serve his parents to his best Capacity. 
One should try to repay his debt to his parents. This is the order of 


the scriptures.” 


Text 25 
evam te kurvatah krsna 
mata-pitror anugraham 
pantyajetam tau sokam syac 
ca dharmas tavanagha 


“O sinless Krsna, if You are compassionate towards Your father and 
mother then they will certainly forget the miseries they underwent 
and You will no doubt be rewarded by Providence.” 


Text 26 
vaisampayana uvaca 
krsnah suviditartho vai 

tam ahamita-vikramam 
badham ity eva tejasvi na 
ca krodhavasam gatah 


Vaisampaya said: O Janamejaya, after hearing these statements, 
supremely-powerful Krsna, without being agitated, replied to 
Akrura, who was almost equally powerful: “We will go with you to 
- Mathura.” 


Text 27 
te ca gopah samagamya 
nanda-gopa-purah-sarah 
akrira-vacanam srutva 
celuh kamsasya sasanat 


All the cowherd men, headed by Nanda Maharaja, had listened 
carefully to what Akrara said. Thereafter, they began to make 
arrangements to go to Mathura, as ordered by Karhsa. 


Text 28 
gamanaya ca te saya 
babhivur vrajavasinah 
sajjam copayanam krtva 
gopa-vrddhah pratasthire 


All the cowherd inhabitants of Vraja prepared for the journey to 
Mathura. The elderly men took various gifts and other items and 
placed them on the bullock carts and departed. 


Texts 29-30 
karam canaduhah sarpir 
mahisams caupanayikan 
yatha-saram yatha-yutham 
upaniya payo dad 


tam sajjayitud kamsasya 
karam copayanani ca 

te sarve gopa-patayo 
gamanayopatasthire 


Everyone collected the things to be given as the annual tax, bulls 
for pulling the carts, buffaloes, ghee, milk, yogurt, and many other 
gifts, according to their capacity. After putting all these things on 
the bullock carts, the leading cowherd men assembled in front of 
Nanda Maharaja’s house, before departing for Mathura. 


Text 31 
akrirasya kathabhis ca 
saha krsnena jagratah 
rauhineya-trtiyasya sa 
nisa vyatyavartata 
Akrira spent the entire night talking to Krsna. Balarama, the son of 


Rohini, also took part in the conversation. 


Texts 32-34 
tatah prabhate vimale 
pakst-vyahara-sankule 


AKRURA BRINGS KRSNA AND BALARAMA TO MATHURA 345 
naisakare rasmi-jale 
ksanadaksaya-samhrte 
nabhasy aruna-samstirne 
paryaste jyotisam gane 
pratyusa-pavanasaraih 
kledite dharani-tale 


ksinadkarasu tarasu supta- 
nispratibhasu ca 

naisam antardadhe rupam 
udgacchati divakare 


Early the next morning, the birds began to chirp, the moon rays 
became dim, the entire sky appeared reddish, the stars disappeared, 
the surface of the earth became soaked with dew, and even the 
brightest stars appeared dim. By the rising of the sun, the darkness 
of night vanished. 


Text 35 
sitamsuh santa-kirano 
nisprabhah samapadyata 
eho nasayate rupam eko 
vardhayate vapuh 


By the arrival of the sun, the moon became pale and lusterless. 


It appeared that the moon had vanished as the sun displayed his 
prowess. 


Texts 36-38 
gobhis ca sama-kirnasu 
vraja-niryana-bhimisu 
manthandvarta-purnesu 
gargaresu nadatsu ca 


damabhir damyamanesu 
vatsesu tarunesu ca 

gopair apiryamandsu 
ghosa-rathyadsu sarvasah 


tatraiva gurukam bhandam 
Sakataropitam bahu 

tvaritah prsthatah krtva 
jagmuh syandana-vahanah 


There were cows and calves crowding the roads of Vraja. The SOunds 
of churning butter could be heard in each and every house. There 
were pitchers filled with yogurt. Calves were seen being tied with 
rope at different places. The lanes of Vrndavana became crowded 
with people, cows, and calves. The cowherd men of Vrndavana 
loaded huge pots of yogurt and milk onto the bullock carts and 
then quickly departed for Mathura. 


Text 39 
krsno ‘tha rauhineyas ca 
sa caivamita daksinah 
trayo vatha-gata jagmus 
iriloka-patayo yatha 


Krsna, Balarama, and Akrira, who always gave a great deal of 
wealth in charity, boarded their chariot and departed for Mathura, 
appearing like the emperors of the three worlds. 


Text 40 - 
athaha krsnam akriro 
yamuna-tiram asritah 
syandanam catra raksasva 


yatnam ca kuru vajisu 


In the course of their journey, they arrived by the shore of the river, 
Yamuna. Akriira turned to Krsna and said, “Let us stop our chariot 
here and give the horses a rest.” 


Text 41 
hayebhyo yavasam datud 
haya-bhande rathe tatha 
pragadham yatnam asthaya 
ksanam tata pratiksyatam 


AKRURA BRINGS KRSNA AND BALARAMA TO MATHURA 44 


“Kindly wait here for awhile. You can give grass and water to the 
horses and watch them until I return.” 


Text 42 
yamunaya hrade hy asmin 
stosyami bhujagesvaram 
divyair bhagavatair mantraih 
sarva-loka-prabhum yatah 


“I would like to bathe in the Yamuna and offer my prayers to Lord 
Ananta, the king of the serpents and master of the entire universe, 


while reciting suitable mantras.” 


Text 43 
guhyam bhagavatam devam 
sarva-lokasya bhavanam 
srimat-svastika-murddhanam 
pranamisyami bhoginam 


sahasra-sirasam devam 
anantam nila-vdsasam 


“Lord Ananta is a most confidential personality of Godhead. He 
creates and maintains the entire universe. His head is adorned with 
a glittering svastika. The serpent, Lord Ananta, has one thousand 
hoods and He is dressed in blue garments. Let me offer my 


obeisances to Him.” 


Texts 4445 
dharma-devasya tasyatha 
yad visam prabhavisyati 
sarvam tad amrta- 
prakhyamasisyamy amaro yatha 


svastikayatanam drstua 
dvythvam sri-vibhisitam 

samajas tatra sarpanadm 
Santyartham vai bhavisyati 


'€O ORT VISNU-FARVA 


“After worshiping Ananta Sesa, the king of the serpents, wh ois full 
of opulence and is decorated with auspicious characteristics, 


, : I will 
drink some nectarean water from the Yamuna as His remnant 


S, just 
as the demigods drink nectar. The Lord is always surrounded by 


many serpents.” 


Text 46 
astam mam samudiksantau 
bhavantau sangatav ubhau 
nivrtto bhujagendrasya 
yavad asmi hradotiamat 


“Until I return from the Yamuna, after worshiping my beloved Lord 
Ananta, You two brothers sit here and wait for me.” 


Text 47 
tam aha krsnah samhrsto 
gaccha dharmistha ma ciram 
avam khalu na saktau 


svastvaya hinadv upasitam 


Krsna smiled and replied, “O religious-minded personality, go and 


quickly return. We will not be able to wait very long without your 
association.” < | 


Text 48 
sa hrade yamunayas tu 
mamayjamitadaksinah 
rasdtale sa dadrse naga- 
lokam imam yatha 


Thereafter, Akrira, who is unlimitedly charitable, approached the 
river Yamuna. As soon as he entered the water, he had a vision of 
the beautiful planet, Rasatala, where Lord Anantadeva resides. 


Text 49 
tasya madhye sahasrasyam 
hema-talocchrita-dhvajam 


AKRURA BRINGS KRSNA AND BALARAMA TO MATHURA 349 


langalasakta-hastagram 
musalopasritodaram 


Within the water of the Yamuna, Akrira saw his worshipable Lord 
Ananta, situated in Rasatala and possessing one thousand heads. 
Beside Him was a golden flag displaying a palm tree. He carried a 
plough in one hand and His club was kept by His left side. 


Text 50 
asttambara-samvitam panduram 
pandur asanam 
kundalaikadharam mattam 
suptam amburuheksanam 


His complexion was golden and His throne was white. The Lord 
was dressed in blue garments. He wore one earring. He appeared 
to be relaxing in a very pleasant mood. His two eyes resembled fully 
blossomed lotus flowers. 


Text 51 
bhogotkarasane subhre 
svena dehena kalpite 
svasinam svastikdbhyam ca 
varahabhyam mahi-dharam 


He was sitting on a white dsana in the form of a gigantic serpent. 
Lord Ananta, who holds the universe on one of His hoods, was 
adorned with an auspicious svastika and symbol of Varaha.. 


Text 52 
kificit savyapavrttena 
maulina hema-cilina 
jata-ripamayaih padmair 
| malayacchanna-vaksasam 


On His head was a golden crown and a golden comb on the left 
Side. On His chest was a beautiful garland of lotus flowers. 


Text 53 
rakta-candana-digdhangam 
dirgha-bahum anndamam 
padmandabha-sitabhrabham 
bhabhir jvalita-tejasam 


His entire body was smeared with reddish sandalwood paste. His arms 
were long and capable of destroying His enemies. His complexion 
was white, like a cloud of the autumn season. He looked attractive 


because of His great effulgence. 


Text 54 
dadarsa bhoginam natham 
sthitam ekadrnavesvaram 
pijyamanam dvizithvendrair 
vasuki-pramukhaih prabhum 


Akrira saw his worshipable Lord Sesa, the proprietor of the entire 
creation and protector of the serpents. He was being worshiped by 


exalted serpents, such as Vasuki. 


Text 55 
kambalasvatarau nagau tau 
camara-karav ubhau 
aviyjayetam tam devam 
dharmasana-gatam prabhum 


Some serpents were fanning Lord Anantadeva with caémaras as He 
sat On an asana composed of religious principles. 


Text 56 
tasyabhyasa-gato bhati 
vasukih pannagesvarah 
vito ‘nyath sacivaih sarpaih 
Rarkotaka-purah saraih 


By His side was the king of serpents, Vasuki, as well as other serpents, 


such as Karkotaka, who are considered to be the ministers of Lord 


Ananta. 


Text 57 
tam ghatath kaficanair divyaih 
pankajacchanna-mastakaih 
rajanam snapayamasuh 
snatam eharnavambubhih 
Akrara saw that servants were bathing Ananta Sesa, pouring on Him 


the water of the Ekarnava from divine golden pitchers whose tops 
were decorated with lotus flowers. 


Text 58 
tasyotsange ghanasyamam 
srt vatsac-chaditorasam 
pitambaradharam visnum 


supavistam dadarsa ha 


Akraura saw that Lord Krsna, dressed in yellow garments, was 
peacefully seated upon the lap of Lord Ananta Sesa. His complexion 


was like that of a dark cloud. His chest was decorated with the marks 
of Srivatsa. 


Text 59 
aparam caiva somena tulya- 
samhananam prabhum 
sankarsanam iwvasinam tam 


divyam vistaram vind 


To his astonishment, Akrara saw another personality of fair 
complexion by Krsna’s side. His effulgence was pleasing, like that 
of the moon. This personality looked like Balarama. He was sitting 
next to Krsna but without an opulent dsana. 


Text 60 
sa krsnam tatra sahasa 
vyahartum upacakrame 
tasya samstambhayamasa 
vakyam krsnah sva-tejasa 


fre 


A IN | Ww SAP SY Ge "A FR ON OY TR 


Although Akrara tried to speak to Krsna, he could not do so because 
his voice became choked due to Krsna’s awesome presence. 


Text 61 
so ‘nubhiya bhujanganam 
tam bhagavatam avyayam 
udatisthat punas toyad 
vismito ‘mita-daksinah 


After witnessing the glories of the indestructible Lord, the king 
of the serpents, most-magnanimous Akrura became struck with 
wonder and slowly came out of the water. 


Text 62 
sa tau rathasthavasinau 
tatraiva bala-kesavau 
niriksyamandav anyonyam 
dadarsadbhuta-ripinau 


As he came onto the shore of the Yamuna, to his surprise, Akrura 
saw Krsna and Balarama sitting on the chariot, looking at each 
other. Both of Them appeared exquisitely attractive. 


Text 63 
athamajjat punas tatra 
tadakrirah kutihalat 
yyate yatra devo ‘sau 
nila-vasah sitananah 


Akrura returned to the Yamuna, to the same spot where he had just 
seen Lord Ananta, dressed in blue garments arid with a glistening 
face, being worshiped. 


Text 64 
tathaivasinam utsange 
sahasrasya-dharasya vai 
dadarsa krsnam akrirah 
pijyamanam tada prabhum 


AKRURA BRINGS KRSNA AND BALARAMA TO MATHURA 35! 


He saw Krsna and Balarama seated upon the lap of Ananta Sesa, 


who had one thousand hoods. 


Text 65 
bhiyas ca sahasotthaya tam 
mantram manasa japan 
ratham tenaiva margena 
jagamamita-daksinah 


Being exceedingly perplexed, Akrura began to chant his worshipable 
mantra. After doing so, he slowly came out of the water and went 


before the chariot. 


Text 66 
tam aha kesavo hrstah 
sthitam akriram adgamat 
kidrsam naga-lokasya 
urtiam bhagavate hrade 


When Akriura arrived at the chariot, Krsna asked with a smile, “Tell 
me—what have you seen within the water? How was the vision of 
Nagaloka possible within the water of the Yamuna?” 


Text 67 
ciram ca bhavata kalo 
vyaksepena vilambitah 
manye drstam tvayascaryam 
hrdayam te yathacalam 


“You took a long time for your meditation and worship. I am sure 
that you must have seen something extraordinary in the water, which 
is why your mind has become absorbed in something wonderful.” 


Text 68 
praty uvaca sa tam krsnam 
ascaryam bhavata vina 
kim bhavisyati lokesu 
sthdvaresu caresu ca 


54 SrI VISNU-PARVA 


Akrara replied, “My dear Krsna, who other than You within the 
entire world of moving and non-moving living entities can be the 


object of wonder?” 


Text 69 
tatrascaryam maya drsiam 
krsna yad bhuvi durlabham 
tad ihapr yatha tatra 
pasyami ca ramami ca 


“O Krsna, the uncommon thing that I had seen within the water js 
rarely experienced in this world. Indeed, whatever wonder I had 
seen in the water I am also seeing here.” 


Text 70 
sangatas capi lokanam 
ascaryeneha rupina 
atah parataram krsna 


nascaryam drastum utsahe 


“O Krsna, today, I have personally witnessed the most extraordinary 
incident, which is rarely seen within the three worlds. Now, there is 
nothing more extraordinary left for me to see.” 


Text 71 
tadagaccha gamisyamah 
kamsa-raja-purim prabho 
yavan nastam vrajaty 
esa divasante divakarah 


“Now, my dear Lord, let us proceed towards Karnsa’s city. We should 
try to reach Mathura before sunset.” 


Thus ends the translation of the twenty-sixth chapter of the Visnu 
Parva of Sri Harivamsa. 


Krsna and Balarama Enter Mathura 


Texts 1-3 
vaisampayana uvaca 
te tu yunktva rathavaram 
sarva evamitaujasah 
krsnena sahitah prayams 


tatha sankarsanena ca 


asedus te purim ramyam 
mathuram kamsa-palitam 

vivisus te purim ramyam 
kale rakta-divakare 

tau tu sva-bhavanam virau 
krsna-sankarsanav ubhau 

pravesitau buddhimata hy 


akriirenarka-varcasau 


Vaisampaya said: O Janamejaya, in this way, all the cowherd men, 
along with Krsna and Balarama, mounted their chariots and bullock 
carts and went to the beautiful city of Mathura, which was well 
protected by King Kamsa. As they reached Mathura, the sun was 
about to set on the western horizon. Intelligent Akraira desired to 


take Krsna and Balarama, who were as brilliant as the sun, to his 
house. 


Text 4 
tav Gha vara-varnabhau 
bhito danapatis tada 
tyakiavya tata gamane 
vasudeva-grhe sprha 
The two brothers, Krsna and Balarama, looked incomparably 
attractive. Akrira, who was always afraid of Karnsa’s wrath, politely 


said to Krsna, “My dear children, You should not think of going to 
Vasudeva’s house for the time being.” 


355 


PIO YR VIAN UBANETARVA 


Text 5 
yuvayor hi krte vrddhah 
kamsena sa nirasyate 
bharisyate ca diva ratrau 
neha sthatavyam ity api 


“Simply because of You, sinful Kamsa always harasses Your old 
father, Vasudeva, in so many ways, trying to force him out of the 
kingdom.” 


Text 6 
tad yuvabhyam hi kartavyam 
pitrartham sukham utiamam 
yatha sukham avapnoti tad 
vat karyam hitanvitam 
“Both of You should look after Your father’s welfare and insure that 


he attains the highest happiness. Act in such a way that his life will 
_ be benefited.” 


Text 7 
tam uvaca tatah krsno 
yasyavavam atarkitau 
preksantau mathuram vira 
raja-margam ca dharmika 


tasyawva tu grham sadho 
gacchavo yadi manyase 


Krsna replied, “O righteous one, with your permission, we two 
brothers will take a tour of Mathura and enjoy its gardens, buildings, 


and surrounding areas. Thereafter, we will approach Karisa’s 
palace.” 


Text 8 
vaisampayana uvaca 
akriro ‘pi namaskrtya 
manasa krsnam avyayam 


jagama kamsa-parsvam 
tu prahrstenantaratmana 


Vaisampayana said: Akruira mentally offered his obeisances to the 
indestructible Supreme Lord, Krsna, and then departed in a joyful 
mood, to see King Kamsa. 


Text 9 
anusistau ca tau virau 
prasthitau preksakav ubhau 
alanabhyam ivonmuktau 


kurjarau yuddha-kanksinau 


Having received Akrura’s permission, the two brothers, Krsna 
and Balarama, went to see the city. It appeared as if two kings of 
elephants were preparing to engage in battle with other elephants. 


Text 10 
tau tu marga-gatam drstua 
rajakam ranga-karakam 
ayacetam tatas tau tu 
VASAMSL TUCLYANL Vat 
While walking along the road, They came upon a washerman who 
was carrying clothes that he had dyed various colors. The two 
brothers approached him and asked for some excellent clothes. 


Text 11 
rajakah sa tu tau praha 
yuvam kasya vanecarau 
raja-vasamst yau maudhyad 
yacetham nirbhayav ubhau 


With a look of surprise, the washerman said, “Who are You? Where 


have You come from? How dare you foolishly demand the king’s 
clothes!” 


Text 12 
aham kamsasya VaSAMS1 
nana-desodbhavani vat 


kama-ragami Sataso 
ratyayami visesatah 


“I am employed by King Karnsa. I wash and dye his clothes, which 
were made in different countries. I take pleasure in performing this 


service for the king.” 
Text 13 
yuvam Rasya vane jatau 
mrgath saha vivarddhitau 
jata-ragav idam drstua 
raktam acchadanam bahu 


“Whose sons are You? It appears that You were born in the forest 
and that You were raised along with animals. Today, by seeing these 
colorful and opulent clothes, You have become eager to possess 
them.” 
Text 14 
aho vam jiwiiam tyaktam 
yau bhavantavihagatau 
murkhau prakrta-vinanau 
vaso yacitum icchatah 


“Alas! It is very strange! It appears that You have given up all hope 
of maintaining Your lives and for that reason, You have come here. 
You are fools, possessing intelligence like village boys and so You 


ask for the king’s clothes.” 


Text 15 
tasmai cukopa vai krsno 
rajakayalpa-medhase 
praptanistaya murkhaya 
syjate van-mayam visam 


When Krsna heard these insulting words of the washerman, who 
was an evil-minded miscreant, foolish and poisonous like a snake, 


He became very angry. 


KRSNA AND BALARAMA ENTER MATHURA 356 


Text 16 
talenasanikalpena sa tam 
murddhany atadayat 
sa gatasuh papatorvyam 
rajako vyasta-mastakah 


Krsna angrily gave a blow to the washerman’s head, which he felt to 
be like a thunderbolt. With his head separated from his body, the 
washerman bled profusely and fell dead onto the ground. 


Text 17 
tam hatam paridevantyo 
bharyas tasya vicukrusuh 
tvanitam mukta-kesyas ca 
jagmuh kamsa-nivesanam 


When the washerman’s wife saw her husband killed in this way, she 
loudly lamented her fate as her hair loosened. She then went to 
King Kamsa to inform him of what had happened. 


Text 18 
tav apy ubhau suvasanau 
jagmatur malya-karandat 
vithi-malyapananam vai 
gandhaghratau dvipav wa 


The two brothers happily selected the clothes of Their choice and 
after dressing, They looked very enchanting. Desiring to wear 
flower garlands, They next approached a florist. It appeared as if 
two kings of elephants had arrived, being attracted by the fragrance 
of flowers. 


Text 19 
gonako nama tatrasin 
malyavritih pryamvadah 
prabhita-malyapanavam 
laksmivan priya-darsanah 


oO 


ORL VISNUHPARVA 


The florist’s name was Gunakaand he spoke very sweetly to everyone 
His shop was very nicely decorated with varieties of fragrant flower 
garlands. He was quite wealthy and handsome as well. 


Text 20 
tam krsnah slaksnaya vaca 
malyartham abhisrstaya 
dehity uvaca tatkale 
malakaram akdtaram 


Desiring flower garlands, Krsna politely spoke to the florist: “Dear 
one, kindly give Us some flower garlands.” 


Text 21 
tabhyam prito dadau malyam 
prabhitam malyajtvanah 
bhavatoh svam idam ceti 


provaca priya-darsanau 


The florist, who maintained himself by selling flower garlands, very 
happily gave Krsna and Balarama many nice flower garlands. After 
decorating Themselves, Krsna and Balarama appeared even more 
beautiful. The florist declared, “Whatever is in my possession— 
everything actually belongs to You!” 


Text 22 
pritah sumanasa krsno 
gunakaya varam dadau- 
srs tuam mat-sambhava saumya 
dhanaughair abhipatsyate 


Krsna became very satisfied upon hearing the words of the florist. 
He blessed the florist, Gunaka, saying, “O noble one, having pleased 
Me, you will become endowed with great opulence.” 


Text 23 
sa labdhva varam avyagro 
malya-vrttir adho-mukhah 


KRSNA AND BALARAMA ENTER MATHURA 36 


krsnasya patito murdhna 
pratyagraha tam varam 


After very happily accepting this benediction, the florist respectfully 
bowed down before Krsna and Balarama, touching his head to Their 


lotus feet. 


Text 24 
yaksavu wmav itt tada sa 
mene malya-jivakah 
sa bhrsam bhaya-samvigno 
nottaram praty apadyata 


The florist considered his guests to be great personalities—maybe 
Yaksas. Due to fear of Kamsa, he refrained from further conversation 
with Them. 


Text 25 
vasudeva-sutau tau ca 
raja-marga-gatav ubhau 
kubjam dadrsatur bhuyah 
sanulepana-bhajanam 


Krsna and Balarama left the florist and began to walk on the king’s 
road in a happy mood. While going, the sons of Vasudeva met a 
hunch-backed woman named Kubja, who was walking with a plate 
of sandalwood paste in her hands. 


Texts 26-27 
tam aha krsnah kuljeti 
kasyedam anulepanam 
nayasy ambuja-patraksi 
ksipram akhyatum arhast 


sasmita sammukhi bhitva 
praty uvacambujeksanam 

krsnam jalada-gambhiram 
vidyut-kutila-gamini 


Krsna said to Kubja, “O lotus-eyed girl, for whom are you Carrying 
this sandalwood paste?” Kubja, who walked in a crooked manner, so 
that she resembled lightning, smiled and replied with a voice that 
sounded as grave as a cloud. 


Texts 28-29 
rajnah snana-grham yami 
tad grhananulepanam 
drstvaiva tuaravindaksa 
vismitasm. varanana 


yat-tvam icchast me vira 
tvam grhananulepanam 

sthitasmy dgaccha bhadram 
te hrdayasyasi me priyah 


Kubja replied, “O lotus-eyed one! O handsome hero, I am on my 
way to give this sandalwood paste to King Karhsa. I have become 
enamored by Your matchless beauty and so, You can take as much 
sandalwood paste as you want. Please come to my house so that I 
can serve You to my heart’s content because You are the Lord of 
my life.” 


Text 30 
kutas cagamyate saumya 
yan-mam tvam navabudhyase 
maharajasya dayitam 
niyukiam anulepane 


“O enchanting hero, where are You from that you are not familiar 
with me? I am a dear maidservant of King Karnsa who supplies him 
the best sandalwood paste.” 


Texts 31-32 
tam uvaca hasantim tu 
krsnah kubjam avasthitam 
avayor gatra-sadrsam 
diyatam anulepanam 


Se I Ree ER SR ae Se ER Ee AGE DS Ee Re ar ee ae 
vayam hi desatithayo 

mallah prapta varanane 
drastum dhanur mahad divyam 

rastre caiva maharddhimat 


Krsna said to Kubja, who was standing before Him, smiling: “O 
girl with a beautiful face, kindly smear this sandalwood paste over 
Our bodies. We are wrestlers that have come to your city as invited 
guests. We would like to see the celestial bow that 1 is being kept in 
the royal assembly of your king.” 


Text 33 
praty uvacatha sa krsnam 
priyo ‘si mama darsane 
rajarham idam avyagram 
tad grhananulepanam 


To this, Kubja replied, “In my estimation, You are the most 
attractive of all males and so I will happily decorate Your body with 


this fragrant sandalwood paste.” 


Text 34 
tav ubhav anuliptangau 
caru-gatrau virejatuh 
tirthagau panka-digdhangau 
yamunayam yatha vrsau 


After Kubja offered the sandalwood paste to Krsna and Balarama, 
They appeared even more transcendentally attractive. They looked 
like two bulls that had come out of the Yamuna with mud caked on 
Their bodies. 


Text 35 
tam ca kubjam sthagor madhye 
dvyangulenagra-panina 
Sanath sampidayamasa 
krsno lila-vidhanavit 


36: 


Poe we MHS Fk Oo IN Ye UTP ANN 


Then, Krsna, who is expert in performing wonderful pastimes, 
gently pulled Kubja’s body so that her deformity immediately 
disappeared. 


Text 36 
sa ca magnam sthagum 
matva svayatang? sucismita 
jahasoccath stana-tati 
rjuyastir lata yatha 


Seeing how her crooked body had become straight and attractive, 
Kubja smiled with great happiness. Her two nicely shaped breasts 
made her appear very beautiful, like a creeper embracing a strong 
tree. 


Text 37 
pranayac capi krsnam 
sa babhase matta-kasini 
kva yasyast maya ruddhah 
kanta tistha grhana mam 


Becoming overwhelmed by lust, Kubja addressed Krsna: “O dear 
one, where are You going now? Please stay here with me and allow 
me to serve You to my full satisfaction.” 


Text 38 
tau jata-hasav anyonyam 
satalaksepam avyayau 
viksamanau prahasitau 


kubjayah sruta-vistarau 


Upon hearing this, Krsna began to laugh. The indestructible Lord 
and friend of all living entities glanced at Balarama, as if in a joking 
mood. Kubja had previously heard descriptions of the transcendental 
qualities of the two brothers, Krsna and Balarama. 


Text 39 
krsnas tu kubjam kamartam 


sasmitam visasarja ha 


SS AEA LT EO RA 866m 


tatas tau kubjaya muktau 
pravistau raja-samsadam 


Thereafter, Krsna and Balarama left Kubja, who was afflicted by lust, 
and quickly proceeded toward King Karhsa’s palace, 


Text 40 
tav ubhau vraja-samvrddhau 
gopa-vesa-vibhisitau 
gudha-cestananau bhitva 
pravistau nrpa-vesma tat 


Krsna and Balarama were born and brought up in the village of 
Vrndavana and They were dressed as cowherd boys. Thus, Their 
external appearance was such that no one could understand Their 


real intentions. 


Text 41 
dhanuhsalam gatau tatra 
balav aparitarkitau 
himavad vana-sambhitau 

simhav iva madotkatau 


Eventually, the two brothers, who appeared like two intoxicated 
lions that had emerged from a forest at the foot of the Himalayas, 
came to the stage where the huge, celestial bow was kept. Everyone 
was surprised to see how boldly the brothers entered the arena. 


Text 42 
didrksantau mahattatra 
dhanurayoga-bhisitam 
papracchatus ca tau virav 
ayudhaganikam tada 
Krsna and Balarama were very eager to see the celestial bow, which 
was decorated with flower garlands and worshiped. For this purpose, 
They inquired as follows from the guards about it. 


WHO 


WN KE Yiomnwu*y AHN Y 


Texts 43-48 
bhoh kamsa-dhanusam pala 
sruyatam avayor vacah 
katarat tad dhanuh saumya 
maho ‘yam yasya vartate 


ayogabhutam kamsasya 
darsayasva yadicchasi 

sa tayor darsayamasa tad 
dhanuh stambha-sannibham 


anaropyam asambhedyam 
devair api savasavaih 

tad grhituva tada krsnas 
tolayamasa viryavan 


dorbhyam kamala-patraksah 
prahrstenantaratmana 

tolayitva yatha-kamam tad 
dhanur-daitya-pujitam 


Gropayamasa bali 
namayamasa casakrt 

anamyamanam krsnena 
prakarsad uragopamam 


duidhabhitam abhin madhye 
dhanurayoga-bhisitam 

bhanktva tu tad dhanuh srestham 
krsnas tvarita-vikramah 


niscakrama mahdvegah 
sa ca sankarsano yuva 


“O guards, please listen carefully to what we have to say. We would 
like to see the celestial bow for which this gorgeous festival has bee? 
arranged.” After hearing this, the guards led the two brothers to 
where the celestial bow was kept. This bow was so strong that eve? 


KRSNA AND BALARAMA ENTER MATHURA 367 


the demigods, headed by Indra, could not break or even string it. 
Still, lotus-eyed Krsna effortlessly picked up the bow, as ifina playful 
mood. He tossed it from one hand to the other a few times before 
stringing it with ease. Indeed, as Krsna bent the bow, which was 
decorated with flower garlands, it suddenly broke into two parts. 
After breaking the bow, the two brothers, Krsna and Balarama, 
quickly departed. 


Text 49 
dhanuso bhanga-nadena 
vayu-nirghosa-karind 
cacalantahpuram sarvam 
diSas caiva puptrire 
The loud sound that was created by the breaking of the bow 
reverberated in the four directions and resembled a great rumbling 
of clouds. Indeed, the entire earth shook. 


Texts 50-53 
nirgamya tv ayudhagaraj 
jagmatur gopa-sannidhau 
vegenayudha-palas tu gacchan 
sambhranta-manasah 


samipam nrpater gatua 
kakocchvaso ‘bhyabhasata 
sruyatam mama vynapyam 
ascaryam dhanuso grhe 
nirurttam asmin kale yaj- 
jagatah sambhramopamam 
narau kasyapy asadrsau 
stkha-vitata-murddhajau 


nila-pitambara-dharau 
pita-svetanulepanau 

tav antahpuram ajnatau 
pravistau kama-vesinau 


a FRIF 


\7 IN wT a ee EN we TS EN ee 


Thereafter, the two brothers, Krsna and Balarama, went to where 
the inhabitants of Vrndavana had made their camp. Meanwhile, the 
guards of the bow rushed to the royal court to inform the king of 
the news. The guards approached King Kamsa and said, “O King, 
please pay heed to our words. Just now, something wonderful hag 
happened to your celestial bow. It appears that the world is going to 
meet with destruction very soon. Two ordinary boys came to where 
the bow was being kept, a little while ago. They were unique in Their; 
appearance, having long hair. One of Them was dressed in blue 
garments and the other one was dressed in yellow garments. One 
of them was smeared with yellow sandalwood paste and the other 
was smeared with white sandalwood paste. They suddenly appeared 
within the arena where the bow was being kept, without anyone 
noticing.” 


Text 54 
deva-putropamau virau 
balav wa hutdsanau 
sthitau dhanur-grhe saumyau 
sahasa khadivagatau 


maya drstau panvyaktam 
rucirachadana-srajau 


“These two heroes looked like sons of a demigod. Their features 
were most enchanting. While gazing at Them, it appeared to us as if 
the fire-god had personally appeared in the form of young boys. The 
dress and flower garlands of the two boys were very charming.” 


Text 55 
tayor ekas tu padmaksah 
syamah pitambara-srajah 
jagraha tad dhani-ratnam 
durgrahyam daivatair api 


“The eyes of one of the brothers were like lotus petals and His 
complexion was like that of a dark cloud. His dress and necklace 


KRSNA AND BALARAMA ENTER Mayq HURA 369 


were yellow. That blackish personality easily picked up the celestial 
bow, which was difficult for even the demigods to move.” 


Text 56 
tat sa balo mahac-capam 
balad yantram wvdadyasam 
aropayitva vegena 
namayamasa lilaya 
“That young boy took the huge bow in His hand, as if it were a small 
toy, and began to string it. In a playful mood, He slowly began to 
bend the bow.” 
Text 57 
akrsyamanam tat tena 
vibanam bahusalina 
musti-dese vikujitua 
dvidhabhutam abhajyata 


“Being pulled by the powerful arms of that hero, the celestial bow 


suddenly broke into two, making a very loud sound.” 


Text 58 © 
tatah pracalita bhumir 
naiva bhati ca bhaskarah 
dhanuso bhanga-nadena 
bhramativa nabhas talam 


“When the bow broke, the entire earth shook due to the powerful 
vibration, the light of the sun appeared to dim, and the sky seemed 
to spin.” 


Text 59 
tad adbhutam mahad drstva 
vismayam paramam gatah 
bhayad bhayada-satrubhyas 
tad ihakhyadtum agatah 


hea 4a NO YOU 


OY FN | vos aN 


“As I witnessed this amazing feat, I became highly astonisheg 
Anticipating some future danger from an enemy camp, | prams 


° ”° 
running here to give you the news. 


Text 60 
na janami maharaja kau 
tav amita-vikramau 
ekah kailasa-sankdasa eko 
‘njana-girt prabhah 


“O King, I do not know who these two unlimitedly powerfy 
personalities are. One’s complexion was as white as Mount Kailasa 
and the other’s complexion was as dark as a black mountain.” 


Text 61 
sa tu tac-capa-rainam vai 
bhanktva stambham wa dvipah 
nispapatanila-gatih 
sdnugo “‘mita-vikramah 


agama tam duidha krtva na 
jane ko ‘py asau nrpa 


“Immediately after breaking the celestial bow, which was as big as a 
giant pillar, that unlimitedly powerful hero and His brother quickly 
departed. O ruler of men, who knows the identity of these two? 
They came, broke the bow, and then left.” 


Text 62 
srutvaiva dhanuso bhangam 
kamso vidita-vistarah 
visryyayudha-palam vai 
pravivesa grhottamam 
King Karhsa was always expecting something like this to happe”: 


When he heard this news of the breaking of the celestial bow, he 
dismissed guards and went inside his palace. 


Thus ends the translation of the twenty-seventh chapter of the Visnu 
Parva of Sri Harivamsa. 


CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT 


Kamsa Orders the two Wrestlers, Canura and 
Mustika, to kill Krsna 
Text 1 

vaisampayana uvaca 

sa cintayituad dhanuso bhangam 
bhoja-vivardhanah 

babhiva vimana raja cintayan 
bhrsa-duhkhitah 


Vaisampayana said: The more Kamsa, who should have increased 
the glories of the Bhoja dynasty, contemplated the incident of the 
breaking of the bow, the more he became filled with anxiety. 


Text 2 
katham balo vigata bhirava 
matya maha-balam 
preksyamanas tu purusatr 
dhanur bhanktva vinirgatah 


He thought, “Alas! How could a small boy be so fearless and break 
a huge, celestial bow in front everyone, ignoring the warnings of my 


guardsr” 


Text 3 
yasyarthe darunam karma 
krtam loka-vigarhitam 
pitrsvasratmajan viran sad 
evaham nyapothayam 


This is the same person IJ have been trying my best to kill by various 
cruel means. I killed six of my sister’s newborn sons, smashing them 
against the stone.” 


Text 4 
daivam purusakadrena na 
Sakyam atiwartitum 


naradoktam ca vacanam 
nunam mahyam upasthitam 


“Il think that it is not possible to reverse the arrangements fad 
e 
by providence. It seems that whatever Narada Muni had Previous 


l 
told me is going to take place, without fail.” y 


Text 5 
evam raja vicintyatha 
niskramya sva-grhottamat 
preksagaram jagamasu 
mancanam avalokakah 


While contemplating in this way, Karnsa came out of his palace and 
entered the sacrificial arena, to supervise the arrangements being 
made for the next day’s wrestling competition. 


Texts 6-7 
sa drstva sarva-niryukiam 
preksagaram nrpottamah 
sreninam drdha-niryuktair 
manca-vatair nirantaram 


sottamagara-yuktabhir 
valabhibhir vibhisitam 

chadibhih sampravrddhabhir 
eha-stambhair vibhisitam 


The powerful king found all the arrangements to be satisfactory. 
There were many stages and raised platforms erected by professional 
craftsmen. They were decorated with colorful flags that were marked 
with signs of the planets. The main stage was erected on six pillars. 
Thus, the sacrificial arena looked very attractive with stages, pillars 
and flags. 


Text 8 
sarvatah sara-nirvyiham 
suayatam supratisthitam 


KAMSA ORDERS TWO WRESTLERS TO KILL KRSNA _ 373 


udagraklista-suklista- 
mancarohanam uttamam 


The walls on all sides were made of bamboo poles. The entire area 
was vast and appeared like a small town. There were staircases on 
both sides so that people could climb onto the stage. Everything 
about the wrestling arena appeared delightful to the eyes and 
mind. 


Text 9 
nrpasana-panksiptam 
sancara-patha-sankulam 
channam tad vedikabhis ca 
manusaugha-bharaksamam 


Many thrones were placed on the stage for kings to sit. There were 
many pathways leading to the stage, coming from all directions. 
Seating arrangements were made so that innumerable people could 
attend. 


Texts 10-11 
sa drstua bhisitam rangam 
ajnapayata buddhiman 
Suah sacitrah samalyas ca 
sapatakas tathaiva ca 


suvasita vapusmanta 
upanitottarac-chadah 
kriyantam maricavatas ca 
valabhyo vithayas tatha 
Being satisfied after seeing the arrangements in the sacrificial arena, 
Kathsa gave the following instructions to the organizers: “Tomorrow 
morning, you should decorate this stage very nicely. Make sure the 
pillars and pathways are nicely decorated with flower garlands and 
flags, Sprinkle scented water all over the ground and make it appear 


very attractive. Now, erect a beautiful canopy above the wrestling 
arena.” 


Texts 12-13 
ranga-vate karisasya 
kalpyantam rasayo ‘vyayah 
patastarana-sobhas ca 
valayas canurupatah 


sthapyantam sunikhatas ca 
pana-kumbha yatha-kramam 

udabhara-sahah sarve 
sakancana-ghatottamah 


“The wrestling arena should be smeared with cow dung. Curtains 
should be placed all around the stage. Make sure that there are 
enough pillars so that the stage is supported and the curtains 
are fixed. These pillars should be planted deep into the ground. 
Place many tables here and there and keep golden pitchers filled 
with water and glasses on top of them, for the convenience of the 
spectators.” 


Text 14 
balayas copakalpyantam 
kasayas caiva kumbhasah 
prasnikas ca nimantryantam 
Srenyas ca sapurogamah 


“There should be varieties of gifts kept ready. These gifts should 
be kept in large vessels with open mouths. You should invite the 
foremost wrestlers who are conversant with the rules of wrestling. 
You should invite all the merchants, artists, and their followers 
participate as spectators.” 


Text 15 
ajna ca deya mallanam 
preksakanam tathaiva ca 
samaje manca-sobhas ca 
kalpyantam stipakalpitah 


KAMSA ORDERS TWO WRESTLERS TO KILL KRSNA. 375 


“You should arrange for judges for the wrestling competition and 
they should be here on time. ‘I’o enhance the beauty of the wrestling 
arena, properly decorate it, and give all respect to the judges.” 


Text 16 
evam ajnapya raja sa 
samaja-vidhim uttamam 
samaja-vaian niskramya 


V1IVESA SUaAM nivesanam 


After giving orders for insuring adequate arrangements for the 
smooth functioning of the wrestling competition, eae Karnsa left 
the arena and returned to his palace. 


Text 17 
ahvanam tatra saricakre 
tasya malla-dvayasya vat 
canurasyaprameyasya 


musttkasya tathaiwva ca 


In his palace, King Kamsa summoned his two most experienced 
wrestlers. The names of these two unlimitedly powerful wrestlers 
were Canutura and Mustika. 


Text 18 
tau tu mallau maha-viryau 
balinau bahu-salinau 
kamsasyajnam puraskrtya 
hrstau vivisatus tada 


Being summoned by the king, the two powerful, might-armed 
wrestlers went to see him in a mood of great happiness. 


Text 19 
tau samipagatau drstva 
mallau jagati visrutau 
uvaca kamso nrpatih 
sopanyasam idam vacah 


a ee | 


When Kamsa saw that the two formidable wrestlers, Canira an d 
Mustika, were standing before him, he began speaking to them ina 
very reasonable manner. 


Text 20 
bhavantau mama vikhyatau 
mallau vira-dhvajocchnitau 
pusitau ca yatha-nyayam 
satkararhau visesatah 


“You two are the most powerful and experienced wrestlers in my 
kingdom. You have earned many titles and have won numerous 
trophies. You are situated on the topmost platform of the art of 
wrestling. Because of this, you are always favored by me and as such, 


I respect you very much.” 


Text 21 
tan-matto yadi satkarah 
smaryate sukriani ca 
Rartavyam me mahat karma 
bhavadbhyam svena tejasa 


“Kindly remember my past favors and help me by accomplishing a 
greatly important mission. This can be accomplished by utilizing 


your immense prowess.” 


Text 22 
yau etau mama samvrddhau 
vraje gopalakav ubhau 
sankarsanas ca krsnas ca 
balav api sita-sramau 
“You must have heard of the two young cowherd boys, Krsna and 


Balarama, who were raised in Vrndavana, within my jurisdiction. 
These two possess such great energy that They never seem to tire.’ 


Text 23 
elau ranga-gatau yuddhe 
yuddhyamanau vanecarau 


nipatanantaram sighram 


hantavyau natra samsayah 


“These two boys, who are forest-dwellers, will compete with you. As 
soon as They come to wrestle with you, throw Them to the ground 
and quickly kill them. Don’t worry about the consequences,” 


Text 24 
balav imau sucapalav 
akriyav itt sarvatha 
navajna tatra kartavya 


kartavyo yatna eva hi 


“*These two boys are very restless and have no knowledge of the art 
of wrestling.’ Never think of Them like this, being complacent. You 
will have to exert yourselves to the utmost to defeat Them.” 


Text 25 
tabhyam yudhi nirastabhyam 
gopabhyam ranga-sannidhau 
ayatyam ca tadatve ca 


Sreyo mama bhavisyati 


“If you kill these two cowherd boys in the wrestling arena, I will be 
freed from all types of present and future fear.” 


Text 26 
nrpateh sneha-samyuktair 
vacobhir hrsta-manasau 
ucatur yuddha-sammattau 


mallau canira-mustikau 


After hearing these affectionate words of King Karnsa, the hearts of 
the two wrestlers became filled with joy. The two wrestlers, Canura 
and Mustika, who were always intoxicated with pride in their 
wrestling abilities, replied to the king as follows. 


Text 27 
yady Gvayos tau pramukhe 
sthasyete gopa-kilbisau 
hatav ity eva mantavyau 


preta-rupau tapasvinau 


“O King, if these two cowherd boys, who are a disgrace to their 
family, stand before us, know for certain that They are as S00d as 
dead. Consider that They have made all preparations to be ghosts 
in Their next lives.” 


Text 28 
yady avam pratryotsyete 
tav arista-paniplutau 
— avabhyam rosa-yuktabhyam 


pramukhe tau vanecarau 


“If They are foolish enough to wrestling with us, there is no doubt 
that we will kill Them, right in everyone’s presence.” 


Text 29 
evam vag visam utsrya tav 
ubhau malla-pungavau 
anujnatau narendrena sve 


grhe tau prajagmatuh 


After vomiting poison in the form of uttering insulting words, the 
two renowned wrestlers took permission from Karnsa and returned 
home. 


Texts 30-32 
maha-matram tatah kamso 
babhase hastijivinam 
hasti kuvalayapidah 


samaja-duan tisthatu 


balavan mada-lolaksas 
capalah krodhano nrsu 


KAMSA ORDERS TWO WRESTLERS TO KILL KRSNA 


danotkatakatas candah 
prativarana-rosanah 


sa sannodayitavyas te tav 
uddisya vanaukasau 

vasudeva-sutau virau 
yatha syatam gatayusau 


tvayda caiva gajendrena 
yadi tau gostha-jivinau 

bhavetam patitau range 
pasyeyam aham utkatau 


Thereafter, Karnsa summoned his foremost elephant driver and 
ordered him, “Take your best elephant, Kuvalayapida, and keep him 
near the gate to the sacrificial arena. I know that this elephant is very 
strong, restless, mischievous, and always inimical to human beings. 
As soon as he sees another elephant, he becomes filled with anger. 
Indeed, it is his nature to be always angry. When the two powerful 
sons of Vasudeva arrive at the gate on Their way to the wrestling 
arena, urge the elephant to trample Them so that hopefully, They 
will instantly die. I want to see the two proud cowherd boys who 
live in the forest smashed to the ground, Their lives squeezed out 
by the king of elephants, Kuvalayapida, at the gate to the wrestling 
arena.” 


Text 34 
tatas tau patitau drstva 
vasudevah sabandhavah 
china-milo niralambah 
sabharyo vinasisyatt 


“When the two boys are killed in this way, Vasudeva will lose all 
desire to remain alive. He and his wife, along with their relatives, 
will be devastated.” 


579 


Text 35 
ye ceme yadava muirkhah 
sarve krsna-parayanah 
vinasisyanticchinnasa drstua 
krsnam nipatitam 


“In addition, all the members of the Yadu dynasty who support Krsna 
and who have full faith in Him, will fall into the pit of devastation 
when they see their dear Krsna vanquished.” 


Text 36 
etau hatva gajendrena 
mallair va svayam eva va 
purim niryadavim krtva 
vicansyamy aham sukhi 
“I hereby vow to kill these two brothers, either by means of the 
elephant, Kuvalayapida, or by means of the wrestlers, or by myself. 


In this way, I will make the city of Mathura devoid of Yadavas and 
thereafter live peacefully.” 


Text 37 
pita hi me pantyakto 
yadavanam kulodvahah 
Sesas ca me parityakta 
yadavah krsna-paksinah 


“I have rejected my father, who took upon his shoulders the 
responsibility for looking after the members of the Yadu dynasty. 
Anyone who takes the side of Krsna will be killed by me.” 


Text 38 
na caham ugrasenena 
jatah kila sutarthina 
manusenalpa-viryena 
yatha mam aha ndradah 


KAMSA ORDERS TWO WRESTLERS TO xILy KRSNA _ 38] 


“The fact is that I was not born as an ordinary child of my insignificant 
father, Ugrasena. This information was given to me by the great 
sage, Narada.” 


Text 39 
mahamatra uvaca 
katham uktam na@radena 

rajan devarsinad pura 
ascaryam etat kathitam 


tuaitah srutam arindama 


The elephant driver said, “O respected king, what did the great 
sage, Narada, tell your O destroyer of the enemies, I am surprised 
to hear this from your mouth.” 


Text 40 
katham anyena jatas tuam 
ugrasenat pitur vind 
tava matra katham rajan 


kriam karmedam idrsam 


“O King, if Ugrasena is not actually your father then who is your 
real father? How could your mother engage in such an abominable 
act?” 


Text 41 
anyapi prakria nari na 
kuryac ca jugupsitam 
vistaram Srotum icchami 
hy etat kautuhalam hi me 


‘Normally, no ordinary woman would engage in such a sinful act. 
Why did your mother do this? I wish to know about this from you 1n 
detail. I am very eager to hear the story.” 


Text 42 
kamsa uvdaca 
yatha kathitavan vipro 
maharsir nadradah prabhuh 


tathaham sampravaksyami 
yadi te Sravane matih 


Kamrnsa said: “O elephant keeper, if you are really interested to know 
about this mystery then let me tell you the story exactly as the great 
sage, Narada had narrated it.” 


Text 43 
agatah sakra-sadanat sa 
vai Sakra-sakho munth 
candramsu-sukla-vasano 
jata-mandalam udvahan 


“Narada Muni is a friend of Indra, the king of the demigods. One 
day, Narada dressed himself in cloth that was as white as moon rays 
and then came to see me from the abode of Indra. His hair was 


matted.” 


Text 44 
krsnajinottariyena 
rukma-yajnopavitavan 
dandi kamandalu-dharah 
prajapatir wwaparah 


“On his shoulder hung a deerskin. He was adorned with a fine 
golden sacred thread. He carried a stick and a water pot in his 
hands. He looked like another Prajapati.” 


Text 45 
gala caturnam vedanam 
vidvan gandharva-vedavit 
sa narado ‘tha devarsir 
brahma-lokacaro ‘vyayah 


“Narada is not only a learned scholar of the Vedic literature but also 
very great expert in the art of music. He always sings the glories of 
the four Vedas. The great sage, Narada, who wanders throughout 
the universe, came to my palace.” 


KAMSA ORDERS TWO WRESTLERS TO KILL KRSNA 


Text 46 
tam agatam rsim drstuva 
pujayitva yatha-vidhi 
padyarghyam adsanam datva 
sampravesyopavisya ha 


“As soon as he came to my residence, I greeted him with great 
respect and worshiped him with offerings of pddya and arghya. I 
took him inside my palace and offered him a comfortable seat.” 


Text 47 
sukhopavisto ‘tha munih 
prstva ca kusalam mama 
uvaca ca prita-mana 
devarsir bhavitatmavan 


“After being comfortably seated, the sage inquired about my well- 
being. After being fully satisfied by my hospitality, Narada spoke to 


+P 


me. 


Text 48 
narada uvaca 
pujito ‘ham tuvaya vira 
vidhi-drstena kharmana 
idam eham mama vacah 
Sruyatam pratigrhyatam 


Narada said: “O great hero, you have worshiped me according to 


the injunctions of the scriptures. Now, take these words of mine to 
heart.” 


Text 49 
gato ‘ham deva-sadanam 
sauvarnam meru-parvatam 
so ‘ham kadacid devanam 
samaje meru-mirdhant 


3 


83 


“The demigods reside on the golden Sumeru mountain. One day 
there was a meeting of the demigods on the peak of the mountain. 
I was also one of the persons attending that meeting.” 


Text 50 
tatra mantrayatam evam 
devatanam maya srutah 
bhavatah sanugamyaiva 
vadhopayah sudarunah 


“In that assembly of demigods and their followers, there was a 
serious discussion about the ways and means to kill you. This is what 
I had personally heard.” 


Text 51 
tatra yo devaki-garbho 
visnur loka-namaskrtah 
yo ‘sya garbho ‘stamah kamsa 
sa te mrtyur bhavisyati 


“My dear Karmsa, the eighth embryo of Devaki will be your greatest 


enemy, the universally worshipable Lord Visnu. That child will 
become the cause of your death.” 


Text 52 
devanam sa tu sarvasvam 
tridivasya gatis ca sah 
param rahasyam devanam 


sa te mrtyur bhavisyate 


“Lord Visnu is the life and soul of the demigods. He is the shelter of 


the residents of heaven and their worshipable Lord. The same Lord 
will be the cause of your death.” 


Text 53 
yatnas ca kriyatam kamsa 
garbhanam patanam prati 
navajna ripave karya 


durbale svajane ‘pi va 


KRAMSA ORDERS LW WREOTLERS SOO RT La mee ee a ee 


“Q Karnsa, you should therefore try to kill the son of Devaki. If an 
enemy is weak, or one’s relative, he should still never be shown 
mercy or neglected.” 


Text 54 
na cayam ugrasenah sa 
pita tava maha-balah 
- drumilo naéma tejasvi 
saubhasya patir urjitah 


“Ugrasena is not your actual father. Your real father is the powerful 
Drumila, the master of the airplane, Saubha.” 


Texts 55-56 
srutvaham tad vacas tasya 
kincid rosa-samanvitah 
bhiyo ‘prccham katham brahman 
drumilo nama danavah 


mama matra katham tasya 
brihi vipra samagamah 

etad icchamy aham srotum 
vistarena tapodhana 


Kamsa said: “When I heard these words of Narada, I became 
enraged. I said, ‘O brahmana, how did the demon, Drumila, become 
my father? O you who are enriched by great austerity, please tell 
me how he had sexual relations with my mother. I want to hear all 
about this from you in detail.’ ” 


Text 57 
narada uvaca 
hanta te kathayisyamt srnu 
rajan yatharthatah 
drumilasya ca matra te 
samvadam ca samagamam 


Narada said: “O King, kindly listen with rapt attention as I describe 
to you the meeting of Drumila with your mother.” 


Text 58 
suyamunam nama nagam 
tava mata rajasvala 
preksitum sahita stribhir 

gata vai sa kutuhalat 


“Once, when your mother’s menstrual period had just finished 
she went, just for the pleasure of it, to see the mountain known as 


Suyamuna, in the company of other women.” 


Text 59 
sa tatra ramaniyesu 
rucira-dvrumasanusu 
cacara naga-srngesu 
kandaresu nadisu ca 


“She climbed to the charming peak of the mountain, which was 
decorated with beautiful trees, and enjoyed walking there. She saw 


many caves and streams in that mountainous region.” 


Text 60 
kinnarodgita-madhurah 
pratisruty abhinaditah 
srnvanti kamayananir 
vacah srotra-sukhadvahah 


“At that time, she heard some pleasing words that were meant to 
agitate the mind. These words were spoken by Kinnaras and so they 
were melodious, like a song. This speech vibrated throughout the 


entire forest, filling the four directions.” 


Text 61 
barhinam caiva virutam 
khaganam ca vikiijitam 
abhiksnam abhisrnvanti 
strt-dharmam abhirocayat 


“She also heard the crowing of peacocks and the chirping of vat ae 
kinds of birds. As a result, her mind became agitated with lust. 


Text 62 
etasminn antare vdyur 
vanaraji-vinihsrtah 
hrdyah kusuma-gandhadhyo 
vavau manmatha-bodhanah 


“A cool breeze carrying the sweet aroma of flowers began to blow 
in that forest. This further stimulated your mother’s passionate 


desire.” 


Text 63 
dvirephabharanas caiva 
Radamba vayu-ghattitah 
mumucur gandham adhikam 
santatasadra-mirchitah 


“Bumblebees hovered around the fully blossomed kadamba flowers. 
Because of the cool breezes and the streams flowing through the 
forest, the kadamba flowers exuded a very strong fragrance.” 


Text 64 
kesarah puspa-varsats ca 
vavrsur mada-bodhanah 
nipa dipa wabhanti 
puspa-kantaka-dharinah 
“The fragrant flowers called ndga-kesara that agitate one’s mind were 
scattered throughout the forest. The forest appeared like the Nipa 
island, which is filled with thorny bushes with flowers.” 


Text 65 
mahi nava-trnacchanna 
Sakra-gopa-vibhusita 
yauvanastheva vanita svam 
dadharartavam vapuh 


Being covered by fresh green grass, bushes, and plants, the earth 


looked like a young girl in the prime of her youth.” 


Text 66 
atha saubha-patih sriman 
drumilo nama danavah 
bhavisyad datva-yogena 
vidhatra tatra niyate 


“In such a condition, the lord of the Saubha airplane, Drumila, who 
was considered to be a very powerful demon, appeared there, being 
sent by the creator under the arrangement of providence.” 


Text 67 
kamagena rathenasu 
tarundaditya-varcasa 
yad rcchaya gatas tatra 
suyamuna-didrksaya 
“The demon’s airplane, which could fly at will, sparkled like the 


morning sunshine. Flying in his excellent airplane, the demon came 
to the Suyamuna mountain to enjoy its beauty.” 


Text 68 
vthayasa kamagamo 
manaso ‘py asu-gamina 
sa tam prapya parvatendram 
avatirya rathottamat 


“Drumila’s airplane could fly faster than the speed of mind. The 


demon, who moved in the sky as he liked, arrived at the Suyamuna 
mountain and got out of his airplane.” 


Text 69 
parvatopavane nyasya 
ratham para-rathaérujam 
athdsau sita-sahitas 


cacara naga-mirdhani 


“Drumila left his aerial chariot, which was capable of destroying the 
chariots of the enemy, in a garden and began to wander about 0” 
the peak of the mountain, accompanied by his driver.” 


Text 70 
tato bahuny apasyetam 
kananani vanani ca 
sarvartu-guna-sampannam 
nandanasyeva kananam 


“The demon and his driver walked here and there, through many 
beautiful forests and gardens. These forests resembled the Nandana- 
kanana forest and displayed the symptoms of all seasons.” 


Texts 71-73 
ceratur naga-srngesu 
kandaresu nadisu ca 
nana-dhatu-pinaddhais ca 
srngair bahubhir ucchnitaih 


nana-ratna-vicitrais ca 
Rancanatyana-rajatan 

nana-kusuma-gandhadhyan 
nana-sativa-ganair yutan 


nana-dvya-ganatr ghustan 
nana-puspa-phala-druman 

nanausadhi-samayuktan 
rsi-siddhanusevitan 


“Drumila and his driver walked through mountain peaks, near 
caves, and along river banks. The mountain peaks were covered 
with colorful minerals so that they looked shiny, like jewels. Some 
of the mountain peaks resembled gold, silver, and black ointment. 
The entire atmosphere was saturated with the sweet aroma of forest 
flowers. There were many kinds of animals living in the forest. The 
sounds of chirping birds could be heard in all directions. Everywhere 
there were trees and plants bearing fruit and flowers. Many great 


Sages and perfect beings resided in that forest, which was filled with 
Medicinal herbs.” 


Texts 74-75 
vidyadharan kimpurusan 
rksa-vanara-raksasan 
simhan vyaghran varahams ca 
mahisan charabhan chasan 


srmarams camaran nyankin 
matangan yaksa-raksasan 

evam bahu-vidhan pasyams 
caramano nagottamam 


“They saw many Vidyadharas, Kinnaras, bears, monkeys, demons, 
lions, tigers, wild pigs, buffalos, hares, wild deer, yak, spotted 
deer, elephants, Yaksas, and nocturnal animals while wandering 
throughout the mountain.” 


Text 76 
durad dadarsa nrpatir 
devim deva-sutopamam 
kridamanam sakhibhis ca 
puspam caiva vicinvatim 
“The king of demons, Drumila, came upon the queen of Ugrasena, 
seeing her from a distance. She was playing and joking with her 


companions. As she engaged in picking flowers from the garden, 
she looked like a celestial woman.” 


Text 77 
tatas carantim susronim 
sakhibhih saha samvrtam 
drstud saubhapatir diurad 
vismayan stitam abravit 


“When Drumila, the master of the Saubha airplane, saw from a 
distance that most beautiful lady with a slender waist, surrounded by 
her many friends, he became astonished and spoke to his driver. 


Text 78 
kasyeyam mrga-savaksi 
vanantara-vicarini 
rupaudarya-gunopeta 


manmathasya ratir yatha 


Drumila said, “Who is this doe-eyed married woman, wandering 
about in this forest? She is exceedingly attractive and seems to 
possess all good qualities. She looks to me like Rati, the wife of 
Kamadeva.” 


Text 79 
saciva puruhitasya 
utaho v4 tilottama 
narayanorum nirbhidya 


sambhita vara-varnini 


ailasya dayita devi yosid 
ratnam kim urvasi 


“Alas! Is she Saci, the wife of the king of the demigods? Is she 
Tilottama, or is she the beautiful Urvasi, who manifested from the 
thigh of Lord Narayana and became the beloved queen of King 
Pururava?” 


Texts 80-81 
kstrarnave mathyamane 
surasura-ganath saha 
manthanam mandaram 
krtvamrtartham iti nah srutam 


tato ‘mrtat samuttasthau 
devi srir loka-bhavini 
narayananka-lulita kim 
srir esa varangana 
“T have heard that, to obtain nectar, the demigods and demons once 
churned the ocean of milk, using Mount Mandara as the churning 


= a AN OS 


a 42 IN VO ER 


rod. At that time, Laksmi, the goddess of fortune and benefactor 
of the entire world, appeared as a result of the churning. Laksmi 


always remains by the side of Lord Narayana. Could this beautify} 
lady be Laksmi?” 


Text 82 
nila-meghantaragata 
dyotayanty actra-prabha 
tatha yosidganan madhye 
rupam pradyotayad vanam 


‘Just as lightning sometimes appears within a cloud, manifesting 
its great effulgence, this woman, surrounded by her companions, is 
displaying her great beauty.” 


Text 83 
ativa sukumarangi 
suprabhendu-nibhanana 
drstva rupam anindyangya 
vibhranto vyakulendnyah 


“All the limbs of her body are exquisitely beautiful and her face 
shines like the full moon. While gazing at her faultless form, I have 
become captivated and my senses have become agitated.” 


Text 84 
kadmasya vasam adpanno 
mano vihvalativa me 
bhrsam krntati me ‘ngani 
sayakath kusumadyudhah 
bhitva hrdi Saran pafica 
nirdayam hanti me manah 


“Iam now overcome by lusty desires. My mind is greatly agitated. 


Kamadeva has pierced my heart, as well as all of my limbs, with his 
five famous arrows.” 


Texts 85-87 
hrdayagnir vardhayati 
ajyasikta tvanalah 
katham adya bhavet karyam 
Samartham manmathadgnina 


kenopayena kim kurmo 
bhajen mam matta-gamini 

evam bahu cintayano 
nopalabhya ca danavah 


sutam aha muhirtam tu 
tisthasva tuam ihanagha 

aham yasyami tam drastum 
Rasyeyam iti yositam 


“The fire of lust continually increases in my heart. It burns like a 
fire fed with ghee! I simply think about how to extinguish this fire 
of my lusty desires. Alas! What should I do so that this beautiful 
woman will accept me as her lover?” 


Even after considering the matter in so many ways, the demon could 
not come to any conclusion. Finally, he said to his driver, “O pious 
one, wait here while I go and see for myself whose wife this beautiful 


lady is.” 


Text 88 
pratiksamanas tisthasva 
yavad dgamanam mama 
srutvad tu vacanam tasya 
tathastv iti vaco ‘bravit 


“Until I return, wait here for me.” When Drumila issued this order, 
his driver gave his consent, saying, “So be it! I shall do as you say.” 


Text 89 
evam uktva danavendro 
gamanaya mano dadhe 


UATYUPESPTSVA OULAUEN 


dhyanam evanv acintayat 


“After instructing his driver in this way, the powerful king of the 
demons, Drumila, washed his hands and mouth and then began to 
meditate for the purpose of discovering the woman’s identity.” 


Text 90 
muhurtam dhyanamatrena 
drstam jnana-balat tatah 
ugrasenasya patniti 
pnatua harsam upagatah 


“After absorbing his mind in meditation for a few moments, Drumila 
could understand that the lady was the wife of King Ugrasena. Upon 
learning this, the demon became very happy.” 


Texts 91-92 
ugrasenasya rupam var 
krtva svam parwartya sah 
upasarpan mahabahuh 
prahasan danavesvarah 


smayamanas ca sanakair 
jagrahamitaviryavan 

ugrasenasya rupena 
mataram te vyadharsayat 


“The wicked and powerful demon then assumed the form of 
Ugrasena and approached the woman, while exhibiting a charming 
smile. While pretending to be the woman’s husband, he embraced 
her and in this way, polluted your mother’s vow of chastity.” 


Text 93 
sa pati-snigdha-hrdaya 
tam bhavenopasarpati 
Sankita cabhavat pascat 
tasya gaurava-darsanat 


KAMSA ORDERS TWO WRESTLERS TO KILL KARSWNA 395 


“Because of her great love and affection for her husband, the woman 
served the demon, Drumila, with great respect. Later on, however, 
she became suspicious due to the great burden of the demon’s 
body, and so she became frightened.” 


Text 94 
sa tam Ghotthita bhita na 
tvam mama patir dhruvam 
kasya tuam vikrtacaro 
yenasm. malinikrta 


“Finally, she pushed the demon aside and stood up in a fit of anger. 
She said, ‘You are certainly not my husband. Who are you? Whose 
sinful son are you? Why have you polluted my chastity in this way?’ 


” 


Text 95 
eka-bhartr-vratam idam 
mama sandusitam tvaya 
patyur me rupam asthaya 
nica nicena karmana 


“‘O sinful, wretched person, you have polluted my good character 
and broken my vow of chastity by assuming the form of my husband.’ 


” 


Text 96 
kim mam vaksyanti rusita 
bandhavah kula-pamsanim 
jugupsita ca vatsyami 
pati-paksair nirakrta 


“ “How will I be able to show my face to my friends and relatives? 
What will they say to me? I will have to spend the rest of my life 
being condemned by the members of my husband's family.’ ’ 


Text 97 
dhik-tuam idrsam aksantam 
duskulam vyutthitendriyam 


avisvasyam anaryam ca 
paradara abhimarsanam 


“You are the destroyer of the good name of your family. Your senses 
are uncontrolled. You are the lowest of men—a cheater, unfaithfy] 
to the principles of religion. You have spoiled the life of someone 
else’s wife. How shameful!’ ” 


Texts 98-99 
sa tam aha prasayantim 
ksiptah krodhena danavah 
aham vat drumilo nama 
saubhasya patir urptah 


kim mam ksipast rosena 
mudhe pandita-manini 
manusam patim asritya — 


nicam mrtyu-vase sthitam 


“As Ugrasena’s wife continued to condemn the demon in this way 
while profusely lamenting, he became enraged and said, ‘O foolish 
lady, you think yourself to be very chaste and intelligent. Do you 
know who am I? Iam the proprietor of the famous Saubha airplane, 
the powerful demon, Drumila. You are the wife of an ordinary 
human being. How dare you display your anger at me when your 
life is in my hands?’ ” 


Text 100 
vyabhicaran na dusyanti 
striyah stri-mana-garvite 
na hy asam niyata buddhir 
manusinam visesatah 


““Proud lady, when adultery occurs due tothe urges of uncontrollable 
desire then neither the man nor woman become polluted. There 1S 
no doubt that the intelligence of the wives of human beings remains 


> 99 


intact in such a situation. 


Text 101 
sruyante hi striyo bahvyo 
vyabhicara-vyatikramaih 
prastia deva-sankasan 
putran niscala-vikraman 


“It has been heard by me that many women, even after polluting 
their chastity, became the mothers of powerful and pious children.’ 


” 


Text 102 
ativa hi tuam stri-loke 
pati-dharmavati sati 
suddha kesan vidhunvanti 
bhasase yadyad icchasi 


“Do you think that you are the only one who is chaste and faithful 
to her husband? Are you the only one who is as pure as milk? You 
talk unnecessarily!’ ” 


Text 103 
hasya tvam itt yac caham 
tvayokto matia-kasini 
kamsas tasmad ripu-dhvamsi 
tava putro bhavisyati 


“*O lady, intoxicated with pride, you had asked, “Whose son are 
you?” Because of this, you will give birth to a son named Kamsa, who 


will destroy his enemies.’ ” 


Text 104 
sa sarosa punar bhiutva 
nindanti tasya tam varam 
uvaca vyathita devt 
danavam dhrsta-vadinam 


“Upon hearing these words of the demon, the wife of Ugrasena 
became more inflamed with rage. Condemning this so-called 


benediction, she spoke to the puffed-up demon with a heart that 
was tormented by grief.” 


Text 105 
dhik te vrittam sudurvritta 
yah sarva nindasi striyah 
santi strtyo nica-vrttah 
santi cava pati-vratah 


“*O sinful demon, I condemn this reprehensible action of yours, 
How dare you blaspheme all the women of the world? There are 
certainly some deceitful women in this world but at the same time, 
there are many cultured women who are thoroughly honest and 


9 99 


chaste. 


Text 106 ce 
yas tv eka-patnyah Ssrityante — 
‘rundhati-pramukhah striyah 
dhria yabhih prajah sarva 
lokas catva kuladhama 


“ “O disgrace of your family, remember ladies such as Arundati, 
who are absolutely chaste! These ladies sustain the inhabitants of 
all a by the strength of their chastity!’ ” 


Text 107 
yas tvaya mama putro 
vat datto vrtta-vindsanah 
na me bahumatas tu 


esa srnu capi yad ucyate 


“ “The son that you have given me, who will kill many pious men, 
will not be favored by me. Even though he is my son, I will not have 
much love and affection for him. Now, listen to what I have to say: 


39 


Text 108 
utpatsyatt puman nica 
pativamse mamadya yah 


KAMSA ORDERS TWO WRESTLERS TO KILL KRSNA _ 399 


bhavisyati sa te mrtyur 
yas ca dattas tuaya sutah 


“ “OQ low-class demon, the Supreme Personality of Godhead will 
appear in my husband's family. Know for certain that He will be the 
cause of death for the son that you have given me, as well as your 


own death!’ ” 


Text 109 
drumilas tv evam uktas 
tu jagamakasam eva tu 
tenaiva ratha-mukhyena 
divyenapratigamind 


“After Ugrasena’s wife had cursed the demon, Drumila, in this way, 
he boarded his incomparably beautiful airplane and disappeared 


into the sky.” 


Texts 110-114 
jagama ca purim dina 
mata tad ahar eva te 
mam evam uktva bhagavan 
narado muni-sattamah — 


dipyamanas tapo viryat 
saksad agnir tva jvalan 

vallakim vadyamano hi 
sapta-svara-vimircchitam 


gayano laksya-vithim sa 
jagama brahmano ‘ntikam 

Ssrnusvedam mahamatra 
nibodha vacanam mama 


tathyam coktam nadradena 
trailokyajnena dhimata 

alam balena viryena 
nayena vinayend ca 


pramanair vapri viryena 
tejasa vikramena ca 
satyena caiva danena 


nanyo ‘stt sadrsah puman 


Narada concluded by saying, “Your mother, being extremely morose, 
returned to Mathura that very same day.” 


Kamsa continued, “O elephant keeper, after describing this incident, 
the great sage, Narada, who was greatly empowered by his penance 
and who shone brightly like fire, departed for the abode of Brahma 
through the airways while singing the glories of the Supreme Lord 
and playing his stringed instrument. Whatever the great sage, 
Narada, who knows past, present and future, has told me will 
certainly come to pass. What more can I say? There is no one within 
the three worlds who can match my strength, humility, arrogance, 
power of speech, influence, truthfulness, and magnanimity.” 


Text 115 
viditua sarvam atmanam 
vacanam Sraddadhamy aham 
Rsetrajo ‘ham sutas 


tasya ugrasenasya hastipa 


“O Suita, when I consider how I possess these wonderful but 
contradictory qualities, my head bends down in respect for Narada 


Muni. There is no doubt in my mind that I am not actually the son 
of King Ugrasena.” 


Text 116 
mata-pritrbhyam santyaktah 
sthapitah svena tejasa 
ubhabhyam api vidvisto 
bandhavais ca visesatah 


“My father and mother practically deserted me from my very birth. 
Today, by my own strength, I am established as the king of Mathura. 
Not only my parents—my friends and relatives are also envious of 


” 


me. 


I EE IIE IIE EIS NEE, EEE REE AE Pak EAMES UR RS SN ERE 


Text 117 
elan api hanisyami 
yadavan krsna-paksinah 
tad imau ghatayitua tu 
hastina gopa-kilbisau 


“All the members of the Yadu dynasty have joined their hands with 
Krsna. Therefore, I want to destroy both the Yadu dynasty and 
the cowherd community by squeezing them under the feet of your | 
powerful elephant.” 


Text 118 
tad gaccha gajam aruhya 
sankusa-prasa-tomarah 
sthiro bhava mahamatra 
samaja-dvari ma ciram . 
“Go quickly and bring the elephant, Kuvalayapida, beating him 
with your goad. Do not waste any time and be prepared by arming 
yourself with a sword and other weapons. Remain stationed at the 


gate to the wrestling arena.” 


Thus ends the translation of the twenty-eighth chapter of the Visnu 
Parva of Sri Harivamsa. 


Krsna Kills the Elephant, Kuvalayapida, 
at the Gate to the Wrestling Arena 


Text 1 
vaisampayana uvaca 
tasminn ahani nirurtte 
duitiye samupasthite 
apiryata maha-ranga paurair 
yuddha-didrksubhih 


Vaisampayana said: On the day of the wrestling competition, all the 
inhabitants of Mathura, who were very eager to see the exhibition 
of prowess, came to the sacrificial arena. 


Text 2 
sacitrastas tri-caranah 
sargala-dudra-vedikah 
sagavaksardha-candras ca 
sutalpottama-bhisitah 


The wrestling arena was decorated with many colorful pictures. 
There were pillars on all sides, supporting the platform. On both 
sides of the platform there were staircases and decorated entrances. 
The entire area was covered with soft carpets and pillows were 
strewn, here and there. 


Texts 3-4 
pran mukhais caru-nirmuktair 
malya-damavatamsitath 
alankriatr virajadbhih 
Saradair iva toyadath 


mancagaraih suniryuktair 
yuddhaya suvibhisitath 

samaja-vatah susubhe 
sameghaugha ivarnavah 


04 SRI VISNU-PARVA 


The main entrance to the wrestling arena faced east and the main 
gate was decorated with flower garlands and pearls. The entire 
arena appeared like a cloud in autumn. Within the wrestling arena 
were seen many famous wrestlers, nicely dressed for the occasion. It 
appeared as if a great ocean was covered by many dark clouds. 


Text 5 
svakarma-dravya-yuktabhih 
patakabhir nivantaram 
Sreninam ca gananam ca 


manca bhanty acalopamah 


There were separate sitting places arranged for the various classes of — 
people, such as artists and craftsmen. The entire area was decorated 
with colorful flags. With these flags, resembling peaks, the wrestling 
arena appeared something like a mountain. 


Text 6 
antahpura-caranam ca 
preksagarany anekasah 
rejuh kancana-citrani 


ratna-valakulani ca 


Many ladies from the royal family came there to watch the wrestling 
competition. They were decorated with gold and jeweled ornaments. 
Because of these ornaments, their faces appeared to be shining. 


Text 7 
tant ratnaugha-kiptani 
sasanupragrahani ca 
rejur javanikaksepaih 
sapaksa iva khe nagah 
There was a large flag placed on top of the wrestling arena, which 


was surrounded by colorful curtains. Because of this, the arena 
appeared something like a mountain with wings, flying in the sky. 


Text 8 
tatra camara-harais ca 
bhisanandm ca sifijitaih 
maninam ca vicitranam 
vicitras cerur arcisah 
The wrestling arena appeared very bright because of the effulgence 
emanating from the ornaments, necklaces, cémaras, and innumerable 


jewels. 


Text 9 
ganikanam prthan mancah 
Subhairastaranambarath 
sobhita varamukhyabhir 
vimana-pratimaujasah 


There were separate seats for the judges. The sheets where the 
Judges sat were covered with soft blankets and fine cloth. There 
were many young girls present, greatly increasing the beauty of the 


arena. 


Text 10 
tatrasanani khyatani 
paryankas ca hiranmayah 
prakirnas ca kuthas citrah 
sapuspa-stabakair vrtah 


The arena was filled with countless seats, golden couches, and 
Carpets, which were all decorated with bunches of flowers and 


flower petals. 


Text 11 
sauvarnah pana-kumbhas ca 
panabhiimyas ca Sobhitah 
phalavadamsa-purnas ca 
canger yah pana-yopiiah 


Pitchers of water were kept at intervals, providing the spectators 
with water to drink. They were also decorated with colorful cloths, 
There were many baskets filled with fruit kept at various places so 
that anyone who wanted fruit could take as much as he liked. 


Text 12 
anye ca marca bahavah 
kastha-sancaya-bandhanah 
rejuh prastaranas tatra 


Sataso ‘tha sahasrasah 


There were many raised platforms erected for the spectators. These 


platforms were covered with soft white cloth. Actually, there were 
thousands of these platforms. 


Text 13 
uttamagankas caiva 
suksma-jalavalokinah 
strinam preksagrha bhanti 
rajahamsa twvambare 
The ladies had separate places to sit and watch the competition. The 
ladies’ sections were covered with fine netting, through which they 


could watch the matches. The wrestling arena appeared something 
like a swan flying in the sky. | | 


Texts 14-15 
pran-mukhas caéru-nirmukto 
meru-srnga-samaprabhah 
rukma-patranibha-stambhas 


citra-niryoga-sobhitah 


preksagarah sa kamsasya 
pracakase ‘dhikam sniya 

Sobhito malyadamais ca 
nivasakrta-laksanah 


Kamsa’s section was constructed in a very distinguished manner. 
The entrance to his private section was facing east. It hada beautiful 


KRSNA KILLS KUVALAYAPIDA 407 


curtain hanging at the door. His section shone brightly, like the 
peak of Mount Sumeru. The pillars around the king’s section were 
covered with gold, making it appear very charming. Karnsa’s section 
was decorated with artistically-drawn pictures and beautiful flower 
garlands. Everything befitting a ruler of men had been placed 


there. 


Texts 16-17 
tasmin nana-janakirne 
janaugha-pratinadite 
samaja-vate samstabdhe 
kampamanarnava-prabhe 


raja kuvalayapidah 
samaja-duvan kunjarah 

tisthatv iti samajnapya | 
preksagaram updyayau 


Beginning from the morning, people came in droves. There was 
a huge commotion because of the sound made by all the people 
talking to one another. Indeed, the arena looked like a ocean, 
swollen with large waves. When everything was ready and everyone 
was comfortably seated, an announcement was made: “Bring the 
elephant, Kuvalayapida, and keep him near the gate of the arena.” 


Just then, King Kamsa arrived upon the scene. 


Text 18 | 
sa Sukle vasasi bibhrac. 
chveta-vyajana-camarah 
susubhe sveta-mukutah 
svetabhra iva candramah 


Karnsa was dressed in white garments. Servants on both sides of 
him fanned him with white camaras. His head was decorated with 
a white crown so that he appeared like a full moon surrounded by 


white clouds. 


Text 19 
tasya semhasanasthasya 
sukhasinasya dhimatah 
rupam apratimam drstua 
paurah procur jayasisah 


When King Kamsa was comfortably seated upon his throne, 
the assembled spectators happily enrouraged him by shouting, 


“Jayaljaya!” 


Text 20 
tatah pravivisur malla 
rangam avalitambarah 
tasras ca bhagasah kaksah 
pravisan balasalinah 


Thereafter, the wrestlers entered the arena, nicely dressed for the 
occasion. The wrestlers sat in the front of the arena, in three lines. 


Text 21 
tatas turya-ninadena 
ksveditasphotitena ca 
vasudeva-sutau hrstau 
ranga-dvaram upasthitau 


The sounds of musical instruments could be heard above the din of 
the crowd. At that time, the two sons of Vasudeva cheerfully arrived 
at the gateway to the wrestling arena. 


Texts 22-23 
ballavau vastra-samvitau 
sura-candana-bhisitau 
urdhvapidau sragapidau 
bahu-Sastrakriau yamau 


asphotayantav anyonyam 
bahu caivargalopamau 

tav Gpatantau tvaritau 
pratisiddhau varananau 


tena mattena nagena 
codyamanena vai bhrsam 


The two brothers, Krsna and Balarama, were dressed in beautiful 
garments, like cowherd boys. Their foreheads and bodies were 
smeared with sandalwood paste. Their heads were adored with 
flowers garlands, as were Their chests. The only weapons They carried 
were Their mighty arms. They appeared like twin brothers. They 
playfully struck each other on the back and arms to exhibit Their 
challenging mood. As the two all-attractive brothers approached, to 
enter the main gate, They were obstructed by the king of elephants, 
Kuvalayapida. The gigantic elephant had been placed there to kill 
Krsna and Balarama. 


Text 24 
sa matta-hasti dustatma 
krtva kundalinam karam 
cakara codito yatnam 
nihantum bala-kesavau 


The intoxicated elephant was by nature very mischievous. Being 
goaded by his keeper, Kuvalayapida raised his trunk in an attempt 
to kill Krsna and Balarama. 


Text 25 
tatah prahasitah krsnas 
itrasyamano gajenavai 
kamsasya tan matam caiva 
jagarhe sa duratmanah 


Being threatened by the elephant, Krsna simply laughed while 


condemning sinful Kamsa’s tactics. 


Text 26 
tvarate khalu kamso ‘yam 
gantum vaivasvata-ksayam 
yo mam anena nagena 
pradharsayitum icchatt 


ERM 


WON Ek Yaw AN UY AN SS 


He said, “Karnsa must be very anxious to go to the abode of Yamaraja 
For this purpose, he has tried to have Me crushed under the feet OF 


this elephant.” 


Text 27 
sannikrste tato nage 
garjamane yatha ghane 
sahasotpatya govindas cakre 
talasvanam prabhuh 


Thereafter, when the elephant charged Krsna while roaring 
terrifyingly, the Lord dodged him by jumping into the air as He 
angrily challenged him. 


Text 28 
ksveditasphotita-ravam 
krtvad nagasya cagratah 
karam sastkaram tasya 
pratiyjagraha vaksasa 


Krsna roared like a lion and clapped His hands and then deftly 
erabbed the elephant by its trunk and pressed it to His chest. 


. Text 29 
—- visanantarago bhutva 
punas carana-madhyagah 
babadhe tam gajam krsnah 
pavanas toyadam yatha 


Krsna carefully positioned Himself and then suddenly went between 
the elephant’s tusks and underneath his body, between his two front 
legs. There, He began to harass the elephant, just as strong wind 
disturbs clouds in the sky. 


Text 30 
sahastagrad viniskranto 
visanagrac ca dantinah 
vimuktah padamadhyac ca 
krsno dvipam apothayat 


KWRSNA KILLS KUVALAYAPIDA 411 


After a few moments, Krsna came from underneath the elephant’s 
stomach and began pulling its tail. 
Text 31 
so ‘tehayas tu sammiudho 
hantum krsnam asaknuvan 
gajah svesv eva gatresu 
mathyamano rarasa ha 


The huge elephant soon became exhausted, all his attempts to 
kill Krsna having failed. Being dragged to the ground by Krsna, he 
loudly trumpeted. 


Text 32 
papata bhiumau janubhyam 
dasanabhyam tutoda ca 
madam susrava rosac ca 
gharmapaye yatha ghanah 


Being dragged by Krsna, the elephant fell to its knees and its tusks 
struck the ground, causing it severe pain. Streams of saliva came 
from the elephant’s mouth, as torrents of water come from the 


clouds in the rainy season. 


Text 33 
krsnas tu tena nagena 
kriditua sisu-lilaya 
nidhanaya matim cakre 
kamsa-duistena cetasa 


Krsna battled the elephant as a child might play with a toy. To 
exhibit His anger toward Karmsa, Krsna decided to kill the elephant, 


Kuvalayapida, without further delay. 


Text 34 
sa tasya pramukhe padam 
krtva kumbhad anantaram 
dorbhyam visanam utpatya 
tenaiva praharat tada 


NS 


Srt Visnu-PARVA 


Krsna placed His right foot on the elephant’s forehead and pulled 


out one of its huge tusks. With this tusk, Krsna began to beat the 
elephant very hard. 


Text 35 
sa tena vajra-kalpena 
svena dantena kuryjarah 
hanyamanah sakrn mitram 


mumocarto rarasa ha 


Being beaten by its tusk, which was as strong as a thunderbolt, the 
elephant began to pass stool and urine while screaming in pain. 


Text 36 
krsna-janaritangasya 
kutyarasyarta-cetasah 
katabhyam ati susrava 


vegavad bhun sonitam 


Blood oozed from the wounds on the elephant’s cheeks caused by 


Krsna’s strong blows with the tusk. Thus, the helpless elephant was 
put into a most pathetic condition. 


Text 37 
langulam casya vegena 
niscakarsa halayudhah 
satla-prsthardha-samlinam 


vainateya tvoragam 


Meanwhile, Balarama grabbed the elephant’s tail and began to 


pull it with great force. It appeared as if Garuda was pulling a huge 
serpent, half of whose body was hidden within a mountain cave. 


Text 38 
tenaiva gaja-dantena 
krsno hatva tu dantinam 
jaghanaika-praharena 


gajarohanam ulbanam 


KRSNA KILLS KUVALAYAPID, 413 
After killing the elephant, Krsna did not S 
elephant keeper. With a powerful blow of th 
sent the proud trainer to the abode of Yamar 


Pare the life of the 
e elephant’s tusk, He 
aja. 
Text 39 

so “rtanddam mahat krtua 

vidanto dantinam varah 
papata sa mahamatro 

vajra-bhinna ivacalah 


The king of elephants, Kuvalayapida, who had very powerful tusks, 
screamed loudly as it fell to the ground, like a mountain after bein 


struck by Indra’s thunderbolt. 8 


Text 40 
tatas tau totanangani 
pragrhya rana-karkasau 
gajasya pada-raksams ca 
jaghniuh purusarsabhau 


Thereafter, the two valiant personalities, Krsna and Balarama, picked 
up broken pillars and killed the other attendants of the elephant. 


Text 41 
tams ca hatva vivisatur 
madhyam rangasya tav ubhau 
nasatyav asvinau svargad 


avatirnavivecchaya 


After killing the elephant and its trainer, Krsna and Balarama 
entered the wrestling arena. It looked as if the twin Asvini-kumaras 
had come down to the earth from heaven, of their own will. 


Text 42 
vrsny andhakas ca bhojas 
ca dadrsur vanamalinau 
ksveditotkrusta-nadena 
bahvorasphotitena ca 


simha-nddais ca talais ca 


harsayamasatur janam 


Krsna and Balarama, who were decorated with garlands of forest 
flowers, were greeted by the members of the Vrsni, Andhaka and 
Bhoja dynasty. By their roaring, clapping of hands, bragging, 
challenging attitude, and lion-like gait, the two brothers plunged 
everyone into an ocean of jubilation. 


Text 43 
tau drstva bhoja-rajas tu 
visasada vrtha-matih 
pauranam anuragam ca 
harsa calaksya bharata 


O descendent of Bharata, when Karmsa, the king of the Bhoja dynasty, 
whose intelligence was polluted, saw the two brothers, Krsna and 
Balarama, present in the wrestling arena unharmed, and when he 
saw that the spectators were overjoyed because of this, he became 
merged into a pool of great lamentation. 


Text 44 
tam hatva pundarikakso 
nadantam dantinam varam 
avatirno ‘rnavakaram 


samajam saha-pirvajah 


In this way, lotus-eyed Krsna killed the king of elephants, 


Kuvalayapida, and entered the crowded arena, along with His elder 
brother, Balarama. 


e i U 
Thus ends the translation of the twenty-ninth chapter of the Vist 
Parva of Sri Harivamsa. 


CHAPTER THIRTY 


Krsna and Balarama Kill Canura and Mustika 
Texts 1-4 
vaisampayana uvaca 
pravisantam tu vegena 
marutavalgitambaram 
purvajam puratah krtva 
krsnam kamala-locanam 


gaja-danta-krtollekham 
subhujam devaki-sutam 

lila-krtangadam viram 
madena rudhirena ca 


valgamanam yatha simham 
vythamanam yatha ghanam 

bahu-sabda-praharena 
calayantam vasundharam 


augrasenth samalokya 
danti-dantodyatayudham 

krsnam bhrsdyasta-mukhah 
sarosam samudatksata 


Vaisampayana said: Thereafter, lotus-eyed Krsna and His elder 
brother, Balarama, entered the wrestling arena. Their garments 
waved in the breeze and They appeared very powerful, carrying 
the uprooted tusk of the slain elephant. Krsna’s arms were covered 
by the blood of the elephant so that it appeared as if He were 
decorated with red armlets. Krsna moved about like a restless lion 
as He considered how to kill Karnsa so that He appeared like a cloud 
Moving across the sky. When Krsna loudly roared in a challenging 
mood, the earth trembled. When Ugrasena’s son, Karhsa, saw Krsna 
holding the elephant’s tusk in His hand, he became pale and his 
mouth became dry. He gazed at Krsna in utter disbelief. 


Text 5 
bhujasaktena susubhe 
gaja-dantena kesavah 
candrardha-bimba-samsakto 
yathatka-sikharo girih 


With the elephant’s tusk in His hand, Krsna appeared like 
mountain, its beautiful white peak adorned with a half moon. 


a 


Text 6 
valgamane tu govinde sa 
krisno rangasagarah 
janaugha-pratinadena 
puryamana wababhau 


As soon as Krsna entered the wrestling arena in a triumphant mood, 
all the spectators became filled with joy as they stood up to greet 
Him. 


Texts 7-8 
tatah krodhabhi-tamraksah 
kamsah parama-kopanah 
canuram adisad yuddhe 
krsnasya sumahabalam 


andhram mallam ca nikrtim 
mustikam ca maha-balam 

baladevaya sakrodho 
didesadricayopamam 


Kamsa, whose eyes were as red as fire due to anger, ordered his 
most powerful wrestler, Canura, whose body was as hard as the 
stone, to wrestle with Krsna. Karnsa then ordered the deceitful 
demon, Mustika, who possessed immense strength, to wrestle with 
Balarama. 


Text 9 
kamsenapi samajnaptas 
cantrah pirvam eva tu 


i i a ia Bee oi i de ak! Oe Ae). 4N/ 


yoddhavyam saha krsnena 
tvaya yatnavateti vai 


Karnsa had previously urged Canura to fight with Krsna without 
leniency, SO that He would be killed. 


Text 10 
sa rosena tu cantirah 
hasayitkrta-locanah 
abhyavartata yuddhartham 
apam purno yatha ghanah 


Inflamed with rage and his eyes as red as fire, Canura approached 
Krsna to begin wrestling. At that time, Canura appeared like a great 
cloud filled with water. 


Text 11 
avaghuste samaje tu 
nissabdastimite jane 
yadavah sahitas tatra 
dam vacanam abruvan 


After hearing an announcement by the king, everyone became quiet 
and sat down to watch the wrestling competition. At that time, the 
members of the Yadu dynasty began to speak amongst themselves. 


Text 12 
bahu-yuddham idam range 
saprasnikam akataram 
kriya-bala-samajnatam 
asastram nirmitam pura 


“The Organizers of this wrestling competition have made the rule 
that fighting should be done only with the strength of one’s arms 
and no weapon can be used. There are judges to decide the winners. 
No Cowardly person will be allowed to wrestle.” 


Text 13 
adbhis catisramo nityam 
vineyah kala-darsibhih 


karisena ca mallasya 
satatam satkriya smrta 


“There should be some experienced people assigned to look aft 
the wrestlers’ needs, such as removing their fatigue. The wrestli = 
ng 


arena must be covered with sufficient cow dung.” 


Text 14 
sthito bhimi-gatenaiva yo 
yatha margatah sthitah 
samyujyatas ca paryayah 
prasnikath samudéhrtah 


“It is a rule that one should only wrestle with an opponent of equal 
prowess and skill. One should only have to fight with one wrestler 


at a time.” 


Text 15 
balo va yadi va vrddho 
madhyo vapi krso ‘pi va 
balastho va sthito range 
jneyah kaksantarena vai 


“Whether a wrestler is a young boy, an elderly man, a middle-aged 
man, a weak man, ora strong man, he must have a suitable opponent 


possessing similar qualifications.” 


Text 16 
balatas ca kriyatas ca bahu- 
yuddha-vidhir yudhi 
nipatanantaram kiticin na 
kartavyam vyanata 


“The wrestlers may employ all of their bodily strength and tactics but 
only using their arms. A wrestler conversant with the rules should 
not attack a defeated wrestler who is lying upon the ground.” 


Text 17 
tad idam prastutam range yuddham 
krsnandhra-mallayoh 


KRSNA AND BALARAMA KILL CANURA AND MUSTIKA 41 
balah krsno mahan andhrah 


hkatham na sydd vicdrana 


“However, just consider this contest between Krsna and the wrestler 
from Andhra, named Canura. Krsna is still a young boy whereas 
Canura is an imposing and experienced wrestler. Why has no one 


objected to this unfair match?” 


Text 18 
tatah kilakila-sabdah 
samaje samavartata 
pravalgata ca govindo 
vakyam cedam uvaca ha 


There was a big commotion as this was discussed among the 
spectators. In the meantime, with great enthusiasm, Krsna made 


the following declaration. 


Text 19 
aham balo mahan andhro 
vapusa parvatopamah 
yuddham mamanena saha 
rocate bahusalina 
‘Lam only a small boy and this great wrestler from Andhra looks like 
a mountain. Still, let Me wrestle with this mighty-armed hero for I 


accept the challenge.” 


Text 20 
yuddha-vyatikramah kascin 
na bhavisyati matkriah 
na hy aham bahu-yodhanam 
dusayisyami yan matam 
"You can rest assured that I will not transgress the standard rules 


of wrestling. I will never act in such a way as to pollute the long- 


Standing wrestling tradition.” 


Text 21 
yo ‘yam karisa-dharmas ca 
toya-dharmas ca rangajah 
kasadyasya ca samsargah 
samayo hy esa kalpitah 


“It has been the practice of wrestlers to rub their hands and bodies 
with cow dung powder, wash their hands whenever needed, and 
apply saffron dye.” 


Text 22 
samyamah sthirata Ssauryam 
vyayamah satknya balam 
range ca niyata siddhir etad 


yuddha-vidam matam 


“To maintain self-control, to remain steady, to display prowess, to 
exercise one’s hands and legs, to use only decent language, and 
not to employ deceitful means are the six rules prescribed by the 


authorities of wrestling. By following these rules, one is sure to 
attain victory.” 


Text 23 
avairam evam yad ayam 
savairam kartum udyatah 
atra vat nigrahah karyas 
tosayisyamy aham jagat 


“Although wrestling should be performed as wholesome 
entertainment, Kamsa and Canura have organized this event 46 
a fight of envy and hatred. Therefore, the time is ripe for Me 


eliminate them and bring peace back to the minds of the people ss 
the world.” 


Text 24 
Rarusesu prasiito ‘yam 
canuro nama namatah 
bahu-yodhi Sarirena 


karmabhis catra cintyatam 


KRSNA AND BALARAMA KIL A 
as L CANURA ANp MUSTIKA 49] 


“This wrestler, Canura, was born in the kingdom of Karusa. I will 
tell you something about his behavior, so that you can carefully 


consider it.” 


Text 25 
elena bahavo malla 
nipatananiaram hatah 
ranga-pratapa-kamena 
malla-margas ca disitah 


“He has wrongly defeated many wrestlers in the arena by using 
his prowess with the help of deceitful means. Many times, after 
throwing his opponent to the ground, he has killed him. By doing 
these things, he has given the wrestling community a bad name.” 


Text 26 
sastra-siddhis tu yodhanam 
sangrame sastra-yodhinam 
ranga-siddhis tu mallanam 
pratimalla-nipataja 


“It is alright to pierce the body of an enemy in a battle where weapons 
are being employed but as soon as a wrestler throws his opponent to 
the ground in the wrestling arena, he becomes victorious.” 


Text 27 
rane vyayamanasya 
kirtir bhavati sasvati 
hatasyapi rane Sastratr 
naka-prstham vidhiyate 


“Those who are victorious in a battle by employing weapons achieve 
inexhaustible glory. Those who lay down their lives on the battlefield 
attain the heavenly planets.” 


Text 28 
rane hy ubhayatah siddhir 
hatasyeha ghnato ‘pi va 


sa hi prananitki yatra 
mahadbhih sadhu-pijita 
“In a fight with weapons, which is a matter of life and death, both 
the victor and the defeated can attain perfection. Fighting on 


the battlefield is glorified by those who are knowers of religious — 
principles.” 


Text 29 
ayam tu margo balatah 
kriyatas ca vinthsrtah 
mrtasya range kva svargo 
jayato va kuto ratth 


“However, a wrestling competition such as this is based on displaying 
one’s bodily strength and skill. Those who die in the wrestling arena 
do not attain heaven and those who achieve victory do not obtain 
eternal happiness.” 


Text 30 
ye tu kectt sua-dosena 
rajnah pandita-maninah 
prataparthe hata malla 
malla-hantur vadho hi sah 


If, to enhance the prestige of a proud king, a wrestler kills his 
opponent by employing devious means, he is considered responsible 
and thus incurs the sin of killing. 


Text 31 
evam sanjalpatas tasya 
tabhyam yuddham sudérunam 
ubhabhyam abhavad ghoram 
varanabhyam yatha vane 


As Krsna was speaking in this way, Canura angrily approached Him. 
Thereafter, a fierce duel took place that resembled the fighting of 
two elephants in a forest. 


Text 32 
krta-pratikytats citrair 
bahubhis ca sakantakaih 
sannipatavadhitais ca 
pramathonmathanais tatha 
Both wrestlers were expert in baffling the attempts of the other. They 
pulled, pushed, and tackled one another with great enthusiasm. 
They clasped one another tightly in their arms and then forcibly 
freed themselves. Sometimes, they picked up their opponent and 
dashed him against the ground. 


Text 33 
tav ubhav api samslistau 
yatha sailamayau tatha 
ksepanair mustibhis caiva 
varahoddhita-nihsvanath 


When they fought hand-to-hand, they appeared like two huge 
mountains. Sometimes, they struck one another on the chest with 
their fists and sometimes, they picked their opponent up, whirled 
him in the air, and threw him to the ground, making a crashing 


sound. 


Text 34 
kilair vajra-nipatais ca 
prasrstabhis tathaiva ca 
Salaka-nakha-patais ca 
padoddhiutais ca darunaih 


Sometimes, they jabbed one another with their elbows or knees. 
Sometimes, they slapped each other with great force. Sometimes, 
they pinched each other with their nails and sometimes, they threw 
each other to the ground, employing some special maneuver. In 
this way, both fought with great enthusiasm. 


Texts 35-36 
janubhis casma-nirghosath 
Sirobhyam cavaghattitath 


tad yuddham abhavad 
ghoram asastram bahu-tejasa 


balapranena siranam 
samajotsava-sannidhau 

arajyata janah sarvah 
sotkrsta-ninadotthitah 


Sometimes they violently struck one another with their knees and 
heads. Even though their only weapons were their bodily strength 
and skill, the wrestlers filled the spectators with fear. Everyone 
eagerly watched the contest and encouraged the wrestlers with 
their loud shouts. 


Text 37 
sadhuvadams ca maricesu 
ghosayanty apare janah 
tatah prasvinna-vadanah 
krsna-pranthiteksanah 


nyavarayata turyani kamsah 
savyena panind 


Some of the spectators, who were sitting on raised platforms, made 
comments, saying, “Very good! Well done!” Karnsa’s eyes were 
fixed on Krsna and when he heard these comments, his anxiety 
increased. Then, with a gesture of his left hand, Karnsa indicated 
that the musicians should stop playing their instruments. 


Text 38 
pratisiddhesu tiiryesu 
mrdangadisu tesu vai 
khe sangatanya-vaddyanta 
deva-tiryany anekasah 


When Karhsa stopped his musicians, immediately, in the sky, the 
demigods began to play their musical instruments. 


Text 39 
yuddhyamane hrsikese 
pundarika-nibheksane 
svayam eva pravaddyanta 
turya-ghosas tu sarvasah 


Thus, as lotus-eyed Krsna continued to wrestle, the sounds of 
musical instruments filled the four directions. 


Text 40 
antardhanagata deva 
vimanaih kama-ripibhih 
cerur vidyadharath sarddham 
krsnasya jaya-kanksinah 


While remaining invisible in the sky, the demigods, along with 
the Vidyadharas, desiring Krsna’s victory, were stationed in their 
celestial airplanes. 


Text 41 
jayasva krsna caniram 
danavam malla-rupinam 
itt saptarsayah sarve tcus 
caiva nabhogatah 


The seven great sages offered their blessings to Krsna from the sky, 
saying, “May You attain victory over this demon, Canura, who has 
now appeared in the form of a wrestler.” 


Text 42 
canurena ciram kalam 
kriditua devaki-sutah 
balam aharayamasa 
kamsasyabhava-darsivan 


Krsna, the son of Devaki, was actually concerned with the destruction 


of Karnsa and so He wrestled with Canura in a playful manner, as a 
pastime. 


aa ¥ gh 


Text 43 
tatas cacadla vasudha 
mancas caiva jughiirnire 
mukutac capi kamsasya 


papata manir uttamah 


As Krsna began to manifest His unlimited prowess, the earth began 


to shake, the platforms began to move, and the precious jewels fel] 
from Kamsa’s crown. 


Text 44 
dorbhyam anamya krsnas 
tu cantram Sirna-jivitam 
praharan mustina mirdhni 


vaksasyahatya januna 


Being repeatedly struck by Krsna, Canura’s strength began to 
diminish. Then, with His powerful arms, Krsna pulled Canura to 


the ground and after kneeling on his chest, began to strike his head 
with powerful blows. 


Text 45 
nihsrte sasru-rudhire 
tasya neire sabandhane 
tapaniye yatha ghante 
kaksopani vilambite 


As a result, tears and blood poured out from Canura’s eyes and 


mouth. Then, his eyes came out from their sockets, appearing like 
two golden bells hanging from a rope. 


Text 46 
papata sa tu rangasya 
madhye nihsrta-locanah 
caniro vigata-prano 
jrvitante mahitale 


After a few moments, the demon, Canura’s, eyes lost all luster as the 
life-air departed from his body and he fell down dead in the middle 
of the wrestling arena. 


Text 47 
dehena tasya mallasya 
canurasya gatayusah 
sanniruddho maha-rangah 
sa Saileneva laksyate 


As the gigantic body of the demon lay upon the ground, it appeared 
as if a mountain had fallen, obstructing all the pathways. 


Text 48 
rauhineyo hate tasmims 
cantre bala-darpite 
jagraha mustikam range 
krsnas tosalakam punah 


After Krsna killed Canura, who had been very proud of his bodily 
strength, Balarama, the son of Rohini, caught hold of Mustika while 
Krsna turned to contend with the demon, Tosala. 


Text 49 
sannipate tu tau mallau 
prathame krodha-mircchitau 
sameyatam rama-krsnau 
kalasya vaSsavartinau 


nirghaiavanatau bhutva 
ranga-madhye vavaigaiuh 


Before the wrestling match had begun, the two demons, Canura 
and Mustika, were very enthusiastic. They were filled with anger as 
they began to fight with Krsna and Balarama. However, when their 
strength began to fail, another demon, named Tosala, challenged 
the two brothers in the wrestling arena. 


Text 50 
krsnas tosalam udyamya 
giri-srngopamam bali 
bhramayitva Sata-gunam 
nispipesa mahitale 


Powerful Krsna easily lifted Tosala, whose gigantic body was like 
a mountain peak, whirled him around and around, more than a 
hundred times, and then smashed him to the ground. 


Text 51 
tasya krsnabhipannasya 
piditasya baliyasah 
mukhad rudhiram atyartham 


upjjagama mumirsatah 


Being smashed by Krsna in this way, the practically lifeless demon 
began to vomit blood profusely from his mouth. 


Text 52 
sankarsanas tu suciram 
yodhayitua maha-balah 
andhra-mallam maha-mallo 


mandalani vyadarsayat 


Meanwhile, unlimitedly powerful Balarama engaged with Mustika, 


the wrestler from the province of Andhra, displaying His great skill 
in the art of fighting. 


Text 53 
mustinatkena tejasvi 
sasanistanayitnund 
Strasy abhyahanad viro 
vajreneva mahda-girim 


When Balarama struck a blow to Mustika’s head with his powerful 
fist, it made a sound like a thunderbolt. Indeed, it appeared as if 
lightning had struck a mountain peak. 


KRSNA AND BALARAMA KILL CANURA AND MUSTIKA 499 


Text 54 
sa nispatita-mastisko 
visrasta-nayano bhuvi 
papata nihatas tena 
tato nado mahan abhit 


As a result of this blow, the demon’s head cracked and started 
bleeding profusely. The demon’s eyes came out from their sockets 
as he fell to the ground dead, making a loud crashing sound. 


Text 55 
andhra-tosalakau hatva 
krsna-sankarsanav ubhau 
krodha-samrakta-nayanau 
ranga-madhye vavalgatuh 


After killing the two demons from Andhra, Mustika and Tosala, the 
two brothers, Krsna and Balarama, whose reddish eyes made Them 
appear very angry, awaited further challengers in the wrestling 
arena. 


Text 56 
samajavato nirmallah so 
‘bhavad bhima-darsanah 
andhre tada maha-malle 
mustike ca nipatite 


However, after the death of these two demons, many of the 


other wrestlers fled from the arena out of fear, making it appear 
desolate. 


Text 57 
ye ca sampreksaka gopa 
nanda-gopa-purogamah 
bhaya-ksobhita-sarvangah 
sarve tatravatasthire 


“RINE 1 INE WD aN ek ok IN OW! 2K 


The cowherd men, headed by Nanda Maharaja, who were Sitting 
as spectators, had remained silent all the while, being very fearfy] 
while watching the violent wrestling matches. 


Text 58 
harsajam vari netrabhyam 
varsamana pravepati 
prasravotpidita krsnam 
devaki samudaiksata 


Tears of jubilation flowed from Devaki’s eyes as she watched her 
victorious son. Milk flowed from her breasts due to great affection 
for Krsna as she gazed upon Him with unblinking eyes. 


Text 59 
krsna-darsana-jatena 
baspenakuliteksanah 
vasudevo jaram tyaktva 
snehene tarunayate 


Vasudeva was so pleased while watching Krsna that his eyes were 
constantly filled with tears. It appeared that he had thrown off his 
old age and regained his youthful appearance. 


Text 60 
vara-mukhyas ca tah sarvah 
krsnasya mukha-pankajam 
papurhi netra-bhramarair 
nimesantara-gamibhih 


The ladies in the audience spent their time simply relishing the 
sweetness of Krsna’s lotus-like face. Their eyes appeared just like 


bumblebees, darting here and there. 


Text 61 
kamsasyatha mukhe svedo 
bhri-bhedantara-gocarah 
abhavad rosa-niryasah 
krsna-sandarsanenitah 


KRSNA AND BALARAMA KILL CANURA anp MUSTIKA 431 


On the other hand, as evil-minded Kamsa continued to watch 
Krsna, his entire body became pale, his mouth dried up, and his 
brow became covered with perspiration. 


Text 62 
kesavaya sadhtimena 
YOSA-NISVASA-VAYUNGA 
diptam antargaiam tasya 
hrdayam manasagnina 


The hatred that Kamsa had always displayed towards Krsna was now 
replaced by mental agony in the form of smoke, air, and fire that 
burnt his heart. 


Text 63 
tasya prasphuritausthasya 
suinnalikatalasya vai 
kamsa-vaktrasya rosena 
rakta-suryayate vapuh 


Kamsa’s lips trembled with anger and his forehead was soaked with 
perspiration. Because of his pent-up rage, Kamsa’s face looked like 
a red sun. 


Text 64 
krodha-raktan mukhat tasya 
nihsrtah sveda-bindavah 
yatha ravikara-sprsta 
vrksavasyaya-bindavah 


The drops of perspiration on Karnsa’s red face looked like dewdrops 
that appear on the leaves of trees during winter. 


Text 65 
so ‘inapayata sankruddhah 
purusan vyayatan bahtin 
gopav etau samajaughan 
niskramy etam vanecarau 


£32 


Sei Visnu-Parva 


Becoming excited with rage, Karnsa ordered the remaining wrestlers 
to eject the two brothers, Krsna and Balarama, who were residents 
of the forest, from the arena. 


Text 66 
na caitau drastum icchami 
vikrtau papa-darsanau 
gopanam api me rajye na 
kascit sthatum arhati 


(Kamsa said:) “These two have become demented. It is a sin to even 
look at Them. I do not want to see Their inauspicious faces. I wiil 
not allow any of these cowherd men to reside within my kingdom.” 


Text 67 
nanda-gopas ca durmedhah 
papesv abhirato mama 

ayasair nigadakarair 
loha-pasair nigrhyatam 


“Wicked-minded Nandaisa cheater who has always given me trouble. 
He habitually speaks in a deceitful manner. Therefore, arrest him, 
bind him in chains, and keep him in a prison cell.” 


Text 68 
vasudevas ca durortto 
nityam dvesakaro mama 
avrddharhena dandena 


kstpram adyaiva sasyatam 


“Sinful Vasudeva has always been envious of me. I order you to 


severely punish him without leniency, considering him to be an 
elderly personality.” 


Text 69 
ye ceme prakria gopa 
damodara-parayanah 


hnyantam gdava etesam 
yac castt vasu kincana 


“Take all the cows, wealth, and whatever else these cowherd men 
of Vrndavana have in their possession. Their fault is that 


they have 
taken shelter of my enemy, Damodara.” 


Text 70 
evam ajnapayanam tam 
kamsam parusa-bhasinam 
dadarsayastanayanah krsnah 
satya-parakramah 


While issuing these harsh orders to his servants, sinful Karnsa angrily 
looked at Krsna, who is always fixed in the truth. 


Texts 71-73 
ksipte pitari cukrodha 
nanda-gope ca kesavah 
jnaiinam ca vyatha drstva 
visanjnam caiva devakim 
sa simha iva vegena 
kesavo jata-vikramah 
aruruksur maha-bahuh 
kamsa-nasartham acyutah 


ranga-madhyad utpapata 
krsnah kamsadsanantikam 

asayjad vayunad “ksipto yatha 
khastho ghanaghanah 


When Krsna heard Karnsa insult His father, Vasudeva, and His foster- 
father, Nanda Maharaja, in this way, he became enraged. Seeing 
how His friends, relatives, and parents were being offended, Krsna 
decided not to delay any further in dealing with Karhsa. Krsna, who 
never fails in His determination, jumped onto Karhsa’s platform, 


Just as a cloud quickly moves across the sky, being driven by a strong 
Wind. : 


Text 74 
dadrsur na hi tam sarve 
ranga-madhyad avapluiam 
kevalam kamsa-parsvastham 
dadrsuh pura-vasinah 


The spectators could not understand how Krsna suddenly appeared 
before Kamsa. All they could see was that Krsna suddenly challenged 
Kamsa in an angry mood. 


Text 75 
so ‘bi kamsas tatha “yastah 
paritah kala-dharmana 
akasad iva govindam mene 
tatragatam prabhum 


Karmsa, who was under the control of eternal time, became 
bewildered. He thought that Krsna must have come from the sky 
to attack him. 


Text 76 
sa krsnenayatam krtva bahum 
pangha-sannibham 
murdhajesu paramrstah kamso 
vai ranga-samsadi 


With His unlimitedly powerful hand, Krsna caught hold of Karnsa 
by the hair, as everyone looked on. 


Text 77 
mukutas capatat tasya 
kancano vajra-bhisitah 
_ Strasas tasya krsnena 
paramrstasya panina 
When Krsna grabbed Kamsa in this way, the golden crown that was 


decorated with diamonds and pearls feli from the king’s head onto 
the ground. 


KRSNA AND BALARAMA KILL CANURA AND MusSTIKA 435 


Text 78 
sa graha-grasta-kesas ca 
kamso niryatnatam gatah 
tathaiva ca visammidho 
vaikalyam samapadyata 


Karhsa appeared paralyzed, as if he had been attacked by an 
jnauspicious planet. He remained motionless, being perplexed, not 


knowing what to do. 


Text 79 
nigrhitas ca kesesu 
gatasundha nihsvasan 
na Sasaka mukham drastum 
kamsah krsnasya vai tada 


Karnsa appeared to be almost devoid of life as Krsna forcefully 
pulled him by the hair. He began to breathe heavily and couldn’t 
bear to look at Krsna’s face. 


Texts 80-81 
vikundalabhyam karnabhyam 
oa china-hadrena vaksasa 
pralambabhyam ca bahubhyam 
gatrair visrta-bhusanath 


bhramsitenottariyena 
sahasavalitananah 

cestamanah samaksiptah 
kamsah karsnena tejasa 


son Cautiful earrings fell from his ears. The necklaces on His chest 

oo here and there. His arms hung by his sides like two 

floor. His = Ornaments from his body were scattered over ss 

Karhsa see ee the ground. As Krsna continued to drag him, 
Hot resist but fell to the ground with a loud thud. 


Text 82 
cakarsa ca maha-range 
mancan niskramya kesavah 
kesesu tam balad grhya 
kamsam klesarhatam gatam 


Krsna dragged Kamsa into the wrestling arena. Krsna again caught 
hold of Kamsa’s hair and proceeded to drag the king around the 
wrestling arena. 


Text 83 
krsyamanah sa krsnena 
bhoja-rajo maha-dyutih 
samajavate partkham 
deha-krstam cakara ha 


Being mercilessly dragged by Krsna, greatly powerful Karmsa of the 
Bhoja dynasty was put into a pathetic condition. His entire body 
became bruised and began to bleed. 


Text 84 
samajavate kriditva 
vikrsya ca gatayusam 
krsno visarjayamasa 
kamsa-deham adiratah 


After dragging Karhsa’s almost lifeless body in a playful manner, 
Krsna left him in the middle of the wrestling arena. 


Text 85 
dharanyam mrditah sisye 
tasya dehah sukhocitah 
kramena viparitena 
pamsubhih parusikriah 


The same body with which Karnsa had enjoyed royal happiness 


was now lying unattended on the ground. For a heroic king, such a 
insult was worse than death. 


KRSNA AND BALARAMA KILL CANURA AND MUSTIKA 


Text 86 
tasya tad vadanam syamam 
suptaksam mukutam vind 
na vibhati viparyastam 
vipalasam yathambujam 


Because his shoulder was broken, Kamsa could neither sit up nor 
stand straight. His black face devoid of a crown looked like a lotus 
flower without its petals. 


Text 87 
asangrama-hatah kamsah 
sa banair apantksatah 
kesa-grahan nirastasur 
vira-margan nivakriah 


In this way, Karnsa was killed without putting up a fight. His body 
had not been injured by any weapon but it was full of scratches and 
bruises due to being dragged by Krsna. In such a condition, Karnsa 
gave up his life, being unable to die like a hero. 


Text 88 
tasya dehe prakasante 
sahasa kesavarpitah 
mamsaccheda-ghanah sarve 
nakhagra jivitac chidah 


Karhsa’s body displayed many marks caused by Krsna’s nails. Blood 
came from all over his body, spilling onto the ground. 


Text 89 
tam hatuva pundarikaksah 
praharsad dviguna-prabhah 
vavande vasudevasya 
padau nihata-kantakah 


Having killed sinful Kamsa, Krsna felt great jubilation. After 
eliminating Karnsa, who was like a thorn in the side of the people 


437 


4388 SRI VISNU-PARVA 
of the world, Krsna offered His obeisances at the feet of His father, 
Vasudeva. 


Text 90 
matus ca Sirasa padau 
nipidya yadu-nandanah 
sasiticat prasravotpidaih 
krsnam adnanda-nihsrtaih 


Thereafter, Krsna, the beloved child of the Yadu dynasty, bowed 
down to His mother, touching His head to her feet. At that time, He 
became drenched by the milk that poured from mother Devaki’s 


breasts. 


Text 91 
yadavams cava tan sarvan 
yatha-sthanam yathavayah 
papraccha kusalam krsno 
dipyamanah sva-tejasa 


Krsna, who looked jubilant and victorious, also greeted and inquired 
about the well-being of the other members of the Yadu dynasty, 
according to their age and position. 


Text 92 
baladevo ‘pi dharmatma 
kamsa-bhrataram trjitam 
bahubhyam eva tarasa 
sunamanam apothayat 


Meanwhile, Balarama, the personification of religion, effortlessly 
killed Karnsa’s powerful guard, named Sunama, simply by means of 
His powerful arms. 


Text 93 
tau jitari jita-krodhau 
cira-viprositau vraje 
svapitur-bhavanam virau 
jagmatur hrsta-manasau 


KRSNA AND BALARAMA KILL CANURA AND MUSTIKA 439 


The heroic brothers, Krsna and Balarama, who never failed to 
conquer Their enemies while They remained absorbed in Their 
pastimes in Vrndavana, joyfully went to the residence of their father, 


Vasudeva. 
Thus ends the translation of the thirtieth chapter of the Visnu Parva 


of Sri Hanivamsa. 


