
M ENGLISH TRANSLATION 

OF 

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA 

WITH 


A rULL AND COMPREHENSIVE INTRODUCTION, ADDITIONAL TEXTS, 
, DIFFERENT READINGS, NOTES, COMPARATIVE VIEWS, 
INDEX, GLOSSARY AND PLATES 


IN THREE VOLUMES 


EDITED liY 

KAVIRAJ KUNJA LAL BHISHAGRATNA, M.R.A.S. 


VoL II. 

NIDANA-STHANA, S'ARIRA-STHANA, CIIIKITSITA- 
STHANA AND KALAPA-STHANA. 


CALCUTTA 1 

PUBLISHED BY THE AUTHOR, 
No. 10, KASHI GHOSE’S LANE 

igii 

All Rights Reserved, 



PRINTED BY M. BHATTACHARYYA, AT THE BHARAT MIHIR PRESS, 
25, ROY BAGAN STREET, CALCUTTA. 



'PREFACE. 


It is with mingled feelings of pain and 
pleasure that we now place before the public the 
Second Volume of our English Translation of 
the Susruta Samhita, The arduous task of com- 
piling a connected and succint history of any 
part whatever, of the ancient Hindu System 
of Medicine — requires greater leisure and more 
extensive reading than we can lay any pre- 
tension to. Years of patient study and constant 
discourse with our sainted preceptor the late 
lamented Mahamahopadhyaya Kaviraj Dwaraka 
Nath Sen, Kaviratna, that refulgent link of the 
golden chain of -the- Dhanvantaric succession, 
have enabled us, however, to 'grasp the leading 
facts, and, during the last feW years we have 
worked continuously, in moments snatched from 
the practice of an anxious profession that knows 
no respite, to arrange these facts in their present 
form. It breaks our heart . to record the sad 
departure of our Venerable Acharyya from this 
sublunary sphere to a land “from whose bourne 
no traveller e’er returns.’’ 

It is hardly necessary for us to reply to those 
critics who, through their ignorance of the original 



( 2 ) 

Sanskrit works, persist in describing Ayurveda 
as an empirical system destitute of Anatomy, 
Physiology or Pathology in any scientific sense. 

It behoves us, however, in this preface to meet 
some of the charges which have been brought 
against us. 

Exception has been taken to our not includ- 
ing in the opening stanza the usual invocation 
to the Supreme Self (for a successful completion 
of the work) although it has found its way into 
almost all the printed editions of the work extant. 

Now the stanza referred to finds no place in 
the various manuscript copies of the original 
work which are in our possession, or on which 
we have been able to lay our hands. The work 
was first put into print by the late Dr. Madhu- 
sudan Gupta and we believe that it was only 
in this printed edition that the benedictory 
address in question appeared for the first time, 
and that it has since crept, by the process of 
circulation, into subsequent printed editions. 

In this opinion we are supported by the fact, 
that in none of the various commentaries and anno- 
tations on the Susruta Samhita is any mention 
made of the line in question, whereas, had it been 
the opening stanza of the original work, it would 
certainly have received at least a passing notice 
at the hands of the commentators, however easy 
or simple it might have been. Further, were it 
composed by Susruta himself, it would not have 



( 3 ) 


been in the form in which we find it in the printed 
editions. The ancient sages used invariably 
the auspicious expression “WWW*.” or 
and the like, when commencing a work and 
never invoked any particular deity for a happy 
termination of their undertaking.^^ These are 
the reasons which have led us to omit the 
passage in our present translation. 

Another objection raised by a certain section 
of the community is that we should not have at 
all undertaken to translate the work into the 
English language. Their contention is that the 
Ayurveda, being an integral portion of the 
Eternal V edas, should, on no account, be 
rendered into a Mlechchha Bhdshd and thus made 
accessible to the public at large, irrespective 
of caste or creed. 

Such an objection, at this time of the day, is, 
to say the least, most puerile ! T ruth is truth, and 
latitudes and longitudes are not its boundary 
lines. The Vedas themselves have been trans- 
lated into many European languages. To keep 
the truths promulgated by our ancient sages con- 
fined within the coterie of the privileged classes 
and thus to deprive the educated public of the 


* Thus :~ 

'd) — Charaka Samhita. 

{^) “wft — Kanada Vaiseshika Sutra 

(0 Vedanta Sutra. 



( 4 ) 

benefit of such truths would certainly be a 
sacrilege. In giving preference to English as 
the medium of translation we have been actuated 
by more reasons than one. 

It cannot be gainsaid that English has now 
become almost the lingua franca of the world, 
and to disseminate the ancient wisdom of India 
throughout the world, we could not have selected 
a medium better than the English languao’e. 

Besides this, we have been actuated by the 
hope of drawing the direct attention of our be- 
nign Government to the scientific value of our 
system of Medicine by the adoption of such a 
procedure. 

Here we must not stop without expressing 
our sincere and hearty thanks to our learned and 
valued friends Kaviraj Jogindranath Sen, M.A., 
Vidyabhusana, Kaviraj Jnanendranath Sen, B.A., 
Kaviratna and Professor Satyendranath Sen, 
M. A., Vidydvagisa, who have rendered us material 
help in the publication of this volume. We must 
freely admit that but for the active and continued 
co-operation of the above-named gentlemen we 
could not have brought out this volume so 
promptly and successfully. Our thanks are also 
due to Dr. S. Sanyal, B.Sc., L.M.S. for his kind 
Help, to Dr. S. N. Goswami, B.A., L.M.S. for 
his kindly supplying us with materials for writing 
the Introduction, and to our readers for their 
kind encouragement. 



( 5 ) 


In conclusion, we implore our readers to 
excuse the errors of omission and commission 
which are inevitable in the execution of such a 
huge work, more especially when the author is 
encumbered with- the responsible duties of his 
profession involving, as they do, the life and 
death of persons entrusted to his care. 


lo, Kashi Ghoshe’s Lane,-! 

Calcutta. ^ Kunja Lal Bhishagratna. 

November, igii. ^ 




INTRODUCTION. 


->—OOC>- 


Ayurveda is not 
an Encyclopsedia 
of ancient medical 
■works, but a Trea- 
tise on Biology. 


In the introduction of the first volume of our translation 
of the Susruta-Samhita we have attempt- 
ed to place before the public a correct 
interpretation of Vayu, Pitta and Kapha, 
the falsely so-called humours of the 
body* and it is a great pleasure to us, 
that our pronouncement has been very kindly accepted. In 
the introduction of the present volume we would draw the 
attention of the readers to the fact that Ayurveda is not at 
all an encyclopedic work, — an Encyclopedia of the Indian 

* Berdoe says “What is known as the Humoral Pathology formed 
the most essential part of the system of the Dogmatics. Humoral 
Pathology explains all diseases as caused by the mixture of the four 
cardinal humours, viz,, the blood, bile, mucus or phlegm and water. Hip- 
pocrates first leaned towards it, but it was Plato who devoloped it. The 
stomach is the common source of all these humours. 'When diseases 
develop, they attract humours. The source of the bile is the liver, of the 
mucus the head, of the water the spleen. Bile causes catarrhs and rheu- 
matism, dropsy depends on the spleen.” 

Be it observed that among the humours of Hippocrates there is no 
place for Vala although in point of fact both his Physiology and Patho- 
logy are to be traced to the “Tri-dhatu” of Ayurveda. The secret of 
this anomaly is that the theory of Vata was found to be a complicated one 
and Hipprocates, not being able to comprehend its original import, left 
it out and cautiously introduced, in its stead, his own theory of “water”. 
Sowe find “Humoral Pathology is not of Indian origin ; neither it is the 
same which the Indian Rishis of Rigveda developed under the name of 
Tri-dhatu. It is simply an imitation of Susruta who introduced blood 
( ) as the fourth factor in the genesis of diseases. But the bor- 

rower, in his interpretation of Susruta, had made a mess of it. He retain- 
ed blood, but substituted “water” in place of Vata, the most important 
the three, for reasons best known to him. 



11 


INTRODUCTION. 


system of Medicine in all its departments, but it is the 
Science of Life entire. 

Though it is customary and convenient to group apart 
such phenomena as are termed mental and such of them as 
are exhibited by ipen in society, under the heads of Psycho- 
logy and Sociology, yet it must be allowed that there are no 
absolute demarcations in Nature, corresponding to them, 
and so in the entire Science of Life, psychology and sociology 
are inseparably linked with Anatomy and Physiology, nay, 
more, with Pathology and Hygiene and above all with 
Treatment. In short the Biological Sciences must deal with 
whatever phenomena are manifested by living matter in 
whatever condition it is placed. Life in health ( ) as 

well as Life in disease ( ), therefore, fall within the 

scope of Biology— even life exhibited by man in Society 
( ) is not exempted from it. 


^ ’srfnnTr#?; u ii I’fT i 

In calling Ayurveda, therefore, the entire Science of Life, 

Ayurveda. the guided by any prejudice 

entire Science of of our own, but we rely solely on 
facts and figures, and these, when 
closely studied, will lead any one to arrive at the same 
conclusion, not unlike our own and to interpret Ayurveda 
as a collection of Biological Sciences in all departments. 
In the first place, for the guidance of our readers, we will 
mention that the name Ayurveda itself is a strong evidence 
in favour of its being called the Science 

Negative Eviden- . 

ces thereof Life. Secondly, we will refer to 

1. The Name it- arrangement of the subject-matter 

in the Sarira-sthdna which is popu- 
larly belived to be the anatomical portion of the book, as 
tending to the same conclusion. In 
of the suh- l^his section, chapters on Midwifery 

ject-matters. and Management of Infants follow 

close to the heels of those on Anatomy and Physiology, and 


self. 


n. 

ment 



INTRODUCTION. 


iii 


these latter again are immediately preceded by chapters 
on Psychology. This intermixture is certainly an anomaly 
and can in no wise be satisfactorily explained unless we 
have to look upon these as general truths of Biology, 
elucidated by the Introduction of special truths exclu- 
sively collected from the science of medicine — 

I To call it Descriptive Anatomy or Physiology, 
in the modern sense of the term is simply ridiculous. The 
absence of any reference to brain and 

Want of Descrip- spinal cord, to pancreas and heart, in 
tive Anatomy and ^ , . ’ , . . 

Physiology in the a book of Anatomy and Physiology is 

sth^naitsrif^— unpardonable and in the Sarira-sthana 
we feel this absence almost to despon- 
dency. Moreover, in western medical science, Grey’s Ana- 
tony and Kirke’s Physiology, for instance, in their bulk, 
exceeds, each, more than a thousand of pages and to present 
to the public, under the same name less than half a dozen 
of pages, as the result of Indian wisdom, is certainly a very 
miserable contrast — a contrast that is calculated to inspire 
no admiration, but, on the contrary, to generate in scientific 
minds an universal apathy, at least an apathy towards all that 
is connected with the system of Indian Medicine. In order 
to save our venerable Rishis from this disastrous plight, we 
announce here foremost of all, that our beloved Science 


of Ayurveda is by no means an Encyclopsedic work, but 

distinctly possesses every characteristic 

Dviden- (.j^g Science of Biology. 

I The definition The very name Ayurvada indicates 
of Ayus. , . . 

Same as Life as that it is actually a science of Ayus 

hert^lpencw^ 

same sense as Mr. Herbert Spencer 
understands by his remarkable definition of Life. 

In his masterly classification Mr. Herbert Spencer has, 
in his Biology, given, indeed, the first place to Anatomy and 
Physiology, but still it is divested of any elaborate chapters 
dealing with the subjects. 


P 



IV 


INTRODUCTION. 


In the science of Life a short reference to the structures 
of the body or its functions is quite suflRcient to illustrate 
its principles, and if we fail to find therein any discourse on 
the descriptive Anatomy and Physiology, we still consider 
that there is nothing amiss. 

But unfortunately the fate of Ayurveda is otherwise. 
Though the very name indicates that it is Biology pure and 
simple, still it is denounced for its dificiencies in Anatomy 
and Physiology, and doomed for ever., 

Sanskrit words are notorious for their confusion of 
meanings, but, as regards Ayurveda there exists no difference 
of opinion, at least, so far as the first word is concerned. 
Ayus is Ayus everywhere in Ayurveda and it is the only fault 
our venerable Rishis may be reasonably charged with, that 
they did not put themselves into any great trouble to 
explain Ayus, but, on the contrary, unlike scientific men, 
misspent their energy to ascertain the significance of the 
insignificant portion of Ayurveda, that is the meanings of the 
root ^'VidcC' in the light of Grammar. 

The scientific ear, ever unsatisfied with these grammati- 
cal eruditions, has ultimately thrust an Encyclopsedic value 
upon what is properly speaking, a book of Biology. Of course, 
there is a marked difference between thej, two. An ordinary 
treatise on Biology deals with the general truths of life, 
and does not represent, by way of illustrations, all its special 
truths, nor their practical sides, but so far as Ayurveda is 
concerned, the general truths of Biology are thrown into the 
background and the special truths, gleaned exclusively from 
the science of medicine, are given great prominence 

), so much so, that it is now regarded 
as a system of Medicine and Surgery which has neither 
Biology, nor Anatomy, nor Physiology, nor Pathology— but 
is a systematised Empiricism or Quackery. This is certainly 
a great misfortune. Apart from the name, the arrangement 
of the subject, to which we have just referred, at least, in 
the section of Sarira-sthana (the falsely so-called Anatomy of 



INTRODUCTION. 


V 


Internal evidence. 


the Hindus), — is a direct contradiction to its bieng considered 
as an EncyclopEedic work. The existence of the chapters on 
midwifery and management of infants in the same, following 
immediately the chapters on Anatomy, serves as ' a strong 
additional evidence thereof. It is an anomaly no doubt, 
that Midwifery has been offered a place in the section of 
Anatomy, but the confusion does not 

p orating Midwifery 8®^ confoundedi if we are led to 

into tMs Anatomi- believe that the science of generation 
cal section. ° ,, 

of a superior race (if we are at all 

permitted to use the term) forms, indeed, an important depart- 
ment of Practical Biology. 

From whatever standpoint we look to the question, we 
find there are grounds to lead any one to pronounce in 
our favour and to come to the conclusion at which we 
now venture to arrive. Besides these two important facts, 
we now cite the following passage as 
a strong internal evidence in favour of 
our view. Maharshi Punarvasu, after giving us a short table 
of the principal structures of the human body, remarks that 
even this reference is considered by many as superfluous, 

^Beasons for omit- an acquaintance 

Descriptive with the molecular construction of an 
organism is quite sufficient to help us 
as a reliable guide to treatment. 

The passage referred to is quoted below : — ■ 

Now we ask the reader if this is not a sufficient evidence, 
proving to the hilt, that Ayurveda is nothing but Biology 
and that we run no risk of committing a grave omission if 
the chapter on Anatomy is wholesale dispensed with from 
Ayurveda. For the improvement of this awkward position — 
that in the section of Anatomy there should be no Anatomy 
the entire credit is due to Susruta, as he has very wisely 
made the suggestion, that a knowledge of the anatomical 
structures of the body is of great value, at least so far as it 


ting 
Anatomy. 



VI 


INTRODUCTION, 


helps ihe Surgcoii!-- and the Surgeons only in their operations.’^' 
But so far as Biology is concerned v?ith medicine, Susruta 
does not forget to lay particular stress on the knowledge of 
the molecular construction of the body. The following 

memorable passages actually preached by this renowned 

Surgeon, some three hundred centuries ago, still stands as a 
model from which modern Science, even in its present ad- 
vancement, can draw inspirations. 

He says : — 

1. ^ 1 

mfiT VITO ^ i 

2. 'ilR ^l^?Ecn 1 

1 ' 

1% Viral'S^ i 

11 

That is, the protean work of the protoplasm in which the 
great Self resides cannot be detected by the body's eye ; to 
know its work, mind’s eye is necessary, along with the body’s 
eye. For acquiring efficiency in Surgery alone, the dissection 

* Susruta recommends dissection on dead human bodies and suggests 
that it is only requited of those who will practise surgery and that students 
of medicine can do without it. Herophilus practised dissection on 
living bodies and with the object of practising medicine successfully, 
but it soon fell into disrepute and did not at all influence the art of 
Medicine. He was condemmed e/en by his own pupil Philinus of cos 
who declared that all the Anatomy his vivisecting master had taught him 
had not helped him in the least in the cure of his patients. Such 
indeed was the fate of vivisection for which Europe now takes pride. 

But Susruta’s, Avagharshana is now considered by many as the only 
perfect mode of dissection ever known. It is with the help of this 
method of dissection that the layers of epidermis and deririis could be 
discovered and blood-vessels with their minute branches could be counted 
to be as many as thirty millions. Not only this, but also in the opinion of 
several European savants, Susruta still stands as a model of surgery and 
European surgery has borrowed many things from Susruta and has yet 
niany things to learn. 



INTRODUCTION. 


Vii 


of dead body (not of living body as proclaimed by 
Herophilus), nay, the Avagharshana which brings into view 


The knowledge 
of the Molecular 
Construction of the 
body is all that is 
wanted. 


the layers of the epidermis and the 
dermis, the number and branches of 
blood-vessels and nerves that lie embed- 
ded in muscles, etc-, is only necessary. 


Professor Michael Foster’s remarks in his article on 


Physiology in the Encyclopedia Britannica, to all appearnces, 
are just in the same line, if not identical with our extract, 
when he says “that the problem of Physiology, in the future, 
is largely concerned in arriving by experiment and infer- 
ence, by the mind's eye, and not by the body’s eye alone, 


assisted, as that may be, by lenses yet to be introduced 
at a knowledge of the molecular construction of the protean 
protoplasm ; of the laws according to which it is built up 
and the laws according to which it breaks down j for these 
laws when ascertained will clear up the mysteries of the 
protean work which the protoplasm does.” 

In short the knowledge of the molecular construction of 
the body is just the thing with which Biology is concerned, 
and such is the unanimous verdict both in the East as well as 


in the West, in the most ancient and in the most modern 
Sciences of the world. Now, if the ‘knowledge of the molecular 
construction of the protoplasm, of the laws according to which 
it is built up, and the laws according to which it breaks down,’ 
is all that is necessary for an accurate knowledge of Anatomy 
and Physiology, our Ayurveda is pre-eminently the Science 
we want. 


The following extracts, from Charaka Samhita, are cited 
here to prove that we are quite justified in our contention. 

2 . ^ ^ 1 

That is, the body is composed of molecules and these are 
said to be numberless, because no body can count them up. 



INTRODUCTION. 


vm 


By their union, they build up the body, and this union is 
governed by three Laws, viz,, the Laws of Vayu, Karma and 
Swabhava (which are almost equivalent to the three Biological 
Laws, i e., the law of heredity, the law of external relations and 
the law of molecular motion caused by Ethereal vibrations 
compared with which nerve-impulses — akin to electric force, — 
are grosser and coarser shocks). So far we think we have 
proved that Ayurveda, as a Biology is not defective, if it 
contains no descriptive Anatomy and Physiology — descriptive 
in the same sense as Grey’s Anatomy or Kirke’s Physiology is. 
Its Histiology is molecular; its Pathology is molecular ; its 
Physiology is molecular. Molecular in every sense is 
the Biology of the Hindus. Virtually speaking, Ayurveda is 
our Science of Life, and we will presently shew that Life 
and Ay us are identical. ^ 

The continuous adjustment of molecules, their .successive 
breaking down and building up within an organised living , 
body, without destroying its identity, is the definition of Ayus 
as suggested by Maharshi Punarvasu. 

He says 




In another place the same definition is repeated with a 
slight modification and in this he enumerates 

(consciousness) as the most distinctive 
of^yu characteristic of ,4;w. According to this 

definition, and ^pug- 

refer to an organised living body ; tgcqg; and are 

identical with processes of breaking down and building up of 
the organism without destroying its identity. The idea of 
continuous adjustment is included also in these two words. 

So we find, the definition oiAyus, as sugessted by Punarvasu, 
includes more than what is proposed in 
The same as Life. Spencer’s definition of Life. 

The words and ^{WT, as explained by the great annotator 
Chaktapani, represent two more distinct phases of Life, the 



introduction. 


ix 


first bearing upon the existence in the system of a preven- 
tive factor of putrefaction, the second 

he^slve than^Life pointing to the agent or agents that 

as defined by Mr. adjust the internal relations by deli- 
Herbert Spencer. , ... . u i 

cate touches, which professor Michael 

Foster speaks of as "continuously passing from protoplasm to 

protoplasm and compared with which the nervous impulses 

_ „ , . , , (which are perhaps electrical in nature) 

Prof. I Michael ' ^ > 

Foster on the The- are grosser and coarser shocks.” Now 

ory of Sensation, tl jagj. epithet, viz.^ as ex- 
plained by Chakrapani~‘‘^^?l1% furnishes us 

with a clue to determine what Ayus ( ) actually means. 

Our Sacred Upanishads now come for- 
the^p^M*^^^ tell us, in the first 

place, “^siTg; Jum:,” ie., Ayu and Prana 
are one and the same principle. In the second place, “g; RPii: 
^ ?rg:”, i-e, Prana and Vayu are identical. In the third place, 
W Wd t.e., Vayu is not unlike Ether. 

In the fourth place, ‘‘id gigTid”, i.e., the primitive fluid 
(according to Lord Kelvin) is divided into two parts, viz,, one 
without motion, another endued with motion. In the fifth 
place, i-e., everything in this world are 

waves of this Ether endued with motion. In the sixth place, 

rto: in^g”, i e., Vayu is the universal 
store of energy j in the Physical world it is known by the 
name of Vayu j in the Living world it is called under a 
different name and that name is Prana 

From the above short table we come to know that the 
agent that adjusts the internal relations to external relations, 
is Ayus and that Aytis is Life, and that Life is a motion of the 
great etherial fluid which is known in Sanskrit as ‘'?d” and that 

is the sum of all the various 
mitive fluid as de- energies— biological and abiological— 
^Ivin Lord which under the name of heat, light, 

electricity or consciousness, etc., manifest 
themselves both in the Physical as well as in the Metaphysical 



X 


INTRODUCTION, 


world, and that Prana is another name of the same force 
that, in acting on an aggregated living body, divides itself 
into five distinct forces, viz., Prdna, Afdna, Samdna, Uddna, 
and Vydna, and subserves the functions of correlation ( gjg; ) 
and sustentation ( ftti ) and controls oxidation (^■^). So 
Prana continuously helps to adjust, like the main-spring of a 
watch, the internal relations to the external relations. We are 
indebted to the master mind of Sankara for his able exposi- 
tion of the functions of this main-spring, 
Vrfyn and Ether. ethenal vibrations (^rpTu:) 

as transformed into the vital force in 
an organised body. We quote below what be says about it 
in his celeberated commentary on the Ved&nta Darsana. 

The five divisions _ _ ^ _ 

of Vdyu in its ac- JH*?! 'TW crsFoT snsrtr '^rj- 

ag^eg^o.^ living 

i 

That is, the primitive fluid that is endued with motion in its 
evolution of Life gets knotted into five divisions, viz , Prdna, 
Apdnn, Samdna, Uddna and Vydna, and this acting on any 
aggregated living matter is called Prana. So what we call 
Prana is not the Vayu itself, but a particular mode of its 
motion. Hence the question of identity and non-identity is a 
matter of choice. Shortly speaking, this is the Biology of 
the Hindus. This too is the sum and substance into which 
(as a department of Biology), Physiology unfolds itself. 

This too evidently serves as the line of 
Biology forms the demarcation between •''od 

SdlLe develope^d and From this too 

as so much col- Health and Disease, Hygiene and 
lateral hranc es Treatment, Psychology and Sociology 

have all their origin and start. In fact, Biology forms the basis 
upon which the great edifice of the Indian Medical Science, as 
a collateral branch, has been developed. 
Conclusion. general truths of Biology a.e ail 

there in the Ayurveda ; but the special truths from medicine 



INTRODUCTION. 


XI 


Hydropathy. 


have been given so great a prominence that the real character 
of the book has been over-shadowed and it has been trans- 
formed into a Science of Medicine. 

* * * • * * * 

With a view to convey to the minds of our readers 
an idea of the different branches of the Medical Science 
which developed as a’collateral branch of this great Science of 
Life, we would here touch upon a few of them in passing. 

Magnetism had formed its way into the therapeutics of 
the ancient Hindus and animal magne- 
Magnetism. extensively practised in 

India long before they were recognised by Mesraer in Germany 
and subsequently by John Elliotson in England. 

The Indian writers on Medical Science of the good 
old days have described in length the 
medicinal properties of the waters of 
the principal rivers, lakes, water-falls and mineral springs of 
the country that were known at the time and their respec- 
tive curative powers as applied to various ailments that 
human flesh is heir to. This goes a long way to establish 
the fact that Hydropathy was known in India long before 
it was even dreamt of in the Western world. 

The ancient Hindu sages from time immemorial had 
been cognizant of the benefits of 
massage and shampooing and taken 
to practising them. Whereas, it is but of late that the 
advantages of these methods have begun to be appreciated 
by the Western Medical School and it no longer hesitates 
to acknowledge them as efficacious therapeutic agents. 

The Science of begetting healthy and beautiful children, 

„ which is just beginning to receive atten- 

Genesiology. • .u 

tion in other countries was not un- 
known to the ancient Hindus, and Manu in his Mdmva- 
dhartna-Sdsira has laid down special injunctions which still- 
form an integral part of the domestic life of the orthodox 
section of the community. As a matter of fact, they knew 

C 


Massage. 



INTRODUCtiON. 


xii 

that mental impressions of the parents at the lime of con- 
ception exercise a great influence over the future destiny 
of the child in embryo. 

Thus we read in the Sastras : — “A woman, though at a 
distance, conceives a child of the shape of the person she 
loves ardently and thinks of at the time. Just as a tree that 
grows is not different from the parent tree whether we plant 
a branch or sow a seed, so the main features of the child 
partake of the features of its father, though there might be 
slight changes due to the soil.” 

The subtle soul co-operates with the Manas (the mind) ; 
the mind co-operates with the senses ; the senses perceive 
objects ; all this takes place in little or no time. The above 
is the connection between the soul and objects around us. 
What is there which the mind cannot comprehend ? There- 
fore, wherever the mind enters, the soul follows it. 

“The soul being subtle, whenever it enters another soul, 
requires some time and an effort of the mind to know the 
latter. The soul, which intensely meditates on an object, 
assumes the shape of that object.’’ etc, etc. 

In a book entitled Bhoja-Prabandha being a collection 
of the anecdotes realating to the reign 
Ansesthetics. by Pandita Ballala 

there is narrated the detail of an interesting surgical opera- 
tion which had been performed on the Raja, who was suf- 
fering from an excruciating pain in the head. All the 
medical aid obtaining at the same time was availed of, but 
in vain and his condition became quite critical when two 
brother physicians accidentally arrived in Dhar, who were 
duly called in. These physicians, after carefully examining 
the patient, held that unless surgically treated no relief 
could possibly be afforded to the Royal patient. Accordingly 
they administered an anesthetic called Sammohini with 

* Baraha Mihit’s Brihat Samhilk Book, II. Chapter Ixxv- 

Verses 1-3. 



INTRODUCTION. 



a view to render him insensible and, when completely 
under the influence of the drug, they trephined his skull, 
removed the malignant portion of the brain, the actual seat 
of the complaint, closed and stitched up the opening and 
applied a healing balm to the wound. Then they adminis- 
tered a restoration known as Sanjivani to the patient, 
who, thereupon, regained consciousness and felt quite at 
ease. This incident (as narrated by Thakur Saheb of 
Gondal in his Short History of Aryan Medical Science) 
goes to prove that the attendant physician of Buddha, is 
likewise recorded to have practised cranial surgery writh the 
greatest success. Instances of successful cases of abdominal 
section are also not rare. Thus it will appear that the ancient 
Indians knew and successfully practised surgical operations 
which are regarded now-a-days as the greatest triumphs of 
modern surgery. The purpose of chloroform in the palmy 
days of yore was used to be served by Sammohini, but 
there is hardly a drug known to modern Pharmacopseias, 
corresponding whith Sanjivani which certainly lessens the 
chances of deaths that at present sometimes occur under 
auEesthetics. 


Let them, who allege that the Hindu system of the heal- 
ing Art is unscientific, now pause and reflect ere they make 
such an unwarranted and irresponsible assertion. How can a 
system which contains so accurate an account of the unions of 
bones and ligaments, anastomoses of nerves, veins and 
arteries, etc , and which assures the world of the existence of 
three crores and a half of veins and arteries in the human 
body giving facts and figures thereof with such mathe- 
matical precision, be regarded as being unscientific ? 

It is certainly an undeniable fact that one of the colossal 
achievements of modern Western Medical Science is its 
Anatomy; but the point at issue is whether the process of 


Bissection. 


laying open the structures of the body 
with the lancets, is at all a satisfactory 


method. For, is it not a fact that the finest and the 



XIV 


INTRODUCTION. 


minutest arteries of the skin are never disclosed, if the scalpel 
is used so recklessly to remove the skin all at once and 
not allowed to go deeper into the muscles to expose the 
minute branches of blood vessels and nerves that may happe i 
to lie embedded therein ? But, on the contrary, look at the 
process promulgated by Susruta for demonstrating practical 
Anatomy 1 Its originality and perfection beats hollow all 
the known methods, although it was discovered in almost the 
pre-historic age. The process prescribed by the Hindu 
system is as follows : — Cover a dead body with Kusa grass 
and place it at the edge of the water of a rivulet. After 
.three days take it out carefully, and gradually take off 
the succsesive layers of the epidermis and dermis and 
of the muscles beneath by gently and lightly rubbing it over 
with a soft brush. Thus the smallest and the thinnest 
arteries, which have by tliis time swelled and obtained a 
.distinct existence are made palpable everywhere even to 
the minutest. 

The process is termed, as we have pointed before, Ava- 
gharsliana by Susruta. The Western method might be an 
easier and a more off-hand one, but by no means precise. 

Though the merit of discovering this mode 
Avagharshana. dissection is due to Susruta, we are all 

blind to it and call Hippocrates the father of Medicine ! It is 
generally believed that with a view to further his researches 
and perfect his knowledge, it is Hippocrates who inaugurated 

the system of dissection of dead human bodies and he did 

the work secretly. Credulous people may lend a willing ear 
to such assertions but the fact is, that it was not till a century 
later that Hirophilus openly resorted to dissection of 
human bodies and thereby earned an undying fame in 
Europe, obliterating Susruta’s name for ever, though, virtually 
speaking, he (Susruta) was the pioneer of dissection and 
figured in the world more than a millenium before the 
advent of Hippocrates and oyer eleven centuries prior to the 
age of Herophilus, 



INTRODUCTION. 


XV 


It would not, perhaps, be out of place here to mention 
that Dr. A. F. E. Hoernle, M. A , F. R. S, C. I. E., Ph. D., 
in his recent publication on Hindu Osteology, has proved it 
to the hilt, how systematic, scientific, unerring and exact were 
the researches of the ancient Hindus and what a mine of 
resplendent truths lay imbedded in them ! We, in our Intro- 
duction of the first volume of this work, have tried to prove 
how very superb, salutary and supremely happy was the theory 
of Vayu, Pitta, and Kapha promulgated by Susruta. There 
we have incidentally mentioned that the Science of Embryo- 
logy was not unknown to the Hindu sages. In the present 
volume we mean to prove to a point that the main principles 
promulgated in the A^natomy, the Physiology and the Patho- 
logy of Susruta yield in no way to the principles on those 
subjects included by the modern Western Scientists and 
investigators. On the other hand, we boldly affirm that in the 
theories propounded by Susruta some two thousand years 
back there lies a fund of truths which might well throw a flood 
of light on the field of labour of the modern scientific men of 
the West. For is it not a fact that the theories of Vamana 
(causing to eject the contents of the stomach by mouth), 
Virechana (causing the evacuation of the intestines), Nasya 
(causing to inhale through the nose), A7itivdsana and Asihd- 
pana which, in ancient India, had earned the appellation of 
Pancha-Karma, and had gained universal prevalence, and were 
extensively practised by oriental physicians from time im- 
memorial, have, of late, been hailed by the medical authorities 
of the day as the most approved and commended mode of 
treatment. 

Sceptics who care nor to examine and weigh solid facts, 
bluntly allege that the Ayurvedic system is not based 
upon experiment and observation — the key-stone of all 
true Science, and such being the case its Anatomy, Physio- 
logy, Pathology and Therapeutics are all erroneous. The 
suggestion, cruel and baseless as it is, originally emanated 
from an eminent Indian physician who has earned an pn- 


xvi 


INTRODUCTION. 


enviable reputation by writing a Treatise on Hindu Materia 
Medica. He says : — "It (the Ayurvedic system) is built not 
so much upon experiment and observation as upon an 
erroneous system of Pathology and Therapeutics.'' But such 
an expression would not stand the light of day. Indeed 
none but the ancient Hindu sages did set a high value on 
experiment and observation, and where they did not claim 
some occult knowledge or intuition, it is upon these two that 
they mainly ba^ed all their knowledge. 

The Materia Medica of the Hindus is really a marvel. 
Its description of the properties of drugs belonging to the 
animal, vegetable and mineral kingdoms, and of the articles 
of food essential to the maintenance of health and strength, 
its selection of the specific dietaries and elimination of what 
are prohibited in particular ailments are every day being 
found correct. The European preparations of Indian drugs 
and diets are corroborative evidence thereof. The theory 
adopted by the ancient Hindus as the basis of their investiga- 
tion is that every substance, whether regitable or animal, 
possesses five properties namely, — Rasa, Guna, Viryya, Vipaka 
and Prabhava which lenses alone cannot reveal, nor the body’s 
eye after observation and experiment made upon rats and 
rabbits. And those who have opportunities of studying and 
practising both the Eastern and Western Medical Science 
assert that the ancient Medical Science of the Hindus once 
reached the highest standard of excellence and perfection in 
Materia Medica, Therapeutics and Hygiene and was simply 
unrivalled and unapproachable, as it blended Philosophy with 
Science— the mind’s eye with the body's eye, 

A dispassionate examination of these facts (and such as 
can be multiplied to any extent), will convince an impartial 
reader that Ayurveda, as we find it described in Charaka 
Samhita and Susruta Samhita, if approached in a spirit of 
fairness and enquiry, might reveal the germs of not a few 
of the marvellous achievement of the present age in the 

. r If O — - — «■« >4 i'/'N 

UUluaiii 


INTRODUCTION. 


xvii 

Student a vast scope and varied materials for comparision 
between the Eastern and the Western systems, and render 
material help in improving upon the one with the aid of 
the other, and this to the benefit of the suffering humanity at 
large. 

Lastly it is our prayer, that if Western Medical Science 
was ever anywise, directly or indirectly, benefited by the 
ancient Medical Science of the Hindus, it is but meet 
and fair that the former should come forward to render all 
possible aid to her parent Science, and that as it is almost 
dying now for want of aid and succour we look hopefully to 
our present benign Government in whose power lies the 
means of its complete regeneration. 





Sec Cliapter VI, S'arira-S'lhana. 






Vital points (Martnas) in the leg Vital points (Marmas) in the back 
(outer side). of the thigh and the leg. 

“J” indicates the points recognised in Juijutsu. 

See Chapter VI, S'.arira-Sthana. 




CONTENTS 


NIDANA STHANA. 

(Section on Pathology). 

:o: 

CHAPTPR 1. 

Diseases of the Nervous System, etc The action of the Vrfyu 
in its normal state. — The Pr^na Vayu — The Udana Vayu — The Samana 
Vayu — The Vyana V 4 yu — The Apana Vayu. — Descriptions of the nature 
of the diseases — When they are localised in the different parts of the system. 
— Pathology of VsJta-rakta — Its premonitory symptoms — Its prognosis. 
— Spasms — Convulsions — Epilepsy without Convulsions — Epilepsy with 
Convulsions. — Hemiplegia — Its Prognosis. — Wry-neck or Torticollis. — 
Facial Paralysis — Its Premonitory Symptoms — Its Prognosis. — Sciatica. — 
Erb’s Paralysis. — Synovitis of the Knee-joints. — Lameness. — Vata-Kantaka. 
— Pada-Diha — Pada-Harsha. — Ams'a-s'oshaka. — Ear-ache. — Deafness. — 
Nasal voice. — Indistinct Speech. — Tuni — Prati-tuni. — Tympanites. — Vdt^- 
shthiH. — Pratyashthild. ... ... ... Pages i — ly. 


CHAPTER II. 

Haemorrhoids Classifications — Psithology— Premonitory Symptoms. 
— Vataja Type— Pittaja Type— Kaphaja Type — Raklaja Type— Sannip^laja 
Type — Congenital Type. — Figwarts or condylomatous growths about the 
genitals. — Prognosis.',.. ... ... i8 — 24. 


CHAPTER III. 

Urinary Oalculii t — General Aitiology. — Premonitory Symptoms. — 
Leading Indications. — S'leshmaja As'mari — Pittaja As'mari — Vdtaja As'mari. 
— Seminal Concretions. — Supervening Symptoms. — Situation of the Blad- 
der. — ^How stones are formed in the Bladder. ... ... 25 — 30. 



n 


CHAPTER IV. 

Fistula-in-ano and Fistular Ulcers :—ClnssificaHons— Premonitory 
Symptoms. — Derivation of the term Bhagandara. — V.-itaja Type — Pittaja 
Type — Kaphaja Type — Sannipatika Type — Traumatic Type — S'ata-ponaka 
Type — Ushtra-griva Type — Parisrdvi Type — S’ambukavarta Tppe — Un- 
mdrgi Type. — Fistulous Pustules. — Prognosis. ... ... 3 ^ — 34 * 


CHAPTER V. 

Cutaneous Affections in general Premonitory .Sympioms— 
.^Etiology — Classifications. — Aruna-Kushtha — Audumbara — Rishya-jihva 
— Kapdla Kuslitha (Macula). — Kdkanaka — Pundarika — D.idru (ring-worm) 
— Sthuldrushka — Eka-Kushtba (Ichthydsis) — Charma-dala (Hypertrophy of 
the skin) — Visarpa-Kushtha — Parisarpa-Kushtha — Sidhma — Vicharchikd 
(Psoriasis) — Vipddikd — Ivitima (Keloid) — Pdmd (Eczema) — Kachchhu — 
Rakasd (Dry Erythema) — Kildsa. — Congenital cause of Kushtha. — 
Prognosis. — IIow Kushtha becomes contageous. — Some other contagious 
diseases enumerated. ... ... ... ... 35 — 42. 


CHAPTER VI, 

Diseases of the Urinary tracts ’.—Pathology— Premonitory Symp- 
toms. — General characteristics. — Kaphaja Type — Pittaja Type — Vdtaja 
Type.— Names sind Symptoms of Kaphaja Meha— Surd-meha— Lavana- 
meha — Pishta-meha — Sdndta-meha — S'ukra-meha. — Names and Symptoms 
of Pittaja Meha — Nila-Mcha — Haiidrd-meha — Amla-meha — Kshdra-Meha 
— Manjishthd-meha — Rakta-meha. — ^Names and Symptoms of Vjitaja Meha 
— Sarpir-meha — Vasd-meha — Kshaudra-meha — Hasti-meha. — Supervening 
Symptoms. — Kaphaja Types — Pittaja Types — Vdtaja Types. — Abscesses. — 
Carbuncles. — Pimples. — Pustules, etc., due to Prameha. — Prognosis. — 
Symptoms of Madhu-Meha. ... ... ... ... 4, ^n. 


CHAPTER VII. 

Dropsy with an abnormal condition of the abdomen: — Classifications. 

Predisposing causes. — Premonitory Symptoms. — ^Vdtaja, Pittaja and 
Kaphaja Types —Tridoshaja Typo.— Enlargement of the Spleen and the 
Liver with dropsy of the Abdomen. — Vaddha-gudodara — Parisrdvi-Udara. — 
Jalodara (Ascites). — General Characterstics of Dropsy. — Prognosis. 50 — 54. 



ni 


CHAPTER VIII, 

Palse Presentations and Difficult Labour -.—Causes.— Definition. 
—Classifications and Symptoms. —Abortion. —Miscarriage.— Prognosis. 
Csesarian Section.- ’ ••• ••• 5S-"60' 


CHAPTER IX. 

VidradM (Abscess, etc.) :— Definition and Classification— Vataja, 
Plttaja and Kaphaja Types— Sdnnipatika Type— Traumatic Type— Raktaja 
Type— Incurable type of External Abscess.— Internal Abscesses— Their 
localities.— Differentiating diagnosis of Gulma and Vidradhi. — Incurable 
Type . ... ... ... ••• ••• 


chapter X. 

Erysipelas. Sinus and Diseases affecting the mammary glands 
of women : — Definition of Erysipelas — ^Vataja, Pittaja and Kaphaja Types 
— Sdnnipatika Type — Kshataja Type. — Prognosis. — Nsidi-Vrana (Sinus). 
—Classification — Vataja, Kaphaja and Pittaja Types— Dvandvaja and 
Tti-doshaja Types— S'alyaja Type.— Stana-roga.— Breast-milk— Its 
character — Its normal and abnormal traits. — Stana- Vidradhi (Inflammation 
of mammary glands). ... ... ... ' ... 67 — 71. 


CHAPTER XI. 

Glands, Scrofula, Tumours and Goitre Dosha-origened Glands 
—Sirdja gland (aneurysm or Varicose Veins). — Apachi (Scrofula, etc.) — Its 
symptoms. — Tumour — Its symptoms — Blood-origined Tumour. — Mamsa- 
Arvuda. — Prognosis. — Adhyarvuda. — Dvirarvuda. — Cause of its not being 
suppurated. — Definition of Goitre — Its specific Symptoms — Vataja 
Goitre — Kaphaja Goitre — Medoja Goitre. — Prognosis. — General shape of 
Goitre.— ... ... ... ... 73—78. 


CHAPTER XII. 

Hydrocele, Hernia, Scrotal Tumours, Upadams'a (disease of the 
g.'nital organ) and Elephantiasis:- Classification of Vriddhi — Definition 
and Premonitory Symptoms of Vriddhi. — Sj-mptoms of Dosha-origined 
Vriddhi. — Medoja Vriddhi — Raktaja Vriddhi — Hj'drocele. — Inguinal 



iv 


Hernia. — Upadams'a — Symptoms of clifferenl Dosha-origlncc'l types of 
Upaclams'a. — Ralctaja Upadams'a. — Definition of Elephantiasis. — Causes 
and Symptoms of different kinds of Elephantiasis. — Prognosis of Elephan- 
tiasis. — Localisation of Elephantiasis. ... ... ... ■ 79 — 84. 


CHAPTER XIII. 

Diseases known by tbe general name of Ksbudra-Roga (minor 
ailments): — The Names and Symptoms of the diseases included therein. — 
AjagalHkd — Yava-prakhya — Andhalaji — ^Vivrita— Kachchhapikd — ^Valmika 
— Indra-Arriddha — Panasikd — Pdshdna-Gardabha — Jdla-Gaiddabha — Kak- 
shd — Vishphota — Agni-Rohini — Chippa — Kunakha — Anus'ayi — Viddrikd — 
S'arkardrbuda — Pamd — Vicharchikd — Rakasd — Pdda-ddrikd — Kadara — 
Alasa — Indra-lupta (Alopecia) — Datunaka — Arumshikd — Palita — Masurikd 
etc. — Tila-kdlaka — Nyachchha — Charma-kila — Vyanga — Parivartikd — Ava- 
pdtikd — Niruddha-Prakas'a — Niruddha-guda — Ahi-putana — Vrishana- 
kachchhu — Guda-Bhranis'a, ... ... ... 85 — 03. 


CHAPTER XIV. 

^uka-dosba: — Its classification. — S)'mptoms of different Types. — 
Progonsis. ... ... ... ... ... 94 — 96. 


chapter XV. 

Fracture and Dislocation, etc -.—Their Causes.— Genenal features 
of Sandhi-mukta (Dislocation). — Diagnostic Syniptons of Dislocation. — 
Different kinds of Kanda-bhagna (Fmcture) — General symptoms of Kdnda- 
bhagna. — Curable and incurable T)’pes. ... ... ... gy — loo. 


CHAPTER XVI. 

Mukba-Eoga (Diseases which affect the cavity of the mouth in 
general): — General Classification and Localisation. — Diseases of the lips. — 
Dosha-origined Types.— Raktaja Type— Mdngsaja Type— Medoja Type 
— Diseases of the roots of tbe teetb. — Their Names and specific Symp- 
toms.— Danta-Nddi (Sinus at the root of a tooth).— Diseases of the tootb 

proper. — Their Names and specific Symptoms. — Diseases of the tongue 

Their Names' and specific Symptoms. — Diseases of the Palate— Their 
Naitjes' and specific Symptoms.— Diseases of the Tbroat and Larnyx 



V 


— Their Names and specific Symptoms. — The different Kinds and Symp- 
toms of Rohini. — Diseases in the entire cavity. ... ... loi — iii. 

End of the contents of Sutra-sthaCna. 


SAEIEA STHANA. 

{Slction on Anatomy). 


CHAl TER I. 

The Science of Being in General The Twenty-four Tattwas or 
first Principles, — ^ThePtirusha or the Primordial Being or the Self-conscious 
Reality. — The Prakriti or the External Nature personified or the non- 
conscious Eternity — Traits of Commonalty and Diversity. — Comparison of 
the Philosophy of A'yurveda with that of S^mkhya as well as with the 
other branches of Philosophy. — Prakriti and Purusha how understood in 
the A'yurveda— Different kinds of Mmas (mind). — The five Primary 
Elements of Creation — Their specific function— Their mutual co-operation 
in creation, ... ... ... ... ... 113 — 121. 


CHAPTER II. 

Purification of Semen and Cataminal fluid etc. :— Derange- 
ment of Semen. — Specific treatment. — Derangement of Cataminal fluid. — 
Specific treatment. — Traits of pure and healthy Semen and Cataminal fluid, 
— Menorrhagia. — Amenorrhoea. — Their treatment. — Regimen to be ob- 
served during Menses. — Conduct of husband during the period. — Prohibited 
period. — Conception — Subsequent Conduct. — Causes of different Colours 
in the child. — About twins — Causes of the child being of Defective Organ 
~Fecundation without se.xual intercourse — Causes of Deformity in the child 
— Slate of the Feetus — Its activity while in the womb. ... 122— 133. 


CHAPTER III. 

Pregnancy, etc. ’. — Combination of Self with the Impregnated 
Matter. — Factors which determine Sex. — Period and .Signs of Menstruation, 
— Signs of Pregnancy. — Prohibited conducts during Gestation. — Develop- 



vi 


merit of the Foetus. — Longings nncl its effects during pregnancy.*— Develop- 
ment of the Foetus from the Sixth to the Eighth month. — Time of Delivery. 
— Different opinions on the formation of the Foetal body. — The solution — 
Factors respectively supplied by the Paternal and Maternal Elements, etc. — 
External Signs of Male, Female and Twin conception. ... 134-- 143. 


CHAPTER IV. 

The development of Pactors in the womb as well as the 
Pactors which contribute to the growths of its different bodily organs and 
principles ; — Different folds of skin over the foetus. — The definition of 
Kalas and their varieties. — Seat of the semen. — Why and how semen is 
discharged. — Placenta. — Formation of different limbs and organs of the 
Fa:tal body. — Sleep and its effect. — Heart and its action. — Effects of day- 
sleep. — Somnolence. — Effect of Sleep on an Encientc woman —Gnawing. 
—The temperaments. — Symptoms of Viitaja, Pittaja and Kafaja tempera- 
ments - Symptoms of Dvandvaja and Sannnipatika temperaments. — Sattvika, 
Rdjasika and Tamasika features. ... ... ... 144 — 15S. 


CHAPTER V. 

• The Anatomy of the Human body Definition of feetus.— 
Enumeration ofthe dfferent Limbs and Membeis of body. — Their Numbers — 
The Cavities or Viscera. — Channels. — ^ICandata. — ^Jdla or Ple.xuses. — ICurcha 
or Cluster. — Sevan! or Sutures. — Asthi-Sanghdta. — Simanta. — Bones of 
the four Extremeties. — Bones of the Trunk. — Bones above the Cavicles — 
Different kinds of Bones and their situation — Sandhi or Joints. — 
Joints of the four Extremities. — Sandhis of the Koshtha and Clavicles. — 
Their forms, distinctions and locations. — The Snayu or Ligaments. — 
Their Number and Situations. — Muscles. — Muscles in the extremities in 
the Koshtha — Of the Head and Neck. — Extra Muscles in Women. — The 
Vaginal Canal — The Uterus — The Womb. — Superiority of Surgery — 
Preparations of dead body — Mode of dissection. ... .. 156 — 172. 


CHAPTER VI. 

The Mamas or Vital parts of the body:— Classifications of 
Mannas — Their different Numbers. — Their Locations. — Their Names and 

Disfributions. — The different Heads of Mannas. — Qualitative Classes. 

Different opinions on Marmas. — Mannas of the Extremities. — Marmas of 
the Thorax, etc. — I^Iarmas in the Back. — ^Marmas in the Clavicular region. 
•—Their s pecific Symptoms when injured, ... ... 173 — 



CHAPTER VII. 

The Description and Classification of Sirei or the Vascular 
System; — Their Numbers and action. — Names and Classification of the 
principal Siras. — Their specific Locations. — The Pitta, Kapha, Vayu and 
Rakta-carrying Sirds. — ’Specific Colours of Sirds. — The specific Sirds not to 
be punctured. — Siras of the four E.xtrcmeties, Trunk and the region above 
the Clavicles and their roots. ... ... ... 191 — 197. 


CHAPTER VIII. 

The method of Venesection : — Persons unfit for Venesection : — 
Preliminary Rules. — The Jantra-Vidhi or how the patient should be placed 
in cases of Venesection. — Venesection in the Extremeties. — Venesection on 
the different parts of the body. — Proper and Defective Venesection — Classi- 
fication and definition of Defective Venesection. ... ... 198 — 208. 


CHAPTER IX. 

The Description of the Arteries, Nerves and Ducts Region 
and Number of Dhamanis. — Functions of the up-coursing Dhamanis. — 
Functions of the down-coursing Dhamanis. - Functions of the lateral cours- 
ing Dhamanis. — The Situation of the Srotas and the specific Symptoms 
when pierced at the roots. ... ... ... 209 — 215. 


CHAPTER X. 

Nursing and Management, etc- of Pregnant Women from the 

day of conception till parturition '.— General rules. — Especial Regimen 
during the period of Gestation. — Sign of imminent Parturition — Effects of 
premature Urging — Preliminary Measures.-- Post-parturient Measures.— 
Natal Rites. — Diet for Children. — Treatment of the Mother — Makkalla pain 
•and its tre.atraent. — Management of the Child. — Lactation. — Selection of 
Wet-nurses. — Examination, etc. of Breast-milk. — Treatment of Wet-nurses, 
•ylnfantile Diseases and their Diagonosis — Treatment of Infants. — I ifant- 
ilc Elixirs. — Nursing of child. — Symptoms when malignant stars, etc. 
strike the child.— Eductation and Marriage. — Defective Pregnancy — Its 
Symptoms and Medical treatment. — Miscarriage — Its treatment. — Manage- 
ment of Pregnancy and special Recipe for Pregnant Women according to 
c months of Gcst.atlon. ... ... ... ... 216 — 238. 

End of the contents of deCrira Sthana. 



CHIKITSITA STHANA. 

(SECTION ON TlICRArEUTICS). 

CHAPTER I. 

The two kinds of inflamed Ulcers: — The Causes, Symptoms and 
Classification of Ulcers. — Idiopathic and Traumatic ulcers. — General and 
specific Symptoms. — Symptoms of different Dosha-origined ulcers. — Symp- 
toms of Blood-otigined ulcers. — Symptoms of Buddha Vrana. — Thcr.apcu- 
ticS. — The sixty different Factors of mcdicaltrcatmcnt of ulcers. — Upadrava 
or the Supervening Symptoms of ulcers. ... ... 269—264. 


CHAPTER II. 

The medical treatment of Traumatic Wounds or Sores:— 
Different Shapes and Classifications of Sores. — Their definitions — Their 
specific Symptoms — Their treatment. — Treatment of Cuts or Incised 
Wounds. — Treatment of Excised Wounds. — Treatment of Viscera when 
perforated. — Subsequent treatment. — ^Treatment of Diabetic Ulcers. — 
Treatment of Ulcers due to Kushtha or malignant Ulcers. ... 265 — 278. 


CHAPTER III. 

The medical treatment of Fractures and Dislocations 
Symptoms of incurable fractures. — Bandage. — Diet. — Defective Bandaging 
— ^^Vashing. — Prrgnosis. — Treatment of fractures in particular lir.rbs. — 
Gandha-Taila. — Suppuration of fractured Bones — Symptoms of Complete 
union of fractured Joints. ... ... ... 279 — 288. 


CHAPTER IV. 

The medical treatment of Vdta-Vyddhi or Nervous disorders ; 

— Nervous affection of the A'mas'aya — Nervous affections of the Pakvds'aya 
— S'alvana-upanaha. — General Measures beneficial to Vata-Vyadhi. — The 
Tilvaka-Ghrita. — The Anu-Taila. — The S'ata-paka and Sahasra-paka Taila, 

The Patra-lavana. — The Kanda or Sneha-lavana. — The Kalyanaka- 

lavana. ••• — ... ... 289 — 296. 



ix 

CHAPTER V. 

TEe medical treatment of Mah^-V^ta-Vyadhi Causes of 
Vata-Rakta. — Its definition — Premonitory symptoms — Specific features of 
Vata-Rakta — Prognosis. — Preliminary remedial measures. — Plasters etc. — 
Treatment of Vata-Rakta with a preponderance of different Doshas. — The 
five Ptadehas— Guda-Haiitaki and Pippali-Vardhamana Yogas. — Diet. — 
Regimen of conduct. — The Medical Treatment of Apatanaka. — Traivrita 
Ghrita. — Treatment of Pakshaghata. — Treatment of Manya-stambha. — 
Treatment of Apatantraka. — Treatment of Ardita. — Kshira-Taila. — 
Tympanites etc. — Hingvadi-vati. — Symptoms and Treatment of Uru- 
stambha. — Therapeutic properties of Guggulu. ... ... 297 — 315, 


CHAPTER VI. 

The medical treatment of Areas (Hsemorrhoids) ;--Generai 
remedial measures. — Application of Kshara (Alkali). — Symptoms of 
satisfactory, excessive and defective Cauterisation. — Diet — Rectal Speculum. 
— Plasters. — Treatment of Internal piles. — Dantyarishta. — Abhayarishta. — 
Bhalldtaka-yoga. — Other forms of Bhallataka-yoga. — Regimen of diet and 
conduct. ... ... ... ... ... 316-328, 


CHAPTER VII. 

The medical treatment of As'mari (Urinary Calculns, etc) 

Different modes of treatment in As'mari. — Treatment of Vataja, Pittaja 
and Kaph.aja As'mari. — Alkaline treatments. — Modes of Surgical operations. 
— Prognosis. — Lithotomic operations. — Post-surgical measures. — Surgical 
treatment in Seminal Concretions. — Diet. — Parts to be guarded in Litho- 
tomic operations. ... ... ... ... 329-337. 


CHAPTER VIII. 

The medical treatment of Bhagandara (Fistula-in-ano, etc) 

Classification. — General treatment. — Specific measures. — Different Forms 
and Karnes of incision. — Treatment of Ushtra-griva. — Treatment of 
Patisr.avi. — Bhagandara in infants — Treatment. — Treatment of traumatic 
type.— Tre.itmcnt of Tri-doshaja type. — Syandana Taila. — Description of 
instrument. — Regimen of diet. ... ... ... 33S-345. 


B 



X 


CHAPTER IX. 

The medica] treatment of Eushtha (Cutaneous Affections in 
general) : — Pathology. — Conduct of diet and regimen. — Regulation of 
diet and conduct. — Preliminary tre.atmcnt. — Treatment of Doshaja types. — 
Maha-tikta Ghrita. — Tikta-Sarpih. — Medieinal plasters. — ^Alkaline treat- 
ment. — Treatment of S'vitra. — Nila-Ghrita. — Maha-nila Ghrita. — Treatment 
by Bleeding, Emetics and Purgatives. — ^\^ajraka Taila. — hlaha-Vajr.ika 
Taila. — Treatment by Khadira. — Diet.... ... ... 346-361. 


CHAPTER X. 

The medical treatment of Mahd-Kushtha (Major Cutaneous 

Affections). — Mantha-Kalpas. — Diet. — Medicated Arishtas, Asavas, Sur.ns 
(Wine) and Powders. — Medicinal Ayas-kriti. — Aushadha Ayas-kriti. 
— Mahaushadha Ayas-kriti. — Khadira preparations. ...Khadira-Sara pre- 
parations. ... ... ... .... _ ... 362-371. 


CHAPTER XI. 

The medical treatment of Prameha (Diseases of the Urinary 
tracts): — Two-fold Classifications, Causes and Symptoms.— Forbidden 
articles of food and drink.— Articles of diet.— Preliminary’ treatment. — The 
five medicinal remedies. — Specific treatment of Kaphaja Meha — Specific 
■ treatment of Pittaja Meha. — Specific treatment of Vataja Meha. — Palli- 

r 

ative measures — Medicinal Arishtas, Asavas, Yavagus, etc. — Mode of treat- 
ing a poor Prameha-patient. ... ... ... ... 372-378. 


CHAPTER XII. 

The medical treatment of Prameha-Pidakd (the Abscesses or 
Eruptions which mark the sequel of a case of Prameha) : — Curable cases of 
Prameha-Pidaka. — Treatment. — Dhanvantara-Ghrita. — Fomentations for- 
bidden in cases of Madhu-meha. — S'ala-sdradi Avaleha. — Nav.dyasa Churna. 
— Loharishta. — Traits of cure. ... ... otq.-jSs 


CHAPTER XIII. 

The medical treatment of Madhu-meha S'ild-jaiu— its origin, 
properties' and use.— The Mdkshika-Kalpa.— The Tuvar.aka-Kalpa. 2S6-391. 



CHAPTER XIV, 

The medical treatment of XJdara (Dropsy with an abnormal 
condition of the Abdomen) : — Symptoms of curable and incurable types. — 
Diet of articles forbidden. — Treatment of Vataja, Pittaja and Kaphaja 
types. — Treatment of Dushyodara. — General treatment ofUdara. — Haritaki 
Ghrita. — Maha-vriksha Ghrita. — Chavya Ghrita. — Anaha-Vartis. — Treat- 
ment of Plihodara. — Shat-palaka Ghrita. — Treatment by Venesection. — 
Treatment of Baddha-Gudodara. — Treatment of Parisravi Udara. — Treat- 
ment of Udabodara. — Treatment by tapping. — Diet 392-403. 


CHAPTER XV. 

The medical treatment of Mudha-(5arbha (Difficult and mal- 
presentalion of the Fcetus and Difficult Labour) ; — Varieties of Mudha- 
Garbha.— Incantations.— Postures of the Foetus.— Operations involving 
destruction of the Foetus. — Craniotomy. — After-measures. — Diet and regi- 
men of conduct.— The Bala Taila. — The Bala-Kalpa. ... 404-411. 


CHAPTER XVI. 

The medical treatment of Vidradhi (Abscesses) and Turn ours:— 
Classifications. — Treatment of Vataja, Pittaja and Kaphaja Vidradhi. — 
Katanjadya Ghrita. — Treatment of traumatic and blood-origined types. — 
Treatment of internal Vidradhi, — Treatment of Vidradhi. — Treatment of 
Majja-jata Vidradhi. ... ... ... ... 412-417. 


CHAPTER XVII. 

The medical treatment of Erysipelas etc., Sinus and Diseases 
of the Mammary Glands : — Classifications of curable and incurable 
types of Visarpa (Erysipelas)— Treatment of Vataja and Pittaja Visarpa. — 
Gaury,ndi Ghrita. — Treatment of Kaphaja Visarpa. — Treatment of Nadi- 
Vrana (Sinus). — ^Treatment of Vataja, Pittaja, Kaphaja and S’alyaja Nddi 
(Sinus). — Alkaline treatment — Treatment by Plug-stick — Bhallatakadya 
Taila— Treatment of Stana-Roga — Purification of breast-milk — Surgical 
trc.itmcnt of Stana-Roga. ... ... ... ... 418-426. 


CHAPTER XVIII. 

The medical treatment of Granthi (Glandular Swellings), 
Apachi (Scarvi), Arvuda (Tumour) and Gala-ganda (Goitre) :— General 



ti'eatment of GrrantM — Treatment of Vataja, Pittaja, Kaphaia and Medoja 
Granlhi.— Medical treatment of ApacM.— Surgical treatment of Apachi.— 
Arvuda— Treatment of Vataja, Pittaja, Kaphaja and Medoja types of 
Arvuda (Tumour).— Gala-ganda— Treatment of Vataja, Kaphaja and 
Medoja types of Gala-gatlda (Goitre). ... ... ... 427-43S. 


CHAPTER XIX. 

Ihe medical treatment of Vriddlli (Hernia, Hydrocele, Scrotal 
Tumour, etc.), ITpadamsa (Diseases of the Genital Organ) and S'lipada 
(Elephantiasis) Treatment of Vataja, Pittaja, Raktaja, Kaphaja, 
Medoja and Mutraja VriddM. — Treatment of Antra- Vriddhi; — Treat- 
ment of “Upadams a — General treatment — Treatment of Vataja, Pittaja, 
Kaphaja, Tridoshaja and Raktaja types of Upadanrs'a. — Treatment of 
dlipada — General treatment — Treatment of Vataja, Pittaja and Kaphaja 
types of S'lipada— Alkaline remedies. ... ... ... 439 — 449. 


CHAPTER XX 

The medical treatment of Kshudra-Roga (Minor Ailments) 
Treatment of Aja-gallika and Yava-jjrakhya. — Treatment of Vivrita, etc. — 
Treatment of S'arkararvuda, etc. — Treatment of Pada-dari, etc. — Treat- 
ment of Alasa and Kadara. — Treatment of Baldness and Alopecia, etc. 

Treatment of Datunaka, etc. — ^Treatment of Jatu-mani, etc — Treatment of 
Yuvdna-pidaka — Treatment of the Retroflexion of the Prepuce. — Treatment 

of the Constriction or Stricture of the Urethr.a — Its surgical treatment. 

Treatment of the Stricture of the Anus, etc. — 'J'reatment of Valmika, Ahi- 
putana and the Prolapsus of the Anus. ... ... 450-458. 


CHAPTER XXL 

The medical treatment of the Sores on the Penis produced 
hy the ^uka : — The specific treatment of the different types of S'uka- 
dosha — General treatment. — Prognosis. ... ... 459.461. 


CHAPTER XXII. 

The medical treatment of the Affections of the Month 
Treatment of Vataja, Pittaja, Kaphaja and Medoja types of Oshtha- 



kopa— Treatment of the diseases of the Danta-mula.— Treatment of 
Danta-Veshta etc. — Paridara — S'aushira — Upakus'a — Danta-Vaidarbha — 
Adhimamsa. — Treatment of Danta-nsidi. — Treatment of the diseases of the 
different types of Tooth proper. — Treatment of Tongue-diseasss — 
Treatment of Vataja, Pittaja and Kaphaja types of tongue-diseases — 
Treatment of the different types of Tdlu-gata diseases — Treatment of 
Throat-diseases. — Treatment of Vataja, Pittaja, Kaphaja and Raktaja 
types of Rohini. — Treatment of the different types of the Sarva-sara 
Mukha-Roga. — Incurable types of Mukha-Roga. ... ... 462-474. 


CHAPTER XXIII. 

The medical treatment of Sopha (Swellings).— Classifications of 
general S'opha — Its causes. — The specific symptoms of Dosha-origined 
types of S'opha. — Symptom of Vishaja S'opha — Complications — Prognosis. — 
The Special treatment of the different types of S'opha. — General remedies. 
—Diet. ... ... ... ... ... 475-477- 


CHAPTER XXIV. 

The Rules of Hygiene and the Prophilactio Measures 
Tooth-brushing — Cases where tooth-brushing is forbidden. — Eye and Mouth- 
w.ashing. — Collyrium. — S'iro’bhyanga. — Combing. — Anointing. — Parisheka. 
— .A.ffusion. — Effusion. — Anointments. — Prohibitions of Anointments, etc. — 
Physical Exercise. — Rubbing and Friction. — Massage. — Bathing. — Prohibi- 
tion of Bathing. — Anulcpana. — A'lepa. — Food. — Pravata and Nivata. — ■ 
Sleep — Gcner.al Rules of Conduct. — Rules for Drinking Water, etc. — Curd 
(Dadhi) — When and How to be taken. — Women unfit to visit. — Evil 
Effects of the foregoing Abuses. ... ... 480-502, 


CHAPTER XXV. 

The medical treatment of a Variety of Diseases Diseases of 
the Ear-lobes — Classification — Causes and Symptoms — General treatment — 
Specific treatment. — Treatment of Palita. — Treatment of V3-anga, etc. 



xiv 

CHAPTER XXVI. 

Tlie medical treatment for inc inS the Strength and the 
Virile Power of weak persons : — Definition of Vdji-Karana — Means of 
V:iji-karana. — Causes and Symptoms of the six Forms of Sexual incapacity. 
— Incurable types. — Remedies — Utlcarika — Pupalika. — Cakes etc. 510-514. 


chapter XXVII. 

The Recipes and Modes of using Elixirs and Rejuvenators 

The Human Organism — Which will make it invulner.ablc to the inroads of 
any Disease and Decay. — Time of using Rasayana. — Rasayana for Mental 
and Physical maladies — Vidanga-Rasayana — Vidanga-kalpa. — Kas'marya- 
kalpa. — Bala-kalpa. — Ati-bala, Naga-bala, Vidari and S'atavari-kalpa. — 
Varahi-kalpa, — Use of S'ana (-seeds). ... ... ... 515-52!. 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 

The Elixirs and Remedial Agents which tend to improve the 
Memory and invigorate the ?ilenta! Faculties as well as to increase the 
Duration of Human Life ; — S'vetdvalguja-Rasayana— Krishnrtvalguja- 
Rasrlyana — Manduka-parni-Rasayana — Brahmi-Rasdyana — Brohmi-Ghrita 
— ^Vachd-Riisayana — 'S'ata-pAka-Vacha-Ghrita. — pleasures for prolonging 
life. — Uses of Gold. ... ... ... ... 522-523. 


CHAPTER XXIX. 

The Restorative and the Constructive Agents which arrest 
innate morbific tendencies and decays : — Classifications of Soma. — Mode of 

using the Soma. — Regimen of Diet and Conduct after taking Soma. Its 

Therapeutic effects. — Distinctive features of the Soma-plants Their des- 
criptions — Their Habitats. ... ... ... ... tr-Jo-cqS, 


CHAPTER XXX. 

The Tonic Remedies which remove Mental and Physical 
Distress ; — Persons unfit for the use of Ras%na — Names of the healing 

drugs. — The Mode of their use. — Regimen of Diet and Conduct Dosage 

Therapeutic effects. — Differentiating traits. — ^Mode of Culling the above 
drugs. — Their Habitats. — The common Habitat of all the Oshadhis. 

S39-54S- 


XV 


CHAPTER XXXI. 

The medicinal uses of Sneha, etc, Classifications of Sneha— 
Description of Sneha — The specific uses. — Measures of drugs. — The 
Kash^ya-paka-Kalpa —The Sneha-paka-Kalpa.— Alternative methods.— 
Application of Sneha according to specific Dosha and Season. — Degrees of 
Cooking a Sneha — Distinctive traits of the complete cooking of a Sneha. — 
Process of Internal Use of Sneha — The Specific Uses of Clarified butter — 
The Dosage. — Evil Effects of over-dosage — Sadyah-Sneha. — Forbidden cases 
of Sneha-pana. — Good Effects of .Sneha-pana. ... ... 546 "SS 7 * 


CHAPTER XXXII. 

The medical treatment by measures of Sveda (Fomentations, 
Diaphoretic measures etc. ): — Classifications of Sveda. — Its Specific Appli- 
c.ations. — Effects of Sveda. — Prohibited cases of Sveda. — Symptoms of per- 
fect and imperfect Sveda. — iMeasures to be followed after Sveda. 558-564. 


CHAPTER XXXIII. 

The Distresses which prove amenable to the use of Purga- 
tives and Emetics : — Importance of Purgatives and Emetics. — j\Iode of 
application of Emetics. — Symptoms of e.vcessive, satisfactory and deficient 
Emetics. — Effects of satisfactory Emetics. — Cases where Emesis is forbid- 
den. — Cases where Emesis is recommended. — IMode of administering 
Purg.atives. — Classifications of Koshtha — Diet. — Benefits of proper Purga- 
tion. — Persons who should not be purged. — Persons who should be purged. 
—Necessity of applying Sneha before ithc administration of Purgative or 
Emetic. ... ... ... ... ... 565-5S9- 


C HAP TER XXXIV. 

The treatment of the Disorders resulting from an Injudici- 
ous Use of Emetics or Purgatives Their Classes.— Causes and treat- 
ment. — Evils of an Unpurged Residue of a Purgative or Emetic. — Evils of a 
Digested Purg.ativo, etc. — Evils of insufficient or e.\cessis-e e.-:pu]sion of the 
Doshas. — Flatulent Colic. — Partial and Deficient Medication (Ayoga). — 
Over-drugging with purgatives, etc- (Ali-yoga). — Il.vmorrhage due to 
cxcc.ssivc Vomiting or evce.ssive Purging (Jivad.ana), — ^Jiva-s'onita, how 
to he known. — Flatulent distention of the Abdomen (Adhmana). — Cutting 



XVI 


pain in the Anus, etc. — Di'senteric stools (Parisrava). — Diarrhoea 
(Pravahikd). — Overwhelming the heart. — Retention (Vibandha) of flatus, 
stool and urine. ... ... ... ... 577 — 5S9. 


chapter XXXV. 

The Dimensions and Glassifications of a Netra and a Vasti 
with their therapeutic applications -.—The importance of Vasti- 
Karma. — The application of Vasti in different diseases. — Dimensions of the 
Pipe. — Materials of the Pipe. — Construction of the Vasti. — Classifications of 
the Vasti. — Nomenclature of the Vasti. — Application of Niruha-Vasti and 

f 

Asthapana-Vasti. — Their therapeutic Effects — The different Defects of a 
Vasti. ... ... ... ... ... 590 — 59S 


CHAPTER XXXVI. 

The medical treatment of the mishaps which are consequent 
on the Injudicious Application of the Pipe and the Vasti 

Remedies for the injudicious application of the Pipe. — Disorders resulting 
from a defective Vasti (bladder) and its contents. — Disorders resulting 
from the defective Position of the Patient. — Remedies for the Complications 
of the defective position of Niruha-Vasti and Sneha-Vasti. — Intervals for 
the application of Purgative, Emetic, Asthapana-Vasti and Anuvdsana- 
Vasti. ... ... ... ... ... 599—607. 


CHAPTER XXXVII. 

The treatment with Anuv^sana-Vasti and Dttara-Vasti-.— The 

Process of Anuvasana-Vasti — The process of preparing several medicated 
Oils and Snehas. — Proper time for the application of Sneha-Vasti. — The 
mode of applying a Sneha-Vasti. — Symptoms of insufficient, excessive, and 
satisfactory application of Anuvasana-Vasti. — Diet after the application of 
a Vasti. — The Successive Actions of a Vasti. — Distresses from Injudicious 
Application of Sneha-Vasti. — Specific Symptoms — Their remedies. — 
TJttara-Vastis— Dimensions of the Pipe of the Vasti for a Male and for 
a Female patient. — Mode of application. — Vaginal Uttara-Vasti. — Diseases 
amenable to Uttara-Vasti. ... ... ... ... 60S — 626. 



xvH 

CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

The mode of applying, as well as the treatment with a 
Nirudha-Vasti The mode of Preparing a Vasti,— The mode of Apply- 
I'ng a Vasti. — Symptoms of a satisfactory application of a Vasti. — Subsequent 
treatment and Diet — Drugs to be used in a Niruba-Vasti. — The Formula of 
a Niruba-Vasti. — The process of preparation. — The Dvadasa-Prasriti. — 
Classifications of Vastis according to the range of their therapeutic appli- 
cations. — Corrective Vastis. — Lekhana- Vasti. — Vaji-Karana-Vasti. — Vrim- 
hana-Vasti.— Pichchhila-Vasti.— Grahi-Vasti,— Sneha-Vasti.— Utkles'ana- 
Vasti. -Dosha-hara- Vasti.— Soothing Vasti.— Yukta-ratha-Vasti.—Siddha- 
Vasti. — Mustddika-Vasti. — Variations in the composition of Vastis in cases 
of persons of different Temperaments. — Nomenclature of different Vastis 
and their Specific Uses. ... ... 637 — 646. 


CHAPTER XXXIX. 

The treatment of distre.gsing Symptoms which are manifest- 
ed in a patient The quantity of diet to be taken after the exhibition 
of a Niruha-Vasti. — Internal application of Sneha after Blood-letting. — 
Preparations of different diets. — Diet to be taken according to the Dosha 
and to the Strength of the patient. — Regimen of conduct. — Articles of diet. 

647 -- 652 . 


CHAPTER XL. 

The treatment which consists in employing the Dhuma 
(Fumes), Nasya (Snuffs) and Kavala (Gargles) j— Classifications of 
Dhuma — Materials of different Dhuma- Varti. — Formation of the Pipe used 
in Dhuma-Pa'na — Mode of inhalation of different Dhumas — Prohibitive cases 
— Time of Dhuma-pana (Smoking) — The therapeutic effects of Dhuma- 
Pana— Mode of Smoking. — Snuffs and Errhines (Nasya) — The Nomen- 
clature of the term “Nasya” — Classifications of Nasya — S'irc-Virechan.a — Its 
application — Dosage of .Sneha-Nasya — Effects of proper, e.xcessive and defi- 
cient application of a Sneha-Nasya — .^vapida-Nasya — Forbidden cases. — 
Prati-marsha Nasya when to be used— Its effects. — Specific use of Sneha- 
Nasya — Kavala-graha (Gargles) — Classification — Mode of application — 
Their uses — Kavala and Gandusha distinguished — How long Kavala 
should be retained — Symptoms of satisfactory, deficient and e.vcessive 
(Targling. — Prati-sarana — Its classification and effects. ... 653 — 671. 

End of the Contents of the Ohikitsita Stha'na. 


C 



lALPASTHANA. 

(Seci’ion on Toxicology). 

CHAPTER I. 

The mode of Preserving Food and Drink from the effects of 

Poison : — The necessary qualifications of a Superintendent of the Royal 
Kitchen — The necessary features of a Royal Kitchen. — Characteristic features 
of a Poisoner. — Indications of poisoned food and drink, etc. — General 
treatment. — The mode of preparing Soup, etc. ... ... 673 — 684. 


CHAPTER ir. 

The Indications (Effects, Kalure and Operations) of SthsCvara 
Poisons : — Sthavara Poison — Its source. — Names of the diflerent Vegetable 
and hlineral poisons. — Effects of poison on the Human organism.— Effects 
of Bulb-poisons — Specific properties and actions of Bulb-poisons — Definition 
of Dushi-visha — Symptoms of weak and slow poisoning— Derivative 
meaning of Dushi-visha — Symptoms of the different stages of Sthavara 
Poisoning — The medical treatment. — Kcshatakyddi-Yavdgu — Ajcya-Ghrita 
— ^Vishdri Agada. — Treatment of the supervening Symptoms of Poisoning. — 
Prognosis. ... ... ... ... ... 6S5 — 694, 


CHAPTER HI. 

The Subject of (the nature, virtue, etc. of) Animal PoisoUS : — 
Different locations— Characteristic features and purifications ol poisoned 
Water. — Poisons in the Atmosphere and its purification. — Mythological 
origin of Poison. — Properties of Poison — Nature and Location of Snake- 
poison— General treatment of poisoning — Symptoms of taking poison 
internally. — Eat.al bites. — Prognosis, ... ... gne -q2. 


CHAPTER IV. 

The Specific Features of the Poison of a Snake-bite Clasifica- 

tions of Snakes — Classifications of Snake-bites — Their specific Symptoms 

Characteristic features of the different species of Snakes. — Features of the 
different Castes amongst Snakes, — Particular Habits of the different kinds of 
Snakes. — Names of (he different species of Darvi-kara Snakes — Names of 



XIX 


the difietent species of Mandali Snakes — ^Names of the different species of 
Rajiman Snakes— Names of the different species of Nirvisha Snakes— Names 
and Origin of the different species of Vaikaranja Snakes — Sub-families of 
the Vaikaranja Snakes. — Characteristic features of Male and Female Snakes — 
Features of <heir bites— General and specific symptoms of a bite by a Darvi- 
kara Snake— Specific symptoms of a bite by a Mandali Snake— Specific 
symptoms of a bite by a Rajiman Snake — Specific symptoms of bites by 
Snakes of different Sexes and Ages, etc.— Symptoms of the different stages 
of poisoning from the bites of a Darvi-kara Snake — Different stages of 
poisoning from the bite of a Mandali Snake — Different stages of poisoning 
from the bites of a Rajiman Snake. — 'The Vegdniara (or the intervening) 
Stages. — Different Stages of poisoning in cases of Lower Animals. — 
Different stages of poisoning in cases of Birds. ... ... 703 — 714. 


CHAPTER V. 

Tlte medical treatment of Snake-bites General treatment 
of Snake-bites. — Mantras (Incantations) — Blood-letting in Snake-bites — 
Specific treatement of the bite by a Hooded (Darvi-kara) Snake, a Mandail 
Snake and a Rdjiman Snake. — Contra-indication to blood-letting inc.asesof 
Snake-bites. — Dosage of Collyrium, etc., to be resorted to in cases of 
different Beasts and Birds. — General dosage of medicines in cases of Snake- 
bites — Specific treatment of poisoning according to the Physical Symptoms 
— Specific treatment of the different Supervening Symptoms. — Remedy for 
the aggravated Doshas due to Poison — Medical treatment of persons made 
unconscious from the effects of a Fall or Suspended Animation.— -Symptoms 
of wounds from Poisoned Darts, etc. — ^Treatment of a Poisoned Wound — 
Recipe of different Agadas— Mahagada — Ajitagada — Tarkshya'gada — Risha- 
bhdgada — Sanjivana Agada — Darvi-kara- Rajila-visha-hara-Agada — Man- 
dali-visha-hara Agada — Vams'a-tvagadi Agada — Pancha-s'irisha Agada — 
Sarva-Kdmika Agada— Ekasara Agada. ... ... yij — 727. 


CHAPTER VI. 

Cases of Rat-poisoning Different Varieties of Rats— General 
.Symptoms of Rat-poisoning — Specific symptoms and treatment of Rat- 
poisoning— General treatment. — Cati.ses of Rabies— Symptoms of Hydro- 
phobia Prognosis. — .Symptoms of Jala-trasa — Its treatment — Treatment of 
bites by rabid-dogs — Treatment of teeth and nail-scratching. 72S — 736. 



XX 


CHAPTER VII. 

Treatment with the Sounds of a (medicated) Drum, etc., 
possessed of Anti-venomous Virtues : — Ksharagada— Its Uses and 
Therapeutic Effects — Kalyinaka-Ghri!a — Amrita-Ghrita — Mahd-sugandhi 
^gada — Rules of Diet and Conduct. — Symptoms of Elimination of Poison. 

737 — 741 - 


chapter Vlll. 

On insects, i-e., the measures, etc. to he adopted in cases of 
Insect-bites, etc- •• — The Germination and Classification of Insects — 
Insects of Vataja, Pittaja, Kaphaja and Sdnnipatika temperaments. — 
Symptoms of their Bites — The Kanabha class of Insects — The Gaudheyaka 
class of Insects — S'ata-padi — Manduka (Frogs)— -Pipilika (Ants) — Makshika 
(Stinging Flies) — Mas'akas (Mosquitoes). — Incurable classes — Treatment of 
a bite by strong and acute-poisoned Insects — Recipes of Remedies in 
different cases. — Origin and Classification of Scorpions — Specific traits and 
characteristics of Mild-poisoned Scorpions, Madhya-visha Scorpions and 
Tikshna-visha Scorpions — Treatment of Scorpion-bites.— Spider-bites. — 
Development of Luta-poison — Its Potency — Location. — Characteristics of 
Poison according to its seat in the body of a Spider — Mythological Account 
of the Origin of Luti. — The different names of Spiders and the general 
Symptoms of their Bodies — Specific Symptoms of Spider-bites and their 
Treatment — General Remedies — Specific symptoms of the Incurable cases of 
Spider-bites— Their treatment. — Surgical Treatment— Treatment of Ulcers 
incidental to the Bites by Insects or Snakes. ... ... 7^2 762. 


End of the Contents of the Kalpa Sth^na. ' 



THii 

SUSHRUTA SAMHITA 

NIDANA STHANAM. 


CHAPTER I 

Now wc shall discourse on the Vsitavyadhi- 
(diseases of the nervous system) Nidsilaam*'. 

IWetrical text: — Having clasped the feet of 
the holy Dhanvantari, who had arisen out of the 
primordial ocean with the pitcher of ambrosia on his 
head, and who was the foremost of all knowers of truth, 
Sus'hruta interrogated hirn as follows : — “Tell me,0 thou, 
the foremost of discoursers, all about the different 
locations and functions of the bodily Vayu (nerve force), 
both in its normal and agitated conditions, (as well as 
when it changes its natural scat through a concourse of 
disturbing or aggravating causes). Instruct me 017 the 
nature of distempers, which result from its deranged 
condition.” 2 . 

The holy Dhanvantari, the greatest of all healers, 
having listened to the foregoingwordsof Sus'hruta,replied 
as folloM’s: — ^This vital Vayu (nerve force), which courses 
through the bod}'-, is self-begotten in its origin, and 

■* Th; term Nidanani, usually translated as Pathology, is meant to 
include factors, which fall within the respective provinces of Pathology, 
.liiiology, Symptoniology and Pathognomy as well. For the meaning and 
functions of V.ayu see Introduction vol. I. pp. xlj. — .\Iii. 



2 


the SUSIIRETA SAMIIITA. 


[Chap. i. 


is regarded as identical with the divine energy of eternal 
life (God), inasmuch as it is unconditional and absolute 
in its actions and effects, eternal and self-origined, 
and is subtile and all-pervading (like the sky and the 
atoms). It is the primary factor, which determines the 
principle of cause - and effect in all forms of created 
things, whether mobile or immobile. It is so called 
(Vayu) from the fact of its coursing (skr. Va — to move) 
throughout the universe. It determines the growth, 
origin and disintegration of all animated organisms, and 
as such, it receives the homage of all created beings. 
Although invisible in itself, yet its works are patent or 
manifest. It is cold, light, mobile, dry and piercing, and 
follows a transverse course. It is characterised by the 
two attributes (proper-sensiblcs or Gunas) of sound and 
touch. It abounds in the fundamental quality of Rajas 
(principle of cohesion and action), is of inconceivable 
prowess, propels all the deranged or obstructing prinicples 
(Doshas) in the organism, (or in other words, is primarily 
concerned with the deranged* piinciples of the body 
which arc pathogenic in their actions). It is instantaneous 
in its action, and radiates or courses through the organ- 
ism in constant currents. It has its primary field of 
action in the intestinal tract (Pakvddhana) and the 
rectum (Guda). In its deranged state, it is the principal 
factor, which, (in combination with the deranged Pittarn 
and Kapham), lies at the root of all diseases, and is 
accordingly termed the king of diseases (Rogardt). 3 . - 

The action of Vayu in its normai 
State — Now, hear me describe the symptoms, which 
mark the Vayu, as it courses through the organism. 
"The Vayu, in its normal or undisturbed condition, main- 
tains a state of equilibrium between the different Doshas 
and the root principles of the body (Dhatu) ; it further 



Chap. I,] 


KIDANA STHANAM. 


0 

tends to maintain uniform state in the metabolism of 
■the body, (protoplasmic, Agni*) and helps the organs 
of sense-perception in discharging their specific functions, 

■ The bodily Vdyu, like the Pittam in the organism, is 
grouped under five different subheads according to the 
difference in its functions and locations, and is classified 
as the Prdna, UdAna, Samana, Vyana and ApAna.f 
These five classes of Vayu, located in their specific 
regions, contribute towards the integration and main- 
tenance of the body. 4 — 6 

The Prana Vayii : — The Vayu, that courses in 
(governs)the cavit}'' of the mouth, | is called the Prana,its 
function being to force down the food into the cavitj^ of 
the stomach, and to assistthc different vitalising principles 
of the body (such as the internal heat or fire etc.) in dis- 
charging their functions in life, and to contribute to the 
general sustenance of the body. A deranged condition of 
this particular kind of Vayu (PrAna) is usually followed 
by hic-cough, dyspnoea and other kindred distempers. 7. 

The Udana Vayu : — The most important of the 
vital VAyus, which courses (sends its vibrations) upward, 
is called the UdAna. It produces speech, song, etc. In 
its deranged state it brings on diseases which are speci- 
ficallj'' confined to regions l5dng above the clavicles. 8. 

The Samana Vs^yu The SamAna Va)^ 
cour.scs in (governs) the stomach (Amashaya) and in the 

* See Iniroduclion Vol. I. p.p. XLYIII — XLIX Mahamnhopadhyay.i 
Dv.arka Natha Kavlralna inlerprels Ihis Agni as digestive heal (la!har(igjii), 
t The Prana Vayu is identical with the energy of the nerve centre 
in the medulla ; the Udana with that of the one which is situated in the 
speech centre. The Samana is same as the energy of the epig.astric 
plexus, the Udana is same as the energy of the Motor-Sensory Nerves, and 
the Apana is identical with the force of the Hypogastric plexus. 

i The field of its action includes the regions of the heart, throat, head 
and the nose. 



'4 


THE SUSIIRUTA SAMIIITA. 


[Chap. I. 


region of intestines (Pakvdstiaya). Its functions consist in 
digesting the chyme brought down into the intestines ’in 
unison with the digestive ferment (Agni), and especially 
in disintegrating its essence from its refuse or excreted 
matter. A deranged or aggravated condition of the 
Samdna Vayu causes dysenteiy, Gulma, and impaired 
digestion, etc. 9. 

The Vyd^na Vayu : — The Vdyu known as the 
Vy^na courses (acts) through the whole organism, and its 
functions consist in sending the lymph chyle etc. all 
through the body and in helping the out-flow of blood 
(Asrik) and perspiration. Five kinds of muscular move- 
ments- are ascribed to the action of the Vyana Vayu, 
a deranged condition of which is generally attended 
with diseases which are not confined to any particular 
region, member, or organ of the body, but arc found to 
affect the whole organism (such as, fever, etc). 10. 

The Apana Vayu The Vayu known as the 
ApAna acts in the lower region of the intestines 
(Pakvadhana). Its functions consist in bearing down the 
foetus and the faeces and in evacuating the urine, semen, 
and catamenial blood. An enraged condition of this Vdjm 
tends to bring on serious diseases, which are pcculiarto 
the urinary bladder and the distal portion of the large 
intestine (Guda). An aggravated condition of both the 
VyAna and Apana Vayus may produce Prameha and 
disorders of the seminal fluid, while a simultaneous 
excitement of the five vital Vayus leads to a sure and 
speedy termination of life. 11-12. 

Now we shall describe the nature of diseases, brought 
about by the localization of the variously aggravated 
Vayus in the different parts of the body. — In the cavity 

* Such as expansion, flexion, lowering down and lifting up or lateral 
thrusting of any part of the body. 



chap. I.] 


NIDANA STHANAM. 


5 


of the stomach (Amashaya) the deranged or aggra- 
vated Vayu gives rise to vomiting, vertigo, epileptic fits, 
thirst and pain at the sides iPArs'va Sula) and about 
the region of the heart (Hridgraha). In the intestines 
(Pakvdshaya) the enraged or disturbed Vayu gives rise 
to a rumbling in the intestines, a piercing pain about the 
region of the umbilicus, scanty and painful urination 
and stool, or their entire suppression (Anaha), and pain 
about the region of the coccyx (Trika). 13 — 15. Similar- 
ly, incarcerated in the sense-organs, such as the ears, etc. 
it tends to deprive them of their respective faculties. 
In the skin (lymph chyle) it produces a discolouring of the 
complexion, parchedness and twitching in the skin, and 
causes a complete local anaesthesia, giving rise to a 
tingling, piercing pain in the skin, which spontane- 
ously bursts, or becomes marked with cracks and fissures. 
Similarly, the aggravated Vayu interfering with the 
principle of blood gives rise to ulcers. In the flesh, it 
produces painful nodes and tumours (Granthi), while in 
the principle of fat it brings on almost painless tumours 
(Granthi) unattended with any kind of ulcer. Incar- 
cerated in the veins &c. (SirA) it produces a stiffening or 
painful contraction, or a varicose or neuralgic condition ; 
in a ligament (SnAyu),it produces numbness (ansesthesia), 
palsy, aching pain and convulsive jerks ; in a long joint, 
it tends to deprive it of its contractibility and produces 
a painful inflammatory swelling (about the affected 
part). In the bones it produces a wasting (atrophy) of 
the bones which crack and begin to spontaneously burst, 
attended with the characteristic bone-ache. Again in 
that important principle of life, the marrow, it tend.s to 
dry it up and produces a sort of pain, extending all over 
the bod}'' which knows no respite or abatement. Similar!}', 
in the principle of semen it tends to produce a scanty, 



6 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap, I, 


defective, of excessive emission of that vital fluid, or a 
complete stoppage thereof. 16—23. 

The Vdyu, thus disturbed and agitated, affects in 
succession the lower and the upper extremities of the 
body, and the head, or extends all over the body and 
deranges all its root-principles (Dhatu). The symptoms, 
which mark such conditions of the body, are numbness 
(paralysis), convulsive contortions of the limbs (Akshepa), 
ansesthesia, and various kinds of pain (Sul a), and swelling 
(Sopha) of the body. The deranged Vayu, having enter- 
ed the natural seats of the Pittam or Kapham, develops 
symptoms, which are peculiar to cither of them, and 
gives rise to numerous diseases. 24 — 25. 

The symptoms, which characterise the union of the 
deranged Vayu with the Pittam (in its particular seat) 
are a burning sensation, heat, thirst, and loss of conscious- 
ness, in addition to the symptoms of the Vataja disease 
so generated in that particular part of the body, while 
a .similar unison with the Kapham develops coldness, 
swelling and heaviness fof the affected part). The 
disturbed or agitated Viyu in unison with the principle 
of blood gives rise to a sort of pricking pain (pins and 
needles in the affected locality), which can not bear the 
least touch, or is marked by complete anaesthesia, and 
symptoms, peculiar to the deranged Pittam, follow 
in its train. 26 — 28, 

Vomiting, and a burning sensation, etc. in the body, 
mark the instance when the Prftna Vayu is surcharged 
(Avrita) with the Pittam ; while weakness, lassitude, 
somnolence and a general discolouring of the com- 
plexion ( D. R., — loss of taste ) characterise a case 
when it is surcharged with the deranged Kapham A 
burning sensation in the body, loss of con.sciousness or 
epileptic fits, and a sense of giddiness (vertigo) and 



Chap, 1.] 


NIDANA STIIANAM. 


7 


physical' languor arc the indications, which distinguish' 
a case of'thc ’ Udana Vayu being surcharged with the 
Pittam ; while a stoppage or absence of perspiration, 
appearance of goose-flesh on the skin, impaired diges- 
tion, coldness and numbness of the affected part 
characterise a case of the same being surcharged with 
the Kapham. 29 — 32. 

Copious flow of perspiration, heat with a burning 
sensation in the body, and epileptic fits indicate a case 
when the Samana Vayu has become united with the 
Pittam ; while a copious flow of stool and urine, and 
an excess of mucous secretion (Kapham) from the nose 
(fluent coryza) etc. and horripilation mark a case, where 
it has become saturated with the Kapham. 33 — 34. 

Heat and a burning sensation in the affected part 
and a profuse menorrhagia mark a case when the 
Ap'ana Vayu becomes surcharged with the Pittam, where- 
as a sense of heaviness in the lower limbs characterises 
a case when it becomes overcharged with the Kapham. 
35— 3d. 

[Symptoms such as,] burning and jerking in the 
limbs; and a sense of physical languor become manifest 
in the event of the Vyana Vayu being surcharged with 
the Pittam, while a general heaviness of the limbs, stiff- 
ness or numbness of the bone-joints, and an incapability 
of locomotion indicate the fact of its being surcharged 
with the Kapham. 37 — 38. 

The Nid^nam of Vsita Raktam - 

An over-indulgence in grief, excessive sexual inter- 
course, inordinate physical exercise, drinking large 
quantities of wine, observance of a regimen of diet and 
conduct in a particular season of the year which is im- 
proper to it, use of articles of food which arc not con- 
genial to one’s own temperament and an improper or 



8 


THE SUSIIRUTA SAMillTA, 


[Chap. t. 


baneful use of such oleaginous substances (as oil, clari- 
fied butter etc.) arc the factors, which vitiate in common 
the blood and Pittam of a person. The foregoing 
causes especially tend to vitiate or agitate the Vayu 
and blood in persons of delicate constitutions, or in' 
corpulent persons, or in those who observe a form of 
perfect continence. 39. . 

The vital Vayu becomes enraged or agitated by exces- 
sive riding on horses, camels or elephants, or through 
the lifting or canying of great weights, etc., or by an in- 
ordinate indulgence in things which are possessed of the 
specific virtue of enraging or aggravating that vital 
principle. On the other hand, an over-indulgence in 
such articles of food as arc heat-making in their potency, 
or a surfeit of edibles largely composed of sharp, acid or 
alkaline substances, as well as a large consumption of 
potherbs etc., or an exposure to heat tends to vitiate 
the blood of the organism, and which, on account of such 
contamination, tends to speedily obstruct the passage of 
the fleet-coursing Vayu. The Vayu, thus impeded in its 
course, Ibecomes more and more agitated each moment, 
and is prone to speedily agitate the blood in a similar 
way. The antecedence of the term "Vata” or "Vdyu” 
in the nomenclature of the disease (Vata-Rakta)is owing 
to the precedence accorded to the action of the deranged 
Vayu in bringing about the malady, although it effects 
this In concert with the vitiated blood of , the 
organism. 40. 

Similarly, the disease brought about by the agitated 
Pittam, in conjunction with the vitiated or agitated blood, 
is called the Pitta- Raktam, while the one incidental 
to the combination of the deranged Kapham with 
the vitiated blood is called Kapha-Raktam. In a case 
of Vsita-Raktam, the legs, or the lower extremities can 



Chap. 1.] 


nidAna STHANAM. 


9 


not bear the least touch (Hyperaesthesia) and a sort of 
pricking, piercing pain (pins and needles) is experienced 
in those regions. The legs become withered or 
atrophied and lose all sensib ility to touch. In a case 
of Pitta-Raktam, the legs become extremely red, hot, 
soft and swollen, characterised by a sort of indescribable 
burning sensation. In a case of Kapha-Raktam, the 
legs become swollen and numbed. The swelling assumes 
a whitish hue and feels cold to the touch, and is 
accompanied by excessive itching. In the Sannipatika 
or Tridoshaja form of Dushta-Rakfcam, the legs exhibit 
symptoms, which are respectively peculiar to all the 
three preceding types. 41 — 4 $. 

Premonitory Symptoms; —In the incuba- 
tive stage of the disease the legs perspire and become 
cold and flabby, or (on the contrary), the local perspira- 
tion is stopped and the legs become hot and hard. More- 
over, a pricking pain is experienced in the affected parts 
which are marked by complete ansesthesia, heaviness, or 
heat, and discolouring of the skin . The disease creeps 
in either from the lower extremities, or in some cases, 
first affects the upper ones and gradually extends all 
over the body like an enraged rat-poison. 

Prognosis : — The form of the disease in which the 
skin of the part lying between the instep and the knee- 
joint becomes abraded or spontaneously bursts open, 
exuding pus and blood, attended with loss of strength 
(PrAna) and flesh, curvature of the fingers, and eruptions 
of nodules, should be regarded as incurable; while a 
case of one year’s standing admits only of palliative 
measures. 44. 

The enraged or agitated Vayu, while coursing swiftly 
through the Dhamanis (neiwes) of the body, shakes it in 
quick succession, and a disease, (exhibiting such 



lO 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA 


[Chap, I. 


symptoms as shaking or convulsive jerks), is originated 
which is called Akshepaka* (spasms, convulsions). The 
form of the disease, in which the patient falls to the 
erround, at intervals, is called Apatstnaka (Epilepsy 
without convulsions). The aggravated or agitated Vayu, 
charged with an abnormal quantity of Kapham, some- 
times affects and stuffs the entire nervous system, and 
wives rise to a form of disease, which is called DandsC- 
pat^aakamt (Epilepsy with convulsions), inasmuch as it 
deprives the body of its power of movement and flexibility, 
making it stiff and rigid like a rod (Danda). 45 — 46. 

The disease but rarely yields to medicine and, is 
cured in rare instances only with the greatest difficulty ; 
its characteristic symptom being a paralysis of the jaw- 
bone, which makes deglutition extremely difficult. The 
disease in which the enraged Vayu bends the body like 
a bow is called Dhamislitamblia (Tetanus). The disease 
admits of being divided into two distinct types accord- 
ingly as the body of the patient is curved internally 
(Autarsiyama, lit -.—inwardly or fonvardly extended, 
emprosthotonos), or externally (Vahir^yama, lit ; — ex- 
tended or bent on the back, resting on his heels and 
occiput— Opisthotonos). When the extremely enraged 
and powerful bodily Vdyu (nerve-force), accumulated in 

* The patient suffers from vanishings [lAmyatC) and loss of con- 
sciousness through the instrumentality of the enraged and aggravated 
Vayu, hence the disease is so named — Gayaddsa^ 

t Jejjada holds that the enraged Vayu, in unison with the deranged 
Kapham, gives rise to another kind of convulsions (Akshepaka) which he 
has denominated as Danda- patanakh which, exhibits such symptoms as 
coldness, swelling and heaviness of the body on account of its being 
brought about by a concerted action of the deranged Pittam and Kapham. 
Several authorities aver that there are four distinct types of Akshepakah, 
such as Dandd-patanakh, Anlarayamah, Vahirdyamah, and Akshepakh 
of traumatic (Abhighdtaja) origin. 



Chap. I.] 


NIDANA STHANAM. 


II 


the regions of the fingers^ insteps, abdomen, chest, heart 
and throat, forcibly draws in the local ligaments (Sndyu), 
the body becomes contracted and bent forward, bringing 
about a curvature of the inner trunk. The disease 
in this form is called Antaraty^ma Dhanushtamhha. 
The movements of the eyes become impossible, which 
become fixed in their sockets ; the jaw-bones become 
paralysed, the sides are broken, and the patient ejects 
(at intervals quantities of) slimy mucous (Kapham). 
These are the features which mark the first type 
(Antarayama Dhanushtambha). On the contrary, when 
the same enraged Vdyu, centred or lodged in ligaments 
which traverse the posterior side of the body, attracts 
them violently, the body is naturally bent backward. 
The patient experiences a sort of breaking pain at 
the chest, waist and thighs, (which are ultimately 
broken). The disease is called Vahir^yitina, and should 
be looked upon as beyond the pale of all medicinal 
treatment. 47 — ^50. 

Four types of Akshepaka are usually I'ecognised 
in practice such as, the (l) one incidental to the 
concerted action of the enraged bodily V^yu and 
Kapham (2), the one brought about through the union 
of the enraged Vayu with the deranged Pittam, (3), 
the one due to the single action of the agitated VAyu 
(4) and the one due to any external injuiy or blow 
(Abhighataja),* An attack of Apathnkah due to excessive 
haemorrhage, or following closely upon an abortion or 
miscarriage at pregnancy (difficult labour), or which is 
incidental to an external blow or injury (traumatic), 
should be regarded as incurable. 51 — 52. 

* Bvahma Devn designated the four types of the disease, as Apat&nakah, 
SatTiSiishla Akshepakab, simple Akshepakah and the Abhighfitaja 
(traumatic). 



12 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA, 


[Chap. I. 


The disease, in which the extremely agitated Vdyu 
affects the nerve chains (Dhamanis) which spread either 
in the left or in the right side of the body, whether in 
the upward, downward, or lateral direction, making them 
lax and vigourless, and in which the joints of the other 
side of the body become useless and inoperative, is called 
PakshEtghsbta (Hemiplegia) by eminent physicians. 
The patient, the whole or half of whose body has 
become (almost) inoperative and lost all sensibility, but 
who retains his consciousness so long as there remains 
the least vestige of vitality in the affected part, suddenly 
falls down and expires. 53 — 54. 

Prognosis:— A case of Pakshdghata (Hemi- 
plegia), brought about through the single action of the 
enraged or agitated Vdyu of the body, can be cured 
only with the greatest care and difficulty. A case of 
the same disease, engendered by the aggravated Vayu 
in conjunction with the deranged Pittam or Kapham, 
proves amenable to medicine (Sadhya). It becomes in- 
curable when caused through the waste of the root prin- 
ciples (Dhatu) of the body. 55. 

Apatantrakah (Convulsions) : — The Vayu, 
aggravated (by its specifically exciting factors and 
principles) and dislodged from its natural seat or recep- 
tacle in the body in consequence thereof, courses upwards 
and finds lodgment in the regions of the head, heart and 
temples. It presses upon those parts and gives rise to 
convulsive movements of hands and legs, or at times 
bends them down. 

®y*^ptoiTlS : — The patient lies with his eyes 
closely shut, or stares with a sort of fixed or vacant 
gaze, the eyes remaining fixed or immovable. The 
patient loses all perception, and groans. Respiration 
becomes difficult, or symptoms of temporary asphyxia 



Chap. I.] 


NIDANA STHANAM. 


13 


and unconsciousness set in. • Consciousness and a normal 
condition of the organism return with the passage 
of the enraged Va}^ from the heart, while on the 
other hand the patient relapses into unconsciousness 
simultaneously with the envelopment of the heart with 
that enraged and Kapha-saturated Vdyu. This disease 
is called Apatantrakah and is ascribed to the action 
of the enraged Va}^ surcharged with the deranged 
Kapham. 56. 

IVIanyastambha:— The local Vayu, agitated 
through such causes as sleep in the day time, reclining 
with the neck on an uneven place or pillow, gazing 
upward for a considerable length of time, or looking 
aside in a contorted way, and enveloped in the deranged 
Kapham, gives rise to the disease known as Manyd- 
stambha (wry neck or torticollis). 57. 

Arditam (Facial Paralysis) :~*Pregnant women, 
mothers immediately after parturition (Sutikd), infants, 
old and enfeebled persons are most prone to fall victims 
to this disease*. It has been also known to result from 
excessive hsemorrhage or loss of blood. The local Vayu, 
extremely enraged or aggravated by continuous talking 
in an extremely loud voice, chewing of hard substances, 
loud laughter, yawning, carrying extremely heavy loads, 
and lying down in an uneven position on the ground, 
finds lodgment in the regions of the head, nose, upper lip, 
chin, forehead and the joints (inner cornea) of the eye, 
and produces the disease called Arditam by distorting 
the face. 

Symptoms : — The neck and half of the face 
longitudinally suffer distortion and are bent. The head 
shakes ; the power of articulating speech is lost, and the 

* The portion of the text included within asterisks has been rejected 
by Jejjaddcharyya as spurious. 



14 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. I. 


eyes are distorted into a variety of shapes. The portions 
of the neck and the chin, as well as the teeth on the 
affected side become painful. 

Premonitory Symptoms The disease 
generally commences with shivering, horripilation, 
cloudiness of vision, upcoursing of the bodily Vdyu and 
anaesthesia, a pricking pain in the affected locality, 
numbness or paralysis of the jaw-bone, or of the cervical 
muscles of the neck. Physicians, conversant with the 
.^Etiology of discasc.s, call it Arditam (Facial paralysis). 
Prognosis; — A case of Arditam, appearing in an ex- 
tremely enfeebled or emaciated patient, or exhibiting 
.such symptoms as a winkless vision, inarticulate speech 
which hardly seems to come out of the throat, excessive 
palsy of the face, as well as the one of more than three 
yeans’ standing, should be deemed as incurable. 58. 

Gridlhras'i (Sciatica); — The disease in which the 
two great nerve-trunks (Kandara), which emanating from 
below the lower c.xtremity of the thigh reach down to 
the bottom of the insteps and toes, and become stuffed or 
pressed with the enraged Vayu, thus depriving the lower 
extremities of their power of locomotion, is called 
Gridhras'i. 59. 

VisVachi (Erbe’s paralysis or Bracial neuralgia): — 
The disease in which the enraged Vayu affecting the 
nerve-trunks (Kandard) which run to the tips of fingers 
from behind the roots of the upper arms, making them 
incapable of movement and depriving them of their 
pow'er of flexion or expansion is called Vis'vachi.'^' 60. 

Kroshtukas'l rsha (Synovitis of the knee- 
joints): — An extrimely painful swelling in the knee- 

* When the aforesaid nerve of a sirgle arm is afTecld Ihe disease is 
restricted to it alone, while it attacks the both when both their nerves are 
affected. 



Chap, I.] NIDANA STIIANAM. 1$ 

joints, which is originated through the concerted action 
of the deranged Vayu and the vitiated blood is called 
Kroshtukas'irsha from the fact of its resembling the 
head of a jackal (Kroshtuka) in shape. 6i. 

Khan ja (Lameness); — ^The disease proceeds from 
the drawing up of the nerve trunks (Kandara) of a leg 
by the deranged Vayu lying about the region of the 
waist. When both the legs are similarly affected, the 
patient is called a Pangu. He, whose legs tremble before 
starting for a walk and who afterwards m^-nage.s to go 
on limping is called a Kala'ya Khaiija one in whom the 
bone-joints become loose. 62 — ^63. 

Vata Kantaka : —The local VdyU, enraged by 
making a false step on an uneven ground, finds lodg- 
ment in the region of the ankle (Khudaka, instep 
according to others), thus giving rise to a disease 
which is called Vata Kantaka. The burning sensation 
in the soles of the feet caused by the enraged local 
Vdyu, in conjunction with the deranged Pittam and 
blood, is called P£(da-d2(ha, which is generally seen to 
afflict persons of pedestrian habits. When the legs are 
deprived of all sensibility of touch, and a sort of tingling 
pain is experienced in them it is termed Pa'daharsha, 
which is due to the deranged action of the Vayu and 
Kapham. The disease in which the enraged local Vayu 
dries up the normal Kapham lying about the shoulder- 
joints is called Ansa-shoshaka. The form in which the 
aggravated local Vayu contracts the nerves of the arms 
is called Avav^huka*. 64—67. 

Vadhiryayam (deafness) : —The disease occurs 
only when the deranged Vayu, cither singly or sur- 

* The Ans.i-shosh.n is due to the single action of the enraged Vayu, 
while Ava-vahulca is due to the concerted action of the deranged Vayu 
and Kapham. 



1 6 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. 1. 

charged with the Kapham, stuffs the sound-carrying 
channels (Srota) of the ears. 68, 

Kama S'ulam The disease in which the 
deranged Vdyu causing a piercing pain in the regions of 
the cheekbones, head, temples and neck, gives rise to a 
sort of aching pain in the tympanum, is called Karna- 
s'ulam (otitis). The local deranged and saturated 

with the Kapham stuffing the nerves (Dhamani) which 
conduct of the sound of speech, produces complete (in 
some cases partial) loss of the power of speech — eg. 
Muka (dumbness , EEinmina (nasal voice) and Gad-g'ada 
(indistinct speech). 69 — 70 

A sort of pain, which (rising from the bowels or the 
urinary bladder and ranging downward) gives rise to 
a bursting sensation in the regions of the anus and the 
genitals, is called Tuui, whereas the one, rising upward 
from the preceding parts and extending up to the region 
of the intestines, is called Prati-tuni. A distension 
of the abdomen (Udara), attended with the incarceration 
of flatus (Vdyu) and an intense pain and rumbling in its 
inside, is called Adhlns^aanl (Tympanites). When it first 
affects the stomach fAmdsdya) and is unattended with an 
oppressive feeling about the heart and pain at the sides' 
it is called Pratysfdhm^nam. The Vayu saturated with 
the deranged Kapham causes the preceding type of 
distemper. 71 — 74. 

A knotty stone-like tumour (Granthi) of consider- 
able density, whether fixed or mobile, and appearing 
below the umbilicus, and having an elevated shape which 
is always found to be extended in an upward direction, is 
called a VsttElsthilst, (which) as its name implies, is due 
to the action of the local deranged Vayu. The tumour, 
thus formed, obstructs the emission of flatus and impedes 
the evacuation of faeces. A tumour of similar shape, 



Chap. I.] 


NIDANA STHANAM. 


appearing laterally or across the region of the abdomen 
(Jathara) and obstructing the passage of stool, urine 
and flatus (Vata) is called a Pratyashthils^. 75 — 76. 

Thus ends the first Chapter of the Nidana Sthanani in the Sushrula 
Sanihili, which treats of the Nidanam of the diseases of the nervous 
system. 


3 



CHAPTEll 11. 


Now wc shall discourse on the Nidaiiam of 
Ars'as (Haemorrhoids), i. 

Haemorrhoids may be divided into six classes vi^\~ 

(i) Vdtnja (due to the action of the deranged Vayu), 

(ii) Pittaja (due to the action of deranged Pittam), (iii) 
Kaphaja (due to the action of deranged Kapham), (iv) 
Raktaja (due to the action of the vitiated blood), (v) 
Sannipdtaja (due to the concerted action of the deranged 
Vayu, Pittam and Kapham i and (vi) Sahaja (congenital). 

Pathology : — The deranged Vayu, Pittam, etc. 
enraged by their specific aggravating causes, or by such 
acts or conduct as partaking of food composed of in- 
compatible substances, eating before the previous meal 
has been digested, inordinate sexual intercourse, sitting on 
the haunches, excessive riding, and the voluntary suppres- 
sion of any natural urging of the body, either severally 
or in combination of two or three Doshas, or vitiating 
the blood of a person, who observes no moderation in 
food and drink &c., become dislodged from their natural 
scats in the body [according to the law of Prasaranam 
(expansion and change of place by a deranged organic 
principle)] and are carried down through the large 
intestine (Pradhana Dhamani) into the descending colon 
and getting lodged therein, give rise to growths of 
polypi or fleshy condylomata, which are known as piles. 
These growths chiefly appear in persons suffering from 
impaired digestion (Agni), and gain in size through 
friction with the wearing apparel, weeds, wood, lumps 
of clay or stone, or by contact with cold water. 3. 

The lower end of the large intestine, which passes 
into the flexure of the rectum and measures four and 



Chap. II.] 


- NIDANA STHANAM. 


19 


a half fingers in length, is called the Gudam (lit — 
the channel of fecal matter;, the interior of which is 
provided with three spiral grooves. Each of these grooves 
or ring-like muscles lie a finger and a half apart, and 
are respectively known as Pravdhini, Visarjani and 
Samvarani, or the grooves of out-flow, defecation and 
closure of the anus (sphincter ani), covering a space of 
four fingers and having laterally an elevation of one 
finger’s width. 4. 

Metrical Texts : — These grooves are like the 
involuted indentures of a conch shell, situated one above 
the other, coloured like the palate of an elephant. A 
part of the channel, half a finger’s width in length as it 
is usually measured from the outer haiiy orifice of the 
rectum, is called the anus (Gudoushtha). 5 — 6. 

The first of the aforesaid grooves or rings lies about 
a finger’s width apart from the orifice of the anus. 

Premonitory Symptoms A non-relish 
for food, a tardy and difficult digestion of food (brought 
into the stomach), acid eructations, a sense of weakness 
dn the thighs, a rumbling sound in the intestines, emacia- 
tion of the body, frequent eructations, swellings around 
the eyes, a croaking sound in the intestines, cutting 
pain in the rectum (Guda), apparent indications of an 
attack of phthisis, jaundice, dysentery, cough, dyspnoea. 
Vertigo,- somnolence, excessive sleep, weakness of the 
organs (Indriya), arc indications which predict the 
advent of this disease, and which become more marked 
with its progress. 7. 

The Yataja Type : — Piles, due to the action 
of the aggravated Vayu, arc non-exuding, rose-coloured, 
and uneven in their surface. They resemble the Kadamba 
flowers in structure and are cither tubular or sharp- 
pointed like a needle, sometimes assuming the shape of 



20 


THE SUSIIRUTA SAMIIITA. 


[Chap. 11. 


the wild Tundikeri flower. The stool of a hremorrhoid 
patient of this type becomes excessively hard, and can 
be evacuated only in a sitting posture, with the greatest 
pain and difficulty. An excruciating pain is experi- 
enced in the regions of the waist, back, sides, 
anus, umbilicus and the genitals. Symptoms peculiar 
to Gulma, Ashthila, enlarged spleen and abdominal 
dropsy add to the distress of the patient, whose skin, 
nails, eyes, teeth, face, urine and stool also assume a 
daik black colour. 8. 

The Pittaja Type:— Piles, brought on 
through the action of the deranged Pittam, arc slender, 
blue-topped, shifting in their nature, j'ellowish in their 
hue, or are colouied like shreds of liver, resembling in 
shape the tongue of the Suka bird. They are thick at 
middle, like barley grains, or resemble the mouth of 
leeches and secrete a sort of slimy exudation. The 
stool is marked with blood, and the patient complains of 
a painful, burning sensation (in the rectum) at the 
time of defecation. Fever, with a buining sensation and 
thirst, and epileptic fits, supervene. The skin, nails, 
eyes, face, teeth, stool, and urine of the patient assume 
a yellow hue. g. 

The Kaphaja Type .-—Piles, due to the action 
of the deranged Kapham, become white, are sunk 
about their roots, and are hard, round and glossy. They 
assume a greyish hue and resemble the teats of a cow or 
the stones of the Karira, or of a Panasa fruit. These 
piles do not burst, nor do they exude any sort of secretion. 
The patient feels an irresistible tendency to scratch the 
excrescences. The stools become copious in quantity 
and aie charged with mucous (Sleshmd), resembling 
the washings of meat. Indigestion, fever with shivering 
(Sita-jvara), and heavine.ss of the head and oedema 



Chap. II.] 


NIDANA STHANAM. 


21 


with a non-relish for food are the symptoms which be- 
come manifest with the progress of the disease. The 
skin, finger nails, eyes, teeth, face, stool and urine of the 
patient also assume a white colour. lO. 

The Raktaja Type : —Piles (haemorrhoids), 
having their origin in the vitiated condition of the blood 
resemble the sprouts of the Vata tree in shape and are 
of the colour of red coral, or the seeds (dark red) 
of Gunja berry. They exhibit all the symptoms, 
which are peculiar to the Pittaja type of this disease. 
Pressed hard by the constricted faeces in their 
passage through the anus, they suddenly give rise to a 
hemorrhage of vitiated (venous) blood, and symptoms 
characteristic of excessive bleeding are found to 
supervene. 1 1 . 

The Sannipata Type: -In a case of 
hemorrhoids due to the concerted action of the 
deranged Vayu, Pittam and Kapham, symptoms 
characteristic of each of these types manifest themselves 
in unisonl I2. 

The Congenital Type Congenital haemor- 
rhoids (Saliaja Ars'as) are usually ascribed to defects in 
the semen and ovum of one’s parents and should be 
medicinally treated with an eye to the special deranged 
Doshas involved in the case. The polypi (in this type) 
arc hardly visible and are rough and yellowish, with their 
faces turned inward. They are extremely painful. A 
person suffering from this type of piles gets thinner and 
thinner cveiy day and cats but very little. Large veins 
(SirA) appear on the surface of the bodj\ The patient 
becomes irritable, the semen decreases in quantitj'’, 
making the procreation of a small number of children 
possible only bj" him. The voice becomes feeble, the 
digestion is impaired, and disorders affecting the head 



22 


THE SUSIIRUTA SAMllITA. 


[ Chap. 11. 


nose, cars and eyes follow. A. croaking sound is 
heard in the intestines, attended with a rumbling in the 
abdomen. All relish for food vanishes and the region 
of the heart seems to be smeared with a kind of stick}' 
paste (of mucous), etc. 13. 

Auhoritative verse on the subject 

A qualified physician should undertake the medical treat- 
ment of hremorrhoids which occur either about the 
outer or the middle groove of the rectum, (in as much as 
they prove amenable to medicine). A polypus, appear- 
ing 'about the innermost ring or groove of the rectum, 
should be treated without holding out any definite hope 
of cure to the patient. 14. 

Ling'ars'as (Fig warts or condylomatous growths 
about the genitals); — The deranged and aggravated 
Vfiyu etc., finding lodgment in the genitals, vitiate 
the local flesh and blood, giving rise to an itching sensa- 
tion in the affected localities. The parts become ulcerat- 
ed (through constant scratching) and the ulcers become 
studded with sprout-like vegetations offlesh(warts),which 
exude a kind of slim}', bloody discharge. These growths, 
or excrescences generally appear on the inner margin, or 
on the surface of the glans penis, in the form of soft, 
slender vegetations of skin, resembling the hairs of a 
small brush (Kurchaka). These vegetations ultimately 
tend to destroy the penis and the reproductive faculty 
of the patient. 

Bha.g'a.rs'a.S : — The deranged Vayu etc. of the 
body, lodged in the vaginal region of a woman, gives rise 
to similar crops of soft polypi in the passage. They 
may crop up isolated at the outset, and (by coalescing) 
may assume the shape of a mushroom or an umbrella, 
secreting a flow of slimy, foul-smelling blood. 

The deranged Vayu, etc. may further take an 



Clmp. II.] 


NIDAXA STIIANAM. 


upward course, and finding a lodgment in the eai.s, no.se, 
mouth and eyes ma\’ produce similar warts in those 
localities. Warts, which crop up inside the cavities of 
the ears, may bring on earache, dumbness, and afoul dis- 
charge from those organs, while those (c\’sts) cropping up 
in the ej’cs will obstruct the movement of the eye-lids, 
giving rise to pain and a local secretion and ultimately 
destro}' the eye-sight. Simiiarl)', such growths in the 
nostrils produce catarrh, excessive sneezing, shortness 
of breath, headache, nasal speech and the complaint 
known as Putinasya. Such vegetations cropping up in 
and about the lips, palate or the larynx, tend to make the 
speech confused and indistinct. When appearing in the 
mouth, they impair the faculty of taste, and diseases 
which affect the cavit}' of the mouth follow. The ex- 
cited Vyana Vayu, united with the aggravated Kapham, 
produces a kind of hard papillomatous growths on the 
skin (about the anus) which are called the Charmakilas 
(papillomata).'’ 1 5. 

Authoritative verses on the subject : 

— These Charmakilas may be attended with a kind of 
pricking pain through an excess of the deranged Vdyu, 
whereas those which have their oiigin in the deranged 
Kapham (lymphatics) assume a knotty shape and be- 
come of the same colour as the surrounding skin. On 
the other hand, they become dry, black or white, and 
extremely hard through an exuberance of the deranged 
local blood and Pittam. 16. 

The symptoms of polypi, appearing in the neighbour- 
hood of the anus, have been described in full, while the 
general characteristics of those, which are found to 
crop up around the genitals, have been briefly discoursed 

* According to others, Charmakilas may crop up on the skin of any 
part of the b dy. 



i 4 the SUSHRUTA SAMIIITA. fClmp. II. 

upon. An intelligent physician .should ponder over 
tlie two groups of symptoms while engaged in treating 
a case of pilc.s. A case of piles exhibiting symptoms 
peculiar to the two deranged Doshas is called the 
Samsargajam. Six distinct type.s of bio-Doshaja piles 
are known in piactice.'* i/. 

Prognosis : — A case of piles due to the con- 
certed action of the three deranged Doshas of the body, 
(with its characteristic symptoms) but partially develop- 
ed, maj' be tcmporaril)' checked (Y.ipyaV Cases, which 
arc of more than a \-car’s standing, as well as those in 
which the hemorrhoids are due to the conceited action 
of the two Doshas (Sam.sargaja), or arc situated in the 
middle groove of the rectum, ma\- be cured but with 
the greatest difficulty. Cases of the Sannipatika or 
congenital (Sahaja) types should be given up as 
incurable. The Apana Vayu, in a person whose rectum 
is overrun with such polypus growths, tries to pass out 
through the anus, but is driven back upward, being 
obstructed in its passage by the vegetations, and then 
mixes with his V}-ana Vayu, thus imparing (the five- . 
functioned) fire (Pittam) in his body. 1S-19. 

* Such ss (i) the one due to the concerted action of the der.angcd 
Pittam and Kapbani, (2) the one incidental to the simultaneous derange- 
ment of the Vayu and the Kapham, (3) the one brought about through the 
disordered condition of the V.-iyu and blood, (4) the one due to the 
combination of the deranged Pittam and Kapham, (5) the one produced 
by the concerted action of the deranged Pittam and blood, (6) the one 
which results from the combined action of the deranged Kapham 
and blood. 

Thus ends the second Chapter of the Kidiinasthanam in the Sus'ruta 
Samhita. which deals with the Nidanam of piles. 



CHAPTER III. 


Now wc shall discourse on the Nida'uam of As'« 
mari (urinary calculi), r. 

The disease admits of being divided into four several 
t3-pcs, such as the Vjltaja, the Pittaja, the Kaphaja and 
the Sukraja (Seminal) concretions. An exuberance or 
preponderance of the deranged Kapham should be under- 
•slood as the underlying cause of all invasions of this 
disease. 2. 

General set io logy : — The Kaphah of a man, 
who neglects to cleanse (Sams'odhana) the internal 
channels of his organism, or is in the habit of taking 
unwholesome food, enraged and aggravated by its o\vn 
exciting causes, is carried into the urinary bladder. 
Here it becomes saturated with the urine, and gives rise 
to the formation of concretions or gravels in its cavit}^ 3, 
Premonitory Symptoms:— An aching 
pain In the bladdct, wlAv a non-Tc\lsb foT food, difoonllLy 
in urination, an excruciating pain in the scrotum, penis, 
and the neck of the bladder, febrile S3'-mptoms, physical 
lassitude, and a goat-like smell in the urine are the 
symptoms, which indicate the formation of gravel in 
the bladder. 4, 

Metrical Text ; —The deranged Doshas involv- 
ed in a particular case respectively impart their specific 
colour to the urine, and determine the character of the 
accompanying pain. The urine becomes thick, turbid, 
and vitiated with the action of the aggravated Doshas, 
and micturition becomes extremely painful. S* 

Leading Indications A sort of exciu- 
ciating pain is experienced either about the umbilicus, 
01" in the bladder, or at the median rape of the 

4 



26 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. III. 


perineum, or about the penis, during micturition when 
gravel is forming in the bladder. The urine is 
stopped at intervals in its out-flow, or becomes charged 
with blood, or flows out twisted and scattered like 
spray, leaving a sediment of clear, sandy, red or yellow 
particles of stone, which resembles a Gomedha gem in 
colour. Moreover a pain is experienced in the bladder 
at the time of running or jumping or in swimming, or 
while riding on horseback, or after a long journey. 6. 

The ^leshmas'mari Stone or gravel, ori- 
ginated through the action of the deranged Kapham, 
saturated with an excessive quantity of that Dosha by 
the constant ingestion of phlegm-generating (Siesh- 
mala) substances, increases in size at the lower orifice of 
the bladder and ultimately obstructs the passage of the 
urine. The pressure and recoil of that incarcerated fluid 
on the walls of the urinary badder gives rise to a kind of 
crushing, bursting, pricking pain in that organ, which 
becomes cold and heavy. A Kapha-origined stone or 
gravel is white and glossy, attains to a large size, to 
that of a hen’s egg, and has the colour of the Madhuka 
flower. This type is called S’leshmAs’mari. y. 

The Pittaja As'mari The Kapham 
charged (dried) with the deranged Pittam becomes hard 
(condensed) and large in the aforesaid way, and lying at 
the mouth of the bladder obstructs the passage of the 
urine. The bladder, on account of the flowing back of 
the obstructed urine into its cavity, seems as if it has 
been exposed to the heat of an adjacent fire, boiling 
with the energy of an alkaline solution, A kind of 
sucking, drawing and burning pain is experienced in the 
organ. This type of As'mari is further marked by 
symptoms which characterise Ushna-vdta (stricture). 
The concretion is found to be of a reddish, yellowish 



Chap. 111.] 


nidana sthanam. 


2 ; 


black colour like the stone of the Bhalldtaka fruit, or it 
is coloured like honey. This type is called Pittaja 
As'mari. 8. 

The Vatcts'mari The deranged Kapham 
(mucus) inordinately saturated with the bodily Vdyu, 
acquires hardness and gains in dimensions, and these 
l)dng at the mouth of the bladder obstructs the passage 
of the urine. The incarcerated fluid causes extreme 
pain in the organ. The patient constantly under severe 
pain gnashes his teeth or presses his umbilical region, 
or rubs his penis, or fingers his rectum (Pdyu) and 
loudly screams. A burning sensation is experienced 
in the penis, and urination, belching and defecation 
become difficult and painful.* The concretions in this 
type of As'mari are found to .be of a dusky colour, 
rough, uneven in shape, hard, facetted and nodular like 
aKadamva flower. This type is called Vdtds'mari. 9. 

Infants arc more susceptible to an attack of any of 
the three preceding types of As'mari, inasmuch as they 
are fond of day sleep or of food composed of both whole- 
some and unwholesome ingredients, and are in the habit 
of eating before the digestion of a previous meal, or of 
taking heavy, sweet, emollient and demulcent food. In 
children the bladder is of diminished size and poor in 
muscular structure. These facts contribute to the easy 
possibility of the organ being grappled (with a surgical 
instrument) and of the stone being extracted with 
the greatest ease in cases of infantile As'mari. 10. 

The ^ukras' mari : — Sukras'maris or seminal 
concretions are usually formed in adults owing to the 
germination of semen in their organisms. A sudden or 
abrupt stoppage of a sexual act, or excessive coition 
tends to dislodge the semen from its natural receptacle 

* Stool and urine can be voided only with the greatest straining. 



2 S THE SUSIIRUtA SAMIIITA. [Chnp. HI. 

in the bod3^ The fluid thus dislodged, but not emitted, 
finds a wrong passage. The Vajui gathers up the fluid 
(semen), thus led astray, and deposits it (in a round or 
oval shape) at a place lying about the junction of the 
penis and the scrotum and dries up the humidity with 
which it is charged. The matter, thus formed, condensed, 
and hardened, is called the seminal stone (Suknls'mari), 
which then obstructs the passage of the urine, giving 
rise to pain in the bladder, painful micturition, and 
swelling of the scrotum. The stone vanishes under 
pressure in its seat'. li — 12. 

Authoritative verses on the sub- 
ject : —Concretions, sands and sediments found to be 
deposited in the urine in a case of Bhashma-mcha arc but 
the modifications, or attendant symptoms of a case of 
.stone in the bladder (As’mari). The same group of 
symptoms and the same kind of pain arc exhibited and 
experienced in a case of gravel {S'arkard) as in a 
case of stone (As'marl) in the bladder. The local 
VAjm coursing in its natural direction helps the dis- 
charge of calculi (As'mari) with the urine in the 
event of they being extremely attenuated in structure. 
Particles of a stone broken by the Vayu are called 
urinary calculi {S'nrkard). A pain about the cardiac 
region, a sense of weakness and lassitude in the thighs, 
a griping pain in the regions of the spleen -and liver 
(Kukshi-s'ula), a shivering sensation, thirst, hiccough or 
eructations, darkness or sallowness of complexion, 
weakness, emaciation with a non-relish for food and 

* We can not but contemplate with admiration the fact that Sushruta 
was aware of the formation of seminal or spermatic concretions in the 
seminal vesicles through degrnerative changes of spermatozoa and other 
secretions and their subsequent calcification as lately discovered by the 
savants of the West . — Translator 



Chap, III.] nidana sthanam. 29 

impaired digestion are the symptoms which are 
manifest in a gravel-patient, A gravel {S'arkard) 
obstructed at the mouth of the urinaiy- channel is 
detected by the following indications : — viz., weakness, 
lassitude, emaciation, cachectic condition of the body, 
pain over the hepatic region (Kukshi-s'ula), a 
non-relish for food, sallowness of complexion, hot and 
high coloured urine, thirst, pressing pain at the cardiac 
region and vomiting, 13. 

The bladder is situated in the pelvic cavity, sur- 
rounded on its different sides by the back, loin (Kati), 
umbilicus, scrotum, rectum (Guda), groins and penis. 
This organ is provided with a single aperture or 
opening and lies with its mouth downward, covered with 
nets of nerves (Sira) and ligaments (Snayu), in the 
shape of a gourd. The organ is extremely thin in 
structure ; and thus situated within the pelvic cavity, it 
is connected, through its mouth or external orifice, with 
the rectum, the penis, and the testes. It is also known 
by the name of Maladhara (the receptacle of impure 
matter) and forms (one of) the primary seats of vital 
energy (Prana)'~. The urinary ducts (ureters) pass closed 
by the large intestines (Pakvas'aya) and constantly 
replenish the bladder and keep it moist with that waste 
product of the .system in the same manner as rivers 
carry their contributions of water into the ocean. 
These passages or ducts (which are two) are found to 
take their origin from hundreds of branches (or 
mouths tubuli uriniferi), which are not visible to the 
naked eyes, on account of their extremely attenuated 
structures and carry, whether in a state of sleep or 
wakening, the urine from below the region of the 

* The text has Praniyatanam, which means that an injury to the 
urinary bladder may be attended with fatal result. 



30 THE SUSHRUTA SAMIIITA. tChap. III. 

stomach-f (Am^lsaya) into the bladder keeping it filled 
with this important fluid of the bod}', just as a new 
pitcher, immersed up to its neck in a vessel full of water, 
is filled by transudation through its lateral pores. 14. 

In the same way the Vayu, Kapham and Pittam arc 
carried into the bladder (through their respective ducts 
or channels), and in unison with the retained urine, give 
rise to the formation of stone, on account of the slimy 
character of the deposit produced. Stone is formed in 
the same way in the bladder as sediments are ultimatel}’ 
deposited from clear and transparent water at the bottom 
of a new pitcher which contains it. As the wind 
and lightning jointly condense the rainwater into 
hailstones, so the bodily VYiyu and Pittam (heat) jointly 
contribute to the condensation of the Kapham in the 
bladder and transform it into stone. 

The Vayu in the bladder, couising in its natural 
downward direction, helps the full and complete 
emission of urine ; while couising in a contrary direction, 
it gives rise to various forms of maladies such as, 
Pramcha, strangur}^ as well as seminal disorders ; in 
short, it produces any urinary trouble to which the 
bladder may be subjected. 1 5. 

1 From the kidneys. 

Thus ends the third Ch.ipter of the Nidana Slhanam in the Sushrula 
Samhitd which tre.ats of the Nidanam of urinary calculi. 



CI-IAPTEll lY. 


Now we shall discourse on the Nidatuam of Bhag- 
andaram (fistula in ano and fistular ulcers), i. 

The deranged Vayu, Pittam, Kaphah and Sannipatah 
(a simultaneous derangement of the three bodily Doshas) 
and extraneous causes (such as a blow etc.) give rise 
to the types of Bhagandaram known as Sataponaka, 
Ushtragriva, Parisrdvi, SamvukAv’-arta and Unmargi. 
The disease is so named from the fact that it bursts 
the rectum, the perineum, the bladder and the place 
adjoning to them (thus setting up a mutual communica- 
tion between them). The pustules, which appear in this 
regions are called as Pidakas in their unsuppurated 
stage, while they are called Bhagandaram when they are 
in a stage of suppuration. A pain about the sacral 
bone and an itching about the anus, accompanied by a 
swelling and burning sensation, are the premonitory 
symptoms of this disease. 2. 

The ^ataponakah Type The Vayu, 
excited, condensed, and rendered motionless by a course 
of unwholesome food, gives rise to a pustule within 
one or two fingers’ length from the rectum (anal 
region, — Guda), by vitiating the flesh (areolar tissue) 
and blood (of the locality).- It assumes a vermilion 
colour and is characterised by a variety of pricking, 
piercing pain. If neglected at the outset, the pustule runs 
into suppuration. Owing to its vicinity to the bladder, 
the abscess or the suppurated pustule exudes a kind of 
slimy secretion and becomes covered with hundreds 
of small sieve-like holes, through which a constant frothy 
discharge is secreted in large quantities. The ulcer, thus 
formed, seems as if it is being thrashed with a rod, pierced 



5 ~ 


TJIE SUSIIRUTA SAMIIITA. 


fChap. IV, 


with a sharp instrument, cut with a knife, and pricked by 
needles. The region of the anus cracks and bursts, and 
jets of urine, fecal matter, flatus (Vata) and semen 
arc emitted through these sieve-like holes. This type 
of fistula is called Sataponakah (Sieve-like fistula 
in ano). 3. 

The Ushtra-grivah Type;— The enraged 
Pittam, carried down b)- the Vayu (into the rectum) finds 
lodgmcit therein, and there gives rise to a small, raised, 
red pustule, which resembles the neck of a camel in 
shape, and is characterised by a varied kind of pain, 
such as sucking etc. The pustule, not medicinall}- treated 
at the beginning, luns into suppuration. The incidental 
ulcer seems as if it is being burnt with fire or alkali, and 
emits a hot, fetid discharge. Jets of urine, flatus (Vata), 
fecal matter and semen flow out of the ulcer in the 
event of it not being healed up with proper medicinal 
remedies. This type is called Ushtragrivah. 4. 

The Parisravi Type:— The enraged ICaphah, 
carried down by the Vayu (into the rectum) and lodged 
therein, gives rise to a white, hard, itching pustule in that 
localit)’, characterised by a variet}- of itching pains, etc. 
If neglected at the outset, it soon runs into suppura- 
tion. The incidental ulcer becomes hard and swollen, 
marked by excessive itching and a constant secretion of 
slim)'- fluid. Jets of urine, fecal matter, flatus and semen 
are emitted through the ulcer in the event of it not 
being well cared for at the outset. This type is called 
Parisravi. 5. 

The ^amvukavartah Type The en- 
raged Vdyu, in conjunction with the aggravated Pittam 
and Kapham, is carried down, and finds lodgment (in 
the region of the rectum), giving rise to a pustule of the 
size of the first toe, and characterised by a piercing 



Chap. IV.] 


NIDANA STHANAM. 


33 


pain, and burning, itching sensations etc. Such a pustule, 
neglected at the outset, speedily suppurates, and the 
incidental ulcer exudes secretions of diverse colours, 
characterised by a kind of whirling pain, which 
revolves about, in the direction of the involuted 
indentures (within the grooves of the rectum) such as 
are found within the bod}'’ of a river or fresh water 
mollusc. This is called Samvukavartah. 6. 

The UniTlcirgi Type : — Particles of bones, 
eaten with (cooked) meat by an imprudent, greedy, glut- 
tonous person, may be carried down with the hard and 
constipated stool by the Apana Vayu (into the rectum), 
thus scratching or abrading the margin of the anus, or 
burrowing into the rectum in the event of their being 
evacuated in improper directions through (transverse or 
horizontal postures). The scratch or abrasion is soon 
transformed into a fetid and putrid ulcer, infested with 
worms and parasites, as a plot of miry ground 
will soon swarm with a spontaneous germination of 
similar parasites. These worms and parasites eat away 
the sides of, or largely burrow into, the region of the 
anus, and jets of urine, fecal matter, and flatus (Vayu_) 
are found to gush out of these holes. This type of 
Bhagandaram is called Unmdrgi. 7. 

Authoritative verses on the sub- 
ject; — A pustule, appearing about the region of the 
anus and characterised by a slight pain and swelling, 
and spontaneously subsiding, should be regarded as a 
simple pustule, which is of a quite different nature 
from a fistula in ano, which has contrar}'^ features {i.e., 
invariably found to be attended with a violent pain 
and swelling etc., and takes a long time to heal). 
A Fistula-pustule crops up within a space of two 
fingers’ width of the PAj’U proper (distal end of the 

5 



34 ' 


THE SUSIIRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap, IV. 


rectum), is sunk at its root, and attended with , pain 
and febrile symptoms. Pain, itching and burning 
sensations are experienced about the anus after a ride 
in a carriage, or after defecation. The anus becomes 
swollen, and the waist painful in the premonitoiy stages 
of Bhagandaram. 8 — 9. 

Prognosis Almost all the types of- this 
disease (Fistula in ano) yield to medicine after a 
prolonged course of ' treatment, and are, hard to cure, 
except the Sannipatah and traumatic ones, which arc 
incurable. lo. 

Thus ends the fourtli Ch.ipler of the NiclAna Sihanam in the Sushriila 
Samhii.a, which treats of the Nidanam of Fistula in ano (Bhagandaram). 



CHAPTER y. 


Now we shall discourse on the Nid^nam of^Kush- 
tham (cutaneous affections in general), i . 

Improper diet or conduct; especially ingestion of 
improper, unwholesome, indigestible, or inconge- 
nial food; physical exercise or sexual intercourse 
immediately after partaking of any oleaginous subs- 
tance, or after vomiting ; constant use of milk in com- 
bination with the meat of any domestic, aquatic 
or amphibious animal ; a cold water bath after an 
.exposure to heat ; and repression of any natural urging 
for vomiting etc. are the factors which tend to derange 
and aggravate the fundamental principle of Vayu in a 
person. The enraged or aggravated Vdyu, in combina- 
tion with the agitated Pittam and Kapham, enters into 
the vessels or ducts (Sird), which transversely spread 
over the surface of the body. Thus the enraged Vdyu 
deposits the Pittam and Kapham on the skin through the 
medium of their channels and spreads them over the 
entire surface of the body. The regions of the skin in 
which the aforesaid morbific diatheses are deposited 
become marked with circular rings or patches. The mor- 
bific diatheses (Doshas), thus lodged in the skin, continue 
to aggravate, and having been neglected at the outset, 
tend to enter into the deeper tissues and thus contaminate 
the fundamental principles (Dhatus) of the body. 2. 

^Premonitory Symptoms A roughness 
of the skin, sudden horripilation, an itching sensation in 
the surface of the body, excess or absence of perspiration, 
anjethesia of the parts, a black colour of the blood, and 
a rapid growth and expansion of any ulcer (appearing on 
the body) are the S3''mptoms which mark the premoni- 
tory stages of Kushtham. 3. 



S6 THE SUSIIKUTA SAMIHTA. [Cliap. V. 

Classification : — [Diseases, falling under the 
group of Kushtham, may be divided into two broad 
subdivisions], viz ., — MahdkiisJithas (major) and Kshudra 
(minor) Kusht/ias, the first consisting of seven, and the 
second of eleven different types, aggregating eighteen 
in all. The Mahtikushthas are classified as, Aruna, 
Audumvara,Rishya-Jihva, Kapala, Kakanaka, Pundarika, 
and Dadru. The minor or Kshudra-kushthas (Lichen and 
Dermatitis) arc Sthularushkam, Mahakushtham, Eka- 
kushtham, Charmadalam, Visarpah, Parisarpah, Sidhma, 
Vicharchikci, Kitima, Pama, and Rakasa. All the types 
of Kushtham, whether major or minor, involve the action 
of the deranged Vayu, Pittam or Kapham, and arc con- 
nected with the presence of parasites in those localities.^' 
The preponderance of any particular morbific diathesis 
(Dosha) in any case of Kushtham should be looked upon 
as its originating cause. The type, known as Aruna 
Kushtha, is due to the action of the preponderant Vayu; 
Audumvara, together witli Rishya-Jihva, Kapala and 
Kakanaka, to a preponderance of the deranged Pittam ; 
while Pundarika and Dadru owe their oi'igin to an 
excess of the deranged Kapham. These types of major 
or minor Kushthas are successively more extensive in 
their action and more incurable on account of their 
respectiv^ely invading a greater number of the bodily 
elements (Dhatus). 4 — 6. 

IVIahEtkushthas : — Aruna-kiislitlia owes its 
origin to an exuberance of the deranged Vayu. It is 
slightly vermilion-coloured, thin and spreading in its 

* Certain authorities hold that, all types of Kushtham (cutaneous 
affections) to be of parasitic origin. The Garuda Pitranam avers that, the 
parasites, which infest the external principles of the body, are the primary 
causes of' cutaneous affections — Kushthaika'hetavontarjdh shlemshajd 
vdhya-icimbhavdh, Ch. CLXIXV. 4. 



Chap. V.] 


NIDANA STIIANAM. 


37 


nature. A sort of pricking, piercing pain (is experienced 
in the affected locality) which loses all sensibility to 
the touch. The type known as Andumbara is coloured 
and shaped like a ripe or mature Audumiara fruit 
and has its origin in the deranged Pittam. The type 
called Risliyajiliva is rough and resembles the tongue 
of a Rishya (Deer) in shape and colour. The type 
known as Kapalla (Macula caerulee) resembles a black 
(deep blue) Kharpara ( baked clay ). The Ka'kanaka 
type is characterised by a dark red and black colour 
like the seed of the Gunja bcny. A sort of sucking 
and burning pain is experienced in the affected 
locality in all the four preceding types of the disease 
which are the outcome of the deranged Pittam. The 
whole diseased surface seems as if burning with fire, 
and emitting hot fumes. They are speedy in their 
origin and rapidly suppurate and break. All these 
types soon become infested with parasites. These 
are the general features of these forms of ICushthas. 7 . 

PuncIa.l*ikcL ! — The patches resemble the petals 
of a (full blown) lotus flower in colour, and Dadru 
(Ringworm) assumes the colour (faint blue) of an 
Atasi flower, or of copper. They are spreading in their 
nature and are found to be overspread with pustules. 
Both the Dadru and Pundarika types are raised, circular, 
and characterised by itching and take a considerable 
time to be fully patent. These are the general chai'ac- 
teristics of Dadru and Pundarika. 8. 

Kshudra Kushthas : — We shall now des- 
cribe (the features of the diseases known as) Kshudra- 
knshthas (M. Text): — The type known as SthuMrushka 
appears about the joints. It is extremely thick at its 
base, is cured with the greatest difficulty, and is strewn 
over with hard pustules (Arungshi). In the type known 



38 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tChap. V. 

as of ,Mali£tkuslithain the skin contracts, and with the 
bursting of the skin (a piercing pain is felt in the affec- 
ted part), which loses all sensibilit3''to the touch, accom- 
panied by a general sense of lassitude in the limbs. In 
the Ekakushtham (Ichthyosis) type the skin assumes a 
reddish black colour. It is incurable. In the form known 
as Charmadalam (Hypertrophy of the skin) a burning, 
sucking, drawing pain is experienced in the palms of the 
hands and in the soles of the feet which become cha- 
racterised with an itching sensation. The disease, which 
affects in succession the (organic principles oQ skin, 
blood and flesh, and speedily extends all over the body, 
like Erysipelas, and is attended with a burning sensation 
(Vidaha), restlessness, suppuration and a piercing pain 
and loss of consciousness (epileptic fits), is called V’isarpa' 
Kushtham. The form in wdiich a number of exuding 
pustules gradually extend over the surface of the body 
is called Parisarpa Kushtham. The type of the disease 
which is white and thin, and is characterised by itching 
and does not create any disturbance (in the patient), is 
called Sidhma (Maculje atrophicae). This form is generally 
found to restrict itself to the upper part of the body. 
Vicharchiksi (Psoriasis)is characterised b}'’ excessive pain 
and itching and gives rise to extremely dry crack-like 
marks on the body [hands and feet]. The same form of 
malady attended with pain, burning and itching, and 
restricting itself solely to the lower extremities, is called 
Vipa'dika^. The type in which the eruptions exude (a 
kind of slimy secretion) and which arc circular, thick, 
excessively itching, glossy and black-coloured is called 
Kitima (Keloid tumours). Small pustules or pimples 
characterised by an itching, burning secretion and 
appearing on the surface of the body are called P^ma 
(Eczema). The preceding kinds of pimples attended 



Chap. V.] 


jS^IDANA STHANAM. 


39 


with burning vesicles, are called Kachcliiis and are 
found to be chiefly confined to the legs, hands and 
buttocks. A sort of dry and non-exuding pimples 
characterised by excessive itching and appearing all 
over the body, is called Rakassi • (diy Erythema), 9-10. 

. The forms known as Sthularushka, Sidhma, Rakasa, 
Mahakushtliam and Ekakushtham should be considered 
as offspring of the deranged Kapham. Parisarpa-kush- 
tham alone is due to the action of the deranged Vayu; 
while the remaining types (of minor Kushtham) owe 
their origin to the action of the deranged Pittam. 1 1. 

Kilasam : — The disease known as Kilasam is 
but another form of Kushtham. It may be divided into 
three types according as it is brought about through 
the action of the deranged Vayu, Pittam or Kapham, 
The difference between KiMsam and Kushtham is that 
the former confines itself only to theTvaka (the skin)and 
is marked by the absence of any secretion.* A case of 
Kilasam caused by the action of the deranged Vayu is 
circular, vermilion-coloured and rough to the touch. The 
affected part when rubbed peals off scales of morbid skin. 
A, case of Kildsam, due to the action of the deranged 
Pittam, is marked by eruptions, resembling the petals 
of a lotus flower (in shape and colour), and are attended 
with an extremely burning sensation. In the type 
originated through the action of the deranged Kapham, 
the affected part (skin) assumes a glossy, white colour, 
becomes thick and is marked by an itching sensation. 
The form in which the eruptions or patches extend and 
become confluent, invading even the soles of the feet, 

* A case of Kushtham has its primary seat in the blood and skin (of the 
patient), in which it lies confined during the period of incubation, after 
which it attacks the skin and secretes the characteristic secretion of the 
deranged' Dosha involved in it. 



40 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMIIITA. 


iCbap. V. 

the palms of the hands and the region of the anus, and in 
which the local hairs assume a red colour should be 
regarded as incurable. A case of Kilasham, which is 
the outcome of a burn (cicatrix) should be likewise con- 
sidered as incurable. 12. 

A preponderance of the deranged Vayu in a case of 
Kushtham (leprosy) is indicated by a contraction of the 
skin, local anaesthesia, a copious flow of perspiration, 
swelling, and piercing or cutting pain in the affected part, 
together with a deformity of the limbs and hoarseness. 
Similarly, an excess of the deranged Pittam in a case of 
Kushtham, should be presumed from the suppuration of 
the affected part, from the breaking of the local skin, 
from the falling off of the fingers, from the sinking of 
the nose and ears, from the redness of the eyes and from 
the germination of parasites in the incidental ulcer. An 
excessive action of the deranged Kapham, in a case of 
Kushtham, gives rise to itching, discolouring and swelling 
of the affected part which becomes heavy and e.xudes 
the characteristic secretion. The types, Pundarika and 
Kdkanam, which are due to the germinal defect of 
the patient, are incurable, inasmuch as they involve 
(according to Dallana) the concerted action of the 
three simultaneously deranged Doshas from the veiy 
outset. 1 3 . 

Memorial verses As a tree, full grown in the 
course of time, has driven its roots, which derive their 
nourishment from the rain water, deeper and deeper 
into the successive strata of the soil, so this disease 
(Kushtham), first affecting and confining itself to the 
upper layers of the skin, will invade the deeper tissues 
and organs etc. of the patient, if unchecked until al- 
most all the fundamental principles or elements Dhdtus 
are attacked by its virus in the course of time. 14. 



NIDANA STMANAM. 


Chap, V.] 


4t 


The ^ Kushtham confined only 

to the serous (Tvaka) fluid of the skin are the loss of the 
perception of touch, a scanty perspiration, itching and dis- 
coloration and roughness of the affected part. The symp- 
toms which manifest themselves when the disease is con- 
fined to the blood are complete anmsthcsia, horripilation, 
absence of perspimtion, itching and excessive accumu- 
lation of pus in the affected parts. The .symptoms of 
Kushtham affecting only the flesh arc thickness of the 
patches, dryness of the mouth, roughness and hardness 
of the patches which become covered with pustular 
eruptions and vesicles, and an excruciating pricking pain 
in, and numbness of, the affected part. The symptoms 
of (Kushtham) invading the principle of fat only arc a 
fetid smell and an excessive accumulation of pus in the 
affected part and a breaking of the .skin, c.xposing deep 
gashing wounds which soon become infested with para- 
sites. The body seems as if covered with a plaster. 
Symptoms of (Kushtham) affecting only’’ the bones and 
the marrow are a sinking (lit: breaking) of the nose, a 
redness of the eyes, loss of voice and the germination 
of parasites in the incidental ulcers. Symptoms of the 
disease restricting itself only to the principle of .semen 
are a crippled state of the hands and distortion of the 
limbs, loss of the power of locomotion, .spreading of 
ulcers and all the other symptoms peculiar to the pre- 
ceding types of the disease. 15—20. 

A child, which is the offspring of the contaminated 
semen and ovum of its parents afflicted with Kushtham, 
should be likewise regarded as a Kushthi. 21. 

Prognosis: — A case of Kushtham appearing 
in a person of prudence and discretion and confined 
only to the serum (Tvaka), flesh and blood of his orga- 
nism should be regarded as curable. A palliative treat- 

6 



42 


the' susiiruta samiiita. 


[Chap. V. 


mcnt is the only remedy in eases where the disease is 
found to invade the principle of fat ; whereas a case 
where the poison is found to have pcnclralcd into 
any of the remaining organic principles should be given 
up as incurable. 22. 

Wise men hold that, for killing a Brahmana, or a wo- 
man, or one of his own relations, for theft, as well as for 
doing acts of impiety, a man is sometimes cursed with 
this foul disease by way of divine retribution. The disease 
rcattacks a man even in his next rebirth in the event of 
his dying with it. Uncured Kushtham (leprosy) is the 
most painful, and most troublesome of all diseases. 23 — 24. 

A Kushthi (leper), getting rid of this foul malady by 
observing the proper regimen of diet and conduct and 
by practising e.xpiatoiy' penances and by resorting to 
proper medicinal measures, gets an elevated status after 
death. 25. 

Kushtham (Leprosy) is a highly contagious disease ; 
the contagion being usuall}'- communicated through 
sexual intcrcouric with a leper (Kushthi), or by his touch 
or breath, or through partaking of the same bed, and 
eating and drinking out of the same vessel with him, or 
through using the wearing apparel, unguents and 
garlands of flowers previously used by a person afflicted 
with this dreadful disease. Kushtham (Leprosy), fever, 
pulmonaiy consumption, ophthalmia and other Aupasar- 
gika disease (incidental to the influences of malignant 
planets or due to the effects of impious deeds) are 
communicated from one pei'son to another. 26. 

Thus ends the fifth Chapter of the Nidanasth.anam in the Suahrut.'t 
Samhila which treats of the Nidiinani of cutaneous affections (Kushtham). 



CRAPTER YI. 


Now we shall discourse on the Niddnam of Pra- 
meha (diseases of the urinary tracts), r. 

It may be prognosticated that an idle man, who 
indulges in day sleep, or follows sedentary pursuits or 
is in the habit of taking sweet liquids, or cold and 
fat-making or emollient food, will ere long fall an easy 
victim to this disease. 2. 

Pathology : —The bodily principles of Vdyu, 
Pittam and Kaphah of such a person get mixed with 
improperly formed chyle of the organism.- Thus de’ranged, 
they carry down through the urinaiy ducts the de- 
ranged fat, etc.--' of the body and find lodgment at ' the 
mouth (neck) of the bladder, whence they are emitted 
through the urethraf, causing diseases, known by the 
(generic) name of Prameba- 3 

Premonitory symptoms:— A burning 
sensation in the palms of the hands and of the soles of 
the feet, a heaviness of the body, coldness or sliminess 
of the skin and limbs, sweetness and whiteness of 
the urine, somnolence, lassitude, thirst, a bad-smelling 
breath, a shortness of breath, slimy mucous deposit on the 
tongue, palate, phaiyx and teeth, clotted hair and an in- 
ordinate growth of the finger and toe nails are the 
indications which mark the advent of the disease. 4. 
Genera! Characteristics -.—A copious flow 

of cloudy or turbid urine characterises all the types of 
the disease, which, together with the abscesses and 
eruptions (Pidakd) which mark its sequel, should be 

** The particle “cha” in the text denotes other virus or morbific 
matter. Dallana. 

t Remain incarcerated therein according (0 others. 



44 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMIIITA. 


[Chap. VI. 


regarded as involving the concerted action of the de- 
ranged Doshas (Vdyu, Pittam and Kaphah). 5. 

The Kaphaja Types Cases of Prameha, 
which are caused by an exuberance of the deranged 
Kapham, may be grouped under ten subheads such as, 
Udaka-nicha, Jkslm-mcha, Sura-nicJia, Sikata-mcha, S'a- 
nai-mcha, Lavana-melta, PisItta-meJia, Shtdra-mcha, S'tik- 
ra-incha and Phcna-mcha. The ten aforesaid types arc 
curable, inasmuch as the medicines which tend to remedy 
the deranged Kapham (Dosha), the cause of the disease, 
prove also remedial to the other principles of the body 
(flesh, marrow, blood, semen etc.) deranged (Dushya) 
from the same causes. 6. 

The Pittaja Types The types, which are 
brought about through an exuberance of the deranged 
Pittam, are named as Nila-nieha, Haridrd-mcJia, Amla- 
ineha, Kshara'-weha, Ma?tJ{sJit}td-inc/ia, and S' oniia-meha. 
Palliation is all that can be effected in these types, 
inasmuch as the medicines which tend to correct the de- 
ranged Pittam, which has brought on the disease, fail 
to exert similar virtues on the organic principles 
(Dushyas) deranged by it. 7. 

The Vataja Types : — The types of Prameha 
which are produced by an aggravated condition of 
the bodily Vayu are divided into four subgroups, such as 
Sarpi-ineha, Vasd-mcha, ICsIioudra-meha and Hasti-7neha. 
These should be regarded as most incurable inasmuch as 
no kind of medicine can restore the fleet-coursing, deep 
diving {ie. invading the bones and the marrow) V;iyu, 
which at the same time also augments the Pittam, to its 
normal state and thus advances (unchecked) in its work 
of disintegration . 8. 

The deranged Kaphah, in conjunction with the 
(morbid) Pittam, Vayu and fat, gives rise to all Kaphaja 



Chap. VI. 


NIDANA ST HAN AM. 


45 


types of Prameha. The deranged Pittam, in conjunc- 
tion with the deranged Vayu, blood, fat and Kapham, 
produces the Pittaja ones; while the deranged Viyu, in 
unison with the deranged Kapham, Pittam, fat, marrow 
and Vasa (myosin), engenders the types of Vataja 
Prameha. 9. 

Symptoms Of Kaphaja-Mehas : — The 

urine* of a person suffering from an attack of TJdaka- 
melia becomes white and water-like and is passed without 
the least pain. In a case of Ikshiimeha the urine 
resembles the expressed juice of sugarcane. It has the 
colour of wine in a case of Sura'meha. The urine in a 
case of Sikats^melia is passed with pain and is found 
to leave a sediment of extremely fine and sand-like 
concretions (Sikata's). In a case of Sanaimeha the 
urine gushes out at intervals in jets and is charged 
with a slimy mucous (kaphah). The urine in a case of 
Lavanameha becomes limpid (non-viscid) and acquires 
a saline taste. There is horripilation at the time of 
micturition in a case of Pishtameha (Chyluria), the 
urine resembling a stream of water, charged with a 
solution of pasted rice (Pishtam). 

In a case of Sandrameha, the urine becomes 
thick and turbid, while in a case of Sukrauielia 
the urine resembles semen (or the urine is found to 
be charged with semen : — Madhaba). In a case of 

* Tl e Sanskrit term Mcha literally means to micturate. The. verbal 
noun Mehanam signifies urination as well as the act of passing any morbid 
urethral secretion. Hence the urine in most of these cases denotes the 
fact of its being charged with pus or any other morbid secretion of the 
urinary organs such as Oj.rh (albumen), marrow, etc., which imparts their 
characteristic colours to the fluid, —a fact which determines the nomen- 
clature of the disease and forms the keynote of its diagnosis in the 
Ayurveda.— E;d, 



46 


THE SUSIIRUTA SAMIIITA. 


[Chap, I. 


Plienamelia the patient passes frothy urine in broken 
jets. 10. 

Symptoms of Pittaja IVIehas:~Now we 

shall describe the characteristic features of the t}'’pes 
of Prameha, which are due to the action of the deranged 
Pittam. The urine in a case of Nilameha becomes 
frothy, transparent and bluish. The urine in a case of 
Havidr^tneha becomes deep j'cllow like turmeric 
(Haridra) and is passed with a burning pain. The 
urine in a case of Aullameha acquires an acid taste and 
smell. The urine in a case of Ksliaramelia"^ resembles 
an alkaline solution filtered (through a piece of linen). 
The urine in a case of Manjisthsiaielia resembles the 
washing of the Manjistha, while in a case of Raktauielia, 
the urine is found to be of blood-colour (or charged with 
blood - Mddhava). i r . 

Symptoms of Vataja-Mehas Now we 

shall describe the characteristics of the different types of 
Prameha, which arc due to an exuberance of the 
deranged Vdyu. In a case of Sarpiitieha, ihc urine 
looks like a stream of clarified butter, while in one of 
Vas?(m8ha it resembles the washings of Vasa. In a case 
of Kshaudrameha. the urine looks like honey and 
acquires a sweet taste. In one of Hastimelia, the 
patient passes a copious quantity of urine, like an 
excited elephant, at a time, and in one unbroken stream, 
(the organ becoming steady immediately after the act 
of micturition). 12 , 

Supervening symptoms The fact of 

the urine being assailed by a swarm of flies, lassitude, 
growth of flesh (obesity), catarrh, looseness of the limbs, a 

* The urine acquires a distinct alkaline taste, smell, colour and touch. 
(Madhaba Nidanam). 

t Charaka has included it within Rshaudra Meha and Madhu Me a. 



Chap. VI.] 


N ID AN A STHANAM. 


47 


non-relish for food, indigestion, expectoration of mucous, 
vomiting, excessive sleep, cough and laboured breathing 
(Svasa) are the supervening traits CUpadrava) of the 
Kaphaja Prameha. A piercing pain in the testes, a 
pricking (veda) pain in the bladder, a shooting pain 
(Tuda) in the penis, a griping pain at the heart, acid 
eructations, fever, dysentery, a non-relish for food, 
vomiting, a sensation as if the entire body is emitting 
fumes, a burning sensation in the skin, thirst, 
epileptic fits, insommia, jaundice (Pdndu) and a yellow 
colour of the stool and urine are the supervening 
symptoms which mark the Pittaja types of Prameha. 
An oppressive feeling at the heart (Hridgraha), eager 
longings for foods of all tastes, insomnia, numbness 
of the body, fits of shivering, colic pain and constipation 
of the bowels are the supervening symptoms, which 
specifically mark the Valtaja types. Thus we have 
described the nature of the twenty different types of 
Meha with their supervening evils as well. 13-16. 

The ten different types of Pidaka (abscess, carbun- 
cles, pimples, pustules etc.) are found to crop up on the 
bodies of patients, suffering from Prameha, and abounding 
in fat and Vasa, and whose fundamental principles have 
been affected by the simultaneous derangement of 
the Vdyu, Pittam and Kapham. They are named as 
Sara'vikij;, Sarshapika', Kachchapika, Ja'iini, Viuaia, 
Putrini, Masurika;, Alaji, Vida'rika' and Vidradhika. 17. 

lYietrical Texts : — An abscess which is raised 
at the margin and dipped in its centre, so as to resemble 
an Indian saucer in its shape is called SarSlvika'. Pimp- 
les or pustules of the shape and size of white mustard 
seeds arc called Sarsh^pikti. An abscess, resembling 
(the back of) a tortoise in shape and attended with a 
burning sensation, is called Kachchapika by the wise. 



48 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. VI, 


An abscess studded with slender vegetations of flesh and 
attended with an intolerable burning sensation is called 
J^Iini. A large blue-coloured abscess (carbuncle) 
appearing on the back or the abdomen, and exuding a 
slimy secretion and attended with a deep-seated pain is 
called VinatSi A thin and extensive abscess (studded 
withslendcrpustulcs— D.R.) is called Pntriiii. Pimples to 
the size of lentil seeds arc called Masurika. A dreadful 
abscess which is of a red and white colour, studded over 
with blisters or exuding vesicles is called Alaji. A hard 
and round abscess as large as a (full-grown) gourd is 
called Vida^riksL. An abscess of the Vidradhi type is 
called Vidradhikal (carbuncle) b}' the wise. An incidental 
abscess in a ease of Prameha should be regarded as 
having its origin in the same morbific principle (Dosha) 
as that which has produced the disease (Prameha) 18-28. 

Prognosis ; — A Pidaka.oran abscess, appearing 
about the region of the heart, anus, head, shoulder, back 
or at any of the vital joints (Manna) of the body, and 
attended with other supervening sjmiptoms producing 
extrom: prostration [impaired digestion — D. R.] in 
the patient should be abandoned as incurable. In 
a case of Vataja mcha, the deranged Vayu presses 
all the fundamental principles out of the body through 
the urethra and rages rampant in the lower part of the 
body, united with the deranged fat, marrow and Vasa. 
Hence a case of Vataja meha, (or its accompanying 
abscess), is held as incurable. 29-30. 

A person in whom the premonitory symptoms [Pur- 
varupam of Prameha) have appeared and who passes 
a little larger quantity of urine than usual, should be 
considered as already afflicted with it. A person 
afflicted with all or half of the premonitory symptoms 
of the disease and passing a copious quantity of urine 



Chap. VI, 


NIDANA STHANAM. 


49 


should be considered as one suffering from an attack 
ofPrameha, 31 — 32. 

A Prameha patient afflicted with deep-seated absces- 
ses and other distressing symptoms, which are usually 
found to supervene in the disease, should be pronounc- 
ed as suffering from Madhumeha and adjudged incurable, 
A Madhumeha patient seeks a halting place while walk- 
ing, wants a place to sit on while halting, lies down if he 
finds a sitting place, and sleeps if he lies down. 33 — 34. 

As five mixed colours such as grey, brown, Kapila 
(bluish yellow), Kapota (blackish grey), Mechaka 
(light-green) may be produced by combination of the 
five primary colours in definite proportions (such as 
white, green, black, yellow and red), so a diversity of 
causes, through the relative preponderance of the parti- 
cular kinds of food, and of the deranged Doshas, root 
principles (Dhdtu) and excretions of the body (Mala), 
may be attributed to the origin of Prameha. 35. 

Memorial verses All types of Prameha, 
not properly treated and attended to at the outset, 
may ultimately develop into those of lladhumeha 
types, which are incurable. 36 

For English equivalents of the different types of Prameha compare : — 

Cystitis (Acute Infective) — Frequent, painful micturition, small quantity 
of urine voided with pain and urgency. Urine — slightly acid or alkaline in 
reaction, cloudy, containing blood corpuscles. Cystitis (Chronic Infective) 
— Great and frequent pain, in the lumbar region, rigor. Urine — thick, 
offensive and alkaline, containing ropy mucous and blood. Cystitis (Non- 
Infective)— Symptoms like those of acute inflammatory type. Urine — 
acid and cloudy with mucous. Blood is generally present in 
considerable quantity. Neuralgia of the bladder, compare Albuminuria, 
Albumojuria, Hoemoglobinuria, Hoematuria, Peptonuria, Pyuria, 
Spermatorrheea and Diabetes, Proteuria and Polyuria. 

Thus ends the sixth Chapter of the Nidana Sthanam in the Sushrula 
Sambil^, which treats of the Nidanam of Prameha. 


7 



CHAPTER Vn. 


Now wc shall discourse on the Nid^nam of Udara 
(dropsy with an abnormal condition of the abdomen), i. 

Metrical Text : — The royal sage Dhanvan- 
tari, the foremost of all pious men who equalled 
in splendour and glorj^ the lord of the celestials, thus 
blissfully discoursed on the Niddnam of Udara to 
Sus'ruta, the son of the holy Vis'vamitra, who devoutly 
approached him for that purpose. 2. 

Classification : — This disease may be divided 
into eight different types, of which four are produced 
by the several actions of the three deranged Doslias of 
the body and their concerted action as well. Of the re- 
maining types, two being known as Plihodara (including 
Yakritodara), and Vaddha-Gudodara (tympanites due to 
the constriction of the anus), the seventh Agantuka 
(traumatic or of extraneous origin), and the eighth 
Dakodara (Ascites proper). 3. 

Predisposing- Causes The deranged 
Doshas of a person of extremely impaired digestion, 
addicted to the habit of taking unwholesome food, or 
of eating dry,- putrid food, or of violating the rules of 
conduct to be observed in connection with oleaginous 
- measures etc.,* are aggravated and find lodgment in the 
abdomen. Thus appearing in the shape of an abdomi- 
nal tumour (Gulma),they give rise to thisdreadful disease, 
attended with all its characteristic symptoms. The lymph 
chyle formed out of the assimilated food gets vitiated, 
and, impelled by the aggravated Vdyu, it percolates 

•These include purgative, emitic, A'stha'panam and Anuva'sapam 
measures, , 



fcbap. VlL] NIDANA ■ STHANAM. §1 

through the peritoneum 'in the same manner as a quantity 
of oil or clarified butter kept in a new earthen pot will 
transude through the pores 'of its sides. It thus gradually 
distends the skin (Tvak) of the abdomen. The process 
becomes general all through the abdominal region and 
the disease (Udara) is produced in consequence. 4 — 5. 

Premonitory sypmtoms : — The precursory 
symptoms of the disease are loss of strength, complexion 
and appetite, emaciation of the muscles of the abdomen, 
appearance of veins on its surface, acid reaction of food 
closely following upon its digestion (Viddha\ pain 
in the bladder, and swelling of the lower extremities. 
The patient cannot ascertain whether his meal has been 
digested or not. 6. 

The Vataja, Pittaja, and Kaphaja 
Types'! — A case of Udara in which the abdomen en- 
larges on its sides and posterior part, and • is over- 
spread with nets of black veins should be ascribed to the 
action of the deranged Vdyu. A pain (Sula), suppression 
of the stool and urine (Andha) and a cutting and piercing 
pain and flatulent rumbling in the intestines are the symp- 
toms which likewise characterise this Vaitaja form of 
Udara. A sucking pain in the abdomen, thirst, fever with 
a burning sensation, yellow colour of the swollen skin of 
the abdomen, on the surface of which yellow veins 
appear, yellow colour of the eyes, nails, face, stool and 
urine and the rapid increase of the dropsical swelling, are 
the characteristics of the Pittaja Udara. In a case of 
Kaphaja type the dropsical swelling is cold to the touch 
and becomes overspread with white-coloured veins. 
The abdomen seems heavy, hard, glossy and is extreme- 
ly distended. The swelling slowly increases, and the finger- 
nails and face of the patient become white, and he 
complains of a general lassitude, y — 9. 



55 


THE SUSIIRUTA SAMIIITA. 


[Chap. VII. 


The Tridoshaja Type Evil-naturcd wo- 
men (with a view to win the affections of their husbands 
or lovers sometimes) mix with their food and drink such 
refuse matters of their bodies as nails, hair, faeces, urine, 
catamenial blood etc. (which are supposed to be possessed 
oftalismanic virtues). The three Doshas of the body, vitia- 
ted by such food or drink, or through imbibing any sort of 
chemical poison (Gara) administered by one’s enemy, or 
by taking poisonous waters, or Dushi-Visha (slow poison 
whose active properties have been destroyed by fire or 
any antipoisonous medicine), will vitiate the blood and 
give rise to a kind of dreadful dropsical swelling of the 
abdomen, marked by the specific symptoms of each 
of them The disease is aggravated in cold and cloudy 
days and a burning sensation is felt [in the inside of 
the abdomen\ The patient becomes pale, yellow and 
emaciated, and is afflicted with thirst and drjmess in the 
mouth, and loses consciousness at short intervals. This 
disease is also known as the dreadful Dushyodaram. lo. 

Plihodaram. — (Spleen with dropsy of the abdo- 
men) ; — Now hear me describe the symptoms of Pliho- 
daram. The blood and the Kapham of a person, derang- 
ed and aggravated through the ingestion of phlegma- 
gogic food, or of those which is followed by an acid 
digestionary reaction (Viddha), often enlarge the spleen, 
(which gives rise to a swelling of the abdomen). This 
disease is called Plihodara by the experts. Plihodaram 
protrudes on the left side of the abdomen, its characteristic 
symptoms being lassitude, low fever, impaired digestion, 
loss of strength, jaundice, weakness, and other distress- 
ing symptoms peculiar to the deranged Pittam and 
ICapliam. A similar enlargement of the liver through 
similar causes on the right side of the abdomen is 
called Jakriddadyudaram. ii— 12. 



Chap, VII.] KIDANA STHANAM. • 53 

Vaddha-g’udodaram'^ The fecal matter, 
mixed with the deranged Vayu, Pittam etc, of the 
■body, lies stuffed in the rectum of a person whose in- 
testines have been stuffed with slimy food (as pot herbs) 
or with stones and hair (enteritis). They give rise to 
a sort of abdominal dropsy by swelling the part between 
the-heart and the umbilicus which is called Vaddha 
Gudodaram. Scanty stools are evacuated with the great- 
est pain and difficulty and the patient vomits a pe- 
culiar kind of matter with a distinctly fecal smell 
(scyabalous ?). 13. 

Parisravi-Udaram : — Now hear me describe 
the causes and symptoms of the type of Udaram which 
is called ParisrSivi-udaram. Thorny or sharp-pointed 
substances (such as fish-bones etc,), carried down with 
the food in a slanting way from the stomach into the 
abdomen, sometimes scratch or burrow into the intes- 
tines, Causes other than the preceding ones, (such as 
a long yawn or over-eating etc.) may contribute to the 
perforation of the intestines, giving rise to a copious 
flow of a watery exudation which constantly oozes out 
of the anus and to a distension of the lower part of the 
abdomen situated below the umbilicus. This is called 
Parisravyudaram which is marked by a cutting pain and 
a burning sensation. 14. 

Dakodaram ; — Now hear me describe the 
causes and symptoms of the type known as Dakodaram 
(ascites). The drinking of cold w'ater immediately after 
the application of an Aunvdsanam or Asthapanam 
enema, or closely following upon the exhibition of any 
purgative or emetic medicine, or just after the taking of 
a medicated oil or clarified butter, etc. tends to derange 

Dropsical swelling of the abdomen with tympanites due to the cons- 
triction of the rectum known as intestinal obstruction. 



54 


tliE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chaii. VII. 


the water-carrying channels of the body* The same result 
may be produced by the drinking of oil, etc. in inordi- 
nate quantities The water, by percolating or transud- 
ing through the walls of these channels, as before des- 
cribed, inordinately enlarges the abdomen, which be- 
comes glossy on the surface and is full of water, being 
rounded about the umbilicus and raised like a -full- 
bloated water-drum. The simile is complete as it 
fluctuates under pressure, oscillates, and makes a pecu- 
liar sound like a water-drum under percussion. 15. 

Distension of the stomach, incapacity of locomotion, 
weakness, impaired digestion, cedematous swelling of 
the limbs, a general sense of lassitude and looseness In 
the limbs, suppression of flatus and stool, and a burning 
sensation and thirst are among the general characteris- 
tics of the disease in its various forms. 16. 

Prognosis All cases of Udaram after the 
lapse of considerable time develop into those of ascites, 
and a case arriving at such a stage should be given up as 
incurable. 16 — 17. 


Thus ends the seventh Chapter of the Niddna Sthanam in the Sus'ruta 
Samhita which treats of the Nidanam of Udaram. 



CHAPTER Vni. 

Now we shall discourse on the Nidanam of 
IWuCihag'arbham (false presentations and difficult 
labour), i. 

Causes of IWudha-g'arbham Sexual 
intercourse during pregnancy, riding on horseback, etc., 
or in any sort of conveyance, a long walk, a false step, a 
fall, pressure on the womb, running, a blow, sitting or 
lying down on an uneven ground, or in an uneven 
posture, fasting, voluntary repression of any natural 
urging of the body, partaking of extremely bitter, 
pungent, parchifying articles, eating in inordinate quan- 
tities of Sakas and alkaline substances, dysentery 
(Atisdra), use of emetics or purgatives, swinging in a 
swing or hammock, indigestion, and use of medicines 
which induce the labour pain or bring about abortions, 
and such like causes tend to expel the faetus from its 
fixture. These causes tend to sever the child from the 
uterine wall with its placental attachment owing to a 
kind of Abhighdtam (uterine contraction) just as a blow 
tends to sever a fruit from its pedicel. 2. 

Definition: — The faetus, thus severed and 
dislodged from its seat, excites peristalsis not only in 
the uterus, but induces a sort of constant, spasmodic 
contraction of the intestinal cavities (Koshthas), pro- 
ducing pain in the liver, spleen, etc. The Apana Vdyu, 
thus obstructed through the spasmodic contraction 
of her abdomen, produces any of the following symp- 
toms, viz. a sort of spasmodic pain in the sides, or 
in the neck of the bladder, or in the pelvic cavity, 
or in the abdomen, or in the vagina, or Andha (tymp- 
anites with obstruction, etc.) or retention of urine, 



56 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tChap. VIII. 

and destroys the fetus, if immature, attended with 
bleeding. In case the fetus continues to develop 
and is brought in an inverted posture at the entrance 
to the vaginal canal, and is impacted at that place, 
or if the Apana Vdyu gets disordered and conse- 
quently cannot help the expulsion of the same, such 
an obstructed fetus is called Mudlia garbliah. 3. 

Classification and Symptoms: -Cases 
of Mudha-gaibha may be roughly divided into four 
different classes such as, the Kilah, the Pratikhiirah, 
the Vijakah and the Parighah. The sort of false 
presentation in which the child comes with its hands, 
legs and head turned upward and with its back firmly 
obstructed at the entrance to the vagina, like a stake 
or a kila, is called Kilah. The sort of presentation, in 
which the hands, feet and head of the child come 
out, with its body impacted at the entrance to the 
vagina, is called Prathikhurah. The type in which only 
a single hand and the head of the child come out 
(with the rest of its body obstructed at the same 
place), is called the Vijakah. The type in which the 
child remains obstructing the head of the passage in 
a horizontal position, like a bolt, is called the Parighah. 
Certain authorities aver that, these are the only four 
kinds of Mudhagarbha. But we can not subscribe to 
the opinion (which recognises only four kinds of false 
presentations), inasmuch as the deranged Vdyu (ApAna) 
can present the fetus in various different postures 
at the head of the vaginal canal. Sometimes, the two 
thighs of the child are first presented, and sometimes it 
comes with a single leg flexed up. Sometimes the 
child' comes with its body, bent double, and thighs 
drawn up, so that only breech is obliquely presented, 
gojnetimes the child is presented, impacted at the he?id 



Chap. VIII.] 


NIDANA STHANAM. 


57 


of the passage with its chest, or sides, or back. Some- 
times the child is presented with its arm around its head, 
resting on the side, and the hand -coming out first. 
Sometimes only the two hands are first presented, the 
head leaning on one side; sometimes the two hands, legs 
and the head of the child, the rest of the body being 
impacted at the exit in a doubled up posture. Some- 
times one leg is presented, the other thigh being impacted 
at the passage (Pdyu). I have briefly described these 
eight sorts of presentation of which the last two 
are irremediable. The rest should be given up as 
hopeless if these are attended with the following compli- 
cations vt0., deranged sense-perception of the mother, 
convulsions, displacement or contraction of the repro- 
ductive organ (yoni) a peculiar pain like the after-pain of 
child birth, cough, difficult respiration, or vertigo. 4. 

Memorial verses : — As a fruit, fully matured, 
is naturally severed from its pedicel and falls to the 
ground and not otherwise, so the cord, which binds 
the foetus to its maternal part, is severed in course 
of time, and the child comes out of the uterus ( into 
this world of action ). On the other hand, as a fruit, 
worm-eaten or shaken by the wind or a blow, untimely 
falls to the ground, so will a foetus be expelled out of its 
mother’s womb, before its time. For four months 
after the date of fecundation, the fsetus remains in a 
liquid state, and hence its destruction or coming 
out of the womb goes by the name of abortion. In the 
course of the fifth and sixth months the limbs of the foetus 
gain in firmness and density, and hence, its coming out 
at such a time is called miscarriage. 5-7. 

PrOgfllOSiS : — The enceinte who violently tosses 
her head in agony (at the time of parturition) and 
the surface of whose body becomes cold, compelling 

§ 



gs THE SUSIIRUTA SAMHITA. CChnp. VIII. 

her to forego all natural modesty, and whose sides 
and abdomen arc covered with nets of large blue- 
coloured veins, invariably dies with the dead child 
locked in her womb. The death of the foetus in the 
womb may be ascertained by the absence of movements 
of the foetus (in the womb) or of any pain of child-birth, 
by a brown or yellow complexion of the cnecinia, cade- 
verous smell in her breath, and colic pain in the abdomen 
and its distension owing to the continuance of the swollen 
and decomposed child in the womb. 8-9. 

The death of a child in the womb may result from 
some emotional disturbance of its mother, (such as 
caused by bereavement or by loss of fortune during 
pregnancy) ; while an external blow or injury (to the 
womb) or any serious disease of the mother may also 
produce the like result. A child, moving in the womb 
of a dead mother, who had just expired (from convulsions 
etc.) during parturition at term, like a goat (VastJimAra) 
should be removed immediately by the Surgeon from the 
womb (by Caesarean Section) as a delay in extract- 
ing the child may leads to its death lO-i i. 


* Csecsarean Section means incision of the uterus through the abdomi- 
nal walls and extrication of the foetus therefrom. Operation like this upon 
a dead subject requires no skill of a surgeon. Any one can do it without 
the help of any anatomical knowledge. In modern times, when the 
mother’s life is in peril, and the expulsion of the feetus becomes nearly 
impossible, by the natural passage, owing to an existence of deformity 
either in the parturient canal or in the forms and structures of the feetu', 
to save both mother and child this operation is principally undertaken. 

The evidence of similar attempts, in ancient India, is found recorded 
in passages like what we have just translated and that the operation was 
practised on living subjects, there is not the least doubt about it. This 
custom is still preserved in Central Africa, and it is possible that the Egyp- 
tians like Hindu philosophy and religion learnt this also from the Hindus. 
“Felkin,” says “Baas in his History ofMedicine p. 70 “saw a case of the 
Ctesarean operation in Central Africa performed by a man. At one stroke 



Chap. VIII.] 


NIDANA STHANAM. 


■59 


Additional Text The bladder is ruptured, the dead child lies 
like a weight upon the placenta and is pressed upward on the spleen, liver 
and gall bladder. The mother shivers and is oppressed with tremor, 
dryness of the tongue, dyspnoea and perspiration. She complains of 
a cadaverous smell in her breath and stands in danger of imminent 
death. By these symptoms a physician shall know the death of the 
child in the womb. This portion is partly recognised by Brahmadeva 
and is totally rejected by Jejjadacharya as spurious. 

an incision was made through both the abdominal walls and the uterus. 
The opening in the latter organ was then enlarged, the hremorrhage 
checked by the actual cautery, and the child removed. While an assis- 
tant compressed the abdomen, the operator then removed the placenta. 
The bleeding from the abdominal walls was then checked. No sutures 
were placed on the walls of the uterus but the abdominal parietes were 
fastened together by seven figure-of-eight sutures, formed with polished 
iron needles and threads of bark. The wound was then dressed with a 
paste prepared from various roots, the woman placed quietly upon her 
abdomen, in order to favour perfect drainage, and the task of the African 
Spencer Wells was finished. It appears that the patient was first rendered 
half unconscious with banana wine. One hour after the operation the 
patient was doing well. And her temperature never rose above loi F. 
nor her pulse above io8. On the eleventh day the wound was completely 
healed, and the woman apparently as well as usual.” 

When we read this evidence of Felkin, we are reminded of the opera- 
tive steps as described in our own ancient book of Surgery from which 
modern surgeons have been able to borrow the operation of rhinoplasty. 
It is a great pity that while in Africa the same practice is still retained 
intact, we in India by spurious attempts and disgraceful contortions, subs- 
titutions of false readings and dismal knowledge of grammar and rhetoric 
try to prove in the face of strong evidence that in ancient India Cmsarean 
Section was at'empted only on cases where one “might not perspire " 

If we take in the sense of “a woman whose life is in great 

danger” and not exactly in the sense of “a woman who is dead” as recom- 
mended by Dalian and Arundulta (and which might have been the 
meaning if instead of fqqg a word like sjfiqg had been used in the text), 
we find at once that Weber’s remark in his History of Indian Literature 
p, 270 “that in Surgery they (the Hindus) attained to high proficiency” 
is not based on the solitary evidence of rhinoplasty alone. 

In performing obstetric operations with success examples like this are 
not rate. If the two different readings qqjJTK “I’d he taken con- 

jointly into consideration we are impressed with the idea that in ancient 



6o 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. Vlir, 


India Csasarean operations were very frequently undertaken in cases of 
puerperal eclampsia, where the mother had heen in the deplorable condi- 
tion of a goat suffering from cramps and convulsions as well as in cases 
of an accidental death notunlike that which fell to the lot of the poor 
mother of him in whose name the operation is called. qg=goat = 
destroyer (See Monier William’s Dictionary) hence a goat-dcstroyer=a 
tiger or wolf) or in cases where the presence of deformity in the parturient 
canal or of malformation of the foetus prevented the natural delivery of a 
living child. The incision is not to be made anywhere else but exactly 
in the place where Felkin saw the illiterate Negro successfully apply his 
knife, the Selection of as suggested by some commentators 

being a tempest on a tea pot especially when the subject is beyond the 
grave. In a living Subject the selection of a proper site for the oferation 
is of course very commendable. Hence we venture to suggest that 
extraction of the living foetus from the womb by m.aking incision through 
this part of the pelvis was also attempted later on. We extract here the 
two different readings and leave our readers to judge whether we are 
correct to draw the above inferences. — Ed. 

I Bagabhala S'atira Sthanam. ch. II. slo. 53. 

fqqsiqt: ffg; qf? qc^gujisqmqiig n qizrqE^?^- 

fsqqi I 

Thus ends the eighth Chapter of the Nidana Sthdnam in the Sus'ruta 
Samhitd, which treats of Nidanam of difficult labour and false presenta- 
tions. 



CHAPTER IX. 


Now we shall discourse on the Nidanam of 
Vidradhi (abscess etc.). I. 

The blessed Dhanvantari, the honoured of the gods, 
who for the promulgation of the knowledge of the 
Ayurveda and for administering proper medicines 
(^to the sick), took his birth at Kasi, (Benares) as a 
king, thus fully discoursed on the symptoms of Vidradhi 
(abscess etc.) to his disciple, Sus'ruta. 2. 

Definition and classification :--The 
extremely deranged and aggravated Vayu, Pittam 
and Kapham, resorting to the bone and vitiating 
the Tvaka ( skin ), blood, flesh, and fat of a person 
(with their own specific properties), gradually give 
rise to a deep-seated, painful, round or extended 
swelling which is called Vidradhi by the wise. The 
disease admits of being divided into six types such as 
the Vataja type, the Pittaja type, the Kaphaja type, 
the Sannipdtika type, the Kshataja type (traumatic), 
and the Asrija (which has its seat in the vitiated blood). 
Now we shall describe their specific symptoms. 3-4. 

The Vataja Type : — This abscess assumes a 
black Or vermilion colour, is felt rough to the touch and 
is characterised by a soi't of excruciating pain. The 
growth and suppuration of the abscess are brought 
about in a variety of forms (owing to the variable 
and irregular action of the deranged Vdyu inolved in 
these cases). 5. 

The Pittaja Type : — This abscess assumes a 
blackish yellow colour or one like that of a ripe Audum- 
Vara fruit. It is attended with fever and a burning 
sensation, and is of rapid growth and suppuration. 6. 



62 


NIDANA STIIANAIil. 


Chap. I>i.] 


The Kaphaja Type: — This absce.ss is shaped 
like an Indian saucer (s'arava) and seems cold to the 
touch. It assumes a light yellow colour and is character- 
ised by numbness, itching and little pain. The growth 
and suppuration of this abscess is very slow. The 
secretions from a Vataja abscess are thin, those from 
a Pittaja type arc 3''cllow, while the exudations from a 
Kaphaja abscess are white. 7. 

The Sannip^tika Type:— An abscess of 
the Sdnnipatika type is of varied colour, and is attended 
with a varied sort of pain (sucking, drawing, turning 
etc.) and exudes secretions of various colours (white, 
yellow, etc.). It is little raised or elevated at its top, 
large and irregular in its shape and docs not uniformly 
suppurate in all its parts. 8. 

Agantuja or Kshataja Type The local 
or inherent heat of an ulcer, (caused by a blow or a 
dirt) in a person, addicted to unwholesome regimen, is 
augmented and conducted bj'- the deranged Vdyu and 
vitiates the blood and Pittam, thus giving rise to a kind 
of abscess which is known as the Agantuja Vidradhi 
(traumatic abscess). Symptoms of the Pittaja type like- 
wise mark this type of abscess and fever, thirst and a 
burning sensation attend it from the very beginning. 9. 

The Raktaja Type: — This abscess assumes 
a black or tawny colour, covered with a large number 
of black vesicles, and fever and an intolerable burning 
and pain attended with all the sj'^mptoms peculiar to 
the Pittaja type, mark the present form of the disease. 
It I is called Raktaja Vidradhi. Of external Vidradhis 
or abscesses, those of the Sdnnipdtika type should be 
regarded as incurable. 10 — ii. 

Antara-Vidradhi :— Now we shall describe 
the characteristic features of internal abscesses (Antara- 



•[Chap. IX. the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA . 63 

Vidradhi). The Vdyu, Pittam and Kaphah of the body, 
deranged through eating heav}^ incompatible and in- 
congenial (to the physical temperament of the eater) 
articles of food or of dry, putrid and decomposed sub- 
stances, or by excessive coition and fatiguing physical 
exercise, or by voluntaiy repression of any natural 
urging of the body or through the eating of food which 
is followed by an acid reaction, either severally or 
collectively give rise to a tumour-like (Gulma), raised, 
or elevated abscess in the interior of the organism, which 
is often felt to be shaped like an ant-hill. 12-13. 

Localities : — They are generally found to be 
seated at the mouth (neck) of the bladder, or about the 
umbilicus, or in the sides, or in the Kukshi (inguinal 
regions), or on the Vrikkas, or on the liver, or in the 
heart, or on the Kloma, or on the spleen, or in the 
rectum. Their general characteristics are identical with 
those of the several types of external abscess. The 
symptoms of their suppurated or unsuppurated stages 
should be determined in the light of the chapter on 
Amapakvaishanyiam (Ch XVII Sutra.). I 4 "i 5 ' 

Their specific symptoms : -Now hear 
me describe the symptoms which specifically mark these 
internal abscesses according to their seats in the differ- 
ent regions of the organism. An abscess appearing 
in the rectum (Guda) is marked by the suppression 
of the flatus (Vata). Seated in the bladder, it gives rise 
to difficulty of urination and scantiness of urine. 
Appearing about the umbilicus it produces a distressing 
hic-cough and a rumbling sound (Atopa) in the intes- 
tines. Seated in either of the sides (Kukshi) it tends to 
aggravate inordinately the vAjm of the body. Appear- 
ing in the inguinal region it gives rise to an extreme 
catching pain at the back and waist. Seated in citlicr 



64 


NIDANA STIIANAM 


[Cliap. IX. 


of the Vrikkas it brings about a contraction of the sides. 
Appearing on the spleen, it produces symptoms of 
difficult and obstructed respiration. Seated on the heart 
it gives rise to an excruciating and piercing pain within 
its cavity and a drawing pain (Graha) extending all over 
the body (D. R. — cough). Seated in the Liver its 
characteristic indications arc thirst and difficult 
breathing (D. R. — hic-cough) whereas a sort of unquen- 
chable thirst is the symptom which marks its scat on 
the Eloma. 16-17. 

Prognosis : — An abscess appearing on any 
vital part (Marma) of the organism, whether large 
or small in size, suppurated or unsuppurated, should be 
deemed as extremely hard to cure. Discharge from an 
abscess formed in the region of the organism above the 
umbilicus and (spontaneously bursting), will flow out 
through the mouth whereas similar secretions from down 
the umbilical region of (the abdomen), naturally find 
an outlet through the fissure of the anus. The case 
in which the secretions (pus etc.) find a down- 
ward channel and outlet may end in reco\ ery of the 
patient whereas the one in which the secretions take an 
upward course invariably proves fatal. An incision 
made by surgeon from the outside into an internal 
abscess, other than the one situated on the heart, or on 
the bladder or on the umbilicus may occasionally, prove 
successful, but the one, seated on any of the preceding 
vulnerable visceras (heart, bladder etc.) of the body and 
surgicall}'- opened invariably ends in death. 18-19. 

A woman, who has miscarried or has been even 
safely delivered of a child at term, may be afflicted with 
a dreadful abscess in the event of her taking injudi- 
cious and unhwholesome food after parturition. The 
abscess in such a case, which is attended with extreme 



Chaf). IX.] , nIDANA STHANAM. is 6.5: 

hyper-pyrexia - (Dihajvara) should -be considered' as' 
having had its' "origin to the vitiated blood (Raktaja- 
Vidradhi) accumulated in the organism.. The abscess, 
which appears in the Kukshi (in the iliac region) of 
a safely delivered woman owing to the presence of the 
unexpelled blood-clots in those regions after child- 
birth, should be also diagnosed as a case of Raktaja 
abscess. The unexpelled blood is called Makkalla. 
Such an abscess, if not absorbed in the course of a week, 
is sure to suppurate. 26 — 21. 

Differentiating' diagnosis of Gu I ma- 
and Vidradhi*" Now I shall discuss the features 
which distinguish a Gulma (internal tumour) from a 
Vidradhi (internal abscess). It may be asked, how is 
it that Gulma, (internal tumour) though caused by, 
and involving the co-operation of the same deranged' 
Doshas as an internal abscess, docs nut suppurate, while 
the latter (Vidradhi) does run to suppuration ? 22—23. 

The answer is that a Gulma (internal tumour), though 
caused by the same deranged Doshas as a Vidradhi 
(internal abscess), does not resort to any deranged 
organic matter, such as flesh, blood, etc., while, on the 
contrary, in a case of Vidradhi, the diseased flesh and 
blood of a locality arc in themselves transformed into 
an abscess. An internal tumour (Gulma) is like a 
water bubble floating ami moving about within a cavitj’- 

* A Gulma according to Sus'riita does . not .sivppiirate, but the terra 
“Api” (also) contemplates instances in \yhich n Gulma nia}’ suppurate 
as in the c.ase where it has got its basis in the 'deranged flesh etc. of the 
locality. Charaka asserts that retarded digestion ‘of the ingested' foqd 
followed by digestionary acid reaction, colic pain, insomnia with fever 
and a non-relish for food and a sense of oppression, etc. are the symp- 
toms which indicate that suppuration has set in a Gulma, and he -advises 
that it (Gulma) should be treated with poultices, etc. 


9 



66 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. IX. 


of the body etc. without any fixed root of its own. 
Hence, it is that a Gulma (internal tumour) does not 
suppurate at all. Suppuration sets in in an abscess only 
because it largely contains flesh and blood unlike a 
Gulma (internal tumour) which is not formed of any 
such organic matter, and depends only on the aggravated 
Doshas giving birth to it. Hence, a Gulma does not 
suppurate at all. 24. 

Incurable Types ; — A case of an internal 
abscess suppurating about the heart, bladder of 
umbilicus as well as one of the Tridosha type (appearing 
in any part of the organism) should be given up as in- 
curable. The abscess in which the marrow suppurates 
(generally) becomes fatal. The suppurating process in 
an internal abscess, which generally affects the under- 
lying bone, is sometimes found to affect the marrow. 
The suppurated marrow, failing to find an outlet on 
account of the compactness of the local flesh and bone, 
produces a sort of burning sensation in the locality 
which consumes the body like a blazing fire. The 
disease confined to the bone, like a piercing dirt, 
torments the patient for a considerable length of time. 
An incision (made into the affected bone) is followed 
by the secretion of a fat-like, glossy, white, cold and 
thick pus. Men, learned in the knowledge of the 
Medicinal SAstras, designate such an abscess as an 
Asthighdta-Vidradhi (abscess of the bone) which 
involves all the three kinds of deranged Doshas, and is 
attended with various kinds of pain which mark them 
•respectively.- 25-26. 

, Thus en3s the ninth Chapter of the Niddnasihdnam in the Sus'tuta 
SapthitA which treats of the setiology of abscess. 



CHAPTER X. 


Now we shall discourse on the Nidanam of Visar- 
pa (erysipelas), Nadi (sinus) and Stana-roga 
(diseases affecting the mammas of a woman), i. 

Definition of Visarpa The deranged and 
aggravated Doshas, (Vdyu, Pittam and Kapham) having 
recourse to, and affecting the Tvaka (Skin), flesh and 
blood, speedily give rise to a sort of shifting, elevated 
swelling (Sotha) marked by the characteristic symptoms 
of any of them involved in the case. This swelling tends 
to extend all over the body. The disease is called 
Visarpa from the fact of its extending or swiftly shifting 
character (Skr. srip —to go, to extend). 2. 

The Vsitaja Type : — The swelling (Sotha) is 
soft and rough and assumes a black colour attended with 
an aching pain in the limbs and a cutting or piercing 
pain (in the affected locality). It is further marked by 
(all the usual) symptoms of the Vdtika fever. A case of 
this type in which uneven flame coloured vesicles or 
bulbs appear on the affected part through the extreme 
vitiation (of the Vayu and Pittam) should be given up 
as incurable. 3. 

The Pittaja and Kaphaja Types The 

Pittaja Visarpa (erysipelas) rapidly extends (over the 
body), attended with severe fever, a burning sensation, 
suppuration and cracking (of the skin’. A large 
number of vesicles appears on the spot which as- 
sume a blood-red colour. A case of this t5'^pe, 
characterised by the destruction of the local flesh and 
veins owing to the excessively aggravated condition of 
the deranged Doshas (Kaphha and Pittam) and a 



68 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMlilTA. 


[Chap. X. 


collyrium-like black colour (of the swelling), should be 
regarded as incurable. The Kapliaja Visarpa extends 
slowly and the process of suppuration is tardj'. The 
affected part becomes white, gloss3r and .swollen, and 
•is 'marked by a slight pain and excessive itching. 4-5- 
The Sannipatika Type The Visarpa of 
the Tridoshaja type is deep-seated and the affected 
part assumes all colours and is attended with all sorts 
of p.ain which arc peculiar to the three aforesaid tj'pcs 
The local flesh and veins arc destroyed in the suppurating 
‘stage of this disease and hence, it .shouldbe looked 
upon as incurable. 6. 

The Kshataja Type (Er3\sipelas due to a 
wound or an ulcer) ; —The Pittam of a person with a 
temperament marked by the extreme aggravation of all 
the three Doshas, in conjunction with the blood, resorts 
to a wound*’ in his bod)^ and immediately gives rise to 
• Erysipelas (Sopha— lit rash) which assumes a reddish- 
brown . colour, with high fever with a burning sensation, 
and suppuration in its train, and it is found to be 
covered with black vesicles to the size of Ktdditha 
pulse. 7 . 

Prognosis : — The Vataja, Pittaja and Kapfiaja 
Visarpas are curable ; the Sannipatika and Khataja 
ones being incurable. The symptoms, which indicate 
an unfavourable prognosis in a case of Vataja or 
Pittaja Erysipelas, have been described before. Those, 
.'which attack the vital parts (Marmas) of the body, can 
•.be cured only with the greatest difficulty.^ 8. 

. * Of through the extreme augmentation of all. the three doshas in 

- the ulcer (Sadyah-kshata-Vrana) according to others. 

, -V . .Golden coloured (yellow) Erysipelas due' to the .action of the 
' (deranged) Pitlam is iricurahle {'Pif/a/mA' A'aticfiana-va/’use^ia (a'hn. na 
' R: ' ' - - 


Chap. X.] 


. "NIDANA STHANAM. 


69 


The Nadi-Vrana The pus of an abscess or 
swelling burrows ■ into the affected part if a person 
neglects it in its fully suppurated stage, dubious of its 
being so conditioned, or not, or even neglects to open a 
fully suppurated abscess. An abscess or swelling is 
called a Gati Vrana owing to an excessive infiltration 
of pus, and it is also called a Na'di-vrana owing to the 
presence of a large number of recesses or cavities in 
its inside. There are five different types of Nddi-vraiia 
(sinuses) such as the Vataja, Pittaja Kaphaja, Tridoshaja 

f 

and Salyaja. 9— 10. 

The Vataja, Kaphaja and Pittaja 
Types : — The Vataja Sinus is rough and short- 
mouthed, characterised by an aching pain (in its inside). 
It exudes a sort of frothy secretion which becomes 
greater at night and is attended with an aching pain. 
Thirst, lassitude, heat and a piercing pain(in the affected 
locality) are the usual accompaniments of the Pittaja 
types. Fever is present from the beginning and the Sinus 
exudes a large quantity of hot and yellow coloured 
secretion which is more by day than by night. The 
Kaphaja Sinus becomes hard and is characterised by 
'itching and a slight pain (numbed ?). It is found -to 
secrete a copious quantity of thick, shiny, white-coloured 
pus which becomes greater at night. 11-13. 

Dvandaja and Tridoshaja Types 

A case of Nadi-Vrana involving the concerted action 

O 

■of any two of the deranged Doshas (Vi}m, Pittam 
and Kapham) and ' exhibiting symptoms peculiar to 
both, is called a Dvandaja'^ one. There are three 


* Ga)’adasa does not read the symptoms of Dvi-doshaja (/ «., due 
to iwo morbific principles) types of sinus a g ven in the lexi v, hich 
’he has rejected as spurious 



70 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA*. 


[Chap. X. 


types of this class of disease, (such as the Vttta-piUaja, 
Vata-kaphaja and Pitta-kaphaja) A ease of Na'di- 
vrana, exhibiting symptems of the three aforesaid types, 
and attended with fever and a burning sensation, diffi- 
cult breathing, dryness of the mouth and syncope, is 
called Tridoshaja. An attack of this type should 
be regarded as dreadful and fatal, casting around the 
gloom of death. 14-1 $• 

The ^alyaja Ncidi-Vrana A foreign 
matter (such as dirt, bone, splinter etc.), lodged within 
the bodj' and invisible to the eye, tends to burst open 
the skin, etc. of the locality along its channel of inser- 
tion and gives vise to a type of Sinus. It is character- 
ised by a constant pain, and suddenly and rapidly 
exudes a sort of hot, blood-tinged, agitated, frothy sccre- 
tion. This type is called Salyaja. 16. 

ThcStana-Rogia: — These may be divided into 
as many types as the aforesaid NAdi-Vrana and arc 
caused by the same exciting factors as the last named 
malady. The milk-carrying ducts remain closed in the 
breast of a nullipara thus barring the possibility of the 
descent of the Doshas through them and of an attack 
of any disease at that part of the body. On the 
contrary, such ducts in the breast of a ptimipara open 
and expand of their own accord, thus making the 
advent of diseases possible that are peculiar to the 
mamma. I7"i9- 

The breast- milk : —The sweet essence of the 
Rasa (lymph chyle) drawn from the digested food 
courses through the whole body and is ultimately con- 
centrated in the breast of a mother or a woman (big 
with child) which is called milk. 20. 

Its character ; — The breast-milk, like semen, 
lies hidden and invisible in the organism, though 



chap. X.] 


NIDANA STHANAM. 


71 


permeating it in a subtle or essential form. The charac- 
teristic features of the breast-milk bear analogy to those 
of semen The breast milk is secreted, and flows 
out at the touch, sight or thought of the child in the 
same manner as the semen is dislodged and emitted 
at the sight, touch or recollection etc. of a beloved 
woman. As the strong and unclouded affections of a 
man are the cause of the emission of semen, so the fondest 
love of a mother for her children brings about the secre- 
tion of her breast-milk Both semen and breast-milk are 
the product of the essence of digested food, this essence 
being converted into milk in women. 21 — 22. 

Its abnormal and normal Traits:— 

The milk of a mother vitiated by the deranged Vayu 
of her system has an astringent taste and floats on 
water. The milk of a mother vitiated by the deranged 
Pittam has an acid and pungent taste and becomes 
marked with a yellow hue,* if left to float on water. The 
milk of a mother vitiated by the deranged Kapham 
is thick and slimy and sinks in water. The milk of a 
mother vitiated by the concerted and simultaneous 
derangement of the three Doshas of the body is marked 
by the combination of all the preceding symptoms. An 
external blow or hurt too (Abhighdta) sometimes pro- 
duces vitiation of the mother’s milk. 23. 

The milk (of a mother), which instantly mixes with 
water, tastes sweet and retains its natural greyish tint, 
should be regarded as pure. 24. 

The bodily Doshas having recourse to the breasts of 
a woman whether filled with milk or not and vitiating 
the local flesh and blood give rise to mammary diseases, 

* The panicle “Cha” in the text indicates that the colour may lurn 
t>Iue or pink in some c;tse^ 



72. 


THE SUSI-IRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. X. 


(Stana-roga)’. All the types of ab.sccs,s (Vidradhi) 
excepting the one called the Raktaja out of the six 
types described before arc found to attack the mammai> 
and their symptoms should be understood as identical 
with those of external abscesses. 25. 

Thus ends the tenth Chapter of the Nidanam Sthdnam in the Sus'rula 
Samhit.a w ich treats of the ocliology and symptoms of Erysipelas, .Sinus 
and mammary abscesses. 



CHAPTER XL 


J 


Now we shall discourse on the Nidinam of Granthi 
(Glands etc.), Apachi (Scrofula etc.), Arvuda (Tumours) 
and Galaganda (Goitre), i . 

The deranged and unusually aggravated V’d}^ etc. 
(Pittam and Kapham), by vitiating the flesh, blood and 
fat mixed with the Kapham (of any part of the or- 
ganism), give rise to the formation of round, knotty, 
elevated swellings which are called Granthi (Glandular 
inflammation). 2. 

The Dosha-Orig'ined Types The swell- 
ing (Sopha) of the Va'taja type seems as if it were 
drawn into and elevated or as if severed or pricked 
with a needle, cleft in two or drawn asunder or as if 
cut in two or pierced. The knotty growth assumes a 
black colour, and is rough and elongated like a bladder. 
On bursting a granthi of this type exudes clear bright 
red blood. The Pittaja Granthi is characterised by 
heat and an excessive burning sensation (in its inside). 
A pain, like that of being boiled by an alkali or b}'’ 
fire. is felt in the inside. The knotty formation assumes 
a red or yellowish colour and exudes a flow of extremely 
hot blood on bursting. The Kaphaja Granthi is slightly 
discoloured and cold to the touch. It is characterised 
by a slight pain and excessive itching, and feels hard 
and compact as a stone. It is slow or tardy in its 
growth and exudes a secretion of thick white-coloured 
pus when it bursts. 3-5. 

TI16 WlGdlaja Type I — The fat on’gined Gran- 
thi is large and glossy and gains or loses in size with 
the gain or- loss of flesh by the patient. It is marked 

10 



1 \ 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. Xt. 


by a little pain and an excessive itching sensation and 
exudes a secretion of fat resembling clarified butter or 
a gruel, in colour and consistency, made of the levigated 
paste of sesamum on bursting. 6. 

^ira-Gl*anthi— (aneurism or varicose veins) : — 
The bodily Vayu in weak and enfeebled persons, de- 
ranged by over-fatiguing physical exercises, straining or 
exertion or by pressure, presses on, contracts, dries or 
draws up the ramifications of veins (Sira) or arteries 
(of the affected locality), and speedily gives rise to a 
raised knotty formation which is called a Sira-Granthi, 
In the event of its being shifting and slightly painful, 
it can be cured only with the greatest difficulty. 
Whereas a case in which the knotty formation is pain- 
less, fixed, large and situated at any of the vital parts of 
the body (Marmas), should be deemed incurable.* 7. 

Apachf — (Scrofula etc.) ; — The augmented and 
accumulated fat and Kapham give rise to string of hard 
glossy, painless, nodular, or elongated granthi swellings) 
about the joints of the jawbones, at the waist, joint, 
about the tendons of the neck, about the throat or about 
the region of the arm-pits. These glands (Granthis) re- 
sembling the stones of the Amalaka fruit or the spawn 
of fish in shape or like some other shape, are of the same 
colour as the surrounding skin ; and a string or a large 
crop of such glandular knots, gradually growing is 
called Apachi-j- on account of the extensive nature of 
their growth. 8-9. 

* In several editions an additional line is to be found running as men 
well conversant with symptoms (of Gtanthis) recognise a type oi Granthi 
due to the action of the deranged flesh and blood, which exhibit."; symp- 
toms identical with those of a tumour (Afansjta'srayatii clidmuda 
' ioskhanena iulyam hi drishtamath lakshanajanih). But Jejjata has 
rejected it as of questionable authority. 

*( These glandular formations appear about the root of the penis, about 
the sides, in the arm-pits and about the throat and the tendons of the neck. 



Chnp. XI.] 


NIDANA STHANAM. 


These knotty formations are characterised by itching 
and a slight pain. Some of them spontaneously burst 
exuding secretions while others are observed to vanish 
and re-appear (in succession). Such vanishings, re- 
appearances, or fresh formations continue for a consider- 
able time. The disease undoubtedly owes its origin to 
the deranged fat and Kapham, and may only be made 
amenable (to medicine) with the greatest difficulty 
lasting for years at a time. lo. 

Arvuda— (tumour etc.) : — The large vegetation 
of flesh which appears at any part of the body, becomes 
slightl}'' painful, rounded, immovable and deep-seated, 
and has its root sunk considerably deep in the affected 
part, and which is due to the vitiation of the flesh 
and blood by the deranged and aggravated Doshas 
(VAyu, Pittam and Kapham) is called an Arvuda 
(tumour) by the learned physicians^’’. The growth of 
an Arvuda is often found to be .slow, and it seldom 
suppurates. The characteristic symptoms of an Arvuda 
which owes its origin to the deranged condition of the 
Vayu, Pittam, Kapham, flesh or fat, are respective!}' 
identical with those, which mark the cases of Granthis, 
brought about by the same deranged principles of the 
bod}'. II. 

Raktaja— Arvuda The deranged Doshas 
(Vilyu, Pittam and Kapham; contracting, compressing 


They resemble spawns of fish in shape and size and arc due lo the action 
of the deranged Viiyii, Pittam and Kapham. The appearance ol such 
glands in the upper part of the body should be niiributed to the action 
ollhe deranged and aggravated Vayu. They are extremely hard to cure 
in as much as their growth (foriiialion) involves the concerted action 
ol the morbific principles (Doshas) of the body. — Bhoja- 

Charaka, who designates this dise.ase as GaudamtUA, de'cribe.s its 
location in regions about the jawbones alone. 

‘That they having recourse to the flesh, produce decp-sraird 
vegetations (of flesh) is the reading adopted by Gaydd.-lsa and others. 



76 THE SUSIIRUTA SAMIIITA. XI, 

and drawing the vessels (Sini) and blood (of the affec- 
ted part^, raise a slightly suppurated and exuding 
tumour which is covered w'ith small warts and fleshy 
tubercles and is called a R£(ktarvuda. This tumour is 
rapid in its growth and exudes a constant flow of 
(vitiated) blood. The complexion of the patient owing 
to depletive actions and other concomitant evils of 
haimorrhage becomes pale and j^cllow. The tj^pc 
should be considered incurable on account of its having 
its origin in the blood.* 12 — 13. 

IVI^nS^rvuda : — The flesh of any part of the 
body hurt by an external blow etc. (hurting it with a 
log of wood — D.R.) and vitiated in consequence, gives 
rise to a sort of swelling (tumour) which is called 
MAnsdrvuda, which originates through the action of 
the deranged Vayu. It is glossy, painless, non-sup- 
purating, hard as a stone, immobile, and of the same 
colour as the surrounding skin. Such a tumour 
appearing in a person addicted to meat diet becomes 
deep seated owing to the consequent vitiation of the 
bodily flesh and soon lapses into one of an incurable 
type. 14. 

PrOgTIOSiS I— ‘Even of the aforesaid curable 
types (such as the Vataja, etc.), the following types of 
Arvudam (tumours) should be likewise regarded as incur- 
able, those which appear in the cavity of a Srota chan- 
nel or an artery , or any vulnerable joint of the body and 
are characterised by any sort of secretion and also im- 
movable, should be deemed incurable. An Arvudam 
(tumour) cropping up on one existing from before is 

' Although i\ll types of Atvmlu have their origin in the deranged flesh 
and blood, preponderant action of the deranged blood is found in Rakta- 
aruuda^ while a dominant action of the deranged flesh marks the 
M&nidi~vuda. type; ■ ■ ■. 



Chap, XI. 


NIDANA STHANAM. 


77 


called Adhyarvudanij which should be likewise deemed 
as incurable. A couple of contiguous Arvudam (tumours) 
cropping up simultaneously or one after another is called 
Dviarvudam, which should be held as equally incurable 
(with one of the foregoing types). *An Arvuda (tumour) 
of whatsoever type, never suppurates owing to the 
exuberance of the deranged Kapham and fat as well 
as in consequence of the immobility, condensation and 
compactness of the deranged Doshas (Vayu, Pittam and 
Kapham involved in the case, or out of a specific trait 
of its own nature. I5"i6. 

Definition of Galag^anda (Goitre):— The 

deranged and aggravated Vijm in combination with the 
deranged and augmented Kapham and fat of the loca- 
lity affects the two tendons of tlie neck (Manyas) and 
gradually gives rise to a swelling about that part of the 
neck characterised by the specific symptoms of the 
deranged Doshas (Vayu or Kapham) and principles in- 
volved in the case. The swelling is called Galganda 
(Goitre). 17. 

Symptoms of the Dosha-origined 
Types : — The swelling or tumour in the V^tajaJ goitre 
is characterised by a pricking pain (in its inside) marked 
by the appearance of blue or dark coloured veins iSira) 
on its surface. It assumes a vermilion or tawny brown 
hue. The goitre becomes united with the local fat 
in cour.se of time, and gains in .size, giving rise to a 
sense of burning in the throat, or is characterised b}- 
the absence of anj' pain at all. A Vfitaja goitre is rough 
to the touch, .slow in its growth, and never or but rarel)* 
.suppurates. A sense of drync.s.s in the throat and tlic 
palate as well as a bad taste in the mouth likewise 
marks this type. The swelling in the Kaphaja Type 
a,ssumcs a large shape and becomes hard, firm, cold 



78 . 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XI. 


and of the same colour (white). There is but slight pain 
and the patient feels an irresistible inclination to scratch 
the part. It is slow in its progress and suppuration is 
rare and tardy. A sweet taste is felt in the mouth and 
the throat and the palate seem as if smeared with a sort 
of sticky mucous. 18-20. 

Symptoms of the Medaja Type:— 

The swelling is glossy, soft (heavy — D.R) and pale- 
coloured. It emits a fetid smell and is characterised by 
excessive itching and an absence of pain. It is short at 
its root and hangs down from the neck in the shape of a 
pumpkin (Aldvu), gradually gaining its full rotundity at 
the top. The size of the goitre is proportionate to the 
growth or loss of flesh of the body. The face of the 
patient looks as if it has been anointed with oil and a 
peculiar rumbling sound is constantly heard in the 
throat. 2 1 . 

Prognosis : - A case of goitre attended with 
difficult respiration, a softening of the whole body, 
weakness, a nonrelish for food, loss of voice as well as 
the one which is more than of a year’s standing should 
be abandoned by the physician as incurable. 22. 

Kletrical Text:— A pendent swelling whether 
large or small and occurring about the region of the 
throat and resembling the scrotum in shape is called 
a Gala-Ganda. 23. 

Thus ends the eleventh Chapter of the Nidana Sthanam in the 
Sustuta Samhita which treats of the Niddnam of Granlhi, Scrofula, etc. 



CHAPTER Xn 


Now we shall discourse on the Niddnamof Vriddhi 
(hydrocele, hernia, scrotal tumours etc), Upadansa 
(disease of the genital organ, and ^'lipada (.ele- 
phantiasis). I . 

Classes : - There arc seven different t3'^pes of 
Vriddhi such as the Vdtaja, Pittaja, Kaphaja, Raktaja, 
Medaja, Mutraja and the Antra-vriddhi. Of these both 
the Mutraja-vriddhi (hydrocele or extravagation of the 
urinel, and Antra-vriddhi types, though owing their ori- 
gin to the deranged condition of the bodily Vayu, have 
been so named after the organic matters or anatomical 
parts (urine, iliac colon etc.) involved in them, 2. 

Definition and Premonitory symp- 
toms : — Any of the deranged Doshas (.Vayu, Pittam, 
etc ) lying in the nether regions of the body may resort 
to the spermatic cords (Dhamani) and give rise to a 
swelling and inflammation of Phalacosha ^scrotal sac) 
which is called Vriddhi (scrotal tumour etc,). A pain 
in the bladder, scrotum, penis and the waist (Kati) 
incarceration of the Vayu and the swelling of the 
scrotum, are the premonitory symptoms of the 
disease. 3 — 4. 

The Dosha-orig^ined Types The type 

in which the scrotum becomes distended with Vayu 
like an inflated air-drum, marked by roughness of 
(its surface) and the presence of a varied sort of Vataja 
pain (in its interior) without any apparent cause is called 
Vataja Vriddhi. The swollen scrotum, of the 
Pittaja Vriddhi, assumes the colour of a ripe 



8o 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. Xll. 


Audumvara fruit and is attended with fever, a burning 
sensation and heat in the affected part. It is of a 
marked rapid growth and speedy suppuration (of the 
scrotum). The swollen organ in the Kaphaja Vriddhi 
becomes hard and cold to the touch accompanied by 
little pain, and itching (in the affected part;. In the 
Raktaja type the swollen scrotum is covered over with 
black vesicles, all other symptoms of the type being 
identical with those of the Pittaja one. In the Medaja 
type the swollen scrotum looks like a ripe Tala fruit 
and becomes soft, glossy and slightly painful. The 
patient feels a constant inclination to scratch the part. 
The Mutraja-vriddhi (hydrocele) owes its origin to 
a habit of voluntary retention of urine, its characteristic 
symptoms being softness and fluctuation on the surface 
of the swollen scrotum like a skin-bladder filled with 
water, painful urination, pain in the testes and swelling 
of the scrotum . 5. 

Antra-vriddhi (Inguinal hernia, -.—The local 
Vayu enraged and unusually aggravated by lifting a 
great load, wrestling with a stronger person, violent 
physical strain or a fall from a tree and such like 
physical labour doubles up a part of the small intestine 
and presses it down into the inguinal regions lying 
there strangulated in the form of a knot (Granthi) 
which is known as Antra-vriddhi (inguinal hernia). 
The part not properly attended to at the outset 
descends into the scrotum which becomes ultimately 
elongated and intensely swollen and looks like an 
inflated air-bladder. It (hernia) ascends upwards under 
pressure, making a peculiar sound, (gurgling) ; while let 
free it comes down and again gives rise to the swelling 
of the scrotum. This disease is called Antra-vriddhi 
and is incurable. 6. 



.Chap. Xllt] 


NIDANA STHANAM. 


8l 


ThcUpadansam : — An inflammatory swelling 
of the genital, whether ulcerated or not is called 
TJpadansa*. The disease owes its origin to the 
action of the local Doshas, aggravated by promiscuous 
and excessive sexual intercourse, or by entire absti- 
nence in sexual matter ; or' by visiting a woman, who 
had observed a vow of lifelong continence or one who has 
not long, known a man, or one in her menses or one with 
an. extremely narrow or spacious vulva, or with rough or 
harsh or large pubic hairs ; or by going unto a woman 
whose partturient canal’ is studded with hairs along its 
entire length ; or by visiting a woman not amorously 
disposed towards the visitor and vice versa ; or by know- 
ing a woman who washes her private parts with foul 
water or neglects the cleanliness of those parts, or suffers 
from any of the vaginal diseases, or one whose vagina 
is naturally foul ; or by going unto a woman in any of 
the natural fissures of her body other than the organ of 
copulation (Vi-yoni) ; or by pricking the genital with 
finger nails, or biting it with the teeth, or through poison- 
ous contact, or through practice of getting the (penis 
abnormally elongated by pricking the) bristles of a 
water parasite {S ukd) into its body ; or by practising 

* Upadans'a is not syphilis whole to whole. Certain types of 
Upadans'a such as the Raktaja and Sannipatika types which entail the 
destruction of the organs concerned exhibit certain symptoms which are 
common to syphilis as well. The secondary eruptions and tertiary 
symptoms of syphilis are not mentioned by the A'yurvedic Rishis who 
used to treat it only with vegetable medicines and this fact intimates 
the probability that the secondary and terli.\ry symptoms of syphilis 
might not arise by their efficient and able treatment from the very 
beginning, preventing the absorption of the poison into the system. 
The practice of ablution, so common among the Hindus, might be 
taken into consideration as one of the important preventive factors. 
Maharshi Charaka has comprised it within the chapter on ‘Senile 
Impptency’.— Ed. 



82 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. Xri. 


masturbation, or any unnatural offence with female 
quadrupeds ; or by washing the genitals with filthy or 
poisonous water ; or through neglect to wash the parts 
after coition, or voluntary suppression of a natural flow 
of semen or urine or through any hurt or pressure 
on the organ etc. The inflammation of the genital 
thus engendered is called Upadans'a. The disease 
admits of being divided into five distinct types, such 
as, the V^taja, Pittaja, Kaphaja, Tridoshaja and the 
Raktaja. 7 — 8 . 

The symptoms of different Types 

The roughness of the genitals, the bursting or cracking 
of the integuments of the penis and prepuce etc., numb- 
ness and swelling of the affected part which is perceived 
rough to the touch and the presence of a varied sort of 
pain peculiar to the deranged Viyu are the characteristic 
indications of the Wtaja type. In the Pittaja type 
fever sets in (from the very beginning), the penis becomes 
swollen and assumes the colour of a ripe Indian fio- 
(reddish-yellow), attended with a sort of intolerable 
burning sensation The process of suppuration is rapid 
and a variety of pain peculiar to the deranged Pittam, 
(distinguishes it from the other forms of the disease). 
The penis becomes swollen, hard and glossy in the 
Raphaja type maiked by itching and a variety of 
pain characteristic of the deranged Kapham. In the 
blood-origined type (Raktaja) the organ bleeds heavily 
and is covered with the eruptions of large black vesicles. 
Fever, thirst, (Sosha), burning sensations and other 
characteristic symptoms of the deranged Pittam are also 
piesent. Palliation is all that can be occasionally effected 
in these cases. Symptoms specifically betraying to each 
of the Vataja, Pittaja and Kaphaja types concurrently 
manifest themselves in the Satnuipsitika type of Upa- 



Chap. Xil.3 


NIDANA STHANAM. 


83 


dansa. The organ cracks, the ulcers or cancers become 
infested with parasites arid death comes in to put a stop 
to the suffering of its wretched victim. 9 — 13. 

^lipadam (Elephantiasis) : — The disease in which 
the deranged Vayu, Pittam and Kapham, taking a down- 
ward course, are lodged in the thighs, knee-joints, legs 
and the inguinal regions and spread to the feet in course 
of time and gradually give rise to a swelling therein, 
is called ^lipadam. Thei'e are three types of Slipada 
severally due to the actions of the deranged Va(yu, 
Pittam and Kapham. 14—15. 

The symptoms of the different 
Types : — The swollen parts assume a black colour in 
the Va(fcaja type and are felt rough and uneven to the 
touch. A sort of spasmodic pain without any apparent 
reason is felt (at intervals in the seat of the disease), 
which largely begins to crack or burst. The Pittaja 
type is characterised by a little softness and yellowish 
hue (of the diseased localities) and often attended with 
fever, and a burning sensation. In the Kiphaja type the 
affected localities become white, glossy, slightly painful, 
heavy, contain large nodules (Granthis) and are studded 
over with crops of papillae. 16. 

Prognosis : — A case of elephantiasis of a year’s 
growth as well as the one which is characterised by 
excessive swelling (of the affected parts), exudation and 
vegetation of knotty excrescences resembling the sum- 
mits of an ant-hill should be given up as incur- 
able. 17. 

Wlemorable Verses : -A preponderance of 
the deranged Kapham marks the three types of the 
disease, in as much as, the heaviness and largeness (of 
the swelling) can not be brought about by any other 
factor than Kapham. The disease is peculiar to countries 



34 


THE SUSHRUTA. SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XII. 


■ in which large quantities of old rain-water rertiain 
. stagnant during the greater part (lit.— all seasons) 
of the year making them damp and humid in all 
seasons.' 18-91 

• The disease is usually found to be confined to the legs 
and hands of men but cases are on record in which it 
has extended to the ear, nose, lips and the regions of the 
eyes. [Penis — Mddhaba-Niddnam). 20. 

Thus ends the twelfth Chapter of the Niddnasthanatn in the Sus'ruta 
Samhila which treats of the Nidanam of scrotal tumours, hernia, Upa- 
dans'am and elephantiasis. 



CHAPTER Xin. 


Now we shall discourse on the Niddnam of 
Kshudrarog'am (diseases which are known by 
the general name of minor ailments), i. 

These diseases are generally divided into forty- 
four distinct varieties or types such as ; — AjagallikA, 
Yavaprakshyd, Andhdlaji, Vivritd, Kachchapika, 
Valmika, Indravriddha, PanasikA, Pdshdna-garddabha, 
Jdla-garddabha, Kakshd, Vishphota, Agni-rohini, 
Chippam, Kunakha, Anusaye, 'Vid&riki, Sarkari- 
Arbudam, Pam^ VicharchikA, Rakasa, PAdaddrikd, 
Kadara, Alasa, Indralupta, Darunaka, Arunsbikd, 
Palitam, Mas'urikd, Yauvana-pidakd, Padmini-kantaka, 
Yatumani, Mas'aka, Charmakila.TilakAlaka, Nyachchya, 
Vyanga, Parivaitikd, AvapAtikd, Niruddha-prakas'a, 
Niruddha-guda, Ahiputanam, Vrishana-kachchu, and 
Guda-bhrans'a . * 2. 

Metrical Texts The species of pimples or 
eruptions which are shaped like the Mtidga pulse and 
are glossy, knotty and painless is called Ajagallikat. 
They are - of the same colour (as the surrounding 
skin) and their origin is usually ascribed to the action 
of the deranged Kapham and Vayu. The disease is 
peculiar to infants.-j* YJiVE^praksliyat *. — The eruptions 

■* Brahmadeva comprising Garddavika, Irotllika, Gandhapidikd and 
TilaMlaha in the list reads it as consisting of thirty-four different species. 
Jejjata does not hold the four forms of disease commencing with Gardda- 
vika, tic, as included within the list. Gaydddsa, finding them included in 
all the recensions reads GarddabKikd, etc. as included wilhin^lhe list of 
Kshttdra Hoga, and Pdma etc. as included within the list of Kshudra 
Kushtham, 

i They afflict cerlairi infants— Dallana. 



g6 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. CCh»p. XlII. 

which are shaped like the barley-corns, extremely hard, 
thick at the middle, knotty and affect (lit- confined to) 
the flesh are called Yavaprakshyd. They are due to the 
action of the deranged Vayu and Kapham. Andhsil'ji: 
— The dense, raised, slender-topped eruptions which 
appear in circular patches and exude a slight pus 
are called Andhdlaji, They are due to the action of 
the deranged Vdyu and Kapham. VivritSl; -Pustules 
or eruptions, which are coloured like a ripe fig. fruit and 
are flat-topped and appear in circular patches with an 
intolerable burning sensation, are called Vivrita They 
are due to the action of the deranged Pittam. 3 - 6. 

Kachchapiksi A group of five or six hard, 
elevated, nodular eruptions (Granthis), arranged in the 
shape of a tortoise (which may appear on the sur- 
face of any part of the body), are called Kachchapika. 
They are due to the action of the deranged Kapham 
and Vdyu. Valtnika The knotty undurated erup- 
tions (Granthis) which gradually appear on the soles, 
palms, joints, neck and on the regions above clavicles 
and resemble an ant-hill in shape, slowly gaining in size 
are called Valmika. Ulcers attended with pricking 
pain, burning, itching sensations and exuding mucopu- 
rulent discharges appear around the aforesaid eruptions 
(Granthis). The disease is due to the action of the 
deranged Kapham, Pittam and V^yu. 7—8. 

lncira.vricldllcl : — Pimples or eruptions (Pidakd) 
arising (on the surface of the body), arranged in the same 
circular array as marks the distribution of the seed (sacks) 
in a lotus flower are called Indravriddha' by the 
physicians. The disease is caused by the action of the 
deranged Vdyu and Pittam. Pauasika Eruptions 
(Pidakd) of a sort of extremely painful pustules all 
over the back or the ears which resemble the 



Chap. XIII.] 


NIDANA STHANAM. 


87 


Kumuda bulb in shape, are called Fanasiksi. They 
are due to the action of the_ deranged Kapham and 
Vkyu. P£ksh^ua-&arddablia A slightly painful and 
non-shifting hard swelling, which appears on the joint 
of the jawbones, t^Hanu-sandhi, is called Pdshdna- 
Garddabha. The disease is the effect of the deranged 
Kapham and Vdyu. Jaila-Garddablia A thin and 
superficial swelling, which like erysipelas is of a 
shifting or progressive character and is further attended 
with fever and a burning sensation and which is but 
rarely found to suppurate, is called Jila-Garddabha 5 ’ 
The disease results fi'om the deranged Pittam. 
Kaksh^ •. — The disease characterised by the eruptions of 
black and painful vesicles tShphota_j on the back, sides, 
and on the region about the arm-pits, is called Kaksh^. 
The disease is likewise attributed to the action of the 
aggravated Pittam, Vishpliotaka • — The disease in 
which eruptions of burnlike vesicles (Shphota) crop up 
on the whole surface of the body, or on that of any 
particular locality, attended with fever, is called Vish- 
photaka. The disease is the effect of vitiated blood 
and Pittam. 9 — 14. 

Agni-Rohinit ; — Vesicles (Shphota) having the 
appearance of burns and cropping up about the waist 


* The circular raised spols siuddcd with vesicles are called Gardda- 
bhA. They are reddish and painful and produced by ihe action of VAyu 
and Pittam. GayadJisa reads it so. 

+ Dallana quotes from another Tanlram that the morbific principles 
in men, aggravated through the action of the enraged and augmented 
Pittam and blood, give rise to vesicles (blisters) like red-hot charcoal by 
breaking open the flesh at the waist, attended with (.xtreme pain, high 
fever and an insufferable burning sensation which, if not properly remedied, 
bring on death within a fortnight, or ten days of their first appearance. 
These (vesicles) are called Vahnt- Hohini, And again from another work 
he cites that a case of Vahm- Hohini the action of the deranged 



88 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap, XIII. 


(Kak'shd) by bursting the local flesh, and which 
is attended with fever and a sensation as if a blazing 
fire is burning in the inside (of the affected part), are 
called Agni-Rohini. The disease is caused by the 
concerted action of the three deranged Doshas (.Vdyu, 
Pittam and Kapham). It is incurable and ends in the 
death of the patient either on the seventh"-, tenth or 
fifteenth day (of its first appearance). 15. 

Chippa.m : — The deranged Vdyu and Pittam 
vitiating the flesh of the finger-nails, give rise to a 
disease which is characterised by pain, burning and 
suppuration. The disease called Chippam, is also 
denominated Upanakha and Kshataroga. Euna- 
kham ; — The nails of fingers becoming rough, dry, 
black, and injured through the action of the Doshas 
enraged through the effect of a blow, are called Kunakha 
(bad nails). It is also called Ktdinain, Anusayi :-~ 
A small swelling (on the surface of the body) which is 
of the same colour (as the surrounding skin), but is' 
deep-seated, and suppurates in its deeper strata, is called 
Anusayi by the physicians. The disease is the effect 
of the deranged Kapham, Vid^riksf : — A round reddish 
swelling rising either on the auxiliary or inguinal regions 
in the shape of a gourd iyiddrikandd) is known as 
Vid^rikd. The disease is due to the concerted action 
of the deranged Vayu, Pittam and Kapham and 
is characterised by symptoms peculiar to each of 
them. 16 — 19, 


Kapham proves fatal within a fortnight, that due to the deranged Pittam, 
within ten days, and that due to the deranged Vdyu, within a week. 

* The patient dies on the seventh day in a case of disease marked by 
the dominant Vdyu, on the tenth day in a case marked by the dominant 
Pittam and on the fifteenth day in a case of dominant deranged Kapham. 



Chap, XIII. J 


NIDANA STHANAM. 


89 


^arkard^rbudam The deranged Vayu and 
Kapham having recourse to and affecting the flesh, veins 
(Sn-a), ligaments (Snayu) and fat give rise to a sort of 
cyst (Granthi) which when it bursts exudes a copious 
secretion in its nature somewhat like honey, clarified 
butter or Vasa. The aforesaid Vayu, when aggravated 
through excessive secretion, dries and gathers the flesh 
up again in the shape of (a large number of) gravel-like 
concretions (Sarkard) known accordingly as Sarkararbu- 
dam. A fetid secretion of varied colour is secreted from 
the veins (Sira) in these Granthis which are sometimes 
found to bleed suddenly. The three varieties of the skin 
disease called Vsimd (Eczema), Vicharchika' (Psoriasis) 
and Rakassi have already been discussed under the head 
of Kushtham (Chapter. V.). 20—21. 

P^dad^rika The soles and feet of a person 
of extremely pedestrian habits become dry (and lose 
their natural serous moisture). The local Vdyu thus 
aggravated gives rise to peculiar painful cracks 
(Ddri in the affected parts) which are called Pada- 
dirikd. Kadara : — The knotty (Granthi), a painful, 
hard growth raised at the middle or sunk at the sides, 
which exudes a secretion and resembles an Indian 
plum (Kola— in shape), and appearing at the soles 
(palms according to — Bhoja) of a person as an outcome 
of the vitiated condition of the local blood and fat 
produced by the deranged Doshas incidental to the 
pricking of a thorn etc. or of gravel is called a Kadara 
(corns).' Alaaa : — An affection, caused by contact of 
poisonous mire and appearing between the toes, which 
is characterised by pains, burning, itching and exuda- 
tion, is called Alasa. 22 — 25. 

Indralupta: — The deranged Vayu and Pittam 
having recourse to the roots of the hairs bring about their 


12 



90 


THE SUSHRHTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XIIl. 


gradual falling off, while the deranged blood and 
Kapham of the locality fill up those pores or holes, thus 
barring their fresh growth and recrudescence. The 
disease is called Indralupta,* Rujya or Kh^litya (Alo- 
pecia). Darunaka; — The disease in which the hairy 
parts of the body (roots of hairs) become hard, dry and 
characterised by an itching sensation is called Ddru- 
naka. The disease is due to the action of the deranged 
Kapham and Vayu. Arunshika^ •• — Ulcers (Arunshi) at- 
tended with mucopurulent discharges and furnished with 
a number of mouths or outlets and appearing on the 
scalps of men as the result of the action of local 
parasites and of the deranged blood and Kapham (of 
the locality) are called Arunshika. Palitam : — The 
heat and Pittam of the body having recourse to the 
region of the head owing to overwork, fatigue, and ex- 
cessive grief or anger, tend to make the hair prema- 
turely grey, and such silvering of the hair (before the 
natural period of senile decay) is called Palitam. 
Masuriksi (variola) ; — The yellow or copper-coloured 
pustules or eruptions attended with pain, fever and burn- 
ing and appearing all over the body, on (the skin of) the 
face and inside the cavity of the mouth, are called 
Masurikl Tauvana-pidaksi— (Miikhadushik£fc) The 

pimples like the thorns of a Salmali tree, which arefound 
on the face of young men through the deranged condition 
of the blood, Vdyu and Kapham, are called Yauvana- 
pidaka or pimples of youth. Padmini-Kantaka : 
—The circular, greyish patches or rash-like eruptions 

* Women ate geneially proof against this disease owing (o their 
delicate constitution and to their being subjected to the monthly discharge 
of vitiated blood and at the same time to their undergoing no physical 
exercise, and hence there is little chance of the bodily Pittam being 
deranged and bringing on this disease. 



Chap. XIII. ] NIDANA STHANAM. 9 1 

Studded over with thorny papilla of the skin resembling 
the thorns on the stem of the lotus marked by itching 
are called Padmini-kantaka. The disease is due to the 
deranged condition of the Vdyu and Kapham. Tatu- 
mani (mole) -.—The reddish, glossy, circular, and pain- 
less, congenital marks (Sahajam) or moles on the body not 
more elevated (than the surrounding skin) are called 
Yatumani. The disease is due to the deranged condition 
of the blood and Pittam. 26 — 33. 

n/lasaka (Lichen) : —The hard, painless, 
black and elevated eruptions on the body (skin) re- 
sembling the Mdsha pulse in shape, caused by the 
aggravated condition of the bodily Vayu are called 
Mas'aka Tilaksilaka: — The black painless spots on 
the skin about the size of a sesamum seed and 
level with the skin are called TilakAlaka. This 
disease is caused through the aggravated condition of 
the Vayu, Pittam and Kapham.f Nyaclicham; — The 
congenital, painless, circular, white or brown (Syava) 
patches on the skin, which are found to be restricted 
to a small or comparatively diffused area of the skin, 
are called Nyachcham. Charmakila (hypertrophy of 
the skin) : — The causes and symptoms of the disease 
known as Charmakila have been already described 
(under the head of the Ars'a-Nidanam). Vyanga : — 
The Vdyu being aggravated through wrath and over- 
fatiguing physical exercise, and surcharged with Pittam, 
and suddenly appearing on the face of a person, causes 
thin, circular, painless and brown-coloured patches or 
stains. They arc known by the name of Vyanga * 34-38. 

* According to certain authorities it is due to the absorption of blood 
by Vayu and Pittam. 

+ According to others the spot goes by the name of Nilikam, if it 
is black-coloured and appears anywhere other than on the face. 



92 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XIIL 


'The Parivartika The vital Vdyu (Vydna) 
aggravated by such causes as excessive massage (mastur- 
bation), pressure, or local trauma, attacks the integuments 
of the penis (prepuce) which being thus affected by 
the deranged Vayu forms into a knot-like structure and 
hangs down from the glans penis. The disease known 
as Parivartika or Phymosis is due to the action of the 
deranged Vayu aggravated by any extraneous factor. 
It is marked by pain and burning sensation ; and some- 
times suppurates. When the knotty growth becomes 
hard and is accompanied by itching, then it is caused by 
the aggravated Kapham. 39» 

Avapcltika When the integuments of the 
prepuce is abnormally and forcibly turned back by such 
causes as coition under excitement, with a girl (before 
menstruation and before the rupture of the hymen and 
consequently with a narrow external orifice of the vagina) 
or masturbation or pressure or a blow on the penis, 
or a voluntary retention of a flow of semen or forcible 
opening of the prepuce, the disease is called Avapdtikd 
or paraphymosis. Niruddha-praka'sa The prepuce 
affected by the deranged Vdyu entirely covers up the 
glans penis and thus obstructs and covers up the orifice 
of the urethra. In cases of partial obstruction a thin 
jet of urine is emitted with a slight pain. In cases 
of complete closing the emission of urine is stopped 
without causing any crack or fissure in the glans penis 
in consequence. The disease is called Niruddha-prakds'a 
which is due to the deranged VAyu and is marked by 
pain (in the glans penis\ 39-41. 

Niruddhaguda : — The Vayu (Apana) obstruct- 
ed by the repression of a natural urging towards de- 
fecation stuffs the rectum, thus producing constriction 
of its passage and consequent difficulty of defeca- 



Chap. XIII.] 


nidana sthanam. 


93 


tion. This dreadful disease is known as Niruddha- 
gudam (stricture of the rectum) which is extremely 
difficult to cure. Ahiputana ; — A sort of itch-like 
eruptions appearing about the anus of a child owing 
to a deposit of urine, perspiration, feces etc conse- 
quent on the neglect in cleansing that part. The 
eruptions which are the effects of the deranged blood 
and Kapham soon assume an Eczematous character 
and exude a purulent discharge on account of constant 
scratching. • The Eczema (Vfana; soon spreads, and 
coalesces and proves very obstinate in the end. The 
disease is called Ahiputana. Vrishana-kachchu: — When 
the filthy matter, deposited in the scrotal integuments 
of a person who is negligent in washing the parts or 
in the habit of taking daily ablutions, is moistend 
by the local perspiration, it gives rise to an itching 
sensation in the skin of the scrotum, which is speedily 
turned into running Eczema by constant scratching 
of the parts. The disease is called Vrishana-kachchu 
and is due to the aggravated condition of the Kapham 
and blood, Guda-Bhransa : — A prolapse or falling out 
of the anus (due to the Vdyu) in a weak and lean patient 
through straining, urging or flow of stool as in dysentery 
is called Guda-Bhrans'a or prolapsus ani. 42 — 45. 

Thus ends the thirteenth Chapter of the Nidana Sthanam in the 
Sus'ruta Samhila which treats of the Nidanam of minor ailments. 



CHAPTER XI7. 


Now we shall discourse on the Niddnam of the 
disease known as ^ukadOSha. i. 

Any of the eighteen different types of the disease 
may affect the genital (penis) of a man who foolishly 
resorts to the practice of getting it abnormally elongated 
and swollen by plastering it with SakaT^ 
irritating water insect) and not in the usual officinal way. 

Classification ; — Diseases, which result from 
such malpractices, are knonwn as, — Sarshapika, Ashthi- 
lika, Grathitam, Kumbhikd, Alaji, Mriditam, Sammudha- 
pidaka, Avamantha, Pushkarikd, Spars'ahdni, Uttamd, 
Satoponaka, Tvakapdka, Sonitarvudam, Mansdrvudam, 
Mdnsapaka, Vidradhi and Tilakalak. 2. 

Metrical Texts The tiny herpetic eruptions 
(Pidaka) which resemble the seeds of white mustard in 
shape and size, (and are found to crop up on the male 
organ of generation) on account of a deraneed condition 
of the blood and Kapham, as the result of an injudicious 
application of ^uka plasters are called Sarshapik^ 
by the wise. Eruptions of hard stone-like pimples, 
(Pidaka) irregular at their sides or edges and which are 
caused by the aggravation of the local Vayu by the use 
of a plaster of the poisonous Suka, are called Ashthilik^. 
The knotty Granthis (nodules) on the penis owing 
to its being frequently stuffed with the bristles of a 
Suka insect are called (Jrathitam. This type is caused 
by the deranged action of the Kapham. A bla'ck wart 
resembling the stone or seed of a jamholin fruit in 
shape is called Kumhhik£(- This type i.^ due to the 
deranged condition of the blood and Pittam. 3 — 5. 



Chap. XIV,] NIDANA STHANAM. 95 

An AIa.ji (incidental to an injudicious application 
of Suka on the penis) exhibits symptoms, which are 
identical with those manifested by a case of Alaji 
in Prameha (Ch. vi). A wart (papilloma) attended 
with swelling of the part and caused by the aggravated 
Vdyu on the hard and inflamed penis causing pressure 
(on the urethra) is called Mriditam. The pustule or 
eruption appearing on the penis on account of its being 
extremely pressed by the hand (.for the insertion of the 
hairs of the Suka) in its dorsum is called Sammudlia- 
pidakai. (It is the outcome of the aggravated Vdyu^'). 
A large number of elongated pustules on the penis (in- 
cidental to an application of Suka to the part) which 
burst at the middle, causing pain and shivering, is called 
Avamantha (epithelioma'. 6 — lo. 

The Pushkarika type of the disease is marked 
by the eruptions of small pimples around the principal 
one The type has its origin in the deranged condition 
of the blood and Pittam, and is so called from the part 
of the excrescenses being arranged in rings or circles like 
the petals of a lotus flower in shape. A complete anes- 
thesia (of the affected organ) owing to the vitiated blood 
by the injudicious application of a Suka is called Sparsa- 
liEbni. Pustules appearing on the penis through the 
vitiation of the local blood and Pittam by such con- 
stant applications are called UttaniEt. A suppuration of 
the prepuce under the circumstance is called Tvakapstkh. 
There is fever with a burning sensation in the affected 
organ. The disease is due to the vitiated condition 
of the blood and Pittam. ii — 15 . 

The type of the disease in which the penis is marked 
by the eruption of black vesicles and is covered over 
with a large number of red pimples or pustules with 

According lo Dallana it is due to the action of Viiyu and blood. 



9^ 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XIV. 


an excruciating pain in the ulcerated region of the organ 
is called Sonit£brvudam. The vegetation of a fleshy 
tumour on the penis (incidental to a blow on the organ 
to alleviate the pain of inserting the hairs of the Suka 
insect into its body), is called M£^n£^rvIldam. A sup- 
puration as well as sloughing of the penis attended with 
different kinds of pain which severally mark the de- 
ranged Vayu, Pittam and Kapham is called Ma'nsa- 
paTia. This type is caused by the concerted action 
of the deranged Vayu, Pittam and Kapham. 15-18. 

The specific symptoms of a Tridoshaja Vidradhi 

as described before (Chap.ix.) mark the one which affects 

the penis (owing to an injudicious application of the 

/ 

highly poisonous irritant Suka to the organs) The 
disease is called Vidradhi. A process of general sup- 
puration and sloughing of the organ marks the type 
which is produced by the application of a black Suka or 
one of a variegated coloured insect of the same species. 
The type is called Tilaksilaka, and should be regarded 
as Tridoshaja one. 19 — 21. 

Prognosis : — Of the above enumerated malig- 
nant diseases of the penis, those known as Mansirvuda, 
Mdnsapdka, Vidradhi and Tilakilak shoulda be deemed 
as incurable. 22. 

Thus ends the fourteenth Chapter of the Nid.-ina Sthdnam in the 
.Sus'tula Satnhita which treats of Nidanam of different types of S'ukadohsa. 



CHAPTER XY. 


Now we shall discourse on the Nidanam of Bhag- 
nam (fractures and dislocations etc. of bones), i 

Various kinds of fracture may be caused from a 
variety of causes, such as by a fall, pressure, blow, 
violent jerking or by the bites of ferocious beasts etc. 
These cases may be grouped under the two main sub- 
divisions such as Sandhi-Muktam (dislocation) and 
Ktinda-Bliagnain (fracture of a kdnda). 2. 

Cases of Sandhi-muktam (dislocation) may be divided 
into six different types, such as the Utplishtani, Vis!- 
lishtam, Vivartitain, Adhah-Kshiptam, Ati-kshiptain and 
Tiryak-kshiptain. 3 . 

General features of a dislocation 

Incapability of extension, flexion, movement, circum- 
duction and rotation (immobility, considered in respect 
of the natural movements of the joint), of the dislocated 
limb, which becomes extremely painful and cannot 
bear the least touch. These are said to be the general 
symptoms of a dislocation . 4. 

Diagnostic symptoms of a disloca- 

tion In case of a friction of a joint by two articular 
extremeties (Utplislitam) a swelling is found to appear 
on either side of the articulation attended with a variety 
of pain at night. A little swelling accompanied by 
a constant pain and disordered function of the dislocated 
joint, marks the case of simple-looseness (Vislishtam) 
of the articulation ; while pain and unevenness of the 
joint owing to the displacement of the connected bones 
distinguish a case of Vivartitam (lateral displacement). 
An excruciating pain, and looseness of the dislocated 

13 



98 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XV. 


bone are the symptoms which characterise a case in 
which a dislodged bone is seen to drop or hang down 
from its joint (Adhah-ksliiptam). In a case of abnor- 
mal projection (Ati«kshiptam), the dislocated bone is 
removed away from its joint which becomes extremely 
painful. A case of oblique dislocation (Tiryak-kshiptam) 
is marked by the projection or displacement' of the 
bone on one side accompanied by a sort of intolerable 
•pain, S- 

Different kinds of Kanda Bhag- 

nam : — Now we shall describe the Kdnda-Bhagnam 
(fracture etc.). Fractures may be divided into twelve 
different kinds which are known as, Karkatakam, As'va- 
karnam,Churnitam,Pichchitam,Asthi-chchalitam, Kdnda- 
bhagnam, Majjdgatam, AtipAtitam, Vakram, Chchiniiam, 
PAtitam and Sphutitam. 6. 

General symptoms of K^nda-bhag- 

nam : — A violent swelling (about the seat of fracture) 
with throbbings or pulsations, abnormality in the position 
(of the fractured limb), which cannot bear the least 
touch, crepitus under pressure, a looseness or dropping of 
the limb, the presence of a variety of pain and a sense of 
discomfort in all positions are the indications which 
generally mark all kinds of fracture (Kdnda-bhagnam). J. 

Diagnostic symptoms The case where a 
■fractured bone, pressed or bent down at its bvo articular 
extremities, bulges out at the middle so as to resemble 
the shape of a knot (Granthi), is called Karkatam. 
The case where the fractured bone projects upward 
like the ear of a horse is called As'vakarnam. The 
fractured bone is found to be shattered into fragments 
in a case of the Churnitam or comminuted kind which 
can -be detected both by palpation and crepitation. 
A smashed condition of the fractured bone- marks a 



Chap, XV.] 


NIDANA STHANAM. 


99 


case of the PicTicMtam kind which is often found to 
be marked by a great swelling. The case where the 
covering or skin of the bone (periosteum) is cast or 
splintered off is called the Astlii-ohcliallitam. The 
case where the completely broken or severed bones are 
found to project through the local skin, is called K3^ada- 
bhagnam (compound). The case where a fragment of 
the fractured or broken bone is found to pierce into the 
bone and dig out the marrow, is called MajjEknugatam, 
(Impacted fracture). The case where the fractured bone 
droops or hangs down is called Ati-p£ktitani. The case 
where the unloosened bone (from its position) is bent 
down in the form of an arch is called Vakram The 
case where only one articular extremity of the bone is 
severed is called Chliinnam. The case where the bone 
is slightly fractured and pierced with a large number 
of holes, is called Pailtitairi, an excruciating pain being 
the leading indication. The case where the bone largely 
cracked and swollen becomes painful as if stuffed with 
the bristles of a Suka insect is called Sphutitam (Green- 
stick fracture). Of the several kinds of fracture, cures 
are effected with extreme difficulty in a case of the 
Churnitam, Chhinnam, Ati-pdtitam or Majjdnugatam 
kind. A case of displacement or laxation occurring 
in a child or in an old or weak patient or in one suffer- 
ing from asthma (Svasa) or from any cutaneous affec- 
tion (Kushtha) or Kshata-Kshina disease is difficult to 
cure. 8. 

Memorable verses ; —The following cases 
are to be given up as hopeless— y/i fracture of the 
pelvic bone (or of bones that are of this description, 
wherever they may be situated) ; dislocation of the 
pelvic joints ; compound fracture of the thigh bone or 
of the flat bones) ; fracture into small pieces of the 



100 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XV'. 

frontal bone or its dislocation ; simple fracture of the 
breast-bones, back-bone and temporal and cranial bones. 
If the dislocations and fractures be improperly set 
from the outset (Adito)* or if the union be anyhow 
disturbed there is no hope for recovery. 9 — ir. 

If fractures happen at any time of the first three 
stages of adult life which has been described before 
(vide Sutrasthdna Chap. XXXV.) and if they are set up 
by an able surgeon they have a great chance of being 
united. 12. 

A bending of a gristle or cartilage (Taruna) is 
called its fracture. A Nalaka (long bone) bone is 
usually found to be severed. A Kapetla bone is found 
to be cracked, while a Ruchakai* (tooth) is found to be 
splintered off. 13. 

* The word Adilo may be taken into the sense of congenital mal- 
formation which is beyond remedy. 

+ The presence of the particle ‘cha’ denotes Valya-asfchi. 

Thus ends the fifteenth Chapter of the Niddna Sthdnam in the Sus'ruta 
amhitk which treats of the Niddnam of dislocations and fractures. 



CHAPTER XVL 


Now we shall discourse on the Niddnam of 
IVIukharog'am (diseases which affect the cavity of 
the mouth in general), i. 

General Classifications:— Sixty five* dif- 
ferent forms of mouth disease are known in practice. 
They are found to attack seven different localities viz. 
the lips, the gums of the teeth, tongue, palate, throat and 
the entire cavity ; of these eight are peculiar to the lips ; 
fifteen, to the roots of the teeth ; eight to the teeth ; 
five to the tongue ; nine to the palate ; seventeen to 
the throat; and three to the entire cavity. 2 — 3. 

Diseases of the lips : — The eight forms which 
affect the lips, are either Vataja, Pittaja, Kaphaja, Sanni- 
pdtika, Raktaja, Mdns'aja, Medaja or Abhighdtaja 
(Traumatic). 4. 

The Vsitaja Type : — The lips become dry, 
rough,numbed, black, extremely painful and the affected 
part seems as if it were smashed and pulled out or 
cracked by the action of the aggravated Vafyu. In the 
Pittaja type — the lips become blue or yellow-coloured 
and studded with (a large number of small) mustard- 
seed-like eruptions, which suppurate and exude a puru- 
lent discharge attended with a burning sensation (in 
the locality). In the Kaphaja type — the affected lips 
are covered with small eruptions, which are of the same 
colour as the surrounding part, and become slimy, heavy 
or thick, cold and swollen. Pain is absent in this type 
and the patient feels an iri'esistible inclination to scratch 
the parts. In the Sa'nnipattaja type, the lips change 

* According to others sixty-seven— but D.illan does not support this. 



102 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


.[Chap. XVI. 


colour, becoming black, yellow, or asb-colourcd (white) 
at intervals and are found to be studded with various 
sorts of eruptions. 5 — 8. 

The Raktaja type (Produced by the vitiated 
condition of the blood) the affected lips look as red as 
blood and profusely bleed and crops of date-coloured 
(chocolate-coloured) eruptions appear on their surface. In 
the Ms^nsaja type (due to the vitiated condition of the 
local flesh), the lips become heavy, thick and gathered up 
in the form of a lump ol flesh. The angles of the 
mouth become infested with parasites which germi- 
nate and spread themselves in the affected parts. In 
the Medaja (fat-origined) type the lips become numbed, 
soft, heavy and marked by an itching sensation. The 
skin of the inflamed surface becomes glossy and looks 
like the surface layer of clarified butter exuding a thin 
crystal-like (transparent) watery discharge. In the 
Abhigh^taja (Traumatic) type, the lips become red, 
knotty and marked by an itching sensation and seem as 
if ipierced into or cut open with an axe and {become 
cracked and fissured). 9 — 12. 

Disease of the roots of the teeth 

jDiseases which are peculiar to the roots of the teeth, are 
known as Sithda, Danta-pupputaka, Danta-veshtaka, 
Saushira, Mdha-Saushira, Paridara, Upakusa, Danta- 
vaidarbha, Vardhana, Adhimdnsa and the five sorts of 
Nddi (sinus). 13. 

Sit^da (Scurvy);— The gums of the teeth suddenly 
bleed and become putrified, black,slimy and emit a fetid 
smell. They become soft and gradually slough off. 
The disease has its origin in the deranged condition 
of the local blood and Kapham. Danta-pupputaka 
^um boil): — The disease in which the roots of two or 
three teeth at a time is marked by a violent swelling and 



Chnp, XVI.] NIDANA STHANAM. I03 

pain is called Danta-pupputaka. The disease is due 
to the vitiated condition of the blood and Kapham. 
Danta-veshtaka: — The teeth become loose in the gums, 
which exude a discharge of blood and pus. This disease 
is due to the vitiated blood of the locality. Satisllira: — 
The disease in which an itching painful swelling appears 
about the gums attended with copious flow of saliva is 
called S*aushira (Alveolar abscess). It is caused by the 
deranged blood and Kapham of the locality. Maha'- 
Sansliira — The disease in which the teeth become loose, 
the palate marked by sinuses or fissures, the gums putri- 
fied, and the whole cavity of the mouth inflamed, is 
called Mahds'aushira, the outcome of the concerted action 
of the deranged Doshas of the body. 14 — 18. 

Paridara : — The disease in which the gums be- 
come putrified, wear off and bleed is called Paridara 
(bleeding gumsh The disease has its origin in the 
deranged condition of the blood, Kapham and Pittam. 
Upakusa The disease in which the gums become 
marked by a burning sensation and suppuration and 
the teeth become loose and shaky (in their gums) in 
consequence and bleed at the least shaking, is called 
Upakus'a. There is a slight pain, and the entire cavity 
of the mouth becomes swollen and emits a fetid smell ; 
this disease is due to the vitiated condition of the 
blood and Pittam. 19. 

Danta-Vaidarlbha : — The disease which is 
consequent upon the friction of the gums marked by the 
appearance of a violent swelling about the portion (so 
tubbed and in which) the teeth become loose and can be 
moved about, is called Danta-vaidarbha which is due to 
an extraneous cause such as a blow etc. Vardhana : — 
the disease which is marked by the advent of an 
additional tooth (the last molar) through the action 



THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XV!.- 


t04 


of' the deranged V^yu with a specific excruciating pain 
of its own, is called Vardhana or eruption of the Wisdom 
tooth. The pain subsides with the cutting of the tooth. 
AdhimsiiiBa : — The disease in which a violent and 
extremely painful tumour appears about the root of the 
tooth, and is situated in the farthest end of the cavity of 
the cheek-bone accompanied by a copious flow of saliva 
is called Adhimdnsa or Epulis, It is due to the 
deranged Kapham. The five sorts of llEidi (sinus) 
which affect the roots of the teeth (are either Vataja, 
Pittaja, Kaphaja, Sdnnipataja or Abhighataja), their 
symptoms being respectively identical with those of the 
types of Nddi-vrana. 20—24. 

Diseases to the teeth proper Diseases 
which are restricted to the teeth proper are named as, 
Ddlana, Krimi-dantaka, Danta-harsha, Bhanjaka,Sarkara, 
Kapdlika, Sydva-dantaka and Hanu-moksha. 25. 

’ Dal ana S — The disease in which the teeth seem 
as if being cleft asunder with a violent pain is called 
Ddlana or toothache, the origin of which is ascribed 
to the action of the aggravated state of the bodily Vayu. 
Krimi-dantaka The disease in which the teeth are 
eaten into by worms, is called Krimi-dantaka (caries). 
The teeth become loose and perforated by black holes 
accompanied by a copious flow of saliva. The appear- 
ance of an extremely diffused swelling (about the roots of 
decayed teeth) with a sudden aggravation of the accom- 
panying pain without any apparent cause is also one 
of its specific features. Danta-harsha : — The disease 
in which the teeth cannot bear the heat, cold or touch is 
called Danta-harsha. It is due to the deranged condi- 
tion of Vdyu. Bhanjaka — The disease in which the 
face is distorted, the teeth break, and the accompanying 
pain is severe, is called Bhanjaka (degeneration of the 



Chap, XV 7 ] NIDANA STHAXAM, I05 

teeth). The disease is due to the deranged condition of 
the Vdyu and Kapham. Sarkara^ The disease, in 
which sordes, formed on the teeth and hardened (by the 
action of the deranged Vayu), lie in a crystallised form 
at the roots of the teeth, is called Sarkara (Tartar), 
Such deposits tend to destroy the healthy growth and 
functions of the teeth. Kapalik^ The disease in which 
the preceding crystallised deposits get cemented together 
and aftenvards separate from the teeth taking away a part 
of their coating (enamel) is called Kapalika (calcareous 
deposit) which naturally makes an erosion into and 
destroys the teeth Sy£tva-dantaka : — The disease, in 
which the teeth variously scorched by the action of the 
deranged Pittam assumes a blackish or blue colour, is 
named as Syava-dantaka (black teeth). Haiiu-moksha : — 
The disease in which the Vayu aggravated (by such 
causes, as by loud talking, chewing of hard substances, 
or immoderate yawning) produces the dislocation of the 
jawbones is called Hanu-moksha It is identical with 
Ardditam as regards its symptoms. 26 -33. 

Diseases of the tong-ue The five kinds 
of diseases which affect the organ of taste are the 
three sorts of Kantakas due to the three deranged 
Doshas (Vdtaja Pittaja and Kaphaja), Aklsa and 
Upa-jihvikd. 34. 

The three Kantaks ;--In the VatajaKan- 

taka type the tongue becomes cracked, loses the 
sense of taste and becomes rough like a teak leaf 
(giving the organ a warty appearance). In the Pittaja 
Kautakaform the tongue is coloured yellow and studded 
over with furred blood-colourcd papillae with the burning 
sensation (of the Pittam in them). In the Kaphaja 
Kautaka tj-pe the tongue becomes heavy, thick and 
grown over with vegetation of slender fleshy warts in llie 



.Io6 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [^hap. XVJ. 

shape oi S'almali thorns. Al^sa : -The severe inflam- 
matory swelling about the under surface of the tongue 
is called Alasa, which if allowed to grow on unchecked 
gives rise to numbness and immobility of the organ 
and tends to a process of rapid suppuration at its base. 
The disease is caused by the deranged blood and 
Kapham. The Upa-jihvEt : -The disease in which a 
(cystic) swelling shaped like the tip of the tongue 
appears about the under-surface of that organ by raising 
it a little is called Upa-jihvika (Ranula). The accom- 
panying symptoms are salivation, burning and itching 
sensations in the affected organ ; these are due to the 
deranged Kapham and blood (of the locality). 35 — 37* 
Disease of the palate ; — Diseases which arc 
peculiar to the part of the palate are named Gala-s'undika, 
Tundikeri, Adhrusha, M^insa-kachchapa, Arvuda, Mansa- 
sanghata, Talu-s'osha and Talu-pdka. 38, 

Gala-SUndik^ : — The diffused and elongated 
swelling, caused by the deranged blood and Kapham, 
which first appears about the root of the palate and 
goes on extending till it looks like an inflated skin- 
bladder is called Gala-sundikd (tonsilitis) by physicians. 
Thirst, cough, difficult breathing are the ‘indications of 
the disease. Tundikeri A thick swelling resembling 
the fruit of the Tundikeri plant in shape and appearing 
about the root of the palate attended with a burning, 
piercing or pricking pain and suppuration is called 
Tundikeri (abscess of the tonsil). Adhrusha A red, 
numbed swelling appearing about the same region, as 
the effect of the vitiated blood of the locality, attended 
with severe fever and pain, is known by the name of 
Adhrusha. Mstnsa-kachchapa:— A brownish and slightly 
painful swelling somewhat shaped like the back of a 
tortoise (and appearing about the region of the soft 



Chap. XVr.] 


NIDANA STHANAM. 


107 

palatcl is called Mansa-kachchhapa. The disease is. 
slow in its growth or development and is due to the 
deranged Kapham. Arvuda: — A swelling shaped like 
the petal of the lotus lily and appearing in the region 
of the soft palate as an outcome of the aggravated con- 
dition of the local blood is called Arvudam. The 
swelling is identical with the Raktarvuda described 
before. Mfiusa-SaiigliELta A vegetation of morbid 
flesh at the edge or extremit}^ of the soft palate 
through the action of the deranged Kapham is called 
MAnsa-SanghAta. It is painless. Ta'hi-pupputa : — A 
painless permanent swelling to the shape of the Kola 
fruit (plum) caused by the deranged fat and Kapham 
at the region of the soft palate is called Talu-pupputa. 
Tsblii-sosha The disease of the soft palate in which 
the patient feels a sort of parched sensation with 
dyspnoea and a severe piercing pain in the affected 
part is called Tdlu-s'osha, which has its origin in the 
aggravated condition of the bodily Vdyu acting in 
concert with the deranged Pittam. Talu-pa'ka — The 
disease in which the deranged Pittam sets up a very 
severe suppurative proce.ss in the soft palate is called 
Talu-pAka. 39-47. 

The diseases of the throat and 
larynx : — The diseases peculiar to the throat and the 
larynx arc seventeen in number and are known as 
the five types of Rohini, Kantha-Saluka, Adhijihva, 
Yalaya, Yalasa, EUa-vrinda, Yrinda, Sataghni, Gilayu, 
Gala-vidradhi, Galaugha, Svaraghna, Mansatana, and 
YidAri. 48. 

General features of Rohinis The 

aggravated Ya}^, Pittam, Kapham, cither sevcralK’ or 
in combination, or blood may affect the mucous of 
the throat and give lisc to vegetations of fleshy papilla:. 



Io8 THE SUSIIRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XVI. 

which gradually obstruct the channel of the throat 
and bring on death. The disease is called Rohini 
(Diphtheria^ 49. 

The Vataja Rohini: -A vegetation of ex- 
tremely painful fleshy Ankuras (nodules), crops up all over 
the tongue which tend to obstruct the passage of the 
throat and are usually accompanied by other distressing 
symptoms characteristic of the deranged Vdyu. Pittaja- 
Rohini The Ankuras (nodules) in the present type are 
marked by speedy growth and suppuration, and are 
accompanied by a burning sensation and high fever. 
Kaphaja Rohini : —The Ankuras (nodules) become 
heavy, hard and characterised by slow suppuration 
gradually obstructing the passage of the throat. 50*52. 

The Sannipatika Type : — Suppuration 
takes place in the deeper strata of the membrane ac- 
companied by all the dangerous symptoms peculiar to 
the three aforesaid types of the disease. It is rarely 
amenable to treatment Raktaji Typo ; -Symptoms 
characteristic of the Pittaja type of the disease are 
present and the fleshy outgrowth formed in the throat, 
is found to he covered with small vesicles. This type 
is incurable.^ 53 ~S 4 

Kantha-^ctlukam : —The disease in which a 
hard rough nodular growth (Granthi) in the shape of a 
plum-stone crops up in the throat, which seems as if it 
has been stuffed with the bristle of a S'zika insect or 
been pricked by thorns is called Kantha-Sdlukam. The 
disease is due to the action of the deranged Kapham. 
It is amenable to surgical treatment only, Adhijihva : — 
A small swelling like the tip of the tongue caused by the 

* The reading Sadhya (curable) which is to be met with in the several 
printed editions of Madhab’s Nidanam in lieu of the reading Asadhya 
(incurable) is not to our mind correct. 



Chap. XVI.] 


NIDANA STHANAM. 


109 


deranged blood and Kapham over the root of the tongue 
i.s called Adhijihva, which should be given up as soon as 
suppuration sets in. Valaya A circular or ring-shaped 
raised swelling obstructing or closing up the upper end of 
the oesophagus (structure of oesophagus) is called Valaya. 
It cannot be cured and hence should be given up. It is 
due to the deranged action of the Kapham in the 
locality. Vals(sa : —The disease in which the unusually 
aggravated Vayu and Kapham give rise to a .swelling 
in the throat, which is extremely painful and causes a 
difficulty of respiration, ultimately producing symptoms 
of complete asphyxia is called Valasa by learned 
physicians and is very difficult to cure. 55 — 58, 

Eka-vrinda and Vrinda^; — The disease in 
which a circular, raised, heavy and slightly soft s\velling 
appears in the throat attended with itching, a slightly 
burning sensation and a slight suppuration is called 
Eka-vrinda. The disease is due to the effect of vitiated 
blood and Kapham. The disease in which a round 
elevated swelling attended with high fever and a slightly 
burning sensation is formed in the throat through the 
aggravated condition of the blood and Pittam is called 
Vrinda. A piercing pain in the .swelling points to its 
V^taj a origin. 59 — 60. 

^ataghni : — The disease in which, through the 
concerted action of the deranged Vayu, Pittam and 
Kapham, a hard throat obstructing Varti (jagged mem- 
brane! edged like a Sataghni*}* and densely beset with 
fleshy excrescences is formed along the inner lining of 

* The diseases of the throat are 17 in number. Taking Vrinda as a 
scp.arate disease tlicy amount to iS ; but Vrinda, afTecting similar place 
and being similar in appearance with but a slight distinction of symptoms, 
is only a particular state of Eke-vtinda, and not a separate disease. 

1 Sataghni is a kind of weapon used in ancient warfare. 



IIO 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA 


[Chap. XVI. 


that pipe is denominated as Sataghni. Various kinds 
of pains, (characteristics of each of the deranged Vayu, 
Pittam and Kapham) are present in this type which 
should be necessarily considered as irremediable. 6r. 

GilayU : — The disease in which the aggravated 
Kapham and blood give rise to a hard and slightly 
painful (D. R extremely painful^ glandular swelling 
in the throat to the size of the stone of the Amalaka 
fruit is called Gil^yu. A sensation as if a morsel or 
bolus of food is stuck in the throat is experienced which 
by its very nature is a surgical case. 62. 

Gala-vidradhi: — Thediseasein which an exten- 
sive swelling occurs along the whole inner lining of the 
throat, owing to the concerted action of the deranged 
Vdyu, Pittam and Kapham is called Gala-vidradhi which 
exhibits all the features present in a Vidradhi of the 
Sdnipdtika type, Galaugha : — The disease in which a 
large swelling occurs in the throat so as to completely 
obstruct the passage of any solid or liquid food and also 
that of UdAna-vdyu (choking the pharynx, larynx and 
the mouth of the esophagus), attended with a high fever 
is called Galaugha, the origin of which should be as- 
cribed to the action of the deranged blood and Kapham. 
Svaraghna: -The disease in which the patient faints 
owing to the choking of the larynx by the deranged 
Kapham which is marked by stertorous breathing, hoarse- 
ness, dryness and paralysed condition of the throat is 
called Svaraghna. which has its origin in the deranged 
Vayu. 63 — 65. 

IVld.nS 3 .'t 3 .n 3 . : — The disease in which a pendent, 
spreading and extremely painful swelling appears in 
the throat which gradually obstructs the pipe is called 
Mdnsatana. It invariably pi-oves fatal and is caused 
by the deranged Vayu, Pittam and Kapham 66 



Chap. XVI.] 


NIDANA stiianam. 


Ill 


Vidari : —The disease in which a copper-coloured 
swelling occurs in the throat, marked by a pricking and 
burning sensation, and the flesh of the throat gets 
putrefied and sloughs off (and emits a fetid smell) is 
called Vidari. The disease is of a Pittaja origin and is 
found to attack that side of the throat on which the 
patient is in the habit of lying. 67. 

The disease in the entire cavity: — 

Cases which are found to invade the entire cavity of 
the mouth (without being restricted to any particular 
part thereof) may be either due to Vataja, Pittaja, 
Kaphaja or Raktaja type and are known by the general 
name — Savra-Sara. 68. 

In the Vsitaja type the entire cavity of the mouth 
is studded with vesicles attended with a pricking 
sensation in their inside. In the Pittaja type a large 
number of small yellow or red-coloured vesicles attended 
with a burning sensation crops up on the entire (mucous 
membrane lining the cavity of the mouth. In the Kaphaja 
variety a similar crop of slightly painful, itching vesicles 
of the same colour ns the skin (is found on the entire 
inner surface of the mouth.) The blood-origined JEtaktaja 
type is nothing but a modification of the Pittaja one 
(giving rise to similar symptoms) ; it is also by others 
called Mukha-paTja. 69-72. 

Thus ends the si\leenth Chapter of the Nidana Sthanani in the Sus'ruta 
S.'imhila which treats of the Nidanam of the diseases of the mouth. 


Here ends the Nidana Sth^nam, 




THE 


SUSRUTA SAMHITA 

SlEIRA STHANAM, 

(Section on Anatomy). 

-.O'. 

CHAPTER 1. 

Now we shall discourse on the S'driram which treats 
of the science of Being in general (Sa.rV3.**Bhuta. 
ChintSL ^'Eiriram). i. 

The latent (lit : unmanifest) supreme nature (Prakriti) 
is the progenitor of all created things. She is self- 
begotten and connotes the three fundamental or primary 
virtues of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, She is imaged or 
embodied in the eightfold categories of Avyakta (un- 
manifest), MahAn (intellection), Ahamkdra (Egoism) and 
the five Tanmdtras or elementals (proper sensibles) and 
is the sole and primary factor in working out the evo- 
lution of the universe. The one absolute and original 
nature is the fundamental stone house of materials out 
of which the bodies of all self-conscious (Karma-Purusha) 
working agents (agents who come into being through the 
dynamical energy of their acts or Karmas) have been 
evolved in the same manner as all water, whether con- 
fined in a tank or a reservoir, or coursing free through 
the channels of streams and of might}' rivers, have been 
welled up from the one and shoreless primordial ocean. 2. 

Out of that latent unmanifest (Avyakta) or original 
nature (impregnated by the atoms or elemental units of 

15 



1 14 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. I. 

consciousness or Furushas) Intellection or Mahdn has 
been evolved, and out of Mahan egoism. This Mahdn or 
intellection should be likewise considered as partaking 
of the thi-ee fundamental attributes (Sattva, Rajas, and 
Tamas) of the latent (Avyakta) or original nature.^ 
Ahamkdra or egoism in its turn may be grouped under 
three subheads as the Vaikdrika Taijasa (operative) or 
Rdjasika, and Bhutddi (illusive or Tdmasika). 3. 

The eleven organs of cognition, communication or 
sense perception have emanated from the co-operation 
of the aforesaid Vaikdrika Ahamkdra with the Taijasa 
or Rajasa. They are the ears, skin, eyes, tongue, nose, 
speech, hands, genitals, anus, feet and the mind (Manah). 
Of these foregoing organs the first five are intellectual 
or sense organs (Vuddhi-Indriya) ; the next five being 
operative (Karma-Indriya). The mind (Manah) par- 
takes of the character of both the intellectual and 
operative organs alike. 4-5. 

The five Tanmdtras or elementals (or the five proper 
sensibles of hearing, touch, sight, taste, and smell) charac- 
terised by the Nescience, etc, have been evolved out of the 
Bhutddi etc. (or Tdmasa Ahamkdra) concerted with the 
Taijasa Ahamkdra through the instrumentality of the 
Vaikdrikam. The gross or perceptible modifications of 
these five Tanmdtras are sound, touch, taste, sight and 
smell. From the combination of the aforesaid five 
Tanmdtras (Bhutddi) taken one at a time, have succes- 
sively emanated the five gross matters of space such as 

■* Sattva, Rajas and Tanias : — Adhesion, cohesion and disintegration 
in the Physical plane ; afliection, love and hate in the moral ; emancipa- 
tion, spiritual affinity and sin in the Psychic. 

Simply phenomenal or the simple outcome of the phenomenal evolution 
without being by other specific attributes of matter and hence Sattvika or 
illuminating or quasi-spiritual, 



Chap. I.] SARIRA STHANAM. II5 

ether, air, heat, (fire,) fluid (water), and earth (solid). 
These twenty four categories combinedly form what is 
technically known as the twenty four elements 
(Tattvas). Thus we have discoursed on the t\venty four 
fundamental principles (Chaturvins'ati-tattvam). 6. 

Hearing, touch, sight, taste and smell respectively 
form the subjects of the five intellectual (Vuddhi) 
organs of man, whereas the faculty of speech, handling, 
pleasure, ejections or evacutation, locomotion successively 
belong to the (remaining) five operative (Karma-Indriya) 
ones. The original nature (Avyakta), Mahdn* (intellec- 
tion), Egoism (Ahamkdra),the five sensibics (Tanmdtras), 
and the five gross material principles in their nascent 
stage in evolution form what is included within the eight 
categories of Nature (Prakriti), the .remaining sixteen 
categories being her modifications (Vikdra). The objects 
of intellection (Mahdn) and Egoism (Ahamkdrd) as well 
as of the sense organs of knowledge and actions arc the 
material principles (Adibhautika) though they are spiri- 
tual in themselves and in their nature. 

The tutelary god of intellection (Buddhi)is Brahma. 
The god Is'vara is the presiding deity of the sense of 
egoism (AhamkAra) ; the moon god is that of the mind 
(Manah) ; the quarters of the heaven, of the ears ; the 
wind god is that of the skin ; the sun is that of the 
eyes ; the water is that of the taste ; the earth is that of 
the smell ; the fire is that of the speech ; Indra is that of 
the hands ; Vishnu is that of the legs ; Mitra is that of 
the anus and Prajapati is that of the organs of 
generations. 7. 

* Mah.in, Ahamkdta and Ihc five Tanmaitas, though but roodificalions 
of the ongin.nl Nature in themselves, h.nvc been included within the 
category of Nature (Prakriti) in asmuch as they form the immediately prior 
or antecedent conditions of the evolution of the phenomenal universe. 



Il6 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tChap- i- 

All the aforesaid (twenty-four) categories or 
elementals (Chaturvins'ati-Tanmdtras) are devoid of 
consciousness. Similarly the modifications of the 
primal cause of Prakriti such as the Mahat etc. are 
all bereft of consciousness in as much as the cause 
itself, the Avyakta or the original nature is devoid of 
it. The Purusha or the self-conscious subjectivity, 
enters into the primal cause (Mula-Prakriti or original 
Nature) and its necessary effect (the evolved out 
phenomena) and makes them endued with his own 
essence or self-consciousness. The preceptors and holy 
sages explain the proposition by an analogy that as 
the milk in the breast of a mother, though unconscious 
in itself, originates and flows out for the growth and 
sustenance of her child ; (as the semen in the organism 
of an adult male though devoid of consciousness, flows 
out during an act of sexual intercourse) ; so these 
twenty-four primary material principles (elementals), 
though unconscious in themselves, tend to contribute 
towards the making of the self-conscious self or the 
universal individual (the aggregate of limited or condi- 
tional selves) for the purpose of working out his final 
liberation or emancipation i.e., attainment of the stage of 
pure consciousness or perfect knowledge 8. 

Now we shall describe the tracts which the Purusha 
(subjective or self-conscious reality) and Prakriti or 
nature (passive non-conscious eternity) pass in com- 
mon as well as those wherein they differ from each 
other. 9. 

Traits of commonalty Both the Purusha 
and Prakriti are eternal realities, both of them are un- 
manifest, disembodied, without a beginning or origin, 
eternal, without a second, all— pervading and omni-’ 
present. 



Chap. I.] 


SARIRA STHANAM. 


I17 

Traits of diversity : — Of the Purusha and 
the Prakriti, only the latter is non-conscious • and 
possesses the three fundamental qualities of Sattva, 
Rajas and Tamas. Prakriti performs the function 
of the seed or in othenvords she lies inherent as the 
seed or the primary cause in the latter phenomenal 
evolution of the Mahat etc. and contributes the maternal 
clement in the conception, development and birth of 
the primordial cosmic matter (phenomenal universe\ 
fecundated by the Purusha (self-conscious subjectivity) 
in its different stages of evolution. These stages arc 
called Mahat, Ahamkdra etc. ; and Prakriti is not indif- 
fcrcni, as the Purusha is to the pleasures and misery of 
life. But the Purusha (units or atoms of consciousness), 
devoid of the threefold virtues of Sattva etc. arc non- 
concerning hence non-producing and bereft of the seed- 
attributes of lying inherent in all as the primary 
cause of evolution. They arc mere witnesses to the 
joys and miseries of life, and do not participate in their 
enjoyment though imprisoned in the human or- 
ganism. 10 

Since an effect is uniform in virtue to its producing 
cause, the evolutionised effects or products of the Pra- 
kriti such as the Mahat, Ahamkfira etc. must needs par- 
take of the three fundamental qualities (Sattva, Rajas 
and Tamas; which arc predicated of the Prakriti. In 
other words, these hlahat, Ahamkara, etc. arc but the 
modifications of the three fundamental qualities of 
Sattva, Rajas and Tamas. Moreover, certain authorities 
hold Ih.at the Purushas arc units of self-consciousness, 
pos«:csscd of the three aforesaid qualities owing to their 
antecedent conditions or causes (the gross material 
universe) being permeated with and characterised by 
them. II. 



THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. t. 


Ilg 


Metrical Text (Vaidyakc.) : — It is asserted in 
the Ayurveda that it is only the gross-sighted ones 
and men capable of observing only the superficial 
appearances, who confound eternal order or se- 
quence of things and events (Svabhilba), God (Is'vara).^ 
Time (Kdla), sudden and unlooked for appearances 
of the phenomena (Yadrichchha), Necessity (Niyati) and 
transformation (Parindma) with the original Nature 
(Prakriti). The five different forms of matter (such as 
Ether etc ) are nothing but the modifications or trans- 
formed states of the original nature and are characterised 
by the three universal qualities of Sattva, Rajas and 
Tamas, and all created things, whether mobile or im- 
mobile, should be considered as alike exponented by the 
same. In the Science of medicine the cause of a 
disease is the one sole aim to be achieved by means of 
administering proper medicinal remedies (matter), and 
hence the properties of matter are the only fit subject 
to be dealt with in a book on pharmacy. And further, 
because the immediately prior cause of the human 
organism is a proper and congenial admixture of the 
sperm and ovum (matter), the sense organs are the 
resultants of phenomenal — evolution of matter, and the 
objects of sense perception are equally material or 
phenomenal in their nature. 12—14, 

Memorable verse : -A man by a particular 
organ of his body perceives the same matter which 
forms the proper object of that sense organ in as much 
as the perceiving sense organ and the perceived sensible 
are produced by the same material cause. The matter, 

* The second factor according to Sankhya, in the order of cosmic 
evolution, which as the seed of the universe, was hid in the burning disc 
of the central, primordial Sun, out of which the different solar systems 
have come into beingi 



Chap. L] 


SARIRA STHANAM. 


1 19 

which specifically forms the object of a particular sense 
organ, cannot be perceived by the other. We see a 
flower with the eyes and not with the nose. 1 5. 

The Science of medicine does not lay down that the 
self-conscious Selves (Kshetrajna) are all pervading, but 
on the contrary it asserts that they are real and eternal 
and are born in the planes of divine, human or animal 
existence according to their good or evil deeds in life. 
The existence of these self-conscious entities can be 
ascertained duly by inference inasmuch as they are 
extremely subtle in their essence. The self-conscious 
self is possessed of infinite consciousness, is real and 
eternally subject to the process of being evolved out 
into a finite, organic individual through the dynamics 
of the combined sperm and ovum. The view is further 
corroborated by a dictum of the Sruti which holds that 
Purusha (individual) is nothing but a combination of 
a self-conscious self and the five kinds of matter (Mahd- 
bhutas) formed into an organic body. This Purusha or 
individual, which is called Individual of action (Karma- 
Purusha), falls within the scope of the science and art 
of medicine.* 16—17. 

* Here lies the difference between Sknkhya and Ayurveda. While the 
former discourses on in material character of the soul, the latter com- 
mences to discuss on the questions how the material environment in 
which the soul is said to inhabit is evolved, and how the inclusion of 
the spiritual within the material organism is effected. 

Hence Sus'ruta’s Physiology, like that of Charaka, is in the strictest 
sense of the word molecular and his science of life is an attempt at 
explanation of consciousness from the materialistic standpoint, which 
agrees with the views of modern western science. Intellect according to 
Sus'ruta is material and belongs to the same category which the Sankhya 
system of philosophy in its explanation of evolution enumerates originally 
as seven. The soul, according to Sus'ruta, is an independent existence and 
is often associated with what is called life. Where there is life, there is a 
soul, and it is nut everywhere the same. The soul in Sus'ruta is individual 



120 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. I. 


The attributes of an organic indi- 
vidual Longing for pleasure, shunning of pain, 
enemity, energetic undertaking of work, respiration 
(Pr4na\ emission of flatus (Ap^na), closing and opening 
of the eyelids, intellect (Vuddhi), sentiment (Manah), 
deliberation, discretion, memoiy, knowledge of art, 
perseverance, sensation and perception, arc the attributes 
of an organic individual. i8. 

Distinctive features of the different 
classes of mental temperaments An 

absence of all killing or hostile propensities, a judicious 
regimen of diet, forbearance, truthfulness, piety, a belief 
in God, spiritual knowledge, intellect, a good retentive 
memoiy, comprehension, and the doing of good deeds 
irrespective of consequences, are the qualities which 
grace the mind of a person of a SsJttvika temperament. 
Feeling of much pain and misery, a roving spirit, non- 
comprehension, vanity, untruthfuincss, nonclcmency, 
pride, an over winning confidence in one’s own excel- 
lence, lust, anger and hilarity are the attributes which 
mark a mind of the RjCjashika cast. Despondency, 
stupidity, disbelief in the existence of God, impiety, 
stupification and perversity of intellect, lethargy in 
action and sleepiness arc the qualities which mark a. 
mind of a T£^mashika stamp. 19, 

The distinctive traits of the five' 
material of Elements of the world 

The properties of Akjis'a (ether) are sound, the sense of 
hearing, porosity and differentia evolution of the veins, 
ligaments etc. into their characterised species (Viviktat^.) 

takes cognisance of sorrow, disease and death by its 
union with the body ( nx siCific )• Hence 

the living frame together with the soul that ia said to inhabit it forms the 
subject-matter of Ayurvedic medical treatment. Ed. 



Chap. I ] 


SARIRA STHANAM. 


I2I 


The properties Veiya (ethcrin) are touch, the skin, all 
functional activities of the organism, throbbing of the 
whole body (Spandana) and lightness. The properties 
of Tejl (fire or heat) are form, the e5'’es, colours, heat, 
illumination, digestion, anger, generation of instanta- 
neous energy and valour. The properties of Apa (water 
or liquid) are taste, the tongue, fluidity, heaviness, cold- 
ness, olioginousness and semen. The properties or 
modifications of Prithivi (the earth matter or solid) 
are smell, the nose, embodiment and heaviness. 20. 

Of these the ether or Akasa abounds in attributes of 
the S 4 ttvika stamp, the Vayu ov ethcrin in Ra^ashlka, 
the Teja in Sattvika and Rajashika, the water in Sattvika 
and Tamashika and the earth in Tdmasha attributes. 21. 

There are Memorable Verses ; —These 
qualities are found to characterise and enter into the suc- 
cessive elements in the order of their enumeration. The 
specific attributes of these elements are manifest in the 
substances which are respectively originated from them. 
The term Prakriti or original nature connotes the eight 
categories (of Avyakta, Mahan, Ahamkdra, and the five 
Tanmatras) and the rest of the twenty four fundarnental 
principles are its modifications. The Purusha forms the 
twentyfifth principle. These twentyfive fundamental prin- 
ciples of cosmogony have been dealt with in the present 

treatise (.Salya-Tantram) as well as in the other treatise 
/ 

fSdlaky-Tantram and Sankhya Philosophy). 22 — 23. 

Thus ends the first Chapter of the S'atira Sthanan in the Sus'ruta Samhilft 
which deals with the science of Being in general. 


16 





- - ;r--3 

fluid «h0S= 

^ariram); o, tagetun» ^ittam ov 

^ "'“j'"fcctedby*'=“®« u or has acq«"«' 
acminal «“'<>■ cadaverous smei , UK 

ICavham, emd character o curnc 

a doited or a ^U.u, 

putrid pos. or hy *0 

ov stool. 2. sernetl :— Sem colour and 

ncra'^S®^ . a (reddlslvl^^^ ^vhid^ 

deranged V4ya Kquu^^^^.„g ““"ueing emitted^ 

gives rise to a the ctsatyd'o"'** 

characterises* by the pai" 

T\:s rr 

deranged ICaphaio K ^ *rged -*; « gcranged 

vain Vecn -a; “;,otrid corpse 
produces ail ^^cnen sroeiis shreddy o' 

SouitaiVittamV J quantities. Th ^e 

end is emitted m a^S^ (GrahtnlW ^ ^„d 

clotted charactei o derange ^^ranged 

ascriieei to the^a^^^ ^ oi 

’^‘‘"Tand Kapham it lU deranged V4y» 

■pittatn auo oy 

puya-). Thin semen 



Chap. II.] 


SARIRA STHANAM. 


123 


Pittam as described before. A concerted action of the 
deranged VAyu, Pittam, and Kapham causes the semen 
to smell like urine or fecal matter. Of these, the 
cadaverously smelling, shreddy and clotted, putrid pus- 
like and thinned semen can be remedied and corrected 
only with the greatest difficult}^ ; while the one, having 
the smell of stool or urine, should be regarded as beyond 
cure. The remaining kinds are curable. 3. 

Deranged Artavam ; — The catamenial fluid 
(Artavam) of a woman vitiated by the deranged YAyu, 
Pittam, Kapham, or blood, cither severally or in 
combmatlon of two or more Doshas should be likewise 
considered as unfit for the purpose of fecundation. 
Vitiated catamenial fluid exhibits the characteristic 
colour and pain of the deranged Doshas or blood 
(underlying at its roots). Of the several kinds (of 
vitiated catamenial fluids) those which smell like a putrid 
corpse or fetid pus, or which is clotted, or is thin, or emits 
the smell of urine or fecal matter, should be deemed as 
being beyond remedy, the rest being amenable. 4. 

Wlemorablc Verses : — The first three types 
of seminal derangements or defects should be corrected 
by an intelligent physican with an application of 
medicated oil etc. ^Sneha-karma), diaphoric measures 
etc* or uretheral injections (Uttara-vasti). A medi- 
cated Ghrita prepared with a (decoction and Kalka 
of) Dhatahi flowers, Khadira, Dddima and Arjuna 
barks should be given to drink to a man whose 
semen emits a cadaverous smell (Kunapa\ As an alter- 
native, a medicated Ghrita prepared with (a decoction 
and levigated paste or Kalka of) the drugs forming the 
5 dlasdrddi group should be given to him. In a case of 

The word “ Adi ” in ihe text includes emelic^, purgatives, Aniiv.-i- 
sdnnu^and Asthdpanam measures according to their specific Doshas. 



124 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap II. 


clotted and shreddy semen (Granthi), the patient should 
be made to drink a medicated Ghrita prepared with a 
(decoction and Kalka of) S'athi, or with an alcaline solu- 
tion prepared from the ashes of the burnt P aids ha wood. 
In the ca.se of a pus like appearance of the fluid the 
jjatient should be treated with the medicated Ghrita 
prepared with (a decoction and Kalka of) the drugs 
included within the groups of Pamshakddi and Vatddi 
(Nydgrodhddi) Ganas. In a case of thin semen, 
measures laid down under the same head before, as well 
as those to be hereafter described should be resorted to. 
Similarly a medicated Ghrita, prepared with (a de- 
coction and Kalka of) Chitrakk roots, Ushira roots and 
Hingu, should be drunk in a case of the semen smelling 
like urine or fecal matter. In all cases of seminal 
disorders as well as in menstrual anomalies, Uttara- 
Vssti (uretheral or vaginal injection) should be made 
after having recourse to the application of medicated 
oil etc. (Sneha-karma , purgatives, emetics, Asthdpana 
and Anuvasana measures. 5 — 12 

Treatment of deranged Artava;— In 
all the four cases when the catamenial blood would be 
found to be vitiated [by the deranged Vdyu, Pittam, 
Kaphahor Sonita), the preliminary remedial measures of 
the application of oil etc, purgatives etc. (Pancha-karma) 
should be first employed and then the following 
measures should be undertaken viz. application of 
Kalka, [levigated paste of drugs), Pichu (medicated 
plugs -pecharies etc), Pathya [diet) and Ichamana 
(washes with decoctions) as described under the treat- 
ment of Gyonoecological cases etc. Appearance of 
clots of blood (Granthi) in place of the healthy men- 
strual fluid would indicate, decoction or a pulverised 
compound of PkhA, Trushuna and Vrikshaka (Kutaja). 



Chtip. II.] 


NIDANA STHANAM. 


125 


A decoction of and Chandanani is indica- 

ted in the case when the menstrual fluid would smell like 
fetid pus, or contain marrow. The remedies described 
under the head of seminal disorders, should be likewise 
prescribed in cases of menstrual anomalies caused by 
the action of the deranged Vajm, Pittam and Kaphah 
according to the requirements of each individual case 
under treatment. Sali-rice, barlejq wine and meat 
with cholagoguc properties should be deemed as a 
wholesome diet in these case.s. 15 — 16. 

Traits of pure and healthy semen 
and menstrual blood Semen which is 
transparent like ciystal, fluid, glossy, sweet and emits 
the smell of honey ; or like oil or honey in appearance 
according to others, should be considered as healthy. 
The catamenial blood (Artava) which is red like the 
blood of a hare, or the washings of shellac and leaves 
no stains on cloths (which may be washed off by 
simply soaking them in water) should be considered as 
healthy. 17 — 18. 

Asrigdara (Menorrhagia) ; — An abnormal or 
excessive discharge of the menstrual blood (Artava), 
or its long persistence even after the wonted time, 
or its appearance at a premature or unnatural period 
(as well as contrarity in its colour or properties) is 
called Asrig'dara. All types of the disease (Asrigdara) 
arc attended with an aching in the limbs and a paiiiful 
flow (of the catamenial fluid). In case of exce.ssive 
hcemorrhage (from' the uteru-s), symptoms such as weak- 
ness, vertigo, loss of consciousness, darkness of vision, 
or difficult breathing, thirst, burning (sensation of the 
body), delirium, palour, somnolence and other Vataja 

Btndrah'riyam is S'richandanam according lo Dallana or while 
Sandal Nvood according Gayddasa. 



126 


THE SUSITRUTA SAMIHTA, 


[Chap. II. 


troubles (convulsion, hysteria etc.) may set in, A 
physician should treat a case of Asrigdara with 
measures and remedies as laid down under the head of 
Rakta-pittam (hoemorrhage) in a case when ihe 
patient is young (of sixteen years), careful in her diet, 
and the disease unattended with severe complica- 
tions. ig— 21. 

Amenorrhoe : —In a case of suppression of 
menstruation (Amenorrlice) caused b}'’ the obstruction 
of the deranged Doshas (Vdyu and Kapham) in the 
passage, the patient should be advised to take fish, 
Kiilaitha pulse, Masha pulse, Kanjika»i i^fermented sour 
grujl etc.), Tila, wine (Sur^), cow’s urine, whey, half 
diluted Takra, curd and S tiktani for her diet. The 
.symptoms and treatment of thin and scanty menstrua- 
tion have been described before. Still in such a case 
measures laid down for the treatment of Nashta-Rakta 
(amenorrhoe) may be adopted. Under a course of 
treatment described as before, the semen or the cata- 
menial blood of a person would be resorted to their 
healthy and normal condition. 22 — 23. 

A woman with [healthy) catamenial flow should 
forego the bed of her husband during the first three 
days of her uncleanness, as well as day sleep and 
collyrium. She shall not shed tears nor bathe, nor 
smear her person (with sandal paste etc.), nor anoint 
her body, nor pare her nail, nor run, nor indulge in 
loud and excessive laughter and talk, nor should she 
hear loud noise, nor comb her hair, nor expose herself 
to droughts, nor do any fatiguing work at all ; because 
if a woman sleeps in the day time (during the first three 
daj^s of her period) her child of subsequent conception 
becomes sleepy or somnolent. The woman who applies 
collyrium along her eyelids (during those days), gives 



Chap, tl.] 


SARIRA STHANAM. 


127 


birth to a blind child ; by shedding tears (during her 
period) a woman gives birth to a child of defective eye- 
sight ; by bathing or smeai'ing her body (with sandal 
paste etc.) a miserable one ; by anointing her body 
a leper (Kushthi) ; by paring her nails a child with bad 
nails ; by running a restless one ; by indulging in ex- 
cessive laughtei-j a child with brown (S> ava) teeth or 
palate or tongue ; by excessive talking a garrulous 
child or one of incoherent speech ; by hearing loud 
sounds, a deaf child ; by combing her hair, a bald one ; 
whereas by exposure to the wind or by doing 
fatiguing work (during the first three days of her 
period) she gives birth to an insane child (conceived 
immediately after it). Hence these acts (day sleep etc) 
are to be avoided. 24, 

Regimen to be observed in her 
menses : —A woman in her menses should lie down 
on a matress made of Kus'a blades (during the first three 
days of her uncleanness), should take her food from her 
own blended palms or from earthen sauces, or from tray.“ 
made of leaves. She should live on a course of Habishya 
diet and forswear during the time, even the sight of her 
husband. After this period, on the fourth day she should 
take a ceremonial ablution, put on a new (untorn) 
garment and ornaments and then visit her husband after 
having uttered the words of necessary benediction 25. 

Metricai Text : — A child conceived after the 
period resembles the man whom she first sees after 
ablution on the fourth day of her menses ; hence she 
should see none but her husband^ at that time (so that 
the child may resemble his father). After that the 
priest shall perform the rites (Garbh^dhana ceremony), 

In the case of the husband being absent at the time, she should look 
at the sunt 



128. 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. II. 


to help the conception of a male child and after the 
ceremony a wise husband should observe the following 
rules of conduct. 26 — 27. 

Conduct of Husband A husbaud wish- 
ing to beget a son by his wife, should not visit her bed 
for a month [before the day of the next flow). Then on 
the fourth day of her uncleanness, he should anoint or 
lubricate his body with Ghrita, should partake of a food 
in the afternoon or evening composed of boiled S'dli rice, 
milk and clarified butter, and then visit the bed of his 
wife The wife also, in her tern, .should observe a similar 
vow of sexual abstinence (Brahma-charini ^ for a month 
before that day on which she .should anoint or lubricate 
her body with oil, partake of food largely composed 
of oil and Mhsha pulse, and then meet her husband 
at night. The husband then having uttered the appro- 
priate Veda Mantias and having awakened confidence 
in the wife, should go unto her on the fourth, sixth, 
eighth tenth or on the twelfth night of her menses for 
the progenation of a male child. 28. 

Metrical Text ; — A visit to the wife on any 
of these nights leads to the continual increase of the 
wealth, progeny, and the duration of the husband’s life. 
On the other hand, a visit to one’s wife on the fifth, 
seventh, ninth, or eleventh day of her flow leads to the 
conception of a female child The thirteenth and the 
lemaining days (till the next coiir.se) arc condemned 
as regards intercourse. 29—30 

Prohibited Period etc. A going unto 
one’s wife on the first day of her monthly course tends to 
shorten one’s life and a child born of the act dies imme- 
diately after its deliveiy. The same result is produced 
by a, visit on the second day, or the child dies lying-in 
loom i.e. ten days of its biith \ A visit on the third day 



Chap. 11.] 


SARIRA STHANAM. 


129 


leads to the child’s being deformed and short-lived. A 
child which is the fruit of a visit on the fourth day lives 
long, will be well developed and remain in the full vigour 
of health. The semen cast in the womb of a woman 
during the continuance of her monthly flow does not 
become fruitful because it is carried back and flows out 
in the same manner as a thing thrown into a stream does 
not go against but is carried away with the current. 
Hence a husband should foreswear the company of his 
wife during the first three days of her uncleanness, when 
she also should observe a vow of sexual abstinence ; the 
husband should not visit his wife within the month 'after 
the twelfth day of her menses). 31, 

After the impregnation on any of these nights, three 
or four drops (of the expressed juice) of any of the 
following drugs such as Lakshmih, Vata-S'n 7 iga' , 
S'ahadevd or Vis’vadevd, mixed with milk should be 
poured into the right nostril of the enceinte for the 
conception of a male child and care should be taken 
that she does not spit it away, 32. 

Metrical Text: — A co-ordination of the four 
factors of menstrual period (Ritu), healthy womb 
(Kshetra), nutrient liquid i.e. chyle of digested food 
(Ambu), healthy semen (Vija) and the proper observance 
of the rules is necessary for the conception and develop- 
ment of a healthy child just as the proper season 
(Ritu), good soil (Kshetra), water (containing nutrient 
matter) and vigorous seeds (Vija) together with proper 
care, help the germination of strong and undiseased 
sprouts. A child which is the fruit of such conception 
IS destined to be beautiful, of vigorous health, generous, 
long-lived, virtuous, attached to the good of its 
parents and capable of discharging its parental obliga- 
tions. 33. 


17 


THE SUSIIRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap, li. 


130 


Causes of different colours of the 
Child;— The fiery principle (Teja-dhsitu) of the 
organism, which is the originator of all colours of the 
skin (complexion), happening to mix largely with the 
watery principle of the body at the time of conception, 
serves to make the child a fair complexioned one 
(Gaura-varna) ; mixed with a large quantity of the 
earth principle (Kshiti) of the body, it makes the chiid a 
dark complexioned one (Krishna-varna). In combi- 
nation with a large quantity of earth and ethereal 
principles of the organism, it imparts a dusky (Krishna- 
s'yama) complexion [to the full developed foetus). A 
similar combination of wateiy and ethereal principles 
serves to make the child dusky yellow (Gaura-s'ydma), 
Others on the contrary aver that the complexion of the 
child is determined by the colours of the food taken 
by its mother during the period of gestation. 34. 

A child is born blind in the failure of the fiery 
principle (Teja-dh4tu) of the organism in reaching the 
region of its still undeveloped eyes (part — where the 
eyes would be) ; so also a penetration by the same 
(Teja-dhdtu) into its blood accounts for the blood-shot 
eyes of the child. Entered into the Pittam it makes 
the child a yellow-pupiled one (Pingalaksha). Entered 
into its bodily Kapham it makes it a white-eyed body 
and mixed with its bodily Vayu, a child of defective 
eyesight. 35. 

Memorable verses:— As a lump of con- 
densed clarified butter melts and expands if placed by 
the side of a fire, so the ovum (Artava) of a woman is dis- 
lodged and glides away in contact with an adult male*. 

* Sus'iuta’s theory isjhat ovulation occurs about the same time as 
menstruation and rather initiates the latter, and the shed ova are washed 
out with the menstrual flow, hence there is a possibility of conception on 



Chap, ir,] SARIRA STIIANAM. I'SI 

A seed divided into two by the deranged Vayu within 
the (cavity of the) uterus (Kukshi) gives rise to the birth 
of twins, conditioned by the good or evil deeds of their 
prior existence a- A child born of scanty paternal 
sperm becomes an Asekya and feels no sexual desire 
(erection) without previously (sucking the genitals and) 
drinking the semen of another man. A child begotten 
in a sordid vagina is called a Songandhika, whose 
organ does not respond to the sexual desire without 
smelling the genitals of others. The man who first be- 
comes a passive member of an act of sodomy and then 
again commits sodomy with the woman (he visits) is 
called a Kumhliika (or Guda-yoni and is included 
within the category of a Kliva). 36 — 40. 

The man who cannot copulate with a woman without 
previously seeing the sexual intercourse of another couple 
is called Irshaka. A child born of an act of fecund- 
ation foolishly or ignorantly effected during the menses 
of its mother by its progenitor by holding her on his 
bosom during the act is called a Shauda and invariably 
exhibits effeminate traits in his character. A daughter 
born of a woman riding on her husband during the act 
of sexual intercourse will develop masculine traits in 
her character. 41 — 43. 

connexion during the period of flow. But when the menstruation 
stops of itself by the end of the third day, it also indicates that 
ovulation has ceased and no ovum is left to be fertilized, hence the 
question arises how can there be conception then on connexion on the 
fourth day and thereafter ? The explanation (as in the following verse) 
is that the ovulating organ though quiescent at the lime is again 
stimulated to activity by intercourse with a male and new ova are shed 
which are ready to be fertilized by the semen. — Ed. 

* Gayi interprets the term “Dharmetara” to mean evil deeds (other 
than good) and quotes verses from S'rutis, S'mritis and Tantras on ex- 
piations of sin in support of his view. 



THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA 


[Chap. II. 


132 

Semen is developed in the four types of Kliva 
known as Asekya, Sougandhika, Kumbhikaand Irshaka, 
whereas a Shanda is devoid of that fluid (Sukra). 
The semen carrying ducts of an Asekya etc. are ex- 
panded by the drinking of the semen as above described 
which helps the erection of his reproductive organ. 44-45 

The conduct and character of a child and its incli- 
nation to particular dietary are determined by those of 
its parents during the act of fecundation. A boneless 
{i. e. with cartilaginous bones) monstrosity is the 
outcome of the sexual act in which both the parties arc 
female and their Sukra (sexual secretion) unite some 
how or other in the womb of one of them. Fecundation 
may take place in the womb of a woman, dreaming of 
sexual intercourse in the night of her menstrual ablution . 
The local Vayu carries the dislodged ovum into the uterus 
and exhibits symptoms of pregnancy, which develop 
month after month till the full period of gestation. The 
offspring of such a conception is a Kalala (a thin bone- 
less jelly-like mass) on account of the absence of the 
paternal elements* in its development. Such monstro- 
sities as serpents, scorpions, or gourd shaped foetus 
delivered from the womb of a woman should be ascribed 
as the effects of deadly sins. 46-49. 

The child of a mother whose wishes are not honoured 
and gratified during pregnancy stands in danger of being 
bom palmless, hunchbacked, lame, dumb or nasal 
voiced through the deranged condition of the Vdyu of 
its mother’s body. The malformation of a child in the 
womb should be ascribed to the atheism of its parents, 
or to the effects of their misdeeds in a prior existence, or 

* Hair, beard, nails, teeth, arteries, veins, ligaments and semen are 
called paternal elements inasmuch as these are said to be inherited hy 
the child Irom its father 



Chap. II.] 


SARIRA STHANAM. 


133 


to the aggravated condition of the Vdyu, Pittam and 
Kapham, 50 — 51. 

A foetus in uterus does not excrete faeces or urine, 
owing to the scantiness of the fecal matter, etc , in its 
intestines and also to the obstruction and consequently 
lessened admission of the Vayu into its lower bowels. 
A child in the womb does not ciy inasmuch as its 
mouth remains covered with the sheath of the placenta 
i.e. foetal membranes (Yarau) and its throat is stuffed with 
Kapham. The processes of I'espiration, sleeping and 
movement of the foetus in the womb are effected through 
those of its mother. 52 — 53. 

The adjustment of the different limbs and organs 
of the body of a child in the womb at their proper 
places, the non-development of hair on its palms and soles 
and the subsequent cutting and falling off of its teeth are 
spontaneously effected according to the laws of nature 
after the model of its own species. An honest, pious, 
erudite man, who has acquired a vast knowledge of 
the Sastras in his prior existence, becomes largely 
possessed of mental traits of the Sdttvika stamp in 
this life too and also remembers his prior births 
(J8^tismara). Acts similar to those, which a man 
performs in^ a prior existence, overtake him also in the 
next, Similarly the traits and the temperament which 
lie had developed in a previous existence are likewise 
sure to be patent in the next. 54 — 55. 

Thus ends the second Chapter of the S'arira Sthanam in the Sus'ruta 
Samhild which treats of the purification of sperm and ovum. 



CHAPTER III. 

Now wc shall discourse on the Sdriram which treats of 
pregnancy, etc. (Garbha Vakranti ^ariramhi. 

The male reproductive element (Sukra) is endowed 
with Soma-guna (i.e , thermolytic properties) the female 
element Artava) presents the opposite propert}'’ and is 
therefore Agni-guna (i e , thermogenetic properties). 
The principles of earth, water, fire, air atid ether are also 
present in men in their subtile forms and contribute to 
the formation of the material parts by their molecular 
adjustment in the way of supplying nutrition and in 
way of the adding to their bulk. 2. 

Combination of Self with the im- 
pregnated matter The local Vdyu (nerve- 
force) heightens or aggravates the heat generated by 
the friction of the sexual organs in an act of copula- 
tion, The Vdyu and heat thus aggravated tend to dis- 
lodge the semen from its sac or receptacle in a man 
which enters into the uterus of a woman through the 
vaginal canal and there it mixes with the ovum 
(Artavaml dislodged and secreted by similar causes. 
The combined ovum and semen are subsequently con- 
fined in the uterus i^Garbhds'aya). After that. He who 
is known by the epithet; of Self-conscious, impressioner 
(creator of sensations and perceptions), toucher, smeller, 
seer, hearer, taster. Self or Ego, creator, wanderer, wit- 
ness, ordainer, speaker, though eternal, unmanifested 
and incomprehensible in his real nature, takes hold of 
the five subtile or essential material principles contributed 
by the united impregnating matter, assumes a subtile 
shape throughout, marked by the three fundamental 



Cliap. Ill ] 


SARIRA STHANAM. 


qualities of Saltva, Rajas and Tamas, and led away by 
the Vayu, lies confined in the uterus to be subsequently 
evolved out in the shape of a god, animal, or monster, 
as determined by his acts in the former existence. 3. 

Factors which determine sex The 

birth of a male-child marks the preponderance of semen 
over the ovum (in its conception) ; the birth of a 
daughter shows the preponderance of the maternal ele- 
ment. A child of no-sex (hermaphrodite) is the product 
when ovum and sperm are equal (in their quality and 
quantity). The first twelve nights after the cessation 
of the flow should be deemed as the proper period for 
conception, as being the time during which the ova are 
secreted. Certain authorities hold that there are women 
who never menstruate to all appearances 4 — 5. 

Memorable verses : — The face of a woman 

(lit ; a woman of undetected menstruation) becomes 
full and lively. A moist and clumsy deposit is found 
on the body, face, teeth and gums. She feels a 
desire for sexual intercourse and speaks sweet words. 
Her eyes, hair, and belly droop down. A sort of 
distinct throbbing is felt in her aims, thighs, mammee, 
umbilicus, perineum and buttocks. Her sexual desire 
grows intense and prominent, and its gratification gives 
her utmost joy and pleasure. These symptoms will at 
once indicate that a woman has menstruated (inter- 
nally). 6. 

Just as the petals of a full blown lotus flower are 
gathered up during the night, so the uterus (Yoni) of a 
woman is folded up {i. e., os of the uterus is closed) after 
the lapse of the menstrual period {i e. fifteen days from the 
date of the flow). The menstrual flow, accumulated in 
the course of a month, is led in time by the local Vayu 
through its specific duct (Dhamani) into the mouth of 



136 


THE SUSHRUTA SAIMIIITA. 


[Chap. III. 


the utei'us (Yonij whence it flows out odourless and 
blackish. 7. 

Period of IVIenstruation The process 
(menstruation) commences at the twelfth year, flowing 
once in every month, and continues till the fiftieth* year 
when it disappears with the sensible decay of the body. 8 

A visit*)* to one’s wife on even days during the cata- 
menial period (twelve days in all from the cessation of 
the flow) leads to the conception of a male child while 
an intercourse on odd days results in the birth of a 
daughter. Hence a man, seeking a male-issue, should 
approach his wife for the purpose in a clean body and 
with a quiet and calm spirit on an even date. 9. 

A sense of fatigue and physical languor, thirst, 
lassitude and weariness in the thighs, suppression of the 
flow of semen and menstrual secretion (Sukra and 
Sonita) out of the uterus (Yoni), and throbbing in the 
organ (after coition) are symptoms of a recent fecun- 
dation. lO. 

Sig'ns of Pregnancy— (M. T.^:— A black 
rash (areola) around the nipples of the mammEC, the 
rising appearance of a row of hair (as far as the umbilicus), 
contractions of the eye-wings, sudden vomitings, nausea 
which does not abate even on smelling perfumes, water- 

* Some are of opinion that the menstruation continues up to the 
sixtieth year. 

+ According to Videha, menstrual secretion flows less on even 
days, hence a son is born if the sexual intercourse be made on those 
days ; whereas menstrual secretion becomes more on odd days, so a 
daughter is born if the intercourse be made on odd days. 

According to Bhoja, a son is born from intercourse on even days and 
a daughter is born from that on odd days. The birth of a male issue is 
due to the preponderance of semen virile and that of a female sex is due 
to the preponderance of menstrual secretion. If both the secretions be 
equal (in quality and quantity) a hermaphrodite is issued. 



Chap'. III.] 


SARTRA STHANAM, 


137 


brash, and a sense of general lassitude are the indications 
of pregnancy, ii. 

Prohibited conducts during: gesta- 
tion : — •Immediately on the ascertainment of her 
pregnancy, a woman should avoid all kinds of physical 
labour, sexual intercourse, fasting, causes of emaciation 
of the body, day-sleep, keeping of late hours, indulgence 
in grief, fright, journey by carriage or in any kind of 
conveyance, sitting on her haunches, excessive appli- 
cation of Sneha-karmas etc., and venesection at an 
improper time ii.e , after the eighth month of gestation), 
and voluntary retention of any natural urging of the 
body. 12. 

WlGtrical Text : — The child in the womb feels 
pain in the same part of its body as the one in which 
its mother feels any ; whether this (pain) may be from 
an injury or through the effect of any deranged morbific 
principle (Dosha) of her organism. 13. 

Development of the Foetus:— in the first 
month of gestation a gelatinous substance is only 
formed (in the womb) ; the molecules of the primary 
elements (Mahabhuta — air, fire, earth, water, and ether) 
being acted upon by cold (Kapham^, heat (Pittam) and 
air (Vdyu or nerve-force) are condensed in the second 
month. A lump-like appearance (of that confused 
matter) indicates the male-sex (of the embryo). An 
elongated-like shape of the matter denotes that the 
feetus belong to the opposite sex ; whereas its tumour- 
like shape (like a S4lmali-bud) predicts the absence of 
any sex {i e. a hermaphrodite). In the third month, 
five lump-like protuberances appear at the places where 
the five organs —namely the two hands, two legs and the 
head would be and the minor limbs and members of 
the body are formed in the shape of extremely small 

18 



138 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. III. 

papillae. In the fourth month all the limbs and organs 
(of the body of the embryo) become more potent and 
the foetus is endowed with consciousness owing to the 
formation of viscus of the heart. As heart is the seat 
of consciousness, so as the heart becomes potent, it is 
endowed with consciousness and hence it expresses its 
desire for things of taste, smell etc. (through the 
longings of its mother). The enciente is called double- 
hearted (Dauhrida) at the time, whose wishes and 
desires — not being honoured and gratified — lead to the 
birth of a paralysed, hump-backed, crooked-armed; 
lame, dwarfed, defect-eyed, and a blind child. Hence 
the desires of the enciente should be gratified, which 
would ensure the birth of a strong, vigorous and long- 
lived son. 14. 

lYIcmorablc Verses : — A physician should 
cause the longings of a pregnant woman (Daulirida) 
to be gratified inasmuch as such gratifications would 
alleviate the discomforts of gestation ; her desires being 
fulfilled ensure the birth of a strong, long-lived, and 
virtuous son. A non-fulfilment of her desires during 
pregnancy, proves injurious both to her child and her 
ownself. A non-gratification of any sensual enjoy- 
ment by its mother (Dauhrida) during gestation tends 
to painfully affect the particular sense-organ of the 
child. 

Longings and its effects during 
pregnancy ; An enciente longing for a royal 
interview during her gestation (fourth month) gives 
birth of a ^ child, who is sure to be rich and to hold a 
high position in life Her longing for fine silks, 
clothes, ornaments etc. indicates the birth of a beauti- 
ful child of aesthetic taste. The birth of a pious’ and 
self-conti oiled cnild is indicated by its mother’s longing 



Chap. III.] 


SARI R A STHANAM, 


139 


for a viiit to a hermitage. The desire of a pregnant 
woman to see a divine image or an idol, predicts the 
birth of a child in her womb who would grace the council 
of an august assembly in life. Similarly, a desire to 
see a savage animal on the part of a pregnant woman 
signifies the presence of a child of savage and cruel 
temperament in her womb. A desire for the flesh of a 
Godha indicates the presence of a sleepy, drowsy person 
in her womb who would be tenaciously fond of good 
things in life. Similarly a longing for beef on the 
part of the mother (during gestation) indicates the birth 
of a strong and vigorous child capable of sustaining 
any amount of fatigue and physical pain A longing 
for buffalo-meat of the mother indicates the birth of a 
hairy, valiant and red-eyed child (in her womb^; a 
longing for boar-flesh indicates the birth of a drowsy 
child though valiant ; a longing for venison indicates 
that of an energetic, determined and sylvan-habited 
child ; a longing for Srimara-meat indicates that of a 
distracted person ; a longing for the flesh of Tittira 
bird indicates that of a child of timid disposition ; 
whereas a desire on the part of an enciente for the 
flesh of any particular animal indicates that the child 
in the womb would be of such stature and would 
develop such traits of character in life as are peculiar 
to that animal. The desires of a woman during her 
pregnancy are determined by ordained fate and effeAs 
of the acts of the child in its prior existence (that are to 
be happened during the present life). 15. 

Development of the Foetus in the 

fifth mouth the foetus is endowed with mind (Manah^ 
and wakes up from the sleep, of its sub-conscious exis- 
tence. In the sixth month cognition (Buddhi) comes 
m. In the seventh mchth all the limbs and members 



140 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. III. 


of its body are more markedly developed. The Ojo- 
dhdtu (in the heart of the foetus) does not remain silent 
in the eighth month * A child born at that time (eighth 
month) dies for want of Ojo-dhatu soon after its birth, 
a fact which may be equally ascribed to the agency of 
the malignant monsters. Hence (in the eighth month of 
gestation) offerings of meat should be made to the demons 
and monsters (for the safe continuance of the child). 
The parturition takes place either in the ninth, tenth, 
eleventh or twelfth month of conception, otherwise 
something wrong with the foetus should be appre- 
hended. 1 6. 

The umbilical chord (Nddi) of the foetus is found to 
be attached to the cavity of the vein or artery of its 
maternal part through which the essence of lymph-chyle 
(Rasa) produced from the assimilated food of the 
mother, enters into its organism and fastens its growth 
and development, (a fact which may be understood from 
the analogy of percolation or transudation of blood). 
Immediately after the completion of the process of 
fecundation, the vessels (Dhamani) of its maternal body 
which carry the lymph-chyle (Rasa) and run laterally and 
longitudinally in all directions through it, tend to foster 
the foetus with their own transudation all through its 
continuance in the womb. ry. 

Different opinions on the formation 
of» the fcetal body Saunaka says that 
probably the head of the feet us is first developed 
since head is the only organ that makes the functions 
of all other organs possible. . Kritaviryya says, it is 
the heart that is first developed since heart is the seat 
of Man ah and Buddhi (mind and intellect). The son of 

-* Sometimes it passes from the body of the child to that of the 
mother 'and. vue vtria, . . 



chap. liL] 


SARIRA STHANAM. 


141 

Para's'ara says that the developmeut of the umbilical re- 
gion of fcetus must necessarily precede (that of any other 
part of its body) inasmuch as it is through umbilical 
chord that an embryo draws its substance from mother’s 
body. Ma'rkandeya says that the hands and feet of a 
foetus are first te be developed since they are the only 
means of movements in the womb. Subhuti Gautama 
says that the development of the trunk is the earliest in 
point of time since all other limbs and organs lie solder- 
ed to and imbedded in that part of the body. But all 
these are not really the fact. Dhanvantari holds that the 
development of all the parts of the body of an embryo 
goes on simultaneously ; and they can not be perceived 
or detected in their earlier stages of development in the 
womb owing to their extremely attenuated size like a 
mango fruit or sprouts of bamboo. As the stone, marrow, 
pith etc. of a ripe and matured mango-fruit or the 
sprouts of bamboo, cannot be separately perceived in 
the earlier stage of their growth but are quite distin- 
guishable in the course of their development, likewise 
in the early stage of pregnancy the limbs and organs of 
the body (foetus) are not perceptible for their extremely 
attenuated stage but become potent (and therefore they 
are distinctly perceived) in the course of time for their 
development, 18. 

Factors respectively supplied by the 
paternal and maternal elements Now 

"'e shall describe the parts and principles of the 
body of a foetus which are respectively contributed by 
the paternal element, maternal factor, the serum 
(Rasaja),the soul (Atmaja), the natural (Sattvaja) and the 
innate physiological conditions (Satmyaja). The hairs 
of the head and body, beavd and .moustaches, bones, 
oails, teeth, veins (Sira), nerves, arteries (Dhamani), 



142 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. 


semen and all the steady and hard substances (in 
the organism of a child) are contributed by the 
paternal element in the conception Pitraja ; whereas 
flesh, blood, fat, marrow, heart, umbilicus, liver, spleen, 
intestines, anus (Guda) and all other soft matters in 
the body owe their origin to the maternal element 
(Mdtrija) ; strength, complexion, growth, rotundity and 
decay of the body are due to the sernm (Rasaja). 
The sensual organs, conciousness, knowledge, wisdom, 
duration of life (longivity), pleasure and pain etc. are 
the outcome of the spiritual element in man (Atmaja). 
We shall describe the Sattvaja features of the body in 
the next chapter. Valour, healthful ness, strength, glow 
and memory are the products of a child naturally 
born with physiological conditions of the parents 
(Sdtmyaja). 19. 

Signs of male and female concep- 
tion : — An enciente, in whose right mamm$the milk 
is first detected, who first lifts up her right leg at the 
time of locomotion, whose right eye looks larger, or 
who evinces a longing largely for things of masculine 
names, dreams of having received lotus flowers (red 
and white), Utpala, Kumuda, Amrataka, or flowers of 
such masculine denomination in her sleep, or the glow 
of whose face becomes brighter during pregnancy, may 
be expected to give birth to a male child ; whereas 
the birth of a daughter or a female child should he 
pre-assumed from the contriety of the foregoing indi- 
cations. An enciente whose sides become raised and 
the forepart of whose abdomen is found to bulge out 
will give birth to a sex-less (hermaphrodite) child. An 
enciente, the middle part of whose abdomen becomes 
sunk or divided in the middle like a leather-bag, will 
give birth to a twin, 20. 



Chap. III.] 


SARIRA STHANAM. 


H3 


Memorable verses Those women who 
are devout in their worship of the gods and the 
Brahmins and cherish a clean soul in a clean body 
during pregnancy are sure to be blest with good, 
virtuous and generous children ; whereas a contrary 
conduct during the period is sure to be attended 
with contrary fruits. The development of the limbs 
and the members etc. of a foetus in the womb is natural 
and spontaneous, and the qualities and conditions 
which mark these organs are determined by the acts 
of the child which are anterior to its genesis and were 
done in its prior existence. 21 - 22 . 

Thuj ends the third Chapter of the S'arira Slhanam in the .Su 'rula 
•Samhila which treats of the generation and pregnancy. 



CHAPTER lY. 


Now we shall discourse on the' S^driram which 
treats of the development of a foetus in the womb, 
as well as of the factors which contribute to the growth 
of its different bodily organs and principles (Garbha- 
Vyakaranam-^ariram). r. 

The Pittam (fiery or thermogenic) and Sleshma 
(lunar principles of the body, the bodily Vdyu, the three 
primaiy qualities of Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas (adhesion, 
cohesion and disintegration), the five sense organs, and 
the Self (Karma-Purusha) are the preserver of the life 
(PrdnAh) of the Foetus. 2. 

Folds of Skin ; -—Seven folds or layers of cover- 
ing (Tvaka— skin) are formed and deposited on the 
rapidly transforming product of the combination of 
(semen) Sukra and Sonita (fertilized ovum) which 
have been thus charged with the individual Soul 
or Self in the same manner as layers (of cream) are 
formed and deposited on the surface of (boiling) milk. 
Of these the first fold or layer is called Avahha'sini 
(reflecting) as it serves to reflect all colours and is cap- 
able of being tinged with the hues of all the five mate- 
rial principles of the body. The thickness of this fold 
measures eighteen-twentieth of a Vrihi^- (rice grain) and 
it is the seat of skin diseases, such as Sidhma, Padma- 

* The complexion of a person is due to this first layer ; and as the 
colour of an opaque body is due to the rays that are reflected from its 
surface, this layer is rightly named Avabhas'ini or reflecting layer. 

** The text runs “Vriherashtadashabhaga,” which means eighteen (or 
so many) parts of a Vrihi ; and Dalian comments that “Vrihi” stands for 
^ measure equal to the twentieth division of a Vrihi or rice grain. 



Chap. IV.] 


SARIRA STHANAM. 


145 


kantaka etc. The second fold (from the surface) is 
called Lohit£i ; it measures a sixteen-twentieth ,of a 
Vrihi and is the seat of such (cutaneous affections; as 
Tilakalaka, Nyachcha and Vyanga etc. The third fold 
or layer is called S/jtEi, which measures in thick- 
ness, a twelve-twentieth of a Vrihi, and forms the scat 
of such diseases as Ajagalli, Charm adala, and Mas'aka 
etc. The fourth fold or layer is called T^mrst 
measurincf an eight-twentieth of a Vrihi and forms 
the seat of such diseases as the various kinds of Kilasa 
and Kushtha etc. The fifth fold or layer is called 
Vedini, measuring in thickness a five-twentieth of a 
Vrihi and forms the seat of Kushtha, Visarpa, etc. The 
sixth fold or layer is called Roliini, which is of equal 
thickness as a Vrihi (grain), and is the seat of Granthi, 
Apachi, Arvuda, Slipada and Gala-ganda etc. The 
seventh fold or layer is called MstQsa-dhar^ twice a 
Vrihi in thickness and is the seat of Bhagandara, 
Vidradhi, and Ars'a etc. These dimensions should be 
understood to hold good of the skin of the fleshy parts 
of the body, and not of the skin on the forehead, or 
about the tips of the fingers, inasmuch as there is a 
surgical dictum to the effect that an incision as deep as 
the thickness of the thumb may be made into the 
region of the abdomen with the help of a Viihi-mukha 
(instrument). 3. 

The Kalais too number seven in all and are situated 
at the extreme borders (forming encasement and support) 
of the different fundamental principles (Dhatus) of the 
organism. 4. 

Memorable Verses : — As the duramen or 
core of a piece of wood or stem becomes exposed to view 
by cutting into it, so the root principles (DhEitus) of the 
body may be seen by removing the successive layers or 

19 



146 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. Chap. iV.] 

tissues of its flesh. These Kalds' are extensively supplied 
with Sndyus (fibrous tissues), bathed in mucous, and 
encased in a membranous covering. 5*6- 

Mansadhara- Kala: — Of these Kalds, the first 
is named M^nsadharsL (fascia), in the contained flesh 
(bodily substance of the Kali) of the Siri (veins), Sniyu 
(fibrous tissues), Dhamani (arteiies) and other Srotas 
(channels) are found to spread and blanch out 7. 

Memorable Verse As the roots and stems 
of a lotus plant respectively situated in the ooze and 
water (of a tank), do simultaneously grow and expand, 
so the veins etc. situated in the flesh, grow and 
ramify, 8. 

Raktadhara- Kala : -The second Kali is 
called Rakt£i-dhar£{ (Vascular tissue of the blood vessels 
etc.). The blood is contained in these inside the flesh 
and specially in the veins (Siri) and in such viscera of 
the body as the liver and spleen. 9. 

Memorable Verse As a plant containing 
latex in its tissues, when injured ‘or pricked, exudes 
milky juice, so blood oozes out instantaneously on the 
flesh of the body (supplied with the Raktidhari-kali) 
being injured . i o. 

Medadhara-Kal^ The third Kald is called 
MedadharEi (adipose tissue). Meda (fat) is present (chiefly) 
in the abdomen of all animals, as well as in the cartila- 
ges (small bones). The fatty substance present in large 
bones is called Majjsi (marrow), ii. 

M6mor3.bIC Vers© : — Marrow is found inside 
large bones, whereas a substance similar in appearance 
and found inside other bony structures (cartilages) should 
be considered as Meda, mixed with blood. The fats, 
present in purely muscular structures, go by the name 
of V assC (muscle-fat) . 12-13. 



[Chapr.IV. 


SARIRA STHANAM, 


147 


^leshm^dhara-Kala : — The fourth KaU is 
called Sleslimsidliar£C (Synovial tissues) and is present 
about all the bone-joints of animals, 14. 

Memorable Verse : —As a wheel easily turns 
upon a well greased axle, so the joints moistened by the 
mucous (^leshmd) contained in these sacs admit of easy 
movements. 15. 

Purishad[hard!-Kal^ The fifth kald is 
called Purishadharsi and being situated in the Kostha 
(abdomen) serves to separate the faecal refuse in the 
(Pakvds'aya) lower gut (from other ingested matters). 16. 

Memorable Versa : — ThisKald extends about 
the liver, upper and lower intestines and other abdominal 
viscera and keeps the fceces in the lower intestines (Un- 
dukara) separate and hence is called Maladhard-kald 17. 

Pittadharel-Kalgl : — The sixth Kald is called 
Pittaphara'-kalai ; it holds (the chyme derived from) the 
four kinds of solid and liquid foods (in the Pitta-sthdnam 
or biliary region) propelled from the stomach (Amds'ay'a 
or Grahani-Nddi) and on its way to the (Pakds'aya) 
intestines (for the proper action of the digestive juices 
upon it). r8. 

Memorable Verse : — The four kinds of food, 
viz. those that are chewed, swallowed, drunk, or licked, 
and brought into the intestines (Kostha) of a man, are 
digested in proper time through the heating agency 
(actionl of the Pittam 19. 

^ukradhara-Kal^ : — The seventh Kald is 
called Sakradhar^ (semen-bearing), which extends 
throughout the entire body of all living creatures. 20. 

Memorable Verse : —The physician should 
know that like fat (Sarpi) in the milk, or sugar in the 
expressed juice ofi .,sugar- cane, the (seat of) semen is co- 
extensive with the whole organism of a man (or animal). 



148 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. IV. 


The semen passes through the ducts situated about two 
fingers’ breadth on either side (vas deferens) and just 
below the neck of the bladder and finally flows out 
through the canal. The semen of a man during an act of 
sexual intercourse with a female under exhilaration 
comes down from all parts of his body owing to the 
extreme excitement (engendered by the act). 21-33. 

The orifices of the Artava— carrying channels (vessels 
of the uterine mucosa) of a pregnant woman are ob- 
structed by the foetus during pregnancy and hence there 
is no show of menses (during gestation). The menstrual 
blood thus obstructed in its downward course ascends 
upwards ; a part of it accumulates and goes to the 
formation of placenta (Apar^', while the rest ascends 
higher up and reaches the breasts ; this is the reason 
why the breasts of a pregnant woman become full and 
plump. 24. 

The spleen and liver of the foetus are formed out 
of blood ; the lungs are made of the froth of the 
blood ; and the Unduka or faecal receptacle, of the refuge 
matter [Mala) of the blood. 25, 

Wletrical Texts The intestines (Antra), the 
bladder (Vasti), and the anus [Guda) of the foetus are 
formed out of the essence of the blood and Kapham, 
baked by the Pittam into which Vdyu enters as well. 
As fire fed by draughts of air refines the dregs of 
golden ore and transforms it into pure metal, so blood 
and Kapham acted upon by the heat of the Pittam 
are transformed into the shape of the intestines etc. 
in the abdomen. The tongue is made of the essence 
of the flesh, blood and Kapham. The Vdyu, com- 
bined with heat (Pittam) in adequate proportion, rends 
through the internal channels into the flesh and trans- 
forms them into muscles (Pesi). The Vdyu, by taking off 



Chap. IV.] 


SARIRA STHANAM. 


149 


the oily principles of fat (Meda), transforms them into 
{Ssi and ifibi-ous tissues) Sn^yu.the underbaked (Mridu) 
ones being converted into the Sird and the overbaked 
(Kshara) ones into the Sndyu. The internal cavities 
(Asayas) of the body mark the spots or regions where the 
Vayu had constantly stayed in its embryo stage. 26-29. 

The kidneys (Vrikkas) are made out of the essence 
of the blood and fat. The testes are formed out of the 
essence of the blood, flesh, Kapham and fat. The heart 
is formed out of the essence of blood and Kapham ; 
and the vessels (Dhamanis) carrying the vital principles 
of the body are attached to it (heart). The spleen and the 
lungs are situated below and beneath the heart on the 
left side, and the liver and Kloma (Pancreas ?) below 
and beneath it (heart) on the right. The heart is the 
special seat of consciousness (ChetaDEk) in all creatures. 
Sleep sets in when this viscus 'heart; of a person becomes 
enveloped by the effects of the Tamas (principles of 
illusion or nescience). 30-31. 

IVIcmorable Verse : — The heart which is of 
the shape of a lotus bud hangs with its apex downward, 
folding itself up during sleep and expanding with the 
return of wakening or consciousness. 32. 

Sleep and its virtues Sleep is the illu- 
sive energy of God ^lit. — the all-pervading deity; and 
naturally has its sway over all created beings. The 
kind of sleep which sets in when the sensation-carrying 
channels vSnayu) of the body are choked by Sleshma, 
which abounds in the quality of Tamas, is known as 
Tamasi-nidiEt. It is this sleep which produces uncon- 
sciousness at the time of dissolution or death. A man 
of Ta'masika-temperament sleeps both in the day and 
night ; one of the EEtjasika-teinperament sleeps either in 
the day or in the night ; while sleep never visits the 



‘^150 THE SUSIIRUTA SAMHITA. Chap. IV.] 

eyelids of a man of SsCttvika-teinper ament before mid- 
night. Persons with enfeebled Kapham and aggra- 
vated Vayu, or suffering from bodily and mental troubles, 
get little sleep, and if at all, their sleep is of the Vaiki- 
rika or delirious type {i.e. much disturbed)* 33-34. 

Memorable Verses s — O Sus'ruta ! the heart is 
said to be the primary seat of consciousness (Chetand) in 
the animated beings. Sleep overcomes a man whenever 
the heart is enveloped in the illusive effects of Tamas. 
Sleep is the offspring of Tamas and it is the quality of 
Sattvam that brings on awakening. This is the funda- 
mental law of Nature. The self-conscious individuality 
(Self), ensconced in the material frame of man which 
is composed of the five material elements, recollects 
through the agency of the mind (Manah), which abounds 
in the quality of Rajas, the renaissance of his by-gone 
•existences, and wakens up in his psychic plane the pic- 
tures of good or evil deeds done by him therein. 
Dreams are but the embodiment of these recollections, 
The self or Jivatm^, though he sleeps not himself, is 
said to be sleeping, whenev'er the sense organs are over- 
powered by the illusive energy of Tamas. 35. 

Day sleep is forbidden in all seasons of the year, 
except in summer and in the case of infants, old men, 
and persons enfeebled by sexual excesses, or in Kshata- 
kshina diseases and in case of habitual tipplers, A sleep 
in the day may be enjoyed after the fatigue of a long 
journey, riding, or physical labour, or on an empty 
stomach. It may be allowed as well to men suffering 
from the loss of fat, Kapham or blood, to those of 

* Such petsons may get sleep only, when being tired and exhausted 
they cease to think of their affairs. 

'G /. Charaka ; — When the active self of a person, tired in body and 
mind, loses-touch with his worldly affairs, sleep comes to him, 



Chap. IVO SARIRA STHANAM- 1 5^ 

scanty perspiration, or of dry or parched constitution ; 
and also to those who have been suffering from indi- 
gestion and who may sleep for a Muhurta (48 minutes) 
in the day lime. Those who have kept late hours in 
the night may sleep in the day for half the time they 
have watched in the night (and no more). Day sleep is 
the outcome of perverted nature and all the Doshas of 
the body are aggravated by a sleep in the day, bringing 
on many a troublesome complaints such as cough, 
asthma, catarrh, heaviness of the body, aching or lassitude 
in the limbs, fever, loss of appetite etc. On the other 
hand, the keeping of late hours in the night- develops 
symptoms (Upadrava) which are peculiar to the deranged 
Vdyu and Pittam. 36. 

IVlemorable Verses:— Hence, one should not 
sleep in the day, nor keep late -hours. Having known both 
these acts to be injurious, the wise should observe 
moderation in sleep. A conformity to the preceding 
rule of conduct is rewarded with health, good humour, 
strength, healthful complexion, virility and beauty, a 
frame which is neither too fat nor too thin, and a long life 
of a hundred years). A day sleep may not prove injurious 
to those who are habituated to it and conversely keeping 
late hours at night may not tell upon the health of those 
to whom it is customary. 37-39. 

An aggravated condition of the bodily Vdyu or 
1 ittam, an aggrieved state of the mind, loss of vital 
fluid, and a huit or an injury may bring on insomnia, the 
icmedy being the adoption of measures antagonistic to 
those which destroy sleep. The following measures are 
useful in cases of sleeplessness— such as anointing the 
body, rubbing of oil on the head, soft massages of the 
body (with cleansing paste) and shampooing ; a diet 
Consisting of cakes and pastry made up of Sdli-rice and 



152 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


Chap. IV.] 


wheat prepared with sugar or other derivatives of sugar- 
cane, sweet or soothing articles with milk or meat juice 
or flesh of animals of the Biskira or Viles'aya class, 
and eating of grapes, sugar and sugar-cane at night, are 
beneficial (,in such cases) ; so also a soft and pleasant 
bed, and easy and convenient seats and means of loco- 
motion. Hence, a wise physician should advise those 
and similar other measures to allay insomnia. 40-41. 

Excessive sleep should be remedied by emetics, 
Sans'odhana measures, fastings, bleeding, and works 
which tend to disturb the mental equanimity of man. 
Keeping up at night is beneficial to persons afflicted with 
obesity, poison or the deranged Kapham ; so also a nap 
in the day is beneficial to people troubled with hiccough, 
colic pain, dysentery, indigestion, or thirst. 42-43. 

Somnolence or Drowsiness etc. In 

this kind of lignt sleep, or in the preliminary stage of 
sleep, the sense organs are overpowered and remain 
only partially cognisant of their respective objects and 
all (subjective and objective) symptoms of a sleepy 
person such as, yawning, sense off atigue and heaviness 
ol the limbs, present themselves in succession ; these are 
the special features of Tandra. One (prolonged) inha- 
ling of the air through a widely open mouth and 
subsequent exhaling with the contraction of the limbs 
and tearful eyes are (all together) called Jrimbha' or 
yawning. 

A sense of fatigue without any physical labour which 
comes upon a person unaccompanied by hurried res- 
piration is called Klama. It obstructs the proper 
functions of the senses as also the workings of the active 
organs.* An inordinate love of pleasure and a great 
aversion to pain, attended with an apathy to all sorts of 

* ^ Hand, leg, anus, and generative organ etc. 



Chap. IV.] SARIRA STHANAM. 153 

work even with the capacity of carrying them through is 
called Alasyam (laziness). Nausea, without vomiting of 
ingested food, attended with salivation and formation 
of sputum, and cardiac distress are the symptoms of 
Utklesham. A sweet taste in the mouth, drowsiness, 
a beating pain in the heart, dizziness, and non-relish 
for food are the signs of Glstai (languor). A feeling as 
if the whole body were wrapped in a wet sheet, accom- 
panied by an extreme heaviness of the heart, is called 
Gauravam. 44'50- 

Loss of consciousness (MurchchSL) is due to an excess 
of the deranged Pittam and to the quality of the Tamas ; 
vertigo (Bhrama) is due to an aggravated state of the 
Vdyu, Pittam, and to the quality of the Rajas ; drowsiness 
(Tandi'Jt) is due to a similar condition of the Vdyu, 
Kapham and to the quality of the Tamas ; while sleep 
(Nidr^jis produced by the predominance of Kapham and 
to the quality of the Tamas in the organism. 51 . 

The growth of a foetus in the womb is effected by 
the serum (Rasa) prepared out of the food (assimilated 
by its mother) incarcerated by the Vdyu in the internal 
passage of its body. 52 . 

WlGinorablc Verses : — Be it clearly under- 
stood that there exists fire or heat(Jyoti) in the umbilical 
region of the foetus which is fanned by its bodily 
Vdyu and thus contributes to the growth of its body. 
The same VAyu in combination with the heat (thus 
generated), expands the upward, downward, and lateral 
channels (in the body of the embryo) and thus leads 
to the growth of the foetus. The eyes (Dristi— aper- 
ture of sight) and the hair-follicles of a man do not 

* In ihc Icxl we find the word “Indiiya” which refers to both 
Jndr.cndriy.i (sensory functions) and Karmendriya (motor functions) of 
tlic body. 


20 



154 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap, IV. 


participate at all (in the general expansion of the body). 
This is a law of nature, and is the opinion of Dhanvantari. 
On the other hand the growth of hair and finger nails 
continue even when the body enters the stage of decay. 
This also is a law of nature. 53-56. 

The Temperaments The temperaments 
(Prakriti) of persons may be of seven different types, 
according as the deranged Doshas of the body are 
involved therein, cither sex'^erally, or in combination 
of two or of all the three together. The temperament 
(Prakriti) of a man is determined by the preponder- 
ance of the particular Doshas at the time of his genera- 
tion (actual combination of the semen and ovum) and 
is marked b}' that preponderant Dosha. The character- 
istics of the different Prakritis are now described. 57-58. 

Vataja*' Temperament A man of Vatika^ 
temparameut is wakeful, averse to bathing and cold 
contact, unshapely, thievish, vain, dishonest and fond 
of music ; the soles of his feet, and the palms of his 
hands are much fissured ; has often a rough and grisly 
beard and moustache, finger nails and hairs in him ; 
he is hot-tempered and is given to biting his finger 
nails and grinding his teeth (when asleep), Morally he 
is impulsive, unsteady in his friendship, ungrateful, lean, 
and rough ; his body is marked with a large number of 
prominent veins (Dhamani) ; he is incoherent in his 
habit and vac'Uating in his temper. He is a fast walker 
and dreams of scaling the skies in his sleep. His eyes 
are always moving. His mind is never steady. He 
makes few friends, is capable of accumulating veiy 
little money and talks incoherently. The traits of 
his character etc, seem to resemble those of a goat, 
jackal, hare, mouse, camel, dog, vulture, crow, and of an 

ass. 59-60. 



Chap. IV.] SARIRA STHANAM. 1 55 

Pittva]a-Temperament ;~A man of 

Pittvaja Umperament perspires copiously emitting a ' fetid 
smell. His limbs are loosely shaped and yellowish' in 
colour. The linger nails, eyes, palate, tongue, lips, soles 
and palms of such a person arecopper-coloured. He looks 
ugly with wrinkles, baldness and grey hair; he eats much, 
is averse to warmth and irritable in temper, thpugh he 
cools down very soon. He is a man of middling strength 
and lives up to middle age. He is intelligent and 
possesses a good retentive memory and loves to 
monopolise the conversation (by pulling down any 
speaker that may be present). lie is vigorous and 
is simply irresistible in battle. He dreams in his 
sleep of such things as meteors, lightning-flashes, fire, 
Nageshvara, Palas'a or Karnikara plants. He is never 
overpowered with fear nor bends before a powerful 
antagonist ; he protects the suppliant and is very often 
afflicted with suppuration in the cavity of the mouth. 
The traits of his character resemble those of a serpent, 
an owl, a Gandharba (heavenly musician), Yaksha, cat, 
monkey, tiger, bear, and of a mongoose. 61-64. 

Kapha ja-Temperament : —The complexion 
of a man of S'kshmd temperament resembles either 
the colour of a blade of grass, blue lotus, polished 
sword, wet Arlshta, or that of the stem of the Sara grass. 
He is comely in appearance, fond of sweet tastes, 
grateful, self-controlled, forbearing, unselfish and strong ; 
he does not hastil}'’ form any opinion, and is fast in his 
enmity. His eyes are white ; his hair curly and raven 
black. He is prosperous in life. His voice resembles tlie 
rumbling.s of a rain-cloud, tlie roar of a lion, or the 
sound of a Mridanga. He dreams in his sleep of large 
lakes or pools decked with myriads of full blown lotus 
flowers, swans and Chakravakas. His eyes aic slight!} 



156 ' THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap IV. 

red towards the corners, the limbs are proportionate and 
symmetrically developed with a cool effulgence radiating 
from them He is possessed of the qualities of the 
Sittvika stamp, capable of sustaining pain and fatigue 
and respectful towards his superiors He possesses faith 
in the SAstras and is unflinching and unchanging in his 
friendship ; he suffers no vicissitudes of fortune, makes 
large gifts after long deliberation, is true to his word 
and always obedient to his preceptors. The traits of his 
character resemble those of Brahma, Rudra, Indra, 
Varuna, a lion, horse, an elephant, cow, bull, an eagle, 
swan and of the lower animals. 65-68. 

A combination of two different temperaments should 
be called a double temperament or a Dvandaja one ; 
and one of all the three temperaments in a person 
should be stated as a SsLiinip^tika one. 69. 

The temperament of a man is never altered, nor 
does it suffer any deterioration or abatement. A 
change, abatement or deterioration in any particular 
case should be regarded as the harbinger of death. 
As a worm, bred in poison, is not troubled with it, 
so the temperament of a person however painful to 
others does no inconvenience to himself. Several 
authorities hold that the temperaments of persons have 
their origin in the material elements of the body and 
accordingly they classify them as the Vsttika Prakriti, 
the Taijasa Prakriti, and the Apya (watery) Prakriti, 
the characteristic traits of which respectively correspond 
to the first three temperaments described above. 70—71. 

A man of the Psirthiva temperament is large in 
his stature, and is firm, strong and muscular in his limbs. 

A man of the Nahhasa temperament is pious and 
long-lived, has large aural cavities. The mental tempera- 
ments are classified according to their qualities. 72. 



Chap. IV. 3 


SARlRA STHANAM. 


157 


Sattvika Features The features of a 
BrallIQa-k£^ya person are cleanliness of person and con- 
duct, belief in the existence of God, a constant reader of 
the Vedas, a worship and reverence of elders and 
preceptors, hospitality and celebration of religious 
sacrifices. Those of a Mahendra-k^ya person are valour, 
command, constant discussion of the Sdstras, main- 
tenance of servants and dependents and magnanimity. 
The features of a Karuna-kSiya person are a liking for 
exposure to cold, forbearance, a brown hue of the pupils, 
golden colour of the hair and sweet speech. The 
features of a Kouvera-kstya person are, arbitration 
of disputes, capacity of bearing hardships, earning and 
accumulation of w'^ealth, and capacity of propagation 
or fertility. The features of a Gandharva-k^ya person 
are love of garlands and perfumes, fondness of songs 
and music, and love making. The features of a Yamya- 
Sattva person are sense of duty, promptness, firmness 
of action, courage, memoiy, purity, and absence 
of anger, illusion, fear and malice. The features of a 
Rislii-Sattva man are divine contemplation, obser- 
vance of vows, complete sexual abstinence, performance 
of Homas, celebration of religious sacrifices, knowledge, 
wisdom and cultiv'ation of divine or spiritual science. 
These seven t3''pes of men should be considered as 
belonging to the Sattvika group (of Sattvika mental 
temperament). Now hear me describe the features of 
men of RAjasika stamp (of mindk 73. 

Rajasika Features Asura-Sattva men 

arc affluent in circumstances, dreadful, valorous, irascible, 
jealous of other men’s excellence, gluttonous and fond 
of eating alone without sharing with any one else. A 
Sarpa-Sattva man is irritable, laborious, cowardly. 
angr\*, double-dealing, and hast>' in eating and sexual 



158 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. IV. 

intercourse. A Sa,kuna-Sattva man is gluttonous, 
intemperate in sexual matters, irritable and fickle. A 
Rakshasa-Sattva man is solitaiy in his habits, fierce, 
jealous of others excellence, externally pious, extremely 
vain and ignorant. The characteristics of a Paisa'cha- 
Sattva man are eating food partaken of by another, irri- 
tability of temper, rashness, shamelessness, and covetous- 
ness of female possessions. Those of Preta-Sattva man 
are utter want of knowledge as regards duty, laziness, 
miserableness, env}', covetousness, niggardliness. These 
six belong to the Rdjasika cast of mind. Now hear 
me describe the characteristic traits of men of the 
Tamasika temperaments. 74. 

Teimasika Features:— The features of a 
PsLSava-Sattva man are perverseness of intellect, parsi- 
moniousness, frequent sexual dreams and incapacity of 
ascertaining or discerning anything. The features of 
Matsya-Sattva man are unsteadiness, stupidity, cowar- 
dice, fond of intermissive quarrel and oppression and a 
longing for water. The features of a Vanaspati-Sattva 
man are fondness of staying at the same place, constant 
eating and absence of truthfulness, piety, riches and 
enjoyment. Thus the three types of Tdmasika tempera- 
ment have been described, A physician should take in 
hand a patient with an eye towards these mental traits 
etc. A physician should coolly deliberate upon the 
different types of temperament described herein and 
their characteristic features. 75-7b. 

Thus ends the fourth Chaplet of the S'atira Sthanam in the S'us'tuta 
Samhitd which treats of fcntal development etc. 



CHAPTER Y. 


Now we shall discourse on the Sariram which treats 
of the anatomy of the human body (^arira- 
^ankhya--Vyakaranam). r. 

Definition of Garbha and ^arira ; — 
The combined semen and ovum (Sukra and Sonita) in 
the womb, mixed with (the eight catcgoiics known as) 
the Trakriti and (her sixteen modifications known as) 
Vikdra, and ridden in by the Atiuai (self-consicous self), 
is called the fffitus. There is consciousness in the 
embryo. The Vayu (or the vital force) divides it into 
Dosha, Dhfitu, Mala, etc , limbs, and organs, etc. The 
Teja (or the heat latent in the fecundated matter) gives 
rise to the metabolism of the tissues ; the Apa (water) 
keeps it in a liquid state ; the Ksliiti (earth) is embodied 
in the shape of its species ; and the Akalsa (ether) contri- 
butes to its growth and development. A fully developed 
foetus with all its parts, such as the hands, feet, tongue, 
nose, cars, b\ittocks etc. and the sense-organs, is called 
riram or body. The body is composed of six 
main parts, namely, the four extremities (upper and 
lower), the trunk or middle body, and the head. 2. 
Different members of the body Now 

we shall describe the I’ratyatigas or members of the 
body. The head, the belly (Epigastrium), the back, the 
navel (umbilical region), the forehead, the nose, the chin, 
the bladder, and the throat (neck), occur singl}’ ; the 
cars, the eyes, the nostrils, the eye-brows, the temples, 
the shoulders, the cheek, the armpits, the breasts, the 
testes, the sides, the buttocks, the arms, the thighs, and 
the knee-joints, etc., occur in pairs. The fingers and 



i6o 


THE SUSIIRUTA SAMMITA . 


[Chnp V.- 


toes which number twenty in all, and the interior 
channels (Sr5tas) of the body, to be presently described, 
arc likewise included within the Pratyangas. These 
are the different Pratyaug'as or members. 3. 

Enumeration of the different limbs 
and members of the body The different 
layers of the skin, the Kalas, the Dhdtus (root principles, 
such as blood, chyle, etc.), the Mala (excrements-, the 
Doshas (morbific principles, such as the Vdyu, Pittam, 
or Kapham', the spleen, the liver, the lungs, the colon 
and CEEcum (Unduka), the heart, the cavities or viscera 
(As^j'as), the intestines (Antras), the Vrikkou (Kidneys) 
the Srotas (internal passages or ducts), the Kandara 
(nerve trunks;, the Jalas (membranes), the Kurchas,* the 
Rajjus (tendons) the Sevanis (sutures), the Sanghdtas 
(facets), the Simanta, the bones, the joints, the SnAyu 
(ligament), the Pes'i (muscles), the Marmas (vital parts, 
such as anastomosis of veins and arteries, etc.), the S'ira 
(veins), the Dhamani (arteries), and the Yogavahini 
Srotas*}*, constitute what is collectively called the 
organism. 4. 

Their number The layers iof skin (Tvaka) 
number seven in all. There are seven connective tissues 
or fascia (Kalds). The cavities or viscera (Asayas) are 
seven in all. The root principles (Dhdtu) of the body 
are seven in number. There are seven hundred Sird 
(veins), five hundred Pes'i (muscles), nine hundred 
SnAyu (ligaments), three hundred bones, two hundred 
and ten Sandhi ^joints), one hundred and seven Marmas 
(vital parts), twenty-four Dhamanis (arteries etc.), three 
Doshas (morbific principle— such as the Vdyu, Pittam, 

* Meetings of muscles, ligam:n( 5, veins, nerves nnd bones as at the 
annular ligament. 

t Those, that ate in connection with ijie Dhamani. 



Chap. V.] SARIRA STHANAM. l6l 

and Kapham), three kinds of Mala (excrements) and 
nine Srota (canals) in all in the human organism, which 
will be described in detail later on, 5. 

The skin, Kald, the root principles of the body, 
(Dhitus) the morbific principles (Doshas) such as the 
VAyu etc, of the body, liver, spleen, lungs, Unduka 
(colons), heart and the Vrikkas (kidneys) have been 
already described (in the preceding chapter). 6, 

Th6 Asayas (cavities or viscera) ; — They are 
named as the VE(tE(saya (the receptacle of the bodily 
Vdyu), Pittstsaya (the receptacle of the Pittam), 
Sleshmasaya (the receptacle of Sleshma or Kapham), 
UaktsLsaya (the receptacle of the blood), AmsCsaya 
(stomach), Pa(kv£L8'aya (intestines', and the Mutra- 
saya (bladder). Females have another As'aya 
(receptacle) in addition to these which is called the 
Garbliaisaya (uterus). The intestines (of an adult) 
male, measure fourteen cubits (three and a half Vy^mas) 
in length, while those of an adult female measure only 
twelve cubits. 7 — 8. 

The Srotas or Channels The nine 
canals (Srotas) of the body, such as the ears, the eyes, 
the mouth, the nostrils, the anus and the urethra, open 
on the outside. Females have three more such ducts 
or canals as the two breasts (milk channels') and the 
one which carries off the menstrual blood. 9. 

Tfie Kandaras : — The Kandards number six- 
teen in all, of which four arc in the legs, four in the 
hands, four in the neck, and four in the back. The 
Kand.ar.-is of the four cxtrcmetics extend to the roots of 
the nails of the fingers and toes. The four KandarAs of 
the neck, connecting it with the heart, extend down to 
the penis. The four Kand.ar.ds at the back and in the 
region of the Stoni extend down to the buttock>^ 

ei 



r62 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMIIITA. 


[Chap. V, 


(Vimba). These KandarAs terminate above in the head, 
the thighs, the breast and in the balls of the shoulders 
respectively (i.e. the Kandaras of the neck terminate 
above in the head, those of the legs in the thighs, those 
of the dorsum in the chest, and those of the arms in the 
shoulders). lo. 

The Jala or Plexuses The Jdla or 
plexuses are of four kinds, such as the muscular plex- 
■uses, the Vascular plexuses, ligamentous plexuses, 
and bony plexuses. One of each of the four kinds 
of plexuses, is found about each of the Manibandda 
(wrists) and Gulfa (ankles). These four kinds of 
plexuses intermingle and cross one another in the 
form of a net-work. The whole body is a chain-work 
of plexuses, ii. 

The kurchas ; — There arc six Kurchas’'in all ; 
of which two are in the hands, two in the feet, one in the 
neck, and one in the penis. There are four great mus- 
cular cords or Kajjus which originate from cither 
side of the spinal column, one pair going inwards 
and another outwards for the purpose of binding the 
muscles together.i- 12 — 13. 

The Sevanis or Sutures ^They arc 

seven in number, e. g. five in the head, one in the tongue 
and one in the genital. An incision should not be 
made into any of these sevanis. 14. 

The Asthi-Sang-hd!tas The Asthi-sangh- 
dtas (collection of a number of bones) are fourteen in 

* The Kurchas (clusters or groups) may be made up of muscles, 
bones, vessels and ligamentous structure— Dallana. 

t According to Gayadasa four such cords are found on each side of 
the spinal column and thus totalling eight in all. 

X Sevani evidently means the central tendinous band which looks 
like a suture from which the muscles on either side arise. 



Chiip. V.] 


SARIRA STHANAM. 


163 

number. Of these one is found in each of the following 
positions, viz. the two ankles, the two knees and the two^ 
groins ; of the remaining eight, six are to be found in' 
similar positions of the upper extremities, namely 
one in each of the wrists, elbows and axillas ; one is in 
the cranium and another in the regions of the Trika"' 
(thus making up fourteen in all). 15. 

The Si mantas The Simantas number four- 
teen in all. and are respectively situated about the place 
of each of the aforesaid Asthi-sanghata. Several autho- 
rities assert that there are eighteen Sanghdtas.f 16. 

The Bones : —According to the followers of the 
Ayurveda (general medicine), the entire number of 
bones in the human body is three hundred and sixty ; 
whereas Salya-Tantram (the present work) counts only 
three hundred. Of these, one hundred and twenty are 
to be found in the (four) extremities, one hundred and 
seventeen in the pelvis (Sroni), sides (Pai3va), back, 
chest (Urah) and the region of the abdomen (Udara), 
and sixty-three in the neck and the regions above ; thus 
numbering three hundred in the aggregate.^ 17. 

* “Trika” generally means the sacral region, but Dallanan says 
that here it refers to the meeting of the two clavicles with the breast* 
bone. 

t According to them four more Asihi-sangatds are to be found over 
and above the fourteen already mentioned ; these are — one above the 
sacrum, one above the chest, one at the junction of the thorax and 
abdomen, and one at the acromial end (of the Scapula). 

+ Pundita Gangadhata Kaviratna of Murshidabad in his famous 
commentary, known as the Tika-jalpa-kalpa-taruy in the 7th. chapter 
of Sarira Sthanam in the Charaka Samhita states : — 

In the surgical text-book of Sus'ruta the number of bones in the 
human body is given to be three hundred in all. Of these, one 
hundred and eight bones are in the four extremeties ; one hundred 
and twenty-six in the pelvic cavity (S'roni), sides (Pats'va), back (Prishtha), 
(Aksha) collcir -bones and breast (Utah) ; and sixty-six in the region 



l6^ 


^ SAMIIITA- 

tii^. StISH Tbe'^*^ 

„ethteebon«^^;ottetoes °f ^^usleA 

fifteen bones atog T=‘'=‘ f'=\„d one forme *e 

bones of each leg. ”f ^^e Janghi 

and Gnlfha ^^^,3 „e U,u 

Pishnl fhcel) , an lo«ei 

(leg) * ^king ^ a in the case of 

:lihV thus ,^befho\dsgood'"’^\. ^n^bs. 

(thigh) , number , um 

extremity • ^ br that of the t 

,be other leg ae «^,e four eKtrem.t.es are 

^Thus the bones 

and twenty m O TrunK - about 

®°”Toelvic cavity) the ^^^tamva 

the Sroni (p (pnbis), 

the Guda (anus). . b made up. 

r:t:aSS5li3£S 

u. -“-■'rrs: 

‘f”; “C i°v« “’'''» '"';;ll;i.°»»“ 

ate two is consUtuVed couu P 

and sactum i side ^Pats ^p,ishlha) ; '.^^en m 

i.e i- 

, ^shasanina) ; ^ICanlVta-tiddO . in the 

te^h. There ate thjee 

nechiGtivd). ibitiy-two one each m 

is made up. ^ of the 

‘“•■■”*t,'f‘w..o"h «»"»''■ 

Viones 01 


[Chap. 



Chap, V.] SAIURA STIIANAM. l6s 

(hips), and the fifth one is the Trika or triangular 
bone (the sacrum). There arc thirty-six bones in 
one Pars'va (side), and the same number in the other ; 
thirty in the Prishtha (back), eight in the Urah (chest) ; 
and rtvo more known as Akshaka (collar-bone). 
(Thus making one hundred and seventeen in 
all). 19. 

Bones above the Clavicles There arc 
nine bones in the Griva (neck) ; four in the Kantha-nadi“ 
(wind-pipe) ; two in the Hanu (Jay's). The teeth num- 
ber thirty-two. There are three bones in the nose ; 

one in the Talu ^palalc) ; also one in each Kama (car), 

/ 

Sankha (temple), and Ganda (check), (thus making six 
in all) ; six bones form the Sira (cranium). [Thus 
making sixty-three in all], 20. 

Different kinds of Bones and their 
situations : —These bones may be divided into five 
classes (according to their character), such as the Kapala, 
Ruchaka, Taruna, Valaya and the Nalaka. The bones, 
situated in the knee-joints, shoulders (AnsaJ*), hips 
(Nitamvas), cheeks (Ganda), palate, temples, and the 
cranium belong to the Kapala kind (flat bones). The 
teeth belong to the Ruchaka class. The bones in the 
nose, ears, throat (trachea) and the socket of the eyes 
(Akshi-koshaJ*) are called Taruna (cartilages) ; while 
those which are found in the palm (wrist), foot (ankle), 
sides back, chest and regions of the abdomen, belong to 
the Valaya (irregular or curved) class. The remaining 

Tala, Kutcha, and Kanlha-nddi ate identical with Charak’s 
Salakd, Sthdna and Jattu respectively. 

t Though it is asserted here that there exist Taruna bones in the 
sockets of the eyes (Akshi-kosha) but there is no mention at all in the 
text, of the presence of any such therein. There is no mention of the 
shoulder-blade (.\nsa) here though it is a part of the skeleton. 



l 66 THE StJSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. V. 

bones belong to Nalaka class (long-bones, lit.r— reed-like 
or cylindrical). 21. 

Memorable Verses : — As trees are supported 
by the hard core inside their trunks, so the body is 
supported (and kept erect) by the firm bones (which are 
found in its inside). And since these bones form ’ the 
pith (Sara) of the human organism, they are not des- 
troyed even after the destruction and falling off of the 
attached flesh, skin, etc, of the body. Muscles are 
attached strongly to the bones by means of the veins 
(Siras) and ligaments (Snayus), and are thus kept in 
position and do not fall off. 22. 

The Sandhis or Joints— (M. T.) The 
joints may be divided into two kinds according as 
they are immovable (synarthrosis) and movable (diar- 
throsis). Those which are situated at the four extremi- 
ties as well as in the Kati (waist) and Hanus (jaws) are 
movable ; the others are known to be unmovable by the 
learned. There are two hundred and ten articulations 
(Sandhis) in the human body. . Of these sixty-eight 
-re in the four extremities ; fifty-nine in the trunk 
^Koshtha); and eighty-three in the neck and in the 
region above it. 23, 

Sandhis of the four Extremities 

Three joints are found in each toe, two only in the 
great toe, thus making fourteen in each leg ; one 
is placed in each ankle, knee-joint and groin, thus 
making seventeen Sandhis in each leg or thirty-four in 
the two lower extremities. A similar number is to be 
found in each of the two upper extremities. 24-25. 

Sandhis of the koshtha and Clavi- 
cles : — There are three Sandhis about the Kapala or flat 
bone in the Kati (waist, hence pelvis) ; twenty-four in the 
vertibral column ; twenty-four in the sides ; eight in the 



Chap. V-] 


SARIRA STI-IANAM. 


167 


chest ; eight in the GrivA (neck) ; three in the Kanthas 
(windpipe) ; eighteen in the cords or bands (Nddi) binding 
the Kloma and the lieart ; thirty-two about the roots of 
the teeth, one in the region of the th3a-oid (Kakalaka) ; 
one in the nose ; two in the cj’^cs ; one in each of the two 
ears, temples and checks (thus making six in all) ; two 
about the joints of the jaw-bones ; two over the eye- 
brows ; two above the temples ; five in the Kapdla 
bone of the fore-head and one in the head. 26-27. 

Their forms, distinctions, and lo- 
cations : — These joints may be divided into eight 
different classes (named after the objects which they 
respectively resemble in shape), namely Kora (hinged 
or lap-shaped), Udukhala (ball and socket), Samudga 
(back of the palm), Pratara (raft), Tunna-sevani 
(seam-like or dove-tailed), Vayasa-tunda ^crew-beak), 
Mandala (circular), and Sankh^-vartah (involutions of 
conch-shell). The joints in the fingers, wrists, ankles 
knee-joints and elbows (Karpura) belong to the Kora 
group. Those in the axilla or shoulder-joint (Kakshd). 
teeth, and hip (Vankshana) arc of the Udukliala type. 
The joints in the region of the anus, vagina, shoulders 
(Ansa-pitha — i.e glenoid cavity) and hips, belong to the 
Samudga form. The joints in the neck and the spinal 
columns, belong to the Pratara (irregular) type ; while 
those found in the Kapala bones of the pelvis (Kati) 
and the forehead, are of Tunna-sevani (suture) form. 
The joints on either side of the cheek-bones (tem- 
poromandibular) belong to the VaCyasa-tunda type. The 
Mandala joints occur in the encircling Nddi of the 
heart, throat, eyes and Kloma. Sanklisi-varta joints 
occur in the bones of the ears and the nostrils. The 
peculiar features of these different kinds of joints 
(Sandhis) are evident from their names. 28. 



i68 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap, V. 


Metrical Text :-Only the bone-joints have 
been enumerated and described ; the joints of muscles 
ligaments and veins are innumerable. 29. 

The Ligaments (Sn^yu) There are nine 
hundred ligaments (Sndyus) in the human body, of 
which six hundred occur in the four extremities ; two 
hundred and thirty in the trunk (Koshtha) and seventy 
in the neck and upwards. (Of the six hundred ligaments 
in the four extremities), six ligaments are situated in 
each toe making thirty (in the toes of each foot) ; thirty 
in the Tala (soles), Gulpha (ankles), and the Kurcha 
(ankle-joint) ; thirty in the leg (Janghd) ; ten in the 
knee-joints (Jdnu) ; forty in the Udara (abdomen) ; ten 
in the groin (Vankshana) ; thus making one hundred 
and fifty in each leg. The same number is found in 
the other lower limb and in each of the two upper 
extremities. (Of the two hundred and thirty ligaments 
in the trunk\ there are sixty in the lumbar region 
(Kati) ; eighty in the back ; sixty in the sides ; and 
thirty in the chest. (Of the seventy ligaments to be 
found in the region above the clavicles) there are thirty 
six in the neck (Grivd.) and thirty-four in the head. 
Thus the total number of ligaments in a human body 
is nine hundred. 30 — 33. 

Memorable Verses : — Now hear me describe 
the ligaments (Sndyus) They may be grouped under 
four distinct heads, viz , Pratdnavati (ramifying or 
branching), Vritta (ring-shaped or circular), Prithu 
(thick or broad), and Sushira (perforated). The liga- 
ments (Snayus) which present in the four extremities 
and the joints belong to the Prat£(navati type. The 
Kandards or large ligaments are of the Vritta type ; 
while those which arc found in the stomach (Amds'aya)or 
in the intestines fPakvds'aya), and in the bladder belong 



SARIRA STI-IANAJr. 


CInp. V.] 


169 


to the Susliira t3’pe. The ligaments of the chest, back, 
sides and head are of the Prithii type. 34—35* 

As a boat made of planks and timber fastened 
together by means of a large number of bindings 
is enabled to float on the water and to carry cargo ; 
so the human frame being bound and fastened at the 
Sandhis or joints by a large number of ligaments 
(Snayu) is enabled to bear pressure. An injury to, or 
diseases of, the bones, veins, joints or muscles are not so 
detrimental to the system as is the case if the Snajms 
are affected in an}’' way. Only the physician, who is 
acquainted with the internal and external ligaments 
(Sndyus) of the body, is qualified to extract a hidden 
and imbedded Salyam (extraneous matter etc.) from any 
part of the body. 36. 

The Muscles (Pesis) The muscles (Pesis) 
number five hundred in all, of which four hundred 
are in the four extremities ; Sixty-six* in the 
trunk (Koshtha) and thirty-four in the region above the 
clavicles. 37. 

Muscles in the Extremities There are 
three muscles in each of the toes, thus making fifteen 
in the toes of one leg ; ten in the anterior part of the foot 
and the same number (ten’l attached to the Kurchcha ; 
ten in the sole and the ankle-bone (Gulpha, — mailed!) ; 
twenty in the region between the Gulpha and the knee- 
joint; five in the knee-joint (Janu) ; twenty in the thigh 
(Uru) ; and ten in the groin (Vankshana) ; thus making 
one hundred muscles in all in each leg. The same 
number is found in each of the other three extremities ; 
(thus making four hundred in all). 38. 

Muscles in the Koshtha : — (Of the sixty- 

six muscles in the trunk), three are in the region of the 

Gayaddsa reads sixty in the tranks and forty above the clavicles. 

22 



170 THE SUSHRUTA SAMIIITA. Chap. V.j 

anus(Piyu); one in the penis; one in the perineum 
(Sevan i); two in the scrotum; five in each of the 
haunches (Sphik) ; two in the top or head of the 
bladder; five in the abdomen (Udara) ; one about the 
umbilicus ; five along each side (of the spinal column), 
on the upper part of the back {making ten in all) ; six 
in the sides ; ten in the chest ; seven around the armpits 
and shoulders (Akshaka-Ansa) ; two in the region of 
heart and stomach (Amds'aya) ; and six in the region 
of the liver, spleen and colon (Unduka). 39, 

Muscles of the Head and Neck (Of 
the thirty-four muscles found in this region), four are in 
the throat (Grivd) ; eight in the two jaw-bones (Hanu) ; 
one each in the regions of the throat (Kakalaka and 
Gala) ; two in the palate ; one in the tongue ; two in 
the Ups : two in the nose ; two in the eyes ; four in the 
cheeks ; two in the ears ; four in the forehead ; and 
one in the head. Thus the positions and distribu- 
tions of the five hundred muscles (Pes'is) have been 
described. 40. 

Metrical Text : — The ligaments, veins, bones 
and joints etc., of a human body, derive their strength 
from the fact of their being supported by or covered over 
by the muscles. 41. 

Extra Muscles in Women Females 
have twenty extra muscles ; ten muscles are to be found 
about the two breasts, five in each, which (muscles) 
attain their full growth during puberty ; four muscles 
are present about the parturient passage ; and of these 
(four) two are about the external and two in the internal 
orifices (of the vagina) ; three about the region of the 
os, and three along the passages of the ovum and sperm. 
The Garbhdsdya or uterus is situated in the space 
bounded by the Pittas'aya (small intestine) and Pakvds'aya 



Chap. V.] 


SARiRA StHANAM. 


in 


(large intestine) and the foetus lies in this during the 
period of gestation.*’ 42-43, 

According to their position in the system, these 
muscles are found to be thick, slender, small, expanded, 
circular, short, long, hard, soft, smooth or rough. The 
muscles cover the veins, ligaments, bones and joints ; 
hence their shape and size are determined by the 
exigencies (organic structures) of their positions. 44. 

Memorable Verses;— The muscles which 
are found in the penis and scrotum of a man as des- 
cribed before correspond to the covering of the uterus 
in the case of a woman owing to the absence of those 
organs in her body. The positions and classifications 
of the veins, channels, Marmas and arteries will be 
dealt with in a separate chapter. 45-46, 

The vagina of a woman resembles the navel of a 
conch-shell in shape and is possessed of three involuted 
turns (Avartas) like the interior of mollusc. The uterus 
(Garbhds'aya — foetal bed) is situated at the third posterior 
involuted turn. The shape of the uterus resembles the 
mouth of aRohit-fish (narrow at the mouth and expanded 
in the upper end). The foetus lies in a crouched or 
doubled up posture in the uterus and thus naturally at 
the time of parturition its head is presented at the 
entrance to the vagina. 47-48. 

Superiority of ^alya-Tantram The 

different parts or members of the body as mentioned 
before including even the skin cannot be correctly 
described by any one who is not versed in Anatomy. 
Hence, any one desirous of acquiring a thorough 
knowledge of anatomy should prepare a dead body 
and carefully observe (by dissecting it) and examine 

If we read Mutras'aya (bladder) in place of Pillab'aya it explains 
the anatomy belter.— Ed, 



172 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMIIITA. 


Chap. V.] 


its difFei-enl parts. For a thorough knowledge can only 
be acquired by comparing the accounts given in the 
Sistvas (books on the subject) by direct personal 
observation. 49. 

Mode of dissection : — A dead body selected 
for this purpose should not be wanting in any of its parts, 
should not be a person who had lived up to a hundred 
years (i. c. too old age) or ol one who died from any 
protracted disease or of poison. The excrementa should 
be first removed from the entrails and the body should 
be left to decompose in the water of a solitary and still 
pool, and securely placed in a cage (so that it may not be 
eaten away by fish nor drift away), after having covered 
it entirel)'’ with the outer sheaths of jllimja grass, Kns'a 
grass, hemp or with rope etc. After seven days the body 
would be thoroughly decomposed, when the observer 
should slowly scrape off the decomposed skin etc, with a 
whisk made of grass-roots, hair, Kusa blade or with a 
strip of split bamboo and carefully observe with his own 
eyes all the various different organs, external and internal, 
beginning with the skin as described before. 50—56. 

Memorable Verses The Self, the occult 
or invisible Lord of the body cannot be detected except 
with the psychic eye or with that of the mind. He, who 
has observed the internal mechanism of the human body 
and is well read in the works bearing on these subjects 
and has thus all his doubts expelled fi'om his mind is 
alone qualified in the science of Ayurveda and has a 
rightful claim to practise the art of healing. 57. 

Thus ends the fifth Chapter of the S'arira-slhanam in the Sus'nila 
Samhita w hich treats of the anatomy of the human body. 



CHAPTER VI. 


Now we shall discourse on the Sariram which speci- 
fically treats of the Mannas* or vital parts of the body 
(Pratyeka-marma-nirdesa ^d^riram.) r. 

Classification of Marmas There are 
one hundred and seven Marmas (in the human organ- 
ism), which may be divided into five classes, such as 
the jMansaAIarmas, Sira-Marmas, Snajm-Marmas, Asthi- 
Marmas and the Sandhi-Marmas. Indeed there are no 
other Marmas (vulnerable or vital parts) to be found 
in the body than the preceding ones. 2. 

Their different numbers ’.—There are 
eleven Mansa-Marmas (vulnerable muscle-joints) ; forty- 
one Sira-Marmas (similar veins, anastomosis) ; twenty- 
seven Snayu-Marmas (vital ligament-unions) ; eight 
Asthi-Marmas (.bone-unions) and twenty Sandhi-Marmas 
(vulnerable joints). 3. 

Their Locations : — Of these, eleven are in 
one leg, thus making twenty-two in the two lower ex- 
tremities The same number counts in the two hands. 
There are twelve Marmas in the regions of the 
chest and the abdomen (Udara); fourteen in the back ; 
and thirty-seven in the region of the neck (Griva) and 
above it. 4. 

Names and distributions of Marmas : 

The Marmas which are situated in each leg are known 
as Kshipra, Tala-Hridaya, Kurchcha, Kurchcha-Sirah, 
Gulpha, Indravasti, Janu, Ani, Urvi, Lohitaksha and 
Vitapa. The twelve Marmas which are situated in the 

I laces where veins, arteries, ligaments, joints and mu-cles unite 
and an injury to which proves generally fatal. 



ate 




(anus, vast! 

' *e WO Z fooni i« 

^ f t\ie breasts,) -airatraas to , 

(musc\es 0 T:ue fouvteetr J ^T^avuna-bone 

tbc ^acb iCuburrdava ) two 

v/aist', tb ^^vo si ., ..fades') an 

p^vs'va-Sandbis t ^sbouldei m 

* wo Ansa-pV>-':J» 

Vat^''°“'"“tslcKsWpW. ^“\";l„va.ti, 

^ • ni-vi 'Lobitabs r vbe other, .n-DbamamS) 

A*"’ tolds good of * aa*o'°"’ ” i 4 ,,ataa, 

tbe one ari^ ,.p<Tlons are ,^'^e two v lo 

agove*ecUv.c'^tsvo&ite"^^^^ Avavtas. 

theeigWW'^‘"^*eWO APt””"-";^ one Sthapaoi 

*=‘'"!'Trot ®“C= Adhfp^"' ''®:of 

trrr w 

.j”-’‘-T'o’” - rs"”—'' 

'IT -r’"-' ''"sTpanf, naa-. 

B'Waya, «"S.®ar)nas. 

aTT. ^^tTahaaodB'-'”" l^tT^ava, 
Sa"^“’TTo *■• T vasti. BaW«- ^as- 

’■*““TdT Vidh«» a'''^^^^a-tav“'’a. J4nu, *= 

'r T- - Te^^'*^r J TU.t 

^ Tka SaoVcha, ar= * the ^,,3 

pkaVaha, c-;,nanta. ® , ,,„ the Ava't 

Kuipasa.*a^ _ ^„i,aaia,a, 

^vibdtM 



Chap. VI.] 


SARIRA STIIANAM. 


175 


Qualitative classes Again these Marmas 
(vital unions of the body) are under five distinct heads, 
namely, Sadya-Pranahara, (fatal within twenty-four 
hours), Kaldntava-Pranahara, (fatal within a fortnight 
or a month), Vis’alyaghna (fatal as soon as a dart or any 
other imbedded foreign matter is extracted therefrom), 
Vaikalyakara, (maiming or deforming) and Rujdkar 
(painful) [according as an injury respectively produces 
the aforesaid effects]. Of these, nineteen Marmas 
belong to the Sadya-Prdnahara group ; thirty-three to 
the Kaldntara-Pranahara group ; three to the Vis'alya- 
ghna group; forty-four to the Vaikalyakara group ; and 
eight to the Rujakara group. 15. 

Memorable Verses : — To the Sadya-Pra'na- 
hara group (fatal in the course of a day if anyway hurt) 
belong the four Sringatakas, one Adhipati, the two 
Sankhas, the eight Kantha-Sirds, the Guda, the 
Hridaya, the Vasti and the Ndbhi. To the Kstlsintara- 
Pratnahara group (fatal later on, if any way hurt) 
belong the eight Vaksha-Marmas, the five Simantas, 
the four Tala-Marmas, the four Kshipra-Marmas, the 
four Indra-vastis, the two Katika-tarunas, the two 
Pars'va-Sandhis, the two Vrihatis, and the two 
Nitamvas. To the Visalyaghna class belong the two 
Utkshepas and the one Sthapani. To the Vaikalyakara 
(deforming) group belong the Marmas, known as the 
four Lohitakshas, the four Anis, the two Jdnus, the 
four Urvis, the four Kurchchas, the two Vitapas, the 
two Kurparas, the two Kukundaras, the two Kaksha- 
dharas, the two Vidhuras, the two Krikatikas, the two 
Ansas (shoulder), the two Ansa-phalakas, (shoulder- 
blades), the two Apkngas (tips of eyes), the two Nials, 
the two Manyas, the two Phanas and the two Avartas. 
A learned physician should know that the two Gulphas, 



176 THE SUSIIRUTA SAMIIITA. [Chap. VI. 

the two Mani-vandhas and the four Kurchcha-Sirah (of 
the hands and legs) belong to the E,uja(kara group 
(painful if hurt). A piercing of the Kshipra-Marma 
ends in an instantaneous death ; or death may follow 
at a later time. i6-2i. 

Firm unions of Mdnsa (muscles), Sira (veins), Snayu 
(ligaments), bones or bone-joints are called Marmas 
(or vital parts of the body) which naturally and specifi- 
cally form the seats of life (Prsfna), and hence a hurt to 
any one of the Marmas invariably produces such symp- 
toms as arise from the hurt of a certain Marma.^‘ 22. 

The Marmas belonging to the Sadya-Pr^nahara group 
are possessed of fiery virtues (thermogenetic) ; as 
fiery virtues are easily enfeebled, so they prove fatal 
to life (in the event of being any way hurt) ; while 
those belonging to the Kdldntara-Pranahara group are 
fiery and lunar (cool) in their properties. And 
as the fiery virtues are enfeebled easily and the cooling 
virtues take a considerable time in being so, the 
Marmas of this group prove fatal in the long run (in 
the event of being any way hurt, if not instantaneously 
like the preceding ones). The Vis'alyaghna Marmas 
are possessed of Vataja properties (that is, they arrest 
the escape of the vital Vayu) ; so long as the dart 
does not allow the Vayu to escape from their injured 
interior, the life prolongs ; but as soon as the dart is 
extricated, the Vdyu escapes from the inside of the 
hurt and necessarily proves fatal. The Vaikalyakaras 
are possessed of Saumya (lunar properties) and they 
retain the vital fluid owing to their steady and cooling 
virtues, and hence tend only to deform the organism 

* Some ate of opinion that hallucination, delirium, death, stupor and 
coma as described in the Sutrast anam are the results of injuries to 
thes Mar as. 



Chap. VI.] 


SARIRA STHANAM. 


177 


in the event of their being hurt, instead of bringing 
on death. The Rujakara Marmas of fiery and Vataja 
properties become extremely painful inasmuch as both 
of them are pain-generating in their properties. 
Others, on the contrary, hold the pain to be the result 
of the properties of the five material components of 
the body (Pancha-bhautika). 23. 

Different Opinions on the Marmas: — 

Some assert that Marmas, which are the firm union of 
the five bodily factors (of veins, ligaments, muscles, bones 
and joints), belong to the first group (Sadya-Prdna- 
hara) ; that those, which form the junction of four such, or 
in which there is one in smaller quantity, will prove fatal 
in the long run, in the event of their being hurt or injured 
(Kdlantara-Pranahara).* Those, which are the junction 
of three such factors, belong to the Vis'alya-Prdnaharai* 
group ; those of the two belong to the Vaikalyakara 

* The Marmas, such as Stana-mula, Apalapa, Apastambha, 
Simanta, Katika-Taruna, Parsva-Sandhi, Vrihati, and Nitamva be- 
longing to the Kalantara-maraka group, are devoid of Mansa (muscles) ; 
and the ‘Marmas’ known as Stanarohita, Talahridaya, Kshipra, and 
Indravasti, belonging to the same class, are devoid of Asthi (bonesl. 

t The Utkshepa marma, belonging to the Vis'alya-pranahara 
group, is devoid of Mansa (muscles) and Sandhi (joint). 

+ The Sthapani-Marma, belonging to the Vaikalyakara class, is 
devoid of Mansa (muscle), S'ira and Snayu ; the Lohilaksha-marma 
(of the same group) is devoid of Snayu, Sandhi and Asthi (bones) ; (he 
Janu-marma (of the same group) is devoid of Mansa, S'ira and Snayu: 
the Urvi-marma (of the said group) is devoid of Asthi, Mansa and Snayu ; 
the Vitapa-marma (of the same class) is devoid of Mansa, Sira and Asthi ; 
the Kurpara-marma (of the same class) is devoid of Mansa, S'ira, 
and Snayu ; the Kukundara-marraa (of the same class) is devoid 
of Mdnsa, S'ira and Sandhi ; the Kakshadhata-marma (of the same 
class) is devoid of S'ira, Asthi, and Sandhi ; the Vidhura-marma (of the 
said group) is devoid of Mansa, Sira and Sandhi ; the Krikatika-marma 
is devoid of Mansa, S'ira, and Sandhi ; the Ansa-marma (of the same 
group) is devoid of Mansa, Snayu and Sandhi ; the Ansa-phalaka-marma 



178 


THfe SUSHRUTA SAMHITA . 


[Chap, VI. 


group ; and those in which only one of them exists 
belongs to the last or pain-generating type (Rujdkara)*'. 

But the fore going theory is not a sound one, inas- 
much as blood is found to exude from an injured joint 
which would be an impossibility in the absence of any 
vein, ligament (Sndyu) and muscle being intimately 
connected with it. Hence every Marma should be 
understood as a junction or meeting place of the five 
organic principles of ligaments, veins, muscles, bones 
and joints. 24-25. 

Metrical text : — This is further corroborated 
by the fact that the four classes of Sird or vessels (which 
respectively carry the Vdyu, Pitta, Kapha and the blood) 
are found to enter into the Marmas for the purpose 
of keeping or maintaining the moisture of the local 
ligaments (Snayu), bones, muscles and joints and thus 
sustain the organism.t The Vdyu, aggravated by an 
injury to a Marma, blocks up (those four classes of 
vessels) in their entire course throughout the organism 
and gives rise to great pain which extends all over the 
body. All the internal mechanism of a man (of which a 
Marma has been pierced into with a shaft or with any 
other piercing matter) becomes extremely painful, and 
seems as if it were being constantly shaken or jerked, 
and symptoms of syncope are found to set in. Hence a 
careful examination of the affected Marma should 

(of the said group) is devoid of Mansa, Snayu and Sandhi ; the Nila, 
Manya and Phana Marmas (of the same group) are devoid of Mansa, 
Sandhi and Asthi ; the Avarta-raarma is devoid of S'irS,, SnfLyu and 
M^nsa ; the Apanga-marma (of the said class) is devoid of Mansa, Snayu 
and Sandhi. 

* The Gulpha, Manibandha, and Kurchcha-s'ira Marmas, belonging 
to the Rujakara group, are devoid of Mansa, S'iri, Sna.yu and Asthi, i.e. 
Sandhi alone is present in these. 

t Hence the piercing of a bone is attended with bleeding. 



Chap. VL] 


SARIRA STIIANAM. 


179 


precede all the foregoing acts of extricating a Salya from 
its inside. From that similar aggravated conditions and 
actions of the Pitta and the Kapha should be presumed 
in the event of a Marma being any way injured or 
pierced into, 26 — 29. 

A Marma of the Sadyah-Prdnahara type being 
perforated at its edge brings on death at a later time 
(within seven days), whereas a deformity of the organ 
follows from the piercing of a Kdldntara-Mdraka" 
Marma at the side (instead of in the centre). Similarly, 
an excruciating pain and distressful after-effects mark a 
similar perforation of a Marma of the Vis'alyaghna*]* 
group. And a Marma of the Rujikara]; class pro- 
duces an excruciating pain (instead of a sharp one) in 
the event of its being pierced at the fringe. 30. 

An injured Marma of the Sadyah-Prdnahara type 
terminates in death within seven days of the injury, 
while one of the Kaldntara type, within a fortnight or a 
month from the date of hurt (according to circumstances). 
A case of injured Kshipra-Marma seldom proves fatal 
before that time (seven days). An injured Marma of the 
Vis'alyaghna or Vaikalyakara group may prove fatal 
in the event of its being severely injured. 31. 

Wlarmas of the Extremities Now we 
shall describe the situation of every Marma. The 

* If any of the Matraas of the Kalanlara-Prdnahara group be 
deeply perforated, then this perforation is sure to bring on death within 
a day (j'.e. it will act like a slightly injured Marma of the Sadyah- 
Pranahara group). 

t Any Marma of the Vis'alyaghna-group, being deeply perforated, 
brings on death within seven days (/, e. it will hehave like a slightly 
injured Marma of the Kalantara-Prdnahara class). 

t Any Marma of the Rujakara class, being deeply perforated (injured), 
is Sure to bring excruciating pain etc, (i.e., it will act like a slightly 
injured Marma of the Vis'alyaghna group), 



l8o THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. VI. 

Marma, known as the Esliipra^ is situated in the 
region between the first and the second toes (Tarsal 
articulation), which, being injured or pierced, brings 
on death from convulsions. The Marma, known as the 
Tala-Hridayaf, is situated in the middle of the sole 
of the fool in a straight line drawn from the root of 
the middle toe. An injury to this Marma gives rise to 
extreme pain which ends in death. The Marma, known 
as the Kurchcliaj, is situated two fingers’ width 
above from the Kshipra one on each side of the 
foot. An injury to this Marma results in shivering 
and bending in of the foot. The Marma called 
Kurcliclia-Sirali § is situated under the ankle-joints, 
one on each side of the foot (Gulpha- Sandhi) ; an 
injuiy to it gives rise to pain and swelling of the 
affected part. A perforation of the Gulpha-Marma 1!, 
which is situated at the junction of the foot and 
the calf, results in pain, paralysis and maimedness 
of the affected leg. 32-37. 

An injury to the Marma which is situated in the 
middle muscle of the calf to the distance of between 
twelve and thirteen fingers’ width from the ankle, and 
known as the Indravasti-Marma,^^ results in excessive 
haemorrhage which ends in death. 38. 

* It is a Snayu-Matma (ligament) to the width of half a finger, ami 
belongs to the Kdlantata group. 

t It is a Mansa-Marma to the width of half a Enger and belongs to the 
Kdldntara group. 

J It is a Sndyu-Marina lo the length of four fingers’ width, and 
belongs to the Vaikalyakara group. 

§ It is a Sndyu-Marraa, one finger in length and belongs to the 
Vaikalyakara group. 

11 It is a Sandhi-Marma, to Ihe length of two fingers’, and belongs to 
the Vaikalyakara group. 

V Indravasti measures two fingers in length according to Bhoja and 



Chap. VI.] SARIRA STHANAM. l8l 

An injury to or piercing of the J^iiu-Marma,^' 
situated at the union of the thigh and the knee, results 
in lameness of the patient. 39. 

A piercing of the i.ni-Marma,t situated on both the 
sides above three fingers’ width from the Janu (knee-joint), 
brings on swelling and paralysis (numbness) of the 
leg. 40. 

A perforation of the Urvi-Marma^: situated in the 
middle of the Uru (thigh), results in the atrophy 
of the leg, owing to the incidental hsemorrhage. An 
injury to the Iiohita'ksha-Marma,!) situated respectively 

Uttle above awd below the Urvi-Marcna and the 
Vankshana (groin-joint), and placed near the thigh, is 
attended with excessive hzemorrhage and causes para- 
lysis (of the leg). 41-42. 

An injury to the Vitapa-Marma,1i situated between 
the Scrotum and the Vankshana (inguinal region), brings 
on loss of manhood or scantiness of semen. Thus the 
eleven Sakthi-ffiarmas of one leg have been described ; 
those in the other being of an identical nature with the 
preceding ones. The Marmas in the hands are almost 
identical with those of the legs, with the e^cception that 
Manivandha, Kurpara and Kakshadhara Marmas 


Gayddasa, though half a finger in width according to others. It is a 
Mdnsa-Marma and belongs to ihe Kalantara group. 

It is a joint-Marma, thiee fingers in length and belongs to the 
Vaikalyakara group. 

t It is a ligament- Marma, half a finger in length, (three fingers 
according to Gayadasa) and is of the Vaikalyakara class. 

t It is a S'ira-Marma, half a finger in length and of the Vaikalya- 
kara group, 

II It is a S'ira-Marma, half a finger in length and of the Vaikalya- 
kara group, 

^ It is a Snayu-Marma to the length of one finger and of the 
Vaikalyakara group. 



i 82 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA, 


[Chap. VI, 


occur in the place of the Gulpha, Jdnu and 
Vitapa Marmas respectively. As the Vitapa-Marma 
is situated between the scrotum and the Vankshana 
(inguinal region), so the Kakshadhara-Marma is situated 
between the Vaksha (chest) and the Kaksha (armpit). 
An injury to these causes supervening symptoms. 
An injury to the Manivandha-Marma (wrist-marma) 
results specially in inoperativeness (Kuntha) of the 
affected hand ; an injury to the Kurpara-Marma ends 
in dangling (Kuni) of the hand ; and an injury to 
the Kakshadhara results in hemiplegia. Thus the 
forty-four Marmas of the upper and the lower extremi- 
ties have been described, 43-46. 

Marmas on the Thorax etc. ’.—Now we 
shall describe the Marmas, situated in the region of 
the thorax and the abdomen (trunk). A hurt to 
the Guda-Marma^', which is attached to the large 
intestine and serves as the passage of stool and flatus, 
ends fatally (within twenty-four hours of the hurt). 
An injury to the Vasti-Marma,t situated inside 
the cavity of the pelvic region and the bladder and 
composed of small muscles and blood (and which 
serves as the receptacle of urine), proves fatal with- 
in the day, except in the cases of extracting the 
gravel, only when the injury to the organ is short 
of complete perforation of both of its walls. The 
urine oozes out through the aperture in the case 
where only one of its walls has been perforated, and 
which may be closed and healed up with proper 
and judicious medical ti'eatment. An injury to the 

* It is a Mansa-Marma to the length of four fingers’ width and be* 
longs to the Sadyo-maraka class, 

t It is a ligament combination (Snayu-marma) to the length of font 
fingers, belonging to the Sadyah-Pr^nhara class. 



Chap. VI.] 


gARlRA STHANAM. 


183 


N^bM-Marma,* the root of all the ^ir&s and situated 
between the Am^s'aya (stomach) and the Pakv&s'aya 
(intestines) ends in death within the day. 47-50. 

A hurt to the Hridaya-Marma,+ which is situated 
in the thorax between the two breasts and above the 
pit of the Am&s'aya and forms the seat of the qualities 
of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, proves fatal within the 
day. An injury to the Stana-mula-Marmas^: situated 
immediatelj^ below each of the breasts and about two 
fingers in width fills the Koshtha (thorax) with deranged 
Kapha, brings on cough, difficult breathing (asthma) 
and proves fatal. An injury to any of the Stana- 
Rohita-Marmas,! situated above the nipples of 
the breasts about two fingers in width, fills the cavity 
of the Koshtha (thorax) with blood, producing symptoms 
of cough and asthma, and ends fatally. An injury to 
the Apalsbpa-BIarmas,!! situated below the Ansa-kuta 
(balls of the shoulders) and above the sides (meeting 
of the different branches of the sub-clavicle veins i,e. 
axilla), transforms the blood of the organism into pus 
and proves fatal thereby. 51-54. 

An injury to any of the Vayu-car lying vessels, known 
as the Apastambha-Marma^ (meeting of the bifurcated 
branches of the bronchi lying on both the sides 

It is a S'ita-Marma to the length of four fingers, belonging to the 
Sadyah-Pranahara class. 

+ It is a S'ira-Marma to the length of four fingers and of the Sadyah- 
Pranahara class. 

X It is a S'ita.Marma, two fingers in length and of the Kalantara 
class. 

§ It is a Mansa-Marma about half a finger in length and of the 
Kalantara class, (according to Vgabhata, of the Sadyo-Maraka class). 

II It is a S'ira-Marma, half a finger in length, and of the Kalantara 
class. 

IT It is a S'ita-Marma, half a finger in length and belongs to the 
Kalantara class. 



184 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. VI. 


of the breast), fills the Koshtha with the deranged 
Vliyu (tympanites) accomapanied by cough and dys- 
pepsia, and terminates in death. Thus the twelve 
Marmas situated in the thorax and abdomen are 
described. 55-56. 

Prishtha IWarmas : — Now we shall discourse 
on the Marmas in the back (of a man). An injury to 
any of the Katika-tarunas* (sacro-iliac articulation), 
situated in the region of the S'roni ('sacrum) on both 
sides of the spinal column, gives rise to an excessive 
haemorrhage and consequent pallor and ends in death. 
A hurt to any of the Knkundara Marmas ] (lit -a 
hollow — the great sacro-sciatic notch), situated on both 
sides of the spinal column and in the region slightly 
below the waist (in the loins), results in complete 
anaesthesia and inoperativeness of the lower extremi- 
ties. A hurt to the Nitamva-Marmas,]: attached to 
the side above the Sroni (pelvis) and attached inside to 
the muscles of the waists, gives rise to Sosha (atrophia) 
in the lower extremities, weakness and ultimately brings 
on death. An injury to the Pairsva-Sandhi-Marmas § 
(caelic axes) which are situated just at the middle below 
the extremities of the sides (Pa.rs'va) and which lies 
attached at the middle between the loins at their lower 
regions, feels the Koshtha (abdomen) with the blood 
and results into death A hurt to the Vrihati-Marmas !1 

It is an Aslhi-Marma, half a finger in length and of the Kalantara- 
mataka class. 

t They are Joint-matmas (Sandhi), half a finger in length and of the 
Vaikalyakara group. 

t It is a bone Marma, half a finger in length, and of the Kalantara class. 

§ It is a S'ira-Marma to the length of half a finger and belongs to 
the Kalantara class, 

II They are S'ira-Marmas (arterial anestomsis) to the lengt of half 
a finger and belong to the Kalantara class. 



Chap. Vr.] gARtRA StHANAM. 185 

which commencing from the roots of the breast 
course round both the sides of the spinal column 
(Pristha-vams'a), cause excessive bleeding, and the patient 
dies, as supervening symptoms arise from an excessive 
loss of blood. An injury to any of the two Amsa-phalaka= 
Marinas* situated on either side of the vertebral column 
and connected with the scapula brings on anesthesia 
or atrophy (Soshaj of the arms. There are two Marmas 
known as Amsa-Marm.as'f which are situated on either 
side midway between the neck and the head of the arms 
and connect the Amsa-Pitha (glenoid cavity) and the 
Skandha (shoulder). An injury to any of these Marmas 
is attended with an incapacity of moving the hands. 
Thus the fourteen Marmas in the back have been 
described. 57-65. 

The Jatrugata- Marmas :-Now we shall 
describe the Marmas which are situated in the regions 
above the clavicles (U rddhva- J atru). There are four 
Dhamani (arteries) about the two sides of the Kantha- 
Nddi (wind-pipe). Two of them are known as Nil^, and 
the other two as Mauysi. One Nild and one Manyd are 
situated on either side of the larynx, (i.e , anterior and 
posterior side of the larynxk An injury to any of them 
produces dumbness, and change of voice (hoarseness), 
and 'also the loss of the faculty of taste. I An injury to 
any of the eight Sirds (arteries), four being on each side 
of the neck (Grivd), and known as Sirs^-MEitrika- 
Marmas § ) ends fatally within the day. 65-69. 

* It is an Asihi-Matnia, half a finger in length and is Vaikalyakara. 

t They are Snayu-Marmas, half a finger in length and of the 
Vaikalyakara class. 

+ They ate S'ita-Matmas, to the length of four fingers and of the 
V.'iikalyakata class. 

§ They are S^ira-Maimas, four fingers in length and of the Sadyo- 
Matan class. 


24 



1 86 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHlTA, [Chap. Vl. 

An injury to any of the two Marmas lying at the 
junction of the head and neck (Grivd) and known as 
Krikaitik# (transverse process of the arch of the atlas) 
results in a free movement of the head. A hurt to any 
of the Marmas attached to the lower end of an ear 
(ppsterior extrensic ligament) and known as the 
Vidhurat Marma results in the loss of hearing. An 
injuiy to the Phana-Marmas^ attached to the interior 
channels of both the nostrils, results in the loss of the 
faculty of smell. An injury to the ApEinga-Marmas § 
(Anastomosis of the infra-orbital artery) situated below 
the tips of the eye-bi'ows and about the external corners 
of the eyes, brings on blindness or defective vision. An 
injury to the j^varta-Marmas 11 situated above and below 
the eye-brows, brings on blindness and impaired vision. 
An injury to the Sankha-MamasH (meeting or suture 
of the temporal, frontal and sphenoid bones — Pterioit), 
situated over the tips of the eye-brows and between the 
ears and the forehead, results in death within the day. 
The Marmas situated over the two temples (Sankha) 
and at the border of the hair (sculp) are called Utkshepa- 
T/farma (meeting of the posterior and anterior temporal 
arteries)$. An extraction of a shaft (Salya) or of any 

* They are Sandhi-Matmas, half a finger in length, and of the 
Vaikalyakara group. 

■ t It fs a S'ndyu-Marma, and is of (he Vaikalyakara class. 

J They ate S'ird-Marmas to the length of half a finger and of the 
Vaikalyakara class, 

§ They are S'ird-Marmas to the length of half a finger and of the 
Vaikalyakara class. 

■' 11 They are Sandhi-Marmas, to the length of half a finger and of the 
Vaikalyakara class. 

IT They are Aslhi-Marmas to the length of half a finger. 

$ They ate S'ndyu-Matmas, half a finger in length and of the 
Vib'alyaghna class. 



Chap. V/.] SARIRA STHANAM. IC7 

extraneous pointed thing lodged into these Marmas, 
results in the death of the patient, who, on the contrary, 
lives as long as the shaft is allowed to remain inside, or 
if the shaft comes out itself (after putrefaction). 7 ^- 7 S- 
- An injury to the Sthapani-Marma^' (nasal arch of 
the frontal veins), situated in the middle of the eye- 
brows, ends in the manner of the preceding one. An 
injury to any of the five joints of the head which are 
known as the Simanta-Marmasi*, results in fear, insensi- 
bility and madness of the patient and terminates , in 
death. An injury to any of the four SringEitaka- 
Marmasj; which forms the junction of the four Sirds 
(nerves), (branches of the facial artery) and soothes the 
nose, the eyes, the ears and the tongue, proves fatal 
within the day. An injury to the Adhipati- Marmas § 
(the vertical groove on the frontal bone) which is marked 
in the inne'r side of the roof of the cranium by the Sird- 
Sannipdta (superior longitudinal sinus), and on the 
exterior side by the ringlet of the hair (Romdvarta) 
proves fatal within the day. Thus we have described 
the thirty-seven Marmas, situated in the region above 
the clavicles (Urddhva-Jatru). 76-80. 

Memorable Verses An incision should 
be made at the spot a fingers width remote from the 
Urvi, Kurchcha-Sird, Vitapa, Kaksha and a PdrsVa- 
Marma ; whereas, a clear space of two fingers should 

* They are S'itd-Matraas to the length of half a finger and of the 
Visalyaghna class. 

t They are Sandhi-Marmas to the length of four fingers and of the 
Kaldntara.Pr.dnahara class. 

t They are S'ird-Marmas to the length of four fingers and of the 
Sadyah-Prdnahara class. 

§ It is a Sandhi-Marma, hall a finger in length and of the Sadyah- 
Pfdnahara class. 



i88 


THE SUSI-IRUTA SAMHITA . 


[Chap. VI. 


be avoided from its situation in making any incision 
about the Stanamula, Manivandha or Gulpha-Marma. 
Similarly a space of three fingers should be avoided 
from the Hridaya, Vasti, ICurchcha, Guda or Ndbhi 
Marma ; and a space of four fingers should be avoided 
in respect of the four Sringdtakas, five Simantas and 
ten Marmas in the neck (Nila etc.) ; a space of half 
a finger being the rule in respect of the remaining (fifty- 
six).* Men, versed in the science of surgery, have laid 
down the rule that, in a case of surgical operation, the 
situation and dimension of each local Marma should 
be first taken into account and the incision should be 
made in a way so as not to affect that particular Marma, 
inasmuch as an incision, even extending or affecting, 
in the least, the edge or the side of the Marma, may 
prove fatal. Hence all the Marma-Sthdnas should be 
carefully avoided in a surgical operation. 8i. 

The amputation of a hand or a leg may not prove 
fatal whereas a wound in any of the Marmas situated 
therein is sure to bring on death. The vessels become 
contracted in the case of a cut in the leg or in the hand 
of a man, and hence the incidental bleeding is compara- 
tively scantier. Therefore it is that a cut in atiy of these 
parts of the body, however painful, does not necessarily 
prove fatal, like the lopping off of the branches of a 
tree. On the contrary, a man pierced into in any such 
Marmas, as the Kshipra or the Tala, suffers from excessive 

* Some are of opinion tliat a surgical operation (in the case of the 
remaining fifty-six) should be made, leaving a space equal in measurement 
to the dimensions of a palm (from the affected part). Gayadasa, having 
learnt from Bhoja, explains that a space of two fingers should be left (from 
the affected part) in making surgical operations of the ten marmas, namely, 
the two Gulpbas, the roots of the two breasts, the four Indravastis, and the 
two Manivattdhas. 



Chap. VI.] 


SARIRA STHANAM. 


189 


hsemorrhage (from the affected part) and attended with 
an excruciating pain, owing to the derangement of the 
Viyu, and meets his doom like a tree whose roots 
have been severed. Hence, in a case of piercing or 
of injmy to any of these Marmas, the hand or the leg 
should be immediately amputated at the wrist or at 
the ankle (respectively). 82. 

The medical authorities have described the Marmas 
to have covered half in the scope of Salya Tantra 
(Surgery), inasmuch as a person hurt in any of the 
Marmas dies presently (i. e., within seven days of the 
hurt). A deformity of the organ is sure to result from 
an injuiy to one of these Marmas, even if death be 
averted by a course of judicious and skillful medical 
treatment. 83. 

The life of the patient is not to be despaired of even 
in the case of fracture or crushing of a bone of the 
Koshtha, Sirah and Kapila or perforation of the intestines 
etc , if the local Marmas are found not to be in any way 
hurt or affected. Recovery is common in cases of 
cuts (pierce) in the Sakthi, Bhuja, P^da and Kara 
or in any other part of the body and even where a 
whole leg or hand is found to be severed and carried 
away if the Marmas are not in any way hurt or 
affected. 84, 

■ These Marmas form the primary seats of the Vdyu, 
the Soma (lunar) and Tejas (fiery pj'inciples of the 
organism), as well as of the three fundamental qualities 
of Satva, Rajas and Tamas, and that is the reason why 
a man, hurt in any of the Marmas, does not live. 85. 

An injury to a Marma of the Sadyah-Prdnahara class 
(in which death occurs within a day) is attended with 
the imperfection of the sense organs, loss of conscious- 
ness, bewilderment of Manah (mind) and Buddhi 



THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. VI, 


190 


(intellect) and .various kinds of pain. An injury to a 
Marma of the KAldntara group (of a person) is sure to 
be attended with the loss of Dhdtus (blood etc.) and 
various kinds of supervening symptoms (Upadrava) which 
end in death. The body of a person, hurt in any of 
[the Vaikalyakara Marmas, may remain operative only 
under a skillful medical treatment ; but a deformity 
of the affected organ is inevitable. An injury to any 
of the Vis'alyaghna Marmas ends in death for the 
reasons mentioned above. An injury to any of the 
Rujdkara Marmas gives rise to various kinds of pain 
in the affected organ, which may ultimately bring about 
a deformity of the same, if placed under the treatment 
of an ignorant and unskillful Vaidya (Surgeon). 86. 

An injuiy to the adjacent part of a Marma, whether 
incidental to a cut, incision, blow (Abhighdta), burn, 
puncture, or to any other cause exhibits the same 
series of symptoms as an actually affected one. An 
injury to a Marma, whether it be severe or slight, is 
sure to bring deformity or death.* 87. 

The diseases which are seated in the Marmas, are 
generally serious, but they may be made to prove 
amenable with the greatest care and difficulty. 88-89. 

* Gayadasa does not read this verse. 

Thus ends the sixth Chapter of the S'arira Sthdnam in the Sus'ruta 
Samhita, which Ireais of Marmas, 



CHAPTER VII. 


Now we shall discourse on the Sdriram which treats 
of the description and classification of Sira or vascular , 
system - ( ^ira- Vamana-Vibhaktinama 
^ariram). 

There are seven .hundred Sirds (vessels) in the 
human organism (except those which cannot be counted 
for their extremely attenuated size). The vessels 
(Siras) by their contractibility and expansibility &c , 
sustain and nourish the organism in the same manner 
as streamlets and canals serve to keep a field or a 
garden moist and fruitful. From the principal or cen- 
tral trunk hundreds of small and minute vessels branch 
off and spread all over the body, just as small or minute 
fibres are found to emanate from the large central vein 
of the leaf of a plant. They originate from the umbili- 
cal region and thence they spread all over the body up- 
wards and downwards and obliquely. 2. 

WIcmorablG VgtSGS : — All the Siras (vessels) 
that are found in the organisms of created beings, ori- 
ginate from the umbilical region (Nabhi)*]* and thence 
they spread all over their bodies. The life of an or- 
ganic animal is seated in the vessels surrounding its 
navel which forms their starting point. The navel in 
its turn rests on or is attached to the Pranas (the life- 
carrying vessels — nerves attached to it) in the same 

The Sanskiita term S'ita denotes veins, nerves, arteries and lympha- 
tic vessels as well. Some read S'ird-Farna (different colours of the 
Siras) in lieu of S'ira-varnana (description of S'iras). 

t Most probably the idea is derive.! from the appearance of the S'iras 
in their fcetal state. 



192 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


tChap. Vll. 


manner as the nave of a wheel supports the spokes, and 
the spokes in their turn support the nave. 3-4. 

Principal ^ir^SS— Of these s'iras (vessels), 

forty are principal ones, of which ten are Vayu-cariying 

/ 

Sirds (nerves), ten are Pitta-carrying Sirds (veins), ten 
convey Kapha (lympkatic vessels?) and ten are blood- 
carrying Siras (arteries). Of these the Vayu-carrying 
Sirds, situated in the specific receptacle of that bodily 
principle (Vdta), are again found to branch out in one 
hundred and seventy five smaller branches (ramifications). 
Similarly, each of the I'emaining Pitta-carrying, Kapha- 
carrying and blood-carrying vessels (Sirds) situated in 
their specific receptacles, {le, in the receptacles of Pitta, 
Kapha and spleen and liver respectively) are found to 
branch out in as many numbers (one hundred and 
seventy-five), —thus making a total of seven hundred 
in all. 5. 

Their Specific Locations There are 
twenty- five Vdyu-carrying Sirds (nerves) in one leg and 
the same count applies to the other. Similaidy there 
are twenty five VsLyu-carrying Sirds (vessels) in each of 
the hands. There are thirty-four Vdyu-carrying vessels 
in the Koshtha , trunk) ; of these eight occur in the pelvic 
regions attached with the anus and the penis ; two in 
each of the sides, six in the back, six in the Udara 
(cavity of the abdomen), and ten in the region of the 
chest. There are forty-one Vdyu-carrying Sird’s (ves- 
sels) situated in the region above the clavicles. Of 
these fourteen occur in the neck ; four in the two ears ; 
nine in the tongue ; six in the nose and eight in the 
two eyes. Thus we have finished the description of the 
one hundred and seventy-five Sirds that carry Vdyu. 6. 

What has been said of these Vdyu-carrying vessels 
(Sirds) will also hold good to the rest (in blood-carrying. 



Chap vri.] 


SARIRA STHANAM. 


193 


Pitta-carrying and Kapha-carrying channels in the res- 
pective regions oP the body), with the exception that^ 
in these three cases. ( Pitta, Kapha and blood ) ten 
occur in the eyes and two in the ears in lieu of eight 
and four respectively, as in the case o.f Vdyu-carrying 
S'irds (vessels). Thus we have described the seven hun-, 
dred Sirds with their branches. 7. 

Memorable Verses— The Vayu-canying 
S'iras;— The Vdyu in its normal state and coursing 
through its specific Siias (vessels) helps the unobstructed^ 
performance of its specific functions viz., expansion, 
contraction, speech, &c., and produces the clearness and 
non-illusivencss of Buddhi ( intellect ) and the sense-, 
organs, whereas a coursing of the said Vdyu in a de- 
ranged condition through the aforesaid Sirds (vessels)j- 
gives rise to a host of such diseases as are due to the 
derangement of Vdyu. 8. 

The Pitta-carrying ^ir^s The Pitta in 
its normal state and coursing through its specific Sirdg 
(vessels) produces the healthy glow of complexion, 
relish for food, kindling of the appetite, healthfulness 
and other good effects, characteristic of the Pittpi, which, 
however being aggravated and coursing through them 
gives rise to a host of Pittaja diseases. 9. 

The Kapha-conveying ^ir^s:— The 

Kapha in its normal state and coursing through itsspecific 
Sirds (vessels) smoothes and contributes to the firmness 
of the limbs and joints, improves the strength and pro- 
duces all other gosd effects specially belonging to it, 
whereas the same Kapha, flowing through them in an 
aggravated condition, ushers in a large number of the 
Kaphaja distempers of the body. lo. 

The Rakta-carrying ^ir^s The blood 
in its normal state and flowing through its specific Sirds 


25 



194 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMIIITA. 


[Chap, VII. 


(vessels) strengthen? the other fundamental principles 
(Dhdtus) of the body, improves the complexion, aids 
the organ of touch in the proper performance of its- 
functions and produces other functions characteristic of 
it in the body. , Flowing through them in a vitiated 
condition, it begets diseases which are due to the de- 
rangement of the blood, il. 

There is not a single Sird (vessel) in the body 
which carries either the Vdyu, or the Pitta or the 
Kapha alone. Hence each of the vessels should be 
regarded as affording an opportunity for conveying all 
kinds of the Doshas of the body, for as soon as they are 
deranged and aggravated they seem to flow through all 
the S’irds promiscuously. Hence they are called Sarva- 
vahali. 12. 

Specific colours of the firsts: -The 
vessels which carry the bodily Vdyu (nerves) have a 
vermilion (yellowish red) hue and seem to be stuffed 
with Vdyu, The Pitta-carrying vessels (veins) are 
coloured blue and felt warm to the touch. The Kapha- 
canying vessels are hard, cold to the touch and white- 
coloured. The blood-carrying vessels (arteries) are red 
and neither too hot, nor too cold. 13. 

Now we shall describe the Sirds (veins) which a 
surgeon should not pierce or open, inasmuch as it may 
result in death, or bodily deformity. An intelligent 
surgeon shall always bear in mind that sixteen out of 
the four hundred vessels in the extremeties, thirty-two 
out of the hundred and thirty-six vessels in the trunk 
and fifty out of the sixty-four vessels in. the region above 
the clavicles, should not be opened or bled on any 
account. 14-15- 

Of the one hundred vessels in a single leg, the one 
Jdladhard (which is attached to the connective tissue 



Chap. Vli.] 


SARIRA STi-IANAM. 


195 


of the Kurchcha-S'irah) as well as the three internal 
ones, of which two are known as the Urvi- veins and the 
other as the Lohitdksha, together with the correspond- 
ing ones in the other leg and in the two hands, thus 
making sixteen in all, which are situated in the upper 
and lower extremeties, should be held unfit for opening. 
Of the thirty-two veins in the pelvic region (Sroni), eight 
such, known as the four) Vitapas (two on each side of the 
testicles) and the four known as the Katika-tarun as (two 
on each side) should be considered unfit for bleeding or 
opening. Of the sixteen veins (eight on each side) at the 
sides, the one which courscsupward from each of the two 
sides and is attached to the Marma known as the P£(rsva- 
Sandhi, should be considered unfit for similar purposes. 
Of the twenty-four Siras which are found in either side 
of the spinal column, an incision should not be made 
into any of the two Siras (on each side) known as 
the Vrihati and which run upward along either side 
of it (spinal column). Similarly of the twenty-four Sirds 
in the abdomen, the two along each of the two sides of 
symphis pubis should be held unfit for opening or 
bleeding Of the forty veins in the chest, the two in the 
heart, two in the root of each breast and two in each 
of the Stana-rohita (muscle of the breast) and one in 
each of the Apastambhas and Apalapas, making fourteen 
in all, should not be opened. Thus thirty-two Siras in 
the regions of the back (i. e., the sides and the pelvic 
regions), the abdomen and the chest should be regarded 
as unfit for opening or other surgical purposes. 16—21. 

There are one hundred and sixty-four Sirds in the 
region above the clavicles. Of these the eight and four 
(making twelve and respectively known as the eight 
Mdtrikds, the two Nilds and the two Manyds) out 
of the fifty-six in the neck and the throat, should be 



:ig6 THE SUSliRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. Vii. 

h'egarded as unfit' for opening. Similarly the two veins 
'iii the -two'. K'rikdtikds and two in the two "Vidhuras, 
■should be' held unfit for similar purposes ; thus making 
sixteen in all in the lieck. Of the sixteen vessels (eight 
'on' each side'/ of the Hanus (Jaws), the two Siras about 
.each of the joint of the jaw-bones should never be 
:opened. 22. ' 

:■ Of the thiity-six* vessels in the tongue, sixte'en are 
situated in the under-surface of that organ and twenty 
in the upper surface ; of these the two speech-carrying 
and the two taste-carrying ones should be held unfit for 
■venesection. Of the twenty-four vessels in the nose, 
•the four adjacent to the nose proper and the one running 
into the soft palate should be held unfit for similar 
purposes.' Of the thirty-eight vessels in the two eyes, 
the one situated at each Apdnga should not be 
opened. Of the ten vessels in the two ears, the sound- 
carrying one in' either ear should not be opened. Of 
the sixty vessels of the nose and eyes 'coursing 
"through the region of the forehead, the four vessels 
adjacent to the sculp proper and the Avarta-Marma 
should be held unfit for opening or bleeding. One 
vesser(Sird) in each of the two Avartas and the one in 
the Sthapani-marma should not be' opened (on any 
account). Of the ten vessels in the temple, the one 
a^jout each temple-joint should be held unfit for opening 
"or bleeding. Of the twelve vessels in the head, the one 

^Gayi asserts that there are eight each of the Vayu-carrying, Pitta- 
carfying, Kapha-carrying and blood-carrying S'iraS in the region of the 
'heck, thus making a total of 32 in place of 36 of the te-Kt. 

■ He also holds that there are 28 in place 'of 36 S'iras in the tongue, 
16 in place of 24 in the nose, 24 in place of 38 in the eyes, 16 in place of 
10 in the ears and 8 in place of 10 in the temple. In the counting of the 
S'iras situate in the other parts of the body, he, however, does not differ 
from Ihe text. 



Chap. Vli.] 


SARIRA STHANAM. 


19? 


in each of the two Utkshepa-Marmas, one in each of the 
^five) Simanta-Marmas and one in the Adhipati-Marma, 
should be held unfit for the purpose. No incision or 
opening should be made into any of these fifty vessels 
situated in the region above the clavicles. 23-31. . 

Memorable verses As the stem and leaves 
etc , of a lotus plant, originated from its bulb, spread 
over the whole surface of a pool or tank (lit : water), 
so the vessels emanating from the umbilicus of a' man 
spread over his whole organism. 32. ' '> 

Thus ends Ihe- seventh Chaplet ot the S'atira .Sihanam in the 
Sus ruta Samhiia .which treats of. the description and classification of 
S'iras (vessels). 



OEAPTER VIII. 


# 

Now we shall discourse on the Sdriram which treats 
of the method of Venesection etc. (^irgL-Vyadha- 
Vidhi-^ariram). i. 

Persons unfit for Venesection:— The 

f 

vessel or vessels (Siri) of an infant, an old man, a per- 
ched man, one fatigued and emaciated with endocarditis 
(Kshata-kshina), a person of timid or coward disposition, 
a person used up with excessive drinking or sexual 
enjoyments or tired with the troubles of long journey, 
an intoxicated person, a patient who has been treated 
with purgatives, emetics or with AnubAsana and 
Asthdpana measures (enemas), a man who has passed 
a sleepless night, an impotent (Kliva) or emaciated person, 
an enceinte, or one afflicted with cough, asthma, high 
fever, phthisis convulsions, paralysis, thirst, epilepsy, 
or effects of fasting, should not be pierced or opened. 
Incisions should not be made into those veins (Sirds) 
which are not fit for opening, or into the fit ones, if 
invisible ; it should be the same with those which cannot 
be properly ligatured or even if ligatured cannot be 
raised 'up. 2. 

Diseases which are amenable to acts of venesection 
have been described before (Sonita-Varnaniya-Adhydya). 
Venesection may be performed in the said diseases as 
well as in those which have not been enumerated in 
connection with them and also in other cases whether 
suppurated or unsuppurated, if such a proceeding is 
deemed necessary and after the application of Sneha and 
Sveda. Venesection should be made even in the cases 
declared unfit for it (such as in an infant etc.) in cases of 



Chap. VIII.] 


SARIRA STIIANAM. 


199 


blood-poisoning (such as snake-bite etc.) and in fatal 
diseases (Vidradhi etc.). 3-4. 

Preliminary rules : —The patient should be 
duly fomented ',Sveda) and anointed (Sneha) with oily 
preparations. A liquid* food or diet consisting of articles 
which are antidotal to the bodily principles (Doshas) 
which engendered the disease or Yavdgu (gruel j should 
be given to him at first. Then at the proper season (i.e., 
not in the rainy or winter season etc.) the patient should 
be brought near the surgeon and made to sit or lie down 
and the part to be incised upon should be bound, neither 
too loosely g , in the extremities etc.) nor too tightly 
{eg., in the head etc.), with any of the accessories, such as 
cloth, linen, skin, the inner fibres of a bark, creepers etc,, 
so as not to create any pain or agitation in his mind. 
Then the vein should be duly opened with proper instru- 
ment (and with a careful regard to the situation of any 
local Marma). 5. 

Metrical text : —Venesection should not be 
performed in an extremely cold or hot, cloudy or windy 
day. It is forbidden to open a vein without necessity 
or in a healthy person, or in a disease in which such as a 
proceeding is absolutely prohibited. 6. 

The Yantra-Vidhi : — The patient whose 
vein is to be operated upon should be seated on a stool 
to the height of an Aratni (distance of the elbow from 
the tip of the small finger) with his face turned towards 
the sun. He should keep his legs in a drawn up or 
contracted posture resting his elbows (Kurpara) on his 
knee-joints and the hands with his two thumbs closed 
in his fists placed on (the upper ends of; his Manyds 
(stcrno mastoid muscles), Then having cast the binding 

A liquid food is recommended for Ihe purpose of liquefying the 
blood so as to bked easily. 



200 


THE -SUSIIRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. 


linen on the two closed fists thus placed on the neck, the 
surgeon should ask another 'man from the back side of 
the patient to take hold of the two ends of the cloth 
with his left hand having the palm turned upward, and 
then ask him to tie up with his right hand the bandage 
round the part, neither too diffusely nor too tightly nor 
too loosely, so as to raise the vein and to press the 
bandage round the back for a good out-flow of 
blood. Then he (surgeon) should perform the operation 
in the desired spot, the patient having been previously 
asked to sit with his mouth full of air he should 
confine his breathing till the surgical operation is com- 
pleted). This proceeding should be adopted in opening 
any vein of the head, save those which arc situated in the 
cavity of the mouth. 7. 

In the case of opening a vein (S'ird) in the leg, the 
affected leg should be placed on a level ground, while 
the other leg should be held in a somewhat contracted 
posture, at a little higher place. The affected leg should 
be bound with a piece of linen below its knee-joint 
and pressed with the hands down to the ankle. A liga- 
ture of the above kind should then be tied four fingers 
above the region to be incised upon, after which the 
vein-sh©uld be opened. 8. ■ 

In the case of opening a vein (Sird) in the arms, 
the patient should be caused to sit easily and fixedly 
with his two thumbs closed in his fists (.as above), 
A ligature ol the above-mentioned kind (rope etc,,) 
should be tied (four fingers above the part to be incised 
upon and the vein opened in the aforesaid manner. 
The knee-joint and the elbow should be held in a 
contracted or drawn up posture at the time of opening 
a vein in a case of Gridhrasi (Sciatica) and Vis'vachi, 
respectively. The patient should hold his back raised 



Chap. Vllt.] 


SARtRA StiIANAMi 


201 


up and expanded and hts head (and shoulders) bent down 
at the time of opening a vein in the back, shoulders and 
the Sroni (hips). He should hold his head thrust back 
and his chest and body expanded at the time of open- 
ing a vein in the chest or in the abdomen. 9-12. 

He shall embrace his own body with his arms at the 
time of opening a vein in his sides. The penis should 
be drawn downward in an flaccid state) on a 

similar occasion in that region. The tongue should be 
raised up to the roof of the mouth and its fore-part 
supported by the teeth at the time of opening a vein in 
its under-surface. The patient should be told to keep his 
mouth fully open at the time of opening a vein in the 
gums or in the palate. Similarly a Surgeon should devise 
proper and adequate means for the purpose of raising 
up (distinct appearance of) a Sird (vein) and determine 
the nature of the bandage to be used therein according 
to the exigencies the health and the kind of diseases 
of the patient), of each case. 13-17. 

An incision to the depth of a barley-corn should be 
made with a Vrihimukha instrument (into a vein 
situated) in the muscular parts of the body, whereas the 
instrumevrt should be thrust only half that depth or to 
the depth of a Vrihi seed in other places (V rihi here 
signifies S' ukadhdnya as well as Rakta-s'ali\ An inci- 
sion over a bone should be made with the Kutharikd 
(small surgical axe) to the half depth of a barley- 
corn. 18-19. 

WleiTlorabl© VgtSGS : — An opening should 
be effected in such a day in the rainy season as would 
be devoid of the rumblings of a thunder-cloud, during 
the cold (f.A, in the fourth) part of the day in summer, 
and at noon in the winter season (Hemanta). These 
are the only three times of opening a vein. A well 

26 



252 


THE. SDSHHUTA SAMHITA. 


[dhap. vitr. 


and successfully pierced vein bleeds in streams (almost 
simultaneously with the thrusting of the knife) and 
spontaneously stops after a Muhurta (a little while). The 
vitiated blood is seen first to flow out of an opened 
vein, like the drop of yellow pigment first coming out of 
a Ktisimibha flower. Blood does not flow out from an in- 
cision made into a vein of an unconscious (Murchchhita), 
much frightened, or a thirsty patient. An incision of a 
vein without proper bandaging and raising up is attend- 
ed with a Similar result. 20-23. 

A weak person, or one affected with the unusual 
derangement of the bodily Doshas etc., or one fainted 
(under operation), should not be subjected to a measure 
of continuous blood-letting at a time ; instead of that, 
the vein should be opened afresh in the same afternoon 
or on the following day, or on the third day (as the exi- 
gency requires). An intelligent surgeon should not 
allow the flow of blood to an excess but should stop 
the flow even with a remnant of the diseased blood in 
the system and administer soothing internal remedies 
(Sams'amana) for the purification of the diseased rem- 
nant. Bleeding to the quantity of a Prastha^' measure 
should be deemed sufficient for a strong and adult patient, 
stuffed with a large quantity of the deranged Doshas (in 
the body). 24-26. 

The vein should be incised with a Vrihimukha instru- 
ment at a distance of two fingers above the seat 
of the Kshipra-marma in such diseases as Padadaha, 
Pada-harsha, Ava-vdhuka, Chippa, Visarpa, Vata-rakta, 
Vata-kantaka, Vicharchikd, Pddaddri etc. The mode 
of opening a vein in the case of Slipada (Elephantiasis) 

* In medicinal preparations, a Praslha measure is understood to be 
four seers in the case of liquids, but in cases of excreta due to emetic and 
purgative measures and of blood-letting, a Prastha is meant to be 
thirteen Palas and a half only. 



[Chap. VIII. 


SARIRA STIIANAM. 


203 


would b2 described under the treatment of that disease. 
In Vdta-rogas, such as Kroshtuka-sirah (Synovites), 
maimedness (Pangu) and lameness (Khanja), the Siia 
(vein) of the Janghk (lower leg-calf), four fingers above 
the Gulpha, should be opened. In cases of Apachi 
(scrofula), the vein should be opened simultaneously with 
the appearance of the disease two fingers below the 
Indravasti-marma. In a case of Gridhrasi (sciatica), 
the vein should be opened four fingers above or below 
the Janu (knee-joint). In a case of goitre, the veins 
attached to the roots of the Uru (thighs) should be 
opened. The instructions regarding the opening of a 
vein in one leg shall hold good in the case of that in 
the other, as well as in cases of those situated in the- 
two upper extremities (hands), but the speciality is that 
in a case of enlarged spleen, the vein near the Kurpara- 
sandhi (elbow-joint) of the left hand or that inside the 
fourth and the fifth fingers should be opened. Similarly 
in a case of Yakridddlyodara or Kaphodara, the corres- 
ponding vein in the right hand should be opened. 
Several authorities advise the opening of the same vein 
in cases of cough and asthma* due to the action of the 
deranged Kapha. 27-35. 

In a case of Vis'vachi, the same argument holds good 
(four fingers above or below the Kurpara-sandhi) as- in 
a case of Gridhrasi. In a case of Pravahikd (diarrhoea) 
attended with Sula (colic), the vein within two fingers 
width around of the Pelvis (Sroni) should be opened. 
The vein of the penis should be opened in a case of 
Parikartiki (D.R.-ParivartikA), Upadans'a, S'uka-dosha 
and seminal disorders. The vein on either side of 


Gayi holds that in cases of asthma and cough venesection should 
he had recourse to only when they are in a mild form’. 



204 


THE SUSIIRUTA SAMHITA. 


Chap. VIII.] 


the scrotum should be opened in a case of hydrocele 
(Mutra-Vriddhi). 36-39. 

The vein four fingers below the navel and on the 
left side of the Sevani (suture) should be opened in a 
case of Dakodara (ascites). In a case of internal 
abscess and colic in the sides (Pleurod3'’nia), the vein in 
the region between the breast and the left armpit 
should be opened. Several authorities assert that in a 
case of Avavahuka and Vdhus'osha (atrophy of the hand), 
the vein between the Amsas (shoulders) should be 
opened. In a case of Tritiyaka (Tertian) fever, the vein 
inside the Trika-Sandhi should be opened. In a case 
of Chaiurthaka fever, a vein joined with either side of 
and below the shoulder-joint should be opened. In a 
case of Apasmdra, the middle vein adjacent to the joint 
of the jaw-bones (Hanu-Sandhi) should be opened. In 
a case of insanity and hysteria'^ (Apasmara), the vein 
between the temple and the edge of the sculp or those 
in the Apinga (tips of the eyes), the forehead or the 
chest should be opened. In cases of the diseases of the 
tongue and the teeth, the veins on the under-surface 
(Adho-Jihvd) of the tongue should be opened. In 
the case of a disease of the palate, the local vein should 
be opened. In diseases of the ears and specially in 
a case of inflammatory ear-ache (Karna-Sula), the vein 
along the region above the ears should be opened. In 
diseases of the nose and specially in a case of the loss 
of the smelling faculty, the vein at the tip of the nose 
shou'd be opened. In cases of eye-diseases, such as 

• D-iIlina, however, differs here from the text. He says, on the 
authority of Vagbhata, that the opening of a vein between the temple and 
the edge of the sculp or those in the Apanga, the forehead and the chest 
should be recommended in c.ases of insanity only, and not in the case of 
of .^paimara as well (as in the text). 



Chap. VIII.] 


SARIRA STIIANAM. 


205 


Timira (blindness), Akshipdka (ophthalmia) etc., as well 

as in diseases of the head and in Adhimantha, the veins 

about the nose, the forehead and the Apanga (the 

outer canthus of the eyes), should be opened. 40-51. 

Defective Venesection Now we shall 

describe the twenty kinds of defects relating to an 

opened vein (Dushta-vyadhana'. They are as follows : — 

Durviddha, Atividdha, Kunchitd, Pichchita, Kuttita, 

Aprasrutd, Atyudirnd, Ante-abhihata, Paris'ushka, 

Kunitd, Vepita, Anutthita-viddhd, SdStrahata, Tiiyag- 

viddhd, Apaviddha, Avyddhyd, Vidrutd, Dhenukd, 

Punhpunarviddha and Marmaviddha, i.e., incised about 
/ 

the Sira-marma, the Snayu-marma, the Asthi-marma 
and the Sandhi-marma. 52-53. 

Their definitions : — The vein in which an 
act of venesection is unattended with a satisfactory 
outflow of blood owing to its being incised with an 
extremely slender instrument and is marked by an 
extremely painful swelling in consequence thereof, is 
called DurviddhEi (badly incised). The vein in which 
the incision becomes excessive and no blood comes out 
properly or enters an internal channel owing to the 
largeness of the incision, is called AtividdhEi (over-in- 
cised). An opened vein in which the incision has been 
made in a curving manner and is attended with the fore- 
going results, is called KunchitEi (crooked or contracted). 
An incised vein presenting a flattened or thrashed ap- 
pearance on account of its being opened with a blunt 
knife ^Kantha-Sastra) is called Pichchita (thrashed). 
The vein at the sides of which incisions have been 
successively made, instead of in its body, is called 
Kuttitst (lacerated) An incised vein, unattended with 
any bleeding owing to the patient’s fright, coldness or 
loss of consciousness, is called Aprasruta' (unbleeding). 



2o6 


THE SUSIIRUTA SAMIIITA. 


[Chap. VIII. 


A vein with a "large incision in its body made with 
a sharp and flat-edged instrument, is called Atyudirna' 
(improperly wide-incised). An opened vein in which 
blood oozes out in small quantitj'- is called Ante- 
ahhiliatEC (struck in the interior). An opened vein 
in an anamic patient (marked by a total absence 
of bleeding and) stuffed with Vayu (lit, as if the 
flow has been dried up by the V^yu), is called 
Paris'uslika^ (dried up). A vein opened but to a quarter 
part of the proper length and attended with a scanty 
outflow of blood, is called KunitSL (partially incised). A 
vein which trembles owing to its being bandaged at a 
wrong place and from which blood does not flow out 
in consequence, is called Vepita' (quivermgi. A vein 
incised without being previously properly raised up and 
attended with a similar result (i c., absence of blood), is 
called Amittliita-viddli8(. A vein cut into two and 
attended with excessive bleeding and inoperativeness 
of the organ is called ^astrahatsi (knife-cut). A vein 
incisid with an instrument applied slantingly and 
(consequently) not fully opened, is called Tiryag-viddha' 
(obliquely incised), A vein incised several times 
and (every time) with an improper instrument, is called 
Apaviddhgt (wrongly incised) A vein unfit for opening 
whose opening has been forbidden in the Sdstras\ 
is called Avyddhyd (unfit for opening). A vein opened 
carelessly and hastily is called VidrutsC (erratic). A 
vein bleeding continuously owing to its being repeatedly 
pressed and successively opened, is called DhenukEi. 
A vein variously cut owing to its being pierced into 
the same part with an extremely slender-pointed instru- 
ment, is called Panak-punarvidaha' (repeatedly incised). 

If a vein in the Sndyu-marmas, the Asthi-marmas, the 
SirA-marmas or the Sandhi-marmas be opened, it is 



Chap. VIII.] 


SARIRA STHANAM. 


207 


called Marma-viddha' and in such cases severe pain, 
emaciation (Sosha) deformity or (even) death may be 
the result. 54. 

Memorable Verses : —Practice (even) docs 
not give the necessary skill in surgical operation of the 
veins etc., as they are naturally unsteady and changing 
like fishes. Hence a vein should be opened with the 
greatest care. An opening into the body, made by an 
ignorant and unskilful surgeon, is attended with the 
aforesaid dangers and many other distressing symptoms. 
An act of venesection, properly performed, gives more 
speedy relief than that derived from the application of 
medicated oil &c , or of plaster as well. Venesection 
(bleeding) properly performed is half of the treatment 
described in surgery like the application of Vasti- 
karmas (enematic measures) in therapeutics. 55. 

A man medically anointed (Sneha-karma), diapho- 
rised (Sveda\ vomited (Vamana), purged (Virechana), 
or treated with both the Vasti-karmas (Anuvasana and 
Asthapana) or bled shall forego anger, physical labour, 
sexual intercourse, sleep in the day time, excessive 
talking, physical exercises, riding or driving etc., sitting 
on his haunches, frequent ramblings, exposure to cold, 
winds and the sun, hardly digestible, uncongenial and 
incompatible food until the strength is perfectly restored 
or, according to some authorities, for a month. These 
subjects will be fully dealt with later on Aturopa- 
drava-chikitsri,, ch. — 39], 56. 

Memorable Verses The vitiated blood 
incarcerated in any part of the body should be abstract- 
ed therefrom by scarifying it, by cupping it with a 
Sira (pipe), a horn, a gourd, or leeches, or by the opening 
of a vein respectively, according to the density of the 
blood. (Others assert that) leeches should be applied in 



208 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMI-IITA. 


[Chap. Vllt. 


the case of the (vitiated) blood being confined deep 
into the body, scarification with a surgical instrument 
should be made in the case of clotted blood, with a pipe 
in the case .of extensive vitiation of the blood through- 
out the body and with a horn or a gourd in the 
case of the deranged blood having been seated in the 
skin. 57-58. 

Thus ends the eighth Chapter of the S'.nrira Sthanam in the Sus'ruta 
Samhita which treats of venesection. 



CHAPTER IX. 


Now we shall discourse on the Sdriram which treats 
of the description of the arteries, nerves and ducts, etc.*' 

(Dhamani-Vyakarana-^ariram). i. 

There are twenty-four Dhamanies (ducts) in all, and 
all of them have their origins in the naval region 
(which includes the whole abdominal region-f). Several 
authorities assert that no arbitrary distinctions should 
be made among the Siras (veins), Dhamanis (arteries), 
and the Srotas, (channels), since Dhamanis and Srotas 
are but different modifications of one original kind 
of Sird (vessels). But this opinion is not a sound one 
inasmuch as they have got different natures, origins 
and functions and as being described so in the Ayurveda. 
But owing to their adjacent positions, the existence 
of several authoritative dicta (Apta-vdk) regarding the 
oneness of their character, similarity of their functions, 
and the minute nature of their shape, they appear to 
be homologous in their action, even amidst' the real 
diversities in their work and office. 2. 

Of the twenty-four Dhamanis, which (originally) 
have their roots in the naval region (Ndbhi), ten 
have upward course, ten have downward course, and 
four flow laterally or transversely. 3. 

Functions of the up-coursing Dha- 
inanis : — The ten up-coursing Dhamanis (nerves) 

* Sans. Dhama — to be filled with air, so called from the fact 
of their being distended with air after death. 

t So far, as in foetal life, allantoic arteries and the unbilical veins 
subserve the purposes of nutrition, excretion, etc , and reflects the rudi- 
mentary vascular system. 



210 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap, IX. 


perform such specific functions of the body, as sound, 
touch, taste, sight, smell, inspiration, sighing, yawning, 
[^sneezing, laughter, speech, and weeping, etc., and tend to 
maintain the integrity of the body. These Dhamanis, 
reaching the heart, respectively ramify themselves into 
three branches, thus making thirty (ramifications in all). 
Ten of these serve the following purposes, viz , two serve 
as the channels of the bodily Vdyu, two of the Pitta, 
two of the Kapha, two of the blood, and two of the 
Rasa (lymph chyle). Eight of the remaining ones 
(bventy), serve the following functions, viz., two of them 
carry sound, two sight or colour, two smell, and two 
taste. Moreover a man speaks with the help of another 
two, makes sound with the help of another couple, 
sleeps through the instrumentality of another pair 
(couple), and wakes up with the help of another couple. 
Two of the Dhamanis (ducts) carry the fluid of lachry- 
mation, two of them (ducts), attached to the breasts 
of a woman, cany milk of her breasts, which, coursing 
through the breast of a man, convey his seminal fluid. 
Thus we have described the thirty Dhamanis with 
their ramifications. These sustain and maintain the 
integrity (of the limbs and members of the body) above 
the (line of) umbilicus, such as the Udara, the sides, 
the back, the chest, the neck, the shoulders and the 


arms. 4. 

IVIemorable Verse: — The up-coursing Dhama- 
nis duly perform the offices stated above. Now I 
shall describe the specific functions, etc., {i.e., nature, 
office, and situations, etc.,) of the down-coursing ones. 5. 


Functions 


the down -coursing 


DWamaniS : — The down-coursing Dhamanis res- 
pect wely form the channels for the downward conveyance 
(flatus), urine, stool, semen, and catamenial 



Chap. IX.] 


SARIRA STHANAM. 


211 


fluid, etc. These Dhamanis reaching down into the 
PittAs'aya (receptacle of the Pitta) separate the serum 
prepared out of the food and drink through the agency 
of the local heat (and pitta), and carry it to the remotest 
parts of the organism maintaining their health}'’ 
moisture, supplying them with the necessary principles 
of nutrition and (ultimately) conveying them to the up- 
coursing and lateral Dhamanis, in order to be conveyed 
to the parts traversed by them respectivel}^ Thus they 
indirectly serve to supply the heart with its quota of 
healthy Rasa (serus fluid), if not in a direct way. Moreover 
they tend to separate the effetematter (urine, stool and 
sweat) from the fully transformed lymph-chyle in the 
abdomen, the stomach and the small intestines (Amds'aya 
and Pakvds'aya). Each of the down-coursing Dhamanis 
is found to ramify into three branches at a place midway 
bet^veen the Amds'aya (stomach) and the Pakvds'aya 
(intestines). Thus they number thirty in all. The 
functions of the ten out of these (thirty vessels) are as 
follows, vis., two serve to carry Vdyu, two Pitta, two 
Kapha, two blood, and two Rasa (lymph-chyle). Two of 
these Dhamanis, running into the intestines, carry the 
food, another two carry the Toya* (watery) part, another 
two, running into the bladder, serve to carry out the 
urine (from the bladder), another two carry the semen, 
and another two serve as the channels of transmission 
and emission of the same fluid and serve to carry the 
ovarian discharge in women. The two Dhamanis, attached 
to the large intestine (Sthulantra), serve as the channels 
of faecal mattei', while the remaining eight convey 
perspiration to the lateral-coursing Dhamanis. Thus we 
have finished describing these thirty Dhamanis with 
their ramifications. These sustain and maintain the 

This Watery part reaching the bladder Is transformed into urine. 



212 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. IX. 


integrity of the parts of the body below the naval 
region, such as the Pakv^s'aya (Intestine), the waist, the 
organic principles of stool and urine, the organs of 
generation, the anus, the bladder, and the lower limbs of 
the body (Sakthi) (according to their utility in the 
physical economy of the organism). 6. 

Memorable Verse ; — These down-coursing 
Dhamanis perform the afore-said functions. Now I 
shall describe the specific functions {i.e , nature, office, 
and situations, etc.,) of the lateral-coursing Dhamanis. 7. 

Functions of the lateral-^coursing 
Dhamanis: — The four lateral-coursing Dhamanis, 
gradually ramifying themselves into hundreds and 
thousands of branches, simply baffle counting. The 
net-work of these Dhamanis spreads over the whole 
orgnism and maintain its integrity. Their exterior 
orifices are attached to the roots of hairs (poms of the 
skin) through which they convey the perspiration and 
the Rasa (serum), thus supplying the body, both inter- 
nally and externally, with the soothing nutidtions 
(moisture of healthy lymph-chyle). The effects and 
potencies of the articles of anointment, sprinkling, 
immersion, and plasters, enter through these orifices 
into the internal organism through the agency of the 
heat in the skin, and sensations of a pleasant or 
painful contact are experienced through their instru- 
mentality. Thus we have finished describing the four 
lateral-coursing Dhamanis with their ramifications 
throughout the whole organism, 8. 

Memorable Verses The Dhamanis have 
got pores in their sides through which they cany 
the Rasa (lymph-chyle) throughout the organism, like 
the filaments and fibres of water-lily and lotus. The-^-e 
Dhamanis furnish the self-conscious Ego, confined in 



Chap. IX.] 


SARIRA STHANAM. 


213 


\ 


the material body, which is the resultant of the combi- 
nation of the five material elements, with a distinct 
sensation-^ peculiar to each of the five sense-organs-j- 
and break up the combination (of the five material 
elements) at the lime of death. 9—10. 

Now we shall describe the symptoms produced by a 
Srota (duct or channel) pierced at its root or starting 
point. The ducts or channels respectively conveying 
the life, the food, the water, (the organic principle of) 
the Rasa (serum), the blood, the muscles, the fat, 
the urine, the stool, the semen, and the cata- 
menial blood, naturall}'' fall within the scope of 
‘ Surgery (Salya-tantra). Several authorities assert that 
the Srotas (vessels) arc innumerable^, and perform 
different functions in their different aspects. 

The two Srotas (channels) of Prsiiiia (bronchi) have 
their roots in the heart and the Rasa-carrying Dhama- 
nis (pulmonary arteries). An injury to any of these 
Srotas (vessels) produces groaning, bending down of 
the body, loss of consciousness (Moha), illusion, and 
shivering, or may ultimately prove fatal The food- 
carrying Srotas (Aisophagus) have their roots in the 
Amdsaya (stomach) and in the food-cariying Dhamanis 
(intestines). An injury to or piercing of such a duct 
(Srota), gives rise to tympanites, colic pain, aversion to 
food, vomiting, thirst, blindness or darkness of vision, or 
may even end in death. There are two water-carrying 
(Udaka-vaha) ducts or channels which have their roots 
in the palate and the Kloma, and a pie'- cing of any 

Hearing, loucb, smell, taste, and sight. 

t Eyes, eats, nose, tongue and skin. 

+ But this science does not take any cognisance of them, since the 
pain incidental to a piercing of, or an injury to, any of these extremely 
!>tte?ju^t^d channels, must be slight in its character. 



THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. IX. 


makes the patient thirsty and ends in his instan- 
'f^eous death (/. e , within seven days). The serum- 
carrying (Rasa-vaha) ducts arc two in number and 
have their roots in (the viscus of) the heart and the 
serum-carrying Dhamanis (vessels). An injury to or 
piercing of any of these ducts gives rise to Sosha (con- 
sumption) and symptoms identical with those developed 
by a hurt to the Prdna-vaha channels of the body, 
ending in death. The blood-carrying Srotas (channels) 
are two in number and have their roots in the spleen and 
the liver, and the blood-carrying Dhamanis (capillaries 
in general). An injury to any of these channels is 
attended with pallor, bluishness of complexion, fever, 
burning sensations, excessive haemorrhage, and redness 
of the eyes. The two muscle-carrying Srotas (ducts or 
channels) have their roots in the (Sndyu), nerves 
Tvak (serum), and the blood-carrying Dhamanis 
(capillaries). An injury to any of these channels is 
characterised by swelling, loss or atrophy of the muscles, 
appearance of varicose veins or may (ultimately) resu’t 
in death. The fat-carrying Srotas (ducts) are two in 
number and have their roots in the region of the Kati 
(waist) and the Vrikkas (kidneys). An injury to any 
of these bring in (a copious flow of) perspiration, oily 
gloss of the skin, parched condition of the palate, 
extensive swelling (of the affected locality) and thirst. 
The two urine-carrying Srotas (channels) have their 
roots in the bladder and the penis (urethra). An injury 
to any of these is marked by constipation or epistaxis 
in the bladder, retention of urine, and numbness of the 
genitals. .The two stool-carrying Srotas (ducts) have 
their roots in the Guda (anus) and the Pakvds'aya 
(intestines) ; an injuiy to any of these is characterised 
by complete retention of stool (in the boryels), accom- 



Chap. IX.] 


SARIRA STHANAM. 


215 


panied by a distention of the abdomen, foul smell and 
intussusception of the intestine (as in a case of ententes). 
The two , semen-carrying Srotas (ducts) have their 
roots in the breasts and the testes. An injury to any 
of them leads to loss of manhood, delayed emission 
of semen, or blood -streaked character of that 
fluid. The two Artava- carrying Srotas (ducts) have 
their roots in the uterus as well as in the Dhamanis 
which cany the Artava (ovarian product). An injury 
to any of these brings on sterility, suppression of 
the menses and incapacity for copulation. A cutting 
to the Sevan! (median raphe of the perineum) exhibits 
symptoms identical with those of a case of injured 
bladder or anus, described before. A physician may 
take in hand the medical treatment of a case of a Srota 
which has been pierced, but he shall not necessarily 
entertain any hope of ultimate success, (But time 
Works wonders, and such a case may sometimes end in 
recovery). A case of pierced duct, from which the 
dart (Salya, or the like piercing matter) has been 
extricated, may be medically treated (without holding 
out any prospect of recovery to the friends of the 
patient), according to the direction laid down under 
the head of ulcer tVrana). 11-12. 

Metrical Text ; — The ducts emanating from the 
cavity of the heart, other than the Sirds (veins), Dhamanis 
(arteries), and found to course through the whole body, 
‘ire called Srotas (lit, channels or currents). 13. 

Thu ends the ninth Chapter of the S'drita Sthanam in the 
^"sruta Samhita which treats of the descriptions of the arteries, 
tucis and nerves. 



CHAPTER X. 


Now we shall discourse on the Siriram which treats 
of the nursing and management, etc., of pregnant 
women from the day of conception till parturition 

(Garbhini -Vyakarana-^^riram). r. 

General Rules : — An enciente, from the first 
day of conception, should always cherish a clear joy- 
ful spirit in a clean body. She should wear clean and 
white garments, ornaments, &c., engage herself in the 
doing of peace-giving and benedictory rites and live in 
devotion to the gods, the Brahmins and her elders and 
superiors. She should not touch nor come into contact 
with unclean, deformed or maimed persons, and should 
forego the use of fetid smelling things, avoid dreadful 
sights and painful or agitating sounds and the use of 
diy, stale and dirty food as well as that prepared 
overnight. Long and distant walks from home, resorts 
to cremation-grounds or to a solitary retreat, or to a 
Chaitya^', and sitting under the shadow of a tree should 
be absolutely forbidden (to her during the period of 
gestation). Indulgence in anger, fright or other agita- 
ting emotions of the mind should be deemed injurious. 
To carry a heavy load, to talk in a loud voice and 
all other things which might occasion injury to the 
feetus, (sexual intercourse, &c.') should be refrained from. 
The practice of constant anointment and the cleansing 
of the body, &c., (with Amalaki, Haridrd, etc. —lit. cos- 
metics) should be given up. All fatiguing exercises 
should be discontinued and the rules laid down for the 
* Chaitya — is a haunted or diefied tree, or according to others a 
Budhistic monastery. 



Chap. X.] SARIRA STHANAM. 217 

guidance of a woman in her menses should be strictly 
adhered to. The couch and the bed of a pregnant 
woman should be low, soft and guarded on all sides by 
a number of soft pillows or cushions. The food should 
be amply sweet, palatable (Hridya),* well-cooked, pre- 
pared with appetising drugs and abounding in fluid 
substances. These rules should be followed up till 
delivery. 2. 

Special regimen during the period 
of Gestation : —During the first three months of 
pregnancy an enciente should partake of food abound- 
ing in sweet, cool and fluid articles. Several medical 
authorities recommend a food made of Shashtika rice 
with milk, to be given to her specially in the third 
month of gestation, with curd in the fourth, with milk 
in the fifth and with clarified butter in the sixth 
month of pregnancy. Food largely composed of 
milk and butter, as well as relishing (Hridya) food 
with the soup of the flesh of jdngala (wild) animals 
should be given to her in the fourth, food with milk 
and clarified butter in the fifth, adequate quantity 
of clarified butter prepared with (the decoction of) 
Svadamshtrd, or gruel (Yavdgu) in the sixth ; and clarified 
butter prepared with (the decoction of) the Prithak- 
parnyddi group in adequate quantities in the seventh 
month of gestation. These help the foetal development. 
For the purpose of restoring the Vdyu of her body 
(nervous system) to the normal course and condition and 
for the cleansing of the bowels, the enciente should be 
given an Asthdpana (enema), composed of a decoc- 
tion of Vadara mixed with Vald, Ativald, Satapushpa, 
Palala (flesh), milk, cream of curd, oil, Saindhava salt, 

* “Hridya” here means the diet in which there is an abundance of 
Ojo-producing (albuminous) properties. 



2i8 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. X. 

Madana fruit, honey and clarified butter. After that 
she should have an Anuvisana (enema) made up of 
oil prepared with milk and decoction of the drugs 
known as the Madhurddi-gana. This restores the Vdyu 
to its normal course and condition, which brings on 
an easy and natural parturition unattended with any 
puerperal disorders. Henceforth up to the time of 
delivery the enciente should have liquid food (Yavagu) 
made up of emollient substances (fats; and soup of the 
flesh of Jangala animals (deer, etc.). If treated on these 
lines the enciente remains healthy and strong, and 
parturition becomes easy and unattended with evils. 
An enciente should be made to enter the lying-in 
chamber in the ninth month of her pregnancy and 
under the auspices of happy stars and propitious 
lunar conditions. The chamber of confinement (SutikA- 
griha) in respect of a Brdhmin, Kshatriya, Vais'ya and 
Sudra mother should be raised on grounds respectively 
possessed of white, i‘cd, yellow and black soils, and 
made of Vilva, Vata, Tinduka and Bhallataka wood. 
Couches should be made of these woods respectively 
in cases of the different social orders. The walls of 
the room should be well-plastered and the furniture 
(necessary accessories) should be placed tidy in their 
proper places. The door of a lying-in chamber should 
be made to face the south or the east, and the inner 
dimensions of the room should be eight cubits in length 
and four in breadth. Religious rites for warding off 
the visitation of evil spirits and malignant stars should 
be undertaken at (the door of) the room. 3. 

Signs of imminent parturition— (M.-- 

T.) : — A looseness of the sides of the abdomen and 
untying of the umbilical cord of the child (from the 
cardiac cord of its mother) and a perception of the 



&p. -n:.] sarIra sthAnam. 219 

characteristic pain at the waist would indicate the 
approach of the time of delivery. A constant and 
severe pain at the waist and the back, constant (in- 
voluntary) motions of the bowels and micturition and 
mucous discharge from the vulva are the symptoms 
which are manifest at the time a little before) of 
parturition. 4-5. 

Preliminary IVIeasures Rites of bene- 
diction should be performed for the safety of the 
enciente in her travail and she should be made to 
pronounce benedictory Mantras surrounded by male 
babies on all sides. A fruit with a masculine name 
should be given in her hand. Her body should be 
anointed with oil and washed with warm water and 
she should be made to drink largely a gruel (Yavagu) 
made of articles (which exert a beneficial virtue at the 
time). Then she should be laid on her back on a soft 
and sufficiently spacious bed, her head being placed 
on a pillow and her legs slightly flexed and drawn up. 
Four elderly ladies with paired finger-nails and skilled 
in the art of accouchement and with whom she feels 
no delicacy, should attend and nurse her at the time. 6. 

Then after having gently lubricated the mouth of 
the parturient canal along the natural direction of the 
pubic hairs (Anuloma) (so as not to create any discom- 
fort in the part) one of them (elderly ladies) should 
address the enciente as follows : — “O fortunate damsel, 
try to bear down the child, but do not make such an 
attempt in the absence of real pain.” On experiencing 
an untying of the umbilical cor’d of the child, the 
enciente should gently make such urgings, whenever 
she will experience pain in the pelvic, pudendal and 
pubic regions and in the region between the neck of 
the bladder and the pelvis. Deep urgings should be 



226 tilE SUStlRUTA SAMHITA. <^*'ap. >i.3 

made on the exit of the foetus out of the uterus, 
and after that deeper urgings should be made during 
the passage of the child through the canal until 
delivery. 7. 

An urging (made by the enciente) in the absence 
of any real pain may lead to deafness, dumbness and 
deformity of the jaw-bones of the child or subject 
it to attacks of cough, asthma, consumption, etc., or lead 
to the diseases of its head, or to the birth of a haunch- 
backed or deformed child. A case of abnormal presenta- 
tion (Pratiloma) should be converted into the normal 
or cephalic one (Anuloma) by version*. 8-9. 

In the case of protracted delivery, c.£., an obstruc- 
tion of the child at the vagina, — the vagina should be 
fumigated with the fumes of the slough (cast-off skin) 
of a cobra (snake) or with the fumes of Pinditaka 
(Madana) or the roots of Hiranyapnshpi (Kantakdri) 
should be tied (round the neck or the waist) or Suvar- 
chala {Aiasi) or Vis'alya (Patala) should be tied round 
the hand (wrist) and leg (ankle) of the parturient 
Woman. lo. 

Post- parturient Measures The shreds 
or membranes lying on the body of the child should be 
removed immediately after its birth and its mouth 
should be cleansed with clarified butter and rock-salt. 
Then a linen pad soaked in clarified butteri* should be 
applied on the head of the new-born baby. Then the 
umbilical cord, after having been slightly drawn out, 
should be ligatured with one end of a string at a point 
eight fingers apart from its navel, the other end 

• The vaiiov\s forms of (Ptaliloma) abnormal ptesenlalions have been 
described under Mudha-Garbha Nidanam (Nidan-Stbana — Chap. IX.) 
and their treatment is lo be found in Chikitsa-Slhdna — Chap, XV. 

t Brahmadeva recommends Vala-Taila instead of clarified butler. 



Cllap, H,] 


SARIRA STIIaNaM 


2 i'l 

of the string being tied round its neck ; then the um- 
bilical cord should be severed immediately above the 
ligature, il. 

Natal Ritas ! — Then having sprayed (the face 
of) the baby with cold water, the post-natal rites should 
be performed unto it. After that the baby should be 
made to lick an electuary composed of honey, clarified 
butter and the expressed juice of Brdlimi leaves and 
Anantd, mixed with (half a Rati weight of) gold dust and 
given with the ring-finger of the feeder. Then the body 
of the child should be anointed with ValA-taila and . 
it should be bathed in an infusion of the barks of 
Kshiri trees, or in the washings (decoctions) of drugs 
known as the (Elddi group), or in water 

in which red-hot gold or silver bar has been immersed, 
or in a tepid decoction of Kapittha leaves, according 
to the nature of the season, the preponderance of the 
deranged Doshas in its body and according to its physi- 
cal conditions. 12. 

Diet for the Child— (M.—T.) -.—The milk in 
the breasts of a newly parturient woman sets in three or 
four days after parturition owing to the dilation of the 
orifices of the milk ducts (galactoferous ducts). Hence 
the baby should be fed thrice daily (morning, noon 
and evening) on a handful (child’s own hand) of clarified 
butter and honey mixed with (a Rati weight of) pul- 
verized Anantd roots sanctified with Mantras on the 
first day ; and on the second and third days the child 
should be fed on clarified butter prepared with the 
Lakshand ^root). On the following (fourth) day the child 
should be fed on its handful of honey and clarified 
buttet only twice (/. e.^ in the morning and at noon), 
(hrom the evening of fourth day) the mother should 
first squeeze off a quantity of her milk and then give 



222 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMIIItA. 


[Chap, X. 


the child her breast. (This rule should be observed 
at the time of tending the child every day). 13-14. 

Treatment of the mother : —The body 
of the mother should be anointed (after parturition) 
with the Vald-Taila and treated (both internally and 
externally) with a decoction of Vayu-subduing drugs 
(such as the Bhadra-Ddrvddi etc.). If still there be 
any abnormality in the condition of the Doshas (the 
discharge of vitiated blood { c., lochia), the mother 
should be given to drink a luke-warm solution of 
treacle mixed with powders of Pippali, Pippali roots, 
Hasti-pippali, Chitraka and S'ringavcm, and the medi- 
cine should be continued for two or three days or 
longer, (if necessary), till the disappearance of the 
vitiated blood (lochia). When the discharge gets normal 
{ie., on the appearance of healthy lochia), the mother 
should be made to take for three days a gruel 
(Yav^gu) prepared with the decoction of the drugs 
constituting the Viddri-Gandkddi Gana and mixed with 
(a good quantity of) clarified butter or a Yavagu prepared 
in milk. After that a meal of boiled SAli-rice and a 
broth made from the meats of Jangala animals 
boiled with barley, Kola and Kulaitha pulse, should be 
prescribed for her, taking into consideration the 
strength and the condition of her appetite (Agni or 
digesting power). The mother should observe this 
regimen of diet and conduct for one month and a half 
(after delivery). After this period she may be at 
liberty to choose any food to her liking and revert 
to her natural mode of living. According to several 
authorities, however, a woman does not regain her 
natural temperament of body till the reappearance of 
the healthy menstruation (after parturition). 15. 

A strong but newly delivered woman, born and 



Chap. X.] 


SARIRA STHANAM. 


223 


bred up in a Jdngala country should be given to drink, 
for three or five nights, either oil or clarified butter 
in an adequate quantity with an after-potion consisting 
of the decoction of drugs constituting the group known 
as the Pippalyddi Gana. She should be daily anointed 
with oil, etc. If, however, of delicate health, she 
should be made to take, for three or five nights in 
succession, a medicated Yavdgu (gruel) as described in 
the last para. Thenceforth a diet of demulcent pro- 
perties should be prescribed for her and her body 
should be regularl)'- washed with a copious quantity 
of tepid water. A mother, after parturition, should 
forego (for a considerable time) sexual intercourse, 
physical labour and indulgence in irascible emotions^* 
etc. 16 

IVIemorable Verses Any disease acquired 
by a newly delivered mother (Sutika) by her injudicious 
conduct of life soon lapses into one of a difficult type 
(hard to cure) ; and it becomes incurable if it be due to 
too much fasting. Hence a wise pliysician should treat 
her with such measures as arc natural and congenial to 
her temperament, the time, the place and the nature 
of the disease, so that she may not be afflicted with any 
evil effect. 17. 

A placenta retained in the uterus causes constipa- 
tion (Anaha) of the bowels and distention of the 
abdomen ^tympanites). Hence in such a case her 
throat should be tickled with a finger covered with 
hair ; or the exterior orifice of the vagina should be 
fumigated with the fumes of the cast-off skin of a snake, 
Katnka, Aldvu, Kritavedhaiia and mustard seeds mixed 
with mustard oil. In the alternative, a plaster of Ldngali 

Fifteen kinds of emotions as descriljed in the thirty-ninth chapter of 
the Chikitsa-sthanam, 



224 


THE SUSI-IRUTA SAT^IHITA, 


[Chur. X. 


roots should be applied to the palms and soles of her 
hands and feet; or the milky juice of tree 

should be applied over her scalp ; or a compound made 
of pasted Ldngali roots and Knshiha mixed with either 
wine or the cow’s urine should be given her for drink. 
A Kalka either of S' dli roots or of the drugs con- 
stituting the Pippalyddi Gana mixed with wine (Sura) 
should be given her for the purpose In the alterna- 
tive, an AsthApana (enema) of white mustard seeds 
Kitshthn (Kuda), Ldngali, and the milky juice. of Mahd- 
vriksha, mixed with Surd-manda should be prescribed. 
(If the above measures fail) an Uttara-Vasti (uterine 
douche) prepared with the aforesaid drugs and boiled in 
mustard oil should be applied ; or else the placenta 
should be removed by the hand lubricated with an olea- 
ginous substance and with the nails clipped off. i8, 
n/lakkalla and its Treatment i—Thc 
lochia of a newly delivered woman whose organism 
has become excessively dry on account of profuse use 
of absorbants or deranged by any other causes, — the 
lochia being obstructed in its exit by the local Vdyu,— 
gives rise to Gran this (nodules) which may appear 
below the navel, on the sides of the pelvis about the 
region of the bladder or of the pubis. Severe piercing 
pain (Sula) is felt about the region of the navel, the 
stomach and the bladder and a sensation of pricking 
with needle and cutting pain in the intestines. 
At the same time the abdomen becomes distended 
with the retention of urine. The-ie are the symptoms 
of Makkalla. In such a case, a decoction of the drugs 
of the Viratawddi Gatia mixed with a powdered com- 
pound of the Ushakddi Gana should be given her. In the 
alternative, a potion of carbonate of potash [Yavakshdra) 
dissolved in tepid water or in clarified butter ; of rock- 



Chap, X.] 


SARIRA STHANAM. 


225 


salt dissolved in the decoction; of the Pippalyddi Gana ; 
of a compound made of the powdered drugs of the latter 
Gana with SurA-manda ; of the powders of cardamom 
and Pancha-kolas dissolved in the decoction of the 
drugs of the Varunddi Gana ; of the powders of pepper 
and Bhadraddm dissolved in the decoction of the 
Prithakparnyddi Gana ; or of pulverized Trikatu, 
Chaturjdtaka and Knstumburu mixed with old treacle ; 
or of simple Arishta, should be prescribed. 19. 

Management of the Child The baby 
being wrapped up in silk should be laid on a bed covered 
with a silken sheet ; it should be fanned with the 
branches of a Pilti, Nimba, Vadari, or Parushaka tree. 
A (thinl pad (Pichu) soaked in oil should be constantly 
kept on the head of the child, and its body should be 
fumigated with the fumes of drugs Vacha, mustard, 
etc.) potent enough to keep off the (evil) influences of 
demons and evil spirits. The same drugs should be tied 
round the neck, hands, legs and head of the infant and 
the floor of the lying-in room should be kept strewn 
over with pounded sesamum, mustard, linseed [Atasi). A 
fire should also be kept kindled in the chamber. Measures 
laid down in the chapter on the nursing of an Ulcer- 
patient (chapter IX. Sutra.) should be observed in the 
present case as well. 20, 

Then on the tenth day of its birth the parents having 
performed the necessary rites of benediction and cele- 
brated the occasion with suitable festivities, shall give 
the child a name of their own choice or one determined 
by its natal a^trism, etc. 21. 

Lactation and selection of a wet- 
nurse : —For the healthy gro-vth of the child a wet- 
nurse should be selected from among the matrons of 
it.s own caste (Varnal, and possessed of the following 

29 



226 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. X. 


necessary qualifications. She should be of middle 
stature, neither too old nor too young (middle-aged), 
of sound health, of good character (not irascible or easily 
excitable), not fickle, ungreedy, neither too thin nor too 
corpulent, with lips unprotruded, and with healthy and 
pure milk in her breasts which should neither be too 
much pendulent nor drawn up. It should be carefully 
observed that her skin is healthy and unmarked by any 
moles or stains, she being free from any sort of crime 
(such as gambling, day-sleep, debauchery, etc,). She 
should be of an affectionate heart, and with all her 
children living. 

She should be of respectable parentage and conse- 
quently possessed of many good qualities, with an exu- 
berance of milk in her breasts, and not in the habit of 
doing anything that degrades woman in life. A “SyAmA” 
girl possessed of the aforesaid qualities makes a good 
wet-nurse. A child nursed at the breast of a woman 
with upturned or unprominent nipples is apt to be 
deformed (Kardla) in features, while extremely pendu- 
lous (large and flabby) breasts may suffocate the child 
by covering its mouth and nostrils. Having chosen a 
wet-nurse of the commendable type, the child with its 
head well-washed should, on an auspicious day, be laid 
on her lap wrapped in a clean and untorn linen. The 
face of the child should be turned towards the north, 
while the nurse should look to the east at the time. 
Then, after fir.st having a small quantity of the milk 
pressed out and the breast washed and consecrated with 
the following Mantras (incantations) the child should be 
made to suck her right breast. 22. 

Metrical Texts ; — “ 0 , thou beautiful damsel, 
may the four oceans of the earth contribute to the 
sectetion of milk in thy breasts for the purpose of im- 



Chap. X.] SARIRA STHANAM. 22^ 

proving the bodily strength of the child. 0, thou with 
a beautiful face, may the child, reared on your milk, 
attain a long life, like the ■ gods made immortal with 
drinks of ambrosia”. 22. 

A child nursed at the breast of any and every 
woman for want of a nurse of the commendable type, 
may fall an easy prey to disease, owing to the fact of the 
promiscuous nature of the milk proving incongenial to 
its physical temperament. The milk of a nurse not 
being pressed out and spelled off at the outset may 
produce cough, difficulty of breathing, or vomiting of 
the child, awing to the sudden tush of the accumulated 
milk into its throat choking up the channels. Hence 
a child should not be allowed to suck in such milk. 23. 

The loss or suppression of the milk in the breasts of 
a woman is usually due to anger, grief, and the absence 
of natural affection for her child, etc. For the purpose of 
establishing a flow in her breast, her equanimity should 
be first restored, and diets consisting of S 4 li-rice, barley, 
wheat, Shashtika, meat-soup, wine (Sur^), Souviraka, 
sesamum-paste, garlic, fish, Kas’eruka, S’ritigdtaka, lotus- 
stalk, Viddri-kanda, Madhiika flower, S’atd^ari, Nalikd, 
Aldvit, and Kdla-S'dka, etc., should be prescribed. 24. 

Examination, etc., of milk The breast- 
milk of a nurse or a mother should be tested by casting 
it in water. The milk which is thin, cold, cleai-, and 
tinged like the hue of a conch-shell, is found to be 
easily miscible with water, does not give rise to 
iroths and shreds, and neither floats nor sinks in water, 
should be regarded as pure and healthy. A child fed 
on such milk is sure to thrive and gain in strentgh and 
health. A child should not be allowed to take the 
breast of a hungry, aggrieved, fatigued, too thin, too 
corpulent, fevered, or a pregnant woman, nor of one in 



228 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA . 


[Chap, X. 


whom the assimilated food is followed by an acid reac- 
tion, or of one who is fond of incongenial and unhealthy 
dietary, or whose fundamental principles are vitiated. 
A child should not be given the breast until an adminis- 
tered medicine is assimilated in its organism, lest this 
should give rise to a violent aggravation of the pharmaco- 
logical action of the medicine, as well as of the deranged 
Doshas (Vdyu, Pitta, etc.), and the refuse matters (Malas) 
of its body. 25. 

Memorable Verses; —The Doshas [Vdyu, 
Pitta and Kapha) of a wet-nurse are aggravated by 
ingestion of indigestible or incompatible food, or of those 
articles which tend to derange the Doshas of the body, 
and hence her milk may be vitiated. A child, fed on the 
vitiated milk of a woman, vitiated by the deranged 
Doshas owing to injudicious and intemperate eating 
and living, falls an easy prey to physical disease, An 
intelligent physician in such a case should devise means 
for the purification of the milk as well as of the derang- 
ed Doshas which account for such vitiation (inasmuch as 
the medication of the child alone will not produce any 
satisfactory effect). 26-27. 

Infantile diseases and their Diagno- 
sis : — A child constantly touches its diseased part or 
organ and cries for the least touch (by another of that 
part of its body). If the seat of disease be its head, the 
child cannot raise nor move that organ and remains with 
its eyes closely shut. A disease seated in its bladder 
gives rise to retention of urine, thirst, pain and occa- 
sional fainting fits. A retention of urine and stool, 
discolouring of complexion, vomiting, distention of the 
abdomen, and gurgling in the intestines indicate the 
seat of the disease to be its Koshtha (colon). A 
constant crying (and the child’s refusal to be consoled) 



Chap. X.] 


SARIRA STHANAM, 


229 


would signify that the diseased principle (morbiferous 
diathesis) extends all through its organism, 28. 

Treatment of Infants Medicines laid 
dow.n under the head of a particular disease should like- 
wise be prescribed in the case of its appearance in a 
child or an infant ; but then only the remedies of mild 
potency and those which do not tend to disintegrate the 
bodily fat and Kapha should be given in adequate 
doses (according to age, etc.) as mentioned here- 
after and administered through the vehicle of milk and 
clarified butter, to a child living on milk alone, while the 
nurse also is to take the same medicines as well.* In 
the case of a child fed both on milk and (boiled) rice 
{Kshirdnnada\.z.., living on both solid an i liquid food) the 
medicine should be administered both to the child and 
its wet-nurse. In the case of a child living on solid food 
only, decoctions (Kashdya) etc. should be given to the 
child and not to the nurse. Medicines to the quantity of 
a small pinchful may be prescribed for a suckling who 
has completed its first month of life. Kalkas (medicated 
pastes) should be given to a child fed on both milk and 
rice to the size of a stone of a plum-fruit (Kola), and the 
dose for a child fed on rice (solid food) only being to 
the size of a plum (Kola) f 29. 

* Milk and clariGed butler being congenial to the constitution of 
infants should be used as vehicles for drugs in their cases but, these are 
not necessary in the case of the nurse. 

1 According to several other authorities, the dosage in the case of 
children is to be regulated as follows ; — 

In the case of a child, one month old, drugs should be given in the form 
of an electuary through the vehicle of milk, honey, syrup, clariGed butter, 
dose being one Rati (about two grains) at Grst, and gradually 
increased by a Rati a month, till it completes one year. After this time the 
dose is to be one Masha (about twenty grains) for each year of age till 
he is fifteen. 

This dosage, however, does not apply in the present age. — Ed. 



230 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. X. 

Metrical Texts : — In the case of anj^ disease 
of a child nursed at the breast, the breasts of the nurse 
should be plastered with the pastes of drugs recommended 
by physicians for the particular malady (instead of 
giving the drugs to the child), and the child made to 
suck the same. The use of clarified butter is not bene- 
ficial to a child on the first day of an attack of Vata- 
jvara (fever due to the derangement of the bodily Vdyu), 
within the first two days of an attack of Pittaja fever, 
and within the first three days of that of Kaphaja fever. 
But the use of clarified butter may be prescribed for 
an infant fed on milk and boiled rice, or on boiled rice 
alone, according to requirements. 30-31. 

In case of fever a child should be given no suck at 
all, lest the symptoms of thirst might develop. Pur- 
gatives, Vastis, or emetics are forbidden in the disease 
of children, unless the disease threatens to take a fatal 
course. 32. 

If the local Vdyu aggravated by the waste of brain- 
materials (Mastulunga), bends down the palate bone of a 
child attended with an excessive thirst and agony, 
clarified butter boiled with (the decoction and Kalka of) 
the drugs of the Madhura Gana, should be used both 
internally and externally, and the patient should as well 
be treated with spray of cold water (to stimulate him). 
The disease in which the navel of a child becomes 
swollen and painful, is called Tundi. It should be 
remedied by applying fomentations, medicated oils, 
Upanahas, etc., possessed of the virtue of subduing the 
Vdyu. A suppuration of the anal region (Guda-paTia) of 
a child should be treated with Pittaghna (Pitta-destroy- 
ing) measures and medicines. Rasdnjana used inter- 
nally and externally (as an unguent) proves very effica- 
cious in these cases. 33-35. . 



Chap. X.] 


SARIRA STHANAM. ■ 


231 


Infantile Elixirs Clarified butter cooked 
with (the decoction and Kalka ofj white mustard seeds, 
Vachd, Mansi, Payasyd, Apdmdrga, S'atdvari, Sdrivd, 
Brdhmi, Pippali, Haridrd, Kushiha and Saindhava salt 
should be given to an infant fed exclusively on milk. 
Clarified butter prepared with (the docoction and Kalka 
of) Madhuka (Yashtimadhu), V acha, Chitraka, Pippali 
and Triphald should be given to an infant fed both on 
milk and (boiled 1 rice (solid and liquid food). Clarified 
butter boiled with (the decoction and Kalka of) Das'amula, 
milk, Tagara, Bhadraddnc, Markka, honey, Vidanga, 
Drdkshd and the two sorts of Brdhmis should be given 
to an infant fed on (boiled) rice (solid food) By these the 
health, strength, intellect and longivity of the child 
is improved, 36-37. 

A child should be so handled or lifted as not to 
cause any discomfort. A baby should not be scolded, 
nor suddenly roused up (from sleep), lest it might get 
awfully frightened. It should not be suddenly drawn 
up nor suddenly laid down, lest this should result in the 
derangement of its bodily Vdyu. An attempt to seat 
it (before it has learnt to sit steadily), may lead to 
haunch-back (Kyphosis). Lovingly should a child 
be fondled and amused with toys and play-things. 
A child unruffled by any of the above ways becomes 
healthy, cheerful and intelligent as it grows older. An 
infant should be guarded against any exposure to the 
rains, the sun, or the glare of lightning. He should not 
be placed uuder a tree or a creeper, in low lands, 
and in lonely houses or in their shades (cavesl ; and it 
should be protected from the malignant influences of 
evil stars and occult powers. 38. 

Metrical Texts A child should not be left 
(alone) in an unclean and unholy place, nor under the sky 



232 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. X. 


(uncovered place), nor over an undulating .ground, nor 
should it be exposed to heat, storm, rain, dust, smoke and 
water. Milk is congenial to the organism of a chiid, 
i e., it is its proper food Hence in the absence of 
sufficient breast-milk, the child should be given the milk 
of. a cow or of a she-goat in adequate quantities. 39. 

In the sixth month of its birth the child should be 
fed on light and wholesome boiled rice. A child should 
always be kept in an inner apartment of the house, 
and religious rites should be performed on its behalf for 
the propitiation of evil deities, and it should be carefully 
guarded against the influences of evil stars. 40. 

Symptoms when a malignant star, 
etCn, strikes S — The child looks frightened and 
agitated, cries, becomes unconscious at times, wounds 
himself or its nurse with its teeth and finger-nails, 
gnashes its teeth, crooks, yawns, or moves its eye-brows 
with upturned eyes, vomits frothy matter, bites its lips, ■ 
becomes eross, passes loose stool mixed with shreds 
of mucus, cries in an agonised voice, becomes dull in 
complexion, becomes weak, does not sleep in the night, 
does not suck the breast as before, or emits a fishy, 
bug-like or molc-like smell from its body — these are 
the general symptoms exhibited by a child under the 
influence of a malignant star or planet which will be 
specifically described later on in the Uttara-Tantra 41. 

Education and marriage : -The educa- 
tion of a child should be commenced at a suitable age 
and with subjects proper to the particular social Varna 
or order it belongs to. On attaining the twenty-fifth year 
he should marry a girl of twelve. A conformity to 
these rules, is sure to crown him with health, satisfaction, 
progeny and a capacity for fully discharging the religious 
rites and paying off his parental debts. 42,. 



Chap. X.] 


. SARIRA STHANAM. 


233 


IVIetrical'TextS An offspring of a girl below 
the age of sixteen by a man below tweiity-five is 
usually found to die in the womb. Such a child, in the 
event of its being born alive, dies a premature death 
or else becomes weak in organs (Indriyas). Hence'agiii 
of extremely tendei' age should not be fecundated at all. 
An extremely old woman, or one suffering from a 
chronic affection (of the generative organ), ot* afilicte'd 
with any other disease, should not be likewise impreg- 
nated. A man with similar disabilities should be h’eld 
likewise Unfit. 40-44. 

A fcetus, on the point of being miscarried on account 
of the above-mentioned causes, produces pain' in the 
uterus, bladder, waist (Kati), and the inguinal regions 
(Vamkshana) and bleeding. In such a case, the patient 
should be treated with cold baths, sprays of cold water 
and medicated plaster (Pradeha) &c., at the time, and 
milk boiled with drugs constituting the Jivaniya 
group, should be given to her for drink. In case of 
unusual movements of the fcetus in the womb, the 
enciente should be given a drink of milk boiled witli the 
drugs of Utpalddi Gana, for soothing and making it 
steady in its place, 45 

A foetus being displaced from its normal position 
produces the following symptoms, viz , pain or spasms 
in the back and the sides (Pdrs'va), burning stfnsation, 
excessive discharge of blood and retention of urine and 
foeces A foetus changing place or shifting from one 
place to another, swells up the abdomen (Koshtha). 
Cooling and soothing measures should be adopted in 
such cases. 46. 

* Jivaniya drugs two Tolds, milk sixteen Tolas and water sixty-four 
Tolas, to be boiled and reduced to sixteen Tolds, i e., to weight of the 
milk. 


30 



THE SUSHRUTA SAMIIITA. 


[Cliap, X. 


234. 

IVledical Treatment In a case of pain 
under tlie circumstances, the enciente should be made 
to drink a potion consisting of milk boiled with Makd- 
saharKshudrasahd,. MadJmka flower, S'vadansttd and 
Kantakdri, mixed with sugar and honey. In the case of 
retention of urine, the patient should be made to 
drink a -potion of milk boiled with drugs known as the 
Ddi'vddi Gana (mixed with sugar and honey). In the 
case of -A'ndha (retention of stool attended with disten- 
tion of the abdomen), a potion consisting of milk 
boiled with asafetida, Sativarchala salt, garlic and Vacha 
(mixed with honey and sugar) should be given. In 
cases of excessive bleeding, linctus made of the powdered 
chamber of a Koshthdgarikd insect * , Samati^d, 
Dhdtaki flowers, Navamdlikd, Gairika, resin and Rasdn~ 
jana, or of as many of them as would be available, 
mixed with honey, should be licked. In the alternative, 
the bark and sprouts of the drugs known as the Nya~ 
grodhddi Gana mixed with boiled milk should be 
administered, or a ■ Kalka of the drugs of the.Utpaladi 
group mixed with boiled milk should be used, or a. 
Ralka of S'aluka, S'ringdtaka and Kas'eru mixed with 
boiled milk should be given. As a further alternative, the 
enciente may be made to eat cakes made of powdered 
Sdli rice with the decoction of Udumbara fruit and 
Audaka-kanda, mixed with honey and sugar. A piece 
of linen- or a plug soaked in the expressed juice of the. 
drugs of the Nyagrodhadi group should be inserted 
into the passage of the vagina. 47. 

In a case of pain unattended with bleeding, the 
enciente should be made lo drink a potion composed- of 
milk-boiled with il/aif/w/^fl(Yashtimadhu), Devaddni and 

* There is a kind of insect which makes its chamber with earth 
generally under the ceiling or on the walls. This earth should be used. 



Chap. X.] . SARIRA STHANAM. • 235 

Payasyd ; or with As'mantakai Saidvari and Payasyd ; 
or with the drugs of the group of Viddrigandhddi Gana ; 
or with Vrihdti^ Kantakdri, Utpala, S'atdvari, Sdrivd, 
Payasyd and Madlmka (Yashtimadhu). These remedies 
speedily applied tend to alleviate the pain and make the 
foetus steady in the womb. 48 . 

After the foetus has been steadied by the aforesaid 
mesaures, a diet consisting of (boiled rice and) cow’s 
milk, boiled with the dried tender fruits of Udtimvara, 
should be prescribed for the patient. In the event of 
miscarriage, the patient should be made to drink a 
Yavdgu (gruel) of the Udddlaka rice, &c., cooked with 
the decoction of the Pachaniya group (Pippalyddi) and 
devoid of all saline and fatty matter, for a number of 
days corresponding to that of the month of gestation. 
Old treacle mixed with .the powdered drugs of the 
Dipaniya group (Pancha-kola), or simply some Arishta 
(Abhaydrishta, etc.), should be given, in the event 
of there being pain in the pelvis, bladder and 
abdomen. 49. 

The internal ducts and channels (Srotas) stuffed with 
aggravated Vdyu lead to the weakening (Laya) of the 
foetus and, if the state continues, it leads even to its 
death. Hence the case should be treated with mild 
anointing measures, etc., (Sneha-karma, etc.,) and gruels 
made of the flesh of the birds of the Utkros'a species and 
mixed with a sufficient quantity of clarified butter, should 
be given to her. As an alternative, Kulmasha ^ boiled 
with ,Mdsha, sesamum and pieces of dried (tender) 
Vilva fruit should be given her, after which she should 
be made to drink, for a week, honey and MAddhvika (a 
kind of weak wine). At the non-delivery of the child 

* ‘'Kulmdsha” may mean either Kulnltha pulse or half boiled wheat, 
barley, etc. 



336 the SUSHRUTA SAMIIITA, [Chap. X. 

even after the lap$e of the full term of gestation, the 
enciente should be made to thrash corn with a pestle in 
an Udukhala or mortar (husking apparatus) or should be 
made .to sit or move (on legs or by conveyance), on an 
uneven ground. 50. 

Atrophy of a foetus in the womb should be ascribed 
to the action of the deranged VAyu. This is detected 
by the comparatively lesser fulness of the abdomen 
of the enciente and slow movement of the foetus in 
the womb. In such a case, the enciente should be 
treated with milk, with the Vrimhaniya (of restorative 
and constructive properties) drugs, and with meat- 
soup,* 51. 

A combination of ovum and semen affected by the 
deranged Viyu in the womb, may not give rise to a 
successful fecundation (living impregnated matter), but 
leads .to a distention of the abdomen (as in pregnancy), 
which again, at any time, may disappear of itself. And 
this is ascribed by the ignorant to the malignant 
influence of Naigamesha (spirits). Such an impregnated 
matter, sometimes lying concealed in the uterus, is 
called Nigodara, which should be treated with the 
remedies laid down under the head of Lina-Garbha 
(weak fcutus). 52. 

Npw we shall discourse on the management of 
pregnancy according to the months (period) of gestation. 

M^etrical Texts;— The following receipes, such as, 
(i) Madhuka (Yashtimadhu), S'^kavija, PayasyA, and 
Deyaddru ; (2) As'mantaka, black sesamum, pippali, 
])I_anjishthd, Tdmra-yalli and Satdyari ; (3) Vrikshddani, 
Payusyd, Latd (Durvd), Utpala and Sdrivd ; (4) Anantd, 
Sdrivk, Rdsnd, P,adma, and Madhuka (Yashtimadhu) ; 

* The pajucle “chA’’ in ih? t.ext signifies the use of any other 
consiniciive tonic. 



Chap. X.] 


SARIRA STHANAM. 


237 


(5) Vrih^ti, Kantakdri, Kas'marlj sprouts (S'unga) and 
barks of milk-exuding trees (as, Vata, etc.), and clarified 
butterf ; (6) Pris'ni-parni, Vald, S'igru, S'vadanshtrd 
and Madhuparnikd ; and (7) S'ring'taka, Visa (stalks 
of lotus), Drdkshd, Kas'aru, Madhuka (Yashtimadhu), 
and sugar ; should successively be given with milk^' to 
an enciente, from the first to the seventh month of her 
gestation, in the case of a threatened miscarraige or 
abortion. 53. 

An enciente should be made to drink milk boiled 
with the roots of Kapittha, Vrihati, Vilva, Patola, 
Ikshu and Kantakdri, (in case of impending or 
threatened miscarraige) in the eighth month of her 
pregnancy. Jn the ninth month (and under similar 
conditions), the potion should be made up of Madhuka 
(Yashtimadhu), Ananta-mula, Payashd and Sdrivd. In 
the tenth month (and under similar conditions), a potion 
consisting of milk boiled with Sunthi and Payasyd 
is beneficial, or, in the alternative, may be given a potion 
made up of milk with Sunthi, Madhuka (Liquorice; and 
Devaddru. The severe pain would vanish and the 
foetus would continue to develop safely in the womb, 
under the aforesaid mode of treatment. S4-S7. 

A child born of a woman, who had remained sterile 
(not-conceived) for a period of six years (Niviitta- 
prasavd;* after a previous child-birth, becomes a short- 
lived one. 58. 

* ChaktndaUa reads “Visam” (stalks of loins) instead of “Gbrilara” 
(clarified butler). 

t If a conception does not occur in a woman for a period of more than 
five years after a child-bitlb, she is called Nivritfca-prasavaC. 

* Sivaddsa also says that powders of these drugs should be given 
with boiled milk, but he adds that some authorities recommend theae 
drugs to be boiled in milk according to Kshira-paka-vidhi. 



238 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMIlITA. 


[Chap. X. 


Application of mild emetic medicines, (though -for- 
bidden in the case of a pregnant woman), may be 
resorted to, in the case of a fatal disease, (even in that 
stage), A diet consisting of sweet and acid things should 
be prescribed for her, so as to bring the deranged 
Doshas to the normal state ; mild Sams'amani5’'a 
(soothing and pacifying) medicines should be applied 
and food and drink consisting of articles mild in their 
potency, predominently sweet-tasting and not injurious 
to the foetus, should be advised and mild (external) 
measures not baneful to the fcetus should be resorted 
to, according to the requirements of the case. 59. 

Memorable Verses : — The growth, memory, 
strength and intellect of a child are improved by the 
use of the four following medicinal compounds, used as 
linctus (Prds'a), viz., (i) well-powdered gold, Kushtha, 
honey, clarified butter and Vacha ; (2) Matsydkshaka* 
(Brdhmi), Sankha-puspi, powdered gold, clarified butter 
and honey ; (3) Arkapuspi, honey, clarified butter 
powdered gold and Vacha ; and (4) powdered gold, 
Kaitaryyah (Mahd-Nimba), white Durbd,t clarified 
butter and honey. 60. 

Thus ends the tenth Chapter of the S'atira Sthdnam in the Sus'rula 
Samhita, which treats of the nursing and management etc. of pregnant 
women. 

• Some, however, explain Matsyakshaka to be Dhustura\ others again 
say it is a kind of red-flowered shrub grown in the Anupa country. 

t The word “5'veta,” in the Text, may either be adjective to 
“Durvrt” and mean “white” or it may mean white Vacha or white 
Aparajitd or white Durv££. 


Here ends the ^arira Sthdnam. 



THE 


SUSEUTA SAMHITA 


CEIKITSA-STHANAM, 

(Section or Therapeutics). 


CHAPTER I. 

Now we shall discourse on the medical treatment 
of the two kinds of inflamed ulcers (Dvivraniya 
Chikitsitam). i. 

Ulcers may be grouped under two head.o according 
as they are Idiopathic or Traumatic in their oiigin. 
The first group includes within its boundary all ulcers 
that are caused through the vitiated condition of the 
blood or the several deranged conditions of the Vdyu, 
Pitta and Kapha, or are due to their concerted 
action (Sannipdta), while the second group embraces 
those which are caused by the bites of men, beasts, 
birds, ferocious animals, reptiles or lizards, or by a 
fall, pressure and blow, or by fire, alkali, poison, or 
irritant drugs, or through injuries inflicted by pointed 
wood, skeletal bones’*, horns, discus, arrows, axes, 
tridents, or Ktintas (a kind of shovel\ or such other 
weapons. Although both these classes of ulcers possess 
many features in common, they have been grouped 
under two distinct heads on account of the diversity of 
their origin, the difference in remedial measures to be 
adopted in their treatment, and the variation in their 

* Fragments of biokcn poller)'. — Dallana. 



240 THIS SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. C^hap. t. 

strength and tenacity. Hence the chapter is called 

Dvivraniya. 2, 

In all cases of traumatic ulcers, cooling measures 
should be at once resorted to, just after (the fall or 
blow or stroke), for the cooling of the expanding (radia- 
ting) heat of the incidenta' ulcer, in the manner laid 
down in respect of (the pacification of enraged) Pitta, 
and a compound of honey and clarified- butter should be 
applied on the wounded locality for the adhesion 
(Sandhina) of the lacerated parts, [and for the pacifica- 
tion, i.e , restoration to normal state, of the local blood 
and Vdyu aggravated through an obstruction of their 
passage]. Hence arises the necessity of making the 
two-fold classification of ulcers. After that (a week) 
a traumatic ulcer should be treated as an idiopathic 
one (to all intents and purposes', inasmuch as it is 
found to be associated with deranged Vayu, Pitta or 
Kapha. Hence at that stage the medical treatment 
of both the forms of ulcer is (practically) the same. 3. 

In short, ulcers are further subdivided (particularly) 
into fifteen groups, according to the presence of’ the 
morbific diathesis (deranged Vdyu, Pitta Kapha 
and blood therein), either severally or in combi- 
nations as described (before) in the Chapter on Vrana- 
Pras'na (Sutra Sthdnam. Ch. XXI). Several author- 
ities, by adding the simple uncomplicated ulcers (un- 
associated with any of the morbific principles of the 
deranged Vdyu, Pitta, &c.) to the list, hold the number 
of types to be sixteen. (Practically they are in- 
numerable, according to the combinations made of the 
deranged Vdyu, etb. and the different Dhsitus of the 
system). 4. 

Symptoms of ulcer may be divided into two kinds vis.. 
General and Specific; Pain is the general characteristic 



Chap, I.] CHIKITSA STlIANAM. ^41 

(of all forms of ulcer), while the symptoms, which are 
exhibited in each case according to the virtue of the 
deranged Vdyu, Pitta, etc, involved therein, are called the 
Specific ones. A Vraaa is so named from its etymology 
(the term being derived from the root Vrana— to break) 
and signifies a cracked or broken condition ,of the skin 
and flesh of the afflicted part) of the body. 5. 

The Vataja-UIcer : — The ulcer assumes a 
brown or vermilion colour and exudes a thin, slimy 
and cold secretion, largely attended with tension, 
throbbing and a sort of pricking and piercing pain (in 
its inside), which seems as if being expanded and 
extended. This type of ulcer does not extend much 
and is characterised by a complete destruction of the 
tissue (flesh). The Pittaja ulcer is rapid in its growth. 
It assumes a bluish yellow colour, exudes a hot secretion 
' resembling the washings of Kims'uka flowers, and is 
attended with burning, suppuration and redness, being 
surrounded with eruptions of small yellow-coloured 
pustules. The Kaphaja ulcer is found to be extended 
and raised around its margin and is accompanied by an 
irresistible itching sensation. It is thick and compact 
(in its depth), covered with a large number of vessels 
and membranous tissues (Sira-sn^yu-jdla), grey in 
colour, slightly painful, hard and heavy, and exudes a 
thick, cold, white and slimy secretion. The Raktaja 
ulcer (resulting from a vitiated condition of the blood) 
looks like a lump of red coral. It is often found 
to be surrounded by black vesicles and pustules and 
to smell like a strong alkali. It becomes painful and 
produces a sensation, as if fumes were escaping out 
(of it). Bleeding (is present) and the specific symp- 
toms of the Pittaja type are likewise found to 
supervene. 6 — 9. 


31 



242 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. Chap. 1.] 

The Vata-Pittaja Type : — An ulcer due to 
the concerted action of the deranged Vdyu and Pitta 
is marked by a pricking and burning pain and a red 
or vermilion colour. A sensation of fumes arising out 
of it (is also felt) and the ulcer exudes a secretion 
which partakes of the characteristic colours of both the 
deranged Vayu and Pitta. An itching and piercing 
pain is felt in the ulcer due to the combined action of 
the deranged VA)--u and Kapha (Kapha-Va'taja type), 
which becomes heavy and indurated, constantly dis- 
charging a cold, slimy seci-etion. An ulcer resulting 
from the deranged condition of the Pitta and Kapha 
(Kapha-Pittaja type) becomes heavy, hot and yellow. 
It is marked by a burning sensatian and exudes a pale, 
yellow-coloured secretion. An ulcer marked by the 
aggravated condition of the deranged Vdyu and blood 
(Vsita-Eaktaja type) is dry and thin and is largely 
attended with a piercing pain and anaesthesia. It 
exudes blood or a vermil-coloured secretion and is 
marked by the combined hues respectively peculiar to 
the deranged Vayu and blood. An ulcer due to the 
combined action of the deranged Pitta and blood 
(Kakta-Pittaja type) is marked by a colour which 
resembles the surface cream of clarified butter. It 
smells like the washing of fish, is soft, spreading (eiysi- 
pelatous), and secretes a hot blackish matter. An 
ulcer due to the combined action of the deranged 
Kapha and blood (Kapha-Raktaja type) is red-coloured, 
heavy, slimy, glossy and indurated. It is usually 
marked by itching and exudes a yellowish bloody 
secretion. An ulcer due to the concerted action of the 
deranged Vdyu, Pitta and blood (Vstta-Pitta-Raktaja 
type) is marked by a sort of throbbing, pricking and 
burning pain. It discharges a flow of thin yellowish 



chap. 1 .] ' CHIKITSA STHANAM. 243 

blood and produces a sensation, as if fumes were 
escaping (out of its cavity). An ulcer due to the con- 
certed action of the deranged Vdyu, Kapha and blood 
(Va^ta-Sleshma-Raktaja type) is usually attended with 
itching, throbbing and tingling sensations and thick, grey, 
blood-streaked discharge. An ulcer associated with 
the deranged Kapha, Pitta, and blood (Kapha-Pitta- 
Raktaja type) is largely attended with redness, itching, 
suppuration and burning sensation. It emits a thick, 
greyish, bloody secretion. An ulcer marked by the 
concerted action of the deranged Vayu, Pitta and 
Kapha (S^iiinipaLtika) is attended with diverse kinds 
of pain, secretion, colour, &c., peculiar to each of 
these types. An ulcer associated with the combined 
action of the deranged Vayu, Pitta, Kapha and blood 
(Vaita-Pitta-Kapha-Raktaia type) is attended with a 
sensation, as if it were being burnt and lacerated. It is 
largely accompanied by throbbing, itching sensation, 
a sort of pricking and burning pain, with complete 
anaesthesia in the locality; redness, suppuration, various 
other kinds of colour, pain and secretion are its further 
characteristics. 10 — 20. 

An ulcer (V rana) which is of the same colour with the 
back of the tongue, soft, glossy, smooth, painless, well- 
shaped and marked by the absence of any kind of 
secretion whatsoever, is called a clean ulcer (^uddha- 
Vrana). 21. 

Therapeutics 1 — The medical (and surgical) 
treatment of a Vrana (ulcer) admits of being divided 
into sixty different factors, such as, — Apatarpana 
(fasting or low diet), Alepa (plastering), Parisheka 
(irrigating or spraying), Abhyanga (anointing), Sveda 

* N.B. Aulhorities, however, differ in enumerating these factors, 
although every one of them sticks to the total number of sixty. 



tliE SOSHRUTA SAMHlfA. 


[Chap. t. 


'244 


(fomentations, etc.), Vimldpana (resolution by mass- 
age or rubbing), Upandha (poultice), Pachana (inducing 
suppuration), Visrdvana (evacuating or draining), Sneha 
(internal use of medicated oils, ghrita, etc.), Vamana 
(emetics), Virechana (purgatives), Chhedana (excision), 
Bhedana (opening — e.g., of an abscess), Darana (bursting 
by medicinal applications), Lekhana (scraping), Aharana 
(extraction^ Eshana (probing), Vyadhana (puncturing— 
opening a vein), Vidrdvana (inducing discharge), Sivana 
(suturing), Sandhdna (helping re-union or adhesion), 
Pidana (pressing), Sonitdsthdpana (arrest of bleeding), 
Nirvdpana (cooling application), Utkdrikd (massive 
poultices), Kashdya (washing with decoctions), Varti 
(lint or plug), Kalka (paste), Ghrita (application of 
medicated clarified butter), Taila (application of 
medicated oil\ Rasa-kriya (application of drug-extracts), 
Avachurnana (dusting with medicinal powders), Vrana- 
Dhupana (fumigation of an ulcer), Utsddana (raising of 
the margins or bed of an ulcer), Avasddana (destruction 
of exuberant granulation), Mridu-Karma (softening), 
Ddruna-Karma (hardening of soft parts), Kshdra-Karma 
(application of caustics), Agni-Karma (cauterization), 
Krishna-Karma (blackening), Pdndu-Karma (making 
yellow-coloured cicatrices), Pratisdrana (rubbing with 
medicinal powders), Roma-sanjanana (growing of hairs), 
Lomdpaharana (epilation), Vasti-karma (application of 
enemas), Uttara-Vasti-karma (urethral and vaginal 
injections', Vandha (bandaging), Patraddna (application 
of certain leaves — vide Infra), Krimighna (Vermifugal 
measures', Vrimhana (application of restorative tonics), 
Vishaghna (disinfectant or anti-poisonous applications), 
^iro-virechana (errhines), Nasya (snuff), Kavala- 
dhdrana (holding in the mouth of certain drug-masses for 
diseases of the oral cavity or gargling), Dhuma (smoking 



Chap. 1 .] CHIICITSA STHANAM. 245 

or vapouring), Madhu-sarpih (honey and clarified butter), 
Yantra (mechanical contrivances, e g., pulleys, &c.), 
Ahara (diet) and Raksha-Vidhana (protection from 
the influence of malicious spirits), 22. 

Of these, Kashaya, Varti, Kalka, Ghrita, Taila, Rasa- 
kriya and Avachurnana are the measures for the cleansing 
(Sodhana) of an ulcer and for helping its granulation 
(Ropana). The eight acts (from Chhedana to Sivana) 
are surgical operations. We have already spoken of 
such acts as Sonitasthdpana, Kshara-karma, Agni- 
karma, Yantra, Ahdra, Rakshd-vidhana and Vandha- 
Vidhdna (in the Sutra-sthdna). Later on, we shall 
discourse on Sneha, Sveda, Vamana, Virechana, Vasti, 
Uttara-vasti, Siro-virechana, Nasya, Dhuma, and Kavala- 
dhdrana. Of the remaining measures we shall speak 
in the present chapter. 23. 

There are six kinds of swellings (Sophas), as described 
before, and the following eleven measures, commencing 
with Apatarpana and ending in Virechana, should be 
regai'ded as their cure. These are the proper remedies for 
a swelling and do not (cease to be efficacious in, nor) prove 
hostile to cases of swelling which are transformed into 
ulcers. The other measures should be deemed as 
remedial to ulcers but Apatarpana is the first, 
general and principal remedy in all types of swellings 
(Sophas). 24. 

Wlemorable Verses Apatarpana (fasting) 
should be prescribed in the case of a patient, full of 
enraged Doshas, as well as, in one having his organic 
principles (Dhdtus) and refuse matters (Malas) of the 
system, deranged by them, for the purpose of bringing 
them to their normal condition, with a regard both 
to their nature and to the strength, age, &c., of the 
patient. Persons afflicted with diseases which result 



246 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap, 1. 


from the up-coursing of the deranged Vdyu(Urdhva-vdta) 
such as cough, asthma, See., or with thirst, hunger, 
dryness of the mouth and fatigue, as well as old men, 
infants, weak persons, men of timid dispositions and 
pregnant women should never fast. A swelling and an 
extremely painful ulcer should be respectively treated 
with a proper medicated plaster at the very outset. The 
pain in such a case will yield to the medicinal plaster 
as a blazing room or house is readily extinguished by 
means of steady watering. Such plasters not only give 
comfort to the patient (by i-emoving the pain and leading 
to the absorption of the swelling), but heaves up the bed 
of the sore or the ulcer and contributes to its speedy 
purification and healing up (granulation), 25—28. 

In the case of a swelling brought on by the deranged 
Vdyu, the affected part should be washed or sprinkled 
(Parisheka) with a warm lotion of clarified butter, oil, 
Dhdnydmla and essence of meat or with a decoction 
of the drugs that tend to pacify the enraged Vayu 
and to relieve the pain. A swelling due to the action of 
the deranged Pitta or blood or to the effect of 
a blow or poison should be washed or sprinkled 
with a lotion of milk, clarified butter, honey and sugar 
dissolved in water, the expressed juice of sugar-cane 
and a cold decoction of the drugs of the Madhura group - 
(KdkolyAdi-gana) and the Kshira-Vrikshas. A Kaphaja 
swelling on the body should be washed or sprinkled 
with a luke-warm lotion of oil, cow’s urine, alkaline 
solution, wine (Surd.), Sukta and with a decoction of 
drugs that destroy the deranged Kapha. 29 — 31. 

Metrical Text : —As a fire is put out by jets of 
water, so the fire of the deranged morbific principles 
(Doshdgni) of the body are speedily subdued and put down 
by the application of (medicinal lotions) washes. 32. 



Chap. I.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


247 


An anointing (Abhyanga), duly prescribed and used 
with a full regard to the nature of the aggravated 
Doshas, leads to their pacification (restoration to the 
normal condition) and to softness (subsidence) of the 
swelling. 33. 

Metrical Texts: — An application of an anoint- 
ment (Abhyanga) should precede the measures of fomen- 
tation, resolution, &c , while it should follow all evacuating 
measures, &c. A painful, extended and indurated swell- 
ing, as well as an ulcer of a similar nature, should be 
fomented, while an act of Vimlapana (resolution by 
gentle massage) should be done in respect of a fixed or 
unfluctuating swelling attended with little or no pain 
whatsoever. A wise physician should first annoint 
and foment the part and then gently and slowly press 
it with a bamboo-reed or with the back of his thumb 
or palm. A non-suppurated swelling or one that is 
partially suppurated should be treated with poultice 
(Upandhal, which would lead to its resolution or suppu- 
ration, as the case might be. A swelling, not resolved 
or not subsiding even after the adoption of the measures 
beginning with Apatarpana and ending in Vircchana 
tin the given list), should be caused to suppurate 
with the drugs enumerated in the chapter of Mis'raka, 
such as curd, whey, wine (Surd), Sukta and DhdnyAmla 
(a kind of fermented paddy gruel). They should be 
formed into a paste and the paste should be cooked into 
an efficacious poultice-like composition (Utkdrikd), and 
mixed with salt and oil or claiified butter, it should be 
applied over the affected part (swelling) and bandaged 
with the leaves of an Eranda plant. The patient 
should be allowed to take a wholesome (f a, which does 
not produce Kapha) diet as soon as suppuration would 
set in (in the swelling). 34-39. 



248 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA . 


[Chap, I. 


Blood-letting" : — Blood-letting should be re- 
sorted to in a case of newly formed swelling for 
its resolution and for alleviating the pain. Bleeding 
(Visr^vana) is recommended in the case of an ulcer 
which is indurated, marked by a considerable swelling 
and inflammation and is reddish black or red-coloured, 
extremely painful, gagged in its shape and considerably 
extended at its base (congested), specially in the case 
of a poisonous ulcer, for the subsidence of the pain and 
for warding off a process of suppuration therein, either 
by applying leeches or by opening (a vein in the 
locality) by means of an instrument. An ulcer-patient 
of a dry or parched temperament affected with dis- 
tressing supervenients or ulcer-cachixia or who is weak 
should be made to drink an emulsive potion cooked 
with (a decoction of) appropriate drugs. A patient 
afflicted with an ulcer with an elevated margin and 
attended with swelling and specially marked by the 
presence of the deranged Kapha and by a flow of 
blackish red blood should be treated with emetics. 
Ulcer-experts recommend purgatives to a patient 
afflicted with an old or long-standing ulcer, attended 
with a deranged condition of the Viyu and Pitta. 
An excision should be made into an ulcer which refuses 
to suppurate and which is of a hard and indurated 
character attended with sloughing of the local nerves and 
ligaments (Sndyu). An opening or excision (Bhedana) 
should be made into an ulcer (Vrana) in the inside of 
which pus has accumalated and makes it heave up and 
which not finding any outlet consequently eats into the 
underlying tissues and makes fissures and cavities. 40-46. 

Measures which contribute to a spontaneous bursting 
by medicinal applications (Dzirana) of a swelling should 
be adopted in the case of an infant or an old or enfeebled 



Chap, i.] CHliaTSA STHANAM. 249 

patient, or of one incapable of bearing the ' pain (of a 
surgical operation), or of a person of a timid disposition, 
as well as in the case of a woman, and in the case of 
swellings which appear on the vulnerable parts (Marmas) 
of the body. Remedies which lead to the spontaneous 
bursting of a swelling should be applied by a wise 
physician to a well-suppurated swelling drawn up and 
with all its pus gathered to a head ; or an alkaline 
substance should be applied on its surface and a 
bursting should be effected when the Doshas are found 
to be just aggravated by the incarcerated pus. 47. 

. An ulcer which is indurated, whose edges are thick 
and rounded, which has been repeatedly burst open, 
and the flesh of whose cavity is hard and elevated, 
should be scarified by a surgeon ; or, in other words, 
an indurated ulcer should be deeply scarified, one 
with thick and rounded edges should be excessively 
scarified, while the one which has been repeatedly 
burst open should be entirely scraped off. An ulcer 
with a hard and elevated bed should be scraped evenly 
and longitudinally along the length of its cavity. In 
the absence of a scarifying instrument, the act should be 
performed with a piece of Kshauma (cloth made of the 
fibres of an Atasi plant), a linen (Plota) or a cotton pad 
(Pichu), or with such alkaline substances as nitrate of 
potash, Samudra-phena, rock-salt, or rough leaves of 
trees (e. g., those of Udumbara, &c.). 48. 

The cavities or courses of a sinus, or of an ulcer which 
had any foreign matter lying imbedded in its inside, or 
which takes a crooked or round about direction, as well as 
of the one formed into cavities within its interior, should 

* This scraping off of ihe ulcer should be done by an instrument of 
Surgery and not by any tough leaf or the like, men'ioned hereafter. 

32 



250 


the StiSHRUTA SAmHITA. 


[Chap. t. 


be probed by gently introducing the tender fibres of 
bamboo sprouts (Karira), a (lock of) hair, a finger, or an 
indicator into its inside. The course of a sinus occurring 
about the anus or in the region of the eyes (Netra- 
Vartma) should be probed with the slender fibres 
of Chuchchu, Upodikd, or Karira, in the event of 
their mouths being narrow and attended with bleeding. 
The Salya (incarcerated pus, etc.) should be extricated, 
whether the mouth of the sinus is constricted or other- 
wise, in conformityw ith the directions laid down before 
on that behalf. In diseases amenable to acts of punctur- 
ing (Vyadhana), the knife should be inserted into the 
seat of the disease to a proper depth and extent, to be 
determined by its situation in the body, and the 
Doshas (pus, etc.) should be let out, as stated before. 
Ulcers with a wide mouth, unattended with anysymptoms 
of suppuration, and occurring in a fleshy part of the 
body, should be sutured up, and the adhesion (San- 
dhAna) of the edges should likewise be effected, as direct- 
ed before. A plaster composed of drugs (capable of 
drawing out and secreting the pus), as described before, 
should be applied around the mouth of an ulcer seated 
in any of the Marmas (vulnerable parts), or full of pus 
in its inside, with a narrow-mouthed aperture. The 
plaster should be removed when dry, and should not 
be applied on the orifice of the ulcer, as it would, in that 
case, interfere with the spontaneous secretion of pus 
(Dosha). 49 - 54 - 

An excessive haemorrhage incidental to such acts, as 
excessive hurting of the vein, etc., should be arrested with 
suitable styptic* measures and remedies (Sonitasthdpana). 


* Styptic measures ate of four kinds— Sandh.ana, Skandatia, Pachana, 
and Dabana. See Sutra- Sthanam, Chap. XIV. ‘ 



Chap. I.J 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


251 


An ulcer attended with fever, suppuration and burning 
sensation due to the excited state of the deranged 
Pitta and congestion of blood should be allayed (Nir- 
vdpana— literally putting out) with suitable and proper 
medicinal remedies. It should be allayed with com- 
pounds made up of the proper cooling drugs (of the 
Mis'raka chapter), pasted with milk and lubricated with 
clarified butter. Cooling plasters (Lepa) should then be 
applied as well. 55-56, 

An ulcer whose flesh is eaten away, which discharges 
a thin secretion, or is non-suppurating in its character, 
and is marked by roughness, hardness, shivering and 
the presence of an aching and piercing pain, should 
be fomented with a poultice-like efficacious preparation 
(UtkairikEi )cooked with the drugs of Vdyu-subduing 
properties, those included within the Amla-varga, and 
those which belong to the KdkolyAdi group, and with 
the oily seeds (such as linseed, sesamum, mustard, 
castor, etc.). An indurated, painful, faetid, moist and 
slimy ulcer should be washed with a disinfectant or. 
purifying lotion consisting of a decoction of the drugs 
mentioned before for the purpose. 57-58. 

Plugs or lints plastered with a paste of the purifying 
drugs (enumerated before) should be inserted into an 
ulcer with any foreign matter (e.g., pus) lying embedded 
in it, or into one with a deep but narrow opening, or into 
one situated in a fleshy part of the body. An ulcer full 
of putrid flesh and marked by the action of the highly 
deranged Doshas (Vayu and Kapha) should be purified 
with a paste of the aforesaid available drugs making up 
the plug. An ulcer of a Pittaja origin, which is deep- 
seated and attended with a burning sensation and with 
suppuration, should be purified with the application of 
a medicated clarified butter, prepared with the purifying 



252 THE SUSHRUTA SAMIIITA. [Chap, I. 

drugs with an admixture of Kdrpdsa-phala*. An 
intelligent Surgeon should purify an ulcer with raised 
flesh, and which is dry and is attended with scanty 
secretion with an application of medicated mustard oil. 
An indurated ulcer, refusing to be purified with the fore- 
going medicated oils, should be purified with a duly 
prepared decoction of the drugs enumerated before 
(Sutra, chap. 38,— the Sdlasdrddi group) and prepared in 
the following manner of Rasa-kriya'. A decoction of 
the said drugs duly prepared should be saturated with 
an after-throw of Haiitala, Manahs'ild, Kdsisa and 
Sanrdshtra earth, and well compounded together ; the 
preparation should also be mixed with the expressed 
juice of Mdiulun^a and with honey. The medicine thus 
prepared should be applied to the ulcer on every third 
or fourth day. 59, 

Deepj* and foul-smelling ulcers covered with layers 
of deranged fat (phlegmonous ulcer) should be purified 
by the learned physician with the powders of the drugs 
with which the purifying plug or the lint has been 
enjoined to be plastered (Ajagandhd, &c.). Decoctions 
of the drugs which are possessed of the virtue of setting 
in a process of granulation (Ropana) in an ulcer, suen 
as Vata, &c., as stated before, should be used by a 
surgeon (Vaidya) after it had been found to have been 
thoroughly purified. Medicated plugs, composed of 
drugs possessing healing properties (such as, Soma,Ainritd, 
As'vagandhd, etc.) should be inserted in deep-seated ulcers, 
when cleansed and unattended with pain. 60-62. 

* The total weight of the purifying drugs should be equal to that of 
the Karpasa-phala alone and they should be boiled together with four times 
their quantity of clarified butter and with sixteen times of water. 

t There is a different reading of “Agambhira” in place of “Gabhira,” 
but Gayi thinks the emendation undesirable. 



Chap. I.] CHIKITSA STHANAM, 253 

A Kalka or a levigated paste of sesamum and 
honey (mentioned in the Mis'raka Chapter) should be 
applied for the purpose of healing up an ulcer situated 
in a muscular part from which all putrid flesh has 
been removed or sloughed off and which exhibited a clear 
cavity. This paste (of sesamum) tends to allay the 
deranged Vayu through its sweet taste, oleaginous- 
ness and heat-making potency ; subdues the deranged 
Pitta through its astringent, sweet and bitter taste and 
proves beneficial even in the case of the deranged 
Kapha through its heat-producing potency and bitter 
and astringent taste. An application of the levigated 
paste of sesamum mixed with the drugs of purifying and 
healing properties tends to purify and heal up an ulcer. 
An application of the levigated paste of sesamum mixed 
with honey and M;«^«-leaves leads to the purification 
of sores ; whereas an application of the same paste 
(?■ e , sesamum, honey and leaves of Nimba), mixed with 
clarified butter tends to heal up the ulcer. Several 
authorities atribute the same virtue to a barley-paste.* 
Levigated pastes of barley and of sesamum (or a paste of 
barley mixed with sesamum) contribute to the resolution 
or subsidence of a non-suppurated swelling, fully suppur- 
ate one which is partially suppurated, lead to the spon- 
taneous bursting of a fully suppurated one, and purify 
as well as heal up one that has already burst out. 63-65. 

An ulcer,which is due to the effects of poison, vitiated 
blood, or aggravated Pitta, and which is deep-seated or is 
of traumatic origin, should be healed up with a medicated 
clarified butter prepared with the drugs of healing virtues 
(Ropaniya — enumerated before) and milk. An ulcer 
marked by an aggravated condition of the deranged 

* Jejjada and Gayadasa interpret the term to mean “barley-paste 
mixed with sesamum.” 



254 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. I. 


Vdyu and Kapha should be healed up with the applica- 
tion of an oil, boiled and prepared with the proper- 
purifying drugs mentioned before. 66 67. 

Easa-kriy£^* with the two kinds of Haridrd should 
be resorted to for the purpose of healing up an ulcer, in 
which bandaging is forbidden (such as those due to the 
deranged Pitta or blood, or to blow, &c., or to the effects 
of poison), and an ulcer appearing on the moveable 
joints, which, though exhibiting all the features of 
a well-cleansed sore, has not been marked by any process 
of healthy granulationf. Healing medicinal powders 
should be used in the case of an ulcer which is con- 
fined to the skin, and is firm-fleshed and marked by 
the absence of any irregularity in its shape not 

uneven in its margin). The mode of applying medicinal 
powders, as stated in the Sutra-sthdna, should be adopted 
in the present instance. 68-69. 

The healing and purifying measures described above 
should be deemed equally applicable to, and efficacious 
in cases of ulcers in general with regard to their 
Dosbas (both idiopathic and traumatic). The success 
of these measures has been witnessed in thousands of 
cases and has been recorded in the Sastras (authorised 
works on medicine). Hence they should be used as 
incantations without any doubt as to their tested and 
infallible efficacy. An intelligent physician should 
employ the drugs, mentioned before, in any of the 
seven forms (either in the shape of a decoction, or a 

* The decoction of IriphaU and the drugs of the Nyagtodhadi group 
should be duly prepared, filtered and then condensed to the consistency of 
treacle. Powders of Saridri and Ddtu-haridra should be then thrown 
into it. In the end, the whole preparation should be well-stirred, 
mixed with honey and applied. This is what is called Rasa-kriy^. 

•( Several editions read "though cleansed yet ungranulating ulcers.” 



chap, t.] 


CIIlkiTSA STHANAM, 


255 


plug, or a paste, or through the medium of medicated oils 
and clarified butter, or in the shape of Rasa-kriya, or as 
powders), according to the requirements of each case. 70. 

The drug.s which constitute the two groups ofPancha- 
mulas (major and minor), as well as those of the Vayu- 
subduing group, should be employed in the case of an ulcer 
due to the aggravated Vaiyu in any of the seven forms 
—decoction, etc. Similarly the drugs which are included 
within the groups of Nyagrodhadi or Kdkolyddi should 
be used in any of those seven forms, in the case of an 
ulcer due to the aggravated Pitta (for the purification 
and healing thereof). Drugs which form the group of 
Aragvadhddi, as well as those which have been des- 
cribed as heat-making in their potency, should be used 
in any of those seven aforesaid forms, in the case of 
an ulcer due to the deranged Kapha. The drugs of two 
or three of those groups, should be combinedly used 
in any of those seven forms, in connection with an 
ulcer marked by the aggravated condition of any two 
or three of the deranged Doshas respectively. 71-74. 

Fumigation: — Vataja ulcers with severe pain 
and secretion should be fumigated with the fumes of 
Kshauma, barley, clarified butter and other proper fumi- 
gating substances [such as turpentine and resin (gum of 
SAla tree)]. 75. 

Utsadana-Kriya (Elevation) : — Medicated 
plasters (consisting of Apdmdrga, As'vagandhd, etc.) and 
medicated clarified butter (prepared with the same 
drugs should be used in ulcers (due to the aggravatedVdyu 
and marked by the absence of any secretion, and affecting 
a considerably smaller area or depth of flesh, as well 
as in those (due to the deranged and aggravated Pitta 
and) seated deep into the flesh, for the purpose of raising 
up (filling up) the beds or cavities thereof. Meat of carni- 



2'S6 ' THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. 1. 

vorous animals should be taken in the proper manner by 
the patient, inasmuch as meat properly partaken of in 
a calm and joyful frame of mind adds to the bodily flesh 
of its partaker. 76. 

• Avasadana (destruction of super-growths) ; — 
Proper drugs or articles (such as sulphate of copper, 
etc.) powdered and pasted with honey should be applied 
for destroying the soft marginal growths of an ulcer 
found to be more elevated than the surrounding surface 
of the affected locality. 77. 

Mridu-Karma (softening) ; — In respect of 
indurated and fleshless (not seated in a part of the body 
where flesh abounds) ulcers marked by a deranged 
condition of Vayu, softening measures (with the 
help of repeated applications of lotions and plasters 
composed of sweet and demulcent substances mixed 
with salt in a tepid or luke-warm state) and blood- 
letting**^' should be resorted to. Sprinkling (Seka) and 
application of clarified butter or oil prepared with the 
Vayu-subduing drugs should also be resorted to. 78. 

Daruna-karma : — The employment of harde- 
ning measures (Daruna-karma) is efficacious in con- 
nection with soft ulcers and in the following man- 
ner. Barks of Dhava, Priyanpi, As' oka, Rohini, 
Triphala, Dhdtaki flowers, Lodhm and Sarjarasa, taken 
in equal parts and pounded into fine powders, should be 
strewn over the ulcer, i.e., the ulcer should be dusted 
with the same. 79. 

Ksh^ra-Karma (Potential cauterization)*.— 
The measure of applying alkali should be adopted for the 

* Blood-lellinj should be resorted to in the event of any vitiated 

blood being found to have been involved in the case ; but in the event of 
a similar participation of any deranged Kapha, oils and lotions composed 
of the Vayu-deslroying drugs should be made use of. 



Chap. I.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM, 


257 


purification of the sore of a long-standing ulcer • which' i? 
of an indurated character with jts margin raised, high'er 
(than the surrounding skin), and is marked by 'itching 
and a stubborn resistance to all purifying medicines. 80. 

Agrii-Karma (actual cauterization) : — An uldar 
incidental to an act of lithotomic operation allo\Ving the 
urine to dribble out through its fissure, or one marked 
by excessive bleeding, or in which the connecting ends 
have been completely severed, should be actually cauter- 
ised with fire. 81 . . , 

Krishna- Karma : —The blackening of a 
white cicatrix, which is the result of a bad .or defective 
granulation, should be made (after the complete healing 
up of the ulcer) in the following manner. Several Bhalla* 
taka seeds should be first soaked in the urine of a cow 
(and then dried in the sun, this process should be 
repeated for seven days consecutively), after which they 
should be kept (a week) immersed in a pitcher full of 
milk. After that the seeds should be cut into two and 
placed in an iron pitcher. Another pitcher should be 
buried in the ground with a thin and perforated lid 
placed over its mouth, and the pitcher containing the 
seeds should be placed upon it with its mouth downward 
(so that the mouths of the two pitchers might meet), and 
then the meeting place should be firmly joined (with 
clay). This being done a cow-dung fire should be lit 
around the upper pitcher. The oily matter (melted by 
the heat) and dribbling down from the Bhalldtaka seeds 
into the underground pitcher should be slowly and care- 
fully collected. The hoofs of village animals (such as 
horses, etc.) and those which live in swamps (Anupas — 
such as buffaloes, etc.) should be burnt and pounded 
together into extremely fine powder. The oil (of the 
Bhalldtaka seeds collected as above) should then be 

33 



THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


••^S8 


tChap. I. 


■mixed with this powder, and applied to the .white 
cicatrix. Similarly, the oily essence of the piths of 
some kinds of wood, as well as of some kinds of .fruit 
{Phala-snehd) prepared in the manner of the Bhalldtaka 
■oil (and mixed with the powdered .ashes of hoofs) should 
^be used for the blackening of a cicatrix. 82-83. 

Pandu-karana : — The natural and healthy 
colour (PAndu) of the surrounding skin should be im- 
parted to a cicatrix which has assumed a black colour 
owing to the defective or faulty healing up of the sore iii 
•the following manner. The fruit of the Rohini’^ should be 
immersed in goat’s milk for seven nights and, aftenvards 
finely pasted with the same milk, should be applied 
to the skin. This measure is called P^ndu-karana 
(imparting a yellow or natural skin-colour to the 
cicatrix). To attain the same result, the powder of a 
new earthen pot, Vetasa roots, S’dla roots. Sulphate of 
iron, and Madhuka (Yashti-madhu) pasted together with 
honey may be used. As an alternative, the hollow rind 
of the Kapittha fruit, from which the pulp has been 
removed, should be filled with the urine of a goat to- 
gether with Kdsisa (Sulphate of iron), Rochand, Tuttham 
(Sulphate of copper). Haritdla, Mana/is'tld, scrapings 
of raw bamboo skin, Prapunndda (seeds of Chdkunde), 
and Rasanjana and buried a month beneath the roots 
of an Arjuna tree after which it should be taken out 
and applied to the black cicatrix. The shell of a hen’s 
egg, Kataka, Madhuka, (Yashti-madhu), sea-oysters and 
crystalsf (pearls according to Jejjata and Brahmadeva) 
taken in equal parts should be pounded and pasted with 


* Rohini, according to some co -nmentators, means a kind of Haritaki ; 
according to others, it means Ka'.u-turabi. 

t Burnt ashes of sea-oyslers and pearls etc., should be used. 



CHlKltSA StiaANAM. 


Chap, i.] 


259 - 


the urine of a cow and made into boluses which should 
be rubbed over the cicatrix.* 84-87. , 

Roma-sanjanana-— hair-producers The 

burnt ashes of ivory and pure Rasdnjana (black 
antimony; pounded (and pasted with goat’s milk) should 
be applied to the spot where the appearance of hair 
{Lomotpatti) is desired. An application of this plaster 
would lead to the appearance of hair even on the palms 
of the hands. Another alternative is a pulverised 
compound consisting of the burnt ashes of the bones, 
nails, hair, skin, hoofs and horns of any quadruped, 
over a part of the body, previously anointed (rubbed) 
with oil, which would lead to the appearance of hair in 
that region. And lastly, a plaster composed of Sulphate 
of iron, and tender Karanja leaves pasted with the 
expressed juice of Kapittha, would be attended with 
the same result. 88—90, 

Hair-depilators The hair of an ulcer- 
ated part of the body found to interfere with the satis- 
factory healing up of the ulcer, should be shaved with 
a razor or clipped with scissors, or rooted out with the 
help of forceps. As an alternative, an application of a 
plaster consisting of two pai'ts of pulverised (burnt ashes 
of) conch-shell and one part of Haritdla (yellow orpiment 
or yellow oxide of arsenic) pasted with Sukta (an 
acid gruel) over the desired spot, would be attended 
with the same result A compound made of the oil of 
BhallEitaka mixed with the milky exudation of Snuhi, 
should be used by an intelligent physician as a depila- 
toiy measure. As an alternative, the burnt ashes of the 
stems of plantain leaves and Dirghavrhita (Syondka) 
mixed with rock-salt, Haritdla and the seeds of Sami, 


* This also is a remedy for giving a natural colour to the skin. 



26 a. "THE SUSHRtJTA SAMHI'TA. [Chap. !•: 

p'asted with cold water, should be deemed a good hair- 
depilatory.* A plaster composed of the ashes of the 
tail'of a domestic lizard, plantain, Haritdla (oxide of 
arsenic), and the seeds of Ivgiidi burnt together and 
pasted with oil and water, and baked in the sun may 
also bo used for the eradicating of hair in the affected 
locality. 94-95- 

Vasti- Karma : — A medicated Vasti (enema) 
should be applied to the rectum in the case of an ulcer 
marked by an aggravated condition of the deranged 
Vdyu which is extremely dry and is attended with an 
excruciating pain occurring specially in the lower region 
of the body. A measure of Uttara-vasti (Vaginal or 
Urethral syringe) should be adopted in the cases of 
strictures and other disorders connected with urine, 
semen and menstruation, as well as in cases ol' 
gravel f in case these are due to an ulcer. An ulcer is 
purified, softened and healed up by bandaging leaving 
no' room for the apprehension of a relapse. Hence 
bandaging is recommended. 96-98. 

Pa.'tra.dcina. (application of leaves on an ulcer) : — 
Leaves possessed of proper medicinal virtues taking 
into consideration the particular Dosha and season of the 
year should be tied (over the medicinal plaster applied) 
over an ulcer of non-shifting or non-changing character 
and not affecting a large depth of flesh and which 
refuses to be healed up owing to its extreme dryness. 
An ulcer of the deranged Vayu should be tied over with 
the leaves of the Eranda, BJmrja, PtUika, or Haridrd 
plants as well as with those of the Upodikd and 
Gdmbhdri. An ulcer marked by an aggravated condition 

• According to seme this may be used internally for the purpose. 

t D. R. Some read “TathsCuile” in place of “ABinari'vrane.” 
.“Talhdnile” means and in cases of (aggravated) Vayu. 



dliap. I.'] 


CIIIKITSA STHANAM. 


261 


of the deranged Pitta, or incidental to a vitiated condi- 
tion of the blood, should be tied in the aforesaid manner 
with the leaves of the Kds'mari, the Kshira trees (milk- 
exuding trees), and aquatic plants. An ulcer due to the 
deranged and aggravated Kapha, should be tied over 
with the leaves of the Pdthd, Murvd, Guduchi, Kdka- 
indchi, Haridrd or of the S'ukandsd. Only those leaves 
which are not rough, nor putrid, nor old and decomposed, 
nor worm-eaten and which are soft and tender should.be 
used for purposes of Patradstna/ The rationale of such 
a procedure (Patra-vandha) is that the leaves tied by an 
intelligent physician in the manner above indicated 
serve to generate heat or cold and retain the liniment 
or medicated oil in their seat of application. 99-102. 

Vermifugal : — The germination of worms due 
to flies in an ulcer is attended with various kinds of 
extreme pain, swelling and bleeding in case the worms 
eat up the flesh. A decoction of the drugs of the 
Snrasddi gana proves efficacious as a wash and healing 
medicine in such a case. The ulcer should be plastered 
with such drugs as the bark of Saptaparna, Karanja, 
Arka, Nimba, and Rdjddana pasted with the urine of a 
cow, or washed with an alkaline wash (for expelling the 
vermin from it). As an alternative, the worms should be 
brought out of the ulcer by placing a small piece of raw 
flesh on the ulcer. These vermin may be divided into 
twenty groups or classes, which will be fully dealt with 
later on. (Uttara-Tantram— ch. 54). 103. 

Vrinhanam (use of restorative and constructive 
tonics) : — All kinds of tone-giving and constructive 
measures should be adopted in the case of a patient 

The leaf which does not poison the Sneha and the essence of the 
medicinal drugs placed in a folded piece of linen (and applied over an 
ulcer is the proper leaf and) should be used for tying over the paste. 



2d2 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Ctap. t 

weak and emaciated with the troubles of a long-standing 
sore, taking full precaution not to tax his digestive 
powers. Anti-toxic (Vishaghna) medicines and measures 
and symptoms of poisonings will be described under 
their respective heads in the ICalpa-Sthdnam . 104-105. 

^iro-virechana and Nasya :-S'iro-viie- 
chana measures (errhines) should be resorted to by 
skilful physicians in respect of ulcers situated in the 
clavicle regions and marked by itching and swelling. 
The use of medicated (fatty) snuff (Nasya) is recom- 
mended in cases where the ulcers would be found to be 
seated in the regions above the clavicles and marked by 
an aggravated condition of the deranged Vayu, pain, 
and absence of the oily matter. 106-107. 

Kavala-dhctrana : — Medicated gargles (con- 
sisting of decoctions of drugs) of purifying or healing 
virtues either hot or cold * (according to require- 
ments) should be used in the case of an ulcer in the 
mouth, for the purpose of alleviating the Doshas therein, • 
for allaying the local pain and burning, and for removing 
the impurities of the teeth and the tongue. 108. 

Dhuma-pana inhaling of smoke or vapours 
(of medicated drugs) should be prescribed in cases of ulcers 
of the deranged Vdyu and Kapha attended with swelling, 
secretion and pain and situated in the region above the 
clavicles. Application of honey and clarified butter, se- 
parately or mixed together should be prescribed in cases 
of extended or elongated ulcers which are traumatic or 
incidental in their character (Sadyo-Vrana) for allaying 
the heat of the ulcer and for bringing about its adhe- ' 
sion . Surgical instruments should be used in connec- ■ 

* Hot gargles are recommended in cases of ulcers of the deranged 
Vdyu and Kapha while cold ones in cases of ulcers of the aggravated Pitta 
and blood. 



Chap. I.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 263 

tion with an ulcer which is deep-seated but provided 
with a narrow orifice and which is due to the pene- 
tration of a Salya (shaft) and which could not be re- 
moved with the hand alone. 109-111., 

The diet of an ulcer-patient should in all cases be 
made to consist of food which is light in quantity 
as well a.c in quality, demulcent, heat-making (in potency) 
and possessed of appetising properties.^' Protective rites 
.‘should be performed for the safety of an ulcei'-patient 
from the influences of malignant stars and spirits with 
the major and the minor duties (Yama and Niyama) 
enjoined to be practised on his behalf. 112-113. 

The causes of ulcers are sixf ; their seats in the 
body number eightj' in all ; the features which charac- 
terise them are five $. The medicinal measures and 
remedies in respect of ulcers are sixty il in number. 
And these ulcers are curable with the help or co-opera- 
tion of the four necessary factors (the physician, the 
medicines, the nurse and the patient). 114. 

The comparatively smaller number of drugs which 
I have mentioned (under the heads of Ropana, 
Sodhana, etc., in the present chapter) from fear of 
prolixity, may be increased in combination with other 
drugs or substances of similar virtue, (digestionaiy trans- 
formation and potency, etc.) without any apprehension 

* .‘'ce Chap. XIX. — Sulra-Sthanani. 

t The six causes of an ulcer arc V.ayu, Pitta, Kapha, Sannip^ta 
S'onila mid Aganlu. 

t The eight seats of an ulcer are Tvak, Mansa, S'ir.-i, Snayu, Sandhi, 
Asthi, Koshlha and Marma, 

§ The five symptoms of an ulcer are due to Vata, Pitta, Kapha, 
Sannipala and Agantu. The symptoms due to S'onita being identical 
with those due to Pitta, are not separately counted. 

11 The sixty medicinal measures ttnd remedies are those described 
before in the present chapter. 



264 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [CImp. I. 

of doing any mischief thereby. Recipes consisting 
of rare or a large number of drugs or ingredients, 
should be made up with as many of them as -.would be 
available in the absence oC all of them, as mentioned 
in the present work. A drug belonging to any parti- 
cular Gana or group if separately described as non- 
efificacious to any specific disease, should be omitted 
whereas a drug not belonging to a group may be added 
to it if it is elsewhere laid down as positively beneficial 
thereto. 115-117. 

Upadrava : — The distressing supervening symp- 
toms which are found to attend a case of ulcer, are quite 
different from those of an ulcer-patient. Those which 
confine themselves solely to the ulcer are five in all — 
smell, colour, etc., and those which are exclusively mani- 
fest in the patient are fever, diarrhoea, hiccup, vomit- 
ing, fainting fits, aversion to food, cough, difficult 
breathing, indigestion and thirst. The medical treat- 
ment of ulcers though described in detail in the present 
chapter, will be further dealt with in the next chapter 
on Sadyo-Vrana. 118-120. 

Thus ends the first Chapter of the Chikitsila-Sthanam in the Sus'riita 
Sanihila which deals with the treatment of the two kinds of ulcer. 



CHAPTER II. 


Now we shall discourse on the medical treatment of 
recent or traumatic wounds or sores (Sadyovrana- 
Chikitsa). i, 

Metrical Texts ; —The holy Dhanvantari, the 
foremost of the pious and the greatest of all discoursers, 
thus discoursed to his disciple Sus'ruta, the son of 
Vis'vdmitra. 2. 

Different shapes Of Sores I shall de- 
scribe the shapes of the various kinds of Vrana (sores 
or wounds) caused by weapons of variously shaped edges 
in the different parts of the human body. Traumatic 
ulcers have a variety of shapes. Some of these are 
elongated, others are rectangular, or triangular, or 
circular, while some are crescent shaped, or extended, or 
have a zigzag shape, and some are hollow in the middle 
like a saucer, and lastly some have she shapes of a 
barley corn (bulged out at the middle). An abscess 
or a swelling, due to the several Doshas and which 
spontaneouly bursts out, may assume any of the aforesaid 
forms, while the one effected by a surgeon’s knife should 
never have a distorted or an improper shape. A surgeon 
thoroughly familiar with the shapes of ulcers is never 
puzzled at the sight of one of a terrible and distorted 
shape. 3—5. 

Physicians of yore have grouped these variously 
shaped traumatic ulcers under six broad sub-heads, such 
as the Chhinna (cut), Bhinna (punctured or perforated), 
Viddha (pierced), Kshata (contused), Pichchita (crushed), 
and the Ghrishta (mangled or lacerated) according to 
their common features and I shall describe their 
symptoms. 6. 


34 



266 


THE SUSHRUTA SAM HIT A. 


[Chap. II. 


Their definitions: — A traumatic ulcer which 
is oblique or straight and elongated is called a Chhinna 
I^cut) ulcer, while a complete severance of a part or 
member of the body is also designated by that name. 
A perforation of any of the cavities or receptacles of 
the body by the tip of a Kunta, spear, Rishti, or a sword 
or by a horn, attended with a little discharge, constitutes 
what is called a Bhiniia (punctured) wound or ulcer. 
The Amas'aya (stomach), the PakvAs’aya (intestines), the 
Agnyas'aya (gall-bladder?', the Mutrds'aya (urinary 
bladder), the Raktds'aya (receptacle of blood), the heart, 
the Unduka and the lungs constitute what is called the 
Koshtha (viscus). A perforation (of the wall of any) 
of the As'ayas causes it to become filled with blood 
which is discharged through the urethra, the anus, the 
mouth or the nostrils and is attended with fever, thirst, 
fainting fits, dyspnoea, buming sensations, tympanites, 
suppression of stool, urine and flatus (Vata) with an 
aversion for food, perspiration, redness of the eyes, a 
bloody smell in the mouth, and feted one in the body 
and an aching pain in the heart and in the sides. 7 — lo. 

Now hear me discourse on (their) detailed symptoms. 
A perforation of the wall of the Atnsksaya (stomach) is 
marked by constant vomiting of blood, excessive 
tympanites and an excruciating pain. A perforation of 
the Pakvsis'aya fills it with blood and is attended with 
extreme pain, a heaviness in the limbs, coldness of the 
sub-umbilical region, and bleeding through the (lower) 
ducts and orifices of the body. Even in the absence of 
any perforation, the Antras (intestines) are filled with 
blood through the small pores or apertures in their walls 
in the same manner as a pitcher with its mouth firmly 
covered may be filled through the pores (in its sides), and 
a sense of heaviness is also perceived in their inside. 11-13. 



Chap. II.] 


CHIItITSA STHANAM. 


267 


A wound or an ulcer caused by any sharp pointed 
S'alya (shaft) in any part of the body other than the 
aforesaid As'ayas with or without that Salya being extri- 
cated is called a Viddha (pierced one). An ulcer which 
is neither a cut nor a perforation or puncture but partakes 
of the nature of both and is uneven is called a Kshata 
(wound). A part of the body with the local bone 
crushed between the folds of a door or by a blow be- 
comes extended and covered with blood and marrow and 
is called a PichcMta (thrashed) wound or ulcer. The 
skin of any part of the body suffering abrasion through 
friction or from any other such like causes and attended 
with heat and a secretion is called a Ghrishta (mangled 
or lacerated) wound or ulcer. I4-I7‘ 

Their Treatment : —A part or member of the 
body any wise cut, perforated, pierced or wounded which 
is attended with excessive bleeding and with the local 
Vdyu enraged or aggravated by the incidental bleeding, 
or haemorrhage will occasion excruciating pain. Potions 
of Sneha (oily or fatty liquids) and using the same as a 
washing (in a lukewarm state) should be advised in such 
cases. Preparation of Ves'avaras and other Kris'aras 
largely mixed with oil or clarified butter should be used 
as poultices and fomentations with the MAsha pulse, 
etc., and the use of oily ungents and emulsive Yastis 
(cnematas)^ prepared with decoctions of Vayu-subduing 
drugs should be applied. A crushed or thrashed wound 
or abrasion is not attended with any excessive bleeding 
an absolute absence whereof, ^on the contrary) gives rise 
to an excessive burning sensation and suppuration in 
the affected part. Cold washes and cooling plasters 
should be used in these cases for the alleviation of the 

* SnehapAna is recommended when the ulcer is in a region above the 
umbilicus and Vasli-karma when the ulcer is^in a subumbilical region. 



268 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. ir. 


burning and suppuration as well as for the cooling of 
the (incarcerated) heat. What has been specificall}'’ 
said of these six forms of ulcers, or wounds should be 
understood to include the treatment of all kinds of trau- 
matic wounds or ulcers as well. i8 — 20, 

Treatment of cuts or incised wounds 

&C : — Now we shall discourse on tbe medical treatment 
of Cblliniia cuts. An open mouthed ulcer on the side 
of the head* should be dul}'- sutured as described before 
and firmly bandaged. An ear severed or lopped off 
should be sutured in the proper way and position and 
oil should be poured into its cavit3^ A Chhinna cut on 
the Krikatika (lying on the posterior side of the junction 
of the neck and the head) and even if it allow the 
VAyu (air) to escape through its cavity should be 
brought together and duly sutured and bandaged in a 
manner (so as not to leave any intervening space 
between'. The part thus adhesioned should be sprinkled 
with clarified butter prepared from goat’s milk. The 
patient should be made to take his food Ijdng on his 
back, properly secured or fastened with straps (so that he 
might not move his head and advised to perform all 
other physical acts such as, urination, defecation etc , in 
that position). 21-24 

In the case of a lateral and wide-mouthed wound 
(sword-cut, etc.) on the extremeties, the bone-joints 
should be duly set and joined together as instructed 
before and the wound should be sutured and speed ilj'- 
bandaged in the manner of a Vellitaka bandage, or 

* Several commentators explain those that are situated either on the 
head or on the sides. 

t The dictum that a hurt on any of the wind-carrying sounding chan- 
nels is pronounced to be incurable, should not be supposed to hold good 
in the present case. 



Chap, 11.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


269 


with a piece of skin or hide in the Gophana or such 
other form as would seem proper and beneficial and oil 
should be poured over it, In the case of a wound on 
the back the patient should be laid on his back, while in 
the case of its occurring on the chest the patient should 
be laid on his face.* 25-27. 

In the case of a hand or a leg being carried away or 
completely severed the wound should be cauterised with 
the application of hot oil and bandaged in the manner 
of a Kosha bandage and proper healing medicines 
should be applied. An oil cooked with the eight drugs 
Chandaua, Padmaka, Rodhra, Utpala, Priyangn, Haridrd, 
(Yasthimadhu) and milk, forms one of the 
most efficacious healing (Ropana) agents A Kalka of 
the thirteen Chandaii^, Kaikatdkhya, the two 

kinds of Sahd (Mugani and Mdshani), Mdnsi, (^D.R. — 
Mashahva, Somahva), Aniritd, Haiemi^ Mrindla 

Triphald, Padmaka and Utpala should be cooked in 
oil mixed withmilk (four times that of oil) and the three 
other kinds of oily matter (lard, marrow and clarified 
butter) and this medicated oil should be used for 
sprinkling over a wound of this type for the purpose of 
healing (Ropana). 28. 

Medical Treatment of Bhinna 

Henceforth we shall deal with the medical treatment 
of Bhiuua (excised) wounds. A case of an excised eye 
(Bhinna) should be given up as incurable. But in 
the case where an eye (ball) instead of being completel}* 
separated would be found to be dangling out (of its 

* For the complete elimination of the deranged Dojha r.e., puf, etc , 
of the wound invlovcd in the case — Jejjat.i. 

He who has got a wound on his back should be laid on his face and 
he who has got an ulcer on his breast should be laid on his back — 
DKTercul Reading Gayi. 



270 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. ir. 


socket) the affected organ should be re-instated in its 
natural cavity in a manner so as not to disturb the 
connected Siras (nerve arrangements) and gently pressed 
with the palms of the hand by first putting a lotus leaf 
on its (eye) surface. After that the eye should be filled 
(Tarpana) with the following (D.R,- Ajena in place of 
‘ Anena’ — i.e., prepared from goat’s milk) medicated 
clarified butter, which should be as well used in the 
form of an errhine. The recipe is as follows ; — Clarified 
butter prepared from goat’s milk, Madhuka, Utpala, 
fivaka and Rishavaka taken in equal parts should 
be pasted together, and cooked with sixteen seers of 
cow’s milk and four seers of clarified butter.* The 
use of the medicated Ghrita thus prepared should be 
regarded as commendable in all types of occular hurt or 
injury. 29, 

In the case of a perforation of the abdomen marked 
by the discharge of lumps or rope-like Varti (fat) 
through the wound, the emitted or ejected fat-lump 
should be dusted with the burnt ashes (D. R. — powders) 
of astringent woods (such as Marin, Arjuna, etc.) and 
black clay (pounded together). A ligature of thread 
should then be bou'id round the fat-lump and the fat- 
lump cut off with a heated instrument. Honey should 
then be applied and the wound (Vrana) should then 
be duly bandaged. The patient should be caused 
to drink clarified butter after the full digestion of his 
injested food. Instead of this Ghrita, milk prepared 

* Several authorities, however, say that equal parts of clarified 
butter prepared from goat’s milk and from cow’s milk should be taken and 
cooked with 16 seers of cow’s milk and with the four drugs as a Kalka. 

But Gayi recommends only four seers of clarified butter prepared from 
goiit’s milk cooked with l6 seers of cow’s milk and the four drugs as 
a. Kalka. 



Chap. II ] 


CHIKITSA STIIANAM, 


^.271 


medicinally with Yashti-inaddu, Ldkshd and Gokshuroy 
mixed with (a proper quantity of) sugar and castor oil 
(as Prakshepa)*, is equally commendable for the alle- 
viation of the pain and the burning sensation, (in the 
wound or ulcer). The fat-lump (pariental fat) afore- 
said causes a rumbling sound with pain in the abdomen 
and may prove even fatal in the event of its being left 
uncut. The medicated oil to be mentioned hereafter 
in connection with Medaja-Granthi should be applied 
in .such cases. 30-32 

Foreign bodies ^Salya) piercing into any of the 
Koshthas after having run through the (seven layers ofj 
skin, whether passing through the veins, etc , (muscles, 
nerves, bones or joints, or not, produces the distressing 
symptoms described before (Ch. III. — Sutra). The blood 
(of the affected chamber or receptacle) in such case lies 
incarcerated therein in the event of its failing to find an 
outlet and causes a paUor of the face and a coldness of the 
extremities and of the face in the patient. Respiration 
becomes cold, the eyes red-coloured, the bowels consti- 
pated and the abdomen distended. The manifestation 
of these sj'-mptoms indicates the incurable character of 
the disease. 33-34. 

• This expinnaiion is given on the authority of old Vdgabhata. 
Dallana, however, explains the verse in a different way. lie explains it 
to mean two different preparations of milk — one with Yashti-madhu and 
mixed with sugar and castor oil as a Prakshepa and the other with 
GoUshuta and mixed with Lakshd and castor oil as a Prakshepa. 

A third in'erpr.-tation would make three preparations of milk prepared 
separately with Yashti-madhu, Laksha and Gokshura — sugar and castor 
oil being mixed in the first (as Prakihepa) and castor oil alone in the 
second and third. 

A fourth prcp.aration would be to prepare the milk separately with 
Vasktimadhu, Laksha and Gokshura as in the preceding case — without the 
addition of castor oil (as Prakshepa). 



272 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap, II. 

Emesis is beneficial in the case where the blood 
would be found to be confined in the Am^s'aya 
(stomach). Purgatives should unhesitatingly be pre- 
scribed where the blood would be found to have been 
lodged in the PakvAs'aya (intestines) and Asthapana 
measures without oil should be employed with hot, 
purifying (Sodhana) substances (such as the cow-urine, 
etc.) The patient should be made to drink a Yavagu 
(gruel) with Saindhava salt and his diet should consist 
of boiled rice mixed with the soup of barley, Kola and 
Kulalttha pulse divested of oil. 35-36. 

In a case of a perforation or piercing of any of the 
bodily Koshthas attended with excessive haemorrhage 
or bleeding, the patient should be caused to drink (a 
potion of animal) blood and such a case marked by the 
passage of stool, urine, etc., through their proper channels 
of outlet and by the absence of fever and tympanites 
and other dangerous s^'^mptoms, (Upadrava), may end 
in the ultimate recovery of the patient. 37-38. 

In a case of a perforation of the Koshtha (abdomen) 
where the intestines have protruded or bulged out in an 
untorn condition, they should be gently re-introduced 
into the cavity and placed in their original position, 
and not otherwise. According to others, however, 
large black ants should be applied even to the perforat- 
ed intestines in such a case and their bodies should be 
separated from their heads after they had firmly bitten 
the perforated parts with their claws. After that the 
intestines with the heads of the ants attached to them 
should be gently pushed back into the cavity and re- 
instated in their original situation therein. The bulged 
out intestines should be rinsed with grass, blood and 
dust, washed with milk and lubricated with clari- 
fied butter and gently re-introduced into the cavity of 



Chap, n.] 


CHlklTSA STHANAM. 


2^3 


the abdomen with the hand with its finger nails cleanly 
paired. The dried intestines should be washed with mil 
and lubricated with clarified butter before introducing 
it into their former and natural place in the abdo- 
men. 39 - 4 ^- . ,, 

In a case where the intestines could be but partially 

introduced, the three following measures should^ be 
adopted. The interior of the throat of the patient 
should be gently rubbed with a finger [and the urging 
for vomiting thus engendered, would help the full 
introduction of the intestines into the abdominal casity]. 
As an alternative, he should be enlivened with sprays 
of cold water ; or he should be caught hold of by his 
hands and lifted up into the air with the help of strong 
attendants and shaken in a manner that would bring 
about a complete introduction of the intestines into 
the natuial position in the abdominal cavity. They 
should be so introduced as to press upon their specific 
(Maladhard) Kald (facia). 42-43. 

In a case where the re-introduction of the intes- 
tines into the abdominal cavity would be found to be 
difficult owing to the narrowness or largeness of the 
orifice of the wound, it should be extended or widened 
with a small or slight incisiona ccording to requirements, 
and the intestines re-introduced into their proper place. 
The oiifice or mouth of the wound should be forthwith 
carefully sutured as soon as the intestines would be 
found to have been introduced into their right place. 
Intestines dislodged from their proper seat, or not intro- 
duced into their correct position, or coiled up into a 
lump bring on death. 44-46. 

Subsequent Treatment : -[After the full 

and correct introduction of the intestines] the wound 
should be bandaged with a piece of silk-cloth saturated 

35 



is;4 TME siisriRUTA samiiita. icliap. ii. 

with clarified butter, and the patient should be given a 
draught of tepid clarified butter (D. R. tepid milk) with 
castor oil for an easy passage of the stool and downward 
coursing of the Vdyu (spontaneous emission of the flatus). 
Then, for its healing up (Ropana), a medicated oil, pre- 
pared with the bark of the Asvakarna, Dhava, S'dlmali, 
Mesha-s'i'ivgj, S'allaki, Arpnia, Viddri, and Kshiri trees 
and Vald roots should be applied to the wound.- For a 
year the patient should live a life of strictest conticence 
and forego all kinds of physical exercise, 47 — 48. 

The legs and the eyes of the patient should be 
washed and sprinkled with water in the event of the 
bursting out of the testicles which should be intro- 
duced into their proper place within the scrotum, and 
sewn up in the manner of a Tunna-sevani (raised seam). 
The scrotum should be bandaged in the shape of a 
Gopliansi-Vandlia and a restraining apparatus (Ghatta- 
Yantra) placed round the waist of the patient (to 
guard it against its oscillations or hanging down). The 
wound should not be lubricated with any kind of 
oil or Ghrita inasmuch as it would make the wound 
moist and slimy. The wound should be healed with a 
medicated oil prepared with Kdldjmsdri, Agitnt, Eld^ 
Jdti flower, Chandana, Padmaka, Ma 7 tahs' ild, Devaddf'tt, 
Amrita and sulphate of copper (pounded together). 49-50. 

A plug of hair should be inserted into a wound on 
the head, after having extracted the foreign matter 
therefrom, with a view to arrest the exuding of the- 
brain matter (Mastulunga) which invariably proves fatal 
to the patient through the aggravation of the deranged 
Vayn in consequence thereof. The hairs of the plug 
should be taken out one by one as the healing process 
progresses granulation). An oleaginous medicated plug 
or lint should be inserted into a wound on any other 



Chap. II 3 CHIKITSA STHANAM. 275 

part of the body, which should be treated with the 
measures and remedial agents laid down in connection , 
with a traumatic ulcer after having first allowed the 
vitiated blood to escape. 5 1-52 • 

The medicated oil known as the Chakra-taila* 
should be poured (frequently applied) by means of a 
slender pipe into an ulcer (wound) which is deep-seated 
but narrow-mouthed, after first letting out the vitiated 
bloodf. An oil duly prepared and boiled with Sainangd, 
Haridt Padmd^ Trha7'ga\ Tuttha, Vidanga, Katuka, 
Pathyd^ Guduchi and Karanja acts as a good healing 
(Ropana) agent (in these cases). The use of an oil 
prepared with Tdlis'a,Padmakay Mdnsi, Ha7'eii7i, AgU7ti, 
Cha7tda7iay and the two kinds of Harid7'd, Padma-vija, 
Us'h'a and Yashti-madhu acts as a good healing remedy 
in casfes of traumatic ulcers. $3-55 • 

A cut wound (Kshata) should be treated with its 
own specific measures and remedies, while a bruised 
one (Pichcliita) should be treated (to all intents and 
purposes) as a case of Bhagna (bone-fracture). The first 
treatment of a mangled or contused wound (Grhrishta) 
is to extinguish pain, after which it should be dusted 
with the powder of proper medicinal drugs (such as 
S' dla, Sarjtty A7jwia, etc.). 56-57. 

In the case of a dislocation of any part of the body, 
caused by a fall (from a tree), or in the event of having 
been run over or trampled down (Mathita— by a carriage 
or by a beast), or of being wounded (by a blow, etc.), 

* The oil jusl pressed out of an old oil. mill or squeezed out of the 
chips of wood belonging to an old one, in the manner of the Atru-taila 
to be described hereafter, is called the Ohakra-taila 

t The vitiated blood should first be let out for fear of putrefaction 
of the ulcer. 

$ Triphald, Trikatu and Trimada arc called Trivarga- 



2/6 


THE SUSIIRUTA SAMfllTA. 


[Chap. II,- 


thc- patient should be kept immersed in a large tank 
(Droni) of oil and the diet should consist of the soup or' 
essence (Rasa) of meat. A man fatigued (from the 
labours of a journey), or hurt at any of the Marinas, 
should be likewise treated with the preceding 
measures. 58. 

Oil or clarified butter should be always administered 
as drinks, washes or external healing applications for an 
ulcer-patient with a due regard to his temperament and 
the nature of the season. Medicated Ghritas, yet to be 
mentioned in connection with the medical treatment of 
a Pittaja abscess, should be used as well in the case of 
a traumatic ulcer (according to its respective indica- 
tions). A physician should wash a traumatic ulcer- 
attended with an aching pain either with a Vala-oil or 
tepid clarified butter (according to the nature of the 
season and the temperament of the patient).’^ 59 — 61. 

An oil cookQ<X\\\th.Samangd,Rajam, Padnid^Qh-irgl ), ' 
Pathyd, sulphate of copper, Suvarc/iald, Padinaka^ - 
Lodhra, Yashti-madJmka, Vidaiiga, Haixmika, Tdlisa- 
patra, Nalada {fatdmdnsi), (red) Chandana, Padma- 
kes'ara, ManjisJithd, Us'ira, Ldkshd, and the tender 
leaves of Kshiri trees, Piydla seeds, raw and tender 
Tinduha fruit, or with as many of them as would be - 
available, should be regarded as a good healing remedy 
in respect of all non-malignant traumatic sores or ulcers. ■ 
Applications of astringent, sweet, cooling and oily 
medicines should be used for a week in a case of a ■ 
traumatic ulcer (Sadyo-vrana), after which those men- 
tioned before, in the Chapter of Divraniya, should lae 
adopted 62 — 63. 

* With oil in autumn and in the case of a patient of Rakta-pitta 
temperament, and wi'h Vala-oil in winter and in the case of one of a Vata- 
kapha temperament. 



Chap, II.] ' CHIKITSA STHANAM. 277 

Treatment of Dushta-Vrana in the 

case of a malignant ulcer (Dushta-Vrana) emetics; 
errhines, purgatives, Aslhapana, fasting, specific sorts 
of diet (composed of bitter, pungent and astringent 
things) and blood-letting, should be prescribed (accord- 
ing to the requirements of each case). The ulcer or 
sore should be washed with the decoctions of the 
drugs of both the Aragvadhddi and the Surasddi ganas,' 
and an oil cooked with a decoction of the said’ 
drugs should be applied to the wound for [the' 
purification (Sodhana) thereof. As an alternative, an oil 
boiled and prepared in an alkaline water or solution' 
(four times that of oil) with a Kalka of alkaline 'subs-' 
tances (such as Ghantapiruli, PalAs'a, etc.) should be 
used for that end Oil cooked with Dravanii 
(Satamuli, according to certain authorities, Mushika- 
parni according to others), Chiravilva, Danti^ Chit- 
raka, Prithvikd Nimba-leaves^ Kdsisa, TtiUha, Trivrit, 
Tejovaii, Nili (indigo), the two kinds of Haridrd, 
Saindhava salt, Tila, Bhumi-Kadamha, Sti-vahd, S'tikd- 
khyd, Ldngaldhvd, Naipdli, Jdlini, Madayanti, 
Mrigddani, Sudhd, Mwvd, Arka, Kitdri^ Haritdla^ 
and Karanja, or with as many of them as would be 
available, should be used for the purification (of a malig- 
nant sore or ulcer). If found applicable, a medicated 
Ghrita prepared and cooked with the foregoing drugs 
and substances as Kalka should be used for the same 
purpose. In the case of a malignant ulcer, due to the 
aggravated Vayu, the purifying remedy should consist 
of a Kalka of Saindhava salt, Trivrit and castor leaves. 
In the case of a (malignant) Pittaja sore, the remedy 
should consist of a Kalka of Trivrit, Hatidrd, Yashti- 
madhti and Tila. In the case of a malignant ulcer, 
caused by the aggravated Kaplia, the purifying remedial 



2^8 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap, ir. 


agent should consist of Tila, Tejo/tvd, Dauti, Svarjikd 
and Chitmha roots. An ulcer brought on owing to the 
presence of the virus of Meha or Kushtba in the system, 
measures and remedies mentioned under the treatment 
of Dushta-vrana should be adopted and used, 64 — 6S. 

The recognised school of physicians, which recognises 
these six types of traumatic sores, does not add to the 
list, herein mentioned, other types of ulcers, whereas 
vain pedagogues tiy to swell it with a larger number of 
types by adding connotative prefixes and suffixes to the 
names of the aforesaid six. It is mere vain-gloriousness 
on their part to saj’- so, since all the other types that 
they can devise are but single instances and can be made 
to fall under one of these six general heads. Hence 
there should be only six kinds (of traumatic sores) and 
not more, 69. 

Thus ends the second Chapter of the Chikitsita Sthanam of the Sus'ruta 
Samhitd which deals with the treatment of Sadyo-vrana (traumatic sores). 



CHAPTER III. 


Now we shall discourse on the medical treatments 
of fractures and dislocations (BllB.g'nd.S). i. 

Metrical Texts : — A fracture or dislocation 
(Bhagna) occurring in a person of a Vdtika tempera- 
ment, or of intemperate habits, or in one who is sparing 
in his diet, or is affected with such supervening disorders 
(as fever, tympanites, suppression of the stool and urine, 
&c.) is hard to cure.* A fracture-patient must forego 
the use of salt, acid, pungent and alkaline substances 
and must live a life of strictest continence, avoid expo- 
sure to the sun and forego physical exercises and parchi- 
fying (devoid of oleaginous) articles of food. A diet 
consisting of boiled rice, meat-soup, milk, f clarified 
butter, soup of Satina pulse and all other nutritive and 
constructive food and drink, should be discriminately 
given to a fracture-patient. The barks of Udtmbara, 
Madlmka, As'vattha, Palds'a, Kaknbha, Bamboo, Vata 
or Sdla trees should be used as splints (Kusa). Manji- 
shthd, Madhuka, red sandal wood and Sdli-nc% mixed 
with S'ata-Dhauta clarified butter clarified butter 

* Jejjala does not read the first verse, but Gayi does. 

t As a general rule, milk should not be prescribed to a patient 
suffering from an ulcer (Vrana) in general ; but a case of fracture forms 
an exception thereto. Some authorities hold that tepid milk may be 
given to a fracture-patient, if there be no ulcer (Vrana). Others, on the 
contrary, are of opinion that milk should not, in any case, be given to a 
fracture-patient for fear of suppuration and the setting in of pus. 

Others, however, take “Kshira-sarpih” to be a compound word and 
explain the term to mean the clarified butter prepared from milk (as 
distinguished from that prepared from curd). 

But experience tells us that in cases of excessive weakness or emacia- 
tion, milk may be given without any hesitation— Ed. 



28 o 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMIIITA. 


[Chap. lii. 


washed one hundred times in succession) should be used 
for plastering the fracture. 2-6. 

Bandage Fractures should be (dressed and) 
bandaged once a week in cold weather, on every fifth 
day in temperate weather in spring and autumn), 
and on every fourth day in hot weather {{£., in summer), 
or the interval of the period for bandaging should be 
determined by the intensity of the Doshas involved in 
each individual case. An extremely loose bandage 
prevents the firm adhesion of a fractured bone, a light 
bandage gives rise to pain, swelling and suppuration 
of the local skin, Src. Hence in cases of fractures, 
experts prefer a bandage which is neither too tight nor 
too loose. 7-8. 

■ -Washings Acold decoction of the drugs of 
the Nyagi'odhddi group should be used in washing (the 
affected part), whereas in the presence of (excessive)' 
pain, (the part) should be washed with milk boiled with 
the drugs of the (minor) Pavcka-mula,ov simply with the 
dil'known as the Chakra-taila made lukewarm*. Cold (or 
warrn) lotions and medicinal plastei's(Pradehas)of Dosha- 
subduing drugs should be prescribed with due regard to 
the nature of the season and the Doshas involved in 
each case. 9-10. 

A preparation of milk from a cow, delivered for the 
first time, boiled with the drugs of the Madhurddi group 
and mixed with powdered shellac and clarified butter (as 
an afterthrow) should be given (when cold) to a fracture- 
patient as a beverage every morning. In a case of 

, In winter and where the aching pain is present due to Vayu and 
Kapha. 

•f Consisting of the drugs of the Kakoly^di group weighing two Tolas, 
milk sixteen Tolas, water sixty-four Tolas, boiled together with the w.ater 
entirely evaporated. 



Chap, ill.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 28 1 

fracture attended with ulcer on the part, an astringent 
plaster plentifully mixed with honey and clarified butter 
should be applied ; and the rest (diet and regimen of 
conduct) should be as laid down in the case of a (simple) 
fracture. 11-12. 

PrOgTlO^iS : -A case of fracture occurring in a 
youth or a person with slightly deranged Doshas or in 
winter, is held to be easily curable (with the help of the 
aforesaid medicines and diet). A fractured bone in a 
youth is joined by the aforesaid treatment in the course 
of a month, in two months in the case of a middle- 
aged man and in three months in one of old age. 13* 14* 

An elevated and fractured joint should be reduced by 
pressing it down, while one hanging down should be 
set by raising it up, by pulling it in the case of its 
being pushed aude, and by reinstating it in its upward 
(proper) position in the event of its being lowered down, 
An intelligent physician should set all dislocated (Bhagna) 
joints, whether fixed or movable, by the mode of 
reduction, known as Anchhana, Pidana, (pressure), 
Sankshepa and Vandhana (bandaging). 15-16. 

Treatment : — A crushed or dislocated joint 
should not be shaken {i.e., should be kept at rest) and 
cold lotions or washes and medicated plasters (Pradeha) 
should be applied to the part. A joint is spontaneously 
reset to its natural or normal state or position after the 
correction of its deformity incidental to a blow or hurt 
having been effected. The fractured or dislocated part 
should be first covered with a piece of linen soaked in 
clarified butter. Splint should then be placed over it 
and the part properly bandaged. 17-19. 

Treatment of fractures in particular 

limbs S— Now we shall discourse on the measures to 
be adopted in fractures occurring in each particular 

36 



282 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. III. 


limb. In the case of a nail-joint, being in any way 
crushed or swollen by the accumulation of the deranged 
blood (in the locality), the incarcerated blood should be 
first let out with the help of an awl (Ari) and the part 
should be plastered with a paste of SAli-rice. A finger or 
phalanx bone put out of joint or fractured should be first 
set in its natural position and bandaged with a piece of 
thin linen and should be then sprinkled over with 
clarified butter. In the case of a fracture in the foot the 
fractured part should be first lubricated with clarified 
butter, then duly splinted up, and bandaged with linen. 
Such a patient should forego all kinds of locomotion. 
In the case of a fracture of the knee-joint or thigh-bone 
the affected part should be lubricated with clarified 
butter and carefully pulled straight, after which it should 
be splinted with barks (of Nyagrodha, etc.) and band- 
aged \yith clean linen. In case of the fracture projecting 
out a thigh-bone should be reset with the help of a 
circular splint and bandaged. In the case of Sphutita 
(cracked) or Pichchita (bruised) thigh-bone, the part 
should be also bandaged in the aforesaid manner. 20-24. 

In a case of a fracture in the Kati (Ilium-bone), it 
should be reduced by the fractured bone being raised 
up or pressed down (as the case may be) and the patient 
should then be treated with Vasti (enematas of medicated 
oils or Ghritas^j. In the case of a fracture of one 
of the rib-bones (Pdrs'aka), the patient should be lubri- 
cated with clarified butter. He should then be lifted 
up (in a standing posture) and the fractured rib (bone), 
whether left or right, should be relaxed by being rubbed 
with clarified butter. Strips of bamboo or pad 

* In the Niddna-Sthana — Chap. XV., 9— it is stated that a case of 
fracture in the Kati should be given up (Varjjayet). Jejjata, however, 
explains “Varjjayet” as “hard to cure.” 



Chap. III.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


283 


(Kavalikd) should ba placed over it and the .patient 
should be carefully laid in a tank or cauldron full of 
oil with the bamboo splint .duly tied up with straps 
of hide. In the case of a dislocation of the Amsa- 
Sandhi (shoulder-joint), the region of the Kaksha 
(arm-pit) should be raised up with an iron-rod (Mushala) 
and the wise physician should bandage the part, thus 
reduced, in the shape of a Svastika (8-shaped) bandage. 
A dislocated elbow-joint should be first rubbed with 
the thumb, after which it should be pressed with a view 
to set it in its right place by fixing and expanding the 
same. After that the affected part should be sprinkled 
over with any oleaginous substance. The same measures 
should be adopted in the case of a dislocation of 
the knee-joint (Jdnu-sandhi), the wrist-joint (Gulpha- 
sandhi) and the ankle-joint (Mani-vandha). 25-29, 

In the case of fractured bones in the palms of the 
hands, the two palms'*-' should be made even and opposed, 
and then bandaged together and the affected parts should 
be sprinkled with raw and unmedicated oil (Ama-taila). 
The patient should be made later first to hold a ball of 
cow-dung, then a ball of clay and then a piece of stone 
in his palms and so on, with the progressive return of 
strength (to the affected parts). In a case of a fracture of 
the Akshaka, the affected part should be first fomented 
and then reduced by raising it up with a Mushala 
(iron-rod) in the arm-pit or by pressing it down (as the 
case may be) and should be firmly bandaged. A case 
of fractured arm-bone should be treated according 
to the directions given in the case of a fractured 
thigh-bone. 30-32, 

The text has "Ubht tale same kritvd,” Jejjata explains “Ubhe tale” 
to mean “palms of the hands and soles of the feet Gaya Dasa explains 
it to mean “the palms of both the hands." 



284 the SUSHRUTA SAMIIITA. tChap. 111. 

Iath3cas3of abending (twisting) or intussuscep- 
tion of the neck downward, the head should be lifted up 
by putting the fingers into the hollow (Avatu) above the 
nape of the neck and at the roots of the jaw-bones (Hanu/*. 
Then the part should be bandaged with a piece of linen 
after having evenly put the splint (Kus'a round the neck). 
The patient should be caused to lie constantly on his 
back for a week. In a case of a dislocation of the joints 
of the jaw-bones (Hanu\ the jaw-bones should be foment- 
ed and duly set in their right position, bandaged in the 
manner of a Panchdngi-vandha, and a Ghrita boiled 
and prepared with (the Kalka and a decoction of) the 
Madhura (K^kolyAdi) and Vdyu-subduing (Chavyddi) 
groups should be used as errhines by the patient. 33-34 

A tooth of a young person, not broken but loose, 
should be plastered with a cooling paste on its outside 
after having pressed out the accumulated blood at the 
root. The tooth should be sprinkled or washed with 
cold water and treated with drugs having Sandhdniya 
(adhesive) properties. f The patient should be caused 
to drink milk with the help of a lotus stem. The 
loose tooth of an old man should be drawn. A nose 
sunk down or depressed (by a blow) should be raised 
up with the help of a rod or director, while it should 
be straightened in a case of simple bending. Then 
two tubes, open at both ends, should be inserted into 
the nostrils (to facilitate the process of breathing) 
and the organ should be bandaged and sprinkled with 
clarified butter. In the case of (the cartilage of) the 
ear being broken, the organ should be rubbed with 

* According to Gayi, the lifting up of the head by putting fingers in 
the Avatu and in the Hantts should be made in cases of bending and 
intussusception of the neck respectively. 

t Honey, clarified butter, and drugs of the Nyagrodhadi group. 



Chap. III.] CHIKITSA STIIANAM 28$ 

clarified butter straightened, and evenly set in its 
right position and bandaged. Measures and remedial 
agents mentioned in connection with Sadyo-vrana, 
should be likewise adopted and employed in the present 
instance. 37. 

In a case of a fracture of the bone of the forehead 
unattended by any oozing out of brain matter, the 
affected part should be simply rubbed with honey and 
clarified butter and then duly bandaged. The patient 
should take clarified butter for a week 38. 

Cooling plasters and washes should be applied to a 
part of the body, swollen but not in any way ulcerated 
on account of a fall or a blow. In the case of a fracture 
of the bone in the leg and in the thigh, the patient should 
be laid down on a plank or board and bound to five 
stakes or pegs in five different places for the purpose 
of preventing any movements of his limbs. The 
distribution of the (bindings) pegs in each case should be 
as follows. In the first case (fractured leg-bone), two on 
each side of the two thighs making four and one on the 
exterior side of the enguinal region of the affected side. 
In the second case (fracture of knee-joint) two on each 
side of the ankle-joints making four and one on the side 
of the sole of the affected leg. The same sort of bed and 
fastenings should be used in cases of fractures and 
dislocations of the pelvic-joint, the spinal column, the 
chest and the shouldersi*. In cases of long-standing 
dislocations, the joint should be lubricated with oily or 
lardaceous applications, fomented and softened (with 

’ In Ihe case of such an emission or oozing out a plug of bristles or 
hiir as described in the preceding chapter and remedial agents laid down 
in connection therewith, should be used. 

t The principle of splintering and bandaging may be profitably 
compared with those followed in Agnut’s splint. 



286 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. III. 


pi’oper medicinal drugs) in the manner mentioned above 
in order to reduce it to its natural state. 39-40. 

In the case of a faulty union of a (fractured) bone 
lying between two joints (K^ada-bhagna), the union 
should be again disjointed, and the fractured bone should 
again be set right and treated as a case of ordinary 
fracture. In the case where a fractured bone would be 
found to have protruded out of the ulcerated part and 
dried, it should be carefully cut off near the margin of 
the (incidental) ulcer, (so as not to create a fresh ulcer on 
any other spot of the affected parti and subsequently 
treated as a case of fractural ulcer. A fracture occurring 
in the upper part of the body should be treated with 
applications of Mastikya-Sirovasti [oil-soaked pads on 
the head] and pourings of oil into the cavity of the ears. 
Potions of clarified butter,* errhines and Anuvdsana 
(enematas) should be prescribed in cases of fractures in 
the extremeties. 4i'43- 

Gandha-TaUa I — Now we shall discourse on 
the recipe of a medicated oil, capable of bringing 
about the union of fractured bones. A quantity of black 
sesamum-seeds (tied up into a knot with a piece of linen) 
should be kept immersed at night in a stream of running 
water and taken out and dried in the sun (for seven conse- 
cutive days). It should then be saturated with cow’s milk 
(at night and dried in the sun, during the second week). 
During the third week the sesamum-seeds should be 
saturated with a decoction of Yashti-madhu (at night) 
and dried in the sun the next day. Then (during 
the fourth week) it should be again saturated with cow's 
milk and dried and powdered. The said sesamum- 

* According to Jejjata, not, only Anuvdsana-enematas but potions of 
clarified butter and errhines also should be prescribed in cases of fractures 
in the extremeties. 



Chap. III.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


287 


powder and powder of the drugs^ constituting the 
Kikolyddi Gana as well as Yasthi-madhu, Manjishthd, 
Sdrivd, Kushtha, Sarja-rasa, Mdnsi, Deva-ddm, (red) 
Chandana, and S'atapushpd should be mijced together. 
Then a quantity of cow’s milk boiled with the aromatic 
drugs (of the Eladi group) should be used with the pre- 
ceding pulverised compound for the purpose of pressing 
out the oil therefrom. The oil thus pressed out’i should 
be boiled in four times the quantity of cow’s milk with 
the drugs such as E-ld^ S' dip ami, Tejapatra, Jtvaka^ 
Tagara, Rodhra, Prapaimdanka, Kdldmisdri, (Tagara), 
Saireyaka, Kshira-Viddri, Anantd, Madhulikd, S'ringd- 
taha, and those of the aforesaid list (Kdkolyddi group 
and Yasthi-niadJm, etc., up to S' atapushpd) pasted 
together. The oil should be duly cooked over a 
gentle fire and is called the Gandha-Taila. This oil 
should be administered with good results in possible 
ways (e.g., as potions, liniments, unguents and errhines) 
to a fracture-patient. Its efficacy is witnessed in cases 
of convulsions, hemiplegia, parchedness or atrophy of 
the palate, in Ardita (facial paralysis) as well as in 
Manyd-stambha (Paralysis or stiffness of the neck), 
in diseases of the head (cephalagia), in ear-ache in 
Hanu-graha, in deafness and in blindness and in 
emaciation due to sexual excesses. Administered in 
food or drink, or employed as a liniment, in Vasti-karma 
(enemata measures) or as an errhine, it acts as a 
sovereign restorative. Rubbed over the neck, chest 
and shoulders, it adds to the strength and expansion 
of those parts of the body, makes the face fair and 
lovely like a full-blown lotus and imparts a sweet 

* There should be three parts of sesamutn p'owder and one part of 
the powders of Kdkolyddi, Yashti-madhu, Manjishtha. etc. (combined). 
But Biva Dasa says that four parts of sesamum-powders should be taken. 



288 


THE SUSHRlfTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. lit. 


fragrance to the breath. It is one of the most powerful 
remedial agents in disorders of the aggravated Vd.yu 
(diseases of the nervous system). It may be used 
even by kings and for them it should be specially 
prepared. 44-45. 

The expressed oil of the seeds of the Trapusha, 
Aksha and Piydla should be cooked with a decoction of 
drugs of the Madhura group (Kdkolyddi gana) and with 
ten times the quantity of milk. A quantity of lard, if 
available, should be poured into it (during the process of 
cooking). It is an excellent medicated oil and used as 
a potion for anointing, and as an errhine, Vasti-karma 
and washes, it speedily brings about the union of 
fractured bones. 46. 

A physician should exert his utmost to guard against 
the advent of any suppurative setting in in a fractured 
bone, since a suppuration of the local veins, nerves and 
muscles is difficult to cure A complete union of a 
fractured joint should be inferred from its painless or 
unhurt character, from its full and perfect development 
(leaving no detectable signs of its once fractured con- 
dition), from the absence of all elevation (unevenness) 
and from its perfect freedom in flexion and expansion, 
etc. 47-48. 

Thus ends the third Cliapter of the Chikitsita Slhanam in the Sus'ruta 
Samhita which deals with the medical treatment of fractures and dis. 
locations. 



CHAPTER IV. 


Now we shall discourse on the medical tieatment of 
nervous disorders (Vata-vyadhi). i. 

IVIetrical Texts The patient having been 
made to vomit in the event of the deranged Vayu being 
incarcerated (lodged) in the AmaiSa/ya. (stomach), a 
pulverised compound known as the Shad-Dharana-yoga 
(a compound of six Dharanas or twenty-four Mashd 
weight) with tepid water should be administered to him 
for seven days. A compound made up of Chitraka^ 
Indra-yava, Pdthd, Katuka, Ativishd, Abhayd (taken 
in equal parts) together is known as the Shad- 
Dharana-yoga^ and contains the properties of sub- 
duing an attack of Vdta-vyddhi. 2-3. I 

In the event of the aggravated Vdyu being incar- 
cerated in the Pakvdsaya • intestines), purgatives of fatty 
matters (Sneha-Virechana, i.e ,Tilvaka-Sarpih,etc.), and 
Sodhana- Vasti of purifying drugs (with decoctions and 
Kalka of fatty matters) and diet (Prds'a) abounding in 
sallf or saline articles should be prescribed , In the case 
of the aggravated Vdyu being incarcerated in the Vasti 
(urinary bladder), diuretic (lit. bladder-cleansing) 
measures and remedial agents should be resorted to. 
Anointing with medicated oils, Ghritas, etc., application 
of poultices (Upandha) compounded of Vayn-subduing 
diugs, massage, and plasters (Alepa) of similar pro- 
perties are the remedies in cases where the aggravated 
Vayu is lodged in the internal ducts or channels such 


One Dharana is equal to four Mashas. 

+ Sneha-Lavana and Kanda-Lavana, etc. 


37 



^90 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. iV. 

as the ears, etc,, of the body.' Blood-letting (vene- 
section) is the remedy where the aggravated VAyu 
would be found to be confined in the skin, flesh, 
blood or veins (Sirds). Similarly, application of fatty 
matters (Sneha), actual cauterization, massage, appli- 
cation of poultices and binding of ligatures should be the 
remedies where the aggravated Vdyu would- be found 
to have become involved in the Snsiyu (ligaments), joints 
and bones Where the aggravated Vayu would be 
found to have become situated in the bone, the skin and 
flesh of that part of the body should be perforated with 
a proper surgical instrument (Ara-Sastra) and the under- 
lying bone should be similarly treated with an awl. A 
tube open at both ends should be inserted into the 
aperture, thus made, and a strong physician should suck 
the aggravated Vdyu from out of the affected bone by 
applying his ^ mouth to the exteiior open end of the 
tube.- 4-9. 

In the case of the aggravatd Vflyu having contamin- 
ated the semen, measures and remedies for seminal dis- 
orders (Sukra-dosha)* should be employed. The intelligent 
(physician) would take recourse to measures, such as 
blood-letting, immersion or bath in a vessel (full of Vayu- 
subduing decoctions), fomentation with heated stones, as 
well as in the manner of Karshu-Sveda, vapour-bath in 
a closed chamber (Kuti sveda), anointment, Vasti- 
Karmas, etc., in the event of the aggravated Vdyu having 
extended throughout the whole organism ; whereas 
bleeding by means of a horn (cuffing) should be 
regarded as the remedy when the aggravated Dosha 

* Treatments, such as, the purification of the semen, etc., and the use 
ol medicin.s for making Aphrodisia (Vaji-karana) and for the remedy 
of the disordered urinary organ (Multa-dosha) should be adopted and 
employed. 



Chap. IV.] 


CHIKITSA STMANAM.- 


291 


would be found to have been confined in any parti u!ar 
part of the body.* 10-12. 

In the event of the aggravated Vayu being connected 
either with the Pitta or the Kapha, .such a cotir.se of treat- 
ment should be adopted as would not be hostile to the 
two other Doshas. Blood-letting (in small quantities) 
should be resorted to several times in a case of 
complete eenesthesia (Supta-Vata) and the body should 
be anointed with oil mixed with salt and chamber-dust 
(Agara-dhuma) Milk boiled with a decoction of the 
drugs of the Pancha-mula group, acid-fruits (Phalamla), 
meat-soup or soup of (well-cooked) corn (Dhdnya) 
with clarified butter are beneficial in cases of Vata- 
roga. 13-15. 

^'alvana-Upanaha : — A poultice composed 
of the drugs of the Kdkolyadi group, the Vayu-sub- 
duing drugs (those of Bhadra-ddrvddi and Viddri- 
gandhddi groups), and all kinds of acid articlesf (such as, 
Kdnjika, Sauvira, fermented rice-gruel, etc.), the flesh of 
animals which live in swamps (Anupa) or in water 
(Audaka)l', oil, clarified butter and all kinds of 
lardaceous substances, mixed together and saturated 
with a profuse quantity of salt and then slightly heated 
is known by the name of Sa'lvana. A person suffering 
from any form of Vdta roga should be always treated 
with such Sdlvana poultices (Upandha). The poultice 
should be applied to such part of the body as is 

* It is to be understood that measures and remedies laid doivn 
under the head of Sarvdnga-gata should be used when the Vayu 
would be found to be diffused throughout the whole organism instead of 
being confined to any specific part. 

t According to others it means all kinds of acid-fruits, etc. 
i Chakradatla reads (well-cooked with the flj.h 

t e ' 

of “Anupa" animals) in place of I 



292 TJ'E SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. IV. 

numbed, painful or contracted and the affected part 
should be fiimly bandaged thereafter with a piece of 
Kshauma* linen ( r woollen cloth. As an alternative, 
the affected part should be plastered (and well rubbed) 
with the ingredients of the Sdlvana-Upanaha and inserted 
into a bag made of cat or mungoose skin or that of a 
camel or deer hide. i6. 

The aggravated Va}^!, if located in the shoulders, the 
chest, the sacrum [Trika) or the Manyd, should be subdued 
by emetics and errhines judiciously employed. Siro-Vasti 
should be applied to the head of the patient as long as it 
would take one to utter a thousand M^trds (a short vowel 
sound), more or less, as the case may require, where the 
aggravated VAyii would be found to have located itsellf 
in the head, (if necessary) blood-letting should be 
resorted to. As a mountain is capable of obstructing the 
passage of the wind, so the Sneha-Vasti (oily enema) is 
alone capable of resisting the action of the aggravated 
Vjtyu whether it extends throughout the whole system 
or is confined to a single part. 17-19 

IVieasures beneficial to Vata-Vyadhi: 

■ — An application of Sneha, fomentations, anointment of 
the body, Vasti, oily purgatives, Siro-vasti, the rubbing of 
oils on the head, oily fumigation, gargling with tepid oil, 
oily errhines, the use of meat-soup, milk, meat, clarified 
butter, oil and other lardaceous articles (of food), all 
kinds of acid fruits, salt, lukewarm washes, gentle 
massage, the use of saffron, Agwa^ Patra, Ktishtha, Eld, 
Tagara, the wearing of woollen, silken, cotton or any 
other thick kind of garments, living in a warm room or 
in one not exposed to the wind or in an inner chamber, 
the use of a soft bed, basking in the glare pf fire, entire' 
sexual abstinence, these and such like other things 

* Sopie read it as Valka, t.e., raade up bark. 



Chap. IV ] 


CIIIKITSA STHANAM. 


293 


should be generally adopted by a patient suffering from 
Vata-roga 20. 

The Tilvaka-Ghrita A paste (Kalka) of 
the following drugs, viz, Trivrit, Dnnti, Suvarna-kshtri, 
Saptald, S amkhini, 1 riphald 2 iVi<\ each weigh- 

ing an Aksha vtwo tolas), and Tilvaka-roots and 
Kampillaka, each weighing a Vilva (eight tolas), a 
decoction of Triphala and curd, each weighing two 
Patras •' tthirt3'-two seers) and clarified butter, weighing 
sixteen seers, should be duly cooked together. Medical 
authorities recommend this Tilvaka- Ghiila as an oily 
purgative in cases of Vata-roga. As'oka-Ghrita and 
Ramyaka-Ghrita ate prepared in the same manner, (viz., 
bj’' substituting As'oka and Ramyaka respectively for 
Tilvaka). 21. 

The Anu-Taila : — The log of a long-standing 
wooden oil-mill should be cut into small chips and then 
thrashed and boiled in water in a large cauldron. The 
globules of oil that will be found floating on the surface 
of the boiling water should be skimmed off either with 
the hand or with a saucer. The oil thus collected 
should then be cooked with the Kalka of Vayu-subduing 
drugs as in the preparation of a medicated oil. This 
oil is known as the Anu-Taila- The use of this oil has 
been advised by medical authorities in cases of Vdta- 
roga. This oil is so named from the fact of its being 
pressed out of small chips of oily wood (as described 
above). 22. 

The Sahasra-paka-Taila !— The wood 
of drugs belonging to the group of Maha-pancha-mula 
should be collected in large quantities and burnt on a 

' P.atra nie.ins 64 P.-iIa?, i e. , 8 sect':, but in cases of liquids the 
weight should be doubled. 



294 


THE SUSIIRUTA SAMIIITA. 


fChap IV. 


plot of land, so as to make the soil black. The fire 
should be kept burning one whole night ; on the 
following morning on the extinction of the fire the ashes 
should be removed and the ground, when cool, should 
be soaked with one hundred Ghatas (six thousand and 
four hundred seers; of oil cooked with the drugs of 
the Viddri-gaiidhddi group and with the same quantity 
of milk and kept in that condition for one night more. 
On the next morning the earth should be dug up, down 
to the stratum found to have been soaked with the oil 
and the soil should then be dissolved in warm water in 
large cauldrons for the purpose. The oil that will be 
found floating on the surface of the water should be 
skimmed off with both hands and kept in a safe basin. 
Then the decoction of the Vayu-subduing drugs (the 
Bhadra-d^rvadi group), meat-juice, milk, fermented rice- 
gruel (each taken in a quantity measuring a quarter 
part of that oil) should be taken one thousand times 
and each time should be boiled with the oil. V^yu- 
subduing and aromatic drugs and spices, in the northern 
(^trans-Himdlaya) and southern (Deccan) countries, should 
be thrown into it and boiled with the oil. The boiling 
should be completed within the period during which it 
could be properly done. Then after the completion of 
tne cooking, conch-shells should be blown, Dundubhis 
should be sounded, umbrellas should be held open, 
chowries should be blown into it and a thousand 
Brahmins should be treated with repasts. The oil so 
sacredly prepared should be stoi'ed carefully in golden, 
silver or earthen pitchers. This oil is called the 
Sahasrapatka-Taila and is of irresistible potency and 
fit even for the use of kings. Satapa'ka-Taila is also 
prepared in the above manner (with the aforesaid ingre- 
dients) by cooking it one hundred times only. 23. 



chap. IV,] 


CIIIKITSA STIIANAM. 


295 


The Patra-Lavana The green leaves of the 
Eranda plants and those of the trees known as Mnsh- 
kaka, Naktamdla, Atarus/iaka, Pniika, Aragvadha and 
Chitraka should be thrashed with (salt of equal quantity) 
in an Udukhala (a hand thrashing mill) and placed in 
an earthen pitcher, saturated with oil or clarified butter. 
Having covered the mouth of the pitcher with a lid, it 
should be plastered and burnt in fire of cow-dung. 
The medicine thus prepared (with the help of internal 
heat) is called the Patra-Lavaua. Medical experts 
advise the application of this medicine in cases of 
Vata-roga. "4. 

The Kanda-Lavaiia Similarly, Snuhi- 
twigs, Brinjal (Vdrtdku), and S' igru-hdLxk (taken in 
equal parts) and rock-salt (of equal weight as the entire 
drugs) should be thrashed and kept in a pitcher. Oil, 
clarified butter, lard and marrow should be added to 
it equal in weight with salt and then having covered 
the mouth of the pitcher with a lid, it should be plaster- 
ed and burnt in a fire of cow-dung (as before). The 
use of this medicated salt which is called the Katnda- 
Lavana or Sneha-Lavana is recommended by experts 
in VAta-roga. 25. 

The Kalyanaka-Lavana The follow- 
ing drugs with their roots, leaves and twigs, viz., 
Gandira, Paldsa, Kntaja, Vilva, Arka, Snuhi, Apd- 
inarga, Pdiald, Pdribhadra, Nddeyi, Krishnagandhd 
Nipa, Niinba, Nirdahani, Atarushaka, Nakta-indlaka, 
Puttka, Viihati, Kantikari, Bhalldtaka, Ingudi, Baija- 
yanii, Kadali, Varshdbhu, Hrivera, KsJiuraka, Indra- 
vdriuii, Svetamokshnka and Asoka should be gathered in 
a green condition and mixed with (as large a quantity 
of) rock-salt and having thrashed them in an Udukhala 
should be burnt in a hermetically sealed pitcher as 



ig6 THE SUSIIRUTA SAMlIItA. iChap. IV. 

above, after which it should be filtered (twenty times) 
and boiled in the manner of alkaline preparations At 
the close of the boiling, powders'*' of the drugs of the 
Hingvddi or Pippaly<adi group should be mixed with 
it. This medicine is called the Kala'yiiaka-Lavana and 
is specially efficacious in all cases of Vata-roga and 
is applicable both in food and drink in cases of Gulma, 
enlarged spleen, impaired digestion, indigestion, hce- 
morrhoids, intestinal worms, aversion to food and 
cough. 26 

Memorable Verse;— The remedy proves 

efficacious in VAta-roga through its heat-making potency, 

power of liquifying and secreting the deranged Doshas 

and of restoring and correcting them as well. 27. 

* 

Thus ends the fourth Chapter of the Chikitsita Sthanam in the 
Sus'ruta Samhita which deals with the treatment of "VdlaA yadhi. 

* The total weight of these powders should be one-fourth of the 
weight of the rock-salt taken in the course of the preparation. — Dallana, 



CHAPTER T. 

No\V we shall discourse on the chapter which deals 
with the medical treatment of TWaVi^-Vata- 
Vyadhi. i-. 

Several authorities group the disease Vafa-Rakta 
under two different sub-heads, such as superficial and 
deep-seated. But such a classification is arbitrary and 
unscientific, inasmuch as this disease first manifests 
itself on the surface (layer of the skiii) like ICushtha and 
gmduaUy invades the deepbr tissues of the body. Hence 
there are ho (two) forihs of this disease; i-2; 

Clauses of Vata-Rakta The VayU of 
the bddy is enraged or agitated by such causes as 
wrestling with a man of superior and uncommon physical 
strength, etc.', while the blood is vitiated by siich causes 
as constant over-eating of edibles which are of difficult 
digestion arid heat-making in their potency or ingestion 
of food before the digestion of the previous meal. The 
Vayu thus eriraged and agitated enters into the blood- 
carrying channels of the body and being obstructed 
in its passage, become^ mixed with the vitiated blood. 
The deranged Vayu and the blood thus combine to give 
rise to a disease characterised by the specific symptoms 
of oath, which is known as VsCta-Rakta. The charac- 
teristic pain, which at first confines itself to the extre- 
mities, gradually ejctends over the whole body. 

Premonitory symptoms of Vata- 
Rakta : —The disease is ushered in with a pricking 
pain, a burning and an itching sensation (in the affected 
part), a swelling, roughness and numbness (anesthesia) 
of the diseased locality, throbbing of the veins, ligaments, 

38 



298 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. V. 

nerves and arteries, a weakness in the thighs and sudden 
appearance of red or brownish circular patches on the 
palms of the hands and soles of the feet, fingers and heels, 
etc., (A. R. — wrists). If neglected and immoderately 
treated in its premonitory stages, the disease soon 
develops its characteristic symptoms in succession, which 
have been described before ; whereas (a lifelong) defor- 
mity (of the affected part) is the penalty for neglecting 
it (in its fully patent or devoloped stage). 3. 

Memorable Verse : — Men of a mild and deli- 
cate constitution, as well as those who are (inordinately) 
stout or sedentary in their habits or are addicted to 
unwholesome and incompatible food, etc., are generally 
found to be susceptible to an attack of Vatta-Bakta. 4 - 

Prognosis : — A physician is advised to take in 
hand the medical treatment of a Vdta-Rakta-patient 
who has as yet not lost much strength and muscle, nor is 
afflicted with thirst, fever, epileptic fits, dyspnoea, cough, 
numbness (of the affected part), aversion to food, indi- 
gestion, extension and contraction of the limb, as well 
as of a person who is strong and temperate in his living 
and can afford to pay for the diet and other necessary 
accessories of the treatement. 5. 

Preliminary remedial measures In 

the first stage of the disease the blood, having become 
vitiated owing to its being obstructed in its course (by 
the unusually agitated Vdyu in the system), should be 
gradually and not profusely bled, except when the body 
would be found to have become extremely dry or to have 
lost its natural healthful glow or complexion through the 
action of the aggravated morbific principle (Vdyu), for 
fear of further aggravating the Vdyu. Emetics, purga- 
tives, and Vasti (enemas), etc., should be administered 
and the patient should be made to take a diet consisting 



Chap, V.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


299 


of old and matured clarified butter (and boiled rice), in 
the case where the aggravated condition of the deranged 
Vdyu would be found to predominate. As an alternative, 
he should be made to drink a potion consisting of goat’s 
milk mixed with half its quantity of oil, with two Told 
weight of Yashti-inadhu or goat’s milk cooked with 
Pris'niparni (two Told weight) with honey and sugar 
(added after cooking), or cooked with S’unthi, S'ringd- 
taka, and Kas'eriika, or cooked with S’ydmd, Rdsnd, 
Sushavi, Pris’niparni, Pilu, S’atdvari, S’vadamshtrd and 
Das’a-mula. 6. 

Oil. cooked with the addition of milk previously 
boiled with the decoction of Das'a-mnla of eight times 
its own weight and a Kalka of Madhuka, Mcsha-s’ringi 
(A. R. Sdrngashtd), S'vadamshtrd, Sarala, Bhadra-ddru, 
Vachd and Surabhi pasted together, should be adminis- 
tered in drinks, etc., (viz., anointment, sprinkling, etc,\ 
As an alternative, the oil cooked with the decoction of 
S'atdvari, Mavtiraka, Madhuka, Kshira-Viddri, Vald, 
Ati-vald and Trina-pancha-mjila, with the paste of the 
drugs belonging to the Kdkolyddi group, or the oil^ 
cooked with the decoction and a Kalka of Vala for 
a hundred times should be prescribed for the patient. 
The affected part should be washed with the milk, boiled 
with the roots of the VAta-hara (VAyu-subduing) drugs 
(f.c., Das'a-mula), or simply with Amla feruel, etc.), or 
a plaster composed of barley, Madhuka, Eranda (castor) 
and Varshdhhu (pasted together and heated), should be 
applied to the part. 7. 

Plasters, etc. Barley, wheat, sesamura, 
Mudga pulse aud MAsha pulse should be taken in equal 

* According to Jejjata Acharyya, the “ Val.-i-Taila ”, which is 
administered in the medical Ueatment of Mudha-gatbha, should be 
prescribed in this case. 



300 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap,' V. 


parts and pounded separately ; and the paste of the 
following drugs, viz., KdkoU, Kshira-kdkoli, Jivaka, 
Rishabhakay Vald, Ati-vald, Visa-mrindla (lotus stem), 
Pris’iiiparni, Mesha-s*riiigi, Piydla, S' arkard (sugar), 
Kas'entka, Surabhiy and Vachd should be mixed with 
each of the preceding powders and each of these 
compounds (so formed) should be boiled with milk, 
oil, lard, marrow and clai'ified butter. The five 
compounds, thus prepared, are called p^yasas, which 
should be applied as a hot poultice (Upandha) to 
the affected part ; or an Utkarik^, made of the pul'p 
of oily fruit (seeds) (prepared by cooking them with 
milk) should be applied ; or powders of wheat, barley, 
sesamum, Mudga pulse, or MAsha pulse, and Ves'avara, 
made of various kinds of fish and' flesh, should be used 
as a plaster* Vilvapcs'ikd, Tagara, Deva-ddju, S avoid, 
Rdsndy H'arenUy Kmktha, S'atO'pnshpd, Eld, Surd and 
cream of milk-eurd' pasted together, should be ai)plied 
to the affected part as a plaster (Upansiha'. As an 
alternative, the expressed juice of Matulunga, mixed- with 
Kanjika, Saindhava salt and clarified butter, pasted to- 
gether with the root of the diadhu-s'igru and with sesa- 
mum, -f should be used in a similar way. The preceding- 
remedies should be administered in a case of Vs^ta-Rakta 
maiked by a preponderance of the aggravated' Vayu. 8. 

V^ta-Rakta with a preponderance 
of Pitta : — In cases of Vdta-Rakta whore the Pitta 
preponderates, the patient should be made to dHnk a 
potion consisting of a decoction of Drdkshd, Aragvadka, 
Katphala, Kshii'a-viddri, Yashti-madhu, Chandana and 
Kds marya sweetened with a quantity of sugar and honey. 

* Such'as-sesamura, castorFSeed, linseed,, 'Vil^hitaka-seeds,, eta. 

t Some say that a. paste of sesamum only should be, used! a- 
i separate plaster. 



Chap. V,} 


CIIIKITSA STHANAM. 


301 


As an alternative, a decoction of S'atdvari, Yashti- 
madhu, Patola, Triphald, and Katu-rohini, ora decoction 
of Guditchi, or a decoction of the drugs belonging to the 
Chandanfidi group, which are possessed, of virtues for 
allaying pittaja fever, should be administered to the 
patient, sweetened with sugar and honey. Clarified 
butter, cooked and prepared with a decoction of bitter 
and astringent drugst also proves beneficial in such 
cases. 9. 

The affected part should be washed (Parisheka) with 
a decoetkn of Visa-mrindla, Chandana and Padmaka 
(^taken in equal parts and} mixed with half its quantity 
of milk. As an alternative, the affected part should’ be 
sprinkled with a compound composed of milk, the 
expressed juice of Iksliu (sugar-cane), honey, sugar, and 
washings of rice (taken in equal parts) ; or witli curd- 
cream, honey, and Dhanydmla (fermented paddy-gruel)) 
mi.xcd with a decoction of grapes and Ikshu ; or the 
affected part should be anointed with clarified butter 
cooked with the drugs of the Jivani5'-a group, or withthe 
clarified butter washed a hundred times in water, or 
with clarified butter cooked with the Kalka of the 
KakolyAdi group. 10. 

Pradcha (plaster) composed of S'dli, Shashfika, A^ala, 
Vanjtda, Tdlis’a, S'rigdiaka, Galodya, Haridrd, Gairika, 
S'akxda, Padmn-kdshtha, leaves of padvia (lotus),, pasted 
with DhduydmJa and mixed with clarified butter, should 
be applied to the affected part. This plaster (Ptadeha) 
may be applied lukewarm even in cases of VAta-Rakta, 
marked by a preponderance of the aggravated Vayu. 
All the remedial measures (laid down above) ma)’' also 

* D. R. — Stt’cel, bitter, and astringent drugs. 

Litter drugs — Patoladi group ; Kashdya drugs — Triphaladi group ; 
sweet drugs — Kakolyddi group. 



302 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. V. 


be advantageously applied in cases marked by a pre- 
ponderance of the vitiated blood, with this exception 
that cold plasters and repeated blood-lettings should 
be resorted to in the latter (Raktaja-Vdta-Rakta). ii. 

V^ta-Rakta with a preponderance 

of Kapha!— Incases where the Kapha preponderates, 
the patient should be made to drink a potion consisting 
of a decoction of Haridrd and Ainalaka, sweetened with 
honey ; or a decoction of Triphald, or a Kalka of 
MadJmka, S'ringavera, HaHtaki and Tikta-rohini mixed 
with honey. As an alternative, Haritaki and treacle 
with either cow’s urine or water, should be given to him. 

The affected part or limb should be sprinkled or 
washed with cow’s urine, oil, alkaline water. Surd, Sukta, 
or with a decoction of Kapha-destroying drugs. A hot 
decoction of the drugs constituting the Aragvadhddi 
group may be used with benefit in sprinkling the 
affected part. The body of the patient should be lubri- 
cated or anointed with clarified butter, boiled with 
the cream of milk-curd, cow’s urine, wine, S'ukta and 
with the Kalka of Yashti-madJm, Sdfdvd and Padina- 
kdshtha. A plaster (Pradeha), composed of pounded 
sesamum, mustard seed, linseed and barley (taken in 
equal parts) and mixed and pasted with S'les/imdiaka, 
Kapittha,Madhu-s'igniz.xi 6 .zo'iPs urine, and Yava-kshdra 
should be applied (hot to the seat of the disease). 12-13. 

The Five Pradehas (i) A paste of white 
mustard seed, (2) that of sesamum and As'vagandhd, 

(3) a similar paste of Piydla, S'elu and Kapittha bark, 

(4) that of Madhti-slgm, Punarnavd and (5) a paste of 
Vyosha, Tiktd, Prithakparni and Vrihati, these five 
kinds of Pradehas should be separately pasted with 
alkaline water and (any of them) applied lukewarm to 
the affected locality. 14. 



Chap. V.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


303 


As an alternative, a plaster composed S'dlaparni, 
Pris’niparni, Vrihati and Kantakdri, pasted together 
with milk and mixed with Tarpana,* should be applied 
(to the seat of the disease). In cases of Vdta-Rakta 
involving the concerted action of two or three of the 
Doshas, the remedy consists in applying such drugs in 
combination as are possessed of the efficacy of subduing 
the action of each of them. 15. 

Guda-Haritaki and Pippali-Vardha- 
mana Yogas \'—Haritaki with treacle may be used 
in all types of Vdta-Rakta. As an alternative, the 
patient should be enjoined to use Pippali^ pasted with 
milk or water, every day (in the following way).-|* The 
number of Pippali should be increased by five or ten 
respectively on each successive day till the tenth day of 
its use ; after which period the number of Pippali should 
be decreased (by a similar number) on each successive 
day till it is reduced to the original five or ten. The 
patient should live on a diet of milk and rice only (during 
the entire course of this treatement). This medicine 
which is known as the Pippali-Vard.hainE(na,|: proves 
efficacious in cases of Vdta-Rakta, chronic fever 
(Vishama-Jvara), aversion to food, jaundice, enlarged 
spleen, piles, cough, asthma, oedema, phthysis, loss of 
appetite, heart-disease and ascitis. 16. 

Clarified butter, cooked in milk with the paste of 
the drugs of the Jivaniya group, should be used in 

• Flout of barley or fried grain, dissolved in water, is known as 

Tarpana. 1 

t The dosage should begin originally with five or ten Pippalis according 
to the strength of the patient. 

t Mahatshi Charaka mentions this Toga in the chapter on Rasayana 
and prescribes it also in the treatement of Udara. Chakradatta mentions 
the use of this medicine in the treatment of liver and spleen and of 
fever. 



3D4 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. Chap. V. 

anointing (the body of the patient). A plaster, composed 
of Saha, Sahadcvd, Chajidana, Mmird, Mustd, Piydla, 
S'atdvari, Kas'eru, P adnia-kdstha Yashti-madhu, S'ata- 
piiihpd (A. D. Vidari) and Kushtha, pasted together with 
milk and mixed with the cream of clarified butter, should 
be applied (hot) lo the affected locality. A plaster 
composed of Saireyaka, Atanishaka, Vald, Ati-vald 
Jivanti and Sushavi, pasted together with the milk of a 
shh-goat, Should be like\vise applied (to the seat of the 
disease). As an alternative, the diseased locality should 
be plastered with the pastes of Kds’marya, Yas/iii- 
madhu and Tarpana mixed together ; or it should be 
treated with Pinda-Taila, prepared b}’’ cooking Madhn- 
tluhhishta (bee’s wax), Manjiihthd, resin, and Ananta- 
mnla in milk* (and oil taken together)i 17-20. 

In all cases of Vdta-Rakta, old and matured clarified 
butter boiled with the expressed juice of Amalaka 
should be prescribed as drinks. The affected part 
should be washed or sprinkled with old and matured 
clarified butter, boiled with a decoction and paste 
(Kalka) of the drugs belonging to the Kdkolyddi gi'oup, 
or with those of the Jivaniya group, or with the decdc- 
tion of Sushavi, or of Kdravellakai The Vala-Tailat 
should be used for sprinkling and immersing purposes, 
and as drink and Vasti-karma (enemas)# 

DiC't : — The diet should consist of articles made 
of old and matured S'dli or Shashtika rice, wheat or 
barley, taken with milk \ or with the soup of Mudga 

* Milk four times of oil should be taken. 

t The “Vdld-Taila” described in th^ medical treatment of Mudha- 
garbha, ch. XV. 

J III the case of Vata-rdga with preponderant Pitta, the patieht should 
take the food with milk ; in the preponderance of Vdyu, with the sOup of 
Jangala taeat; and in the pfeponderance of Kajlha, with Mddga-soup, 
devoid of any acid combination. 



Chap, V.] 


CHIKITSA StHANAlSl. 


30 $ 


pulse or flesh of Jdngala animals and devoid of any 
acid combination.* 2I. 

Frequent blood-letting should be resorted to and 
measures, such as, emetics, purgatives, Asthapana and 
Anuvasana should be adopted in cases of the aggravated 
Doshas-f (involved in the case). 22. 

Memorable Verses A case of Vdta- 
Rakta of recent growth, proves readily amenable to the 
remedial measures described before. , Long-standing, i.e., 
chronic cases (of -Vdta-Rakta) are never perfectly cured, 
but can only be palliated. The application of poul- 
tices (Upanaha), of medicinal washes or sprinkles (Pari- 
sheka), hot-plasters, anointings (Abhyanga), spacious 
and comfortable bed-chambers which do not admit of 
too large an influx of air, shampooing, and the use 
of soft and pleasant beds and soft pillows, are chiefly 
recommended in a case of Vata-Rakta ; whereas physical 
exercise, sexual intercourse, display of anger, the use of 
heat-making, saline, acid and difficultly digestible food 
and eatables producing effuse serus or slimy matter in 
the bodily channels, and sleep in the day-time (should 
be deemed extremely injurious and hence) should be 
studiously refrained from. 23. 

The Medical Treatment of Apatsi- 

naka : — The medical treatment of a patient suffering 
from Apatsinaka (hysterical convulsions), not exhibiting 
fixedness of gaze and arched eye-brows, with an absence 

* In the case of Vdta.roga, with a preponderance of Pitta, the patient 
should take his food with milk ; in the preponderance of Vayu, with the 
soup of Jangala meat; and in the preponderance of Kapha, with Mudga- 
soup, devoid of any acid combination. 

t In the preponderance of Kapha, emetics should be employed ; in 
the preponderance of Pitta, purgatives should be given ; and in the pre- 
ponderance of Vayu, Anuvasana and Asthapana measures should be 
resorted to. 


39 ' 



^3b6 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tChap. V. 

of perspiration, quivering, delirium and the numbness 
of genitals, found not to fall on the ground but capable 
of being supported on his arms (Akhatta-pati) and whose 
trunk is not bent or arched on its posterior (dorsal) side 
^Vahirdy^ma), may be attempted (with success). The body 
of the patient should be first anointed with emulsions 
(Sneha) and then fomented ; strong medicated snuff 
should then be administred for purifying (the accumu- 
lated mucus in) the head. After that the patient should 
be made to drink a clear potion prepared of clarified 
butter, cooked in combination with a decoction of the 
drugs constituting the Vidari-gandhadi group, extract 
of meat, milk and milk-curd, so as to arrest the further 
expansion of the deranged Vdyu into the system. 

Traivrita Ghrita : — ’A decoction of the Vdyu- 
subduing drugs, such as, Bhadra-ddi-vddi, etc., barley, 
Kulattha pulse. Kola, and the flesh of the Anupa and 
Audaka animals with the Pancha-Vargas=t- should be 

* According lo Jejjata, “Pancha-Vargam” means the flesh of the five 
kinds of Anupa animals, viz,, Kulachara, Plava, Kos'astha, Padin and 
Matsya (fishes). 

The reading here is doubtful. The term “Audaka” in the compound 
word “ Sdnupaudaka-mamsam ” seems to be redundant, inasmuch as 
“Audaka” animals are included in the “Anupa” class. (Sutra, chap. 
XLVI. Page 487, Vol I). In this cise the word “ Pancha-vargam ” also 
seems to be only an explanation of the term “Anupa” meaning the fiive 
kinds of Anupa flesh, and it seems to have surreptitiously crept into the body 
of the text from the marginal notes of some authoritative manuscript copy 
of the book. If, however, we are to abide by the current reading of the 
book, “Pancha-varga” cannot mean the five kinds of flesh in the presence 
of the word “Audaka” mentioned separately, as Jejjata would have it. In 
that case it can only mean either the five groups of Pancha.mulas, viz., the 
major Pancha-mulas, the minor Pancha-mulas, the Valli-Pancha-mulas, 
the' Kantaka-Pancha-mulas and the Trina-Pancha-muIas. (Sutra, chap. 
XXXVIII; Pages 355-6, Vol. I), as some would explain it to mean. Others, 
however, prefer the reading as it is and explain the term “Pancha-varga” 
to be the five kinds of medicinal drugs mentioned before in the sentence. 



Chap. V,] CHIKITSA STHANAM,- 307 

made. •, The decoction, thus prepared, should’ be mixed- 
with milk and fermented rice-gruel, etc., and -then cooked 
with an adequate quantity of clarified butter,- oil, lard 
and marrow by casting Kalka (paste) of the Madhura 
(Kakolyddi group) into it. This Traivrita-Ghrita^ (lit. 
consisting of clarified butter with three other lardaceous 
articles), thus prepared, should be administered to- 
Apatanaka-patients in potions and diet, in effusions 
and immersions, in anointings and errhines, as well as 
in Anuvdsana measures. Diaphoretic measures should 
be applied according to the prescribed rules. In a 
case marked by an unusually aggravated condition of 
the Vayu, the patient should be made to stand neck-deep 
in a pit tolerably warmed or heated with burning husks, 
and cow-dung. As an alternative, Palds'a leaves should 
be strewn over a Hot stone-slab or over a hot oven, 
after having sprinkled wine over them, and the 
patient should be laid full length upon these leaves, or 
fomentations should be made with Ves'avdm, Kris' ara 
and Pdyasa. 24—25. 

An oil, cooked in combination with the expressed 

viz., the Valaghna drugs, Yava, Kola, Kulattha and flesh. Others, again, 
mean by the term “Pancha-varga” the five parts, viz., leaf, fruit, flower, 
bark and root, of the Vataghna drugs naentioned in the sentence. 

We have, however, the authority of Vagbhata and Chakradatta in our 
side to accept the first view that the term "Audaka” is redundant, in- 
asmuch as they have not read the word “Audaka” in their compilations. 
-Ed. 

According to Dallana, four seers of clarified butter, oil, lard and 
marrow (each weighing one seer), sixteen seers of Kanji, etc., sixteen seers 
of milk, sixteen seers of the decoction and one seer of the Kalka (paste) 
should be taken in its preparation. But Gayadasa is of opinion that 
four seers of milk should be taken instead of sixteen seers. 

Four seers of Ghrita, etc., four seers of milk, six seers of Kanji, six 
seers of the decoction and one seer of the Kalka (paste) are generally 
taken byexperienced physicians in its preparation.— Ed. 



308 


THE SUSHRUTA SAmHITA. 


[Chap. V. 


juice of Mulaka, Eranda, Spkufya, AfjaAa, Arka, Saptald 
and S'amkhini should be used in washing (Parisheka), 
etc., the body of an Apatdnaka-patient. Potions con- 
sisting of sour Dadhi (milk-curd) mixed with powdered 
pepper and Vac/id, ■ or of oil, clarified butter, lard, 
or honey, mixed with the same things and taken 
in an empty stomach, prove curative in cases of 
Apatftnaka. 26. 

These remedial measures are applicable in cases of 
Apatanaka when the action of the aggravated Vayu 
alone preponderates. In a case involving the concerted 
action of two or mere of the Doshas, drugs, remedial 
to each of them, should be combinedly employed. 
Medicinal liquid errhines {Avapida) should be employed 
after the subsidence of a severe attack The fat or lard 
of a cock, crab, Krishna-fish, porpoise or of a boar 
should be taken**' by the patient. As an alternative, 
he should be made to drink (a potion consisting of) 
milk boiled with Vayu-subduing drugs (Das’a-mula, etc.), 
or a gruel (Yavdgu) composed of barley, Kola, Kulattha- 
pulsc and Midaka, cooked with curd, oil and clarified 
butter. Oily purgatives, Asthapana and Anuvasana 
measures, should be employed if the paroxysm does 
not subside even in ten days. Medicines and remedial 
measures laid down under the head of Vata-vyddhi 
and the process of RakshA-karma, should be likewise 
adopted (in cases of Apatanaka). 27. 

Treatment of Pakshaghata A physi- 
cian is enjoined to take in hand the medical treatment 
of a patient laid up with Pakshaghdta, unattended 
by a discolouring of the skin, but having pain in the 
affected part, and who habitually observes the rules of 

* Vridciha Vagbhata recommends external application with these 
lards, 



Chap, V.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


309 


diet and regimen and who can afford to pay for the 
necessary accessories. The affected part should be first 
anointed and then fomented. Mild emetics and 
purgatives should be subsequently employed for the 
purpose of cleansing the system. Medicated Anuvasana 
and Asthdpana measures should then be employed, after 
which the general directions and remedial measures, 
laid down under the treatment of Akshepaka, should 
be followed and employed at the proper time Appli- 
cations of the Mastikya-Siro-vasti with the Anu-taila for 
anointing the body, of the articles of Salvana-Sveda 
for the purpose of poulticing, and of the Vala-taila as an 
Anuvisana measure, are the marked features of the 
medical treatment of this disease, and should be followed 
carefully for a continuous period of three or ■ four 
months, 2g. 

These preceding remedies as well as dry fomenta- 
tions (Ruksha-sveda) and errhines, which possess 
the virtue of subduing the deranged Vdyu and 
Kapha should be likewise employed in cases of Manyai- 
stambha. 29. 

Treatment of Apatantraka Fasting 

is prohibited in cases of patients suffering from Apa- 
tantraka (Apoplectic convulsions). Emetic, Asthdpana 
and AnuvAsana measures are likewise forbidden. The 
passage of respiration should be blown open by violent 
breathings in the event of its being choked up with an 
accumulation of the deranged Vayu and Kapha. The 
patient should be made to drink a potion consisting of 
Tumhmi, Pushkara, Hingtt, Anila-vetasa, Haritaki and 
the three (officinal) kinds of salts, with a decoction 
of barley.* As an alternative, four seers of clarified 

* ChaViadatta quotes this in the chapter on the treatment of colic 
is'ula), but does not read ‘Amla-vetasa’ there. 



310 THE SUSHRUTA SAJHIITA. [Chap. V, 

butter, cooked in combination with sixteen seers of 
milk, two Pala weight of Sauvarchala salt and fifty of 
Haritakis should be prescribed for the use of the patient. 
All other remedial agents, possessing the virtue of 
subduing the deranged Vayu and Kapha should be 
likewise employed. 30. 

Treatment of Ardita : —A patient suffering 
from Ardita ffacial Paralysis) should be treated with the 
measures and remedies laid down under the head of 
Vata-vyadhi in the event of his being found to be suffi- 
ciently strong and capable of affording the neces- 
sary expenses for his treatment. Errhincs, Mastlkya- 
Siro-vasti, inhalation of the smoke (Dhuma-pana) from 
medicated drugs, poulticing (Upanaha), unguents and 
Nadi-sveda, etc., are the special features of the medical 
treatment of this disease. After that, a decoction should 
be made of the dioigs constituting the groups of Trina- 
Pancha-miila, Mahd-Pancha-muIa, Kdkolyddi ^x\d Viddri- 
gandhddi groups, aquatic bulbs, and the flesh of animals 
which are aquatic in their habits (Audaka) and those 
which frequent swampy places (Anupa), by boiling them 
together with a Drona measure of milk and double the 
quantity of water. The decoction should be considered 
boiled when three quarter parts of its original weight of 
the liquid has been evaporated and should then be 
strained. The decoction thus prepared should be boiled 
with a Prastha measure of oil (four seers) and be removed 
from the fire when the oil is well mixed with the milk. 
The compound (oil and milk) thus prepared should be 
allowed to cool down and then churned. The churned 
off cream (Sneha) should be again boiled with the drugs 
of the Madhura (Kakolyddi) group, Mdsha-parni and 
milk (four times that of the original oil). This 
medicated oil is known as the Kshira-Taila and should 



chap. V.] CIIIKITSA STHANAM. $11 

be administered as potions and unguentSj etc , to an 
Ardita-patient The above preparation with clarified 
butter in the place * of oil is known as the Kshira" 
savpih and it should be used as an Akshi-tarpana (eye- 
lotion). 31 — 32. 

Venesection should be duly resorted to in the affect 
ed parts, according to the directions given before, in cases 
of Sciatica, Gridhrasi, Vis'vachi (Synovitis of the knee- 
joints), Kroshtuka-s'irah, Khanja (lameness), Pangula, 
Vata-kantaka, Pdda-d^ha, Pdda-harsha, Ava-vahuka and 
Vadhiryya and in cases where the deranged Viyu would 
be found to be seated in a Dhamani. Measures 
and remedies laid down under the head of Vata- 
vyddhi should be adopted, except in a case of 
Ava-vdhuka 33. 

The expressed juice of green ginger, made lukewarm 
after mixing it with (equal quantities of) oil, honey and 
Saindhava salt, should be poured .into the cavity of the 
ear in a case of (acute) ear-ache. As an alternative, 
the urine of a she-goat, or oil and honey, or oil with 
the urine (of a cow) mixed with the expressed juice of 
MdUdwiga, pomegranate and tamarind, or the oil boiled 
and prepared with Surd, Takra, Sukta, salt and 
the urine (of a cow), should be poured into the cavity of 
the ear ; fomentation should be given (to the interior of 
the affected organ) after the manner of Nddi-sveda. 
The remedial measures for Vdta-vyddhi should be re- 
sorted to. We shall, however, revert to the subject in 
the Uttara-T antra. 34. 

The patient should be made to drink a potion of 
Sneha-Lavana’^ dissolved in an adequate quantity of 
water, or the powders of the Pippalyadi group (with an 

Sneha-Lavana has been described in Chap, 4. (treatment of 
Vata-vyadhi) para. 24. 



312 • THE SUSHRUTA SAMHlTA. [Chap. V. 

adequate quantity of water), or clarified butter, thickened 
or saturated with pulverised asafcetida and Yava-kshara 
(Carbonate of Potass), in cases of Tuni and Prati-tuni. 
Applications of Vastis should also be resorted to. 35. 

In a case of AdhinsCna (Tympanites), the remedy 
should consist in the applications of powders of the 
Dipaniya (appetising) group, of suppositories (Phala-varti), 
Vastis and digestive drugs (Pachaniya group). The 
patient should also be advised to observe a rigid fast 
and his abdomen should be fomented with hot palms. 
After that he should break his fast with boiled rice pre- 
pared with appetising (Dipana) drugs such as, Dhanyaka, 
Jiraka, etc. Similarly, a case of Pratya'dhmana should 
be treated with fasting, emetics and appetising drugs; 
Cases of Ashthilst or Pratyashtliilsi should be treated 
as a case of Gulma and internal abscess, to all intents 
and purposes. 36-38. 

HingveLCli-Vati : — A compound consisting of 
asafcetida, TrikaUt, Vachd, Ajamodd, Dhanyd, Aja- 
gandhd,Dddimba, Patha, Chitraka, Yava-kshara, 

Saindhava salt, Vid salt, Sativarchala salt, Svarjikd- 
ksJidra, Pippali-tmda, Amla-vetasa, S'athi, Pushkara- 7 nnla, 
Hapushd, Chavyd, Ajdji and Pathyd, powdered together 
and treated many times with the expressed juice of Mdtu- 
hinga in the manner of Bhdvana* saturation, should be 
made into boluses, each weighing an Aksha (two ToMs) 
in weight. One (such) pill should be taken (in an empty 
stomach) every morning in all diseases of the deranged 
Viyu, This compound- proves curative in cough, 
asthma, internal tumour (Gulma), ascites, heart-disease, 

* “ Bhavana” consists in soaking a powder or a pulverised compound 
with the expressed juice or decoction of any drugs or with any liquid and 
in getting it dry (generally). This process should be cotinued many times 
(generally seven times) in succesion. 



Chap. V.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


tympanites, aching pain at the sides, in the abdPmhfi 
and in the bladder, in cases of an aversion to fooS, 
retention of stool, strangunary, enlarged spleen, piles, 
Tuni and Prati-tuni. 39- 

Memorable Verses From the symptoms 
or leading indications, exhibited in each case and from t 
close examination thereof, it should be inferred whethe'r 
the Vdyu alone has been deranged or whether it has 
combined with any other Dosha, or has affected any 
other fundamental principle (Dhdtu) of the organism ‘as 
well ; and the medical treatment should follow a 
course, so as not to prove hostile to the Doshas or the 
Dhaitus (organic principles) implicated in the case, in 
its attempt to subdue the aggravated Vdyu. In a 
case of cold, compact and painful swelling (appearing 
in any part of the body) owing to the combination of 
the deranged Vdyu with fat, the treatment should be 
identical with that of a swelling in general. 40-41. 

Uru-Stambha : — The deranged Vdyu, sur- 
charged with the local fat and Kapha gives rise to a 
swelling in the region of the thigh which is known 
as Uru-stambha ; others designate it as Adhya-'V'aita. 
This disease is marked by lassitude and an aching pain 
in the limbs, by the presence of fever, horripilation and 
somnolence and by a sensation of coldness, numbness, 
heaviness, and unsteadiness in the thighs, which seem 
foreign to the body. 42. 

Its Treatment The patient should be made 
to drink a potion consisting of the pulverised compound 
known as the Shad-dharana-yoga ; or of the drugs con- 
stituting the Pippallyddi group, dissolved in (an adequate 
quantity of) hot %<,ater without using any oleaginous 
substance ; or a f^mbative, composed of pulverised 
Triphald and Katu^ mixed with honey, should be 
1 40 



THE BUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. Y. 


3H 


used; or a potion, consisting of Guggulu or S'iidjatu 
dissolved in cow’s urine, should be administered. These 
compounds subdue the aggravated Vdyu surcharged 
with deranged fat and Kapha and prove curative in 
heart-disease, an aversion to food, Gulma and internal 
abscesses. A medicinal plaster composed of Karanja 
fruits and mustard seeds, pasted with a copious quantity 
of cow’s urine should be applied hot to the affected part, 
which may be as well fomented with cow’s urine mixed 
with alkali (Kshdra) ; or the locality should be sham- 
pooed with articles devoid of any oily substance. The 
diet of the patient should consist of old and matured 
Sy^mdka, Kodrava,UddAla and Sail rice with the soup of 
dry Mulaka or Patola, or of the flesh of animals of 
the Jdngala group cooked without clarified butter or 
vegetables {S'dkd) cooked without salt. The use of oil 
and of lardaceous substances in general (Sneha-karma) 
should, however, be prescribed after the deranged fat 
and Kapha have (totally) subsided. 43, 

Therapeutic properties of Gugg[ulu ; 

— Guggulu is aromatic, light, penetrating into the mi- 
nutest parts of the body, sharp, heat-making in potency, 
pungent in taste and digestion, laxative, emulsive, slimy, 
and wholesome to the heart (Hridya). New Guggiilu is 
an aphrodisiac and a constructive tonic. Old Guggulu 
is anti-fat and hence reduces corpulency. It is 
owing to its sharpness and heat-making potency 
that Guggulu tends to reduce the Vdyu and the 
Kapha ; it is its laxativeness that destroys the Malas 
(refuge deposits in the Srotas) and the deranged 
Pitta; its aroma removes the bad odours of the 
Koshtlia ; and it is its subtle essence that improves 
the appetising faculty. Guggulu. should be taken 
every morning with u decoction of Tripliald, Ddrvi and 



Chap. V.J 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


315 


Patola or with that of Km' a roots* ; it may also be 
taken with an adequate quantity of cow’s urine, or with 
alkalinef or tepid water. The patient should take 
boiled rice with soup, milk, or extract of meat after the 
Guggulu has been digested. Diseases such as internal 
tumour (Gulma), urinary complaints (Meha), Uddvarta, 
ascites, fistula-in-ano, worms in the intestines, itches, 
an aversion to food, leucoderma (Svitra), tumour and 
glands (Arvuda), sinus, Adhya-Vata, swelling (oedema), 
cutaneous affections (Kushtha) and malignant sores and 
ulcers readily yield to it, if used for a month (with the 
observance of the regimen of diet and conduct laid down 
previously). It also destroys the deranged Vayu incar- 
cerated in the Koshtha, bones and joints, just as a 
thunderbolt will destroy trees, 44. 

Thus ends the fifth Chapter of the Chikitsita Sthanam in the Sus'ruta* 
Samhitd which deals with the medical treatment of Mahd-Vaia-Vyddhi. 

* Some explain that a third decoction should be that of Triphala, 
Ddrvi, Patola and Kus'a grass taken together.-- Dallana. 

The decoctions may be prepared separately with Triphald, D^rvi, 
Patola and Kus'a. — Ed. 

t Some read “Kshira” (milk) in the place of “Kshara” (alkali). 



CHAPTER VI. 


• Now we shall discourse on the medical treatment of 
Haemorrhoids (A rsas). l. 

The remedial measures in hasmorrhoids may be 
grouped under four subheads ; namely, the emploj’-ment of 
(active) medicinal remedies, the application of an alkali 
(into the seat of the disease), actual cauterization (of the 
polypii) and surgical operation. A case of recent origin 
involving the action of theDoshas to a slight degree and 
uncomplicated with any grave or dangerous symptom 
and complication may prove amenable to medicine 
alone. Deep-seated polypii, which are soft to the touch 
and markedly elevated and extended (external — D R.), 
should be treated with alkaline applications, while 
those which are rough, firm, thick and hard should be 
cauterized with fire. Polypii which are raised, exuding 
and slender at the roots should be surgically treated. 
Hoemorrhoids which are held amenable to medicine and 
are nqt visible (to the naked eye) should be treated with 
the help of medicines alone. Now, listen to the 
procedure to be adopted in the treatment of Ars'as 
which would require alkaline applications, a cauteriza- 
tion, or a surgical operation. 2. 

Application of Ksharas— The body of 
the patient suffering from haemorrhoids, in the event of 
possessing sufficient streagth, should be anointed and 
duly fomented. He should be made to eat warm but 
demulcent food (Anna) m a fluid state (of a gruel-like 
consistency) to alleviate the excessive pain in- 
cidental to the action of the deranged Vayu. In a 
seasoU neither too hot loor too cold, and when the 



Chap. VI.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


317 


sky is cloudless, he should be placed in. a raised 
up position in a clean and well -equipped place oh' 
a plain slab or on a clean bed with his head resting 
on the lap of an attendant and the anal region ^ 
exposed to the sun. In this position the waist should 
be made to elevate a little and to rest on a cushion 
of cloths or blankets. The neck and the thighs of 
the patient should be drawn out, and then secured with 
trappings and held fast by the attendants so as not to 
allow him to move. Then a straight and slender-mouthed 
instrument (somewhat like the modern rectal speculum', 
lubricated with clarified butter, should be gently inserted 
into the rectum and the patient should be asked to 
strain down gently at the time. After seeing the 
polypus (through the speculum), it should be scraped 
with an indicator and cleansed with a piece of cotton ori 
linen after which an alkali should be applied to it. 
The exterior orifice of the instrument should be closed' 
with the palm of the hand after this application and. kept 
in that manner for a period that would be required to 
utter a hundred words. . . ’ 

Then after having cleansed the polypus, a fresh 
application should be made according to the strength 
of the alkali and the intensity of the aggravated Doshas' ■ 
involved in the case. Further application of the alkali 
should be stopped and the polypus washed with ■ 
fermented rice-gruel (Dhdnyamla), curd-cream, Sukta, . 
or the juice of acid fruits, in the event of its having 
been found to have become a little flabby, bent down, ' 
and to have assumed the colour of a ripe Jambu fruit; 
After that it should be cooled with clarified butter 
mixed with Yashii-MadJm, the trappings • should be 
removed and the patient should be raised up and placed 
in a sitting posture in warm water and refreshed with-' 



3I8 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. VI. 

sprays of cold water, or, according to some authorities, 
with warm water. Then the patient should be made to 
lie in a spacious chamber, not exposed to the blasts of 
cold winds (specially), and advised as regards his diet and 
regimen. Each of the remaining polyp ii, if any, should 
be cauterized with the alkaline application at an interval 
of seven days. In case of a number of polypii, those 
on the right side should be first cauterized and then 
those on the left, and after that those on the posterior 
side ; and lastly those that would be found to bo in 
front. 3. 

Polypii, having their origin in the deranged V£(yu and 
Kapba, should be cauterized with fire or alkali ; while 
those, which are the outcome of the deranged Pitta and 
vitiated blood should be treated with a mild alkali alone, 
A perfect and satisfactory cauterization (Samyag- 
dagdha) of a polypus should be understood from such 
symptoms as, restoration of the bodily Vdyu to its 
normal condition, relish for food, keenness of the appe- 
tite, lightness of the body and improvement in strength, 
complexion and pleasure. An over-cauterized (Ati- 
dagdha) polypus gives rise to such symptoms as, 
cracking of the region of the anus, a burning sensation 
(in the affected locality), fainting, fever, thirst, and 
profuse hsemorrhage (from the rectum), and consequent 
complications ; while an insufficiently cauterized (Hina- 
dagdha) polypus is known by its tawny brown colour, 
smallness of the incidental ulcer, itching, derangement 
of the bodily Vdyu, discomforts of the cognitive oi'gans 
and a non-cure of the disease- 4. 

A large polypus, appearing in a strong person, should 
be clipped off (with a knife) and cauterized with fire. 
As regards an external polypus full of extremely 
aggravated Doshas (Vdyu, Pitta, Kapha and blood) no 



Chap. VI.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 3^9 

Yantra should be used, but the treatment should consist 
of fomentation, anointing, poulticing, immersion, 
plastering, evacuating measures (Visrdva), cauterization 
with fire and alkali and a surgical operation. 
Measures laid down under the head of Rakta-pitta 
should be resorted to in cases of haemorrhage 
(from the seat of affection). Remedies mentioned 
in connection with dysentery (Atisdra) should be em- 
ployed in cases of a looseness of the bowels ; whereas 
in cases of constipation of the bowels oily purgatives 
should be administered, or the remedies for Uddvartta 
should be adopted. These rules shall hold good in the 
cases of treating (cauterization, etc.) a polypus occurring 
in any part of the body whatsoever. 5. 

A polypus should be caught hold of and an alkali 
should be applied thereto with a Darvj, or a brush 
(Kurcha), or an indicator (Saldkd). In a case of a 
prolapsus of the anus, cauterization should be made 
without the help of any Yantra (speculum). 

Diet ; — In all types of haemorrhoids, the diet 
should consist of wheat barley, Shashtika rice or ^dli 
rice, (boiled) and mixed with clarified butter, to be taken 
with milk, Nimba-soup, or Patola-soup. The patient 
should be advised to take (his meal) with Vdstuka, 
Ta7iduliyaka, Jivanti, Upodikd, As'va-vald, tender 
Mtilaka, Pdlanka, Asatta, Chilli, Chuchchu, Kaldya, 
Vain, or any other S'dkas (pot-herbs', according to the 
nature of rhe Doshas involved in the case Any other 
oleaginous, diuretic, laxative and appetising (Dipana) 
diet possessing the virtue of curing piles should also be 
prescribed. 6. 

After the cauterization of the polypus, as well as in 
a case where no cauterization would be necessary, the 
body of the patient should be anointed with clarified 



320 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. . [Chap, Vf, 

butter and oil, etc., and measures both general and 
specific (mentioned below and in accordance with the 
Dosha or Doshas involved) should be employed for the 
purpose of improving the digestive powers and to 
alleviate' any aggravation of the Y^JVl. He should 
be made to drink a potion consisting of clarified butter 
cooked with the Vdyu-subdumg and appetising (Dipana) 
drugs* (Kalka and Kvatha) mixed with the powders 
of Hingu, etc., (described in the treatment of Maha-Vata- 
vyddhi, chapter. V). In a case of Pittaja-Ars'as, clarified- 
butter prepared by cooking it with the drugs of the 
Pippallyddi and Bhadra-ddrvddi\ groups, should again 
be cooked with the decoction of Prithakparnyddi group 
and the Kalka of the Dipaniya (Pippallyddi) group, and 
given as a potion to the patient. In a case of haemorr- 
hoid due to the action of the deranged blood I 
(Raktdrs'as), the clarified butter should be cooked with 
a decoction oi Maiijishthd, Murimgi, (D. R. Surangi), 
&c., while in a case of one due to the action of the 
deranged Kapha, the clarified butter should be cooked 
with a decoction of the drugs constituting the 

Suras ddi group. The supervening distresses should 
be alleviated by the remedial measures peculiar to 
each of them 7. 

Cauterization with fire or with an alkali or any surgical 

* Such as the decoction of the drugs of the Bhadra-darvadi {Vdyu- 
subduing) and Pippalyddi (Dipaniya) groups. This Ghrita should be 
prescribed in a Vcttaja Arsas. 

t The epithet “Bhadra-datvddi-pippallyddi” in the phrase “Bhadra- 
ddrvddi-pippallyddi-sarpih” seems to be included into the body of the 
text through an accident. In our opinion, it is only an annotation of the 
phrase ‘‘Dipaniya-Vdta-hata-siddha’' occurring in the last sentence. — Ed. 

' t The Kalkas of the Pippallyddi group should also be taken in the 
preparation of the two kinds of medicated clarified butter to be used in 
Raktdrs'as, and' Pittdrs'as," — Dallana, 



Chap. VI.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


321 


operation in the present disease should be effected by- 
introducing the Yantra (speculum) into the rectum (with 
the utmost carcj inasmuch as an error happening in any 
of these cases may bring on impotency, swelling (Sopha), 
a burning sensation, epilepsy, rumbling in the intestines, 
retention of stool and urine, dysentery, diarrhoea, or may 
ultimately end in death. 8. 

Rectal Speculum Z—Now we shall describe 
the dimensions of the Yantras (and the materials of 
which they are made of). The instrument may be 
made of iron, ivory, horn or wood. It should -be made 
to resemble the teat of a cow. In the case of a male 
patient, it should be four fingers in length and five 
fingers in circumference ; whereas in the case of a female 
patient, the length should be commensurate with that of 
the palm of the hand (of the same length as before — 
D. R.) and six fingers in circumference. The instrument 
should be provided with two separate apertures in its 
inside, one for seeing the interior of the rectum and the 
other for applying an alkali, or actual cautery (Agni) to 
the polypus, since It is impossible to apply fire and 
alkali through the same aperture. The circumference 
of the aperture in the upper three fingers of the instru- 
ment should be like that of a thumb. There should 
be a bulb-like protrusion of the same width, at the 
bottom, and above it a space of half a finger’s width. 
Thus we have briefly described the shape of . the 
instrument. 9-10, 

Alcpa (plasters) ; — Now we shall describe the 
plasters to be applied to 'the haemorrhoids (to cause 
their spontaneous dropping off). The first consists of 
pulverised turmeric mixed with the milky exudation of 
the Snuhi tree. The second contains of the cock- 
evacuations and pulverised Gunjd, turmeric and Pippali 

41 



THli SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. VI. 


322 


pasted with the urine and bile of a cow. The third 
is compounded of Danti, Chitmka, Stivarchikd and 
Ldngali pounded together and made into a paste with 
cow’s bile. The fourth consists of Pippalz, rock-salt, 
vS‘'?m/i!<2-seeds and Kushtha pasted with the milky juice 
of an Arka, or Snnhi plant. An oil cooked in combina- 
tion with Kdsisn (sulphate of iron), Haritdla (yellow 
orpiment), rock-salt, As'vazndraka, Vzdan^a, Puiika, 
Kritavcdhana, Jambti, Arka, Uitaindrani, Danti, 
Chiu-aka, Alarka and and used as an 

unguent, leads to the falling off of the polj^pus. ii. 

Internal piles Now we shall describe the 
remedial measures which bring about the falling off of 
the invisible (internal) haemorrhoids. The patient should 
take Haritaki with treacle every morning ; or a hundred 
Hariiakis should be boiled in a Drona measure of cow’s 
urine and the patient, observing a strict continence, 
should take with honey every morning as many of them 
as suit his constitution ; or he should be made to 
take every day a paste made of the roots of Apdmdrga 
with the washings of rice and with honey. S'atdvari 
pasted with an adequate quantity of milk or -.a Karsha 
measure of) the powders of Chitraka mixed with a copious 
quantity of good Sidhu wine, or a gruel (Mantha) 
(neither extremely thick nor thin), or powdered barley 
or wheat mixed with Takra and Bhalldtaka powder, 
should be administered without any salt. A quantity of 
Takra should be kept in an earthen pitcher, plastered 
inside with a paste of Chitz-aka roots, and given to 
the patient in food and drinks whether fermented or 
not. A Takra should also be separately prepared as in 
the preceding manner with Bhdrgi, Asphotd, barley, 
Amalaka and Guducki and administered similarly ; this 
is called the Takra-kalpa (butter-milk compound). 12. 



Chap, VL] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


323 


A medicated Takra should also be prepared with 
Pippali, Pippali-imila, Chavya, Chitraka, Vidanga, 
S’unthi and Haritaki, in the manner described above, 
(and given to the patient), who should abstain from 
taking any solid food, but live only on (this) Takra for a 
period of one full month ; or he should be given milk 
boiled with a decoction of S'ringavera, Punarnavd and 
Chitraka, or a condensed decoction (Phdnita) of the 
bark of Kutaja roots mixed with an after-throw of the 
powdered drugs of the Pippalyddi group and honey. 
The patient should be made to partake of the medicinal 
.compound known as the Hingva'di-churua,^^ described 
in the chapter on Mahd-Vdta-vyadhi, and be made to 
live either on milk, or on Takra. As an alternative, he 
should take Ktdmdsha boiled in Kshdrodaka (alkaline 
water) prepared from Chitraka-roots and made saline 
with a liberal after-throw of Yava-kshdra; or he should 
take milk boiled with the Kshdrodaka (alkaline water) 
prepared from Chitraka-roots, or Kulmdsha boiled with 
the alkaline water prepared from the ashes of burnt 
Paldsa ; or he should drink frequent potions of clarified 
butter mixed with the alkali made of the ashes of either 
Patola, Apdmdrga, Vrihati, or Paldsd wood ; or drink 
Takra mixed with the Kalka of the roots of Kutaja and 
of Vanddka ; or take the alkaline water of Putika 
mixed with a Kalka of Chitraka, Putika and Ndgara ; 
or use the clarified butter boiled in an alkaline solution-}* 
with the powdered drugs of the Pippalyddi group, 

* In a preponderance of Vayu and Kapba, Takra should be taken as 
diet ; whereas milk should be taken in a case of the preponderance of 
vitiated blood. 

t During the period when the above mentioned alkaline preparations 
are used, the diet of the patient should consist of clarified butler, milk 
•ind meat-soup for fear of the loss of the Ojo-Dhsitu, 



■ 324 ■ THE SUSHRUTA- SAMHITA. [Chap. VI. 

added to it by way of an after-throw ; or he should take 
every morning one or two Palas of black sesamum 
(according as required), with cold water. These 
measures prove remedial in cases of hemorrhoids and 
tend to improve the digestion. 13. 

/ Dantyarishtai— A Tula weight* (twelve seers 
and a half) of the following drugs, %iz., Das* a-imda, 
Danti, Chitraka and Haritaki should be boiled with 
four Drona measures of w.atet till reduced to one quarter 
part (one Drona). The decoction, thus prepared, should 
be cooled down, filtered, mixed with a Tuld measure of 
treacle and preserved into a receptacle which formerly 
contained clarified butter, which should then be 
kept buried for a month in a heap of unthrashed 
barley At the close of this period an adequate dose 
of this preparation should be given to the patient 
every morning. This medicine proves beneficial in 
cases of hremorrhoids, chronic diarrhoea (Grahani), 
jaundice, obstinate constipation of the bowels (Udivartta) 
and in an aversion to food. It is also a good stomachic 
agent. 

Abhayarishtaf Two Pala weight of each 
of the following drugs, viz., Pippali, Mancha, Vidanga, 
Elavdlukd and Lodhra, fivej Pala weight of htdra- 
vdriini, ten Pala weight of the inner pulps of the Kapittha 
fruit, half a Prastha measure (one Prastha is equal 
to two seers) of Haritaki and one Prastha weight of 
Amalaki, boiled together with four Drona measures of 

* Some are of opinion that one Tula weight of each of the drugs 
should be taken ; but Gayadasa does not say so. 

t Charaka also reads this under the name of Abhaydrishta. 

t Experienced physicians recommend two and a half Pala weight of 
Indra-Vdruni in lieu of five Palas for Us astringent taste. Charaka, 
however, recommends oply "hajf a Paja.” 



Chap. VI.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


325 


water until reduced to one quarter of its quantity. This 
decoction should be filtered (through a piece of linen) 
and cooled down, after which two Tuld weight of 
treacle should be added to it. The whole preparation 
should be then kept in a receptacle which formerly 
contained clarified butter, and be kept buried half a 
month in a heap of unthrashed barley. After the lapse 
of the said period, the patient should be made to drink 
(an adequate quantity of) this preparation every 
morning according to his strength. This Avishta 
proves curative in cases of an enlarged spleen, 
impaired digestion, chronic diari'hoea (Grahani), Arsas, 
heart-disease, jaundice, cutaneous affection,- ascites, 
Gulma, oedema (Sopha), and worms in the intestines, 
and improves the strength and complexion of the 
body. 14 

Anointing (Sneha-karma), fomentation, use of emetics 
and purgatives and the application of Anuvdsana and 
Asthdpana measures should be employed in cases of 
haemorrhoids due to the action of the deranged V£^yu*. 
The use of purgatives is recommended in the Pittaja 
type ; soothing or pacifying (Samsaman a) measures in 
the Biaktaja type ; and S' ringavcra and Kulattha in the 
type caused by the action of the deranged Kapha. All 
the preceding remedies should be combinedly employed 
when the concerted action of all the Doshas would 
be detected. As an alternative, milk boiled with the 


proper drugs may be administered in cveiy case. 15. 

Bhallataka-yogai* • — Now we shall describe 
the mode of using Bhallaftaka in cases of haemorrhoids. 


Some are of opinion that the Rishis do not read this line. But as 
Gayaddsa explains it, so Dallana, he tells us, also does the same. 

+ A physician should apply this medicine after a due consideration 
and according tq the physical condition of the patiept, 



326 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. VI. 

A ripe and fresh Bhalldtaka should be cut into two, 
three or four pieces and a decoction should be made of 
them in the usual way. The patient should be made 
to drink four Tola weight of this cold every morning 
after lubricating or anointing his tongue, palate and 
lips with clarified butter, and should take his chief 
meal wiih milk and clarified butter in the afternoon. 
The numbei of Bhalldtakas in preparing the decoction 
should be increased by one every day till the fifth 
day, (and 'the quantity of the decoction to be drunk 
by the patient should be similarly increased). After 
that, the number of Bhalldtakas (and consequently 
the quantity of the decoction to be taken) should be 
increased by five every day This method should be 
followed till the number of the Bhalldtakas reaches 
seventy, after which it should be decreased every 
day by five until it is reduced to five Bhalldtakas 
only (and five Sukti measures of the decoction). 
Subsequently the number of Bhalldtaka (and the dose) 
should be diminished by one (and one Sukti measure 
respectively) every day, until it is reduced to the original 
one (and one Sukti measure). By taking a thousand 
Bhalldtakas in this manner, one may get rid of an attack 
of any kind of Kushtha and Ars'as, and, having 
become strong and heaUhy, may live for one hundred 
years, i6. 

Other forms of B hall ^taka-yoga : — 

The oil extracted from or pressed out of Bhalldtakas, 
in the manner laid down in the chapter on Dvi-vrana, 
should be taken in a dose of one Sukti (four Tolds) every 
morning. The patient, as in the preceding case, should 
take his meal [ of boiled rice, milk and clarified 
butter) after the digestion of the oil with a similar good 
effect. As an alternative^ oil should be extracted frorn 



Cliap. VI.] CHIICITSA STHANAM 327 

the marrow of Bhalldtakas and the patient, after cleansing 
his system with emetics and purgatives, etc., and regulat- 
ing his diet in the order of Peyd, etc. should enter 
into a spacious chamber, protected from the blasts of the 
winds and take two Palas, or one Pala weight of the oil 
according to his strength A meal of boiled rice, 
milk and clarified butter, etc., should be taken after the 
oil had been fully digested. The oil should be conti- 
nued, in this way, for a month, the regimen of diet 
should be strictly observed for a period of three months 
and the patient should abstain from anger, etc, duiing 
this period. The use of this oil, in the above mentioned 
way, not only ensures a radical cure of the disease with 
all its complications, but would increase the duration of 
life to a hundred years with the glow of youth and 
health and with an increment in the powers of memory, 
retention and wisdom. The application of this oil for 
every one month will extend one's life for a period 
of one hundred years. In the same way a continuous 
use for ten months would enable him to live for a 
thousand years. 17 

Wlemorabie Verses Vrikshaka (Kutaja) 
and Bhallsttaka^ prove as much curative in cases of 
all kinds of haemorrhoids, as Kshadira and Vijaka are 
effective in cases of cutaneous affections (Kushtha). 
Cauterization with fire, or with an alkali, proves as 
much palliative in cases of external hemorrhoids as 
turmeric proves soothing in those of Prameha. 18-19. 

Medicated Ghritas, appetising drugs, electuaries, 
medicinal wines, Ayaskriti and Asava should be 
prescribed in cases ol hemorrhoids, according to 
the nature and intensity of the Doshas involved 

Boiled wiih sixteen times of w.-»ler in the event of the Bhallalaka 
being dry, otherwise with eight times of water only. 



328 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. VI. 


therein. Voluntary suppression of any natuial urgings 
of the body, sexual intercourse, riding on horse-back, 
etc., sitting on the legs and such diets as would 
aggravate the Doshas, should be avoided in cases of 
haemorrhoids. 20-21. 


Thus ends the sixth Chapter in the Chikitsita Sth.-inam of the Sus'ruta 
Samhitii which deals with the medical treatment of Ars'as. 



CHAPTER VIL 


Now we shall discourse on the medical treatment 
of urinary calculus, etc.*(Asrn3.ri). l. 

Metrical Texts; — As'mari (urinary calculus, 
etc) is a dangerous disease and is as fatal as death itself. 
A case of recent origin (acute) proves amenable to 
medicines, while an enlarged or chronic one requires 
surgical operations. The remedial rneasuies, in the 
order of anointing, etc., should be employed in the first 
or incipient stage of the disease, whereby the entire 
defects with their causes {i.e., roots of the disease) would 
be radically cured. 2, 

Treatment of Vataja Asmari Clarified 
butter cooked with a decoction of Pdshdnabheda, Vasuka, 
Vas'ira, As'mantaka, S'atdvari, S'vadamstrd, Vrihati^ 
Kantakdrikd, Kapotavamka, A'rtagala, Kakubha^\ Us'ira^ 
Kubjaka, Vrikshddani, Bhalluka, Vanina, S' dka-phala, 
barley, Kulattha, Kola and Kataka fruits and with the 
Kalka of the drugs constituting the group of Ushakddi, 
speedily brings about the disintergration of As'mari 
(urinary calculi, etc.) due to the action of the deranged 
V^yu. Milk, Yavdgu (gruel), a decoction, soup, or an 
alkali, properly prepared with the above Vayu-subduing 
drugs should also be administered as food and drink 
in the above cases. 3. 

Treatment of Pittaja Asmari Simi- 
larly a medicated clarified butter cooked with the 

* Chakradatta reads “KopotavakUa” in place of “Kapolavamka” 
“Kanchana” in place of ‘‘Kikubha” ; and ‘‘Gulnjaka” in place of 
“Kubjaka ” From an e.xamination of Dallana it appears that 
‘‘Ivachchhaka’’ is also a reading of ‘•Kakiibha.” 


42 



330 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap, VII. 


decoction of Kus'a,Kds’a,S'ara, Gimdrd, Itkata, Morata, 
As'mahhid, S'atdvari, Viddri, Vdrdhi, S' dli-mula, Tri- 
kantaka, Bhalluka, Pdtald, Pdthd, Pattura, Knruntikd, 
Punarnavd^ , S'irisha, with the paste (Kalka) consisting 
of S'ildjatu, Madhuka (flower) and the seeds of Indivara\, 
Trapiisha and Ei-vdrnka, would ' speedily bring about 
the disintegration of Pittaja As'mari (calculi, etc.). 
An alkali, Yavdgu (gruel), soup, a decoction, or milk, 
properly prepared with the above Pitta-subduing drugs, 
should also be prescribed as food and drink in these 
cases. 4. 

Treatment of Kaphaja Asmari !— 

The use of medicated clarified butter prepared from 
the milk of a she-goat*}* and cooked with the paste 
(Kalka) of the drugs constituting the Vaninddi group]:, 
Guggulu, Eld, Hareiiu, Knshtha, the Bhadrddi group, 
Maricha, Chitraka, Surdhvd and the Ushakddi group, 
leads to the speedy disintegration and expulsion of the 
As'mari (stone, etc.) due to the action of the deranged 
Sapha. So also the use of an alkali, Yavagu (gruel), 
soup, milk, or a decoction, properly prepared with the 
above Kapha-subduing drugs, is recommended as food 
and drink in such cases. $■ 

A potion consisting of the powdered fruit of the Pichuka, 
Amkola, Kataka, S' aka and Indiva7'a mixed with treacle§ 

* Chakradatta reads “Punarnavg” i.e., both the kinds of Punarnava. 

t Jejjata explains “Indivara” as ‘Nilolpala.’ But Gayadasa does not 
support this. 

t Some say that “Aja-sarpih” is superfluous. Chakradatta reads 

in place of “jpg) 

'S meaning thereby that the decoction of the Varunadi-gana is to 
be used. Chakradatta’s reading seems to be the correct one and is 
observed in practice with good results, — Ed. 

§ The quantity of treacle, to be taken, should be equal to the entire 
quantity of the powders ; anfl hot water should be usefl — Dallana. 



Chap. VII.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. '33'I 

and water proves bcnGficial in cases of GrrSiVSl (Sarkar^)i 
The bones of the Krauncha, camel and ass, as well as 
the drugs known as S'vadamshtrd^ Tdlamuli, Ajatnddd, 
Kadamba-'ioots and Ndgara pounded together and ad- 
ministered through the vehicle of wine (Surd) or hot 
water, leads to the disintegration of Sarkara (gravel). 
The milk of an ewe mixed with powdered Trikantaka- 
seeds and honey should be used for seven days for the 
disintegration and separation of an As'mari. 6-7. 

Alkali ne Treatments : —An alkali should be 
prepared from the ashes of the drugs used in the prepara- 
tion of the aforesaid medicated clarified butters, by dis- 
solving and filtering them in ewe’s urine The alkali should 
then be slowly boiled with an alkali similarly prepared 
from the dung of domestic animals, with the powders of 
and the drugs of the Ushakddi group thrown 
into them as an after-throw. It proves curative in cases 
of stone, Gulma, and gravel. Alkaliesf from burnt bark 
of sesamum, Apdntdrga, plantain, P aids' a and barley 
taken with the urine of an ewe destroy the gravel 
(S'arkard). As an alternative, the alkalies of Pdtald and 
Karavira should be used in the preceding manner, 8-9. 

Two Tola (Aksha) weights of the pastes of S'va- 
danistrd, Yashti-madhu and Brdhmi (mixed with ewe’s 
urine) should be given to the patient ; or the expressed 
juice of the Edakd, S' obJidnjana and Mdrkava (with the 
said urine) should be given, or a potion consisting of the 
pasted roots of the Kapotavanika with Kdnjika, or Sura, 
etc., should be administered. Milk boiled with the afore- 
said drug (Kapotavamka) should be taken by a patient 

* Some e.xplain it as “Gokshura-seeds” and others as “Markataka- 
sceds.” 

+ Four or six Tola weight of an alkali should be dissolved and filter’d 
for a number of limes before use. 



332 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. VII. 


in case there is pain (in urinating). Milk boiled with 
Triphald or Varshdbhii should be administered as a 
drink and a decoction of the drugs of the Vira^tarddi 
group should be employed in all these cases.* lo. 

A physician should have recourse to the following 
measures (surgical operations) in cases where the 
above-mentioned decoctions, medicated milk, alkalies, 
clarified butter and Uttara-vasti (urethral syringe) of 
the aforesaid drugs, etc., would prove ineffective. Surgical 
operations in these cases do not prove successful even in 
the hands of a skilful and experienced surgeon ; so 
a surgical (Lithotomic) operation should be considered 
a remedy that has little to recommend itself. The death 
of the patient is almost certain without a surgical opera- 
tion and the result to be derived from it is also uncertain. 
Hence a skilled surgeon should perform such operations 
only with the permission of the king. 11-12. 

Modes of Surgical Operations The 
patient should be soothed (Snigdha) by the application of 
oleaginous substances, his system should be cleansed with 
emetics and purgatives and be slightly reduced thereby ; 
he should then be fomented after being anointed 
with oily unguents ; and be made to pertake of a 
meal. Prayers, offerings and prophylactic charms 
should be offered and the instruments and surgical 
accessories required in the case should be arranged 
in the order laid down in the Agropaharaniya chapter 
of the present work (Sutra-sthdnam, ch. V.). The 

* Dallana recommends the use of Triphala boiled with milk in 
cases of pain accompanying Plltaja As'mari, while (bat boiled with 
Varshabhu is advised to be given for the alleviation of pain in a case of 
Vat-aja or Kaphaja As'mari. The drugs of Vira-taradi group should be 
used with milk, clarified butter, a decoction, Yavdgu (gruel), food, etc., 
and also for bath, immersion, etc. 



Chap. VII.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


333 


surgeon should use his best endeavours to encourage 
the patient and infuse hope and confidence in the 
patient’s mind. A person of strong physique and un- 
agitated mind should be first made to sit on a level 
board or table as high as the knee-joint. The patient 
should then be made to lie on his back on the table 
placing the upper part of his body in the attendant’s ‘lap, 
with his waist resting on an elevated cloth cushion. 
Then the elbows and knee-joints (of the patient] should 
be contracted and bound up with fastenings (S'ataka) or 
with linen. After that the umbelical region (abdomen) 
of the patient should be well rubbed with oil or with 
clarified butter and the left side of the umbelical region 
should be pressed down with a closed fist so that the 
stone comes within the reach of the operator. The 
surgeon should then introduce into the rectum, the 
second and third fingers of his left hand, duly anointed 
and with the nails well pared. Then the fingers should 
be carried upward towards the rope of the perineum i.e , 
in the middle line so as to bring the stone between the 
rectum and the penis, when it should be so firmly and 
strongly pressed as to look like an elevated Granthi 
(tumour), taking care that the bladder remains con- 
tracted but at the same time even. 

Prognosis-M. Text: — An operation should 
not be proceeded with nor an attempt made to extract 
the stone (Salya) in a case where, the stone on being 
handled, the patient would be found to drop down 
motionless faint) with his head bent down, and eyes 
fixed in a vacant stare like that of a dead man, as an 
extraction in such a case is sure to be followed by death. 
The operation should only be continued in the absence 
of such an occurrence. 

An incision should then be made on the left side 



334 


TtlE SUSHRUTA SAMHitA. 


tChap. Vlt 


of the raphe of the perineum at the distance of a barley- 
corn arid of a sufficient width to allow the free egress of 
the stone. Several authorities recommend the opening 
to be on the right side of the raphe of the perineum for 
the convenience of the operation. Special care should be 
taken in extracting the stone from its cavity so that it 
may not break into pieces nor leave any broken particles 
behind (i.e.j inside the bladder), however small, as they 
would, in such a case, be sure to grow larger again. 
Hence the entire stone should be extracted with the 
help of an Agravaktra Yantra (a kind of forceps the 
points of which arc not too sharp). 13. 

Lithotomic Operation in a female : - 
In a wornan, the uterus (Garbhds'aya) is adjacent to the 
urinary bladder, hence the stone should be removed 
by making an oblique and upward incision, otherwise 
a urine-exuding ulcer might result from the deep 
incision in that locality. Any hurt to the urethra 
during the operation would be attended with the 
same result even in a male patient, An incision 
made only on one side of the organ in a disease other 
than that of stone, baffles all attempts at healing ; 
while an ulcer incidental to an incision made on both 
its sides, should be deemed incurable An ulcer 
incidental to an incision made on either side of the 
bladder in extracting a stone might be healed up, in- 
asniuch as medicinal potions and fomentations, etc., 
employed for the healing of a surgical wound, lead 
to the healing of the wound in the bladder ; secondly 
because the surgical opening is only made large enough 
for the extraction of the stone as recommended in the 
authoritative books ; and thirdly because an increase 
in the quantity of urine contributes to an increase in 
the size of the stone and hence a slight secretion of that 



Chap. VII.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


335 


fluid or employment of diuretic Peyas, etc., are not 
attended with any injurious effects. 

Post-Surgical Measures After the ex- 
traction of a stone, the patient should be made to sit in 
a Droni (cauldron) full of warm water and be fomented 
thereby. In doing so the possibility of an accumula- 
tion of blood in the bladder will be prevented ; however 
if blood be accumulated therein, a decoction of the Kshira- 
trees should be injected into the bladder with the help 
of a Pushpa-netra (urethral Syringe). 14-15- 

Memorable Verse : — Stones and the accu- 
mulated blood in the bladder would be speedily expelled 
by means of injecting a decoction of the Kshira-trees 
into it with the help of a Pushpa-netra (urethral 
Syringe). 16. 

For the clearance of the urinary passage, a treacle 
solution should be given to the patient ; and after tak- 
ing him out of the Droni, the incidental ulcer should be 
lubricated with honey and clarified butter. A Yavdgu, 
boiled with the drugs’* possessed of the virtue of cleans- 
ing or purifying the urine, and mixed with clarified 
butter, should be given to the patient in a warm state 
every morning and evening for three consecutive days. 

After that period a diet (meal) of rice well 
boiled and mixed with milk and a large quantity of 
treacle, should be given (to the patient) in small quan- 
tities for ten days for the purification of the blood and 
the secretion of urine as well as for the purpose of esta- 
blishing secretion in the ulcer. The patient should be 
made to partake of a diet (of rice) with the soup of the 
flesh of Jangala animals and the expressed juice of acid 
fruits after the lapse of these ten days. 17. 

The urine-purifyim; drugs are the Ttlna-Panchamulas, Gohshura, 
Knsaniard.i, Pdshanabheda, etc. 



33<5 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. , [Chap. VII, 


After that period, the body of the patient should be 
carefully fomented for ten successive days by applying 
any warm oleaginous substance or with any warm 
medicinal fluid (Drava-Sveda). As an alternative, the 
ulcer should be washed with the decoction of (the 
bark of) the Kshira-Vrikshas. A paste of Rodhra, 
Madhuka, Manjishthd and Prapaundarika (pounded to- 
gether), should be applied then to the ulcer. A medicated 
oil or Ghrita cooked with turmeric and the preceding 
drugs should be applied to the ulcer. The accumulated 
blood in the affected part should be removed with the 
help of a Uttara-vasti (urethral Syringe). The .ulcer 
should be cauterized with fire in the manner described 
before in the event of the urine not flowing through 
its natural passage after the lapse of seven days. 
After the urine takes its natural course, Uttara-vasti, 
Asthilpana and Anuvisana measures should be employed 
with the decoction of the drugs belonging to -the 
Madimra-Varga. . 

A seminial stone or gravel (S'arkard) spontaneously 
brought down into the urinary passage should be I'e- 
moved through the same passage. The urethra should be 
cut open and the stone should be extracted with a hook 
(Vadis'a) or any other insti'ument in the case of its not 
being expelled out by the passage. The patient should 
refrain from sexual intercourse, riding on horse back or 
on the back of an elephant, swimming, climbing on 
trees and up mountains and partaking of indigestible 
substances for a year even after the healing of the 
ulcer. i8. 

Parts to be gruarded in Lithotomic 

Operations;— The Mutra-vaha (urine-carryingi and 
the S'likra-vaha (semen-carrying) ducts or channels, the 
Mushka-srotas (cords of the testes), the Mutra-praseka 



Chap. VILJ 


CHIlCITSA STHANAM. 


337 


(urinary) channels, the Sevan! (the raphe of the perineum), 
the Yoni (uterus, vagina, etc,), the Guda (rectum) and the 
Vast! (bladder) should be carefully guarded at the time of 
performing a lithotomic operation. Death results in the 
event of the urine-carrying channels being in any way 
hurt during the operation owing to an accumulation of 
urine in the bladder. Similarly, any hurt or injury to the 
semen-cariying ducts at the time, results in death or in 
impotency of the patient ; a hurt to the cords of the 
testes begets an incapacity of fecundation ; a hurt to the 
urinary ducts leads to a frequent dribbling of urine ; while 
a hurt to the Yoni (uterus, vagina, etc.), or to the 
raphe of the perineum gives rise to extreme pain. 
The symptoms which characterise a hurt to the rectum 
or to the bladder have been described before. 19. 

Memorable Verses: — The surgeon who is 
not well cognisant of the nature and positiohs of the 
Marmas or vulnerable parts seated in the eight Srotas 
(ducts) of the body such as, the raphe of the perineum, 
the spermatic cords, the cords of the testes and the 
corresponding ones in females (Yoni), the anal region, 
the urinary ducts, the urine-carrying ducts, and the 
urinary bladder and is not practiced in the art of 
surgery brings about the death of many an innocent 
victim. 20. 

Thus ends Ihe seventh Chapter of the Chikitsita Slhanatn in the 
Sub'ruta Samhitd which deals with the treatment of Urinary calculus. 


43 



CHAPTER yill. 


Now we shall discourse on the medical treatment of 
■Fistula-in-ano, etc., (Bliagandara). T. 

. The disease admits of being divided into five different 
groups, of which the two, known as S'ambukdvarta and 
S'alyaja (traumatic^, should be regarded as incurable, 
and th"; rest as extremely difficult to cure. 2. 

The General Treatment The eleven* 
kinds of remedial measures commencing with Apatar- 
pana up to purgatives (as described under the treatment 
of Dvi-vrana) should be employed as long as any 
fistular ulcer would remain in an insuppurated stage 
The patient should be soothed by the application of 
medicated oil, etc., and his body should be fomented by 
immersing him in a receptacle of warm water, etc as 
soon as suppuration would set in (and even after the 
ulcer had burst). Then having laid him on a bed 
and bound his hands and thighs with straps as des- 
cribed under the treatment of Hmmorrhoid, the surgeon 
should examine closely as to where the mouth of the 
fistula is directed, outward or inward, and whether 
the ulcer itself is situated, upward or downward. Then 
the whole cavity or receptacle of pus (sinus) should 
be i-aised up and scraped out with an Eshani (indicator 
or probe). In a case of inter-mouthed fistula, the patient 
should be secured with straps (as before described) 
and asked to strain down. An incision should then 
be made by first directing the indicator when its mouth 
would become visible from the outside. Cauterization 

* Apalarpana, Alepa, Parisheka, Abhyanga, Sveda, Vimldpana, 
Upaniha, Pachana, Visravana, Sneha, and Vamana. 



Chap; viir.j 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


339 


with fire or an alkali is a general remedial measure which 
may be resorted to in all the types of this disease. 3-4, 
Specific measures— IVI. Texts; Incases 
of the ^ataponaka type all the small Vraiias about 
the anus should be first incisioned and the principal sinus 
in the locality should not be looked after '.until these 
small ones had been healed up. The connected abscesses 
should be respectively incisioned 'on the external side, 
while the unconnected one's should .'not be. opened' at 
the same time in order that they may ' not' run into 
■ one another and be thus converted into. a wide-mouthed 
ulcer. The urine and the fajcal matter are found in each 
case to flow out of the cavity of such a 'wide-mouthed 
ulcer ; and aching pains in the rectum and a rumbling 
sound in the abdomen, due to the action of the aggravr 
atcd "Vdyu, are experienced. Such a case is enough 
to confound even a well-read and experienced physician! 
Hence the mouth of a fistula of the Sataponaka type 
should not be opened with a broad incision. 

Forms of incision ; — An experienced surgeon 
should know that the LAngalaka, Ardha-Ldngalaka, 
Sarvatobhadraka and the Gotirthaka forms of incision 
should be the different shapes of incision, in a' case of 
a many-mouthed S'ataponaka. An incision equal in its 
two sides is called the L^ngalaka (curvilineal), while the 
one with one arm longer than the other is named the 
Ardha-Lsiugalaka. An incision made in the region of 
the anus in the shape of a cross (crucial) and a little 
removed from the raphe of the perineum, is called the 
Sarvatobhadraka by men conversant with the shapes 
of surgical incisions. An incision made by inserting the 
knife in one side is called the Gotirthaka (longitudinal). 
All exuding (bleeding) channels in the affected region 
should be cauterized with fire by the surgeon. 



340 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA, [Chap. VIII. 

■ A case of the ^ataponaka type occurring in a 
person of timid disposition or of delicate constitution, is 
extremely difficult to cure. Medicinal fomentations en- 
dowed with the virtue of arresting secretion and alleviat- 
ing pain, should be quickly applied (to the seat of the 
disease). Fomentations with Kris'ard, or Pdyas.a (por- 
ridge), made with the aforesaid Svedaniya (diaphoretic) 
drugs with a decoction of the drugs constituting the 
Vilvddi group, Vrikshddani and roots of the castor-plant 
mixed and boiled together with the flesh of the Ldva, 
Vishkira (a kind of bird) and that of animals living 
in swampy or marshy land or aquatic in their habits 
or Grdmya animals, and then kept in an oily pitcher and 
applied in the way of a Nddi-Sveda (fomentation through 
Nddi or pipe), should be at once applied to the seat of 
the ulcer. Sesamum, castor-seeds, linseed, 3Idsha-^v\sQ, 
barley, wheat, mustard-seeds, salts and the Amla-Varga 
(see Rasa-Vijndniya chapter) should be boiled in a 
saucer and the affected part or ulcer should be fomented 
therewith. After being fomented, the patient should 
drink (a potion consisting of) Kushtha, salts (the five 
officinal kinds of salts) Vac/id, Hingu and Ajamoda 
taken in equal parts and mixed with (an adequate 
quantity of) clarified butter, grape-wine (Mdrdvika), 
Kdnjika (Amla), Surd or Sauviraka,* Subsequent to 
that, the ulcer should be wetted with the Madlmka-oW 
and the rectum should be washed with medicated oils 
which would alleviate pain due to the action of the 
deranged and aggravated Vdyu. The preceding 
medicinal remedies tend to bring about the outflow or 
evacuations of stool and urine through their natural 
channels or courses, and undoubtedly alleviate all 
acute and supervening distresses which specifically mark 

* By the use of this potion the digestive power is inqreused. 



Chip, VlIF.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


341 


the progress of the disease. We have described the treat- 
ment of a case of fistula- in-ano of the Sataponaka 
(sieve) type ; now listen to me about the treatment of 
the Ushtragriva (camel’s neck) type of the disease. 5. 

Treatment of Ushtra-griva The ulcer 
should first be searched with a probe or director and, 
after an operation, an alkali should be applied to it. 
To remove all sloughed off or sloughing flesh and 
membranes cauterization with fire is forbidden. [The 
fissures of pus (sinuses) and sloughed off flesh should be 
first drawn out]. A plaster of clarified butter and 
pasted sesamum should then be applied to it, and the 
ulcer duly bandaged. Clarified butter should be constant- 
ly applied over the bandage which should be removed 
on the third day. Cleansing or disinfecting ^S'odhana) 
measures should then be used by the surgeon, accord- 
ing to the Doshas involved in the ulcer, and the 
successive healing (Ropana) measures resorted after its 
being properly purified (S'odhana). 6 

Treatment of Parisr^vi In a case of the 
ParisrAvi (exuding) type, where there is bleeding and 
secretion from the ulcer, the sinus and the cavities of pus 
should be first removed and then cauterized with an alkali 
or with fire by an intelligent surgeon. The region of the 
anus should then be kept wet b}’’ the sprinkling of luke- 
warm Anu-toila (described in the chapter on -VAta-vyAdhi). 
Warm plasters, or poultices, mixed with Yavakshdra 
and the urine (of a cow) should then be applied. 
Decoction of the emetic drugs as the seeds of Madana, 
etc.), should also be sprinkled slightly on the affected 
part. The ulcer when found to be softened and 
nearly free from pain and secretion (owing to the 
preceding measures) should, be searched with a probe 
and the principal sinus should be cut open and again 



342 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap VIII. 


completely cauterized with' fire or with an alkali. The 
incisions should be made in the shape or form of a 
Kharjura-patra (leaf of the date-palm), Ardha-chandra 
(half-moon), Chandra-chakra (moon’s disc), Suchi-mukha 
(needle’s mouth), or Avammukha (with downward mouth). 
After that the ulcer should be purified with mild cleans- 
ing or disinfecting remedies (as described above) 7. 

In the case of an infant cauterization with fire or 
with an alkali, the use of strong purgatives and surgical 
operations are forbidden in the case of the disease 
(Bhagandara), whether outer mouthed or inter-mouthed. 
Medicinal remedies calculated to be mild, though keen 
in their efficacy, should be used in such cases. A plug or 
a Varti in the shape of a wick and made of powdered 
Aragvad/ia, Haridrd and Kald, mixed with honey and 
clarified butter, should be inserted into the ulcer for 
purifying purposes. This medicinal compound speedily 
brings about the healing of a sinus, just as the wind 
will drive away a cloud. 8 — 9 

Treatment of Agantuka Bhagan- 
dara : — The sinus in a fistula of traumatic origin 
should be carefully cut open by a surgeon (with a knife) 
and cauterized, according to the rules laid down, with 
a red-hot Jambvoshtha (instrument) or with a red- 
hot director (SaUkd). Vermifugal remedies should be 
applied to it, and measures laid down in connec- 
tion with the extraction of a Salya from the body 
should be carefully resorted to. 10, 

Treatment of Tridoshaja Bhagan- 
dara A case of Bhagandara, due to the concerted 
action of the three Doshas, should be treated without 
holding out any hope of recovery tot he patient’s people, 
or should be given up as hopeless. The measures and 
remedies mentioned above should be adopted in 



Chap. VUL] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


343 


succession in all types of Bhagandara. In the 
event of there being any pain in it, 'owing to the 
insertion of a knife or to any other surgical operation, 
luke-warm Anu-taila should be applied. As an alternative, 
the drugs possessed of the virtue of subduing the de- 
ranged Vdyu (Bhadra-darvddi and Erandddi groups) 
should be boiled in a pot covered by a lid having a 
hole or aperture on its top ; then the patient with his 
rectum anointed with oil, etc., should be made to sit in 
such a way over the said covered pot that the seat of 
the disease may be fomented with the warm fumes 
escaping through that aperture ; or Nddi-sveda should 
be applied to the affected region through a pipe in a 
recumbent posture to alleviate the pain. As an 
alternative, a hot bath should be prescribed for the 
alleviation of the pain. Sf^lvana Upanatha (described in 
connection with the treatment of "VAta-vyadhi and that 
with the skins of the Kadali Mriga,Lopaka and Priyaka, 
should be applied to the affected locality to subdue 
the pain A potion of the drugs or substances such 
as, Trikatu, Vachd, Hiiigti, salt (five kinds of salt) and 
Dipyaka, should be administered with wine, Kdnjika, 
Sauviraka and Kulattha-Soup, etc 11-12. 

Jyotishniati, Ldugaloki, S’ydmd, Danti, Trivrit, Tila, 
Kushtha, S' atdhvd,Golomi , Tihaka, Giri-lwnikd, Kdsisa 
and the two kinds of Kdnehaua-kshirt , compose the group 
which isposscssed of the virtue of purifying (afistular sore). 
(The decoction of these substances should be applied for 
the purification of the ulcer). The sore of a fistula may 
be filled (healed) up by the application of (a compound 
of) Trivrit, Tila, Ndgadanti, Manjishthd and rock-salt 
pasted together with milk and honey. A plaster (Kalka) 
consisting of Rasdujaua. turmeric. Ddiu-karidrd, 
j\faujiskt lid, A^if/iba Xevixes, Trivrit, Tejovati and Danti 



344 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. Vlir. 


proves curative in a case of sinus. The drugs known as 
Kushtha, Trivrit, Tila, Danti, Pippalif Saindhava, 
honey, turmeric, Triphald and sulphate of copper 
(Tuttha) are efficacious in purifying an ulcer. 13-16. 

Oil® cooked (slowly) with Pippali, Yashti-madhu, 
Lodhra, Kushtha, Eld, Harenu, Samaiigd (Bardha-krdntd), 
Dhdtaki flower, Sdrivd, the two kinds of Haridrd, 
Pripajigu, Sarja- 7 'asa, Padmaka, Padmd-keda 7 ’a, Sudhd, 
V achd,Ld 7 igalikd, wax, and Saindhava should be regarded 
as a potent remedy in healing up the ulcer and curing 
fistula-in-ano. This remedy proves beneficial in cases of 
scrofula (Ganda-mAld), Meha, ulcers and in the Mandala 
type of cutaneous affections as well. The drugs which 
constitute the Nyagrodhddi group are efficacious in dis- 
infecting (Sodhana) and healing up an ulcer. A medi- 
cated oil or Ghrita prepared with the pieceding drugs 
proves curative in a case of fistula in-ano Similarly 
a medicated oil duly cooked and prepared with the roots 
of Trivj-it, Danti, Haridi-d, and • Arha, as well as with 
Vidanga, Tniphald, milk of both Snnhi and Anka, honey 
and wax should be applied, as it is specifically efficacious 
in a case of Bhagandara 17-19. 

Syandana Taila Oil slowly cooked and 
prepared (in the manner aforesaid) with Chitj-aka, Arka 
Trivrit, Pdthd, Malapu (Kdkodumbara), Karavira, 
Stidhd (Snuhi), Vachd, Ldngalaki, Saptaparna, Suvar- 
chikd and Jyotishmati, is called the Syandana-Taila and 
should be constantly applied in a case of Bhagandara. 
It is efficacious in purifying, healing and imparting a 
natural skin-colour to the cicatrix. A learned and 
experienced physician should adopt the remedial 
measures for this disease according to the procedure laid 

* Four seers of oil, one seer of the drugs and sixteen seers of water 
should be taken at the time of preparation. 



Chap. VIII.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


345 


down under the treatment of Dvi-Vrana, when there 
is any ulcer (yrana) in existence. 20. 

The bulb-like protrusion above the hole of the instru- 
ment (speculum), mentioned in connection with the 
treatment of Ars'as, should be removed and the instru- 
ment, now in the shape of a half-moon, should be used 
by an experienced surgeon in the treatment of a case of 
fistula-in-ano. The patient should refrain from sexual 
intercourse, physical exercise, riding, anger, and the use 
of heavy and indigestible articles of food for a full 
period of one year even after the healing up of the ulcer 
in a Bhagandara. 21 — 22. 

Thus ends the eighth Chapter of the Cbikitsita Slhdnam of the 
Sus'ruta-Samhita which deals with the treatment of Bhagandara. 


44 



CHAPTER IX. 


Now we shall discourse on the medical treatment of 
cutaneous affections in general (Kuslitha). i. 

A cutaneous disease (Twag-dosha) originates through 
injudicious conduct of life such as^ partaking of large 
quantities of unwholesome food, or taking it before the 
previously eaten one is digested {z. c , eating too often), 
indulgence in incompatible articles of fare, voluntary 
suppression of the natural urgings of the body, and 
improper application of medicated oil, clarified butter, 
or other lardacious articles. It is attributed even to the 

A 

dynamics of sinful acts done by a man in this or in 
some prior existence. 2. 

Conduct of diet and regimen A 

person afflicted with any kind of skin disease should 
refrain fi'om taking meat, lard, milk, curd, oil, Knlattha 
pulse, Mdsha ^xi\.SG.^Nishpdva, preparations and modifica- 
tions of sugarcane juice, acid substances, incompatible 
food, meals taken before the complete digestion of the 
preceding one, unwholesome and indigestible food, or 
food causing a burning sensation and some kind of 
internal secretion, day-sleep and sexual intercourse. 3. 

Regulation of diet and conduct 

The old and matured grain of S'dli, Shashtika, barley, 
wheat, Komdusha, S’ydmdka, Udddlaka, etc., boiled and 
taken along with the soup(Supa) or a decoction'*' (Yusha) 

* An unsalted decoction of any substance not seasoned with any 
spices whatever is called Yusha, while the one salted and seasoned 
with spices is called Supa- In preparing the soup of any pulse, all husks 
should be carefully thrashed out and the grain should be slightly fried 
before boiling. 



Chap. IX. 3 


. CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


347 - 


of either Mudga pulse or Adhaki pulse mixed with 
Niinba leaves and Arushkara are wholesome in a case 
of Kushtha. Preparations of any of the aforesaid 
grains may be taken with Manduka-parni, Avalgiija, 
Atarushaka and Rupikd flowers cooked in mustard oil or 
clarified butter, or with the Soup prepared of the articles 
of the Tikta-varga (bitter group, mentioned in the Sutra- 
sth^nam). The cooked flesh of Jdngala animals, devoid 
of all fatty matter, should be given to a patient, 
habituated to the use of meat diet. The medicated oil, 
known as the Vajraka-Taila should be used for anoint- 
ing the body. A decoction of the drugs of the Arag- 
vadhddi group should be used for rubbing (Utsadana) 
purposes. Decoctions of Khadira should be employed 
in drinks, baths, washes, etc. The preceding rules are 
intended to regulate the diet and regimen of one suffer- 
ing from Kushtha (cutaneous affections). 4. 

Preliminary Treatment In the premo- 
nitary stages of the disease the system should be 
cleansed by the application of both emetics and pur- 
gatives. When the disease is found to invade the 
Tvak* only, a plaster prepared of the purifying drugs 
should be applied to the affected parts ; blood-letting 
and the use of medicinal decoctions and purifying and 
disinfecting plasters are the remedies to be employed 
when the desease would appear to infect the blood. 
The same remedies and Arishta, Mantha, Pras'a, etc, 
should be employed when the disease would be found 
to have invaded the principle of the M£(msa (muscles). 
Palliation and temporary respite are the only cure that 
can be offered in a case of the sin-begotten type"]* of the 

Tvak here means Rasa or serum. 

t The type of Kpshtha affecting the principle of Medas (fat) is 
generally supposed to be sin-begotten. 



348 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. IX, 


disease which is the fourth (in order of enumeration) and 
that even is purely contingent on the willingness and 
capacity of the patient to conform to a strict regimen of 
diet, conduct and dress. Blood-letting and purifying 
measures (emetics and purgatives) should be resorted to 
in such a case and then the special medicinal remedies 
prepared from Bhallaltakat, Sil^jatu, Guggulu, Aguru, 
Tuvaraka, Khadira, and Asaua and the Ayaskriti 
should be used in accordance with the prescribed ! rules. 
The disease in its fifth form (is found to invade the 
bones and) should be given up as incurable. 3-6, 

Treatments of Doshaja Types in 
the first stage of Kushtha, the patient should be treated 
in accordance with the prescribed maxims (lules) of 
Sneha-pana. In a case of Vaitaja-Kushtha, oil or 
clarified butter, cooked with (a decoction and Kalka of) 
Mesha-s'ringi, S'lvadainshtrd, S'amgashtd, Gnduchi 
and the drugs included in the group of Das'nmnla 
should be used as drink and ointment. In cases 
of the Pittaja type, the patient should be made to 
drink (a potion consisting of) clarified butter prepared 
with (a decoction and Kalka of) Dhava, As’vakarua, 
Kakuhha, Folds' a, Pichu-mardha, Parpataka, MadJmka, 
Rodhra and Samangd. In the Kaphaja type, clarified 
butter cooked with (a decoction and Kalka of) Piydla, 
■S'dla, Aragvadha, Nimba, Saptapai-na, ChitraJea, 
Mancha, Vacha and Kushtha should be prescribed. 

* Bhallataka-preparations have been described in the treatment cf 
Ars'as, preparations of S'ilajatu, Guggulu, Aguru and Tuvaraka in the 
treatment of Prameha-pidaka, and Khadira, Asana and Ayaskriii prepara- 
tions in the treatment of Maha-kushtha. 

t Oil should be used in a case of Kapha-predominance, whereas 
clarified butter in that of Pitta-predominance. Others assert that clarified 
butler should be used for drinking purposes and oil for anointments. 



Chap. IX.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


349 


The clarified butter cooked with (a Kalka and a decoc- 
tion of) Bhalldtaka^Ahhayd and Vidanga, or (the medicinal 
oils known as) the Tuvaraka Taila and the Bhalldtaka 
Taila should Be used in all types of Kushtha, 7-8. 

The Wlaha-tikta Ghrita;— A paste or 
Kalka should be made by pounding equal parts of 
Saptaparna, AragvadhUy Ativishd, Pdthd, Katii-rohmi, 
Ainritd^ TripJiald, Patola, PicJm-marda, Parpataka, 
Durdlabhd, Trdyamdnd, Musid, Chandana, Padmaka, 
Haridrd, Upaknlyd, Vis’ did, Mni-vd, S'atdvari, S'drivd, 
Indra-yava, Atanishaka, Shadgranthd (vacJia), Madhtika, 
Bhu-nimha and Giishtikd*. This paste (Kalka) should be 
cooked with four times its own weight of clarified butter, 
with the juice of Amalaka,\ve.ig\i{\ig twice as much as the 
clarified butter and with water weighing four times the 
quantity of the Amalaka juice. It should be constantly 
stirred (with a ladle), while being cooked. This medi- 
cated Ghrita is called the Mali£(-tikta Ghrita, which 
proves curative in Kushtha, chronic fevers, haemorrhage, 
heart-disease, insanity, ApasmAra, Gulma, postular 
eruptions, menorrhagia, goitre, scrofula, elephantiasis, 
jaundice, erysipelas, impotency, itches and Pdma, etc. 9. 

The Tikta-Sarpih T^vo Pala weight of 
each of the following drugs, viz., T 7 -iphald, Patola, Pichu- 
mai'da, Ataniskaka, Katu-rohiiii, Dtirdlabhd, Trdyaindnd 
and P arpataka\ should be taken and boiled together in 
a Drona measure of water. The boiling should be 
continued till it is reduced to one fourth of its original 
quantity. Then half a Pala weight of each of the 
following drugs, viz , Trdyamdnd, Musta, Indt'a-yava, (red) 

^ Chakradatta does not read “Grishtika” but read .“Us'ira” instead. 
He also takes both the kinds of “Haridrd,” of “Upakulyd” (Pippali) and 
of “Sdtiva”. 

t Chakradatta reads ’‘Nis'd” in addition to the above drugs. 



350 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. IX, 


Chandana, Kirdta and Pippali should be pasted together. 
This pasted Kalka and the decoction should be cooked 
with aPrastha measure of clarified butter. The medicated 
Ghrita thus prepared is called the Tikta-Sarpili- Dis- 
eases such as ICushtha, chronic fever, Gulma, Haemor- 
rhoids, Grahani, edema, jaundice, erysipelas and impo- 
tency readily yield to the curative efficacy of this 
Ghrita. lo. 

Medicinal Plasters for Kushtha 

Having first soothed the patient with any of the pre- 
ceding medicated clarified butters and having his body 
fomented , the surgeon should have recourse to the veni- 
section. One, two, three, four, or five s'irds (veins) of the 
patient may be opened (according to the circumtances). 
The raised or elevated patches on the skin should be 
scraped off, or should be kept constantly covered with a 
medicinal plaster. As an alternative, the characteristic 
patches of the disease should be first rubbed with 
the substance known as the Samudra-phma or with the 
leaves of S'dka, Goji, or Kdkoduvihara and a plaster 
(Lepa) composed of Ldkshd. Sarja-rasa, Rasdnjana, 

■ Prapiinndda, Avalguja, Tejovati and the .roots of 
As'va-mdraka, Arka, Kutaja, and Arevata, pasted with 
the urine or bile of a cow, should be applied to them ; or 
Svarjikd, sulphate of copper, sulphate of iron, Vidanga, 
Agdra-dhuma, Chitraka, Katuka, Stidhd, turmeric and 
Saindhava pounded together with the urine or bile of a 
cow should be applied to the diseased localities. 

As an alternative, the alkali, prepared from the ashes 
of Paldda wood in the prescribed manner, should 
be boiled with the powders of the preceding drugs ; it 
should be removed from the oven after reducing it to 
the thickness or consistency of a Phdnita and used jn 
plastering (the diseased patches) ; or a plaster composed 



chap. IX.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


351 


of fyotishka fruits, Ldkshd, Markka, Pippali and the 
leaves of the Jdti flower pasted together ; or a plaster 
composed of yellow orpiment, Manah-s'ild, the milky 
juice of Arka, sesamum, S'igni and Markka, pasted 
together; or a' plaster composed of Svarjikd, Kusktka, 
sulphate of copper, Kntaja, ckitraka, Vidanga, Markka 
and pasted together; or a plaster of Haritaki, 
Karanjikd, Vidanga, white mustard seeds, rock-salt, Goro- 
ckand, Somardji and Haridrd pasted together should be 
applied to the diseased localities. 

Metrical Text ; — The preceding seven medi- 
cinal plasters are possessed of the virtue of destroying 
or curing Kushtha in general. Now hear me deal with 
the remedies to be specifically employed in cases of 
ringworm (Dadrn) and leucoderma (Svitra\ 1 1 . 

Treatment of Dadru •.-A plaster composed 
of Kusktka, mustard seeds, S'ri-nikeia, Haridrd, Trikatu 
and the seeds of Ckakra-inarda and of Mulaka pasted 
together with Takra (butter milk ?) should be applied to 
the ringworm. The disease is found to readily yield 
to the curative efficacy of a medicinal plaster, composed 
of Saindkava, Ckakra-marda seeds, treacle, Kes'ara 
(Vakula), and Tdrkska-s'aila (Rasanjana) pasted together 
with expressed Kapittka juice. Preparations of Hema- 
kskiri, Vyddki-gkdta (Aragvadha), S'iriska, Nimba, 
Sarja, Vatsaka and Aja-karna (a species of Sarja) should 
be used in cases of ringworm of a virulent type for 
baths (D. R. Drinks),* plasters and rubbing. 12. 

Treatment of ^vitra : — In cases of Svitra 
and Pundarika, the patient should be made to drink a 
lukewarm decoction prepared with equal parts of the 

* In drinks or baths, a decoction should be used and in plasters and 
rubbings the ingredients should be pasted with Takra and the expressed 
juice of Kapittha. 


352 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMIIITA. 


[Chap. IX. 


roots of Bhadrd (Udumbara) and Malapti, The use 
of this potion would produce blisters on the patches. 
These blisters should be treated, after their bursting, with 
a plaster (Pralepa) composed of the ashes of the burnt 
skin of leopards and elephants and made into a thin 
paste with (mustard) oil. A plaster composed of the 
insect known as the Puti and the Kshara (alkali) of 
Aragvadha should be found to be the best remedy for 
Svitra. 13. 

All kinds of Svitra are found to readily yield to the 
application of a medicinal plaster made of the black 
ashes of a well-burnt cobra (Krishna-Sarpa) pasted with 
the oil of Vibhitaka. The white ashes of the said cobra 
mixed with one and ahalf time of its own weight of water 
should be filtered seven times in the manner of preparing 
an alkali. Mustard oiP should be cooked with this 
alkaline water weighing four times as much. An appli- 
cation of this oil proves curative in cases of Svitra. 14. 

The Pi'apnnndda seeds. Knslitha and Yashti-inadlm 
should be pasted together with clarified butter. The 
plaster thus prepared should be given to a domestic 
white cock, purposely kept without food for a day and 
a half when it would evince any sign of hunger after the 
period. The dung of the said cock should then be 
collected after a full digestion of the said medicated 
drugs and applied as plasters on the affected patches for 
a month. It would bring about the cure (even) of 
internalf Svitras. 15. 

Well burnt ashes of the dung of an elephant);, mixed 

* This is the best medicine for curing S'vitra. 

t The internal S'vilras ate those under the blisters produced by the 
application of the remedy mentioned first in the list. 

$ S'ivadiisa, the commentator of Chakradatta, says that some read 
in place of in which case it would mean “S'amatba.” 



Chap. IX.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


353 


with elephant’s urine, should be filtered several times 
(twenty-one times or seven times) after the rhanner of an 
alkaline preparation. A Drona measure of this alkaline 
solution should be boiled with the seeds of the Somardji 
weighing a tenth part thereof. This compound should 
be taken down from the oven as soon "as it assumes 
a glossy hue and should then be made into boluses. 
Having rubbed the diseased patches of- Svitra, a 
plaster of these boluses should be applied to them 
which would soon assume a healthy and natural com- 
plexion. 1 6. 

The leaves and bark (Dala-tvacham) of the Amra 
(mango) and the Haritaki* should be well soaked in a 
decoction of the same drugs (after the manner of a 
Bhdvand-saturation) and made into Vartis plugs). 
These Vartis should again be well soaked in the milky 
exudation of the Vata tree and lighted (with mustard oil) 
in a copper vessel used as an Indian lamp. The lamp 
black, thus produced, should be collected and well 
soaked in a decoction of Haritaki. KiHsa (a particular 
kind of Kushtha) is destroyed, if rubbed with this 
preparation for several times after having been lubri- 
cated with mustard oil.-f* 17. 


* According to some, both the leaves and bark of the "Amra” and 
ol the "Hatilaki” should be taken. 

t The leaves and bark respectively of the A'mra and the Haritaki 
should be taken in the preparation. The whole stanza seems to be of faulty 
construction. Dallana, in his commentary, says that some read the fourth 
line as 1%^' ^2^1 n” This seems to 

be a better reading. It removes the difficulty in the construction, but it 
omits also the word "Kil^sa” from the text. This, however, is also an 
improvement, inasmuch as this preparation seems to be a remedy for 
Svitra (which is only a variety of Kildsa) like the preceding and the 
following ones ; and it seems unlikely that Sus'ruta would introduce a 
remedy for Eil^sa in general in the special treatment of S'vitra. 

45 



354 


TriJi SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. IX. 


A case of leucoderma would (undoubtedly) yield to 
the curative virtue of a medicinal plaster composed 
of Somardji . Mdkshika, Kdkodumhara, Ldkshd, 

powdered iron, Pippali and Rasdiijana, taken in equal 
parts and black sesamum equal to their combined 
weight, pasted with the bile of a cow and applied to the 
diseased patches. Similarly, a case of ^vitra would 
prove amenable to the application of peacock’s bile, or 
of burnt Hrivera mixed with the said bile. i8. 

Various types of Svitra are cured with the appli- 
cation of eitker of the two following medicinal plasters. 
The first consists of Tuttha (sulphate of copper), Haritdla 
(yellow oxide of arsenic), Katnkd, Trikatn, Svnha (Rakta- 
Sobhdnjana), Arka, Karavira, Kushtha, Avalgiija, B/tal- 
Idtaka, Kshirini, mustard seeds and Smihi ; and the 

second consists of the leaves of the Tilvaka, Arishta 

/ 

(Nimba), Pilu and Aragvadha pasted together with the 
seeds of the Vidanga and Karavira and Haridrd, Ddni- 
haridrd, Vrihati and Kantakdri. 19. 

Nila-Ghrita. ! — Vdyasi, Phalgu and Tiktd each 
weighing one hundred Palas, two Prastha measures of 
powdered iron, three Adhaka (eight seers) measures of 
Triphald and two Adhaka measures of Asana should be 
boiled together with three Drona measures of water. This 
decoction should be taken down when reduced to one 
quarter of its original measure and cooked again with a 
quantity of clarified butter (weighing a quarter part of 
the former (decoction) and with a Kalka consisting of 
Indra-yava, Trikatu, Tvak, Dcva-ddni, Aragvadha, Pdrd- 
vatapadi, Danti, Vdkucki, Kes'aidhva (Vakula) and 
Kantakdri. The patient should be made to drink this 
medicated clarified butter when the disease would be 
found to have attacked the Dh^tus (fundamental prin- ■ 
ciples of the organism), or to have beconie involved in the 



Chap. IX.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 355 

aggravated Doshas of the system. . The diseased patches 
should be rubbed with it, in the event of the affection 
being found to be confined to the Tvak (skin) alone. 
Even the type of Kushtha, commonly held to be incur- 
able, has been found to prove amenable to the use of 
this medicated clarified butter, which is known as the 
Nila-G-hrita. 20. 

IVIaha-Nila-Ghrita A Tuld* weight of 
the drugs known as Triphald, Tvak, Trikatii, Surasd, 
Madayantikd, Vdyasi and Aragvadha and ten Pala 
weights of each of the drugs known as Kdkamdchi, 
Arka, Vanina, Danti, Kutaja, Chitraka, Ddrn-haridrd 
and Kantakdri should be boiled together with three 
Drona measures of water. This decoction, boiled down 
or reduced to six Prastha measures, should be again 
boiled with the watery secretion of cowdung, cow’s 
urine, milk, curd and clarified butter, each weighing an 
Adhaka, and with the Kalka (weighing one-fourth’ as 
much of clarified butter) of BJm-niinha, Trikatu, 
Chitraka, Kardnja-ixxdxt, Nilikd, S'ydnid, Avalpifa, Pilu, 
Nilini and Nimba-^o'NQxs. It is a curative for Kushtha. 
The rubbing of the diseased patches with this Ghrita 
imparts a healthy and natural colour to the skin- in 
cases of Svitra or white leprosy. It also cures diseases 
like fislula-in-ano, worms in the intestines and Ars'as. 
It is known as the Mahat-Nila-Ghrita.t 21, 

A compound consisting of cow's urine, Chitraka, 
Trikatu and honey should be kept for a fortnight in a 

• A Tuld is equal to a hundred Palas or twelve seers and a half of 
our modern measure. 

t Dallana, in his commentary, says that the two Ghritas (Nila and 
Mahd-Nila) seem to be spurious (Anarsha). But he has included them 
in his commentary as Jejjata and Gayaddsa have read and explained 
Ihejn before him, 



356 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. IX. 


closed earthen pitcher which formerly contained clarified 

t ' 

butter. A Svitra-patient would do well to take this 
medicine after this period. He should also observe the 
rules of diet and regimen of a Kushtha-patient. The 
application of a Lepa (medicinal plaster), prepared by 
pasting the tender twigs of the Putika, Arko, Smihi, 
Aragvadha and of the Jdti flower with cow’s urine, would 
prove curative in cases of Svitra, ringworm, ulcer, bad 
types of liJEmorrhoids and sinus. 22-23. 

In case the foregoing medicinal remedies prove 
ineffective, the patient should be duly bled for the 
purpose of letting out the vitiated blood from the 
system, and after sufficiently recouping his strength 
(after blood-betting) his body should be anointed with 
clarified butter. Copious vomitings should be induced 
with the help of strong emetics and the patient should 
be treated subsequently with a judicious administration 
of purgatives (so as to remove the aggravated Doshas 
from the system). The aggravated Doshas of the 
body, not being fully expelled from the organism of 
a Kushtha-patient by means of the preceding emetic 
and purgative measures, tend to extend all over the 
organism and the disease in consequence thereof is sure 
to lapse into one of an incurable type. Hence the 
aggravated Doshas should be fully eliminated from the 
organism. 24-25. 

Emetics should be administered to a Kushtha-patient 
once a fortnight and Sramsana (purgatives) once a 
month. He should be bled twice a year though not 
profusely and medicated snuffs should be administered 
to him every fourth day. 26. 

Internal application of Haritahi, Trikatu and treacle 
( prepared from the juice of the sugarcane ) mixed with 
oil would lead to the early recovery of a case of Kushtha, 



Chap. IX.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


357 


As an alternative, he should use a lambative medicinal 
compound of Anialaka, Aks/ta, Pippali and Vidmiga 
mixed with honey and clarified butter Or he should 
take a Pala weight of Haridrd with an adequate quantity 
of cow’s urine every day for a month in order to get 
free from Kushtha ; or the same quantity of the fine 
powder of Pippali or of Chitraka should be given to 
him through the same vehicle and for the same period 
which would cure him of Kushtha. The same quantity 
of the fine powder of Rasdnjana should be given through 
the said vehicle and in the same manner for a period 
of one month and the same should also be repeatedly 
applied externally. 27-28. 

The bark of Arishta (Nimba) and Sapta-pami^Ldkshd, 
Musta, Das'a-inuli, Haridrd, Ddni-Jiaridrd, Manjishthd, 
Aksha, Vdsaka, -Deva ddni, Pathyd, Chitraka Trikatu, 
Amalaki and Vidanga taken in equal parts and pounded 
together should be mixed with powdered weigh- 

ing as much as the total weight of the preceding drugs ; 
the patient should be made to take a Pala weight of 
this pulverised compound every day (for a month), or he 
should be made to drink (in adequate doses) a Drona 
measure of medicated clarified butter, cooked with the 
powders of Triphald and Trikata. As an alternative, 

t 

Aksha-pida should be boiled in a Drona measure of 
cow’s* urine. Clarified butter, cooked in this pre- 
paration may be used, as a remedy for Kushtha. 
An adequate quantity of old and matured clarified 
butter should be boiled with Aragvadhd., Sapta-pama, 
Patola, Vrikshaka, Naktamdla, Nimba, the two kinds 
of Haridrd and Mushkaka. This medicated Ghrita, 

* Cow’s urine and water in equal parts should be taken according to 
some commentators. Dallana, however, recommends cow’s urine only and 
no water, 



358 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap, IX- 

thus prepared, would lead to the destruction of 
Kushtha* 29-30. 

Drugs such as Rodhra,Nimia, Padma-kdshtha, Rakta- 
chandana, Sapta-parni, Aksha, Vnks/iaka and Vijaka 
should be administered in the bathi* of the patient in 
the event of there being any burning sensation ; or a 
potion consisting of honey and pasted Tri-hhandi 
(Trivrit) should be given to him. Old and matured 
Mudga, boiled in the decoction]; of Nimba and mixed 
with oil, should be given to the patient as drink where 
sloughing would be detected in the diseased localities. 
A decoction of Niniba or that of Arka, Alarka and 
Sapta-chchhada should be given him if there be any 
worms in the diseased locality. The affected part of 
the body should be plastered over with the roots of the 
As'va-nidra and Vidanga, pasted with cow’s urine, in the 
event of its being eaten away by the worms. Cow’s urine 
should be sprinkled over the diseased locality and all. 
food (of the patient) should be given with the powders 
of Vidanga. 31-32. 

As an alternative, the affected - parts should be 
rubbed with the oil of Karanja, mustard, S'igm, or 
Kos'dmra, or with an oil (any one of the preceding oils) 
cooked with (a decoction of) pungent, bitter and heat- 
producing substances. Measures laid down under the 
head of Dushta-Vrana (malignant ulcer) should be 
resorted to in a case where the aforesaid remedies would 
fail to produce any beneficial effect. 33. 

* Dallana says that the authorship of this remedy should not be attri- 
buted toSus'ruta, inasmuch as Jejjata doesnot mention it in his commentary. 

t The drugs are to be boiled in water in Which the patient should 
take his bath. 

t The decoction should be prepared in the ipinrer of " Shadanga- 
kalpa.” 



Chap. IX.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


359 


■ Vajraka-Taila : — The roots of Sapta-pama, 
Karanja, Arka, Mdlati, Karavira, Snuhi, S’irisha, 
Chitraka and Asphoid as well as of Visha (aconite root), 
Ldngala, Vajrdkhya (mica), sulphate of iron, Haritdla, 
Manah-s'ild Karanja-s&QA?>f Trikatu, Triphald, the two 
kinds of Haridrd, white mustard -seeds, Vidanga and 
Prapunndda should be pasted together with the urine of 
a cow. The paste thus prepared should be cooked in 
an adequate quantity of oil.* This oil known as the 
Vajraka-Taila, used as uguents, proves remedial to 
Kushtha etc., sinus and malignant ulcers in general. 34. ’ 
Wlaha-Vajraka Taila The drugs and sub- 
stances known as white mustard-seeds (Siddhirthaka), 
the two kinds of Karanja, the two kinds of Haridrd, 
Rasdnjana,Ktitaja, Prapunndda, Sapta-parna,Mrigddani 
Ldkshd, Sarja-rasa, Arka, Asphotd, Aragvadha, Snuhi, 
S'irisha, Tuvara, Kutaja, Arushkara, Vacha, Kushtha, 
Vidanga, Manjishthd, Ldngali, Chitraka, Mdlati, Katu- 
tmnbi, Gandhdhvd, Mulaka, Saindhava, Karavira, Griha- 
dhtcma, Visha (aconite), Kampillaka, Sind%ira (mercuric 
oxide), Tejohvd and sulphate of copper should be taken 
in equal parts and made into a paste. This paste 
(Kalka) should be cooked with either Karanja-oW or 
mustard-oili*, both of which have great curative potency, 
with double the quantity of cow’s urine. It may also be 
prepared with sesamum-oil, but in this case four times as 
much of cow’s urine should be taken. As an anointment 
it is undoubtedly efficacious in a case of Kushtha of 
whatsoever type as well as in cases of scrofula, fistula-in- 
ano, sinus and malignant ulcers. This oil is known by the 

* S'ivadasa, the commentator on chakradatta, asserts, on the authority 
of Vdgbhata, that the oil should be sesamum-oil and it should be boiled 
with cow’s urine. 

t According to Gayaddsa mustard-oil should be used. 



3^0 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. IX. 


name of MahsC-Vajraka oil and is possessed of supreme 
and unquestionable efficacy. 35. 

The drugs which constitute the Ldkshddi group 
should be pasted with an ' adequate quantity of cow’s 
urine and cooked* with sesamum-oil and ’mixed with 
Pitta (.cow’s bile). The oil, thus prepared, should be 
preserved for a week inside the body of a Katukdldvu. 
The oil should be taken out (after this period) and the 
patient should use it both internally and externally 
(in an adequate quantity). After doing this, he should 
expose himself to the heat of the sun whereby all the 
Doshas would be eliminated from his organism. After 
the complete elimination of the Doshas from the sys- 
tem, the patient should be removed from the sun and 
bathed with a decoctioni* of Khadira, and a gruel, pre- 
pared with the decoction of Khadira, should be given 
him as diet. Similarly, oil or clarified butter boiled and 
prepared with the drugs constituting the Sams' odhana 
group (mentioned in chap, xxxix, Sutra.) or with 
the drugs possessing anti-Kushtha properties should 
be used as hot plasters and rubbings (in the diseased 
localities) Purgatives should be administered every 
morning with good results. The preceding remedies 
should be taken and continued for five, six, seven, 
or eight days, or till the Doshas of the system pro- 
ducing the disease are not perfectly eliminated. As 
an alternative, camel’s urine and after its full digestion, 
camel’s milk should be taken. Even parasitic types of 
Kushtha are sure to disappear within six months (under 
the course of this treatment). 36. 

* In cooking the oil, cow’s urine weighing four times of oil should be 
taken.— Dallana. 

t The decoction of Khadira in the bath as well as in the preparation of 
the gruel should be prepared after the manner of Shadanga*Kal pa.— Dallana, 



Chap. IX.] CHIKITSA STIIANAM. 361 

A Kushtha-patient desirous of being perfectly cured 
should constantly use preparations of Khadira in his 
drinks, food, bath, etc. Khadira, if properly used, is 
potent enough to curb the virulence of the disease in 
the same proportion as the latter is in invading , the 
successive strata of the human organism and ultimately 
in bringing on, the death of the patient. ’ 37. 

The paring of the nails and shaving the hair off, light 
physical exercise, the use of wholesome food, regularity 
in using medicines, abstinence from wine, women and 
meat-diet are the rules of conduct which should be 
strictly observed by a patient affected with Kushtha. 
With the strict observance of the above rules a Kushtha- 
patient may be expected to recover, 38. 

Thus ends Ihe ninth Chapter of the Chikitsita Sthilnam in the 
Sus'rula Samhita which deals with the medical treatment of Kushtha. 


46 



CHAPTER X. 


Now we shall discourse on the medical treatment 
of major cutaneous affections (Wlaha-Kushthal* I. 

Metriical Text : — An intelligent physician 
should have recourse to the following medicinal com- 
pounds in virulent types of Kushtha, urinary com- 
plaints (Meha), diseases due to the action of the de- 
ranged and aggravated Kapha and general cedima of 
the body and also in respect of inordinately corpulent 
persons wishing to reduce their obesity. 2. 

IVIantha-KalpaS Pounded barley-corn 
should be saturated with the urine of a cow and kept in 
a large bamboo basket (Kilinj i) for the whole night ; and 
should then bi dried in the sun on the following day. 
This process should be continued for seven consecutive 
days. At the close of this period it should be fried in an 
earthen vessel J<lapdla) and then ground to fine powder 
(Saktu). The powder, thus prepared should be given 
every morning to a person afflicted with Kushtha 
(leprosy), or any urinary complaint (Prameha) through 
the medium of a decoction of the drugs included 
within the S'dlasdrddi group, or of the Kantaki (thorny) 
trees, and mixed with a pulverised compound of Bhalld- 
taka, Praptmndda, Avalguja, Arka, Chitraka, Vidar.ga 
and Musta weighing a fourth part of the S'aktu. Barley- 
corn should, in the same manner, be soaked in a 

* Kushtha which affeds the deeper tissues and fundamental principles 
of the body is called. MahS-Kushlha. 

Gayi interprets the term “Maha-Kushtha ” as signifying those seven 
types of Kushtha which cannot be attributed to any detectable cause, 
t Vadara, Khadira, Arimeda, §nuhi, etq. 



Chap. X.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM, 


363 


decoction of the drugs constituting the S’ dia-sdrddi or 
the Aragvadhddi groups, or barley-corn should be given 
to a cow to .eat and the undigested barley-corn passed 
with the cow-dung should be collected. This barley- 
corn should then be fried and powdered in the form of 
Saktu. This powder should be mixed with a pul- 
verised compound of BJialldtaka^ etc., jnentioned above, 
and given to the patient through the medium of a 
decoction of any one of the Khadira, Asaua, Niinba, 
Raja- Vriksha, Rohitaka and Gudtichi, sweetened with 
honey and sugar, and acidified with grapes, or the ex- 
pressed juice of pomegranate and Ainla-vetasa and 
then mixed with rock-salt. This is the method of pre- 
paring all kinds of Manthas. 3. 

Articles of food made of barley-corn in the form 
of Dhdna, Lunchaka, Kulmdsha, Apupa, Purnakosa, 
Utkdrika,* Sashkulikd, Kundrif and Kondli, etc., should 
be given as diet. Preparations of wheat and Venu-yava 
(seeds of bamboo) after the manner of barley prepara- 
tions should also be recommended as a proper 
food. 4-5. 

Medicated Arishtas Now we shall describe 
the mode of preparing Arishtas (applicable in cases 
of Kushtha). Six Pala weight of each of the following 
drugs, viz., Puiika, Chavya, Chitraka, Deva-ddni, Sdrivd, 
Danti zxiA and one Kudava weight of Vadara 

and Triphald should be powdered. An earthen jar or 
pitcher, which formerly contained clarified butter, should 
be purified^ and plastered inside with a compound 

*■ Gayadasa reads Chilra (a kind of soup) be'ote “Uikdtika.’ 

t Dallana does not read “Kondli” but says that some read “Kondlikd’ 
in place of “Kundti” both of which ate synonyms. We have, howevtr, 
both the terms in our text. 

$ The jar should be purified or disinfected by fumigation with the 
medicinal drugs such as Nimba-UaveSj Guggulu, etc. 



3^4 


IHE .-SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


,[Chap, X- 


of honey, clarified butter and powdered: Ft/>pah’. " Then 
the pult^erised compound, mentioned 'above, together 
with seven Kudava measures ;of water* half a Kudava 
measure of iron-powder, and half a Tuld weight of treacle, 
should be poured into the said jar which should then be 
tightly, covered with a lid and placed under a heap of 
barley for se'ven ^days (for fermentation). After this 
period', it ’should be taken out arid the patient should be 
made to take some of it (every day) according to his 
physical capacity. ' This Arishta (fermented liquor) cures 
Kushtha, obesity, urinary complaints (Meha), jaundice 
and oedima. Arishtas may also be similarly perpared 
from the drugs included in the S' dla-sdradi, the Nya- 
grodhddi or the Aragvadhddi group. 6. 

- MediCHted Asavas Now we shall describe 
the mode of preparing Asavas, The ashes of ' burnt 
Palds'a should be dissolved in hot water and duly filtered. 
Three parts of this (alkaline) water, subsequently cooled, 
and two parts of Phanita (molasses) should be 
■mixed together and fermented in the manner of pre- 
paring Arishtaf. Asa’vas may be similarly prepared 
with the alkali made of the ashes of sesamum plants 
(described in connection with the treatment of As'mari 
— Chapter. VII), or with the drugs constituting the S'dla- 
sdrddz, the Nyagj-odhddi, or the Aragvadhddi groups, or 
with cow’s urine as iri the proceeding manner. 7. 

■ , IWedicated Surd^S : — Now we shall describe 
(the process of ’ preparing Surds (wines). A decoction 
should be. duly made of S'ims'pd and Khadira woods 
with Uitamdrani, Brdhini and Kos’dtaki boiled together 

* Jyjata. recommends twenty-eight Pala weight of water, but Gaya- 
dasa does not support this. 

t Powders of. Putika, Chilraka, etc., mentioned in connection .wilh the 
preparation of Arishtas should be likewise added to it. — Daljana., 


Chap. XL] , CHIKITSA STHANAM. 3<^5 

in waters Then Surd-kinva (the drug winch is used to 
cause the fermentation in the manufacture of spirits) 
should be mixed with the above decoction . and the 
compound distilled in the usual officinial method-. ’ The 
liquor thus, prepared is called Sara. Sm'ds rriay be 
similarly prepared, from the drugs of the S'dltt-sdfddi, 
the Aragvad/iadi, or the Nyngrodhddi groups. 8. 

Medicated Avalehas (lambatives) Now 
we shall describe (the method of preparing) medicated 
Avalehas (lambatives). A decoction should be prepared 
with the Sdra inessential parts) oi Khadira, Asana, Nimba, 
Rdja-vriksha and S'dla. t Fine powders of the same 
drugs should be mixed with the above (decoction) and 
boiled again. The compound should be removed from 
the fire neither thick nor thin. The patient should 
be made to lick a handful I of the compound mixed 
with honey and be made to abstain from taking any meal 
in the morning. Similar preparations may be made 
(A-Valeha) from the drugs of the S'dla-sdrddi, the Arag- 
vadhddi, or the Nyagrodhddi groups. 9. 

Medicinal Churnas:— Now we shall de- 
scribe the process of preparing pulverised compounds. 
A Prashtha measure of the powdered SAra of the 
trees belonging to the S' dla-sdrddi group should be 

* Qne part of S'io-ii'apa', one of Khadita and a third of Uttamarani, 
Btahmi and Kos'aiaki should be taken. TuH weight of the drugs and 
four Drona measures of water should be boiled and reduced to one Drona. 
— Dallana. ' ' " _ \ 

t Gayadasa does not read ‘-S'ala” in the list. 

$ Though the word "Panitala” means a “Katsha” r.e., two TblaS, yfet 
as there is the word “Purnam” inserted after it, so a handful - should, be 
understood here by .this term. — Dallana. It should be observed, 
however, that the difference- in the two -interpretations is' ultimately 
immaterial. — Ed. 



366 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. X. 

many times (i. e., seven days) saturated with the decoc- 
tion of the drugs of the Aragvadhddi group (and dried). 
Then the prepared compound should be taken with the 
vehicle of the decoction of the drugs of the said S' dla- 
sdrddi group. A pulverised compound {Churna) may be 
as well prepared in the above manner from the fruits 
of the Nyagrodddhi group or from the flowers of the 
Aragvadhddi group. lo. 

IVledicinal Ayaskriti ; — Nowwe shall de- 
scribe the process of preparing an Ayaskriti (iron com- 
pound). Thin leaves of steel should be plastered with the 
(five officinal kinds of) salts and heated in fire a of dried 
cow-dung. When red-hot, they should be immersed in a 
decoction of Trifhald and the drugs of the S'dla-sdrddi 
group. The above process should be repeated sixteen 
times in succession after which they should be heated and 
burnt in a fire of Khadira wood. When cooled down, 
the iron foils should be pounded into fine powder and 
passed through a piece of thick linen. The patient should 
be made to take this powder with honey and clarified 
butter in an adequate dose suiting his capacity. After 
the digestion of the medicine, he should take such a meal 
as is not hostile to hisparticular disease and is devoid 
of salt and acid articles. The use of a Tuld measure 
of this medicinal iron preparation in the above manner 
leads to the recovery of Kushtha, Meha (urinaiy com- 
plaints), obesity, oedima, jaundice, insanity and epilepsy 
and makes the patient live for one hundred years. The 
use of each additional Tuld weight of the preparation 
adds a centuiy to the duration of the user’s life. 
This is the mode of medically preparing all kinds of 
Loha (zinc, copper, lead and gold). 11-12. 

Aushadha Ayaskriti A ball of iron 

(weighing fifty Palas) heated and made red-hot in a 



Chap. X.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


367 


fire of Khadira wood should be cooled by immersing it 
in a cauldran (Droni), made of • (green) Paldsa wood 
and containing (five-hundred Palas of) Svarasa (expressed 
juice^^ofTrivit, Agnimantha, Samkhini, Kevuka, 

Lodhra/Priphald, Palds'a and S'ims'apA. The iron mass 
should be thus heated and cooled twenty one times 
in succession ; finally the iron ball should be immersed 
and boiled in the expressed juice of the foregoing drugs 
over a fire of cow-dungs. It should be removed from 
the fire when only a quarter part of the liquid would 
remain. It should now be filtered and the mass of 
iron should be again heated in the fire mixed with the 
same liquid and boiled again; when the cooking is 
nearly complete, (it should be removed from, the fire 
and) a pulverised compound of the drugs included in the 
Pippalyddi gr:oVi^ together with honey and clarified butter 
each weighing double the quantity of the iron mass or 
ball should be mixed with the same. When cooled down, 
this preparation should be preserved in a well-sealed, 
iron-pitcher. The medicine, thus prepared, should be 
given to the patient according to his capacity but not 
less than a Sukti (.half a Pala) or a Prakuncha measure 
(one Pala). After the digestion of this medicine, a diet 
should be given to the patient determined by the nature 
of his disease. This is called the Aushadha Ayaskriti 
and it cures even the incurable types of Kushtha and 
urinary complaints (Meha\ reduces obesity, impairs 
cedima and improves the impaired digestive functions. 

* Old and experienced physicians explain "Svaraiam" to be the 
decoction as well. Gaya> d<a says that a decoction of one Drona weight 
of the drugs, boiled in four Drona weight of water and reduced to its 
quarter part should be taken. Dallana says that if the expressed juice of 
the drugs be not available, then a cold infusion of one Adhaka weight of 
the powdered drugs should b? Ifiken, 



368: 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap, X. 


It ..is' specially efficacious in cases, "of phthisis 
(Rdja-Yak'shma). A proper, and’ regular use of this 
remedy increases the duration of' life to a hundred 
years. 13. ' ' 

Wlahaushadha-Ayaskriti A decoction 
of the drugs of the S'dla-sdrddi group should be poured 
in a Droni (vessel) made of Patds'a wood. "Sheets of 
iron should be made 'red-hot and cooled down 
(twenty one times) by immersing them into the said 
decoction of the drugs of the S'dla-sdrddi group. The 
interior part of an earthen pitcher should be disinfected 
(with fumigation). Then the iron foils and the powder 
of the drugs of the Pippalyddi group together with 
treacle and honey should be added and preserved 
in the earthen pitcher with its mouth well-covered 
with a lid for a period of one month (in winter) or a 
fortnight (in summer). This preparation is called the 
Mahaushadha-Ayaskriti and an adequate quantity of 
it should be- given to the patient after the lapse of the 
said period. Similar preparations of (iron) may be 
made with a decoction of the drugs of the Nyagro- 
dhddi or Arevaiddi (Aragvadhddi) group. 14. 

The Khadira Vidhana : — Now we shall 
describe the Khadira preparations. The earth around 
the central root of a middle-aged Khadira tree, grown 
in a commendable soil and not worm-eaten, should 
be' dug out and the central and principal root of the 
tree should be cut open. An iron pitcher should be 
placed under the tree so that the secreted juice maj’- 
collect into it through the main root. The outer surface 
of the tree should be completely plastered with a' 
-paste .of clay and cow-dung (mixed together). It should 
then be -tre.ated with a fire fed with faggots mixed 
■\vith cow-dung so that the glutinous secretions of 



Chap. X.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


369 


the Khadira. tree would naturally settle down- into -the 
pitcher (through the principal root). 'When the pitcher 
is filled up, the juice should be collected and 
filtered and then kept in another vessel with its lid 
carefully closed and sealed. The extract so pie- 
served should be taken in proper doses with honey, clari- 
fied butter and the expressed juice of Amalaka. The 
patient should be made to take such diet and observe 
such regimen of conduct, as has been prescribed in 
connection with the use of Bhallsitaka compounds, after- 
the digestion of the medicine. A Prastha' measure of 
this remedy gradually taken by a man enables him to 
Vive a hundred summers. 15. 

Khadira-Sara-Kalpa A decoction made 
by boiling a T uld weight of the essential part (Sdra) of the 
Khadira tree with a Drona measure of water and boil.ed 
down to a sixteenth part of its original quantity should 
be kept in a vessel with its mouth tightly closed. 
An adequate quantity of this decoction should be taken 
every day with honey, clarified butter and the expressed 
juice of Amalaka. The present method should be 
adopted with the extract from the essential parts (Sdra) 
of all other medicinal trees. 16. 

Every morning the patient should be made to take 
an adequate dose of the powders of Khadira-EEira, 
or its decoction, until a Tula weight is consumed-, or 
he should be made to take a potion of the clarified 
butter churned from the milk of a ewe and cooked in 
a decoction of Khadira-sdra, As an- alternative 
the expressed juice or a decoction Ainrita-valli, or 
clarified butter cooked with that juice or decoction, 
should be taken every morning. The patient should 
every afternoon take a meal of boiled rice with clari- 
fied butter and Amalaka-soxx'^. A constant use of this 

47 



370 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap, X. 


remedy and a conformity to the foregoing diet for a 
month would lead to a radical cure of any type of 
Kushtha. ly. 

Oils pressed out of black sesamum and Bhalldtaka, 
clarified butter, the expressed juice of A^fialaka and 
the decoction of the .drugs of the S' dla-sdrddi group, 
each weighing a Drona measure, and a Pala weight 
of each of the following drugs, viz., Triphald, Trikatu, 
the pith or marrow of Parusha fruit, Vidanga seed, 
Chitraka, Arka, Avalguja, Haridrd, Ddm-haridrd, 
Triviit, Danti, Indra-yava, Yashti-inadhit, Ativishd, 
Rasdnjana and Priyangu, should be boiled together 
in the manner of cooking medicated oil, etc. (Sneha- 
pAka Vidhdna). When well cooked, this medicated com- 
pound should be strained (through a piece of clean linen) 
and carefully preserved (in an earthen pitcher with its 
mouth well closed w'ith a lid). The system of the patient 
should be well cleansed (with appropriate emetics 
and purgatives) and a Pala weight of this preparation, 
mixed with honey, should be given to him every 
morning. After the digestion of this medicine, he 
should be made to take a light meal of rice well cooked 
with a decoction of the Khadira-wood and mixed with 
clarified butter, and the soup (Yusha) of Arnalaka pr 
Mudga unseasoned with salt. A Drona measure (of this 
compound), gradually taken in the aforesaid manner by 
a patient taking a (light) decoction'*^ of Khadira (instead 
of water), would ensure a speedy recovery from all 
types of Kushtha and enable the patient to witness a 
hundred summers (on earth) in the full enjoyment of 
sound health and intellect. i8. 

* The decoction of Khadira-wood for drink should be prepared after 
the manner of Shadanga-paniya preparation.— Ed. 



Chap. X.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


371 


Memorable Verse : — An intelligent physi- 
cian may prepare a thousand varieties of medicated 
remedies, such as Surds, Asavas, Arishtas, Lehas 
(lambatives), powders and Ayaskritis (metal-prepara- 
tions) with the aforesaid drugs and in the manner 
described above. 19. 

Thus ends the tenth Chapter of Ch'ikitsita Sthdnam in the Sus'ruta 
Samhita which deals with the medical treatment of Mah^-Kushtha. 



CHAPTER XI. 


Now we shall discourse on the medical treatment of 
the diseases of the urinaiy tracts (Pramcha). i. 

This disease may be ascribed to two causes, such 
as the congenital (Sahaja) and that attributable to 
the use of injudicious diet. The first type (Sahaja) 
is due to a defect in the seeds of one’s parents and 
the second is originated from the use of unwhole- 
some food. The symptoms, which mark the first 
of these two types, are emaciation and a dryness 
(of the body), diminished capacity of eating, too 
much thirst and restlessness; while the symptoms, which 
usually attend the latter type of the disease, are obesity, 
voracity, gloss of the body, increased soporific tendency 
and inclination for lounging in' bed or on cushions. A 
case of emaciation, etc., (viz., the first kind of Prameha) 
should be remedied with nutritious food and drink, etc., 
whereas Apatarpana, etc., (fasting, physical exercise,, 
depletory measures etc.), should be adopted in cases of 
obesity viz., the second kind of (Prameha). 2, 

Forbidden Articles of Food & Drink : 

— All patients suffering from Prameha should forego 
the use of (the different species of wine and fermented 
liquor known as) Sauviraka, Tushodaka, Sukta, Maireya, 

t 

Surd, and Asava, water, oil, clarified butter, milk, any 
modification of the expressed juice of sugarcane, cakes, 
milk-curd, acid, Pdnaka* the flesh of domestic and 
aquatic animals and of those which frequent swamps 
or marshy places. 3. 

* Made of sugar, lemon-juice, or fermented rice.gruel boiled together. 



Chap. XI.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


373 


Articles of diet! — The use of sufficiently old 
and matured, S'dli and Shashtika rice, barley, wheat, 
Kodrava, Udddlaka, with the different preparations of 
Chanaka, Adhaki, Kulatiha or Mtidga pulse is recom- 
mended ; or the meal should be taken with the S'dkas 
(potherbs) of bitter or astringent taste cooked with the 
oils of Nikumbha, Ingitdi^ mustard or linseed oil ; or 
with the soup of the lean flesh of Jdngala animals 
which are possessed of anti-diurctic properties cooked 
without any clarified butter and unseasoned with any 
acid juice. 4. 

Preliminary Treatment The patient 
should be first anointed with any of the oils (of Nikum- 
bha, Ingudi, Sarshapa, Atasi, etc.); or with the medi- 
cated clarified butter^''" cooked with the drugs of the 
Priyangvddi group and should also betieated with strong 
emetics and purgatives-]*. After the application of pur- 
gatives, an Asthdpana measure with a decoction of the 
drugs of the Surasddi group, mixed with honey and Sain- 
dhava salt and with the powders of S'unthi, Bhadraddru 
and Musta by way of an after-throw, should be resorted 
to. (On the eighth day) in a case attended with a burn- 
ing sensation, a decoction of the Nyagrodhddi group 
without {i.e , mixed with a little quantity of) Sneha (oil 
or clarified butter) should be used (in the manner of 
an Asthdpana). 

The five Wledicinal remedies After 
cleansing the system, the expressed juice| of 
Anialaka mixed with//rt;77W7'a (powder) and honey should 

* The p.itient should be anointed with the medicated clarified butter 
in a case of Piltaia-meha. 

t Emetics in cases of Kaphaja-melia and purgatives in those of 
Pittaja-melia, should be applied. 

t This is also found in Chataka and has kpen quoted by Chakradatta 
in his compilation, 



374 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.. 


[Chap. XI, 


be administered. . As .an alternative, a decoction* of 
Triphald, Vis' did, Deva-ddnt and Musta or an Aksha 
(two Told) measure of the Kalka (powders)t of S'dla, 
Kmnpillaka and Mushkaka [both of them) sweetened 
with honey and the expressed juice of Amalaka should 
be taken ; or powders]: of the flowers of KutaJa,Kapittha, 
Rohita, V'ibhitaka. and Saptaparna (should be taken 
with honey, Haridrd and the expressed juice of Amalaka), 
or a decoction of the roots, leaves, barks, flowers and 
fruits of Nimba, Aragvadha, Saptapar7ia, Mwvd, Kutaja, 
Soma-vrikska, Balds' a should be given to the patient. 
All cases of Meha are often found to yield to the use of 
any of these five medicinal preparations, g. 

Specific Treatments Now we shall speci- 
fically describe the course of treatment to be adopted 
in each particular type of the disease (Prameha). A 
decoction of Pdrijdta should be given in a case of 
Udaka-melia ; a decoction of Vaijayanti in that of 
Ikshu-meha j a decoction of Nhnba in a case of Sur£i- 
meha ; a decoction of Chitmka in a case of S'ikatii- 
meka; a decoction of Khadira in a case of S'anair- 
meha; a decoction of Pdthd and Agimi in a 
case of Lavana-meha ; a decoction of Hai-idrd 

*This is quoted by Chakradatta but he reads “ ” in place 

of " ®od does not mention the use of the expressed juice of 

Amalaka. The practice, however, is to follow the recipe of Chakradatta. 

t The third Yoga of the text is also quoted by Chakradatta but no 
addition ofHaridra powder is prescribed there. Chakradatta is more 
generally followed in the case, 

t The fourth Yoga of the text is found .also in Charaka although with 
some variation. Charaka adds the flowers of Kampilla and S'ala in the 
list, but does not recommend the use of Haridra powder nor of the 
expressed juice of Amalaki as the medium of taking the medicine. 
Charaka, however, is quoted verbatim by Chakradatta and is followed 
in practical use, 



Chap. XI,] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


375 


and Ddrii-haridrd in a case of PisMa-melia ; 
a decoction of S'aptaparna in a case of Saindra- 
meha ; a decoction of Dm-vd, S'aivdla, Plava, Hatha- 
karanja and Kas'eruka, or that of Kakubha and red- 
sandal wood in a case of Sakra-melia ; and a decoction 
of Triphald, Aragvadha and Drdkshd mixed with honey 
in a case of a Phena-meha. All detections, to be em- 
ployed in the foregoing ten types of Kaphaja-meha, 
should be sweetened with honey (slightly sweetened with 
honey — D, R ). 

Treatment of Pittaja Prameha : - In 

the Pittaja types of the disease, a decoction of the drugs 
of the S' dla-sdrddi group or that of As'vattha should be 
administered in a case of Nila-meha ; similarly a de- 
coction of Rdja-vriksha should be given in a case of 
Haridrjf-meha ; a decoction of the Nyagrodhddi group, 
mixed with honey, in a case of Amla-meha ; a decoc- 
tion of Triphld in a case of Ksha'ra-meha ; a decod- 
tion of Manjishthd and (red) Chandana in a case of 
Manjishthsi-meha ; and a decoction of Gtidiichi, seeds of 
Tinduka, Kds'ma^ya and Kharjura, mixed with honey, 
in a case of Sonita-Tneha*'. 6. 

Palliative Measures Now we shall de- 
scribe the palliative measures to be adopted even in cases 
of incurable types of the disease. A Kalka compound of 
Kushtha, Ktitaja,Pdthd, Hingti ?Ln6. Katu-rohmi s\ion\d 
be taken with a decoction of Guduchi and Chitraka in 
a case of Sarpir-meha. A patient afflicted with an 
attack of Vasai-meha should be made to drink a decoc- 
tion of Agni-mantha or of S'hns'apd. Similarly a decoc- 

Honey should be added to all oi these decoctions prescribed in 
cases Pittaja-meha. — Dallana. 

t Honey should also be added to these decoctions prescribed in 
cases of Vaija Meha. — Dallana. 



THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap, XL 


376 


tion oi Khadira, Kadara and should be given 

in a case of Kshaudra-meha ; a decoction of Thiduka, 
Kapittha, S'irisha, Palds'a, Pdthd, IPirvd, and Dus- 
parsd (Dur^Iabhd) mixed with honey * or the Kshdra, 
(alkaline water) prepai'ed from the ashes of the bones of 
an elephant, horse, hog, ass or camel, in a case of 
Hasti-meha'. A gruel (Yavdgu prepared in the manner 
of Shadanga-kalpa) with a decoction of aquatic bulbs 
and sweetened with milk and the juice of sugarcane 
should be prescribed in a case attended with a burning 
sensation. 7- 

Wledicinal Arishtas, Asavas, Yava- 

gUS, etc. \ — Likewise Arishtas, Ayaskritis, lamba- 
tives and Asavas should be prepared (in the manner 
hereinbefore described) with Priyangti, Ana'atd, Yuthikd, 
Padmd (Bhdrgi), Trdyantikd, Lohitikd, Ambashthd, bark 
of pomegranate, S' dla-parni, (D.R. — Tdla-parni), Padnia 
(lotus), Tiinga, Kes’ura, Dhdtaki, Vakula, S'ahnali, 
S'7-i-veshtaka and Mocharasa, should be administered 
to the patient. As an alternative, similar preparations 
made of S'7-ingdtaka, Gilodya,, Mi'mdla, Kas'e7ttka, 
Madhuka, A'7n7a, Jainhu, Asa7ia, Thiis'a, A7ju7ia, Kat- 
va7iga, Lodh7‘a, Bhalldtaka, Cha7-7ni-vriksha, Gh’i-kariiikd, 
S'ita-s'iva, NicJmla, Dddhna, Aja-kar7ia, Ha7-i-v7-iksha, 
Rdjdda7ia,Gopagho7itd and V ika77ikata should be prescrib- 
ed. Different preparations of Yavdgu, etc. should be given 
to the patient as diet. A gruel (Yavdgu) cooked with 
the decoction of the preceding medcinal drugs or (only 
these) decoctions should be given to the patient as drinks. 

Potions of any of the aforesaid Asavas thickened 
with an admixture of powdered Pdihd, Chitraka and 
Ha7'itaki and sweetened with a liberal quantity of honey 


* Jejjata interprets it as grape-wine, but Gayadasa does not support 
this view. 



Chap. XI.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


377 


should be prescribed for a rich or royal patient- of 
injudicious conduct and refusing to take medicines ; 
or he should be made to drink frequent potions of 
Mddhvika liquors (prepared' from honey) # with meat 
roasted on gridiron over a charcoal fire. Food and drinks 
mixed with' honey, Kapittha and pepper should be 
prescribed for him. 8. 

The powdered dung of a camel, a mule, or an ass 
should be administered to him in food ; he should take 
his meal with soups saturated with a compound of 
asafcetida and Saindhava salt or with mustard prepara^ 
tions (Raga). * His food and drink should be fragrant 
and well flavoured Iwith ingredient not incompatible 
with the nature of the disease. 9-10. 

The practice of regular physical exercise, wrestling, 
active sports, riding on a horse or an elephant, long 
walks, pedestrial journeys, practising archery, casting 
of javelines, etc., should be resorted to in a case where 
the disease has made a decided advance, ii. 

A poor and friendless patient should live on alms, 
lead a life of perfect continence like an ascetic, forego 
the use of shoes and umbrella and walk a hundred 
Yojanasf or more on foot without staying for more than 
one night at a single village. A rich man (suffering 
from Prameha) should live on S'ydmdka, Kapittha, 
Tinduka and As'mantaka and live among the deer. 
He should constantly follow the tracks of cows and take 
their dung and urine (for food and drink). A Brahman 
patient should live on the grain, spontaneously fallen 
from plants, constantly study the Vedas and draw 


* Some read i e. polheib t of mustard ) in place of 

I” 

+ A Yojana is equal to eight miles. 


48 



THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


(Chap. XI, 


^78 

chaqotB occupied by BrAhmanas, * A patient ' belong- 
ing.to the lower orders of society (Sudras, etc.) should be 
■fnade to sink wells (under such circumstances) and the 
strength of a weak or emaciated patient should be pre- 
served ^with nutritive diets, etc.). 12. 

Memorable Verse : — A poor patient, carefully 
following these directions of his medical advisers 
without the least demur or delay, should be able to get 
rid of the disease (Prameha) in the course of a year or 
even in less than that time. 13. 

Thus ends the eleventh Chapter of the Chikitsita Sthanam in the 
Sus'tuta Samhitd which deals with the medical treatment of Prameha. 


^ Sopifr explain the phrase to mean that he 

should retain in his memory (the teachings of) the Vedas.. —Dallana. 



CHAPTER XII. ' 


Now we shall discourse on the medical treatment of 
the abscesses or eruptions which mark the sequel of a 
case of Prameha (Prameha-Pidaka). i. 

The nine kinds of abscesses (Pidakas), such as 
Sardvikd, etc., have been described before. Of such 
abscesses those, appearing in a strong person but 
small in size, affecting (only) the Tvak (skin) and the 
flesh, soft to the touch, slightly painful, easily suppura- 
tive and after a time bursting, are curable. 2. 

Patients suffering from Prameha and afflicted with 
the above kinds of abscesses (Pidakas) should be 
treated (in the following manner). Measures, such as 
fastings (Apatarpana), etc., decoctions^ (of Vata, etc.) 
and the urine of a she-goat, should be employed in the 
incubative stage of the disease. The urine, perspira- 
tion and the Sleshmd (sputum, etc.), soon acquire a 
sweetish taste, if the aforesaid preliminary measures 
are not resorted to and if the patient goes on using sweet 
articles of food in utter disregard of the instructions, 
thus developing fully the specific indications of Pra- 
meha. In this stage the system of the patient should 
be cleansed (Sams'odhana) with both emetics and 
purgatives. If the disease is not checked (even at 
this stage) with the aforesaid measures (emetics and 
purgatives), the aggravated Doshas of the body go ort 
increasing in intensity and tend to affect or vitiate the 
flesh and the blood and produce an inflamatory swelling 
of the body, or bring on other supervening distresses 

* Astringent drugs of fig.tree (Vata-tree), etc. — D. R. 



38 o 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


tChap. Xll. 


in their train, venesection as well as the aforesaid 
remedies and measures should be resorted to in such 
cases. 3 . 

The swelling increases in size attended with exces- 
sive pain and burning sensation, if the aforesaid remedies 
be not employed at this stage of the disease. Surgical 
operations and other remedial measures, described in 
connection with abscesses or inflammatory swellings 
(Vrana) in general, should be resorted to in such cases. 
If these be not done (at this stage), the pus eats into 
the deeper tissues of the locality, creates large cavities 
in its inside, and is accumulated there and the abscess' 
(Vrana) becomes incurable. * Hence a case of Prameha 
should be remedied at its veiy outset, 4-6. 

Dhcinvantara-Ghrita:— Ten Pala weight of 
each of these drugs, vis,, Bhalldtaka, Vilva, Amhu, roots 
of Pippali, Vdakiryyd, Prakiryyd'\, VarshdbJni, Punar- 
navd\, Chitraka, S'athi, Snuhi, Vartmaka, Pushkara, 
Danti and Haritaki and one Prastha measure of each 
of the following, viz., barley, Kola and Kulattha pulse 
should be boiled with a Drona measure of water. The 
decoction should be boiled down to its quarter part, 
removed from the fire, and strained. It should then be 
cooked with a Prastha measure (four seers) of clarified 
butter with half a Pala weight of each of the following 
drugs, vis,, Vac/id, Trivrit, Kafnpilla, Bhdrgi, Nichula, 
^iinthi, Gaja-PippaU, Vidanga and S'irisha as Kalka. 

t r.* On the failure of the above treatment it would spontaneously burst 
out and secrete pus and force its way inside, which would lead - gradually 
to widen. Us mouth or fissure, and help its running into an incurable 
stage. — Dallana. 

t “Ildakirya and Prakirya” are the two kinds of Karanja. 

t “Varshabhu and Punarnava” are the two kinds of Punarnava 
{i,e., red and white). 


Chap. XII.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. • 38 1 

It is called the Dh2^llVantara-Ghrita'*= and covers within 
thejange of its therapeutic application Meha (urinary 
diseases), swelling, (S'otha), Kushtha, Gulma, Ascites, 
haemorrhoids, enlargement of the spleen, carbuncles 
(Pidak^) and abscesses, 7. 

Ordinary purgatives fail to produce any satisfactory 
effect in cases of Madhu-Meha owing to the excessive 
accumulation and pervasion of Medas (fat) in the or- 
ganism of the patient. Hence strong Sodhana (pur- 
gatives) should be employed in such cases. In all types 
of Meha, attended with Pid.aka (eruptions or abscesses) 
and other complications, the perspiration and expectora- 
tions, etc. of a Prameha-patient acquire a sweet taste 
and smell like that of honey. Hence they are techni- 
cally known as Madhu-Meha (to all intents and pur- 
poses . Fomentation (of any kind) is forbidden in the 
case of a patient suffering from Madhu-Meha, since it 
might lead to the gradual emaciation of his frame by 
drying up the organic fat (Medas), which is usually 
found to abound in his organism. The aggravated Doshas 
of the body fail to make an upward passage in the 
organism of a Prameha-patient, owing to the weakne.ss 
of the channels of chyle, blood, Kapha and Pitta (as 
well as for an exhausted condition of the nerves in his 
body) and the Doshas are thus forced to course in and 
confine themselves into the lower part of the body where 
their incarceration helps the easy formation of Pidaks^s 
(abscesses), etc. Such a Pidaka should be remedied with 
the measures described in connection with Vranas, as 
soon as the process of suppuration would set in; whereas 
Accoiding to Dallana, the introduction of this medicated Ghrita 
into the text is an interpolation. Since Jejjata has not explained it in his 
commentary, Dallana does not explain it, Chakradatta, however, 
mentions this Ghrita in his compilation, though with some additions and 
alterations under the treatment of Prameha.— Ed. 



382 T.ME 'StJSHRTJTA SAMIllTA. Ktl 

it' should be treated as a swelling in’ its unsuppurated 
stage. -Medicated oils should be likewise employed 
for the 'purposes of healing (Ropana^, etc.' 8. 

A decoction of the drugs of the Aragvddhddi group 
should be used for the purpose of raising up (Utsddana) 
the cavity of the incidental ulcer ; that of the S'ala-sdra'di 
group should be used for sprinkling purposes ; that of the 
drugs of the Pippalyddi should be given as food 

and drinks. A pulverised compound of Pdthd, Chitraka, 
S' drmgashtd, Kshtidra, Vrihaii, S'drivd Sdina-valka, 
Saptaparna, Aragvadha and Kutaja roots mixed with 
honey should be internally given to the patient. 

S'^la-saradi Avaleha A decoction of (one 
hundred Pala weight of) the drugs of the S' dla-sdrddi 
group should be made by boiling it (in sixteen tirhes the 
weight of water) down to a quarter part (of the water) and 
then duly filtered (through a piece of linen). If should 
be cooked again very carefully, so that it may not be 
burnt; powders of Amalakap Rodhra, Priyamgu, Danti, 
black-iron and copper should then be added to it just 
before the completion of the cooking, so that it may be 
reduced to the consistency of an Avalcha (lambative). 
It should then be removed firom the fire and kept in a 
closed earthen pitcher. The patient should take an 
adequate dose of this medicine as it is a sovereign re- 
medy for all types of Prameha. 9. 

Navayasa-Churna Equal' parts of the 
powders of the following nine drugs, viz., Triphald, 
Chitraka, Trikatu, Vidanga and Musta, and nine parts 

* Chakradatta reads “ S'ivd ” in place of “Amalaka” and does not 
include “ Priyamgu ” in the list. According to some commentators the 
total -weight of the after-throw (Prakshepa) would be a quarter part of the 
total weight of the drugs boiled ; whereas, according to others, the 
different drugs for Prakshepa would weigh one Pala each. 



Chap. XII.] CHIKIT5A STHANAM. S^S 

of powdered blsck'iro'n^' should be mixed togethei and. 
taken in adequate doses with honey and clarified butter* 
This is called the Navayasa Churna, which proves 
curative in abdominal obesity, improves the impaired 
digestion and acts as a prophylactic against haemor- 
rhoids, swelling, jaundice, Kushtha, indigestion, cough, 
asthma and Prameha, etc. lo. 

Loh^riShta : — A decoction of the drugs of the 
S’ald-sdrddi group should be made by boiling it down 
to a quarter part (of the original quantity of water). 
Then it should be duly filtered ; when cooled, a quantity 
(i.e., fifty Pala weight) of Mdkshika-honeyf should be 
added to it. A quantity of purified treacle]: reduced to 
the consistency of Phanita as well as fine powders of 
the drugs of the Pippalyddi group should be mixed with 
it. A strong and well cleansed (earthen) pitcher satu- 

* Charaka and Chakrapdni Datla insert this medicine among the 
curatives of “ Pa'ndu-roga ”. S'ivadasa (the commentator) advises to 
take “ Manduta-iron” instead of “ black-iron In the practical field 
also we derive great and good effects in cases of spleen and liver diseases 
and specially in cases of infantile liver and heart diseases. — Ed. 

t Dallana says that fifty Pala weight of each of the two substances — 
Madhva'sava and Pha'nila, and twenty-five Pala weight of each of the 
following substances., viz., the powders of the drugs of the Pippalyadi 
group and steel-foils, should be taken in preparing it. But Gayadasa 
explains that such a quantity of old and matured honey should be mixed 
with the decoction as will sweeten it ; the same quantity of old and 
matured Phanita treacle should be taken ; the powders of Pippalyadi 
group should be added to it till it gets a slight astringent (Katuka) 
taste. 

Some commentators, however, hold that the honey, the powders of the 
drugs of the Pippalyadi group and of the steel-foils should be each a 
quarter part of the decoction in weight. 

Dallana explains the term “Madhu” as the A'sava prepared of 
honey. Gayadasa, however, explains it simply as honey. 

t The PhSnita should be refined by dissolving it in the decoction of 
the drugs of the S'ala-saradi group and then filtere .—Dallana, 



384 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. Xir. 


•rated with clarified butter should be purified ' (in the 
usual way) and its interior plastered with coating of 
honey. and powdered Pippali made into a thin paste. 
The medicinal compound prepared as above should be 
kept in the pitcher. After that, thin foils of steel made 
i-ed-hot in a fire of Khadira wood should be immersed 
into the compound prepared before. Then the pitcher 
with the steel-foils immersed into its contents should be 
kept buried in a heap of barley for three or four months 
or until the steel-foils are entirely eaten away by the 
medicine and the characteristic flavour is produced. It 
should be used in proper doses every morning and a 
suitable diet should be given to the patient after its use, 
It reduces fat, improves the impaired digestion and 
proves efficacious in cases of swellings, internal tumours, 
Kushtha,Meha, jaundice, dropsy of the spleen (Plihodara), 
chronic fever, and excessive urination (dribbling of 
urine). This preparation is called Loha(ri8hta* and' it is 
a highly efficacious remedy, ii. 


* The recipe of L'lhatishta, according to Vdgbhata, is as follows ; — 
The drugs of the Asanadi group (which corresponds with Sus'ruta’s 
S'ala-satadi group), each weighing twenty Palas, should be boiled in eight 
Dfonas of water down to a quarter part of its weight. Two hundred Pala 
weight of treacle and half an Adhaka (four seers) ot honey and the powders 
.of the drugs of the Vatsakadi group (which corresponds with the Pippa- 
lya'di group of Sus'ruta), each weighing one Pala, should be mixed 
with the aboveidccoction when cooled. A (new earthen) pitcher should 
■be plastered inside with (an adequate quantity of) Pippali-powder and 
honey, the outer side being plastered with shellac. The above prepara- 
tion should now be poured into this pitcher which should be kept in a 
heap df barley. A fire should be kindled with Khadira charcoal. Thin 
iron-foils should be alternately heated in this fire and immersed in the 
above preparation until the iron- foils are powdered. Vdgbhata gives 
the name of Ayaskriti to this preparation. 

We, however, follow Vagbhata in the preparation of this Arishtu with 
good results.. — Ed, 



Chap. XIL] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM, 


38s 


Traits of euro : —The cure of Prameha-patients 
should be understood from the non-slimy and unturbid 
condition of the urine and from its clear transparent 
aspect and bitter or pungent taste. 12. 

Thus ends the twelfth Chapter of the ChikitsilaSthanam in the Sus'ruta 
Samhita which deals with the medical treatment of Prameha-Pidaka. 



CHAPTER XIIL 


Now we shall discourse on the medical treatment 
of Diabetes (Wladhu-WIeha). i. 

Metrical Text : — The intelligent physician 
should adopt the following course of treatment in the 
case of a Madhu-Meha-patient abandoned as incurable 
by other physicians. 2. 

^ilajatu, its origin and properties 

A kind of gelatinous substance is secreted from the sides 

of the mountains when they have become heated by the 

rays of the sun in the months of Jyaishtha and Ashddha. 

/ 

This substance is what is known as the Sildjatu and it 
cures all distempers of the body. 

The presence of the six kinds of metal, such as tin, 
lead, copper, silver, gold and black-iron, in their essen- 
tial form ,in the substance (Sildjatu), may be 
detected by their respective smell and hence it is 
known to the people by the name of Shad-Toni 
(lit. — having six different origins). The taste of 
this shellac-coloured substance has the same taste 
(Rasa) and potency (Virya) as the metal to whose 
essence it owes its origin. It should be understood that 
as tin, lead and iron, etc., are progressively more and 
more efficacious, so the different varieties of Sildjatu, ori- 
ginated from the essence of tin, lead, iron, etc., are pro- 
gressively more efficacious in their application. 

All kinds of SilAjatu have a bitter and pungent 
taste with an astringent after-taste (Anu-rasa), are 
laxative, pungent in their digestionary reaction, heat- 
making in their potency and possessed of absorbing and 
purifying (Chhedana) properties. Of these what looks 



Chap. XIII.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 387 

black and glossy, is heavy and devoid of sandy particles, 
as well as what smells like the urine of a cow, should 
be considered as the best. . This best kind of S'ilijatu 
should be infused with the decoction of the drugs of 
the ^dla-siradi group after the manner of BhAvana 
saturation (for ten, twenty or thirty days). Then after 
cleansing the body (by the application of emetics and 
purgatives), it should be taken every morning (by the 
patient in adequate doses), well pasted with Sdrodaka.^ 
He should further be made to take a meal of boiled 
rice mixed with the soup of the flesh of animals of 
the Jangala group after the medicine had been fully 
digested. 3-4. 

A Tuld measure of this hill-begotten panacea 
(S'iHjatu), when gradually taken, (in adequade doses) 
tends to improve the strength and complexion of 
the body, cures an attack of Madhu-Meha and 
enables the user to witness a hundred summers on 
earth, free from disease and decay. Each Tula 
weight of this medicine, taken successively, adds a 
century to the duration of human life, while ten Tuli 
measures extend it to a thousand years. The regimen 
of diet and conduct during the period of its use should 
be identical with that described in connection with the 
use of the Bhallaitaka compounds. Cases of Meha, Kush- 
tha, epilepsy (Apasmdra), insanity, elephantiasis, poison- 
begotten distempers, phthisis, aedema, haemorrhoids, 
Gulma (internal tumours), jaundice and chronic fever, 
prove readily amenable to the curative efficacy of 
Sildjatu. Indeed thex'e is no such bodily distemper 

* It is evident from the reading of Chakradatta that “Sdrodaka” 
means a decoction of the drugs of the ^ila-SfCrddi group. But Dnllana 
e.\plains it as “Pancha-sarodaka” which is quite unintelligible. In 
practice, also, Chakradatta is followed.— Ed. 



388 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XIII. 


which does not yield to its highly curative virtues. It 
acts as a potent solvent in cases of long-standing Sarkard 
(gravel) in the bladder as well as of stone. Sildjatu 
should be treated (soaked and dried) with appropriate 
medicinal drugs by stirring it up with the same. 5. 

The IVI^kShika Kalpa:— The metal known 
as M^kshika (iron-pyrites), which grows, in the river 
Tdpi and which copes with the divine ambrosia in its 
highly therapeutic properties, may be also used in the 
same way and under the same sort of preparation. 
The metal is divided into two classes according to 
its colour, as Svarna-Makshika (gold-coloured) and 
Rajata-Makshika (silver-coloured). Qf these the first has 
a sweet taste while the second is acid. Both of them 
prove efficacious in cases of decrepitude, Kushtha, Meha, 
jaundice and consumption. A person using Sildjatu 
and Mdkshika (in the manner prescribed above) should 
refrain from taking pigeon-flesh and Kulattha pulse 
(during his life-time). 6. 

The following measures should be adopted by an 
experienced physician in the case of a patient suffering 
from (Meha and) Kushtha and who has a firm faith in 
medicines and is desirous of existence (life) and in 
whose case the curative efficacy of Pancha-karma^‘ has 
been baffled. 7. 

The Tu varaka Kal pa : —The Tuvaraka plants 
which grow on the shores of the Western Sea 
(Arabian Sea) are constantly tossed about by the winds 
raised by the waves of the sea. The pith or marrow 
of the seeds (lit.— fruits) of these plants should be care- 

* Some take the term in its ordinary sense to mean the five measures 
of emetics, purgatives, etc. ; but Dallana would explain it as the measures 
adopted in the treatment of the Kushtha affecting the bone which is the 
fifth Dbatu in the system. 



Chap. XIII.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


3 ^ 9 ' 


fully collected in the rainy season while they ripen and 
should be subsequenly dried and pounded. The oil 
should be either pressed out of these seeds in a mill in 
the manner of preparing sesamum oil, or squeezed out 
(of a press bag) like that used in the case of Kusumbha 
flowers. The oil should be boiled over a fire so as to- 
have its inherent watery particles completely evaporated. 
Then it should be taken down from the fire and kept in 
a pitcher and then buried for a fortnight in a heap of 
well dried cowdung. The patient (in the meantime) 
should be duly anointed, fomented and treated with 
cleansing remedies p.e., emetics and purgatives).-* He 
should wait a fortnight (after the administration of 
the aforesaid measures) and wait for a period of 
four mealsf (i.e., two days) more ; and on the next 
morning he should drink a portion of the oil in ade- 
quate doses (two Tolds) under the auspices of favourable 
astral combinations in the lighted fortnight of the month. 
He should be made to recite, at the time of his taking 
the fourth dose, a Mantra which runs as follows : — 
“Cleansest and purifiest, O Thou potent essence of seed- 
marrow, all the essential principles of (my) vital organism. 
The deity who knows no decay and suffers no change and 
who weilds a discus, a mace and a conch-shell in his 
arms, commands -thee on that behalf.” 

The Doshas in both the upper and the lower parts of 
a patient’s body are cleansed with the help of this oil 

The Kapha should be first reduced with emetics ; and after a 
forlninht, the Pitta with purgatives. A fortnight after the use of purgatives, 
a potion of the Tuvarka oil should be administered inasmuch as it is a 
Sams'odhaka (cleansing) remedy. 

t On the si.xteenth day after the administration of the cleansing mea- 
sures, as well as on the morning of the seventeenth day, the patient should 
take his meals as usual. On the evening of the seventeenth day no meal 
should be taken. On the following morning the oil should be taken. 



390 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XIII. 


(which should be given to the patient in the morning) ; 
while a cold gruel, unseasoned* with salt and not mixed 
with any emollient substance (oil or clarified butter) 
should be given to him in the afternoon. The use of this 
oil should be repeated in the same manner for five days 
in succession, and the patient should avoid anger, 
etc., and live on Mudga soup (Yusha) and boiled rice for 
a fortnight. A five days’ use of this oil would ensure 
the cure of every types of Kushtha (and Madhu- 
meha). 8-9. 

The foregoing (Tuvaraka) oil should be boiled and 
prepared with a decoction of Khadira weighing three 
times the quantity of the oil and taken internally with 
patience for a month for the same purpose. The patient 
should anoint his body with the same and then take his 
meals in the prescribed form. A Kushtha-patient (as 
well as a Meha-patient) suffering from hoarseness, red- 
eyes and with worm-eaten and emaciated limbs should 
be speedily treated with this oil as an anointment and 
a drink. Regular potions of the above medicinal (Tuva- 
taka) oil taken svith honey, clarified butter and a 
decoction of Khadira and a diet consisting of the soups 
of bird’s flesh (during its course) would enable the user 
to live for a period of two hundred years. A use of this 
oil as errhines (Nasya^ for a period of fifty consecutive 
days would enable the user to witness three hundred 
years on earth, in the full enjoyment of bodily vigour 
and a youthful glow of complexion, as well as with a 
very powerful retentive memory. 

A regular use (in an adequate dose) of the pith 
of Tuvaraka cleanses the system of the patient 
and is a most potent remedy jn cases of Kushtha 
and Meha. 10. 

* A little quantity of salt and of oil or clarified butter may be given. 



Chap. XIII.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


391 


The pith (inner pulp of the seeds' of the Tuvaraka 
burnt in a closed vessel (Antar-dhuma) should be mixed 
with Saindhava-salt, Anjanc^ and Tuvaraka oil. This 
prepared compound, used as a collyrium, is efficacious in 
cases of eye-diseases, such as night-blindness, Arman, 
Nili, Kdcha-roga (dimness of sight) and Timira. ii. 

Thus ends the thirteenth Chapter of the Chikitsita Sthanam in the 
Sus'ruta Samhita which deals with the treatment of Madhu-Meha. 

* Dallana recommends the three things, viz., the pith of the Tuvaraka, 
the Saindhava-sait and the Rasanjana to be mixed and burnt together in a 
closed vessel. 



CHAPTER XIV. 


Now we shall discourse on the medical treatment of 
dropsy with an abnormal condition of the abdo’men 

(Udara). i. 

Of the eight different types of Udara, described be- 
fore, those severally known as the Vaddha-guda and the 
Parisravi should be understood as incurable, the rest being 
equally hard to cure. Hence the medical treatment of all 
cases of Udara (abdominal dropsy) should be resorted to 
without holding out any positive hope of recovery. The 
first four types of the disease (as metioned in the list of 
enumeration), may prove amenable to medicine ; but the 
rest would require Surgical treatment. All the types of 
the disease, however, would, with the progress of time, 
require a surgical operation, or (attaining an incurable 
stage) they may have to be abondned. 2, 

Diet of articles forbidden A patient, 
afflicted with an attack of Udara, should forego the use 
of heavy (indigestible), or emollient fare, of all kinds 
of meats and of those that produce a state of extreme 
dryness in the system, or produce a slimy secretion from 
the channels (of the Doshas and the vital principles) of 
the body, or give rise to a sort of digestionary acid 
reaction (acid transformation in the stomach) and re- 
frain from bathing and using effusions. Meals consisting 
of well cooked S'dli rice, barley, wheat, or Nivdra seeds 
should be the daily diet of such a patient. 3. 

Treatment of the Vataja type : - in a 

case of Vdtaja Udara, the body of the patient should be 
anointed with clarified butter cooked with the drugs of 
fhe Viddri-gandhddi group, while the one cooked with 



Chap. XIV.] 


CHIXITSA STHANAM. 


393 


Tilvaka should be used as purgatives (Anuloma). A 
compound made of a copious quantity of oil of 
Chitrd seeds, mixed with a decoction of the drugs of the 
Viddri-gmidhddi group, should be used as Asthdpana 
and Anuvdsana measures. The Ssilvana Upanaha 
(poultice) should be applied to the abdomen. Milk 
cooked with the drugs of the Viddri-gaiidhddi group, 
or the soup of the flesh of Jangala animals should be 
given to the patient with his meal and the affected 
region should be frequently fomented. 4. 

Treatment of the Pittaja Type In 

a case of Pittaja Udara, the patient should be anointed 
with clarified butter cooked with the drugs of the 
Madhura (Kdkolyddi) group. Similarly, clarified butter 
cooked with S'ydmd, Jriphald and Trivrit should be 
used as purgatives and the decoction of the drugs of the 
Nyagrodhddi group, mixed with a copious quantity of 
sugar, honey and clarified butter, should be used as 
AnuvAsana and A'sthdpana measures. The abdomen 
should be poulticed with Pdyasa (porridge prepared with 
rice and milk) and the diet should consist of boiled rice 
and milk, cooked with the drugs of the Viddri-gandhddi 
group. 5. 

Treatment of the Kaphaja Type In 

a case of Kaphaja Udara, the patient should be anointed 
with clarified butter, cooked with the decoction of the 
drugs of the Pippalyddi group. Likewise, clarified 
butter, cooked with the milky juice of Snuhi plants, 
should be used as purgatives ; and the decoction of the 
drugs of the Mushkakddi group, with a copious quantity 
of Trikatu, cow’s urine, Kshdra (Yava-kshara) and oil, 
should be applied as Anuvasana and Asthdpana 
measures. A poultice (Upanaha) prepared of S' ana 
seeds, Atasi seeds, Dhdtaki (flower), mustard, Mulaka 

So 



THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XIV. 


-394 


seeds and Kinva should be applied (hot) to the ab- 
domen. The diet should consist of (boiled rice well- 
mixed with) Kulattha soup (Yusha), profusely seasoned 
with powdered Trikatu, or of Pdyasa ; and the abdomen 
should be frequently fomented. 6. 

Treatment of Dushyodara In a case 

of Dushyodara, the patient should be treated without 
giving any hope of a positive cure. Purgatives with 
clarified butter, cooked with the expressed juice of 
the Saptald and S'amkhini, should be first administered 
(continuously) for a fortnight or even a month ; or clari- 
fied butter, cooked with the milky juice of the Mahd- 
vriksha, and with wine and cow’s urine, should be simi- 
larly used as a purgative. A Kalka made up of the roots 
of the As'vawdraka, Gunjd and Kdkddani mixed with 
wine (Sura), should be given after the bowels had begun 
to move freely. As an alternative, a Krishna- Sarpa (black 
lance-hooded cobra) should be enraged to bite a sugarcane 
and this piece of sugarcane should be given to the patient 
to chew (and suck) ; or the fruits of creepers (Valli-phala) 
should be used (in the preceding manner ) ; or poisonous^"’ 
roots and bulbs should be prescribed, whereby the 
disease may be cured or may take a different turn, y, 
IVIemorable Verse : —A case of abdominal 
dropsy (^Udara) of whatsoever type should be presumed 
to have its origin in an aggravation of the bodily 
Vayu and an accumulation of fsecal matter in the 
bowels ; hence frequent use of Anulomana (purgatives, 
etc.) is recommended in this disease. 8. 


* If this be not done, the ptitient is sure to die ; but it is not certain 
whether he would get any relief from this treatment. It being, however, 
possible in some cases to save the life of a patient by the application 
of this medicine, it should be used, as the last resort with the permission 
of the king.— Dallana. 



Chap.. XIV.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 39$ 

General Treatment;— Now we shall 
describe a few general medicinal compounds (which may- 
be used with advantage in cases of Udara). They are as 
follows ; — Castor oil with milk or with the urine of a cow 
should be taken for a month or two. No water should 
be taken during the period, or the patient should forego 
the use of water and all other food, but drink only the 
urine of a she-bufFalo and (cow’s) milk ; * or he should 
live upon the milk of a she-camel alone, foregoing the 
use of rice and water and submit himself to a course of 
Pippali for one month in the manner described before 
(under the treatment of Mahd-Vatavyddhi),-]* or take the 
oil of the Nikiimbha with Saindhava-salt and powdered 
Ajaniodd dissolved in it. The said oil (of Nikumbha), 
cooked with a hundred Pdtra weight of the expressed 
• juice of A'rdraka and S'ringawra (fresh ginger), should be 
applied in the event of there being any Sula (colic pain); 
due to the action of the deranged and aggravated Vdyu. 
Milk,- boiled with the expressed juice of S'ringavera 
(fresh ginger), should be taken. A paste-compound of 
Chavya and S'ringavera, or a paste-compound of Sarala, 
Dcva-ddric and Chitraka (with milk), or a paste-com- 
pound of Mnrangi, S'dlaparni, S'yd7nd and Punaimavd 
(with milk), or the oil of foytishka seed, mixed with 
milk, Svarjikd and Asafoetida, should be administered 
to'the patient. 9. 

He should take Haritaki with treacle, or a thousand 
Pippali soaked (twenty one times) with the .milky juice 
of the Smthi plant ^.in the manner of Bhdvand saturation), 
should be gradually consumed. Powdered Pippali and 

The milk here, says Dallana on the authority of Jejjata, sl'.oiild be 
buflalo s milk. But, according to Vagbhata and S'ivaddsa, the commen- 
tator of Chakradalta, cow's milk should be used.— Ed. 

t The Pippalls shohld be taken with milk only in the present instance, 



396 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XIV. 


Baritaki should be soaked with the milky juice of the 
Snuhi plant (and dried in the sun). Utkdrikd should 
now be preapared with this compound and given to the 
patient. lo. 

The Harltaki Ghrita:— A Piastha mea- 
sure of powdered Baritaki should be mixed with an 
Adhaka measure of clarified butter and heated over a char- 
coal fire by stirring it up quickly with a ladle ; when well 
mixed, the compound should be poured into an earthen 
pitcher, which should be kept well corked and buried 
in a heap of barley for a fortnight. The pitcher should 
then be taken out and the compound should be 
strained and cooked again with an adequate * quantity 
of the decoction of Baritaki, Kdnjika (fermented 
rice-gruel) and curd. The patient should use this medi- 
cine for a month- or a fortnight in proper doses and • 
with adequate vehicles, ii. 

The Wlahsi-vriksha Ghrita:— A quantity 
of the milky juice (one fourth of the cow’s milk in quanti- 
ty) of the Mahd-vriksha (Snuhi plant), should be boiled 
with cow’s milk. Then it should be removed from the oven, 
cooled down and churned (with a churning rod). The 
butter thus prepared and cooked again with the milky 
exudations of the Mahd vriksha (and an adequate 
quantity of water) should be given to the patient for 
a month or a fortnight in adequate doses and with 
proper vehicles. 12 . 

The Chavysidi Ghrita Half aKarsha (one 
Told) measure of each of the following drugs,w.s'., Chavya, 
Chitraka, Danti, Ativishd, Ba7-id7-d, S'atttkhini, Trivrit 
and Trikatu, together with an eight Karsha measure of 
the inner pulps of the fruit (seeds) of the Rdja-vriksha, 

* Each of the three things (liquids) should be four times as much as 
the clarified butter. 



Chap. XIV.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


397 


two Pala weight of the milky juice of the Mahd-vriksha, 
eight Pala weight of cow’s milk and eight Pala weight of 
cow’s urine, should be cooked* with a Prastha measure 
(four seers) of clarified butter. The medicated Ghrita, thus 
prepared, should be given in convenient doses to the 
patient for the period of a month or a fortnight. 13. 

The aforesaid three Ghritas (Haritaki-Ghrita, Mahd- 
vriksha-Ghrita and Chavyddi-Ghrita) and the Tilvaka- 
Ghrita (mentioned in the chapter dealing with Vdta- 
vyAdi) should be employed, whenever purgatives would 
be necessary in cases of Udara, internal tumour (Gulma), 
abscess, AshthilA, Andha, Kushtha, insanity and 
epilepsy. 14. 

Constant use of (cow’s) urine or (any kind of) Asava, 
Arishta or wine, cooked with the milky exudation of 
Mahd-vrikshd, f is recommended. A decoction of 
purgative drugs, thickened with an admixture, in 
copious quantity, of powdered S'unthi and Deva-ddm, 
may be used with advantage in this desease. 

Anaha Varti:— APala weight of the emetic 
and purgative drugs and the same weight of the fine 
powders of the drugs of each of the Vachddi, Pippalyddi 
and the Haridtddi group, and all the officinal kinds of 
saltshould be mixed (with four or eight times that of) the 
urine (of a cow, buffalo, etc.). Then this ^^mixture) com- 
pound should be boiled and cooked over a gentle fire with 
a Prastha measure of the milky juice of Mahd-vriksha 

* In the absence of any mention about the quantity of water to be 
added, four times as much of water should be added for the completion of 
the preparation according to the general maxim.— Ed. 

t Dallana explains the sentence as follows 

Asavas, Arishtas and Sur.ns should be prepared with urine (instead of 
the liquid i.c., water) and the milky exudation of Maha-vriksha (as an 
after-throw), .and should be constantly used. 



398 , 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XIV. 


by constantly stirring it with a ladle Precaution should 
be taken so that the Kalkas may not be scorched 
or burnt. This medicinal compound, when properly 
prepared, should be removed- from the fire and when 
cooled should then be made into pills (Gutikd), each 
being an Aksha (two Tolds) in weight. These pills 
should be given once, twice or thrice daily according to 
the exigency of the case and the capacity of the patient 
for a period of three or four consecutive months. The 
medicine is known as the .^nstha-varti, and is specially 
beneficial in cases of Mahd-vyddhi, and is equally 
efficacious in destroying intestinal worms. These 
pills, if regularly used, prove beneficial in cases of 
cough, asthma, Kushtha, parasites, catarrh, indigestion, 
aversion to food and Uddvarta. . 15. 

Second An^ha-Vartl : —The inner pulp of 
the seeds of Madana fruits with Kutaja, Jimtitaka, 
Ikshvdku (bitter gourd), Dhdindrgava, Trivrit, Trikatu, 
mustard seed and rock-salt, should be pasted together 
with either the milky juice of Mahd-^j'iksha or with the 
urine of a cow ; and the paste should be made into 
thumb-shaped plugs (Varti). In a case of Andha of the 
patient already suffering from Udara, the outer end of 
his rectum should be lubricated with oil and salt and 
one or two of the plugs should be inserted therein. The 
application of this Ansiha-varti should as well be 
applied in cases of Uddvarta, due to a suppression or 
retention of stool, urine, and Vdta (flatus) and in 
cases of tympanites (Adhmdna) and distention of the 
abdomen (Andha). 16. 

Treatment of Plihodara in a case of 
Plihodara, * applications of Sneha (oil, etc.) and Sveda 

* Dropsical swelling of the abdomen owing to an enlargement of tfje 
spleen. 



Chap, XIV ] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM, 


399 


( fomentations ) should be made and the patient 
should be fed on boiled rice mixed with milk-curd. 
Then the vein (Sird) inside the elbow of his left hand, 
should be duly opened. The spleen should be rubbed 
with the hand for the proper out-flow of its deranged 
blood (for the relief of that enlarged organ). Then 
having properly cleansed his system, the physician 
should advise the patient to take the alkali of marine 
oyster-shells through the medium of milk. As an alter- 
native, Yava-kshdra should be given to himwxthSativarch- 
ikd and Hingu, or with filtered alkali (made with the 
ashes) of Paldsa wood. As an alternative, the alkali 
of Pdrij'dtaka, Ikshvdku and Apdmdrga^ mixed with oil, 
should be prescribed ; or the decoction of S'obhdnjana^ 
mixed with Chitraka,Saiiidhava ^.ndPippali,or the alkali 
of Puii-karauja^ filtered with Kdnjika and mixed with 
a copious quantity of Vid salt (black salt) and 
powdered Pippali should be administerd, 17. 

Shat-palaka Ghrita One pala weight of 
each of the following drugs, viz,. Pippali, Pippali-roots, 
Chitraka, S'unthi, Y ava-kshdra and Saindhava should 
be cooked with one Prastha measure of clarified butter 
and the same quantity of milk". The medicated Ghrita 
thus prepared is called the Shat-palaka-Ghrita. It is high- 
ly efficacious in cases of an enlargement of the spleen, 
impaired digestion, Gulma, dropsy, Udavarta, swelling 
(Svayathu), jaundice, cough, asthma, catarrh, Urdhva- 
Vdta and Vishama-Jvara. In cases of Udara attended 
with impaired digestion, the Hingva'di Churua should be 
prescribed. These measures should be as well employ- 
ed in a case of an enlargement of the liver (Yakrit), 
but the speciality is that the vein (inside the elbow) of 

* The praclice, in this case, is to add twelve Seers (three prastha 
measures) of water to the Prastha measure of milk at the time of cooking. 



400 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XIV. 


the right hand (instead oftheleft hand) should be opened 
in this case. i8. 

Metrical Text After slightly bending down 
the wrist (of the left hand), the vein in connection with 
the thumb of the left hand should be cauterized with 
a (burning) Sara for the purpose of giving relief in a 
case of enlarged spleen. 19. 

Treatment of Vaddha-gudodara, 
etc. !— In cases of the Vaddha-guda (Entertis) and 
the ParisraCvi types of Udara, the patient should be 
first treated with emulsive measures and fomentations 
and then anointed with a sneha. Then an incision should 
be made on the left side of the abdomen below the um- 
bilicus and four fingers to the left of the line of hair which 
stretches downward from the navel. The intestine to the 
length of four fingers should be gently drawn out ; 
any stone, any dry hardened substance (Scybalum ?), 
or any hair found stiffing to the intestine should be 
carefully examined and removed. Then the intestine 
should be moistened with honey and clarified butter. 
It should then be gently replaced in its original 
position and the mouth of the incision in the abdomen 
should be sewn up. 20. 

Treatment of ParisrcCvf-Udara In 

cases of the Parisr£(vi type of Udara, the obstructing 
matter should be similarly removed (from the intestines), 
as in the preceding case, and the secreting intestine 
should be purified. The (two ends of the severed 
intestines should be firmly pressed and adhered toge- 
ther and large black ants should be applied to these 
spots to grip them fastly with their claws. Then the 
bodies of the ants having their heads firmly adhering to 
the spots, as directed, should be severed and the intes- 
tines should be gently reintroduced into their original 



Chap. XIV.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 401 

position (with the ■ severed heads of the ants adhering to 
the ends of the incision) and sutured up,- as in -the prece- 
ding case. - A union or adhesion of the incidental 
wound should then be duly effected . The ■^eam should 
now be plastered with black earth mixed with Yashti-' 
madhu and duly bandaged. The surgeon should cause 
the patient to be removed to a chamber protected from 
the wind and give him the necessary instructions. The 
patient should be made to sit in a vessel full ■ of oil or 
clarified butter and his diet should consist only of 
milk. 21. 

Treatment of Udakodara A patient 
afflicted with Jalodara (ascites) should be first anointed 
with medicated oils, possessed of Vdyu-subduing virtues, 
and fomented with hot water. Then his friends, and 
relatives should be asked to hold him firmly by his 
arm-pits, when the surgeon would make a puncture with 
a surgical instrument, known as the Vrihi-mukha, on 
the left side of the abdomen below the umbilicus, to the 
breadth of the thumb in depth and at a distance of 
four fingers to the left of the dividing line of hairs 
in the abdomen. Simultaneously with that, a metal 
tube or a bird’s quill, open at both ends, should be 
introduced through the passage of the puncture to allow 
the morbific fluids (Doshodoka), accumulated in the 
abdomen, to ooze out. And then having I'emoved the 
tube or the quill, the puncture should be lubricated with 
oil and Saindhava salt and bandaged in the manner 
described in connection with the banda^ins of ulcers. 

The entire quantitj'- of the morbific fluid should not 
be allowed to ooze out in a single day, inasmuch as 
thirst, fever, aching of the limbs, dysentery, dyspnoea 
and a burning of the feet (Pdda-daha) might supervene in 
consequence, or as it might lead to a fresh accumulation 


51 



402 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


l[Chap. XIV. 


of matter in the abdomen, in the event of the 
patient being of a weak constitution. Hence it should 
be gradually tapped at intervals of three, four, five, six, 
eight, ten, twelve, or of even sixteen days. After the 
complete outflow of the fluid, the abdomen should be 
firmly tied with a piece of flannel, silk-cloth or 
leather, inasmuch as this would prevent its flatulent 
distention. 

Diet: — For six months the patient should take 
his food only with milk or with the soup (Rasa) of 
Jdngala animals. 

The diet^‘ for the next three months should consist of 
(meals taken with) milk diluted (and boiled) with an 
equal • quantity of water or with the soup of flesh of 
animals of the' Jdngala group seasoned with the juice 
of acid fruits. During the next three months it should 
consist of light and wholesome meals. This rule 
observed for n year brings about a cure. 22.- 

Memorable Verse Skilled physicians 
should prescribe boiled milk and the soup of the flesh 


* The use of water is forbidden during these nine months. 

During the first six months, drinking, washing, etc., should be done 
with milk or the soup of Jangala animals. After this period, the said 
purposes 'should be served with half-diluted milk or meat-soup seasoned 
with the juice of acid fruits. Water may be used during the period of 
the next three months.— Dallana. 

Vdgbhata following Charaka says; — 

The patient should live only on milk for six months. After this 
period, he should live on porridge (Peya) boiled with milk ; and for the 
next three months he should live on boiled S'ydma-rice with milk, 
or with the soup of meat seasoned with the juice or acid fruits and mixed 
with clarified butter and a small quantity of salt. 

The water of tender and green cocoanuls is used in cases of Udara 
in place of pure drinking water with benefit. — Ed. 



Chap. XIV.] 


CHikiTSA STHANAM. 


403 


of animals of the Jdngala group as food arid drink 
in all cases of Udara and use these as Asthdpana 
measures and as purgatives as well. 23. 

Thus ends the (outleenth Chapter in the Chikitsita Sthanam of the 
Sus'rula Samhild which deals with the treatment of Udara. 



CHAPTER XV. 


Now we shall discourse on the (surgical and medical) 
treatment of the cases of difficult malpresentation of the 
foetus and of difficult labour (Miidha-Grarl)lia). i. 

The extraction of a foetus, acting (^in the womb) as 
an obstructing Salya (foreign matter lodged in the body), 
is the most difficult of all surgical operations, inasmuch 
as actual contact or actual manipulation is the only 
means accessible to a surgeon in the region of the pelvic 
cavity, the spleen, the liver, the intestines and the 
uterus. All surgical acts in respect of the foetus or the 
enceinte, such as lifting up, drawing down, changing of 
postures (version), excision, incision, the cutting of limbs 
and section, pressure, the straightening and the perforat- 
ing of the abdomen, could not be done othenvise than by 
actual contact of the hand, which may sometimes 
prove fatal to the foetus or to the enciente. Hence the 
king should be first informed (as success in these cases 
is often uncertain) and all acts should be performed 
with the greatest care and coolness. 

We have stated before that the foetus is generally 
presented in cases of difficult labour in eigM different 
postures or forms. The obstruction of the child in the 
passage of parturition (Garbha-Sanga) may be effected 
in three different ways, owing to its head, shoulders or 
hips being presented in a wrong way and held fast in 
the passage. Every care should be taken and no pains 
spared to bring a child alive into the world, which'is not 
already dead in the womb. The sacred verses (Mantras), 
possessing of the virtue of bringing out the foetus, should 
be recited in the hearing of the enciente in the case of a 



dbap.XYO CHIKITSA_S.THAXAM. 4&S 

failure in -the first attempts at ’ effecting parturition^ 
The mantras are as follows, 2. ' . 

Metrical Texts “O thou beautiful damsel, 
may the divine ambrosia’ and the Moon god with Chitra- 
bhdnu and the celestial horse Uchchaih-Sravas take 
their residence in thy room ; may this water-begotten 
nectar, help thee, O lady, in swiftly casting off thy womb.' 
May the Sun, the Vdsavas and the Wind-god "(Pavana) 
in the company of the saline Ocean give thee peace: 
The incarcerated beasts have been freed from their 
fastenings and binding chords. The Sun god has freed 
his rays of light. Freed from all danger, come, O, 
come, O child, and rest in peace in these precincts.” 3. 

Proper and useful medicinal remedies should also be 
employed for the delivery of the child. 

Postures of the Foetus :~In the case of the 
foetus being dead in the womb, the enciente should be 
made' to lie on her back with her thighs flexed dorVn 
and with a pillow of rags under her waist so as to keep 
it a little elevated. Then the physician should lubri- 
cate his (own) hand with a compound consisting of earth, 
clarified butter and (the compressed juice of) S'allaki^ 
Dhanvana and S'dhnali and inserting it into the passage' 
of parturition (Yoni) should draw out the_dead foetus 
(downward with the hand). 4. 

In the case of a leg-presentation (Sakthi), the foetus 
should be drawn downward by pulling its legs. In case' 
where a single leg (Sakthi) is presented, the other leg of 
the foetus should be expanded and then it should be 
drarvn downward. 

In the case of the presentation of the IjtittccksiSphik) 
(brcecli prcseirtation), the buttodcs should be* first 'pressed 
and 'lifted upland thei} the foetus, should be' ‘drawn 
downward -by the legs,- In the ca^e of a longitudinal 



4o6 the SiJSkRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XV., 

presentation {the child coming stretched cross-wise) like 
a belt and arrested in the passage, its lower extremities 
should be pushed upward with the hand and the child 
should be drawn out with its upper part the head^ 

etc.), thus pointed downward, and brought straight into 
the passage of parturition. In a case of the head being 
hung back a little on one side, the shoulder should be 
lifted up by pressing it (with the hand) after chafening 
it, so as to bring the head at the door of the passage 
and the child should be drawn straight downward- 
Similarly in the case of the presentation of the two 
arms, the shoulder should be lifted up by pressing it 
(with the hand) and, the head being brought back to 
the passage, the child should be drawn downward. 
The remaining two kinds of false presentation 'Mudha- 
garbha) previously described (in the eighth Chapter of 
the Nid^na Sthana) should be considered as irreme- 
diable. The applications of instruments (Sastra) should 
be the last resort when such manipulatory measui'es 
would fail. 5. 

Wletrical Text : —But even in such irremediable 
(Asddhya) cases, surgical operations should not be made 
if the foetus could be detected alive in the womb, as 
such a course (as the cutting of the fcetus, etc.) would 
fatally end both as regards the child and its mother. 6. 

Operations involving- destruction of 
the Foetus— Craniotomy : -In cases where 
there would be any necessity of using an instrument for 
the purpose of delivery, the enciente should be en- 
couraged (with hopes of life) before making the surgical 
operation"; Thb' head or skull of the child in such 
cases' should be' -severed with the knife'" khdrVn kS the 
Mandalkgra bV’the Angbli-^astra ; -then having 'caYefully" 
taken" out" "’the" p'articles of the ='skull'*bo*ife "(Kk^'kl’a), 



Chap, XV.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 4^7 

the foetus should be drawn out.by pulling it at its chest 
or at the shoulder with a Sanku (forceps). Where the 
head would not be punctured and smashed, the fcetus 
should be drawn out by pulling it at the cheeks or the 
eye-sockets. The hands of the fcetus should be severed 
from the body at the shoulders, when they (the shoulders) 
would be found to have been obstructed in the passage 
and then the foetus should be drawn out. The abdomen 
of a child, dead in the womb, should be pierced and the 
intestines drawn out, in event of the former being swollen 
into' a flatulent (Vdta) distension like a leather bag ^,for 
holding water), as such a procedure would remove the 
stiffness of itslimbs, and then it should be drawn out. The 
bones of the thighs (Jaghana-kapdla) should be first cut 
out and removed, where the foetus would be found to have 
adhered fast to the passage with its thighs (Jaghana). 7 . 

IVIetrical Texts In short, that part of the 
body of the foetus should be severed and removed 
which Iprevents its (foetus) withdrawal from the womb 
and the life of the mother should be saved at all 
hazards. The different types of false-presentations 
should be ascribed to the abnormal coursing of the 
deranged Vaiyu (in the uterus), and hence an intelligent 
physician .should adopt, after careful considerations, 
proper remedies (for its pacification). An intelligent 
physician should not waste a single moment in drawing 
out the foetus, as soon as it would be found to be dead 
in the w'omb, since neglect in such cases leads to tlie 
instantaneous death of the mother, like an animal dying 
of suffocation. An erudite physician, well-versed in 
anatomy, should use in such cases a MandaUgra instru- 
ment for the purpose of cutting out (.the foetus), since 
a sharpe-edged Vriddhi-patra ma}’ sometimes hurt the 
mother during the operation. 9-10 



4o8 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XV. 


A non-falling placenta (Aparat) should be extracted 
in the way indicated before or the enciente should be 
firmly pressed and the placenta extracted with the 
hand. Her body should be constantly shaken or 
her shoulders constantly rubbed at the time (of 
extracting the placenta' after lubricating the passsage 
of parturition with oil. ir. 

After- m6asur6S : — Thus having extracted 
the S'alya (foetus', the body of the mother should be 
washed with warm water and anointed with oil, etc 
Oil should also be copiously applied to the passage of 
parturition, as it would soften the Yoni and alleviate 
the pain therein. After that, powdered Pippali, 
Pippali-roots, S'unthi, Eld, Hhigit, Bhdrgi, Dipyaka, 
Vachd, Ativishd, i\dsnd and Ckavya should be given 
in a Sneha (clarified butter, etc.), for the (proper) 
discharge {i.e., purification) of the Doshas (lotia) and for 
the alleviation of the pain. A plaster, or a decoction, or 
a pulverised compound of the said drugs without the 
addition of any Sneha (clarified butter, etc.) may also be 
given to her. As an alternative, the physician should 
ask the parturient woman to take S'dka-hdivk, Hingti, 
Ativishd, Pdihd, Katii-fohmi and Tejovati prepared and 
administered in the preceding manner. Then for 
three, five or seven days, Sneha (clarified butter, etc.) 
should again be given ; or the patient should be asked 
to take well prepared Asavas and Arishtas at night time. 
A decoction of the bark of S'irisha and Kakudha 
should be used for washing (Achamanaf) purposes and 
the * other supervening distresses [i.e,, complications) 
should be remedied with proper medicines,. 12 -A. 

- ■ * The oil should be introduced into the vaginal canal by means o.- 
Piclni)»«.) cotton plugs soaked in oil, etc. 

t This decoction should be specially used for 'washing the uterus 
(Yoni).— Ed. 


Chap. XV.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 4 o9 

Diet and regimen of conduct The 

mother should always be neat and clean and subjected 
to a course of a small quantity of wholesome and 
emollient diet and to daily anointments and foment- 
ations ; and she should be advised to renounce all anger. 
Milk cooked with the Vdyu-subduing drugs should be 
used for the first ten days. Meat-soup should then be 
prescribed for another such period, after which a diet 
should be prescribed according to the patient’s health 
and nature. This regimen should be observed for a 
period of four months, after which, the patient would 
be found to have regained her health, strength and 
glow of complexion, without any complications, when the 
medical treatment, etc , should be discontinued. 12-14. 

The following ValA-Taila should be used for apply- 
ing into the Yoni (Vagina, etc,), for anointing the body 
and for drinking and eating purposes (i.c., along with 
other food) as well as for Vasti-Karma, as the oil is 
highly efficacious in curbing the action of the deranged 
and aggravated bodily Vsiyu. 15— A. 

The ValsCTaila : — ^ An adequate quantity of 
sesamum oil should be cooked with eight times as much 
of the decoction of each of the following'] viz., ValA 
XQQts, Das'a~mula‘ax\^ the three combined drugs of Yava, 
Kola and Kulaitha and with eight times as much of 
milk and (one-fourth as much of) a paste (Kalka) com- 
pound of the drugs included in the Madhura group as 
well as with Saindhava-'s,^t, Aguni, Sarja-rasa, Sarala- 
Kdshtha, Deva-ddru, Manjishthd, Chandana, Kushtha, 

• Four seers of sesamun oil, Ihitly-lwo seers of the decoeVion of Ihe 
Valif-rools, Ihirly-lwo seers of the decoction of Das'a-mula, thirty-two 
seers of the decoction of the drugs Yava, Kola and Kulattha taken 
together, thirty-two seers of milk and one seer of the paste compound 
(Kalka) should he taken in the preparation of the oil. 


52 



410 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XV. 


Eld, Kdldnusarivd, Ifdnsi, S' aihy a, Teja-patra, Tagara, 
S'drivd, Vachd, S'atdvari, As'va-gandhd, S'dta-pushpd 
and Punaniavd. After the completion of its cooking 
the oil should be kept carefully in a golden, silver, or 
earthen pitcher with its mouth well-stoppered. This oil 
is known as the Valsi-Taila and proves curative in all 
diseases due to the action of the deranged Vdyu. A 
newly delivered woman should use this oil in adequate 
doses, according to her physical condition. Women 
wishing to be mothers and men seeking the blessings 
of fatherhood should use this Taila, which proves 
equally beneficial in cases of an emaciation of the body 
due to the action of the deranged Vayu, weariness of 
the body through hard labour, and also in cases of hurt 
or injury to any vital and vulnerable part of the body 
(Marma), in cases of fractured bones, convulsions, Vdta- 
Vyddhi, hiccough, cough, Adhimantha, Gulma and 
dyspnoea. A case of hernia would likewise yield to the 
continuous use of this oil for six months. The essential 
and vital principles (Dhatus) of the organism of a man 
are strengthened through' its use and his youth will 
suffer no decay. It should be used alike by kings, king- 
like and wealthy persons, as well as by those of a 
delicate and ease-loving temperament. 15 — B. 

The Val^-Kalpa : —Seeds of sesamum 
should be successively soaked a number of times in a 
decoction of Vald roots* and then dried (in the manner 
of a Bhdvand saturation). The oil pressed out of such 
sesa'mum should be successively cooked a hundred times 
with the decoction of Vald-roots. This being done, the 
oil should be poured into an earthen pitcher and the 

* Vald wou’dbe the Kalka in this oil, says Dallana. But he also says 
•that some authorities hold that the Kalkas used in the Vala-Taila should 
be used as the Kalka in this oil as well. 



Chap. XV.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 4II 

patient, while taking it in adequate doses, should live 
in a lonely chamber protected from the wind. After its 
digestion, the patient should partake of milk and boiled 
Shashtika rice. A Drona measure of the oil, should in 
this way, be gradually taken and the regimen of diet 
(milk and Shashtika rice, etc.) should be observed for 
double that period. This oil is efficacious in improving 
one’s strength and complexion and adds a century (of 
years) to the duration of one’s life, and at the same time 
absolves him from all sins. It is said that the use of each 
succesive Drona measure of this oil adds a century to 
one’s days on earth. 16. 

Oils may similarly be prepared with each of At-imshd, 
Guduc/ii, Aditya-parui, Saireyaka, Virataru, S'atdvari, 
Tri~kantaka, Madhuka and Prasdrani, and may be 
prescribed by an experienced and erudite physician. 17. 

Nilotpala and S^atdvari should be cooked in milk. 
The milk thus prepared should be again cooked with 
sesamum oil successively a hundred times and a 
paste of all the drugs used as a paste in the Valsi Taila 
should be added to it at the time of cooking. The 
therapeutic virtues of all these oils are the same as 
those of the Vald-Taila and the same regimen of diet 
and conduct should be observed in all such cases, 18. 

Thus ends the fifteenth Chapter of the Chikitsita Sthdnam in the 
Sus'ruta Sarahitd which deals with the medical treatment of Mudha- 
garbha. 



CHAPTER XVI. 


Now we shall discourse on the medical treatment 
of Abscesses and Tumours (Vidradhi). i. 

Of the six types of Vidradhis, the one of the Sdnni- 
pdtika type should be regarded as incurable. In all 
other types curative measures* should be speedily 
resorted to in their unsuppurated stage, as in the treat- 
ment of a case of Sopha (inflammatory swelling or 
boil). 2. 

Treatment of Vataja-Vidradhi in 

a case of Vdtaja Vidradhi, a compact or thick plaster 
(Alepa) composed of pasted Mtvangi-x mixed 
with clarified butter, oil and lard (Vasd), should be 
applied lukewarm. The flesh of the animals which 
frequent swamps and marshes as well as of aquatic ani- 
mals boiled with the drugs of the Kdkolyddi group, 
Kdnjika, salt, barley powder and Sneha (clarified 
butter, &c.), should be applied as a poultice (Upandha\ 
and the affected part should be constantly fomented 
with (warm) Ves'avdra, Kris'ard, milk and Pdyasa. 
Blood-letting should also be resorted to. 3. 

If, in spite of the use of the preceding remedies, 
suppuration should begin to set in, suppurating measures, 
should be resorted to and the abscess (finally) lanced. 

* Commencing with Apatarpana up to purgative measures (Chikits:!, 
chapter. — i). 

t Both Dallana and Chakrapani Datta read “V^taghna” in place of 
“Mutangi”of the text. Dallana explains the term “Vdtaghna” as the 
“Bhadra-darvadi group” and S'iva-dasa, the commentator of Chakrapani, 
explains it as the “Das'a-mula”. Both of them, however, say that he 
different reading is “Surangi” meaning “S'obhdnjana.” “Murangi” also 
means “S'obhdnjana.” — Ep. 



Chap. XVI.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


41 3 ' 

with a knife. Cleansing measures should then be applied 
to the (^incidental) ulcer. After incision, the ulcer 
should be washed with a decoction of the P ancha-mula y 
and an oil cooked with the drugs of the Bhadra-ddi-vddi 
group and YasMi-madhu, and, mixed with an abundant 
quantity of salt, should be used in filling (healing up) 
the cavity of the wound. The cleansing of the ulcer 
should be effected with the powdered Vairechanika 
(purgative) drugs mixed with Traivrita-s and the 
healing should be effected with Traivrita cooked with 
the drugs of the Prithak-parnyddi group, 4-6. 

Treatment of Pittaja Vidradhi:— In a. 
ease of Pittaja Vidradhi a plaster (Pradeha) composed 
of sugar, fried paddy, Yashti-Madhu and Sdrivd pasted 
with milk should be applied, As an alternative, a 
plaster composed of Payasyd, Us’ira and (red) sandal 
wood pasted with milk should be used. Cold infusions 
of Pdkya (Yava-kshAra), sugarcane-juice and milk, and 
jivauiya-G-hrita mixed with sugar should be used in 
affusing the abscess. The patient should be advised to 
lick a lambativc composed of powdered Haritaki 
and Trivrit saturated with honey ; and leeches should 
be applied (to an unsuppurated) abscess for letting out 
the blood. An intelligent surgeon should (lance a 
suppurated abscess and) wash the incidental ulcer with a 
decoction of Kshira-Vriksha or of aquatic bulbs. 
Poultices of sesamum and Yashti-Madhu mixed with 
honey and clarified butter should then be applied to 
it and bandaged with a piece of thin linen. Clarified 
butter cooked with Prapawidarika, Maiijishtha, 
Yashti-Madhu^ Us'ira, Padniaka, Haridrd and milk, 

'Traivrita” is a technical term and means clarified butter mixed 
with the three other lardacious substances, viz., oil, lard and marrow. 
Vide Chikitsita Sthdnam. Chapter — y. 



414 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap, XVI. 


should be' used to heal up the cavity of a Pittaja 
ulcer- by (inducing’ granulation). As an alternative, 
clarified butter cooked with Kshira-S'ukld, Prithak- 
parni, Samangd, Rodhra, Chandana and the tender 
leaves and bark of the drugs of the Nyagrodhddi group 
should be employed for the same end. 7-10. 

Karan jadya Ghrita :~A Karsha measure 
of each of the following drugs, viz., the tender leaves and 
fruits of Mh.Q\Naktamdlai the leaves of the Snmana (Jdti 
flower), Patola and of Arishta, Hartdrd, Dam-Haridrd, 
wax, Yashti-MadJm, Tikta-Rohini, Priyangup Kud a- 
roots, Nichula-h&rk, Manjishthd, sandal wood, Us'ira^ 
Utpala, Sdrivd and Trivrit should be cooked with a 
Prastha measure of clarified butter. This medicated 
Ghrita is called the Karanja'dya Ghrita, and it 
will cure malignant ulcers (Dushta-Vrana) and act as a 
purifier in sinus and recent ulcers, etc., burns and scalds, 
deep sores and even deep-seated sinuses, ii. 

Treatment Of Kaphaja Vidradhi In 
a case of Kaphaja Vidradhi, the seat of affection should 
be fomented with a heated brick, sand, iron, cow-dung, 
husks, ashes and cow’s urine.j* The Doshas involved 
in such a case should be curbed down by a constant 
use of medicinal *decoctions, emetics, plasters (Alepa) 
and poultices (Upandha). The vitiated blood of the 
Ipcality should be cuffed out with an Aldvu-yantra 
(gourd). The abscess when suppurated should be (lanced 

* Chakrapani Datta in his compilation does not include Priyangu, 
Kus'a-roots add Nichula-bark in the list but he reads both the kinds of 
sariva, i. e., Anantamula and S'yamd-lata. 

t In Chakradatta, the reading is i.e., pasted in cow’s urine, 

instead of | S'ivadiisa, the commentator, however, holds that 

this reading is not authoritative, though he says that some commentatoirs 
have accepted it. 



Chap. XVI.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 4I5 

and) washed with a decoction of hragvadha. The 
sore of such an ulcer should be filled up (healed) with a 
medicinal compound consisting of the paste of Haridrd 
Trivrit, S'aktit, sesamum and honey and bandaged in 
the manner described before. After that, a medicated 
oil properly cooked with a paste of Kulatthikd, Danii, 
Trivrit S'ydntd, Arka, Tilvaka, cow’s urine and rock- 
salt should be applied in such a case. 12-13. 

Treatment of Agantu ja and Raktaja 
Vidradhi In a case of abscess of traumatic 
(Agantuja) origin, or due to the vitiated condition of the 
blood (Raktaja), all the measures and remedies laid 
down in connection with those of the Pittaja type 
should be employed by a s-killed surgeon. 14 

Treatment of internal Vidradhi A 

case of an unsuppurated internal abscess yields to the use 
of a potion consisting of a decoction of the drugs of 
the Varunddi group saturated with the powders (Kalka) 
of those of the Ushakddi group. Clarified butter 
cooked with the decoction of the drugs of the two 
preceding groups, as well as clarified butter cooked with 
purgative ?drugs, taken every morning, will cure an 
internal abscess in a very short time. The decoctions 
of the above groups should be mixed with Sneha (oil or 
clarified butter) and speedily used as an Asthdpana as 
well as an Anuvasana measure. The bark of Madini-s'igru 
mixed with the powders of the drugs antidotal to the 
Doshas involved in the case, being administered in food 
and drink and used as a plaster, proves curative in a 
case of an internal abscess in its unsnppurated stage. 
As an alternative, the said drug (i.c , Madhu-s'igrul should 
be taken with water, Dhdnydmla, cow’s rine, or Sura 
(wine). Purified S'ildfatu, Gugguiu, S'untlii, or Deva- 
ddrii, dissolved in the decoction of the drugs antidotal to 



4I6 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chkp. xvi. 

the aggravated Doshas involved in the case, should' be 
administered. Applications of poultices, Sneha-Karma 
(emollient measures), as well as Anulomana (Vayu-sub- 
duing) measures should be frequently resorted to in 
such cases. 15-20. 

The veins (S'iri) should be opened in a case of the 
Kaphaja type of abscess as directed before ; while 
some authorities advise to open the veins at the arms in 
cases of Raktaja, Vataja and Pittaja types. 21. 

Treatment of Suppurated internal 
Vidradhi A suppm-ated internal Vidradhi having 
bulged up (above the surface of the body) should be 
opened with a knife and treated in the manner of an 
(incidental) ulcer. Whether the pus drains through the 
lower or the upper channel of the body (rectum or 
mouth) the patient should be made to take the drugs of 
the Varunddi group or Madim-s'igru mixed with (a 
copious quantity of) Maireya, Surd, Asava, or Kdnjika. 
The diet should consist of rice boiled and cooked with 
white mustard seed in the decoction of Madhu-s'igni 
and taken with the soup of barley, Kola and Kulalttha 
pulse. The Tilvaka G-hrita (Chikitsa Sthdna, ch. IV.), 
or clarified butter cooked with the decoction of the 
Trivritddi group, should be taken every morning in 
adequate doses for the purpose. Particular care should 
be taken by the phsyician to guard against the suppura- 
tion of an internal abscess, since suppuration in such 
cases leads but to a slender hope of success. 22-23. 

Treatment of IWajja-jata Vidradhi : 

— The medical treatment of a patient, afflicated with a 
Majja-jata abscess (abscess affecting the marrow), should 
be taken in hand without holding out any definite hope 
of .recovery fas a proper course of treatment in .such 
cases does not invariably prove successful). Sneha-karma 



Chap. XVL] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 417 

(anointments, etc.) and fomentations should be first 
resorted to, after which blood-letting should be 
made ; and the remedial measures of the present 
chapter should be then employed. When it reaches the 
suppurating stage, the bone should be operated upon, 
and after the full elimination of the pus and the putrid 
matter from the incised ulcer, purifying remedies should 
be employed. The incidental ulcer should be washed 
with the decoction of the bitter drugs and the Tikta- 
Sarpis^ should be U 5 ed. An intelligent physician 
should apply the decoction of the drugs of the 
Sams'odhaniya group, if the oozing out of the marrow 
is not arrested. A medicated oil cooked with Priyangu, 
Dhdtaki, Rodhra, Katphala, Nemi\ and Saindhava 
salt should be used in healing up an ulcer incidental 
to an opened up Vidradhi. 24-25. 

Thus ends the sixteenth Chapter of the Chikilsita Sthanam in the 
Sus'ruta Samhitji which deals with the treatment of abscess. 


* This medicated Ghrita (Chikitsita Stbdnam, Ch. IX) may be used 
both internally and externally with good results. Ed. 

t Dallana reads “Tini” in place of “Nemi,” both of which, however, 
mean "Tinis'a”. Chakradatla docs not include "Saindhava” in the list, but 
reads “Tinis'a-twacham” in place of "Nemi-Saindbavam”. S'ivaddsa, 
however, adds another reading ‘Tinis 'am' Dhavani” on the authority of 
Chandrata. 


-:-o-: 


53 



CHAPTER XVIL 

Now we shall discourse on the medical treatment of 
•erysipelas, etc., (Visarpa), sinus, etc., (Nadi- 
Vrana) and diseases of the mammary glands 

(Stana-roga). i. 

Of the types of erysipelas (Visarpa) the first three 
(viz., the Vdtaja, Pittaja and Kaphaja ones) are curable ; 
the two remaining types, viz., those caused by the con- 
certed action of the three Doshas (of the body) and 
those originating from wounds (Kshataja) should be 
considered as incurable. In cases of the curable types, 
medicated Ghritas, plasters (Upadehas) and affusions 
(Seka) prepared with the drugs (antidotal to the specific 
aggravated Dosha or Doshas (involved in the case) 
should be prescribed. 2 

Treatment of Vataja Visarpa In 

cases of the Vsttaja type of the disease, Mustd, S'aidhvd, 
Sura-ddni, Kushtha, Vdrdhi, Kustumbwi (DhanyAlca) 
Krishna-gandhd, and the drugs of a heat-making potency 
(Ushna-gana)’^ should be used in preparing the medicinal 
washings (Seka), plasters and Ghritas, The drugs res- 
pectively included within the groups of the Vrihat- 
PancJia-mida and the Svalpa-Pancha-mula, the Kantaka- 
Pancha-mtda and the Valli-P aitcha-imda should be 
(separately) used to prepare the medicinal plasters, 
affusions, medicated Ghritas and as well as the neces- 
sary oils. 3. 

* Ch.ikradatla reads “Arka”, Varas'd and Artagala instead of the 
drugs of a heat-making potency. Dallana explains the drugs of a 
heat-making potency to be the drugs of the Bhadra-ddtvddi and the 
Pippaljddi groups. 



Chap. XVII.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


419-' 


Treatment of Pittaja Visarpa in 

cases of Pittaja Visarpa, a plaster consisting of 
Kas erukay S' ringa-taka, Padjna, Gundrd (.Guduchi), 
S'aivdla, Utpala and clay pasted together and mixed 
with clarified butter, should be wrapped"^ in a piece 
of linen, and applied cool to the affected part. A 
paste composed of Hrivera, Ldmajjaka (Us'ira-mula), 
Chandana, Sroioja (Rasanjana'', Muktd, Mani and 
Gairika, pasted together with milk and mixed with 
clarified butter should be applied thin and cool to the 
affected part to alleviate the pain. ' Pittaja erysi- 
pelas readily yields to the application of a medicinal 
plaster composed of Prapaundarika, Yashti-imdhu, 
Payasyd, f Manjishthd, Padmaka, Chandana and 
Sugandhikd pasted together. Decoctions of the drugs of 
the Nyagrodhddi group should be used in washing (the 
affected part; ; or clarified butter should be cooked with 
the expressed juice of the above drugs and employed 
in the case. The part may be affused (Seka) with cold 
milk (or water), or with water mixed with Iioney or 
sugar, or with the expressed juice of the sugarcane. 4-5. 

Gauryadi Ghrita I— A Prastha measure of 
clarified butter should be cooked with the Kalka of 
Gauri, I Yashti- 7 nadhu, Aravmda, Rodh'a, Amhi, 
Rdjddana, Gairika, Riskabhaka, Padmaka, Sdi’ivd, 
Kdkoli, Medd, Kumuda, Utpala, Chandana, Madhu- 
S'ai'kard, Drdkshd, S third, Pj-idni-parni, and S'atdhvd 
taken in equal parts (and weighing one seer § in all) 

* In order to facilitate its removal. 

t It means “Kshira-vidari’’. Jejjata explains it as “Arka-puslipi”. 

t Some explain it as “Hatidra”, vrhile others explain it as 
“Gorochana”. 

§ Dallana, however, says that these drugs will weigh four Palas 
i. e., half a seer in all. 



420 


THE SHSHRHTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XVH. 


and with the decoctions, weighing four times that of the 
Ghrita, of the drugs of the Nyagrodhddi^ Sthirddi (minor 
Pancha-mula) and Vilvddi (major Pancha-mula) 
groups together with the same weight (sixteen seers) of 
milk. The washing (of the affected part) with this me- 
dicated Ghrita proves curative in Pittaja erysipelas and 
sinus. Visphota (boils\ head diseases, malignant sores 
and inflammatory affections of the mouth, yield to 
the internal use of this Ghrita. It is called the 
G•allryy£^dl Ghrita and is highly efficacious in 
the derangements to which children are liable, (com- 
monly) attributed to the malignant influences of evil 
stars, aS well as in cases of emaciated ones. 6, 

Treatment of Kaphaja Visarpa 

Cases of the Kaphaja type of Visarpa readily yield to a 
proper application of a medicinal plaster (Pradeha) 
composed of Aja-gandhd, As'va-gandhd, Sarald^ 
Kdld, Ekaishikd i* and Aja-s'ringi \ pasted with 
the urine of a cow. Drugs, such as Kdldimsdryd, Agiiru, 
Chocha (cardamom), Gtinjd, Rdsnd, Vachd, S'ita-s'iva, 
Indra-parni, Pdlindi, Munjdta and Mahi-Kadaniba 
(applied similarly) are also efficacious in the present 
type. Drugs of the Varunddi group may be used in any 
form (such as plasters, washes, etc.', for erysipelas. 
Blood-letting (by means of leeches) and Sams'odhana 
(purifying) measures are the principal remedies in all 
cases of this disease (Visarpa\ Suppurated erysipelas 
should be first purified and then treated with the reme- 
dies described in the treatment of Vrana (ulcer). 7-8. 

"SaraH” here means “Trivrit”. Chakradatta reads “'SW” 
which also means “Trivrii”. 

f ‘Ekaishika,” according lo Dallana, would mean S^aldvati but 
S'ivadasa explains it as Paiha. 

t Gayadasa explains it as Karkafa-S'ringi. 



Chap. XVli.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM, 


421 


Treatment of Nadi-vrana A Case of 

•Ns^di-Vrana (sinus) due to the concerted action of the 
three Doshas (Saniiipataja) baffles all cure, while the 
four remaining types are amenable to , careful medical 
treatment. Poultices (Upandhi)* should be applied at 
the outset in the Veitaja Nstdi-Vrana and then 
the course of the pus-channels should be (ascer- 
tained and) fully opened (with a knife) and bandaged 
with a paste of sesamum, Apdindrg'a-seeds and 
Saindhava salt. A decoction of (the drugs of) the 
Vrihat-Paiicha-imUa group should be constantly 
used in washing the ulcer. Oil i* duly cooked with 
the followiug drugs, viz , Hinisrd, Haridrd, Katuka, 
Void, Gojihvikd and Vilva-xoofiS should be used for the 
purification, filling up and healing of the sores of 
the sinus. 9-1 1. 

Treatment of Pittaja Nadi In a case 
of Pittaja sinus, an intelligent surgeon should 
employ a porridge (Utkarika) mixed with milk and 
clarified butter as a poultice. Then having opened 
the sinus with a knife, a plaster composed of Tila, 
Ndga-danti and Yashti-madhti should be applied to 
heal it. A decoction of Soma, Nimha and Haridrd 
should be used by a skillful surgeon in washing the 
ulcer daily. A medicated Ghrita cooked with S'ydnid, 
Trivrit, Triphald, Haridrd, D dni-Haridrd, Rodhra 
and Kutaja and with milk should be used to lubricate 
(Tarpana) the sinus. This Ghrita will even heal a sinus 
affecting the Koshtha. 12-13. 

Poulticing with the drugs which induce suppuration is not approv- 
ed of by Gayaddsa. 

t Four seers of oil, the (Kalka) drugs combindely weighing one 
seer and sixteen seers of water ate to be taken in its preparation. — 
Dallana. 



422 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XVJf. 


Treatment of Kaphaja Ncidi:— in a case 
of the Kaphaja type of the Nddi, the sinus should be duly 
poulticed I Upanaha) with Kulattha, white mustard seeds, 
S'aktii and Kinva. When softened by its application, 
the direction of the sinus (with the help of a director) 
should be first ascertained ; and an expert surgeon should 
then open it fully with a knife and plaster it with a com- 
pound composed of Nimba, sesamum, Saindhava salt and 
S auras htra-inrittikd. A decoction (Sva-rasa-lit.— express- 
ed juice) of the Karanja, Nimba, Jdti, Aksha and Pihi 
should be used in washing the incidental ulcer. Oil duly 
cooked with Suvarchikd, Saindhava, Chitraka, Nikum- 
bha, Tdli^ Nala, Rupikd and Apdmdrg'a-seeds and with 
cow’s urine should be used for healing purposes, 14. 

Treatment of ^alyaja Nadi s— In a case 
of Salyaja (incidental to any foreign matter into 
the body), the Salya should be first extracted by an 
incision into the sinus. Then having fully cleansed the 
channel, the ulcer should be purified with a plaster of 
sesamum profusely saturated with honey and clarified 
butter. It should b3 then healed up. Oil cooked with 
the decoction of the tender fruits of the Knmbhika, 
Kharjura, Kapittha, Vilva and the Vanaspaiis tVata, 
etc.'', and with the Kalkas of Mustd, Sarald, P 7 -iyangii_ 
Sugandhikd, Mocharasa, f Ahipushpa (Ndgesvara), 
Rodhra and Dhdtaki fiowers leads to a speedy healing 
up (granulation) of ulcers (Vrana) and traumatic 
sinuses, 15. 

* Dallana’s reading evidently is “Tdli-lala" and he explains it as 
the roots of “Bhumy^malaki”, Chakradatta also prescribes this oil but he 
takes “Nilika” instead of “Tali”, S'ivadasa, again, in his commentary 
quotes from Sus'rula but reads ‘‘Nili-Nala’ in place of “Tala-Nala.” 

t “Mocha-rasa” is explained by Dallana to be “S'obhinjana,” but it 
generally means “S'almali-veshta,”and S'ivada-a explains it as such. — Ed. 



,Chap. XVir.] 


CHIICITSA STHANAM. 


-423 


Treatment with Ksh^ra-Sutra An 

erudite surgeon should open a i-inus, occurring in any 
of the Marmas, or in a weak, timid, or emaciated person 
with an alkalined string (Kshaira-Sutra\ and not with a 
surgical knife. The course of the sinus should be first 
ascertained with a director ; and a needle, threaded with 
a string of alkalined thread should be passed from one 
end of the sinus and quickly drawn out through the other. 
Then the two ends of the thread should be firmly fasten- 
ed together. An intelligent surgeon should likewise pass 
another alkalined thread in the event of the alkali of the 
first thread being comparatively weak. This should 
be repeated till the sinus completely bursts out. 
The surgeon should know that the same procedure 
may be as well adopted in cases of fistula-in-ano. 
Similarly in cases of tumours (Arvuda), etc. they 
should be lifted up (with the hand) and tied round at 
their base witii an alkalined thread, or it should be 
punctured around with a kind of needle with their mouth 
resembling a barley corn and then tied again at their 
base with an alkalined thread. After their bursting (and 
falling off), they should be treated as common ulcers 
(Vrana). 16, 

The different kinds of Plug-Stick (Varti) described 
in the Dvi-Vraniya Chapter (Chikitsita — chap.-i.) may 
be similarly used with advantage in all cases of sinus. 
The use of a plug made of the following drugs, viz., 
the bark and fruit of the Ghonta, (the five officinal kinds 
of) salt,* Ldkshd, Puga and the leaves of the Alavand -f- 

• .A.ccording to Chakradalta’s reading and S'ivadds’s commentary there- 
on, only the Saindhava (instead of the five officinal kinds of salt) should be 
taken. We, however, follow Dallana’s interpretation with good results. 

t ‘‘Alavand” has been explained by Dallana as “Kaka-mardanika” 
and by S'ivadasa as “Jyolishmati”. S'ivaddsa is, however, followed in 
practice in this case, 



424 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XVir. 


pasted together with the milky juice of the Snuhi and 
Arka leads to the speedy healing up of a sinus. The 
powdered* stones of Vibhitaka, mangoe fruits, Vata- 
sprouts, Haretm,' S'amkhini-sczd, VdrdJii-kanda mixed 
with oil can also be used in a case of sinus. 17-19. 

The seeds of the Dhusturat Madana and Kodrava^ 
Koddtaki, S'uka-nasd, Mriga-bhojani and the seeds and 
•flowers of ^\itAmkota should be pounded together and 
applied to a sinus (Nddi) after having washed it with a 
decoction of Ldkshd. Cases of sinus speedily yield 
to the curative efficacy of the application of these 
powders mixed with oil. The use of the oil cooked 
with cow’s urine and with the preceding drugs (as 
Kalkas) brings about the healing up of a sinus in seven 
nights. 20-21. 

The application of the oil cooked with the roots of 
the Pinditaka treated with the expressed juice of the 
Vardha-kanda in the manner of a BhAvana saturation 
and with the bulbs of Suvahd brings about a speedy and 
effective remedy for a sinus. The same effbet is pro- 
duced by an application of the oil cooked with the 
bulbs of the the Vajra-kanda. 22. 

Bhallatakadya Taila:— The use of the 
oil cooked with the paste (Kalka) of Bhalldtaka, 
Arka, Maricha, Saindhava salt, Vtda^iga, Haridrd, 
Ddni-Haridrd and Chitraka and with the expressed 
juice of the BJmnga-rdfa readily cures cases of sinus, 
Apachi and ulcer due to Vdyu and Kapha. 23. , 
Treatment of Stana-roga : - In cases of 
a derangement of the milk (of the breast) a draught of 
clarified butter should be quickly given to the Dhdtri 

* According lo some different reading “burnt ashes” (instead of pow- 
ders) of the drugs should be taken. In our humble opinion the reading in 
the text seems to be the correct one, 



Chap. XVir.] 


CHIKITSA STHANaM, 


42s 


(mother or wet-nurse) by the physician ; and in the 
evening a draught composed of the decoction of Nimba, 
mixed with honey and Mdgadhikd, should be given 
to her for emetic purposes. Next day she should 
take a meal (of boiled rice) with the soup (Yusha) 
of Mudga pulse. The use of emetics should be 
continued for three, four, or six days ; or she 
should be made to drink a potion of clarified butter 
(cooked) with Triphald. A decoction of Bhdrgi, 
Ativishd, Vachd, Sura-ddrti, PdtJid, the drugs of the 
Mtistddi Gana, Murvd and Katii-rohini, or that of the 
drugs of the Aragvadhddi group mixed with honey, 
should be given to the Dhdtri y^wet-nurse) for the purifi- 
cation of her breast-milk. 26. 

The above are the general remedial measures which 
are to be adopted in the affections of breast-milk. Any 
other defect in the breast-milk should be corrected 
specially with an eye to the nature of the Dosha 
involved in the case. In cases of inflammatory 
swellings of the breasts, the phj'^sician should remedy 
them by means of any one of the various measures laid 
down under the head of Vidradhi with a due considera- 
tion to the requirements of each particular case. Medici- 
nal remedies should only be internally employed and no 
poultices should be applied for the speedy suppuration 
of the swelling of the breast, even if found to have al- 
ready commenced to suppurate ; since the breasts are of 
an extremely soft and fleshy growth, any tight banda- 
ging about those parts may be followed b)’’ local slough- 
ing or even bursting. In a case where suppuration had 
already taken place, an operation should be made 
in the affected part, avoiding the milk-carrying veins 
as well as the nipple with its black surroundings. 
In all the cases of Stana-Vidradhi— whether 

54 



426 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. (Chap. XVU. 

Don-suppurated, suppurating; or suppurated— the 
milk' should be pressed out from the breast of the 
Dhdtri * ' 27-29. 

Thus ends the Seventeenth Chapter of the Chikitsita Sthanam in the 
Sub'tuta Samhita which deals with the treatment of erysipelas, sinus 
and the diseases of the mammary glands. 


■* The milk should be pressed out of the Dhatri’s breasts in the 
non-SUppurated stage, to alleviate the burning sensation therein, in the 
suppurating stage for the avoidance of further suppuration, and in the 
suppurated stage for the prevention of sores, sinus, etc. 



OHA.PTER XVIIL 


Now we shall discourse on the . medical treatment 
of Glandular Swellings, etc. (Granthi), Scurvy 
(Apachi), Tumour, etc. (Arvuda) and Goitre 

(Gala-ganda). i. 

General treatment of Granthi In 

the non-suppurated or acute (inflammatory) stage of 
Granthi, an experienced physician should prescribe 
the measures * laid down in connection with (in- 
flammatory) swellings (Sopha) in general. As bodily 
strength arrests the progress of the disease, the 
strength of the patient should hence be always carefully 
guarded against suffering any diminution in that respect. 
The patient should be made to drink oil, or clarified 
butter, or both ; or he should be made to drink lard, 
oil and clarified butter, mixed together.f Apehivdtd 
(Prasarani) and Das'a-mula cooked with the four kinds 
of lardacious or emollient substances (oil, clarified 


* Beginning with Apatarpana up to the purgative measures. 

t Oil, clarified butter and lard mixed together is technically called 
the “Trivrita ” — Dallana. 

In the case of a Vataja Granthi, a potion of oil cooked with the 
decoction and paste (Kalka) of the Vayu-subduing drugs should be 
prescribed for the patient ; in the case of a Pittaja Granthi, clarified 
butter cooked with the decoction and Kalka of the Pitta-subduing drugs 
should be administered in the same manner ; while in the case of a Kaphaja 
Granthi, oil cooked with the decoction and Kalki of the Kapha-subduing 
drugs should be token by the patient. But in a case of Granthi due to 
the concerted action of the two, or three of the Doshas, any compound 
medicated oil, prepared by cooking any two, three, or four of the oily 
substances, w/i., oil, clarified butter, lard and marrow, with the 
decoction and Kalka of those drugs which are antidotes to the said 
Doshas, should be prescribed for the patient as drinks, 



428 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA, [Chap. XVIII. 


butter, lard and marrow), or with any two of them 
should be prescribed. 2-3. 

Treatment of Vataja Granthi A 

medicinal plaster composed of Himsrd, Rohini, Amritd, 
Bhdrgi, S'yondka, Vilva, Agimi, Krishna-gandhd, Goji 
and Tdla-patri (T 41 a-parni — D. R.) pasted together, 
should be applied ito the inflamed gland) in the 
Vaitaja type of Granthi. Different kinds of fomen- 
tation (Sveda), poulticing (Upandha; and medicinal 
plasters (^Lepa), possessed of the efficacy of subdu- 
ing the deranged Vdyu, should be likewise resorted to. A 
suppurated swelling should be opened and the pus drained. 
Then the incised wound should be washed with a 
decoction of Vilvap Arka and Narendra (Aragvadha) 
and purified (disinfected) with a plaster consisting of 
sesainum and the leaves of the Panchndgiila (castor oil 
plants), together with Saindhava salt. After the 
purification, it should be healed up by applying a 
medicated oil, mixed with the powders of Rdsnd and 
Sarald ; or by a medicated oil prepared by cooking it 
with Vidaiiga, Yashti-madim and Amritd and cow’s 
milk. 4. 

Treatment of Pittaja Granthi In a 

case of the Pittaja type of the disease, leeches should 
be applied to the affected part, which should be further 
affused with milk and water. The patient should be 
made to drink a cold decoction of the drugs of the 
Kdkolyddi group with the addition of sugar ; or he 
should take the powders of Haritaki through the 
medium of grape-juice, or of the expressed juice of sugar- 
cane. Hot plasters, prepared by pasting together the 
bark of the Madhzika (flower) tree, and of the Jambu 

* Some read and explain that iheidecoctions of 

the Vilviidi and the Arkadi groups are to he taken for the purpose. , 



Chap. XVIII.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


429 


tree, Arjwia tree, and Vetasa creeper. As an alter- 
native, hot plasters compounded of the roots of the 
Trina-s'unya (Ketaki), or Mnchuktinda mixed with 
sugar, should be constantly applied to the affected part. 
The Granthi should be opened when fully suppurated, 
and the pus let out ; after which it should be washed 
with a decoction of the baik of the Vanaspail* The 
incidental ulcer should then be purified with a plaster 
composed of sesamum and Yashti madhti ; and lastly it 
should be healed up with clarified butter cooked with 
the drugs of the Madhtra .KAkolyadi group 5-6. 

Treatment of Kaphaja Granthi In a 
case of the Khaphaja type of the disease, the Doshas 
should be first eliminated from the system with the 
regular and successive measures.t The affected part 
(Granthi) should then be fomented and firmly pressed 
(Vimldpana) and rubbed with either the thumb, or a 
piece of iron rod, or stone, or with a bamboo rod in order 
to bring about its resolution. A plaster composed of the 

t 

roots of the Vikamkaia, I Arogvadha, Kdkananti (Gunja), 
Kdkddani i^VAyasa-tinduka), and T dpasa-Vriksha 
(Ingudi) and with Pinda-phala (Tiktdldvu), Arka, § 
Bhdrgi, Karanja, Kdld and Madana, pasted together, 
should be applied to it by an erudite physician. A 
glandular swelling ^Kaphaja Granthi) on any part of the 
body other than a vital and vulnerable one (Marma) and 

* The Vanaspati class consists of Vata, Plaksha, As'vatlha and 
Udumbara trees. 

1 These are the applications of Sneha, fomentation, emetics, pur- 
gatives, Asthapana, S'iro-virechana and blood-letting. 

J n.illana explains “Vikamkata” as “Kanta-kdrika,” but it means 
Sruv.d (called Vainch in Bengal) and S'ivadasa also explains it as 

Vic\\. — Ed. 

g Chakradatia docs not jend “Arka” in, the list. 



430 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XVIH. 


not (otherwise) resolved and absorbed should be cut open 
even in its non-suppurated stage and the glands 
removed. The expert surgeon should then cauterize the 
incidental wound after the cessation of the bleeding and 
treat it in the manner ^ of the Sadyo-Vrana treatment. 
These remedies should be employed by the experienced 
physician, where the swelling would be found to have 
assumed a large, stiff, elevated and fleshy aspect 
(bulging from the deeper tissues of the flesh). A 
Kaphaja Granthi should be opened with an incision as 
soon as it becomes fully suppurated and should then be 
washed wiih a decoction of appropriate medicinal 
drugs. The incidental ulcer should be purified i,disin- 
fected) with a purifying remedy prepared with a 
profuse quantity of Vava-kshara, honey and clarified 
butter ; and finally it should be healed up by the 
application of an oil, cooked with Vidafi£^a, Pdthd and 
Rohini. 7-9. 

Treatment of Medoja Granthi ; -In a 

case of Medoja Granthi (originated from the vitiated 
condition of the bodily fat) a plaster of pasted sesamum, 
placed inside the folds of a piece of linen, should 
be applied to the seat of the affected part and fomen- 
tations with hot iron- rods should be frequently applied, 
inasmuch as application of heat (lit. — fireiis efficacious 
in such cases. As an alternative, the affected part 
shou'd be fomented with a ladle, pasted with heated 
shellac (Liksha). The Granthi (in its non-suppurated 
stage) should be opened by an incision and the 
fat removed ; the incidental ulcer should then be 
(actually) cauterized. On the other hand, the Granthi, 
when fully suppurated, should be incised and washed 
with the urine (of a cow). Then a paste, composed of 
• Applications of honey, clarified butter, etc. 



dhap.-XVIII.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 43^ 

Suvarchikd; Iiayitdla‘Z.x\<^ rock-salt, pounded 
together and rnixed with honey, clarified butter and an 
abundant quantity of Yava-kshara, should be applied 
to the incidental wound for purifying purposes. Oil, 
cooked with the two kinds of Karanja, Gtmfd, the 
green scrapings of bamboo, Ingtidi and the urine * * * § of a 
cow, should be used to heal the ulcer. lo-ii. 

Treatment of Apachi Clarified butter 
cooked with the fruit of Jhnutaka and Kosha vaii, 
and with fthe roots of) Dami, Dravanti and Trivrit^ 
is a very powerful ' and efficacious remedy-i* Adminis- 
tered internally as well as externallj'’, it leads to the 
cure of the advanced cases of Apachi. 1 2 . 

A strong emetic composed of Nirgundi, Jdti (flower) 
and Varihistha (Vala) together with Jinn'itaka, profusely 
mixed with honey and Saindhava, should be given 
warm to the patient. It is a very powerful emetic, 
and leads to the recovery of even a malignant form 
of Apachi. An oil, cooked with the pastes (Kalka) of 
Kaitaiyya,\ Vimbi and Karavira^ may be profitably used 
as an errhine (Siro-virechana). Oil cooked with the 
expressed juice of S'akhotaka may also be used profit- 
ably as an errhine. § Avapida errhines (used in drops 

* Cow’s urine measuring four limes the oil should be taken in 
the preparation of this medicated oil. 

t In preparing this medicated Ghrita, the quantity of clarified 
butter should be taken four times as much as the combined weight of 
the Kalka (paste). These should be boiled with water, taken four times 
as much as the quantity of clarified butler. Some authorities, however, 
are of opinion that both the paste (Kalka) and the decoction of the drugs 
are to be taken in its preparation, 

j: Some re.ad ‘Nirgundi’ after it. 

§ This medicated oil should be cooked without any Kalka, But some 
are of opinion that both the decoction and the Kalka of S'akhotaka should 
be used. 



43 ^ 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. CChap. X III. 


into the nostrils; should be applied with Madhtika-sdra, 
S ' and Apdindrga-st&^sr 13-15. 

A glandular swelling (Granthi), occurring in any 
part of the body other than a Marma, should be opened 
in its non-suppurated stage and cauterized with 
fire ; f or it should be rubbed with an alkali ]: after 
scarificatirn as already advised. 16, 

A length of twelve fingers should be measured 
(Mitvd) from and above the Pdrshni, z.e., the posterior 
side of the ankle (and the space of Indra-vasti above 
this part should be ascertained). The Indra-vasti 
(occupying a space of half a finger, or, according to 
others, two fingers) having been carefully avoided, an 
excision (on the opposite side of the affection) should 
be made and the spawn-like glands having been 
removed (therefrom), the excisioned part should be 
cauterised with fire. 

Others say that the excision should be made straight 
above the ankle 'Ghona) after carefully avoiding the 
space of Indra-vasti, measuring two fingers (and to 
make sure an additional space of half a finger should 
be left out), which would be found out by taking one- 
eighth part (of the Jangha, /.c,, the leg— excluding the 
foot and measuring twenty fingers) from the Khulaka 
(ankle-joint) of which the (two) Gulphas (ankles) look 
like the (two) ears. § 17-18. 

* Madhuka-sara mixed with tepid water and the expressed juice 
of S'igru-secds and of .Apaniarga-secds should be used. 

t In cases of the preponderance of Vayu and of Kapha. 

t In cases of the preponderance of Pitta. 

§ There is a good deal o' difference as to the reading and ex. lanation 
of this passage amongst the different commentators. The differen* explana- 
tions arise from the different interpretations pul upon the word ‘‘jiffT” 

in the Text, kfif sRSI etc.” The words nfh” 



Chap. XVIII.] ■ CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


433 


As an alternative, the region of the wrist (Mani- 
bandha) should be branded by a physician with three 
mark lines, one finger apart, for a radical cure of 
Apachi. 19. 

may mean either of the following. ( 1 ) On the opposite side of the Pdishni. 
Vdgbhata subscribes to this view. ( 2 ) On the opposite {i.e., the other) 
Pdrshni, that is to say, if the affection be on the right side of the body 
the operation should be made on the Parshni of the left leg and so on. 
Vriddha V.-i^bhala subscribes to this interpretation in the clearest 
language. ( 3 ) In the region of the Parshni, i.e,, on the dorsal side of 
the leg. 

The different commentators, again, do not agree as to the seat and 
extent of the excision. Some say that the operation should be made 
above the Indta-vasli and the extent should be two fingers in length. 
V.-igbhata seems to subscribe to this view. Others hold that the operation 
should be made below the Indra-vasti and the extent should be two 
fingers’ length: Dallana is of this opinion. A third class of commentators 
assert that the whole extent of the length from above the Parshni up to 
the Indra-vasti should be opened. 

As to the extent of the Indra-vasti, again, there is a difference. 
According to Dallana it occupies a space of two fingers. But Jejjata 
holds that it occupies a space of half a finger only. The Indra-vasti 
(Marma) is situated twelve fingers above (r.e., in the thirteenth finger oQ 
the Parshni. The reading in the printed editions of the text is 
whereas Vrinda and Chakradatta read ''fiicql”. Dallana’s reading also 
evidently is “1%^”. would be quite redundant and as ‘’f?Tc5T’,’ 

gives a better meaning, we accept this reading. 

Now we come to the second stanza. Commentators differ more in the 
exposition of this stanza than of the former. By the expression 

is meant by some commentators “from the Gulpha to the Kama.” 
Others, however, mean to take it as an adjective to ef^Tfej” and explain 

it ns meaning “from above the Khulaka whereof the Gulphas look like 
the Karnns.” As regards the expression some are inclined 

to think that the excision should be made straight above the Ghond 
(i.e., the posterior part and especially the big vein there which looks like 
the nose (Ghond) of the ankle-joint). 

Others, however, read it as and explain it 

njq;) ns meaning “in a straight line with the Ghond (which may mean 

55 



^ ' THE. SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XVIII. 

I'f - . >■ . . * . 

The ashes (Masi) of the skins of a 'peacock, cow, 
lizard (Godhd) and' snake and of tortoise shells 
should be dusted (over an Apachi after lubricating it) 
with the (c^^'pressed) oil of the Ingtidi. Medicated oils to 
be described under the treatment of Slipada (elephan- 
tiasis) and Vairechanika fumes should also be applied in 
a case of Apachi and the diet should consist of cooked 
barley and Mudga pulse. 20-21. 

Treatment of Vataja Arvuda In a 

case of Vsitaja Arvuda, a poultice composed of 
Karkdruka, Ei-vdruka, cocoanut, Piydla and castor 
seeds, boiled with milk, water and clarified butter, 
and mixed u'ith oil, should be applied lukewarm 
(to “ the ’tumour). As an alternative, a poultice 
made up of boiled meat or of Ves'a-vdra, should be 
applied to it Fomentation of the part in the manner 
of a N2(di-sveda (application of medicated fumes through 
a pipe; should be applied by an experienced physician 
and the (vitiated) blood (of the locality) should be 
repeatedly cuffed off with a horn. S'atdhvd or Trivrit 
boiled, with the decoction of the Vdyu-subduing 
drugs and with milk and Kdnjika, should be given to 
the patient. 22-23. 

Treatment of Pittaja Arvuda ■ 

Applications of mild fomentations and poultices (to the 

either the nose or the big vein (Kandard) at the heel looking like the 
. nose (Ghona) of the ankle joint and below the Indta-vasU”. 

Dallana says that the part to be excisioned, according to the first 
stanza, is below the Indra-vasti and that, according to the second, is 
above thefindra-vasti. We also think that the seat of the Indra-vasti 
should be carefully avoided and an excision should be made both above 
and below the Indra-vasti, according to the requirements in each case. 

* There is a different reading Iwi” in place of “sTcrfj^j 

In that case, roots of white Trivrit should be boiled with the 
decoction, etc. 


Cbap. XVIII.] 


CHIKITSA STIIANAM. 


435 


affected part) and of purgatives 'are efficacious in 
Pittaja Arvuda. The tumour should be well rubbed 
with (the rough surface of) the leaves of the Udumbara, 
S'dka, or of the Goji and it should be plastered over 
with the fine powders of Sarja-rasa, Priyangu, Pattanga 
(red sandal wood), Rodhraj Anjana and Yashti- 
inadhu^ mixed with honey. As an alternative, a plaster 
composed of Aragvad/ia, Goji, ‘Soma -and S’ydind, 
pasted together should be applied to it after the 
secretion Visrdva Clarified butter, cooked with 
Klitaka (as a Kalka) and with the decoction of S'ydvid, 
Girihvd, Anjanaki, Drdkshd and Saptalikd should be 
prescribed for internal application in a case 5 f Pittaja 
Arvuda and of abdominal dropsy (Jathara) of the 
Pittaja type 24-26. 

Treatment of Kaphaja Arvuda In 

cases of the Kapliaja type of Arvuda blood should be 
let out from the affected part after the system of the 
patient has been cleansed (by emetics and purgatives). 
Then a medicinal plaster composed of the drugs, f which 
are efficacious in correcting the Doshas, confined to the 
upper and lower parts of the oi'ganism, should be 
applied hot to the tumour. Or a plaster composed of 
Kdnsya-nila, S'lika, Ldngaldkhya and Kdkddani roots, 
and the dung of a Kapota and of Pdrdvata pasted 
together with urine, or with alkaline water should be 
applied to it The Kalkas (pastes) of Nishpdva (S'imbi), 
Pinydhn (oil-cakes of sesamum) and Knlattha pulse, 
pasted with curd-cream and an abundunt quantity of 
flesh, should be used in plasteiing the affected part so 
that worms and parasites may be produced in the ulcer 

* Cliakradalla reads “Atjuna’’ in place of “Anjana”. 

t These are the drugs included in the emetic and purgative groups 
(see chap. XXXIX, Sutra Slhdnam). 



436 


THE SU9HRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XVIII. 


and flies attracted to it (and so consume the ulcer), A 
small portion of the ulcer, left unconsumed (un-eaten) 
by worms and parasites, etc., should be scarified and 
the ulcer should then be cauterised with fire. 27-28. 

A comparatively superficial tumour (Arvuda) should 
be covered with thin leaves of zinc, copper, lead, 
or of ii'on, and cauterization with fire or with an 
alkali as well as surgical operations should be carefully 
and repeatedly resorted to, so as not to hurt, nor in any 
way injure the body. The incidental ulcer should be 
washed with the decoction of the leaves of the Asphoia, 
pdti, and Karavira for the purpose of purification. A 
medicated oil, cooked with Bhdrgi, Vidanga, Pdthd,s.r\d 
Triphald should then be used as a healing remedy. An 
experienced physician should treat a tumour, sponta- 
neously suppurating, in the manner of a suppurated 
ulcer. 29-31. 

Treatment of Medoja Arvuda A 

Medoja Arvuda (fatprigined tumour) should be first 
fomented and then incised. The blood in its inside 
having been cleansed it should be quickly sutured and 
then plastered over with a compound composed of 
Haridrd, Griha-dhuma (soot of a room), Rodhra, 
Paitanga, Maiiah-s'ild and Haritdla pounded together 
and mixed with a proper quantity of honey. After its 
purification, thus produced, it should be treated with 
the application of Karanja-Taila (prescribed before in 
cases of Vidradhi). Even the least particle of Doshas 
(pus, etc.) in a tumour, left unremoved, would lead 
to a fresh growth of the excrescence and bring on death 
just like the least particle of an unextinguished fire. 
Hence.it should be destroyed in its entirety. 32-33. 

Treatment of V^taja Gala-ganda 

A case of the Vsitaja type of Gala-ganda (goitre) should 



Chap, XVIIl.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


437 


be treated with fomentations of the vapours of the 
decoctions of tender leaves of the Vayu-subduing drugs 
prepared by boiling them with Kanjika, various kinds 
of urine and milk as well as with minced meat and oil, 
and should be applied in the manner of a NsSdisveda. 
After this fomentation, the contents should be carefully 
drained (^from inside the goitre). Then after having duly 
purified (the incidental ulcer), it should be plastered with 
a medicinal compound composed of (the seeds of) the 
S'aiia^ Atasi, Mulaka, S'igru and sesamum and Kinva 
and the piths of the Piy&la, or with that composed of 
Kdld, Amritd, S’igru, Punarnavd, Arka, Gaja-pippali, 
Karahdta .Madana) and Kushtha, or with that com- 
posed of EkaisJiikd, V rikshaka and Tilvaka. All of 
them should be pasted with Sura and Kanjika and ap- 
plied hot to the affected part The internal use of a 
medicated oil, cooked*^ with Amritd, Ninida, Hamsdhvd, 
Vrikskaka, Pippali, Vald, Aii-vald, and Dcva-ddni, 
always proves efficacious in a case of goitre. 34-36. 

Treatment of Kaphaja Gala-ganda : 

— A case of the Kaphaja type of goitre should be treated 
with applications of fomentation and poultice and 
should be duly drained (Visrdva). Then a medicinal 
plaster composed of Aja-gandhd, Ati-vishd, Vis'alyd, 
Vishdnikd, Kushtha, S'ukdhvayd, Gttujd (taken in 
equal parts) and pasted with the alkaline water 
prcpai'cd from the ashes of the Palds’a wood should 
be applied hot to the affected part. A medicated oil 
cooked with the drugs of the Pippalyddi group and 
mixed with the five officinal kinds of salt should 

* Some say that the oil should be prepared with the decoction as 
well as with Kalka of the said drugs. Oihets, however, hold that water 
should be used in the preparation of the oil and the said drugs should be 
used only as a Kalka. 



438 THE SliSMllUTA SAM HIT A. [Chap, XVIII. 

be taken by the patient. Emetics, errhines and 
inhalations of Vairechanika-dhuma are beneficial in such 
cases. In the Va't'aja and the Kaphaja types of goitre 
(Gala-ganda), 'the skilful * physician should employ 
suppurating measures in partially suppurated cases. 
The patient’s diet should consist of rice, barley and 
Mudga soup and should be taken with honey, Trikatu, 
cow’s urine, fresh giilger, Patola and Nimba. 3?-39. 

■ Treatment of Medoja Gala-ganda 

In^a case of a Medoja goitre (due'to the deranged fat>, the 
patient should be first made to use oleaginous substances 
(infernally and externally) and venesection should then 
be resorted to, as advised before (SArira-Sth^na, Ch VIII). 
A hot plaster composed of Sydmd (Trivrit), Sud/id, 
Mandura, Danti and Rasdnjana pasted together should 
' be applied to the seat of the disease. Powders of the 
essentiaj parts (Sara) of a S'dla tree mixed with cow’s 
urihe may be given every morning with advantage 
As an alternative, the Goitre (Gala ganda) should 
he. opened, its fatty contents fully removed and the 
' wound then sutured. Or it should be cauterised with 
the application of heated animal marrow, clarified 
butter, laid, or honey ; after which it should be lubri- 
cated with clarified bulter and honey (mixed together), 
and a pulverised compound of Kdsisa, Tuttha, and 
, Gorochand, should be applied to it ; or after lubricating 
- it with oil, it should be dusted with the ashes of cow- 
dung and of S'dla-sdra. Daily washings with the decoc- 
. tion of Triphald, hard bandaging and a diet of barley, 

. orove efficacious (in cases of goitre). 40. 

Thus ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Chikitsita Sthanam in the 
Sus'ruta Samhitd, which deals with the_ medical treatment of Glands, 
Scrofula, Tumour and Goitre. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

Now we shall discourse on the medical treatment of 
hernia, hydrocele, scrotal tumour, etc, (Vriddhi), 
diseases of the genital organ (UpadamS^a.) and 
elephantiasis (^lipada). i. • ' > - 

In the six types of Vriddlii other than the one 
known as the Autra-VriddM (Hernia), riding on horse 
back, etc., excessive physical labour, fastings, sitting in an 
unnatural position, constant walking, voluntaiy restraint 
of any natural urging (for stool and urine, etc.), sexual 
intercourse and eating of food difficult of digestion 
should be avoided. 2. 

Treatment of V^taja Vriddhi In 

the Vs(taja t)'pe of Vriddhi, ‘the patient should.. be first 
soothed (Snigdha) with the application of Traivrita 
Ghrita (vide. Chap. V. Chikitsita Sthana), He should then 
be duly fomented and subjected to a proper course of 
purgatives. As an alternative, he should be made to 
drink the expressed oil of the Kos'dmra, Tilvaka, or 
Eranda (castor) oil (as a purgative) with milk for a month. 
A decoction of the Vayu subduing drugs mixed with 
the powders of the same drugs should then be employed 
by an experienced physician at a proper time in 
the manner of a Niruha Vasti. The patient should 
then be made to take a meal (of boiled rice along with 
meat soup ; and oil cooked with Yashti madJm should be- 
applied (in the manner of an Anuvasana measure). 

* After .1 period of one week from the time of the .application of 
purgatives .and in c.ase the patient is strong enough to undergo the 
Niruha Vast! mcBSure. 



440 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chnp, XIX. 


Applications of Sneha (oil, etc.), poultices (Upandha), 
and plasters (Pradeha) of the Vdyu-subduing drugs should 
be applied to the affected part. If the tumour (Vriddhi) 
begins to suppurate, it should be made to do so 
fully. It should be then opened with an incision 
avoiding the median line (Sevani) of the perineum 
and the proper purifying (i.e., antiseptic and healing) 
measures should be resorted to in the usual way 
laid down (in the treatment of Dvi-vrana*). 3. 

Treatment of Pittaja Vriddhi A 

case of the non-suppurated stage of Pittaja Vriddhi 
may be beneficially treated with the remedies laid 
down in connection with a case of the same type of 
glandular swelling (Pittaja Granthi). In the case of 
it being suppurated, the surgeon should open it with 
a knife and purify it with the application of honey 
and clarified butter. The incidental ulcer should then be 
healed up with oils and pastes of healing virtues. 4, 
Treatment of Raktaja Vriddhi In a 
case of Raktaja Vriddhi (originated through the vitia- 
ted condition of the blood), the (vitiated) blood should 
be drawn out by the application of leeches. As an 
alternative, purgatives should be administered through 
the medium of honey and sugar Remedial measures 
described in connection with the Pittaja type of the 
disease should be employed both in the suppurated 
and the non-suppurated stages (of this type). 5. 

Treatment of Kaphaja Vriddhi In 

a case of the Kaphaja type of the disease, poultices 
with the heat-making f drugs (i.e , Vachddi, Pippdlyadi 

* According to Gayadasa, the measures to be adopted should be those 
laid down in the Mis'raka chapter (Chap. XXV). 

t Some say that the heat-producing drugs are those comprised in the 
Aja-gandhadi group mentioned in the Mis'^raka chapter, Sutra Sthinam. 



Chup. XIX.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 44I 

and Mushkakddi groups, etc.) pasted with cow’s urine 
should be applied. The patient should be made to 
drink a potion consisting of the decoction of Ddru- 
Haridrd mixed with the urine of a cow, and all the 
remedial measures with the exclusion of Vimldpana 
(resolution by pressure) laid down under the treatment 
of the Kaphaja Granthi should be employed. The 
tumour should be opened (with a knife) when suppurated 
and the oil cooked with fdti, Aruslikara, Amkota and 
Sapta-parna should be used for the purification 
(disinfection) of the incidental ulcer. 6. 

Treatment of Wledoja Vriddhi !— in 
a case of the Medoja (fat-originated) type of the disease, 
the affected part should be (lightly) fomented, ^ and 
plasters composed of drugs (of the roots) of the Surasddi 
group or of the S' iro-vircchana group (Ch. XXXIX. 
Sutra SthAna) pasted with the urine of a cow should be 
applied to it in a lukewarm state. The inflamed and 
swollen scrotal tumour, (lightly) fomented as before, 
should be tightened round with a piece of cloth. Then 
having encouraged the patient, the surgeon should open 
the tumour with a Vriddhipatra (knife) carefully avoid- 
ing the two testes (lying within the scrotal sac) and the 
median line of the perineum (Sevani). Then having 
carefully removed all morbid products (Medas) from its 
inside, Saindhava and sulphate of iron should be applied 
to the incised part, an I the scrotum should be carefully 
bandaged (in the manner of a Gophand bandage). After 
the proper purification (disinfection) of the ulcer, its 
healing should be effected with the application of an oil 

• Thi (omcnltiUon should be applied according to S'ivadds'a, wirh 
balls of cow-dung, etc., slightly heated. It should be noted in this 
connection that strong fomentations should not, in any case, be applied 
to the teites. 


5<3 



442 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XIX. 


dooked with Manahs'ild, Haritdla (yellow oxide of 
arsenic), rock-salt, and Bhalldtaka. 7- 

Treatment of IVIutraja Vriddhi : — 

In a case of an enlargement of the scrotmi (hydro- 
cele) due to the derangement of urine, it should be first 
fomented and then a piece of cloth should be tightened 
rount it. A puncture should then be made in the bottom 
of the sac with a Vrihimukha instrument, on either side 
of the raphe of the perineum (Sevani). A tube open 
at both ends should be introduced (into the puncture) 
and the accumulated (morbid) fluid should be let out. 
The tube should then be taken oif and the scrotum 
should be tied up with a bandage of the Sthagik4 
pattern and the incidental ulcer should be purified and 
healed up with appropriate medicinal applications. 8. 

Treatment Of Antra-Vriddhi : -A case 
of Antra-Vriddhi (hernia when strangulated) extending 
down to the scrotal sac (Kosha) should be given up as 
irremediable ; but, in the case of its not being so 
extended, it should be treated as a case of Vdtaja- 
Vriddhi. If the colon be found to have descended down 
to inguinal region (Vamkshana), it should be cauterized 
with a heated crescent-mouthed • rod (Arddha-Chandra 
S'aldka) to prevent its descending down into the scrotal 
sac. A case of hernia that, in spite of all these pre- 
cautions, descends down into the scrotal sac (Kosha), 
should be given up as irremediable. The first finger of 
the hand opposite " the affected part the affected 
testes) should be incised at its middle and cauterized. 

* Incision and cauterization should be performed in the thumb of 
the right hand, if the left testis is affected, and in case the affection is in 
the right testis, incision and cauterization should be made in the thumb 
qf the left hancl. 



Chap. XIX:.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 443 

In -cases of hernia (Antra-Vriddhi) of- the Vsitaja 
and of the Kapliaja type the affected part should 
be carefully cauterized in the above manner ; but in 
these two cases, the Snriyu (ligamenls) should be cut 
off in addition \_before cauterization). In a case of 
Antra-Vriddhi the veins (S'ird) of the temples at the 
(upper) end of the ears on the opposite sides of the 
affection should be carefully opened avoiding the 
Sevani therein. 9-12. 

Treatment of Upadams'a * In cases of 
the curable type of Upadams'a, Sneha (oleaginous sub- 
stances) should be first applied, and the affected part 
should be fomented. Then the veins of the penis 
should be opened, or leeches should be applied (to the 
organ) for the elimination of the contaminated blood t 
(according as the affections arc more or less severe). 13, 
General Treatments The system of the 
patient should be cleansed with both emetics and 
purgatives in the event of an excessive aggravation 
of the Doshas inasmuch as the local pain and swelling 
would subside simultaneously with the elimination of 
the aggravated Doshas from the system. Medicinal 
Vastis (enemas) should be injected (into the rectum) in 
the way of a Niruha-Vasti for the elimination of the 
aggravated Doshas, where the weakness of the patient 
would prohibit the application of purgatives. 14. 

Treatment of Vataja Upadams'a In 

a case of the Vataja type of the disease, drugs such as, 
Propauudarika, Yashti-viadhii, Varshdbhu, KtcsJitha, 
Deva-ddru, Sarabd, Agiiru and Rdsnd^ should be used 
as a plaster (over the affected organ). Similarly 

• See note, Ciupter XII., Xiddna Sih.dnam. 

f holds that leeches should be applied in a c.-isc of siipctficial 

Up.idnnis'a. 



444 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XIX. 


plasters composed • of Nichnla, castor-seeds, and pul- 
verised wheat and barley grains pasted with Sneha 
(clarified butter, oil, etc.) should be applied lukewarm to 
the seat of the disease, which should also be affused 
with a decoction of the above-mentioned drugs, vis,., 
Prapmindarika, etc. 1 5 • 

- Treatment of Pittaja Upadams'a in 

a case of the Pittaja type of the disease, a plaster 
composed of Gairika, Anjaiia, Yashti-inadhu, S'drivd, 
Us'ira, Padmaka, (red) Chandana and Utpala mixed 
with a Sneha (clarified butter),^ or that composed of 
Padnia, Mrindla, SarjJa, Arjtina, Vetasa, and Yashti- 
madhu mixed with clarified butter should be applied to 
the affected organ which should be sprinkled with a 
solution of milk, clarified butter, sugar, sugar-cane juice 
and honey, or with a cold decoction of the drugs of 
Vata, etc. i6. 

Treatment of Kaphaja Upadams'a : — 

In a case of the Kaphaja type of the disease, a plaster 
composed of the barks of S' dla, As'va-kama, Aja-kariia 
and Dhava pasted with Surd and mixed with oil, should 
be applied hot to the affected part. As an alternative, 
the drugs such as, Haridrd, Ativishd, Mustd, Sarald, 
Deva-ddrii, Patra, Pdthd, and Pattuva should be used 
for similar purposes and the affected organ should 
be affused with a decoction of the drugs of the Su- 
rasddi and A' ragvadliddi groups. 17. 

The above remedial measures, vis., plasters, sprinkl- 
ing [Parisheka), blood-letting and Sams'odhana 
application of purgatives, emetics, etc.) as well as those 


•* According to S'ivad^sa the Sneha to be used in the plaster should 
be clarified butter washed a hundred times. 



Chap. XIX.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


445 


described in the Sutra Sthdnam (and the first Chapter 
of the Chikitsita Sthdnam), should be resorted to 
in a case of (non suppurated) Upadams'a. The physi- 
cian should try his best to arrest the setting in of 
suppuration (in a case of Upadams'a) inasmuch as 
suppuration in (and consequent putrefaction of) the (local) 
veins, ligaments, skin and flesh would lead to the 
destruction of the organ (Dhvaja). An incision should 
be made as soon as suppuration would set in, and the 
pus and other putrid matters being drawn out, the 
incised part should be plastered with the paste of 
sesamum mixed with honey and clarified butter. 
The incidental ulcer should be washed with a decoction s- 
of the leaves of Karavira, of Jdti and A’ragvadha, or of 
Vaijayanti and Arka. i8. 

The use of a medicinal plaster composed of the fine 
powders of Smirdshtra-mrittikd^ Gairika, Tuitha, 
Pushpa-Kdsisa, Saitidhava, Rodhra, Rasdnjana, Ddrti- 
Haridrd, Haritdla, Manahs'Ud, Harenukd and Eld, 
mixed with honey is highly recommended in all cases 
of Upadams'a. 19. 

A decoction of the tender leaves of Jamhii, A'mra, 
Swnanas, Nimba, S'vetd, and of Kdmboji and the 
barks of S'allaki, Vadara, Vilva, Raids’ a, R inis' a and 
of the Kshiri trees, as well as Triphald should be used 
by the physician for constantly washing the ulcer. Oil 
cooked with the preceding decoction, with the Kalkas of 
Goji, Vidanga and Yashti-madhu, as well as with the 
different spices (Elddi group) should be used as the best 
remedy for the purpose of the healing up (Ropana) of 


• According to Chakradatta the five kinds of leaves should be 
separately used in the preparations of the decoctions for washing, 
t “Mishaparni” according to Gayaddsa. 



44^ THE • SUSHRUtA ' SAMHITA. [Chap. XIX. 

an-Upadams'a-ulcer of whatsoever type. The use of a 
pulverised compound composed of Svarfikd, Tuttha, 
Kdsisa, S'aileja, Rasdnjana, and Manahs'ild taken in 
equal parts arrests the extension of an ulcer and 
Visarpa. Cases of Upadams'a and Visarpa readily yield 
to the application of a pulverised compound of the 
ashes of Gund^-d, Haritdla and Manahs'ild. An 
(external) application of Bhrimgardja, Triphald and 
Danti mixed with the powders of copper and iron, 
destroys Upadams'a just as the thunder bolt of Indra 
(completely) destroys a tree. 20. 

Treatment of Tridoshaja and Rak- 
taja Upadams'a : —The medical treatment of the 
two kinds of Upadams'a due to the concerted action of 
the three Doshas as well as that due to the vitiated blood 
(Rxktaja) should be taken in hand without holding out 
any definite hope of recovery. The above-mentioned 
medicines specific to the different Doshas should be 
combinedly applied in these cases in consideration of 
the nature and intensity of the Doshas specifically involv- 
ed in them. Now hear me discourse on the special 
treatment of Tridoshaja Upadams'a, It should be the 
same as in the case of a malignant ulcer (Dushta-Vi'ana). 
The putrid portion of the male Organ should be cut off 
and the remaining portion should be fully cauterized (in 
the incised part) with a Jambvoshtha instrument, made 
red-hot in fire. Honey, and clarified butter should then 
be'applied to the cauterized part, and medicinal plasters 
and oils possessed of healing properties should be 
applied to the incidental ulcer when it would be 
cleansed (disinfected). 21-22. 

Treatment of ^lipada In a case of 
Elephantiasis (Slipada) due to the action of the deranged 
and aggravated Vaiyii, the vein (Sird) at a distance 



Chap, XIX.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 447 

of four fingers above the instep (Gulpha) should be 
opened after an application of Sneha and Sveda 
to the patient. Vastis should be employed when 
the patient has been (soothed and) restored to his 
former condition (with appropriate and nutritious diet, 
etc.'. He should be made to take continuously for a 
month, a potion consisting of castor-oil mixed with 
(an adequate quantity of cow’s) urine The patient 
should take rice as his diet with milk duly cooked with 
S’linthi. The use of the Traivrita Ghrita as well as 
cauterization of the affected part with fire is also recom- 
mended in such a case. 23 

Treatment of Pittaja ^Iipada!-In a 
case of Pittaja type of Elephantiasis, the vein (Sird) 
below the instep (Gulpha) should be opened. Medicinal 
remedies mentioned in connection with the treatment 
of the Pittaja type of tumours (Arvuda) and of Erysi- 
pelas tVisarpa) as well as other Pitta-subduing remedies 
and measures should be employed-]*. 24. 

Treatment Of Kaphaja ^Iipada s-ln 
a case of the Kaphaja t3'^pe of elephantiasis the principal 
vein (Sird) of the first toe should be opened by an 
experienced surgeon and the patient should be made 
to take at intervals the decoction (of the Kapha-sub- 
duing drugs) with honey. As an alternative, the patient 
should be advised to take the powders (Kalka) of Abhayd 
mixed with any officinal kind of urine. The affected 
locality should be constantly plastered with the paste 

* Chakradatla reads in place of 

meaning thereby that such Sveda and Upandha should be applied 
before the incision of the vein. Gayadasa also supports this reading as 
is evident from Dallana’s commentary Ed. 

t The particle in the text shows that Kapha-subduing remedies 

•tnd measures should also be used in all these cases. 



448 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap, XIX. 


of KaUika, Amritd, S'unthi, Vidanga, Deva-ddrii and 
Chitraka, or with . Chitraka and Deva-ddni. ‘ An oil 
cooked with Vtdanga, Maricha, Arha, S’unthi, Chitraka, 
Deva-ddru, Elakd and all the five officinal kinds of salt 
should be given him as a potion. Cooked barley is 
specially recommended as diet in the present case. 25. 

As an alternative, the patient should be made to 
drink a potion of mustard oil* or of the expressed juice 
of the leaves of Puti-Karanja according to his capacity 
for the cure of Slipada. In the same wayf the juice of 
Puiranjivaka should be prescribed by a physician 
after a due consideration as to the strength of the 
patient and of the time. The same juice {i.e., of Putran- 
jivaka) should be taken along with the juice of the 
bulbs of KecJmka with Pdkima (vit) salt, 26. 

The Alkaline Remedies An alkali 
should be prepared from the ashes of Kdkddani, Kdka- 
janghd, Vrihati, Kantakdrikd, Kadamha-pushpa, Mandd- 
ri, Lanibd Sukanasd in the usual way by filtering them 
(twenty one times) after dissolving them in cow’s urine. 

! The expressed juice of Kdkodumbarikd, Sukanasd and 
the decoction of Madana fruit should be mixed with 
the above alkaline preparation (and duly cooked in the 
manner of Kshdra-pdka). Diseases, such as Slipada 

• Chalcradatta reads of tW 

which shows that the expressed juice of Puti-Karanja leaves should 
be taken with mustard oil and not separately. Dallana evidently supports 
this in his commentary. That Chakradatla’s reading is the correct one is 
also evident from the next copulet which says that the expressed juice of 
Putranjivaka should be taken in the preceding manner. This “preceding 
manner” evidently means “with mustard oil”, and unless’ we accept 
Chakradatta’s reading, the expression would be unmeaning. — Ed. 

+ It evidently means that the expressed juice of Putranjivaka should 
be taken with mustard oil— see last note. — Ed. 



Chap. XlJt,] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


449 


(Elephantiasis), Apachi (Scrofula\ Gala-ganda (Goitre), 
Grahani (chronic diarrhoea), aversion to food and the 
affections of all kinds of poison, yield to the internal use 
of this alkaline preparation. An oil cooked with the 
aforesaid drugs, if used as errhines and anointments, 
will cure all the foregoing maladies as well as malignant 
ulcers (Dushta-vrana). 27. 

The ashes of the Dravanti^ Trivrit, Danti. JVi/i, 
S'yamd, Sapiald and S'antkhini should be filtered in the 
way of preparing alkalies after dissolving them in c^w’s 
urine. The solution, thus prepared, should be boiled 
with a decoction of Tripliala. Taken internally it 
tends to act in the lower part of the body {i.e , 
it moves the bowels). This medicine produces the same 
effect as the preceding ones. 28. 

Thus ends the nineteenth Chapter of the Chikilsita Slh^nam in the 
Sus'ruta Samhita which deals with the medical treatment of Vriddhi, 
Upadams'a and S'lipada. 



CHAPTER XX. 


Now we shall discourse on the medical treatment of 
the minor ailments or diseases (Kshudra-rog'a.''. i. 

Treatment of Aja-gallika : -Leeches “ 
should be applied to the affected part in a case of non- 
suppurated Aji-galliksi ; it should be subsequently 
plastered with the alkalies (Kshdra) of oyster-shells, 
S'rughni (^Svarjika)j T and of Yava ; as an alternative, 
it should be plastered with the paste compound (Kalka) 
of S'ydmd, LAngalaki and Pdthd. When suppurated it 
should b3 treated in the manner of an ulcer (Vrana). 2. 

Treatment of Yava-prakhya, etc. 

Fomentation (Sveda) should be the first remedy to be 
resorted to in cases of Antra'laji, Yava-prakhyak, 
Panasi, Kackchhapi and PstsliEtna-gardablia (in their 
non-suppurated stages). They should then be plastered 
with the pastes (Kalka' of Manahs'ild, Haritdla, 
Kushtha and Deva-ddru An incision should be made 
as soon as suppuration would set in ; and the treatment 
should b) similar to tint of an ulcer. 3-4. 

Treatment of Vivrita, etc. The 
remedies mentioned in connection with the treatment 
of the Pittaja type of Erysipelas (Visarpa) should 
be employed in cases of VivritaC, Indra-vriddha', 
G-ardahhi, Jaila-gardabha, Irivelli, Kaksbat, Gandha- 
naimni and Vispkotaka. Clarified butter cooked with 

* Gayadasa explains that a non-suppurated Aja-gallikcl should 
be first plastered with Yava-kshdra, oyster-shells and Saurdshtri. Leeches 
should be next applied to it, 

t Chakradatta reads &c.” in place of 

S:c.”, evidently, after the commentary of Gayadasa 



Chap. XX.J CHIKITSA STHANAM. 45 1 

the drugs of the Madhura (KiholyAdi) group should', 
be applied in healing up the ulcers in the suppusated., 

stages. 5 . 

Treatment of Chipya, etc In a case- 
of Chipya, the affected part should be first washed* ■ 
with hot water and (the incarcerated pus, etc.) 
drained (Visrava) by cutting it away (with a knife).'- 
Then after anointing it with (the oil known as) the' 
Chakra-taiU it should be dusted over with the 
powders of Sarja (resin) and duly bandaged. If 
this process of treatment fail, the affected part should 
be cauterisej with fire and an oil cooked with (a 
decoction of) the drugs of the Madhura (Kdkolyddi) 
group should be applied to heal (the incidental ulcer).' 
The same course of treatment should also be adopted 
in a case of Ku-nakha (bad nail). 6-7. 

Treatment of VidaYika' :-In a case of 
Vidafrikst, the affected part should be first anointed 
(with oleaginous substances) and then fomented. It 
should then be rubbed (with the fingers) ; and a plaster 
composed of Naga-Vrittika, Varshdbim and Vilva- 
roots, well pasted together, should be applied to it. 
Purifying and disinfecting (Sams'odhana) remedies 
should hi employed as soon as the affected part would 
be found to have been changed into the state of an 
ulcer ('V’rana\ and it should then be healed up with the 
application of an oil cooked with the decoction of (the 
drugs of the Kashdya (Nyagrodhadi) and Madhura 
(Kakolyddi) groups In the non suppurated stage of 
Viddrikd, the vitiated blood therein should be let out 
by means of Prachchhina (scarification), or by applying 
leeches. -The affected part should then be plastered with 

* Vrinda and Chakradalta prescribe fomentation (Sveda), and not 
washing, with hot water and they do not prescribe secretion (Visrava). 



THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XX. 


452 


the roots of the Aja-karna and of the Paldsa pasted 
together. A. case of fully suppurated VidjtrikEi should 
be lanced and plastered with a paste compound of Patola, 
Pichumarda and sesamum, mixed with clarified butter 
and should then be duly bandaged. The incidental ulcer 
should then be washed with a decoction (of the barks ; 
of the Kshiri trees and Khadira. Healing remedies 
should be applied after it has been properly purified 
(disinfected) S-Q. 

Treatment Of ^arkararvuda, etc.:— A 

case of Sarkara(rvuda should be treated like that of 
an Arvuda (tumour) of the fat-origined type. Cases of 
Kichchhu, VicliarcMkai and PaimEi should be treated 
in the manner of a Kushtha. A medicinal plaster 
composed of Stktha (wax), S'atdhvd and white 
mustard seeds, or of Vachd, Ddrti-haridrd and mus- 
tard seeds, pasted together, should be applied (to the 
seat of the disease). As an alternative, Naktantdla 
(Karanjal oil, or Sdra-taila boiled with [the drugs of) 
the Katiika (Pippalyddi) group should be applied for 
anointing purposes, i o- 1 1 . 

Treatment of Pada-d^ri in a case of 
Psida-dalri, the prescribed vein should be opened, and 
the affected part should be treated with fomentations 
and unguents, d The affected part should be plastered 
with (an ointment composed of) wax, lard, marrow, 
powder of Sarja (resin), + clarified butter, Yava-Kshdra 
and Gairika. 12. 


* By “Sdra-taila” is meant the oil pressed from the Sara (essential 
parts) o* S'iras'ap^, .^guru, Sarala, Deva-ddru and such other trees. Some, 
however, read “Sarala-laiia” in place of “Sdra-taila.”— Dallana. 

t According to Dallana and S'ivaddsa, fomentations and unguents 
should be first applied, and the vein should be next opened. 

t Chakradalta also prescribes a similar remedy, but there he does 
not read “Sarja” and “ Gairika.” — Ed. 



Chap. XX.] 


CHIKITSA STHANaM. 


453 


Treatment of Alasa and Kadara in 

a case of Alasa, the legs should be sprinkled with Arandla 
(a kind of KAnjika) ; and a plaster composed of sesamum, 
Niniba leaves, sulphate of iron [Kdsisa), Haritdla and 
Saindhava, or of Haritaki pasted with the decoction 
of Ldkshd (Ldkshd-rasa) * should be applied to the 
affected parts. Blood-letting should also be resorted to. 
As an alternative, mustard oil boiled with the expressed 
juice of Kantakdri should be applied to them or the 
affected localities should be rubbed or chafed (Piati- 
sdrana) with a pulverised compound of sulphate of iron 
(Kdsisa), GoroJiand and Manah-s'ild. In a case of 
Kadara, the seat of the disease should be scraped off 
(with the aid of a knife) and cauterised with (the 
application of) heated oil.-f* 13-14. 

Treatment of Indra-lupta In a case 
of Indra-lupta (baldness or Alopecia), the bald part 
or seat should be anointed and fomented, and then 
bleeding {hy venesection) should be resorted to, after 
which a plaster composed of Manah-s' ild, Kdsisa, Tuttha 
and Maricha, or of Kutannatd and De.va-ddrii, pasted 
together, should be applied to it. As an alternative, it 
should be deeply scraped and constantly kept covered 
with a paste of 6/m/r^-seeds. As an alternative, 
Rasdyana medicines should be administered for its 
cure. An oil cooked with Mdlati, Karavira, Chitraka 
and Naktamdla is highly efficacious in curing a case of 
Alopecia, if used as an unguent, i 5. 

Treatment of Arumshika : - Blood-let- 

' ChaUrap^ni reads 

Sivad^sa explains c.^;” as Ed. 

t Chakradatla prescribes cauterisalion «ilh fire as well, in such a 
case, — Ed, 



454 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XX. 


ting*. from the affected pait should be first resorted to in 
a case of ArumshikEt ; and it should then be affused 
with the decoction of Nimba Medicinal plasters pre- 
pared with the R -.sa (liquid) pressed from horse-dung, 
mixed with Saindhava, should be applied to it. As an 
alternative, it should be plastered with the paste com- 
pound (Kalka) of Haritdla Haridrd Nhnba and Patola, 
or with that of Yasthi-madhn, Nilotpala, Eranda, and 
Mdrkava. 't6. 

Treatment of Dcirunaka, etc.:— Anoint- 
ment and fomentation of the diseased patches are the (pre- 
liminary! remedies in a case of DEbrtinaka, after which 
bleeding should be effected by opening the vein in the 
forehead Remedial measures such as^ Avapida-Sirovasti 
and Abhyanga (anointment) should be employed as 
well ; and the affected parts should be washed with the 
alkaline solution of burnt Kodrava w eeds. Measures 
for arresting the premature greyness of hair (Palita() 
Will be described later on (in the Mis’raka Chapter 
XXV). Curative plasters and remedies, etc , mentioned 
in connection with the treatment of Kushtha should be 
employed in cases of Masurika'; or those, laid down 
under the treatment of Erysipelas (Visarpa) originated 
through the concerted action of the deranged Pitta and 
Kapha should as well be u-ed. 17-19. 

Treatment of Jatu-mani, etc. The 

seats of affection should be scraped (with a knife) 
and gradually and judiciously cauterised-f by 
applying an alkali or fire in cases of Jatu 
mani (congenital moles), Mas'aka and Tila-k^laka 

^ Accotding lo ChaktadaUa blood-leUing should be tesotlcd to in 
such cases only by means of venesection, or with leeches. 

t The cauterisation should be effected with an alkali, when the 
disease is superficial and with fire when it is deep.sertted. 



dhap. XX. 3 CHIKITSA STHANAM, 45 S 

(freckles) An opening of the local veins in the 
temporal region, etc., should be effected in cases of 
Nyachchha, Yyanga and in accordance with the 

prescribed rules. The affected parts should be rubbed 
[with Samudra-phena, etc.) and plastered with the barks 
of Kshiri trees, pasted with milk tor with Vald, Ati-vald, 
Yashti-madhu and Rajani, pasted together. As an 
alternative, plasters composed of Payasyd, Agunt and 
Kdliya pasted together with Gairika, or of a tooth 
of a boar pasted with clarified butter and honey, or of 
Kapittha and Rdjddana pasted together, may also be 
used with benefit 2021. 

Treatment Of Yuv^na-Pidaka, etc;, — 

Emetics are specially efficacious in cases of "YuvSLna- 
pidakal (pimples) which disfigure the face in youth. 
The application of medicinal plasters composed of 
Vachd, Lodhra^ Saindhava and (white mustard seeds 
or of Kustumhim, Vachd, Lodhra and Kushtha 
pasted together is also recommended. In a case 
of Padmini-Kantaka, a decoction of Nimba bark 
should be given as an emetic, and the patient should 
be made to drink a potion of clarified butter cooked 
with a decoction of Nimba and mixed with 
honey. A decoction * of Nimba and Aragvadha 
should be used for chafing (Utsadana) the diseased 
locality. 22-23, 

Treatment of Parivartik^, etc.;~ln a 

case of Parivartik£( (retroflexion of the prepuce) the 
glans penis should be rubbed with clarified butter and 
duly fomented, and Sjdvana and such other Vdyu- 
subduing plasters (Upandha) should be applied for three 

Chaktapani prescribes the powders in place of the decoction 

(inU) Nimba and Atagvadha. He also reads in place 

of ' I here they mean the same thing. — Ed. 



456 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XX. 


or five days. Then having lubricated the part (with 
Ghrita), the glans penis should be gently pressed and 
the prepuce should be smoothly drawn over the glans 
perils, so as to cover it entirely within its fold. The pre- 
puce, being so drawn, should be fomented with warm 
poultices. Vdyu-subduing Vastis ^Clysters) should be 
employed and emollient diet should be prescribed 
(during the course of the treatment;. A case of Ava- 
p£^tika^ should be similarly treated, after a due considera- 
tion of the nature and intensity of the Doshas involved, 
in the case. 24-25. 

Treatment of Niruddha-Prakas'a 

In a case of Niruddlia-Prakasa (constiiction or stricture 
of the urethra', a tube (open at both ends) made of iron, 
wood, or shellac should be lubricated with clarified butter 
and gently introduced into the urethra. The marrow 
or lard of a boar, or of a porpoise, or the Chakra-taila, 
mixed with Vdyu-subduing drugs should be sprinkled 
over the affected part. Thicker and thicker tubes 
should be duly introduced into the urethra every 
third day. The passage should be made to dilate in the 
aforesaid manner, and emollient food should be given 
to the patient. As an alternative, an incision should 
be made ^^into the lower part of the penis), avoiding the 
sevani (raphe of the perineum\ and it should be treated 
as an incidental ulcer Sadyo-vrana). 26. 

Treatment of Sanniruddha-Guda, 
etc. : - Cases of Sanniruddha-Guda (stricture of 
the anus), Valmika and Agni-Rohini should be duly 
treated with regard to the nature and intensity (of the 
Doshas engendering the disease , but without holding out 
any definite hope of recovery. The treatment of a case 
of Agni-Rohini should be like that of Visarpa (Erysi- 
pelas), while the remedial measures, mentioned in connec- 



Chap. XX.i CHIKITSA STHANAm. 457 

tion with Niruddha-prakas'a, should be employed in a 
case of Sanuivuddha-Guda. 27 . 

Treatment of Valmika : -The diseased 
patches should be scraped off in a case of Valmika and 
cauterised with fire or with an alkali ; while the purifica- 
tion and healing up (of the incidental ulcer; should 
be effected as in the treatment of an Arvuda 
(tumour). A case of Valmika appearing in any part of 
the body other than a Marma, and not of a considerable 
growth should be duly treated with venesection after the 
application of Sams'odhana measures (purgative, emetic, 
etc,). The affected part should be plastered (Pralepa) 
with a medicinal compound composed of the roots of 
{Vana-) Kulattha, Arevata, Danti and S'ydmd, pasted 
together with Guduchi^ rcck-salt, Palala (pastes of sesa- 
mum) and powdered barley. It should be poulticed 
(Upan^ha) with the same compound, well mixed with 
clarified butter and made lukewarm (in case suppu- 
ration be desired). When found to be fully suppu- 
rated, the course of the pus- channels should be 
ascertained by an experienced surgeon. The ulcer should 
then be opened (with a knife) and cauterised, and after 
being fully purified of the putrid flesh ^in its cavity), 
it should be again cauterised with an alkali. Healing 
(Ropana) remedies should be applied to it after it 
has been found to be thoroughly cleansed Nimba- 
oil cooked with Swnanas (Jdti leaves, Granthi, Bhatld- 
taka, Manah s'ild, Kdldntisdri, small Eld, Aguni and 
red Chandana should be applied with advantage 
to heal up the incidental ulcer in a case of) Valmika, 
A patient suffering from an attack of Valmika appearing 
either on his hands or feet and attended with swell- 
ing and a large number of cavities should be aban- 
doned by a wise physician. 28. 


58 



458 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XX. 


Treatment of Ahi-putana, etc.:— in 

the treatment of an infant laid up with an attack of' 
Ahi putan£^ the breast-milk of its mother or nurse should 
be first purified. Cases of Ahi-putana yield to the use of 
a potion of clarified butter, cooked with Triphald, Rasdn- 
jana and Patola leaves, and a decoction of Triphald, 
Kola and Khadira should be used (as a wash) to heal 
the ulcer. Plasters composed of sulphate of iron, Goro- 
chand, sulphate of copper {Tuttha), Haritdla and Rasdn- 
jatia, pasted together with KAnjika, or of Vadari bark 
and rock-salt, should be applied (to the diseased locality'.- 
It should be dusted as well with the pulverised com- 
pound of a burnt earthen pot and sulphate of copper. 
The preceding measures should be adopted in cases 
of Vrishana-Kachchhu as well. 29-30. 

Treatment of Cuda-Bhramsa : -In a 
case of Guda-Bhramsa, the protruded part should be 
fomented and lubricated with Sneha.+ It should then be 
gently re-introduced. The region of the anus should 
then be bandaged with a piece of hide in the manner of 
a Gophana Bandha, with an opening in it (lying imme 
diately below the anus), so that it may not in any way 
interfere with the emission of Vayu. The affected part 
should then be constantly fomented. A quantity of milk, 
Mahd-pancha-mula and the body (flesh) of a mouse, 
bereft of its entrails should be first boiled together (with 
waterp An oil cooked with the milk thus prepared 
(with water) and the VAyu-subduing drugs should 
be administered as drink and unguents. By these 
measures the most difficult cases of prolapsus aui would 
be cured. 3^-32. 

* According lo S'iva-ddsa, cow’s fat only should be used. 

Thus ends the twentieth Chapter of the Chikitsita Sthanam in the 
Sus'ruta Samhitd which deals with the treatment of minor ailments. 



CHAPTER XXI. 

Now we shall discourse on the medical treatment of 
the Sores on the penis produced by the Suka, a kind of 
poisonous insect (^uka-Roga). i. 

Treatment of Sarshapi, etc. In a 
case of the Sarshapi type of the disease, the affected' 
(ulcerated) part should be scarified and dusted with 
the (powdered) drugs of an astringent taste (as' dfr- 
scribed in the Mis'raka chapter), and an oil, cooked with- 
(the Kalka and decoction of) the same drugs, should be 
applied for healing purposes. In a case of the AshtM- 
likj( type of the disease, the skilful physician should 
apply leeches to the seat of affection. In case the swelling 
does not still subside, it should be removed and treated 
as a KaphajaGranthi (glandular swelling). A GrahtM 
type of the disease should be constantly fomented in the 
manner of Natdi-Sveda, and should be poulticed with a 
lukewarm medicinal compound mixed with a profuse 
quantity of Sneha (oil). 2-4. 

Treatment of Kumbhik£i, etc. An 

incision should be made into the suppurated seat of 
affection in a case of the KumbhikEf type of the disease, 
and the incidental ulcer should be purified (disinfected) 
and healed up with the application of the oil, cooked 
with Triphald, Lodhra, Tinduka and Ajnrdtaka^ In 
the Alaji type of the disease, the affected part should 
be bled by applying leeches to it and should then be 
afifused with a decoction of the astringent drugs. An 

* S iva-dasa in his commentary on Chikra-datta quotes this couplet 
from Sus'rula, but there he reads in place of lo 

say, he says that A mra should be used in place of Amrataka. lie 
further adds that the stones of Amra and Tinduka fruits should be taken. 

* • » t 



460 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XMI. 


oil, cooked with the decoction of the same drugs, should 
be used to heal up the (incidental) ulcer. 5-6. 

Treatment of Wlridita, etc. : — In the 
Mrldita type of the disease, the affected part should be 
afjfused with tepid Valji oil and poulticed with a 
lukewarm plaster (Upandha) of the drugs of the Mad- 
hum (Kdkolyddi) group, pasted and mixed with clarified 
butter. Leeches should be speedily applied to the condyl- 
omatous growths (PidaksC) in a case of Sammudha- 
Pldaksi. In cases of suppuration, they should be opened 
and plastered with honey and clarified butter. In a case 
of Avamautha, the growths (Pidakd) should be opened, 
when suppurated, and healed up with the application of 
an oil, cooked with Dhava, As^va-Karm, Pattanga, 
S'allaki 2i.nA Tiuduka. 7 — 9 

Treatment of Pushkariksf, etc. :~In a 
case of Pushkariksf, all kinds of cooling measures should 
be applied and the vitiated blood should be extracted 
by applying leeches. The affected part should be 
subsequently affused with clarified butter. In a 
case of the Spars'a-haini type of the disease, blood 
should be let out and plasters (Pradeha) of Madhura 
(K^kolyddi) drugs should be applied. The affected part 
should be affused with a very cold compound of milk, 
clarified butter and the expressed juice of sugar cane. 
In the type of the disease known as TJttam^, the 
Pidak^s .condylomatous growths) should be removed 
with the help of a Vadisa instrument, and powders of 
astringent drugs with honey should be applied to the 
seat of affection. 10 — 12. 

Treatment of ^ata-ponaka, etc.:— in 

a case of the Sata-pouaka type of the disease, the affect- 
ed part should be scarified and the measures laid down 
jn connection \Yith Rasa-Krlyd should he resorted tq. 



Chap. XXI.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


461 


After this, an oil, cooked with the Prithak-pamyddi 
drugs,^ should be likewise applied to the seat of the 
disease.) The medicinal treatment, in a case of Tvak- 
p^ka, should be the same as described in cpnnection 
with Erysipelas (Visarpa). The remedial measures, 
laid down under the head of Rakta-vidradhi, should be 
employed in a case of the ^DnitsCrvuda type of the 
disease. 13-14. 

General Treatment Remedies such as 
medicinal decoctions, pastes (Kalka), medicated clarified 
butter, powders, Rasa-Kriyd, etc., and the measures for 
purifying and healing (incidental sores or ulcers\ should 
be employed with due consideration to the nature 
and intensity of the aggravated Doshas involved in the 
case. The application of specifically prepared medicated 
clarified butter, purgatives, blood-letting and light 
diet should be similarly prescribed.*}* 15. 

PrOg'nosiS : —The medical treatment of the 
patient affected with any of the following types of the 
disease, viz., Arvuda, Mdmsa-pAka, Vidradhi and Tila- 
Kdlaka should be undertaken without holding out any 
definite prospect of recovery. 16. 

Thus ends the twenty-fitst Chapter of the Chikitsita Sthdnatn in the 
Susltuta Samhitd which deals with the treatment of S'uka-Roga. 

■* For Rasa-kriyd and the Prithak-parnyddi drugs, see Chapter 
XXXVI — Sulra-sthdna. 

t This seems to be the general treatment of all the types of S uka- 
Roga. 



CHAPTER XXII. 


Now we shall discourse on the medical treatment 
of the affections of the mouth (WIukha-Roga). i. 
Treatment of Vataja Oshtha-kopa:— 
In a case of inflammation of the lips (OslLtlia-K.opa) 
due to the action of the deranged Ydyn, the affected 
part should be rubbed with (an ointment composed of) 
the four kinds of lardacious (Sneha) substances mixed 
with wax. Fomentations in the manner of Nadi-Sveda 
should also be resorted to by an intelligent physician. 
Applications of the Sailvana poultices and those of the 
medicated oils, possessed of the virtue of subduing the 
deranged Vdyu, as crrhines and Mastikya (Siro-vasti) 
are also recommended. The lips should be treated 
with the powder composed of S'ri-veshtaka* Sarja rasa, 
Sura-ddru, Gugguhi and Yashti-inadhu. 12-4. 

Treatment of PIttaja Oshtha-kopa, 
etc.:- In a case of Oshtha-kopa of traumatic origin, 
fAbhighaStaja) or one due to the deranged action of the 
blood (Raktaja) or of the Pitta, bleeding of the affect- 
ed part should be effected by the application of leeches 
and all the measures and remedies (Sarns'odhana and 
Sams'amana) mentioned in connection with the treatment 
of the Pitta-Vidradhi should be likewise employed. 5. 

Treatment of Kaphaja Oshthakopa ; 

— The use of medicated Siro-virechana(errhines'i, fumiga- 
tions, (Vairechanika Dhuma), fomentation and (Sveda) 
Kavala (gurgles), prepared from the Kapha-subduing 
drugs should be recommended after blood-letting in the 
Kaphaja type of Oshtha-kopa. The swollen and inflamed 
lips should be treated (Prati-sdrana) with a compound con- 
i' yagbhata reads “ ” i. e., wax, in place of I 



Chap. XXil.l 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


463 


sisting of Tvikcitu^ Sdyjiku-kslidTci, (iVd-Kshdi'd and 
VU-ldVdiid ^black-salt) * pounded together and made 
into a thin paste with the admixture of honey. 6. 

Treatment of IVIedoja Oshtha-kopa : 
—In a case of the fatty type of Oshtha-kopa, the 
affected part should be fomented and opened (when 
suppurated) ; and should then be purified and 
cauterised with fire, A paste compound of Priydiigu, 
Triphald, Lodhm and honey should be rubbed over the 
affected part (Prati-sarana). These are the remedies for 
the curable types of Oshtha-kopa. 7-8. 

Treatment of the Diseases of Danta 

-Wlula : — Now we shall describe the treat- 
ment of the affection of the roots of the teeth (Gingi- 
vitis). In a case of the Sit^da type of the disease, 
the gums should be first bled and a decoction of 
Sdrshdpd, Ndgdvd, Triphald and Mtisid ■f mixed 
with Rdsdiijaiid should then be used as gurgles. The 
gums should be plastered (Pralepa) with Priyaiigii, 
Mustd and Triphdld and (clarified butter, cooked with) 
the decoction of Triphdld, Madlmkd, Utpdld and 
Pddnidkd should be used as an errhine. In an acute 
case of Danta-Papputaka, the gums should be first bled 
and then rubbed (Prati-sarana) with the five officinal 
kinds of salt and Yava-Kshdrd mixed with honey. 
The use of errhines (Siro-virechana). medicated snuffs 
(Nasya)and demulcent food is recommended. 9-10. 

Treatment of Danta-Veshta, etc. 

In a case of Danta-Veshta, the swelling should be first 
bled and then rubbed with a pulverised compound of 
Rodhra, P dttangd, Ydshti-niddhu and Ldkshd mixed with 
a profuse quantity of honey. A decoction of (the bark 

Vrinda and Chaktapani do not read Vid-lavana. 

t Vtinda and Chakia.dalta do not read Musla, nor Rasanjana. 



464 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tChap. XXII. 

oO the Kshiri trees, mixed with sugar, honey and clari- 
fied butter (as an after-throw) should be used as gurgles 
(Gandusha). Clarified butter, cooked with the drugs 
of the Kdkolyddi group with ten times its own weight of 
milk, should be used as snuff (Nasya). In a case of 
Saushira, the affected parts, after being properly bled, 
should be plastered (Lepa) with Lodhra, Musta and 
Rasdnjana, pounded together and mixed with honey. 
A decoction of the Kshiri trees should be used as 
gurgles (Gandusha), and clarified butter cooked with 
the paste-compound of Sdrivd, Utpala, Yashti-madhu, 
(Lodhra\ Apiru, (red) Chandana and ten times 
its own weight of milk should be recommended 
as an errhine, ir-12. 

Treatment of Pari-dara, etc. In a 

case of Pari-dara the treatment should consist of the 
remedies described in connection with Sitada- In a 
case of Upakusdas well,* the system of the patient 
should be cleansed both ways (^by means of emetics and 
purgatives), and his head should be cleansed with Siro- 
virechana. The affected part (in a case of Upa-kus'a) 
should, in addition, be bled (by rubbing it over) with the 
leaves of the Kdkodumbarikd, or of the Goji, or with 
the application of a medicinal compound composed of 
the five officinal kinds of salt and Trikattt: mixed with 
honey. Tepid watery solutions-)* of Pippali, (white) 
Sarshapa, Ndgara, and Nichtila fruits should also be 
used as gurgles (Kavala). The use of clarified butter 
cooked with the drugs of the Madhuta (Kdkolyddi) 

■* This shows that cleansing the system by means of emetics and 
purgatives, as well as with S'ito-virechana should be resorted to in a case 
of Pari-dara as well. 

t The solution may be prepared with the drugs taken together or 
separately. 



Chap. XXII.] CHIXITSA STHANAM. 4^5 

group as errhine (Nasya) and gurgle (Kavala) is also 
recommended. I 3 'I 4 - 

TrcatmGritof Danta-Vaidarbhaj ctc.s 

—In a case of Dauta-Vaidarblia, the regions about 
the roots of the teeth should be cleansed by open- 
ing them with a (Mandaldgra) instrument and sub- 
sequently treated with alkaline applications. Cooling 
measures should also be resorted to ^,during the treatment 
of this disease). In a case of Adhika-danta, the 
additional tooth should be uprooted and removed; 
then (in order to arrest the bleeding, if any), the part 
should be cauterised with fire, and then an experienced 
physician should apply the remedies mentioned under 
the head of worm-eaten teeth (Krimi-dantaka). 15-16. 

Treatment of Adhi-mamsa in a case 
of Adhi-mttmsa, the additional fleshy growth about 
the roots of a tooth should be removed (with 
a knife) and treated with a compound of Vachd, 
Tejovati, Pdthd, Sarjikd and Yava-kshdra^ pasted 
together with honey. Powdered Pippali, mixed with 
honey, should be used as a gurgle (Kavala); and a decoc- 
tion of Patola, Triphald and Nimba for washing the 
affected part. Errhines (Siro-vi rechan a) and inhalation 
of Vairechana smoke, (that lead to the secretion of 
mucus from the head), would likewise prove efficacious 
in such cases. 17, 

Treatment of Danta^Nadi i — In a case of 
Danta-DIadi, the treatment of Nadi (Sinus) about the 
teeth is identical with that of sinus in general. The 
specific remedial measure, however, is that the gum of 
the affected tooth should be incised, and the tooth should 
be extracted, if it be not in the upper jaw. The affected 
part should then be purified and cauterised with an 
alkali or fire Hence in a case of Sinus (Nadi), 

59 


a com- 



466 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XXll. 


plete extraction of any fragment of the broken bone, 
or tooth, is essentially necessary (for its cure), inas- 
mucti as, if left u.iextracted, it may cause the sinus to 
affect (run below) the jaw-bone. If the affected tooth 
be in the upper jaw, and if it be found to be firm and 
steady at its roots, though attended with tooth-ache, 
it should not be extracted, inasmuch as it might 
produce an excessive haemorrhage from its roots, 
and usher in blindness, facial paralysis, or other 
dange ous affections (such as convulsion, etc.) due 
to the excessive loss of blood. Hence in the case 
of a looseness of such a tooth in the upper jaw, it should 
not be extracted A decoction *)* of Jdti, Madana, 
Svddii~Ka7itaka and Khadira should be used to wash 
the mouth. An oil cooked witn Jdti, Madana, 
Kaiuka, Svddu-Kaiitaka, Yashti-madhu, Rodhra, 
Mmijishthd and Khadira should be used to cleanse and 
heal a sinus invading the roots of a tooth. The re- 
medial measures to be employed in the diseases affecting 
the roots of the teeth have thus been described above. 


* Both Vrintla anS Chakradatla quote this passage from the text, but 
both of them read (excessive bleeding takes place) in 

place of (if it be found to be firm and steady at its roots, 

though attended with tooth-achj) S'ri-kantha Dalta, again, in his com- 
mentary quotes another reading (if it be loose in its 

sockets and be extracted with its roots). In our humble opinion, however, 
the current reading of the text seems to be the correct one, inasmuch as 
both the readings quoted above seem to be redundant in the presence of the 

two following sentences “^ <ti T fh^ ^lIr[ ” and Ed. 

t According to S'rikantha and S'lvadasa, it appears that the applica- 
tion of this decoction as a wash is not to be found in alt editions of the 
Sus'ruia Sauihita, but they say that it is found only in Jejjata’s reading. 
Jejjatd’b reading and explanation seem to be correct and have beetj 
followed by us in the translation. — Ed, 



Chap. XXIt.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 4^7 

We shall now proceed to describe the medicinal remedies 
to be employed in the diseases which confine them- 
selves exclusively to the teeth. 18-21. 

Treatment of the diseases of Tooth 
proper : — A case of Danta-harsha yields to the 
use of any lukewarm Snehaf or the Traivrita-ghrita 
(mentioned in Chapter V), or of the decoction of the 
Vdyu-subduing drugs as gurgles (Kavala). An applica- 
tion of Snaihika Dhuma (emulsive fumes) and the use 
of snufF (Nasya), emulsive articles of food, meat soups, 
gruel prepared with meat (Rasa-Yavdgu), milk, milk- 
cream, clarified butter, Siro-vasti and the other Vayu- 
subduing measures generally prove efficacious. 22. 

In a case of Dauta Sarkarai (^Tartar-calcareous 
deposits on the teeth), the deposit should be removed 
in such a way as not to hurt the roots of the tooth, after 
which the part should be dusted (Prati-sarana) with 
powdered Ldkshd with honey. All the remedies men- 
tioned in connection with the treatment of Danta- 
harsha may as well be employed in this disease. 23 
Treatment of Kapalika, etc. These 
remedies are also efficacious in a case of Kap£(liks( 
(caries of the tooth) which is extremely hard to cure. 
In a case of Krimi-Danta (worm-eaten tooth) found to 
be firm and unloosed (in its socket), the affected tooth 
should be fomented, and the accumulation (/. the pus, 
blood, etc.) should be removed. It should then be treated 
with some Vayu-subduing errhines of the Ava-pida 
form and with emollient gurgles (Gandusha), as well as 
with plasters, prepared with V avshdbhu and the drugs 
of the Bhadra-Ddrvddi group and with a diet of 
emulsive articles of food. In the case, however, where 

All the four kinds of Sneha should be used separately or 
cotnbinedly. 



468 


THE SHSHRUTA SaMHITA. 


[Chap. XXlI. 


the tooth is found to be loose (in the socket^, the 
loose tooth should be extracted, and the cavity 
cauterised with fire or an alkali (for the purpose 
of arresting the bleeding!. An oil cooked with the 
pastes (Ivalka) of Vzddrz, Yashii-madhu, S'ringdtaka, 
and Kas'enika and with ten times its own weight of 
milk should be administered as an errhine (in such 
cases). The course of treatment in a case of Hanu- 
moksha is the same as in one of facial paralysis. 24-27. 

A person suffering from any affection of the teeth 
should refrain from taking acid fruits, cold water, diy 
(Ruksha) food, excessively hard articles of food and 
from brushing his teeth (with a twig). The treatment 
(’of the curable types of tooth-diseases has been thus 
described above, we shall now (proceed to) describe the 
treatment of the curable types of tongue-diseases. 28 29. 

Treatment of Tongue-diseases in 
the Vtitaja type of Jihvsi-kantaka (Papilla), the 
treatment should be the same as in the case of 
Vataja Oshtha-kopa. In the Pittaja type (of Jihva 
kantaka! , the vitiated blood should be made to secrete 
from the affected organ by rubbing it with any article of 
rough surface (such as the leaves of S' dkhotaka, etc.), and 
the drugs of the Madhura (Kakolyddi) group should be 
used for gurgles and errhines, as well as for being rubbed 
over (Prati-sarana) the affected organ. In the Kaphaja 
type (of Jihvd-kantaka). the organ should be bled by 
scarifying it (with a Mandala patra and such other 
instrument) ; it should then be rubbed with the 
powders of the drugs of the Pippalyddi group mixed 
with honey. A compound of powdered white mustard- 
seed and Saindhava should be administered as 
gurgles (Kavala), and the patient should be made 
to take his food with the soup of Patola, Niinba] 



Chap. XXII.] CHIIilTSA STHANAM. 4^9 

and Vdrtdkic mixed with (a liberal quantity of) 
Yava-Kslidra 30. 

Treatment of Upa-Jihva In a case of 
TJpa.-jiiiV£i (Ranula),the affected part should be scarified 
and rubbed with an alkali, and the patient should be 
treated' with errhines (Siro-vireka), gurgles (Gandusha) 
and inhalations of smokes (Dhuma), The treatment of 
the tongue diseases has been thus descrioed above. 
We shall 'now describe the medical treatment of the 
affections of the palate (Talu-gata Roga). 31-32. 

Treatment of theTalu-gata diseases: 

—In a case of Grala-sandikat, the Sundikd (protuber- 
ance) should be drawn out along the tongue with the 
help of the thumb and the second finger of the hand, or 
with a Samdams'a (forceps) and then cut off with a Man- 
daldgra instrument. But it should be severed neither 
more nor less than three-quarters of the append- 
age, inasmuch as profuse hjemorrhage might follow 
an excessive incision, and death might result therefrom ; 
whereas, a case of lesser severance is usually found to 
be attended with swelling, excessive salivation, somno- 
lence, vertigo, darkness of vision, etc. Hence a 
surgeon, well-versed in the seience of surgery and well- 
skilled in practical operations, should carefully operate 
a Gala-s'undika (with a knife) and subsequently adopt 
the following measures. The incidental ulcer should 
bi treated with the pulverised compound of Maricha, 
Ati-vishd^Pdthd, Vachd^Ktishtha^xi^ Kuta^inata, mixed 
with honey and rock-salt. A decoction of Vachd, 
Att-vtshd, P dthd, RdstidiKatuka-rohini and Pichu-inarda 
should be used as gurgle (Kavala). The five drugs, viz., 

S'likantha Datta, in his commentaiy on 'Vrinda’s compilation, quotes 
this passage from the text, but does not include “somnolence” therein. 
He,re.ads in place of “^trar ” ) 



4^0 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXll. 

Ingudi, Apdtndrga, Danti, Sarald and Deva-ddm 
should be pasted together and made into Vartis (sticks), 
well flavoured by the addition of perfuming drugs. 
Twice every day (once in the morning and again in the 
evening), should the patient be made to inhale the 
fumes of these burning Vartis (sticks) which have the 
property of subduing the (deranged) Kapha, and 
should be made to take the soup of Mudga boiled in 
alkaline water.* In cases of Tundikeri, Adhrusha, 
Kurma, Matmsa samghstta and Tzilu pupputa, the pre- 
ceding measures should be adopted, but the surgical 
operation should vary with the nature of the particular 
disease under treatment. 33-34. 

Treatment of T^Iu-p£ika, etc. 

Remedies which destroy the deranged Pitta should be 
employed in Tatlu-p^ka (suppuration of the palate) ; 
while applications of Sneha (oil, etc.) and Sveda 
(fomentations), as well as V:iyu-subduing measures should 
be the remedies in a case of a Tadu-^opha (swelling 
of the palate). The remedies to be employed in the 
diseases affecting the palate have been thus described 
above. Now hear me discourse on the remedial 
measures in Kantha-Roga (diseases of the throat). 

35-36. 

Treatment of Throat-diseases :-in 
a curable type of RoMni, blood letting and the 
applications of emetics, gurgles, inhalations (of medi- 
cated fumes) and errhines (Nasya) are efficacious. 
In cases of V^taja RoMni, blood- letting should 
be first effected, and the affected part should then be 

■* The alkaline water to be used in the Mudga-soup should be pre- 
pared from Yava-kshara according to Dallana. But according to Slva- 
ddsa, alkaline water prepared from the ashes of Mushkaka, Apdmarga, 
etc.) should be used. 



Chap. XXII.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


471 


rubbed with salts. Gurgles ^Gandusha) of tepid 

Sneha (oil, clarified butter, etc.) should be con- 
stantly resorted to. In cases of the Pittaja 
Biohini, the powdered Pattanga, honey and sugar 
should be rubbed (Prati-sArana) over (the affected part), 
and the decoctions* of Drdkshd and of Parushaka, 
should be used as gurgles (Kavala). In the Kaphaja 
type of Rohini, the affected part should be rubbed 
with Katuka and Agdra-dhmna (soot of a house — 
chimney-soot). An oil properly cooked with S'vetd 
Vida7iga, Danti and Saindhava should be employed as 
(Nasya) and employed as gurgles fKavala), In a case 
of Raktaja Rohini, a physician shall employ the 
same measures of treatment as in the Pittaja type of 
the disease. 37. 

Treatment of Kantha-^eiluka, etc.: 

—In a case of Kantha-SsCluka, it should be bled and 
treated as a case of Tundikeri, and the patient should 
be enjoined to take a single meal in the day consisting 
only of a small quantity of Yavdnna (barley-rice) with 
clarified butter. The treatment of a case of Adhi- 
jihvikd should be the same as that of Upa-jihvika. In 
a case of Eka-vrinda, blood-letting of the affected part 
should be resorted to (by the application of leeches), 
and Sodhana-|* (purifying) remedies should be 
employed. The medical treatment of a case of Gilsiyu 
(Sildyu.-D.R.) consists of a surgical operation (on the 
scat of thi disease). Incision should be made into a 


* According to Chakra-pani, Drdkshd and Parushaka should he 
combinedly used in preparing the decoction. 

t The “purifying remedies” here means S'iro-virechana, fumigation, 
plasters and applications of alkali, etc., for purifying the Doshas in the 
thro.tt, 



472 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA, 


[Chap. XXII. 


G-ala-Vidradlii (throat -abscess ' in its suppurated stage 
and appearing at a part other than a Marma (vulner- 
able part). 38-42. 

Treatment of Sarva-sara IVIukha- 
Rog'a : — The affected part should be rubbed with 
powdered salts* in a case of Sarva-sara Mnkha-roga 
(invading the entire cavity of the mouth) due to the 
aggravated Ydyn. Oil cooked with the (decoction and 
the pastes of) VAyu-subduing drugs (such as, theBhadra- 
darvddi group, etc.) and used as errhines (Nasya) and 
gurgles (Kavala) is efficacious in this disease. After the 
application of this oil, the patient should be treated with 
the Suaihika form of fumigation (Dhuma) in the follow- 
ing manner, Tuntuka leaves smeared with honey should 
be plastered with a compound of the Sdra of S'dla, 
Piydla and castor wood, the marrow of In^udi and 
Madhuka, Guggiilu, Dhydmaka CGandha-trina), Mdmsi, 
Kdldna-sdrivd, S'ri (Lavanga), Sm’ja-rasa, S'dileya and 
wax pounded together and mixed with an adequate 
quantity of clarified butter or oil. It should then be 
burnt, and the patient made to inhale the fumes. This 
medicinal fumigation (Dhuma) proves remedial in the 
disease. It destroys the deranged Vsiyu and Kapha, 
and proves curative in all affections of the mouth. 
In the Pittaja type of the Sarva-sara Mukha-roga, all 
the morbific principles (Doshas) should be eliminated 
from the patient’s body (with emetics and purgatives), 


* Dallana and Nis'chala explain the term as the 

powders of the five officinal kinds of salt. S’iva-dasa, however, holds that 
powdered Saindhava salt only should be used. Vrinda reads ‘‘ 
and the commentator S ri-kanlha Hatta explains it to mean either the 
powders of i.«., Jyotishmati or those of r.e,, the five 

officinal kinds qf salt. — Ed. 



ch&p. XXII.] chikitsa STHANAM. • 473 

and all kinds of sweet, soothing and Pitta-subduing 
drugs should be administered. Medicated gurgles 
(Gandusha), fumigation (Dhuma), Pratisdrana (rubbings) 
and purifying (S^odhana) measures as well as the 
Kapha-subduing remedies should be employed in the 
Kaphaja type of the Sarva-sara-Mukha-roga, and the 
patient should be made to take one Dharana measure 
(Twenty-four Ratis) of powdered Ati-vishd Pdthd, 
Musta, Deva-ddru, Katuka and Kutaja seeds, with an 
adequate quantity of cow’s urine. This medicine acts 
as a potent remedy for all the Kaphaja disorders of the 
body. Gurgles (Kavala) with milk, sugarcane juice, 
cow’s urine, curd-cream, Kdnjika, oil, or clarified 
butter (Sneha) should be prescribed according to the 
nature of the aggravated Doshas involved in each case 
(of the Sarva-sara-Mukha-roga). We have described 
above the medical treatment of the affections of mouth 
which yield to medical remedies. 43-45. 

incurable Types : — Now we shall enumerate 
the different incurable types of mouth-diseases. Of 
the types of Oslitha-p£(ka, those due to the vitiated 
condition of the flesh, or of blood, and those due 
to the concerted action of the aggravated Doshas 
(Sannipdta) should be deemed as incurable. Of the 
diseases peculiar to the roots of the teeth, the affections 
known as the Sdnnipdtika Danta-naCdi (Sinus in the 
gums) and the Sdnnipitika ^aushira (Mahd-Saushira) 
should be also deemed as incurable. Of the affec- 
tions of the teeth, those known as the ^y^va-dantaka, 
B^laua and Bhanjaua, and of the diseases which 
restrict themselves to the tongue, the one known as the 
Al^sa should be looked upon as incurable. Similarly, 
of the affections of the palate, the Arvuda should be 
deemed as incurable. Of those of the throat, the Svara- 

60 



474 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XXII 


ghna, Valaya, Brinda, Bal£^sa, Bidiirikrf, G-alauglia, 
M^msa-t^na, ^ataghni and Rohini should be regarded 
as beyond the pale of medicine. The nineteen kinds of 
the disease mentioned above are incurable, and the 
medical treatment of the^e diseases should be taken in 
hand without holding out any definite hope of 
recovery. 46 —49. 

Thus ends the Twenty-second Chapter of the Chikitsita-Sthdnatn in the 
Sus'ruta Samhit^ which deals with the medical treatment of the diseases 
of the moath. 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

Now we shall discourse on the (symptoms and) 
medical treatment of swellings (^opha). I- 

The six kinds of swelling (Sopha) appearing in the 
particular parts of the body have already been described* 
with the variations in their symptoms and the medical 
treatment to be pursued in each case. But the' swelling 
known as the Sarva-sara ^opha (general Anasarca) 
may be divided into five subheads. They are as 
follows, namely, the V^taja, Pittaja, Kapahja San- 
nip^taja and Viahaja the one due to the introduc- 
tion of any extraneous poison ipto the system). 2. 

Their ca.USe5 : — ’The Doshas (morbific prin- 
ciples) become aggravated and give rise to swellings 
(Sopha) of the body, by such causes, as by undertaking 
a journey immediately after a meal, or by the use of 
Harita-sdkas (potherbs', cakes and salts in inordinate 
quantities, or by the excessive use of acids by weak 
and emaciated persons, or by the use of clay, baked or 
unbaked, of lime-stones, or of the flesh of aquatic 
animals, or of those frequenting swampy places, exces- 
sive sexual intercourse, use of fares consisting of incom- 
patible articles and lastly by the joltings when riding 
on elephants, horses, camels, in vehicles, etc., or on 
persons on the part of dyspeptic patients. 3. 

Specific Symptoms:— A swelling (S'opha) 
of the Valtaj^ type is vermilion or black-coloured and 
is attended with softness and a pricking pain in the 
swelling which disappears at intervals, A swelling of 
the Pittaja type assurpes a blood-red or yellow colour, 
swiftly expands and is attended with a burning and 

• See Sutra.slhJinB, Chapter XVIL 



THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap.' XXIII. 


476 


drawing pain (Chosha). A swelling of the Kaphaja 
type assumes a white or greyish colour, becomes hard, 
cold to the touch and glossy, is slow in its growth, and 
is attended with itching, pain, etc. A swelling of the 
Sakunipattika type (due totae concerted action of all the 
three Doshas of the body) exhibits all the symptoms 
which specifically belong to each of the three above- 
said types . 4-7. 

Symptoms of Vishaja-^opha : —A 

swelling (Sopha) which results from the contact or 
introduction of a (weakened) chemical poison (Gara) with 
or into the body, or from the use of polluted water, 
or by bathing in a foul and stagnant pool or tank, or by 
dusting the body with the powders of substances 
poisoned by any poisonous animal, or from the contact 
with weeds and plants, which have become poisoned 
by the urine, fcjecal matter, or semen of poisonous 
animals, is called a Vishaja swelling. The swelling 
is soft, pendent and persistent, expands rapidly and 
moves gradually (from one part of the body to the 
other) and is attended with a burning sensation and 
suppuration. 8. 

IVl0moraPl0 V0rs0 *The aggravated Doshas 
of the body confined in the stomach (Amdsaya) give rise 
to a swelling in the upper part of the body. Confined 
in the intestines (Pakvas'aya), they give rise to a swelling 
in the middle part of the body. If they are confined 
in the receptacle of the foeces (Malds'aya), the lower part 
of the body becomes swollen. The swelling .extends 
all over the body in the event of their (Doshas) being 
diffused throughout the organism. 9. 

ProgTlOSiS : — An cedematous swelling (Sopha) 
occurring in the middle part (trunk) of the body or 
extending all over it may be cured with difficulty as 



Chap. XXIII.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


m 


well as the one which first occurs at either (the upper or 
lower) half of the body and tends to extend upward. 
A case of swelling attended with dyspnoea, thirst, 
weakness, fever, vomiting, hiccough, dysentery, colic 
(S'ula), and a want of relish for food is extremely hard 
to cure and soon proves fatal. lo-ii. 

We shall now proceed to describe their general and 
specific remedies. The use of acids, salts, milk, curd, 
treacle, lard, water, oil, clarified butter, cakes and all 
kinds of heavy (in digestion) edibles should be refrained 
from in all the types of oedema (S'opha). 12-13. 

The Special Treatment of ^opha s— 
Traivrita (Ghrita) or castor oil should be administered 
for a month or a fortnight to the patient suffering from 
the Vs(taja type of oedema (Sop ha). Clarified butter 
cooked with the decoction of the drugs of the Nyagro- 
dhddi and the Aragvadhddi groups should be respec- 
tively prescribed in the Pitfcaja and Kaphaja types. 
In the Sannipdtaja type, the patient should be made' 
to drink a potion of clarified butter. cooked 
with a Pitra* measure of the milky exudation of thei 
Snuhi plant and twelve Pdtra measures of fermented, 
rice gruel (Kdnjika) with an adequate quantity of 
Danti as a Kalka. The remedy in regard to a swelling, 
due to the action of poison (Vishaja) imbibed into the, 
system will be duly described in the Kalpa Sthdnam. 14. 

The general remedies Now we shall 
describe the general remedies (which are applicable in 
cases of Sotha). Any of the four Ghritas ending with 
the Tilvaka Ghrita which have already been mentioned 
under the treatment of Udara would prove remedial 
in a case of Svayathu (CEdematous Swelling). The 
use of (the officinal) urine and the applications of the 

A P&tra measure is equal lo eight seers 



478 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


I [Chap. XIII 


(medicated) Yartis are likewise recommended. The 
patient should be made to take every day the 
medicine known as the Nav^Cyasa* * * § through the 
medium of honey. He should be made to take a 
Dharana weight of the compound of powdered 
Vidanga, Aiivishd, Kutajadrxxit, Bkadra-ddrtt, Ndgara 
and Markka in tepid water. Trikatu, Yava-kshdra 
and powdered iron should be mixed together and 
administered through the medium of the decoction 
of Triphald ; or, cow’s milk and cow’s ■ urine, in 
equal proportions should be taken. As an alternative, 
treacle and Haritaki mixed in equal proportions should 
be administered. D^va-ddru. and S'u7ithi\ may be given ; 
or Guggulu \ dissolved in cow’s urine or in the 
decoction of Varshdbhu. Equal parts of treacle 

and S'ringavera § may as well be prescribed ; or the 
roots of the Varshdbhu pasted with the decoction of the 
same drug and mixed with powdered S'unthi dissolved 
in milk should be given to the patient every day for a 
month. He should take Mudga pulse fried with the 
clarified butter prepared by cooking it with the decoc- 
tion of Trikatu and Varshdbhu. Milk boiled with 
Pippali, P«/)/a/z-roots, CJiavya^ Chitraka^ Mayura (Apd- 
mdrga) and Varshdbhu, or with Sunthi and Surangi- 
roots, or with Trikatu, Eranda-roots and vS'y<^z«^^-roots, 
or with Varshdbhu, S’unthi, Sahd and Deya-ddru 
should be given to the patient. A paste of Aldvu and 

* See Chapter XXII, para. lo, Chikitsita-sthdnam. 

t Some commentators explain that the compound of Deva-d^rn and 
S'unthi also should be taken through the medium of cow’s urine or the 
decoction of Varshdbhu. 

t According to Ohakradatta’s reading, Deva-daru, S'unthi and 
Guggulu should be taken together with cow’s urine. 

§ The S'ringaveta in this compound may be either fresh or 
dried.-— Ed, 



chap. XXIIl 3 


CHIKITSA STHANAM, 


479 


Vibhitaka dissolved in the washings of rice, should 
likewise be administered. 15. 

The diet of the patient should consist of cooked 
barley or wheat saturated with the unsalted soup of 
Mudga pulse, cooked with Yava-kshdra, Pippali, 
Markka and S'ringav&ra, and prepared with only a 
small quantity of oil or clarified butter. A decoction 
of Vrikshaka, Arka, Naktamdla, Nimba and Varshdbhu 
should be used in effusing (Parisheka) the affected part. 
It should be plastered with a compound consisting of 
Sarshapa, Suvarchald, Saindhava and S'drngashtd, 
.pasted together. Strong purgatives, Asthdpana 
measures and applications of Sneha, Sveda and 
Upan^a should be constantly employed according to 
the nature and instensity of the aggravated Doshas 
involved in the case. In a case of Sotha, other than 
what is the outcome or supervening symptom (TJpadrava) 
of any other disease, the patient should be frequently 
bled by opening a vein of the locality. 16. 

Memorable Verse A patient wishing to 
get rid of an attack of Sopha (cedematous swelling) 
should refrain from taking all sorts of cakes, acid sub- 
stances, liquor, clay, salts, oil, clarified butter,* water, 
heavy and indigestible articles of food, sleep in the day 
time, the flesh of animals other than that of the animals 
of the JAngala group and from visiting the bed of any 
woman. 17. 

Thus ends the Twenty-third Chapter in the Chikitsita Sthiinain of the 
Susrula Samhild which deals with the medical treatment of S'opha. 

• Some read “ treacle in place of » i.e., clarified 

butter. This reading seems to be the correct one, inasmuch as it is 
supported by all other authoritative works on Ayurveda — Ed. 



CHAPTER XXIV. 


Now we shall discourse on the rules of hygiene and 
the prophilactic measures in general (An^gat^- 

v^dha-Prati-shedhaniya), i. 

metrical Texts : — -Now we shall describe the 
rules of conduct to be daily observed by an intelligent 
man (after leaving his bed) 'seeking perfect health and a 
sound body. 2. 

Tooth -brushing : — A man should leave his 
bed early in the morning and brush his teeth. The 
tooth-brush (Danta-Kishtha) should be made of a 
fresh twig of a tree or a plant grown on a commendable 
tract and it should be straight, not worm-eaten, devoid 
of any knot or at most with one knot only (on one side), 
and should be twelve fingers in length and like the 
small finger in girth- The potency and taste of the 
tNvig (tooth-brushl should be determined by or vary 
according to the season of the year and the preponder- 
ance of any particular Dosha in the physical tempera- 
ment of its user.* The twig of a plant possessed of any 
of the four tastes as sweet, bitter, astringent and pungent 
should be alone collected and used. Nimba is the 
best of all the bitter trees ; Khadira of the astringent 
ones ; Madhuka of the sweet ; and Karanja of the 
pungent ones. 3. 

* A man of a Kaphaja temperament should use a twig of a plant 
possessed of a pungent taste (Tikta) in brushing his teeth. A man of a 
Fittaja temperament should brush his teeth with a twig possessed of a 
sweet taste (Madhura), while a man of a Vitika temperament (nervous) 
should use that with an astringent (Kasiya) taste. This rule should be 
observed even in respect of the preponderant Doshas of the body, in a 
disease. 



Chap. XXIV.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 48l 

The teeth should be- daily cleansed with (a com- 
pound consisting of) honey, powdered Tri-katu, Tri- 
vnrga*, Tejovati, Saindhava and oil. Each tooth should 
be separately cleansed with the preceding cleansing paste 
applied on (the top of the twig bitten into the form of) 
a soft brush, and care should be taken not to hurt the 
gum anywise during the rubbing. This tends to 
cleanse and remove the bad smell (from the mouth) and 
the uncleanliness (of the teeth) as well as to subdue the 
Kapha (of the body). It cleanses the mouth and 
also produces a good relish for food and a cheerfulness 
of mindf. 4. 

Cases where tooth-brushing is for- 
bidden : — Tooth-brushing is forbidden to the persons 
suffering from , affections of the teeth, lips, throat, 
palate, jor tongue, or from stomatitis, cough, asthma, 
hiccough and vomiting, weakness, indigestion, 
epilepsy, head-disease, thirst, fatigue, alcoholism, facial 
paralysis, car-ache, and to persons tired with over- 
drinking. 5- 


* The term “Tri-varga” generally means Tri-katu, Tri-phaM and 
Tri-mada. D.allana explains it as meaning Tri-sugandhi, t.e., Tvak, Eld 
and Patra. — Ed. 

+ Additional Texts It brings on a relish for food, imparts a 
cleanliness, lightness and sense of freedom to the teeth, tongue, lips and 
palate. It protects the mouth, throat, palate, lips and tongue from being 
affected by any disease. It arrests salivation, imparts an agreeable aroma 
to the mouth and relieves nausea and water-brusb. It strengthens the 
religious inclination and gives a lightness to the organs. Hence one 
should every day use the tooib-twig, but its use is prohibited in respect 
of persons suffering from diseases of the palate, lips or tongue as well as 
from MukUa-pAka (stonialiiis), dyspnoea, hiccough, parchedness of the 
mouth and.nausca. The last two lines of the additional text, however, 
occur in the tc\t in a slightly different form. See the t\ext two lines of the 
text. 



482 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXIV. 


The use of a thin, smooth and flexible foil of gold, 
silver, or wood, ten fingers in length, is commended for 
the purpose of cleansing the tongue by scraping. It 
gives relief and removes the bad taste, foetor, swelling 
and numbness of the mouth. Sneha (oil) should be 
used as a gurgle (Gandusha) every day (after the cleansing 
of the teeth), as it makes them firm, and brings on a 
natural relish for food. 6-7. 

Eye and Mouth -washes The mouth and 
the eyes of a person of sound health should be washed 
with the decoction of the barks of Kshira trees mixed 
with milk, or with that of Bhillodaka, or of Ainalaka, or 
with (a copious quantity of) cold water.*' This procedure 
would soon prove efficacious in destroying such affections 
of the body, as Nilikd, dryness in the mouth, pustules 
or eruptions, Vyanga and the diseases due -to the 
(concerted) action of the Rakta and Pitta, and by 
such washings the face becomes lighter and the sight 
stronger. 8. 

CoIIyrium : — Srotonjana, produced in the river 
Indus, is the best and purest of Collyriums. It 
alleviates the burning and itching sensations in the eyes, 
removes all local pains, secretions and impurities, 
increases the range of vision, enables the eyes to bear 


^ Gayad^sa interprets that the mouth should be washed with the 
decoction of Bhillodaka and the eyes with that of A'malaka. He also 
interprets that the eyes and the mouth may both, however, be washed 
with cold water. 

Perhaps Gayadasa was of opinion that the decoction of Amalaka, 
being astringent, might arrest the dilatation of the pupils due to age, 
and so help to keep the eye-sight unimpaired. Others explain that the 
mouth should be washed with the decoctions of Bhillodaka and of 
Amalaka, and the eyes with cold water. The decoctions, however, if 
used as an eye-wash, should be used in a cold state. — Ed. 



Chap. XXIV. 3 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


483 


the blasts of the wind and the glare of the sun and guards 
against the inroads of occular affections. Hence tlie 
application of collyrium (along the eye-lids) is highly 
recommended ; but its use is forbidden just after taking 
one’s meal or bath (washing the head) and after the 
fatigue of vomiting, or riding, etc., nor after keeping 
late hours and also not during an attack of fever. 9-1 1. 

A betel-leaf prepared with cloves, camphor, nut- 
meg (JAti), lime, araca-nut, Kakkola and Katukdhva 
;^Latd-kasturi), etc., should be taken (chewed after meals), 
as it tends to cleanse the mouth, impart a sweet aroma 
to it, enhance its beauty and cleanse and strengthen 
the voice, the tongue, the teeth, the jaws and the 
sense-organs. It checks excessive salivation, soothes 
the body (Hridya), and acts as a general safeguard 
against throat disease. A betel-leaf (prepared as 
before) proves wholesome after a bath, after meals, 
after anointing as well as after rising from sleep. 
A person suffering from Rakla-Pitta, Kshata-Kshina, 
thirst, or parched ness of the mouth should refrain 
from taking betel-leaf, the use of which is equally for- 
bidden in such diseases as anmmia, internal dryness 
of the organism and epilepsy. 12. 

^irobhyanga Anointing (Abhyanga) the 
head with oil is a good cure for the affections of the head. 
It makes the hair grow luxuriantly, and imparts thick- 
ness, softness and a dark gloss to them. It soothes and 
invigorates the head and the sense-organs and removes 
the wrinkles of the face. The medicinal oil known as 
the Chakra-Taila should be cooked with the paste 
(Kalka) and the decoction of MadJiuka, ICsJuva-s'iikld , 
Saraia, Deva-ddrn and the minor Paiicha-imda taken 
in equal parts fin each case). The head should be 
stantly anointed with this cooling oil. 13-14. 


con- 



484 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXiV. 


Combing" the hair improves its growth, removes 
dandriff and dirt, and destroys the parasites of the scalp. 
Pouring oil (Karna-purana) into the cavities of the ears 
is highly efficacious in pains of the jaws (Hanul and of 
the Manyd, and acts as a good cure for head -ache and 
ear-ache. Anointing (Abhyanga) the body (with oil, 
etc ) imparts a glossy softness to the skin, guards 
against the aggravation of the VAyu and the Kapha, 
improves the colour and strength and gives a tone to the 
root-principles (Dhdtus) of the body. * 

PariShcka : — Affusing the body (Parisheka) 
removes the sense of fatigue, and brings about the 
adhesion of broken joints. It alleviates the pain which 
usually attends burns, scalds, bruises and lacerations, and 
Subdues the actions of the deranged Vdyu. Sneha (oil) 
affused on the human organism imparts a tone and vigour 
to its root-principles (Dhdtus), in the same manner as 
water furnishes the roots of a tree or a plant with the 
necessary nutritive elements, and fosters its growth, 
when poured into the soil where it grows. The use of 
Sneha (oil, etc.) at a bath causes the Sneha to penetrate 
into the system through the mouths of the veins (Sirds) 
and the ducts (Dhamanis) of the body, as also through 


* Rilbbed on the body and allowed lo stand or kept unwiped, the 
Sneha (oil) reaches down the skin, through the hair-follicles in the course 
of lime necessary to utter four hundred Malras, It reaches the principle 
of blood in the course of that necessary lo utter five hundred Matr^s, 
and to the principle of flesh in the course of that necessary to utter six 
hundred Mdtras. It penetrates further to the principle of fat in the 
course of that necessary to utter seven hundred Matrds, and to the 
principle of bone in the course of that necessary to utter eight hundred 
Mdtrds, and lastly to the principle of marrow in the course of that 
necessary to utter nine hundred Mdtras. It successively cures the diseases 
respectively located in those principles. — Dallana. 



Cha^i. XXIV. CHIKITSA STHANAM, 4^5 

the roots of the hair, and thus soothes and invigoiates 
the body with its own essence. i8 — 20, 

Under the circumstances, affusions and anointments 
of the body with oil or clarified butter should be pre- 
scribed by an intelligent person with due regard to one’s 
habit, congeniality and temperament and to the climate 
and the season of the year as well as to the preponder- 
ance of the deranged Dosha or Doshas in one’s physical 
constitution. 21. 

Prohibitions of anointments, etc.:— 

Anointments of the body simply with (unmedicated) 
Sneha are strictly forbidden in cases of undigested (Ama) 
Doshas (as long as the aggravated Doshas of the body 
continue in an unassimilated or undigested state and 
in their full virulence and intensity). Anointment should 
not be resorted to in cases of acute fever and indiges- 
tion, nor after the exhibition of emetics and purgatives, • 
nor after an application of a Nirudha-Vasti. Anoint- 
ment in the first two cases (acute fever and indigestion) 
serves to make the diseases curable with difficulty and 
even incurable, while that made on the same day after 
the application of purgatives, emetics, or a Nirudha- 
Vasti, tends to impair the digestive capacity, etc. Anoint- 
ment is similarly prohibited in diseases due to Samtar- 
pana (repletion, etc). 22 — 24. 

Physical Exercise What is (popularly) 
known as physical exercise is (nothing but) a sense 
of weariness from bodily labour, and it should be 
taken every da)'. After taking physical exercise, the 
whole body should be shampooed, until it gives rise 
to a comfortable sensation in the limbs. It makes 
the body stout and strong, helps the symmetrical 
growth of the limbs and muscles, improves the com- 
plexion and the digestive powers, prevents laziness and 



4^6 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXIV. 

makes the body light and glossy, firm and compact. 
The power of enduring fatigue and weariness and 
the variations of temperaturCj. thirst, etc., are the 
virtues which are invariably found to follow in its 
train. It leads to an undiseased existence and is the 
best means of reducing corpulency. The enemies of 
a man habituated to regular physical exercises, dare 
not molest him through fear (for his strength — D. R.). 
Imbecility and senile decay never approach him, and 
the muscles of his body become firm and steady. 
Diseases flj' from the presence of a peison, habituated^ to 
1‘egular physical exercise and (subsequent) shampooing, 
just as small beasts do on seeing a lion . It makes an 
aged and deformed man (young and) good-looking. 
Food consisting of articles incompatible i.n their 
potency, and indigested and decomposed food are easily 
digested in a man who takes regular physical exercise 
(and cannot produce any bad effectb Regular physical 
exercise is (particularly) beneficial to a strong man 
accustomed to the use oi emollient food (abounding in 
proteid matter), in all seasons of the year ; but in 
the winter and the spring, it is highly 'indispensably) 
necessary for him. A man seeking his own good should 
take physical exercise every day only to the half extent 
of his capacity (Valardha), as otherwise it may prove 
fatal. That amount of exercise which makes the Prdna- 
VAyu come out through the mouthf {ie., as soon as 

* Dallana’s reading here evidently is P'^^ce of 

| This would mean “of one taking so much exercise 

as produces sweat.” 

t According to several authorities, the appearance of perspiration 
on the nose, the axilla, the forehead and in the joints of the hands 
and the legs and dryness of the mouth are the symptoms which 
indicate that one has taken Valairdha physical exercise (f.e., to the 
half extent of his capacity). — Dallana. 



Chap. XXIV,] CHIKITSA STHANAIiI. 4^7 

hard-breathing vould set in', is known as the Va/lS/i'dlia. 
exercise. One’s own age, strength, physique and food 
as well as the season of the year and the physical 
nature of the country are the factors which should be 
considered before one began to take phj^sical exercise, 
as otherwise it might bring on some disease 25 - 

Consumption, hmmorrhage 'Rakta-pitta), thirst 
phthisis, aversion to food, vomiting, illusivcness, weari- 
ness, fever, cough and asthma are the diseases, which are 
likely to originate from excessive physical exercise, 
and is, therefore, forbidden after a meal and the fatigues 
of sexual intcrcour-se, in a fit of vertigo and in respect of 
persons suffering from hmmorrhage, phthisis, cachexia, 
cough, asthma and ulcer. 26-27. 

The deranged VAyu of the body is restored to its 
normal condition by the help of Udvartaua (massage). 
It reduces the fat and the aggravated Kapha of the 
system, smoothes and cleanses the skin and imparts a 
firmness to the limbs. 28 

UtsEidaua (rubbing) and Udgharsliaua^' (friction") 
tend to dilate the orifice of the (superficial) ducts and 
increase the temperature of the skin. Utsddana 
specifically improves the complexion of females and 
gives a lovely appearance, cleanliness, beauty and 
suppleness to the female form. Udgharshana (friction) 
pacifies the bodily Vdyu, cures itches, rashes and 
eruptions Uvotha). Phenaka t imparts lightness and 
steadiness to the thighs, cures itches, eruptions, Vata- 
slambha and cxcrctal diseases. Friction of the body 
with brickbat powders excites the heat of skin, brings 

’ Ulfadana nr.d Ud(;har5han.T .ire the Uvn kinds of rubbing the body 
A^ilh incdicinat powders with and wiihoiii .0 Sneiia respectively. 

t PllOliaka is rv kind of friction of the body with sniall wooden 
toileis. 



488 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. .[Chap. XXIV. 


on the dilation of the orifices of the bodily ducts, and 
cures itches and Kotha. 29-32, 

Bathing' : — Bathing removes somnolence, (in- 
ordinate) bodily heat and a sense of fatigue. It allays 
thirst and checks itching and perspiration, brings on a 
fresh relish for food, removes all bodily impurities, clears 
the sense-organs, gladdens the mind, purifies the blood, 
increases the appetising power, destroys drowsiness and 
sin, and increases , 'semen. The sight of a man is 
invigorated by applying cold water to the head at the 
time of bathing, while the pouring of warm water on 
the head tends to injure the eye-sight. In cases 
of an aggravation of the deranged VAyu and Kapha, 
the head may be washed with warm water, as a 
medicine, after a careful consideration of the intensity 
of the disease. 33-35- 

Prohibition of Bathing Bathing in 
extremely cold water in winter tends to enrage the 
bodily Vdyu and the Kapha, while bathing in hot water 
in summer agitates the blood and the Pitta. Bathing 
is not beneficial in fever, diarrhoea, ear-ache, tym- 
panites, Adhmdna, aversion to food and indigestion, and 
in the disorders or diseases due to the actions of the 
deranged Vdyu. It should not also be taken just after a 
meal. 36-38. 

Anulepana : — Anointing (Anulepana) the body 
(with scented pastes) removes a sense of fatigue and 
foetor and perspiration. It produces a sense of pleasure 
and improves the Ojas, the strength and the complexion 
of the body^ enhances the beauty and glow of the frame 
and gives it a lovely appearance. Anulepana is forbidden 
in those cases in which bathing is prohibited. 39. 

The wearing of gems, flowers and clean clothes is 
beneficial in a variety of ways, as it acts as a goo4 



Chap. XXIV.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


489 


prophylactic against the influences of monsters and 
malignant spirits, enhances the Ojas and the beauty of 
the body and keeps the mind in a cheerful mood and 
proves highly auspicious. 40. 

Alcpa. 1 — 'Besmearing (Alepa) the face (with scented 
pastes, etc.) imparts steadiness to the eyes, brings on a 
broad and graceful contour of the cheeks and mouth, 
produces their healthful glow like that of a lotus flower 
and prevents its disfigurement by pimples, moles and 
such like growths and eruptions (Vyanga). The use of 
collyrium (Anjana) furthers the growth of large and 
beautiful eye lashes, cleanses the eyes by removing 
the unhealthy secretions, makes the eyes more wide 
and graceful and also imparts a brilliant lustre to the 
pupils, 41-42. 

Devotion to the gods and Brdhmanas and hospi- 
tality towards guests (Atithi) add to one’s good 
name, piety, wealth, progeny and duration of life. 
Food (AMra) nourishes and gladdens the heart and 
directly contributes to one’s bodily strength. It 
improves the memory, appetising power, energy and 
the natural strength of the mind (Tejas), and increases 
the Ojas and the duration of one’s life. 

Washing the feet increases the semen (Vrishya), re- 
moves the sense of fatigue, gladdens the heart, makes the 
soles free from all adhering dirt and local diseases, acts 
as a prophylactic against evil spirits (Rakshoghna) and 
clears up^' the vision. Anointing (Abhyanga) the 
feet (with oil, etc) brings on sleep. It is refreshing 
and invigorating to the body and the sight, removes all 

Dallana explains that washing Ihe feel keeps Ihe neive (Nadi) 
joining the soles with the eyes cool and thus helps to clear up the vision. 
There is a custom of frequently washing the feet amongst the Hindus 
most probably on this account.— Ed. 


62 



490 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. t^^hap. XXIV . 

drowsiness and sense of fatigue and softens the skin of 
the soles of the feet. 4S-46. 

The use of shoes is efficacious in curing the diseases 
of the feet and is conducive to pleasure and verile 
potency. It acts as a prophylactic against the influences 
of evil spirits, makes walking easy and pleasant, and 
improves the Ojas in the body.. Walking without shoes 
is perilous to life and health, and is attended with 
the danger of impaired vision. ^17-48. 

The shaving of hair and the paring of nails lead to 
the expiation of one’s sins, make a man cheerful, tend 
to appease his fate, increase his energy and impart 
a lightness to the frame. The putting on of armour 
(Vsinava'ra) improves one’s strength, energy and com- 
plexion and gives a lustre to the body. The wearing of 
a turban (Ushuislia) acts as a protection against wind, 
dust, sun and light, helps the luxurious growth of hair 
and tends to improve the purity of the mind. 49-51. 

The use of an umbrella is a protection against 
rain, wind, dust, dew and sun. It improves one’s 
energy, Ojas, eye-sight and complexion, and is an 
auspicious thing in itself. The use of a stick (Danda) 
dispels the fear of dogs, snakes, beasts of prey, (tigers, 
etc.) and horned animals. It considerably alleviates 
the toil of a journey, lessens the probability of making 
a false step and is specially commended to the weak 
and imbecile. It increases one’s energy, strength and 
patience, makes the mind firm and bold, acts as a proper 
support and makes one fearless. 52 53. 

Sitting idle {Asy^) gives pleasure. It improves the 
glow of one’s complexion, increases the Kapha and corpu- 
lency and makes the body delicate, while an active pedes- 
trian habit (Mliva) is detrimental to the complexion. 
It reduces the fat and Kapha of the body, and removes 



Chap, XXIV.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


491 


the delicateness of the frame. Contrary results (to those 
produced by sitting idle) are produced by excessive 
walking which further brings on weakness and emacia- 
tion of the body. A gentle walk or stroll, which is not 
very fatiguing to the body, tends, on the contrary, to 
improve his memory, strength, digestive capacity 
(Agni) and the functions of the sense-organs. It 
increases also the duration of life. 54' 57* 

Lying down in an easy posture on a soft bed removes 
the sense of fatigue, pacifies or soothes the bodily 
Vdyu, brings on sleep and lost recollections to the 
mind, is spermatopoetic and is conducive to the 
growth of the body ; while lying down in a contrary 
manner is attended with contrary results. Fanning 
with Chowries (Vatla-vyajana) is refreshing and keeps 
off flies and mosquitoes ; while fanning (with ordinary 
fans) arrests perspiration, removes the sense of fatigue 
and fainting fits, and alleviates the burning, scorching 
and parched sensations. Shampooing (SamvaTiana) is 
pleasant, refreshing, soporific, and spermatopoetic 
(Vrishya). It destroys the bodily Vdyu and Kapha, 
removes the sense of fatigue and is soothing to the 
blood, skin and the muscles. 58-60. 

A strong wind (PravsCta) is parchifying in its effect 
and injurious to the complexion. It destroys the burning 
-Sensation (if any) in the body, allays thirst, removes 
fainting fits and stops perspiration, but (at the same 
time) produces numbness of the body and destroys the 
digestive powers ; whereas the contrary results are pro- 
duced by a gentle wind. The gentle breeze of summer 
and of autumn should be breathed (as it is attended 
with beneficial results to the health). A seeker 
after health and a long life should reside in a chamber, 
not exposed to strong blasts of wind (Nivetta). An 



492 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XXiV. 


'undue exposure to the sun (^tapa) aggravates the Pitta, 
but increases the power of digestion. It agitates the blood 
and begets thirst, perspiration, faintness (sun-stroke), 
vertigo and a burning sensation in the body attended 
with a discolouring of the complexion, etc. ; whereas 
the contrary results are produced by a (cool) shade 
(ChliE^y^). A basking in the glare of fire (Agni) remedies 
the (wrong) coursing of the "Vayu and Kapha, removes 
cold and shivering, digests the slimy secretions in the 
channels ; but aggravates the blood and Pitta. A good 
sleep (Nidl'Et) enjoyed at the proper time (and for 
the proper period) tends to improve the growth, strength, 
vigour and complexion of the body. It increases 
the power of digestion, removes drowsiness, and 
restores the natural equilibrium among the different 
fundamental principles (Dh^tus) of the organism. 6i 65. 

General rules of conduct The first 
rule is that one should keep his nails and hair short, 
always put on clean and white clothes, wear a light turban 
and a pair of shoes and cany an umbrella and a stick in 
his hand. One should discourse, when necessary, with 
another in a sweet and gentle voice and his speech 
should be laconic and pleasing. He should first accost 
his elders and acquaintances in cases of meeting before 
they speak. He should be kind and compassion- 
ate to all creatures, and be approved of by his elders 
and superiors. He should be in full possession of re- 
sources and in an undisturbed state of the mind. One 
should not stir out at night nor walk about in the grounds 
of public executions, undulated places, dens and rocks.* 
He should not go (at night) to where roads cross nor 
to places covered with heaps of husks, ashes, bones, 

* The text has Indra-kila which means a hilly Country inhabited 
by barbarous people. 



Chap. XXIV.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


493 


hair, stones, baked earth';and charcoal, nor to places 
commonly considered as unholy. 66. 

Men should never deride a king, nor use harsh and 
impolite words to, nor act meanly and treacheiously 
towards him. One should not speak ill of the king, 
the gods, the Brahmanas and the Pitris (departed 
Manes), and he should never use harsh and slanderous 
words. He should not tell a lie nor associate with 
king-haters nor with the insane, degraded, mean and 
narrow-hearted persons. 67. 

Climbing up trees, mountains, ant-hills and undula- 
ting grounds, etc., and going up to a waterfall as well as 
riding on a wild and unbroken horse or elephant are 
strictly prohibited. One should not descend into an 
' unknown tank, den as well as into the sea or into a river 
at flood times. Old haunted and deserted houses, cre- 
mation grounds and solitary forests should be strictly 
shunned. One should not come into actual contact 
with fire, wild beasts, snakes and venomous insects. 
The site infested with wild beasts, snakes, venomous 
insects, lizards and horned animals as well as where 
virulent epidemics would be raging should be avoided, 
nor should the sites of actual affrays and battles be 
resorted to, nor the scene of a violent conflagration of 
fire. 68. 

Passing between two rows of fire, between cow's, 
elders, Brdhmanas, moving cradles and a married couple 
is forbidden. One should not (unnecessarily) follow a 
corpse. Even the shadow of a fallen, degraded and sick 
person as well as of a cow, Brahmana, divine image, 
banner or of a Chaitya (tree growing on a cremation 
gtound) should not be trodden upon. One should 
not gaze at the rising or the setting sun. One 
should not report to another the fact of a milch 



494 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap, XXIV. 


COW sucking her own calf, nor of her traversing or freely 
grazing in another’s field nor the fact of witnessing a 
rainbow or a meteor-fall. One should not blow up a fire 
with one’s breath, nor hit the ground or water with 
one’s hands and feet, 69, 

A man should never repress any natural urging of 
his body, nor should he pass water or evacuate excre- 
ments in an open or public place, within the confines of 
a town or village, close to a cremation ground or any 
place of worship, at the crossing of roads, in reservoirs 
of water or on the high road nor should he do so facing 
a fire, in the presence of his superiors, cows, the sun and 
the moon nor facing against the wind. 70, 

Scratching (unnecessarily) the ground with one’s 
nails, etc,, should not be done, and one should not yawn 
nor sneeze, nor raise any eructations nor breathe hard in 
an assembly (of gentlemen) without previously covering 
his face. Sitting in an unseemly raised-up position on a 
couch as well as with extended feet in front of one’s 
superiors should be renounced. 71. 

The hair, nostrils, ear holes, teeth or any channel of 
the body should not be fingered. The hair, face, finger- 
nails, clothes and the body should not be shaken. Never 
keep time with music by beating the body or the 
cheeks with the hands or by striking the finger nails 
against each other. Never (wantonly) strike or break or 
cleave a piece of wood or stone or weed, etc. 72. 

Never expose yourself to the rays of the sun, or to 
the gusts of wind blowing in your face. Basking before a 
fire immediately after a meal or sitting on one’s legs on 
a narrow wooden stool should not be indulged in. Never 
hold the neck in a contrary (contorted) posture. Neither 
do nor eat anything by keeping the body in a contrary 
posture. Never look steadfastly towards any object and 



ChapXXlV.] 


CHIXITSA STHANAM. 


495 


particularly towards the sun or any luminous body^? or 
towards any extremely attenuated, revolving or moving 
object. Never carry a load on the head. Sleeping, wak- 
ing, sitting, lying down, walking, jumping, running fast, 
plunging in water, swimming, riding on a horse or in 
a vehicle, talking, laughing, sexual intercourse and 
taking (any other) physical exercise though accus- 
tomed and recommended should not be inordinately 
indulged in. 73. 

A bad habit should be gradually discontinued and 
a good one even when (beneficial to health) should 
similarly be gradually inculcated by a quarter only and 
not all at once. 74. 

It is improper to lie down with one’s head downward. 
One should not drink water from a broken vessel nor 
with the help of blended palms. Food, which is 
wholesome and approved of by one’s physician and 
which abounds in articles of sweet and emollient pro- 
pertiesf should be taken at the proper (and regular) 
time (every day) in a moderate quantity. It is forbidden 
to take any food in the house of a trader of a 
(hotel- keeper) or a courtesan, nor in the house of a 
wily, degenerate or inimical person, nor at a village- 
assembly. The refuse of another’s dishes, as well as 
articles of food infested with flies, insects, etc.^ or 
possessed of an objectionable colour, taste, smell, touch or 

* Some explain “Jyolish” as a blaze of 6re and olhers explain it as 
slats. 

t The framers of the Ayurveda were aware of the fact that ihe human 
system is incapable o( directly assimilating starchy substances without 
converting them into sugar. This has been emphasised in the Sutra- 
Slhdna, where Sus'ruta insists that a food stuff, in order to be worthy 
of the epithet, must be Madhuta [i e , of sweet flavour) and contain 

a large quantity of proteid matter such as is found in milk, butter, 
meat, etc, — Ed. 



495 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA 


[Chap. XXIV, 


sound or those which producejan unpleasant impression 
in the mind, or food of like nature as well as those 
served (handled) by many persons should not be partaken 
of (in spite of repeated requests in (that behalf). It is 
not advisable to sit down to a meal without washing 
one’s hands and feet. One should never take anything 
by repressing a natural urging for stool and urine, nor 
sit down to a meal just at the break or the close of day, 
nor in an unprotected situation (i.e, without any shade, 
or without something to sit upon). One should not take 
his meal after the expiry of the (daily) appointed time 
nor in an insufficient or inordinate quantity, nor partake 
of food whose Sneha (oleaginous substance) has been 
removed. 75. 

IVIetrical Text : — It is forbidden to see one’s 
image reflected in water, nor is it advisable to' plunge 
naked into water. Curd should never be taken at 
night, nor should it be taken (at all) without sugar * or 
clarified butter, nor without saturating it with Mttdga- 
soup or the admixture of honey, nor without (the 
expressed juice of) the A’malaka, nor with any hot 
substance f or article, as otherwise it may bring on 
Kushtha (cutaneous affections), erysipelas, etc. 76-77. 

Exercise, addiction to wine, gambling and music are 
bad. One should not bear witness to any fact (before a 

* Dallana adds that curd should not be taken without an addition of 
water and salt as well. This is also the practice in general. 

t All the existing editions of the Sus'rula Samhita read [i e., 

curd should not be taken with any “hot” substance). Here it should be 
noted that the terra “hot” may also include the substances which are heat- 
making in their potency. Here, however, the reading seems to be in- 
correct. The lines are found verbatim in the work of Chataka, where he 
reads i-e-y hot curd should not be taken, since it produces, as he 

himself tells us later on, an aggravation of the blood and the Pitta. — Ed. 



Chap, XXIV.] 


CI-llKlTSA faTHANAM. 


497 


law court), nor stand surety for any body. One should 
not use the shoe, umbrella, garland (of flowers), orna- 
ments or ragged clothes previously used by another. 
Never defile a Brdhmana, or a fire, or a cow by 
touching them before washing (your hands and mouth) 
after eating. 78. 

Wlemorable Verses The general rules of 
(good) conduct are described above. Health, wealth 
and longevity never fall to the lot of those who do not 
follow these rules of conduct. A wise man should take 
food of such tastes (Rasa) in any particular season 
of the year as is antidotal to the bodily Dosha which 
is naturally aggravated in that season. 79-80. 

Rules of drinking water, etc. Water 
should not betaken during the rainy season and only in 
moderate quantities in autumn. Water may be spar- 
ingly taken during the first four months of the rainy 
season if found to be indispensably necessary). Hot 
water should be taken in winter and spring (Vasanta), 
but cold water to one’s fill in summer. Sidhu and 
Arishta should be taken in winter and spring. 
Water boiled and subsequently cooled should be drunk 
in summer and meat-juice in Prdvrit. Yusha (Mudga- 
soup, etc.,) should be taken in the rainy season and 
cold water after the expiry of the rains These rules 
should be observed only by persons in sound health, 
whereas the rules regarding persons suffering from 
any disease should be regulated by the prescription, of 
any diet according to the particular Doshas involved 
in each case. 81-82. 

Any Sneha (such as oil or clarified butterj satura- 
ted with powdered Saindhava salt and Pippali should be 
regularly taken for the purpose of improving the 
digestive capacity. The natural urging of the body 

63 



498 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap, XXIV 


should never be repressed (as a repressed physical pro- 
pulsion is sure to usher in a physical distemper). A 
Sneha (oleaginous substance) should be freely and largely 
used during the Prdvrit and the spring seasons as well as 
in antumn (Sarat)as such a proceeding would act as a 
good appetising measure and a cure for diseases. Eme- 
tics, purgatives and applications of Vastis are respec- 
tively beneficial in diseases due to the actions of the de- 
ranged Kapha, Pitta andVdyu, whereas a regular course 
of physical exercise tends (equally) to curb an ag- 
gravation of all the three preceding Doshas of the body, 
so much so that their aggravation can never be detected 
in persons in the habit of taking it regularly 
every day, though otherwise addicted to an incompatible 
diet, etc. 83-86. 

The attention should not be diverted to any other 
subject at the time of urination, defecation, sexual inter- 
course, taking of food, as well as at the time of taking 
emetics and purgatives, etc. It is not wise to anticipate 
and indulge in the gloomy thoughts of a future and 
probable invasion of a disease, and to suffer any physical 
privation on that account. 87-88. 

All sexual excesses should be studiously abstained 
inasmuch as they are sure to produce Sula (colic), 
cough, asthma, fever, emaciation, phthisis, jaundice, 
epilepsy, convulsions, etc. A person, who is moder- 
ate in sexual intercourse, lives a long life, becomes 
good-looking, healthy, strong and firm in his nerves and 
muscles, and becomes capable 'of averting (untimely) 
decay. One may visit his wife (lit. a woman) on each 
fourth night in all the seasons of the year except in 
summer when he may see her once a fortnight. 89- A. 

Women unfit to visit:— A woman in 
her menses, not amorously disposed, uncleanly in her 



Chap. XXIV.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


■499 


habits, not sufficiently endeared and endearing and 
belonging to a higher social order,* older than one’s self, 
affected with any disease, wanting in any limbs, inimi- 
cally disposed to one’s self, in her period of gestation, 
suffering from any uterine disorder, belonging 
to his own blood (Gotra), or leading the life of 
an anchorite, or who is his preceptor’s wife, should 
not be gone unto by a man (seeking health and 
longevity). A w'omdii should not be gone unto in 
the Sandhyis (morning and evening), as well as on the 
Parva daysf (prescribed in the S'dstras), early in the 
morning, at mid-day, or in the dead of night. Going unto 
a woman at an infamous, unwholesome, or exposed place 
is similarly forbidden. Sexual intercourse by a man who 
is hungry, or thirsty, or who may be suffering from any 
disease, or may be angry, or in a cheerless spirit, is strict- 
ly forbidden. A man should not go unto a woman by 
repressing a natural urging for Vdta (flatus), stool or 
urine,, or if he is in a weak state of health, (as it would 
be highly injurious to his health). Incest with lower 
animals, unnatural sexual intercourse, obstruction of 
semen in its passage, as well as sexual intercourse with 
a woman having any vaginal disease are strictly for- 
bidden even in respect of a strong person. 89-B. 

It is highly injurious for a man to indulge excessive- 
ly in sexual intercourse, or to enjoy it while standing, 
or while lying on his back, or to shake his head at the 
time ; these should not be indulged in by an intelligent 


* The text has “Varna-Vtiddha” which literally means superior 
to the man in respect of Varna or the magnetic vibrations of the body, 
which are determined by one’s birth in a certain family. It means 
several castes of the Hindus.— Ed. 

t The P.atva days ate the 8th, the I4tb and isth days of either fort- 
nights and the last days of the solar months. — Ed. 



^00 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tChap. XXIV. 

and judicious person even (occasionally for pleasure’s 
sake. 89-C. 

Evil effects of the foregoing abuses : 

— Visiting a woman in her menses results in the loss of 
sight, longevity and vital power, and should be accord- 
ingly considered as a sinful act. The duration of a 
man’s life is diminished by going unto a woman, older 
in age or higher in social status (Varna), or unto the 
wife of his preceptor or superior, in the morning or 
the evening, or on the Parva days (the interdicted days), 
or unto a woman belonging to the same blood as he, A 
visit to a woman big with child is extremely painful 
and injurious to the foetus confined in the womb. A visit 
to a diseased woman results in the loss of the man’s 
vital power. A going unto a deformed, uncleanly, 
spiteful, non amorous, or sterile woman, or at an 
unclean, infamous, or exposed place is detrimental to 
the semen and intellect of the visitor 89-D. 

Similarly, sexual intercourse enjoyed by a man at 
noon time, or by one who is in an enfeebled, thirsty, or 
hungry state of the body, in a standing up posture, or 
in a cheerless mood, brings on an excessive loss of semen 
and aggravation of the bodily Vdyu. Phthisis due to the 
loss of semen is the result of over-intemperance in sexual 
matters. Pain, enlargement of the spleen, epilepsy 
and even death may follow from sexual gratifica- 
tions in a diseased state of health. The Vdyu and 
the Pitta become aggravated by the sexual inter- 
course enjoyed early in the morning or at midnight. 
An incest with lower animals, unnatural sexual inter- 
course, or that with a woman having a diseased vagina 
is attended with an excessive loss of semen and an 
aggravation of the bodily Viyu, and is the cause of Upa- 
dams'a (syphilitic virus). An act of coition enjoyed by 



Chap. XXIV,] CHIKITSA STHANAM, 

holding the woman on one's bosom or by repressing the 
natural urgings towards urination or defecation, as well 
as a repressing of seminal discharge would help 
the early formation of seminal conci’Btions (in the 
bladder). Sp-E. 

Hence these (injurious and harmful) practices should 
be shunned by a man for his welfare in this life as well 
as for that in the next. On the contrary, repression of a 
natural and (legitimate) sexual desire, from a sense of 
unwise delicacy or shame, is a physical sin.* Hence a 
healthy and passionate man possessed of the necessary 
fecundating element, under the course of a proper Vdji- 
karana (aphrodisiac) remedy, should cheerfully go 
unto and duly enjoy the pleasures of company with 
a girl, beautiful in looks, tender in years, modest, virtu- 
ous, equally passionate, cheerful, kindred to him both in 
physical and mental temperaments, and well-decked 
with orn iments. Fatigue after coition should be re- 
moved by the enjoyment of a bath i*, a cool breeze, or a 


* It should be always borne in mind that God has implanted 
this desire in the mind of man and provided him with the necessary 
organic appendages only for the propagation of his species and not for 
the gratification of any diseased or morbid sexual propensity which is 
found nowhere else in Nature save and except in debauched human 
subjects and which lowers them even below the level of brutes. Hence 
love should be the essence of the bond which binds a couple and 
converts them into a kind of human centaur, the man and the wife, and 
union sexually considered, should be effected only under the promptings 
of th.it sacred instinct in Nature which makes the lilies blow and causes 
the pollens to unite their fecundating principles with one another and 
which a hc.althy unsophisticated human heart can instinctively read as 
the send time of youthful exuberance. 

+ A bath is recommended for a man of strong virile power, in case of 

sexual intercourse in the day time or it may he possible to lake a bath 

early in summer nights. — Dallana. 



502 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XXIV. 


sound sleep. Food or milk, saturated with sugar, and 
meat-juice, prove very refreshing after the act. 89. 

Thus ends the Twenty- fourth Chapter in the Chikitsita Sthanam of the 
Sus'tuta Samhita which deals with ihe rules of Hygiene and the prophy- 
lactic measures in general. 



CHAPTER XXV. 

Now we shall discourse on the medical treatment of 
a variety of diseases (Misraka-CMkitsita). i. 

It has been stated before that blood-letting is the 
remedy in diseases of the PsCli (ear-lobes). Now hear 
me describe in detail the treatment of those affections 
which are confined to the lobes of the ears. They are 
five in number and are called the Paripota^ UtpsCta, 
"Onmantha Duhkha-Vardliana and the Parilehi. 2-3. 

Causes and Symptoms : -if the lobe of 
an ear be suddenly pulled and kept in that position for a 
long time, a numbed and painful swelling of a blackish 
red colour is produced on the lobe, owing to its soft 
and delicate nature. This is found to spontaneously- 
burst .or crack, and is called the Paripota, which 
should be ascribed to the action of the deranged Vsiyu 
^ (of the system). 4. 

A painful swelling attended with a burning sensation 
and suppuration, appearing in the lobe of the ear, 
owing to the friction and movements of a heavy orna-. 
ment worn in the lobe, is originated from the vitiated 
condition of the blood and the Pitta. Its colour is 
either brown or red and is called the Utp^ta. 5. 

Pulling the ear-lobes down by f Tce tends to enrage 
the Vdyu (of the localities^ which in union with (the 
deranged) Kapha gives rise to a painful swelling in those 
regions, attended with itching and tinged with the 
specific colours<i= and symptoms of the Doshas 
involved. The disease is called the TJamantha, and is 

Mddhava in his compilation roids {that the 

swelling is attended with a numbness and no pain) in place of 
Vagbhala also supports this, — Ed, 



504 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap, XXV. 

originated through the concerted action of the deranged 
V^yu and the Kapha. 6. 

A swelling in an ear-lobe attended with pain, 
burning and itching sensations owing to its being I'pulled 
down and) lengthened, when found to suppurate (in the 
end) is called the Dulikha-vardhana ; it^ restricts itself 
only to the skin (of the affected part , 7. 

Small exuding pustules resembling mustard-seeds 
(in size) and attended with pain, burning and itch- 
ing sensations, appear in the lobes of the ears owing to 
the action of the vitiated blood, or the deranged Kapha, 
or to the presence of parasites [in those localities). 
The disease soon spreads itself (and assumes an erysi- 
pelatious character). It is called the Parilehi from the 
fact of its eating away the affected lobe with the entire 
helix. 8. 

General Treatment These dreadful dis- 
eases (which invade the lobes of the ears) are highly 
dangerous and tend to destroy and eat away the affected 
appendages, if not properly attended to at the outset and 
specially when the patient is addicted to unwholesome 
food and drink and to an injudicious conduct of life. 
Hence a physician should speedily remedy these 
complaints with applications of medicated Sneha, 
Sveda, etc., ointments, washes, plasters, poultices and 
blood-letting.f This is the general treatment of those 
diseases. 9. 

* Madhava adds “an unsuccessful perforation (in the ear-lobe)” 
to be an additional cause of this disease. He also reads 
i.e., “due to the concerted action of the three Doshas” in place of 
Madhava has Vagbhata’s support in this. — Ed. 
t In cases of the predominance of the Vciyu, anointment, Anuvd- 
sana and poultices should be resorted to. In cases of Pitta-predominance, 
purgatives should be applied. Emetics should be applied in cases of 
Kapha-predominance and lastly blood-letting, purgatives and washps, 


Chap. XXV.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


505 


Specific Treatment Now we shall de- 
scribe the medical remedies which should be specially 
used in anointing (the affected parts in these diseases). 
Drugs, such as Khara-Manjari, Yasliti-madhu, Sain- 
dhava, Deva-ddnu, Ad va-gandhd and the seeds of M^llaka 
and of Avalguja should be pasted together and cooked 
with a compound of milk, oil, clarified butter, lard, 
marrow and wax. This preparation should be applied 
lukewarm to the affected lobe in a case of the Pari- 
potakatype. lo-ir. 

Manjishthd, Sesamum, Yasliti-inadhu, Sdrivd, 
Utpala, Padma-kdshtha, Rodhra. Kadamba and the 

f 

tender leaves of the Vald^ Jambu and Amra (mango) 
should be cooked together with (an adequate quantity of) 
oil and Dhdnyamla ^K^r>jika). This oil proves curative 
in a case of Utpata. 12. 

Similarly (a medicated) oil cooked with Tdla patri, 
As'va-gandhd, Arka, Vdkuchi-sccds, Samdhava, Sarald* 
Ldngali, lard of a Karkata (crab) and of a Godhd (a 
kind of lizard), proves beneficial in cases of Unmantha. 
The affected lobes should be washed (Sechana) with 
a decoction of the leaves of the As'mantaka, Jambu and 
Amra (in such cases). 13. 

In a case of Parilehi, the affected lobe (Pdli) should 
be dusted with powdered Prapaundarika, Yashti- 
madhu, Manjishthd and the two kinds of Haridrd after 
lubricating it with the oil cooked with the Kalkas of 
Ldkshd and Vidanga. It should be as well fomented 
with heated cow-dung and plastered with the lukewarm 
pastes of Vidanga alone, or in combination with Trivrit, 


etc., should be resorted to in cases of the afTection being due to the 
concerted action of the vitiated blood and the Pitta. 

* Sarala here means Dhupa-kashtha, according to Dallana. 

64 



5o6 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XXV. 


sydmd and Arka pasted together (with cow’s urine\ 
or with the pastes of Karaf^'a-seed, Ingudi seed, Kutaja 
and Amgvadha (pasted with cow’s urine). Mustard oil 
cooked* with the admixture of all the foregoing drugs 
and with Marzc/ia, Nimda-lcaves and wax, proves effi- 
cacious as unguents (in such cases). I4H5* 

In cases where the ear-lobes are affected and have 
become either thin, or hard, an ointment should be 
applied to them in order respectively to increase their 
growth, or to soften them. i6. 

The marrow of a jackal and of an animal frequenting 
and living in swampy grounds (Anupa, siich as a buffalo, 
etc.), together with lard, oil and fresh clarified butter, 
should be cooked with a quantity of milk weighing ten 
times their combined weight and with the drugs of the 
Madhura (Kakolyddi) group, Asva-gandhd and Apd- 
indrga and Ldkshd-Rasa (decoction or infusion of 
Ldksha). The oil thus prepared should be filtered 
and preserved carefully in an earthen pitcher. The 
affected ear-lobes should be constantly fomented and 
well-lubricated with it. The use of this medicated oil 
helps the growth of the eai-lobes and makes them 
healthy, soft, smooth, painless, evenly developed and 
capable of bearing the weight of ear-pendants. i7. 

Treatment of Palita :-The expressed 
juice of the Bhringa-rdja and (the decoction of) Triphald, 
powders of indigo leaves, Arjuna\i^x\i, Bhringa-rdja, 
Pinditaka, black-iron, flowers of the Vija and of Saha- 
chara, Haritaki, Vibhitaka and Aznalaka vnhced together 
and pasted with a quantity of mud found adherent 
to lotus-bulbs weighing as much as the combined 

* Dallana says that this oil should be cooked with cow’s urine 
weighing four times as much as the oil. 



Chap. XXV.] 


CHIKITSA STIIAXAM. 


507 


weight of the aforesaid drugs should be kept in an iron- 
pitcher well covered and preserved inside a room for a 
fortnight. After this period it should be cooked with 
(an adequate quantity of) oil and with the expressed 
juice'^ of the Bhriuga-rdja and (a decoction of) Triphald, 
For the purpose of ascertaining the proper cooking 
of the oil, a (white) feather of a Valdka mrane) should 
be dipped into it, and satisfactory preparation should 
be judged from the deep blue colour imparted to the 
feather. The oil should be then preserved in a black- 
iron pitcher for a month Used as anointments, this 
oil arrests a premature greyness of the hair. 18. 

The flowers of the S^ahiya, Jantbii^ Arjuna and of 
the Kds'inari, sesamum, Bhr{ 7 iga-rdia-sttAs, mango- 
stones, Punarnavd, t mud, Kaniakdri, Kdsisa^ marrow of 
the seeds of Madana, powdered iron, Rasdnjma, 

Yashti-inadhu^ Nilotpala, Sdrivd, and Madayanti\ should 
be pasted together with the decoction of the Sdra (pith) 
of the Vijaka. It should then be mixed with seven 
Prastha measures of the decoction of the Sdra of Vijaka 
and preserved for ten days in a covered iron vessel. 
This compound should then be carefully cooked with 
an A'dhaka measure of Vibhitaka-oil and again pre- 
served in a new iron-pitcher for a month. Then after 
cleansing the system of the patient, the oil thus prepared 

* In the cases of cooking an oil, the liquid substance to be used, 
should be, as a general rule, four times as much as the oil ; but in this 
case, ihe expressed juice of Bkringa-rdja and (the decoction of) Triphald 
should be continued to be added, so long as the feather does not become 
deep blue. 

1 According to Dallana, the reading would have been i e , 

the two kinds of Punarnavd, 

t One Karsha measure of each of the aforesaid drugs should be 
taken. 



5o8 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XXV, 


should be used as errhines (Nasya) and in anointing the 
head, and the patient should be advised to live on diet 
consisting of MdsJta-pulse, or of Kfis'ard. In the course 
of a month, it imparts a (deep black) gloss like that of 
a black bee, or that of Rasdnjaiia to the hair and makes 
it grow thick and curly. It cures baldness, arrests 
the susceptibility of the system to an attack of pre- 
mature decay, removes the wrinkles of the face, and 
invigorates the sense-organs in the performance oj 
their proper and respective functions. This oil should 
not be given to a man who does not wish to use it, nor 
to an indigent person, to an ungrateful wretch, nor to 
an enemy. 19. 

Treatment of Vyasiga, etc. i—Ldkshd, 
Rodhra., the two kinds of Haridrd, Mnnahs'ild, 
Haritdla, Kushtha, Ndga (lead), Gairika, V arnaka, 
Manjishthd, Vacha, Sawdshtra-mrittikd, Pattanga, 
Gorochand, Rasdnjana, bark of Hcmdnga (Champaka), 
the tender leaves of Vata, Kdliya-Kdshtha, Padma- 
kdshtha, the filaments of a lotus, both red and white 
chandana, Mercury’^ and the drugs of the Kdkolyddi 
group should be pasted together with milk. The paste, 
thus prepared, as well as lard, marrow, wax, clarified 
butter, milk, and a decoction of the drugs of the Kshira 
trees should be cooked together. This medicated clarified 
butter, is the best of all the unguents that may be applied 
to the face. It cures the most difficult cases of Vyanga 
and Nilikd, and removes all tans, specks, marks, moles, 
eruptions, etc., from the face. It imparts smoothness to 
the wrinkled skin, gives a healthy plumpness and bloom 
to the cheeks, and makes the face as beautiful as a lotus. 

* This is the first time that we come across the mention and use 
of “Pdrada” (Mercury) in the Sus'ruta Samhild. — Ed. 



Chap. XXV.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


509 


It should be recommended to kings and to the ladies 
of the royal court, as well as to persons of the same 
rank. It acts as a good remed}'’ for cutaneous affec- 
tions (Kushtha), and may be as well applied in cases of 
Vipddikd. The use of a cosmetic compound consisting 
of powdered Haritaki, leaves of Nimha, the bark of 
mango, stems of the pomegranate, and the flowers and 
leaves of Madyantikd'^dStttA together, imparts a god-like 
effulgence to the complexion of a man. 20-21. 

Thus ends the Twenly-fiflh Chaplet of the Chikilsita Sthanam in the 
Sus'rnta Samhita which deals with the treatment of a variety of diseases. 



CHAPTER XXVL 

Now we shall discourse on the medical treatment 
for increasing the strength and virile power of weak 
persons (Kshina-Valiyam Vaji-Karana). i, 

A youth in sound health taking regularly some 
sort of Vs^ji-Karana (aphrodisiac) remedy may enjoy 
the pleasures of youth every night during all the 
seasons of the year. Old men^ those wishing to enjoy 
sexual pleasures or to secure the affections of women, 
as well as those suffering from senile decay or sexual 
incapacity, and persons weakened with sexual excesses, 
should do well to submit themselves to a course of 
Vdji-karana remedies. They are highly beneficial to 
gay, handsome and opulent youths and to persons 
who have got many wives. 2-A. 

Definition of Vaji-Karana If duly 

taken, the Vdji-Uarana* remedies make a man sexually 
as strong as a horse (Vdji), and enable him to cheerfully 
satisfy the heat and amorous ardours of young maidens, 
a fact which has determined the nomenclature of this 
class of (^medicinal) remedies. 2-B. 

Means of Vaji-Karana Various kinds 
of (nutritious and palatable) food and (sweet, luscious 
and refreshing) liquid cordials, speech that gladdens 
the ears, and touch which seems delicious to the skin, 
clear nights mellowed by the beams of the full moon and 
damsels young, beautiful and gay, dulcet songs that 
charm the soul and captivate the mind, use of betel- 
leaves, wine and wreaths of (sweet-scented) flowers, 

* The Vclji-Karana remedies are o£ three kinds, viz,, (i) those pro- 
ducing the semen, (2) those secreting the semen, and {3) those producing 
as well as secreting the semen. 



Chap, XXVI.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 5^1 

and a meriy careless heart, these are the best aphro- 
disiacs in life. 2. 

Causes of Sexual Incapacity A cessa- 
tion of the sexual desire owing to the rising of bitter 
thoughts of recollection in the mind of a man, or a 
forced intercourse with a disagreeable woman (who fails 
to sufficiently rouse up the sexual desire in the heart 
of her mate) illustrates an instance of mental impotency. 
Excessive use of articles of pungent, acid, or saline 
taste, or of heat-making articles of fare leads to the 
loss of the Saumya Dhatu (watery principle) of the 
organism. This is another kind of impotency. Virile 
impotency resulting from the loss of semen in persons 
addicted to excessive sexual pleasure without using any 
aphrodisiac remedy is the merit form of virile impotency. 
A long-standing disease of the male generative organ 
(syphilis, etc.), or the destruction of a local Marma such 
as the spermatic cord) destroys the powers of coition 
altogether. This is the fourth form of impotency. 
Sexual incapacity from the very birth is called the 
congenital (Sahaja) impotency. Voluntary suppression 
of the sexual desire by a strong man observing perfect 
continence, or through utter apathy produces a hardness 
of the spermatic fluid, and is the cause of the sixth 
form of virile impotency. Of the six foregoing types 
of impotency, the congenital form as well as the 
one due to the destruction of any local Marma 
(spermatic cord) should be regarded as incurable, the 
rest being curable and amenable to the measures and 

remedies antidotal to their respective originating 
causes. 3. 

Their Remedies s — Now we shall describe the 
different Vayi-Karana (aphrodisiac) remedies. Powders 
of sesamum, Mds/ia-pn\se, Viddri, or S’dli-x\cQ should 



512 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XXVI. 


be mixed with Saindhava salt and pasted with a 
copious quantity of the expressed juice of the sugarcane 
of the Paimdarika species. It should then be mixed 
with hog’s lard, and Utkdrikd should be prepared by 
cooking it with clarified butter. By using this 
(medicinal) Utk^riksi, a man would be able to visit a 
hundred women. 4. 

The testes of a he-goat should be boiled in milk. 
Sesamum seeds should then be successively treated 
with this milk in the manner of a Bhavand saturation. 
Cakes should be made of these sesamum seeds with the 
lard of a porpoise. This medicine exerts the same 
action as the preceding one without producing any 
exertion whatever. By eating the testes of a he-goat 
with (an adequate quantity of) salt and powdered 
long-pepper (Pippali), fried in clarified butter prepared 
from churning milk (and not from curd), a man is 
enabled to visit a hundred women. 5. 

Powders of Pippali, Mdsha-'^vXs^, S‘dli-x\c& wheat 
and barley, should be taken in equal parts. Cakes 
(PupsilikEi) should be prepared with this compound and ■ 
fried in clarified butter. By taking these cakes and 
a potion of milk sweetened with (a copious quantity of) 
sugar, a man becomes potent enough, to enjoy the 
pleasures of love like a sparrow (Chataka). 6. 

Powdered Viddri successively soaked in the expressed 
juice of the same and dried, should be licked with 
honey and clarified butter, whereby a man would be 
able to visit ten women successively (at a time). Simi- 
larly powders of (dried) Amalaka successively soaked 
in its own expressed juice should be licked with honey, 
sugar"? and clarified butter, after which a quantity of 

* According to S'ivadasa it may also be taken with honey and clarified 
butter only. 



Chap. XXVL] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 5^3 

milk should be taken. This compound would make even 
an old man of eighty sexually as vigorous as ayouth. 7 S 
The testes of a he-goat or of a porpoise mixed with 
salt and powdered long-pepper, and fried in claiified 
butter should be taken for speedy and effective 
aphrodisiac purposes. The eggs of a tortoise, of an 
alligator, or of a crab,* or the sement of a male 
buffalo, of a he-ass, or of a he-goat should be similarly 
taken for the same purpose. 9. 

Milk boiled and cooked with the sprouts, bark, 
roots and fruit of an Asvattha tree, should be sweeten- 
ed with sugar and honey, and taken ; this enables a 
man to enjoy sexual pleasures like a sparrow. The 
powdered bulbs of Viddri, weighing an Udumhara (one 
Tol 4 ) in measure, and taken with milk and clarified 
butter, j; would make an old man young again. A 
Pala measure of the pulverised Masha pulse^ mixed 
with honey and clarified butter should be licked and 
a potion of milk should then be taken ; this would 
make a man sexually as strong as a horse. Wheat and 
Atnia giiptd should be boiled in milk, and taken, 
when cold, with clarified butter, and a potion of milk 
should then be taken for the same purpose. 10-13, 
Clarified butter should be boiled with eggs or 
the testes (as the case might be) of alligators, mice, frogs 
and sparrows. By lubricating the soles of the feet 
with this Ghrita, a man would be able to visit a woman 
with undiminished vigour so long as he would not touch 
the ground with his feet. 14. 

Some explain as house-sparrows. 

1 Here semen would mean the testes, the receptacle of the semen. 

J Some read (boiled) in place of In that case the 

boiled milk only should be taken and no clarified butter should be 
added thereto.. 


65 



514 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap, XXVI. 

The use of pulverised Atnia-gtiptd and Ikslmr'aka 
(Kokilaksha) seeds mixed with sugar and taken with 
milk just milched enables a man to indulge in the 
pleasures of youth for the whole night without any 
sense of fatigue. The powders of the Uchchatd should 
also be taken similarly [with milk and sugar). S'atdvari 
and Uchchatd roots should also be similarly taken by a 
man wishing to have (sexual) vigour. A soup of Atma- 
giiptd seeds and M dsha-'^wX^e (boiled together) should be 
taken. Atmaguptd-stt6.s,Gokshura Uchchatd 

should be boiled with milk and constantly stirred with 
a ladle. The use of this preparation (with an adequate 
quantity of sugar) enables a man to enjoy the pleasures 
of love all the night long. Likewise the milk boiled 
with Mdshapulse, Viddri, or Uchchatd should be taken 
with honey, clarified butter and sugar. By using this a 
man may indulge in the pleasures of the bed for the 
whole night like a sparrow. 15-19. 

The use of the milk of a Grishti (a cow delivered 
only once) with a grown up calf (one year old) and 
exclusively fed on the (fresh) leaves of the Mdsha- 
parna, is recommended as a sexual tonic. All kinds of 
meat and milk, as well as the drugs of the Kdkolyddi 
group should be regarded as being highly possessed of 
the virtue of imparting tone and vigour (to the male 
productive organs). They should, therefore, be used (for 
that purpose). The medicinal remedies and compounds 
described in the present chapter should be taken in 
sound health and proper seasons, as they are exhilarat- 
ing and invigorating, and help the procreation of 
children. 20-21. 


Thus ends the Twenly-sixlh Chapter of the Chikitsita Slhanam in the 
Sus'rula Samhita which deals with the treatment of the viiile impotency. 



CHAPTER XXVII. 

Now we shall discourse on the recipes and modes 
of using elixirs and rejuvinators of the human organ- 
ism which will make it invulnerable to the inroads 
of any disease or of decay (SarVOpa.g'Iia.ta. — 
^amaniya-Ras^yanam). i. 

Metrical Texts ; — A wise physician should 
(invariably) prescribe some sort of tonic (Rasdyana) for 
his patients in their youth and middle age after having 
their systems (properly) cleansed by the applications 
of a Sneha and purifying remedies (emetics and 
purgatives) . A person whose system has not been 
(previously) cleansed (Sodhana) with the proper puri- 
fying remedies (emetics and purgatives) should not, 
in any case, have recouise to such tonics inasmuch as 
they would fail to produce the wished-for result, just 
as the application of a dye to a piece of dirty cloth 
will prove non-effective. 2. 

Now we shall describe the remedial measures and 
agents for the maladies due to the aggravated 
Doshas*', both mental and physical, which have 
already been described (in several places). Old age 
and senile decay would be arrested (lit. perpetual or 
life-long youth would be secured) by drinking milk, 
cold water, honey and clarified butter, either severally 
or jointly {i.e , in any combinationt taken one, two, 
three or four at a time\ in early life (just on or 

* The mental Doshas are Rajas and Tamas, whereas the physical 
Dashas are Vdyu, Pitta and Kapha, 

t There would be four combinations of one each, six of two 
each, four of three each and one of four jointly ; thus there svould be 
fifteen combinations in all. 



THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XXVII. 


516 


just before the completion of the process of organic 
development) 3-4. 

Vidanga-Ras^yana The powdered seeds 
of the Vidanga (Tandula) and pulverised Yashti-madlni 
should be mixed together and taken in cold water in 
an adequate dose (according to the strength of the 
patient), and a potion of cold water should then be 
taken. This medicine should be regularly continued 
for a month. The same pulverised Vidanga seeds 
should be similarly taken for a month through the 
vehicle of the decoction oiBhalldtaka mixed with honey; 
or of the decoction of grapes mixed with honey ; or 
with the expressed juice of Amalaka sweetened with 
honey ; or through the vehicle of the decoction of 
Guduchi, Thus there are these five ways (of taking 
pulverised Vidanga seeds (Tandula) as an e'ixir. A 
meal of boiled rice with a copious quantity of clarified 
butter should be taken with the soup of Amalaka and 
Mudga pulse unseasoned with salt and cooked with only 
a small quantity of Sneha (claiified butter) after the 
medicine has been well digested. These (Rasayana) 
remedies prove curative in cases of haemorrhoids and 
in complaints of worms. They improve memory and 
the power of comprehension and their use for every 
month increases the life-time of the user b}'^ one 
hundred years. 5. 

Vidanga- Kal pa : — One Diona measure of 
Vidanga (seeds) should be boiled in the way of 
preparing cakes in an Indian cake-pan. When the 
watery portion (of the cakes) have been removed (eva- 
porated) and the Vida 7 ga-gi-a.ins well boiled, they should 
be taken down and well pasted on a stone-slab. They 
should then be kept in a strong iron pitcher after 
having been mixed with a copious quantity of the 


Chap. XXVIL] CHIKITSA STHANAM. $17 

decoction s of Y^cisliti-ificidhu. The pitchei should be 
buried in a heap of ashes inside a closed room 
during the rainy season and preserved there during the 
four months of rain ; after that period the pitcher should 
be taken out (of the ashes). Its contents should then be 
consecrated with (appropriate) Mantras by uttering them ^ 
a thousand times and should be taken every morning 
in suitable quantities after the system has been thoroughly 
cleansed (by appropriate emetics and purgativeSj etc.),^ 
The diet should consist of cooked rice and clarified 
butter mixed with a copious quantity of the soup of 
31udga pulse Amalaka cooked with a small quantity 
of Sneha and salt 5 and should be taken after the 
digestion of the medicine. The patient should lie on 
the ground (and not on a bedding). Worms would be 
found to have been issuing out of the body after the 
regular and continuous use of the medicine for a month, 
which should be extracted with the aid of a pair of 
bamboo tongs or forceps after the body had been anoint- 
ed with the Anu-taila (described before) Ants would 
be coming out of the body during the second, and ver- 
mins (Yuka) in the third month of the use of the medi- 
cine which should also be i-emoved as in the preceding 
manner. The hair, nails and teeth begin to fall off and 
become dilapidated in the fourth month of its use. In 
the fifth month the body beams with a divine glow, 
becomes resplendent as the midday sun, and exhibits 
features which specifically belong to the etherial being. 
The ears become capable of hearing the faintest and 
remotest sound (under its use), and the vision extends 
far into space and beholds objects at a great range 

Dallana explains the term Madhukodakol/am to mean a large 
quantity of Madhuka and water, (and by water he means the decoction of 
Vidansa), 



THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XXVII. 


Si8 


(which is not usually given to mortal eyes to descry). 
-The mind, shorn of the qualities of Rajas (action) and 
Tamas (nescience), becomes possessed of Sattva (illumi- 
nating principles or true knowledge). Things are per- 
manently and indelibly impressed upon his (user’s) 
^^emory at a single hearing and the faculty of inven- 
tion'^woii^^-fully expands. Old age and decay perma- 
nently vanish and youth returns to stay in him for 
~.good,-.^ringing with it an elephantine strength and a 
horse-like speed, and he is enabled to live for eight 
. hundred springs The medicated ral known as Auii- 
^,taila should be used in anointing (the body at this 
stage of treatment) ] a decoction of Aja-karna for 
•UtsAddfl’a , washing) purposes, well-water saturated with 
Us'ira for bathing purposes, sandal paste in anointing 
(Anulepana) the body, and the regimen of diet and 
conduct as described in connection with the Bhall^taka 
treatment (Vidhdna) should be observed. 6. 

■ Kasmarya Kalpa s—The use of huskless 
Ktismaryaja seeds for rejuvinating purposes, is similar 
to the preceding one, except that it requires a separate 
kind -of diet and does not require the use to lie on the 
ground. Under this treatment, the diet should consist 
of (boiled) rice and well-boiled milk and the beneficial 
effects that would result from its use, are identical with 
•those of the foregoing one. These remedies should 
be erhployed in diseases originating through the 
-vitiated blood and Pitta of the system. 7 . 

VaSa-Kalpa : — A Pala or half a Pala weight 
•of the-(powdered) roots of the Yal^ should be well-stirred 
dn cow’s milk and taken (every day\ and the patient or 
the user should not be allowed to stir out of his room as 
.prescribed before (during the entire course of taking the 
medicine). He should be advised to take a meal con- 



Chap. XXVIL] CI-UXITSA STHANAM. ^19 

sisting of boiled vice, milk and clarified butter after the 
medicine bad been fully digested. Premature old age 
and senile decay would be arrested for a period of twelve 
years by taking this elixir continuously for twelve 
days in the foregoing manner^ whereas an extension 
of its course to a hundred days would add a hundred 
summers to the duration of his youthful age. 

Naga-valtC, Vidari, Sats^vari may be similarly taken 
for the same purposes, with this distinction that the 
(powders ofj the Aii-vald should be taken with water, 
those of the Ndga-valA, with honey, whereas Vidari and 
the S'aidvari powders should be taken with milk. The 
regimen of diet and conduct as well as the beneficial 
results produced therefrom should be the same (as from 
the use of Vala). The present remedies are recom- 
mended to persons seeking strength or suffering from 
an attack of Hoematemcsis or Hcematochczia.^' 8. 

Ka!pa 5— A Tuld measure of the 
powders of V?(r^lii-bulbs should be taken in an adequate 
dose (everyday) by mixing it with honey and stirring 
it with milk. A meal of boiled rice with clarified 
butter and milk should be taken after it had been 
digested and the patient should be advised to observe 
a regimen of diet and conduct (Pratishedha) as laid 
down before (in connection with the foregoing elixirs).' 
By using it a man is enabled to witness a hundred 
summers and does not feel any fatigue after sexual 
excesses, A quantity of this powder should be mixed 
with milk and boiled (according to the rules of Kshira- 
pdka). When sufficiently cooled/ the rriilk should be' 
churned and the clarified butter produced therefrom 
should be taken after the medicine had been digested. A 


* SuflTering from consumpUon and hcemoptysis.— D. R. 



520 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXVII. 


continuous use of the medicine for a month enables a 
man to live up to a good hundred j^ears. 9. 

A decoction should be made by boiling together 
the pith of the Vijaka^ (Pita Sdla) and the roots of the 
Agni-niantha with which a Prastha measure of Masha- 
pulse should be duly cooked. When the Masha-pulse is 
sufficiently boiled, an Aksha measure of powdered 
Chitf-aka roots and the expressed juice of the Ainalaka 
weighing a fourth part of the Jlldsha-pulse should 
be added to it, and the whole compound should be 
removed (from the oven) at the close of the cooking. 
When cooled down this compound should be taken in 
adequate doses with honey and 'clarified butter after 
consecrating it a thousand times with appropriate 
Mantras, Persons seeking longevity and a stronger or 
improved range of vision should take this and they 
should be advised to take their meals without any salt. 
The meal, after the digestion of the medicine, should 
consist of boiled rice and a copious quantity of clarified 
butter and should be taken with unsalted Mudga, and 
Ainalaka soup or with milk alone. A continuous use 
of either of these two medicines for three consecutive 
months would make a man’s eye-sight as keen and 
foresighted as that of a Suparnat and enable him to 
witness a hundred summers in the full vigour of health, 
strength and manhood.|' 10. 


Dallana recommends one Pala weight of Vijaka Sara and Agnl- 
manlha to be boiled in an Adhaka measure of water which should be 
reduced to one half for the preparation of the decoction. 

t Suparna is the king of birds and is said to be the most keen- 
sighted. 

t Dallana says that some commentators do not read this, since they 
do not consider it to be a part of the original text. Jejjata also has not 
read this. 



Chap. XXVII.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM, 


521 


Memorable Verse : — The use of Sana (seeds) 
boiled with milk and taken also with milk guards 
against the loss^ of flesh and prevents the body from 
suffering any decay, 1 1. 

Thus ends the Twenty-seventh Chapter of the Chikitsita Slhanam in the 
Sus'tuta Samhit^ which deals with elixirs and rejuvenators. 


66 



CHAPTER XXYIII. 


Now we shall discourse on the elixirs and remedial 
agents which tend to improve the memoiy and invigor- 
ate the mental faculties as well as to increase the 
duration of human life (IVIedhayushkciniiyam 
RasEiyanam). i. 

^vetavalguja-Rasayana ;~The fruit 
(seeds) of the white Avalguja should be dried in the 
sun and then reduced to a fine powder. This powder 
should be stirred with (an adequate quantity of) treacle 
and placed in an earthen pitcher which previously 
contained clarified butter (Sneha-kumbha). The pitcher 
should then be kept buried in a heap of paddy for 
seven days after which it should be taken out and 
its contents given in convenient doses every morning 
before sunrise to a person, seeking improvement of 
memory and longevity, after his system has been 
thoroughly cleansed ^^with proper emetics and purgatives, 
etc.). Hot water should then be drunk. After taking 
the medicine, the patient should enter his room in 
accordance with the rules laid down in connection with 
the Bhalldtaka-Vidhdna. After the digestion of the 
medicine, the patient should be advised to take a cold 
b'.th and to partake in the evening of a meal of 
well-cooked S'd/i or Shashiika rice with ^boiled) milk 
sweetened with sugar. This medicine continuously 
taken in this manner for six months would make the 
life of its user sinless, and extend it in the full glow 
of health and vigour and in the sound enjoyment of 
a vigorous memory and of all his intellectual faculties 
to a hundred green summers. 2. 



dhap. XXVIII.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 523 

In cases of Kushtha, jaundice and abdominal 
dropsy (Udara), the medicine should be prepared by 
stirring (the powdered seeds of) the Krishnd^' (black 
Avalguja) with the urine of a cow (instead of with 
treacle) and given to the patient in doses of half a Pala 
weight every morning after the sun has ceased to look 
red.f In the afternoon the patient should be made to 
partake of a meal of boiled rice with clarified butter 
and unsalted A'malaka soup. A continuous use of this 
medicine in the aforesaid manner for a month would 
improve the memory and intellectual faculties of the user, 
and enable him to witness a hundred summers on earth 
in the full enjoyment of sound health. Chitraka rcots^ 
and Rajani (turmeric) may be used in the same 
manner and for similar purposes with this distinction that 
the dose of the Chitraka-'coot preparation should be two 
Pala measures (instead of half a Pala as laid down in 
regard to the foregoing compounds). The rest are 
identical with the above. 3. 

Manduka-parni Rasayana:— The Doshas 
of the system of a person should be first thoroughly 
cleansed (with the help of proper emetics and purgatives, 
etc.), and he should be advised to undergo the prescribed 
diet of \_Peyd, Yavagu, etc , in their proper order) He 
should be further advised to enter his chamber in the 
prescribed manner (and to remain there during the entire 


•Jejjala explains “Krishna” to mean Pippali. But both .Gayi and 
Dallana explain it to mean the black Avalguja. It should be mentioned, 
here, that Dallana recommends the toots of black Avalguja, but we think 
that its seeds should be taken. — Ed. 

t Before sunrise. — D. R. 

t The roots of the Chitraka with black flowers should be taken.— 
Dallana. 



524 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[ghap. XXVHI; 


course of the treatment). An adequate dose of the 
expressed juice of the Manduka-parni should then be 
stirred with milk, and should be taken after consecrating 
it by reciting the proper Mantras a thousand times. 
A potion of milk may then be taken immediately after. 
After it had been fully digested a meal of cooked 
barley grains with milk should then be partaken of ; 
or (the expressed juice of Manduka-parni) with an 
admixture of sesamum seeds followed by a potion 
of milk. A meal of boiled rice with milk and clarified 
butter should then be taken after the digestion of 
the medicine and should be continued for three 
months in succession. This would ensure a long life 
of a hundred 3'’ears in the full vigour of retentive 
memory and intellectual faculties, and would impart a 
god-like effulgence to the complexion. As an alter- 
native, the patient should fast three days and take 
only the expressed juice of Manduka-parni for these 
three days. After this period he should live on milk 
and clarified butter only, or he should be made to take 
a Vilva measure (of the paste of Manduka-parni) stirred 
with milk for ten consecutive days which would ensure 
a life of a hundred years in the full enjoyment of his 
intellectual faculties, 4. 

Brd^hmi Rasayana : —Having had the Doshas 
of the system duly cleansed (with proper emetics 
and purgatives, etc.), a person (wishing to undergo a 
treatment of Rasdyana^ should be advised to take the 
prescribed diet of (PeyA, Yavdgu, etc., in their proper 
order), and should be made to enter his room (Agara). 
He should then take the expressed juice of the Br^hmi 
in an adequate dose after consecrating the juice a 
thousand times with the proper Mantras. After the 
medicine had been fully digested he should be advised 



Chap. XXVIII.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


525 


to take in the evening Yavagu (gruel) without any salt', 
or with boiled milk in the event of his being habituated 
to its use. A continuous use of the medicine foi a 
week improves the memory, leads to the expansion of 
the intellectual facultit-s and imparts a celestical glow 
to the complexion. In the second week of its course it 
revives old and forgotten memories in the user and adds 
to his proficiency in the writing out of any book to 
be written. In the third week it enables a man to repro- 
duce fiom memory as many as one hundred words if 
twice heard or read (at a single sitting'. In the same 
manner a (further) use of the drug for twenty -one days 
removes all inauspicious features whether of the body 
r of the mind, the goddess of learning appears in an 
embodied form to the (mind of the) user, and all kinds 
of knowledge come rushing into his memory. A single 
hearing is enough to make him reproduce [verbatim 
from memory a discourse however lengthyl, and he is 
enabled to live for five hundred years. 5 

Br^hmi Ghrita Two Prastha measures of 
the expressed juice of the Brahmi and one Prastha 
measure of clarified butter should be cooked with one 
Kudava measure of Vidanga seeds, two Pala weight of 
each of Vacha and Trivrit, and twelve (in number) 
of each of Haritaki, Amalaka and Vibhitaka well 
pounded and mixed together. When properly cooked, 
the (prepared) Ghrita should be carefully preserved in a 
covered pitcher. It should then be taken in adequate 
doses as in the preceding manner The patient should be 
advised to take meals of boiled rice, clarified butter and 
milk, after the medicine had been fully digested. 
Under its use worms and vermin would be expelled 
tfrom their unsuspected seats in the organism) and creep 
out of the upper, lower and lateral parts of the body. 



526 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap, xxviir. 


This preparation would give a favourable turn to one’s 
fortune, impart a lotus-like bloom (to the cheeks) with 
perpetual youth, unparalleled intellectual faculties and a 
life that would cover a period of three centuries of song 
and sunshine. This elixir orRassiyana covers within its 
therapeutic range such affections of the body as cutane- 
ous diseases (Kushtha\ chronic fever, epilepsy, insanity, 
and the diseases due to the effect of poisons and to the 
evil influences of ghosts and malignant spirits, as well 
as of all other dangerous diseases. 6. 

Vacha Rasayana: — A paste of white Vachai 
to the size of an Amalaka should be taken with (an ade- 
quate quantit)^ of) milk, after consecrating it (in the 
proper manner). The medicine should be taken after 
cleansing the system (with emetics and purgatives, 
etc.) and after entering the Agdra (room). After the 
medicine had been digested, a meal of boiled rice with 
milk and clarified butter should be partaken of. A 
continuous use of this elixir for twelve days improves 
the power of hearing. It increases the power of 
memory if taken for the next twelve days. It enables 
the user to remember a hundred words at a time by 
a thrice repetition of the same {i.e., by taking it for a 
period of thirty-six days). A repetition of a twelve days’ 
(?>., forty-eight days) use of the medicine leads to 
the expiation of all sins ; it imparts a keenness of sight 
like that of Garuda and enables the user to witness a 
hundred summers on earth. A decoction prepared with 
two Pala weight of any other species of Ysichd should 
be taken with milk.* The benefits which would result 
from its use and the rules of diet and conduct to be 

* According to Dallana, this preparation of Vacha should be pre- 
pared by boiling it in the manner of Kshira-pdka Vidhi, 



/xxvill.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 52? 

observed (during its course) are identical with those of 
the preceding one. 7. 

^ata-p^ka Vachsi-Ghrita Clarified 
butter should be coohed a hundred times tn succession 
with an adequate quantity of Vach^. The use of a 
Drona measure of this' medicated Ghrita (taken every 
day in an adequate dose) extends the earthly career of 
its user to five centuries, and proves beneficial in cases 
of scrofula, goitre, elephantiasis and hoarseness. 8. 

IVIeasures for prolonging life— M. T. : 

—Now we shall discourse on life-prolonging measures 
and remedies. The powders of Vilva (roots) should 
be consecrated a thousand times with Vilva flowers by 
reciting the Sree-Snkta (as mentioned in the Rig- 
Veda). They should then be mixed with (powdered) gold, 
honey and clarified butter (in the form of an electuary'), 
and licked every morning. It is thus a combination of 
medicine and Mantra, and, if used continuously for a 
year, would remove all inauspicious features (both of 
the body and of the mind). 9-10. 

Every morning after a bath, a man should offer ten 
thousand oblations in fire and take the powders and decoc- 
tion of the roots and bark of the Vilva with milk in a 
spirit of self-control, whereby he would be able to 
acquire longevity. This remedy should be considered as 
a good Rasdyana. Similarly a decoction of Mrin^la 
mixed with honey and fried paddy and duly consecrated 
a hundred thousand times with oblations in fire would 
be considered an infallible Rasdyana. 11-12. 

The use (of a compound consisting of gold, Padma- 
reed, Priyangu and fried paddy mixed with honey 
and taken in (an adequate quantity of) cow’s milk 
gives a favourable turn to one’s fortune. A potion 
of milk cooked with the decoction of the petals (Dala) 


528 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [^hap- - 


of Nilotpala (in the manner of Kshira-pdka Vidhi) an 
mixed with gold and sesamum seeds, is attended with 
similar results. 13-14. 

Cow’s milk with gold, wax and Mdkshika (honey), 
if (regularly) taken after having performed a Homa 
ceremony a hundred thousand times, should be consider- 
ed the best Rasdyana. The use of the pulverised com- 
pound of the three things viz.., VachA, gold and Vilva, if 
taken with clarified butter, tends to improve the health, 
memory, intellectual powers and physical growth. It 
increases the duration of one’s life and brings good luck 
in its train. 15-16. 

A (medicated) oil prepared by duly cooking it with 
the decoction of a Tul4 weight of VdsA-vootz should be 
taken by a man after having performed a Homa cere- 
mony with a thousand libations for the expansion of 
his intellectual faculty and the increase of the duration 
of his life on earth A Tuld weight of barley grains 
should be powdered. The preparations of this barley 
powder (gradually) taken with honey and powdered 
increases one’s capacity for study. 17-18. 

The use of pulverised Amalaka and gold with 
honey imparts vitality to a dying man. A regular use 
of the ^^ataCvari-ghrita mixed with honey and pulveris- 
ed gold enables a man to subjugate even his king. 
A compound consisting of Go-chandand, Mohanikd, 
honey and gold should be taken by a man wishing a 
good turn to his destiny 19-21. 

Clarified butter cooked with an admixture of the 
pasted Yashti-madhu and with the decoction of Padina 
and Nilotpala should be regularly taken with gold, and 
then a potion of milk cooked with the foregoing drugs 
should be taken. It invariably removes the evil features 
(of both mind and body), and gives a good turn to 



Chap. XXVIII.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


529 


fortune. It increases longevity and makes the user 
(fortunate like) a king. 22-A. 

The Tri-padi (lit. three-footed) Gdyatrl should be 
recited in connection with the use of any of these elixirs 
where no Mantra would be found to be specifically 
mentioned. The use of the foregoing medicinal com- 
pounds improves one’s beauty, surrounds a man with the 
majesty and effulgence of the gods and makes him as 
strong as an elephant. Constant study, disquisitions 
(on philosophical and scientific topics), discussions in 
other subjects, and residence with professors or men 
learned in the respective branches of knowledge, are the 
best means for improving memory and expanding one’s 
intellect. Eating after the digestion of a previous meal, 
non-repression of any natural urgings of the body, 
annihilation of all killing propensities, perfect contin- 
ence, self-co ntrol and refraining from rash and hazard- 
ous undertakings, should bs deemed the keys to a 
long life. 22. 

Thus ends the Twenly-eighlh Chaplet of ihe Chikjlsila-Slh^nam in 
the Sus'tula Samhita which deals with elixirs and remedial agents for 
improving the memory and inlellect and increasing longevity. 



CHAPTER XXIX. 


Now we shall discourse on the restorative and on 
the constructive agents (Rasdyana) which arrest innate 
morbific tendencies and decays? (Sv^Jah^vika*- 

Vyadhi Pratishedhaniya Rasayana). i. 

'Metrical Text : —In the days of yore the gods 
such as Brahmd, etc created a kind of Amrita -ambrosia) 
which is known by the epithet of Soma, for the preven- 
tion of deatht and decay of the body. We shall now. 
deal with the mode of vising this (ambrosia). 2. 

The one and the same divine Soma plant may be 
classified into twent 5 ^four species according to the differ- 
ence of their habitats, structures, epithets and potencies. 
They are as follows: — Ann'untdn, Mnnjavdu, Chandra- 
vidh, Rajataprabha, Dw-vd Soma, Kaniydn, S'veidksba, 
Kanaka prabha,Pratditavdn, Tdlavrinta^Karavira, Ant- 
s' avdii, Svayani-prabha, Mahd-soma, Garuddhrita, Gdya- 
trya, Traishtubha, Pdmkta, fdgata, S'dmkara, Agni- 
shtmia, Raivata, Yathokta and Udtipati. All these 
kinds of Soma secure for the user a mastery of the 
Gdyatri (and hence in the Vedas), and are known by the 
above auspicious names mentioned in the Vedas 

* These are decrepitude, death, hunger, thirst, sleep, etc. 

t Here death may mean, according to some authorities, the death 
of tissues as well, 

t The whole of the hymns in the 9th Book of the Rig-veda, besides a 
few in other places, are dedicated to the honour of Soma, but these twenty- 
four names do not occur there. The plant is there represented as a god, 
and his worship must at one time have attaired a remarkable popularity. 
The extraordinary properties of the exhilarating juice of the Soma are 
fretjuently mentioned in the Rig-veda and the language throughout in 
which it is behymned could not be more eulogistic. As an instance of 



CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


Chap. XXIX.] 


531 


Their virtues and methods of using them are identical 
with each other and are described below. 3 4. 

Mode of using the Soma s— A room or an 
inner chamber (Ag£ira) in a commendable site protected 
with three walls on each side and provided with all kinds 
of accessories and attendants, should be first secured 
before taking (the expressed juice of) any of the aforesaid 
Soma plants. Then at an auspicious hour on an auspi- 
cious day marked by favourable astral combinations 
and lunar phase, the person desirous of using the Soma 
should enter the inner or central Chamber after having 
had his system cleansed (with the proper emetics, purga- 
tives, etc ) and having had his diet in the proper order (of 
PeyA, etc.). A (whole) plant of the Ams'umdn (or of any 
other kind of) Soma should be procured in the manner 
to be observed at the time of collecting the Soma for an 
(Agni-shtoma) sacrifice and (all) the (preliminary) rites 
o'f Homa should be performed (in the usual orthodox 
way). After that the bulb (of the Soma plant) should be 
pricked with a golden needle and a quantity of the 
secreted milky exudation should be collected in a golden, 
vessel. The patient (with the auspicious rites of protection. 


this we might refer to Rig-veda VIII. 48.3 which has been metrically 
translated by Muir as follows ; — 

We’ve quaffed the Soma bright, 

And are immortal grown ; 

We’ve entered into light, 

And all the gods have known. 

What mortal now can harm. 

Or foeman vex us more ? 

Through thee, beyond alarm. 

Immortal god, we soar. 

It should be mentioned, however, that as far as our knowledge goes, 
this Soma is novv-a-days not within our reach, — Ed. 



532' 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XXIX. 


etc., done unto him) should drink off an Anjali (Kudava) 
measure of the secreted juice at a draught without tast- 
ing it, and the remainder, if any, should be cast into 
water. He should then wash and rinse his mouth with 
water in the manner of Achamana. Then having 
controlled his mind and speech with the vows cf Yama 
(paramount duties/ and Niyama (minor duties)/ 
should stay in the protected inner chamber surrounded 
by his friends. 5. 

Metrical Text : — After having drunk the 
Rasdyana (Elixir) one should reside in a windless (pres- 
cribed) chamber, spend his time in perfect control ove'r 
his senses, sitting, standing or walking about in his 
chamber in a holy spirit and by no means indulging in 
sleep (which is injurious under the circumstances). 6. 

Or the patient may, after taking his meal in the 
evening and hearing the benedictory words, lie down 
on a mattress of Kus'a-grass covered with black-deer 
skin and thus pass the night among his friends and may 
take cold water when thirsty. Then having got out of 
his bed in the morning he should hear the benedictory 
words recited and have the benedictory rites performed 
unto him. He should then touch the body of a cow 
and sit down in the same manner (in his chamber). 
Vomitings mark the digestion of the Soma-juice and 
after vomiting the blood -streaked worm-infested matter, 

*Patanjali, the propounder of the Yoga system of Philosophy, 
enumerates the Yamas as folbws: — (harmlessness), 
(trulhfuln.’ss), (abstinence from stealing), (continence) 

and (non-acceptance of offerings except in prescribed cases). 

tThe Niyamas, according to the same authority, are;— 
(purity— external or internal), (contentment) “ciq;" (penance), 

(religious study) and (meditation of the Divine 

Being). 



Chap, XXIX ] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


533 


milk boiled and cooled should be given him in the 
evening. Worm-infested stools follow on the third day 
(of its use) which help the system in purging off all filth 
and obnoxious matter (accumulated in the organism) 
through errors in diet and conduct, etc. The patient 
should in that case bathe in the evening and take cold 
boiled milk as before and lie down on a piece of 
Kshauma cloth stretched over (the aforesaid mattress). 
Swellings appear on the body on the fourth day (of its 
use) and worms are found to creep out from all parts 
of the body. The patient should lie down that day on 
a bed strewn over with dust and in the evening, he 
should be made to drink a potion of milk as beforer^ 
He should pass the fifth and sixth day in the same 
manner, but milk should be given him in the morning 
and in the evening (instead of only in the evening). 
The muscles become withered by this time and on the 
seventh day the patient is found to be a mere skeleton 
covered with a skin only and left with bare animation, 
the vital spark being retained by the potency of Soma. 
The body should be washed with tepid milk on that 
day and plastered with a paste of sesamum, Yashti- 
inadhu and sandal wood, and milk (only) should be 
given him to drink, j-h. 

On the morning of the eighth day, the body should 
be washed with milk, and plastered with sandal paste, 
and potions of milk should be prescribed for him after 
which the patient should be advised to leave his bed 
of dust and lie down on one covered with a piece of 
Kshauma cloth. From now the muscles of the body 
begin to show signs of fresh and vigorous growth, 
the skin becomes cracked, and the teeth, nails and 
hail begin to fall off. On and from the ninth day the 
medicinal oil known as A.uii-Taila should be used to 



534 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XXlX 


anoint (the body) and the decoction of Soma-valka for 
bathing (Pari sheka). The same should be prescribed 
on the tenth day, and from thence the skin becomes 
firm. The eleventh and twelfth day should be passed 
in the same way. From the thirteenth fill the sixteenth 
day (both the days inclusive) the body should be washed 
with the decoction of Soma-valka. New teeth well- 
formed, symmetrical, strong, hard and as clear as a 
diamond or crystal or ruby would appear on the seven- 
teenth and eighteenth days. Gruels (Yavdgu) pre- 
pared with old S’dli-rice and milk should form his diet 
till the twenty-fifth day. After that period well boiled 
S’dli rice should be taken in the morning and evening 
with milk. Fixed, glossy and coral- coloured finger- 
nails resembling the new rising sun in lusture and 
possessed of auspicious marks would be found to be 
growing after the lapse of that period and hair begin 
to grow, the skin would assume the soft hue of a blue 
lotus (Nilotpala), Atasi flower or of a ruby stone. 
After a month the hair should be shaved and a plaster 
composed of Us'ira, Chandana and black sesamum 
applied to the scalp, and the patient should take a 
milk-bath. This would lead to the growth of deep 
bee-black curls of hair in the course of a week. y-B. 

Then the patient should be allowed to stir out from 
the inniost chamber only to re-enter it again after a stay 
of a Muhurta (forty-eight minutes) in the outer chamber. 
Thenceforth Vals( taila (described before) should be used 
in anointing (Abhyanga) his body ; pasted barley in 
rubbing (Udvartana) ; tepid milk in washing (Parisheka) 
it ; and a decoction of Aja-karna in rubbing (Utsddana) 
the dirt of. Similarly well water (scented) with Us’h'a 
should be used for the purpose of bathing (Sndna) ; 
Sandal pastes as unguents (Anulepana) and the expressed 



Chap. XXIX.] 


CHIKITSA StHANAM. 


535 


juice of the Amalaka should be invariably mixed with 
any kind of Yusha or supa (he may take). Soup and 
black sesamum seeds boiled with milk and Yashti- 
inadhu should be used (in the preparation of the food). 
These rules of diet and conduct should be observed for 
ten consecutive days, 7 C. 

The patient should stay in the second (outer) 
chamber for a second ten days. Then he should be 
made to come out and enter the third ^outmost) chamber 
(veranda) and to remain there for ten days with a' quiet 
control over the mind and should be allowed to take 
a short exposure to the sun and wind during this 
period (of ten days). He should then be made to ret 
enter again the inner compartment. 7-D. 

The patient should not contemplate himself in a 
mirror during this time owing to his enhanced personal 
beauty and renounce all passions and anger for a further 
period of ten days. This rule holds good in respect of 
all kinds of Soma ; but there is this distinction that the 
Soma plants which are found to trail upon the ground 
or grow as small shrubs or in bushes should (themselves) 
be taken (instead of their expressed juice being drunk) 
and a dose of these would be four Mushtis^ and a 
half. 7, 

The expressed juice of the Ains'umdn .^Soma) should 
be pressed and taken in a golden pot and that of the 
Chandvaindh (Soma) in a silver one. By its use a man is 
sure to develop the eight godly powers t and is thus able 
to imitate the god Ls'dna. The expressed juice of a 
Soma plant belonging to any other species should be 

* A Mushli measure is equal to eight Tolds. 

t The eight godly powers, according to some authorities, are : — 

«nfR: uniTRi cTwr 1 

cnjt II 



536 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XXIX. 


taken in a copper or an earthen pot or in a (pot pre- 
pared of a) piece of red-coloured and stretched skin. 
A member of any of the three twice-born castes but 
none of the S'udra class is privileged to drink this 
ambrosial elixir (Soma'. In the fourth month (of 
taking it) and under the auspices of a full moon a 
Soma-drinker should be allowed to stir out of his 

/ 

chamber with the auspiciousj rites done unto him and 
to resume the daily avocations of his life after he had 
worshipped the Brdhmanas in a holy place. 8. 

Metrical Texts : —The use of the (expressed 
juice of a) Soma plant, the lord of all medicinal herbs 
is followed by rejuvenation of the system of its user 
and enables him to witness ten thousand summers on 
earth in the full enjoyment of a new (youthful) body. 
Such a person bears a charmed life against fire, water, 
poison and weapon and develops a muscular energy 
in his limbs which would be in no way inferior to the 
combined strength of a thousand excited (rutted) ele- 
phants, of the Bhadra class (which are the most fero- 
cious and irrenstible) in their sixtieth year. Equipped 
with such an excellent ph}'^sique, he can easily and 
without any opposition cross the Ksbiroda (ocean) and 
go up to the abode of S'akra (the king of the gods) and 
roam to the extreme confines of Uttara (northern) Kuru 
or to any other place he likes. He is invested with 
a beauty of frame which belongs to Kandarpa (the god 
of love) and his complexion (lustre) vies with the 
beams of the full moon. The presence of such a 
beautiful man gladdens the hearts of all, and the entire 
Veda with all their allied branches* of knowledge 

* The allied branches of the study of the Vedas are six in num 
They are i 



Chap. XXIX.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


537 


instinctively dawn upon his consciousness. Like the 
godSj he knows no failure in life and roams about in the 
world in the full glory of divine majesty. 9- - • 

Distinctive features of the Soma 

Plants I — A Soma plant of whatever species is fur-_ 
nished with fifteen leaves which wax and wane with 
the waxing and the waning of the moon. Thus one 
leaf grows every day in the lighted fortnight attaining 
the greatest number (fifteen) in the night of the • full 
moon and then the leaves begin to decrease in number 
dropping one by one every day till the bare stem of 
the creeper is left on the night of the new moon. lO, ' 

Their description The Ams'umin species 
of the Soma is characterised by a smell like that of 
clarified butter and has a bulb, while the Lajata-prabha 
is possessed of a bulb resembling a plantain in shape. 
The Munjavdn puts forth leaves like those of a garlic 
while the Chaudramdh species is possessed of a golden 
colour and is aquatic in its habitat. The Garuddhrita 
and S'veldksha species are yellowish (Pdndura) and look 
like the cast-off skins of a snake and are usually 
found to be pendent from the boughs of trees ii. 

All other species are marked with parti-coloured 
circular rings. Possession of fifteen leaves of variegated 
colours, a bulb, a creeper-like appearance, and secretion 
of milky juice are the general characteristics of all the- 
Soma plants. 1 2 - A. 

Their habitats S— -The Himdlayas,’the Arvuda, 
the Sahya, the Mahendra, the Malaya, the S'ri-Parvata, 
the Dcva^iri, the Deva-saha, the Pdripdtra, the Vindhya 
mountains and lake Devasunda are the habitats of the 
Soma plants. Somas, of the Chandramdh species are often 
found to be floating here and there on the mighty stream 
of the river Sindhu (Indus) which flows down at the foot 

68 



538 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA 


[Chap. XXIX. 


of the five large mountains lying to the north bank 
beyond the Vitastd (river). The Munjavdn and the 
Ams'umin species may also be likewise found in the 
same locality while those known as the Gdyatri, 
Traishtubha Pdmkta, Jdgata, S'dmkara, and others 
looking as beautiful as the moon are found to float on 
the surface of the divine lake known as the little 
Mdnasa in Kashmir. 12-B. 

The Soma plants are invisible to the impious or to 
the ungrateful as well to the unbeliever in the curative 
virtues of medicine and to those spiteful to the 
Brdhmanas, 12. 

Thus ends Ihe Twenty-ninlh Chapter of the Chikittila Silidnam in the 
Sus'tuta Samhit^ which deals with the Prophylactic eli.xirs for the innate 
maladies. 



CHAPTER XXX. 

Now we shall discourse on the tonic remedies which 
remove mental and physical distress (Nivritta- 
samta'piya-Ras^yana). i. 

Metrical Text Even in this world mortals 
may live happily, free from disease and care like the 
gods in heaven if they (mortals) can secure the after- 
mentioned drugs (of all-healing potency). 2. 

Persons unfit for the use of Ras^- 
yana The (following) seven classes of persons, viz , 
the intemperate, the lazy, the indigent, the unwise, the 
immoral (Vyasani)* the sinful and the triflers of 
medicine, are unfit to take these ambrosial (Rasdyana) 
drugs on account of their respective ignorance, inacli- 
vity, poverty, vascillation, intemperance, impiety and 
inability to secure the genuine medicines. 3. 

Names of all-healingf drugs s— Now 
we shall discourse on these drugs. They are S'veta- 
kdpoii, Krishna-kdpoti, Gonasi, Vdj-Ahi, Kanyd^ 
Chhatrd, Ati-chchatrd, Karemi^ Ajd, Chakrakd, Aditya- 
parnini, Suvarchald, Bralmia-suvarchald, S'rdvani, 
Ufahd-s'rdvaui, Goloini, Aja-lomi and Mahd~Vegavaii. 
These are the names of the eighteen different kinds of 
drugs of mighty potency. The mode of their use, their 

^ lechnica^ lerm and is divided into two classes, viz., cn i ^ ot 
(i f., piuduccd by pa'sion or desire) and [i.e., originated from 

anger). The fir.,t grmp comprises hunting, dice-playing, day-sleep, 
censuring, addiciion to woman, intoxication, singing, dancing, playing on 
TOU'ical instinments and idle wanderings. The second class comprises 
wicVcdncss, violence, malice, jealousy, envy, extravagance, roughness in 
language and assault. See Manu, Ch. 7. 47, 48, 



540 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXX. 

therapeutical effects and the religious rites to be observed 
in their connection, have been described in the Sdstras 
and are identical with those of the Soma plants. In order 
to use them a man should enter the (prescribed) chamber 
(AgEira) and perform the (prescribed) Homa ceremonies. 
A Kudava measure of the milky juice of the secreting 
species of the plants should be taken once for all after 
entering the chamber. 4. 

Three twigs or branches, however, to the length of a 
span of those of the non-secreting species having roots 
■should be taken for a single dose. The (whole of) 
S'veta-kdpoti with its leaves and roots should be used. 
A quantity of the severed pieces of either of the Gonasi, 
Ajagari (Suvarchald) or Krishna-kdpoti species including 
their thorns, and weighing a Musti (Sanakha-mushtika;* 
should be boiled with (an adequate quantity of; milk 
(and water). The milk thus cooked and prepared 
should be passed through a piece of cloth and taken 
only once duly consecrated. The milk cooked and 
prepared with one of the Chakrakd\ species also 
should be taken with milk only once, whereas (that of 
one of) the Brahma-stivarchald species should be taken 
•for seven days in succession. 5. 

Five Palas of any of the remaining species should 
be boiled with an A'dhaka measure of milk and taken 
down with one quarter left. This should then be strained 
and the milk thus cooked should be taken in a single 

* Some explain “Sanakha muslika” as what would be contained in 
the hollow of a palm, with the finger nails (f.e., the fingers) extended. 
•But “Nakha” seems to refer to the thorns of the plants and "Mushli” a 
Pala' weight (/.«., eight Tolds). 

- t Gayi reads qPHRt” in place of 

explains -it as a preparation of one part of the powders of the fruit 

of Kanyaka and two parts of rice cooked with milk. 



Chap. XXX]. 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


541 


dose and once only. The regimen of diet and conduct 
is the same as in the case of Soma, until the patient 
comes out of his prescribed chamber, with this difference 
that his body should be anointed with butter (Nava- 
nita). 6. 

Memorable Verses The use of any of 

the aforesaid drugs rejuvenates the system, fills it 
with the strength of a lion, invests it with a beautiful, 
shape, blesses the user with such powerful memory that 
he can commit to memory anything once heard, and 
ultimately extends his career to two thousand earthly 
years. Crowned with diadems of celestial beauty, de- 
corated, as if, with Angadas (bracelets), Kundalas (ear-: 
rings), crowns and heavenly wreathes (of flowers). Sandal 
paste and dress, the users are enabled to traverse, like the 
gods, the cloud-spangled high ways of heaven, unflinch- 
ingly in their pursuits. Persons whose systems have 
been fortified with these medicinal herbs (Oshadhis), 
like the users of Soma go not by the roads on earth but 
scale those inaccessible heights of heaven from whence 
the pendent rain-clouds look down upon the soil below 
and where the feathered wingers of the ethereal blue 
frequently soar up to. 7. 

Differentiating Traits:— Now we shall 
describe the different traits of these (all-healing) Osha- 
dhis. The Ajagari* Oshadhi is found to put forth five 
leaves which have a brown colour and are marked with 
variegated ring-like patches. It looks like a snake and 
measures five Aratnis (a cubit of the middle length from 
the elbow to the tip of the little finger) in length. The 


* There is no mention of “Ajagari” in the list (para. 2) and there 
is no mention of “Suv.archalA’’ in this descriptive list. It seems, therefore, 
prob.-vble that “Aj.igari” and “Suv.archal.V’ are identical. 



542 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap, XXX. 


S'veta-ka'poti is a leafless, gold-coloured, snake-shaped 
plant with a root two fingers in length and is red 
at the extremities. The G-onasi is a bulbous plant 
possessed of two leaflets, red-coloured and is marked with 
black rings. It measures two Aratnis in height and 
resembles a Gonasa (boa) snake in shape. The Krishna- 
ka(poti is a soft, hairy, milk-secreting plant and its 
juice is possessed of a colour and a taste like that of 
sugar-cane juice. The V£(rs(hi is bulbous and puts forth a 
single leaflet; it is resplendent like broken pieces of black 
antimony. It resembles a black lance hooded Kobrd, 
(Krishna Sarpa) in shape and is possessed of mighty 
potency, 8, 

The ChratrJi and the Ati-cliclihatrg( are bulbous 
in their origin and are found to be attached to a 
plant of the Sveta-kdpoti species Both of them are 
possessed of the virtue of arresting death and decay 
and act as prophylactic against the Rakshas as (malig- 
nant spirits). A plant of the Kanya( species is found to 
put forth a dozen leaflets beautifully coloured like the 
breast-feathers of a peacock. It is bulbous in its origin 
and exudes a gold-coloured juice. An Oshadhi plant 
of the Karenu species abounds in milky juice and its 
bulb resembles an elephant. It puts forth two leaves 
which look like those of a Hasti-karna-paldsa tree. An 
Oshadhi plant of the Aja species abounds in milky 
juice, grows like a Kshupa or bushy plant and is white- 
coloured like the moon, a conch shell, or a Kunda 
flower ; its bulb resembles the udder of a she-goat. An 
Oshadhi plant of the Cliakrakst species is white-coloured, 
puts forth flowers of variegated colours, grows in bushes, 
resembles a Kdkddani plant in shape and size and - is 
possessed of the efficacy in warding off death and decay. 
An Oshadhi plant of the A'ditya-parnini species grows 



Chap. XXX,] CHIKITSA STHANAM. ^43 

from roots (and has no bulb) and is furnished with five 
red-coloured leaflets as soft as a piece of linen and which 
always point towards the sun (change their direction 
with the progress of that luminary in heavens) An 
Oshadhi . plant of the Bi’fliliina-Suva/rclia/lSi species, is 
gold-coloured, abounds in milky juice, resembles a 
lotus plant in appearance, grows by the side of water 
{ie., in marshy lands) and spreads in all directions. An 
Oshadhi plant of the Maliji'S'rttvani species bears flowers 
like a Nilotpala and collyrium-c floured fruit. The 
stem of the Kshupa (bushy) plant measures an Aratni 
and the leaf two fingers in length. It is gold-coloured 
and abounds in milky juice. An Oshadhi plant of the 
STa'vaui species, possesses all the preceding features, 
(of the MahA-s'rdvani) but is tinged with a yellow 
colour. The Oshadhi known as the Golomi and the 
Ajalomi are hairy and bulbous (in their origin). A 
Vegavati Oshadhi plant puts forth leaves from its roots ; 
its leaves are severed like those of a Hamsapddi creeper, 
and move about violently (even in the absence of any 
’wind), or it resembles a Samkha-pushpi creeper in all its 
features, looks like the cast-off skin of a snake and grows 
at the end of the rain}'’ season («>., in autumn). 9. 

Mocie of culling the above drugs 

The fiist seven of the all -healing Oshadi plants enumerat- 
ed above should be culled by reciting the following 
Mantra ; —“We appease thee with the holy energy and 
dignity of Mahendra, Rdma, Krishna and of the Brdhma- 
nas and of cows. Exert your beneficial virtues for the 
good of mankind”. The intelligent one should consecrate 
all these Oshadhis with this Mantra. The lazy, the 
impious, the ungrateful and the unbelieving invariably 
fail to see and secure the Soma plants, or the drugs 
possessed of similar virtues. The gods after having 



544 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. CChap. XXX. 

drunk the celestial ambrosia to their fill cast .the residue 
to the Somas and kindred plants as well as to the 
moon, the lord of the Oshadhis, lo-A. 

Their habitats I —The Br'ahma-suvarchald 
species (of the Oshadhis) is found to grow in and about 
the waters of the great river Indus and the lake Deva- 
sunda. The Adityaparnini species may be had in 
those two regions at the end of winter, and Gonasi and 
Ajagari at the beginning of the rains. The the 

Kanyd, the Chhatrd, the Ati-chchhatrd, the Golomi, the 
Aja-lomi, and the Mahd-s' rdvani varieties of the Osha- 
dhis are found (in spring) in the lake of Kshudraka- 
Manasa in Kashmir. The Krishna-sarpdkhyd and the 
Gonasi species also are found in that locality during the 
spring. The S'veta-kdpoti species is white coloured 
and is found to grow on the ant-hills which cover a 
space of three Yojanas on the other (viz^ the western) 
side of the river Kaus'iki and to the east of the Sanjaya- 
nti. The Oshadhi of the Vegavati species grows on 
the Malaya hills and on the Nala-setu. lO-B. 

Any one of these Oshadhis should be taken after a 
fast under the auspices of the full-moon in the month 
of Kdrtika. The regimen of diet and conduct is the 
same as laid down in connection with Soma-RasEiyana 
and the results have been already described to be the 
same, loC. 

The common habitats of all the 
Oshadhis : — The Soma as well all the other 
Oshadhi plants may be had on (the summits of) the 
Arvuda mountains whose cloud-rending summits are 
the favourite haunts of the gods and which abound in 
holy pools and fountains frequented by the gods, the 
Siddhas and the holy Rishis, and whose large hollow 
caves are reverberated with the thundering roars of 



Chap. XXX.] CHixlTSA STHANAM. S45 

lion and which are moated on all sides by swift cours- 
ing rivers, whose waters are perpetually tossed by 
sportive elephants of the forests and whose brows are 
effulgent with the lustres of various brilliant metals 
imbedded in their hearts. .10. 

These ambrosial plants (as well as other drugs) 
are to be sought in the rivers, the holy forests and 
hermitages, as well as in lakes and on hills, since 
this world is a bed of gems and is known to hold 
priceless treasures in all places. 1 1 . 

Thus ends the Thitlieth Chapter of the Chikiisita Sthdnam in the 
Sus'fut.a SamUita which dc.als with the Ionic remedies which have the 
power of removing the mental and physical distresses. 


69 



CHAPTER XXXL 


Now we shall discourse on the medicinal uses (both 
internal and external) of the Snehas’*', i.e., oleaginous 
substances (Snehaupayogika-Chikitsita). i- 

A Sneka or an oleaginous substance forms the 
essential factor of the physical organism, and the self- 
conscious animated element (which contributes directly 
to its vitality and makes life possible) abounds in 
oleaginous principles; both ai'e consequently in constant 
want of a Sneha. Snehas or oleaginous substances are 
enjoined to be administered in food and drinks as well 
as in Anuv^sana, Mastikya s'iro-vasti and Uttara-vasti 
(urethral or vaginal enemas), errhines (Nasya), ear-drops 
(Karna-purana) and unguents (Abhyanga). 2. 

There are four kinds of Snehas which, however, are 
divided into two classes according to their origin ; viz., 
vegetable and animal. Clarified butter prepared from 
cow’s milk is the best of the animal Snehas, while 
Sesamum oil is the best of the vegetable ones. 3 

Now we shall describe the ends for which the 
different vegetable oils should be used as well as the 
modes in which they should be prepared and employed. 4. 

The expressed oils prepared from (the seeds of) 
Lodhra, Eranda, Kos'dmra, Danti, D^-avaiiti, Saptald, 
S' amkhini, P aids' a, Vishdnikd, Gavdkshi, Kampillaka, 
Sampdka and of Nilini act as purgatives. The oils 
prepared from (the seeds of) Jitmitaka, Kutaja, Kritave- 
dhana, Ikshvdku (bitter gourd), Dhdmdrgava and of 
Madana act as emetics. The expressed oils prepared 
from (the seeds of) Vidanga, Khar a manjari, Madhu- 

* The Sneha is of four kinds, viz,, clarified butler, oil, lard and 
marrow, of which clarified butter and oil are generally used. 



Chap. XXXL] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


S47 


s'igru, Surya-valli, Pihi, Siddhdrthaka and o{ Jyoiishmati 
act as errhines (S'iro-virechana). 5. 

The expressed oils prepared from (the seeds of) 
Karanja, Putika, Kritamdla, MdUihinga, Ingudi and of 
Kirdta-tikta are usid in cases of Dasllta-vrana (malig- 
nant ulcers). The expressed oils of Tuvaraka, Kapittha , 
Kampillaka, Bhalldtaka and of Patola are u^ed in cases 
of Maha-vyeidhi (Kushtha, etc.). The expressed oils of 
Trapuslia, Endnika, Karkdruka, Tumbi and of Kush- 
mdnda are used in cases of Mufcra sanga (for diuretic 
purposes). The expressed oils of Kapotx-VAmka, Aval- 
guja and of Haritaki are used in cases of Sirkara'- 
s'mari (gravels, stones, etc). The expressed oils of 
Kusumbha, Sarshapa, Atasi, Pichu marda, Atininktaka 
Bhdndi, Kaiu- tumbi and of Katabhi are used in cases of 
Pr amelia (urinary complaints). The expressed oils of 
the fruits of Tdlci^ Ndrikela, Panama, Mocha, Piydla, 
Vilva, Madhuka, S' Ushmdtaka and of Amrdtaka are 
used in diseases due to the deranged Vatyu acting in 
concert with the deranged Pitta. The expressed oils 
of Vibhitaka, Bhalldtaka and of Pinditaka are used in 
Krishaa-karma (blackening the cicatrix of a healed 
ulcer, etc.). The expressed oils of S'ravana, Kanguka and 
of Ttintiika are used in imparting a yellow colour (to a 
cicatrix). The expressed oils of the pith of S'hns‘'apd 
and of the^^wi! are used in cases of Kushtha known as 
Dadra 'ring worm) and Kitima, 6-7. 

The primary action of all kinds of Sneha (oil, clari- 
fied butter, etc.) is to subdue the aggravation of the 
deranged Vdyu of the body, and the general virtues of 
all kinds of (vegetable) oil have been described above. 8. 

Now we shall describe the process of preparing drug- 
decoctions and of medicating oils (therewith). Accord- 
ing to several authorities, the bark, roots and .leaves, 



548 


THE SUSHRUTA SAM HIT A. 


[Chap. XXXI. 


etc., of the drugs to ba used should be boiled with 
water weighing four times their combined weight, 
and should be taken down with three-four. hs of the 
original water evaporated by boiling. This is the rule 
of preparing drug-decoctious (Kashdya'. Six Prasrita 
(one Prasrita being equal to sixteen Tolis) weight of oil, 
twenty-four Prasrita weights of the liquid (decoction 
prepared before) and four Aksha measures (one Aksha 
being equal two to Tolas) of pasted drugs (as Kalka) are 
the proportions to be observed in cooking a medicated 
oil. But this is not correct Why? Because it is 
not in conformity with the injunctions of the Scriptures 
(officinal standard). We shall now proceed to explain 
the different measures of Pala, Kudava, etc, 9-10. 

Measures of Drugs The weight of twelve 
middle-sized DhAnya-mashas (corns of paddy) make 
one Suvarna-mishaka. Sixteen Suvarna-mdshakas make 
one Suvarna, The weight of nineteen middle-sized 
Nishpdvas (pulse) make one Dharana, Three Dharanas 
and a half make one Kavsha. Four Karshas make one 
Kudava. P'our Kudavas make one Prastha.* P’our 
Prasthas make one Adhaka. Four Adhakas make one 
Drona. Hundred Palas make one Tuld. Twenty Tulds 
make one Bhdra. This is the measure in respect of 
dried substances. The quantity should be doubled in 
cases of fresh vegetables and fluids -f* 1 1, 


* Thirly-two Palas make one PraUha in respect of water ; but 
in respect of non-oily substances a Prastha is equal to twenty Palas, where- 
as in respect of fresh drugs it is equal to only sixteen Palas, 

t Some drugs, viz- : — Vdsd, Kutaja, Kushmanda, Prasa'rani 
Vala, Amrita and Nimba, etc., are invariably employed in their fresh 
state and the practice is not to take them in double measures in spite of 
their freshness. Two different kinds of measure have been adopted 
in the Ayurvedic Pharmacopceia. One is called the KfClinga and the 



Chap. XXXI.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


549 


The Kash^ya-Paka Kalpa The bark, 

roots and leaves, etc., of medicinal drugs should be 
dried in the sun and taken in any of the aforesaid 
measures, should be cut in small pieces, or pounded, 
as the case may be, and soaked in a quantity of water^' 
weighing eight or sixteen times their combined weight. 
They should then be boiled over a fire and the decoc- 
tion should be taken down from the oven with only 
a quarter part of the water left. This is the general 
rule for preparing a decoction (Kash^ya). 12. 

Thie Sneha-Paka Kalpa One part of 
the Sneha (oil, clarified butter, etc.), four parts of (any 
one or more) liquidf substances, a fourth part of the 
medicinal pastes (Kalka) should be boiled together. 
This is the general rule for the preparation of a 
medicated Sneha (oil, clarified butter, etc.). 13. 

Alternative methods : -As an alterna ivc, 
a Tuld measure of the bark, roots and leaves, etc. (as 
the case may be) of the drugs to be decocted, should be 
boiled with a Drona measure of water. The water in the 
preparation should be boiled down to a quarter part of 
its original quantity and then considered as cooked and 


oVhei the M^gadha tnrasuie. Mahatshi Oharaka has adopled the first, 
but that adopted by SuVrula is the second one. 

* Water weighing four limes as much as the drugs when the drugs are 
of a soft consistency and eight limes as much when they ate hard and 
Sixteen limes as much when they aie vevy hard. 

t When there ate mote liquids to be used than one, the general 
rule is that the total weight of all the liquids wjuld be four limes that 
of the Sneha, it not otherwise directed. All this liquid part should, 
however, be boiled aw.ay and the Sneha part should be left before the 
Sneha is removed from the Bte and before it can be fit for use. It should 
be noted that the cooking of a Sneha should not be completed in one 

day.— Ed, 



550 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. fChap. XXXI. 

prepared. A Kudava measure of oil should be boiled 
and cooked with four times as much of the liquid 
and a Pala measure of pasted drugs (Kalka). This 
is another process of cooking medicated Snehas 
(oil, etc,), 14. 

Memorable Verses : —The foregoing rules 
should be adopted where no measures would be found 
to have been specifically given of the Sneha, the liquid 
and of the drugs, whereas in cases of specification, the 
specific quantities should be taken. Water should be 
used as the liquid, where no other liquid wo'uld be 
mentioned by name (in c:)nncction with medicating a 
Sneha, viz., oil, clarified butter, etc , by cookingl. Both 
for the decoction and paste (Kall<a\ the drugs 
mentioned in the respective list should be used in 
preparing a medicated Sneha in the absence of any 
explicit and specific injunction to that effect. 15, 

Now we shall discuss the degrees of medically 
cooking a Sneha (oil or Ghrita). Mild (Mridu\ middling 
or intermediate (Madhyaina) and hard (Khara) are the 
three degrees which the boiling process undergoes in 
medically cooking a Sneha. A cooking is said to be 
mild (Mridu-PAka) when the oil is found to drop off 
entirely from its drug-paste (Kalka) leaving it dry and 
sapless; whereas in an act of mMdle-cooking (Madhyama- 
Paka) the paste would be found to have become 
pellucid and non-sticky like wax ; a cooking done 
until the paste (in the Sneha'' assumes a little clear, 
glossy, frothless, black colour is termed strong (Khara- 
P^ka). A Sneha cooked beyond the Ust named degree 
is called a burnt Sneha. A Sneha should, therefore, be 
properly cooked. A mild'y cooked Sneha should be 
administered in food and drinks. A middling-cooked 
one for the purposes of errhines and anointments, while 



Chap. XXXl.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 55 1 

a strongly cooked one should be used for the purposes 
of Vasti-Karma and as ear-drops* i6. 

Memorable Verses The cooking of a 
Ghrita should be considered medically complete as 
soon as the froth and the sound would vanish and 
the peculiar smell, colour and taste of preparation 
would be manifest. The medically cooking of an oil 
resembles in all respects that of a Ghrita with this 
exception that an abundance of froth appears on the 
surface of the oil at the C(jmpletion of the coohing. 17. 

The process of taking a Sneha in- 
ternally : -Now we shall describe the process of 
taking a Sneha internally. A man with an empty stomach 
should be made to take a draught of a medicinal or 
medicated oil or Ghrita, just as the god of day (sun) would 
appear on the summit of the hill at dawn and lighten 
up the horizon with the first shoots of his vermilion- 
tinted golden rays. Rites of benediction should be 
first done unto the patient before administering to 
him the oil or the Ghrita in an adequate dose. After 
that he should wash his mouth with warm water and 
quietly stroll about with his shoes on. 18. 

Metrical Texts T he use of a potion of a 
(medicated) Ghrita is recommended to patients 
suffering from an extremely parched or dry condi- 
tion of the organism, or from ulcers, or from the effects 
of a poison, or from those due to the actions of the 
deranged Vttya and Pitta, as well as to persons of weak 
memory and intellect. Potions of (medicated) oils 
should be prescribed in aggravations of the Kapha and 

Charaka, on ihe conlrary, holds that a Khara {strongly cooked) 
Sneha should be used in anointing the body, a middling-cooked one for 
the purposes of drinks and Vasti-karma and a mildly cooked (Mridu) 
one for the purposes of erihines. 



TliE SUSHRUtA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXI. 


^^2 

of fat, as well as in cases of worms (in the intestines) 
and incarcerated flatus (wind in the abdomen), or when 
the patient is found to be habituated to the internal 
use of any oil, or seeks the firmness of his body 
(muscles). The use of lard is recommended to persons 
emaciated with over- fatiguing physical labour, or to 
persons whose blood and semen are greatly diminished 
or to those suffering from an attack of MahA-vyddhi 
(due to the vitiated condition of the blood), or to 
persons of a voracious appetite (Mahdgni', or of Vdtaja 
(nervous) temperament, as well as to those possessed 
of great physical strength. The use of marrow or of 
medicated Ghritas mixed with appropriate drugs is 
beneficial to men of strong digedive capacity (Dipta- 
vahni', or to those afflicted with a deranged Vayu, or 
to those whose bowels are not easily moved, or who 
are capable of undergoing a large amount of physical 
hardship. Clarified butter, without any other thing 
added thereto, should be administered in the affections of 
the deranged Pitta ; whereas it should be mixed with 
salt before use in the diseases due to the action of the 
deranged Vdyu and with the admixture of Yava-kshAra 
and pow'dered Trikatu in the affections of the aggra- 
vated and deranged Kapha. Oil or clarified butter 
should be administered through the medium of one, 
two or more of the sixty three different combinations^ 
of the (six different) Rasas (flavour) according to 
the nature and intensity of the aggravated Dosha 
or Dos has involved in each case. 19- A. 

Clear (filtered) oil, clarified butter, etc., should be 
taken by a man habituated to its use and capable of 
undergoing physical hardships during the months of 


* Vide Ultara-Tantta, Chapter, LXIII. 



Chap, XXXI. ] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM, 


553 


the year which are neither too hot nor too cold* in- 
asmuch as the use of clear or transparent oil or Ghrita 
is above being commendable. A Sneha should be taken 
in the morning (lit. day-time) during the cold months of 
the year and in case of the joint aggravation of the bodily 
Vdyu and Kapha ; whereas it should be taken in the 
evening (lit. night) during summer and in cases of the 
joint aggravation of the bodily Vayu and Pitta. Potions 
of oil or clarified butter taken in summer by a person 
suffering from an aggravation of the bodily Vdyu 
and Pitta may bring on thirst, epileptic fits and 
insanity. In the same manner draughts of oil or 
clarified butter taken in winter by a person suffering 
from an aggravation of the bodily Vdyu or Kapha 
may be followed by a heaviness of the limbs, aver- 
sion to food and i colic (Sula). If a patient feels thirsty 
after taking a Sneha, he should take warm water, and 
be made to vomit the Sneha with (further) draughts of 
hot water in the event of the thirst still not subsiding. 
Cooling plasters should be applied to his head and 
a cold water bath should be prescribed. 19-B. 

Th6 Dosag^e i — The Dosage of a Sneha which 
requires the quarter part of a day three hours) 
to be digested, should be deemed appetising and bene- 
ficial in slight aggravations of the bodily Doshas ; that 
which requires half a day to be digested should be 
regarded as invigorating, spermatopoietic, construct- 
ive and beneficial in moderate aggravations of the 


* Both Vrinda and Chaktapani read this but with little difference. 
Both of them read ^ in the cold season. But their 

commentalois accept the reading •TlfO’TOkra,” in the text, to be 

a variant. We have the authority of Chataka, however, to accept the 
reading of the text. 


70 



554 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXI. 


bodily Doshas. The dosage of a Sneha which takes 
three-quarter parts of a day to be digested, acts as 
a bodily emollient and should be prescribed in cases 
of extreme aggravation of the bodily Doshas, while 
the quantity which can only be digested in the course 
of an entire day (twelve hours) should be considered 
efficacious in all affections of the body and does not 
produce physical lassitude, fainting fits and delirious 
conditions. The measure or quantity of a Sneha which 
takes a whole day and night to be digested without 
undergoing any kind of vitiation (reactionary acidity) 
in the stomach, proves curative even in cases of 
Kushtha (cutaneous affections), insanity, poisoning 
(effects of poison) and Apasmdra (hysteric convulsions), 
ascribed to the baneful influences of the malignant 
stars. I9-C, 

The evil effects of Over-dosage A 

patient should be made to take as much of the Sneha 
as he would be able to easily digest inasmuch as an 
excessive over-dose may prove fatal. The patient 
should be made to vomit with draughts of hot water 
in a case of over-dose or abuse of a Sneha and in the 
event of its continuing in an undigested or partially 
digested state in the stomach. In cases of doubt- 
ful digestion, similar potions of hot water should 
be administered which would produce good eructa- 
tions and bring on a fresh relish for food. 19-D. 

When the Sneha begins to be digested, it is attended 
with thirst, vertigo, lassitude, weariness, a disturbed state 
of the mind and a burning sensation. When the Sneha 
appears to have been fully digested the patient should 
be affused with hot water. A gruel prepared with only 
a small quantity of rice should be given lukewarm to the 
patient (at this stage). As an alternative, a well- 



Chap, XXXI.] CHIKITSA STHANAM, 555 

aromated soup (of Mudga, etc.) or meat-juice cooked 
without the addition of any Sneha (oil or Ghrita) 
or with only a small admixture of clarified butter 
should be given, or he may take Yavdgu (pure 'and 
simple). 19-E. 

A Sneha should be taken three, four, five or six 
days consecutively ; used (continually) for more than a 
week it becomes habituated to the user. A Sneha should 
be taken with food (at the time of mid-day meal) by a 
weak, or an old man or an infant, or a thirsty person, 
or one of a delicate constitution, or one averse to its use 
in summer. 19-F. 

Sadyah-Snehana The administration of 
a potion composed of powdered Pippali and (Sain- 
dhava) salt mixed with curd-cream and the four kinds 
of oleaginous substances (Sneha) constitute what is 
known as the Sadyali-Snehana (?.e,, it produces the 
effects of the Sneha within a very short time). The 
use of a Yavdgu well-cooked* with the soup of half- 
fried meat (instead of water) and a Sneha (clarified 
butter), and mixed with honey acts as a Sadyah- 
snehana, A Yavagu prepared with milkf and a small 
quantity of rice and taken lukewarm with clarified 
butter produces the same result. The use of cow’s 
milk milched into a pot containing clarified butter 
and sugar produces an instantaneous emulsive effect 
(Sadyah'snehana), if taken by a man with a parch- 
ed state of the organism. Clarified butter cooked 
with three parts 01 the decoction of Yava, Kola and 

In place of (well-cooked), Chakradatta reads 

cl’3^’ (pfep.-ired with a small quantity of rice). 

t In place of (prepared with milk), Chakradatta reads 

(prepared with an abundance of sesamum which, according 
to S'ivaddsa, would constitute three parts with only one part of rice). 



556 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XXXI. 


Kulattha pulse (taken together) and one part each of 
milk, curd, wine and clarified butter churned from milk 
acts as an instantaneous demulcent (Sadyah-snehana) 
and is hence recommended to kings and king-like 
personages. This potent emulsive measure (Sadyah- 
snehana) should be prescribed for the old, the imbecile, 
to females and to persons of sluggish appetite, as well 
as to sensitive persons and in diseases due to a slight 
aggravation of the bodily Doshas, 19-G. 

Forbidden cases of Sneha-p^na 

The internal use of a Sneha is forbidden to persons 
suffering from ascites, fever, delirium, alcoholism, aver- 
sion to food and vomiting, as well as to weak, 
corpulent, thirsty, fatigued, or intoxicated persons. 
It is forbidden on a cloudy day, in an improper season 
of the year, after the application of Vasti-measures, 
purgatives and emetics and after premature parturition. 
The internal use of a Sneha (oil or Ghrita) gives rise 
to a host of maladies in the foregoing cases, or the 
diseases become more serious or may even become 
incurable. In cases of premature parturition, there 
remains a quantity of mucus and vitiated lochia in 
the womb ; therefore, stomachic (Pdchana) and parch- 
ing (Ruksha) drugs should be administered to females 
after child-birth. After a period of ten days, however, 
draughts of oil or clarified butter should be given 
according to requirements. 19. 

A dry or parched condition of the organism should 
be inferred from a general dryness of the body, the hard 
and knotty character of the fcecal matter (stools), a slug- 
■gish digestion with a burning sensation on the epigas- 
trium (liras) and an upward coursing of the Vdyu from 
the abdomen (Koshtha) as well as from the weakness and 
discoloration of the body. Lassitude, a sense of heaviness 



Chap. XXXI.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


557 


in the limbs, the oozing out of the Sneha through the 
lower orifices of the body and an aversion to any kind of 
oleaginous substance are the indications which mark the 
satisfactory action of an emulsive remedy in a human 
organism, while its abrupt excess or abuse is followed 
by aversion to food, salivation, a burning sensation about 
the anus, dysenteiy and diarrhoea and such like symp- 
toms. A condition of dryness in the organism should 
be remedied with a Sneha, while an excess of the latter 
should be corrected with meals of S'ydwdka or Kora- 
dnsha grains, as well as with milk-curd (Takra), levi- 
gated sesamum paste (Pinydka) and powdered barley 
(Saktu). 20-23. 

The good effects of Sneha-p^na 

The blessings which attend a person who has duly 
taken a Sneha are improved digestive capacity, regular 
and satisfactory motions of the bowels, a growth of all 
the vital principles of the body, strength and firmness of 
the organs, improvement of complexion, a delayed old 
age and the enjoyment of a hundred summers on earth. 
The application of a Sneha is potent enough to increase 
the strength and the digestive capacity of a weak person 
suflfering from impaired digestion, and a person having 
his health and digestive capacity recouped (by the use 
of a Sneha) does not yield to the evil effects of errors 
of diet. 54-55. 

Thus ends ihe Thirty-first Chapter in the Chikitsita Sthdnam of the 
Sus'ruta Samhitd which deals with the treatment of the diseases where 
oleaginous medicines are useful. 



CHAPTER XXXn. 


Now we shall discourse on the medical treatment by 
measures of fomentations, diaphoretic measures, etc. 

(Sveda-vacharaniya). i. 

Sveda'^ (calorification, fomentation, diaphoretic 
measures, etc.) may be divided into four groups such as, 
the application of direct heat (T^pa-sveda), foment- 
ation (Ushma-sveda), poulticing (Upandha-sveda) and 
the application of heated fluids (Drava-sveda). All 
kinds of diaphoretic measures (Sveda) belong to one 
or the other of these groups. 2. 

T^pa-SVeda: — Of these the TApa-sveda consists 
in repeatedly applying heat to (any affected part of the 
body of) a patient made to lie down (on a bed) with 
the help of the palm of the hand, a piece of brass, an 
Indian saucer, a piece of baked clay or sand, or a piece 
of cloth after heating them over a fire of Khadira wood, 
etc. 3. 

Ushma-sveda : — A piece of stone, brick, iron, 
or baked clay should be made red-hot and sprinkled 
over with water or with sour gruel ^Kdnjika). The 
affected part of the body should be covered with (cotton 
plugs soaked in) Alaktakaf and then fomented with 


* The Sanskrit term “Sveda” is not properly rendered by the terms 
fomentations, diaphoretic measures or any other such word or phrase. 
Sveda is used to mean the application of heat in any possible way — it 
may be to cause or not to cause perspiration. Vapour baths, hot water 
baths, applications of warm poultices, etc., are also included in the mean- 
ing of the term Sveda. We have, however, for convenience sake, used 
the term fomentation as a synonym of Sveda in general. 


Jejjata reads 


and explains that the cotton plug soaked in Alaktaka should be made 


wet and placed over the affected part before applying the fomentation. 




Chap. XXXII.l 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


559 


the above-named (heated) articles. As an alternative, 
a metal saucer containing milk, curd, Dhdnydmla, meat- 
soup and a decoction of the tender leaves of the Vdyu- 
subduing plants (jointly or separately) should be heated 
over a fire. The mouth of the saucer should be covered 
(with a piece of blanket or such other cloth)* and the 
affected part of the body should be fomented with the 
vapours rising therefrom. As an alternative, another 
pitcher should be placed with its mouth downward over 
the mouth of the above pitcher (containing the above- 
named heated articles). Then an aperture should be 
made in the side of the upper pitcher and a pipe to the 
shape of an elephant’s trunk should be inserted into it. 
The affected part of the body should then be fomented 
with the vapour escaping through that pipe. 4. 

Metrical Texts -The mode of applying 
heat to a patient suffering from any disease or 
affection of the bodily Vdyu (disease of the nervous 
system, etc.,) is as follows : — He should be first anointed 
with oil, etc.,') and wrapped up in a thick cloth. He 
should then be made to sit in an easy posture. Heat 
should then be applied through a pipe shaped as an 
elephant’s trunk. The advantage of this mode of 
fomentation is that the entire body of the patient may 
be easily fomented without causing him any serious 
trouble. The pipe should be made half a Vyama*}* in 
length with three bends or turns? in its body to resemble 


* The mouth of the pitcher should be coveted only to mitigate and 
regulate the heat. 

+ A Vydma is the length measured by the outstretched hands of a 
man. 

t The reasons for bending the lube ate to make the fomentation 
delightful, in consequence of the vapour not passing in a straight course. 



56 o 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XXXII. 


the trunk of an elephant.* The use of a pipe made of 
the materials (such as Kus'a, Kds'a, etc.) used in the 
making of a Kilinji (basket) and resembling the trunk of 
an elephant in shape is only recommended - for the 
purposes of Sveda (heat-application). 5. 

A plot of ground commensurate with the length 
of the patient’s body should be dug and heated 
with fire of Khadira wood and then sprinkled over 
with milk, water and Dhan)''Amla. The heated ground 
should be then covered with a layer of leaves (of 
the Vdyu-subduing plants) and the patient should be 
made to lie down full stretched upon the (bed of) 
leaves and thereby fomented.i* an alternative, a 

stone slab should be heated and the fomentation 
(Sveda) should be applied similarly to the patient by 
making him lie down upon it after the ashes and 
cinders have been removed As an alternative, the 
patient should be seated inside a chamber with four 
doors (one on each side) and fomented by lighting 
up a good blazing fire (of Khadira wood) at all the 
doors (simultaneously Another alternative is that the 
patient should be laid on a mattress (made of Kus'a, 
Kas'a, etc.) or on a similar bed as before and fomented 
with the fumes of duly boiled paddy (and Mdsha- 
pulse, etc.) kept under the same mattress. In the 
same manner, Sveda (fomentation) might be applied 
with the help of heated cow-dung, ashes, husks of 
paddy, weeds, etc. 7. 

Upan^ha-Sveda (Poulticing) : — The roots 

of the Vdyu-subduing drugs should be pasted together 

* This is called the “ Hcfdi-SVeda 
t This is called the “ Karshu-sveda ”. 
t This is called the " As'ma-ghana-sveda ”. 

, § This is called the “ Kuti-Sveda”. 



Chap. XXXII.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


with Afnla (Kanjika) and mixed with an alaundant.^ 
quantity of rock-salt and of Sneha (clarified butter, etc.). ( 
The paste should be heated and applied lukewarm' 
to the affected part. The pastes of the drugs included ' 
within the Kdkolyddi, the Elddi or \.\\e Su7'asddi groups 
as well as a paste of mustard seed, sesamum oi-^ 
linseed, or Kvisar^, Psiyasa (porridge) or 

Ves'av^ra, or the drugs of S'dlvana* (as described' 
under the treatment of Vdta-Vy4dhi) should be 
similarly applied (lukewarm to the affected locality) 
'folded in a piece of thin linen. This is what is called 
the TJpausilia-Sv'eda. 8. 

Drava-Sveda (Diaphoresis with fluids) : — A 
jar or a cauldron should be filled with a lukewarm 
decoction of any of the Vdyu-subduing drugs and 
the patient should be immersed therein. In the same 
way, the patient might b3 immersed in a tubful of warm 
milk, meat-soup, soup (of Mudga or Mdsha pulse), oil, 
DhdnyAinla (fermented or sour gruel), clarified butter, 
lard, cow’s urine, etc.d The patient may also be 
sprinkled over or washed with a tepid decoction (of 
the above-mentioned drugs).| This is what is called 
the Drava-Sveda. 9. 

Of the four forms of Sveda described above those 
known as the Tdpa-Sveda and Ushma-Sveda pre-emi- 
nently destroy the deranged Kapha, while the Upandha- 
Sveda subdues the deranged Vaya of the body ; 

* Drug, of iha KdkolydJi group should be used in cases of the 
daminant d.:rangeJ Piit.a acting in cincerl with the deranged Vayu ; those 
of Elidi group in cases of the dominant deranged Kapha acting in concert 
with the deranegd Vayu and the S'alvana, or sesamum, linseed, etc., in 
cases of a simple or complicated der.anged Vdyu, 

t This is called the Avagaha-Sveda. 

X This is called the "Parisbeka-Sveda.” 


71 



562 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XXXII. 


the Drava-Sveda, however, is beneficial in cases due to 
the concerted action of the deranged Pitta with either 
of the other two Doshas {viz., VEiyu and Kapha). lo-A, 

The patient should be diaphorised by making him 
put on warm clothing or exposing himself to the sun 
or by becoming fatigued after a long walk, or by 
wrestling, or some other physical exercise, load-carrying, 
etc., or by arousing his anger in a case where the 
deranged VEiyu. would be found to be subcharged with 
the deranged fat or Kapha. lo. 

Memorable Verses : — The four forms of 
Sveda mentioned above may be employed in two 
ways, viz. : — either to the whole body or to any 
particular part of it. Sveda should be first employed 
in cases of patients fit to be treated with errhines 
(Nasya), purgatives, emetics or with Vasti-measnres. 
It should be applied to the enciente in cases of 
obstructed foetus (Mudha-garbha) unattended with any 
other supervening distresses {ie., excessive discharge 
of blood, etc.) after the extraction of the S'alya (the 
obstructed foetus) from the womb, and after parturi- 
tion, and in cases where pregnancy runs to its full and 
natural term. Sveda should similarly be applied both 
before and after the surgical operation in cases of 
fistula-in-ano and stones, gravel, etc., (in the bladder) 
and of haemorrhoids. Specific modes of applying 
Sveda in other diseases should be duly described under 
their respective heads, ii. 

Men conversant with the rules of Sveda (fomenta- 
.tions, etc.) should, under no circumstances, employ it 
before rubbing or softening the body or the limb with a 
Sneha (oil, etc.) inasmuch as a piece of wood is found 
to break or burst immediately under the application of 
heat if not previously rubbed with a Sneha. 12 — A. 



Chap. XXXIL] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 5^3 

Effects of Sveda improved digestive capa- 
city (Agtii-dipti), softness of the limbs, smoothness and. 
clearness of the skin, relish for food, clearness of the 
bodily ducts or channels, absence of somnolence .and 
drowsiness and restored functions (free movements) of the 
numbed bone-joints are the benefits which result from an 
application of Sveda. The Doshas (morbific principles) 
having been moistened with a Sneha and lying inherent 
in the root principles (Dhdtus) of the body or imbedded in 
its ducts or channels or located. in their specific seats 
within the system, become liquefied and carried down 
into the bowels JCoshtha) by and after an application of 
Sveda and are eventually totally eliminated from tho 
system (by means of correcting ncieasures — D. R.). 12-B, 

A perfect or satisfactory application of Sveda is 
marked by a copious flow of perspiration, an abatement 
or amelioration of the disease, a lightness of the body 
and a desire for cool things and the softening of the 
patient’s limbs, while the contrary effects result from 
an imperfect or unsatisfactory application of the same. 
An excessive application of Sveda would produce 
pain in the joints, and a burning sensation (in the body). 
It produces blisters, an aggravation of the Pitta, an 
excited condition of the blood, epileptic fits, vertigo, 
thirst, and fatigue. In such a case the evils should be 
speedily remedied with cooling measures. 12. 

Prohibited cases of Sveda Applica- 
tions of Sveda should not be resorted to in cases of 
persons suffering from jaundice, urinary complaints, 
haemorrhage, pulmonary consumption (Kshaya), ema- 
ciation, indigestion, ascites (Udara),* thirst, vomit- 

Vrinda evidenlly quotes this verse from Sus'rula Samhitd but by 
a little change in the versification he excludes cases of vomiting and 
poi.oning from the list and mentions . only the cases of Dakodara 



THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


Chap, XXXII. 


564 


ing, dysentery, and from diseases due to the effects 
of poison. It is also prohibited in respect of pregnant 
women and intoxicated persons, inasmuch as an appli- 
cation of Sveda proves fatal in these cases or tends to 
impart an incurable character to the disease (inflicting 
an irreparable injury to the whole organism\ 13. 

Mild Sveda may be applied (and that only in cases 
of emergency) to the aforesaid persons suffering from 
diseases amenable only to an application of Sveda, as 
well as to the regions* of the eyes, the heart (Hridaya) 
and the scrotum. 14 

Sveda should be applied unto a patient in a covered 
and windless place and after the complete digestion of 
his ingested food, and .after having anointed his body 
with a Sneha. During the application of Sveda (to the 
eyes and to the heart) the eyes of the patient should 
be (first) covered with something cold {e g., lotus leaves, 
etc.) and the heart should be constantly touched with 
something cold {e.g-., cold palms of the hand, etc ) 15. 

After a full and complete application of Sveda, the 
(body of the) patient should be well rubbed with a 
Sneha (oil, etc.) and a hot bath should be prescribed. 
The patient should then be made to keep his body well 
covered (with warm clothes) and be removed to a wind- 
less chamber (immediately afterwaids). The diet should 
consist of such articles as would not produce any 
internal secretion (in the channels of the system) and 
he should observe, if necessary, the other rules of 
conduct (enjoined in such cases). 16. 

(instead of Udara in general) as unfit for Sveda and this is consistent 
with the treatment prescribed by Sus'ruta himself in Chapter XIV, 
Chikitsita Sthdna. 

Thus ends the Thirty-second Chapter in the Chikitsita Sthdnam of the 
Sus'ruta Samhita which treats of the applications of Sveda. 



CHAPTER XXXIir. 

Now we shall discourse on the treatment of the 
distresses which prove amenable to the use of purga- 
tives and emetics (Vamana-Virechana- 
Sadhyopadrava). I. 

The principal maxims to be followed are to augment 
the- loss or deficiency, to pacify the aggravation -and 
reduce the increment of the . Doshas and maintain 
them in a stale of healthy equilibrium. Emetics and 
purgatives are the principal remedies in cleansing the 
S3^stcm of all the Doshas (morbific principles). Now 
hear me, therefore, discourse on the mode of their 
administration. 2. 

The body of the patient should be first anointed 
with a Sneha (oil, etc.) and Sveda should then be applied 
thereto. He should then be made to partake of meals 
which would produce internal secretions from the 
system, so that all the Doshas (morbific diathesis, etc.) 
accumulated in the organism would be loosened and 
dislodged from their seats. Thus having observed the 
liquei'action and dislodgment of the Doshas (morbific 
diathesis) from their locations, the physician should feed 
the patient to his satisfaction, if he be found to be 
sufficiently strong with a strong digestive capacity and 
habituated to the use of emetics, but troubled with 
a plethora of Doshas and subject to serious diseases 
(Mahd-vyddhi), telling him at the same time that an 
emetic medicine will be given to him on the day 
following, 3. 

IVl6mora.bl6 VerSG I — An emetic medicine 
docs its fullest action, when given to a man after having 



566 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XXXIII. 


applied a Sneha and Sveda (to him) and after having 
stirred up the Doshas of his body with the help of a 
soft mucilaginous (Kapha-producing)* fluid and emol- 
lient food so as to accelerate their easy expulsion 
from the system 4. 

On the next morning, when it is neither too hot 
nor too coldf the patient should be made to vomit 
with an adequate dose of an emetic in any of the follow- 
ing forms, viz., powder, pa=te, decoction, (medicated) 
oil 'or Ghrita as the case may be. Such things 
as have a fetid or an obnoxious smell or sight 
should be used- for emetic purposes having regard to the 
characteristic nature of the patient’s stomach (Koshtha), 
the contrary being the rule in respect of the use of 
purgatives. $. 

Infants, old men, weak and timid persons as well 
as those who are of a delicate constitution should be 
first made to drink their full of milk, curd, milk-curd 
(Takra) or a gruel (Yavdgu)]; in diseases amenable 
to emetics and in such quantities that the patient 
feels it rising up to the throat. After the emetic has 
been administred, the body of the patient should be 
(gently) fomented for a short time with the heated palms 
of the hands and the effect (of the emetic) observed.) 
The dislodgraent and passing of the Doshas from their 
respective seats into the Kukshi (stomach ?) should 


* Vrinda reads in place of but they would ulti- 

mately mean almost the same thing 

t Dallana says that some explains 1° niean “in 

the proper seasons, viz., the rainy season, the Autumn and the Spring.” 

^ The milk, the curd, the milk-curd and the gruel prescribed to 
be taken in this case should, according to Dallana, be either medicated 
with emetic drugs or should be taken alone as an after-potion. 



Chap. XXXril ] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


567 


be inferred from the flow of perspiration (Sveda) that 
would ensue. The patient should then be made to sit 
on a seat as high as his knees and as soon as he would 
feel the least tendency to vomit, the attendants should 
be told to catch hold of his waist, sides, back, throat 
and forehead. Then a finger or the stem of (a leaf of) 
a castor plant or of a lotus should be inserted down 
his throat and the patient should be made .to fully eject 
the contents of his stomach until the symptoms of 
satisfactory vomiting would fully appear. 6. 

Memorable Verses : - The symptoms of an 
imperfect emesis are water-brash (Kaphapraseka), stick- 
ing secretion or sensation of impurity in the regions of 
the Hridaya (^heart) and itching sensations. An excess- 
ive discharge of' the Pitta, the loss of consciousness, 
pains in the throat and in the region of the heart are the 
features which mark excessive or over-vomiting. The 
indications which characterise the perfect and satis- 
factory action of an emetic remedy are the free emission 
of Pitta after that of Kapha, a light and pleasing 
sensation in the heart, the throat and the head, a 
lightness of the body and the complete cessation of the 
emission of Kapha (mucus). 7. 

Thus having observed the symptoms of a satisfactory 
emesis, the patient should be advised to inhale the 
fumes (Dhuma) of a (burning') drug of either the 
Snehana, Vairechana or Samana (soothing) virtues in 
such doses as he could conven iently take and to observe 
the proper regimen of diet and conduct. 8. 

Memorable Verses ; — Then having washed 
his body with tepid water and having perceived him to 
be in a pure state of mind and body the patient should 
be advised to take his evening meal with the soup of 
Knlattha or of Mudga or of Adhaki or with the soup 



568 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XXXIII. 


of the flesh of any Jdngala animal.* A person treated 
with emetics (at regular intervals) by cough, accumula- 
tion of Kapha in the throat, loss of voice, somnolence, 
drowsiness, fetid smell in the mou'.h, evil effects of 
poisoning (other supervening distresses of Kapha — D. K..), 
water-brash and lienteric diarrhoea (Grahani). The 
(accumulated) Kapha of the system having been ejected 
by vomiting under a course of emetic treatment, the 
possibility of all Kapha-origined affections is removed, 
just as a felled tree soon dries up together with all its 
twigs, fruits and flowers. 9-10. 

Cases where emesis is forbidden: — 

Emesis or the exhibition of emetics is forbidden in cases 
of Timira (cataract', upward determination of the 
Vdyu in the body (Urdhva-vdta), Gulma, Udilvarta, 
abdominal dropsy, enlargement of the spleen, worms 
(in the intestines) and urinary complaints, as well as; 
in respect of fatigued, corpulent, thirst}'’, hungry, 
emaciated and too old persons and of infants, Kshata- 
kshina patients and those suffering from a loss of voice 
and in respect of those also who are of studious habits 
or are capable of being treated with a strong emetic and 
that only with the greatest difficulty. It should be 
never resorted to in cases of Hoemoptysis and obstinate 
constipation of the bowels and in the case of an encientc 
and after the application of a Niruha-vasti. It should 
not be applied in an extremely dry or parched condition 
of the organismf as well as in simple diseases due 
to the Vdyu. ii. 

* The diet of Iha patient who has taken an emetic should be very 
carefully prescribed inasmuch as his digestive capacity is liable to become 
very weak in such cases. 

t Persons afflicted with cataract or blindness, Gulmi, facial paralysis, 
convulsion (Akshepaka), jaundice, ascites, haemorrhoids and corpulency 



Chap. XXXIII.] CHliaXSA STHANAM. 


569 


To induce vomiting with an emetic medicine in the 
(aforesaid) diseases in which it ought not to have been 
resorted to is likely to give an irrecoverable tuin to 
those diseases. Emetics should not, therefore, be applied 
in such cases. To induce vomiting, however, with the 
help of the decoction of Madhuka (Yashti-madhu)* 
is not forbidden even in these cases, if the patient be 
suffering from indigestion or from an extremely aggra- 
vated condition of the deranged Kapha as well as from 
poisoning symptoms. 11-12, 

Cases where emesis is recommend- 
ed : — On the other hand, vomiting or the exhibition 
of an emetic is recommended in cases of poisoning, in 
wasting diseases tS'osha), in the derangements of the 
breast-milk, in precarious or sluggish (Vishama) appetite, 
in insanity, in Apasm^ra (hysteric convulsions), in 
Elephantiasis (S'lipada), in Viddrikd, in tumours (Arvu- 
da), in obesity, in Meha (urinary complaints), in cases of 
slow chemical poisoning (Gara-dosha'' in the system, 
in fever, in aversion to food, in scropfula (Apachi), in 
mucous dysentery, in heart-disease, in distraction of the 
mind, in erysipelas, in inflammatory abscesses (Vidradhi), 
in indigestion, in water-brash, in nausea, in asthma, 
in cough, in Pinasa (catarrh), in fetid smell of the 
nostrils (Puti-ndsa), in inflammations of the lips, 
throat and mouth, i* in (fetid) discharges from the 
ears, in Adhi-jihvikd, Upa-jihvikd and Gala-s'undikd 


as well as extremely old men and Kshala-kshina patients should not be 
treated with emetics (lit. should not be caused to vomit), — D. R. 

Jejjata explains Madhuka to mean honey. He means to say that 
vomiting should be induced with honey and water. 

tSome read here “Kushtha, Galaganda, Prameha and S'opha 
(swelling)” but as Meha is mentioned above separately it seems to us that 
that reading is not a good one. — Ed. 

p 



570 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHItA. 


[Chap. XXXIII. 


(affections of the glottis and the thorax), in hsermorrhage 
from the lower channels, in the derangements due to the 
bodily Kapha and in all affections of the location 
of Kapha?r. 1 3. 

mode of administering purga- 
tives : —Purgatives should also be administered to a 
patient after the due application of Sneha (oil, etc.) and 
Sveda (for a second time) after the administration of an 
emetic. O.r the day before the administration of the 
purgative, the patient should be told that a purgative 
should be given to him the next morning. He 
should at this time be provided with a light repast 
followed by potions of hot water and (the expressed 
juice of) acid fruits. On the next morning an adequate 
dose of the (purgative) medicine should be administered 
after clearly ascertaining that the patient’s body has been 
cleansed of all mucous ^Slesbrnd) accumulations and in 
the manner laid down in the Aturopakramaniya chapter 
(Chapter XXXV, of tho Sutra-sthdna). 14. 

Classification of Koshtha Koshtha 
(bowels) may be grouped under three heads as mild or 
easily movable (Mi’idu), middling or moderately consti- 
pated (Madhya^ and hard or constipated (Krura). The 
first kind (Mridu) of the Koshtha should be ascribed to 
the abundance of Pitta therein and can be moved even 
with milk only ; the last (Krura) is ascribable to the 
action of an abundance of Vsiyu and Kapha and 
can be moved only with the greatest difficulty ; 
while the second, Madhayama, should be held as the 
product of a condition of equilibrium among the (three) 
Doshas and this is the most general type. Purgatives 

* Dallana says that some commentators do not read this part, but 
they say that the necessity of applying emetics is mentioned in each 
particular case where required. 



Chap. XXXIII.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


571 


should be administered in small doses to persons of lax 
bowels (Mridu "K-oshtha}, in moderate doses to those of 
moderately constipated bowels fMadhayama Koshtha), 
and in large doses to persons of extremely constipated 
bowels (Krura Koshtha). After having taken a purga- 
tive the patient should think of nothing else but purging 
and when passing his stool he should not go far from 
his bed-side. 15. 

WlBtrical Texts : — He should at this time lie 
in a windless chamber, foregoing the use of cold water 
and exposure to cold wind, and should not repress any 
urging (towards stool) nor should he strain. Emission 
of urine, stool, Pitta, the (purgative) medicine and lastly 
of Kapha consecutively follow under a course of pur- 
gative, in the same manner as an emission of saliva, 
the (emetic) drug. Kapha, Pitta and lastly of V^yu are 
consecutively ejected under the course of an emetic. 
16-17. 

Memorable Verses An aggravation of the 
Kapha and Pitta, a burning sensation in the body, an 
aversion to food, heaviness of the limbs and impaired 
digestion (lassitude — D. R.) are the effects of an 
improper application of a purgative. Heaviness, of the 
Kukshi and of the heart, itching and burning sensation, 
and the retention of stool and urine are the symp- 
toms which follow in the wake of a purgative medicine 
which has failed to satisfactorily open and cleanse the 
bowels. Loss of consciousness, prolapsus of the anus, 
aggravation of the bodily Kapha and ^ula colic pain in 
the intestines) result from an act of over-purging. A 
sense of lightness about the region of the umbilicus* 
and hilarity of the wind due to the discharge of the dis- 

In place of ^1^” some read which means 

“a sense of lightness and lassitude”. 



572 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXIII. 

tempers connected with the Kapha .(mucus, stool, etc.^ 
and restoration of the bodily Vdyu to its normal 
condition due to the discharge of the (deranged) Vdyu 
(from the system) are the symptoms which mark the 
satisfactory action of a purgative medicine. i8-A. 

DiCt^ !— No liquid food or Peya should be given 
to the patient on the day in the event of his not 
being properly purged and not being feebled (with pur- 
ging') and in the event of his impaired digestion (after 
the use of a purgative\ A light and lukewarm Peya 
should, however, be given to him in small doses, when- 
ever he would feel weak and thirsty after the proper 
exhibition of a purgative medicine. t?-B, 

Benefits of proper purgation Clear- 
ness and expansion (Prasdda) of the intellect, firmness 
of the organs and of the Dhatus (root-principles) of ihe 
body, increase of energy (Bala)s‘, improved digestive 
capacity and a late or delayed old age are the blessings 
which follow a proper administration of purgative re- 
medies. The deranged Pitta of the system, having been 
fully removed (with the help of a purgative), precludes the 
possibility of the existence of any Pitta-origined com- 
plaint, just as the waters of a tank or any other reservoir 
of water, having been fully baled out, bar against the 
possibility of the existence of all aquatic animals and 
plants living therein. i8. 

Persons who should not be purged : 

— 'Exhibition of purgatives are prohibited in respect of 
persons of impaired digestion, or of those treated with an 
excessive application of any emulsive remedy (Sneha- 
Karma), or of those who are exceedingly corpulent, too 
old, fatigued, thirsty or intoxicated, or of those suffering 
from any ulcer. They are similarly prohibited in 
* Vrinda does not include "Bala” (energy) in the list. 



Chap. XXXIII.3 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


573 


respect of frightened persons and Kshata-kshina pa- 
tients or of those afflicted with hemorrhage from thi 
downward orifices of the body or of persons with any 
dart or foreign matter fsalya) lying imbedded in the 
organism as well as in respect of infants and enciente. 

A purgative medicine should not be administered before 
the digestion of a meal previously taken, neither in the 
diseases due to an abuse of wine, nor in acute catarrh 
and acute fever or to a newly parturient woman and 
persons not previously treated with a Sneha (oil or 
Ghrita). A mild purgative may, however, be adminis- 
tered (in cases of emergency) to a person of extremely 
Pitta-predominant temperament. Purgatives adminis- 
tered by ignorant physicians to persons who ought 
not to be purged (often) prove fatal. 19. 

Persons who should be purged s— 

The distempers of the body in which a purgative should 
be exhibited with good results are ; —fever, effects of slow 
chemical poison (retained in the system), an aversion 
to food, haemorrhoids, tumours (Arvuda), ascites 
(Udara', glandular swellings (Granthi), abscess (Vidra- 
dhi), jaundice, hysteric convulsions (Apasmara), heart- 
disease, Vata-rakta, vaginal or uterine diseases, fistula- 
in-ano, vomiting, erysipelas (Visarpa), Gulma, pain 
in the Pakv^s'aya (intestines), retention of stool, Visu- 
chika, Alasaka, strangury (Mutraghata), cutaneous affec- 
tions (Kushtha), Visphotaka (carbuncle, etc.), Prameha, 
distension of the abdomen with the suppression of stool 
and urine (AnAha), enlargement of the spleen, oede- 
matous swellings (Sopha), Vriddhi (enlargement of the 
scrotum, etc.) and kindred complaints, ulcers inflicted by 
weapons, alkaline scalds and burns, malignant ulcers, 
(Dushta-vrana), inflammation of the eyes (Akshi-pAka\ 
KAcha, Timira, conjunctivitis ( Abhishyanda), burning 



574 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XXXIII, 


sensations in the head, ears, eyes, nose, mouths, anus and 
the penis, haemorrhage from the upper channels (Urdhva- 
Rakta-pitta), worms, diseases of the Pittds'aya (bowels?) 
i.e., the diseases which are peculiar to the seats of the 
Pitta in the organism as well as any other disease due 
to an aggravation of the Pitta. 20. 

Metrical Texts Emetic and purgative 
remedies, in spite of their possessing in common the 
powers of motion (Saratval, subtlety, keenness, ex- 
pansiveness and heat-making properties, tend to 
remove the injurious and deranged morbific principles 
(Doshas) of the body in (two) different ways by 
virtue of their respective inherent qualities (Prakriti)*. 
A purgative, in the course of its digestion, carries down 
with it all the Doshas from the system (loosened and 
dislodged by virtue of its own specific properties). An 
emetic, on the other hand, is not digested, owing to (its 
lightness due to) its inherent extraordinary qualitiest, 
but it soon forces its way up with the Doshas (to be) 
removed. 21-22, 

A strong purgative given to a man of loose or lax 
bowels (Mridu-Koshtha) or of strong digestive capacity, 
cannot remove all the Doshas fully owing to their being 
suddenly and forcibly purged off. 23, 

A purgative medicine, which is capable of being 
digested and of expelling the Doshas from the body 
in the time which a morning meal ordinarily takes to 
be digested, should be regarded as pre-eminently the 
best. 24. 

* Dallana quotes a different reading which means that emetic and 
purgative remedies produce the wished-for result, if properly administered, 
otherwise not. 

t The extraordinary qualities of an emetic are those of the V^yu and 
of the Agni. 



CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


575 


Chap. XXXIII.] 

The (assravated) Doshas accumulated in a large 
quantity in the organism of a weak patient and found 
to be dtlodged from their seats should^ be gradually 
expelled from the system, while soothing (S amaiia; 
remedies should be used in cases of the Doshas being 
very slight, even if they be found to have been dislodged 
from their seats. The aggravated Doshas matured and 
spontaneously dislodged (from their scat or place of 
accumulation in the system) should be puigcd off, 
whether the patient be strong or weak, inasmuch as, 
if neglected (and not expelled from the syslcm\ they 
(Doshas) tend to produce lasting troubles. 25-26, 

A purgative should be administred to a patient of 
impaired digestive capacity and extreme habitual con- 
stipation of the bowels (Krura-koshlha) after having im- 
proved his digestion with the admixture of rock-salt, 
Yava-ksMra and clarified butler and after applying 
Sneha and Sveda (as usual). A purgative remedy used 
after a due application of Sneha and Sveda to the body, 
leads to the looseness and dislodgment per foi’ce of the 
aggravated Doshas from their seats, since they do not 
adhere to the Internal channels and passages just as a 
drop of water does not adhere to a pot or vessel saturated 
with a Sneha- An oleaginous purgative should not be 
given to persons who have already taken internally ^ 
an abundant quantity of Sneha, as it would tend 
to make the aggravated Doshas of the body dis- 
lodge from their seats and again adhere to the internal 
channels and passages, 27-28. 

An excessive quantity of Sneha should be used in 
cases of poisoning, hurt, pustular eruptions (Pidakd), 

*Vtnvdix of This 

wternallyr inletrwHy and 



576 


THE SUSIIRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XXXIII. 


oedema and cutaneous affections before the application 
of purgatives or emetics. The body of a patient, habit- 
uated to the use of oleaginous articles (Sneha), should 
be first made dry (Ruksha). Sneha should then be used 
again as usual and purgatives or emetics applied. The 
aggravated Doshas would be thereby expelled from the 
system and the patient would grow stronger*. 29-30. 

Mild emetics and purgatives should be given at the 
outset to a person to be treated with such medicines, 
who had never taken any purgative or emetic before. 
Emetics and purgatives should then again be adminis- 
tered to him, after thus finding out the state and nature 
of his Koshtha (bowels). An emetic or purgative 
medicine of tested efficacy and which is pleasant, 
aromatic, agreeable and small in dose but of mighty 
potency should be given to a king ; (in addition to these 
qualities) the medicine should be such as would not 
produce any serious injury. 31-32. 

The body (health) of a patient to whom a purgative 
or emetic medicine is administered without first applying 
Sneha and Sved a thereto breaks up like a piece of sapless 
wood at the time of bending it. The aggravated Doshas 
dislodged from their seats in the organism through the 
effects of Sneha and Sveda and stirred by emollient foodf 
are easily expelled by emetics and purgatives. 33. 


Thus ends the Thirty-third Chapter of the Chikitsita Sthanam in the 
Sus'ruta Samhitd which deals with the treatment of diseases amenable to 
the use of emetics and purgatives. 


^ Vrinda reads in place of This means 

that the Doshas, so long obstructed by Snehi, are thereby expelled, 
t Some explain to mean "with emollient meat.soup”. 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 


Now we shall discourse on the treatment of- the dis- 
orders resulting from an injudicious use of emetics or 
purgatives (Vamana-Virechana-Vyapach- 
Chikitsitam). i. 

Their Classes : — Fifteen different kinds of 
disorders may result from an injudicious use of emetics 
and purgatives owing to the ignorance of the physician 
or of the patient. Of these (fifteen), the upward coursing 
in casesof purgatives and the downward coursing in cases 
of emetics are peculiar to each of them respectively. 
The fourteen other remaining disorders (VyApat) are 
common to both. They are Sa'vas'eshaushadhatva 
(continuance of the drug in the stomach), Jirnansha- 
dhatva (complete digestion of the medicine), Hina- 
doshipabritatva (insufficient elimination of the Doshas 
from the system) Adhika-dosliaipaliritatva (excessive 
elimination of the Doshas from the system), VEfta-SUla 
(Vdtaja colic), Ayoga (insufficient dosage^ Ati-yoga 
(over dosage), JivatdEtna (haemorrhage), .i.dllm£^na 
(tympanites), Pari-kartiks^ (cutting pain in the anus, etc.), 
Parisr^va (oozing out of stools), Prav^hik£^ (diarrhoea), 
Hridayopasarana (rising of the Doshas towards the 
heart) and Vibandha (suppression of stool and urine). 2. 

Causes and Treatment : — An emetic taken 
by a hungry or a weak person or by one possessed 
of a very keen digestive capacity (Tikshndgni) or 
of lax bowels (Mridu koshtha), naturally drops down 
into the intestines in virtue of the identical nature and 
intensity of their attributes, in the event of its being 
retained in the stomach, even for a short while. A 
failure of the medicine to produce the wished-for result 

73 



578 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XXXIV. 


and a further stirred or agitated condition of the aggra- 
vated Doshas are the effects thereof. In such a case 
Sneha (and Sveda) should be again applied and a 
stronger emetic administered. 3. 

An obnoxious and large-dosed purgative taken by 
a person with a residue of a previous meal remaining 
undigested (in the stomach) or with an aggravated 
Kapha or with a disordered stomach (Amds'aya), is 
forced upward and is ejected through the mouth. In 
a person of disordered stomach the accumulations 
(Kapha) in the stomach should be first speedily ejected 
with an emetic and a stronger purgative should then 
be administered, A case where the food remains still 
undigested (in the intestines) should be treated (with 
fastings and digestants) as in a case of mucous diarrhoea. 
A pleasant or tasteful purgative should be given in a 
moderate dose in the event of a previous one having 
been ejected on account of its obnoxious taste and ab- 
normal dosage. A third dose should not be given in 
the event of the second also being not retained in the 
stomach. At this stage, purging should be effected 
with the help of a lambative (Leha) prepared with 
honey, clarified butter and treacle. 4, 
t Sa.va.S'6Sll3.UCiha.t^va. (Evils of an unpurged 
residue of a purgative or emetic) : — A small dose of 
medicine, whether an emetic or a purgative, if it is 
absorbed by the deranged Doshas of the body and 
retained in the system, cannot produce the wished-for 
result of cleansing the system. In such a case, it give's 
rise to thirst, pain in the sides, vomiting, epileptic 
fits, nausea, piercing or breaking pain in the joints, 
aversion to food, impure eructations, and suchlike 
symptoms. The patient in such a case should be made 
to vomit the con lents of his stomach with draughts of 



Chap. XXXIV,] CIIIKITSA STHANAM. 479 

hot water. When a least residue of a purgative medicinfe 
previously administered would be found to have been 
retained in the stomach of a strong patient and with 
extremely aggravated Doshas of the body, the patient, 
if there be an insufficient purging, should be similarly 
made to vomit. 5 . 

Jirnaushadhatvam (Evils of a digested 
purgative, etc.) : — A mild purgative or emetic or. a 
medicine administered in a small dose to a man of 
extremely constipated bowels (Krura-koshtha) or of an 
extremely keen digestive capacity (Tikshnagni), is like 
food easily digested in the stomach (and therefore fails 
to produce the wished-for results). The aggravated 
Doshas, being thus unexpelled by the (purgative or 
emetic) medicine from the body, brings on fresh distem- 
pers and loss of strength (Bala)+ of the body. Under 
the circumstances a stronger medicine or a larger dose 
of the same should be administere4 to the patient. A 
mild medicine as well as a medicine administered 
without a previous application of Sneha and Sveda 
subdues only a slight aggravation of the Doshas. 6. 

Evils of insufficient or excessive 
expulsion of the Dosha.S: — A nausea, a sense 
of heaviness in the limbs, a sticky sensation in the chest 
and aggravation of the (existing) disease are the evils 
which attend an insufficient ejection of any bodily Dosha 
from the system after the administration of an emetic. 
More satisfactory vomitings should be induced in such 
cases with the help of an appropriate (and stronger) 
medicine. Tympanites, heaviness of the head, sup- 
pression or incarceration of Vdyu (flatus), a cutting pain 
(Pari-kartana) in the anus and aggravation of the [exist- 
ing) disease, are the evils which result from an imper- 

* For the meaning of “Bala” here see Chapter XV., Sulra-Sihdna, 



580 


THE SUSHRU'TA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXIV. 


feet or partial expulsion of the Doshas from the system 
under the administration of a purgative remedy. The 
remedy in such cases should consist in inducing stronger 
purgings after a further application of Sneha and Sveda 
to the patient. A mild medicine should be administered 
on the third day to a strong-limbed patient, if there be a 
large quantity of dislodged agitated Dosha in his 
system. 7. 

Vata-S'llla (^Flatulent colic) ; — The bodily Vdyu 
become enraged or agitated by the use of parching 
(Ruksha) medicines by a person who has not been treated 
with a previous application of Sneha and Sveda or by 
one who does not observe a total abstinence in sexual 
matters. The Vdyu thus enraged tends to produce a 
kind of pain (S'ula) in the sides, waist (S'roni), back, 
tendons and the (principal) Marma (heart) and brings 
on vertigo, epileptic fits and loss of consciousness. • The 
remedy under such circumstances consists in anointing 
the patient’s body with oil or clarified butter, fomenting 
it with (hot and half-boiled) paddy (Dhdnya-Sveda). An 
oil cooked with Yashti-madhu should then be employed 
as an Anuvdsana-Vasti. 8-A. 

Ayoga. (Partial and deficient medication) : — A 
mild or an insufficient dose of an emetic or purgative, 
administered without a previous application of Sneha 
and Sveda to the patient, fails to find an outlet 
either through the upper or the lower fissures of the 
body and hence brings about an aggravation of the 
Doshas incarcerated in the organism and produces a loss 
of strength (Bala), as well as tympanites with a catching 
pain in the chest (Hridaya-graha), thirst, epileptic fits and 
a burning sensation in the body. This is called Ayoga. 
The remedy in such cases should consist in inducing, 
without any delay, vomiting with powered Madana 



Ciiap. XXXIV.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


581 


fruit dissolved in a saline solution, or in moving the 
bowels with a stronger purgative in the shape of 
decoctions. 8-B. 

The bodily Doshas are aggravated through deficient 
or scanty vomitings under the action of an emetic drug 
and expands through the entire organism, giving rise 
to itching, swelling, cutaneous affections, pustular erup- 
tions, fever, aching of the limbs, piercing pain and such- 
like symptoms. The remaining or uneliminated Doshas 
should then be expelled with (adequate) medicines of 
strong potency (Mahaushadhi). Similarly, insufficient 
purgings under the action of a mild purgative, ad- 
ministered without a previous application of Sneha 
and Sveda to the patient, produce a numbed and drum- 
like distension of the abdomen below the umbilicus, 
causing a retention of the stool and flatus, and produce 
(colic) pain (S'ula), itching and urticarious eruptions 
(Mandala). The remedy under these circumstances 
should consist in employing emulsive measures (Sneha) 
and a stronger purgative after having employed an 
Asthdpana-Vasti . Draughts of hot water should be given 
to the patient and the abdomen and the sides should 
be fomented with the heated palms of the hands for 
exciting or inducing purging in the event of an unsatis- 
factory purging and of obnoxious matter not being 
expelled from the system. The purging (of Dosha) 
would thus be induced. A second dose of a purgative 
should be again administered in the evening with a due 
consideration to the strength of the patient when the 
first would be found to have been digested before produ- 
cing a sufficient purging if the system of the patient be 
still full of Doshas and morbid matter. In case of 
failure of this also to remove the Doshas (excreta), the 
system of the patient should be first treated with 



$82 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. CChap. XXXlV, 

Sneha and Sveda after the lapse of ten days and should 
then be again cleansed with a further dose of a purgativet. 
Patients in whom purging can be induced only with 
the greatest difficulty should be first treated with 
Asthapana. Sneha should again be applied and a strong 
purgative should then be administered. 8. 

Ati-yog'a (Over-drugging with purgatives, etc.): — 
Women, merchants, persons attending a king and 
pious Brahmanas learned in the Vedas (S'rotriya) are 
often subjected to the necessity of repressing their 
natural urgings of the body towards micturition, etc., 
out of a sense of delicacy, fear or greed. The Vdyu in 
their systems remains consequently aggravated and 
accordingly purgatives fail to easily produce any effect 
in their organism. Hence their system should be clean- 
sed with purgatives preceded by Sveda (fomentations) 
and a copious application of Sneha. An over-dose of a 
purgative or a strong one administered to a person 
copiously treated with Sneha and Sveda or to one 
whose bowels are easily moved would exhibit the symp- 
toms of an over-dosage (Ati-yoga) of purgatives. 

Excessive emission of Pitta ^^bile), loss of strength 
(Bala) and an aggravation and augmentation of the 
deranged Vdyu follow from the over dosage (Ati-yoga) 
of an emetic medicine. In such cases, the body of the 
patient should be anointed with clarified butter and he 
should be bathed in cold water and made to take a 
lambativef with sugar and honey with a due consider- 
ation of the nature and intensity of the Doshas involved. 
An over-dose of a purgative may bring on excessive 

* Dallana says that the system of the patient, in this case, should be 
cleansed with an emetic or a purgative as the case may be. 

t A different reading says that the patient should be fomented with 
washings of rice mixed with honey. 



Chap. XXXIV,] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 

emission of Kapha (mucus) mixed even with blood in 
the end. In this case, too, loss of strength (Bala) and en- 
ragement of the bodily Vdyu would be the consequence; 
The patient in such a case should be sprinkled over 
with or bathed in very cold water and vomiting should 
be induced with potions of cold washings of rice mixed 
with honey. Applications of Pichchhd-vasti and of 
Anuvdsana enemetas with milk and clarified butter are 
recommende h The patient should also be made to 
drink potions of the washings of rice mixed with the 
drugs of the Priyangvddi group- The diet should con- 
sist of boiled rice with milk or meat-soup. 9-10. 

Jivadana (H?emorrhage) due to excessive vomit- 
ing : — In the event, of an excessive use of an emetic 
the patient may spit or vomit blood. In such a case 
the tongue hangi out (of the mouth) and the eyes seem 
to expand, and numbness of the jaws, thirst, hiccough, 
fever and faintness are found to supervene. A potion of 
goat’s blood, red Chandana, Us'ira, A,njana and the 
•powders of fried paddy mixed with water and sugar, 
should be administered in these cases. As an alternative, 
the patient should be made to take his food in the Peyd 
fprm with the expressed juice of fruits (such as the 
Dadiniba, etc.^ and with clarified butter, honey and 
sugar, or a Peyd prepared with the sprouts of Vata, etc. 
with honey, or one cooked with any drug having the 
power of producing costiveness ; or he should be made 
to take his food with milk or with the soup of the meat 
of a Jdngala animal. Measures laid down in respect 
of excessive bleeding or haemorrhage should also be 
resorted to 1 1. 

In a case of excessive protrusion or hanging down 
of the tongue, the organ should be rubbed with pow- 
dered T vikatii and rock-salt or pasted with a plaster of 



584 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap.XXXIV. 


sesamum and grapes (Drdkshd: and re-introduced into 
its proper place and position after which some other 
men should be made to taste any acid article in the 
sight of the patient. In a case of the expansion of the 
eyes they should be rubbed with clarified butter and 
(gently) pressed. Errhines and fomentations (of the part 
with drugs) antidotal to the deranged Vayu and Kapha, 
are recommended in a case of a numbness or catching 
pain of the jaw-bones in such cases. The other super- 
vening distresses such as thirst, etc, should be treated 
with appropriate medicinal remedies. A faintness (under 
the circumstances) should be broken with the (sweet) 
sounds of a lute or a lyre. 12. 

Jivaid^rta (Hmmorrhage) due to excessive purging : — 
An excess (Ati-yoga) of purging is marked, at the 
outset, by a flow of watery mucus through the rectum, 
resembling the crest of a peacock’s plume in colour, 
This is followed by an emission of shreddy and blood- 
streaked mucus resembling the washings of meat, 
succeeded by an oozing out of actual red blood 
attended with a shivering, protrusion of the anus and all 
the supervening distresses of emetics. The treatment 
in such cases should be as in those of haemorrhage.- 
The protruded anus should be first lubricated (with 
a Sneha) and subsequently fomented and re-introduced 
into its proper place or it should be treated according 
to the directions laid down in the chapter of Kshudra- 
Roga^. The shivering should be treated with remedies 
laid down in connection with Vdta-vyadhi. Remedies 
in cases of a protrusion of the tongue, etc., have been 
already described. Milk boiled (according to the K'shira- 
paka-vidhi) with Kds'mari fruit, Vadari fruit, Us'ira 

* The remedial measures for the treatment of Guda-bhrams'a, etc., 
under the Kshudra-Roga, should be employed in such cases, 



Chap. XXXIV.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


585 


and Dtirvd grass subsequent!}^ cooled and mixed with 
the cream of clarified butter and Anjana, should be 
syringed into the rectum in the manner of an Asthd- 
pana-Vasti in the case of an excessive flow of red 
.-blood (lit. life-blood) from the bowels. Vasti should 
be employed in such cases, with a decoction of the 
drugs of the Nyagrodhddi group mixed with milk, 
clarified butter, expressed juice of sugar-cane and (goat’s) 
blood. Remedies mentioned under haemoptysis (Rakta- 
pitta) and bloody dysentery should be employed in cases 
marked by spitting of life-blood (Jiva-sonita). Decoc- 
tions of the drugs of the Nyagrodhddi group should be 
given with food and drink. 13. 

Jiva-^onita, how to be known A 

piece of a linen or cotton should be soaked in (and dyed 
with) the emitted blood where any doubt would arise 
whether it is a case of arterial blood (Jiva-s'onita) 
or one of Rakta pitta. The continuance of the dye or 
red stain on the linen even after being washed with hot 
water would conclusively establish its identity with the 
arterial blood or Jiva-s'onita. As an alternative., the 
discharged blood mixed with barley-powder or any 
other kind of food should be given to a dog to eat. If 
it is eaten by the dog. it would at once establish the 
identity of the emitted blood with the healthy arterial 
blood of the organism. 14. 

Adhmana (flatulent distention of the abdomen): — 
If a person who is suffering from a plethora of the 
Doshas in his system and who has not previously been 
treated with a Sneha and whose bowels still contain the 
undigested residue of a previous meal and (consequently) 
an abundance of Vayu therein, takes a (purgative or an 
emetic) which is neither emollient nor hot, the medicine 
is likely to produce a flatulent distention of his abdo- 

74 



586 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXIV. 


men (Adhmdna). It arrests the emission of flatus 
(Vayu), stool and urine, makes the abdomen distended, 
produces a breaking pain in the sides, a pricking pain 
' in the anus (Guda) and in the urinary bladder (,Vasti) 
as well as a disrelish for food. This is called Adhmsina. 
•The patient, in such a case, should be treated with 
Anaha-varti, appetising medicines and with Vasti 
measures. 15. 

Parikartika (cutting pain in the anus, etc.) : — 
The Vayu and Pitta in the organism of an enfeebled 
person or of a person whose bowels can be easily moved 
or of one of a dry and arid temperament or afflicted 
with impaired digestive capacity, are deranged and 
aggravated by the use of any extremely sharp, hot, 
saline or dry (emetic or purgative) which give rise to 
a sort of cutting, sawing pain (Parikartikd) in the 
anus, penis, umbilical region and the neck of the 
bladder (Vasti). The emission of flatus is arrested, 
the Vayu (wind) lies incarcerated in the abdomen and 
relish for food vanishes. The remedy consists in em • 
ploying a Pichchhti-Vasti with Yashti-madlm and black 
sesamum pasted together and dissolved in clarified butter 
and honey. The patient should be laved in cold water 
;and be given his food with milk. Anuvdsana-Vasti* 
with the cream of clarified butter or with oil cooked 
with Yashti-madhu should be employed. 16, 

•Parisr^va (Dysenteric stools) : — The Doshas and 
-the morbid matter accumulated in the system of a man 
of extremely constipated bowels and almost saturated 
with a plethora of Doshas (morbific diathesis) are stirred 
,up but are not fully emitted under the action of a mild 

* In cases of a Pitta-predominance, the Vasti should be employed 
with the cream of clarified butler and in cases of a V^yu predominance, 
with oil. 



Chap. XKXIV.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


587 


(emetic of purgative) medicine. The Doshas (conse- 
quently) tiy to pass out of the body constantly but in 
smaU quantities and bring on weakness, numbness and 
rigidity of the abdomen, aversion to food and lassitude 
of the limbs. The deranged Pitta (bile) and Kapha 
(mucus) are constantly emitted with pain (through the 
anus) in such a case, and the disease is called Parisrsiva. 
Asthdpana-vasti with a decoction of Aja-katna, Dhava, 
Tinis'a and Palds'a saturated with honey is recommended 
in such cases After the subsidence of the bodily 
Doshas involved in the case, the patient should be 
treated with Sneha and Sams'odhana (emetic or 
purgative) remedies should again be employed. 17. 

Prav^hika (Diarrhoea) • — A medicine (purgative 
or emetic) administered to a person who has been 
excessively treated with Sveda or with Sneha produ- 
ces Pravsihik^ in him by making him pass his stool 
and flatus without any straining or by restraining 
altogether those natural urgings respectively. Constant 
passing of slimy, black, white or red-coloured mucus 
(Kapha) with cramps, loud flatus and burning sensation 
form the chief characteristics of this disease. Its medical 
treatment should be similar to that of a case of 
Parisr^va. I8. 

Hridayopasarana (Overwhelming the heart): 
— Urgings towards vomiting or purging being injudi- 
ciously checked by a person from ignorance, causes 
a downward or upward coursing of the Do.ihas of the 
body to and in the heart, thus pressing the greatest of the 
Marmas and giving rise to an excruciating pain in that 
locality. The patient, in such a case, drops down 
unconscious iu a swoon with upturned eyes, violently 

* Dallana recommends that a strong purgative or emetic should be 
employed. 



5^8 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXIV. 

gushing his teeth and biting his tongue. An inexperienc- 
ed physician usually abandons such a patient as lost/ 
whereas the remedy in such cases consists in anointing his 
body with a Sneha (oil or clarified butter) and fomenting' 
it with half-boiled and unhusked paddy (Dh^nya-Sveda). 
Oil cooked with Yashti-niadhu should be employed in 
the manner of an Anuvdsana Vasti, and strong errhines 
(Nasya) should also be administered. After that the 
patient should be made to vomit with draughts of the 
washings of rice mixed with Yashti-inadhu and Vastis* 
should be employed in consideration of the preponder- 
ance of the Dosha or Doshas involved in the case. 19. 

Vi]ba.ndha (retention of flatus, stool and urine): — 
Use of cold water, exposure to cold winds arid re- 
sorting to cool places and such other conduct during 
the action of an emetic or a purgative remedy in a 
person tend to thicken the Doshas loosened and dis- 
lodged from their seats by virtue of its potency, arrest 
their out-flow, make them adhere to the internal passages 
through which they pass and, by affecting the ex- 
cretions, give rise to a suppression of stool, urine and 
Vdyu (flatus), attended with rumbling in the intestines, 
fever, burning sensation and excruciating pain. The 
patient should in such a case f be made to speedily vomit 
the contents of his stomach, and the concomitant 
symptoms (such as fever, etc.) should be treated with 
appropriate medicinal remedies (as in the case of their 
actual and ' respective attacks). Drugs efficacious in 
subduing the Doshas confined in the lower cavity 
(abdomen) of the body (Adhobhdga-hard) I should be 
employed for purgative purposes with the admixture of 

* Dallana recommends both Niruha and Snaihika Vastis in such cases. 

t This evidently refers to the case of an abuse of an emetic. 

t See Chapter XXXIX., Sutra-Sthanam. 



Chap. XXXIV.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


589 


Saindhava, Kdnjika and cow’s urine in cases of the 
retention of the stool, etc., due to an abuse of a purgative. 
Proper Asthdpana and Anuvdsana Vastis should be- 
p rescribed in consideration of the nature and intensity 
of the Doshas involved in the case. The nature of the 
diet should be judiciously determined according to the 
nature of the Doshas. The supervening distresses in 
both the cases should be remedied with due considera- 
tion of the nature of the Doshas originating them. 20. 

The cutting pain in the anus in connection with 
purging corresponds to the digging in the throat in a 
case of vomiting. The oozing out of the faecal matter, 
downward (Parisrdva) in connection with a purgative 
corresponds to the water-brash in the case of an emetic. 
What diarrhcea (PravdhikA) is to purging, a dry eruc- 
tation is to vomiting. 2i. 

Wlcmorablc Verse:— The fifteen kinds of 
distempers (Vydpat) described in the present chapter 
originate through an excessive, injudicious or insufficient 
use of purgatives or emetics. 22. 

Thus ends the Thiily-fouvlh Chaplet of ihe Chikitsiia Sthdnam in the 
Sus'rula Samhitd which deals with the treatment of the disorders resulting 
from an injudicious use of purgatives and emetics. 



CHAPTER XXXV. 

Now we shall discourse on the dimensions and 
classifications of a Netra and a Vasti (pipes, nozzles and 
apparatus) with their therapeutic applications (Netra- 
Vasti-Prain£(na-Pravibh£(ga-Cliikitsitam). i. 

Sages of authority hold an application of the Vasti 
to be the best of all me^ures such as, the application of 
a Sneha, etc.; and why ? Because on account of its 
varied functions and of its being composed of the 
various kinds of medicinal drugs a Vasti helps to restrain 
(Samgraha), pacify (Sams'amana) and cleanse (Sams'o- 
dhana) the different Doshas (morbific principles) of the 
body. It helps the recreation and growth of fresh 
semen, contributes to the building up of an emaciated 
frame, reduces corpulency, invigorates eyesight, arrests 
premature old age and tends to rejuvenate. A regular 
and proper use of a Vasti tends to improve one’s com- 
plexion and bodily strength, imparts longevity, contri- 
butes to the growth of the body, ensures the enjoyment 
of sound health and guards against the inroad of any 
disease whatever. Applications of Vastis are highly 
efficacious in cases of fever, dysentery, cataract, catarrh, 
diseases of the head, Adhimantha, vomiting, facial 
paralysis, epileptic fits, convulsions, (Akshepaka), hemi- 
plegia, locomotor ataxy (Ekdnga) and paraplegia 
(Sarvanga-Roga), tympanites, ascites or abdominal 
dropsy, Sarkard (gravels or urinary concretions), 
gastralgia (Sula), scrotal tumours (including hydro- 
cele, hernia, etc.), Upadams'a, retention of stool 
and urine (Andha), strangury (Mutra krichchhra), Gulma, 
Vdta-rakta, upward coursing of urine, stool and Vdyu, 



Chap. XKXV.] 


CHIKIfSA STHANAM. 


591 


loss of ssrncn) brssLSt'inilk and of cataoianial fluid, 
Hrid-graba (catching pain in the chest), Manydgraha 
(wryneck), Hanu-graha (numbness of the jaws), hsemor- 
rhoids, Asmari (stone) and Mudha-garbha (false pre- 
sentation and difficult labour). 2. 

Wlemorable Verse Applications ofVasti 
are always efficacious in diseases due to the action of 
the deranged Vdyu, Pitta and Kapha, in those due to 
the vitiated condition of blood and in those brought on 
by the concerted action of any two or all of them. 3. 

Dimensions of the pipe The length of 
the pipe of a Vasti should be made six fingers in respect 
of an infant of one year and eight and ten fingers in 
respect of a boy of eight and an adult of sixteen years 
respectively, the girth of its calibre being respectively 
equal to those of the small finger, the ring finger and 
the middle finger respectively in the three afore-named 
instances. The pipe should have Karnikds * or bulb- 
like protrusions attached to it at one of the ends above a 
space of one finger and a half, two fingers, and two 
fingers and a half respectively in the three afore-said 
forms of the apparatus. The girth of their mouths (to 
be introduced into the rectum) should be respectively 
made to equal those of the calibres of feathers of a crow, 
a falcon and a peacock, and the girth of the channels of 
the main body of the pipes should respectively be such 
as to let a Mu^ga pulse, a Masha pulse and a Kaldya 
pulse to pars through them. The quantity of the fluid 
with which an Asthapana-Vasti should be charged 
is equal respectively to two, four, and eight Prasritasj* 

The Karnikds are attached to the pipes for guarding against their 
being thrust into the rectum. 

1 A Prasrita measure is generally equal to two Palas, i e., sixteen 
Tol.ds, But here it has the particular meaning as given in the text. 



592 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. CChap. XXXV. 


(in volume), A Prasrita measure being heie equal to 
what can be contained in the hollow of the patient’s 
own palms (in each particular case). 4. 

Memorable Verse : — The length of the pipe 
and the quantity of the fluid to charge with should 
be gradually increased with the progress of the patient’s 
age and in consideration of his strength and bodily 
capacity. 5- 

The pipe of a Vasti in respect of an adult above 
twenty-five years of age, should be made twelve 
fingers in length having a girth equal to that of his 
thumb at its base and a girth equal to that of the small 
finger at its mouth. At a distance of three fingers from 
above the mouth the Karnikds should be fixed. The 
b )re should be such as to allow a feather of a vulture to 
pass through it, while the fissure at the mouth would 
have a girth to allow the stone of a Kola fruit or of a 
boiled Kaldya pulse. The pipe should in all cases be 
supplied with two Karnikds at its root, for the purpose 
of firmly securing it to the mouth of the Vasti (bladder). 
The quantity of the fluid to charge with in the case of 
an Xstha(paiia Vasti is twelve Prasritas. The length of 
the pipe in respect of persons above seventy years of 
age should be like that in the preceding case but the 
quantity of the fluid to charge with should be made as 
in the case of a youth of sixteen. 6. 

Materials of the pipes The pipe should 
be made either of gold, silver, copper, iron, brass, 
ivory, horn, gems or wood. It should be straight, 
smooth and firm, tapering at the top like the tuft of hair 
in the tail of a cow, and bulbular («> , not pointed) at 
its mouth. The Vasti * should be (prepared with) the 

* The Vasti is so called from its being prepared with the bladder 
(Vasti) of an animal. Dallana notes in this connection that the bladder 



Chftp. XXXV.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


593 


bladder (Vast!) either of a full-grown ox, buffalo or a 
sheep nor should it be soft (flexible) and firm, neither too 
thick nor too thin and of adequate dimensions, 7. 

Wletrical Text : — In the absence of a pipe, a 
reed, bamboo, or horn might serve the purpose. In the 
absence of the bladder of any of the foregoing animals, 
the Vast! should be made of skin or of thick linen. 8. 

Construction of the Vasti:— The bladder 
(of which a Vasti should be made) should be cleansed, 
tanned and dyed (disinfected). It should be softened 
and repeatedly lubricated with a Sneha. It has 
generally a wide mouth which should be bent and lightly 
fitted to the butt end of the pipe (Netra). The mouth 
of the bladder should then be lied above the (Karnikd). 
The whole bladder should be heated with a piece of hot 
iron (in order to polish the surface and remove the pores 
therein, if any). The mouth of the bladder should then 
be folded and again tied (below the Karnikd). The 
whole should then be carefully preserved. The Asthd- 
pana or the oily (Snaihika) Vasti should be applied, 
as the case may be, with the help of such a Vasti. A 
mild Vasti should be applied specially to infants and 
old men, since a strong one is likely to injure their 
health and strength. 9. 

Vastis may be grouped under two heads — NairuMka 
(dry or oillcss) and Snaihika (oleaginous). The term 
Asthdpana is synonymous wdth Niruha. The Vasti known 
as the Madhu-Tailika is only an alternative of a Niruha- 
vasti. The terms Ydpana, Yukta-ratha, and Siddha-vasti 
convey also the same meaning. A Niruha-vasti is so 
called from the fact of its expelling the Doshas (morbific 

of an o\, buffalo, ot a hog, ihould ba used in the Aslhapana and Anuvd- 
ssna measures, and the bladder of a goat or a sheep should be used in the 
Uttara-v.asti. 

;s 



594 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXV. 


diatheses) from the system and from its curing the diseases 
of the body ; while Asth^pana is so named from its virtue 
of rejuvenating the organism or producing longevity. The 
process of Madhu-tailika would be described in connec- 
tion with the mode of applying a Niruha-vasti. lo. 

The Anuvaisana is only an alternative of a Sneha- 
Vasti, but (with this difference that) the quantity- of the 
fluid to charge with should be three-fourths, and the 
amount of the good effect therefrom would also be three- 
fourths. An Auuva'sana-vasti is so called from the fact 
of its not injuring the system even in the event of its 
being retained in the bowels a whole day, or from the 
fact of its being adapted to daily application. The 
Ma(tr£(-vasti again which is applicable in all cases, is an 
alternative to an AnuvAsana-vasti, but should be 
charged with only a half part of the fluid of that used 
in an Anuv^sana-vasti. ii. 

Metrical Texts A Niruha -vast! acts as 
a cleanser of the system (Sodhana). It is anti-fat 
(Lekhana), emulsive (Snehana) and constructive (Vrim- 
hana). Oleaginous matter (Sneha) may freely enter into 
the organism when all its ducts and channels have been 
previously cleansed by the application of a Niruha- 
vasti. As water will freely run through channels 
previously cleansed of all refuse matter, so does an Anu- 
vdsana tend to cleanse the organism of all Doshas 
(morbific diatheses) and to increase the vitality of the 
organism. A Sneha-vasti should, therefore, be applied 
to a person previously purged of all Doshas by the 
application of a Niruha-vasti. 12. 

Both the Anuvdsana and the AsthapAna Vastis should 
be regarded as forbidden in cases of insanity, in the mental 
conditions of terror and grief, of a thirsty state of the 
body, of aversion to food and of indigestion, jaundice 



Chap. XXXV.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


595 


; iPdndu), giddiness, delirium, epilepsy, vomiting, 
Kushtha, Meha, ascites, obesity, asthma, cough, dryness 
of the throat and cedema as well as in respect of a Kshata- 
Kshina patient and a pregnant woman in (and before) the 
third or the fourth month of her gestation, in the case of 
a person suffering from dulness of appetite, impatient and 
incapable of bearing the least pain as well as in respect 
of infants, old men and persons emaciated by a bodily 
distemper other than one due to Vayu. 13. 

Metrical Text : — The Asthdpana-vasti should 
be exclusively applied in cases of ascites, urinary 
complaints (Meha), Kushtha and obesity. The appli- 
cation of an Anuvdsna-vasti is entirely forbidden 
in those cases inasmuch as it might make the disease 


run into an incurable type, and a great amount of lassi- 
tude of the organism would be the consequence. 14. 

Medicine duly injected (through the rectum) with the 
help of a Vasti remains in the intestines (Pakvds'aya), in 
the region of the pelvis and below the umbilical region. 
The potency of the Vasti (medicine) spreads over the 
whole organism from the intestines (Pakvds'aya), just as 
the potency of the water poured at the root of a tree tends 
to permeate the whole tree (through its minutest cells 
and fibres). The liquid part of the Vasti is emitted out 
through the rectum either by J itself or with the focal 
matter, etc.s, but its potency acts over the whole 
organism through the intervention of the Apdna and 
the other Vdyus. The potency of the Vasti in the 
Pakvds'aya acts on the whole organism from top to toe, 
like the sun in the heavens acting on the humidity (Rasa) 


’ Srikantha Dutta in his commentary quotes this sloka, but he reads 
there (with Kapha) in. the place of (with the foecal 


matter, etc.). The reading in the text, however, is preferable inasmuch as 
Kapha is included in Mala. 



596 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap, XXXV. 

of the earth below. The Vasti, if duly applied, tends to 
eliminate completely from the system all the Doshas 
(morbific diatheses) accumulated in the regions of the 
back, waist and the abdomen (Koshtha). 1 5-A. 

As the aggravation of all the Doshas (morbific 
principles) of the body is principally dependent on the 
derangement of the bodily Vdyu ; an aggravated condi- 
tion of the latter may hence lead to the dissolution of 
the body, and consequently the application of a Vasti, 
and nothing else, is the only means of coping with the 
aggravation of the Vayu (by subduing and restoring 
it to its normal condition\ just as the sea-coast is the 
only barrier to the swollen and wind-agitated surf of 
the sea. A well-applied Vasti contributes to the 
growth, health, strength and longevity of the body and 
to the improvement in its complexion. 15. 

The different defects of a Vasti Now 
we shall deal with the defects and the evil effects which 
are consequent upon the wrong and injudicious appli- 
cation of a Vasti, The defects of wrongly handling a 
Vasti (Prauidhs^na-dosha) are six in number, viz., the 
pipe may shake or revolve ; it may also be pressed side- 
wise or thrown upwards ; and it may sink down or may 
be pressed slantingly. Excessive thickness, coarseness, 
bending down, narrowness, cleavage, nearness or dis- 
tance of the tying bands (Karnikd), narrowness or excess- 
ive width of its internal aperture, excessive length or 
extreme shortness are the eleven defects which the pipe 
of a Vasti (Netra-dosha) may have. The five objection- 
able features in the bladder (Vasti-dosha) are an excess- 
ive flabbiness, narrowness, width of its internal aperture, 
leakiness and an imperfect bending at its mouth (neck). 
Variation in pressures put upon a Vasti (Enema syringe) 
during its application may be attended with any of the 



Chap. XXXV.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


597 


four objectionable features (Pida/lia^doslia)^ viz.j over- 
pressure (pressing the injection into the rectum with an 
injuriously excessive force), under-pressure, repeated 
pressures and pressure at long intervals. The eleven de- 
fects in the ingredients of the Vasti (Dravya-dosba) are 
insufficient cooking, excessive or insufficient quantity, 
extreme coldness, excessive heat, extreme keenness of 
potency, excessive mildness, excess or want of oiliness 
(Sneha), extreme thickness of consistency and over- 
fluidity. Lying with the head raised up or hung down 
or in a bent or sitting posture or resting on one’s 
back or in a contracted posture or on one’s right 
side are the seven defective postures (^ayysC- dosha) 
in which a patient should never be laid during the 
application of a Vasti. These are the twenty*four 
defects which attend the wrong application of a 
Vasti owing to the ignorance or inexperience of a 
physician, while those which are the effects of the 
injudiciousness of a patient are fifteen in number and 
would be described in the chapter on Aturopadrava- 
Chikitsita (Chapter XXXIX, Chikitsita-sthdna). l6. 

The Sneha injected into the bowels by a Vasti is 
obstructed in its passage and cannot consequently 
leave the system but is retained in it through any of the 
following eight causes, viz, obstruction of the food 
by the three Doshas, its admixture with the fcecal 
matter (accumulated in the bowels), its being injected 
too high up into the intestines, an omission to foment 
(the patient’s body), using the Sneha in a cold state 
or in a small quantity and lastly use of no meals or 
of scanty meals by the patient previous to the 
application of a Vasti. These (retentive conditions) are 
due to the indiscretion of both the physician and the 
patient. Nine distressing symptoms (Vyipad) namely 



598 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXV. 


as a defective application of either the Anuvdsana or 
the Asthdpana Vastis^ distension of the abdomen, 
(Adhmdna), a cutting pain in the region of the anus, 
(Parikartikd) Dysenteric stools fParisrdva), diarrhoea 
(Pravdhikd), affecting the heart (Hridayaopasarana), 
catching pain in the limbs, over-dosage, haemorrhage 
manifest themselves in consequence of any act of in- 
discretion of the physician in attendance. 17. 

Memorable Verse : — The seventy-six kinds 
of the distressing symptoms (Vydpad) have been 
briefly described above. Their symptoms and treat- 
ment would be described in the following chapter. 18. 

Thus ends (he Thirty-fifth Chapter in the Chikitsita Sihdnam in the 
Sus'ruta Samhita which deals with the dimensions, classifications ai d 
therapeutical applications of a Netra and a Vasti. 



CHAPTER XXXVL 


Now we shall discourse on the medical treat- 
ment of the mishaps which are consequent on an 
injudicious application of the pipe and of the vasti 

(N et ravasti - Vay pach -Chi kitsitam) . i . 

IVIetrical Text A displacement or retro- 
version of the pipe during the application of a Vasti 
produces a painful and bleeding ulcer in the rectum, 
which should be treated as a recent or incidental 
ulcer. An extremely up-turned or down-turned posture 
of the pipe at the time gives rise to a pain in the 
rectum which should , be treated with Pitta-subduing 
remedies and sprinkled with Snehas (oil, clarified 
butter, etc.'', A slanting or one-sided posture of the 
pipe after its introduction into the rectum causes its 
mouth to be closed and thus prevents a complete 
and satisfactory injection of the fluid (into the bowels). 
Hence its mouth should be held straight (and steady) 
by an experienced physician. The use of an excess- 
ively thick or rough pipe or of one with a down- 
turned or bent mouth, produces a bleeding and painful 
ulcer in the rectum which should be remedied in the 
manner mentioned above. The injection of a Vasti 
proves abortive in the event of the Karniki (attached 
to the pipe) being too near the end of the pipe or 
itself being broken or too small. These defects should, 
theiefore, be carefully avoided. In a case of theKamikd 
(attached to the pipe) being at a greater distance from 
the mouth of the pipe, it would hurt the Guda- 
marma (marma at the anus) and produce a considerable 
bleeding therefrom. Pitta-subduing remedies and 



6oo 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA, tChap. XXXVi. 


Pichchhila-Vastis should be employed in such a case. 
The application of a Vasti with a pipe of small 
length or narrow calibre produces pain, and the injected 
fluid dribbles out (without entering into the rectum), 
thus occasioning all the maladies* which attend an 
insufflcient or abortive use of a Vastif, In the event 
of the pipe being large and wide-calibred one, the 
result would be that a large quantity of the fluid would 
be at once injected into the bowels just as in a case of 
Avapida-dosha (constant pressing). 2. 

Disorders resulting from a defect- 
ive bladder ; — The effects which result from the 
use of a bladder (Vasti) too large or too thick are 
identical with those which follow from an imperfect 
fitting of its neck with the pipe. A (proportionately) 
smaller efficacy is obtained from the use of a small 
bladder f capable (necessarily) of injecting a smaller 
quantity of the medicinal fluid. An imperfectly fixed 
bladder or the one with small pores therein produces 
effects similar to those resulting from the use of a 
cracked pipe. 3. 

An injection made with considerable force by a 
Vasti (Enema-syringe) enters the stomach (j^m^s'aya) 
which being forced higher up by the up-coursing 
Vdyu in the organism is emitted through the mouth 
and the nostrils. I Under the circumstances, the 

* These are strangury (Mulra-krichchhra), suppression of urine (Mutr^- 
ghata), etc. 

t According to DalUna the remedy in this case would be that 
applicable in a case of Mutraghdta, etc. ; but Jejjata holds that the 
remedy lies in applying a Pichchhila Vasti as in the preceding case, 

J An additional reading says that it causes vomiting, nausea, 
epileptic fits and a burning sensation of the body. Vrinda supports this 
additional reading. 



chap. XXXVI.J CHIKITSA STHANAM. 66l 

patient should be immediately pressed by the 'neck 
and (his body) shaken. Strong purgatives and errhines 
should be administered, and sprinkling him with cold 
water should be prescribed. If a Vasti be applied with 
lesser force, the medicinal fluid of the Vasti cannot 
reach the intestines (Pakvds'aya) and (consequently) fails 
to produce the desired effect Hence it should be duly 
pressed. If it be pressed at intervals, the wind (Vdyu) 
in the abdomen becomes enraged, and gives rise to 
tympanites (Adhmdna) and excruciating pain therein. 
The medicinal treatment in such a case should be the ap- 
plications of proper Vastis in consideration of the nature 
of the aggravated Doshas involved therein. If the pipe 
be retained for an (unnecessarily) long time in the 
rectum during the application of a Vasti, it tends to 
increase the pain, and bring about an aggravation of the 
disease. This should be remedied by a second appli- 
cation of the Vasti charged with proper antidotal solutions 
sufficient to cope with the intensity of the disease. 4. 

The use of an insufficiently cooked Sneha (in a 
Vasti) leaves a slimy sticky deposit on the inner 
lining of the rectum accompanied by a local swelling 
which should be remedied by the application of a 
Sams'odhana-vasti and the exhibition of purgatives.* 
The application of a Vasti of either kind (Asthdpana 
and Anuvdsana) charged with a deficient or inadequate 
quantity of a medicinal solution, proves abortive in all 
instances ; whereas diarrhoea (Atisdra), fatigue and Andha 
(distension of the abdomen with the retention of stool, 
urine, etc.) result from the application of one charged 
with an excessive quantity of the fluid. The applica- 
tion of a Vasti charged with an extremely warm or 

* Gayaddsa reads and recommends that the purgatives to be used in 
such a case should be devoid of any oleaginous substances (Sneha). 

76 



602 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA [Chap. XXXVI. 


strong solution produces epileptic fits, a burning sensa- 
tion, diarrhoea and (an aggravated condition of the) 
Pitta. The use of any extremely cold or mild medicine 
for the purpose of a Vast! arrests the emission of the 
flatus (Vdyu), and produces Adhmdna (distension of the 
abdomen).^ Antidotal measures should be adopted in 
cases of the deficient or excessive quantity, etc The 
fluid to be used in charging a Vasti should be thickened 
in the event of its extremely attenuated consistency and 
vice versa. The application of a Vasti charged with a 
fluid consisting of an excessive quantity of Sneha 
would produce a general inertness of the organism, 
(dullness of organic functions), while one entirely 
bereft of any Sneha would produce numbness of the 
organism and a distension of the abdomen. The 
remedy in either case consists in employing a Vasti 
of the opposite kind (w>,, an oily or non-oily Vasti 
respectively). 5. 

The application of a Vasti to a patient with his 
head downward is attended with symptoms peculiar to 
an act of over-pressing (the bladder of the Vasti), and 
the remedy also would be similar. The application 
of a Vasti to a patient with his head held up high 
and erect would block the urethra, r.e., would suppress 
the urine, in which case the patient should be treated 
first with Sveda and then with an Uttara-vasti (urethral 
syringe;t which would give the patient much relief. 
The injected fluid goes astray (within the abdomen) 

• An additional reading says that a dry (thickend ?) Nituha-vasti 
produces a slimy deposit in the rectum and in the pelvic region, 
while one with Us fluid of an extremely thin consistency would produce 
only a little effect and might produce diarrhoea. 

t Jejjata’s reading of this passage does not include the application of 
Sveda but means that the Uttara-vasti should be applied wiih a Sneha. 



Chap. XXXVI.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


603 


and fails- to enter into the intestines (Pakvds'aya) *in 
the event of the patient lying in a stooping posture' 
during the application of a Vasti. The Vdyu in such 
a case becomes aggravated and gives rise to pain in 
the regions of the heart, abdomen and rectum. The 
injected fluid fails to penetrate into the bowels in Ihe 
event of the patient lying on his back during the 
application of a Vasti owing to the consequent obstruc- 
tion of the passage. The bodily Viyu becomes in this 
case agitated and enraged by the (introduction of the) 
pipe (of the Vasti;. A contracted position of the body 
or of both the thighs, during the application of a Vasti 
prevents the full outflow of the injected medicine from 
the intestines, owing to its being acted upon by 
the bodily Vdyu. In a case of the application of a 
Vasti to a patient in a sitting posture, the fluid rolls 
down without entering into ^he bowels ; itt cannot 
consequently soothe the .As'aya and thus proves abor* 
tive. The injected medicine cannot fully enter into 
the Pakvds'aya (intestines), when the Vasti is applied to 
a patient lying on his right side, since the Pakvds'aya 
is situated on the left side (of the abdomen). The 
application of a Vasti is not recommended when the 
patient lies on his face or in such other posture 
since it is followed by an aggravation of the bodily 
Vdyu, which should be remedied by medicines chosen 
according to the exigencies of each case. 6, 

We shall describe hereafter (in the next chapter) 
the dangers (Vyefpat) which attend the misapplication of 
a Sueha-vasti and the course of the medical treatment 
to be adopted in each. The dangers (Vygipat) attending 
a deficient application (Ayoga) of a (Niruha) Vasti. with 
their respective treatment are described here in this 
chapter. 7, 



604 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap- XXXVI. 

Ayoga : — Cramps or colic pains (Sula) in the 
intestines, and heaviness and distension of the abdomen 
result from the application of a Vasti charged with a 
medicinal solution either cold, inadequate in quantity, 
or deficient in its therapeutic virtues. All these symp- 
toms are included within the term Ayoga or deficient 
application of a Vasti which should be remedied by a 
strong Vasti and a strong purgative. 8. 

Distension of the abdomen and consequently an 
excruciating pain (Sula^ in the regions of the sides, 
back, waist and the heart result from the applications of 
a Vasti to a person who has taken a second meal before 
the digestion of a previous one, or in the event of the 
presence of a large accumulation of Doshas (in his 
body; If the Vasti be applied in a tepid state and in 
a large quantity just after a heavy meal, the results 
would be the same. Similar results would follow 
injections of cold medicinal solutions in large doses 
saturated with only a small quantity of salt and Sneha 
(oil or clarified butter as well as from those in a 
person with a large accumulation of foecal matter (in his 
bowels . The remedy in all these cases should consist 
in the application of a Vasti charged with stronger 
medicinal solutions as well as of an Anuvdsana- 
vasti. 9. 

The Pitta and the Vdyu of the body are conjointly 
aggravated by the application of a Vasti charged with 
extremely parching, hot and saline solutions which give 
rise to the distress, known as Parikartikd, attended ith 
a sort of cutting pain in the pelvis and about the anus 
and the region of the umbilicus. Applications of the 
Picliohhila-vasti of a medicated Sneha cooked with the 
drugs of the Mad/mm group should be the remedies in 
these cases. 10. 



Chap. XXXVIO CHIKITSA STHANAM. 60$ 

The distress known as ParisrEiva attended with loss 
and hodily lassitude results trorn the appli* 
cation of a Vasti charged with solutions of extremely 
strong, acid and saline substances. Pitta begins to 
secrete at this stage, and produces a consequent burning 
sensation in the anus. Applications of a Pichchhila-vasti 
as well as a Vasti of clarified butter churned from milk 
should be the remedy in these cases, ii. 

The distress known as PravErhiksi or the passing of 
bloody stools or painful motions, attended with colic 
^^ula) and a burning sensation, is the effect of an 
excessively strong As'thdpana or Anuvdsana Vasti. 
This disorder should be remedied by the application 
of a Pichchhila-vasti, a diet of boiled rice saturated 
with milk and with injections into the bowels, in the 
manner of an Anuvdsana Vasti, of a medicated Sneha 
(oil or clarified butter) cooked with the drugs of the 
Madhura group, 12, 

The distress known as Hridayopasarana, accom- 
panied with such symptoms as, aching pains in the 
limbs, epilepsy, delirium, heaviness of the body and all 
other discomforts peculiar to the action of the deranged 
Vdyu, originates from the application of a IS! iruha- 
vastl charged with extremely parching solutions as 
welt as from those of an Anuvdsana-vasti in the 
complicated diseases of the deranged bodily Vdyu. 
The remedy in these cases consists in applying the 
Sodhana Vasti charged with solutions efficacious in 
subduing the actions of all the Doshas of the body, 13, 
A breaking pain in the joints and the limbs, 
numbness (Anga-graba), yawning, shivering and lassitude 
are the symptoms which follow the applications of a 
Vasti inadequately charged, or charged with medicinal 
solutions which are either too mild or too Ruksha (dry) 



6 o 5 


THE SUSIIRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXVI. 


in their potency, or applied in the case of a patient having 
Iain in a'ly of the objectionable postures at the time, 
of the application, or possessed of a dry or Vdyu- 
predominating temperament. The remedy in these 
cases should consist in applying Sveda, anointments 
and appropriate Vastis. 14. 

Symptoms which are known as Atiyoga, following 
applications of Vastis charged with an inordinate 
quantity of medicinal fluid or with extremely hot or 
strong solutions as well as the application of Vastis 
after an excessive application of Sveda (fomentation) 
and in slight 'derangements of the bodily Doshas 
should be treated identically as in cases laid down 
in connection with ah Atiyoga (excessive use) of pur- 
gatives, The use of a Pichchhila vasti in a cold 
state is also recommended, as it would give the patient 
much relief. 15. 

Measures and remedies mentioned in respect of 
Jivdddna (haemorrhage of the bowels) in connection 
with an excessive use of purgatives should be employed 
in the case of similar symptoms (Jivsida'na) follow- 
ing the excessive use of a Vasti. Applications of 
Pichchhila-vasti charged with blood are likewise recom- 
mended in these cases. 16. 

The foregoing nine kinds of distressing symptoms 
(Vyaipat) resulting from an injudicious application of 
a Niruha-vasti are also found to result from the inju- 
dicious application of a Sneha-vasti. All the dis- 
tresses (of the injudicious applications of a Vasti) with 
their symptoms and the course of medical treatment 
to be adopted (in each case) have thus been described. 
A discrete and experienced physician should so act 
as not to induce these distresses (Vydpat) in connection 
with the applications of a Vasti. 17-18. 



ap. XXXVI.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


607 


A purgative should be given after the lapse of a 
fortnight from the date of the exhibition of an emetic 
drug. An Asthipana-vasti should be applied a week 
after the date of purging. An Anuvdsana-vasti should 
also be applied on the very same day. 19. 

Thus ends the Thitly-sixlh Chaplet of the Chikitsita Sthaoam in the 
Sus'tula Satnhild which treats of the medical treatment of the diseases 
consequent on the injudicious applications of a Vasti. 



CHAPTER XXXYIT. 


Now we shall discourse on the treatment of an 
Anuvdsana vasti and an Uttaravasti (Anuvasan- 
ottara-Vasti-Chikitsita). i. 

IVIetrical Texts: — An AnuvAsana-vasti should 
be applied to a patient fit to be treated therewith, seven 
days after the administration of a purgative and after 
he has regained his strength and taken his meal of 
rice. Three-quarter parts of the medicinal solution 
enjoined to be used in connection with a Niruha-vasti 
(dry or oilless) in consideration of the age and tempera- 
ment of the patient form the (full) dose of a Sneha vasti 
An enema (Vasti) should be applied after the emission of 
stool, flatus and urine from the system, since they resist 
the penetration of the Sneha into the bowels. A Sneha- 
vasti (emulsive or oleaginous enema) should not be 
applied to a person whose organism has not been 
previously cleansed (by an appropriate emetic and 
purgative). The potency of the Sneha would be able 
to easily infiltrate into a system previously cleansed 
in the manner before indicated. 2. 

Now we shall describe (the process of preparing) the 
several medicated oils in due order with reference to 
the different Doshas which should be used as drink 
and errhines and in charging a Sneha vasti and which 
have the power of destroying a variety of diseases (if so 
used). 3-A. 

First Tal la : — Drugs such as S'athi, Pushkara, 
Krishndt Madana, Deva-ddru, S'atdhvd, Kushtha, Yashti- 
madhu, Vacha, Vilva and Chitraka should be pounded 
together, made into a paste and duly cooked with oil (of 



Chap. XXXVII.J 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


609 


four times their combined (weight) and milk weighing 
twice and water, four times as much as the oil. The use 
of this medicated oil as a Vasti-measuve proves curative 
in pacifying the incarcerated Vdyu and in cases of hem- 
orrhoids, lienteric diarrhoea (Grahani), tympanites with 
retention of stool aud urine, Vishama-jvara and the 
affections of Vdyu (nervous disorders) in the waist 
(lumbago), the thighs (sciatica), the back and the 
abdomen, 3. 

SGCOndTailaS — VachA, Pushkara, Knshtha, Eld, 
Madana, D&va-ddni, Saindhava, Kdkoli, Kshira-KdkoU, 
Yashti-madJm, Medd, Mahd-medd, Narddhipa (Aragva- 
dha), Pdthd,Jivaka, fivanti, Bhdrgi, Chandana, Katphala, 
Sarald (white Trivrit), Aguru, Vilva, Vdlaka, As'va- 
gandhd, Chitraka, Vriddhi, Vidanga, Aragvadha, S'ydntd 
Trivrit, Pippali Riddki should be pasted' together 
and cooked with the proper quantity of oil, milk and 
the decoction of the drugs of the (major) Pancha-mula 
group, Anuvdsana-vastis of this kind are highly 
efficacious in cases of Gulma, tympanites with suppressed 
stool and urine, impaired digestion, heemorrhoids, 
lienteric diarrhoea (Grahani), retentions of urine and 
diseases due to the action of the deranged Vayu. 4. 

Third Taila l^Chitrakd, Ativishd, Pdthd, 
Danti, Vilva, Vacha, Amisha {Gnggiiltc), Sarald (white 
Trivrit), Ams'uvtati (Salaparni), Rdsnd, Nilhii, ChaUir- 
angula (Aragvadha), Chavya, Ajamodd, Kdkoli, the two 
kinds of Mcdd, Deva-ddru, Jivaka, Rishavaka, Vars/id- 
bhu, Aja-gandlid, S'atdhva, Harcnu, As va-gandhd, Man- 
jtshtha S atlii, Pushkara aud Taskara v^Choraka) should 
be pasted together and cooked with the proper quantity 
of milk and oil. The oil thus prepared is highly effi- 
cacious in the disorders of the deranged Vayu, In- 
jected into the bowels in the manner of (an Anuvasana- 

77 



6io 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap, XXXVII. 


vasti), it speedily cures Gridhrasi (sciatica), lameness, 
haunch-back, Adhya vdta, urinary diseases, obstinate 
constipation of the bowels (Udd-varta), impaired diges- 
tion and weakness of the body. 5- 

Fourth Taila : — A decoction of the drugs 
Bhuiika, Eranda, Varshdbhti, Rdsnd, Vdsaka, Rohisha, 
the drugs of the Das'a-imda group, Saha (Mudga-parni), 
Bhdrgi, Shad-granthi (Vacha), Deva-ddni, Vald, Ndga- 
vald, Murvd, As'vagandhd, the two Amritd (Guduchi 
and Haritaki), Sahdchara, Vari (Sata-vari), S'withi, 
Kdka-ndsd^ Viddri Yava, Mdsha, Aiasi, Kola and 
Kuldttha should be cooked in an adequate quantity of 
oil with (a Kalka of) the drugs of the Jivaiiiya group 
and a quantity of milk weighing four times as much 
as the oil, The oil, if employed in the manner of a 
Vasti, would prove beneficial in cases of diseases due to 
the action of the deranged Vdyu localised in the regions 
of the thighs, legs, coxcy (Trika), sides (Pdrsva), balls of 
the shoulders (Amsa) and in the hands, the head and 
Manyd (nerves of the neck). 6. 

Fifth Taila (with clarified butter) : — The drugs 
Jivanti, Ativald, Medd, the two kinds of Kdkoli, Jivaka, 
Rishavaka, Ativishd, Krishnd, Kdka-ndsd, Vacha, 
Deva-ddru, Rdsnd, Madana, Yashti-jnadhu, Sarald (white 
Trivrit), S'atdvari, Chandana, Svaya^n-gnptd with an 
adequate quantity of oil and clarified butter (in equal 
parts) with a quantity of milk weighing eight times as 
much as the combined weight of the oil and clarified 
butter. This oil should be employed in the manner of 
an Anuvdsana-vasti in cases of Gulma and retentions 
of stool and urine with a distension of the abdomen. 
It conquers the deranged Vdyu and Pitta of the body, 
acts as an invigorating and constructive tonic, improves 
digestion, increases strength and creates fresh 



Chap. XXXVII] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 6ll 

semen. Used as an errhine or as a drink it tends to 
alleviate all affections confined to the regions above 
the clavicles. 7. 

Sixth Sncha : — Yaskti-madhu, TJs'ira, Kddm- 
arya, Katuka, Utpala, Chandana, S'ydmdp’ Padma- 
Kdshtha, Jiimita, Indra-yava, Ativishd and Vdld (in equal 
parts) should be pasted together and cooked with an ade- 
quate quantity of clarified butter and oil, the oil weighing 
a fourth part of the whole quantity of Sneha to which 
should be added a quantity of milk weighing eight times 
as much as the Sneha (oil and clarified butter added 
together) with a decoction of the drugs of the Nyagro- 
dhddi group. This (medicated Ghrita), used as a Vasti 
proves efficacious in cases of Asrig-dara (menorrhagia), 
erysipelas (Visarpa), Vdta-Rakta, abscess (Vidradhi), 
fever, burning sensations in the body and all other dis- 
orders due to the action of the deranged Pitta. 8. 
Seventh Sneha A paste of Mrindla, 

Utpala, S’dltcka, the two kinds of Sdrivd, (Ananta-mula 
/ 

and SyamalatS.), Ndga-kes' ara, the two kinds of 
Chandana (red and white), Bhu-nimha, Padfna-vija, 
Kas'enika, Patola, Kaiuka, Raktd (Manjishtha’', Gundrd, 
Parpataka and Vdsaka (weighing one seer in all) should 
be cooked with (sixteen seers of) the decoction of 
Trina-mida\ with (four seers of) oil and with milk 
twice as much as the oil. A variety of Pittaja diseases 
yields to the curative efficacy of this medicated oil, 
used as a Vasti, or as errhines, drink unguent. 9. 

Eighth Sneha : — A paste composed of Tri- 
phald, Ativishd^ Mwvd^ Trivrit, Chitraka, Vdsaka, 

* Dallam explains “ S'yama ” as “ Priyangu ” and ■' Jimuta ” as 
“Mustaka.” 

f Dallana explains “Trina-mula” as "Trina-pancha-mula” for which 
see Cl. XKXVIII. Sulra.Slhanam. 



6l2 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap, XXXVII, 


Nhnba, Aragvadha, Shad-granthd (Vacha), Sapta-parna, 
the two kinds of Handl'd, (Haridrd and DAru-haridrd), 
Gudiichi, Indra-sura, (Indra-varuni), Pippali, Ktishtha, 
Sarshapa and Ndgara in equal parts (weighing one seer 
in all), should be cooked with an adequate quantity 
(four seers) of oil and (sixteen seers of) the decoction of 
the drugs of the Surasddi group. Obesity, a feeling of 
physical languor, itches, etc., as well as diseases due 
to the deranged condition of Kapha, readily yield 
to the use of this (medicated oil) employed as a medi- 
cinal snuff (Nasya), a gargle (Gandusha), a drink, or 
anointment, or as a Vasti. lo. 

Ninth Sneha : — A paste (weighing one seer in 
all) composed of Pdthd, Ajainoda, S' Armgashtd, Pippali, 
Gaja-pippali, S'unthi, Sarald (D. R. — Saptald), Agimi, 
K&liya, Bhdrgi, Chavya, Deva-ddru, Maricha, Eld, 
Haritaki, Kataka, Pippali-nmla, Katphala pounded 
together and mixed with a decoction of the ValH * and 
the Kantaka each weighing twice as much as the weight 
of the oil, should be cooked with an adequate quantity 
of sesamum or castor oil (weighing four seers). All 
kinds of diseases due to a deranged condition of the 
bodily Kapha readily yield to the use of this (medicated) 
oil when employed in the manner of an Anuvfisana 
enema (Vasti). ii. 

Tenth Sneha: — A pasted compound of 
Vidanga, Udichya, Saindhava salt, S'athi, PusJikara, 
Chitraka, Katphala, Ativishd, Bhdrgi, Vacha, Kushtha, 
Deva-ddru, Medd, Madana, Yashti-madhu, S'ydmd f, 

* The “ValU” and the “Kantaka” here evidently mean the “Valli- 
pancha-mula” and the ‘ Kantaka-Pancha-mula” respectively for which 
see chapter XXXVIII. Sutra-Slhanam. 

Dallana explains “S'yaraS” as “Vtiddha-ddraka” and “Renu’ 
as “Pat pataka”. 



Chap. XXXVII.] CHIKITSA STHANAM, 


613 


Nichiila (Jala-Vetasa), Ndgarut S'atdahvd, NiUni, R&snd, 
Kadali, Vdsaka, Rcnit, Vilva, Ajamoda, Pippali, Danti, 
Chavya, Naradhipa (Aragvadha) with the decoction 
of the drugs of the Mushkakddi group, should be cooked 
with an adequate quantity of sesamum or castor 
oil. The use of this oil in the manner of an Anuvdsana- 
vasti (enema) speedily proves curative in cases of 
Plihodara (enlargement of the spleen), obstinate con- 
stipation of the bowels, Vita-Rakta, Gulma, retentions 
of stool and urine with a flatulent distention of the 
abdomen, in diseases due to the action of the deranged 
Kapha, in urinary complaints, gravels in the bladder 
(S'arkara) and in hemorrhoids. 12. 

An Anuvdsna-vasti may be applied in all parts of 
the day and night and even (if necessary) without 
any previous exhibition of emetics and purgatives, 
in the case of a patient in whose system the Vdyu has 
been incarcerated and extremely aggravated. The 
application of a Nirudha-vasti (enema) should, [however, 
be made in respect of a person of an extremely dry 
temperament, or in whose system the deranged and 
aggravated Vdyu extremely predominates, only after 
his system had been made sufficiently emulcent 
(Snigdha) by t\vo or three injections with an Anu- 
vdsana-vasti. But if his system be agitated only with 
an extremely aggravated condition of his bodily Vdyu, 
a Nirudha-vasti (enema\ charged with a medicinal solu- 
tion and with a profuse quantity of Sneha added therewith, 
may be applied even before applying a Sneha (Vasti). 
On finding that the Nirudha-vasti has fully acted, 
the physician should treat the patient with medicinal 
solutions of oils prepared with Yashit-tnadhu and 
Madatia fruit respectively in the manner of an Anuvdsa- 
na-vasti in cases of the aggravations of VAyu, etc. 13. 



6I4 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXVII 

A Vasti should not be applied in the night since the 
Doshas of the system are (generally) aggravated at this 
time and since the Sneha (of the Vasti ; owing to 
its potency is likely to give rise to a distention of the 
abdomen attended with fever and heaviness of the 
limbs. The mouths of the internal ducts of the body 
remain dilated and the Doshas I'emain in their proper 
places are not generally agitated), and the digestive 
fire remains surcharged with the essence of the diges- 
tive food during the day time, hence the potency (Ojas) 
of a Sneha-vasti employed during the day time easily 
spreads through the ducts of the body. An Anuvasana- 
vasti may be applied during (the early part of) the night 
in summer in a case marked by a preponderance of the 
deranged Pitta and a (consequent) weakness of the 
Kapha, and an extremely parched condition of the orga- 
nism, as well as in cases of the affections of Vdyu 
(Vdta-roga). Unfavourable symptoms such as a burning 
sensation in the body, etc., arise from the application of 
a Vasti in the day time during a preponderance of the 
Pitta, or in summer. The physician should, therefore, 
make such applications in the evening (Pradosha) in 
such instances. 14. 

Propertimefortheapplication of the 
Sneha-vasti: — A Sneha-vasti should be employed 
during the day in spring and winter and in the evening 
during summer and the rainy season, with a view to ward 
off the dangers due to the misapplication in the internal 
use of a Sneha.* It may, however, be applied at any 
time during the day, or in the night in a case marked 
by a preponderance of the deranged bodily Vdyu. 15. 

In the serious stage of a disease an Anuvasana- 
enema should be applied after the patient has partaken 
* See Chapter XXXI." Chikitsiia-Sth.-lnatn. 



chap. XXXVII. ] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


615 


of a second meal, having already digested his previous 
one. The use of a Sneha-vasti is forbidden in an 
empty stomach as it might otherwise send the injected 
fluid higher up into the intestines owing to the empti- 
ness and cleansed * (unencumbered) state of the sto- 
mach. An application of the Anuvasana-vasti should be 
made just after a meal, since the application of a Vasti 
made during the continuance of a partially digested 
or undigested meal in the stomach brings on fever. 
An Anuvisana enema should not, however, be applied 
after the patient had taken his meal, richly saturated 
or cooked with a Sneha (oil or clarified butter), since the 
double introduction of the Sneha into the system 
through the medium of food and the Vasti brings on 
vertigo and epilepsy. The strength and complexion 
of the patient suffer much by the application of an 
Anuvasana-vasti after he has taken a dry (Ruksha) meal 
containing no Sneha. A patient should, therefore, be 
first fed with a diet saturated with a moderate quantity 
of an oleaginous substance before being treated with an 
Anuvasana-vasti. The patient before being treated 
with an Anuvasana vasti should be fed with Mudga- 
soup cow’s milk and meat-essence to a quarter part I 
less than the quantity he can ordinarily take. 16. 

* Gayadasa reads “ ” in place of and explains it 

to mean “ owing to the potency of the Sneha in traversing through the 
minutest channels of the body.” 

t Dallana explains that the Mudga soup should be taken without 
being mixed with any Sneha. He further says that the patient should be 
given Mudga-soup, cow’s milk and meat-essence in accordance with 
the aggravation of the deranged Kapha, Pitta and Vayu respectively. 

+ Dallana, on the authority of the older Commentators explains 
that the patient should not be fed to his fill but only to three-fourths, 
half and one-fourth of what he can ordinarily take according to his 
digestive capacity. 



6i6 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XXXVII, 


The mode of applying a Sneha- 
vasti : — The body of the patient to be treated with 
an Anuv^sana-vasti should be first anointed (with 
a Sneha) and gently fomented with hot water. Then he 
should be advised to take his meal in the prescribed 
way and made to take a short walk. Then having 
passed stools and urine, he should be treated with 
the Sneha-vasti. The mode of applying (the apparatus) 
is described under that of Niruha-vasti. He should 
be kept silently lying on his back as long as it 
would take to count a hundred words (Vik). The 
potency (Virja) of the injected Sneha spreads through the 
entire organism in the event of one’s lying with 
outstretched limbs in the above manner after the 
application of a Sneha-vasti. The patient should be 
gently struck* three times on each of the soles and the 
palms of his hands and on the buttocks-j*. The (patient 
with his) bedding should be thrice raised (and shaken 
with gentle jerks). After that he should be laid on a 
bed stretched out at full length and be advised to speak 
and exert himself as little as possible and conform to 
a strict regimen of diet and conduct. 17-19. 

A quantity of S'atdhvA and Saindhava should be 
mixed with the Sneha (to be used in the Vasti) and (the 
whole compound) applied lukewarm, inasmuch as the in- 
jected Sneha would thereby easily flow back (without pro- 
ducing any pain and burning sensation, etc.) and dribble 

* Dallana explains that the patient should be caught hold of by 
his wrists and ankles and given the gentle jerks so as to allow the potency 
of the Sneha spread through the organism. 

• t Some explain that the buttocks of the patient should be 
raised up with his bedding and his couch. At any rate his buttocks 
should' be raised up in order to enable the injected Sneha to remain 
inside the intestines and not to come out instantly. 



Chap. XXXVn.j CHIKITSA STHANAM. 617 

down in due time after the application. If at any 
time a quantity of the Sneha injected into the bowels 
in the manner of an Anuvasana enema (Vasti) is instant- 
ly driven back by the pressure of the incarcerated 
abdominal V^yu, or the Vayu (air) of the bladder (Vasti), 
or by an excessive heat, keenness (in potency), or an 
over-dose of the injected fluid itself, or by the over dose 
of the medicines (subsequently) added thereto, a Sneha- 
vasti charged with a smaller dose of the Sneha should be 
again applied, since a Sneha un-retained in the abdomen 
fails to produce any emulsive effect. 20-21. 

Retention of stool, urine and Vayu (flatus) is pro- 
duced by using an insufficient quantity of Sneha in 
an Anuvdsana-vasti. A burning sensation in the body, 
diarrhoea (Pravaha) and fatigue accompanied with pain 
set in as the natural resultants of an excessive Anuvdsana 
enema. The satisfactory nature of the application of 
an Anuvdsana-vasti should be inferred from the timely 
discharge of the injected Sneha with flatus and fcecal 
matter* out of the bowels of a patient without giving 
rise to any distressing symptoms such as burning 
and sucking f sensations, etc. 22. 

The patient may be given a light t meal or diet 
in the evening, in case he is possessed of a keen digestive 
capacity^, subsequent to the digestion of a previous 
meal and (should he feel hungry) after the discharging of 
the injected Sneha. Tepid water boiled with Dhanydka 

* It should be noted that the particle in the text means 

that on the satisfactory action of an Anuvasana-Vasti, the injected S neha 
may come out with urine as well, 

t Dallana explains to mean thirst, 

t “Light” means both light in quantity as well as in quality. 

§ Some commentators explain this couplet to mean that a patient 
of ordinary digestive capacity should be given a light food, where.as a 
patient of keen digestive capacity may lake a full one. 


78 



6i8 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tChap, XXXVII- 


and S'withi should be given hot to the patient on the 
(following) morning as it would sharpen his appetite 
and produce a fresh relish for food. 23. 

This is the procedure of applying a Sneha-vasti. 
Six, seven, eight or nine applications of Sneha-vastis 
should in this manner be made in succession alternately 
with those of a Nirudha-vasti. 24-A. 

The Successive actions of the 
Vastis ; — The first application of the Vasti per- 
meates ihc pelvic and the inguinal regions with the 
emulcent essence of the injected Sneha. The second 
tends to restore the Vayu in the cephalic part of the 
body to its normal conditipn. The third contributes 
to the improvement of bodily strength and complexion. 
The fourth permeates the Rasa (lymph chyle) with its 
own oily essence. In this way the fifth application 
of a Vasti permeates the blood, the sixth the 
flesh, the seventh the fat, the eighth the bones, and 
the ninth the marrow with the oily essence. This 
series of Vasti-applications repeated twice tends to 
purify the semen from all its impure or unhealthy 
constituents. 24. 

A person treated with eighteen series (three hun- 
dred and twenty-four in number) of such Sneha-vastis 
and Niruha-vastis in the above mentioned way and 
observing the prescribed rules of diet and conduct is 
enabled to develop a muscular strength in no way 
inferior to that of an elephant, and to live a sinless 
life a thousand years, in the full enjoyment of his 
intellectual faculties, god-like beauty and horse-like 
swiftness. 25. 

An excessive application of only one kind of Vasti, 
either of a Sneha-vasti, or of a Niruha vasti, should be 
avoided, since an excess of the first (Sneha-vasti) tends to 



Chap. XXXVII.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 619 

impair the di^e^tive capacity^ and to bring on an 
aggravation of the deranged Kapha, while an excess of 
the second (Niruha-vasti) tends to aggravate the bodily 
Vayu. Hence an application of the Sneha-vasti should 
[be followed by one of the Niruha-vasti and vice versa, 
in order to avoid all apprehension of an aggravation of 
Pitta, Kapha and Vayu. Daily applications of a Sneha- 
vasti are not forbidden in respect of a person of parched 
or dry (Ruksha) and Vayu-predominating temperament, 
while in other instances they should be made on each 
fourth day, so that the digestive capacity might not 
be thereby impaired. The application of a moderate 
quantity of Sneha with a Sneha-vasti is always beneficial 
to persons of parched or diy temperament. Similarly, 
an application of the Niruha vast! in a small quantity 
always proves beneficial to the persons who have been 
already treated with a Sneha ( Vasti). 26. 

Distresses from Sneha-vasti Now 

we shall describe the distresses which are found to attend 
(an abuse or excess of) a Sneha vasti. Various kinds of 
distressing symptoms are produced by the application 
of a Sneha vasti of a mild or weak potency in the case 
of a patient whose stomach is filled with the aggravated 
Doshas so that the Sneha cannot flow back, being over- 
whelmed, as it would be, by the aggravated Doshas. 27. 

Specific Symptoms:— An astringent taste 
in the mouth, yawning, shivering and Vishama-Jvara 
with the peculiar Vayu origined distempers such as, pain 
(in the limbs) are the symptoms which mark the reten- 
tion of the injected Sneha in the bowels over-whelmed 

* reads “ ” in place ol ‘ 

This means that the Pitta and the Kapha would be aggravat- 
ed by an excessive use of a Sneha-vasti. The next couplet in the 
text woul.i better support Vrinda’s reading. — Ed. 



620 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMIIITA. [Chap. XXXVII 


by the action of the deranged Vaiyu. Fever, a burning 
^ sensation (of the body), thirst, perspiration, a pungent 
taste in the mouth and yellowness of the complexion, 
urine and the eyes are the features which are due to the 
[retention of the injected Sneha in the bowels over- 
whelmed by the action of the deranged Pitta. Water- 
brash, a sweet taste in the mouth, heaviness of the limbs, 
vomiting, difficult breathing, catarrhal fever (^ita-Jvara) 
and an aversion to food are the indications due to the 
retention of the injected Sneha in the bowels over- 
powered by the action of the deranged Kapha. In these 
cases, applications of (Sneha) Vastis and such other 
remedial measures as are soothing to the Dosha or 
Doshas (giving rise to the retention of the Sneha in the 
bowels) should be adopted with due regard to the nature 
and intensity of each. 28-29. 

Cramps (Sula) and heaviness in the stomach 
(Am&s'aya), suppression of the Viyu (flatus), affec- 
tion of the heart, a bad taste in the mouth, difficult 
respiration, epileptic fits, vertigo and an aversion to 
food are the symptoms which attend a retention of 
the Sneha in the bow'els owing to the pressure of food 
matter carried down into the abdomen of a person who 
has been so treated after a heavy meal, and they should 
be remedied first by fasting and then by appetising 
measures. 30. 

A languid feeling in the limbs attended with a dis- 
tension of the abdomen, colic (S'ula), difficult breathing 
and a sense of heaviness in the intestines mark the 
retention of the injected Sneha surcharged with the 
fcecal matter of a person previously uncleansed by 
proper remedies. The remedy in such cases consists 
in the application of Niruha-vastis as well as Sneha- 
vastis with the admixture of keen-polencied drugs. 31. 



Chap. XXXVII.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


621 


A scent of the Sneha in the mouth, cough, difficult 
breathing, an aversion to food and dullness of all sense- 
organs which become internally charged with a coating 
of oil and a glossy appearance of the skin (mouth — D. R.) 
mark an undesirably higher introduction of the Sneha 
injected into the system previously cleansed (with proper 
emetics and purgatives). Such a case should be 
treated as a case of Ati-pidita (over-pressure on the 
bladder of the) enema and with the applications of 
Asthapana-vastis as well. 32. 

An inadequate quantity of Sneha of a mild or weak 
potency, injected cold with the help of an enema, 
is not retained in the system, if not duly fomented 
and cleansed before, but gives rise to scanty stools, 
cramps (Sula), heaviness and distention in the region 
of the intestines (Pakvds'aya) and (ultimate) suppres- 
sion of stool, etc. Such cases should be speedily 
remedied by the application of an Asthdpana as well 
as by that of an Anuvdsana-vasti. 33. 

A small quantity of Sneha of mild potency, injected 
into the bowels of a patient taking only a small 
quantity of food, fails to flow therefrom and gives rise 
to a dullness of spirit, a tendency to vomit and a 
sense of lassitude which should be remedied by the 
application of Asthapana-vastis charged with (the 
decoction of) S'odhaniya (cleansing) drugs and by the 
application of Anuvdsana enemas charged with 
Sneha boiled and cooked with those (S'odhaniya) 
drugs. 34. 

The Sneha of a Vasti, if found to dribble down (from 
the system] after the lapse of even a whole day and 
night from the time of its application, without giving 
rise to any physical discomfort, does no mischief but 
exerts all the good effects of the application of the Vasti. 



622 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXVII. 


Whereas, if digested, it produces but very little benefit to 
the patient. The retention of the whole or of any por- 
tion of the Sneha injected into the bowels of a patient 
without producing any special physical discomfort 
should be ascribed to an extremely parched or dry 
condition of his organism, and would not require any 
special medical treatment. 35-36. 

In case of a Sneha not flowing out from the bowels 
within a period of t\vent3’’-four hours of its introduction 
(and in case of its producing any supervening symp- 
toms), corrective (S'odhana) remedies should be employ- 
ed and all subsequent applications of Sneha should be 
stopped. Thus we have finished describing the diseases 
(Vyapat) and symptoms which result from the injudi- 
cious use of Sneha (-Vastis) together with the nature of 
the medical treatment to be employed in each of 
them. 37. 

Uttai*a-vastiS : — Now we shall describe the 
mode of applying an U ttara-vasti (injection into the 
urethra of a male or of a female patienth The pipe 
to be used for the purpose (in the case of a male 
patient) should be made to measure fourteen fingers 
in length, measured by the patient’s own fingers. It 
should be shaped like the stem of a Mdlati flower (in 
girth) at its top-end and provided with an aperture 
admitting the passage of a mustard seed. Several 
authorities hold that the leng h of the pipe should 
be equal to that of the penis (of the patient). The 
largest dose of a Sneha to be used in connection with 
an urethral injection lU ttara-vasti) is only one Kun- 
cha (Pala) ; and this should be determined with discretion 
in respect of patients below twenty-five years of age. 
There should be (two) Karnik^s (protrusions) in the 
middle part of the pipe (Netra) in the case of a male. 



Chap. XXXVII ] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 623 

In the case of a female patient, however, the Karnikds 
should be placed above a space of four fingers (from its 
end). The whole pipe should be ten fingers in length 
and should be made to suit the urethral channel (of the 
patient) with an aperture sufficient to allow a Mudga- 
pulse to pass through it. 38. 

In the case of a vaginal douche or injection (V asti), 
the pipe of the Uttara-vasti should be introduced to the 
extent of four fingers only into the vaginal canal. Two 
fingers only of the entire length of the pipe should be 
inserted into the channel of the urethra in the case of 
an adult woman, whereas, in the case of a young girl 
of tender years, the pipe should be introduced to the 
length of one finger only. Here it should be noted 
that these measures are to be determined by the 
standard of the patient’s own fingers. A Prasrita mea- 
sure of the Sneha by which is meant a quantity that would 
be contained in the hollow of the palms of the patient’s 
hand extending to the roots of the phalanx is the 
largest dose to be used in both these instances. In the 
case of patients of tender years the dosage should be 
determined with discretion in each case. 39. 

The Vasti (bladder of the enema) should be made of 
the bladder of a hog, lamb, or, a goat, or in its absence, 
of the skin of the neck of a bird, or of the leg 
of a Driti (,a leathern bag for holding water), or of 
any other soft skin. 40. 

Mode of application The body of the 
patient should be first treated with a Sneha and with 
fomentation (Sveda), and his bowels (As'aya) should be 
cleansed. He should then be made to partake of a gruel 
(Yavdgu)mixed with milk and clarified butter according 
to his digestive capacity. He should be made to sit on 
4 cushion placed on even ground and as high as his 



624 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXVII. 

knee-joints. Lukewarm oil should be rubbed over the 
region of the neck of the bladder, and the penis should 
be (artificially) excited and made steady and straight. 
The orifice or the channel of the urethra should be first 
(dilated and) searched with the help of an indicator 
(S'alaka), and then the pipe of the Uttara-vasti, lubri- 
cated with clarified butter, should be gently and 
gradually inserted therein to the extent of six 
fingers. The Sneha should be injectdd into the ure- 
thra by gently pressing the bladder of the Uttara- 
vasti, and the pipe should then be gradually with- 
drawn from the urethra. The patient should be made 
to partake of a moderate quantity of boiled rice 
with milk, Yusha (Mudga-soup, etc.), or meat-soup* 
in the evening after the dribbling out of the injected 
Sneha. Three or four injections should be thus 
made with the help of an urethral enema (Uttara- 
vasti). 41. 

Vaginal Uttara-vasti A grown up fe- 
male patient, (under the circumstances), should be laid 
on her back with arched and up-drawn knees, and an 
injection should be made into her vaginal canal (Yoni) 
by an experienced physician (D. R. — carefully). The 
pipe should be most gently pressed in the case of a girl 
before menstruation. For the purpose of purifying 
the uterus (Garbhas'aya), double the ordinary (one 
Prasrita) quantity of Sneha should be injected into the 
vaginal canal (by means of a Vasti) with a pipe having 
three Karnikds. (protuberance) attached to it. 42-43. 

In case the injected fluid does not come back (within 
the prescribed time), a fresh Vasti (enema) should be 

* Milk, Yusha and meat-soup should be prescribed in cases of 
the predominance of Kapha, Pitta and Vayu respectively.— Dallana. 



(Irp. XXXVII.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 625 

again applied with „(the decoctions of) the S'odhana* 
(purifying) drugs, or a Varti (plug) prepared with the 
Sodhana (Jrugs should be injected into the rectum. 
As an alternative, an indicator (Eshani) should be 
inserted into the mouth of the bladder, or the region 
of the abdomen below the umbilicus, and be firmly 
pressed with a close fist, or medicinal plugs or sticks 
(Varti) of the, size of a Mudga--^w\s&, cardamom- seOci 
(Eld), or mustard-seed should be made up of Saindhava 
and the leaves of the Aragvadha pasted with the ex- 
pressed juice of Niigundi and cow’s urine, and these 
plugs (Varti) should, according to the age- of the 
patient, be inserted (into the mouth of the bladder) with 
(the-top-end of) a rod or an indicator (Saldkd) for-the 
out-flow of the injected fluid. Another alternative is to 
use a stick (.Varti) made up of the pendant soot of a room 
( Agdra-dhuma'', VHJtati, Pippali, Madana'itwx^, Sain- 
dhava salt and S'unthi pasted with S’ukta (a sort of 
K^njika) and cow’s urine (in the preceding manner). 
Other (similar) measures should be adopted for the 
successful action of an Anuvasana enema (Vasti), 
44-A. 

A cold decoction of Yashti-niadhu saturated with 
honey and sugart or a decoction of the (bark of the) 
milk-exuding trees (Kshiri-Vriksha'', or cold milk, should 
again be injected into the bladder, in the event of there 
being a burning sensation in that organ. 44. 

Diseases such as derangements of the semen, or of 
ovum, or difficult menstruation, excess or suppression 

* The S'odhana drugs here are the Trina-pancha-mula and such other 
drugs. — Dallana. 

t According to Dallana a quantity of sugar and honey should be 
added in each of the three cases, via,, (i; the decoction of Yashti- 
madhu, (2) that of the Kshiri-ttees, and (3) milli. 


79 



626 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tChap. XXXVlI, 


of the monthly flow, diseases of the uterus and of the 
vaginal canal, non-falling of the placenta, strangury and 
other diseases of the urine, gravel, stones (As'mari), sper- 
matorrhea (S'ukrotseka), cramps in the bladder, in the 
groins and m the urethra and aif other severe diseases of 
the bladder other than Meha, will all yield to the appli- 
cation of an Uttara-vasti (urethral enema). Symptoms 
which mark, or dangers which attend, a judicious or an 
injudicious application of an Uttara-vasti are respect- 
ively identical with those which characterise or attend 
those of a Sneha-vasti. 45-46. 

Thus ends the Thitly.sevenlh Chapter of the Chikitsita Sthdnam in the 
Sus'tUta Samhitd ^¥hich deals with the Anuv^sana-vasti and the UUata- 
vasUj 



CHAPTER XXXYin. 

Now we shall discourse on the mode of applying 
as well as on the treatment with a Nirudha-vasti 

(Nirudhopakrama-ChSkitsitam). i. 
The mode of preparing a Vasti The 

application of an Anuvdsana-vasti (enema) should be 
followed by that of one of the Asthapana class. The 
body of the patient should be first anointed (with 
a Sneha) and fomented. Previous to the application of a 
vasti, the bowels and bladder should be relieved of all 
(foecal) accumulations (flatus and urine). The clyster 
(Vasti) should be applied at noon in a well-cleansed cham- 
ber, devoid of any gust of wind, and the patient should 
be laid on his left side on a spacious bed not furnished 
with any pillows, but a little raised up there where his 
buttocks would rest, and there should be attendants 
at his feet. The patient should continue in a 
cheerful mood with his left thigh held in an out- 
stretched posture and the right one flexed, and 
should refrain from speaking to any body. The diges- 
tion of the ingested food taken by the patient is 
necessary (before the application of the Vasti), The 
physician having placed the pipe of the enema (Vasti) 
upon his left foot should firmly press its Karnikd with 
the first and the second toes of his right foot. One 
half of the mouth of the Vasti should be kept con- 
tracted by pressing it with the small and ring finger of his 
left hand and the (other) half should be stretched with 
the aid of his thumb, index and middle fingers, and thus 
the medicinal solution should be poured into the bladder 
(Vasti). The pipe should be held with the middle and 
the index finger of the right hand. Care should be taken 
not to let the medicinal solution overflow from the sui- 



628 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMIIITA [Chap. XXXVIII. 


face of the pipe, nor to admit of even a bubble of air into 
the bladder (of the enema), nor to produce its over-con- 
traction nor dilatation during the process (of pouring the 
medicine). The bladder filled with the proper quan- 
tity of medicinal solution should then be held in the 
left hand, and washed with the right hand. It should 
then be firmly tied (at the neck) just over the (surface 
of the) medicinal solution with ligatures of two or three 
rounds of thread. 2- A. 

The mode of applying a Vasti The 

Vasti should then be held up on the palm of the right 
hand, its pipe gripped with the middle and index fingers 
of the left hand, and the orifice closed with the thumb of 
the same hand. The neck of the pipe should be previous- 
ly lubricated with clarified butter, and gently introduced 
into the rectum of the patient up to its Kainikd 
(protuberance) along the line of spinal column and 
with its mouth up-turned. The patient should be asked 
to take the same with care. 2. 

Metrical Text : — The physician should then 
hold the enema (Vasti) with his left hand and press 
its bladder with his ri^t. The injection (of the medi- 
cinal solution contained in the enema) should be made 
at once, neither too slowly nor too hurriedly. 3. 

The pipe should then be withdrawn and removed, 
hnd'the-patient should be asked to remain in the same 
position for a peiiod sufficient to utter thirty Mdtras'^ 


* According to Agnives'a the lime necessary for the tips of the fingers 
'to fall down upon the right thighs, i.e., the time required for a twinkling 
of the eye (Nimesha) is called a M^trtC. Paras'ara says that the time 
necessary to close and open the eye-lids (Niraesha and Unmesha) once, 
while throwing the arm around the right thigh is called a Matra. He 
has prescribed one hundred such Matrds in respect of a patient of 
constipated bo^rels, and thirty-seven in respect of a patient of lax 



Chap. XXXVIII.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 629 

from the time of injection. The patient should then be 
asked to get up and sit on his legs for the full outflow 
of the injected solution. The period of a Muhurta (about 
forty-eight minutes) is usually required for a complete 
outflow of the Niruha-vasti (from the bowels). 4. 

Metrical Texts:— This method of applying 
the Vasti should be continued three or four times 
as required in each case by the physician, experienced 
in the application of the same. It should be disconti- 
nued after certain characteristic symptoms had been 
fully developed and manifested (in the system of the 
patient). Less is better than excess (in respect of 
Vasti-ap plications and more so particularly in the case 
of a patient of a delicate constitution. 5. 

Symptoms of an inadequate and 
excessive appiication of a Vasti The 

emission of only a small quantity of flatus (Vayu), foecal 
matter and (of the medicinal solution applied in) the 
Vasti, as also the appearance of the supervening dis- 
tresses of urinary disorders, an aversion to food and 
physical lassitude indicate the inadequacy of the appli- 
cation of the Vasti. Symptoms which have been 
described before* as marking an excessive use of 
purgatives are also said to result from an excessive 
application of a Niruha-vasti. 6 -A. 

Symptoms of a satisfactory appli- 
cation of a Vasti : — A lightness of the body, 
experienced in consequence of the successive and satis- 
factory evacuations of stool, f Pitta (bilious matters), 

bowels.-— Dallana. The period of a Matra has elsewhere been defined 
as that required to utter a short vowel.— 

* See Chapter XXXIII, Para. tS, Chikitsita Sthanam. 

t Satisfactory urination should also be understood as one of the 
symptoms of the satisfactory application of a Niruha-vasti. — Ed. 



630 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXVIII. 

Kapha (mucus) and Vdyu (flatus) from the bowels, are 
the salient features of a satisfactory application of a 
Niruha-vasti (Su-nirudha). After the manifestation of 
the foregoing symptoms the patient should be advised 
to bathe (in hot water) and to take meat-soup (Rasa), 
milk and pulse-soup (Yusha) in diseases due to the 
action of the deranged Vdyu, Pitta and Kapha respect- 
ively. The essence (Rasa) of the meat of any Jdngala 
animal may, however, be prescribed in all cases under 
the circumstances, since it would produce no harm. Only 
a quarter, a half or three-quarter part of the usual diet 
should be prescribed according to the digestive capacity 
of the patient, and the nature and intensity of the 
Doshas involved in each case. 6-B. 

The subsequent treatment should consist in apply- 
ing a Sneha-vasti (oleaginous enema) according to 
the nature and intensity of the underlying Doshas 
in each case, A lightness of the body, sprightli- 
ness of the mind, amelioi'ation or abatement of the 
disease, an emulsive condition of the organism, are 
the features which mark the satisfactory application of 

t 

an Asthdpana as well as of an Anuvasana-vasti. 6-C. 

The patient should be made to partake of his meal 
with meat-soup on the day of his being treated with a 
(Niruha) Vasti ; since there is an apprehension of the 
Vayu being greatly deranged and aggravated (by the 
application of the Vasti). He should then be treated 
with an Anuvdsana (Vasti) on the same day. There- 
after the application of the Sneha-vasti should be 
regulated -if with a regard to the state of the appetite 
and the intensity of the deranged Vdyu, and in the 

* A second application of the Sneha-vasti should be made, if 
necessary, on the and, 3rd, or 5th day with a due regard to the symptoms 
mentioned in the text. 



Chap. XXXVIII.] CHIKItSA STHANAM. 63 1 

event of the Koshtha (stomach) being found to have been 
stuffed with food. 6 

A fresh and stronger Nirudha injection (Vasti), 
composed of Yava-hshdra, cow’s urine, Kdnjika and the 
S'odhana (purifying) drugs, should be applied (into the 
bowels) in the event of the previous one not passing out 
within a Muhiirta, since a Nirudha injection (Vasti) 
long retained in the bowels by the enraged and aggra- 
vated Vdyu causes Sula (colic), an aversion to food, 
fever and Anaha* (distension of the abdomen with 
suppression of stool and urine), or may ultimately 
have a fatal termination. 7. 

The application of an Asthdpana enema is for- 
bidden after a meal as it may bring on an attack of 
Visuchika* (D. R.— Ama), or of vomiting, or may tend 
to aggravate the Doshas of the body. Hence an 
Asthapana-vasti (enema) should be applied only on 
an empty stomach. The Doshas (in the system) of a 
person lie in a free and potent state at the close of the 
process of digestion, and are easily and spontaneously 
eliminated from the system (by the application of the 
Asthapana-vasti), when the stomach (As'aya) is not 
further oppressed or stuffed with food. The digestive 
fire {fdthard^nz) can not digest the food, if scattered or 
diffused by the application of an Asthapana-vasti 
(into the bowels). Hence it is that an Asthapana 
injection should be made on an empty stomach. The 
application of a Niruha-vasti (which is not applicable 
in all cases) should, however, be determined with a 
regard to the exigencies of the case, since the strength of 
the aggravated Doshas of the body abate with the evacua- 

Bolh \ rind.i and Chakradatla read ‘'A'lepc^'' (rumbling sounds in 
the intestines) in place of "a" ttaha.'’ 



632 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. XChap- XXXVIII. 


tions of the bowels (as well as with the elimination of 
all filthy matters from the system), 8. - 

Drugs to be used in a Niruha- 

vaSti : — The following drugs and articles, or as many 
of them as would be available, such as, all kinds of 
milk, acid group (K^anjika, etc.), urine, Sneha (olea- 
ginous substances). the drug decoctions (Kashaya), meat- 
soup (Rasa), salts, Phala (Triphald), honey, S'atdhvd, 
Sarshapa, Vacha, Eld, Trikatu, Rdsnd, Sarala, Dcva- 
ddni, Rajani, Yashti-madlm, Hingu, Kushtha, -th.^ drugs 
of the Sams' odhana (corrective) group (Trivrit, etc.), 
Katuka, Sugar, Musta, Us'ira, Chandana, S'aihi, 
Manjishthd, Madana, Chandd Trdyaindnd, Rasdnjana, 
(dried) Vilva fruit, Yamdni, Phalini, Indra yava, Yava, 
Kdkoli, Kshira-kdkoli' , Jivaka, Rishabhaka, Medd, MaJid- 
medd, Riddhi, Vriddhi and MadhuHM, should be used 
in charging a Nirudha-vasti. 9. 

Formula of the Niruha-vasti In the 

case of a healthy person (marked by an equilibrium 
of Vdyu, Pitta and Kapha), the solution to be injected 
should be composed of four parts of the decoction -of 
drugs'^ and one part (a fifth part of the entire com- 
pound) of the Sneha (any oleaginous substance). In 
any case marked by a pi'eponderance of the deranged 
Vayu, the Sneha should measure a quarter part of the 
whole, one-sixth in a case of a preponderance of the 
deranged Pitta and an eighth part in a case of the 
deranged Kapha. In a case of aggravation of all the 
(^three) Doshas, the Kalka should measure an eighth 
part (of the entire quantity of the medicinal solution 
to be injected), and the following drugs or articles, 

* Dallana means to say that of the whole compound weighing 
twelve Prasrita measures (twenty-four Palas), there should' be four 
Ptasrila weights (8 Palas) of the docoction, and so on. 



Chap. XXXVIII.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


633 


viz., salt, honey, cow’s urine, Phala (Madana), milk, 
acid group (Kdnjika, etc.) and extract of meat, in 
charging a Nirudha-Vasti should, as regards dosage, 
be determined by a due consideration of the require- 
ments in each case. When the Kalka, the Sneha, 
and the decoction would be well mixed together, 
the solution for injection should be considered to 
have been well prepared The application of such a 
solution would be supposed to produce the wished-for 
results. loA. 

The process of preparation An 

Aksha measure (two ToUs) of Saindhava salt should 
be first mixed with the palms of the hand on a plate with 
two Prasrita (thirty-two Tolds) measures of honey, to 
which Sneha (oil, etc.) should be gradually added. When 
well dissolved, the pastes of (Madana) Phala should be 
added thereto. The drugs to be used as the Kalka in 
proportion to the prescribed parts should then be finely 
powdered and mixed with the preceding compound. The 
whole should then be well stirred in a deep vessel with a 
ladle (Khaja) * so as not to make it too thick, nor 
too thin. The compound thus prepared should be 
mixed with five Prasrita measures of the well-filtered 
drug decoction (prescribed in each case) and with cow’s 
urine, meat-essence, milk and acid articles (Kdnjika, 
etc.) according to the nature of the Doshas involved 
in the case. 10. 

Dv^-das^a Prasriti Now we shall describe 
the (recipe and preparation of) Vastis (technically) 
called the "DvEi-dasa-Prasrita” (weighing twelve 
Prasritas). An Aksha measure (two Tolds) of Saindhava 
salt should be rubbed with two Prasritas (thirty-two 
Tolds) of honey to which should be added three Prasritas 

* The hand would serve the purpose of a ladle best in this case. 

80 



634 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXVII . 


of a Sneha (oleaginous substance). The whole should 
then be stirred and when the Sneha would be well 
mixed, a Prasrita measure of a medicinal Kalka, four 
Prasritas of a decoction^ and two Prasritas of medicinal 
after-throws (powdered drugs thrown to or cast in a 
medicinal compound at the close of its decoction) 
should be added to it. In this way an enema solution 
should be made to measure twelve Prasritas in all and 
is hence called “Dvsi-dasa-Prasrita”. This should be 
regarded as the rule in respect of a full dose and the 
physician may reduce the numbers of Prasritas (if 
required). This kind of variation according to the age of 
the patient, in the quantity of each drug of a Niruha-Vasti 
which commences with the Saindhava salt and ends with 
the liquid (vis., Kashdya) has always been observed by 
the physician aspiring after success (in prescribing a 
Vastih 1 1. 

Classification of Vastis according to 
the range of their therapeutic applica- 
tions : -Now we shall deal with the classifica- 
tion of (Nifudha) enemas (according to the difference 
in their therapeutic ranges) which, when applied with 
due consideration of the aggravated Doshas (acting 
as the exciting factors), will conquer many a 
disease. 12. 

A decoction should be prepared with one Pala of 
each of Sampdka, Ruvti, Varshdbhu, As'va-gandhd, 
Nis'd-chchhada (Sathi), Pancha-nmla, Vald, Rdsnd, 
Guduchi and Deva-ddru and Madmia fruit eight (two 
Palas) in number (boiled together and reduced to a 
quarter part of the original quantity of water). After 
that a paste (Kalka) composed of Mdgadhikd, Anibhoda, 
(Mustd), Havushd, Misi (anisi), Saindhava, Vatsdhva, 
Priyayigu, Ugrd (Vacha), Yashtydhva, and Rasdnjana 



Chap. XXXVin.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 635 

being mixed with honey, etc.,* should be dissolved in 
the preceding medicinal decoction and injected lukewarm 
(into the bowels) in the manner of an Asthdpana-Vasti. 
Pain in the back, the thighs and in the regions 
of the sacrum (Trika), stone, retention of stool, urine 
and flatus, diarrhoea (Grahani), Hsemorrhoids and 
diseases due to the action of the deranged Vsiyxi, 
readily yield to the curative efficacy of such injections, 
by which also, the blood, muscles and the strength are 
improved. 13. 

A decoction duly prepared with Guduchi, TriphalA, 
Rdsna^Dad a-inula and Void weighing one Pala j* each, 
and a pulverised compound consisting of Priyangii, 
Rasdnjana, Saindhava, S'ata-ptishpd, Vachd, Krishnd, 
Yaindni, Kushtha^ Vilva fruit and treacle each weighing 
an Aksha (two Tolds) and half a Pala of pulverised 
Madana fruit, should be injected into the bowels (in the 
manner of an Asthdpana enema injection), stirred and 
mixed with an adequate quantity of honey, oil, clarified 
butter, milk, Sukta, Kdnjika, Mastu (curd-cream) and 
cow’s urinej. Strength, energy, vigour, complexion, 
digestive capacity, verility and vital duration of the 
user would be increased by its application, and all 
derangements of the bodily Vayu would yield to its 
curative efficacy. It is one of the best rejuvenating 
agents. 14. 

A decoction should be made by boiling together 
the drugs of the Kshudra-Pancha'jmda group, Musta^ 

* Honey, Sneha, milk, Kdnjika, cow’s urine, meat-juice, etc., 
should be taken. 

t Dallana takes Pala in the sense of meat (Mdmsam). 

t The quantity of honey, oil, and clarified butter, should be 
as before, that of S'ukta, Kdnjika, Mastu and urine half a Pala each and 
that of milk two Palas. — Dallana. ’ 



636 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Cbap- 


Tri-phald, Utpala, Vdsaka, SdrivA, Manjishthd^ 
Rdsnd, Renu, and Panishaka each weighing one Pala. 
A compound of S'ringdtakUi Aima-gupid, Gaja-pippalit 
Kes'ara, Aguru, Chandana, Viddri, Misi (anisi), 
3Ia7ijishthd, S’ydmd, Indt'a-yava, Saiiidhava-salt, 
Madana-Phala, Yashti-madhu, Padma-kdshtha pasted 
together, should be dissolved in the preceding decoc- 
tion which should be mixed and stirred with milk, 
honey and clarified butter and injected cold without the 
addition of any acid substance, in the manner of an 
Asthapana enema (Vasti). It should be applied in 
liquid form. A burning sensation of the body, 
menorrhcea (Asrig-dara), Haemorrhage, Pittaja-gulma, 
Pittaja-fever, yield to the curative efficacy of such a 
medicinal injection (Vasti). 15 . 

A decoction should be duly prepared with Lodhra, 
Rakla-ckandatta, Matijishthd, Rdsftd, Anantd^ Vald, 
Riddhi, Sdrivd, Vrisha, Kds’maryya, Medd, Madhtika 
(Yashti-madhu), Padtnaka, the drugs included in the 
Sthiradi (minor Pancha-mula) and the Trina-Pancha- 
imila groups, each weighing three Karshas (six Tolds). 
Then a paste composed of Jivaka, Rishabhaka Kdkoli, 
K'shira-Kdkoli, Riddhi, Yashti-madhti, Utpala, Prapatm- 
darika, Jivatiti, Medd, Remi (Parpataka), Paf'ushaka, 
(S'atdvari), Misi, Saindhava, Vatsaka, Us'ira, 
Padinakay Kas'eni and sugar pasted together should be 
mixed with the preceding decoction made into a fluid 
solution with an adequate quantity of milk, honey, and 
clarifled butter and other fluid substances* other than 

* Dallana recommands the use of meat-juice (one Pala) and sugar-cane 
juice (two Palas) as the liquefacient agents in this preparation. It should 
also be noted that coldness and non-addition of, any acid substances 
are recommended as the injection is to be applied in cases of diseases due 
to the derangement of Pitta* 



Chap. XXXVIII. 1 CHIKITSA STHANAM. 637 

strong acid ones (Kdnjika, etc.). It should then be 
injected well cooled in the manner of an Asthdpana- 
Vasti, It would undoubtedly prove curative in cases of 
Gulma, menorrhoegia (Asrig-dara), heart diseases, 
jaundice, ■Vlshama-ovata, (Rakta-pltta), 

dysentery, and other Pittaja ailments. 16. 

A compound of Vula, Muddnci fruit, ScivsJicipciy 
Saittdhava^ Dsva-ddfii^, Kushiha, Elci, PippdH, Vtlva and 
S’unthi (weighing three Palas in all) pounded together 
and mixed with the decoction of Bhadrd^ Nimba, 
Kulattha pulse, Arka, Koddtaki, A^nrita, (Guduchi), 
Diva-ddnt, Sdrivd, Vrihati, Pdihd, Muivd, Aragvadha 
and Kutaja-see^s (weighing sixteen Palas in all) cooked 
with water (one hundred and twenty-eight Palas) should 
be injected in the manner of an Asthdpana-Vasti, with 
the addition of an adequate quantity of mustard oil, 
honey, alkali, cow’s urine, sesamum oil and water (three 
Palas). This would speedily conquer an attack of 
Chlorosis (Kdmald), Jaundice, Meha, obesity, impaired 
digestion, aversion to food, goitre, slow poisoning, 
(Gara visha), elephantiasis, Udara, or of any disorders 
due to the deranged Kapha. 17, 

Musta, Saindhava, Deva-ddru, Pdthd, Pippali and 
Indra-yava, pounded together, and made into 
a paste with the admixture of the decoction 
prepared with such drugs as Das'a-mula, Haridrd, 
Vtlva, Patola, Triphald, and Deva-ddru, should be 
stirred and saturated with oil, Yava-kshdra and honey 
and reduced to a soluble fluidity by adding (an adequate 
quantity of) cow’s urine, Madanaphala and Kdnjika. 
The solution thus prepared should be injected (into the 
rectum of the patient) in the manner of an Asth^pana 
enema-injection and this would prove curative in cases 
of Jaundice, deranged Kapha, alcoholism, lassitude, 



'638 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXVIIl. 


suppression of flatus (Vdyu) and of urine, in cases of 
there being any rumbling sounds in the intestines 
(Atopa), and Gulma and in diseases due to worms. 18. 

Madana-phala, Yashti-madhu, VacJia, Deva-ddni, 
Sarshapa, Pippali-inula, Saindhava salt (Sindhuttha), 
YamdniiMisi and Indra-yava showXd be pounded together 
and made into a paste with the admixture of the decoc- 
tion prepared with a Pala measure each of Vdsaka, 
As'ma bheda, Varshdbhu, Dhdiiya, Eranda-mula, Das'a- 
mula, Vald, Mui-vd, Yava, Kola, Nis'a-chchkada (Sathi), 
Kulattha, Vilva, and Bhu-nhnba and dissolved in an 
adequate quantity of honey and the expressed juice of 
sugar-cane, milk, oil, clarified butter, meat-essence, 
and the urine (of a cow) by stirring them together. 
The solution thus prepared should be speedily injected 
in the manner of an Asthdpana injection into the 
rectum of a patient suffering from a disease marked 
by the concerted action of two or more of the deranged 
Doshas, Diseases such as Gridhrasi, S'arkard, Ashthild 
Tuni and Gulma may be rapidly cured with this 
injection tVasti). 19. 

Madana fruit, Yashti-madhu, J//j?(anisi), Saindhava, 
Pfiyangu and Indra-yava pounded together and made 
into a paste with the decoction of the drug'?, one Pala 
each of Rdsnd, Aragvadha, Varshdbhu, Kaluka, Us'ira, 
Mustaka, Trdyamdtid, Amrita (Guduchi), Raktd (Man- 
jishthd), P ancha-mula, Vibhitaka and Vald should be 
duly mixed with (an adequate quantity) of Rasdnjana, 
extract of meat (Rasa\ honey, Sauvira and the 
expressed juice of the Drdkshd. The solution thus pre- 
pared should be injected lukewarm into the bowels of 
the patient in the manner of an Asthdpana-Vasti. It 
adds to the growth of flesh, creates fresh semen and 
Ojas, improves the digestive capacity and the strength 



Chap, XXXVIII. J CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


639 


of the body, imparts longevity and cures and conquers 
the following diseases, viz., Gulma, Menorrhagia, 
Erysipelas fVisavpa), Strangury, Kshata-kshaya, 
Vishama-jvara, Haemorrhoids, Diarrhcea (Grahani), 
Vdta-kundali, catching pain due to the incarceration of 
the V^yu in the regions of the thighs, knee-joints, head 
and bladder (Vasti), obstinate constipation of the bowels, 
(Uddvarta) and the other distempers of the bodily 
Vdyu, Vata-rakta, Sarkard (gravels in the bladder), 
Ashthild, cramp in the groins, Udara, aversion to food, 
Rakta-pitta (Haemorrhage), affections of the deranged 
Kapha, Insanity, Prameha, distension of the abdomen 
(Adhmdna), catching pain at the heart (Hrid-graha). 20. 

A Vasti composed of the decoction of the Vdyu- 
subduing drugs mixed with Trivrit^-, Saindhava and 
Kdnjika (or the expressed juice of acid fruits) should be 
applied lukewarm in cases due to the aggravation of 
the bodily Va'yu. Similarly, a Vast! composed of the 
decoctions of the drugs included within the Nyagrodhddi 
group mixed with sugar, clarified butter, powders of 
those included within the Kdkolyddi group should be 
applied in diseases due to the aggravation of the Pitta. 
A Vasti composed of the decoction of the drugs of the 
Aragvadhddi group saturated with the pulverised com- 
pound of those included within the Pippalyddi group, 
should be employed with (an adequate quantity of) cow’s 
urine, added thereto in a case of the aggravation of 
Kapha. A Vasti composed of a copious quantity of the 
decoction of Kshira-Vrikshas mixed with (an adequate 
quantity of) the expressed juice of the sugar-cane, milk. 


* According to Dallana, “Trivrii” should be understood to mean the 
same as «' Traivrita” mentioned in the treatment of Maha.vdta-vyddhj 
(see Chapter V., Para. 25, Chikitsita Slhdnam), ^ 



640 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXVIII. 

sugar, and clarified butter should be applied in a cold 
state in cases marked by a vitiated condition of the 
blood of the system. 21 — 24. 

^odhana (corrective) Vastis The 
drugs of the S'odhana group (possessed of corrective 
therapeutic properties) should be pounded together and 
mixed with an admixture of their own decoction. The 
solution thus formed should be mixed with Saindhava 
and Sneha and stirred with ladle. It should then be 
injected into the bowels of the patient. This is called 
the S'odhana- Vasti*. 25. 

Lekhana-Vasti The powders of the drugs 
of the Ushakddi group should be mixed with the 
decoction of Triphald and with cow’s urine, honey and 
Yava-kshdra. The whole solution should be applied as 
a Vasti and is called the Lekhana-Vasti. 26. 

Vrimhana-Vasti : — A paste composed of 
the drugs of the Madhura (Kdkolyddi) group mixed with 
the decoction of the drugs possessed of tonic and 
constructive properties (Vrimhana drugs) should be 
injected into the bowels with clarified butter and the 
extract of meat added thereto. It is called the 
Vrimhana- Vasti. 27. 

Vaji-karana-Vasti The seeds of the 

t 

Atmagiiptd should be pounded and mixed with the decoc- 
tion of (the roots ofj the Uchchatd together with (the con- 
tents of) the egg of a sparrow (Chataka) and an adequate 
quantity of milk, clarified butter and sugar. The 
solution should be injected into the bowels in the manner 
of a Vasti and is called the Vzyi-karana-Vasti (aphro- 
disiac). 28. 

* According to Dallana, four Pala weights of\honey, one Pala of milk, 
one Pala and a half of cow’s urine, and four Pala and a half of Kdnjikn, 
^Irould be added 19 this solutiofi. 



Chap. X'XXVIIl.] CHlKlTSA STHANAM, 


641 


Pichchhila-Vasti Milk cooked with 
Viddrif Airdvati, S’elu, S'dlmali and the tender sprouts 
of DJianvana should be used as a Vasti with the blood 
and honey (added to it) ;t it is called the PichchMla- 
Vasti. The fresh blood of a buffalo, hog, sheep, or of 
a cat, or the contents of a newly laid (hen’s) egg^ may 
be used for the purpose. 29-30. 

Grgfhi-Vasti !— A paste of the drugs of the 
Ambashthddi group, dissolved in a decoction of those of 
the Priyangvddi group and mixed with honey and 
clarified butter, may be used as a Vasti and is called 
the GrraChi-Vasti. 31- 

Sn eh a-" Vasti : — A Sneha- Vasti should be 
prepared by duly cooking the drugs of one or two of the 
above groups with a Sneha. 32. 

Sterile women should be treated with a Vasti con- 
sis'dng of the S'ata-pdka-Vala-Taila or the Traivrita- 
Ghrita (as described before)^ after being cleansed 
(S'odhana) in due succession. 33. 

Strong enemas (possessed of keen medicinal potency) 
should be employed in respect of extremely strong 

* Both Vrinda and Cbakrapdni read “ Vadari ” in place of “ Viddri”, 
and their annotators mean to say that the lender sprouts of all trees, 
viz,^ Vadari, etc., should be used. 

t Viinda does not recommend the addition of honey; he reads 
’0'.” (*•«•> file Vasti should he in a cold state), in place of 
But it is evident from the reading of Dallana’s commentary, 
as quoted by S'rikantha Patta, that honey should be added. 

4 Both Vtinda and Chakrapdni read ’ in place of which 

means that the newly spilt blood of a goat should be added to the list and 
hen’s egg should be eliminated therefrom. 

§ Vaia-Taila has been mentioned in the treatment of Mudha-gatbha 
(Chaplet XV, Chikilsita Sthanam) and the Traivrita-Ghrila has been 
described in the treatment of Maha-Vdlavyadhi (Chapter V, Chikilsita 
Sthdnam). 


Sr 



642 THE SUSHRETA SAMHITA. tChap. XXXVIIl, 

4 ) 31161115 , and those of moderate potency should be 
employed in respect of persons possessed of a middling 
sort of bodily strength, while weak persons should be 
treated with Vastis (enemas) of mild potency. An 
experienced physician should thus apply Vastis (enemas) 
with due regard to the nature of the season, the strength 
of the patient, the nature and intensity of the disease 
under treatment and of the Doshas involved therein 
and to the nature of the potency of the ingredients 
to be used in charging the Vasti (enema).* 34. 

Loosening or disintegrating (Utkles'ana — lit. irri- 
tating) enemas those possessed of the virtue of dis- 
lodging and disintegrating the accumulated Doshas in the 
system) should be employed at the outset and corrective 
ones (Dosha-hara) should then be employed, while those 
exerting a soothing influence on the organism (Sam- 
s'amana) should be employed last of all towards the 
close of the treatment, 35. 

Different Vastis An Utkles'ana (disinte- 
grating) Vasti consists of castor seeds, Yashti-niadhti, 
Pippali, Saindkava, Vacha, Habushd and Phala (Triphald 
— Madana-phala, according to others) pasted together. 
A Dosha-hara-vasti (corrective enema) consists (of a 
solution) of Yashti-inadhu, Kutaja seeds and Madana- 
phala with Kdnjika and cow’s urine. A Samsodhana- 
Vasti!(soothing enema) consists of Priyangu, Yashti- 
madhu, Musta and Rasdnjana with cow’s milk. 36 — 38. 

M^dhu-Tailika Vasti : — Now vve shall de- 
's6ribe in short the process of applying a Mddlm-Tailika 

♦ S'ivad^sa, the commentatof of Chakradatta, quotes two additional 
lines as being incorporated in Sus'ruta’s text which, when translated, 
would be as follows Better use a Vasti of milder potency but never use 
on of strong potency than what is necessary and this is recommended 
ejpecially in cases of delicate persons. — Ed. 



Chap. XXXVIII;] CHIKITSA STHANAM. C43'' 

Vast! ^eoema) which should be lesorted to only in- 
respect of kings or king-like personages as well as in 
respect of women, old men, infants and persons of 
delicate constitutions for the purposes of eliminating the 
Doshas (accumulated in the organism) and of improving 
the strength and complexion. The use of this remedy 
does not entail any strict observance of continence 
or of any particular rules, diet, conduct, or conveyance 
on the part of the patient, nor is it attended with any 
possible complication though it is quite on a par with ' 
any other kind of Vasti as regards its excellent and 
highly beneficial therapeutic virtues. It may thus be 
applied at any time by an experienced physician in the ’ 
manner of a Nirudha-Vasti (enema) whenever the patient 
wishes to be treated therewith. Equal parts of honey, 
oil and the decoction of castor roots, half a Pala of 
S' ata-pushpdi a quarter Pala of Sanidkava, and one 
entire Madaiia fruit should be mixed together by stirring ' 
the whole with a ladle. The whole compound thus 
prepared should be injected lukewarm into the rectum 
of the patient. This measure is called the M^dhu- 
Tailika-Vasti.* 39- 

Yukta-ratha & Dosha-hara Vastis 

The Yukta-ratha Vasti consists in injecting a medicinal 
solution surcharged with Vac/ia, Madhtika (honey), f oil, 
meat-essence, Saindhava, Pippali, Madana fruit, and the • 
decoction (of Eranda) into the bowels of a patient/' 

* The quantity of the fluid should be nine Ptasiilas in all cases of the 
MBidlm-Tailika Vasti and such-like Vastis (enemas).— 

t Vacha, salt, Madana-phala, Pippali, each should be one'lCaisba ; 
honey and oil four Ptasrilas and two Karshas each, and the decoction of 
Etanda roots four Prasritas and two Karshas.— j 

In the text we find “Madhuka” which generally means Yashti-madhu. 
Here, however, it should mean “koney”. This is evident from Dallana’s 
CO mmentary. 



^644 the SUSIIRUTA SAMHITA, [Chap, XXXVIII. 

A compound of Deva-ddru, Vara (Triphald), Rdsnd, 
S' ata-pashpd, Vacha, honey, asafcetida and Saindhava 
salt, used together as a Vasti, is called the Dosha-hara 
Vasti. 40-41. 

Siddha- Vasti : — This Vasti should be prepared 
with the decoction of Pancha-imda, mixed with oil, 
honey and a paste of S'atdhvd, Pippali and Saindhava 
salt. Similar Vastis consisting of a decoction of Yava, 
Kola and Kidattha, and mixed with a paste of Pippali, 
Saindhava, Yashti-niadhu and honey may also he used. 
This kind of Vasti is called a Siddha-Vasti. 42-43. 

Wlust^dika- Vasti : — A Pala measure of each 
of the following drugs, viz., Mustd, Pdthd, Amritd 
(Guduchi), Tiktd, V aid, Rdsnd, Punarnavd, Manjishthd, 

0 

Aragvadha, Us'ira, Trdyamdnd, Gohshura as well as 
of those included within the group of minor (Svalpa) 
Pancha-imda, and eight Madana fruits should be boiled 
with an Adhaka measure of water down to its quarter 
part. The decoction thus prepaied should again be 
boiled with the admixture of a Prastha measure of 
milk. The boiling should be continued till the wateiy 
part is completely evaporated and the milk alone is left 
behind. It should be then strained (through a piece of 
clothX This (cooked) milk should be mixed with honey, 
clarified butter,* and the extract of meat of any Jdngala 
animal, each measuring a quarter of the (above-prepared 
milk) and a Karsha measure each of the following 
drugs, viz., powdered S'atdhvd, Phalini (Priyangu\ 
Yashti-madhu, Vatsaka, Rasdnjana and Saindhava. 
The application of the above in the manner of a Vasti 
proves curative in Vdta-rakta, urinary complaints 
(Prameha), Edema, Haemorrhoids, Gulma, retention 

* According to Dallana, however, a Pala measure of each of honey 
and clarified buller should be added. 



645 


Chap. XXXVIII.] CHIKITSA STIIANAM. 

of urino, HcEinorrhagc (l^akta-Pitta), Etysipelas, fevef, 
and a looseness of the bowels. It acts as an aphrodisiac 
and vitalising tonic ; it also invigorates the eye-sight and 
is anti colic in its action. It is known as the Musta'di- 
Vasti and is the best of all the Asthdpana enemas. 44. 

A judicious physician may prepare, in the light 
of the principle laid down in connection with the 
preparation and application of Vastis in general, 
hundreds of different other kinds of Vastis (enemas) 
with a due consideration of the virtues of their re- 
spective ingredients i^drugs) and the nature of the 
disease under treatment. Applications of Vastis are 
forbidden during the continuance of an undigested meal 
in the stomach. Proper rules of diet and conduct should 
be observed, and day-sleep should not be indulged in, 
after being treated with a Vasti. 45-46. 

The compound Ma'dlitt-Tailika Vasti is so called 
from the facts of its being principally composed of 
Madliu (honey) and Taila (oil). The term Tukta-Ratha 
Vasti owes its nomenclature to the fact of its imposing 
no restriction as regards riding in carnages (Rathas), 
or on horses and elephants after their application. The 
Siddha- Vasti derives its name from the uniform success 
(Siddhi) which attends its application in a large 
number of cases of bodily distempers and from its 
irresistible power in improving the strength and com- 
plexion of the body, Mddku-Tailika Vastis are recom- 
mended to persons of easy and luxurious habits as well 
as in respect of those whose bowels can be easily moved, 
or who are in the habit of being daily treated with 
emulsive measuies (Sneha-karma) and whose organisms 
are marked by scanty accumulations of the bodily 
Doshas, A Siddha- asti does not produce any distress 
or discomfort, since it is mild in potency and is applied 



646 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap XXXVIII, 


in only three quarters of the usual dose (nine Prasritas 
only) and does not entail any strict observance of the 
regimen of diet and conduct (such as the previous 
administration of emetics and purgatives, etc.), and 
since it produces a satisfactory result by a single appli- 
cation. 47. 

Thus ends the Thirty-eighth Chapter of the Chikitsita Sthdnam in the 
Sus'ruta Samhitd which de.als with Nituha-Vaslis. 



GBAX^TER XXXIX. 

Now we shall discourse on the treatment of distress- 
ing symptoms* which are manifested in a patient 
(Aturopadrava-Chikitsitam). i. 

The digestive fire (Ksty^gui) of a person naturally 
grows duU'l* after the exhibition of emetics and purga- 
tives, after the administration of a Niriiha-Vasti, after the 
internal application of a Sueha and after blood-letting. 
It is further lessened by the eating of extremely heavy 
(difficult of digestion) articles of fare, just as a low or dull 
five is extinguished by a heavy load of fuel. Light 
meals taken in small quantities, on the other hand, in- 
crease the digestive fire under these circumstances, just 
as light fuel in small quantities serves to re-kindle a 
low fire. 2. 

The quantity of diet should 'be proportionate to the 
Dosha (morbific diathesis) eliminated from the organism. 
The quantity of the Dosha or Doshas eliminated consists, 
of three measures, viz., one Prastba,| balf an Xdbaka 
or an Xdhaka (at most). The first is the lowest, the 
second is the intermediate and the last named measure 
(one Adhaka) should be deemed as the highest quantity 
(of the Dosha that can be eliminated under the circum- 
stances). 3. 

Yav&gu (gruel) prepared with a small quantity of rice 
(Tandula) should be given once, twice or thrice respect- 

* By “distressing symptoms” are generally meant those complications 
that follow the exhibition of emetics, purgatives, Vastis, etc. 

t tVe have been told that the digestive fire is kindled by the exhibition 
of emetics, purgatives, etc., but here we are told just the reverse. The 
solution is that the digestive fire is ultimately kindled by these measures, 
whereas, immediately after the exhibition, it becomes dull and sluggish. 

j. The Prastha measure here means thirteen Palas and a half. 



648 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Ctap. XXXI 5 C. 

ively in cases of the eliminated Dosha being a Prastha, 
half an Adhaka or an Adhaka in quantity. 4. 

After this a quarter part of the quantity of rice or 
grain otherwise deemed proper and adequate for the 
patient, should be cooked in the form of Vilepi. The 
rice or the grain (used in the preparation) should be well 
boiled, without the addition of any Sneha (oil or clarified 
butter) or salt. 5. 

It should then be (passed through a piece of cloth 
and) made non-slimy, and should be taken in the 
above-prescribed manner with a clear (pure) soup of 
Mudga-'^\i\.?>e. The patient should then be given a diet 
measuring half the quantity of his usual one. The food, 
in this case, should be well saturated with any oleaginous 
substance (Snaha). The meal of the patient in the next 
stage should consist of well-boiled rice measuring three 
parts only of his usual diet and should be made palatable 
to the taste and sufficient to stimulate the sense-organs. 
The meal in this case, should be taken with the trans- 
parent surface of clarified butter {Ghrita-niandd). After 
this period the patient should be allowed to take his full 
meal with well-prepared soups of venison, etc. 6-7. 

The above order of taking one-fourth, half and three- 
fourths of the usual meal applies in cases of deficient, 
intermediate (moderate), or satisfactory action of a 
purgative. 8. 

Peyas, taken in an aggravated condition of the de- 
ranged Pitta, and Kapha, or by a person addicted to 
drinking habits or subsequent to a deficient exhibition 
of emetics and purgatives, may give rise to an increased 
(mucous) secretion (Abhishyanda) in the organism. 
Tarpana measures (demulcent food) should, therefore, be 
deemed beneficial in these instances. 9. 

A person is likely to fast from any of the following 



Chap. iCXXix.] ' CHIXITSA SIHANAM. ^40 

causes,' pain,' unattainment of wished-for objects, . 
penance, bereavement, and mental distraction. Rules 
enjoined to be observed after a course of purgatives 
should as well be adhered to in such cases. lO, 

An Adhaka, half an Adhaka and a Prastha measure 
should similarly be the quantity of excretion in con- 
nection with a course of purgatives under the three 
different degrees of its action. But some are of opinion 
that there may be no fixed quantity of excretion ^ 
in this case, since purgation should not be considered 
satisfactory until the S'leshma tmucus) of the system 
has come out.* A purgation should be considered 
satisfactory when the S'leshmA comes out and in that 
case no more purgative should be given. The strength 
(Bala) of a patient has been laid down to be of three 
degrees, consequently the rules of diet and conduct 
should be similarly determined. A strong patient 
should observe the .regimen of diet only once, one of 
middling strength (Itadhya-bala) twice, while a weak 
patient thrice. Certain authorities, however, assert that 
this order of diet should be observed by the patients with 
an impiired, intermediate and keen digestion, ir. 

Lest the Doshas might become aggravated by the 
appetite already kindled by the observation of the rules 
of diet prescribed for the purpose, the patient should 
be made to take his meal in the following order at this 
stage. Sweet and bitter articles of fare should be 
partaken of at the outset of a meal, followed by olea- 
ginous, acid, saline and pungent food. After this, sweet, 
acid and saline food should again be taken followed by 

Here a line is not found in the printed edition of the Sus'rufa 
Samhiiii, which is evident from Dallana’s commentary and supported by 
S’rikanlha D.atla in his commentary on Vtinda. The line is as follows 


82 



The SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tChap- xkxtx. 


650 

articles of sweet and bitter tastes. Dry (Ruksha) and 
demulcent food should be enjoined in succession in the 
course of a meal. The meals of a healthy person should 
then be prescribed. 12, 

Light diet should be given for a week after the 
internal use of a Sneha and after the exhibition of 
emetics. A patient should observe a proper regimen 
of recoupment of his health, after having been subjected 
to a course of blood letting or treated with a course of 
S'odhana remedy (purgative). Intervals of three days 
should be allowed between two successive applications 
of a Vasti and the period of the third interval thus 
allowed, should be determined according to the require- 
ments of each case.* 13, 

A patient suffering from an ulcer (Vrana) or recently 
treated with emulsive measures (Sneha-karma) or cleans- 
ing (emetics or purgatives) measures, or afflicted with 
any affection of the eyes or with fever attended with 
dysentery (Jvaratisdra) resembles a vessel of unbaked 
clay fitted with oil, t.e., such a patient is greatly liable 
to the derangement of the Doshas. 14. 

An irascible mood or fit of anger (in such a person) 
agitates his Pitta and produces Pitta origined distem- 
pers jf physical labour and grief cause a distracted 
state of the mind ; and gratification of sexual desires 
(in such a state) brings on such dangerous diseases as 
convulsions, epileptic fits, paralysis, aching pain in the 
limbs, swelling about the anus, cough, hiccup and 

* Some commentators explain this verse to mean that the patient 
should observe the rules of diet and conduct (prescribed hereafter) for a 
period of three days after each application of a Vasti, but after the third 
application the rules of diet and conduct should be determined according 
to requirements. 

t The Pitta*origined distempers ate thirst, burning sensation, elci 



CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


Chap. XXX1X.J 


6Sl 


emission of blood-streaked semen and haemorrhage 
from the vagina. 15- A. 

Day-sleep under the circumstances . gives rise to the 
affections of the deranged Kapha, vis., enlargement of 
the spleen (Plihodara), catarrh, jaundice, edema, fever, 
loss of consciousness, a sense of physical langour, in- 
digestion, an aversion to food, and causes the patient to 
become overwhelmed with the quality of Tamas which 
produces in him a desire for sleep. 15-B. 

Talking in a loud voice aggravates the VAyu and is 
attended with such grave consequences as pain in the 
head, blindness, inertness, loss of the faculty of smell, 
dumbness, deafness, dislocation of the jaw-bones (Hanu- 
moksha), Adhi-mantha, facial paralysis, paralysis of the 
eye-balls (Netra-stambha), thirst, cough, insomnia, shak- 
ing of the teeth and similar other distempers (due to an 
aggravation of the Vdyu). 15 C. 

Riding (on horse-back, etc.) under the circumstances 
may cause vomitings, swoons, vertigo, a sense of 
fatigue, stiffness of limbs, and the serious functional 
derangements of the sense organs. A long continuance 
in a sitting posture or bathing may give rise to pain in 
the region of the pelvis ; while, on the contrary, excess- 
ive walking under the circumstances aggravates the 
Vdyu and is attended with pain in the knee-joints, atro- 
phy of the thighs, edematous swellings of the localities, 
or the form of disease known as Pdda-harsha (sensitive- 
ness in the feet). 1 5-D. 

The use of cold water and other cold things* (such as 
paste of Sandal, etc.) under the circumstances tends to 
aggravate the bodily Vdyu and brings on an aching 

* In place of Gayaddsa reads 

which means the use of cold food and drink. This reading seems to b? 
belter.— j&o’. 



652 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. C^hap. XXXIX. 

pain in the limbs, Sula (gastralgia), atuffedness of the 
injested food in the stomach (Vishtambha) and infla- 
tion of the abdomen (Adhmdna) and shivering. An 
undue exposure to the sun and wind produces fever 
and discoloration of the complexion . The use of any 
unwholesome and incompatible diet as well as food taken 
before the complete digestion of the previous meal 
tends to produce serious distempers and may ulti- 
mately result in death. The use of incongenial fare 
undoubtedly leads to the deterioration of the strength 
and complexion of the body. A man of irregular and 
intemperate habits, who eats voraciously like an animal, 
suffers from indigestion which is the cause (source) 
of a number of physical distempers. 15. 

In all these instances the real cause of the distress 
should be first ascertained, which should be then remedied 
with proper antidotal measures and remedies 16. 

Articles of Diet A diet consisting of 
cooked Shashti gi'd.m (Tandula) or matured S'dli rice, 
Mudga pulse as well as (the soup of the flesh of) an 
Ena, Ldva, hare, peacock, Tittiri, or deer, and such 
other light food should be given to a patient after the 
exhibition of emetics and pui’gatives. 17. 

Thus' ends ihe Thirly-nInUi Chapter of the Cbikitsita Sthdnam in the 
Sus'ruta Samhild which deals wiih the treatment of distressing symptoms 
which are manifested in a patient. 



CHAPTKR XL. 

Now we shall discourse on the treatment which 
consists in employing the (inhalation of) medicated 
fumes, snuffs, (errhines) and gargles (Dhuma- 
Nasya-Kavala-Graha-Chikitsita). i- 
Dhuma (fumes) may be divided into five groups,* 
viz.^ Prayogika (capable of being daily used), Snehana 
(soothing), Vairechana (expectorant), f Kdsaghna (anti- 
cough) and Vdmaniya (emetic). 2. 

Materials of different Dhuma-varti ; 
—The drugs of the Elddi group, excepting Kushtha 
and Tagara, should be pasted together. A space" of 
eight fingers out of the entire length of a stem of S'ara 
weed twelve fingers long should be covered with a piece 
of silk cloth and plastered with the coat of the preced- 
ing paste. This stick should be burnt and used in the 
Pr£(yogika Dhuma pdna. The pith (pulp) of oleaginous 
fruits, wax and resin, Gtigguhi, etc., with the admix- 
ture of a Sneha (oil or clarified butter; should be used 
in the Snehana-Dhuma. The drugs included into S'iro- 
Virechana group should be used in Vairechana Dhuma. 
VrUiati, Kanta-kdrikd, Trikatu, Kdsa-marda, Hhigii, 
Ingudi^bark^^ Manah-d ild, Guduchi^ and Karkata-s' ringi 
and such other drugs which allay cough should be used 
in the Ktisaghna-Dhuma. Nerves, skin, horns, hoops, 
shells of a crab, dried fish, dry meat or worms, etc., and 

Charaka, however, divides Dhuma into three classes only— 
rtiyog^a, Snaihika and Vairechanaka, and includes the Kasa-hara into 
the Pr-ayogika, and Vamaniya into the Vairechana Dhuma. 

t The term Vairechana here means S'iro-Virechana by means of fumes, 
t Some commentators mean to explain as Ingudi and 

cardamom instead of as Ingudi-bark. This seems to be better. 



654 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XL. 


such other emetic drugs should be used in the Vstma- 
niya-Dhuma. 3. 

Formation of the pipe used in 
Dhuma-P^na: — The pipe to be used in respect 
of an inhaler should be made of one or other of the 
same substances* of which the pipes of enema-syringes 
(Vasti-Netra) are made. The girth of such a pipe 
should be equal to that of the small finger at its mouth 
with an inner aperture or calibre as large as a Kaldya 
pulse, and its girth at the root or base should 
be equal to that of the thumb, while the girth of the 
inner apertureor near (at the root) should be sufficiently 
large to allow the Dhuma-Varti (made of S^ara weed) to 
fit in. The length of the pipe should be forty-eight 
fingersf in respect of a Prdyogika, thirty-two fingers in 
respect of a Snehana, twenty-four fingers in respect of a 
Vairechana, sixteen fingers in respect of a Kdsaghna 
(anti-cough) and Vdmaniya (emetic) Dhuma. The girth 
of the aperture (channel) should be equal to that of a 
stone of the Kola fruit in respect of the tube to be used 
in the last two cases (Kdsaghna and Vdmaniya), The 
tube to be employed in fumigating an ulcer should 
be eight fingers in length and equal to a Kaldya pulse 
in outer girth, while the girth of the inner orifice should 
be sufficient to allow a Kulattha pulse to pass in. 4. 

The medicinal stick (Varti) should be lubricated 

* See Chapter XXXV, Para. 7, Chikitsita Sthana. 

t Chataka’s description of the pipes, (Chapter V, S'lokasthdna) cor- 
responds closely to that of Sus'ruta, except in the case of Pr^yogika pipe, 
where Charaka’s reading is somewhat ambiguous. There it may be 
construed to mean thirty-six as well as forty-eight fingers. Jatu-karna, 
however, explicitly asserts forty-eight fingers to be the length of the pipe 
in question. Vrinda is in a fix, and solves the difficulties by explaining that 
in cases of an aggravation of Kapha and an abundance of Doshas, tfie 
length of the pipe should be thirty-six fingers. 



Chap. XL.j CHIKITSA STHANAM. 65 S 

with a Sneha (clarified butter, etc). It should then be 
attached to one end of the pipe (Netra) and lighted. 
The patient should sit in an easy and comfortable 
posture, maintain a cheerful frame of mind and carefully 
inhale the medicinal fumes with his eyes cast down 
straight towards the ground. 5. 

Metrical Texts The fumes should be first 
inhaled through the mouth and then through the nostrils ; 
whether inhaled through the mouth or the nostrils they 
should be invariab'y exhaled through the mouth. In- 
haled through the mouth, they should not by any means 
be exhaled through the nostrils, as such a course (of 
e.xhaling through the nostrils) would act wrongly and 
impair the eye-sight. 6. 

The fumes (Dhuma) should be specially inhaled 
through the nostrils, in connection with a Pr£(yogika 
inhalation, while they may be inhaled both through the 
mouth and the nostrils in Snehana-Dhuma. They 
should be inhaled through the nostrils alone in an act 
of Vairechaua inhalation and through the mouth only in 
the two remaining cases (Vatmaniyaand Kaphaghna). 7. 

Mode of inhalation In an act of Praiyo- 
gika inhalation, the stick (Varti) should be dried in shady 
places protected from the wind. The stem of the S'ara 
weed inside the Varti should then be removed. The Varti 
should then be lighted with a live charcoal and fixed to 
the end of the pipe (Netra) and then the patient should be 
asked to inhale the fumes. The same method should be 
followed in respect of Snekana and Vairechana ones. In 
the other cases of smoking (Kafsaghna and V^maniya) 
the fumigating drugs (Varti) should be placed over a bed 
of smokeless burning charcoal contained in an earthen 
saucer. Another saucer furnished with an aperture at 
its top or middle should be fitted over the former saucer 



6s6 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap.' XL. 


and the inhaling pipe should .be fitted into this aperture, 
and the fumes should be inhaled (through the mouth).' On 
the subsidence of the fumes the remaining portion of the 
stick should be cast into the fire and the patient should 
continue to inhale the fumes till the complete elimina- 
tion of the aggravated Doshas from his organism. This 
is the rule and means of inhalation (Dhuma-pdna). 8.' 

Prohibitive Cases : — Any kind of smok- 
ing (Dhuma-pana) is forbidden to a person afflicted 
with anger, fear, bereavement, fatigue, and in a heated 
state of the body and after fasting. It is also forbidden 
in cases of poisoning, haemorrhage (Rakta-pitta), 
alcoholism, swooning, burning sensation of the body, 
thirst, jaundice, dryness of the palate, vomiting, head- 
disease, eructation, Timira, urinary complaints (Pra- 
meha), abdominal enlargement with dropsy (Udara), 
inflation of the abdomen and Urddha-vata, and in respect 
of infants, old and enfeebled persons, as well as of those 
treated with purgatives and Asthdpana-vasti. It is also 
forbidden to enciente women, those suffering from in- 
somnia or a parched condition of the body as well as to 
those suffering from any kind of cachexia or from 
Urahkshata. An act of inhaling (smoke) is also pro- 
hibited after taking a potion of honey, clarified butter, 
curd, and milk, fish, wine or grnel (Yavdgu) as well as 
during the continuance of a small quantity of Kapha 
in the organism, 9. 

Metrical Text : —Medicated fumes inhaled in 
an improper season {viz., in the above-mentioned prohi" 
bited cases) bring on vertigo, fainting fits, diseases of the 
head and serious injury to the eyes, ears, nose and the 
tongue. 10. , • • 

Time of Smoking- The first three kinds of- 
inhalations should be resorted to at the close of the 



Chap. XL.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 657 

following’ twelve physical functions and acts, viz. 
sneezing, cleansing the teeth, snuffing, bathing, eating, 
sleeping in the day, coition, vomiting, micturition, 
passing stools, fits of anger and surgical operations. 
A Snehana-Dhuma should be smoked after sneezing, 
micturition, passing stools, coition or after a fit of 
anger. Similarly, a Vairechana-Dhuma should be 
smoked after bathing, vomiting and sleeping in the day 
time, while a Prsiyogika-Dliuma should be smoked 
after cleansing the teeth, snuffing, bathing, eating and 
after a surgical operation, ii. 

The therapeutic effects of Dhuma-* 
pg^na : —Smoking the Snehana-Dhuma subdues the 
deranged and aggravated Vdyu of the body owing to 
the existence of the Sneha with which it is charged, 
as well as to a consequent sticky coating being 
deposited in the organism. The Vairechana-Dhuma 
facilitates the loosening and flowing out of the mucus 
(Kapha) owing to its dryness, non-viscidness (Vais'adya), 
keenness and heat-making potency. While the 
PrjCyogika-Dhuma tends to loosen the accumulation of 
mucus (Kapha) and helps its expulsion from the system 
by virtue of its being possessed of common therapeutic 
properties with both of the two preceding kinds (of 
Dhuma). 12. 

Memorable Verse : -inhalation of (medi- 
cated) fumes removes the cloudening of the faculties of 
the organs of sense-perception and imparts distinctness 
of the speech and firmness to the teeth, hair of the head 
and to beard. It cleanses the mouth and fills it with 
an aroma. 13. 

The inhalation of medicated fumes guards against an 
attack of cough, asthma, an aversion to food and clumsy 
sensation in the mouth, hoarseness, excessive salivation, 

83 



658 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XL. 


nausea,* somnolence, sleep, numbness of the jaws and 
of the nerves (Sn§.yu) on the back of the neck (Many&.), 
catarrh, diseases of the head, ear-ache, inflammation of the 
eyes, and any affection of the mouth due to an aggrava- 
tion of the deranged Vdyu and Kapha. 14, 

It behoves a physician to be fully acquainted with 
the effects of satisfactory and excessive smoking 
(Dhuma-pdna). Properly administered, it is followed 
by a distinct alleviation of the disease (under treat- 
ment) ; while its excessive use is followed by a positive 
aggravation or non-amelioration of the disease and is 
likely to produce a dryness of the palate and the throat, 
a burning sensation in the body, thirst, fainting fits, 
vertigo, delirium, alcoholism, affection of the ears, nose 
and eyes, impairment of vision, and weakness of the 
body. 15. 

Mode of Smoking' : -The Prsiyogika-Dliiima 
should be smoked thrice at a time either through the 
mouth or through the nostrils and may be repeated thrice 
or four times (according to the strength of the patient and 
the itensity of the Dosha), The Snaihika-Dhuma should 
be inhaled until the appearance of tears in the eyes. 
While the Vaircchanika-Dhuma should be smoked till 
the beginning of the elimination of the Doshas from the 
system. The Viiinaniya-Dhuma should be smoked by a 
patient after he has taken a gruel of huskless sesamum 
(Tila-Tandula), and the K^saghna-Dhuma should be' 
inhaled between morsels of food.f Fumigation of an 
ulcer should be made by means of a tube attached' 
to (the orifice of) a covered saucer. Fumigation alle- 

* According to Vtinda’s commentator we have here “ Sneezing and a 
sudden obstruction of breath”-as an additional text. 

f Dallana quotes a different reading which would moan that the 
Kasaghna-Dhunta should be iqhaled after taking meals, 



Chap. XL.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 659 

viates the pain in an ulcer, arrests its discharge and 
makes it clean and non-viscid. 16. 

Wletrical Text The processes of inhalation 
and fumigation have been briefly described above. Now 
1 sbaW M\y describe the processes of usiT\g medicinal 
Snuffs (Nasya). 17. 

On Snuffs and Errhines The term 
"Nasya” (Snuff) is so called from the fact of its being 
composed of the powders of any drugs or of any 
Sneha (oleaginous substance) cooked with such drug 
or drugs, to be stuffed into the nostrils. It may be 
broadly divided into two kinds, liiz. r-^iro-Virechana 
(errhines) and Snehana (contributor of oleaginous 
principles) ; and may, however, be further grouped under 
five specific heads, Nasya, ^iro-Virechana, 

Pratiinarsha (a medicated Sneha poured into the 
postrils to be discharged into the mouth), Avapida 
(the expressed juice of any drug put into the nostrils 
in drops by pressing it with the palms then and there) 
and Pradhamana (a medicinal snufF blown into the 
nostrils with the help of a blow pipe) . Of these, the 
Nasya (snuff) S'iro-Virechana (errhines) are pre-emi- 
nently the most effective. Pratimarsha is a Nasya while 
Avapida and Pradhamana are Siro-Virechana (errhines). 
Thus it is that the term Nasya is employed in the above 
five senses. The term Nasya, in the specific sense, is 
particularly used with reference to the snuffing of any 
Sneha (oleaginous substance) with a view to make up 
the deficient oily matter in the brain in the case of 
a patient complaining of a sense of void or emptiness 
in the head or to impart tone to the nerves and muscles 
of the neck, shoulders and chest, or to invigorate the 
eye-sight. This should be prepared with a Sneha 
(oleaginous substance) cooked with the drugs possessed 



66o 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XL. 


of the virtue of subduing the deranged Vdyu and Pitta 
and should be snuffed in by a patient affected in the 
head through the over\vhelming preponderance of the 
deranged Vdyu and in cases of the falling off of the 
teeth and hair of the head and beard, in Karna- 
Kshveda, acute ear-ache, Timira (cataract), loss of 
voice, disease of the nose, dryness of the mouth, Ava- 
Vdhuka, premature greyness of the hair and wrinkling 
of the skin and other dangerous complications due to 
the deranged Vayu and Pitta as well as in similar other 
affections of the mouth. i8. 

^irO-Virechana : — Powders of the S'iro-Vire- 
chana drugs* or any Sneha cooked with those drugs-j* 
should be employed in the event of there being an ac- 
cumulation of Kapha (mucus) in the region of the 
palate, throat, or head of a patient, as well as in cases 
of an aversion to food, head-ache, heaviness of the head, 
Pinasa (coryza), Ardhdvabhedaka (hemicrania), worms, 
Pratis'y^ya (catarrh), loss of the faculty of smell, 
hysteric convulsion (Apasmdra) and in similar other 
diseases of the super-clavicular regions due to the action 
of the deranged Kapha. 19. 

These two kinds of Nasya (snuffs) should be ad- 
ministered before meals. To a patient affected with 
diseases of Kaphaja origin they should be adminis- 
tered in the morning, while one suffering from any 
Pittaja complaint should use them at noon and one 


* The S'iro-Virechana drugs are Pippali, Vidanga, S'igru, Siddh^r- 
Ihaka, Apamarga, etc. See Sutrashdna, Chapter XXXIX. 

t S rikantha Datta, coniinentator of Vrinda, says that Gayi reads 

from which it is evident that he pre- 
scribed only the Sneha cooked with the S'iro-Virechana drugs as S'iro- 
Virechana Hasya. 



Chap. XL.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


66 1 

afflicted with any distemper of the deranged V^yu 
should use them in the afternoon.* 20. 

Before the application of a S'iro-Virechana (errhine) 
the patient should be asked to cleanse his mouth with 
a tooth-twig and by smoking. Then the regions of 
the neck, cheek and forehead should be fomented and 
softened with the application of heated palms, the 
patient himself being laid on his back in a dustless 
chamber not exposed to the sun and the wind. His 
head should be kept "a little hung back with his arms 
and legs fully stretched out and expanded and a com- 
press should be tied over the eyes. Then the phy- 
sician should lift up with the fore-finger of his left 
hand the tip of the nose of the patient and slowly drop 
with his right hand a continuous jet of (medicated) Sneha 
into the cleansed channels of the (patient’s) nostrils. 
The oil to be so used should be made lukewarm (D. K.. 
— made lukewarm in the sun) and kept in a golden, 
silver, copper, or earthen receptacle or in an oyster 
shell and poured down into the nostrils of the patient 
by means of an oyster shell (D. R.— pipe) or (by pressing) 
a cotton plug (soaked in that oil). Care should be taken 
that the oil does not get into the eyes (while being 
poured into the nostrilsl.-]* 21. 

Metrical Texts : -The patient should refrain 
from shaking his head or indulging in a fit of anger or 

* In respect of healthy patients, the Nasya should be adminis- 
tered at noon in winter, in the morning in spring and autumn, and in 
the afternoon in summer, while in the rainy season, they should be 

administered at a time when the sun would be visible in the sky. 

Vriddha- V&ghhata, 

t The commentator of Vrinda adds two more conditions — viz., the 
patient should be made to pass stools and urine before the application of 
the Nasya and that the Nasya should be applied at a time when the sky 
would be free from clouds. 



662 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XL. 


speaking, sneezing or laughing at the time of any oily 
snufF (Sneha-Nasya) being administered unto him, as 
it may otherwise badly interfere with its reaching 
dowU to the desired spot or may bring on an attack' 
of cough or coryza (catarrh) or any affection of the 
head or of the eyes. 22. 

Doses of a Sneha-Nasya Eight drops 

of oil trickling down the two upper phalanges of the fore- 
fingers should be regarded as the proper quantity for' 
the smallest (lit. — first') dose. A Sukti measure (thirty- 
two drops) is the intermediate (lit. — second) dose and a 
PAni-Sukti measure (sixty-four drops; is the highest 
(lit. — third) dose. These are the three doses (of Sneha- 
Nasya) which should be dertermined in proportion to the 
strength of the patient and of the disease under treat- 
ment. An oily snuff should never be swallowed. 23. 

Metrical Text : — An oily snuff (Sneha-Nasya) 
should be hawked in so as to flow along the girths 
(Sringdtaka) of the nostrils and immediately spit out (by 
the patient), without retaining it in the mouth for a 
moment, as it may otherwise (irritate the mucous mem- 
branes of the throat, etc., and) aggravate the local 
Kapha. 24. 

The region of the neck and the cheeks, etc., of the 
patient should be fomented again after the use of the 
oily snuff [Sneha-Nasya) and the patient should be 
made to smoke, and partake of a meal not composed of 
any phlegmagogic articles (Anabhishyandi). He should 
then be advised as to regimen of conduct, etc. (to be subse- 
quently observed). Washing the head, exposure to the 
sun, dust and smoke, the use of any intoxicating liquor or 
of any other liquid or oleaginous substance, indulgence 
in a fit of anger and excessive driving, etc., are strictly 
prohibited (after the application of Sneha-Nasya). 25. 



Chap. XL.] GHtKITSA STHANAM. ’ ' 663 

Effects of proper, excessivie, or 
deficient application of aSneha-Nasya 
(Wl.— T.) The effects of proper and excessive 

applications of (oily) snuffs will now be described. 
■Lightness of the he^^d, sc.\iwd Awd reCreshiwg sleep, the 
state of being easily awakened, alleviation of the disease, 
hilarity of the mind and a gladsome activity of the 
sense-organs in performing their respective functions, are 
the symptoms which attend a proper and satisfactory 
application (of an oleaginous medicinal snuff). Sali- 
vation, heaviness of the head, and dulness of the 
sense-organs are the symptoms which result from' an 
excessive application of a Sneha (Nasya) and the 
remedy in such cases consists in employing the parch- 
ing measures or medicines. A case of deficient appli- 
cation (of a Sneha-Nasya) is marked by the functional 
derangements of the sense-organs* and a dryness 
(Rukshatd) of the system without any indication of 
the amelioration of the disease. The remedy, in such 
cases, consists in a fresh application of the (oleaginous) 
snuff. 26. 

The proper doses of an oleaginous errhine (Siro- 
Vireka) should be four, six or eight drops in accordance 
with the strength- (of the disease and of the patient- 
under treatment). 27. 

The fra uers of the Ayurveda have particularly classi- 
fied the effects of the application (of a Sneha-Nasya) into 
three classes, vis., proper or satisfactory, deficient and 
excessive. The head being satisfactorily cleared (by 
the satisfactory application (of an oleaginous errhine) 
is marked by a sense of lightness in the head, clearness 
of the channels (of the mouth, throat, nostrils, etc.), 

*Gayi’s reading, according loDallana, as well S'likantha’s reading is 
which means the functional derangement of the local V.ayu. 



664 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XL, 


an amelioration of the disease tinder treatment, healthy 
and vigorous workings of the sense-organs and an 
exhilarating sensation of the body and of the mind. 
Itching, clumsiness ^of the mouth}, heaviness, satura- 
tion of the local channels (of the mouth, throat, etc,) 
with mucous coatings are the symptoms which mark 
the deficient action of (an oleaginous) errhine. A dis- 
charge through the nostrils of Mastulunga (the brain 
matter), an aggravation of the Vdyu, dulness of the 
sense-organs and a sense of void or emptiness in the 
head are the indications which mark an excessive appli- 
cation of an (oleaginous) errhine. 28. 

Measures and remedies possessed of the virtue of 
subduing the deranged Kapha and Vdyu should be (re- 
spectively) employed in cases of excessive and deficient 
applications of (an oleaginous) errhine (Nasya), while in 
the case of a proper and satisfactory application the 
patient should be made to snuff in a quantity of clarified 
butter on each alternate day or at an interval of two days 
for one, two or three weeks in succession or for any longer 
period as considered proper according to the exigency of 
the case. In a case of an overwhelming aggravation of 
the Vayu, the patient may be made to use the snuff (of 
clarified butter) even twice a day, 29. 

Avapida- Nasya The Avapida-Nasya, like 
the Siro-Virechana Nasya, should be administered to a 
person bitten by a snake, or lying in a comatose or 
unconscious state or suffering from a disease of the head 
due to its being oppressed with an accumulation of fat 
and mucus (Abhisyanda). An Avpida-Nasya should be 
administered to a patient by pasting any of the (fresh) 
Siro-Virechana drugs and putting a few drops therefrom 
into the nostrils of the patient. In cases of a distraction 
of the mind or of a disease of a parasitic origin or of' 



aap. XL.] CHIKITSA STHANAII. 665 

patients suffering from the effects of poisoning the fine 
powder ;of the iiro-Virechana drugs) should (by means 
of a pipe) be blown into the nostrils of the patient. 
Sugar, the expressed juice of the sugar-cane, milk, clari- 
fied butter or an extract of meat should be (similarly) 
administered in the case of a weak patient or of one 
suffering from an attack of Rakta-Pitta. ^o. 

Metrical Texts:— A Sneha (oil or clarified 
butter) cooked with the pasted drugs (of the SVo-Vire- 
chana group) v/ould be as beneficial as the powder 
(Kalka) of those drugs for the purpose of an errhine in 
respect of a weak, emaciated, timid, delicate or female 
patient. 31. 

Forbidden Cases : —A fasting person, or one 
who has just taken his meal, or one suffering from an 
acute catarrh or coryza of a virulent type, an enciente 
woman, a man found to be still under the influence of an 
intoxicating liquor or who has taken a Sneha (oleagin- 
ous substance), water orany other liquid, or one suffering 
from indigestion or who has been treated with an enema 
(Vasti), one in an angry and excited state of mind or 
afflicted with thirst or who is suffering from the effects of 
any slow chemical poison (Gara) or fatigued or over- 
whelmed with grief as well as an infant, an old man, one 
who has voluntarily repressed any natural urging of the 
body or one about to take a full bath (Sirah-Sndna) should 
be regarded unfit for treatment with fany kind of medi- 
cinal) snuffs (Nasya). Snuffing and smoke inhalation 
should not be resorted to in the event of the sky being 
(unseasonably) overcast with clouds at a time when such 
phenomena do not usually or ordinarily happen. 32-A, 

A deficient or an excessive application of snuffs (at 
one time), or its extreme heat or coldness, a sudden or de 
layed application of the same (into the nostrils), drooping 

84 



666 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XL. 


posture of the head or its- movements during the appli- 
cation, the fact of its being used while the patient would 
be taking his meals, or its application in any forbidden 
case may produce such distressing symptoms as thirst 
eructations, etc., due to the action of the aggravated or 
decreased Doshas of the body. 32. 

Metrical Texts : — The evils which are usually 
found to attend an abuse of medicinal snuffs (Nasya) 
or errhines (S'iro-vireka) may be grouped into two classes 
— those incidental to the aggravation (TJtklesa) of the 
Doshas or to the loss or waste (Kshaya) of the same. 
The distempers due to an aggravation of the Doshas 
should he remedied with soothing (S'amana) and correct- 
ive ^^S'odhana) measures and remedies, while those 
resulting from the loss or waste of the Doshas should be 
remedied with such drugs and remedies as would make 
up the decreased Doshas (of the system). 33. 

Pratimarsha Nasya when to be 
used : —The Pratimarsha form of snuff should be 
resorted to on any of the following fourteen different 
occasions, .-—after quitting the bed in the morning, 
after cleansing the teeth, on the occasion of going out 
of the house, after having been fatigued with physical 
exercise, after sexual intercourse and a journey, after 
defecation and urination, after the use of gargles (Kavala) 
and collyrium (Anjana), in an empty stomach, after 
vomiting, just after a day-sleep and in the evening. 34, 

Their Effects : — A Pratimarsha snuff used by 
a person just after rising from his bed tends to remove 
the waxy mucus (Mala) accumulated in the nostrils during 
the night and brings on a cheerful state of the mind, when 
used after having cleansed the teeth, it imparts a sweet 
aroma to the mouth and makes the teeth steady and 
firm (in their sockets). When used by a man on the 



C'bap. XL,] CHikiTSA STHANAM. ’ 667 

occasion ' of his going out of the house, it acts as a' 
safeguard against the troubles of smoke ■ and dust 
(assailing him on the road) owing to the consequent- 
moist mucous secretion in the nostrils. When used 
after the exertion of physical exercise, coition or a’ 
journey, it serves to remove the sense of consequent 
fatigue, and when used after micturition or defecation 
it tends to remove the dulness or heaviness of vision. 
When applied after gargling or after an application of 
collyrium (along the eyelids) it serves to invigofate' 
the eye-sight. When applied on an empty stomach, it 
cleanses the internal channels of the body and imparts a 
lightness to it. Taken after an act of emesis it tends 
to cleanse the mucous (S'leshmd) deposit on the beds of 
the internal ducts of the body and thus brings on a 
fresh appetite for food. When taken after a day-sleep 
it tends to remove the sense of drowsiness and physical 
heaviness and purges the filthy accumulations (in the 
nose, etc.) thus bringing about a concentrated state of 
the mind. When taken in the evening it brings on a 
good sleep and an easy awakening. 35. 

Wletrical Texts The quantity ofSneha 
which, being lightly snuffed in, reaches down into the 
cavity of the mouth, should be deemed adequate for a 
dose of the Pratimarsha (kind of snuff*). The benefit 
of using a snuff may be perceived in a variety of ways, 
as it tends to cure the diseases peculiar to the super- 
clavicular regions of the body, removes the cloudening 

* One drop or two, or the quantity necessary to bring about a 
disruption of the Doshas, is the dose of a Pratimarsha Nasya according 
to Vriddha-Vagabhata. 

The four forms of Nasya-Karma (medicinal) snuffs, should be 
prescribed for patients above seven years of age. Pratimarsha is recoiq- 
mendetl in Gulma.— 



668 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XL. 


or dulness of the sense-organs, imparts a svveet aroma to 
the mouth, and strength to the teeth, jaw bones, 
head, neck, Trika, arms and the chest, and guards 
against an attack of baldness, Vyanga, premature grey- 
ness of the hair and the premature appearance of 
wrinkles or, furrows. 36-37. 

Specific use of Sneha-Nasya This 
snuff should consist of oil in a case marked by (the con- 
certed actions of the deranged) Kapha and Vdyu, while 
it should consist of Vas^ (lard) in a case involving the 
action of the VAyu alone. Similarly clarified butter 
should be used as a snuff in a case of a Pittaja disorder, 
while the snuff should consist of MajjE( (marrow) in a 
case marked by (the concerted actions of the deranged) 
Vdyu and Pitta. The four different modes of using 
snuff have thus been described in all of which oil may 
be used as not being hostile in its action as regards the 
seats of Kapha within the organism. 38. 

' Kavala-graha : — Now we shall describe the 
process of using medicinal gargles (Kavala) which may 
be divided into four kinds, viz . ; — The Snehi (oleaginous), 
Prasddi (soothing), Sodhi (purifying) and the Ropana 
(healing). The oleagirious (Snehi) gargle should be 
surcharged with any oleaginous substance and should 
be prescribed tepid in a case marked by the action 
of the deranged V^.yu, while cold and sweet articles 
should be employed in preparing a soothing (Prasa'di) 
gargle and should be prescribed in cases of the de- 
ranged Pitta. The purifying (^odhana) gargles should 
.be composed of acid, pungent and saline drugs which 
^are parching and heat-making* in their potency and 

* .Vrinda does not include ‘patching’ while Chakradalta does not 
include ‘heat-making’ as the conditions of this kind of Kavala in thejr 
tespective collections. 



Chap. XL.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


669 


should be employed lukewarm (for corrective purposes) 
in diseases due to the action of the deranged Kapha. 
The healing (Ropana) gargles should be composed of 
bitter, astringent, sweet, pungent heat-making^ articles 
and should be employed in cases of ulceration (of the 
mouth). The therapeutic virtues and applications of the 
four different kinds of gargle (Kavala) have thus been 
described (above). 39-40. 

The neck, cheeks and the forehead of the patient to 
be treated with gargles should be ^first) fomented and 
softened and he should be made to take (into his mouth) 
Trikatu, Vacha, mustard-seeds, Haritaki and rock-salt 
pasted together and dissolved in any of the follow- 
ing articles, : — oil, Sukta, Suri, alkali, (cow’s) urine 
or honey, and made lukewarm (before use as a 
gargle). 41. 

Kavala and Gandusha— distinguish- 
ed (IW. T.) The quantity which can be easily and’ 
conveniently rolled out in the mouth is the proper dose 
in respect of a Kavala, whereas the one which cannot be 
so (easily and conveniently) rolled out in the mouth is 
called a Gandusha. 42. 

Kavala— how long it should be re- 
tained A gargle (Kavala) should be so long heldt 
in the mouth by a patient till the aggravated Dosha]: 
would accumulate in the regions of the cheeks§ 
and would secrete copiously through the nostrils and 

* ChakradaUa does not include ‘pungency’ and ‘heat-making potency’ 
as conditions of this kind of Kavala. 

t Viinda here reads i.c., ‘and should be rolled out 

(in the mouthy. 

t “Dosha” here means ‘Kapha’, 

§ Vrinda reads which means till the 

Do^ha accumulates in the regions of the throat and the cheeks, 



6yo 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. XL, 


the eyes, after which the gargle (Kavala) should be every 
time removed and fresh ones should be taken and kept 
(similarly) in the mouth. The patient should during 
the use of a Kavala sit in an erect posture without 
allowing the mind to be in the least distracted. 43. 

Metrical Texts Gargles (Kavala) should be 
similarly prepared with Sneha, milk, honey, curd, urine, 
meat-juice or Amla (K^njika) mixed with the decoction 
(of any drug) or hot water prescribed according to the 
nature and intensity of the bodily Dosha or Doshas 
involved in the case. An amelioration of the disease, 
a sense of lightness and of purity in the mouth, a 
cheerful frame of mind and an exhilarating vigour in 
the organs of sense are the features which mark an 
act of perfect or satisfactory gargling (Kavala), 
whereas a sense of physical lassitude, salivation and a 
(consequent) defect in the sense of taste are the traits 
which mark deficient gargling. Thirst, an aversion 
to food, diyness of the mouth, a sense of fatigue and an 
inflammation of the mouth are the symptoms which 
attend an act of excessive gargling. These symptoms 
undoubtedly arise in due proportion to the nature and 
intensity of the corrective drugs used. 44-45. 

Sesamum, Nilotpala, clarified butter, sugar, milk 
and honey^ used as a gargle (Gandusha) alleviates 
the (consequent) burning sensation of a burn inside the 
mouth. 46. 

The process of using medicinal gargles (Kavala) in 
general have thus been briefly described. 

* Commentators, on the authority of Videha, hold that gargles 
should be used with these articles either collectively or separately in cases 
of burning in the mouth by an e^fcessive use of an ^Ikali of snch other 
pfticles, 



Chap. XL.] 


CHIKITSA STHANAM. 


671 


PratiS^rana I — A Pratisdrana remedy may be 
of four kinds, viz., that prepared with a Kalka (paste), 
B,a8a-kriy£(, honey and with powders. Prepared with 
the appropriate drugs, such a compound should be rubbed 
gently with the tip of a finger in a case of an affection of 
the mouth. An intelligent Physician may exercise his 
discretion in selecting the drugs to be used in the pre- 
paration of such a remedy. The symptoms of a satisfac- 
tory or unsatisfactory Pratisdrana should be respectively 
identical with those of a Kavala. The ranges of thera- 
peutic applications are also co extensive in both the 
cases. In other words the diseases of the mouth which 
yield to the use of medicinal gargles, equally prove 
amenable to that of Pratisdrana remedies. The diet in 
both the cases should be composed of light and non- 
phlegmagogic articles of food. 47. 

Thus ends the Fortieth Chapter of the Chikitsita Sthdnam in the 
Susruta Samhiti which deals with the inhalation of medicinal fumes, 
snuffs, and gargles. 


Here ends the Chikitsita Sth^nam 




THE 


SUSHRUTA SAMHITA 

KALPA-STHANAM 

(Section on Toxicology). 

:o: 

CHAPTER I 

Now we shall discourse on the mode of preserving 
food and drink from the effects of poison (Anna- 
peCna-Raksha-Kalpa). i. 

Dhanvantari, the King of Kds'i, the foremost in 
virtue and religion and whose commands brook no 
disobedience or contradiction, instructed his disciples, 
Sus'ruta and others (in the following words). 2. 

Powerful enemies and even the servants and rela- 
tions of the sovereign in a fit of anger to avenge them- 
selves on the sovereign sometimes concoct poisonous 
compounds and administer the same to him, powerful 
though he may be, by taking advantage of any defect or 
weak point in him. Sometimes the ladies (of the royal 
house-hold) are found to administer to the king various 
preparations (of food and drink), which often prove to be 
poisonous, from a foolish motive of securing his affection 
and good graces thereby, and sometimes it is found that 
by the embrace of a poisoned girl (Visha-Kanya'},*^ 

* A girl slowly habituated to taking poison or poisoned food is 
called a Visha-Kanyi, such a girl presented to a king by a pretending 
friend of the stale often managed to hug her royal victim into her fatal 
embrace. Toe poison operates through the perspiration, proving almost 
instantaneously fatal through the acf of dalliance* 


85 



674 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. I. 

he dies almost instantaneously. Hence it is the im- 
perative duty of a royal physician to guard the person 
of the king against poisoning. 3. 

The minds of men • are restless and uncontrollable 
like an unbroken horse. Faith is a rare thing in the 
human society and hence a crowned head should never 
believe any one* in this world. 4. 

The necessary Qualifications of a 
Superintendent of the Royal Kitchen : 

— A king should appoint a physician for the royal 
kitchen (to superintend the preparations of the royal 
fare). He should be well-paid and possess the follow- 
ing qualifications. He should come of a respect- 
able family, should be virtuous in conduct, fondly 
attached to the person of his sovereign, and always 
watchful of the health of the king. He should be 
greedless, straight-forward, god-fearing, grateful, of 
handsome features, and devoid of irascibility, rough- 
ness, vanity, arrogance and laziness. He should be 
forbearing, self-controlled, cleanly, compassionate, well- 
behaved, intelligent, capable of bearing fatigue, well- 
meaning, . devoted, of good address, clever, skilful, 
smart, artless, energetic and marked with all the neces- 
sary qualifications (of a physician; as described before. 
He should be fully provided with all kinds of 
medicine and be highly esteemed by the members of 
his profession. 5. 

The necessary features of a Royal 
kitchen The Royal kitchen should be a spacious 
chamber occupying an auspicious (south-east) corner of 
the royal mansion and built on a commendable site. 
The vessels and utensils (to be used in a royal kitchen) 
should be kept scrupulously clean. The kitchen should 
* A Royal Physician is an honourable exception in this r pect. , 



Chap. 1.] 


KALPA-STHANAM. 


675 


be kept clean, well lighted by' means of a large number of 
windows and guarded with nets and fret works (against 
the intrusion of crows, etc.). None but the trusted and 
proved friends and relatives should have access to the 
royal kitchen, or hold any appointment therein.- Highly 
inflammable articles (such' as hay, straw, etc.) should not 
be stacked in the royal kitchen whose ceiling should be 
covered with a canopy. The Fire-god should be (daily) 
worshipped therein. The head or managar of the royal 
cooks should generally possess the same qualifications 
as those of a physician. The bearers and cooks in the 
royal kitchen should have their nails and hair clipped 
off and should bear turbans. They should be cleanly, 
civil, clever, obedient, good-looking, each charged with 
separate duties, good-tempered, composed in their 
behaviour, well-bathed, greedless, determined, and 
prompt in executing the orders of their superiors. A 
physician of the royal kitehen should be very cautious 
and circumspect in the discharge of his duties, since 
food is the main stay of life, and the sole contributor to 
the safe continuance of the body. Every one employed 
in a royal kitchen such as, bearers, servers, cooks, soup- 
makers, cake-makers (confectioners), should be placed 
under the direct control and supervision of the physi- 
cian of the kitchen. 6. 

Characteristic features of a poison- 
er : — An intelligent physician well qualified to ascertain 
the true state of one’s feelings from the speech, conduct, 
demeanour and distortions of the face, would be able to 
discover the true culprit (poisoner) from the' following 
external indications, A giver of poison does not speak 
nor does he answer when a question is put to him'. He 
swoons or breaks off suddenly in the middle of his 
statement, and talks incoherently and indistinctly like a 



THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA 


[Chap. I. 


67^ 


fool,' He is found suddenly and listlessly to press the 
joints of his fingers or to scratch the earth, to laugh and 
to shiver. He will look fiightened at the sight of others 
(indifferently), and will cut (straw or hay) with his finger- 
nails, and his colour changes constantly. He will scratch 
his head in an agonised and confused state, and will 
look this way and that, trying to slip away by a back or 
side door, thus betraying his guilty conscience by his 
confusion. 7. 

An innocent man, unjustly arraigned before the royal 
tribunal might from fear or precipation, become (confused 
and) liable to make untrue statements (and thus be 
unjustly convicted). Hence the king should first of all 
test the sincerity and fidelity of his servants ascertaining 
the non-poisonous character of the boiled rice, drink, 
tooth-twigs, unguents, combs, cosmetics, infusions, 
washes, anointments (with sandal pastes, etc.), garlands 
(of flowers, etc,), clothes, bedding, armour, ornaments, 
shoes, foot cushions, the backs of horses and elephants and 
snuffs (Nasya"), Dhuma (tobacco smoking), collyrium and 
such other things (reserved for the use of the king). 8-9. 

Indications of poisoned food and 
drink, etc. : — The indications by which the 
poisonous character of food, drink, etc. (to be used by 
a king) may be detected are described first and the 
medical treatment is dealt with secondly. A portion 
of the food prepared for the royal use should be first 
given to crows and flies and its poisonous character 
should be presumed, if they instantaneously die on 
partaking of the same. Poisoned food burns making 
loud cracks, and when cast into the fire it assumes the 
colour of a peacock’s throat, becomes unbearable, burns 
in severed and disjointed flames and emits irritating 
fumes and it cannot be speedily extinguished. The 



[Chap. I. - 


KALFA-STHANAM. , 


',67^ 

eyes of a Chakora bird are instantaneously affected 
by looking at such poisoned food and a Jivajivaka dies 
under a similar condition. The note of the cuckoo 
becomes hoarse and a Krauncha (heron) becomes 
excited. A peacock moves about and becomes sprightly, 
and a Suka and a Sdrikd scream (in fear). A swan 
cackles violently and a Bhringardja (of the swallow 
class) raises its inarticutate voice. A Prishata (a species 
of spotted deer) sheds tears and a monkey passes 
stools. Hence these birds and animals should be kept 
in the royal palace for show and entertainment as well 
as for the protection of the sovereign master. 10. 

The vapours arising from poisoned food when served 
for Use give rise to a pain in the cardiac region and pro- 
duce headache and restlessness of the eyes. As an 
antidote, a preparation of Kushtha, Rdmatha (asafcetida), 
Nalada and honey mixed together should be used as an 
Aujaua (along the eye-lids) and a medical compound of 
the same drugs should be snuffed into the nostrils. A 
plaster composed of S'irisha, turmeric, and sandal 
pasted together or simply a sandal paste should be used 
over the region of the heart in such cases li. 

A poison affecting the palms of the hands, produces 
a burning sensation in them and leads to the falling off 
of the finger-nails. The remedy in such cases consists 
in applying a plaster of S'yamd*, hidra, Gopa sotna and 
Utpala pasted together. 12. 

Poisoned food partaken of thrpugh ignorance or 


* Some explain “S'ydmd” as “S'ydmd-latd* ; others explain it as 
“Priyangu”. Dallana explains “Indra” to mean “Indra-Vdruni”, “Gopa” 
to mean "Sdrivd” and “Soma” to mean “Guduchi” Others, however, 
take “Indta-Gopa” as one word and explain il to mean a kind of insect 
known by that name, and they take “Soma” to mean “Soma-latd” in the 
ordinary sense of the word. 



678 


THE StJSHRUTA SA^lHITA, 


tChiap. 1. 


folly, produces a stone-Hke swelling and numbness of the 
tongue, a loss of the faculty of taste and a pricking 
burning pain in that organ attended with copious mu- 
cous salivation. The measures and remedies already 
laid down in connection with the treatment of cases of 
poisonous vapours as well as those to be hereinafter 
described in connection with the use of a poisoned 
tooth-twig should be adopted. 13. 

Food mixed with poison, when it reaches the 
Am^'aya (stomach), gives rise to epileptic fits, vomiting, 
dysenteric stools (Atis&ra), distention of the abdomen, a 
burning sensation, shivering and a derangement of 
the sense-organs. Under such circumstances an emetic 
consisting of Madana, Aldvu, Vhnbi and Kos'dtaki 
pasted together and administered through the medium 
of milk, curd and Udasvit (Takra) or with rice-washings 
should be understood as the proper remedy. 14. 

Food mixed with poison, if it reaches the Pakvd- 
s'aya (intestines), gives rise to a burning sensation (in 
the body), epileptic fits, dysenteric stools (Atisdra), 
derangements of the organs of sense-perception, rumbling 
sounds in the abdomen and emaciation, and makes the 
complexion (of the sufferer) yellow. In such a case a 
purgative composed of clarified butter and Nilini 
fruits should be the first remedy. As an alternative, 
remedies to be described lateron (in the next chapter) 
in connection with the effects of DusM-Visha (slow 
chemical poison) should be adopted and used, saturated 
with milk-curd (Dadhi) or honey. 1 5, 

All liquid substances such as wine, milk, water, etc,, 
if anywise poisoned, are found to be marked with 
variegated stripes on their* surface and become covered 

* The Colours of the different poisoned articles vary in each case and 
this is elaborately dessribed by Vagbhata in his Sarahitdt 


Chap. I.] KALPA-STHANAM. 679 • 

over with froth and bubbles. Shadows are not reflected 
in such (poisoned) liquids and if they ever are, they look 
doubled, net-like (porous) thin and distorted. i6. 

Preparations of potherbs, soups, boiled rice and 
cooked meat are instantaneously decomposed, and 
become putrid, tasteless and omit little odour when in 
contact with poison. All kinds of food become tasteless, 
smellless and colourless when in contact with poison. 
Ripe fruit, under such conditions, is speedily decomposed 
and the unripe ones are found to get prematurely 
ripe. 17 — 18 

If the tooth-twig be anyway charged with poison its 
brush-like end is withered and shattered and if used 
gives rise to a swelling of the lips and the tongue and 
about the gums. In such a case, the swollen part should 
be first rubb ed (with any leaf of rough fibre) and then 
gently rubbed with a plaster composed of Dh&taki 
flowers, Pathyd, stones of Jamiuline (black-berry) and 
honey pasted together. As an alternative, the pait 
should be gently rubbed and dusted over with a plaster 
of powdered Amkotha roots or Sapt a-chchada bark or 
seeds of S'irisha, pasted together with honey. The 
same remedies should be applied in the cases of affec- 
tions due to the use of a poisoned tongue-cleanser or a 
poisoned gargle (Kavala). 12 — 20, 

Poisoned articles for Abhyanga foils and unguents) 
look thick, slimy or discoloured and produce, when 
used, eruptions on the skin which suppurate and exude 
a characteristic secretion attended with pain, perspira- 
tion, fever and bursting of the flesh. The remedy in 
such a case consists in sprinkling cold water over the 
body of the patient and in applying a plaster of sandal 
wood, Tagara, Kushtha, Us’ira, Vemi-patrikd (leaves of 
bamboo), SoiTia-yalli, Afftf'ttd, S'v^i(i-pad 7 na (lotus), 



68o 


'THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap, t 


Kdliyaha and cardamom ' pasted together (with cold 
water), A potion of the same drugs mixed with the 
urine of a cow and the expressed juice of Kapittha is 
equally commended in the present instance. Symptoms 
which mark the use of poisoned armour, garments, 
bedding, cosmetic, washes, infusions, anointments, etc, 
and the remedies for these are identical with those 
consequent upon the use of poisoned unguents, 21-22. 

A poisoned plaster (if applied to the head) leads to 
the falling off of the hair and to violent headache, bleeding 
through the mouth and the nostrils, etc., and the appear- 
ance of glands on the head. The remedy in such a case 
consists in the application of a plaster made of black 
earth treated (Bhdvita) several times with the bile of a 
Rishya (a species of deer), clarified butter and the ex- 
pressed juice of S'ydtnd, Pdlindi (Trivrit) and Tandu- 
liyaka (in succession). The expressed juice of Mdlati 
(flower) or of Mushika-parni, fluid-secretions of fresh 
cow-dung and house-soot as external applications are 
also beneficial in such cases. 23. 

In cases of poisoning through head-unguents or 
through a poisoned turban, cap garland of fllowers, 
or bathing water, measures and remedies as laid down 
in connection with a case of poisoned Anulepana should 
be adopted and applied. In a case of poisoning through 
cosmetics applied to the face, the local skin assumes 
a bluish or tawny brown colour covered with eruptions 
like those in cases of Padmini-kantakaand the symptoms 
peculiar to a case of using a poisoned unguent become 
manifest. The remedy in such a case consists in the ap- 
plication of a plaster composed of (white) sandal wood, 
clarified butter, Payasyd, Yashti madhu, Phanji> (Bh^rgi), 
Vandhujiva and Panarnavd. A potion of honey and 
clarified butter is also beneficial in this case. 24-25, 


Chap. 1.] 


KALPA-STHANAM. 


68l 


A poisoned elephant usually exhibits such symptoms 
as restlessness, copious salivation and redness of the 
eyes. The buttocks, the penis, the anal region and the 
scrotum of its rider coming in contact with the body of 
such an elephant are marked by eruptions. Under such 
conditions both the animal and its rider should be medi- 
cally treated with the remedies laid down in the 
treatment of poisoning through an unguent. 26. 

A poisoned snuff (Nasya) or poisoned smoke (Dhuma) 
produces bleeding from the mouth and nose, etc., pain 
in the head, a discharge of mucus and a derangement 
of the functions of the sense-organs. The remedy in 
such cases consists in drinking and snuffing* a potion of 
clarified butter duly cooked with the milk of a cow 
or such other animal together with Atwishd, Vacha and 
Mallikd flower (as Kalka). A poisoned garland ( of 
flowers) is characterised by the loss of odour and by 
the fading and discolouring of its natural colour, and 
when smelt produces headache and lachrymation. Re- 
medies laid down under the heads of poisoning through 
vapour (Dhuma) and through cosmetics for the face 
(Mukha-lepa) should be used and applied. 27-28. 

The act of applying poisoned oil into the cavity of 
the ears impairs the faculty of hearing and gives rise to 
swelling and pain in that locality and to the secretion 
(of pus) from the affected organs. The filling up of the 
cavity of the ears with a compound of clarified butter, 
honey and the expressed juice of Vahuputrd (S'atdvari)t 


* Dallana explains this couplet to mean that clarified butter cooked 

with milk and Ativishd should he given for drink, and that cooked with 

Vacha and Mdlati flower as an erthine. 

t Dallana says that some read and explain 

to mean l” 


86 



682 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. I. 


or with the juice of Soma-valka in a cold state prove 
curative in such cases. 29. 

The use of a poisoned Anjana (collyrium) to the 
eyes is attended with copious lachrymation, deposit of 
an increased quantity of waxy mucus (in the corners 
of the eyes), a burning sensation, pain (in the affected 
organs), impairment of the sight and even blindness. 
In such a case the patient should be made to drink a 
potion of fresh clarified butter (Sadyo-ghrita)* alone or 
with pasted Pippali which would act as a Tarpana 
(soother). Anjana prepared with the expressed juice of 
Mesha s'ringi, V anina-h'axk, Mushkaka or Ajahania or 
with Satnudra-phena^^-st&d with the bile (Pitta) of a cow 
should be applied to the eyes, or the one prepared 
with the (expressed juice of the) flower of Kapittha, 
Mesha-s'ringi, Bhalldtaka, Bandhuka and Amkotha 
separately, 30. 

The case which is incidental to the use of a paste of 
poisoned sandals, is marked by a swelling in the legs, 
secretion from the affected organs, complete anesthesia 
of the diseased locality and the appearance of vesciles 
thereon. Those due to the use of poisoned shoes or 
foot-stools exhibit symptoms identical with those of 
the above case and the medical treatment in all of 
these cases should be one and the same. Ornaments 
charged with poison lose their former lustre and give 
rise to swelling, suppuration and the cracking of the 
parts they are worn on. The treatment in these cases 
due to the use of poisoned sandals and ornaments 
should be similar to the one advised in connection 

* Some are inclined to take as an adverb meaning “instantly” 

and modifying “ tjti Tr ” meaning thereby that clarified butter should be 
instantly taken. 



KALPA-STHANAM. 


Chap. I.] 


683 


with that due to the use of poisoned unguents 
(Abhyanga). 31-32. 

General Treatment The symptoms 
which characterise cases of poisoning commencing with 
“poisoning through poisoned smoke’^ and ending with 
that due to the use of “poisoned ornaments” should be 
remedied with an eye to each of the specific and charac- 
teristic indications, and the medicine known as the 
MaM-sugandlii Agada to be described hereafter should 
be administered as drink, unguent, snuff and Anjana. 
Purgatives or emetics should be exhibited and even 
strong venesection should be speedily resorted to in 
cases where bleeding would be beneficial. 33-34. 

The drugs known as Mushikd and Ajaruhd should 
be tied round the wrists of a king as prophylactics to 
guard against the effects of poisoned food, since either 
of these two drugs (in virtue of their specific properties) 
tends to neutralise the operativeness of the poison. A 
king surrounded by his devoted friends shall cover his 
chest (with drugs of heart-protecting virtues) and shall 
drink those preparations of clarified butter, which 
are respectively known as the Aje-ya and the Amrita 
Ghritas^. He should drink regularly every day such 
wholesome cordials as honey, clarified butter, curd, 
milk and cold water and use in his food the meat and 
soup of the flesh of a peacock, mungoose, Godhd (a 
species of lizard), or Prishata deer. 35 — A. 

The mode of preparing the Soup 

The flesh of a Godha, mungoose, or deer should be 
cooked and spiced with pasted Pdlindi (Trivrit), Yashti- 
madhu and sugar. The flesh of a peacock should be 
similarly cooked and spiced with sugar, Ativishd 

* See Kalpa-Stlidna, Chapter II. Para 27, and Chapter VII. 
para 5, respectively. 



684 the SUSHRUTA SAMHlTA.i' tChap. t 

and Sunt/ii and that of a Prishata deer with Pippali and 
S'unthi. The soup of S''imbi taken with honey 
and clarified butter should, similarly, be deemed 
beneficial (as being possessed of similar antitoxic 
properties). An intelligent king should always use 
food and drink of poison-destroying properties. 
In a case of imbibed poison, the heart should be 
protected (with a covering of anti-poisonous drugs) 
and the patient should be made to vomit (the contents 
of his stomach) with a potion composed of sugar, 
Pippali, Yashti-madhu, honey and the expressed juice 
of sugar-cane dissolved in water. 35-36. 

Thus ends the first Chapter of the Kalpa-slhdna in the Sus'rula 
Samhita which deals with the mode of protecting food and drink (from 
the effeclf of poison}. 



CRAPTEE II. 


Now we shall discourse on the chapter which treats 
of the indications (effects, nature and operations) of 
Sthavara ^vegetable and mineral) poisons (Sthavara- 
Visha-Vijnaniyam). i. 

Sthavara-poison : its Source (M. T.)— 
There are two kinds of poison vis.^ that obtained from 
immobile things tStlieivara) and that obtained from 
mobile creatures (Jangama). The sources of the 
Sthivara (vegetable and mineral) poison are ten, while 
those of the Jangama (animal) poison are sixteen in 
number. The ten sources from which a StMvara 
poison may be obtained are roots, leaves, fruits, flowers, 
bark, milky exudations, pith (Sdra', gum (Nirydsa), 
bulb and a mineral or metal (Dha.tu). 2-3. 

Names of the different Vegetable and 
Mineral poisons l—KlUaka, As'va-indra, Gunjd, 
Subandha^, Gar gar aka, Karaghdta, Vidytich-chhikhd 
and Vijayd are the eight root-poisons. Visha-Patrikd, 
Lainbd, Avaraddrtika, Karambha and Makd-Karambha 
are the five leaf-poisons. The fruits of Kumudvati, 
Renukd, Karambha, Mahd-Karambha, Karkotaka, 
Venuka, Khadyotaka, Charmari, Ibha-gandhd, Sarpa- 
ghdti, Nandana and Sdra-pdka, numbering twelve in all, 
are the twelve fruit-poisons. The flowers of Vetra, 
Kadamba, Vallija {Ndrdcha — D. R ), Karambha and 
MahdKarambha are the five flower-poisons. The bark, 
pith and gum of Aiitrapdchaka, Kartariya, Satiriyaka, 
Kara-ghdta, Karambha, Nandana and Vardtaka are 


• Lamb^, according to G.iyi— D. R. 



686 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. II. 


the seven bark-poisons, pitb-poisons and gum-poisons. 
The milky exudations of Kumudaghni, Sntthi and 
fdla-Kshiri are poisons and are known as the three 
Kskira-Vishas, Phen^s'ma-bhasma ■ ( white arsenic ) 
and Haritala ( yellew orpiment ) are the two mineral 
poisons. Kdla-kuta, Vaisa-ndbha, Sarshapaka, Pdlaka^ 
Kardamaka, Vairdiaka, Mustaka, S'ringi-visha, Prapaun- 
darika^ Mulaka^ Hdldhala, Mahd-visha and Karkaiaka, 
numbering thirteen in all, are the bulb-poisons. Thus 
the number of poisons obtained from the vegetable 
and mineral world (Sthdvara) amount to fifty-five in 
all. 4-1 r. 

Metrical Text:— There are four kinds of 
Vatsa ndbha poisons, two kinds of Mustaka and six 
kinds of Sarshapaka. The remaining ones have no 
different species. 12. 

Effects of poison on the human or- 
ganism Root-poisons or poisonous roots produce 
a twisting pain in the limbs, delirium and loss of 
consciousness. A leaf-poison or poisonous leaf gives 
rise to yawning, difficult breathing and a twisting pain 
in the limbs. A fruit poison is attended with a 
swelling of the scrotum, a burning sensation in the body 
and an aversion to food. A fiower-poison gives rise to 
vomiting, distensions of the abdomen and loss of cons- 
sciousness. A bark-poison, or pitk-poison, or gum-poison 
is .marked by a fetour in the mouth, roughness of the 
body, headache and a secretion of Kapha (mucus from 
the mouth). The effects of the poisonous milky exud- 
ations (of a tree, plant or creeper) are foaming from 
the mouth, loose stools (diarrhoea) and a curvature 
(drawing back! of the tongue, whereas a mineral poison 
gives rise to pain in the heart, fainting and a burning 
sensation in the region of the palate. All these are 



Chap. 11.3 KALPA STHANAM. 687 

slow poisons proving fatal only after a considerable 
length of time. 13. 

Effects of Bulb-poisons Now we shall 
describe in full the respective effects of the bulb-poisons 
which are very strong (^Tikshna) in their actions The 
bulb-poison known as the Kiilakuta produces complete 
anesthesia, shivering and numbness. Paralysis of the 
neck and yellowness of the stool, urine and of the 
eye-balls are the symptoms produced in ' a case of 
Vatsansibba-poisoiiing. Retention of stool and urine 
(Andha), disorders of the palate and the appearance of 
glands are the effects of a case of Sarsbapa-poisoning. 
Loss of speech and weakness of the neck are the 
symptoms in a case of Palaka poisoning. Water-brash 
loose stools (diarrhoea! and a yellowness of the eyes 
mark a case of Kardamaka-poisoning. Pain in the limbs 
and diseases of the head are produced in a case of 
VairJitaka-poisoning. Shivering and a numbness of the 
limbs are the effects of a case of Mustaka-poisoning. 
Lassitude, a burning sensation in the body and an en- 
largement of the abdomen mark a case of S'ring'i-visba- 
poisoning. An enlargement of the abdomen and 
redness of the eyes are the symptoms of Pundarika- 
poisoning. A discolouring of the complexion, vomiting 
hic-cough, swelling and a loss of consciousness are the 
effects of the Mulaka-poison. Difficult breathing and 
a tawny brown colour of the skin mark a case of Hsilai- 
bala-poisoning. Aneurysm (Granthi) on the region of 
the heart and a piercing pain in the same are the symp- 
toms in a case of Mabd-visba-poisoning ; while a case of 
Karkataka-poisoning is marked by laughing, gushing 
of the teeth and jumping up (without any caused. 14 

Specific properties of the above- 
nained Bulb-poisons: — These thirteen kinds of 



688 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. II. 


bulbous poisons should be deemed as very strong?'' 
in their potency and they possess the following ten 
properties in common. They are parching (Ruksha) 
and heat-making (Ushna. in their potency. They are 
sharp (Tikshna) and subtle (Sukshma) i.e., have the 
power of penetrating into the minutest capillaries of 
the body and are instantaneous (As'u) in their effects. 
They first permeate the whole organism and become 
subsequently digested (Vyavdyi) and disintegrate the root- 
principles of the body (Vikds'i). They are non-viscid 
(Vis'ada), light in potency (Laghu) and indigestible 
(Apdki). 15. 

A poison aggravates the bodily Vdyu in virtue of its 
parching quality and vitiates the blood and the Pitta 
through its heat-generating property. It overwhelms 
the mind (produces unconsciousness) and tends to 
disintegrate the limbs and muscles in virtue of its sharp- 
ness and penetrates into and deranges the minutest capi- 
llaries owing to its extreme subtile essence. It proves 
speedily fatal owing to its speedy activity and spreads 
through the entire organism (which is the very nature of 
a drug") on account of its rapid permeating or expansive 
quality, It annihilates the root-principles (Dhdtus) as 
well as the Doshas and the Malas (excreta) of the body 
through the power of disintregation, and does not 
addhere to any spot therein owing to its non-viscidness. 
It bafifies the efficacies of other drugs and thus becomes 
unremediable on account of the extreme lightness (of 
its potency), and it cannot be easily assimilated owing 
to its innate indigestibility. It thus proves trouble- 
some for a long time. 16. 

* The text has ‘‘Ugra-viryani’* (strong in potency). Gayi reads 
“Agra-Vity^ni” (of great poteney). 



Cbap. II.] 


KALPA STHANAM. 


689 


A poison of whatsoever sort, whether animal, 
vegetable, or chemical, which proves almost instan- 
taneously fatal (within a day) should be regarded as 
possessed of all the ten aforesaid qualities, ly. 

Definition of Dushi-visha (weak and 
slow poison) ;-^A poison whether animal, vegetable 
or chemical, not fully eliminated from the system and 
partially inherent therein, enfeebled, of course by anti- 
poisonous remedies, is designated a DnsM-visha (weak 
and slow poison) which is even extended to those 
the keenness of potency whereof is enfeebled by the 
sun, the fire and the wind, as well as to those which 
are found to be naturally devoid of some of the ten 
aforesaid natural qualities of a poison. A Dushi visha, 
owing to its enfeebled or attenuated virtue and as a 
necessary consequence of its being covered over with 
the bodily Kapha, ceases to be fatal though retained in 
the system for a number of years. 18, 

Symptoms of weak and slow poison- 
ing :-A person afflicted with any sort of DusM- 
Visha develops such symptoms as, looseness of 
stool (diarrhoea), a discoloured complexion, fetor in 
the body, bad taste in the mouth, thirst, epileptic fits, 
vomiting (D. R.— vertigo), lassitude, confused speech 
and all the symptoms of Dushyodara.* A Dushi- 
Visha lodged in the Am^saya (stomach) gives rise to 
diseases due to the combined action of the Vdyu and 
Kapha ; seated in the Pakv^saya (intestines) it brings on 
diseases due to the deranged condition of the Vdyu and 
Pitta and leads to the falling off of the hair. The patient 
becomes rapidly atrophied, and looks like a wingless 
bird. When it attacks the Rasa, etc.f of the system 

♦ See Chapter VII. para lo, Niddna-sthdna. 

t These are the seven fundamental principles of the body. 

87 



690 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. II. 


it produces the diseases* peculiar to the root or vital 
principles of the body. Its action on the body becomes 
aggravated on a cloudy day and by exposure to cold 
and wind. 19-21. 

Premonitory Symptoms of Dushi-* 
ViSha poisoning" : — Now hear me first describe 
the premonitory symptoms (of its aggravation). They 
are as follow : —Sleepiness, heaviness (of the limbs), 
yawning, a sense of looseness ' (in the joints), horripi- 
lation and aching of the limbs. These are followed 
by a sense of intoxication after meals, indigestion, 
disrelish for food, eruptions of circular patches (Man- 
dala) on the skin, urticaria (Kotha), fainting fits, loss of 
the vital principles of the organism (D. R — loss of flesh\ 
swelling of the face and the extremities (D.R, — Atro- 
phy of the hands and legs), ascites (Dakodara), vomiting, 
epileptic fits, Visharaa-jvara, high-fever and an un- 
quenchchable thirst. Moreover, some of these poisons 
produce insanity. Some of them are characterised by 
an obstinate constipation of the bowels (Anaha), others, 
by an involuntary emission of semen while a few others 
produce confused speech, Kushtha (leprosy), or some 
other similar disease. 22. 

Derivative IVIeaning of “ Dushi- 
ViSha ’’ : — A constant use of some particular time,f 
place and diet as well as constant and regular day-sleep 
tends (slowly) to poison the fundamental root-principles 


* See Chapter xxvii, Sutra Sthdna. 

t By “ the particular time” is meant a cloudy and windy day 
as well as the rainy season. By “the particular place” is meant a 
marshy country, and by “the particular diet”£is meant wine, sesamura, 
Kulaltha-pulse, etc. as well as physical exercise, sexual intercourse, 
fils of anger, etc, 



Chap. IL] KALPA STHANAM. 69 1 

(DK^tus) of the body and this (slow) poison is conse- 
quently known as the DusM-Visha. 23. 

Symptoms of the different stages 
of Sthavara poisoning In the first stage 
of a case of poisoning by a Stli£^vara (vegetable 01 
mineral) poison, the tongue becomes dark brown and 
numbed, and epileptic fits and hard breathing follow in its 
wake. The second stage is marked by such symptoms 
as shivering, perspiration, burning sensation, itching 
and pain in the body ; when seated in the Amds'aya 
(stomach) it causes pain in the region of the heart, The 
third stage is marked by a dryness of the palate and 
severe (colic) pain in the stomach. The eyes become 
discoloured, yellow-tinted aud swollen. When seated 
in the Pakvds'aya (intestines) it produces hic-cough, 
cough, and a sort of pricking pain and rumbling sound 
in the Antra (intestines). The fourth stage is marked 
by an extreme heaviness of the head. The fifth stage 
is marked by salivation, discolouring of the body and 
a breaking pain in the joints. It is marked also by 
the aggravation of all the Doshas and pain in the 
Pakvddhdna (intestines ?). The sixth stage is charac- 
terised by loss of consciousness or excessive diarrhoea ; 
while the seventh stage is marked by a breaking pain 
in the back, the shoulders and the waist and a complete 
stoppage (of respiration)* 24. 

Treatment In the first stage the patient 
should be made to vomit and to drink cold water after 
that. Then an Agada (Anti-poisonous remedy) mixed 
with honey and clarified butter should be given him. 
In the second stage, the patient should be first made to 
vomit as in the preceding stage and then a purgative 

The seven stages of the poisoning are due to the poisoning of the 
seven fundamantal root-principles (DhEitus) of the body in succession. 



692 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHltA. 


[Chap. II. 


should be given him. Anti-poisonous potions, medi- 
cated snuffs (Nasya) and Anjanas possessed of similar 
virtues are beneficial ' in the third stage. An anti- 
poisonous potion through the vehicle of a Sneha (clari- 
fied butter) is efficacious in the fourth stage. In the 
fifth stage the patient should be given an antipoison- 
ous medicine with the decoction of Y ashti-madhu 
and honey. In the sixth stage the treatment. should be 
as in a case of diarrhoea (Atisdra) and the use of 
a medicated snuff in the form of an Avapida is 
recommended. The latter remedy (A vapid a- Nasya) 
should be applied in the seventh stage as well and the 
scalp after being shaved in 'the shape of a Kdka-pada* 
(crow’s claw) should alsof be incised with a small 
incision. The incised flesh and the (vitiated) blood 
should also be removed. 25. 

Kosh^taky^di Yavsigu S— After adopting 
the respective measures enjoined in respect of the 
several stages of poisoning, the patient should, in the 
interval of any two stages be made to drink in a cold 
state a gruel (Yavdgu) prepared with the decoctions of 
Koshdtaki (Ghosh^), Agnika (Ajamodd), Pdthd^ Surya- 
valli, Amritd, AbJiayd,S'irisha, Kinihi, S'du, Girydhvdt 
(white Apardjitd), the two kinds of Rajafd, the two kinds 
of Punarnavd, Harenu, Trikatu, Sdrivd, and Bald (D.R; 
Sdrivd and Utpala) mixed with honey and clarified 
butter. This is beneficial in both the cases of (animal 
and vegetable) poisoning. 26, 


* The particular form of shaving the hair, in which the part of 
the scalp from and above the forehead only is shaved is technically 
called a Ec(ka-pada. 

t The particle "vk” means that the measures laid down in respect of 
the treatment of a Jangama poison viz. beating the patient on' the 
head, forehead, etc., should also be resorted to. 



Chap. li.] KALPA STHANAM. 693 

AJcya-Ghri'ta.S — Clarified butter should be duly 
cooked with an adequate quantity of water and the 
Kalka of Yashti-madhu, Tagara, Kushtha, Bhadfa-ddru, 
Haremi, Punndga, Eld, Ela-vdluka, Ndga-kes'ard, Utpala, 
sugar, Vidanga, Chandana, Patra, Priydngu, Dhyd- 
inaka, the two kinds Haridrd, the two’ kinds of Vrihati, 
the two kinds of Sdrivd, Sthird (^dla-parni) and Sahd 
(Pris'ni-parni). It is called the Ajeya-Ghrita., It 
speedily destroys all kinds of poison in the system and 
is infallible in its efficacy. 27. 

Vishelri-Agadla S — A patient afflicted with the 
effects of Dushi-Vislia inherent in the system should be 
first fomented and cleansed by both emetics and purga- 
tives. The following anti-poisonous Agada (medicine) 
should then be taken daily. The recipe of this Agada 
is as follows: — Pippali, Dhydmaha, Mdmsi, Sdvara 
(Lodhra), Paripelava*, Suvarchikd, small Eld, Toya 
(Bdlaka) and Suvarna-Gairika should be taken with 
honey. It destroys, when taken, the Dushi-Visha (slow 
chemical poisoning) in the system. It is called the 
VishEfri- Agada and its efficacy extends also to cases of 
all other kinds of poisoning. 28. 

Treatment of the Supervening 
Symptoms of poisoning;— Cases of fever, 
burning sensation in the body, hic-cough, constipation 
of the bowels, loss of semen, swelling, diarrhoea, epi- 
leptic fits, heart-disease, ascites, insanity, shivering, 
and such other supervening symptoms (consequent 
on the effects of a Dushi-Visha inherent in the 
system) should be treated with remedies laid down 
under the respective heads of the aforesaid diseases 
in accompaniment with (suitable) anti-poisonous 
medicines. 29. 

* "Paiipelava” means eilhei “Dhanydka’' or “Kaivartta-Muslaka”. 



694 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap, II. 

Prognosis : — A case of Dushi-Visha poisoning 
in a prudent and judicious person, and of recent growth 
is easily cured, while palliation is the only relief that 
can be offered in a case of more than a year’s standing. 
In an enfeebled and intemperate patient, it should 
be considered as incurable. 30. 

Thus ends the second Chapter of the Kalpa Sthdna in the Sus'ruta 
Samhita which treats of the Sthdvara and jangama poisons. 



CHAPTER in. 


Now we shall discourse on the subject of (the nature, 
virtue, etc. of) animal poisons (jangama-Visha- 

vijnsCniya). i. 

We have briefly said before that there are sixteen 
situations of poison in the bodies of venomous animals. 
Now we shall deal with them in detail. 2. 

Locations : — An animal poison is usually 
situated in the following parts, viz ; the sight, breath, 
teeth, nails, urine, stool, semen, saliva, menstrual blood, 
stings, belching^', anus, bones, bile, bristles (^uka) and 
in the dead body of an animal. 3. 

Of these, the venom of celestial serpents lies in their 
sight and breath, that of the terrestrial ones in their 
fangs while that of cats, dogs, monkeys, Makara 
(alligators ?), Frogs, Pdka-matsyas (a kind of insect), 
lizards (Godhd), mollusks (Snails), PrachalAkas (a kind 
of insect), domestic lizards, four-legged insects and of 
any other species of flies such as mosquitoes, etc., lies 
in their teeth and nails. 4. 

The venom of a Chipita, Pichchataka, Kashdya- 
vAsika, Sarshapa-vdsika, Totaka, Varchah-kita, Kaun- 
dilyaka and such-like insects lies in their urine and 
excreta. The poison of a mouse or rat lies in its semen, 
while that of a Lutd (spider) lies in its saliva, urine, 
excreta, fangs, nails, semen and menstrual fluid 
(ovum). 5 — 6. 

The venom of a scorpion, Vis'vambhara, Rdjiva-fish, 
Uchchitinga (cricket) aud a sea-scorpion lies in their 

* Vriddha-Vdgbhala reads Alaji-S'onile in place of "Visardhjla.” 



696 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. III. 


saliva. The venom of a Chitra-s'irah, Sardva, Kurdis'ata, 
Ddruka, Arimedaka and Sdrikd-mukha, lies in their 
fangs, belching, stool and urine. The venom of a fly, 
a Kanabha and leeches lies in their fangs. The poison 
lies in the bones of an animal killed by any poison, as 
well as in those of a snake, a Varati and a fish*. 
The poison lies in the bile of a ^akuli, a Rakta-rdji and 
a Chdraki fish. .The poison lies in the bristles (^uka) 
and the head of a. Sukshma-tunda, an Uchchitinga 
(cricket), a wasp, a centipede (Satapadi), a ^uka, a Vala 
bhika, a ^ringi and a bee. The dead body of a snake 
or an insect is poisonous in itself. , Animals not includ- 
ed in the above list should be deemed as belonging to 
the fang-venomed species the poison lies in their 
fangs. 7 — II. 

WlcmorablG Vei*S6S : — The enemies of a 
sovereign poison the pastures, water, roads, food-stuff’s 
and smoke (Dhuma) of their country and even charge 
the atmosphere with poison in the event of his making 
incursions into their country. The poisonous nature 
of the foregoing things should be ascertained from 
the following features and should be duly purified 
(before use). 12-A. 

Characteristic Features and Purifi- 
cations of poisoned water, etc A sheet 

of poisoned water becomes slimy, strong-smelling, frothy 
and marked with (black-coloured; lines on the surface. 
Frogs and fish living in the water die without any 
apparent cause. Birds and beasts that live (in the 
water and) on its shores roam about wildly in confusion 
(from the effects of poison), and a man, a horse ' or an 
elephant, by bathing in this (poisoned) water is afflicted 

* Some read (Varati fish) as one word — the pame of a 

species of fish. • 



Chap. III.] 


KALPA STHANAM. 


697 


with vomiting, fainting, fever, • a burning sensation 
and swelling of the limbs. These disorders (in men 
and animals) should be immediately attended to 
and remedied and no pains should be spared to purify 
such poisoned water. The cold ashes, of Dhava, 
As'va-karm, Asafta, Pdrihkadra, PAtald, Siddhaka, 
Mokshaka, Rdja-drmna zxid' Sotnavalka burnt together, 
should be cast into the poisoned pool or tank, whereby 
its water would be purified ; as an alternative, an 
Anjali-measure (half a seer) of the said ashes' cast in a 
Ghata-measure* (sixty-four seers) of the required water 
would lead to its purification. 12-B. 

A poisoned ground or stone-slab, landing stage 
or desert country gives rise to swellings in those parts 
of the bodies of men, bullocks, horses, asses, camels 
and elephants that may chance to come in contact 
with them. In such cases a burning sensation is felt in 
the affected parts and the hair and nails (of these 
parts) fall off. In these cases, the poisoned surface 
should be purified by sprinkling it over with a solution 
of Anania and Sat-va-gandha (the scented drugs) dis- 
solved in wine (Sur 4 )f , or with (an adequate quantity 
of) black clay!|; dissolved in water or with the decoc 
tion of Vidanga^ Pdthd, and Katabhi. 12. C. 

Poisoned hay or fodder or any other poisoned food- 
stuff produces lassitude, fainting, vomiting, diarrhoea or 
even death (of the animal partaking thereof). Such cases 
should be treated with proper anti-poisonous medicines 

* Jejjata explains ‘Ghata’ as a pitcher, i.e., a pitcher-ful of water. 

t D.allana holds that the use of the plural number here in “ ” 

means that honey, treacle, etc. should also be used with wine. 

t Dallana says that some read * earth of an ant-hill* in place of ‘black 
clay for its anti-poisonous properties. 


88 



698 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [C ap- lit. 

according to the indications of each case. As an alter- 
native, drums and other musical instruments smeared 
with plasters of anti-poisonous compounds (Agadas)j^ 
should be beaten and sounded (round them). Equal parts 
of silver (Tdra), mercury {Su^dra) and Indra-Gopa insects 
with Kuril- Vindaf equal in weight to that of the 
entire preceding compound, pasted with the bile of a 
Kapila (brown) cow, should be used as a paste over the 
musical instruments (in such cases). The sounds of 
such drums, etc. (pasted with such anti-poisonous drugs) 
are said to destroy the effects of even the most dreadful 
poison. 12-D. 

Poisons of the Atmosphere and its 
purification ! — The dropping of birds from the 
skies to the earth below in a tired condition is a 
distinct indication of the wind and the smoke 
(of the atmosphere) being charged with poison. It is 
further attended with an attack of cough, catarrh, 
head ache, and of severe eye-diseases among persons in- 
haling the same wind and smoke. In such cases the 
(poisoned) atmosphere should be purified by burning 
quantities of Ldkshd, Haridrd, Aii-vishd, Abhayd, 
Abda (Musta), Renuka, Eld, Dala (Teja-Patra), Valka 
(cinnamon), Kiishtha and Priangu in the open ground. 
The fumes of these drugs would purify the Anila (air) 
and the Dhuma (smoke) from the poison they had been 
charged with 12, 

IWythoIogical origin of poison (Visha): 
— It is stated in the Scriptures that a demon named 
Kaitabha obstructed in various ways, the work of 
the self-origined Brahmd when he was engaged in 
creating this world. At this the omnipotent god grew 

* See Chapter VII, Kalpa-Sthina. 

t ‘Sarivii’ according to Dallana. ‘Bhadra-musta’ according to others. 



Chap. III.] KALPA STHANAM. 699 

extremely wrathful. The vehement wrath of the god 
gradually swollen and inflamed, at last emanated in 
physical forms from his mouth and reduced the mighty, 
death-like, roaring fiend to ashes. But the energy of 
that terrific wrath went on increasing even after the 
destruction of the demon, at the sight of which the 
gods were greatly depressed in spirit. The term Visha 
(poison) is so called from the fact of its filling the gods 
with Viskdda (depression of spirits). After that the god 
of creation, having finished his (self imposed) task of 
creating this world, cast that wrath both into the mobile 
and the immobile creations Just as the atmospheric 
water which is of imperceptible and undeveloped taste, 
acquires the specific taste of the ground or soil it 
falls upon, so it is the very nature of the (tasteless) Visha 
that it partakes of the specific taste (Rasa) of a thing or 
animal in which it exists. 13. 

Properties of poisons All the sharp 
and violent qualities are present in poison. Hence 
poisons should be considered as aggravating and and 
deranging all the Doshas of the body. The Doshas 
aggravated and charged with poison forego their own 
specific functions. Hence poison can never be digested 
or assimilated in the system. It stops the power of 
inhaling. Expiration (exhalation of the breath) becomes 
impossible owing to the internal passages having been 
choked by the deranged Kapha. Consequently a 
poisoned person drops down in an unconscious state 
even when life is still present within his body. 14. 

Nature and Location of Snake- 
poison : — The p ison of a snake like the semen in 
an adult male lies diffused all through its organism. 
.'\s semen is gathered up, dislodged and subsequently 
emitted through the urethra by being agitated (by 



700 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. III. 


contact with woman, etc.), so the poison in a snake is 
gathered up and secreted through the holes of its 
fangs under the conditions of anger and agitation. The 
fangs being hook-shaped, a snake cannot secrete its 
poison without lowering its hood just after a bite. 15. 

General treatment of poisoning:— 
Since a poison of whatever sort is extremely keen, 
sharp and heat-making in its poteney, a copious sprink- 
ling with cold water should be used in all cases of 
poisoning. But since the poison of an insect is mild 
and not too much heat-making in its potency and as 
it engenders a large quantity of Vdyu and Kapha in the 
organism, measures of fomentation [Sveda) are not 
forbidden in a case of insect-bite. A bite by a 
strongly poisoned insect, however, should be treated as 
a snake-bite to all intents and purposes. 16. 

The poison of a venomed dart or of a snake- 
bite courses through the whole organism of the victim 
but it is its nature that it returns to the place of hurt 
and bite respectively, A man eating, from culpable 
gluttony, the flesh of such an animal, just dead (from the 
effects of poison), is afflicted with symptoms and diseases 
peculiar to the specific pathogenetic virtues of the poison 
with which the dead body is charged, and, in the long 
run, meets with his doom. Hence the flesh of an 
animal killed by a venomed dart or a snake bite (should 
be considered as fatal as the poison itself and) should 
not be taken immediately after its death. The flesh of 
such an animal, however, may be eaten after a period of 
forty eight minutes (Muhurta) from its death after the 
portions of the hurt and the bite have been removed. 17. 

Symptoms Of taking poison inter- 
nally Whoever passes a black sooty stool with loud 
flatus, or sheds hot tears and drops down with agony, 



Chap. Ill,] 


KALPA-STHANAM. 


•JOI 

and whose complexion becomes discoloured, and whose 
mouth becomes filled with foam, should be considered as 
afflicted with poison taken internally (Visha-pita). The 
heart of such a man (dying from the effects of internal 
poisoning) cannot be burnt in fire ; since the poison 
from its very nature lies extended in the whole viscera 
of the heart, the seat of cognition*. i8. 

Fatal bites : — A man bitten by a snake in any 
of the vulnerable parts of the body, or near (the root of) 
an As'vatthva tree, or a temple, at the cremation ground 
or on an ant-hill, or at the meeting of day and night, or 
at the crossings of roads or under the influence of the 
Bharani or Maghd asterisms (astral mansions) should be 
given up as lost. The poison of a hooded cobra 
(Darvri-kara, proves instantaneously fatal. All poisons 
become doubly strong and operative in summer 
(Ushna)f . In cases of persons suffering from indigestion, 
urinary complaints, or from the effects of deranged Pitta 
or oppressed with the heat of the sun (sun stroke) as 
well as infants, old men, invalids, emaciated persons, 
pregnant women, men of timid disposition, or of a dry 
temperament, or oppressed with hunger, or bitten on a 
cloudy day, the poisons become doubly strong and 
operative. 19-20. 

On the other hand, a snake bitten person, into whose 
body an incision is unattended with bleeding, or on 
whose body the strokes of lashes leave no marks, nor 

* In Ihe Charaka Samhild also we come across identical ex- 
pressions of opinion as to the scat of poison in the dead body of an 
animal or man, dying from poison from a poisoned dart or snake-bite or 

from poison administered internally. See chapter xxiii, chikilsa-sthdna 

Charaka Samhitd. 

t In place of some read This would mean "if 

bitten in the upper part of the body,” 



702 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. III. 


does horripilation appear even after a copious pouring 
of cold water on the body, should be likewise given up 
as lost. A case of snake-bite in which the tongue of the 
victim is found to be coated white and whose hair falls 
off (on the slightest pull), the bridge of whose nose be- 
comes bent and the voice hoarse, where there is lock- 
jaw and the appearance of a blackish-red swelling 
about the bite, — such a case should be given up as 
hopeless, 21 22. 

The case in which thick, long lumps of mucus are ex- 
pectorated accompanied by bleeding from both the 
upward and the downward orifices of the body with 
distinct impression of all the fangs on the bitten part, 
should be given up by the physician. 23. 

A case of snake-bite marked by the symptoms of 
an insane state like that of a drunkard and accom- 
panied by severe distressing symptoms (Upadrava), 
as well as loss of voice and complexion and an absence 
of the circulation of blood* and by other fatal symptoms 
should be abandoned and no action need be taken 
therein. 24, 

Thus ends the third Chapter of the Kalpa-Sthdna in the Sus'ruta 
Samhitd which treats of animal poisons. 

* The text has “Avegi”. Kdrtika explains it to mean “with sup- 
pression of the natural urgings, it., of stool, urine, etc. 



CHAt’TER IV. 

Now we shall discourse on the Chapter which 
treats of the specific features of the poison of a snake- 
bite (Sarpa-dashta-Visha-Vijnaniya). i. 

Having laid himself prostrate at the feet of the holy 
and wise Dhanvantari, the master of all the S'dstras, 
Sus'ruta addressed him as follows : — "Enlighten and 
illumineus, O Lord, on the number and classification 
of snakes, on the nature of their poison and on the 
distinguishing marks of their respective bites”, where- 
upon Dhanvantari, the foremost of all physicians replied 
as follows ; — Innumerable are the families of serpents, 
of which Takshaka and Visuki are the foremost and the 
most renowned. These are supposed to carry the earth* 
with the oceans, mountains and the islands on their 
heads and are as powerful and furious as the blazing 
fire, fed upon the libations ol clarified butter. I make 
obeisance to those who constantly roar, bring down 
rain, scorch the whole world (with the heat of their 
hundred-headed venom) and are capable of destroying 
the universe with their angry looks and poisonous breath. 
It is fruitless, O Sus'ruta, to enter into a discourse on 
the treatment of their bites as they are beyond the 
curative virtues of all terrestrial remedies. z-A. 

Classification I shall, however, describe in 
due order, the classification of the terrestrial snakes 
whose poison lies in their fangs wherewith they bite the 
human beings (and other animals). They are eighty in 
number, classified into five main genera, namely, the 


* In the Hindu mythology the earth is supposed to rest on the 
heads of snakes, the inmates of the infernal region. 



^04 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHif A. [Chap. IV. 

Darvi-kara (hooded), Mandali (hoodless and painted 
with circular patches or rings of varied colours on 
their skin), EsCjim^n (hoodless and striped), Nirviska 
(non-venomous or slightly venomous) and Vaikaranja 
(hybrid species). The last named is also, in its turn, 
divided into three sub-divisions only, viz., the Darvi-kara 
(hooded), the Mandali (hoodless and ring-marked) and 
the RAjimdn (striped ones). 2. 

Of these there are twenty-six kinds of Darvi-kara 
snakes, twenty-two of the Mandali species, ten of the 
Rdji-mdn class, twelve of the Nirvisha (non-venomous) 
species and three of the Vaikaranja (hybrid) species. 
Snakes born of Vaikaranja parents are of variegated 
colours (Chitra) and are of seven different species (three 
of these being Mandali (marked with rings) and (four) 
Rdjila (marked with stripes). 3. 

Classification of snake-bites :--A 

snake trampled under foot, or in a fit of anger or hunger, 
or anywise terrified or attacked, or out of its innate 
malicious nature, will bite a man or an animal. The bites 
of these snakes highly enraged as they are, are grouped 
under three heads by men conversant with their nature, 
viz., Sarpita (deep-punctured), Radita (superficially 
punctured) and Nirvlska (non-venomous) bites. Some of 
the authorities on snake-bites,however, add a fourth kind 
viz,, Sarpdngdbhihata (coming in contact with the body 
of a serpent). 4* A. 

Their specific Symptoms The bite in 
which one, two or more marks (punctures) of fangs of 
considerable depth are found on the affected part 
attended with a slight bleeding as well as those which 
are extremely slender and owe their origin to the turning 
aside and lowering of its mouth (head) immediatelyafter 
the bite and are attended with swelling and the charac- 



Chap. IV.] 


KALPA STHANAM. 


.705 


teristic changes (in the system of the victim) should be 
known as the Sarpiti bite. A (superficial) puncture (or 
punctures) made by the fangs of a snake and the affected 
part being attended with reddish', bluish, whitish or 
yellowish lines or stripes is called the Radita bite, which 
is characterised by the presence of a very small quantity 
of venom in the punctured wound. A Nirvisha (non- 
venomous)bitc is marked by the presence of one or more 
fang marks, an absence of swelling and the presence of 
slightly vitiated blood at the spot and is not attended 
with any change in the normal (physiological) condition 
of the person bitten. The contact of a snake with the 
body of a naturally timid person may cause the aggra- 
vation of his bodily Vayu and produce a swelling of the 
part. Such a man is said to be Sarpa'ng^bhihata* 
(affected by the touch of a snake). 4. 

A bite by a diseased or agitated snake or by an 
extremely old or young one, should be considered as 
considerably less venomous. The poison of a snake 
is inoperative in a country resorted to by the celestial 
Garuda (the king of birds), or by the gods, Yakshas, 
Siddhas and Brahmarshis, as well as in one in which 
there are drugs of anti-venomous virtues. 5. 

Characteristic features of the dif- 
ferent Species of snakes Those having 
hoods and marked with spots resembling a wheel or a 
plough, an umbrella or a cross (Svastika) or a goad 
(Amkusa) on their heads and are extremely swift, 
should be known as the Darvi-kara snakes. Those 
which arc large and slow and marked with parti-coloured 

* It should be noted here that coming in contact with thorns and 
n.aiU, etc., if unnoticed, miy also produce in the minds of persons the fear 
of having been bitten by a snal:e and may thus produce the effects of 
such poisoning. 


89 



J'06 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap, IV. 

ring-like or circular spots on their skin, and have the 
glow of the sun or fire should be known as Mandali 
snakes, while those which are glossy and whose bodies 
are painted with parti-coloured horizontal, perpendi- 
cular and lateral stripes, should be known as the 
Raiijiman species 6. 

Features of the different Castes 
amongst snakes ;--The snakes whose skin is 
lustrous like a pearl or silver, is coloured yellow and looks 
like gold and emits a sweet smell, should be regarded 
as belonging to the Br£ilimaiia species of snakes. Those 
which are glossy, extremely irritable in their nature 
and marked with spots on their skin resembling the 
discs of the sun and moon, or of the shape of a conch- 
shell (Ambuja) or an umbrella, should be regarded 
as belonging to the Kshatriya species. The snakes of 
the Vaisya caste are coloured black or red or blackish 
grey or ash-coloured or pigeon-coloured and are 
(crooked or hard in their structures) like a Vajra. The 
snakes which resemble a buffalo or a leopard in colour 
and lustre or are rough-skinned or are possessed of a 
colour other than the preceding ones should be consi- 
dered as belonging to the Sudra class. 7. 

The poison of all hooded snakes (Phani) deranges 
and aggravates the bodily Vatyu, that of the Mandali 
(circular spotted) species aggravates the Pitta, while 
that of the Rdjimdn (striped) class aggravates the bodily 
Kapha. The poison of a snake of hybrid (Vaikaranja) 
origin aggravates the two particular Doshas of the body 
which its parents would have separately aggravated — a 
fact which helps us to ascertain the species to which its 
parents belong. 8. 

Particular habits of different kinds 
of snakes : — Now hear me describe the special 



Chap. IV.] ICALPA STHANAM. 70^ 

habits of each of these families of snakes. A snake of 
the Rdjimdn species, is found abroad in the fourth or 
the last quarter of the night, the Mandali snakes are 
found to be out in the three preceding watches, while 
the Darvi-kara snakes are found to be abroad (in quest 
of prey) only in the day time. 9. 

A Darvi-kara snake of tender age, a middle-aged 
Rdjimdn snake and an old Mandali snake are as fatal 
as personified death. A snake of extremely tender 
age, as well as the one roughly handled by a 
mungoose, or oppressed with water, as well as an 
extremely old and emaciated one, or one which is 
extremely frightened or has recently cast off its slough 
should be considered as mild-venomed. lO-ll. 

Names of the different Species of 
Darvi-kara Snakes : — Snakes known asKrishna- 
Sarpa, Mahd-krishna, Krishnodara, Sveta-kapota, Vald 
haka, Mahd-Sarpa, Sankha-pdla, Lohitdksha, Gave- 
dhuka, Parisarpa Khanda-phana, Kakuda, Padma, 
Mahd-Padma, Darbha-pushpa, Dadhi-mukha, Pundarika, 
Bhrukuthmukha, Vishklra, PushpibhAku-ua, Gvtl-sarpa, 
Riju-sarpa, Svetodara, Mahd-s'iras, Alagarda and As'i- 
visha belong to the family of Darvi kira snakes. 12 
Names of the different Species of 
Mandali Snakes : — Snakes known as Adarsha- 
mandala, Sveta-mandala, Rakta-mandala, Chitra-man- 
dala, Prishata, Rodhra-pushpa, Milindaka, Gonasa, Vrid- 
dha-gonasa, Panasa, Mahd-panasa, Venu-patraka, Sis'uka,' 
Madana, Palimhira, Pingala, Tantuka, Pushpa-pdndu, 
Shadga, Agnika, Vabhru, Kashdya, Kalusha, Pdravata, 
Hastdbharana, Chitraka and Enipada belong to the 
family of the Mandali species of snakes. 13. 

Names of the different species of 
Rajim^n Snakes Snakes known as Punda- 



7o 8 ' THE SUSHRUtA SAMHITA. [Chap. IV. 

rika, Raji-chitra, Angula-rAji, Vindu-rdji, Kardamaka, 
Trina-s'oshakas, Sarshapaka, ^veta-hanu,Darbha-pushpa, 
Chakraka,Godhumaka, Kikvisida belong to the Eaijimain 
family of snakes. 14. 

Names of the different species of 
Nirvisha snakes The GalagoU, s'uka-patra, 
Ajagard, Divyaka, Varshdhika, Pushpa-s'akali, Jyoti- 
ratha, Kshirika, Pushpaka, Ahi-patdka, Andhdhika, 
Gaurdhika and the Vi iks'he-s'aya belong to the Nirvisha 
(non-venomous) group of snakes. 15. 

Names and Origin of the ditferent 
species of Vaikaranja snakes The Vai- 

karanja snakes are the cross-bred of the above first 
three species, viz., Darvi-kara, etc , and are known as 
Mdkuli, Potagala and Snigdha-raji. Those born of a 
Krishna-sarpa father and Gonasi mother or the contrary 
are known as Mdkuli. A Rdjila father and Gonasi 
mother or the contrary bring forth a (hybrid species 
known as the) Potagala, and a Krishna-sarpa father 
and a Rdjimati mother or the contrary produce a 
Snigdha-rdji snake. According to several authorities, 
the poison of a snake of the first of these three hybrid 
sub families partakes of the nature of that of its father 
while that of the remaining two partakes of the nature 
of their mother. 16. 

Sub-families of the Vaikaranja 
Snakes : — Seven other sub-families arise out of the 
three aforesaid families of Vaikaranja snakes and are 
known as Divyelaka, Lodhra-pushpaka, Rdji chitraka, 
Potagala, Pushpdbhikirna, Darbha-pushpa and Vellitaka. 
Of these the first three species resemble the Rdjila and 
the last four resemble the Mandali species of snakes. 
Thus we have finished describing the eighty different 
families of snakes. 17. 



Chap. IV.] KALPA STHANaM. 

Characteristic features of Male 
and female snakes i— The eyes, the tongue, 
the mouth and the head of a male serpent are large, 
while those of a female snake are small Those which 
partake of both these features' and are mild-venomed 
and not (easily) irritable, should be considered as 
hermaphrodite (.Napumsaka). i8. 

Now we shall describe the general features of snake- 
bites : — Why does snake-poison prove instantaneously 
fatal like a sharp sword, thunder-bolt or fire? Why is it 
that a case of snake bite, if neglected even for a very 
short time (Muhurta) at the outset, terminates in the death 
of the patient without (even) giving him an opportunity 
of speaking ? 19-20. 

From the general characteristics of the bites, it 
should be presumed that they may be divided into three 
kinds. We shall, therefore, describe in detail the specific 
features of the bites of these three kinds (instead of all 
of them separately). It will be both beneficial to the 
patient and will leave no room for the confusion of the 
physician. From the specific features of these three 
kinds of snake-bites should be inferred all other snake- 
bites. 21. 

Specific symptoms of a bite by a 
Darvi-kara snake:— A black colour of the skin, 
eyes, nails, tooth, urine and stool and the seat of the 
bite, roughness of the body and heaviness of the head, 
pain in the joints, weakness of the back, neck and waist, 
yawning, shivering, hoarseness of the voice, a rattling 
sound in the throat, lassitude, dry eructation, cough. and 
difficult breathing, hiccough, upward course of the bodily 
Vdyu, pain (S'ula) and consequent aching of the 
limbs, thirst, excessive salivation, foaming in the mouth, 
choking of the external orifices of the body (such as 



THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. IV. 


^lO 


the mouth and the nostrils) and peculiar pains (such 
as the pricking, piercing pain in the body) due to the 
aggravation of the bodily Vdyu, — these are the specific 
symptoms of a bite by a snake of the Darvi-kara 
species. 22. 

Specific symptoms of a bite by a 
Mandali snake : —Yellowness of the skin, etc., 
longing for cold, a sensation as if the whole interior is 
being burnt with scorching vapours, extreme burning 
sensation in the body, thirst, a sensation of intoxication, 
delirium, fever, haemorrhage through both the upper and 
the lower channels, sloughing of the flesh, swelling and 
suppuration in the affected part, a jaundiced sight, .a 
rapid aggravation (of the Pitta) and the presence of 
various sorts of pain peculiar to the derangement of the 
of the bodily Pitta, — these are the specific symptoms of 
a bite by a snake of the Mandali species. 23. 

Specific symptoms of a bite by a 
Rajiman snake : — Whiteness of the skin, etc., 
Sita-Jvara (catarrhal fever), horripilation, a numbness 
of the limbs, a swelling about the seat of the bite, flow- 
ing out of dense phlegm (from the mouth), vomiting, 
constant itching of the eyes, a swelling of and a rattling 
sound in the throat, obstruction of breath, delirium, 
peculiar pain and troubles characteristic of the deranged 
Kapha in the body, — these are the specific symptoms of . 
a bite by a snake of the E.g(jim^n species. 24. 

Specific symptoms of bites by^ 
snakes of different sexes and ages,/ 

etc. : — The sight or the pupils of the eyes of a person 
bitten by a male snake, is turned upward. A bite by 
a female serpent exhibits such smyptoms as downcast 
eyes and appearance of veins on the forehead, while 
that by .a hermaphrodite (Napumsaka) snake makes the • 



Chap. IV.] • KALPA STHANAM. 

patient look sidelong. A person bitten by a pregnant 
snake produces yellowness of the face and tympanites. 
A bite by a newly delivered snake causes Sula (pain), 
bloody urination and an attack of tonsilitesfUpa-jihvikd) 
in the victim. A person bitten by a hungry serpent 
craves for food. A bite by an old serpent is marked by 
a slow and mild character of the different stages of 
poisoning. A bite by a snake of tender age is marked 
by a rapid setting of the characteristic poisonous symp- 
toms which are found to be mild in their nature. A 
bite by a non- venomous serpent is marked by' the 
absence of any of the specific symptoms of poisoning. 
According to several authorities, a bite by a blind 
serpent brings on blindness in its train. An Ajagara 
(Boa-constructor) is found to actually swallow up the 
body of its prey, to which should be ascribed the death 
of the victim in such a case (resulting from the crushing 
of bones and strangulation) and not to the effects of any 
poison. A person bitten by a snake of instantaneously 
fatal poison, drops down dead at the moment of the bite 
as if struck by a sharp weapon or by lightning. 25. 

Symptoms of the different stag'es 
of poisonings from the hites of a Darvi- 
kara. Snake : — The poison of all species of snakes 
(snake-bites) produces seven distinct stages of transfor- 
rhation (in the organism of a person bitten by one of 
them). The poison of a snake of the Darvi-kara species 
affects and vitiates the blood (vascular system) in the first 
stage of its course or its physiological transformation in’ 
the body. The blood thereby turns black, imparting its 
hue to the complexion and giving rise to a sort of creep- 
ing sensation in the body, as if ants have been creeping 
over it. In the second stage the poison affects the 
principle of flesh, turns it deep black and produces’ 



712 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. IV. 


swellings and Granthis all over the body. In the third 
stage it invades the principle of Medas (adipose tissues ?) 
in the body, giving rise to a <5011 of mucous discharge 
from the seat of bite, heaviness in the head, perspiration 
and numbness of the eyes. In the fourth stage the 
poison enters the Koshtha (abdomen?) and aggravates 
the Doshas, especially Kapha, producing somnolence, 
water-brash and a breaking sensation in the joints. In 
the fifth stage, it penetrates into the principle of bone, 
deranges the Prana (vital principle) and impairs the 
Agni (digestive fire), giving rise to hiccough, a burning 
sensation in the body and a breaking pain in the joints. 
In the sixth stage, it enters the principle of -Majjan 
(marrow) and greatly deranges the Grahani (the large 
intestines ?) giving rise to a sense of heaviness of the 
limbs, dysentery, pain in the heart and epileptic fits. 
In the seventh stage it permeates the principle of 
semen, extremely aggravates the vital nerve-governing 
V^yu known as the Vydna, dislodges the Kapha even 
from the minutest capillaries, producing secretions of 
lump-like phlegm from the mouth, a breaking pain in 
the waist and the back, impaired functions of the mind 
and of the body, excessive salivation, perspiration and 
a suppression of breath. 26. 

Different stages of poisoning from 
the bites of a lYlandali Snake;— in the 

first stage of bite by a Mandali snake, the poison 
affects the blood (vascular system), which being thus 
vitiated produces shivering (lit. coldness} followed by a 
burning sensation in the body and pallor (yellowness) 
of the skin. In the second stage the poison contamin- 
ates the flesh which causes an extreme yellowness of 
complexion attended with a burning sensation in the 
body and yellowness about the seat of the bite. In the 



Chap. IV.] 


KALPA STHANAM . 


•713 


third stage, the poison affects the principle of Medas 
(adipose tissues) producing numbness of the eyes, thirst, 
slimy exudation from the wound \bite) and perspiration 
as in the case of a bite by a Darvi kara snake described 
before. In the fourth stage, it enters the Koshtha (cavity 
of the trunk) and produces fever. In the fifth stage, it 
produces a burning sensation throughout the whole 
organism. The sixth and the seventh stages are 
identical with those of the foregoing (Darvi-kara 
bite). 27. 

Different stages of poisoning from 
the bite of a Rajiman Snake The poison 
of a EiE^jiman snake in the first stage of poisoning, 
vitiates the blood whicht is turned pale yellow pro- 
ducing the appearance of goose-skin of the victim 
who looks white. In the second stage, it contaminates 
the flesh, giving rise to an extreme paleness of com- 
plexion, prostration and swelling of the head. In the 
third stage, it affects the principle of Medas, giving rise 
to haziness of the eyes, deposit of filthy matter on the 
teeth, perspiraion and secretions from the nostrils and 
the eyes. In the fourth stage, it enters the Koshtha 
(abdominal cavity) and produces paralysis of the nerves 
of the neck (Manyd) and heaviness of the head. In 
the fifth stage, it gives rise to loss of speech and brings 
on S'ita-Jvara (catarrhal fever). The sixth and the 
seventh stages of the poisoning are identical with the 
preceding kind. 28. 

Memorable Verses :~A snake-poison is 
found to successively attack the seven Kalds or facio 
described before (in Chapter IV. Sdrira Sthdna', and 
gives rise respectively to the seven stages of poisoning. 
The interval of time during which a deadly poison leaves 
a preceding Kald and, carried forward by the bodily 



714 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. IV, 


Vdyu, attacks the succeeding one, is called its Veg£feu- 
tara (the intervening stage). 29-30, 

Different Stages of poisoning in 
cases of lower animals : — A lower animal 
bitten by a snake first becomes swelled up and looks 
steadfast and distresse d.In the second stage of poison- 
ing, salivation, horripilation and pain in the heart set in. 
The third stage is marked by pain in the head and 
drooping of the neck and of the shoulder. In the 
fourth stage, it shivers, gnashas its teeth, drops down 
unconscious and expires. Some experts hold that 
there are only three stages of poisoning in the case 
of a lower animal, the fourth being included there- 
in. 31. 

Different Stages of poisoning in 
cases of birds : — A bird, bitten by a snake, looks 
stead-fast and becomes unconscious in the first stage of 
poisoning. The second stage is marked by an extreme 
agitated condition of the bird and the third stage ends 
in death. According to several authorities there is 
only a single stage of poisoning in the case of a bird. 
A snake-poison cannot penetrate far into the body of a 
cat, mungoose, etc. 32-33. 

Thus ends the fourth Chapter of the Knlpa Sthdnnm in the Sus'ruta 
Samhitd which treats of the specific features of the poison of a snake- 
bite. 



CHAPTER V. 


Now we shall discourse on the Chapter which deals 
with the medical treatment of snake-bites- (Sarpa- 
dashta Kaipa-Chikitsitam). 

General treatment of Snake-bites : — 

In all cases of snake-bites ligatures of cloth, skin, soft 
fibre or any other soft article (consecrated with the 
proper Mantras), should first of all be bound four 
fingers apart above the seat of the bite in the event of 
its occurring in the extremities, inasmuch as such a 
proceeding would arrest the further (upward) course of 
the poison in the body. As an alternative, the seat of 
the bite should be incisioned, bled and cauterized where 
such a ligature would be found to be impossible. Inci- 
sion, cauterization, and sucking (of the poisoned blood 
from the seat of the bite) should be highly recommend- 
ed in all cases of snake-bites. The cavity of the mouth 
should be filled with a linen* before sucking (the blood 
from the wound). It would do the man bitten by a 
snake an immense good if he could bite the serpent 
that had bitten him or failing that, bite a clod of earth 
without any loss of time. 2-3. 

The seat of the bite by a Mandali snake should not, 
however, be cauterized inasmuch as the preponderant 
Pittaja character of the poison, aggravated by the appli- 
cation of the heat, might lead to its speedy expansion 
or coursing in the system. 4. 

Mantra-S : — A physician well-versed in the 
Mantras of anti-venomous potency should bind a 

* Dallana recommends burnt earth or the earth of an ant-hill or ash 
for the purpose of filling up the mouth before sucking the poisoned blood. 



7i6 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


tChap. V. 


ligature of cord consecrated with appropriate Mantras 
which would arrest a further spread of the poison. 
The Mantras full of occult energy of perfect truth 
and divine communion, disclosed by the Devarshis 
and Brahmarshis of yore, never fail to eliminate the 
poison from the system, and hold their own even 
in cases of deadliest poisons. Elimination of the poison 
with the help of Mantras, full of the energy of Brahm^, 
of truth and austerities, is more rapid than under the 
effects of drugs. 5. A. 

A man, while learning the Mantras, should forego 
sexual intercourse, animal diet, wine, honey, etc., should 
be self-controlled and clean in body and spirit and 
(before learning the Mantras) shall lie on a mattress 
of Kus'a-grass. For the successful application of his 
newly acquired knowledge (Mantras), he shall devo- 
tedly worship the gods with offerings of perfumes, 
garlands of flowers, edibles, (animal) oblations, etc., and 
with the appropriate Mantras sacred to them as well as 
with burnt offerings, since a Mantra chanted by a man 
in an unclean spirit or body, or accented or uttered in- 
correctly will not take effect. The medicinal compounds 
of anti-venomous drugs should also be employed in such 
cases. 5. 

Blood-letting in Snake-bite A skill- 
ful physician should open the veins round the seat of 
the bite and bleed the affected part. The veins of the 
fore-head and the extremities should be opened in the 
case where the poison would be found to have spread 
through the whole organism. The poison will be found 
to have been fully eliminated with the passage of the 
blood (from the incisioned wound); Hence bleeding 
should be resorted to as it is the best remedy in a case 
cf snake-bite. 6-A. 



Chap. V.] 


KALPA STHANAM, 


717 


Plasters of anti-poisonous drugs (Agada) should be 
applied all round the seat of the bite after scarifying it, 
which should be sprikled with water mixed with (red) 
Sandal wood and or with their decoction. The 

appropriate Agada compounds (according to the nature 
of the bite) should be administered through the medium 
of milk, honey and clarified buttei', etc. In the absence 
of these, the patient should be made to take (a solution 
of) the black earth of an ant-hill (dissolved in water). 
As an alternative, (a paste of) Koviddra, S'irisha, Arka 
and Katahhi should be prescribed for him. The patient 
should not be allowed to take oil, the soup of Kulattha- 
pulse, wine and Sauviraka. The patient should be 
made to vomit with the help of any other suitable 
liquid available, since vomiting in most cases leads to 
the elimination of the poison from the system. 6. 

Specific treatment of the bite by a 
hooded (Darvi-kara) Snake In the case 
of a bite by a hooded (Darvi-kara) snake, bleeding 
by opening the veins should be resorted to in the 
first stage of poisoning. In the second stage, the 
patient should be made to drink an Agada compound 
with honey and clarified butter. In the third stage, 
anti-poisonous snuffs (Nasya) and collyrium (Anjana) 
should be employed. In the fourth stage, the patient 
should be made to vomit, and medicated Yavagu 
(gruel) mentioned before (in connection with vegetable 
poison— see Chapter II, para. 26, Kalpasthdna) should 
then be given him for drink. In the fifth and the 
sixth stages, after the administration of cooling 
measures, strong purgatives and emetics should be 
administered and the foregoing medicated Yavagu 
(gruel) should be administered to the patient. In the 
seventh stage, strong medicated Avapida-snuffs and 



7i8 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. V. 


strong collyrium of anti-venomous efficacy should be 
employed for the purification (purging) of the head. 
Superficial incisions like the marks of crow's feet should 
be made on the scalp and the affected flesh and blood 
should be removed. 7. 

Specific treatment of bites by a 
Mandali Snake : —In the first stage of a case of 
poisoning by the bite of a Mandali snake, the treat- 
ment is the same as in the corresponding stage of a 
Darvi-kara (cobra) bite. In the second stage, an Agada 
compound should be given with honey and clarified 
. butter and after making the patient vomit the preced- 
ing medicated Yavdgu (gruel) should be administerd to 
him. In the third stage, after the exhibition of drastic 
purgatives and brisk emetics, a proper and suitable medi- 
cated gruel should be administered. In the fourth and 
the fifth stages, the treatment would be the same as in 
the corresponding stages of a Darvi-kara (cobra) bite. 
In the sixth stage, the drugs of the Madhura (Kdkolyddi) 
Gana taken with milk prove efficacious. In the 
seventh stage, anti-venomous Agada compound in 
the shape of Avapida ( snuff ) would neutralise the 
effects of poison. 8 . 

Specific treatment of R^jiman- 
bites : — In the first stage of a case of Raljiman-bite, 
bleeding should be resorted to and an Agada should be 
administered with milk and honey. In the second stage, 
emetics and an anti-venomous Agada should be given 
to the patient. In the third, fourth and fifth stages, the 
treatment should be the same as in the corresponding 
stages of a case of Darvi-kara-bite. In the sixth stage, 
the use of the strongest (anti-venomous) collyrium and in 
the seventh stage, that of an Avapida (snuff) of similar 
virtue should be prescribed. 9. 



Chap. V.l KALPA STHANAM. , 71 

Contra-indication to blood-letting' 
in cases of Snake-bites:— in the case of an 
infant, an old man, or an enciente woman having been 
bitten by a snake, all the foregoing remedies in milder 
doses with the exception of blood-letting should be em- 
ployed according to the requirements of the case. lo. 

Dosage of Collyrium, etc., to be re- 
sorted to in cases of different beasts 
and birds : — The quantity of medicated collyrium 
(Anjana) to be used and blood to be let out in the case 
of a goat or a sheep bitten by a snake should be equal 
to those laid down in connection with a similar human 
patient, while the quantity should be doubled in the 
case of a cow or a horse. In the case of a camel or a 
buffalo it should be trebled, while in the case of an 
elephant, it should be quadrupled Birds of what, 
soever species in a similar predicament should, howevei, 
be treated only with sprays of cold water and cooling 
medicated plasters, ii. 

General dosage of medicines in 
cases of Snake- bites : — in cases of snake-bites, 
collyrium to the weight of one Mashaka (Mdsha) should 
be used at a time. The dosage of medicated snuff 
(Nasya), potions and emetics being respectively double, 
quadruple and eight times thereof. But a wise physi- 
cian should treat a case of snake-bite with a full regard 
to the nature of the country, season, temperament, as 
well as to the intensity and the particular stage of 
poisoning the case has reached. 12-13. 

We have described the anti-venomous measures and 
remedies applicable to the different stages of poisoning 
(by a snake-bite). We shall now deal with the specific 
treatment of poisoning of either kind according to the 
physical symptoms developed in the patient, Blood- 



720 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Cbap. V. 


letting should be speedily resorted to in the case where 
the poisoned limb had become discoloured, rigid, swollen 
and painful. Curd, Takra, honey, clarified butter and 
meat-soups should then be given to the patient affected 
with a poison marked by a preponderance of the ag- 
gravated Vstya and by a craving for food. A person 
affected with a poison marked by a predominance of 
the aggravated Pitta would have thirst, epileptic fits, 
perspiration and a burning sensation in the body and 
should be treated with shampooing with cold hands 
and with cold baths, and cooling medicinal plasters. A 
person affected with a poison marked by a predomi- 
nance of the aggravated Kapha and bitten in the winter 
would have cold salivation, epileptic fits and intoxica- 
tion and should be treated with strong emetics. 14. 

Specific treatment of the different 
Supervening Symptoms Purgatives 
should be exhibited in the event of the patient being 
oppressed with such symptoms as pain and burning 
sensation in the abdomen, Adhmana (tympanites), reten- 
tion of urine, stool and flatus, painful urination and 
other troubles of the deranged Pitta. Collyrium should 
be applied (along the eyelids) in the case of a swelling 
of the eyeballs, somnolence, discolouring of the eye, 
cloudiness of vision and discoloured appearance of all 
objects. The head of the patient should be cleansed 
(purged) with medicinal errhines (Nasya) in the case of 
pain and a heaviness of the head, lassitude, lock-jaw, 
constriction of the throat (Gala-graha) and violent 
wryneck (Manya-stambha). Powders of such drugs of 
the S'iro-virechana group as are of strong potency, in the 
shape of Pradhamana Nasya should be blown into the 
nostrils of the patient suffering from the effects of poison- 
ing in the case where such symptoms as loss of conscious- 



Chap. V.] 


KALPA STHANAM. 


721 


ness, upturned eyes and drooping of the neck would set; 
in. The veins of his forehead and of the extremities „ 
should be instantly opened. When such opening of the 
veins would not be attended with (.the desired) bleeding., 
superficial incisions in the shape of cow’s feet (Kdka-._, 
pada) should be made ' by an experienced surgeon on 
the scalp of the patient. These failing, the incisioned 
bits of flesh mixed with blood should be removed, 
and the decoction or powders of a Charma-vriksha : 
(Bhurja patra) should be applied to the incisions. 
Dundubhis (small drums) smeared with anti-venomgus 
plasters should be sounded around the patient, The 
patient thus restored to consciousness should be treated; 
with both purgatives and emetics. A complete elimi- 
nation of the poison from the system is a very difficult 
task but it is indespensably necessary, since the least, 
remnant of the poison may again be aggravated in, 
course of time and cause lassitude, discolouring of the 
complexion, fever, cough, headache, swelling, emaciation 
(^osha), cataract, blindness, catarrh (Pratis'ydya), aver-' 
sion to food and nasal catarrh (Pinasa). These diseases- 
and any other supervening symptoms of poisoning 
should be treated according to the injunctions laid down 
under their specific heads with a careful consideration 
of the Dosha or Doshas involved in each case. 15. - 
The ligature should then be removed, the seat of the 
bite incisioned and an Agada plaster should be applied 
there, so inasmuch as the poison is found to be lodged in 
a condensed form (in the puncture of the fangs) and 
is likely to be afterwai'ds aggravated (if not fully 
eliminated). 16. 

Remedy for aggravated Doshas due 
to poison:— If the V^yu of the body be found to be 
in an aggravated condition, even after a careful elimh 

91 



722 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. V. 


nation of the poison from the system with the ' -help of 
suitable Mantras, measures and medicinal remedies, 
it should be pacified and restored to its normal con- 
diiton with any VAyu-pacifying Sneha, etc., other than 
oil. The use of fish, Kulattha-%o\x^ and acid articles 
(fermented rice-gruel, etc.) is forbidden. The aggravated 
Pitta in such a case should be remedied with the appli- 
cation of a Sneha-Vasti and with the decoction of drugs 
prescribed in cases of Pittaja-feVer, while the deranged 
Kapha should be corrected with Kapha-subduing 
remedies or with (the decoction of) the drugs of the 
Aragvadhddi Gana mixed with honey, or with a diet 
consisting of bitter and parching (Ruksha) articles of 
food. 17. 

A person found to be unconscious from the effects of 
a fall from an uneven ground or from the top of a tree 
or precipice as well as a drowned man rescued uncon- 
scious, or one in a state of suspended animation owing 
to strangulation should be treated according to the 
injunctions and with remedies laid down in connection 
with the treatment of persons who have become uncon- 
scious from the effects of poisoning (mentioned in the 
present chapter). 18. 

If a deep seated incision (Prachchhita) in, or an 
extremely tight fastening (Arishta) around the seat of 
the bite, or an application of extremely irritant plasters 
or any such other application thereon gives rise to a 
local swelling which emits a bad smell and slimy matter 
it should be inferred from these that the inherent poison 
in such a case has putrefied the flesh of the affected 
part which can be made amenable to medicine only 
with the greatest difficulty. 19-A. 

Sypmtoms Of wounds from poison- 
ed darts, etc ; The poisonous character of 



,Chap. V.] 


KALPA STHANAM. 


a dart or of an arrow with which a person has been 
pierced (Digdha-viddha) should be inferred from the 
following symptoms, viz.^ flow of black-coloured blood 
from an immediately inflicted wound, suppuration, a 
constant burning sensation (in the incidental ulcer) and 
sloughing of black-coloured, putrefied and morbid flesh 
mixed with a mucopurulent discharge from the wound, 
and thirst, vertigo, epileptic fits, a burning sensation in 
the body and fever. 19. 

Treatment of a poisoned wound In 

a case where all the above symptoms of poisoning are 
present whether in a case of snake-bite or of a bite by 
a spider (Lutd), or in a case of being pierced with a 
venomed arrow, or in a case of poisoning of any kirid, 
where putrefaction has set in, the putrid flesh of the 
incidental ulcer should be judiciously removed and the 
. vitiated blood of the locality should be speedily extract- 
ed by applying leeches thereto. The system of the 
patient should then be cleansed with purgatives and 
emetics and the affected part of his body should be 
profusely sprayed or washed with the decoction (of the 
bark) of a Kshiri-Vriksha A poultice prepared with 
the anti venomous drugs of cool potency mixed with 
clarified butter (washed a hundred times and) placed 
inside the folds of linen should also be applied. In the 
event of its being caused by the insertion or introduc- 
tion of a bone* of any animal, the bone of which, is 
poisonous in itself, the measures and remedies laid 
down above as well as those prescribed under the treat- 
ment of the “Pitta-poisoning’' should be adopted and 
used; 20. 

♦ Dallana holds that by the word “bone” in the text should be un- 
derstood all the different sources of poison, r;«., fasces, urine, nail, tooth, 
bristle, etc., of an animal. 



724 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. V. 


r Recipe of different Agadas IVIah^- 
gada : — The powders of Trivritt Vis'alyd, Yashti- 
‘madhu, the two kinds of Haridrd, Raktd ^Manjishthd), 
Natendra (Aragvadha), the five kinds of officinal salt 
and pasted with honey, should be placed inside 

a horn. This Agada or anti-poisonous compound used 
•as snuff (Nasya), collyrium and anointment acts as a good 
neutraliser of poison. It is irresistible in its potency and 
is of mighty efficacy. It is called the Malistgada. 21. 

Ajitagada: — A compound made of powdered 
Vidaiiga, Pdthd, Tri-pliald, Ajamoda, Hingu, Chakra 
(Tagara), Tri-katu, the five kinds of officinal salt and 
Chiiraka, pasted with honey, should be kept for a fort- 
night inside a cow’s horn covered with a lid of the same 
material. This anti venomous . compound I Agada) is 
known as the Ajitaigada and is efficacious in cases of 
both vegetable and animal poisoning. 22. 

T^rkshy^gada A compound made of the 
fine powders of Prapaandarika, Deva-ddru, Mustd, Kdld- 
tiusdryd, Katu-rohini, Sthauneyaka, Dhydmaka, Pad- 
maka, Ptmndga, Tdlis'a, Suvarchikd, Ktitaimata, Eld, 
white Sindhu-vdra, S'aileya, Kushtha, Tagara, Pf'iyangu, 

' Lodhra, Jala {Bdlaka), Svarna-Gairika , Mdgadha, (red) 
Chandana and Saindhava salt, taken in equal parts 
' and pasted with honey, should be kept inside a horn. 
This Agada is called the Tstrkshya'gada and is capable 
of neutralising the effects even of the poison of a 
Takshaka. 23. 

' Rishabh^gada : — A compound made of the 
powders^ of Mdnsi, Triphald, Murangi, Manjishthd, 
Yashti-madhu, Padmaka, Vidanga, T dlls' a, Sugandhikd, 
.Eld, Tvak, Ktishtha, Teja-patra, Chandana, Bhdrgi, 
yPatola,Kinihi ( Apamdrga), Pdthd, Mrlgddanl,Karkallkd, 
pura (Guggulu), Pdlindi, As' oka, Kramuka and flowers 



Chap. V.] KALPA STHANAM." 72$ 

of Surasi and of Bhalldtaka, well pasted with honey 
and with the bile of a boai‘ (Vardha), Godha, Peacock, 
^allaka, cat, Prishata (deer) and of mungoose, should be 
preserved inside a horn. This anti-venomous medicine 
is called the RishabliEigada. Snakes never visit the 
house of the fortunate and mighty one wherein this 
well prepared remedy is preserved. Venomous insects 
dare not come within the precincts of such a mansion 
and even their poison loses its quickness and fatal 
character. The sound of trumpets and drums, smeared 
wiih this compound and blown upon and beaten, tend 
immediately to destroy the effects of poison. If a 
poisoned patient would only look at the banner 
plastered with this Agada the poison from his system 
would be thereby eliminated. 24 

Sanjivana Agada; -a compound made of 
the powders of Ldkshd, Haremt, Nalada, Priyangu, the 
two kinds of S'igru, Yashti-madhu, Prithvikd (Ela) and 
Haridrd, pasted with honey and clarified butter, should 
be preserved inside a cow’s horn and covered in the 
above manner. This anti venomous medicine is called 
the Sanjivaua Agada and should be used as snuff, 
collyrium and drink, It is capable of restoring even a 
man apparently dead (by poisoning) to life, 25. 

Darvi - kara - Ra j i la - V ish ah ar a- Aga- 
da ; — An Agada consisting of the powders of S'leslmd- 
taka, Katphala, Mdtulunga, S'vetd, Girihvd, Kinihi, sugar 
and Tanduliya should be regarded as the best remedy in 
cases of poisoning by Darvi kara or Eajila-bites. 26. 

IWandli-Vishahara Agada; -One part 
Ga.ch. o{ Drdkshd,Sugandhd,lS!aga-v 7 'ittikd*' and Samangd 

* Dallana says that in place of ‘‘Sugandha Naga-vriitikd” some read 
"Sugandha Naga-mrittikd” which means *‘the sweet-scented earth of the 
mountain^^ known to be possessed of anti-poisonous virtues. 



726 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. V, 


(Vai'Aha-krdntd), two parts each of the following dr.ugs, 
viz.^ — leaves of Surasd, Vilva, Kapittha, and of Dddima, 
and half a part each of the following, viz. : - (leaves of) 
black Sindhuvdra^ Amkotha and Gairika, should be 
powdered together and mixed with honey. This anti- 
venomous medicine (Agada) is highly efficacious es- 
pecially in the case of poisoning by a Mandali-bite. 27. 

Vamsa-tvagadi Agada;— An Agada should 
be prepared with the scrapings of green bamboo 
(Vams'a-tvak), Anialaka, Kapittha, Tri-katti, Haimavaii, 
Kushtha, Karanja-^ttds, Tagara and S'irisha flowers, 
pasted with cow’s bile. Used as a plaster, snuff or 
collyrium, it destroys the poison of a spider, mouse, 
serpent or any other (poisonous) insect. Used as a 
collyrium (over the eye-lids), as a plaster over the 
umbilical region, or as a Varti (plug), it removes the 
obstruction of stool, urine and Vdyu (flatus, elc.), or of a 
foetus in the womb. Used as a snuff or a collyrium, its 
curative potency is manifest even in such dangerous 
eye-diseases as Kdcha, Arman, Kotha, Patala and 
Pushpa, 28. 

Pancha-^irisha Agada:— A potion con 
sisting of a decoction of the I'oots, flowers, bark, seeds 
and sprouts of a S'irisha tree, taken with honey, 
the five officinal kinds of salt and a profuse quantity 
of powdered Tri-kutu, proves speedily efficacious in a 
case of poisoning by an insect-bite. 29. 

Sarva-Kdmika Agada ;— An Agada pre- 
pared with Kushtha, Tri-katu, Ddrvi, Madhuka (flower), 
the two kinds of salt (Saindhava and Sauvarchala), 
Mdlati (flower), Ndgapushpa and all the drugs of the 
Madhura (KdkolyAdi) group and pasted with the juice 
of Kapittha and mixed with honey and sugar destroys all 
sorts of poison specially that of a mouse (Mushika). S®- 



Chap. V.] 


KALPA-STHANAM. 


727 


Ekasara Agada : — The following drugs viz., 
Somardji seeds and Somardji flowers,*' Katdbhi, Sindhu- 
vdra, Choraka. V aninaJCushtha^ Sarpa-gandhd^ Saptald, 
Ptmarnavd^ flowers of S' iris ha, Aragvada and of Arka, 
S'ydmd, Ambashthd, Vidanga, Ainra, As'mantaka, black 
earth and Kuravaka comprise the Ekasara Agada. 
These should be applied singlyl or in combination of 
two or three to destroy the effects of poison. 31. 

Thu- ends the fifth Chapter of the Kalpa-Sdthana in the Sus'ruta 
Samhild which deals with the medical treatment of snake-bites. 

* Some explain ^'ti” to mean ‘Somardji, Phala (Madana) 

and Pushpa (Ndga-kes'ata).’ 

t Some explain to mean that the Agada should’ 

be used "once, twice or thrice” according to the requirements in each 
care. 



CHAPTER YI. 


Now we shall discourse on cases of lat-poison- 

ing (IVIushika-kalpa). i. 

Different varieties of rats (IW. Text) : 

— Now hear me enumerate the names of the different 
families of MusMka (rats) briefly referred to before as 
having their poison in their semen, classified according 
to their different names, features and the medical treat- 
ment to be employed for the neutralisation of the effects 
of their poison. They are eighteen in number and are 
named as follows ; — Ldlana, Putraka, Krishna, Hamsira, 
Chikkira, Chhuchhundara, Alasa, Kashdya-das'ana, 
Kulinga, Ajita, Chapala,. Kapilaj Kokila, Aruna, Mahd- 
Krishna, S'veta, Mahd-Kapila and Kapotdbha. 2 A 
General symptoms of rat-poison- 
ing : — The blood of any part of a human body 
coming in contact with the semen of any of these 
different classes of rats or scratched with their nails, 
teeth, etc., previously besmeared with their semen 
(S'ukra) is vitiated and gives rise to the appearance of 
Granthi (nodes), swelling, Mandala, eruptions of circular 
erythematous patches on the skin, Karnikd (eruptions 
of patches resembling the calycle of a lotus flower), 
pimples (pustules) violent and acute erysipelas, Kitima 
(keloid tumours), breaking pain in the joints, extreme 
pain (in the body), fever, violent epileptic fits, anemia, 
aversion to food, difficult breathing, shivering and 
horripilation, 2. 

Specific symptoms and treatment 
of rat- poisoning The general symptoms of 
fat-poisoning have been briefly described above. 



Chap. VI.] KALPA STHANAM. 729 

hear me specially describe the symptoms of the bites 
by the different families of rats (Mushika). A bite by 
a rat of the L^ana class is marked by a copious flow 
of saliva, hic-cough and vomiting. The patient in 
such a case should be made to use a lambative made 
of the roots of Tanduliyaka mixed with honey. A bite 
by a rat of the Putraka family is marked by a sense 
of physical langour, yellowness of the complexion and 
the appearance of nodular glands (Granthi) resembling 
young rats, A compound of S'irisha and Ingudi pasted 
together and mixed with honey should be given to 
the patient as a lambative in this case. A bite by a rat 
of the Krisknjf (black) class in foul weather and more 
especially on a cloudy day is characterised by the 
vomiting of blood. A pasted compound of S'irisha 
fruit and Kushtha with the washings of the ashes of 
Kims'uka (flower) should be given to the patient in 
such a case. 3- A. 

A bite by a rat of the Hansira species brings on an 
aversion to food, yawning and horripilation. In such 
a case emetics should be first given to the patient who 
should be then made to drink a decoction of the drugs 
of the Aragvadhddi group. A bite by a rat of the 
Chikkira class is accompanied by headache, swelling, 
hic-cough and vomiting. In such a case an emetic con- 
sisting of the decoction of Jdlini, Madana fruit and 
Ainkotha should be prescribed. A bite by a venomous 
Mushika of the Chliuclichlniiidara (mole) species gives 
rise to diarrhoea (watery stool), numbness of the muscles 
of the neck and yawning. In this case an alkaline 
compound prepared of the ashes of the dry plants of 
barley (Yava-ndla), Rishabhi (Atma-guptd) and Vrihati 
should be prescribed*. 3-B. 

* Different reading.— A bite by a Mushika of the Chhuchchhundara 

92 



730 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. VI. 


A bite by a rat of the Alasa species is characterised 
by a numbness of the neck, an upward coursing of the 
Vdyu, fever and pain at the seat of the bite. In this 
case the patient should be made to take the Mahsfgada 
with honey and clarified butter as a lambative. A bite 
by.aratofthe Kasha'ya-dasana species is marked by 
somnolence or excessive sleep, atrophy (Sosha) of the 
heart and a general emaciation of the body. In such a 
case a lambative made of the bark, pith and fruit (seeds) 
of S'irisha mixed with honey should be given to the 
patient to lick. A bite by a rat of the Kulinga species 
is marked by pain, swelling and stripe-like marks about 
the seat of the bite, the remedy consisting in a lambative 
made of the two kinds of S<2//«(Mudga-parniand Mdsha- 
parni) and Sindhuvdra pasted together and mixed with 
honey. 3-C. 

A bite by a rat of the Ajita species is characterised 
by vomiting, epileptic fits (fainting), a catching pain 
at the heart (Hrid-graha) and blackness of the eyes. 
The patient in such a case should be made to lick a 
compound made of (the roots of) Pdlindi (Trivrit) 
pasted with the milky juice of Snuhi and mixed with 
honey, A bite by a rat of the Chapala species is 
marked by vomiting, epileptic fits and thirst, and the 
remedy in this case should consist of a lambative 
made of Tri-phald, Bhadra-hdshtha (Deva-daru) and 
Jatd-mdnsi (D.R. — Yava) pasted together and mixed with 
honey. A bite by a rat of the Kapila species is follow- 
ed by Kotha (putrefaction) of the bite, appearance 

class produces thirst, vomiting, fever, weakness, numbness of the muscles 
of the neck, swelling, abscess on the back, loss of the sense of smell and 
VisuchikS. A compound of Chavya, Haritaki, S'unthi, Vidanga, Pippali, 
S'vetaka-seeds and the ashes of (the plants of) Vrihati pounded together 
and mixed with honey should be prescribed in this case, — Gayadtisa. 



Chap, VI.] KALPA STHANAM. 

of nodular glands (Granthi) and fever. The remedy 
consists in the use of a lambative made of Tri-phald, 
S'vetd^ (white Apardjitd) and Punarnavd pasted 
together and licked with honey. A bite by a rat of 
the Kokila species is attended with high fever, an in - 
tolerable burning sensation in the body and the appear- 
ance of nodular glands (Granthi), Clarified butter duly 
cooked with the decoction of Varshdbku and Nilini 
(Indigo plants) should be administered in such a case. 3-D. 

A bite by a rat of the Aruna (vermilion coloured) 
species is marked by an extremely aggravated condi- 
tion of the bodily Vdyu and the symptoms peculiar to 
it A bite by a rat of the ]yIalI£^-krislllla (extremely 
black) species leads to an aggravated condition of the 
Pitta, while a bite by one of the Mah^-sVeta class 
ushers in an aggravation of the bodily Kapha. The 
blood of a person is vitiated by the bite of a rat of the 
Mahef-kapila family, while the bite by one of the 
Kapota species leads to the derangement of all the 
four principles viz.^ the three Doshas (Vdyu, Pitta and 
Kapha) as well as of the blood. Their bites are accom- 
panied by a violent swelling of the affected locality, the 
appearance of nodular glands (Granthi) and such other 
erythematous and eczematous growths as Mandala, 
Karnikd and Pidakd (Pustules). 3-E. 

Three Prastha measures-]* each of clarified butter, 
curd and milk should be duly cooked with the duly 
prepared decoction of Karanja, Aragvadha, Tri-katu, 

* Some explains "S'vetd Punarnavd” to mean “white Punarnavd.” 
Gayaddsa reads “S'reshthd” in place of “S'vetd" in which case also the 
white species of Punarnavd is evidently meant. 

t According to Dallana, the recipe of this Ghrita is as follows : 

One Prastha each of clarified butter, curd and milk, two Palas each of 
I^ranja, etc., and sixteen seers of water to be boiled down to four 
seers, the drugs of the Kalka weighing one seer in all. 



•732 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. VI 


Vrihati, Ams'umati and Sthird} (Kdkoli), and with 
Trivrit, Tila, Amritd (Gulancha), Chakra, Sarpa-gandhd, 
(black) earth^ (of an ant-hill) and the barks of Kapittha 
and Dddima as Kalka. The whole should be duly cooked 
over a gentle fire. The Ghrita thus prepared would 
destroy the poison of the five kinds of rats viz., Aruna, 
etc. As an alternative, clarified butter duly cooked 
with the expressed juice of Kdhddani and Kdka-mdchi 
should be given to the patient in such cases. A wise 
physician shall have recourse to bleeding or venesection 
in these cases and the system of the patient should be 
cleansed by purgatives and emetics. 3. 

Genet*cLl Treatment: —The general measures 
to be adopted in the case of a bite by a rat of what- 
soever class are as follows The seat of the bite 
should be first cauterized (with boiling clarified butter), 
and blood-letting should be resorted to (by opening 
the veins of the patient). The seat of the bite should 
then be marked with superficial incisions and a plaster of 
S'irisha, Rajani, Ktishtha, Kumkuina and Amrita (Gula- 
ncha) should be applied. The patient should be made 
to vomit with the decoction of Jdlini or with that of 
S'ukdkhyd and Anikotha boiled together. The (powdered) 
roots of S’ukdkhya, Kos'dvati, Madana fruits and Deva- 
ddli fruits should be administered with curd for the 
elimination by vomiting the (internal) poison (if any). 
The patient should be made to take (with curd) the 
compound consisting of Phala (Madana), Vacha, Deva- 
ddli and Kushtha pasted with the urine of a cow (as 
an emetic). This remedy neutralises the effects of the 
poison of all species of venomous rats. 4.- A. 

A compound composed of Trivrit, Danti and Tri- 
* In place of some reads 

while Jejjata reads 



Chap. Vr.] 


KALPA STHANAM. 


733 


pliald should (if necessary) be employed as a purgative 
(in such a case), A compound prepared with the pith 
of S'irisha and the pulp of its fruits should be used (if 
necessary) as an errhine (S'iro-virechana). The watery 
secretion of fresh cow-dung mixed with a profuse 
quantity of (powdered) Tri-hattt should be used as 
collyrium. The patient should be made to lick a 
compound prepared with the expressed juice of the fruits 
of Kapittha and with honey and the serous secretion of 
(fresh) cow-dung, or a lambative made ,of Basdnjanai 
Haridrd, Indra-yava, Katuki and Ati-vishd with honey 
should be given to the patient in the morning. A potion 
of medicated cfarified butter duly cooked with the roots 
of Tandtdiyaka should be given to the patient for drink. 
As an alternative, clarified • butter, duly cooked with 
the five parts {viz., roots, bark, fruits, leaves and 
flowers) of a Kapittha tree or with the roots of Ashphotd, 
should be prescribed, 4. 

The poison of a venomous Mushika (rat or mole) 
even though (apparently) eliminated from the system 
may sometimes still be aggravated in cloudy days or in 
foul weather. In such a case, all the above measures as 
well as the remedies laid down under the treatment of 
Dushi-visha should be resorted to. The round protrud- 
ing edges (Karnikd) of an ulcer, incidental to a rat-bite, 
whether benumbed or painful, should be excised (D.R. — 
made to suppurate) and should be treated with purify- 
ing or cleasing remedies according to the deranged 
Dosha or Doshas involved in each case. 5-6. 

Causes of Rabies:— The bodily Vdyu in 
conjunction with the (aggravated) Kapha of a jackal, 
dog, wolf, bear, tiger or of any other such ferocious 
beast affects the sensory nerves of these animals 
and ovenvhelms their instinct and consciousness. The 



734 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


tChap. VI. 


tails, jaw-bones (D. R. — neck) and shoulders of such 
infurated animals naturally droop down, attended with 
a copious flow of saliva from their mouths. The beasts 
in such a state of frenzy, blinded and deafened by rage, 
roam about and bite each other. y-A. 

Symptoms of Hydrophobia The limb 

or part of the body of a person bitten by such a rabid 
and (consequently) poisonous animal loses its sensi- 
bility of touch, and a copious flow of dark sooty blood 
is emitted from the seat of the bite. The patient in 
such a case generally exhibits all the symptoms which 
mark a case of poisoning by a venomed arrow. y-B, 

Prognosis : — A person bitten by a rabid ani- 
mal barks and howls like the animal by which he is 
bitten, imitates it in many -other ways and, bereft of 
the specific functions and faculties of a human subject, 
ultimately dies. If a person, bitten by a rabid animal, 
sees its (imaginary) image reflected in water or in a 
mirror, he should be deemed to have reached an unfavour- 
able stage of the disease. y-C. 

Symptoms of Jala-tr^sa If the patient 

in such a case becomes exceedingly frightened at the 
sight or mention of the very name of water, he 
should be understood to have been afflicted with 
Jala-tr^sa (Hydrophobia) and be deemed to have been 
doomed. Such a case of Jala-trdsa (water-scare) even in 
an unbitten person or in a healthy person, if frightened 
(by such a scare), whether waking or in sleep, should 
be regarded as a fatal symptom, y. 

Troatmont : — In the case of a bite by a rabid 
animal, the seat of the bite should be profusely bled 
(by pressing it) so as to let out all the (vitiated) blood. 
It should then be cauterized with (boiling) clarified 
butter and pasted with any of the aforesaid Agada, 



Chap. VI.] 


KALPA STHANAM. 


735 


or the patient should be made to drink a potion of 
matured clarified butter. Clarified butter mixed with the 
milky exudation of an Arka plant, as well as a com- 
pound of white Punamavd^' and Dhutttira'\ should be 
prescribed for the patient as an errhine. 8-A. 

Treatment of bites by rabid dogs 

A compound of pasted sesamum mixed with its oil, 
treacle and the (milky) juice of a Rnpihd plant eliminates 
the poison of a rabid dog (Alarka) from the system as a 
gale of wind drives a pack of clouds before it. A quan- 
tity of rice, two Tolds(one Karsha)in weight of the roots 
of S' am-pumkha and half a Karsha weight of Dlmttura 
(roots) should be pasted together with the washings of 
rice. The paste should be covered with (seven) Dims- 
tura leaves and baked (on the fire) in the shape of an 
Apupaka (cake). The cake thus prepared should be 
given, at the proper time of taking a medicine, to a person 
bitten by a rabid dog for a complete nullification of the 
poison. But the use of these cakes is attended with 
certain other troubles at the time of their digestion and 
these troubles become subdued by a retiring to in a dry 
but cool chamber away from water. The patient (after 
the subsidence of the troubles) should be bathed the 
ne.xt day and a diet of boiled S'dli or Shashtika rice 
with tepid milkj: should be prescribed for him. On the 
third and on the fifth day, the aforesaid anti-venemous 
compound should again be administered in half doses to 
the patient for the elimination of the poison. 8-B. 

* Some explain “S'vetd Punnrnavd” to mean "white Punarnavd", but 
others explain it to mean “S'vetd (Katabhi) and Punarnavd”. 

t Some commentators prescribe the roots of Dhustura to be taken, 
while others hold that its fruits should be used. 

J Dallana says that in place of Gayaddsa reads 

**ijsr*n*tr*T* j that is to say, the diet should be taken with clarified butter. 



736 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. VI. 

The person in whom the poison (of a rabid dog or 
jackal, etc.) is spontaneously aggravated has no chance 
of recovery. Hence the poison should be artificially 
aggravated (and then remedied) before reaching that stage 
of aggravation. The patient should be bathed at the 
crossing of roads or on the bank of a river with pitcher- 
fuls of water containing gems and medicinal drugs and 
consecrated with the appropriate Mantra, Offerings of 
cooked and uncooked meat, cakes and levigated pastes 
of sesamum as well as garlands of flowers of variegated 
colours should be made to the god (and the following 
Mantra should be recited). ‘^O thou Yaksha, lord of 
Alarka, who art also the lord of all dogs, speedily makest 
me free from the poison of the rabid dog that has bitten 
me.” Strong purgatives and emetics should be ad- 
ministered to the patient after having bathed him in the 
above manner, since the poison in a patient with an un- 
cleansed organism may sometimes be aggravated, even 
after the healing of the incidental ulcer. 8. 

The poison of a (rabid) dog, etc., lies in the teeth 
and tends to aggravate the Pitta and the Vdyu and 
hence, the patient bitten by such animals is found to 
imitate their cries and nature. A patient afflicted with 
such poison cannot be saved even with the greatest care. 
The seat of a scratch made by the nails or teeth of any 
of those animals should be rubbed (and the poisoned 
blood should be let out). It should then be sprinkled 
over with tepid oil, since the poison in this case 
aggravates only the Vdyu of the system.. 9-10 

This reading of Gayaddsa seems to be the better one, as the use of 
clarified butter in such cases is supported by the custom of out country. 

Thus ends the sixth Chapter of the Kalpa-sthdna in the Su'sruta 
Samhitd which deals with the symptoms and treatments of rat-poison. 



CHAPTER Vn. 


Now we shall discourse on the Chapter which treats of 
the sounds of a (medicated) drum^ etc.j possessed of anti- 
venomous virtues (Dundhubhi-Svaniya). i. 

Ksharagada:— The woods of Dkava, As'va- 
karna, Tinis'a, Folds' a ^ Fichu-mar da, Pdtali, Fdribhad- 
raka, Ainra, Udumbara, Karahdtaka, Arjuna, Kakubha, 
Sarja^ Kapitana^ Sleshmdtaka, Amkothay Amalaka^ 
Fragraha, Kutaja, S' ami, Kapittha, As'vmantaha, Arka, 
Chira-vilva, Mahd-vriksha, Anishkara, Aralu, Madliuka, 
Madhu-s'ignt, S' dka, Goji, Murvd, Tilvaka, Ikshuraka, 
Gopa-ghantd and Ariinedd* should be taken (in equal 
parts) and burnt down to ashes. The said ashes 
should be dissolved in the urine of a cow and filtered 
(through a piece of linen) in the manner of preparing 
an alkali. This alkaline solution should then be duly 
boiled (till it would assume a transparent blood-red 
hue and slimy character), and the powders of Fippali- 
inula, Taiidtdiyaka, Vaidnga, Chochaka, Manjishthd, 
Karanja, Hasti-Pippali, Maricha, Utpala, Sdrivd, 
Vidanga, Griha dhiima (soot of a room), Aiiantd, Soma, 
Sarald, Vdhlika, Guhd, Kos'dmra, white mustard seeds, 
Varuna, Lavana, Plaksha, Nichula, Vardhamdna, Van- 
jtda, Putra-s'reni, Saptaparna, Dandaka, Ela-vdluka, 
Ndga-danti, Ativishd, AbJiayd, Bhadra-ddru Kushtha, 

* The plants of these should be taken in full i.e, with their leaves, 
roots, branches, etc. The prepared ash should be dissolved in cow’s urine 
weighing six times the combined weight of the ashes. Dallana says that 
Gayaddsa does not read “S'irisha, Pichumarda, Kakubha, Arushkara and 
Madhu-S'igru” in the list. 


93 



738 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. Vll. 


Haridrd and Vachd together with pulverised (dead) 
iron (taken in equal parts)'^ should be added to it. Then 
it should be boiled again and preserved in an iron 
pitcher after it had been duly prepared in the manner 
of an alkali. 2. 

Metrical Texts :—Dundhubhis (drums), ban- 
ners and the gate ways of houses should be smeared with 
this alkaline preparation, hearing the sound as well as 
the sight and touch whereof would lead to the complete 
elimination of the poison from the system of the 
patient. This medicine is known as the KshsCr^- 
'gada which is equally efficacious in cases of S'arkard 
(gravel), stones in the bladder. Haemorrhoids, Vdta- 
Gulma, cough, S'ula (colic), Udara (abdominal dropsy), 
indigestion, Grahani, extreme aversion to food, general 
oedema of the body and violent asthma. The remedy 
is applicable in all cases of poisoning of whatsoever 
type and acts as a sure antidote to the poison of the 
serpents headed by the dreadful Takshaka. 3. 

Ka.Iy£inaka Ghrita; — An adequate quantity 
of clarified better duly cooked with (the decoction and 
Kalka of) the drugs known as Vidanga, Tri-phald, 
Danti, Bhadra-ddru, Haremt, Tdlis'a-patra, Manjishthd, 
Kss'ara, Utpala, Padmaka, Dddima, Mdlati flower, 
the two kinds of Rajani, the two kinds of Sdrivd, 
the. two kinds of Sthird, Priyangu, Tagara, Kushtha, 
the two kinds of Vrihati, Ela-vdluka, sandal wood and 

c 

* The total weight of these powders to be added should be one 
thirtieth part of the prepared alkaline solution. Divllana says that 
Gayaddsa counts only thirty and he does not read “Maricha, Soma, Guhd, 
Lavana, Chakra and Ala in the text. We do not, however, find Chakra 
and Ala in the text. We have, on the other hand, the names of some more 
drugs which are believed to be mere interpolations from the marginal notes 
of some manuscripts. 



"" Chap. VII.] 


KALPA STHANAM. 


739 


Gavdkshi, is known as the Kalysinaka Grhrita. ' The 
curative; efficacy of this Ghrita extends to cases of 
poisoning, Grahdpasmdra (hysteria due to the influence 
of malignant stars and, planets). Jaundice, Gara dosha 
(slow chemical poisoning), asthma, sluggishness' ,of 
appetite, fever and cough. It is commended to conr 
sumptive patients; as well as to men suffering from 
scantiness of semen and women afflicted with 
sterility. 4. , . • 

Amrita Ghrita; — An adequate quantity of 
clarified butter duly cooked with the seeds of Apdmdrga 
and of the two kinds of S'vetd, S'irisha^ and Kdkamdchi 
(previously) pasted with the urine of a cow is known 
as the Amrita-Ghrita. It embraces within the pale of 
its therapeutic virtues all cases of poisoning and is 
capable of bringing back an apparently dead man to 
life. 5. 

IVIahai-sugandhi Agada The follow- 
ing drugs viz., (red) sandal wood, Agiini, Kushtha, 
Tagara, Tila-parnika, Prapatmdarika, Nalada, Sarala, 
Deva-ddrii, Bhadra-s'ri (white sandal wood), Yava- 
phald, Bhdrgi, Nili, Sugandhikd, Kdhyaka, Padmaka, 
Madhuka, Ndgara, Jatd (a variety of Jatd-mdmsi), 
Punndga, Eld, Elavdlu, Gairika, Dhydmaka, Bald, 
Toy a, Sarjarasa, M dmsi, Sita-puskpd, Harenukd, Tdlis'a~ 
patra, small Eld, Priyangu, Kutannata, S'dila pushpa, 
S'aileya, Patra, Kdldmi-Sdrivd, Tri-katu, S'ita-diva,* 
Kdsmarya, Katu-rohitii, Sojnardji\Ati-visha, Prithvikd, 
Indra-vdrtim, Us'ira, Vanina, Musta, Nakha, Kustum- 
burn, the two kinds of S'vetd, •}• the two kinds of 

* Dallana explains “S'ita-s'iva” to mean "camphor”. Others explain 
it to mean "S'ami.” 

+ The text has "S'vetd” in the dual number meaning the two kinds of 
"S'vetd’ ms; white Vacha and white Apardjitd. Dallana gives only 



740 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. VII. 

Haridrd, Sthauneya, Ldkshd, the five kinds of officinal 
salts, Kumiida, Utpala, Padina, flower of Arkoy flowers 
and fruits of Champaka, As'oka, SumanaSy Tilaka 
(sesamum), Pdtaliy Sdhnaliy S'elUy S'irisha, Surasiy 
Trina-duli and of Sindhuvdra, flowers of Dhava, As'm- 
karntty and Tinisa, Guggiiluy Kwnkumay Vimbi, Sarpd- 
kshi and Gandha-Ndkidi should be carefully collected 
and pasted with honey, clarified butter and the bile 
of a cow and should be kept inside a horn (or a 
receptacle made of that material). This medicine, which 
is the best of all anti-venomous medicinal preparations, 
would rescue from the jaws of death, a .patient even 
with drooped down shoulders and sunk and upturned 
eyes. It is capable of destroying in a moment the 
irresistible fire-like poison even of the dreadful infuriated 
Vdsuki, the king of serpents. This Agada which con- 
sists of eighty-five ingredients is calleJ the Mahsi- 
sugandhi Agada and is the most potent of all anti- 
venomous remedies. It should constantly be in the 
possession of a king. Smeared with the present 
preparation he is sure to be a favourite with all his 
subjects and to shine with his sovereign majesty even 
amidst his enemies. 6. 

A physician well versed in the natures of poisons, 
should adopt all remedial measures excepting the heat- 
engendering ones in all types of poisoning. But this 
rule would not be applicable in a case of insect-bite in- 
asmuch as the poison of an insect is cool in its potency 
and hence would be aggravated by the application of 
any cooling measures. 7. 

“Vacbd” as its synonym, which shows he takes the word in the singular 
number and not in the dual as in the printed text. This appears to be 
tha correct reading, for otherwise the number of the drugs in the list would 
be tpote than eighty-five, 



Chap, VII.] 


KALPA STHANAM. 


741 


Rules of diet and conduct Whole- 
some diets which have been enumerated in the chapter 
on Anupdna-Vidhi, should be prescribed in cases of 
poisoning after a due consideration of the nature, habit, 
and temperament of the patient who should be warned 
against the use of unwholesome ones. The use of 
Phdnita (liquid treacle), S'igru, Sauvira, the taking of 
meals before the digestion of the previous ones, the 
group of Nava-DhAnya (unmatured corn), wine, sesa- 
mum, oil and Knlattha-^\i\s^, sleep in the day time, 
sexual intercourse, physical exercise, fits of anger and 
exposure to the sun are forbidden in the case of a 
poisoned patient. 8, 

Symptoms of elimination of poison : 

— The restoration' of the deranged Doshas and of the 
vital principles (Dhdtus of the body) to their normal 
state, a natural craving for food and drink, the normal 
colour and condition of the tongue and of the urine 
and the normal state and functions of the mind and of 
the sense-organs in a poisoned patient would indicate 
the full and complete elimination of the poison from 
his system. 9, 

Thus ends the Seventh Chapter of the Kalpa-Stbana in the Sus'ruta 
Samhild which treats of the sounds of medicated drums, etc. 



f 


CHAPTER Yin. ' 

Now we shall discourse on insects, t.e. the measures, 
etc. to be adopted in cases of insect-bite, etc. (Kita** 
Kalpa). I. 

Various kinds of wdrms and insects (Kita) germi- 
nate from the semen, fecal matter, urine, putrid eggs 
and putrid carcases of serpents which are marked by 
Vdtaja, Pittaja (Agneya) and Kaphaja (Ambuja) tern* 
peraments. The poisons of these vermin which are 
nothing but insects (Kita), are apt to be most dangerous 
in the long run on account of their being acted upon by 
the Doshas and may be divided into four* groups. 2. 

Insects of V^taja Temperament 

The eighteen classes of insects known as the Kumbhi- 
nasa, Tundikerl, Sringi, Sata-Kuliraka, Uchchitinga, 
Agninima, Chichchitinga, Mayurikd, Avartaka, 
Urabhra, Sarikd-mukha, Vaidala, Sardva-kurda, 
Abhirdji, Parusha,' Chitra-sirshaka, Sata bdhu and 
the Rakta-raji are possessed of a Vsitaja^ temperament 
and their poison tends to aggravate and derange the 
bodily Yjtyu and produce the specific diseases due 
thereto. 3, 

Insects of Pittaja Temperament:— 

The twenty-four families of insects known as the Kaun- 
dilyaka, Kanabhaka, Varati (asp), Patra-vris'chika, 
Vindsikd, Brahmanikd, Vindula (D.R.-Viluta), Bhramara, 

* Dallana says that the four groups are to be determined according 
to the origin of the insects from the semen, etc. of a Darvi-kata, Mandali, 

Rdjila, or a Vaikaranja serpent. To us it seems, however, that the groups 
should be Vdtaja, Pittaja, Kaphaja and Sannipdtaja. 



Chap. VIIL] 


KALPA STHANAM. 


743 


Vahyaki, Pichchita, Kumbhi, Varchah-kita, - Arimc- 
daka, Padma-kita, Dundubhika, Makara, ^ata-pjidaka 
(centipede), Panchdlaka, Pfika-matsya, Krishna-tunda, 
Gardabhi, Klita, Krimi-Sarai and the Utklesaka are of 
a fiery i. c. Pittaja tcinperamcnt and their poison tends 
to derange and aggravate the bodily Pitta and produce 
the specific diseases due to the derangement of that 
Dosha. 4. 

Insects of Kapliaja Temperament ; 

—The thirteen families of insects known as the Vis'vam- 
bhara, Pancha-s'ukla, Pancha-krishna, Kokila, Saircyaka 
Prachalaka, Valabha, Kitima, Suchi-mukhd, Krishna- 
Godhd, Kashdya-Vdsika, Kita-gardabhaka and the 
Trotaka are possessed of Saumya {.e., Kaphaja tempera- 
ment, and their poison aggravates and deranges the 
Kapha and produces the specific diseases which owe 
their origin to the deranged condition of that Dosha. 5. 

Insects of Sannipatika Tempera- 
ment : — The twelve kinds of insects known as the 
Tungi-ndsa, Vichilaka, Tdlaka, Vdhaka, Koshthdgdri, 
Krimikara, Mandala-Puchchhaka, Tunga-nabha, Sarsha- 
pika, Avalguli, Sambuka and the Angi-kita are danger- 
ously fatal in their bite. A person or an animal bitten 
by any of these dangerous insects exhibits stages and 
symptoms similar to those of a case of a snake-bite and 
their poison tends to derange and aggravate the three 
Doshas (Sannipatika) of the body and produce the 
specific symptoms thereof. 6-A. 

Symptoms of their bite;— The seat of 

the bite seems as if on fire or being burnt with strong 
alkali and is characterised by a red, yellow, white or 
Vermillion colour. The symptoms which are developed 
in the entire course of the poisoning (or are found to 
supervene) in cases of their bites are fever, breaking 



• 744 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tChap. VIH. 

and aching pain (in the limbs), horripilation, vomiting, 
thirst, a burning sensation in the body, loss of conscious- 
ness, yawning, shaking of the limbs, difficult breath- 
ing, hic-cough, (sometimes)' a burning and (at others) 
a cold sensation (in the seat of the bite), eruption of 
pustules, swelling (in the affected locality), appearance 
of nodular glands (Granthi), circular erythematous 
patches (Mandala) on the skin, ring-worm. Erysipelas, 
Kitima (Keloid Tumour) and Karnika (round about 
the seat of the bite) as well as any other symptoms 
peculiar to the Dosha aggravated by the poison of each 
species. 6. 

The other characteristic features of the poison of 
these (fatal and strong-poisoned) insects should be 
speedily ascertained by comparing the symptoms of 
aggravation of the Dushi-Visha (consequent thereon) 
and by examining the effets of the application of 
different anti-poisonous plasters as well. 7. 

These are the characteristic features of sharp-poison- 
ed insects ; now hear me describe those of the mild- 
poisoned ones. The symptoms which are manifest in 
the case of a bite by such an insect are salivation 
(Praseka), an aversion to food, vomiting, heaviness in 
the head, a slight sensation of cold and the appearance of 
pustules and urticaria according to the deranged Dosha 
aggravated by the species of the biting insect. 8. 

The pulverised bodies of these insects possessing, as 
they do, the characteristic features of Dushi-Visha or 
enfeebled poison (lying inherent in a human system) is 
.turned into a Gara or chemical (combinative or resultant) 
poison, if administered (internally) with any medicine 
or externally with any plaster. 9. 

We shall henceforth describe the distinctive traits' 
of one insect from another of the same species according 



Cbap. VIII.] 


KALPA STIIANAM, 


745 


to the classification and general characteristics and 
incurability of their bites. 9. 

The Kanabha class of Insects:— The 
Trikantaka, Kuni, Hastidcaksha and the Apardjita are 
the four kinds of insects that belong to the Kanablia 
group and arc extremely painful in their bites giving 
rise to swelling, aching in the limbs, heaviness of the 
body and a black aspect at the scat of the bite. 10. 

The Gaitdheyaka class of Insects:— 
The five kinds of insects known as the Prati-surya, 
Pinga-bhdsa, Bahu-varna, jMaha-siras and the Nirupama 
belong to the G-andlieyaka class. The stages and the 
symptoms of a bite by an insect of this group arc often 
identical with (or mistaken for) a snake bite and are 
marked by all its characteristic pain and the appearance 
of dreadful Granthis (nodular glands) of varied colours 
and shapes, ir. 

The six kinds of insects known as the Gala-goli, 
S'veta-krishnd, Rakta-rdji, Rakta-mandala, Sarva-s'vetd, 
and the Sarshapika belong to one and the same species. 
A bite by any of these insects excepting by a Sarshapikd 
is attended with a burning sensation and slimy exud- 
ation from and swelling in the scat of the bite, that of 
the Sarshapikd being accompanied by an attack of 
dysentery (Atisdra) and pain at the heart. 12. 

^ata-padi (centipede): — The S'ata-padi (centi- 
pede) species is divided into eight kinds, vijs., the Parusha 
(rough), Krishna (black), Chitra (of variegated colours), 
Kapilikd (tawny brown), Pitaka (yellow), Raktd (red), 
S'vetd (white) and the Agni-prabhd (resembling fire 
in virtue), A bite by any of these insects is attended 
with swelling, pain and a burning sensation in the heart. 
A bite by one of the Sveta or the Agni-prabhd species 
is marked by all the aforesaid symptoms as well as by 

94 



746 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. Vlll. 


violent epileptic fits, an intolerable burning sensation 
and eruptions of white pustules (Pidak^). I3. 

IVIanduka (frogs):— The Mandukas (frogs) are 
divided in eight different species vis.., the Krishna, Sara, 
Kuhaka, Harita, Rakta, Yava-varndbha, Bhrikuti and the 
Kotika A bite by any of these is accompanied by an 
itching sensation in the seat of the bite and a flow of 
yellow-coloured foam from the mouth. A bite by one of 
the Bhrikuti or Kotika species gives rise to the aforesaid 
symptoms as well as a burning sensation, vomiting and 
a severe attack of epileptic fits in addition thereto. 14. 

A bite by one of the VisVambkara species of insects 
is followed by Sita-jvara (catarrhal fever; and an eruption 
of white pimples (Pidakd) in the shape of mustard seeds 
round about the seat of the bite. A bite by one of the 
Ahinduka species is marked by piercing pain, a burning 
sensation, itching and swelling (in the affected locality), 
as well as by delirium. A bite (contact) by one of the 
Kandumakd species is followed by a yellowness of 
the complexion, vomiting, dysentery and fever, etc. 
A bite by one of the S'uka-vrinta or such like species 
is attended with itching and Kotha (urticaria) and the 
bristles of the insects are found to be adhering to the 
affected locality. 15. 

Pipilika (Ants) : — There are six kinds of Pipilikd 
(ants) viz., the Sthula-s'irshA, Samvdhikd, Brdhmanikd, 
Kapilika. and the Chitra-varna. A bite by any of these 
is attended with imflammatory swelling and a burning 
sensation (in the seat of the bite) resembling those 
produced by contact with firef 16. 

IVIakshika (stinging flies): — Flies (Makshika) 
may be divided into six species vis., the Kdntarikd, 
Krishna, Pingalikd, Madhulikd, Kdshdyi and the Sthdlikd. 
A bite by any of these is accompanied by swelling and g 



Chap. Vlli. ] 


KALPA STHANAM. 


747 


burning sensation. A bite by one of the SthalikA 
or the Kdsliayi species, however, is marked by the 
preceding symptoms as well as by the eruption of 
pustules (Pidakdl, with supervening symptoms in addi- 
tion thereto. 17. 

Masakas (Mosquitoes): — Mosquitoes (Mas'akas) 
are divided into five species, viz.^ the Samudra, Pari- 
mandala, Hasti-mas'aka, Krishna and the Parvatiya. 
A mosquito (Masaka)-bite is characterised by a severe 
itching and swelling of the affected locality ; while the 
symptoms which mark a bite by a Parvatiya one arc 
similar to those of a bite by fatally venomous insects, 
and a sting of the points of their antenna; is followed 
by the appearance of pustules (Pidaka) attended with 
a burning sensation and suppuration therein, when 
scratched by the finger-nails. The characteristic features 
of a bite by Jalaukas (leeches) with the mode of 
treatment thereof have already been described. 18. 

Memorable Verses The poisons of the 
Gaudheyaka, Sthalikd, Svetd, Agni-samprabhd, Bhrikuti 
and the Kotika belonging to their respective classes 
are incurable. 19. 

Contact with the dead body, stool or urine of a 
venomous animal is accompanied by itching and a 
burning sensation, pricking pain, eruption of Pidakd 
(pustules), ulcers and Kotha as well as by a slimy and 
painful exudation. The local skin is found to suppurate 
and the treatment would be the same as in the case of a 
wound by an envenomed arrow. 20. 

A bite which is neither depressed nor raised, but 
very much swollen with pain (round about), but un- 
attended with any pain in the seat itself just after 
the bite, should be regarded as not easily amenable to 
any medical remedy. 21. 



748 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. t^hap. VllI, 

A bite by an insect of strong and acute poison 
should be treated as a snake-bite and the three-fold 
remedies to be employed in snake-bites according to 
the three-fold divisions of snakes should also be em- 
ployed in these cases. The measures of fomenting, 
plastering and hot-washing would prove efficacious in 
these cases, except in the event of an insect-bitten 
patient having been found to have been fainting away 
on account of suppuration and sloughing in the seat of 
the bite, in which case all kinds of cleansing (emetic, 
purgative, etc.) and anti-poisonous measures should be 
adopted. 22-23. 

Planters of S irisha, Katuka, Kushtha, Vacha, 
Rajani, Saindhava, milk, marrow, lard (Vasd), clarified 
butter, S'miihi, Pippali and Deva-ddru in the form of 
Utkarika (poultice-like preparation) should be used in 
fomenting (the seat of the bite). As an alternative, the 
fomentation with the drugs of the S'dla-parnyddi Gana 
in the same (Utkdrikd) form should be considered 
equally efficacious in the case. 24. 

In the case of a Scorpion bite, the affected part should 
not be fomented. It might, however, be fumigated with 
vapours of the drugs to be dealt with later on. The 
medicinal remedies (Agadas) applicable in the several 
cases are here separately described. 25-26 

Recipes of remedies in different 
ca.ses : — An anti-venomous compound (Agada) con- 
sisting of Kushtha, Chahra (Tagara), Vachd, Vilva xooXs,, 
Pdthd, Stivarchikd, house-soot and the two kinds of 
Haridrd is efficacious in the case of a bite by a Trikan- 
taka insect. An Agada consisting of house-soot, 

Chakra, Kushtha and the seeds of Palds'a destroys the 
■ poison of a Gala-goli insect. An Agada composed of 
Kunikuma, Tagara, S'igrtt, Padmaka and the two kinds 



Chap. VIII.] 


KALPA STJIANAM. 


749 


of Rajani, pasted with water, proves curative in the case 
of a bite by a S'ata-padi (centipede) An Agada consist- 
ing of Mesha-s' rivgi, Vackd, PeitJid, Nichula, RoJiini, 
and Bdlaka is efficacious in all kinds of Mailduka- 
poisoning. An Agada consisting of Vacha , As'va'gandhd, 
Aii-hald, Bald, Atigiihd (SAla-parni) and AgitJid (Pris'ni- 
parni) nullifies the poison of a VisVambliara insect. 
An Agada consisting of S'irisha, Tas^arn, Kushtha, the 
two kinds of Haridrd, Ams'u-mati and the two kinds of 
Sahd destroys the poison of an Ahiiiduka insect. Cooling 
measures should be adopted in the night time in the 
case of a Kandumaka-bitc, since the poison which is 
aggravated by the sun’s rays in tlic day docs not 
prove amenable to any remedj'^, if applied at that time. 
An Agada consisting of Chakra, Kushtha and Apd- 
nidrga is efficacious in a case of Siika-vrmta*bite. As 
an alternative, the earth of a black ant-hill pasted with 
the expressed juice of Bhiinga would prove efficacious in 
such cases. A plaster prepared with the earth of a 
black ant-hill and the urine of a cow proves curative 
in cases of bites of flies, ants and mosquitoes. The 
treatment of a case of a bite by a Prati-suryaka is the 
same as that of a snake-bite. 27-36. 

Origin and Classification of Scor- 
pions : — Scorpions are divided into three classe, viz., 
the mild-poisoned ones (Manda-visha), those whose 
poison is neither mild nor strong (Madhya-visha), and 
the strong-poisoned ones (Mahd-visha). Scorpions 
germinating from cow-dung'” or from any other rotten 
substances are Manda-visha. Those which germinate 
from (decomposed) wood or (decayed) bricks are 
Madhya-visha (with poison neither mild nor strong); 

* Dallana sajs tliat by cow-dung (Gomaya) is meant the dung, the 
urine etc. of not only a cow, but of a buffalo, etc. as well 



750 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. fChap. VIII. 

while those which originate from the decmposed carcase 
of a snake or from any other poisonous putrid organic 
matter are Tikslina-vislia (strong-poisoned). The first 
group of scorpions includes twelve different species, 
the second three and the third and last fifteen, thus 
making thirty’*' species in all. 37-3S. 

Specific traits and Characteristics 
of mild-poisoned Scorpions Scorpions 
which are black (Krishna) or dark- brown (S'yava) or of 
variegated colours (Karbura) or yellow (Pilndu) or 
coloured like the urine of a cow or rough or dark blue 
(Mechaka) or white or red or greenish (S'ddvala) or 
red mixed with white (Rakta-s'veta)f or provided with 
hair on their bodies (Romas'a) should be regarded as 
Manda-vislia ( mild-poisoned ones). A bite by a 
scorpion of this species is accompained by pain (in the 
seat of the bite), shivering, numbness of the limbs and a 
flow of blackish blood (from the punctures of the bile). 
In the case of a bite at any of the extremities, the pain 
courses upward, accompained by a burning sensation, 
perspiration, swelling of the bitten part and fever. 39 
IWadhya-visha Scorpions Scorpions of 
the Madliya-vislia (mild-poisoned) class are red (Rakta) 
or yellow (Pita), or tawny (Kapila). All of them are 
ash-coloured in their belly and provided with three 
joints or links. They germinate from the stool, excreta, 
eggs and putrid carcases of the three (aforesaid) groups 
of snakes and respectively partake of the nature of the 

* According to Gayadasa the total number of the three classes of 
scorpions would be twenty-seven, of which the first (mild-poisoned) class 
consists of eleven, the second consists of three and the third of thirteen. 

t In place of “white, red and whitish red” some read “white, red 
and little red” (Arakta),” while others make it “white in the abdomen 
(S'vetodara), red and white.” 



Chap. VIII.] 


KALPA STIIANAM. 


751 


serpent whose fecal matter, etc. they originate from. 
A bite b}’- a scorpion of this species is accompanied 
by a swelling of the tongue, an incapacity of deglutition 
and violent epileptic fils. 40. 

Tikshna-visha Scorpions The keen- 
poisoned (Tikslina-vislia) scorpions are either white or 
parti-coloured (Chitra) or blackish (S'yamala) or reddish 
white (Rakta-s'veta) or red-bellied or blue-bellied or 
reddish or bluish j'^ellow or reddish blue or bluish 
white ; others are reddish brown and are (further divided 
into four classes), viz., three-jointed (like those of the 
previous class) or one-jointed or two-jointed or jointless. 
The poison of this group of scorpions, varying in colour 
and shape, is extremely dreadful and should be regarded 
as the veritable robber of vitality. They germinate from 
the putrified dead body of a snake or any poisoned 
animal. A bite by a member of any of these families 
produces those ph5’siological transformations in the 
body of its victims which mark the different stages of a 
snake-bite, and gives rise to pustular eruptions (Sphota) 
on the skin accompanied by vertigo, a burning sensation 
(in the body), fever and excessive discharge of black- 
coloured blood from the channels (mouth and nostrils, 
etc.). And hence their bite proves so rapidly fatal. 41. 

Treatment of Scorpion -bites A 
bite by a scorpion of the middle-venomed or strong- 
venomed class should be treated as a case of snake- 
bite to all intents and purposes. In a case of a bite by 
a mild-venomed one, the affected seat should be sprink- 
led over with the Chakra-Taila or with a tepid oil duly 
cooked with the drugs of the Viddryddi group. The 
affected locality should be (repeatedly) fomented with 
the application of poultices in the UtkArikd form pre- 
pared with 4nti-venomous drugs (.5'irisha, etc.). The seat 



752 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. VIIL 


of the bite should then be marked with superficial 
incisions (scratches) and should be gently rubbed 
(Prati-sdrana) with powders of Haridrd, Saindhava, 
Trikatu and the fruit and flower of S'irisha. The 
tender leaves of Surasd pasted with the juice of Mdtu- 
lunga and the urine of a cow in a lukewarm state, or 
lukewarm (i.e,, fresh) cow-dung should be employed in 
plastering and fomenting the affected part. Potions of 
clarified butter mixed with honey, milk mixed with a 
profuse quantity of sugar and honey, treacle mixed 
with cold water and perfumed with Chaiur-jdtaka, or 
cold milk mixed with treacle should be recommended 
as drinks. Fumigation (Dhupana) with the compound 
made of the feathers of the tail of a cock or a peacock, 
Saindhava, oil and clarified butter pasted together and 
burnt is a speedy destroyer of scorpion-poison. As an 
alternative, the fumes (Dhuma) of a compound made 
up of Kusumbha flower, the two kinds of Rajani and 
Kodrava straw mixed with clarified butter applied to 
the region of the arms speedily destroys the poison of 
a venomous insect in general and of a scorpion in 
particular. 42. 

Spidcr-bitcS : — Cases of Lutai (venomous 
spider)-bite (lit. — poison of a LutA) are the most difficult 
to diagnose and cure. The diagnosis of such a case 
puzzles the head of many an experienced physician, 
while novices in the art of healing find it a very difficult' 
matter. In a case of doubt or of conflicting indications 
pointing equally both to the venomous and non-venom- 
ous character of the bite, a physician should employ 
anti-poisonous remedies of such a character as would 
not prove hostile (to the natural temperament and vital 
principles of the patient’s system nor to the course of 
food and drink he is enjoined to take or naturally takes), 



Chap. VII I ] 


KALPA STHANAM. 


753 


since the Agadas are applicable only in cases of poison- 
ing and, applied otherwise in healthy non-poisoned 
persons, would produce all kinds of discomfort. Hence 
it is incumbent on a physician to gather conclusive 
evidence of the poisonous nature of the bite at the very 
outset. A physieian, failing to ascertion the existence 
of poison, proves more fatal in many cases than the bite 
itself. 43. 

Development of Luta-poison As 

the first sprouting of a tree does not enable a man to 
correctly ascertain the species, so the poison of a venom- 
ous spider in its first stage of incubation into the body, 
does not develop any specific symptoms sufficiently 
potent to throw any light on its nature, nor docs it give 
any hint as to its correct diagonosis. A spider (Luta)- 
poison latent in a human organism, is marked by a slight 
itching sensation in the seat of the bite, as if the poison 
were shifting from one place to another* in that loca- 
lity, by the presence of Kotha (urticaria), and by an 
indistinctness of colour on the first day of its incuba- 
tion. On the second day the seat of the bite becomes 
swollen at the end and sunk in the middle and the 
characteristic marks of biting show themselves. On 
the third day the specific symptoms (fever, shivering, 
etc.) of the poison of the animal set in. On the 
fourth day the poison is aggravated. On the fifth day 
the symptoms and disorders peculiar to its aggravated 
condition, are present. On the sixth day the poison 
begins to course through the organism and envolopes the 
Marmas (or the vulnerable parts). On the seventh day 

^ In place of "Prachala” Gayaddsa reads "Prabala,” i.e,, strong 
and says that the poison becomes stronger and stronger with the lapse 
of time, 


95 



754 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. VIII, 


the poison is diffused throughout the whole organism, 
becomes extremely aggravated and proves fatal. 44. 

Potency : — The poison of spiders (LutS.) which 
are acutely and violently venomous proves fatal in the 
course of a week. That of a middle-poiso nous one would 
take a little more time in order to prove fatal, while 
a bite by one of the mild-poisonous brings death within 
a fortnight. Hence a physician should try his best 
with anti-venomous remedies for the complete nulli- 
fication of the poison immediately after the bite. 45. 

Location Z— A spider is found to secrete seven 
kinds of poison through the seven different parts or 
principles of its body, viz., saliva (Ldld), nails (claws), 
urine, fangs, ovum (Rajas), fecal matter and semen, 
and such poison is, either kien or mild in its potency, 
or follows a middle path between the two keen and 
mild). 46. 

Characteristics of poison accord- 
ing to its seat in the body of a spi- 
der : — ^The poison which is secreted with the saliva 
(of a spider) gives rise to non-shiftting superficial 
Ko’tha (urticaria) attended with itching and slight 
pain. The poison from a scratch with the tips of its 
claws, is attended with swelling, itching, horripilation 
and a sense as if fumes had been escaping from the 
body. Any part of the body coming in contact with 
the urine of a spider is marked by a (slight) blackness 
of skin in the middle of the point of contact. and red- 
ness at its edge, and the affected part is cracked. In a 
case of fang-poison (actual bite) the seat of the bite is 
marked by fixed circular patches and becomes indurated 
and discoloured. The poison in this case is strong. 
A part of the body touched with the Rajas, semen, or 
with fecal matter of a (venomous) spider is marked by 



KALPA STHANAM. 


Cihap. Viil.] 


7SS 


eruptions of pustules which assume a yellow colour like 
that of a ripe Amalaka or Pilu. 47. 

Thus far we have described the effects of spider- 
(Luta,)-poison according to its seat in the body of the 
insect and to the period of its aggravation. Now we 
shall describe the mythological accouut of the origin of 
these insects and the curable and incurable natures' of 
their bites together with the course of medical treatment 
to be followed in each case. 48. 

Mythological account of the origin 
of Luta : — Once upon a time, it is said, king 
Vis'vdmitra went to the hermitage of the holy Vas'ishtha 
and by his actions aroused the wrath of the holy sage. 
Drops of perspiration were thereupon produced on 
the forehead of that holy and celestially brilliant sage 
and trickled down on the stacks of hay culled and 
gathered (Luna) by the -holy sages for. the use of the 
(celestial) cow, and behold ! they (the drops of sweat) 
were transformed into innumerable dreadful and venom- 
ous spiders (Luti) which, up to this day, are found to 
infest the articles of royal use for the iniquity of 
that royal sage (Vis'vdmitra). They are called Lut^S 
(spiders) from the fact of their being germinated from 
the drops of perspiration of the holy sage Vas'ishtha 
fallen on the culled (Luna) stacks of hay and they are 
sixteen in number. 49. 

The different names of spiders and 
the general symptoms of their hites 

The poison of spiders is divided into two classes — cur- 
able with difficulty and incurable. Of the sixteen kinds 
of spiders, the bites or poisons of eight may be cured 
with the greatest difficulty, while those of the remaining 
eight are incurable. . The Tri-mandald, Svetd, Kapild,' 
Pitikd, Ala-vishd, Mutra-vishd, Raktd and the Kasand 



THE SUSHKUTA SAM hit a. 


[Chap. Vlll. 




are the eight species of spiders which belong to the first 
group. A bite by any of them is attended with an 
aching pain in the head, pain and itching about the 
seat of the bite and the symptoms and disorders peculiar 
to the aggravated Vayu and Kapha. The Sauvarnikd, 
Ldja-varnd, Jdlini, Eni-padi, Krishna-varnd, Agni varnd, 
Kdkdndd and the Mdld-gund belong to the second group 
and their bites are marked by bleeding, fever, a burning 
sensation, dysentery and disorders due to the concerted 
action of all the three deranged Doshas of the body, 
and the bitten part putrefies. Eruptions of various sorts 
and pustules and large circular patches as well as large, 
soft and shifting swellings, red or brown in colour, 
appear on the skin about the affected part. These are 
the general features of spider (Lutd)-bites. Now we 
shall describe the characteristic symptoms which are 
developed by bites of the several classes of spiders and 
the course of ' medical treatment to be adopted in 
each case, 50 " 5 i- 

Specitic symptoms of spider-bites 
and their treatment A bite by a spider 
of the Tri-mandalst species is marked by a flow of 
black-coloured blood from the bite which is transformed 
into an open ulcer. It is also attended with deafness, 
impaired or cloudy vision and a burning sensation 
in the eyes. In such cases, a compound consisting 
of Arka roots, Rajani, Ndkuli and Pris'ni-parnikd 
should be employed as snuff as well as in drink (Pdna), 
enemas (Vastis) and ointments etc. A bite by a spider 
of the Svetd species is followed by the eruption of 
white-coloured pustules attended with itching, burning 
sensation, epileptic fits, fever, erysipelas and pain in 
and secretion from the bite. An Agada consisting of 
Chandana, Rdsnd, Eld, Harenu, Nala, Vmijula, Kushtha, 



Chap. VIIl.l 


KALPA STHANAM. 


757 


lidmajjaka, Chakra and Nalada is efficacious in such 
a case. A bite by a Kapilsi spider is characterised by 
eruptions of copper-coloured pustules of an indurated 
nature accompanied by a sense of heaviness in the 
head, a burning sensation, vertigo and darkness of 
vision (Timira). The remedy in such a case consists 
of an anti-poisonous Agada composed of Padmaka, 
Kushtha, Eld, Karanja, Kakubha-h^ivk, S'ihird, Arka- 
parni, Apdmdrga, Dutvd and Brdhmi. A case of 
bite by a Pitikai spider is marked by an eruption 
of hard pustules, vomiting, fever, colic (^ula) and 
redness of the eyes, and the remedy consists in the 
application of an Agada, composed of Kutaja, Us'ira, 
Kinihi, S'clti, Kadamba and Kakubha-h^Lx'k. A case of 
bite by an ida-vishat spider is marked by the bright 
red colour of the seat of the bite, eruption of pustules 
like mustard seeds, parchedness of the palate and a 
burning sensation in the body. The remedy in such 
a case should consist of an Agada composed oi Priyangit, 
Hrivera, Kushtha, Ldfuajja, Vanpda, S' atapushpd and 
the sprouts of the Pippala and the Vala trees. The case 
of bite by a spider of the Mutra-vishai class is attended 
with putrefaction (of the affected locality), eiysipelas, 
a flow of blackish blood (from the seat of the bite), 
cough, difficult breathing, vomiting, epileptic fits, fever 
and a burning sensation. The remedy in such a case 
consists in Manah-s'ild, Ala, Yashti-madhu, Kushtha, 
Chandana, Padmaka and Ldmajja pasted together and 
mixed with honey. The case of bite by a spider of the 
Rakfca' species is marked by eruptions of yellow-coloured 
pustules full of blood and coloured red in the extremities 
(round the seat of the bite), with a burning sensation 
and slimy secretion. The Agada in such a case should 
be prepared with Toya (Bdlaka) C/midatia, Us'ira, 



THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 


[Chap. Vlii. 


758 


Padmaka and the bark of Arjuna, S'elu and Amrdtaka. 
A bite by a spider of the Kasanst class is attended 
with a flow of slimy cold blood (from the bite), 
and with cough and difficult breathing, the treatment 
being the same as in the case of a bite by a spider of 
the Ratk^ class, 52-59. 

A bite by a spider (Lutd) of the Krishnaf class 
smells of fecal matter and is attended with a scanty flow 
of blood, as well as with fever, epileptic fits, vomiting, 
burning sensation, cough and difficult breathing. The 
treatment of such a patient should be taken in hand 
without holding out any definite hope of recovery and 
the remedy in this case should consist of an Agada 
composed of Eld, Chakra, sarpdkshi, Gandha-ndkidi, 
Chandana and the drugs known as the Mahd-stigandhi 
(as described in the Dundubhi-svaniya chapter). The 
case of bite by an Agni-varn^ spider is marked by a 
burning sensation in the seat of the bite, excessive 
secretion (of blood), fever, a sort of sucking pain, 
itching, horripilation, a burning sensation in the body 
and eruptions of pustules. In a case of this type, the 
patient may be treated with the Agada prescribed for 
the treatment of a bite by a spider of the Krishnd class 
but no hopes should be held out. 6o-6r. 

General Remedies An Agada made of 
Sdj'ivd, Us'ira, Y ashti-inadhu, Chandana, Utpala and 
Padmaka may be used with advantage in cases of 
spider-bites of all types. The bark of S'leshmdtaka and 
Kshira-pippala should be deemed equally efficacious in 
all cases of spider-bites, and these may be employed 
in any shape, viz., as snuff, potion, unguent, etc.’ • 62. 

We have described (the symptoms and the treatment 
of the bites of) the eight classes of spiders which can be 
cured with difficulty. Those of the two classes (of the 



Chap, viii.y 


KALPA STHANAM. 


7 


Other group whose bites are generally incurable) have 
also been described above, as being sometimes found 
amenable to medicine (with the greatest difficulty). 
Now hear me describe (the symptoms and the treat- 
ment of the bites of) the remaining six species which 
are incurable. 63. A. 

Specific Symptoms of the incurable 
cases of Spider-bites A bite by a spider of 
the Sauvarniksi species is marked by swelling and a 
frothy secretion and a fishy smell from the seat of the 
bite, and is followed by cough, difficult breathing, fever, 
thirst and violent fainting fits, A bite b)'' a La(ja-varn£i 
spider is marked by a flow of flesh-smelling and fetid 
blood from its seat as well as by a burning sensation, 
dysentery, fainting fits and pain in the head. A case of 
bite by a spider of the Jjilini species is very severe and 
is marked by a cracking of the seat of the bite which 
is striped with lines as well as by numbness, difficult 
breathing, parchedness of the palate and continued 
dizziness of the head. The bite by an Eiii-padi spider 
resembles the seeds of black sesamum in shape and is 
marked by thirst, fever, fainting fits, vomiting, cough 
and difficult breathing. A bite by a K£^k£^lldak£^ 
spider is marked by an excruciating pain and a 
reddish-yellow colour at its seat. A bite by a ]!lI£^l8^- 
gunai spider is characterised by a cracking of the 
seat of the bite in several parts and is marked by a 
red colour, smoky smell, extreme pain, fever and 
epileptic fits, 63. 

Treatment of the incurable cases of spider-bites 
should, however, be taken in hand by a wise physician 
with a due consideration of the aggravated Dosha or 
Doshas in each case with the exception of making 
incisions (chheda-karma). 64-A. 



76 o 


THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. CChap. VII I. 


Surgical Treatments ;~ln all cases of the 
curable types of spider-bites, the affected part should 
at once be cut open and removed with a Vriddhi- 
patra instrument and the incisioned part should then be 
cauterised with a red-hot Jambvoshtha instrument in 
the absence of any fever or such like distressing symp- 
toms and in the event of its not occurring in any of the 
vulnable parts of the body (Marmas). The act of 
cauterisation should be continued until the patient 
himself (through pain) prohibits the continuation of the 
same. If the affected part is found to be attended with 
a slight swelling, it should be cut open and removed. 
It should then be plastered with a paste of the (Mahd- 
sugandhi and such other) Agada mixed with Saindhava 
and honey or with the paste of Priycngti, Haridrd, 
Ktishtha, Samangd and Yashti-madhu. A potion com- 
posed of the decoction of Sdrivd, the two kinds of 
Yashti-tnadhu*' Drdkshd, Payasyd, Kshira-fnorata, 
Viddri and Gokshura mixed with honey should be 
administered to the patient. The affected part should 
be washed with a cold decoction of the bark of the 
Kshiri-vrikshas. Any other distressing symptoms 
should be remedied with anti-poisonous measures with an 
eye to the deranged Doshas involved in the case. 64. 

Any of the (ten-fold) remedial measures of Nasya 
(snuff), medicated collyrium, unguents (Abhyanjana\ 
potions (PAna) Dhuma (fumigation), Avapida form 
of snuff, gargling, emesis, purging and blood-letting 
by the application of leeches should be adopted 
in a case of spider-bite according to its require- 
ments. 65. 

* Mention of Madhuka twice in the list shows that one part each of 
both the kinds Yashti-madhu (liquorice) — grown on lands and in water — 
should be lakeq. 



chap. VIII.] KALPA STHANAM. 761 

All cases of bites by any insect or by any snake, 
and ulcers incidental to those bites should be carefully 
treated with measures and remedies laid down in 
connection with snake-bites as long as the stage of 
inflammation and suppuration would last. The growths 
(if any) of pappills (Karnika) around the seat of the 
bite should be removed after the subsidence of the 
swelling by the application of a plaster consisting of 
Niniha leaves,"*^ Trivrit, Danti, Kusiwtbha flower, Rajani, 
honey, Guggulu, Saindhava salt, Kinva and the dung of 
a pigeon pasted together, and such diet as would not 
aggravate the effects of poison should be carefully pre- 
scribed. The papillatous growths (Karnika) due to the 
poison pf any kind should be scratched with a proper 
surgical instrument in the event of their being hard and 
painless and should then be plastered with a paste of 
purifying (Sodhaniya) drugs (such as Nimba leaves, etc.) 
mixed with honey. 66. 

The specific features and treatment of the bites by 
the one hundred and sixty-seven types of insect arc 
now described. The subjects mentioned but not included 
within these one hundred and twenty chapters (from the 
commencement of the book) would be dealt with in 
detail in the latter part of the present treatise (Uttara 
Tantara). 67 68. 

We have not heard of a holier discourse than the 
medical science on account of the eternal and imperish- 
able character of the Ayurveda (the science of life) 
from its tested merit and its beneficial effects upon the 
created beings and since it is always worshipped by the 
whole human race for the fact of its fully explaining 

* Gayaddsa reads “S'ikhi” (Langalaki) and “Vams'a” (scrapings of 
bamboo) in place of “Nimba-patra”. He also reads “Danta” (tooth of 
a cow) in place of “Kinva.” 


96 



762 tHE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. VIII, 

the import of words (/.c. delineation of its specific sub- 
jects). Who ever stores up in his memory and acts up to 
these sacred and worshipful injunctions on the science 
of life propounded, as it is, by the nectar-origined 
sage (Dhanvantari), the preceptor of all physicians and 
equal to the celestial Indra in respect of majesty, enjoys 
happiness both in this world and in the next. 69. 

Thus ends ihc eighth Chapter of the Kalpasthana in the Sus'tula 
Samhita which treats of the measures to be adopted in the case of an 
insect-bite. 


Here ends the Kalpa Stha'na. 




